
Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
2
Renaissance E Books
www.renebooks.com
Copyright ©
NOTICE: This eBook is licensed to the original purchaser
only. Duplication or distribution to any person via email,
floppy disk, network, print out, or any other means is a
violation of International copyright law and subjects the
violator to severe fines and/or imprisonment. This notice
overrides the Adobe Reader permissions which are
erroneous. This eBook cannot be legally lent or given to
others.
This eBook is displayed using 100% recycled electrons.
Distributed by Fictionwise.com

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
3
LYCAN BLOOD: VOL. II
FIREBORN LAW
By
JANRAE FRANK
ISBN 978-1-60089-115-1
All rights reserved
Copyright © 2007 Janrae Frank
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part without
written permission.
For information contact:
PageTurnerEditions.com
PageTurner Editions/Futures-Past Fantasy
A Renaissance E Books publication

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
4
DEDICATION
To the memory of Leviathan, "Levy," my companion of eleven
years. Seventeen pounds of love and loyalty, whose devotion
never wavered. Because one of the things that dogs do best
is love.
And also to Livejournal Fandom who rose up and fought the
Strikethrough 2007 war and won.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
5
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank my favorite Dutchman, Mark Prins, for
reading through my endless drafts and helping me create the
languages and slang used in my novels. Since most of the
cultures and races emigrated to Daverana from Earth, the
languages, words, and names are all derived from both living
and dead languages with his invaluable assistance.
I also want to thank Andrea Wideman, one of my first
readers, for helping me to avoid stepping into plot holes and
falling on my face. She has been an endless source of help
and encouragement when I needed it.
Jane Letty and Jean Marie Stine have given me endless
moral support when called upon to keep me going.
The list is huge, and I have only room to mention a few.
Kaolin Fire and his wonderful covers. Phil Smith for fearlessly
telling me when I'm wrong. Jane Beresford for keeping me on
my toes. Sovay Jennifer Fox, because no one could ask for a
better daughter.
And last, but not least, Jack Kincaid for driving me nuts.
Insanity loves company.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
6
THE EXILE'S CURSE
When the Serpent comes, they all shall perish,
The Redhands fall like sheaves of grain, until only the Exile
shall remain of those who own their name.
When fireborn law breathes hot upon the root
One born of fire shall perish for the truth
The exile's victory shall be his pardon
Those he claims will rule
The prince from shadows shall emerge
To sit a blood drenched throne
.... Alistar Weems' dying words.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
7
THE FIRST MOTHERS
[The lycans have a primarily oral tradition, although
increasing numbers of them are becoming literate. This is the
first poem that a young boy apprenticed to a lawgiver learns.]
We howled to the moon one winter's night
And she howled back to give us might
From all the packs gathered 'neath her light
She chose among us one single wight
Tala took that male to her silvery home
She told the packs to hide, not roam
From that mating, Navaryn came
To make us men in more than name
Navaryn, first mother to us all
By her blood our shapes are tall
Pandeena, second mother to us all
When they howl, heed their call
They gave us laws, the ways, and speech they changed all
things within our reach
The ways of culture we were taught
To bring us from old Skawtsslund fraught
By dangers vile and dangers fell
So goes the ancient, ancient tale
Navaryn, first mother to us all
By her blood, our shapes are tall
The woodland god, at their pleading,
Opened a Gate Arcane to end our bleeding
On the strands of Skawtsslund fraught

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
8
With the dangers mankind brought
Pandeena, second mother to us all
When she howls heed well her call
We passed between the pillars tall
To these new lands beyond man's pall
We settled here and built our lives
Where lycan kind can grow and thrive
In a new world of hope and promise
Beyond the reach of murdering Thomas.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
9
THE THREE BROTHERS
Once there were three brothers, Brandrahoon the vampire,
Isranon called the Dawnhand, speaker to spirits, and
Waejonan the Accursed, first of sa'necari. Isranon defied his
brothers and was destroyed, his descendants forced into the
darkness.
.... St. Tarmus of Lorendon

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
10
CHAPTER ONE
LAWGIVER
Pandeena Moonbow rode into the quiet village of Running
Horse at the southern edge of the mountain fastnesses of
Clan Silverpaw. She had not been here in centuries, yet it had
changed little. Cubs played along the streets: in human form
wearing scruffy traditional robes; rolling, barking, and darting
about in wolf form; two who had mastered the hybrid form
wrestled near a horse trough. People walked the tree-shaded
main street, most of them wearing the traditional wraparound
robes with loose ties, made of embroidered cloth for the
bitches and rope for the dogs. The human clothing styles,
prevalent in some of the larger towns, had not yet reached
Running Horse. She saw few males in trousers and shirt, and
no bitches; which made Pandeena all the more conspicuous in
her freeranger-style dark green leathers, trousers and jerkin
with a pale brown shirt. She carried a Sharani longsword at
her shoulder and a pair of lycan fighting knives at her hips. A
two-chambered bow case rode beneath the flap on her heavy
lycan saddle.
One of the easiest ways to spot a lycan village was to see
how green it was. Unlike the humans in other countries, they
had not given up their connection to the natural world. They
built up instead of out for the most part, to allow for gardens
and trees around their businesses and homes. The balconies

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
11
of the buildings overflowed with flower boxes and roof top
gardens abounded, all tended with loving care.
Two things made Running Horse famous: their strong,
tough horses that regularly won the log pull at clan festivals
and their lawgiver, Padruig Caimbeul, who was celebrated for
his wisdom, even-handed decisions, and utter fearlessness.
Pandeena pondered what kind of reception she would get
from Caimbeul, considering that they had parted in anger a
century ago. The average lycan lifespan was six score years,
barring accident, disease, or violence. Caimbeul, however,
was nearly five hundred years old. His paternal grandmother
had been a fireborn, and he had inherited the lifespan, if
nothing else.
Pandeena reached the village common, glanced across the
expanse of open green, and spied the Lawgiver House sitting
on the northeast corner of Roundtop Street facing the
common. She turned her horse onto the green and cut across
it, avoiding six sheep grazing there under the watchful eyes
of two cubs.
The Lawgiver House was a human-style building—
Pandeena noted that she was seeing more of those every
time she ventured out into the lands of her people—a blunt
brick structure with a columned portico across the front and
tie-up rails in the yard. Two lycans sitting on the portico in
wooden chairs stopped in their conversation to stare at her as
she dismounted and tied her horse to the nearest rail.
She was accustomed to being stared at. Part of the reason
was the way she dressed. The second reason was her looks:

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
12
Pandeena was beautiful, as befitted a granddaughter of the
Moon God, Tala, Mistress of Wolves and the Hunt.
A young wolf, his silver hair like a touch of moonlight on a
bright night, rose to his feet as she mounted the steps. "Can I
help you?"
"I'm looking for the lawgiver."
"That's me. I'm Samuel Tarvish, lawgiver to Running
Horse."
Pandeena extended her hand to him, palm up, fingers
curved into a half-claw.
Samuel raised an eyebrow at that, grasped her hand and
sniffed her fingers. "Lycan?"
Pandeena nodded. "I'm looking for Caimbeul."
"Pity that." The other lycan, a gray-beard on his chin,
chuckled. "Pretty bitch like you ought to stay away from that
old crosspatch."
She frowned. "We are talking about Padruig Caimbeul?"
"Oh, aye. He's retired now. All he does these days is drink
and snarl."
"Where can I find him?"
Samuel led her inside, where he drew a map on a scrap of
paper to show her how to find Caimbeul's cottage.
* * * *
Pandeena found a cottage exactly where Samuel had said,
but, looking at it, she was certain it could not possibly be
Caimbeul's. She wrinkled her nose in distaste. The place was
little more than a rundown shack built out of cast off
slatboards. One of the posts on the porch had rotted away,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
13
causing the roof to droop. The sight of it gave her stomach an
odd flutter, remembering how Caimbeul had once disparaged
wolves who lived like this. The boards creaked as she
mounted the steps and crossed the porch. She knocked on
the door.
"Caimbeul?"
"Go away." The voice from inside the shack carried an
edge of irritation marred further by slurring. "I don't talk to
anyone."
Pandeena frowned. This did not sound like the Caimbeul
she remembered. "I need you."
"Go away!"
She turned the knob and stepped inside. The interior
shocked her worse than the exterior had. The Caimbeul she
had known years ago had been clean and tidy, everything had
a place, and he wanted everything kept in its place. A king's
ransom in empty beer and whiskey bottles lay scattered over
the dirt floor of the one room shack. The acrid scent of rotted
food drew Pandeena's attention to the square table shoved in
a corner, stacked high with filthy plates and pans whose
odorous contents would not bear close inspection. A dozen
empty mead kegs with their sides busted in stood silent
witness to a recent fit of drunken rage.
"What do you want, Pandeena?"
Caimbeul's surly voice drew her gaze to a corner. The
huge, grizzled wolf, nearly completely gray, lay on the floor
with a bottle in his hand, and whiskey dribbling down his
unshaven chin. He had developed a paunch. The tremendous
biceps and muscular chest she had so admired had turned to

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
14
flab. Caimbeul had finally gotten old; and he had not aged
gracefully. Only the craggy features, now lined and
weathered, remained to suggest he had ever been handsome.
"I need a lawgiver." Pandeena kicked bottles out of her
path and stepped further into the messy cottage.
"I'm retired."
"Are you, old lecher? I say you're sulking." Pandeena
scanned the room again, trying not to stare at him. He had
changed so much that she wondered if this had turned into a
fool's errand.
"Go away, Pandeena. I've had enough aggravation."
Caimbeul pushed into a sitting position and leaned his back
against the wall. He took another swig from his bottle of
whiskey and glared at her.
A faint frown drew lines across Pandeena's forehead.
"Seems to me the only aggravation you've got comes out of a
bottle."
"Oh for gods' sake, Pandeena. Let me be."
"I need a lawgiver and the best."
Caimbeul threw the bottle at her, sending a spray of
whiskey across the room. "Get out."
Pandeena caught the bottle, looked at it, and saw there
was some left. She wiped it off and drank it. "You're the best,
Caimbeul."
"I'm old. I don't do it anymore." Caimbeul snatched up two
empty bottles and threw them in a determined effort to hit
her.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
15
Pandeena side-stepped the missiles and the sound of
shattering glass told her they had struck the wall behind her.
"The Butchering Serpent is in Wolffgard."
"The hell you say." He stopped short with another two
empties in his grasp. "Look at you ... a fresh face girl of
eighteen for the rest of your life." Caimbeul smashed the
bottle he was holding against the wall. "Where were you when
I needed you?"
"You knew what I was when you married me."
"And you knew what I was when you divorced me."
"A lecherous old sot with no concern for my feelings."
Caimbeul flinched. "I loved you."
"Is that why I was always hauling your ass out of
whorehouses when you went to Waejontor?" Her lips
compressed into a tight line of annoyance.
Caimbeul averted his eyes from her cool, blue gaze, and
changed the subject. "What's this about the Serpent?"
Pandeena folded her arms and stared at him for a moment
before answering. "Are you really interested? Or just trying to
avoid an argument?"
"Cut the crap. What's this about the Serpent?"
"Do you even know who he is? For all I know you've been
too drunk to notice anything for the past twenty years. Or
longer."
"I heard about it. Okay? Sixteen years ago, the Assassins'
Guild tipped off a Battle-Clan that someone was kidnapping
city wolves and murdering them wholesale. It was a lurid tale.
Vivisections. Toxin testing. Mass graves."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
16
"Would Fireborn Law like to take a shot at bringing him
down?"
Caimbeul winced. "Don't call me that. Fireborn Law died in
Skeleton Creek ... when they killed my son."
"Our son."
"You wouldn't know he was yours ... way you were never
home."
"I loved him."
"You barely knew him." Caimbeul snorted. "I raised him
alone."
"Not totally." Pandeena glanced away. "Look, I'll stop
bringing up the past, if you will."
"So, back to the Serpent."
"Someone murdered the lawgiver ... well, tried to. Nikko
Softpaws is with my mother. We don't know if he's going to
live or not. He's in bad shape. His people think he's dead and
it's best left that way."
"He tell you the Serpent attacked him?"
"No. Trauma wiped his memory. The only thing he knows
is his name."
"Then how do you know it's the Serpent?"
Pandeena almost smiled. She could hear the quickening of
interest in Caimbeul's voice. "It's a long story. Can I sit
down?"
"The floor don't mind."
She cleared a space on the floor and settled cross-legged.
"Nikko was shot with a special blend of Devil's Silver that only
the Serpent is known to use. I decided to look into it. When I

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
17
got to Hell's Widow, Amos Raggat told me that Wolffgard's
priest had died."
Caimbeul's eyes got that old familiar steel in them, and
Pandeena knew that this was not a fool's errand after all.
"Priest and lawgiver both?" He scratched at the stubble on his
chin. "Sa'necari always send someone in to kill the priest and
the lawgiver as a prelude to invasion."
"You taught me that."
"You learned something. Go on."
"Claw Redhand sent his best courier to fetch a priest from
Shaurone. Cullen Blackwood."
"How is Cullen? I haven't seen him in years."
"Dead. Sa'necari butchered him. I suspect it happened in
Hell's Widow."
"Damn." Caimbeul's hands clenched into fists, his mouth
tightened, and his gaze roved the roof beams. "I used to win
... a lot betting on him. He could ride like Death over a
battlefield. Cullen was a prick ... and a slut ... but he had a
good heart."
Pandeena flicked a strand of golden hair out of her face. "I
know. I didn't like him at first. He got on my nerves. I'm the
one found his body. Kynyr Maguire asked me to scry for it ...
so we could bring his remains home. They'd dumped him into
a shallow grave outside Hell's Widow. That's why I think he
died there. Cullen was given a proper burial and lies behind
my shrine in Wolffgard."
"You think the Serpent did it?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
18
"I'm certain he did. According to Kynyr, one of the sluts
from the Crimson Lady witnessed the murder. A mon in a
serpent mask killed Cullen."
"Anyone can wear a mask, Pandeena."
"Put it together, lawgiver. Mask, signature poisons,
signature arrows. It's him."
Caimbeul sucked in a deep breath, a calculating look came
in his eyes, his manner focused and steadied. "I don't own a
horse. Only clothes I got is what I'm wearing. I'm not
presentable."
Pandeena eyed him for a second, trying to decide whether
his statement was the beginnings of an excuse or a true
suggestion of need. "Clothes and a horse ... I can provide
them. Does this mean you'll come?"
"Count me in."
* * * *
New clothes and a bath did wonders for Caimbeul and
Pandeena soon had him looking acceptable. She missed his
long hair, but the mats and snarls had been so bad when she
set to work on it, that Pandeena had been forced to cut it
short and close to his head.
Caimbeul stood in front of the mirror in his room at the
Sleeping Dog Inn and wagged his head at the image reflected
there. "I can't say if I like it or not, Pandeena."
Her nose wrinkled at him. "I imagine it took a lot of
scrubbing to get the dirt off."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
19
"Well, yes and no." Caimbeul grinned and left her to make
what she would of the implications. "So I'm to be Lawgiver of
Wolffgard."
Pandeena had spent the past days giving Caimbeul more
details, and he had mulled them over. The facts of the
situation bothered him greatly. The previous lawgiver had
been unusually young; Nikko Softpaws had received his place
at the age of sixteen and held it for only three years when he
disappeared. He was believed dead, although his body had
never been found. Bits of his flesh had been discovered
lodged in the teeth of several dead imps. Imps ate their prey
alive. The bits and pieces of Nikko's flesh were Read, and
found to contain traces of Devil's Silver, a deadly poison to
lycans, but not to imps. Imps did not use Devil's Silver. Myn
did. He had scrutinized all of the information that Pandeena
had given him and found her reasoning sound.
"Does it bother you? The idea of being senior to all the
lawgivers in Red Wolf?"
His eyes went distant and he crossed the room to a small
table where his pipe and tobacco pouch lay beside a small box
of lucifers. He settled into a chair, filled his pipe, and lit it. "A
century ago ... I would have leaped at the chance. Gwythyr
would have been proud of me ... he was anyway ... but you
know what I mean." Caimbeul caught the look in Pandeena's
eyes and made a fending off gesture. "I don't want to talk
about our son. I'll try to stop mentioning him. But you must
understand, Pandeena ... not a day goes by that I don't think
about him."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
20
Her eyes softened. "How does this affect your willingness
to go to Wolffgard?"
Caimbeul looked away, his head lowered; then he sucked
in a deep breath and straightened. "I'm not as sure of myself
as I used to be."
"I know that."
"Have you picked our route?"
"The direct route is across the Hellblade Corridor.
However, that's heavily patrolled and I don't wish to reveal
myself. It would be in the best interests of our people if no
one knew that the Second Mother was at large in the world
again."
Caimbeul considered that a wise decision. Before the Lycan
Rebellion of 997, Red Wolf had touched on Silverpaw in the
north. When the Waejontori crushed the rebellion, they seized
that strip of land and fortified it in an effort to isolate the two
strongest of the Nine Great Clans: Red Wolf and Silverpaw.
That area currently lay in the hands of the Waejontori Queen
Tomyrilen the Bastard, who had raised a revolt against the
Sharani.
"So you won't simply Jump us there?" He tried to keep his
gaze on her face, but his eyes kept drifting across her
exquisite body in spite of his best efforts; and he wondered
by what cursed chance he had managed to fall in love with
the Second Mother of the lycan race. All lycans, to one degree
or another, traced their ancestry to Pandeena, a yuwenghau—
a minor divine.
"Same reason."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
21
Caimbeul nodded and puffed on his pipe for several
minutes, thinking. "That leaves only making a detour through
Waejontor proper. We'll still be dodging Queen Tomyrilen's
forces until we reach Sharani held territory."
"We're taking the same route back that I took getting
here. I know what I'm doing."
"There are things I will need to buy along the way."
"I guessed as much." Pandeena unfastened a pouch from
her belt and tossed it to him.
Caimbeul caught it in mid-air with a speed and ease that
belied his obvious age, noted the weight, and opened it. Coins
filled the pouch, mostly silver, but with a substantial amount
of gold. "All of this is mine?"
"I said I would take care of you."
A small smile lit his grizzled face. "You always were as
good as your word."
"Don't spend it all on whiskey. A drink or two at the inns
we stop at is one thing ... but if I catch you lost in a bottle ...
I'm going to beat the unholy hell out of you."
"You have my word. I will stay sober."
* * * *
The final purchase at Running Horse had been two pack
animals and a gentle gelding for Caimbeul. He had thrown a
fit, wanting a spirited animal like he had ridden in his youth.
Pandeena overruled him; she had no idea how badly his skills
might have deteriorated after spending years in the bottle.
The single thing she had no doubts about was the condition of
his mind: he was as sharp as ever.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
22
They rode out of Running Horse three days after Pandeena
appeared at Caimbeul's shack, winding their way down
through the western foothills of the Eiralyskali Mountains,
heading into Waejontor proper. The Waejontori—and hence
the Sharani also—considered the lands of the Nine Great
Clans to be part of Waejontor. The lycans considered
themselves independent and neutral. The Sharani had
respected the lycans' right to rule themselves; while the
sa'necari aristocracy of Waejontor never had even to the
slightest degree, and with the rise of Queen Tomyrilen, were
beginning to pressure the clans. The situation did not bode
well for the lycans.
They entered Waejontor in the evening of their second day
of travel, stopping for the night at a lycan-owned inn on the
outer edge of the town of Skinner's Hollow. Pandeena got
them rooms with a connecting door and had dinner sent up to
Caimbeul's room. They sat together eating in silence, worn
out by the tensions of the day. Pandeena had been bending
her Wilderkin talents to avoid the guard patrols, the birds and
the beasts alerted her whenever one was near and they got
off the road.
Caimbeul pushed his plate away and settled back in the
chair with his pipe. "You still haven't told me if you have a
suspect."
"I do and I don't. It's hard to explain."
"Try."
"Claw Redhand extended a kindness to the women and
children fleeing the war, by creating and supporting a refugee
camp they call the Sanctuary."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
23
"Humans?"
Pandeena nodded. "And five sa'necari women with lycan
offspring. Some of the children are sa'necari-born."
That brought a frown to Caimbeul's face. "Sa'necari
murdered his sons and he's taking their offspring in? Where'd
he get that?"
"His grandson is sa'necari. His daughter had a bastard
child by a Dark Brother of the Light, possibly a descendant of
Dawnhand."
"I thought they were all dead. That massacre ten years
ago.... "Caimbeul took a long draw from his pipe.
"There were two survivors. Isranon and his sister. The
sister perished three years later. According to Lokynen
Willidar, Isranon is now calling himself Dawnreturning."
"What's the cub's name?"
"Darmyk. He's a sweet little cub. However, there are
several odd things about him. He's Wilderkin. And he has a
wine-stain birthmark on his left shoulder in the form of the
Willodarian bear."
"Godmark?"
"I suspect so. I haven't been able to contrive an
opportunity to examine it."
"We are living the old curse about interesting times. I've
never heard of a sa'necari child who was godmarked and
Wilderkin."
"Neither have I. But he is."
"I'd like to have a look at him."
"You will. Any way. There's a mon at Sanctuary who has a
lot of influence with the young wolves. He's human. I touched

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
24
him, so I should know. However, I swear he tried to Read
me."
"Mage?"
"No sign of it. His name is Malthus Estrobian. My gut
instinct says that's not his real name. He came to the camp
with two sa'necari born nieces, orphans. When Lokynen found
Nikko, the young wolf said something that sounded like Marl
or Mal or something like that, and that there was a sa'necari
in Wolffgard who shot him."
"You have five of them to pick from."
"You mean the women? No, they've been there for several
years now and they're spellcorded."
"So you think he meant Malthus?"
"Possibly. The mon makes me uneasy."
"Well, you've given me a lot to think about. I'll probably
have more questions later."
After Pandeena had gone to bed, Caimbeul slipped
downstairs and purchased three bottles of whiskey that he
stowed in his packs. He would keep his word about staying
sober on the road, but once he got settled into Wolffgard,
Caimbeul intended to tie one on.
* * * *
As they descended out of the mountains where the lycan
clan, Silverpaw, dwelled, the tangled forests gave way to
larger and larger stretches of farmland, and the towns and
villages grew closer together on the flatlands of central
Waejontor. Despite the war, people still traveled. They passed
peasants on the road; black clad Waejontori women in their

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
25
headscarves and shapeless dresses following the proper
number of paces behind their men. A coach rattled past them
at midday with a large armed guard. As the number of people
on the road increased, it soon became clear to Pandeena that
it would be next to impossible to avoid the Waejontori patrols
entirely. They would become mixed in with the others and her
animals spies would more easily confused.
What they did not see caused a sense of tension to grow in
both of them: there were no lycans anywhere.
"Where have they all gone?" Pandeena asked, frowning at
Caimbeul.
"I don't know, but we're conspicuous by their absence. And
I think we're about to find out."
Pandeena followed his glance and saw a small unit of
guardsmyn approaching them: dark myn in blood-red livery.
"Ho, lycans!" The captain shouted at them.
Pandeena reined in and waited. Had she been alone, or
had Caimbeul still had all the skills of his youth, she would
have acted against them at once; however, it seemed better
to take a wait and see approach to this.
The Captain swung off his horse and stalked toward them.
"Dismount and show me your papers."
She blinked. "My what?"
"Travel papers. All lycans in the Queen's territory are
required to have travel papers. You must have permission to
travel."
"I don't know what you're talking about."
The commander raised an eyebrow at her. "Clans wolves
are you?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
26
Caimbeul dismounted and sauntered up to the
commander. "We dinna know aboot this." He thickened his
accent in a deliberate fashion, hoping to appear as a simple-
minded farmer. "Ah'm takin' mah new bride home. She's a
pretty thing, don't ya think?"
The commander glanced at Pandeena. "If you like them
pale."
"Sa what we do aboot these papers?"
"You'll have to come into town with us. We'll talk, and if
my commander likes your answers, you will be given papers
and allowed to go on."
"An if ya dunna like them?"
"Matters could get rather ugly." The captain sneered at
them. "I'm sure the garrison will enjoy opening your wife's
legs."
Caimbeul frowned. "Ah dunna want thaht. Ah ain't hawd
time ta swell her yet."
The captain chuckled at the stupidity of Caimbeul's
answer. "If you don't cooperate, you'll leave with her swollen
... but it won't be yours."
"An' if'n ya like muh answers, Ah get her back untouched?"
Caimbeul sounded puzzled, scratched behind his ear, and
flashed Pandeena a cat sign that was hidden by his large head
and thick neck.
Pandeena extended her Wilderkin talents, touching the
Waejontori horses' nostrils with the scent of lions. They
bucked and reared. Several bolted.
"What the hell?" The captain froze, staring at the spectacle
incredulous.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
27
In the moment of distraction, Caimbeul drew his knife,
grabbed the captain by the shoulder, and plunged the blade
into his throat with a ripping twist. The captain's eyes bulged
in shock as he sank to his knees. Caimbeul jerked the blade
out, turned, and remounted his horse. "Come on, let's get out
of here."
A sharp tingling sensation swept through Caimbeul and his
horse shuddered under him. He felt Pandeena's powers
gathering for a Jump. They vanished from the road in a
shimmer of golden light.
They materialized beneath a stand of beeches and
Caimbeul had no idea where they were. The roads had
changed a lot over the century that he had retreated
gradually into the bottle in Running Horse.
"You should have done that in the first place."
Pandeena shrugged. "I wanted to see if you could talk us
out of it."
"I tried. I'm rusty at that stuff."
"I saw that." Pandeena noticed that Caimbeul was shaking.
"Are you all right?"
"I haven't killed anyone since Skeleton Creek."
"When Gwythyr died?"
"I put my blades up. This isn't even a proper knife." He
pulled his blade and showed it to her as they rode.
"It's just a belt knife...."
"Yah. I'm surprised it worked so well."
"You must start wearing your blades again. It isn't safe."
"I don't own any." Caimbeul's expression darkened as if
staring into the mouth of nightmares.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
28
"Then I'll get you some."
He gave a mute nod and did not reply. His thoughts drifted
to the pair of fighting knives wrapped in silk and buried in his
packs—the ones he had not worn since he failed to save his
son. "Where are we?"
"Sharani held territory ... or at least it was last time I was
through here."
"Yes, but where?"
"Due west of Tamrath Falls."
Caimbeul scratched his chin, certain that his request would
not go over well with her, but deciding to make it anyway.
"Can we stop off at Skullbones?"
"Why?" Suspicion crept into her tone. "What do you want
there?"
"Stop off at that mage shop ... if it's still there."
A frown deepened on Pandeena's face. "The only thing you
ever bought there was contraceptives ... those bloody seed
crystals. We're almost killed and all you can think about is
sex?"
Caimbeul winced, glaring at his hands as he summoned up
the courage to respond, and wondered where he had lost it. It
had always been easier to argue with her when a haze of
alcohol lay between them. Some days he was painfully
conscious of who she was and on other days, she was just
Pandeena to him. Caimbeul was too self-aware not to realize
how and why he wavered between reverent and irreverent
with her. She was both one of his gods and simply a bitch he
had gotten his bone into. Life was easier when he took the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
29
latter view and he clung to it when he finally formed a
response. "Why not? I've no intention of remaining celibate."
Pandeena snarled at him wordlessly.
"I'm male. Deal with it."
"Kynyr isn't like that."
Kynyr? "Who the hell is he?"
"Kynyr Maguire. Cahira Sinclair's grandson."
"Are you sleeping with him?
"Not that it's any of your business ... not yet." Pandeena
went arch on him, savoring her jabs in undisguised fashion.
"However, we will be soon. Have you ever known a wolf that
could turn me down?"
Caimbeul averted his eyes and did not speak to her for the
rest of the day except to answer brief questions. Meanwhile,
she prattled on about the 'noble' and 'handsome' Kynyr
Maguire until Caimbeul wanted to hit him in the face.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
30
CHAPTER TWO
KYNYR AND THE KID
The young guardsmon, Kynyr Maguire, strode through the
second floor hallway, heading for the Blue Room. His golden
ginger hair, so thick it bloused around his face no matter how
tightly he tied it back, hung at his shoulders in a clubbed
knot. A narrow fringe of close-cropped golden beard framed
his face from sideburns to an inch from his chin. His lantern
jaw, pronounced cheekbones with dramatic hollows beneath
them, and cleft chin made him the visual epitome of lycan
masculinity. This often produced more discomfort than
pleasure.
Growing up, his four older sisters would start telling him
how handsome he was just before admonishing him not to
get dirty on pain of being whomped with a hairbrush. He had
decided young that ugly cubs had more fun and probably got
to go fishing more often. Fishing had been one of Kynyr's
favorite childhood pastimes and they had been forever trying
to prevent him from doing it. Kynyr had spent many hours
making elaborate plans for eluding them and running off with
his fishing pole at every opportunity. Now that he was grown
and living away from home he rarely got to go fishing, but the
reasons were different.
Claw had sent for him to come and play checkers. The
chieftain had been sending for Kynyr with increasing
frequency just to talk to him over checkers or chess. The

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
31
servants, as the Redhands insisted upon calling their small
herd of nibari slaves, passed him along the way, going about
their chores. They always smiled at him.
Redhand Manor had three main sections: the guard wing
on the west, the main section where the family lived in the
center, and the servants' wing on the east side. Ostensibly,
the sections where only connected through doors that opened
onto stairs wells on either end of the main hallway through
which Kynyr walked. There were rumors of hidden passages
and servants' passages that provided closer links with the rest
of the house, but if they existed, Kynyr had never found
them. The manor had been added onto many times over the
five centuries of its existence, making it a veritable warren of
halls, passages, drawing rooms, closets, and bedrooms.
The guardsmyn wing, where Kynyr had lived until two
months ago, was the most recent addition. Claw had
expanded his household forces to two hundred myn-at-arms
over the last eighty years since the Lycan Rebellion of 997
had been crushed by their sa'necari overlords. He continued
to expand it and still had room to hire another one hundred
myn. In addition to his regular patrols that moved through
the house and watched the manor grounds and their herds of
sheep, goats, and racing horses, Claw had added a unit of at-
large guardsmyn to the family section of the house that spent
most of their time sitting with his bitches—Aisha his wife, two
elderly sisters, Fianait and Searlait, and his daughter
Merissa—eight myn and an officer to keep them company,
walk in the gardens with them, and take them shopping. As a
sign that Claw was adopting more of the human ways, he

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
32
declared Kynyr their lieutenant, although no one really knew
how to interpret the title.
Of the dozen drawing rooms in the manor, the Redhands
used the Blue Room most often. The room was done in
shades of blue: rugs, furniture cushions, and curtains. A long
row of built-in cabinets—another thing borrowed from the
humans—lined the south wall. A dining table that could seat
forty stretched its stout polished surface near the west
windows, which were open to cope with the summer heat.
The hearth on the north end had not been lit in months, and a
cluster of chairs with end tables and a pair of sofas framed its
heavy bricks. A square table that normally sat off to the side
had been moved over to the chairs and the checkers and
board rested in the middle.
Claw sat stacking and unstacking the red and black
wooden rounds, his pipe clenched in his teeth although the
fire had gone out in it. The chieftain looked up as Kynyr
entered. "About time you got here."
"It's my day off," Kynyr protested.
"You get those, do you?" Claw tilted his head, eyes
narrowing in an appraising way.
The young guardsmon could tell that Claw was in one of
those unpredictable moods that so often threw Kynyr off-
stride. "I was out in the barn when Kissie found me. Larkspur
needs more exercise than I have time to give her."
"You could sell her to me." Claw arranged the pieces on
the board, with a nonchalance that Kynyr recognized as pure
fakery. The chieftain had given Larkspur to Cullen Blackwood
before he realized just how much horse she was. Larkspur

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
33
could outrun nearly anything on four legs and she was
carrying a foal by Claw's top stud, Stormsong.
"No, sir. I couldn't. Cullen left her to me ... made me
promise to take good care of her."
"Then you should hire a boy to take her out every day.
She's a racer, Kynyr."
"On my wages?" Kynyr settled into the opposite chair and
stared at the checker board.
Claw wagged a thick finger at him. "Don't give me that. I
know your gram gives you a stipend. A couple of coppers a
week isn't going to steal all your drinking money."
"I don't know a cub who could handle her."
"Don't lie to me." Claw brought his fist down hard in the
middle of the checker board, knocking everything onto the
floor. "Georgie Rogan says that dwarf of a cousin of yours
rides her."
"Cooley?" Kynyr sucked in a breath, and swallowed back a
groan. He wished the cub would stay away from the manor.
Larkspur had belonged to the cub's murdered father, and so
proved an irresistible draw to the boy. However, the last thing
Kynyr and his family wanted known was that the cub was
actually Cullen Blackwood's bastard son by the Madam of the
Crimson Lady Brothel in Hell's Widow. When Cullen died,
Silkie Faggini had sent the boy to Kynyr along with
permission for his grandparents to adopt the ten-year-old. If
these visits kept up, someone might start asking about
Cooley and Kynyr worried that Cullen's murderers might come
after the boy.
"That one."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
34
Kynyr knelt and picked up the checkers, putting them back
on the board.
"If that family of yours objects to mine so bloody much,
then why the hell did you ever come to work for me?"
"My family doesn't dislike the Redhands." A note of caution
entered Kynyr's voice, knowing how easy it would be to say
the wrong thing and let slip matters best left private.
"Cahira..."
"Has issues. Gram doesn't discuss them. So I don't know
what they are. I've told you that before. If you want to know
what they are, you'll have to ask her."
"I intend to."
"Did you ask me here to play checkers or to interrogate
me about my family?"
"Neither." Claw jerked his thumb at the cabinets on the far
wall. "Fetch that bottle of Dragonsbreath and a couple of
glasses. And while you're at it, close the door."
Kynyr could feel Claw's eyes boring into him with a
thousand unanswered questions as he closed the door and
fetched the whiskey. Claw snatched the bottle and poured for
both of them as soon as Kynyr slipped back into his chair.
"You tell Cooley I'll give him two coppers a week to help
Georgie with the horses in the mornings, including Larkspur."
"I'll do that. Now, what was it you wanted to talk about?"
"That no-good son-in-law of mine." Claw's lips pulled back
from his teeth in a grimace of distaste.
"If you objected to Malthus that strongly, why did you
allow the marriage? He's not right for Merissa."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
35
"Crotchety bitches. All descended on me and complained I
was ruining Merissa's life. If I hadn't said yes, I would never
have heard the end of it."
Kynyr released a sigh, scratching at his thick yellow
sideburns. "I know that one. The Dreaded Horde could be a
bit much to handle."
Claw raised an eyebrow and chuckled. "Your sisters."
"Mine and Finn's. My six and his eight."
"You were neighbors?"
Kynyr gave Claw a long look. "I thought this wasn't going
to be an interrogation."
Claw considered that for a moment and changed the
subject. "Are you certain it wasn't Malthus put a knife in your
back last spring?"
"Positive. He was walking away from me when it
happened. The bitches and cubs were throwing rocks at me
... I guess because I bested him with the practice blades.
Then someone ... it had to be lycan ... threw something
sharper."
"Women and children ... they're humans."
"Yes."
"What happened then?"
"I keep telling you. I don't remember. I got hit in the head
with one too many rocks. Going over and over this isn't going
to make me remember." If I ever find out who did it, I'll gut
them.
Claw stacked the red checkers up again and relit his pipe.
He puffed for a bit. "I've got too many deaths now. I've

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
36
stopped sending my messages out on horseback. Someone's
killing my couriers. Cullen was just the first."
Kynyr went cold inside. "There's been more?"
"Three. And then you add in the dead priest and the
lawgiver. Pandeena's gone to get us a lawgiver. Someone
good."
"I thought she was visiting relatives..."
"That's what we wanted folks to think."
Kynyr put his black checkers in their places on the board
before answering. "I can see your point. But what has this to
do with Malthus? You said that was what you wanted to talk
about."
"Make your move. If anyone walks in on us, just shut up."
Kynyr nodded and started playing: suddenly all the
invitations to play made sense—the invitations that he was
not allowed to refuse—now that the crafty old chieftain had a
mon in his household that he did not fully trust, the games
had become a way of covering for conversations that Claw did
not want anyone to take notice of.
"So tell me, Kynyr. Is it true you beat Malthus?"
"I did."
"The young wolves are all saying you're the best I've got.
You trained with Todd Sinclair. You ought to be."
"Finn did also ... but I'm better than Finn." Kynyr tensed.
"I wish that hadn't gotten out. Belgair has been pushing for a
fight with me ever since people started talking about it."
"Pretty hard not to." Claw chuckled and jumped two of
Kynyr's piece. "He shows up with two of your uncles
threatening to tear the place apart."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
37
"He didn't!"
Claw shrugged with another laugh. "Nah. But when you
said Todd Sinclair was your grandsire, I didn't know you
meant that Todd Sinclair."
"Can we stay away from the subject of my family?"
"We can try. I don't know that Malthus had anything to do
with what's happening around here. But then I don't know
that he hasn't. The only thing I do know is that since the
wedding he's kept my daughter in bed all day with her legs
open and dumped his nieces on my family to watch."
"You want me to go back to keeping an eye on him?"
"Yeah."
"I'm going into Hell's Widow tomorrow. Aisha gave me a
list of things to pick up for the manor. Would you mind if I
spent a couple of days there? I want to talk to the prostitute
who found Cullen's body."
"Still not going to tell me her name?" Claw gave Kynyr that
edgy, appraising look again.
"No. She's frightened enough as it is."
Claw blew a heavy breath out through pursed lips. "Don't
go alone. Cullen was good with his blades and they still got
him. I want to know how. I want to know who. Once I know
who, I want you to take him out."
"And if it's Malthus?"
"Kill him." Claw jumped another of Kynyr's pieces. "King
me."
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
38
Kynyr's head whirled from the long conversation with
Claw. He had promised his grandmother, Cahira Sinclair, that
he would pick up some things for her at Hell's Widow when he
went to pick up supplies for Aisha Redhand, Claw's wife,
tomorrow. As he crossed the yard to walk into the village of
Wolffgard, he noticed several children playing in the gardens.
Searlait, Claw's youngest sister, sat watching them. She
looked much like Kynyr imagined Merissa would when she
reached Searlait's age. He could see the faded beauty in the
aristocratic lines of Searlait's face, the wealth of ginger hair
mixed with gray and a single white streak at her left temple.
A basket of embroidery sat beside her and she held a hoop
with a square of cloth in it, stitching, and looking up
periodically to check on the children. Malthus' two nieces, Ros
and Lyrri, romped with Darmyk Redhand, Cooley, and the two
Scott cubs, Rory and Hamish. It looked like a game of tag.
Darmyk's maned hunting cat, Kenly, lay beside Searlait's feet
drowsing. Darmyk had been a year old when he acquired
Kenly, and the name was actually the child's mispronunciation
of 'Kynyr' in an attempt to name the cat after him.
Kynyr gestured at Cooley. "I'm going to see Gram and I'd
like to have a talk with you along the way."
"I didn't do anything wrong." Cooley shuffled his feet as he
joined Kynyr and stood staring at his toes for a few moments.
"I didn't say you did. But we need to talk." Kynyr saw Rory
and Hamish start toward them and waved them off. "Alone."
The two brothers shrugged and went back to playing.
"Am I in trouble?" Cooley asked, an uncertain frown
wavering on his scruffy face. Small for his age, Cooley looked

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
39
eight years old rather than ten. Kynyr hoped the cub would
get a bit more height than his late father. Cullen had stood
only five feet, four inches tall and taken a lot of kidding for his
height. Which, now that Kynyr thought on it, might have been
what had made Cullen so feisty.
Kynyr noticed a puffiness around Cooley's left eye, stopped
walking, and flicked a long strand of white hair that was just
darkening into blond back from the cub's face. Under all the
dirt was a bruise. "You got into another fight?"
Cooley's expression flashed into sullen. "They were picking
on me."
"Did they hit you first? Or was it just words?"
"They were calling my Ma a slut."
"They know about your mother?"
Cooley twisted away from Kynyr. "I told Lany O'Connor my
mother was Silkie Faggini. I didn't think he'd tell."
Kynyr stopped and dragged Cooley unresisting into a hug.
He ruffled his hair. "You mustn't tell people these things.
Especially not about your father." Kynyr took a deep breath
and expelled it in a huff. He had not wanted to frighten
Cooley, but there seemed no other way to get him to keep his
mouth shut. "Did your mother say anything about why she
sent you to us? Why she let us adopt you?"
Cooley shook his head, his expression flashing from sullen
to sad. "I miss my Ma. I guess she just don't want me any
more. I always was a problem."
Kynyr grasped Cooley's hand and started walking with him
again. "She sent you to us because she loves you."
"That don't make no sense."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
40
"Cooley, did she tell you much about your Dad's death?"
"Just that Da got killed. Courier's a dangerous job."
"There's more to it. They tortured him to death for
information. He died rather than give it to them."
"He was brave."
"Yes, he was." Kynyr ruffled Cooley's hair again. "Your Ma
is afraid they'll try to kill you also. That's why she had us
adopt you."
Cooley's eyes went large and he made a choking sound.
"Ki-kill me?"
"Like they did your dad. That's why you must never tell
anyone who your folks were. I'm sure Cahira can fix the
situation concerning that slip of your tongue. But it mustn't
happen again."
"Ma gave me up because they were gonna kill me?"
"Yes. Like your father."
Cooley burst into tears.
Kynyr stopped walking and gathered Cooley into his arms,
patting his back. "Todd and I aren't going to let anyone hurt
you. But you must keep your mouth shut."
"I will."
"Good." Kynyr hoisted Cooley onto his shoulders, grasped
his legs firmly, and walked on with him.
Cooley's sniffles gave way to laughing and their mood
eased.
"Before I forget ... Claw wants you to come to work in the
barns for two coppers a week. Half days, mornings."
"Really?"
"Yes. You'll be exercising Larkspur and Bucky as well."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
41
"Bucky's awesome. I've sat on him a few times ... but I
haven't exactly ridden him."
Kynyr tried unsuccessfully to repress a smile at the
audacity of the boy getting up on his big war-trained stallion.
"You've been up on Bucky ... hmmn. Does Georgie know
that?"
"He made me get off him."
"You stay off Bucky until I get back from Hell's Widow.
Then I'll show you what he can do and how to handle him."
"He's a war horse, ain't he?"
Kynyr half-choked and then smiled. Observant little scamp.
"Yeah. Todd trained him."
"Could he teach me to train them?"
"What would like to be when you grow up?"
"A courier like my Da was."
"It got him killed. Are you sure you want to do that?"
"I'm not afraid."
Kynyr lifted an eyebrow at that. "Really?"
"Train horses?" Cooley suggested hopefully, watching
Kynyr's face for a reaction.
"That's better."
* * * *
Cahira's Potions and Notions stood on Elmind Street,
around the corner and down two blocks from the Difficult
Horse Tavern that Kynyr and his friends frequented.
Underneath the words on her sign were three sets of symbols
that the largely illiterate lycan community could understand:
a mortar and pestle; a serpent wrapped staff; a book, a bottle

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
42
of ink, and a quill. The shop combined Cahira's four
specialties; apothecary, healer, scribe, and translator. She
could read and write in six languages, and she spoke ten.
Even for a lycan that was unusual. Most could manage to
speak four—lycan, common, Sharani and Waejontori—and
read none.
Cahira Sinclair was that rarest of lycans: a mage. She had
no large talents; nothing great enough to call herself anything
except a generalist. However, Kynyr's grandmother had
literally dozens of minor talents that she put to such skilled
use that her lack of a major gift often went overlooked by
those who did business with her.
Kynyr sat Cooley down when they reached the shop.
Cahira and Todd Sinclair, Kynyr's grandfather, lived on the
second floor. Todd had turned half of the third floor into a
salle and taken on a handful of students for combat training.
The retired Battle-Clan armsmaster had become a teacher
again.
Cooley rushed into the shop, whooping about his new job,
and Kynyr followed slower to give the cub room to brag and
receive some notice from his adoptive parents. A pleasant
array of display cabinets, wood halfway up and clear glass the
rest, filled two sides of the shop with shelves built from floor
to ceiling behind them. The rear of the shop had a low cabinet
that flanked a long table with six chairs around it. Cahira sat
at the table, totaling things in her ledger.
His grandmother was a tiny bitch, barely five feet tall, with
a long blonde braid hanging down her back. Despite her

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
43
years, a soft beauty lurked around the delicate bones of her
face along with the laugh lines around her mouth and eyes.
Kynyr leaned against a wall with his arms folded loosely
and smiled at Cooley. Cahira noticed him and waved a piece
of paper.
"Here's my list."
Kynyr strolled over and nodded as he took the list from her
hands and shoved it into his pouch. "I need to talk to Todd for
a bit."
"He's in the salle."
"Is there anyone with him?"
Cahira shook her head. "He's just working out."
"Okay."
Kynyr headed down the hall and went up the stairs to the
third floor. He stepped into the room as quietly as he could,
although his horsemon's heels clicked on the wood and gave
him away to his sharp-eared grandfather.
"I'll be right with you, Kynyr," said Todd without hesitating
in working through his forms.
The big lycan stood six foot three inches and weighed two
fifty; yet despite his one hundred and seven years of age,
Todd Sinclair was still mostly muscle and rock hard. His bright
red hair was as much a Sinclair trait as was his size. Family
legend held that the Sinclairs could trace their lineage all the
way back for thousands of years to a hero of the first
godwar—a mon who was regarded by most as little more than
a myth—Aristotle Sinclair. Kynyr had never disparaged Todd's
claims, although the older he got, the more it seemed like
humoring the man.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
44
Todd left the mat, turned and bowed to it in a
conspicuously Creeyan manner, before gesturing at the table
and chairs on the far side of the room. The old mon had
trained in the Creeyan and Sharani forms as well as the lycan
arts. He had trained his children and his grandchildren with a
mix of discipline and patience like an iron hand in a velvet
glove. As a result of that, Todd and Cahira's huge extended
family was the closest thing to a Battle-Clan that the village
of Longbranch had.
"You've got that look in your eyes, Kynyr. Something on
your mind?"
"Yeah." Kynyr considered his words before saying anything
further. They both knew that Cooley was proving to be a
challenge. The cub meant well, but he was having trouble
fitting in. It was not just the differences between city wolves
and clan wolves. Cooley had been raised in a brothel with
only the children of prostitutes to play with; more to the point
he had been the lone lycan cub in the bunch. The only lycans
Cooley had known had been a handful of whores who worked
for his mother; his father who rode into town from time to
time and stayed only for short periods; and the males who
came for their jollies. Now, at ten-years-old, the cub found
himself thrust into a lycan clan community as a misfit among
his own race. "Cooley. I'm going to Hell's Widow tomorrow."
"Your Gram said. Are you going to talk to his ma?"
Todd Sinclair had a strong, hearty face. The folded lines
running from the wings of his nostrils to the outer edges of
his lips were deep; the crinkles around his dark blue eyes
were crevices in the stalwart earthiness of his features; his

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
45
heavy eyelids did not lend themselves to clear expression of
emotion, making any effort to read his features difficult even
for those who knew him well. His calm, centered mien
suggested a mon who did not go looking for trouble, but once
it found him would be utterly relentless in dealing with it.
"Yeah. I wanted to go before now, but Claw wouldn't let
me until he was sure I had healed up."
"Wise decision." Todd settled into a large chair that he
reserved for himself alone. "Is he still bothering you about
who your grandfather might have been?"
"He stopped trying to convince himself that I might be his
great-grandson once you spoke to him."
"That's good." Todd regarded Kynyr for several moments.
"You should never have come to Wolffgard. You're the spitting
image of Tarrant Redhand. More so than your father."
Kynyr looked away and then back, trying to hide his
discomfort. "That's what everyone there keeps telling me.
You're probably right. I never had someone try to kill me
before ... except for the time Claw sent us to deal with those
outlaws. But that's different."
"You think it happened because they figured out you're
Tarrant's grandson?"
"I don't know what to think. Right now, I'm more
concerned about Cooley. He told Lany O'Connor that he was
Silkie's son. That was what the fight was about."
"She was Cullen's favorite whore for many years." Todd
rubbed his forefinger across his chin. "It's only a hop, skip,
and a jump to seeing Cullen in him."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
46
Kynyr put his hands on the table, laced his fingers, and
leaned toward Todd. "That's what worries me."
"You think they'll make a try for the cub?"
"I think the ones who killed Cullen have agents in
Wolffgard, possibly in the manor itself."
"So?"
"They killed Cullen in front of Silkie. Until I know more, all
I can do is make guesses."
"Make them."
Kynyr glanced away again, wishing that Todd would not
put him on the spot this way. It made him uncomfortably
aware of the difference between them in terms of age and
experience. Todd was the master of strategy and tactics, of
discernment and logic—things that Kynyr, although he was
considered a master by many of his peers among Claw's
guardsmyn, still struggled with. He always worried about
appearing the fool in front of Todd. "One. They tortured
Cullen to get the names of Claw's other couriers. There's been
three more killed. Claw's stopped sending messages by
horseback. I don't know how he's doing it now."
"Next guess?"
Kynyr exhaled loudly. "Second concerns Silkie. I think they
made her watch him die to intimidate her."
"Good so far. Why would they intimidate her?"
"To take control of the Crimson Lady. Brothels are good
places to learn things. Males will spit out stuff to the whores
without considering where the information might go from
there."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
47
"Now, connect it up to Cooley and I'll give you my
thoughts."
"They must know that Cullen and Silkie had been lovers.
They may even know that Cooley is Cullen's, although Silkie
implied that no one but Cullen knew it. So there's two
possibilities. They could be after Cooley because he's Cullen's.
In which case they intend to kill him. Or they could be after
Cooley because of Silkie, in which case they want him alive as
a hostage."
"You're awfully certain they're after the boy."
"Silkie must have reason to think so, Todd. Otherwise why
send him to us?"
"Good point. However, I doubt they want him as a
hostage."
Kynyr blinked, a sense of unease creeping along his arms.
"Why not?"
"We're not dealing with humans or lycans. We're dealing
with sa'necari. Sa'necari would not need a hostage. They
would simply cram Silkie's mind full of coercions until there
was nothing she could do but obey."
"No. I don't think they would. Psi craft like that always has
side-effects. Personality changes. Someone would notice."
"Only if they paid attention, Kynyr. No one pays attention
to whores. Which is probably the reason males betray
themselves so freely to them."
"Cullen did." Kynyr's mouth tightened.
"Cullen was an odd wolf. We'll see what we can do to fix
the damage Cooley's caused himself."
"I'd like you to train him."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
48
"He's not emotionally stable. The fight with Lany O'Connor
was not the first one that Cooley's had."
"Training could help that." Kynyr met Todd's eyes with a
calm steadiness. "The cub's life is on the line. If you don't
train him, he'll die."
"Gut instinct?"
"Yeah."
"I'll teach him avoidance. But until he stops fighting with
the villagers, I'm not going to teach him the arts of war. I
don't want to see him kill another child just because they
taunted him."
"Understood."
"Then I'll start with him this evening after dinner."
Relief blossomed on Kynyr's face. "Thank you."
Todd lifted his hand to forestall more talk from Kynyr. "But
I expect something in return."
"What?"
"You'll answer all of my questions."
"About what?"
"I want to know everything you learn in Hell's Widow
tomorrow. Everything his mother tells you. There will be other
questions. Something bad is going on in this town and I want
to know what."
Beneath Todd's calm exterior, Kynyr could sense an edge
he had never seen before, and it prompted his agreement.
"So be it."
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
49
The Difficult Horse Tavern, called that because of its sign
that featured a horse sitting on its rump while a mon tugged
the reins before it, stood on Main Street across from the
village common. Hereward Wiggins, the owner, brewed his
own mead from locally produced honey and it was considered
the best in Wolffgard.
Barrels with spigots jutting from them lined the rear wall
behind a polished bar of walnut heartwood. Sturdy chairs
circled the round tables placed throughout the common room.
Kynyr occupied a table with his three closest friends, who
had become his subordinates in the new unit that Claw had
formed. His spiritbrother, Finn MacIver, sat at his right hand.
Finn's pale hair hung in a long silken tail to the middle of his
back with a neat orderliness that Kynyr envied every time he
had to fight with his own discipline resistant mane. Ramsey
Fitzgerald had the chair to Kynyr's left. Three tankards of
mead had lent a rosette flush to his fair skin and heightened
the color in his round cheeks until they nearly matched his
fiery red hair. Eideard Doyle, the oldest of them at twenty-
four sat directly across from Kynyr. His dramatic cheekbones
broke the symmetry of his otherwise bland square face,
framed by crinkly ash blond hair that was caught at his neck
with a twist of leather.
Hereward's four buxom daughters waited tables at the
Difficult Horse, flirting with the customers in a manner that
skirted the edges of propriety, strictly 'look but don't touch.'
The tavern master kept a spiked club behind the bar and
everyone in the village knew better than to test his temper—
especially where his daughters were concerned. When it got

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
50
too busy in the evenings, the two nibari Hereward owned
would be sent out to help with the orders.
Kynyr's eyes roved the room, searching for his favorite,
LoraKady—or Kady as most called her. She was Hereward's
eldest, a sweet-tempered bitch with flaxen hair that hung
past her hips and a ready smile that suggested mischief. He
frowned when he did not see her. "Where's Kady tonight?"
Finn glanced around the room before answering. "I don't
know."
"She hasn't been around much since that Cullen business."
Ramsey tilted his head to the side and contemplated his
tankard as if he knew something he felt reluctant to share.
"There's rumors going around about her."
"Like what?"
Eideard gestured at Rachel Wiggins with his tankard,
indicating he wanted another. "Spit it out, Ramsey ... or I
will."
Kynyr's frown deepened. "One of you tell me."
Ramsey looked uncomfortable, so Eideard growled
something under his breath and then repeated it louder.
"They're saying Kady is a slut. A bunch of those wet-tailed
wheat-grinders that work at the mill." Eideard snorted
derisively. "They're saying they got their rods into her ... and
she liked it."
"They said that here?" Kynyr sounded incredulous. "What
did Hereward do?"
Ramsey licked his lips and took a drink from his tankard.
"That's the odd thing. Nothing. Acted as if he hadn't heard it,
and I know damned well he had."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
51
Kynyr blew a breath through pursed lips and scratched his
sideburns. "I don't know what to make of that."
Rachel Wiggins, Hereward's youngest, sashayed up with a
large tray of full tankards. "Another round?"
Finn and Eideard shoved their empties at her along with a
five penny piece. Rachel took the empties and the coins, then
placed full tankards in front of them.
"Where's Kady?" Kynyr asked her.
Her smile died and her mouth tightened. "How should I
know?"
Rachel moved on to another table and Kynyr stared at her
back with one eyebrow lifted.
"What's the plan for tomorrow, Kynyr?" Eideard asked,
sipping at his mead.
"We're doing it different. Full arms. Armor."
"That'll mark us, Kynyr." Ramsey leaned across the table.
"They'll know we're guardsmyn. The Sharani garrison will get
antsy."
Eideard snorted. "Those she-devils aren't stupid, Ramsey.
I'm sure they already knew that Claw's errand boys were
guardsmyn."
"Probably. But the road's not safe anymore." Sitting his
tankard aside, Kynyr got to his feet. "I'll be back in a bit."
"Where you going?" Finn started to push his chair back and
follow.
"Out back for a bit of relief." Kynyr's mouth twisted into a
crooked smile.
"Oh."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
52
Kynyr passed through the common room and down the
short hallway past the kitchen to the back door that opened
on the alley. The sheltered rectangle that held the tavern's
neatly sorted trash stood to the left of him and beyond that
the dingy square of the privy. Kynyr felt as if the beer had
gone right through him and filled his bladder to bursting as
soon as it passed his lips. He put his hand on the door knob
of the privy and started to turn it when a voice from within
loosed a string of curses followed by "I ain't done yet."
Kynyr hissed between his teeth, knowing there was no way
that he could hold it much longer. He glanced up and down
the alley before slipping around behind the privy. Kynyr
opened his pants, lifted his bone out, and relieved himself
against the stone wall of the tavern like a dog marking
territory.
As he finished lacing his pants closed, he heard a muffled
cry and the sounds of a struggle. He came around as quiet as
he could and saw two myn holding a bitch down while a third
moved atop her. They had her skirts shoved up to her chin
and a roll of cloth in her mouth. She writhed and jerked in a
futile effort to get free.
"Be still you stupid whore or I'll beat the shit out of you,"
one of them growled.
Kynyr thought he recognized the voice, but was not certain
as he slipped up to them. He kicked the one holding her left
arm in the head, grabbed the one riding her by the collar and
slammed him into the side of a building. The third released
her and scrambled away as Kynyr's sword cleared the sheath.
"Kynyr Maguire," one of them spat at him.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
53
"Cormic Parry." Kynyr leveled the sword at him.
Cormic's eyes widened and he backed farther from Kynyr.
Then they all broke and fled.
Every since the day he beat Malthus Estrobian with a
practice blade, most of the young rowdies did not want to
fight him. It gave Kynyr a bitter satisfaction since that was
also the day that someone put a knife in his back because
they were afraid to try and take him from the front.
Kynyr sheathed his sword, knelt down, and gathered the
young bitch in his arms. "Let me help you inside. Do you need
a healer?"
"No."
The light from the tavern windows fell across her face.
"Kady Wiggins! I'll get your father."
"No! He doesn't give a damn."
That did not sound like Hereward Wiggins. He had always
been fiercely protective of his four daughters. "Kady, he's had
all the dogs scared to touch you."
"My sisters, yes. Not me." She burst into loud sobbing.
"This has happened before. He told me to get used to it ...
that you can't rape a slut."
"You're not a slut, Kady."
"He thinks I am."
"Why?"
"Cullen."
"But I thought nothing happened."
Kady lowered her head and her shoulders drooped. "We'd
been doing it for weeks ... meeting at the Commons after
midnight. Dad had me checked by the midwife when rumors

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
54
started flying. When Baroucha told him I was not a virgin, he
turned his back on me."
"You're lucky you didn't get pregnant."
"Cullen used eelskins. He didn't take chances with that."
"He was your first?"
Kady swallowed and managed a small nod.
"Come on. I'll take you to Cahira."
"No. I'm all right." Kady pushed away from him. "Forget
this happened." She got to her feet and fled down the alley.
"Kady!"
She hesitated at the mouth of the alley and glanced back
at him.
"I'm going to beat the shit out of Cormic Parry, Kady. I
promise."
She dipped her shoulders at him, turned, and vanished
into the street.
Kynyr walked back into the tavern feeling troubled. The
soul of Wolffgard seemed to be rotting away at its roots and
he could not figure out why. He paused at the table he had
been sharing with his friends.
"I'm going home."
Finn frowned. "You got that look in your eye. What
happened?"
"I don't want to talk about it."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
55
CHAPTER THREE
A SIP OF DEATH
The trip to Hell's Widow and back had proved to be
uneventful. With the Waejontori Rebellion against their
Sharani occupiers growing more heated, large numbers of
Sharani troops had been pulled out of the more remote areas
that bordered the various lycan clans, and fielded elsewhere.
As a result, Sharani forces no longer patrolled the stretch of
road between Hell's Widow and Red Wolf. The main portion of
Malthus' forces operated in the north and northeast with the
goal of preventing the lycans from crossing into either Creeya
or Iradrim. He also had a few units in Hell's Widow testing
plans for interdicting the road and cutting Red Wolf off from
Waejontor. Eventually no one would get in or out of the
valley.
The only people who knew that Malthus was sa'necari were
those who had already fallen so deeply under his sway that
they could not reveal him. He passed for human by wearing
the simple golden ring on his right hand that Lord
Brandrahoon had given him, which was an ancient sa'necari
artifact. Hoon had a huge hoard of such things, and when
Malthus had learned that Hoon was actually Brandrahoon the
ancient vampire, he had stopped being surprised by any of
the small gifts that were frequently bestowed upon him by his
benefactor.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
56
Malthus had the latest shipment of goods from his mother
and a few things that Heironim had been saving for him
carried up to his study by two guardsmyn and three servants.
Another of Claw's guardsmyn would drive the wagon on to the
Sanctuary Refugee Camp where the last of his purchases
would be unloaded and sorted out by the bitch who ran the
camp, Clodagh Demarist.
When he married Merissa Redhand, he had insisted upon
having a study. The manor had plenty of unused space. He
shooed them all out as soon as everything came up and then
locked his door, dropping the bar.
The first crate he opened contained three bottles of wine
marked with a "C." Heironim had had his sanguiner blend this
special for him. He got a corkscrew from his desk drawer and
opened the first one. It was laced with blood.
Malthus put the bottle to his lips and took a small amount
into his mouth, rolling it around his palate. "Ah, Cullen, what
a delightful vintage you've become."
He fetched a glass from the cabinet near the rear and
poured himself a glass of it before settling in his chair. He
closed his eyes and leaned back, savoring both the blood and
the memory of how Silkie Faggini—he felt certain that was
not her real name—and Ellie Remus had looked when he
shoved the blade into Cullen's chest. He had jacked Cullen's
lover of many years, Silkie, next to his cooling body. Malthus
finished it off and poured a second glass, sipping at it as he
opened the rest of the crates.
Heavily packed in straw were six bottles of a rare whiskey,
fifty-year old Cair Dairmid from Doronar. A small lycan clan

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
57
produced it based on an old family recipe. People said it was
the smoothest whiskey on the continent, especially when
aged like this.
He gathered the bottles up and carried them to his desk.
Malthus took another sip of wine. Gifts of rare liquors
delighted Claw; and his capacity for alcohol was prodigious.
Malthus sketched a sa'necari rune on the first bottle with
his finger. It glowed darkly for a moment and then vanished.
"Here's a little more death for you to drink, Claw."
He runed each of the bottles. So far, Malthus had seen no
signs of suffering in the old wolf, although his calculations had
estimated that Claw should have begun experiencing heart
trouble weeks ago. Perhaps, I'm being too subtle. I'll give it
another week and take another approach if I must.
Then he drank the last of his glass of wine, put the cork
back in and filled his arms with the whiskey.
He carried it to the Blue Room where he knew he would
find his father-in-law at that time of day. A dining table that
could seat forty dominated the near side of the room. The
opposite side had two clusters of overstuffed chairs and sofas
with end tables. A row of cabinets lined the same side of the
wall as the door. A stack of serving tables filled a corner. The
walls were pale blue and the carpets and curtains were a dark
blue.
Claw sat at his chair near the window, letting the afternoon
breeze cool him. He held a wooden soldier in his hand,
turning it this way and that before working on it again with
his knife. The old chieftain enjoyed making toys for his
grandcub, Darmyk. He had changed out of his work clothes

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
58
into a comfortable robe that wrapped around and closed with
a sash.
Malthus set the bottles on the table beside his chair, and
gestured at them.
"What have you got there?" Claw set his whittling aside,
leaning close to see. A smile spread over his face. "Cair
Dairmid!"
"Presents from my mother. I wrote her that you liked such
things."
"Considerate mon." Claw opened a bottle. "Get me a
glass."
Malthus fetched glasses for them both and poured. The
curse on the bottle was keyed to Claw and presented no
danger to anyone else—unlike poisons.
Claw took a sip and rolled it around in his mouth. "This is
good. I've not had anything so smooth in years."
"I'm glad that you like it. If there is anything special you
would like her to find, tell me and I'll write her."
"I'll do that. What all did you pick up in Hell's Widow?"
Malthus lowered his head, gave a tiny nod, and a smile
that failed to touch his eyes flickered across his lips. "I went
mainly for the Sanctuary. Clodagh needed several things that
could not be found in Wolffgard. For the children mostly."
"So you're going to keep working there?"
"A bit. I gave Beth my word on it before she died. I'm a
mon of my word."
"I guess you're okay for a human." Claw refilled his glass.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
59
The lycan capacity for drink always surprised Malthus. He
had seen Claw down six doubles in a row and barely feel it.
"I'm glad you think so."
"You should be. Tell me, did you see any sign of bandits?
The merchants that come through are complaining of them."
"Not a one."
"Aisha's sending Kynyr to Hell's Widow tomorrow to pick
up some things for her."
"I could have picked them up for her."
"That's Kynyr's job. She likes sending him. She's a picky
old bitch and likes things done a certain way. She's got Kynyr
trained and that's that. Ahg..." Claw leaned back in his chair
with a grimace, rubbing his chest.
"What's wrong?" Malthus asked solicitously, extending his
gifts in a low level scan for a taste of Claw's discomfort.
"...chest pains. I've been getting a lot lately."
I'm sure you have. "Has anyone looked into it?"
"Baroucha. She's given me something for it."
Ahh, Baroucha. I've been neglecting you lately. "Perhaps
you should rest. I'll send for a servant."
Malthus reached for the bell on the table and Claw covered
it with his hand. "I'll rest when I'm damned well ready to."
"So be it. If you'll excuse me, I have other matters to
attend to." Malthus rose and left.
As he reached the stairs, Merissa turned the corner. She
lifted her long skirts to free her feet and ran to him. He pulled
his lovely, ginger-haired wife into his arms and kissed her
deeply.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
60
"I missed you, darling," Merissa said when he ended the
kiss.
"I missed you too." He glanced around to see that no one
was near and cupped her breast, thumbing her nipple. "I'll
show you just how much after dinner."
Malthus grasped her hips and ground his pelvis into hers.
"Yes, indeed I will. And all night long too."
* * * *
Malthus stood for a moment, staring at the front of
Baroucha's dingy shop on Main Street a block and a half from
the Difficult Horse Tavern where he spent many afternoons
drinking with his friends from Sanctuary. The green paint had
cracked and peeled. He shook his head at it, wondering that
she had any customers at all considering how badly she had
neglected the outside.
Like most shops in towns and villages, whether lycan or
human, Baroucha's living quarters were upstairs above her
work rooms. Ordinarily a village as large as Wolffgard—
practically a small town in size—would have had several
healers and midwives. Yet, until Cahira Sinclair had set up
shop, Wolffgard had had only Baroucha.
It had not taken Malthus long to discover why. Baroucha
resented competition. Gossip was her chief weapon and she
wielded it with great effect to drive out anyone who dared to
set up a competing shop and business. She tolerated the
human apothecary, Atreius Ivanstern, only because he had
access to drugs and herbs that she could not come by—

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
61
mostly through connections in Creeya—and he was willing to
sell to her at discount.
The bell on the door rang as Malthus entered and Baroucha
looked up from the table where she sat discussing a bottle of
medicine with a middle-aged bitch wearing one of the
traditional lycan robes that wrapped around and tied with a
sash.
A tiny sneer touched Malthus' lips at the high collared
dress Baroucha wore despite the blazing heat of late summer.
He had not been by to feed on her in weeks, yet she still wore
those dresses as if expecting to find his fangs in her throat at
any moment.
"I need to talk to you for a bit. Privately."
"Just a moment." Baroucha turned back. "Just one
teaspoon, morning and evening."
The bitch slid Baroucha two coppers, took the bottle, and
left with a backwards glance at Malthus. He flipped the sign
on the door to "closed," and dropped the bar across it so that
they would not be disturbed.
"What do you want, Malthus?" Baroucha's hand went to
the mottled skin on her neck, her eyes filling with tension.
She looked like an oversized toad and Malthus doubted that
the old bitch had ever been pretty.
"Let's go into the backroom for this."
She preceded him into the backroom, which was a maze of
cabinets, tables, and bookshelves with a sofa along the
farthest wall. Malthus noted with satisfaction that Baroucha
had replaced the ratty old thing she had had before his visits

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
62
began with one covered in an overstuffed burgundy brocade
that had pillows piled high in the corners.
She settled in a corner against the pillows and unfastened
the bodice of her dress. "Payment first?"
"Always." Malthus seated himself beside her and ran his
finger along the loose, wrinkled skin on her neck.
She watched his fangs descend from their sheaths, her
heartbeat quickened, and she breathed in small rapid pants.
"Go on. I'm ready."
Malthus' sneer broadened. Baroucha had been one of the
smart ones, and never fought him. His coercions had gone
into her mind with ease and he had not been forced to layer
them as he did with the others.
She shivered as he licked along her neck and stiffened for
an instant as he sank his fangs into her. Because Baroucha
was always so cooperative, Malthus triggered her endorphins
once the first taste of her blood was in his mouth. She
relaxed with a sigh, eyes distant, and a smile playing across
her face. He wondered what she dreamed of as he sucked.
"Alistar ... Alistar..." She moaned.
She always says that name. A lover perhaps?
He pulled out of her and wiped his mouth off on a
handkerchief. "What have you been giving Claw for his heart
trouble?"
Baroucha blinked, shaking off the visions he had given her.
"Foxglove extract."
"Excellent. When do you send him his next bottle?"
"Morcar is picking it up this afternoon. Why?" She fingered
the tiny wound before closing the neck of her dress.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
63
"Give me the bottle."
"That's it sitting on the table."
Malthus rose and followed her pointing hand to the table
nearest the door. A cluster of jars sat in the nearest corner of
the table and just beyond it, a six ounce bottle. The bottle
had a colorless liquid in it with instructions, written in a neat
hand, pasted to it. Malthus carried it over to her work table.
He took a slender chain from his pouch that had nine globes
of various colors on it. He tapped a lavender one and a small
crate appeared on the table with an assortment of bottles,
spoons, an eyedropper, glass mixing rods and other.
"Carrying globes." Baroucha pulled out a chair and sat
down across from him. "What are you doing?"
Malthus' sneer became a true smile that lit his eyes. "I'm
killing Claw."
"I'll get blamed for it." Her voice took on a nervous edge.
"They'll kill me."
Malthus chuckled. "They'll never know. I started killing him
weeks before my marriage."
"Poison?"
"Nothing so primitive." He unstoppered the bottle, and
took a bottle from his crate. He unstoppered that and dipped
an eyedropper into it, he added a precise nine drops to the
foxglove extract. He dipped a glass rod into the bottle and
stirred it well. "That should bring the heart attack on faster."
"You're going to kill them all, aren't you?"
"Of course."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
64
She sucked in a deep breath as an expression of wonder
took years from her face. "Alistar's curse. You're delivering
Alistar's curse."
"What's this?" Malthus closed the bottle of foxglove extract
and put his tools away.
"Alistar Weems. Tarrant Redhand and Todd Sinclair
murdered him. He cursed them as he was dying ... said all
the Redhands would die."
"Interesting." Malthus stroked his oak leaf beard.
"You'll have to kill Kynyr too." Baroucha's word sped up as
her excitement grew. "And Branduff Maguire to get them all.
And his daughters too."
"What do you mean?"
"Branduff Maguire—Kynyr's father—he's Tarrant's
bastard."
"Sooo." Malthus licked his lips. "The resemblance everyone
speaks of isn't a coincidence."
"Cahira thinks she can elude the curse that my Alistar ...
my precious Alistar ... laid upon them ... by not letting
anyone know Kynyr's a Redhand. Not even Claw knows. She
threatened to kill me if I said anything. But I want them dead.
I want them all dead. They killed my Alistar."
"We'll have our vengeance, Baroucha. I promise you. They
killed my brother."
Malthus realized that he would not need to play with her
mind any longer: she saw him as an ally, rather than a
master.
"And Todd Sinclair, too. Please?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
65
"Of course." He reached across the table and patted her
hand. "I'll arrange it all. Be patient. This isn't something that
can be rushed."
"I understand. Oh, praise the dark gods you came."
"Yes. Praise them indeed."
* * * *
The information that Baroucha had given Malthus burned
in his mind like a bonfire. Until then, his desire to see Kynyr
Maguire dead had been purely personal; now it had become
business and business always came before pleasure. Had he
not returned so recently from Hell's Widow, he would have set
out again. Heironim Traxton needed to know this about
Kynyr. The messengers that Hoon used to carry missives
between them kept erratic schedules—they only appeared
when they had something to bring Malthus—so he could not
trust that they would appear in a timely fashion. That meant
trusting one of his lycan cat's paws further than he liked.
They all worked at the Sanctuary, so he headed for it.
Passing the Difficult Horse, Malthus saw three of them
emerge from the tavern: scrawny Yren who always looked
half-starved; huge Torquil the smith's apprentice; and Preece,
the one he wanted to talk to. Preece's only loyalty was to his
purse and the person who put the most coins into it, which
happened to be Malthus.
"Hey, Preece!" Malthus made a come here gesture.
Preece excused himself from his companions and
swaggered across the street. "What you need?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
66
The tall, raw-boned lycan went shirtless in the late
summer heat and wore his drawstring pants so loose they
hung around his narrow hips. The sheaths of the long knives
hanging from his belt were strapped to his thighs for an easy
draw. Preece's dead, world-weary eyes—at odds with his
youthful face—spooked his peers, yet intrigued Malthus. His
thin lips disappeared into an off-kilter twist that passed for a
smile as he regarded Malthus.
"Well?" Preece rested his knuckles on his hips.
"Meet me at the cottage. I have a task for you."
"Coins in it?"
"And more."
"I'll see you there." Preece's gaze slid sideways and
Malthus glanced to see what he was looking at.
Kady Wiggins walked away from the door to the dry goods
store with her head down.
"Promptly, Preece."
"Yeah."
Preece overtook Kady in three long strides, caught her by
the shoulders, and pushed her up against the side of Atreius
Ivanstern's apothecary. "Hello, slut."
"Let go of me." She twisted in his grasp.
"Have a drink with me at the Striped Dog tonight?"
"No."
"Either the Striped Dog tonight, or stay off the streets after
dark, Kady."
"Are you threatening me?"
Preece shrugged. "The weapon's friendly."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
67
Malthus did not wait to hear the rest of the exchange, but
started walking. He reached the Sanctuary and strode past
the Willodarian shrine that marked the entrance. The shrine,
built of yellow stone and white pine, was a simple box with
two wings that contained the priest's apartments on the right
and the school room on the left. Children played across the
open ground beyond the shrine, enjoying an unexpected
holiday with the priest gone to visit her relatives in Silverpaw
and not there to teach her morning classes.
He slipped around to the back on the shrine on a whim. An
arch and a low, white stone fence marked off the cemetery.
There were only two graves in it: Tempest Anstey, their
former priest who had died of heart failure, making him
Malthus' first victim in Wolffgard; and Cullen Blackwood.
Malthus puzzled over how Pandeena had managed to locate
his remains. He stood beneath the arch and gazed across at
the head stones. With any luck, Maguire would be joining
them beneath the ground in the next few days.
"Malthus?" Clodagh stepped out of the shadows, wringing
her hands. "Three new females arrived today."
"Human?" Malthus turned away from the graves.
She nodded. "And one sa'necari."
"They spellcorded her?"
"Yes."
"Good. I'll take care of it before I leave today."
Malthus walked off.
His cottage lay on the far west side of the camp, beyond a
dense stand of sheltering forest and almost upon the banks of
the Bonnie Draw River. He had picked this spot for the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
68
privacy it gave him. The house was a human style dwelling
and far nicer than the traditional longhouses that were going
up elsewhere on the camp grounds. The large front room
served as both kitchen and living room. It had two bedrooms
and a study. Malthus fetched pen and paper from the study
and carried it to the square table in the living area, along with
sealing wax and a candle. If it started to get dark before
Preece arrived, it would not do to let him discover how well
Malthus could see in dim light—a talent the sa'necari shared
with the lycans.
He quickly wrote two letters, one to Heironim, and the
other to Dymier Bianco who ran the Devil's Dance Inn.
Malthus had just gotten them sealed when Preece gave a
perfunctory knock at the door before sauntering inside and
joining him at the table.
"So what's this about?"
"Letters. They must be delivered today. No questions
asked."
"What's in it for me?"
Malthus slid two silver nobles across the table and Preece
scooped them up.
Preece frowned. "You've given me far more for nothing."
"There's more. Take both letters to Dymier at the Devil's
Dance Inn. He'll you lodging and all the liquor you want on
my tab. Plus a token that will get you into the Crimson Lady
to fuck any and all whores you wish. You'll spend the night at
the Inn in case there's a reply coming back for me and return
tomorrow evening. I'll have more coin for you then."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
69
Preece shoved the letters into his belt pouch and stood up.
"The sooner I'm gone, the more time for fun."
"One thing." Malthus gestured for Preece to wait a
moment. "There's a chance you might encounter Maguire
tomorrow. I'd prefer he didn't see you."
Preece's face lost all expression and his hands settled on
the hilts of his blades. "I'm not afraid of Maguire."
"That's not the point. Just do as you're told."
"So long as you're paying for it." Preece turned and left.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
70
CHAPTER FOUR
HEART'S DESIRE
They rode west for a day toward the town of Skullbones.
The nearer they got to the town, the quieter Caimbeul
became. Pandeena had stopped shoving Kynyr in his face, yet
the subject still came up. The way that Pandeena's eyes
brightened at his name bothered Caimbeul in a way that sent
a poignant ache through him, which in turn forced him to
realize how much he still wanted Pandeena. He assessed
himself, and reluctantly admitted that he had nothing to offer
her compared to a young wolf. Female yuwenghau were not
as promiscuous as the males. Therefore, Kynyr Maguire had
to be an impressive individual.
"But so was I ... once," he muttered under his breath.
"What did you say?" Pandeena nudged her horse closer to
his.
He glanced at her with his head lowered. "An idle thought.
Not worth repeating."
"Come on. Tell me what you said."
"You must need me desperately to come all this way just
to drag me out of my hovel."
"Mother insists that I work within the laws. If we break the
laws and customs we spent generations encouraging, then we
will destroy all that we have achieved."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
71
An idea sparked, but he decided to bide his time. Caimbeul
straightened in the saddle. "She's right. It probably would.
But not all change is bad."
"Vigilante justice is wrong."
The vehemence in her tone made Caimbeul straighten in
the saddle. He suspected that far more was going on in
Wolffgard and Hell's Widow than Pandeena had yet told him.
"Agreed. What is it you are expecting me to do?"
Pandeena's mouth tightened. "Find the evidence we need
to nail him into a chair."
"Into a chair?" Caimbeul had never heard of doing that as
a punishment before.
Pandeena's expression tightened still more. "That's what
he did to Cullen ... drove spikes through his shoulder blades,
hipbones, wrists and ankles ... nailed him into a chair."
"Shit." Caimbeul flinched at the image. "And you think it's
this Malthus fellow?"
"Yesss." She hissed, wrapping her tongue around the
word. "Yess!"
"Because of Cullen?"
"Among other things. I've reached for his spirit, but he
doesn't answer."
"Could they have rited him?"
Pandeena shook her head. "I would have sensed that." Her
face darkened. "There wasn't much left of him. They shoved
him into several layers of canvas sacking and buried him.
Parts of him were missing."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
72
"Testicles, liver, kidneys, and heart." Caimbeul's eyes went
distant. "Probably took his entrails as well. I'll wager you
found his body cavities emptied."
"How did you know?"
Caimbeul shrugged. "Maybe I'm not as out of touch as I
seem. There has been a vogue among the sa'necari for the
last ten years. Their bio-alchemists have been using lycan
organs in fertility potions."
"Ghastly."
"Irony is ... it doesn't help. They're still going sterile at
thirty."
"They'll try anything ... even butchering our people
because we're fertile."
"They've started marrying their children off as soon as
they can consummate."
"They must lose a lot of girls in childbirth."
Caimbeul shook his head, his eyes going hooded. "Before
marrying, the girls get their first rite. It strengthens them.
Girls as young as eleven having babies with no difficulty.
They'll never match us for numbers ... but they don't have to.
They're deadlier than we are."
"I'll never understand why the humans support them."
"Perceptions of Authority, Pandeena. Same thing that
keeps our people going."
"You've explained that before, but I'll never grasp it."
"You don't want to."
Caimbeul let the conversation drop as they entered
Skullbones.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
73
It was a dirty town, filled with dust from the dirt roads and
a few scattered trees that looked half dead from lack of care.
The buildings were thrown together, ramshackle wooden
structures and those in the center were dead stone and brick,
sharing side walls.
"Which inn, Pandeena?"
"Three Lizards. It's lycan-owned."
Caimbeul gave a nod. Lycan establishments located away
from clan lands tended to have threes and sevens in their
names because of the religious aspects: three gods, Tala,
Navaryn, and Pandeena; and according to legend, Pandeena
had borne seven sons at a single birthing and those sons had
founded the first clans. Caimbeul had always intended to ask
Pandeena about whether that had been true—about her
sons—but never found an opportune moment to ask. He had,
long ago, discovered her reticent to speak about the old world
from which their people had come and the things that had
happened there. The last time she had been to old Yurth had
been at the site of a battle she called 'Culloden Moor,' and
any of her people who had failed to get through the Gate
Arcane, during the three weeks she managed to hold it open,
had been abandoned. Neither she nor Navaryn had ever gone
back after that.
He eyed her for a moment, with more questions in his
head than she would ever answer—and asking the wrong
question would serve only to get them quarrelling again. "I'll
meet you there later. I'm going to see if the Scarlet Angel
mage shop is still here."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
74
Pandeena's face flushed. "Go on and get your damned
crystals so you can start shoving your bloody bone into every
available hole."
Caimbeul winced. He had always been circumspect in
scratching his itch, never doing it among his own people,
always crossing the border into Waejontor when he felt like
playing Jack in the Orchard. Clan wolves tended to look down
on it more than city wolves. Even the custom of the Wild
Cousins—a form of unwed serial monogamy, practiced
originally as a way of determining that a bitch was fertile
before marriage—had begun to noticeably die out, and
Caimbeul had never been able to decide whether that was a
good thing or bad one. "Maybe I should get you some ...
considering you're going to open your legs to Kynyr Maguire
as soon as we get home."
"I have all the control over my fertility that I need."
Caimbeul gave her a glance full of slightly naughty
guilelessness. "Didn't stop me landing you one in the belly."
"I wanted Gwythyr, damn you. I wanted him and you got
him killed. It's your own bloody fault our son is dead."
Caimbeul sucked in a deep breath and kicked his horse
into a canter, turned down a side street and then an alley to
lose her. He reined in near a privy behind a tavern and just
sat there. His stomach had clenched up and he felt a
disturbing pressure in his chest and a tightness in his throat.
Caimbeul leaned his head as far back as he could get it and
closed his eyes. "I failed you, Gwythyr ... failed you. And I'm
so damned sorry. I miss you."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
75
A mon opened the door to the privy and emerged lacing
his pants up. He stared at Caimbeul for an instant. "Watcha
doin' there? You some kind a privy peeper?"
"I'm lost and need directions."
"I thought you dog-nosed bastards never got lost. You was
peepin'."
"Why would I do that?" Caimbeul sneered. "My cock is
bigger than yours, human." He kicked his gelding into a trot
and left the alley, ignoring a string of obscenities shouted in
his wake.
Caimbeul rode down to Main Street—it amused him that
nearly every town and village he had ever been in had a Main
Street—and turned off onto Loren Lane. Three blocks farther
and he spotted the sign: Scarlet Angel Mage Supply. The
name made it sound as if there were dozens of mages in
Skullbones. However, unless things had changed a lot since
he was last here, most of their customers were ordinary folk
who bought potions, charms, candles, and incense. A bell
rang on the door as he entered.
The shop had changed in subtle ways. The shelves along
three walls behind glass topped counters were the same. The
curtain covering the rear door into the backroom had been
replaced with strings of glass and ceramic beads that brushed
the floor. The small table in the center, beneath a sign that
bore the symbols for tarot readings, palmistry, and casting
the stones, was new.
A small, clean-shaven mon emerged from the backroom.
"Can I help you?"
"Yah. Is Giuliano Albertus around?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
76
The mon's eyes narrowed and he studied Caimbeul before
answering. "Granddad has been dead fifty years, fireborn."
Caimbeul tensed. "You know what I am."
"I can see auras and spirit-forms. The firebird sits on your
shoulders. Your aura shimmers like the fires of damnation."
"Who are you?"
The mon tilted his head and squinted at Caimbeul as if
looking for something more than he had first perceived.
"Luciano Albertus. I inherited the shop from my father ...
more or less."
"What do you mean?" Suspicion crawled along the
lawgiver's arms and up the back of his neck.
"Lemyari have a taste for mages. I'm not one, so they
leave me alone."
"Then what are you?"
"Can't you tell?"
"I'm not so rude as to Read people without being asked
to."
"Complaint noted. I'm a psi spiritworker. I don't have
enough power to interest them, so the Lemyari haven't tried
to sink their fangs into me ... yet."
Caimbeul's lips curled back from his teeth. "They probably
won't. Folks say spiritworkers taste rancid."
"Touché." Luciano's mouth pursed into a droll smile. "So
what can I do for you?"
"Two dozen seed crystals. Half a dozen memory stones,
capable of holding an encryption. Three ounces of Moon's
Mourning Green."
"That's an expensive order."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
77
"I have plenty of gold."
"You'd better. As to the Moon's Mourning, I have the raw
white, but not the green. I tell you what, if you'll take the
white—I don't get much call for it, most people don't know
how to process it right—I'll throw in a free palm reading and I
promise not to peek."
Caimbeul chuckled. "I'm fairly certain I'm peek proof." He
reached into the largest of the three pouches hanging from
his belt, came out with thirty Sharani double-gryphons, and
made three stacks of coins on the counter. "However, I'll take
you up on the offer. Will that cover everything?"
"More than." Luciano's eyes saucered and his eyebrows
shot up almost to his hairline. "You're Padruig Caimbeul,
aren't you? Fireborn Law? My father told me stories about me
when I was little."
"Keep the change and forget you saw me."
"Of course. Only let me warn you. The sa'necari are
looking for you. Two of them came through yesterday. They
know you've left Silverpaw." Luciano gestured at the table.
"Sit down while I bag up your purchases. Then I'll give you
that Reading I promised you."
Caimbeul settled into a chair, muttering an old Creeyan
proverb. "Reputation is a double-edged sword. It cuts both
ways."
Luciano returned and placed a burlap sack with Caimbeul's
purchases on the lycan's side of the table. "Give me you use
hand, not your birth hand."
The lycan extended his right hand. The shopkeeper stroked
his finger along the lines in Caimbeul's rough paw. Luciano

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
78
frowned deeply as if something troubled him. The first part of
the reading covered matters that could easily have been
gleaned from old tales about Caimbeul and did not explain the
look on Luciano's face.
"There's something you don't like there. Just spit it out and
get it over with."
Luciano's brow wrinkled all the way to his hairline. "So be
it. Your lifeline is split into two possible paths. There's a
decision in your future."
"There's a lot of decisions in my future."
The shopkeeper sucked in a breath. "Yes, but the wrong
choice will get you killed. If you follow the path of your
heart..." Luciano swallowed and his mouth tightened. "If you
follow your heart, you won't see the new year. If you keep
logic uppermost, you'll see another century of life ... at the
very least."
The memory of holding his murdered son in his arms
flashed through Caimbeul and he jerked his hand from
Luciano's grasp, growling. "Maybe I don't want that century."
Caimbeul grabbed the burlap sack and stalked out of the
shop.
* * * *
In the course of their travel, Caimbeul's stowage on the
pack horse increased steadily, until Pandeena began to
wonder what he was buying along the way. When they
camped for the night outside Hell's Widow—they could have
stayed at an inn, but Pandeena had developed a massive
dislike for the place after finding Cullen Blackwood's

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
79
butchered remains—she decided the time had come to follow
her gut instincts and have a look at everything.
When Caimbeul went into the trees to relieve himself, she
pounced on his packages and bags. The first one contained
four bottles of Dragonsbreath, a whiskey more famed for its
potency than its taste. She put the bottles aside and kept
going through. Bottles of Dragonsbreath were stuffed
everywhere. By the time she heard him returning, there were
twenty bottles of whiskey lined up.
Caimbeul sauntered into their campsite, tying his pants
closed. "I've a gut instinct, Pandeena. I think we'll..." He
stopped and stared at the mess she had made of his
belongings, the bottles of whiskey standing in a row. "Aww,
shit."
She faced him with her hands on her hips. "You promised
to stay sober."
"I ain't touched a drop since we left Running horse."
"That's not what this looks like."
"I only bought a few." Caimbeul's brogue thickened with
discomfort. "An' I ain't been drinkin' it."
Pandeena pointed at the bottles of whiskey. "Twenty is
more than a few."
"Who's counting?"
"Me."
"You always did. Look, Pandeena. I only promised not ta
touch it while we was on the road. Remember?"
"Well, I'd hoped you'd give it up."
Caimbeul forced a half-hearted chuckle. "And ruin my
reputation?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
80
"It looked fairly wrecked four weeks ago ... when I found
you."
"Ah, well. I had my reasons."
"Excuses."
"You always were a hard bitch." Caimbeul sidled over,
wrapped his arms around her, and cupped her breasts while
nuzzling her neck. "Forgive me?"
"None of that you old lecher," she scolded, unable to
completely school the fondness from her voice.
"Just once for old time's sake?"
"No. The relationship's been over for a century. Let it go."
Caimbeul withdrew his hands. "It was nice ... living in that
little house ... watching the boy grow up."
Pandeena softened. "I loved our son. It broke my heart
when they killed him."
"It could be nice again."
"No, Caimbeul. It's over. We're just friends now. I like it
that way."
Caimbeul rocked back on his haunches with a sigh. "The
least you could have done was to Jump us to Wolffgard."
"I don't want them to know what I can do." Pandeena
straightened and carried her bedroll to the horses. She tied it
to the back of her saddle.
Caimbeul followed her. "You really think this Malthus is the
Butchering Serpent?"
"I'm certain of it. The evidence, however, is only a little
dog and a seriously wounded young lawgiver who can't
remember his own name and who everyone thinks is dead."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
81
Caimbeul pulled at his stubbled lip. "Well, once we get
there, I'll think of something."
"I'm sure you will. You always did before."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
82
CHAPTER FIVE
CRIMSON LADY
The morning light shining in Preece's eyes woke him. He
cringed away from it, shading his eyes with his hands. His
stomach soured and burning bile rose to the back of his
throat. Lurching to his feet, he staggered to the window,
shoved it open, and vomited onto the roof of the veranda
below him. Preece turned about and stared into the room,
trying to remember where he was and how he had gotten
there.
"Bit of a hangover, dearie?" a droll voice asked from the
bed.
Preece glared at the naked whore lying on her side in the
bed with her head propped on her hand.
She had long, silken black hair and voluptuous curves; and
seeing her made some of the pieces click into place in his
mind.
"This is the Crimson Lady?"
She giggled. "You been here all night."
"Shit." I was supposed to spend the night at the inn.
Preece's glare deepened into a scowl.
"Hair of the dog's on the table if you need it." She pointed
at a bottle of whiskey in the middle of a small round table
standing midway between a dresser and a wardrobe.
"You got White Fire in this place?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
83
"Sure. Costs extra." She got out of bed and padded across
the room to the dresser where she took a small silver box out
and a metal tube. Picking up a hand mirror, the whore carried
it all to the table and laid out lines of white powder from the
box.
"Silkie says it's all on the House."
"So it is." She handed the tube to Preece as he joined her.
He snorted two lines and smiled as the drug hit his system,
banishing all traces of the hangover, and sending a rush of
energy through him. Malthus must have incredible influence. I
wonder how far it goes? "What's your name?"
"Lola."
"Okay, Lola." Preece decided to test the limits of Malthus'
influence and Silkie's hospitality. A sneer spread across his
lips that almost touched his eyes. "I want to take a bottle of
this stuff..." Preece tapped the lid of the box. "With me. A big
bottle."
"You're asking a lot. Amphereon that pure is expensive."
"Is that a no?"
Lola rose and shrugged into a filmy robe, sashed it closed.
"Of course not. How big is big?"
"Twelve ounces?"
"Might as well ask for a pound."
"Can I get it?"
She looked at him with her head tilted and an expression
blended equally of contempt and idle speculation. "Of course.
Any thing else you want to take with you?"
"Two bottles of that good whiskey. A bottle of rum."
"Is that all?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
84
"And you."
"Hah! You finally hit on something you can't take with
you."
"I didn't want you. I got a flaxen-haired bitch that's just
begging for it."
"What's her name?"
"Kady."
Lola flounced from the room.
Preece did a third line of White Fire and then dressed. He
had finished belting his knives on when she returned with a
burlap sack. Preece checked out the contents and left without
another word.
When he reached the Inn, he found the common room
empty except for the owner, Dymier, who was sitting with
two other myn at a table near the bar. Both myn were
Waejontori wearing their long black hair tied back. The mon
to Dymier's right was nearly as tall as Preece and clean-
shaven; the other was of average build and slender. Yet when
Preece met their eyes, predator recognized predator. Preece
had never been one to stand down from a challenge, so he
sauntered over and addressed Dymier. "Anything going
back?"
Dymier handed him two letters and Preece put them into
his pouch.
The tall one sized Preece up with a sweep of his gaze. "So
you're Malthus' new courier. What's your name?"
"Preece Malloy ... if that's any of your business."
"It is my business. Next time bring them directly to me."
"Where?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
85
"Offices of the Green Sheaf Grain Merchants. I'm the
owner. Heironim Traxton. This is my associate, Dorjan
Calendri."
Preece's eyes narrowed. "And when I mention your names
to Malthus, he'll know you?"
Dorjan chuckled. "Oh, very good."
"I expect you to," said Heironim and flipped a gold crown
at Preece.
The lycan snapped the coin out of the air without blinking
and shoved it into his pocket. "If that's all, I'm gone."
* * * *
Kynyr tucked a pair of loaded crossbows under the seat of
the wagon and a case of quarrels. Rumors from merchants
coming through Red Wolf Valley claimed that the road to
Hell's Widow had gotten rougher since he last went there.
They were entering in large, armed parties instead of one or
two at a time as they once did. The harder that Queen
Tomyrilen's forces pressed the Sharani armies; the more
Sharani turned their attention in her direction and the more
they neglected the isolated districts that they had once
patrolled and guarded.
In times past, Kynyr and his friends had gone to great
lengths to avoid being marked out as Clan guardsmyn when
in Hell's Widow. This time they would be wearing chainmail
under their civilian clothing, and carrying horse bows. If
someone shot at them, they intended to shoot back. The
lycans were as good with their bows as the freerangers were
and could fire accurately from the saddle at a full gallop,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
86
getting off each shot in less than half a minute. Kynyr wished
he could have barded the horses, but Claw had overruled him
on it. They were going to be conspicuous enough as it was.
His companions waited on their horses. Ramsey Fitzgerald
with hair as red as a whore's petticoats and a temperament
so mellow and steady that it proved a mon's nature could not
be judged by the color of his hair; tow-headed Finn MacIver,
Kynyr's spiritbrother since early childhood, who had missed
being youngest by two months; and sandy-haired Eideard
Doyle, the oldest of them at twenty-four, and the most
outspoken. They had all served Claw Redhand since they
were sixteen; and were good with their weapons. However,
guardsmyn in an informal lycan household did more than
guard and fight. They also worked the herds, mended fences,
ran errands, and did general tasks around the manor and its
properties.
The lycan saddle had been adapted from those used by the
freeranger companies that roamed the continent in service to
the Willodarian Temples. It had a front swell and a horn
instead of the cavalry pommel favored by many armies, a
substantial skirt, and a side flap to hold a horse bow and
quiver, as well as a hook for a coiled rope. They were used
primarily for herding stock, but the lycans could fight from
those saddles as well.
Heavy sheepskin pads showed beneath the saddle skirts.
"You think we'll have trouble?" A twig went round and
round in Ramsey's mouth: a substitute for his pipe since he
did not like trying to smoke in the saddle. Most dog lycans
smoked pipes and so did some of the bitches.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
87
Kynyr climbed up on the wagon before answering, released
the break, and started turning it about to drive out of the
yard. "I doubt we'll have any on the way out. Most of the
trouble seems to be with people heading toward the valley,
not away from it."
"Bandits, you think?" Finn rode up alongside Kynyr as the
wagon rolled out onto the path and they headed for the
bridge over the Eirlys River.
"That's the rumor," Kynyr replied. "We'll need to keep our
eyes open on the road."
"We ought to be able to handle bandits." The twig whirled
and bobbed in Ramsey's teeth as he talked around it.
"They're usually poorly armed, untrained, and disorganized.
Like that band we routed two years ago."
Stands of white pine and blue spruce shaded the broad dirt
road. Shadowy canine forms moved beneath the trees, lycans
patrolling in full wolf form, watchers whose job was not to
engage the enemy, but to sound the alert should something
untoward occur. The wheels of the wagon and the hooves of
the horses churned up the dirt on that dry late summer
morning. Heat had already begun to gather over the road
despite the earliness of the hour.
Kynyr went quiet as the support columns on the bridge
came into view. When Cooley had first arrived, riding his
father's horse and carrying a message for Kynyr, the
guardsmon's friends had tried various ways to get him to
divulge the contents of Silkie's letter. All to no avail. Finn
knew more than the others, but even he gained only the
merest outline from Kynyr. The questioning had slacked off

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
88
until three weeks ago, when Pandeena had brought Cullen's
broken remains home for a proper burial. Planning for the
journey to Hell's Widow for supplies, had sparked a fresh
round of them; and Kynyr knew that his three companions
expected to finally have their answers. It was getting more
difficult to deny them that.
"It wasn't bandits that killed Cullen." Kynyr's eyes took on
a distant look.
"Sa'necari?" Finn asked.
"I got a letter from one of the prostitutes at the Crimson
Lady saying it was sa'necari that murdered him."
Ramsey eyed Kynyr closely, curiosity filling his face. "She
say how she knew?"
"She saw them do it."
That information surprised all but Finn; and it was several
minutes before Ramsey ventured another question. "Which
one is she?"
"No." Kynyr shook his head. "I can't tell you that."
Eideard watched them for a long time. "Can we come
along?"
"To the Crimson Lady?"
"Yah."
"You can't be there when I talk to her."
Eideard shrugged. "I didn't expect to. I just want to dip my
wick. I haven't been laid since before I got cut up two months
ago."
"I have no problem with that. I might do it myself." Kynyr
smiled with a startling grin as he shook off his misgivings
concerning the journey. Hell's Widow was roughly half a day's

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
89
ride from the manor and Wolffgard Village. "I haven't had
bitch under me in half a year."
Finn gave Kynyr a sidelong look. "What do you mean you
haven't been laid in six months? Your bed was never empty
from the time you was fourteen."
"My choice, Finn. I don't want to talk about it."
Eideard lifted an eyebrow, glanced at Finn and Ramsey,
gave at nod at Kynyr's back and they shared a shrug. "It's my
opinion that those myn who tried to grab Cullen off the street
were sent by the same ones who later killed him."
"The night we were going to the Crimson Lady with
Cullen?"
"Yeah. I owe the little shit my life." Eideard lowered his
eyes, and rolled his shoulders as if trying to shake off the grip
of a bad memory. "I'm the one who's been leaving offerings
on his grave ... ever since the priest brought his remains
home."
"Look, guys," Ramsey interrupted. "The only proof—if you
can call it that—that sa'necari were involved is a letter from
one of the whores at the Crimson Lady. There was no
evidence of dark magic involved in Cullen's death ... no psi
traces of his having been fed on. The usual earmarks were
not there."
Kynyr gave a small nod. "That's why I want to talk to her."
"Don't scare her, Kynyr." Ramsey's tone stayed quiet and
gentle. "Don't buy everything she says either."
"I don't play intimidation games with bitches, Ramsey. I
learned a lot from the Dreaded Horde."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
90
Finn let a broad grin slide across his face. "HAH! She's
lycan, isn't she?"
"I didn't say that." Kynyr shot back with a flash of
defensiveness.
"You said 'bitch' not woman or female." Finn's grin
broadened in triumph.
"Ellie!" Eideard crowed. "It must have been Ellie. She was
Cullen's favorite and lycan. Cute little thing. Her cunt sucks ...
oh mon, does it ever!"
"Shut up until we're across the bridge." Kynyr slowed the
wagon down as rest of the stout wooden structure came into
sight. "If one of the Bridge Guards catches a word of this it
will be all over the village before we get back."
The bridge guards lounged on benches set back among a
thick stand of fragrant white pine and cedars three spear
lengths beyond the bridge on the lycan side where a heavy
barrier of brush and briars offered them concealment from
people approaching from the opposite side. They had a policy
of getting a look at anyone arriving at the bridge from the
Waejontori side before showing themselves, although they
were clearly visible from the lycan side.
A couple of them waved at Kynyr and his companions as
they passed.
Tree trunks formed the support columns of the bridge that
spanned the gorge that had been cut through the sheer stone
walls by the deep cataract known as the Eirlys River. The
rushing roar of the Eirlys filled the air, drowning out the calls
of circling birds. On three sides the land descended into
rugged canyons and twisted valleys that looked like a giant

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
91
had ripped his fingers through the soil. The lycan clans
preferred to make their homes in hard to reach places, areas
that could easily be defended against invasion.
The half-walls of the bridge's sides offered limited shelter
while not blocking the view of people approaching it. Kynyr's
wagon rattled onto the heavy boards. Eideard nudged his
horse past the wagon to take the point. Finn and Ramsey
followed him. The wagon was a hard spot to fight from, even
with the crossbows, and severely limited Kynyr's options in a
fight. That put the burden of defense upon the other three.
Kynyr had placed Morcar Ross in charge of the other four
myn in their unit, the ones who remained behind to keep
watch over Aisha, Searlait, and Fianait. Their responsibilities
used to include Merissa, but since her marriage Malthus had
insisted on removing her from their care.
The late summer heat made the chain mail he wore seem
twice as hot and heavy to Kynyr.
They traveled in silence for nearly an hour before Eideard
brought up the subject of the letter again. "So the letter was
from Ellie?"
Kynyr gave him a sidelong glance, as it became clear that
his friends were going to keep pressing him both about the
letter and the identity of the prostitute who had sent it to
him. "It wasn't from Ellie."
"We've been waiting a month for you to tell us and we are
not taking no for an answer now." Eideard dropped back to
ride closer to the wagon. "When you say one of them saw him
killed, does that mean it happened at the brothel?"
"Spit it out, Kynyr." Finn gave him an irritated look.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
92
The three wolves were Kynyr's closest and most trusted
friends, yet the idea of involving them in the investigation
troubled him. He thought back to the fight months ago that
had nearly gotten Eideard killed. Of the three of them,
Eideard was the most headstrong and apt to act without
consulting the rest of them. Kynyr knew that he could count
on Finn and Ramsey to follow his lead and obey his wishes in
the matters. Eideard, however, still had the instincts of the
loner he had been before Kynyr befriended him. "If I tell you
what I know, you must promise not to talk about it with
outsiders ... And..." Kynyr held up his hand to forestall
comments. "I want your promise that you won't go acting on
your own initiative. You'll consult me and if I veto it, you'll
accept that. Anything else could get us all ... her included ...
killed."
That brought a chorus of oaths and promises. Kynyr let it
all die down before going on. "The letter was from Silkie. She
didn't give me any details. And Cooley brought it."
"What the hell was Cooley doing in Hell's Widow?" asked
Ramsey.
"Cooley isn't my cousin. He's Cullen and Silkie's son."
Kynyr waited for a reaction and when he got none, continued.
"Silkie loved Cullen. He had his faults ... but she loved him.
They tortured him to death in front of her. The rest is
guesswork, but Todd agrees with my guesses."
Eideard sucked in a breath. "Damn."
"She asked us to adopt Cooley because she felt he would
be safer with my family than in Hell's Widow."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
93
Eideard edged his horse to the side where he could glance
over his shoulder at the others as they rode. "I'd say the cub
just got himself three new uncles. What do you say?"
Ramsey and Finn nodded their agreement.
"We'll help you look out for him and teach him what we
can." Eideard moved back into his place riding point.
* * * *
Preece got off the road as soon as he felt certain that no
one was following him, turning his horse onto a game trail
that paralleled Cataract Road until roughly two hundred yards
from the bridge onto Clan Red Wolf lands. He watched the
road as he traveled, screened from view by thick clusters of
oak and elm and the occasional thicket of hawthorn.
The day was quiet and he passed no one until a little past
noon, when the creaking of a wagon and the rhythmic beat of
hooves on the hard packed dirt alerted him to myn coming
from the opposite direction. Preece dismounted and put his
hand over his horse's nose to keep the beast quiet. He had
started to come down from the effects of the White Fire and
felt sorely tempted to open the burlap sack and do another
line of it. The stuff made him feel good.
He had been doing lines the day he killed his mother. She
caught him and demanded to know where Preece was getting
the money for it, asked him if he'd been stealing again: White
Fire was an expensive habit. When she launched into her
usual rant about him being a 'thorn in her side,' Preece gave
her a thorn all right—a long sharp steel one in the belly. Then
he had dragged her into the woodshed and settled in to watch

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
94
her die. The experience had been a revelation, filling him with
sensations of power and exaltation that he still savored ten
years later. Those rants of hers, combined with his knife
skills, had given him the nickname Thorn back when he lived
in Dragonton on Torment Lake. The only one in Red Wolf
allowed to call him that was his fourteen year old roommate,
Rheu.
The wagon rolled closer, the sounds of it shaking Preece
from his reverie. Now Preece could make out Maguire driving
with his three companions ranged around the wagon. They
were armed for bear, swords and bows as well as their long
knives. Something was up. Those simple-minded clan wolves
might miss the connections, but Preece was still a city wolf at
heart—it made him smarter than the rest—and he knew a
game when he smelled it. It was beyond coincidence that
Malthus had bribed him so expansively just to get two letters
delivered and now there went Maguire on his way to Hell's
Widow. Preece regretted that he had never learned to read,
because Malthus was running a game of some kind and the
nature of it was probably in those letters. Moreover, there
appeared to be a lot of money in it and it somehow connected
to Kynyr Maguire or the Redhands or both.
He wondered if Maguire would be coming back from Hell's
Widow on his wagon or in a canvas sack tomorrow. Irritation
pricked him and Preece's lips curled away from his teeth. His
thoughts drifted to the day of the riots at Sanctuary nearly
three months ago.
The practice field had been Malthus' idea. Originally it had
been a small clearing north of the corrals and barns where

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
95
the camp's animals were kept, at the edge of a densely
forested section. Torquil the smith's hulking apprentice had
shown up with practice blades the day after Malthus
purchased his swords. Preece had been skeptical of Malthus'
claims to having been a kandoyarin—mercenary—until
watching him humble Torquil. When Malthus offered to teach
the wolves who worked at the Sanctuary, Preece had been
the last to join in, preferring to take everyone else's measure
first.
Within a week the young wolves had cleared an area that,
according to Shalto, was as large at the Great Hall of the
manor itself and they all started showing up for a couple of
hours every afternoon to practice and learn from Malthus. A
few trees dotted the cleared area, but all the rocks, boulders,
and brush had been removed from the center, leaving a half-
moon of trees, vines, and bushes on the far side. They had
tree rounds and an oak log for those waiting their turn to sit
on. A long trestle table stood off to the side near the
remaining woods, covered in various kinds of practice
weapons made of weighted wood and ranging in kind from
knives and swords to axes and quarterstaves.
Preece noticed that Kynyr's wagon had gone around a
curve and out of sight. He took his hand from his horse's
nose, hung the dangling reins on a bush, and pulled the
burlap sack from the saddle. Squatting, Preece opened the
sack and took out a box lined with wax paper. Lifting the lid
off, Preece's eyes gleamed with more life than he usually
displayed as he dipped his little finger into the white powder
and tasted it.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
96
"Damn, this is pure. One for the road." Preece dug the
little tube out of his pocket, arranged two lines of White Fire
in the lid, and snorted it. The sensations of incredible well-
being hit fast. Preece put everything away, climbed into the
saddle and moved out onto the road.
His mind drifted as he traveled. His memories expanded
and grew larger than life as he relived the day of the riot.
Preece slipped into the bushes with Rheu on the far side of
the practice field. He liked little boys every bit as much as he
did the bitches. Rheu was the longest relationship—if you
could call it that—which Preece had ever had: nearly three
years. Rheu had been an eleven-year-old street cub in
Skeleton Creek when Preece rescued him from two slavers on
a whim and made the cub say 'thanks' by sucking him off.
Preece thought that was the end of it until he discovered
Rheu had followed him out of town on a stolen horse. The cub
worshipped Preece and never said no about anything. Preece
liked that, and so he kept him.
Rheu snuggled against Preece, slipping his hand down the
front of Preece's pants to stroke his bone.
Preece grabbed Rheu's wrist and stopped him. "Listen."
"What?" Rheu withdrew his hand and glanced back through
the bushes, frowning in question at the hoots and whistles
coming from the practice field.
Preece threw himself down on his belly and squirmed
closer for a better look. "It's that bloody guardsmon,
Maguire."
They watched Kynyr Maguire swagger across the clearing
as if he owned the place. Malthus walked up to Kynyr and

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
97
they spoke for a moment. Preece strained his hearing trying
to catch what they were saying, and caught almost nothing;
although the nature of the conversation became clear when
Maguire stripped to the waist and picked up one of the
practice blades.
"Oooh, he's gonna fight Malthus."
"Yah." Preece's gaze swept Kynyr. The guardsmon was
built like a fighter and moved like he might know his stuff.
"Malthus'll kick his ass."
"What if Malthus loses? I hear Kynyr's good."
Preece's eyes narrowed dangerously. "If Maguire wins, I'll
kill him and he'll never see it coming."
"You're good, Thorn."
The fight lasted for close to half an hour. Preece had never
seen anyone make Malthus work so hard or long. There was
no question in Preece's mind that he was watching a pair of
masters pushing themselves to their limits. They were both
breathing hard and drenched with sweat. Preece had room in
his life for just one master swordsmon: Malthus. The duel
gradually brought both combatants closer to where Preece
and Rheu had hidden for their tryst.
"Shall we call it a draw?" Maguire asked.
Malthus snarled and lunged at Kynyr with an upsweep
strike at the lycan's head. "No."
Kynyr leaped to the side, his sword snapping into an
upright block. He sprang forward with a feint to Malthus'
stomach and kicked him in the side of the knee hard.
Malthus' leg gave. He swung about on Kynyr as he
dropped to one knee. Kynyr circled left. Malthus managed a

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
98
furious attack, the blades clanging together, as he tried to
stop Kynyr from getting behind him before he could get to his
feet again. Kynyr engaged Malthus' blade and trapped the
edge on his crossguard, forcing Malthus' arms up. A swift kick
below Malthus' sternum sent the kandoyarin sprawling. Kynyr
brought his blade to rest against Malthus' chest over his
heart.
Rheu's eyes saucered. "Shit!"
Kynyr snarled at Malthus, his lips drawn back from his
teeth. "If this were real, you'd be dead."
"Asshole." Preece drew his left knife, balancing it for a
throw as he shifted into his hybrid form.
Rocks showered Kynyr. He flinched and stepped back. All
of the females and children were throwing rocks. The males
stood laughing and pointing at him.
Rheu giggled and reached for a rock to throw. Preece toed
the youth in the side and shook his head. Rheu dropped the
rock.
Malthus rolled away from Kynyr with a chuckle. "If rocks
were blades ... you'd be too."
Kynyr spun about shouting. "Stop it."
He threw down the wooden practice blade and sheltered
his face. A rock caught him on the cheek, leaving a long cut.
Rocks came from all sides, striking him in the head, chest,
back, and stomach. He staggered toward the trees. "Hell's
goat-sucking ... Stop!"
Malthus walked across the clearing as if nothing were
happening.
"Malthus! Tell them to stop."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
99
The silver blade snapped from Preece's hand, thrown with
such force and accuracy that it plunged to the quillons in
Maguire's back. Preece smiled all the way to his eyes as he
watched the guardsmon collapse in the dirt.
"Back so soon, Preece?" Odhran called out to him as
Preece crossed the bridge onto Clan Red Wolf soil.
Preece glanced up, startled by Odhran's voice. He had
been so lost in his thoughts, riding the drugs racing through
his bloodstream, that his arrival at the bridge had not
registered. "Money goes fast when you spend it at the
Crimson Lady."
* * * *
The Three Candles Inn in Hell's Widow stood three blocks
off Main Street on Wheelwright Road in the lycan section of
town. Most of the various citizenry called it the 'ghetto,' and
the term always bothered Kynyr because he saw it as a bad
reflection on his race. The ghetto was the prettiest quarter in
Hell's Widow. The buildings shared fences, but not walls as
they did in the human sections. Every shop had a garden
along the sides, flower boxes on the upper floor windows,
planters overflowing on the balconies, and rooftop gardens.
They rode into the yard, and the hostler, Jordi, appeared in
the door of the livery stable.
Kynyr reined the horses in, set the break, and climbed
down. He dug in his pouch, brought out a silver, and tossed it
to Jordi. "Do a good job."
Jordi caught the coin and shoved it in his pocket. "Yessir. I
will, sir."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
100
The four myn entered the inn through a side door just off
the kitchen. Amos Raggat's wife, Nainsi, walked to the door
and waved at Kynyr. "Good to see you back."
Kynyr gave her a nod and a smile and kept on walking.
They found Amos in the common room, attending to some
other customers. Kynyr grinned at the fat lycan, who
reminded him of an apple dumpling on legs.
"You'll be wanting rooms for the night?"
"One room. One of those Comfort Nesting rooms you got
with two double beds."
Many unmarried lycans still practiced the old custom of
Comfort Nesting, taking wolf forms and piling up together to
sleep in a non-sexual manner.
"Comfort? Or watching your backs?"
"A bit of both."
"Cullen?"
"What do you think?"
Amos gestured for them to come into the keg room behind
the bar. Casks were stacked two deep along three sides and a
rectangular table with six chairs occupied the center of the
room. He pointed at the chairs, fetched a bottle and glass
from a shelf, and sat down. Ramsey moved to the door and
leaned against the wall with his arms crossed loosely. Amos
glanced from Ramsey to Kynyr. "You come in armed like
that." Amos gestured at their swords. "Everyone will know
you're here on Clan business."
"I decided that safety was more important than discretion
this time." Kynyr watched Amos pour, lifted his glass, and
sipped the whiskey. "Good stuff."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
101
"I just laid in several cases of Tormuth Whiskey. Ever since
that priest ... what was her name? Pandaira found the body
... folks have been laying bets as to how long it would be
before Claw sent someone to look into it. I guess you're it."
"Pandeena, not Pandaira."
"Yeah her. That's the one. When Cullen didn't come back
that first night, I had my suspicions. Then this cub, Cooley
comes by with a note from Silkie saying Cullen was dead and
Larkspur belonged to you." Amos knocked his whiskey down
in a gulp and poured another. "Made me nervous as hell
having that horse here, but I knew better than to try and get
rid of it. Claw would have tacked my hide to the wall. Staining
her black was my idea."
"We're going to the Crimson Lady to have a talk with
Silkie."
"I'd talk to Ellie Remus also. Ever since Cullen died, she's
had a lot of money to spend."
Eideard gave Kynyr an 'I told you so' glance. Kynyr
shrugged at him.
Ramsey sauntered over and claimed his glass of whiskey.
"If we don't come back from the Crimson Lady, let Claw know
about it."
Amos turned from Ramsey to Kynyr. "I don't like getting
involved with the Clan. I'm a city wolf; you know how most of
the clan regards us."
Kynyr scratched at his sideburns, looked away, and then
back. "Amos, you're involved just because we always stay
here. If we don't come back and you don't send word, Claw

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
102
will have fifty soldiers pounding on your door even if brings
the Sharani garrison down on him."
"Sounds like the old bastard. Okay, I'll do it."
"Anything else you want to tell us?"
"Nah. Just be careful."
"We will, Amos. Don't you worry about that."
* * * *
The Crimson Lady Brothel stood on Corbie Way, six blocks
south of Main Street. The elegant old mansion, with its fluted
columns and wide portico, had been built by the sa'necari
family that established the town ten centuries ago to trade
with and keep an eye upon the eastern lycan clans, such as
Red Wolf and Silverpaw. The Sharani had wiped out the
family twenty years ago, at which point the manor had been
abandoned until Silkie bought it over a decade past.
Corby Way was a jewel in a dark hole. Any thing and
everything illicit could be found on the streets around it: from
prostitution to gambling to street drugs and opium dens.
However, Corbie Way belonged to Silkie Faggini and she
reigned over it like a queen—or at least, that was what Kynyr
had always been told. He doubted that was true any longer,
suspecting that Silkie had become a bird in a gilded cage as
soon as the sa'necari moved into the neighborhood.
The Crimson Lady had thirty prostitutes in residence at all
times, more or less since there was always some turnover,
and new girls frequently showed up. A mon had to go as far
south as Skeleton Creek or west as far as Dragonton and
Torment Lake to find a larger whorehouse. Although most

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
103
people avoided discussing it, the Crimson Lady was the
largest employer in Hell's Widow with a restaurant and a well-
stocked bar on the premises.
The lycans had no outright nudity taboos, only situational
ones. When they ran as wolves, the shift back to human or
hybrid forms required a tolerance for the naked human form
long enough to grab a robe or activate a charm of changing
that produced the illusion of clothing. None of them paraded
nude down the streets of their villages and towns.
No matter how often Kynyr had come to the Crimson Lady
during the four years he had lived at Wolffgard, the
provocative attire of the girls who earned their living on their
backs caused his body to react in ways that the casual
wolfskin nudity of his people did not. His bone hardened the
moment he walked into the foyer with Finn, Ramsey, and
Eideard at his back.
The greeters, two of the working girls, rose from a plush
sofa wearing the sheerest of linen fabric through which the
dark circles of their nipples could be seen and the thatch on
their loins. The thin fabric served only to heighten the sense
of titillating obscenity.
Cullen had once claimed that he had done one of them
right there in the foyer with people passing around them.
Cullen Blackwood had been a bone-happy little bastard,
sticking it into every female that he could coax into opening
her legs to him, talking incessantly about whores and horses
as if those were the only things of importance that existed in
the world. He had also been a staunch friend who had backed
Kynyr in several confrontations. Standing there, in the foyer

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
104
of Cullen's favorite brothel, Kynyr found that he could not
stop thinking about him.
"Kynyr Maguire!" One of the greeters strutted up to him,
tilting her breasts in a manner that demanded to be
squeezed. "Don't you remember me? Ellie? Ellie Remus."
Ellie. His stomach clenched and he lost his arousal. She
had been Cullen's favorite. Kynyr had bedded her several
times back when he still came regularly to the Crimson Lady.
Her hair, as pale as fresh cream, hung loose to her waist.
Kynyr stood five foot eleven, and Ellie's head came to the tip
of his nose.
He stiffened as she brushed against him. "Cullen wanted to
marry you."
The lycan whore flinched away from him. "Cullen? I
haven't seen him in months."
"He's dead."
All the color fled from Ellie's face and she seemed to fold in
on herself as she withdrew toward the hallway leading to the
Main Hall, then broke, and ran. Kynyr watched her go, seeing
signs of guilt in her excessive reaction. He wondered if
Eideard's guess concerning Ellie's involvement could be right.
There was no way that she could not have known that Cullen
was dead. According to Amos, the entire lycan community of
Hell's Widow had been talking of little else for over a month.
Erotic tapestries and paintings dominated the walls of the
foyer to the Crimson Lady. A huge desk of polished dark wood
stood guard at the far end with a matchstick of a clerk sitting
there with an appointment book open in front of him. A stack

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
105
of other books rose like multicolored soldiers in a long, low
wooden box to his left hand.
A long padded bench lay to the left hand of the desk with
two young boys who worked as runners sitting there. Kynyr
glanced at them as he strode up to the desk.
"I want to talk to Silkie."
"She's not taking customers." The clerk, who called himself
Flavio Ricci, frowned at Kynyr.
"I'm not a customer. You go tell her Kynyr Maguire is
here."
"I'm not supposed to..."
"Either you tell her, or my friends and I go looking for
her."
"Guardsmon?" Flavio's eyes went to the sword riding at
Kynyr's shoulder.
Kynyr could see where matters were headed. He decided
to keep things as open and above board as seemed safe, so
as not to be misunderstood. If the clerk wished to play push
and shove games, then it seemed best to bring Claw's
influence into play. "We're on a clan matter."
"Something important?"
"Rather."
A shrewd look entered Flavio's eyes. "Wouldn't have to do
with the murder everyone has been talking about for months?
Ever since that visiting priest found the body."
"Maybe."
Flavio gestured at one of the boys, who sprang from his
seat in answer. The clerk whispered in his ear, and sent him

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
106
running. "Have a seat in the Main Hall. I'll have Silkie's
answer in a moment."
Kynyr and his companions headed through the doorway to
their right.
Flavio took a sheet of paper from the drawer, dipped his
pen in the ink well, and scribbled a quick note. He blew on it
to dry the ink, folded it three times, and waved it at the
remaining boy. "Take this to Master Traxton at the Green
Sheaf."
The boy put the note in his pouch and ran out.
* * * *
The office that the boy showed Kynyr to had a heavy door
designed as much for defense as style, and Kynyr guessed it
would take a lycan in hybrid form several whacks with a great
axe to even begin to break it down. The boy opened the door,
gestured for Kynyr to enter, and then closed it again when
Kynyr passed.
The mon behind the desk looked to be in her early forties,
Kynyr decided, although he sometimes found it difficult to
judge the age of humans whose lifespans were so much
shorter than lycans. Her coppery skin and black hair marked
her as Waejontori and the aristocratic angles of her face
retained the traces of a fading beauty. She wore her make-up
tastefully done, rather than blatant like the other prostitutes;
and the tight bodice of her dress thrust her ample breasts
into a youthful illusion with the edge of the upper curve
showing at the neck.
Silkie rose to greet Kynyr, extending her hand.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
107
The folds of her skirt fell askew across the slight puffiness
of her belly that seemed contradictory on her slender frame.
Something about it niggled at Kynyr as he lifted Silkie's hand
to his lips, and kissed it.
"I've never seen such manners from a lycan." Silkie
gestured at a chair. "Did you come here about Cullen or
Cooley?"
Kynyr settled into a chair. "Both."
"How is my son?" She flicked back a loose strand of hair.
"I hated giving him up ... but if he'd remained with me..."
Silkie heaved a sigh. "They would've killed him."
"I told him that. He was feeling abandoned."
Kynyr assessed Silkie for a moment. She could not have
been young when she had Cooley. Her looks had held up well.
Her puffy stomach drew his gaze again and, having grown up
in a female dominated household, Kynyr realized what he was
seeing: Silkie was pregnant—and early enough along that
most would have failed to notice it.
"Tell him I love him. That I did it because I love him."
"I have. He's got Cullen written all over him."
"I know. Has anyone noticed?"
Kynyr shook his head, his eyes narrowing as a guarded
edge entered his voice. "Not yet. So you're a Waejonan."
Silkie closed her eyes and ran a hand over her face. Her
shoulders drooped. "I'm human. Do you know what the
sa'necari-born do when they produce a freak like me?"
"I know very little about your people, beyond what they do
to mine."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
108
"My people? They're not my people. I ran away. I whored
for my bread from the time I was twelve. I tell people I was
fourteen, but that's a lie. To save face. Since you don't know,
I'll tell you what they do with the human children that are
born to them. They sacrifice them."
Kynyr's insides tightened. "Mortgiefan?"
"No. For the girl children it is called 'marrying Bellocar.'
They dress her as if for a wedding. A divinator dressed as the
god has sex with her. Then he puts a blade through her heart,
opens her belly, and reads her entrails for omens. I'd rather
be a whore than dead."
"I'd have to agree with that."
"I expected you sooner. Cullen's been dead for months."
"Someone shoved a blade in me."
"Oh, gods." Silkie tilted her head back and to the side,
sucking in deep breaths in an effort to steady herself.
"Who killed him?"
Her eyes went distant, troubled, as she returned her gaze
to Kynyr. "I loved Cullen. I never told him so, but I did.
Otherwise I would never have borne Cooley. I've aborted
before ... taken tansy. I wanted Cooley."
"Who killed his father?"
"Please be patient with me. I've had no one to talk to since
that day. I'm certain they have spies in the Crimson Lady. I
don't know who they are, but I know they're here."
"Okay." Kynyr licked his lips, crossed his arms, and settled
back in his chair. "Tell it."
"One of them came and tried to buy the Crimson Lady. I
refused. I didn't know he was sa'necari. Usually I can spot

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
109
them, but this one I couldn't. He blended in like a viper on a
branch. Some how, he subverted one of my girls and she
betrayed Cullen ... drugged him. He never had a chance."
"Shit." Kynyr sat forward in the chair, all his instincts rising
to attention. "It was Ellie, wasn't it?"
"It was Ellie. She seemed genuinely shaken when we were
forced to watch them kill Cullen. For a time, I thought she
was as much as victim as I was. Since then, I've changed my
mind about her. I think she was horrified—not because it was
Cullen—but because she had never seen anyone tortured
before."
"And you have?"
"Yes."
Silkie pulled a drawer out and laid it on the desk, and then
she bent around and felt in the vacant shelf. A moment later,
the madam produced an ornately carved box which she laid
on the desk and returned the drawer to the shelf. A tap on
the lid and a word of command opened it.
Kynyr gave a low whistle. "Mage locked."
"You know about these things?"
"My Gram's a mage."
"A lycan mage?"
"Yeah."
Silkie favored him with a brittle smile. "How rare. Are
you?"
"No." Kynyr shook his head. "None of us inherited the gift.
She's got twenty-six grandchildren and none of us have it."
"But you grew up around magic. I sense it on you."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
110
"More or less." Kynyr caught himself before his hand could
go to the amulet he wore against his skin. "Go on about
Cullen."
"First you must see what's in the box. Not everything. Just
one ... or two." Silkie took out an ivory round hanging from a
long golden chain. "You know what this is?"
"Can I touch it?"
Silkie extended it to him.
Kynyr took the ivory, closed his fingers over it, and let his
eyes go heavy-lidded. He sensed the energy in the stone. It
left a metallic taste on his tongue and an itch in the back of
his throat. "Modified memory stone. Gram calls them truth
stones."
"Very good. I used this on Ellie one night while she slept.
There are no coercions, no triggers, no sways, no arcane
influences in her mind. She's clean. She betrayed Cullen for
money and gifts."
"Shit. Shit. Shit."
A smile that contained a wealth of sorrow spread across
Silkie's face. "Cullen used to say it that way. Always three
times."
"I guess that's where I picked it up."
"They broke Cullen's arms and legs ... crushed his fingers
and toes ... nailed him into a chair..." Silkie's smile tightened
into a grimace as she rushed through the description to get it
over with. "They shoved a silver blade into his belly, gave it a
twist, and then locked us in with Cullen to watch him die."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
111
"Did he suffer long?" Kynyr repressed a shiver at the
thought of a belly wound. He doubted that even his Gram's
gifts could mend one.
"Four days. It wasn't the belly wound that killed him. A
mon in a serpent mask put a blade through his heart four
days after they locked us in with him. They caught a second
courier ... one who was more forthcoming than Cullen had
been."
"The Butchering Serpent?"
"Yes. What's more ... I'm pregnant."
"Cullen?"
"The Serpent. He manipulated my body somehow." Tears
burst from Silkie's eyes. "He filled—" Silkie made a choking
sound, mastered herself, and forced the next words out.
"Filled my belly the same day he murdered the only mon I
ever truly loved. Cullen wasn't even ... cold yet. The Serpent
took me on the floor beside his dead body, triggered my
ovaries and ... oh gahds."
Kynyr's brow furrowed, his eyes narrowed, and he glanced
away, unable—for a moment—to look how the toughness he
had always associated with Silkie seemed to have been
leeched out of her. "You could lose it."
"They'd kill me if I did. They check me every week ...
make certain that monster's abomination is growing. I'm at
the edge of the change ... a lot of women die trying to ...
birth one at my age."
"Who are they?"
"I've only seen one of their faces. They were masked. I
don't know where they took me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
112
"Who is he?"
"If I tell you his name and you go after him, they'll know I
told you. They'll kill me. Or worse."
"If you don't tell me his name now, I'll come back. And I'll
keep coming back until you do."
"Get me out of here. Get me out of Hell's Widow and I'll
tell you his name. I'm watched constantly. I can't seem to go
anywhere that he doesn't know about it. He flaunts his
knowledge to frighten me."
"I might know a way to get you out, but it's risky. I'll be
back in three or four weeks. That's the usual pattern for Claw
sending me here on errands."
"I'll be waiting."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
113
CHAPTER SIX
BAD NEWS
Pandeena dismounted from her horse, a blunt faced yellow
dun of sturdy Silverpaw breeding. She had a pack animal tied
to a rope that connected it to her saddle, as did her
companion, Caimbeul. They walked together toward the stout
wooden bridge.
Seven lycan guards in gigantic wolf form emerged from the
thick stand of fragrant white pine and cedars three spear
lengths beyond the bridge where a heavy barrier of brush and
briars offered them concealment.
Odhran, a slender lycan in his hybrid form, accompanied
them, wearing a loose robe over trousers.
"Welcome back, Pandeena," Odhran said. "We've missed
our priest."
"I've brought you a lawgiver, as I promised," she replied,
thumbing at Caimbeul.
Odhran eyed the grizzled lycan walking beside her. "Who is
he?"
A large smile of anticipation spread across Pandeena's
features. "Caimbeul of Running Horse. He has come to serve
Clan Red Wolf in their time of need."
All seven of the wolves changed to myn to greet Caimbeul
as Odhran stared open-mouthed at the newcomer. He
recovered quickly and rushed to greet the legendary lawgiver.
"I'm honored to meet you. Honored."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
114
Caimbeul gripped Odhran's hand and sniffed his fingers.
"You'll do."
Odhran returned the gesture, and then glanced at
Pandeena to explain what the lawgiver meant by that, but
Pandeena just shrugged.
"Let's go see the chieftain, Caimbeul," Pandeena said.
"You'll need to introduce yourself and establish your
presence."
"Of course," Caimbeul responded. "I've not seen young
Claw in decades."
Several of the bridge guards glanced away and repressed
chuckles that emerged instead as snickers.
"Well, he's not young any more." Pandeena cast a
disapproving eye in the direction of the guards and the
snickering subsided.
Caimbeul shrugged. "None of us are."
Odhran goggled at the easy way their young priest
handled the legend walking at her side.
They approached the tremendous manor house; three
stories high and built of blue-veined yellow stone. Elaborate
gardens surrounded the back and east side. A stand of oak
thickets started across a cobblestoned walk from the gardens
and spread across the road with a mixture of elms and
hawthorn copses. A large, smooth boulder rested placidly
beneath a spreading elm close to where the thickets began.
High, dense hawthorn hedges enclosed the rear and
easternmost side of the gardens with short, carefully
manicured hedges dividing the rest into sections interrupted
by ivy-covered arbors.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
115
A large barn and stables swept out to the west side, with
pasturage behind it divided by a combination of tall split rail
fences and hawthorn hedgerows that rose from stone
reinforced embankments. The simple practicality of water
troughs and hitching posts in the courtyard contrasted sharply
with elegance behind it.
Caimbeul had never been to Wolffgard before and had not
been on Red Wolf soil since the Lycan Rebellion, when
Waejontor annexed that swath of land now called the
Hellblade Corridor and cursed—or consecrated depending on
which side you were on—it with the blood of lycan princes
from each of the Nine Great Clans.
Pandeena spied the woven arbor standing in the middle of
the garden at the same time that Caimbeul did: a wedding
arch. The bride and groom walked through it together in
symbol of their joining. It would be left there until the bride
became pregnant, and then taken down as a signal to the
community that their mating had proved successful. A lycan
bride's duty was to produce her first cub as soon as possible.
The sooner an arbor went down, the more the male's
reputation in the community increased.
"Who married?" Pandeena asked.
"Our princess. We were beginning to think she wouldn't
ever stop lusting after that filthy sa'necari who abandoned
her."
Pandeena smiled back at Odhran. "Who was the lucky
wolf?"
"Not a wolf. But, at least he isn't sa'necari." Odhran's tone
sounded a bit off, and Caimbeul wondered at that.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
116
Pandeena tilted her head to the side. "Who?"
"Malthus Estrobian. He's a strong male. He'll have the
princess swollen with a proper heir for old Claw in no time."
The breath caught sharply in Pandeena's lungs, tightening
her chest, and she glanced at Caimbeul, who gave her a tiny
nod. "I'm happy for her," Pandeena lied.
"A wedding is always a happy event," said Caimbeul. "I
can't wait to congratulate them."
"The lawgiver from Sweet Fishes presided over it. He's
gone back to his village now. I expect you'll want to visit all
the villages," said Odhran.
"In time ... in time." Caimbeul pulled at his grizzled chin.
Odhran knocked on the manor's door and a nibari
answered. The delicate brunette was hugely swollen in the
last stages of pregnancy. Claw had acquired a young nibari
stud last winter named Klaudi, and to test his fertility had
bred three of his females to him as soon as they came into
season. Nibari had a ninety day cycle, rather than the twenty-
day cycles of human and lycan females, with a two week
window of fertility. Rumor had it that Klaudi had been
thoroughly exhausted by the time that all three of the
females had caught.
"Hello, Isbeth." Odhran winked at her belly with a grin.
"We're here to see your master. Pandeena has brought the
new lawgiver."
Isbeth nodded to him, and ushered them into the great
hall. A huge hearth at the far end dominated the room and
there were four looms set out to the side of it. Clusters of
furniture filled the chamber. Six people sat in the hall.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
117
Merissa's mother Aisha, and her paternal aunts, Fianait
and Searlait, sat at their looms near the hearth working the
delicate kazamerie wool that their family was famous for.
Aisha had gone grey with age and very little of her youthful
brown coloring remained in her heavy hair. Fianait, although
younger than her brother Claw by a handful of years, had
thinning white hair that she wore in a bun. Searlait, the
youngest, had a single white streak through her fading
chestnut hair. Merissa had been a change of life child for Claw
and Aisha; looking at Searlait, Pandeena could tell that
Merissa had gotten her coloring from Claw's side of the
family.
Merissa sat in a chair near the looms with Malthus beside
her, his hand possessively on her arm. She had the flushed
look of a newlywed when the mating began in earnest.
Pandeena noted that Merissa had set aside her usual attire—
human styles that showed her body off—and wore instead the
traditional lycan wraparound robe that could be easily opened
to facilitate their shape changing. However, Pandeena
suspected that shape changing was not the reason Merissa
wore it, since it also made it easier for Malthus to get her
clothes off. Pandeena had no doubt that Malthus would get a
child on her very quickly—if he was fertile. A lycan child would
inherit the valley, since Merissa's bastard son Darmyk had
been born sa'necari.
If Malthus were the Butchering Serpent, as Pandeena
suspected, then he was sa'necari and they were rarely fertile
at the age that this mon appeared to be. Yet, when Pandeena
had touched him briefly several weeks ago, she had detected

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
118
nothing to suggest he was anything more than true human. If
he was not the Serpent, then he was allied with that
mysterious, faceless sa'necari who had systematically
murdered hundreds of her race. Of that, at least, Pandeena
was certain. Some kind of link did exist. She hoped that
Caimbeul would uncover it.
She shook herself free of her thoughts before she stared
too long at Malthus and gave her suspicions away.
"Congratulations on your marriage, Merissa and Malthus."
"Thank you," Merissa responded politely. She regarded
Caimbeul closely. "For some reason, I expected you to look
like my Uncle Brock, Aunt Fianait's twin brother."
Fianait chuckled. "Brock was such a handsome young
wolf."
"Have I disappointed you?" Caimbeul asked.
Merissa blushed. "No, not at all."
Claw sat near the hearth in a large chair with a stand
beside it. A small pipe rack with six pipes and a jar of tobacco
rested in the center of the stand. He put his pipe aside, and
rose when they entered. "Pandeena, who have you brought
us?"
"Our new lawgiver. Caimbeul of Running Horse is now
Caimbeul of Wolffgard."
Caimbeul and Claw looked to be the same age, both
grizzled and gray, yet still hardy. The three old lycans at their
looms gave Caimbeul polite dips of their shoulders and went
on about their weaving.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
119
Claw looked astounded at his good fortune, and the bright
smile that spread across his grizzled features took ten years
off his age. "I met you when I was sixteen."
Padruig Caimbeul shook his head. "You have it wrong. We
met several times during the Rebellion. We spoke last on the
Day of Despair ... just after they dumped Tarrant's body at
your feet."
"You're right." The shadow of remembered nightmares
gathered in Claw's dark cobalt eyes. "Memory has become a
labyrinth. Bright and clear before the Rebellion and lost in
shades of gray until a few years after it."
Claw shoved the dark mood aside and gestured for
everyone to sit with a wave of his hand. "Isbeth, get us some
mead and some wine. As I recall, you'd rather have red wine,
than mead, Pandeena?"
Malthus frowned slightly, and then lowered his head with a
glance to the side at Merissa. "Let's go upstairs. There are
things we should be doing."
Merissa flushed, placed her hand on his, and rose with
him. "You'll excuse us?"
Pandeena nodded and settled into a chair beside Caimbeul.
"Certainly. And, yes, Claw, you remembered my preferences."
Isbeth headed for the kitchens at a gesture from the
chieftain.
"Yah. My great grandbitch was fireborn," Caimbeul said. "I
figure I've still another five or six centuries left in me."
"And we'll be glad to have them." Claw took up his pipe,
scraped it out and refreshed the tobacco, then struck a lucifer
and lit it. He had barely taken four puffs when he set it aside,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
120
sagging back in his chair with a grimace, kneading his left
arm.
Pandeena frowned. "Are you all right?"
"Yes," Claw growled, in an annoyed tone, adding
grudgingly, "I've been getting these pains."
"Have you spoken to the healer?" Pandeena leaned
forward in her seat, regarding Claw for a long time. "The
valley depends upon you. You must take care of your health."
"I don't need her. They go away." He made a dismissive
gesture and started smoking again.
"How long have you been having them?"
"A week or two. It's nothing. It'll pass."
"Is Kynyr around?"
Claw shook his head. "He's gone to Hell's Widow for a few
days. Errands. He'll be back tomorrow."
"I'm looking forward to meeting this Kynyr Maguire," said
Caimbeul. "I have heard a lot about him." I'm going to break
his bloody nose and then see if Pandeena can still call him
handsome.
Pandeena flushed. "Come on. There's things you need to
see. People to meet."
* * * *
Merissa climbed the stairs to the suite she shared with
Malthus. Her parents had moved her into a larger suite of
rooms, now that she shared her bed with a husband. Malthus
walked with his arm around her, whispering eroticisms into
her ear and kissing her neck.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
121
As they went down the hallway, Darmyk ran up to her. He
pulled at her skirts. Kenly, his maned hunting cat stalked
along behind him, his ever-present companion, and guardian
that at one hundred and fifty pounds no one in their right
minds would mess with. Darmyk was nearly three years old,
but like most children of lycan blood, he was as coordinated
as a human child of seven and precocious in his speech.
"Mama, I want to show you something."
She looked into his eager face, and felt a twinge of
unhappiness. Since marrying, Merissa had very little time for
her son, except when Malthus went into the village for
something, over to help with the refugees at the sanctuary
camp, ran errands in Hell's Widow, or off to hunt in order to
supply the camp with meat. The rest of the time he spent
opening her legs at every opportunity. It was not that Malthus
was unskillful—no, he was very good in bed—just that there
was so much of it, and so little of anything else.
"I can't right now, Darmyk. Please go play with Ros and
Lyrri."
Darmyk looked intensely disappointed. "All right, mama."
He walked off with downcast eyes.
She watched the little boy go and it tugged at her heart
that she couldn't play with him as much as she used to.
"He'll be okay." Malthus slipped his arm around her waist
and nibbled at her ear. "He needs to learn to do without you
more. Especially once we give him a little brother or sister."
"I know."
Merissa had confided her feelings to her mother about
Malthus' sexual appetites, and been advised that it would

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
122
pass, that it was natural at this point in a marriage, and that
she should give him what he wished like a proper wife. Her
father had been blunt and to the point as soon as they
exchanged their vows, telling her and Malthus, "Get me an
heir. One that will be acceptable to the clans."
The clans rarely allowed themselves to be governed by a
bitch; it nearly always had to be a dog wolf. Neither she nor
Darmyk would be acceptable to the elders should something
happen to her father.
They entered their chambers, and Malthus locked the door.
"I don't want the children walking in on us." He pulled his
tunic off and tossed it onto a chair.
Merissa opened her robe and let it fall to the floor,
revealing her body.
Malthus sat in the chair, drew his boots off, and untied his
pants, shoved them down and stepped out of them. He stood,
and Merissa could see that he was already aroused. Malthus
took her hand, and led her into their bedroom.
She lay down and he climbed onto the bed beside her,
running his hands over her. His fingers circled her stomach.
"When it swells, how will you feel?"
"Happy," Merissa answered. "I want your child, Malthus."
He kissed her forehead, her mouth deeply, and then each
of her nipples. "Each day, I dream of seeing my son sucking
on those lovely breasts."
"But we might have a daughter...."
"Whatever, I'll love it." He probed between her legs with
his long fingers, played with the knob of her clit. "I want a
large family, many children. Some of both. Humans are not

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
123
as long-lived as your kind. I'm thirty-six. I haven't a lot of
time to make them."
"I know.... "Merissa said, and then gave a long moan of
pleasure as he aroused her body, making her impatient to
have him inside her.
Malthus licked his way along her and tormented her
nipples with his teeth. His cock bobbed tantalizingly against
her clit. "You'll always look more beautiful to me when you're
swollen with my children, than when you're slender without
them."
"Seed me," Merissa moaned again. "Seed me."
Malthus reached down, guiding his knob inside her warm,
wet sheath, and began to thrust.
* * * *
Odhran followed Pandeena and Caimbeul as they left the
manor after their conversation with Claw. "Shall I fetch your
horses?"
"Nah, I'd rather walk." Caimbeul scratched at the stubble
on his chin.
"Our lawgiver was teaching the morning classes at the
camp," Odhran said. "And then our priest, that was old
Tempest, taught the second half, religious stuff and so forth."
"Tempest Anstey?" Caimbeul asked.
"Why, yes, Master Caimbeul."
"Caimbeul's my name, not Master Caimbeul," he said, then
added with a wink, "Though to listen to her..." he thumbed at
Pandeena, "you'd think it was Old Lecher."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
124
Odhran looked uncomfortable as Pandeena grumbled
under her breath and waved him away. "I'll show Caimbeul
around. Do you have a lawgiver house?"
"Yes. But it hasn't been lived in since Nevin left. Nikko
stayed with his mother."
"Nikko's the dead one?" Caimbeul asked.
"Yes," replied Odhran. "It will probably take a day or two
for the house to be made livable." He scratched at the back of
his head. "Actually ... Cahira Sinclair used the house for a bit
after Kynyr was wounded."
"Caimbeul can stay with me until its ready," Pandeena told
him.
"As you wish." Odhran hurried off.
Pandeena turned to Caimbeul, with her hands on her hips,
and a stern expression. "Next time you're wondering why I
divorced you, think about how what you just said sounded."
"Then it wasn't just the boy?" Caimbeul asked, sobering.
She looked away from him in discomfort. "No. Losing him
was just the last cut of the knife."
"I'm sorry."
"Yes, I'm sure you are," she said, going suddenly brusque.
"Come on. If I had thought that anyone else was up to the
task at hand, I would never have asked you."
The rustic village contained mostly the traditional
longhouses of variegated stone, with newer frame houses
sprinkled through, painted in the forest colors beloved of the
lycans. A single main street traversed the village, which was
almost large enough to be called a small town, with numerous
residential side streets. They passed a large assortment of

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
125
shops and establishments, including two eateries, a couple of
taverns, a dry goods, a tanner's, and toward the end a
blacksmith and a harness-maker. The majority of lycans were
no more than semi-literate, hence the graphics on the signs
over every place of business.
A block from a large tavern, the Difficult Horse, Caimbeul
saw a sign that made him stop in his tracks and stare.
BAROUCHA'S POTIONS
"Tell me that's not Baroucha Seaver..."
Pandeena glanced at the sign. "I'm afraid it is."
"Shit. Let's go. I'll want to think about this."
Where human villages tended to be dirty, with streets of
dead brown, packed down earth, the lycan main street was
thick with trees of all kinds and grass growing in a wide swath
down the middle. Trees shaded the fronts and sides of every
building, with tree rounds and benches for sitting scattered
through with comfortable abandon. The lycans were fond of
sitting outside and gabbing with whoever happened by.
People stopped to nod at them and acknowledge their priest
Pandeena in a mix of politeness and curiosity as they sized up
the newcomer walking beside her.
She introduced Caimbeul as they walked, knowing that
word of his arrival would sweep the village, and everyone
would know by nightfall.
At the northeast end of the village, the road divided into a
Y, with the left hand road leading to the refugee camp and
the right hand continuing on to the next village. They took the
left branch and walked along the shady path until they
reached the camp.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
126
The sanctuary proved to be mostly a cluster of woven
cone-shaped sheelings that required dropping to your knees
before crawling inside. Smoke rose from ventilation holes in
the roofs. A long house built of stone stood at the center with
a chimney in the middle of its roof. Several smaller buildings
of wood stood half finished. A short distance away three more
stone houses were being raised as permanent shelters, as
well as others that were still being constructed by the
refugees with hired-help and volunteers from among the
lycans. Most of the workers were teenagers, yet they moved
to their tasks capably and without hesitation. All lycans were
reared to a trade as soon as they could walk, and at fourteen
they took on an adult's work as they were then considered to
be of legal age. All of the land had once belonged to Beth
Ryan, a lycan who had donated and supervised most of it
until her death early in the summer, and was now run by
Clodagh Demarist under the auspices of the Willodarian
Shrine.
Several young myn paused in their work to regard them.
Caimbeul's glance went to the spellcords on a female's wrists.
"How many sa'necari did you say are here?"
"Five. All women with children. I'm told they allowed
themselves to be corded in order to have sanctuary here for
the children. Two of them have lycan children."
"Interesting. Lots of cubs here," Caimbeul observed.
"Well, yes, but then that's the reason they're all here.
Women with children can't run as far and as fast as males, so
they needed a place to go to ground as close to their home
territories as they could. Although the one from farthest away

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
127
is Diantha. She tried for the Sharani border, because she was
close on it. But the Battle of Phligethyn forced her to turn
back. Two of her three children perished before she reached
here."
Pandeena pointed to a slender dark mon, who stared dully
across the yard. "Only her twelve year old daughter survived.
They had both been beaten and raped during their flight here.
I'm told the daughter was given tansy shortly after arriving to
abort what those assholes shoved inside her."
Caimbeul stared at his hands for a time. "There's no way
to keep our people out of the war."
"It isn't a question of keeping our people out of it. The
assholes have brought it to us," Pandeena growled. "You were
further from it when you were at Running Horse in Silverpaw.
Red Wolf is on the leading edge of it. This time, don't let me
down."
Caimbeul lifted her eyes to hers. "I won't, Pandeena. I
swear it."
"Come on and I'll introduce you to Clodagh." A note of
impatience entered Pandeena's voice. "She runs the camp
under my supervision."
Pandeena walked up to the central and largest longhouse,
where she knocked on the door. An attractive bitch, pretty in
a round-faced way, answered.
"Welcome back, Pandeena," Clodagh said in a pleasant
voice. She looked Caimbeul up and down speculatively. "Is
this our new lawgiver?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
128
Pandeena wondered why the way Clodagh sized up
Caimbeul sent a shiver over her. "This is Padruig Caimbeul,
previously of Running Horse."
Clodagh's eyes widened at the name. "Oh, my, you did
bring us a good one. Please, come in." She stepped back from
the door. "Let me get you something to drink. I have tea,
mead, whiskey."
Caimbeul started to step in and Pandeena's hand on his
arm stopped him. "No, thanks. I still need to finish showing
Caimbeul around. Perhaps later."
"Come any time, Lawgiver. Day or night," Clodagh said.
As Pandeena led Caimbeul back toward the corner of the
compound where the shrine lay, he asked her, "Is Clodagh a
slut?"
"She certainly is not," Pandeena snarled, and then went
silent, thinking furiously. "What made you ask that?"
Caimbeul pulled at his whiskery chin. "She's not my type.
But I think she was flashing her tail at me."
Pandeena's brow furrowed. "The previous bitch who ran
this place was a known slut of enormous proportions. She
was killed a few months ago. I simply cannot imagine how
Claw could have placed another one like that in charge."
"I may be wrong sometimes about dogs, but I'm rarely
wrong about bitches."
The Shrine to Willodarus proved to be a simple building, a
square box with two wings, located in a shady yard with grass
and flowering hedges. "My apartment is on the right wing.
The left is the schoolroom," Pandeena explained as they
walked around the building.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
129
She took Caimbeul to the back and pointed out an area
directly behind the shrine, marked off as a graveyard by a
dotting of white stones. A wooden arch framed the entrance
with the likeness of the Willodarian bear atop it. She walked
through and indicated one of the headstones of the two
graves. Caimbeul's glance, however, went to the one beside it
because someone had left grave offerings on it: a tiny
wooden horse and a wealth of flowers. He knelt and lifted a
pine wreath covering the name.
CULLEN DIOMEDES BLACKWOOD. 1017-1077 AQ.
Caimbeul rubbed his hand over his eyes. "Gods, he was
still young."
"Look at the other one. You knew Tempest Anstey, didn't
you?"
Caimbeul frowned slightly, again pulling at his chin. "What
of it?"
"That's his grave."
Caimbeul's eyes looked as if he were searching for
something inside himself, as he asked. "What did he die of?"
"A heart attack—they say."
"That's the one thing he couldn't die of," Caimbeul growled
under his breath.
"So you know about Teakamon linking his heart to a tree."
Caimbeul's eyes slewed around and he snapped low, "Shut
up. To your left. We're being followed."
Pandeena dropped to her knees and began cleaning off
Tempest's headstone. From the corner of her eyes, she saw
Shalto and Oswyl watching them. She knew that the two

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
130
sixteen-year-olds spent an uncommon amount of time with
Malthus. "Let's go inside. I imagine you're thirsty."
"I definitely am," Caimbeul said in a loud voice. "You
wouldn't happen to have some Dragonsbreath with you? Best
whiskey there is."
"I hate it. But I may have something you'll like just as
much." She led Caimbeul in through the back door, made a
left turn in the corridor that wrapped around the back of the
shrine and opened a door to her left. She nodded at the one
on her right and further down. "That one opens into the
shrine itself."
Pandeena's apartment contained three cozy rooms, a
sitting room, kitchen, and bedroom. Caimbeul poked his nose
into the bedroom and whistled at the huge bed that dwarfed
the rest of the furniture. "There's room for more than two in
that one."
"Don't get any ideas," Pandeena admonished.
Caimbeul popped back out and trailed her into the sitting
room. "You have any idea why they were following us?"
"Suspicions only. I battered them severely some weeks
back for trying to climb my back in a very insistent fashion."
"Same old Pandeena." He grinned. "Dogs their age are
always trying to climb every bitch in sight. They'll get over it."
"Yes, well. I have a lot more to be concerned about
besides two youngsters with nutsacks for brains. So, has any
of this put questions in your mind?" She picked a chair that
sat against the wall furthest from the door, and next to a
sofa.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
131
"Lots. To start with, what's this about a proper heir?"
Caimbeul asked, as he settled on her sofa.
"I told you about that." Pandeena brought him a beer and
sat in a chair across from him.
"Remind me."
"Merissa has a bastard child by a sa'necari lover."
"Right. That's why Claw built the camp. I remember now.
It's a shame his sons were executed. I told old Romney
Silverpaw that nothing good would come from rebelling."
"Don't bring Tarrant and Logan up to Claw again. You saw
how it still hurts him to think about them. Claw loved his
sons. I think that's why he's so drawn to Kynyr. It's startling
how much he looks like Tarrant."
"So that's why you're so eager to get into bed with him!"
Caimbeul took a swig from his glass. "Tarrant turned you
down. That must have stung."
"Tarrant was genuinely in love with Bridget Silverpaw.
That's why he turned me down. I can't fault that." Pandeena
lowered her head. "I saw them rite him. There was nothing I
could do. They had consecrated the ground. I couldn't get
close."
"I know. I saw you there."
Pandeena's head snapped up. "I didn't see you."
"I didn't want you to." A tiny smug twist touched the left
corner of his mouth.
"But..."
Caimbeul leaned forward in his chair, propped his feet up
on the edge of another chair, and pulled his boots off to rub

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
132
at his toes. "Just because I never demonstrated any talents,
does not mean I don't have them."
"Shut up, Caimbeul. I suspect that the boy, Darmyk, might
be the last descendant of Dawnhand.... Claw and his
household are very close-mouthed about the boy's father, so
I can't be certain. And his mother's just married a mon I
believe is connected to the Butchering Serpent."
"It's possible he has some small mage gift, perhaps?
Nothing that you've said, none of the evidence you've offered
really proves that he's not the Serpent." Caimbeul sat back
with a heavy settling of his weight, his arms draping the chair
arms and his hands closing on the ends. The chair creaked.
Caimbeul's huge size translated into a three hundred pound
wolf whenever he changed.
Pandeena could not remain in her chair long, stood and
walked to her window. She opened the shutters and stared
into the garden. Two shapes moved in the trees at the edge.
"Keep your voice, down, Caimbeul. They're still out there."
"This is not good," he growled. Hair sprouted and
lengthened along his arms, spreading over his face in black
and gray.
She faced him again, speaking quietly. "Malthus felt
perfectly human to my touch, and if he had not tried to Read
me, I would have assumed there was nothing out of the
ordinary about him."
"I will want to speak with the young lawgiver I am
replacing here."
"They think he's dead, Caimbeul." Pandeena paced back
and forth with her glass of wine in hand. "I want to leave it

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
133
that way. If the Serpent learned that he had failed to kill
Nikko, he'd find a way to strike at him."
"They'll hear nothing about him from me."
"Caimbeul, we've been over this before. Sometimes I think
you only remember the parts you want to remember, and
forget the rest. Nikko can't even remember his own name.
Although.... "Pandeena paused for a moment, thinking. "He
did remember the dog's name when I took little Moss to my
mother's. That was the first thing he said. Moss. And then he
looked at me for confirmation that the dog's name was Moss."
"Trauma. I won't do anything to upset him." Caimbeul
scratched his hairy arm. "Pandeena, will you please stop
pacing, you're beginning to get on my poor old nerves. I'm
not a young wolf anymore."
Pandeena frowned, and sat down. "His heart is damaged.
Upsetting him could kill him."
Caimbeul ran a hand through his shaggy hair, and made a
despairing sound. "I understand that. I said I wouldn't upset
him. I simply want to see him, to smell him."
Pandeena pursed her lips and blew through them. "We'll do
that once you're settled in."
Caimbeul's tongue slid from the side of his half extended
muzzle and hung there like a hungry dog. "I'd rather settle in
here."
"None of that, you old lecher," Pandeena said. "We're not
married any longer."
Caimbeul heaved a great sigh, his muzzle shrinking back
into his face. "You do know how to hurt an old mon. I'll make
you a trade. I find the proof that this Malthus is the Serpent,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
134
or link him to the Serpent so that you can find the whoreson,
and you give me a night in your bed like old times." He gave
her a wicked grin full of little boy naughtiness.
"Caimbeul...."
"One night. Just one." His voice turned mournful.
Pandeena's lips parted and she raked her teeth over her
lower lip. "One night."
Caimbeul's face brightened with eagerness. "The night of
my choice."
"Caimbeul! You're going to try and catch me in season,
aren't you?"
The old wolf shrugged, with a guilty smile.
Pandeena's eyes widened into an affronted stare. "Our son
is dead. Making another isn't going to change how I feel
about you. We're just friends. If I did decide on another child
... I'd get him from Kynyr."
Kynyr. The old wolf dropped his eyes. "You want my help,
those are my terms."
"You should do it for the good of our people. Or vengeance
for Cullen."
"I'm feeling selfish in my old age." Caimbeul crossed his
arms and sat back. "Besides, you can't blame an old mon for
trying, can you?"
"One night. Of your choosing. Don't ask again and keep
your hands to yourself until then. And, you're sleeping on the
sofa until they get the house ready."
"Another thing, Pandeena. The Butchering Serpent is one
of the most dangerous sa'necari in existence. Therefore, I
want you to mark me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
135
"Are you sure? You refused when we were married."
"One of our lives might depend on our being psychically
linked through your Godmark."
She considered that. "Open your robe."
Caimbeul opened his robe completely, which caused
Pandeena to look at his crotch.
"Well, you needn't have showed me that, I have no
intention of climbing onto it." She placed her palm on his
chest, and accepted his allegiance. Her touch seared his flesh,
but he did not wince from it. When she drew back her hand,
the wolf's head brand of the Second Mother was burned over
his heart.
* * * *
Kandaishee hurried back inside her house when she saw
Pandeena and the newcomer arrive. That grizzled old wolf
had to be the new lawgiver. Caution had become a watchword
now that she could no longer conceal her pregnancy. She
dared not let either of them see her, because they would
demand to know who had gotten the child on her. Clodagh
could still go about freely because she was not showing yet.
The house had a dirt floor and two half walls at either end
with curtains over the windows and doors leading into the
central chamber, like all the traditional lycan longhouses.
Kandaishee's bedroom lay on the left hand side, and her little
son Gilzean's on the other. She went into her bedroom and
curled up on her bed, crying. She felt the little jerks as
Malthus' child moved in her belly. Her pregnancy was the
furthest along of all of them. The spellcords on her wrists

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
136
itched, but she feared to touch them lest she set off the
deadly seals. Malthus had some method of concealing his
nature beyond anything Kandaishee had ever heard of, or
else he would be corded like her four sa'necari companions.
Since the rebellion began, the lycans would not allow
uncorded adult sa'necari in their valley.
Even had she not been corded, Kandaishee doubted that
she could have fought him off the day he raped her and
shoved his child into her womb: the Butchering Serpent was
simply too powerful.
The child inside her moved again. Kandaishee put her hand
on her belly, running her fingers across herself. She had
surrendered to Malthus' arcane intrusions, rather than risk
having her mind ripped open and forcibly altered, because of
her small son who would have suffered had her mind been
too damaged to care for him.
Those memories made her rise from her bed. Kandaishee
left her room and went to his. Gilzean lay curled on his side, a
little stuffed wolf clutched in his hands. She had made the toy
for him herself when they first came to the valley. The five-
year-old already looked so much like his dead father that it
brought tears to her eyes.
She straightened the blanket around him. The nights lately
had turned cool with the first hint of autumn. Feeling the
shivering hands of memories tightening through her,
Kandaishee returned to the main room of the longhouse.
"Why couldn't they have left us alone?" Kandaishee
muttered angrily. "Why? They stick their damned bones into

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
137
lycan bitches often enough. What was wrong with my
marrying Domhnall?"
She knew the answer. Sa'necari condemned interracial
marriages involving their women. It was all about the bloody
gene, their males wanting to hold onto every female who
could produce a sa'necari child. The sa'necari gene was
recessive. When a sa'necari female married a lycan, the
children usually were all lycan as Gilzean was. When sa'necari
bred with sa'necari, the result was always sa'necari. Oh, there
were rare exceptions of a human child resulting and
Kandaishee had heard of a few. She had known a couple in
the priesthood who were rearing their freakishly human
offspring as a sacrifice to Bellocar.
A vision flashed through her mind of the farmhouse on fire,
and Domhnall shouting for her to flee. She saw him outlined
against the burning house in his hybrid form, struggling to
fight off the six sa'necari males who had attacked their home.
Kandaishee felt Gilzean's fingers clutching her tightly as she
fled into the forest. Domhnall's death scream echoed through
her mind as clearly as it had that night, ululating through the
darkness.
The heaviness of the flashback brought Kandaishee
sobbing to her knees. Beth had sheltered her in this camp.
She and Gilzean had been the first of the refugees. The
Chieftain Claw had insisted that she be corded and sealed
from her powers. So long as Gilzean was safe, what did that
matter?

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
138
"Domhnall, if your spirit can hear me, I didn't want this
child." Kandaishee pressed her hands to her belly. "I swore I
would never bear another man's child. Forgive me."
Then she thought of Beth, her only real friend among the
lycans. The lycans had found pieces of her near Iudris
Meadows, but not enough for the Readers to say how she
died. Kandaishee believed that Malthus or one of his allies
had rited her.
His coercions, sways, and triggers were now too deeply
and well set in her psyche and body for her to ever be free
again. Malthus owned her, as he did all of the other females
in camp, including Clodagh, the camp supervisor.
With his spells lodged in all their brains, he had turned it
into a discreet brothel for his favorites among the lycan youth
who flocked to emulate him. At last count there were nine
pregnancies in the camp. They had no access to
contraception, nor to Baroucha—Malthus did not want them
going to a healer—and the lycans seemed not to care what
happened to them. Except Clodagh, but Malthus' seed was
growing in that belly also. Four of them were pregnant by
Malthus, herself, Clodagh, and two other sa'necari, Laleyna
and Oliffyia. Of them, only Clodagh was not conspicuously
swollen yet.
Malthus was as freakishly fertile as he was powerful.
Kandaishee wept for all of them.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
139
Malthus sat his desk smacking the two letters Preece had
brought him against his palm. The missive from Heironim had
had only two lines written in it:
"The bastard prince goes home in a sack. Count on it."
The second letter had come from Flavio and was a list of
Preece's expenses. The only item that Malthus had raised as
eyebrow at was the pound of White Fire. He wondered
whether Preece intended to use it or sell it or both. It was
worth at least fifty Double Gryphons—more money than
Preece could earn in ten years doing manual labor. If Preece
had an appetite for street drugs, Malthus had plenty to offer
him and that would put Preece more firmly under his thumb.
He slipped from the manor at midnight while the
household slept and walked in the garden as he did each
night. Living at the manor made him privy to more
information, but it had its drawbacks. There were too many
people to observe him there, and he needed to be accessible
at some point each day in case messages came from Lord
Brandrahoon.
He shivered at Brandrahoon's name. Malthus had not
known that Lord Daemon, who had hired him to infiltrate the
Red Wolf community and command the conquest of it, had
actually been the ancient vampire—brother to Waejonan,
founder of the kingdom and the sa'necari cult from which
their race had risen. Brandrahoon had regained his lands and
estates that had been seized four thousand years ago by
Waejonan, who had exiled him. Queen Tomyrilen, who led the
Waejontori rebellion against the Sharani occupying their land,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
140
rode with him at her right hand as her first advisor above all
others.
Brandrahoon ... Merissa is mine. I'll not yield her up to
you.
Malthus paced into the trees, letting the deepest shadows
envelop him. He should never have written that letter to Lord
Daemon, telling him about Merissa and Darmyk. Hoon wanted
them because they belonged to the last descendant of his
brother Isranon Dawnhand. Malthus could almost consider
giving Hoon the boy, but not Merissa. He loved Merissa; she
had borne a sa'necari child. Usually the lycan gene was
dominant over the sa'necari gene, and a child of such
couplings was born lycan. But Merissa—No, Merissa was his.
If she could bear one sa'necari child, then she would likely
conceive mostly sa'necari children. He would keep her belly
filled continuously, deliciously. They would have a huge
family, one that boasted of his unusual virility.
He ought to write his mother, and tell her how well the
potions and arcanes she had treated him with since
adolescence had slowed the progressive infertility of his
kind—if anything her efforts had enhanced his fertility beyond
anything his kind ever possessed. His mother Sidera Tyrins,
currently employed as a toxicologist and bio-alchemist by
Lord Hoon, had been quietly and systematically setting up
laboratories in the dungeons of Carrion Crevasse, Malthus'
hidden manor, in preparation for his return there. The Tyrins,
a branch clan of the Romilay family, had specialized in
poisons and venoms for generations, including the discovery
and refining of Devil's Silver and experiments with genetically

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
141
altered and enhanced breeds of vipers using a mutagenic
arcane they had developed.
The flapping of wings in the trees above him drew Malthus
from his thoughts. He tensed when he saw the bat, wondering
if Sergei had returned. The Lemyari messenger had raped
Malthus' seven-year-old niece Ros, and left her for dead with
a small quantity of his venom in her blood stream. Malthus
had managed to pull Ros out of the paralysis, but the child
remained weakened. It enraged him, and he raised power to
rip the undead soul out of the messenger.
He opened his necromantic senses and threw a low level
scan into the trees. The bat up there was definitely undead
and vampiric. "Come down, Sergei, and I'll rip your throat
out."
The bat fluttered out of his reach to another cluster of
trees, and Malthus followed, with a hand on his sword. In the
shadows stood a slender mon, her lips curved into a sneer.
"Having trouble with Sergei?" Zinzi asked, taking the
messenger's pouch from her shoulder.
Malthus frowned, stepping cautiously toward the slender
vampire. "I heard you were dead."
She laughed low. "As dead as undeath."
"In Minnoras...."
"Oh that." Zinzi extended the pouch to him. "That was
someone else's head that Hoon found on his gatepost. I sent
in a changeling first. I suspected that traitors had been killing
my birds, so you can understand my caution."
Malthus took the pouch from Zinzi, removed the letters,
and handed the pouch back. "I can indeed."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
142
Hoon, like many of the older Lemyari, favored turning
mages. Malthus wondered why he had never suspected
before that Zinzi might have been a mage, but then Lemyari
mages tended to hide or disguise their talents, favoring
discretion over display.
"Having trouble with Sergei?" Zinzi repeated.
"He raped my niece. If he comes back, I'll kill him."
Zinzi smirked. "I'm sure you'll try. But I'll ask Hoon to
keep him away."
"I would appreciate that." Malthus turned on his heel,
walking toward the manor.
"My payment," Zinzi called after him.
Malthus paused and looked at her. "I don't owe you. I
haven't anything going back."
After weeks of no messages, Malthus had not come
prepared to pay. However, there was one payment that was
always accepted. He pushed up his sleeve and extended his
wrist. "A couple of sips, and no more."
Zinzi grinned then, and came to him. Her fangs descended
from their sheaths with the distinctive tiny hook at the bottom
that marked her as vampire. Malthus did not flinch when she
took his wrist and plunged her fangs into him, although he
had not fed anyone in years, except Ros when he called her
back from the edge of death with his own blood. Zinzi took
two strong pulls, hauling as much of his blood as she could in
the sips allotted to her.
"That's enough," Malthus growled.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
143
Zinzi withdrew, swiping her tongue over the wound to
close it. "Delicious. You aren't bad looking. You could come to
my bed anytime."
"I don't sleep with vampires." Malthus turned and left her.
"Rude bastard," Zinzi muttered, and changed.
Malthus walked back to the house, drawing his cloak more
tightly around his shoulders. The first cool nights of autumn
had arrived with the waning of summer. He let himself into
the manor through a servants' door in the rear, passing with
swift silence through the corridors, past the sleeping
chambers of the nibari and those of the lycan servants. The
guardsmyn, who might have been more alert to his passage,
slept in another wing above the salle. Claw had expanded the
manor over the last ten years, almost as if he were gathering
his household for war.
Well, he didn't do it fast enough. The war is upon him and
he's not ready or strong enough to stop us.
Malthus thought back to the increasing frequency that he
saw Claw grimace and knead his left arm. The chieftain was
ill. Stupid wolf, I'm killing you and you don't know it.
He crossed the broad landing of the second floor staircase,
heading for the study Claw had given over to him at his
request. He opened the door and locked it behind him, easing
down the bar that would prevent it being opened even if the
mon on the other side had a key. Removing it would give him
time to hide whatever he did not wish to be seen. He knelt at
the fireplace and got a blaze going there, before settling at
his oaken desk with the letters that Zinzi had brought him.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
144
Three letters. One from Hoon, one from his mother, and
one from Egidius. Zinzi must have been making a circuit,
picking up payments at each stop.
He slid his fingers over the seal on his mother's letter.
Sidera always put a mage seal beneath the wax one. If
anyone except the one for whom it was intended tried to open
the letter, the missive would destroy itself. Sidera had a
distinctive and powerful mage gift, which was why her father
had chosen her—out of all the offspring his harem had given
him—to be the principal inheritor of his estates. Women could
not, under normal circumstances, inherit properties, titles,
and great estates in Waejontor, but every rule was made to
be broken—with the right influence.
Malthus popped the letter open with the proper word of
command.
Malthus,
I'm so very happy to learn of your marriage. I can't wait to
meet her. From the description of your successes with your
concubines, I expect that I'll have a legitimate grandchild
soon as well.
The special chambers have been readied at Carrion
Crevasse for your concubines, and I have sent talented
people there to see them through their laying in times. Also,
the dungeons and laboratories are finished to your
specifications, stocked, and prepared. The first captives you
sent have been confined per your instructions. Your cousin
Tarentia has moved into quarters there to serve as your
seneschal and primary assistant as she did at the previous
manor.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
145
Not a word of this place has escaped to either Hoon or the
queen. I am grateful concerning your warnings. I would never
have dreamed that Lord Daemon was Hoon, much less
Brandrahoon.
Your loving mother,
Sidera Tyrins
Malthus smiled in satisfaction after finishing the letter. His
mother never let him down. But that was to be expected,
considering that he was her only child. Sidera had been Lord
Feodras' toxicologist and bio-alchemist, designing poisons and
antidotes on his behalf. Lord Feodras had made her his
mistress against her will, got Malthus on her, and forbidden
her other lovers. With her sylvan blood, she was still young
enough for other children, but so far had not chosen to make
any since Feodras' death. Malthus wondered what it would
feel like to have a sibling from his mother. All of his paternal
siblings were dead. Two of them at his own hands. The only
brother he had experienced any closeness to had been
Troyes. But Isranon had killed Troyes over Merissa, and then
gotten his bastard child on her. The little bastard would have
to die—and his father also.
He folded the letter, took it to the fireplace, and shoved it
into the flames. Once he had it burning well, Malthus returned
to the desk and considered the final two. The one from Lord
Hoon made him nervous, and he left it for last.
Malthus,
When you are ready, Laetus has his units positioned to
take the village of Three Stones. That's one of the four we
picked out for first strikes. Give the word and we'll take it. As

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
146
per our agreement, forty percent of the women and children
captured will be sent on to Carrion Crevasse to await your
pleasures, the other ten percent of your share will be held in
the caves to meet your needs. Four from that last steading
we burned are still available for use, although I admit I'm
getting very hungry for a rite.
Egidius
Malthus carried that letter to the fire and burned it also.
A rite. Yes, a rite would be so nice. I haven't felt a mon die
beneath me in weeks. Malthus' cock grew hard at the thought
of slipping it into a dying body. That made him think of
Merissa. He put Hoon's unread letter into a secret
compartment at the bottom of his quiver of arrows, and then
headed for the bedroom to wake his wife.
A pleasant thought occurred to him and Malthus smiled in
anticipation. This time tomorrow, Kynyr Maguire will be dead.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
147
CHAPTER SEVEN
PLANS
The meeting room lay deep in the bowels of the renovated
grain warehouse known as the Green Sheaf. It had no
windows. Wards against scrying had been drawn upon all four
walls, floor, the ceiling, and the door. A long table that could
easily seat forty or more occupied the far end, while sofas,
low tables, and chairs filled the area nearest the door.
Nine sa'necari held their seats along the sides of the great
table, watching their leader, Heironim Traxton sitting at their
head. Heironim privately called himself "Lord Traxton"
although he had no right to the name. The sa'necari, one of
Malthus' two right hand myn, had been born Heironim
Calderone, one of the last Lord Traxton's many bastards. He
and Malthus Tyrins—who currently called himself Malthus
Estrobian—rited Lord Traxton when they were mere boys in
retaliation for his refusal to legitimize Heironim. Traxton had
died screaming with his bastard offspring's cock up his ass
and a knife in his ribs.
Nine green glass jars clustered to Traxton's right hand and
a rolled map lay to his left. Heironim tapped an impatient
rhythm with his forefinger on a folded note.
"I called you here, because Kynyr Maguire is in town.
Flavio sent word. He's looking into the death of Cullen
Blackwood."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
148
"We've been expecting that." Dorjan Calendri sat at
Heironim's right hand in the place of honor as senior among
Heironim's lieutenants. Average height and slight of build, his
amaranthine eyes were the deepest of those present, a sign
that he had tasted the fruits of death in the rites more often
than the others. They showed their true eyes at these
meetings, casting aside the cloaking spells that allowed them
to pass for human.
A sa'necari on the far side of the table curled his left hand
up as if it held something and made a hammering motion
with his right. "That runt screamed like a pig when I drove
the spikes through him."
Dorjan caught a glimmer of irritation in Heironim's eyes
and glanced at his companion. "Shut up, Nelek."
Nelek shrugged his left shoulder and said nothing.
They had all known each other since childhood, some since
birth. Sidera Tyrins and her household had raised, trained,
and educated them. They were all sa'necari-born; either
bastards or orphans—a few of them were both—of sa'necari
nobility who had perished at the hands of the Sharani
occupiers. Sidera called them the Band of Friends, and her
iron lessons had given them surprising cohesion and discipline
compared to other sa'necari groups. They had bonded and
fused into a formidable force despite their small numbers—or
perhaps because of it—Dorjan was never certain.
"The note's from Flavio?"
Heironim glanced at Dorjan with a curt nod. "This isn't a
personal vendetta. Maguire called it 'clan business.' Claw has
made his first move and sent Maguire to ask questions."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
149
"He won't learn anything. The whores are all bought in one
way or another."
"It isn't enough." Heironim crumpled the note and threw it
at the wall. "The high and mighty Kynyr Maguire ... have any
of you gotten a look at him?"
Nelek waved his hand at Heironim, and received
permission to speak. "We got a look at all four of them. Three
blonds and a red-head. I'm not certain which is him. It's the
same four stopped me from taking Cullen the first time."
"Which one put the knife in your belly?" Heironim leaned
forward on his elbows.
Dorjan watched Nelek's face. Sa'necari were hard to kill,
especially after they had gotten fifteen or twenty rites under
their belts. The wound had been easily healed with a bottle of
fresh blood; however, Nelek had been the butt of the joke
ever since.
"The one with the whitish hair."
"Finn MacIver." Dorjan supplied the name from a sheet of
descriptions that Malthus had given them.
"Tomorrow you can return the favor, Nelek." Heironim
favored Dorjan with a smile, suggesting that he might yet be
forgiven for his own failure: Dorjan had failed to stop that cub
of Silkie's from escaping. But who would have dreamed the
cub could ride like that or that the horse Cooley had been up
on could have been so fast and have had such tremendous
stamina. Dorjan's mount had dropped dead trying to overtake
the cub. The horse Cooley had ridden that day had been
black, not sorrel, and yet the more that Dorjan thought on it,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
150
the more convinced he had become that the horse must have
been Cullen Blackwood's celebrated Larkspur.
"Kill them all, Dorjan. Let them get close to home ... close
enough to feel safe and then do it. Tie their bodies to their
horses and send them across the bridge as a warning to Claw
Redhand. It's time the lycans knew the road is ours."
"We get too close and we'll have the bridge guards on us."
Heironim handed the jars around. "Just shoot them and
fade before the guard can catch you."
Dorjan noted the runes—actually sa'necari ideograms—on
the nine green glass jars: Sidera had given the toxin a rating
of nine, putting it a shade above curare and just below
Lemyari venom on the Romilay Scale. The jars had broad
mouths and cork stoppers, perfect for popping open and
dipping arrowheads into the contents; although some of them
preferred to pour a measure in a bowl and apply it to their
weapons with a brush.
"Something new?" Dorjan inquired, breaking the long
silence.
"Very. Still Devil's Silver based, but the neurotoxic
elements are stronger ... work faster. Dorjan, you're in
charge. Don't disappoint me."
"I won't." Dorjan took the jar and opened the lid, stared
into the contents. The acrid odor that arose from the jar
burned his nostrils. The smell would fade when the toxin
dried, but it made unpleasant working.
"I want four units of five with an officer each. Black shaft
arrows are to be issued to only two of the archers in each
group."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
151
"Why so few?" Nelek scowled. "Why not all of them?"
Dorjan wished that Nelek would not argue. It only irritated
Heironim. The black shaft arrows were poisoned, while the
red shafted ones were not. Dorjan had no idea why Malthus
wanted both in play at once, but he knew better than to
argue with him. So did Heironim.
"Just do as you're told." Heironim unrolled the map and
pinned it flat with paperweights. He tapped a spot on the map
and they all leaned in to see it better. "The road dips and
bends here, just before it comes in view of the bridge. Heavy
tree cover. The wagon can't move fast and he won't be able
to turn it. Enfilade them from the sides. Block their retreat
front and rear."
* * * *
Eideard and Ramsey were waiting in their room when
Kynyr arrived with Finn trailing him. Kynyr could see the
questions in their eyes as he sat down on the bed and started
pulling his boots off. The room felt cramped, rather than cozy,
with two large beds squeezed into it, a table that seated four,
a couple of dressers and a sofa.
Silkie's words had disturbed him enough that Kynyr kept
running them through his mind. He had an easy way to get
Silkie out, but it involved first bringing his Gram to Hell's
Widow; and he doubted that Todd would agree to risk her
that way.
"How'd it go?" Eideard sat in a chair near the window,
watching Kynyr.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
152
Ramsey sat in the middle of the bed he would be sharing
with Eideard, bare to the waist. Rust-colored hair bristled on
his muscular chest. "I asked for Ellie, but she was booked
until midnight ... knew Kynyr didn't want us there that late."
Kynyr tossed his boots into a corner near the bed, peeled
his tunic off, and started unlacing his mail. Ramsey whistled
at the blue-violet shimmer of Kynyr's armor. "When did you
get that? It's kendaryl isn't it?"
"Early solstice gift from Gram. Made in Iradrim."
"That don't come cheap." Eideard went closer to get a
good look at it. He tapped a small square of metal in the form
of a shield near the shoulder. "Maker's mark. Eitri Nevskaya.
Shit, Kynyr, he's the best out there. Your gram must have
money."
Kynyr pushed Eideard away. "She's translating a book for
their High Priest. Cahira got this in trade ... more or less."
"Ellie..." Eideard moved to a chair.
"I told you to stay away from her." Kynyr paused with his
fingers on the lacings to scowl at all of them. "If anyone
speaks to her, it will be me."
Finn scanned their faces and tongued his lips. "You see the
way she fled when Kynyr brought up Cullen?"
They all nodded.
"Looked suspicious to me. What'd Silkie say?"
Kynyr exhaled heavily, and let his gaze drift across their
faces. "Remember your promises, friends. Silkie says Ellie
drugged Cullen. He was taken without a fight."
Eideard's face went livid with rage and he unleashed a
string of curses. "Someone should gut that bitch."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
153
The room went silent and everyone stared at Eideard until
Kynyr spoke. "I know Cullen saved your life, but you were
always the one who hated to see him coming."
"A mon changes, Kynyr. Down there on my knees, hurting
so bad I could barely move ... knowing the next blow would
kill me ... and Cullen shoves a blade into the asshole's
kidneys. I've never seen a mon look so welcome."
"There's that," Finn interjected. "What are we going to do
about Ellie?"
"We are not going to do anything. I am." Kynyr shrugged
out of the padded linen shirt he wore beneath his armor. The
amulet that Silkie had sensed—an azure crystal with a runed
band on it—hung from a golden chain around his neck.
Eideard's teeth peeled back from his teeth, hair sprouting
along his arms. "I say kill her before she sends another of us
to the butchers ... if she hasn't already."
"Move too fast, Eideard, and we'll put our feet in a badger
hole. We need to talk to Todd before we do anything."
Finn's gaze traced the scar on Kynyr's chest from the long
silver blade that had gone completely through him. Kynyr
noticed the glance and grabbed a robe. He had never felt
awkward before without his clothes on, but the way people
stared at the scar bothered him. There were very few things
that could scar a lycan, among them silver—especially runed
silver—and kendaryl blades.
Eideard's face began to grow a snout as he snarled at
Kynyr. "You're being too cautious."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
154
Kynyr met Eideard's gaze, calm and steady. "I'm your
commander as well as your friend, Eideard, and we'll do
things my way."
"Fuck your way!" Eideard spun about and headed for the
door.
"Where are you going?"
"I'm taking a walk."
"You shouldn't go alone."
"Fuck that!" Eideard ran out before anyone could stop him.
Finn grabbed his shirt and started to pull it over his head.
"Let him go," said Kynyr, a frown of irritation marring his
handsome features. "And hope he walks it off without getting
into trouble."
"Kynyr..."
"No. Finn, he'd probably take a swing at you. Then you'd
have to whip his ass and I'd have to order him flogged. None
of us want that."
Ramsey stretched out on the bed and then popped back
up. "Kynyr's right. Give him some space. I'm going down and
see about getting us a bottle of whiskey."
Finn pulled his shirt on and headed for the door. "I'll go
with you and see what Nainsi's got cooked. I'm hungry
again."
"You're always hungry." Kynyr grinned at him as the mood
faded.
"I'm still a growing cub."
"Well, growing cub, bring me something back to eat also."
"You'll tell us the rest of it, Kynyr?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
155
"Yeah. But I suggest eating first. You won't feel like it
afterward."
Ramsey paused at the door beside Finn and turned back to
glance at Kynyr. "That bad?"
"Worse."
* * * *
Eideard prowled the back streets, struggling with himself,
trapped between his promise to Kynyr; and his unspoken vow
of vengeance for Cullen. He could not put his finger upon the
point when he had first begun to suspect that Ellie had played
a role in Cullen's death; only that he had had a gut instinct
about it long before they rode off to Hell's Widow. His anger
pulsed hot and then cold and then hot again. He passed an
abandoned house on Skull Road, turned back, and stood
staring at it.
In an effort to distract himself, Eideard climbed the steps
onto the porch of the house and peered through a window,
wondering what had happened to the people there. His sharp
lycan eyes made out the edges of the furniture. Whoever had
once lived here must have departed suddenly, leaving with
only the clothes on their backs because nothing looked out of
order. Eideard found the door unlocked and stepped inside.
Only the thick layer of dust laying over everything and the
odor of mold gave signs of the long absence of the
inhabitants. He wandered into the kitchen and spied a pot on
the wood stove. The contents of the pot had turned into a dry
green dust that made his nose wrinkle.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
156
Eideard made an idle search of the bedrooms. Children's
toys lay in disarray upon the floor of the closest bedroom as if
they had been whisked away on very little notice. The bed in
the adults' room lay undisturbed, the comforters still smooth.
He put his face to the spreads and sniffed them. The scents
had faded to almost nothing, yet what traces he could catch
suggested the people who had lived here had been humans.
The bed had huge sturdy posts and a canopy.
A wisp of imagination stretched Ellie Remus on that bed,
her wrists and ankles bound to the posts. He thought of how
he could make her scream as Cullen must have. The silver
spikes had still been lodged in Cullen's shoulder and hip
bones when Pandeena brought the courier's remains home.
The lycan customs held that friends or family prepared a body
for burial. Cullen had had no surviving family; therefore his
friends had prepared his remains: Kynyr, Eideard, Ramsey,
and Finn. Seeing all of Cullen's broken bones had bothered
him as much as the spikes. It sickened him to think about it,
and yet he could not stop thinking and remembering both
what he had seen and what he had heard concerning Cullen's
death. The only comfort, slight as it was, lay in Pandeena's
assurance that Cullen had not been rited, that his soul had
gone home to the Mother.
"Wergeld is owed," Eideard muttered, recalling Kynyr's
admonitions to stay away from Ellie. "You've no right to keep
me from getting vengeance for Cullen and wergild for
Cooley."
Eideard made his decision, walked two blocks up to Corbie
Way, and four blocks west to the Crimson Lady. Lights

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
157
gleamed in all the windows. The brothel was the only place
still awake and busy at that midnight hour. He stared at the
doors, picturing the suffering that Cullen must have gone
through before he died, and little Cooley without a father. The
Sinclairs were good to the cub, but it wasn't the same. Cullen
had taught his son to ride; Eideard could see the similarities
in the way they rode, now that Kynyr had revealed the facts
of the matter to him. He wondered how he had missed it
before.
Customers passed him, coming, and going, none of them
making eye contact. Eideard sucked in a breath and entered
the Crimson Lady. The two greeters in the foyer stood talking
to other customers. Their filmy dresses left too little to the
imagination, and the lycan's body reacted despite the fact
that his taste did not run to dark females.
The scrawny clerk still sat at the desk, meticulously
dressed in black and crimson silk, his copper-skin glistened,
and a thick layer of kohl lined his large eyes. Flavio wore his
long black hair in oiled braids that matched the current
Waejontori fashion, and was so conspicuously coshorach that
it made Eideard's skin crawl. He had no problem with most
men who preferred men, so long as they kept their hands and
suggestions away from him. Flavio, however, always had
some lewd comment to make whenever Eideard showed up.
He wondered if the clerk did the same to the other wolves,
and resolved to ask his friends if they had been subjected to
it also, or if Flavio simply singled him out for attention. If
Flavio had been lycan, Eideard would have called him out,
and either beaten him bloody or put a knife in him. As it was,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
158
the wolf had to take a strong hold on himself to deal with
Flavio, since he had to go through the clerk to reach Ellie.
Eideard went to the desk.
Flavio grinned at him. "Back for more?" He winked at
Eideard. "You know what they say about lycan dogs?"
"I don't want to hear it."
Flavio's grin widened, as if he enjoyed his bit of play. "That
your appetites and stamina is second only to the sa'necari ...
and that you have the biggest cocks of all."
The hair rose on Eideard's neck. After tonight, he would
not dare to return to the Crimson Lady, and he yielded to a
fey urge. "I'm here for the bitches—not the dogs. One more
remark from you and I'm going to break your bloody neck."
Flavio winced and went business-like. "Anyone in
particular?"
"Ellie Remus. I was told she'd be available after midnight."
"You're in luck. Ellie is free. However, her prices have gone
up."
Eideard reached in his pouch and brought out two gold
nobles, four month's pay that he had managed to save up for
this trip to Hell's Widow, and slid it across the desk at the
clerk. If Kynyr had not been picking up the tab for their
drinks, most of that would have already been spent. "That
enough?"
"Certainly. Shall I have someone show you upstairs?"
"I know the way."
Eideard walked through the brothel, outwardly calm and
easy, inwardly a spinning top of turmoil. He had arrived
without a plan, but he had begun to formulate one since

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
159
leaving the derelict house. The wolf rapped twice on the door,
pushed it open, and walked inside. Ellie Remus stood near the
window, gazing out, and turned at the sound of his arrival.
"Hello, Eideard. I haven't seen you in a while."
"I've been busy." His gaze roved her fragile body, seeing
how Cullen could have fallen for her so hard. All of his friends,
including Kynyr, had been with her at least once. Ellie was
popular with all the lycans, one of only four working at the
Crimson Lady as whores, and it had not surprised Eideard
that her prices had gone up.
She wore a filmy robe with a loosely-tied sash. The front
gaped enough for Eideard to see the edges of her dark rose-
colored nipples. Ellie tugged the sash and the robe fell open,
revealing everything that so delighted the male eye. She
sashayed up to him, pressed her body against his, and
stroked his bone. "My, you're so big and hard."
Eideard closed his eyes, sucking air in long deep draws.
His arm shot out, crushing her to him. "Make a sound, and I'll
kill you."
"What have I done?"
Her eyes went wide, so like a frightened doe's that it shook
Eideard. He clutched at his resolve to steady himself to the
task. "You know what you did."
"This is about Cullen isn't it? Whatever Silkie told you, it's
a lie."
"I haven't spoken to Silkie. Kynyr did."
"But..."
"Claw sent us."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
160
All the strength seemed to drain out of her; all the fight—
what little she possessed to begin with—vanished, replaced
by a helpless resignation. "I told them he would."
Eideard resisted asking the obvious question, wanting to
get her out of the brothel first. He guided Ellie to a chair and
sat her down. He took spellcords from his pouch and a gag.
"What are you doing, Eideard?" Ellie asked in a tiny voice
thick with fear.
"Depends. You call out for help and I'll have a blade in
your belly before they get here. It's an ugly way to die."
"I know." Ellie shuddered, but did not resist as Eideard
spellcorded her wrists to prevent her shape changing, bound
her hands behind her back, and shoved a gag in her mouth.
He went through her belongings. Several items of clothing
must have cost more than a year's pay for a guardsmon like
himself. It sharpened his belief that Ellie was being well-paid
for more than just betraying Cullen. He spotted her jewelry
box on the dresser and opened it. The wealth in gems and
precious metals took his breath away. "What are you still
doing here if you've got all that?"
Eideard dipped his hand into the treasures and started
shoving it all into his pouches. This would provide for Cooley
well. Toward the bottom he found two rings that made his
stomach clench: Cullen's rings. "Damnit all, I was right."
Eideard shifted to his hybrid form, threw Ellie over his
shoulder, and went to the window with her. He poked his
head out and looked at the roof of the veranda that circled
the brothel, gauging whether it would hold his weight.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
161
As he climbed onto the roof, Eideard scanned the yard.
Ellie's window faced the rear gardens and there was no one
about on this side of the Crimson Lady at midnight. He edged
along it and when he reached the end, he jumped to the
ground and ran into the darkness with her. Half a block from
the brothel, he slipped into an alley and kept off the streets
until he reached the abandoned house on Skull Road.
He carried her into the bedroom, and threw her down on
the bed. Untying her hands, he left her wrists spellcorded and
fastened them to the posts. Eideard did the same with her
ankles, and only after he had her securely bound did he take
the gag out.
Ellie whimpered and Eideard could see the tears glistening
on her cheeks in the moonlight.
Eideard pulled a chair up and sat down beside the bed.
"How much did they pay you to drug Cullen?"
"I didn't..." Ellie flinched at the rage in Eideard's eyes a
moment before he backhanded her across the face.
"How much gold does a mon's life cost? You knew they
were going to kill him."
"I didn't know. They said they wanted to talk to him."
"Bullshit." Eideard hit her again, splitting her upper lip. "Lie
to me again and I'll cut you open. You're not stupid, Ellie. You
stole Cullen's rings. You wouldn't have done that unless you
knew he wasn't coming back."
"Damn you, Eideard!" Ellie's face crimsoned into a mask of
anger. "Damn you! You think I liked opening my legs to that
little bastard? I hated it when that undersized freak climbed
onto me." She spat, landing a glob on Eideard's cheek.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
162
Eideard wiped his cheek off and smashed her in the nose,
breaking it. "Don't call him that!"
"That's what Cullen was! A goddamned freak. Yes, I knew
they were going to kill him. I told them put the blade in his
belly. Give him the Weems' Cure, I told them. Satisfied?"
The sheer hatred in Ellie's voice sent hair sprouting along
Eideard's arms. "He was a good wolf."
"How can you say that? You didn't like him any better than
I did. You told me so yourself."
Eideard flinched, guilt and shame flooding his face. "I
learned different. Who killed him?"
"They'll kill me."
"I'll kill you." Eideard pulled his knife and pricked her belly.
Ellie released a long shriek, followed by broken sobbing.
"Heironim Traxton."
"Who's that?" Eideard dragged the knife along her thigh,
splitting the skin.
She flinched and writhed as Eideard cut her again. "Owns
the Green Sheaf."
"Tell me how they killed him? About the spikes."
"They nailed him into a chair."
The encouragement of Eideard's blade brought the full
description of the sordid affair from Ellie. It confirmed
everything that Kynyr had told them. His face grew flush with
rage.
Eideard unfastened his pants just enough to get his
engorged bone out, without removing any of his clothing, not
wishing to contend with unlacing his armor. "I paid for one
last ride, whore, and I'm going to get it."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
163
"They'll kill you, Eideard. They'll kill you for what you've
done."
"Maybe." Eideard climbed onto the bed and settled
between her legs. "Cullen loved you ... told me he wanted to
marry you."
"I'm sorry, Eideard." Her tone softened, became pleading,
filled with helpless femininity. "I'm sorry. Please believe me."
A haunted look entered Eideard's eyes. "Did he scream
when they stuck him in the belly? Or was he too far gone
already?"
Ellie whimpered and tears rolled from her eyes. "Please,
don't."
He shoved his cock into her. Terror had left her vagina dry
as a bone, but Eideard did not care. He hurt her, thrusting as
hard and fierce as possible. "Did he scream?"
"Yes. Yes, he screamed. Oh, gahds, Eideard. Please stop."
Eideard pumped his way to a climax that did nothing to
alleviate his rage. He pushed off her when he finished, and
removed his tunic. Eideard tossed his tunic onto the floor, and
drew his knives. It would be easier to wipe the blood off his
chain than get it out of his tunic.
"Let me go, Eideard. Please let me go. I'm sorry. I'm very
sorry about Cullen."
"Cooley's an orphan because of your treachery, whore."
"I'm sorry. I'm sorry." Her pleading broke off in a scream
as Eideard plunged his knife into her belly with a yank to the
side.
Eideard climbed off the bed, leaving the blade inside her.
"Now you know how he felt."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
164
"You bastard! Bastard!"
"You deserved it."
"Oh gahds ... gahds it hurts." Ellie writhed in pain, tears
flowing harder over her face.
Eideard regarded her, his lips twisted in distaste. Part of
him wanted to leave her there, let her die slowly. Caution
demanded that he finish her. He had to get back to the inn
before Kynyr sent the others looking for him.
He jerked his blade from her body, grabbed her nipple,
and pulled her breast to the side to give him easy access to
her heart. Eideard drove the blade into her and raked it
around, ripping the organ. Blood spurted on him. Ellie
shuddered and went still, her eyes staring sightlessly at the
canopy of the bed.
Eideard pulled his knife, cleaned it on the bedspread, and
used a corner of it to wipe his chain. He backed away from
her, shaking so hard that it took him several tries to get his
blade into the sheath. The enormity of what he had done
caught up to him. He had never killed a bitch before ... and
never killed except in self-defense. Regardless of what Ellie
had done, this had been murder. Plain and simple.
He fumbled with his tunic, struggled into it, and fled out
the back door into the alley behind the house. Disoriented
and dizzy, swept up in a physical reaction worse than any he
had ever had before to killing, Eideard found himself
staggering and stumbling by the time he reached the yard of
the Three Candles Inn.
Taking several deep breathes to steady himself, Eideard
slipped in through the kitchen door and forced a steadiness

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
165
into his stride that he did not feel. He reached the rented
room, got undressed and slipped into bed with Ramsey.
* * * *
Dorjan's four units began slipping out of Hell's Widow at
midnight. They would reach the rendezvous point by dawn
and move into position from there.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
166
CHAPTER EIGHT
WAYS OF RAGE
Caimbeul threw the blanket off and sat up. His back ached
from sleeping wrong. One night on Pandeena's sofa, enduring
her litanies about Kynyr Maguire, had convinced Caimbeul
that the sooner he moved into the Lawgiver House the better.
He had begun to fantasize about slamming his fist into
Kynyr's face as soon as they were introduced. Time away
from Pandeena would, he hoped, allow his temper to cool
down before Maguire got back from Hell's Widow. Taking an—
apparently—undeserved swing at someone as popular in the
village as Kynyr Maguire would not help his reputation any.
He straightened his clothes as he stood up and crossed the
room to dig in the cabinet where he had seen Pandeena put
that bottle of whiskey last night. Jerking the door open,
Caimbeul ran his gaze across stacks of plates, glasses, cups
and saucers, but found no bottles of anything that resembled
liquor.
"Damnit. She hid it." Annoyance fired his blood and he
stomped out of the apartment into the little garden, rubbing
at the sleep lingering in his eyes. He walked around the side
of the shrine.
The broad dirt path into the center of the Sanctuary
opened up before Caimbeul. Lycans who worked at the camp
had already begun to arrive. He knew that some of them lived
there, having been given food and shelter in addition to their

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
167
meager wages. Fifteen young males were scattered across
the open ground in little groups, some of them sitting under
the trees, others standing. They all took note of him, sizing
him up at a glance. The air felt pregnant with threats and
suspicion.
Caimbeul's mind raced through all the possibilities for the
attitude he perceived among them. It could have come from
the fact that he was the new lawgiver. It might have been
because he spent the night with Pandeena, although he
doubted that they would credit it if he told them that he had
slept on the sofa and not in her bed. Young wolves tended to
think with their genitals instead of their brains at times—
especially those from the lower classes and all of those
present were definitely members of the bottom rung of lycan
society. The third possibility bothered him the most and he
could not really say why: they knew he was the wolf who had
been known as Fireborn Law in his youth. That double-edged
sword called reputation cut two ways. Caimbeul knew that he
needed to feel out people in the village, learn things, and
become acquainted with the citizens—discover the nature of
the dichotomy he sensed at work in Wolffgard. He had to
learn before he acted, pick his battlefields before he fought
whatever he might find himself up against. There was still too
much that Pandeena had not told him—or perhaps it was
simply that she was not aware of it.
Things began to click into place in Caimbeul's mind. There
were matters that Pandeena, priest and yuwenghau, would
never be able to learn; places in their society where she could

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
168
not walk; places where she was not admitted. No wonder that
she needed him.
Five young lycans lounged on tree rounds beneath a
chestnut tree. Their attitude and body language made him
think of city wolves. He recognized two of them as Shalto and
Oswyl, the pair that had been observing them in the cemetery
the other day.
A tall, lanky fellow, wearing drawstring pants that looked
ready to slide off his hips, made a circle with thumb and
forefinger and began poking the middle finger of his opposite
hand through the circle in a suggestive manner after
indicating Caimbeul with a thrust of his chin.
Shalto brayed with laughter. "She must like gray dick."
A small, scrawny youth with reddish brown hair bent over
his folded arms, his body shaking with loud cackles. "Must be
the wrinkles. Tickles her flesh hole."
Caimbeul decided not to address the comment, made a
mental note of their faces, and started down the path that
would take him to the village. He had just reached the road
when he spotted Odhran riding up, leading the gelding that
Pandeena had bought him.
"Lawgiver!" Odhran drew rein in front of him. "I suppose
you'd rather ride. Your packhorse has been unloaded at the
Lawgiver House."
Caimbeul took the reins of his mount from Odhran and
climbed into the saddle. "Lead on."
"If there's anything you need, just ask."
"A better horse."
"Do you want to do that right now?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
169
Caimbeul licked his lips. "Nah. Do that tomorrow. Show me
the Lawgiver House. I'm moving in today whether it's clean or
not. I don't want another night on her sofa."
Odhran chuckled at the acerbic tone in Caimbeul's voice.
"So the house first?"
They rode along the broad dirt road, close to the side to
take advantage of shade thrown by the clusters of oaks and
maples.
"Inns? Taverns? Places where folks get together?"
"We have two inns and five taverns. When they took the
last census ... that was about ten years ago ... the population
of Wolffgard, if you add in the manor, was over two thousand.
And most of them were under the age of sixty. Can you
imagine having that many young people? We should really be
calling ourselves a town, but the elders keep rejecting those
suggestions."
Caimbeul narrowed one eye and closed the other. "I've
seen bigger."
"Lycan?"
"Yeah. So tell me about these taverns. Give me the names
in order of popularity."
"Well, the Difficult Horse is the biggest ... and the most
popular." Odhran scratched his ear and thought for a
moment. "I guess the Striped Dog would be next. The Dog
and the Partridge. The Hunt. The Sheep's Clothing."
They reached the Lawgiver House without incident.
Caimbeul dismounted and stood in the yard, staring at it and
scratching his head while Odhran gave him the history of the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
170
place. He only listened with half an ear, but figured that he
had gotten all the important parts.
The Lawgiver House was an eccentric pastiche of various
styles of human architecture designed by Maldwyn Softpaws,
Nikko's father, with too much interference from Claw
Redhand. As a result it stood four stories high with a
basement equally divided into store rooms and dungeons. It
had balconies, parapets, gargoyles, towers and dormer
windows, as well as other architectural nightmares that made
Caimbeul wince just to look at it. He could see why Nikko had
preferred to live with his mother.
Rivaling the manor for size, it had taken ten years to
complete. Rumor had it that Claw had built this house as a
way of relieving the sense of emptiness that had plagued him
after the deaths of his sons, turning it into an obsessive
hobby and Maldwyn's artistic bane.
Caimbeul dug his fingers into the inner corners of his eyes
as Odhran imparted that last bit of information to him. He had
never had more than passing contact with Logan, the younger
of Claw's twin sons; but he had known Tarrant well.
Odhran led Caimbeul inside and gave him the keys to the
various doors.
The short, broad foyer led into a sitting room to the right
hand and a hallway directly ahead. Nibari bustled about,
cleaning and dusting.
Odhran gestured at them. "Claw sent them to get the
place in order."
"Are there any servants attached to this monstrosity?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
171
"Not since Nevin Scarface left. However, I'm certain that
Claw would be willing to give you some."
"I'll think about it." Caimbeul spied his packs piled on a
table in the sitting room. "I'm not used to having company."
He sauntered over and sat down on a sofa, propping his feet
on the table beside his packs. "You!" He gestured at one of
the nibari, a shapely brunette. "Get me two glasses."
Caimbeul thumbed at the sofa where he sat. "Sit down."
He leaned forward and snagged one of his packs onto his lap,
taking out a bottle of Dragonsbreath. The nibari returned with
the glasses and he ran his eyes over her body as he poured
whiskey for Odhran and himself. Nibari, the genetically
altered humans, were the most docile and compliant of
creatures. The best thing about them, to Caimbeul's mind,
was that having sex with a nibari slave was not considered a
stain upon a lycan's reputation among the clans. It had been
decades since Caimbeul had made the bottle his only
companion. He studied her. "What's your name?"
"Dulcinea, if it pleases you, Master."
"Are you in season?"
"No, sir."
"You'll warm my bed tonight?"
She favored him with a sweet smile. "As you wish."
Odhran gave Caimbeul a long, sidewise glance.
"I ain't had any in thirty years, I'm entitled to it," Caimbeul
growled.
Odhran lowered his head and chuckled. "I guess so."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
172
Caimbeul handed Odhran a glass of whiskey and took a
swallow from his own. "Maybe I'll see about buying some
nibari of my own."
"They're expensive."
"I can afford them." Caimbeul took another drink,
contemplating the luxuries he had not had in far too long, and
which were now his again. "I want to ask you some questions,
Odhran."
"Ask."
"Tell me about this Kynyr Maguire to start with. What does
he look like?"
"Tarrant Redhand. That's what everyone says. I wouldn't
know myself. He'd been dead nigh on sixty years before I was
born."
Caimbeul scratched behind his ear in an attempt to hide
his irritation. The more people that said Kynyr looked like
Tarrant; the more tempted Caimbeul became to hit first and
ask questions later the moment someone introduced them.
* * * *
Sunlight lanced through the windows, glinting on Kynyr's
golden hair as he sat on the edge of his bed, pulling on his
boots. Ramsey and Finn had already carried their gear down
to the stable and were getting their horses saddled and the
team hitched to the wagon. Eideard lingered, staring at a
knothole in the wall with a pensive air that made Kynyr
wonder if his friend was trying to muster the courage for
words.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
173
Kynyr glanced at Eideard time and again. "Something you
want to tell me?"
"What would you say, if I told you..." Eideard's voice
dribbled off to a coarse whisper and he lowered his head until
his chin nearly rested on his chest. He swallowed and his eyes
searched the floor. "If I told you I ... know who killed Cullen?"
"I'd ask how you got the information." Kynyr finished with
his boots, stood up and walked over to stand in front of
Eideard while he buckled his blades on.
"What if I didn't want to tell you that?"
"Then I wouldn't trust the information. Where were you
last night? I waited up past midnight."
"Walking."
"So, you were just walking around and someone on the
street decided to whisper the name in your ear? Not bloody
likely. Where did you go? Who did you talk to?"
"Walking! I was just walking." Eideard's face flushed and
he clasped his hands together. "Just walking."
"You went to see Ellie, didn't you?"
"No!" Eideard jumped to his feet and headed for the door.
He paused with his hand on the knob. "I didn't go anywhere
near Ellie last night."
"If I find out otherwise, there'll be hell to pay ... and it
won't come from me. It will come from Claw."
Emotion flickered across Eideard's face and vanished
before Kynyr could decipher it.
"What did you do?"
"Nothing! I went for a walk. That's it."
"Get your gear together we're going home."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
174
Eideard plunged through the door as if a demon had him
by the tail. Kynyr exhaled heavily, his brow furrowing.
Something was bothering Eideard. Kynyr had half a mind to
drop by the Crimson Lady, but doubted that anyone would be
up this early and he did not want to spend another day in
Hell's Widow. He had one of those itches, which Todd called a
gut instinct, that the longer they stayed in town, the more
danger he and his companions were in.
* * * *
Pandeena had been postponing introducing herself to
Cahira Sinclair as long as she could. She doubted that Kynyr
realized yet that she was chasing him, but he would if he
caught her hanging around his grandmother all the time. She
glanced back every few blocks to be certain that Caimbeul
had not followed her. The last thing she needed was to have a
jealous ex-husband making a scene in Cahira's shop.
Main Street in Wolffgard dead-ended at Cheshire Road in
the north near the path that led down from the refugee camp
that Pandeena lived on the edge of. Heading from the camp
into the village, her long legs ate the distance with an easy,
swinging stride. Kynyr was due back that afternoon and she
planned to accidentally-on-purpose encounter him at Cahira's.
He reminded her of Tarrant Redhand in ways that made her
mouth water and her loins grow damp.
She strode down Main Street, nodding to the myn who
greeted her in passing. Most of the villagers had welcomed
her with open arms. As she neared the center of the village,
near the broad green common, she spied three coming out of

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
175
the Difficult Horse Tavern that had been a constant source of
aggravation: Preece Malloy and the two Beggins cousins,
Shalto and Oswyl. They lived and worked at the camp. Those
three were scum of the worst order, and if she could have
found a way to get rid of them she would have. In fact, she
had tried to persuade Clodagh to dismiss them and gotten
nowhere.
There was something off-kilter about Preece that Pandeena
had trouble defining. For one thing, his dead, jaded eyes and
indolent smile bothered her. The second was far harder to
identify, but she could sense a deeper rot in his soul. He went
bare-chested in the heat, his drawstring pants slouched
around his lanky hips. If they had been any looser his pants
would have slid to his yard. A pair of long fighting knives
hung from a worn leather belt, the sheaths lashed to his
thighs for an easy draw, and his pants legs bunched around
them. While his sturdy bones could easily have carried more
weight, Preece did not lack for muscle and the long curves of
his biceps looked like hammered steel. Years of working in
the sun had weathered his fair skin to a nut brown. A length
of leather held his long, mustard brown hair in a tail at his
neck. Pandeena knew that many of the younger bitches found
him attractive in a bad wolf way. She had given up on arguing
with them to stay away from Preece.
She saw nothing remarkable about Shalto and Oswyl.
However, they had attempted to forcibly seduce her a few
months back. It had taken them weeks to fully recover from
the beating she gave them.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
176
Preece Malloy spotted her first and punched his
companions. They all glanced at her. Shalto grinned and said
something that Pandeena could not quite catch. Then Preece
lowered his hand, palm up, and made a sexually-suggestive
poking motion at her with his middle finger.
Pandeena ignored it, although it made her hackles rise.
She turned down Elmind Street south of the Difficult Horse,
and walked two blocks further to Cahira's Potions and
Notions. The shop was only a month old. Cahira had arrived
in Wolffgard a little over two months ago to look after Kynyr,
who had been wounded by an unseen assailant during a riot
at the camp. Pandeena's inquiries as to what had caused the
riot had so far produced nothing.
Baroucha, the other healer in Wolffgard, had been steadily
losing business to Cahira. Rumor had it that there was an old
rivalry at work there. Pandeena could understand why as she
stood in front of Cahira's brightly painted shop. The windows
with boxes of flowers along the bottom had a welcoming look
that Baroucha's dingy shop lacked. She had briefly known
Baroucha eighty years ago; an unpleasant young healer who
had become involved with one of the most infamous lycan
mages ever to exist: Alistar Weems, notorious for his alleged
power of the Evil Eye. Alistar had been summarily executed
by Tarrant Redhand and his mentor, Todd Sinclair.
Pandeena stopped in her tracks with her hand on the door
knob, frowning. "Todd's dead. This can't be the same Todd
Sinclair. Todd, Cahira, Baroucha ... it's too much
coincidence."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
177
She pushed the door open and a bell rang as she entered.
The bright interior equaled the outside for welcome. Cases
lined the room, polished wood halfway up and glass the rest
with neat wooden shelves behind them. A long table sat at
the rear with chairs around it. Two cubs stood on ladders
stocking the shelves, while a third handed things up to them.
She recognized Cooley Sinclair on one ladder and Rory Scott
on the other. Rory's younger brother, Hamish, was the one
handing jars and bottles to them.
They all turned to look, pausing in their efforts to restock
the shelves.
Rory Scott climbed down and approached her. "Can I help
you?"
"I'm here to see Cahira. Is she around?"
"In the back." Rory pointed at a door behind the table, and
returned to his ladder.
"Thank you." Pandeena walked into the back room. She
stared for an instant at the old lycan bitch grinding herbs with
mortar and pestle, seeing something familiar about her—just
peel away the years and—"Cahira Maguire."
"Pandeena!" Cahira looked up from her grinding, her eyes
widened into saucers. "Oh my gods, you haven't changed at
all." Setting aside the mortar and pestle, Cahira sprang to her
feet, rushed around the table, and threw herself at Pandeena.
"Long-lived blood ... I've got long-lived blood." Pandeena
wrapped her arms around Cahira and they held each other for
a long time. "Now I know why Kynyr looks so much like
Tarrant."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
178
Cahira started shaking. "You mustn't tell anyone. I'm
begging you, Pandeena."
The terror in Cahira's voice moved Pandeena. "I won't.
Does Claw know?" She walked her over to a sofa along the
back wall.
Cahira shook her head and leaned back. "He thinks
Branduff is Todd's."
"The last time I saw you ... you were sixteen and so
swollen with Tarrant's child you could hardly move."
"Let's not talk about Tarrant. It still makes me cry."
Pandeena hugged her again. "So be it. But you must tell
Claw."
"No!"
"But Kynyr is the rightful heir. He's Red Wolf's prince."
"No. Branduff's a bastard. He doesn't count." Cahira
pushed free of Pandeena. "I never wanted Kynyr to come
here. He's so stubborn."
"Hello, am I interrupting?" Todd came in, buckling his
blades on as he walked; a pair of long knives at his hips and
two broadswords at his shoulders. "I thought we might go for
a walk."
Pandeena's expression brightened in a mix of pleasure and
surprise. Age had put lines in Todd's face and a sprinkling of
gray in his red hair, but she could still recognize the mon she
had known during the years of the tragic Lycan Rebellion
eighty years ago. She bounded across the room and grabbed
him. "Creation! They told me you were dead ... killed in that
ambush when Tarrant was taken."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
179
Todd blinked. "Do I know ... Pandeena? By the gods,
Pandeena! You haven't changed at all."
"Long-lived blood. You look so well. I can't believe it."
"If it hadn't been for a peddler named Dyna and her
grandchildren I wouldn't be here."
"Dyna..." Pandeena half-choked on the name. Suddenly,
she saw the Trickster's signature written over everything.
"You know her? Our attackers left me for dead. Her
grandchildren found me. Bodi and Lilac."
"I'm surprised it wasn't Sugar and Pie." Pandeena hugged
him again. "They're coming to Wolffgard."
"But..."
"Long-lived."
A smile curled across Todd's face. "We have a lot of
catching up to do. I'm a grandpa several times over. Have
you met Kynyr?"
Pandeena's cheeks reddened. "Met him? I've been drooling
over him for weeks."
Todd laughed.
* * * *
Caimbeul drew every eye as he entered the Difficult Horse
with his lawgiver runes showing. There were not many wolves
his size. He stood six foot five inches and weighed three
hundred pounds. Except for the beer belly, Caimbeul was not
fat.
Hereward Wiggins came out from behind his bar with two
tankards of mead, grinning. "On the house. Welcome to
Wolffgard, Lawgiver."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
180
Caimbeul settled at a table with Odhran and accepted the
offering with a nod. "I'm liking this place already."
"That's good. I can't stay much longer. I have bridge duty
today."
"What do you do exactly?"
Odhran cocked his head to conceal a glance at table near
the back of the common room to the far right of them. "Odd
jobs mostly. I'm a tinker by trade; however, I share the
civilian watch on the bridge. I've been doing it since our
lawgiver, Nikko Softpaws, died. There's three of us. I also
help out around Sanctuary four days a week."
Caimbeul's eyes tracked to what Odhran had glanced at
and recognized the same five wolves who had made the
risqué comments to him earlier. A dark-skinned mon sat with
them. The only dark face in a sea of fair ones made it
impossible to miss him. "Does Malthus come here a lot?"
"Yeah." Odhran downed the rest of his tankard and pushed
back from the table. "Those young dogs sitting with him ...
they're the Lycamornots. Rumors cling to them like spider silk
on a fly. I don't have time to talk now." Odhran rose to his
feet. "I'll come by this evening after work, if you've more
questions."
"I'll have plenty."
* * * *
The closer they got to home, the more Kynyr found himself
thinking about Kady Wiggins. He had a promise to keep.
Kynyr intended track down Cormic Parry and beat him bloody
for what he had done to Kady. One thought led to another,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
181
and Kynyr found himself wondering if Kady knew how to
dance. The Autumn Eve Faire was only three weeks away.
Kynyr decided that this year he would ask Kady to go to the
Faire with him.
"You're awful quiet, Kynyr." Ramsey nudged his horse up
alongside Kynyr. "We're nearly home and you haven't said
three words the entire time."
"Lot on my mind." Kynyr scanned the road ahead, refusing
to look at his friends.
"Thinking about Silkie?" Finn rode up on the other side.
"Nah, he's thinking about Cullen." Ramsey shouted, riding
in the rear.
"I'm thinking I want to get home." Kynyr cracked the reins
across the backs of the horses. They threw their shoulders
into it and picked up the pace.
"Aw, com'on, Kynyr," Finn whined. "Tell us more."
Kynyr scooped the two crossbows from under the wagon
seat and put one next to his leg and the other on his lap. His
eyes narrowed and lines of tension appeared around his
mouth and across his forehead. "Todd says the best place for
an ambush is close to home."
"It's been too quiet." Finn slid his bow out and strung it.
"They could be out there."
"That's my thought." Kynyr scanned the tree line for
figures in the shadows. "Folks let their guards down when
they get close to home."
"Todd Sinclair..." Ramsey's brow furrowed with sudden
insight. "Same one rode with Tarrant Redhand?"
"Yeah, he is."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
182
Eideard knotted his reins, let them drop, and controlled his
mount with his legs as he strung his bow. "Should've told us.
We could have been learning from him all this time."
Finn shifted to his hybrid form and the others followed suit.
"What do you think, Kynyr?"
"Why the hell you think I got the crossbows out?" Kynyr
shook himself free of his brooding. "Ramsey, take the point.
Be careful."
Ramsey swung to the side and urged his horse into a
canter. He had scarcely gotten past the lumbering buckboard
when he nocked an arrow to the string with a shout. "I see
them! Whip those horses up!"
Kynyr slapped the long reins across the hind quarters of
the horses and the wagon lurched as the startled horses
broke into a run. Retreat was not an option. He knew he
would never get the wagon turned. His only choice was to try
and drive over them, break through to the bridge around the
bend.
Ramsey leaned low over his horse, firing rapidly.
Kynyr spotted a mon standing among the trees with a long
bow. He brought the crossbow up, laid it across his forearm,
and fired. The archer went down with a scream. He tossed the
bow at his feet, grabbed the other bow, and fired at another.
A hailstorm of arrows fell around them. Several struck Kynyr
in the chest, and failed to pierce his armor. The wicked shafts
hit his horses, sending the wounded beasts into panicked
flight. The wagon careened out of control into the dip in the
road near the turn.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
183
Sharp pain in his calf and thigh made Kynyr glance down.
Three arrows protruded from his thigh and two from his calf.
Three of the shafts were black with crimson and brown
feathers; the others were red shafted with blue and red
feathers. He clutched his leg. Archers had one principal
reason for coding their arrows: poison.
"Shit."
Eideard and Finn raced ahead of him, firing back at their
attackers. Ramsey rode hard beside the rattling wagon. Kynyr
tried to reload the crossbow, but the out of control wagon
seemed to hit every rough spot in the road, jarring him.
"Tala, Night Hunter, Mistress of Wolves be with me..."
Kynyr murmured the beginnings of a prayer.
Eideard tumbled from the saddle and the wagon rattled
past his still form. Kynyr cried out in rage at seeing his friend
fall. Then the acrid scent of dark power swept over Kynyr and
he glanced to the right. While he had no magic gifts, he could
see the patterns of arcane energy—and he saw the bolt of
death strike his horses. They stumbled and fell. The wagon
tongue struck the ground and the next instant Kynyr was
tumbling through the air as the wagon heaved over.
Kynyr struck hard, skidding into a roll. The arrows twisted
in his wounds as the shafts broke off close to the skin, leaving
just the heads embedded in his flesh. The pain nearly made
him black out. He tried to drag himself up, but his wounded
leg would not support him. Pain seared through him as if his
veins were on fire. His chest felt tight, as if a fist pressed
down on his heart and lungs. He recognized what was
happening. "Devil's Silver."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
184
He saw Ramsey fall with arrows in his chest and back.
"No!"
Kynyr drew the amulet from beneath his shirt, grasping
the azure crystal tightly. They could not save him; but they
could avenge him. "Cahira! Cahira, help me! Ambush!"
Finn had nearly broken free, when he saw that Kynyr had
been hit and turned back.
"No, Finn! Keep going! Keep going!"
"Kynyr!" Finn sprang from the saddle, and ran toward him.
"I can't leave you behind."
Barely three yards from Kynyr, Finn stiffened and stared
down at his mid section as three arrows punched through his
ribs and a fourth hit him in the belly. He swayed a moment
before collapsing where he lay unmoving.
"Finn.... "Kynyr choked on the name. He crawled forward.
His fingers brushed Finn's face. "I loved you ... brother."
Then darkness claimed him.
* * * *
Two riderless horses bolted past Dorjan as he put an arrow
into the belly of Finn MacIver. Dorjan nocked another arrow
to the string, watched the lycan stumble to his knees, and
released it, sending the last one into his chest. Finn crumpled,
collapsing onto his back to lie unmoving. A thin sneer crossed
his face as he lowered his bow. Putting so many arrows into
them had been a bit of overkill—the first poisoned arrow to
hit them had ensured their deaths—but stopping them from
reaching the bridge before dying, stopping them from giving

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
185
warning, that had required shooting them until they fell down
and no longer moved.
"That's all of them."
He raised his arm, signing his myn to move out onto the
road. Dorjan wanted a closer look at his handiwork before
signaling withdrawal. He unstrung his bow and slid it back
into the case hanging at his side.
Nelek trotted up to Dorjan and walked at his shoulder. "If
any are alive, shall we finish them?"
"No need. The poison's done for them." Dorjan strode past
Eideard lying in the middle of the road face up, and paused
near the overturned wagon, surveying the bodies, and
counting the number of black shafts in each of them. "They
look like porcupines. They're all dead, Nelek."
Ramsey curled on his side against the base of a tree, four
black arrows in his back and two in his chest, his face a
frozen rictus of suffering, eyes clenched. Blood soaked
Kynyr's leg—there were no other marks on him; yet the
poison had brought him down and he lay motionless, his
fingers resting against Finn's cheek.
Dorjan walked over and stood staring down at Kynyr. "So
much for Kynyr Maguire."
"That one's the bastard prince?" Nelek kicked Kynyr onto
his back.
"Yeah."
"Shouldn't we cut them open and take the parts?"
Dorjan considered for a moment. "Heironim said nothing
about it ... one way or another."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
186
"Twenty gold for their grapes. Ten for the heart and liver.
That's too much to let go to waste."
"I agree. Start with Kynyr."
Nelek knelt and sliced Kynyr's tunic and shirt down the
front. The kendaryl armor glistened in the sunlight. Nelek's
eyes widened and he whistled low. "Look at that. No wonder
we couldn't hit him."
Dorjan peered over Nelek's shoulder and grinned. "The
armor's mine."
"Bastard." Nelek tugged at the lacings, heard Kynyr groan,
and glanced at Dorjan. "He's still alive."
"He won't be once you open him up." Dorjan laughed. "We
ought to charge extra. Royal grapes."
* * * *
"You remember Baroucha? She—" Cahira broke off, her
eyes wide. "Todd! Todd, Kynyr's hurt! They've been
ambushed."
Pandeena stood up as Cahira did and grabbed her wrist.
"How do you know?"
Cahira pulled a chain from beneath her dress and let it
dangle through her fingers. A blue crystal hung from the
chain; nearly half of it was darkened. When it went
completely black, it would mean that Kynyr was dead. Within
a few seconds it had turned three-quarters black. "He's
dying."
"We'll never get there in time." Pandeena felt as if her
heart was being torn out of her.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
187
"Yes, we will." Cahira extended her hand to Pandeena.
"Take my hand. We'll Jump."
"You don't know where they are."
"The crystal does. I'll follow it."
Pandeena grasped Cahira's left hand as Todd grasped her
right. Cahira's power swept over them and they vanished.
* * * *
Odhran sat on the bench beneath the aspen trees, talking
with the guard. His duties as bridge-watcher had been
reduced since the arrival of Caimbeul the other day. He would
no longer be making the decisions about whether to allow
strangers to cross the bridge or not. Instead, Odhran would
send for the lawgiver to judge whether or not to allow them
on clan lands.
He actually felt more than a little relieved by that. Odhran
had never liked making those decisions, constantly worrying
about making a mistake in those troubled times.
"So what do you make of this Caimbeul?" asked Sergeant
Lon Anglesey.
"I'm impressed with him, Lon." Odhran could not bring
himself to call Lon 'sergeant.' This latest idea of Claw's to call
his officers by human ranks felt awkward on Odhran's lips and
he avoided it as much as he could.
The sound of iron shod hooves clattering across the bridge
brought their heads up. Two riderless horses, with lycan
saddles on their backs, bolted across the bridge, lathered and
sweating, eyes wild. Instinct and habit had brought them
home.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
188
Odhran rose to his feet and started forward, his heart
hammering in his chest, the loud beats pounding in his ears
with the relentlessness of a smith shaping metal.
Lon grabbed him, pulling him back. "Stop. Don't frighten
them. That's Eideard and Ramsey's horses."
The guardsmon reached in his pocket, bringing out an
apple he had intended to eat as a snack. Lon held the apple
out, murmuring softly to the animals as he advanced toward
them. "Come on, you little ladies."
The two mares hesitated on the lycan side of the bridge,
trotted hesitantly onto the path, regarding Lon with doubt and
suspicion.
"Come on, Vicky. Come on, girl." Lon eyed the other
horse, Ramsey's mare, Walker. If he could get Vicky, then
Walker would follow.
Vicky—short for Victory—hesitated two yards from Lon, her
ears pricked and her eyes calmed. She whickered as he
continued to approach her slowly. Lon smiled when she took
the apple from his hand and ate it. He took hold of the
dangling reins, patting her. His eyes widened, seeing what he
had feared to find. "Odhran, get Belgair. There's blood on the
saddle." Lon brushed his finger through the blood. "And it's
fresh. This just happened."
Lon grabbed the reins as Walker came to stand beside
Vicky, and shouted at his myn. "Blow the alarm!"
The horn call rang out.
Odhran ran for the manor, shouting to everyone he
passed. "Kynyr's been ambushed. Eideard's horse came back
without him. Blood on the saddle." Villagers, those who were

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
189
armed, ran for the bridge. In the front yard, Odhran spotted
Searlait and her bodyguard, Robert Morcar herding the
children from the garden and into the safety of the manor.
The little prince, Darmyk rode his maned hunting cat up to
the door with his two step-cousins, Ros and Lyrri, close
behind him. One of the servants, Kissie, held the door for
them, fear written across her gentle features.
Searlait turned to face him, her aristocratic face tight.
"What's happening? That horn call..."
Odhran slowed to a walk and halted before her. Morcar
moved closer to hear his message as soon as the last of the
children were indoors. The blocky guardsmon was referred to
as a "black lycan" because of his stiff raven hair that he kept
shaved close to his head and the light olive cast to his skin.
They were a minority among the fair skinned wolves.
"Out with it mon," growled Morcar, his square jaw set in a
hard angle.
"Eideard and Ramsey's horses came back without them.
There's blood on the saddles. Either they were ambushed, or
the clan is under attack. The guards are on the bridge and
sending myn to investigate. But they need reinforcements.
We don't know what's happening."
Morcar nodded. "I'll tell Claw as soon as we're all inside."
"I'll tell him now." Searlait gathered her skirts and ran for
the manor.
Odhran turned and saw guardsmyn rushing out of the
barracks door.
Georgie Rogan and the other hostlers led saddled horses
into the yard and went back for more. The guardsmyn

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
190
mounted up swiftly, without waiting for orders. Then Belgair
came barreling out of the barracks, grabbed his horse, and
headed out. The rest followed their captain.
A swift reaction had been trained into them and grounded
by experience. They all knew their roles and went to it. The
village volunteer militia began arriving. It looked like a war to
Odhran, even though he had yet to see the enemy.
* * * *
The door to the Difficult Horse slammed open and a lycan
in homespun trousers and robe stumbled in, clutching a stitch
in his side and breathing hard. "Kynyr's party has been
ambushed!"
All save two sprang to their feet and poured from the
tavern: Malthus and Preece Malloy. A tiny smile brushed the
corners of Malthus' lips and he lowered his head to conceal it.
"The thorn has been plucked from my side."
Preece's jaded gaze rested on Malthus' face. "You arranged
it."
"Did I?" Malthus lifted his head.
"There's more to you than meets the eye." Preece gazed
over the edge of his tankard before downing the last of the
contents.
"Is there?"
"I've only one complaint, Malthus." Preece banged the
tankard on the table. "I wanted in on that kill."
"You're good, Preece ... but Kynyr was better."
"Not from the back."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
191
"We ought to join the others before they start to wonder."
Malthus left the tavern with Preece walking beside him.
Preece leaned close to Malthus as the door closed behind
them and whispered into Malthus' ear. "I knew Kynyr was
coming home in a bag when I passed him on the road
yesterday. I'm not stupid."
"That's why I sent you."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
192
CHAPTER NINE
VENGEANCE
Cahira Jumped them to a stand of trees near the dip in the
road. From where they stood, Pandeena saw five myn; and
beyond them the overturned wagon and Eideard's still form
on the road. She drew her sword, turned to say something to
Todd and saw that he was not there. Todd's gifts seemed
undiminished by his years.
Pandeena closed her eyes to reduce distractions, and
reached into the forest with her Wilderkin senses. She
touched the minds of every predator close enough to make a
difference, summoning the bears, the lions, and the wolves.
Then she reached farther along the psychic scale and called
the antlered stags, and everything that had size as well as
tearing fangs, sharp claws, or long horns. Within moments,
the forest seethed with deadly life and the fullness of her
rage. Then the screaming began as beasts set to their work.
She approached in silence, and brought her blade down
across the neck of one mon. Bone gave with a loud snap. She
spun about to kill another just in time to see Todd clamp a big
red-furred hand over a mon's mouth, shove a blade into his
kidneys, and drop him.
She sheathed her sword and robbed a body of its quiver
and bow. Pandeena pulled an arrow from the quiver, noted
the black shaft, and extended her senses along it.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
193
"Devil's Silver and a taste of something else. Let's see how
they like it."
* * * *
Kynyr's armor lay atop the slashed remains of his tunic,
beside his sword belt and weapons. Nelek slashed his pants
open and jerked them down. He cupped Kynyr's testes. "He's
got big ones. They'll bring a good price."
"Don't start with those." Dorjan's gaze kept drifting to
Kynyr's armor. Kendaryl in any form was a rare prize. He
drifted closer to the armor, glanced back to assess Kynyr's
size as compared to his own, speculating on whether the
armor would fit him without a lot of alterations.
"Why not?" Nelek released Kynyr and glared at Dorjan.
"Don't tell me it has to be done in some kind of bloody order.
It's just meat."
"I can see you've never done this before." Dorjan, with
obvious reluctance, moved to stand beside Nelek where he
could observe better. Contempt touched the edges of Dorjan's
mouth. Nelek had always struck him as not particularly apt at
arcane matters, failing either to study or pay enough
attention to the lore and rites.
"I'm no meat man."
"Precisely. The organs are to be used for arcane matters.
Therefore, Nelek, they must be taken in a specific order to
avoid arcane and vibrational contamination."
"Don't lecture me. Just tell me how you want it done."
"Don't cut anything off until I've looked at the entrails.
Start the first cut just below the sternum and end at the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
194
groin. Then a cross cut at the hips. Split him open carefully so
you don't damage anything. You do want to get a good price
for his parts, don't you, Nelek?"
"Yeah."
"Then do as I say."
Kynyr twitched as Nelek made the first cut across his belly.
Nelek glanced at Dorjan again. "He's alive, I tell you."
"So?" Dorjan's eyes lit with interest. "Open your
awareness, Nelek. He's dying. Savor it. Savor the fact that he
feels the blade, but can't do anything about it."
Nelek stroked the cut with his finger and then sucked
Kynyr's blood off it. "Nice."
"Yes." Dorjan sauntered over to the armor and knelt,
examining it. The maker's mark brought a smile to his face. A
true master had crafted it. "He's close to my size. It won't
take much alteration to make the armor fit me."
A choking sound made Dorjan turn. Nelek had his hand
inside Kynyr, just starting to peel back the first layer of skin.
The black shaft of a poisoned arrow protruded from Nelek's
back. Eyes wide in shock, Nelek shuddered as two more
arrows erupted from his chest. Nelek tried to rise to his feet,
turning toward the archer. Another arrow hit him and he
jerked around, sagged to his knees, and pitched forward onto
the ground beside Kynyr.
Dorjan sprang to his feet, seeing bears and lions emerge
from the forest. Screams sounded on all sides of him as the
animals tore his myn apart.
"Wilderkin! There's a bloody Wilderkin out there."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
195
A tall, blonde bitch stepped into the open, fitting another
shaft to the string.
Dorjan threw up his shields in time to block the arrow that
the bitch released, the arcane energy crushing it.
"Sa'necari!" Pandeena snarled, dropped her bow, and drew
her sword, charging across the stretch of open ground.
A monstrous red lycan in hybrid form followed her with a
broadsword in each hand. Dorjan's myn tried to rally, but
Todd sliced his way through them as if they were children
with sticks.
Dorjan cupped his hand, drawing together the strongest
death web he could and tossed it at the bitch charging him.
Pure golden light flared around Pandeena and her divine
glory shone forth. She turned his spell with a gesture and her
sword shattered Dorjan' arcane shields. He staggered back
from her.
"Yuwenghau!" Malthus and Heironim might have been able
to stand against her, but Dorjan knew instantly that he was
overmatched. He retreated toward the wagon.
Pandeena's gaze fell upon Kynyr and she unleashed a howl
of grief and rage that sent a shiver of terror through Dorjan
as he guessed they must have been lovers. Malthus had
made a bad mistake targeting Kynyr.
He threw every spell he knew at her and could not so
much as slow her down. Dorjan stepped into the middle of
the spilled goods scattered over the ground before he realized
it. A bottle rolled under his foot, and he lost his balance.
Her sword came at him hard and fast, he barely managed
to get his own up to block her swing. Pain shot through his

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
196
arm at the impact when their blades met. His arm went numb
and the sword fell from his fingers. Dorjan shrieked, spun
about, and tried to run. His foot caught on the edge of an
overturned crate and he fell. His skin broke out in cold sweat
as he scrabbled in the litter, anticipating her blade in his
back.
It was not long coming.
She brought her foot down on his leg so that he could not
escape. Dorjan twisted and whimpered.
"Bloody sa'necari," Pandeena growled. She stomped his
leg, shattering the bone and then stomped the other.
Dorjan screamed.
Pandeena kicked him over on his back and rested the point
of her sword at his throat.
"Just do it," Dorjan pleaded. "Fast. Make it fast."
"Remember Cullen?"
"Oh, gods, no. Please. Just kill me."
Pandeena drove her foot into his belly, rupturing his
organs.
Dorjan screamed again. He was Steeped-in-Death: she
could torture him a long time before he died. "Mercy..."
"So be it." Pandeena poked his left eye out and then his
right.
Todd appeared at her elbow. "Finish him. Kynyr's alive."
Pandeena's expression brightened for an instant and she
shoved her blade into Dorjan's heart, passing it through his
chainmail as if it were paper.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
197
Cahira waited until the battle ended before she emerged
from the concealment of the trees. Her mage gifts were too
minor to have offered much in the way of defense. Todd and
Pandeena had killed twenty-five myn in a handful of minutes.
She had always known how dangerous her husband could be,
yet he had never been anything but patient and gentle with
her. Stepping over and around the corpses, her healer's
nature could not resist the feelings of revulsion gathering in
the pit of her stomach.
She headed for the young wolves lying too still upon the
ground. The first one she reached was Eideard. He stank; his
body having released its wastes at the approach of death.
There was a cyanotic cast to his flesh.
She knelt down and touched his face, Reading him. Cahira
recoiled from the psychic scent of Devil's Silver. The lycan
healer mastered herself and Read further. Life still flickered
within him, but he was too far gone to be helped. Arrows had
gone through both lungs, his spleen, and his belly; and the
poison had eaten the rest of him.
Eideard's eyes fluttered open, glazed with pain. "Tell Kynyr
I'm ... sorry." He coughed up blood. "All my ... worldly goods
... give Cooley ... all my worldly..."
Eideard's face went slack, his eyes staring.
Cahira swallowed and closed Eideard's eyes. Tears slid
down her cheeks. She had become fond of her grandson's
friends during the brief months she had been in Wolffgard.
She straightened wearily, and looked about her. A prayer
formed in her heart and emerged on her lips, whispered

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
198
softly. "Kalirion, Lord of Healing ... let me save one of them
... at least one of them."
Pandeena sat cross-legged on the ground with Kynyr
cradled in her arms. Todd carried Ramsey into the middle of
the road and laid him down beside Finn. That old look Cahira
remembered so well had returned to his eyes: the haunted
calm of the battlefield. She picked her way through the debris
and joined them near the wagon.
"Eideard's dead."
"He was a good mon." Todd broke off the ends of the
shafts in Ramsey's body as he spoke. "He had no family. I'll
see he gets a proper burial."
Pandeena glanced up at her. "Kynyr's alive."
"Oh, thank the gods." Cahira knelt beside her. All the
wounds appeared to be in his legs. The kendaryl mail had
held against the arrows. She grasped his pants leg and ripped
it open to his knee. One look at the necrosis around his
wounds and the hope fled from her face. "Devil's Silver."
Todd finished his work with Ramsey and started on Finn.
"Ramsey's pulse is thready. I don't think he'll last much
longer."
Pandeena brushed her fingers across Finn and then
Ramsey. "There's Devil's Silver ... in all of them."
"Finn?"
"He's not as bad as Ramsey. I need to get us back."
Pandeena's power swirled and swept out around them. She
carried them all, including Eideard's body, the corpses of the
myn they had killed, the wagon and its scattered contents,
even the dead horses to Wolffgard Village, materializing in

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
199
front of Cahira's shop. The transported carnage spread along
half a block.
Passers-by stopped in their tracks, stared for an instant,
and then rushed to help them. Others ran off to tell of what
had happened. Word swept through the village like wildfire
and help arrived in many forms. The difference between
human villages and lycan ones showed immediately. Without
being asked, people began piling the spilled goods in front of
Cahira's shop. The bodies of the enemy dead were tossed
together on the far side of the overturned wagon. Knackers
arrived and removed the dead horses. Pandeena carried
Kynyr into the shop while Todd followed with Ramsey.
Grizzled old Hereward and one of his patrons lifted Finn up
between them and bore him inside, while Hereward's
daughter Kady rushed around them to Cahira.
"Can I help? Please ... Kynyr's been good to me."
Cahira turned to Kady with a dazed expression. "I'll need
all I can get." She swallowed and said the dreaded words.
"Devil's Silver."
Kady showed surprising presence of mind, entering ahead
of Cahira and going to the kitchen where she filled basins with
water.
Cahira turned to fetch her medical case and satchel, only
to find Rory and Cooley standing behind her holding them.
The cubs had learned fast and reacted well in situations that
would have paralyzed an adult. "Take them to the guest room
for me."
The two cubs rushed to the stairs and climbed swiftly.
Cahira followed as well as her aged knees would allow. Soft

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
200
furry hands closed on her arm, steadying her and she looked
down to see Hamish in hybrid form.
"Let me help you."
Even in hybrid form, Hamish was too small to be much
assistance, but Cahira's could sense the love in his offer. "I
can manage. Go down and see about moving all the spilled
merchandise into the shop?"
"Sure." Hamish darted back down the stairs.
She reached the guestroom and saw that Rory had already
opened her case and satchel, arranging everything in the
order she liked. Todd and Pandeena had undressed Finn and
Ramsey, laying them side by side on the large bed.
"Rory, fetch Claw. Cooley, find the lawgiver. Todd, where's
Kynyr?"
The two boys shot out of the room.
Todd looked up with one of Cahira's scalpels in his hand,
and tossed a bloody arrowhead into a dish. "His room. Triage,
Cahira. Finn and Ramsey are worse off than he is."
Pandeena, working on Finn, nodded. "I've heard you're a
Mender."
"Yes ... but Devil's Silver ... there's no antidote."
Pandeena held up a silencing hand. "There is and there
isn't. You mend the internal injuries and let me worry about
the Devil's Silver."
Cahira hesitated.
"Trust me."
Kady arrived with a basin of water and a stack of wash
cloths. She shooed Todd away from Ramsey and began

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
201
cleaning the blood off him. Todd set a chair by the bed so
that Cahira could comfortably see to Ramsey.
"I'll start on Kynyr." Todd picked up a bottle of astringent
and pocketed the scalpel before walking out of the room.
Cahira took a deep breath to steady herself. She stuck her
finger into the wound in Ramsey's side and Read him as she
worked. The tear in his spleen needed only a nudge to close:
the lycan clotting factor had already been hard at work on
that. She closed the first of the lung wounds and started on
the second when she felt his heart stop.
"Nooo!" Cahira pounded him in the chest.
Pandeena left off on Finn and came around the bed. She
placed her hands on Ramsey's chest and sent a surge of raw
power into his heart.
Ramsey's chest heaved and his eyes opened. "Ca-Ca ...
hira?"
Cahira snapped her fingers at Kady. "Pollendine. Three
fingers. The bottle's labeled."
A fit of coughing seized Ramsey, bringing up blood and
froth. Cahira wiped his mouth and chin off.
Pandeena returned to Finn, dug the last arrow out, and
shoved a roll of bandages into the wound to slow to the
bleeding. "I'll be right back."
She raised her arms and vanished in a shimmer of golden
light.
Kady brought the glass around to Cahira. "She Jumped."
"What you see here, stays here."
"Right."
"Now lift him up a bit. Support his head."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
202
Ramsey swallowed the violet liquid and they eased him
back down. "The ... others?"
"Finn's next to you. Kynyr's in his room."
"Eideard?"
"I'm sorry."
Ramsey's mouth tightened. He closed his eyes and slipped
back into the darkness.
Cahira got to her feet and Kady moved her chair to the
other side so that she could start on Finn.
Kady set to bandaging Ramsey's wounds, glancing
frequently at Cahira, as if mustering the courage to ask
something. Cahira caught the looks each time she finished
Mending one of Finn's wounds. Although Cahira could not do a
true healing, such as the lifemages did, her gifts closed the
damage to his lungs and other internal injuries with the
precision of a highly-skilled surgeon. The best Assassins'
Guild surgeons could not have done it better. Cahira was
bone-weary by the time she finished with the belly wounds,
and weariness added to her growing impatience with the
looks that Kady kept giving her.
"I see those questions in your eyes. I don't bite, Kady."
"Do you need an apprentice? I'm a good nurse."
"I hadn't thought about it. I'm already teaching Rory,
Hamish, and Cooley."
"There's a lot they can't do, 'cause they're littles. Nursing's
the one thing I'm good at ... besides waiting tables."
"I hadn't really thought about it," Cahira repeated.
"Please, Cahira. I'm desperate." Kady gave her a
beseeching look. "I need to move out."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
203
"Why?"
"Ever since my father caught me with Cullen, he's been
impossible."
"What do you mean?"
"He says I'm a slut."
"Are you?"
Kady shook her head. "Just Cullen. We only did it a few
times before Da' caught us."
"Pregnant?"
"No."
"Then you're lucky. I've dispensed a lot of tansy lately.
Mostly to unweds."
"But we only did it a few times..."
"It only takes once, Kady. With three patients under my
roof, I can use the help." Cahira raised her hand to forestall
interruptions. "However, if you're going to be living under my
roof, you'll keep your legs crossed."
"I promise."
"I'll hold you to it. You'll have to sleep on a cot in the
storeroom until we can rearrange the living quarters."
"I can do that."
"You'll have to help with the shop. Rory can show you how
to do it. Now, I must tend to Kynyr. Fetch your things while
I'm up there."
* * * *
A grim calm settled over Todd as he worked on Kynyr,
turning his efforts into a meditation. His eyes flicked to the
long cuts crossing his grandson's stomach each time he

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
204
finished getting an arrow head out of Kynyr's leg and packed
the wound.
"You're not dying on me, boy. We got there in time. You're
not dying on me."
Todd finished with the arrows, broke open a package of
surgical catgut and a sterile needle. He threaded the needle
and set it aside. Then he shaved and swabbed the wound with
alcohol, pulled the pieces together and carefully stitched
Kynyr's belly closed.
He brushed a strand of golden hair back from Kynyr's face,
grasped Kynyr's hand in both of his, and held it tight. "You're
not dying on me."
"My turn." Pandeena laid her case next to Todd's box of
catgut. "You love him."
"He's mine. Blood doesn't matter. He's still mine." Todd
sucked in a deep breath. "Most cubs ... their first word is da
or ma ... Kynyr's was Todd. He came crawling across the floor
with his nappies sagging, put his hand on my foot, looked up
at me, and said 'Taahdd.' Just like that."
"I'll do everything in my power to keep him alive, Todd. I
promise." Pandeena squeezed Todd's shoulder. "Now why
don't you go see if you can find Cooley? He ran off crying.
Rory and Hamish are looking for him, but they could use
some help."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
205
CHAPTER TEN
AFTERMATH
Claw dismounted across the street from Cahira's shop, tied
his horse in front of the dry goods, and stood for a moment
with his hands on his hips surveying his ruined wagon. There
were arrows in the side boards and he noted the two different
types of fletching, recognizing it as a code. He half-dreaded
what he would find once he got inside. Claw hated losing
young wolves in his service. Despite the tough exterior he
presented to the world, restraining himself from the
flamboyant displays of grief common to his people, he still
mourned deeply when they died.
His two guardsmyn, Gorgarty Burr and Erskine Faraday,
dismounted beside him and walked at his back as Claw made
his way across the street, picking a path through the
remaining debris.
Gorgarty sneered at the wreckage. "Looks like Maguire
finally got his comeuppance."
"Shut up, Gorgarty," Erskine growled. No one liked the big
stupid oaf, while Kynyr had always been well-liked by most of
the older guardsmyn. "It looks like a war."
Erskine's eyes scanned the wagon. "See there? From the
location of the arrows that struck it..." He pointed at various
spots that fairly bristled with feathered shafts. "I'd say he got
enfiladed."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
206
"So pretty boy got his ass shot off." Gorgarty released a
loud guffaw.
"Shut up, Gorgarty. Someday one of us is going to shove
your words down your throat."
Claw paused with his hand on the doorknob of the shop.
"You heard him, Gorgarty. Shut your ugly mouth."
Kady came out of the backroom as the bell rang telling her
that someone had entered the shop. She had gotten her stuff
packed in minutes and cajoled two of her father's customers
into carrying it down for her. The shop and the living area
upstairs were filled with people coming and going. Several of
the neighbor bitches had brought food and were fixing tea
and sandwiches for those working with the wounded.
She knew that Rory had gone after Claw, so she answered
his questions before he asked them. "Pandeena and Cahira
are upstairs working on them. We put Eideard's body in the
storeroom for the moment."
Claw grimaced. "He was a good wolf. How are the others?
Kynyr?"
"It's still touch and go. Devil's Silver."
"Rory told me." Claw headed for the little hallway that led
to the stairs. Erskine followed him, but Gorgarty lingered
behind leering at Kady.
When Claw reached the second floor, two middle-aged
bitches—whose names he could not remember—came out of
the kitchen. The chieftain realized, with a lurch, just how
seldom he came to the village. He never went among his
people for pleasure any longer.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
207
"If you're looking for Pandeena, she's in with Finn and
Ramsey." The brassy-haired blonde pointed at a door far
down the hallway. "If you're looking for Cahira, she's in with
Kynyr." She pointed at a door near the kitchen.
"Thanks, uhmn..."
"Annie."
"Annie. Right. How're my myn doing?"
Annie's face darkened with distress. "They almost lost
Ramsey twice. Cahira doesn't think he'll make it till morning.
Finn's not much better."
"Kynyr?"
"His wounds aren't serious ... but the poison..."
"Does anyone know how this happened?" Claw's voice
filled with ire.
Annie winced at his tone. "All I know is what I've
overheard. Pandeena and Cahira..."
Erskine glanced sidewise at Claw, watching for a reaction.
Claw gave a nod and headed for Pandeena without another
word. Erskine trailed after him.
Pandeena heard them come in. "Just a minute," she said
without raising her head.
They stood and watched her work. Pandeena sat by the
bed, carefully removing Ramsey's bandages. Claw winced at
the blackened skin around the edges of the wounds. She used
a scalpel to remove the necrotic skin, smeared a golden salve
into the wound, and covered it again with light gauze.
"Will that help?" Claw walked over and stood at her
shoulder.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
208
"It should." Pandeena laid a narrow board on the bed and
bound Ramsey's arm to it. Then she opened a small casket,
took out some long needles stained with a goldish substance,
stuck four of them into his arm, and left them there.
"What's that?"
"A variation on the Creeyan art of inoculation. Something
better's been developed in Rowanhart, but I haven't been
able to get my hands on it." She straightened and rubbed the
back of her neck.
Erskine took that as an invitation and put his big hands on
her neck, massaging the muscles. "You're tired."
"I know it. But I can't stop yet. There's still Finn and Kynyr
to do." She glanced over her shoulder at him, noting the
chocolate and claret livery of a guardsmon. "Do I know you?"
"We've met a few times."
"I don't remember your name."
"Erskine."
Claw growled and Erskine moved away. "What are their
chances?"
Pandeena noticed him for the first time. "Chances? I'd say
it depends on how much strength they have left to fight it."
"Odds, bitch. Give me the odds."
She blinked at his tone. "Ramsey is terribly weak. I'll be
surprised if he makes it until morning. If he does, he has a
fighting chance. Same for Finn."
"And Kynyr?"
"His wounds weren't as serious to start with ... they're all
in his leg. Devil's Silver is nasty stuff."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
209
Claw's eyes narrowed. "You know an awful damn lot for
someone your age."
"I'm older than I look." Pandeena gathered her things and
moved to the other side of the bed to work on Finn.
"How old?"
"None of your damned business."
Erskine chuckled. "Never ask a bitch her age."
Claw turned on his heels and walked out. Erskine lingered.
"You look like you could use a drink. Could I buy you one
when you're finished?"
"No."
* * * *
As he put his hand on the knob, Claw heard Cahira singing,
weaving her spell words to focus her gifts. He hesitated,
uncertain of his welcome despite the fact that she had sent
for him. Easing the door open, he stood two steps over the
threshold and watched Cahira working on Kynyr as he had
with Pandeena and Ramsey. Todd sat on the opposite side of
the bed, holding his grandson's hand and bathing his face
with a wet cloth.
"Come on, boy," Todd said in that slow, steady voice of
his. "Come on. You're not dying on us. You hear me?"
Claw sucked in a breath and leaned his head back to stare
at the ceiling. He had half-hoped for four years—ever since
first laying eyes on Kynyr—that the handsome young wolf
would turn out to be his great-grandson. The resemblance to
his murdered son was uncanny. Kynyr even had Tarrant's
easy self-confidence. Having Kynyr in his employ was like

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
210
having his son back again. Todd has dashed all of that two
months ago when he unequivocally stated that he had sired
Kynyr's bastard father, Branduff, on Cahira.
Kynyr moaned, shifting restlessly, his head moving back
and forth. "No, Finn. Keep going ... keep going. Fiiiiiinn!"
Claw moved closer to the bed on Todd's side. "Kynyr?"
"He can't hear you." Todd glanced up as Claw stopped
beside him. "Kynyr doesn't even know we're here."
"Fever?"
"Yes. The poison's eating him up inside."
"At least they accounted for several of them."
"No." Todd shook his head. "I did."
"Killing was always what you did best, Todd."
"Be quiet or get out!" Cahira snapped.
Todd stood up and tossed the wet cloth at Claw. "You and
Cahira need to talk. I'm going to check on Kady. Make sure
the cubs haven't overwhelmed her."
Claw studied the wall for a moment, threw the cloth into
the basin of water, and picked one of the arrowheads out of
the dish Cahira had been tossing them into. "Swallowtails.
Wicked looking thing. Ought to see if Ranoul can make
something nastier that we can give them some payback
with."
Cahira brandished a scalpel at Claw. "Hold his hand. He
doesn't thrash as much if someone's holding him. Kynyr's not
conscious, but touch still registers."
Claw settled into the chair vacated by Todd and grasped
Kynyr's hand, patting and squeezing it. The old chieftain
studied the young wolf's suffering face. He tensed, seeing the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
211
resemblance to his dead son so strongly that it flashed
memories through him. Once more he saw his twin sons,
Logan and Tarrant executed in rites of mortgiefan while he
watched unable to do anything, his wife Aisha held hostage to
his cooperation.
"Todd's a bloody liar! Kynyr's mine."
Cahira's lips curled back into a silent snarl. She Mended
the deepest parts of the wound, cut away the blackened flesh,
and applied Pandeena's odd salve to it. Then she glared
across Kynyr at Claw. "There's a curse on your house."
"Yah ... and I've heard twenty different versions of it.
Weems' Curse they call it. Bullshit, Cahira. All bullshit. There
is no bloody curse."
"Isn't there? Where's your brother? Where's your sons?
Darmyk can't inherit. He's sa'necari. One of those monsters
that destroyed your family. The Redhands are a dying breed.
You're the last. They'll put some other family on the throne
after you're gone."
"Is that why you sent for me? To shove this bloody curse
in my face?"
Cahira stiffened. "The law says that the chieftain must be
sent for when his guardsmyn are wounded or dead. I've kept
the letter of the law. Now get the hell out of my home."
The chieftain retreated to the hallway and leaned against
the wall, breathing hard. The tightness and shooting pains in
his chest were back with a vengeance. He took the bottle of
foxglove extract from his pouch, popped it open, and took a
swallow of it. Baroucha had told him to measure it carefully,
but most of the time Claw never bothered to. His doses were

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
212
erratic. Sometimes he forgot them. He should have told Aisha
about it, but Claw had not wanted to worry her.
"Claw?"
He glanced up as he slipped the bottle back into his pouch
and saw Todd standing by the stairs. "I'm leaving. Your
bloody wife told me to."
"We need to talk."
"I'm leaving."
Todd gave Claw a long, searching look. "About Cullen.
Come upstairs with me."
The big lycan started up the stairs without waiting for the
chieftain's reply. Claw pushed away from the wall and
followed. By the time he reached the third floor, the chieftain
was panting and the chest pains had worsened. He stumbled
on the last step and nearly fell on the landing. Todd caught
Claw's arm and steadied him. "Are you alright?"
He guided Claw down the hallway to a large room divided
by a mat on one side and mirrored the entire length of it.
Racks of practice weapons stood in the corner nearest the
door and at the far end sat a square table with four chairs
and a cabinet behind it.
Claw settled into a chair and Todd brought a bottle of
whiskey and two glasses from the cabinet. "Whiskey?"
"Yeah."
Todd poured. "What's wrong with you? That bottle..."
Claw glared at him. "Tell me about Cullen."
"Show me the bottle."
Claw took the bottle out and set it beside the whiskey.
"You tell anyone and I'll run you both out of town."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
213
Todd read the label. "Heart trouble? How long?"
"Couple a months. Thought I had it hidden, but a week ago
my damned son-in-law caught me having one of those
spells."
"Cahira should have a look at you."
"She won't do it."
"I could talk to her."
"Forget it. Tell me about Cullen."
"Are you still looking for his family?"
"Law says I have to. A year and a day."
"I can tell you where to find his son. But I want your word
you won't share that with anyone."
"You have it."
"It's Cooley. He's Cullen Diomedes Blackwood, jr."
"Why all the secrecy?"
"We think that Cullen's murderers are looking for him.
When he made that ride to Wolffgard two months ago, some
myn chased him down the road. Cooley gave Larkspur her
head and she outran them."
"Good horse, that one."
"Ayup."
"What do you want me to do?"
"Quietly transfer Cullen's assets to Cooley. We'll set up a
trust for him until he's of age."
"Consider it done."
* * * *
Kady tried to ignore Gorgarty. The way that he stared at
her, undressing her with his eyes, made her skin crawl. She

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
214
looked about the shop for something to do, and saw the cases
of jars and bottles sitting between the two ladders that Rory
and Cooley had been using earlier. Reading the labels, she
matched them up with those on the shelves and put them
away.
"I saw them moving yer stuff in as we turned the corner."
Gorgarty followed her, folded his arms atop one cabinet, and
leaned across it. "What are ya doing here?"
"Working." Kady stiffened. "I work here now."
"On yer back or standing up?"
"Leave me alone. I'm working."
"If ya say so." Gorgarty shrugged, his eyes resting on her
rump. "Cullen ever give it to ya up the ass?"
"That's none of your business." Kady returned to the
crates of supplies and took out a small bottle. It had the
name written on it in three languages, only one of which Kady
recognized. The late priest, Tempest Anstey, had taught Kady
her letters. Although she was not a good reader, Kady could
sound out most words and this one surprised her:
Amphereon. Normally Amphereon was blue. Apothecaries and
healers color-coded drugs with natural food coloring. This was
white. The purest, most expensive form there was of it—
which the addicts called White Fire. She had heard it
discussed many times working in her father's tavern. Cahira
must have an outstanding supplier to get her hands on it.
Kady turned about, trying to decide where to put it and
spotted a locked cabinet. She went to the back, sat the drug
on the table which Cahira used for a counter, and started

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
215
looking for the key. Kady would be glad when Cooley and
Rory got back to help her learn where things were.
"What ya got there?" Gorgarty sauntered along in her
wake and picked up the bottle. He squinted at the label as if
trying to read it. Gorgarty popped the stopper out and sniffed
it. "Wheeew! Amphereon. Bitch, that stuff will really stiffen
the bone. Wanna see mine?"
Kady snatched the bottle out of his hand and realized that
the stopper was not there. "Give me that!" She grabbed his
hand, trying to peel his thick fingers open.
Gorgarty laughed at her, clenching his fist around the
stopper. "Let me nuzzle yer teats and ya can have it."
"Please don't do this to me. It's my first day. They've got
wounded upstairs. Please."
"Pretty Boy Maguire took it in the ass." Gorgarty chuckled,
shrugged Kady off, and went around behind the table after
her. "Wish I'd been there to see it."
Kady glanced about frantically for a place to flee to.
Gorgarty had cut her off from the door to the hallway. She
spied the door to the backroom, and retreated through it.
He followed her. "Good place. Ya want to do it on the sofa?
The floor? Or up against the wall. Ya were doing it standing
up when yer da caught ya."
"Get out of here!"
Kady realized that she was shaking, and shoved the bottle
onto a shelf so that she would not spill it. There was only one
door and she would have to get past Gorgarty to reach it. She
darted to Cahira's worktable and put that between her and
the guardsmon.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
216
The table pressed against a cabinet that blocked the end
off, completing an L-shape with the wall behind her. She was
trapped.
Gorgarty glanced at the area. "Ya sure ya want to do it
there? Not much space."
"Touch me and I'll scream."
"Scream." Gorgarty shrugged. "No one helps a whore."
"I'm not a whore." Kady backed up as he came around the
side and started toward her, opening his pants. "Kynyr..."
"Oughta be dead soon." Gorgarty loosed a sour laugh.
"Guess Todd'll be slipping ya the bone soon. If ya like geezer
bones..."
"Shut up." She slapped his face.
"Like it rough, Kady? Is that it?" Gorgarty grabbed her
wrist and twisted it, sending a sharp pain up her arm. "I got
no problem with that."
"Let go." She jerked her arm, trying to free it, finally
repeating the futile effort with the bottle top, and attempting
to pry his fingers loose from her wrist.
"How rough ya want it, Kady?" Gorgarty grinned, seized
her golden hair, and yanked her head around. His fetid breath
and dirty teeth made Kady's stomach roil as Gorgarty brought
his face close to hers. He covered her lips with his own,
forcing them apart.
Kady set her jaw and clenched her teeth together.
"Open them."
Kady's eyes glittered with the desperation of a cornered
animal and she kept her mouth closed. She shook her head.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
217
Gorgarty slammed his fist into her solar plexus, knocking
the air out of her. "Play nice."
Kady sobbed for breath, a freshet of tears dampening her
cheeks. What little fight she had had to begin with
evaporated. Between Cullen's death and her father turning on
her, Kady Wiggins had been gradually losing her sense of self
for several weeks. She knew it full well, but saw no way to
recover it. The spark of hope that Cahira had given her mere
hours ago faded and died like a blown out candle.
He shoved her against the wall, rubbing his pelvis along
her body. "Ya'll like me. I'm not a runt like Cullen. Once
you've had me inside you, Kady, you won't want anyone
else."
"I don't want you." Her voice cracked and her head moved
listlessly, as if trying not to think about what was happening
to her. Ever since word had gotten out about her losing her
virginity to Cullen Blackwood, the males had been getting
more and more insistent with her. Her father had stopped
protecting her, writing her off as a slut after having her
virginity checked by Baroucha, the midwife. Kady felt helpless
and abandoned. She knew that if she screamed, her
reputation would condemn her. No one would believe that she
had not come on to Gorgarty and then changed her mind.
"Course ya do. I seen the way ya been looking at me.
Everyone has. They keep telling me ya want me."
"Please stop." Fear made her legs weak. "Don't do this."
Gorgarty squeezed her breasts. "No one's gonna catch us
back here, if that's what ya're afraid of." He mouthed her

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
218
nipple and blew a hot breath through the fabric, moistening
the cloth. "Not like when you did it with Cullen in the alley."
Kady tensed as he rubbed his big body over hers, making
humping motions with his cock against her loins. She could
not think and words deserted her, reducing her protests to
simplistic repetitions. "I don't want you. Please don't do this."
"I do it good. Ya're gonna like this." He fumbled with the
lacings on her bodice, lifted one of her pale breasts out, and
gave it a perfunctory squeeze. "Nice."
Resignation crept into her voice and she turned her face
away from his, surrendering to despair. Resistance had
gained her nothing in the past except rougher handling. "Get
it over with."
"I knew ya wanted me." Gorgarty rolled her skirt up and
tucked the end into her sagging half-open bodice. He lifted his
engorged member out. "I get it in and ya'll know what I
mean."
Her gaze flicked across his cock, drawn to the sight out of
dread, her lower lip trembling. Blue veins stood out in
Gorgarty's thick pinkish spear and the uncircumcised tip had
an odd bend in it. A giggle laced with hysteria escaped her.
"Cullen was bigger."
"Hah! Right."
Kady sobbed as he shoved his hand into her small clothes.
"I hate you."
"Not for long." Gorgarty slipped his fingers between the
lips of her vagina, and poked them inside her. "That's real
sweet." He shifted her small clothes down more to get them
out of his way, grabbed his yard, and pushed into her with a

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
219
grunt. "Don't that ... feel good? Ya tell me if that don't feel
good."
Her stomach soured. A silent chant formed in her mind.
It'll be over soon. It'll be over soon. Don't fight and maybe he
won't hurt me again. Just let him do it ... let him do it.
The fullness inside her felt like a nightmarish intrusion. She
resisted an urge to let her bladder go and pee on him, certain
that he would kill her if she did. Cullen's considerate love-
making seemed so distant at that moment. Kady burst into
soft weeping. "I'd rather have a blade in my gut."
"Liar. I'm ... giving ya ... the best fuck ... ya ever had."
Gorgarty punctuated his words with grunts as he thrust in
and out of her. "Ya got the ... tightest little cunt ... I ever
been in."
Kady's sobbing worsened.
"I'll buy ya a drink ... and we can do it ... again."
"You're ... raping me."
"Can't rape the willing. Oh. Oh, there it goes." Gorgarty
spurted, filling her with his milky seed. "Now, wasn't that fun,
Kady? Wasn't that fun?" He pulled his flaccid, spent member
out and kissed her on the nose. "I'll be back around when I
get off duty. We'll have a drink at the Striped Dog and do it in
a bed."
A trace of courage seeped into Kady as she pulled her
bodice up. "I'm not going anywhere with you. I hate you. I
begged you not to. You're an ugly, nasty gutterfucker. If I'd
had a blade, I would have stuck you."
Gorgarty chuckled, lacing his pants closed. "I'll be by
around six. Wear something nice."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
220
"I hate you. I hate you."
"Scum," said a weary voice behind Gorgarty.
Strong hands seized the guardsmon by the collar and the
seat of his pants, jerking him backwards. Gorgarty flailed at
the cabinets.
"Break something, and I'll break you." Todd Sinclair hauled
Gorgarty out from behind the cabinets, and then propelled
him toward the door.
Freed, Kady sank to her knees and huddled against the
cabinets, Gorgarty's thick, milky cum soaking her small
clothes and skirts. "I hate you, Gorgarty."
"She wanted it."
"You raped her." Todd's voice held not the slightest trace
of emotion, just an eerie stillness to his words.
"Ya can't rape a slut."
"You're banned from this place."
"I'm a guardsmon!" Gorgarty twisted in Todd's grasp,
tearing the neck of his tunic as they reached the front room.
"I'll bust ya up, old mon."
Todd raised his knee between Gorgarty's legs, a short
calculated strike. Gorgarty shrieked. The aging Battle Master
released the younger guardsmon's clothing, grabbed his
wrist, and stepped in with the simplest of hip throws, laying
Gorgarty out on the floor. His foot came down on the
guardsmon's neck and rested there in quiet threat. "You're
trash. Complain to the lawgiver and see how far you get. If
Kady wants to press charges, I'll support her."
"She's just ... a cheap ... slut." Gorgarty sobbed for
breath, clutching his balls. "Ask anyone."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
221
"What'd he do?" Erskine leaned against the door frame at
the edge of the hallway.
"Raped Kady Wiggins in my backroom." Todd moved aside,
watching Erskine warily.
"Ya can't rape a slut! Tell him, Erskine!" Gorgarty threw a
worried look at his companion. "Ya can't rape a slut. She
wanted me to do it."
Erskine shook his head with a shrug. "Not my problem,
Gorgarty."
Seeing that Erskine had no intention of intervening, Todd
kicked Gorgarty in the side. "Touch her again and I'll feed you
your balls. You saw those bodies in the street?"
"Yah."
"I did that. Don't mess with me and mine. Understood?"
Something in Todd's calm manner got through to Gorgarty
in ways that yelling obscenities would not have. He hesitated,
looking again to his companion for help that was not
forthcoming. "Yah, I got it."
"Get him out of here."
Erskine jerked Gorgarty to his feet and shoved him
through the door. Gorgarty recovered his attitude as soon
they were out of Todd's sight.
"I'll kill him." Gorgarty snarled. "I swear I'll kill him."
Erskine regarded Gorgarty, his mouth set in a line of
contempt. "Don't press your luck. He rode with Tarrant
Redhand."
"He's old."
"And you're stupid." Erskine closed his fist and hit Gorgarty
in the face, decking him.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
222
Gorgarty lay on his back, rubbing his chin. 'Why'd ya do
that?"
"Because you're stupid. It's going to get you killed."
"What do ya mean?"
"Assuming you did get lucky with Todd—Kynyr's got a lot
of friends who won't take kindly to something happening to
his grampa. That includes me. Touch his family and we'll give
you the Weems' Cure."
"Ya wouldn't dare."
"Try me."
* * * *
Caimbeul surveyed the broken, over-turned wagon and the
bodies littering the street around it. The only mon he knew
who could have Jumped an entire scene of carnage and its
debris to a street in Wolffgard was Pandeena. He had been
having a drink at the Difficult Horse when word of this had
reached the place and the tavern's patrons and others had
rushed out.
He arrived too late to see the wounded carried into the
shop. Twenty-odd dead bodies had been lined up along one
end of the block. Caimbeul pulled his lawgiver runes from
beneath his shirt and let them dangle from the golden chain
in plain sight. He had only been in Wolffgard for two days,
and had not yet had time to make his presence well enough
known to be recognized on sight. He sauntered over to them
and noticed that at least three of them were sa'necari.
"Don't leave them here." His voice broke across the silent
myn carrying the bodies. "Take them to the commons. One of

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
223
you get an axe and chop their heads off. We don't need any
unpleasant surprises. Get a bonfire built to burn them."
"Who are you to be giving orders?" A lycan snarled at him.
Caimbeul flicked his runes. "Your new lawgiver."
A slender fellow nudged the one who had challenged
Caimbeul. "That's Fireborn Law ... Padruig Caimbeul."
They all stopped work to stare at him.
"Get some wagons over here. It'll be easier to get them
moved." Caimbeul headed for the door to Cahira's shop just
in time to see Erskine deck Gorgarty. "What's going on here?"
Gorgarty scrambled to his feet, rubbing his jaw. His eyes
fell upon Caimbeul's lawgiver runes. "Slipped my bone into a
slut what was begging for it. That arsehole Sinclair's saying I
raped her. Ya can't rape a slut."
Caimbeul favored him with a skeptical glance. "What's
your name?"
"Gorgarty Burr and I ain't never put my bone into a bitch
that didn't want me."
The lawgiver scratched the side of his nose as he glanced
at Erskine. "Who owns this shop?"
"Cahira and Todd Sinclair," responded Erskine. "Same
Todd Sinclair that rode with Tarrant Redhand. They're Kynyr
Maguire's grandparents."
Caimbeul snorted and a wicked grin bloomed on his lips.
"Todd's the one put a silver spike through Alistar Weems'
belly ... and Weems' crime was rape. Don't push him, Burr,
and don't push me. If the bitch wants to press charges ... I'll
have you in a cell like that." He snapped his fingers.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
224
Todd returned to the backroom and found Kady huddled on
a sofa crying.
He walked over to a cabinet, took out a bottle of whiskey
and two glasses. Todd set them on the table and settled
himself, gesturing at the other chair as he filled the glasses.
"Come here. You need a drink."
"Don't tell Cahira. Please don't tell her." Kady sank into a
chair and grasped her whiskey with shaking hands.
"Why?" Todd knocked his whiskey down and poured a
second one.
Kady took a swallow of whiskey and felt the warmth of the
liquor spread through her. "Because ... She told me to keep
my legs crossed or she'd throw me out. I'm barely here and
now I'll be out on the street."
Todd stared into his glass, rubbing his forefinger across his
lower lip, and thinking. "Why'd you let him do it? Why didn't
you fight him?"
"What good would it have done?" Bitterness laced Kady's
words. "Every time I've fought, they've just hurt me worse
and still gotten their bone into me."
"You could have screamed."
"Who would have believed me? My reputation..."
"Is unearned." Todd stroked Kady's head in a calming
gesture. "One love affair does not a slut make, Kady. If one of
those hot-tailed dogs bothers you, come to me."
"Todd..."
Sinclair pulled a silver from his pocket and put it into
Kady's hands. "Get yourself some trousers. Loose enough

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
225
that you can move freely. Same with the shirt. Claw's
guardsmyn have only the most basic of training. They're little
more than brawlers ... except for Finn and Kynyr. Work hard
and I'll show you how to knock them on their faces. Starting
with Gorgarty."
"But I'm not a dog."
"I've taught bitches as well as dogs. You'll learn."
"Okay." Kady drank her whiskey and poured a second. By
then her shaking had begun to ease.
"And don't brood about it. Think of yourself as a wounded
soldier and get on with your life."
Kady could not think of what to say to that, so she simply
nodded.
"For the time being, don't go anywhere in town alone.
Take one of the cubs with you. I'm sure that Rory and Cooley
will be happy to walk you places. I'll explain what happened
to Cahira. Then she'll Read you. If that asshole left a present
in your belly, it's easily gotten rid of."
Kady's fear, shame, and humiliation began to ease under
Todd's kind words. She remembered Kynyr rescuing her in
the alley that night, trying to comfort her afterwards, and she
knew where he had gotten that attitude now. "Thank you,
Todd. Thank you so much."
"Excuse me?"
They both turned and saw Caimbeul standing in the
doorway.
"Caimbeul! It's been years!" Todd's eyes lit up and he
gestured at the table. "Sit. I'll get you a glass."
Kady's eyes settled on the runes. "Lawgiver..."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
226
Caimbeul accepted the glass of whiskey that Todd pushed
toward him on returning to the table. "Do you want to press
charges against Gorgarty?"
She glanced at Todd, who refused to indicate his feelings
on the matter. Kady dropped her gaze. "No."
"Why not?" Caimbeul asked in a neutral tone.
Kady tossed her hair back. "With my reputation? No one
would ever convict him."
"If you change your mind, the law says you must do this
before sundown tomorrow."
"I know. I won't."
* * * *
Their home had finally emptied of concerned neighbors
trying to help. Cooley had been tucked into bed with a mild
sedative following a crying jag. Once the quiet of the night set
in, Cooley had had a delayed reaction to what had happened
to the myn he idolized. Kady had sat with him, telling him
stories until the cub fell asleep. Something had happened to
Kady, and Cahira had caught the haunted look that lay behind
the mask the girl had put on while helping with the wounded
and Cooley.
She sat at her kitchen table, staring into a cup of tea, her
eyes distant and unfocused following Todd's account of what
Gorgarty had done to Kady. An untouched plate of food sat on
the table in front of her. She picked at it with her fork,
moving the food around, yet not putting a single bite to her
lips.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
227
Todd sat across from her, his eyes filled with gentle
concern. "You must eat, Cahira."
She shifted her head in a listless motion. "I can't chew. It
feels like I'm swallowing rocks."
"You're just tired. It's been a hard day."
"No. It's more than that, Todd." She clenched her eyes
shut and turned her head away as Todd proffered a slice of
beef on a fork at her. A sob broke from her throat. "Gahds,
the curse is killing Kynyr."
"He took his chances. The curse isn't killing him."
"Yes, it is. It is. Claw knows. He's threatened to have
Kynyr Read."
Todd laid the fork down, went around the table, and held
his wife. "Kynyr must have made a mistake somewhere.
That's all. It could have happened to anyone."
"It nearly killed Branduff many times. Now it's after Kynyr.
He should never have come here."
Todd propped his chin on her head. "I love you, Cahira. I
love Kynyr as if he were my own. If I must place my life
between Kynyr and Weems' Curse, I will."
"Then I'd lose you too."
"I'm one hundred and seven years old. I don't have a lot of
years left. I can feel the age in my body."
"Todd..." Cahira turned into his embrace and wrapped her
arms around his waist.
Todd smiled. "If I weren't so tired, I'd ravish you right here
on the floor."
"Another time?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
228
"Remember how we used to make love in the deep grass
by the river?"
"How could I not? That's how we got Trevor and I decided
I had better marry you."
Todd chuckled. "I planned it that way."
"You what?"
"Confession time?"
Cahira pulled away from him. "I should think so! Trevor's
nearly seventy years old."
A guilty smile, full of little boy naughtiness, came on
Todd's lips. "I switched your herbs. I knew if I landed you one
in the belly, you'd have to stop turning me down."
"Todd, you're incorrigible."
His smile turned into a grin. "Only when it comes to you.
We've had a good marriage? Haven't we?"
She reached across the table and squeezed his hand. "Yes,
Todd. We have. I have never once regretted it."
"And you'll take care of Kady?"
"I think what happened is partly my fault. If I hadn't been
so hard on her, she probably would have screamed instead of
submitting to him." Cahira's mouth tightened. "Todd, listen. If
you must fight Gorgarty? Kill him."
"I will."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
229
CHAPTER ELEVEN
KADY
Kady Wiggins woke with a flinch and sat up shivering in
the fading clutches of a nightmare. She had dreamed that
Gorgarty had come back, dragged her off to the Striped Dog
and passed her around to be used by all of the males in the
common room there. The males surrounding her kept
chanting "You can't rape a slut."
Her shivering stopped as the images faded from her
waking mind. The cot shifted under her as Kady drew her feet
up and tucked them under her to sit cross-legged. Pulling at
her simple white slip, which she had worn under her dress
and then slept in, Kady stared at all the cabinets, chests, and
shelves in momentary confusion as to where she was. It
slowly returned to her that she had spent the night in one of
the storerooms of Cahira's shop.
Sunlight from a high window made a patch of brightness in
the center of the floor. The dress she had worn yesterday
draped a chair at the edge of the light. Kady reached for it
and froze, seeing the spatters of blood down the front from
working with the wounded.
"Kynyr." The image of him being carried torn and bloody
from the street flashed through her mind and banished all
thoughts of her own suffering. Kady threw back the light
coverlet and swung her feet over the side of the cot, spied
her chest of clothing, and peeled the slip over her head.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
230
Sifting through her folded dresses, Kady rejected each one
that she picked out. They were more suited to waiting tables
in the tavern and serving drinks than working in a healer's
shop, and entirely too revealing in the cleavage department—
so much so that Kady fully expected Cahira to complain about
them. Her fingers brushed across a blue scarf and inspiration
struck. Kady got out her sewing kit and, with a few quick
tacking stitches secured the scarf into the top of the bodice of
one of her dresses. Then she put it on and was satisfied that
nothing objectionable showed. No one could accuse her of
looking like a slut in that.
Her stomach and chest tightened and Kady fought down a
sensation of panic. "I'm not a slut. I'm not."
Todd's words came back to her: One love affair does not a
slut make. She remembered the silver that Todd had given
her to purchase trousers and a shirt. Kady opened her pouch
and counted out the coins in it. In addition to the silver, she
had seven copper fivepence that she had been saving. If she
bought two sets of pants and shirts, then she could rip the
seams out of one set and use it as a pattern to turn all of her
dresses into more pairs. If she was going to start a new life
and put all the ugliness behind her as Todd had said, then
clothes were a good beginning.
She walked out into the shop and found Cahira sitting at
the table with a cup of tea. A teapot, a platter of hot scones,
a tub of butter, and another of jam sat in the middle of the
table.
"Sit, Kady. Have some tea and scones."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
231
"You should have gotten me up. I could have fixed
breakfast for you."
Cahira gave her a maternal smile. "You needed the rest.
After what happened yesterday."
"I'm worried about Kynyr."
"I'm more worried about Ramsey. Kynyr and Finn are
responding to Pandeena's treatments. Ramsey isn't."
"Poor Ramsey. He was always nice to me."
Cahira's lips tightened for an instant as she nodded. "Here,
eat. Can you handle a team?"
"Yes."
"Good. Once you've eaten, you can drive over to the
manor. The cubs have loaded all of Aisha's stuff that was
salvageable into the wagon. Take Rory with you."
"Is there anything I can pick up for you while I'm out?"
"Lots of things. Todd cleared the second floor storage room
so we can use it as an infirmary. The biggest problem is
finding beds for it."
"I'll see what I can find. Maybe we can get people to
donate since it would benefit the whole community."
"Well, see what you can do. But first, eat."
* * * *
Georgie Rogan came out of the barn when Kady drove into
the yard with Rory beside her. The hostler offered her a hand
down from the seat as she set the break. "Hello, Kady. What
ya got there?"
"Everything we could salvage from the broken wagon."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
232
Kady hesitated to put her hand in his, uncertain whether to
trust him or not, memories of Gorgarty Burr making her
cringe.
Rory jumped from the wagon and ran over to stand next to
Georgie. "Give him yer hand, Kady! No one's gonna mess
with you while I'm around."
Kady managed a whiff of a grin that vanished the instant it
appeared.
"Ack, Kady, I'm sorry." Georgie clucked his tongue at her.
"Heard about Gorgarty Burr. No one believes him. No one
likes him. Let me help ya down."
Kady sucked a breath through her nostrils, a smile
wavering across her lips as she accepted Georgie's hand.
"Thank you."
Georgie held onto her hand after her feet touched the
heavy packed earth, and that set her stomach to fluttering
with a case of nerves. He led her up to the door and knocked
on it.
Kissie answered. The blonde nibari had a kind smile for
Kady that took the edge off the young bitch's initial
nervousness.
"Kissie, this here is Kady Wiggins and she's just brought
Aisha's salvage. Be a good one and take her in to talk to the
Mistress."
Kady saw Rory nod at her. "Okay."
She had never been inside the manor before. The sheer
size of it overwhelmed her and she had to struggle not to
hunch her shoulders and lower her head, which would have
revealed how intimidated she felt by it all. Kady grabbed

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
233
Rory's hand and clutched it, sneaking glances at the rich
tapestries on the walls and the elegant chandeliers hanging
overhead.
The immensity of the Great Hall stole Kady's breath and
her steps faltered as Kissie showed her inside. Two rows of
stone support columns ran along the south and north sides of
the room. Clusters of comfortable chairs, sofas, and low
tables in dark-stained wood broke the Great Hall into false
alcoves. The sections of a large trestle table stood stacked
along the south wall to be assembled for rare formal dinners.
At the east end stood the deep hearth and to the left of the
hearth were three looms, a spinning wheel, and several
baskets of wool and yarn.
Two bitches in fine dresses sat at the looms, while a third
kept the spinning wheel going with a steady hand.
"Hello, Kady. What brings you here?"
Kady jumped and nearly fell over. She had not noticed
Robert Morcar sitting in the shadows. He wore chain mail that
hung to his knees with the sides split to make movement
easier, with a breast plate of a strange sapphire metal she
had never seen before.
Rory stepped in front of her, bristling with a child's ire and
protectiveness, laced with the arrogance of the street and a
deeply-rooted self-myth of his own invincible resourcefulness.
"We brought Mistress Aisha everything that wasn't broken."
The bitch at the spinning wheel rose and walked into the
middle of the Great Hall, smiling at the cub's audacity. "Rory,
Darmyk is playing in his treehouse. Why don't you join him
there?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
234
"Todd told me to keep an eye on Kady so nothing bad
happens to her."
"Go play, Rory," said Robert Morcar. "Kady is perfectly safe
here. Erskine and I won't let anything happen to her. Go.
Play."
Rory gulped and backed away from Morcar. "Yessir."
The cub turned and fled.
"Kady, come along. I want to talk to you a bit in private."
Aisha picked a bell off the nearest table and rang it.
Kissie reappeared. "Yes, Mistress Aisha?"
"Please bring..." Aisha turned to Kady. "What would you
like to drink? Sherry? Brandy? We have some very nice
claret."
"Uhmmn. The claret."
"Kissie, two glasses and a bottle of claret. Bring them to
the Rose Room. And some of those Eccles cakes you baked
this morning."
The Rose Room was small—by the standards of the
manor—decorated in deep shades of rose and mauve. A
mural covered the south wall of lycans at a picnic in the
middle of a rose garden the males in hybrid form and the
females in human while true wolves romped around them.
The wall hangings were all of pastoral scenes. Sofas and
chairs formed half circles around three low tables,
upholstered in matching rose brocades. A woven reed basket,
containing knitting, occupied the corner of a sofa. Aisha
settled on that sofa, moved her knitting to the floor, and
adjusted her skirts.
"Sit where you're comfortable, Kady."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
235
Kady chose a chair, smoothing her skirt. Although she
wore her best dress, Kady felt shabby compared to Aisha.
Kissie arrived with a platter, placed it on the low table, and
left.
Aisha poured claret for both of them. "I hope it's to your
taste, Kady. I don't favor the stronger spirits that my
husband prefers."
Kady sipped her wine and nodded. "It's very good."
"How is Kynyr ... and the others? When I heard about the
Devil's Silver..."
"None of them have been fully conscious yet. Ramsey's the
worst though. Cahira says he's..." Kady had a difficult time
with some of Cahira's words and phrases. "She says he's not
responding to treatment."
"It's hard when you lose the young ones, Kady." Aisha put
an Eccles cake on a small plate and extended that to her.
Kady set her claret on the table and accepted the plate.
She took a bite and the sweet, sugary treat made her smile.
"That's good."
"Isbeth is an excellent baker. Her lying in time is
approaching, so Domina will be taking over for a few weeks.
Dommy is good, but not as good with the sweets as Isbeth."
Kady nodded, trying to look interested. Her father owned
three nibari, but Kady had never felt entirely comfortable with
them.
"Is there anything I can do to help? Cahira and I ... we've
never gotten along, but I trust her more than I do Baroucha."
"Beds. Furniture is the biggest problem right now."
"How so?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
236
"We've turned the storeroom into an infirmary, but we've
no beds yet. The furniture maker says he can't have more
ready for at least a week."
Aisha sipped her claret with a considering look. "We have a
lot of spare beds. Would Cahira accept them if I sent them to
her?"
"I'm sure she would. She told me she would be grateful for
any help she could get right now."
"How many?"
"Six for the infirmary. Singles, not doubles. It's easier to
work on someone when you don't have to lean across."
"I will have them delivered before nightfall. Is there
anything else? Something for yourself?"
"I'm sleeping on a cot."
"So, seven beds. One of them a nice big one?"
"I'd like that."
"Tell Cahira I want to help ... that I want to put the past
behind us?"
Kady knew there had to be an ulterior motive, and a
gesture of friendship from the Chieftain's wife was not
something that should be refused. If Cahira disagreed, Kady
resolved to enlist Todd in convincing her.
* * * *
Two huge wagons loaded down with goods, each drawn by
four stocky ponies, pulled up in front of the Scarlet Angel
Mage Supply. A hunch-backed old mon drove the lead wagon,
her long white hair tied into a tail at her neck; while another

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
237
geezer drove the rear wagon. Both vehicles had four children
perched precariously atop the stacks of chests and crates.
The crone sprang from the lead wagon as sprightly as a
child, glanced both ways and darted into the shop. "Hey,
Luciano, where's your dad?"
"Dyna!" Luciano came from behind the counter and hugged
her. "Lemyari got him."
"Sorry to hear about that."
"Not as much as I was. He bit me three days later and
informed me that spiritworkers taste bad. He hasn't been
around since."
"Well, they do."
"You'd know about those things?"
Dynanna snickered. "I got those supplies you wanted."
Luciano shook his head, his expression turned unhappy.
"Can't use them. I'm closing the store. Queen Tomyrilen
routed the Sharani forces at Wolfbane Field. General Mardreth
Dovane has retreated to Skeleton Creek to regroup."
"You gonna run?"
"No choice."
Dynanna lowered her head, and rubbed her forefinger
under her nose. "I got something that will help, but I want it
back."
She reached into her pocket and produced a small clear
glass globe.
"Is that a carrying globe?" Luciano's eyes saucered as he
accepted it.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
238
"Yup, put the whole store in your pocket. Then head for
Red Wolff. Yuwenghau are making a stand there. We're gonna
protect the last descendant of Dawnhand."
"Oh, My Lady. Thank you. Where shall I meet you?"
"Wolffgard. I'll be there no later than the equinox. Open a
store there and I'll find you."
"I'll leave tonight."
"Good mon. If the lycans contest your presence, just ask
for Pandeena and tell her I sent you."
"Which name shall I give her?"
"Dyna. She knows all my faces."
Dynanna stalked toward the door.
"Wait, My Lady..."
She flicked her hair back as she turned to look at Luciano.
"What?"
"Several things actually. You told me to gather gossip and
I have. Padruig Caimbeul has left Running Horse. He's in
Wolffgard. Todd Sinclair—for eighty years the sa'necari
believed him slain at Kinsdale Wood—he's alive and in
Wolffgard. He has a grandson, Kynyr Maguire, possibly the
greatest swordsmon the lycans have produced in over two
hundred years." Luciano's eyes narrowed. "So the Butchering
Serpent's cowardly myn shot him with poisoned arrows. They
don't know yet if Maguire will survive."
Dynanna's features went still. "Sinclair, Caimbeul, and the
last descendant of Dawnhand ... all in Wolffgard at the same
time. Hmmn." She sucked her left cheek in and thought for a
moment. "Can Lokynen be far behind?"
"The Battle-Master?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
239
"Yeah, that one. He was Todd's first mentor. Small world."
A cheeky grin spread across the Trickster's face. "Looks like I
got me a new bag of trouble to play with and I'm going to
make good use of it. Funsies!"
She snapped her fingers and a tall staff appeared in her
hands. She gave it to Luciano. "You're going to need this."
Luciano's eyes saucered. "But that's ... that's Sunrise."
"Yeah, I know. It has just been sitting in my hoard for the
past five hundred years gathering dust. Take good care of it."
"I thought the Obsidian Dragon had it..."
Dynanna chuckled. "The dragon came down with a bad
case of hives and while he was busy scratching his itch I stole
half his hoard. Last I heard, the old bugger was still
scratching. His wings are in tatters and he's got a bad case of
nervous exhaustion."
Luciano burst out laughing and hugged the staff. "I'll take
good care of it, My Lady."
"I bet you will. Be sure to tell any of the Faithful you
encounter on the way to Wolffgard that I'll be there soon and
I'm opening my armories."
Dynanna strode out to the wagons and gestured at the
children riding on hers. "Bodi, I got a mission for you and
Lilac."
Bodi jumped down and ran over to her. "A mission! I got a
mission."
He paraded around her in small circles, grinning.
Lilac gathered her skirts, climbed carefully to the ground,
and joined them. She patted her pouches and smiled at the
jingling coins. "What's the mission?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
240
"Spies," Dynanna hissed. "And a delivery. I heard that a
friend of yours is in Wolffgard. Todd Sinclair. He's gonna need
the stuff in the orange chest."
"Funsies!" Lilac squealed.
"You gonna loan us a carry ball?" Bodi stopped parading
and looked up at her.
"Can't. I loaned my spare to Luciano. You'll have to carry
it."
Bodi wiggled his eyebrows. "It's heavy."
Dynanna nodded. "Pieface, you get them to Wolffgard.
Take Sugar Maple along to help carry it. Once the delivery is
made, I want you and Sugar Maple back on the wagons,
pronto."
"Gotcha." Pieface snapped his fingers, his powers swirled
around the four children in shades of red and rose. Then they
all vanished.
* * * *
Kady settled into the chair by the bed, dipped a cloth into
a basin of cool water, and bathed Kynyr's sweat-drenched
face.
Kynyr moaned. His eyes opened, staring out into dimly lit
room. "Promised Kady ... I..."
"I'm here." She continued to dip the cloth into the water,
squeeze it out, and then stroke his face with it. "Kynyr, I'm
here."
"Promised Kady ... I would..." He clenched his eyes shut; a
grimace tightened his features as his body spasmed.
"Promised ... promised ... beat Cormic..."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
241
She tilted and inclined her head, lips parted in concern.
"Kynyr, look at me. I'm here. It's Kady."
"I found her ... Leeny."
"I'm not Leeny, I'm Kady. Please, Kynyr." Emotions rippled
through Kady striking her heart like riffles in the stream—
fear, desperation, and despair—making her voice tremble.
"Please, Kynyr..."
"Leeny ... she's ... beautiful." His words broke off in
another shuddering spasm.
"Who's Leeny?"
"His sister. Kathleen." Cahira had slipped into the room so
quietly that Kady had not known she was there until she
spoke. "Kynyr and Kathleen were very close as children. Even
though she was older by two years, Kynyr was always fiercely
protective of her. She was born with a cleft palate. It took me
years to fix it."
While she spoke, Cahira filled dosing glasses with poppy
milk, Holadil, and Pandeena's elixir called Idyn Gold. "Leeny
couldn't say certain words for many years. One of them was
her name. The letter K gave her a lot of trouble. She could
not say 'brother' properly either. Brother became Brubs and
she still calls him that. Kathleen became Leeny for the same
reason. Lift him up, Kady, so I can try to get the medicines
into him."
Kady moved from the chair to the side of the bed and
cradled Kynyr, supporting his head.
In fits and starts, Cahira filled Kynyr's mouth with the
medicine and stroked his throat to make him swallow. To

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
242
Kady, it seemed to take forever before Cahira finished and
they eased him back down onto the bed.
Kady sucked in a trembling breath and a tear came to her
eye.
Cahira noticed and squeezed Kady's shoulder. "The gods
won't let him die, Kady. They know we need him. Todd's too
old for another war. That's what we trained Kynyr for."
"He..." Kady swallowed. "He told me once ... that he
wanted to be my champion. I laughed at him. I thought he
was just having me on."
"Kynyr would never do that."
"I know that now. The night before he left for Hell's
Widow, he rescued me from Cormic Parry and his friends.
Kynyr promised to thrash Cormic as soon as he returned."
"Go to bed, Kady."
"I don't want to leave him."
"He'll sleep until morning. You need your rest. Tomorrow is
going to be a long day."
"But, Cahira..."
"No buts. Go to bed."
"Yes, mam."
"One last thing, Kady. Tomorrow Pandeena and I will be
warding all the minds in the household. We're dealing with
sa'necari and it never hurts to be cautious."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
243
CHAPTER TWELVE
FUNERAL
Heironim sat at his desk, drumming his fingers, his head
propped on his other hand. His four remaining sa'necari
lieutenants formed a half circle before the desk, sitting
uneasily in their chairs. Hell's Widow was only half a day's
ride from Red Wolf Valley. Dorjan and his units should have
been back the next morning at the latest.
"Where are they? They should have been back two days
ago."
Jondries, a spindleshanks of a mon, with a long, wispy
beard on the tip of his pointed chin, shifted uneasily in his
chair. His amaranthine eyes had just begun to lose their
whites, pupils, and irises to the genetic alteration of the rites.
"Could the bastard prince have taken a different way home?"
Heironim smashed his fist on the desk. "No. Not with a
wagon. Something has happened to them. Gather seven myn
and meet me at the lightning struck tree at the edge of
town."
Once they had assembled, Heironim and his band set off at
a good pace, not so fast that it would tire the horses, but
steady enough that they would reach the site where Dorjan
had been instructed to carry out his ambush while there was
still enough light to see with.
Crows circling above a stand of elms near the bend in the
road, drew them to a body that had bloated in the heat and

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
244
split the seams of its skin. Heironim rode close to it and
extended his necromantic senses in a low level scan before
dismounting. His eyes went distant, his body alert to all the
sounds and psychic scents around him. The area was
drenched in death and yet this was the only corpse he could
sense.
Heironim walked up and knelt beside the corpse. Maggots
swam in the liquefying flesh that soaked the body's livery with
rot. "It's one of ours. Where are the rest?"
"Maybe the lycans carried them off?" Jondries suggested,
his unguarded eyes glinting their true amaranthine colors.
"No." Heironim shook his head, rising to his feet. "They
would have burned the bodies here ... in the middle of the
road. Not taken them home to burn them."
As he walked into the middle of the road a bit of green
glass caught his eye near an oak tree and he walked in that
direction. He found three shattered bottles and one unbroken
one with a Dragonsbreath label.
Jondries reached for the bottle.
"Don't touch it, back away."
His aide withdrew, stepping into his own footprints.
Heironim knelt and placed his hands in a clear spot to
either side of the debris. His voice went hollow as he scanned
it. "The wagon overturned. A lycan died. Three lay dying." He
snapped out of his vision with a shriek. "Diviiiiiniiity! Bellocar
protect me! Wilderkin divinity. It slaughtered them. There
was a broad spectrum Jump. That's why there's nothing
here."
Jondries turned ashen. "Yuwenghau? Or one of the Nine?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
245
Heironim sucked in a deep breath to steady himself and
scanned again. "Yuwenghau. An extremely powerful one. I
must get word to Malthus."
"How?"
"I'll think of something."
* * * *
Malthus rolled over on his side and watched his wife
slipping her arms into the sleeves of a black dress. "Why
black? I don't like you in black. It makes you look pale."
"They're burying Eideard this afternoon. And I want to stop
off and find out how Kynyr is doing before going on to the
funeral."
"He was just a guardsmon, Merissa. There's no reason—"
She spun around on him, her eyes blazing as tears slid
down her cheeks. "Eideard was my friend. I knew him for
eight years. Show some compassion, Malthus."
"As you wish." He slid out of bed nude, still smelling of
sex, and helped her lace her dress up. "I'll have the wagon
hitched up and drive you there."
"I would appreciate it."
Malthus went to the closet and snatched a blue tunic and
brown trousers out.
Merissa's eyes widened. "Wear something black, for the
gods' sake. Show respect."
"I didn't know him well." Malthus threw the clothes on
their bed and dug back into the closet, coming out with a
black shirt, tunic, and pants. "Will this satisfy you?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
246
"What's wrong with you? Every time I open my mouth, you
snap at me."
"You're exaggerating. If you don't wish me to stay, I'll
leave."
Merissa's face twisted up. "Oh, Malthus, don't say that. I
love you. I'm just ... upset. I don't mean to take it out on
you."
He forced a smile and kissed her. "I am certain the past
few days have been hard on you. The attack upon Kynyr and
his companions has been hard on us all. You go on down and
wait for me in the Great Hall. I'll get dressed and have the
wagon readied."
* * * *
The shop sign said "closed," but black clad lycans were
coming and going as Malthus drove up to the front. He set the
break, tied the horses up, and walked around to Merissa. He
lifted her down and they went inside.
All of the cabinets and shelves had been draped in black
until nothing showed that it was a shop. A large table had
been moved into the center and piled with food. As the
bitches entered, they placed more food on the table that they
had brought. The taste of grief was in the air and Malthus
inhaled it like the bouquet of fine wine. His only regret was
that it was Eideard's funeral and not Kynyr's. He intended to
find out whatever he could while he was here and then head
for Hell's Widow at his first opportunity to talk to Heironim.
Something had gone wrong with the ambush and he needed

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
247
to find out just what it had been. The bastard prince should
have been dead.
There were eight cubs in the crowd, all solemn and quiet,
sticking close to their mothers. They all wore black traditional
robes. Malthus recognized three of them: Cooley, Rory, and
Hamish. That Sinclair cub was, supposedly, older than Rory,
but he was closer to Hamish in height. Compared to the other
cubs, Cooley was of exceptionally small stature and,
comparing him to them, piqued Malthus' curiosity.
Cooley pulled at his robe, muttering, "I want my trousers
back."
"Shh!" Rory gave him a scowl and an elbow in the ribs.
"It's a funeral."
"I been to them before and I didn't have to wear this
thing." He glanced around at the adults, all dressed as he
was.
"You sound like a damned city wolf. Stop it."
"I am a city wolf."
Malthus stared at Cooley, walked over, and squatted in
front of him. "You're a city wolf? I thought you were from
Three Stones."
Cooley gulped, backed up, and fled for the stairs.
"What did you do to frighten him?" Merissa disengaged
herself from a group of elderly bitches and put her hand on
his arm.
"I don't know."
"Well, come here. Some of the aunties want to meet you.
The dogs are having a drink in the upstairs parlor. There's
going to be a wake for Eideard at the Difficult Horse after the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
248
funeral. But it's dogs only. The bitches and cubs are coming
back here."
Malthus endured the fluttering attention of the elderly
bitches as long as he could stand it, and was about to
disengage himself and head upstairs to the parlor, when a
tiny blonde bitch made her way through the crowd and
stopped in front of him.
"Merissa." She greeted his wife with a stiff nod.
A tentative smile touched Merissa's lips. "Cahira, this is my
husband, Malthus Estrobian. Malthus, I would like you to
meet Cahira Sinclair, Kynyr's grandmother."
"Pleased to meet you. Your grandson is a brave mon."
Malthus took her hand, brought it to his lips, and attempted a
discreet scan. A sting of power struck him across the face.
Cahira scowled at him and jerked her hand back. "That's
not polite."
Merissa stared after her in shock. "Cahira is so odd."
"I'm going to go sit with the dogs."
Malthus went upstairs and glanced about. The loud talking
made it easy to tell where the parlor lay and the smells from
the kitchen established that it was next to the parlor.
Therefore, the rooms where the wounded lay had to be to his
left. Malthus walked past two doors and went into the third
room.
His lips curled in malevolent pleasure: he had gotten lucky
with his first try. Pale-faced and ill, Kynyr lay either sleeping
or unconscious—Malthus could not tell from the doorway—
with the sheet turned back to his waist because of the
summer heat. The windows were open to allow a breeze to

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
249
cool the room. Malthus closed the door behind him and
moved to the bedside. The hair had been shaved from Kynyr's
chest and stomach, and the neat catgut stitches holding him
together showed.
Belly wound? Or something else?
Malthus flicked the sheet back and gazed at the cross cut.
They opened him up to take his organs ... why isn't he dead?
Three needles with half-moon heads protruded from
Kynyr's left arm.
Inoculation?
Malthus drew one from Kynyr's arm and pocketed it before
placing two fingers on his chest to Read him. The poison had
made a mess of the bastard prince, as Malthus had known it
would. The new blend was much stronger than what he had
used on Nikko. It puzzled Malthus that Kynyr had not died
within an hour of being shot. He expanded his search of
Kynyr's bio-alchemy and sensed the traces of a countering
agent that Malthus could not identify. He had believed that
nothing less than the Sapphire Elixir of Idyn—which was
nearly impossible to acquire—could have counteracted his
new blend. Malthus decided to send the needle to his mother
to see if she and her bio-alchemists could identify what had
been used on it.
It would be a simple matter to finish Kynyr off, a small
thrust of power into his heart that would leave no residue,
and no one would be the wiser. Malthus inserted a needle of
darkest energy into Kynyr's body. The unconscious
guardsmon shuddered but did not waken. Malthus increased

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
250
the strength of his intrusion gradually, feeling Kynyr's
heartbeats turn irregular, struggling.
Almost done. Just a little bit more.
"What are you doing in here? Get away from him."
Malthus jerked his hand from Kynyr's chest, and turned to
see Kady Wiggins standing in the doorway. "As you wish.
We're old friends, you know."
"You certainly are not. You nearly came to blows in my
Dad's tavern often enough."
Kady Wiggins wore a shapeless black shirt and pants that
did little to conceal the finer points of her voluptuous body. A
broad leather belt cinched her waist. Two long fighting knives
hung from the belt, sheaths strapped to her thighs for an
easy pull. Malthus wondered what she was playing at dressed
like that. There was no possibility that anyone would assume
her to be a threat, considering how often her legs had been
forcibly opened. Malthus had heard various dogs bragging
about it.
"You're Hereward's daughter—the slut."
Malthus stalked toward her, expecting her to flee. Instead,
she stood her ground. His hand shot out. His fingers brushed
her cheek and he lunged for her mind only to slam up against
the strongest wards he had encountered in years. Malthus
knew he could break them, but it would take hours of
concentrated effort—hours he did not have right then.
Perhaps I should turn Preece loose on her. He'd enjoy that.
"Get out of here. The parlor is that way." Kady pointed
down the hall with a preemptory gestured. "Go on."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
251
"As you wish." Malthus headed for the parlor, having to
work to keep his pace calm. If Cahira had set that ward, then
she was stronger than any lycan mage he had yet
encountered—and he had killed several in his laboratories.
Baroucha might be right in insisting that Cahira was a threat
that should be removed.
Eideard's open coffin sat in the center of the parlor, grave
offerings spread across him. Malthus felt conspicuous as all
eyes turned toward him. The furniture had been moved back
along the walls where more than a dozen lycans spread
themselves across the chairs and the floor, while others stood
around or leaned against the walls. Six lycans stood lined up
at the coffin; one by one they left their grave gifts in the
coffin and bestowed the kiss of farewell on Eideard's cold
face. Cooley sat on the lap of a large, red-haired lycan of late
years. When the cub saw Malthus, he nestled deeper against
Todd Sinclair.
"He's here," Cooley murmured, pressing his face into
Todd's shoulder.
Malthus recognized some of the faces from having seen
them drinking at the Difficult Horse, however, they were not
wolves of his acquaintance, and he had no names to put with
the faces. He could almost taste the suspicion in the room
and knew that he needed to do something to turn matters
around before suspicion turned to anger and they all attacked
him simply for being the only non-lycan there.
He strode up to Todd, reached in his pocket and brought
out two gold coins. "Merissa and I would like to contribute to
the cost of the funeral and wake."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
252
"Ayup. Sure you would." Todd's eyes narrowed as he
tightened his arm around Cooley. "Your people killed him."
Malthus sucked in a breath as he saw several of the lycans
sprout fur. "My people?"
"You're human, aren't you?"
"Well ... yes."
"You've made no secret your sire was sa'necari."
"Where are you going with this?" Malthus' necromantic
senses reeled beneath the vibrations of rage filling the room.
"What has my father got to do with this?"
"Then your people killed him. Eideard never had a chance.
They shot him down in cold blood."
The mourners gathered around Todd and Malthus,
growling. Malthus saw that some of them had their blades
out. The two gold coins fell from Malthus' hand as he backed
towards the door.
Cooley whimpered. Todd patted the cub on the back.
"Quiet. The mutherin' Thomas is not going to bother you."
Todd threw the racial slur in Malthus' face without anger in
his tone.
"I had nothing to do with it."
"Ayup. That's what you all say. Liars all."
Malthus knew that they would be on him at any moment.
There were too many to fight. The lycans would rip him apart.
"What's going on here?" Caimbeul came through the door.
He was the only one in the room that matched Todd Sinclair
for size. The lawgiver's gaze swept the room, sized the
situation up in a flash, and he stepped between Malthus and
the others.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
253
"He's a human," a lycan snarled. "Humans killed Eideard."
Caimbeul fixed that one with a glance. "I know you, Ezra.
You work at the mill."
Ezra gave a quick nod. "Yup."
"So you want to kill this mon because he's human? Atreius
Ivanstern is downstairs, come to pay his respects. Are you
going to kill Atreius because he's human?"
"What's Atreius got ta do with it?"
"My point exactly. What's Malthus done besides being born
the wrong race?"
"But..."
Caimbeul shook his head at Ezra and then wagged his
finger at the room. "You know the law. Malthus was working
at the Sanctuary Refugee Camp when Eideard was attacked.
He was helping our people. His wife is downstairs. You all
know Merissa."
Todd cuddled Cooley and remained silent.
"Malthus has not broken our laws. He has as much right to
live in our village as anyone else. Let him be." Caimbeul
scanned the room. "If you still wish to kill him, then you'll
have to go through me."
First one and then another returned to their places around
the room. Caimbeul took Malthus by the arm and walked him
out the door. "Go downstairs and stay with your wife. They're
less likely to bother you with her at your side."
"My thanks."
"I don't need your thanks for doing my job, and I don't
want them either. I don't like you, Malthus. But until you
break our laws, there's nothing I can do to you. When you do,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
254
I'll be there. Count on it. You're going to get more trouble
than you can handle." Caimbeul turned and went back into
the parlor.
* * * *
From the doorway of the shop, Kady watched them load
Eideard's coffin into the back of a wagon and drape it with a
black cloth. Todd drove with Cahira and Cooley on the seat
beside him. It seemed as if the entire village had turned out
to follow the coffin to the little cemetery behind the
Willodarian Shrine. When the procession turned the corner
onto Main Street and passed out of Kady's sight, she closed
the door and locked it.
Kady went upstairs to the kitchen, checked the wood in the
stove, and set the kettle on the fire. She gathered the plates
and glasses from the parlor onto a wooden serving tray and
carried them back into the kitchen where she settled them
into a pan of water to soak. By then steam had begun to pour
from the kettle's spout. She filled a ball with tea, placed it in a
cup, and covered it with hot water.
Settling into a chair with her cup of tea, Kady sifted
through the events of the day and remembered chasing
Malthus out of Kynyr's room. Something strange had
happened or been about to happen. The way he had stood
there, bent over Kynyr with his fingers on the wounded mon's
chest, bothered Kady. It had looked—somehow—predatory.
Furthermore, she had sensed something indescribable that
felt like a gathering of ice in her stomach and a tickle of chill
along her arms. Kady had had feelings like that before, but

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
255
never known what to make of them. She resolved to discuss
those sensations with Cahira.
Abruptly, Kady abandoned her tea and went to check on
Kynyr, wanting to make certain that he was all right. She
intended to talk to Todd about Malthus' odd behavior. Kady
was just eighteen years old and had been waiting tables in
her father's tavern since she was twelve. She had enjoyed the
interaction with the young males who spent many a late
afternoon there; learned to be wary; yet never realized just
how much of their restraint toward her had come from her
father's protection—until he withdrew it.
Then she had discovered the rotting underside of lycan
society, the young wolves who did not care how they got their
bone into a young bitch, so long as they did. Where once she
had thought there was honor among her people, she began to
see fear and that fear made her weak.
"Fear only fear." Kady muttered one of the proverbs that
Todd was constantly shoving at her, and thrust her fear back.
"It'll be an icy day in high summer before I let another of
them part my legs."
Kady lit a lamp and went into Kynyr's room. His eyes were
open, staring into the gathering darkness. Her heart skipped
a beat. Kynyr was so pale and still that he looked dead. She
put the lamp on the nightstand and brushed her fingers along
his cheek, a lump forming in her throat.
Kynyr stirred at her touch, and tried to sit, only to fall back
on the bed.
Relief flooded her. She wanted to touch him, hold him, kiss
him, anything to reassure herself that her champion was

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
256
going to live. Kady pulled a chair up and settled into it,
stroking his face in touches as light as feathers.
His eyes glistened and his cheeks were wet. His voice was
harsh and raspy. "Kady?"
"Yeah, it's me." She squeezed his hand.
"I'm ... home?" His hand went to his chest, fingers curling
into a fist as he ground them into his muscles over his heart.
"I dreamed ... someone thrust a blade ... into my heart."
Kynyr paused between words with gasps, sucking air in jerky
pulls. "My chest ... hurts."
Malthus. Malthus hurt him. I know he did. But how? Kady's
gaze swept over the labels of the bottles clustered on the
night stand. "I'll get you something for it."
Kynyr's fingers drifted to the catgut stitches, an edge of
horror entering his voice. "They opened me up."
"Hush. Nothing's missing, Kynyr. They didn't get that far."
Her eyes softened with concern. Moving the bottles around,
Kady located the Fire Poppy milk and poured a measure into
the dosing glass as Cahira had shown her.
"How'd I ... get here?"
"Pandeena. She's a mage of some kind." She ran her
fingers through the wealth of ginger hair spread across the
pillow like a golden halo where the lamplight touched it,
combing the sweat-drenched locks away from Kynyr's face.
"They killed my friends ... Finn ... he could have got away,
but he came back for me. They shot him."
The grief in his voice, so thick and heavy, pounded the
strings of her heart like a hammer. "He's alive, Kynyr. Finn's
alive. So's Ramsey."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
257
"Eideard?"
"They buried him today."
The tears worsened and a long, keening note shivered
from Kynyr's throat so like the wild cousins that goose-
pimples broke out on Kady's arms. She moved to sit on the
edge of the bed, and cradled him like a child, his face pressed
against her breasts. His arms went around her waist and he
clung to her.
"It's my fault. It's my own damned fault."
"That's not what Todd says, Kynyr. You were outnumbered
six to one."
"I keep seeing them fall, Kady." A frantic note entered
Kynyr's voice. "I keep seeing them fall ... and there's nothing
I can do. Nothing at all. I was in command. I should have ...
gods help me."
"It's not your fault." Kady brought the glass of poppy milk
to Kynyr's lips. "That's the pain talking. I can see it in your
eyes. Drink this and you'll feel better."
Kynyr turned his head away, burying his face between her
breasts. "What is it?"
"Fire poppy."
"I don't want it."
The right corner of Kady's mouth twisted in annoyance.
"You're punishing yourself and that's wrong."
"It's my fault."
"I'm not going round and round with you about this,
Kynyr. Either drink this or I'm going to smack you silly."
Kynyr lifted an eyebrow. "Now you sound like the Dreaded
Horde."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
258
"The what?"
"My sisters ... and Finn's ... the Dreaded Horde. Bossy
bitches."
"Are you going to drink it? Or am I going to smack you?"
She poised a threatening hand where he could see it.
"I drink it." He favored her with a wan smile.
Kady put the glass to his lips again and this time he drank.
She disengaged his arms, gentle yet firm, and lowered him to
the bed, then straightened the sheets around him. Kady's
face came close to his and, impulsively, she kissed his lips in
a brief chaste brush.
Kynyr tangled his fingers in her hair as he began to feel
the drug. "You're beautiful."
"Don't be silly." Kady pulled away him. "Pandeena's
beautiful. I'm not."
"I love you, Kady. I want you."
She felt his forehead. "You're either feverish or it's the
poppy milk."
"Kiss me again. Please, Kady, kisssss..." His eyes closed as
the drug pulled him under.
She checked his vital signs and tucked him in better. Then
Kady kissed him on the forehead. "Silly male."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
259
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
A DAY OF CHANGES
Malthus rode north to keep his rendezvous with Egidius
and finalize his plans for destroying another section of Claw's
lands to satisfy his bargain with Brandrahoon. Eighty three
years ago, Malthus' paternal ancestor, Lord Carneades Iagaris
had destroyed the Lycan Rebellion of 997 and personally rited
Claw Redhand's twin sons, Logan and Tarrant, as part of an
elaborate execution in which more than a dozen lycan
chieftains and their sons perished. Thirty years ago, the
Sharani swept into Waejontor led by the Lionhawk of Danae
and, aided by lycan treacheries, overran three-quarters of the
realm over the space of roughly fifteen years. The surviving
sa'necari nobility had been driven into the remotest reaches
of the Eiralyskali Mountains.
Brandrahoon had promised Malthus the lands and titles of
his father, Lord Feodras Iagaris, in exchange for destroying
the Redhand family and subjugating Clan Red Wolf. Until his
meeting with Queen Tomyrilen and Lord Brandrahoon,
Malthus had never dreamed that what he felt was his due had
any hope of becoming a reality. Now he could almost taste it.
The elimination of Shaurone's lycan allies now entered its
final phases. The queen had agents insinuated in the villages
and lands of each of the Nine Great Clans and four of the
smaller ones. In every major city where lycans lived among
the humans and sa'necari, the queen's forces under

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
260
Brandrahoon were quietly rounding them up, and moving
them to detention centers located deep in the territories that
had been reclaimed from their Sharani occupiers.
After riding for two hours, Malthus caught a flash of orange
moving among the branches high above him. More and more
of his watchers began to come out of hiding. Imps scampered
through the brush and briars, through the trees on every side
of him, leaping like wizened orange-skinned monkeys. The
imp-warlord Gahni had worked with Malthus many times over
the years. Yet it had taken substantial promises of food, gold,
and booty to persuade Gahni to bring his people from the
West Bank of the Hillora to Waejontor.
By the time he reached the caves, Gahni would have sent
messengers on to Egidius' encampment about his approach,
and Egidius would be waiting at the caves for him.
The trees gave way steadily, thinning into a rocky fell. As
Malthus' horse topped the first treeless rise, he saw the
northern border of Claw's lands, the Place of Boulders. Huge
rocks, which had fallen from the mountains rising above it,
broke up the landscape like the remains of a giant's scattered
toys. It looked like a good place for an ambush and Malthus
rode cautiously through them.
He arrived at the caves, and dismounted. One cave, half-
concealed by an overhang of thick moss and brush, had two
stone tables in front of it: a bleeding table and a table for the
tools of the rites. A twelve-year-old lycan cub lay shackled to
the table on his belly. Malthus raised a speculative eyebrow
as he ran his fingers over the still warm corpse; grasped the
wealth of rufous hair now matted with blood and turned the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
261
dead cub's head to view its face. That one had been a fine
looking cub that would have brought a fair price at the slave
markets. A twist of irritation curled through Malthus. He
counted fifteen wounds in the cub's corpse and gritted his
teeth: of all the sa'necari under his current command, only
Egidius and Laetus practiced the esoteric form of mortgiefan
called the Fifteen Piercings.
Egidius emerged from the cave with a bottle of wine, which
he waved at Malthus. "It's a decent vintage for lycan
homebrew. Come inside and have some."
"That cub was worth at least two hundred gold. Don't
waste them." Malthus scowled at Egidius. "Furthermore, you
were supposed to wait for me to make my picks from the
newest batch of captives."
"I thought you were going to come sooner." Egidius placed
his bottle on the bleeding table beside the corpse's neck,
stuck his fingers into a large wound, and pulled them out
coated with the thick goo of congealing blood. He sucked the
blood off his fingers.
"I got away as soon as I could. I'm not as free now that
I'm living in the manor." Malthus watched Egidius repeatedly
sticking his fingers into the wounds and licking them off,
growing more and more irritated by his friend's insouciance.
Egidius leered. "Enjoying your bitch now that you've
married her?"
Malthus's stomach growled and he realized that he was
hungry. He imitated Egidius and began snacking on the
corpse's coagulating blood. The image of Merissa's nude
body, legs opened wide to receive him, flashed through

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
262
Malthus' mind, and mellowed his mood. "As a matter of fact, I
am. The chieftain wants a lycan heir so badly, that he has no
problem when I keep her on her back all day with her legs
spread."
Egidius shook his head, wiped his fingers on his pants leg,
and then ran his hands through his hair. "I still don't
understand why you'd want to marry one of them."
"You don't have to. It's my business, not yours. Anyway,
once she's ridden my stick long enough to swell, I'll have
more free time to come here." A wisp of fresh irritation
wafted through Malthus. Until Claw's health failed enough to
serve as a distraction, Malthus did not dare to use his gifts on
Merissa, and as a result it appeared to be taking longer to
quicken her womb than it had the others. If it did not happen
soon, Malthus intended to write his mother and ask for her
advice.
"And if the child is sa'necari? They'll know what you are
then."
Malthus gave Egidius a long, languid smile. "I'll mask the
genes."
Egidius lifted an eyebrow. "Can you do that?"
"You have no idea what I can do, Egidius," Malthus replied.
"I have stolen several major legacies in the rites."
"Legacies! Which ones?"
Malthus waved a finger at Egidius. "You don't need to
know that. Many legacies that are believed to have perished
with King Baaltrystan when the palace collapsed didn't. They
ended on my altar at Carrion Crevasse."
"Sometimes you frighten me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
263
Malthus laughed and clapped him on the back. "That's as it
should be. Now, about the females. Have you let our soldiers
enjoy them?"
"Some of them have been raped so often, they spend all
the rest of the time curled into whimpering balls."
"Have any of them caught?" Malthus walked toward the
cave, thirsty for blood as his fangs descended from their
sheaths.
Egidius followed him. "A few."
"Good. Send those to my estate."
"What are you going to do with them?"
Malthus laughed again. "I'm going to do what Waejonan
failed to. I intend to establish a breeding program to reduce
the race to something akin to the nibari. I'll want a few
males, but not many. And I want them all young like the one
you rited. No adult males. They're too much trouble to
break."
"The only way that we're going to fill your larder is to start
taking villages. Shall I send word for Laetus to attack?"
"Yes. I want all the adult males killed. That includes
striplings. The only male cubs I want are age seven and
under. Beyond that, what you do with your share of the
harvest is your business. Drain them for the bottles.
"Another thing, Mother says that the market for organs
has increased. Especially for testes and hearts. Box up the
testes, hearts, kidneys, and livers. There's a rumor that some
of the divinators are interested in dried lycan spleens and
willing to pay a fair price for them. So toss in a few and we'll
see how they sell. Remember all of it has to come from un-

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
264
rited bodies. The rites destroy the bio-alchemical properties
that make the organs valuable."
"I know that. How much of a cut am I getting from the
profits?"
"Fifteen percent. Mother's taking half since she's doing the
processing and distribution."
Malthus sauntered into the cave. It had been turned into a
dwelling place long before Malthus and his comrades found it.
Cabinets stood along one wall, and a table and chairs sat in
the middle of the first chamber. Beyond a wasp-waisted
connection, a second, larger chamber opened with beds and
several chests in it.
He had thought of this as his brother's cave since finding
confirmation here that Troyes was dead. Malthus had found
bottles of Troyes' blood, his blades, and the family crest he
had worn in the cabinets. Troyes, his father's legitimate son,
had been the only member of Malthus' paternal family that he
had even come close to liking. Isranon murdered him and
drained his body for the bottles. Once he had matters well in
hand, he would kill Darmyk, and send pieces of the boy to
Isranon—let him weep for his son as Malthus had for his
brother, Ros and Lyrri's father.
He took pen and paper from the cabinet and sat down at
the table. "Meet me halfway between Wolffgard and here in
two weeks. I need to get my concubines safely to my manor.
I'll mask all the genetics at my soonest opportunity, so don't
question when I send you a pregnant woman, just get her
there. Don't question whether the child they're carrying

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
265
appears to be sa'necari or not, because you won't be able to
tell."
"So they all bred true?" Egidius sat down opposite to him.
Malthus' eyes brightened with a smirk spreading across his
face. "Indeed, yes. Four sa'necari children for me. There's
another one coming, but she's in Hell's Widow. Heironim will
be moving her to my estate in a few more weeks."
"I don't see how you can be so fertile." Egidius' eyed
Malthus speculatively.
"Ask my mother. It's her doing." Then Malthus chuckled. "I
have the fertility of a thirteen-year-old."
"Impressive. It's been four years since I was last able to
make a child, and I'm seven years younger than you."
Malthus saw a flash of envy in Egidius' eyes. "Talk to my
mother next time you see her. She might be able to help you,
if you're not too far progressed ... if your cods aren't
completely withered. However, I warn you, it will be
expensive and rather uncomfortable at times."
"To be able to get more children—it would be worth it."
"Indeed." Malthus gave Egidius' hand a squeeze. "Now,
back to business. Get Laetus moving, and wait for me to send
you word, or come myself to arrange for the females to be
moved."
"What about the chieftain? Are you still planning on leaving
him until last?"
Malthus chuckled darkly. "He developed heart problems
the day of the wedding."
Egidius grinned. "How convenient. You always go to the
heart of the matter."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
266
Malthus poked Egidius in the chest over his heart. "It's my
favorite target. I have another target that is just as
important. Longbranch. There's a family there that must be
exterminated down to the smallest infant."
"Which one?"
"The Maguires ... and to be safe, the Sinclairs also."
"Why?"
"They're a bastard branch of the Redhands. Branduff
Maguire is Tarrant Redhand's bastard son. He's a school
teacher. Kill him first."
Egidius stroked his goatee. "Three Stones would have to
be eliminated first. Longbranch is half a day's ride south of it.
Laetus is over there now. I'll send word to him."
* * * *
Caimbeul sensed the undercurrents of trouble in Wolffgard
without being able to put his finger upon it. Rumors of rapes
and murders on the back roads leading into Wolffgard, but no
bodies had been found and no complaints had been filed. The
ambush of Kynyr had bothered him deeply, knowing as only a
handful did, that Kynyr was—son of a bastard or not—the
rightful prince of Red Wolf. The coincidence—of having all but
one of the surviving people who had been close to Cahira
Maguire Sinclair during the time that she had been pregnant
by Tarrant Redhand—in Wolffgard at the same time stank of
fate, or karma as the Creeyans called it. The only one who
had not yet shown up was Sheradyn, Cahira's mentor.
Sheradyn lived in Blue Rock Village to the southeast of
Wolffgard with his much younger lover, Gillivray. Caimbeul

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
267
felt tempted to ride down to Blue Rock and talk to Sheradyn,
but shelved it. An itch along his spine kept telling him that,
sooner or later, Sheradyn would come to Wolffgard.
He had postponed checking out the refugee camp; because
he wanted to avoid encountering Pandeena until he felt more
prepared to deal with her—and with his own feelings
concerning her. Except for the day of the funeral, people in
the village had little to say about Malthus; although they were
critical of his choice of companions. Kynyr Maguire figured
more and more in Caimbeul's contemplations. According to
Odhran, Kynyr had regained consciousness four nights ago.
His Training and experience as a lawgiver had driven his
jealousy of Kynyr from his mind the moment that he learned
of the ambush. Caimbeul's instincts kicked in and focused on
Kynyr. There was bad blood between Kynyr and Malthus that
seemed to center around Merissa. Although Malthus' alibi was
iron clad, that did not mean he had had nothing to do with
the ambush—or the riot. Two attempts had been made on
Kynyr's life. Five people currently living in Wolffgard knew the
truth about his ancestry. One of them had no reason to keep
that secret and every reason to want to harm the Maguire
family: Baroucha Seaver.
Caimbeul stepped into Cahira's shop, wondering how he
might establish a connection between Baroucha and
Malthus—assuming one existed. Nikko had done everything
himself, and therefore Caimbeul found himself without
servants, deputies, and other assistants. It would take time to
set up and he had a feeling in his gut that he needed to know
more about the people of Wolffgard before he recruited

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
268
anyone. Caimbeul did not yet know who to trust, who was,
and who was not connected to Malthus.
Kady Wiggins sat at the table in the rear, totaling up a
customer's purchases on a counting board. "Lawgiver, I'll be
with you in just a moment."
"Is Todd around?"
"Third floor. The salle. Go on up."
Caimbeul headed for the door into the hallway when Rory,
Hamish, and Cooley rushed in from the back. The heels on
Cooley's new riding boots clicked smartly on the floor. The
three cubs' eyes sparkled with mischief. Caimbeul had heard
Rory described as the penultimate village sneak and an idea
occurred to him. Cubs loved secrets and conspiracies. They
played the Great Game with a verve and devotion seldom
matched by their elders.
He crooked his finger at the cubs. "Rory."
"I'm not in trouble, am I?" Rory asked, following Caimbeul
into the hallway.
Caimbeul took a ten penny piece from his pocket and
waved it in Rory's face. "I hear you're a sneak and a good
one."
"Yeah." Rory eyed that coin hungrily.
Hamish and Cooley stood in the doorway, watching in
silence.
"I need a spy. In fact, I need several. How would you like
to become my spymaster?"
"Oooooh." A big grin lit Rory's mud splashed face. "Can my
friends help?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
269
"Can they keep secrets?" Caimbeul whispered to him just
loud enough to carry to Hamish and Cooley.
"Yes."
"You may have this to start. Come to the Lawgiver House
after dinner and I'll tell you how to earn money. Agreed?"
Rory nodded.
"You mustn't tell any of the adults why you're coming. Tell
them, I'm paying you to help around the place."
Rory held up his crossed fingers and made a circular
motion in what cubs called the Moon's Promise.
"I'll see you then."
Caimbeul headed for the stairs at the end of the hallway
that folded upward. He climbed to the second floor and
glanced down the hall toward the bedrooms to his left,
repressing an urge to speak with Kynyr first. Cahira's voice
drifted from the kitchen, talking to someone that Caimbeul
could not identify. He turned and climbed to the third floor.
There he found a short hall with three doors. Opening the first
door on his right, he stepped into the salle.
Half of the far end was covered in mats. Caimbeul had
never practiced the Creeyan arts, but he recognized the
movements as Todd worked through his forms with an axe in
one hand and a broadsword in the other. Bare to the waist,
massive scars showed on Todd's chest and mid-section. Few
things could scar a lycan, but it looked as if Todd must have
encountered most of them—and lived to speak of it.
Todd's eyes brushed Caimbeul and he continued without
missing a beat. "Lawgiver."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
270
Caimbeul sauntered over to the table and sat down. A
bottle of whiskey and four glasses sat in the middle. Caimbeul
picked up a glass, examined it with a critical eye, and wiped it
out with his shirt sleeve. Satisfied, he poured himself a double
measure.
"I want to talk to Kynyr. But first I want to talk to you."
Todd stepped off the mat, bowed to it, and returned his
weapons to the rack near the door. "I've been expecting you."
"Last time I was here, Cahira explained her reasons to me.
Under the circumstances, I decided not to argue."
"Ayup. I appreciate that." Todd settled into the chair
opposite Caimbeul, poured himself a glass, and leaned back.
"Say what you got to say."
"How many people know about Kynyr?"
"More than I'd like."
"That doesn't answer the question."
Todd's bushy red eyebrows knit. "Cahira, Pandeena,
yourself, Baroucha, Sheradyn. Bran's family, obviously.
Kynyr's his only son. Ulicia's pregnant again. Due in a few
weeks. My daughter-in-law insists it's a boy. That'll make two
of them."
"Your daughter-in-law?"
"Mary, Trevor's wife. Ulicia is Kynyr's mother."
"You've got a large family. Any chance one of them could
have leaked it?"
"Nope. They all know about the curse."
Caimbeul exhaled heavily, rubbing his forefinger under his
nose. "I don't believe in the curse. I think Alistar was
hallucinating ... the pain put him out of his mind. I don't think

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
271
he could have cursed anyone with that spike in his belly. You
used runed silver, didn't you?"
"Ayup. Nastiest runes Roarc O'Shea could charge."
"Roarc etched them too?"
"Ayup."
"That proves my point. Alistar Weems died in too much
pain to have laid a curse."
"You're wrong, Padruig. You didn't hear him. I did."
Caimbeul downed his whiskey, poured a second double,
and folded his arms. "That doesn't agree with what I
remember of that night. You and Tarrant came back directly.
I know. I followed you. I watched you put that spike in
Weems' belly. I heard the way he screamed."
"Asshole. You should have said something."
"Why? Had I spoken up, people would have asked why I
didn't stop you. Tarrant not withstanding, what you did was
outside the law."
"Then why the hell didn't you stop us?"
Caimbeul threw his head back and stared at the ceiling for
several breaths before looking at Todd again. "Weems
deserved it."
* * * *
Merissa sat watching the children playing in the garden,
with her hands in her lap. Her gaze stole to the wedding arch.
She knew that she should order it taken down, so that
Malthus could make the rounds of the taverns and exercise
his bragging rights. Merissa didn't want to tell him yet. Some
part of her kept holding off. She had recognized the first tiny

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
272
changes in her body the moment they began, and knew from
her previous pregnancy what it meant. Merissa had never
expected to become pregnant so soon. She was not certain
why she kept holding back.
"Merissa," Claw's voice came from behind her.
She swiveled on the bench. "Father."
"He spends a lot of time hunting, that husband of yours,"
Claw growled.
Malthus had gone hunting two days ago to provide meat
for the sanctuary as he had been doing frequently since late
last spring. Shalto, who worked at the sanctuary, had stopped
by to inform Malthus of the need and off they went. Merissa
always felt relieved when her husband left for a few days,
because he kept her on her back with her legs open more
often than not when he was home. Since the day of the
wedding, his work for the sanctuary and his trips to Hell's
Widow had become the only thing that gave her time to
herself, time to be with Darmyk. Maybe that would change
once he knew his efforts had proved fruitful.
"He still provides for the sanctuary, father," Merissa
responded. "He feels responsible for them. He's a good mon."
"He should be here. He has other responsibilities," Claw
grumbled.
Knowing what her father referred to, Merissa glanced at
the arch and then stared at her hands. "Take the arch down,
father."
Claw's face lit, and he pulled her into his arms for an
awkward hug. "So he's done his job. I have another grandcub
on its way."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
273
She stirred uneasily. Ever since the letter from Nevin
stating that Isranon had repudiated Darmyk and called her a
slut, her father had been trying to be more comforting and
affectionate with her, as if to fill the emotional gap in her life
and relieve some of her pain. She hadn't told anyone that she
still cried over that letter. "Yes, father."
"Shall I send for Baroucha?"
Merissa pushed away from him, shaking her head. "I don't
like Baroucha." She shivered, remembering how hard
Baroucha had pushed for her to abort Darmyk, and how the
healer had threatened to poison Isranon. "I'd rather you sent
for Sheradyn. He attended me while I carried Darmyk. I'm
sure granny can spare him."
Claw kissed her forehead. "Whatever you wish. Now go in
and tell your mother. I'll get that arch down, so your mon will
know his efforts have been victorious."
Merissa gave a demure nod, and headed into the manor.
She found Aisha at her loom, weaving a bright pattern into
the cloth. Fianait settled her skirts into place as she returned
to her loom. She needed to get out her old maternity clothes
and see what shape they were in. Merissa had become
depressed during the final months of carrying Darmyk, crying
over the fact that she would probably never see his father
again, and as a result wore mainly dark unflattering colors
until a year after Darmyk's birth. Malthus would expect her to
dress better than that while carrying his child. She would
need to have their nibari start stitching for her.
Robert Morcar sat near the door, carving a toy soldier from
a block of pine for Darmyk. The dark wolf watched her from

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
274
the corners of his eyes. Merissa felt suddenly conspicuous.
There was always a guardsmon in the Great Hall with them,
in the gardens with them, wherever they were there was a
guardsmon, as if her father feared that the enemy would
burst through the doors at any minute. The attack on Kynyr
had only made matters worse. Searlait made a game of
sneaking off to be alone in the mornings, and so far, no one
had discovered where she went. Merissa suspected that Kynyr
knew where she went, because he always vanished from the
manor shortly after Searlait did. She wondered who—if
anyone—was watching over her since Kynyr's wounding.
Kynyr had always been so devoted to her family—maybe if
her father had not kept pushing Kynyr at her ... She shook
herself loose from those thoughts. She was married now and
it was too late for such regrets.
Merissa drew a chair up so that she could sit behind her
mother, and sucked in a fortifying breath. "Mother, I'm—I'm
pregnant."
Aisha laid her shuttle down and pushed her seat back,
studying her daughter. "You don't look happy."
Merissa looked away, wondering why it was so hard for her
to meet the eyes of the people who loved her. "Malthus will
be very happy. Father is."
"What about you?"
"I'm happy. Really, I am. It's just—for some reason I want
to cry, and keep crying."
"That's normal," said Aunt Fianait. "You're young. You'll
get over it."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
275
Merissa, feeling strangely uneasy, bit back a retort as to
what Fianait would know about bearing cubs—considering
that Fianait had measured every dog wolf against her twin,
Brock, found them lacking, and remained an old maid.
Aisha gave Fianait a silencing look, and turned to her
daughter. "How long have you known?"
"Two weeks."
Aisha looked thoughtful. "Your husband is a potent male.
That's good."
Going so long between children had been nice, Merissa
thought. However, from the way that Malthus spoke to her, it
sounded as if he intended to give her no time between
pregnancies.
"At least this one will probably be lycan," said Searlait
gently. "And that should please everyone, Merissa."
Merissa contemplated her hands, her fingers twined over
her stomach. "Yes, it should." She turned to Morcar in an
attempt to change the subject. "When will Kynyr, Finn, and
Ramsey be back?"
Morcar stirred in his chair near the window. "Cahira says
Kynyr can come home in a week or two, if he takes it easy.
Finn ... a little bit longer than that. Ramsey? Well, Cahira's
not certain. He's still pretty sick."
Merissa's expression turned pensive. "Devil's Silver is a
hellish thing."
"Tell me about it," Morcar said with uncharacteristic
bitterness. "I thought they were all going to die."
"Haven't you been going to see them?" Fianait glanced
around the loom at her.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
276
"Not since the funeral." A flush lit Merissa's cheeks as if in
shame.
"Why not?"
Morcar set his whittling aside and leaned forward in his
chair, sour speculation in his eyes as he waited for Merissa to
answer Fianait's question.
"Malthus forbids it. He—he had a bit of trouble with Todd."
"What kind? Todd doesn't snap at throats without reason."
"Malthus refused to say." Merissa wrung her hands.
"If you'd like, I can ask Todd about it. I play checkers with
Kynyr in the evenings."
Merissa responded with a tiny nod and then bolted from
the room.
* * * *
Caimbeul entered Kynyr's room quietly, started to speak,
and fell silent staring at him. Kynyr lay dozing, nude, the
sheet pulled over his good leg and a twisted corner covering
his loins. Sunlight streaming through the open window,
accompanied by a pleasant breeze, lit the angles of Kynyr's
face and glistened on his hair. Caimbeul rubbed his eyes and
looked again, disturbed by Kynyr's uncanny resemblance to
Tarrant Redhand. No wonder Pandeena wanted the young
wolf in her bed.
Closing the door without making a sound, Caimbeul went
to the bed and sat down in the chair beside it. He winced at
the neat rows of stitches that made a long cross on Kynyr's
belly. No one had told him to expect this; only that Kynyr had
been shot.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
277
He sucked in a breath and said softly, "Kynyr?"
Kynyr Maguire opened his eyes, blinking to clear the sleep
from them.
"I'm Padruig Caimbeul, the new lawgiver."
"Of Running Horse?" Kynyr pushed himself up into a sitting
position. Caimbeul snagged a couple of pillows from the foot
of the bed, shoved them to Kynyr's back, and helped him
settle comfortably.
"The same."
"I've heard of you."
"Lot of folks have." Caimbeul shrugged. "I need to ask you
some questions about what happened."
Kynyr looked uncertain. "The ambush?"
"And what happened in Hell's Widow leading up to it."
"I run errands for Aisha."
Caimbeul's eyes narrowed to slits and he shook his head.
"Uh uh. A wagon load of groceries didn't bring the sa'necari
down on you. What were you doing in Hell's Widow?"
"A private matter..."
"For the clan? Maybe concerning Cullen?"
Kynyr squirmed.
"I'm your lawgiver, damnit Kynyr. I can't investigate
something if people start holding back on me. There have
been two attempts made on your life ... and from the look of
those stitches this last one nearly succeeded. Are there parts
missing?"
Caimbeul snatched the sheet away from Kynyr and glanced
at his genitals with a frown.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
278
Kynyr flushed and snatched the sheet back, covering
himself. The movement sent a grimace of pain across his
features. "Nothing's missing."
"Hurting?"
"Yeah."
Caimbeul found the dosing glass and the poppy milk. He
poured two fingers of the thick whitish liquid into the glass
and extended it to Kynyr.
"Four fingers."
"No. Two should take the edge off. I don't want you dozing
off before you've answered my questions."
Kynyr heaved a sigh and drank the drug. "You're right
about Cullen. Claw sent me in to talk to a prostitute who was
there when the Butchering Serpent killed Cullen."
"The Serpent?" Caimbeul leaned closer, took the glass
from Kynyr's hand, and put it on the nightstand after pouring
a single finger of the drug into the glass.
"You're going to let me hurt ... just to get your answers?"
"If you force me to." A weary edge crept into Caimbeul's
voice.
"Todd..."
"Isn't going to cross me. I could drag him in on three
charges of murder, put him to the question, and make it
stick. There's no expiration on charges of murder."
The color faded from Kynyr's already pale face. "You
can't..."
"Try me."
"What do you want to know?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
279
"Start from the beginning. How did you know about the
prostitute?"
Kynyr gestured at a chest standing beneath a window
wedged between a wardrobe and a table. "There's a small
brown casket inside. Bring it to me."
Caimbeul fetched the casket and gave it to Kynyr. The
guardsmon put the box on his good knee, touched the lock,
and spoke a single word. Caimbeul's eyebrow lifted. "Mage
locked?"
"Yes."
"What's in it?"
"Mostly ... my grandfather's letters to Gram. His diaries.
Gram gave them to me. My ace in the hole if matters got so
ugly that I needed to prove who I was." He shifted the papers
around and brought out a single folded letter along with a
ring. Kynyr gave those to Caimbeul.
"Proof that you're Tarrant's..."
"Grandson."
Caimbeul examined the ring. Two snakes intertwined,
noses touching, wrought of white gold and kendaryl with
glittering hematite eyes. "That's Cullen's."
"It came with the letter and his horse, Larkspur."
"He gave you his horse?"
"Willed her to me. I gave her to Cooley two days ago."
"Why?"
"Cooley's his son."
"You've been keeping that under wraps. Why?"
"Read the letter. Can I have that glass now? I feel like my
leg's on fire."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
280
Caimbeul passed the glass to Kynyr and unfolded the
letter.
Dear Kynyr Maguire.
Cullen trusted you. So I am trusting you. By now you must
know, or at least suspect, that Cullen is dead. They forced me
to watch him die. The sa'necari have returned to Hell's
Widow. I am trusting you with our child and my secret so that
you will understand why I do not dare go to the garrison with
this. You know me as Silkie Faggini. I was born Silkanna
Mircala de Waejonan. Get word to the garrison, but do not tell
them how you know. And, I beg you. Take care of our child.
Cooley is no longer safe in Hell's Widow.
Sincerely,
Silkie
"Did you go to the garrison?"
"No. Claw says it's clan business and he doesn't want the
Sharani Garrison sticking their noses into it."
"Sounds like Claw."
"Silkie knows the name of one of the sa'necari who killed
Cullen."
"The Serpent?"
"His lieutenant. She's offered to give me the name if I can
find a way to get her out of Hell's Widow." Kynyr told
Caimbeul everything that had happened in Hell's Widow,
everything that Silkie had told him, and everything that he
suspected.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
281
Claw was breathing heavily by the time he wrestled one
side of the arch from the ground. It twisted in his hands and
he hesitated, knowing that it was considered bad luck if the
arch broke being removed. A sharp pain lanced through his
chest and he staggered back. The arch swayed and started to
topple on one side. Claw darted forward, caught it, and then
leaned his head against it fighting a wave of dizziness. The
pain, dizziness, and shortness of breath had become more
frequent since he first experienced it on Merissa's wedding
day.
"Let us help you, Claw," said Belgair.
Claw glanced up and saw the captain of his guardsmyn and
Odhran coming toward him. He straightened in an effort to
mask his difficulty. The two younger myn reached him and
took the arch from his hands.
"Where do you want it? The storage room?" Belgair asked.
"Yes." Claw felt grateful that they had not remarked on his
momentary weakness. "Can you handle it without me?"
"Malthus got his job done fast." Odhran sounded
appreciative as they carried the arch back to the manor.
"We'll have a true prince this time," said Belgair.
Claw did not answer. He loved his grandson, but the
chieftain had known from the outset that his people would
never allow Darmyk to inherit because he was born sa'necari.
They would only accept a lycan as the next chieftain.
He left them to their work, and went inside to rest in his
big chair in the Great Hall. His sisters and Aisha were gone,
fussing over Merissa most likely, and he was alone. Claw
stuffed his favorite pipe, a chunky long-stemmed pipe with a

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
282
large bowl, lit it with a lucifer, and settled back to smoke and
rest. The dizziness lingered, and he felt as if he could not hold
his eyes open, and was being propelled into sleep. Claw
resisted that, managing to get a few more puffs on his pipe
before it became apparent that he was losing his battle, and
put the pipe aside.
Rest. I just need to rest a bit.
Pain lanced through the old wolf's chest and he blacked
out, his head falling limp against the back of the chair.
* * * *
Kynyr settled into his pillows as Kady gathered the empty
dinner dishes and glass from the bed table and sat them on a
dresser. The feistiness, that had characterized her behavior in
the tavern before Hereward had withdrawn his protection,
had begun to return and he saw Todd's hand in that. When
Kady had told him about Todd throwing Gorgarty out, her
face had glowed. Kynyr wished that glow had been for him.
Todd had renewed Kady's sense of security. Had he not been
ambushed, Kynyr had intended to bust heads as soon as he
returned from Hell's Widow and see that no one touched Kady
against her will again.
She had sat in the chair, fussing at him and over him while
he ate, making certain that he did not leave so much as a tiny
bite in the bowl. Her flaxen hair bloused around her face like
a halo and she dressed like a Battle-Clan apprentice, which
led him to suspect that she had begun training with Todd.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
283
"Would you like some pie, Kynyr? Strawberry pie? I baked
it myself." She smiled at him with a fond eagerness to please
that tickled Kynyr.
"I couldn't eat another bite. Maybe later?" He resisted an
impulse to take her hand and kiss her fingers. A fragile wisp
of memory hinted at a shared kiss and haunted the edges of
his mind in a way that he could not quite trust.
"If you want we could play cards?"
"I just want to sleep, Kady. Thank you."
Kady left after dosing Kynyr for pain and he fell asleep,
only to awaken in the middle of the night to the honeysuckle
smell of magic in the room. Pandeena stood in the darkness,
wearing a robe of some fabric—he could not identify it—that
clung to her body so closely that he could make out the points
of her nipples. The female musk of her arousal filled his
nostrils with an erotic scent that went straight to his loins.
"Pan—Pandeena?"
"I want you, Kynyr." Pandeena purred, opening her robe,
revealing her nude body. "I've wanted you for months."
Kynyr's lips parted and he inhaled sharply. He had
fantasized in a casual way about having sex with her. All of
his friends had also at one time or another—it was impossible
not to: Pandeena was the most beautiful bitch in Wolffgard.
However, the beating she had administered to Shalto and
Oswyl had convinced them all that it was best to let her do
the choosing, make the first move.
She dropped her robe and slithered between the sheets
with him, running her finger lightly along his chest and belly,
avoiding the stitches.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
284
Her touch sent need shivering through him, raising the hair
on his body like a kiss of lightning. He tangled his fingers in
her golden hair, brought her head close to his, and parted her
lips with his own. Kynyr's tongue darted into her mouth,
questing and twining with hers.
Pandeena eased him onto his side while his hands
cherished her breasts with tender attentions. She draped one
leg across him, reached down to his cock bobbing against her
clit, and guided him inside her.
Kynyr closed his eyes and sucked air with a low moan. The
first twinges of pain threatened as he moved his pelvis to
thrust deeper into her. Pandeena sensed it, slipping one hand
beneath him and other over him to grasp and support his
buttocks.
"Relax, sweetheart. I'll do the work."
The walls of her vagina tightened, sucking at his hardness
as she wiggled her pelvis, sliding her female parts up and
down him.
Kynyr's seed spilled into her in shuddering spurts. He
pushed away from her and lay back on the bed, a glaze of
pain in his eyes.
"You're hurting again."
"Yeah."
"I'm sorry. I didn't help matters, did I?"
Kynyr managed a little smile. "It was good."
"I love you, Kynyr." She brushed his sweat-drenched hair
back.
"Pandeena, you're beautiful, but..."
"You don't love me?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
285
"Not that way."
"There's someone else?"
Kynyr's eyes went distant as he thought of Kady Wiggins.
"Maybe. I don't know yet."
"Can we be like the wild cousins for the time being?"
"I think so." His thoughts drifted to Kady again. After all
she had been through; she did not need him chasing her.
"Yeah. I'd like that."
* * * *
Cahira sat at the kitchen table sipping tea and enjoying a
hot, buttered scone fresh from the oven. The past week had
been difficult, but thanks to Kady, not impossible. Kady was
the first one up in the mornings and the last to go to bed at
night. Every morning since Kady's arrival in her household,
Cahira had awakened to the smell of baking bread. Kady
made breakfast for Cooley, packed him a lunch, and sent him
off to the Manor where the cub worked each morning for
Georgie Rogan, Claw's head ostler. She also made first
rounds of the three wounded, got the various medicines down
them before Cahira woke. The six beds in the new infirmary
were Kady's doing. The young bitch had gone directly to Aisha
Redhand, with Rory in tow—at Todd's insistence, she never
went anywhere alone—and persuaded Aisha to donate them.
The aged lycan mage decided that Kady was the best thing
that had happened to her household in a long time.
Her pleasant musings were interrupted by Kady who
plunged into the kitchen with a worried look on her face.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
286
"Cahira, come quick! Ramsey's forehead is hot as an oven.
I've done everything I could think of and it's not working.
Erskine's with him."
Cahira came to her feet fast, pushed past Kady, and ran
for the infirmary with Kady close behind her.
Finn had the bed closest to the door and he sat up as they
came inside. Kady saw that and veered to his side, shoved
pillows to his back and headed for Ramsey.
Ramsey lay shivering and coated in cold sweat although
his eyes were bright with fever and his face flushed. The
whites of his eyes had a yellow cast that bothered Cahira
even more than the rest of the symptoms.
Erskine sat beside the bed on the far side, gripping
Ramsey's hand, squeezing and rubbing the back of it from
time to time.
Cahira slipped into a chair, grasped Ramsey's clammy
wrist, closed her eyes to concentrate and Read him. The color
fled from her face, a wan, sad smile spread across her lips.
"I'm sorry, Ramsey. I'm so sorry."
"How bad?" Ramsey's voice was hoarse and rasping.
"Cahira ... how bad?"
She dropped her gaze and stared off at the edge of the
bed, mastered her reticence and looked him in the eyes.
"Gangrene. The internal kind. It's spread all through you."
Ramsey's eyes hooded until only a slit showed as he
digested his death sentence. "How much ... time do I ...
have?"
"A few days."
"I want ... talk to Kynyr."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
287
"What about your family? Are they coming?"
Ramsey swallowed, and glanced at Erskine. "No."
"Do you want to see them?" Cahira asked in the kindest
tone she had.
"I'd like to ... see Ma ... again."
Cahira pinned Erskine with a glance. "Who talked to
them?"
"I did. Ramsey's asshole brother won't let them come."
"Erskine, you go right now and tell Aisha about Ramsey's
condition and his family. Tell her that he wants to see his
mother. If I know Aisha, she'll have them here before
sundown."
Erskine looked discomfited. "Mind if I say you sent me to
her?"
"Tell Aisha anything you like. Tell her to talk to me if she
has a problem."
"Will do." Erskine squeezed Ramsey's shoulder. "I'll be
back in a bit, brother."
Erskine strode from the infirmary and closed the door
behind him.
Cahira turned to Kady next. "Four fingers of Pollendine as
needed, but no more than once every two hours. Three
fingers of Holadil increase to four times a day."
Kady filled the dosing glasses and helped Ramsey to sit
long enough to drink them down. Then she lowered him to
the bed.
Cahira rose and gestured for Kady to follow her out into
the hall.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
288
"Tell Todd he needs to sit with Ramsey, then take Rory
and go to Claw. Ask him to release several of Ramsey's
friends from duty to sit the death watch."
Kady nodded, blinking back tears, and left.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
289
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WOES
A pall had settled over the household with the diagnosis of
gangrene in Ramsey. At Todd's insistence, Kynyr was not told
about it while they waited to see if Aisha managed to
persuade Ramsey's mother to come visit him. Robert Morcar
and Erskine Faraday arrived an hour after the shop opened
for business, and went directly up to the infirmary to sit with
Ramsey. All day long, Ramsey's friends among the
guardsmyn came and went, never leaving him alone.
Someone was always there in case he needed more
pollendine for pain, or a shared remembrance for comfort.
Aisha must have set out immediately for Blue Rock,
because the big carriage that Claw had given her for their last
anniversary came rolling up to the front of Cahira's shop late
in the afternoon. Cahira rose from her table when she saw it
through the window.
The driver proved to be Georgie Rogan, whom Cahira had
only met once. Georgie went around, opened the carriage
door, and helped Aisha down. A grey haired bitch with a worn
face, dressed in simple homespun robes climbed out after
Aisha and they came into the shop together.
"Cahira Sinclair, I would like you meet Glenna Fitzgerald,
Ramsey's mother."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
290
"Nice to meet you." Glenna sounded bewildered and
overwhelmed, uncertain of what to say. She stood wringing
her hands nervously. Her eyes were puffy and red.
Cahira hugged her. "I'm so sorry about your son."
Glenna dissolved into tears. "Ramsey was such a good
cub..."
"Let's go upstairs. He's been asking for you." Cahira put
her arm around Glenna's shoulder and turned to Aisha. "I'll be
right back. I think we should talk."
Aisha nodded. "I think so too."
Cahira took Glenna upstairs. The folding screen had been
extended, blocking the view of Ramsey from the rest of the
room. Finn slept quietly on his bed, a dose of poppy milk
having put him under.
They stepped beyond the screen. Erskine and Morcar sat
by the bed. Glenna let out a small worried noise and went to
Ramsey's side.
Erskine's eyes widened briefly when he saw Glenna. He
took hold of Robert's arm and edged him away from the bed.
"Let's leave them alone."
Robert looked dubious and curious, but went with Erskine.
"Who is she?"
"His mother."
Glenna kissed Ramsey's forehead, and his eyes fluttered
open. "Ma?"
"I'm here and I'm not leaving." She bent over him and
kissed his cheek.
Cahira withdrew from the room and headed down to the
shop where Aisha waited for her. On returning to the front

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
291
room, she saw Aisha sitting at the table in the rear talking to
Kady. She gestured for Aisha to come with her and they went
into the back room and closed the door.
She indicated that Aisha should sit at the square table at
the side, rather than the long table Cahira used for working,
and grabbed a bottle of brandy from a cabinet along with
glasses.
Aisha folded her hands together in front of her as Cahira
settled into the opposite chair. "What was it you wished to
talk about?"
"With all that's happening..." Cahira poured for both of
them and handed Aisha a glass of brandy. "Well, I thought
maybe we should put our differences aside."
"I never had a problem with you, Cahira. Not really. What I
never understood was why you had a problem with me."
Cahira took a large swallow of brandy, produced a
handkerchief from her pocket, and dabbed her mouth. "It's
the Redhands..."
"You remember that day when you came to the manor
with that babe in your arms?"
"I'll never forget it. I didn't want to go to you. Baroucha
insisted."
"Baroucha." Aisha's lips gathered into a little knot of
annoyance. "She told me the babe was Tarrant's and then
you started blathering about sleeping with half the army."
"I must have seemed mad."
"As a hatter."
Cahira lowered her head, her cheeks coloring. "I was afraid
you'd take Bran away from me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
292
"I would never do that."
"There's a curse on the Redhands."
Aisha exhaled heavily and considered her words for several
breaths. "I know. I've always believed in it. Claw and I ... we
used to have terrible fights over it. It's why I put off having
another child so long."
"I can understand that."
"Tell me the truth, Cahira. Is your son, my grandson?"
Cahira flinched. "I always believed that ... so long as they
did not claim the name, then the curse wouldn't touch them."
"Do you know the exact words that Alistar spoke?"
"No. Too many things happened ... and so swiftly. I blotted
most of it out of my mind. It was that or go truly mad."
"And I can understand that." Aisha patted Cahira's hand.
"Please don't tell Claw."
"I'll not tell him, if you'll promise me something in
exchange."
"What?"
"There's a line in the curse ... at least the way I first heard
it ... about an exile. That must be Brock."
Cahira blinked. "But Claw rescinded the order of
banishment on him. He's not an exile."
"That can be argued several ways, Cahira. Just promise
me, if Brock comes home, you'll tell him."
"Why Brock?"
"Did you ever meet him?"
"No."
"He was twenty-three when Suleahan banished him. That
was ninety years ago. Brock visited us one summer when

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
293
Merissa was twelve. The odd thing is, he still looked twenty-
three."
"That's not possible."
"Isn't it? Brock was always odd. Supposedly, Brock and
Fianait are twins. Fianait is blonde. Brock is the only Redhand
ever born with jet black hair."
"Are you suggesting he's not a Redhand?"
"Not at all. Suleahan is stamped on Brock's face as plain as
day. However, a few years ago, I heard of a bird that lives in
the far west. It's called a cuckoo."
Cahira shook her head. "Never heard of it. What has this
bird to do with Brock?"
"Maybe nothing. Maybe everything. You see, a cuckoo lays
its eggs in the nests of other birds and those birds raise its
young as their own."
A loud gasp escaped Cahira. "You're suggesting that
Sorcha was not his mother?"
"Precisely. Now will you make me that promise?"
"You have my word."
"Good enough. Now, can I go up and see my great-
grandson?"
Cahira rose and extended her hand to Aisha. "Yes."
"Is it all right if I tell him I know?"
"We'll tell him together."
* * * *
Morning came and with it the burning sensations in his leg
that woke Kynyr from a sound sleep. Two weeks in bed had
left Kynyr feeling restless and frustrated. Every time he had

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
294
tried to stand, the wounded leg had refused to support him
and he ended up on the floor. The only things that made his
circumstances the least bit bearable were Pandeena's secret
midnight visits and Kady's daytime company. And Aisha,
Kynyr amended his thought. The day that she and Cahira
came up and told him that Aisha knew he was her great-
grandson, they had all hugged and wept for an hour. Kynyr
had not realized, until then, how deprived he had felt in
keeping Cahira's edict of silence.
He rolled onto his side, grabbing his left leg as movement
sent a rush of pain through it, and stretched his other hand
toward the dosing glass and the bottle of poppy milk on the
nightstand.
"I'll get it." Todd walked in, carrying a set of crutches,
leaned them against the headboard of Kynyr's bed, and
poured a measure of poppy milk into the dosing glass, which
he then handed to Kynyr with a nod at the crutches. "Try
those out."
Kynyr drank the poppy milk and scowled at the crutches.
"I'm not getting around like a bloody cripple."
"You put weight on that leg before it's ready to take it and
you will cripple yourself."
Pushing the glass onto the nightstand, Kynyr settled back
on the bed with a sigh, eyeing the crutches. "You made
them?"
"Ayup."
Kynyr's gaze drifted to the quilt that Kady had thrown over
him last night when the first bite of autumn chill had become
noticeable. It had slid down around his hips when he tried to

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
295
reach the dosing glass on the nightstand and lay in disheveled
folds across his lap. He glanced at Todd's implacable
expression, glanced at the crutches again, glanced at the
quilt, and remembered how difficult it had always been to
argue with Todd; which was why he did it so seldom. "Grab
me a robe out of the closet."
A small grin of victory teased the corners of Todd's mouth
as he fetched a brown robe and tossed it at Kynyr, who
caught and shrugged into it.
Kynyr swung his legs over the side, got the crutches
positioned beneath his armpits, and levered himself up.
Todd knelt in front of Kynyr, studied his legs, and gave
him a nod. "Now put a little weight on it and tell me what it
feels like."
Kynyr put his foot down, winced sharply, and shifted,
holding his bad leg with the knee bent. "Shit."
"I expect so. Now put a bit of weight on it again and stop
when the pain gets bad."
"I hate this." Kynyr eased his injured leg down.
Todd straightened. "That's enough. Let's take a walk."
"Can I see Finn?"
"I need to talk to you about something first. How about the
kitchen?"
Kynyr maneuvered to the door. "When I thought he was
dead...."
"Broke your heart? I felt the same about Tarrant. He was
easy to love. I think everyone in Red Wolf loved Tarrant."
"Yeah." Kynyr concentrated on walking and Todd followed.
"I haven't put a moon-offering on his grave in two weeks."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
296
"The cubs took care of it."
"They didn't get caught?"
"If ever a pair of cubs were born sneaks, it's Rory and
Hamish. They took Cooley along. He's learning." Todd
stepped around Kynyr and opened the kitchen door for him.
"How's he doing?"
"We haven't told him yet, but he's a wealthy little wolf."
"He is?"
"I decided it was time to tell Claw who Cooley was in case
the cub had an inheritance coming from his dad. Cullen had a
surprising amount of gold set away for his retirement."
"Cullen was wealthy?"
"Not quite. However, Eideard left everything he had to
Cooley also. And he had a King's ransom in jewelry on him
when he died ... including Cullen's lost rings."
Eideard's words to Kynyr the morning they were getting
ready to leave Hell's Widow flooded back into Kynyr's mind.
Anger sent a flush across Kynyr's features.
"Gods damn it all to hell! Ellie." Kynyr dropped into a chair
at the kitchen table and leaned his crutches against the chair
beside him. "I told Eideard to stay away from her. Ten to one
she's dead. Eideard killed her."
"Why?"
"Ellie betrayed Cullen. She drugged him. Cullen was taken
without a fight." Kynyr launched into a description of what
had happened to Cullen Blackwood, unable to repress the
outpouring of emotionally charged words.
A loud sob made both myn turn. Kady stood in the
doorway, pale and shaking, her knuckles in her mouth.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
297
When Todd rose to go to her, Kady turned and fled. Kynyr
reached for his crutches, but Todd shook his head. "You wait
here. I'm going to get your gram."
Kynyr itched with restlessness waiting for Todd to return.
His thoughts began straying to Finn and Ramsey. The kitchen
seemed too quiet. He wondered where the cubs were, glanced
at the window to judge the time, and decided that Cooley
must have left for his duties with Georgie Rogan, and the
Scott cubs had not arrived for work yet.
Each passing moment made Kynyr want to see Finn, to
reassure himself with his own eyes that his spiritbrother was
recovering from his wounds. It was one thing to be told so
and another to see it with his own eyes. There were also
things he wanted to ask Finn about their last night in Hell's
Widow—the night that Eideard had stayed away until past
midnight. He took his crutches under his arms and headed
out, pausing at the door to see if there were any signs of
Todd returning. Seeing that no one was in the hallway, Kynyr
headed for the infirmary, and slipped inside, closing the door
behind him.
Kynyr scanned the long room. Finn lay on the nearest bed
with one of those 'pressed' books in his hands, reading.
Cahira had begun importing them from Creeya and offering a
few for sale in the shop. A folding screen had been extended
beyond the next bed, and Kynyr suspected that Ramsey was
on the other side, although why Cahira would want to isolate
him from view like that sent a tremor of concern through
Kynyr.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
298
"Hey, Finn!" Kynyr leaned his crutches between the wall
and the nightstand to hobble closer to Finn, using the
furniture to spare his leg.
Finn closed the book, his eyes lit up when he saw Kynyr,
and he laid the book on the nightstand.
"How're you doing, Finn?"
"Fine ... except when I eat. My belly's damned sore."
Finn's mouth curved into a rueful grin.
Kynyr grabbed his spiritbrother, hugging him tight. "When
I thought you were dead..."
His grin dissolved into a brittle smile and tears of relief
came into Finn's eyes as his arms closed around Kynyr.
"Same here, brother."
Kynyr broke the embrace and settled into a chair beside
the bed. "Damnit, Finn! You should have kept going. You
shouldn't have gone back for me."
Finn tilted his head in a sidewise nod. "The Dreaded Horde
would have skinned me if I hadn't."
"There's that."
"Death by hairbrush is not a pleasant thought."
"Agreed." Kynyr chuckled and then sobered abruptly,
indicating the folding screen with his chin. "How's Ramsey?"
"Didn't they tell you?" Finn looked troubled.
"What?"
"He's got gangrene."
Kynyr felt his world tilt with grief, and he realized what
Todd had wanted to tell him. He clenched his eyes shut, and
his mouth thinned. "No, they didn't."
"I'm sorry."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
299
Kynyr opened his eyes, and his expression had gone
distant. "Has his family come to visit him?"
"Only his mother. Aisha had to go and get her, or Glenna
would not have come. Erskine rode over to Blue Rock the day
after Eideard's funeral and told them. From what I hear,
Ramsey's brother is an unforgiving sort."
"That's a shame."
"Tell me about it. Erskine stops by most evenings and sits
with him. Glenna's been here since last night."
Kynyr grabbed his crutches and limped across the
infirmary to the extended screen. He hesitated for an instant,
steeling himself to see what condition his friend Ramsey was
in. Then he went around it.
Ramsey's face was flushed with fever and his breathing
stertorous. His round cheeks had become sunken and the
bones in his face stood out as if all the muscles beneath his
skin had melted away. A chair sat close to the head of the
bed. The nightstand beside it had a dosing glass and several
bottles clustered in the center. An elderly bitch that Kynyr did
not recognize sat on the far of the bed beside Erskine.
Kynyr walked over to the nightstand, shifted his crutches
to free his hands, and picked up the purple one, reading the
label: Pollendine, a narcotic pain reliever so strong and
potentially addictive that healers usually reserved it for the
dying. Kynyr's stomach clenched. He touched Ramsey's
forehead and felt the intense heat burning his friend up from
the inside.
"Ah, gods, Ramsey. Not you too."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
300
As if there were some magic to Kynyr's touch and his
voice, Ramsey's eyes fluttered open. "K-Kynyr ... I been
waitin' for ... you." Ramsey shuddered, struggling for breath.
"Get those ... assholes ... for me."
"Yeah, Ramsey. I'll get them. Whoever's behind this ... I'll
get them."
A smile as sweet as a summer morn touched Ramsey's
lips. His eyes closed. His body stiffened in pain for an instant
and then his features went slack. Kynyr dropped his crutches
and clutched his friend to his chest, but was too late. A long
howl of grief erupted from Kynyr's throat and shivered
through the building as he held his dead friend. The keening
cries of the bitch matched his own for grief as Erskine held
her.
* * * *
"This had best be important, Cooley," said Todd. "Kynyr's
waiting for me in the kitchen."
"It is. We need a clubhouse and it's urgent." Cooley sat on
a chair in the salle, swinging his dangling feet back and forth
while watching Todd's face for the smallest sign of reaction.
"A club house?" Todd finger-combed his hair to get the
tangles out and then tied it back with a strip of leather. "Well,
I'd have to think about it. Sounds city-fied to me."
"Darmyk Redhand's got a treehouse."
"That's Darmyk. The barn and the garden already take up
a fair bit of space."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
301
"Could we use a corner of the loft? Darmyk said we could
use the treehouse, but Miz Softpaws don't want Toby and
Gille going that far after dark."
"Doesn't want."
"Miz Softpaws doesn't want..."
"What's it for, really?"
Cooley gulped. He had told Rory convincing Todd to give
them some space would not be easy; but he had promised to
try and a promise was a promise. "A hideout ... we're going to
hide and tell scary stories."
"You could do that in your room."
Cooley winced. "Kady'd be sticking her nose in all the time.
The Dreaded Horde..."
A droll smile preceded a soft chuckle from Todd. Cooley
frowned intently, trying to figure out what Todd found so
amusing.
"I have no problems with it then." Todd ruffled Cooley's
hair.
"Thanks." Cooley grinned and started to slide off the chair,
when he stopped with a fresh frown. "They took the arch
thing down."
"Arch thing?"
"At the manor. When I went down there to exercise Bucky,
the thing was gone."
Todd's face lost all expression as he exhaled heavily.
Cooley walked around and hugged Todd. "Why'd they do
that?"
Todd gave Cooley a long, considering look before
answering. "It means that Merissa is pregnant."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
302
"She can get rid of it, can't she? When my ma's whores
caught one in the belly, a proper dose a tansy fixed it just
fine."
Todd had just lifted the bottle of whiskey to pour himself a
drink when Cooley spit those last words out. He made a
choking sound and the bottle veered for an instant sending
the amber liquid onto the table.
"You're spilling it." Cooley grabbed the bottle and pointed
the top up.
"So I am." Todd's eyebrows veered toward his hairline.
"Go play, Cooley."
Cooley had just slid off the chair when a wild keening
erupted through the building. He turned frightened eyes on
Todd. "What's that mean?"
"Ramsey is dead."
* * * *
The first changes made in the living spaces above the shop
had included the infirmary two doors down from the kitchen
and a bedroom for Kady on the opposite side of the
guestroom from Kynyr. She curled into a tight ball, sobbing
against her pillows, a stuffed toy bear clutched in her arms.
Cahira eased the door open and waited for Kady to notice
her. When several moments had passed without any
acknowledgement of her presence, Cahira asked softly, "Can I
come in?"
Kady raised her teary eyes, but made no move to
straighten. "Yes."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
303
Cahira sat on the edge of the bed, stroking Kady's head.
"I'm sorry you had to learn the details of his death that way. I
know you loved Cullen."
Kady sucked in a deep breath, struggling to put on a brave
face and failing. "Cullen didn't love me. It was strictly Wild
Cousins for him. Sometimes ... sometimes I think it was that
way for me too."
"And the rest of the time?"
"I thought I loved him."
"He seemed like such a distasteful little mon ... I won't
pretend to understand the attraction. However, I do
understand grief."
"He wasn't as bad as people thought he was. Cullen was
funny ... and sweet. He told stories that made me laugh."
Kady choked up again. "He didn't deserve to die like that."
"No one does." Except Alistar Weems.
"Don't be upset with me."
Cahira tilted her head, questions furrowing her brow. "For
what?"
"My—my menses are late."
"I see." Cahira grasped Kady's wrist and extended her
Reader's gift through Kady's body. A frown deepened on her
face. "It's nearly a month old. Whose is it?"
"I don't know. It can't be Gorgarty's ... must be someone
else's."
"Explain."
Kady sucked a shaky breath. "Just before Kynyr left for
Hell's Widow, he drove off three myn who were raping me.
Two of them had ... had already shot their wads." She choked

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
304
up. "The third ... he was ... just starting to ... poke me..."
Kady swallowed back a sob. "...when Kynyr grabbed him."
"Do you know who they were?"
"I used to serve them drinks at the Difficult Horse." Kady's
voice wavered. "It wasn't ... wasn't the first time. They'd
been stalking me ... ambushing me ... acted like it was a
game."
"Who are they?"
"They'll kill me if I tell." Kady scrunched up more, pulling
away from Cahira.
Cahira sighed and crawled onto the bed, forcing Kady to
either slide off the other side or stop retreating. The aged
healer gathered Kady into her arms and held her as the
young bitch wept, finally releasing all the pent up pain
accumulated since her father discovered her affair with
Cullen. "Kady, Todd and I will not let them hurt you. Just tell
me their names. You trust Todd, don't you?"
Kady struggled to subdue her sobs and speak. She gave a
small nod against Cahira's shoulder. "Yes."
"Tell me their names?"
"Kynyr knows them. Cormic Parry, the tanner's son. Keith
and Donald Greenlea. Iollan Newell ... First time they did it,
they beat me ... until I couldn't ... stand up." The words
caught in Kady's throat and she had to force them out in
increments.
"It's too late to go to the lawgiver. Legally such things
must be reported before sunset of the second day."
"I know."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
305
"Get the tansy off the shelf, Kady. It tastes nasty, so get
yourself a piece of that honey candy to follow it with. You'll be
rid of this abomination before morning."
Kady pulled herself together and headed for the door to go
downstairs into the shop. A long howl of grief broke from
down the hall. A stricken look came over her face and she
halted with her hand on the door facing. "Kynyr..."
"Ramsey's dead," Cahira said quietly.
Kady ran all the way to the infirmary. The folding screen
had been overturned. Kynyr sat on the bed, Ramsey clutched
to his chest. He had shifted far into the hybrid form, his snout
elongated, golden fur covering him. Kynyr's head was thrown
back as he howled and keened. Finn stood next to him,
looking dazed and helpless, his hand on Kynyr's shoulder.
Kady immediately went to them. She brushed Finn aside with
an admonitory finger pointed at his bed. Then she gently, yet
firmly, separated Kynyr from Ramsey's corpse, drew Kynyr's
arm across her shoulders. "Come along. Lean on me."
Kynyr allowed himself to be taken back to his room. They
passed Cahira, Todd, and Cooley in the hallway. Cooley's eyes
were large and his mouth trembled. Todd lifted the cub into
his arms and carried him to the kitchen for cookies and
comfort.
Once inside Kynyr's room, Kady threw back the covers and
settled him on the bed as his hybrid form faded back to
human. Kynyr seized her, dragging Kady onto the bed with
him, and clung to her, desperate for comfort. She murmured
soothing noises until his lips covered hers, putting a stop to it.
He parted her lips and slipped his tongue inside her mouth.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
306
Kady's loins tightened as their tongues danced and darted
over each other. A hunger for joining her body to his came
over her in a wave of intensity she had only felt with Cullen.
But when his hand went to her breast, Kady pushed away
from him. "No. I'm not ready for this."
"Kady..." he reached for her again. "I need you, Kady.
Please."
"No. Not now."
"Please, Kady. Comfort me..."
"Kynyr, I'm sorry ... I can't ... handle it."
She fled the room.
* * * *
Darmyk opened his window, climbed onto the sill and
stood balanced there in his bare feet. Climbing came easier
barefoot. He bounded onto the broad limb that pushed
against the stones beneath his window, walking cautiously
with his arms extended to both sides, and when he came
close enough to his goal, his huge two-story treehouse,
Darmyk leaped inside. Kenly lay curled on the bed there,
gnawing on a leg bone from something he had caught the
previous night. Darmyk had not yet learned to identify Kenly's
kills so he never knew exactly what animal was being eaten.
His cat did not need to go hunting, but Kenly liked to.
The cub settled next to his cat and leaned against him. His
friends, Cooley and the Scott brothers, had not come by in
over a week and he felt lonely. He missed Kynyr and Finn
also. Since the ambush, which Darmyk had over heard the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
307
adults talking about, the only playmates he had left were two
that he no longer liked.
He heard shoes scrabbling against the bark of his tree, the
creak of the ropes knotted to the deck of his treehouse, and
the bumping of two small bodies against the solid trunk as
the young invaders struggled with the shifting braided hemp
ladder. That would be Ros and Lyrri outside. A flash of
resentment and possessiveness sped through him.
"This is my treehouse, not theirs," muttered Darmyk.
Darmyk did not understand why the two girls could not
climb as easily as he did. His mother always told him that it
was because they were not born to a lycan mother, but
Darmyk suspected it might be simply that they were girls.
Going to the doorway, Darmyk stared down at them
contending with the rope ladder. Ros had a determined look
on her face that Darmyk suspected boded ill for him once she
got inside. Lyrri seemed uncertain and half scared like always,
glancing at the ground every time the ladder shifted.
"What do you want?" He wished he had thought to pull the
ladder up when he first reached the treehouse, because the
two girls never used his way of getting into it.
"To play with you," Ros said. Her damaged leg had a hard
time with the rope, so she moved slowly. She bumped Lyrri's
face with her foot and Lyrri yelped.
Darmyk snickered at Lyrri getting bumped, and then his
lower lip thrust out beneath the upper one. He considered
having Kenly prevent them from reaching the deck. "I don't
want to play with you."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
308
Ros gave him one of those smiles that melted the adults
and irritated Darmyk. "I've thought of a new game."
Darmyk tilted his head, deliberating for an instant. He got
so little attention since they and their uncle moved into the
manor that he felt tempted to let them inside. "What kind?"
"I can't tell you until I get there," responded Ros with a
touch of impatience, climbing another rung higher. "Is Kenly
up there?"
"Yes." So they were going to bring up Kenly again. It used
to be that they both liked playing with his cat, but lately Ros
was always trying to get him to send Kenly away.
"Send him away, or I won't tell you about the new game."
Darmyk's lips tightened. It was just as he had suspected.
"I don't want to."
Ros smiled again and her voice turned coaxing. "Yes, you
do. Lyrri likes the new game."
Darmyk sighed, his hands tightening into fists. "I don't
want to."
Ros' face transformed in fury, and the promise of violence
in her eyes seemed to burn into Darmyk's core, frightening
him. "I'll tell Uncle Malthus that you're being bad again."
His step-father's name squashed Darmyk's defiance. He
had never been spanked before Malthus came, and he had
always tried to be a good boy, yet it seemed like every time
he turned around his step-father was smacking him over
something. He backed away from the door. "Go hunt, Kenly,"
he ordered the cat.
Kenly made a spitting noise and sprang from the window.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
309
Ros limped inside with a look of triumph on her face. Lyrri
stepped around her so that Darmyk was suddenly standing
between them. Darmyk had a very bad feeling about this, and
started to call Kenly back, hoping that the cat had not yet
gone beyond hearing him. Ros grabbed his arm, jerking him
toward her and off balance. Lyrri shoved something into his
mouth. He reached to dig it out, and Ros caught that arm
also. Darmyk twisted, trying to get his arms loose as Lyrri
shoved and Ros pulled, until they forced him backwards onto
the straw bed. While Lyrri sat on him, Ros jerked his robe
open. Her fangs came down.
Darmyk thrashed wildly, but could not free himself. He had
not known that she had fangs.
Ros pinned his head to the side and sank her fangs into his
neck. He writhed a moment, and then stilled as a deep
languor stole over him in response to her sucking. Her tiny,
immature fangs left hardly a mark when she pulled out of
him.
Most female sa'necari got their fangs with their menses.
Ros, however, was a prodigy; she had been born with fangs
and more arcane power than many adults. She touched
Darmyk's forehead and sent him to sleep with the same spell
that her uncle sometimes used on her and Lyrri.
"Did you kill him?" asked Lyrri, who at six years old was a
year younger than Ros. "Uncle Malthus wants to do that."
Ros wiped her mouth off on a black handkerchief, shoved
it back into her pocket, and smirked at her sister in a know-it-
all way. "No. And Darmyk won't remember either. Next time

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
310
we won't have to knock him down. He'll open his robe for
me."
Lyrri stroked Darmyk's neck, her eyes glittering with
fascination, and admiration for her older sister. "Can you
teach me?"
Ros shrugged disdainfully. "What use would that be? You
don't have enough power yet."
Lyrri glared at her sister. "You're not fair."
"I'm not fair? It isn't my fault you're a normie, and I'm
not. You just have to wait."
Lyrri's expression darkened and she stalked to the ladder.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
311
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
VISITS
Malthus returned at dawn, having left two fresh killed deer
at the camp, before riding onto the manor. As he rode past
the garden, Malthus noticed that something had changed. At
first it did not register, and then he realized the arch was
gone and his heart leaped up in his chest.
He dismounted in the stableyard, throwing his reins to
Georgie Rogan.
"Congratulations." Georgie bowed, nodded, smiled, and
practically fell all over himself with happiness. "We got us a
real heir this time."
Malthus beamed at him. "Thank you. It's a fine day."
Merissa sat in the great hall, sipping a soothing tea, and
picking at buttered scones. She looked peaked and her color
was a bit paler than usual. She rose when Malthus entered,
reaching out to him.
"Darling, the arch is gone," Malthus said as he crossed the
room.
"Are you happy?"
Malthus embraced her tightly and thoroughly kissed her,
forgetting that Claw and Aisha were in the room. "Let's go
upstairs, and I'll show you how happy I am."
Hours later, Malthus lay gazing at Merissa sleeping beside
him. His fangs descended. Knowing that she carried his child,
made him hungry to taste her just once, just a little. He

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
312
slipped the blade of his power into her sleeping mind, and
placed a tiny compulsion there, not enough for anyone to
notice, not enough to change her behavior—except in one
way. He could now make her sleep at his command, and only
he could wake her before the light of dawn shone in her eyes.
Four hickeys marred the pale skin of her neck.
He placed his finger beside the largest, as his tongue slid
over his needle like fangs. With the spot marked, Malthus
gently sank his fangs into the center of the bruise, and
sucked. She tasted delicious. He extended his awareness
through her being, and found his child. No, children. Twins.
Sa'necari. Both male. And over a month old.
A small wave of anger rippled through Malthus. Why had
she not told him sooner? Lycans, like sa'necari, and other
gifted races, usually knew within days. He laid his hand lightly
upon her stomach, and reached his powers into her womb.
With a small twist around the tiny embryos, Malthus cast a
deception over them. The Readers would perceive both of
them as lycan. That would please the old bastard Claw—at
least long enough for his heart to give out.
* * * *
Claw returned from riding the fence with his myn. He
always did his full share of the fence mending, herding, and
other tasks. With the first scent of autumn in the air, a lot
needed to be done. The herds had to be moved into the
nearer pens and corrals. He was a lord of farmers and herders
unlike the sa'necari lords who sat on their ass and expected

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
313
their people to do all of it for them. That day the work had
taken more out of him than usual.
He dropped into his chair, fighting a wave of dizziness and
exhaustion far beyond anything he could recall feeling before.
It was worse than the day he struggled with the arch, and
far, far worse than Merissa's wedding day. It had developed
with such suddenness that it worried Claw more than he
allowed himself to admit. He took Baroucha's medicine from
his pocket and swigged it like liquor. Only Morcar, who he
always sent to pick up the medicine from Baroucha, knew
that something was wrong with the chieftain.
He leaned back in his chair with his eyes closed.
Claw heard footsteps approaching, and recognized them,
but felt too weary to open his eyes until forced to.
Soft, gentle hands touched his face. "Are you all right,
Claw? You're deathly pale."
Claw made an annoyed smacking sound with his lips as he
parted his lids. "I'm fine, Fianait. Just very tired."
Fianait kissed her brother's forehead. "I wish Brock would
come home."
Claw closed his eyes again. "I do too."
"Are you happy about Merissa?"
"Yes. But I'm not entirely happy about her choice of
husband."
"Malthus seems like such a nice fellow to me. He's been
very helpful." Fianait put her lips to Claw's forehead and then
drew back. "No fever. Why don't you go upstairs and have a
nap?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
314
Claw opened one eye to glare balefully at his younger
sister. "Stop fussing. I'll doze a bit in the chair."
Sleep came, a deeper sleep than he expected and when he
woke, someone had tucked a blanket around him. Life with
three pushy females was not all bad. He would refrain from
asking whether it had been Aisha, Fianait, or Searlait.
* * * *
Malthus washed, changed into a fine set of clothes, and
strode off into the village to exercise his bragging rights at
the taverns. Played right, Merissa's pregnancy might help him
regain some of the face he had lost the day of Eideard's
funeral.
He went into the Difficult Horse, and spied Shalto and
Oswyl sitting with two other members of their small gang
called the Lycamornots, Preece and Yren. Although Shalto
was nominally the leader, they all answered to Malthus, who
had shown them how to take control of their lives and
squeeze more out of it. Preece was a sturdy young wolf with
skin burned to a nut brown by the hours he spent laboring in
the sun, and the quietest one of them. Malthus liked scrawny
Yren best. There was not much to Yren physically, he looked
like a stick figure with a mop of reddish brown hair, but he
made up for it feistiness—and he liked to hurt people. Malthus
found it extremely easy to point Yren like a crossbow and
trigger him off like a bolt to its target. He disliked Oswyl,
although he never let it show. Oswyl got squeamish too
easily. Sooner or later one of them would have to kill Oswyl.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
315
Malthus sat down at their table, and cast his eye over the
room. "Drinks for all, on me," he shouted. "My fine lady wears
her apron high."
A roar of congratulations went up throughout the tavern,
and old Hereward the tavern master shouted, "Nah, first
one's on me. This one's our proper heir!"
Their words sent a shiver of delight over Malthus at his
evident success at fitting in with the lycan community.
Merissa's pregnancy appeared to have clinched his inclusion,
as he had known it would.
Shalto leaned in and whispered low, "Now that you've
cocked-up Merissa, what are you going to do about the others
you've gotten full-in-the-belly?"
Malthus' gaze slithered around the tavern, scrupulously
avoiding meeting Shalto's eyes. He spied Todd Sinclair sitting
near the west wall with Kady Wiggins and Erskine Faraday.
They did not join in the congratulating, but merely watched
him with something indecipherable in their eyes. It spoiled
the moment for Malthus. "We'll discuss that at the cottage. I'll
meet you there later?"
"Sure."
Oswyl looked thoughtful. "I wonder if any of the others
who are up the stick are carrying my seed?"
Preece propped his elbows on the table, and asked, "How
many are blooming? We've had our sticks in all of them."
Malthus scowled at them. "Eleven. This isn't the time or
place. You don't want to betray the camp, now do you?
Baroucha would be handing out tansy before you could claim
them."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
316
The four youths sobered.
"We'll take this elsewhere," said Shalto.
Malthus allowed himself to be congratulated, and after a
suitable time, he excused himself and walked to his old house
at the far western edge of the camp with Shalto and Oswyl.
He kept the cottage provisioned with liquor and other niceties,
and it had become their meeting place since Malthus' arrival
late last spring. Preece and Yren had gone to get the rest of
the gang.
A large, rough-hewn table occupied the yard with tree
rounds as chairs. Thickets of trees grew close to the cottage,
and Malthus had refused to allow them to be logged because
he preferred the thick curtain of privacy they provided him
with. He had also chosen to build this cottage on the
westernmost corner of the land belonging to the refugee
camp.
"It's a pleasant night," Malthus said. "Why don't you sit
under the stars while I fetch us all some tankards of mead?"
"Did you get it from Hereward?" asked Shalto eagerly.
"Absolutely." Malthus went in and took out three
deliberately mismatched tankards, one a coppery color with a
hunting scene in bas relief, the second was a goldish tone
with a leaping stag, and the third bore a dragon wrapped
around a tree. He had twelve more tankards in his cupboard
and none of them matched. He turned the tap on a keg and
filled each one, then sat them on the table.
His attention drifted to the tap. Sanguiners sometimes
used spigots like those on nibari and others who were to be
drained a bit at a time. Sometimes they went so far as to

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
317
implant them into a nibari's or prisoner's neck, chain them
onto a draining rack, and take just enough at a time to make
their more celebrated blends. A good sanguiner was worth his
weight in gold.
Malthus wished he were back at his mansion discussing
blends with his sanguiner. He missed those luxuries. He
hadn't accepted an assignment of this length in several years.
The sa'necari shook himself free of his musings, and sketched
a spell on two of the tankards. He had not yet dared to take a
male the way he had the females. The relative isolation of the
camp compound had allowed him to restrict the contact the
females here had with the village. Most lycans cared nothing
about the humans and sa'necari here. Certainly no one would
look close enough to investigate any changes in their
behaviors. It was the changes that implanting sways,
triggers, coercions, and outright compulsions wrought in
myn's outward behavior that tended to alert others to
sa'necari and vampiric tampering with a victim's mind.
So he used subtlety with Shalto and Oswyl, enhancing
their suggestibility in his presence, relying on his charismatic
talents to subvert the village's male youth. He had built a
following without resorting to heavy-handed methods.
Malthus offered them what they wanted: females, liquor, and
a feeling of superiority over the rest of the villagers. Some of
them he influenced, and others he owned through
insinuations of power so subtle they did not realize he had
touched them, and a few he held in his pockets for money
and favors. Regardless of the methods, they all belonged to
him. Shalto, Oswyl, Preece, Rheu, and Yren formed the core

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
318
of Malthus' gang, while the other eleven who worked at the
Sanctuary spun like moons around their planets and all of
them circled Malthus' star.
He was using a similar, but different, method to start his
subversion of Claw's guardsmyn and family. Gorgarty Burr
had been delighted to learn how accessible the 'sluts' at the
camp were and he showed up at every opportunity.
Malthus emerged from the house and handed the tankards
around.
Shalto sat with his elbows propped on the table, his
expression more thoughtful than usual. He took a drink. "So
you said eleven? That's seven more than you got full-in-the-
belly."
Malthus smirked. "As much time as you and the others
spend stabbing their tails, what did you expect? You're young,
strong, and potent."
"Yeah, we are," said Oswyl. "But what if more than one of
those high aprons is from the same wolf? That would get us in
a lot of trouble."
Shalto shrugged. "It isn't just the Lycamornots using them
either. We tried to keep it small this time, not like with Beth,
but each of us has a couple of friends we let use those bitches
in exchange for favors and such."
Malthus' small, viperous smile played across his features.
He pulled at his long, thin mustaches and scratched around
his oak leaf beard. "I already knew that, but I appreciate your
admitting it. We'll discuss it when the others get here. I have
an answer for everything. I don't wish to be caught any more
than you do."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
319
Shalto's expression turned grim. "Claw would eat your
heart, if he knew you'd been cheating on Merissa like this."
"I know." Malthus gave a grim bark of laughter. "Where I
come from it's considered a male's right to have as many
mistresses as he wants. My father had seven. All at the same
time."
Shalto grinned. "He must have kept his wick wet more
often than not."
"Huh. Matter of fact, my friend, he did. And, like you, he
was a strong and potent mon." Malthus did not add that most
of the time his father had kept his cock shoved into dying
bodies as he rited captives, rivals, and nibari. Lord Feodras
Iagaris had had a powerful legacy created by generations of
sons riting their fathers when the parent grew too old or
became too injured to survive. Malthus had not waited for
Feodras to grow old: he had rited his father out of hate.
Preece sauntered in with Nesswen at his heels. Nesswen, a
shaggy young blond, had watery blue eyes, and an overbite.
Malthus fetched mead for them and repeated his patterns
with the spells. When he emerged with the tankards, he saw
that Yren had arrived with Rheu and Torquil. Rheu was the
smallest and youngest at fourteen, while Torquil was the
largest member, a huge strapping smith's apprentice. They
were all good with the long knives that rode at their hips, but
only Torquil could claim a moderate expertise with swords
and axes. They wore simple wool drawstring pants, and knee
length robes that wrapped loosely around their upper bodies
in a variation of the traditional lycan garb that allowed them
to switch freely into their powerful hybrid forms.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
320
Malthus had no intention of allowing them to know that he
was sa'necari, and that every single female in the refugee
camp had been made subject to his will, with his spells
knotted into their minds. There were now sixty-one myn
living here in the camp, twenty-one of them adult females.
His taste did not run to true humans, so he had only slept
with the five sa'necari and Clodagh.
"Some of them don't want to come outside anymore,"
Shalto said.
Oswyl nodded a quick agreement. "They don't want
Pandeena and that new lawgiver to see their bellies."
"Sooner or later.... "Preece let his gaze slide across every
face. He had the jaded air of a stone-cold killer, which was
why no one ever crossed him at the camp. Preece had made
no secret, among his companions, that he had been the one
who put a knife in Kynyr Maguire's back during last summer's
riot simply because he had always wanted to kill a
guardsmon. "They're going to get noticed."
"And then we're all in trouble," Torquil said.
"That's not right," Yren protested. "We shouldn't get into
trouble over a bunch of sluts."
Malthus sucked his cheeks in with a sly glance to the side,
his head lowered. "But that's exactly what will happen.
Remember what Pandeena said. She's going to blame us for
whatever happens with these women."
"Hsaaah," Shalto growled. "I didn't do anything to her and
she busted me up."
"She's pretty," Torquil said. "But the only way we'd get a
stick up her would be to tie her down."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
321
"She's a vicious trolleymog," Oswyl muttered, staring into
his tankard. He had not yet raised his head once.
"My point, Oswyl," Malthus said, his tone smooth, with a
faint undercurrent of amusement. Then he straightened and
met each eye in turn. "They'll Read the females, and then
punish us all. The females will complain to make themselves
look innocent. They'll tell on all of us."
"We can't let that happen," said Shalto.
Malthus took a long, considering drink from his tankard,
and then sat it down with a thump for emphasis. "I have a
solution. We need to move the pregnant ones to where they
can't be found, along with their children. And I've found the
perfect place for them."
"Where?" Shalto asked.
"My mother's manor."
"Your mother's got a manor?" Shalto asked in surprise.
"I thought all your family were dead," Torquil said.
Malthus turned to Torquil. "All my sa'necari family, all
those on my father's side except my nieces, are dead. The
human side of my family appears to have found safety in a
distant valley. My human mother has agreed to take the
pregnant ones and their children in. Once they're gone from
here, we should all be safe from the lawgiver and the priest
again."
"What about the other females?" Yren asked. "Sooner or
later aren't they all going to get full in the belly and we'll have
to do this all over again?"
"My mother is a bio-alchemist, when we deliver these to
her, she'll give me some potions to sterilize the others."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
322
Torquil whistled. "You think of everything."
"I would never have survived this long if I didn't," Malthus
said. "I rode to Ocealay alone when I was your age, Torquil. I
proved myself among the kandoyarin there."
"So we'll still get to wet our sticks," grinned Rheu.
"Wear masks to this meeting," Malthus told them. "My
friends and I will be doing so also."
Oswyl finally raised his head from his tankard with a
suspicious expression. "Masks? Why?"
"Safer that way," Malthus replied. "If no one sees your
face, they can't say who you are. Animal masks. I have a lot
to teach you. Next time I go hunting I'll meet with my
mother's friend and set up the meeting."
* * * *
Unseen by all of them, one of the largest wolves currently
in the village slunk away into the shadows. He had not been
able to get close enough to catch more than fragments and
had little idea what they were talking about beyond the
suspicion that they might be sleeping with some of the
women in the camp. He bolted across the forest, taking a
roundabout path to Pandeena's apartment. He would have a
look at some of these females tomorrow, maybe find an
excuse for Pandeena and himself to go door to door and
check on all of them.
Caimbeul's conversation with Kynyr a few days ago had
convinced him that the Sanctuary was the best place to begin
his investigation of Malthus in earnest. Everything else—the
taverns and other gathering places—had failed to pan out. He

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
323
needed to explore other possibilities, and considering what
had happened to Nikko, following Malthus on his hunting trips
did not seem wise.
As he rounded the edge of the compound, Caimbeul saw
several young lycans traveling stealthily over the grounds,
moving from shadow to shadow until they drew near to
various houses. He faded back to watch and listen.
They knocked at doors and were greeted by the females
there.
"A friend told me you could see to my needs," one of the
young males said.
"I'm available, but I have company coming," the female, a
human, answered and let the young wolf inside, closing the
door.
Caimbeul's ears perked forward and he laid his head on his
paws as he heard those phrases repeated with little or no
variation at every door that opened. This required further
investigation. Pandeena would probably call him an old lecher
again for thinking this, but he suspected the females were
being used sexually. He dashed to another spot, closer to one
of the houses and pressed himself against a row of rain
barrels.
Some of the females saw three or four young males that
night. This did not look good. Caimbeul withdrew cautiously
and returned to the Lawgiver House. If he could connect
Malthus to what was occurring at the camp ... or connect him
to Baroucha, Caimbeul would have an excuse to arrest
Malthus.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
324
The principal barn at the manor contained over three
hundred stalls just for the horses that were kept there as
ready mounts and two hundred of them were continuously
occupied by the mounts of Claw's guardsmyn. The huge
building was wrought of the same blue and yellow veined
stone as the manor, with a shingled roof and it sprawled
across the western edge of the courtyard. Behind it to the
north, lay six other barns, none of them nearly as large as
that one. The interior was partitioned into four aisles; the tack
was hung around the stalls to make saddling up in an
emergency faster. The bales of hay and other necessities that
made maintaining the stables easier were kept at the west
and eastern sides of the building in a succession of
storerooms.
Georgie Rogan, Claw's head hostler, had quickly
discovered that there was not a horse born that Cooley could
not ride. Even the meanest and worse-tempered of the war-
trained mounts and the most skittish of Claw's racing stock
gentled in response to Cooley. So Georgie had made
exercising the horses the cub's main task.
Although no one said anything to outsiders, the myn who
worked in the barns and stables had already begun to
speculate about Cooley's parentage. Only one man in Claw's
service had ever had that knack for horses, and that riding
style: Cullen Blackwood.
Lunch time, as soon as the grooms and hostlers gathered,
Georgie would open the storeroom where he kept the kegs of

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
325
mead that Claw allowed them in their rations each month,
and tankards were passed out.
Georgie sat on a crate and leaned his back to a wall as
Elwiss Taylor began describing, with relish, a tavern wench's
reaction when he flashed his bone at her. They had all heard
it before. Elwiss' accounts of his sexual exploits were mostly
lies and exaggerations and they all knew it.
"Just because you're a big dog, don't mean you got more'n
two fingers worth of cock."
All eyes turned and they saw Cooley standing nearby with
the reins of Kynyr's Bucky in his small hands.
They all laughed at him and Elwiss glared. "What would a
little mouse of a cub know about those things? Get off before
I teach you manners."
Elwiss' tone of voice rankled Cooley, and despite the
frequent admonitions from Todd and Kynyr, Cooley spit back
before stopping to think. "My ma ran a whorehouse. I ought
ta know."
"Tell me about your mother," said a new voice.
Cooley looked over his shoulder, and swallowed: Malthus
stood staring at him.
Georgie Rogan saw Cooley turn pale and start shaking. He
had no idea what it was about Malthus that frightened Cooley,
and he did not care; Georgie started to warn Malthus off
when he saw how Bucky had laid his ears back, and held a
hind leg poised to kick. He lowered his head and exchanged a
discreet glance with his buddies.
"I think ya oughtta back up nice and easy, Malthus."
"Stay out of it, Georgie." Malthus sneered at the hostler.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
326
Georgie shrugged and thumbed at Bucky. "I will. He
won't."
Malthus' gaze followed the direction of Georgie's pointing
thumb and had just enough time to throw himself sideways
as Bucky let fly with his hooves. He hit the ground, rolled and
got to his feet, brushing bits of hay and dirt from his tunic.
The grooms burst out laughing.
Cooley threw himself onto Bucky's back. Before Cooley
could get straight in the saddle, or get a decent grip on the
reins, Bucky took the bit between his teeth and sprang to the
side, gathering speed with every stride, until he was racing
along at a full gallop. The horse's pace was nowhere near as
fast as Larkspur or Glorygirl's, yet the warhorse thundered
along as if Bucky could sense Cooley's need to be away from
Malthus. The horse did not slow down until they reached the
edge of the village. Bucky kept the bit in his teeth, resisting
all of Cooley's attempts to turn him about until the horse
came to a stop in front of Cahira's shop.
"Old son of a toad..." Cooley giggled, patting Bucky's neck.
* * * *
Preece Malloy sweated in the sun, coated in dirt and grime
as his shovel bit into the ground. Two lines of White Fire had
made the task of digging Ramsey Fitzgerald's grave less
onerous. As his shovel threw the dirt from the grave, Shalto
and Oswyl moved it to a large pile to the side of the grave. All
three of them were high. Preece listened to his companions
laughing and cracking jokes with an edge of irritation. Those
two did not know how to ride the drug. The zealously guarded

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
327
pound of White Fire had become Preece's best bribe when he
wanted help with something. In this case, the grave
Pandeena had ordered Preece to dig.
He glanced at the measuring stick leaning in a corner of
the grave. Two more feet to go before he was off the hook.
"Hey, Preece! The beer is here!" Nesswen settled his
wheelbarrow near the dirt pile. A hogshead of beer rested in
the wheelbarrow.
Preece flung his shovel down, grasped the edge of the
grave, and heaved himself out, landing on his stomach. He
pushed off the ground and got his feet under him, brushing
his hands on his pants legs.
The entire work crew for the camp lounged around the
cemetery with eager faces. Counting Preece, there were
fifteen wolves; of which, Preece was the oldest.
Yren put a crate of tankards beside the wheelbarrow,
grabbed a tankard, and claimed the first drink.
Preece eyed the beer, shook his head, and pulled a small
leather pouch from his pocket. In one compartment was a
square of metal polished to the brightness of a mirror and his
little silvery tube. The other compartment held a quantity of
White Fire. He laid out lines and the others gathered around
him.
"You gonna share, Preece?" Nesswen blinked his watery
blue eyes, a hopeful smile displaying his big front teeth and
overbite.
Preece slid his gaze across the young wolves encircling
him. "Maybe." He passed the tube to Nesswen. "You brought
the beer."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
328
Nesswen accepted the tube with a triumphant grin and
snorted a line. He returned the tube to Preece as pleasure
suffused his face and heightened the color in his cheeks.
Yren stepped closer, his head tilted and considering. "I
brought the tankards. Don't that count?"
"Sure does." Preece let Yren do a line of White Fire.
"What about the rest of us?" A lean wolf edged between
Yren and Nesswen.
"The grave's only half dug..."
Soon he had more help than he needed. Preece put the
drugs away and sauntered over to a broad oak, where he
settled cross-legged with his back to the trunk. He closed his
eyes and allowed his mind to wander, fantasizing that it was
Maguire getting dumped into that pit, rather than Ramsey.
* * * *
Malthus waited until the household slept. Then he crept
along the hallway to Darmyk's room. Yesterday he had
forbidden the child to sleep with his cat. Kenly made Malthus
uneasy, despite its being only half grown. An adult maned
hunting cat could weigh over three hundred pounds—a
formidable opponent.
With Kynyr out of his reach for the time being, Malthus
decided to make his first moves against the son of the mon
who had killed his brother. Isranon would pay in grief for
killing Troyes when Malthus sent him the pieces of his
mutilated offspring.
The little boy slept with his arm around a stuffed cat
similar to his beloved Kenly, but smaller. The full moon

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
329
filtered its light between the trees growing close to the
window and cast a silver glow on Darmyk's face. Malthus
opened the child's sleep shirt, pausing twice when Darmyk
stirred in reaction to the tickling touch of his stepfather's
fingers. Malthus smiled broadly and his fangs descended. He
bent to sink them into Darmyk's neck.
The sound of splintering glass caused Malthus' head to jerk
up. Kenly bounded across the bed and straddled Darmyk,
hissing at Malthus.
The cat must have been inside Darmyk's treehouse that
Claw had built in the huge chestnut tree just outside
Darmyk's window. Although Darmyk would not be three years
old until mid-winter, his physical coordination was that of a
six or seven year old human, so the treehouse had been an
appropriate gift from his doting grandfather. However, facing
off against Kenly, who had just used the treehouse to access
Darmyk's bedroom, made Malthus wish it had never been
built.
Malthus retreated. Since he had brought no weapons, the
only way to fight the cat would be with magic and that would
reveal him as sa'necari.
Noises came from the hallway. The door opened behind
him and Claw came in with a lamp, followed by Aisha and
Merissa.
"What is going on?" Claw demanded, casting an accusatory
glance at Malthus.
"I heard the glass break," Malthus told them. "So I came
to see and the cat threatened to attack me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
330
"Then the cat has better sense than some people," said
Claw in his crustiest tone, throwing a glance at Merissa. "If he
wants to stay with the cub that bad, then I say he stays with
the cub."
"I don't think that is wise.... "Malthus said.
"I don't care what you think," Claw cut him off. "It's my
house and my grandcub."
Malthus shrugged. "As you say, it's your house. I will not
object again."
Damn the old wolf. I'll reach the boy yet.
Perhaps, it was time for Claw to die. Malthus considered
his choices. He could quicken the process that he was already
using. Or he could resort to a few poisons his mother had
developed that were too subtle and unfamiliar for the Readers
to detect. And then, there was always a viper in his bed. The
weather was still warm enough for one of his mother's pets—
now housed in the cave—to find its way inside without anyone
questioning how it got there.
By the time that Malthus made his decision, Merissa had
fallen asleep, curled on her side. He walked through the great
hall alone at midnight. He went to the table beside Claw's
chair where the little pipe rack and tobacco jar sat in the
middle. One by one he renewed his spells on Claw's pipes. He
smiled as he worked, sketching the spell on the bowl,
watching it melt into the pipe and vanish from view. Each
time that Claw smoked these pipes, another strand of the
death magics would be drawn inside the old asshole's chest
until it accumulated into enough to kill him. Malthus
wondered if he was being too subtle. It had been nearly two

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
331
months since the wedding, and he had seen little evidence of
the effectiveness of his handiwork. If he did not see more
soon, Malthus would increase the strength of his spells.
Claw had sent for a new healer, Sheradyn Kelly. Once
Sheradyn got there, Malthus doubted that he would be able to
get any more of the subtle poison into Claw's medicine.
Baroucha was becoming expendable; however, her shop was
useful. He would write his mother about finding the old crone
an apprentice ... a pretty one; one who could easily compete
with Cahira for business.
Claw kept a second small rack of pipes on his desk in his
study. Malthus headed back upstairs to treat those pipes also.
He imagined what Claw would look like writhing on the
floor, and smiled. They were bringing in the best healer in the
valley to attend to Merissa's pregnancy, but Sheradyn would
not be able to cure Claw's heart problems once they became
obvious. No one would short of a master lifemage.
* * * *
Claw sat down on the side of his bed, breathing heavily.
His chest hurt with a feeling of pressure in the center. Every
time he allowed himself to become too angry, the pain
started. It worried him, but he had not spoken to Aisha about
it. Sheradyn would be arriving tomorrow. If it kept up, then
he would speak to Sheradyn about it. He would find it easier
to talk to a male healer, than another pushy female. Claw had
spoken to Baroucha only once about it and then never gone
back; sending Morcar to pick up the medicine she had
blended for it.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
332
Now the medicine seemed to be less and less effective,
and Claw was both afraid of what Sheradyn would tell him,
and dismissive of it. He knew that he was getting old. He and
Aisha should not have waited so long to have Merissa. If it
worsened, he would try again to find his brother Brock in
Creeya. Brock had last visited when Merissa was twelve, and
told Claw that should he have need of him to write to the
Grand Master; that the Grand Master could find anyone in the
realm. Their father, Suleahan Redhand had exiled Brock
because of a family scandal. The first thing that Claw had
done upon becoming chieftain ninety years ago had been to
rescind that order of banishment; however, Brock had only
come home once and refused to stay.
Malthus' behavior toward Darmyk's cat irritated him.
Resentment flared. Claw had been Darmyk's surrogate father
for three years, and now he had been displaced by Malthus.
He had wanted Merissa to marry eventually, but had never
really considered how that would affect his relationship with
his grandcub. Malthus felt like an intruder to Claw whenever
they disagreed about Darmyk.
Claw pulled off his boots, set them to the side of the bed,
shrugged out of his robe and tossed it on the floor. He paused
for breath, wondering how so little exertion could set off
another round of discomfort. Yanking the string on his
trousers, Claw shoved out of his pants and small clothes. He
threw the blankets back and slid between the cool sheets,
wishing Aisha had got here first and warmed them.
Aisha came in and disrobed. Claw ran his eyes over her
and forgot his troubles. Despite the white hair, she was still a

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
333
fine looking bitch, and he always looked at her with the eye of
memory.
"You shouldn't fuss so with Malthus." Aisha settled next to
him and put her head on his shoulder as she stroked his hairy
chest. "It upsets Merissa. The mon is only trying to be a good
father as he sees it."
"I don't like him," Claw grumbled, digging his hand into
the muscles of his left arm in an attempt to relieve some of
the pain. "Something about the mon just doesn't ring true."
"You're judging him by his race, Claw. I know you'd've
liked it better if Merissa had married one of her own kind, but
love is love."
"Kiss me, old bitch, and I'll show you love."
"Stop snarling and I will."
* * * *
Caimbeul stood before the full-length mirror in the
Lawgiver's House that had been given to him. He rubbed his
hand over his stubbly chin. Not even Pandeena knew about
this freakish talent of his that he had inherited from his
fireborn granddam. Eirian and her lycan husband, Clachmund,
had been unable to have children because their genetics were
too far apart. So they went to Ishla's temple for the potions
that would allow them to produce a child of their joining.
However, such potions generally contained an arcane
mutagen, and odd talents cropped up now and again in their
children and grandchildren.
The lawgiver had one of those—actually he had a handful
of them, but he only intended to use one tonight.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
334
Studying himself more closely in the mirror, Caimbeul
stroked his face with his forefingers. His broad, squared-
jawed face thinned. The stubbly beard vanished. His grizzled
hair turned a light golden brown and hung to his waist. He
gained height and youth. He could not completely lose the
breadth of his shoulders, but his body was now narrow hipped
with a nice waist. He looked less like a bear, and more like a
fireborn. But he would still smell lycan. Caimbeul went to his
closet. Nevin had left a lot behind and some of it would fit this
form.
He chose through things that were nice, but with nothing
that might have identified them as having belonged to
Nevin—such as the formal blue robe with the red wolves
embroidered on it, although he would have loved to have
worn it. That lawgiver had had many fine things, but then
villages liked to see their leaders—lawgivers, priests, and
chieftains—in fine clothing, so most of it had probably been
solstice gifts. Caimbeul pondered on why Nevin had left so
much behind so willingly. But he knew the rumors that Nevin
had been in love with Isranon, and love made myn do strange
things.
Then his thoughts strayed to Pandeena. Love—I know its
strangeness well.
Once clothed in a black silken robe, Caimbeul placed a
handful of seed crystals in his pocket. It would not do for him
to get one of the females pregnant if his suspicions were
correct. Pandeena would be unhappy with him for what he
was about to do, but he had to test his hunch. He would go to
at least three of the women tonight, a sa'necari, a human,

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
335
and the only lycan, Clodagh. Finally, he belted his knives on.
These were not the ones he had carried when his son was
alive—these blades had never taken a life. They were the
ones that Pandeena had insisted upon buying him after the
incident with the Waejontori patrol.
He found his way back to the compound, and stood for a
moment, studying the houses, from the shade of an oak
cluster. He heard someone approach him from the side.
"Have you come for some?" the young male whispered.
"Indeed." Caimbeul put a sneer in his voice. "I didn't
expect to find a place like this among my country cousins,
although I frequented them often enough in the cities."
Caimbeul turned and faced him. He tried to remember
where he had seen this one before, to place his name, but it
wouldn't come.
"You're new here, aren't you?"
"I just rode in yesterday. I'm most recently from
Cherdon'datar. Since news of the rebellion got out, a lot of us
are drifting back. I was talking to a friend at Hereward's ...
and he said to come here."
The younger male muffled a laugh with his hand. "Yes, this
is the place. Just be discreet, we don't want the priest or that
stuffy lawgiver catching us."
Caimbeul smiled. "No, we wouldn't want them spoiling a
bit of fun. I've never known a lawgiver or a priest who didn't
have a prude's tail up their ass."
"What's your name?"
"Patton."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
336
"Nice to meet you, I'm Shalto. What flavor cock-niche do
you favor? We have human, lycan, and sa'necari."
"Well, Shalto, I'm a mon who likes them all, partial to
whatever I can stick mine into. I'm a well-traveled mon. What
do you suggest?"
"The sa'necari. We've got five of them, lovely holes they
have and very cooperative."
"Don't they bite?"
"Nah. They're corded. They don't bite unless you're into
that stuff. I know some that are, but I'm not."
"So which house do you recommend I try first?"
Shalto pointed at Kandaishee's home. "That one. She's the
best. And she sucks and swallows too."
"Sounds like my kind of bitch. Have a drink with me
tomorrow so I can give you a proper thanks?"
"Certainly. Meet me at the Difficult Horse around noon."
That I will, Shalto. That I will. Caimbeul went to
Kandaishee's door and knocked.
"Who is it?" Kandaishee asked.
"A friend told me you could see to my needs," Caimbeul
replied.
Kandaishee opened the door and stepped back. She wore a
lycan style robe and immediately started opening it. The
sa'necari had fine, delicate features, dark-skin, and long black
hair.
Caimbeul noted that she appeared to be nearly four
months pregnant. She looked tired and worn.
"Do you want to do it here, or in the bedroom?"
Kandaishee asked him.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
337
"I like it in bed."
"You're a new one," Kandaishee remarked as she led him
to her bedroom and stretched out to wait for him with her
legs opened.
"I only arrived in Wolffgard today."
"Is there a position you prefer?"
"What ever is comfortable for you with that belly. When's it
due?
"Late winter."
Caimbeul climbed onto the bed with her. He stroked her
body for a long time, turned her on her side, and took her
from the back when his fingers told him she was ready. As he
moved inside her, enjoying the way she moaned with
sensuous pleasure, Caimbeul discreetly slid his Readers gift
through her in a low level scan too gentle to be noticed.
Someone had been in her mind, but if he went deeply enough
to find out more, she would become aware of his presence.
Not even sex would mask that intrusion.
He expanded slightly, focusing on the child, as the
approach of orgasm threatened to drive all thought from his
mind. Caimbeul found traces of psychic scarring in her womb
and surrounding the child. The pregnancy originated from a
violent rape. Revulsion washed through him and he nearly
lost his erection. He withdrew his awareness from
Kandaishee's body, forgot everything but the way her warm,
wet sheath clutched at his cock and exploded inside her.
Caimbeul rolled onto his back and stared up at the ceiling.
His hand idly stroked her.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
338
A knock came at the front door. Kandaishee sat up. "You
have to leave now."
She followed him to the door without bothering to put her
clothes on. He caught the glint of tears in her eyes as the
door opened. She let in a young wolf that could not have
been more than fifteen. The youth immediately put his hand
between her legs as if Caimbeul was not even there.
"Let your fangs down," the youth ordered her. "You know
how I like it."
The old wolf slipped past them and out the door.
He stood in the darkness, with his fists tightening and
relaxing only to tighten again. Part of him said that he should
not care what happened to a sa'necari—sa'necari had
murdered his son. Yet something about the weary
helplessness of Kandaishee touched him. Caimbeul pushed
the thoughts away. He had come here to investigate, not lose
himself in pity.
He considered which way to go next, watching the youths
and a few older wolves sneaking through the compound, most
of them pretending not to see each other. Caimbeul headed
for the main longhouse.
His chest constricted, wondering if Clodagh was part of
this, certainly Shalto had said there was a lycan slut, but
what if there were a lycan living here that Caimbeul did not
know about? Did he give the words or not?
Clodagh answered his knock in the nude. Her young face
had lines of exhaustion that Caimbeul had missed the day he
met her. Either that, or she had been roughly handled for a

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
339
few days. Her blue eyes held the haunted ghosts of
nightmares past and present lurking in their depths.
"On the floor or in the bed?" Clodagh asked without
waiting for him to speak, weary resignation underlined her
words.
Had her mind been touched also, like Kandaishee's?
Kandaishee's could have been old damage from an encounter
with one of her own kind before reaching here, but Clodagh?
No, that made no sense. "Bed."
"You're new," she said, leading the way and pointing at her
bed. "How do you want me, on my back or on my knees?"
Caimbeul shrugged, and slipped out of his robe. "On your
back will be fine."
He felt dirtier with Clodagh than he had with Kandaishee.
She lay back and he straddled her on his knees. Her nose
wrinkled and she sniffed his erection. "You've already been
with one of us?"
"Is there some rule that says I can't have more than one
in a night?"
Clodagh shook her head. "You can have as many as you
like."
He straightened out on top of her, his heavy body pushing
her deep into the rushes filling her mattress.
Clodagh whimpered and turned her face to the side to
breathe. "Stick it in and get it over with."
Caimbeul smelled the reek of despair clinging to her, and
he sat back on his haunches. He fumbled in the pocket of his
robe and took out a flat circular, and highly polished crystal.
"What's that?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
340
"You've never seen one before?"
"No," Clodagh said, watching him closer.
"It's a seed crystal. It absorbs and stores the fertile parts
of my seed so that I cannot get you pregnant. They're fairly
common in mage communities, and cities with them."
"I can't believe you're one of them. You're too
considerate."
"Them?"
"The wolves that run this compound by night. Now please
get it over with."
She spread her legs and parted the lips of her womanhood
with her fingers. Caimbeul fitted the crystal inside her, gently,
yet firmly against the mouth of her cervix while working the
bump of her clit with his huge thumb.
"Just stick it in," Clodagh moaned unhappily. "Don't play
with me."
Caimbeul had never met a slut as distressed to be on her
back as Clodagh. Pandeena had always been right when she
called him a lecher—yet he had never felt filthier in his life
than when he once more stretched out on top of Clodagh, and
pushed his sword into her sheath. Clodagh's vagina was small
and tight and barely able to take him in. He moved slowly and
cautiously inside her, worried that he might tear her. He
humped without lifting his weight from her so that as much of
his body was touching hers at all times as possible. His
Readers gift spread through her delicately to match his
thrusts. He found her pregnancy. She appeared to be about
two months along. It had to have happened around the time
that the previous lawgiver vanished. The same psychic

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
341
scarring was present in her womb. This was another child of a
violent rape. He found something odd, however, about the
genetics: they were blurred. He had no way to tell if the fetus
was lycan or not.
His milk spilled into her, and he rolled off, preparing to
break the link, as he drew the crystal from her body.
Clodagh's eyes widened. "It's you! It's you. You've finally
come for me." Then she doubled up, clutching at her head.
"Get out of here, Padruig."
Caimbeul fled, snatching up his robe, and walked across
the yard in the direction of a human's sheeling. When he
reached it and lifted his hand to knock, it hit him: he had not
told Clodagh his name.
He repeated his actions with the human, Ethne, and found
that her child was lycan. He wondered how many more of the
women were pregnant as he walked wearily home, feeling
every bit the old lecher that Pandeena so readily accused him
of being. They had to do something without tipping their
hands off to Malthus.
When he returned home, Caimbeul found the lights on in
the Lawgiver House and went in cautiously, wearing his
proper form. Pandeena sat on his sofa, drinking his whiskey
and staring into the flames of the fireplace.
"What's wrong, Pandeena?"
She lifted her face to his and he saw a distant flame in her
gaze. "The wedding arch has been taken down. The myn at
the taverns are all toasting and celebrating Malthus' potency."
Her shoulders slumped. "I knew ... I knew ... I knew this was

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
342
going to happen. I knew it. But I never dreamed it would be
so soon."
"This complicates matters." Caimbeul had wanted to tell
her about his discovery, but now he held back. "You're still
certain that he's the Serpent? A sa'necari of his years should
not have been able to.... "Caimbeul searched for a proper
word, not wanting to offend Pandeena, and still feeling dirty
from what he had done. "A sa'necari who was clearly
approaching forty, should be sterile, or nearly so."
"It confounds me," Pandeena said. "Where have you been
so late?"
"Investigating a few things."
"What?"
"I'm not ready to talk about them. Can you get me a list of
the houses and sheelings on the compound? And the names
of all the residents and those who work there?"
"Why?"
Caimbeul shook his head. "Just get them for me."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
343
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
ANOTHER FUNERAL
Cooley moved the crate close to Larkspur and stood on it
to brush her down. He spent hours with her every day since
Kynyr told him the horse was his. She was stabled now in the
small barn in the yard behind Cahira's shop.
Being with Larkspur comforted Cooley in ways that nothing
else could since his father's death. A few days ago some of
his father's friends had brought two chests filled with Cullen's
personal belongings to Cooley. A small circle of grown-ups
now knew that he was Cullen's son and they were looking out
for him.
The swelling from the foal she carried had not yet become
noticeable. Cooley wrapped his arms around her neck,
hugging her. "I love you, Larkspur. You're the best horse in
the whole world."
Rory slipped into the barn and leaned over the stall door.
"Did you take it?"
Cooley stepped down from the crate and moved it to a
safe corner, before letting himself out of the stall. "Yeah.
Caimbeul got the list. What's he looking for anyway?"
Rory glanced around, making a show of checking to see
that they were alone. "Malthus. That's my guess. I didn't like
the way he looked at you."
"He scares me ... following me around ... asking questions.
Bucky tried to kick him yesterday."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
344
"Yup. He's scary all right."
Cooley's face screwed up and a rush of tears emerged
from his eyes. "I'm afraid to go back."
"To the manor?"
"Um hmm."
"Talk to Todd. You don't have ta go back. He won't make
you."
"He'll think I'm acting like a baby."
"Nah, he won't. You just talk to him. Promise?"
"Okay."
"They making you go to the funeral?"
"No. It's my turn to watch the shop."
"Okay. It's time for me to change clothes so I can walk
behind the wagon."
* * * *
Todd drove the wagon bearing Ramsey's coffin that led the
funeral procession with Glenna Fitzgerald riding on the seat
beside him crying on Cahira's shoulder. Aisha's big carriage
came next. Kynyr and Kady rode with Aisha and her family.
Claw came next, mounted on a proud-cut gelding, leading
sixty guardsmyn. The rest of the village followed, mostly on
foot, but with some driving wagons and others on horseback.
More and more people joined the procession as it wended
its way through the village. The loss of a guardsmon always
affected the community deeply and everyone that could do so
turned out to pay their last respects to Ramsey Fitzgerald.
Beyond the Willodarian Shrine, Sanctuary was silent. The
women who lived there with their children huddled in their

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
345
homes and did not come out. Preece Malloy and half a dozen
of the young wolves who worked at the camp loitered
beneath the trees across from the shrine, making no move to
join the crowds.
The carriage parked in front of the shrine. Georgie Rogan
jumped down from the driver's seat and came around to open
the door. The bitches left the carriage by the left door while
Finn emerged first from the right. He stepped down and
moved to the side. Kynyr handed his crutches to Robert
Morcar. Odhran and Lon extended their hands and helped
Kynyr to the ground, yet the young guardsmon still managed
to put too much weight on his wounded leg and nearly fell.
Odhran steadied him with a hand on Kynyr's arms. Then
Robert returned Kynyr's crutches.
Kady came around to Kynyr's side. "You okay?"
"Yeah." Kynyr's smile sagged around the edges. "I'm fine."
Claw's guardsmyn held the crowds back, maintaining a
corridor for them to walk along. Kynyr moved the slowest and
so he came last in the line, except for those who insisted
upon staying with him: Robert Morcar and Kady. He walked
as well as he could, trying not to wince or grimace each time
he put his wounded leg down wrong. Kynyr grimly refused to
give into his injuries. Pride kept him moving.
Pandeena stood at the head of the grave beside Caimbeul.
To their left stood Glenna Fitzgerald, sobbing, with Erskine's
arm around her shoulders. Pandeena began the formal
prayers for the dead, casting a handful of flowers and fragrant
herbs into the grave, and finally a libation of mead. She
gestured to the guardsmyn standing beside the coffin and

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
346
they lowered it into the ground. Erskine scooped up a handful
of dirt and placed it in Glenna's hands. She addressed
Ramsey's spirit, wishing him peace in the next life, and cast
the dirt over the coffin. Erskine threw the next handful of dirt.
Then he and Glenna moved to stand beside Pandeena.
One by one, people passed and cast the dirt over the
coffin. Kady went before Kynyr and turned to help him once
her small handful of soil had gone into the grave. He shook
his head, balanced on his good leg, and cast his contribution
over Ramsey's coffin.
Those who had made their offerings clustered in small
groups. Kynyr got his crutches settled comfortably and moved
away from the grave. The funeral service concluded with
Glenna planting a tree in the soil covering Ramsey's coffin.
Tradition decreed that if the tree flourished, then Ramsey's
spirit had found rest. If the tree died, then the priest would
say more prayers and plant warding herbs such as rue and
garlic over the grave.
Kynyr looked around for Kady. When he failed to spot her,
he turned to Robert Morcar. "Did you see where Kady went?"
Morcar thrust his chin at a stand of trees along the edge of
the cemetery. "Looked like she wanted a private spot to cry.
Losing Cullen ... and now two funerals this close together ...
both of them friends of hers."
"Yeah. I'll go find her."
* * * *
Kady fought back her tears. She had never had many real
friends; her father had discouraged her from forming bonds

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
347
with the wolves that frequented his tavern. When Hereward
withdrew his protection, Kady had swiftly discovered who her
true friends were. Ramsey, Eideard, Robert, Erskine, and
especially, Kynyr were the only ones who stood by her after
her liaison with Cullen became known. Shame suffused Kady
as she remembered Cullen and warred with grief for
dominance in her heart. She wondered if, perhaps, she really
was a slut. Certainly she had felt physically aroused as she
flirted with the customers. Over the past year, the urge to
mate had grown to an intolerable level, and only Cullen had
been bold enough to risk her father's ire by initiating her into
the pleasures of sex.
Shame burned hotter within Kady, becoming a cauldron of
emotion stirred by a stick of guilt. Hereward had vehemently
rejected the old custom of the wild cousins. Kady had defied
him by having an intense affair with Cullen Blackwood. Her
grief was as much for herself as for her slain protector. She
glanced around at the grieving people, and a fresh surge of
guilt made her want to be alone, to flee from the crowds.
Todd had forbidden her to go anywhere alone; demon guilt
and shame made her want to run and run ... to get away ...
to find a safe place to cry where no one would make
assumptions about her tears.
Kady fled into a thicket of elms at the far side of the
cemetery that were further shielded from view by an old
growth of briars and a wealth of sweet pepper bushes. In the
concealment of the trees and bushes, she dropped to her
knees with a sob and buried her face in her hands.
"Hello, Kady."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
348
Her head jerked up and she stared at Preece lounging
against an elm tree. "Leave me alone."
"I got something for you, slut."
Preece was on her before she could gather her wits. Her
brief training with Todd disappeared in a rush of terror, as
Preece forced her onto her back and pinioned her wrists in
one hand. "No, Preece. Please. No."
She writhed and struggled to get her hands free.
"I told you, Kady. I have something for you. It's long and
hard and fits nicely into your flesh hole."
"I hate you."
Preece sneered. "Kynyr wants you. I saw it in his eyes. But
you're mine, Kady."
"Never. I'll never be yours."
"I'm going to own you." He unbuckled her knife belt and
threw it in the bushes. Then Preece shoved his hand down her
pants and fingered her clit. "I've enough gold to pay whatever
bride price your da wants."
Kady snarled, spit in his face, and shifted into her hybrid
form faster than she had ever believed possible. "Let go of
me!"
"I'm going to marry you ... just so Kynyr can't have you."
"I'll go to the priest, damn you. I'd rather be a nun than
marry you."
"If I can't have you, I'll kill you."
"Go to hell."
"Kady?" Kynyr's voice came from the far side of the copse.
Preece clamped a hand over Kady's mouth. "Call out and
I'll kill him."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
349
Kady ceased struggling, yet could not suppress a whimper
as Preece yanked her pants down. Kynyr. Go away, Kynyr.
You're not well. You can't fight him.
* * * *
Negotiating the crowds on his crutches proved more of a
challenge than Kynyr had expected. By the time that he
reached the trees, his leg had begun to throb and ache. He
looked around for her. The thick copse of elm trees had a
cluster of old growth briars along one side and a spill of sweet
pepper bushes beyond that.
"Kady?" He frowned and called out again. "Kady?"
A muffled whimper drew his attention to the sweet pepper
bushes. Kynyr rounded the bushes as quietly as he could
manage on the crutches. He saw Preece lying on top of Kady
with her wrists pinioned above her head. His lips peeled back
from his teeth.
"Get off her!"
"Kynyr, no! He'll kill you." Kady shrieked.
Preece rolled off Kady, scrambled backwards, and got his
feet under him. He reached for the knives at his side. "Bloody
cripple wants to fight?"
Kynyr lifted himself up on his crutches, swinging his body
forward as his good leg snapped out and caught Preece in the
chest hard enough to stagger him.
Freed, Kady's fear gave way to rage. She tackled Preece's
calves and took him to the ground.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
350
Preece grabbed her hair, pulling her head back. Kady
pounded her fist into his groin like a hammer, and he
screamed.
Kynyr came down too hard on his bad leg. It buckled. He
caught himself with the left crutch, barely managing to keep
his feet as pain shot through his injured leg. Shrugging off the
pain, the young guardsmon drove the right crutch into
Preece's stomach.
Gasping for breath, Preece rolled and dislodged Kady. She
hit him in the face before he could get clear of her.
Preece scrambled away from them. "Fucking ... slut."
"Malloy!" Kynyr started after him. "You so much as say her
name ... I'll kill you."
Preece fled.
Victory lent color to Kady's cheeks as she got to her feet
and hugged Kynyr, kissing him. "He said he'd kill you if I
called out."
A bemused smile lit Kynyr's face. "He can try."
"Oh, Kynyr!" She kissed him again. "You're impossible."
"We make a good team, Kady."
"Yeah."
"Will you go to the faire with me?"
Kady stepped back. "If you keep your hands off my tits..."
Kynyr shrugged, his smile yielding to a naughty boy look.
"I promise to try."
Kady laughed.
* * * *

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
351
The day had been more tiring of the spirit than of the
body. Todd sat with a bottle of whiskey in front of him and a
glass half-filled. His tremendous lycan capacity for hard liquor
barely felt two doubles. "Will the tree flourish, Pandeena?"
Pandeena stared at her hands clasped together on the
table. "Are you asking for the truth or for comfort?"
Todd glanced at Cahira nursing a glass of brandy before he
answered. "The truth."
"I doubt it. Have you looked at Cullen and Eideard's trees?
They're barely hanging on. The only thing that has kept them
alive is that someone has been feeding them tears."
Cahira stirred with a loud inhalation. "Cooley."
"I thought so." Pandeena nodded.
"Kynyr spoke of Ramsey and Eideard so often in his letters
home that I felt I knew them long before I met them."
Todd leaned over and hugged his wife. "They were good
myn."
The three fell silent for a time. Cahira refilled her glass and
pinned Pandeena with a glance. "What would make the trees
flourish?"
Pandeena's expression darkened. "Vengeance."
A pounding at the front door ended their conversation.
Todd went to the door and opened it. "We're closed," he said
before taking a good look at the tall mon standing on the
board walk.
"And I'll whip your ass." She threw back her hood and
grinned at him.
"Maevra!" Todd hugged her. "It's been too long."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
352
"Hasn't it though?" Maevra de Groot had a droll smile and
a crisp voice. "Come out and give the children a hand, Todd."
"Sure."
Todd stepped onto the boardwalk and spotted the four
children standing with an enormous brown chest in the
shadows of the street. Maevra followed him. They each
grabbed a handle and heaved. The chest was heavy and
awkward, but with a minimum of effort, Todd and Maevra
managed to get it into the middle of the shop floor.
The children—two boys and two girls—trailed in after them
and, when the lamplight revealed their faces, Todd received a
pleasant surprise. He had not seen them in close to eighty
years, yet they had not changed a bit.
One little boy, his flame-colored hair more orange than
red, wore a leather jacket and cap that had flaps over the
ears. His head sported a strange pair of eyeglasses, the
lenses set in leather straps. "Hi, Todd! We only got a minute."
"Pie? Bodi? Lilac? Sugar? What are you doing here?"
He seized the nearest boy, a little fellow with strawberry
blond hair, an upside down triangle of a smile, and big blue
eyes. "Bodi!"
Todd swung the little boy around, making him laugh;
hugged Lilac who was patting her pouches to hear the coins
jingle in a nervous manner; politely bowed and kissed the
hand of the oldest girl who had long marmalade hair and
dreamy eyes that seemed to look on many planes of
existence at the once. Then he shook hands with Pie and
thumped his glasses. "What have you brought?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
353
"Presents," said Pieface. "Dyna heard your grandson got
shot. She can't get here before mid-autumn so she sent us
with them. We gotta go back now. See ya later."
Pieface's magic swirled through the room in rainbow colors
and the four children vanished.
Todd's eyebrows shot to his hairline.
Maevra laughed. "Beware of gremlins bearing gifts."
Pandeena rose from the table. "Uhmn, Todd. Cahira.
There's something you need to know. Dyna is far more than
she seems."
"I can tell that." Todd ran his hand through his hair.
Maevra cleared her throat to get their attention as she
unshouldered a back pack. "Before you get distracted with the
contents, can we take care of my business first? I need to be
back in Creeya by morning."
"Certainly." Cahira fetched a glass from the cabinet and
gestured at Maevra. "Brandy or whiskey?"
"Brandy, if you don't mind." Maevra placed her pack on the
table, opened it, and took out several books. "The Guild has
lent the dwarves a hand replicating the books in that library
they unearthed. They can't bring the books out because once
the fresh air hits them they disintegrate." She shoved the
books across the table to Cahira and accepted a glass of
brandy. "The language appears to be ancient Engla-Yurpan.
But a lot of the words have us baffled. Since you're one of the
best intuitive translators, Patriarch Mikkal wants you give it a
try."
"This is going to cost you a lot." Cahira opened the first
book.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
354
"And what doesn't?" Maevra took a sip of brandy. "What's
this about your grandson being shot?"
"I'll tell it." Todd joined them at the table.
Maevra's expression became more and more serious and
reflective as Todd told her all that had happened. "Did you
save the arrowheads?"
"Ayup."
"Can I take some of them back with me? I'm certain that
the Patriarch will be willing to set our toxins experts to work
on an antidote."
"I appreciate that, Maevra." Cahira closed the book,
reached across the table, and squeezed Maevra's hand.
Pandeena eyed Maevra from where she sat on the floor,
contemplating the chest. She straightened and joined them at
the table. "You're Guild?"
"Courier. I don't do fieldwork; if you're looking for an
assassin." Maevra's tone gained an edge and she sized
Pandeena up.
"I want to send a message to Grand Master Ceejorn and
High Patriarch Mikkal."
"Say it and I'll decide whether I want to carry it or not."
"The Butchering Serpent is in Hell's Widow ... or possibly,
Wolffgard itself."
Fire and steel flashed in Maevra's eyes. "You're sure of
that?"
"Yes. The Trickster must think so too ... otherwise why
open her armory to Todd Sinclair?"
"The Trickster?" Todd's eyebrows knitted as he lifted his
glass to his lips. "That chest is from her?"

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
355
"You didn't know?" Pandeena shifted in her chair to direct
her gaze at him. "The Trickster rescued you after the ambush
at Kinsdale Wood."
Todd half-choked on a swallow of whiskey and spewed part
of it back into his glass. "Dyna is ... Dynanna?"
"That little bit of magic you witnessed earlier? Those four
'children' are her paladins. They aren't children. Well, they
are, but they aren't. I can't explain it any better than that."
Maevra burst out laughing at Todd's discomfiture. "Well,
I'm convinced. I'll take your message to the Grand Master
and the Patriarch. Now, I need to get on my way. I rather
imagine that the Ceejorn and Mikkal will be sending presents
and help as soon as they hear about the Serpent."
As soon as Maevra departed, they went to investigate the
contents of the chest.
"The Trickster..." Cahira's hands hovered over the chest,
trembling with trepidation. "The trouble she has gotten people
into and out of is both legion and legend."
"Be careful with whatever is in there. Half the time she
doesn't bother to figure out what things do before she starts
handing them out." Pandeena grabbed the lid and pulled it
open. "But let's see what's in it anyway."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
356
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
THE LESSONS OF TODD
Todd went looking for Kynyr. His grandson had not been
the same since Ramsey's death. He found him in the salle,
stretched out on the mat on his back. Todd watched in silence
as Kynyr, his face twisted into a mask of anger and
determination, raised the damaged leg again and again and
again.
"Kynyr..."
"Let me be!"
Todd's mouth tightened for an instant, and then he slipped
off his shoes and bowed to the mat. "That's enough."
"No, it isn't."
Todd knelt beside Kynyr and grabbed his leg as it rose,
stopping it. "Take your pants off and let me examine your leg
before you do anything else."
Kynyr glared at Todd. "I'm going to walk without those
fucking crutches."
"Let me see your leg and I'll get you a cane."
Kynyr heaved a sigh and let his leg drop to the mat. He
untied the drawstring on his pants and slipped out of them.
Todd ran his gaze along the puckered scars on Kynyr's calf
and thigh. The wounds from the arrows, which had not been
poisoned, had closed and healed without leaving a mark; the
ones that had been poisoned, however, had left ugly scars
that would never go away. Seeing no signs of infection or

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
357
irritation, Todd grasped Kynyr's leg and began kneading the
muscles. "Tell me if it hurts."
Kynyr winced. "It's tender."
"How tender?"
"I can handle it."
"Lay back and let me work with it."
Kynyr obeyed.
Todd tested the flexibility of Kynyr's leg, lifting and
bending, watching Kynyr's face for signs of pain. "At least you
haven't made anything worse."
It seemed as if it were the longest hour of Kynyr's life as
his grandfather worked on and with his leg, manipulating the
muscles, stretching them, and kneading them. They pursued
Kynyr's goal of wholeness together, testing the limits of
Kynyr's damaged leg. When it became clear to Todd that the
pain had become too great, he called a halt to it and fetched
the cane as he had promised.
Todd laid the cane across Kynyr's lap. "How's that?"
Kynyr's eyes widened as he fingered the curved head of a
gryphon wrought in kendaryl topping a hard rock maple cane.
"Where did you get this?"
"The last time that Maeva de Groot brought some books
for your Gram to translate was two weeks after the ambush.
Three days ago she brought this along with some things your
Gram had ordered. It's a gift from the Mikkal High Patriarch of
Hadjys. He said to give it to you when you were ready for it. I
guess that's now."
"It's beautiful."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
358
"Oh, it's more than that. Grasp the stick and give the top a
twist."
Kynyr frowned a question. Todd gave a nod. Kynyr twisted
the top and it came free. He stared at the slender sword
blade that emerged from the hard rock maple. "You're right."
"Use it well. I'll expect you up here at dawn and again an
hour after dinner."
For answer, Kynyr laid the sword cane aside and hugged
his grandfather.
* * * *
Kady sat on the dresser stool in front of the mirror,
brushing her long flaxen hair and eyeing her reflection
thoughtfully. The tansy had cleared more from Kady's body
than just the abomination that had been growing in her womb
since the first time that Cormic Parry and his two friends,
Keith and Donald Greenlea, raped her. Kady felt clean for the
first time in weeks. She had tried to stay strong, be strong,
but underneath it all—she realized now—she had been
terrified and despairing, ready to surrender all sense of
herself. The knowledge of how close she had come to
breaking when Gorgarty assaulted her in Cahira's backroom
haunted her.
"Get yourself together; we're going for a drink at the
Difficult Horse."
The brush paused in Kady's hand and hovered near her ear
as she glanced at her door, which she had not heard open.
Todd leaned against the doorway.
"Is Cahira coming?" Kady laid the brush down.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
359
"No. Just us."
She sucked in a breath and clasped her hands together in
her lap to mask her shaking. A rush of fear that Kady thought
she had gotten past swept her up as she remembered
Gorgarty's words to her: had Todd inside you yet? No. Todd
isn't like that. He isn't. He can't be. "I'll have to change
clothes. I can't go like this."
She waved her hands at her sloppy shirt and trousers.
Todd shook his head at her. "That's exactly what you
should wear. Belt on those knives I gave you."
Kady started braiding her hair, letting the sides blouse a
bit in the way she usually wore it.
Todd crossed the room and caught her hands. "Not like
that."
Kady froze as Todd undid her braid, grabbed the brush,
and slicked her hair down into a severe look. He braided it
and then folded it up into a knot at the base of her neck,
which he tied with a thong of black leather. She shivered.
"What are you doing?"
"Taking the softness out of your look."
"We're not going just for a drink?"
"We're Bearding the Bear."
"What's that?"
"Follow my lead and you'll understand."
It's a lesson. Kady felt dizzy with relief. There was nothing
ominous in his insistence on them going alone. She retrieved
her blades from the weapons rack that Todd had built her on
the wall beside her bed and buckled them on, settling the

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
360
knives comfortably at her hips and strapping the end of the
sheaths to her thighs.
Todd squeezed her shoulder. "Remember, Kady. Hot rage
gets you killed. Cold rage gets them killed. Never lose your
temper. Learn to use your temper."
"I'll try."
* * * *
Hereward stopped in mid-sentence as Todd and Kady
came into the tavern. He blinked and then stared at his
daughter before walking over to the table. "Kady..."
Kady stiffened and averted her eyes. Her father had not
spoken to her since she moved in with Cahira and Todd.
Always before, Kady had had at least two companions and
sometimes as many as four. She knew the gossip, having
gotten it from Rory who was always accurate. People were
saying that she had seduced Gorgarty and was now sleeping
with Todd.
"Address me, not her," Todd interrupted Hereward. "As her
guurmondru, I will order for both of us."
The archaic word stopped Hereward in his tracks. "Of
course, Master Sinclair."
"Mead for both my student and myself."
A loud laugh drew Kady's attention to the table where six
young wolves sat drinking: Cormic Parry, the Greenlea
brothers—Keith and Donald—Iollan Newell, and two others
that she failed to recognize, which meant they must be new
to Wolffgard.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
361
Cormic nudged Donald. "Looks like the slut has found a
new cock to slip in her hole."
Donald laughed, thrusting his middle finger underhanded
at Kady suggestively.
Kady glared, snarling under her breath.
"Ignore them." Todd tapped Kady's arm to get her
attention. "Talk is cheap. If one approaches you, remember
what knees and elbows are for."
Kady lowered her head and became very interested in the
tankard of mead her father placed in front of her. Hereward
appeared to be struggling to ignore her to the same degree
that she was trying to ignore him.
Hereward turned to Todd. "Bringing her here like this ...
just the two of you ... there's going to be trouble."
Todd took a swallow from his tankard, his expression
unreadable as he told Hereward in a voice that was far too
quiet, "Keep your club behind the bar."
"You're looking for trouble."
"Only if it finds us."
"My daughter..."
Todd crossed his arms on the table and leaned into
Hereward's face. "She isn't yours any more. She's mine."
Kady hissed low. "You let them rape me ... told me to get
used to it."
Todd touched her arm and Kady went silent.
Hereward Wiggins retreated to his bar, looking as if a
demon was chewing his tail.
"They're watching us," Todd whispered.
Kady started to look, but Todd again tapped her arm.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
362
"Pick a spot on the wall, Kady. Focus on that and then let
your vision open all the way to the corners like I taught you."
She obeyed. "Oh, the guy that laughed. That's Cormic
Parry and his buddies ... they..." She blinked, for sitting in a
darkened corner were Erskine Faraday and Robert Morcar. On
the opposite side of the room sat Odhran and Lon Angelsey.
"You set this up."
"Ayup. You may not have noticed, but Cormic and his
friends have been following you around for a week."
"What?" Kady faltered. "What do you mean?"
"Rory saw them. Give me a big laugh, Kady ... as if I've
told you a joke."
Kady threw her head back and laughed. At first it sounded
forced. However, after a moment, it rose from her diaphragm
full and free.
Cormic glanced at his buddies. Donald snickered. The six
rose together and sauntered over to Kady's table. "What's
with the old geezer? You got a taste for gray cock or
something?"
Donald grinned and his buddies laughed.
Todd said nothing, nor did Kady.
"Hey, I'm talking to you, slut." Cormic growled deep in his
throat. "You want a real wolf, come out back and I'll cram it
in good this time."
Still, Todd and Kady ignored him.
"I said, come out back. My bone is throbbing for you."
Cormic yanked Kady from the chair and several things
happened at once.

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
363
Kady stomped his instep, brought her knee hard into his
groin, and slammed her palm up under his chin hard enough
to knock his head back. Her adversary hit the ground and
curled up, clutching his balls and cursing between sobbing
breaths.
Morcar and Erskine charged across the common room just
as Todd stepped between Kady and the mon's buddies. "Kick
him, Kady."
Kady kicked Cormic in the head and stomach in quick
succession. When his hands came up, one to fend her off and
the other to push himself out of her way, Kady stomped his
hand, breaking his fingers. "Asshole! You fucking asshole."
Cormic screamed.
"I hate you." Kady brought her foot down hard in his groin.
Todd parried a punch from Keith open-handed, snapped
his hand back in a fist, and slammed it into Keith's chest over
the heart. Keith's eyes bugged in shock. He made a choking
noise and dropped to lie unmoving at Todd's feet.
"Next?" Todd demanded in a bland tone, glancing about.
Of the other four, two had fled and the remaining two lay
moaning on the floor with Erskine and Robert standing over
them grinning. Most of the patrons had formed a circle to see
what happened.
"What's going on here?" Caimbeul strode into the common
room.
At the arrival of the lawgiver, people retreated to their
tables.
Todd gathered Kady into his arms. "They attacked us."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
364
Caimbeul knelt and touched Cormic's neck, then raised his
eyes to Todd. "He's dead." He went to Keith. "This one too."
The room went silent until Kady burst into tears. Todd
patted her back, and looked over her shoulder at Caimbeul.
"If you don't mind, Lawgiver, I'll take her home. You know
where to find us."
Hereward followed them outside and put his hand on his
daughter's shoulder.
Kady came loose from Todd's sheltering arms and spit at
her father. "Don't touch me. I hate you!"
Hereward sucked in a breath. "You killed him."
Kady stared into the disturbed face of her father, seeing
the mix of revulsion and confusion. All those months that he
had cast her to the dogs ... and yet she suddenly could not
face him. Triumph and shame warred within her at his glance.
He had let Cormic rape her; seen it happening and walked off
without a backward glance, and yet could look at her like
that. She retreated from both myn, shivering. "I-I didn't
mean to kill him."
Todd followed her, his voice calm. "Yes, you did. Deep
down inside yourself, you did. There's no shame in it, Kady."
She covered her face with her hands and backed further
away. "I kept kicking him. I couldn't stop kicking him ... and
he stopped moving ... and I kept kicking him." An edge of
hysteria crept into her voice.
"You're evil," Hereward snarled at her. "You've lost all
sense."
The word 'evil' struck as deep as knife into Kady's bosom.
For an instant she wanted to fall to her knees and beg her

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
365
father to forgive her. Anger rose suddenly, burning away the
cobwebs of shame. She straightened and held out her hand to
Todd. "You're right. I wanted to kill Cormic. He raped me
three times, Da. You let him. He got me pregnant. I took
tansy ... It's your fault, Da. When you withdrew your
protection, they started pulling me down every time they
caught me." A haunted look gave distance to her gaze, and
her voice sounded hollow. "Cormic, Keith, Donald, and
Gorgarty. They all raped me. But no one's ever going to touch
me again. No one."
Todd took Kady's hand and drew her into the protective
circle of his arm. He pinned Hereward with a glance as sharp
as a mounting pin through a butterfly. "She's my daughter
now, Hereward ... and you'll treat her as such."
"No." Hereward reached for Kady again, but Todd gave
him a firm push that backed him up several steps. "What
have you done to my daughter?"
"She's mine ... and I'm proud of her. Kady Wiggins no
longer exists. Kady Sinclair has replaced her. Treat her as
anything less and I'll thrash you within an inch of your life,
Hereward. Understand me?"
"Yes." Hereward nodded. "I understand."
Todd turned and walked away with Kady in the circle of his
arm.
* * * *
The room exploded into conversation as soon as Todd and
Kady left. Hereward stumbled in looking as if he had been
pole-axed, staggered to the bar, and snatched a bottle of

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
366
whiskey from behind the counter. He poured himself a double
in a dirty glass without thinking, gulped it down, and wiped
his mouth off on his sleeve.
"What started this?" Caimbeul scratched the stubble on his
chin and toed Cormic's corpse.
The tavern went so quiet that a brush of a feather would
have sounded loud. Caimbeul searched the faces. "Well?"
"My daughter." Hereward said without turning. "They were
going to drag her out back."
"What did you do about it?"
"Nothing. I stayed behind the bar." Hereward turned and
rested his elbow on the smooth walnut heartwood with
another double whiskey in his shaking hands.
Caimbeul saw Hereward's wife and his youngest daughter
standing in the door to the kitchen. His wife had a hard
expression, but the daughter had tears in her eyes. He
wondered where the other two daughters were. "So, you were
just going to let them rape your daughter?"
Hereward flinched, lowered his head, and refused to
answer.
"Wasn't no rape about it!" Donald Greenlea protested from
the floor where he cradled his younger brother's dead body.
"Kady's a slut. We only been giving her what she wanted."
Caimbeul pulled at his lower lip, scratched under his nose,
and turned a suddenly stern eye on Donald. "I'd say two dead
bodies is a rather strong no, wouldn't you?"
"Ya can't rape a slut."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
367
"That's bullshit. When a bitch says no ... it's no. Taking her
against her wishes—regardless of her alleged reputation—is
still rape. When you attack someone, you take your chances."
"We didn't attack her." Iollan rubbed the side of his face,
wincing when he touched the edge of his blackening eye
where Erskine had hit him.
Erskine shook his head. "Cormic, Keith, Donald, Iollan, and
two others had been throwing insults and sexual suggestions
at Kady and Todd from the moment they walked in. Then
Cormic tried to pull Kady out of the chair."
Caimbeul listened and then reached into his pouch, taking
out four strands of spellcord and strips of leather. He handed
the cord to Erskine. "Bind them. Donald Greenlea. Iollan
Newell. You're both under arrest for attempted rape. Lon,
Odhran. I'd like you to help Erskine here escort them to the
Lawgiver House and lock them in separate cells. When they
are secured, get a wagon to move the corpses to the
basement of the Lawgiver House." Caimbeul scanned the
room for someone else he considered trustworthy and his
gaze lit on Ezra. "Fetch Her Holiness Pandeena. Tell her I
want her to act as coroner."
Iollan and Donald were jerked to their feet. They thrashed
and cursed, but Erskine and his companions secured them
with a minimum of rough handling. As they vanished out the
door, Caimbeul turned to the one guardsmon remaining:
Robert Morcar, who looked badly shaken.
"Todd killed Keith with a single blow," Morcar muttered.
"I've never seen anything like it."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
368
"Yeah. He was famous for that when we were young."
Caimbeul let his gaze drift to the ceiling for an instant.
"Hereward, pour me a double."
"Who is he?" Hereward demanded as he rounded the bar
to get the lawgiver a clean glass.
Caimbeul settled into a chair and propped his feet on the
one beside him. "Todd Sinclair studied the arts of the Fae, the
Guild, the Creeyans, and the Sharani." As Caimbeul named
each fighting style, the room went another degree quieter.
"As well as his own people. Todd drove the spike through
Alistar Weems' belly." Caimbeul accepted the glass of whiskey
that Hereward poured for him and snagged the bottle out of
the tavern master's hands. "He was Tarrant Redhand's
mentor."
"That Sinclair's dead," protested someone at the back of
the room that Caimbeul could not set name to.
Caimbeul knocked the double back and refilled his glass.
"No. He was left for dead ... badly wounded ... by rights he
probably should have died. But Todd's always been a
stubborn sort." Caimbeul drained his glass a second time and
refilled it. "Mess with him, and he'll teach you your manners—
assuming you survive the lesson."
* * * *
That night, Kady Wiggins celebrated becoming Kady
Sinclair by cutting her hair off. She sat before her dresser
mirror, hacking at her long flaxen locks with a pair of sewing
scissors. "If I'm going to be a warrior, I might as well look like
one."

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
369
"Let me help you." Cahira crossed the room and took the
scissors from Kady. "How short do you want it?"
"Short enough they can't grab hold of it."
Cahira fingered the shortest lengths that Kady had cut. "A
Gormondi cut would look terrible."
"I don't care what it looks like."
"Well, I do. You're pretty, Kady."
"I don't want to look pretty." Kady growled a curse under
her breath.
Cahira gave a tiny nod with a trace of bemusement on her
lips. "Well, would you be satisfied with two inches all over?"
"I guess so, Cahira."
"You can continue calling me Cahira, if that's what you're
comfortable with. Or you can call me Gram like Kynyr.
Pandeena has already expressed her willingness to transfer
your parentage to us."
Kady's lips trembled as if she could not decide whether to
smile or cry. She swiveled in her seat and hugged Cahira.
"Gram."
THE END

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
370
SF/F/H FROM PAGETURNER EDITIONS
CAMPBELL AWARD WINNER ALEXIS A. GILLILAND'S
ROSINANTE TRILOGY
Revolution from Rosinante
Long Shot for Rosinante
Pirates of Rosinante
THE CLASSIC SCIENCE FICTION OF STUART J. BYRNE
Music of the Spheres & Other Classic SF Stories
Star Quest
Power Metal
Hoaxbreaker
The Alpha Trap (1976)
The Land Beyond the Lens: The Michael Flannigan Trilogy
(writing as John Bloodstone)
The Metamorphs & The Naked Goddess: Two Classic Pulp
Novels
Children of the Chronotron & The Ultimate Death: Two
Classic Pulp Novels
Beyond the Darkness & Potential Zero: Two Classic Pulp
Novels
The Agartha Series #1. Prometheus II
The Agartha Series #2. Colossus
The Agartha Series #3: The Golden Gardsmen
Godman (writing as John Bloodstone)
Thundar, Man of Two Worlds The Land Beyond the Lens:
The Michael Flannigan Trilogy (writing as John Bloodstone)
Last Days of Thronas (writing as John Bloodstone)

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
371
The First Star Man Omnibus: #1 Supermen of Alpha & Star
Man #2 Time Window
The Second Star Man Omnibus: #3 Interstellar Mutineers
& #4 The Cosmium Raiders
The Third Star Man Omnibus: #5 The World Changer & #6
The Slaves of Venus
The Fourth Star Man Omnibus: #7 Lost in the Milky Way &
#8. Time Trap
The Fifth Star Man Omnibus: #9 The Centaurians & #10
The Emperor
The Sixth Star Man Omnibus: #11 The Return of Star Man
& #12 Death Screen
STEFAN VUCAK'S EPPIE NOMINEE SPACE SAGA "THE
SHADOW GODS"
In the Shadow of Death
Against the Gods of Shadow
A Whisper From Shadow
Immortal in Shadow
With Shadow and Thunder
Through the Valley of Shadow
JANRAE FRANK'S #1 BESTSELLING FANTASY SAGAS
Dark Brothers of the Light Book I. Blood Rites
Dark Brothers of the Light Book II. Blood Heresy
Dark Brothers of the Light Book III. Blood Dawn
Dark Brothers of the Light Book IV: Blood Wraiths
Dark Brothers of the Light Book V: Blood Paladin
In the Darkness, Hunting: Tales of Chimquar the Lionhawk
Journey of the Sacred King I: My Sister's Keeper
Journey of the Sacred King II: Sins of the Mothers

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
372
Journey of the Sacred King III: My Father's House
THE COSMIC KALEVALA
The Saga of Lost Earths—Emil Petaja (Nebula nominee
author)
The Star Mill—Emil Petaja
The Stolen Sun—Emil Petaja
Tramontane—Emil Petaja
JACK JARDINE'S HUMOROUS SF AND MYSTERY
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #1 The Flying Saucer Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #2 The Emerald Elephant Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #3 The Golden Goddess Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #4 The Time Trap Gambit
The Mind Monsters
Unaccustomed As I Am To Public Dying & Other Humorous
and Ironic Mystery Stories
The Nymph and the Satyr
ARDATH MAYHAR'S AWARD-WINNING SF & F
The Crystal Skull & Other Tales of the Terrifying and
Twisted
The World Ends in Hickory Hollow, or After Armageddon
The Tupla: A Nover of Horror
The Twilight Dancer & Other Tales of Magic, Mystery and
the Supernatural
The Black Tower: A Novel of Dark Fantasy
Forbidden Geometries: A Novel Alien Worlds
HAL ANNAS' COSMIC RECKONING TRILOGY
I. The Woman from Eternity
II. Daughter of Doom
III. Witch of the Dark Star

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
373
THE HILARIOUS ADVENTURES OF TOFFEE
1. The Dream Girl—Charles F. Myers
2. Toffee Haunts a Ghost—Charles F. Myers
3. Toffee Turns the Trick—Charles F. Myers
OTHER AWARD WINNING & NOMINEE STORIES AND
AUTHORS
Moonworm's Dance & Other SF Classics—Stanley Mullen
(includes The Day the Earth Stood Still & Other SF Classics—
Harry Bates (Balrog Award winning story)
Hugo nominee story Space to Swing a Cat)
People of the Darkness-Ross Rocklynne (Nebulas nominee
author)
When They Come From Space-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning
author)
What Thin Partitions-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning author)
Star Bright & Other SF Classics—Mark Clifton
Eight Keys to Eden-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning author)
Rat in the Skull & Other Off-Trail Science Fiction-Rog
Phillips (Hugo nominee author)
The Involuntary Immortals-Rog Phillips (Hugo nominee
author)
Inside Man & Other Science Fictions-H. L. Gold (Hugo
winner, Nebula nominee)
Women of the Wood and Other Stories-A. Merritt (Science
Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame award)
A Martian Odyssey & Other SF Classics—Stanley G.
Weinbaum (SFWA Hall of Fame author)
Dawn of Flame & Other Stories—Stanley G. Weinbaum
(SFWA Hall of Fame author)

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
374
The Black Flame—Stanley G. Weinbaum
Scout-Octavio Ramos, Jr. (Best Original Fiction)
Smoke Signals-Octavio Ramos, Jr. (Best Original Fiction
winning author)
The City at World's End-Edmond Hamilton
The Star Kings-Edmond Hamilton (Sense of Wonder Award
winning author)
A Yank at Valhalla-Edmond Hamilton (Sense of Wonder
Award winning author)
Dawn of the Demigods, or People Minus X—Raymond Z.
Gallun (Nebula Nominee Author)
THE BESTSELLING SF/F/H OF J. D. CRAYNE
Tetragravitron (Captain Spycer #1)
Monster Lake
Invisible Encounter & Other Stories
The Cosmic Circle
PLANETS OF ADVENTURE
Colorful Space Opera from the Legendary Pulp Planet
Stories
#1. "The Sword of Fire"—A Novel of an Enslaved World". &
"The Rocketeers Have Shaggy Ears"—A Novel of Peril on Alien
Worlds.
#2. "The Seven Jewels of Chamar"—A Novel of Future
Centuries. & "Flame Jewel of the Ancients"—A Novel of
Outlaw Worlds .
#3. "Captives of the Weir-Wind"—A Novel of the Void by
Nebula Nominee Ross Rocklynne. & "Black Priestess of
Varda"—A Novel of a Magic World.
NEMESIS: THE NEW MAGAZINE OF PULP THRILLS

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
375
#1. Featuring Gun Moll, the 1920s Undercover Nemesis of
Crime in "Tentacles of Evil," an all-new, complete book-length
novel; plus a Nick Bancroft mystery by Bob Liter, "The
Greensox Murders" by Jean Marie Stine, and a classic mystery
short reprinted from the heyday of the pulps.
#2 Featuring Rachel Rocket, the 1930s Winged Nemesis of
Foreign Terror in "Hell Wings Over Manhattan," an all-new,
complete book-length novel, plus spine-tingling science fiction
stories, including EPPIE nominee Stefan Vucak's "Hunger,"
author J. D. Crayne's disturbing "Point of View," Hugo Award
winner Larry Niven's "No Exit," written with Jean Marie Stine,
and a classic novelette of space ship mystery by the king of
space opera, Edmond Hamilton. Illustrated. (Illustrations not
available in Palm).
#3 Featuring Victory Rose, the 1940s Nemesis of Axis
Tyranny, in Hitler's Final Trumpet," an all-new, complete
book-length novel, plus classic jungle pulp tales, including a
complete Ki-Gor novel.
# 4 Featuring Femme Noir, the 1950s Nemesis of Hell's
Restless Spirits, in an all new, book length novel, plus all new
and classic pulp shudder tales, including "The Summons from
Beyond" the legendary round-robin novelette of cosmic horror
by H.P. Lovecraft, Robert E. Howard, C.L. Moore, A. Merritt,
and Frank Belknap Long.
OTHER FINE CONTEMPORARY & CLASSIC SF/F/H
A Million Years to Conquer-Henry Kuttner
After the Polothas—Stephen Brown
Arcadia—Tabitha Bradley
Backdoor to Heaven—Vicki McElfresh

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
376
Buck Rogers #1: Armageddon 2419 A.D.-Philip Francis
Nowlan
Buck Rogers #2. The Airlords of Han—Philip Francis
Nowlan
Chaka: Zulu King-Book I. The Curse of Baleka-H. R.
Haggard
Chaka: Zulu King-Book II. Umpslopogass' Revenge-H. R.
Haggard
Claimed!-Francis Stevens
Darby O'Gill: The Classic Irish Fantasy-Hermine Templeton
Diranda: Tales of the Fifth Quadrant—Tabitha Bradley
Dracula's Daughters-Ed. Jean Marie Stine
Dwellers in the Mirage-A. Merritt
From Beyond & 16 Other Macabre Masterpieces-H. P.
Lovecraft
Future Eves: Classic Science Fiction about Women by
Women-(ed) Jean Marie Stine
Ghost Hunters and Psychic Detectives: 8 Classic Tales of
Sleuthing and the Supernatural-(ed.) J. M. Stine
Horrors!: Rarely Reprinted Classic Terror Tales-(ed.) J. M.
Stine. J.L. Hill
House on the Borderland-William Hope Hodgson
House of Many Worlds [Elspeth Marriner #1]—Sam Merwin
Jr.
Invisible Encounter and Other SF Stories—J. D. Crayne
Murcheson Inc., Space Salvage—Cleve Cartmill
Ki-Gor, Lord of the Jungle-John Peter Drummond
Lost Stars: Forgotten SF from the "Best of Anthologies"-
(ed.) J. M. Stine

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
377
Metropolis-Thea von Harbou
Mission to Misenum [Elspeth Marriner #2]—Sam Merwin Jr.
Mistress of the Djinn-Geoff St. Reynard
Chronicles of the Sorceress Morgaine I-V—Joe Vadalma
Nightmare!-Francis Stevens
Pete Manx, Time Troubler—Arthur K. Barnes
Possessed!-Francis Stevens
Ralph 124C 41+—Hugo Gernsback
Seven Out of Time—Arthur Leo Zagut
Star Tower—Joe Vadalma
The Cosmic Wheel-J. D. Crayne
The Forbidden Garden-John Taine
The City at World's End-Edmond Hamilton
The Ghost Pirates-W. H. Hodgson
The Girl in the Golden Atom—Ray Cummings
The Heads of Cerberus—Francis Stevens
The House on the Borderland-William Hope Hodgson
The Insidious Fu Manchu-Sax Rohmer
The Interplanetary Huntress-Arthur K. Barnes
The Interplanetary Huntress Returns-Arthur K. Barnes
The Interplanetary Huntress Last Case-Arthur K. Barnes
The Lightning Witch, or The Metal Monster-A. Merritt
The Price He Paid: A Novel of the Stellar Republic—Matt
Kirkby
The Thief of Bagdad-Achmed Abdullah
Women of the Wood and Other Stories-A. Merritt
BARGAIN SF/F EBOOKS IN OMNIBUS EDITIONS
(Complete & Unabridged)
The Andre Norton Omnibus: Three complete novels

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
378
The H. Beam Piper Omnibus: Three complete books
The E. E. Smith, Ph.D. Omnibus: Three complete novels
The First Lord Dunsany Omnibus: 5 Complete Books—Lord
Dunsany
The First William Morris Omnibus: 4 Complete Classic
Fantasy Books
The Barsoom Omnibus: A Princess of Mars; The Gods of
Mars; The Warlord of Mars-Burroughs
The Second Barsoom Omnibus: Thuvia, Maid of Mars; The
Chessmen of Mars-Burroughs
The Third Barsoom Omnibus: The Mastermind of Mars; A
Fighting Man of Mars-Burroughs
The First Tarzan Omnibus: Tarzan of the Apes; The Return
of Tarzan; Jungle Tales of Tarzan-Burroughs
The Second Tarzan Omnibus: The Beasts of Tarzan; The
Son of Tarzan; Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar-Burroughs
The Third Tarzan Omnibus: Tarzan the Untamed; Tarzan
the Terrible; Tarzan and the Golden Lion-Burroughs
The Pellucidar Omnibus: At the Earth's Core; Pellucidar-
Burroughs
The Caspak Omnibus: The Land that Time Forgot; The
People that Time Forgot; Out of Time's Abyss-Burroughs
The First H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Invisible Man: War of
the Worlds; The Island of Dr. Moreau
The Second H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Time Machine; The
First Men in the Moon; When the Sleeper Wakes
The Third H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Food of the Gods;
Shape of Things to Come; In the Days of the Comet

Fireborn Law [Lycan Blood Vol. II]
by Janrae Frank
379
The First Jules Verne Omnibus: Twenty Thousand Leagues
under the Sea; The Mysterious Island; From the Earth to the
Moon
The Homer Eon Flint: All 4 of the Clasic "Dr. Kenney"
Novels: The Lord of Death; The Queen of Life; The
Devolutionist; The Emancipatrix
The Second Jules Verne Omnibus: Around the World in 80
Days; A Journey to the Center of the Earth; Off on a Comet
Three Great Horror Novels: Dracula; Frankenstein; Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
The Darkness and Dawn Omnibus: The Classic Science
Fiction Trilogy-George Allan England
The Garrett P. Serviss Omnibus: The Second Deluge; The
Moon Metal; A Columbus of Space
The Robert E. Howard Omnibus: Three complete books
ADDITIONAL TITLES IN PREPARATION
pageturnereditions.com
If you are connected to the Internet, take a
moment to rate this eBook by going back to
your bookshelf at www.fictionwise.com.

