
Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
2
Renaissance E Books
www.renebooks.com
Copyright ©
NOTICE: This eBook is licensed to the original purchaser
only. Duplication or distribution to any person via email,
floppy disk, network, print out, or any other means is a
violation of International copyright law and subjects the
violator to severe fines and/or imprisonment. This notice
overrides the Adobe Reader permissions which are
erroneous. This eBook cannot be legally lent or given to
others.
This eBook is displayed using 100% recycled electrons.
Distributed by Fictionwise.com

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
3
LYCAN BLOOD: VOL. I
SERPENT'S QUEST
By
JANRAE FRANK
ISBN 978-1-60089-074-1
All rights reserved
Copyright © 2007 Janrae Frank
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part without
written permission.
For information contact:
PageTurnerEditions.com
PageTurner Editions/Futures-Past Fantasy
A Renaissance E Books publication

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
4
THE FIRST MOTHERS
(The lycans have a primarily oral tradition, although
increasing numbers of them are becoming literate. This is the
first poem that a young boy apprenticed to a lawgiver learns.)
We howled to the moon one winter's night
And she howled back to give us might
From all the packs gathered 'neath her light
She chose among us one single wight
Tala took that male to her silvery home
She told the packs to hide, not roam
From that mating, Navaryn came
To make us men in more than name
Navaryn, first mother to us all
By her blood our shapes are tall
Pandeena, second mother to us all
When they howl, heed their call
They gave us laws, the ways, and speech
They changed all things within our reach
The ways of culture we were taught
To bring us from old Skawtsslund fraught
By dangers vile and dangers fell
So goes the ancient, ancient tale
Navaryn, first mother to us all
By her blood, our shapes are tall
The woodland god, at their pleading,
Opened a Gate Arcane to end our bleeding
On the strands of Skawtsslund fraught

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
5
With the dangers mankind brought
Pandeena, second mother to us all
When she howls heed well her call
We passed between the pillars tall
To these new lands beyond man's pall
We settled here and built our lives
Where lycan kind can grow and thrive
In a new world of hope and promise
Beyond the reach of murdering Thomas.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
6
THE EXILE'S CURSE
When the Serpent comes, they all shall perish,
The Redhands fall like sheaves of grain, until only the Exile
shall remain of those who own their name.
When fireborn law breathes hot upon the root
One born of fire shall perish for the truth
The exile's victory shall be his pardon
Those he claims will rule
The prince from shadows shall emerge
To sit a blood drenched throne
...Alistar Weems' dying words.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
7
CHAPTER ONE
THE INFILTRATOR
On an unusually hot day for late spring, Malthus stood in
the middle of the stout wooden bridge spanning the gorge cut
through the sheer stone walls by the deep cataract known as
the Eirlys River: the rushing roar of the Eirlys made fitting
music for the entrance into the lands of one of Waejontor's
most powerful lycan clans. On three sides the land descended
into rugged canyons and twisted valleys that looked like an
impossible giant had ripped his fingers through the soil. Most
of the ruling sa'necari culture did not know this valley existed,
except for the upper castes and their liegemyn who had used
it as a waystation during the years that the late King
Baaltrystan's lords still held their mountain fastnesses.
He clutched two small girls close to him in a protective
embrace, and hesitated as the seven lycan guards in gigantic
wolf form emerged from the thick stand of fragrant white pine
and cedars three spear lengths beyond the bridge where a
heavy barrier of brush and briars offered concealment for
many things.
The newcomers looked ragged and worn: the girls' dresses
were stained and soiled. The hem of the older girl's skirt had
come partially loose and dragged in the dirt. Trail dust
smudged their faces, forming muddied lines around their
mouths and noses where it had mixed with their sweat.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
8
Malthus wore a brace of long belt knives at his hips, an
empty scabbard that had once held a sword at his shoulder,
and a scruffy pack on his back. Several pouches hung from
his belt. He gazed at the assembled lycans through eyes wide
with fear and trepidation. "Please help us. I've been told
sanctuary can be found here for the children."
"Come to our side," said a tall lycan in transitional form,
stepping forward from among his wolf brothers and speaking
with authority. He wore the runes of a lawgiver.
While considering the lycans, Malthus immediately
wondered how someone as young as this mon could have
become their lawgiver: he looked to be in no more than his
late teens, and the last time Malthus heard, the lawgiver for
this place was Nevin Scarface. Malthus began reassessing the
situation in light of this.
Although they traveled swiftest as wolves, they were at
their most dangerous in their hybrid shapes. All of the clans
had a reputation for caution, especially this one: with their
valleys laying in Sharani-occupied Waejontor, they were
vigilant against both their old sa'necari overlords and their
new ones, the Sharani. One wrong move and they would rip
him apart before he could bring his magic to bear. The last
thing he wished was for them to discover what he was.
However, the lawgiver was young, and probably no challenge.
Malthus' arm tightened around the two girls, squeezing
them together against his body while eying the lycans warily.
He walked across, his worn boot heels clicking on the wood
scarcely heard above the water far below.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
9
"These are my nieces. Sa'necari born. Their parents were
slain. We barely escaped with our lives."
The lawgiver nodded as if that was what he expected to
hear but that it made no difference. "These are the rules. No
lives are taken by appetite or rite on Clan Red Wolf lands: we
are Willodarians. Those who have are unwelcome here. If you
are sa'necari, state it now and return across the bridge or be
spellcorded." For emphasis he drew the bands and seals from
the pouch hanging on his wide leather belt. "Someone will be
sent to Read you for the taint, and if you have lied, we will
execute you."
"I am not sa'necari," Malthus said. "My mother was
human, unlike my brother's, so I did not inherit the tainted
gene."
Nikko the lawgiver nodded again with his hand held up to
forestall more words from Malthus, and continued in his
speech. "From the Eirlys River," he pointed at the river, and
then indicated the direction of the rest of the landmarks, "to
the piled boulders and six pines, north to the caves and south
to the broad meadows and place of fallen trees. All that
belongs to Red Wolf. All must ask permission before feeding
on blood; make certain that your nieces adhere to that."
"They carry the sa'necari gene, but they have not matured
into their fangs yet."
"All the better," replied Nikko. "You are welcome here so
long as you obey our rules, and you may make a place for
yourself among the others who have come seeking sanctuary.
The homes and farms on clan land you enter only if invited.
You hunt game only if invited. If the Sharani should have

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
10
reason to pursue you to our borders we will kill you. We are
law-abiding citizens of the occupied zone. These are the
rules."
Occupied zone. The words framed in Malthus' thoughts
with distaste. These stupid wolves. The young Queen
Tomyrilen de Waejonan was beating the Sharani back at
every turn and they still considered themselves citizens of the
occupied zone. It did not matter to the sa'necari and other
Waejontori gathering to her banner that she was the bastard
daughter of the late Prince Shintar and a Sharani banewitch:
what mattered was that, so far as any one knew, she was the
last of the Waejonans. If these foolish wolves continued to
obey the Sharani, then she would soon be torching their
valleys. "We accept them. You have teachers for the children
to bring them to the path of Light?" Malthus asked.
"Yes. A Willodarian priest. You look as if you haven't
eaten."
"Not in three days. The children are hungry. I can work
with my hands. I am strong. I can earn whatever bread you
can provide." I also have plenty of gold to spend, but you
needn't know that yet.
"The Sanctuary Refugee Camp can always use more
hands. We are building shelters and houses for the refugees
like yourselves. Come and let us see that you are fed. I am
Nikko the Lawgiver."
"I am Malthus Estrobian. My nieces are Ros and Lyrri. I
was kandoyarin, serving in Ocealay until I heard about the
rebellion. Fearing for my family, I came home. We're all that's
left."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
11
At their names, the two girls smiled shyly at the lycan
lawgiver.
Nikko smiled back at them. "Welcome to Wolffgard
Village."
Malthus smirked as Nikko led them into the yard around
the Chieftain Claw Redhand's home, which was the nearest
building to the bridge, and sucked in a breath of relief. He
was in. Soon he could begin to sniff around for what had
happened to Troyes, his nieces' father. So far as he had been
able to learn, this was the last place Troyes had been seen.
Tomyrilen Dovane de Waejonan had appeared suddenly
out of nowhere, claiming to be the illegitimate daughter of the
dead prince Shintar de Waejonan, and half-sister to the late
King Baaltrystan. Nobles and commoners alike were rising to
follow her standard. The rebellion had made reaching this
valley difficult, but Malthus had made a deal with the young
queen's first advisor, Lord Daemon. He had been allowed to
slip through in exchange for becoming Daemon's agent here.
The valley would fall and Malthus would be well paid in gold,
land, and slaves.
Malthus was a bounty hunter with a reputation for subtlety
and resourcefulness—and sa'necari by birth. His father had
been nobly born, but Malthus came from the wrong side of
the blankets. He would have inherited nothing, even had his
father's estates not been burned by the Sharani. Five siblings
on both sides of the blankets had been burned alive by the
Sharani. Knowing the swift way that sa'necari fertility faded,
his father had gotten as many children as he could in his
youth. Yet, even so, only Malthus and these two little girls

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
12
were left. Unless Troyes was still alive somewhere. He would
let this play out to his advantage; once he decided what that
advantage was and who it lay with.
They followed Nikko past a large manor house with
elaborate gardens surrounding the back and east side. A large
barn and stables swept out to the west side of it. The simple
practicality of water troughs and hitching posts in the
courtyard contrasted sharply with elegance behind it. Blue
veins shot through the chinked pale yellow stone of the
manor house.
Nikko pointed at it. "That is the chieftain's house, Claw
Redhand."
Malthus nodded, his trained eyes swept the grounds. The
three-story structure wasn't as large as some sa'necari
manors, but he estimated that it must have at least sixteen
bedrooms in the main part and an equal number in the
servants' wing. Lycans did not build their homes for defense.
They counted on stopping invaders before they reached the
houses and generally they were alerted by the packs of true
wolves that freely ran their valleys, which were defensible
areas in and of themselves. Those wild packs would need to
be located and destroyed early.
"How far have you traveled?" Nikko asked.
"Too far," Malthus replied. "Two months ago I was in
Ildyrsetts."
"I have never been there. It is down along the coast?"
"Yes. A little over two weeks ago, I was in Dragonton near
Torment Lake." Malthus rubbed his pen quill thin mustache,
pulling at the curving ends a moment. He had more facial hair

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
13
than most sa'necari because of his inheritance from his
human mother, which required daily shaving with the elegant
folding razor in his pocket to keep neat. Malthus used it to cut
throats as well as to shave. He had picked it up in Timbren
while working for one of the wealthiest bounty hunters in the
business, Necrodez. There were rumors that Necrodez had
finally met his match near Ildyrsetts last winter, but Malthus
would have to see it to believe it.
Nikko nodded thoughtfully. "I hear there has been violence
there."
"Not all of the old nobility wanted to accept the new
queen. They met in Dragonton to discuss what actions to
take. The queen swept down upon them..." Malthus let his
voice trail away and made a cutting motion across his throat
with his finger. "My family was among them."
Malthus studied Nikko. The mon seemed much too young
for his position, no more than seventeen, or eighteen.
Lawgivers were chosen by the location of the stars at their
birth or other omens and reared for the job, serving the elder
lawgiver. Malthus wondered what had happened to the old
one, Nevin Scarface. Well it worked to his advantage to have
such an inexperienced lawgiver to deal with. Now, if only he
could be so lucky with the Willodarian priest.
They walked farther and entered the village proper. By
that time Ros and Lyrri were stumbling with exhaustion.
Malthus lifted Lyrri into his arms. Seeing the way Ros was
faltering also, Nikko picked her up with a glance at Malthus
who nodded his permission.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
14
"I am sorry that it is so far," Nikko said. "We built the
sanctuary in the protected area on the northeast side."
"I can understand that. It is a logical way to protect those
less able to protect themselves." And a good way to isolate
people until you decide whether you can trust them. Canny
wolves.
The rustic village contained mostly the traditional
longhouses of variegated stone, with newer frame houses
sprinkled through, painted in the forest colors beloved of the
lycans. A single main street traversed the village, which was
almost large enough to be called a small town, with numerous
residential side streets. They passed a large assortment of
shops and establishments, including two eateries, a couple of
taverns, a dry goods, a tanner's, and toward the end a
blacksmith and a harness-maker. The majority of lycans were
no more than semi-literate, hence the graphics on the signs
over every place of business. Where human villages tended to
be dirty, with streets of dead brown, packed down earth—the
lycan main street was thick with trees of all kinds and grass
growing in a wide swath down the middle. Trees shaded the
fronts and sides of every building, with tree rounds and
benches for sitting scattered through with comfortable
abandon. The lycans were fond of sitting outside and gabbing
with whoever happened by. People stopped to nod at them
and acknowledge the lawgiver in a mix of politeness and
curiosity as they sized up the newcomers.
Malthus gave them his most humble expression salted with
suitable anxiety as if uncertain of his welcome. The two pretty
little girls were his key to opening doors and hearts, and he

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
15
would see that they played it very well. He patted Lyrri's
back, slid into her mind, and sent her to sleep. Over the
course of their journey, he had placed coercions, sways, and
triggers in their minds as deeply as possible. "She's
exhausted. We all are. Is it much farther?"
"Only a little. Poor little thing," Nikko said. "We'll have you
a place to sleep and food in no time."
The sanctuary proved to be mostly a cluster of woven
cone-shaped sheelings that required dropping to your knees
before crawling inside. Smoke rose from ventilation holes in
the roofs of the sheelings. A long house built of stone stood at
the center with a chimney in the middle of its roof. Several
smaller buildings of wood stood half finished. A short distance
away three more stone houses were being raised as
permanent shelters; as well as others that were still being
constructed by the refugees along with volunteers from
among the lycans. Tree rounds and crude benches provided
seats beneath the trees, as did the scattered small boulders.
Most of the volunteers were teenagers, yet they moved to
their tasks capably and without hesitation. All lycans were
reared to a trade as soon as they could walk.
A plump, middle-aged lycan wearing a shapeless, dark
blue dress stood on the green in front of the long stone
house. Nikko walked up to her. "Beth, I have more folks for
you to care for. This is Malthus. The girls are Lyrri and Ros.
They're sa'necari born, but their uncle isn't. Their family was
wiped out in the rebellion."
Beth quirked an eyebrow at that. "We're getting a few of
those. Come inside." She gestured at the longhouse.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
16
Malthus said nothing when he saw her nostrils flare and
she sniffed him in passing. Lycans did not consider it rude to
check newcomers out with their noses. He knew that she was
confirming his claim to be human. She would not find
anything. Malthus used an embedded spell on the ring he
wore to mask his nature, scent and sa'necari eyes. They could
spellcord him, yet his eyes and scent would still be hidden.
The ring had been a gift from Lord Daemon, who appeared to
have an unusually substantial horde of early sa'necari
artifacts.
The longhouse had a dirt floor and a deep fire pit in the
center, around which several children lay sleeping. A room at
either end was separated from the rest of the building by a
half wall that had a curtained door and window built into the
slat panels. Weathered gray wooden frames were built into
the windows to the outside to hold the shutters that they
closed on cooler nights.
Beth grabbed some bowls off a shelf and knelt by the pit. A
huge kettle hung above the pit, suspended on two iron posts
with a rod across them. She dipped up a hearty stew of
lentils, lamb, and vegetables.
Malthus woke Lyrri as he knelt and set her on the ground.
Nikko placed Ros by her sister near the fire pit.
"I'll return tomorrow and check on how you're doing,"
Nikko said. He left as Beth began handing bowls around to
Malthus and his nieces.
Beth had a sweet, apple-cheeked face and a pleasant
manner. She beamed at the girls as they ate hungrily. "Have
they been blooded yet?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
17
Malthus gave her a startled grin. "That's some years off.
Female sa'necari get their fangs with their menses, or so that
side of my family told me."
Beth glanced at his wrists as if looking for spellcord, leaned
in, and sniffed him again. "You're human."
"I'm afraid so."
Beth sniffed Ros and Lyrri. "Sa'necari. How is it you're
not?"
Malthus had expected to be interrogated. The lycans were
cautious about outsiders. Odds were that Beth might prove to
be a bit of a gossip and that could work to his favor. He gave
her a straight look with just an edge of concern. "My mother
was human. One of my father's numerous mistresses. I was
born in Dragonton near Torment Lake."
Beth brightened. "I know the area. I have cousins up
there. City wolves, but nice folk."
Mixing lies with his truths, Malthus described a bit of his
youth growing up along the lake where their sa'necari
overlords had once held most of their rites since the days of
Waejonan. His last name was not Estrobian, but he had
known the Estrobians well, having grown up with Volosarius
Estrobian, the mon who introduced him to Necrodez, his last
teacher.
Beth warmed to him steadily.
"I never met any of the Estrobians when I visited my
cousins, but I heard of them," Beth said. "Fancy folk."
"Aren't all sa'necari in this land?"
Beth chuckled. "Not the ones working the sanctuary. We
got them spellcorded, sealed, and doing chores."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
18
Shivers ran through Malthus at the thought of being
spellcorded. "You have adult sa'necari here?"
"Yup. Five women. Only way we'd let them accompany
their children across the bridge."
Malthus swallowed back his reaction to that news and
changed the subject. "Where will we sleep for the night? I
would like to get the girls settled soon."
"Here for the moment. I'll get you some mats and
blankets. Tomorrow one of the women should be moving into
a new house with her children. It's there near enough
finished. Then you can have their sheeling for the time being,
until you can get a house up."
* * * *
Dynanna sat in the middle of her bed in Imralon, where
she had remained after Isranon left early last spring.
Normally she would have gone home to either her cottage in
the garden that she shared with her brother, or her little
house in the Badree Nym village of Summersnow near Blue
Dog Pass. Nothing she did could distract her from moping
over the black bottle Dynarien had given her for Isranon.
The bottle contained a euthanasia drug the Assassins Guild
used. Isranon carried a divinator's curse inside his damaged
body. Divinators used the bodies of their victims to turn the
tides of wars, destroy kings, and deliver terrible curses. She
had no way to know what would happen if the embedded
spells killed Isranon.
Dynanna squeezed the bottle until her knuckles whitened.
She shoved the bottle into her pocket with a heavy sigh, and

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
19
got up, wandering listlessly to her wall with the slingshots on
it. Dynanna took each of them down, turning them around in
her hands half-heartedly before replacing them with another
sigh. No doubt existed in her mind but that a great and
powerful curse would be unleashed upon someone with
Isranon's death. The only ways to avert it were to either get
the spells out before they could kill him or to change the
manner of his death. Certain ways of dying would
accommodate the spells, such as the dark rites or a violent
death, especially if blades were involved. Contrariwise, if
Isranon died quietly by his own hand...
Dynanna worried that if she gave him the bottle and
explained about the curse lodged within him, he might decide
to simply take the drug and die, rather than continuing his
struggle to live and risk releasing the curse should the
embedded spells finally claim him. Her hand went to the
bulge in her pockets that was the bottle. "I wish you hadn't
left this up to me, Dynarien," she muttered.
Then a thought struck her that sent a shivering sea of
goose bumps over her body. What if Isranon's death was a
curse directed at the destruction of the Sacred King? Without
the Sacred King and at least one mage-paladin of Kalirion,
matters could soon spiral out of hand what with the dark
forces pounding along the eastern bank of the Hillora. Kalirion
had his king, but not his mage-paladins; they were always
pan-elementalists and lifemages. Usually an Abelard.
But there were none of them left. Except ... except...
Dynanna suddenly had an idea. She had to talk to Kalirion.
Dynanna had been putting that conversation off because

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
20
Kalirion always tried to seduce her and he could be very
persistent. She sucked in a fortifying breath and Jumped for
the Gardens of the Sun.
It was night in the world below, but it was always daylight
in the garden of Kalirion, which lived and blossomed in a
wondrous eternal springtime. The garden was incredibly
lovely. Trees bloomed and fruited all year round. Flowers in
every shade of blue imaginable grew there.
Few signs remained to show that, up until a year ago,
Kalirion's Jesmyrran angels had still been coaxing Dynanna's
gophers from it. At Dynanna's insistence, they had released
those gophers where they were now harassing the fields and
gardens of a particularly nasty tribe of goblins. The garden
now bloomed in its full beauty and luxuriant growth. Every
shade of blue and yellow could be found in a lush riot of color;
from blossoms to fruit; on bushes, vines, and trees. The grass
grew deep and sweet in a soft carpet over every open space.
The winding paths were paved in topaz and turquoise, the
broad stones set in interesting patterns.
The Idyn tree at its center overflowed with large,
iridescent, peacock blue fruit and flowers, showing every sign
of recovering from Dynanna's long ago gopher curse. Looking
closer, however, she could still detect a droop in its branches.
She felt a flash of guilt at that. Dynanna sighed. One of these
days, she would learn to keep her temper in check and not
react without thinking. She had come here seeking answers
to a prophecy and Kalirion, who was in love with her, had
insisted she trade him a day and a night of sex for it.
Dynanna had agreed to the deal and then cursed his garden

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
21
afterward. It had taken his angels years to catch and remove
all of her gophers.
She settled on an elegant white bench to wait for him to
appear. He always knew when she arrived these days.
Dynanna did not have long to wait. Kalirion emerged from
his palace beyond the Idyn tree, wearing only a short white
kilt. He was an immense man, six foot five inches, very
muscular and clean limbed. Every time she saw him, Dynanna
became wet between her thighs with longing; however, her
perverse sexuality was such that every single time she had
sex with a god, she got pregnant. What was worse was that
she could get pregnant with another child every twenty-four
hours for up to a week before it stopped. Multiple births were
a commonplace for her. Gods were fun in bed, but she
preferred mortals since she had not yet managed to get
pregnant by one. Kalirion and Ishla both said they were
looking into a solution to her problem, but neither of them
had found it yet.
"Have you come for conversation or for a favor, belovèd?"
Kalirion asked, joining her on the bench.
She looked into his eyes of flame. "A favor."
A bright, eager smile spread over his fair face and he
flicked back a blond curl from his forehead. "You know the
price."
"Nope." Dynanna grinned cheekily. "I have something else
you want just as much."
The Elder God arched an eyebrow at her. "What would that
be?"
"A mage-paladin. An Abelard."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
22
His lips thinned. "There aren't any."
Dynanna grinned. "Oh, yes, there is."
"Give me his name. If you're right, then I'll give you your
favor."
"Lord Isranon Dawnreturning of the lineage of my brother
Dawnhand." The words were scarcely out of her mouth when
Dynanna could tell that she had Kalirion's full attention. "He's
mine, but I'll trade him to you."
* * * *
The Great Hall of the Redhand Manorhouse was the largest
room in the building. Two rows of stone support columns ran
along the south and north sides of the room. Clusters of
comfortable chairs, sofas, and low tables in dark-stained
wood broke the Great Hall into false alcoves. The sections of a
large trestle table stood stacked along the south wall to be
assembled for rare formal dinners. At the east end stood the
deep hearth and to the left of the hearth were three looms, a
spinning wheel, and several baskets of wool and yarn.
Claw sat in his big over-stuffed chair. Like most of the
lycan clans, he maintained an informal household, rather than
the elaborate courts of the sa'necari and the humans of
Shaurone to the south and Creeya to the Northeast. On the
side table sat his pipe rack with a jar of tobacco in the center
and four pipes in cradles around it. He filled his pipe, struck a
lucifer and lit the herb. Claw took several puffs, then slid his
gaze across the four guardsmyn seated around him: stout
Belgair, the Captain of Claw's Household Guards for the past
two decades, reputed to be a bully although Claw had yet to

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
23
witness it himself; blond Kynyr Maguire, the youngest of the
guardsmyn at twenty and so handsome that some said it was
downright sinful; tow-headed Finn MacIver, who had missed
being youngest by two months; and Ramsey Fitzgerald with
hair as red as a whore's petticoats and a temperament so
mellow and staid that it proved you could not judge a mon's
nature by the color of his hair.
A slender nibari slave entered with a tray and handed out
tankards of mead. "Will that be all, Master Claw?"
"Yes, Kissie."
His gaze rested longest on a handsome young male named
Kynyr Maguire. Kynyr looked so much like Claw's long dead
son, Tarrant, that it often caused a poignant flutter in the
otherwise crusty, obdurate old chieftain. "I hear they've a
new one at the Camp."
Kynyr glanced at the Captain of the Guard, Belgair, before
answering. He drew a glare followed by a shrug from Belgair.
"A male with two little girls."
"I don't like it. Males don't stop here."
The Sanctuary Refugee Camp existed only because Claw
permitted it, and he liked to keep a close watch on it.
"They do if they've children along." Belgair pointed out,
and took a long draw from his tankard.
"Yaw. And how many times has that happened in the last
four years? They stay just long enough to dump the cubs and
run."
Kynyr shook his head at Claw, drawing another glare from
Belgair. "Nikko says this one is insisting he's here for the long
haul ... that he won't desert his nieces."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
24
"Sa'necari?"
"Only the girls. He's human."
"Or so he says. Go ask around, Kynyr. Ramsey, you and
Finn go with him."
Kynyr finished his mead and they left.
Belgair out-stayed the others, leaning in toward Claw.
"Just because he's got a pretty face..."
"Shut up, Belgair." Belgair had never known Claw's twin
sons, Logan and Tarrant. They had died ten years before
Belgair's birth. Belgair had no idea what they looked like
because Claw had ordered all their portraits removed from
the walls of the manor after their deaths: looking at them
made his wife Aisha cry. Let Belgair think what he would;
Claw had no intention of opening himself up for accusations of
sentimentality by telling Belgair what it was that drew him to
Kynyr.
"I wouldn't put so much trust in Kynyr ... if I were you."
"I'll be the judge, Belgair. You've made your points, now
get out."
Belgair frowned and removed himself.
Claw sat a long time alone, smoking and drinking, ringing
the bell for Kissie repeatedly to refill his tankard. He kept
hoping that Kynyr would draw the eye of his daughter
Merissa, but she seemed determined never to fall in love
again; and like the rest of the Redhand family, stubbornness
was proving a curse. So far all that Claw had was the bastard
child Merissa had borne her sa'necari lover—a child that could
not inherit the realm because he had not been born lycan. If
Merissa did not find a husband in the next year, Claw

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
25
intended to exercise his rights and arrange a marriage for her
whether she wished it or not.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
26
CHAPTER TWO
RIPE FOR THE TAKING
The evening breeze had come up early and blew strongly
into the night, carrying a heavy scent of pine and evergreens.
It swirled Malthus' waist-length black hair, which he had
loosed from the confining leather thong. If he did not keep his
hair trimmed, it easily grew to his ankles, like most
Waejontori males.
Malthus stared at the stars and thought.
Because of his reputation, Lord Daemon had given him his
choice of assignments. He had turned down an offer to send
him to Rowanhart and murder the twin sons of Mephistis de
Waejonan. His old rival Corradeo had taken that one. Queen
Tomyrilen's claim to the throne was tenuous at best, being
both a bastard and a female. In four thousand years,
Waejontor had had only two queens and both had ultimately
brought destruction upon the realm. However, once the boys
were dead—Malthus supposed they must be around five years
old by now—all the holdouts among the surviving sa'necari
nobility would have no choice but to follow her.
For once, his personal issues had proved more important
to him than business. He felt more driven to find out what
had happened to his brother Troyes than he did getting paid
for an easy kill.
"What happened to you here, Troyes?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
27
He heard the back door to the longhouse open, and from
the solid sound of the steps, knew it had to be Beth
emerging.
"Mind if I join you?"
"Please do." Malthus turned toward her.
Beth had changed into a pale pink shift that buttoned
down the front as far as her navel. The hem brushed her
ankles with a soft swish. "What are you thinking of? Your
family?"
Malthus lowered his eyes. "What else would I think of? This
is the first time we've been able to stop running in four
weeks."
"You'll be fine here." Beth came to him, swaying her large
hips in a manner that suggested she found him attractive. Her
raw-umber hair had been freed from its earlier bonds and
hung past her waist. Dark hair was rare among the lycans,
and usually indicated mixed blood somewhere in their
ancestry.
"Yes, I think so. We will need all the help we can get. I will
work hard in exchange for it. I just worry about my nieces."
Beth stopped very close to him. "We will do all that we
can. You seem like a good mon to care so much."
"I try." Malthus, guessing that a woman of her age and
build did not get much male attention, gave her a quick kiss
on the cheek. "I appreciate everything you're doing for us,
Beth."
She flushed and started to draw away from him, fluttering
her hands. Her size made the girlish movement seem
grotesque.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
28
Malthus gambled. Most lycans had strong minds that
resisted sa'necari intrusions, and unless they were caught off
guard it required a prolonged, systematic hammering to
break them open. Malthus had always had a fetish for lycans.
Two of his last doxies had been lycan. Malthus had frequented
their taverns and brothels, partied, hunted, and gamed with
them since early adulthood. Dozens had died on his altars,
and hundreds had perished in his dungeons in his
experiments with poisons and various other toxins, as well as
in his detailed examinations of lycan anatomy. He had even
vivisected several. There was very little he did not know
about lycans. He had never completely understood the
attraction, yet he had never denied it.
He sized Beth up as someone who used charity work to fill
up the empty hole where a husband and children of her own
should have been. The extremity of her neediness made her
vulnerable.
"You're too kind," he murmured, and when he sensed her
deeper flush of pleasure, he lunged into her mind with a
needle thin blade of power.
Beth looked confused, one hand went trembling to her
face. "I want to be ... kind. You don't need to be ... to be
so..." Her voice trailed off as Malthus captured her fingers and
kissed them.
He twisted the invisible blade of his gifts deeper into her
psyche. "You like pleasing me."
"Yes, I do. I—" Beth shivered.
Malthus flicked his fingers across her nipples, and Beth
shuddered. "You want me, Beth. You want me as a woman

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
29
wants a man." Each time he said her name, he gave the blade
another thrust into her mind, cutting through the cords of her
resistance.
"Yes, I do. More than anything."
"Good, Beth. You know what I am now, but you're not
going to tell anyone, are you, Beth?"
The light faded from Beth's eyes as he extinguished her
will with each repetition of her name. Her lips parted as if to
speak, but nothing came out. Her arms settled at her sides in
a lifeless manner.
Malthus kissed her again. "Come into the trees with me,
Beth. I'm hungry."
"Yes."
The subtle coercions he wished to place in her mind would
take time to achieve. If he accidentally tore her, Beth's
behaviors would change too abruptly and someone would
notice it. For the nonce a feeding trigger would do nicely, set
just deeply enough for her to open her veins and legs to him.
As Malthus led Beth into sheltered copse, he asked her,
"When was the last time that a sa'necari guested with your
chieftain? This used to be a royal waystation."
Beth licked her lips with a little hhhmmmn. "Must have
been just over three years ago. Two of them. Troyes and
Isranon."
Malthus settled on the ground with Beth and began
unfastening her dress. She stared past him as if unaware of
what was happening. Her body proved to be fat, but not
shapeless, and after a fashion appealing. "And where did they
go when they left, Beth?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
30
"Don't know. They just left. Only Claw's household knows.
He don't like folks talking about it, cause one of those two
storked his daughter. The child's sa'necari."
He fondled Beth's huge breast, eyeing the conspicuous
vein along the top. "Which one do you think did it?"
"Troyes. I was running with the wolves one night and
stumbled on them going at it. We should have stoned her, but
the lawgiver wouldn't let us."
Malthus let his fangs down completely and breathed along
her breast, as he penetrated the innermost places of her
being, binding her to his suggestions. "Nikko?"
"No. Nevin. Nikko's his cousin ... was his apprentice then."
Beth trembled when Malthus removed her clothing and ran
his hands up and down her body.
"What is this princess of farmers' name?"
"Merissa."
"You'll help me find a way to meet her?" Malthus began
removing his own clothing.
Beth watched him disrobe with a glazed expression. "Yes."
"Good. Are you still a virgin, Beth? An old maid?"
"Yes. No one's ever wanted me."
"Be good and I'll take care of that tonight." Malthus laid
Beth on her back. He felt her psyche squirming as he showed
her his fangs that were fully extended from their sheaths. He
rotated his power through every vulnerable spot within her
like a knife in a wound. "Beth, Beth, Beth. You're in love with
me."
Malthus threw himself on top of her, enjoying the way she
moaned as his fangs pierced her breast and he began to suck

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
31
her rich lycan blood. If anyone heard them, they would
assume that someone was making love in the copse. And,
once he finished his meal, they would be.
* * * *
One the far side of the Great Hall, close to the hearth,
Claw's aging sisters, Searlait and Fianait, sat at their looms
weaving. Off to their left the spinning wheel whirred as Aisha
Redhand, Claw's wife, spun strands of wool into yarn to be
taken to the local dyers.
Kynyr had house duty that day. The other guardsmyn
called it bitch watching and were only too glad to trade off
with Kynyr to avoid it. Since all the troubles began, Claw
wanted at least one male at large in the family sections of the
manor, watching over his sisters. Frequently there was more
than one, depending upon Claw's mood, and the gardens and
grounds were patrolled constantly.
Having grown up as an only boy with six sisters, Kynyr
enjoyed it; and his spiritbrother Finn—who had been raised in
similar circumstances, but with eight rather than six—had
begun to also. That often led to the two of them getting
paired for the duty as they were that day.
Kynyr sat next to Fianait with just enough distance
between them that he did not get in her way as she wove the
delicate kazamerie wool on her big loom. Fianait responded
well to his questions about the history of her family and his
favorite stories involved Tarrant Redhand, the older of Claw's
twin sons, who had been executed by the sa'necari.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
32
Fianait took out her scissors and clipped a strand of brown
wool before tying on a green strand for the next row. Kynyr
noticed that the ends of the scissors were blunt and rounded
like children's scissors. On impulse he glanced at her waist
and saw that she carried pouches on her belt, but no knife.
Bitches usually carried a small utility knife, and some of
them—those that had to travel alone for any amount of
time—carried a single fighting knife. The absence of a blade
and the blunted scissors increased the air of fragility that
clung to the elderly bitch in a way that Kynyr found difficult to
define.
Finn sat near the door watching them.
Fianait tucked a strand of thinning, white hair back into the
bun at the base of her neck. Fair-skinned to begin with, she
had become translucently pale with age, the veins showing
violet beneath her skin. Her knuckles, like knobs on her long,
slender fingers, bore the signs of arthritis; however, she
rarely allowed it to slow her down. She smiled at Kynyr as she
started again at her loom.
"You remind me of Tarrant."
Kynyr smiled back at her. The entire family had remarked
on that more than once—in fact, it was repeated almost daily
by at least one of them—and Kynyr enjoyed hearing it, except
when they tried to carry it a bit further. They knew his father
was a bastard and his grandmother had ridden with Tarrant's
army as a healer during the tragic Lycan Rebellion of eighty
years ago. Kynyr had never made an effort to conceal it,
because gossip was a popular lycan mode of communication
and what happened on the East side of the valley was usually

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
33
known all over the west side within a season. But he always
assured them that he was no kin of theirs and usually they let
it drop.
"I'm complimented."
Fianait's smile broadened. "Is your father still teaching
school?"
"Last I heard he was."
Community supported schools were still somewhat of a
novelty in Red Wolf Valley, teaching reading, writing, basic
math, and a little history. Although Kynyr's father said that it
still felt like pulling teeth, literacy had begun to spread among
the lycans.
"Does he enjoy it?"
Kynyr chuckled. He had had this conversation many times
before with Fianait. Either her memory had begun to go with
age, or she just liked hearing it all again. Kynyr was never
certain which it was. "Cubs would rather go fishing than crack
books."
"Frustrates him?"
"A bit."
"I'd've snuck off more often if it hadn't been for the
Dreaded Horde," Finn complained.
Aisha favored them with a prim frown. "Must you always
call your sisters the Dreaded Horde?"
Finn scratched at his scruffy yellow hair. "Don't know what
else to call them. My sisters and Kynyr's used to gang up on
the two of us. Fourteen harpies armed with hairbrushes ...
descending on us like Hell's Army. We've been away from

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
34
home for four years and I swear I've still got some parting
lumps and bruises."
Searlait laughed and that set off the rest of them.
"Changing of the Guard," called a gruff male voice from
the doorway.
Kynyr glanced and saw Captain Belgair Doherty standing
near the entrance to the Great Hall flanked by grizzled Morcar
and the oafish Gorgarty. Then he caught a glimpse of
Ramsey's bright red hair in the hallway just beyond the door
as his friend thumbed at the foyer, indicating that Kynyr and
Finn had friends waiting for them in the courtyard: apparently
a trip to the Difficult Horse for a tankard was planned.
"Excuse us." Kynyr rose to his feet with a polite bow to the
bitches.
Aisha stopped him with a gesture. "If you're going to
Hereward's ask if he's gotten more of the whiskey in that
Claw likes. Otherwise we'll have to send someone to Hell's
Widow for it."
"I'll do that."
* * * *
Malthus slipped out of Beth's bed before first light, lest one
of the children catch him there. He had ridden her several
times in the night, sa'necari having a greater sex drive than
most other races. The children had been forbidden to enter
what passed for a bedroom in the longhouse, but that did not
mean they would obey—children were known for
disobedience. Beth had told him the truth—it was nearly
impossible for anyone to lie with the blade of a sa'necari's

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
35
power lodged in her brain—she had been virgin. He had
thoroughly deflowered her to both their satisfactions. Malthus
tied his pants closed, pulled on his tunic, and belted his
blades and pouch on.
Within a few days, he would have a perfectly cooperative
tool in Beth. He stepped silently around the children sleeping
on the floor like a pile of puppies, and emerged from the
longhouse to the sounds of trees crashing to earth. Malthus
glanced toward the sounds and saw lycans in their hybrid
forms, wearing only pants, trimming away the branches of
the felled trees with axes.
He nodded at that and went to the water barrels lining the
west side of the longhouse, took down a dipper from a
wooden frame above them, and took a long drink before
splashing himself with the leftovers. If he wanted a bath, he
would have to go down to the stream.
"So you're new?"
Malthus straightened and turned at the sound. A tall, long-
limbed mon stood there, wearing the umber robe and forest
green cloak of a priest to Willodarus. He had a heavy nose in
a long face that reminded Malthus of a hound dog he had
once owned. A leonine wealth of nut-brown hair topped his
head, and he had heavy-lidded steel blue eyes, framed in
wrinkles beneath a strong brow ridge. The priest carried a tall
staff and a belt-knife so small it could not be considered a
weapon. At first glance there was nothing to give Malthus
pause to consider the mon a threat, yet his instincts said
there had to be. Malthus gave him a polite bow. "I'm Malthus

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
36
Estrobian. My nieces and I arrived yesterday. The girls are
still sleeping, but I needed some air."
"We all need air. What god do you serve?"
"I haven't pledged to any, but I make offerings to all as
the need comes to me."
The priest's eyes went to Malthus' wrists. "Human?"
Malthus nodded. His eyes slewed to the side and he saw
the lawgiver, Nikko, leaning against an elm tree with his arms
crossed. Malthus wondered what part Nikko had played in
bringing the priest to investigate him.
Nikko noticed Malthus looking at him, and nodded with a
pleasant smile.
The priest's gaze seemed to deepen and extend into him.
Malthus found himself reaching out to the ring to strengthen
his shields. "Waejontori human?"
"Yes. But I've been away for fifteen years."
"Take your tunic off and show me your neck."
Malthus unbuckled his belt, dropped it to the ground, and
then he pulled off his tunic. His stomach tightened and he
forced it to relax. He had not had the ring of concealment
tested this severely: the priest intended to Read him. "Do you
wish me to sit for this?"
"A good point. Bring your things to that boulder, and sit
there." The priest pointed to a huge rock in the middle of the
yard near a wooden bench.
Malthus obeyed, and the priest followed him. Once settled,
the examination began. The priest ran his fingers along both
sides of Malthus' neck, Reading for signs of his having been
bitten, which could have placed him under the control of

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
37
Lemyari and other hemovores. The priest checked his arms,
his chest, his sides, and stomach. Then he grasped Malthus'
wrist and Read him deeply. Malthus analyzed the nature of
the priest's powers as they moved through him: the mon was
human, not lycan. Interesting.
Without releasing Malthus' wrist, the old priest remarked,
"I'm astonished that one who has lived so intimately with the
sa'necari as you have, is not marked in some way."
Malthus shrugged. "I was a noble's bastard. I left young.
There's no place for my kind at court, except to bend over
and offer my neck."
"I'm surprised they let you go."
The priest's tone irritated Malthus. "I'm human. Not nibari.
My father was not so low as to eat his own children."
"Are we getting a little angry?" The lines of the priest's
eyes crinkled as he grinned good-naturedly and let go of
Malthus' wrist. "I apologize for pushing you. It is my job to
assess the newcomers, just as it is for the lawgiver. Nikko is
young, so he likes for me to examine them also." The mon
extended his hand. "I am Tempest Anstey."
Malthus grasped it. "It is good to meet you."
"I hope you find it so. We'll be keeping an eye on you. We
do all of the males at first. You see, not many have shown up
here seeking refuge. Most flee over the borders into Creeya.
It is the women and children who can't run as far or as well
who come to us."
"I am here because of my nieces. I feared they would not
survive that kind of a journey."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
38
"Understandable. I will leave you alone now. However, I
will drop in again."
"I will welcome you."
Malthus turned his attention elsewhere as Tempest
departed with Nikko. Three lycans, bare to the waist, in their
transitional forms, dragged a tree into the compound, and set
to it with hammers and wedges once they had ascertained
which way the grain lay. They split it into planks with swift
efficiency. Several young myn moved the planks to the
houses that were being raised.
He drifted over to them and spied a young lycan who
appeared to be in charge. "Is there something I can do to
help?"
Shalto straightened from running his hand along one of the
planks and nodded. "You're the new one." He extended his
hand and shook with Malthus.
"I'm Malthus."
"Shalto. Well, there'll be plenty of work for you soon. You
don't need to start immediately."
"You're rather young to be in charge, aren't?"
Shalto scowled. "I'm sixteen. I've been of age for two
years."
"I meant no offense."
"Then none taken."
"Perhaps you'd allow me to buy you a tankard at the
tavern in exchange for telling me how best to fit in? I know
very little about your customs, and I don't wish to offend
anyone."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
39
Shalto grinned. "Can my cousin, Oswyl, come?" He
thumbed at another young mon with rust colored hair.
Malthus smiled broadly. "Certainly."
"We'll take a tavern break in the afternoon when the sun
gets hottest. Come back then."
Malthus wandered the camp, observing the people. Naked
children crawled out of the low openings to the woven bark
sheelings and ran laughing across the yard, pursued by older
siblings trying to pull clothes over them. The smoke of cook
fires spiraled out of the exit holes in the sheeling roofs as the
women began to cook their allotments of meal. Others
emerged with their bedding and hung them out to air on lines
stretched between trees. Several women filled pitchers at the
water barrels and carried them back to their houses and
sheelings. Malthus could easily identify the sa'necari among
them by the spellcords on their wrists with the deadly seals
attached—if they tried to remove the cords, the seal would
release a fatal spell upon them. He had only been corded a
few times in his thirty-six years. The first time had been by
his mother who wished for him to understand the effect and
she had released him a day later. Still, looking at the cords
made him shudder.
The refugees were mostly young women with children. He
ran his tongue across his gums, feeling the sheaths of his
fangs. There were several there that Malthus would have
enjoyed getting his teeth into, but caution was a watchword
with him. He would make do with Beth for the nonce. Greed
would betray him to the lycans faster than anything else. He

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
40
had to also make certain that Ros remained in firm control,
since she was precocious and had been born with her fangs.
He sauntered around behind the dwellings to the barns and
watched four of the homeliest nibari he had ever seen milking
goats while the tethered beasts nibbled at the low hanging
leaves of a leaning oak tree. Once Malthus had walked the
entire length of the camp and found each of the red sticks
that had been placed around it to mark its perimeters, he
decided on an isolated corner sheltered by many trees as the
spot where he wanted to place his house. He would inform
Beth of his choice and she would tell the others.
Shalto and Oswyl were sitting on tree rounds, waiting for
Malthus when he made his way back.
"Are you ready?" asked Shalto.
"I certainly am," replied Malthus, reaching into a pouch to
flash several pieces of gold and silver at the youths.
Oswyl nudged Shalto. "Let's go. I'm thirsty."
"The Difficult Horse is the best," Shalto said as they began
walking toward the village. "Old Hereward makes his own
mead from honey the farmers sell him, and it's very nice."
"I imagine so. Lycans are famous for their mead."
"So we are," Oswyl acknowledged Malthus' comment.
The Difficult Horse, called that because of its sign that
featured a horse sitting on its rump while a mon tugged the
reins before it, stood on Main Street across from the village
common. The interior, cool, dark, and pleasant compared to
the heat and glaring sunlight outside, provided a welcome
relief. Barrels with spigots jutting from them lined the rear
wall behind a polished bar of walnut heartwood. Sturdy chairs

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
41
circled the round tables placed throughout. Shalto led the way
to their favorite table near the right hand wall, and the young
lycan indicated that Malthus should sit first. Malthus chose the
chair that put his back to the wall where he could see
everyone around him, an old custom that had saved his life in
the past and played to the caution in his nature.
Six freerangers in forest green leathers sat at a table near
the door. Their presence irritated Malthus. Those sword-
wielding tree-huggers had begun to increase their numbers in
the area, adding their own patrols between the valley and
Hell's Widow to compensate for the decrease in Sharani
patrols as the Saer'ajan of Shaurone turned her attention
toward the Waejontori Rebellion. They could easily endanger
Malthus' lines of communication with his operatives in Hell's
Widow and disrupt his still tenuous supply lines.
A servingmon came to take their order and Malthus
noticed the metal ownership collar around her neck: she was
nibari, a reminder that before Claw closed their borders to his
kind two years ago, this had been a waystation for sa'necari
passing through the occupied zone. The mon had been
expected to open her veins and legs to sa'necari passing
through as well as to serve other customers in the past. It
irritated him and Malthus' thoughts went back to the women
of his kind shackled by sealed spellcords on each wrist.
Spellcord on a single wrist was not enough to completely
stifle the flow of power through a mage's shaukras and the
mage-nets in their body, each wrist had to be corded
separately. His human mother had taught him that by making

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
42
him wear them both ways for a day. He wondered how his
mother fared with her new employer, Lord Daemon.
"So, what did you do before you wound up here?" asked
Shalto, shifting back in his seat as the tankards arrived and
Malthus dropped some coins onto the server's tray.
"I spent fifteen years as a kandoyarin."
"Mercenary. Hsaaah!" Shalto grinned, appreciation glinting
in his pecan shell brown eyes.
Well at least they know the term. That's worth something.
"I've been from one end of the Blood Coast to the other."
From the corner of Malthus' eye, he caught a glimpse of
Nikko covertly watching them. Is he following me around? Or
was he already here?
"Why'd you come back?" Oswyl asked.
A tall blond in the chocolate and claret uniform of the Red
Wolf guardsmyn took a seat at Nikko's table. The young
lawgiver had a ready smile for him. "Hello, Kynyr."
Malthus licked his lips, momentarily distracted by Kynyr's
appearance. It had been years since Malthus saw a male
lycan that so strongly provoked his appetites—yet Kynyr did.
The young guardsmon's golden ginger hair, so thick it
bloused around his face no matter how tightly he tied it back,
hung at his shoulders in a clubbed knot. A narrow fringe of
close-cropped golden beard framed his face from sideburns to
an inch from his chin. His lantern jaw, pronounced
cheekbones with dramatic hollows beneath them, and cleft
chin made him the visual epitome of lycan masculinity.
Looking at him made Malthus hungry.
"Malthus?" Oswyl prodded.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
43
Malthus' attention snapped back to the young wolves at his
table. "Sorry. I was distracted. Who's the young guardsmon?"
"Kynyr Maguire from Longbranch. No one special. Thinks
he's a looker, but he ain't," said Shalto, and then repeated
Oswyl's question. "Why'd you come back?"
"The rebellion. I had family in Waejontor." Malthus pressed
his hands around his tankard and stared into the contents
before continuing. "I became worried about them."
Shalto and Oswyl shared a glance as if deciding who would
ask the obvious question. As usual, it was Shalto who did.
"Had?"
"They're all dead ... except my nieces. I didn't get back in
time."
"We're really sorry to hear about that, aren't we, Shalto?"
"Yeah. Look, if there's anything we can do to help you,
Malthus. You just let us know."
"Thank you, I will."
Malthus bought them a second and a third round. By that
time the two youths were treating him like a long lost
brother, including telling him about their problems with
females: they couldn't get any. They had problems with some
of the other young wolves, feeling that they deserved more
respect than they were getting. Their jobs at the camp didn't
pay well, since they came from donations to the shrine, but
jobs were scarce. Malthus took their measures, probed their
vulnerabilities, and explored their dreams. He purchased a
fourth round and when they finished, the young pair
staggered happily back to the compound with him.
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
44
Kynyr watched Malthus and his drinking buddies leave.
Nikko started to rise and follow them, but Kynyr touched his
arm and nodded at the chair. "I'll buy the next round, Nikko. I
need to ask you some questions."
"About what?"
"Was that the new mon at the camp?"
Nikko settled back in his chair as Kynyr gestured at
Hereward to refill their tankards. "Yes."
"He seems to have cozied right up to your workers. Does
that bother you?"
Hereward arrived with fresh tankards, set them smoothly
in front of the two young wolves, and withdrew, taking the
empties with him.
Nikko stared into his drink with a sigh. "Yes, it does. I'm
not certain about him."
"In what way?"
"Gut instinct, I guess."
"I never ignore one of those. Has Tempest had a look at
him yet?"
Nikko nodded, his lips so tight they nearly disappeared.
"Tempest says he's human."
"But you don't believe that?"
"There's no reason not to believe it. And yet?" Nikko made
a palms up gesture of hopelessness.
"Gut instinct?"
"Yes."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
45
Kynyr scratched at the yellow whiskers trimmed into a
close-cropped thin line around his features. "You ought to get
yourself some apprentices."
"I don't feel ready."
"Some assistants then. Hire some assistants."
Nikko sighed. "I guess I could think about it."
"Until you decide, Claw says to tell you that Finn, Ramsey
and myself are available at all hours."
Nikko ran his hand across his neck, shifting in his chair
with growing impatience. "I will. Now I need to go. Really, I
do."
"Don't bite off more than you can chew, Nikko. Remember
you don't have to do anything alone."
"I'll remember." Nikko rose and left.
Kynyr dragged Nikko's tankard over and saw that the
lawgiver had taken no more than a couple of swallows from it.
Whatever gut instinct was riding Nikko; it was riding him
hard.
* * * *
Malthus crawled into the sheeling and dropped his pack
well away from the firepit. He withdrew a necklace of little
crystal globes that looked like simple pretties. Holding them
one at a time in the palm of his hand, Malthus decided which
one he wanted. He laid the necklace on the dirt floor, and
tapped it with a word of command. Two covered quivers and
a long bow came out. He tapped another, which brought forth
a bowl and several bottles of a silvery liquid. Then he began
to dip the points in and stack the arrows against the side of

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
46
the sheeling to dry. The poison worked best when it was
fresh.
The mountain air of the high elevation valley always
became dramatically cooler in the evenings. A small fire
burned in the pit. Two reed beds lay along the sides with a
quilt to contain them and a light coverlet over that. Ros and
Lyrri crept in behind him. Ros appeared a bit peaked, and he
knew she must be feeling the effects of not having had blood
to drink in several days.
At his gesture the girls settled together on their bed. He
stroked Ros' dark hair. "One more day, Ros. Then I'll have
blood for you."
"Thank you, Uncle. I'm so hungry I hurt."
"I know how that is. I've had to go without a few myself."
Malthus put a finger to each of their foreheads and sent
them to sleep. He studied them both with a deep fondness
while he waited for Beth to arrive. Had he not needed them
for this gambit, he would have sent them to his mother when
he took them from their maternal relatives, who in his
estimation had been not rearing them properly—timid
sa'necari equally fearing both the queen and the Sharani,
trying to pass for human, and running a dry goods store as a
front for their existence. That was no fit life for his brother's
children. Especially Ros, who was a prodigy among sa'necari
and would be very powerful when she came into her own.
Beth scrambled through the opening, glanced back out to
make certain she had not been seen, and sat on his bed.
Nothing they did would wake the girls, only his command, or
the sun in their eyes. She undressed without being told.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
47
Malthus smiled at that. Beth had proved very susceptible. Just
one night and he had her trained this much. Tonight he would
train her further. He needed Beth to feed both himself and
Ros until other arrangements could be made.
"I love you, Malthus," she said, her voice filled with
eagerness for him. "I didn't let anyone see me. I've been
good, Malthus."
"I know, Beth." He looked at the healing bruise he had left
on her breast last night. Lycans healed more quickly than
humans and it would be gone by tomorrow. It would already
be gone, if he hadn't torn her more than he originally meant
to.
Malthus kissed her cheek and slid into her mind again,
turning and knotting the trigger tighter. He began the first
layer of commands that would become a coercion. "You want
to protect me, Beth."
Once more he used repetitions of her name to strengthen
his hold upon her.
"More than anything." Her earnest expression pleased him.
"Good girl, Beth." He gazed at her throat. Bellocar's Hells,
how he wanted to put his fangs in her neck—but that would
show—it was all that he could do to hold himself back. "You
don't want anyone to hurt me."
She raised concerned eyes to his face. "I don't want them
to do that."
"They would kill me, Beth."
Her eyes widened like a small creature trapped in the
sudden glare of a lamp. "No. I can't let them do that."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
48
"You know what you need to do then, Beth," Malthus
murmured into her ear, kissing her head.
"I need to protect you."
"More than that. I need the freedom to come and go from
this place. You will cover for me, lie for me..." Malthus
knotted the edge of the coercion. "Kill for me."
Tears abruptly appeared in Beth's eyes and spread a river
across her cheeks. Malthus knew that she had finally realized
what he had done to her, but he was in too deeply for her to
break free. Her psyche squirmed. She needed to be
disciplined.
He touched a single finger to her chest, with a tiny spell of
muscular disruption, which sent a fiery lance of pain through
her. She gasped sharply and grabbed at his finger. He
brushed her stomach with his other hand, repeating the spell,
and Beth doubled over with a cry.
He licked her tears away and kissed her breasts, dressing
his threats in a lover's soft tones. "Don't fight me, Beth. Don't
make me hurt you."
"I won't," she sobbed.
"That's a good girl." He put another knot in the coercion.
The more firmly he placed his controls, the more aware of
them he could safely allow her to be, enabling him to enjoy
the taste of her fear. "Do I frighten you, Beth?"
She trembled. "Yes."
"Good. Lie back and spread your legs. Which vein shall I
open tonight?"
"Any you wish."
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
49
The two young boys, eight and nine years old, stole up to
Malthus' sheeling in the dark, and squatted down listening to
the grunting and moaning. There had been some words
earlier, but they had not heard them clearly.
"See, I told you Beth is finally getting some," Rory said.
"I never thought fat, old Beth would ever get any," Hamish
replied.
"I doubt she's more'n a waystation to him. He'll drop her
when he gets a prettier sheath for his sword."
"What are you two doing out here this late?" Nikko asked,
emerging from the darkness beneath the trees. He had been
on his way home from counseling one of the human women in
the compound.
Hamish started to run, but Nikko was quicker and had him
by the collar. Rory escaped, running for all that he was worth.
Nikko sighed, wishing he had been faster and gotten them
both. The two Scott boys were not troublemakers; just
underfoot more than Nikko thought they should be. He would
have to talk to their parents tomorrow. That was part of his
job as the lawgiver.
Nikko lifted Hamish onto the tips of his toes. "What are
you doing?" he repeated.
"Listenin' to it."
"What?" Then Nikko's sharp lycan ears were drawn to the
sounds of two people coupling in the sheeling. For a second
he wondered if Malthus was molesting his nieces.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
50
"Beth," Hamish hissed. "It's old Beth. We were goin' home
from playing with those Hansley kids and saw her go crawling
into there. Then the sounds start up. Oh, they been loud."
"Listening to it is rude. You go home right now," Nikko
admonished him, reconsidering his initial decision to speak to
their parents, and deciding to wait and see if he caught them
here again. "If I catch you again, I'll be forced to inform your
parents."
"Yes'm, Master Nikko."
"And you tell Rory that I said it."
"Yes'm."
Nikko released Hamish, and the boy raced off in the
direction of his home in the middle of the village. Well, maybe
the admonition will be enough.
The sounds coming from the sheeling sent an odd shiver
over Nikko, like the skeletal hand of presentiment. Something
wasn't right, but he was almost afraid to touch it. Nevin
would have known what to do. Nikko stared at the sheeling
for a moment. He shook himself. If it was not all right for the
boys to listen, then it was not all right for him either. So he
walked home, wishing Nevin were there to counsel him. More
and more he went to Tempest with his doubts and
uncertainties, but Tempest was not lycan and failed to
understand all of their ways.
He thought of Kynyr Maguire's offer and then shook his
head at it. With no proofs to offer, all Nikko had was possibly
groundless suspicions. He was supposed to be the lawgiver,
not some uncertain, paranoid, wet-tailed cub. It was easier to
admit that he might be wrong to someone older than he was,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
51
than to someone his own age ... he could not do it.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
52
CHAPTER THREE
CULLEN
Cullen perched on the tall sorrel mare like a stocky pit dog
in dusty brown leathers and a nondescript chambray shirt, his
stirrups drawn up almost to the saddle skirts to allow for his
short legs. The leather patch over his dead left eye and a
day's growth of stubble on his weathered face lent him an
unsavoriness matched only by his dour expression as he
reined Larkspur to a walk entering the courtyard of the
manor.
Larkspur recognized that they were home at last and
whickered softly.
Cullen patted her neck. Seventeen hands at the shoulder,
lean and leggy with a deep chest, Larkspur could outrun
nearly anything on four legs: she was Cullen's prize
possession; a gift from Claw Redhand whose herd of fine
racers were the envy of all the clans.
"Yo, hostler! Get yourself out here!"
Cullen adjusted the strap of his nondescript black satchel—
common to many trades—that crossed his compact, muscular
chest, swung his leg over the saddle, and dropped to the
ground.
The hostler, Georgie Rogan, emerged from the barns at
Cullen's left and hurried toward him, grinning at the manner
in which the short wolf had disengaged from his large mount.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
53
A harsh glance from Cullen's cobalt eye banished the smile
from Georgie's face. Although Georgie had several inches in
height and forty pounds over the mon, something in Cullen's
face and manner discouraged trifling with him.
"Brush her down good," Cullen barked at Georgie. "Give
her some oats. Mind my words. I'll check later. If you ain't
done it right, I'll have the skin off your back."
Georgie swallowed, making his Adam's apple bob like a
cork in a stream. "Yessir."
Cullen strode to the front door and pounded on it,
speculating on which of the servants would answer. He could
have just walked in, but he liked making his presence known
whenever he returned from a long trip with a packet of letters
for the household.
Kissie answered the door and stared at him with reddening
cheeks.
Cullen's eyes went straight to Kissie's ample bosom, their
shape revealed by the hang of her drawstring-necked blouse
that she wore tucked into her skirt. His hand shot out and he
gave her his usual greeting: he pinched her nipple. He walked
past her brusquely as if he had done nothing untoward. After
all, Kissie was a nibari, a slave, although the Redhands like to
call them servants. "Where's Claw?"
"The Great hall." Kissie trailed him, drying her hands on
her apron. "Is there something I can get you?"
"You. Naked. My bed." Cullen patted his crotch. "I ain't had
any since yesterday."
Kissie's flush deepened. "I'm in season."
"Pity that. Ya liked it last time, didn't ya?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
54
Kissie's voice dwindled to a murmur and she ducked her
head. "Yes, Master Cullen."
Cullen scratched at the stubble on his chin, uncertain
whether she meant it or was just being polite. That dinged his
ego and he did not say anything else until they reached the
Great Hall. There were three things he considered himself a
master at: riding, fighting, and fucking ... especially fucking.
Claw glanced up from his whittling as Cullen and Kissie
entered the Great Hall, noted the color in Kissie's face, and
growled. "Cullen, keep your paws off Kissie."
The courier settled into a chair opposite the chieftain. The
dour look he had given Georgie returned to his face. "As you
wish."
"I damn well do wish. Kissie, is Tulah out of season?"
"Yes, Master Claw."
"Good. Tell her she's got Cullen duty."
"That what you're calling it now? Cullen duty?" Cullen
removed his pouch and slid it across the intervening table to
Claw.
"You're a slut. My servants aren't your harem." Claw laid
his whittling aside, filled his pipe, and lit it, showing no sign of
having noticed the pouch. He puffed for a minute. "If you
weren't the best ... I'd've dismissed you forty years ago."
"There's that." Cullen took his own pipe out and leaned
back in the chair, smoking. "It's getting tough to get through.
Lord Daemon routed the Sharani at Torment Lake. I had to
slip past their pickets and they almost caught me."
"Sharani?"
"Waejontori."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
55
"I'll go through the dispatches and then you can brief me
tomorrow."
"Will do."
They smoked for a time in silence.
Claw gestured at Cullen with the stem of his pipe. "You've
done well for me, Cullen. I've been thinking of rewarding
you."
Cullen's interest perked up. "How?"
"Isn't Larkspur coming into season soon?"
"Yah. That's why I didn't stop along the way. Don't want
some two-bit, mongrel stud covering her."
Claw nodded. He suspected that Larkspur was the only
female Cullen had ever loved with his whole heart. "I'd like to
breed her to Stormsong."
"Woof!" Cullen's eyes saucered at the thought of Claw's
current top stud. "But, what will I ride when she gets too far
along? My route is a tough run."
"I'll loan you Shadow Orchard."
"He's risling, ain't he?"
Claw nodded again. "He didn't sire the kind of foals I
expected."
"Ahh. Now about Stormsong. He won't hurt her, will he?"
"Not at all. Tell you what, Cullen. You can come and watch
and see that Stormsong doesn't get rough with Larkspur."
Cullen beamed. "I'd like that."
* * * *
Cullen considered going into Wolffgard and spending a few
hours relaxing at the Difficult Horse with a tankard of mead

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
56
and some of Claw's guardsmyn as companions. He decided
instead on a hot bath in his rooms and a hot nibari with her
legs open. It had irked Cullen when Claw called him a slut,
even though the courier had never denied it. Cullen scratched
at his head, and continued along his line of thought as if Claw
were there and they were arguing, muttering to himself the
things he did not dare to say to his chieftain.
"Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'll settle down ... right. And get stuck
with a single bitch for the rest of my bloody existence. Horde
of cubs whining at me. Yeah. And be bored as hell. I got too
much to offer not to spread it around a bit."
He did not have the social status to rate a harem like some
of the clan chieftains and richer merchants maintained. On
the other hand, Cullen had been socking away the gold he
won racing Larkspur at various country shindigs to purchase
half a dozen nibari when he retired. With his reputation, no
self-respecting lycan wanted him anywhere near their
daughters, so that was out. However, there was a sweet little
lycan whore at the Crimson Lady whom Cullen had become
fond of. He could always marry Ellie and thumb his nose at
lycan society. Being a whore, Ellie probably would not rub his
nose in it if she caught him in a few indiscretions—so long as
he did not catch her in one all would be well.
A big tub sat in the middle of his outer room with water
steaming in it. Cullen felt grateful that his status in the
household was such that he didn't have to use the Barrack's
bathhouse to soak the road dirt off him. He dumped his
clothes on the floor and slipped into the water with a loud
"Ahh."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
57
His large cock bobbed for a moment and he winked at it
grinning. "I know what you want."
Cullen's genital endowments were impressive and he took
great pride in them. He was still grinning at himself when
Tulah came in and laid towels on a chair near the tub.
"Hey, Tulah! Whatcha think a that?" He pointed at his
cock.
The nibari came closer and looked.
A naughty boy grin spread over his face and he dragged
her into the tub. Water sloshed onto the floor and Tulah gave
a startled shriek, squirming around in the hot water. Cullen
got her skirt up, shoved his hand into her slit, and winked at
her.
Tulah settled against him. Nibari, the genetically-altered
humans created by the vampires and sa'necari as slave
cattle, bred for thousands of years for complete docility, were
the soul of compliance—unless directed otherwise by their
masters.
She giggled as he shifted her around until she sat on his
lap, facing him with her legs around him.
Cullen thought back to Kissie and the hint of doubt she had
caused him. "I do it good, don't I, Tulah?"
"Yes, Master Cullen." Tulah shrugged out of her wet blouse
and dropped it on the floor beside the tub.
* * * *
Malthus concluded a deal with Shalto's father to buy two
horses, a good riding animal, and a packhorse. Then the next
day he rode into Hell's Widow to meet with Heironim.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
58
The town of Hell's Widow had prospered under the rule of
the Sharani occupiers. Without the constant drain on their
resources by their former masters who had ruled through
blood, terror, and cannibalism, the town had expanded to
twice its borders in twenty years. Malthus rode into Hell's
Widow, and through the town, noting the presence of the
Sharani women walking tall and proud down the streets.
Waejontori peasant women wore shapeless black dresses and
head scarves. The only sa'necaris dwelling in Hell's Widow
lived in the shadows, hidden from the conquerors. They
maintained the secret waystations.
He turned into the yard of an inn called the Devil's Dance,
which was a waystation to those who knew what to look for.
Their rooms on the third floor catered to obscene appetites
concealed from the Sharani. Malthus intended to spend the
night here while he concluded his business, and start home to
Wolffgard Village tomorrow.
He dismounted as an ostler came out.
Malthus tossed the ostler a handful of coppers. "I'll be
staying the night."
Inside the inn, Malthus found the common room filled to
capacity with locals and he spied Heironim sitting in the far
right corner dicing. He strode up to the table and gazed at
Heironim. "You have some goods for me."
"Yes, I have." Heironim picked up his winnings. "You'll
excuse me, but I have business to take care of."
His companions grumbled, but Heironim shrugged them
off.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
59
Malthus started toward the door to the back without
waiting for him, and Heironim fell into step beside him.
They reached the third floor where Heironim had his rooms
and walked down the hallway. A nibari emerged from a room
and greeted them. Her face had the kind of flush that came
from being sucked after having gone too long without fangs in
her flesh.
Malthus raised his hand to halt her. "Do you have more
that are over ripe?"
She curtsied. "Yes, master. Two that are getting the blood-
bloat bad. We haven't had many masters come through
recently."
"Light meat or dark?"
"Both light meat, sir."
Malthus extended his fangs and tongued them with a
smile. "I'll take your best room, and both nibari." He reached
in his pouch and produced two silver coins, which he placed in
her hands. "Have them wait for me in my room. Send up a
nice dinner also." He turned to Heironim. "Now let's have a
look at my supplies."
Heironim's suite had a modest sitting room with four chairs
around a square table, a divan, and two chests of drawers. A
door to the right opened on a bedroom. The only guests who
lodged on this floor were those who could not bear close
scrutiny. Heironim seated himself at the small table and lifted
a chest from the floor onto it. He shoved the chest into the
middle, and Malthus pulled it the rest of the way across.
"Here's what your mother sent."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
60
Malthus opened the chest and smiled. Six bottles of exotic
wines to tempt Claw's palate once the curses were laid upon
them and Malthus had wormed his way into their household.
Tucked into the other side of the chest were jars of powers
and bottles of liquids in strange colors. His mother, Sidera
Tyrins, had sent him a fresh supply of the various toxins
Malthus enjoyed working with and three of her newest
creations. Sidera currently served as Lord Daemon's
toxicologist and bio-alchemist, creating deadly surprises for
his enemies. Poisons and venoms, both arcane and natural,
had been the family business for generations. Malthus had
informed everyone in Red Wolff Valley, especially the people
of Wolffgard Village, that he was the illegitimate son of the
late Lord Estrobian, when actually he was the son of Sidera
Tyrins and Lord Feodras who had gone missing after the
destruction of the late King Baaltrystan's mountain
stronghold.
A large number of sa'necari nobles had gone missing after
the palace collapsed, and only Malthus and his mother knew
what happened to them. Sidera had betrayed them into his
hands as they fled and he had rited them all, including his
father. Each of his victims had carried mortgiefan legacies,
increasingly powerful collections of soul fragments and stolen
magic, that passed from parent to child when the child rited
an aged or dying parent. As a result, his powers now rivaled
that of the late Prince Mephistis, the most powerful sa'necari
of all time, who had been slain by the Sacred King of
Rowanhart.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
61
Malthus took a bottle of wine from the chest, sketched the
spell onto the green glass side, and then added two more
runes to triple the strength of the curse.
"That's an interesting spell," Heironim said, watching
Malthus finish with the first three bottles. "It's a bit too subtle
for my taste, but still interesting. Who's the wine for?"
"A gift for the chieftain."
"Ahhh, the chieftain. I can see why you'd want to be
subtle."
"I'm going to the heart of the matter." Malthus paused to
chuckle at his joke. "His heart."
A knock came at the door as Malthus finished with the final
bottle. He closed the lid and looked up as Heironim answered.
"Tell the other master that his rooms are ready and his
meals are waiting," said the nibari on the other side of the
door.
Heironim nodded, closed the door, and returned to
Malthus, looking at the number hanging from the room key.
"Best room in the house. How do you rate that?"
Malthus shrugged with a tiny smile that spoke of secrets.
"I've known the innkeeper for twenty years. He was having a
bit of trouble when I first met him. So I went out and rited his
trouble."
Heironim laughed.
Malthus pulled three small sheets of paper from his pocket
and passed it across the table to Heironim. "Have your people
purchase all these things for me. My cover is that I'm running
errands."
"I'll do that."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
62
"Your first order of business, once I'm gone, is to buy up
some of the whorehouses. Especially the ones the lycans
frequent." Malthus pulled a pouch of gold from his belt and
sat it on the table in front of Heironim. "Some warehouses
also. Preferably in a section of town that the Sharani do not
frequent."
Heironim nodded. "And what am I doing with it?"
"Watching for couriers."
"I don't have that many myn yet."
"Not on the road, Heironim. In town. They'll have to come
through here. If they're using windfolk, then it's my problem.
If they're using riders, then it's yours."
"I'll make a start at it."
"Good. For now, come to my rooms and have dinner with
me."
"You sure?"
"Of course, why else would I order two blood-bloaters?"
Malthus' rooms were plush, from the carpets to the heavy
drapes, from the overstuffed chairs and sofas to the claw-
footed, elegantly carved tables.
The two nibari, both female, waited on opposite sofas as
Malthus and Heironim walked in. The nibari were in the late
and most dangerous stages of blood-bloat, something that
could kill them if the pressure and other symptoms were not
relieved by being bled. The innkeeper, Dymier, could have
bled them using leeches or have sliced their wrists and
drained a bit off into bottles, but he generally let at least two
or three of them go almost to the point of death because
some sa'necari and vampires would pay high prices to drink

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
63
from a bloater. The bloaters always released a pleasant rush
of tasty endorphins when a master's fangs entered them.
Malthus picked one and sat down beside her, savoring the
symptoms of the bloat. Their normally light skinned faces
were ruddy, their bodies bloated, and their skin clammy with
sweat. She shivered as Malthus opened her bodice and
pushed it back over her shoulders.
"I'm Lona, what position do you wish, master?"
Malthus played with her breasts. A long moan caused him
to glance from the corner of his eyes, and he saw that
Heironim already had his nibari on the floor in third position.
"Position six."
Lona laid down on the sofa, draping one leg over the back,
and placing her other foot firmly on the floor. She pulled her
skirts up, exposing her slit.
"Very good, Lona. Very good." Malthus opened his pants
and mounted her.
She turned her head to the side, offering the best angle for
entering her long neck.
Malthus nuzzled her neck and then slid his fangs into her
as he began to thrust.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
64
CHAPTER FOUR
MERISSA
As Beth had told him he would, Malthus found the young
female sitting upon an ornate bench in the gardens behind
the chieftain's house with a child playing in the grass near her
feet. A basket of crocheting sat on the bench beside her.
Three suede pouches and a small utilitarian knife hung from
her jewel studded belt, all of them—pouches, sheath, and
belt—dyed a delicate rose to match her dress.
She reminded Malthus of Dyllys, his last lycan paramour—
only she was far lovelier than Dyllys had been. He had
thought Dyllys the most beautiful of all. She betrayed him
and he rited her for it. This mon had heavy ginger hair and
fair skin, a delicate mouth and nose, large blue eyes. He
imagined she must make a striking wolf, since the color of
their hair reflected the color of her coat in wolf-form. The
child was black-haired and dark-skinned; yet his eyes like
polished turquoise marked him as hers. This jewel among
wolves had to be Merissa.
The garden was a simple affair of low hedges, rose bushes,
and several rows of herbs. A psychic nudge through the links
he had placed in his nieces' minds sent them running far
ahead of him. They rushed laughing into the garden. Malthus
trailed them with a doting expression. The girls rounded the
hedgerow nearest Merissa and her son, and stopped with a
squeal of fright. Malthus blinked, wondering what they had

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
65
seen. Then, as he came into view, Malthus hesitated. A half-
grown maned hunting cat, a mountain chekaya, rose from
behind the bench. He had not seen it until then. Malthus
grabbed his nieces and pulled them close to him.
Merissa sucked in a surprised breath, saw his reaction, and
caught the cat by the scruff of the neck. "Don't be afraid of
Kenly. My son is wilderkin." She indicated the toddler. "One
day the mother cat appeared and gave him the kitten."
Merissa gave Kenly a pat and the cat settled again by her
son.
Malthus wondered how dangerous that might make the
child, whether the boy might be a simple wilderkin, or the
more rare and deadly predator wilderkin. Caution, caution,
caution. Take this one step at a time. "Have I permission to
sit with you? I'm still learning the ways of this place."
Merissa smiled pleasantly up at him. "Of course. Are these
your daughters?"
Malthus lowered his head as he shook it, allowing Merissa
a brief, fleeting glimpse of his inner sorrow at the loss of his
family. "Nieces. Their parents are dead."
Always the more daring of the two, Ros crept up to Kenly
and touched him tentatively, just brushing her fingers across
his forehead. "He's soft. Come on, Lyrri. He won't bite. Will
you, Kenly?"
Lyrri hesitated and Ros went back, bringing her forward.
Soon both of them sat petting the huge hunting cat.
Kenly started to purr and then gave an odd cough.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
66
Merissa directed a startled glance at Kenly before frowning
at Malthus. "She's sa'necari. Are you?" She looked at his
wrists, which wore no spellcords.
"Me? No, of course not. I thought you were not allowing
any adult sa'necari into the valley now."
"We have a few. They are all spellcorded, sealed, and
watched. It is the only way we would allow them to seek
refuge here. They must repudiate the old ways."
The thought of spellcord made Malthus' stomach clench,
but he forced himself to relax. He would rather die than allow
himself to be corded and cut off from his powers. It had
happened once, but only once and he would never forget the
burn as the cords were twisted into his flesh, and the empty
sickness of being blocked from his dark inner core. What
could possibly have driven his people to allow themselves to
be bound? But the other sa'necari here, besides the children,
were all women, and women were all soft in the head when it
came to their children.
What fools these lycans! No one who has tasted the rites
ever truly repudiates the old ways. Malthus decided not to
point that out to her and thus endanger his own kind.
Instead, he inclined his head to acknowledge the soundness
of her statement. "Which is exactly as you should."
Merissa smiled again. She bent forward and lifted her boy
to her lap. "This is my son, Darmyk. He's two and a half. He'll
be three at mid-winter."
"A handsome boy. Is he sa'necari born? Is that why you
brought him here?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
67
Merissa hesitated before answering. "Sa'necari, yes.
However, Claw is my father."
"Then you are the Princess Merissa!"
Merissa blushed. "We're not that formal here."
"May I call you, Merissa?"
"Yes."
"I am Malthus." He extended his hand and she placed hers
into it. Malthus gave a short bow and kissed her fingers. He
lingered over her hand a moment too long and she pulled
away from him. "My half-brother was sa'necari as was his
wife. I was not born with that stigma. Ros is seven and Lyrri
is six. I thought we'd never reach here safely."
After watching Darmyk rolling over the huge kitten, the
two girls joined him, petting and laughing.
Merissa sighed, her lips tightening a fraction. "It's hard.
Especially with this rebellion against the Sharani claiming so
many lives."
"I hope your husband has chosen to remain here in the
valley."
"I'm not married."
"Widowed?"
"My son was born on the wrong side of the blankets. Not
that it's any of your business..." Merissa said, lifting her head
to a proud angle, and her eyes flashing with anger as if daring
him to say something.
Malthus nodded. Considering the age of the boy, Beth was
right. He wondered whether it had been Troyes or Isranon
who had gotten her pregnant. They had stayed at this farm
together. Troyes' orders had been to ride on after leaving

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
68
Mephistis' young catamite here, but if he had, no one knew it:
Troyes had never been seen again. "I meant nothing. I too
was born on the wrong side of the blankets. My father was
married to someone else."
Merissa sighed more deeply. "I apologize for reading more
into your question than you intended, I'm sure. It's just that
so many people look askance at me. I just assume everyone I
meet already knows. My lover rode off to follow his prince and
left me. At least he was honest. He told me from the
beginning he didn't love me."
"I am sorry." Malthus almost laughed. Isranon, for certain,
had rejoined Prince Mephistis after the fall of the Lord Hoon's
City of the Dead three years ago. Could Troyes have done so
as well? Which one fathered this little boy? He suspected
Troyes. The half-a-mon had never seemed masculine enough
to attract a woman like Merissa, nor possessed of the
boldness to force one. Troyes had been both.
"At least he wishes to know his son and has promised to
come when he can."
"I cannot understand how a man could not love a woman
as beautiful as you."
Merissa shifted uncomfortably and stood up with Darmyk.
"You are kind, but I think I should go in now."
"Will you be out here tomorrow? Maybe the children could
play together. My nieces haven't made any friends yet."
Merissa smiled again, relaxing. "Of course they can play
together. Darmyk will like that."
Malthus watched her go. She was exactly his brother's
type. Troyes would have certainly tried to bed her. When

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
69
Troyes chose a woman, he always got her. Then Malthus
thought of a third possibility. Could the lycans have killed his
brother and hid his body if he had managed to bed her and
get this child? Lycans generally abhorred having a sa'necari
child born to one of their own. Beth's words came back to
him: we should have stoned her.
What a waste that would have been. Merissa was the
loveliest piece of flesh he had ever encountered.
Had Merissa been anyone except the clan chieftain's
daughter, no doubt she would have been forced to abort the
child rather than bear it. Malthus needed to discover the
name of the child's sire.
Malthus continued to consider it as he returned to the
sanctuary with his nieces. Two sa'necari with their wrists
spellcorded and sealed carried buckets of water hanging from
a pole across their shoulders. They looked tired and worn out.
A tickle of anger started in his middle. Sa'necari women
should not look like that, nor work like that. The sanctuary
owned only a dozen nibari, all cast-offs donated from other
lycan households. So feedings for those women were
scattered and few. Fools. Fools all.
"Go play with the other children," he told his nieces and
went into the longhouse. Beth stood at a tub, rising off the
dishes from dinner. She set the last one aside and went to
Malthus, throwing her arms around him in a hug. He
stiffened, but Beth failed to notice it.
"I'm so glad you're back," she said.
"I will be glad of some time alone with you, Beth."
"Do you like my dress?" Beth asked.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
70
Malthus finally stopped thinking about Merissa for a
moment and stared. The neck of Beth's dress was unbuttoned
almost to her nipples. His hand tightened on her wrist.
"Come, Beth. Let's find a place to be alone together." I need
to adjust your triggers otherwise everyone will know I'm
plowing your field. When the time comes, you'll scream nicely
on my altar. It's Merissa I want.
He took Beth to his sheeling and they crawled inside
through the low entryway. The girls would not be back until
dark. They tended to stay away as much as possible, leaving
him to his business once he dismissed them. The lycans had
no nudity taboos, yet being unclad always made a female feel
more vulnerable before a dominant male. So he started each
of his sessions with Beth by having her undress for him.
She sat on his bed, her plump breasts resting on the firm
roundness of her belly, and her heavy thighs opened. The
overhang of her belly partially concealed the tuft between her
loins. Malthus liked them slender, but his friend Egidius liked
them fat. He would introduce Beth to Egidius when he
arrived.
"I love you, Malthus."
"Yes, I know, Beth." He wondered if he had chosen the
wrong first command by making her fall in love with him.
There were other approaches he could have used that might
have worked as well. Putting his hands on her breasts made
her tremble. Initiating rapport, Malthus wrapped himself
through her awareness, tied another knot into the
compulsions regarding her devotion to him. "You must not be

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
71
so forward in showing off your body in public like this. People
will get the wrong idea."
"What idea is that?" Worry furrowed her corpulent face.
"They will think I love you. I don't love you, Beth. I own
you." He gave her left nipple a savage pinch.
Her eyes teared up. "Yes, Malthus. I know that."
"I want to move my sheeling to a more private corner of
your holdings. That is where I want to build my house."
Beth swallowed and nodded. "Whatever you wish."
"Good. I have some friends coming. You will obey them as
you do me. Without question."
"Friends?"
"You know what I mean." Malthus could feel her trying to
resist him and squeezed her thoughts into a painful bundle,
dragging up the worst memories in her mind to hurt her with.
Beth cried out and clutched her head.
Malthus lunged deeper into her psyche and drove a nail of
force through it.
"I'll obey," she gasped.
"You will lie for me. You will kill, if I ask."
Beth cringed. "I will. I will."
"My lieutenant, Egidius, is bringing an army into your
valley from the north. I'm going to butcher your males and
enslave your females." He spoke sharply, provoking her
reactions in order to pierce her defenses. Malthus continued
to stick, stitch, tie, and knot.
Beth's eyes glazed over and she slumped forward. Malthus
shoved her onto her back. Her flesh jiggled distastefully.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
72
Malthus could not understand why Egidius preferred females
like Beth.
"You will betray your people to me, Beth. Repeat that."
Her mouth twisted and she broke out in a cold sweat as
she struggled to resist him. Sensing that Beth might scream,
Malthus touched one finger to the hollow of her throat to stifle
her noises. Beth clutched at her neck, eyes saucering.
"No," she croaked, unable to raise her voice any louder.
Malthus rotated the arcane blade of his power in her mind.
Beth tried to shriek as she folded over her hands,
trembling, her face gone white from the agony of his
intrusion.
"Say it, Beth."
"I will ... betray my ... people."
"I want Merissa. You will not interfere with that."
Beth shuddered. "I will not interfere."
Malthus climbed onto Beth and bit her. He had barely
begun to use Beth, when Ros arrived. She stood for a
moment, watching them, licking her fangs, and then joined
them on the bed, biting deeply into Beth's leg.
* * * *
Near the rear of the gardens, in the southeastern corner of
the manor grounds lay the Redhand family graveyard. Short
hedgerows lined the sides and back. A rose arbor marked the
entrance down a path lined with oaks. Rather than the open
spaces that most humans preferred as a place of burial,
lycans, especially the upper classes, preferred to clutter them
up with trees, bushes, hedges, and flower beds, arranging

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
73
their graves in sheltered rows. Until three generations ago,
the Redhands had burned their dead, burying the ashes in
small urns and planting a shrub over it.
Kynyr sat cross-legged beside the grave of Tarrant
Redhand. He laid the flowers he had picked upon the grave.
"Cahira Maguire sends her love, Tarrant. She's never
forgotten you."
He had been coming here roughly every seven days on the
first day that the moon changed for the four years that he
had worked for the Redhands. Kynyr picked times when no
one would see him steal into the cemetery lest they ask
questions he dared not answer.
There were only four graves: that of Suleahan and
Sorcha—Claw's parents—and those of Claw's twin sons,
Tarrant and Logan. He knew the story of Tarrant and Logan
well. Most of it he had heard from his grandmother, Cahira.
Others had supplied more pieces and the image of Tarrant
Redhand grew to heroic proportions with every telling.
The Lycan Rebellion had taken place nearly eighty years
ago. For three long years the lycans held against the forces of
the sa'necari while trying to persuade both Creeya and
Shaurone to come to their aid. Claw's sons had ridden with
soldiers to the support of Clan Silverpaw. A series of sa'necari
ambushes resulted in the capture of his sons and his wife,
Aisha, within two weeks of each other.
Logan and Tarrant were rited for treason, and Claw had
been forced to watch their executions with Aisha held hostage
to his cooperation. His sons' mutilated bodies were dumped in
front of him after the sa'necari finished with them. He and

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
74
Aisha were allowed to take their remains home and bury
them in the family cemetery. Most folks agreed that Claw had
never been the same afterward.
Kynyr said a prayer for the dead and rose, beating at his
pants to get the dirt off them. "I'm keeping my promise,
Gram."
He headed back into the gardens and spied Malthus talking
to Merissa. It sent a shiver along his spine for reasons he
could not identify. Kynyr faded into the shadows of a clump of
trees and waited for Malthus to leave before emerging into
the open.
Kynyr found Merissa sitting in the Great Hall at the
spinning wheel while Darmyk played at her feet with a set of
toy soldiers carved from an assortment of wood.
He paused to ruffle Darmyk's head and then walked
around behind the spinning wheel rather than have it
standing like a rampart between himself and Merissa. "Who
were you talking to?"
"Malthus Estrobian. He's new here."
"Yes, I know he's new. What was he doing in the garden?"
Merissa glared at him. "None of your business."
Kynyr sucked in a breath and held his temper. Claw had
allowed him a great many privileges over the past two years
and Kynyr had no intentions of spoiling it. "He's only been
here two weeks and he's already sitting in the garden with
you?"
"The children were there. No liberties were taken. What
harm could there be?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
75
"These are dangerous times. Your father doesn't want you
seeing strange males."
"My father or you?"
"Both."
"Jealous?"
"Cautious."
"You're not my husband, Kynyr. Mind your own business."
"My business is seeing that you're safe."
"I was perfectly safe. Kenly was with us." She reached
down and stroked the cat's head. Kenly rumbled contentedly
and rolled over on his back, batting at Merissa's hand.
"We know almost nothing about this Malthus. Caution is
justified."
"Stop being so possessive, Kynyr. You don't own me yet."
An explosive sigh burst from Kynyr's lungs. "I'm not
courting you. I don't intend to court you."
"You wouldn't know that to listen to my father." Merissa
turned away from him with a flounce that made her long
ginger hair bounce around her shoulders.
Kynyr found that he could not argue with that. He had
been unable to avoid noticing the way Claw had seemed to
shove them at each other ever since the news had come that
Merissa's lover, Isranon, had been taken as a bloodslave by
Anksha the Beast two years ago. Lycans were taught from the
cradle to fear the Beast. "That's enough, Merissa."
"I fully agree." She stood, lifted Darmyk to her hip, and
walked out, leaving him standing there alone.
Kynyr scratched at his whiskers, muttering under his
breath. "I thought I knew bitches, but I guess I don't."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
76
* * * *
Shalto and Oswyl helped Malthus move his sheeling to the
secluded spot he had chosen for his home. Afterward, with
two young myn in tow, Malthus went to see the blacksmith to
replace his sword. A wide variety of fine blades and tools
hung upon pegs on the far wall.
"What do you want?" the smith's assistance asked,
emerging from a sheltered corner of the smithy. He eyed
Malthus, measuring him in a suspicious manner. Not all of the
lycans felt comfortable with the influx of non-lycan
newcomers.
"Loosen up, Torquil," said Shalto. "He lost his fighting to
reach here."
"What do you know about swords, human?"
"I was kandoyarin," Malthus replied, walking to the wall
and examining their wares. He unfastened his sheath from his
shoulder and turned, extending it to Torquil. "Something that
fits this?"
Torquil looked at the battered leather and nodded.
"Broadsword. Interesting choice."
"Popular on the coast."
"And in Shaurone."
Malthus raised an eyebrow at Torquil's suspicious tone.
"Have you been beyond the borders of this valley?"
"No. But the battle-clans—"
Malthus cut him off. "Then don't question my choices."
Torquil shrugged. "We might have something. You have
gold?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
77
Malthus brought several coins from his pouch and
extended them to Torquil.
Torquil tucked the sheath under his arm and took the
coins. "Sharani ten-dolu pieces. You've gotten around a bit."
"I told you, I was kandoyarin until a few weeks ago when I
came home."
Torquil took a blade down from the wall and handed it to
Malthus to inspect. The steel was very well made, supple, and
yet strong. It would not break easy.
Malthus slid it into the sheath and noted the fit. He paid for
it. "You should have a drink with us sometime, Torquil," he
told him. "Shouldn't he, Shalto?"
Shalto grinned. "Yeah. Malthus here likes to buy and he
tells great stories. I think I'd like to be a kandoyarin
someday."
"I've met many lycans working for them, but you need to
be able to handle a blade," Malthus said.
"Would you teach me?" Shalto asked.
"Certainly. I'd be glad to."
Torquil laughed, with a trace of skepticism. "I'll have to
stop by with a pair of practice blades, human, and see what
you can do."
"By all means ... do so."
As Malthus and his companions emerged, they saw Nikko
and Tempest watching them from across the street. A small,
fuzzy dog frolicked around them, returning again and again
with a stick in his mouth, begging for Tempest or Nikko to
toss it. Malthus snarled inwardly. Sooner or later they would
misstep and he would eat them.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
78
* * * *
Nikko knelt and patted Moss, took the stick from his mouth
and tossed it toward some trees on the Common. Moss darted
after the stick, barking with simple joy. Nikko glanced up at
Tempest and straightened, brushing his dark brown robes off.
"He knows we're watching him."
"It'll keep him on his best behavior."
"You know he's sleeping with Beth?"
The lines deepened to crevices across Tempest's face as he
frowned. "I hadn't known. How long has he been here?"
"Two weeks."
"And he's already..." Tempest made a distasteful face,
clearly looking for a polite euphemism. "Beth is a gentle,
impressionable bitch."
Nikko nodded and bent down again as Moss pranced up
with the stick in his hairy mouth. The lawgiver tossed the
stick farther this time. "She's lonely. You've said it yourself
enough times."
"Better alone than with the wrong mon." Tempest sighed
and ran a hand through his gray mane, working his fingers
through the tangles. "How long has it been going on?"
"According to Rory Scott, since his first night here. Rory
and Hamish have been spying on them. So have the Hansley
cubs."
"Have you spoken to their parents?"
"I threatened to. They haven't come round the Camp since
then."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
79
"Lawgiver. Your holiness." Kynyr Maguire sauntered up,
followed by Finn and Ramsey.
Finn grinned at them, his thumbs hooked into his belt. "Did
I hear you say someone was slipping the bone into Old Beth?"
Ramsey struggled to repress a snicker, and it escaped as a
snort.
Tempest scowled as Cullen sauntered up to them with his
hands resting on his fighting knives. "If I'd known old Beth
wanted some, I'd've already been to see her."
"You are a slut, Cullen Blackwood." Tempest's lips
tightened with disapproval. "You should be dipped in tar and
feathered."
Cullen shrugged. "It's been tried, priest."
Nikko gave Moss a hand signal to sit next to them. "That
newcomer, Malthus Estrobian."
Kynyr's expression hardened. "Every day for the past
three, he's shown up at the manor gardens to walk with
Merissa."
"I'll talk to him," said Tempest.
"If you don't, I will. And I promise it won't be pretty."
Kynyr's hands settled on the long fighting knives that rode at
his hips.
"Who made you the defender of bitches' virtue?" Cullen
muscled in between Ramsey and Finn.
Kynyr gave Cullen a quiet glance that still managed to tell
him he was trying to piss on the wrong tree.
"You better be as good as you think you are, boy."
"I am."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
80
CHAPTER FIVE
SLUT
Kynyr Maguire sat on his bed in the barracks, oiling his
long knives. His broadsword rested on a weapons rack built
onto the wall beside the bed. A nightstand sat to the opposite
side and a large chest at the foot. Forty beds identical to
Kynyr's, each with their own nightstand and weapons racks,
filled the room. Five rooms like this one fanned out along the
barracks wing of the manor. Claw had two hundred
guardsmyn, not counting the officers who had private
quarters on the second floor. Kynyr had turned down Claw's
offers of a private suite for over a year, because he did not
have the rank to justify it in the eyes of the rank and file,
many of whom were already referring to him as "Old Claw's
pretty boy."
Kynyr found his good looks to be more often a source of
discomfort and complications, than the asset the others
seemed to think they were. Every time one of the dogs
caught him talking to a young bitch, the innuendos started. If
he'd gotten his cock into every female the rumors claimed he
had, Kynyr would have had more bedmates than he had
years of age. The talk, which had been amusing at one point,
had become an aggravation, and for the past year he had not
touched a bitch because he did not want to deal with the
barracks repercussions. Before that he had ridden into Hell's
Widow from time to time for a night with the whores—until he

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
81
encountered Belgair and some others among the older wolves
of the guard doing the same and they had made him squirm
for months over it.
Chieftain Claw Redhand's guardsmyn did more than
soldiering. In a culture where farming predominated, they
also rode herd on the manor's horses, cattle, sheep, and
goats; fixed fences and repaired walls; patrolled the roads
around Wolffgard Village; guarded the bridge over the Eirlys
Cataract that formed the western border of Clan Red Wolf
Valley; and guarded the manor itself and its inhabitants.
The guardsmyn's training was crude but effective, just a
matter of filing the rough edges off whatever they had been
taught growing up by their fathers and older brothers. When
Kynyr signed up with the guards, his only problem had been
concealing how good he was with any weapon they put in his
hands. The last thing he had wanted to do was to attract
unwanted attention and awkward questions.
Finn MacIver dropped onto Kynyr's bed with a cheeky grin,
folded his hands behind his head, and reclined. "We get a day
off and you spend it with your blades! If you don't come along
now, Ramsey and I are for leaving without you."
Kynyr shammed ignoring his friend, gave his blades one
more wipe and sheathed them. He stood and walked off.
"Hey, I'm talking to you." Finn fell into step beside him,
caught the glint of mischief in Kynyr's eyes, and backed
away. "I'm going to the Difficult Horse with Ramsey and
Eideard. You coming?"
The left corner of Kynyr's mouth quirked. "Yeah. So I can
dunk you in the horse trough for nagging at me all day."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
82
Finn's lips twitched into an uncertain grin. "It's cold, Kynyr.
If you're going to dunk me, can't it wait until summer?"
Kynyr snickered. "If it's not hot enough for you yet, I don't
know what is."
They had grown up together, two only sons with an
overabundance of sisters, living on neighboring farms with a
small creek between them. Finn had been allowed to train
with Kynyr's armsmaster so that the cub would have someone
his own age to practice with, and it was only much later that
Finn began to wonder how the son of an herb farmer, who
taught school half a day on the side to make ends meet, and
a small-time country healer could afford to pay a battle-clan
veteran like Todd Sinclair to teach their son. Many things
about Kynyr Maguire did not add up once Finn began to
seriously think about them, but Finn kept his mouth shut
about it both to Kynyr and the outside world. Kynyr's
business was Kynyr's only, and Finn prided himself on not
being a gossip. They had been friends, loving each other like
brothers, since their earliest memories, united against the
dreaded female hordes that assailed them at every
opportunity—otherwise known as Kynyr's six sisters and
Finn's eight.
Kynyr signed up with the Redhands first and Finn showed
up a month later to do the same.
He headed for the door into the yard with Finn at his heels.
It had been four days since he had gone into the village. The
last time he saw Tempest, the priest had persuaded a
promise out of Kynyr to let him speak to Malthus first. So,
rather than be tempted, Kynyr had kept to the manor. Not

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
83
that opportunities had not presented themselves here. Every
afternoon, Malthus showed up with his nieces and visited with
Merissa while the children played together. The presence of
the children kept Kynyr in line around Malthus: he did not
trust himself not to grab Malthus by the throat and shake
him, so Kynyr cut a wide berth around him.
Kynyr ran all of that through his thoughts again as he
strode around to the front courtyard where Ramsey and
Eideard waited for them. Malthus was in Wolffgard on Claw's
forbearance and Kynyr did not intend to see that generosity
abused by a lecher who had apparently developed an appetite
for Merissa. Nor did Kynyr wish to see Merissa hurt again.
Kynyr had thought Isranon to be a good mon, as sa'necari
went, until he abandoned Merissa shortly after getting her
with child. Kynyr had had to fight down an urge to go after
Isranon and beat his head into pulp every time he looked at
Merissa's swollen belly. An undercurrent of sorrow had clung
to Merissa since Isranon left; and it disturbed Kynyr to see it.
If Malthus touches you, I'm going to bust his head.
"Want some company?" Cullen trotted up to them.
Kynyr glanced at his friends and got a round of shrugs
from them. "Sure."
As they entered the Difficult Horse, Hereward spotted
Cullen and came stomping toward them, shaking his thick
finger at the courier. "You keep your bloody paws off my
bitches. You hear me?"
"I only come for a drink." Cullen glared at Hereward.
The tavern master turned to Kynyr. "You keep him in line,
Kynyr. Or I'll toss you all out."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
84
"Sure." As soon as Hereward headed for the bar, Kynyr
turned to Cullen, his lips pursed in bemusement, guessing
why the short lycan wanted their company. "Which one did he
catch you with?"
"His daughter."
"Which one? He's got four." Kynyr headed for a table and
settled in.
"Kady."
Ramsey looked astounded at Cullen's audacity. "You put
the bone to Kady?"
"Nah. I didn't get that far. We was in the alley out back,
kissing. I'd just got her skirt up when..." Cullen glared at
Hereward's back and took a seat next to Kynyr. "He caught
us."
"You get your bone into Kady and he'll kill you." Finn took
the other seat next to Kynyr.
Cullen shrugged. "He'd've tried."
"You gotta be mad, Cullen Blackwood." Ramsey gestured
at a servingmon. "Everyone knows you don't mess with
Hereward's daughters."
Cullen's expression turned dour, and his brogue thickened
in a betraying manner. "Not if ya want ta drink here, ya
don't."
Kynyr ordered a bottle of good whiskey, as he always did;
his companions went for tankards of mead. His grandmother
sent him a modest stipend that rounded out his meager
wages as a guardsmon. Hereward got his supplies of whiskey
and other expensive liquors from a dealer in Hell's Widow, a
situation that was gradually becoming chancier as the

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
85
Rebellion moved closer to Clan Lands. Publicly they were
taking a neutral stance, trying not to antagonize either the
Sharani or the sa'necari. Claw had not yet made his private
views on the matter known, and Kynyr hoped that he would
at least tell his guardsmyn something; however Claw was
playing it close to the vest and Kynyr had to respect that.
They had barely begun to enjoy their drinks when Malthus
entered with three young wolves, only one of whom was
known to Kynyr: Torquil, Smith Ranoul's apprentice. Torquil
was large as lycans went; standing at least two inches above
Kynyr's five foot eleven, big boned and thick muscled.
Malthus laughed and then noticed that Kynyr was watching
them. His gaze locked on Kynyr's, sending the lycan's hackles
rising as one predator recognized another. Malthus crooked a
finger at Kynyr, biding him join them.
Kynyr pushed back from the table.
Finn grabbed at Kynyr and his friend shrugged him off.
"What are you doing, Kynyr?"
"Don't get yourself killed." Cullen took a pull from his
tankard. "I hear that bastard's good."
Kynyr ignored Cullen and headed for Malthus.
His companions stared at Malthus and the mon's
companions. Finn pushed back from the table and their
friends did also.
Malthus lowered his gaze, licking his lips, and framed a
tiny smile. "You've been watching us."
"I'm a friend of Merissa's."
Cullen moved to stand behind Kynyr with his hands on his
blades before anyone could stop him.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
86
Malthus spared Cullen a glance before focusing on Kynyr.
"She's very lovely."
"Yes, I know."
"Are you going to tell me to leave her alone?"
"I might be." Kynyr's hands dropped to his blades.
"I'm kandoyarin. You're just a backwater guardsmon."
Kynyr regarded Malthus evenly. "I'm not impressed."
"Call me out and you will be."
Shalto and Torquil laughed.
"If the boy can't beat ya ... I can." Cullen's lips tightened
into a grim promise.
"It can talk!" Torquil snickered.
Finn and Ramsey seized Kynyr's arms, and maneuvered
him back to their table. Cullen trailed after them.
"Loosen up, Kynyr," Ramsey growled.
Kynyr shrugged and poked Finn in the shoulder. "You
remember telling me the Dreaded Horde sent you to keep me
out of trouble?"
Finn grinned over the edge of his tankard. "Yeah."
"Well ... you're not doing a good job of it."
Finn choked on a mouthful of mead, causing the other four
to laugh at him. As soon as he stopped coughing, he gave
Kynyr an affronted look. "You're hard to ride herd on, Kynyr."
* * * *
Malthus returned to camp feeling edgy. If that guardsmon,
Kynyr Maguire's friends had not intervened, it was clear that
he intended to call Malthus out. He had studied all the human

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
87
and lycan arts of war as well as those of the sa'necari. It was
what made Malthus so versatile.
However, Kynyr was an unknown quantity that would bear
investigating. Malthus had gotten the impression that there
was far more to Kynyr Maguire than met the eye. Thinking of
Kynyr logically led Malthus to contemplate the little, one-eyed
bastard who had had to toss his own two coppers into the
situation in the tavern. A few questions directed at a
servingmon had produced his name and occupation: Cullen
Blackwood, courier.
For the first week, he had avoided the five sa'necari
females living at the camp out of fear of discovery: no one
detected sa'necari as easily as their own kind. With the
number of potential threats growing, Malthus decided that it
was time to take one of them out—the easiest one.
Malthus noticed one of them standing before her house,
which was the closest one to Beth's, not counting the
sheelings. He tried to remember what her name was. She
seemed to be watching him with a speculative expression,
holding a three-year-old on her hip. Her son, as he recalled,
was lycan. No wonder she had fled. Their kind were less
tolerant of a female hooking up with a lycan, than they were
of males doing so.
The longer he waited to deal with his people here, the
more he placed himself at risk of being revealed. Malthus
went to Beth's house and let himself in. He found Beth sitting
at her loom, weaving. She rose to greet him, smiling, and
threw her arms around him. Malthus shoved her away. Beth
looked hurt by his action, but said nothing.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
88
"How many sa'necari are in this camp?"
"Five women," Beth said.
"Who's that one with the lycan child?"
Beth frowned. "Kandaishee."
"Fetch her."
"Why?"
"Just do it."
Beth returned a few minutes later with Kandaishee. The
child had been left with one of the other women.
"What is this about, Beth?" she asked. Kandaishee's eyes
went to Malthus, and she folded her arms across her middle,
shifting uneasily from foot to foot. Recognition glimmered in
her eyes, telling Malthus that he had been right: she had
figured him out.
"I wanted to speak with you," Malthus said. He stepped
close and touched the hollow of Kandaishee's throat to mute
her voice.
She clutched at her throat, turning to flee. Malthus
grabbed her arm, jerking her against him. Kandaishee clawed
for his eyes. He caught that wrist and forced both arms
behind her, bringing her body hard against his. Her fangs
came down and she tried to bite his face. Malthus bumped
her chin with his shoulder and banged her face with his
forehead.
"Hold her, Beth."
Beth seized Kandaishee's arms, pinning them.
"No, please," Kandaishee begged.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
89
"You know that begging does no good, Kandaishee,"
Malthus said. "I can see it in your eyes. You've practiced the
rites."
Kandaishee pulled at her arms, but could not get free from
Beth's grip as the lycan changed to her hybrid form. "I've
renounced them."
"A shame." Malthus stroked her face, Reading her. Her
magic was underdeveloped, suggesting that she had
participated in only a few rites, just enough to alter her eyes,
and not enough to give her the substantial sa'necari strength.
She tried to close her mind to him, twisting and turning
her thoughts about to prevent Malthus from getting hold of
her. Spellcorded, Kandaishee's mind lacked shields and would
be unable to fight him off if he pressed it. However, he did
not wish to leave her wrecked. That would be noticed.
"Don't make me rip you open," Malthus hissed. "No one
cares enough to notice a change in you."
She twisted her head back, trying to look at the lycan
behind her. "Beth, please let me go. He's going to hurt me."
Beth said nothing, only tightening her hold, her strong
fingers digging into Kandaishee's flesh.
Malthus ran his finger down Kandaishee's nose and across
her check, amusement turning the corners of his mouth.
"Beth is mine. I claimed her my first night here."
Kandaishee eyes softened into pools of despair, her mouth
drooped. She stopped straining against Beth's hands. "Gods,
have mercy."
"You're praying to the wrong gods," Malthus said. "Be still
and it won't hurt as much."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
90
"I know." Resignation crept into Kandaishee's voice. "I've
done it myself ... many times."
"Then why resist? You know you can't. Open and let me in.
It will be over quickly."
Kandaishee's head lowered and her shoulders drooped.
Malthus sensed her surrender, felt her mind go still and
yielding. He lunged in, working swiftly, laying in all the
coercions, compulsions, sways, and triggers at once. The
speed of his efforts caused Kandaishee more pain than going
slowly would have. She closed her eyes, turned her head to
the side, and whimpered like a battered puppy. To test his
results, he raped her.
"Bring me another sa'necari," Malthus ordered Beth, as
Kandaishee crawled into a corner and huddled sobbing.
By the end of the day, Malthus no longer had to worry that
one of his people would recognize his true nature and reveal
him to the lycans. What he had said to Kandaishee was true:
neither the lycans nor the humans that lived and worked
about the camp cared enough about sa'necari to notice a
change in them.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
91
CHAPTER SIX
HELL'S WIDOW
Heat stole over the streets of Hell's Widow. Spring had
faded before the arrival of summer. Days were hot, but the
mountain breezes cooled the valley off in the evenings.
Heironim pulled at the edges of his coarse russet shirt and
light wool tunic. He abhorred the crude cloth of the lower
classes, but he dealt with it. A pair of the long slender dirks
carried by the Waejontori commoners rode at his hips, not as
broad and heavy as those worn by the lycans; stabbing
weapons rather than the slash and thrust preferred by the
lycan yeomonry.
Heironim walked along Main Street in Hell's widow,
avoiding eye contact with everyone he passed. The right
clothing and body language contributed to keeping his true
nature hidden. Sidera Tyrins had schooled him well. The art of
concealment had become second nature to Heironim and the
young sa'necari he had brought to Hell's Widow with him. He
had been only five years old when the Sharani crossed the
borders and tore his life apart. Heironim could not remember
a time when he had not needed to hide what he was
whenever he left the Tyrins estate growing up. His myn had
grown up in the occupied zone, living from birth in terror of
discovery by the Sharani. They were a different breed of
sa'necari from those who had managed to escape into the
mountain fastnesses where the Sharani dared not go.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
92
The Sharani guardsmyn, strolling Main Street in pairs, paid
him no heed. One of the first things he had done on reaching
Hell's Widow was to learn their patterns. They patrolled
heavily in certain sections and rarely in others; staying away
from the lycan ghetto on the southwest unless summoned,
and the Red Lantern district that adjoined it. The human
shopkeepers and the upper classes enjoyed more protection
than the poor.
He neared the Town Square, caught the lingering odor of
burnt flesh, and fought his stomach for a moment. A week
ago, the Sharani had caught a young sa'necari, his wife, and
three children, who were trying for the borders to escape the
violence in the northwest. The grisly remains of them were
still chained to the posts in the Square where the Sharani had
burned them all alive.
Heironim turned south on Corbie way and breathed a sigh
of relief that he had gotten past the square without attracting
attention. He disliked traveling at midday when the patrols
were heaviest. However, the patrols rarely ventured down
Corbie Way. Taverns, brothels, gambling house
overshadowed the homes and less shops along the muddy
street. There were certain colors and device best not worn
here, especially the crimson and emerald of Danae, the
neighboring Sharani province that owned this section of
Waejontor; and the claret and chocolate of the Red Wolf
guardsmyn. When myn of either group ventured here, they
did so in civilian garb.
Heironim had been in Hell's Widow for six weeks, quietly
buying up various businesses as fronts for his operations,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
93
under the shelter of a proxy trading company set up by
Malthus' mother, Sidera Tyrins.
The largest of the two brothels the lycans favored was the
Crimson lady which had thirty whores in residence. A mon
had to go as far south as Skeleton Creek or west as far as
Dragonton and Torment Lake to find a larger whorehouse.
Although most people cautiously avoided discussing it, the
Crimson Lady was the largest employer in Hell's Widow.
Madam Silkie Faggini who ran the Crimson Lady employed her
own guards, and was rumored to have put the Sharani patrols
and inspectors on a secret payroll to leave her establishment
alone.
All of that made the Crimson Lady the first order of
business that day. The elegant old mansion on Corbie Way,
with its fluted columns and wide portico, had been built by
the sa'necari family that established the town ten centuries
ago to trade with and keep an eye upon the eastern lycan
clans, such as Red Wolf and Silverpaw. The Sharani had
wiped out the family twenty years ago, at which point the
manor had been abandoned until Silkie bought it a decade
ago.
Erotic tapestries and paintings dominated the walls of the
foyer to the Crimson Lady. A huge desk of polished dark wood
stood guard at the far end with a matchstick of a clerk sitting
there with an appointment book open in front of him. A stack
of other books rose like multicolored soldiers in a long, low
wooden box to his left hand.
Heironim nodded at the clerk. "I have an appointment with
Silkie."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
94
The clerk frowned, selected a book from the box, and
opened it. "Your name?"
"Heironim Traxton."
"I don't see you down. Madam has marked the next three
hours 'do not disturb.' Can I set you up for another time?"
Heironim leaned over the desk, laid a Sharani double-
gryphon down, and slid it over to the clerk with his fingertip
still touching it. The clerk smiled and put his hand over the
coin. Heironim shifted his finger, popping it atop the clerk's,
and extended his gifts through the physical contact. The
clerk's mouth went slack and his eyes vacant.
Pleased by the simplicity of the clerk's mind, which yielded
to him like water, Heironim murmured. "Shouldn't you show
me up now?"
The clerk looked startled, as if shaken from a dream. "Oh
yes." He gestured at one of the savants sitting on a bench
along the wall as a runner. "Lees, take the desk a moment.
I'll be right back."
The clerk led Heironim into the Great Hall and up a broad
swept staircase to the second floor. "Right this way."
"What's your name?"
"Mine, sir?"
"Yours."
"Flavio Ricci."
"We're going to be friends, Flavio." Heironim used
repetitions of Flavio's name to deepen the link he had
insinuated into the mon at desk; a technique he had learned
from Malthus when they were boys together. "You'll have a
drink with me tonight, Flavio?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
95
The clerk brightened. "Oh, of course, sir. Where?"
"My home, Flavio. I'm living above the Green Sheaves
Warehouse. North door takes you to the stairs."
"I'll come straight there after work."
Heironim smiled, remembering Malthus' admonition that it
was best to always have more than one pawn in play at a
time, more than one avenue of attack and retreat, and a
series of overlapping ploys.
Silkie Faggini sat at the desk in her office going over the
ledgers when Heironim entered. The aristocratic angles of her
face had held up to the years well and despite the lines
around her eyes and mouth, Silkie remained an attractive
woman. The edges of her slanted, faintly sylvan eyes
narrowed, their cerulean depths flashing like blue fire. "What
do you want?
Heironim stood at the edge of the desk, smiling. "To make
you an offer."
"You're the one who's been buying up warehouses."
That startled Heironim, who thought he had been discreet.
"I want the Crimson Lady."
Silkie's expression hardened. "She's not for sale."
"My dear lady..." Heironim leaned across the desk, lifted
her hand from the ledger, and kissed her fingers. He used the
physical contact to make a gentle, questing probe and
discovered her mind would not open to him. Wards.
Silkie jerked her hand away and slapped him across the
face. "Get out. Next time you wish to talk, make an
appointment."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
96
Heironim straightened with an exaggerated sigh. "I'll do
that."
He retreated from the room with a bow to Silkie at the
door before slipping into the hallway. Getting to Silkie would
acquire time and planning; and Flavio would prove a decent
start once Heironim got his fangs and coercions into him deep
enough.
* * * *
Kynyr changed into a simple cambric shirt and canvas
pants, both black, and pulled on his boots—all either loose or
with enough give to the fabric that he could shift easily
without tearing anything or having to tightly control the level
of transition. Nothing remained about him to scream
'guardsmon' to passersby. He buckled on his blades and
retrieved Aisha's shopping list from the nightstand, stuffing it
into his pocket.
Claw had grown increasingly reluctant to let his family
leave the valley, and so Aisha had begun sending Kynyr to
Hell's Widow with her lists, enough coin to cover everything
and a little extra for him and his friends to spend as a 'thank
you' in advance. She did not need to have done that, but
Aisha liked people to know they were appreciated, and the
result was that she generally got the best effort out of people.
He headed into the hallway and took the side door into the
courtyard. Ramsey, Eideard, and Finn had already headed out
to get the wagon hitched and their horses saddled.
Cullen strolled across the yard and saw Kynyr coming out.
"Where ya goin'?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
97
"Hell's Widow. Aisha wants some supplies picked up."
"Want some company?"
"Sure, but I don't have time to wait for you. We need to
head out so we can get there while the lights still good."
Kynyr kept walking with Cullen trotting to keep up with him.
"No problem." Cullen gave him a wink and ran into the
barn. "See ya in Hell's Widow."
Kynyr chuckled and scratched at his sideburns. His friends
were waiting with the wagon when he got there. Bucky,
Kynyr's saddle horse, was tied to the back. They sat their
horses, gazing in the direction that Cullen had gone.
"What's with him?" Ramsey asked.
Kynyr shrugged. "Says he'll meet us in Hell's Widow."
Eideard groaned. "All he talks about is horses and whores."
Finn laughed at Eideard's reaction, ran a hand through his
hair, and his lips framed a mischievous smile. "I think he likes
Kynyr."
"Oooh, the old lech likes Pretty Boy Kynyr." Ramsey
chortled and made a mock duck in his saddle as if Kynyr had
thrown something at him.
Kynyr paused reaching for the wagon break, glancing up
with just his eyes. "Maybe he's lonesome, Ramsey. Most folks
don't like him."
"And you do?"
"Maybe. I certainly have no objection to him. My sister,
Tamra, always says that most folks like Cullen are just
misunderstood. And she's usually right."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
98
"The High Priestess of the Dreaded Horde," Finn muttered.
"Well, she don't know Cullen. The Horde would beat the shit
out of him first time he opened his mouth."
"Speaking from experience, Finn?" Eideard grinned.
Finn flushed to the roots of his hair and refused to answer.
Kynyr slapped the reins across the horses and they leaned
into their traces. The wagon pulled out of the courtyard, with
Finn, Ramsey, and Eideard riding guard on it.
An hour down the road, the sound of a horse galloping up
behind them, made Eideard turn to look. He groaned. "We got
company."
"Who?" Kynyr asked.
"Cullen."
Larkspur whickered at Bucky and the stallion shook his
head up and down, calling back to her as she passed him. For
Ramsey and Eideard it was their first good look at Larkspur,
and Ramsey whistled. "That's some horse."
Cullen beamed with pride and patted her neck. "Ain't she
though? Larkspur's my darling girl, ain't ya, sweetheart?"
"The Dreaded Horde would love a horse like that."
They rode into Hell's Widow and took rooms for the night
at the Three Candles Inn. A city wolf named Amos Raggat ran
the Inn with help from his four daughters. Cullen valued
Amos' good will enough to keep his paws off them, although
he had been sorely tempted over the years.
Kynyr put them all, including Cullen, to carrying supplies to
the wagon as they made their rounds of the businesses in
town while he made the purchases on Aisha's list. By the time
they finished, the sun had gone down. They took everything

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
99
back to the inn, and Cullen insisted upon all of them
accompanying him to the Crimson Lady where he promised
them the time of their lives.
They had gone barely two blocks down Corbie Way when
three myn stepped into the light of the street lamps and
barred their way with aggressive gestures. Kynyr gestured for
his friends to halt and sauntered forward to stand at their
head.
"What do you want?"
One mon stepped forward, speaking with a soft northern
accent. "That Cullen Blackwood with you?"
"So what if it is?"
Myn lunged out of the shadows, surrounding them with
swords and knives drawn. They were outnumbered two to
one. The lycans shifted smoothly in hybrid form. If their
attackers were human, that would even the odds by
increasing their strength and speed.
"We just want Blackwood. The rest of you can go."
Cullen frowned and started to speak, only to be hushed by
a gesture from Kynyr. The young guardsmon eyed the mon
with quiet confidence. "No."
"Your funeral, lycan." He lunged across the distance at
Kynyr, sword flashing in the lamplight.
Kynyr went still and cold inside as he let him come before
moving. A sliding step to the left and a calculated twist took
Kynyr out of the way of the initial thrust. A backhand slash
opened the mon from shoulder to elbow. Kynyr's foot
connected with his opponent's hip and sent him staggering.
Todd had taught him that knife fights were decided in

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
100
seconds, unlike swords. Kynyr came at the mon fast before
he could recover, slamming one blade into his side and the
other up under his sternum. He heard movement behind him
as his opponent collapsed. Kynyr leaped forward, spinning to
the side as another mon charged him. He brought his left
blade to guard in time to lock hilts with his attacker's dirk. A
sliding cross-step took him out of the way of a jab at his
stomach, and he slashed the mon across the face as he
disengaged his left blade. The mon made a couple of blind
thrusts, but then Kynyr was on top of him, driving both
blades into his opponent's ribs.
A cry of pain from Eideard made Kynyr turn about. His
friend was on his knees, clutching a long gash in his side as
his attacker lunged in for the kill.
* * * *
Cullen's hands dropped to his blades as he watched the
myn surround them. Despite the darkness and the limited
light thrown by the lamppost on the street corner, Cullen
knew he had never seen any of them before. To Cullen's
mind, he had done nothing to cause trouble in Hell's Widow,
and his initial guess was thieves—until the leader stepped
forward, and said, "We just want Blackwood. The rest of you
can go."
The courier's eyes darted across the solemn faces of his
young companions. They stood with their hands on the hilts
of their blades, ready to draw and fight, making a calm
assessment of their opponents. Ramsey, the oldest of them
was only twenty-three; while Kynyr and Finn were barely

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
101
turned twenty. At sixty-three, verging on a middle-age that
Cullen did not want to acknowledge, he felt an unexpected
rush of responsibility toward them. He did not want to see
any of them hurt, or possibly killed, on his account.
"Let them go. I'll stay—"
A sharp chopping gesture from Kynyr silenced Cullen. If
ever a young wolf had been born to command, it was Kynyr.
Cullen could see it then.
The young guardsmon eyed the mon with quiet confidence.
"No."
"We don't abandon our own," growled Finn.
Cullen shifted into his hybrid form and darted toward a
hitching post. He leaped over it, spun about, and drew his
knives, shifting his grip from hilt to blade with a flick of his
wrists. The mon charging him had no time to register the
switch before Cullen popped one into his chest. His
opponent's eyes saucered in shock, the blades fell from his
hands, and he crumpled to the ground, groaning. Cullen
scooped up the fallen blades, tucked them into his belt, and
yanked his knife out of the mon's chest just in time to throw
himself into a roll to the side, evading a thrust at his chest
from a second mon.
Cullen tucked his feet beneath him as the mon reached
him, shoved a blade into his assailant's groin, and scrambled
to the side again. He sprang up, glancing around for thirds
and spied Ramsey hard pressed from two sides. Cullen darted
forward for a clear throw and hit both of Ramsey's
adversaries in the back.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
102
A cry of pain from a familiar voice brought Cullen spinning
to his right in time to see Eideard fall and a mon move in for
the kill.
"Goat-fucking ... sons a' sluts." Cullen yanked the two
appropriated blades from his belt and sprang across the
intervening distance.
Eideard swayed on his knees, forced back into human form
by the shock of his wound. He grasped his attacker's arm,
trying to stop the inexorably descending blade from reaching
his chest.
"Bastard!" Cullen plunged one blade in the mon's back and
the other into his kidneys.
* * * *
Finn walked up to Kynyr, wiping his blades on a
handkerchief. "Gods, Kynyr ... Cullen got four of them."
Ramsey knelt by Eideard, examining his wound. "Looks
worse than it is. He should be okay."
Eideard nodded, tight-lipped as Ramsey shouldered his
weight and got him to his feet.
Cullen slashed a mon's pouches off and dropped them
down the front of his shirt, moved to another and did the
same.
"What the hell you doing?" Finn demanded.
"Making it look like a robbery. Send the guard looking for
people from the wrong end of town." Cullen went for a third
pouch.
Kynyr glanced at Finn. "He's got a point. Ramsey, get
Eideard to the inn. We'll be along in a bit."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
103
Cullen headed off as soon as he collected a fourth. Kynyr
and Finn gathered the rest and followed.
"What do you make of him now, Finn? Still think he's
kizmeigo?"
Finn shook his head slowly. "No."
When they reached the inn, they found that Amos' oldest
daughter had gotten Eideard cleaned and bandaged. He was
sitting up in bed talking to Cullen and Ramsey. As soon as
Kynyr and Finn walked in and dropped their booty on the
table, Cullen turned to them. "Did either of you check their
eyes?"
Kynyr glanced at Finn and both of them shook their heads
'no.'
"Damn!" Cullen's face darkened into a frown. "Humans,
you think? Why the hell would they be after me?"
"Cullen, you're rather free with the bone. Could have been
some woman's kin." Kynyr dragged a chair over and straddled
it.
"No." Cullen shook his head. "I stick to the whores when
I'm on the road. Ask Amos if you don't believe me. I never
made no moves on his daughters. Nor anyone else's. Too
risky."
"How many know you're a courier?"
"Out here?"
Kynyr nodded.
"Not many. Amos does. And Silkie. Captain of the garrison.
It's not like Wolffgard."
"Well, someone's after you. Question is: why?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
104
"I dawn't know." Cullen's brogue thickened. He scratched
his head and looked away. "Kynyr. If ... if something happens
to me ... I'd like you to have Larkspur."
"Feeling mortal, Cullen?" Finn asked.
"Maybe."
* * * *
Flavio moaned like a bitch in heat, his eyelids fluttering,
and mouth slack. He reclined on the velvet sofa in Heironim's
parlor, his shoulders cradled against the sa'necari's bare chest
while Heironim sucked his neck. Heironim triggered Flavio's
endorphins, slithered through his pleasure centers, and sent
the clerk over the edge into bliss. Flavio came all over
himself, geysering his milky white treasures across the black
velvet sofa.
Heironim disengaged from Flavio's neck, licked the wound
closed, and gazed into the clerk's dark eyes glazed with
satiation.
"I love you." Flavio's fingers trailed along Heironim's
cheek.
"Enough to die for me?"
"Yes."
Heironim chuckled. "Tell me then. Do you know Cullen
Blackwood?"
"Everyone knows Cullen. He's a regular at the Crimson
Lady."
"Is there a whore he favors?"
"Ellie. He used to come for Silkie. The past three years, it's
only been Ellie. Always Ellie.."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
105
Heironim stroked Flavio's smooth, soft chest. "Book Ellie
for me. Tomorrow night, from dusk until dawn."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
106
CHAPTER SEVEN
TEMPEST
One thing at a time. One day at a time. Malthus did not
push things fast, but steadily. He had now been moving about
the village for four weeks, making himself indispensable
around the refugee camp, and using the cachet of his
kandoyarin tales to ingratiate himself with the younger
wolves. He had a good following forming up behind him.
Malthus waited a week after buying his sword, and then took
his core band to speak to Nikko. They included Beth, Shalto,
Oswyl, and Torquil. He wanted to speak to the lawgiver to get
permission to hunt on clan lands. Hunting would give him a
good explanation for wandering far from Wolffgard Village.
Nikko lived with his widowed mother, Granta, on one of
the better streets in a two-story house with a basement. They
shared one of the nicer houses in the village. His late father,
who had been architect trained in Creeya, had returned to
Red Wolf Valley to settle down, marry, and practice his trade.
All of Nikko's siblings had moved to homes of their own when
they married. Nikko had remained at home to care for his
mother.
Malthus knocked at the door and heard Granta's pleasant
voice tell them she was coming.
Beth smiled uncertainly at Malthus and patted her dress to
neaten it. "We'll get this approved, Malthus. It's for the
children, after all."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
107
"I hope so, Beth," Malthus replied. "But I'm not lycan."
"I don't see how Nikko can turn you down," Shalto said. "It
isn't like you were wanting to hunt for sport."
Granta opened the door, and an expression of surprise at
seeing so many lit the pale eyes in her heavily lined face. Her
ears looked a bit too large, as did her eyes, but that was only
because age had withered away the tissues beneath her once
delicate features. She wore her white hair in a knot at the
nape of her neck with a pin stuck through it. "Have you come
to see Nikko?"
Nikko was the youngest of the aged bitch's five cubs, and
she had ten grand cubs from his siblings.
"We have," Beth said.
"Come in." Granta led them to a comfortable living room
filled with soft cushioned sofas and chairs. "Make yourselves
comfortable and I'll fetch Nikko."
Malthus took a chair near the end of a long, low table, but
allowed Beth to take the head as if she led instead of him.
Nikko appeared, tying a loose robe over him as he walked,
and eyed all of them, clearly wondering why a deputation
would come to speak with him. He let his gaze rest the
longest upon Malthus.
The sa'necari gave Nikko a polite smile and inclined his
head in acknowledgement. He knew that Nikko was only
bothering to dress because a human was present.
"What is it you want?" Nikko asked.
"There isn't enough meat for the children," Beth said. "One
of us needs to hunt."
"So? Why does this require so many?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
108
"I want you to give Malthus permission to hunt on clan
lands to provide for the children," Beth said.
"The rest of us are too busy building and working at other
things," Shalto put in.
Nikko's gaze fixed upon Shalto and lingered there. "What
is the point you're trying to make?"
"That Malthus should do the hunting for the compound,"
Beth said. "He needs your permission, since he's not lycan."
"Malthus? Since when did a human hunt better than a
lycan? You have several lycans working for the camp," Nikko
pointed out.
Beth shook her head. "We need Shalto and Oswyl for the
building. They're stronger than a human. Malthus has the
skills for hunting."
Malthus met Nikko's skeptical gaze for a long moment.
"I've had to live off the land many times as a kandoyarin. I
was hunter for my units in Ocealay. I am capable of providing
for the camp."
"Look, Nikko," Shalto interposed. "We're good at building
things. Better than Malthus will ever be. We can spare him,
but not us."
Nikko frowned. "It sounds like you've already decided this
amongst you before coming to me."
"We have," said Beth. "We can spare Malthus, but not
Shalto and Oswyl."
Nikko swept his gaze around the deputation. "So what are
you expecting me to do?"
"Give him permission to hunt on clan lands, permission to
travel," said Torquil, speaking up for the first time. "So long

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
109
as everyone eats at the camp, what objection can you
possibly have?"
Nikko shrugged. "None I guess. I'll notify Claw of my
decision. But if I hear that the meat is not being shared..."
Beth growled at him, deep in her throat. "That's my
decision to make. I trust Malthus to take care of us. That's
more than you've been doing."
"Beth, I have an entire village to attend to, not just your
small camp, as important as it may seem to you."
"Exactly," Beth snapped at him.
"So be it, I grant my permission, but I'll check in on this
from time to time."
"That's understood."
Is it? Malthus wondered. I think you gave in a bit too
easily.
* * * *
Kynyr stepped into the schoolroom and leaned against the
wall with his thumbs tucked into his swordbelt. Ever since
that day when Malthus had practically tossed the gauntlet in
his face at the Difficult Horse, Kynyr had begun carrying his
sword whenever he left the manor. When lycans fought
amongst themselves it generally came down to knives or
fisticuffs. The ancient customs held that they did not fight
each other as wolves because it was an affront to the First
Mother of their race. It did happen; usually in the heat of
impassioned emotions. There were also forms of ritual combat
carried out in wolf shape, such as the choosing of a new
chieftain for a Battle-clan. Carrying a sword on Clan Lands

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
110
generally marked a wolf as being either a guardsmon or a
Battle-clansmon.
Tempest dismissed the children, took his staff up, which
lay propped against the podium, and walked over to Kynyr.
"You need something, Kynyr?"
The guardsmon noted that Tempest seemed to be moving
more slowly of late. Age is catching up to him. "Same old. I
can't put off talking to Malthus much longer. Claw's noticed
him with Merissa in the gardens."
"That's difficult." Tempest scratched his shaggy mane and
stepped through the door into the hallway, heading for his
apartments. Kynyr followed north along the narrow hallway. A
right turn at the end carried them past the door to the
gardens, beyond which lay the little graveyard for the camp
that Tempest had sanctified on New Years. Another right, and
they approached Tempest's quarters.
Tempest unlocked the door and let them inside. Most of
the villagers and the refugees never bothered to lock their
doors. Tempest had begun doing so after half a dozen rowdy
cubs had gotten into his rooms and tried their hands at
redecorating the place using crayons, paper, glue, paint and
dried flowers. It had taken a month of scrubbing to put it to
rights again.
"Is he still putting it to Beth?"
The priest indicated that Kynyr should set on the sofa and
went to the cabinet for glasses and a bottle of whiskey. "Yes.
I've tried talking to Beth, but she refuses to listen to me."
"Is that why you wanted me to wait?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
111
Tempest put the bottle and glasses on the low table before
the sofa and settled into a chair. "Yes. Now she's avoiding
me. Beth didn't come to services this week."
"Sorry to hear that." Kynyr knocked down the whiskey,
turned the bottle around to look at the label, and a quick
smile passed across his lips: it was the bottle he had left in
the offering basket at services three days ago. Some left
money, others food, a few left drink; people offered what
they had to spare. "Claw's given me until the end of the
week, Tempest. If you can't talk sense to him, then I'll warn
him off."
"I'd rather not have violence on the Sanctuary grounds."
Kynyr shrugged and poured himself another drink. "That's
up to him. Finn and I are going to Hell's Widow day after
tomorrow. Is there anything you'd like?"
"Rum?"
"It's hard to come by with the Rebellion stifling trade, but
I'll see what I can find."
"Be careful around Malthus. He's kandoyarin."
Kynyr gave another shrug. "So he says. I think he's just
being kizmeigo." Kynyr's lips twisted into a sneer around the
Creeyan insult for a braggart who always had to go folks one
better.
Tempest shook his head, sipping his whiskey. "He isn't.
I've seen him practicing. He's teaching some of the young
wolves who work here."
The guardsmon's eyebrow lifted. "When did this start?"
"The day after he replaced his sword. He's good, Kynyr.
He's fast."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
112
"So am I."
"Battle-clan trained?"
Kynyr tensed for an instant. Neither he, nor Finn, had let
that part out concerning their training. It paid to let people
underestimate them. Kynyr sucked in a breath and decided to
tell Tempest all of it as a means of reassuring the old mon.
"Todd Sinclair. Guild and Battle-clan training. Don't go telling
anyone that?"
"I won't."
* * * *
Kynyr had not troubled Malthus in over a week, although
they continued to encounter each other at the Difficult Horse.
The guardsmon usually had Cullen in tow, and Malthus had
begun asking around about both of them. What little he could
pick up concerning Kynyr had assured him the young wolf
was no match for him. Cullen, on the other hand, had both an
astonishing reputation with his blades and as Claw's toughest
and most resourceful courier. The only thing that hampered
the one-eyed lycan was his obsession with the whores.
However, that played nicely into Malthus' hands, and he felt
certain that the next time Claw sent Cullen out, Heironim
would make certain the obnoxious lycan did not return.
Malthus thought he had every thing resolved, and nothing
more to worry about as he rode back to his sheeling to work
on his new house some more before dark, only to find
Tempest waiting for him. The priest was seated on a tree
round in the yard with his staff across his knees. Tempest

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
113
stood when Malthus arrived, and approached him with a stern
look.
Dismounting, Malthus tied the horses to a tree and faced
the priest, wondering what this was about. "What can I do for
you? Is this about my nieces? Are they misbehaving?"
"Not at all. They are good students. This is about Beth."
Malthus rocked back on his heels and nodded. "Beth? What
about Beth? Is she okay?"
"That's a good question. Beth is a good mon. But she is a
homely woman. And she knows it."
"I don't know where this is going."
"Perhaps nowhere, perhaps everywhere. Rumor has it that
you are sleeping with Beth."
The calm tone of Tempest's voice irritated Malthus, who
felt as if the priest was playing games with him. "And you
want to know if I am? I don't think that is any of your
business."
"Beth is a very vulnerable woman. She is a member of my
congregation, and a great benefactor of it. Both of her time
and of the land for us to build on."
Malthus glanced around for Nikko. The lawgiver did not
appear to be there. "And that makes it your business?"
"Yes, it does. I want to see her treated fairly."
"I haven't promised her anything. You are familiar with the
lycan term, 'like the wild cousins' and all that it implies?"
Tempest sighed and lowered his head. "So you are
sleeping together."
Malthus' lips curled back in a sneer. "Would you rather I
had said that I was jacking her, priest?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
114
"That's a harsh way to put it."
"Yes, it is. But that's what you came to hear, wasn't it?
And that's what I am doing." Malthus grew irritated, his
contempt for this flower-kissing, tree-hugger priest showed
on his face and in the angle of his stance.
Tempest frowned at him. "It is very evident that she's in
love with you. I can't see why."
"She knows I don't love her. It is strictly like the wild
cousins."
"What if you get her pregnant? Has that crossed your
mind?"
Malthus shrugged. "It's unlikely. Lycans aren't as fertile
with humans as they are with each other."
"You seem to know a lot about lycans."
"I grew up around them. There is a large lycan community
in Dragonton."
"You've been seen walking with Merissa."
"So now we get down to it," Malthus snarled. "I won't stop
seeing Merissa."
"How does Beth feel about this?"
"It doesn't matter how Beth feels about it. I've told her I
don't love her."
"And Merissa? Does she know about Beth?"
Malthus straightened, his voice going chill. "Are you
threatening to tell her?"
"I am. Merissa's already had her heart broken once by a
lover who left her."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
115
Slewing his eyes around to check the area, Malthus
ascertained that Tempest was, indeed, alone. "I don't think
you'll be telling anyone, priest."
"What?"
Malthus' hand shot out and pressed over Tempest's heart
as he grabbed the priest by the shoulder to hold him steady
for the kill. Black energy slammed into Tempest's chest. A
loud groan of agony climbed up Tempest's throat, and
escaped his parted lips. The priest's eyes bulged in shock, and
he gasped for breath. His heart pounded as if ready to rip
through his rib cage.
"Willodarus!" Tempest invoked his god, struck Malthus with
his staff, and staggered free. He faced off, with his chest
heaving and his staff raised.
Malthus cursed. The priest was stronger than he had
expected: that first charge should have stopped his heart.
Tempest jabbed at Malthus' stomach. Malthus sprang to the
side, caught hold of the staff, and jerked it above his head,
bringing Tempest stumbling toward him. He spun the staff,
forced it from the priest's grasp, and tossed it into the trees
near the horses, which caused the animals to shift uneasily.
Malthus' hand shot out and touched the hollow of Tempest's
throat before the priest could draw away from him. A spell
plunged through the aged flesh.
Tempest's lips formed the word "sa'necari," but no sound
came out. His hand went to his throat as a look of horror
came over his face. He mouthed the word "no," and backed
up two steps, turning to flee.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
116
Malthus kicked Tempest's knee, shattering it. The leg gave
and the priest fell into the dirt. Snarling, Malthus kicked
Tempest in the chest, sending the older mon onto his back,
and he pinned him there with his boot heel grinding into the
hollow beneath Tempest's breastbone. "Time to die, old fool."
He dropped all of his weight into the pit of the priest's
stomach and straddled him. The breath whooshed from
Tempest's lungs, leaving him stunned and sobbing for air.
Malthus snagged Tempest's mane and twisted his head to
the side as he slammed his palm to the left side of the priest's
chest. The loose wool robe shifted under Malthus' hand,
bunching up. He shoved his hand inside Tempest's robe,
feeling the slick aged skin beneath his palm. Dark power
constricted around the priest's heart.
"Don't fight me, Tempest," Malthus said with venomous
compassion. "It won't hurt as much ... or as long."
Sobbing and gasping as the unrelenting torment increased,
Tempest grabbed Malthus' hand, trying vainly to force it
away. Flashes of pain shot along Tempest's left arm as the
pressure built in his chest. Dizziness enveloped him, and the
priest felt like fainting; yet Tempest knew that to lose
consciousness was to die. He blanched, breaking into a cold,
clammy sweat.
With the strength from a thousand rites, Malthus held
steady, shrugging off Tempest's efforts to free himself,
continuing to flood Tempest's chest with the deadly magic
that was slowly and steadily rupturing the organ. Tempest's
hold weakened. Malthus drank in his terror and anguish,
savored his pain, and fed deeply upon it, pleased at how hard

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
117
the priest was dying. Tempest had turned out to be a better
psychic meal than Malthus had anticipated.
Malthus' cock hardened—a frequent sa'necari reaction to
killing someone, due to their necromantic natures enhanced
by the rites. He increased the flow of energy. Tempest's eye
lids fluttered, his lips parted with drool coming from the
corners, his fingers slid away from Malthus' wrist. The
necromancer timed the struggling irregular beat of Tempest's
heart.
"Your suffering is nearly over."
"My god ... have mercy..." Tiny convulsions rippled
through Tempest, his body jerked and twitched briefly, and
then stilled. His pupils became fixed and staring. Within
moments, Tempest looked several hours dead, with a deep
purple lividity along the back of his neck, his mouth locked
into a grimace.
Malthus released his grip on Tempest's hair and sat back,
licking his fangs, wishing he dared to sink them into the
priest's body. "It's over old, mon. You died deliciously."
He extended his necromantic senses into the dead flesh,
checking it closely to see if anyone would be able to tell that
it had not been a heart attack that killed the priest. Once he
had satisfied himself that it would pass a Reader's
examination, Malthus carried Tempest's body to his packhorse
and tied it down, covering it with a blanket. He retrieved the
priest's staff and shoved in under the saddle flap. It was best
to get this over with before evening when the lycans would be
returning home from their fields and shops. He would leave
the body in the forest well away from his home.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
118
Now there was only Nikko to be dealt with. And possibly
Kynyr. It would not do to forget about Kynyr.
* * * *
The camp's children sat in the little schoolroom on benches
behind long tables. Nikko sat at the front in his chair beside
the slate board. They were waiting for Tempest, who taught
the second half, religious studies. They had arrived back from
their break with bright, expectant faces, for everyone loved
Tempest's lessons, which were filled with tales of gods,
monsters, and heroes.
Morning turned into early afternoon and still Tempest had
not arrived. Nikko began to worry. He watched the children
start to fidget, crossing and uncrossing their legs, drawing on
the tables with their fingers, shifting on the benches. The little
boys began to pick at and poke the little girls. He wanted to
reprimand them for it, but he felt restless himself and
remembered too well how it had been when he was their age.
Why is Tempest making them wait so long?
"Go outside and play, but don't go far. I'll find Tempest
and see what's keeping him."
The children rushed from their seats without a backward
glance, and Nikko went to the rear door of the schoolroom
that he had helped to build with such loving care. The rear
door led into a U shaped hallway. The door to his right led
into the shrine itself. He turned left and then right, passed the
door into the outside, right again brought him to the door to
Tempest's apartments first on his left and another door into
the shrine on the right beyond it.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
119
He knocked at Tempest's door and received no answer,
beyond the frantic barking of Tempest's fuzzy, little dog,
named Moss. Nikko's brow furrowed. In the four years that
Tempest had been here, the priest had never failed to notify
Nikko when he would be away and where he could be reached
in an emergency. The two of them worked hand in hand
together.
Nikko let himself in. Moss leaped on him, whining
frantically. Like many lycans, Nikko had a strong affinity for
natural canines. He disrobed, changed into a wolf, and settled
on the floor to ask Moss when was the last time it had seen
its master. What the dog communicated to Nikko disturbed
him. Moss had been locked up here since early yesterday,
without food or water. That was not like Tempest. He would
never have left Moss uncared for. Usually, when he was going
away, he brought Moss to Nikko's mother to watch. Tempest
was a kind soul.
Nikko changed back and dressed. Moss watched him,
periodically giving his plumed tail an uncertain tock tock back
and forth. Nikko went into the kitchen and returned with a
bowl and Moss' leash, buckled it on, and took him outside. He
tied Moss to a tree and dipped him some water from a barrel.
While Moss lapped water, Nikko walked to the center of the
main yard.
"Has anyone seen Tempest?" Nikko shouted. "Anyone at
all? He didn't show up to teach the children."
"Maybe he's gone to the next village," Beth said. "He does
that sometimes."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
120
Nikko shook his head vigorously. "Not without informing
me so that I could arrange a substitute for him."
People began gathering down wind of him, watching him in
a manner that made Nikko uneasy. None of them came close
enough for him to get a good sniff of their emotional scents,
not that he normally intruded in that manner. The young
lycans who worked at the camp came closer than the rest,
hands on their hips, regarding him with what? Hostility?
Contempt? Nikko wished they would come nearer so that he
could get a whiff of them. The lycans among them would be
shielding their emotions, of course, so that their scent did not
broadcast as strongly. But the others...
Malthus strode up to him. "Have you checked his home?"
Why had Malthus come forward? The way that the others
hung back and regarded Malthus—it was almost like he was
their leader. His nostrils flared and he tried for a scent clue
from Malthus. Malthus was one of the mostly tightly shielded
humans that Nikko had ever encountered. "Yes. Moss hasn't
had care for two days."
"Check the taverns and infirmary, before you start
worrying people," suggested Shalto in a disparaging tone.
"You worry too much, Nikko."
Nikko scanned the crowd but no one seemed ready to join
or support him. No one offered to help. "I suppose." Nikko
walked off with his shoulders slumped. "But this isn't like
him."
"When you've checked every place else, then come back
here and we'll get a search going," Shalto said, following his
words with a derisive noise.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
121
Nikko scowled, his insides quivering. He saw no respect in
any of the faces before him, nor concern for Tempest. When
had that changed? And how? "I'll be back."
He retrieved Moss and headed for his home to entrust the
little dog to his mother. Moss pulled at the leash frantically,
looking in all directions for Tempest as they traveled. Nikko
could smell the dog's worry. At a watering trough for horses,
Nikko lifted Moss up so that he could get another drink.
People came over to him as usual to speak and to pat Moss,
and Nikko told them all that he had discovered concerning
Tempest. He found that they gave him the normal amount of
respect due to a lawgiver, unlike what was happening at the
camp, which made him wonder why.
On arriving at his home, Nikko saw his mother Granta
sitting on a bench under a shade tree chatting with a
neighbor. Moss immediately jumped onto Granta's lap,
whining.
"Is Tempest going someplace?" she asked, rubbing Moss'
head.
"Tempest is missing. Moss had had no water or food since
yesterday."
"Oh, poor little thing!" Granta made some noises deep in
her throat and Moss perked his ears listening. "Give me the
leash. I'll take care of him, Nikko."
"Tempest is old. And, he's human," the neighbor said.
"Something could have happened to him."
"I know. I'm getting a search going. People have already
agreed to meet me on the Common in an hour."
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
122
Malthus finished chopping the extraneous branches off
another tree with Shalto and his cousin Oswyl as evening
arrived. He wiped his sweating, dirty streaked face on his
shirtsleeve, and grinned at them. "If we're done for the night,
I have a cask of passable mead at home."
Shalto's eyes gleamed and he nodded with a quick smile of
appreciation. "I could do with some of that."
"Then why don't both of you come home with me?"
They dragged the tree from the forested edge of the camp
to the center of the yard, put away their tools, and then set
off for Malthus' place. They sat drinking mead on tree rounds
in front of the house they had just finished laying the
foundation for yesterday and eventually the talk of women
came round, as Malthus knew it would.
"I must admit to liking your custom of doing it like the wild
cousins," Malthus told them, with a knowing grin. He dropped
his hand to his crotch and made a humping gesture.
Shalto's eyes lit. "Yah, I've been hearing rumors of you
and Beth." He mimicked Malthus' gesture. "Wish I could get
me some."
Malthus almost laughed at how easy it had become to
draw the two sixteen-year-olds onto the path he wished them
to walk. "Ah, yes, Beth. She surprised me. I never expected
her to be so experienced."
"Beth?" Oswyl sounded incredulous.
Malthus ran his tongue over his lips and cocked his head,
with a glance to the side. "Well, yes. She's as talented and
experienced as any doxie I've encountered and I've had

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
123
women from as far south as Ocealay to as far north as
Havensword in Creeya."
"Hsaaa! And here we have always thought no one'd ever
touched her. I mean—" Shalto looked nonplussed.
"Then she's been more discreet than most here," Malthus
said. "If that's the case, I'm sorry I mentioned it."
"No, don't be," Oswyl said. "I mean, for the common folks
like us, doing it like the wild cousins is no bad thing."
"Then, maybe you should try her," Malthus suggested.
"Would you like another round?" He gathered up the
tankards.
"Sure thing," Shalto said.
Malthus refilled the tankards from a barrel he had propped
on a makeshift rack beside his sheeling. The walls on his
house would start going up tomorrow.
"Look, if you don't have anything planned with Beth for
tonight, maybe we'll stop by and see if she's willing to
accommodate us," Shalto said.
"You'll find her more than willing, Shalto," said Malthus.
"She's been telling me she had her eye on you."
Shalto grinned and Oswyl nudged him.
Malthus' grin turned evil. "And she likes it up the ass."
The two young lycans looked at each other.
Malthus laughed. "You're not very experienced, are you? I
mean, you do know that the ass is tighter than a well used
cunt, don't you?"
"I'd never thought of it," Shalto replied.
"Much tighter. Try it, you might like it. A snug sheath for
your sword."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
124
Malthus went on to describe the sexual practices of dozens
of cultures, finding the two inexperienced young lycans a rapt
audience. He trusted that, like all young males, they would
brag to their peers once they had been with his slut. Then,
should Merissa learn of his liaison with Beth, the lycan's
reputation would be so completely soiled that Merissa would
think nothing of his actions.
* * * *
Beth opened the door. Shalto leered at her with a knowing
smile and Oswyl grinned over his shoulder. Her heart skipped
a beat. The last group of children that had been living with
her had been fostered out to other women living on the
compound and she finally had the longhouse to herself again.
Two nights ago, Malthus had told her he intended to start
sending males to use her and that she was not to refuse
them, no matter what they wished her to do.
She felt ill, but regardless of how hard her will struggled in
its bindings, she could not get free. "Come in."
Shalto drifted to the curtains of the half wall leading into
her sleeping area.
"Can I get you anything?" Beth asked.
Oswyl nudged Shalto.
"You," Shalto said. "We hear you want it like the wild
cousins."
Beth's head settled on her shoulder as she started unlacing
her dress. She wished she were free to cry, but Malthus had
forbidden her to do that in front of others.
Oswyl nudged Shalto again.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
125
"One at a time?" Shalto asked, and then paused thinking.
"Or two up?"
Beth felt her heart break. She had assisted to whelp these
two sixteen-year-olds, watched them grow up with a longing
fondness in her heart, wishing they might have been her own.
Now it was all being destroyed. "Any way you want it."
Her shift settled around her waist, exposing her breasts.
The eagerness in their eyes made her cringe. Shalto fondled
her breast, and she forced a smile.
Shalto looked at Oswyl. "Two up?"
"I've never done that before," Oswyl said. "But sure."
Shalto let out a series of enthusiastic hoots. "Get naked,
Beth! Oswyl, we're finally gonna get some." He grabbed her
shift and pulled it past her hips. "Oh yeah, gonna get some."
* * * *
On the third day of searching for Tempest, Nikko had
grown disheartened and certain that they would not find his
friend alive, yet frantic to have closure and see the priest's
remain laid to rest. Braided through his shifting emotions, lay
a desperate need to be wrong, to find Tempest alive. Driven
by his inner demons, Nikko continued to search long after the
others had given up and gone home for the night. He thought
of poor little Moss. The dog was mourning, and Granta was
spoiling him as a result. His mother had already promised to
make a place for Moss in their home.
The sun rose, and dawn illumined the landscape in shades
of pinks and oranges. Dozens of black circling shapes lifted
from the trees, becoming a spiraling blemish against the soft

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
126
hues of sunrise, their raucous noises drowning out the
morning bird songs: ravens.
Nikko hastened toward them with his stomach clenching.
His nostrils flared and he smelled death before he saw it. The
crows and ravens blanketed a carcass, tearing at it fiercely,
pecking at each other in a dominance dance for the macabre
feast. Flies buzzed angrily. Nikko plunged in, driving the
crows and ravens from their banquet with broad waves of his
hands. The frustrated birds took refuge in the trees and
watched him.
A figure clad in scavenger-savaged umber and brown
robes rested beneath a tree, with a staff still laying in the
bony remnants of its fingers. The eyes were gone and
portions of the face. Maggots moved around the opened
mouth.
Nikko's throat tightened and his stomach rebelled.
"Tempest."
He sank to his knees, as shock sent him into his hybrid
form, and he howled his grief to the heavens.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
127
CHAPTER EIGHT
SUSPICIONS
Malthus' house had gone up swiftly. So far he had a single
room partitioned off, with full walls and a door, instead of the
usual half walls of the lycan longhouses: his bedroom. His
nieces slept in the living area for the nonce. He intended to
add on a study and a bedroom for them also. Shalto and
Oswyl had already laid the foundations. Eventually he would
have a very cozy human style cottage. There had been a bit
of complaining among some of the myn who had been here
longer, however, once he got inside their minds, it stopped.
The growing insularity of the camp meant that the general
lycan community did not poke their noses in enough to notice
the changes: the camp had become Malthus' little fiefdom.
Beth sat weeping on Malthus' big reed bed. "They use me
like a whore, Malthus. Shalto, Oswyl, Torquil, and a dozen
others. You have no idea what terrible things they do to me."
Malthus leaned against the wall with his arms crossed and
a chill expression on his face. "I suggested most of it to
them."
Beth shot him a disillusioned look. "My own people are
doing this. How many more are you going to send to use
me?"
"As many as I like. You are developing quite a reputation
among the young males as a slut. I don't see why you're

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
128
complaining. You're getting more than you ever did in your
life."
She twisted her hands in her skirt, looking more forlorn by
the moment. Malthus had her wearing better dresses,
brighter colors, and belts to show that—although plump—she
had a waistline. "I—I don't like it. Not this way. Not so many."
"Are you going to refuse them anything?" His voice oozed
with contempt.
Beth squirmed. "I know better than to do that."
"I'm sure you do."
Beth dropped her head. "They found Tempest."
"Oh?"
"He's dead. They're saying it was a heart attack. But—but I
don't think so. I think you killed him."
Malthus laughed derisively. "Of course I killed him. He was
going to Merissa about my relationship with you."
"That's what this is all about, isn't it? Merissa? You want
that sa'necari loving slut princess?"
Malthus came around and gripped Beth's face, forcing her
to look at him. "You're forgetting something, Beth. You are a
sa'necari loving slut."
"Oh, gods, I love you, Malthus."
"Stop saying that," Malthus grumbled irritably. "Take your
clothes off. Since you've been so busy for the past few days,"
he drew the words out with a sneer, "I've been doing
Kandaishee. I haven't had a taste of lycan in far too long."
Beth obeyed and sat waiting for him.
Malthus covered her temples with his palms and tore her
mind open. "Once Tempest revealed how far the rumors had

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
129
spread, I had to soil your reputation before Merissa could
learn of it."
Beth whimpered as he worked on her, shoving more
arcane needles into her most private corners. Tears ran down
her face.
"Shall I tell you how I killed him, Beth?" Malthus asked, his
voice low and sinister.
"No. Please. I don't want to hear it."
"You know how I hurt you with a single finger?"
"Stop, please."
"I put my hand on his chest, and I squeezed his heart until
ruptured it. A very painful way to die. Do you wish to die that
way?"
Beth swallowed and her whimpering worsened. "No," she
said in a small voice.
"I didn't think so. Be good, and it won't happen that way.
Lie down and open your legs, Beth," he said. "You're going to
have a busy night. I have guests coming and I told them how
insatiable you are. But I want to be first."
* * * *
Kynyr stood in the shadows of the trees along the edge of
the graveyard in Sanctuary as Tempest's remains were
lowered into the ground. Baroucha, the village healer and
midwife, said Tempest died of heart failure. Kynyr's gut
instinct insisted it was murder. He wished he could have sent
for his grandmother to examine Tempest's remains, but she
had vowed never to come to Wolffgard again as long as she
lived. It had been eighty years since she last came here. The

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
130
lycan lifespan being between one hundred twenty and one
hundred fifty; Cahira Maguire remained hale, hearty,
relatively youthful, and the stubbornest person Kynyr had
ever known.
Tempest's death had stolen the joy from Kynyr's face and
the cockiness from his stride. His shoulders slumped, and his
mouth set in a tight line, the corners of his narrowed eyes
crinkled. The cacophony of mourning filled his ears and
dragged at his heart. Dogs, bitches, and cubs—they all
keened as they passed the grave, tossing handfuls of soil over
the coffin, putting flowers and offerings around the edges.
Few humans ever became as beloved by the lycan community
they dwelled in as Tempest had. Even the Redhands had
come to say a final farewell to the old priest; and Claw had
paid for the headstone himself.
Kynyr spotted Malthus standing off to the side with a group
of the females from the Camp, apparently offering comfort to
them. It irritated Kynyr that Malthus had managed to
insinuate himself into the front of the line of mourners from
the Camp—close enough to the Redhands to hug Merissa
briefly before moving on with the others.
The young guardsmon sucked in a deep breath and blew it
out through his nostrils with an aggravated noise.
I don't know how you did it, but you murdered him, you
bastard.
As Claw, his wife Aisha, his two sisters, Fianait and
Searlait, filed past Kynyr with their compliment of guardsmyn,
Kyrnyr noticed that Merissa was not with them. He glanced
around for her and spied her moving toward Malthus. Kynyr

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
131
cut through the crowds and fell into step behind her and
realized that she was headed straight for Malthus.
Kynyr darted forward and grasped her wrist. "We need to
go. Your family's leaving."
Merissa jerked free and kept walking. "Go away, Kynyr."
Malthus saw them and approached, giving Kynyr an
appraising look.
Kynyr leaned in and whispered to Merissa. "You don't want
him. He's sticking his cock in Beth."
Merissa stiffened, a hurt expression came over her face,
and her hand went to her lips. She spun about and fled.
Kynyr stifled a sigh, certain that he should have found a
more delicate way of putting that and regretted his angry
phrasing.
Malthus stopped Kynyr from going after her with a curt
gesture. "What did you say to her?"
"The truth."
"Which is?"
"You're fucking Beth."
Kynyr turned on his heel, and stalked off before Malthus
could reply to that.
"Hey! Hey, Kynyr!" Cullen trotted up to him. "That bastard
don't know how to take a hint, does he?"
"Oh, he knows, Cullen. He just doesn't want to give the
right answers."
"I thought maybe you'd have a drink with me. My last
night here. I'm leaving for Shaurone tomorrow."
Kynyr stopped and turned to Cullen. "Claw's sending you?"
"Yeah. I'm going to get us a new priest."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
132
"Sure. Let's go."
"I'll only be gone three weeks. Four at the outside. You
leave a piece of that asshole for me to have a shot at, Kynyr."
Kynyr grinned and slapped Cullen on the back. "Sure
thing."
* * * *
Nikko sat at the little table in his mother's kitchen four
days after the lycans buried Tempest beside his shrine. He
pressed the whitening knuckles of his fists together. "If I'd
only known he was going away, I could have been with him. I
should have been with him."
Another fit of weeping took him. Moss whined and climbed
into Nikko's lap. He scratched behind Moss' ears distractedly.
His mother put a cup of chamomile tea in front of him. She
drew a chair close and put her arm around him. "I'm sorry,
Nikko. But you couldn't have known his heart would give out."
"Tempest ... was like a second father to me."
"I know." She patted his hand. "We all miss him."
"I don't believe it was a heart attack. He never had
anything wrong with heart before, mother."
"Nikko—"
"Mother, listen to me. But don't tell anyone what I say."
"I won't, but be reasonable."
"I am. There's one of the newcomers. Tempest and I ... we
never trusted him. Sa'necari can make a death spell that
appears to be natural, except to a mage-gifted Reader. We
have none of those in the valley."
"All the adult sa'necari are spellcorded."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
133
"I've caught glimpses of strange things in the forest.
Things I've never seen before. None of them showed up
before this mon arrived. I think Tempest was murdered. I
think this mon had something to do with it. Tempest had said
he intended to talk to him about something the day he died."
"Nikko, be careful what you're saying. You're the lawgiver.
You can't accuse without evidence."
"I'll get evidence. And then there's Beth."
"Hsaaa. Beth is a slut. Now that I think on it, she probably
always was and we never noticed."
Nikko sucked in a sharp breath, put Moss on the floor, and
stood up, seeing that he was getting nowhere with his
mother. "I'm going for a walk."
He drifted through the village, acknowledging people with
small nods, while not paying them any real attention. When
he reached the common, Nikko spied Malthus going into the
Difficult Horse with Shalto, Oswyl, and Torquil. It seemed like
every time that Nikko saw Malthus in the village Shalto and
Oswyl were with him, and sometimes Torquil. He was certain
that Malthus had killed Tempest, but he could not think of any
way to prove it. Nor could he offer any possible motives for
Malthus having done it. Only that it was a lingering gut feeling
and Nevin had always told him to listen to his gut on such
matters. So how did he start to investigate Malthus without
the mon knowing it? Most of the young village males had
befriended Malthus, and that did not make any sense either.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
134
CHAPTER NINE
CAPTURED
Cullen rode into Hell's Widow and took a room for the night
at the Three Candles Inn. He rarely traveled after dark unless
the moon was full, partly out of superstition that Tala watched
over her people best when the light was strongest in the
heavens, and partly out of commonsense because the night
had its dangers, especially ambushes. He had thought long
and hard about the last time he came here, about the attack
on Corbie Street.
Old habits were hard to break, and Cullen was too
stubborn to forego a visit with his favorite whore, Ellie
Remus, at the Crimson Lady. He took a different route than
usual and traveled with his full attention focused upon his
surroundings, determined not to be caught with his guard
down. As result, he arrived at the Crimson Lady without a
single incident.
When he entered the foyer, Flavio grinned at him. "Cullen!
It's good to see you again. Ellie will be delighted."
Cullen patted his crotch. "I know she will."
"Go on up, Ellie's free tonight. You're lucky, considering
how popular she's become."
Cullen nodded. "Not surprising."
He went upstairs and down the hallway to Ellie's room,
knocked and let himself in.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
135
Ellie sat at her dressing table, combing her waist length
yellow hair. "I'm not ready yet, Heiron..." She blinked and
came off her stool in a rush. "Cullen!"
"You're sure pretty tonight, Ellie." Cullen's cock filled to
bursting as she embraced him, rubbing her body up and down
his.
"You always say that." She released him and began
unfastening her dress.
He let out a low whistle at the high quality furnishings,
sauntered over to the huge bed with the heavy olive velvet
curtains and peered inside. "You've come up in world."
"I'm popular, Cullen." Ellie pulled the bows on her lacings
and her bodice came open.
Cullen licked his lips as her breasts emerged from the
bodice. He noticed the rings on her fingers, lifted them and
was astonished at the size of a piece of jade in an intricate
gold setting that looked like a temple. "I'll say."
Ellie withdrew her hand, shimmied free of her skirt, and
stretched out on the bed with her legs wide, playing with the
lips of her vagina. "Well, are you going to stare or are you
getting undressed?"
"I'm ready for you."
Cullen tossed his clothes in the corner, grasped his
erection, and wagged it at her.
Ellie giggled. "I'm waiting."
"I guess you are."
Cullen climbed on top of her and thrust into the moist,
welcoming hole.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
136
Ellie's vagina tightened around him, sucking as she
contracted her muscles.
He could see why she was popular. A long moan escaped
him as he thrust.
She clutched his arm and a sharp pain seared through
Cullen's bicep. A needle had emerged from the ring and was
plunged into him. Cullen shoved away from her.
"What've you done?" He felt dizzy and disoriented.
"Poison?"
"They want you alive." She jabbed him again, a nervous
light in her eyes.
Cullen hit her in the face, yanked his arm free, and rolled
off the bed.
Ellie cried out and scrambled to the far side of the bed.
Cullen swayed on his feet. "Bloody whore ... filthy bloody
... whore."
He staggered halfway to the door before collapsing on the
carpets. Ellie slipped from the bed and knelt beside him. His
eyes were open and his lips moved, but nothing came out.
Ellie took his hands, stripped the rings from his fingers,
carried them to the nightstand, and dropped them into her
jewelry box.
* * * *
Cullen sat in a crude chair. His shoulders, hips, wrists, and
ankles had been nailed to the wood with long silver spikes. All
of the hair had been shaved from his body except for the
thatch atop his head. They had broken his arms and legs in
several places, and fragments of bone jutted through his right

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
137
arm, and both of his calves. His fingers and toes had been
crushed and mangled; his nose had been shattered. Bruises
covered him. Spellcord on his wrists prevented him from
changing shape.
The room was large and nearly empty with no windows.
Mirrors covered the ceiling and the walls, and a highly
polished mirrored tile covered the floor. A square table
occupied the northeast corner, four chairs surrounded it, a
bottle of whiskey, and several glasses sat in the middle of it.
Two rough mattresses were dragged in and thrown in the
northwest corner along with a pair of ratty quilts.
Cullen had soon discovered that he had fallen into the
hands of the Butchering Serpent. For sixteen years both the
lycan clans and the Assassins' guild had hunted the genocidal
mastermind behind a hidden laboratory in the far northern
mountains where hundreds of lycans had perished in
nightmarish experiments that had included toxins and
vivisections.
His captors knew their business well; they knew how to
cause the most pain with the least damage, postponing his
inevitable death while making him crave its arrival. They
wanted names, places, sources, and ways and means.
Cullen's initial despair had settled into tight lipped
defiance, knowing that anything he said would sign the death
warrants of others. They tried to crack his mind open with
their arcane arts and there they failed also.
He had grimly refused to name names and thus condemn
his fellows to death; but Cullen was beginning to wonder how
much longer he could hold out.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
138
Heironim paced back and forth before him, wearing a cloth
mask. All of the myn who had tortured him had been masked.
"One last time, Cullen. Who are the other couriers? How does
the clan get messages out?"
"Go to hell." Cullen's voice was hoarse and rasping from
days of screaming his lungs out as they hurt him. "I'm
cadhbair imhaig."
"Dead mon walking?" Heironim made a guess at the
meaning of the lycan phrase, but received no confirmation
from Cullen. "I assume that's your final answer?"
"Bastard."
Heironim gestured and two myn set out a table near
Cullen, placing an array of blades—many of them silver—on
it.
"Our guests have arrived," a mon said to Heironim.
"Good, bring them here and get them seated. Bring a
bottle of Dragonsbreath also. They'll need it."
The mon departed and Heironim returned to Cullen. He
gestured at someone standing behind the injured wolf. Rolls
of hard leather were shoved to Cullen's lower back, forcing his
chest up and out.
Heironim stroked Cullen's chest, his Reader's gift roving
the wolf's organs and insides. "A fine angle. But perhaps a bit
more?"
Two more rolls were shoved behind Cullen and the
pressure on his spine became intense. He groaned.
The door opened and one of the myn ushered in Ellie and
Madam Silkie. Ellie went pale when she saw what they had
done to Cullen, and a strangled sob escaped her and she

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
139
muttered under her breath. "Forgive me. Forgive me. I had to
do it."
Silkie remained hard eyed, her sour mouth set in a tight
line. "Shut up, Ellie."
"Good advice." Heironim indicated the table and chairs.
"Sit. Enjoy the whiskey. You'll need it."
Silkie bustled over to the table and took the chair that
directly faced Cullen. "What are we here for?"
"To learn." He walked to the work table and stood testing
the edge and balance of each blade. "We caught another
courier. He's been very responsive to persuasion. Cullen's of
no use to us."
Cullen tensed, forming a silent prayer that his death would
be quick.
Heironim carried a blade from the table and placed his
fingers on Cullen's taut abdomen, searching with his arcane
senses for the best spot to insert it.
Cullen's blood seemed to chill in his veins. Belly wound.
The bastard was going to make it as slow and excruciating as
possible. "Just do it ... filthy gutterscrew."
"I am." Casual calculation added distance to Heironim's
eyes. "There."
He popped the blade into Cullen's belly with a flick of his
wrist, working it in all the way to the quillions with small
twists.
Cullen jerked and gasped.
Silkie flinched as a long, ululating howl of anguish broke
from Cullen. Her lips tightened, but she gave no other sign
that what she saw bothered her.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
140
Ellie shoved her knuckles into her mouth to keep from
screaming with him.
"It can take as long as four or five days for a lycan to die
of a wound like this," Heironim explained in a detached voice.
He Read the wound, adjusted the angle of the blade, bringing
another scream from Cullen, and left it inside him. "You'll be
our guests until then."
Cullen sagged forward as much as the spikes would allow,
breathing hard, making animal noises in his throat. An
inadvertant glance grazed the mirrors and he saw the silvery
hilt glinting against his flesh. Dying like this ... seemed an
ironic travesty. He had always expected to get it on a street
corner, or in a dark alley, or in the forest making his ride;
maybe an arrow or a blade in the back.
Silkie poured whiskey for herself and Ellie. She put Ellie's
hands on the glass. "Drink it, Ellie."
Heironim sauntered to the table. "While you watch him die,
think on this. You could be next."
He gestured. The blades and the table they sat on were
removed, and they locked Ellie and Silkie in with Cullen.
Ellie went to him and knelt. "Forgive me, Cullen. Please
forgive me. I didn't know they'd ... do this." She gestured
helplessly at his broken body.
He started to say 'never' and swallowed it back.
"Squeamish bitch."
"I'm sorry."
Cullen did not answer for a long time, struggling to ride
the pain and get past it. Silkie put a glass of whiskey to his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
141
lips and he drank it. "You're in ... too deep ... both a ya ...
like the ... blade in my gut."
"I'm afraid of them." Ellie's voice trembled.
Silkie wiped the driblets from his chin with a corner of her
sleeve.
Cullen's eye focused on Ellie, grateful that she blocked the
mirrors. "I'd've ... gotten ya out, Ellie ... if ya'd told me ... if
ya'd bloody told me."
"No one helps a whore." Ellie's voice held a tone of angry
bitterness.
"I did ... have." Cullen tensed with a groan as a hard wave
of pain swept him.
"You always were an odd wolf, Cullen Blackwood. One of a
kind." Silkie stroked Cullen's face, a sad edge in her voice. "If
I'd only known..."
Ellie reached for the hilt of the blade in Cullen's body and
Silkie grabbed her. "Don't touch it."
Cullen roused at the sound of Silkie's voice. "Listen to her,
Ellie."
She glanced from face to face. "Why?"
Cullen struggled to speak, having to pause every few
words, fighting the pain, fighting for breath. "Trapped."
Silkie nodded, shifting her grip of Ellie from her arms to
her shoulders. "They wouldn't leave a blade where we could
reach it, unless it were trapped or cursed in some way."
"But..."
"It's how ... they ... do things." Cullen shuddered, his lips
drawn back from his teeth in a grimace.
"Cullen..."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
142
"No ... what would ... ya do ... wi' it? Fight? Don't be a ...
stupid fool of a bitch."
"He's right, Ellie. There's too many of them. They'd rite us
both for trying."
Ellie pulled away from Silkie, ran across the room, and
huddled in a corner of the mattress.
"Gahds ... I wish ya ... dint have ta watch me ... die ...
Silkie." Cullen writhed in a fresh wave of pain. "Keep her
alive, Silkie. Yar a ... tough old bitch. She ain't."
"I'll try."
"Oh, gods ... Larkspur ... I—I never loved a bitch ... like I
... loved that horse." He fell silent for a moment, pain
grinding through him, his head wobbling on his neck like the
stem of a broken flower. "Pity that."
"Where is she?"
"Amos Raggat."
"The old fool is probably dithering over what to do with her
by now."
"Yah. Horse don't deserve ... ta suffer for ... mah sins."
Cullen's brogue deepened with his anguish. He breathed in
gasps and pants, sweat breaking out across his brow.
"I'll fetch her."
"Ya must know ... all tha lycans in ... town."
Silkie shrugged. "The dogs. Only time the bitches speak to
me is when they drag their menfolk out of the Crimson Lady."
"Pity that."
Silkie tilted her head to the side, her face filling with
sorrow, cracks appearing in her tough façade. "You

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
143
remember..." She swallowed, took a deep breath. "Cooley?
My lycan son?"
Cullen's head listed to the side, his eyelids drooping. "I ...
taught him ... ta ride. Was gonna teach him ... ta fight. Good
cub..."
"He ought to be." Silkie took another deep breath. "You
fathered him ... on me."
A fit of coughing took hold of Cullen. Blood ran from the
corners of his mouth. Silkie used the sleeve of her dress to
wipe the blood away when the fit passed.
"Why'n't ... you say?"
"Didn't want to burden you." Tears started in Silkie's eyes.
"You weren't the marrying kind."
"Nah, gurl. Dawn't let'em ... see ya cry." Cullen coughed
up more blood. "They wanna see ya ... cry."
Silkie wiped her eyes and mastered herself. "I know it."
"Thas muh gud bitch." It grew harder for Cullen to keep
talking. "Use them ... whore's arts a yers ... stay alive."
"Whatever it takes ... I promise."
* * * *
Food, water, and more whiskey arrived twice each day.
Silkie ate everything on her plate with an iron determination
to survive; while Ellie could barely eat and most of it came
back up when she did manage to swallow it. By the third day,
Cullen had begun to slide in and out of fevered delirium. Silkie
ripped the bottom of her dress off, moistened it from the
ewer of water Heironim had left them, and took turns with

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
144
Ellie, wiping Cullen's face in a vain effort to give him some
small relief.
Silence reigned for a long time and then Cullen spoke in a
rasping whisper. "Bassids ... tokmahbrings."
Ellie bent close to him in an effort to hear. As the days and
hours passed, Cullen's speech had become more and more
slurred; harder to understand without great effort—effort
from Cullen to shape the words and effort from them to
discern them. "Silkie? What's he saying?"
Silkie knelt beside Cullen and cupped his chin, lifting his
head. "Say it again. Slow."
"Bastards ... tak muh ... rings."
Ellie swallowed. "I took your rings ... I was going to sell
them ... money to escape on."
"Smart bitch."
Cullen tried to remember which of the wolves he trusted
frequented the Crimson Lady, but in his failing condition only
one name would come to him. "Kynyr Mah—Mah—guire. Get
tha ring ta Kynyr."
"Which one?"
"Sna—ake ring."
The door opened and a tall mon in a serpent mask entered
with Heironim beside him and four more myn along. The work
table was returned to the room and the blades arrayed for the
Serpent's selection. He studied the blades and picked one.
"Doing Cullen pleases me, Heironim. Doing Kynyr will please
me far more. He's a thorn in my side."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
145
Cullen stirred, his eyes glazed with suffering. A rush of
anger cleared some of the slurring from his voice. "Kynyr'll
gut ya."
Silkie moved close to the Serpent, her lips twisting into a
sensual smile. "Can I fondle your hard bit while you stick
him?"
All eyes fixed upon the Madam. The Serpent broke the
tableau. "You know about that ... little ... predilection?"
"Most of my family are sa'necari."
The Serpent chuckled and pushed her hand inside his
pants. "Enjoy yourself."
Cullen snarled. "Do it, damn ya."
"Patience." The serpent grasped Cullen's shoulder and
placed the tip just beneath the courier's sternum. "I like the
way you have his chest presented, Heironim. I wish I'd
thought of this trick."
"I have drawn up some designs that will be even better.
Remind me to show you the workshop."
Although more than half dead, Cullen anticipated the blade
in his chest with a mix of dread and relief. "Gah ahn ... do it
... pissing piece a shit."
The Serpent smiled behind his mask. "He's so eager. Tell
me, Silkie. Are you still fertile?"
"Yes."
"Contraceptives?" The Serpent pushed the tip of the blade
into Cullen.
"No." Silkie glanced at the blade entering Cullen's chest,
and clamped down hard upon her reactions to hide her
feelings.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
146
"I'm going to swell your belly." The Serpent jabbed the
blade deeper, angling it up into the left side of Cullen's chest.
Cullen groaned and Silkie nearly lost it. "When?"
"As soon as he's dead." Malthus pulled and jabbed several
times in quick succession.
Cullen made an odd hiccoughing sound, his chest jerking.
His mouth went slack, his eyes staring and he sagged. The
breath rattled from his lungs.
Silkie withdrew her hand from Malthus' pants, and took
Cullen's dead face in her hands. She kissed his forehead,
cheeks and lips in the farewell to the dead. "You were a good
wolf."
Ellie mastered herself and did the same.
Silkie pulled her skirts up and laid down on the floor. "Stick
me with a friendly weapon, Master Serpent."
Malthus did so.
* * * *
Four lycan corpses hung from the wooden frames, their
heads tied back, throats slit to allow their blood to drain into
basins: Cullen and three who had dared to venture into the
wrong neighborhood at night. Myn worked on the corpses
with skinning knives. The Black Market in lycan hides had
grown lucrative of late.
As soon as the skin had been removed from the corpse,
and placed in a vat of tanning solution, they opened Cullen up
and removed his organs. Heart, liver, and kidneys were
considered a delicacy and would be cured and salted. The
entrails would be cleaned and used as sausage casings.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
147
However, the most expensive part was the testicles as there
was currently a vogue among the bio-alchemists to use lycan
testes as the primary ingredient in a purported cure for
sa'necari infertility. The catch was that they could not come
from a rited corpse and the Readers would know the
difference.
* * * *
Silkie lay on her bed at the Crimson Lady with the curtains
closed. Her breathing was hard. She felt weak and dizzy. She
fought down an urge to touch the place on her neck where
Heironim had given her a final lesson in obedience. He didn't
need to have. She did not know who she feared more: The
Sharani or the sa'necari. If either of them learned her true
name—they would kill her.
"Long ago and faraway." She murmured. When she had
been young and beautiful, Silkie had had a powerful mage
who loved her. He had given her a clever gift, embedding a
crystal in her body where it would not be noticed. Her mind
would always be her own. If anyone tried to put coercions,
sways, and triggers in her, they would appear to be there but
exist only as surface shadows. Over the years many sa'necari
and others had tried to take her and failed.
When her looks began to fade, she came to Hell's widow
and established the Crimson Lady, rightly knowing both lycan
tastes in whores and that brothels were illegal in Red Wolf.
Despite all his flaws, Silkie had loved Cullen more than
anyone else she had ever known. Which was why when she

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
148
found herself pregnant by him, she had chosen not to abort
the child. "I'll get them, Cullen. I'll get them."
Silkie folded her arms across her stomach, hating what she
knew grew inside her. According to the midwife that Silkie
had sent for the first day after they let her go, the Serpent
had filled her belly the same day he killed Cullen. The legends
about his potency were true. Heironim had told her that if she
aborted it, he would kill her and give the brothel to Ellie.
For the first time in her life, Silkie considered deserting her
girls when they were all in danger. If she could escape before
she had gone very far into the pregnancy the child could be
aborted. She shuddered every time she thought about the
abomination in her womb.
So Silkie began to consider her options and plot.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
149
CHAPTER TEN
STALKING
Well, I offered to work for my bread, Malthus thought,
wiping his sweating forehead on his sleeve. The lycans had
put him to chopping wood that morning as his contribution to
the upkeep of the sanctuary. He had been at it for hours, but
now had the woodbins filled. This was the last of it. He laid
the ax aside and pulled his shirt over his head, tossing it onto
a bush. The cool spring breeze sighed over his well-
proportioned chest and arms, chilling the moisture clinging to
his limbs.
He had not yet deepened the compulsions he had set in
the five adult sa'necari enough to turn them into a harem, but
was considering it—although he had stolen a night here and
there with Kandaishee. However, he did not dare to risk
acquiring the very reputation he had so carefully cultivated
for Beth.
The sa'necari helped with the children, the building, and
other chores necessary to keep the sanctuary going. There
was always at least one watchful lycan with them, and more
often several. The lycans provided the sanctuary with nibari
for the sa'necari adults and children to feed upon and all such
meals were carefully supervised. Malthus' deception denied
him access to the nibari, but he had always liked the taste of
lycan best.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
150
Lord Daemon's contacts had provided him with more
preserving bottles of blood, but it was not the same—there
was no taste of fear along with the blood—so he contented
himself with Beth and fed Ros from the bottles. Even the best
trained and most trusting of nibari held some small measure
of fear before a master's fangs entered her. A rite would be
better. That would completely satiate him for a time.
"I thought you might be hungry," Merissa said, walking up
to him with a basket of bread and cheese, a bottle of wine
sticking out of the top, a folded blanket draped her arm. "We
can let the children play together. Darmyk kept asking about
Ros. He likes her."
The toddler rode his half-grown kitten beside Merissa. Ros
and Lyrri rushed up when they saw them and the playing
began as they each got the kitten to chase one and then the
other in a game of cat tag. Ros and Darmyk grabbed Kenly
and fell into a little heap for a moment when he shook them
both off. A shiver of concern ran up Malthus' back when he
saw the hungry glitter in Ros' eyes as she gave Darmyk's
back several strokes. Ros was surprisingly strong for her
years, and he wondered how long his coercions would be able
to prevent her from sinking her fangs into Darmyk. Blood
hunger was a nearly irresistible force, especially in the young.
If they lycans knew she was this advanced they would
spellcord her.
Malthus took the blanket from Merissa, spread it on the
ground, and indicated she should sit first. Her visits had
increased from once a week to nearly every day. He no longer
had to go looking for her. Her beauty made heat rise in his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
151
body, and his throat tighten with longing for a taste from her
veins. Malthus imagined the exquisite pleasure of entering her
just behind her delicate ear and opening her legs to his rod of
possession. She would be afraid. Done right, there was
always fear before passion. He could see how his brother
would have wanted her: he wanted her.
Merissa sat and began taking food and drink from her
basket, fruit juice for the children and wine for herself and
Malthus. He settled close to her where, at the proper
moment, his hand could steal across hers.
"Your son is a pretty child, Merissa," Malthus told her,
watching the children playing. He was very careful with them,
concealing their precocities. Ros had been born with her
fangs, which was a very rare thing. It was only a matter of
time before she tried to feed on Darmyk, since she was
already obsessing on him.
"No more so than your nieces," Merissa replied. She
opened the wine and poured them each a glass.
Malthus accepted his with a languid smile and began to sip
it. Merissa's wine was always of a better quality than what the
sanctuary provided, or what he could buy in the shops. "You
are a pleasant surprise, as ever, Merissa. Your presence
makes my losses bearable."
Merissa hesitated. "I'm sorry for your losses. I'm glad our
friendship, eases it." She chewed her lower lip, and then burst
out, "I hate wars. They took my lover away from me."
"Perhaps they did. Perhaps they did not. You did say that
he didn't love you."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
152
She tensed, her hand choking the glass in her hands. "In
his eyes, we were friends only. In mine?"
"I am sorry." Malthus' hand stole over hers and she pulled
away from him.
Calling the children to her, Merissa made them
sandwiches. "Don't feed your food to Kenly. I know he'll beg,
but he's had his breakfast."
A chorus of "awww" greeted her admonition, but when her
expression showed no sign of changing, they obeyed her.
Malthus took another swallow of his wine, wishing it had
been spiked with blood. Beth did not satisfy him at all. She
had stopped keeping herself as clean as she had before she
became the village slut. He had to constantly repair her mind.
It was fraying around the edges, and people had begun to
remark on the changes in her. At least he no longer had to
worry about the nosy priest.
"You must get lonely with your lover so long away. I'm
lonely." Malthus sipped from his glass.
Merissa gave him a doubting look. "You have Beth."
He shook his head with a small smile. "Merissa, you're too
innocent for words."
She drew back, frowning. "What do you mean?"
"Please don't take this wrong. Beth is the village slut."
"Beth? I can hardly believe that."
"I didn't believe it myself at first. Don't take my word for
it. Ask Shalto or Torquil or Oswyl. They've all been with her.
They're coming and going from her home at all times of the
day and night. But don't condemn her, Merissa. It is after all
the way of the wild cousins."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
153
Merissa flushed and stared at her hands. "Not like that, it
isn't. The wild cousins ... well, that's more like unmarried
serial monogamy. And it isn't generally practiced among the
upper classes."
"It's the reason I insisted on building my home so far from
the main compound. I didn't want the girls exposed to it."
"I never knew."
"Of course you didn't. You're too innocent, Merissa. Too
trusting."
"I'm scarcely innocent. I've had a child out of wedlock."
"What did you say your lover's name was? If he rides with
the Rowdies, I might have met him."
A cautious light came into Merissa's eyes. "I didn't."
He reached out and brushed his fingers along her arm.
Merissa stiffened as he touched her. "Please don't."
Malthus withdrew his hands. "I meant no offense. Only
that you're very lovely and I am very lonely. It's been what?
You said yesterday, three years I think? How can you still
wait for him?"
"Because I will wait for him until I die." Merissa picked up
Darmyk, fleeing in such haste that she grabbed only the
basket, leaving Malthus with the wine, glasses, and blanket.
Malthus poured another glass of wine and knocked the
contents down. His fangs started to descend and he focused
inward to send them back into their sheaths in his mouth. He
wanted to sink them into Merissa, but he would have to make
do with Beth.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
154
"Or until he dies?" he said so softly under his breath that
even Merissa's keen lycan hearing could not pick out the
words.
If the sire was Isranon, then his death would definitely be
sooner than Merissa could dream: both Queen Tomyrilen and
the God-Queen Galee of Minnoras had placed bounties upon
Isranon's head and that of Lord Dawnreturning, as had the
Sacred King of Rowanhart. Assassins were coming at Isranon
from all directions. It was only a matter of time before one of
them killed him. Malthus wished he had a way to lure him up
here so that the kill would be his. No matter. Even if he had a
lure, Isranon would probably be dead before he could arrive
here.
Malthus re-corked the bottle of wine, folded the blanket
with the bottle and glasses in the middle. At least returning
them would give him a reason to see her tomorrow. With
Lyrri and Ros in tow, he walked back to the sanctuary. He
went to the half-finished two room house he had been
building for himself and his nieces, placed his stuff there, and
went looking for Beth.
He found her overseeing some of the sa'necari women she
had doing laundry in a tub on the left side of the yard. Beth
smiled at him.
"Where have you been?" she asked, giving him a hug.
Malthus wished she would not do that, but did not want to
risk pushing the triggers too far to the other side. "Ros and
Lyrri wanted to play with Darmyk."
"You were chasing Merissa again, weren't you," Beth
hissed in his ear.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
155
"Now, now, Beth. Let's discuss this alone, shall we?"
She turned her head in a pouting fashion, dipping her
shoulders at him, but did not resist when Malthus took her
hand. He walked with her to the copse they had once used for
their trysting, and by way of the woods back to his house.
The moment he had her inside away from the sight of other
people, Malthus pulled Beth down onto his bed.
She leaned against him, unlacing her shift. Malthus
crooked a finger under her chin and raised her head so that
their eyes met. Beth smiled just as Malthus lunged into her
mind. Her eyes glazed and she went still.
"There will be no more jealousy, Beth," Malthus
commanded in a silken voice.
"No more jealousy." Beth's voice was toneless and hollow.
Malthus found a vulnerable place in Beth's psyche built
around her feeling of self-worth: she disliked the way she
looked. He stabbed her there with a needle of power and a
thread of spellcraft, knotting another coercion in place. "You
want to be beautiful, Beth?"
"Yes."
"You will become beautiful when you lay down upon my
altar and die. You will die for me, Beth?"
A frightened gleam of understanding showed in her eyes.
"Yes. Upon your altar."
"Good. You will tell no one and you will obey implicitly
when I tell you it is time to go there."
"Yes."
"And if I choose to bestow your death upon another as a
gift, you will go to him willingly?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
156
Beth swallowed, tears gathering in her eyes. "Yes."
"Now undress for me, Beth, and lie down."
* * * *
Merissa sat in the spinning room with the carding combs in
her hands, slowly working the fine wool back and forth until it
was straight and clean. A half filled basket of the carded wool
rested on the floor between her knees. Two baskets of the
uncarded wool sat beside her. The clan had several herds of
sheep and goats, including one whose hair was so fine that a
shawl from it could be drawn through a ring and yet was
wondrously warm. The latter was from the goats and called
kazamerie. When she finished, one of her aunts would spin
and then her mother and two eldest aunts would weave on
the three great looms by the hearth in the main hall. Only the
family was allowed to work with the wool at this stage, not
the clumsy servants who had less to gain from it.
Malthus made her feel uneasy. Combining that with this
room, made her feel queasy. All of her troubles had started in
this room. The motions of her hands became a meditation
and she slid without helping it into her remembrances. Yes,
all of her troubles had started here.
Merissa wore a voluminous skirted cream dress with a
tight, stiff bodice that cupped her breasts and molded itself to
them. A cream hair net held her hair in place. Everything was
cream, the color of this wool so that the loose fibers would
not show when they floated across as some always did. One
of the reasons she liked carding was that the lanolin in the
wool made her hands so soft.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
157
She worked steadily, drifting off into daydreams. While the
clan called her a princess, she was really just a clan
chieftain's daughter. At least that was how she thought of it.
Real princesses, like those at the court of King Baaltrystan,
did not card wool and weave. She was not certain exactly
what they did, beyond the descriptions of balls and intrigue in
some old books, but Merissa was certain it was far more
pleasant and interesting than this.
Taking another handful of the raw wool, Merissa began to
card again with a deep sigh. All of her suitors were clan and
she fancied none of them. The very last thing she wished was
to remain stuck in this valley or another clan valley with each
year much like the one before it. Troyes intrigued her. No
sa'necari who had come through this valley over the years
had ever paid her so much attention, but perhaps that had
been nothing more than the fact that before she had been a
child. Now she was seventeen, a woman.
The door opened as if her thoughts had called him and
Troyes came in. He moved aside some of the baskets and
drew a chair over beside her, settling into it. Merissa's heart
quickened. They had been flirting for days, but this was the
first time she found herself alone with him.
Troyes gave her a languid smile, his eyes soft and sensual.
He ran his finger along her arm and took the combs away
from her, setting them atop one of the baskets. Merissa
shivered at his touch. He stirred her longings in ways that the
lycan males did not. Troyes regarded her a moment, then
leaned in and brushed his lips across hers. She caught her
breath sharply at the electric tingle it sent racing through her

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
158
body. Her loins grew wet and aching. Troyes kissed her again
and this time he parted her lips with his tongue, sliding it
inside. Merissa responded tentatively, twining her tongue with
his, wanting him to touch more of her. Her hands crept up his
arms and linked behind his neck.
The chair arms separated them, but Troyes leaned as far
over as he could and fondled her breasts as he continued to
kiss her. Merissa moaned softly. He moved to the floor and
drew her after him. She went unresisting and lay there on her
back as Troyes pressed his body on top of hers, moving
against her. He pushed her long skirt up, reaching for her
small clothes to move them aside, while he jerked the strings
on his pants loose with his other hand. She caught his hands
and stopped him, realizing that he intended to enter her.
"They'll catch us. Mother comes up for wool or sometimes
to check on me."
Troyes rolled off her, went to the door, and drew a sign
upon it. A black sigil formed, sank into the wood, and
vanished to be sensed rather than seen. Then he returned to
her.
Merissa's heart hammered with sudden fear. "Troyes,
please. I don't wish to go any farther."
Troyes' eyes narrowed and his smile became poisonous.
"You've been teasing me for days, weeks. Parading your
charms and practically begging me to touch them. I am not
one of your farmer boys. I am a grown man, and a sa'necari.
I will not tolerate having you get me worked up, and then
withholding what you have promised with your eyes and
manner."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
159
"I—I'll scream."
Troyes shrugged. "If anyone answers, I'll kill them."
Merissa shivered harder as he knelt between her legs and
removed her underwear. His fingers probed her with his
thumb on the knob of her clit. She whimpered in a tangled
web of fright and desire.
"A virgin. You surprise me, princess of farmers. I
understand both your need and your reluctance." He drew his
hand back and licked her juices off his fingers. "Anyone
coming to this door will suddenly find something else to do,"
Troyes told her. "Do not fear discovery."
Merissa swallowed. She had not meant to go this far, but
now there seemed to be no way out of it. She had never gone
beyond petting with her lycan suitors. Yet, the fear was part
of the attraction. Merissa had been craving the feel of a male,
a powerful male, inside her for two years now. If she did not
yield to Troyes, she had no doubt that he would force her and
hurt her. The sa'necari was completely different from the
lycan youths who had tolerated her retreat before it went too
far. He was older, stronger than anyone she had ever flirted
with—stronger than any male she had ever known.
If she screamed, it would bring her father and Isranon;
and Troyes would kill them. With all the flirting, it would be
assumed she had encouraged him, possibly come to him
willingly, and then cried rape to conceal her sins. Either way
she was disgraced. She wanted to weep and make excuses,
but she knew it was already too late.
Supported by one hand, Troyes' bulk hovered above her,
while he continued to unlace his pants.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
160
"Please, Troyes, this isn't right. Let me go," Merissa said
with more insistence, shoving at him.
Troyes lifted his manhood out. "Don't make me hurt you,
Merissa. You want this. You know you do."
Merissa's breath caught in her chest at the size of his
member, long, hard and thick—more so than she had
expected a male to look. Her pulse raced with fear and an
oddly delicious anticipation as fear seemed to increase her
need and make it sweeter. His knob bumped against her clit
and the entrance to her womanhood, causing it to tingle. Her
loins grew more moist and she squirmed, wanting to be
touched and terrified of the consequences.
"Don't move," Troyes admonished. He settled his heavy
bulk atop her and pressed her down, pinning her.
Merissa swallowed back a scream, his acrid musk betrayed
the countless deaths he had caused in the rites, the lives and
souls he had eaten to increase his powers to a monstrous
level; She felt trapped beneath the pressure of his body.
"Ancestors, have mercy," she whimpered.
He entered her without another word. Merissa cried out
softly as her maidenhead tore. Blood coated Troyes' cock and
stained Merissa's white dress, pooling beneath her hips. Tears
ran down her cheeks and he kissed them away.
"Put your legs around me," Troyes ordered and Merissa
obeyed. "I will teach you the arts of the slut."
Merissa's crying worsened and he ignored it. Any man she
lay with after this, any husband she might be given to, would
wonder who had been first. A husband might even repudiate
her on learning she was not virgin. Had she been a

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
161
commoner, it might not have mattered, but there were
different standards for the Chieftain's daughter.
It seemed as if he sawed at her forever, lasting long after
her tissues had begun to dry, and she was becoming sore.
Merissa wondered if it was always like this, but there would
be no one to ask without revealing what had been done to
her. Finally, he seeded her and rolled off, to lie there gazing
at her. Her underdress was wet with his fluids.
Troyes stroked her hair. "You are very beautiful, princess
of farmers. You belong at the King's court, not doing a
servant's work ... come to my bed tonight and let me show
you how it could be."
Merissa sucked in a deep breath, her head reeling with
confusion. "I—I don't..."
Troyes kissed her again with exquisite thoroughness,
opened her bodice and took out one of her breasts. His
tongue ran around the nipple teasing it to hardness. Merissa
moaned low like an animal. His fangs came down and entered
the blue vein above the nipple. She gasped sharply and then
felt herself swept up as his power took the pain of his feeding
from her. Troyes was very skillful. Her perceptions tilted and
shifted. She grew dizzy and confused. When, at last, he lifted
his bloody mouth from her breast he asked again. "Come to
my bed tonight?"
"Yes."
Merissa felt bile rising in her throat. She dropped the
combs into a basket and folded over her arms. "Was it rape?
Or a forced seduction? Did I really want him? Ancestors, what

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
162
else could I have done? What in hell's name could I have
done?"
She closed her eyes, breathing hard. "I should have fought
him off ... or tried to."
An image of Malthus entered her mind and she wondered
why he made her think of Troyes.
The door creaked open, startling Merissa.
"Mommy?" Darmyk came in with Kenly trailing him, and
climbed onto her lap. "Are you sad?" He touched the wet
streaks on her cheeks.
"No, honey." Merissa set his little hands aside. "I got some
wool in my eyes. That's all."
Looking at Darmyk's chubby face, Merissa imagined what
his fangs would look like when the appetite for blood came
upon him at puberty.
Isranon, I need you. He needs you.
* * * *
In the stillness of the night, Malthus dreamed of the taste
of death. He was back in the manor that a battle-clan had
forced him to abandon years ago, standing between two
bleeding tables, comparing the speed with which a lycan in
hybrid form died versus how swiftly one in human form
succumbed to identical wounds. The hybrid form took longer
to kill.
It had been there that he had rited his father when the
mon refused to provide him with an inheritance equal to that
of his two legitimate brothers. All the tremendous power he
gained from his father that night had left him drunk for days

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
163
afterward. The image changed. His father lay spellcorded,
screaming his lungs out, while Malthus shoved the ritual
blades into his body. Gods, how he had hated that mon for
way he and his mother had been treated.
The subtle tell-tales he had set on his doors and windows
to alert him if someone entered while he slept sounded
through his sleeping mind, summoning him from his slumber.
He flashed into consciousness, his hand going to the naked
sword beside his bed. Malthus slithered from between the
covers, his feet making no noise as he crossed the floor and
slipped to the door without bothering to cover his nudity.
Easing the door open, he stared into the living area where
the two girls slept on their reed beds along the walls. His eyes
shone red in the darkness. He could see almost as clearly as
if it were daylight. Ros gave a soft moan in her sleep and that
was when Malthus saw the bat laying on her chest with its
fangs in her neck.
"What the fucking hell are you doing?" Malthus demanded.
The bat hopped away from Ros after closing the wound,
and changed into a short, ill-favored looking mon with four
rows of heavy frown lines etched into his forehead. His brow
ridge jutted over his small, deep set eyes, and a thick nose,
humped and hooked above his thin sneering lips.
"Having a small drink," the vampire replied, gazing
hungrily at the two little girls. "I assume they are your wine-
presses."
"Don't make assumptions in my home," Malthus snarled.
"They're my nieces. Don't touch them."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
164
The Lemyari messenger shrugged. "That one," he pointed
to Ros, "her blood is intoxicating. She's going to be beautiful
when she's grown."
"Stay away from my nieces, Sergei."
Sergei shrugged again. "Maybe I'll pay her another visit
when she's old enough to bed."
"Stop it." Malthus' hold on his sword tightened. Lemyari
shifters were always mages. Lemyari had a taste for mages,
especially for recruiting them into the ranks of the undead. By
all accounts, Sergei Wraithsbane had been a powerful
battlemage before Brandrahoon turned him. Malthus did not
want to test that—yet. He had only met Sergei a handful of
times, and knew him mainly by reputation—a reputation that
said his tastes ran mainly to girl children younger than twelve
years old.
"Why are you here?"
"Egidius has arrived, and he's brought your army. You
have anything to drink?"
"From a bottle. My wine-presses aren't accessible at this
hour."
"That will have to do." The Lemyari grinned. He followed
Malthus into his bedroom.
Malthus opened a chest and took out two golden
preserving bottles, passing them to the messenger. "For your
troubles. Now get out."
Sergei changed into a bat and left with his payment.
Malthus knelt beside Ros' bed and roused her. She moaned
low, her hand going to her neck. "I hurt."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
165
"I know, darling." Malthus Read her and cursed silently at
how much Sergei had taken from her. She would be ill
tomorrow unless he acted fast. His blood was far stronger
than anything he had bottled. He pressed her face into the
curve of his shoulder. "Feed, Ros.
"Uncle Malthus?" Ros asked in a dazed and sleepy voice.
"Feed on me, Ros. Heal yourself. A vampire got you, but I
chased him away."
Ros snuggled in his arms, and Malthus held her tight
against his chest as her small fangs entered his bicep. He
allowed her to feed until he felt certain that she had
recovered, and then he sent her back to sleep with an
admonition not to mention the vampire.
He fetched a bottle of blood and had a long drink before
going outside to think. Malthus sat down on a patch of grass,
staring up at the brilliant stars. "No one touches my nieces,
Sergei. No one."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
166
CHAPTER ELEVEN
WAYWARD DECISIONS
Kynyr straightened his brown and claret tunic before
knocking on the door to Claw's study.
Sunlight flooded the east side of the deep box of a room,
creating an aureole around the chair at the desk where Claw
sat. The heavy claret drapes had been tied back and the thin,
bleached linen under curtains did little to diffuse the light
from the windows. A carved wolf's head topped Claw's tall
chair, lending it a throne-like quality. Kynyr always thought
that Claw looked most like a king—which he technically was—
sitting in that chair.
"You sent for me?"
Claw gestured at one of the three chairs in front of his
desk. "Sit down, Kynyr. I've decided upon some changes."
Kynyr settled into the closest chair and sat straight.
"Concerning me?"
"Among others. I want a unit of eight moved into the main
living area ... and one officer."
"How do I fit into that?"
"I'm promoting you."
Kynyr sucked in a startled breath. "Belgair..."
Claw gave Kynyr a stern, searching look. "Are you afraid of
Belgair?"
"No, sir." Kynyr retreated into formality. "I'm not afraid of
anyone."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
167
Claw cleared his throat.
"Except yourself, of course."
The chieftain chuckled at Kynyr's correction, took a bottle
of whiskey and a pair of glasses from a drawer in his desk,
and gestured at Kynyr with the bottle. Kynyr answered with a
nod and Claw poured for both of them.
Kynyr began to relax, sipping the whiskey. "What is it
exactly that you wanted?"
"I want nine wolves keeping watch on my womenfolk. Bad
times are coming."
"Agreed. So, Fianait, Searlait, and Aisha..."
"And Merissa. I don't trust that mon she's been seeing in
the gardens."
"Malthus?"
"Aye. That one. I fill the place up with good looking young
wolves ... and who does she chase? A scruffy, grimy human."
"Claw, he's neat, tidy, and clean..."
"You know what I meant." Claw snarled and hair sprouted
along his arms.
"Claw, if you're expecting me to compete with this Malthus
person for Merissa, I can't do it."
"Why not?" Claw's expression turned ugly, and an edge of
bitterness crept into his voice. "I thought it didn't bother you
that she'd played the slut for two sa'necari."
Kynyr shifted uneasily in his seat. Every time Claw used a
nasty turn of phrase in describing Merissa, he found himself
questioning whether Claw's savage disapprobation reflected
the chieftain's personal opinion, or if Claw was using it to test
Kynyr's feelings. After over three years, the vicious gossip

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
168
concerning Merissa's liaison with Isranon had slowed in only
the slightest degree. "Your daughter was never a slut, Claw.
She loved him."
"Don't defend her. Fifty years ago, they would have stoned
her to death for it. Regardless of whose daughter she was."
Kynyr lowered his head, unable to answer that. "I'm fond
of Merissa."
"You'd make a fine chieftain when I'm gone."
"I don't wish to be chieftain." Kynyr shifted uneasily.
"Why not? Damnit, Kynyr, just what is the problem?
You've been waltzing around it for two years."
"My family would never approve."
"My daughter's reputation..."
"Isn't the problem. It's a private family matter. I'm not at
liberty to discuss it."
"Who is?"
Kynyr exhaled heavily and clasped his hands together.
"You'd have to ask my grandmother."
"And she is?"
"Cahira Sinclair."
"Sounds familiar. I knew a Cahira once. Now that I think
on it." Claw scratched his stubbly chin. "She was a Maguire."
"There are dozens of Cahira's in my family. I doubt they're
the same."
"Wispy little blonde thing with the temper of a stung
badger?"
Kynyr lowered his head with a chuckle. "Yes, sir. That's my
Gram in a nutshell. But that description could match six or
seven of them."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
169
Claw scowled and refilled their glasses. "If she's a Sinclair,
how're you a Maguire?"
For once Claw refused to let Kynyr side-step the question.
Four years ago, Cahira had schooled him in his responses
when he told her he intended to join Claw's guardsmyn.
Confronted with the question, Kynyr could not remember all
of the permutations of Cahira's replies. He floundered. "I
believe I told you about my father?"
"You've told me almost nothing about your family."
"Finn and I have told you numerous things about the
Dreaded Horde..."
"Your sisters. What about your father?"
Kynyr felt increasingly trapped by the directness of Claw's
questioning and tried to remember what he might have told
the chieftain in the past. The more elaborate the lie, the
harder it was to sustain it. "My father ... Branduff Maguire ...
was a bastard."
"Was?"
"Is. He's alive and well."
"Who sired him?"
There it was. Staring him in the face and if he answered
wrong Cahira would never forgive him. Kynyr sucked in a
breath and lied. "Todd Sinclair."
"Wrong answer. You don't look like a Sinclair."
Kynyr ran his hands through his hair. "I don't ... Cahira
doesn't..." He paused, swallowing. "She's a healer. She
followed the soldiers."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
170
Claw's expression hardened. "My sons were not identical.
Tarrant was blonde. Logan's hair was auburn. Was one of the
soldiers she slept with my son?"
"No, sir. She never met him. You can have me Read if you
wish. I'm not a Redhand. You aren't the first ... and you
probably won't be the last ... to see a resemblance between
myself and your son. But I've been Read by experts, and I
assure you, Claw. I'm not related to you. That's not Cahira's
issue with your family."
"Then what is?"
"I don't know. I'm sorry, but I don't know."
"Pick your unit." Claw looked suddenly tired and worn as
he finished his whiskey. "Kissie will show you to your rooms
this evening."
"Thank you. Am I dismissed?"
"Yeah. Get out of here."
* * * *
Kynyr felt that his world had diminished and faded around
him. He knew the feeling would pass, yet he could not wrest
his thoughts away from it. People always assumed that
female healers who traveled with the camps were sluts. Some
of them were and some of them were not. Kynyr had not
wanted to smear his grandmother's reputation that way, even
though he knew that she had done so herself when she fled
Wolffgard to protect the child she carried, Kynyr's father,
Branduff. He loved Cahira, and hated having to say anything
that might hurt her reputation in the eyes of others.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
171
However, she had forbidden him, and the rest of his
family, from telling anyone the name of his grandfather
except under direst circumstances. So he had had to do one
hurtful thing to avoid doing another even worse.
Anger rose in Kynyr, displacing his initial distress, and he
realized that if he lingered in the manor that day he would
soon be snapping at whatever unwitting targets presented
themselves. So instead, he saddled his horse and rode into
the village, looking for a place to spend his coins of anger in a
more socially acceptable manner.
When he finally freed himself from his brooding, Kynyr
discovered that he had ridden all the way to the Sanctuary
Refugee Camp without thinking. The sounds of laughter and
shouts of encouragement drew him deep into the camp.
The center was empty. No one was working. The sounds
grew louder and he turned toward them, wondering what had
attracted the entire camp from their daily labors. Kynyr rode
north, past the corrals and barns, and that was when he saw
them. The females and their children had formed a large half-
circle on a cleared space the depth and breadth of the Great
Hall of the manor. A few trees dotted the cleared area, but all
the rocks, boulders, and brush had been removed from the
center, leaving a half-moon of trees, vines, and bushes on the
far side. The opened a path for him as he nudged his battle-
trained destrier through. The males, all lycan except for
Malthus, had formed the inner circle sitting on tree rounds
and an oak log. A long trestle table stood off to the side near
the remaining woods, covered in various kinds of practice

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
172
weapons made of weighted wood and ranging in kind from
knives and swords to axes and quarterstaves.
Kynyr dismounted and dropped his reins. Bucky had been
trained not to wander when the reins trailed the ground.
"Hey! It's the pretty boy." Torquil wiped his sweating brow
on a towel and dropped it in the hands of a female who then
sniffed the towel and smiled at Torquil appreciatively.
Kynyr nodded. Torquil took that as an invitation to
approach him, although it had actually just been
acknowledging that there were bitches among the women. A
lot of lycan customs were built around the act of sniffing.
"Come to try your hand, guardsmon?"
Malthus straightened to see past those gathered and a sly
smile crossed his lips. "Go a round with me? I'll show you how
a kandoyarin fights."
Kynyr considered for an instant before answering,
remembering the words of Todd Sinclair that hot anger gets
you killed and cold anger gets them killed. "Why not?"
He unbuckled his sword belt and secured his blades to his
saddle. Then he walked over to the table and tested the
practice weapons they had sitting there.
Kynyr glanced at the others as he found a longsword that
felt right in his hands. None of the wolves wore padding. Most
were stripped to the waist and many sported bruises. Out of
deference to Malthus, they appeared to have been taking him
and each other on in human form, rather than resorting to
the unfair advantage of assuming their hybrid forms. To be
fair, Kynyr set the practice blades aside and removed his
leather armor, tunic, and shirt. An azure crystal, banded in

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
173
gold and silver with tiny runes inscribed upon the band, hung
from a golden chain around his neck.
An appreciative rumble came from the assembled females
at Kynyr's tight abs, broad chest, and heavy muscles. A light
thatch of golden hair covered the backs of his arms, spread
across his belly and peaked on his lower chest just between
his breasts.
Malthus strode up to him, his dark skin as smooth and
hairless as a woman's, his silken black hair hanging in a braid
down his back, and—Kynyr noted with surprise—not a mark,
scar, or blemish on him. Holding his knife at guard, Malthus'
sword weaved a sinuous pattern as he approached Kynyr.
"Well, Kynyr Maguire, shall we see what you can do?"
* * * *
Finn sat in the Great Hall, watching Merissa's mother and
aunts at their looms. His habit of saying yes to Kynyr had left
Finn stuck with the work when his friend took off a couple of
hours ago. Kynyr always led and Finn always followed—often
into adventures that brought the Dreaded Horde down on
them for what had seemed, at the time, to be the harmless
bending of such rules as no fishing on Willodays or stay out of
the beer, you're not old enough to drink. They had been
nearly inseparable—except for those times when Kynyr
wanted to be alone. That was usually when something was
bothering Kynyr and, as youngsters, Finn had once managed
to track Kynyr down to his secret brooding spot on a
sheltered ledge above the Bonnie Draw River. Finn had never
told Kynyr or the Dreaded Horde that he had found Kynyr's

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
174
bolt hole. He remembered the pensive look in Kynyr's eyes as
his friend would head for the river to think. Which led to
Finn's realizing just what he had seen in Kynyr's expression
when Maguire left a little bit ago: trouble.
"Excuse me, Master Finn..." Kissie came in, drying her
hands on her apron, an apprehensive expression on her face.
A scruffy cub, with hair an indeterminate shade of reddish
blonde, followed her. The boy threw himself at Finn, grabbing
his arm and trying to pull the guardsmon from his chair.
"Kynyr's in trouble."
Aisha glanced at Finn and then the boy. "What kind of
trouble, Rory?"
Finn blinked; it had taken a second to recognize Rory Scott
under all the mud and grime the cub had managed to smear
across his face.
"They're gonna kill him."
Aisha sucked in a sharp breath. "Go on, Finn. Get the
others and go."
Finn nodded. "Rory, I'll meet you out front."
Finn ran upstairs and shouted for his friends in the new
unit. Ramsey and Eideard appeared first, followed by Morcar
and the other four.
They found Rory out in the yard, sitting on Bucky. Finn
shook his head. There were times when that horse did not
seem natural. Up until then Finn would have said the only
ones who could ride Bucky were Kynyr and Todd.
As they saddled their horses, Finn quizzed Rory Scott
about what had happened.
"They're gonna kill Kynyr iffen he beats Malthus."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
175
"Who?"
"Dunno. I was trying to sneak in close to watch it. I heard
'em an' it scared me. I backed away an' tried to run ... fell on
my face." Rory rubbed at the mud on his cheeks and splashed
across his nose. "Then this here horse..."
"Bucky."
"Yeah, Bucky ... he made me get on his back."
Ramsey frowned and came up behind them leading his bay
mare.
"Yeah." Rory pulled at the back of his shirt, blushing
beneath the mask of mud. "Had me by the collar."
"How'd this start?"
"Them camp wolves was practicin' an' I like to watch.
Kynyr comes up an' Malthus asks him to give it a try against
him."
"I got it."
They mounted and set off at a gallop.
* * * *
Kynyr and Malthus had been going at it for close to half an
hour with neither gaining an advantage. Duels, even with
practice swords, rarely lasted this long, except among
masters.
They were both breathing hard and drenched with sweat.
"Shall we call it a draw?"
Malthus snarled and lunged at Kynyr with an upsweep
strike at the lycan's head. "No."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
176
Kynyr leaped to the side, his sword snapping into an
upright block. He sprang forward with a feint to Malthus'
stomach and kicked him in the side of the knee hard.
Malthus' leg gave. He swung about on Kynyr as he
dropped to one knee. Kynyr circled left. Malthus managed a
furious attack, the blades clanging together, as he tried to
stop Kynyr from getting behind him before he could get to his
feet again. Kynyr engaged Malthus' blade and trapped the
edge on his crossguard, forcing Malthus' arms up. A swift kick
below Malthus' sternum sent the kandoyarin sprawling. Kynyr
brought his blade to rest against Malthus' chest over his
heart.
Kynyr snarled at Malthus, his lips drawn back from his
teeth. "If this were real, you'd be dead."
Rocks showered Kynyr. He flinched and stepped back. All
of the females and children were throwing rocks. The males
stood laughing and pointing at him.
Malthus rolled away from him with a chuckle. "If rocks
were blades ... you'd be too."
Kynyr spun about shouting. "Stop it."
He threw down the wooden practice blade and sheltered
his face. A rock caught him on the cheek, leaving a long cut.
Rocks came from all sides, striking him in the head, chest,
back, and stomach. He staggered in the direction that he had
left Bucky and saw that his horse was gone. "Hell's goat-
sucking ... Stop!"
Malthus walked across the clearing as if nothing were
happening.
"Malthus! Tell them to stop."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
177
Searing pain in his back and chest sent Kynyr to his knees.
A warm rush of blood poured down his chest and back. The
point of a blade jutted from his chest. Only a lycan in hybrid
form would have thrown it that hard. From the burn, it was
clear that the blade contained silver.
Another shower of rocks struck Kynyr. Bones broke with a
loud crack. Kynyr crumpled, curling on his side. His fingers
crawled up his chest to the crystal and he grasped it tightly.
"Cahira! Cahira, help me!"
Kynyr dragged himself toward the bushes.
"Stick him again, Thorn!"
"I don't need to..." A soft voice drawled with a northern
lycan accent. "It's in his lungs.
"I want to watch him die. Please..."
"Alright."
Kynyr felt the weight of someone on his back force him to
the ground and stopped his struggles to reach the
questionable safety of the bushes. The hail of rocks stopped.
A strong hand grabbed the back of his hair and ground his
face into the grass.
The point of a silver blade pricked a long line from his
shoulder to his waist.
"Where would you like to put it in? Kidney, heart, spleen?
Base of his skull?"
"Kidneys." A soft hand poked Kynyr in the lower side.
"Get your hand out of the way. Or would you like to do it
yourself?"
"Sure."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
178
Kynyr shuddered as the blade pricked his side. It would be
inside him in another moment and everything would all be
over. A long groan escaped him, followed by an ululating howl
the lycans called a death scream.
Shouts and the jingle of armor came from the far side of
the clearing.
Suddenly the weight left his back.
"Finn." Kynyr gasped out the name as darkness swept
through him and he stilled in the grass.
"Disperse! Disperse!" Finn and his companions rode into
the crowd, using their horses and the flat of their blades to
drive the assembled myn in all directions. Bucky trotted
across the clearing and nudged Kynyr, getting no response.
Malthus gestured at the crowd and they ran for the
houses.
Finn glanced about for Rory, but the boy appeared to have
simply vanished. He dismounted and knelt beside Kynyr. His
companions closed ranks around them.
Bruises and bleeding lacerations covered Kynyr from his
forehead to his waist. Several places on the back and sides of
his head were slick with blood—his blond hair was soppy with
it. Finn's eyes trailed down to the hilt of the blade in Kynyr's
back and his stomach clenched. From the color of the metal,
there had to be silver in it. Silver only hurt if a lycan got it in
a wound or touched it to an open sore; and there was often
hell to pay over it.
"Damnit, Kynyr! Damnit!"
Finn lifted Kynyr onto his lap, cradling him. He looked up
as Ramsey's fingers touched Kynyr's neck.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
179
"This looks bad, Finn. Get mounted and I'll hand him up to
you." Ramsey shifted to his hybrid form and took Kynyr from
him.
"He's alive?"
Ramsey nodded, turned, and shouted at their companions.
"Morcar, find Baroucha and have her meet us at the manor."
Finn straightened, swung onto his horse, and extended his
arms. Ramsey got Kynyr into Finn's arms, and the two of
them managed to get the unconscious guardsmon settled in
front of Finn. By then, Finn had begun to recover from the
shock of finding Kynyr. "I don't know what happened here,
but this is no time to try and find out. Stick close and we'll get
him home."
All of the residents and workers at the camp had drifted
away and the guardsmyn found themselves alone. They rode
back through the village, drawing every eye as they passed.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
180
CHAPTER TWELVE
CAHIRA
The shutters on the airy windows of the kitchen stood open
and the windows had been raised to let in the afternoon
breezes to ease the early summer heat. It was already one of
the hottest summers that Cahira Sinclair could remember.
She sat at her kitchen table, peeling turnips to add to the
stew she was making for dinner. Cahira had changed little
over the years, beyond gaining laugh lines around her eyes
and mouth; and remained much as Claw remembered her: a
tiny blonde, barely five feet tall; cornsilk hair hanging in a
braid past her hips; and a temper like a stung badger.
A chill spread over her as if someone had dropped ice
down her bodice. She laid the knife aside, returned the last
turnip to the bowl, and reached with trembling hands for the
golden chain around her neck. Cahira drew the chain out and
stared at the azure stone, identical to the one that Kynyr
wore. Ice coated the stone.
"Kynyr!" She screamed his name again and again and
again, watching the very tip of the stone start to turn black. If
the stone went entirely black, it would mean that Kynyr was
dead.
"Cahira?" Todd Sinclair came in, grasped her shoulders,
and gave her a small shake to bring her out of it. He was a
big wolf, six three and scarred by battles with things that left
marks even upon lycans. It had been Todd who returned

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
181
Cahira's letters to Tarrant, along with Tarrant's diaries, when
the sa'necari executed him. Cahira had borne him three
strong sons and a daughter when she finally found herself
able to fall in love again.
She turned eyes wide with dread upon him that flashed
into anger as Cahira pulled herself together. She held the
crystal up. "They've hurt him ... bad. I'm going to him."
Todd stared at the darkening tip and gave a slow nod. "I'm
coming with you. Give me a minute to fetch my blades."
"Mama, we're coming too." Trevor arrived from the garden
with his hoe propped against his shoulder at the same instant
that his wife Mary rushed in through the side door.
She had been out in the garden gathering herbs,
something Cahira's aging knees could no longer cope with.
Mary put her basket of herbs on the table. "I'll fetch your
satchels and your black case."
"If there's going to be a fight, don't leave me out." Queran
strode in from the sitting room. Trevor and Queran were as
large as Todd.
"Then arm yourselves. We won't know till we get there."
They rushed to their tasks and returned.
Cahira drew strength from Todd's steady patience that she
had finally succumbed to ten years after Tarrant's death. "I
warned him."
Todd wrapped his arms around her as if to shelter her from
the world. "What can we do?"
Cahira extended her hands. "Join hands."
Todd released her, gripped her hand, and extended his
other one. Trevor grasped his hand and reached for Mary.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
182
She tucked Cahira's black case under her arm and joined
hands with her husband and his brother. Queran grasped
Cahira's other hand and the circle was completed.
A tingle swept through them and golden light over them.
Their forms shimmered for an instant and Cahira made the
jump to Wolffgard with them.
They materialized in the courtyard, bringing a startled
shout from a pair of patrolling guardsmyn.
The front door opened and Ramsey stepped out. "What's
going on?"
Todd scowled in disdain. "Back off. We're here for my
boy."
"Your boy?"
"Kynyr Maguire."
"Oh." Ramsey blinked. "We were about to send word..."
"Don't need it." Todd headed for the door with his family in
tow. "Claw can tell it."
Ramsey gave a puzzled nod and led them inside. The
servants stared as they walked past.
* * * *
When Finn had found himself stuck with setting everything
up while Kynyr rushed off into the village for his confrontation
with Malthus, one of the first things that Finn had had to do
was assign rooms for the new unit. Five suites on the second
floor had to be divvied up between nine myn. He had had
Kynyr's belongings moved to the largest of them, since that
seemed fitting for a commander.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
183
Baroucha, the village healer, an ill-tempered crone with an
unsavory reputation for vicious gossip and not being able to
hold onto apprentices and assistants for long, arrived at the
manor and chased everyone out of Kynyr's bedroom: except
for Finn. Having grown up in a household dominated by
strong-minded bitches, he had long ago learned to dig in his
heels with them. His only concession was to sit in a chair in
the far corner of the room and stay out of her way. It did not
give him a clear view of her efforts, and he intermittently
attempted to lean forward enough to see around her.
Finn winced as Baroucha drew the blade out of Kynyr's
back. Where Cahira would have pulled the blade out with
care, Baroucha simply gave it a yank. She looked more like a
broad, over-large toad than a wolf, and her breadth partially
blocked Finn's view of her actions. Finn blinked. While he
could not be certain of what he had seen, he could have
sworn she had twisted the knife before she pulled it. Finn
rubbed his eyes, deciding that he had seen it wrong; for such
an act would have been crazy when he thought about it.
Baroucha packed the wound to staunch the bleeding, cleaned
Kynyr up and bandage the rest of his injuries.
Baroucha wiped the blade off and examined it. "Runed-
silver. His lung is badly torn." She wrapped the knife in a bit
of black cloth and laid it on the nightstand. "Nothing can be
done for him."
"Nothing at all?"
"I've stopped the bleeding. For all the good it'll do. Which
is none."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
184
Finn felt as if he had been simultaneously hit in the head
with a hammer and stabbed in the gut. He could not imagine
life without Kynyr.
Baroucha took a glass and a bottle of brown liquid—so
dark it verged on black—from her satchel. She set them on
the nightstand and poured a generous measure into the glass.
Finn frowned at the bottle. After years around Cahira
Sinclair, Kynyr's mother Ulicia Maguire, and his sisters, Finn
liked to think that he could recognize most drugs and potions
that healers employed. However, he had never seen anything
like that before. Finn started to ask what it was and then held
back, knowing that they all tended to have their little secret
recipes, and Baroucha would probably bite his head off for
asking.
Baroucha roused Kynyr, supported his head, and put the
glass to his lips. "Drink this and there will be no more pain."
Kynyr had taken only a few swallows when the door
slammed open. Golden light struck the glass and the contents
vaporized. Baroucha yelped, dropped the glass, and spun
around.
A tiny, blonde bitch stood in the doorway snarling. "Get
away from my grandcub, Baroucha, or I'll rip your throat
out!"
"Cahira!"
Baroucha edged away from the bed, glanced back, and
saw that she had left the bottle and her satchel behind her.
She turned to get them.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
185
"Grab her things, Finn." Cahira stalked toward Baroucha,
shaking with rage; and although Baroucha had six inches and
forty pounds on Cahira, the larger bitch retreated.
Finn lunged across the room, grabbed the bottle and the
satchel.
"If that's what I think it is, I'm going to dice you up for
stew meat."
Cahira extended her hand and Finn placed the bottle in it.
She unstoppered it, sniffed and the flush deepened to crimson
across her face. Her eyes hardened. "The Gentle Path. What
... in the name of all that's holy ... did you bloody well think
you were doing?"
"A mercy. The blade's runed silver."
"You? A mercy? Not bloody likely."
Baroucha's expression when suddenly sly. "I Read him.
He's Tarrant's."
"Grandson. Tell anyone and you'll wish you were dead."
Seeing Cahira like this, Finn wished he could crawl under
the bed and hide.
"Get out of here, Baroucha. Once I've tended him, I'm
coming to visit you."
Baroucha fled.
Finn set Baroucha's satchel down and stared at the bottle.
"What is that stuff?"
Cahira put her case on the nightstand and shrugged out of
the straps of her satchels. "Close the door and sit down."
Finn obeyed with alacrity.
"How much of that did she get into him?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
186
"Not much. I think. I mean, I really couldn't see around
her." Finn's Adam's apple bobbed nervously. Only Cahira had
that effect on him. "What is it?"
"Euthanasia drug." She picked up the knife and turned it in
her hands. "Idiot. The runes are etched but not charged. This
is dead silver, not living silver."
Cahira returned the blade to the nightstand, and turned to
find a chair so that she could comfortably Read Kynyr.
Finn leaped up, brought her one, and then retreated back
to his corner.
She removed the bandage on the blade wound, eased her
fingers into it, and sang softly. A golden light sprang up
around the wound. Cahira drew her fingers out a fraction at a
time, continuing to sing. When she finished, the light faded
and she wiped her fingers on a bit of cloth. "He'll live."
"You healed him?"
Cahira shook her head and Finn could see how tired she
looked. "I mended him. He'll need rest ... a few weeks at
least."
Finn sucked in a breath. "What she said about Tarrant..."
"Don't tell anyone."
"But if he's a Redhand—"
Cahira rose and went to Finn, placing her fingers on his
lips. "Hush. Don't tell anyone."
"But why not?"
"It's a long story. I don't have the energy to tell it. But I
suppose you deserve to know, considering how you've stood
by him."
Finn nodded. "Is that a promise?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
187
Cahira smiled, weary and fond. "Yes, Finn. It's a promise."
* * * *
Todd and his sons pulled three of the four chairs in the
ante-chamber close to the bedroom door and settled into
them.
The bedroom door opened and Baroucha ran out. The door
closed behind her. She stopped short in the middle, turned
and stared at him. "Todd..."
He put his pipe down and got to his feet. "Baroucha."
She shrank away from him. "Don't touch me."
"Don't give me a reason."
Baroucha spun and fled into the hallway.
Trevor exchanged a glance with his brother. "Is she the
one that hurt Mom?"
Todd nodded, resumed his place, and relit his pipe.
"Ayup."
"What was she doing in there?" asked Queran.
Todd shrugged. "We'll know soon enough."
A grizzled old wolf stalked in and stared at them. "Todd
Sinclair! I heard you were dead."
Todd took his pipe from his mouth and gestured at Claw
with the stem. "Chieftain. People get funny notions." He took
another draw from his pipe. "Mostly from rumor and gossip."
Claw dragged the fourth chair close and sat down. "Kissie!"
The nibari appeared in the doorway. "Yes, Master Claw?"
"Whiskey and four glasses."
Kissie left and the four myn looked at each other for a
moment.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
188
Claw studied Trevor and Queran. "Your boys, Todd?"
The Battle-Clan armsmaster turned farmer gave a slow
nod, pointing to each in turn. "Trevor. Queran. I got two more
back home. Branduff's my oldest. Then Trevor, Queran, and
Jordy. Gotta daughter too. High tempered little bitch just like
her mother. Lilybeth. Cahira's given me five strong cubs."
"You married Cahira Maguire?"
"Yup."
"Kynyr..." Claw paused, got his pipe out, and started to
load it.
Todd reached in his pouch and produced a packet that he
tossed to Claw. "Try that. It's Tovantè Red Leaf."
Claw grinned and opened the packet, sniffing it. "Good
stuff. I haven't seen any in years."
"It's getting harder to come by. I brought plenty. You can
have that packet."
"Thanks." Claw filled his pipe and took several draws,
savoring the aromatic southern tobacco. "Kynyr..."
"My grandcub. Branduff's boy. Cahira's in with him now.
What happened to him?"
"Near as I can tell..." Claw spoke slowly between puffs of
his pipe. "There was a riot at the Refugee Camp. We don't
know what started it."
"And?"
"Someone shoved a blade in his back. Runed silver."
Trevor snarled and hair sprouted along his arms in a
cinnabar rush. "Cravens! Couldn't take him from the front..."
Todd gestured at his son and Trevor subsided.
"He looks like my son."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
189
Todd looked thoughtful. "Must rip the heart out of you ...
looking at him. But he isn't Tarrant's. He's my grandson."
"There's no chance?"
"None. After the ambush that captured Tarrant, the bloody
soul-eaters left me for dead. By the time I could travel again,
Cahira had vanished. Took me well nigh on ten years to find
her and my boy, Branduff. By then, the cub didn't want my
name."
"Oh. I'm sorry."
"Don't be. We get along fine now.
The door opened and Cahira emerged. "Todd, you need to
find us a place to stay for a few weeks and a wagon to move
Kynyr."
"You could stay here," said Claw.
Cahira noticed the chieftain for the first time and stiffened.
"We'll not stay under your roof, Claw."
Claw frowned and started to argue, only to swallow his
words unsaid. He had too many crotchety bitches in his life,
not to recognize the tone of Cahira's voice as brooking no
argument. "The lawgiver house isn't in use right now."
Todd leaned forward. "You don't have a lawgiver?"
"We have one. Nikko Softpaws. He lives with his mother."
"We'll take it. Now what about a wagon?"
* * * *
Once the guardsmyn had departed, Malthus rounded all of
the young males up who had been present at the attack upon
Kynyr. All fifteen of the lycan youths worked at the camp.
Some of them he influenced, and others he owned through

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
190
insinuations of power so subtle they did not realize he had
touched them, and a few he held in his pockets for money
and favors. Regardless of the methods, they all belonged to
him.
He surveyed his little kingdom harsh eyed and searching.
"Which of you put the blade in Kynyr?"
No one answered.
"I won't have you ruining things for the rest of us."
Preece Malloy leaned against a tree with his arms loosely
folded across his chest. Years of working in the sun had
weathered his fair skin to a nut brown. Preece's drawstring
pants slouched around his lanky hips and if they had been
any looser would have slid to his cock. A pair of long fighting
knives hung from a worn leather belt, the sheaths lashed to
his thighs for an easy draw, and his pants legs bunched
around them. While his sturdy bones could easily have carried
more weight, Preece did not lack for muscle and the long
curves of his biceps looked like hammered steel. A length of
leather held his long, mustard brown hair in a tail at his neck.
He regarded Malthus with dead, jaded eyes and an indolent
smile. "I always wanted to stick a guardsmon. So I did."
"Don't do it again, Preece."
All eyes turned to Preece, watching uneasily for his
reaction.
Preece shrugged. "Whatever."
Malthus gestured at the others. "All of you go. Except
Preece." He pointed toward his cottage. "Come with me."
Preece shrugged again and sauntered after Malthus.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
191
They did not speak until they reached the cottage and
settled onto tree rounds beside a rough hewn table. Malthus
paused and extended his necromantic senses in a low level
scan to be certain they were alone.
"Can that blade be identified?"
Preece's lips parted and he ran his tongue over them. His
mouth quirked into a lop-sided smile. "I filed all the markings
off."
"Where did you get it?"
A snort preceded Preece's answer. "It was sold to me as
runed silver. It isn't."
The discernment in the answer surprised Malthus. "How do
you know it isn't?"
"After I bought them, I tested them on him."
"You killed him?"
"That's what I said."
Malthus began to understand why the rest of the wolves
never crossed Preece, although they did so to each other
frequently. "Shalto is forming a little gang ... under my
tutelage."
"The Lycamornots. Sounds juvenile."
"It isn't."
"Shalto asked me. I said I'd think about it."
"Now I'm asking you."
"Will there be gold in it? I'm tired of breaking my back for
a few bits of copper."
"More than you can imagine."
"I can imagine a lot."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
192
Malthus reached in his pouch and brought out two gold
coins and three silvers. He tossed them to Preece who
snapped them out of the air with a quick economy of motion
that impressed Malthus.
"Count me in, Malthus."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
193
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
TROYES
A month had passed since Malthus first received
permission to hunt on Clan lands. He took Shalto and Oswyl
along on his first three hunts, gradually going farther and
farther afield, matching landmarks up to the maps he carried
of Red Wolf Valley in preparation for going alone. As soon as
Malthus felt certain that the wolves were no longer watching
him as closely, he packed his horse up, intending to go north
and see what lay there for himself. The first of his units would
meet him there.
He had bettered himself faster than the other refugees
because he had plenty of gold to spend and other things
came easily into his hands to trade and bribe the lycans with
for their assistance. And then there was Beth. She had begun
to talk her "lovers" out of gold on behalf of the sanctuary and
splitting it with him. She had also had to turn down several
offers of marriage from young males thrilled to have a female
under them that would be so cooperative in acting out their
nastiest fantasies.
That had worked out so well, that Malthus began
considering the possibility of turning the Refugee Camp into a
discreet brothel, one female at a time. Brothels were illegal
on Clan lands; although the city wolves delighted in them.
Conservative lycan logic held that sluts—whether male or

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
194
female—and brothels caused friction among the younger
wolves and provoked duels.
He periodically went into the town of Hell's Widow to meet
with his contacts there. So far, none of them had been
Sergei. His bow case hung from his side. It had a double
chamber for his arrows, the shafts with the blue and white
fletching were hunting arrows, and those with the black and
red were for killing myn, which he had poisoned in the night.
Nikko's reluctant permission to hunt on clan lands had
resulted in frequent visits from the suspicious lawgiver to
make certain that Malthus was sharing his catch with the
others at the sanctuary. Malthus sensed that the lawgiver
mistrusted him, but had no evidence to back up his feelings
beyond the fact that Nikko appeared to be watching his every
move. If Nikko became a problem, Malthus would give him a
taste of what he gave the priest. The lawgiver was too young,
inexperienced, and uncertain of himself to prove much of a
challenge.
Beth came up to him with a basket of food. "You'll get
hungry," she said.
"You didn't need to do this, Beth." Malthus knew that
everyone was saying she had fallen in love with him. Just as
many were saying that Malthus was chasing Merissa. If they
expected to see sparks fly between the two bitches, they
were sadly mistaken. Malthus had his psychic hooks into Beth
too deeply now for her to object to anything he did—even
sticking a knife into her plump body. She brought him all the
gossip, spied on those who distrusted him, and covered for
his absences.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
195
So far, except for Beth, no one knew he was also jacking
Kandaishee and the other four sa'necari. He resorted to them
rarely, and only when Beth's bed was already occupied. He
had no desire to bed the humans because he did not like the
way that human females smelled, among other reasons. So
far the only use he had put them to was in trying to kill
Kynyr. Although he found the failure of his plot disappointing,
Malthus experienced a small gratification at just having Kynyr
out of his hair for the nonce.
"I just wanted you to know I care," she said.
Malthus blinked, realizing he had let his thoughts drift. "I
know, Beth. You're sure it's not too much trouble for you to
watch the girls for a few days?"
"No trouble at all, Malthus. I enjoy having them."
"Good. Now I must be off."
Malthus rode along the path through the Sanctuary that
connected up with Cheshire Road, which ran north northwest
from Wolffgard, heading for the mountains where he had
been told there were caves. As he reached the entrance to
the camp, Malthus saw Nikko standing at the side of the path
talking to three large wolves who were driving marker pegs
into the dirt at the entrance. There had been talk of fencing
the Sanctuary in and putting a gate across the path there.
The small dog, Moss, danced around Nikko's feet, wagging
his bushy tail and watching Nikko for signs of having been
noticed. Nikko scooped Moss up and stroked his head.
"Hunting again, Malthus?"
"Lot of mouths to feed, Lawgiver."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
196
Nikko said something else, but Malthus pretended not to
hear as he nudged his horse into a canter. He followed
Cheshire Road until it petered out into country lanes, and
finally into a spider web of hunter's traces. At that point
Malthus left the road and kept deep in the forest, making his
own paths, traveling through shadowed places where he was
unlikely to be seen. Glimpses of the distant mountains, seen
through partings in the thick vegetation, served as landmarks
to keep his bearings.
After riding for two hours along a hunter's trace, Malthus
caught a flash of orange moving through the trees above him.
More and more of his watchers began to come out of hiding.
Imps scampered through the trees on every side of him,
through the brush and briars, and up in the trees leaping like
wizened orange-skinned monkeys. He had been promised the
service of dozens, under the leadership of the imp-warlord
Gahni. Malthus and Gahni had worked together many times
over the years. Yet it had taken substantial promises of food,
gold, and booty to persuade Gahni to bring his people from
the West Bank of the Hillora to Waejontor.
Lord Daemon had promised that to make Malthus his
agent here if he could infiltrate the lycans; and he had. In
return, Lord Daemon had kept his promise, and given Malthus
all that he asked for: substantial forces at his disposal, a wide
range of units, and enough dark creatures to encompass all
possibilities.
The trees gave way steadily, thinning into a rocky fell. As
Malthus' horse topped the first treeless rise, he saw the
northern border of Claw's lands, the Place of Boulders. Huge

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
197
rocks, which had fallen from the mountains rising above it,
broke up the landscape like the remains of a giant's scattered
toys. It looked like a good place for an ambush and Malthus
rode cautiously through them.
When he reached the far side, he saw a stone bleeding
table with a tool table sitting next to it almost beneath the
cliff. Remembering Nikko's admonitions about no rites on clan
lands, Malthus had not expected to find one just inside the
clan borders. He rode closer and could now see that a cave
with a shaggy overhang of moss and briars opened beyond
the tables.
He dismounted and dropped his reins, knowing that his
horse was well enough trained to not wander far unless
something spooked it, which was unlikely given that it had
learned at the hands of an irrfelghau. Lord Daemon had sent
this one to him, bringing his mounts to three at the
compound. The lycans assumed he had purchased it in Hell's
Widow. He fastened his pack horse to an oak sapling and
headed for the table.
Malthus approached the bleeding table obliquely,
extending his awareness in a low level scan of the area,
keeping it trained in a narrow focus that only the most
sensitive would detect if it brushed across them and make it
difficult for anyone to get a fix on his location if they did
detect it. He reached the table and ran his hands over it,
feeling the deaths lingering on the auric surface. No rites had
been performed here in—he estimated—close to four or five
years. Which would place the last rite around the time that
his brother vanished. He sensed human, lycan, and a single

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
198
sa'necari death there. That last one disturbed him. Could it
have been his brother?
He shook the thoughts loose and ducked into the cave. No
one had been here in several years. The air smelled stale.
There were two interlocked caves, and they were roomy,
around the size of a bedchamber. The first one had a dusty
cabinet, a table, and two chairs in it. He ran his fingers across
the table, trying to pick up any vibrations that might linger
and identify who or what had last lived here. All that he
accomplished was to leave tracks in the grey dust covering
the table's surface. Dust flew in his face when he opened the
cabinet's doors and he sneezed hard. Wiping his face on his
sleeve, he raised his eyes to the contents. He found blood in
the magical preserving bottles crowding several shelves. Why
would anyone abandon such a well-stocked larder?
One by one, Malthus turned all the labels to face him.
Several of them read "vengeance." That sent a rush of
adrenaline through him. He reached for one and hesitated,
uncertain that he wanted his answer in that way: sa'necari
bottled the blood of their own kind and always labeled it
"vengeance" in some form. Instead he opened a drawer and
found his answer there: two of Troyes' blades and the empty
hilt of a third. The blades only shattered when they were used
to kill their makers. Beside the blades lay the crest of their
family carved into an ivory round, painted, and attached to a
golden chain.
Malthus closed the drawers after pocketing the necklace.
Then he took down one of the bottles of sa'necari blood,
pulled the cork out, and smelled it. He recognized his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
199
brother's blood: Troyes was dead. A cold rage shivered
through the icy nerves of the sa'necari mercenary.
He lifted the bottle, as if in salute, "For remembrance!"
Then he drank from the bottle. "I will punish them, Troyes. I
will see that they suffer." He spoke between swallows,
carrying the bottle outside where he sat down and finished all
of it. "I will send Beth here soon and make an offering of her
to Bellocar in your name."
* * * *
Late in the evening, two riders showed up. They
dismounted and approached Malthus, throwing back their
hoods so that he could see their amaranthine eyes glowing in
the darkness.
"Malthus!" A tall mon hailed him, extending his arms for
Malthus to grasp them in greeting.
"Egidius." Malthus smiled, ignoring the mon's arms, to
drag him into a tight embrace. They parted, and Malthus
regarded the shorter mon, wondering where he had seen him
before. "It is good to see you. What have you brought me?"
"You remember my cousin Laetus?"
"Laetus! Of course, I do. It's been years, hasn't it?"
Malthus turned and clasped the shorter mon as well. "You
hadn't grown into your fangs yet."
Laetus grinned, baring his fangs. "You realize it's been
fifteen years since I was blooded?"
"You must be what? Twenty-five now?" Malthus slapped
him on the back.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
200
"Twenty-six." Laetus glanced around from the bleeding
table to the cave. "You wouldn't happen to have some vein-
juice? Or a lovely piece of flesh I could sink my pleasure
spears into? I'm absolutely famished."
"I have plenty bottled. So far nothing but imps have shown
up." Malthus led them into the cave and took several of the
bottles down. "For the sake of his memory, share this with
me?"
Egidius frowned. "Whose blood?"
"My brother's. Troyes. They killed him."
Laetus shared a glance with Egidius and waited for his
cousin to speak.
Egidius nodded. "Of course we will. In his memory. Troyes
was a fine sa'necari. A powerful mon. A good friend."
Malthus handed each of them a bottle and led them back
out. When they finished there would be no more of brother's
blood left. "What about the units I was promised?"
"They're camped north of here, just outside clan lands. Our
scouts have found evidence of another force moving in the
valley."
"Lycans? A battle-clan?"
"No. We don't know what they are yet, but we can tell you
what they aren't."
Malthus took a long drink of his brother's blood. "So what
aren't they?"
"They're not Sharani, not lycan, not human. One of our
Rakshasha scouts was found ripped to shreds."
"That doesn't sound like sylvans. Could it be Shivari?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
201
"That's the best guess we've come up with. But if so,
they're traveling like humans at least."
"How so?"
"Horses and boot prints. But the scent is all wrong."
Malthus pulled at his moustaches, stroked his oak-leaf
beard, and asked the inevitable question, "Yuwenghau?"
"What the hell would yuwenghau be doing up here?"
Laetus asked. "They've never cared about what happened in
Waejontor before."
"Just because it hasn't happened before, doesn't mean it
can't happen now," Malthus said. "We need to be cautious.
Locate and assess every village in the valley. When the time
comes, I'll eliminate the chieftain ... and his family."
"I hear there are some battle-wolves in the eastern
villages."
"Kill them first. I will meet you back here in seven days or
send you a present."
"A present?" asked Egidius.
A smug smile touched Malthus' lips. "Yes. A lycan bitch I'm
tiring of. I made her my tool the first night I arrived. But now
she's getting in the way. Rite her here, if you wish. However,
I want her remains so torn up she's unrecognizable and left
on the east side of the valley."
Egidius slapped Malthus on the back. "You always knew
how to welcome a friend. You send her along and we'll take
care of the details."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
202
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
OLD WOUNDS
The Lawgiver House was an eccentric pastiche of various
styles of human architecture designed by Maldwyn Softpaws,
Nikko's father, with too much interference from Claw
Redhand. As a result it stood four stories high with a
basement equally divided into store rooms and dungeons. It
had balconies, parapets, gargoyles, towers and dormer
windows, as well as other architectural nightmares that made
foreign visitors wince to look at it. Rivaling the manor for size,
it had taken ten years to complete. Rumor had it that Claw
had built this house as a way of relieving the sense of
emptiness that had plagued him after the deaths of his sons,
turning it into an obsessive hobby and Maldwyn's artistic
bane.
Claw had lent Cahira twenty of his Nibari to get the dust
and cobwebs out and render the place somewhat inhabitable
after four years of standing empty. Cahira made do by
limiting their efforts to a single small section of the House and
pretending the rest did not exist.
Kynyr sat propped comfortably by a pile of goose-down
pillows, eating from a bowl of roasted mutton cut into chunks
that sat on the bed table across his lap. His bruises had
cleared up and the scabs of his wounds had vanished, leaving
unblemished skin beneath. A bandage still covered the blade
wound, to keep the stitches from catching on his clothing.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
203
Company had arrived and encircled him. Nikko, Finn, and
Cahira. His friends came by at every opportunity.
Kynyr chuckled. "At least Mary's letting me feed myself
now."
"You still don't remember?" Finn leaned closer.
"What's to remember? I remember beating Malthus. Then
nothing until I woke up here. Gram calls it concussion."
"And that's what it is." Cahira gave a authoritative nod.
Kynyr touched the back of his head gingerly. "Hell, my
head's still sore."
Moss nestled in Nikko's lap, dozing in doggy contentment.
"I don't like what is happening at the camp. I've questioned
everyone and they act as if nothing happened. No one will
talk to me."
Finn frowned. "Place gives me an itch. It ain't been the
same since that Malthus moved in."
Nikko gave a weary nod. "I know."
"You should toss his butt out."
Nikko shook his head at Finn. "I'm supposed to be
enforcing the laws and customs ... not breaking them."
"Laws and customs change, Nikko," Cahira said. "When I
was young they would have stoned Merissa to death for
sleeping with a sa'necari ... much less bearing his cub."
Kynyr winced inwardly. Every time someone mentioned
changing customs, the first example they gave was always
Merissa. "Isranon was a good mon."
"Was he?" A wisp of irritation crept into Cahira's voice. "I
wouldn't know. I've always stayed away from the sa'necari ...
including the Dark Brothers. What freedoms we have, we

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
204
gained from the Sharani conquest. Thirty years of Sharani
rule. If not for them, the sa'necari would still be demanding a
ritual tithe of our young." Cahira threw a hard glance at the
young wolves, as if daring them to disagree with her.
"Gram..." Kynyr tried to derail it, but could not think of
what to say.
"No. You listen to me. The Rebellion was Claw's dream. He
paid for it with the lives of his sons. And it got him nothing."
"The clans would like to be rid of both of them," said Finn.
"If not one, it will be the other. I, for one, would rather
have the Sharani than the sa'necari."
Nikko ruffled Moss' ears. "I agree with Cahira. After all, the
secret histories..."
Cahira made a disparaging noise. "The secret histories are
just the wishful braggadocio of the elders and the clan
chieftains, claiming responsibility for the deeds of others. You
should know better than to take them seriously, Lawgiver."
The door opened and female voices filled the air. Moss
gave a yelp, made a flying leap from Nikko's lap onto the bed,
and clambered over Kynyr to the pile of pillows behind him.
Then the little dog spun about barking and snarling with
astonishing ferocity.
Merissa halted with Darmyk by the hand and stared at
Moss. Her gaze dropped to Kenly and she grasped the big cat
by the collar, turned him about and put him out of the room.
"Darmyk, tell Kenly to wait outside. He's scaring Moss."
Darmyk slipped his hand from his mother's grasp and
hugged his cat, making growly noises in the cat's ear. Kenly

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
205
gave an unhappy rumble and settled on a rug beyond the
door.
Aisha, Fianait, and Searlait, who had been following her,
stepped over and around Kenly. Cahira got to her feet. Her
eyes met Aisha's briefly as if in silent objection. Then she
straightened her skirts and went to the door. "Please, excuse
me. I have things to do in the kitchen."
Finn jumped up. "I got things to do. I'll be back in a bit."
He went after Cahira.
Merissa settled into the chair that Finn had vacated. "Your
grandmother doesn't like us."
Moss calmed down the moment the door closed, and
began licking Kynyr's ear.
"Cahira's just a bit..." Kynyr groped for a word that would
not cost him in hurt feelings. "Odd. She's a bit odd."
"She always was, if you ask me," Aisha snapped.
Silence descended and remained until Darmyk broke it by
crawling onto Kynyr's bed. He planted a wet kiss on Kynyr's
cheek and said something he could only have gotten from his
grandfather. "Crotchety bitches. Don't listen to them."
Everyone stared at Darmyk for an instant and then
laughter erupted all over the room.
Kynyr hugged Darmyk. "Smart cub."
"I know it." A pleased smile of childish superiority spread
across Darmyk's face, and he nestled against the injured
guardsmon. His robe gaped open and Kynyr's eyes went to
the wine-stain birthmark on the cub's chest that had given
Darmyk his nickname. Kynyr stroked the birthmark and

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
206
chuckled with a wink at the assembled females. "You are so
right, Little Bear."
* * * *
Finn sat across from Cahira at the kitchen table. "I saw
how you looked at them."
Cahira took the tea kettle from the stove and poured hot
water over the little ball in her cup. The fragrance of mint tea
filled the room. She let it steep and fetched sugar and fresh
cream before answering Finn. "You're far too observant,
Finn."
"I guess. Comes from growing up with the Dreaded Horde.
Ignore the warning signs and get thunked with a hair brush."
"Do you dislike them so much?"
Finn shrugged, an impish smile stirring the corners of his
lips. "Nah. I love 'em all. But I'm much happier without
them."
"Why did you follow me?"
"You made me a promise and I've been waiting a week for
it." Finn ticked the days off on his fingers. "Nah, week and a
half."
"You're not going to let me off?"
"No. If I'm gonna keep my promise to the Dreaded Horde,
there can't be secrets when it comes to Kynyr."
"What promise is that?"
"That I'd keep him safe. So far I ain't done very good at
it."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
207
When the mood was on him, Finn could speak with the
aplomb of a noblemon, but most of the time, he preferred to
relax and not worry about it.
"Take my tea to the study for me. We'll talk there. I don't
want to be overheard."
Finn did as Cahira asked and they were soon settled into a
small room on the second floor that contained a desk, four
chairs, two sofas and a small table. Books lined the walls in
floor to ceiling cases.
"Keep your promise, Cahira," Finn said with more
confidence than he felt.
Cahira took a sip from her cup, composing herself. "How
much do you know about the Rebellion?"
"Just what Branduff told me when he was teaching me my
letters."
"We shall have to hope my son was thorough, because
otherwise some of this will not make sense to you."
Finn nodded encouragement.
Cahira's voice took on the tones of a teacher as she began
her story, and Finn could see where Branduff Maguire had
gotten some of his airy inflections from. "It could be said that
Claw Redhand inherited his dream of rebellion from his father
Suileahan. But it took an incident to provoke it."
"Uh huh. I know that part. Prince Shintar ran off with Old
Romney Silverpaws' daughter, Bridget. No one knows what
happened to her. They say she was rited though."
Cahira shook her head. "There's no record of her being
rited. The sa'necari are obsessive record-keepers on those

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
208
matters. Whatever her fate was, we'll probably never know.
However, most scholars doubt that she was rited."
"Okay."
"She was promised in marriage to Tarrant Redhand, Claw's
son. And he used the incident to rouse the Nine Great Clans
against the sa'necari."
"Can we cut to the chase, Cahira? I didn't ask for a history
lesson."
An angry flush spread over Cahira's features and she
snapped at him with a full measure of bitterness. "Like how a
little nobody like me ended up with a prince's cub in her
belly?"
Finn's eyes widened and he made a fending off gesture. "I
didn't say that, Cahira. I didn't say that."
Cahira's anger subsided as quickly as it had risen. "I
haven't talked about this in close to forty ... no." She sighed.
"I told Kynyr five years ago when he insisted on leaving for
Wolffgard. It's a fact of life, Finn. Memory is an odd creature.
Some things diminish with time and others grow stronger."
Finn clasped his hands together and bit his lips to keep
from responding.
"I'm certain I don't remember everything any longer.
There's gray patches and some of the pieces don't fit right
now. I'm not entirely sure what happened first or second. If
something doesn't make sense, just accept it as it is. I'm
old."
"Not as old as Aisha."
"True. But at a certain point, it makes little difference."
"Okay."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
209
"Todd would probably tell it completely different if you
asked him."
"Can I ask him?"
"You might as well. I can't guarantee he'll answer."
"I'll take my chances."
Cahira drank her tea, put the cup down, and stood up. "If
I'm going to tell this, I need something stronger. Would you
like a glass of whiskey, Finn?"
"Sure."
She fetched a bottle of Dragonsbreath from a drawer in
the desk and a pair of glasses. Cahira poured for them both,
knocked hers down like a soldier, and refilled it. Some of the
tension eased from her face. "It was the second year of the
Rebellion. I was sixteen. The clans had put out a call for
healers, physicians, surgeons, and the like to join the armies.
I was young, talented ... my father was thinking of sending
me to Creeya to train at the Royal Medical College in
Havensword. That didn't happen."
Finn leaned forward with his elbows propped on his knees.
"But that did happen."
Cahira sipped at her second glass of whiskey, her eyes
going distant. "After I married Todd, yes. Todd insisted."
Abruptly, she knocked the second glass into her mouth,
swallowed, and poured a third. Stress began to return to her
features, deepening the lines around her eyes and mouth. "I
ran off with a group of healers from Blue Lake who were
passing through on their way to the war."
"And that's how you met Tarrant?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
210
"And Todd." She stared at her hands for a moment and
lifted her head again. "At that time, the front had pushed as
far west as Skeleton Creek and it looked for a time as if we
might drive the sa'necari from all of our ancestral lands. We
sent emissaries to Shaurone and Creeya. They turned us
down."
Cahira fell silent and Finn moved closer to her. As he
reached for her hands to comfort her, he saw tears in her
eyes. Finn dabbed at her tears with his fingers. "If it hurts too
much, you could finish later."
She shook her head. "No. There isn't going to be a later. I
don't ever want to talk about this again. Let's get it over with
now."
"Okay."
"Baroucha was one of the Blue Lake healers. She was a
slut. Sleeping with first this one and then that one. Often a
different dog every night. She's much older than I am. How
much I no longer remember. But I was very impressed with
her. She seemed so knowledgeable and experienced. She
took me under her wing." Cahira paused, her expression
tightening. "At least I thought she had."
A long silence followed and this time Finn waited patiently
for her to continue.
"We arrived at Skeleton Creek two weeks ahead of what
turned into a disaster. The sa'necari brought in divinators.
They had rounded up all of the city wolves who had tried to
remain neutral in four cities. A four fold rite of hecatomb was
used to hit us. Four hundred lycans from the cities were
sacrificed. Then they attacked. The very ground seemed to

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
211
move beneath our feet. Demons and creatures out of
nightmares swarmed us."
"I know that part, Cahira. You don't have to go into it."
"Thank you." She drank a third glass of whiskey and a
fourth. Her words began to slur, yet she slogged on through
her memories. "Less than a quarter of our army got out alive.
We were scattered, broken. Tarrant was wounded. There was
only Sheradyn, Baroucha, and myself, among the healers to
escape with the prince. Baroucha wanted to be the one to
tend Tarrant, but Sheradyn refused her and asked me to do
it.
"Tarrant was feverish. He kept calling me Bridget. I was
terrified that he might be dying ... and ... and when he pulled
me into bed with him ... I didn't say no."
"And that's when you got Branduff?"
"Yes." Cahira began to sob brokenly.
Finn gathered her into his arms and held her. "There's
more?"
"Yes, but I can't deal with it right now. I need—I need to
lie down."
Finn put Cahira to bed as if she were the young cub and he
the elder. Then he found a spot in the garden, knelt down,
and prayed to Willodarus that Cahira would find the strength
to tell him the rest of the story.
The sound of a horse in the courtyard interrupted Finn's
prayers. He rose to his feet, and walked around the building
to see who had come. A lycan cub in hybrid form sat perched
on a tall black mare that seemed somehow familiar. The cub
spotted Finn and turned the horse, trotting her up to him.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
212
"I'm looking for Kynyr Maguire. I've a message for him."
The cub pulled an envelope from his shirt and waved it at
Finn.
"Need help getting down?"
"Nah. I can do it. My Dad taught me." The cub swung his
leg over and dropped to the ground grinning.
"Not bad." Finn touched the horse's shoulder, felt a greasy
residue on his fingers, and stared at them. A black smudge
was smeared over his hand. "She's not black?"
The cub shook his head. "It's a disguise. Larkspur's a
sorrel."
"That's Cullen's horse." Finn's stomach clenched. Only
death could have separated Cullen from Larkspur.
The cub's face crumpled and he looked ready to cry. "My
Dad's dead."
"Cullen's your dad? What's your name?"
The boy nodded and struggled to keep his voice from
breaking. "They call me Cooley. I'm Cullen Diomedes
Blackwood ... junior." He swallowed and his budding Adam's
apple bobbed. "Ma says I gotta give Larkspur and this letter
to Kynyr Maguire."
Finn led Cooley around to the barns, where they turned
Larkspur over to an ostler, and then he took the cub to Kynyr.
"Who's this?" Kynyr smiled at the cub as he accepted the
letter. "Rather young for a courier."
"Cooley. Just open the letter."
Kynyr caught the edge in Finn's voice. "What's wrong?"
"Cullen's dead. It's in the letter. This is his son."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
213
Kynyr ripped the envelope open and a ring fell out on the
bed. He scooped it up and his expression went cold. "It's that
ring Cullen was so proud of. The one Sonden gave him."
Dear Kynyr Maguire.
Cullen trusted you. So I am trusting you. By now you must
know, or at least suspect, that Cullen is dead. They forced me
to watch him die. The sa'necari have returned to Hell's
Widow. I am trusting you with our child and my secret so that
you will understand why I do not dare go to the garrison with
this. You know me as Silkie Faggini. I was born Silkanna
Mircala de Waejonan. Get word to the garrison, but do not tell
them how you know. And, I beg you. Take care of our child.
Cooley is no longer safe in Hell's Widow.
Sincerely,
Silkie
Kynyr raised stricken eyes to Finn. "Ask Gram to give
Cooley a room."
"Uhmn. She's passed out drunk."
"Gram?"
"Yeah."
"Take Cooley to Todd. Tell him Cooley's my..." Kynyr's
head spun at the entire concept. "My ward. Don't tell anyone
else but Todd about Cullen. I need time to think." And grieve.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
214
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
MESSENGERS
Malthus walked with Merissa in the garden while the
children played under the watchful eyes of two nibari and
Kenly. He surreptitiously stole glances at Merissa's breasts
and loins when the dress she wore shifted as she moved and
revealed a bit more to his hungry eyes. He carried a satchel
with the strap crossing his chest, weighted down by the three
bottles of cursed wine he had brought as a gift for Merissa's
father.
Last night, Malthus had gone to Beth to slake his thirst,
and found her wallowing on a cum soaked bed, sniveling
about Shalto and Oswyl for always insisting that she give
them their jollies together. Beth had so appalled him, that he
could barely tolerate feeding on her, and made her clean
herself first.
On the other hand, Merissa smelled of fresh rosemary and
honeysuckle, and beneath her perfume, the scent of clean
washed flesh. He wondered what her thighs would look like
when he finally parted them—sooner or later Merissa would
give him what he wanted, just as she had given his brother.
Troyes had always set his sights on the best, and being the
legitimate son, always gotten it whether he deserved it or
not—even when it was something Malthus had wanted first.
Except for Isranon, who had come to Prince Mephistis' court
at fourteen, a comely and inexperienced youth. The proud

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
215
youngster hated his own kind for reasons that Malthus had
not understood at the time, but looking upon Isranon made
everyone at the court hungry for him. Including Troyes and
Malthus. The more Isranon refused their beds and fangs, the
more they had all wanted him. So Malthus had gotten a
potion from his mother to allow him to pass for human for a
few days at a time. He seduced Isranon. The affair lasted
several weeks, before Malthus lost control and bit him.
Isranon became incensed and resisted Malthus, so he had
calmly raped the youth. The next day Mephistis showed up
and informed Malthus that if he touched Isranon again, the
prince would order Malthus rited. And that was the end of
that. It had made no sense to Malthus why Mephistis would
be so incensed over a mere rape—it wasn't as if he had
seriously injured the young mon. Now that Isranon's secrets
had come out, it made more sense to Malthus.
"What did you do before you came here?" Merissa asked
him.
Her voice shook Malthus free of his memories. "I was a
soldier. My father was nobly born. A high caste sa'necari. He
served King Baaltrystan at court as one of his personal
defenders."
"Have you ever been to court?" Merissa asked, with a trace
of eagerness in her voice.
"Yes. I served there for a time, but a sa'necari court is not
the place for a human who wishes to rise in the world. So I
went south and became kandoyarin. My father died beside
the king, trying to shield him when the palace collapsed after
the Legacy was destroyed. When I heard about the rebellion,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
216
I feared for my siblings and returned. However, I was only
here two weeks before the Queen's forces destroyed my
family. She's slain all of the old nobility who refused to follow
her against the Sharani."
"I am sorry. I did not mean to bring up bad memories."
"You didn't. My father was a brave mon. My nieces and I
are all that remain of my family."
"I am sorry..."
Malthus put a finger to her lips. "Don't—Don't keep saying
that. You haven't done anything wrong. I made my peace
with their deaths."
"Have you seen the new queen?"
"From afar. She is very beautiful and powerful. But not as
beautiful as you. Merissa, you would turn every head at the
queen's court."
"Don't say that."
Malthus saw how Merissa shivered in reaction to his simple
compliment. "Why not?"
"A sa'necari once said that to me. He convinced me to run
away with him. I thought he was taking me to court, but
instead he tied me to a bleeding table in the hills."
It had to have been Troyes—what a fool. "A terrible tale.
But you've nothing to fear from me, Merissa. I'm human. As
for the queen, with Lord Daemon at her side, she cannot fail
but win back her ancestral lands from the Sharani."
Merissa shivered, drawing her shawl tighter. "This rebellion
frightens me."
"Don't let it frighten you. Let the war pass you by here."
"If the palace is gone..."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
217
"The summer palace of Waejonan at Torment Lake still
stands. That is where the Queen dwells. Lord Daemon has
been granted the ancient estates and titles that belonged to
Waejonan's brother, Brandrahoon."
"It's almost as if time were re-setting itself. I am afraid.
How can I not be?"
"I would protect you, if you would let me."
Merissa dropped her head. "Beth's in love with you."
"But I am not in love with Beth. How could I be when she's
had half the males in the village between her legs? I stopped
touching her once I knew the truth that I was just one more
male to conquer."
"I can see that. I feel sorry for her."
"Beth will be all right. I'll talk to her, Merissa. I'm certain
that it's just a passing fancy."
"I hope you're right."
Malthus stopped short and slapped the satchel. "I almost
forgot. I brought your father a gift from Hell's Widow. Perhaps
he'll think more kindly of me once he gets them."
Merissa smiled as he placed the three bottles in her hands.
She looked at the labels. "Oh, they're his favorites!"
"Wonderful!"
* * * *
Malthus rode into the clearing with Beth beside him. He
had arranged to meet her midway between the compound
and the caves. She had cleaned herself up before leaving, so
at least he could stand the smell of her. Her eyes widened at
the sight of the bleeding table and she began to cry, shaking

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
218
her head and refusing to get off her horse. Malthus
dismounted and tied his horse up to a sapling growing near
the mossy entrance.
He pointed sharply at the ground. "Come on, Beth. Get
down."
She swallowed, sucked in a long breath, and left the
saddle. "I'm not ready to die, Malthus. Please—"
"Disrobe and lay on the table like a good girl," Malthus
ordered. "Legs open wide."
Malthus gestured and the coercions in her brain tightened
painfully. Beth took three tottering steps and her legs failed
her. She went to her knees.
Shaking his head in a remonstrative fashion, Malthus
sauntered over and tapped Beth on the shoulder. "Now, now,
Beth. Do as I told you."
Egidius and Laetus emerged from the cave and approached
them. Laetus crossed his arms, a contemptuous moue on his
lips, and moving with an exaggerated swagger.
"Is this the present?" Egidius asked.
Laetus snickered. "Can't you make her more cooperative?"
Malthus scowled at them, spun, and hit Beth in the face for
embarrassing him. "Up, Beth. Go to the table."
Beth rose on wobbly legs, and her eyes teared. "I love
you, Malthus."
"Then obey me." He added in the trigger phrase. "Be
beautiful."
Beth staggered to the table, breathing hard. She fumbled
with her dress, pulling ineffectually at the lacings for several

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
219
heartbeats before managing to get it open. Her large breasts
sagged through the parted middle.
Laetus laughed and shook his head.
She flushed, shoving the shoulders down and wiggling her
arms out. Beth's belly jiggled as she pushed the dress over it,
got it to her hips and then her knees. She sat on the table,
dangling her legs, and kicked out of the encumbering
garment. Beth wrapped her arms about her and lowered her
eyes.
"Lie down, Beth! On your back," Malthus commanded.
"Don't hurt me. Please don't hurt me." She reclined on the
slab, putting first one shoulder to the cold stone where so
many of her people had perished, and then the other. Beth
shivered on that chill bed of death, which not even the heat of
the sun could warm, with her eyes haunted and pleading.
Malthus strolled over to the table and slapped his hands
between her thighs. "Legs open. Wider, wider."
Beth spread her legs until the basalt edge pressed into her
inner thighs and her ankles bumped the fetters attached to
the holed knob of stone that secured the first link in the
chain. "I don't want to die."
"Yes, she's the present. However, I may need her still. I
should know in an hour or two."
Egidius secured Beth's wrists and ankles, straightened, and
ran his hands over her body. "An excellent catch. All I've
caught so far were a handful of bitches too lean for my taste,
and a handful of scrawny cubs."
Malthus got his bow and quiver from his saddle, settling
them at his side. He walked back to stroke Beth's naked

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
220
body. "Sweet Beth, when a sa'necari slips a blade into a bitch
like you, it's like sex and strong wine. Yours will be a beautiful
death. Egidius is a true artist of the rites."
"Can we at least enjoy her while you're gone?" Egidius
said.
"That you may do. Now I need to get as high up here as I
can. A wind-folk courier arrived at Claw's home this morning.
I expect that he'll be leaving about now."
With his bow in his hand, Malthus climbed to the highest
point atop the piled boulders marking the northern limit to
Clan Red Wolf's territory as the sun began to dip over the
distant snow-capped mountains. It formed a shadow patch
against the red glow and spreading orange of sunset. He
strung his bow as a wind-folk courier winged over the
treetops.
So that is how they are getting messages in and out of the
valley. Or at least one of the ways. I'm certain they must use
four foots also.
Six imps crept out from among the rocks and gathered at
his feet.
The movement of couriers on horseback had dried up to a
trickle and then ceased completely when word had gotten out
concerning the death of Cullen Blackwood. He savored the
memory of shoving a blade into the little bastard's heart and
then fucking Cullen's lover beside his dead body. If that
whore's son had not shown up claiming to be Cullen's cub,
they would probably still not know that Blackwood was dead.
It had thrown Malthus' plans off, but not irreparably.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
221
Malthus decided to put a stop to the final source of
messages entering and leaving. He would assign other units
to do likewise. It would still take time to close all the paths a
messenger from the shifter clans could take, but Malthus felt
capable of doing so.
He opened the compartment that held his mon-killing
arrows, their large, swallow-tailed heads were poisoned with
his own special recipe, comprised primarily of blended plant
toxins, snake feces and venoms—venoms he had spent years
painfully immunizing himself against as his rite-enhanced
resistances grew—and as a tribute to the toughness of lycans,
Devil's Silver.
His mother was a bio-alchemist, and had served his late
father as a poisoner, creating and sometimes administering
deadly substances. Her family were the first to discover and
refine Devil's Silver. It was silver liquefied in an arcane
solution compatible with snake venom and other specialized
toxins. One arrow was all it took to kill a lycan. The more
arrows he put into one, the faster they died. So far as he
knew, no antidote for Devil's Silver existed.
With the fall of his father's house, his mother had become
employed by Lord Daemon, which was what led to his own
work with the mysterious lord. Malthus had a sudden urge to
visit her and see what else she might have developed and
was testing.
Malthus set an arrow to his string and drew, following the
messenger with his eyes for a moment and then released the
shaft. The courier jerked in its flight and struggled to remain
in the air. Malthus smoothly nocked, drew, and released,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
222
putting three more shafts into the small body. He smiled as
he watched the dead messenger plummet to earth on the far
side of the Eirlys cataract.
"I never miss."
He glanced down at the six imps gathered at his knees,
orange-skinned withered looking creatures with blowguns and
darts, as well as belt knives. "Fetch it for me and don't be
seen."
They skittered over the rocks in a rush to do his bidding,
squeaking to each other in eagerness. The imps would cross
the Eirlys by way of two large trees that had been dropped
over the cataract north of Claw's borders. Malthus stretched
himself out across the boulder in the evening light to wait. He
wondered how Egidius and Laetus were managing with Beth.
The place of caves and boulders, the northernmost limits
to Claw's lands was an interesting area. There were so many
niches to conceal things. Were Troyes' bones hidden here?
What had they done with his brother's body? Clearly Troyes
had broken the rules. The lycans could have slain him simply
for committing the rites on their lands.
Then a thought occurred to him that should have sooner.
Lycans did not bottle blood. They were not hemovores.
Troyes died here and Isranon went south—Isranon had to be
the one that bottled Troyes' blood. Did the lycans merely kill
Troyes, and Isranon bottle the blood afterward? Or did
Isranon kill Troyes? Malthus felt he was getting closer to the
facts of his brother's murder.
Malthus slid down the boulders, off the final one, and
walked toward the table where Beth lay, running his finger

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
223
along the bleeding table with its grooves and spouts for
carrying the blood of victims into basins. She flinched when
he touched her. Malthus ignored that, observing that her
womanhood was still oozing with Egidius' and Laetus' cum.
There were fresh bite marks on her arms and legs. The
bloodstains interested him more than Beth did. They were old
and nearly erased from the stone, but rites had been
committed here, he could feel it. He wondered if Troyes had
died on this table.
"Have you decided about her?" Egidius asked, sauntering
up to him. "Her body is strong, but her mind is going. The
sooner I can stick her, the more pleasure I'll get out of it. I
don't get off on sticking the mindless. They don't react to the
pain as well."
"I want to see what's in that courier's satchel first. Then I'll
tell you whether you can stick her now or not."
Laetus came over and leaned against the table with his
elbow propped on Beth's breast. "Can we at least cut her a
little? She's lycan. She'll heal."
"Very well. Just a little."
Malthus sat down beside the table and waited, enjoying
the sound of Beth's screaming, inhaling the fragrance of her
terror and pain. Night deepened and Malthus dozed against
the table, dreaming of dead women. A little past midnight the
returning imps awakened him.
They laid the slain courier's body at his feet and placed the
message pouch beside it. It had lost its bird form and was
now a fragile-boned, feathered mon. Some pieces were
missing from the body, indicating that at least one or two of

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
224
the imps had fed on it. They had an interesting resistance to
toxins that allowed them to eat both poisoned and spoiled
meats. Once he had his lands, he would create a large
laboratory and test the limits to their resistances and
immunities. But it would not do to tell Gahni that.
"No messages get in or out of this valley that I do not
send," Malthus ordered. "Make certain that is understood by
the others."
The imps scattered to spread the word.
Malthus fished in the satchel, bringing forth three letters.
Two were addressed to Nevin Scarface, the lycan battle-clan
chieftain, from Claw. The third, in Merissa's lovely hand, was
addressed to Nevin also. He tore that one open first.
Nevin,
When are you going to tell him about the child? I cannot
keep pretending that he'll come. I know he isn't coming back.
But please, please tell Isranon about his son. Grant me that
much."
Merissa.
Malthus crumpled the paper angrily. So the renunciate
butt-boy had sired the child, not Troyes. Had Troyes and
Isranon fought over Merissa and his brother been slain? No,
that was impossible. The prince's catamite had not been
powerful enough to stand against Troyes. Although Isranon
may have bottled the blood afterwards, Malthus still felt
certain the lycans had slain his brother.
He went inside the cave and lit a lamp. Then he took up
pen and paper, writing a swift letter to Lord Daemon.
Lord Daemon,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
225
The lesser renunciate, Isranon, has a son by Merissa
Redhand, out of wedlock. The child is two and a half years old
and named Darmyk. As you know, he runs now with the other
renunciate, Lord Dawnreturning and that cursed freeranger
unit called Gryphonheart's Rowdies. If this information has
served you in any way or will, send me a token and details on
what you wish me to do about it.
Ever your servant,
Malthus
Abruptly, his mind turned another corner. Merissa had lied
to him about the mon wanting to know his son. Isranon did
not even know he had one. Interesting. Merissa did not want
anyone to suspect how deeply she felt rejected, how much
she feared her son would be rejected by his father just as she
had been by her own kind when the knowledge of her
pregnancy emerged. She would prove a more vulnerable
target than he had dreamed.
Malthus ran his tongue over his descending fangs. The
sa'necari was hungry, very, very hungry. He would go out
and wake Beth, who had spent the night sleeping on the
bleeding table, waiting to die. At least he had something solid
to answer his suspicions. Darmyk was Isranon's son. It
scarcely seemed possible that a woman like Merissa would
prefer a half-a-mon like Isranon to a male as powerful as his
brother had been.
The only thing he wanted more was proof that Isranon was
Dawnreturning. The possibility was the source of endless
debate, but if Isranon was Dawnreturning, then it would
answer how he had been powerful enough to overcome

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
226
Troyes—if that was what had happened. Malthus remembered
the feel of Isranon's fourteen-year-old body squirming under
him, desperate to get free, and how easily he succumbed to
Malthus' spells. There was no way he could be Dawnreturning.
There was no way he could have killed Troyes—not without
some kind of treachery.
He bit into Beth's arm wakening her. She moaned and
then began to whimper. Feeling malicious, Malthus drew his
belt knife and caressed her body with the point while he fed.
The chieftain was fond of his grandson and so were the
rest of the clan, even if the matter had gotten off to a rocky
start. It would be worth all his time and effort among these
trembling, boring folk, to take their little prince. First he
needed to get Merissa to trust him. Then he would find a way
to get the boy away from her so that he would rite the child—
unless, of course, Lord Daemon had a better offer to make
him.
Malthus was tired of concealing his nature, scent, and
essence from them; tired of being simply Daemon's agent.
The sa'nekaryiane would pay him well for the child's death
once she learned of its existence. He might even get paid by
both of them, Daemon and Galee. If their offers weren't
substantial enough, however, he might decide to rite the boy
and send pieces of him to his sire, simply because he
belonged to Isranon.
One of the things that made him more accomplished than
other sa'necari who chose to support themselves through
bounty hunting, was that he did not rely upon his spells and
hellblades to achieve the deaths. He had trained from

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
227
childhood with all the weapons that the humans, sylvans, and
their allied races used. None of his kills would have the
earmarks of a sa'necari assassination.
He lifted his lips and wiped the blood off with a
handkerchief.
Egidius came out of the cave yawning. "Well? Have you
made a decision?"
"I need Beth a little longer."
"Thank gods," Beth murmured. "I wasn't ready to die."
"You're giving her too much free speech," observed Laetus.
"She has none in front of outsiders. Find a vein and
breakfast before we leave."
* * * *
Malthus sat on a bench in the chieftain's garden watching
the children play. It had become a daily ritual. Merissa sat
beside him, her hand on the cold stone, and his hand
covering hers. She allowed him that much without pulling
away from him, but she still refused to give him more. Today
she was very unhappy with him.
"I don't care what kind of woman Beth is," Merissa
repeated. "You must be blunt with her. If you are going to
keep seeing me."
"Merissa..." Malthus lowered his head in shame. "I keep
telling her that."
"Then you are not being firm enough."
"I don't want to hurt her."
"What about me? You're hurting me. If you are going to
continue seeing me, then you must stop seeing Beth."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
228
Malthus let his shoulders sag. "So be it. I will stop seeing
her except in public on matters pertaining to the camp." He
brought her hand to his lips and kissed her fingers. "You are
too precious ... too dear to me. I won't let anything or anyone
make you unhappy."
"Malthus..." Her tone softened.
Malthus leaned in with her fingers on his lips until only her
fingers remained between her lips and his. Then he drew her
hand slowly down until his lips pressed hers. His other hand
slipped to the back of her head as he parted her lips and
kissed her deeply.
* * * *
Nikko went looking for Shalto and Oswyl. He missed
Tempest and, with the death of the old priest, had no one to
really advise him. At nineteen, Nikko was the youngest
lawgiver the lycans had had in their extensive history. He had
shouldered the burden at sixteen when Nevin left abruptly
with his spirit-brother Isranon. Nikko knew all of the laws with
the perfect memory of one who had trained since childhood
by reciting them. He knew the cases and histories of the clan.
Because of Tempest and Nevin, he was also literate, unlike
three-quarters of his people. Yet, he didn't always know how
to proceed on some matters.
He wanted to know how the rumors about Beth had
started and when she had begun seducing half the village. It
troubled him because he had grown up around her, and part
of him could not let go of his memories of her as a warm,
soft, comforting presence that he could curl up with when he

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
229
was a cub. He used to play in the field where the camp was
now. Beth always licked the blood off his skinned knees,
cuddled him when he cried because the older children played
rougher. It was Beth he had gone to when Nevin left, and
Nikko felt overwhelmed by his responsibilities.
The image of Beth as a slut who could not get enough
jarred painfully against his memories. If she had been a slut
before, surely someone would have noticed it, surely he
would have noticed it. Certainly, Nevin would have told him
before he left. Sluts were troublemakers, whether they were
male or female. And then there was that newcomer, Malthus,
who seemed to exert an uncanny influence over Beth. He
could not help but notice the unseemly adoration in her eyes
for the mon, and the way he failed to reciprocate it. All of his
instincts were screaming that Malthus was trouble.
He went to the Difficult Horse Tavern. Hereward always
kept the lamps either off or turned down in the daytime to
keep the dark interior cooler during the summer. It took
Nikko's eyes a moment to adjust.
"Can I get ya somethin' nice, lawgiver?" Hereward the
taverner shouted.
Nikko shook his head as he scanned the room. "No,
thanks, Hereward. I'm looking for someone."
He spied Shalto and Oswyl having a tankard of mead at
their favorite corner table. Nikko strode over, put his palms
on their table, and loomed over them. "I want to talk to you
both. Now. Outside. Or I'll have you both arrested."
Shalto looked up, his brows knitting. "We didn't do
anything!"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
230
Sensing trouble, Hereward laid his big club on the bar and
eyed them. The club had silver spikes circling the top, making
it a nasty weapon. "Do what the mon says."
Oswyl raised his hands in a fending off gesture. "I don't
know what has you upset, but I'll cooperate."
Shalto, seeing he would get no support from his cousin,
and fearing Hereward, gave a quick relenting nod before
following Nikko out of the tavern behind Oswyl.
"Now what is this about?" Shalto asked.
"Beth."
"I don't know what's got your hackles up there. I heard
you were getting your share," Shalto said.
"I haven't touched Beth and you shouldn't be either.
Something's not right about all this."
Shalto settled his shoulders against the wall of the Difficult
Horse, arms crossed. "Everyone was talking about it. So we
decided to get our share."
A flush of anger swept Nikko and he started to shake,
which startled him because he had never been that upset
before. He grabbed Shalto by the collar and jerked him hard
enough to stagger him. "You stay away from Beth. Tell the
others to also. If matters are as you say, I can have her
whipped out of the village and the rest of you with her."
Shalto's mouth parted, but no words came out. His lips
wiggled a moment and then he sighed. "Lawgiver, you'll be
making enemies."
"Are you threatening me, Shalto?"
Shalto lowered his eyes and shuffled his feet. "No. Just
stating facts."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
231
Nikko gave Shalto a shove that sent him stumbling, and
turned on his heel, heading for the camp. When he reached it,
Nikko paused in the yard and scanned it for signs of Malthus.
He found none. So he knocked on Beth's door.
The door opened a crack and Beth peered around the
edge. Nikko saw an odd glimmer in her eyes, and wondered
why she didn't simply open it like she used to.
"As the lawgiver, I need to speak with you," Nikko said.
Beth's eyes widened and she gestured for him to enter. "I
haven't done anything wrong."
"I'm hearing things that I wanted to talk to you about."
Nikko walked past her and sat on a small stool.
"What kind of things?" She swayed her hips suggestively
as she approached him.
Nikko blushed to the roots of his hair, and he could feel the
red blooming all the way to his navel. "That you're a sl—a
loose female."
Beth began unlacing her dress. "I've been waiting for you,
Nikko. I knew you'd come eventually. They all do."
"That's not what I meant—I'm not here for that. I just
wanted to talk."
"Of course you did, Nikko." She dropped her dress as she
spoke.
Her nudity did not bother Nikko as much as her obvious
intent. Furthermore, Beth's eyes looked strange and she
smelled odd. He stood up. "We'll talk later."
Beth caught hold of his pants and shoved her hand in.
Nikko yelped and changed to his hybrid form, which gave him

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
232
the strength to lift the heavy bitch bodily away from him.
"Stop it, Beth."
"So you like it rough?" Beth changed to match him. "I like
it rough too. Do what you want to me."
She pulled the drawstring on his pants undone, and
shoved them around Nikko's hips. Nikko clutched at his pants,
and knocked her to the floor. She hit the ground hard, smiled,
and opened her legs to him.
Where Nikko had been shaking with anger earlier, he was
now trembling. He darted around her and left the longhouse.
As he reached the yard, Nikko stopped to tie his pants closed,
and the very last voice he wanted to hear greeted him.
"Got some, did you?" Shalto laughed.
Malthus, Shalto, Oswyl, and Torquil stood there watching
him.
"It isn't what you think." Nikko blushed.
All of them except Malthus laughed at him.
"No more holier than thou, lawgiver," Oswyl said.
"Was she a good ride?" Torquil asked.
"It's not what you think!" Nikko shouted. "I didn't touch
her."
Malthus inclined his head with a glance to the side. "And
what else would it be, seeing you coming from her home
pulling your pants up?"
"You're dirtier than the rest of us, Nikko," said Shalto. "As
least we don't lie about it."
Nikko fled.
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
233
Malthus returned home and found Beth waiting for him in
the living room of his home. The girls were already sound
asleep in their room. His temper flared. Nikko was probably
out there at that very moment, watching the house. He had
to rid himself of Beth. Merissa had kept repeating to him on
their last walks together that he had to tell Beth that he was
not interested in her.
Beth got up and embraced him, opening her shift. "I love
you, Malthus."
Malthus shrugged her off. "Did you actually sleep with the
lawgiver?"
Beth dropped her eyes. "No. I tried, but he refused me."
Malthus snarled, baring his fangs at her. "I have no use for
you."
"Malthus, please. Don't be angry with me. I help you,
Malthus."
"At least his reputation is stained now. No one believes
that he hasn't been sticking it in you. I'd like it better if he
had."
"I tried, Malthus. I tried."
He caught her arm, steering her into the room at the far
end, where he shoved her down on his bed.
Malthus stripped his clothing off, dropping it in the corner
by the bed. His member jutted from the thatch between his
legs, hard and thick. His fangs came down. "Undress."
Beth obeyed.
Malthus spoke the triggering phrase that would make her
go gladly to her death. "I'm going to make you beautiful."
Beth gave him a radiant smile. "I am ready for that."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
234
"I know you are." He slammed into her mind with no
pretense of art, twisting and turning the blade of his power.
She whimpered and writhed.
"Tomorrow afternoon, in front of everyone you will run
crying into the woods. You will refuse to tell them why. You
will go to that cave I showed you and stay there with my
people until Egidius comes for you. You will tell Egidius that
you are ready to be rited. He will rite you with the greatest of
artistry. Your death will be a thing of beauty."
Beth shuddered and tears ran down her face. "Yes,
beloved."
He touched the hollow of her throat and stole her voice
completely so that there would be no more words or sounds
from her.
"He will let out your life with exquisite slowness." Malthus
voiced the words as if he were speaking of love. He leaned
over her, licking the tears from her face, enjoying the taste of
fear and sorrow. "The blade will slide into you again and
again, as he slips his cock into you."
Malthus' hands roved her body. "You will die well, Beth.
When your soul shatters, part of you will always belong to
him. Egidius is a master of elegance. He works slowly, using
five blades in the style called Fifteen Piercings."
Beth shuddered as he walked his fingers over her, poking
her in the places where the blades would be inserted. Then he
bit savagely into her breast, and began to suck, determined
to enjoy his final taste of Beth.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
235
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
THE BUTCHERING SERPENT
Malthus struck the ground again with his hoe, driving it in,
heaving up grassy clods of earth, breaking up more clods,
and then repeating in a nearly unendurable monotony. Ros
and Lyrri sat beside the row of ground, shaking the bits of
grass loose, and making piles of them to the side. Once
finished, the girls would feed the gathered grass to the goats.
Tomorrow they would put in the seed and the seedlings from
the community mudroom.
"Ah, hells, I hate this," Malthus muttered.
Sweat glistened on his smooth chest, gilding the flare of
his wide, bronze shoulders. His cotton, drawstring pants—the
lightest weight garment he owned, which he had purchased in
the deep south—felt heavy with sweat, and had slipped from
his narrow waist to hang around his well-formed hips.
The lawgiver had informed him that now that his house
was up, he had to have a private vegetable garden like the
others. Those in the central sheelings had to work in the
communal garden or help with the building and other camp
chores. The ultimate goal, according the Nikko, had been
independence, so that everyone became less of a drain on the
resources of the camp and the donations of larger lycan
community. He hated keeping up this pretense of being part
of the community. At least his house was at the farthest edge
out of sight of the others. He still spent the first half of each

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
236
day working at something the lycans considered normal,
except when he went hunting. Hunting. If the lycans knew
what he did when he went hunting they would not sleep so
soundly in their beds.
Beth had been missing for a week, and no one had
bothered to go look for her. Everyone assumed she had run
off with someone, or moved on to a village where her
reputation was not known. Clodagh, the young lycan who had
taken over the day-to-day handling of the camp following the
discovery of Beth's body, refused to stay there after dark.
That had limited his opportunities to add Clodagh to his
collection of tools.
Malthus had wanted to watch Beth rited, it had been years
since he had witnessed the kind of artistry that Egidius
brought to the rites, but had not wanted to risk being
discovered away from camp on the same night she vanished.
There had been no further sign of Sergei, but he didn't want
to leave the girls alone on the chance that the vampire was
lurking about, and someone would have known he was away
if he left them with a sitter. Kandaishee was turning out to
have an extremely susceptible and pliant mind. Eventually he
would have her watching them whenever he needed to be
away, and covering for his absences.
The sound of rushing footsteps on packed earth, and a
swish of skirts and petticoats alerted Malthus of Merissa's
approach. She was one of the few lycans who dressed like the
ladies of the queen's court, with a form-fitting bodice and a
wealth of under garments. Most of her people preferred
clothing that would not hamper the change to wolf or hybrid.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
237
Seeing her run along the path toward him, Malthus quit
working. He walked to his house and leaned the hoe against
it. "Go feed the goats and don't come back for a while," he
told his nieces. They ran off obediently.
"Oh, Malthus! It's terrible!"
He could tell she had been crying. Malthus opened his
arms to Merissa and she threw herself into them. "What's
happened?"
"It's Beth. She's dead."
"Oh, gods, no." Malthus' voice caught. "What happened?"
"You remember the day she ran off, crying?"
"Yes, of course. How can I forget it? It was the day I told
her I could never see her again." Malthus set Merissa back a
bit to look in her eyes and noticed someone moving in the
trees, watching them. Nikko. Every time he turned around
that god-forsaken lawgiver was spying on him. Sooner or
later, he'd catch that young idiot alone and that would be the
end of him.
Merissa swallowed and then began to sob. "I'm sorry I
made you tell her. Truly I am. I just thought..."
"It isn't your fault. If it's anyone's it's mine. Where did
they find her?"
"Iudris Meadow where those battle-clan myn were slain.
There was barely enough left of her for the Readers to
identify. It's horrible."
"Were they able to tell what killed her?"
"No." Merissa began to weep harder.
Malthus wrapped his arms around her, holding her close,
her face pressed against his neck. She was so deliciously

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
238
distraught and helpless, that it was all he could do to keep his
fangs in their sheaths. "I am so sorry, Merissa."
"I'm afraid the war is coming here. I'm afraid that is what
it means. I worry about Darmyk and his father."
"Why won't you name your lover, Merissa? Are you
ashamed of him?" Malthus asked.
Merissa looked startled. "No. I'll never be ashamed of
loving him."
"Does the boy know his father's name?"
"No."
"Love and what results from it, is nothing to be ashamed
of." Malthus leaned in and kissed her. Merissa's lips yielded to
his, parting. He slipped his tongue between them, flicking
hungrily around her own. She pressed against him, her body
moving along his. He cupped her breast, catching her nipple
between his fingers and kneading. Merissa moaned, and
arched her back. His hand traced her thigh, wishing that her
petticoats were not preventing him from feeling the special
place between her legs.
Abruptly, Merissa made a soft, almost indescribable sound
that Malthus read as a sob mixed with longing. She pulled
away from him and lowered her head, her face flushed, her
breathing rapid and hard.
"I'm not ready."
Malthus crooked a finger under her chin and lifted her face
up. "I'm falling in love with you."
She twisted away from him, refusing to face him. "Don't."
"Why? Am I that ugly?"
Merissa raised startled eyes to his face. "It isn't you."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
239
"Is Beth going to haunt us?" He gripped her arms,
kneading them.
"No. It isn't Beth either. I'm just not ready." Merissa
shoved away from him and he let her go.
Malthus watched Merissa as she ran, her skirts lifted to
free her feet. He licked his lips and ran his tongue across his
fangs. "You'll be ready very soon, Merissa. Very, very soon."
More movement caught his eye, and Malthus observed
Nikko leaving the grounds. "Follow me into the forest, Nikko,"
he murmured. "I know a good place for you to die."
* * * *
Like most shops in towns and villages, whether lycan or
human, Baroucha's living quarters were upstairs above her
work rooms. Ordinarily a village as large as Wolffgard would
have had several healers and midwives. However, Baroucha
resented competition. Gossip was her chief weapon and she
wielded it with great effect to drive out anyone who dared to
set up a competing shop and business. She tolerated the
human apothecary, Atreius Ivanstern, only because he had
access to drugs and herbs that she could not come by—
mostly through connections in Creeya—and he was willing to
sell to her at discount.
Clodagh had ordered some special creams from Baroucha
after several of the camp's children had encountered a patch
of poison ivy. Atreius had offered her large sums for her
recipe, but she refused to sell it, thus making him dependent
upon her for his own supplies. She had spent the day filling

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
240
seven jars for Clodagh and had them sitting on her counter
waiting to be picked up.
The past few weeks had not been pleasant for Baroucha.
She had caught glimpses of Cahira several times, always
accompanied by Todd, or her two huge sons, or her daughter-
in-law, that uppity bitch named Mary. They had not yet paid
Baroucha the promised visit, and Baroucha wavered between
fits of nervous anticipation and hope that it would never
happen. Somehow, between the intervening years, Cahira
had gone from being a healer of modest talents to becoming
that rarest of lycans: a mage. The change in Cahira had left
Baroucha feeling unsettled.
Baroucha went to the taverns each night in hopes of
gleaning bits of rumor concerning Cahira, but learned nothing
useful. Apparently, Cahira and her family were keeping to
themselves. Baroucha sat in the front room of her shop at a
long table, grinding dried herbs to powder with her mortar
and pestle, work she normally did in her back room. So long
as Cahira remained in Wolffgard, Baroucha wanted to spend
her days watching out her windows for Cahira's approach.
When she finished with the herbs, Baroucha gathered it all
into a basket and carried them into the backroom where she
kept them. The room was a maze of cabinets, tables, and
bookshelves. She had just begun putting the jars of herbs
away when the bell she had hanging on the front rang,
announcing a customer's arrival.
Baroucha flinched at the sound. "Cahira?"
"No," a male voice replied.
"Have a seat. I'll be right with you."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
241
"Clodagh sent me."
Baroucha did not recognize the voice and started for the
door when he appeared, silhouetted in sunlight from the front
room. "No. No. Customers are not allowed back here. Go sit
down."
"I'm allowed wherever I wish to be."
She frowned. "I've seen you around. You're..."
"Malthus. Malthus Estrobian."
"Malthus, you're not allowed back here. I must insist—"
He continued into the room and, as he came nearer, a
shiver ran down Baroucha's back. She retreated from him.
"What do you want?"
"A private talk. I turned your sign to closed. No one will
disturb us."
"Why?"
Malthus smiled and his fangs descended.
Baroucha glanced at his wrists, saw that he was not
spellcorded, and decided not to provoke him. "What do you
want to talk about?"
"Sit down over there." Malthus pointed at the table
farthest from the door.
She obeyed, a sense of dread gathering in her chest.
"What do you want?"
Malthus moved about the back room, opening and closing
the cabinets, examining their contents. He took out a bottle of
black liquid that lacked a label, opened it, and sniffed the
contents. "The Gentle Path. You're Guild?"
"No. I've a supplier in Creeya. That's all." Baroucha's voice
shook.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
242
"Good. I don't like Guild." Malthus continued to open
bottles and jars, sniffing the contents. "You have quite a
collection of poisons for a simple village healer."
"What would Guild be doing in Wolffgard?" She rubbed her
hands together in a nervous washing motion.
"Looking for the Butchering Serpent?"
"The Serpent here?"
Malthus left his explorations of her supplies, walked around
behind her, and kneaded her shoulders. "He's just become
your partner."
"Gods, no." Baroucha shuddered as he breathed along her
wrinkled neck.
"Be a good girl and I won't kill you."
"I'll be good." She flinched as his fangs broke the skin and
he sucked her. His power swept through her mind and
Baroucha sagged in her chair.
Malthus withdrew from her, licked the wounds closed, and
stroked her dull gray hair, finding it as coarse and dry as
straw. "I need workspace for some of my projects."
A small sob escaped from Baroucha as she managed a tiny
nod.
He patted her shoulder. "There. There. I didn't hurt you
that much."
"No."
Malthus chuckled at the timidity of her response. "I heard
you were a surly bitch. Yet, what do I find? A mouse."
"Please..."
"Please what?"
"Don't hurt me."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
243
He pulled at his oak leaf beard. "So predictable. I assure
you, Baroucha ... some of the adjustments I intend to make
to your brain will be extremely painful. But not all of them.
Just remember, the less you resist, the less it will hurt."
"I'll be good."
"I assume those creams on the table are for Clodagh?"
"Yes."
"I'll take those now, but I'll be back tomorrow."
* * * *
Tension had begun to build up within the Lawgiver House
ever since Nikko brought them word of Beth's death. That
was also the last time either Finn or Kynyr had spoken to
Nikko. It troubled the two young guardsmyn that the lawgiver
had stopped coming around to talk. While they considered
Nikko to be level-headed, they also knew the young wolf
seemed to be carrying around a load of undeserved guilt that
could easily drive him to some uncharacteristically rash
actions.
Merissa came by nearly every day to check on Kynyr,
sometimes with her mother and aunts in tow, and sometimes
without them. Whenever they did, Cahira would absent
herself.
Finn watched Kynyr cross the sitting room and settle into a
large chair near the window. Cahira had begun letting him
move about the house a few days ago. That meant that
Cahira would be going back to Longbranch soon and she had
not yet given Finn the rest of the story. His patience began to
wear thin.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
244
The sound of a coach and four outside alerted Finn to the
arrival of the Redhands, and he got to his feet. "You've got
company, Kynyr."
Kynyr nodded and stared at the ceiling. "You might as well
tell Gram to have the Nibari bring lunch out instead of doing it
herself."
Finn heard the door open. "I better duck out now.
Merissa's starting to think I'm avoiding her also the way I
keep excusing myself."
"Yeah. You do that."
Finn found Cahira sitting in the kitchen, her eyes focused
on a window, yet looking at nothing.
"I heard them, Finn."
He slid into a chair across from her. "How much longer you
going to be here?"
Cahira rubbed her eyes. "A week at most ... I think."
"Then you gotta finish the story."
"Finn, can't we just ... not?"
Finn shook his head. "If I don't know all of it, I can't help
Kynyr."
When she looked at him, her eyes were so sad and worn
that Finn almost withdrew his demands.
"The study?"
Finn stood up and went around to Cahira, offering her his
arm. "Let's take the servants' stair so you don't have to deal
with them."
Cahira managed a meager smile as she took his arm and
allowed him to lead her upstairs to the same place where they
had spoken before.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
245
This time she went straight for the whiskey without
bothering with tea first. Cahira drank two glasses of whiskey
before she even began to talk, and Finn could see that it was
costing her a lot.
"Where did I leave off?"
"You slept with him."
She covered her mouth, breathing deep and struggling.
"We fell in love. That's easy enough."
"I guess."
Cahira rubbed her hands over her face again, poured a
third glass and sipped at it. "Baroucha found us in bed
together. She spread it all over camp that I was a slut."
"You know for sure it was her?"
"Alistar told me it was her."
"Skinny old Alistar Heathwick?"
Cahira shook her head. "You never met him. He died
before Branduff was born."
"Okay. Different Alistar. Keep going."
"You know what the word guurmondru means?"
"I don't think I've ever heard it before."
"I'm not surprised. It's one of those customs we've lost. I
haven't heard anyone use that term in years. Take the terms
godfather, mentor, and spiritbrother. Wrap them all together
and you have a guurmundru. That's what Todd was to
Tarrant."
Finn frowned, trying to get his head around that and not
quite making it all mesh. In the end it seemed best to just let
it go, pretend he understood, and keep her talking. "Okay."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
246
"Todd and Sheradyn knew what was going on between
Tarrant and me from the first. Nothing came of it. Nothing
changed for me in camp ... until Baroucha stumbled upon us.
At that point life became awkward. It suddenly seemed like all
of the dogs in camp were trying to get into bed with me. I
turned them down. Some were polite about it, and others got
extremely ... insistent. Even rude. Especially Alistar Weems."
Cahira finished off another drink, refilled her glass, and
resumed talking. "By then, Todd had taken me under his wing
the way he had Tarrant. More to the point, Todd busted
heads..."
"Those who were harassing you?"
"Yes. We made a pact not to take it to Tarrant. I was just
to tell Todd if it got too hard to handle and he would take care
of it."
"Did he take care of this Alistar?"
Cahira released a trembling sigh. "I'm getting there. Alistar
refused to take no for an answer. He said that Baroucha told
him I liked it rough and he intended to give it to me."
Finn's expression darkened with anger. "He raped you?"
"He ... tried. Todd caught him ... pulled him off me before
Alistar could ... could consummate it. Todd not only beat
Alistar senseless, he told Tarrant."
"Whooa!"
"To say that Tarrant was enraged would be understating it.
They staked Alistar out over an anthill. Nude. Smeared with
honey. Drove runed silver spikes through his wrists and
ankles ... and one through his belly."
"That's nasty. But how does this—"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
247
Cahira leaned close and put her fingers over Finn's lips.
"Hush. If you keep interrupting, I'm not sure I can finish."
Finn swallowed and nodded.
She drank her whiskey and poured another.
Finn felt certain that if Cahira kept drinking at this rate she
would be even sicker than she had been the previous time. So
he gave another nod and waited for her to continue.
"Rumor claimed that Alistar had several minor mage gifts.
There was only one I knew he had for certain. Alistar Weems
had the Evil Eye."
Finn sucked a question back and left it unsaid.
"They took Alistar far from the camp to do it. I didn't know
what they intended. Todd told me not to follow them. I did
and I shouldn't have. I was like a moth circling a candle
flame. Alistar kept screaming. On and on and on." Cahira
shuddered. "The more he screamed ... the more I felt driven
... to look."
Finn grasped Cahira's hand, patting it without speaking.
"I'm okay. I'm okay. I'm almost finished." Cahira freed her
hand from Finn and wiped at the tears running from her eyes.
"By the time I got to Alistar, Todd and Tarrant had already
left. The moon was full. I could see Alistar's face clearly. Oh
gods." A sob escaped from Cahira. "Eighty years later and I
can still see his face."
Cahira went silent and Finn struggled not to speak.
Eventually, when Finn had nearly given up hope, she started
talking again.
"Alistar looked at me and that's when he laid the curse. His
voice was so strange. He didn't really sound like Alistar ... and

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
248
yet the words were coming from his mouth. The next day,
Baroucha came to me. She called me a murderer. She said I
had led Alistar on. She said he had cursed me and everyone I
loved would die." Cahira poured herself another drink. "And
that she was pregnant ... by Alistar."
Cahira folded her arms across her stomach and doubled
over sobbing. "Finn, bear with me. This is where everything
gets jumbled and patchy. Don't ask me to explain anything,
because I can't.
"Tarrant was on his way home from Clan Silverpaw. We
had learned that the divinators were destroyed and we no
longer needed to fear them. There were rumors that the Guild
had finally involved itself. The surviving divinators had gone
into hiding. Everywhere, our people were celebrating it as a
victory."
Finn nodded.
"Halfway between Running Horse and the Bonnie Draw
River, they were ambushed. Tarrant and his brother were
taken captive. Todd was the only survivor. They left him for
dead. If a peddler named Dyna had not stumbled upon him,
Todd would have died with the rest of them. When word of it
reached us..." Cahira sucked in a troubled breath. "It came on
the heels of ... sighting a large force of Sa'necari led troops,
most of them demons and the like. I was more than halfway
through my pregnancy with Branduff. We didn't even stand
and fight. We broke and fled."
Cahira took another drink of whiskey. "I thought both
Tarrant and Todd were dead. I couldn't think straight.
Baroucha and I fled together. I don't know why I left with her

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
249
... only that I did. She abandoned her cub at a monastery in
the mountains. She knew I was terrified and she kept ...
reminding me of Alistar's curse upon the Redhands ... telling
me his curse had killed Logan, Tarrant, and Todd. And when
she wasn't telling me that, she was telling me that the
Redhands would take Branduff away from me and cast me
out as a slut. She said many other things too. I don't
remember half of it. I was so frightened and confused. By the
time I reached Wolffgard, Claw and Aisha had been allowed to
return to the manor with the bodies of their sons. Tarrant had
been laid in the ground weeks before I got there. Baroucha
went with me to see Aisha. Gods, I wish I could remember it
right. I'm sorry, Finn. But I don't. I fled as soon as Aisha
asked if Branduff belonged to Tarrant. I babbled that I had
slept with half the army."
Cahira drank her whiskey down, poured another, and
drank that. "You want to know what the strangest thing is?"
Finn nodded.
"Everything I said to Aisha about myself ... described
Baroucha, not me." Tears started down Cahira's face.
"Baroucha followed me as far as Three Stones, telling me I
owed her a child and that she intended to take Branduff in
payment. I suppose I would have been lost completely,
except I encountered a friend of Todd's named Phelan and he
got me back to my father's home in Longbranch. And that's
where Todd found me."
"But why won't you tell them now? That's in the past."
"Because..." Cahira fixed Finn with a stare. "I believe there
really is a curse." She drank her whiskey and poured another.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
250
Finn covered her hands. "I think you've had enough."
"Let go of my hands."
Finn reluctantly released her.
"Curses are odd things. You have to know how to break
them or how to evade them. They're very literal. I know
nothing of breaking curses, Finn. But I know a lifetime's worth
of how to outrun them."
"What did the curse say, exactly?"
"I don't remember it all. Just pieces of it. All the Redhands
shall perish, until only the exile remains. There were a couple
of other lines in there. Then 'the exile's victory shall be his
pardon and those he claims will rule."
Finn licked his lips thoughtfully. "Maybe it isn't a curse."
Cahira looked startled. "What else could it have been?"
"A prophecy?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
251
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
NIKKO
Nikko knew that Malthus rode frequently into the forest,
allegedly to hunt; yet he rarely came back with anything
these days. So Nikko began staying out all night in his wolf
form, watching Malthus' home. He always left his home, went
into the forest and changed into a wolf there after hiding his
clothing. Then he would swing wide and come around behind
Malthus' house, which required crossing a stream that ran
through the village, to lie in wait for Malthus to leave.
Eventually his patience was rewarded, and Malthus rode out
just before sunrise one day with his packhorse in tow. Nikko
slipped though the trees and underbrush after him, moving
from shadow to shadow, trotting as fast as the terrain
allowed. Malthus turned onto a hunter's trace, and Nikko
followed. As Nikko moved deeper into the forest he knew so
well, he began to hear creatures in the trees, chittering back
and forth in a language he failed to recognize.
He gradually became aware of them being on all sides of
him. Their numbers increased steadily and now he caught
flashes of orange skin. He did not know what they were, for
their scent was unfamiliar. Yet he could smell their hostility. It
raised the hackles on his neck. One of them stood forth in the
treetops, giving Nikko his first clear view of one. It was a
nude male, wearing only a belt of pouches that also held a
blowgun, a bandoleer of darts, and a necklace of bones.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
252
Nikko recognized them from drawings in Tempest's books:
imps. Their darts would be either poisoned or drugged. Nikko
realized that he was in trouble, and knew that he needed to
break free before they closed with him.
He reared up in his transitional form and broke for what he
believed to be the weakest portion of them. Nikko found two
facing him with their blowguns to their lips. They fired,
striking Nikko in the shoulder and arm. He throttled one and
broke the other's head open against a tree, dropping the
bodies on the tarry black soil. Darts peppered him from all
sides. Nikko shrugged them off, bursting into the open. For an
instant, Nikko experienced a lightness that he interpreted as
relief at getting free of them. He felt over his body, grabbing
the darts from his flesh, and dropping them on the ground.
Then suddenly, he felt as if he had struck a wall or run
headlong into a large tree. Nikko blinked dully, feeling the
poison hitting his system harder than he had expected. He
had hoped that his hybrid form would be able to shake off
most of it. But he had been wrong. Lethargy crept over him
and a trembling weakness swept through his muscles.
Confusion and disorientation caused Nikko to make a
stumbling circle that brought him back onto the game trail.
Gazing ahead of him, Nikko saw Malthus standing with his
bow raised at full draw and an arrow to the string.
"What are you doing?" Nikko asked, swaying like a
drunkard.
For answer, Malthus released the shaft and drew another.
Nikko tried to dodge the missile, but the dart drugs had
slowed his reflexes. The arrow struck Nikko in the chest and

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
253
he staggered, feeling the burn of some incredible poison in his
body, far worse than the other.
"Devil's Silver. I'm killing you," Malthus said calmly,
releasing his second shaft.
Nikko clutched at the shaft protruding from his chest as
the second one hit him in the ribs. He crashed through a
stand of briars and stumbled into the trees trying to flee. The
shaft snapped off in his hand and fell into the briars when he
tried to jerk it out, leaving the long, barbed head lodged in
his chest and lungs, spreading the poison into his blood
stream. Devil's Silver ... oh, gods. It must be....
Two more arrows pierced his back, making him jerk and
stagger. Another flight of darts punctured his body. The imps
chittered excitedly, crying out their victory over him.
All of Nikko's muscles hurt from the swift acting toxins. He
thought of Nevin, his first mentor, who had been an exemplar
of courage, and steeled himself to fight it. He had to tell
someone, but his sense of direction failed him.
"You're dying, Lawgiver. No need to run." Malthus put
another arrow to the string.
Nikko did not stop. A fifth arrow pierced his thigh, nearly
dropping him. Nikko's fingers dug into the wound around the
shaft, forcing the leg to hold him up. Had it not been for the
Devil's Silver, he might have won free. Lycans could take
horrendous damage from normal weapons. He forced himself
a few more steps and then a few more. A sixth arrow hit him
low, close to his spine. The smallest movement had become
torment. He could hear Malthus and the imps following him.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
254
"I killed the priest. I killed Beth. Now I've killed you. No
one interferes with me," Malthus shouted at him. "I'm
sa'necari."
Nikko staggered on, weaving from side to side. Sa'necari!
How could we not have known it? A fit of coughing nearly sent
him to his knees. Blood, white froth, and yellow bile foamed
around his muzzle. Some force inside him said, "keep going,
keep going," and he did, even though he knew Malthus was
right—he was dying.
The young lycan clutched at his chest and stomach as he
struggled onward. I'm a fool. I should have gone to Claw with
my suspicions.
"Follow him. He won't get far. There's enough poison in
him to kill twenty lycans," Malthus said. "Retrieve my points
from his body. And my shafts."
Imps scampered after Nikko.
You're right, you bastard ... I won't ... get far. But maybe
... far enough.
He heard Malthus riding off in another direction. Nikko's
vision blurred. Fits of spasming rushed through his muscles,
making his body twitch and cramp. Nikko felt weak and tired,
with a pressure in his chest like a fist closing around his lungs
and heart. The constriction left him struggling to breathe,
unable to voice a warning howl into the dwindling light—
assuming it could be heard by anyone—or scream at his pain
and anguish.
He could barely keep his feet, could barely move. He
focused on picking one foot up and then the other. Nikko's
feet slid around under him. His knees kept threatening to

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
255
drop him as if they belonged to a broken doll. Two huge
willow trees grew close together ahead of the young lawgiver.
He heard the river rushing a few feet beyond the trees. If he
threw himself in the river, perhaps his body would wash up
near one of the fishing villages. They could match the arrows
in his body to those Malthus carried, identifying his murderer.
Nikko tottered into the trailing curtain of branches,
clutching at a trunk to hold himself up. The fletching on five
shafts protruding from his body looked like small, dark birds
perched in the willow curtain. The shafts caught on the
branches as he struggled for one last step—the step that
would carry him into the water—and twisted the heads in his
wounds. The death scream he had been unable to voice
earlier erupted from his throat in a long ululation of suffering.
* * * *
Malthus dismounted before the bleeding table at his
brother's cave—that was how he had begun to think of it—his
brother's cave. A dead body draped the table and seven more
hung from sturdy poles with their heads tied back, their
throats cut, and their blood draining into basins. He hoped
that his companions had brought plenty of preserving bottles:
the valley was rich in blood. Malthus had arrived at the
meeting ready to be fed, but not expecting it. Food appeared
plentiful and fresh—assuming they had held something back
for him.
Egidius, Laetus, and five others sat on the ground and
small boulders: two Rakshasas in their lovely female forms,
sat sharing a dismembered arm, slicing chunks from it with

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
256
their long knives; a huge, barrel-chested brukulaco kept
licking his lips hungrily while gazing at the bodies on the
poles; and a pair of lamiae waited for their share of lycan
flesh, their female human torsos emerging from the coils of
their serpentine legs. Malthus nodded at them. Lord Daemon
had procured him some very powerful allies, which was
necessary when dealing with the tough lycans.
A banshee like cry, half-wail, half howl shattered the air.
Egidius' head came up sharply. "What was that?"
Malthus shrugged. "Lycan death scream. You've heard
them often enough."
"Yes, but so close to here..."
Malthus smirked. "That was the lawgiver. I shot him. Nikko
turned out to be a more impressive specimen than I
expected." He moved around the table, examining the dead
lycan there. She had been almost pretty. "I hope you saved
some for me. I haven't had a rite in months."
"We did. Our scouts stumbled on an isolated group of
steadings. The last of the males have been drained, as you
can see." Laetus pointed at the bodies on the poles. "We have
a dozen women and children chained up in another cave."
"Excellent. I've been craving a rite." Malthus stroked the
corpse, sticking his fingers in the wounds, pulling them out,
and licking them. "You haven't been done with this one long."
Laetus laughed, his eyes dancing merrily. "You're good,
Malthus. I'd barely gotten my pants pulled up when we heard
your horse."
"Lycans don't call me the Butchering Serpent for naught."
He slapped Laetus on the shoulder. "I'll pick out some to be

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
257
sent to my estate in Carrion Crevasse. I want to start my
experiments again when this job is done."
"What did you mean by impressive?" Egidius asked.
Malthus chuckled. "My imps had him looking like a
porcupine. I put three arrows into him before it even slowed
him down. I put two more into him to be certain he didn't get
far. And then another. Judging from that scream, it still took
him a while to die."
The imps would eat Nikko and then bring a few trophies
back to Malthus, as they always did. The toxins in Nikko's
corpse would not so much as give them indigestion. With
luck, the imps would bring him Nikko's runes. He wanted to
analyze the way they had been consecrated. The lycans were
primarily ancestor worshippers, only recently turning to the
Nine Elder Gods of Light.
"What news?" Malthus asked them.
"Our eastern units saw fighting with the remnants of that
battle-clan. We exterminated them. Word should be reaching
the villages eventually. We butchered the bodies to feed our
allies, drained the captives and wounded. But you know
lycans; they don't need bodies to know what went down
there. That's why they have wet noses."
"We need to take a few hamlets soon," Malthus said,
pulling at his mustaches. "Eliminate the little stuff and then
move on to bigger game. I want to frighten the lycans."
"Our units are in place around three of them. And what are
you going to be doing in the meantime?"
"I'm getting married to the most beautiful lycan in
creation."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
258
"You said that about Dyllys. You rited her the day before
the wedding. You have no idea how that affected me. I was
looking forward to the parties afterwards."
"I had my reasons," Malthus snarled. "But Merissa is far
more beautiful than Dyllys ever was. Furthermore, she's
already had one sa'necari child. That means she should be
able to give me several heirs."
"Thinking of settling down?" Egidius smirked.
"I am. Mother would approve of her."
Laetus guffawed. "Your mother would approve of anything
that got you back into the family business."
Malthus shrugged and turned his back on Laetus, the fool
was young and too easily amused. "I forgot to ask, Egidius ...
did you enjoy Beth?"
Egidius joined Malthus beside the table. "Yes, indeed. I
made a proper rite of it. The full Fifteen Piercings. Dedicated
her death to Bellocar in your brother's name."
"Thank you." Malthus hugged Egidius. "You're a fine
friend."
* * * *
Nikko fell to his knees, hunched over. Some of the shafts
struck the ground, moving the barbs in his body. He groaned,
wheezed, and coughed up more blood. Nikko broke off the
shaft whose point lay buried in his lower ribs. He desperately
wanted to lie down. Weak and exhausted, he bent forward,
resting on his hands among the roots of the willow trees,
unable to go any farther. He thought of trying to crawl to the
water, but his arms trembled violently and gave out. With no

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
259
strength or will remaining, Nikko instinctively curled up on his
right side to die, which slowed the amount of blood seeping
into his good left lung.
He smelled reeds and the sweetness of the water lilies.
He wished he could have heard birds one last time, but the
imps had scared them away.
He thought of his mother, and wondered who would take
care of her when he failed to come home.
Another round of small convulsions shook him and the
world went hazy. Each moment of anguish seemed to stretch
forever.
How long does it take to die? Let it end. Please, gods, let it
be over. I can't take anymore ... I can't take the pain.
Nikko tried to embrace his death, and slide away into it, so
that the pain would cease. People in the stories did it. Nikko
couldn't.
The imps came out of hiding and crouched around him,
licking their lips like hungry scavengers. The one that Nikko
had seen earlier wearing a necklace of bones and teeth
approached him. Nikko tried to lift his hand to shove the
creature away, but could not find the strength to move. It
squatted in front of him, grinning with a mouthful of
misshapen, yellowed teeth. The leader gestured, speaking in
a few high-pitched sounds.
They grabbed Nikko and yanked him out of his curl. One
behind him forced the shafts through his body so that the
barbed heads ripped out of him. Nikko groaned, and cried
aloud. His body discharged its wastes, leaving him feeling like
a sick, brutalized puppy.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
260
The leader broke the heads off, and dropped them into a
pouch at its waist.
Mother, I'm so cold. For a moment, he felt her presence,
his mind blurred and he was a cub being wrapped in a
blanket. Mother, hold me. I'm afraid.
The sensation vanished with a wave of fresh searing pain
as the one behind Nikko jerked the betraying shafts back
through him. The imp bundled the shafts, and passed them to
the leader, who tied them to its bandoleer: there would be no
evidence of who had slain him. Despair enveloped Nikko like a
wet blanket in the snow, chilling him to the marrow of his
bones.
Another one picked up his arm and bit a chunk from it. A
canine whimpering, more animal than human, came from
Nikko's throat. Their leader, the one wearing the necklace,
thrust this fellow away, and gestured for the others to draw
back. They obeyed, making complaining noises.
The one that had bitten Nikko sat chewing the piece of his
flesh and grinning. "Guud," he muttered in that squeaking
imp tenor. "Tasty."
Nikko's stomach surprised him by clenching up—he had
thought his body incapable of reactions. This one had spoken
in Common to be certain that Nikko knew they were going to
eat him. Nikko prayed they would let him die first.
The imp leader grabbed the lawgiver runes around Nikko's
throat to yank them off, and yelped. He sat back on his
haunches, shaking his burned fingers. The runes had been
consecrated generations ago and could not be touched by a
creature of the darkness.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
261
Nikko felt a small flash of satisfaction at that.
The leader snarled, seized Nikko's hand, bit his forefinger
off, and dropped it in a pouch.
Nikko grimaced, moaned low in his throat, and closed his
remaining fingers.
It can't be much longer. Not when I hurt like this.
The leader stepped back, gestured for the feast to begin,
and left. They swarmed over Nikko.
Oh gods, no. Nikko's mind shrieked as they bit him. He
realized what the deer felt like when his people, running as
wolves, pulled them down in the winter hunting.
A large creature crashed through the trees near Nikko and
then another. The imps screeched. Nikko could smell their
panic. He heard a swish of something heavy and several imps
fell dead across him, their blood mingling with his. The others
fled through the trees with a crashing of leaves and branches.
Battle-magics filled the air with an acrid odor.
Then silence.
Nikko's awareness narrowed into darkness. He knew it was
nearly over for him and the evidence had been carried away.
Hands touched him and he felt the wash of a Reader's
power through him. Someone forced a bottle between Nikko's
teeth, a burning liquid poured into his mouth as a hand
thumped his chest. "Swallow, damn you. Swallow. It will
help."
Nikko swallowed convulsively. The liquid burned worse
going down than it had in his mouth, yet the pain eased.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
262
"It's bad," said a voice with the lilting accents of the Faery
folk. "I don't think he'll make it. There's Devil's Silver all
through him."
Nikko opened his eyes and his fading sight took in the
visage of the ugliest human he had ever seen. Beside that
one crouched a slender Fae with a pair of golden fans folded
and tucked into his sash. He had to tell them, and tried to
force the words out. "Saaaa ... Saaaaa ... necari. Mal—"
Nikko's head listed to the side, settled on the arm of the ugly
human, and he went still.
"Was that a word or name he was trying to say? Mal?"
Hathura asked, glancing at Lokynen, as he unshouldered his
pack, dug around in it and brought out lengths of linen. He
bandaged Nikko's wounds, and removed the darts from his
body.
"Devil's Silver?" Lokynen asked, wishing that his wife
Amberlin were with him. She knew all of that stuff. However,
she was too close to giving birth to be risked out here.
"Silver dissolved into an arcane acid that is compatible
with certain snake venoms and plant poisons," said Hathura.
"Unless we get him to Navaryn fast, he'll die. It may already
be too late. He's lapsed into shock." He shouldered his pack
and rose with Nikko cradled in his arms like a child as if the
full-grown lycan weighed nothing at all.
"Jump out of here."
"I can't. The Jump alone would kill him. Run with me."
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
263
Three dead lycans had been removed from the poles and
Malthus' allies sat eating them. The brukulaco had a femur in
his hands from which all the flesh had been gnawed off. He
broke the femur open and began sucking out the marrow as
he watched the imps approaching.
"Ahhhh," Laetus said. "Here they come."
The leader of the imps trotted up to Malthus. He reached
into his pouch, took out a bloody severed finger, and put it in
Malthus' hand. "Dead now." He gave Malthus a pouch, untied
the shafts, and dropped them at Malthus' feet.
Malthus opened it and counted the points. "All here. You
did well, Gahni." Counting the shafts, he frowned. "One's
missing."
"Give more meat?" Gahni asked, gesturing at the lycan
corpses hanging from the poles.
"Take one down and enjoy it," Malthus said. "But see that
you find the other shaft before morning."
"Generous. We find."
Malthus wondered about the missing shaft. Perhaps he
should change his fletching. No. Gahni's people would find it.
He felt certain of that. "Well, it's time for you to show me that
cave. I want to pick one out and have that rite I've been
starving for."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
264
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
DECISIONS
Navaryn's house nestled in a tiny dell that had only one
outlet, a narrow neck in the stone that required myn to pass
single file. A sheer cliff blocked the back with a waterfall
descending from its heights to feed the stream running
through the center of the little valley. Her gifts concealed the
entrance from those who had been given permission to
approach her. Elms and maples shrouded the garden and the
yard. Goats and sheep bleated in the pasturage behind the
house. Two big dogs rushed out at Lokynen and Hathura,
sniffed at them and then the mon in Hathura's strong arms.
The dogs trotted back to the house to let their master know
that she had company.
The master of the house was standing on the veranda
when they reached it. Navaryn toyed with a long length of her
pale, silvery hair as she reached out to touch Nikko. "A village
lawgiver," she said, noting the runes hanging from his neck.
The lycan born yuwenghau Read Nikko with a quick brush of
her fingers. "Arrow wounds and he's full of Devil's Silver.
Bring him."
Hathura tossed an irritating glance at Lokynen, as if to
say: yes, there is such a thing.
They entered the large, airy house through an expansive
foyer. To their left opened a long, deep sitting room and
ahead of them waited the kitchens and the hallway leading to

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
265
more rooms and a stairway to the second floor. Navaryn's
daughter, Pandeena was just coming down the stairs. She
wore a soft, knee-length shift and light sandals whose thongs
wrapped up her shapely legs to the hem of her shift.
Navaryn gestured for Pandeena to come with them. "I
need you."
Pandeena squeezed against the balusters so that they
could pass, and followed them back upstairs. She ran to the
linen closet in the hall and returned with several thick pads.
Hathura carried Nikko into a guest room that Navaryn
indicated with her hand. Pandeena darted past Hathura,
turned back the covers, and spread the pads on it. It was
easier on a patient to change the pads than to change
complete bed linens. They were also very absorbent and
easily cleaned.
Navaryn helped them settle Nikko on the bed. She glanced
at them. "Hathura, you know better than to tear barbed
heads from someone."
Hathura looked distressed by her statement. "I didn't do it.
Imps did. None of the shafts or heads were left behind
either."
Navaryn frowned. "That's strange."
Pandeena went to tall chest of drawers, opened one, and
started laying her mother's tools and medicines out on the
nightstand.
"What's more." Hathura touched Nikko's hand, indicating
the missing finger. "Their leader bit his finger off and took it
with him as a trophy."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
266
"Proof of his death?" Navaryn suggested. "Imps don't use
arrows, although they've shot him full enough of Death Lotus
to put him down."
Hathura and Lokynen exchanged glances. "We didn't see
anyone else," Lokynen said.
Navaryn began cutting away the bandages and probing the
wounds as she spoke. "Damn! These imps never leave
evidence behind. Their master is cunning."
"You know him?" Lokynen asked.
"Only by his deeds and his trademark. Hundreds of my
people have died at his hands. He's the Butchering Serpent."
"You should leave now," Pandeena said. "Mother and I
must try to draw the poisons out of him and mend his
injuries." She gazed down at Nikko. "He's so young, mother,
to be suffering like this."
"It's always the young males who die first in these wars.
Now hush and work," said Navaryn.
* * * *
Hathura followed Lokynen down to the sitting room before
either of them said anything. Dark brown polished furniture
filled the airy room, contrasting pleasantly with the
whitewashed walls and blue carpets. Linen curtains fluttered
in the breeze from seven huge windows. Sofas, heavy chairs,
and long, low tables filled it. Despite the obvious stoutness of
the furniture, only the largest chair at the far end felt
comfortable to Lokynen's massive body. So he headed for
that one, as was his wont.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
267
"What do you know about this Butchering Serpent?"
Lokynen asked.
"Rumor mostly," Hathura replied. "A battle-clan hit a
manor house that the Sharani missed. It was well hidden in
one of these interminable craggy valleys. There are thousands
of them in the Eiralyskali Mountains. Any way, their leader
had heard that someone was kidnapping lycans, mostly city
lycans, and experimenting on them. The manor was
abandoned when they arrived. The owner must have gotten
wind of their coming."
Lokynen took his favorite seat.
Hathura's eyes lidded as he sat down in a chair by the
window nearest him.
"And?" Lokynen asked impatiently.
Hathura sucked in a breath. "What they found in the
basements were cells filled with dead or dying lycans.
Mutilations, vivisections, poisonings. Those that lived long
enough told them of mass graves on the estate. Spellcorded
lycans, with coercions in their minds to prevent flight or fight,
had been forced to dig the graves for their own kind. The
graves were found. They contained more than two hundred
bodies. All lycan."
"Did they describe the bastard?"
"No. He came to them masked. They did know one thing.
He was sa'necari."
"Damn them! I'd like to see every single one of them
dead."
"So would I," Hathura said softly. "Sooo would I."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
268
"How many villages are close to where we found this
mon?"
Hathura considered. "Close enough for him to have
traveled in half a day?"
"Yeah."
"Three. There's a fishing village near Big Willows. That's
where we found him. Big Willows. There's Wolffgard where
the chieftain lives about half a day southwest on the banks of
the Eirlys. I seriously doubt the main village would have such
a young lawgiver. Last time I was there it was a big lycan
named Nevin Scarface. And there's Muddy Paws to the east of
Big Willows."
"Can I get either of you wine?" Navaryn's housekeeper, a
middle-aged lycan named Ruthvena, entered with a tray
bearing a bottle of red wine, plates of cheeses, and glasses.
She set the tray on a nearby table and opened the bottle.
"I could use it," Lokynen said.
They drank for a time and then Lokynen asked, "Could you
Jump me around to those villages to have a talk with some of
the folk?"
"Jumping, old friend, isn't as simple as you think it is. First
you have to have visited a place or already gotten some kind
of fix on it. Then you must make certain you're going to pop
out in an unoccupied spot. You don't want to materialize
partly in someone else's body or a wall."
"Then how am I going to check these places out?"
"Nothing is simple. We either walk or we see if Navaryn
will loan us horses. Assuming she has anything big enough to
carry you."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
269
Lokynen glared at Hathura. "Okay. We walk."
"And another thing. They aren't going to trust you right
off. You're not lycan."
"And we can't simply walk in and declare ourselves
yuwenghau."
Hathura laughed at him. "No, we certainly can't. The first
thing this Butchering Serpent would do would be to shoot us
both—in the back."
"Take me back to where we found him. Maybe we can find
which way he came from."
"All right my friend, finish your glass and give me your
hand. Ruthvena, we're leaving. Tell Navaryn we won't be
gone more than a day."
Lokynen put his big hand over Hathura's slender one and
felt the tingle of a Jump. Instantly, they were back at the spot
in Big Willows where they had come across Nikko. The bodies
of dozens of slain imps lay scattered upon the ground and
among the trees. Flies buzzed thick, crawling over the orange
skinned corpses.
Hathura studied the ground, walked around the tree that
Nikko had been found beneath, and pointed to the broken
brush. "There's your trail."
They backtracked from there, and found the place where
Nikko had left the hunter's trace. A bit of crimson and black
feathers caught Hathura's eyes.
"Hmmmn. What's this?" Hathura knelt and stuck his hand
gingerly into the briars, withdrawing a broken shaft. "Let's
take this to Navaryn and see if she recognizes the fletching."
"I want to know where he came from first," Lokynen said.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
270
"I can tell you that. The game trail leads to a road that
way." Hathura said. "He came from Wolffgard."
"Then I'm going to Wolffgard. The Serpent is there."
Hathura caught hold of Lokynen's massive arm; his long
fingers could not encircle the limb. "Lokynen, listen to me.
Our wounded wolf could have lived somewhere else and
simply been visiting. We need to get someone inside that
village to ask questions without drawing undue notice. The
Butchering Serpent is extremely dangerous."
Lokynen shrugged Hathura and started down the game
trail.
"If you mess up, Amberlin is going to be very disappointed
in you."
Lokynen stopped in his tracks, turned slowly, and glared at
Hathura.
"Just ask yourself, Lokynen, what would Amberlin do?"
"Talk to Navaryn."
Hathura nodded.
* * * *
Malthus sat feeding upon another slain messenger, sucking
all the juices out of the limp body. His imps crouched around
him, begging for pieces. They preferred the flesh. Thanks to
his efforts, the valley was becoming increasingly isolated. He
had slipped the garrote around their unwitting throats, yet
they would not realize it until he tightened it and cut off their
breath. No messages had gotten in or out for weeks. It was
time to send Merissa one of his own and sign Nevin's name to
it. Apparently Isranon had known about the child since late

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
271
spring, but Claw had chosen not to inform Merissa of that. He
would need to send Claw one also in the same package.
He had begun to see many strange faces among the last
batch of newcomers to arrive here. Most had come asking for
refuge like the others, but some had simply appeared out of
nowhere and taken up residence in various households or
built their own on the east fringes of the lycan village. Some
of them smelled of power, which made Malthus both curious
and cautious.
His imps had eaten Nikko and tossed his bones in the river
like they always did. No Reader would be able to establish
Nikko's identity from his bones, nor what had killed him.
Malthus had never expected that the poison would take so
long to kill Nikko; therefore, he would change the formulation
a bit, increase the amount of Devil's Silver in it, or use a more
concentrated form on his next batch. If the right Reader got
hold of those points, or the remains of one of his victims, they
would recognize his trademark poison—but he had never
missed a kill yet and no one would be able to connect his face
to them. No victim had ever lived long enough to describe
him.
Malthus liked the name the lycans had given him over the
years: the Butchering Serpent. He had enjoyed telling Dyllys
just who she had almost married that last morning, when she
had awakened from drugged slumber on his altar. She had
cursed, pleaded, told him she loved him, right up until the
moment he shoved the first blade in. Then she had screamed.
She deserved it for betraying the location of his manor to that
battle-clan.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
272
He wanted to take the chieftain alive, if possible, and kill
him last. That would serve Claw for taking the Sharanis' part
in this war. Once they took the first villages, Claw would be
forced to take the field against them and that should leave
the main village more vulnerable to their tactics.
A daydream of Merissa flitted into his mind. Malthus vividly
imagined her writhing desperately and ineffectually beneath
him as he violated her and sank his fangs into her lovely
neck; watching her belly swell with his child; taking her home
to his mother to show what a docile and loving wife she had
become.
"You're daydreaming about her again, aren't you?" Egidius
climbed up the rock to sit beside Malthus.
Malthus lifted his blood rimmed mouth, lowered the fragile
windsmon's body to his lap, and snarled, "So what if I am?"
Egidius shrugged, making a gesture for peace. "I don't get
it. That's all. I don't mind them on my altar or in my bed, but
I'd never marry one."
"You don't appreciate their finer points."
Malthus tossed the body to the imps and watched them
scramble to divide it up with their knives.
Egidius settled against a boulder, sitting on one with his
back to the rocks and his legs hanging from a sharp edge. He
pulled a preserving bottle from his pouch—they were nearly
unbreakable—and took a long drink before continuing. "And
how is she going to handle it when you execute her family?
They're traitors to the queen, after all."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
273
Malthus wiped his mouth on a handkerchief and returned it
to his pocket. "I'll make her understand. Even if I must rip
her mind apart to do it."
"You could have done that with Dyllys. Then we would still
have had a wedding and parties."
"I don't wish to speak of Dyllys. Never mention her again."
Egidius shrugged. "So be it."
* * * *
Granta walked into the refugee camp as Malthus came
looking for Ros and Lyrri who had been playing with some of
the other children. She scanned the yard, searching through
the faces of each young lycan male she spotted. Her hands
clutched each other at her waist, opening and closing,
tightening and releasing. The old crone was so evidently
disturbed that people stopped work to look at her.
Malthus caught Ros by the shoulder. "Get your sister and
go home. Stay there."
The tenor of the camp had changed since Beth's murder.
The children were watched closely and the women did not
venture out alone, only the males did.
Clodagh crossed the yard, and the crowd parted, allowing
her to reach Granta's side. "What's wrong?"
"Nikko." The old bitch looked at every face. "Has anyone
seen my son? My Nikko? He's missing. Two days."
"I'll help you look for him, if you wish," Malthus offered. He
glanced at Shalto and Oswyl. "Well?"
"Yes," Shalto said. "We'll help too."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
274
"Wait. Two days? I'm going for Claw." Clodagh gestured at
Kandaishee. "Make her comfortable."
Kandaishee took Granta to a tree round under a spreading
chestnut tree, and fetched her a dipper of water.
The females gathered close around her in a circle,
murmuring words of reassurance.
"I've looked everywhere," Granta said. "It isn't like him to
be gone so long without telling me. A day I could understand.
He has duties. But two?"
"That doesn't sound good," said Kandaishee.
Malthus pulled at his mustache and stroked his oak-leaf
beard. "We'll find him, Granta. Don't worry. I'm certain he's
okay."
* * * *
Cahira surveyed her packed belongings piled in the sitting
room of the Lawgiver House. "I never realized I had bought
so many things here."
Todd lounged on the sofa, his thick legs widespread,
smiling at her with undisguised fondness. "Shopping's what
bitches do best."
"And spoiling me is what you do best." Cahira joined Todd
on the sofa.
He dragged her onto his lap, brushed her braid aside, and
kissed his way up her neck. Todd's big hand closed on her
breast. "I thought this is what I did best."
Cahira giggled like a young girl, nestling tightly against
him. "That too."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
275
A young male voice broke over them, clearing his throat.
"Aren't you a bit old for this?"
Todd jerked his hand away from Cahira and sat on it.
Cahira flushed. "Kynyr!"
Kynyr grinned. "You know what dad says? If you don't
want to get caught, don't do it in the sitting room."
Todd's eyebrow arched, glancing at Cahira. "And who
taught him that?"
Cahira's blush deepened. "I caught Branduff and Ulicia in
the kitchen one night. I told him, 'if you don't want to get
caught ... '"
"Don't do it in the kitchen." Kynyr and Todd chorused, and
then they all laughed.
Cahira sobered. "Kynyr, are you certain you won't come
home with us?"
"Duty is where you find it, Gram." Kynyr quoted the old
Creeyan proverb.
"He's found his duty, Cahira. Best to let him be." Todd
turned his steady gaze on Kynyr. "I may not like it, but I
respect it. I'm proud of you, Kynyr."
The front door slammed open and Finn came staggering
through the foyer into the sitting room, winded and out of
breath. "Kynyr! Nikko's missing."
Kynyr's eyes went steely. "Since when?"
"Two days. Granta went to the camp looking for him and
Clodagh informed Claw. They want everyone looking."
Kynyr glanced at Cahira and Todd as silence yawned. "I
have to go."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
276
Finn and Kynyr ran out of the house, leaving Cahira and
Todd sitting alone. Mary had insisted upon one last round of
shopping accompanied by Trevor and Queran since Wolffgard
was the closest thing to a town she was likely to visit most
years.
Todd rubbed two fingers across his chin. "Gut instinct ...
they won't find him alive."
Cahira looked stricken. "The war's found us, Todd."
"That's the talk in the taverns." Todd saw that she was
shaking and pulled her close again, a protective arm slipping
around her thin shoulders. "I didn't want to tell you. There
was a massacre at Iudris Meadows."
"That's not far from Three Stones."
"Three units of Angus McCutcheon's battle-clan got wiped
out. The attackers spoor ... some human. Mostly not."
"I've been talking to Finn..."
"You've been getting drunk with Finn."
Pink crept into Cahira's cheeks and she nestled into Todd's
arms. "He wanted to know about Tarrant."
"Did you tell him?" Todd's voice softened and a haunted
light darkened his eyes.
"Everything I could remember. Finn needed to know ... he
wants to protect Kynyr."
"Spiritbrothers. Have been since Kynyr first crawled across
the floor and smacked him with a wooden soldier."
"I told him about Alistar's curse. Finn needed to know what
he's up against."
"Alistar." Todd growled deep in his throat. "I should have
put a spike in his heart ... as well as his belly."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
277
"Baroucha started it all. She threw Tarrant in my face in
front of Finn. So I had to tell him."
"You never paid her that visit."
"There's time. There's a little shop for sale a block from
the Commons, around the corner from the Difficult Horse.
Three stories, brick, with a basement."
Todd kissed Cahira's forehead. "I thought we were going
home."
"Kynyr won't come home. I had to think ... consider what
to do if he wouldn't."
"If Branduff had had six sons instead of six daughters..."
She shifted on the sofa, moving just far enough from Todd
to look him in the eyes. "Duty is where you find it. I can't
leave, Todd. I'm needed here. Kynyr needs me. Wolffgard
needs me."
"I need you."
"Want, not need." Cahira put her fingers over his lips to
still his protests before he could voice them. "I've always
known that sooner or later, I would have to turn and face the
darkness. I have to stop running away from it. Todd, I'm
staying."
Todd hugged her again. "Then I am too. There was a little
boy who read to me from an odd book when I was wounded
after the ambush. His name, if I remember right, was Bodi.
And there was a little girl named Lilac who kept patting her
pouches to hear them jingle. He looked in his book and told
me where to find you." Todd's eyes went distant. "And he said
to me, 'duty is where you find it, and yours is Cahira.' He was
right. We'll stay."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
278
CHAPTER NINETEEN
THE SEARCH
Kynyr and Finn arrived at the camp the same time as
Claw. The camp's overseer, Clodagh, walked beside the
graying chieftain and sixty guardsmon followed them wearing
boiled leather armor with swords at their shoulders and long
knives at their hips.
Ramsey spotted Kynyr and sidled over to them. "I'm with
you."
Kynyr answered with a nod and gestured at Claw.
"What's this about the lawgiver?" Claw demanded.
Voices rose in a chatter of concern and Malthus lifted his
hand. "Let Granta tell it."
"Acts like he runs the place." Ramsey muttered, running
his hand through his red hair. "You sure he didn't arrange
that little incident a month ago?"
"That's the one thing I'm positive of." Kynyr kept his voice
down, trying not to intrude on Claw. "But I don't like him
either."
Claw's sharp eyes raked Malthus' and then he turned to
Nikko's mother. "Speak, old bitch."
Granta's face furrowed and she looked on the edge of
tears. "Nikko's bed has not been slept in for two days. He did
not say where he was going or that he would be away."
"All the males, come with me," Claw said. "The rest stay
here, in the yard together."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
279
Claw instituted a formal search, beginning in the center of
the village. Increasing numbers of people joined in as the day
progressed. Knocking on doors and asking if anyone had seen
Nikko, they searched all the dwellings in the village, all the
shops, and businesses, all the streets. Tired and exhausted by
late evening, the searchers gave up and Claw told them that
he would send riders to the outlying farms.
Kynyr remained standing in the middle of the camp, his
eyes distant, thinking hard as the crowds dispersed.
"I know that look, Kynyr." Finn drifted closer to his friend
with Ramsey and Eideard in tow.
"Uhmmn. Nikko's been obsessed with Malthus for weeks.
I'd lay good odds that Nikko's been stalking him."
Eideard's pale blue eyes scanned their faces. "You think
Malthus killed him?"
Kynyr shrugged, staring off into a patch of elm trees
beyond the longhouses. "It's a possibility. I'm the only one in
Wolffgard who's better with his blades than Malthus. If there
was a fight ... Nikko never had a chance."
"So what do we do?" Ramsey's feet shifted into a sturdy
stance and his hands went to his knives.
"We get our horses first. Which of you has the best nose?"
Finn pointed at Ramsey.
* * * *
Merissa sat with Nikko's mother at the small table in the
kitchen where Granta and Nikko had sat so often together.
Her ginger hair veiled her lowered face, and her long fingers
drew idle patterns on the surface. She and Nikko's sisters had

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
280
been taking turns sitting with Granta. Moss climbed into
Merissa's lap, and she patted the dog without looking at him.
"Can I make you another cup of tea?" Merissa asked.
Granta shook her head, her shoulders drooping, and her
white hair disheveled. "No. I don't want anything. Just my
Nikko. My baby."
Nikko was the youngest of five, a change of life child for
Granta, and her special baby. When Nikko was ten, his father
Maldwyn died of a stroke while overseeing some new houses
being built. Nikko had been at his side at the time, and it
affected the boy deeply. Maldwyn's death, the Reader's said,
had been swift and relatively painless, but that was small
comfort.
"I could brush your hair," Merissa suggested, looking at
the disheveled white locks.
"No."
The sun westered toward evening, and most of the riders
that Merissa's father had sent out had returned. All of them
had the same thing to say: no one had seen Nikko.
By nightfall, Granta's hopes had faded, and she launched
into periodic bouts of weeping that Merissa did not know how
to handle. Granta's two daughters had promised to return
soon, once they had taken care of their own families. There
would be comfort nesting in Granta's house tonight. Her
daughters would not let her sleep alone while she was this
troubled.
"My Nikko is dead. I know it. I feel it in my heart." Granta
slapped her hand over her heart for emphasis. She began to
weep again.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
281
Merissa felt Granta's sorrow. It mirrored her own for
Isranon when she learned the Beast had taken him. "You
mustn't give up hope, Granta."
"I have no hope. He's dead. My little Nikko."
Merissa swallowed. She rose from her chair and hugged
Granta. "Don't give up."
"One of the newcomers killed him. I know it in my heart."
Merissa's heart skipped a beat. There were forty
newcomers, counting the children, but only one that Merissa
had fallen in love with. "You can't know that."
Granta straightened and wiped her eyes. "Yes, I can. He
was suspicious of one of them. Tempest had been also."
"Which one?" Oh gods, don't let it be Malthus.
"He did not say the name. That would be a violation of his
ethic."
"Then you can't go making accusations, Granta," Merissa
admonished.
Granta glared at Merissa. "I can and I will. Nikko kept
diaries. I'll find the name there, I'm certain."
"Oh, Granta, don't tell anyone about the diaries. Give them
to my father. If someone did harm Nikko, they'll steal them
and maybe even hurt you."
"It doesn't matter; I've had a long life. I want the
murderer caught."
"Then give them to my father."
"I'll think about it."
Granta's two daughters arrived and Merissa gratefully
excused herself, almost fleeing into the yard.
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
282
Malthus waited for Merissa in the shadows of a stand of
trees growing at the edge of Granta's property. Every tragedy
seemed to make her more vulnerable, lending her a sweet,
defenseless innocence that made his mouth water and his
cock harden. Granta's daughters arrived, and Malthus knew
that Merissa would be leaving soon. He licked his fangs and
drew them back into their sheaths. Soon, soon, he told
himself, fighting an urge to simply drag Merissa off into the
bushes the moment he got his hands on her. The door
opened again. Merissa stood there, briefly illumined by the
lamplight, in her tightly laced bodice that pushed up her fine
breasts so that the upper curve of their mounds showed.
Recently, she had begun dressing in a way that showed her
charms off. Malthus suspected that it was for him. He
straightened and stepped from the darkness into the light
from the windows.
"Let me walk you home? I don't think you should walk
alone."
Merissa stood swaying. Her eyes lifted to his, her lips
trembled, and she rushed into his arms to be held and
comforted. "Granta's convinced that someone from the camp
killed Nikko. I couldn't talk her out of it. She thinks she'll find
it in his diaries."
Diaries? The lawgiver was literate. "I can't imagine anyone
from the camp harming the young mon." Malthus felt
Merissa's shivering, inhaled the fragrant aura of her fear and
worry. He kissed her mouth, long and deeply. He clasped her
firmly against his body, his hardening spear begging for

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
283
release. "If there is anything I can do to bring Nikko back, I
will. I'm riding out with Shalto and Oswyl tomorrow as part of
the search party."
"Be careful. I don't want to lose you."
She slipped her hand into his, and they walked slowly back
through the village. From time to time, he would lift her hand
to his lips and kiss her fingers, or stop beneath a sheltering
tree to press another long, searching kiss on her mouth amid
the green concealment. Lights shone in the houses they
passed. The sounds in the taverns were muted. The village
seemed to have folded in on itself in its concern for the
missing lawgiver.
"If something were to happen to me, Merissa, would you
take care of my nieces?"
"Oh, Malthus, you mustn't let anything happen to you."
Merissa's voice caught.
"You haven't answered my question." Malthus kissed her
fingers.
"Of course I would. They might as well be my own. They're
sweet children. They adore Darmyk and he adores them. And
... and they'd be all I had left of you."
"I love you, Merissa."
"I don't know what I feel. Only that I don't want to lose
you."
"What do you feel this very moment? Say the words. I
won't hold you to them tomorrow."
"I love you."
Malthus pulled her into the shadows of a huge chestnut
tree, pressed her up against it, and kissed her again. His body

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
284
moved along hers, with only their clothing separating them,
and he kneaded her breasts. Merissa moaned, melting into
him. Abruptly, Malthus pulled away, grabbed her hand, and
ran toward this manor. "This won't do. I must get you home
before we do something you might regret."
They reached the manor house, Malthus kissed Merissa
goodnight at the door, and left her.
He walked back through the darkening village, beneath the
sprawling shadow forms of thickly planted trees that loomed
blacker than the night. Lycans never bothered with street
lamps, having little need of them; but neither did sa'necari
need them, although they liked them. Malthus reached the
middle of the village and turned onto the side street that
Clodagh lived on. Despite the lateness of the hour, the lights
were still lit in Clodagh's small longhouse. Malthus'
resentment had festered for a week over the Chieftain giving
an outsider supervision of the camp. If they had given it to
Shalto or one of the others who already worked there,
Malthus would have felt secure. However, the chieftain had
not done that. They had sent again to Shaurone for a priest—
who wasn't coming, because Malthus' agents had overtaken
their messenger a day's ride beyond Hell's Widow and
secretly killed him just as they had Cullen who had been the
first one they sent—in the meantime, Clodagh ruled the
camp. Malthus intended to change that with this visit.
He knocked on her door.
Clodagh answered, opening the door a bare crack and
peering around the edge, which suggested to him that she
was nervous of the night—but then a lot of the females were

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
285
becoming cautious. She recognized him, stepped back, and
swung the door wider.
"Hello, Malthus." She swept her arm at the interior. "Come
in. Is there a problem at the camp?"
Malthus noted the fact that Clodagh wore the old-
fashioned lycan robe that wrapped around with a simple sash
and could be easily shed to accommodate her shape
changing.
"The people in the camp are frightened, Clodagh," he said,
as she showed him to a chair. Clodagh had nice furniture, but
a dirt floor and the traditional half walls to separate rooms on
either end. A square table sat in one corner with four chairs
around it. A long folded cloth lay on the table, with a section
caught in a round embroidery hoop and the brightly colored
threads beside it. Instead of a firepit, she had a small hearth
in the rear, with cabinets to either side of it.
Clodagh brushed her fingers through her long sienna hair,
with a troubled shake of her head. "I don't know what to do
about it. I've tried to reassure them."
Malthus regarded her. She was pretty in a round faced
fashion, and about the same age as Merissa. Clodagh would
be a pleasant change from Kandaishee and the other
sa'necari he had begun sating himself on the day after Egidius
killed Beth. "As have I."
"Can I get you something?" she asked. "Beer? Wine?
Water?"
"Wine."
Clodagh fetched a bottle and glasses from a cabinet. She
poured for them both.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
286
While her attention was away from him, his fingers darted
to the hollow of her throat. A spider-web of dark magic
melted through her flesh and choked off her voice. Her eyes
widened and she dropped the bottle. The heavy bottle struck
the floor, and rolled at her feet.
She staggered back from Malthus, changing into her hybrid
form.
Malthus overturned his chair as he straightened and
lunged at her. "You can't win."
Clodagh came at him snarling and swiping at him with her
claws. Malthus sidestepped, seized her wrist, and whipped her
arm behind her back, doubling her over as he planted his
knee in her stomach. He forced Clodagh to her knees, and
then down on her face. Placing his knee on the small of her
back, Malthus raised her shoulder and shoved his hand
between her breasts. Black energy lashed through Clodagh's
chest.
She cried aloud in pain, but her voice failed to carry past
the muting spell.
Malthus touched her temples and the fight went out of her.
He released her, and Clodagh curled up, sobbing. Slipping his
hand inside her robe below the tie belt, he ran his finger from
her loins to the top of her belly, sending waves of anguish
through her.
"Stop! Stop, stop, stop. Please."
"I hate making this rough and rushed," Malthus said. "But
I have very little time."
Malthus pushed her over onto her back, pulled the tie on
her robe, and opened it. He struck her in the chest and ribs

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
287
with another round of spells to be certain that not the
slightest bit of resistance remained in her. Clodagh went limp,
but her eyes watched him, knowingly.
"You killed them, didn't you?" Clodagh's whispery voice
rose from her throat with an edge of fear and a slice of grief.
"Who else? When I'm finished, you'll not be able to tell
anyone."
Malthus caressed her breasts, pinched her nipples, and
stroked her face. He enjoyed the feeling of lycan fur beneath
his fingers. She shivered, but did not move from the position
Malthus placed her in. He liked that.
Tears came to Clodagh's eyes. "A sigurni said ... one of
you ... would get me."
Needles of energy went into her brain, making her
whimper. "But, did she know it would be the Butchering
Serpent?"
"You? The Serpent?" Clodagh's voice shook.
He stitched and knotted the sways and triggers in her
mind, and bound her tongue so that she could not betray
him. "Yes. You'll be ill for a few days. Rushing it this way has
that effect on a lycan."
She would recover nicely and be very useful to him from
now on. Malthus opened his pants, and lifted his spear and
his rocks free. Clodagh shut her eyes and turned her face
away from him. That, being her first and only movement
since he enervated her, brought a chuckle from Malthus.
Clodagh's tears finally escaped her eyes.
"Never had a lover before?" Malthus lowered his body on
top of hers, parting her legs with his knee. He pressed his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
288
fingers to her temples, inserting more arcane needles into her
mind, her psyche, and her awareness. Since Clodagh was
lycan, Malthus needed to build the compulsions and coercions
slowly as he had with Beth.
Clodagh's whimpering turned to sobbing.
His cock pressed the edge of her mouth of pleasure.
His fangs came down.
"You have a sweetheart?"
Clodagh sucked in a long breath, struggling not to answer.
Malthus sent a wave of sharp, blinding pain through her
head. "What is his name?"
"Odhran." She wept.
"Break it off, or I'll kill him."
Then he bit deeply into her breast, sucking her rich, ripe
blood as he raped her.
* * * *
Kynyr and his friends started their search behind Malthus'
cottage after making certain that the mon was not home.
Ramsey ran with his nose to ground, his thick fur was a shade
more cinnamon than his human hair and he blended into the
night shrouded trees and brush with ease, frequently
becoming lost to sight as he forged ahead of them.
None of them said it, but they all knew they were looking
for Nikko's dead body.
The moon reached its zenith, a slice past full and headed
for half wane, throwing a silvery illumination over the forest.
A long howl from Ramsey told them he had found
something. Kynyr's first thought was that Ramsey had found

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
289
the corpse, and his second was that Malthus was too clever to
have dumped Nikko's remains that close to the camp.
They rode through the trees and found Ramsey standing in
hybrid form with something brown in his hands beside the
banks of Lavender Creek. "Nikko's clothes. Looks like he
crossed the creek here."
Kynyr dismounted and took the clothes from Ramsey. He
held the brown robe to his nose and sniffed it. Kynyr nodded.
"Nikko."
He scanned the creek banks. "We'll make camp here.
There'll be a better chance of picking his trail up on the other
side once it's daylight."
Ramsey went to his horse, which Eideard had been
leading, took a robe from his saddle bags, and wrapped
himself up before settling with his back to a willow tree.
"Least we know he wolffed it."
"You think he's dead?" Eideard asked the question they
had been avoiding.
Kynyr pulled his saddle and kit off Bucky and started
brushing him down before answering. "I know he is."
* * * *
A flame danced upon the wick of an oil lamp sitting on the
nightstand in Malthus' bedroom. Kandaishee lay nude beside
him, her cheeks damp from weeping, the quilted coverlet
clutched so tight in her hands that her knuckles were white.
The nights were cool this far into the mountains, even when
the summer days were hot.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
290
Malthus touched her cheeks, trailing his fingers through
her tears, musing that she always wept when he forced his
rod of possession into her. It delighted him. His fingers
moved lightly from her face to her breasts and he stroked
Kandaishee's body. Malthus' fingers lingered on the almost
unnoticeable puffiness along the lower half of her belly.
"Growing a little present for me?"
She writhed away from him. "It's not fair! You're too old to
be fertile."
"You're forgetting who I am."
"The son of Sidera Tyrins ... oh gods ... she cured it."
Malthus chuckled. "Indeed."
He pinched her nipple.
Kandaishee yelped.
"Be still. I want to Read my gift."
Kandaishee obeyed with a sob.
Malthus extended his awareness through her, narrowed his
focus, and smiled. "A son. Very good. I think I'll keep you."
"You killed him."
"Nikko?"
Kandaishee shivered as he began stroking her again.
"Yes."
"There's no body. But they might find his bones in the
Bonnie Draw."
As soon as he released her, Kandaishee curled into a tight
ball of misery. "Why are you here? Why did you have to come
here?"
"My orders are simple. Kill the Redhands before they can
bring the clans into the war."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
291
"You've never forgotten the Rebellion."
"It would be foolish to forget it. Those who fail to study
history, lose."
* * * *
It took Kynyr half a day to pick up Nikko's trail again and
they found that it backtracked to Cheshire Road. Claw's
messengers, heading for the farms, overtook them at midday
and Kynyr hailed one of them.
"Glendon! Wait."
The messenger was a wiry wolf, small in stature, but with
a reputation for getting rowdy in the taverns. He reined his
horse and waited. "What's up?"
Kynyr reached into his saddle bag, bringing out the brown
robe. He extended that to Glendon who took it from him.
"What's this?"
"We found Nikko's clothes last night at Lavender Creek.
Take it to Claw and tell him they need to search in this
direction." Kynyr gave a quick, but detailed account of
everything they had found, leaving out their suspicions
concerning Malthus. They did not want to find that Glendon
had been spreading that part in the taverns.
Glendon tucked the robe under his knee, turned his horse,
and kicked it into a canter.
Cheshire road branched, the main road turning east and a
narrow cart road bending toward the Bonnie Draw. After a
few searching sniffs, Ramsey led them down the cart road,
which ended a few hours later at the Clegg farmstead.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
292
Neither Old Man Clegg nor his son Douglas had seen
Nikko. The four friends rode back down to the road and sat in
silence for several minutes that was finally broken by
Ramsey.
"What now?"
Kynyr's brow furrowed in thought. "Hunter's traces.
There's some around here that run all the way to the northern
caves."
Ramsey shifted back to wolf and took off. An hour later he
gave them a howl and a shout. "Look what I've found!"
Kynyr dismounted and led Bucky off the road to a game
path littered with recent deer droppings. "Nikko?"
"Imps."
They found Ramsey standing over the rotting corpses of
two imps, one of which had clearly died from having its skull
smashed.
"What the hell are imps doing in Red Wolf?" Kynyr dropped
to his knees and turned the corpses over with a stick.
"Looks like Nikko made his stand here." Ramsey squatted
beside Kynyr.
Finn stood gazing at the trees, wary and tense. "If imps
got him, then Malthus had nothing to do with it."
The closer they came to the Bonnie Draw, the more dead
imps they found. When they reached the willow trees along
the banks, they stumbled upon a cluster of fifteen orange
skinned corpses. Some of them had bits of rotting meat
caught in their teeth.
Kynyr sucked in a fortifying breath and dug the meat from
the teeth of one with his knife. He sniffed it and his face

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
293
hardened, his eyes clenched shut. "Nikko ... and Devil's
Silver."
Finn's eyes widened with incredulity. "Imps don't use
Devil's Silver."
"I know." Kynyr nodded wearily. "Ramsey, you and
Eideard go for Claw. Finn and I will wait here."
"You dogs be careful," Ramsey admonished them as he
climbed onto his horse. "Imps are a bad way to die."
"We will be."
* * * *
For three days Merissa and Nikko's sisters had taken turns
sitting with Granta. The old lycan refused to be comforted by
anyone. On the evening of the third day, Merissa had
managed to convince Granta to sit in a comfortable chair in
the parlor with her. A long, low table occupied the space
between the chairs and the sofa. Merissa had drawn her chair
up as close to Granta's as she could, so that she could
periodically pat the old one.
The door opened, Claw came in looking grim. Granta's two
older sons, as well as Malthus, Shalto, and Oswyl followed the
chieftain inside. Claw carried a bundle of clothing in his hands
that he laid on the table in front of Granta.
"We found these. I'm sorry, Granta. Your son's dead."
Granta let out a long keening cry, collapsing onto the floor
and pulling at her hair. "My Neeekkoooo."
Merissa knelt beside her, gathering the old bitch into her
arms. She held Granta while the mon wept.
"Have you brought his body in?" Merissa asked.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
294
"No body." Claw's lips twisted into a grim expression.
"Imps got him. They ate him."
"Then how can you be so certain?"
"We found his clothes, and then stumbled on the scent of a
blood trail. It ended at Big Willows. We found some dead
imps. From the amount of blood soaked into the ground, he
was already badly wounded before he made his stand there.
Some of his flesh and fur was caught in the dead ones' teeth."
"But if you didn't find—"
Claw shook his head regretfully. "The blood stank of Devil's
Silver. Imps eat those they bring down. They devour them
alive. The trail ended there." Claw rubbed his hand over his
face. "Nikko did not walk away or we would have found
traces. He died there. I'm sorry."
Granta shrieked again.
Malthus covered his surprise by lowering his head. So
Nikko managed to kill some of Gahni's people before he died?
Impressive.
"I'll stay with her until her daughters get here," Merissa
said.
"I don't want you walking home alone." Claw grimaced in
distaste, looking impatient to be out of there.
"I'll see that she gets home." Malthus stepped close to
Merissa.
Claw eyed Malthus. "You're that Malthus who's always
hanging around the gardens."
"I am. My nieces like playing with Darmyk."
"I've heard a lot about you," Claw growled. "No messing
around. Just bring her straight home. You understand?" He

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
295
laid the bundle of Nikko's clothes on Granta's table, turned,
and strode out.
Once Granta's daughters arrived, Merissa walked home
with Malthus' arm around her shoulders, leaning her head
against his chest. Fresh bouts of weeping continued to come.
"Why Nikko? He was so kind. Tempest, Beth, and now Nikko.
I feel like my heart is being ripped out of me."
"He was a good mon. The village couldn't have wanted for
a better lawgiver."
Merissa turned her tear streaked face to Malthus. "Nikko
and I grew up together. If I hadn't already been in love with
someone else at the time, I think I could have loved him. He
was so kind and gentle. So patient."
They paused beneath a spreading chestnut tree and
Malthus drew Merissa into his arms, holding her protectively.
"I love you, Merissa. It breaks my heart to see you so
unhappy ... so overburdened with grief."
"Malthus..."
His lips covered hers as he pressed her back to the elm
tree. She wrapped her arms around him, moaning softly as
his body moved suggestively against hers. Merissa's hand slid
down to the conspicuous bulge in Malthus' pants, and he
responded by grinding his erection into her loins so hard it
seemed as if the cloth separating them would tear.
"Get inside, Merissa!" Kynyr strode into the courtyard,
glaring at Malthus. "Your father can see you from the
window."
Merissa paled and twisted free of Malthus, fleeing into the
manor.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
296
"Stay away from her, Malthus. Stay the bloody hell away
from her."
Malthus regarded Kynyr, a dark, arrogant turn to his lips.
"Make me."
Kynyr's fist shot out, caught Malthus in the face, and sent
him sprawling into the dirt. Then he turned on his heel and
stalked back into the manor.
"I'll give you that one. Next one will cost you."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
297
CHAPTER TWENTY
SHOPS, DIARIES, AND MURDER
Cahira stood in the street, her head craned back as she
watched Todd and the two Scott cubs, Rory and Hamish,
hang the big wooden sign on her shop: Cahira's Potions and
Notions. Underneath the words were three sets of symbols
that the largely illiterate lycan community could understand:
a mortar and pestle; a serpent wrapped staff; a book, a bottle
of ink, and a quill.
"Potions, healing, scribe, and translator. I do it all."
When Todd suggested they should hire some help around
the place, Cahira had immediately decided upon Rory,
because Finn had told her about Rory fetching them when
Kynyr was in danger and she felt she owed the boy a debt—
although she had not told Rory that. Rory had turned out to
be an impressive negotiator for just nine years old,
persuading her to hire his eight year old brother also. So now
the Scott cubs worked around the shop and living area for
two coppers each a week, plus lunch.
Rory glanced over his shoulder as he started down the
ladder, and gave a loud derisive hoot. "Watcha lookin' at ya
old stink face!"
Cahira lifted an eyebrow and turned around to see who
Rory had directed his insult at.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
298
Baroucha stood on the wooden boardwalk across the
street, glaring at the sign. "Don't get too cozy, Cahira. You
won't last."
Despite the summer heat, Baroucha wore a high collared
dress of heavy fabric that snugged her neck. It tied on the
from shoulder to hips. Baroucha made no attempt to hide the
fact that her breasts sagged almost to her waist. She carried
a fighting knife on her belt that made Cahira wonder what
might have changed with Baroucha: she had never carried
one when they were young.
"I like it here, Baroucha."
"Don't cross me, Cahira. You'll regret it."
Cahira's lips tightened. "You weren't so bold when I caught
you trying to poison Kynyr."
Baroucha sucked in a sharp breath and retreated as Cahira
approached her. "It wasn't poison."
"But it would have killed him. So what's the difference?
Hmmmn?"
"Get away from me." Baroucha made a sign against the
Evil Eye, and scuttled off down the street.
Todd stepped from the ladder, chuckling. "It's a god's
guess what she'll try to pull. But she'll try something."
"I hope so. Then I'll step on her and squash her like a
bug."
Rory and Hamish sauntered over to them giggling. Hamish
flipped a victory sign to her. "You go, Cahira. We'll shy a rock
up her ass if you want."
Hamish pulled his sling from his pocket and brandished it,
swinging it around and around.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
299
Cahira put her arms around the cubs and walked them into
the shop. "If anyone's going to throw rocks, it will be me. I
want both of you to stay out of trouble."
Rory and Hamish slipped from her grasp and ran to a stack
of wooden crates sitting in front of a fine cabinet that was
wood halfway up and glass the rest. They started unpacking
the crates and putting things on the shelves without being
asked.
Cahira stood near them smiling. "You know, Rory, when
you turn ten, you can be legally apprenticed."
Rory beamed. "To you?"
"Who else?"
Cooley stepped out of the backroom and watched them
with longing in his eyes. He started to turn away, but Cahira
had seen him.
"Come here, Cooley."
He came, shuffling his feet and staring at them. Cahira
pulled him into her arms and held him for a long time in
silence. The Scott cubs gathered beside them. "You're lonely.
I can see it."
"I want to be an apprentice, too."
"You can't be."
A tear trickled down his cheek. "Why not?"
"Because you're family and that's much more important."
Cooley blinked back more tears. "I am?"
Cahira kissed his forehead and hugged him tighter. "Todd
and I petitioned the temple to adopt you. Our petition was
granted yesterday. We were going to surprise you with a
party and announce it then. However, today will do."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
300
A tremulous smile came over Cooley's lips. Then,
inexplicably he burst out weeping.
Rory put his arm around Cooley's shoulders. "And I can be
your spiritbrother, if you'll have me."
Cooley sniffled and then his smile steadied. "I'd like that."
"Done deal."
* * * *
Malthus had rearranged Baroucha's shop and her home
above it. The table farthest back in the workroom had been
replaced with a sofa. One of her two storerooms now
contained a desk and chairs for Malthus to do business from.
Baroucha's unused guest room had been refurbished, and
turned into luxurious accommodations that included a large
bed with a goose feather mattresses where Malthus could do
a different kind of business.
Baroucha felt an odd satisfaction in the alterations. She
had begun to pride herself on her self discipline, which
allowed her to deal with Malthus to her advantage. Having
Malthus for a business partner made her feel less intimidated
by Cahira. After all, what was a minor lycan mage compared
to a consummate sa'necari.
She was just closing for lunch when Malthus arrived.
Baroucha knew what he would want first. He turned the sign
to closed and headed for the workroom without a word. The
healer followed, opening her collar and stroking her neck in
anticipation. It still hurt when he bit her, but Baroucha had
learned quickly how to endure it.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
301
Malthus sat on the sofa waiting for her as she entered the
workroom. She joined him there, settling against the arm of
the sofa so that it would support her once he began to feed.
Fresh blood had qualities that flesh lacked. The sa'necari were
dependant upon those qualities of the blood, relishing and
feeding upon them at every opportunity. She knew it well.
Anticipation sent a rush of adrenaline through her.
His fangs descended and he wrapped his arms around her,
breathing along her neck. "Heaven or Hell, Baroucha."
"Heaven. Let me feel young again."
She shuddered as Malthus bit into her. Then he triggered
her endorphins and sent her into dreams. For a little while, it
was her beloved Alistar sucking on her neck. Baroucha was
young and in love again. The dreams ended too soon as
Malthus released her.
He licked away the drops that had eluded his mouth as he
fed. "I'm going to hire you an assistant, Baroucha."
"Why? I've never needed one." She grumbled low in her
throat, half formed words that Malthus had trouble discerning.
"You can do more important things for me." Malthus took a
gold coin from his pouch and slipped it into her hand.
"Carrot and stick?" She stared at the coin, which was half
a year's pay for the average lycan laborer. "You tie my mind
in knots and then give me gold?"
"Which would you rather have?"
"Gold. There won't be much for me soon."
Malthus caught the bitter edge underlying her words.
"What do you mean?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
302
"Cahira Sinclair ... Kynyr's grandmother ... She's opened a
shop around the corner from the Difficult Horse."
"You want to get rid of her? Or are you asking me to?"
Baroucha's eyes glittered. "You're my partner, aren't you?"
Malthus stroked his beard, thinking. "I'll have a look at
her. If it's to my advantage, I'll remove her. Meanwhile, I
have other matters to take care of."
He got up to leave and Baroucha clung to his arm. "One
more thing."
"What?"
"Rumors. I've heard that your mother has potions to
restore one's youth."
A sly smile slid across Malthus' lips. "She has such."
"How can I get them?" Baroucha's hold on Malthus' arm
tightened with desperation.
"Kill someone for me."
* * * *
In the middle of the afternoon, while everyone was
working or at their chores, Malthus went to visit Granta with
an empty satchel hanging from his shoulder. He had been
watching her home for days, and he knew when he would find
her alone. The little dog was tied out back. Malthus let himself
in quietly, uncertain about how much age had reduced her
hearing. After a quick search, he found her in the kitchen with
the diaries spread over the small table in front of her. Her
loosely tied robe gapped open at the top and parted at the
knees, revealing the upper edge of her shriveled breasts, and
her bony legs.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
303
The semi-literate crone read them aloud to herself,
struggling with each word.
On the far side of the kitchen, Moss began to bark and
scratch at the door, demanding to come in. Granta's head
came up with a frightened look and she closed the diaries.
"Hello, Granta. Can I help you with that?" Malthus asked,
sauntering toward her.
"You didn't knock." Granta pushed her chair back from the
table.
"You should not be alone, you know. Not with a murderer
loose."
"Get out of my house." Granta stood and changed to her
hybrid form, which caused her belt to come untied. The robe
fell open. Old and frail, completely white with age, Granta's
skin sagged on her withered body, and her breasts drooped to
her waist.
Malthus halted just beyond her reach. "Did Nikko write
about me, Granta?"
She brandished a thin claw at him, snarling, "Get out."
"When I'm ready." Malthus lunged, and threw an arm
around her, pinning her wasted body to his, her arms to her
sides.
"Bastard." She twisted in his grasp, straining against the
tremendous strength imprisoning her, and suddenly the
realization of what he was shone in her eyes. "Sa'necari."
Malthus touched the hollow of her throat with a word of
command, and she could no longer speak above a whisper.
Granta's eyes rounded like tree burls.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
304
She bit for his face, but he lifted his shoulder and bumped
her under the chin. Her mouth closed on his shoulder and the
chain mail he wore hidden beneath his garments turned her
worn old teeth.
"None of that," Malthus said, brushing his finger along her
collarbone, black power burning on the tip, as he spread her
robe open more.
"Aiiiii. Aiiiii." Granta's scream sounded hoarse and rasping
beneath the smothering spell.
His fingers formed a claw with his middle finger resting in
the hollow between her breasts, and he enervated her with a
word. Granta's head lowered, and she hung flaccidly in his
grip. Her hands closed into impotent fists.
"Don't ... hurt ... me."
Malthus smiled thinly, cocking his head with a glance to
the side. "Relax and the pain will be short." He pressed his
face into her neck, murmuring, "It's time to join your son."
Granta panted hard, her heart palpitating. "Gods mercy,
please no."
"Yours ... will be a kind death ... compared to his." Malthus
spoke in a soft voice, utterly without harshness, calm and
dispassionate.
He inhaled the pleasant lycan musk clinging to her as he
slipped his hand beneath Granta's robe and placed his palm
over her heart. The spell worked best flesh to flesh, although
clothing, and even armor, was no barrier to it. He gave a
sharp arcane jab into the heart muscle, and lapped up her
suffering.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
305
Pacing was an art that he had mastered long ago. Hurt
them a little, or hurt them a lot, but never let them know
when the next is coming. Besides, this had to look
progressive and different from the one suffered by Tempest.
When he finished it would look as though she had suffered
from heart problems for years. He knew lycan physiology and
bio-alchemy inside and out. Inside and out. The phrase
almost made him chuckle when he recalled how many
vivisections it had taken to master the knowledge.
Tears of pain and terror ran down Granta's face. "Stop."
Malthus liked the way flesh felt as it died. The auric taste
of it, added to the rhythms of her fear, whetted his
necromantic hunger. Her shuddering anticipation enhanced
his pleasure and fed him. "Now, in earnest. Ready?"
Granta's feeble yanking and pulling at her arms in an
attempt to get them loose achieved nothing. "Please don't."
He Read her, finding that her heart was not strong—for a
lycan—not nearly as strong as Tempest's had been. Still, to
deceive the Readers who would examine Granta's remains, it
paid to proceed carefully.
She writhed in his grip, knowing what was coming, but not
when. "Please."
Kissing her cheek, he sketched a death web over her left
breast. The spell melted through her flesh and settled around
her heart. He returned his palm to its place on her chest and
stabbed her with power.
Granta yelped at the shooting chest pains, yet her spell-
muted voice released the sounds softly and sharply
punctuated.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
306
Malthus began kissing her face as he increased the flow of
the dark energies into her heart as he had with Tempest, all
the while describing how he had killed Nikko, what it felt like
for a lycan to die from Devil's Silver.
"Neeekooo." Granta sobbed as much in grief as in pain.
Beyond the door, Moss continued to bark and growl with
increasing desperation.
Malthus doubted the dog would attract attention at this
time of day, but decided to quicken the process of Granta's
dying, since he needed to do it in stages to cover its arcane
origins. He forced Granta back into fully human form with a
needle of power in her mind, his arm tightening around her as
she shrank. She would fail faster in that shape.
The old crone whimpered in that canine fashion Malthus
enjoyed hearing, her head wagging back and forth listlessly.
It aroused him. Rubbing his erection along her body, Malthus
realized how rite-hungry this was making him. Granta's
breathing shallowed out, and increased again in a fluttering
struggle. Her body erupted in a cold sweat. He licked the
moisture from her face.
"Don't fight me, Granta. It won't hurt as much," Malthus
said in a soothing voice.
Granta moaned, her eyes widened, and her mouth frothed,
drool sliding from the corners. "Please, no," she begged in a
shaking whisper, fighting the unyielding spell lodged in her
throat.
Malthus savored the way her heart weakened. He covered
her mouth with his own and sucked her breath out. Granta's
legs gave and she slipped against him. Malthus held her to his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
307
chest, his lips touching her white locks. He straightened
Granta's chair, settled her into it, and pushed it back to the
table.
Drained and debilitated, Granta's neck could not support
her head, and it flopped backward on her shoulders, which
forced her to look into Malthus' smiling face. "Please stop..."
Granta gasped out. "I won't tell."
"Hush. The less you resist, the sooner it's over." He
thought her eyes looked lovely with the glaze of pain in them.
Malthus placed two fingers on each of her temples, sending
the power into her head. "Grief has caused you to have a fatal
stroke, Granta."
Granta clenched her eyes shut against the sensation of
searing needles in her skull. She shuddered. Malthus Read
her as he worked, selectively disrupting various impulses in
her brain. Her eyelids trembled madly, face twitched, and
abruptly the left side drooped.
"Nearly finished." Malthus shoved his hand inside her robe,
placed his palm firmly against her sagging breast, and
renewed the pressure on her heart. "You're dying nicely, like
a good girl." He kissed her forehead. "You and Nikko will be
reunited soon."
Malthus scanned her damaged organ, and discovered that
the lower aorta was closing faster than the others. He
focused, wrapped his gifts around it, and shut it off. Tilting
her face so that it lay in the crook of his shoulder, Malthus
held her like a lover, his cheek atop her head, to drink in her
body's fading efforts to cling to the life he was stealing.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
308
He felt her awareness gray into shock, as Granta lost
consciousness. "Yes, Granta," he said, although he knew she
could no longer hear him. "Just a little bit more and we're
done."
Malthus tightened the grip of his power and stopped her
heart.
Her body gave a final convulsive jerk.
The air rattled from her lungs.
Granta's eyelids quit moving, her lips parted, and she
slipped sideways over Malthus' arm. He held her up, moved
the diaries aside, and allowed her corpse to settle face down
upon the table.
"A fine effort, Granta. Exactly why I favor lycans."
As he had with Tempest, Malthus searched her remains
with his necromantic senses, studying his artistry to see how
closely he had mimicked a stroke and a heart attack in her.
Satisfied with his results, Malthus scooped the diaries into his
satchel, searched the house for more without leaving a trace
of his passage, and left swiftly.
Moss howled.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
309
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
SEDUCED BY DARKNESS
Claw,
Isranon doesn't want the child. He says that the child isn't
his. That Merissa was sleeping with Troyes and other sa'necari
who came through. He called her a slut. Isranon, also says,
that even if that were not so, that he would never recognize a
half-breed bastard boy as his own. He has called the boy an
abomination.
He has changed a lot. Some months ago he embraced the
darkness of the rites to save his life from the embedded spells
on the blades that wounded him. He has embraced his
birthright. The Rowdies and Lord Dawnreturning drove him
out after learning this. I have no idea where he is now. But if
he should, somehow, turn up in the valley, grant me a favor
and kill him. He is no longer the boy I helped raise and train.
Nevin
"No," Merissa said, crumpling the letter and throwing it on
the floor. "This letter is a lie."
"Merissa, it's Nevin's writing, his code, his seal," Aisha
responded, trying to put her arms around her daughter.
Merissa twisted away from her.
"You should have expected it, Merissa," said Claw. "He's
sa'necari. You saw what he did to Troyes. He'll do anything to
stay alive. So he's crossed the line and committed the rites.
That changes them."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
310
"Will you repudiate his adoption into the clan?" Aisha
asked, her voice quiet.
Claw growled wordlessly before answering. "Yes. And if he
shows here, I will kill him myself and eat his black sa'necari
heart."
"It's a lie! The letter is a lie." Merissa fled the room.
Kynyr reached for her as she ran past him in the hallway.
"Merissa, what's wrong?"
"Don't touch me! Don't come near me! I hate you!"
He stared at her in confusion. "What did I do?"
Merissa spun about, snarling, hair sprouting along her
arms, going wolf on him. "You've been trying to chase off the
only man who ever truly loved me."
"Malthus?" Kynyr blinked. "He's not good for you."
"Because he's human? He loves me, Kynyr. If you touch
him, I'll never speak to you again."
"Merissa..."
She turned her back on him, raced out of the manor into
the yard, and scanned the gardens frantically, looking for an
avenue of escape, not wanting to face anyone. Merissa
blinked, trying to get hold of herself, realizing that people
were staring at her, that the children had stopped in their
play to look at her. All the gossip would start again, except
that this time would be worse. Everyone in the valley and the
village would be saying they had told her so, that sa'necari
were not to be trusted, and calling her a whore and a slut
behind her back—and the boldest would do it to her face. She
saw Darmyk playing with Ros and Lyrri, which meant that
Malthus was in the garden. For an instant Merissa wavered as

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
311
she spotted him sitting on a boulder beneath a spreading elm
tree. Part of her wanted to go to him, part of her wanted to
snatch Darmyk up and run off with him, while yet another
part simply wanted to run until she exhausted herself.
He rose to greet her, and Merissa knew she had to make a
decision: she fled.
* * * *
Malthus sat on a boulder watching his nieces playing with
the other children. The forged letter had arrived that morning
and he had been here waiting for their reaction. Merissa was
too emotional not to react in some spectacular and revealing
fashion. He glanced when he saw the door open and Merissa
came stumbling out with her hands over her face. He rose
and headed for her. She wavered in front of him and then
bolted past.
Running after her, Malthus caught up to Merissa in a tangle
of oak trees. She stood stock still, her fingers gripping her
hair, her eyes red and half-wild, her cheeks wet. He went
quietly to her side, hoping she did not flee again.
"Merissa? What is wrong?" he asked, his voice oozing with
concern.
She tore at her hair. "Go away. I can't breathe. I can't
think."
Malthus lifted her head up with a crooked finger under her
chin. "Why are you crying?"
"My ... my lover has repudiated our son. He embraced the
darkside of his nature and declares that Darmyk is an
abomination."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
312
"Ahhh. I am sorry. What a terrible thing for him to do. My
father would never have denied me, despite my human
mother."
She swallowed back another round of crying.
"Let's go for a walk and talk about it. Darmyk's life will be
better than mine, because he has his grandparents and a
wonderful mother. But it's difficult when a child is rejected."
Malthus slipped his arm around her and she leaned against
him. They walked across the yard and headed for a bench in
an isolated stand of ash trees.
"I loved Isranon. Since childhood..." Merissa's voice kept
breaking. "I thought I knew him. He killed Troyes to save
me."
Malthus stiffened slightly, listening to it come out. So
Isranon had slain his brother. He would make certain to send
Isranon some of Darmyk's body parts. A little hand perhaps?
"I love you, Merissa. Marry me. I'll be a good father to
Darmyk."
"Let me think about it."
* * * *
Kynyr's eyes clenched shut for the space of several breaths
and he shook his head in weary frustration. He had overheard
Malthus propose to Merissa. After Kynyr's wounding, Claw had
given him complete freedom to come and go as if he were a
member of the family, rather than one of his guardsmyn. As a
result, Kynyr had become Claw's eyes and ears both in the
manor and in the village.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
313
He faded deeper into the trees and brush, circling about
and that brought him to a bend in the Bonnie Draw River that
ran through the extensive property. The rocky, Waejontori
soil showed its teeth along the river in a sharp slope to the far
side with piles of wind and rain smoothed boulders, worn flat
and jutting out in layers. The near side, although less steep in
its descent to the deep waters, had almost as many boulders
and rocks as the far side. Rocks, many of them as jagged as a
dragon's tooth, broke the surface of the creek, and water
eddied around them in foamy whirls.
"Hello, Kynyr."
At the sound of her voice, he turned and saw Claw's
youngest sister. "Searlait. So this is where you hide."
"You found me."
Sitting in her favorite spot, a large smooth boulder that
thrust out over the water from a root tangled shelf of dirt and
rock, Searlait cast leaves into the water and watched them
swirl around in frothy riffles, a distracted air clinging to her. A
willow tree sheltered the rock, pressed along the right side,
its roots humped across the edge and rear like a confusion of
dried brown serpents. The long skirt of Searlait's blue dress
spread out around her thin hips and legs, revealing her ankles
and the lower part of her age-withered calves. An inch of
cleavage showed above her tightly laced bodice, just enough
to tease in the current de rigueur of fashion.
Kynyr could see the fading traces of Searlait's vanished
beauty, and wondered why she had never wed. She
resembled her niece Merissa, with a wealth of ginger hair that
had begun to fade toward white with age and a single ivory

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
314
streak at her left temple. He imagined that Merissa would
look like Searlait when she grew old.
The young guardsmon climbed up to the smooth rock she
sat on and settled beside her. "I don't trust him."
"Who? Malthus?" Searlait cast another twig from her small
pile into the water. "I think he's dashing."
"Yeah, Malthus. He's proposed marriage to Merissa."
"You were eavesdropping?"
Kynyr blushed at her tone. "It's part of my job. Keep the
sweet little bitches out of trouble. That includes you." He
winked at her.
"Foo. I'm not a sweet little bitch; I'm a crotchety old
crone." Searlait looked away from Kynyr, her eyes going
distant as she turned them back upon the waters. "I was
lovely once. All the finest young dogs paid court to me. Age
changes everything."
"You're still lovely."
"And you're still sweet." Searlait patted his cheek. "But I'm
too old for blandishments. I know what I look like now." She
looked away and then turned toward him again. "So you don't
like Malthus?"
"That's right."
"You can't dictate love, Kynyr. When it happens, it
happens. I haven't seen Merissa so in love since Isranon
abandoned her. Like it or not; he's good for her."
"I think she's making a mistake."
"Is she?" Searlait looked at him with gentle patience. "Are
you in love with her, Kynyr?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
315
"No." He shook his head. "She's like a sister to me. I'd be
a lot happier if she picked someone like Finn or Ramsey. Then
I'd know they'd take good care of her."
"Kynyr..."
"Searlait, I've got six sisters. Some younger; some older
than me. And I grew up with Finn's eight right next door. We
call them the Dreaded Horde. Merissa reminds me of
Kathleen, my sister who's two years older than I am. She was
seeing this dog from Three Stones who was working at the
dry goods in Longbranch for the summer. I was just twelve
and she was fourteen. One time he made her cry. I took a
stick and beat the holy crap—" Kynyr stopped short, a faint
blush spreading across his cheeks. "I beat the ... well you get
the idea."
"Kynyr, as dearly as we all love you, you're not family.
Leave Merissa and Malthus alone."
Kynyr scratched the back of his head in an offhand
manner, feeling a bit stung. They were his family and he
could not tell them so. "I'll leave Malthus alone where it
concerns Merissa. But if he steps out of line with me ... then
it's on his head."
* * * *
Malthus possessed the largest home in the camp, having
added a study and a bedroom for his nieces onto it. Ros and
Lyrri walked sedately beside him: they had worn themselves
out playing with Darmyk and his cat all day. Once they
entered the deeply forested area in the waning light, Malthus
extended his necromantic senses in a low level scan of the

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
316
area. He still feared that Sergei would return for Ros. His
hand settled on the hilt of a long knife at his hip as he sensed
two presences near his home.
"Stay behind me," he whispered to the girls.
They dropped back without a word.
Malthus found Shalto and Oswyl sitting outside waiting for
him. He touched Ros on her shoulder, "Take your sister
inside, and stay there until I say you can come out."
"Yes, Uncle Malthus." Ros took Lyrri by the hand and they
went inside.
Malthus waited until the door had closed before turning to
the two young lycans. "What's brought you here?"
"We wanted to ask you a few questions," Shalto said.
Malthus tensed, wondering if they had seen him doing
something better left unknown. So far they had proved too
good a tool to waste by killing them. "Certainly. Would you
like a drink?"
Oswyl grinned and nodded.
"Yeah, that'd be nice," said Shalto.
Malthus fetched tankards of mead. He hesitated a moment
and sat them on the table before going back outside. The
tankards were a deliberately mismatched set, one a coppery
color with a hunting scene in bas relief, the second was a
goldish tone with a leaping stag, and the third bore a dragon
wrapped around a tree. He sketched a rune with his fingertip
on the first two tankards. The runes glowed for a moment,
and then vanished. Malthus carried the tankards out and
handed them around.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
317
The two young myn looked delighted, as always, to drink
with him. Malthus watched them drink deeply and smiled with
his head lowered. "Now tell me all about it, good fellows."
"All the deaths are making folks nervous about coming
around the camp," said Shalto.
"Yeah," said Oswyl. "We're having trouble getting more
help."
"Tell me everything that's troubling you. I'm listening,"
said Malthus in a silken tone designed to set his suggestions
into their psyches as deeply as possible.
Shalto scratched at his chin and took another long pull
from his tankard. "People are saying that either someone in
the camp is doing it, or the camp is cursed."
"Which do you think?" Malthus asked.
"Bad luck and coincidence," Shalto replied and Oswyl
nodded agreement.
Malthus noticed that they had gone through the contents
quickly. "Would you like me to get you another?"
Both of the young myn nodded eagerly. Malthus repeated
his steps, refilling and renewing the spell on the tankards. He
returned to them and sat down.
"I agree with you both. Just an unfortunate coincidence."
He handed the tankards around. "Is there more?"
Oswyl made a silly face at Shalto and nudged him.
"Females. None of us have been getting any since Beth—
you know—and since you know so much about females, we
thought you could..."
"Shalto, my friend," said Malthus. "I have the perfect
solution to your troubles."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
318
Oswyl's expression grew sillier, filling with a drunken
delight.
"I knew you would," Shalto said. "You always do."
Malthus licked his lips, savoring the way his spell added
with the liquor made them more open and suggestible by the
moment. "Have you considered the sa'necari?"
"Sa'necari?" Shalto looked surprised.
"Yes. Sa'necari are all sluts. Every last one of them. It's
their nature."
"Won't they try to bite us?"
"No, Shalto. Not if you don't want them to."
"Have you ever done it with one?" Shalto asked.
Malthus chuckled. "I've played nibble games. I've tried
everything. I'm a very experienced mon."
"Wow, maybe I'll try that," Shalto said.
Malthus gave a tiny glance to the side. "None of the
women in the camp can really say no. They have no rights.
They are here by your forbearance."
"Clodagh won't like us getting sluttish with the women
here," Oswyl said.
Malthus laughed long and loud. "She's no one to speak.
She's as big a slut as Beth was."
Their eyes saucered and they stared at Malthus.
Malthus wagged a finger at them. "Just be more discreet
about it this time. The chieftain and elders will shut the camp
down, if they think it's turning into a whorehouse."
"Yeah, they will," Shalto said.
"Can we tell our friends? Like Torquil?" asked Oswyl.
"Those that you can trust to keep their mouths shut."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
319
"We will," Shalto said. "You think it's a good time to roust
out a couple of those whores?"
Malthus' smile broadened with a secret turn at the corners.
"Clodagh moved into Beth's place today. Why don't one of
you tell her I sent you and the other do the same with
Kandaishee?"
"Howls, yes!" Shalto slapped Oswyl on the back.
"Is there anything else?"
"Nah," said Shalto. "We gotta go get some."
Malthus watched them race through the trees while he
sipped his mead. "How very amusing. They'll believe anything
I tell them now ... as if they didn't to begin with. Shalto,
Oswyl, you don't know it yet, but I own you both."
* * * *
Nikko lay on the bed at Navaryn's, barely breathing, his
skin almost translucently pale. The day had turned hot, and
Navaryn had turned the sheet back to his hips to let the
afternoon breezes cool his skin, which was bare except for his
bandages. She leaned close, touching the back of her hand to
his forehead to check for fever. Navaryn stroked his cheek,
her head titled to the side, and concern twisting the corners
of her lips when Nikko failed to respond with so much as a
fluttering of his eyelids.
"I'm afraid we're going to lose him," Navaryn said.
"Has he said anything else?" Lokynen asked, coming to
stand beside the bed where Nikko lay in fevered slumber.
"Anything that would help us identify his attackers?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
320
"He's said nothing." Navaryn flicked back her silvery hair.
The lycan daughter of Tala, Mistress of Wolves, and God of
the Moon and Hunt, Navaryn was a legend to the lycans who
did not suspect she still lived. "I recognized the poison.
There's an assassin in one of the villages. No one knows what
he looks like. Only his handiwork. This mon is a lawgiver.
Rather young for one, but his runes cannot be handled by
anyone who serves the darkness."
"Can you send someone out to check around and see
who's missing a lawgiver?"
"Ask Pandeena. She can do that for you. I don't dare leave
this poor wolf alone for more than a moment. I keep having
to call him back when he starts to slide into the final
darkness. I've drawn a lot of the poison out of him. But
there's still more. It takes time."
"You'll send me word if he speaks?" Lokynen asked.
She nodded. "Or if he dies, which is more likely."
"Or if he dies. We need one of those lifemages out of
Rowanhart."
Navaryn shook her head and the silvery strands slid
around her face. "They would not be able to do much more
than I am. None of them is a master mage."
"A master exists. Lord Dawnreturning."
Navaryn's head came up and she looked at Lokynen with
keen interest. "Can you get him here?"
Lokynen's lips squeezed together and he stared at his big
hands. "I don't exactly know where he is. Last I heard, he
was just south of the Ruins of Aubrudrin."
"Then your information does me no good."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
321
Hathura grinned at Lokynen's discomfort. "You should get
outside the valley more often, Navaryn."
"Well, I don't dare now. Not with this young mon
depending on me and the Butchering Serpent in the valley."
"There's a catch to it anyway," Lokynen said.
"Dawnreturning is sa'necari."
Navaryn cast him an indignant glance, hot with skepticism.
"Impossible."
Lokynen shook his head. "He's one of the last two Dark
Brothers of the Light. Furthermore, he's a freak. A
polymancer. A descendant of Dawnhand."
"Well, that explains it. Dawnhand was a good mon," said
Navaryn. "I wept when word reached me of his death.
Without him I could never have saved my people when the
sa'necari cult first began. The necromancers wanted to turn
us into genetically altered cattle, like their nibari."
A sly look came over Lokynen's face. "The Trickster
gathered us here to protect the last descendant of Dawnhand.
Yet, I hear rumors that Lord Dawnreturning is of that lineage.
The descendant in the valley is a small child."
"His cub?" Navaryn guessed.
"Must be."
"Then it has come full circle. We failed to rescue
Dawnhand's children from the grasp of the evil ones. We shall
not fail this time."
* * * *
Malthus woke before dawn, rolled over, and spooned
around Clodagh, twisting her nipple to wake her. She

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
322
squeaked, and shifted onto her back, wearing a whey-faced,
get-it-done-with expression. Bruises covered her breasts,
many of them from his feedings, and some from simple,
sa'necari maliciousness.
"You don't look well," Malthus said.
"I always look this way in the mornings," Clodagh spit back
at him. "It's your fault."
Malthus chuckled as he mounted her. "Shut up, Clodagh."
Clodagh turned her face away.
"Look at me!"
A stab of pain tore through her head, and she yelped.
Clodagh looked him.
"Good."
He sawed at her for a long time before he came. Like so
many sa'necari who were steeped in the rites, Malthus had
problems reaching climax, unless murder was involved. He
fed with his flaccid cock still sheathed inside her. Then he
pulled out and kicked her off the bed.
"Go home before someone sees you."
Clodagh pulled her robe around her, sashed it, and fled.
Malthus drew his pants on, snagged a bottle of blood from
the chest, and padded out into the living room. He heard the
girls playing in their bedroom. Malthus poked his head in and
a fond smile blossomed on his face. They sat in the middle of
the floor in their nightgowns, moving carved wooden figures
around. "Come out and I'll get you some breakfast started."
He poured Ros a glass of blood and gave Lyrri plum nectar.
"When you're finished with your breakfast, we'll go pick
wildflowers."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
323
"You're going to see Merissa?" asked Lyrri.
Getting a fire going in the hearth, Malthus sliced cheese,
placed it on bread, and slid the pan with it onto brick and
metal shelf above the fire to melt the cheese.
"Is she going to be our new aunt?" asked Ros.
Malthus grinned, leaned in, and put his finger to his lips.
"Shussssh. Yes. The flowers are for her."
Ros ran her tongue as far around her mouth as she could
reach, capturing even the smallest bits of blood. "I like her."
Wrapping a cloth around the handle, he brought the pan to
the table and sat it in the middle. Malthus put plates around
and served the food up.
"And Darmyk? How do you feel about Darmyk?"
A smoldering heat entered Ros' eyes, and her fangs came
down. "He wouldn't last long, Uncle Malthus. I want to taste
him. I ache for him."
Malthus realized that he would not be able to contain Ros'
appetites much longer. Children and youths experienced their
need for blood with greater intensity than an adult, just as at
puberty the desire for sex burned hottest. "Soon, Ros."
* * * *
Clodagh started home, and changed her mind. She turned
into the trees, slipping between the bushes and the
undergrowth, careful to leave no trail. Every time Malthus
touched her, she felt soiled. She dropped her robe and sat
down on the stream bank with her legs dangling in the water.
The fragrance of the thick stand of sweet pepperbush
delighted her nostrils, and she inhaled it gratefully. A loon

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
324
called, shivering the air with its high eerie notes. The sound
of splashing came from two trees over and Clodagh leaned
out to see who or what was there.
Kandaishee paddled around, came up to the bank, and
settled on it. The slight swelling of the sa'necari's belly drew
Clodagh's eyes, and she spoke before she could stop herself.
"You're pregnant!"
Kandaishee startled, seized a stick, and looked around.
She calmed when she saw Clodagh, waded over, and sat
beside her. Her light amaranthine eyes—their pale color
reflecting how few rites she had committed—held a haunted
mirror to Clodagh's own. "You have that look. Are you his
also?"
"Yes. Is the child his?"
Kandaishee placed her hand across her belly, lowering her
head with a faint nod that spoke eloquently of both her
shame and sense of helplessness. "He got me the first week
he arrived."
"I think mine is also. If the coercions were not in so deep
... I'd take tansy and lose it."
Kandaishee sighed. "I tried. But the coercions are in too
deep."
Clodagh kicked her feet in the water, watching the ripples
as she formed the questions she did not wish to face, yet felt
forced to ask. "Are there other women like us?"
"Do you mean pregnant or under his sway?"
"Both, I guess."
Tension threaded Kandaishee's voice. "All of the women
living at the camp are under his sway. He's taken us all."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
325
Clodagh sucked in a breath, her hand going to her mouth.
"Even the humans?"
"All of us. There are five other pregnancies besides ours."
"Which ones?"
"The other four sa'necari, and one human."
"Are they all his?"
Kandaishee snorted. "Certainly not the human's child. That
one must be a lycan's bastard. The Butchering Serpent
wouldn't stick his bone," her mouth twisted in distaste, "in a
human unless she was on his altar. He likes lycan flesh best."
"Could you Read us?"
"Not wearing these things." Kandaishee waved her
spellcorded wrists at Clodagh.
Clodagh broke the white flowered end off a stalk of sweet
pepperbush and stroked the water with it. "If I took them off,
would you let me put them back on?"
"I would have no choice. I can't leave with what he's done
to my brain."
"Is—is this what Waejonan did to Dawnhand's wife?"
Kandaishee touched Clodagh's arm, and the lycan flinched.
"Look at me when you speak, Clodagh. Please. I'm not the
enemy."
Clodagh raised her head, still clutching the stalk, playing
with it nervously. "I didn't think you were. It's a shame that it
makes me look away."
"Then we share it. I recognized him and failed to speak in
time. As to Melisandra Dawnhand, yes. Waejonan did to her,
what Malthus has done to us. Only she found the strength to
throw herself from a balcony after he filled her belly."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
326
"I wish I had that kind of strength..."
Kandaishee shook her head. "None of us do. The arts have
been perfected since Waejonan's day, and Malthus is a
master. We cannot do anything he would not wish us to."
They dressed and Clodagh led Kandaishee back to the
camp by a path that only she knew. Reaching the longhouse
that had been Beth's, Clodagh went in first. Entering this
house always made Clodagh shiver for several breaths until
she grew accustomed to it. She had done everything possible
to get Beth's scent out of it: while Malthus had never said as
much, they all knew Beth had been rited. A small brick oven
covered the fire pit, and carpets topped a layer of woven reed
matting on the floors. Malthus had not allowed her to bring
much from her old house when he moved her in here. She
used her tinderbox to get the fire going in the oven and put a
kettle on for tea.
"Will you fetch them, Kandaishee?"
Kandaishee gave a nod and left.
Clodagh removed her clothing and draped it over a chair.
She put her precious grandbitch's teapot in the middle of the
table surrounded by cups, added a sugar bowl as a special
treat—sugar being expensive—and answered the first knock
at the door.
Ystina and Laleyna, two sa'necari stood looking at her
uncomfortably.
"Please, come in."
Ystina ran her eye over Clodagh's nudity. "Are we doing
this lycan-style?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
327
"Yes." Clodagh noticed that her kettle was steaming. She
put the tea leaves in a small ceramic ball that hung from a
tiny chain, and dropped it into the teapot before pouring the
hot water over it.
Clodagh noticed that Laleyna was as swollen as
Kandaishee and shivered. That one had to be his also, for the
lycan youths had not begun using the sa'necari that early.
Ystina was not showing yet, but that did not mean that it
might not be his.
Oliffyia and Tryphaina, also sa'necari, arrived next, and
seeing the others' nakedness, disrobed without comment.
Clodagh saw the way their bellies had begun to round, and a
hollow, heartsick feeling settled in her chest and stomach.
Malthus' child. Malthus' child. Oh gods.
Kandaishee brought Ethne, one of the humans, last. Ethne
looked hesitantly about her. "Disrobe," Kandaishee said, as
she shrugged out of her loose shift. "It's the best way to do
this."
Ethne nodded, and removed her clothing.
"It would be best if we sat in a circle on the floor," said
Kandaishee, taking a place with her back to the half wall into
Clodagh's sleeping room.
To set the example, Clodagh joined Kandaishee and sat at
her right hand. Clodagh sucked in a breath to strength her
resolve, and reached for Kandaishee. "Give me your hands."
"You're really going to do this?" Ystina asked.
Kandaishee extended her wrists. Clodagh's hands shook
with an extremity of trepidation as she touched the seals and
opened them with a word that worked only for Clodagh,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
328
because she had been attuned to the seals. Deep-rooted fears
of sa'necari, made worse by the violation of her mind and
body by Malthus, made her tense.
"Freedom doesn't change me, Clodagh. I'm still your
friend. Relax." Kandaishee rubbed her wrists with an
expression of relief as her powers surged back to her. She
turned her awareness inward. "Yes. My child is his. Who
next?"
"Me," Clodagh said. "I've been used by all of them, but I
think I felt it happen with him."
"I would not be surprised. It's a fairly common womanly
talent among my own people," said Kandaishee. She placed
her hand on Clodagh's belly, and Clodagh felt the tickle of
Kandaishee's Reader's gift. "I'm sorry, Clodagh. It's his."
Clodagh's shoulders sagged.
The others looked hesitant, as if dreading the knowledge.
So Kandaishee took charge. "Come, Ystina. You next."
Kandaishee Read Ystina. "The child is lycan."
"Can you tell which one sired it? He's made me sleep with
all of them," said Ystina.
"Not without having the possible fathers here to compare
the genes with."
"That won't do," said Clodagh. "I can't afford to get into
trouble."
"I hope it's Odhran's. He's the only one who doesn't get
rough with me."
Clodagh flinched. The love that she had felt for Odhran
drained out of her, knowing that he was using the females in
the camp. The dream she had once held of becoming his

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
329
mate and bearing his children, which she had harbored since
childhood, dissolved like a bitter powder in water. She
became lost in her unhappy thoughts and barely heard the
rest of it.
As she had expected, Oliffyia and Tryphaina's bellies
contained Malthus' offspring. Laleyna and Ethne's were lycan.
The sound of Oliffyia crying drew Clodagh back from her
troubled musings. She rose, fetched a small glass and a
bottle of Dragonsbreath from the cabinet. Clodagh pressed a
glass of the powerful Dwarven whiskey, more famed for its
strength than its taste, in Oliffyia's hands. "I think you need
this more than tea."
Oliffyia nodded, and sipped it.
Clodagh turned to Kandaishee. "I never believed sa'necari
were so fertile."
"We're young and not deepened in the rites," said
Kandaishee.
"But what about him?"
Kandaishee considered for a moment. "His mother is
human and a bio-alchemist of great talent. This could be her
doing. She's also a half-breed. Her mother was a sylvan
harem-slave." Kandaishee extended her wrists to Clodagh.
"Put them back on before I lose my nerve."
"At the rate your people are using us, Clodagh, every
woman here will be pregnant by mid-winter," said Tryphaina.
Clodagh restored the cords and seals to Kandaishee's
wrists. The look of pain that crossed Kandaishee's face made
her stomach clench.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
330
"Even during our menses, they come to us. The smell
excites them." Ystina said.
Clodagh looked weary. "That's because we're wolves who
became myn. When the wild cousin comes into season, she
bleeds.
"The story goes that our packs were being hunted to
extinction on a distant world in a realm called Skawtsslund.
We appealed to the moon, and she sent us Navaryn who
made us myn. Navaryn led us through the world gate to this
place and we settled here."
* * * *
Malthus arrived at Claw's door holding a bouquet of wild
roses behind his back. His nieces, who were being watched by
Kandaishee, had enjoyed the morning gathering them for
Merissa. All felt right in his world.
The door opened and a nibari stood there. "Who have you
come to see?"
"Merissa. I'm Malthus."
"Please follow me." The nibari led him from the foyer into
the main hall where Claw sat whittling. He looked up.
"Malthus?" he growled suspiciously, leaning around to see
the flowers. "I know you didn't bring those to me."
Malthus' lips drew together in a roguish smile. "They're for
your daughter."
Merissa descended the stairs and entered the room
wearing her carding dress. Malthus gave her a bright, eager
smile and brought the flowers out.
She laughed. "Oh, they are beautiful, Malthus!"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
331
"I spent all morning gathering them near the falls."
Merissa hugged him. Malthus kissed her chastely on the
cheek.
Claw made a grumpy noise. "If you're set on courting my
daughter, remember this, sirrah, last one that hurt her, I ate
his heart."
Troyes' heart? Malthus swallowed back his reaction, placed
the flowers in Merissa's hands, and faced Claw. "I assure you,
Lord Claw, my intentions are honorable."
"It's just Claw. And, keep them that way."
"On my honor, I swear it." Malthus gazed at Merissa.
"Walk with me, darling?"
"Yes."
A nibari came up to them smiling and extended her hand
to Merissa. "I'll put them in water, mistress."
"Thank you, Isbeth," Merissa said.
Malthus walked with his arm around Merissa and her head
leaning on his shoulder. They left the house, crossed the
yard, and walked down a narrow path through the trees.
Sunlight shimmered in patches on the ground like a scattering
of jewels. His hand stole up and brushed the base of her
breast as he kissed her cheek. Merissa stiffened momentarily
and then pressed more firmly against him. He cupped her
breast and felt her nipple harden through the fabric. "I am in
love you with you, Merissa."
She looked away from him. "Malthus..."
Malthus' voice softened until it was like a little boy's full of
woe. "Have you no feelings at all for me? You said the other
night you loved me."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
332
She shifted in his arms, turning half away from him, yet
not quite rejecting his nearness. Her ginger hair veiled her
face from him, so he could not see her expression. "I feel
confused. Frightened. I have made so many wrong decisions."
"Just because you made a single mistake, is no reason to
reject love."
Merissa tensed. "Two mistakes. I have had two lovers.
Both sa'necari. I never expected to fall in love with a human."
Malthus stopped walking and pulled her into his arms,
cupping both of her breasts. "Let me make love to you. Let
me show you how much I love you." He could simply have
shoved his power into her mind and body, rendered her
incapable of resisting, but he did not wish to take her that
way and reveal himself. There were too many dangers to
trying to take Merissa. She could have wards from her two
previous sa'necari lovers, or her mind could be stronger than
it seemed. Certainly she had a core of strength or she would
never have been able to insist upon her rights to bear
Darmyk.
"I love you, Malthus. But please don't ask for more than I
can give yet."
Malthus lowered his hand to her waist and continued to
hold her. "So be it. I love you enough to wait. I want to marry
you, Merissa."
"I will think about it."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
333
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
THE NEW PRIEST
Pandeena sauntered onto the bridge over the Eirlys River
dressed in green and brown ranger leathers, pants and tunic,
bow at her back and arrow case at her side, sword and two
knives buckled to her belt. Seven lycans rushed out to face
her. An eighth emerged from the sheltering trees in human
form, and she noticed immediately that he did not wear the
runes of a lawgiver. It should have been a lawgiver who met
her here if they were going to question her right to cross.
"Peace brothers," she said. "I'm Pandeena Moonbow. I
have heard you needed a priest."
"Are you a priest?" the older male asked.
"I am indeed. Priest to both Tala and Willodarus in their
guise as joint guardians of the wolves." She drew her silver
runes and the symbol of a bear holding the lunar orb from
beneath her tunic and flashed them at the lycans.
The leader eyed her closely. "A wolf priest?"
Pandeena favored him with a cheeky smile, extended her
arm, and allowed it to change. "And lycan."
"Come across, fur-sister," the lycan leader said. "You will
need to meet with the chieftain."
"The chieftain? Why not the lawgiver?" Pandeena
wondered what was going on. She had learned from a lycan
at Hell's Widow about the dead priest, and thought it a fine

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
334
opportunity to ease her way into the community. However,
she had heard nothing about problems with the lawgiver.
The other wolves changed to myn and stared at each
other.
The leader rubbed the back of his neck, and refused to
meet Pandeena's eyes. "We have no lawgiver. He's dead."
Dead, not missing? Was the Serpent killing all the
lawgivers? Pandeena wondered as she crossed the bridge.
"I'm Odhran," he said, extending his hand to her. They
clasped hands and sniffed each other's fingers.
Satisfied, Odhran took her to Claw's house and knocked on
the door.
Isbeth appeared. "What is it?"
She frowned at the unfeminine clothing and said nothing at
all about it. Some of the females who ran with the Battle-
clans dressed that way. But in general very few bitches did
so.
"Who's this, Odhran?" Claw sat in the Great Hall to the left
of the foyer, smoking his pipe, and playing checkers with the
handsomest young dog wolf Pandeena had ever seen.
Odhran dipped his shoulders to Claw. "A priest answering
our request for someone to take Old Tempest's place."
Claw's eyes raked Pandeena. "You're a priest?"
Pandeena showed him her runes. "I am."
"You don't look like much of one," Claw grumbled testily.
Pandeena's brows arched, her back straightened stiffly,
and her head came up at a proud tilt. "Why? Because I'm
female?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
335
"Another crotchety female," Claw chuntered. "No. Because
you're dressed out like a Battle-Clansmon or one of those
freerangers that show up here sometimes. Can you use all
that weaponry?"
Pandeena gave him a bright smile. "And more."
"You're gonna need it."
The young blond wolf gave her a bow of his shoulders.
"I'm Kynyr Maguire. The chieftain is right. Lady?"
"Pandeena Moonbow." She flashed Kynyr an appreciative
smile, and turned back to Claw. "Because of the rebellion? I
thought it hadn't reached here yet."
Claw mumbled low, and Pandeena failed to catch all of it.
"What was that?"
"I said, don't be too sure. There's been a lot of deaths in
the valley. A steading was wiped out northeast of here and
the attackers' spoor was strange. Like nothing I've ever seen.
An eastern Battle-clan was destroyed. Something's out there
in our forests."
"I can take care of myself, if that's what you mean."
"I hope so. You're an attractive young bitch and I wouldn't
like to see something happen to you."
"Like what happened to your lawgiver?"
Claw shot Odhran a sharp look. "He told you?"
"I asked him. It isn't normal for a commoner to be doing
the work of a lawgiver."
Claw bristled and went hairy on her. "Imps got him. Grief
killed his mother a few days later. Our old priest is dead, and
the bitch that ran the refugee camp was killed and eaten.
Possibly by imps, but possibly not. Some children from the

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
336
local farms have gone missing and we've not been able to
pick up a trail on them."
"Whose side are you on in this rebellion?"
"Ours. Whatever it takes for my people to survive."
"Our people." Pandeena crossed and extended her hand to
him. He sniffed her.
"Lycan? I expected you to be human."
Pandeena shook her head, her eyes narrowing. "If you side
with the Sharani, or try to remain neutral, and should the
queen win, Queen Tomyrilen will take a tithe of our people for
her rites."
"They were taking tithes already. I want no part of the
queen."
Pandeena's smile broadened. "That's what I hoped you'd
say. Just between us..." She glanced from Claw to Kynyr to
Odhran before finishing her statement. "With nothing of this
being spoken beyond this point..."
The three males nodded.
"The gods have promised us help. Teakamon, shepherd of
the wilds, is in the valley, as is Hathura Waveskimmer and
Lokynen the Battle-Master."
A long, low whistle escaped Kynyr.
Claw's eyes lit with hope. "Praise the guardians."
"Yes, indeed. I'll have you a lawgiver as soon as possible. I
know several who trained as such, but haven't been given a
see yet."
"Thank you. Odhran will show you around, get you
settled."
"We'll speak further, chieftain."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
337
"Yes, we will."
"If there's anything I can do for you, just ask," said Kynyr,
earning himself a bright smile from Pandeena.
Odhran showed Pandeena through the village. She strode
along, attracting every eye with her unfeminine garb and her
golden beauty.
"You'll live in the old priest's home beside the shrine. It's
built on the western edge of the refugee camp," explained
Odhran. "If there is anything you need, just ask."
"I appreciate that, but Kynyr offered first."
* * * *
Malthus had been lounging against a tree, talking to Shalto
and Oswyl when he saw Odhran coming toward them with a
pretty young lycan. He swept his eyes over her and licked his
lips. He had never seen this one before.
"Come everyone!" shouted Odhran. "Come meet our new
priest."
Clodagh emerged from the longhouse, flinching when she
saw Odhran, recovered herself, and crossed the yard to hold
out her hand to Pandeena. "Welcome, priest."
"Pandeena. Call me Pandeena."
Clodagh smiled at her. "I'm Clodagh. I supervise the camp,
although I suppose you'll be doing a lot of it now. The priest
always has the governance here."
Malthus blinked. That slip of a girl was a new priest?
Where had she come from? How did she know they needed a
priest? His agents had killed the lycans' messenger before he

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
338
could get beyond Hell's Widow. He caught Shalto's eye and
nodded toward Pandeena. "Awfully pretty for a priest."
"Much better to look at than old Tempest."
"Shalto, my friend, you're learning." Another threat to be
eliminated.
They sauntered over and studied Pandeena.
She spied Malthus and offered her hand to him. "I am
Pandeena Moonbow, priest to the Guardians, Tala and
Willodarus."
Malthus extended his awareness through the palm of his
hand and took a quick assessment. Lycan, but with the stink
of power, and heavily shielded from enchantary prying. The
wolves produced albinos more frequently than mages.
Something was distinctly odd about her.
Pandeena withdrew her hand as a frown flitted across her
features.
"I'm Malthus Estrobian. I live at the camp with my nieces."
Malthus felt a quiver of worry. Had she detected his
attempted intrusion? Was she mage gifted in some way?
Except for Cahira, he had not heard of a lycan with that gift in
a long time. Perhaps it was a priest gift of some kind.
"You're one of the refugees?"
"Yes. My nieces—my half brother's children—are sa'necari
born. We escaped the clutches of the queen and came here.
Tempest, our priest, was teaching the girls to embrace the
Light. They've had no teacher since the deaths of the priest
and the lawgiver. I hope that you will be stepping into their
shoes."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
339
"I will be." Pandeena turned to Odhran. "You have a
schoolroom?"
"Yes. It's attached to the shrine."
"Explain to the mothers that I want all the children there
tomorrow, bright and early. I'll have a lesson planned for
them."
"I'm very helpful around here," Malthus interjected. "If
there is anything you need, ask."
Pandeena gave him a look that Malthus could not interpret.
"I will. Now, Odhran, explain a few things to me. How many
children?"
"It's just the camp children. Religious training, writing, and
reading."
Malthus watched them walk off together. His gums itched
around the sheaths of his fangs and he licked them.
Something was not right about this. If she got in his way, she
would meet the same fate as the others. And, yet, he coveted
her, almost as strongly as he did Merissa. He found it difficult
to say which was the more lovely. With Beth gone, he had
been using Clodagh and Kandaishee most often. He wanted
something finer. If he had not encountered her shields, he
would have gone after this new priest. Her youth suggested
inexperience, but her shields suggested otherwise. She was a
disturbing enigma—one that he wanted to discover more
about.
"Well, what do you think of her, Shalto?" Malthus asked.
Shalto grinned. "I may have to put it to her."
"Shall we discuss it over a tankard? I'm buying." Maybe he
could let them handle her.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
340
Oswyl nudged Shalto.
"Yeah, let's get one," Shalto said.
* * * *
The Shrine to Willodarus proved to be a simple building, a
square box with two wings, located in a shady yard with grass
and flowering hedges. Pandeena liked it.
"We gave it the best we knew how," Odhran said, opening
the door and gesturing for Pandeena to enter ahead of him.
"I'm sure you did." Pandeena gazed about her, taking it all
in as she stepped through the doorway. "That young bitch,
Clodagh I think her name was. She kept looking at you
strangely."
Odhran looked uncomfortable, staring at his feet. "Your
holiness..."
"Pandeena."
"Yes. We were sweethearts ... since childhood. A few
weeks ago, she rejected me. I don't know why."
"Would you like me to speak with her?"
Odhran brightened. "Yes, holiness. It would ease my heart,
if only to know what I did wrong."
The interior was dusty with disuse. Pandeena's boot heels
clicked and she glanced down to see that the lycans had given
the shrine a tiled floor. Apparently some of the congregation
had money and a willingness to give. The ranks of benches
for the worshippers were eight deep on two sides. Ahead of
them stood a railing, separating the altar from the
congregations' space. A basket for offerings from the
congregation sat on the floor by the far right of the railing, so

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
341
that they could make their offerings after receiving the
priest's blessing.
Pandeena noted the basket was empty and dust had
collected in the bottom. "How long has it been since you lost
your priest?"
"Months."
Pandeena stepped around the railing and went to the altar,
running her hands along it. The vibrations were warm and
loving. The entire place had been properly consecrated. If
someone here was harming the people, why hadn't he
desecrated the altar? "What happened to the priest?"
"Heart attack. He was old ... but there are rumors."
"Of what?"
Odhran glanced away from her in a manner she
interpreted as reluctance. "Well, for one thing he was found in
a part of the forest he had no reason to be in. None of the
farms are out that way. Nothing to attract him. It was all very
strange."
"And?"
"No footprints. No scent trail."
"As if the body had been dumped there."
Odhran pursed his lips. "Yes. Exactly."
"If I were you, I wouldn't mention this to anyone else."
"Oh, I won't. Believe me, your holiness."
"Pandeena. Just call me Pandeena."
"Thank you. I will."
Pandeena left the altar area and walked around to a
hallway on the side, Odhran followed her, trying to look
helpful and she smiled at him from time to time. The first

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
342
door opened on the priest's apartments. She found three cozy
rooms, a sitting room, kitchen, and bedroom.
Plenty of nice furniture filled the apartments, including a
huge bed that dwarfed the rest of the furniture. "Why such a
large bed?"
Willodarians weren't sworn to celibacy like the Taladrim,
however, she was looking for clues.
"A donation. I remember Tempest saying that at his age,
he didn't need something that large ... but a gift is a gift."
Pandeena nodded and raked her teeth across her lower lip.
"I'll want clean linens. Can you arrange that?"
"There are several women in the camp who used to help
out with the housekeeping here. I will get them over to see
you."
"Good. So the priest had no liaisons in the village?"
"I doubt it. I doubt he even touched the slut."
Pandeena frowned. "The slut? You have a slut here?"
"Had. The bitch that ran the camp here, name was Beth.
She was a slut. Rumor says she even had the lawgiver and
possibly the chieftain between her legs."
Pandeena's mouth opened in a surprised 'O' that she chose
not to voice, instead her tone went dark and dangerous. "And
did you ride the slut?"
Odhran flushed.
"Truth. I'll know if you're lying."
"Yes. Many times."
"That's probably the reason Clodagh rejected you. I want
to talk to her."
"She's dead."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
343
Pandeena nibbled her lower lip. "How convenient ... for
someone. How did she die?"
"Imps, near as anyone could tell."
"Where did they find her body?" Pandeena strode out of
the apartments and back into the hallway, which formed a U
around the rear of the shrine.
"East side of the valley, over near the piled boulders.
Iudris Meadow, I think, it was."
"What was she doing over there?"
"Don't know. Last time she was seen here, she was in
tears and wouldn't talk to no one. She ran off."
"Why? Did she have family over there?"
"Nope. No family. Rumor's that the fellow she had her cap
set for rejected her."
"Who was that?"
"Now you're asking too many questions..."
Pandeena's gaze went harsh. "I'm your priest. And until I
find you a lawgiver, I serve in that capacity also. So answer
me."
"Malthus."
"That fellow I met back there?"
"Yup. Malthus. He's seeing Merissa these days."
"The princess?"
"Yup."
Continuing around, Pandeena guessed that the one at the
back led out of doors. She confirmed that there was another
door on the far side, which had to lead into the west wing and
the schoolroom. The school could wait, she wanted to see the
grounds.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
344
Directly behind the shrine, she found an area marked off
as a graveyard by a dotting of white stones. A wooden arch
framed the entrance with the likeness of the Willodarian bear
atop it. She walked through and discovered only a single
headstone.
She spied a fuzzy little dog lying on the grave, his head on
his paws and a woeful expression, tail and ears drooping.
"Whose grave is that?"
"Tempest's. He was our priest."
"And the dog sleeping on it?"
"That's Moss. He was Tempest's dog. Our lawgiver, Nikko,
took the poor little lad in after Tempest died. But imps got
Nikko and his mother died of grief. Moss won't let anyone else
keep him. He spends nearly all his time here. A few people
have tried to lure him inside, but he always gets out and
comes here. The whole village feeds him, waters him."
Pandeena squatted down. "Come here, little fellow. Come
here, Moss." She made a soothing noise in her throat.
Moss perked up and stared at her.
She repeated her words and noises, patting the ground in
front of her.
Moss came and sniffed her hand. His tail swung back and
forth. Pandeena extended her wilderkin gifts and comforted
Moss. He climbed into her arms. Pandeena stood, cuddling
Moss.
"Well, I'll be," Odhran said. "He hasn't done that since
Granta died."
"Granta?"
"The lawgiver's mother."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
345
"Moss and I are going to be good friends."
Imps got the lawgiver ... or did they? Pandeena looked
down at Moss and wondered. What was that word or piece of
a word, the lawgiver had said. Mul, marl, mal? She needed to
ask her mother.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
346
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
SPY HUNTERS
Nikko woke in a bright sunny room that he did not
recognize. A pleasant breeze blew through the windows,
carrying the scents of the forest, flowering bushes, and
farther away goats and sheep. A soothing lethargy held him
in a gentle imprisonment on his bed, with no desire to move.
His awareness felt cottony and displaced. Nikko yawned. He
wondered if one of his people had found him. Then he
wondered who were his people, and why they should have
found him. Why should they even have been looking for him?
The emptiness in his mind shoved needles of panic into his
chest. His pulse raced and his heart hammered, which
brought on a feeling of increasing pressure in his chest as if a
tremendous hand were squeezing his heart.
"Awake finally, lawgiver?" said a nice female voice.
Nikko started to turn on his side, and gasped sharply in
pain. A pair of long-fingered hands pressing on his naked
chest stopped him from moving further.
"I'm having a damned hard time keeping those wounds
closed." Navaryn put her cool fingertips to his temples.
"Relax. Breathe deeply. Your heart is damaged. Tense up like
this and you'll set off an attack."
Nikko dropped flat and obeyed her, feeling her warm
power flow through him. The chest pain eased.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
347
"Lawgiver?" He angled his head to glance at the bandages
on his chest, ribs, and stomach. Beneath the light coverlet, he
felt another near the base of his spine and one on his thigh.
Nikko could not remember being hurt. He reached for the
memories, and his mind flinched away from it, leaving him
staring into a darkened abyss again.
"Yes. You wear a lawgiver's runes," said Navaryn. "What is
your name? Which village are you from?"
Nikko blinked, his thoughts racing as he became aware of
the chain around his neck and pulled the runes forth from
where they had settled along the edge of his neck amid the
pillows. "My ... my name? I don't remember. It's all gone."
"I'm not surprised, really. You had nearly as much poison
as blood in you. Death lotus—it took me days to dig all the
broken off ends of the darts from your skin. Snake venom
and Devil's Silver. It shocked your system. It's the gods' own
miracle that you're alive. If you wish to stay that way, don't
get out of bed without my permission. You're still in bad
shape."
"How bad?"
"To start, you only have one lung left. I managed to save
one kidney and your liver. I may yet be able to fix your
damaged heart. Time will tell. If that arrow that struck near
your spine had been a fraction closer, you'd be paralyzed. So
count yourself lucky. Now do you understand why I want you
to stay in bed?"
"Oh, gods. Yes."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
348
She rose from her chair and poured a greenish liquid from
a bottle into a small glass. "Devil's Silver does that when they
get enough of it into you."
Nikko turned a pleading face to Navaryn, as he accepted
the glass and drank the contents. Despite some sweetening,
it tasted dreadful. He wiped his mouth with his arm,
grimacing. "Do you know who did this to me?"
"We were hoping you could tell us."
"I can't remember anything."
"You're the only person alive who has ever seen his face. It
was the Butchering Serpent who shot you."
"Oh, gods. And he's loose among my people."
Navaryn smiled and Nikko thought she was the loveliest
female he had ever seen. She touched his forehead and he
felt the wash of a Reader's power through him. He caught her
hand when she removed it and sniffed her fingers. At least he
could move his arms without pain so long as the rest of him
did not move. "You're lycan."
"I am," Navaryn said. "At least all of your knowledge is
intact. It's the personal you can't access. There's hope for
that."
Nikko felt his mind and body go cottony. "What did you
give me?"
"Holadil and a pollonae extract. Among other things."
"Not pollendine?"
"You're not dying. Unless you try to do more than your
body's ready for. Hathura gave you the last of the Sapphire
Elixir when they found you, or you would never have reached
here alive."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
349
"Who is Hathura?" he asked. "Who are you?"
Navaryn's lips curled into the smile of one who had a
secret and expected the revelation to take some getting used
to. "Hathura Waveskimmer. I'm Navaryn Moonbow."
Names out of legend. Nikko's brows knit. "You're
descended of the First Mother?"
Navaryn's bemusement deepened. "I am the First Mother."
The lawgiver looked so stunned that he could have been
knocked over with a daisy. "I—I think I want to sleep."
"Good. If you need anything, just pull the bell cord. I've
tucked the end under your pillow." Navaryn stood, preparing
to leave him.
"One more thing. How long have I been here?"
"Nearly four weeks. Now, rest. I'll be back to check on
you."
Four weeks. Urgency clutched at his middle, and a feeling
of displaced danger that he could not hold onto. Nikko closed
his eyes as Navaryn left him. Soon he slept. Finally he
dreamed of a faceless mon chasing him through the woods,
shooting him with burning arrows. And he wept in his sleep.
* * * *
Pandeena sat at the small desk in the living room, books
stacked around her and a quill in hand as she scribbled notes,
preparing the next day's lesson for the children. She had
been there a week, knew everyone in the camp by name, yet
Pandeena could not get past the air of distrust that the
camp's adults displayed. She found that odd and disturbing,
considering that the rest of the villagers accepted her with

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
350
open arms, as befitted a new priest. Just after nightfall, a
knock came at her door, and she answered it, finding Shalto
and Oswyl standing there.
"What do you want? It's late."
Shalto pushed past her with a leer and Oswyl followed.
"I didn't ask you in." Irritation rose in Pandeena's voice.
She slammed the door closed and treaded toward Shalto, who
appeared to be the one in charge of the pair.
"You didn't need to," Shalto said. "You've been begging for
this visit since you laid eyes on us."
"What?" Pandeena's eyes narrowed, surreptitiously
scanning her living room and deciding how to avoid breaking
any furniture. "I want you to leave."
Oswyl nudged Shalto.
"We know you must be lonely," Shalto said. "A fine looking
bitch like yourself shouldn't be alone nights."
"Get out, or I'll throw you out," Pandeena growled, placing
herself near the door into the hallway that circled the shrine,
well away from the sofas, end tables, chairs, and desk.
Shalto circled her casually. "You don't mean that."
"We wanted to talk about the wild cousins," Oswyl said, an
eager note in his voice.
"I'm your priest, not your slut," Pandeena growled still
lower.
Shalto sidled up to her. "Everyone's talking about the way
you look at me."
"Way I what?"
Shalto slid his arm around her, and cupped her breast with
his other hand.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
351
Pandeena stared down at his hand. "Move it, or lose your
fingers."
"Awww, you don't mean it."
Oswyl came up on the other side of her. "Maybe she likes
it rough?"
Pandeena elbowed Shalto hard in the face. He released her
with a sharp howl, staggering backwards, hunched over, and
clutching his bleeding nose. She spun faster than the eye
could follow and kicked Shalto in the stomach, slamming him
into the wall by the door. He slipped to the floor and lay
stunned. Pandeena followed and stamped his hand, grinding
his fingers under her boot heel.
Shalto screamed.
"Maybe you like it rough," Pandeena snarled.
Oswyl heard the bones break in Shalto's hands, his eyes
bulged, and he ran for the other door, but Pandeena was
faster.
"You came for some together," she sneered. "So you'll get
some too, Oswyl."
"Hey, I didn't mean no harm ... We weren't gonna hurt you
none. It's just a friendly weapon, after all." Oswyl backed
away from her.
Pandeena hit Oswyl in the nose and heard the bone
crunch. Oswyl cried out, and his hand went to his nose. She
saw Shalto getting groggily to his feet, grabbed Oswyl by the
arm, and hurled him on top of Shalto. The two young males
went down in a heap together. Before either could recover,
she came at them like a fury out of hell, kicking and stomping
on them.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
352
They shrieked, screamed, howled, and finally begged. Yet,
Pandeena did not relent until she had damaged them enough
to satisfy her. When they lay in a bloodied curl, too frightened
to move, she stood over them with her arms crossed.
"I'm your priest, damnit! If I find out you're treating the
women of the camp like you tried to treat me, I'll give you a
worse thrashing next time."
Shalto shook his head frantically, his eyes like dishes on an
alabaster cloth. "Won't happen again, holiness."
"Nope, won't happen again," Oswyl agreed.
Pandeena threw her front door open and stared. It looked
like the entire camp was standing in her yard. She spotted
Malthus, Clodagh, and Kandaishee near their head.
"This is what happens to anyone who mistreats a woman
in this camp," Pandeena shouted. She snatched Shalto up and
sent him tumbling into the yard.
"My leg!" Shalto screamed. "She broke my leg ... and my
fingers."
Pandeena tossed Oswyl out next.
He landed sobbing. "My arms! My arms, she's broken them
both!"
Pandeena wiped her hands off on her pants leg. "Someone
find them a healer. I refuse to help them. They got what they
deserved."
She closed the door and went to wash the blood from her
hands before settling down again to work on the lesson plan.
* * * *

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
353
Malthus sat cross-legged on the floor of his study, dipping
his arrowheads in the newest batch of poison. He had
increased the amount of Devil's Silver. Images of Pandeena
circled through his mind, blending with the way Shalto and
Oswyl had looked lying in her yard when she finished with
them. He wanted to fuck her, or rite her, but he felt certain
that he would have to shoot her instead. Such a waste.
A small knock preceded Lyrri's entrance.
"I told you not to come in here."
"Uncle Malthus, I can't find Ros."
"What do you mean you can't find Ros?"
Lyrri blinked and dropped her head. "We were playing hide
and seek. When she didn't find me and it got dark, I started
calling her. But she doesn't answer."
Malthus set his arrows aside. "Go into my bedroom and
stay there. Drop the bar on the shutters and the door. Don't
come out for anyone except me."
He waited until he saw Lyrri go in and heard the bars drop
into place. His bedroom had the strongest magical defenses in
the house. Malthus had relied on tell-tales for the girls.
Once in the yard, he started calling. "Ros? Ros, come here.
Come now. No more games."
Fear was a rock in his stomach and a fist in his chest. He
circled the house, still calling and getting no response.
Malthus extended his necromantic senses and caught a flicker
of something. It drew him to a thicket of aspen trees, beyond
that to a tangle of briars, and then to the clustering stands of
sweet pepperbushes bordering a small freshet. Cattails thrust
their green brushes thickly along the edge, shoving against

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
354
the long tips of the sweet pepperbush stalks with their
profusion of tiny white bells. Ahead of him, a large willow tree
overhung the edge of the stream. He saw a bit of blue cloth
among the humped chaos of roots and cattails. Ros had worn
her favorite blue dress that morning.
"Ros!"
Malthus got no answer.
He scrambled over the roots.
Ros lay half in and half out of the little stream, water
flowing across her dangling legs halfway up her naked thighs,
her skirts ripped away, and her small clothes gone. Blood and
drying cum coated her loins. A courier pouch lay tucked
behind her head. Malthus dropped to his knees, dragged her
into his arms, and turned her head to the side. On her neck
he found the distinctive scrape and pierce marks of a
Lemyari. He extended his awareness through her body. Life—
he almost missed the flicker of it. A moment more and he
would have found her dead. Malthus slit his wrist and pressed
it into her mouth. Blood flowing over her tongue caused her
fangs to come down, she bit reflexively without regaining
consciousness, and sucked him.
Rage brought Malthus' fangs to full extension, and sent a
flush across his dark features. He saw a piece of paper folded
and shoved into the neck of what remained of her dress.
Opening the pouch, Malthus shoved that in with the rest, not
bothering to try and read it in the darkness—he knew already
who had written it.
His lips writhed back from his fangs. "I'll kill you, Sergei.
I'll kill you for this."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
355
The rumors that Sergei had a taste for little girls had
finally been confirmed to Malthus. If the vampire had fallen
into the grip of Passion-Dance of Obsession, Sergei would
keep coming back until he had killed all of them, and then go
looking for the rest of Malthus' family. Malthus intended to
make it Sergei's last dance.
Malthus let Ros feed until he was certain that he'd pulled
her back from the edge. Lifting her in his arms, he settled her
against his shoulder, picked up the pouch, and carried her
home. He put Ros to bed, and then fetched a basin, ewer of
water, soap, and a soft cloth. One he had cleaned Ros up, he
let Lyrri out.
"Lyrri, your sister is hurt. She fell in the water. Don't
disturb her."
Her eyes were large as she nodded solemnly. "I won't,
Uncle Malthus.
Malthus put Lyrri to bed, and sent her to sleep with a
touch of his hand. Afterward, he took the pouch to his office
and sat down at his desk. Malthus untied the leather thong
holding the pouch closed and drew out two sealed letters and
the folded paper he had found shoved into Ros' dress.
He unfolded the paper first, and found that the message
had indeed come from Sergei. The note, written in an elegant
hand with graphite said simply:
"Playing both sides of the game? That could get you killed.
"By the way, she was delicious. I'll come back for the other
one."
Sergei.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
356
Malthus crumbled the paper angrily, kneading it in his
hand for several minutes before dropping it into the woven
basket beside his desk. He would see that it was burned with
the rest when he finished. Sergei was so certain of his power,
that he was taunting Malthus, and it rankled. Was Sergei
threatening him? More reason to kill the vampire and be done
with it.
Two more letters, one from Lord Daemon, and the other
from the god-queen Gylorean. No wonder Sergei made that
threat. He must think he can blackmail me here. No matter.
Malthus broke the seal on the first letter.
Malthus,
I want the child alive. He is worth a chest of gold to me. If
you can get me his mother also, I will make that two chests.
They are more valuable than you can imagine. But only if
they are alive when they reach me. I am the only one who
knows how to use them. Do not disappoint me.
Daemon, Lord Brandrahoon.
Malthus felt a moment's elation until he read the signature.
Lord Daemon had just given his true name, and with that
name came an implicit threat. For the first time in his life,
Malthus knew fear. He wished now that he had not told
Brandrahoon of the child and its mother.
He knew all the stories and most of the rumors concerning
the oldest vampire in existence. He was one of the three
brothers who had founded Waejontor.
Once there were three brothers: Brandrahoon the
vampire; Isranon called Dawnhand, speaker to spirits; and
Waejonan the Accursed, first of sa'necari.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
357
The words trembled in his mind. The hellgod-queen
Gylorean Galee had made Brandrahoon the first vampires.
Back in the days that the sa'necari were merely a cult led by
Waejonan the first king of Waejontor, they had learned to
fear Brandrahoon. The dreaded Lord Hoon, a vampire lord
with many holdings throughout the continent, had to have
been Brandrahoon all along.
Historians and others had long speculated on whether the
ancient vampire still lived or not. Now Malthus knew and he
wondered how many others did also. Brandrahoon would only
have revealed himself if he felt secure in his position and his
power. The queen must be aware of this, after all she had
given him back the estates he held before Waejonan exiled
him—before he and his she-creature killed Waejonan and
disappeared into the shadows for centuries, rising only as a
rumor here and there.
Did the she-creature still exist also? If so, he would not
risk a face-to-face encounter with her—he would shoot her
from a distance. Were his poisons enough to kill her? What
more could he add to the blend? Lemyari. There were rumors
of an antidote, but Malthus didn't credit them. He would
secretly take one of those Lemyari who served him, and
imprison it to milk its venom. Sergei. It ought to be Sergei. If
only I could trap that one.
Considering his choices allowed Malthus to recover from
his initial shock, and he pulled himself together. So
Brandrahoon wanted Merissa as well as Darmyk. Malthus
wanted Merissa for himself. She had given Isranon a child,
she could give him one. He needed legitimate heirs, and he

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
358
could not afford to wait much longer. At thirty-six, Malthus
knew he should have already been nearly sterile, yet to judge
from how many camp females he had impregnated he was far
from it.
While there existed many theories concerning his people's
progressive infertility, none of them fully explained it.
Although almost humanly fertile at adolescence, it
degenerated rapidly into sterility, and no one's theories had
yet proven out. He suspected that his mother might be
correct when she said the rites caused it. Acting on that
belief, she had periodically dosed him for prolonged periods
with the same potions that had allowed him to appear human
in the hopes of maintaining his fertility.
And, of course, there was also a small percentage of
variation there, but not enough to remark on. When they bred
outside their own kind, more children resulted, but few of
them were born sa'necari. Here was a young lycan who had
borne a sa'necari child. It made him want Merissa all the
more. That decided him. Malthus would find a way around
yielding Merissa to Brandrahoon.
Then he thought of Pandeena, the mysterious priest, and
his loins tightened. He wanted that one also, but something
about her disturbed him. Spellcord. Yes, that was what he
needed. Spellcord her, and then make her his. Make her spill
her secrets, and open her legs to him.
Malthus opened the letter from Minnoras and discovered
that the god-queen had written him only a single line:
Send me the child alive.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
359
Damn! They both wanted the child delivered to them alive.
So there was no possibility of getting paid double.
Malthus reconsidered everything. The gold would be nice.
However, he had already been promised a title of nobility,
lands, and slaves for betraying the valley into the Queen's
hands. Malthus ran his tongue over his fangs thoughtfully. He
had not specified whether the child had been born lycan or
sa'necari. Perhaps he could substitute Kandaishee's child for
Darmyk ... That was a thought. The two cubs were the same
age. Give that child to Brandrahoon. He was more of a threat
than Galee was. The god-queen still had Angrim, Beltria, and
Shaurone to plow through before she could reach him.
He would have his promised vengeance on Isranon for
killing his brother—butcher Darmyk and send pieces of the
child to his father.
But Merissa? Merissa was another goal entirely. Perhaps he
could substitute Clodagh for Merissa after a bit of fiddling with
her mind to convince the bitch she was Merissa.
He should never have sent those letters, but at least he
now had a plan.
* * * *
After closing all her curtains and shutters in her
apartments, Pandeena cuddled Moss in her arms. He licked
her face with a wag of his tail. "Yes, I love you too, Moss.
We're going to visit a friend of yours."
Pandeena Jumped to her mother's house, and as she
walked past the front room, she saw that the chairs, sofas,
and floor overflowed with members of Teakamon's band in

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
360
mottled gray and brown. Teakamon sat at the head of the
room in the chair that Lokynen favored, wearing his natural
form: his hair the color of fresh spring leaves hung loose to
his buttocks, a seal-brown loin cloth was the only clothing on
his sorrel skinned-body and his lean frame with its well-
defined muscles, and modest flare at his shoulders, looked as
if he had been carved from a light, reddish-brown wood and
then highly polished.
Teakamon rose from his chair when he saw Pandeena,
straightening to his full seven-foot height. A gray-eyed
woman dressed in doeskin trousers and tunic shoved herself
from a chair and followed him. Pandeena's eyebrows lifted at
the sight of Reynan Sharani, the Watcher of the Woods,
knowing that Teakamon would only have brought her if times
had become exceedingly dangerous.
"What have we here?" Teakamon asked, reaching out to
stroke the dog in Pandeena's arms. "I do believe it's little
Moss."
"You know him?" Pandeena asked, startled.
"Why, yes," Teakamon replied. "I gave him to Tempest ten
years ago. He's a cedar puppy. I grow them on my special
tree. They're very intelligent as dogs go, and long-lived."
Teakamon parted the hair on Moss' tail to show the green
spot where Moss had once been connected to the tree he
sprouted from.
Pandeena sucked in a sharp breath. "Tempest is dead.
They say it was a heart attack."
Teakamon frowned, his bushy green brows knitting tightly
together across his narrow forehead. "That's not possible."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
361
"He was old..."
The son of Willodarus shook his head. "Tempest could not
die of that. I linked his heart to a tree. He was one of my
favorites."
Tension rippled through Pandeena. "Could a sa'necari have
stilled his heart? As if it were a heart attack?"
"Death magic, yes. Did you see Tempest's body?"
"No. He was returned to the earth months ago. He's buried
beside his shrine in Wolffgard."
Sorrow washed across Teakamon's features. "Poor little
Moss. Has he been alone all that time?"
"No. I think he had other people for a time. Actually, I
think our injured wolf upstairs belongs to Moss."
"I assume that you are taking him there?"
"I watch and see, but may not tell, of all the evil that I
smell," said Reynan in a singsong voice. "I hunt it down, I kill
it well, I show to all however small."
Pandeena shivered. She had never heard the Watcher
speak before. All she knew about Teakamon's great paladin
was that the mon had been geised at birth by her
bloodmother's enemies. "Yes, I am."
"Shall I come with you?" Teakamon asked.
Pandeena shook her head. "I'll come back down and we
can talk then."
"Good. Reynan and I have things to show you."
Pandeena climbed the stairs with Moss. When she entered
Nikko's bedroom, Moss began squirming to be let down and
whining. Pandeena tightened her hold on him.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
362
"What do we have here?" Navaryn asked, glancing over
her shoulder as she handed Nikko a glass of one of her
potions.
"A friend of his, I think." Pandeena knelt and released
Moss. The little dog immediately ran across the room, jumped
onto the bed, and bounded up to Nikko. He licked Nikko's face
furiously.
"Moss! How did you get here?" Nikko said. He stopped and
blinked. "That's his name, isn't it?"
Pandeena grinned broadly. "Yes, it is. Moss!" she spoke
sharply to get the dog's attention. "Find Nikko."
Moss bounced at Nikko again with a loud bark.
"Well, that settles that," Navaryn said. "Your name is
Nikko."
Pandeena nodded. "Nikko is the missing lawgiver from
Wolffgard Village. They think you're dead, Nikko."
"It's just as well," Navaryn said. "If the Butchering Serpent
knew you lived, he'd come looking for you."
"Does the name Malthus mean anything to you?" Pandeena
asked.
"Mal—Malthus?" Nikko abruptly doubled over with a cry,
clutching at his chest and stomach. Navaryn sprang from her
chair and slipped her hand onto his chest, flooding it with
warmth and energy, taking from her own life force and
sharing it with Nikko, linking the beat of his heart to hers, so
that hers beat for both of them. Pandeena put her hand on
her mother's arm and linked with her in rapport, lending her
own strength to Navaryn's. There was still too much of the

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
363
poison lingering his Nikko's body, too much damage had been
done.
Navaryn pulled Nikko into her arms and cradled him,
maintaining the link between them, which was all that was
keeping him alive. "Get me the powdered Amphereon and the
tube."
Pandeena broke rapport and brought the bottle from the
cabinet. She filled the steel tube with Amphereon and passed
it to her mother. Navaryn shoved it into Nikko's nostril and
blew. She passed the tube back to Pandeena. "Refill it."
The inserting and blowing was repeated, bringing the
highly refined Amphereon into Nikko's blood stream fast
through the mucus membranes. Navaryn Read him and saw
that his damaged heart had steadied.
"Now the blue arcane and the pollendine, quickly."
They managed to get the drugs down him.
Navaryn released the link and they settled Nikko back
among his blankets and pillows.
"What happened?" Nikko asked in a soft, dazed voice, his
hand on Moss' back.
"A name triggered a paroxysm. We won't say it again until
you're stronger."
Nikko stared at a point on the wall, raking his teeth over
his lower lip. "Can I keep Moss?"
"I have no problem with that, Mother. I doubt that anyone
will notice that Moss has vanished. They'll probably decide
something happened to him and get on with their lives. No
one is going to go looking for a small dog."
"Then, yes, you can."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
364
"Thank you." Nikko cuddled Moss and was soon asleep
with the dog beside him.
Pandeena knew that Nikko was nineteen, but right then he
seemed more like a frightened little boy. "Well, I think we
know who shot him."
"Don't say the name until we're out of here," Navaryn said,
and led her daughter down to one of the lower small sitting
rooms.
Pandeena licked her lips and raked her teeth across her
lower one. "Malthus. He appears to be human, but he tried to
Read me."
"He's the Butchering Serpent. Be careful."
"I'll kill him."
"No. We can't break the very laws we helped to create. We
gave the lycans laws, culture, and civilization. Ours will not be
the hands that destroy it. Watch him. Catch him in the act or
find a witness to it. At least we finally know what the Serpent
looks like."
"We have a witness."
"Not Nikko. Not until his memory comes back completely."
"We have Moss."
"A dog cannot be a witness. You know the laws."
"Then I'll watch him."
"And I'll get hold of Lokynen and have him join you at the
village. Teakamon's people are too conspicuous."
"That's a sound plan." Pandeena leaned against the wall
beside the linen closet, her arms crossed. "Teakamon wants
to show me something."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
365
"You don't need to see it. The Watcher has a basket of
trophies. Lemyari, sa'necari, and Rakshasha. You must get
another lawgiver for the village. Under the laws, you will need
one to find the truths and declare Malthus guilty of his
crimes."
Pandeena thought for a moment. "Caimbeul of Running
Horse. It will probably take me a few days to talk him into it,
but his apprentice is thirty years old and more than ready to
take over."
"It would be easier to get the apprentice. Besides, do you
really want to complicate your life with Caimbeul again?"
"I don't want the apprentice, I want Caimbeul. And I can
handle the old lecher." Pandeena winked at her mother.
"I know. Do what you can."
Pandeena Jumped back to her home in Wolffgard and
made arrangements to be gone for a couple of weeks,
figuring that it was better to allow for more time than she
expected to need, rather than too little. She shoved a few
items in her backpack, and Jumped to Running Horse in Clan
Silver Paw's valley. Only Caimbeul would do for her purposes.
Red Wolff would not normally accept an out-clan lawgiver.
Caimbeul, however, was a legend and one of the long lived
owing to having a fireborn among his ancestors. His wisdom
was considered so wide and all-encompassing that he was
frequently called in to settle disputes between clans.
* * * *
Sergei's attack upon Ros had unsettled Malthus far more
than he wished to admit. He slept badly, constantly getting up

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
366
to check on the girls, and finally fell asleep in a chair in the
living room. It had been years since anything had left him
feeling this threatened, even when removing his people to
safety after learning that Battle-clan planned to assault his
holdings. He shifted uncomfortably in his dreams.
Images of Sergei and Brandrahoon haunted him. His
nieces crouched at his feet, terrified as the vampires seized
him. Brandrahoon shoved a blade into his heart while Sergei
recited what he intended to do to Ros and Lyrri. I should not
have brought them—I should not..." he mumbled in his sleep,
writhing as the blade went in and he felt himself die.
A tug on his shirt brought him lurching from sleep.
Lyrri stood there, her eyes wide with worry. "Ros won't
wake up."
His breath caught in his throat as he propelled himself
from his chair at a run. He threw open the shutters to allow
the morning light to play across Ros' still features. She looked
as pale as fresh snow. He sat on the edge of Ros' bed, took
her wrist, and Read her. She lived, yet remained extremely
weak. Malthus mentally kicked himself for not looking for it
last night. But it had seemed so unlikely that a Lemyari would
give a seven-year-old a taste of the venom when fascination
and blood loss would do for her.
Malthus stripped Ros out of her nightgown and began
going over every inch of her body. He found it partially
concealed by other bruises along the inside of her thigh, high
up near her vagina: a single puncture.
A little of the venom paralyzes, more kills. "How much did
you give her, you goat-jacking bastard? I'll kill you." Another

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
367
thought entered Malthus' mind. "No, I'll chain you in my
dungeon and milk you like a cockwhoring serpent."
He opened his wrist and put it in Ros' mouth. Her bite and
suck reflex worked, but her eyes did not open. Malthus let her
take as much as she would, then he closed the wound on his
wrist with a swipe of his tongue, cleaned away the blood
rimming her mouth, and slipped her nightgown back on her.
Ros needed more attention than he could give her, a
female's attention—which meant fetching Clodagh. But what if
Sergei was out there watching him? He could put the
strongest wards he knew how on the bedroom and have Lyrri
stay there with her sister, while he went for Clodagh. But
what if that priest showed up? She appeared to have several
arcane talents. If any of those could detect mage-craft, then
she would know what he was if she arrived while he was
away. Malthus remembered how Tempest had been waiting
for him the day that he murdered him.
"If she gets in my way, I'll kill her."
He strengthened the wards and went to his study. Taking
out the necklace of carrying globes and placing it on top of his
desk, he tapped the red one with a word of command. Three
bundles of blades came out, each wrapped in a different
colored cloth, crimson, azure, and black. Malthus unwrapped
the blades in the crimson cloth. Two knives as long as short
swords lay there. He handled the plain, unadorned blades
cautiously, exchanging them for what he normally carried at
his hips. A tap and a word put the rest of the blades back into
the globe.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
368
The poisoned blades prepared him to deal with Pandeena
should he need to. Malthus shielded his nieces into their
bedroom and left. He paused in his yard long enough for a
low level scan for undead. If Sergei was still out there, then
he had withdrawn beyond the reach of Malthus' ability to
detect. Sergei, like the one who turned him, used his powers
discretely and rarely, so that no one knew their full range and
what he was capable of. Flashy mages who used their abilities
constantly and for every little thing, generally did not live
long—someone eventually ate them.
Malthus strode along the dirt path leading back to the main
compound. He could hear women's voices as they queued up
for their weekly allotment of dry goods. When he came in
sight of them, Malthus could see the buckets each woman
held and the three at the head of each line, who were
dispensing goods from large sacks. The camp's small
buckboard was pulled up, and Torquil was handing the large
sacks down to another male. The smith's apprentice did this
once a week with his master's permission. Clodagh stood at
the head overseeing everything.
"Clodagh, I need to speak with you. It's important."
"A moment, Malthus. I'll be right there." She excused
herself and turned over her duties to another before crossing
the yard to his side. "What is it?"
"Ros is hurt. I need you to come help me with her."
"Oh, no." Her hand went to her mouth. "What can I do?"
"Sit with her, keep her comfortable."
"What happened?"
Malthus glanced around the camp. "I can't tell you here."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
369
"Let me throw a few things together."
Soon they were headed back along the path through the
patches of sunlight and shade. Malthus stopped in one of the
largest patches of sunlight and looked a long time at Clodagh.
"Is something wrong?" she asked him.
"Your color is off. It's been like this for days."
She dropped her head. "I'm nauseated in the mornings. So
are seven of the other females in camp."
"Morning sickness?"
Clodagh flinched away from Malthus. "Yes."
"Has anyone told a Reader or the healer?"
Clodagh shook her head, her shoulders sagging.
"Kandaishee Read us."
"Kandaishee?"
"I uncorded her long enough to do it. We were afraid to
ask anyone else. We were all terrified that what we're
carrying is yours."
"I hope they all are." Malthus' lips curved into a sly smile.
"My sire was unusually fertile for a sa'necari his age."
Clodagh shuddered. "Only four are."
"Only four?" Malthus licked his lips and started walking
again, forcing her to follow him. He might have left children
behind him somewhere. He didn't know because he had spent
too many years moving around. Dyllys, his only long time
mistress, had insisted upon using herbs to protect herself
from pregnancy. Neither the herbs, nor the other method of
contraception—having a mage seal their wombs through
kweigeyl—were available to the camp's females because the

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
370
methods cost money they did not have and there were no
mages at Wolffgard.
"Which four, Clodagh. I will move them to safety before
my forces take Wolffgard."
Clodagh's shame painted itself across her face.
Malthus chuckled. "One of them is you? Who are the
others?"
"Kandaishee, Oliffyia, and Tryphaina. They're farther along
than I am. Kandaishee and Oliffyia are already showing."
"Is what's growing in your belly sa'necari or lycan?" His
thoughts strayed to Silkie Faggini in Hell's Widow. The Madam
of the Crimson Lady was already very pregnant by him.
"Sa'necari. They all are. What about their other children?"
"I'm feeling generous. The children will go with their
mothers.
"And those who aren't carrying your children? What's going
to happen to all these females you've taken?"
"I may still decide to keep my little harem."
They reached the house and Malthus released the seals on
it before ushering her inside. He settled her in the most
comfortable chair in the living room.
"Stay there."
Then he released the holds on his nieces' bedroom. Ros
looked the same as she had when he left her. Lyrri was curled
up crying.
"She's hurt, but I'm making her better. Clodagh's here to
help."
Lyrri rushed out, and started to climb into Clodagh's lap.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
371
"Not yet," said Malthus. "Go sit down, while I do
something."
Lyrri went and sat down in a corner.
Malthus opened Clodagh's robe and put his hand on her
belly. She flinched when he began to Read her. "Kandaishee's
right ... yes." A broad smile spread over his face. "It's mine.
He's sa'necari. My first son."
Clodagh's shoulders sagged. "I knew it when it happened.
I'm gifted that way."
"Really? And when was that?"
"The first rape. That too was foreseen."
"Foreseen? Foreseen! What is all this foreseeing? Who did
it?"
"An old wandering peddler named Dyna."
"What else did she foresee?"
"I don't remember. I was Ros' age at the time. All that I
remember is her telling me that ... actually she was telling it
to my mother, but I was listening at the crack."
Malthus put his finger to her head and lunged into her
mind, searching. He had not known to look for it, so he hadn't
found it. In a tiny corner was a ward, surrounded by a
forgetfulness spell that stank of yuwenghau. His moment of
joy was spoiled. "Come on," he snarled, grabbing her by the
arm. "I'll show you what to do for Ros."
* * * *
Lokynen, Hathura, and Meleajys the son of Kalirion stalked
through the pines and hickories on the northeast side of the
Valley near where a Battle-clan had perished at Iudris

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
372
Meadows. The arrival of Teakamon and his entourage, who
were heading for the area around Wolffgard to join Pandeena,
had freed the trio to investigate this area.
The three yuwenghau were a study in contrasts: massive
Lokynen with his barrel chest, and arms like temple columns,
his legs like tree trunks; Hathura, slender to the point of
appearing fragile, yet flaring through the shoulders,
translucently pale skinned with white hair and silver eyes;
Meleajys, a dark-skinned blond, whose lanky build stretched
his ropy muscles along a raw-boned frame.
They emerged onto the broad expanse of open ground
with asphodel already sprouting to mark where one hundred
lycans had died in battle with an unidentified force. One thing
was certain, they hadn't been any imps here. Imps never
fought in the open where their small size worked against
them. Iudris Meadow was awash in golden flowers on tall
stalks as well as the pale, white asphodel—death flower—and
shone brightly in the morning sun.
White oaks clustered with thickets of hickory on the far
side of the meadow and the ground rose up beyond that into
stands of aspens that whispered in the early breeze. A dark
object rose above it all in the distance.
"What's that over there?" Lokynen pointed to a hillside
barely visible beyond the trees circling the meadow.
Hathura's eyes narrowed as he strained to make it out with
his sharp Fae eyes. "It's a steading on that hill."
"Let's have a look."
They all carried an array of weapons that reflected their
divergent origins, for Hathura's mother had been Fae,

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
373
Meleajys' two mothers had been Sharani, and Lokynen's
mother had been half-Sharani. Hathura carried his silver
longbow at his back a pair of short curved knives at his sides.
Lokynen wore his big sword, Thunder, at his shoulder, two
long knives at his hips and a pair of axes thrust through his
belt.
Light-footed, Hathura ran ahead of the others. Lokynen
and Meleajys crossed the meadow, but by that time Hathura
had already disappeared up a winding dirt path that climbed
the hill. Lokynen's eyes searched the woods as they walked.
When they reached the stands of aspens, they saw Hathura
racing back to them. The Fae's eyes were troubled.
"Something's wrong up there."
"What do you mean?" Meleajys asked.
"I saw no one in the fields or moving about the three
houses."
Lokynen's mouth tightened. "Come on." He strode out
ahead of the others, authority in his movement and purpose
in the way he held his arms. Hathura strung his bow and
followed.
Silence.
The creak of a broken shutter in a sudden breeze.
That was all they heard. Not even the lowing of a cow in
the fields.
Lokynen paused and unsheathed his big sword. "That door
is standing open."
He pointed at it and Hathura nodded as Meleajys moved to
Lokynen's opposite side. Lokynen strode up to the house, and
pushed the door fully open with his sword. A flight of ravens

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
374
rushed out, skimming his head. None of the yuwenghau so
much as flinched in surprise, completely calm and centered.
Hathura unstrung his bow and put it in his case, pulling the
deadly golden fans from his sash instead.
Hathura's eyes hooded a moment. "There's death upstairs.
I can sense it."
Broken and overturned furniture littered the front room.
Lokynen stepped through it, heading for a crude stair into the
loft where the bedrooms had to be. The buzz of swarming
flies could be heard as they climbed. A narrow corridor
opened on three rooms at the top.
Lokynen looked in the first one. Two child sized beds stood
against opposing walls. A nightstand was overturned in the
middle. Lokynen walked into the center and studied the room
for an instant. A huge red stain was spread across a
patchwork quilt. A large crockery basin sat beside the bed
with a cup in it. Lokynen picked up the cup and scratched at
the red-black crusting it around the imprints of lips. "Blood.
Old blood. A child died there. They drained him and drank his
blood."
The eyes in every face hardened.
Hathura nodded. "Check the other rooms."
Meleajys went to look in the next room while Lokynen and
Hathura took the one at the end. Lokynen jerked the door
open. The third room swarmed with flies, huge flies. Hathura
snapped his fans open and spun into the room. From his fans
emerged white birds with trailing tails that consumed the flies
and vanished. In the middle of a double bed lay a body bound
spread eagle, the narrow chest showing that the female must

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
375
have been spellcorded in her hybrid state. The cords were
gone now and only the ropes that held her to the posts
remained.
"Mortgiefan," Lokynen snarled.
"We know what happened to the people who dwelled in
these three houses."
Lokynen nodded, his lips tight, and walked out.
They met Meleajys looking as grim as they did. "There's a
body in there." He pointed at the second room.
"Mortgiefan?" Lokynen asked.
"Yes."
"One in there also." Hathura pointed back where they had
come.
They searched all the houses, finding six more rited
bodies.
"Fire the buildings and pray for their souls," Lokynen said.
Hathura went to each doorstep and summoned a firebird
with his fans. They checked the barns and found them empty.
"It looks like the livestock was driven off by the attackers."
"There's nothing in the fields," said Meleajys, staring out
across the open grounds.
"Let's see if we can pick up their trail," said Hathura.
Lokynen nodded and they walked to the far end of the little
road beyond the houses.
"See," Hathura said. He pointed to a trampled area with
many and diverse footprints. "A meeting was held here. The
Trickster is right. The valley is endangered."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
376
Lokynen knelt beside a large paw print and measured it
with his huge hand, spreading his fingers. "Rakshasha.
Several of them."
"And myn. Many myn and imp prints," said Meleajys from
the far side. "Some are going toward the hamlet of Three
Stones."
"Let's follow them," Lokynen said.
When they drew near to the village, Lokynen signed a halt.
"We've lost them. The Trickster hasn't said anything about
our revealing ourselves to the locals yet."
"We have a group of predators to find and destroy," said
Hathura said. "I wonder how Pandeena is doing?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
377
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
WEDDING
Malthus arrived to take Merissa walking. She carried a
basket on her arm and wore a red ribbon in her hair, the first
bit of brightness he had seen on her since she received his
forged letter concerning her lover's betrayal. Merissa wore a
slate skirt of soft material that swished around her ankles
alluringly, drawing Malthus' eyes instantly, and a loose blouse
that matched the ribbon in her hair. There were no petticoats
and tight bodices to guard her from his hands. It brought a
speculative smile to his face. She had dressed for him; the
red vibrant against her fair complexion.
He glanced around for Darmyk and the cat, but found they
weren't there. "Just us?"
"You don't mind, Malthus?" Her voice held a tentative
edge, a soft vulnerability that attracted him and made him
hungry. "Do you have someone watching the girls?"
Malthus kissed her. "Need you ask? And, yes, Clodagh is
watching them. Where would you like to walk?"
"Silver Veils."
His hopes rose, knowing that the Silver Veils was a lycan
trysting place. Malthus took the basket from her, slipped his
arm around her shoulders, and pressed her close against him,
feeling the warmth of her. She leaned into him and, when his
hand chanced to brush her breast, Merissa smiled.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
378
The folks they passed nodded greetings. They were
becoming accustomed to seeing them together. Some
stopped them as they passed, extending invitations to dinner,
telling them to bring the children. Merissa laughed delightedly
at this. Nothing had turned out as badly as she first expected
and she felt she owed it to Malthus, her ever-present
defender. Rather than treating her child's repudiation as more
reason to chide her for her mistakes, they were responding to
Malthus' arguments for compassion.
"See, I told you they like you, Malthus," she said.
"It isn't me, Merissa, it's finally seeing you smile again."
He kissed her dark hair and her face brightened. She slipped
her hand into his. He squeezed her soft fingers.
They spread their blanket beneath a tree near the largest
of Silver Veil's falls, the rush of the water like a counter-point
to their words. Malthus' hand stole across her to lightly brush
the firm, fullness of her breast.
Merissa stiffened for an instant. "I—I haven't let anyone
touch me in nearly four years ... Not since he left."
"Too long without a man's touch for someone as lovely as
you." He cupped her breast, patiently observing her reaction.
She shivered, yet did not retreat from him. His thumb moved
across her nipple, rubbing gently. Merissa rested against him,
her head on his shoulder. He pressed his lips to hers, pushing
them open as he slid his tongue inside. She twined hers about
his, accepting him hungrily. Malthus' eyes glittered: yes, she
had come to give him what he desired.
He freed the bottom of her blouse from the skirt, sliding
his hand along beneath it, finding not to much as a

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
379
breastband to interfere with him, and fondled her breast. She
moaned softly. Malthus stripped her blouse off, and laid her
on the ground. Merissa's eyes filled suddenly as the blouse
came free and she lay half-exposed to him.
"I can never replace him, Merissa. I can only love you,
poor man that I am."
Merissa swallowed back her tears. "I know."
Malthus nuzzled her breasts. His mouth closed over her
nipple, teasing it with his tongue, sucking it to hardness. She
moaned again, this time long and low. Malthus gave her one
last flick of his tongue and straightened.
Time to act the gentleman and pull back. "If you wish, I
will leave it at this. I don't want to push you, Merissa. I love
you too much."
"No. I want you." She stroked his hardness, slid her hand
inside his pants, her fingers closing firmly around his cock. "I
love you."
Malthus reached beneath her skirt, ran his hand up her
leg, and discovered that she wore nothing beneath it: she had
come prepared to yield to him. His hand covered her womanly
parts and his long forefinger played with her entrance.
"Oh gods, I shouldn't let you do this..."
"Why?" He slipped his finger inside her.
Merissa caught her breath sharply. "I'm too close to my
fertile time ... What if I'm making a mistake."
"Marry me, Merissa. I swear I will try to be a good father
to your son ... And to ours should we have them. I love you."
"Yes. I'll marry you." She lifted him free of his pants,
caressing him.

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
380
Malthus removed his clothing. Merissa slid out of her skirt,
opening her legs to him. Her beauty filled him with an
eagerness beyond anything he had experienced before, even
with Dyllys. This is the sweet bitch who will bear my heirs ...
legitimate heirs. Forget my concubines and their bastards. I'll
keep them, as my father did his, but nothing more.
He stroked her body, sucking and probing, bringing her to
readiness. Malthus entered her and her legs tightened around
him. He began to move gently, and then harder, deeper at
her body responded to his. Malthus was slow to come when a
death was not involved. Merissa wept at the height of her
passion, yet Malthus had not yet had his. She gave him an
odd look as he strove harder. When his seed spilt into her,
Malthus dropped, rolling to the side so that his weight was off
her. "When we return, Merissa, we will tell your parents."
Merissa clung to him. "Yes."
"Let us marry immediately. Life is too fragile to wait."
"Yes."
* * * *
"Marriage?" Claw looked Malthus up and down. They stood
in the large main hall of the house near the hearth where
Aisha, Merissa's mother, and her two aunts had their looms.
"If you are looking to get something out of this, mon, forget
it. You're not lycan. Everything goes to my grandson and any
lycan heirs you get on her."
Malthus met his gaze squarely. "All I want is Merissa. I
love her. And I've grown very fond of little Darmyk. He and
my nieces get on well together."

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
381
"Father, I have a right to a little happiness," Merissa
protested. "I love Malthus more than I've ever loved anyone."
"What did you do for a living?" Claw demanded. "What can
you do now?"
"I was a soldier. But I can learn to farm and herd.
Whatever is required to provide for Merissa and Darmyk I
intend to do."
Aisha rose from her loom and put her arm around her
daughter's shoulders. "Let it be, old mon," she said in her
crotchety old wife's voice. "Let her have her love."
Claw grumbled under his breath and shook a hairy finger
in Malthus' face. "You treat her well, or you'll answer to me!"
Then he stomped out.
"Was that a yes?" Malthus inquired.
Aisha nodded. "Now both of you go sit down over there
and I'll have a nibari fetch some of those rolls I baked and a
little mead."
* * * *
The wedding was a small one by lycan standards, mostly
just the people who lived at the manor, and took place in the
gardens. Malthus provided Claw and Aisha with gifts in
accordance with lycan customs: jewelry for Aisha; liquor, four
pipes, and tobacco for Claw.
As the party descended into complete informality, Claw sat
apart from the festivities, grinding his palm into his chest and
grimacing.
Aisha walked over, her brow furrowing. "Are you all right?"

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
382
"No. I'm not all right." Claw snarled. "I've been having
chest pains lately."
"I'll send for Baroucha."
"No. You won't. I'm just fine. It'll pass in a bit."
"I hope so."
THE END

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
383
SF/F/H FROM PAGETURNER EDITIONS
CAMPBELL AWARD WINNER ALEXIS A. GILLILAND'S
ROSINANTE TRILOGY
Revolution from Rosinante
Long Shot for Rosinante
Pirates of Rosinante
THE CLASSIC SCIENCE FICTION OF STUART J. BYRNE
Music of the Spheres & Other Classic SF Stories
Star Quest
Power Metal
Hoaxbreaker
The Alpha Trap (1976)
The Land Beyond the Lens: The Michael Flannigan Trilogy
(writing as John Bloodstone)
The Metamorphs & The Naked Goddess: Two Classic Pulp
Novels
Children of the Chronotron & The Ultimate Death: Two
Classic Pulp Novels
Beyond the Darkness & Potential Zero: Two Classic Pulp
Novels
The Agartha Series #1. Prometheus II
The Agartha Series #2. Colossus
The Agartha Series #3: The Golden Gardsmen
Godman (writing as John Bloodstone)
Thundar, Man of Two Worlds The Land Beyond the Lens:
The Michael Flannigan Trilogy (writing as John Bloodstone)
Last Days of Thronas (writing as John Bloodstone)

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
384
The First Star Man Omnibus: #1 Supermen of Alpha & Star
Man #2 Time Window
The Second Star Man Omnibus: #3 Interstellar Mutineers
& #4 The Cosmium Raiders
The Third Star Man Omnibus: #5 The World Changer & #6
The Slaves of Venus
The Fourth Star Man Omnibus: #7 Lost in the Milky Way &
#8. Time Trap
The Fifth Star Man Omnibus: #9 The Centaurians & #10
The Emperor
The Sixth Star Man Omnibus: #11 The Return of Star Man
& #12 Death Screen
STEFAN VUCAK'S EPPIE NOMINEE SPACE SAGA "THE
SHADOW GODS"
In the Shadow of Death
Against the Gods of Shadow
A Whisper From Shadow
Immortal in Shadow
With Shadow and Thunder
Through the Valley of Shadow
JANRAE FRANK'S #1 BESTSELLING FANTASY SAGAS
Dark Brothers of the Light Book I. Blood Rites
Dark Brothers of the Light Book II. Blood Heresy
Dark Brothers of the Light Book III. Blood Dawn
Dark Brothers of the Light Book IV: Blood Wraiths
Dark Brothers of the Light Book V: Blood Paladin
In the Darkness, Hunting: Tales of Chimquar the Lionhawk
Journey of the Sacred King I: My Sister's Keeper
Journey of the Sacred King II: Sins of the Mothers

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
385
Journey of the Sacred King III: My Father's House
THE COSMIC KALEVALA
The Saga of Lost Earths—Emil Petaja (Nebula nominee
author)
The Star Mill—Emil Petaja
The Stolen Sun—Emil Petaja
Tramontane—Emil Petaja
JACK JARDINE'S HUMOROUS SF AND MYSTERY
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #1 The Flying Saucer Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #2 The Emerald Elephant Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #3 The Golden Goddess Gambit
The Agent of T.E.R.R.A. #4 The Time Trap Gambit
The Mind Monsters
Unaccustomed As I Am To Public Dying & Other Humorous
and Ironic Mystery Stories
The Nymph and the Satyr
ARDATH MAYHAR'S AWARD-WINNING SF & F
The Crystal Skull & Other Tales of the Terrifying and
Twisted
The World Ends in Hickory Hollow, or After Armageddon
The Tupla: A Nover of Horror
The Twilight Dancer & Other Tales of Magic, Mystery and
the Supernatural
The Black Tower: A Novel of Dark Fantasy
Forbidden Geometries: A Novel Alien Worlds
HAL ANNAS' COSMIC RECKONING TRILOGY
I. The Woman from Eternity
II. Daughter of Doom
III. Witch of the Dark Star

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
386
THE HILARIOUS ADVENTURES OF TOFFEE
1. The Dream Girl—Charles F. Myers
2. Toffee Haunts a Ghost—Charles F. Myers
3. Toffee Turns the Trick—Charles F. Myers
OTHER AWARD WINNING & NOMINEE STORIES AND
AUTHORS
Moonworm's Dance & Other SF Classics—Stanley Mullen
(includes The Day the Earth Stood Still & Other SF Classics—
Harry Bates (Balrog Award winning story)
Hugo nominee story Space to Swing a Cat)
People of the Darkness-Ross Rocklynne (Nebulas nominee
author)
When They Come From Space-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning
author)
What Thin Partitions-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning author)
Star Bright & Other SF Classics—Mark Clifton
Eight Keys to Eden-Mark Clifton (Hugo winning author)
Rat in the Skull & Other Off-Trail Science Fiction-Rog
Phillips (Hugo nominee author)
The Involuntary Immortals-Rog Phillips (Hugo nominee
author)
Inside Man & Other Science Fictions-H. L. Gold (Hugo
winner, Nebula nominee)
Women of the Wood and Other Stories-A. Merritt (Science
Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame award)
A Martian Odyssey & Other SF Classics—Stanley G.
Weinbaum (SFWA Hall of Fame author)
Dawn of Flame & Other Stories—Stanley G. Weinbaum
(SFWA Hall of Fame author)

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
387
The Black Flame—Stanley G. Weinbaum
Scout-Octavio Ramos, Jr. (Best Original Fiction)
Smoke Signals-Octavio Ramos, Jr. (Best Original Fiction
winning author)
The City at World's End-Edmond Hamilton
The Star Kings-Edmond Hamilton (Sense of Wonder Award
winning author)
A Yank at Valhalla-Edmond Hamilton (Sense of Wonder
Award winning author)
Dawn of the Demigods, or People Minus X—Raymond Z.
Gallun (Nebula Nominee Author)
THE BESTSELLING SF/F/H OF J. D. CRAYNE
Tetragravitron (Captain Spycer #1)
Monster Lake
Invisible Encounter & Other Stories
The Cosmic Circle
PLANETS OF ADVENTURE
Colorful Space Opera from the Legendary Pulp Planet
Stories
#1. "The Sword of Fire"—A Novel of an Enslaved World". &
"The Rocketeers Have Shaggy Ears"—A Novel of Peril on Alien
Worlds.
#2. "The Seven Jewels of Chamar"—A Novel of Future
Centuries. & "Flame Jewel of the Ancients"—A Novel of
Outlaw Worlds .
#3. "Captives of the Weir-Wind"—A Novel of the Void by
Nebula Nominee Ross Rocklynne. & "Black Priestess of
Varda"—A Novel of a Magic World.
NEMESIS: THE NEW MAGAZINE OF PULP THRILLS

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
388
#1. Featuring Gun Moll, the 1920s Undercover Nemesis of
Crime in "Tentacles of Evil," an all-new, complete book-length
novel; plus a Nick Bancroft mystery by Bob Liter, "The
Greensox Murders" by Jean Marie Stine, and a classic mystery
short reprinted from the heyday of the pulps.
#2 Featuring Rachel Rocket, the 1930s Winged Nemesis of
Foreign Terror in "Hell Wings Over Manhattan," an all-new,
complete book-length novel, plus spine-tingling science fiction
stories, including EPPIE nominee Stefan Vucak's "Hunger,"
author J. D. Crayne's disturbing "Point of View," Hugo Award
winner Larry Niven's "No Exit," written with Jean Marie Stine,
and a classic novelette of space ship mystery by the king of
space opera, Edmond Hamilton. Illustrated. (Illustrations not
available in Palm).
#3 Featuring Victory Rose, the 1940s Nemesis of Axis
Tyranny, in Hitler's Final Trumpet," an all-new, complete
book-length novel, plus classic jungle pulp tales, including a
complete Ki-Gor novel.
# 4 Featuring Femme Noir, the 1950s Nemesis of Hell's
Restless Spirits, in an all new, book length novel, plus all new
and classic pulp shudder tales, including "The Summons from
Beyond" the legendary round-robin novelette of cosmic horror
by H.P. Lovecraft, Robert E. Howard, C.L. Moore, A. Merritt,
and Frank Belknap Long.
OTHER FINE CONTEMPORARY & CLASSIC SF/F/H
A Million Years to Conquer-Henry Kuttner
After the Polothas—Stephen Brown
Arcadia—Tabitha Bradley
Backdoor to Heaven—Vicki McElfresh

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
389
Buck Rogers #1: Armageddon 2419 A.D.-Philip Francis
Nowlan
Buck Rogers #2. The Airlords of Han—Philip Francis
Nowlan
Chaka: Zulu King-Book I. The Curse of Baleka-H. R.
Haggard
Chaka: Zulu King-Book II. Umpslopogass' Revenge-H. R.
Haggard
Claimed!-Francis Stevens
Darby O'Gill: The Classic Irish Fantasy-Hermine Templeton
Diranda: Tales of the Fifth Quadrant—Tabitha Bradley
Dracula's Daughters-Ed. Jean Marie Stine
Dwellers in the Mirage-A. Merritt
From Beyond & 16 Other Macabre Masterpieces-H. P.
Lovecraft
Future Eves: Classic Science Fiction about Women by
Women-(ed) Jean Marie Stine
Ghost Hunters and Psychic Detectives: 8 Classic Tales of
Sleuthing and the Supernatural-(ed.) J. M. Stine
Horrors!: Rarely Reprinted Classic Terror Tales-(ed.) J. M.
Stine. J.L. Hill
House on the Borderland-William Hope Hodgson
House of Many Worlds [Elspeth Marriner #1]—Sam Merwin
Jr.
Invisible Encounter and Other SF Stories—J. D. Crayne
Murcheson Inc., Space Salvage—Cleve Cartmill
Ki-Gor, Lord of the Jungle-John Peter Drummond
Lost Stars: Forgotten SF from the "Best of Anthologies"-
(ed.) J. M. Stine

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
390
Metropolis-Thea von Harbou
Mission to Misenum [Elspeth Marriner #2]—Sam Merwin Jr.
Mistress of the Djinn-Geoff St. Reynard
Chronicles of the Sorceress Morgaine I-V—Joe Vadalma
Nightmare!-Francis Stevens
Pete Manx, Time Troubler—Arthur K. Barnes
Possessed!-Francis Stevens
Ralph 124C 41+—Hugo Gernsback
Seven Out of Time—Arthur Leo Zagut
Star Tower—Joe Vadalma
The Cosmic Wheel-J. D. Crayne
The Forbidden Garden-John Taine
The City at World's End-Edmond Hamilton
The Ghost Pirates-W. H. Hodgson
The Girl in the Golden Atom—Ray Cummings
The Heads of Cerberus—Francis Stevens
The House on the Borderland-William Hope Hodgson
The Insidious Fu Manchu-Sax Rohmer
The Interplanetary Huntress-Arthur K. Barnes
The Interplanetary Huntress Returns-Arthur K. Barnes
The Interplanetary Huntress Last Case-Arthur K. Barnes
The Lightning Witch, or The Metal Monster-A. Merritt
The Price He Paid: A Novel of the Stellar Republic—Matt
Kirkby
The Thief of Bagdad-Achmed Abdullah
Women of the Wood and Other Stories-A. Merritt
BARGAIN SF/F EBOOKS IN OMNIBUS EDITIONS
(Complete & Unabridged)
The Andre Norton Omnibus: Three complete novels

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
391
The H. Beam Piper Omnibus: Three complete books
The E. E. Smith, Ph.D. Omnibus: Three complete novels
The First Lord Dunsany Omnibus: 5 Complete Books—Lord
Dunsany
The First William Morris Omnibus: 4 Complete Classic
Fantasy Books
The Barsoom Omnibus: A Princess of Mars; The Gods of
Mars; The Warlord of Mars-Burroughs
The Second Barsoom Omnibus: Thuvia, Maid of Mars; The
Chessmen of Mars-Burroughs
The Third Barsoom Omnibus: The Mastermind of Mars; A
Fighting Man of Mars-Burroughs
The First Tarzan Omnibus: Tarzan of the Apes; The Return
of Tarzan; Jungle Tales of Tarzan-Burroughs
The Second Tarzan Omnibus: The Beasts of Tarzan; The
Son of Tarzan; Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar-Burroughs
The Third Tarzan Omnibus: Tarzan the Untamed; Tarzan
the Terrible; Tarzan and the Golden Lion-Burroughs
The Pellucidar Omnibus: At the Earth's Core; Pellucidar-
Burroughs
The Caspak Omnibus: The Land that Time Forgot; The
People that Time Forgot; Out of Time's Abyss-Burroughs
The First H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Invisible Man: War of
the Worlds; The Island of Dr. Moreau
The Second H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Time Machine; The
First Men in the Moon; When the Sleeper Wakes
The Third H. G. Wells Omnibus: The Food of the Gods;
Shape of Things to Come; In the Days of the Comet

Serpent's Quest [Lycan Blood Vol. I]
by Janrae Frank
392
The First Jules Verne Omnibus: Twenty Thousand Leagues
under the Sea; The Mysterious Island; From the Earth to the
Moon
The Homer Eon Flint: All 4 of the Clasic "Dr. Kenney"
Novels: The Lord of Death; The Queen of Life; The
Devolutionist; The Emancipatrix
The Second Jules Verne Omnibus: Around the World in 80
Days; A Journey to the Center of the Earth; Off on a Comet
Three Great Horror Novels: Dracula; Frankenstein; Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
The Darkness and Dawn Omnibus: The Classic Science
Fiction Trilogy-George Allan England
The Garrett P. Serviss Omnibus: The Second Deluge; The
Moon Metal; A Columbus of Space
The Robert E. Howard Omnibus: Three complete books
ADDITIONAL TITLES IN PREPARATION
pageturnereditions.com
If you are connected to the Internet, take a
moment to rate this eBook by going back to
your bookshelf at www.fictionwise.com.

