Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
The Unification Chronicles:
Inquisition
Volume 5
by Jeff Kirvin
 
Solo Media
www.solomedia.org
Copyright ©2005 by Jeff Kirvin
 
NOTICE: This work is copyrighted. It is licensed only for use by the original purchaser. Making copies of this work or
distributing it to any unauthorized person by any means, including without limit email, floppy disk, file transfer, paper print out,
or any other method constitutes a violation of International copyright law and subjects the violator to severe fines or
imprisonment. 
 
The  Story  So  Far:  Humanity’s  first  interstellar  ship,  the  Envoy,  has  been  destroyed
following  a  disastrous  first  contact  with  a  theropod-like  alien  species.  Major  Jack  Killian  and

Lieutenant  Robyn  O’Reilly  of  the  Terran  Republic  Marines  were  able  to  return  to  Earth  and
save nearly half the colonists, but the mission was a devastating failure and a massive setback in
the 200-year old program to relocate some of Earth’s twenty billion humans. Someone  is going
to have to answer for that.
*
*
*
“Right this way, Major.”
It was the first time Jack had ever been subjected to a formal  inquest,  and  he  wasn’t  sure
what to expect. Even after Mars, there’d been nothing like this. They’d barely given him time
to change  into  his  dark  brown  dress  uniform  after  landing  before  they  ushered  him  into  an
elegant courtroom. He was told to stand behind a podium facing a long table with  four  seats,
then he was left alone.
The far door opened and a sergeant came through. The man snapped to attention and then
shouted, “Marine! Ten hut!”
Jack  stood  at  attention,  moving  only  his  eyes  as  the  members  of  the  panel  that  would
question him walked into the room and took their seats.
The first was James Staten, the President of the Terran Republic. Staten was a tall man with
an almost regal bearing. Jack had worked closely with him on Mars and thought well of him.
The  man  was  a  civilian,  but  he  was  strong.  He  had  handled  himself  well  on  Mars  and  had
fought to get Jack on board the Envoy. Jack took his presence as a good sign.
The  next  person  through  the  door  was  Elaine  Takemura,  the  president’s  science  advisor.
Takemura was a genius, generally regarded as the next Hawking or Singh. She was dressed in a
severely  tailored  black  suit,  and  moved  almost  like  a  bird,  with  quick,  precise  motions,
uncomfortably reminding Jack of the Saurians.
Behind Takemura was Thomas Gosnell, the president’s political advisor. Jack had met him
before and didn’t like the man. He may have been a political genius that got his boss reelected
after Mars, but Jack still thought of him as a toad. The man was short and fat, and despite his
obvious wealth wore an ill-fitting brown suit. Jack tried to shake off his feelings. He wasn’t the
first soldier that disliked politicians.
Last into the room was General Orlando Cheung, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
As all four took their seats, General Cheung said, “At ease, Major.”
Jack relaxed his stance just a bit, falling into parade rest. He  clasped  his  hands  behind  his
back and waited.
President Staten took out a small pair of reading glasses, an  archaic  affectation  that  voters
seemed to like. It had always bugged Jack. Staten consulted a slate on the desk in front of him,
bringing up some text. “Jack, good to see you again,” he said, looking up from his notes.
“You too, sir.”
“Let’s not beat around the bush, Jack,” Staten said. “Somebody fucked up out there.”

“Yes sir.”
“I’ve  read  your  report,”  the  president  continued,  referring  to  the  brief  notes  Jack  had
managed to compile on the way  down  to  Earth  from  Envoy’s  tunnel  point  just  inside  Luna’s
orbit. “It doesn’t paint a glowing picture of Captain Chenzokov.”
“No sir, it doesn’t.”
Gosnell looked increasingly irritated in his seat. Staten seemed aware of it, but content not
to acknowledge him just yet.
“But  in  point  of  fact,”  Staten  said,  “we  have  managed  to  confirm  very  little  of  what  you
report. Chenzokov never sent us any word of aliens and none of the colonists we’ve talked  to
so far ever saw one. We’re going to need a little more to go on, Jack. The Envoy was the work of
two hundred years,  the  pinnacle  of  human  achievement.  Now  it’s  a  ball  of  scrap  metal.  The
public is going to want some answers.”
“It’s all in my report, sir. We set down on New Eden, started scouting colony sites. At our
first  location,  we  observed  an  intelligent,  technological  alien  race  with  dinosaur-like
characteristics.  I  informed  Captain  Chenzokov,  and  he  decided  to  make  first  contact  on  his
own and against my advice. The aliens reacted badly and we had to bug out.”
General Cheung leaned forward. “Reacted badly, Major?”
“It  was  weird,  sir.  The  Saurians  were  cautious,  but  not  overtly  threatening  as  we
approached.  They  had  their  weapons  pointed  to  the  sky  rather  than  trained  on  our  vehicle,
even though the big mechs could have taken us out without  waiting  for  us  to  make  a  move.
They  were  quiet,  just  waiting.  It  wasn’t  until  Captain  Chenzokov  rounded  the  back  of  the
vehicle and came into view that they reacted.”
“And for the record, what was that reaction, Major?”
“They went apeshit, sir. They fired on  us  immediately,  screaming  and  hooting  like  it  was
the end of the world.”
Elaine  Takemura  spoke  up.  “I’m  not  sure  we  can  make  any  suppositions  from  their
vocalizations, Major, without knowing what their language is like. What seemed like screaming
to you may have been little more than tactical direction. I am interested in the timing, however.
You say they didn’t open fire until they actually saw Chenzokov?”
“That’s correct, ma’am.”
“Did Captain Chenzokov do anything they might have found threatening?”
“Not that I could see, ma’am.”
“Interesting. So you would say that the reaction they expressed towards our technology was
radically different from the way they reacted to seeing us in the flesh?”
“That was my observation, ma’am.”
“Major,” said General Cheung, “tell me more about what happened once  you  returned  to
the Envoy. What did you observe about the alien vessels?”

“Dangerous, sir. I couldn’t judge their size very well, but they were big.  They  seemed  use
the same tunnel effect we use, and also used it to incorporate a mass driver.”
Cheung nodded. “And their first shot missed you?”
“Yes, sir. I guessed from the sudden gravity spike what they were doing. It occurred to me
that if I could put the gravity field of the Envoy between us, it might alter the trajectory of the
asteroid.”
“Excellent  call,  Major.  That  seems  to  have  made  the  difference  in  making  it  home,”  said
General Cheung.
“Thank you, sir.”
“Major Killian,” said Takemura, “how long did it take to execute the tunnel?”
Jack had to think about that. “Less than a minute, if I recall, ma’am.”
“And the aliens were both watching you the entire time?”
“Presumably, ma’am.”
“And you tunneled straight to Earth, is that correct?”
Where’s she going with this? Jack wondered. “Yes, ma’am.”
Takemura  turned  to  Staten.  “Mister  President,  there  might  be  a  problem.  If  the  aliens
thought  to  observe  and  measure  the  direction  and  intensity  of  our  tunnel,  they  might  have
been able to determine where it terminated.”
“So the aliens might know our location?” said Staten.
“They  would  not  know  it’s  our  home  system,  but  they  might  want  to  check  it  out
eventually.”
Gosnell snorted again. The president sat back, nodding to him.
Gosnell leaned forward, his  jowly  flesh  lapping  over  his  collar.  “Major  Killian,  you  didn’t
get along very well with Captain Chenzokov, did you?”
Jack’s eyes  narrowed.  What  did  that  have  to  do  with  the  Saurians?  “No,  I  did  not.  But  I
don’t see—”
“In  fact,”  Gosnell  interrupted,  “we  have  numerous  accounts  from  technicians,  colonists,
even your own troops that you argued frequently with the captain. Is that correct?”
“We had differences of opinion, and we voiced them. Sir.”
“Differences  of  opinion.”  Gosnell  sat  back  in  his  chair,  the  wood  creaking.  “You  were
actually against the Envoy Project from the beginning, weren’t you, Major?”
“I support the initiatives of the Terran Republic, Mister Gosnell.”
“Well, that’s good to know. Because you see, I was worried about that. I seem to remember
you having gone on record as saying that, what was it?” He tapped  his  finger  a  few  times  on
the slate in front of him, summoning up the quotation he was looking for. “Ah, here it is. You

said, and I quote, ‘Colony domes can still work. Using Envoy to search for habitable planets is a
mistake.’ End quote. That sounds to me like you were opposed to the Envoy Project.”
Jack took a deep breath. “No sir, not at all.”
“But in your own words—”
“I was against limiting our search to worlds that had no need of terraforming. I felt  it  was
slow and inefficient.”
“I’ll thank you not to interrupt me, Major.
“You were against the Envoy, but somehow you convinced us all  to  let  you  on  board.  We
knew you were dangerous after you nearly got the president killed on Mars, and still we gave
you a second chance.
“And  now,  you’d  have  us  believe  that  you  just  happened  to  fail  again,  even  more
spectacularly, and you just happened to be one of the few survivors despite being at the heart of
the conflict and you just happened to make it home while the man you despised and the project
you opposed are both dead?”
It  took  all  of  Jack’s  self  control  not  to  leap  over  the  podium  and  kill  Thomas  Gosnell.  It
would  be  so  easy,  so  satisfying,  to  snap  the  man’s  corpulent  neck.  But  instead  he  centered
himself and looked to the president.
Staten was focused on his slate. Jack didn’t know what  he  could  possibly  be  reading,  but
the president seemed oblivious to the proceedings.
“Major Killian? Is that what we are to believe?” Gosnell asked.
“No, sir,” Jack said. “I stand by my report.”
“Your report,” Gosnell repeated. “You mean this fiction about aliens and starships?  Please,
Major. Don’t insult us by making us discuss this further.”
“It’s not fiction, sir.”
Gosnell  sneered,  making  his  face  even  less  pleasing.  “Then  why  did  Captain  Chenzokov
never communicate any of this to us? Why is this the first we’ve heard of it? Doesn’t it stand to
reason that a man about to make first contact with an alien  race  would  have  called  home  for
advice?”
Jack wondered if  Gosnell  had  ever  met  Chenzokov.  “It  would,  sir.  But  I’m  not  surprised
Chenzokov never did. He had a flair for the dramatic, and I’m sure he wanted to wait until he
could claim the glory for himself.”
Gosnell shook his head. “Not very sporting, is it,  Major,  to  speak  ill  of  the  dead?  Captain
Chenzokov isn’t here to defend himself.”
Finally Gosnell stood. “But that’s the point, isn’t it, Major. The dead tell no tales, right? So
when you and your Marines tried a military coup and it went bad, you had to make sure there
were no witnesses.”
So that’s what  this is about, Jack thought. Gosnell wants to set me up  as  the  fall  guy.  “There

was  no  coup,  Mister  Gosnell.  As  much  as  I  may  have  wanted  to  remove  Chenzokov  from
power, I did my job as a Marine and as Envoy’s head of security.”
Gosnell snorted. “Don’t try to hide behind the flag. We all know what happened out there.”
“There was no coup. I was there. You were not.”
“I know you were, Major. And I—”
“And with all due respect, sir,” Jack continued. “Humanity has a new enemy. The Saurians
are  out  there,  they  might  be  able  to  find  their  way  here,  and  I  think  we  all  have  more
important things to do than cover our political asses while trying to throw some Marines under
the bus.”
“I warned you not to interrupt me, Major.” Gosnell addressed the rest of the panel. “I move
that Major Killian be  placed  under  arrest,  on  charges  of  murder,  attempted  murder,  mutiny
and  treason.  This  man  has  scuttled  decades  of  work,  wasted  trillions  of  dollars  and  is
responsible for the deaths of hundreds of good men  and women that only wanted to serve the
Terran Republic.”
President Staten said  nothing  for  a  long  moment.  Gosnell  turned  to  him,  breathing  hard
from the exertion.
The president looked up from his slate. “I’m sorry, Jack, but charges have been made. We
have  to  see  this  through.  MPs,  take  Major  Killian  into  custody,  bearing  validation  of  the
charges against him.”
*
*
*
Commander Amanda Vogel was having a rough day.
The TRS Hyperion  was cruising through the asteroid belt, ten days out  of  Io  Station.  They
were looking for a pirate vessel that had been hijacking ore shipments back  to Mars. The belt
had been a haven for ore pirates for generations, but Amanda was proud to say that there had
been a noticeable decline since the Hyperion was dispatched to roust them out.
This  one  was  tough,  though.  Hyperion  was  a  frigate,  predating  the  tunnel  drive  or  even
rotational gravity. The old boat was sturdy enough, but she lacked the sensor packages on the
newer boats. Amanda had to get a lot closer to her prey to see them  than the distance at which
some of the newer, wealthier pirates could see her.
This  one  was  cagey.  They’d  had  just  a  few  contacts  over  the  past  few  days,  but  nothing
solid. Just when she thought they had something, it vanished into mist.
She pounded her fist against the armrest of her command  couch, forcing her torso against
the harness in the microgravity. Then she made herself relax, shaking her head and feeling the
short russet hair sway a bit next to her head. Have to get that cut soon, too, she thought.
“Conn,  Radar!”  shouted  Petty  Officer  Beaumont,  her  ECO.  “Contact,  bearing  two  seven
three, mark three four up plane.”
Wow,  Amanda  thought.  How’d  we  miss  that?  The  directional  bearing  the  ECO  had  given

was almost directly left of the Hyperion, and a bit above them,  34  degrees  above  the  plane  of
the solar system. “Roger, Radar. What do we have, Mister Beaumont?”
“It looks like our boy, ma’am.  Hard  to  say  for  sure,  but  it’s  the  right  size  and  shape  and
doesn’t move like a rock.”
“Excellent. Helm, prepare to come about. We’re not losing  him  again.”  Patrolling  the  belt
wasn’t  as  glamorous  as  people  back  home  thought  it  was,  Amanda  knew.  It  wasn’t  like  the
vids. The rocks were scattered hundreds of miles from each other even at their densest, usually
hundreds of  thousands  of  miles  away.  Hyperion  didn’t  have  to  dodge  anything,  but  it  was  a
challenge to pick the enemy spacecraft out of the radar clutter. It wasn’t all that difficult for a
canny pirate to make his metal boat look like just another iron rock.
“Helm, aye, ma’am.”
This is more like it, Amanda thought. Now we’ve got the bas—
“Commander, incoming message, Gold channel,”  said  Ensign  Perez,  her  communications
officer.
“Not now, not now,” Amanda said. “Helm, all ahead full. Let’s get ‘em.”
“Aye, ma’am.”
Amanda felt the change in inertia push her back  into her seat. The Hyperion  had kicked in
her fusion engines and they were accelerating at full speed.
“Conn, Radar!” shouted Beaumont. “Contact is rabbiting!”
The pirate yacht had stopped  pretending  to  be  a  rock  and  was  fleeing.  This  was  the  part
Amanda loved the most. The chase. Running down the bad guys. And if the son of a bitch had
a hold full of ore, he wouldn’t be able to accelerate or turn as fast as the Hyperion. It would all
be over soon.
“Conn, Radar! Target is accelerating. He’s getting away, ma’am.”
Or not, Amanda thought. Why wasn’t this ever easy?
Amanda  brought  up  her  tactical  display  and  looked  at  the  field  of  battle.  There  was
precious little to work with, only a few asteroids remotely close to  her  or  the  enemy.  But  she
saw something.
“Helm, adjust course, one two degrees to port.”
“That will take us off his tail, ma’am.”
“I know, just do it.”
“Aye, ma’am.”
Amanda  turned  to  Ensign  Wilcox  at  Weapons  Control.  “Weapons,  I  want  two  firing
solutions,  and  I  need  them  now.  Feeding  the  data  to  your  station.”  Amanda  touched  her
intended  targets  on  her  console  and  sent  the  data  to  the  weapons  station.  She  saw  Wilcox’s
bushy eyebrows go up, but he got to work.

“Weapons, you may fire when ready.”
“Aye, ma’am,” Wilcox said, already feeding the coordinates to the missiles.
“Fire in the  hole,”  Wilcox  said  as  he  launched  two  missiles,  in  different  directions  and  at
different speeds.
“Captain,” Ensign Perez said. “This Gold Channel call doesn’t want to wait.”
“Well  they’re  going  to  have  to,”  Amanda  said.  “I’m  busy  at  the  moment.  Helm,  reduce
speed 10% and hold this course.”
“Aye, ma’am.”
Amanda  watched  her  tactical  console.  The  first  missile  was  on  the  tail  of  the  pirate,  and
getting closer. It wouldn’t hit him, she was sure, but he’d be preoccupied trying to shake it.
The second missile detonated right on time. It exploded in empty space, but the force of the
explosion altered the orbit of a largish chuck of nickel, sending it directly at the pirate ship.
Pay  attention, now, Amanda thought to the pirate. I’m depending  on  you  to  be  smarter  than
the average thug.
“Conn, Radar! Target is altering course,” said Beaumont. He thought for a second, and then
said in a quieter voice, “He’s headed on an intersect course with our current heading. Time to
target, two minutes.”
That  should  even  the  odds  a  bit,  Amanda  thought.  She  didn’t  think  the  pirate  would  be
dumb enough to hold that course, but by the time he was done dodging asteroids and missiles
he would have brought himself much closer to the Hyperion.
“Captain, new orders,” said Ensign Perez. “We are to come about immediately and  return
to Io Station.”
Amanda twisted in her seat to look at Perez. “What?”
The ensign looked  about  twelve  years  old.  He  wasn’t  much  out  of  the  academy  to  begin
with, and no one on her boat wanted to annoy the Captain. “The orders come from the JCOS,
ma’am.”
What in the bloody hell is this about? Amanda wondered. “It can’t wait? We have him.”
The poor ensign shrank into his seat. “The orders state we are to return with all due haste,
ma’am. Someone’s in a hurry.”
“Gott Verdammt  Stück  Scheiße,” Amanda said. She  had grown up in New Berlin and she
always seemed to return to her mother tongue when she was  mad.  “Helm,  come  about,  new
course. Return to Io Station. Best speed.”
She felt the ship turn again until it had almost reversed direction, then kick  in the engines
again. She  looked at the  fading  report  on  the  radar  screen  and  cursed.  Someone  had  royally
fucked up her day, and they’d pay for that.

*
*
*
“Hey, boss.”
Jack looked up from this bunk and saw Robyn standing at the bars of his cell. He stretched
and stood up. “Lieutenant.”
Robyn leaned against the bars. “What’s the story?”
Jack  looked  up  and  down  the  central  corridor  of  the  brig.  There  was  a  guard  about  ten
meters down, watching both of them with disinterest.
“I got railroaded, Robyn. Gosnell saw an opportunity to make me the goat for losing Envoy
and he took it.”
Robyn  nodded.  “I  thought  so.  I’ve  been  through  questioning  three  times  in  the  last  two
days. They keep asking about a coup. It’s taken this long for me to  sweet  talk  my  way  down
here.”
“What’s the official story topside?” Jack asked.
She  shrugged.  “Not  much  of  one.  So  far  the  general  public  doesn’t  even  know  Envoy
returned. We’ve all been sworn to secrecy. I think somebody is running scared.”
An image of Gosnell’s fat form flashed into Jack’s mind. “After Mars, I don’t think they can
afford more bad press. And having me involved each time gives them an excuse.”
“So what are you going to do?”
*
*
*
“I won’t stand for this, Thomas.”
James Staten sat in his office overlooking the mountains outside the Terran Republic capitol
of  Geneva.  While  Jack  Killian  was  only  a  few  blocks  away—and  many  stories  down—Staten
was starting to wonder if he’d be able to free the Marine.
“Mister President, you don’t have a choice,” said Thomas Gosnell, sprawled across an easy
chair on the other side of the desk as if he owned the place. Staten thought about that. Maybe
Gosnell did have more right to the room than he did.
It wasn’t easy running a global  government.  To  this  day,  Staten  didn’t  know  how  Daniel
Cho had done it. But the result was that the president had  very  little  power  to  actually  make
decisions. Mostly, his hands were tied by political arrangements, markers and favors held and
given. And while Staten did a good job of looking the part of a strong leader, he couldn’t have
done the job without Gosnell, who knew who owed what to whom.
“This dropped into our laps, Jim,” Gosnell continued, his Australian accent more noticeable
away from the cameras. “When the voters hear about what happened to Envoy,  they’re  going
to demand that someone pay for that. The goal of getting people off this rock has been the only
thing  holding  our  government  together  for  two  centuries.  The  public  faith  in  that  goal  was

shaken after Mars.”
“Don’t remind me.”
“I have to, Jim, because you don’t seem to get it. A lot of people connect Mars to you. Right
or  wrong,  fair  or  unfair,  that’s  the  way  neural  pathways  work.  They  think  Mars,  they  think
you,  they  think  disaster  and  no  leaving  Earth.  We  were  able  to  get  you  re-elected  on  the
promise that you’d make good on the other half of Cho’s plan.  If  we  couldn’t  colonize  Mars,
we’d leave the solar system entirely.
“Do you think they’ll forgive you if you botch that, too?”
“I had nothing to do with what happened out there and you know it!”
Gosnell got up and started to pace. “I know that and you know that. But the people … The
people want accountability. They want a leader.
“Now both of  us  know  they’re  not  going  to  get  what  they  want,  but  they  have  to  either
think they’re getting it or they have to have someone to blame. They  can  blame  you,  or  they
can  blame  your  pet  jarhead.  Both  of  you  were  on  Mars  when  it  blew,  and  both  of  you  are
connected, at least in the minds of the public, with Envoy.”
Gosnell stopped and leaned on Staten’s desk. “I know it’s not what you want, Jim. I know
you feel like you owe this guy. But we have to look at the political realities here. It’s you or him,
and thank God we have him in the first place or it’d just be you.
“Look at it this way. He’s a soldier, and you’re sacrificing him for the greater good. You can
do more good for the people of the Terran Republic as President than he can as a  Marine.  So
you sacrifice him. In a courtroom, on the battlefield, what’s the difference?”
Staten sat back in his chair and stared out over the mountains.
*
*
*
Amanda  jumped  out  of  the  shuttle  that  brought  her  over  from  the  Hyperion  and  found
Jeremy waiting for her. “We had him, Jeremy.” She  stepped around him. They  were  alone  in
the dark, dingy metal of the shuttle bay. Jeremy matched her step, again barring her way out.
Commander  Jeremy  Weaver  was  the  senior  officer  of  Io  Station.  He  was  also  Amanda’s
lover. Neither mattered to her all that much  right now, and all she saw was that he was in her
way. “Amanda, you’re going to want to calm down.”
She  stopped. “Calm? You want me to be calm?  We  fucking  had  him.  I’ve  been  after  this
prick for months and we had him before some VIP jackass changed our orders.”
Jeremy smiled in that smug, irritating way he had. Nothing ever seemed to upset him. “I’m
to escort you to meet General Cheung. And just for a change,” Jeremy said as he ushered  her
through the door, “try not biting his head off.”
*
*
*

“Commander Vogel, so good to see you at last,” General Cheung said. “Please, come in and
sit down.”
Amanda was standing at attention at the door to the guest quarters to which  Cheung  had
been assigned. The room was the nicest accommodations Io Station had, but it still amounted
to little more than metal walls, a cot and a desk.
“Commander?”
Amanda walked into the room and the door shut behind her, two MPs on the  other  side.
They’d  opened  the  door  without  speaking  when  she  approached.  Cheung  was  seated  at  the
desk, busy with something on the slate computer he had in front of him. “Please take a seat,”
he said.
Amanda felt a surge of anger rise in her again, a little voice in her head saying he pulls me off
an  intercept  but  then  makes  me  wait  …  but  she  controlled  it.  Frankly,  she’d  expected  a  vice
admiral at best, not the highest ranking member of the TR military. Her curiosity trumped her
anger and she had to find out what Cheung could want with her. She  sat down on a small sofa
facing him.
Cheung put down the slate and gave her his full attention. He wasn’t as old as she thought
he’d be,  mid-80s  maybe.  His  predecessor  had  held  the  post  of  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs
until he was 112. He was dressed in a utility uniform, not Class As.
“I’m sure you’re curious about a number  of things, Commander.  Why I’m here, what the
hurry was, what this all has to do with you. So I’ll get right to the point. I’m here to give you a
promotion.”
“A … promotion, sir?”
Cheung nodded. “Your name is spoken often back at headquarters, Commander.  You have
a way of getting results that has won you many admirers, myself included. You are a  brilliant
tactician  and  strategist.  You  have  a  way  of  getting  more  out  of  your  crew  than  previous
commanders. A ship with you commanding it seems to be more than the sum of its parts.
“Which is why we’re about to throw you straight into hell.”
“Sir?”
“What I’m about to tell you is classified, so high that we’ve had to bump  up your security
clearance just so you could hear it. Only a handful of people back home know what’s going on,
and we’re going to try to keep it a secret for a long as we can.”
Cheung told her about the return of Envoy, and what had happened to it. He told her about
aliens  with  starships  far  more  advanced  than  anything  she’d  seen,  and  terrible  weapons.
Amanda was speechless. This had to be some kind of joke, there’s just no way it could be real.
But Cheung looked deadly serious.
“Frankly,  we’re  lucky  we  know  anything  about  the  aliens  at  all.  It  looks  like  Envoy  just
barely  made  it  back.  Most  of  what  we  do  know  comes  from  Jack  Killian,  Envoy’s  security
chief.”
“Crap,” Amanda said. “I’d forgotten he was on board.”

“You have a problem with Major Killian?”
Amanda shook her head. “Not personally, sir. I’ve never met him. But from what I know of
what happened on Mars with the President, and now this … Trouble seems to follow that guy.
I wouldn’t want him on my ship.”
Cheung  nodded.  “I  understand.  Well,  there’s  more.  Because  of  the  way  Killian  tunneled
back to Earth, we have reason to believe that the Saurians could know our location. We don’t
know why they react so violently to us, but we can’t afford to wait.”
Cheung leaned over and handed her his slate. On it, she saw diagrams  and  sketches  for  a
huge rectangular structure, full of angles and hard planes.
“Those are some of the plans we have for a new kind of starship, the first of the Ares class
carriers. It’s the TRS Daniel Cho. It’s already being built at the shipyard in orbit where we built
Envoy. Like Envoy, it’s powered by a tunnel drive, and like the Saurian ships, the main gun will
be a mass driver.
“We’re promoting you to Captain and you will be the new skipper of the TRS Daniel Cho.”
Amanda looked up from the slate. “Me?”
Cheung nodded. “There are lots of captains more senior than you, but this isn’t a time for
seniority. The fate of the human race might be at stake, and we’re not going risk that to avoid
stepping on some egos. You’re the best officer for the job, and we think—I think—that you will
bring innovative thinking to the job that more senior captains might not.
“I hate to do this to you, Captain. Frankly, you deserve better. But you’re the best we’ve got
and  I  have  to  use  you.  Your  mission  will  be  to  take  the  fight  to  the  enemy,  keep  them
distracted  while  we  build  up  Earth’s  defenses.  We  have  to  assume  that  you’ll  be  facing  a
superior  force  with  very  little  intelligence  about  them.  Your  chances  of  survival  aren’t  very
good. But that’s the hand we’re dealt.”
Amanda was near shock. This was a lot to take in. Had she really been  ready  to  light  into
this guy because of a stupid ore pirate? That all seemed so distant now. Now the  human  race
was at war. With aliens they knew almost nothing about.
Cheung  got  up  and  headed  for  the  door.  “I’m  going  to  my  shuttle.  Grab  what  personal
effects  you’ll  need  for  the  next  month  and  meet  me  there  within  the  hour.  You’re  being
reassigned to oversee the completion of the Cho.  While  you’re  doing  that,  you’ll  put  together
your crew.
“Oh, and one more thing, Captain. I know it’s tradition for a captain to have  right  of  first
refusal when it comes to members  of the command  staff, but I’m afraid we  have  to  make  an
exception in your case. One member of your command staff is non-negotiable.”
*
*
*
“Marine! Ten hut!”
Jack scrambled off his bunk and snapped to attention. He was in his pants and undershirt,
and his beard showed a scruffy two weeks of  growth.  He’d  had  little  two  do  in  the  past  two

weeks but exercise and think about how he was going to get through to the politicos that they
had bigger problems than what to do with him.
He heard sharp footfalls coming down the corridor, expensive dress shoes, not the combat
boots the guards wore. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw a tall, white-haired man in a dark
suit stop in front of his cell.
“At  ease,  Jack,”  President  Staten  said.  Jack  dropped  to  parade  rest  while  the  president
turned to the guard. “Open this up and bring me a chair.”
“Yes, sir!” The guard double-timed it down the corridor after opening the cell door.
Staten stepped into the room. “As you were, Jack, have a seat.”
“I prefer to stand, sir.”
The guard came back with a chair. Staten took it and sat down. “Sit down, Major. That’s an
order.”
“Yes, sir.” Jack sat down on his bunk.
Staten turned to the guard, read his name tag. “Corporal Simmons, you’re dismissed.”
“Sir, I have orders not to leave the prisoner alone—”
“And I’m countermanding those orders. Go.”
Simmons nodded. “Yes, sir.”
After the guard was out  of  earshot,  Staten  turned  back  to  Jack.  “I’m  sorry  about  all  this,
Jack, I really am.”
“I understand, sir.”
“I’m under a lot of pressure, Jack. Gosnell wants me  to,  as  you  say,  throw  you  under  the
bus, and get on with dealing with what happened to Envoy. He tells me that it’s me or you, that
one of us has to take the fall, and that you’re more expendable.”
“Mister President, that’s a mistake. The Saurians—”
“Are out there, yes, Jack. I believe you. We’ve done some more digging, questioned all the
witnesses very thoroughly, and I’m  convinced  you’re  telling  the  truth.  I’ve  always  wanted  to
believe you, and had it been up to me, you wouldn’t be in here, but now we have enough to go
on.
“Doctor  Takemura  has  been  thinking  a  lot  about  what  you  said  in  the  hearing,  and  she
believes that the way the Saurians reacted had more to do with the human form than anything
we did. They were reacting to what we were, or what they thought we were, rather than what
we were doing. I’m not sure I understand that, but I know she’ll explain it to you.
“But you see, Jack, Thomas also has a point. When word gets out about Envoy, the public is
going to want to blame someone. They’re going to want revenge. They’re going to want a sense
of closure. I can’t give them that, and frankly, I don’t think blaming you gives them that either.
If I were to blame you, I’d still catch heat for insisting you be on Envoy  in  the  first  place.  I’m
sure Thomas knows that, so I think we both had better be on our guards.

“Because the unfortunate fact is, the Saurians are out there, they don’t like us, and they just
might know where we live.”
Jack slumped a little at this. He knew it, and had been over it a hundred  times  in  the  last
two weeks. But that didn’t make it better news.
“So here’s what we’re going to do. I’m going to  make  public  that  we’ve  lost  contact  with
the Envoy, but not explain  any  more  than  that.  We’re  building  a  new  fleet  of  tunnel-capable
warships and we’re  going  to  use  those  to  keep  the  enemy  occupied  and  distracted  while  we
shore up defenses here on Earth.
“I’m  also  dropping  all  charges  against  you  and  promoting  you  to  Lieutenant  Colonel.
You’re going to be in charge of the Marine contingent on those warships, and you’re going to
spend the time between now and when they launch training your troops to fight the Saurians
and working with Doctor Takemura to help us learn everything we can about the enemy. We
are going to pick your brain clean, Jack, so be ready.
“I’ve also got to mend some fences with Thomas, so don’t piss him off. He’s not going to be
happy about my ignoring his advice on this, and frankly I’m going to need his political savvy to
sell this war.”
Staten stood, picked  up  Jack’s  uniform  shirt  and  threw  it  at  him.  “Let’s  go,  Colonel.  We
have work to do.”
*
*
*
© Jeff Kirvin 2005
 
Visit www.solomedia.org for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

