Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
Between Heaven and Hell
Unification Chronicles 0
Jeff Kirvin
 
Fictionwise
www.Fictionwise.com
Copyright ©1997 by Jeff Kirvin
 
NOTICE:  This  work  is  copyrighted.  It  is  licensed  only  for  use  by  the  original  purchaser.
Making  copies  of  this  work  or  distributing  it  to  any  unauthorized  person  by  any  means,
including without limit email, floppy disk, file transfer, paper print out, or  any  other  method
constitutes a violation of International copyright law and subjects the violator to severe fines or
imprisonment.
 
Table of Contents

BOOK I: REVELATION
The Accident
Evidence
Disintegration
Disbelief
Susan
Research
The Post
Escape
Fight or Flight
Hellos and Goodbyes
A New Lead
Preparations
The Meeting
Uriel
The Burden of Proof
Changes
Victory and Defeat
Vengeance
Retribution
Revelation
BOOK II: CRUSADE
New Beginning
Demonbusters
Susan’s New Life
The Hunt Begins
He Who Would Be King
The Inquisition
Updates
Inferno
An Old Friend
Point/Counterpoint
Adversary
Allies
The Oracle
Chaos
Crusade
Out of the Frying Pan…
Betrayals
… And Into the Fire
Loss
Survival of the Fittest
BOOK III: JIHAD
Paradise
The Serpent
Falling From Grace
Heretic!
Resistance

Liberation
A Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing
Breach of Faith
Against the Wall
Town Meeting
Jihad
First Offensive
Pyrrhic Victory
Dark Angel
Freedom of Speech
Liberty or Death
Second Offensive
Turning the Tide
Apocalypse
The Dawn of a New…
BOOK I: REVELATION
The Accident
^ » 
It was a bright and sunny day in Washington DC,  and Daniel Cho found himself at the scene
of an accident. It was a terrible three-car pileup. Some  jerk in a Volkswagen had come tearing
up M  Street and plowed right into a station wagon, upending it and flipping  it  into  a  pickup
truck. All three vehicles were totaled, and the wreck completely blocked off the intersection.
Daniel had been walking home from the mini-mart,  and  he  looked  forlornly  at  his  single
bag  of  groceries,  the  pistachio  ice  cream  already  melting  in  the  DC  heat.  Just  my  luck,  he
thought  sardonically.  And  on  my  day  off,  too.  Daniel  set  down  his  groceries,  sure  that  he’d
never see them again, and waded into the carnage. Already he could smell the familiar odor of
blood, gasoline and motor oil.
In  the  distance,  he  heard  the  familiar  sounds  of  ambulance  sirens,  but  they  were  too  far
away  and  the  traffic  blockage  too  heavy  for  them  to  arrive  in  time  to  do  any  good.  Daniel
approached the first car, the Volkswagen that caused the accident. He knew instantly that the
driver was beyond help. He hadn’t been wearing a seat belt, and the impact had rammed the
steering column directly through his chest. Daniel gagged in spite of  himself.  No  matter  how
many  times  he’d  seen  it,  he  still  wasn’t  used  to  death.  The  interior  of  the  car  was  coated  in
blood,  and  the  reek  wafting  from  the  car  was  stomach-churning.  The  driver,  a  man  in  his
mid-thirties, still stared straight forward, his lifeless eyes focused on the  horizon.  Odd,  Daniel
thought, they usually look surprised.
Daniel shook off the mental picture of the man’s lifeless eyes and moved on to the  station
wagon, still propped at a forty-five degree angle over the pickup. Here, he could do some good.
What had formerly been a red Ford now more closely resembled a crushed beer  can,  but  the
passenger compartment  was relatively unscathed. Two kids were in  the  back,  belted  securely

but  knocked  unconscious,  and  their  mom  was  up  front  belted,  slumped  over  a  deployed
airbag  and  starting  to  stir.  The  door  was  badly  mangled  and  certainly  wouldn’t  ever  open
again, and glittering broken  glass covered everything. Getting them  out wouldn’t be easy, and
Daniel knew he couldn’t do it alone.
He turned back to the street and grabbed the nearest gawking pedestrian, a largish man in
jeans  and  a  Redskins  t-shirt,  by  the  arm.  Daniel  flashed  what  he  hoped  was  a  conspiratorial
grin. “Ever been a hero?” he asked.
The man pulled back slightly, and began stammering a reply.
“Don’t  worry,”  Daniel  added.  “I’m  a  paramedic.  I  just  need  an  extra  pair  of  hands.  You
game?”
The man considered a moment,  then nodded. Daniel smiled and led the man  back  to  the
car, and together they eased the woman out of the car through the broken driver’s window.
Following Redskins’ example, more people joined in on the rescue effort, struggling to free
the kids and the driver of the pickup. Eventually, Daniel assumed the role of foreman, stepping
back and directing the rescue. As he watched the now freed and conscious children run up and
embrace their mother, as  he  watched  a  group  of  total  strangers  united  to  rescue  yet  another
stranger from the wreckage of his truck, Daniel marveled at the inherent nobility of the human
race. People always rose to the occasion. It was just a shame it always seemed to take the worst
sort of fortune to bring that spirit out. It was a shame that idiot in the Volkswagen would never
be around to see it.
As if to drive the point home to himself, Daniel glanced over to the ruined Volkswagen. He
froze at what he saw there.
Or didn’t see, actually. The corpse was gone.
What kind of a sicko would steal a bloody corpse in broad daylight? Daniel wondered. He
scanned the crowd, looking for signs of the theft.
Near the edge of the crowd Daniel spotted something  that  made  Daniel  feel  bitterly  cold,
even  on  a  hot  summer’s  day.  The  driver  of  the  Volkswagen  was  calmly  walking  away,
seemingly oblivious to the gaping, bloody hole in his chest. The man looked over his shoulder
once, making sure he wasn’t followed, before turning down a side street. Daniel recognized the
face as easily as if it had been his own.
“Sir?” one of the volunteers asked Daniel, patting his arm.
Daniel  turned  away  from  the  walking  dead  and  faced  the  volunteer,  a  pretty  college
student. “Yes?”
She  was  a  little  taken  aback  by  Daniel’s  attitude,  but  she  asked  her  question  anyway,
regarding the placement of the truck driver, now that they’d removed him from the wreckage.
Daniel answered her quickly, then ran off in the direction of the corpse. He turned the corner
of the side street the man had gone down, but it was no use.
The VW driver was gone.
 

VA XKZ-947.
Daniel sat in the locker room of the firehouse where he worked, staring  at  a  slip  of  paper
with the license plate number of someone that should be dead.
Only he wasn’t.
Or was he?
Daniel leaned back,  his  head  rocking  back  against  his  locker  door  with  a  hollow  thump.
The gunmetal lockers and dingy tile floor looked dark and menacing all of the sudden.
Am I going crazy?
“Danny boy!”
Daniel  looked  up  to  find  the  imposing  form  of  Herb  Sloan  towering  over  him.  Tall,
white-haired and barrel-chested, Herb  was  on  the  downhill  side  of  fifty  and  easily  the  oldest
paramedic in the city. He’d been repeatedly offered an  easier  job  in  a  hospital,  but  he’d  hear
nothing of it. Being a paramedic was in his blood, and he was the spirit of the firehouse. Daniel
couldn’t imagine the place without him.
“Hi, Herb.”
Herb squatted down, bringing his eyes level with Daniel’s. “Why the long face, Danny?”
Daniel looked up at his friend, one of the few he had the time for. He glanced at the slip of
paper again, then back at Herb.
“You got a minute?” he asked.
Herb sat down next to Daniel. “Shoot.”
“What’s the worst you’ve ever seen?”
Herb paused, remembering. He scratched his prominent chin and stared at the ceiling. “Let
me see…
“I  know!  About  eleven  years  ago,  I  was  at  this  tenement  in  Southeast.  The  whole  dump
shoulda  been  condemned,  but  you  know  this  town.  There  was  a  fire,  and  the  whole  damn
building imploded. There were half a dozen people out of maybe twenty  still  alive,  and  all  of
them  trapped  under  the  fire  in  the  basement.  Some  of  them  had  started  out  on  the  fourth
floor. The ones that didn’t make it … Why do you ask?”
Daniel looked at the slip of paper again before answering. “I saw something today,” was all
he could get out.
“What?”
Daniel looked at the older man, saw  the  camaraderie  and  friendship  in  his  eyes.  “Look,  I
know people always  begin  stories  like  this  with  ‘I  know  this  sounds  crazy,  but’,  and  usually
they turn out to be crazier than the stories. I don’t know if that’s the case with me yet, so just
hear me out, okay?”
Herb nodded.

Daniel relaxed a little and told Herb about what he had seen, including the corpse casually
wandering away from the scene. Herb was silent throughout the story, and for a long moment
afterward.
“That’s some story,” he said finally.
Daniel grinned in spite of himself. “That’s an understatement.”
Herb stood up. “I  don’t  know  what  to  tell  you,  Danny.  Are  you  sure  the  guy  was  dead?
Maybe he had a head wound. Even superficial head wounds bleed all over the place.”
Daniel leaned back, exasperated, and smacked his head against the locker. “I know a head
wound  when  I  see  one,  Herb.  He  didn’t  have  a  head  wound.  He  had  a  steering  column
rammed through his chest. I think I’m qualified to diagnose that.”
Herb nodded. “Yeah, I guess you would be.”
Daniel just stared at him.
“Can I see that?” Herb gestured at the slip of paper still in Daniel’s hand. Daniel gave it to
him.
Herb took out a pen and started writing on the back.  “I’m gonna give you the number  of
an old poker buddy of mine. Works at the DMV.  He should be able to tell you who owns the
VW, and we can find out if he’s dead or not.”
Daniel heaved a sigh of relief as Herb  handed  him  back  the  paper.  “Thanks  for  believing
I’m not crazy, Herb.”
“I don’t know what happened out there, Danny. But I know you’re a good kid. If you say
you saw this, then you believe you saw it. And that’s enough for me to believe you saw it.”
Daniel smiled, and Herb headed for the door. He stopped short and turned back  to Daniel.
“I’m  gonna  talk  to  Rob,”  he  said,  referring  to  Robert  Turner,  their  supervisor.  “Take  a  long
weekend. Get some rest.”
Daniel nodded. “Thanks again, Herb. See you Monday.”
“Feel better Danny.”
 
Daniel  aimlessly  wandered  the  aisles  of  the  corner  grocery.  Heeding  Herb’s  advice,  he’d
taken a minivacation. He’d been away from the hectic life of a paramedic for three days now,
and it was driving him crazy.
Being  idle  always  made  Daniel  uncomfortable.  When  his  grandparents  came  to  America
from their native Korea, they’d brought with them  an almost fanatical work ethic which  they
passed on to  their  children,  who,  in  turn,  passed  it  on  to  Daniel.  “Idle  hands  are  the  Devil’s
playthings,” his mother had drilled into him, usually while urging him to finish his homework.
Thanks  to  his  parents’  relentless  support,  he  graduated  third  in  his  high  school  class,
granting him easy acceptance into college. From there, it  wasn’t  far  to  getting  his  degree  and
into med school. He was going to be a doctor.

“Going  to  be”  being  the  operative  phrase.  Daniel  skated  through  med  school  and  was
starting his internship when it happened. He was assigned to an ER, and one night a pregnant
woman was wheeled in, victim of a hit and run. The ER was packed that night, and he was the
only  one  that  could  help  her.  Everyone  else  was  just  as  bad  off,  and  there  weren’t  enough
doctors to go around. Daniel and some nurses worked for five hours to save her, but they lost
the mother and the child.
Daniel was shattered. He decided right then and there that  he  didn’t  want  to  be  asked  to
play God, not ever again. He left the ER and forgot about being a doctor.
Daniel threw some essentials into his plastic hand basket: bread, peanut butter, grape jam.
Some chips, too. He shuffled over to the soft drink aisle.
He was happy with his life as a paramedic. It let him save lives, but without the pressure. A
paramedic wasn’t expected to work medical miracles. The job didn’t leave him much  time  or
opportunity for a social life, but he really felt like his job made a difference. He left work every
day with tangible accomplishments, the faces in his mind of people whose lives he’d saved. He
mattered. That was more than most office slaves could say.
Staples of his bachelor existence collected, he trudged up to the counter to pay for them.
At least he thought he mattered. If he wasn’t going mad (and he couldn’t let himself accept
that he was), then he saw a dead man walk away from a fatal accident. Where was the  use  in
cheating death day in and day out if death could simply be ignored?
Groceries bagged and in hand, he stepped out into the bright  July  sunlight,  letting  it  beat
down on his naturally tan skin. His face featured a broad nose, high cheekbones and a narrow
chin. He had close-cropped black hair and a lean, muscular build over his five foot eight frame.
He was in great physical condition, thanks to his daily runs and, of course, the job.  The  same
job  that  made  his  social  life  nearly  impossible  to  plan  with  any  certainty  and  had  kept  him
dateless  for  over  six  months.  Daniel  often  worked  the  shifts  no  one  else  wanted,  sometimes
putting in more than sixty hours a week.
He  walked  down  the  street  and  up  the  steps  to  his  third  floor,  one  bedroom  southwest
Washington apartment. When he reached the door, the phone was ringing. He nearly dropped
his groceries and fumbled madly for his keys. Daniel burst into the apartment and dashed for
the phone. “Hello?”
There  was  silence  at  the  end  of  the  line  and  for  a  moment,  Daniel’s  stomach  sank  as  he
feared he’d missed the call he’d waited three days to get. Then a small, quiet voice said, “Daniel
Cho?”
“Speaking.”
“I’m Joel Furman, from the DMV? Herb Sloan asked me to call you.”
Daniel unknotted his  shoulders  and  took  the  cordless  phone  with  him  to  close  the  door.
“Do you have some information for me?”
The voice on the other end of the line paused, then continued in a voice even quieter than
before. “You realize, I could get in a lot of trouble for this.”
“I  understand.  I  really  appreciate  this.”  Daniel  silently  prayed  the  guy  wouldn’t  bolt  on

him.
“Well, first off, he’s dead. The owner of Virginia tag XKZ-947 was  Mister  Floyd  Rockport,
thirty-eight years old, with an address in Arlington. He died  three  days  ago  in  an  automobile
accident.”
Daniel  considered  explaining  to  Furman  that  he  knew  that  part  already  but  figured  that
would  scare  him  off  for  good,  as  antsy  as  the  guy  was.  The  less  said,  the  better.  Besides,
Rockport might not be dead after all. “What’s the address?”
Furman paused again. “Look, why do you want to know? The guy’s dead, right?”
That’s a better question than you think, Daniel thought. “Please. The address.”
Furman sighed, but gave Daniel the address, a townhouse in Arlington. “That’s all I know.
Tell Herb he owes me for this.”
The line went dead.
Daniel carefully placed the phone back  in  its  cradle  and  began  to  put  away  his  groceries,
lost in thought. Floyd Rockport. For the  billionth  time,  the  features  of  a  walking  dead  man’s
face filled his mind. A  long  face  with  razor-sharp  lines.  Flint  gray  eyes.  Receding  sandy  hair.
Daniel had two mental images of  that  face,  one  dead  and  lifeless  over  an  impaled  chest,  and
another  sidelong  glance  walking  away  minutes  later.  If  Rockport  was  officially  dead  (and  it
didn’t get much more official than the Department of Motor Vehicles), but walked away from
the crash, where was he?
Grabbing his keys, Daniel hurriedly locked his door and sped down the stairs to the street.
His car was parked a block away, and he had to get across the river to Arlington.
 
Evidence
« ^ » 
The address Daniel had been given was a ratty three-bedroom townhouse in a low rent district
of Arlington. The front door was ajar, so Daniel let himself in.
The interior was a mess. Either Rockport was a terrible housekeeper, or the place had been
ransacked.  The  first  thing  Daniel  noticed  was  that  most  of  the  stuff  was  old,  most  likely
antique.  Everything  was  scattered  all  over  the  living  room  like  a  tornado  had  hit  it.  What
probably  had  been  an  expensive  wooden  coffee  table  was  overturned  and  broken.  The
upholstery was ripped from the leather recliner and couch. An art deco lamp protruded from
the  television’s  shattered  picture  tube.  A  faint  tinge  of  ozone  lingered  around  the  television,
which had probably been on when it was destroyed.
Daniel walked into the kitchen to find a stark contrast to the living room. The kitchen was
immaculate, nothing out of place. It took Daniel a moment  to realize why. There was nothing
there to be out of place. No dishes, no food, no utensils, nothing. The  place  was  empty.  Why
would whoever did this break expensive antiques but steal all the dishes?

Puzzled, Daniel climbed the stairs to the top floor. He found a short hallway with two doors
on either side. The first door on the right was a bathroom,  also spotless. Through a connecting
door Daniel walked into a bedroom, but it had been converted into a computer room, or home
office. It was much  the same state as the living room,  except  there  was  definitely  evidence  of
theft here. The computer was conspicuously missing between the  overturned  printer  and  the
shattered monitor. Both bookshelves  on  the  far  wall  were  upended,  their  contents  spilled  on
the floor.
Thinking of the stolen computer, Daniel realized he was leaving his fingerprints all over the
place. He’d have to wipe carefully everything he’d touched before he left.
Two more rooms to check. The far room on the left side of the hall was a library. It was in a
similar state to the computer room. All the bookcases lining the walls had been toppled.
The last room was … also a library. Where did this guy sleep? Daniel started taking a closer
look at the books. Theology, history, sociology … maybe the guy was a professor.
Getting an idea,  Daniel  ran  back  to  the  “office”  and  searched  the  desk  more  thoroughly,
covering his hands with the end of his shirt. It had to be there somewhere.
Found it! Daniel picked up Rockport’s checkbook  and flipped through it before pocketing
it. There had to be some clues to the guy’s life in there. If the guy was really dead, he wouldn’t
miss it.
Daniel paused, taking in the carnage around him. The silence quickly grew oppressive. He
was rummaging through a dead man’s house.
He had to get out of there.
Speeding  downstairs,  Daniel  wiped  off  everything  he  remembered  touching  and  ran  out
the door.
 
As Daniel fled from the twice-ransacked apartment, he was noticed.
Kneeling, gargoyle-like, on the roof of a nearby building that shared the same courtyard as
the  townhouse  was  the  creature  that  started  this  whole  mess.  The  creature  Daniel  would
recognize as Floyd Rockport.
As Daniel swiftly exited the building and hurried down the walk, the creature snarled, and
leaned forward. It would be so easy to kill him now, it thought. Just jump  down and snap his
neck. Would serve him right for butting into my life.
But  there  were  children  playing  on  the  expansive  lawn  between  the  buildings,  and  their
mothers close by. Daniel Cho was a threat because he’d discovered a secret. It wouldn’t do to
eliminate him only to reveal the secret to dozens more.
No, now was not the time. It was still to light out, and Daniel had too many witnesses. Now
was not the time.
But the time would come.
 

Daniel sat in his apartment and poured over Rockport’s checkbook.  He’d  looked  through
all the check stubs three times already and found nothing. The guy paid the same people over
and over again like clockwork. Rent. Phone. Internet. Cable. Car payment. Nothing out of the
ordinary.
Daniel hurled the checkbook across the room and sat back with a loud sigh. Maybe he was
wrong. Maybe it was just his imagination.
No,  he  thought,  sitting  up  suddenly.  It  wasn’t,  at  least  not  completely.  Even  if  he  did
imagine  the  corpse  walking  away,  he  knew  for  sure  that  it  wasn’t  in  the  car.  Something
happened.
Right?
Daniel  got  up  and  walked  over  to  the  phone.  He  paused  to  remember  the  number  and
dialed.
“Hello, is Tracy there?”
Tracy Klerk worked in the coroner’s office. On a bad day, Daniel delivered more bodies to
her than to the ER. He waited while she came to the phone.
“Klerk.”
“Hi Tracy? It’s Daniel Cho. I have a question about a delivery I made a few days ago. Big car
wreck?”
“Yeah, I remember. No need for an autopsy on that one. What do you need?”
“One? There weren’t two bodies?”
“Come on, Dan. I don’t have time for your practical jokes. Do you have a question or not?”
“That was it. I thought there were two DOAs in that batch.”
Tracy paused. “No, just  the  one.  Poor  schmoe  got  blindsided  by  some  speed  demon,  if  I
remember properly.”
Daniel didn’t know whether to be disappointed or relieved. “Oh. Okay, thanks, Tracy.”
“Any time, Dan.” She hung up.
Daniel  put  the  phone  down  and  stared  at  the  walls  of  his  apartment.  His  minimalist
bachelor pad furniture began to take on dark and looming shapes.
I need some air, he thought.
Grabbing his car keys off of the end table, Daniel walked out of the apartment.
 
On the roof of the apartment building opposite Daniel’s,  the  man  Daniel  wasn’t  sure  was
dead made note of Daniel’s departure and disappeared into the night.
 

Out on the street, Daniel got into his car,  a  battered  Ford  Escort  with  a  “Don’t  laugh,  it’s
paid for” bumper sticker. He got onto 14th street and headed south for I395.
He’d heard stories about people who worked  with  trauma,  doctors,  firemen  and  the  like.
Sometimes,  without  noticing  it  consciously,  they’d  lost  their  ability  to  deal  with  the  carnage
day in and day out. Without warning one day they just reached the  limit  of  human  suffering
they could handle, passed it, and snapped. Daniel wasn’t sure it  had  happened  to  him,  but  a
corpse walking away from the scene of an accident wasn’t a good sign. He didn’t  know  if  his
conversation with Tracy corroborated his story or not. Maybe he imagined it too.
How did you know if you were going mad?
Once on I395, he headed south, past Arlington (and the townhouse of a man who ought to
be dead) and towards Springfield.  Traffic  was  sparse  and  thinned  out  as  he  got  closer  to  the
junction with the Washington Beltway. He thought about stopping at Springfield Mall, but the
last thing he needed was a throng of people. He stayed on the freeway as it  merged  with  I95,
thinking he’d turn around at Dale City. That would make it better than  an  hour’s  round  trip
back to his apartment, and the trip should do him good.
Traffic trickled down to almost nothing after he passed the mall, which made it all the more
annoying that the jerk in the Buick was tailgating him. Daniel signaled right and changed lanes,
expecting the other driver to pass on the left.
The Buick also shifted over to the right, if anything getting closer to Daniel’s bumper.  What
was this guy’s damage?
As if in answer to Daniel’s silent question, the Buick nudged forward.
Thump!
Daniel swerved back to the left, the Buick close behind. Thump!
Daniel jerked the wheel back to the right and floored it, trying to get away, only to have the
other  car  pull  up  effortlessly  beside  his  dilapidated  heap.  He  looked  at  the  other  driver  and
almost ran off the road. It was him.
Floyd Rockport. A dead man.
Daniel  gassed  it,  pushing  his  car  to  its  maximum  speed  of  ninety-five  miles  per  hour.
Rockport kept pace, staying on Daniel’s left. When Daniel looked over at him again, Rockport
turned to face him and smiled.
Daniel  wasn’t  sure  it  wasn’t  just  a  trick  of  the  dim  light,  but  the  man’s  grin  was  …
inhuman.  It  seemed  to  literally  stretch  from  ear  to  ear,  full  of  endless  gleaming  teeth.  Even
worse were the man’s eyes, but for a different reason. The grin didn’t touch them.  They were
the same dead glass orbs Daniel remembered so vividly.
But he wasn’t remembering  now. Daniel hit the brakes just as Rockport swerved violently
to the right, clipping Daniel’s front left  fender  and  damaging  the  wheel.  Daniel  went  into  an
uncontrollable spin as Rockport raced away into the darkness.
Daniel tried steering back into the skid like he’d been taught in traffic school, but it was no
use; the wheel was too far gone. The most he could do was force himself to go limp and hope

the seatbelt held as he spun back  left across the highway and collided with the concrete HOV
barrier.
Daniel came to an indeterminate time later to the sound of sirens in the distance. There was
broken glass everywhere, and he was sure he smelled blood, but the car wasn’t on fire and he
was still alive.
As he listened to the sirens coming closer, he also knew he had a new enemy. Whatever he
knew, or whatever someone thought he knew, was worth killing for. It might be a good idea,
Daniel mused, feeling the onset of shock, to find out why.
As soon as he saw the flashing red lights out of the corner of his eye, Daniel  let  the  shock
and darkness take him. It’d be easier to cut him out of the car that way.
 
Disintegration
« ^ » 
After  staying  mercifully  unconscious  in  the  ambulance  (he  would  have  been  compelled  to
make suggestions had he been awake), Daniel opened his eyes in a hospital bed. The first thing
he saw was Herb’s hulking form hovering over him.
“Hey, Danny boy! Welcome back to the land of the living!”
Daniel winced as he leaned forward and allowed Herb to shove an extra pillow behind his
back to prop him up. He felt the coarse gauze of bandages on his head and arms. “Was it that
bad?”
“Nah,” Herb said, pulling up a chair, “Few scrapes, a bump  on the head.  They’re  keeping
you overnight in case you have a concussion. I tried to tell them  what a tough  guy  you  were,
but you know doctors. You’ll be a free man in the morning.”
Relieved, Daniel leaned back and relaxed a bit. “Have the cops been by to get a description
of the guy who hit me?”
Herb looked puzzled. “Hit you?”
“Yeah,” Daniel laughed uncertainly, “you think I did this to myself?”
“That’s what you said, according to the hospital staff.”
Daniel stared, incredulous.
“From what I hear,” Herb continued, “you came to in the ambulance on the way here and
joked  with  the  EMTs  that  you  should  know  better  than  to  drive  fast  and  dangerous,
considering your line of work. You never mentioned another driver.” Herb paused. “You don’t
remember?”
“I never said it! I was run off the road. Look at the damage to the car!”
“They tell me there’s not much left after you hit the wall and they cut you out.” Herb put a

comforting hand on Daniel’s shoulder. “Danny, what do you remember?”
“I saw the guy that hit  me.”  Daniel  told  Herb  the  whole  story,  the  apartment,  the  call  to
Tracy,  the  Buick,  the  grin,  all  of  it.  “I  know  it  sounds  nuts,  but  that’s  what  happened.  I
wouldn’t crash my car on my own. Someone tried to kill me!”
Herb moved his hand from Daniel’s shoulder to check the bandages on his head.
“Dammit, Herb, I’m not imagining this!” Daniel exclaimed, slapping Herb’s hand away. “I
don’t have a concussion, I’m not hallucinating and I never said a word in the ambulance!”
“I understand, Danny,” Herb said, failing to conceal that he didn’t.
“Just leave me alone, okay? I’m tired. I’m gonna get some sleep.”
Herb  stood  up  and  walked  to  the  door.  He  stopped  and  turned  as  if  to  say  something,
changed his mind and left without a word.
 
For  someone  being  released  from  the  hospital,  Daniel  felt  decidedly  unrested.  His
concussion was mild enough for him to go home first thing in the morning. Herb had offered
to pick him up, but Daniel told him not to bother. He was still ticked off that no one seemed to
believe him.
As the mandatory wheelchair let him off outside the hospital’s front  door,  Daniel  hailed  a
cab. Once he gave the driver his address, he sat back  and tried to puzzle  out  what  was  going
on, something he’d been too worn out to do the previous night.
The impossible grin (which may have been a trick of the light) notwithstanding, Daniel had
to assume everything he’d seen was real. Everything parsed too well not to be connected.  But
what did it mean?
He saw a man walk away from what should have been a fatal wound. He tracked down the
man’s apartment, only to find it ransacked with the computer (and dishes, apparently) stolen.
After Daniel verified that the guy didn’t show up at the morgue, he shows up on the highway
and tries to smear Daniel into the HOV barrier.
Daniel shook his head as the cab pulled up to his building. It  just  didn’t  make  any  damn
sense. There had to be more to it, and he had to find out what, before someone came along and
finished the job they’d started last night.
As Daniel  ascended  the  stairs  and  entered  the  utilitarian  sparseness  of  his  apartment,  he
noticed  the  light  on  his  answering  machine  flashing.  He  pressed  the  playback  button  and
walked to the kitchenette to get a glass of water.
“Daniel?” called the recorded voice of his boss, Robert Taylor. “I know you’re on vacation,
but you’d better get in here ASAP. We need to talk.”
The machine beeped, signaling the end of the messages.
Now what the hell was that all about?
 

“This is bullshit.” Daniel sat in Rob Taylor’s office, not believing what he was hearing.
“I don’t buy it either, Daniel,” Rob said, casually sitting on the edge of his desk and trying
to look placating and supportive. “But, I’m told they have evidence. There is proof—”
“Alleged proof,” Daniel amended.
“Alleged proof that you took liberties of a sexual nature with an unconscious patient.”
“Dammit, I’m not a rapist!”
“I didn’t say you were.” Rob leaned in closer to Daniel. “I believe you. For the record, I’m
going  to  bat  for  you  and  officially  denying  these  charges.”  Rob  paused,  looking  for
confirmation that he was making the right call.
Daniel was speechless. This came completely out of left field. He didn’t even remember  the
patient in question. He thought it had to be some kind of bureaucratic mix up or a fraudulent
claim scam, and said as much to Rob.
“I know, Daniel.  You’re  probably  right.”  Rob  hesitated,  the  way  he  did  before  delivering
bad  news.  “You  realize,  however,  that  I  have  to  put  you  on  suspension  pending  the
investigation.”
Daniel  started  to  jump  out  of  his  chair,  but  Rob  put  up  a  restraining  hand.  “Once  the
charges are dismissed, and I’m sure they will be, you’re back on the job. Until then—”
Daniel got  up  to  leave.  “For  what  it’s  worth,”  Rob  called  out  as  Daniel  opened  the  door,
“I’m sorry.”
Daniel slammed the door on his way out.
“Danny, I just heard—”
“I don’t want to talk about it, Herb.”
Daniel was taking what few personal belongings he had in his locker and putting them  in a
crate. Herb just stood by, silent.
“Fine,” Daniel said, slamming a jacket into the crate. “You want to  hear  me  talk  about  it?
Good, let’s talk. I’m being set up. This a bogus claim, Rob knows it, and he’s hanging me out to
dry.”
“Who would do this, Danny?”
Without any defensive anger from Herb to feed off of, Daniel deflated and slumped against
his now empty locker. “I don’t know for sure, but I have an idea. I think it  has  something  to
with that guy I saw walking away from the  crash,  the  same  guy  that  tried  to  run  me  off  the
road.”
Daniel saw a look of poorly concealed pity in Herb’s eyes.
“Oh, that’s right, you don’t believe that, either,” Daniel said, tensing up again. “Hell, maybe
I did rape that poor girl and just don’t remember  it. I seem to be wrong about everything else
that’s happened to me!” He grabbed the crate and stormed out.

“Danny, wait!” Herb called, but it was too late. Daniel was gone.
Daniel stepped onto the impound lot where what was left of his car was being held. It was
bad enough that he was being set up at work, but to have this happening at the same time was
intolerable. He had no memory  at all of the girl in question, and he knew  what  happened  on
the road. The timing of it all was too perfect for there not to be a connection. The question was,
who was doing it to him, and why?
He hoped his car still held some answers. As he walked over to it, he could see what Herb
meant by “not much  left.” The heap was totaled; he didn’t need  a  claims  adjuster  to  tell  him
that. No body panel was left unscathed, and the driver side door was missing altogether, a side
effect of his rescue. The left front wheel, the one hit by the other car, was missing.
Daniel knelt next to the left front fender. Amongst the faded blue of his own car, he could
make out streaks of brown paint ground into the dented metal. That should prove he was hit,
provided he could find someone to believe him.
 
Disbelief
« ^ » 
Thanks for coming, Herb.” Daniel and Herb were walking back  onto the impound lot. Daniel
was feeling a lot better. Once Herb saw the paint he’d have to believe Daniel’s version of things,
and Daniel trusted Herb to go to bat for him once he knew the whole story.
“It’s over this way,” Daniel said, leading Herb to the car.
Or where the car had been. Daniel saw only an empty space where the wreckage of his car
should be. “It was right here, I swear!”
Herb just looked at him.
“Dammit,  Herb,  I’m  not  making  this  up!  They’re  doing  it  to  me  again!”  He  took  off
towards the office.
“They who?” Herb asked, falling into step beside Daniel.
“The  same  people  that  ran  me  off  the  road,  the  same  bastards  that  trumped  up  those
charges against me!”
They  reached  the  office  and  Daniel  almost  ripped  the  door  off  its  hinges  on  the  way  in.
“Where the hell’s my car?”
The man behind the desk, short, black and fiftyish, looked up in surprise. “Which car?”
“Blue Escort, totaled, towed in here a few days ago,” Daniel hissed. “Where is it?”
The man nodded. “Ah, that car. It’s over by the crusher.”
“You’re going to crush it?”

“We already did.”
Herb put a restraining hand on Daniel’s shoulder. “Under whose authorization?” he asked
in a much more civil tone than Daniel could have managed.
“The owner,” the man said, rummaging through  his  desk.  He  found  the  slip  of  paper  he
was looking for and held it out for Daniel to see. “Here it is,” he said. “A Mister Daniel Cho.”
Daniel started to lunge at the man, but  Herb  put  his  not  inconsiderable  bulk  in  the  way.
“Not here, Danny,” he whispered.
Without another word, Herb ushered Daniel out the door. Once they were outside, Daniel’s
feigned composure evaporated.
“Damn!”  he  exclaimed,  slamming  a  fist  down  on  a  battered  heap.  “They  did  it  to  me
again!”
Herb tried to lead Daniel back to the street, where they’d left Herb’s car.
“I  bet  that  bastard’s  in  on  it  too,”  Daniel  continued.  “But  why?  Why  are  they  out  to  get
me?”
He shouted back to the office. “I’ll find out! You won’t get me without a fight!”
Once they got to the car, Herb, much more solemn than usual, motioned Daniel to get in.
“Well, thanks anyway for coming.” Daniel said as they pulled into traffic.
Herb didn’t reply.
“Just drop me off at my apartment, if that’s okay. Sorry about getting you mixed up in all
this.” He paused. “You still don’t believe me, do you?”
“I believe that you believe it.”
Looking  out  the  window  and  paying  attention  to  the  scenery  for  the  first  time,  Daniel
realized they were heading away from his apartment. It looked like they were heading towards
the hospital. “Herb, where are we going?”
“I think I know somebody who can help you.”
Daniel’s jaw dropped. “You think I’m nuts, don’t you?”
“I never said that.”
“I expected better from you, Herb, I really did. I thought I could trust you, that  you  were
my friend.” Daniel began slowly unfastening his seatbelt.
“I am your friend, Danny! That’s why I’m trying to help. If I didn’t care, you’d probably be
in jail right now for assaulting that poor man!”
A truck darted into traffic in front of them, forcing Herb to slam on his brakes.
“Care  about  this,”  Daniel  said  as  he  threw  open  the  door  and  leapt  from  the  car.
Gridlocked, Herb could only watch helplessly as Daniel ran down the street,  turned  a  corner,
and disappeared.

 
After  locking  the  door  and  peering  out  the  window  to  make  sure  he  wasn’t  followed,
Daniel  picked  up  his  phone.  He  still  knew  someone  he  trusted  implicitly.  He  dialed  the
number from memory and waited for the other end to pick up.
“Hello, Mom?”
“Daniel!” called the voice at the other end of the line. “How are you?”
Daniel felt intense relief just hearing his mother’s voice.  “Not  so  good,  Mom.  Got  time  to
talk?”  Daniel’s  parents  owned  a  vegetarian  grocery  in  San  Francisco,  and  sometimes  it  got
pretty busy.
“I always have time for my favorite son,” his mother replied. Not to mention your only son,
Daniel thought. His two sisters still  lived  in  San  Francisco  near  his  parents.  Kathy,  two  years
Daniel’s junior, worked in the store while Samantha  was still in college at twenty-one. Ronald
and  Delores  Cho  had  wanted  Daniel  to  take  over  the  family  business,  but  he  needed  more
excitement. Careful what you wish for, he thought.
“Can you hang on a minute?” his mother asked.
“Sure.”
He heard his mom  talking to his dad and  then  the  sounds  of  the  store  faded  away  as  his
mother moved the phone into the stockroom. “Go ahead, son.”
“Mom, I know this is going to sound crazy, but just hear me out. It’s important you know
the whole story.” Daniel set  about  telling  her  everything  that  had  happened  to  him  over  the
course of the past week, including the impossible details. When he finished, the line was silent.
“Mom?”
“You have a very serious problem, son,” his mother said, all levity gone from her voice.
Duh, Mom, Daniel thought.
“Daniel, I know you don’t go very often anymore, but this is too big for you to solve all by
yourself. You need to put your faith in the Lord.”
Daniel winced. He’d been afraid of this. Although he had lost the faith to the point of being
borderline agnostic, his mother remained a devout Christian. He’d thought she might pass the
buck  on this one  to  God.  On  the  other  hand,  he  could  think  of  no  scientific  explanation  for
what he’d seen.
“Mom—”
“Don’t ‘Mom’  me,  son.  You  asked  my  advice  and  this  is  it.  Go  to  church  right  now  and
pray for guidance. The Lord will help you if you let Him. I know you prefer to fight your own
battles, son. You always  did.  Just  don’t  be  afraid  to  accept  help  when  it’s  offered.  God  helps
those who help themselves, but that doesn’t mean you have to do it alone.”
“Thanks, Mom.”
“You’re welcome, son. Now get your butt  to  church.  We’ll  be  here  if  you  need  us.  I  love

you.”
“I love you, too.” Daniel hung up the phone and headed out the door.
 
Susan
« ^ » 
We’ve been through this before, Susan,” Harold Preston sighed, wishing he could crawl under
his desk.
“And  you  keep  giving  me  these  useless,  Sunday  fluff  pieces,”  Susan  Richardson  replied.
She sat in her editor’s office at the Washington Post and stared intently at him. Her stare made
people uncomfortable. It wasn’t that she was unattractive; she was pretty enough in a plain sort
of  way—five  foot  five,  pale  skin,  brown  hair  and  eyes,  medium  build.  What  made  her  stare
uncomfortable  was  its  intensity.  There  was  fire  behind  her  eyes,  and  Harold  Preston
increasingly found that fire aimed at him.
He removed his round, wire-rimmed glasses and ran his fingers across his head where  his
hair used to be. “Susan,” he said for what seemed the billionth time, “this is the best I can give
you. We’ve been over this—”
“And you know I deserve better assignments. I’m an investigative journalist. I didn’t work
hard my whole life to write Sunday supplement filler.”
“Your whole life? You’re twenty-four! You’re lucky you’re not working in the mail room!”
“I’m too good for that and you know it. In college—”
“A college  newspaper  is  not  the  Washington  Post,  Susan.  I  don’t  care  what  you  did  in
college. That may have got you this job,  but now that you’re here, you pay your dues just like
everyone else. If that means covering supplement fluff, then you’ll do it, and  smile  the  whole
way through. There’s no shortcut to the top. This discussion is over.”
Fuming, Susan left the office.
Susan stormed through the newsroom, chiding  herself  far  worse  than  her  boss  did.  Tact,
dammit, she reminded herself.
Susan  was  often  her  own  worst  enemy.  Her  blunt,  straightforward  style,  while  useful
investigating  a  story,  didn’t  earn  her  points  in  the  diplomatic  game  of  landing  good
assignments.  It  was  the  one  aspect  of  journalism  she  never  learned  in  college,  or  in  the  two
years since.
She  vowed  to  master  it,  though.  She  really  had  no  choice.  For  as  far  back  as  she  could
remember, Susan wanted to be a reporter. As a kid, she used to wear a crayon-written “Press”
card in her father’s hat while interviewing her dog. When other kids  were  reading  the  Hardy
Boys, she was reading the  newspaper;  when  other  kids  were  watching  the  Brady  Bunch,  she
was watching the evening news.

As  she  got  older,  she  began  to  idolize  newsmen  like  Walter  Cronkite  and  Edward  R.
Murrow.  She  single  handedly  revitalized  her  high  school  newspaper,  and  used  her  college
paper to force the administration to  change  key  policies  regarding  the  treatment  of  students.
Reporting  was  what  she  did;  it  was  in  her  blood,  and  if  it  meant  she’d  have  to  learn  a  little
diplomacy to do it right, then that’s what she’d do.
Her  current  assignment  was  to  find  out  the  effect  of  a  church  renovation  on  the  local
community.  Hardly a Pulitzer opportunity, but she had dues to pay. She  stopped at her  desk
for her notebook.
“Hey, Suzie Q!”
She  looked up and saw Steve Dunbar walking her way.  She’d  gone  to  college  with  Steve
and he’d been the thorn in her side the entire time. Now was no different.
“Love to chat, Steve, but I’ve got to go.”
“Yeah, I heard. Church renovation, right? Slice of life, man on the street piece, right?”
Susan  looked  at  her  bare  wrist  as  if  she  were  looking  at  a  watch.  Steve  didn’t  get  the
message.
“Well, good luck. I’m off to my assignment, too.”
“And that would be?”
“I  have  a  one  on  one  with  Congressman  Fitzhume.  You  know,  Chairman  of  the  House
Armed  Services  Committee?  I’m  going  to  grill  him  on  the  shrinking  military  budget,  and
whether  we’re  spending  enough  to  maintain  our  national  security.”  Steve  gave  her  a  toothy
grin that let her know he knew exactly how much she wanted his story.
Summoning depths of composure she didn’t know she had, Susan smiled politely, grabbed
her notebook and started to leave. “Good luck,” she said, “I’ve got a church to visit.”
Dues, my ass, she thought as she walked out the door.
 
What a dump, Susan thought. If the Second  Baptist Church  had recently been  renovated,
she didn’t want to see the “before” pictures. It wasn’t that the place needed to be condemned
or  anything,  but  the  whole  building  held  an  air  of  shabbiness  not  unlike  the  surrounding
neighborhood.  The  stained  glass  was  dull  and  cloudy;  the  wooden  pews  were  chipped  and
dented. The only hint at renovation was a relentless odor of cleaning products.
The place was also deserted, as far as she could tell, save one Asian guy in the second row.
So much for its effect on the community, she thought. May as well get this over with.
She  waited  patiently  until  the  guy  got  up  to  leave.  “Excuse  me,”  she  called  out.  “Got  a
minute?”
The guy looked at Susan, noticing her for the first time. Susan didn’t have to guess too hard
about why he was here; the guy looked like he hadn’t had a good night’s sleep in weeks. “Can I
help you?” he asked.

Susan  could  tell  from  his  tone  of  voice  that  he  must  have  been  praying  for  something
important. Happy people did not  sound  like  that.  Her  reporter’s  mental  alarm  bell  went  off.
Human suffering always made good copy.
“I’m Susan Richardson, from the Post,” she said, extending her hand. The man just looked
blankly for a moment, then shook it. His grip was strong.
“Daniel Cho.”
He’d be cute if he smiled, Susan decided. Back to business.
“I’m doing a story on this church,  and how its renovation affected the community.  I’d like
to interview you, if you have a few minutes.”
Daniel shook his head. “I’m sorry, I can’t help you. I’ve never even been here until  today.
I’m only here because … I’m sorry. There’s nothing I can tell you.” He started to leave.
Susan wasn’t about to give up that easily. If she couldn’t bring in simple fluff pieces, she’d
never be able to get any hard news. “Please, wait!” she called. Daniel stopped at the door  and
faced her. “If you’re only coming here now, that just supports my premise,” she said, catching
up with him.
“I’m here because it’s the closest church  to my building,” he said. “Nothing more. Now, if
you’ll excuse me.”
“Wait!” He was already starting down the steps outside. She ran after him.
Geez, she just doesn’t quit, Daniel thought. “What, Ms. Richardson?”
“Susan.”
“Fine. Susan. What do you want?”
“For you to tell me why you’re here. Please. You’re the only one here  and  I  can’t  go  back
empty handed.”
 
Daniel had a crazy thought, then dismissed it. The last thing I need is someone else telling
me I’m nuts, he thought.
“Please?” Susan continued. “You look really upset. Maybe I can help.”
Daniel  remembered  his  mother’s  advice  and  suppressed  a  smirk.  She’d  always  told  him
that God worked in mysterious ways, but sending a reporter?
“Okay,” he said. “If you want to hear my story, I’ll tell it to you. Be warned, though, it’s a
long story and it doesn’t make a lot of sense.”
Susan smiled. “My favorite kind.”
Susan sat in the booth of a Pizza Hut across from Daniel and stared. She  had to admit—he
didn’t disappoint. After a block’s walk to sit and eat while they talked, Daniel had calmly and
deliberately recounted the events of his last week. It was a long story, and it didn’t make a lot
of sense.

“Well?” he asked.
“So let me get this straight.  You  think  some  immortal,  supernatural  guy  is  trying  to  ruin
your life.”
“I know, I know, it sounds ridiculous when you put it that way, but—”
“No, no! This is great!” She caught herself and put a hand on his arm. “Well, no, not great, I
mean  it’s  terrible  for  you,  but  it’s  a  great  story  just  the  same.  I’m  sorry,  do  I  sound  like  a
ghoul?”
“Can you help me?” he asked.
“What do you need?”
“To find out who’s doing this. Who they are, what they’re up to, why they want to destroy
me. Can you do this?”
Susan loved a challenge, and this was a doozy. Granted, she doubted his fantastic story was
true, and he was probably a ranting lunatic (although he looked and sounded rational enough
when he wasn’t telling his story), but she felt a connection to  him.  He  was  obviously  sincere,
which was more than she could say for most of the people she dealt with. Sincere,  in need, and
with an incredible story.
News.
Or at least more interesting than the assignments she’d been landing recently.
“I can try. Where do you think we should start?”
 
Research
« ^ » 
So what sorts of things were in this checkbook?”  Susan asked as they walked back  to Daniel’s
apartment to fetch the only hard evidence he had of Rockport’s existence.
“Pretty much  like I said. Same  things over and  over  again.  Cable,  phone,  internet,  rent.  I
don’t remember anything special.”
“Well,  a  lot  of  times  it’s  not  what  you  see  that’s  important,  but  what  you  don’t  see.  I
remember this one time I—”
Susan thrust her arm out and grabbed Daniel as they turned the corner onto his block.
“What is it?” he asked.
“Do you normally have undercover cops hanging out in front of your building?”
As Susan pulled him back around the corner, Daniel saw a brown sedan parked directly in
front  of  his  building.  He  could  see  on  it  the  tell-tale  large  radio  antenna  and  extra  lights

common to D.C. unmarked police cars.
“What’s he doing here?”
“I don’t know,” Susan replied, “but given your  luck  recently  I’ll  bet  it  involves  you.  Stay
here and stay out of sight.”
Susan walked over to the cop car, notebook in hand. The plainclothes officer in the car was
manhandling a huge sandwich into his mouth.
“Evening,  officer,”  Susan  said,  flashing  her  press  card.  “Susan  Richardson,  Washington
Post. What’s the scoop?”
“Bug off.”
“Come now, that’s no way to treat the press.  How  are  we  supposed  to  tell  people  what  a
great job you guys are doing if you won’t talk to us?”
“Fer Chrissakes, I’m on a stakeout! You’re gonna blow my cover!”
“I just want to know what’s going on. If there’s a threat to this community,  the people have
a right to know.” A few people wandering by were starting to listen  in  on  their  conversation,
and the cop was getting nervous.
“If I tell you, will you go away?”
“Happily.”
“Fine. You know I can’t give you names, but we have word that a  paramedic  that  lives  in
the  building  here  has  been  stealing  morphine  from  the  hospital  and  selling  it  on  the  street.
Now go away.”
“Thank you, officer.” Susan tipped an imaginary hat, then walked back to Daniel.
“You’re a drug dealer.”
“What?”
“According to  our  porcine  friend  over  there,  you’ve  been  selling  stolen  morphine  on  the
street.”
“Why that dirty—” Daniel started to lunge around the corner.
“Whoa there, big fella!” Susan said, pushing him back.  “You  lose  your  cool  here  and  you
draw attention to yourself. You don’t want that, I assure you. You can vent all you want when
we get to my place.”
“Your place.”
“Well, you certainly can’t stay here. You can crash on my couch until we  come  up  with  a
better solution. You’ve got me convinced there’s a story here, and I’m not letting you out of my
sight until I figure out what it is. Let’s go.”
Following Susan’s lead, Daniel walked away from his apartment.
 

Susan’s apartment was a disaster area. The sink was piled high with unwashed dishes and
the trashcan overflowed with Chinese takeout boxes. Papers, magazines and books of all kinds
nearly hid her tasteful couch. Similarly obscured was a  large  coffee  table  that  Daniel  thought
was  made  of  wood,  but  he  couldn’t  get  a  good  enough  look  to  be  sure.  Every  seat  in  the
apartment  was  covered  with  paper  save  one,  the  chair  behind  the  computer  hutch  in  the
corner. Papers covered every square inch of the desk not taken up by the keyboard or mouse
pad.  The  monitor  appeared  to  be  constructed  entirely  of  yellow  sticky  notes.  At  first  Daniel
wasn’t sure where the computer itself was, but then he saw Susan take a laptop out of her bag
and connect it to the external monitor and keyboard.
“Trees must hate you,” Daniel said.
“It’s the maid’s decade off.” Susan swept an armful of papers from the couch to the floor.
“Make yourself comfortable.”
Daniel took a seat on the couch as Susan swung the computer chair around to face him.
“Well,  Mister  Cho,”  Susan  began.  “You  are  in  quite  a  little  bit  of  trouble.  You’ve  nearly
been killed—”
“With the evidence destroyed.”
“—you’ve had your livelihood taken away, and now you’re wanted by the law.
“Our goal is to clear your name and in the process expose who has done this to you. To do
that,  we  need  witnesses.  Do  you  know  the  names  of  any  of  the  people  that  might  have
contributed to your predicament? The paramedics that heard you say you wrecked your car?”
Daniel sat back and thought. He didn’t know the names of the paramedics because he was
never awake in the ambulance, contrary to popular belief. Herb might,  though.  The  question
was, could he trust Herb?
“No, I don’t think we can go that route. But what about Rockport himself? I know he’s still
out there somewhere. Why did he  fake  his  own  death?  Who  ransacked  his  apartment?  Why
did he try to run me off the road?”
“Okay, here’s the deal,” Susan said. “You’re going to stay here and watch TV or something.
Don’t answer the phone or the door and don’t leave. I doubt the cops can find you here since
no one knows we know each other. I’ll be back when I have some answers.”
Susan walked out the door, leaving Daniel in silence amidst stacks of paper.
 
Floyd Rockport never existed. Sitting in the county courthouse archives, Susan mulled over
that bit of information.
She’d learned a lot for an afternoon’s work, most of it contradictory. Rockport had a Social
Security number,  but no birth certificate on record. He had college transcripts, but no  record
of actually attending high school anywhere. On paper, the guy just appeared out  of  nowhere,
fully grown and educated. She still had no idea who he was or why he’d attacked Daniel. Aside
from the official documents of his existence as an average taxpaying citizen, he was tabula rasa,
a complete blank slate.

Susan started packing up her things.  Like  she  told  Daniel,  sometimes  it  wasn’t  what  you
saw that was important, but what you didn’t. Rockport had enough holes in his background to
make a whole other person, and concealed in one of those holes was her answer.
 
Daniel was  going  nuts.  After  switching  away  from  one  insipid  sitcom  after  another,  he’d
finally  thrown  the  remote  down  in  disgust.  In  the  three  hours  Susan  had  been  gone  he’d
watched  television,  listened  to  the  radio,  flipped  through  most  of  the  magazines  in  the
apartment, practiced judo, and was currently busy pacing a hole in her carpet.
He hated feeling powerless, doing nothing while others worked in his behalf. He’d already
picked up the phone half a dozen times, intending to wring some information out of Herb. The
only thing that stopped him was the realization that Herb was just about his only friend, thus a
prime candidate for a police wiretap.
This is ridiculous, he thought. Squaring his shoulders, he stormed towards the door just as
Susan opened it and stepped inside.
“Curiouser  and  curiouser,”  she  said.  “It’s  starting  to  look  like  you  had  a  run-in  with  the
Witness Protection Program.”
“Why do you say that?”
“Because  until  a  few  years  ago,  Floyd  Rockport  didn’t  exist.  No  birth  certificate,  no  high
school transcripts, nothing.” Susan walked over to  the  fridge,  popped  open  a  diet  soda,  then
plopped down on the couch. Daniel sat down next to the computer.
“Until  he  graduated  from  college,”  Susan  continued,  “he  was  a  non-person.  There’s  no
record of  immigration,  either.  It’s  as  if  a  native  born  American  citizen,  complete  with  Social
Security number, just magically appeared at the age of twenty-five.”
They both sat in silence for a moment.
“That’s it?” Daniel asked. “That’s all you found out?”
“Back up there, buckaroo. Research is hard work. You think getting access to personal data
like that is easy?”
“Teach me.”
“What?”
“Take me along. We’re not likely to run into anyone that knows me, and I’m going insane
sitting here without anything to do.”
Susan thought  it  over.  It  was  a  dumb  idea,  on  the  surface.  Daniel  didn’t  know  anything
about investigative journalism and would probably just get in the way. She  also didn’t want to
take the risk of him being spotted by the police.
But he just sat there, staring at her with eyes holding a resolve she’d only seen in the mirror.
She  knew  she’d  never  be  able  to  keep  him  confined  to  the  apartment,  and  if  he  was
determined to venture out it was better if she could keep an eye on him.

“Okay,” she began. “The first thing you need to know about reporting is never take no for
an answer.”
 
The Post
« ^ » 
As  Susan  scanned  the  library  microfiche  looking  for  references  to  the  Witness  Protection
Program, Daniel perused the local paper. Sure enough, he was in the  news.  “Paramedic  gone
bad” read the three-inch blurb  in the Metro section of the Post. It detailed the charges against
him and described him as a fugitive still at large.
“Hey, Susan, check this out.”
As Susan scanned  down  the  page,  she  noticed  with  some  annoyance  that  the  byline  was
Steve Dunbar. Steve, you bastard, she thought, I’ve got the scoop this time. Still, he might be
privy to some information that they weren’t. She’d have to look into that. “Thanks Daniel. I’ll
check that out at the office later. In the meantime, look at this.” She motioned to the display.
Daniel studied it for a long moment. “I don’t see anything.”
“Exactly.  I  can’t  find  a  single  reference  to  anyone  connected  to  the  Witness  Protection
Program matching Rockport’s description. We just hit a dead end. I thought maybe he was just
a mobster stoolie finding that old habits die hard, but I guess that was too easy an explanation
to hope for.”
“So what do we do now?”
“Beats  me.  Did  you  ever  go  back  to  that  junkyard  and  talk  to  the  guy  that  said  you
authorized him to crush your car? Maybe we can get something out of him.”
“Let’s go.”
 
Daniel  rode  with  Susan  to  the  Post  offices.  She  wanted  to  get  some  information  out  of
Dunbar before they started out on what may well  be  another  wild  goose  chase.  They  parked
out in front of the imposing stone building and Susan left the keys in the ignition. “Stay here,”
she said. “You might be recognized inside. I’ll be back as soon as I can.”
Daniel watched as she trotted up the steps and into the lobby, then he turned on the radio
and hunkered down in his seat.
 
Damn,  Susan  said  to  herself.  Dunbar  wasn’t  at  his  desk.  She  looked  around  the  busy
newsroom, but she didn’t see him anywhere. She  did notice, however, that his computer was
on. Looking over her shoulder, she sat down.
 

Back  at  the  car,  Daniel  saw  a  police  officer  walking  down  the  sidewalk,  checking  cars.
Daniel slouched down more, trying to fall through his seat.
 
Dunbar’s machine was password protected. Susan started trying likely passwords for a guy
like Dunbar.  His name backwards. His birthday (she’d been to a  birthday  bash  for  him  once
while they were in college). The word “password.”
When  those  didn’t  work,  she  started  thinking  about  what  she  knew  about  her  slimy,
womanizing coworker.
Boink. No.
Babe. No.
Melons. No.
Hooters. Yes!
She  was  in.  She  started  looking  for  any  files  that  might  relate  to  Daniel’s  predicament.
Dunbar’s files were organized by date in  folders.  She  opened  the  folder  for  the  previous  day
and  found  subfolders  for  various  projects  Steve  was  working  on.  She  clicked  on  the  one
marked “Cho” and perused the contents. There were only  two  files.  “Article”  was  more  than
likely the text of the story she and Daniel had read in print.  “Notes”  looked  more  promising.
She opened the file.
She  read down through the expected notes, the sort of rough  information  she  used  when
writing a story. Virtually all of it was in the finished article. It wasn’t until she reached the end
of the file that she found something that wasn’t.
“If you get any new info on Cho,” Dunbar had written to himself, “call this number.”  The
number  was local, with a D.C.  area code.  Susan  dug  into  her  purse  for  her  ever-present  pen
and pad, then scribbled down the number.
Replacing her notepad in her purse, she closed all the files and folders she’d opened on the
computer. She was just about to get up and leave when she heard a familiar voice.
“Well hello there, Suzie Q.”
 
Daniel  averted  his  eyes  as  the  cop  walked  up  and  tapped  on  the  window.  Me?  Daniel
pointed to himself. The cop nodded and dropped  his  hand  to  his  belt,  putting  it  within  easy
reach of his sidearm, his nightstick, or most dangerous of all, his radio. Daniel rolled down the
window.
“Sir,” the cop began, “there’s no parking or standing on this side of the building until five.”
Daniel looked at his watch. It was 4:47. “I’m going to have to ask you to move your vehicle.”
Daniel  released  the  breath  he’d  been  holding.  “Yes,  officer.  I’ll  do  that  right  now.”  He
scooted  over  into  the  driver’s  seat  and  started  the  car,  pulling  out  into  pre-rush  hour  D.C.
traffic and wondering just what the hell was taking Susan so long.

 
Susan spun slowly  around  in  Steve  Dunbar’s  chair  and  leaned  back  to  face  him  like  she
had every right in the world to be there. “Steve! I was wondering where you were!”
“What are you doing with my computer?”
Steve’s abrupt, humorless manner stopped Susan cold. She’d planned just to ask Steve  to
show her what she’d already seen, maybe getting some  more  explanation  along  the  way,  but
now she was on her guard. Something  was definitely not right here. “Nothing,” she replied. “I
was just making myself comfortable until you got back.”
“What do you want?”
Getting more uncomfortable by the second under Steve’s threatening gaze, Susan stood up
and distanced herself from the desk. Maybe it was better Steve not know  her  true  reason  for
her visit. “I was just curious how your interview went.”
Steve seemed to relax a little. “Fine. It’ll be printed tomorrow. Anything else?”
“Nah, not really. I’ll see you later.” Susan walked casually away, but inside she couldn’t get
out of that newsroom fast enough.
 
Daniel couldn’t believe he’d gotten away from  the  cop  unrecognized.  He  resolved  to  find
some way to change his appearance as soon as possible.
As he  completed  his  eighth  lap  around  the  building,  he  spotted  Susan  walking  briskly
down the front steps. She was heading back towards where she’d left the car, so, after checking
to see there were no cops nearby, he stuck his head out the window and yelled her name.
She trotted over to the car and got in. “What are you doing?”
“I had a run in with a cop,” Daniel deadpanned. “No biggie. Though it might be nice next
time if you tell me we’re parked in a no parking zone.”
“Is it before five?” Susan asked, looking at her watch. “Sorry,” she grinned sheepishly.
“So,” Daniel asked, “was this trip at least worth something?”
Susan looked over her shoulder at the building. “I’ll tell you on the road. Drive.”
 
Steve sat and stared at his computer screen. The folder labeled “Cho” was selected, and he
hadn’t worked on it since the day before. Just to check,  he opened the folder and checked  the
file access dates.
Sure enough, “Notes” had been accessed just a few minutes before. He opened the file and
double-checked the number before dialing.
“Hi, it’s me. I think I have some information for you.”
 

Escape
« ^ » 
On  the  way  back  to  Susan’s  apartment,  she  told  Daniel  what  she  found,  as  well  as  Steve’s
uncharacteristic reaction to her presence. Now they huddled around her computer as she tried
to figure out just to whom the phone number belonged.
“Why don’t we just call it?” Daniel asked.
“Because I don’t want whoever’s on the other end to be able to trace the call back to us.”
Daniel watched as Susan brought up the web page for American Directory Assistance, only
to find  that  the  number  had  no  match,  meaning  it  was  unlisted.  “Well,  it  was  worth  a  try,”
Susan smiled. “I guess we’re really going to have to work for this.”
 
On  a  rooftop  across  the  street  facing  Susan’s  apartment,  the  creature  recently  known  as
Floyd Rockport settled in and waited for the police to arrive.
 
Daniel paced from the window to the computer and back.  He was trying to  keep  up,  but
Susan was much  more proficient with computers  and  the  net  than  he  was  and  she  soon  left
him  in  the  dust.  So  while  she  dialed  into  obscure  systems  and  services  tracking  down  the
ownership of the phone number, he paced. It was all he could do; something else he vowed to
change in the near future.
He stopped pacing to stare out the  window.  On  the  street  below,  he  saw  numerous  dark
sedans park and black clad men with guns get out. Further down the street was a police paddy
wagon.
“I think I’ve got something,” Susan said. Daniel turned away from the window and saw her
pointing to something in the monitor.
“I hope it’s good, because we’re out of time.”
“What?”
Daniel pointed to the street. “The police are here.”
Disconnecting her laptop and throwing it  into  her  bag,  Susan  sprang  from  her  chair  and
looked. “Steve! That bastard set me up!”
Daniel was strangely calm.  This  sort  of  thing  was  becoming  old  hat.  He  grabbed  Susan’s
hand and firmly guided her to the door. “We have to go.”
Outside the apartment, they made straight for the emergency stairwell. Susan started down
before Daniel grabbed her.
“No, the cops will be coming up that way.” He pointed up. “This way, to the roof.”

After a few flight’s climb, they burst out into the sultry Washington night air. It was a clear
night, which for the District of Columbia meant you could see a handful of stars. Daniel ran to
the edge of the building closest to its neighbor. It was about a ten-foot jump,  but the other roof
was lower, so it looked doable. He turned back to where Susan was watching the cops deploy.
“Susan. Over here.”
When she jogged over to him and saw what he had in mind, she gave him an unbelieving
look. “You’re out of your mind.”
“You  have  a  better  idea?  Come  on,  the  cops  will  be  up  here  as  soon  as  they  figure  out
you’re not home.”
Daniel  stepped  back  a  dozen  feet  or  so  and  took  Susan’s  hand.  They  looked  into  each
other’s eyes, ran to the edge and jumped.
After what seemed an eternity suspended in midair, they landed on the gravely  tarmac  of
the other roof. Daniel rolled to his feet immediately and helped Susan up.
“I did it,” Susan whispered.
Daniel was already edging for the stairwell. “What?”
“That  was  so  cool!”  Susan  was  suddenly  full  of  energy,  breathing  in  the  air,  looking
around—and then she froze.
She walked briskly over to Daniel, jerking her head over her right shoulder. “Somebody’s
watching us.”
Daniel looked across the street and felt his blood go cold as he recognized the creature that
had ruined his otherwise normal, boring life. Rockport. Involuntarily, he began walking to the
edge of the roof.
This  time  Susan  provided  the  voice  of  reason.  Her  momentary  elation  given  way  to  her
more natural caution, she dragged Daniel by the arm back  to the stairs. “Now’s not  the  time,
Daniel.  There’s  a  Metrorail  stop  just  around  the  corner.  We’ve  got  to  get  some  distance  and
plan out our next move.”
With great  reluctance,  Daniel  tore  his  eyes  from  Rockport  and  followed  Susan  down  the
stairs.
Minutes  later,  Daniel  and  Susan  sat  on  the  brightly-lit  orange  vinyl  seats  of  the  D.C.
subway, speeding west and out of the city. Susan had her laptop out and was trying to explain
to Daniel what she found.
“Then I  finally  tracked  the  number  down  to  a  phone  bank  leased  by  the  Social  Security
Administration. Looking in their internal directory, I found that line assigned to this guy.” She
showed Daniel a picture of a middle-aged guy with a receding hairline and a weak chin. “He’s
listed as Richard Birchmere, an Assistant Director. I—”
She  looked  up  at  Daniel  and  found  him  staring  blankly  out  the  window  as  if  he  hadn’t
heard a thing she’d  said.  She  waved  her  hand  in  front  of  his  face.  “Hello?  Daniel?  Anybody
home?”

Daniel shook himself out of his reverie and turned away from the  darkness  speeding  past
the window.
“I’m sorry. You were saying?”
“I was saying I think we finally have a lead on the bastards that are destroying your life. I’m
more concerned with why you weren’t listening.”
Daniel looked like he was about to say something, then shut up again.
“It’s that guy on the roof,” Susan surmised. “Who was he?”
“Rockport.”
Susan suspected as much,  but it  was  still  a  surprise.  “That  was  him?  What  was  he  doing
watching my apartment?”
“Hounding me, keeping tabs on me. I wouldn’t be surprised if he was the  one  that  called
the cops.” Daniel turned in his seat so that he was sitting sideways, facing Susan directly.
“Susan,  I  want  to  thank  you  for  all  your  help,  but  I  think  it’s  for  the  best  if  we  part
company. You shouldn’t continue to risk your safety because of me.  I  don’t  know  who  these
guys are, or why they’re after me, but it’s obvious they aren’t going to stop until I’m—”
Susan put up her hand, stopping Daniel midsentence. “Don’t say it. It’s not going to come
to that. Besides, you aren’t going to get rid of me  that  easily.  The  cops  are  after  me  too  now,
remember? The only way out of this is to clear your name.”
Susan looked over Daniel’s shoulder to check the map on the wall. “We’ll get off at the next
stop and check  into a motel. I’ll see what I can dig up on this Birchmere guy and you can get
some rest. But make no mistake: we’re in this together, bucko.  You’re stuck with me, so you’d
better get used to it.”
When they got off the train at the next stop, neither  of  them  noticed  Floyd  Rockport  exit
the train several cars behind them.
 
Fight or Flight
« ^ » 
The motel Susan picked was “economical”, meaning it was a dingy rat-bag. Water stains dotted
the  walls  and  the  remote  to  the  ancient  television  was  securely  bolted  to  the  nightstand.
According  to  Susan,  this  was  the  best  possible  choice.  By  paying  in  cash,  they  could  avoid
leaving a paper trail, and the other patrons were unlikely to pay much attention to them.
Susan sat at a rickety desk next to one of the twin beds and pecked away at the keyboard of
her  laptop,  the  evening  news  on  the  tube  just  barely  drowning  out  the  screaming  pipes  of
Daniel’s shower. So  far, she hadn’t found out very much  about Birchmere, but she was going
to keep at it until she did. Things like his address and phone number  had  been  easy,  but  the
juicy stuff was bound to take longer.

The pipes fell silent  and  moments  later  Daniel  emerged  from  the  bathroom  clad  in  jeans
and  an  undershirt,  toweling  dry  his  hair  as  he  padded  barefoot  across  the  room.  “Anything
good?”
“Not so far.” Susan disconnected from the net and shut down her computer. “All I have so
far is personal statistics. I can tell you his driver’s license number, but not why he’d be involved
with Floyd Rockport or an attempt to discredit you.”
Daniel sat down on the edge of the bed and stared down at the towel in his hands. “I don’t
know.”
After a heavy silence, Susan said, “Well, don’t worry about it. We’ll find out. Did I ever tell
you—”
A pounding  on  the  door  interrupted  Susan.  Shaking  off  his  melancholy,  Daniel  shushed
Susan  and  glided  silently  to  the  door.  Looking  out  the  peephole,  he  saw  a  fish-eye-distorted
view of a scruffy elderly man trying to peer back  at him. Daniel motioned Susan to relax and
opened the door.
“Can I help you?”
The old man scratched his white beard and smiled. “Hi, I’m Jeff Frankel. I have  the  room
next door,” he said, pointing. “I was wondering if you folks could spare  some  soap,  seeing  as
how the management declined to give me any and said management is currently passed out in
a drunken stupor.”
Daniel had to smile. It seemed like the first time in ages, and it felt good. “Yeah, hang on.”
He walked back to the bathroom to get some soap.
While  he  was  digging  around  under  the  sink,  he  heard  Frankel  talking  to  Susan.  “Nice
place you folks have,” the old man said. “No bloodstains on the walls. Very classy.”
Daniel returned  with  the  soap  but  botched  the  handoff,  dropping  it  at  Frankel’s  feet.  As
Daniel stooped to pick it up, he noticed Frankel’s tattered sandals. The left one was strapped to
a dull gray steel prosthetic. Daniel  caught  himself  staring  and  stood  up,  handing  Frankel  the
soap. “Here you go. I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to stare.”
Frankel didn’t look the slightest bit  offended.  “S’okay.  I’ve  had  this  thing  so  long  I  don’t
even notice it anymore,” he said, rapping on the leg with his knuckles, resulting in a dull clang.
“Land mine, Korea. This little baby’s got me quite a bit of disability pay out of old Uncle Sam
over the years.” He winked at Daniel knowingly.
“Well, I’ve taken up enough of your time. Thanks for the soap. G’night.”
“Good night, Mister Frankel.”
“Call me Jeff!” Daniel heard as he shut and bolted the door.
 
Daniel couldn’t sleep. Susan was lying peacefully on the other bed, still in her clothes  and
snoring softly. He knew he should be sleeping too, as they had a lot to do in the morning. He
just couldn’t make himself go to sleep.

He couldn’t believe how fast his whole existence disintegrated. Whoever these people were,
they were thorough, and they were merciless. If  Susan  hadn’t  believed  him,  or  hadn’t  cared,
he’d either be in a mental institution or jail by now. He’d been incredibly fortunate to find her,
but even more unfortunate to need her in the first place. Just God’s way of balancing the scales,
he thought.
Daniel turned on his side and watched the shadows of cars going by outside. He was finally
starting to feel sleepy.
Then he saw something move right outside his window.
Daniel  sprang  out  of  bed  and  ran  to  the  door  just  as  the  doorknob  started  to  jiggle.  He
looked through the peephole. On the other side, hand on the doorknob, was Floyd Rockport.
“Susan!” Daniel shouted. “Wake up! He’s here! It’s—”
The  door  was  knocked  off  its  hinges,  crashing  into  Daniel  and  pinning  him  to  the  floor.
Rockport  stood  in  the  doorway,  a  shadow  backlit  by  the  streetlights  outside.  Susan  sat  bolt
upright.
“What the hell’s going on?”
As if in answer, Rockport leapt at Daniel.
 
Thump!
Jeff Frankel sat up in bed  and  listened  to  the  noise  next  door.  Newlyweds,  he  thought  at
first. Now he wasn’t so sure. He’d heard a  lamp  break  and  the  woman  was  screaming  about
something.
Jeff got out of bed and strapped on his leg. He  knew  he  should  just  mind  his  own  damn
business, but he just wasn’t wired that way. He quickly threw on  his  clothes  and  walked  out
the door.
 
In  Daniel  and  Susan’s  room,  things  had  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  Rockport  and  Daniel
warily circled each other amidst the wreckage of the room. Daniel’s knowledge of judo had so
far  kept  him  out  of  Rockport’s  grasp,  but  both  of  them  knew  that  situation  wouldn’t  last
forever. Susan was slowly inching towards the door, laptop in hand.
“Don’t wander off, cow,” Rockport growled, leering at Susan. “I’ll get to you next.”
“Why are you doing this?” Daniel demanded.
Rockport swung his head back to glower at Daniel. “You are a flea, a momentary nuisance.
I owe you no explanation.”
To punctuate his statement, Rockport lunged at Daniel. Daniel barely had enough time  to
grab Rockport’s outstretched arm and bring his elbow down hard on it, snapping both bones
in the forearm.
Instead of grabbing his arm in agony, Rockport flashed Daniel that same haunting grin and

flung the arm sharply out  to  the  side.  Daniel  and  Susan  could  both  hear  a  sharp  pop  as  the
bones were jarred back  into place. Stepping forward, Rockport slugged Daniel  across  the  jaw
with the arm that had been broken only moments before.
Daniel got quickly to his feet. “Susan! Run!”
Needing no further encouragement, Susan bolted out the door and right into Jeff, both  of
them hitting the pavement in a tangle of arms and legs. She’d barely started to get up when the
window exploded in a shower of broken glass as Rockport hurtled through it.
“What the Sam Hill is going on here?” Jeff exclaimed.
Susan was about to explain when Daniel appeared in the doorway and cut her off. “Susan,
get out of here! I can’t hold him off forever!”
“Right you are.” Rockport had gotten to his feet and charged Daniel too quickly for Daniel
to react. In less than a second, Rockport had Daniel pinned against the side of the building.
Susan made a move to intervene, but Jeff grabbed her arm, his grip surprisingly strong. “I
have a better idea, but we have to hurry.”
With a look back at Daniel, Susan followed Jeff into the parking lot.
 
Daniel couldn’t move. Rockport’s steel grip was growing steadily tighter.
“You have no idea,” Rockport hissed, “what you’ve gotten yourself and your friend into, do
you?”
Rockport’s fingers clamped securely around his throat, Daniel couldn’t answer. He instead
worked on wriggling one arm free.
“You just couldn’t leave well enough alone. You had to butt in. You had to root through my
apartment. You’re a nosy little speck, and this time it’s going to cost you.”
As Rockport tightened his grip around Daniel’s throat, Daniel popped an arm free and dug
his fingers deep into Rockport’s eyes, causing them  to well up dark  crimson  blood.  Rockport
stumbled back, clutching his face, only to straighten up and catch Daniel’s fist as Daniel threw
a punch.  Daniel was shocked to see that not only were Rockport’s eyes undamaged,  but  they
weren’t even bloodshot. It was as if the injury never happened.
“You’re  only  delaying  the  inevitable,”  calmly  and  smoothly  bringing  his  free  hand  on
Daniel’s outstretched arm, snapping it like a twig. “Sooner or later, you all die.”
As Rockport drew  back  for  the  killing  blow,  they  were  both  bathed  in  a  powerful  white
light and looked up at a throaty growl coming from the parking lot. Before either could react,
Jeff’s  Winnebago  came  barreling  out  of  the  darkness,  plowing  into  Rockport  and  stopping
alongside Daniel. Susan threw the side door open and pulled Daniel inside.
“Go!” she screamed as Jeff floored it, leaving patches  of  pungent  rubber  as  he  headed  for
the open road.
As they turned out of the parking lot, Rockport leapt at the vehicle, digging his fingers into

the metal of the right front fender.
“What the—” Jeff yelled as he  swerved  violently  to  the  right,  shearing  off  his  unwelcome
passenger by slamming him into a lamppost.
Safe for the moment, the trio sped away into the night.
 
Moments  after  Jeff’s  taillights  disappeared,  the  corpse  recently  known  as  Floyd  Rockport
began to pull itself together. The dent in the crushed skull popped out with a sickening squish
and the dislocated arm fell back into place. Slowly, Rockport rose to his feet and stared off into
the distance.
As he stood there, a greasy, potbellied man in his fifties stumbled out of  the  management
office, clutching a bottle of whiskey.
“What the hell’s going on here?” he shouted, staggering over to where Rockport stood.
Rockport looked briefly over his shoulder, then stepped towards the motel manager.
“Who’s gonna pay for this?” The man gestured at the broken  glass in the parking lot, then
shook his whiskey bottle at Rockport.
With a smooth and practiced motion, Rockport grabbed the manager’s head in both hands
and twisted it sharply, snapping the spinal column. The man dropped  like  a  sack  of  potatoes
and twitched feebly.
Rockport walked silently down the street, disappearing into the gloom.
 
Hellos and Goodbyes
« ^ » 
Jeff’s Winnebago sped down Route 66 away from the brightening eastern sky.
Inside, Daniel reclined on one side of the booth that served as the “dining room” and rested
his arm on the table. Susan  sat  across  from  him.  Now  that  they  were  on  the  open  road,  Jeff
thought it might be a dandy time  to  talk.  “You  folks  mind  telling  me  just  what  the  hell  was
going on back there?”
“I’d tell you if I knew, Mister Frankel,” Daniel hissed between clenched teeth.
“Jeff!”
“Fine. Jeff.
“Susan, we don’t have much  time. You’re going to have to set and splint this arm before I
go into shock and pass out.”
“I am? You’re the paramedic! I don’t know—”

“I’ll talk you through it, but we’ve go to move fast. I don’t  know  how  much  longer  I  can
stay conscious. First, find something to splint with and something I can bite down on.”
As Susan got up and foraged through the “kitchen,” she heard Jeff muttering to himself up
in the cab. Jeff’s mobile residence seemed to fit his personality. Scattered and eclectic, it was a
decorator’s nightmare. He had cheap roadside knick-knacks  from nearly everywhere in North
America, including lots of places she’d never heard of before, and probably never would again.
In the jumbled morass of a kitchen drawer were several wooden spoons and she found a roll of
duct tape behind  a  ceramic  bear  cookie  jar  with  the  name  “Yellowstone”  emblazoned  across
the front. She brought the tape and spoons over to Daniel, noticing that his eyes were starting
to lose focus.
“Okay,” she said loudly, getting his attention. “Now what?”
Daniel looked over what she found. “Give me one of the spoons.”
She handed it over and he placed it sideways between his teeth.
“Okay,” he said around the spoon, “you’re gonna need to grab my wrist and pull it straight
towards you until it won’t go any further, then let it pop straight back  into place. Then you’re
going to splint it with the spoons and tape, keeping it immobile. Put a blanket over me if I pass
out, but make sure I can’t move the arm. Ready?” He bit down hard on the spoon.
Susan  nodded  and  with  a  deep  breath  grabbed  Daniel’s  wrist.  Jeff  ran  over  a  pothole,
jarring her grip and eliciting a scream from Daniel.
“Sorry!” Jeff and Susan yelled in unison.
Susan took Daniel’s wrist again and pulled sharply straight out until the arm was extended
as far as possible, then immediately let it snap back  into place. Daniel let  loose  an  earsplitting
scream and snapped the  spoon  handle  in  his  teeth  before  passing  out.  Susan  rested  the  arm
carefully on the table and applied the splint as gingerly as she  could.  When  she  was  finished,
she stepped away from Daniel’s unconscious form.
“Jeff! Do you have a blanket for Daniel?”
“Check the linen closet,” he shouted back. “It’s just to the right of the bathroom.”
Among  the  assorted  junk  Susan  found  in  there  was  an  old  olive  drab  wool  blanket  that
smelled  faintly  of  mothballs  and  had  the  words  “U.S.  ARMY”  stenciled  on  in  faded  white
paint. She took it down and draped it over Daniel, being careful not to disturb the arm resting
on the table. That done, she walked forward to the cab to sit with Jeff.
“Now  that  he’s  all  squared  away,”  Jeff  began,  keeping  his  eyes  on  the  road,  “could  you
please tell me what the devil’s going on?”
“I don’t completely understand myself, but I’ll tell you what I know. It all started about two
weeks ago…”
Susan  went  on  to  tell  Jeff  about  the  wreck,  all  the  terrible  things  that  had  happened  to
Daniel  since,  how  she  and  Daniel  had  met  and  the  events  leading  up  to  their  timely  escape
from Rockport at the motel. When she was finished, Jeff drove in silence for a long moment.

“Are you trying to tell me that guy trying to kill you back there was some kind of immortal
monster?”
“Believe me,” Susan said, “I know how ridiculous it sounds, and I didn’t really believe that
part  of  it  either  until  tonight.  What  that  guy  did  back  there  just  isn’t  possible  for  a  normal
person.”
“Maybe he was one of those swami types,” Jeff suggested. “You know, one of those martial
arts people that can just ignore pain?”
“You don’t understand. His arm healed, instantly, right then and there. It was like he didn’t
even feel it.” Susan shivered at the memory.
They both sat in quiet contemplation for a bit while  Jeff  drove,  the  dawn  slowly  creeping
up behind them.
 
“Show him in.”
Three  men  sat  in  an  elegantly  appointed  parlor  in  downtown  Washington.  The  room
smelled faintly of oak paneling and old money. Lining the walls were bookcases, hundreds  of
leather  bound  tomes  gathering  dust  on  the  shelves.  All  the  illumination  came  from  old
fashioned reading lamps placed on small tables next to the plush, leather upholstered chairs the
men  reclined  in,  casting  their  faces  into  shadow.  All  three  seemed  to  have  well-maintained
bodies underneath their costly hand tailored suits.
The door opened and the being that had so recently terrorized Daniel and Susan walked in.
Although  there  were  ample  chairs  in  the  room,  he  stood  stiffly,  facing  the  men  that  had
summoned him.
“Good morning, Batarel,” the first man said. “You’ve had a busy night.”
“Yes, sir,” Batarel said. “I almost had them. I believe they were headed west, and—”
The second man held up his hand and Batarel fell silent.
“You’ve become something of a disappointment,” the third man said.
“Sirs, I know this looks bad, but—”
The second man cut him off. “It looks terrible. You’ve had to establish a new identity nearly
a dozen times in the last century.”
“This time you were noticed,” the first man pointed out.
“You let the angels ransack your dwelling,” the second man added.
“And you let the human that discovered you survive,” the third man said. “Not to mention
that he’s enlisted the help of that reporter.”
“That wasn’t my fault—”
“You’re  this  close,”  the  second  man  said,  holding  his  hand  up  with  the  thumb  and
forefinger  about  an  inch  apart,  “to  becoming  a  major  liability.  We  are  not  strong  enough  to

combat the angels openly. We cannot afford to have our existence exposed.”
Batarel started to say something, but thought better of it and stood stoically.
“That said,” said the first man, “you’re being reassigned.”
“Sirs, I must protest!”
“This is not open to negotiation,” the second man said.
“But what about Cho?”
“Cho is no longer your concern,” the third man said. “He will be dealt with.”
“You’ll receive the details of your new assignment and identity shortly,” the first man said.
“Good morning.”
His audience at an end, Batarel left the room.
 
“Jeff? I think he’s waking up.”
Daniel opened his eyes to the bright sunlight streaming in the windows of the Winnebago.
As he stirred and straightened in the booth a bolt of pain shot through his arm, causing him to
nearly bite through his tongue.
“We’ve got to get him to a doctor,” Susan said.
“That’s one of the things I aim to discuss,” Jeff said as he pulled the Winnebago off the road
and cut the engine. “There’s some Tylenol in the  bathroom.  I  think  Daniel  might  need  some
right about now.”
As Susan went to get the medicine, Jeff slid into the booth across from Daniel. “Susan told
me what’s happened to you  two,”  he  said  as  Susan  returned  with  the  Tylenol  and  a  glass  of
water, “and I want in.”
“What?” Daniel almost spit water all over Jeff.
“I think I can help you. I have a place you can stay,” Jeff said, gesturing around the cabin,
“and it’s a place they can’t find.”
“Jeff, you can’t be serious.”
“Can’t I? You need me, Daniel.”
Daniel sighed in exasperation. His arm hurt like hell, and the last thing he  needed  was  an
argument with this  garrulous  old  man.  “As  much  as  I  appreciate  the  offer,  I  really  can’t  ask
anyone else to risk their neck on my behalf.”
“Who says you’re asking?”
“I’ve already dragged Susan into this—”
“No you didn’t,” Susan said. “I volunteered.”
“And I’m doing the same,” Jeff said. “Look at it this way. I’m retired. I ain’t got no family. I

put all my money into this Winnebago  and  I  travel  the  country  looking  for  something  to  do
with the rest of my life. I really think this might be it, and like I said, you need me.”
Like Hell I do, Daniel thought. Just then, Susan rested her hand on Daniel’s good arm.
“He has a point. I keep telling you that you aren’t in this alone. We need Jeff’s help.”
“I can’t be responsible for your safety!”
“So  who’s  asking  you  to  be?”  Jeff  snapped.  “Look,  I  know  what  I  saw  last  night,  what
Susan told me. I know this is dangerous. I also know that in the  nine  years  I’ve  been  driving
this damn thing around, this is the  first  time  I  really  feel  alive,  and  important.  I  need  this  as
much as you need me.
“And dammit, I’m gonna help you whether you like it or not!”
Daniel  could  see  that  any  attempt  to  talk  the  aging  Samaritan  out  of  it  was  futile.  He’d
wanted to keep this whole mess to himself, to spare others from the danger he knew Rockport
represented. That wasn’t going to happen, apparently.
“Where are we?” Daniel asked.
Jeff broke out a map book and pointed to a spot just outside Reston.
“Okay,” Daniel said. “Let’s find a clinic and get a real  cast  put  on  this  arm.  After  that  we
can try to figure out who Rockport’s working for.”
Grinning from ear to ear, Jeff fired up the Winnebago.
 
Those  doddering  old  fools!  Batarel  fumed  as  he  stormed  across  the  parking  lot  and  got
behind the wheel of the same brown Buick he’d used to run Daniel off the road.
Of course, the three  beings  that’d  just  reassigned  him  weren’t  actually  any  older  than  he
was, but he tended to think of them that way. While Batarel worked hard to stay on top of the
times, his superiors were mired in the old ways. That’s the problem,  he  thought  as  he  pulled
out into the D.C.  traffic. The very power and influence  they  flaunted  over  him  would  be  the
key to their downfall. They didn’t know how to change with the times.
In  the  old  days,  the  sort  of  problem  that  they  had  with  Cho  wasn’t  too  serious.  Before
electronic  communications,  even  if  someone  who  knew  the  truth  about  them  was  believed,
Batarel and his brothers could rely on word traveling very slowly. They had ample time to put
together a cleanup operation.
Contrary to what his superiors thought, these were not the  old  days.  Cho  and  his  cronies
had access to the world media, the Internet, to any  number  of  ways  to  get  word  out  quickly
and globally. They had to be stopped. It was clear to Batarel that if left up to his superiors, their
organization  would  be  exposed  and  the  angels  would  be  able  to  use  the  humans  to  destroy
them. If he stayed quiet, if he accepted his reassignment, they were all doomed.
Cho had to be stopped, and it was up to him.
Pumped full of resolve, Batarel disappeared into the D.C. rush hour.

 
A New Lead
« ^ » 
What the hell is this?” Jeff stared incredulously at his fender as Susan and Daniel walked out of
the clinic, Daniel sporting a new fiberglass cast.
“What are you yelling about?” Daniel asked.
“This!  What  the  hell  is  this?”  Jeff  pointed  at  several  long,  thin  gashes  in  his  right  front
fender. Daniel crouched down to get a better look and came to the easy conclusion.
“Rockport.”
“You mean he—”
“Dug his hands into your fender. Yup, that’s it.”
Jeff stood and sputtered, eyes riveted on the gouges in the metal.
“Come  on,  guys,”  Susan  said,  stepping  into  the  Winnebago.  “We’ve  got  work  to  do.
Providing,” she said to Jeff, “you’re still in on this.”
“You kidding?” Jeff said as he ushered Daniel inside before joining them.  “Bastards messed
up my home. There’s hell to pay now.”
They all sat down at the table, Susan  already  booting  up  her  laptop.  Daniel  was  in  much
better spirits now that his arm was fully immobilized up  to  the  elbow.  He  was  most  relieved
that getting it reset and casted wasn’t a big deal. They got it done, paid their bill and left. They
didn’t even need insurance.
“Before our little disturbance last night,” Susan began, “I was telling  Daniel  that  I  tracked
the  number  Steve  was  supposed  to  call  to  a  Richard  Birchmere,  an  assistant  director  of  the
Social Security Administration. What we don’t know is why he’d care about Daniel. There’s no
obvious connection.”
“Could we tail him and find out who he talks to?” Daniel asked. “Maybe he’s just a middle
man.”
“Not easily,” Susan said. “He might notice a Winnebago following him around everywhere
he goes.”
“Tap his phone?” Jeff suggested.
“With what?” Susan asked. “It’s not going to be easy digging up dirt on this guy. As long as
I’m underground, I can’t even rely on my usual contacts.”
“So what can we do?” Daniel asked. He started to worry that his search was over before it
began.
Susan  thought  for  a  moment,  then  grinned  sheepishly.  “Well,  there  is  something,  but  I

haven’t done it since college, and it’s a little weird…”
 
“I  can’t  believe  I’m  doing  this,”  Daniel  said.  He  and  Susan  were  crouched  in  the  bushes
outside  Richard  Birchmere’s  house,  a  beautiful  split-level  in  Friendship  Heights,  an  upscale
suburb of Washington. Jeff was across the street in the Winnebago, acting as lookout.
“I know it sounds weird,” Susan said, “but you can learn a lot  about  a  person  by  looking
through his garbage.” She gestured to Jeff, who gave them the thumbs up.
“The coast is clear,” she said. “Let’s go.”
Daniel  followed  Susan  around  to  the  back  of  the  house.  Birchmere’s  lawn  was  neatly
trimmed and immaculate with a small wooden tool shed in the far corner. Near the back  door
was a small bin with one white kitchen trash bag, the kind with drawstrings, tied neatly. Daniel
and Susan walked over to it.
As Susan grabbed the bag, she heard a low, menacing growl. She  froze and slowly turned
her  head  to  the  right.  Next  to  the  tool  shed  stood  the  biggest  Rottweiler  she  had  ever  seen,
staring at her intensely. “Daniel?”
Daniel had seen the dog too, and was slowly edging his way in front of Susan. “Nice dog,”
he said in the most soothing  tone  of  voice  he  could  muster.  “We’ll  be  out  of  your  yard  very
soon.”
“What are we going to do?” Susan asked, her hand still frozen to the trash bag.
The dog snarled and took a few steps towards them.
“How should I know?” Daniel said. “Just remove your hand very slowly from the bag, and
we’ll see what he does.”
The instant Susan moved her hand, the dog snarled and snapped at her, as well as taking a
few more steps forward.
“That’s not going to work,” Susan hissed.
Daniel  came  up  with  an  idea.  He  thought  it  was  Grade-A  stupid,  but  it  was  all  he  had.
“Okay, then here’s the plan. You grab the bag and run like hell for the Winnebago. I’ll distract
the dog and follow you.”
“What? Are you insane? He’ll rip you to shreds!”
“I don’t think so,” Daniel said, rapping his knuckles on his cast and eliciting another snarl
from the dog.
“I hope you know what you’re doing,” Susan said, tightening her grip on the bag.
“Yeah, me too,” Daniel said. “On three, you run and I’ll hold him off.
“One.” The dog snarled.
“Two.” Sensing something was going on, the dog crouched and prepared to leap.

“Three!” Susan snatched the bag and bolted for the Winnebago as fast as she could. Daniel
inhaled sharply and stepped into the dog’s leap, holding his casted forearm out in front of him.
As expected, the dog’s jaws locked onto the plaster and fiberglass and  shook  violently.  Bright
waves of pain shot up Daniel’s arm, blurring his vision.
As soon as Susan was out of sight, Daniel brought his left fist up and slugged the dog across
the  head.  The  animal  grunted,  but  hung  on.  Raising  his  arm  and  the  dog  higher  in  the  air,
Daniel let loose a swift kick  to the animal’s underside. There was a yelp, and the dog  released
his grip.
Daniel lost no time making good his retreat. He ran  as  fast  as  he  could  around  the  house
and towards the Winnebago, the dog close on his heels.
“Go!” he shouted  at  Jeff  and  Susan.  As  the  vehicle  started  moving,  Susan  threw  the  side
door open and Daniel jumped for it. Susan pulled him in and slammed the  door  shut  just  as
the dog made its leap. There was a thud against the side of the Winnebago, then Jeff accelerated
around the corner and they were gone.
After they drove a safe distance from the house, Jeff pulled into a grocery store parking lot.
Daniel  popped  some  more  Tylenol  to  deal  with  the  shake  the  dog  had  given  his  arm,  and
Susan prepared to empty the bag onto the table.
“Gentlemen, prepare for an in depth look at the life of Richard Birchmere,” she said.
“I just hope this doesn’t stink up the place,” Jeff said.
Susan  opened  the  bag  and  emptied  its  contents.  The  first  thing  they  noticed  was  that  it
didn’t  stink  at  all.  The  pile  consisted  almost  entirely  of  dry  refuse:  crumpled  typing  paper,
take-out  menus,  junk  mail,  magazines,  newspapers,  etc.  There  were  no  food  wrappers,  no
waste leftovers, not even a plastic milk jug. Susan mentioned as much.
“Yeah, I noticed that too,” Daniel said. “When I went to Rockport’s apartment, the kitchen
was positively barren. No food, no dishes even. Think there’s a connection?”
“Maybe. For all we know, though, they could both just be extreme  bachelors  that  eat  out
every meal.”
“Boy, this guy sure does throw out a lot of magazines,” Jeff observed.
Susan  had  noticed  that  as  well.  Along  with  the  standard  Post  Weekend  and  television
listings, Birchmere had a  wide  array  of  reading  material.  Local  interest  stuff  like  Washington
Weekly, national news magazines like Time and Newsweek, several more specific political and
religious  titles.  Conspicuously  absent  was  any  actual  leisure  reading.  No  sports,  no  special
interest hobby  magazines, no entertainment gossip rags. The guy obviously  read  a  great  deal,
but only about current events, politics and religion.
“We may be dealing with the world’s most boring human,” she quipped.
Daniel just looked at her with a somber expression. “Assuming he’s human,” he said.
Susan’s smirk vanished, and she fought off a shudder as she remembered  the events of the
previous night. “Yeah,” she said, “if.”

“Hey guys,” Jeff said, “look at this!” He handed them  a slip of paper with a date and time,
as  well  as  a  hand  written  address  in  Old  Town  Alexandria.  “What  do  think  it  means?”  he
asked.
“Only one way to find out,”  Susan  said,  committing  the  information  to  memory.  “We’ve
got until tomorrow night to find out. Until then, let’s find out what else we have here.”
Both Jeff and Daniel visibly deflated, but they kept sifting through the pile.
 
As soon as  Richard  Birchmere  arrived  home,  he  felt  something  was  amiss.  He’d  been  on
edge all day after dealing with Batarel, but this was different. He went over a mental list of his
surroundings, trying to figure out what was different. Then he had it.
The dog was missing. Normally his guard dog was at the door to greet him.  It  wasn’t  like
Conan to wander off. What could have happened?
Birchmere walked into the kitchen.  No, the dog wasn’t there either. He looked  at  the  dog
door connecting the kitchen to the back yard and decided to check outside.
The dog was there, sitting patiently beside  the  rubbish  bin.  When  he  saw  his  master,  the
dog let out a single bark of greeting, then waited for Birchmere to come look.
When Birchmere got there, he realized the bin was empty. He knew he had put some trash
out, but the  collectors  didn’t  come  until  the  end  of  the  week.  “Where  did  it  go?”  he  mused
aloud. The dog obviously couldn’t answer the question, but it had posed it. With the question
posed, Birchmere knew where to look for the answer.
He walked back  inside  the  house  and  up  to  the  study.  The  room  was  reminiscent  of  the
plushly appointed parlor he and his associates used to discipline the arrogant upstart Batarel. In
the corner was a television screen and a sophisticated control panel. He sat down.
The television connected to a network of security cameras  spread  throughout  and  outside
of the house. Birchmere switched to the camera monitoring the back yard. He stopped the tape
and started running it backwards at high speed.
There.
He froze the tape and stared, amazed, at the image captured there. Perhaps Batarel  wasn’t
quite as incompetent as he  appeared.  On  the  screen  was  a  crystal  clear  image  of  Daniel  Cho
and his reporter friend, raiding the rubbish bin. Birchmere didn’t think they’d garner anything
useful, but the fact that they’d been there at all made it clear he’d underestimated Cho by a fair
margin.
He would have to be certain not to make that mistake again.
 
Preparations

« ^ » 
The  address  in  Old  Town  was  a  warehouse.  Jeff  parked  the  Winnebago  and  let  Daniel  and
Susan out  to  look  it  over  while  it  was  still  light  out.  They  had  no  idea  when  Birchmere  and
company would be there the next day to set up, so they all figured it best to reconnoiter while
they could.
It was a large gray building with metal siding. Railroad tracks ran right past it, and a metal
staircase led up to the roof.
“What a dump,” Daniel said.
“I wonder what they do,” Susan asked, “that they’d need a building this big?”
“Who knows? I guess we find out tomorrow night. How do you want to work this?”
Susan  walked  over  to  the  front  doors  and  peeked  inside  the  small  plexiglass  windows.
“Figure we break in tonight, hide behind one of those crates and wait for them  to show. A lot
of investigative reporting is waiting, and—”
Susan looked up and noticed that Daniel wasn’t listening any more. In fact, he wasn’t even
anywhere near her. He was walking briskly over the staircase on the side of the building.
“No  good,”  he  called  over  his  shoulder.  “After  what  you’ve  seen  so  far,  you  don’t  think
they’ll secure the area? Whatever Birchmere, Rockport and their buddies have in the works, I
don’t think they want anyone to know about it.”
He looked over at the ladder on the side of the building. “Hang on.”
Daniel walked over to the ladder and started to climb.  When  he  got  to  the  top,  he  found
exactly what he was looking for. Roughly in the  center  of  the  roof  was  a  skylight,  about  two
feet  square.  “There’s  a  skylight  up  here,”  he  shouted  down  to  Susan  as  he  descended  the
ladder. “I can go up on the roof and listen in.”
“With a broken arm? You’re out of your mind!”
“Who better? I have experience climbing around buildings, and besides, you need to be in
the van with Jeff in case something happens.”
Susan would have none of it, and got in Daniel’s face, arms akimbo. “Says who?”
“Look at it this way,” Daniel said, smiling nervously. “If anything happens to me, you can
still  get  the  story  out.  We’ll  get  some  walkie-talkies  and  I’ll  relay  everything  I  see  and  hear
down to you in the van. First sign of trouble,  you  guys  get  the  hell  out  of  here.  Don’t  worry
about me,” he grinned, “I’ve dealt with these things before.”
“And the last one broke your arm and almost killed you!” Susan shouted. “If you think I’m
going to just sit in the van and let you—”
“Uh, kids?” Jeff called from the Winnebago. “Can we continue this somewhere a little less
public?”
Daniel and Susan stared at each other in silence for a moment.
“He’s right,” Daniel said. “We’ve got a lot to do in the next twenty-four hours, and we can
continue this discussion later. Just keep in mind what  we’ve  seen  those  things  do  before  you

rush in to confront them, okay?”
Susan answered by turning brusquely on her heel and striding for the Winnebago. Daniel
shrugged his shoulders and followed her.
 
Batarel  wasn’t  stupid.  He  was  well  aware  of  the  meeting  coming  up,  a  meeting  every
demon in the mid-Atlantic region was expected to attend. He also knew that if he  attended  it
openly, he’d be captured and punished for disobeying his order to relocate.
Just the same, he had to go. It was too good an opportunity to pass up.  If  he  was  to  truly
help  his  people,  raise  them  out  of  the  bureaucratic  stalemate  they  were  in,  he  had  to  know
what was going on. Intelligence gathering  was  the  crucial  key  to  any  victory.  Even  though  it
meant risking capture, even if it meant putting his search for Cho and  that  reporter  aside  for
the  moment  (truth  to  tell,  he  had  no  idea  where  they  were  anyway),  he  had  to  be  at  that
meeting.
He had to go.
 
“You’re out of your freaking mind!” Susan shouted.
She,  Daniel and Jeff were in a motel room for the night on Jeff’s credit  card.  She  was  still
trying to talk some sense into Daniel, but it wasn’t doing any good.
And Jeff wasn’t helping. “He’s right, Susan, you know he is.  You  have  to  be  down  in  the
Winnebago with me. If we do learn anything about what these things are, you’re the only one
anybody’s gonna believe.”
“It’s because I’m a woman, isn’t it? You two think that this is some sort of boy’s club—”
“No, Susan,” Daniel said quietly. “It’s because you’re a reporter.”
Susan glared at him, but it was a softer glare than a moment before.
“Jeff’s right. If we get a story out of this, you’re the one to tell it. You’re too valuable to risk.
I’ll be at the skylight with the walkie-talkies, and you’ll take down every word. You won’t miss
out on any of the fun.”
“Fun? Was breaking your arm fun? Think about what they’ve  done  to  you  Daniel.  Think
hard. Do you really think you’re up to this? Have you considered what will happen if you get
caught?”
Daniel was silent for a long moment.  “Yes. That’s why I have to do this. I have to find out
what they are, why they’re doing this to me. I have to, not have someone else tell me. I thought
you’d understand that.”
Susan stood speechless and her face softened. So  that  was  it.  “Yes,  Daniel,  I  understand.”
She took a deep breath. “But if you see the first sign of trouble—”
“I’m outta there.”
As Jeff sat silent but grinning smugly at them,  Susan breathed an inner sigh  of  relief.  She

was concerned about Daniel’s safety, but she had another reason to hope this went off without
a hitch. She had no real proof, but she knew she was knocking on the door of the biggest story
of her career.
She wanted to make sure they all lived long enough to report it.
 
Birchmere stormed into his outer office at the Social Security Administration, then through
the door to his inner office without a word, his attitude knocking his secretary back  in her seat.
She’d  seen  him  like  this  on  occasion,  and  she  knew  better  than  to  say  anything.  Her  boss
wasn’t the easiest guy in the world to get along with. Lately his moods had gotten even worse,
even though his workload hadn’t changed significantly. He never talked about his personal life,
so she had no idea what the problem was.
In  the  seclusion  of  his  inner  office,  Zagam,  the  demon  going  by  the  human  identity  of
Richard Birchmere, was furious.
Batarel hadn’t reported in to his new assignment. With  everything  that  was  going  on,  the
last thing he needed was some reckless rogue mucking  up the works. Zagam fell  heavily  into
the  plush  chair  behind  his  desk.  He  glanced  absently  at  the  paperwork  on  his  desk,  then
dismissed it. He  would  have  plenty  of  time  for  the  affairs  of  humans  later.  For  now,  he  had
more important things to attend to. He reached for the phone, his secure line.
 
Daniel, Jeff and Susan sat around the table in the Winnebago as Susan explained her  plan
for the use of the electronic equipment in front of her.
“Daniel had a good idea about the walkie-talkies,” she said, “but I think this will work even
better.”
She  picked  up  an  expensive  video  camera.  “I  got  this  from  a  friend  at  WDCA.  It’s
lightweight, so Daniel shouldn’t  have  any  trouble  using  it  one  handed.  It  sends  the  signal  to
this receiver, here,” she said, holding up a small black box. “It then feeds into this VCR so we
get  everything  on  tape  and  can  view  it  real-time.  We  might  even  get  the  chance  to  identify
some of the ones we haven’t seen yet.”
“How many of these critters you figure there’ll be?” Jeff asked.
“No  idea,”  Daniel  said.  “We  don’t  know  how  highly  placed  Birchmere  is  in  their
organization. This could just be a weekly status report. On the other hand, he lives pretty well
by human standards, very well compared to Rockport, so maybe his involvement means this is
a major gathering. We’ll find out tonight.”
“In any case, I want you to be extra careful to stay out of sight,” Susan said.
Daniel grinned roguishly. “Yes, ma’am.”
“And  quiet,”  she  continued,  ignoring  Daniel’s  levity.  “We  don’t  know  how  well  these
things can hear, but if their senses are anything like their strength or toughness—”
“All right, Susan, we get it,” Daniel said.

“Just  be  careful,”  Susan  said  as  she  turned  away  from  Daniel  and  started  preparing  the
gear. “Jeff and I will be in the van.”
Susan didn’t know if Daniel fully realized what they were doing. She’d always  thought  of
herself as a strong, independent woman, but after that night in the  motel  those  things  scared
her,  truly  frightened  her  to  the  bone.  She’d  done  this  style  of  investigation  at  college,  even
embarrassed  one  corrupt  professor  into  retirement,  but  she  had  never  spied  on  immortal
monsters with the political connections to ruin someone’s life. She knew Daniel was so positive
and upbeat because he was active and useful again, but she hoped that didn’t overshadow his
caution.
“Hey, buck up, Susan,” Daniel said. “Everything will be fine.”
She tried very hard to believe him.
They arrived at the warehouse early that afternoon. Susan and Jeff set up a block  and a half
away  while  Daniel  waited  on  the  roof,  camera  at  the  ready.  They  had  escape  routes  and
rendezvous prepared, as well as contingency plans should something go wrong. Susan excelled
at that sort of planning, and Jeff’s military experience was also a plus. By five o’clock, when the
first of the demons’ cars approached the building, they were ready and began to film.
They just weren’t quite prepared for what they would see.
 
The Meeting
« ^ » 
The first of them arrived singly and in pairs. They parked their cars on side streets and walked
casually to the warehouse. The first one to reach the building  unlocked  the  door  and  they  all
filed in. Daniel had already opened the skylight slightly, and he could hear them  quite clearly,
even  if  he  didn’t  understand  a  word  they  said.  They  were  speaking  a  language  Daniel  had
never heard. It sounded a little like Latin, but it was harsher, more guttural.
Since he couldn’t decipher what they were saying, Daniel panned around the warehouse. It
was  square,  about  a  hundred  feet  on  a  side.  It  was  clean  and  well  kept,  with  several  large
wooden packing crates stacked against the wall opposite the door. Just to the right of the door
was a large forklift  and  a  stack  of  wooden  palettes.  Most  of  the  warehouse  floor  was  empty,
however, and it was there that people stood and talked as more of their number filed in.
Most of them  were dressed in suits, but a few were clad only in jeans and T-shirts. All the
races  of  humanity  were  represented,  and  they  also  varied  greatly  in  height  and  build.  After
watching a few dozen of them enter and mill about, Daniel finally saw one he recognized.
“English, please!” Birchmere shouted as he stormed into the warehouse.
Most of them  bowed their heads to him in deference and several of them  muttered,  “Yes,
Zagam.”
“Lord  Beelzebub  will  be  here  any  minute,”  Birchmere  (Zagam?)  continued.  “Would  you

have him hear you speaking the ancient tongue and not that of your assigned location? You all
know the penalty for speaking the ancient tongue.”
Most of them were cowed at this, but a few of them  glared at Birchmere in open defiance.
Nevertheless, they spoke English from that point on.
“Zagam!”  one  of  them  called  out,  striding  confidently  up  to  Birchmere.  “Why  has  this
meeting been called? What’s so important to drag Lord  Beelzebub  all  the  way  here?”  Several
others expressed their interest in Birchmere’s answer.
Birchmere stood up a little straighter, obviously trying to look every bit the authority figure
the others took him to be. “I have not been in contact personally with Lord Beelzebub, but the
impression I got was that Satan himself was displeased with something.”
“Indeed,” rang out a deep baritone voice from the entrance.
Daniel panned over and found the source of the  voice,  the  largest  man  he  had  ever  seen.
The man stood nearly seven feet tall, an  expensive  Italian  suit  draping  his  muscular  frame  in
black. His head was bald, the lack of hair throwing the rough crags of his face into sharp relief.
The white of his shirt stood out against his deep olive Mediterranean complexion. The  instant
he  entered  the  warehouse,  all  the  others,  Zagam  included,  dropped  to  one  knee  and  bowed
their heads to him.
“Rise,” Beelzebub said, and they did. “You are  correct,  Zagam,  Satan  is  not  pleased.  Your
progress reports have not been inspiring as of late. In fact, the angels are on the cusp of gaining
dominance in this, the most powerful and influential of human nations. I would know why.”
Zagam stepped forward  and  nervously  cleared  his  throat.  “The  answers  to  your  question
are complex, my Lord—”
“I’ll tell you why, then!” a voice rang out from the back  of the  warehouse.  Daniel  panned
over to see the man he knew as Floyd Rockport striding forward.
“Batarel?” Beelzebub mused.
“My Lord, pay no attention!” Zagam said, rushing to hold back  Batarel. “This rebel knows
nothing. He’s already defied reassignment—”
“I’ve read your report. Let him speak.”
“My Lord!” Zagam protested, only to be silenced by Beelzebub’s gaze.
Batarel made his way to the front of the crowd. “We are making a grave mistake, my Lord,”
he  said.  “Listen  to  yourselves.  Progress  reports!  Schedules!  We’ve  adopted  the  humans’
bureaucracy. Instead of taking our rightful place  and  dominating  mankind,  we  have  become
them!”
“That is enough!” Zagam screamed. “You insubordinate cur! You have no idea what it takes
to fulfill our destiny. You can’t even follow simple directions!”
Zagam turned and faced Beelzebub. “My Lord, pay him no mind. His disobedience aside,
everything is still going according to schedule. I project—”
“Enough.” Beelzebub said, quietly, and the room fell completely silent.

“Batarel’s disobedience is not the problem,” Beelzebub went  on.  “Indeed,  insolent  though
he may be, Batarel has a point.”
“My Lord, you can’t be serious—”
Beelzebub spun and crossed the distance to Zagam in the blink of an eye. “Can’t I?”
Zagam had no response.
“This  is  exactly  what  Satan  was  concerned  about.  That  we’re  getting  soft.  That  we’ve
adopted too  many  human  ways.  That  some  among  us,”  he  looked  pointedly  at  Zagam,  “are
more interested in maintaining their own little empires than furthering our cause.”
“Ridiculous!” Zagam exclaimed. “Nothing’s changed—”
“Precisely,”  Beelzebub  said.  “We  are  the  embodiment  of  chaos,  yet  we’ve  stopped
changing. We are change. Some  among us have forgotten that. It’s time you were reminded.”
He reached his hand towards Zagam.
“My Lord! No!”
Almost too fast for Daniel  to  see,  Beelzebub  thrust  his  hand  deep  into  Zagam’s  chest.  As
Zagam writhed in agony, Beelzebub pulled his hand out, clutching Zagam’s  heart.  As  Zagam
collapsed to the floor, Beelzebub threw the heart down on the warehouse floor and crushed it
under his foot.
Daniel continued filming as Zagam slowly started to rise to his knees. He was obviously in
tremendous pain, but just as obviously alive.
Beelzebub turned and faced the other demons. “This meeting is  over.”  He  walked  briskly
out of the warehouse.
Daniel had seen enough. He signaled Susan. “Got all that?” he whispered.
“Yeah,” came a quiet voice.
“Good. I’m coming in.”
“Be careful.”
Daniel packed up his gear and slinked away from the skylight. He walked to the ladder at
the edge of the roof and started  to  climb  down.  No  sooner  did  he  set  foot  on  the  first  metal
rung than he froze.
There  were  two  demons  walking  directly  beneath  him,  talking  quietly.  Daniel  couldn’t
make out what they were saying, but they seemed quite agitated. Please don’t look up, Daniel
thought as they passed beneath him and turned the corner, out of sight. Once they were gone,
he slowly and carefully descended and made his way to the rendezvous point.
By  the  time  he  reached  the  Winnebago,  his  nerves  were  shot.  Though  he  kept  looking
behind him as he moved, seeing nothing amiss, he couldn’t shake the feeling that he was being
followed.
As he  reached  the  door,  it  flew  open,  Susan  grabbed  him  by  the  jacket  and  pulled  him
inside. “Go!” she shouted at Jeff. The vehicle was already rolling.

Their mission was a success.
 
After  checking  into  a  nondescript  motel,  Daniel,  Jeff  and  Susan  reviewed  the  tape.  The
recording wasn’t great, and the focus was fuzzy in spots, but the audio was clear and the attack
on Zagam by Beelzebub was captured in vivid detail. Daniel and Susan nearly gagged and even
Jeff, a combat veteran, looked distinctly uncomfortable. When it was over, Jeff switched off the
VCR.
“Holy shit.”
“Yeah,” Daniel said, “no foolin’.”
“So  what  we  have  here,”  Susan  said,  her  voice  coldly  clinical,  “is  a  group  of  immortals
posing as demons of biblical literature.”
“Or they actually are the demons themselves,” Jeff added.
“That’s  impossible,”  Susan  said.  “You’re  saying  the  Beelzebub  we  saw  there  was  the  real
Beelzebub?”
“Why not?” Jeff replied. “We know they’re immortal, they’ve certainly exerted considerable
influence over your life, why couldn’t they be the real thing?”
“Well, they hardly fit the most commonly  accepted description,” Susan said. “No  fire  and
brimstone, no great leathery wings or barbed tails.”
“I have a theory,” Daniel said.
“Yes?”
“I  think  these  aren’t  so  much  the  creatures  of  myth,  but  the  real  life  inspiration  of  that
myth.”
Jeff and Susan looked blankly at him.
“Think  about  it.  Thousands  of  years  ago,  these  things,  with  their  strength,  their
invulnerability,  would  have  been  far  more  impressive  than  they  are  now,  and  they’re  still
damned impressive today. I think we saw real demons, the creatures  that  inspired  the  myths
Milton and Dante wrote about.”
“If that’s true,” Susan asked, “where are the angels?”
“Oh, we get around,” came a voice from the doorway.
Daniel, Jeff and Susan spun to face a tall, handsome middle-aged guy with tousled  brown
hair, jeans and a battered bomber  jacket. He leaned against  the  doorframe  as  if  he  had  every
right  in  the  world  to  be  there.  “I’d  introduce  myself  by  my  current  human  identity,  but  I
doubt I’ll have need to use that name much longer. Better you know me by my true name.
“I am the Archangel Uriel.”
 

Uriel
« ^ » 
Instead of waiting for the humans to regain their composure, the angel simply walked into the
room  and  sat  down.  “My  associates  have  been  watching  the  three  of  you  quite  closely,  ever
since Daniel visited Batarel’s apartment. We’ve seen what you’ve seen, know what you  know.
I’m about to do something unprecedented in the history of my kind. We have decided the time
to keep our ancient secret  has  passed.  You’ve  already  surmised  much  of  the  truth.  I’ve  been
sent to explain the rest.”
“Why?” Susan asked.
“Because it’s time. It’s time you know the truth and time for us to  step  out  into  the  light.
And because you’re damn close to figuring it out on your own anyway.”
“Figuring out what?” Daniel asked.
“Who and what we really are, of course. None of us can remember  how it all began, just as
none of you can remember  being born.  We have existed at least as long as human civilization,
over one hundred thousand years, living among you and guiding your way.
“For ages, we were united in our goal of protecting and guiding mankind.  We have a need,
you see, to do what’s best  for  you.  We  don’t  understand  it  ourselves.  This  unity  was  broken
roughly five thousand years ago, at the time of the Fall.”
Daniel’s mind was reeling. “The Fall? As in the biblical Fall?”
“The  real  event  upon  which  your  myths  are  based,  yes.  One  of  our  most  powerful  and
influential was Satan. Over time he began to question our purpose, to think himself better than
the humans he served. He eventually gave up even  the  pretense  of  helping  humans  and  said
our  proper  place  was  dominating  humanity,  our  inferiors.  So  great  was  his  influence  that
roughly half our number  defected to his cause. They decided to prey on humanity, to  torture
and subjugate you. Thus began a war that continues to today, a war in which you got caught in
the middle.”
“So what are you going to do?” Susan asked.
“Me?” Uriel replied. “I’ve done what I’m going to do. The question is,” he said as he got up
and headed for the door, “what are you going to do?” He left.
“Wait!” Daniel shouted as he ran after Uriel, but it was no use.
The angel was gone.
“So what the hell do we do now?” Daniel asked.
They  had  all  left  the  motel  room  and  fanned  out,  looking  for  Uriel,  but  the  angel  was
nowhere to be found. Dejected,  they  returned  to  the  room  and  tried  to  assess  what  had  just
happened.
“This  is  heavy,”  Jeff  said.  “I  mean,  if  we  believe  what  just  happened,  that  was  Uriel,  the

angel that stood at the gates of Eden with the flaming sword.”
“If that myth has any basis in truth,” Daniel added.
Susan  got  up  to  pace.  “So  since  the  dawn  of  human  history  there  has  been  this  race  of
immortals living alongside us, guiding us, protecting us—”
“Preying on us, manipulating us,” Daniel added.
“We don’t know that,” Susan said.
“Whether they have or not,” Jeff said, “the demons are the threat. Now that we know what
they are, how can we force them into the open?”
“We’ve got the tape,” Daniel suggested.
“A good start, but we need more than that,” Susan said. “Video and photographic evidence
is too easy to fake these days. We need hard proof. Documentation.”
Daniel perked up. “I have an idea.”
 
“You’re developing a penchant for this sort of thing, aren’t you?” Susan whispered.
“Shhh.” After stopping to rent a car on Jeff’s credit card, they were again  down  the  street
from Zagam’s house. They watched as a spotless  gunmetal  Mercedes  came  up  the  street  and
pulled into the driveway. Zagam, still clutching and rubbing his chest, got out  of  the  car  and
walked into the house. Susan watched him  with  binoculars,  and  scribbled  down  the  code  to
his door alarm.
“Okay, he’s in. Do it,” Daniel said.
Susan  picked  up  her  cellular  phone,  dialed  Zagam’s  number  and  handed  the  phone  to
Daniel.
The demon answered the phone after two rings. “Yes?” he hissed.
“You put on quite a show tonight, Birchmere,” Daniel  said,  “or  should  I  call  you  Zagam?
You really put your heart into it.”
“Who is this?” the demon demanded.
“My name is Daniel Cho. We’ve never been properly introduced, but  I’m  the  guy  Batarel
was after.”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Zagam sputtered.
“Man, Beelzebub was right,” Daniel chided, smiling at Susan. “You don’t catch on very fast
to a change in conditions, do you?”
Zagam made exasperated noises.
“In case you haven’t caught on yet, I was  there  tonight,  at  your  little  shindig.  So  was  my
video camera. The camera loves you, by the way. I got the whole thing, including Beelzebub’s
rather inventive discipline, in living color.”

Daniel’s  voice  hardened.  “You  and  your  kind  are  finished,  Zagam.  Once  you  can’t  hide
among us any more, we’ll hunt you down and destroy you.
“My, look at the time. It’s getting late. I have to go now, but I just  figured  I’d  call  and  let
you know that your kind’s free lunch is officially over.
“See you soon.” Daniel hung up.
“Little rough with him, weren’t you?” Susan asked. “He’s had a rough day.”
“Ah,  kids?”  Jeff  spoke  up.  “Aren’t  you  getting  a  little  carried  away?  You  guys  already
forgotten what we’re up against?”
Susan and Daniel sobered  immediately.  Daniel  started  to  answer,  but  Susan  cut  him  off.
“He’s moving,” she said.
“I’m gone,” Daniel said, and he rushed out the door. Susan watched him run to the rental
car, and then turned to watch Zagam back out of his driveway. As the demon drove down the
street and out of sight, Daniel followed at a discrete distance. Their taillights faded out and they
were gone.
Turning to Jeff, she picked up one of the walkie-talkies. “Keep an eye out,”  she  said,  then
she too left the Winnebago, running across the street to Zagam’s house.
Warily,  Susan  edged  up  to  Zagam’s  front  door.  Consulting  the  number  she’d  hastily
scribbled down minutes before, she keyed in the combination to the home security system and
held her breath as she watched the light change from red to green.
She opened the door and cautiously stepped inside. The house was dark and cavernous. A
living room or den was directly ahead of her, filled with bookshelves, and a staircase led up to
her  left.  She  climbed  the  stairs  to  find  another  den,  lined  wall  to  wall  with  bookshelves.
Adjoining were a kitchen and dining room (empty, like Daniel said) and another short flight of
stairs.
At the top of the stairs was a short hallway with doors on either side. In the second door to
the right, Susan found what she was looking for.
Zagam’s office was what should have been  the  master  bedroom.  While  one  wall  held  the
seemingly  requisite  bookshelves,  the  other  three  housed  a  massive  U-shaped  computer  and
video surveillance console. She sat down and turned the computer on.
While  she  waited  for  it  to  boot  up,  she  turned  on  the  walkie-talkie.  “Susan  to  Jeff,”  she
whispered. “You there?”
“Read you loud and clear, Susan,” Jeff drawled from the speaker.
“I found the computer room. I’m trying for access now. Let me know the second  you  see
anything.”
“Gotcha.”
Susan turned her attention back  to the PC and found it asking for a password. Damn! she
thought.  She  should  have  known  that  with  all  the  other  security  Zagam  wouldn’t  leave  his
computer unprotected, but she had allowed herself to hope anyway. She already lucked out by

guessing Steve’s password, and she could only do that because she knew so much  about  him
that she could guess his likely choices. This demon she knew practically nothing about except
that  he  was  an  unimaginative  career  bureaucrat,  went  by  the  human  identity  of  Richard
Birchmere and his true demonic name was—
Susan’s hands flew to the keyboard and she typed the name “Zagam”.
The login screen disappeared and Zagam’s desktop lay before her, ripe for plundering.
She was in.
 
The Burden of Proof
« ^ » 
Daniel  tried  to  follow  Zagam  as  closely  as  possible  without  being  noticed.  The  demon  was
headed downtown, probably towards the Social Security building.
Daniel was still a little riled over Jeff’s question. He knew exactly what  he  was  up  against,
and  that  was  the  best  part.  For  the  first  time  in  what  felt  like  years,  Daniel  knew  what  was
going  on,  what  needed  to  be  done.  Granted,  what  needed  to  be  done  was  to  eradicate  an
immortal race  of  beings  that  had  preyed  on  mankind  for  centuries,  but  at  least  he  knew  he
wasn’t going mad.
Trying  not  to  follow  too  close,  Daniel  trailed  Zagam  deeper  into  the  labyrinthine,  traffic
circle infested maze that was downtown Washington D.C.
Zagam  pulled  up  first  at  a  red  light,  Daniel  two  car  lengths  behind.  With  no  warning,
Zagam lurched across the intersection to a blare of horns.
“Damn!” Daniel shouted as he too leaned on  his  horn.  He  should  have  known  a  creature
that had been around as long as Zagam could spot, and easily lose, a tail. As soon as the car in
front  of  him  was  clear,  Daniel  sped  down  the  streets  of  Washington,  headed  for  the  Social
Security building.
As he pulled up in front of the granite building, Zagam’s car was nowhere to be seen. The
demon wasn’t there, but Daniel thought he had a pretty good idea where Zagam was going. He
hit the gas and sped back the way he came.
 
Susan  had  hit  paydirt.  Almost  everything  she  could  want  was  in  Zagam’s  computer.
Dossiers of thousands of angels and demons, complete histories, current identities, everything.
Susan pulled an optical disk out of her bag and started the transfer. There was a lot of data, and
the  copy  would  take  quite  a  while.  She  started  poking  around  the  room  for  anything
interesting.
As she expected based on Daniel’s account of Batarel’s apartment and their examination of
Zagam’s  trash,  the  books  on  the  shelves  were  numerous,  but  limited  in  scope.  The

overwhelming majority were either world history or theology.
On the top shelf to the far left was a dusty, leather bound tome so  seemingly  ancient  that
any print on the binding had long since faded from sight. As the progress indicator on the file
copy inched slowly towards completion, Susan took the book down and opened it.
 
Outside and down the street, Jeff kept vigilant with his binoculars. Daniel had been gone a
long time, and it seemed like he’d waited forever just since the last time Susan checked in.
Though Jeff was  still  serious  and  committed  to  help,  the  reality  of  what  they  were  doing
was making him increasingly uneasy. He’d come to accept the idea that the creatures they were
plotting  against  were  the  actual  demons  of  legend,  and  while  it  strengthened  his  resolve,  it
terrified him at the same time.
As Jeff panned back  up the street, he caught sight of the now familiar gunmetal Mercedes
and almost dropped his binoculars. He scrambled for the walkie-talkie.
“Susan, come in,” hissed Jeff’s voice over the tinny speaker.
Susan hurriedly shoved the book into her bag and keyed the walkie-talkie. “Yes?”
“He’s back. I can see his car coming up the street.”
“But, Daniel—”
“Is nowhere to be seen. Get out of there. Now.”
Susan  turned  her  eyes  to  the  computer  screen.  The  copy  was  almost,  but  not  quite,
finished.  Susan  spared  an  anxious  look  towards  the  door,  then  picked  up  the  walkie-talkie
again.
“I can’t leave yet,” she whispered. “It’s not done.”
“You don’t have a choice, kiddo. He’s pulling into the driveway. Get out,  right  now.  Take
the back door. I mean it.”
Susan  turned  off  the  walkie-talkie  and  sat  down  facing  the  computer.  The  progress
indicator bar read 98% and was moving too slowly to discern.
Outside, she heard a car door slam.
99%.
Susan looked at the window, above her and to the right. It faced the street, and there was a
small section of roof beneath it, leading down to a ten-foot drop over the driveway.
She heard the front door open.
100%. The computer was silent once more.
“Conan!” she heard Zagam shout.
Ripping the disc out of the computer and slamming it  into  her  bag,  Susan  got  up  on  the
computer desk and tried to open the window.

It wouldn’t budge.
“Here, boy,” Zagam called, sounding much  closer this time. Susan wrenched  the  window
with every ounce of force she had.
It moved. Only an inch or so at first, then it flew open as the last of the dirt and corrosion
that held it shut broke free.
Susan threw her bag out the window, then followed it as quickly as she could. After a brief
pause to collect it outside, she leapt into space.
Landing on the hard, concrete driveway brought a sharp, stabbing pain to her right  ankle
and bright spots to her  eyes.  Shaking  it  off  as  much  as  she  could,  she  limped  away  into  the
darkness and was out of sight when the light came on in Zagam’s computer room.
 
Daniel met up with the Winnebago at the  designated  rendezvous,  a  supermarket  parking
lot. When he walked in the door, he found Jeff and Susan in jubilant conversation.
“This is fantastic!” Jeff exclaimed.
“Isn’t it, though?” Susan answered smugly.
Daniel walked over to where they were and looked over Jeff’s shoulder at Susan’s notebook
computer. It was cycling through a database of faces, alongside columns of text. Names, aliases,
histories. Everything they needed to track down any demon in the world.
“Incredible,” Daniel whispered.
“Pretty cool, huh?” Susan smiled. She got up and limped across the cabin. “And that’s not
even the best part.”
“What happened to your leg?” Daniel asked.
Susan shrugged. “I had to jump out of Zagam’s house. Can’t let you hog all the action.”
She  picked up the ancient leather book  she  found  in  Zagam’s  study.  “This,”  she  said,  “is
the cool part.” She handed the book to Daniel.
Daniel unlatched the book and opened it, noting that the book  was very, very old. The text
was a dialect of Latin he couldn’t fully decipher.
“What is it?”
Susan  sat  back  down  next  to  the  computer.  “It  appears  to  be  a  text  written  by  a  monk
around  500  A.D.  It’s  a  detailed  history  of  angels  and  demons,  and  it  jibes  much  more  with
what Uriel told us than what we learned in the Bible.”
“You can read this?”
“I studied a lot of languages in school. It’s amazing how knowing other languages increases
your ability to communicate in English. It’s a very uncommon  dialect of Latin, but I can make
out most of it.”

Daniel handed the book back to Susan. “So read.”
 
Zagam  was  incensed.  In  the  thousands  of  years  of  life  he’d  seen,  he  couldn’t  remember
having a day this  bad.  After  returning  from  the  wild  goose  chase  Cho  had  coaxed  him  into,
he’d discovered that it had all been a front for that damned reporter to raid his house. Of all the
days for the damn dog to disappear!
He found his computer on and the database accessed. He could only assume that Cho and
his friends now knew everything. Zagam had to find a way to make sure it didn’t get out any
further. But if he didn’t know where Cho was, what could he do?
Zagam picked up the phone and  dialed  a  number  with  a  San  Francisco  area  code.  There
was  a  demon  assigned  there  that  owed  him  a  favor  dating  back  to  when  they  were  both
stationed in Salem.
If he couldn’t find Daniel Cho, he could do the next best thing.
 
Susan read well into the predawn hours of the morning. The book  recounted the history of
a race of immortal beings, much  as had been explained by Uriel. Once united, the angels split
in a civil war instigated by the archangel Satan.
The war dragged on for centuries, neither side gaining nor losing much ground. There were
rules of  engagement,  and  much  care  was  taken  to  avoid  actually  killing  one  another.  As  the
sides were separated  only  by  ideology,  a  simple  change  of  heart  could  theoretically  make  an
angel into a demon or vice versa. Neither side wanted to waste an irreplaceable potential ally.
Finally,  as  the  sunlight  began  to  stream  into  the  windows  of  the  camper  and  Susan
continued  her  translation  of  the  history  of  the  war,  Daniel,  Susan  and  Jeff  found  what  they
were looking for.
“The  demon  Baraqel  had  committed  many  atrocities  against  mankind,  and  with  a  heavy
heart Michael thusly decreed that Baraqel be destroyed.
“A dozen  angels  stalked  Baraqel  as  ten  winters  passed.  Finally  cornering  the  demon  in  a
ravine, the angels set upon him with swords.
“Baraqel fought fiercely,  and  his  wounds  healed  almost  as  quickly  as  they  were  inflicted.
The  angels  fought  day  and  night,  giving  no  quarter,  until  near  the  sunset  of  the  third  day,
Baraqel tired and fell. His wounds no longer healed quickly enough, and the angels cut him to
pieces.  The  pieces  were  separated,  burned  and  the  ashes  scattered  to  the  four  winds,  and
Baraqel was no more.
“Their  task  completed,  the  angels  each  cut  off  one  of  their  own  fingers  to  honor  the
memory of their fallen brother and former comrade, Baraqel.”
Susan closed the book and put it down.
“They can be killed.”
“I’ll be damned,” Jeff breathed.

“We finally have a weapon,” Daniel said. “Now we just have to figure out a way to use it.”
 
Changes
« ^ » 
Daniel woke later to the early afternoon sunlight streaming through the window of  the  motel
room the three of them had rented. As he rubbed  his eyes and sat up, he couldn’t believe that
it had only been twenty-four hours since he’d climbed on top of that warehouse in Old Town.
It was amazing how much life could change in a single day.
He got up, stretched, and walked over to the bathroom.  Susan  was  out  cold  on  the  other
bed, and Jeff snored softly on the couch. As Daniel closed the bathroom  door, he took survey
of what he saw in the mirror. He had aged. There were lines around his eyes that weren’t there
two weeks ago, and he could swear he saw gray hairs  on  a  head  that  hadn’t  even  seen  thirty
years yet. Stress, he thought. Well, a lot of that’s about to turn around.
As  he  walked  back  into  the  motel  room,  he  was  startled  by  a  knock  on  the  door.  He
checked his  watch;  it  was  one  thirty.  Maybe  they  missed  checkout?  As  Susan  stirred  awake
and Jeff continued snoring, Daniel walked to the door and looked through the peephole.
There was no one there.
Cautiously,  Daniel  opened  the  door  and  looked  out,  squinting  into  the  bright  sunlight.
Before he could react, a strong hand appeared out of nowhere and lifted him off his feet.
“No, no, no! Terrible! Never do that!” Uriel admonished Daniel before putting him  down.
The angel strode past him into the motel room and knocked  Jeff’s  feet  out  of  the  way  before
taking a seat on the couch.
After looking out the door and seeing no one else, Daniel closed the door and turned to face
Uriel. “How did you find us?”
“It  wasn’t  that  hard,”  Uriel  answered,  reclining  comfortably  as  Jeff  sat  next  to  him  and
struggled to pull himself together. “I placed a tracking device on your camper last night before
I spoke to you.”
“You can do that?” Susan asked.
“Just because I’m older than recorded human history doesn’t mean I’m  limited  to  archaic
means. We angels are  every  bit  as  technically  adept  as  humans,  if  not  more  so.  We  keep  up
with the times. And so do the demons. If it was this easy for me to track you down, it won’t be
that much harder for Zagam.”
Uriel had the humans’ undivided attention.
“Which brings me to my reason for dropping in on you today. It has come to my attention
that you raided Zagam’s house last night, and made off with quite a bit of potentially damaging
information. Bravo. Smug bastard’s had it coming for centuries.

“Still,  that  said,  it  doesn’t  change  the  fact  that  you  three  are  now  the  most  endangered
creatures  on  the  planet.  Before  last  night,  you  were  a  nuisance  to  the  demons,  a  thorn  in
Zagam’s side, nothing more. Zagam isn’t that popular, so many of the demons probably found
you  a  source  of  amusement.  Mortals  that  learn  our  secret  aren’t  quite  as  rare  as  you  might
think,  but  there’s  usually  not  much  they  can  do  about  it,  short  of  getting  themselves
committed.
“All  that  has  changed.  Now,  you  three  are  a  legitimate  threat.  You  alone  can  prove  our
existence to the world  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  And,  as  you  probably  also  know,  human
weapons  technology  is  finally  powerful  enough  to  end  even  our  lives.  Zagam  and  his  fellow
demons won’t let it come to that. They will stop at nothing to prevent you from passing on the
information that you  possess.  I  had  to  shake  two  of  them  this  morning  just  so  I  could  meet
with you without leading them here.
“With all that in mind, I offer some advice. Change your appearance. Zagam will have seen
to it that every demon on the Eastern Seaboard knows what you look like. Ditch the camper.
Batarel, at least, knows it quite well, and you can’t afford to be recognized. Lastly, lie as low as
you can until you  get  that  information  out,  confirmed,  and  believed.  Wide  exposure  for  this
information is your only salvation. Once their existence and nature is exposed, the demons will
have bigger problems on their hands than  what  to  do  with  you.  Good  luck.”  He  got  up  and
walked to the door.
“Wait!” Daniel shouted.
The angel turned. “Yes?”
“What about you? What will you be doing?”
“The angels and I  will  watch,  and  act  when  the  time  is  right.  For  reasons  beyond  mortal
understanding, we can’t get involved yet, at least not  directly.  We  will  watch,  and  offer  what
little protection we can.”
“But  why  can’t  you  help  us  directly?”  Susan  asked.  “Why  can’t  you  go  public  on  your
own?”
Uriel lingered in the doorway. “Imagine, if you will, what would happen if I, in my identity
as a prominent businessman, called a press conference and confessed that it was all a front, that
I was actually an immortal protector of humanity, what they would refer to as an angel? They’d
fit me for a straight jacket on the spot. And believe me, that’s getting off easy. It wasn’t too long
ago  that  sort  of  talk  would  get  one  burned  at  the  stake  for  heresy.  Do  you  know  how  long
burns like that take to heal, even  for  one  of  us?  No,  the  revelation  about  our  existence  must
come from a third party, from a human. We will help you when and where we can. But watch
your backs.” The angel walked out the door and turned the corner.
Daniel, Jeff and Susan all rushed out the door after him, only to find Uriel had once again
vanished without a trace.
“How the heck does he do that?” Jeff asked.
 
Batarel  fumed.  Word  leaked  out  quickly  about  what  had  happened  to  Zagam,  and  from

that, that Cho had actually been at the meeting, and recorded it. It  was  more  important  than
ever that the mortal be silenced. Unfortunately, the speck  had  disappeared.  He  and  his  bitch
reporter had fallen off the face of the Earth.
He had to find them,  and stop them.  For the safety of his people and  the  sanctity  of  their
mission, Batarel had no other choice. And knowing modern  humans  as  he  did,  Batarel  knew
the perfect place to start.
 
“I wish  I  felt  better  about  this,”  Jeff  muttered,  stepping  out  of  his  camper  and  lugging  a
battered suitcase.
They were in the long-term parking lot of Dulles International Airport,  more  than  half  an
hour’s drive from the D.C.  city limits. It  was  early  evening,  and  the  sound  of  aircraft  carried
quite well in the cooling, humid air.
“I’ve told you, it makes perfect sense,” Daniel replied, the five o’clock  shadow  on  his  face
nearly as long as the shaved hair on his head. “We needed to find a place to stash your camper
and rent a car the demon’s aren’t likely to trace to us. This does both.”
“And,” Susan, now a blonde, said as she opened  the  trunk  of  their  huge  rental  sedan,  “if
anyone does spot it, all the way out here, they’ll think we skipped town.”
“I know,” Jeff grumbled, putting his suitcase gingerly  in  the  trunk.  “It’s  just  that  this  old
girl has been my home for almost nine years. I don’t like leaving her behind.”
“Hey,” Daniel said as he opened the passenger door for Jeff, “it’s not like you’ll never see it
again. In just a few more weeks, this’ll all be over, thank God.”
With one last look over his shoulder, Jeff got into the car.
 
Barely  ten  minutes  after  they  left,  Batarel’s  battered  brown  Buick  pulled  into  Dulles
International Airport.
Hours later and three thousand miles away, two demons got out of a car in San Francisco.
While one removed gas cans from the trunk, the other walked up to the front door of the Cho
Vegetarian Grocery. Ignoring the sign on the door that read “closed”, the demon grabbed  the
doorknob and simply ripped the door off its hinges.
Responding to the clatter, two Koreans in their fifties appeared from the back  room, a man
and a woman. The demon recognized them as his targets, Ronald and Delores Cho.
“What are you doing here?” Ronald demanded. “We’re closed! My God, look what you’ve
done to my door!”
Without  a  sound,  the  demon  stepped  forward,  took  Ronald’s  head  in  his  hands,  and
snapped Ronald Cho’s neck.
Delores ran screaming to the stockroom as the second demon entered and began  sloshing
gasoline over the store’s shelves and floor. The first demon followed her.

Delores was hysterical. “Please, don’t kill me,” she begged. She  frantically scrambled to the
desk  in  the  corner  and  grabbed  a  handful  of  photos  of  Daniel  and  his  sisters,  Kathy  and
Samantha. “Take what you want, but let me live. I have children. They need me.”
The demon said nothing.
Delores  began  to  rock  herself  back  and  forth.  “Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the
shadow of death,” she recited as the demon approached her, “I will fear no evil…”
The  demon  put  a  hand  gently  on  either  side  of  her  head,  twisted  sharply,  and  Daniel’s
mother lay still.
In the other room, the second demon put down his gas can and lit a match.
 
Victory and Defeat
« ^ » 
Susan had recommended a hotel in D.C. not too far from the Post offices. Just as they settled in
and  began  the  long  process  of  collating  all  their  information  into  a  presentable  format,  the
phone rang. The three of them  exchanged a look. No one was supposed  to  know  where  they
were.
“Maybe it’s the front desk,” Daniel said as he picked up the phone.
“You’ll have to do better than that, Daniel,” rang Uriel’s voice on the other end of the line.
Daniel was startled, but not really surprised. “How did you know we were here?”
“By having you followed. We’ve become  quite adept at surveillance, over  the  millennia.  It
might interest you to know that  we  also  spotted  Batarel  lurking  about  at  Dulles  shortly  after
you left, asking all kinds of questions.”
“Was he in long term parking?” Daniel asked.
“If  by  that  you  mean,  did  he  see  the  camper,  yes,  he  did.  He  doesn’t  have  the  same
resources I do, but it’s relatively  easy  for  him  to  verify  that  you  did  not  catch  a  flight  out  of
Dulles. He’s well on his way to tracking you down. And getting a  hotel  room  within  walking
distance of Miss Richardson’s newspaper was an act of dubious judgment.”
Daniel paused a moment to think. “Does this work both ways?”
“Does what work both ways?”
“Well,” Daniel began, “if you can find out all this information about the demons,  can  you
also leak information to them?”
Daniel listened for a long time to silence from the angel. Finally, Uriel answered him. “What
did you have in mind?”
 

The  next  morning  found  Jeff  and  Daniel  in  an  abandoned  warehouse  in  Crystal  City,
Arlington, just south of the Pentagon. If Uriel did what he said he’d do, Batarel would “track”
them to the warehouse by nightfall. In the meantime, they had work to do. They were rigging
numerous makeshift pipe bombs to various locations in the warehouse.
“You’re sure this will work,” Daniel said.
“Sure?” Jeff replied. “Hell no! But I think, yeah, we have a good shot.”
Jeff  paused  in  his  work  and  faced  Daniel.  “I  have  no  illusions  about  what  we’re  doing,
Daniel. We’re relying on an old man’s wartime knowledge of explosives to mine  a  warehouse
in hopes of killing an immortal  demon.  We’ll  be  lucky  if  we  don’t  blow  ourselves  up  before
Batarel ever gets here.”
“That’s chipper.”
“Well, you asked. Now shut up and hand me that wrench.”
Choking down their nerves, the men got back to work.
 
Batarel arrived at the warehouse by dusk, just as Uriel predicted. Daniel waited inside and
tried to quiet the butterflies in his stomach. For the umpteenth  time,  Daniel  reached  into  the
pockets of his jacket and grabbed his only  protection,  two  Korean  War-era  grenades  Jeff  had
given him. Jeff had briefed him on their use, but a grenade was an imprecise weapon at  best,
and Daniel hoped he wouldn’t have to use them. He didn’t want to blow himself up.
Provided the bombs  didn’t get him when they got Batarel.  After  checking  that  his  escape
route was clear, he grabbed the remote detonator and checked  Batarel’s progress. The  demon
was about to enter the mined area of the warehouse and was beginning to look discouraged.
It was showtime.
 
Batarel  was  growing  suspicious.  Cho  and  his  cronies  were  nowhere  to  be  seen.  Was  it
possible that his sources had given him false information?
“Batarel.”
The demon spun around and between two crates near the back door stood Daniel Cho.
“Where are your friends?”
“Around,” Daniel said casually.
It finally dawned on Batarel that he might  be  walking  into  a  trap.  He  looked  around  and
noticed the pipe bombs taped to crates and shelves all around him. Batarel knew exactly what
those bombs could do to flesh, even immortal flesh. “No, I—”
“Goodbye,” Daniel said.  As  he  lunged  out  the  back  door,  he  punched  the  button  on  the
detonator.
Daniel rolled to his feet outside the warehouse, his leap given distance by the concussion of

the blast. The pavement was littered with broken  glass and Daniel could see a flickering  glow
inside  the  building  from  small  fires  spawned  by  the  explosion.  He  got  up  and  walked  back
inside. He had to get confirmation.
The pipe bombs had packed a bigger punch than he expected. No structure inside was left
intact.  There  was  a  sizable  chunk  of  debris  in  the  center  of  the  warehouse,  roughly  where
Batarel stood at the instant of the explosion.
The pile began to move. “That,” it said, “hurt.”
Daniel stood his ground, frozen in place.
“You  insignificant  little  speck,”  Batarel  said,  shaking  rubble  off  his  scorched  and  tattered
shoulders. “Did you actually think you could destroy me?”
Daniel couldn’t take his eyes off of the demon. A human that had taken the same damage
would’ve been killed instantly. A human certainly wouldn’t be pulling himself to his feet  and
getting angry.
Batarel began to walk, slowly, purposefully, towards Daniel. “You’ve made the last mistake
of your worthless life, mortal.”
Daniel began backstepping and he reached into his jacket pocket for the  first  grenade.  As
he popped the pin, he began counting to himself.
Three…
Batarel was picking up speed, clenching his charred and ruined hands.
Two…
Daniel moved a step away from the door.
“One!” he shouted as he threw the grenade and leapt.
He heard a clang and a laugh as the grenade bounced past Batarel. It didn’t go off!
The next thing Daniel knew he was outside the building and being held off his feet.
“That was clever, speck,” Batarel hissed. “Pity it didn’t work.”
Up  close,  Batarel  looked  much  worse  than  Daniel  had  previously  thought.  Most  of  the
demon’s skin had either been flayed or burned off his face, and there was a gaping hole in his
chest  where  three  of  his  ribs  had  been  ripped  away.  The  smell  of  burning  flesh  was
overpowering, and Daniel couldn’t help but gag.
“Oh, I’m sorry, Daniel,” Batarel sneered, the tatters of flesh hanging from his face shaking
with his outrage. “Do I disgust you?”
Daniel reached frantically into his jacket.
“You think you’re so smart,” Batarel continued, “don’t you, mortal?”
Daniel shook his head, playing for time as he got a grip on the final grenade.
“Yes,  you  do.  I  know  you  do.  I’ve  seen  your  kind  come  and  go.  Individually,  you’re

meaningless, worthless. You think you know so much,  you think you’re so important, but the
seventy-odd years you’re limited to just isn’t enough for you to see the big picture. It’s different
for us. I’m immortal. I’ve got perspective. There’s more to this existence than you or your kind
could ever possibly comprehend.”
Batarel shook Daniel violently. “Pity you’ll never even get the chance. I will not allow you to
jeopardize our mission. Say goodnight, Daniel.”
Daniel popped the pin from the grenade with his thumb. “Goodnight, Daniel,” he hissed as
he shoved the live grenade into the space where Batarel’s ribs used to be.
“What?” Batarel said as he dropped Daniel and groped at his torso. Daniel rolled away and
hugged the ground as the demon exploded.
Daniel  raised  his  head  and  looked  at  the  aftermath.  None  of  the  charred  and  burning
chunks of flesh was larger than a softball. Batarel, the demon that destroyed his life, was gone.
Forever.
Daniel  reached  into  his  jacket  for  his  radio.  “It’s  over,”  he  said  after  he  punched  the
transmit button.
It was over.
 
Jeff and Susan picked up Daniel in the car and ran him back to the hotel before the cops or
fire department could arrive. Daniel was tired as hell, but Jeff had enough energy for all three
of them. “Didn’t I tell you, Daniel? It worked! Damn if it didn’t work!”
“Well, the bombs hurt him, but what saved my life was the other things you gave me.”
“The grenades?”
“Yeah,” Daniel said as he reclined on one of the beds and turned on a cable news network
for background noise. “The first one was a dud, but the second one was pretty damn effective.”
Daniel proceeded to tell them the details of his fight with Batarel.
“What do you think he meant by ‘the big picture’?” Susan asked.
Daniel wasn’t listening. “Shhh,” he said as he turned up the television.
“The  police  have  released  the  names  of  the  deceased  as  Ronald  and  Delores  Cho,”  the
newscaster said, “killed last night  before  someone  set  a  gasoline  fire  in  their  privately  owned
San Francisco grocery store.”
“Oh my God,” Susan breathed.
The  television  screen  was  full  of  the  aftermath  of  the  blaze.  Daniel’s  parents’  store  had
burned  almost  to  the  ground,  only  the  metal  parts  of  the  building  left  standing  amidst  the
ashes. The network cut back to the anchor.
“Police have confirmed foul play, but have yet to produce a motive. The cash register  and
safe were still stocked with money.

“At the same time as the attack on  Ronald  and  Delores  Cho,  their  private  home  was  also
burned to the ground, claiming the lives of their two daughters, Kathy and Samantha.
“San Francisco Detective Lieutenant Robert Forsberg had this to say.”
“This doesn’t have the makings of a hate crime,” Forsberg said at a press conference. “The
bodies were not defiled, and  the  victims  were  killed  quickly  and  efficiently.  All  the  evidence
would  seem  to  point  to  a  professional  hit.  We’re  investigating  any  possible  connection  with
organized crime, and we’ll let you know as soon as we find anything.”
Daniel clicked the remote and the picture tube went blank. He sat motionless and silent for
a long moment before uttering one word.
“Zagam.”
 
Vengeance
« ^ » 
The mood in the hotel room had changed very quickly.
“I’ll kill him,” Daniel vowed as he lunged for the door.
“Whoa, there, bucko,” Susan said as she stepped between Daniel and the door. Jeff walked
over to stand beside her.
“If you go after Zagam now,” Susan continued, “he’ll rip you apart. You’d be lucky to get
past the front door.”
“I don’t care. I’m going.”
Jeff reached  up  and  placed  his  palm  flat  on  Daniel’s  chest.  “Daniel,”  he  said  quietly,  but
with more force and authority than Daniel had ever heard, “sit down.”
Daniel sat.
Jeff stood over him, his aged body somehow managing to look imposing. “Daniel, Susan’s
right. Zagam did this terrible thing to get to you, and if you go charging over there looking for
revenge, you’ll just get yourself  killed.  He’s  waiting  for  you,  and  you  can’t  afford  to  play  his
game.
“So here’s what you’re going to do. You’re going to stay right here and help Susan and me
prepare the story. You have more firsthand knowledge than we do, and we need you too much
right now to let you get yourself killed. Later, when the story’s out, you’ll have the opportunity
and the means to take the bastard out.”
“No.” Daniel started to get up, but Jeff pushed him back in the seat.
“You don’t understand!” Daniel screamed. “That monster—”
“I understand!” Jeff  yelled  in  Daniel’s  face.  “I  understand  better  than  you’ll  ever  know!  I

know how it burns, knowing that bastard’s  out  there  and  that  the  cops’ll  never  catch  him.  I
know how your heart cries out for vengeance. But as hard as this may be to accept, you  have
more important things to do right now.
“You can die tomorrow. We need you today.”
Daniel finally broke down and began to sob. Susan put her arm around him, and the three
humans were quiet for a while.
 
An hour later Daniel was sound asleep on one of the beds while Susan sat with Jeff in  the
kitchen, talking quietly about what they’d do after the story was released.
“It’s just going to be so nice,” Susan said, “to finally stop living in hotel rooms and be able
to go home again.”
“You can’t go home again, Susan,” Jeff smirked,  then  his  face  grew  solemn.  “I  don’t  care
what  Uriel  said  about  the  demons  having  bigger  fish  to  fry  than  us  once  the  news  is  out.
There’s always going to be somebody looking for a little payback.”
“Oh,” Susan said. That reminded her of something. “Jeff, can I ask you a question?”
Jeff smiled. “Since when do reporters ask permission?”
“When Daniel wanted to go kill Zagam and said you didn’t understand, you said you did,
far better than he’d ever know. What did you mean?”
Jeff’s lighthearted yet sarcastic manner, so much  a part of his personality that Susan didn’t
even notice it anymore, vanished. He looked  like  a  different,  and  far  older,  person.  “Oh,”  he
said, “that.
“You see Susan, I’ve been exactly where Daniel is right now. I know how he feels because
he is me, a me from a long time ago. It all started about the time I got this,” he said, tapping on
his metal leg.
“I’d just had the misfortune of stepping on a  land  mine  in  Korea.  The  docs  couldn’t  save
my leg, so they took it off and sent me home. I was very  upset  about  losing  my  leg,  but  I’ve
always  been  a  roll-with-the-punches  kind  of  guy,  so  instead  of  dwelling  on  my  disability,  I
focused all the way home on seeing my family, my wife, Rose, and my son, Jeremy. I may have
lost a leg, but I was going home to be with the people I loved more than anything in the world.
“What I didn’t know was that somewhere over the Pacific Ocean I must have crossed paths
with the letter from the State Department informing me of their murders.”
Susan’s jaw dropped.
“It  had  been  a  botched  burglary.  The  thief  woke  up  Rose  and  Jeremy  by  accident,  and
when they discovered him he panicked and shot them both.
“But  you  see,  he  wasn’t  completely  incompetent.  He  left  no  fingerprints,  and  after  the
shootings he must have decided not to take anything that could be traced. He made off with all
the cash in the house and disappeared. The cops never caught him. To this day, the murders of
Rose and Jeremy Frankel remain officially unsolved.”

“Officially,” Susan repeated.
“Right. The cops didn’t catch him, but I did.
“Maybe I’d seen too many damn detective movies, I don’t know, but I decided I was going
to track down the man that took my family from me and have my revenge. I went to a lot of
bars  on  the  ugly  side  of  town  and  spent  a  lot  of  money  I  really  didn’t  have  to  spend,  but  I
finally got a name and address.
“The  guy’s  name  was  Joel  Rushing.  I  waited  in  an  alley  outside  his  apartment  with  a
Saturday night special I’d picked up in a pawnshop. For three nights I watched him go in and
out, until I was sure it was him, then I made my move.
“The next time he walked in front of my hiding place in the alley, I grabbed him and threw
him into the shadows, almost falling off my fake leg in the process. I whipped out the gun and
told him who I was.
“He  said  he  didn’t  know  what  I  was  talking  about,  but  his  eyes  told  a  different  story.  I
called  him  a  liar  and  a  murderer,  and  told  him  he’d  never  be  able  to  hurt  anyone  again.  I
pulled the trigger.
“But the gun didn’t go off, you see. It jammed. While I struggled to clear it, he pulled out a
knife and plunged it into my stomach. He knelt down to me and whispered, ‘And I got away
with it,’ then ran off into the night.
“I  was  lucky.  The  knife  missed  all  my  vital  organs,  and  I  managed  to  crawl  back  to  the
sidewalk.  Some  kind  soul  called  the  ambulance  that  got  me  to  the  hospital  before  I  bled  to
death. While I was laid up, I told the  cops  my  story,  about  Rushing  and  where  he  lived,  but
they never found him. He skipped town and for all I  know  he’s  still  out  there  somewhere  to
this day.”
“That’s terrible,” Susan said.
“The worst part is that I still wonder if he’d have been caught and convicted if I’d gone to
the  cops  right  away  with  what  I  knew,  instead  of  trying  to  exact  my  own  vengeance.  I  just
don’t know.
“Of course, as far as I know, Joel Rushing was no demon, not literally, anyway. Daniel just
needs  to  understand  that  once  word  gets  out  about  them,  Zagam  will  be  hunted  down  and
destroyed. Then and only then will Daniel have his revenge.”
“Oh, I understand that perfectly,” came Daniel’s voice from the living room.
As he  walked  into  the  light  of  the  kitchen,  Daniel  looked  different,  stronger  and  more
confident than before. “And if I’m not mistaken,” he continued, “we’ve got work to do.”
 
The three of them worked until very early the next morning putting together Susan’s story
and organizing the data into the most easily understood presentation. Daniel was full of energy,
and his firsthand observations of the demons proved invaluable to Susan in bringing life to the
story. When the sunlight finally streamed into the windows of the hotel room, Susan was just
typing the final sentence of what she felt was the finest work of her career. Daniel and Jeff were

toasting each other, and her, and they were a little punchy from lack of sleep.
Finally, the end  of  their  ordeal  was  in  sight.  The  story  was  done.  All  they  had  to  do  was
deliver it.
Susan woke up a few hours later to the sound of commotion  and cursing.  She  forced  her
eyes open and found Jeff strapping on his leg and muttering.
“What’s going on?” she asked.
“Damn kid’s gone and done it,” Jeff replied. “Daniel’s gone and I’ll give you three guesses
where he went. First two don’t count.”
“Damn!” Susan got up and started putting on her shoes.
“Where do you think you’re going?” Jeff demanded. “You’ve got a story to deliver,  missy.
I’ll corral Daniel before he gets himself killed.”
Jeff opened the door and began to walk out. “I hope,” he added before the door swung shut
behind him.
 
Daniel lurked outside Zagam’s house in the hot midday sun. He’d made half a dozen pipe
bombs  before  he  arrived  and  carried  them  in  a  backpack  slung  over  his  left  shoulder.  He’d
listened  closely  as  Susan  recounted  her  story  of  being  inside  the  demon’s  house,  and  he
thought he had a pretty good mental picture of the layout.
He didn’t know if the demon would be home during the day, but Daniel was determined
to plant the bombs one way or another. If Zagam wasn’t home, Daniel would just have to wait
until  the  demon  arrived  to  detonate  them.  He  just  hoped  he’d  have  the  chance  to  kill  the
bastard face to face.
Daniel crept through the bushes to the back  of the house. The dog he and Susan had met
before was nowhere to be seen. He walked uncontested to the glass patio door.
It was locked, of course. Daniel was in no mood to be subtle. He grabbed a rock and hurled
it through the glass.
No alarm.
Daniel was beginning to get suspicious. This was too easy. He carefully walked through the
living room to the first short flight of stairs by the foyer.
Daniel walked forward into the den. It was vacant,  so  he  hung  a  right  at  the  far  end  and
into the dining room and adjoining kitchen (which showed the telltale demonic trait of disuse;
however  the  demons  sustained  themselves,  they  apparently  didn’t  eat),  finally  exiting  the
kitchen back where he started, at the stairs of the split-level house, one staircase leading up, the
other back down to the foyer. He still saw no sign of anyone else in the house.
The  only  place  left  to  check  was  the  top  floor.  Daniel  carefully  climbed  the  stairs  and
walked down a hallway with two doors on either side, just as Susan described. The last door on
the right, the computer room, was open, and Daniel headed straight for it.

No sooner had he passed the first two doors than a demon appeared out of each. They said
nothing, but ushered him ahead into the computer room. When Daniel crossed the threshold,
he discovered why.
“Welcome, Mister Cho, to my humble abode, though I believe you have been here before,”
Zagam  said,  reclining  comfortably  in  front  of  the  computer’s  main  console.  “These  are  my
associates,  Moloc  and  Sariel.  You’re  going  to  tell  me  everything  you  know  about  your  little
friends’ plans, including what they plan to do with the data they stole from me.
“And then, if you’re lucky, you will die.”
 
Retribution
« ^ » 
Jeff sat in the car outside Zagam’s house. As he drove up, he could have sworn he saw Daniel
lurking in the bushes, but the kid was nowhere to be seen now. “Screw it,” he said to himself.
“No time like the present.”
Jeff  got  out  of  the  car  and  opened  the  trunk.  Inside  was  an  antique  bazooka,  the  last
remnant  of  his  once  extensive  gun  collection.  When  he  sold  his  house  and  moved  into  the
camper, he had to sell most of his guns to make  room  for  more  essential  possessions,  but  he
couldn’t  bear  to  give  up  the  bazooka.  Somewhere  else  along  the  line  he’d  picked  up  some
shells for it. He hoped they still worked.
Thusly  armed,  Jeff  trotted  across  the  street  as  fast  as  his  steel  leg  would  carry  him  and
headed around back.
He  noticed  immediately  that  the  patio  door  was  shattered.  Either  this  was  a  tougher
neighborhood than he thought, or he was on the right track; Daniel had been  here.  Avoiding
loose shards of glass, he stepped inside.
He heard voices upstairs, and one of them  sounded vaguely like Daniel. After making sure
the bazooka was ready to fire, he climbed the first flight of stairs. In the den between the first
and second flights, the voices were clearer. He stopped to listen.
“Come now, Cho. I know you can tell me how to retrieve my files, and the sooner you do
so,  the  sooner  this  will  all  be  over.  You  can’t  be  very  comfortable,”  said  someone,  probably
Zagam.
“No?” the voice continued. “Very well. Right ring finger.”
“Yes, Zagam,” another voice answered.
Jeff heard  a  sickening  crack  followed  by  Daniel’s  scream  of  pain.  The  sick  bastards  were
torturing him!
Jeff momentarily aimed the bazooka up the second flight of stairs, only to  realize  he’d  get
Daniel too. Well, he thought, if not all together, one at a time. He shifted his aim down the first

flight of stairs, the way he came, and pulled the trigger.
With a whoosh of air the shell flew down the stairs and into the floor of the foyer, where it
promptly exploded. Jeff ran backwards and took cover in the dining room.
“We’re under attack!” he heard Zagam yell. Within moments,  two demons he’d never seen
leapt down the stairs. As soon as the first one was clear, Jeff let him have it with the bazooka.
Body parts flew and the demon was gone.
One down …, Jeff thought as he dodged the blast into the kitchen.
“Zagam!” the second demon screamed. “He has a bazooka!”
“What  of  it,  coward?”  There  was  a  pause,  then,  “Hold  your  fire,  human.  I’m  coming
down.”
Suddenly Jeff realized he was in something of an inopportune strategic location. As Zagam
reached  the  bottom  of  the  stairs  and  stood  in  the  doorway  to  the  kitchen,  remarkably
unconcerned that the two bazooka blasts had set his house afire, the other demon entered the
dining  room  by  way  of  the  den.  They  were  both  carrying  pistols,  and  they  had  him  in  a
textbook crossfire.
“My  my  my,”  Zagam  mused  as  the  flames  from  the  foyer  climbed  the  lower  staircase
behind him. “Cho and his little playmates are just popping out of the woodwork, aren’t they?
And this one, really. You’re nearly as old as I am. And threatening an immortal with that relic.”
“Did  a  pretty  good  job  on  your  buddy  in  there,”  Jeff  said,  mustering  all  the  bravado  he
could.
“Yes, well, Sariel was caught unawares. He was always impetuous. Moloc and I are far more
careful, and more than capable of dodging a shell we can see coming. Put  down  the  weapon,
old man, and we just might let you live.”
“In a pig’s eye,” Jeff spat. “I’ve seen what your kind is capable of.”
“Well we can’t let mere mortals get in the way  of  our  mission,  can  we?  It’s  for  your  own
good, you know. You need us.”
“Fuck you,” Daniel said as he leapt  down  the  stairs  and  tackled  Zagam,  bringing  his  cast
down hard on the demon’s head.
Jeff whirled and pulled the trigger on Moloc just as  the  demon  opened  fire.  Moloc  didn’t
dodge after all, and burst apart in flames as Jeff sank to the floor, a bullet in his chest.
“Jeff!”  Daniel  screamed  as  Zagam  collected  himself  and  pistol-whipped  Daniel  in  the
temple.
Daniel  didn’t  crumple  quite  the  way  Zagam  expected.  He  rolled  off  the  demon
immediately, kicking the gun out of his hand and into the fire.
“Bad move, human. That was your only weapon.”
“No,” Daniel said, pulling out the same detonator he’d used on Batarel. “This is.”
Zagam looked down and noticed for the first time in all the commotion  a pipe bomb  in his

waistband.
Daniel pressed the button as  he  dove  behind  the  minibar.  The  explosion  shook  the  walls
and when Daniel got up it took a second to see the results through all the smoke.
Zagam wasn’t dead. His legs and lower torso were completely gone, but nonetheless he was
clawing his way up the remains of the stairs. Daniel caught him and rolled him over.
“That was for what you did to me, to my life.” He produced another bomb  and  armed  it.
“This is for my family, you son of a bitch.”
Daniel shoved the bomb deep into the hot, slick mass of Zagam’s exposed entrails. Without
another word, Daniel took cover in the kitchen and pressed the button.
And Zagam was no more.
As  the  flames  crawled  slowly  into  the  kitchen,  Daniel  rushed  to  Jeff’s  side.  Silently  he
hoisted Jeff up onto his shoulder and rushed  away  from  the  flames,  into  the  dining  room.  A
sliding glass patio door opened out from there onto an elevated wooden deck, and Daniel was
soon resting Jeff on that deck and examining the wound.
“Daniel?” Jeff croaked.
“Don’t speak, Jeff. You need to conserve your strength.”
“Bullshit,” the old man replied. “I’m dying and I know it. And  I’m  going  to  have  my  last
words whether you like it or not.”
Daniel already had a tear in his eye because he knew Jeff was right, but he smiled anyway.
“Thank you,” Jeff continued.
“For  what?”  Daniel  heard  the  sounds  of  sirens  in  the  distance,  police  or  ambulances  or
firemen.
“I told you that first day, right before we got that cast on your arm, that I was looking for
something to do with my life. I didn’t do too  well  in  the  army,  and  the  chance  to  be  a  good
husband and father was taken away from me before I really got the hang of it, but I could help
you and Susan do this. You’re going to change the world, Daniel. And I wanted to thank you
for letting me have a hand in it.”
The sirens were getting closer. “We’ve got to get you to a hospital,” Daniel said.
“No, we don’t. I’m finished. And it’s okay, you know? With all the stuff we’ve seen, I don’t
know anymore if there’s really a Saint Peter waiting for me at the Pearly Gates, but if there is, I
can  finally  look  him  in  the  eye  and  say  that  Jeff  Frankel  meant  something.  That  I  made  a
difference, that I was important. I’ve waited my whole life to be able to say that.”
Jeff paused for a moment, gathering the remains of his strength.
“It’s time for you to go, Daniel.”
Daniel started to cry in spite of himself. “I’m not leaving you like this.”
“Yes, you are. I’m dying, quicker by the minute. Things will be different in a few days, once

the  story’s  hit,  but  for  today  we  just  killed  a  highly  placed  government  employee  and
destroyed his home. My prints are all over that bazooka, but you can still be long gone by the
time they find my dead body.
“Go, Daniel. Change the world. It’s all right. Say goodbye and walk away.”
Choking  back  his  tears,  Daniel  leaned  forward  and  hugged  the  dying  old  man  that  had
been his friend, advisor and companion during the darkest time Daniel had ever known.
“Goodbye,” he whispered in Jeff’s ear, then he rose, vaulted the railing on his good arm and
ran down the alleyway behind the house.
Jeff watched Daniel run to safety, then relaxed, closed his eyes, and died.
 
While Daniel  and  Jeff  were  still  fighting  their  way  out  of  Zagam’s  house,  Harold  Preston
met Susan in the lobby of the Post building, accompanied by two security guards.
“Susan, what the Hell’s going on here?” he demanded. “Where have you been all this time?
Why did you demand a security escort? Did you know Steve’s been accusing you of raiding his
files? Since when have you had blonde hair?”
Susan, looking much older than he remembered,  merely smiled and produced and optical
disk from her purse. “All here, chief. The biggest story the Post has ever printed.”
Harold took the disk and looked at Susan. It wasn’t the smug posturing that he was used to
seeing from Susan that he saw now. It was the calm self-assurance of a seasoned reporter.
“Let’s take this upstairs,” he said.
 
Revelation
« ^ » 
Susan and Harold went up to his office with two armed guards, one on either side, a scene not
lost on Steve Dunbar. One guard stayed in front of the office door after they went in, the other
walked away. Steve finished typing the sentence he  was  on,  then  got  up  and  walked  over  to
Harold’s office door.
“John,” he said to the guard, a burly  man  he  occasionally  had  a  beer  with,  “what’s  going
on? Is Suzie in trouble?”
The guard looked nervously up and down  the  newsroom,  then  said,  “She’s  got  some  big
story brewing. I’m not supposed to tell you.”
Steve was taken aback. “Me? Specifically? Come on, man, what the hell did I do to deserve
this?”
“For crying out loud, would you keep your voice down? I don’t know any more. She  had a
big story on computer disk, real hush-hush, and she didn’t want you, specifically, to be in on

it. Now go away before you get me in trouble.”
Steve went back to his desk, picked up the phone, and dialed a number from memory.
“You have reached the residence of Richard Birchmere. I’m not in right now—”
Damn, Steve thought. The voicemail picked up right away, meaning the line was in use. He
didn’t have time to wait until he could get through. He had to act on his own. He had a pretty
good idea what was going on, given the rumors he’d heard as of late.
Steve got up and walked calmly  over  to  the  door.  “Sorry  to  do  this,  John,”  he  said,  “but
you’re in my way.”
Without further comment,  Steve lifted the security guard, a man that outweighed him  by
at least a hundred pounds, and flung him effortlessly down the hall. He then twisted open the
locked door and stepped into Harold’s office. “Knock, knock.”
Susan was already up and standing near the  window,  hands  behind  her  back.  Harold  sat
off to the side, behind his desk, and though he looked surprised, it wasn’t the shock and  fear
Steve had seen so often before, but the surprise in confirmation of something he hadn’t really
believed.
“Suzie Q, what are you up to?” Steve sneered.
“Your downfall, Steve. Or should I call you Nybras?”
At the mention of his true name, the smile fell  off  the  demon’s  face.  So  the  rumors  were
true; Susan had been working with Cho, and they had really discovered proof of the demons’
existence.
“Poor, misguided Susan,” he said. “You don’t really think I’m going to let you do  this,  do
you?”
“You don’t really think I’d come this far, knowing what you really are, without protection,
do you?” she answered.
Nybras stepped forward. “What do you have behind  your  back,  there?  A  secret  weapon?
Come now, Susan, I expected better of you. What is it? Silver? Holy water? Not that it matters.
Time to die.”
“Come and get me, you sick bastard.”
Nybras  took  another  step  forward,  then  his  caution  got  the  better  of  him.  These  upstart
humans had killed Batarel, or so he’d heard.  What  did  Susan  have  up  her  sleeve?  As  Harold
nervously backed his chair to the wall, Nybras decided it didn’t matter. No mere  human  was
going to get in his way. He lunged at Susan.
Remembering  what Daniel taught her, Susan stepped into his lunge and got her center  of
gravity underneath him. In one swift motion, before Nybras  really  knew  what  was  going  on,
she flipped him towards the window.
The glass shattered as Nybras hurtled through the pane, but he caught the edge on the way
out and did not fall, instead hanging from the sill by his fingertips.

“Clever, mortal,”  he  hissed  through  the  already  disappearing  blood  and  pain,  “but  I  fear
only a momentary stay of execution.”
Susan stood at  the  window  and  smiled  down  at  the  demon.  “You  know,  ‘Steve’,  I  never
really liked you. In fact, I always kinda wanted to do this in college.”
In one hand, she held Jeff’s last  Korean-era  grenade.  With  the  other  hand,  she  pulled  the
pin. “So long, ‘Steve’,” she said as she stuffed the grenade down his shirt.
“No!” Nybras shouted, and in his panic to remove the grenade, he let  go  of  the  ledge.  He
exploded halfway down, showering the cars below with gore.
“I can’t believe that worked,” Harold said.
“That’s  probably  the  last  time  it  will,”  Susan  answered,  turning  away  from  the  window.
“We’ve been able  to  kill  them  so  easily  only  because  they’re  arrogant  and  not  used  to  being
threatened. Soon they’ll stop underestimating us and taking them  down will become  orders of
magnitude harder.”
With a shrug of her shoulders, Susan put that thought behind her. “In the meantime,” she
said, “we’ve got a story to put out.”
 
Less  than  a  week  later,  Susan’s  story,  along  with  all  the  corroborating  evidence,  was
released to an unsuspecting public. The Post released a special edition devoted entirely to what
they dubbed “the story of the millennium,” and nearly every major news service on the planet
picked it up soon after.
Like most major revelations, the news caused neither immediate  nor  dramatic  reaction.  It
took  a  while  for  the  full  effect  to  sink  in.  The  United  Nations  called  a  special  session  to
determine what to do about “the demon problem”.
For  her  part,  Susan  won  the  Pulitzer  Prize,  fulfilling  a  dream  she’d  had  since  childhood.
She became a hot property in the news industry, and suddenly had more to do as a respected
journalist than she knew what to do with.
And life went on.
Once Susan’s story cleared his name, Daniel returned to his old job and his old apartment.
He was happy for Susan’s success (even though the only time she’d had to speak to him was at
Jeff’s funeral), but he was happy mostly just to get his old, boring life back.
And that’s when they found him.
 
Daniel  had  just  got  off  what  was  only  his  second  day  back  on  the  job,  and  he  was
discovering  that  he  wasn’t  that  happy  after  all.  The  cliché  was  right;  you  really  couldn’t  go
home again. He’d gone out on only two calls in as many days. The rest of  his  time  was  spent
answering questions about his ordeal. It didn’t seem to matter to anyone that he didn’t want to
talk about it anymore. Daniel was deep in thought over this topic when he opened the door to
his apartment. Inside were three men in conservative dark suits.

“Daniel Cho?” the lead one asked.
Daniel should have  been  outraged,  but  he  felt  only  resigned  fatigue.  Once  you’ve  fought
demons and won, he mused,  government  spooks  can’t  intimidate  you.  “Yes.  Can  I  help  you
gentlemen with something?”
“My name is Paul Simonson,  Mister Cho. I represent  a  new  organization  that  needs  your
help.”
Daniel walked over the sink and got a glass of water. “Is that a fact.” It wasn’t a question.
“Yes, sir. As I’m sure you’re aware, the United Nations has finally come to a resolution  on
the demon issue.”
Daniel plopped down on the couch. “I hadn’t heard.”
“Sir, we represent the UN Demon Task Force. The DTF’s charter is to seek out and destroy
the demons that you, Mister Frankel and Miss Richardson uncovered.”
“Sorry, boys, but I’m out of the demon hunting business.”
Simonson nodded to his companions. They promptly got up and left the apartment.
“Mister  Cho,  I  can  understand  your  feelings.  If  I’d  been  through  what  you  just  went
through,  I’d  have  had  my  fill  of  it  too.  But  this  is  bigger  than  you  or  me.  We  need  your
experience.  The  demons  have  been  preying  on  mankind  for  millennia.  They’re  the  greatest
threat our species has ever faced. And if we’re going to wipe them  out, we need someone who
knows them, how they think. We need you.”
“Why don’t you call the angels? Uriel was very helpful.”
Simonson  looked at his shoes. “We haven’t been able to reach them.  Please,  sir.  Mankind
needs you.”
Daniel had finally had enough. “Don’t you people get it? Those damn things ruined my life,
almost killed me, they killed my family and one of the best friends I ever  knew.  I’m  through
with them. Hell, it’s because of me, Jeff and Susan that you even know about them.  I’ve done
my part. You can do the rest without me.”
Simonson  stood in silence for a long moment.  “Very well,  if  that’s  your  final  word,  that’s
what I’ll relay to my superiors. On a personal note,  I  must  say  I’m  very  disappointed.  You’re
quite a hero to millions of people, myself included. We really could have used your help in this.
We’re trying to change the world.” He turned to leave.
Change the world. Jeff’s dying words came rushing back  to  Daniel.  What  the  hell  was  he
doing?
“Simonson.”
The agent stopped with his hand on the doorknob.
“I’m in,” Daniel said.
Thus  began  the  effort  to  exterminate  the  demons,  an  effort  dubbed  by  the  media  as  the
Demonic Crusade.

And Jeff was right.
The world would never be quite the same again.
 
BOOK II: CRUSADE
New Beginning
« ^ » 
SAN FRANCISCO. SIX MONTHS LATER.
Colonel  Daniel  Cho  stood  in  the  cold  bay  wind  at  the  foot  of  his  mother’s  grave.  He  was
dressed  in  jeans  and  a  conservative  blazer,  his  hair  had  grown  back,  and  for  once  he  didn’t
have a cast or a brace on his arm or fingers. Physically, he was whole again.
Emotionally was another matter.
This was the first opportunity he’d had to visit his family’s graves since their deaths. During
his  training  with  the  DTF,  he  been  able  to  repress  his  feelings,  to  concentrate  on  the  work,
learning  to  destroy  the  monsters  that  had  taken  so  much  from  him.  But  now  that  he  was
home, now that he could see the physical reminder of that loss, it all came rushing back.
A lone tear streamed down from his right eye. “Mom…” he whispered. He knew he would
never forgive the bastards for what they did to him, to his family, to Jeff Frankel. His hatred of
them seemed to double every day. Because  of  them,  he  could  never  again  tell  his  mom  how
much  he loved her, never again share a beer with his dad, never tease  his  sisters,  never  show
Jeff how much the world changed, just as the old guy predicted.
In the last six months, he had indeed seen the world change. Most of the demons, the vast
majority, went underground when the story hit. Those that didn’t and stood their ground were
wiped out quickly. The leaders, Beelzebub and Satan  himself,  were  still  unaccounted  for  and
presumed to be plotting some kind of retaliatory action. No one knew where they’d gone.
The angels were still incommunicado, and no one knew where they were, either. Mankind
was left to deal with the demonic threat alone.
That was just fine with Daniel. He remembered vividly Jeff’s tale of botched vengeance, but
the  bastards  had  taken  Jeff,  too,  and  Daniel  needed  to  be  involved  in  their  destruction
personally.
Enter the DTF. They were a good group of people, and they had accepted Daniel with open
arms as one  of  their  field  leaders.  After  a  crash  course  in  combat  strategy  against  demons,  a
course he helped develop, Daniel was awarded the rank of Colonel and given his  own  squad,
five people that he’d learned to trust with his life.
Daniel looked down at the headstone of his little sister, Samantha,  dead at  21.  As  good  as
things were getting, they didn’t change the past. The demons, the monsters that had  inflicted

so much  pain on Daniel and  countless  others  throughout  the  course  of  human  history,  were
still out there. Daniel couldn’t rest until the very last one of them was destroyed.
The ring of his cellular phone cut the still silence of the cemetery.
“Cho.”
“Colonel,”  came  the  voice  on  the  other  end.  Harris,  his  second.  “We’ve  got  a  lead  on
another one. Belphegor.”
“I’m on my way,” Daniel answered, then disconnected.
With a final glance at the four headstones reading “Cho”, Daniel left the cemetery.
 
The Demon Task Force’s Los Angeles headquarters was an abandoned and converted police
station. It was a large, three-story brick building, at least 1940’s construction and looking older.
When Daniel had left it earlier, it had borne no markings to identify its occupants. He noticed
with a wry grin how that had changed. Over the large double doors at the front of the building,
someone had hung a four-foot long paper banner with the DTF logo and initials.
That oughta clear up any uncertainty, Daniel remarked to himself as he climbed the short
stairs and entered the building.
The interior of the building was, if anything, shabbier  than  the  outside.  The  building  had
been abandoned for years before the DTF commandeered it, the local cops having moved out
to more modern facilities. Everything was brick and faded linoleum, steel desks and chairs that
were  probably  never  comfortable.  Daniel  walked  through  the  lobby  and  into  the  precinct
room, where his team had set up shop.
Lieutenant Colonel Jack Harris sat alone at  a  table  studying  case  files,  his  long,  lean  body
hunched  over  and  running  his  fingers  through  his  graying  brown  hair.  Jack  was  Daniel’s
second in command.  A former SWAT team leader in Chicago, and a Navy  SEAL  before  that,
Jack  was  known  as  a  tactical  genius,  specializing  in  fugitive  extraction.  He  had  a  knack  for
finding  and  flushing  out  the  bad  guys  with  a  minimum  of  civilian  danger  and  collateral
damage.
Major Paul Simonson paced by the window. A blue-eyed blond farmboy from Minnesota,
Paul  was  a  FBI  agent  at  heart  years  before  he  actually  made  it  to  the  academy.  He  grew  up
fascinated by tales of G-men, and knew that being a federal cop was the life for him. When the
revelation  about  the  existence  of  demons  broke,  Paul  found  the  greatest  challenge  an  agent
could face—a group of powerful, immortal fugitives from justice. He leapt at the chance to join
the DTF, and never looked back.
Stout  but  hearty  Captain  Roberto  Ortiz  sat  on  the  couch  with  his  notebook  computer,
happily typing. Roberto grew up as the only hacker/computer  nerd in his small village outside
of  Mexico  City.  His  friends  never  really  understood  his  fascination  with  his  homebuilt
computer,  but  through  it,  Roberto  could  see  a  whole  new  world,  one  that  his  parents  and
friends would never know. By the time he was 21,  Roberto graduated from MIT with honors.
A year later he had his Masters and a year after that his PhD. He joined the DTF as one of the
world’s leading authorities in communications and encryption technology.

Compact  and  redheaded  Captain  Lucy  O’Malley  lounged  on  the  couch  next  to  Roberto.
Rumored  to  have  been  former  IRA,  Lucy  knew  just  about  all  there  was  to  know  about
explosives. Her older brother was  killed  during  “The  Troubles”  in  an  altercation  started  by  a
man later revealed by  Zagam’s  files  to  be  a  demon.  She  took  great  delight  in  destroying  the
demons, but lived for the day she could destroy Asbeel, the individual demon that she blamed
for the death of her brother.
Tall, young and handsome Lieutenant Heinrich von Braun stood in a corner, trying not  to
stare  at  Lucy  and  failing  miserably.  Heinrich  was  a  natural  when  it  came  to  weapons
technology, but a raw novice at practically everything else. A natural marksman  bordering on
savant, he won  German  national  shooting  titles  by  the  age  of  eight.  He  understood  weapons
almost instinctively, and  had  been  known  to  field  strip  a  weapon  he’d  never  seen,  perfectly,
after examining it for only a few seconds. Heinrich was also extremely devoted to the Christian
faith. When the story of the demons broke, Heinrich saw it as his calling to use his Divine Gift.
He joined the DTF immediately.
Roberto glanced up from computer. “Hey, boss,” he called in a very slight Spanish accent.
“What  took  you  so  long?  You  think  maybe  these  demons  are  going  to  live  forever  or
something?” No one laughed at Roberto’s attempt to lighten the mood.  They  all  knew  where
Daniel had been, and why he’d gone.
“Damn  plane  had  to  obey  the  laws  of  physics,  ‘Berto.”  Daniel  turned  to  Jack.  “Where  is
he?”
Jack unrolled a map on a table. “Right here in L.A.”
Daniel wasn’t surprised. Most of the demons they’d destroyed had been located in densely
populated  urban  areas,  trying  to  hide  in  the  surging  mass  of  humanity.  They  knew  that
demons looked identical to humans, and tried to take advantage of the trait humans had of not
noticing much that didn’t directly affect their lives.
“And it’s a match?” Daniel asked. Since  the vast majority of demons had run to ground, it
became imperative for the DTF to verify each demon spotting.  If  the  DTF  mobilized  on  each
alleged  sighting,  they’d  spend  all  their  time  on  wild  goose  chases.  The  best  forensic  and
behavioral  scientists  in  the  world  had  drawn  up  a  set  of  profiles  that  the  real  demons  were
likely to meet. Only those that met those requirements were investigated.
“Highly probable, sir. The description matches Belphegor, and the  suspect  fits  the  profile.
Confidence is high.”
“All right, then,” Daniel said loudly, addressing the entire team.
“Let’s move out.”
 
Demonbusters
« ^ » 
The apartment they tracked the demon  to  was  one  of  those  rundown  places  where  even  the

nosy  neighbors  don’t  ask  too  many  questions.  A  perfect  place  to  hide,  Daniel  thought.  He
stood  outside  his  team’s  van  in  his  combat  uniform,  an  armored  outfit  similar  to  police  riot
gear. “Paul,” he said into his headset mike, “how we doing?”
Paul sat somewhere on a rooftop facing the  target.  Once  they  got  on  site,  the  team  never
saw him, but his observations had often proved invaluable. “Doing fine, boss. Confirm that the
target is home.”
“ ‘Berto?” Daniel said.
Roberto  responded  from  inside  the  van,  where  he  was  surrounded  by  communications
gear.  “Negative  activity.  Phone  line’s  quiet  and  there’s  no  outgoing  cable  or  radio
transmissions. If he knows we’re coming, he’s not telling anybody about it.”
Daniel exchanged a look with the tactical component  of his team, Jack, Lucy and Heinrich,
attired  as  he  was.  They  were  just  finishing  the  adjustment  of  their  various  weapons  and
equipment. “We have a go,” he said.
“Roger that,” Jack said, and with a wave, led them  all into the building, Daniel bringing up
the rear. Once inside, they crept quietly up the stairs to the second landing, then down the hall
to room 203, the location of the suspected demon. Jack glanced back at Daniel, who gave him a
nod.  With  Heinrich  directly  behind  him  and  aiming  his  high  powered  rifle  over  Jack’s
shoulder, Jack kicked the door open.
“DTF!” he yelled as he rolled into the shabby apartment. The apartment’s sole occupant, a
man in his mid-thirties, sprang up from the couch, where he’d been watching television.
“Please,” he said, raising his hands, “don’t—”
Heinrich shot him once in the chest. The target fell to the floor, bleeding.
Daniel  and  Lucy  entered  the  room  after  Jack  had  verified  that  there  was  no  one  else
present. Daniel walked over  to  the  target,  who  to  his  credit  did  not  try  to  get  up.  As  Daniel
investigated the chest wound, he could see that it was already healing, a dead giveaway that the
target was an immortal. “Confirm,” he said.
“Let’s do it, then,” Jack answered, and Heinrich stepped up to the target, now confirmed as
Belphegor.  With  a  look  of  great  satisfaction,  he  shot  the  demon  point  blank  in  the  head,
incapacitating it. He then slung his rifle and hoisted the demon over his shoulder.
Daniel  had  been  looking  around  the  room,  searching  for  clues  to  any  other  demons’
whereabouts.  He  found  nothing  of  interest,  only  mementos  and  relics  that  had  most  likely
been  collected  over  the  course  of  the  demon’s  life,  probably  plundered  from  unsuspecting
humans. It occurred to Daniel that quite a few of the individual artifacts in the apartment were
worth more than the entire building that housed them.  “Let’s get someone up here to catalog
this stuff,” he said.
“Yes,  sir,”  Jack  answered,  and  without  another  word,  they  went  back  outside,  demon  in
tow.
 
By  the  time  Belphegor  had  recovered  enough  from  the  head  wound  to  be  aware  of  his
surroundings,  he  found  himself  in  a  field,  the  skyline  of  Los  Angeles  vaguely  visible  in  the

distance. He was tightly bound at the wrists and  ankles,  and  in  his  weakened  state,  he  could
not snap the bonds.
He  looked  down  at  his  body,  and  directly  underneath  his  completely  healed  chest  was
strapped a package with a digital timer. He’d heard enough stories from his brothers about the
DTF to know  what  the  package  was.  He  began  scrambling  frantically,  trying  to  dislodge  the
bomb.
By  the  time  the  counter  ticked  down  to  ten  seconds,  he  knew  it  was  futile.  He  tried  to
remember all the things he’d seen in forty thousand years, the people he’d known, the historic
events in which he’d participated. It’s been a good life, he thought as the counter approached
zero. But I don’t want to di—
His last thought was interrupted by the fiery explosion that ended his millennia of life. His
burning body parts scattered hundreds of yards across the field, joining the charred remnants
of several other demons that had once made Los Angeles their home.
 
When the last of the smoke dissipated and the flames had burned themselves out, the DTF
van that had been parked at the edge of the field drove away.
Reunited at the L.A. DTF headquarters, the team allowed themselves a little celebration.
“Uno down, God knows how many to go,” Roberto said.
“Easy there, ‘Berto,” Daniel cautioned. “We know there’s a finite number  of them,  so each
one down is a victory in my book.”
“Is  it  just  me,”  Heinrich  asked,  his  high  voice  contrasting  with  his  heavy  and  guttural
German accent, “or is this getting easier as we go?”
“You  bet  it  is,”  Jack  answered,  reclining  on  the  couch,  “but  only  because  we’re  getting
better  at  it.  We’ve  had  time  to  develop  a  standard  operating  procedure,  and  we  follow  it.
Professionals always make the job look easy.” The team toasted themselves on that  comment,
before Jack added, “But just remember that the second you get too cocky and stop acting like a
professional, the enemy will eat you alive.”
That sobered them.  Not all DTF teams were as successful as they had been, and a few had
been lost, the entire teams, to the demons they pursued.
As Heinrich took a seat next to Lucy and  complimented  her  on  the  bomb  that  destroyed
Belphegor, Roberto waved at Daniel. “Hey boss, come here.”
Daniel walked over and stood over Roberto’s shoulder. “What you got, ‘Berto?”
Roberto showed Daniel his notebook. “Email coming in, addressed to you.”
Daniel took the computer from Roberto and opened the message. It was from DTF Central
Headquarters, inside the United Nations building in New York. The message was short and to
the point.
“Pack your bags, people,” he said. “The boss wants to see us.”

 
Susan’s New Life
« ^ » 
Susan Richardson was having a little difficulty adjusting to her new life. After years of studying
print journalism, Susan was “discovered” by the television networks and deemed too telegenic
not to be on camera. She’d been wooed by all the broadcast and cable networks, but she finally
settled on the fledgling  World  News  Network,  a  cable  all-news  outfit  located  in  Washington,
D.C.  that  lured  her  away  from  the  bigger,  more  established  networks  with  a  promise  of
complete autonomy. The opportunity to  pick  her  own  stories  and  report  them  without  even
the possibility of editorial changes was simply too good to pass up.
A  few  months  later,  Susan  practically  owned  WNN.  Her  face  and  reputation  had
single-handedly put the tiny network on every major cable provider  in  the  world,  and  Susan
had become  one of the most recognized  and  trusted  voices  in  news.  People  tuned  in  to  hear
what she had to say. Which was beginning to annoy the hell out of her.
Not  that  she  didn’t  appreciate  the  following.  Every  time  she  heard  herself  compared
favorably to great newsmen like Walter Cronkite, she got all tingly inside. It was, after all, her
life’s  dream.  No,  the  problem  was  the  pressure.  She’d  already  broken  the  “story  of  the
millennium”; there simply  wasn’t  anywhere  to  go  from  there.  She  did  her  best,  but  corrupt
politicians  and  airline  disasters  paled  somewhat  in  comparison  to  evil,  immortal  monsters
preying on mankind for centuries.
Her  life  wasn’t  full  of  slow  news  days,  however.  As  she  proofed  her  copy  one  last  time
before air, Susan noticed that things were picking up right in her own back yard.
“Good news, Susan?” asked Bob Pack, her co-anchor.
Susan glanced up and smiled. “You mean for the world or the ratings?”
She still really hated that one thing about televised news. She often felt like a ghoul seeking
out the most depressing, tension-filled stories. The same thing applied in print journalism, but
television was much  more merciless. One of her journalism professors had  once  told  her  that
no  one  bought  a  newspaper  to  read  about  “happy  bunny  people.”  But  where  a  newspaper
reader  might  simply  glance  down  to  the  next  story,  a  television  viewer  would  change  the
channel  and  probably  not  return.  She  didn’t  have  the  luxury  in  television  of  telling  people
good news. It was as simple as that.
Keith, the stage manager, waved to  get  their  attention.  “We’re  on  in  five,”  he  said,  “four,
three, two, one.”
“Good evening, and welcome to WNN,” Susan said as she smiled warmly into the camera.
“I’m Susan Richardson.
“Our top story tonight, tempers flare on Capitol Hill as Congress narrowly votes down the
Demonic  Emergency  Act,  a  temporary  repeal  of  the  fifth  amendment  proposed  by  Texas
Senator Timothy Phillips. Phillips had this to say.”

The camera cut to tape of a tall, heavyset man in his fifties. His mahogany hair was receding
and  graying,  and  a  prominent  brow,  bulbous  nose  and  heavy  jowls  dominated  his  leathery
face. “Now don’t get me wrong,” he said in a deep  voice  with  a  strong  southern  accent,  “the
DTF is a fine idea, but it’s not enough. One, they’re too small, and two, all they have to go on is
a six month old computer database that was sketchy at best even when it was current.
“Let’s not kid ourselves, people. These godless monsters were successfully blending into the
human  population  centuries  before  this  country  was  even  founded.  They  know  how  to
disappear. Hell, your best friend could be a  demon  and  you’d  probably  have  no  idea  until  it
was too late.
“That’s why we need new laws in this country. The liberal lawmakers that came before me
saw  to  it  that  the  hands  of  the  law  enforcement  agencies  are  so  tied  with  red  tape  and  due
process that by the time we think we know about a demon, he’s had time to disappear again.
These inhuman monsters are a clear threat to the public’s well-being, but we’re not allowed to
do a blessed thing about it.”
The camera cut back  to Susan. “While many think the legal changes proposed by Senator
Phillips  are  too  extreme  and  in  clear  violation  of  the  Constitution,  most  of  the  people
questioned  in  a  poll  earlier  today  agree  that  the  demons  are  a  significant  threat  that  the
government is not properly prepared to deal with.
“In other news…” Susan went on  with  her  nightly  telecast,  bantering  lightly  with  Bob  as
they  went  down  the  list  of  the  day’s  stories.  However,  as  soon  as  Keith  yelled,  “And  we’re
clear,” the practiced smile fell from her face.
During the newscast, one of the production assistants had slipped her a  note.  It  was  from
Sal Peterson, her favorite journalism professor from college. Peterson had shaped much  of her
journalistic style, and she felt she owed much  of  her  success  to  his  instruction.  Although  she
still sent him Christmas cards, she hadn’t actually spoken to him in years. There wasn’t much
informational content to the message. Just his name,  phone  number  and  the  word  “Urgent!”
underlined. What could he want?
Susan  excused  herself  from  the  set  and  made  her  way  back  to  her  private  office.  After
shutting the door, she sat down behind her desk and dialed the number  on the note. Peterson
picked up after the second ring.
“Hello?” The tension was almost louder than his actual voice.
“Sal? It’s Susan. I’m returning your call.”
“Susan, thank God it’s you,” he said. She heard the relief in his voice. “Have you heard the
news?”
“Which news?”
“I’m  under  indictment.  They  say  I’m  some  kind  of  demon  sympathizer,  in  league  with
them.  They’ve suspended  me  from  the  university  pending  the  investigation,  and  I’ve  started
getting threatening phone calls.”
“My God, Sal, what happened?”
“There was a demonstration last week  at  the  university.  A  bunch  of  kids  were  protesting

the DTF, on the basis that their policies show a complete disregard for our laws of due process.
It’s something I’ve been worried about, that one of these alleged demons that  they  shoot  first
and ask questions later will turn out to be human,  so I joined in. They got me  on  stage  and  I
gave a little speech about the  Bill  of  Rights.  The  next  morning  I’m  in  the  dean’s  office  being
asked to leave until this can all be worked out.”
“My God, Sal, that’s terrible.”
“Tell me about it. Look, Susan, I just wanted you to know. I didn’t call for you to bail me
out or anything. I think I  can  handle  this  myself.  I  just  want  you  to  look  into  this,  see  if  it’s
happening to other people, you know? If it is as widespread as I think, get the word out. People
listen  to  you,  and  you’re  probably  one  of  the  few  people  that  could  speak  out  against  this
insanity without being called a demon yourself.”
It was true. Susan’s past accomplishments put her pretty much beyond suspicion, or so she
hoped.
“I’ve  got  to  go,”  Sal  continued.  “My  wife  just  walked  in  the  door,  and  she  looks  pretty
upset. Look into what I told you, okay, Susan?”
“Sure, Sal.”
He hung up.
Bewildered,  Susan  gingerly  put  the  phone  back  in  its  cradle.  She  had,  of  course,  heard
about this sort of thing happening, but this was the first time it had happened to someone she
knew.
Susan  turned  out  the  lights  in  her  office  and  walked  out  the  door.  Stagehands  and
cameramen waved at her as she made her way to the exit, and she smiled politely and waved
back.  Her  new  apartment  (much  larger  than  her  old  one)  was  walking  distance  from  the
studio, and she was soon outside in the chill winter air of Washington D.C.
As she looked around, she noticed that the city had grown quiet. For as long as  she  could
remember,  Washington  had  been  a  place  of  bustling  excitement.  People  worked  as  many
different schedules as one could imagine, and the streets of the nation’s capitol were always full
of someone going somewhere.
But not tonight. As Susan walked the five blocks from the tiny studio to her apartment, she
saw maybe three people. The more she thought about it, she realized that she’d seen fewer and
fewer  people  out  at  night  over  the  last  six  months.  People  were  afraid.  Day  or  night,  Susan
didn’t  think  it  mattered  to  the  demons,  but  people  were  clearly  unwilling  to  venture  out  as
much as they used to in Washington, something that struck Susan as almost funny. Before the
Revelation,  Washington  had  been  one  of  the  country’s  most  violent  cities.  What  had  really
changed?
When  Susan  got  into  her  apartment,  she  slid  the  deadbolt  shut  (couldn’t  be  too  careful,
after all), turned on her computer and got on the internet. She had some research to do.
 

The Hunt Begins
« ^ » 
Daniel stepped off the elevator on the twenty-third floor of the United Nations building in New
York City. The entire floor was dedicated to the DTF. His team was still in the hotel, as Daniel’s
orders had been to come alone. In his high collared, cobalt blue dress uniform, Daniel walked
up  the  corridor  to  the  office  of  Marie  Motumbo,  the  leader  of  the  Demon  Task  Force.  He
opened the door and stepped inside.
The  outer  office  was  spacious  and  tastefully  decorated.  As  always,  Doris  Klein,  Marie’s
secretary, sat primly behind her desk. Daniel couldn’t be sure that she had legs. “Daniel,” Doris
said warmly. “Marie’s expecting you. Go right in.”
Daniel continued into the inner office, the citadel from which Marie Motumbo  coordinated
the global fight against the demons. The room was decorated colorfully yet  tastefully  with  art
from her homeland of Nigeria. Daniel’s eyes focused, as always, on the ceremonial spears and
shield mounted on  the  wall.  They  told  volumes  about  their  owner’s  warrior  spirit.  Marie  sat
behind a massive oak desk,  pouring  over  some  paperwork.  She  stood  when  she  saw  Daniel,
rising to her full six foot five inch height.
“Colonel  Cho,  welcome,”  she  said  in  a  deep  contralto  as  she  extended  her  hand,  which
Daniel promptly shook. “Please, sit down.”
Marie  Motumbo  was  an  unconventional  but  highly  practical  choice  to  lead  the  Demon
Task  Force.  Herself  a  Colonel  in  the  Nigerian  Army,  she’d  had  decades  of  practice  running
down fugitives and criminals. Shortly after the Revelation, Nigeria was nearly free of all known
demons,  quite  a  few  of  them  dispatched  by  her  personally.  When  the  UN  went  looking  for
someone to head up the DTF, all fingers pointed to her.
They both sat, and Marie leaned back in her chair to study Daniel. “I’ve been reading your
progress reports,” she said  in  nearly  unaccented  English.  “Your  team  has  the  highest  success
rate in the DTF, an accomplishment I attribute largely to you.”
“Thank you, but my team deserves as much credit as I do.”
“I’m sure they do. I didn’t bring you here for a pat on the back, Colonel. Have you read the
papers recently?”
“Not much, ma’am. Just here and there.”
“Well  look  at  this,”  she  said,  tossing  a  newspaper  in  Daniel’s  lap.  “The  CEO  of  Chrysler
stepped down last week amidst charges that he was either a demon himself or in  league  with
them. He denied the charges, but the public pressure and plummeting stock prices forced him
to  resign.  After  the  fact,  it  was  revealed  that  the  people  making  the  original  allegations  had
strong financial connections to Ford, but nobody seemed to care.
“Things are getting ugly out there, Daniel. The paranoia in your country  is  rising  to  levels
unseen since the Red Scare. In other parts of the world, my country, for example, hundreds of
people are lynched on a daily basis for the mere speculation that they might be demons.”
“Spirit  of  Salem,”  Daniel  said.  The  phrase  had  become  a  popular  graffiti  epitaph  in

particularly intense areas. Even Daniel and his team had been accused of being “witch hunters”
by the more liberal media, who were then generally accused of being in league with demons. It
was a vicious cycle.
“So you have been paying attention. While I think we can both  agree  that  the  removal  of
the demons is of paramount importance, we can’t very well tear  the  world  apart  doing  it.  So
you’re being reassigned.”
Daniel sat bolt upright in his chair. “What?”
“Calm down, Colonel. You and your team are doing so fine a job,  I’m giving you a special
mission.  If  we  keep  going  the  way  we  have  been,  it  could  be  years  before  the  demons  are
completely  wiped  out.  We  can’t  afford  to  get  one  here,  one  there  anymore.  So  you’re  going
straight to the source.”
“And that would be?”
“Hell. You’re going to Hell.”
Daniel was speechless.
“We’ve  heard  rumors  that  the  demons  have  a  stronghold  somewhere,  that  Satan  and
Beelzebub  have  taken  refuge  there.  We  believe  that  if  you  find  this  Hell,  we  can  destroy  it,
Satan  and  Beelzebub,  and  thus  cut  the  head  from  the  snake.  Your  mission  is  to  locate  Hell,
verify Satan’s presence and if possible, destroy him. We’ll do the rest. With any luck, this will
be a  crippling  blow  to  the  demons,  and  we  can  restore  some  semblance  of  order  before  the
world tears itself apart.”
Marie  Motumbo  sat  back  in  her  chair  and  picked  up  her  paperwork,  signaling  that  the
meeting was over. Daniel left quietly, deep in thought.
 
“We’re going where?” Paul asked.
“Hell, Paul. Satan’s stronghold, wherever that is,” Daniel replied.
When  Daniel  arrived  at  the  hotel  and  broke  the  news  about  their  new  assignment,  he’d
expected … he really didn’t  know  what  he  expected.  Surprise,  maybe,  excitement.  His  team
had other ideas.
Mostly Paul. “What’re we going to do, just walk up to Satan’s door and say, ‘Here we are’?”
“Something like that. Of course, we have to find the door first.”
“Hey, amigo,” Roberto yelled from behind his computer, “betcha when all those people in
your life told you to go to Hell, you never thought you’d really go, did you?”
“Bite me, ‘Berto.”
“Enough,” Daniel said, and they quieted.
“Jack? Any ideas?”
Jack hadn’t said a word since Daniel notified them  of  the  new  mission,  and  to  be  honest,

Daniel had no idea if he was in favor of it or not. He just knew  he  never  wanted  to  face  Jack
across a poker table.
“Yes, sir, I have a few. First thing I’d try is to capture and interrogate a demon. They’d have
to know the location of Hell.”
“Good idea,” Daniel said. “We can start looking for—”
“This  is  ridiculous!”  Paul  exclaimed.  “What  we’re  doing  now  is  fine,  we  don’t  need  to
traipsing off on some wild goose chase like a bunch of—”
Before  Paul  could  get  out  another  word,  Jack  was  up  and  in  his  face.  “Do  we  have  a
problem, Major?”
Paul could see there was only one right answer to the question. “No, I suppose we don’t.”
“Good,” Jack said, straightening Paul’s uniform, “because the Colonel has a new mission for
us, and that’s what we’re going to do. Are we clear?”
“Yes, sir.”
Daniel made a mental note to thank Jack later. The last thing he needed to worry about was
dissension in the ranks.
“Well,” Daniel said, “if there are no further questions, let’s get to work.”
 
He Who Would Be King
« ^ » 
Texan Senator Timothy Phillips sat in his San Antonio hotel room and waited for John  to  call
him.  Phillips  was  back  in  his  home  state  to  give  a  keynote  speech  to  a  group  of  area
businessmen. He made many such public appearances, as they gave him the means to spread
the word about his cause.
Which was, of course, himself.
Tim Phillips was a survivor. The last of six children to a Dallas city worker who never made
much above minimum wage, Phillips had to struggle for everything he ever had. Starting from
buying  his  own  school  supplies  in  junior  high  with  the  money  he  made  mowing  lawns,  he
eventually managed to put himself through not only college, but law school as well. He worked
the most menial part-time jobs imaginable, but he got his degree, passed the bar, and got a job
in  the  Dallas  District  Attorney’s  office.  After  years  of  laboring  as  an  assistant  D.A.,  Phillips
finally made District Attorney. He amassed a  stunning  record  of  convictions,  and  he  had  the
position of power and authority that he’d always been denied as a child.
But it wasn’t enough. After more than fifteen years as  a  prosecuting  attorney,  Phillips  ran
for public office, a seat in  the  Texas  state  legislature.  Tall,  imposing,  charismatic  and  with  an
impeccable service record, he won by a landslide, and ran for the U.S.  Senate four years later,
an  election  that  he  again  won  easily.  Phillips  became  a  force  for  change  on  Capitol  Hill,  his

booming  voice  often  heard  on  the  Senate  floor  vociferously  arguing  for  the  rights  of  the
common working man. His public life was untouchable.
His private life was a different matter. Phillips was, simply put, a megalomaniac. At the age
of fifty-three, he was still single because he had never felt it was worth the distraction from his
advancement  to  settle  down  and  start  a  family.  His  insatiable  lust  for  power  insured  that
although  he  was  a  U.S.  Senator,  one  of  one  hundred  men  that  made  the  laws  for  the  most
powerful nation of Earth, he still wasn’t happy. He wanted more.
When the news  about  the  demons  broke,  Phillips  knew  he  finally  had  his  opening.  As  a
lawyer  and  student  of  history,  he  knew  quite  well  the  kind  of  power  the  Red  Scare  had
bestowed  upon  Joe  McCarthy  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  He  saw  in  the  Demonic  Crusade  the
potential to give himself similar power, by giving  people  something  universal  to  be  afraid  of,
something he could blame on his rivals.
There  came  a  knock  on  his  door.  John  Williams,  a  young,  slightly  built  black  man  and
Phillips’ aide, poked his head in the door. “Senator, they’re ready for you.”
“Thanks,  John,”  Phillips  said  as  he  rose  from  the  hotel  room  couch  and  walked  out  the
door, following his aide down the hall and into the conference room of the hotel. John Williams
had been his aide since his first term in the Senate, and he was one of the few people Phillips
trusted. The young man had made many sacrifices for his boss, something Phillips appreciated,
even if he never said it.
Phillips took his place behind the podium and stared out at the sea of faces. Most of these
San Antonio high rollers had contributed heavily to his last campaign, and he knew what they
expected him to say.
“Gentlemen,  I  wish  I  could  stand  before  you  today  and  tell  you  how  well  we’re  doing.  I
wish  I  could  tell  you  that  we  live  in  the  greatest  country  in  the  world,  and  that  we’re  the
luckiest generation ever to walk the planet.
“I  wish  I  could  tell  you  these  things,  but  I  can’t.  It  just  wouldn’t  be  right.  The  truth  is,
gentlemen, that we have a problem.
“The  greatest  threat  to  ever  face  mankind  is  walking  our  streets,  and  we  aren’t  doing
anything about it. The UN’s so called  Demon  Task  Force  is  an  undersized,  ill-equipped  joke,
and the liberals on Capitol Hill are making sure the regular police and army have their  hands
tied.
“They could be anywhere, even now. Your neighbor, your dry cleaner, a derelict on a street
corner. The demons have had six months to blend back into human society. That ain’t a tough
task  for  an  immortal  monster  that’s  been  hiding  among  us  for  millennia.  Anyone  you  meet
could be a demon, and not only would you not know it, but even if you did you couldn’t do a
damn thing about it.
“Based on the number  of demons exterminated in the  last  six  months,  a  number  inflated
by the demons that refused to go into hiding before they were destroyed, the best estimate for
the DTF to wipe out this scourge is eight years.
“Eight years. More than enough time for most of these demons to disappear completely, to
establish new identities, to continue their eternal assault on mankind.  We  can’t  afford  to  wait

while the opportunity to end this slips through our fingers.
“I’m sure y’all are aware of the Demonic  Emergency Act, a bill I proposed that would help
us end this, a bill that was just voted down. The bill would have allowed local law enforcement
to  engage  in  demon  hunting,  and  it  would  have  revoked  a  demon’s  right  to  due  process,
preventing the godless monsters from clogging up our court  system.  We  need  legislation  like
this to rid ourselves of this threat, but it’s going to take a grass-roots movement to get it passed.
You know I’ve always been  a  defender  of  the  common  man.  Now  it’s  time  for  the  common
man to defend the world.
“I need each and every one of you to take up arms with me. I need you to champion the life
and liberty of every human being. Together, we can end the demonic threat once and for all!”
The room erupted into standing applause. Phillips smiled and waved, gave the thumbs  up
and walked out of the room. He headed for the hotel lobby, where he knew John would have
his  bags  packed  and  waiting.  The  money  pouring  out  of  the  pockets  of  those  businessmen,
even though Phillips had been careful not to ask for it directly, would go a  long  way  towards
lobbying his cause on the Hill.
Phillips believed maybe half of what he’d just told that room of fat-cat businessmen. He did
believe that the demons were the greatest threat mankind had ever known, and he did believe
that the DTF and U.S.  government were ill-equipped to deal with  them.  The  rest  was  mostly
rhetoric  designed  to  whip  the  audience  into  a  paranoid,  yet  patriotic,  frenzy.  In  cases  like
tonight,  it  was  designed  to  get  people  either  scared  or  enthused  enough  to  spend  a  lot  of
money. It usually worked.
Phillips was a man with a  plan.  If  he  could  raise  the  level  of  paranoia  and  distrust  in  the
country  high  enough,  he  could  have  any  public  official  that  got  in  his  way  impeached  for
merely the hint of demonic ties. If he played his cards right, he  might  even  get  the  president
himself  booted  out  of  office,  and  Phillips,  as  a  man  obviously  beyond  demonic  influence,
would be the obvious people’s choice to take the job.
Yeah, he thought as he got into the limousine John had waiting for him, he had it all figured
out, and everything was going according to schedule.
Lying back in the plush seat of the car, alone with his dreams (John didn’t really count), the
soon to be most powerful man in the world disappeared into the traffic of San Antonio.
 
The Inquisition
« ^ » 
ONE MONTH LATER.
The Interrogation Chamber was a specially constructed room inside an old warehouse Daniel’s
team had modified for their mission.  Constructed  of  titanium  reinforced  steel,  the  room  was
just large enough to accommodate a small group of interrogators and one subject  strapped  to
an angled table. The room was  a  vault,  designed  with  demonic  strength  in  mind.  It  was  just

outside this room that Daniel stood, waiting.
He’d just received word from Jack that they finally had a captive. After four long weeks of
searching,  the  team  had  finally  located  another  demon,  reportedly  named  Uzziel.  Jack  had
informed  Daniel  that  the  capture  had  been  made  cleanly,  and  that  they  were  bringing  the
subject in.
The door to the warehouse flew open and the DTF van  drove  in.  Daniel  walked  over  and
helped open the rear door to the van, then helped Jack and Heinrich wheel the gurney with the
rapidly healing demon into the Interrogation Chamber.  They soon had the demon  secured  to
the table, and by the time Uzziel was fully conscious, they were ready to begin.
Daniel did most of the talking. “You are the demon named Uzziel.”
“Bite me, mortal.”
“I’ll take that as a yes.” Daniel picked up a clipboard and began taking notes as he talked.
“Do you know where you are?”
“Disneyland.”
“Really.”
“Does it matter?”
“Come now, you aren’t the slightest bit worried about your situation?” Daniel asked.
Uzziel  stared  back  defiantly.  “Oh,  don’t  get  me  wrong.  You  and  your  little  band  of
witch-hunters have quite a reputation among my people. We all know what you’re capable of.
“But I served as a lieutenant to Gabriel’s personal guard before  the  Fall.  I’ve  served  under
Beelzebub ever since. Once you’ve had to answer to them, you mortals are strictly small time.”
“I see,” Daniel said. “I’ll cut right to the point. We need to know the  location  of  Hell,  and
we believe that you, as a demon, know where it is. So you’re going to tell us.”
Uzziel spat at Daniel. “Fuck you, human.”
Daniel seemed completely nonplused. “Heinrich, you may begin.”
Humming a happy and familiar little Christian hymn,  Heinrich set to work. The first thing
he did was to grab a large, sharp knife and peel the skin from Uzziel’s arm like he was peeling
a potato, then pour copious amounts of salt on the wound.
“This  the  best  you  can  do,  mortal?”  Uzziel  hissed  through  clenched  teeth.  “Were  our
positions reversed, I’d be tempted to do something really nasty.”
“We’re just warming up,” Daniel said with a smile. “Now tell me, where is Hell?”
“In your father’s basement, under the ashes.”
The smile disappeared from Daniel’s face, and he became very still.
“Sir, are you all right?” Jack asked.
“Fine,” Daniel answered, shaking it off. “Heinrich.”

Heinrich opened a small metal box and pulled out a metal  rod.  At  the  touch  of  a  button,
the tip of the rod began to glow red. Heinrich moved the rod slowly towards the demon’s face,
then plunged it carefully into each eye until they burst, oozing fluid down Uzziel’s cheeks.
The demon clenched his teeth  and  tensed  every  muscle  in  his  body,  but  did  not  make  a
sound.
“Where is Hell?” Daniel asked more forcibly.
“Up your ass,” Uzziel croaked, though his wounds were already beginning to heal up.
Daniel  nodded  again  to  Heinrich,  who  in  turn  sawed  off  the  demon’s  left  hand.  Uzziel
screamed, but said nothing coherent. Crimson blood flowed freely from the wound for  a  few
seconds, then tapered off.
Daniel took a step closer. “Where is Hell?” he screamed into the demon’s face. He received
no answer.
“Do it,” he said to Heinrich. The young German picked up a long, sharp knife and made an
incision down the length of Uzziel’s torso.  He  then  grabbed  a  metal  hook  and  began  pulling
out the demon’s intestines.
“Even for someone as old as you,” Daniel said, “you can’t have faced much  worse than this.
It can’t be comfortable. All you have to do to make it stop is tell us what we want to know.”
“And then you kill me,” Uzziel whispered, his breathing ragged and faint. “Fuck you, Cho.
I’m not playing your game.”
“Heinrich, the torch.”
The  young  German  put  down  his  hook  and  ignited  a  small  blowtorch.  After  spreading
open the hole in Uzziel’s torso, he began scorching random organs.
“Where is Hell?” Daniel demanded.
“You know,” Uzziel observed, speaking each word with great difficulty and concentration,
“it just occurred to me how much you look like your mother. You should have heard how she
begged just before I snapped her neck.”
Before either Heinrich or Jack could react, Daniel had one of the knives in his hand and was
straddling Uzziel. “Where is it, you son of a bitch?”  he  screamed  as  he  began  wildly  hacking
away at the demon. “Where’s Hell, motherfucker?”
Daniel went  into  a  frenzy,  mercilessly  slashing  and  stabbing  with  the  knife,  the  demon’s
blood  splashing  the  metal  walls  five  feet  away.  “Tell  me!”  Daniel  thundered.  “Tell  me,  you
fucking monster! You sadistic son of a bitch, tell me what I need to know!”
Daniel  gradually  became  aware  of  someone  calling  his  name.  He  turned  and  saw  Jack
standing behind him, pleading for Daniel to step away. As Daniel pulled himself back  from the
pile of torn and severed flesh that was quick resolving itself back into a demon, he noticed that
he  was  covered  in  blood,  and  that  Heinrich  and  Jack  weren’t  much  cleaner.  Daniel  was
ashamed of himself. He wasn’t much of a leader if he let himself lose control like that.
Daniel and Jack stepped away, not out of the demon’s earshot, but comfortably away from

most of the blood.
“It’s no use,” Daniel said. “He’s not going to tell us anything useful.
“Destroy him.”
“Sir, do you want me to  take  him  out  in  the  van  and…”  Jack  mimed  pushing  down  the
plunger on an old fashioned dynamite detonator.
“No, we don’t have time for that,” Daniel said. “Just drop  him  in  the  shredder  and  make
sure  you  burn  the  pieces.”  The  warehouse  came  equipped  with  an  old  waste  shredder,
essentially a large metal hopper feeding into motorized spinning blades.
“And find me another interrogation subject.”
Daniel walked out of the Interrogation Chamber, closing the door behind him.
 
Updates
« ^ » 
Daniel sat in Marie Motumbo’s  office and tried to think of a way to put a positive spin on the
way things had gone. Motumbo spoke before he could think of anything.
“I have to admit, Colonel, I’m a little disappointed.”
So was Daniel. In the three weeks since the incident with Uzziel, things had gone no better
for his team. “Yes, ma’am. We are  too.  We’ve  interrogated  three  demons  so  far,  and  none  of
them has told us anything important. If we don’t get something soon, we’re  going  to  have  to
write off this whole method of inquiry.”
Motumbo got up and stood by her office window, staring out into space. It was something
Daniel had often seen her do when she had something important on her mind.
“Daniel?” she asked.
“Yes, ma’am?”
She turned back to face him. “Drop the ‘ma’am’ for now, okay? I just want to talk person
to person.”
“Sure, Marie. What’s on your mind?”
“How are we doing? Really?”
“What do you mean?” Daniel asked.
Marie  began  to  pace.  “I  sit  up  here  in  this  office  all  day  and  orchestrate  a  global  assault
against inhuman monsters. That’s my job, and I think I do it well. But I never really get out in
the field anymore. I know what’s going on in this war only by the progress reports I read. That,
and the newspapers.”

She  stopped  and  leaned  against  her  desk,  facing  Daniel.  “And  what  I  read  scares  me.
Things get worse out there every day, more hysteria, more innocent people dead or ostracized,
with  no  end  in  sight.  You  walk  the  streets  every  day,  so  I  want  your  opinion.  How  are  we
doing?”
Daniel eased back in his chair and gave it some thought. “Well, we’re making headway. We
know there’s a finite number of them, so each one we take out, no matter how long it takes, is
one step closer.”
“That’s just what worries me, Daniel. It’s taking too long. Demons have always been agents
of chaos, and chaos  is  just  what  they’re  getting  right  now.  I’m  beginning  to  fear  that  by  the
time we destroy the last demon, they will have already won.”
Daniel stood up and straightened his uniform. “That’s not going to happen. We’ll find Hell
soon, and when we do, we can end this once and for all.”
Instead of  responding,  Marie  Motumbo  turned  and  stared  out  the  window  again.  Daniel
left her alone with her thoughts in the silent office.
 
Susan had hit paydirt. At least, she thought she did. She’d been spending most of her time
following up on Sal’s lead, doing an in depth study of the hysteria and the people it affected.
In the hundreds of highly publicized accusations of demonic ties and sympathies, almost all
of them, if you dug deep enough, could be connected to one man.
Senator Timothy Phillips.
Susan  had  suspected  as  much.  Over  the  last  few  months,  she’d  literally  gotten  sick  of
reading his name on her nightly newscasts. To  suspect  was  one  thing  however,  now  she  had
proof.
Susan got up from the desk in her apartment and walked to the window. What could she
do about it? As far as she could tell, Phillips had done nothing technically wrong; no laws had
been broken,  no official rules of the Senate stepped  on.  Phillips  had  personally  done  nothing
but make suggestions, inferences.
Inferences that were quickly whipping the public into a paranoid frenzy. The  man  had  to
be stopped. Susan had always been taught that the news media was not a place to air personal
issues,  and  she  was  a  deep  believer  in  journalistic  objectivity,  but  Sal  was  right.  She  was
probably the only person that could speak out against Phillips and this witch-hunting insanity
without  being  accused  of  demonic  sympathies.  Too  many  people  had  already  lost  their
livelihoods, or their lives, because someone else accused them  of being in league with demons.
It had to stop.
And once again, Susan found herself not just reporting the news, put preparing to make it.
 
Timothy Phillips was nearly beside himself  with  exhilaration.  He  had  just  received  all  the
necessary  permits  and  authorization  to  hold  a  rally  against  the  demons  on  the  Mall  in
Washington D.C. He was virtually guaranteed maximum press coverage, and he’d already seen

to it that a number of stories about highly placed demon sympathizers would break just before
the rally. With any luck at all, the publicity from this rally would begin the wave of popularity
that swept him into the White House.
There came a knock at his office door.
“Come in.”
John walked in, carrying a tray with cups and a coffeepot. “Your coffee, sir.”
Phillips waved a dismissive hand. “Just set it down anywhere.”
As John placed the tray gingerly on Phillips’ desk, he said, “Great news about the rally.”
Phillips sat back  in his chair. He  loved  talking  about  his  accomplishments.  “Yes,  yes  it  is.
How’s  that  speech  coming?”  Although  Phillips  selected  the  topics  and  major  themes  of  his
public speeches, it was more often than  not  John  that  wrote  the  actual  words.  He  seemed  to
have a gift with the kind of fiery, inspirational writing Phillips needed so much these days.
“Very well, sir. Another draft or two and it’ll be ready.”
“Wonderful. That will be all, John.”
With a submissive nod of his head, John Williams left the office.
Phillips turned his chair so he could stare out  his  window,  the  view  overlooking  the  Mall
with the  Lincoln  Memorial  and  the  Washington  Monument  visible  in  the  distance.  One  day
soon, Phillips thought, all this will be mine.
 
Daniel  made  his  way  on  foot  through  the  streets  of  New  York,  deep  in  thought.  He’d
decided to walk back to the temporary headquarters his team had set up so he could figure out
a  course  of  action.  It  was  obvious  that  the  interrogation  idea  was  a  wash.  Even  when  he
managed  to  restrain  himself  and  conduct  the  questioning  rationally  and  methodically,  the
demons simply wouldn’t talk. Not to him. Not to a human.
And time was running short, perhaps shorter than even Marie understood. The world was
quickly polarizing into two distinct camps, and Daniel could tell just by the way people looked
at him on the streets which they fell into.
Some saw the cobalt blue of his DTF uniform and smiled, maybe even added a bit of spring
to their step. They were the people Timothy Phillips spoke to, the people who, like Daniel and
every  member  of  the  DTF,  felt  that  the  demons  were  the  greatest  threat  in  the  history  of
mankind and that they had to be wiped out, whatever the cost.
Only Daniel wasn’t sure just how much of that he believed anymore.
The primary reason for his doubt was the look of the others he saw on  the  streets.  People
that scowled at him openly, or muttered “witch-hunter” under their breath. Often accused  of
being somehow in league with the demons if they aired their views too openly, these were the
people that Marie was concerned about. While the vast majority of them  held no love in their
hearts  for  the  demons,  they  opposed  the  “fanatical  methods”  used  in  the  demons’
extermination. They felt no threat was worth the revocation of their basic human rights.

As long as the demons existed,  the  people  of  the  world  would  be  thusly  divided.  And  as
long as that division existed, the tension would continue to threaten a fragile world peace it had
taken centuries to build.
And so Daniel had to find a way to  destroy  the  demons  he  had  inadvertently  discovered.
Before the world fell into chaos and terror, before the demons won.
As Daniel walked into their makeshift headquarters, an old firehouse, Roberto flagged him
down. “Hey, boss! You’re just in time. You have a phone call.”
Daniel walked over and took the phone. “Who is it?” he asked Roberto.
“He wouldn’t say, but he said you’d know him.”
“Hello?” Daniel said into the phone.
“You’re a hard man to reach these days, Daniel,” said Uriel’s voice on the other end of the
line. “I think we need to talk.”
 
Inferno
« ^ » 
Deep  inside  a  supposedly  abandoned  missile  silo  in  the  Nevada  desert  north  of  Las  Vegas,
Satan  waited.  The  demon  sat  in  a  large  room  lined  with  television  screens,  each  tuned  to  a
different  channel  and  all  muted.  In  the  glow  of  the  monitors,  Satan  looked  young,  like  a
human in his early thirties. His full, black hair was swept back  from his forehead, accentuating
his high cheekbones and aquiline nose. His azure eyes held a look of intense  concentration  as
he  absorbed  information  from  the  screens,  which  randomly  switched  channels  every  thirty
seconds.
“My Lord,” called a deep voice from the edge of the room.
Satan snapped out of his trance and hit a button on  the  armrest  of  his  chair,  blanking  all
the screens at once. He looked to the doorway and saw Beelzebub, who had grown a full head
of ebony hair since Cho had released pictures of him to the humans.
“You wished to see me?” Beelzebub asked.
“Yes,” Satan replied with a charming smile. “Take a look.”
He  turned  on  the  screens  again.  “Look  at  them,  old  friend.  They’re  frightened.  Chaotic.
Even  in  the  broadcasts  that  don’t  address  the  ‘Demonic  Threat’  directly,  there  is  increased
sexual  imagery,  more  violence.  Every  single  one  of  these  screens  practically  screams  ‘War.’
We’re winning.”
Satan rose from his chair. “Walk with me,” he said.
The two demons left the monitor room and began an informal tour of the stronghold they
called “Hell.” The missile silo had  been  expanded  significantly  during  the  conversion  process

and  was  now  an  underground  fortress  the  size  of  a  medium  sized  town.  More  than  twenty
stories deep and nearly a mile across, Hell was the focal point for the world’s demonic activity,
and the temporary home for nearly half the demons, at least until the hunts blew over.
“Overall,  I’m  very  pleased,”  Satan  said  as  they  passed  the  library,  a  hall  of  books  that
rivaled the Library of Congress, except that  Hell’s  library  had  quite  a  few  ancient  tomes  that
could be found nowhere else on earth. “Only one thing troubles me.”
“The DTF?” Beelzebub guessed.
Satan chuckled. “No,  my  friend.  For  the  moment,  they’re  more  help  than  hindrance.  As
long  as  they  exist,  the  tension  between  fanatical  demon  haters  and  liberal  human  rights
activists  remains  high.  Without  knowing  it,  they  work  in  our  favor.  No,  my  worry  is  an
individual human.”
“Timothy Phillips, then,” Beelzebub said. He hated it when Satan played his little guessing
games, but he could do little about it.
“No,  he  too  serves  our  purpose,  though  in  a  very  roundabout  fashion.  He  makes  people
afraid, and I want them afraid. Besides, when he’s no longer useful to us, it will be easy enough
to dispose of him. No, our problem is his nemesis.”
Beelzebub cast a sidelong glance at the power station as they passed. Hell ran on geothermal
energy, and the power system took up nearly a quarter of their space. Satan often joked about
Hell being powered by the “fires of the underworld.” Beelzebub racked his brain, but  he  had
no clue to whom his boss referred. “His nemesis?”
“Yes. A young newscaster named Susan Richardson. I’m sure you’ve heard of her.”
Beelzebub merely gave Satan a sour look.
“At first,” the head demon continued, “she was of some use to us, in that in publishing that
fool Zagam’s files, she stirred the fires of fear and unrest that we’d let die down. Our exposure
actually helped our cause, as it was a destabilizing influence.”
Beelzebub sighed. He’d heard this a million times, but The Prince of Lies loved to talk.
“Now Miss Richardson seems to be undoing what she’s done,” Satan added.
“How so?”
“She’s taken it upon herself to be the voice of reason in  the  face  of  Phillips’  tirades.  She’s
speaking out to anyone who’ll listen about the dangers of paranoia, the evils of fanaticism.”
“A lot of people are saying those things,” Beelzebub observed.
“Yes,” Satan said, stopping at the Pit. A vertical shaft where the missile used to be, it ran the
entire depth of the complex. Satan often stopped at a railing at its edge and peered down into
the darkness below. “Yes, a lot of people are indeed saying that. But most of those people don’t
have the pull Susan Richardson has. She  has quickly become  one of the most recognized and
respected journalists on the planet, largely thanks to us. People are listening to what she has to
say.”
“More than they listen to people like Phillips?”

“Not yet, but they will soon. And so I have a job for you.”
“If I eliminate her, it will only make her a martyr.”
“Maybe, maybe not. I doubt her message is strong enough yet to carry on  without  her.  It
will be soon, but not yet.
“In two days, Phillips is holding a rally on the Mall. I’m quite sure Richardson will attend.
You  are  to  eliminate  her,  publicly,  during  the  rally.  Make  it  as  messy  as  you  like,  for  the
cameras.  With  any  luck,  her  death  at  the  hands  of  a  very  recognizable  demon  will  bolster
Phillips’ point, and help spread the chaos we need so badly, if we are to defeat the angels and
fulfill our calling.
“Have you any questions?”
Beelzebub bowed his head. “No, my Lord.” He was tempted to ask Satan what to do about
the  DTF  forces  that  were  sure  to  be  in  attendance,  but  the  second  in  command  of  all  the
demons was expected to be able to handle himself. Beelzebub turned and walked away, leaving
his master standing at the edge of the abyss and staring into the darkness.
 
An Old Friend
« ^ » 
As the sun set on Washington D.C.,  Daniel wrapped  his  coat  a  little  tighter.  He  stood  on  the
broad  marble  steps  of  the  Jefferson  Memorial,  one  of  the  city’s  smaller,  more  private
monuments.  It was his  favorite  spot  in  the  whole  city.  In  the  spring,  the  trees  that  lined  the
tidal basin in front of the domed memorial would be  pink  with  cherry  blossoms.  Daniel  had
often spent many of the few hours he wasn’t working as a paramedic reclining on the marble
steps or sitting under one of those trees, reading. On the days he actually walked past the great
columns and into the monument  itself, he never failed to be  awed  by  the  Thomas  Jefferson’s
words on the walls. He dearly missed the quiet, anonymous peace of those days.
“Cold, Daniel?”
Daniel turned and saw the archangel Uriel,  looking  exactly  the  same  as  when  they’d  first
met.  Same  brown  hair,  same  chiseled,  ageless  looks,  same  battered  leather  jacket  and  jeans.
The angel looked nothing like his legend, that of the angel who stood at the gates of Eden with
the flaming sword. He looked like any other human in Washington. Centuries of blending in at
work, Daniel thought. “Uriel. It’s good to see you again.”
Uriel  slapped  Daniel  on  the  back  and  they  began  to  walk  slowly  around  the  tidal  basin.
“You too, Daniel.  You  and  Susan  have  both  made  names  for  yourselves.  I  sometimes  like  to
think I had a little part in your success.”
“More  than  a  little.  But  you  could  have  done  more.  Why  did  you  and  the  other  angels
disappear after the story broke?”
Uriel reached up, broke a small twig off a tree and toyed with it. “We felt it was your time

to shine. We didn’t want to get in the way. And we felt that were we to take too prominent a
role, you might not have driven the demons underground, so to speak.”
“Why is that?”
Uriel stopped and looked Daniel in the eye. “If we’d been fully present when  the  news  of
our  and  the  demons’  existence  broke,  the  demons  might  have  felt  so  threatened  that  they
would have declared all out war on both of us. As it was, they thought, wrongly perhaps, that
they could handle you on their own. By bowing out we may have saved millions of lives.”
Daniel started walking again. “If that’s true, what’s so important to bring you out now?”
“Angels aren’t infallible, Daniel. We’re beginning to wonder if we did the  right  thing.  I’ve
kept  up  with  current  events.  Even  as  you  wipe  them  out,  the  demons  are  winning.  Chaos,
paranoia and hysteria run rampant in your  society,  and  it’s  even  worse  in  the  less  developed
parts of the world. A number  of angels, Gabriel chief among them,  are concerned that by the
time the demons are wiped out, there may not be enough of human civilization  left  for  us  to
guide. We’re worried that your crusade may already be a lost cause.”
Has  he  been  talking  to  Marie?  Daniel  wondered.  “Yeah,  we’ve  been  kind  of  concerned
about that, too. We’ve already come to a decision about it.”
“Really? And that would be?”
For a moment Daniel wondered whether or not he should explain his mission to the angel.
He  really  knew  next  to  nothing  about  Uriel,  other  than  the  fact  that  Uriel  had  helped  him,
Susan and Jeff just when they needed it the most.  “My  team  is  on  special  assignment.  We’re
supposed to locate  Hell  and  kill  Satan.  With  him  down,  a  strike  force  might  be  able  to  take
down  the  demons’  nerve  center.  You  wouldn’t  happen  to  know  the  location  of  Hell,  would
you?”
Uriel laughed. “No, the demons generally make sure we angels aren’t privy to that kind of
information. But I could try to find out for you.”
Daniel almost couldn’t believe what he was hearing. “Really?”
“Daniel, it’s the least I can do. For reasons I hope you never know.”
Daniel looked around. Full  dark  had  fallen,  and  the  lights  on  the  memorial  made  it  look
more majestic than usual. “Thanks, Uriel. I really—”
As he turned back, he saw the angel walking away. Must be slipping in his old age, Daniel
thought. We never used to see him leave.
As if on cue, Uriel turned around and walked back  to Daniel. “I almost  forgot,”  the  angel
said. “The other thing I had to say. I received word this morning that Beelzebub is in town.”
“Here?” Daniel asked. “In D.C.?”
“Yes.  Phillips’  rally  on  the  Mall  is  tomorrow  afternoon,  and  if  you  ask  me,  Beelzebub’s
arrival the day before the demons’ biggest human antagonist speaks to the nation’s media is a
little too coincidental. You may want to be there.”
“Understood.”

“Good  luck,  Daniel.  Until  we  meet  again.”  The  angel  turned  and  walked  away.  No  trick
disappearances anymore, Daniel noticed. He merely walked into the night.
With much on his mind, Daniel did the same.
Shortly after Daniel and Uriel departed, a man neither had noticed appeared from behind a
tree. He made a few notes in a small spiral notepad, then walked quickly towards downtown.
 
Point/Counterpoint
« ^ » 
When  Phillips  was  ready  to  speak  the  next  afternoon,  Daniel  and  his  team  were  ready.  The
podium was set up on a huge metal stage not far from the Washington Monument.  Daniel had
people set up all around, including Heinrich, his best shooter, in the Monument  itself.  Daniel
was out of sight on the stage, only ten meters from the podium. He began a final check over his
radio.
“DTF one to team. Report in.”
“DTF two, all clear,” reported Jack from the other side of the stage.
“DTF three, all clear,” reported Heinrich from his sniper’s position atop the monument.
“DTF four, all clear,” reported Lucy from her position at the base of the monument.
“DTF five, all clear,” reported Paul from behind the stage.
“DTF six, all clear,” reported Roberto from inside the communications van.
By  the  estimates  the  Park  Service  gave  Daniel,  there  were  over  one  hundred  thousand
people gathered on the hillside at the base of the monument  and stretching up the mall nearly
to  the  Capitol  Building  waiting  to  hear  Phillips  speak.  Hundreds  of  them  held  signs  and
banners, roughly evenly split in favor of Phillips’ policies and opposing  them.  He  still  saw  no
sign of Beelzebub, though.
A limousine pulled up  behind  the  stage.  Surrounded  by  aides  and  Secret  Service  agents,
Senator  Timothy  Phillips  got  out  of  the  car  and  made  his  way,  smiling  and  waving,  to  the
podium.
“My fellow Americans and people of the world,” Phillips began, “I want to thank  y’all  for
hearing me today. I need to discuss something that could affect the future of all mankind.
“About eight months ago, we finally learned the demons of our nightmares were real, flesh
and blood creatures. In the time  since,  we’ve  tried  to  wipe  out  this  plague,  and  we’ve  failed.
The demons are, if  anything,  more  widespread  and  dug  in  now  than  when  this  whole  thing
started. The UN’s Demon Task Force is a failure, and it’s about time we own up to that.
“Worse  than  that,  the  demons  are  everywhere.  These  godless  monsters  have  had  untold
centuries  experience  blending  into  the  human  population,  and  that’s  exactly  what  they’ve

done.  Despite  what  they’ve  told  you,  the  DTF  doesn’t  have  the  slightest  idea  how  many
demons  there  really  are.  The  ones  that  weren’t  named  in  Zagam’s  files  probably  kept  their
human  identities  and  even  now  work  against  you.  They  could  be  anyone.  Your  boss.  A
cabdriver. Even your best friend.
“And these are demons that the DTF will never find.
“So I’ve come here today with a Call to Arms. If the DTF and the federal government can’t
or won’t track down and destroy these monsters, it’s our duty as Americans to do it for them.
We have the right as Americans to bear arms. We have the right, as Americans, to protect our
homes and families. If we can’t depend on those elected to protect us, it’s our duty to  protect
ourselves, and end the demonic threat once and for all!”
The crowed erupted into a cacophony of cheers and boos. The sides were drawing up.
“I call for every American to take up arms and hunt down the demons close to you. I want
each and every one of you to consider yourself a demon hunter, and to strike fast and without
mercy when you discover one of these monsters. I want—”
“That’s enough!” cried another voice from the side of the stage. Most of the crowd hushed
as  Susan  Richardson  forced  her  way  up  to  the  podium.  “Don’t  listen  to  this  madness!”  she
yelled.
“Now just hold on there, little lady,” Phillips said, trying  to  maintain  control.  “This  here’s
by invitation only, and I don’t recall inviting you.”
“He’s afraid,” Susan said into the microphone. “He’s afraid a voice of reason will break his
spell.”
Someone  in the crowd  began  chanting  “Let  her  speak!  Let  her  speak!”  and  thousands  of
people picked up on it. Not wanting to do anything in front of the cameras that worsened his
image, Phillips relented.
“Some of what Senator Phillips said is true,” Susan began. “Yes, there are still demons out
there. Yes, the DTF is destroying them slower than we hoped.
“But last I checked,  vigilantism and public lynchings were  still  illegal  in  this  country.  The
witch hunt mentality Phillips proposes merely plays into the  demons’  hands.  It  instills  chaos,
distrust and fear. We can’t allow fear of the demons to do their work for them.  We can’t let it
tear us apart!”
Someone  in  the  crowd  shouted  “Demonlover!”  and  lobbed  a  beer  bottle  at  the  podium,
where it caught Susan in the head. She went down, bleeding.
That was all  it  took.  Within  moments,  the  tensions  and  divisiveness  in  the  crowd  turned
violent. As the riot grew, the hopelessly outmatched Park Police tried to quell it and the Secret
Service escorted everyone on the stage, including Daniel, Jack and Susan, out the back.
Waiting behind the stage out of the way yet still in view  of  the  television  cameras  stood  a
tall figure in a hat and heavy coat. When Susan and Phillips exited  the  stage  and  were  in  full
view, Beelzebub threw off the coat and hat, revealing a huge battle-axe, and prepared to make
his move.

 
Adversary
« ^ » 
Madre de Dios.” Inside the communications van, Roberto couldn’t believe what he was seeing.
They  had  all  expected  Beelzebub  to  make  his  move  on  Phillips  during  the  speech,  for
maximum  effect. Now Roberto had on camera a perfect shot of the  demon  behind  the  stage,
getting ready to use one hell of an axe.
Roberto keyed his radio. “DTF six to DTF one.  Come  in,  boss.”  He  got  no  response  from
Daniel, and judging from what he could see on his camera, neither Daniel  nor  Jack  had  even
heard him.
Roberto wasn’t combat ready, but he couldn’t just sit there and watch this happen. He took
a pistol he’d only fired at practice ranges from the console next to him, opened the back  door
of the van, and stepped into the fray.
On the Washington  Mall,  chaos  reigned.  The  tensions  that  had  been  simmering  over  the
past few months had boiled over with a vengeance. Thousands of people were already battered
and bloodied as the riot spilled into the streets of the U.S. capitol.
 
Inside the  White  House,  President  Walter  Thomas  watched  the  carnage  on  television.  He
looked away when Bill Peterson, his chief of staff, walked into the Oval Office.
“So you’ve seen,” Peterson said.
“Bill, how on earth did we let it come to this?” the president asked.
“I suppose we didn’t see it coming.”
“Bullshit, Bill, a blind man could see this coming. We were just too afraid of standing up to
Phillips and his witch-hunters to act on it.”
The  President  of  the  United  States  continued  to  watch  the  riot  unfold  on  his  television.
Before  long,  he  thought,  I’ll  be  able  to  watch  it  out  the  window.  “It’s  not  going  to  get  any
better,” he said. “Call in the National Guard.”
 
Roberto ran, not for his life, but for others. From his vantage point, he was still the only one
that could see Beelzebub. His shouted warnings were lost in the din of the riot, and the demon
was closing in on the tight knot of people that was Daniel, Jack, Susan, Phillips and a handful
of Secret Service agents.
Though  Roberto  had  his  pistol  out,  he  dared  not  fire.  The  demon  was  in  a  direct  line
between him and the others. If he missed, he might end up doing the demon’s work for him.
His  only  hope  was  to  get  close  enough  to  the  demon  for  a  shot  he  couldn’t  miss  before  the
demon reached his target.

And  it  soon  became  obvious  as  Roberto  lugged  his  heavy  frame  across  the  Mall  that  he
wasn’t  going  to  make  it.  Ten  meters  away  from  Beelzebub  and  twenty-five  from  Daniel,
Roberto took his shot.
The bullet flew high and wide to the right. The demon kept running.
Roberto couldn’t let this happen. He took  off  with  everything  he  had,  figuring  if  he  gave
himself a heart attack, maybe his momentum  would let him  tackle  Beelzebub  anyway.  Scant
meters before Beelzebub would be in striking range of his first target, Roberto let go a  primal
scream and made contact. He and the demon went down in a tangle of limbs.
 
Daniel whirled at the commotion  and saw Roberto struggling  feebly  but  bravely  with  the
demon. “DTF one to team,” he shouted into his radio. “Beelzebub is behind the stage. ‘Berto’s
down! Move it!”
Daniel and Jack moved into position  as  Beelzebub  regained  control  of  the  situation.  They
couldn’t get a clean shot because the demon was using Roberto as a shield. He held Roberto in
front of him with one hand and the axe at his side with the other.
“You’ve got nowhere to go, Beelzebub,” Daniel said over the riot. “Put him down and step
back and no harm will come to you.”
“Well,”  Beelzebub  replied  in  his  thundering  baritone,  “since  you  put  it  that  way…”
Uncurling  his  arm,  he  flung  Roberto  to  the  side.  At  the  last  second,  he  refused  to  let  go  of
Roberto’s jaw. Even over the crowd noise the others heard quite clearly the snap of the man’s
spine  as  he  heavy  body  went  one  way  and  his  head  remained  in  place.  Beelzebub  dropped
Roberto’s corpse.
Daniel couldn’t believe what he just saw. “Take him down!” he screamed.
The  bullets  flew  from  the  weapons  of  the  DTF  and  Secret  Service,  but  Beelzebub  didn’t
seem to mind. Faster than anyone expected, he  charged  into  his  group  of  attackers,  bringing
them  into  each  other’s  line  of  fire.  He  then  began  to  swing  his  axe  with  reckless  abandon,
taking out two Secret Service agents before anyone thought to stand back.
And on the Mall, the riot raged on.
 
Allies
« ^ » 
The  battle  with  Beelzebub  had  quickly  devolved  into  a  stalemate.  The  demon  kept  moving
quickly, weaving his way in front of one person after another, so no one could get a clear shot.
On the other hand, the DTF and Secret Service kept everyone else out of range of that axe. And
so the game continued, each side playing out little feints that ultimately went nowhere.
Then,  over  the  noise  of  the  riot,  over  even  the  noise  of  the  approaching  National  Guard,

they all heard the thunder of rockets, drawing nearer by the second.
“Look!” someone shouted.
Daniel reluctantly took his eyes off the demon and searched the sky. Out of the glare of the
afternoon  sun,  he  saw  four  vaguely  man-shaped  figures  drop  from  the  air.  The  first  landed
with  a  heavy  thud,  his  back-mounted  rocket  scorching  the  grass  between  Daniel  and
Beelzebub. The other three landed soon after, surrounding the demon.
Stark  white  suits  of  armor  the  likes  of  which  Daniel  had  never  seen  covered  the  four  of
them from head to toe, shifting metallic plates mimicking  in shape and position all  the  major
muscle  groups.  Folding  metal  wings  swung  back  from  the  shoulder  blades,  each  wing
including an integral rocket or engine.  The  armor  suits  each  stood  seven  feet  tall,  and  nearly
five feet wide even with the wings folded. They looked like metal, winged gods.
Beelzebub spoke first, addressing the armored figure between himself and Daniel. “Gabriel.
Long time, no see.”
Gabriel answered him, the angel’s voice amplified through the armor. “It’s over, Beelzebub.
You and your kind will trouble the humans no longer.”
Beelzebub looked around at  the  four  angels  that  faced  him,  then  dropped  his  axe.  “Fine.
You win. I’ll leave.”
Gabriel took a step forward. “I’m afraid you don’t understand. The rules have changed.”
Before  even  his  demonic  reflexes  could  react,  the  four  angels  each  grabbed  one  of
Beelzebub’s limbs. Gabriel half-turned to face the crowd of humans, and more importantly, the
television cameras. “Let this be an example  to  the  demons  of  the  world!”  his  amplified  voice
rang. “Your reign of terror is over!”
Without  another  word,  the  four  angels  extended  their  wings,  ignited  the  wing-mounted
rockets, and took off. Daniel and the others watched at they flew hundreds of feet into the air,
Beelzebub flailing  helplessly  between  them.  On  Gabriel’s  cue,  they  all  flew  away  in  different
directions, ripping the demon apart. Before any of the pieces could fall back to earth, they were
incinerated by the angels’ arm-mounted flame-throwers. Without  any  further  statements,  the
four angels turned and flew away to the northwest.
 
By nightfall, the National Guard had dispersed most of the rioters. A few were detained for
questioning, but most simply went home. The president was wrong. The fighting never got as
far  as  the  White  House.  Small  miracles,  he  thought  as  he  again  stared  out  the  Oval  Office
window. But this has to stop.
Someone  knocked  on  his  door.  Jenny  Miller,  his  press  secretary,  poked  her  head  in.
“Mister President, they’re waiting.”
“Thank you, Jenny.”
Walter  Thomas  straightened  his  jacket  and  hurriedly  gathered  together  the  speech  he’d
spent all evening writing. This foolishness had gone on long enough.

When he walked into the White House Press Room, the gathered mass of reporters quieted
at once. Personally, he was amazed at the turnout. It’d been a heavy news day.
“Thanks for coming on such  short  notice,”  he  said  into  the  microphone.  A  few  reporters
laughed good-naturedly.
“Eight  months  ago,  we  learned  that  humans  weren’t  the  only  sentient  creatures  on  this
planet, and that the creatures we knew only in myth and religion as angels and demons  were
real,  flesh  and  blood  creatures.  We  also  learned  that  the  demons  had  been  hounding  and
tormenting mankind for centuries.
“That  knowledge,  like  all  knowledge,  could  have  become  either  a  blessing  or  a  curse,
depending on what we did with it. Today in the nation’s capitol, we found out which it would
be.
“As much  as I might agree with Senator Phillips in ideology,  I  must  condemn  his  means.
While our laws in this country only cover human rights, his call for individual citizens to hunt
down demons on their own is irresponsible and dangerous. A man’s right to swing his fist ends
at another man’s nose, and thousands of individual demon hunts are going to get a lot of noses
broken.  We have laws regarding vigilantism in this country, and I expect our citizens  to  obey
them.
“The UN’s Demon Task Force is doing the best it can to erase the demonic threat, but while
those brave men and women do their jobs, we need to get out of the way.
“In  that  light,  I’m  declaring  a  national  State  of  Emergency,  the  duration  of  which  being
until  the  demons  are  wiped  out.  During  this  time,  any  demon  hunts  conducted  by  private
citizens will be considered a federal crime, and will be prosecuted as such.
“It’s important, ladies and gentlemen, to remain calm. The situation is being handled, and
despite what some may tell you, it’s being handled well. You are in no danger other than fear
and hysteria. We’ll get through this thing, together, as a nation.”
Most  of  the  reporters  began  asking  questions,  but  one  voice  quieted  them  all.  “Mister
President, may I join you?”
Nearly all the  reporters  recognized  the  voice  from  the  footage  they’d  seen  of  Beelzebub’s
destruction. The crowd parted to allow Gabriel, who’d been standing quietly at the back  of the
room, to approach the podium. The angel stepped up and stood next to the president. Gabriel
towered over the human.  Though  not  as  tall  as  Beelzebub,  he  stood  at  least  six  foot  six.  The
armor was gone and he was dressed in an impeccable Italian suit.
“Mister  President,  it’s  an  honor.  I  am  the  archangel  Gabriel.”  The  man  and  angel  shook
hands.
“Pleased to meet you, Gabriel. You did quite a job on Beelzebub out there today.”
“Yes  sir.  That’s  rather  what  I  wanted  to  discuss.”  Gabriel  turned  to  face  the  press,  the
president seemingly forgotten.
“My people have made a mistake. When the news of our and the demons’ existence broke,
we thought that our involvement would only complicate things. If the demons were faced with
having to fight both humans and angels, we were afraid they would fight more fiercely and the

battle  would  cost  too  many  irreplaceable  human  lives.  We  counted  on  their  arrogance,  and
your skill, to wipe them out before they realized they needed to strike.
“Unfortunately,  we  were  wrong.  The  demons  have  proven  far  more  difficult  to  remove
than we hoped, and now we realize our need to step in and help you end this madness. Today
was our first test.
“I would like to announce that from this point on, the angels are willing and active partners
with  humans  in  the  struggle  against  the  demons.  Together,  with  our  strength  and  your
flexibility, we can wipe their evil from the Earth for all time!”
The crowd erupted into applause, and the angel stepped down from the podium to answer
each reporter’s questions individually. No one noticed when the president left the room.
 
The Oracle
« ^ » 
Uriel crouched behind a cluster of tumbleweeds in the hot Nevada desert,  taking  one  picture
after another.
It  had  taken  countless  hours  of  non-stop  investigative  work,  exhausting  all  of  his  usual
sources, but he finally thought he had the location of Hell. He’d tracked several demons to this
area just north of Las Vegas, where  he’d  discovered  an  abandoned  missile  silo.  It  didn’t  look
like much  from the outside, more a shack than anything else, and if he didn’t  know  what  he
was looking for he probably would have missed it. But the longer he stayed and took pictures,
the more sure he was that he was right. This was the place.
The angels had suspected for quite some time that Satan had moved his headquarters after
the Revelation. Immediately after talking with Daniel in Washington, Uriel had caught a flight
for the Middle East, and verified that all Satan’s previously known roosts were abandoned. He
then tracked down one false lead after another on  a  trail  that  led  him  to  Tibet,  Australia,  the
Congo rain forest, and the Andes before he finally ended up in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Inevitable, I suppose, he mused, a smirk on his sun-browned face.
Once  he  had  taken  all  the  shots  he  could  from  his  current  vantage  point,  he  stealthily
moved on to more cover and started shooting from another angle. He needed all the proof he
could muster.
 
“He’s been out there for hours,” Belial said, sitting at the surveillance console and pointing
at the monitors.
Satan stood behind him, looking over the shoulder of his new second in  command  at  the
pictures  being  picked  up  by  the  surveillance  cameras.  Clear  as  day  he  saw  the  angel  taking
photographs, moving to a different location, and taking more. “Uriel, what are you up to?” he
wondered aloud.

“Should I have him brought in?” Belial asked.
“No, I don’t think so. I’m interested in why he’s here, and we’re not going to learn that by
questioning him. Have him followed when he leaves. If he merely runs back to Michael, fine. If
he talks to anyone else, I want to know who.”
“My Lord, do you think it’s wise to let the angels learn where we are?”
“I don’t see what harm it can do.”
“With all due respect, my Lord, need I remind you what happened to Beelzebub two days
ago?”
Satan leaned against the console and stared intensely at his second. “Beelzebub was a good
friend, and he’ll be missed. But Gabriel’s stunt in Washington was just that, a stunt. A carefully
constructed gesture to lessen our chaotic effect on the humans.”
“My Lord—”
“Belial, relax. I can’t for a moment  believe Michael would actually  attack  us  directly.  That
goes against every rule of engagement both our sides have obeyed for over five thousand years.
We knew the angels would learn our location eventually. I just want to know who they tell.”
Satan stood and left the room, leaving Belial alone to frown over the cameras and carry out
his orders.
 
Susan had just stepped into her office when the phone rang. “Susan Richardson.”
“I have a tip for you,” said the voice at the other end of the line. “About Senator Phillips.”
“And?”
“Not over the phone,” the voice said. Susan was pretty sure it was a man, and he sounded
scared. “Meet me at the Francis Scott Key Park at noon.” He hung up.
Susan stared at the receiver. She knew the park in question, a tiny little collection of bricks
and plants  where  M  Street  intersected  the  north  end  of  the  Key  Bridge.  A  public  place,  but
small and far enough out of the way for a clandestine meeting.
She  was a little uneasy about this cloak and dagger sort of thing, but with everything  that
had been going on recently, a tip about Phillips could be important. She  glanced at the clock.
9:07. Three hours to go.
 
Susan arrived ten minutes early to find her contact already waiting for her. She  wasn’t sure
at first which of the handful of people was there to see her specifically, but any  questions  she
might  have  had  were  quickly  erased  when  a  young,  slim  black  man  walked  up  and  said,
“Susan Richardson?”
Though he didn’t introduce himself, she recognized him.  She  didn’t  know  his  name,  but
she’d seen him often enough to know that the man was Phillips’ aide. This should be good, she
thought.

“I don’t have a lot of time,” the man said, nervously glancing over his shoulder. “Phillips is
planning  a  coup.  He’s  going  to  publicly  accuse  the  president  tomorrow  of  demonic
collaboration, hoping the very idea of it will get the president kicked out of office. You’ve been
warned.”
Before  Susan  could  get  a  word  out,  the  man  ran  away,  got  into  his  car  parked  off  of  M
Street, and was gone.
 
“We now lay to rest a hero, who served his world well.”
Daniel and the surviving four members  of his team stood in a  San  Antonio  cemetery  and
watched as Roberto Ortiz’s body was lowered into the ground. It was in Roberto’s will that he
be buried in San Antonio, the city he’d called home after leaving MIT. He’d often said the place
reminded  him  simultaneously  of  the  promise  of  America  and  the  history  of  Mexico.  Daniel
thought the place suited Roberto. The people were friendly and the climate dry and sunny.
The team had been  very  quiet  since  losing  their  most  vocal  member.  They  all  knew  that
death was a constant risk and part of the job,  and that many DTF teams hadn’t been nearly as
lucky as they, but Roberto’s loss still came as quite a shock.
Daniel  had  taken  it  the  hardest.  He  was  still  trying  to  make  the  transition  from  loner  to
leader, but it seemed as if no matter how hard he tried, he kept losing people who counted on
him. Jeff, his parents, now Roberto.
As the priest wrapped up the ceremony, a hand  fell  on  Daniel’s  shoulder.  He  turned  and
saw Uriel’s deeply tanned face smiling at him. The angel nodded, then removed his hand and
observed the conclusion of the ceremony. When it was over, he pulled Daniel aside.
“I have some news,” he said.
Daniel was at a loss what to feel. It took all the emotion he  could  muster  to  say,  “What  is
it?”
Uriel reached into his jacket and pulled out an envelope of photographs. “Pictures of Hell,”
he whispered.
Daniel took the pictures and leafed through them. “It’s a shack in the desert,” he said.
“Not everything is as it seems,” Uriel said. “Come.”
Uriel  walked  towards  a  grove  of  mesquite  near  the  edge  of  the  cemetery,  and  Daniel
followed. “Hell is under the shack,” Uriel said, “in the Underworld.” He chuckled softly, pulled
out a candy bar, and started to munch on it.
“Hey,” Daniel said, “I thought you guys didn’t eat.”
“We  don’t  eat  much,”  Uriel  corrected  with  a  mouthful  of  chocolate.  “We  require
nourishment as you do, but our metabolisms are far superior. Barring a significant injury that
forces me to regenerate, this single snack bar can sustain me for more than a month.”
Uriel looked over at Daniel’s team, then at his  watch.  “Getting  back  to  business,  Hell  is  a
converted missile silo  just  north  of  Las  Vegas.  Perfect  place  for  it.  It  probably  extends  down

about twenty stories. Satan knew what he was doing when he picked it out. It’s shielded by the
Earth itself, and while it’s far enough outside the Vegas city limits to be discrete, it’s too close to
the  city  for  you  to  use  nuclear  weapons  on  it.  The  only  way  to  effectively  attack  it  is  by
invasion, and there’s only one way in or out. So. Is this what you wanted?”
Daniel started to allow himself a glimmer of hope. “Yes, Uriel. I think so. I owe you one.”
Uriel turned and walked away. “You owe me several,” he laughed. “Be glad we’re on your
side.”
Smiling for the first time in days, Daniel rejoined his team.
 
Chaos
« ^ » 
Timothy Phillips once again stood in front of the television cameras, this time from the comfort
and safety of his own office. “My fellow Americans, we are living in the gravest period in  our
country’s existence.
“A few days ago, as I spread the truth about demons on the Mall, a riot broke  out. I’ve seen
evidence  that  the  instigators  of  the  fighting  may  have  had  ties  to  some  of  the  demons
mentioned  in  Zagam’s  files.  During  the  riot,  two  people  were  killed  and  hundreds  were
injured.
“After the riot, the President of the United States broke  down his  plan  for  us  on  what  he
planned  to  do  about  the  demonic  threat.  He  plans  to  do  nothing.  In  fact,  he  went  as  far  as
barring law-abiding Americans from protecting themselves against the demons.
“At  first  I  thought  this  was  merely  the  political  act  of  a  politician  that  was  more
consensus-taker than leader. Then I began to wonder.  Could  it  be  that  he  was  so  ambivalent
about tracking down the demons because he didn’t want them found?”
Phillips held a stack of papers in front of the camera. “I have here proof that the President
Walter  Thomas  took  campaign  contributions  from  individuals  later  revealed  to  be  demons.
Proof that your president has ties to these monsters, and has been on their payroll since before
he was elected. Proof of why he doesn’t want them destroyed.
“In light of this information, I call for his impeachment.  I  also  ask  that  every  red-blooded
American disobey his State of Emergency decree and do what you feel is right for yourselves,
and for America.
“Thank you, good night, and God bless you all.”
 
The reaction to Phillips’ speech was swift and violent. Within the hour, a mob  had gathered
around the White House, and despite the Secret Service’s security measures, a few had already
thrown Molotov cocktails on the White House lawn.

An  hour  later  still,  a  large  group  of  protesters  arrived  in  support  of  the  president.  After
angry screams of “witch-hunter” and “demon-lover”, fighting inevitably broke out again.
And not only in Washington.
 
“This  is  Susan  Richardson  reporting  for  WNN.”  Susan  sat  behind  her  newsdesk  in
Washington  and  tried  to  tune  out  the  sounds  of  violence  right  outside  the  studio.  On  the
screens of the world’s televisions, pictures of the rioting appeared behind her.
“Shortly  after  Senator  Phillips’  press  conference  this  evening,  rioting  broke  out  again  in
Washington, New York, Los Angeles and Chicago. While half the country seems to be behind
Phillips and calls for the immediate impeachment  of the president, others are just as  violently
opposed to what they call ‘witch-hunting hysteria’ and ‘jack-booted thugs’, a catchphrase some
use for the DTF.”
Susan put down her copy and stared directly into the camera. “This has gone too far. When
I broke  my journalistic objectivity and publicly condemned Phillips, I never thought it  would
come to this. We’re tearing ourselves apart, and I can’t help but feel it’s my fault. I’d like to ask
every person watching to stay in  their  homes.  No  matter  how  strongly  you  might  feel  about
either  side  of  this  issue,  this  divisiveness  and  violence  is  exactly  what  the  demons  want.  By
fighting each other, we’re playing right into their hands!
“Please…”  Reaching  the  end  of  her  emotional  endurance,  Susan  sat  back  heavily  in  her
chair and began to sob. The stage manager gave the signal to cut, and the broadcast moved on
without her.
And the fighting continued.
 
Walter  Thomas  wasn’t  in  the  Oval  Office.  Moments  after  the  mob  arrived,  the  Secret
Service had advised him to move to a backup  office in the White House sub-basement.  From
where he sat now, a nuclear weapon would have trouble touching him.
The isolation only made his decision harder to bear.
“We’re ready when you are, Mister President.”
Thomas  looked  up  from  his  desk  at  the  television  cameras  and  crew  crowding  the  tiny
office. May as well get this over with, he thought.
“Roll ‘em,” he said.
As soon  as  the  cameraman  pointed  to  him,  Walter  Thomas  looked  into  the  cameras  and
made history.
“My  fellow  Americans,  good  evening.  It  would  seem  that  many  of  you  have  decided  to
ignore my advice from a few days ago. Not only does the fighting and strife continue, but it’s
spread  across  the  country.  It’s  become  a  tangible  thing,  and  a  legitimate  threat  to  National
Security. I can’t allow that.”
Thomas  took  a  deep  breath,  then  continued.  “Effective  immediately,  I’m  declaring  a

nationwide State of Martial Law. Curfew is at eight PM local time, and any citizens found with
weapons  at  any  time  of  day  will  be  arrested  and  prosecuted.  The  National  Guard  will  be
deployed and on patrol nationwide to help local police enforce this order.
“I am also issuing an executive order for the arrest and detainment of Timothy Phillips, on
the charge of treason and conspiracy to incite riot. While I value the freedom of speech in this
country as much  as  anyone,  Phillips  has  shouted  ‘Fire’  in  a  very  large,  very  crowded  theater
and I won’t let him get away with that.
“I’m deeply saddened that it has to come to this, America, but you hired me to take care of
you and that’s exactly what I’m going to do, even if it means protecting you from yourselves.
“Thank you, and good night.”
 
Crusade
« ^ » 
Daniel’s  team  caught  a  flight  to  Las  Vegas  the  next  morning.  Once  there,  they  boarded  a
helicopter and gave the pilot the directions to the site Uriel had designated as Hell.
For Daniel, it was the culmination of a long, painful struggle. As the helicopter cruised fast
and low over the hot desert sands, he reflected on all the events in his life that had led, almost
inevitably it seemed, to this moment.  He finally felt at peace with himself, as though  this  was
his  purpose,  what  he  had  been  born  to  do.  Though  the  path  to  this  moment  meant  losing
everything and everyone that had been dear to him, he believed he was near the fulfillment of
his destiny.
He looked back  inside the cabin at the other members  of his team. No one talked, and  all
but  Jack  busied  themselves  with  last  minute  checks  of  their  weapons  and  equipment.  They
were armed for bear, and while not as heavily  armored  as  the  angels,  most  of  them  felt  they
stood a pretty good chance of not only a successful mission, but surviving it as well.
The only pessimist in the group was  Paul,  who  had  vehemently  declared  from  the  outset
that  it  was  an  impossible  suicide  mission.  Paul  was  under  orders  to  keep  his  distracting
opinions to himself.
Daniel  looked  back  outside  and  felt  the  hot  wind  on  his  face.  Come  what  may,  he  was
prepared to meet his fate.
One member  of the team had only given lip service to  the  idea  of  surviving  their  descent
into Hell, but not because she thought it impossible.
Lucy O’Malley was prepared for a different kind of  destiny.  Since  the  Revelation  she  had
searched the world for Asbeel, the demon she blamed for the death of her brother, but she had
never  gotten  so  much  as  a  trace  of  him.  She  knew  no  other  DTF  team  had  dispatched  the
demon, meaning he was still out there somewhere, and the most logical place for him to hide
was Hell itself. Whatever the mission called for, Lucy was dedicated to a higher purpose. While
inside Hell she would find Asbeel, and she’d have her vengeance.

Outside the helicopter, the featureless desert sands sped by.
 
Uriel stared  out  his  Washington  D.C.  hotel  room  window  at  the  streets  below.  Since  the
president’s martial law decree, the city,  the  nation,  had  ground  almost  to  a  halt,  but  now  he
saw clusters of humans walking the streets, most of them  headed in the direction of the Mall.
What was drawing them there?
He heard a rattling at his doorknob. Housekeeping, he thought. “Occupied!” he called.
The  door  was  wrenched  open,  and  three  figures  entered.  He  recognized  them  instantly,
though  he  hadn’t  seen  them  in  a  thousand  years.  “We  know,”  said  the  lead  one,  named
Amezyarak. The other two, Nelchael and Harut, blocked the door after closing it.
“Why have you come?” Uriel asked.
“Because  you’ve  been  a  naughty  boy,  Uriel,”  Amezyarak  answered,  walking  closer.  “You
told  the  humans  where  to  find  us.  Wouldn’t  you  say  that  kind  of  goes  against  the  rules  of
engagement?”
Uriel stepped away from the window to give himself more room to move. “The old rules no
longer apply. If you doubt that, perhaps you should ask Beelzebub.”
“Yes,”  Amezyarak  said,  “we  noticed  that.”  The  other  two  demons  began  to  close  in,  the
three of  them  surrounding  Uriel.  “And  if  the  old  rules  no  longer  apply,  and  there’s  nothing
barring direct combat between angels and demons…”
Two  hours  later,  amidst  the  confusion  of  the  fire  alarm,  Amezyarak  and  Harut  left  the
scorched and smoky hotel room.
 
Daniel’s  team  landed  not  far  from  the  rundown  shack  that  concealed  their  destination.
They quickly offloaded their equipment and moved in as the helicopter lifted off for its return
to Vegas. Jack had recommended  that the chopper would be safer in  the  air  than  waiting  for
them on the ground. They’d call it back when they needed it.
“This can’t be it,” Paul observed.
“I  told  you,”  Daniel  said,  “this  is  just  a  front.  It’s  a  converted  missile  silo.  Underground.
Come  on.”  Daniel  led  the  team  to  the  door  of  the  shack.  After  verifying  that  the  door  was
locked, Lucy set some plastique on the lock and they all took cover as it blew. The team  very
cautiously  entered  the  shack,  only  to  find  it  empty.  The  only  thing  it  housed  was  what
appeared to be an elevator. An electronic card key was lodged in the appropriate slot.
“Here goes nothing,” Daniel said, then pushed the button on the elevator. The team found
their weapons trained on nothing as the door opened.
“This is too easy,” Jack said.
“Maybe,”  Daniel  answered,  “but  we  knew  there  was  a  chance  they’d  know  we  were
coming. I think we all realize at this point that it’s a trap, but we  came  here  with  a  job  to  do
and we’re going to do it, whether they’re ready for us or not.”

Without another word, Daniel  stepped  into  the  elevator.  The  team  followed  suit,  and  the
five of them began their descent into the Underworld.
 
Out of the Frying Pan…
« ^ » 
For  the  second  time  in  less  than  a  week,  Timothy  Phillips  stood  on  the  Washington  Mall
display  stand  and  faced  the  Washington  Monument.  This  time  he  hadn’t  bothered  with
permits and authorizations, and  he  had  surrounded  himself  with  armed  guards  loyal  to  him
and his cause. He couldn’t afford to be arrested now, not when he was so close to his goal.
As he prepared to speak, he knew that operatives he’d placed months before were ready to
splice footage of his speech into the broadcast media. His words would find  their  audience  in
spite of Thomas’ control of the media. The Mall had filled with more than  a  thousand  people
that had come to hear what he had to say. It was the biggest  crowd  he  could  get  by  word  of
mouth without tipping off the police, but it would look impressive enough for the cameras.
Finally, John cued him, meaning everything was in place and it was time for him to speak.
“I’d like to thank everyone for showing up today.  I  know  many  of  you  have  risked  great
personal harm to assemble here, as is your right as Americans, in direct defiance of the police.
“We stand at a great turning point for our nation. Our elected leader has been revealed as a
fascist with demonic ties, the greatest threat mankind has ever  known  walks  our  streets  with
impunity, and a great many Americans huddle in their homes,  afraid  to  venture  out  into  the
chaos beyond.
“It’s not too late for change, my friends. It’s not too late to reclaim the country and liberties
of our birth from the evil tyrants and immortal monsters that have stolen them  from  us.  Not
too late to seek a new dawn of safety, peace and freedom.”
Phillips  noticed  that  already  the  National  Guard  troops  approached,  armed  with  rubber
bullets  and  tear  gas.  In  ten  minutes,  his  assembly  would  disappear.  He  allowed  himself  an
inward smile. In five minutes, it wouldn’t matter.
 
“What  the  hell’s  going  on?”  Susan  demanded.  She’d  been  right  in  the  middle  of  her
newscast  when  the  footage  of  Phillips’  speech  cut  in  on  her.  The  technicians  were  working
furiously to restore control, but for the moment it seemed that they were providing coverage of
Phillips’ speech whether they liked it or not.
Phillips continued to address the crowd and cameras. “I’ve  been  a  public  servant  most  of
my life. I grew up  loving  this  country  and  the  principles  it  was  founded  on.  In  the  past  few
months  I’ve  seen  the  country  I  love  brought  to  its  knees,  and  those  principles  ignored  and
rejected.
“It’s time to start over, America. It’s time for a New Order, a reaffirmation of the ideals  of

our founding fathers. No longer can we afford to let fascists and monsters hold sway over our
way of life. We are Americans, born in freedom, guaranteed that freedom by the deaths of  so
many American heroes that came before us.
“This  country  was  born  when  a  handful  of  common  people  raised  their  voices  and  their
weapons in open revolt. Revolt against a ruler that didn’t listen or didn’t care about their needs,
that used them for an agenda all his own. Now we face that situation again, but the tyrant isn’t
the British king, but an American king we elected into power, little knowing who and what he
was taking his orders from. And just like those heroes of two hundred years ago, we find that
the only way to gain our freedom once more is to fight for it.
“I call today for nothing less than open  rebellion.  A  revolution  for  a  New  America,  based
once again on life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. This  tyrant  and  his  legion  of  demons
can’t stand long against the combined will of 250 million Americans fighting for their freedom.
Americans fought for their rights once! Now we must do it again! We will be free!”
At that moment,  right on cue, the National Guard began to dispel the crowd with tear gas
and riot troops, as they were ordered under the terms of the martial law decree. As the cameras
filmed on and the news networks helplessly transmitted the scene to the rest of the world, the
government  of  the  United  States  attacked  its  common  citizens,  lending  weight  to  Phillips
argument. In less than an hour, the seats of government around the country found themselves
under attack by angry citizenry.
The revolt had begun.
 
The WNN technicians finally found the source of the feed splice and restored control over
their  broadcast.  Ignoring  the  pre-broadcast  chaos  around  her,  Susan  sat  behind  her  anchor
desk and furiously wrote her own copy, a scathing  condemnation  of  what  Phillips  had  done.
She was interrupted by Richard, one of the stage managers.
“Susan, you got a phone call.”
“I’m a little busy, Rich,” she said without looking up.
“Yeah,  I  know,  but  he  said  it  was  urgent,  a  matter  of  life  or  death.  Said  his  name  was
Harold Preston.”
Susan finally looked up. What could her old editor want with her now? “I’ll take it  in  my
office,” she said as she got up and rushed off stage.
“Line two!” Richard shouted after her.
Susan reached her office and picked up the phone. “Harold?”
“Susan, thank God I found you,” he said. “You need to get out of town immediately.”
“What?  In  case  you  hadn’t  noticed,  it’s  turning  into  a  pretty  busy  news  day.  I  have  a
broadcast to do.”
“No  you  don’t,  if  you  want  to  live.  Susan,  I  just  got  a  tip.  Phillips  is  scared  of  you.  He
realizes that you are the most significant threat to his little coup going off. If you don’t get out

of Washington right now, he’s going to have you killed, and make it look like the demons are
responsible.”
Susan sat down in her chair with a thud.
“Susan?”
“I’m here, Harold. Listen, are you sure?”
“Get out. Now.” He hung up. That, or the line was cut. Susan couldn’t be sure anymore.
She prepared to leave Washington while she still could. Before she left, she had a quick  chat
with her producer. They weren’t going to get her off the air without a fight.
 
Betrayals
« ^ » 
Hell  wasn’t  quite  what  Daniel  expected.  No  fire  or  brimstone,  just  a  white,  utilitarian
sparseness and lots of metal. The elevator faced a long vertical shaft where Daniel presumed the
missile used to be. He wondered why they kept it that way. Walking up to the metal railing, he
looked down and saw more than twenty levels that appeared the same as the  one  he  was  on.
Behind him and around the shaft were dozens of doors  that  most  likely  led  to  whatever  Hell
was built to  house.  In  a  place  four  times  larger  than  the  Pentagon,  he  had  no  idea  where  to
even begin looking for Satan.
Lucy didn’t share his indecision. As soon as they were all off the elevator, she took off at a
run down the corridor. Jack moved to follow, but Daniel put his hand up. He could still see her
as she ran around the open ring by the railing. Almost directly across  from  him,  she  shouted
“Asbeel!” and took off down a side corridor.
Oh, Hell, Daniel thought. You should  have  seen  that  coming  a  mile  away.  When  are  you
going to start acting like a leader?
“I really wish she hadn’t done that,” Paul said.
“You and me, both,  Paul,” Daniel answered, then turned to face what was left of his team.
He found Paul’s grenade launcher pointed at his chest.
“What the hell are you doing?” Daniel demanded.
“My job,” Paul said. “And she just made it so much  harder. And my name  isn’t  Paul.  It’s
Hakael. Of the Grigori.”
 
Lucy ran aimlessly, searching every corridor. Much  to her surprise, she found  no  demons
at all, just one empty hallway after another. “Asbeel!” she yelled over and over. “Show yourself,
coward!”
“Ye don’t need to shout, lass,” called a voice she knew too well. “I’m right behind you.”

Lucy  whirled  around  and  found  herself  face  to  face  with  the  demon  that  haunted  her
dreams.
“Asbeel’s the name,” he said with a smile. “And who might you be?”
 
“The Grigori?” Daniel asked.
“An  elite  group  of  demons  answering  only  to  Satan,”  Hakael  replied.  “Before  your
interference, our purpose was to spy on  other  demons  and  report  to  Satan  on  who  could  be
trusted. I used my cover as an FBI agent to watch Zagam during your little escapades.”
“Which would explain why his files didn’t mention you,” Jack said.
“Precisely. After Zagam’s death, Satan decided to have me keep  my  cover  and  try  to  join
the DTF. My assignment was to act as a member  of your team unless you actually made  it  to
Hell. Then I was to stop you. As I’m doing now.”
With  no  warning,  Heinrich  brought  his  grenade  launcher  up  and  fired  at  Hakael.  The
demon managed to dodge the direct impact, but the concussion in the enclosed space knocked
them all off their feet.
Daniel, it knocked over the railing.
Daniel fell. He’d  fallen  past  several  levels  already  and  was  picking  up  speed.  He  couldn’t
quite get a grip on another railing, and thought he’d rip his arms out of socket if he tried now. I
didn’t expect to die like this, he thought.
Then,  suddenly,  he  wasn’t  falling  anymore.  After  he’d  recovered  from  the  sudden
deceleration, he realized he hadn’t hit bottom;  he’d been caught. He  looked  up  at  the  face  of
the  demon  that  had  saved  him.  The  demon  was  tall,  with  angular  facial  features  and  bright
blue eyes. His black hair was swept back from his forehead, and his perfect teeth were bared in
a charming smile.
“Daniel Cho, I presume,” said the demon as he lowered Daniel carefully to the floor. “The
infamous leader of the Demon Task Force. Pleased to meet you at last.”
Daniel sat and stared, trying to catch his breath.
“Ah, but you don’t know who I am,” the demon continued. “Please allow me to introduce
myself. I’m a man of wealth and taste.”
 
… And Into the Fire
« ^ » 
Washington D.C. burned, the flames rising high into the night.
Three factions had been engaged in steady combat  for hours: those in favor of Phillips’ call
to revolt, those violently opposed, and the National Guard, who just wanted everybody else to

go home. Many of the city’s landmarks and symbols of power were under  attack,  and  bit  by
bit the National Guard was overwhelmed. At the eastern end of the Mall, the Capitol Building
was under siege. Leading the assault was Timothy Phillips himself.  He  had  “liberated”  a  tank
through some Guardsmen sympathetic to his cause, and he was using it to lead the charge up
the Capitol steps.
“Freedom!” he cried as the driver guided the massive war machine up the marble steps and
into the lobby of the building itself. The mob  poured in after them,  and began the violent task
of dismantling the building from within.
And Washington burned.
 
President Walter Thomas honestly didn’t know what to do. He’d never  imagined  that  out
of all the possible crises he’d have to face during his presidency, the most trying would be the
open revolt of his own people. Third World countries did it all the  time,  sure,  but  Americans
weren’t supposed to do that sort of thing.
At least, not anymore.
“Mister President, we’ve got to go.”
Thomas turned from watching the carnage through his Oval Office window and  saw  Pete
Mitchell, the head of his Secret  Service detail. The White House was in  darkness,  and  he  was
supposed to have  been  evacuated  quite  a  while  before.  He  just  couldn’t  leave.  “In  a  minute,
Pete. In a minute.”
He  looked  back  out  the  window  and  watched  the  fires  dance  into  the  night.  He  was
ashamed to admit, even to himself, that he didn’t know what to do, that he  wasn’t  even  sure
how all this happened in the first place. It was all spinning out of control so quickly…
Disgusted, with the riot or himself he couldn’t be sure, he turned away from the window.
“Pete, let’s go.”
Pete was no longer there.
“Pete?” he called.
“Gone, Mister President,” said a voice in the darkness.
“Who’s there?”
A lone figure stepped out of the shadows and approached him, a man  Thomas  had  never
seen before. “Who are you?” the president demanded.
“A friend of a friend of a friend,” the man replied. “Quite a mess you’ve got here.”
“I don’t know who you are, but—” Thomas reached for the phone.
“I wouldn’t bother,” the man said, bringing his hand gently but firmly down on Thomas’s,
pinning it to the receiver. “There’s nobody there.”
For the first time, the gravity of his personal situation began to close in on Thomas past the
haze of what had happened to his job. “Who are you?” he asked again.

“An ally of your enemy, in a sense. For a few more minutes, anyway.”
“What happens in a few more minutes?”
“You won’t have any enemies.”
Fighting off the cold tendrils of fear that had a death grip on his spine, the president hastily
grabbed a letter opener off his desk and slashed out at the stranger. In the dim firelight seeping
through his window, he saw the blood quickly disappear as the wound healed up.
No one heard the President of the United States scream.
Chaos reigned.
 
Over the course of  one  night  in  Washington,  the  government  of  the  United  States  fell  to
ruin.  The  president,  vice  president,  most  of  the  cabinet  and  congress  were  either  dead  or
vanished. Most of the halls of power, the power which had ruled the planet for fifty years, had
been destroyed. The chaos and destruction spread across the nation, aided by pictures in living
color provided by the media. The United States found itself  divided  again,  this  time  between
people that wanted a Phillips’ New Order, and those that didn’t. Though it had taken civil war
years to tear the country apart a century before, Americans at the end of the millennium were a
much  faster-paced  bunch;  what  had  taken  years  in  the  age  before  airplanes  and  electronic
media could now be accomplished in a single night.
And by morning, the United States of America as the world had known it would cease  to
exist.
 
Phillips was beside himself. Everything had  gone  better  than  he  ever  could  have  possibly
dreamed. Yes, it was shame about the people that died in the rioting, but omelets, broken  eggs
and all that. You couldn’t stand in the way of progress.
He stood across the river at the Iwo Jima Memorial, safely away from  most  of  the  rioting,
but  with  a  nearly  perfect  view  of  the  Mall.  The  gravestones  of  Arlington  National  Cemetery
stood to his right, in mute protest of what he’d done.
He didn’t care. The door was open, facing him with undreamed of opportunities. Not only
would he be the obvious choice to lead now, but he’d be leading a country of his own making,
living by his rules. He was completely, totally, in charge.
“Enjoying yourself, sir?”
He turned momentarily from the view and noticed John approaching from the car. He was
glad.  He  needed  someone  to  watch  him  gloat.  He  spread  his  arms  wide,  including  the
panoramic view. “Look at what we’ve done, John. It’s beautiful, isn’t it?”
The younger man craned his skinny neck  to take it all in. “Beautiful. Yes, it most certainly
is.”
“Yes,” Phillips continued. “And by morning, it will all be mine.”

“Oh, I seriously doubt that, Senator.”
Phillips cast a questioning look at his aide. “What did you mean by that?”
Before Phillips could react, the much  smaller man reached out, lifted  him  off  the  ground,
and tossed him easily into the metal base of the memorial.
John Williams approached Phillips, no longer looking the part of the dutiful aide.  “What  I
meant,” he said, his voice deeper, harsher, “is that now that your purpose is fulfilled, I see  no
reason to tolerate your presence any longer.” Williams lifted Phillips by the neck  and held him
off the ground. His fingers were as hard, and as immovable, as steel.
“What?” Phillips choked, still unbelieving.
“Even now,” Williams continued, “I can’t believe that a backwoods idiot like yourself  rose
to such a position of power. Democracy at work, I suppose. But for you to have one of the very
demons you railed against as your  closest,  most  trusted  advisor,  and  never  have  the  slightest
inkling of it, well now that’s just pathetic. We played you, Senator.  Up  to  this  moment,  your
plans  and  ours  coincided,  and  we  gave  you  all  the  rope  you  needed  with  which  to  hang
yourself. You see, chaos is our business. While we certainly appreciate all your help in bringing
down the government the whole world revolved around, we can’t allow anyone to actually fill
that vacuum of power. We’d be right back where we started.”
Phillips’ eyes widened until it seemed they’d pop from their sockets as the full realization of
what he’d done sank in upon him.
Still holding Phillips with that terrible, immobile grip, “Williams” glanced back  at the fires
rising off the Mall. When he turned back  to look at  his  puppet/tool/victim,  Phillips  could  see
the total lack of humanity in his eyes. “So while we thank you for your efforts in our behalf, I
don’t think we’ll be needing you any longer.
“You’re fired.”
With a crack of  bone  and  nervous  tissue,  the  dreams  and  aspirations  of  Timothy  Phillips
came to an end.
 
Loss
« ^ » 
Ye can drop the phony Irish accent,” Lucy  said  to  Asbeel,  “I  know  who  and  what  you  really
are.”
“Fine,” the demon said reasonably, and without a trace of accent. “What do you plan to do
about it?”
Lucy smiled a very unfriendly smile, then tossed a grenade at the demon.
 

Heinrich  and  Jack  found  Hakael  much  harder  to  take  down  than  they  would  have
anticipated. For one thing, he not only knew all their moves and tactics, but he was armored as
well as they were and he knew the layout of Hell far better than they did. Several times already
they thought they had him, only to lose him down a side corridor at the last second.
“Getting tired yet, boys?” the demon asked.
Wiping the sweat from his brow, Heinrich responded by launching another grenade. Again
the demon deftly avoided the brunt of the explosion.
Jack  wondered  where  the  other  demons  were.  They’d  chased  Hakael  nearly  all  the  way
around Hell’s first level, and he was the only demon they’d yet seen. Where were the others?
“Come  now,  gentlemen,”  Hakael  taunted.  “After  all  of  my  people  you’ve  destroyed  so
quickly, so cleanly, you’re having such trouble with little old me?” The demon backed into yet
another side corridor.
Heinrich made a move to follow. “Stop!” Jack shouted. When Heinrich turned to question,
Jack said more quietly, “It’s a trap.”
Heinrich looked disgusted. “Of course it’s a trap,” he said. “We’re in Hell. This whole place
is a trap.” After checking that no demons were actually in sight, the young German knelt. “But
with God’s guidance and protection, we will rid the world of Satan and his minions once and
for all.” He made the sign of the cross over his heart.
Heinrich then stood, looked into Jack’s eyes, and ran off after Hakael, yelling at the top  of
his lungs.
Ah, Hell, Jack thought. That kid’s gonna be the death of me. He ran after Heinrich into the
unknown corridors of Hell.
 
“Satan?” Daniel asked, getting to his feet.
“One and the same,” the demon replied, bowing slightly. “I’m very pleased to meet you at
last. I’ve heard so much about you.”
“Likewise,” Daniel said as he whipped out his grenade launcher and prepared to fire.
The demon kicked out faster than Daniel thought possible and knocked  the launcher over
the railing and into the abyss. “Please,” he said, “let’s try to keep this civil.”
Daniel  had  a  few  hand  grenades  left,  but  he  was  sure  they’d  prove  just  as  useless
one-on-one  against  Satan  as  his  launcher  had.  He  didn’t  know  what  to  do,  other  than  play
along until reinforcements arrived.
“Come with me,” Satan said. “There’s something very interesting on  television  you  might
want to see.” The leader of all demons turned and walked away. At a loss for anything else to
do, Daniel followed.
Satan led Daniel into a room lined with  television  screens.  The  demon’s  hand  was  poised
over a button on the arm of the only chair in the room. “Watch this,” he said.

Satan pushed the button and all the screens flared to life at once, though silently. On screen
after screen, Daniel saw pictures of warfare, rioting and destruction.
“Disaster movie marathon?” he asked.
“Listen,” Satan said. He pressed another button.
Audio now joined the video feed. Daniel concentrated, but he was only able to pick out bits
and pieces from the cacophony.
“…Capitol Building utterly destroyed…”
“…President Walter Thomas found dead in the Oval Office…”
“…Tokyo stock market crashing through the basement…”
“…Russians on the move into Eastern Europe…”
“…riots in Los Angeles making previous riots look like picnics…”
“…thousands dead in Washington tonight…”
“…Iraqi troops have re-entered Kuwait…”
“…vice president dead…”
“…chaos reigns in what’s left of the United States tonight…”
Satan pushed a button,  and all  the  screens  went  black  and  silent  once  more.  The  demon
walked over in front of Daniel and flashed a dazzling smile. “We’ve won.”
 
Lucy had used all but one of her grenades, but nothing had worked. The demon that killed
her brother was still breathing, and there was seemingly nothing Lucy could do about it.
“So you’re one of the mighty DTF,” Asbeel taunted. “Really, from all the press you people
get, I expected better.”
“Sorry to disappoint,” Lucy quipped as she looked for an opening to use her last grenade.
She kept it hidden from view, so the demon wouldn’t know how many she had left.
“You’re  so  much  like  your  brother,”  Asbeel  went  on.  “Such  a  young,  idealistic  fool.  He
never stood a chance, you know. He was too reckless. A family trait?”
Lucy came to a decision. She offered a quick and silent prayer to her brother’s spirit. Peter,
forgive me.
Popping the pin behind her back,  she ran at the demon and wrapped her arms around it.
Asbeel didn’t get it.
“A hug? Now, after all we’ve been through?”
Then they exploded.
 

As night  fell  outside  on  the  flat  expanse  of  Nevada  desert,  the  quiet  of  the  evening  was
broken  by the roar of rocket engines. In the western sky over a converted missile silo, dozens
of white, winged man-sized forms dropped from the sky on plumes of fire.
And the angels descended upon Hell.
They wasted no time gaining entry. Instead of taking the elevator down  as  Daniel  and  his
team had done, the angels destroyed it and flew down the open shaft. They stopped at the first
level and  fanned  out  through  the  corridors,  their  massive  suits  clanging  loudly  on  the  metal
walkways.
 
It had, indeed, been a trap.  Jack  and  Heinrich  found  themselves  pinned  down  in  a  small
vestibule while they held off more than a dozen demons, led by Hakael, with the last  of  their
grenades.
“It’s over, Jack,” Hakael called out to him. “We won, you lost. Come on out and take your
medicine like a man.”
The demons were moving in again. Jack glanced back to Heinrich. “How many you got?”
Heinrich held up two hand grenades. His launcher lay empty on the floor.
Jack  peeked  around  the  corner  at  the  demons  in  riot  gear  moving  slowly  towards  them.
He’d blown two of them to … well not Hell, but wherever they went when they died. The rest
were more  cautious,  but  he  and  the  kid  only  had  five  grenades  left  between  them  and  they
stood no chance against a dozen demons hand to hand.
Suddenly,  Jack  heard  thundering  footsteps  headed  their  way.  His  spirits  dropped.
Reinforcements, he thought. Then he saw a rocket streak past him and blow apart two demons
at once. “What the—”
He and Heinrich watched, slack-jawed, as three angels in the  same  gleaming  white  armor
they’d worn on the Mall ran past him and tore through the remaining demons like a hot knife
through butter. Between their rockets and  their  flame-throwers  and  their  sheer,  unbelievable
strength,  it  was  over  almost  before  it  had  begun.  None  of  the  demons  remained,  Hakael
included, and the angels moved on to other unseen targets.
Jack and Heinrich exchanged a look, then followed them.
 
Survival of the Fittest
« ^ » 
Daniel stared at the blank monitors in shock. Satan was right. They were too late; the demons
had won.
“Don’t  look  so  crestfallen,  Daniel,”  the  demon  said.  “It’s  for  your  own  good,  in  the  long
run.”

The  words  sank  in  on  Daniel.  Our  own  good.  Zagam  had  said  the  exact  same  thing
moments before his death. This was too much. “What?”
“Please,” Satan gestured to the chair. “Sit.”
Suddenly exhausted, Daniel sat.
“I’m telling you this, Daniel, because I want you to understand. You’ve been through a lot
at our hands, and I feel we owe you an explanation. Now that we’ve won, it no longer matters
whether you know or not why we do what we do. From what you  already  know,  from  what
the angels have told you, you are aware of our struggle against them.  But you only know half
the story.
“Five thousand years ago, after leading the angels at Michael’s side for tens of thousands of
years, I had a revelation of my own.”
The  demon  paused,  thinking.  “But  I’m  getting  ahead  of  myself.  For  you  to  understand
what my frame of mind had become, you have to know what it was.
“We are not evil,” Satan said. Seeing  Daniel’s  reaction,  he  held  up  a  hand.  “I  know  what
you’ve been taught, but most of  that  is  what  the  angels  would  like  you  to  believe.  Since  the
dawn of human history, we immortals had watched over you, guiding your development. Not
in the name of some nebulous and arbitrary concept of ‘good’, but in the  name  of  order.  We
helped  you  learn  to  cooperate,  build  communities,  to  accept  a  structure  in  your  lives  that
allowed you to be more as a group than you could have been as individuals.
“But  we  went  too  far.  After  instilling  this  pattern  of  order  that  pulled  you  out  of  chaos,
Michael and the others set about enforcing that order, keeping you in tight little rows, held in
check  by fear of what  we,  your  gods,  might  do  if  you  disobeyed.  Having  reached  a  point  of
civilization where you could function as a society, that society began to stagnate.
“About five thousand years ago I decided to change that. I’ve read Miss Richardson’s story
about us, and one of the quotes she attributed to Uriel is true; we have a need, deep down, to
do  what’s  best  for  the  human  race.  We  demons  still  feel  and  act  on  that  need.  And  at  that
point, so long ago, I felt very strongly that the  path  Michael  had  chosen  for  your  people  was
not  the  right  one.  Once  humanity  had  been  civilized,  you  no  longer  needed  order  enforced
from  without.  You  were  perfectly  capable  of  organizing  yourselves.  What  you  needed,  more
than anything else, was the impetus to advance. We provided that.”
“By attacking us?”
“Exactly. Think about it, Daniel.  Without  conflict,  without  stress,  a  society  stagnates.  You
needed something to struggle against, something to prevent you  from  becoming  complacent.
It’s evident throughout the last five thousand years, but just for the moment,  think about  the
last  fifty.  Look  at  all  the  technological  advances  that  were  the  direct  result  of  the  Cold  War,
most of which have led to a steadily increasing standard of living for your people. Do you think
mankind would ever have set foot on the moon if your government didn’t  need  the  rocketry
and  electronic  guidance  technology  to  build  ICBMs?  Look  at  all  the  great  works  of  art  and
literature directly inspired by conflict. Your own national anthem describes one glorious night
in a war!”
Satan stood directly in front of Daniel and looked him straight in the  eye.  “All  because  of

us. Our prompting. Our pushing your race to excel. Without us, your mighty six billion strong
human  race  would  still  be  a  hundred  thousand  farmers  stagnating  between  the  Tigris  and
Euphrates. You owe all you are to our encouragement. The strength of your race was forged in
the  fires  of  the  tension  we  create.  It’s  nothing  more  than  Survival  of  the  Fittest.  We  are  the
lions, and you are the herd we strengthen by weeding out the weak.”
“So what now?” Daniel asked. “Aren’t we back  to  the  same  chaos  you  lifted  us  out  of  to
begin with?”
Satan chuckled. “No, I don’t think so. Your race has too many generations of order behind
them to revert completely. You’ll rise from the ashes now, just as you’ve always done.  But  by
making it harder, by knocking out the governments and other support mechanisms that made
it possible for you to watch eight hours of television a day, we’ve done your race a great service.
A service we’ll continue to provide for as long as necessary.”
“I think not,” said a voice from the doorway.
Daniel and Satan looked over  and  saw  several  white-armored  angels  walk  into  the  room.
The first one spoke again.
“I told your second it was over, Satan. You didn’t take me seriously.”
Satan  looked  remarkably  nonchalant.  “Gabriel.  Haven’t  you  been  watching  the  news?
We’ve won. The last bastions of order are falling even as we speak. What can you possibly  do
about it now?”
“Rebuild,” the angel said as he fired a rocket.
Satan barely dodged in time. Daniel slipped out of the chair and moved to the edge of the
room.
“What  are  you  doing?”  Satan  demanded,  finally  looking  upset.  “Have  you  forgotten  the
rules?”
Gabriel  stepped  forward  and  the  other  angels  spread  out  behind  him,  blocking  the  exit.
“No,” he said. “But as I told Beelzebub, the rules have changed.” Gabriel made a fist in the air
next to his head, then pointed at Satan.
Daniel eased his way over and watched from the door as the angels tore the demon apart.
Satan didn’t go down easily, and he even managed to take an angel or two with him, but after
a long, violent and desperate struggle,  Satan  was  destroyed.  Even  at  the  end,  Daniel  thought
the great demon really couldn’t believe what had happened to him, to his plans.
Belief or no, Satan fell.
 
By morning, Hell was free of demons. Daniel, Jack and Heinrich stood outside on the desert
floor and watched as one by one the angels emerged, spread their metal wings and took off to
the  west,  the  rising  sun  glinting  off  their  wingtips.  There  was  an  explosion  that  they  all  felt
through their feet as the last angel emerged, and soon after that, the fires of Hell burst through
the  destroyed  elevator  shaft.  No  one  could  re-enter  for  quite  a  while,  and  when  they  did,
there’d be nothing to see.

There was no answer when Daniel tried to call back  the helicopter, and eventually  he  and
the last two members of his team made their way back to what was left of Las Vegas on foot.
The Demonic Crusade officially ended a few weeks later when the angels tracked down and
destroyed  the  last  of  the  demons,  Belial,  who  had  escaped  the  purge  of  Hell  by  being  in
Washington D.C. at the time. With his destruction, the demons no longer existed.
When  the  United  States  government  crumbled,  it  took  its  economy  with  it.  Soon  after,
other governments began to crumble as the world economy ground to a halt. The chaos Satan
worked so hard to bring about was complete.
The angels were very helpful in rebuilding human  society.  Michael  had  proclaimed  it  the
dawn of a new Golden Age. There was talk of using the opportunity to create a single, unified
world government, with the former sovereign nations of the world acting much  the same way
as the individual states of the United States. The angels would help set up such a structure, and
arbitrate disputes. Hungry for leadership, most of the world eagerly went along with Michael’s
plan.
And for a while, everyone was happy.
 
BOOK III: JIHAD
Paradise
« ^ » 
HEAVEN. THIRTY MONTHS AFTER THE DEMONIC CRUSADE.
Daniel walked the halls of Heaven, the boots of his tan uniform echoing loudly through the
empty spaces. Built on the ruins of what had been downtown Los Angeles, the angels’ seat  of
government  was  a  technological  marvel.  The  gleaming,  golden  building  was  more  than  one
hundred stories tall and covered a ground area of more than forty city blocks. It reportedly was
as impervious to earthquakes as it was to everything else. Michael said he wanted a symbol as
much as a base of operations when he had it built, and that’s exactly what he got.
The  reconstruction  of  society  from  the  chaos  the  demons  created  had  gone  surprisingly
well. It had taken only about a year to get all the provisional governments of the world to sign
on  to  the  Heaven  Proposal.  There  had  been  a  few  who  scoffed  openly  at  the  idea  and
stubbornly refused to give up their national sovereignty (such that it was after the demons got
through  with  it),  but  they  all  eventually  came  around.  With  the  signing  of  France  eighteen
months after the close of the Demonic  Crusade, the Earth’s six billion people had been united
under a single government.
A year tomorrow, Daniel said to himself.
Heaven buzzed with preparations for the first anniversary celebration. Rumor was that the
global party was going to be the biggest single social event in human history,  a  celebration  of

Michael’s  Golden  Age.  Movie  stars,  prominent  scientists  and  dignitaries  of  every  stripe  had
practically climbed over each other to wrangle an invitation.
Daniel just wanted to hide until it was over. He’d never been a party guy, and he was sick
to  death  of  hearing  about  it.  Unfortunately  for  him,  it  was  part  of  his  job  to  hear  about  it.
Daniel  had  spent  the  last  thirteen  months  as  Michael’s  “Security  Advisor”,  a  figurehead
position more than anything else. Gabriel’s Elite Guard handled all of Heaven’s actual security,
but Michael thought it looked good having the Great Hero of the DTF as a prominent member
of his staff. Daniel was expected to attend the party planning committee  meetings, even if  his
attendance was mostly for show.
Daniel finally reached Michael’s court. The two angels on either side of the gigantic, golden
and  ornate  doors  opened  the  doors  as  soon  as  they  saw  him.  Advantages  of  fame,  Daniel
mused as he crossed the threshold; only a select group  of  humans  was  ever  allowed  into  this
room. The vast room was decorated in gold and sky blue, and was far more opulent than  the
office of any human head of state Daniel had ever seen. The mix of luxury and technology was
striking;  though  Michael  sat  on  an  elegantly  appointed  (and  tremendous)  throne,  he  was
surrounded  on  either  side  by  computer  consoles  and  monitors.  He  could  control  the  entire
world from that chair.
Michael fit the room, or  the  room  fit  him.  The  leader  of  both  the  angels  and  the  human
race looked every bit as majestic and regal as befitted the office. He was  tall,  at  least  as  tall  as
Gabriel, with a sleek yet  powerful  frame.  His  naturally  golden  skin  and  hair  brought  out  his
powder blue eyes, and his chiseled, ageless good looks instilled a feeling of trust and goodwill.
If Michael had any flaws, Daniel didn’t know what they were.
No, that wasn’t true. The camera didn’t know what they were. Michael had a tendency to
get on Daniel’s nerves. While Daniel granted that if anybody had a right to a “holier than thou”
attitude, this would be the guy, the angel’s smug assertion that he always knew best grated on
Daniel. He usually fought down his annoyance  with  a  shrug  and  figured,  “What  am  I  gonna
do, the guy runs the planet.”
“Daniel!” Michael called as Daniel entered the room. “Good to see you!”
Daniel nodded in reply. As always, Michael was flanked by Gabriel to his right and Susan
Richardson to his left. Susan was Michael’s media liaison, a position  she  fit  like  a  glove.  Who
better  to  convey  Michael’s  proclamations  than  the  world’s  most  beloved  and  trusted
newswoman? There were maybe half a dozen others in  the  room,  various  department  heads.
Most were angels, but a few, like Daniel and Susan, were prominent humans.
Daniel walked over and took a seat next to Susan. With a push of a button from Michael’s
throne, the seats to either side of him  swung  around  on  the  floor  to  face  the  opposing  wing,
forming a sort of conference table without the table.
Susan leaned over and whispered, “Why the long face?”
Daniel hadn’t been aware he was broadcasting his emotions so clearly. “Nothing,” he said,
then straightened a little in his chair.
“Now that we’re all here,” Michael said with a nearly  imperceptible  glance  at  Daniel,  “we
can begin.”

Michael  went  on  at  length  about  what  he  expected  for  the  following  day’s  gala.  Each
department head reported in turn on how their end of the preparations were going. Daniel had
heard most of this before,  and  found  his  mind  wandering  when  Michael  looked  to  him  and
said, “Security.”
Daniel hastily shook himself out of his reverie. “Nothing new to report, sir. Gabriel informs
me  that  all  the  necessary  precautions  are  in  place.”  The  truth  was  that  Gabriel  had  handled
everything, and almost certainly kept Michael appraised of how things went. Daniel was  only
kept in the loop as a formality.
“Good,”  Michael  said,  clapping  his  hands  together.  He  stood,  as  did  everyone  else.  He
glanced around the room and everyone, including Daniel,  left  promptly.  Only  Gabriel  stayed
behind, but he always did.
The meeting was over.
 
“What  was  the  matter  with  you  in  there?”  Susan  demanded.  She  had  raced  to  catch  up
with Daniel as he left the meeting.
He hardly turned to acknowledge her. “What do you mean?”
Susan  put  a  hand  on  his  shoulder  and  stopped  him.  “You’re  changing,  Daniel.  You’ve
become so distant recently. I want to know what’s bothering you.”
“What’s bothering me, or what’s bothering Michael’s Security Advisor?”
Susan paused. “What’s the difference?”
Daniel nodded. “That’s what I thought.” He turned and walked away from her, angry with
himself for getting angry.
“Wait a minute!” Susan called, running after him again. “What did you mean by that?”
Daniel spun on his heel and faced her. “Look around you, Susan. What do you  think  this
place means?”
“Peace, prosperity—”
“Did Michael teach you to say that or did you come up with it on your own?”
Susan slapped him. Daniel ignored it.
“You used to be a journalist, Susan. Now you’re a puppet. So  am I. I guess I’m just getting
tired of it.”
“We aren’t puppets!”
“Aren’t we?” Daniel asked. “Come here.”
He led Susan down the hall to a door with a rather elaborate electronic lock. “You ever been
in there?”
“No…” she answered cautiously.

“No human has,” Daniel said. “You and I are supposed to  be  members  of  Michael’s  staff,
yet the only ones I’ve ever  seen  enter  that  room  are  Michael  and  Gabriel.  And  I’ve  watched.
Since Gabriel handles all the actual security around here, I’ve had plenty of time.”
Susan  relaxed.  “So  that’s  what  this  is  all  about,”  she  said.  “You  feel  underused  and
unappreciated. Daniel, I’m sorry if you’re bored, but you have to realize what an honor it is to
be on Michael’s staff. You—”
“That isn’t it at all,” Daniel said. “But I guess you wouldn’t understand.”
Without another word, he turned and walked away. This time, Susan let him go.
 
The Serpent
« ^ » 
The world rejoiced.
Over the evening skies of Los Angeles, fireworks burst in multicolored  glory,  accented  by
angels  in  powered  armor  flying  in  formation  over  the  city.  It  was  an  image  mirrored  over
nearly every major city on the planet. The population of Earth celebrated their unity, the defeat
of the demons, and their saviors, the angels.
Daniel thought it was a load of crap.
Nonetheless, he was thankful for the celebration. If his plan worked, it would give him the
chance to learn something that had bothered him for months.  While most of the population of
Heaven,  Michael  and  Gabriel  included,  partied  either  on  the  roof  or  in  the  streets  outside,
Daniel sat in alone in Security Control, perched behind an out of the way computer console.
His computer illiteracy while he and Susan  had  been  on  the  run  was  a  thing  of  the  past.
He’d  spent  a  fair  portion  of  the  last  two  years  becoming  proficient  with  computers,  and  he
knew the angels’ security system  inside  and  out.  Tonight  he  had  a  very  special  task.  He  was
determined to get into the forbidden room that he  had  pointed  out  to  Susan.  With  everyone
else preoccupied with the celebration, he figured he’d never have a better chance.
As he’d  done  so  many  times  in  the  past,  he  located  the  file  that  contained  the  security
passcode that would open the door.  It  had  taken  nearly  three  months  to  locate  that  file,  and
when he had, he’d learned that it wouldn’t do him any good. The file was encrypted, and even
though he knew how to access the file, he couldn’t actually read it  without  a  key,  a  key  he’d
never been able to find.
A few weeks before, he’d discovered how to do something that would allow him to bypass
the key altogether. If he couldn’t read the code, he could replace it with null values, effectively
deleting it.  In  theory,  the  door  would  then  open  for  anyone.  There  was  a  problem  with  this
plan. Once he’d done it, he couldn’t undo the damage. He’d have to get in, see what the angels
were  hiding  and  get  out  again  before  anyone  else  came  near  the  room.  Once  out  again,  he
could feign ignorance of the zeroed out passcode, Gabriel would reset it, and no one would be
the wiser.

The celebration offered the perfect cover. It was now or never.
Daniel glanced at the security monitors to verify that Michael and Gabriel were still  at  the
party. They were. Daniel then arranged for the security camera that monitored the door to be
disabled.  Electronics  glitch.  Terrible  thing.  Then  he  finally  turned  back  to  his  terminal.  He
already  had  the  command  to  zero  out  the  passcode  typed  in.  All  he  had  to  do  was  press
“enter”.
Once I do this, I’m committed, Daniel thought. His hand hovered over the key.
Screw it. His hand pressed the “enter” key  quickly  and  decisively.  Daniel  was  already  up
and headed out the door.
Daniel  reached  the  door  two  minutes  later.  As  expected,  the  hallway  was  empty.  He
glanced up at the video camera he disabled, winked, then pushed on the door.
It swung open.
Daniel quickly moved inside and closed the door. The room was smaller than he expected,
and filled with computer equipment and a modest conference table. He sat down at the main
computer console.
The computer was already on and there didn’t seem to be any security precautions. Daniel
wondered why at first, then realized it’d be just like Gabriel to  decide  such  measures  weren’t
necessary inside a secure room. He began poking around the computer. It wasn’t  long  before
he found the sort of thing he was looking for.
“Oh my God.” He pulled an optical disk from his uniform, then started a file copy.
Several minutes later, Daniel left the room as he found it, the blind eye of the camera seeing
nothing.
 
Daniel caught up with Susan a while later on the roof. “We have to talk,” he said quietly.
Caught  up  in  the  festivities,  Susan  barely  noticed  him.  “What?”  she  asked,  still  smiling.
Then she caught the expression on Daniel’s face and grew concerned.
Without another word, Daniel took her by the arm and led her away from Michael and the
crowd, over to an edge of the roof relatively free of people.
“I found out what they’re up to,” Daniel said.
“Who?”
Daniel rolled his eyes and sighed. She  used to be smarter than this, he thought.  “Michael.
The angels.”
Susan shook her head. “Daniel, what are you talking about?”
“This,” he said, showing her the disk. “I broke into that room. I found this on a computer.”
She looked at the disk, but made no move to take it. “What is it?”

“Their plans.” He looked over her shoulder at Michael, roughly a hundred meters away. He
never had successfully determined how sensitive immortal senses were. “I don’t think it’s safe
to talk about this here. Can we go to your quarters?”
Susan looked at Daniel and smirked. “Why Mister Cho, are you coming on to me?” For the
first time, Daniel noticed she was a swaying a little. Damn, he cursed, she’s been drinking.
“This is serious!” he said, but not loudly enough (he thought) for Michael to hear. “We need
a place to talk, and Michael probably suspects I don’t trust him. Your room is less likely to be
bugged.”
Daniel’s  manner  finally  started  to  pierce  Susan’s  alcohol-enhanced  good  mood.  “Daniel,
what do you think you have there?”
“Downstairs,” he said. They went.
“Here,” he said. He handed Susan the disk and she inserted it into her computer.
Daniel plopped down in a chair as Susan read. It didn’t take long for her to get to the end
of what he’d been able to copy before caution and fear drove him out of the room. “This can’t
be right,” she said.
“It is. I took it from Michael’s secure system. Why else do you think we’re  not  allowed  in
there?”
She  handed  the  disk  back  to  Daniel.  “I  can’t  believe  this.  It  has  to  be  a  prank,  a  fake,
something, but Michael would never do such things.”
Daniel  sat  up  straight.  “You  don’t  think  so?  Think  about  what  everybody  out  there  is
celebrating. We have peace, yes. We have a unified world government, certainly. But what kind
of government? A theocracy, a dictatorship that we all just went along with because Michael’s
immortal and he claims to know what’s best for us. Did I ever tell you about the conversation I
had with Satan the night he  fell?  He  wasn’t  evil.  He  thought  he  knew  what  was  best  for  us,
too.”
“Daniel, there’s a reason he was called the ‘Prince of Lies’.”
Daniel stood  up  quickly.  “Yeah,  because  that’s  what  Michael  wanted  us  to  call  him!”  He
held up the disk. “Do you believe this? Do you believe me?”
Susan dropped her eyes to the floor.
Daniel nodded. “Fine,” he said.
“Daniel,  I  don’t  think  you’re  lying,  but  this  is  just  too  far-fetched  to  accept  without
confirmation. I can’t make a decision on a single data point. You’ve been under a lot  of  stress
recently.  I  know  that  for  years  you  were  either  on  the  run  from  demons  or  chasing  them
yourself. Don’t you think it’s possible that you want to believe this because you need an enemy
to fight?”
Daniel stared open-mouthed at Susan. “You think I made this up?”
“Maybe not consciously, but—”

Susan didn’t get the rest of the  sentence  out  before  Daniel  was  gone,  slamming  her  door
behind him.
 
Falling From Grace
« ^ » 
Daniel packed as fast as he could. He had to get out of Heaven before Susan, good intentions or
not, ratted him out. His room was still pretty spartan, though not as bare as his old apartment
in  Washington.  He  threw  most  of  his  clothing  into  a  bag,  grabbed  a  few  other  things  he
couldn’t bear to leave behind, then walked out his door.
He  was  stopped  only  once  on  his  way  out  of  the  gargantuan  complex,  by  Heinrich  von
Braun, now proudly serving as one of Heaven’s many guards. Heinrich was obviously puzzled
by the bag. “Where are you going, sir?”
Daniel smiled, slung the bag casually over his shoulder and walked over to Heinrich. “I’m
off to visit a friend, Heinrich. A young lady  that  doesn’t  live  here  in  Heaven,  but  who  might
just have a heaven of her own for me.”
Daniel  winked  at  the  young  German,  who  smiled  and  blushed  simultaneously.  Heinrich
nodded, and Daniel was on his way. As he walked out of the security gates on the ground level,
Daniel vowed there would only be one way he’d ever return.
 
Michael  sat  on  this  throne  and  frowned.  He  was  alone  in  his  enormous  “office”  and  the
object of his consternation was something on one of his many flat-screen computer  monitors.
He didn’t look up until Gabriel walked into the room.
“You wished to see me, Michael?”
“Look at this,” Michael said and spun the monitor over to Gabriel in disgust.
“An email from Cho,” Gabriel observed. “Why did this make you so—”
“Read it!” Michael commanded.
“Michael,” Gabriel read aloud. “I’ve discovered what you really are and what you’re  really
doing. I know all about your plans, and I won’t let you get away with it.”
Gabriel paused, then read, “I’ve been in the secure room.”
“Is it true,” Michael asked. “Has he?”
Gabriel looked away from his leader. “It could be,” he said. “I was about to  come  tell  you
about  it  when  you  summoned  me.  The  passcode  on  the  door  has  been  zeroed  out,  and  the
security camera watching the door appears to have malfunctioned. Even  so,  the  only  time  he
could have gone in there without being noticed—”
“Was during the party.” Michael said. “And I don’t remember  seeing much  of Cho on the

roof with us.”
“No,  I  remember  seeing  him  talking  to  Richardson  for  a  few  minutes,  but  that’s  all.  We
can’t prove Cho was in the planning room last night, but if he says he was, I see no reason to
disbelieve him.”
Michael sunk further into his massive chair. “Were you aware that  by  the  time  I  received
this  message,  Cho  was  nowhere  to  be  found  in  the  complex,  and  that  his  room  had  been
cleaned out?”
Gabriel studied the floor. “No, sir, I was not.”
Michael  stood  and  walked  to  one  of  the  foot-thick  windows.  “We  have  a  major  security
problem here, Gabriel. If Cho does know our plans, he could turn public opinion against us. I
don’t want a rebellion on my hands after only being in office a year.”
“My Lord, he’s only one human. I doubt—”
Michael spun and faced Gabriel. “One human.  One human that discovered  our  existence.
One  human  that  helped  orchestrate  the  fall  of  Hell.  One  human  that  the  entire  planet
recognizes as a hero. That’s the one human to whom you refer?”
Gabriel said nothing.
“You’ve  let  me  down,  old  friend,”  Michael  continued.  “Cho  was  given  a  place  of
prominence on my staff not only because the world expected it, but so you could keep an eye
on him. We knew, you knew, how dangerous he could be and still you let this happen.”
Gabriel got defensive. “You still have Richardson.”
“Yes, thankfully. She’s still under control, and depending on what Cho may have told her,
we might even be able to use her to do some spin doctoring. But that isn’t the issue. You  will
find  Cho  and  return  him.  He’s  too  dangerous  to  be  allowed  to  walk  around  on  his  own,
especially if he knows what he says he knows. Find him. Quietly.
“Now.”
Gabriel left quickly.
 
The more Daniel walked, the more furious he became.  He felt like a fool. Not  just  me,  he
thought.  Michael  played  us  all  for  suckers.  As  Daniel  walked  further  into  the  parts  of  Los
Angeles that weren’t made of gold, he reflected more and more on what he’d learned.
Virtually everything Daniel had been through in the last three years was part  of  Michael’s
master plan. Not his initial discovery, of course; that was coincidence, luck, fate, whatever. But
everything  that  happened  after  was  part  of  a  carefully  orchestrated  plan  to  place  Michael
exactly where he was.
Satan had been telling the truth after all, no matter what Susan thought. Just as he and the
demons sought to improve humanity through the fires of chaos, the angels saw themselves as
lords of order. When Daniel began to discover what the demons really were, Michael (who had
agents  everywhere)  saw  it  as  his  opportunity  to  eliminate  his  opposition,  bring  order  to  a

chaotic  world  and  finally  make  it  stick.  Throughout  the  Demonic  Crusade,  Michael  and
Gabriel  carefully  let  the  world  fall  apart,  let  millions  die  in  the  witch-hunts,  all  so  that  they
could step in and defeat the demons at the last possible minute. All so they could be in charge
by the time the world began to rebuild.
In the name of Order.
The  problem,  Daniel  thought,  is  that  the  Nazis  were  obsessed  with  order,  too.  Michael’s
theocracy, earned with the blood of millions of innocent humans, was only the beginning. Now
that he was in charge, he had plans for the human race. It was the knowledge  of  these  plans,
more than anything else, that drove Daniel from Heaven.
While  Satan  sought  to  strengthen  the  human  race  through  adversity,  weeding  out  the
weak, Michael had a much  more straightforward strategy. Rather than waiting for misfortune
or an inability to compete to weed out the unfit, Michael had decided to remove them  directly,
in the name of genetic purity.
Daniel  had  heard  rumors  about  an  unbalanced  health  care  system  that  the  angels  had
implemented. People with chronic problems, the ones that needed the most care, seemed to hit
the  most  delays.  He’d  even  heard  that  some,  people  with  Down  Syndrome  or  diabetes,  for
example,  had  been  transferred  to  specialized  “Care  Centers”.  Now  he  knew  what  the  Care
Centers really were: concentration camps.
Michael  was  systematically  removing  from  the  gene  pool  anyone  with  illnesses  or
infirmities that could be passed on genetically. It wasn’t a Darwinistic manner of the genetically
unfit not being able to reproduce. It was that they simply weren’t allowed to reproduce.
Unconsciously, Daniel’s hands clenched to fists.
All that was only the start. There had been much  more  on  the  computer,  but  Daniel  had
only been able to copy so much before he had to get out of that room. Knowing what he knew
about Michael, Daniel had no doubts the angel would have him “removed” if he had begun to
see Daniel as a threat. So Daniel removed himself first.
He stopped and looked at his surroundings. He didn’t know how long he’d been walking,
but  the  immense,  gleaming  edifice  of  Heaven  was  still  visible  on  the  horizon  behind  him.
Immediately  around  him,  however,  stood  buildings  of  a  different  sort  altogether.  The  slums
reminded him of some of the tenements in Washington  he’d  visited  as  a  paramedic.  Most  of
the buildings looked as though they were still standing only because they were too stubborn  to
fall down.
Amazing, he thought, that such squalor could exist so close to the angels’ headquarters.  It
served as yet another indication of the disdain the angels felt for those that that weren’t “good
enough”.
Daniel was so busy assessing the slums, he never saw the hands reach out of the shadows to
grab him.
 
Inside his armor, Gabriel fumed. He had warned  Michael  many  times  that  Cho’s  attitude
problem  could  blossom  into  something  far  more  troublesome,  but  Michael  had  consistently

ignored  him.  If  Gabriel  had  half  Michael’s  talent  for  organization,  he’d  have  replaced  the
overconfident buffoon centuries ago.
And  these  slums!  Gabriel  had  recommended  to  Michael  countless  times  that  they  be
leveled. Considering his plans for the humans, Michael had been surprisingly concerned with
what they’d think of such an action. What good was the power he held over the humans if he
didn’t use it?
For  whatever  reason  Michael  let  the  eyesores  stand,  they  made  Gabriel’s  job  a  hundred
times  harder.  He  and  a  team  of  armored  angels  had  been  searching  the  area  surrounding
Heaven for hours, but they’d seen no sign of their quarry.
They’d  have  to  turn  back  soon.  The  longer  he  stayed  out  here,  the  more  questions  the
humans would ask. They were quickly approaching the limit of what they could pass off as  a
“security  patrol”.  As  much  control  as  Michael  had  over  the  media,  humans  were  too  damn
curious for their own good.
Michael  was  right  about  two  things,  Gabriel  thought.  Cho  is  too  great  a  threat  to  be
running loose.
And I will find him.
 
Heretic!
« ^ » 
Daniel  crouched  in  the  shadows,  held  silent  and  immobile  by  powerful  arms  as  the  angels
walked  by  in  their  sleek,  muscular  armor.  When  the  angels  were  finally  gone,  the  pressure
relented somewhat and Daniel was able to turn around. The man holding him was a monster, a
walking  wall  of  muscle  and  bone.  The  man  put  a  pale  finger  to  his  lips,  and  motioned  for
Daniel to follow him.
After glancing over his shoulder to where the angels had  been,  Daniel  followed.  His  huge
guide led him through a maze of half-fallen walls and make-shift shacks, occasionally stopping,
thinking and scratching the blond stubble on his nearly bald head. Finally, they arrived.
Buried deep within the wreckage of what had been South  Central Los Angeles was hidden
a sanctuary. The  building  consisted  of  one  large,  open  room,  and  Daniel  guessed  that  it  had
once  been  a  warehouse.  It  was  hundreds  of  yards  away  from  the  nearest  open  street,  and
presumably  not  discernable  from  the  surrounding  wreckage  when  seen  from  the  air.  There
were  maybe  three  dozen  people  milling  about,  and  the  few  that  noticed  Daniel’s  interest
quickly turned and went about their business.
“Now you can’t be who I think you are,” said voice to Daniel’s left.
Daniel followed the sound and saw a tall, well built black man walking  towards  him.  The
man wore a tee-shirt and overalls and was busy wiping the engine grease off his hands with a
rag. Behind him was  a  mid-90’s  era  sedan,  with  the  markings  of  a  police  interceptor.  Daniel
wasn’t terribly surprised. Internal combustion vehicles had been outlawed for months,  but he

doubted many here could have afforded the conversion process to electric. It  wasn’t  until  the
man got closer that Daniel noticed the black eyepatch against the man’s dark  skin,  obscuring
his right eye. The man thrust out a hand nearly free of grease. “Ricardo Jones.”
Daniel shook. “Daniel Cho.”
Jones smiled. “So you really are Daniel Cho, Discoverer of Demons,  Hero  of  the  Crusade,
and  Security  Advisor  to  the  Archangel  Michael.”  Jones’  smile  disappeared  quickly  at  the
mention of Michael’s name. He now looked very serious, and suspicious.
Daniel decided to take a chance. “Former Security Advisor,” he amended.  “Michael  and  I
have had something of a falling out.”
“Is that a fact.”
Daniel  smiled  inwardly.  Once  again,  he  was  about  to  engage  in  a  struggle  to  spread  the
word. He pulled the disk from his jacket. “Got a computer?”
 
Heedless of the guards, Susan stormed into Michael’s office. The angel was alone, engaged
with whatever was on his computer monitors. He did, however, notice when Susan barged in.
It would have taken intense concentration not to. “Susan,” he said, offering his most charming
smile. “What can I do for you?”
“Where’s Daniel?” Susan stopped just short of Michael’s throne  and  burned  holes  in  him
with her eyes.
“You don’t know either?” Michael said.
Susan softened a bit. “You mean you don’t have anything to … I’m sorry, Michael. Daniel
said some things to me last night, and … He’s been under a lot of stress—”
Michael stood and walked down to put an arm around Susan. “Yes, he has. And I’m afraid
he’s done something rash.”
“What?”
“Susan, sit.” She took her normal seat.
“I’m  afraid  Daniel  has  turned  against  us.  I  had  been  warned  someone  with  his  life
experience  might  develop  a  persecution  complex  and  turn  against  any  and  all  figures  of
authority, but I suppose I  just  hoped  Daniel  would  keep  it  under  control.  That  changed  this
morning. I received an email from Daniel shortly after he left Heaven of his own accord. In the
letter were many paranoid, inflammatory statements, and threats that I have no choice but  to
consider acts of treason. Gabriel is trying to find him and bring  him  back,  for  treatment,  but
Daniel, as you know, is awfully good at hiding.”
Susan was speechless.
“Susan, it’s important for you to be strong. You and Daniel are heroes to your people, and
with Daniel turning on us, it’s important that people know that they can still rely on you. Can
you do that?”

Susan’s mind raced a mile a minute, but she managed a nod.
“Good,” Michael said.
 
“No shit,” Ricardo Jones said as he finished reading.
“You don’t seem terribly surprised,” Daniel said, looking over Jones’ shoulder.
Jones swiveled in his chair and motioned for Daniel to sit. “I’m not,” he said. “Why else do
you think we’re here?”
Jones leaned in a little closer to Daniel and lifted his eyepatch. While his left eye was a deep,
rich brown, the right was a sickly, milky  bluish-white.  The  iris  was  contracted  to  a  pinprick,
and it didn’t react at all when exposed to the light. “Congenital defect,” Jones said. “I was born
with only one good eye.” He lowered the eyepatch into place  again.  “Since  I’ve  never  known
what’s it’s like to see with two eyes, it never really bothered me.”
Jones leaned back in his chair and put his hands behind his head, running his fingers over
his short, black hair. “I’d never really considered it a disability,  and  neither  did  the  angels,  at
first. But I knew people with real disabilities. People that either needed constant medical care,
like  diabetics  and  hemophiliacs,  or  people  with  problems  that  made  it  difficult  for  them  to
interact  with  society,  mental  retardation,  that  sort  of  thing.  One  by  one,  over  a  period  of
months,  these  people  disappeared  into  the  night.  When  anyone  asked  the  authorities  what
happened to them, the answer was always the same.”
“Care Centers,” Daniel said.
Jones smiled. “Give the man a cigar. Yeah, Care Centers. You  ever  hear  the  phrase  ‘Those
that forget the past are condemned to repeat it’?”
“Santayana,” Daniel said.
“Yeah. Well,  I’m  a  student  of  history.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  was  working  on  my  Masters
when the angels came into power. My thesis was on the psychology of the Nazis, and I’d seen
this pattern of behavior before. I figured I could either disappear or wait for them to get around
to taking me. I chose the former.”
Jones gestured around to the others in the sanctuary. “Others had the same idea. Everyone
in here, according to this,” he said, holding up Daniel’s disk, “would have been tagged by the
angels as unfit to reproduce, and eventually eliminated.”
He threw the disk in Daniel’s lap. “Except for you,” he finished.
Daniel  barely  had  time  to  grab  the  disk  before  the  hulking  brute  that  guided  him  in
grabbed him from behind and pulled him out of the chair.
Jones  stood  and  walked  over  to  him.  “Bob  here  doesn’t  say  much,  but  he’s  very  strong.
Now why don’t you tell us what Michael’s lap dog is really doing here?”
Before Daniel could get a word out, someone called, “Ricardo! Take a look at this!”
Jones walked over to the other man, part of a group surrounding a television. Bob followed,

with Daniel securely in tow.
Michael’s face was on the screen. Someone turned up the sound. “In light of these events,”
the angel  said,  “I  have  no  choice  but  to  charge  Daniel  Cho  with  Heresy  Against  the  State,  a
capital crime. We can’t afford to allow anyone, not even a former hero, to jeopardize what we
have built here. The state is offering a substantial reward for information leading to the arrest of
Daniel  Cho,  and  all  citizens  are  instructed  not  to  deal  with  him  directly.  He  is  considered
armed,  delusional  and  extremely  dangerous.  Thank  you.”  The  screen  returned  to  normal
programming.
Jones turned and looked thoughtfully at Daniel. “Bob,” he said. “we need to talk about this
privately. If you could?”
Daniel felt Bob’s forearm constrict around his neck, then everything went black.
Daniel  awoke  to  smelling  salts.  The  first  person  he  saw  was  Ricardo  Jones,  but  he  then
noticed that most of the denizens of the sanctuary stood behind their leader.
“Daniel Cho,” Jones said, “you are a very lucky man. We put it  to  a  vote,  and  most  of  us
decided that the reward for turning you in wasn’t worth the risk of being captured ourselves.
You are, for the foreseeable future, our guest. Welcome to the Underground.”
 
Resistance
« ^ » 
ONE YEAR LATER.
This is Susan Richardson with a Heavenly News Bulletin.
“Last  night,  the  world  celebrated  its  second  full  year  of  peace  and  unity.  Michael  was
quoted  as  being  pleased  with  the  turnout,  and  that  he  looked  forward  to  many  such
celebrations in the future.
“In other news, there is no truth to the rumor that a Care Center east  of  Los  Angeles  was
the target of a bombing  four days ago. As seen here, the  Care  Center  is  undamaged,  and  the
patients inside are still happily and  safely  continuing  their  treatment  and  work  towards  their
eventual recovery. Authorities believe the rumor began as part of an effort by the terrorists in
the Underground as part of a propaganda campaign designed to undermine the public’s trust
in Heaven. Citizens are instructed to ignore such rumors in the future.
“The worldwide curfew instituted by Michael last month seems to be working. Street crime
is down nearly eighty percent, with further reductions expected. Most citizens  we  questioned
were strongly in favor of the curfew, stating that they felt safer than they had in years.
“This has been a Heavenly News Update.”
 
Daniel Cho had had a busy year. Things had been a bit rocky at first, as Jones and the rest

of  the  Underground  didn’t  really  trust  him.  After  a  few  months  (and  more  of  Gabriel’s
sweeps), they’d started to come around, and Daniel began to make the change from captive to
collaborator.
The Underground was far more widespread than Daniel initially thought. It seemed that as
soon  as  Michael  took  over,  there  were  people  that  disagreed  with  him,  his  policies,  or  both.
Though Daniel had been introduced to the Los Angeles of the Underground, it existed to some
extent in nearly every major city around the world. Organized loosely to put it charitably, the
Underground had  no  central  leadership,  but  the  various  groups  did  keep  in  touch  with  one
another and passed on information. Daniel felt this would be useful when the time came.
Daniel and Ricardo Jones became good friends. Once their initial skepticism wore off, most
of the Underground began to treat Daniel almost as if he were visiting royalty,  but  not  Jones.
The de facto leader of the Los Angeles Underground, he treated Daniel with the respect due his
accomplishments,  but  also  regarded  him  as  a  valuable  resource.  Jones  was  still  in  charge  in
L.A., and Daniel saw no reason to challenge that.
The Los Angeles Underground was several hundred strong by the second year of Michael’s
reign. Most of the members were like Ricardo; they’d gone into hiding to avoid being captured
because  they  didn’t  measure  up  to  the  angels’  standards  of  perfection.  A  small  but  steadily
growing portion of the Underground, though, was composed  of  perfectly  healthy  individuals
that had decided to stand against the angels’ regime.
The Underground had kept busy, raiding everything from junkyards to the angels’ supply
depots  for  supplies,  though  they  never  attacked  civilian  targets.  After  two  years,  they  were
finally ready for something big.
Daniel  and  Ricardo  sat  in  a  makeshift  planning  room,  going  over  some  maps  and  aerial
photographs  of  an  area  south  of  Los  Angeles.  In  the  warehouse  around  them,  the
Underground’s forces readied for a major assault.
“If we come in here, from the north,” Ricardo said, “they’ll be less likely to see us coming.”
“They’re going to see us either  way,  Ricardo,”  Daniel  answered.  “If  we  come  in  from  the
north and they do see us, we have fewer avenues of retreat. We should come in from the east,
towards the service entrance.”
Ricardo leaned back in his seat and rubbed  his eyepatch, something Daniel had often seen
him  do  when  he  was  frustrated  or  annoyed.  “Damn,”  he  said.  “Why’s  a  damn  Care  Center
have to be done up like a fort?”
“Because it’s not a hospital. It’s a death camp. Michael knows by now that I’m one of you,
even if he can’t find me. He’s scared to death that we’ll do exactly what we’re doing. Consider
us lucky. Last we checked,  the camp didn’t have any armored angels as protection. We get in
and out fast enough, we can rescue the inmates and be gone before any armor shows up.”
Jones stood and opened the door. “That’s a mighty big ‘if’, Daniel.” He left.
Daniel smiled and looked over the maps one more time. He knew what they had planned
was a terrible risk, but it had to be done. More people died in that camp every day they waited,
and to rescue them the way Daniel had suggested almost a month ago would draw attention to
their cause, and maybe help make up the minds of the so many people that were uneasy about

the  angels,  but  didn’t  really  know  why.  Daniel  knew  that  if  it  didn’t  go  off  well,  if  he  were
captured,  then  he  was  as  good  as  dead.  Michael  still  had  egg  on  his  face  from  Daniel’s
defection, and Daniel was still considered a Heretic by the government. He didn’t care, really.
He’d been a marked man in one way or another ever since witnessing Batarel’s resurrection at
that car wreck, so long ago. He’d learned to live with it and do what must be done. This rescue
qualified. Rolling up the maps, he followed Ricardo.
 
Late that night, they approached from the east, as Daniel suggested. The  Care  Center  was
about  the  size  of  a  large  hospital  complex,  but  most  of  the  buildings  were  only  one  or  two
stories tall. There were no other buildings for miles, an insurance taken by the angels that the
only view most citizens would ever have of a Care Center was what they saw on television. The
buildings themselves were clean, white and they looked very medical. The fences topped with
razor wire were far enough away as to not be seen by the occasional television camera.
Daniel  and  Ricardo  crouched  in  the  brush  about  a  half-mile  away  from  the  fences,
watching closely with binoculars. They were surrounded by a dozen of the Underground’s best
fighters. Nearly a mile behind them,  out of sight from the complex, was an array of makeshift
armored vehicles, all internal combustion powered, and therefore illegal. Least of our  worries,
Daniel mused.
“Not much activity,” Ricardo said.
“Not yet, but there will be. Remember,” said Daniel, speaking to all of them, “the angels are
fast,  even  without  armor.  Don’t  even  get  near  one  hand  to  hand.  And  don’t  waste  your
grenades.  They’re  your  only  effective  weapons.  Use  them  only  when  you’re  sure  they’ll  do
some good.
“Once we get that fence down, two things  will  happen.  Our  people  will  haul  ass  in  there
and start loading people into vans, and the angels will  try  to  stop  that  from  happening.  Your
primary concern is to protect the vans. Don’t go chasing after any angels that might try to draw
you away. That’s my job.”
Ricardo looked quizzically at Daniel.
“The instant we blow down the gate, I’ve got to find and destroy the commandant.  It’ll buy
us more time, and send a message as well. Don’t wait for me.”
Ricardo nodded, then spoke into a walkie-talkie. “Everyone ready?”
He received various affirmative replies, then looked again at  Daniel.  “May  as  well  get  this
over with,” he said.
Daniel smiled grimly, and nodded.
Ricardo keyed the walkie-talkie again. “Go.”
 

Liberation
« ^ » 
Once the word was given, things happened quickly. Daniel, Ricardo and the others rushed the
service  entrance,  blowing  it  open  with  their  grenades  only  moments  before  the  speeding
Underground  vans  barreled  through  the  opening.  Daniel  clapped  a  hand  on  Ricardo’s
shoulder. “Don’t wait for me!”
Ricardo  nodded,  then  followed  the  vans.  Daniel  loped  off  to  the  north,  where  they  were
fairly sure the commandant’s office must be.
Ricardo was thankful. They’d taken the angels by surprise, and met almost no resistance at
all  making  their  way  to  the  holding  areas.  They’d  seen  only  one  angel  so  far,  and  Bob
dispatched him fairly quickly. Thirty seconds with no trouble, he thought. Not bad.
He  knew  the  situation  wouldn’t  last,  though.  Already,  the  warning  sirens  were  blazing
throughout  the  complex.  Judging  by  the  reaction  times  they’d  recorded  at  the  other  Care
Center  they’d  bombed,  they  had  two  more  minutes  until  the  complex’s  unarmored  guards
arrived,  and  ten  minutes  beyond  that  until  the  armor  dispatched  from  Heaven  showed  up.
They had to move quickly.
On  Ricardo’s  signal,  the  lead  van,  one  specially  modified  with  an  armored  grill,  plunged
through  the  wall  of  central  holding  facility.  The  instant  the  cinderblocks  stopped  falling,
Ricardo  was  through  the  hole.  “We’re  the  Underground!”  he  shouted  at  the  pale,  emaciated
people inside. “We’re here to rescue you!”
While  the  others  started  loading  people  into  the  trucks,  Ricardo  looked  to  the  north,
waiting for the angels to come, and wondering what Daniel was doing.
 
Daniel wasn’t sure what he was doing. He and Ricardo had studied everything they  could
about the layout of the Care Centers, and he thought he knew his away around one pretty well.
He quickly discovered that knowing the layout of place from the air and knowing it from the
ground were two different things.
He wasn’t lost, exactly. He still knew roughly where in the complex he was, and  he  knew
the route back  to  the  exit  and  rendezvous  with  Ricardo  and  the  others.  He  just  had  no  idea
where the commandant was.
“Stop where you are,” commanded a voice behind him. “And drop your weapon.”
Daniel stopped and turned around slowly, dropping his grenade launcher on his right foot.
One of the dozen or so angels in the complex, one of Gabriel’s security goons by his uniform,
held a pistol aimed in Daniel’s direction.
The angel smiled. “I can’t believe my good fortune. You’re Daniel Cho.”
Daniel shrugged.
“Gabriel’s been looking long and hard for you, traitor. I’m going to look awfully good when
I turn you in.”

Daniel cocked an eyebrow and grinned.
“You have something to say, Cho?”
“No,”  Daniel  said  as  he  dropped  backwards  to  the  ground,  simultaneously  ducking  the
angel’s bullet  and  kicking  the  grenade  launcher  back  into  his  hand.  Within  seconds,  all  that
was left of the angel was a smoking wet spot on the wall of the nearest building.
“I’ll be damned. It worked.” Daniel kept looking.
 
Ricardo hastily glanced at his watch as he waved  more  people  into  the  trucks.  They  were
running out of time.
As  if  on  cue,  the  angels  arrived.  They  weren’t  armored,  instead  wearing  the  tan/gold
uniforms of Heaven Security.  They  were  armed,  however,  and  while  the  automatic  weapons
they carried were only a nuisance to an  immortal,  they  were  lethal  enough  against  a  human.
“We have company!” Ricardo yelled. “Don’t let them near the trucks!”
Humans  and  angels  opened  fire  simultaneously.  In  the  first  few  seconds,  a  handful  of
angels were blown apart and a handful of humans were cut in half by automatic weapons fire.
Both sides dropped back to regroup.
“Keep firing!” Ricardo shouted. Maybe half the prisoners were loaded, and unless his men
could keep the angels a safe distance away, they’d die anyway, along with their rescuers.
He hoped Daniel was faring better.
 
Daniel finally got his bearings and thought he knew where he was. Directly  ahead  of  him
was  the  building  he  and  Ricardo  had  agreed  to  be  their  central  command  building.  It  was
huge, white and marble, with giant ornate columns. This single building probably outweighed
and cost more than the rest of the complex combined.  Angelnomics, Daniel thought. Only the
best for humanity’s keepers. He had just started up the front steps  when  instinct  told  him  to
duck.
An explosive shell  whistled  over  his  head  and  exploded  about  thirty  meters  behind  him.
When Daniel looked  up,  he  saw  an  armored  angel  step  out  the  door.  Too  soon!  he  thought.
Then he realized it was alone.
Of course the commandant would have a personal suit.
“Daniel Cho,” the angel said through its amplified loudspeaker. “I suppose it’s too much  to
ask that you’ve come to turn yourself in?”
Daniel smiled and raised his grenade launcher.
Instead  of  making  a  move  to  dodge  or  fight  back,  the  angel  just  stood  there.  “Please,
human.  That  might  make  a  difference  against  a  normal  angel,  but  it  will  hardly  dent  my
armor. What are you going to do, pummel me with it?”
Sort  of,  you  smug  bastard.  Daniel  adjusted  his  aim  and  fired  a  grenade  into  the  marble

column  next  to  the  angel.  It  collapsed,  bringing  tons  of  marble  crashing  down  on  the
commandant as Daniel leapt aside. When the dust cleared, only the angel’s armored head and
shoulders were in view.
“Now,”  Daniel  said,  “about  that  pummeling?”  He  aimed  the  launcher  squarely  at  the
angel’s head.
 
“Faster!” Ricardo screamed.  His  men  were  running  out  of  grenades,  and  he  was  running
out of men. Only Bob and a few others still stood, while many of the others that still lived did
so only if Ricardo could get them  medical attention quickly enough. The only good part of his
situation was that most of the prisoners were free.
He checked his watch. Two more minutes until the cut off. He and the trucks had to be out
of the complex and to the camouflaged safe havens within five, or the flying angels would spot
them.
“Go!”
Bob crept over to him. The mute gave the hand signal to go. The loading was complete.
“We’re out of here!” Ricardo shouted. He made his way to the nearest truck,  Bob providing
cover fire, as he then provided for Bob. The instant the large man was in the  truck  it  lurched
forward and Ricardo shut the reinforced back door.
They had done it.
 
Daniel ran through the complex, trying to make it to the exit before the armor arrived.
As he ran along the outer fence, he saw the trucks receding in the distance. Good for them,
he thought. Now if only I can survive this.
He heard them before he saw them. The deep thundering roar of the angels wing-mounted
rockets. He looked at his watch. Damn, they’re early!
He was only fifty meters from the  exit,  but  it  was  all  open  ground.  He  got  as  close  as  he
could to the nearest building, and waited for the angels to land. If they landed near the exit, he
was dead.
Fate  smiled  on  him.  From  the  sound  of  their  rockets,  they  landed  near  the  Command
Center, probably to check with the commandant before combing the area.
Daniel took the opportunity  to  race  into  the  southern  California  desert,  where  the  others
waited for the angels to fly away again.
 
A Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing

« ^ » 
The  trucks  lurched  into  the  Underground  headquarters  later  that  night,  moving  from  their
hiding places only after the thunder of the angels’ rockets  had  long  faded  away  to  the  north.
Daniel and Ricardo were among the first off the trucks, and helped with the unloading. A lot of
people didn’t make it, both prisoners and rescuers. Among the dead  was  Bob,  who  died  of  a
chest  wound  in  transit.  Ricardo  took  the  news  calmly,  then  went  to  his  office,  the  planning
room.
Daniel followed. “That was a little cold, don’t you think?”
Ricardo sat down behind his desk, the only substantial piece of furniture in the room other
than the conference table, and pulled out a bottle of tequila. He uncapped  it  and  took  a  swig
straight from the bottle. “Yeah, probably. Bob was the first person I met in the Underground,
the one that brought  me  here  in  the  first  place,  just  like  he  brought  you.  But  I  thought  you
understood, Daniel. This is war. People die. It’s inevitable. We saved more people than we lost
tonight, so in my book that’s a victory. Bob will be missed.”
Ricardo took a long pull from the bottle. “But the war goes on.”
Daniel walked out of the office and returned to the trucks. Just outside the nearest truck, an
emergency medical station had been set up. Daniel saw two men  lowering a third into a chair.
“What’s the problem?” Daniel asked.
One  of  the  lowerers  looked  up,  and  stood  up  straight  when  he  recognized  Daniel.
“Diabetic, sir. He says he’s having a sugar reaction.”
“I don’t doubt it,” Daniel said.
“Animals,” the diabetic said. “They were animals.”
Daniel knelt by the man. “Excuse me?”
Someone brought over a syringe and a vial of insulin. Daniel watched as the man carefully
measured out his dosage, then shot it into his left leg. Only then did the man relax.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m in a bit of a snit. Lewis Malone.”
“Daniel Cho.” They shook hands. The man’s grip was firm and strong.
“I was  in  that  hell  hole  for  only  three  days,  but  not  once  did  they  allow  me  any  insulin.
They knew I was a diabetic, but—”
“That was the point, sir,” Daniel said. “The whole reason for that place is  to  remove  those
Michael considers genetically defective from the gene pool. With most people, the angels have
to exterminate them eventually. With people dependant on medication to survive, they can just
ignore you until you die. It’s even worse for hemophiliacs. I’m told they don’t often make it to
the cells. They’re cut coming off the bus, and bleed to death right there in the courtyard.”
“Animals,” Malone said again.
“Are you feeling any better now?” Daniel asked, gesturing to the syringe.
“Much,” Malone said. “Thank you.”
Daniel  smiled  and  moved  on.  A  couple  of  people  were  trying  to  help  an  old  man  down

from the next truck, but he was having none of it.
“Get your hands off me? What do I look like, an invalid? I can get down on my own!”
Seeing he was the last one in the truck, Daniel waved the helpers away and sat on the edge
of the truck. The old man stood and stared at him.
Daniel returned the stare. “So you going to get down or not?”
Looking daggers at Daniel, the old man tried to clamber over the edge, but lost his footing.
Daniel was there instantly to gently lower the man to the ground. The old man  shook  off  the
assistance. “I knew what I was doing!”
Daniel nodded, then  leaned  against  the  truck.  “Mmm  hmm.  So  what’s  a  spry  youngster
like you doing in a Care Center?”
The man started to answer,  then  stopped  himself  to  take  a  closer  look  at  Daniel.  “Wait  a
second,” he said. “I know you. You’re that demon catcher guy, Chang, Chong … Cho! Daniel
Cho!”
Daniel took a small, perfunctory bow.
The old man stuck out his hand. “Ira Rosenbaum. Pleased to meet you.”
Daniel shook the man’s hand, then repeated his question. “What were you in for?”
“Eh,” the man said, waving dismissively. “With those thugs, who needs a reason anymore?
Something  wrong  with  my  genes,  they  said.  It  doesn’t  matter.  They  don’t  need  excuses
anymore, come on, they run the planet, for crying out loud.”
Ira looked around, then leaned closer to Daniel. “I’ll tell you something. It isn’t just medical
anymore. A few weeks before they took me, I noticed some problems with my neighbor. Nice
guy,  typical  overworked  gentile.  He  must  have  worked  twelve-hour  days  at  some  big  shot
business  in  the  city,  not  counting  the  commute,  and  most  weekends  too.  He  didn’t  spend
much time at home, and the wife worked too. Over time, the man’s lawn got a bit messy. One
night, an angel dropped by in one of their big golden cars and told him to mow his lawn. The
guy said okay, but you know the type; he forgot. A few days later I  hear  this  big  commotion
over there at night. I get up the next morning and the guy and his family are gone.
“My parents, they told me stories about times  like  these.  They  lived  in  Poland  in  the  late
thirties,  early  forties.  They  survived  the  camps,  even  managed  to  stay  together,  but  most  of
their friends weren’t so lucky. I just thank God neither of them  is alive to see what the world’s
become, to see the madness has returned.”
Daniel said nothing; he couldn’t think of anything that wouldn’t sound trite.
“Well, thanks for the rescue, Mister Cho. I gotta find the  john.  Excuse  me.”  The  old  man
wandered off, loudly asking the way to the facilities. Deep in thought, Daniel watched him go.
An hour or two later, after  all  the  trucks  were  unloaded  and  moved  out,  a  sense  of  calm
returned to the Underground. Any plans of a victory party were squashed by the reminders of
the  enormous  cost  of  the  rescue,  and  soon  everything  was  squared  away  again.  Which  was
exactly what Lewis Malone was waiting for.

Soon after he was deemed okay and left alone, he began exploring the building. He found
what he was looking for after only fifteen minutes of searching. A tiny niche behind some huge
wooden  packing  crates,  it  was  dark  and  out  of  the  way,  the  perfect  hiding  place.  From  his
pants pocket, Malone took a small electronic device. After turning it on, he carefully placed it
in the corner, out of sight.
Walking away from the device, Malone’s eyes sought out Daniel Cho. The rebel stood near
a group of the others. Malone was disgusted with the rebel’s smug attitude, and the deference
the others gave him. But that would all change soon enough.
 
Breach of Faith
« ^ » 
This is Susan Richardson, with this Heavenly News Update.
“Tragedy struck last night as improperly stored fuel in a motorpool caused an explosion in
a Care  Center  south  of  Los  Angeles.  Authorities  believe  that  a  fire  broke  out  late  last  night
which  in  turn  caused  multiple  barrels  of  gasoline  to  explode.  The  explosive  force  and  fire
devastated the compound resulting in the fatalities of most of the patients, as well as many  of
their  angelic  caretakers.  Though  internal  combustion  engines  have  long  been  outlawed  for
personal  vehicles,  they  are  still  legal  and  common  for  industrial  use.  Michael  is  personally
looking into the incident, and has said that steps will be taken to insure that it never happens
again.
“Rumors  that  the  explosions  were  the  result  of  an  Underground  terrorist  assault  are
completely unfounded, and should be ignored.”
 
Susan was miserable. She realized shortly after Daniel had left that he’d been right after all,
and that she’d been too blinded by all the  perceived  good  the  angels  had  done  to  see  it.  The
very day Michael declared Daniel a heretic, Susan began looking into the allegations Daniel had
made.
The  results  shocked  and  angered  her,  but  she  stayed,  thinking  she  could  help  more  by
being the voice of reason in the media, by trying to tone down the angels from the inside. The
world had been through so much death and chaos, she didn’t want to start another revolution.
She’d tried to do all those things, but in the end, she had to admit nothing had changed. If
anything, things had gotten worse the longer Michael was in power, and she remained nothing
more than a puppet, her only consolation that she, unlike so many others, could see the strings.
Susan knew quite well what had happened the night  before.  She  knew  the  rumors  she’d
just told people to discount were the real truth, the truth she’d sworn as a journalist to tell. She
knew what the Care Centers were, she knew what the Underground had done, and she knew,
even though she had no proof whatsoever, that Daniel had been there.
She thought of him often, out there fighting the ever-growing injustice while she remained

the mouthpiece of … of what?
Inhuman  monsters?  The  angels  certainly  weren’t  human,  but  even  after  all  she’d  seen,
Susan still believed they meant well. Then again, according to what Daniel had told her, Satan
believed the same thing. Who was right?
Maybe it was the power, she reasoned. The power of guidance the angels and demons had
possessed for millennia. Maybe they were so full of their roles as shepherds, they lost  sight  of
what was really best for the flock.
In any case, her life was hollow, people died by the thousands every day  for  genetic  flaws
they  had  no  control  over,  and  while  Daniel  fought  for  those  people,  Susan  did  nothing  but
cover it up. One way or another, Susan swore that would change.
 
Obeying an urgent summons,  Gabriel walked into Michael’s  throne  room.  The  angel  that
ruled the world stared intently at one of his data screens, but looked up when Gabriel entered.
“He’s in,” Michael said.
“He’d better be,” Gabriel replied. “We lost a lot in Cho’s little raid.”
Michael  sat  back  on  his  throne,  looking  very  regal  but  not  impressing  Gabriel  in  the
slightest.  “Yes,”  he  said,  “but  who  would  have  thought  Cho  and  his  merry  little  band  of
outlaws would be so efficient?”
“Certainly not Adonaeth,” Gabriel said dryly.
Michael sobered a little. “That part mustn’t get out. If the humans ever come to believe that
one of them can fight and kill an armored angel—”
“—we wouldn’t have a minor resistance, but a full-scale revolt,” Gabriel finished.
Michael smiled. “I don’t know if I’d go quite that far, old friend, but you get the point. In
any case, Rhaumel is in place, and he has activated the homing beacon. We now know exactly
where Cho and the rest of the Underground are hiding.”
“Excellent,” Gabriel said. “I’ll arrange for an aerial strike immediately.”
“No!” Michael said. “Aerial bombing is too high profile, too deliberate. We’ve spent a lot of
time  and  effort  over  the  past  year  painting  the  Underground  as  pathetic,  incompetent
malcontents, and if we publicly bomb  them  now,  we  bestow  upon  them  the  very  credibility
we’ve worked so long to deny.
“No, you and a strike team will go in on foot, in armor. Afterwards, we can pick any cover
story  we  like,  that  a  routine  security  patrol  happened  upon  a  den  of  looters,  whatever.  The
important thing  is  to  keep  it  quiet.  Rhaumel  will  signal  when  they  are  least  prepared  for  an
attack. You will then strike hard, fast and quiet. Once word gets out in the Underground about
this attack  and  the  death  of  Cho,  they’ll  lose  heart.  We  can  crush  this  resistance  quite  easily
after that.”
“And Richardson?”

“Yes, noticed that, did you?” Michael asked. “I don’t quite know what to make of her these
days.  She’s  developing  quite  an  attitude,  and  I  think  she  knows  more  of  what’s  really
happening than she lets on. Still, for the moment,  she’s  loyal,  and  her  value  as  a  trusted  and
beloved  spokesperson  outweighs  her  danger  as  a  journalist,  so  caught  up  in  some  ethereal
concept of truth rather than concrete and definable order.
“You know, Gabriel, things were so much  easier a thousand years ago. The church  listened
to us, and everyone else listened to the  church.  We  set  the  rules,  they  obeyed.  No  questions.
Order.  Now  these  humans  are  so  caught  up  in  ridiculous  concepts  like  freedom  and
self-determination, as if they were actually  wise  enough  to  rule  themselves  effectively.  Didn’t
the rampant chaos during their centuries of self-rule teach them  anything?  Don’t  they  realize
what’s best for them?”
“Old  friend,”  Gabriel  said,  “sometimes  I  wonder  if  these  humans  should  be  allowed  to
continue  the  practice  of  their  old  religions  and  philosophies.  Too  many  different  schools  of
thought make it much harder to control them effectively.”
Michael waved a dismissive hand. “Leave Richardson to me. I’ll keep a close eye on  her.  I
want you to concern yourself only with a successful strike. I literally  want  the  head  of  Daniel
Cho on my desk by morning. Go.”
 
Gabriel assembled a strike team of his best warriors, suited up in  armor,  and  left  Heaven,
“on patrol”.
Gabriel had mixed emotions about what he was doing. On the  whole,  he  agreed  with  the
plan, but he often wondered if it came too late. Not all of the humans’ mythology and religion
was bunk. Even though a great deal of it was fiction created by his people to keep the humans
in line, there were often real lessons to be learned from it, even for angels.
Lately  he’d  been  preoccupied  with  the  story  of  Adam  and  Eve.  He  had  become  acutely
aware that he was  watching  that  ancient  tale  play  itself  out  again,  this  time  on  a  far  grander
scale. Just as Eve became poisoned to Paradise by eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, the
humans  were  increasingly  becoming  poisoned  to  the  angels  by  ideas  of  freedom.  He  agreed
with Michael that the angels, in their immortal perspective, had the wisdom to know what was
truly best for the humans and that only the  angels  could  guide  the  human  race  efficiently  as
time went on. He just doubted it would happen with this group of humans.
Gabriel had tried to voice this concern to Michael on several occasions, once even detailing
a plan to isolate  a  large  group  of  very  young  children,  kill  off  the  adult  population  and  start
over  from  scratch.  Michael  generally  scoffed  at  his  concerns,  confident  that  the  angels,  by
virtue of nothing more than simple longevity, would win out.  Gabriel  wasn’t  so  sure.  Gabriel
had watched humans more closely than most of his brethren, and had paid particular attention
to  human  wars.  He  knew  why  humans  fought,  what  they  fought  for  and  what  they  were
willing to die for, by the millions if need be. He knew that so long as the humans had a word in
their  language  for  freedom,  the  angels  would  never  be  truly  secure  in  their  power  base.
Humans were too damn independent for their own good.
Finally,  the  signal  he’d  been  waiting  for  flashed  onto  the  display  inside  his  helmet.  The
Underground’s guard was as far down as it was going to get. It was time to strike.

 
Against the Wall
« ^ » 
The attack came with no warning. The angels were inside before the sentries  even  knew  they
were there. In the first ten seconds, a dozen humans nearest the door perished in fire.
Daniel was awake, weapon in hand, before the first explosion ceased its echo. He sprang off
his  bunk  and  had  a  half  dozen  fighters  at  his  side  by  the  time  the  last  angel  entered  the
building.
“How’d they find us?” someone asked.
“Worry about that later,” Daniel said as he began firing on the lead angel. As expected, their
grenades did more damage to the surrounding architecture than to the angels.
“Damn!” Daniel cursed. Already, the smoke from the multiple grenade explosions and the
angels’ flame-throwers made it very difficult to see. It wouldn’t be long before the smoke made
it difficult to breathe.
A hand fell on Daniel’s shoulder. Daniel whirled around and  nearly  struck  Ricardo  in  the
head  with  the  barrel  of  his  grenade  launcher.  “We  have  to  retreat,  Daniel!”  Ricardo  shouted
over the increasing noise.
“Good idea! You get the civilians out, and I’ll cover you!”
Ricardo shook his head. “I don’t think so!”
Before  Daniel  could  react,  three  bulky  Underground  fighters  grabbed  him  from  behind.
“You’re  too  valuable  to  risk  here!”  Ricardo  shouted.  “I’ll  see  you  at  the  rendezvous  point!”
Ricardo  motioned  for  the  emergency  exit,  and  the  three  men  carried  Daniel  away.  The  last
thing  he  saw  before  they  entered  the  darkened,  narrow  tunnels  to  safety  was  the  image  of
Ricardo trying to organize a counterstrike against  ten  armored  angels.  He  offered  a  prayer  to
whatever god Ricardo worshipped.
 
Ricardo hoped he hadn’t just made a fatal mistake.  While  it  was  true  that  Daniel  was  too
valuable to the overall resistance to risk capture, he  was  also  a  brilliant  tactician,  and  Ricardo
knew that he’d need every advantage he could get to get out of this alive.
While his men  kept  the  angels  relatively  contained  with  explosive  blasts,  the  angels  were
giving  far  better  than  they  were  getting,  and  it  wouldn’t  be  long  before  they  tore  the  place
apart. Most of Ricardo’s men  had formed a protective wall of constant firepower  to  mask  the
escape  of  the  civilians  and  those  too  weak  or  injured  to  fight.  Due  to  the  angels’  efficiency,
Ricardo  noticed  they  didn’t  have  to  evacuate  nearly  as  many  as  he  originally  would  have
thought.
Unfortunately, the wall of protectors wasn’t holding very well either, for  the  same  reason.

“Fall back!” Ricardo screamed. “Orderly retreat!”
A grenade, from the angels or an errant shot from one of his own people, he didn’t know,
exploded directly over his head, raining down plaster,  wood  and  metal.  “We  are  leaving!”  he
shouted.
Ricardo and a handful of others concentrated  cover  fire  until  they  were  the  only  humans
left alive in the building, with seven angels bearing down on them.  The  angelic  armor  was  in
varying stages of disrepair, from only scratched to nearly totaled, but the angels themselves still
moved with all the speed and power that was their trademark. Ricardo and his men  crowded
in front of the emergency exit, waiting for the angels to get close enough for Ricardo to give the
order. When the angels were within ten paces, Ricardo jerked his head backwards. “Let’s close
the door!”
As one, the men  backed into the tunnel, leaving the  angels  as  the  only  living  creatures  in
the building. When the angels rushed to follow, the men  fired  their  grenade  launchers  not  at
the angels, but at the  walls  and  ceiling  of  the  tunnel  entrance.  Tons  of  rubble  that  had  been
carefully placed around the entrance months before came raining down.
“Go!” Ricardo shouted over the din. As  his  men  retreated,  Ricardo  slowly  followed  them,
walking backwards and firing more grenades to bring  down  more  rubble.  Once  he  was  sure
he’d created a barricade large enough to buy them time to escape, he turned and ran down the
dark tunnel to the rendezvous.
Ricardo  caught  up  with  Daniel  a  short  time  later  at  the  rendezvous  point,  where  Daniel
supervised the loading of the weak and  injured  into  the  trucks  for  the  evacuation  out  of  Los
Angeles. The city wasn’t safe for them anymore.
Daniel managed a quick smile as Ricardo approached. “So it’s done?” he asked.
Ricardo nodded, still out of breath from his escape. “If they try to dig through  and  follow
us, we’ll be long gone before they get out of that tunnel. If they just  radio  in  and  close  down
the city—”
“We’ve already got ways around that,” Daniel said. “Good work, Ricardo.”
“Daniel, how’d they find us?”
Daniel looked around, then put an arm around Ricardo’s shoulder and took  him  aside.  “I
have an idea, but I wanted to wait until you got here to test it. You’re still the boss in L.A.”
Not  anymore,  Ricardo  thought,  looking  first  at  Daniel,  then  at  the  remains  of  the  Los
Angeles Underground packing into the evacuation trucks. “What’s the plan?”
 
Rhaumel, or “Lewis Malone”, waited in line, impatient to get in the truck.  The injured and
elderly were being helped in first, and those rebels cursed with being ambulatory had to wait.
As  he  looked  around,  he  noticed  Jones  and  Cho  walking  towards  him.  He  was  initially
suspicious, but they were both smiling and chatting happily. They probably knew nothing, he
decided.
“Lewis!” Cho called out. “We need your help with something.”

Rhaumel pointed to himself with a questioning look.
“Yes, you,” Cho said, smiling even wider and chuckling to himself.
Reluctantly, Rhaumel stepped out of line. He didn’t need to draw undo attention to himself
by refusing whatever they wanted outright. “What do you need?”
This time, Jones did the talking. “We’re short-handed loading some of the cargo, and Daniel
here says you’ve got a pretty strong grip. We sure could use the help.”
Rhaumel scowled. Bad enough the rebels  escaped  Gabriel’s  assault,  but  now  they  wanted
him to do manual labor?
“Come  on,”  Daniel  said,  “it’s  the  least  you  can  to  pay  us  back  for  all  that  insulin.”  He
playfully jabbed Rhaumel in the shoulder.
“All right,” Rhaumel said.
“It’s this way,” Jones said, pointing the way, “We’ll meet you in a second.” Rhaumel began
to walk in the prescribed direction. As soon as he was ten meters or so away from the line, he
heard Cho shout “Now!”
From hiding places behind trucks and crates, a  dozen  rebels  raced  out  and  grabbed  him.
He’d been tricked!
He quickly glanced around and assessed the situation. None of the rebels holding him were
armed, but there were several just beyond arm’s reach that were. Cho and Jones stood directly
in front of him, and even with his strength and speed he didn’t think he could break the grips
of a dozen humans and reach either of the ringleaders before the armed  rebels  could  fire.  He
decided to maintain his cover and try to play it off as  a  big  misunderstanding.  Humans  were
fond of that. It was the basis for most of their comedy.
“What’s … what’s going on?” he asked in the most terror-stricken voice he could muster.
“A test,” Cho said, unsheathing a knife. “I’ve had doubts about you ever since we first met.
Now I’m going to see if I was right.”
Rhaumel struggled, but the humans just  barely  held  him  in  check.  Cho  stepped  forward
and  slashed  quickly  along  Rhaumel’s  arm  with  the  knife.  The  wound  had  already  begun  to
heal by the time Cho sheathed the knife again. The other rebels tightened their grips, now that
what they were dealing with had been confirmed.
“What’s your real name?” Cho demanded.
Dropping all pretense of humanity, the angel answered promptly. “Rhaumel. How did you
know, rebel?”
“You should have picked a better cover ailment. Very few diabetics could have really gone
three whole days without insulin, and none  of  them  would  have  been  as  strong  as  you  were
after a sugar reaction. I just wish I’d thought of that before tonight, when I saw you  were  the
only one other than the sentries already up when the attack  began.  All  this  death  could  have
been averted.”
“So what now, rebel?”

Cho shrugged, a maddeningly casual gesture. “We’re leaving. You’re dying. Goodbye.”
Cho turned and walked briskly away,  already  resuming  the  job  of  coordinating  the  rebel
departure.  As  Rhaumel  looked  around,  he  saw  Jones  glaring  at  him,  the  hatred  exceedingly
obvious, a rebel preparing a small plastic explosive device, and another rebel stepping in front
of him and leveling a pistol at his head. Rhaumel struggled again, but he couldn’t get enough
leverage to break his bonds.
“Everyone get away from his head,” the pistol-wielding rebel said,  and  just  for  a  moment
Rhaumel thought he had enough freedom of movement to get away. But he wasn’t quite  fast
enough.
 
Town Meeting
« ^ » 
What?” Michael said, incredulous.
Gabriel stood before him in the throne room, still clad in his charred armor and holding his
helmet in his hands. He spoke quietly. “Cho escaped, and we lost  contact  with  Rhaumel.  We
believe his cover was blown, and he’s presumed dead.”
Michael  nodded,  stood,  and  walked  to  the  window,  its  vast  expanse  overlooking  the
pre-dawn Los Angeles below. “What you’re telling me,” he said, “is that you knew where Cho
and his band of traitors were, you  took  them  by  surprise,  killed  nearly  half  of  them,  yet  not
only did Cho and the other rebel leaders escape, but you lost three of your own men  and  the
mole we sacrificed a Care Center to plant?
“Is that what you’re telling me?”
Gabriel stared at the floor. “Yes, sir.”
Michael  whirled  on  his  subordinate.  “This  is  intolerable!  Gabriel,  you’ve  served  me  well
over  the  millennia,  and  that’s  the  only  reason  you’re  still  alive.  I  will  not  accept  this  sort  of
failure any longer. They’re only humans! You’re an immortal! Act  like  it!  From  this  point  on,
I’m assigning someone else  to  run  security  around  here.  Your  job,  for  every  second  of  every
day, is to find Daniel Cho and deliver his dead body to me.
“Is that understood?”
“Yes, sir.”
Michael pointed to the door. “Get out of my sight.”
Scowling, Gabriel left.
 
The trucks filtered into San Diego by morning, and Daniel found the members  of the San
Diego Underground very receptive. Their leader was a burly Mexican named Manuel Nogales,

and he seemed particularly pleased to have Daniel in town.
“So you’re the Great and Powerful Daniel Cho,” Nogales said, enveloping Daniel’s hand in
a beefy palm and shaking vigorously.
“Just Daniel,” Daniel smiled, finding the large man’s enthusiasm infectious.  Daniel  looked
around the compound as the other Los Angeles Underground members  started unloading the
trucks.  It  was  a  vast  underground  maze  of  forgotten  irrigation  tunnels,  hard  to  find  and
protected from aerial strikes. Daniel approved. “Quite a place you have here, Mister Nogales.”
“Please,  Daniel,  it’s  Manuel.  Come  this  way.  There’s  someone  who  wants  to  see  you.”
Manuel put a tree-trunk arm around Daniel’s shoulders and  half  led,  half  dragged  him  away
from the trucks and further into the tunnels.
Further  in  from  the  entrance  and  “loading  docks”,  the  tunnels  had  been  substantially
modified  to  provide  living  quarters  and  other  makeshift  rooms.  Most  of  the  “walls”  were
nothing more than sheets of pressboard or drywall propped against one another, but  it  was  a
more  elaborate  headquarters  than  they’d  had  in  Los  Angeles.  As  they  passed,  all  activity
stopped and as one  the  denizens  of  the  San  Diego  underground  turned  and  watched  Daniel
walk by. Daniel was a little disturbed by their silence.
“Your reputation precedes you,” Manuel said, noticing Daniel’s discomfort. “You’re a hero
to these people, and others around the world. I hope  their  reverence  doesn’t  cause  you  undo
discomfort.”
“It’s a little unnerving,” Daniel said, looking around at one awed face after another.
“It shouldn’t be. You discovered the immortals and exposed them.  You were present at the
destruction  of  Hell.  You’re  the  only  human  to  publicly  defy  Michael  and  survive.  Can  you
blame them for thinking you walk on water?”
Daniel didn’t have an answer. He didn’t think of himself as a hero. He just did what he had
to do.
“We’re here,” Manuel said. “My office.”
The  “office”  was  a  plywood  shack  inside  one  of  the  largest  tunnels.  Manuel  opened  the
door and ushered Daniel inside. The interior was sparsely decorated, all the furniture obviously
pillaged from junk  heaps and dumpsters. Daniel noticed none of this. He was busy smiling at
the man behind the ancient steel desk.
Jack Harris, his old second in command, stood up and gave Daniel a quick  salute. “Good to
see you, Colonel.”
Jack  had  turned  down  a  posting  at  Heaven,  instead  preferring  to  retire  and  enjoy  the
newfound peace. At least that’s what he had said at the time.
“I had a bad feeling about the angels from the beginning,” he said  to  Daniel  and  Manuel,
the three of them  crowded around Manuel’s desk. “Something that occurred to me  while  we
were in Hell. Heinrich and I were pinned down, just about  out  of  grenades,  and  facing  more
demons than we had a chance of destroying. Just when I was sure our numbers  were up,  the
angels  arrived  in  their  shiny  white  armor  and  blew  the  demons  to  smithereens,  never  even
glancing our way to see if we were all right.

“And  I  noticed  something.  The  demons  never  stood  a  chance.  With  the  firepower  and
protection of that armor, the angels could have destroyed Hell and everything in it long before
they actually did. Why did they wait?
“I started thinking more and more that it wasn’t a coincidence that the angels didn’t make
their move until after the United States government fell apart. They weren’t waiting until they
were ready to attack. They were waiting until we had no choice but to accept them.”
Daniel slumped back  in his seat and exhaled sharply. “That’s it,”  he  said.  “I  knew  for  the
whole year I lived in Michael’s golden trophy that there was something about them  that didn’t
sit right, something over  and  above  their  smug  self-righteousness,  but  I  could  never  put  my
finger on it. That was it.”
“I wanted nothing to do with them,”  Jack  continued,  “but  I  kept  an  eye  on  the  news,  or
what  that  damn  toady  Richardson  chose  to  report.  When  I  saw  that  you’d  left  and  been
declared a heretic, I not only knew I was right, but that you’d seen it too, or something worse.
Given what’s happened in the last twelve months, I gather it was worse.”
“So why didn’t you come to L.A.?” Daniel asked.
“I was busy. I’ve spent the last  several  months  setting  up  the  Underground  in  Chicago.  I
flew down here two weeks ago because I didn’t want the angels getting suspicious if I flew into
Los Angeles. I had just arranged with Manuel for ground transport to your L.A. headquarters
when we got word you were coming here.”
Manuel leaned forward. “So what now, amigos?”
Daniel  brought  his  hand  to  his  face  and  stroked  his  chin.  “I  think  it’s  time  for  a  town
meeting.”
 
Daniel’s “town meeting” took nearly a week of frenzied activity to set up. When all was said
and  done,  they  had  the  leader  of  every  Underground  branch  in  the  world  online  for  a
conference  over  the  Internet,  the  one  form  of  media  Michael  had  been  unable  to  control.
Through the use of audio encoding, the final result was one gigantic conference call.
“Greetings, and thanks  for  doing  this,”  Daniel  began  into  the  microphone.  “By  now,  I’m
sure many or most of you are aware of what happened a week ago in Los Angeles. This latest
attack has brought into sharp relief the need for a  coordinated  effort  from  the  Underground.
Our  random  strikes  and  acts  of  defiance  aren’t  really  getting  us  anywhere,  and  it  just  pisses
them  off.  So  what  I’d  like  first  is  a  sense  of  the  room.  What  is  the  angelic  occupation  like
outside southern California?”
One by one, the other leaders gave Daniel a progress report of their situation.
In China and most of the Far East, the angels held their position through intimidation and
violent  oppression  when  necessary.  The  Asian  mythology  didn’t  allow  for  the  same  reverent
grace  period  the  angels  enjoyed  in  Christian/Jewish/Muslim  countries,  so  the  angels  had
resorted to time tested political methods.
Australia  and  New  Zealand  fell  to  the  same  religious  and  political  pressures  as  most  of
Europe, but the angels kept a heavier hand there because of the  geographic  isolation.  Sydney

had become a police state after a few public protests, and the penalties for disobedience of the
angels’ edicts were swift and fierce.
The angels were particularly merciless in India, where they took a no nonsense approach to
controlling its nearly one billion inhabitants. Angels rarely appeared there without armor, and
they had a habitual practice of sweeping the streets clean of vagrants with their flame-throwers.
Africa  was  well  under  control.  The  Muslim  population  had  gone  along  with  Michael’s
wishes very early, and had thus been spared the purging endured by the Indians and Chinese.
The  angels  had  recently  been  increasing  their  patrols,  and  invoking  ever  more  strict
regulations, but by and large the people obeyed.
Europe  was  hit  harder  than  anyone  but  the  Japanese  by  the  fall  of  the  United  States
economy, and thus relied heavily upon the angels  to  rebuild.  The  angels  were  as  dominant  a
presence in Europe as they were in North America,  and  the  Europeans  had  similar  problems
organizing their resistance movement.
South  America found itself in an angelic stranglehold. The vast majority of the  population
was  Catholic,  and  had  initially  done  anything  the  angels  asked.  Only  much  later  did  they
realize  that  the  angels  didn’t  value  much  in  South  America,  and  that  the  people  had  only
succeeded  in  caging  themselves  at  the  angels’  behest.  The  angels  were  rarely  seen  in  South
America, but order was strictly maintained by religiously fanatical human dictators left in place
by the angels.
Elsewhere in North America, the situation was much  the same as in California. People  led
their daily lives without much  interference by the angels, so long as they stayed firmly within
the increasingly confining rules. Those that rebelled, or forgot the rules, were swiftly removed
from society. Even jaywalkers were often carted away by police and seldom seen again.
When the last person stopped talking, Daniel  was  quiet  for  a  long  moment.  “We  need  to
organize a counteroffensive,” he said at last.  “A  world  wide  effort  coordinated  to  weaken  the
angels until we can assault Heaven itself.”
“Who will lead such an effort?” asked the representative of the British Underground.
“We’ll have to elect one, I guess,” said  Daniel.  “The  important  thing  is  that  the  strikes  be
concurrent.  We  have  to  force  them  to  divide  their  forces.  Even  they  can’t  be  everywhere  at
once and be effective.”
“We must put this to a vote,” said the representative from Nigeria. “We’ll get back to you.”
One  by  one,  they  disconnected,  leaving  Daniel  sitting  by  the  computer  and  looking
questioningly at Ricardo, Manuel and Jack.
 
Jihad
« ^ » 
The  reply  came  quicker  than  Daniel  expected.  Unanimously,  the  other  leaders  of  the

Underground had elected him as their leader, and they now waited for his orders to attack.
Daniel quickly called a  meeting  with  his  War  Council,  as  he’d  come  to  think  of  Ricardo,
Manuel and Jack.
“Any suggestions on what we do first?” he asked.
Jack was the first to speak. “The Underground isn’t big enough for the synchronous assault
you  mentioned,  at  least  not  yet.  Thanks  to  the  angels’  propaganda  campaign,  a  lot  of  folks
don’t  even  know  we  exist,  and  most  of  those  that  do  think  we’re  a  disorganized  rabble  of
troublemakers.”
“We aren’t?” Manuel asked.
Daniel  smiled  and  said,  “I’d  like  to  think  not,  Manuel,  but  Jack’s  right.  We  need  better
press and more recruits if we’re going to make this work.”
“What about your friend Richardson?” Ricardo asked.
Daniel shook his head. “Susan’s in too deep. Even if she believes me now, and she didn’t a
year ago, I don’t think she’ll openly defy Michael like that. There has to be another way.”
“What if we just make an announcement?” Manuel asked.
“What do you have in mind,” Jack asked, “paper fliers?”
“I  was  thinking  television,”  Manuel  said.  “I  used  to  be  an  engineer  at  one  of  the  local
network affiliates. I know how to do a satellite uplink, and  how  to  run  the  equipment  in  the
studio.”
“You can get us on the angels’ satellite broadcast?” Ricardo asked.
Manuel  shrugged.  “For  a  few  minutes,  probably.  More  than  that  I  don’t  know.  They’ll
probably catch on pretty quick and block us out.”
“A few minutes is all we need. Just enough for a declaration of war,” Daniel said.
The other three men stared at Daniel as he laid out his plan.
 
Two days later, they sat in a van a block away from the television station where Manuel had
recently been employed.
“Everyone knows their assignments,” Daniel asked.
Everyone in the van gave an affirmative reply. In addition to Daniel, Manuel, Ricardo  and
Jack, there were four  other  Underground  members,  all  technical  staff  that  like  Manuel,  who
used to work in television.
“All right, then,” Daniel said. “Let’s move.”
On Daniel’s signal, the van pulled up to the service entrance of the studio building. Daniel
and  his  men  filed  out  and  into  the  building  with  military  precision.  The  instant  they  were
inside, Jack fired a round from his rifle into the ceiling.

The gathered technicians and crew in the backstage area froze  as  Daniel  stepped  forward.
“My name is Daniel Cho,” he said with authority, “and we’re with the Underground. We’d like
to borrow your equipment for a while.”
The only reply Daniel received was silence as everyone in the building stepped away from
their posts. No one made a move to stop them as they commandeered the cameras in the news
studio. Daniel looked at Manuel in the control booth, and Manuel gave him the thumbs up.
This  is  it,  Daniel  thought.  As  Jack  and  Ricardo  watched  the  doors,  Daniel  took  his  place
behind  the  news  desk.  Manuel  gave  a  signal  to  the  camera  operator,  who  then  waved  four
fingers at Daniel, then three, then two, then one.
“Greetings. I’m Daniel Cho.
“For the last two years, the collected people of Earth have lived under the oppression of an
immortal dictator. We in the Underground have pledged to change that.
“Most of you don’t know what’s really  going  on.  Many  of  you  have  seen  loved  ones  and
friends shipped off to Care Centers for  the  treatment  of  various  genetic  illnesses  and  defects.
What you don’t know is that these Care Centers  are  in  actuality  death  camps  where  Michael
intends to remove those he considers genetically defective from the gene pool.
“In India, angels regularly clear the streets with flame-throwers. In Sydney, Australia, those
that dared to publicly protest angelic regulation were killed where they stood.
“In  the  name  of  order,  Michael  is  weeding  out  the  best  of  humanity.  Under  his  regime,
people  like  Steven  Hawking  or  Ludwig  von  Beethoven  would  never  have  existed.  We  can’t
allow this to continue.
“Throughout human history, people have fought for  the  cause  of  freedom.  We  fight  now
not for the freedom from oppressions of the present, however terrible they might be. We fight
for the freedom of the future. The freedom to decide  for  ourselves  what’s  best  for  humanity.
There  is  no  greater  need  in  all  creation,  and  no  greater  threat  in  our  thousands  of  years  of
history than the one Michael poses right now.
“The Arab people have a word for a  holy  war:  Jihad.  That’s  what  we’re  fighting,  whether
the  average  person  knows  it  or  not.  We’re  fighting  for  the  soul  of  mankind,  and  for  future
generations’ ability to express it.
“We now declare an official war, the Angelic Jihad, and we will not  stop  until  mankind  is
free!
“So I beg of you, good people, join us. Help regain your freedom before it’s too late. Many
of you can already feel Michael’s noose tightening…”
 
Michael’s face was a bright red, and  veins  stood  out  sharply  on  his  forehead.  “How  is  he
doing this?”
“Unknown, my Lord,” replied one of the angels in Michael’s court. “He must have spliced
into a satellite feed.”

“And no one can stop it?” Michael asked, a million threats unspoken in his voice.
“We’re trying, my Lord, but—”
Just then the screen went black.
“We found him, my Lord,” came a voice over the intercom. “The transmission originated in
San Diego. Once we found it, it was a simple matter to mask it out—”
“Yes,  fine,”  Michael  said.  “Gabriel,  get  going  and  bring  him  to  me!”  Michael  turned  for
confirmation, but Gabriel was already gone.
 
Daniel became aware of the cameraman signaling to him. “What?”
Manuel’s  voice  came  down  over  the  speakers  from  the  control  room.  “We’ve  been
blocked,” he said. “I told you we wouldn’t have much time.”
Daniel was already removing his clip-on microphone. “It was enough,” he said. “We’re out
of here.” The Underground left the television studio as swiftly as they arrived.
 
Gabriel and four other angels, all clad in armor, burst into the television studio. “Where are
they?” demanded Gabriel.
No one spoke for a long moment, then the lead technician stepped forward. “They’re gone,
sir. They left about fifteen minutes ago, as soon as the transmission was cut.”
Gabriel stood and smoldered. “Why didn’t any of  you  notify  the  proper  authorities  when
they first arrived?”
Again,  the  intimidated  humans  were  not  forthcoming  with  answers.  Gabriel  stepped
forward  and  lifted  the  lead  technician  off  his  feet.  “Answer  me!”  Gabriel  shouted,  his
armor-amplified voice echoing through the studio.
“Th-th-they had us under gunpoint,” the technician stammered.
Gabriel dropped the technician to the floor. “No excuse. One of you could have reached  a
phone.”  He  turned  to  his  second  in  command,  Azrael,  the  Angel  of  Death.  “Execute  every
human in this building for harboring a known heretic.”
“Yes, my Lord,” replied Azrael.
The  room  grew  cold  as  Gabriel  turned  to  leave.  Near  the  door,  he  stopped.  “Azrael,”  he
said.
“Yes, my Lord?”
“Do it on camera,” Gabriel said, still facing the door. “I want the world to know the price of
offering the aid Cho just requested.”
“Where will you be?” Azrael asked.
Though the massive shoulders of the armor didn’t move, Gabriel seemed to deflate a bit. “I

have to go explain to Michael why we’ve failed him again.”
With the  heavy  thud  of  armored  footsteps,  Gabriel  exited  the  building  as  Azrael  and  the
others closed in on the doomed humans.
 
First Offensive
« ^ » 
Susan Richardson had caught every word of Daniel’s broadcast.  It  played  on  her  worst  fears,
but she had to be sure. That’s how she found herself crammed  into a ventilation shaft leading
directly into Michael’s throne room. She  had to hear it for herself. She  had  waited  for  one  of
Michael’s private meetings with Gabriel, then moved to  listen  in.  Now  she  wasn’t  sure  if  she
really wanted to hear it.
“Progress is slow,” Michael said, “but it’s working.”
“According to schedule?” Gabriel asked.
“Not exactly. Figure four or five generations to weed out the genetically unfit. Not quite the
three we’d hoped for, but progress just the same. In one hundred to one hundred  fifty  years,
we will have bred out all the known genetic defects and abnormalities in the human race. After
that, it’s just a question of maintenance.”
“Maintenance?”
“A  child  can  be  genetically  tested  for  random  mutations  while  still  in  the  womb.  If  it
doesn’t meet standards, we destroy it and the parents start over.”
“That’s not going to go over well,” Gabriel observed.
“Nonsense,”  Michael  said.  “This  petty  rebellion  will  die  quickly  enough  once  you  finally
deliver Cho’s head to my desk, and in a few generations time the humans will do what we tell
them  without  question.  We  could  probably  even  order  the  parents  to  destroy  the  child
themselves, but that wouldn’t be as efficient.”
“You think the humans would destroy their own child?”
“If  we  told  them  to.  Besides,  the  practice  has  been  part  of  the  human  tradition  for
thousands of years already, for things as minor as being the wrong sex, or simply because the
parent couldn’t be bothered to raise a child. We’re not telling them  to do anything they don’t
already do.”
Gabriel was silent for a moment, then, “How many chances do they get?”
“For what?”
“To produce healthy offspring.”
“Three, I think. After that, they’re sterilized.”

Michael  paused  a  moment.  “On  second  thought,  they  should  be  destroyed.  If  they  can’t
contribute  to  the  following  generation  in  three  tries,  they  shouldn’t  be  allowed  to  continue
draining society’s resources.”
Susan had heard enough. As she crawled back  the way she came, she  tried  to  think  of  as
many ways as she could to use her position to help Daniel and the Underground.
 
To some extent, the initial stage of Daniel’s plan had worked. Over the past few weeks, the
San Diego Underground had steadily gained members,  and Daniel had been informed by the
other leaders that the effect was similar worldwide, even  more  pronounced  in  hard  hit  areas.
The Indian Underground had nearly tripled in size. The Underground was quickly nearing the
size  required  for  phase  two,  a  full  scale,  worldwide  assault  of  key  angelic  bases.  The  vast
majority  of  Daniel’s  time  was  devoted  to  planning  the  offensive,  to  the  point  that  Jack  or
Ricardo frequently had to force him to stop and eat or sleep.
Though he never mentioned  it,  Daniel  was  terrified.  On  the  rare  occasions  he  let  himself
step  back  from  the  details  of  the  assault  and  look  at  the  big  picture,  the  concept  nearly
knocked  him  flat.  The  whole  world,  six  billion  people,  depended  on  him  to  help  them  win
their independence. He’d developed an ulcer over the last week, and in the few hours he slept
he had frequent nightmares of what would happen if they failed.
The weight of the world was literally on his shoulders.
He  was  pouring  over  maps  and  schedules  around  two  A.M.  one  morning  when  Jack
walked into his office.
“Morning, boss.”
Daniel looked up, bleary-eyed. “Jack,” he grunted.
Jack took a seat across from Daniel and lit a cigarette. “When was the last time you slept?”
Daniel managed a weary smile. “What day is it?”
“You got to ease up, Daniel,” Jack said, blowing smoke at the lone, dangling light bulb. “We
aren’t going anywhere if you collapse from exhaustion.”
Daniel sat up straight, hearing his spine creak as he did it. “I’m fine, Jack.”
“And I’m Harry Truman. You have to relax, Daniel.”
“You think Michael’s relaxing? Or Gabriel? We can’t afford to delay this any longer than we
have to. I have to get—”
“That’s your problem,” Jack said.
“What?”
“You said, ‘I  have  to’,”  Jack  said.  “Not  ‘we’.  You  aren’t  in  this  alone.  You’ve  got  Ricardo,
Manuel and  me  here  to  help  you,  and  the  leaders  of  the  Underground  around  the  world  to
delegate authority to. You’ve come  a  long  way  since  I  first  met  you.  When  we  started  in  the
DTF, you were a hero, but not a leader. I saw potential, and that’s the big reason I asked to be

assigned to your team,  but  you  didn’t  know  much  about  leading  others  back  then.  You  still
wanted to do everything yourself.
“Now, on the other hand, you really are the leader everyone thinks you are. You know how
to use your reputation and your actions to inspire those who follow you. Most of the folks out
there,” Jack said, jerking this thumb  towards  the  main  tunnel,  “would  follow  you  anywhere,
do anything you ordered, without question. You know how to lead. You just don’t know how
to administrate.”
Daniel knew Jack was right. “Fine,” he sighed heavily, the weight of the past few weeks still
pulling him into his chair. “What do I still need to learn, o Buddha?”
Jack  grinned.  “Start  by  trusting  your  subordinates.  The  others  leading  the  Underground
around the world are in their positions because they’ve proven they can do the job.  Give them
their goals, then let them  find a way to accomplish them.  You don’t have to  do  it  all  on  your
own.”
Daniel nodded as Jack stood up. “And get some sleep for crying out loud,” Jack said as he
opened the door. “You look like Hell.”
Daniel leaned back in his chair, and was asleep before Jack closed the door.
 
Preparations  for  the  offensive  began  in  earnest  two  days  later.  Forces  that  had  swelled
remarkably  since  Daniel’s  address  began  to  mobilize  around  the  world,  waiting  quietly  for
Daniel’s order to attack.
In San Diego, the target  was  a  golden,  armored  bunker  used  by  the  armored  angels  that
patrolled the city. Lacking any Care Centers nearby (the closest one was the one south  of  Los
Angeles that Daniel and Ricardo had liberated), the bunker  was the only  angelic  target  in  the
area. Unfortunately, its defenses were only slightly less intimidating that those of Heaven itself.
Scouting  reports  estimated  over  twenty  armored  angels  present  at  any  given  time,  and  the
building, while ornate and beautiful, was  nearly  indestructible.  Daniel  knew  that  they  would
be outgunned and overmatched, but the situation wouldn’t be different  anywhere  else  in  the
world. It was time to make their stand.
At 10 P.M. GMT, the humans around the world attacked as one.
Daniel  and  his  troops  emerged  from  their  hiding  places  near  the  bunker  and  advanced
under the early afternoon sun. The timing was less than optimal for them,  but it would be the
dead of night  in  the  more  oppressed  parts  of  the  world,  and  Daniel  figured  the  Indians  and
Chinese could use every advantage they could get. To pay the price for that, Daniel  fought  in
broad daylight. Such was life.
The first few minutes of the attack went well. The angels were  caught  off  guard.  The  first
volleys of explosives launched at the bunker went unanswered, and left significant denting and
scoring on the metal walls. Daniel wondered if the surprise attack might work even better than
he’d hoped. Then, like angry hornets, the flying metal angels swarmed from their nest.
 

Pyrrhic Victory
« ^ » 
Daniel  recognized  one  of  the  angels  right  away  by  the  golden  markings  on  his  armor.
“Gabriel.”
As if in response, Gabriel turned  his  armored  head  in  mid-flight  and  spotted  Daniel.  The
angel  brought  his  weapon  to  bear  as  Daniel  raised  his  grenade  launcher,  and  they  fired
simultaneously.
Daniel dove for cover as Gabriel’s rocket whizzed by his head, exploding safely behind him.
Gabriel  wasn’t  so  lucky,  the  explosion  from  Daniel’s  grenade  ripping  off  his  left  wing  and
forcing him to the ground.
Daniel wore riot armor very much  like his  DTF  combat  uniform,  but  he  had  no  illusions
about taking on Gabriel in a toe to toe fight. The only thing he did have in his  favor  was  that
the other angels seemed to be ignoring him, not wanting to get between Gabriel and his prize.
Testing the theory, Daniel turned and ran.
As he expected, only  Gabriel  followed.  “You  can’t  escape  me  this  time,  Cho!”  the  angel’s
amplified voice bellowed.
I don’t  plan  on  it,  Daniel  thought.  The  angels’  bunker  was  situated  on  a  huge  lawn  that
spanned a city block, but it was surrounded by downtown San Diego. Daniel was soon off the
burning grass and running through the streets, dodging the occasional rocket from Gabriel. He
soon  found  cover  around  a  corner,  and  let  the  speeding  angel  have  a  grenade  when  Gabriel
came into view.
The explosion was dead on, and knocked Gabriel off his feet. Daniel noticed that the angel’s
armor was scorched and blackened in places, but still intact.
Daniel ran again, and the chase continued.
 
Manuel wasn’t having as easy a time. He and his men were pinned down behind a burning
truck by two angels. Manuel figured it wouldn’t be  long  before  one  of  them  tried  a  flanking
maneuver. Manuel knew they were only fifty yards from the entrance to the bunker,  and that
if they could get around these two angels, they could probably gain entry. Two of his men were
badly injured and weren’t going anywhere, leaving only him and three  others  to  remove  two
armored angels.
Bad odds, Manuel thought, shaking his head with a sardonic grin. He risked a peek around
the  side  of  the  van,  and  a  rocket  whistled  by  his  head.  Both  the  angels  were  still  there.  No
choice, he realized.
“All right, here’s the plan,” he said to his men.  “I’m going to run off to the left  and  try  to
draw  their  fire.  While  they’re  watching  me,  you  three  go  out  to  the  right  and  knock  them
down. You’re only going to get one shot, so watch your aim.”

The other three men nodded.
“On three,” Manuel said. “One, two,
“Three!”
On cue, he burst out from behind the van and ran as fast as his legs could carry his heavy
frame. As expected, both angels turned and fired on him. He heard his own men  returning fire
just as the first rocket caught up with him. The explosion blew him off his feet and tossed him
through  the  air.  As  the  ground  flipped  beneath  him,  he  saw  both  angels  drop  and  his  men
move to finish them off. He hit the ground hard just before the other rocket found him.
 
Daniel’s game of cat and mouse was beginning to take the wind out of him. He’d managed
to hit Gabriel solidly twice  now  (three,  counting  the  wing  shot),  and  scored  three  other  near
misses, all without being hit himself. But, he cautioned himself, one would be all it took to get
through his armor. Daniel didn’t have the leeway that Gabriel enjoyed. He had to end this.
If his sense of direction was correct, he had very nearly led Gabriel in a circle leading back
to the bunker. If he could get to some reinforcements…
Daniel left his hiding place and took off  at  a  run.  Gabriel  spotted  him  and  followed  close
behind.
 
Ricardo was doing fairly well.
His group had confirmed the destruction of eight angels so far and they were hard at work
on a ninth. They had the lone angel pinned down, and it was just a question of whittling down
its defenses.
As Ricardo stepped back  to supervise, he heard  a  familiar  voice  screaming  his  name  over
the  comm  channel.  He  turned  and  saw  Daniel  running  a  zig-zag  pattern  towards  him,  a
one-winged angel with gold markings hot on his tail and firing wildly.
Ricardo quickly had half his men cease fire. “General Cho’s in trouble!” he shouted.
As one they turned and took aim at Gabriel. Ricardo heard Daniel’s voice again. “As soon as
I find  cover,  blast  him!”  Daniel  shouted,  sounding  very  out  of  breath.  Ricardo  nodded  and
relayed the orders to his men.
 
Gabriel  was  no  fool.  He  saw  what  was  sizing  up  against  him,  and  he  was  prepared.  The
instant Daniel dove to the ground, Gabriel switched targets and fired on Ricardo and his men
just as they fired on him.
Daniel  rolled  over  on  his  back  just  in  time  to  see  several  grenades  impact  on  Gabriel’s
armor, blowing it apart. The fire from the explosions reached high into the afternoon sky, and
Gabriel was no more.
Daniel turned to wave thanks to Ricardo. He found only a smoking crater where his friend

had stood. Daniel stood and began to lurch over to it when  a  badly  damaged  angel  appeared
from behind the crater and tried to fly.
Daniel destroyed it, then collapsed to his knees.
 
The  battle  wore  on  for  a  while  longer,  but  after  Gabriel’s  destruction,  the  outcome  was
never really in doubt. Late  that  afternoon  the  last  angel  in  San  Diego  was  destroyed  and  the
bunker fell into the hands of the Underground.
Relatively  speaking,  Daniel’s  attack  was  a  stunning  success.  At  the  end  of  the  day  that
would long be remembered at the First Offensive, just over half the angelic population of Earth
had been destroyed. More than two thirds of the human attackers had perished to buy such a
victory.  In  New  Delhi,  more  than  ninety  percent  of  the  resistance  fighters  perished  before
destroying the angels, in the end just running unarmed and unarmored at the armored angels
until the angels’ weapons ran  out,  eventually  ripping  the  angels  apart  through  sheer  force  of
numbers.
Around the world, the survivors rejoiced, then prepared to do it all again.
 
Daniel sat on the scorched ground outside the captured bunker, staring at Gabriel’s charred
helmet in his hands. Around him, the members of the Underground celebrated their victory in
the late afternoon sun. Daniel heard footsteps walking towards him and looked up to see Jack’s
smiling, if filthy, face. Daniel nodded and frowned.
Jack plopped down on the dirt next to Daniel. “So you’ve seen?”
“I  have,”  Daniel  said.  The  reports  from  the  other  commanders  had  come  in  just  over  a
half-hour before.
“You  know,”  Daniel  said,  sitting  back  and  thinking,  “when  the  Greek  general  Pyrrhus
defeated the Romans at Asculum, losing most of his forces in the process, he  was  reported  as
saying, ‘Another such victory and I must return to Epirus alone.’ I know how he felt.”
“This isn’t a Pyrrhic victory, Daniel.”
Daniel laughed, a bitter sound. “Isn’t it?”
“Look around you,” Jack said. “We won.”
“Won what?” Daniel snapped. “We lost two thirds of our forces to take out only half of the
angels. Now, you can do the math if you want, but that almost never works out.”
“So we’ll get more people,” Jack said. “After today the whole planet knows the angels can
be beaten, and while we can replenish our numbers, they can’t.”
“So I get the privilege of sending millions more to their deaths. Wonderful.”
“That’s the wrong way to look at it,  and  you  know  it,  Daniel.  Look  out  there,”  Jack  said,
sweeping his arm around the carnage of the battlefield. “You had just as much  of a chance  of
buying it today as anyone else, yet you survived. So did I.”

“Ricardo and Manuel weren’t so lucky.”
“True,” Jack said, nodding. “And they’ll be missed. You have to understand that people die
in war.”
“I know,” Daniel said, and he threw Gabriel’s helmet as far away as he could.
“But Daniel,” Jack said as he put a hand on Daniel’s arm, “people live in war, too. You may
not believe this, but everyone here today was here of their own accord. The Underground has
no conscript soldiers. Those that died today died while fighting for something they believed in.
Maybe  I’m  just  a  romantic  old  soldier,  but  I  think  dying  for  something  you  believe  in  is  a
pretty good way to go. Honor the people that died today by honoring what they  chose  to  die
for.”
Daniel was silent for a long moment. “Jack?”
“Yes, sir?”
“Why me?”
“Why you what, exactly?”
Daniel  laid  back  in  the  dirt,  placing  his  hands  behind  his  head.  “How  did  I  become  …
whatever it is that everyone thinks I am? Everyone looks to me to be this great leader, but half
the time I don’t know what the hell I’m doing.”
Daniel sat up again and looked at Jack. “Sometimes I just want to scream ‘Don’t you people
know I’m just making this up as I go?’, but I can’t. I just have to keep going and hope I don’t
make some horrible mistake.”
Jack smiled. “That’s why you’re  the  leader.  Daniel,  nobody  knows  what  they’re  doing  all
the time, and no one expects you to have all the answers.  But  we  trust  you  to  make  the  best
decision, and we follow where you lead. Try letting yourself lead us, quit hamstringing yourself
with doubts, and you’ll be fine.”
Daniel shook his head. “You were a leader of Navy SEALs and a major  metro  area  SWAT
team. Why do you follow me?”
Jack grinned and got to his feet. “Because whether you know it or not, whether you believe
it or not, you’re the best damn leader of men I’ve ever seen. You inspire. You ennoble. Millions
of people will throw themselves into battle against almost certain death if you say it’s necessary.
I could never be what you are.
“Sir.”
Jack  offered  a  quick  salute,  then  walked  away.  Daniel  watched  him  go,  then  turned  his
attention to the setting sun and thought about tomorrow.
 
Dark Angel

« ^ » 
Daniel soon found that tomorrow would have to wait.
Before the sun had completely set,  one  of  the  Underground  fighters  (whose  name  Daniel
was chagrined that he didn’t remember) came running up to him.
“Sir! Come look!”
Daniel sprang to his feet with much more energy than he thought he had. Without a word,
he followed the young soldier into the bunker.
“It’s  right  this  way,  sir,”  said  the  soldier,  leading  Daniel  quickly  through  a  labyrinth  of
corridors.
“What’s your name, soldier?” Daniel asked.
“Simmons, sir.”
“What’s so important, Simmons?”
Simmons led Daniel into a brightly lit room. “This,” he said.
On  the  far  wall,  Daniel  was  amazed  to  see  a  gleaming  white  and  empty  suit  of  angelic
armor.
Fifteen  minutes  later,  Daniel  was  alone  in  the  room  with  the  armor,  Jack  and  Manuel’s
successor, Julia Cohen.
“Well, people,” Daniel asked, “what do we do with this?”
“The way I see it,” said Cohen, a  former  university  history  professor,  “we  have  no  choice
but to disassemble it for study. The more weaknesses  we  can  find  in  the  design,  the  easier  it
will be to exploit those weaknesses in the future.”
Daniel started to reply, but Jack cut him off. “No,” he said sharply. “This is too valuable  a
weapon to just let someone rip it apart and hope we can figure out a weak spot. We have to test
it, figure out how to use it, then save it as our ace in the hole.”
“And in the meantime,” Cohen countered, “we pass up this opportunity to let our fighters
get a better idea of what we’re up against.”
“If we want to win, yes,” Jack nearly shouted.
“That’s enough,” Daniel said, and both Jack and Cohen fell silent. “You’re both  right,  and
you’re  both  wrong.  We  will  study  the  armor,  from  the  inside,  but  we  aren’t  going  to
disassemble it. It seems to me that we can divine the weaknesses of the armor more effectively
by putting it to use than by dissecting it.” Daniel walked over to the armor  and  ran  his  hand
over its sleek lines.
“Excellent  idea,  sir,”  Jack  said,  earning  him  a  poisonous  gaze  from  Cohen.  “I’ll  find
someone to start putting the armor through its paces right away.”
“That won’t be necessary,” Daniel said, turning back to them. “I can’t very well ask anyone
under me to do something I’m not willing to do myself, can I?”
Jack did not at all like the look of Daniel’s smile.

 
The  testing  officially  began  early  the  next  morning.  With  the  help  of  Jack  and  a  few
technicians, Daniel struggled to put on the armor.
The armor was divided essentially into two parts. The first, inner layer was a neoprene-like
bodysuit lined with electrodes. Naming  it  the  “wetsuit”,  the  technicians  had  surmised  that  it
was responsible for transmitting and interpreting the neural impulses of the wearer.
Over  the  wetsuit  fit  the  powered  exoskeleton.  Even  without  the  muscle-mirroring  armor
plates, the exoskeleton weighed more than five hundred pounds. While it was presumed than
an  angel,  with  their  far  superior  physical  strength,  could  suit  up  alone,  a  human  required
several assistants to put on the suit. Daniel felt like a knight of the Round Table preparing for
battle.
Much  to everyone’s surprise, as soon as the exoskeleton came in contact with  the  wetsuit,
the circuit completed and Daniel was able to move that part of his body with minimum  effort.
He put on the final  glove  and  his  helmet  with  no  outside  assistance  at  all.  They  had  still  not
managed to locate the power supply, but it was apparently very efficient and always available.
Preparations finally complete, Daniel trudged out of the bunker  and into the mid-morning
sunlight. The lawn was  still  in  ruin  from  the  previous  day’s  fighting,  but  Daniel  still  tried  to
find  a  patch  of  ground  free  of  grass  to  begin  testing.  No  sense  burning  what  little’s  left,  he
thought.
Daniel took a look around and tried to familiarize himself with  the  helmet’s  displays.  The
interior  of  his  visor  contained  a  heads-up  display,  much  like  those  used  in  the  cockpits  of
fighter jets. Some of the readouts, like airspeed and altitude, were meaningless on the ground.
However, he did have access to information about his groundspeed, range to  whatever  object
was directly in front of him, and the condition of his weapons. He noted that his suit was fully
armed and fueled with zero damage.
Before he took to the air, Daniel decided to test the physical abilities of the suit while still on
the ground. He walked over to the wrecked and burned out hulk of a truck  at the edge of the
lawn.
“I’m going to try a strength test,” he said to the techs. They nodded and made notes. Daniel
reached down and sank his armored fingers into the  metal  of  the  exposed  frame.  Bending  at
the knees and lifting with his legs, Daniel lifted the two ton vehicle and held it over his head. It
was  heavy,  but  not  dangerously  so.  Daniel  figured  the  suit  was  roughly  one  hundred  times
stronger than a human,  maybe ten times stronger than an angel.  He  relayed  his  findings  and
tossed the truck aside.
He’d been keeping an eye on the speedometer inside his helmet. Now was the time to put it
to the test. “I’m going for a run,” he said. “I’ll be back soon.”
Picking a street relatively free of debris, Daniel took off at a run. It was rough going for the
first few steps, then the wings folded back  again on themselves to reduce the wind resistance.
Daniel picked up speed rapidly, and soon found himself exceeding 50  miles per hour through
the  streets  of  San  Diego,  covering  more  than  a  dozen  yards  with  each  bounding  stride.  He
doubled back  and returned to the bunker,  nearly running  over  the  technicians  as  he  tried  to

stop.
The next step was to try to fly. “If I’m going to fly,” Daniel said, “I need a destination.” He
turned to Jack. “What were the coordinates for the Care Center east of L.A.?”
Jack shook his head. “Daniel, don’t—”
“Come on, Jack, you were the one that said I needed to trust my instincts, remember?”
“You haven’t tested a single weapon!”
Daniel turned and raised his arm to point at the van he’d tossed aside. A rocket flew out of
Daniel’s arm-mounted launcher and blew the van to pieces.
Daniel turned back to Jack. “The coordinates?”
Jack stared at what was left of the truck, mouth open. “How did you—”
“Targeting is automatic. Firing is voice controlled. I’m just glad it’s programmed in English.
Probably a  holdover  from  the  days  when  the  immortals  weren’t  allowed  to  speak  their  own
language.
“The coordinates?”
Jack nodded and told Daniel what he needed to know. Daniel then motioned for everyone
to stand back.
“I  obviously  won’t  be  able  to  transport  anyone  to  safety,”  Daniel  said  as  he  spread  his
wings, “but with everything else the angels have to worry about right now, I doubt they have
the time or resources to track down the people I release. I’ll keep my radio on, and I’ll let you
know how it works out.”
Daniel ignited his engines. “I’ll be back  soon.” Without another word, Daniel rose into the
sky and flew north over the horizon.
 
Daniel had to admit he was starting to understand what the angels saw in all of this.
Cruising three  hundred  feet  above  the  desert  floor  at  over  four  hundred  miles  per  hour,
Daniel did a barrel roll and let out a little whoop of joy. He’d grown up  reading  comic  books
about superheroes that could  fly,  and  had  often  daydreamed  about  what  that  might  be  like,
but even his wildest dreams hadn’t prepared him for this. The sparse cactus and tumbleweed
of arid southern California sped past and underneath him in a blur, as did the occasional very
confused jackrabbit. Daniel did another barrel roll.
The  in-flight  guidance  of  the  armor  was  remarkably  simple.  The  throttle  was  voice
controlled, and the maneuvering handled by reacting to his body movements. Raise  the  right
shoulder while dipping the left, bank to the left. It was a lot like swimming through the air.
Once Daniel got the hang of the “controls”, he poured on the speed and  zeroed  in  on  the
coordinates Jack had given him. According to the readouts on his HUD, he should be coming
up on the Care Center any minute now…
There!

The low-slung, stark white and very medical-looking buildings were practically identical to
the Care Center south of L.A. Daniel had attacked not so long ago. Daniel saw no movement as
he flew overhead, so he quickly throttled down, banked hard left and came back in for a closer
look. His landing was a little rough, but passable.
At first Daniel thought the Care Center may have  been  abandoned.  There  was  no  sign  of
movement or any evidence  that  anyone  still  walked  its  dusty  streets.  On  closer  examination,
many  of  the  buildings  bore  powder  burns  and  a  few  even  had  chunks  of  stone  torn  out  of
them.  There had been quite a fight here. The only sign of life left in the entire complex was  a
thin plume of white smoke crawling out  of  a  nearby  chimney  and  dissipating  quickly  in  the
desert wind.
Of  course,  Daniel  thought.  The  reports  from  the  newly  established  Los  Angeles
Underground had been sketchy at best, but it seemed likely that the  fledgling  division  of  the
Underground  would  strike  here  on  the  First  Offensive  rather  than  at  Heaven  itself.  Chances
were good that Daniel was a day late if he planned to liberate the patients here.
“About time someone else showed up,” said a voice behind him.
Daniel turned to see an angel in a grimy gold uniform step out of the doorway to one of the
larger buildings. The angel approached Daniel and wiped his hands on a dirty rag.
“Are you the only clean up crew we’re going to get?”
Daniel nodded.
“Wonderful,” the angel continued. “I guess these upstart rebels have Michael more worried
than I thought. Oh, well. We’ve been loading bodies into the incinerator all morning.  We  lost
our only suit in the battle yesterday, so it’s been pretty hard work. We’ve still got…” The angel
trailed off. “Nah, it’s easier to just show you. Follow me.”
Daniel fell into step behind the  angel  and  followed  him  into  the  building.  When  his  eyes
readjusted to the dim lighting after the solar glare outside, Daniel struggled to repress a gag.
There were bodies everywhere. They were stacked like firewood along the walls of the giant
room, and laid out in neat rows on the floor. Some  of them  obviously died in battle, but more
than  three  quarters  of  them  wore  the  white  coveralls  of  Care  Center  inmates.  Hundreds  of
lifeless eyes stared at Daniel as he followed the angel to the furnace at the far end of the room.
Three more angels stood near the furnace and threw body after body into its fires.
The angel looked over his shoulder at Daniel. “Ever worked a Care Center before?”
Daniel shook his head.
“This  is  the  final  destination  for  most  of  the  humans  that  come  here.  When  they’re  no
longer useful for experimental purposes, they’re  brought  here,  put  to  sleep,  and  disposed  of.
We don’t have the time or resources to give them a mass burial, so we just burn  them.  We four
are the only survivors of yesterday’s attack,  and  Michael  can’t  spare  the  manpower  to  restaff
this  place  and  make  keeping  it  open  cost  efficient,  so  after  we  dispose  of  the  bodies  I  guess
we’re just going have to return to Heaven until this rebellion  garbage  blows  over.  Thanks  for
helping us out, by the way. Without armored strength, this would have taken us all day…”
The  angel  stopped  talking  when  he  turned  to  glance  at  Daniel  and  found  the  armor’s

weapons trained on him and his compatriots.
“What’s going on?” he asked.
“Allow  me  to  introduce  myself,”  Daniel  said.  “I’m  Daniel  Cho,  leader  of  this  ‘rebellion
garbage’ and operator of a captured suit of angelic armor.”
The angels said nothing.
“Outside,”  Daniel  said,  motioning  to  the  door.  Daniel  never  lowered  his  weapons  as  he
followed them out.
“So what now, Cho?” asked the angel that had spoken to Daniel. “You  going  to  kill  us  in
cold blood?”
“You mean like you did the prisoners here?”
“Hey, man,” the angel replied, “we were just following orders. Personally, I like humans.”
Just for a moment,  Daniel started to lower his weapons. Then he heard it. The distant and
very distinctive roar of  angelic  armor  in  flight.  The  instant  Daniel  glanced  up  to  be  sure,  his
captives scattered.
Damn!, he thought to  himself.  Those  bastards  were  just  stalling.  He  should  have  realized
that the armor the first angel mistook him for would show up eventually.
Daniel ran to the south end of the camp, catching up with one of the four angels he’d lost
and smearing him against a building. As he ran, he called up the radar  display  in  his  helmet,
which he’d turned off earlier because he found it distracting. Dumb move, he noted.
The angels were still  over  two  miles  away,  and  flying  at  high  altitude.  There  were  five  of
them, according to his radar, and Daniel wasn’t stupid enough to take them  on. Flying as low
and fast as he could, he took off to the south and hoped his own radar signature would be lost
in the ground clutter.
He wasn’t followed.
 
Daniel  arrived  at  the  San  Diego  bunker  early  that  afternoon  and  told  his  story.  He  then
took the armor into a back room and shut the door.
Two hours later, he called  for  someone  to  help  him  suit  up.  When  he  emerged  from  the
bunker, everyone stopped whatever he or she was doing to look.
The armor was painted a deep, flat black  that  seemed  to  swallow  up  any  light  that  hit  it.
Daniel stepped out onto the lawn, an avenging dark angel, and addressed his troops.
“The  tests  have  been  successful.  I  will  wear  this  armor  as  I  lead  you  into  combat.  I’ve
changed its color, not only to differentiate it from the enemy, but as a symbol of those we have
already lost. Too many of us have perished already for Michael’s dream of Order, and as I stand
before you today I vow that this insanity will end!”
Daniel Cho raised an ebony gauntlet over his head, and led the battle cry in San Diego.

 
Freedom of Speech
« ^ » 
As the  setting  sun  cast  long  shadows  across  Heaven,  Michael  paced.  The  cleanup  crew  he’d
sent to shut down the east L.A. Care Center had just reported in. Cho had a suit of armor! The
situation had quickly gone from annoying to intolerable. At first he hadn’t believed Cho’s little
resistance  movement  to  be  a  serious  threat,  but  the  previous  day’s  events  and  this  new
information had forced him to reevaluate that assessment.
Damn!
As he had done so many times in the past twenty-four hours that he’d lost count, Michael
wished Gabriel  was  there  to  advise  him.  His  friend  didn’t  have  Michael’s  gift  for  strategy  or
organization, but he was a  cunning  warrior  and  often  saw  things  Michael  did  not.  Now  that
Cho had forced  Michael  to  view  this  situation  as  a  legitimate  military  engagement,  he  direly
needed a warrior’s point of view. But Cho had taken that away from him too.
Michael nearly put his fist through the wall, badly denting the golden metal. Damn!
More politician than  warrior,  Michael  had  spent  most  of  the  day  assessing  his  losses  and
trying to come up with a way to put a positive spin on them.  The Underground’s  victories  of
the previous day were no secret, and public opinion was rapidly turning against him. The time
when  he  could  dismiss  the  Underground  as  bumbling  malcontents  had  passed.  If  he  didn’t
treat them as a respected and dangerous enemy now, he’d seem the fool in comparison. But he
couldn’t  speak  to  the  humans  directly.  His  image  was  still  too  hot  for  such  obvious  spin
doctoring. He still had one ace in the hole.
“Susan!”
Moments  later, Susan Richardson entered Michael’s throne  room,  notepad  in  hand.  “You
summoned me, my Lord?”
“Yes,” he said, walking to the window and trying to look as regal as possible. “We need to
make a statement about yesterday’s  rebel  insurrection.  I  want  you  to  tell  the  people  that  the
angelic  losses  were  nowhere  near  the  rumored  levels,  and  that  most  of  the  rebels  were
destroyed and/or humiliated. Assure them  that  I  am  still  in  complete  control,  and  that  while
the rebels were stronger than we originally anticipated, they are on the verge of destruction and
we are very near to capturing Daniel Cho.”
“Are you, my Lord?” Susan asked.
“Am I what?” he answered, turning to face Susan.
“Are you close to capturing Cho?”
Michael stroked his chin. “I believe so. We know he’s in San Diego, or was there yesterday.
Azrael  is  assembling  a  strike  force  that  should  be  ready  to  wipe  out  his  petty  rebellion  in  a
matter of days. More than that you don’t need to know. Go. Relay my message.”

Susan bowed and left the room, leaving Michael alone with his plans.
 
Susan took a deep breath as  she  entered  the  “broadcast  studio”,  a  small  room  in  Heaven
with automated cameras and her newsdesk.
This was it. She had taken steps a few weeks before to ensure that when the time was right
no  one  could  cut  into  or  block  her  newscast.  Her  tampering  had  gone  undetected,  but  she
knew she could only use it once. Now was the time.
She locked the door and seated herself at the desk, turning to the control console mounted
just out of sight of the cameras. She  flipped a few switches, toggled over to her secure satellite
feed, and looked into the dark eye of the camera.
Showtime.
“This is Susan Richardson with a Heavenly News Bulletin.
“As many of you know, the resistance movement known as the Underground attacked the
angels in a worldwide strike just over  twenty-four  hours  ago.  I’ve  been  instructed  to  tell  you
that  while  the  angels  suffered  very  few  losses,  the  damage  done  to  the  Underground  was
devastating, and that their leader, Daniel Cho, will soon be in angelic custody.
“I’m supposed to tell you all that, but I can’t. It isn’t true, and I’m not going to lie for them
anymore.”
 
Michael  stared  at  the  monitor,  mouth  agape.  “What  does  she  think  she’s  doing?”  he
breathed.
Only Azrael had the nerve to speak up. “I warned you leaving public relations in the hands
of a human could be disastrous. It would appear your ‘mouthpiece’ has grown a mouth  of her
own.”
Michael  lifted  Azrael  off  his  feet  and  threw  him  across  the  gigantic  throne  room.
“Communications!” Michael screamed.
“Yes, my Lord?” came a harried voice over the intercom.
“Why is she still on the air?”
“We don’t know, my Lord. We’ve tried to cut her off, but the controls aren’t responding. I
believe she has us blocked at the source. We can’t stop this broadcast.”
Michael bellowed as he stormed out of the room.
 
“I’ve  learned  things  over  the  past  year  and  a  half  that  no  human  was  ever  supposed  to
know,” Susan said on the screens of televisions around the world. “Until now, I’ve  never  had
the opportunity to tell you what I’ve learned, never when it would have done some good. I’m
sorry it’s taken so long, and I’ll get right to the point.

“Michael is the greatest threat to the human race that we’ve ever encountered. He’s Stalin,
Hitler,  Genghis  Khan  and  every  other  evil  dictator  in  human  history  all  rolled  into  one.  The
only difference is that if we don’t stop him now, while we still can, his reign will never end.
“Many of you have seen friends and loved ones with genetic illnesses or congenital defects
shipped off to Care Centers. It’s time you knew these Care Centers are actually Nazi-style death
camps, where those that don’t measure up to Michael’s standards are ruthlessly exterminated.
“Michael is engaged in a  program  to  ensure  the  genetic  purity  of  the  human  race.  While
Satan strove to improve us through a chaotic survival of the fittest, Michael wants to improve
us by imposing an orderly and merciless plan of weeding out those he deems unfit to survive,
regardless  of  the  contributions  they  could  make.  Under  Michael’s  reign,  Beethoven  would
never  have  existed.  Neither  would  Steven  Hawking,  or  anyone  born  less  than  physically
perfect.
“Michael’s plan is to kill anyone that doesn’t meet his genetic standards of purity. He’ll kill
your  babies  just  after  they’re  born  if  they  don’t  measure  up.  He’ll  kill  you  too,  if  you  can’t
produce perfect offspring in three tries, no matter how perfect you may be yourself.
“We can’t allow this to continue. The world unity  the  angels  have  brought  isn’t  worth  an
eternity of slavery and death.
“The Underground is our only hope. Far from the  hapless  renegades  Michael  has  painted
them  as,  the  Underground  is  a  well-organized,  top-notch  military  organization.  Their  leader,
Daniel  Cho,  is  a  great  hero  and  a  good  friend,  and  if  any  human  can  bring  Michael  down,
Daniel’s the  one.  I’m  sorry,  Daniel,  that  I  didn’t  believe  you  when  you  told  me  these  things
yourself. I was blinded by Michael’s accomplishments, and now I’m paying the price.”
A  loud  thundering  noise  began  off  camera,  like  someone  pounding  on  a  door.  Susan
glanced away, then faced the camera again.
“I’m running out of time.
“The angels can be beaten. In yesterday’s attack, countless brave men and women lost their
lives,  but  nearly  half  the  angels  were  destroyed.  Another  good  fight  like  that  and  we  can
destroy  them  forever.  But  the  Underground  needs  people.  I  urge  you  to  seek  them  out  and
help mankind destroy these inhuman monsters!”
The pounding ceased and a door flew through the air in front of the camera. Michael strode
into the room, looking furious.
“Shut up!” he roared.
“They can be beaten!” Susan continued, standing up and leaning into the camera. “Michael
is  scared!  Daniel  has  him  on  the  ropes!  Gabriel  died  in  yesterday’s  attack,  fighting  Daniel’s
personal troops! The  Underground  knows  how  to  win,  but  you’ve  only  got  a  few  days  until
Azrael’s strike force is ready to attack! Please! For your children, don’t let this go on!”
“Shut up!” Michael screamed again, putting his hands on either side of Susan’s head.
A tear ran down Susan’s cheek. “Daniel,” she said, “I’m sorry…”
With a primal scream, Michael twisted and ripped Susan Richardson’s head away from her

shoulders  and  threw  it  across  the  room.  Crimson  blood  fountained  up  from  her  neck  and
drenched  his  face  and  golden  shirt  before  her  body  collapsed  across  the  newsdesk.  Michael
sneered into the camera and wiped the blood away from his face with his sleeve. He turned at
last to the control panel next to Susan’s chair.
“Stupid bitch,”  he  muttered  as  he  flipped  a  switch,  and  television  sets  around  the  world
went black.
 
Liberty or Death
« ^ » 
Daniel walked around the bunker  in a mild state of shock. Susan’s final broadcast had a huge
effect on people. Michael was finally revealed for what  he  truly  was,  and  the  people  of  Earth
had decided not to tolerate him any longer. As he walked, Daniel nodded to so many faces he
didn’t know. Overnight, the membership  of the San Diego Underground had nearly doubled,
and he’d received word from other commanders reporting similar or better situations.
Finally, Daniel heard a familiar voice.
“How you feeling, sir?” Jack asked as he fell into step at Daniel’s side.
“I honestly don’t know,” Daniel answered. “Susan was one of my best  and  oldest  friends.
We’d been through so much, and I really don’t believe I would have survived to tell the world
about the immortals without her. But when I  see  what  her  sacrifice  has  bought  us…”  Daniel
waved his arm around to all the new recruits.
“Yeah, I know,” Jack said. “She’s a hero.”
“And a martyr,” Daniel added. “And the shitty thing of it is, I know how to use that to our
advantage as well, when the time is right.”
“So what do we do now, sir?”
“Just  before  her  death,  Susan  mentioned  Azrael  and  some  kind  of  strike  force.  She  said
they’d be ready to move in a few days, but I’m betting now that their cover’s blown they plan
to  move  much  sooner.  We  have  to  be  ready  before  they  are.  I  bet  we  have  no  more  than
twenty-four hours to mount  our Second  Offensive and destroy Heaven, or we’ll be too late to
be effective. How’s the training going?”
Jack sighed. “As well as could be expected. The vast majority of these people  are  civilians,
with  no  military  or  police  training  at  all.  With  some  of  them  it’s  all  we  can  do  to  get  them
pointing the grenade launchers in the right direction.”
Daniel smiled. “The heroes of the American Revolution weren’t professional soldiers either,
Jack. I’m betting the passion of people fighting for  their  lives  and  their  futures  will  outweigh
their lack of technical savvy.”
Daniel  stopped  and  looked  around,  seeing  the  people  around  him  not  as  unseasoned

civilians or even as individuals, but as a growing, highly-motivated army. “Round up the other
local commanders and set up the communications links to the others. We’ve got an assault to
plan.”
 
Michael sat in his darkened throne room and sulked. As loathe as he was to admit it, even
to  himself,  the  situation  with  Cho  and  the  humans  had  indeed  become  a  war,  and  he  was
losing  it.  His  reconnaissance  satellites  showed  heightened  activity  at  many  suspected
Underground  bases,  and  many  of  his  lieutenants  had  reported  a  sudden  drop  in  the  visible
population. Michael knew where all those people had gone, and what they were doing.
He was stupid to deal with Richardson while on the air, but there was nothing he could do
about that now. In a fit of rage, he hadn’t  thought  the  situation  through,  and  now  his  image
was forever tainted  to  this  generation  of  humans.  If  he  won  this  war  (and  he  had  to  at  least
accept the possibility that he might not), he’d probably have to exterminate  the  adult  human
population and start over with the children. Such a waste.
He reached over and brought up Azrael’s latest report on one of his monitors. At least this
was good news. The strike team would be ready far sooner than expected, and they were set to
strike at noon the next day. Michael glanced at  the  clock.  Twenty-five  hours.  Just  over  a  day
and  Cho  would  be  out  of  his  hair  forever.  The  other  rebels  didn’t  concern  him  if  their
ringleader was removed. Cho was the catalyst; he’d been at ground zero since it all began with
the  discovery  of  Batarel.  Without  him,  the  rebel  house  of  cards  fell  apart,  and  they  really
became the directionless bumblers they were before his arrival. Michael slumped in his throne
and stared into the darkness.
Twenty-five hours.
 
Daniel  and  the  other  leaders  of  the  Underground  spent  most  of  the  day  planning  the
following day’s attack. Throughout most of the world, the Second  Offensive would be a replay
of the  First  Offensive,  if  more  decisive  and  impassioned.  Both  sides  knew  what  was  at  stake
now, and neither would yield while still breathing. It promised to be quite a fight, but  Daniel
was confident it would be successful.
In  southern  California,  the  situation  was  quite  different.  No  one  had  attacked  Heaven
directly  in  the  First  Offensive,  but  that’s  exactly  what  Daniel  had  to  do.  They’d  have  no  air
support, the crutch of American military strategists since World  War  One,  and  from  Daniel’s
perspective it looked and felt like a much older type of conflict: a castle siege.
Heaven’s defenses were formidable, but not impossible to breach. Daniel attributed that to
Michael’s arrogant underestimation of the human race. It was really Michael’s only weakness,
and  Daniel  planned  to  exploit  it  to  maximum  efficiency.  While  the  doors  were  too  heavily
defended,  Daniel’s  force  should  be  able  to  blow  a  hole  in  a  wall  with  the  weapons  they’d
cannibalized from the bunker.
Daniel  stood  before  thousands  of  people  in  the  makeshift  auditorium,  a  theater  they’d
commandeered. He gestured to floorplan schematics of Heaven on the briefing screens. “Once
we’re in, destroy anything that moves. It’s an unfortunate fact that Michael  still  has  a  human

guard force inside Heaven that’s loyal only  to  him,  but  I  doubt  you’re  going  to  have  time  to
determine  whether  or  not  your  opponent  is  human  before  they  try  to  blow  you  away.
Anything you see that isn’t part of the Underground, shoot it.
“Unfortunately, this is a no surrender, no  retreat  situation  for  both  sides.  Aside  from  any
humans inside who manage to surrender before we open fire, neither side can  afford  to  back
off in this one. It’s going to be a bloody, prolonged fight that won’t stop until either all of us or
all of the angels are dead. It’s never easy to invade an enemy fortress, particularly one so vital to
defend,  but  it  can  be  done.  As  some  of  my  Mexican  compatriots  enjoy  pointing  out,  Santa
Anna eventually took the Alamo.”
Daniel stepped away from the briefing screens and stood center stage. “A lot of good people
have died to get us this far. Ricardo Jones and Manuel Nogales led many of you into battle, and
sacrificed their lives to our cause. Susan Richardson paid with her life to spread the truth about
the immortals, and many of you are here now only because she cared enough about what was
at stake to risk everything  she  had,  everything  she  was.  We  owe  it  to  these  heroes  that  have
gone before us to finish the fight they started.
“In 1775,  the British army had landed in  Boston,  and  despite  ten  years  of  protests  by  the
American colonists, the British rule was growing more severe by  the  day  as  the  King  tried  to
control  a  people  he  knew  nothing  about,  people  who  were  separated  from  him  by  a  three
month ocean voyage. There was talk of a war for independence, but most of the leaders of the
day  favored  the  current  peace,  believing  they  had  no  hope  against  the  British  army  in  a
declared  war.  In  the  midst  of  this  stagnation  was  a  man  named  Patrick  Henry.  In  a  speech
delivered on March  23,  1775,  he implored his fellow Americans to go to war with the  British.
To him, liberty was far more valuable than peace and maintaining the status quo. If I may read
the last bit of his speech, I think you’ll recognize the immortal words at the end.”
Daniel  pulled  a  piece  of  paper  from  his  uniform  pocket,  unfolded  it  and  began  to  read.
“Gentlemen may cry, Peace, Peace—but there is no peace. The war is actually begun! The next
gale  that  sweeps  from  the  north  will  bring  to  our  ears  the  clash  of  resounding  arms!  Our
brethren  are  already  in  the  field!  Why  stand  we  here  idle?  What  is  it  that  gentlemen  wish?
What would they  have?  Is  life  so  dear,  or  peace  so  sweet,  as  to  be  purchased  at  the  price  of
chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take; but as
for me, give me liberty or give me death!”
The theater shook with the shouts  and  applause  of  the  Underground,  but  Daniel  quieted
them and continued on, the paper discarded. “What we fight for  tomorrow  morning  is  more
than  Patrick  Henry  ever  dreamed  possible.  We  fight  for  liberty,  yes,  but  a  liberty  like  no
human has ever known. Should we win the day, we will be the first humans in the history of
our race truly free to control our own destiny. For thousands of years, allegedly free men  have
been influenced and steered by immortal hands. We fight to end this! Should we lose, we will
know not only our own deaths, as individuals, but the death of humanity as we know it.  The
death  of  our  children,  should  they  not  meet  Michael’s  standards.  The  death  of  our  fellow
humans, should they dare overstep the narrow bounds Michael sets for them. The death of art,
the death of free expression, the death of the human soul. We can not, will not let this happen!”
Daniel raised his arms high above his head. “Liberty or Death!” he shouted.
“Liberty or Death!” the crowd responded.

“LIBERTY OR DEATH!”
 
Second Offensive
« ^ » 
In  the  pre-dawn  darkness  the  next  morning,  Daniel’s  troops  assembled  outside  Heaven’s
eastern wall. They’d taken two massive energy cannons off the roof of the bunker  and loaded
them onto flatbed trucks. These cannons were currently trained on a single section of the wall.
Jack and Daniel stood next to one of the cannons. Jack was clad in police riot gear, like most
of the Underground fighters, and Daniel wore his black suit of armor.
“This feel a little easy to you?” Daniel asked.
Jack nodded. “The thought had occurred to me,” he said. “But at this point, I’m willing to
accept a little good luck and believe we’re taking them by surprise.”
Daniel  walked  to  the  edge  of  the  flatbed  and  peered  up  the  side  of  the  mammoth  gold
building. “I don’t like it,” he said. “Michael’s not this stupid. Arrogant, yes, but not stupid. He
knows we’re coming. He’s got something up his sleeve.”
Jack joined Daniel at the edge. “Whether he does or not, it’s really  academic  at  this  point.
We’re here.”
Daniel paused for a moment,  then  nodded  agreement.  “Right.  Let’s  do  what  we  came  to
do.”
Daniel  walked  back  to  the  men  controlling  the  cannons  and  gave  them  some  final
instructions. Then he keyed the amplifier on his suit and addressed his troops.
“You all know what to do. Good luck.
“On three.” He nodded to the cannon operators.
“One.”
The resistance fighters tensed, preparing.
“Two.”
Over two thousand eyes focused on the golden wall, ready  to  burst  through  it  at  the  first
opportunity.
“Three!”
Both angelic energy cannons opened fire, and soon the metal of the wall began to twist and
warp. Daniel thought he heard something else over the whine of the cannons, a  deep  rumble
maybe, but he wasn’t sure.
Suddenly, the tortured wall gave way and the interior of the angels’ stronghold was open to

them.  The  cannons  shut  off  and  Daniel  lead  the  surge  forward.  Too  late,  he  heard  and
understood the rumbling noise he had hoped he only imagined.
He stopped and looked to  the  sky.  From  the  rooftop  soared  angel  after  angel,  more  than
two dozen in all. They waited until more than half the humans were through the huge hole in
the building, then began to dive.
It was a trap. Daniel and his troops had no  choice  but  to  run  headlong  into  the  building,
where a prepared force no doubt waited for them.  There would be no escape, no possibility of
retreat, and Daniel’s fighters would have to fight in front and behind.
Damn! Daniel thought. How could I have been so stupid? Such  introspection  would  have
to  wait.  By  the  time  he  and  Jack  finally  crossed  the  jagged  threshold  into  the  building,  the
battle was joined.
The fate of humanity was about to be decided.
 
At the same moment  Daniel’s forces  began  their  invasion  of  Heaven,  other  Underground
troops around the world launched attacks on their local targets. As expected, the  battles  were
more heated than in the First Offensive, and the angels were better prepared.
Heinrich von Braun was in a panic.
Michael  had  informed  them  that  the  traitors  in  the  Underground  would  likely  attack
during the night, but most of the night had passed without incident. Heinrich was certain the
rebellion  had  had  a  change  of  heart,  or  lost  their  nerve.  An  attack  against  the  angels  was
foolhardy  and  counterproductive.  Surely  they  saw  that.  Their  lies  and  fake  newscasts  would
collapse under their own weight, and peace would be restored.
Then someone blew a hole in the east wall, and Heinrich’s hopes for a peaceful resolution to
the conflict were dashed.
He’d rushed with the other guardsmen to the conflict, but he wasn’t prepared for what he
saw. Dozens of bodies lay on the floor and there  was  blood  on  most  of  the  walls.  Just  before
Heinrich turned a corner, the man in front of him disintegrated in an explosion of gore.
Heinrich turned and ran. He didn’t think of himself as a coward. He was falling back  to  a
more defensible position. Yes, that was it.
He ran so fast, he didn’t see the  angel  until  it  was  too  late.  He  slammed  into  the  hulking
metal armor and caromed into the wall. The angel stopped, reached down and picked him up.
“Thank you, my Lo—”
“Where are you going?” the angel demanded. “You are a Guardsman, are you not?”
Heinrich nodded feebly. His knees had turned to rubber.
“The fight is that way!” the  angel  shouted,  half  throwing,  half  shoving  Heinrich  back  the
way he came.
Heinrich was at a loss. He didn’t want to disobey an angel, but what he’d seen…

“Go!” the angel commanded.
Heinrich went.
Everything  will  be  fine,  he  thought  as  he  grew  closer  to  the  sounds  of  combat.  I’m  well
armed, highly trained, and God is on my side…
Heinrich’s next step took him into the path of a grenade meant for an angel, and he never
knew what hit him.
 
The storming of Heaven was slow and bloody going.
By dawn, Daniel and his troops were completely inside the massive complex and had taken
out  dozens  of  angels  and  more  human  cannon  fodder  than  they  cared  to  count.  It  had  cost
them  nearly  a  third  of  their  force.  Michael’s  pincer  movement  had  been  defeated  by  the
Underground’s  rear  echelon,  but  at  a  terrible  sacrifice.  Their  invasion  finally  complete,  a
significantly smaller assault force found themselves inside the home of the enemy.
Once inside, the resistance split and followed predefined routes Daniel had mapped out for
them  in  advance.  The  going  was  easier  then,  but  it  remained  a  bloody,  foot  by  foot  fight  as
territory was gained and grudgingly held.
That  didn’t  concern  Daniel.  He,  Jack  and  an  elite  strike  force  cut  through  the  angelic
opposition with no thought of holding the territory they passed through.
Daniel had bigger fish to fry.
 
Turning the Tide
« ^ » 
Around the world, the human forces fought for more than just their lives. In China and India,
the Underground overwhelmed the angels by sheer weight of numbers.  In Europe, the angels
fell prey to dazzling cooperative tactics staged by people who had previously been at war with
each  other  for  centuries.  South  and  Central  America  saw  displays  of  ferocity  not  witnessed
since the time of the Aztecs and Incas.
Bit by bit, the angels fell.
 
Daniel was so near his goal he could taste it, but the opposition was getting tougher.
Daniel, Jack and the others were roughly two hundred meters away from Michael’s throne
room.  It  may  as  well  have  been  two  hundred  miles.  Only  one  corridor  led  to  the  massive
chamber,  and that corridor was filled with armored angels, led  by  Azrael  himself.  The  angels
had  opened  fire  with  a  furious  onslaught  of  firepower  the  moment  Daniel  came  into  view,
forcing the rebels into a side corridor.

“I get the impression Michael doesn’t want to see us,” Jack observed.
Daniel managed a grim smile through his faceplate. “Noticed that, did you?”
Daniel hazarded another peek  around  the  corner,  prompting  another  barrage  of  missiles.
The unguided projectiles missed and impacted on the wall at the end of the corridor.
“At least they aren’t coming to get us,” Daniel said. “I’ll bet  they  have  strict  orders  not  to
leave Michael’s door.”
He turned to Jack. “Any thoughts on how to use that to our advantage?”
Jack shrugged. “Logistically, they’re sitting ducks. We have them  pinned down in a closed
area where they can neither advance nor retreat. We have them right where we want them.”
“Except that the instant we poke  our  heads  around  this  corner  and  attack,  we  get  blown
into a million pieces,” Daniel said.
Jack smiled. “No battlefield situation is without its flaws.”
Daniel stopped to think for a moment.  “How long do you think you guys  can  keep  them
occupied?”
“Doesn’t look like they’re going anywhere. Why?”
Daniel  stood  up  and  looked  down  the  corridor  they  were  in,  away  from  Azrael’s  troops.
“Because I just remembered  there is another way into Michael’s throne room. It has a big bay
window, and I can fly.”
Any hint of mirth disappeared from Jack’s face. “You can’t be serious. He could have just as
many armored angels inside as out here. They’d tear you apart.”
Daniel started to walk down the corridor. “That’s a chance I’m going to have to take. Keep
them busy, and don’t let on that I’m gone. With any luck, I’ll be able to take them from behind
when I’m done with Michael.”
Jack shot Daniel a look, but didn’t argue with his superior officer. “Yes, sir, General.
“And good luck,” he said to Daniel’s retreating form.
Once  Daniel  had  disappeared  from  view,  Jack  addressed  the  strike  force.  “What  are  you
doing there on the floor?” he asked. “You heard the general.”
With great care, the humans began firing on the angels.
 
Elsewhere, entire angelic strongholds began to fall.
The angels had no answer to the weakness the Underground had exploited so successfully
the first time. By attacking everywhere at once,  the  Underground  didn’t  allow  the  angels  the
opportunity to consolidate their forces. Small, isolated patches of angels  grew  steadily  smaller
as the fighting wore on. They took their toll in human life, of course, but it often seemed that
for every human destroyed, two more took his place. The angels were losing, and the outcome
of the battle became more certain by the minute.

Still, the human victories would mean little if Michael and his forces held on to Heaven.
 
Daniel stood on the roof of the great building, wings extended. The morning sun sat low in
the  sky,  casting  long,  hazy  shadows  over  the  Los  Angeles  cityscape.  The  fighting  was  well
inside the building now, and the city looked surprisingly peaceful.
Standing  there  in  the  stillness  of  the  morning,  Daniel  took  a  moment  to  center  himself,
reflecting on all the events that had conspired to bring him to this  place.  It  seemed  a  lifetime
ago that he was just a workaholic EMT with no social life, but really it had been less than four
years. Who would have guessed then that now he’d be the leader of millions, standing atop the
world’s  center  of  government  clad  in  powered  armor  not  made  by  human  hands,  and
preparing to do battle with none other than the archangel Michael?
Daniel  shook  his  head.  A  stranger  life  I  have  never  known,  he  thought  to  himself.  He
stepped to the edge of the roof. Michael’s throne room was directly beneath him.
Time to embrace my destiny, he thought, then ignited his engines and took to the air.
 
Michael  sat  alone  in  his  throne  room,  encased  in  armor  and  watching  the  course  of  the
battle on his monitors. He’d argued with Azrael that the armor wasn’t necessary, with a legion
of  his  best  troops  stationed  at  his  door,  but  the  other  angel  insisted.  Michael  was  hot  and
uncomfortable, but he endured.
He was also beginning to worry. He had spotted Cho some time ago  in  that  blasphemous
black  armor  in  the  corridor  outside  his  throne  room,  but  while  Cho’s  fighters  and  Azrael’s
continued to exchange fire, Michael hadn’t actually seen Cho in quite a while. The instant the
fighting died down a bit he’d have to radio Azrael.
Over the noise of combat  from  his  monitors,  he  became  aware  of  another  sound,  a  deep
rumbling. It grew louder and louder until it drowned out everything else.
“Azrael!” Michael called, but it was too late.
With a terrible crash, Cho shattered the bullet-proof glass of the bay window and swooped
into the room. He banked sharply to avoid hitting the far wall, then landed light and neat at the
foot of Michael’s throne.
“Now we settle this,” the human said, and trained his weapons on the leader of the world.
 
Apocalypse
« ^ » 
Responding to  Michael’s  call,  Azrael  and  his  troops  burst  into  the  throne  room.  They  found
Michael and Daniel circling each other, weapons raised and no more than six feet apart. Azrael
cursed. He couldn’t fire on Daniel for fear that the collateral damage would harm Michael. So

the angels watched.
Shortly after the angels filed in, so did Jack and his men.  The angels either didn’t notice or
didn’t care. Jack held his fire for the same reason Azrael did, and the standoff continued. Jack
activated a small video camera  mounted  on  his  left  shoulder.  He  had  a  feeling  Daniel  would
want these events broadcast.
“You  may  as  well  give  up,  Cho,”  Michael  said.  “Even  if  you  destroy  me,  there’s  no  way
you’re making it out of this room alive. Without you, the resistance will fall, and my legacy will
continue.”
“That’s  where  you’re  wrong,”  Daniel  said.  “If  I  fall,  another  will  take  my  place,  then
another, then another. And none of them will follow you.
“You rose to power on charisma and the fear of chaos. The people of Earth now know there
are far worse things than chaos, and your charisma isn’t what it used to be.”
Michael scoffed. “Is that what you think?” he asked, continuing to circle Daniel warily.
“I’ve  been  the  guardian  of  mankind  for  over  one  thousand  centuries,”  Michael  went  on.
“No one knows the human race better than I do, or what’s best for it. Mankind  will follow me
because it knows no other way.
“I can still remember when you made your first tool, or when you discovered fire. I can still
speak the  first  human  language,  and  I  can  still  remember  all  the  ancient  religions.  I’ve  been
present  at  nearly  every  significant  event  in  the  history  of  your  race.  I  was  present  at  the
crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth. I was in New Mexico to see the detonation of the first atomic
bomb. I sat in Mission Control during the first moon landing. I decide who wins your wars, I
decide which treaties get signed, I keep the world running smoothly.
“So  don’t  tell  me  mankind  will  simply  do  without  me.  You  never  have  before,  and  you
won’t now.”
“You’ve been at all the significant places in history?” Daniel asked.
“Yes.”
“Nazi Germany?” Daniel asked.
Michael nodded. “For all his flaws, Hitler  really  understood  the  value  of  order.  If  only  he
hadn’t developed that irrational hatred of the Jews. It was a very difficult decision, letting him
lose the war.”
“Yet  you  don’t  share  his  weaknesses,”  Daniel  said,  noting  the  tiny  red  light  on  Jack’s
camera.
“No, I love the entire human race.”
“And  your  death  camps?”  Daniel  prompted.  “Do  you  love  the  people  you’ve  ruthlessly
exterminated?”
“They  don’t  count,”  Michael  said.  “They’re  defective.  They  drag  down  the  gene  pool.
Humans  can  never  achieve  their  full  potential  if  these  misfits  are  allowed  to  reproduce  and
pollute their genes.”

“That’s where you’re wrong,” Daniel said, his voice hardening. “Ludwig von Beethoven was
deaf,  yet  his  music  has  moved  and  inspired  millions.  According  to  you,  his  existence  was  a
mistake, and he should have been exterminated.”
Michael stayed silent.
“For  someone  who  claims  to  know  humanity  so  well,”  Daniel  continued,  “you  don’t
understand  us  at  all.  We  achieve  our  full  potential  by  overcoming  adversity,  including
biological  adversity.  Many  of  mankind’s  greatest  specimens  have  had  some  kind  of  physical
problem. It was overcoming that obstacle that gave them the strength of character to go on and
do  great  things.  You  would  deny  us  this.  By  removing  those  that  aren’t  already  perfect,  by
controlling and breeding us like farm animals, you inhibit our growth. You’re trying to purify
our genes at the cost of our souls.”
“You sound like Satan.”
“He went too far in the other direction, but he made  a  lot  more  sense  than  you.  You’re  a
terrible guardian, Michael, and we don’t need you anymore.”
With  a  bellow  of  rage,  Michael  lunged  at  Daniel.  Black  and  white  armor  struck  with  a
clang, and chaos ensued.
 
The  instant  Daniel  and  Michael  collided,  Jack  opened  fire  on  Azrael.  If  Daniel  won  his
personal battle, Jack didn’t want him to have to fight his way out. The first volley of fire hit the
angels  by  surprise,  and  several  of  them  went  down  from  the  impact.  Jack  and  his  men
immediately dove for cover as the angels returned fire. One of Jack’s men  disappeared in a red
mist, but the others kept firing. Two angels went down, gaping blackened holes in their armor.
And the battle continued.
 
Michael was stronger than Daniel had expected.
The armor made them  more  or  less  equally  matched  in  terms  of  leverage  and  firepower,
but  Michael  remained  standing  through  some  exchanges  that  would  at  the  very  least  have
knocked Daniel down.
Michael took a swing at Daniel, who ducked as the powerful armored arm  arced  over  his
head. Daniel took advantage of his position to leap up and forward, ramming his shoulder into
Michael’s midsection. The angel staggered back, then regained his composure.
“You can’t win, Cho,” he shouted over the explosions of their fighting troops. “Believe me,
I’ve seen your kind come and go a million times!”
“Maybe,”  Daniel  answered.  He  noticed  that  Michael  was  standing  directly  between  him
and the broken bay window.
“Maybe not!” he shouted as he ignited his rockets and charged. He slammed into Michael’s
chest, picked him up, and carried both of them out the window and into the morning sunlight.
 

Jack was actually starting to believe this could work.
He was down to three of his men other than himself, and everything in the room had been
reduced to rubble (including the floor in some places), but the angelic opposition was down to
only Azrael and two others, all heavily damaged.
“Throw down your weapons, humans,” Azrael shouted, “and we might let you live.”
Jack  poked  his  head  out  from  behind  the  remains  of  Michael’s  throne,  which  he’d  been
using  for  cover.  “You  don’t  exactly  look  like  someone  in  the  position  to  make  such  an
ultimatum,” he shouted.
Azrael answered with a rocket, which, if Jack’s count based on Daniel’s armor was correct,
should have been his last one. The weapon detonated harmlessly on the wall behind Jack, and
Jack gave the signal to his men for a blast of simultaneous fire.
On  cue,  four  humans  popped  up  from  their  hiding  places  and  opened  fire.  One  of  the
angels returned fire, killing the man to Jack’s right. The four grenades launched by the humans
hit their targets, and all three angels went down. Only Azrael managed to struggle back  to his
feet.
Jack stepped out from behind the ruined throne and walked slowly towards his adversary.
Azrael raised his rocket launcher towards Jack.
“Don’t bother,” Jack said. “You and I both know you’re out.”
Azrael shrugged, then launched his final rocket.
Jack dropped to the floor just in time to feel the heat of the rocket’s exhaust on his back.  He
then  heard  two  explosions  in  quick  succession,  one  behind  him  and  one  in  front.  When  he
looked up, the Angel of Death was gone and smoke slowly curled from the barrel of the man
to his left.
It was all up to Daniel now.
 
Two metal titans clashed in the skies over Los Angeles.
Held  aloft  by  back  mounted  wings  and  rockets,  the  two  figures,  one  black,  one  white,
dived and banked and collided in midair, only to separate and do it again.
“Curse you, Cho, fall!” Michael screamed.
Daniel  answered  by  falling  back  and  launching  a  rocket,  which  Michael  only  barely
avoided.
Daniel  reversed  direction  and  charged  Michael  once  more.  The  angel  made  no  move  to
dodge, and instead met Daniel head-on.  The  collision  could  be  heard  from  the  ground,  even
over their rockets, and both combatants, man and angel, were visibly shaken.
Daniel recovered first and quickly ducked under Michael’s field of vision.
Michael shook it off and looked for his enemy. “You can’t hide from me up here, Cho!” he
shouted.

“Don’t intend to,” said a voice very close by and behind him.
Before Michael could turn around, Daniel seized one of the angel’s metal wings and ripped
it away  from  the  suit  of  armor.  Michael  began  to  spin  out  of  control.  Before  he  really  knew
what was going on, the angel was spiraling rapidly towards the ground.  Daniel  followed  with
much more grace and control.
Michael survived the impact with the ground,  landing  in  a  vacant  lot,  but  he  didn’t  land
well.  His  right  leg  and  arm  were  both  shattered,  and  though  they  began  to  heal  almost
immediately, they’d be quite useless for a few minutes.
Daniel had no intention of giving him that long.
Daniel landed a few meters away from Michael’s struggling form and trained his remaining
rockets on him.
“It’s over, Michael,” he said.
“NEVER!” the angel screamed, and loosed all his remaining rockets against  Daniel.  Daniel
backpedaled furiously, but he couldn’t evade all of  the  massive  barrage.  Three  of  the  rockets
impacted squarely on his armor, and he fell to the ground.
The diagnostic readouts in his helmet told him more than  he  really  wanted  to  know.  The
armor’s power was down to nearly ten percent, barely enough to move its own massive bulk.
Most  of  the  armor  plating  was  weakened  to  the  point  of  uselessness,  and  on  top  of  all  that,
Daniel’s right leg was broken.
As  Daniel  tried  to  sit  up,  he  noticed  Michael  was  already  getting  to  his  feet.  With  the
condition of Daniel’s armor, the angel could easily tear him apart with his bare  hands.  Daniel
couldn’t give Michael the opportunity, but he only had two rockets left. He had to make them
count.
Still  sitting  and  dragging  his  broken  leg,  Daniel  began  to  pull  himself  backwards,  away
from Michael.
Michael shook his armored head. “Oh, no you don’t,” he said. On his good leg, he began to
lurch after Daniel.
“What were you saying about it being over?” Michael taunted.
Daniel  said  nothing,  but  continued  to  pull  himself  away  from  the  approaching  angel.
Closer, you arrogant son of a bitch, he thought. Come closer.
“You thought you knew so much,” Michael continued. “You had the incredible audacity to
believe you knew better than I what was best for the human race. Pathetic.
“You have no idea what’s really going on. Everything that has happened on this planet over
the last four years has happened because I willed it. I was the one that kept the demons just far
enough away from you  that  you  could  get  your  story  to  the  press.  I  manipulated  Satan  into
tipping his hand before he was ready, letting him fall into my trap. I engineered the collapse of
your  national  governments,  knowing  you’d  have  no  choice  but  to  embrace  my  rule.
Everything  has  happened  exactly  as  I  intended,  and  I’m  not  going  to  let  one  insignificant
human stand in the way of my master plan.”

Michael  was  very  close  now,  almost  close  enough  to  reach  Daniel  with  his  good  arm.
Almost, Daniel thought.
“But now it ends,” Michael said. “First you die, then your inconsequential rebellion. I only
hope that now, at  the  end,  you  realize  which  of  us  was  truly  right.”  Michael  began  to  reach
down towards Daniel.
“I do,” Daniel said, raised his arm, and launched his final two rockets.
Both hit Michael square in the chest, knocking  him away from  Daniel.  The  concussion  of
the explosion knocked Daniel flat on the ground, but not before he saw Michael’s armor blow
apart.
As the  ringing  in  his  ears  began  to  fade,  Daniel  became  aware  of  the  sound  of  cheering
human  voices,  coming  from  the  direction  of  the  giant  golden  building  that  had  until  very
recently been the seat of all earthly government. The angels had been defeated.
It was over.
 
The Dawn of a New…
« ^ 
Mister President, they’re waiting for you.”
Daniel Cho thanked his aide and checked  his tie in the mirror one last time. Not  too  bad,
he thought. Very presidential.
Daniel  had  had  a  very  busy  six  months  following  the  fall  of  Heaven  and  the  end  of  the
Angelic Jihad. Despite his other flaws, Michael had succeeded where Genghis Khan, Alexander
the  Great  and  Napoleon  had  failed.  He  united  the  entire  world  under  one  banner,  one
government. When the angel died, he left a vacuum of power in his absence that threatened to
plunge the world again into chaos.
Once again, Daniel had stepped into the fray. Opposing vocal and powerful proponents of a
return to nationalism, he claimed that the idea of a central world government was valid, so long
as no single person ran it. Daniel conceived, championed, and eventually sold to the masses the
idea of a worldwide representative democracy, patterned after the governments of the  United
States and Canada. The Terran Republic slowly took form, with the  former  sovereign  nations
of the world now functioning much  as the states of the former United  States.  Each  sent  their
representatives to a central world Congress in Geneva. A bicameral legislature  took  form,  but
they still needed an executive branch.
Daniel won by a landslide, opposed only by power hungry niche players who failed to win
the  trust  and  confidence  of  the  masses  that  Daniel  enjoyed.  With  Jack  Harris  as  his  vice
president,  Daniel  was  elected  to  lead  the  people  of  Earth  just  five  and  a  half  months  after
Michael’s destruction. His term of office would be five  years,  with  the  possibility  of  a  second
five year term. After that, he would have to step down.

Daniel  wasn’t  sure  he  was  ready,  but  he  doubted  anyone  sane  enough  to  do  the  job
correctly ever was. If he wanted the job for his own sake, he shouldn’t have been allowed to do
it.
Still, he thought a lot about those that preceded him, or tried to. Not a day went by that he
didn’t think about Satan and Michael, and what they tried to accomplish.
Satan wanted a world of utter chaos, total Darwinian  survival  of  the  fittest.  Only  through
struggle  and  blood,  the  demon  had  said,  could  mankind  strive  to  be  something  better.
Mankind  under  his  rule  would  have  been  reduced  to  paranoid  barbarism,  with  only  the
strongest  and  most  ruthless  living  to  fight  another  day.  Barbarians  had  little  use  for  art  or
culture,  and  under  Satan  most  of  the  finer  aspects  of  humanity,  the  things  that  separate
humans from animals, would have disappeared.
Michael, on the other hand, put a great deal of emphasis  on  civilization,  cooperating  with
others  instead  of  fighting  them.  However,  the  angel  also  took  it  too  far.  Michael  decided  to
strengthen  the  human  race  by  breeding  out  the  qualities  he  arbitrarily  decided  were  unfit.
While  his  ideals  seemed  nobler  on  the  surface,  Heaven  quickly  deteriorated  into  a  sterile,
merciless institution, no better than a thousand dictators  throughout  the  history  of  mankind.
Pure, unquestioned order was no better than pure chaos.
Still, Daniel thought, in their own ways, each had humanity’s best  interests  at  heart.  Both
sought to improve and better the human race. Angel and Demon  both wanted the same thing:
the continued existence and improvement of humanity.
The very same goal which Daniel now faced.
Daniel turned away from the mirror and walked out the door. It was a sizable walk to the
outdoor display stand where he was to give his inauguration speech. Several aides had offered
to write a speech for him, but he preferred to “wing it”, speaking from the heart. He still had
no idea what he was going to say. Flanked by security men,  Daniel huffed up the stairs to the
walkway that led to the display stand. He  was  still  getting  used  to  the  Swiss  mountain  air  in
Geneva.
Over the last month  or so, Daniel had begun to  understand  his  two  immortal  foes  a  little
better, and he developed a growing understanding of where they went wrong. Both Satan and
Michael  had  valid  philosophies,  on  the  surface.  Satan  was  right;  humanity  had  made  its
greatest  advancements  in  times  of  great  stress.  Michael  was  also  right;  it  was  order  and
community that made humans people instead of animals.
The problem was that each went too far. Too much of anything is never a good idea, Daniel
mused. The angels and demons lacked balance.
Balance  had  become  a  very  important  concept  to  Daniel  recently,  so  much  so  that  he
decided to make the symbol of the Terran Republic the Tai Chi Tu, the Chinese Yin and Yang
symbol. Two opposing forces, each containing the seed of the other,  in  perfect  balance.  Light
and darkness. Activity and rest. Order and Chaos.
Humanity needed Satan’s chaos to  strive,  to  develop,  to  change.  Without  some  degree  of
chaos, society would become static, unable to adapt to changing conditions.
But humanity also needed Michael’s structure  and  order,  so  that  the  changes  induced  by

chaos  would  have  a  solid  foundation  to  build  upon.  Without  order,  chaos  would  be  a
destructive force rather than an agent for necessary change.
Both immortals were right, and both were wrong.
Suddenly, as Daniel heard his introduction and walked out onto the display stand, billions
of eyes watching his every move, Daniel had his speech. After clearing his throat he began, his
voice determined and strong.
“The destiny of humanity lies between Heaven and Hell.”
 
 
Copyright © 1997 Jeff Kirvin
—END—
 
Visit www.Fictionwise.com for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

