Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
The Unification Chronicles
First Contact
Part 3 of 4
by Jeff Kirvin
 
The Story So Far: After landing  on the first extrasolar  world  discovered capable  of  supporting
human life, Major Jack Killian and  his group  of  Terran  Republic  Marines encountered a  creature,  a
multiton carnivore that killed one of the Marines. Upon closer inspection of  the beast,  Jack  discovered
a brand, evidence of  domestication. Jack  showed this evidence to Vladimir  Chenzokov,  captain  of  the
exploratory vessel Envoy, who dismissed it as coincidental. The colony world, now dubbed New Eden,
was human property, and Chenzokov would hear no talk of aliens.
*
*
*
Major Jack Killian paused in his work, stopping to remove his helmet and wipe  the  sweat
from his brow. Despite the armor’s strength and climate control, he was dripping.
It had been a busy three weeks. Shortly after dismissing Jack’s concern about the branded
creature,  Chenzokov  had  the  colonists  begin  shuttling  down.  Jack  and  his  men  had  the

perimeter fences up just as the last shuttle came down.
Chenzokov called an assembly and gave a stirring speech that Jack knew must’ve taken the
old Russian half the trip to write. Chenzokov talked about the noble ideal they were living, and
the great responsibility of founding humanity’s first extrasolar colony. He finished by  naming
the planet “New Eden” and calling for a celebration that lasted well into the night.
The  next  morning  the  colonists  began  ferrying  down  materials  to  build  the  first  human
settlement  on  New  Eden.  Despite  the  use  of  prefab  materials  and  plenty  of  powerloaders,
unarmored  civilian  construction  versions  of  the  military  powered  armor  suits,  Chenzokov
insisted that  Jack  and  his  men  “earn  their  keep”  by  helping  with  the  construction.  Jack  had
been building parts of the compound ever since.
Jack  knew  the  real  reason  for  the  order,  of  course.  While  the  security  team’s  powered
assistance was valued, the real reason Chenzokov wanted them  working was so Jack wouldn’t
have time to pursue his “paranoid theories.”
All that was about to change. Jack and some civilian workers were just putting together the
last  building  now.  Once  that  was  completed,  Chenzokov  would  have  to  let  Jack  conduct
“security patrols”; to do otherwise would call undue attention to himself. Chenzokov wasn’t a
politician himself, but he answered to politicians, and there were lots of VIPs in the colony that
would be quite upset to discover that the captain had placed them in possible danger.
Jack  looked  around  the  colony  to  appraise  his  handiwork.  The  first  settlement  on  New
Eden was a sight to behold. It was a frontier outpost,  to  be  sure,  and  inefficient  compared  to
the  arcologies,  but  they’d  done  a  damn  fine  job  putting  it  together.  The  gleaming  white
buildings  covered  almost  a  square  kilometer,  several  of  them  two  or  three  stories  tall.
Everything the colony needed was present, much  of it transplanted from the Envoy. They had
hydroponics  gardens,  dormitories,  labs  for  biochemistry,  zoology  and  the  other  ecosciences.
Each building was a marvel of modern architecture, self sufficient and self contained. The roofs
were composed of high-efficiency solar cells, and each building could be hermetically sealed if
the need arose. Around the complex  was  a  four-meter  tall  perimeter  fence,  ample  protection
from anything smaller than the creature that killed Rodas.
But Jack wasn’t concerned about wildlife. He was still convinced the mark  on that creature
was a brand, and that the colonists weren’t the only sentients on New Eden. And now he had
the opportunity to test that theory.
Jack  strode  across  the  compound,  looking  for  his  Marines.  He  found  Sergeant  Major
Eleanor Jabari and Corporal Horatio Shimura in the barracks.
“Suit  up,”  he  said  from  the  door,  his  armor-amplified  voice  ringing  off  the  prefab  walls.
“We’re going on patrol.”
*
*
*
Jack and his patrol started off to the north, the same direction the creature had come from.
The rain forest made for easy travel, sparse tree trunks dotting the  landscape  under  the  high,
interlocking canopy of foliage. It was quiet, peaceful, and it gave Jack the creeps.
“You looking for anything in particular, Major?” asked Jabari.

“Yeah,” Jack  said.  “Whatever  made  that  brand.  If  there’s  another  sentient  species  on  this
planet, I want to make sure they’re friendly.”
“We didn’t see any  signs  of  settlement  from  orbit,”  Shimura  said,  “or  on  the  way  down.
What makes you think they’re still here, sir?”
“I don’t, necessarily. It’s possible they just left that creature behind by accident. But I have
to be sure.”
They  continued  on  for  a  few  hours,  moving  at  a  slow  enough  speed  not  to  overlook
anything, and keeping chatter to a minimum.  This was no nature hike and they all knew it. If
they didn’t find anything within fifty klicks, Jack had decided to turn around,  and  they  were
fast approaching that boundary.
“Sir?” Shimura said.
“Yes, Corporal?”
“I’m reading several heat sources two klicks north by northeast, in a small valley. A few of
them look…”
“Look what?”
“Artificial.”
Jack didn’t see anything on his own sensors, but he probably wouldn’t. Since  their original
scout got eaten, Shimura had drawn scout duty. His suit was lighter than the others but it had
greater range and a better sensor array. The heat sources he saw were beyond the preset range
for this patrol, but they were exactly what Jack  was  looking  for.  “We  check  it  out.  Carefully.
This may be a first contact situation. We go in stealth, and try not to startle them.”
“Aye,  sir,”  the  two  Marines  answered  in  unison.  They  all  turned  and  began  walking  the
direction Shimura  advised, but they began walking slowly, taking great care not to make  any
excess noise.
Not long after they came upon the source of the heat readings. It was another  base  camp,
but nothing like Jack or his Marines had ever seen. The artificial heat sources  were  machines,
hulking bipedal walkers with reverse-articulated legs. The lines of the walkers  were  sleek  and
curved, and they appeared to be made a dull pewter metal. There were five of the walkers, two
small ones and three that were much larger, the big ones dotted with menacing arms and what
Jack presumed were weapons pods. Jack thought  they  were  not  unlike  the  legged,  all-terrain
tanks the Terran military sometimes used on rough worlds like Mars or Europa.
As interesting as the walkers were, they were nothing compared to the natural heat sources
in the valley.
The  creatures  were  also  bipedal,  and  demonstrated  a  mix  of  avian  and  reptilian
characteristics. They each had two arms and legs, horizontal spines,  long  tails  and  long  necks
that ended with heads featuring huge braincases and large eyes. Their  mouths  were  long  and
filled with sharp,  curved  teeth,  except  at  the  end,  where  the  mouth  terminated  with  a  bony
protobeak.  They  had  three  digits  on  each  limb,  each  ending  with  a  sharp  and  hooked  claw.
Their skin was smooth on the back  and sides, with a thin layer of down  along  the  underside.
Wattles hung from their necks, reminding Jack of Terran turkeys.

The  larger  type  was  red  in  color  with  yellow  stripes  and  a  thick  crest  of  white  feathers
running from the top of the head down to the shoulders. They also wore gleaming body armor
and carried rifles of some kind in addition to vicious bladed weapons.
The smaller type, and the type apparently in charge based on their actions, was dull green
with  red  stripes  and  no  crest.  They  wore  no  armor  or  clothing,  but  each  had  some  kind  of
necklace bearing a metallic symbol, which Jack thought had to be some kind of rank insignia.
Some  of these green aliens were piloting the walkers while the others busied  themselves  with
complex electronic equipment or ordered the red aliens  around.  Their  vocalizations  consisted
of screeches and twitters, similar to Terran tropical birds, only much deeper in tone.
Jack and his men crouched down, doing their best to remain undetected.
“What do we do now, sir?” Shimura asked.
Damn good question, Jack thought. “We make note of this location and return to camp. The
next step is Chenzokov’s call, not mine.”
Slowly, carefully, Jack and his Marines retreated the way they came.
*
*
*
Back in camp, Jack proceeded to the Administration building without bothering to remove
his  armor.  Chenzokov  had  taken  up  residence  in  the  Colonial  Governor’s  office,  and  it  was
there that Jack found the big Russian.
“We have to talk,” Jack said, closing the door behind him.
Chenzokov  looked  up  from  his  computer  and  studied  Jack’s  armored  form.  “Finally
staging your coup, Major?”
“We  found  XTs,”  Jack  said,  ignoring  Chenzokov’s  jibe.  “We  counted  at  least  a  dozen
individuals, and there are probably more. Their technology is at least as advanced as ours, and
they appeared to have war machines.” Jack continued to explain, in detail, exactly what he and
his men had seen.
“We have to leave,” Jack concluded.
Chenzokov leaned back in his chair. “Nonsense,” he said. “We will do no such thing.
“Major,  assuming  I  believe  you,  assuming  this  isn’t  another  one  of  your  attempts  to
sabotage  our  mission,  your  news  still  means  nothing.  We  found  no  evidence  of  a  sentient
civilization on this planet, which means the aliens are likely just visitors, and will leave shortly.
Furthermore,  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  their  intentions  are  hostile.  Any  race  advanced
enough to achieve starflight is  going  to  be  civilized  enough  to  communicate  with.  For  all  we
know,  the  aliens’  presence  here  could  be  the  greatest  fortune  to  ever  befall  mankind!  If  we
could forge an alliance with a more advanced race, the benefits and advances we could acquire
would be unimaginable!”
Jack stood silent for a moment, then said, “In the course of human history, contact between
an advanced society and a less advanced one has always been disastrous for the lesser  society.
Ask  any  of  the  Amerindian  or  African  or  Australian  tribes  wiped  out  due  to  European

expansion.
“I’m putting my men on full alert, and readying the shuttles for a quick  evacuation. When
you come to your senses, let me know.”
Jack walked from the room, leaving Chenzokov in silence.
*
*
*
Chenzokov stared at his office door, his mind racing.
Aliens! He knew that they were statistically possible, even likely, but he never expected  to
meet any. Habitable  planets  in  the  galaxy  were  just  too  hard  to  come  by  for  alien  species  to
cross paths with any frequency.
Major  Killian  didn’t  understand  that.  The  same  rarity  of  habitable  worlds  that  made  XT
contact so unlikely was the same  reason  humanity  couldn’t  afford  to  give  up  New  Eden  just
because another species might and there was still no proof of this have gotten there first.
Killian  never  seemed  to  appreciate  the  enormous  pressures  Chenzokov  was  under.  The
Envoy Project was the  single  most  expensive  undertaking  in  human  history,  and  backers  on
Earth expected results. More specifically, they expected habitable worlds, places where humans
could live without atmospheric domes or expensive and time-consuming terraforming. If those
were acceptable options, there would have been no reason to leave Sol.
Chenzokov turned  and  looked  out  his  office  window,  marveling  at  the  alien  sun  shining
through it. No, New Eden was a human world now, and they were there to stay.
Aliens. He couldn’t wait to meet them.
*
*
*
That night Robyn O’Reilly wandered the complex, looking for  her  boss.  Jack  hadn’t  been
seen all afternoon, and Robyn was starting to … not  worry,  so  much,  as  Jack  was  more  than
capable of taking care of himself, but Robyn was starting to wonder where Jack was, and if  it
had anything to do with the news.
Robyn found Jabari on her way back from the mess hall. “Sergeant Major!” she called out.
The older Egyptian halted her stride and approached Robyn. “Yes, Lieutenant?”
“Seen the Major?”
Jabari tilted her head. “Not recently, ma’am. Have you checked the perimeter?”
Robyn slapped her forehead. “No, I haven’t. Thanks, Sarge.”
Jabari smiled and Robyn trotted over  to  the  security  fence  encircling  the  compound.  She
should  have  figured  it  out  before.  Robyn  had  known  Jack  since  Mars,  and  when  he  was
troubled,  Jack  got  meticulous.  Given  Chenzokov’s  afternoon  announcement,  Robyn  should
have guessed that the first thing Jack would do would be to check the defenses.

Robyn followed the fence almost halfway around the complex before she found her friend
and superior officer. Robyn could  see  Jack’s  armored  silhouette  leaning  against  the  northeast
side of the fence. It was not lost on Robyn that northeast was the side closest to the alien camp.
Illuminated by the floodlights from camp, Jack’s figure almost blended right in with the dark
shadows of the forest beyond.
“Heard the news, then, I take it?” Robyn called out.
Jack  turned  and  looked  at  her,  and  Robyn  could  see  what  passed  for  a  sarcastic  grin
through Jack’s faceplate.
“Yeah, I heard,” Jack said, his voice sounding tinny through the armor’s speakers.
“And?”
Jack stepped away from the fence. “What do  you  want  me  to  say,  Robyn?  I  told  him  we
should leave. I told him there was nothing but trouble here. Is it my fault he’s decided to run
headlong into that trouble?”
Robyn held out her hands in front of her. “Hey, no, boss, I didn’t mean any of that.”
Jack  stared  at  his  lieutenant  for  a  moment,  then  relaxed.  “Sorry,  Robyn.  Didn’t  mean  to
bite your head off.
“We’ll have enough of that tomorrow.”
Robyn walked a little closer to Jack and leaned with him against the fence. “You really think
Chenzokov is that far off the mark?”
“You  didn’t  see  those  things,  Robyn.  Physically,  they  had  the  look  of  pure  carnivores,
predators of the highest order.”
“The same could be said of humans.”
Jack  ignored  her.  “And  their  war  machines,  walking  tanks  with  more  firepower  than  a
squad of armored men. I got a bad vibe from them, Robyn.”
“We’re armored and armed, too. What’s to  say  their  intentions  are  any  less  peaceful  than
ours?”
Jack started to speak, then hesitated. “I don’t know. Something about the way they moved,
their attitude. They’re warriors. I see the same checked aggression in them that I see in us. They
are prepared to fight, and we’re about to provoke them.”
Robyn stood in silence for a moment  with her friend, listening to  the  night  sounds  of  the
jungle mix with the human noises from camp. It was getting close to curfew, and the colonists
were starting to pack up for the night.
“What’s Chenzokov allowing for defense?”
“Just me,” Jack said. “and no armor. I’m allowed to carry a sidearm, but that’s it. A handful
of colonists, Chenzokov himself, and me with a pistol against heavily armed aliens.
“Robyn,  I  want  you  to  get  us  ready  tomorrow  after  I  leave.  If  this  thing  goes  south,  I’m
going to need you to lead the defense of the colony while they evacuate.”

“You really expect the worst, don’t you?”
“Wait until you see them, and you’ll understand.” Jack left the fence and walked back  into
camp, leaving Robyn alone with the jungle.
*
*
*
First light found Jack boarding one of the colony’s wheeled transports with Chenzokov and
a dozen or so colonists. The transport was a huge metal box, painted stark white and held aloft
on giant struts and two-meter high rubber tires. It could roll over just about anything, and the
passengers  would  be  enclosed  and  comfortable.  Per  Chenzokov’s  order,  Jack  was  dressed  in
fatigues  and  armed  only  with  a  hand  pistol.  He  rode  up  front  with  the  driver  as  the  bulky
vehicle made its bumpy and ambling way across the jungle to the alien camp.
Jack still dreaded what he was sure the day would bring. He wasn’t a xenophobe; many on
Earth  dreaded  the  very  thought  of  meeting  nonterrestrial  sentients,  but  not  Jack.  He  just
preferred to meet them  on  better  terms,  under  the  guidance  of  scientists  and  diplomats,  not
politicians.
Chenzokov staggered over to Jack as the transport crawled over the uneven  terrain.  Speak
of the devil and he appears, Jack mused. “Yes, Captain?” Jack asked before the Russian could get
a word out.
“I wanted to talk to you before we arrived,” Chenzokov said. “I want you to know that you
are  present  only  to  be  in  compliance  with  regulations.  First  Contact  Protocol  requires  the
presence  of  at  least  one  security  officer,  and  you’re  it.  However,  I  believe  your  aggressive
presence  to  be  a  detriment  to  our  mission  of  peace  and  understanding.  You  will  therefore
remain confined to the transport for the duration of the contact with the alien species. You may
watch through the viewscreen, but you will not under any circumstances make your presence
known to the aliens. We have to establish ourselves as a peaceful, enlightened race, and I don’t
believe you capable of that.
“Do I make myself understood, Major?”
Jack stared at the Colonial  Governor  of  New  Eden  until  the  older  man  dropped  his  eyes.
“Yes sir,” Jack said. “I understand you perfectly.”
Chenzokov  nodded,  and  moved  to  walk  away,  back  to  the  exit  where  the  others  were
preparing to disembark.
“But you understand,” Jack said to  Chenzokov’s  back,  loud  enough  to  be  heard  over  the
transport’s  engines,  “that  I  have  the  right  and  responsibility  to  act  as  I  see  fit  in  a  state  of
emergency, should the XTs pose a clear and present danger to any human colonists.”
Chenzokov stopped, but did not turn or say a word. After a moment,  he continued to the
back exit of the transport.
Jack turned and looked out the viewscreen. They were almost there. The transport was just
entering  the  valley  where  Jack  had  found  the  XTs,  and  he  could  see  a  couple  of  their  giant
walking machines already. Jack checked  the clip in his pistol, and prayed he wouldn’t have to
use it.

Slowly,  the  transport  rolled  up  to  the  edge  of  the  XT  camp.  Jack  watched  as  the  aliens
gathered around the front of the vehicle. He was able to study the creatures more closely now,
having nothing else to do.
The males were the larger of the two types, and Jack felt the same sense of dread looking at
them  now  as  before.  All  the  males  wore  armor  over  their  yellow-striped  red  skin,  and  held
mean-looking  weapons  in  their  clawed  hands.  They  reminded  Jack  of  Terran  dinosaurs,  a
vicious species known  as  Velociraptor.  Their  saurian  eyes  stared  unblinking  at  the  transport,
but they did not open fire, or seem overtly threatening.
Behind the males the smaller, red-striped on green females  stood  their  ground.  Several  of
them directed male warriors to new positions, but none of them  were armed directly.  Behind
the  females  stood  the  massive  war  machines,  gun  pods  tilted  upwards,  away  from  the
transport.
Overall, the impression from the aliens was one of caution, but no real threat. They seemed
to be deliberately trying not to threaten the transport.
Could I have been wrong? Jack wondered.
“Today will be long remembered  by the human race,” Chenzokov said at  the  back  of  the
transport, near the exit hatch. “Our first contact with a sentient species other than our  own.  I
am deeply honored to lead you.”
Chenzokov  opened  the  hatch,  and  extended  the  ramp  down  to  the  ground  behind  the
transport, the side farthest from the aliens.
“Into history!” Chenzokov said as he and the other colonists started down the ramp.
Jack  watched  on  the  viewscreen  and  external  camera  monitors  as  Chenzokov  and  the
others made their way around  the  massive  transport.  They  would  be  in  view  of  the  XTs  any
second.
As  he  and  the  others  stepped  around  the  corner,  Chenzokov  spread  his  arms  wide.
“Greetings from Earth!” he said with a large smile.
The alien reaction was dramatic and swift. The females screamed and gestured wildly. The
males opened fire.
Chenzokov was hit by the first volley and killed instantly.  The  other  colonists  dropped  to
the ground, some dead, some wounded, others scared out of their minds.
Jack was on his feet and bolting  for  the  door  even  as  Chenzokov  fell.  He  unholstered  his
tiny  pistol  and  swung  around  the  back  of  the  transport,  firing  at  the  closest  Saurians.  His
bullets  ricocheted  off  the  armor  of  the  males,  but  two  females  went  down,  and  they  pulled
back.
Jack  started  ushering  the  wailing  colonists  back  into  the  transport.  An  over-the-shoulder
glance told him the giant war machines were on the move, and they didn’t have long if he was
to  get  warning  to  the  colony.  A  Saurian  energy  bolt  grazed  his  left  arm  as  he  dragged  a
hysterical man back to the transport, the pain intense enough to knock him to his knees. As he
turned around, the Saurian male warrior walked  towards  him  warily,  weapon  up  and  ready.
Human screams, Saurian screams and weapons fire filled the air.

They’re still cautious, Jack realized. They didn’t think they  could  beat  us.  He  raised  his  pistol
and shot the alien in the face, one of the few unarmored body parts he could see. The Saurian
fell to the ground, screaming its parrot scream.
“We’re going,” Jack said to the colonist, and he got up and ran for the transport, the other
man staggering after him.
*
*
*
Only Jack and five colonists made it  back  to  the  relative  safety  of  the  transport  alive,  but
that was only a temporary measure. The Saurian war machines were moving, and preparing to
fire. Jack settled behind the transport controls  and  fired  up  the  engine.  One  of  the  machines
already had its guns trained on the transport, and Jack didn’t want to give it a stationary target.
“Here  we  go!”  he  shouted  as  he  threw  the  transport  into  full  reverse  just  as  the  Saurian
machine fired. The ground where the transport used to be exploded in a rain of rock and dirt,
and the transport backed away, bouncing over the uneven terrain.
Jack keyed the radio as he spun the vehicle around. “Killian to base camp. Do you read?”
“Roger, boss,” Robyn answered. “Five by five. What’s your situation?”
Jack accelerated the transport as fast as it would go, but the Saurian walkers were having an
easier  time  on  the  rough  ground,  and  they  were  gaining.  “The  XTs  attacked  us  on  sight.
Chenzokov is dead. I need you to start the evacuation immediately, and send anybody you can
spare to our beacon to provide cover fire.
“Shit!” Jack added as one of the Saurian blasts came a little too close.
“Roger, sir,” Robyn said. “Will comply. Over and out.”
*
*
*
Robyn  was  stunned  but  she  didn’t  let  that  get  in  her  way.  No  sooner  did  she  break
communication with Jack than she was on the colony PA system.
“Attention,  please.  This  is  Lieutenant  Robyn  O’Reilly  of  the  security  team.  We  are
evacuating the colony. I repeat: we are evacuating  the colony. Please drop what you  are  doing
and report to the shuttles immediately.”
After programming the PA system to repeat her announcement in a loop, Robyn ran out of
the  communications  building,  switching  to  her  armor’s  tacnet.  “O’Reilly  to  team.  Shimura,
Ahiga and Bersi are to supervise the evacuation. Everyone else, with me.”
As Robyn’s armored strides sped her to the northeast gate, the armored forms of Jabari and
Girish formed up at her side. “The boss is in trouble,” Robyn explained as they ran. “The XTs
attacked on sight, and now they’re in pursuit. We need to home in on the transport beacon and
provide cover fire for the transport. Questions?” she asked.
“No ma’am!”

Robyn checked  the radar on her HUD. The transport wasn’t far, but there were five  huge
signatures practically on top of it. Jack had to be doing a helluva job  of  driving  to  keep  away
from them, but he couldn’t last much  longer. The alien machines were trying to outflank him
and cut him off.
“O’Reilly  to  Killian,”  Robyn  broadcast  over  the  base  radio.  “We  are  en  route  to  your
position. What’s your situation? Over.”
“Agh!” Robyn heard Jack answer, along with what sounded like an explosion way too close
to the transport. “Transport is heavily damaged. The XTs are trying to outflank me.”
“Roger that,” Robyn said. “ETA thirty seconds. Over.”
As Robyn and the men  crested the next rise, they saw the transport and its pursuers. “Oh
my God,” Robyn said.
Surrounding the transport were five alien war machines,  each  a  bipedal,  metal  monster  a
dozen  meters  tall  and  weighing  tens  of  tons,  judging  by  the  depth  of  their  footprints.  They
were built around a bulky, horizontal fuselage, not unlike the snout of a dropship. Underneath
the  fuselage  were  two  birdlike  reverse  articulated  legs,  ending  in  splayed  metal  feet  three
meters  across.  The  machines  also  sported  a  wide  variety  of  weaponry  attached  as  “arms”,
missile  racks,  autocannons  and  energy  weapons  that  made  Robyn’s  plasma  rifle  seem  like  a
kid’s water pistol.
In short, the machines were exactly as Jack had described them,  the weapons of a race that
knew  how  to  fight.  Wait  until  you  see  them,  and  you’ll  understand,  Jack  had  said.  Robyn
understood.
“O’Reilly  to  team,”  she  said  over  the  tac  net.  “Fire  at  will.  Fire  at  will.  Protect  that
transport!”
Running down a slight grade and on an intercept course with the transport, Robyn opened
fire.
*
*
*
© Jeff Kirvin 2005
 
Visit www.solomedia.org for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

