Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
The Unification Chronicles #1
First Contact
Part 1 of 4
by Jeff Kirvin
 
Like most stars, it had countless satellites. Two rocky inner planets, one of those blue green
and  teeming  with  life.  Five  gas  giants  of  varying  sizes.  Several  hundred  comets.  Billions  of
asteroids ranging in size from small planetoids down to specks of sand. All of them  moving in
regular ellipses unchanged for billions of years. Stellar clockwork.
The  blue-green  planet  was  the  farther  out  of  the  two  inner  worlds,  roughly  ten  light
seconds  away  from  the  star.  It  had  one  satellite  of  its  own,  an  asteroid  over  five-hundred
kilometers wide captured by the planetary gravity eons before. Had the vector of  the  asteroid
been different by less than a degree, it would have hit the planet instead of being captured by
it.  The  impact  would  have  been  sufficient  to  kill  everything  on  the  world,  wiping  out  the
planet’s ability to support life.
One  day,  philosophers  and  theologians  from  other  worlds  would  debate  whether  or  not
that should have happened. The history of the Milky Way galaxy would have been different.
As it was, the planet had one moon. Then the very next moment, it had two.

The newcomer was a featureless white sphere a mere kilometer in diameter. It fell into orbit
around the blue green world, with only its unnatural perfection and regularity betraying that it
didn’t belong.
*
*
*
Jack Killian, Major of the Terran Republic Marine Corps, paused to straighten the tunic of
his dress uniform. He looked both ways down the long, curving corridor.  With  everything  in
place, he opened the door and strode in.
He was on  the  bridge  of  the  white  sphere,  the  TRS  Envoy.  She  was  humanity’s  first  true
starship,  capable  of  crossing  the  vast  gulfs  between  star  systems  in  the  blink  of  an  eye.  The
bridge  was  expansive,  the  sounds  of  dozens  of  crew  members  muffled  only  slightly  by  the
non-slip rubber  flooring. The flat black floor ran right up to the far wall, which consisted of a
floor to ceiling viewscreen, displaying a view of space and the planet below. Jack always felt the
bridge was floating in space, open to the stars.
Jack’s  target  was  the  man  sitting  in  the  center  of  the  bridge,  his  back  to  Jack.  “Captain
Chenzokov!”  Jack  called  with  a  baritone  voice  used  to  commanding  men.  Everyone  on  the
bridge turned to look, except Chenzokov himself.
Chenzokov  continued  to  stare  at  the  screen,  showing  Jack  the  back  of  his  head.  “Major
Killian.” The bridge crew seemed to expect more from their captain, but that was all he had to
say.
Rather  than  walk  to  the  front  of  Chenzokov’s  chair,  Jack  planted  himself  behind  the
captain,  in  a  direct  line  between  Chenzokov  and  the  door.  He  stood  at  military  attention,
shoulders square, feet together, hands at his sides. “We need to talk, Captain.”
The captain didn’t turn. “So talk.”
“In private, sir.”
Now Chenzokov turned, his chair swiveling to face Jack. Chenzokov was much  older than
Jack,  a  robust  bearded  Russian  in  his  seventies.  With  the  vista  of  the  planet  behind  him,  he
looked every inch the master of his ship. “We  will  do  no  such  thing,  Major.  I  trust  my  crew
with my life. Anything you have to say to me you can say in front of them.”
Jack  didn’t  move  from  attention,  but  somehow  gave  the  impression  of  nodding.  He
gathered a  breath.  “Why,”  he  said,  “was  I  not  informed  of  your  intention  to  use  the  Tunnel
Drive?”
Chenzokov  smirked,  the  action  creasing  his  face.  “Inform  you?”  He  turned  to  address
Ensign Williams, the communications officer on duty. “Mister Williams, have we received any
changes to our orders?”
“No, sir.”
Chenzokov nodded. “I see. So  then under the authority of President  Staten,  I  am  still  the
captain of this ship?”
“Yes, sir.”

“Hmm. Major  Killian,  it  would  seem  that  I  am  the  captain  of  this  vessel,  it’s  undisputed
lord and master. Why would it be necessary to inform you before moving it?”
“The security of this vessel is my responsibility, Captain—”
“No, Major Killian, the security of our passengers is your responsibility. The security of the
vessel itself is mine. Your  past  accomplishments  mean  nothing  to  me,  Major.  I  will  not  have
you usurping my authority on this ship.”
Jack wasn’t finished. “The President of the Terran Republic appointed me head of security
for this mission. Before we tunneled into an unknown system, you should have given  me  the
chance to make sure it would be safe to do so. My duty is to see to it that these people are safe,
and I won’t have you jeopardize that just because you want to play cowboy with ‘your’ ship.”
“We scanned the system,” Chenzokov said at last.
“The probes—” Jack began.
“The probes are fine,” Chenzokov said. “The best Russian technology has to offer. If  there
were a threat in this system, we’d know about it.”
Jack took a deep breath, marshaling his strength. “I’m not going to get sucked into a debate
over  your  pointless  nationalistic  rivalries.  Not  again.  If  you  have  issues  with  my  being
American, that’s just too bad. I’m the security officer for this mission, and I should have been
notified before tunneling so we could be prepared to defend this vessel against any threats that
your probes may have missed.”
Chenzokov rose from his chair. “ ‘Defend this vessel’? Against  what?  If  anyone  is  playing
‘cowboy’ here, Major, it’s you. Maybe you see danger everywhere you go; given your record, I
can  understand  why.  But  I  assure  you,  my  dear  Major,  we  are  quite  safe  here,  and  if  we
weren’t, there’s nothing you and your Marines could do about it.”
Jack stood in silence for a moment, beaten. He raised his head and looked the captain in the
eye. “You have a point, Captain. Maybe I was overreacting.”
Chenzokov nodded, and the bridge crew turned back to their tasks.
“As there are no threats in the area to keep us with the ship,”  Jack  continued,  “I’d  like  to
take my Marines down in the dropship and scout potential colony sites. We might  be  able  to
see things on the ground that we could miss from orbit.”
“Yes, fine,” the captain waved his hand. “Whatever. It will be a few  days  until  the  science
teams will be ready to land. You have until then.”
Jack exited the bridge. No one saw the smile on his face.
*
*
*
Marine  Lieutenant  Robyn  O’Reilly  stood  in  the  cramped  Marine  briefing  room,  a
conference  room  near  the  drop  bays.  Like  most  of  the  military  quarters  on  the  ship,  it  was
small, poorly ventilated and looked like the afterthought it was. The one thing it had going for
it was the far wall, a floor to ceiling viewscreen similar to, though much  smaller than, the one

on the bridge. It gave her an unobstructed view of the planet they now orbited.
The door opposite the screen opened and  Jack  walked  into  the  room.  He  looked  pleased,
but worried about something too. She’d been Jack’s XO long enough to read his moods. Now a
First Lieutenant, she’d been a Second Lieutenant fresh out of the academy when Jack had first
met her on Mars. Now she was vital to him as a sounding board,  voice  of  reason,  and  all  too
often, his conscience.
“So, how’d it go?” she asked.
“He approved a scouting mission in the dropship.”
Robyn had expected it, but the news still surprised her. “With armor?”
“My discretion,” Jack said, walking past her to the viewscreen.
“How did you manage that? Chenzokov has had  us  just  about  confined  to  quarters.  He’s
wanted to shove us all out the damned airlock since we left spacedock.”
Jack turned to her and smiled. “I started an argument with him, then apologized. Once he
saved face in front of his crew, he stopped listening and gave me anything I wanted.”
Robyn laughed. “You are my god.”
“Easy there, Lieutenant. The tough part is just beginning.”
She looked at the screen, the world so like Earth spinning beneath them.  “You don’t like it,
do you?”
He looked at the screen. “It wouldn’t  be  my  first  choice.  Too  many  unknowns.  There’s  a
whole  ecosystem  down  there  that  we’ve  never  seen.  All  we  know  is  that  the  gravity  and
atmosphere  are  close  enough  to  Earth  not  to  kill  us.  That  leaves  a  whole  lot  of  things  down
there that can.”
She walked over to stand next to him. “You understand why we’re here. You know better
than anyone why terraforming a dead world isn’t politically viable with the folks back home.”
He sighed. “Yes, Robyn, I know.”
“Hey,” she said. “Mars wasn’t your fault. You did everything possible to avert—”
“It wasn’t enough, though, was it?” Jack said. “And now we’re passing up any number  of
worlds suitable for terraforming, taking unnecessary risks—”
“We’re soldiers, sir. We’re doing what we’ve been ordered to do.”
Jack stood a little straighter at that. “Good point, Robyn.”
Jack touched a few controls at the  edge  of  the  screen.  The  view  of  the  planet  zoomed  in,
showing just the tropical and temperate zones.
With his finger, Jack circled three locations on the planet, two in the northern hemisphere
and one in the southern. The screen reacted to his touch by showing bright red circles around
the locations he specified and humming softly as each circle pulsed.

“I think we should concentrate here,” he  said.  “All  three  sites  offer  a  good  mix  of  terrain
and climate. They should give us a nice overview of what this planet has to offer.”
Jack leaned against the viewscreen as he talked. Robyn thought it looked like he was about
to fall out into space. She didn’t know why, but the image frightened her. She shook it off. She
was a Marine. She  wasn’t afraid of anything. “What are the opspecs?” she  asked,  focusing  on
the view of the planet itself.
“We’ll  go  down  in  full  armor,  and  breathe  on  suit  air  until  we’re  sure  there  are  no
pathogens in the atmosphere. I  want  a  full  dispersal,  full  sensor  sweep.  This  is  going  to  be  a
nature hike on an alien world, and we need to treat it with the requisite caution.”
Robyn nodded. “Yes, sir.”
Jack  walked  towards  the  door.  “Round  up  the  troops  and  meet  me  in  the  drop  bay  in
fifteen minutes, Lieutenant. I want to get off this giant golf ball before Chenzokov changes his
mind.”
The door closed behind Jack, and Robyn looked back  at the screen. Something  about that
planet unsettled her, but she’d be damned if she could figure out what it was.
*
*
*
Jack walked into his quarters, a room two by three meters square. It held a cot, a locker and
not  much  else.  Part  of  the  wall  above  the  locker  was  a  viewscreen  capable  of  displaying
anything  he  wanted,  but  Jack  left  it  blank.  He  didn’t  have  time  for  entertainment  vids,  and
landscapes or other scenery were just fluff.
The one thing in the room Jack cared about was a small steel pendant on a stand above his
locker. He walked over and  held  it,  enjoying  the  feel  of  the  rough-carved  steel.  The  pendant
had cost him almost nothing when he got it from a street vendor in New Chicago.  It  was  the
shape of the Tai Chi Tu,  the  Chinese  Yin  and  Yang  symbol.  Besides  being  the  symbol  of  the
Terran Republic, it was a religious symbol to Jack. Or at least, he tried to make it one.
Jack tried to be a Taoist. The ancient Chinese philosophy stressed tolerance, going with the
flow,  relaxing  and  letting  events  unfold  at  their  own  pace.  The  problem  was  that  he  was  a
classic “Type A” personality and just letting things happen wasn’t in his blood.
He was the last in a line of military men  dating back  to the American Civil War. In all that
time, he was the first officer, and he was proud of  that.  But  in  the  two  centuries  of  a  unified
world government since the Angelic Jihad, the role of a soldier had changed.
Earth had been at peace for over 150  years, and  even  the  French  Separatist  Movement  of
2029  was settled without  undue  bloodshed.  Most  citizens  didn’t  feel  the  need  for  a  standing
military, and Jack had taken  his  share  of  being  called  “warmonger”  and  “killer.”  Chenzokov
was vocal about the need, or lack of need, for a security force on board Envoy, and the Marines
were shoved in late in the construction, ordered on board by the President  over  Chenzokov’s
objections.
Envoy was a mission of peace, after all. The ship was the brainchild of Daniel Cho, the first
President of the Terran Republic. Cho understood that most of the fighting in the history of the

human  race  was  over  territory.  If  humanity  was  to  stay  at  peace,  united  by  a  single
government, it would have to spread out, move into the stars.
The  first  phase  of  Cho’s  plan  was  the  colonization  and  terraforming  of  Mars.  This  was
working out until  six  years  before,  when  a  presidential  assassination  gone  bad  destroyed  the
largest colony dome on Mars, killing millions of civilians. Jack had foiled the assassination but
failed  to  prevent  the  explosion.  He  and  the  President  lived,  but  waiting  centuries  under
pressurized colony domes to terraform a planet was deemed too dangerous to continue.
Cho had started another project after his presidency ended that ran in parallel to the Mars
Project. Project Envoy was more ambitious, but would give mankind the stars if it succeeded.
The idea was to build a faster than light engine that would allow true star  travel,  then  use
that to power a  colony  ship  that  could  settle  other  star  systems.  The  Tunnel  Drive  had  been
invented when Jack was just a boy, but took decades to perfect it and build a ship to use it.
After  the  Mars  incident,  politicians  in  the  Terran  Republic  decided  that  Envoy  would  be
used to find earthlike, habitable worlds. It made the search longer, more difficult and orders of
magnitude more expensive, but safer.
President James Staten disagreed, despite what he’d experienced on Mars. When it became
clear  that  the  Senate  would  mandate  a  search  for  Earthlike  worlds  over  his  objections,  he
fought to put Jack Killian on board the Envoy.
Jack  took  his  appointment  to  protect  the  Envoy  and  her  crew  seriously,  even  if  he  was
unwelcome. He’d seen enough danger in his career to know that nothing was safe,  no  matter
how innocuous it looked.
He brushed his fingertips over the pendant, then started changing from his dress uniform
into the combat harness he’d wear underneath his armor.
*
*
*
The drop bay of the Envoy was the largest single room on the ship.  Only  the  tunnel  drive
itself was bigger, but it wasn’t a room. The drop bay was situated on the Envoy’s “equator” and
was  shaped  like  the  inside  of  a  doughnut,  with  the  central  pillar  housing  the  Tunnel  Drive.
Along the outer edge, it had multiple doors that opened into space. Facing most of these doors
were  shuttles,  large  bulbous  ships  designed  to  carry  as  many  passengers  and  equipment  as
comfortably and safely as possible.
One ship was different. The Marines’s drop ship was a sharp, angular and wicked looking
ship,  apart  from  the  gleaming  white  civilian  shuttles.  The  snub-nosed  cockpit  gave  way  to
massive “shoulders” that housed 30mm  chaingun arrays. The dorsal side of the  dropship  was
studded  with  missile  launchers,  and  it  tapered  to  a  V-shaped  tail.  The  cockpit  sides  were
painted  with  shark’s  teeth,  a  design  dating  back  250  years,  and  the  motto  of  the  Terran
Republic Marine Corps was painted above it. “Semper  Fidelis,” in white cursive script against
the dull gunmetal gray. Always Faithful.
When  Jack  walked  into  the  drop  bay,  the  assembled  Marines  were  standing  around,
leaning  on  equipment,  clustered  around  the  dropship  but  not  doing  anything  in  particular.

Robyn was among them, shooting the shit with the guys. As soon as she saw Jack, she bolted to
attention and shouted, “Ma-RINES, ten-HUT!”
The Marines ran to their spots in formation and snapped to attention. Jack stood back  and
addressed the troops. There were only four of them,  just  a  fireteam.  Envoy  didn’t  even  rate  a
full  platoon.  “Okay,  Marines,  we  finally  get  to  do  what  we’ve  been  training  for.  Captain
Chenzokov has authorized a dropship mission to scout potential colony sites.
“I think you all know the dangers involved. We have no  idea  what’s  waiting  for  us  down
there. We do know it’s a new ecosystem, and as far as the planet’s concerned, we don’t belong
there.  Our  primary  goal  is  to  make  sure  that  when  Chenzokov  sends  down  the  civilian
scientists, they don’t get eaten, poisoned, driven crazy or dissolved.
“We’re going to scout three colony sites, ensuring the safety of each one. We can’t afford to
miss anything. We’ve  got  a  couple  days  to  determine  everything  this  planet  can  throw  at  us
before the captain gets impatient. We need to work quickly.
“Let’s suit up.”
Jack led the Marines to a section  of  the  wall  surrounding  the  central  pillar.  Lined  up  like
sentinels  were  several  suits  of  armor.  The  armor  was  flat  black,  metallic  and  sculpted  to
correspond to major human muscle groups. The result was a dark Greek god, sleek, lithe and
powerful. The armor was based on the suit of angelic armor worn by Daniel Cho in the Angelic
Jihad, although two  centuries  of  refinements  had  made  these  suits  stronger,  faster  and  more
responsive than Cho’s. Each suit weighed less than two hundred pounds, and each Marine was
capable of suiting up on their own, without the group of assistants Cho had needed. The new
armor was also more power-efficient, allowing  a  Marine  to  run  for  up  to  two  weeks  without
recharging the suit.
Jack put on his armor, the rank insignia on the shoulders all that differentiated it from the
others. He looked out through the heads-up display in his faceplate, seeing readouts for various
suit systems superimposed over his vision. He cycled through several targeting modes, making
sure everything checked  out. A  Marine’s  armor  was  more  than  protection.  It  was  weaponry,
life support, mobility. A suited Marine could run over fifty miles an hour in bounding strides,
lift  up  to  five  tons,  and  survive  in  environments  from  the  cold  vacuum  of  the  moon  to  the
molten-lead greenhouse heat of Venus. In a  hostile  environment,  a  Marine’s  suit  was  his  life,
and Jack instilled that respect in all his troops. They were on a short time  schedule,  but  there
was no rushing to check out their suits. No one would leave until everyone was suited up.
Jack got a thumbs-up  from each of the Marines.  Everyone  was  checked  out  and  ready  to
go. He led them to the back of the dropship, where they all walked up the ramp into the belly
of the ship. Robyn and her co-pilot Corporal Shimura  continued forward to the cockpit while
Jack and rest took their places along the walls, fitting themselves into armor-sized restraints for
the  ride  down.  Once  secured,  Jack  and  the  other  Marines  would  be  parts  of  the  ship,  as
immovable as the hull itself. Jack was right next  to  ramp.  He  insisted  on  the  last  in,  first  out
position.
He  heard  Robyn’s  voice  over  the  TacNet,  a  radio  link  between  armored  suits.  “Everyone
secure?” He knew she could see a readout in the cockpit that showed the status of each Marine
in their harness, but she asked anyway. Like many pilots, Robyn didn’t trust instrumentation.

Jack looked around, then joined the TacNet. “That’s affirmative, Lieutenant.”
“Roger. Buttoning up,” she said, and the ramp began to pull forward and tip up to become
the bottom panel of the dropship’s tapering tail. It sealed with a metallic clang.
“Clearing  the  drop  bay,”  Robyn  announced  with  calm  routine.  Jack  heard  a  whooshing
through the hull of the dropship as all the air was sucked out of the room and into other parts
of the ship. No sense wasting it by letting it vent out to space when the doors opened. Looking
to his left, he could see down the  center  of  the  dropship  into  the  cockpit.  The  drop  bay  was
bathed in red light, a warning to any unsuited civilian to get the hell out of there.
“Drop bay is clear,” Robyn announced. “Opening the bay doors.”
Jack saw but could no longer hear the huge white doors slide up and down,  revealing  the
blackness of space beyond. He couldn’t see the planet below from his vantage point.
“Powering  cat,”  Robyn  said.  Jack’s  adrenaline  level  and  heart  rate  was  rising,  but  Robyn
sounded bored. Jack knew her well enough to know she was as excited as he was, but military
pilots had a tradition going back to the dawn of the jet age of keeping their cool. If they didn’t
sound like they were about to fall asleep, they weren’t pilots.
Jack felt an increase in vibration as the catapult holding the dropship powered up, building
and holding enough power to fling the massive armored craft out of the Envoy and into space.
“Launch in five,” Robyn said.
“Four, Three, Two…”
Jack felt a sharp build in power. Here it came…
“One.”
With a jolt, the dropship plunged out of the drop bay and into the open space beyond. The
exploration of humanity’s first extrasolar colony world had begun.
*
*
*
© Jeff Kirvin 2005
 
Visit www.solomedia.org for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

