Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
The Unification Chronicles:
Exiting Eden
Volume 4
by Jeff Kirvin
 
The Story So Far: Major Jack Killian and the crew of the Envoy discovered humanity’s first
extrasolar planet, which they named New Eden. Shortly after landing, they found evidence of
another sentient life form on the planet. Jack accompanied the captain of the Envoy to meet the
aliens, an avian race resembling a large-brained cross between a velociraptor and a turkey. The
aliens attacked as soon as they saw the humans.
*
*
*
Jack noted the arrival of the Marines, but he was too busy not getting killed to acknowledge
them.  Another  explosion  rocked  the  transport,  and  Jack  could  see  two  Saurian  machines
closing in from the sides. If Robyn and the others couldn’t slow those behemoths  down,  Jack
knew he would never make it back to the colony.
Robyn had started the evacuation,  but  TRHQ  had  to  know  what  they’d  be  facing  if  they
sent  any  more  colony  ships  out.  If  Jack  didn’t  make  it  back,  someone  who  had  faced  these
things in combat would have to.

Jack vaulted the transport over the crater of another near miss as Robyn and others moved
in on the Saurian machines and engaged.
Humanity had a new enemy, and somebody had to live to tell them about it.
*
*
*
Robyn and her Marines did their best against the aliens, but their best wasn’t doing much
good. They’d each managed to distract one of the alien machines who didn’t seem to care what
they  attacked  but  that  still  left  two  following  the  transport.  She  couldn’t  take  down  her
machine quickly enough to attack the ones following the transport, assuming she could kill it
at all.
The machine in question brought its foot down hard, nearly stomping  Robyn  flat.  With  a
thought, Robyn activated her jumpjets  and rocketed over the Saurian mech.  From above,  the
avian shape was more obvious, and the dorsal side seemed to have less  armor  than  the  front.
She fired her plasma rifle as she arced down with gravity, drawing only a scorched black scar
on the back of the machine.
Robyn rolled as she landed, coming up  in  a  crouch  and  shooting  at  the  knee  joint  of  the
mech.  She  saw a  satisfying  burst  of  sparks,  then  had  to  roll  to  her  side  to  avoid  a  stream  of
autocannon fire from the mech.
She saw another blast of fire hit the mech  in the “arm,” just above the autocannon. Private
Girish bounded into her line of view, dodging the attacks of the mech with effortless grace.
“I got mine, Lieutenant,” she heard his voice over the tacnet. “Let’s finish these assholes and
get back to camp!”
She jumped up and ran around the thing’s legs, firing as she went. She  was doing damage,
but not enough. The only thing she had going  for  her  was  that  with  Girish  jumping  around,
bouncing off cockpit, back, autocannon like an armored gnat, the mech’s pilot wasn’t working
too hard at shooting at her.
She  dodged a giant metal talon as the mech  nearly stepped on her, then saw her opening.
Lying supine, she raised her plasma rifle and fired at the underside of the mech,  where the legs
met the torso.  She  heard  a  loud  crack  as  something  weakened  and  snapped,  then  the  mech
began to topple.
As the cockpit of the  mech  smashed  into  the  dirt,  Girish  bound  up  again  to  jump  on  its
back.
He never landed.
Girish  was  ripped  to  shreds  by  autocannon  fire.  He  didn’t  have  time  to  scream.  Robyn
peeked around the fallen mech to see another running her way. The legs didn’t move that fast,
but  with  a  stride  that  long,  they  didn’t  have  to.  She  could  see  the  small  armored  form  of
Sergeant Jabari trailing after it.
“Get under it!” Robyn shouted to Jabari. “Hit the hip joint!” She  used the crippled mech  as
cover and opened fire on the newcomer.

Instead of attacking the new threat, the mech spun and opened fire on Jabari. She  leapt out
of the way, but it tracked her.
Robyn wasn’t about to lose two of her people.  Not  like  this.  She  bounded  over  the  fallen
mech  and  landed  on  top  of  the  new  one.  She  pointed  her  plasma  rifle  straight  down  and
opened fire on the cockpit, trying to drill down into it.
The pilot lurched, trying to shake her off. Then she  heard  a  familiar  crack,  and  the  mech
began  to  fall  backwards.  Robyn  jumped  away,  staying  well  clear  of  the  mech’s  still  firing
autocannon.
“Come  on,”  she  told  Jabari.  “We’re  outta  here.  Let’s  just  hope  the  boss  made  it  back  to
camp.”
*
*
*
Jack made it back to the colony, but that wasn’t the end of his problems.
He drove the huge transport over the perimeter fence, and headed straight for the landing
pad. The two Saurian machines slowed somewhat inside the fence, pausing occasionally to turn
their weapons on buildings.
Go ahead, boys, Jack thought. We’re never coming back here.
The  colony  was  deserted,  and  when  Jack  arrived  at  the  landing  pad  he  confirmed  why.
Other than the security team’s dropship, only one shuttle stood on the pad, prepped and ready
to go. One of the few security concessions the optimistic and naïve designers of the Envoy had
made  was  to  include  enough  shuttles  to  evacuate  the  entire  colony  in  one  trip.  Nearly  a
thousand  people  were  already  safe  aboard  the  Envoy,  and  they  would  leave  within  the  hour
with or without him.
If Jack didn’t find a way to distract them, the two Saurian machines could make easy work
out of him and the remaining colonists as  they  tried  to  transfer  to  the  shuttle.  He  had  to  get
them off his back.
He turned to one of the colonists huddling in  the  back  of  the  transport.  “You!  You  know
how to drive?”
The man, a balding scientist in his late forties, shook his head. He was terrified, and nearly
incoherent. Still, he was only one back there that wasn’t either injured or in shock.
“Time to learn,” Jack said. “Get up here.” The man stumbled to the cockpit.
“What’s your name?” Jack asked.
“Mike,” the man stammered.
“It’s real simple, Mike,” Jack said, pointing with one hand as he talked, driving  in  narrow
avoidance of the Saurians with the other. “The long skinny pedal on the  right  makes  you  go,
the short stubby one on the left makes you stop.  You  control  your  direction  with  this  wheel.
Got that, Mike?”

Mike nodded.
“Great. You’re going to drive while I distract  our  two  friends  back  there.  As  soon  as  they
leave you alone, head straight for the landing pad and get yourself and the others on  that  last
shuttle. Once you’re all on board, run to the cockpit and punch the button marked ‘Autopilot’.
It’s already programmed to take you back to Envoy.
“Got all that?”
Mike nodded again, doing his best to make himself look composed and in control.
“You’ll do fine, Mike,” Jack said, hurling the transport around a sharp corner to give Mike a
few seconds to take the controls. Once the older man sat down behind the wheel, Jack lurched
over to the side hatch. They were very close to the security building.
“I’ll see you on the Envoy,” Jack said, then he jumped.
As soon as he was clear of the transport, Jack sprinted for the security building. He  didn’t
have  much  time.  The  once  stark  white  buildings  of  the  compound  were  a  dingy  gray,  and
many of them  were missing large  chunks  of  plasticrete.  The  place  was  empty,  a  ghost  town.
The Saurians had done an effective job of defending their territory.
He reached the security building and hurried inside. His armor was where he left it, and he
donned it with practiced efficiency. In under a minute, Jack underwent a transformation from
harried  man  to  confident  metal  demigod.  He  grabbed  the  most  powerful  weapons  he  could
carry. Armed with a small shoulder-mounted rocket launcher, a  plasma  rifle  and  a  rifle-sized
rail gun, he stepped back onto the street. Elapsed time from his exodus from the transport: 77
seconds.
Jack homed in on the sounds of weapons fire. The transport was three blocks away, the two
Saurians in close but frustrated pursuit. Mike’s inexperience with piloting was working in  his
favor, as the colonist haphazardly  hurled  and  caromed  the  transport  around  the  wide  streets
with  frenzied  unpredictability.  The  Saurians  couldn’t  draw  a  steady  bead  on  the  weaving
vehicle.
Let’s give them something else to shoot at. He loosed a missile salvo for the Saurian on the left,
and a few high density iron slugs magnetically accelerated to supersonic speeds by the railgun
for the Saurian on the right.
The effect was immediate and exactly what Jack had hoped. Both Saurian machines pivoted
and addressed the new threat that had pierced their rear armor. The transport forgotten, they
advanced on him.
Jack keyed his helmet radio. “Killian to transport! Do you read me, Mike?”
“Yes,” came the tentative reply.
Jack backpedaled, making sure he kept the Saurians’ attention, and fired of his plasma rifle
to keep them  interested. He noticed  it  didn’t  do  as  much  damage  as  the  kinetic  weapons.  “I
think I’ve got their undivided attention,” Jack said into the radio. “Head for the shuttle and get
everyone on board. After you leave I’ll make my way  to  the  dropship  and  meet  everyone  on
Envoy. Got all that?”

The Saurians let loose a  barrage  of  particle  beams,  and  Jack  barely  dodged  in  time.  They
crumbled the building behind him.
“What was that, Mike? I didn’t read you.”
“I said I understand,” the colonist shouted into the radio, causing more ringing in Jack’s ear
than the Saurian weapons. “I’ll get us out of here.” The transmission cut off.
That’s  done,  Jack  thought,  running  into  an  alley,  throwing  just  enough  firepower  at  the
Saurians to entice them into giving chase. He didn’t plan on taking out the two Saurians, but if
he  could  keep  them  distracted  long  enough  for  the  shuttle  to  take  off,  everything  would  be
okay. He needed the friendly confines of the prefab colony buildings; the Saurians could pick
him apart out in the open. He ran through the alley, firing back at his pursuers.
The  Saurians  seemed  to  reach  the  same  conclusion.  With  their  next  volley  of  fire,  they
destroyed the two buildings on either side of Jack, landslides of rubble rolling in towards him.
Jack vaulted up onto the artificial rocks and returned fire. He’d thrown away the ineffectual
plasma  rifle  some  time  before,  and  was  left  now  with  the  more  effective  kinetic  energy
weapons, the railgun and missile rack. His next volley set off a series of explosions in one of the
machines, causing thick, oily smoke to billow out of its left “knee”. When the machine moved
again, advancing on its small but dangerous prey, it moved with a distinct limp.
So you can be damaged, Jack pondered as he leaped from the rubble, somersaulting over the
answering Saurian particle beams.
As Jack landed on his feet in the street beyond the rubble, he heard the roar of engines  at
the edge of the compound,  in the direction of the landing pad. Looking that way,  he  saw  the
final shuttle lift off and climb out of sight. Now he just had to get to the dropship and wait for
Robyn and the others.
A  Saurian  particle  beam  shook  him  as  it  pulverized  the  ground.  Rolling  with  the
concussion and then back  to his feet, Jack saw the two Saurian machines  lumbering  over  the
rubble they created. They crept with great caution over the unstable surface, and Jack took off
in a powered run. He might be able to outrun them to the landing pad.
No  such  luck,  Jack  discovered  before  he  turned  the  first  corner.  He  could  outrun  the
machines, but not their  weapons.  Rapid  fire  particle  beams  from  behind  him  pulverized  the
buildings in front of him, the wreckage pinning him in. He could  jump  for  it,  but  a  burst  of
fire over his head convinced him he’d be an easy target until he got over the makeshift wall.
Instead,  he  turned  and  fought.  The  knee  joint  of  one  of  the  machines  was  still  billowing
smoke, and Jack hoped to do just  enough  damage  to  get  past  and  around  them.  There  were
many routes to the dropship. He had to find a different one.
The  damaged  Saurian  lurched  forward  and  fired  off  several  of  its  weapons.  Jack
sidestepped the missiles and autocannon fire, not realizing that it would take him in line with
the particle beam.
The  force  of  the  blast  hit  him  dead  center  in  the  chest  and  knocked  him  off  his  feet.
Warning lights flared and buzzers sounded all through his helmet, desperate to tell  him  what
he already knew: one more hit like that and he was dead.

Jack struggled to get to his feet, but a missile barrage from the other Saurian machine kept
him down. They had him pinned, and they were moving in for the kill, or worse, capture. Jack
didn’t  know  what  Saurians  did  with  their  POWs,  but  they  were  all  claws  and  teeth,  and  he
didn’t relish the thought of being alone with them without his armor.
Jack  rolled  across  the  rubble,  staying  ahead  of  a  stream  of  autocannon  fire.  Somewhere
along  the  way,  he’d  lost  his  railgun,  and  his  shoulder-mounted  missile  rack  was  pulverized.
Fight was no longer an option; he had to find a way to make flight feasible.
The Saurians machines drew closer to Jack with each barrage of  weapons  fire,  the  one  on
the  right  stepping  lightly  for  a  hunk  of  steel  weighing  several  tons,  and  the  one  on  the  left
eschewing  avian  grace  for  a  crippled  stagger  and  dragging  its  smoking  leg.  The  noose  was
closing,  and  Jack  could  see  no  way  around  them  that  wouldn’t  get  him  flattened  in  the
attempt.
Better  that  than  capture,  he  thought,  and  pulled  himself  into  a  crouch  on  the  rubble,
preparing to explode into the fastest run his armor could muster.
Just as the closer of the two machines, the crippled one, drew  another  step  in,  Jack  heard
the  familiar  sound  of  plasma  fire  and  saw  a  stream  of  superheated  hydrogen  erupt  off  the
cockpit  of  the  machine.  Two  figures  appeared  in  his  peripheral  vision,  one  on  either  side  of
him, and the Saurians stepped back, reassessing the situation.
“I was wondering when you’d get here,” Jack said to Robyn. “Where’s Girish?”
“He didn’t make it.”
Jack nodded, and looked  back  at  the  two  Saurian  machines.  Their  initial  surprise  fading,
they  moved  towards  the  humans  again.  “At  least  the  odds  are  in  our  favor.  Three  to  two
instead of two against one.”
Jack was knocked off his feet by an explosion from behind. Spinning around, he saw three
more  Saurian  war  machines  crest  the  rubble,  standing  atop  the  ruined  building,  great
conquering birds forged in steel.
“Make that five against three,” Robyn said. “Where the hell did they come from?”
Jack lurched to his feet. “You didn’t think we saw all they had in that clearing, did you? We
still don’t know what their dropships look like. Let’s go.”
Robyn  and  Jabari  turned  and  fired  on  the  three  Saurians  standing  on  the  rubble.  The
Saurians returned fire, but the humans were no longer there. They ran top speed  for  the  two
Saurians in the street, Jack slowing only to scoop up his railgun.
Jabari took aim  and  fired  on  the  smoking  knee  of  the  crippled  war  machine,  tearing  the
joint apart and causing the machine to topple onto the street. The  standing  war  machine  was
hit  repeatedly  by  weapons  fire  from  the  other  three  Saurian  machines  as  the  humans  put  it
between the three on the rubble and their escape. As they turned the first  corner,  they  heard
the chain reaction of explosions that signified the machine’s demise.
Two  down,  three  to  go,  Jack  thought  as  the  human  trio  wound  their  way  down  a
labyrinthine path through the artificial canyons of the colony base camp. Their radar picked up
the three war machines following them,  but the big Saurian  machines  weren’t  as  agile  as  the

armored humans, and Jack and his Marines gained distance on the Saurians with every turn.
They reached the landing pad. As expected, the dropship sat  alone  on  the  far  edge  of  the
flat plasticrete expanse, its boarding ramp extended.
“We’ll be sitting ducks until I can get that thing prepped,” Robyn said.
Jack checked  his radar. The Saurians seemed to have figured out where the  humans  were
headed, and were taking the straightest route possible to the landing pad. “Then get to it. Jabari
and I can hold them off for a few minutes.”
The  trio  rushed  to  the  dropship.  Robyn  hurried  inside  while  Jack  and  Jabari  assumed
defensive positions just outside.
The Marines stood ready while Robyn brought up the dropship’s engines, the whine of its
fusion turbines drowning out the approaching thunder of the Saurian mechs.
All  three  appeared  at  once,  coming  from  different  directions.  They  formed  a  rough
semicircle around the landing pad, noted the bristling weaponry on the  dropship  and  moved
cautiously.
“How long?” Jack asked Robyn over the tacnet.
“About forty seconds to liftoff.”
Forty seconds, Jack thought. Not too long at—
As if reading Jack’s thoughts, the Saurian mechs charged as one, their towering metal  legs eating
up distance to the dropship.
“Open fire!” Jack shouted.
Both armored Marines gave the Saurians everything  they  had,  but  it  wasn’t  doing  much.
Jabari’s  plasma  rifle  just  scorched  the  mech  rushing  from  the  north,  and  Jack’s  railgun
knocked  the arm off the eastern mech,  but nothing  more.  They  didn’t  have  the  firepower  to
standoff the giant war machines.
Jack felt the dropship lurch into the air behind him. Riding gouts of superheated flame, the
Terran warship swiveled in midair and launched a barrage of missiles at each mech,  reducing
them to shrapnel.
Robyn’s voice sounded over the tacnet. “You folks need a ride?”
Thirty seconds later, the final three human survivors of New Eden were aloft and speeding
back to Envoy.
*
*
*
Per evacuation protocol, all the colonists were still in their shuttles when Jack arrived, lined
up in the launch bay. Jack and his Marines exited the dropship the moment  it touched down
and ran to the bridge.
The bridge of the massive ship was nearly deserted, only the skeleton crew of  ship’s  pilot,

navigator and communications officer present. Jack removed  the  helmet  from  his  armor  and
began giving the orders to tunnel back to Earthspace. He was interrupted.
“Sir!” the comm  officer  shouted.  “We  have  two  tunnels  opening,  bearing  245,  thirty-two
degrees up!”
“Show me.”
One the central viewscreen, Jack watched the images captured by cameras on  that  side  of
the  ship.  In  two  different  locations,  Jack  witnessed  the  signature  distortion  of  the  starfield
caused by the intense gravitational  energies  of  a  tunnel  drive  bending  the  light.  Two  tunnels
opened,  and  from  these  rents  in  the  fabric  of  space,  two  starships  emerged.  They  were  like
nothing he had ever seen.
The  ships  were  identical.  Each  was  nearly  two  kilometers  long,  and  roughly  cylindrical.
They were dark pewter, full of sleek curves and ripples, suggesting the powerful  musculature
of a predator. The bow of each ship bristled with spiky extrusions Jack took to be the barrels of
weapons, and at the center of the bow was a dark maw. On one of the ships, this maw began to
glow.
“Sir!” the comm officer shouted again. “I’m reading a massive gravitational surge from one
of the craft!”
“Adjust our orientation,” Jack said as he  slid  into  the  Captain’s  chair,  listening  to  it  creak
and protest under  the  weight  of  his  armor.  “I  want  both  of  those  ships  underneath  us.  And
ready the tunnel drive to get us out of here. We’re going home.”
“Aye,  sir,”  said  the  ship’s  pilot  from  his  neural  interface  couch.  Jack  felt  the  slight  tidal
disturbances as Envoy’s gravitational field altered, pulling it into  a  new  orientation.  The  views
on the screens shifted to keep the alien craft in view.
Jack watched as the glow increased from the alien ship.
“Sir! The alien craft’s gravitational field is spiking!”
I was  afraid  of  that,  Jack  thought.  “Hang  on,  everybody!”  he  shouted  as  he  gripped  the
arms of his chair with armored strength, almost ripping them off.
A flash of light appeared on the bow of the alien ship, followed almost instantaneously by a
severe rocking of the Envoy. Robyn and Jabari fell to the deck, and the navigator was knocked
away from his console.
“What was that?” Jabari inquired.
“A mass  driver,”  Jack  said.  “Probably  an  asteroid,  accelerated  by  their  tunnel  engines  to
good chunk of C. It was deflected by the space curvature caused by our tunnel drive to create
artificial gravity, but they won’t make that mistake again.
“Where the hell is that tunnel drive?”
“On line in twenty seconds,” the navigator said. “I’ve laid in the course to Earth. We should
come out just outside of Luna’s orbit.”
Twenty seconds, Jack thought. Not so bad…

“Sir, I’m picking up the same gravity surge  in  the  second  alien  vessel,”  the  comm  officer
said.
Bad, Jack thought. “Pilot! Tunnel the instant the tunnel drive is on line.”
“Aye, sir.”
Jack could do nothing more than  watch  as  the  seconds  crept  by.  The  glow  on  the  alien’s
bow was growing much more quickly this time.
“It’s spiking!” the comm officer called.
“Initiating tunnel drive,” the pilot called.
Jack felt the familiar tug against his body  in  all  directions  as  the  tunnel  drive  deep  in  the
heart of Envoy created a fold in the fabric of space,  temporarily  placing  their  current  position
just nanometers from a point in the Sol system. They tunneled home.
The last thing Jack saw on viewscreen before the tunnel was a bright flash from the bow of
the alien ship.
*
*
*
The Envoy had no sooner reappeared in Earthspace than  it  rocked  with  a  huge  explosion,
the  lower  third  of  the  giant  sphere  ripped  off  and  flung  into  space.  It  began  to  spin  as
atmosphere rushed out of the missing hull.
The  bridge  was  in  chaos.  Power  had  gone  out,  and  the  emergency  power  had  kicked  in
only partially. The pilot had let out a bloodcurdling scream at the moment  of impact, then lay
limp in his neural interface couch. Jack and his Marines were still okay, but the artificial gravity
was coming on and off intermittently, and they had to engage the electromagnets in their boots
just to remain standing.  The  navigator  and  comm  officer  weren’t  so  lucky,  and  the  irregular
gravity was wreaking havoc with them.
“Report!” Jack shouted to whoever was still listening.
Robyn made her way over to a status console, stopping to check  the reading on the pilot’s
couch. “The pilot’s dead. The neural feedback from the damage overloaded his safety buffers.
Nearly the lower third of the ship is gone, and the tunnel drive is severely damaged. The power
system has gone completely haywire, and is causing secondary explosions and fires all over the
ship. Oh my God.”
“What?” Jack asked as he made his way over to Robyn.
“Several of the explosions have been in the launch bay. I can’t get a reading on the status of
any of the shuttles.”
“Then we check it out personally,” Jack said, reading the data over Robyn’s metal shoulder.
“It’s time to get off this scow anyway.”
Robyn  and  Jack  each  grabbed  one  of  the  still  living  crewmembers,  who  had  now  been
forced  to  don  emergency  oxygen  masks  due  to  the  thinning  atmosphere.  They  were  also

shivering from the cold. The bridge rocked sharply from  a  nearby  explosion,  and  the  gravity
cut out.
“Sergeant Major,” Jack called out as he reached the door. “You coming?”
“No sir,” Jabari said,  taking  a  seat  in  front  of  the  emergency  command  console.  “I’ll  stay
here and try to stabilize things as much as I can until you get the evacuation underway.”
Jack nodded. “Don’t wait too long, Eleanor. Meet us at the dropship.”
She nodded, and the others left the bridge.
The rest of Envoy was in much  worse shape than the bridge. Twice Jack and Robyn had to
backtrack  and find alternate routes to the launch bay due to  fires  in  the  corridors,  the  bright
flames  flowing  like  water  in  the  zero  gravity.  They  could  have  ignored  the  flames  in  their
armor, but the bridge crew didn’t have that luxury.
They reached the launch bay. Jack stopped short, and almost dropped his charge.
Half the launch bay was missing. A great gouge had been ripped in the side of the ship, and
the half of the launch bay that remained opened to empty space. Jack did a quick count.
More than half of the shuttles were gone.
Liquid,  zero-G  fire  was  spreading  into  the  remains  of  the  launch  bay.  They  didn’t  have
much time. Feeling rather than hearing their magnetic boots thunder down on the deck, Jack
and Robyn ran for the nearest shuttle. After cycling through the airlock, Jack ran to the control
console of the huge craft.
He opened the radio channel as he ripped off his helmet. “Jabari!” he shouted.
There was no answer for a moment, then faint, with crackling interference, “Yes, sir!”
“Half the launch bay is missing!” Jack said. “The ship’s coming apart!”
Another delay, then, “I know! The reactor has taken too much  damage. The tunnel drive is
totaled,  and  we  have  no  AG  or  insystem  propulsion!  The  remnants  of  the  tunnel  effect  are
tearing the ship apart!”
“Get  down  here!”  Jack  said  as  he  eased  his  armored  form  into  the  control  chair.  “We’re
leaving.”
“With all due respect, sir,” Jabari answered, “get the other shuttles out first. It’s all I can do
here  to  hold  the  ship  together.  I’m  tied  into  the  pilot’s  neural  interface  couch.  Envoy’s  a  lot
bigger than the transport mechs I jacked in training, but she’s manageable. As soon as I leave,
Envoy will shake apart!”
Jack  stared  at  the  radio,  then  turned  his  attention  to  another  control  panel.  As  a  safety
feature for just such occasions, the shuttles all had an emergency override feature than allowed
the  entire  group  to  be  controlled  remotely  from  any  shuttle.  Jack  engaged  this  feature,  then
began moving the shuttles out of the launch bay in something resembling an orderly manner.
In the microgravity, a slight touch on the thrusters was all that was needed to get most of the
ships clear of Envoy.

As Jack tended to this task, he noticed the tremors shaking the Envoy increasing in intensity
and frequency. With or without Jabari’s intervention, the ship was shaking itself apart.
Finally, only Jack’s shuttle remained. He turned to the radio again. “Jabari!”
There was no reply.
“Sergeant Major!” Jack shouted into the microphone.
Nothing. Robyn put her hand on Jack’s shoulder just as another mammoth  quake  racked
the ship. “She’s gone,” Robyn said. “Let’s make her sacrifice mean something.”
Jack nodded, and fired the thrusters that would take the  shuttle  out  of  the  ruined  launch
bay and into space.
Clear of the ship, Jack brought the rear  camera  view  up  on  the  monitor.  Great  holes  had
been ripped out of Envoy’s once unbroken sphere, and gouts of fire shot from rents in the hull.
The great ship quivered,  shook,  and  collapsed  in  on  itself,  leaving  only  a  small  and  irregular
hunk of metal smaller than one of the shuttles.
Turning his attention back to the front viewscreen and the view of Earth, Jack moved aside
and let Robyn pilot the shuttle home.
*
*
*
© Jeff Kirvin 2005
 
Visit www.solomedia.org for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

