Scanned & proofed by N.E.R.D.
Cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
The Unification Chronicles:
First Contact
Part 2 of 4
by Jeff Kirvin
 
The Story  So Far:  The TRS  Envoy,  humanity’s  first  true  starship,  has  reached  a  planet  close
enough to Earth’s ecosystem to allow human colonization. After  convincing the captain  of  the Envoy
to let him explore the planet,  Major  Jack  Killian  of  the Terran  Republic  Marines is leading  a  squad
down to determine what threats might wait for the colonists.
*
*
*
The dropship plunged into the planet’s ionosphere, buffeted by winds. Jack could hear the
screaming  air  through  both  the  dropship’s  hull  and  his  helmet.  Jack  had  been  through  this
dozens of times, on Earth and on Mars. He noticed Private Vijay Girish’s brown face taking on
a  tinge  of  green  behind  the  flat  faceplate  of  his  helmet.  The  young  Indian  was  a  fearless
infantryman that Jack had seen firsthand on Mars. Girish was an expert with every weapon the
team carried, and a natural shot.
“Private Girish,” he said over the chop.

“Sir?” Girish managed to sputter.
“I thought you were rated for planetary drops.”
“I am. Sir.” He avoided retching into his helmet.
Jack looked at him.
“Just  because  I  can  do  it,  sir,  doesn’t  mean  I  have  to  like  it.”  Girish  said  as  he  choked
something back.
Jack smiled. “So long as you’re okay by the time we hit ground, Private.”
“Yes sir.”
Robyn O’Reilly, the dropship’s pilot, radioed back  to Jack. “Approaching the first LZ! Two
minutes!”
Landing Zone, Jack translated. The first of three spots designated as suitable colony sites by
the Envoy computer analysis of the planetary topography.
“Roger that,” he said to Robyn. Then, to the rest of the team, “Lock and load, people, we hit
dirt in two.”
The  team  checked  the  charges  on  their  weapons,  then  the  integrity  of  each  other’s  suits.
The atmospheric probe sent  down  by  Envoy  hadn’t  detected  anything  toxic  in  the  air,  but  it
was better not to take any chances.
“One minute!” Robyn called back.
Jack could see the planet’s surface out the pilot’s window. They were flying over a lush and
expansive jungle, much like the pictures of rain forests he’d seen in history class as a child. The
last Terran rain forest had disappeared more than a century before his birth. This alien version
was breathtaking.
“Prepare for touch down!” Robyn shouted. Jack braced himself, and the dropship pounded
into the soft ground of the landing site. The hydraulics of the landing gear absorbed a lot of the
shock,  but  the  impact  still  would  have  broken  both  his  legs  if  he  hadn’t  been  wearing  the
armor.
Before the ship even had a chance to  settle,  the  rear  door  snapped  open  and  the  Marines
filed out, fanning out into a defensive formation as soon as they cleared the dropship.
For a few tense moments, the only sounds in the clearing were the hum  of charged plasma
rifles and the ticking of cooling metal on the dropship. The Marines trained their weapons on
the trees around them,  looking for anything that could threaten  the  civilian  colonists.  Finally,
Jack raised his hand and called the All Clear.
“What next, sir?” asked Private Sighis Ahiga, a Navajo from  a  family  that  chose  to  live  as
their  ancestors  did,  outside  the  city-sized  arcologies  that  dotted  Earth’s  land  masses.  Earth’s
ecosystem wouldn’t have been able to handle twenty billion humans if they were all still spread
out over the surface, and some of the arcology dwellers resented “natives” like Ahiga. Living off
the  land  made  the  towering  Navajo  stout  and  muscular,  an  ideal  build  for  the  fireteam’s
mechanic and heavy gunner.

“We  button  up  the  dropship  and  secure  the  area,”  Jack  said  as  Robyn  and  Corporal
Shimura exited the craft. “We’ve determined the air and gravity won’t kill us, but nothing else.
We’re here to find the snakes in the Captain Chenzokov’s Garden of Eden.”
That brought a smile from most of the troops. Jack’s feud with the Envoy’s skipper was no
secret. Most of the Marines shared Jack’s assessment that  Chenzokov  was  idealistic,  and  thus
dangerous.
Jack raised his plasma rifle. “Let’s go.”
*
*
*
The first few hours of the search were uneventful, but that came as no surprise to anyone.
The dropship landing made enough noise to scare off an army, much less any wildlife. As far as
anyone could tell, the planet was every bit as benign as the probes said it was.
Then it happened.
*
*
*
Even  though  the  armor’s  power  amplification  wasn’t  supposed  to  make  it  any  more
stressful to wear than a normal uniform, Private Bartalo Rodas was tired. They’d been scouring
the  area  for  hours,  and  found  nothing.  Rodas  trudged  over  to  the  nearest  tree  and  leaned
against it.
Although regulations stated that all components of the armor were to be worn until further
notice, Rodas removed his helmet. Screw the regs, he thought. I’m not breathing  this canned  crap
one more  minute. They had all been breathing the air of the  planet  for  a  few  hours,  ever  since
Major Killian declared it safe to  breathe,  but  by  the  time  it  passed  through  all  the  vents  and
filters, it smelled and tasted just like canned suit air.
Rodas wasn’t thrilled about his assignment. Like most of the enlisted member’s  of Envoy’s
security team, he’d been randomly  selected,  volunteered  for  the  job.  TRHQ  wanted  to  ensure
there was no favoritism in the selection, so they ended up with a group that didn’t care, or  at
least that’s the way Rodas saw it. He had a nice little life going on back  in Spain, and he had to
uproot it all for this tromping around lightyears from home so some rich civilians could move
out of the arcologies and screw up another planet the way humans had screwed up Earth.
So Rodas leaned against a tree, inhaling the moist and tangy air of  an  alien  world,  and  he
never knew what hit him.
*
*
*
Jack stood up to his armored chest in the river, analyzing its composition. Nothing out of  the
ordinary,  he  noted,  just  water  and  dirt.  There  were  a  few  microorganisms,  but  nothing  that
couldn’t be filtered out.
“Major!” Robyn called from bank.

Jack  stored  his  sampling  equipment  and  began  wading  out  of  the  river.  “What  is  it,
Robyn?”
“Rodas didn’t report in.”
Jack  wasn’t  surprised.  The  guy  had  an  attitude  problem.  For  the  millionth  time,  Jack
wished  he’d  been  allowed  to  select  his  own  team.  It  was  all  he  could  do  to  get  Robyn  and
Private Girish from his Mars squad, but the politicians assigned the rest. “Where was he the last
time you did hear from him?”
“Recon, sector fourteen.”
Damn scouts. Jack hadn’t wanted to send Rojas off on his own, but his scout suit was faster
than the rest. So  while the other Marines were paired up, Rojas was free to roam on his  own,
the furthest from camp. Sector fourteen was kilometers away.
Jack keyed his helmet radio and called the two most reliable of his enlisted  troops,  Girish,
and Sergeant Major Eleanor Jabari, a thin and elegant Egyptian old enough to be Jack’s mother.
Jabari looked matronly, but  she  could  best  any  man  in  her  platoon  in  hand-to-hand  combat
and she could drink most of them under the table. Robyn was Jack’s right hand, but Jabari was
his conduit to the enlisted troops, and was invaluable to maintaining discipline. “Jabari. Girish.
Meet me in sector fourteen, waypoint one. We have a straggler.”
*
*
*
They found Rodas’s armor several hundred meters into the forest, or  what  was  left  of  the
armor.  Scattered  fragments  of  if  lay  about  like  bits  of  lobster  shell  after  a  feast.  Bloodstains
marked the trees for ten meters.
“The first thing I want is  to  examine  the  remains,”  Jack  said.  “Private  Girish,  you  get  the
honors of gathering them.  Sergeant  Major,  you  and  I  will  provide  cover  while  Private  Girish
works. I don’t want whatever happened to Rodas to happen again.”
“Yessir,” the  enlisted  Marines  said  in  unison.  Jack  and  Jabari  spread  out,  weapons  ready,
and Girish went to work.
Jack  had  been  afraid  something  like  this  might  happen.  It  was  arrogance  on  the  part  of
Chenzokov, and his cronies back on Earth, to believe an alien world wouldn’t have threats and
dangers all its own. Life wasn’t that simple. Even on Earth it wasn’t safe for most people to live
outside the arcologies. Outside those self-contained havens of humanity, the rest of the  planet
had  gone  feral  again.  Grasslands  had  broken  up  and  swallowed  the  vast  seas  of  twentieth
century  concrete,  and  predators  once  again  roamed  wild,  maintaining  the  balance  of  the
ecosystem.  Every  once  in  a  while,  Jack  read  a  story  about  a  family  outside  the  domes  on
vacation that got themselves eaten by wolves or something. It happened. And if it happened on
Earth, a planet where humans had been the  undisputed  masters  for  centuries,  why  wouldn’t
the same risk apply on a world that had never known mankind?
“Sir,” Girish said, holding out an arm of the armor suit. “This arm still has arm in it.”
“Good,”  Jack  replied.  “The  remains  may  give  us  some  clue  as  to  what  killed  him.”  Jack
turned  and  saw  that  Girish  had  all  of  the  armor  parts  gathered  in  an  alloy  mesh  bag.  “Got

everything?” he asked.
“Yes sir.”
“Back to the ship, then,” Jack said.
They left the rain forest. They were not followed.
*
*
*
That night, from the safety of the dropship, Jack radioed  Captain  Chenzokov  and  relayed
the news. Chenzokov took it well.
“What do you mean, a creature?” the thick Russian accent boomed over the speakers of the
dropship radio.
“What I mean, sir, is that an unknown,  indigenous creature has attacked and killed one of
my men.  I mean that this planet may not be safe for colonization, considering  that  the  attack
came while he was in full armor. I mean that you should not under any circumstances attempt
to send  a  shuttle  down  until  we  determine  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  threat.  Is  all  of  that
perfectly, absolutely clear, sir?”
The captain was silent for a long moment,  and Jack began to wonder if the radio link  had
failed.  Then,  “Do  you  understand,  Major,  how  rare  a  planet  is  that  is  capable  of  supporting
human life without an atmospheric dome?”
Jack  knew  all  too  well.  It  was  the  reason  they  were  there,  after  all.  “Yes,  sir,  I  am.  But
breathable air won’t make any difference if the colony gets eaten within the first six months.”
“We  aren’t  leaving,  Major,”  Chenzokov  said.  “I’m  sorry  about  your  man,  but  we  aren’t
giving  up  a  promising  colony  world  just  because  there’s  a  violent  predator  on  it.  Find  this
creature, and kill it, but we aren’t leaving.
“Envoy out.”
The  radio  went  dead  and  Jack  just  sat  in  the  cockpit  staring  at  it  for  a  moment.  It  was
obvious that his recommendations meant nothing. The colonists’ safety meant nothing. All that
mattered was the bottom line. Jack knew that the colonists were coming down sooner or later,
and that if they weren’t safe, he’d be held responsible, not Chenzokov.
Jack got up and walked to the back  of the cramped dropship, sidestepping the temporary
base camp set up in the middle. A small workbench  had been set up aft, and it was there that
Jack found Private First Class Honir Bersi studying what was left of Rodas.
“What do we have here, Bersi?”
Bersi turned to Jack and held up his hands. “First off, sir, I’m  just  a  paramedic.  I’m  not  a
doctor, I’m not a forensic scientist. All I really know is that Rodas is way too dead to treat.”
“But you have some theories,” Jack said. Bersi was using the Corps as on the job experience
en route to being a doctor back in Norway. Jack had talked to Bersi over beers earlier in the trip
and found him amiable, but he had no idea how Bersi would react in a dangerous situation.

“Of course. We’ll start with the obvious stuff,” he said as he turned back to the remains and
pointed  out  things  as  he  spoke.  “All  that’s  left  of  Rodas  is  most  of  his  right  arm,  up  to  the
deltoid, and part of his left foot. Now, on both wounds, there are characteristic gouges, here,”
he said, showing Jack the lacerated end of Rodas’ arm, “and here,” he said, showing the foot.
“The gouges are consistent in size and depth, and they appear to run in parallel.”
“Teeth marks,” Jack said.
Bersi nodded. “Looks that  way,  but  these  teeth  would  have  to  be  15-20  centimeters  long
and tough enough to bite through armor. Not to mention that the creature itself would have to
be strong enough to attack and kill an armored man.”
“Given what you can surmise from Rodas, can we find this creature, and kill it?”
“Sir, we can kill anything you want. And as big as this thing has to be, finding it shouldn’t
be impossible.”
“How big do you think it is?”
Bersi leaned against the workbench.  “About five to seven tons, seven to ten meters long, if
it’s shaped at all  like  Terran  predators.  Sir,  we  had  a  creature  with  the  same  size,  speed  and
teeth on Earth.
“The Tyrannosaurus Rex.”
*
*
*
On  board  the  Envoy,  Captain  Vladimir  Chenzokov  seethed  in  his  quarters,  pacing  from
wall to wall and back  again. Unlike most of the crew quarters on the ship,  his  were  spacious.
He couldn’t cope with the burdens of his mission without being able to pace.
Killian didn’t get it. They had to settle this world, whatever the dangers. It wasn’t a matter
of preference. It wasn’t like they had centuries to roam the galaxy, looking for someplace was
just perfect, full of fuzzy bunnies and Povidlyanka.
The Terran Republic government, not to mention scores of private corporations, had spent
far too much money for Chenzokov to allow Killian any vetoes. If they failed to find a suitable
colony world, somewhere without the delay of centuries of terraforming … Chenzokov shook
it off. The penalties of failure were not something he wished to contemplate. He would not fail.
So there  was  an  animal  down  there.  Of  course  there  was.  There  were  billions  of  animals
down there. The planet wouldn’t be worth settling if there weren’t. He had to rely on Killian to
secure  the  area,  make  it  safe.  That’s  what  his  warmongering  kind  was  good  for,  wasn’t  it?
Killing, destroying? Just like he’d done on Mars. Yes.
Chenzokov stopped pacing and sat down at  his  computer.  He  starting  going  through  the
rosters of scientists, putting together a select group he could take down to the surface with him
in one shuttle. If Killian couldn’t handle this, maybe he needed closer supervision. To be shown
the realities of the situation.
Yes.

*
*
*
The next morning the Marines returned to the jungle in full combat  armor, determined to
find and destroy the creature that killed one of their own. In an attempt to cover more ground,
they split up into smaller groups, two, two and three. Jack was teamed with Private Bersi and
Corporal Shimura.  The jungle was silent, and heavy  with  mist.  Jack  could  see  maybe  twenty
meters in any direction.
“What are we looking for, Private?” Jack asked.
“I’m not sure, sir. Just because this thing has the size and the bite of a Terran T. Rex doesn’t
mean  it  shares  any  other  characteristics.  It’s  big,  meaning  that  even  if  it  is  exothermic,  we
should still be  able  to  pick  it  up  on  infrared,  and  being  a  predator,  it’ll  smell  terrible.  Other
than that, I have no idea what it looks like.”
Jack keyed his helmet radio. “Killian  to  team.  Given  the  size  of  this  thing,  we’re  likely  to
pick it up on infrared long before we get visual through this mist. Switch to IR  imaging  until
target is acquired. Out.”
Jack  switched  his  helmet’s  visual  display  to  IR  overlay.  On  the  HUD  projected  on  his
faceplate, the jungle took on strange, ethereal shapes and colors as he began discerning objects
by their thermal output rather than the visible spectrum colors they reflected. The ground was
black, the trees a  deep  navy,  and  the  occasional  small  forest  creature  a  bright  splash  of  fiery
yellow, orange and red. But nothing big enough to have ripped open Rodas’ armor.
“I have a heat source!” radioed Private Ahiga. “Two hundred meters north of my position.
It’s big, and it’s moving, north by northeast.”
“Roger, we’re on our way.” Jack called up a map of the area showing the relative position of
his men. Ahiga was almost five hundred meters east of him.
Waving his Marines on, Jack took off in a powered lope towards a position north of Ahiga,
his armored strength carrying him more than ten meters a stride. Bersi and Shimura followed.
Jack reached Ahiga. “Report,” he said.
“There, sir,” Ahiga said, pointing northward. “150 meters.”
Jack looked where Ahiga was pointing  and  froze.  The  thing  was  huge,  larger  than  Bersi’s
estimate. And it was heading their way.
Jack noted that the rest of the strike team had joined  them.  “Here  it  comes,  Marines,”  he
said. “Fire at will when it comes into visual range.”
For a moment,  the jungle was silent enough for Jack to become  aware of the sound  of  his
own breathing. Then, the creature appeared.
Bersi had been right about the head; it did resemble a Terran tyrannosaur. The rest  of  the
body was different. It had four limbs, the front two being large and powerful enough for it to
walk as either a biped or a quadruped. The tail was short and stubby, and the creature leaned
against it as it reared up on his hind legs. The skin was smooth, and bright orange on the back
fading  to  a  pale  cream  underside.  As  soon  as  it  saw  the  men,  the  creature  let  out  a  terrible

bellow, a scream no human had ever heard before.
“Fire at the body!” Jack shouted. “I want the head for study!”
On  Jack’s  order,  the  men  opened  fire  with  their  plasma  rifles.  Superheated  streams  of
hydrogen enveloped the creature’s torso, which burst into flames even before it died.
Once  it  was  down,  Jack  and  the  men  surrounded  it.  “Stay  clear  of  the  mouth,”  Jack
warned, “until we’re sure it’s dead.”
Upon closer examination, the creature looked less like a monster and more like what it was:
an animal looking for food. Jack felt a certain pity for it, and was even more convinced that this
was the wrong planet for Envoy to colonize.
“Sir!” called Jabari. “You’d better take a look at this.”
Jack trotted over to where Jabari was standing, the flank of the beast. “What do you have,
Sergeant Major?”
She  pointed to some strange markings  on  the  creature’s  right  thigh.  “That.  We  didn’t  do
that. Is that what I think it is?”
Jack studied the strange symbols scarred into the creature’s flesh, then it  hit  him  what  he
was looking at. His mind flooded with images he’d seen in school as a child, a textbook  of the
American west. “Shit.”
“Sir?”
“It’s a brand. This creature belonged to someone. Or something.
“Let’s cut down some of these trees and make some kind of harness to drag this thing back
to camp. Then I have a call to make.”
*
*
*
Chenzokov and a few scientists came down in the first shuttle just over an hour later, and
Jack was there to greet them as they came off the shuttle ramp.
“Good afternoon, Captain,” Jack said,  guiding  Chenzokov  towards  the  dropship.  “I  think
there’s something you need to see.”
As Jack walked with Chenzokov behind the  dropship,  he  heard  the  older  man  gasp.  The
carcass of the creature was laid out alongside the dropship, and between the plasma burns and
the jungle’s heat, it was beginning to get a bit pungent.
“The first thing I want you to take note of,” Jack said, dragging Chenzokov to the front of
the beast, “is the head. Note the teeth, both their  size  and  number.  These  are  the  same  teeth
that ripped open one of my men, while he was still wearing his armor.”
The Russian gagged, but said nothing.
Jack  nodded.  “And  while  you  are  thinking  about  that  mouth  attached  to  nine  tons  of
muscle, let me show you something else.” Jack guided Chenzokov to  the  rear  of  the  creature

and pointed out the brand.
“Notice anything strange about this marking?” Jack asked.
Chenzokov coughed. “It is an odd shape and placement for scar tissue, I’ll admit—”
Jack threw up his hands in disgust. “It’s a brand, Captain. Proof of ownership. Someone  or
something tried to domesticate this animal.
“We are not alone here.”
“I—I see no proof of this,” Chenzokov sputtered.
“Captain!” Jack exclaimed. “You can’t still believe—”
Chenzokov straightened and  looked  Jack  in  the  eye.  “I  believe  you  and  your  men  found
and  killed  a  predator  which  attacked  one  of  your  men,  a  creature  that  bears  a  curious,  if
random, piece of scar tissue. Nothing more.
“We are here, Major, to establish a colony world for the Terran Republic. This planet  is  as
close to perfect as we are going to find, and I’ll not let you chase us away from it with your wild
and unfounded speculations!
“A brand. A barbaric practice we abolished centuries ago! To think a starfaring race would
still … No, you are wrong, Major. There is no danger here other than the wild animals of this
ecosystem. To that end, you will  set  up  a  defensive  perimeter  large  enough  for  the  colonists.
And I will hear no more of your paranoid theories!”
With  that,  Chenzokov  turned  on  his  heel  and  walked  away,  leaving  Jack  to  ponder  the
strange symbol on the creature’s thigh.
*
*
*
© Jeff Kirvin 2005
 
Visit www.solomedia.org for information on additional titles by this and other authors.

