
 
 
 
 
JESUS NEVER LIVED! 
VOLUME 3 
THE PAGAN MORALS OF 
JESUS CHRIST 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
JESUS NEVER LIVED! 
VOLUME 3 
THE PAGAN MORALS OF 
JESUS CHRIST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laurence E. Dalton 
Shirley Strutton Dalton 


 
 
 
Jesus Never Lived! 
Volume 3 The Pagan Morals of Jesus Christ 
 
 
 
Jesus Never Lived! 
Volume 3 The Pagan Morals of Jesus Christ 
 
 
Copyright © January 2014 
Laurence E. Dalton and Shirley Strutton Dalton 
ISBN-13:  
ISBN-10:  
www.jesusneverlived.com 
Under Creative Commons public license Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 
International the copyright holders hereby grant a license to copy and 
redistribute the within material in any medium or format for any purpose, 
even commercially. This license cannot be revoked as long as licensee 
follows the license terms. You must give appropriate credit and provide a 
link to the license. No derivatives or adaptations are allowed. You may not 
remix, transform, or build upon the material; you may not distribute 
modified material. You may not apply legal terms or technological 
measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license 
permits. This license does not reduce or restrict exceptions and limitations 
to copyright, such as fair use quotation, provided credit is given. 
 
 


 
 
 
Contents 
Preface .............................................................................................................................. 9 
PART 1 The Moral Teachings in the Gospels are not from Jesus ............ 13 
Chapter 1 Jewish Morals in the Gospels? .......................................................... 15 
Parallels to the the Gospels ........................................................................... 17 
Chapter 2 The Moral Teachings of the Gospels Are Falsely Attributed to 
Jesus. ................................................................................................................................ 35 
PART 2   Christians on Pagan Philosophies ..................................................... 49 
Chapter 3 Most ancient Christian Writers Believed That All Pagan 
Philosophies Have Some Christian Truth. ........................................................ 51 
Pagan Philosophy and Christians ............................................................... 51 
Two Early Christians Who were  Against Pagan Philosophy .......... 59 
EXCURUS .............................................................................................................. 62 
Christians who Accepted Pagan Philosophy as Truth ....................... 63 
Pagans On Philosophy..................................................................................... 76 
Conclusion for This Chapter:........................................................................ 79 
PART 3   Christian and Pagan Stoic Morals ...................................................... 87 
Chapter 4 Jesus and Paul And Pagan Stoics On Sexual Morals. ............... 89 
The Religion of Woman – An Historical Study ................................... 107 
Chapter 5 Comments on Morals by Pagans and Jesus .............................. 131 
Chapter 6 More Christian and Pagan Morals Compared ......................... 173 
Chapter 7 The “Liberal” Image of Jesus .......................................................... 215 
The Gospel of Mark ....................................................................................... 215 
 


 
 
 
PREFACE 
The purpose of this Volume is to show that Christian 
ethics were derived from the pagan world – from Roman 
Stoicism. The argument that the "unique" moral 
teachings of Jesus can be traced back to an historical 
personage is false. 
As the reader will see in what follows, the moral 
teachings attributed to Jesus are found in the pagan 
Stoicism of the Roman Empire. Stoicism was founded in 
Athens by Zeno about 308 BCE. The Stoic School was 
closed, along with all the other pagan schools of 
philosophy, in 529 CE by the order of the Christian 
Emperor Justinian. Roman Stoicism flourished from the 
first century CE, the same century in which Jesus was 
alleged to have lived.  
We believe that Christian and Roman Stoic morals differ 
in two important ways. First, the Christians added 
eternal punishment in Hell to the Stoic philosophy. 
Secondly, the Roman Stoics taught universal love 
whereas the Christians restricted that love to members 
of the Christian religion (and only Orthodox Christians 
at that). (For more, see Runar Thorsteinsson’s book, 
Roman Christianity and Roman Stoicism: A Comparative 
Study of Ancient Morality. Oxford:  Oxford University 
Press, 2010.) 
Quotes on the Stoic influence on the New Testament: 
Bruno Bauer argued that Christianity “is Stoicism in 
Jewish garb.” The Sources of the Morality of the Gospels 
(1914) by Joseph McCabe.  
 

 
According to Bruno Bauer, the writer of Mark's gospel 
was "an Italian, at home both in Rome and Alexandria"; 
that of Matthew's gospel "a Roman, nourished by the 
spirit of Seneca"; Christianity is essentially "Stoicism 
triumphant in a Jewish garb."  
"Christianity was the last great creation of the ancient 
pagan world." The Story of Civilization, Caesar and 
Christ, Will Durant, Part III, 1944, p. 595)  
"It is difficult," says Lightfoot, "to estimate, and perhaps 
not very easy to over-rate the extent to which Stoic 
philosophy had leavened the moral vocabulary of the 
civilized world at the time of the Christian era."  
Dissertations on the Apostolic Age by J. B. Lightfoot, 
D.D., D.C.L., LL.D., Lord Bishop of Durham 
"The very same thing which now is called Christianity 
existed among the ancients and was not absent from the 
beginning of mankind until Christ appeared in the flesh, 
whence the true religion, which already existed, began 
to be called Christian." St. Augustine (354 CE – 430 CE) 
Retractions, Book One, Part 12, "One Book on the True 
Religion." 
Religion is regarded by the common people as true, by 
the wise as false, and by the rulers as useful. Seneca 
Paul Tillich (1886-1965) wrote that Stoicism is "the only 
real alternative to Christianity in the Western world." 
The Courage To Be (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1952), p. 9. 
 
Using the hope of heaven and the punishment of 
hell as the proper motives for virtue falls “...far 
below the best of the ancients (pagans)....”  John 
Milton, On Liberty 

 
 
“Let the ghosts go. We will worship them no more. Let 
them cover their eyeless sockets with their fleshless 
hands and fade forever from the imaginations of men.” 
The Ghosts by Robert G. Ingersol 
Also, see The Sources of the Morality of the Gospels 
(1914) by Joseph McCabe, where the author attributes 
the teachings of Jesus to Pagan and Jewish sources. 
Other books we found useful include:  
The Story of Religious Controversy (1929) by Joseph 
McCabe   
The Religion of Woman – An Historical Study (Chapters 2 
through 6) by Joseph McCabe 
Woman, Church and State (1893) by Matilda Electa 
Joslyn Gage; Celibacy (Chapter 2) 
In what follows we will compare the ethics of the pagan 
Roman Stoic, Seneca (first century CE), with the morals 
of Jesus (died ca. 33 CE) and Paul (died ca. 62 CE).  
l 


 
 
 
PART 1 THE MORAL TEACHINGS IN THE 
GOSPELS ARE NOT FROM JESUS  


 
15 
 
CHAPTER 1 JEWISH MORALS IN THE GOSPELS? 
The Jewish Scriptures were written over a number of 
centuries and they developed from a relatively primitive 
set of ethics to a highly advanced moral system as the 
reader will see in the writing by McCabe below.  
The Sources of the Morality of the Gospels (1914), by 
Joseph Mccabe. Chapter 4 The Evolution Of Jewish 
Morality. Edited by Laurence E Dalton and Shirley 
Strutton Dalton  
 
Micah and Isaiah, writing about 720 and later, have the 
same fierce denunciation of the sins of the rich, the 
general looseness of morals, and the widespread 
idolatry. 
 
The second Isaiah, as he is misleadingly called, or the 
anonymous continuer of Isaiah, seems to have written 
nine chapters (xl-xlviii) a few years before the fall of 
Babylon, when Cyrus was advancing at the head of the 
Persians. It is the beginning of the vindication of 
Jahveh; he moves the armies of the world to deliver 
Judea. "The fury of his anger," which was quite just, is 
over. Now the blind shall see, and the deaf hear, and the 
lame walk, there will be a general amnesty for offenders, 
and a chance to recover grace. God is the God of pity, 
mercy, tenderness, concern for the downtrodden. The 
sentiments are relative; it is tenderness after righteous 
anger, and a tenderness for Israel only. But a later age 
will forget the historical setting, the relative application, 
and make Jahveh and his prophet the teachers of mercy 
and gentleness to the whole world. The time came, of 
course, when men conceived "Isaiah" as foreseeing 
Jesus of Nazareth literally healing the blind and deaf; 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
16 
but we are beyond that stage. The important point is 
that Jahveh is recovering, or even showing in vaster 
form, his power, and is becoming a tender, comforting 
father. There is still no question of a reward beyond the 
grave. The Jew knows nothing of it, or looks upon the 
future like the Chaldsean, as a misty and repulsive 
region. Mercy and generosity on this earth are to be the 
signs of the restoration to favour.  
 
Babylon falls, but the prophetic message has not a great 
effect.  
 
Still, the Hebrew conception advances. God is a god of 
mercy, justice, tenderness for the destitute, and he 
presses these virtues above others. 
 
But their teachers continued to develop the ethical 
message of the prophets, and at the very time when 
Christ is supposed to have been pitting his humane 
teaching against their arid ceremonialism we find that 
they were saying precisely those things, in precisely the 
same form (parable), which we are asked to take as the 
wonderful inventions of Jesus.  
 
The Gospels, which are so little Jewish that they have to 
explain Jewish (or. Aramaic) words and Jewish customs 
to their readers, faithfully reflect the zeal for the law of 
the Pharisees, but represent Jesus as holding dialogues 
with them that are at times ludicrously impossible. The 
Essenes and their lofty standard of morals they entirely 
ignore. As a result, Jesus is depicted as bringing a new, 
more tender, and more human spirit into a world that is 
swathed in ceremonial observances and content with 
the letter of a ritual law. This is entirely inaccurate, and 
we have to see what knowledge we gain from other 
sources of the living morality of Judaea at the time.  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
17 
Here it is enough to premise that there is not a moral or 
humane sentiment in the Gospels which was not 
familiar to the Rabbis and their pupils. Love of 
neighbours, and even love of enemies; tenderness to 
children and help of the helpless; purity of thought and 
intention as well as of conduct; respect for parents and 
humanity to all; the golden rule; even the counsel to 
turn the other cheek to the smiter all are familiar 
elements of the rabbinical exhortation. The description 
of the Jewish teachers in the Gospels is false in spirit 
and detail.  
 
In its inception Christianity was a great improvement 
and purification of religion. But on the moral side it was 
a mere continuation of the development which we have 
found beginning in the early prophets, broadening in 
the later prophets and wisdom-writers, and faithfully 
elaborated by the Scribes and Pharisees of the first 
century of the Christian Era.  
 
McCabe’s writing shows the moral parallels of the 
Christian Gospels and the Jewish Scriptures (the Old 
Testament). For us the Talmud was written too late to 
have influenced the Gospels.  
The gospel quotes are all from Matthew in order. 
 
PARALLELS TO THE THE GOSPELS 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Blessed are the meek;for they shall inherit the earth. MT 
5.5 
 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
18 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me to comfort all that 
mourn. Is., Ixi, 1-2.  
 
The meek shall inherit the earth. Ps. xxxvii, 11.  
 
The Lord lifteth up the meek. Ps. oxlvii, 6.  
 
The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord. Is, xxix, 
19. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness; for they shall be filled. MT 5.6 
 
Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.MT 
5.7 
 
Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God. MT 
5.8 
 
Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called 
the children of God. MT 5.9 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more; but they shall sit every 
man under his vine and under his fig-tree. Micah, iv, 3.  
 
He that walketh righteously shall dwell on high. Is, 
xxxiii, 15.  
 
Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will 
deliver him in time of trouble. Ps. xli, 1. 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
19 
 
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? He that hath 
clean hands and a pure heart. Ps. xxiv, 3-4.  
 
Seek peace and pursue it: the eyes of the Lord are upon 
the righteous.Ps. xxxiv, 14. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Blessed 
are 
they 
which 
are 
persecuted 
for 
righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute 
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely 
for my sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is 
your reward in heaven. MT 5.10-12 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and 
no torment shall touch them.For even if in the sight of 
men they be punished, their hope is full of immortality; 
and having borne a little chastening, they shall receive 
great good, because God made trial, and found them 
worthy of himself. Wisdom, ill, 1-5.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
THE GOSPELS 
 
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least 
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be 
called the least in the kingdom of heaven; but 
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be 
called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I say unto 
you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in 
no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye have heard 
that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
20 
and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the 
judgment. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry 
with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of 
the judgment. MT 5.19-21 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments; 
which, if a man do, he shall live in them. Levit., xviii, 5. 
 
THE GOSPELS 
This is the first and greatest commandment. And the 
second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ MT 
22.38-39 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou 
shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the 
children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself. Levit. xix, 18. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time: Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. But I say unto you,That 
whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath 
committed adultery with her already in his heart. MT 
5.27-28 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour'swife.Exodus,xx, 17.  
 
Lust not after her beauty in thine heart. Prov., vi, 25.  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
21 
I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I 
think upon a maid? Job, xxxi, 1.  
 
THE GOSPELS 
Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of 
old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt 
perform unto the Lord thine oaths: but I say unto you, 
Swear not at all. MT 5.33-34 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in 
vain. Ex., xx, 7. 
 
Accustom not thy mouth to an oath, and be not 
accustomed to the naming of the Holy One. A man of 
many oaths shall be filled with iniquity, and the scourge 
shall not depart from his house. Ecclus., xxiii,. 9-11. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you that ye resist 
not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also. MT 5.38-39 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them 
that plucked off the hair. Is., 1, 6.  
 
Let him give his cheek to him that smiteth him. 
Lament., iii, 30. 
 
THE GOSPELS  

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
22 
 
Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would 
borrow of thee turn not thou away. MT 5.42 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt not harden thine heart nor shut thine hand 
from thy poor brother.  
 
Turn not away thine eye from one that asketh of thee. 
Ecclus., iv, 5. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy; but I say unto 
you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you and persecute you ; that ye may be 
the children of your Father, which is in heaven ; for he 
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and 
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. MT 5.44-45  
 
FN: Nowhere in the Old Testament is a man told to hate 
his enemy, and a Jew can hardly have said or written 
this. McCabe 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18. 
 
If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to; if he be 
thirsty, give him water to drink; for thou shalt heap 
coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward 
thee. Prov., xxv, 21-22 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
23 
Though one might recall passages of the Psalms, etc., 
where the Jew invokes a curse on his enemies (as Christ 
does on the Pharisees and on the cities which would not 
receive his followers). On the other hand, love of 
enemies is a common maxim of the Old Testament and 
the Talmud, and of all moralists of the time. McCabe  
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have 
ye? Do not even the publicans the same? MT 5.46 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
This also were an iniquity if I rejoiced at the destruction 
of him that hated me. Job, xxxi, 28-9.  
 
Have we not all one Father? hath not one God created 
us? MaL, ii, 10.  
 
Upon whom doth not his light arise? Job, xxv, 3. 
 
The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be as one born 
among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself. Levit., 
xix, 34. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
The stress which Christ constantly lays on the reward of 
good deeds should be noted and contrasted with the 
exhortations of rabbis and pagans. 
 
When thou hast shut thy doors and darkened thy 
closet, and when thou has shut the door, pray to thy 
Father, which is in secret ; and thy father which seeth 
in secret shall reward thee openly. MT 6.6 
 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
24 
THE GOSPELS 
 
After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which 
art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. MT 6.9 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou, Lord, art our Father. Is., Ixiii, 16.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our 
debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into 
temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory forever. Amen. 
MT 6.11-13 1 
 
The "Lord's Prayer" is much shorter in Luke, and is 
unknown in Mark. It is commonly regarded by 
theologians as a composition not due to Christ.  
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he hath done thee, 
and then thy sins shall be pardoned when thou prayest. 
Seeks., xxviii, 2.  
 
Thine, Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the 
glory. 1 Chron., xxix, 11.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where 
moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break 
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in 
heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,and 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
25 
where thieves do not break through nor steal ;for where 
your treasure is, there will your heart be also. MT 6.19-
21 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Labour not to be rich.... for riches certainly make 
themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle towards 
heaven. Prov., xxiii, 4. 
 
Bestow thy treasure according to the commandments of 
the Most High, and it shall profit thee more than gold. 
Ecclus., xxix,11.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
The light of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light.But if thine 
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If 
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great 
is that darkness? MT 6.22-23 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
The wise man's eyes are in his head, and the fool 
walketh in darkness. Ecchs., ii, 14.  
 
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that 
put darkness for light,and light for darkness.Is., v,.20.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do 
they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly 
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? 
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his  

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
26 
stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider 
the lilies of the field,how they grow; they toil not, neither 
do they spin; and yet I say unto you, That even Solomon 
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. MT 
6.26-29 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. 
Ps. xxxiv, 10.  
 
Who provideth for the raven his food ? Job, xxxviii, 41.  
 
Who maketh the grass to grow upon the mountains. He 
giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens 
which cry. Ps. cxlvii, 8-9.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. MT 7.1 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Judge of thy neighbour by thyself: and be discreet in 
every point. Ecclus.,xxx, 15.  
 
THE GOSPELS 
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the 
law and the prophets. MT 7.12 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix,18. 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
27 
What thou thyself hatest, do to no man. Tobit, iv, 15. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and 
broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many 
there be which go in therein. Because strait is the gate, 
and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it. MT 7.13-14 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
The way of sinners is made smooth with stones, and at 
the last end thereof is the pit of Hades. Ecclus., xxi, 10.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, 
and not sacrifice; for I am not come to call the 
righteous, but sinners to repentance. MT 9.13  
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice. Hosea, vi, 6.  
 
What doth the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and 
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Micah, 
vi, 8.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-
in-law against her mother-in-law. And a man's foes 
shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father 
and mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
28 
that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy 
of me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth 
after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life 
shall lose it; and he that loseth his life, for my sake, 
shall find it. MT 10.35 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth 
up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her 
mother-in-law; a man's enemies are those of his own 
house. Micah, vii, 6. 
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father; for 
so it seemed good in thy sight. MT 11.25-26 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb, and made the 
tongues of babes to speak clearly. Wisdom, x, 21.  
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the 
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor have  
the Gospel preached to them. And blessed is he 
whosoever shall not be offended in me. MT 11.4-6 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
29 
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears 
of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man 
leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing. Is., 
xxv, 5-6. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Take my yoke upon you; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light. MT 11.29-30  
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Draw near unto me, ye unlearned Put your neck under 
the yoke, and let your soul receive instruction. I 
laboured but a little, and found for myself much rest. 
Ecclus., li, 23-27.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
If ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy 
and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the 
guiltless. 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice. Hosea, vi, 6.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father.  
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of 
the 
firmament, 
and 
they 
that 
turn 
many 
to 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
30 
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. Daniel, xii, 
3. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul? MT 16.26 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh 
under the sun ? Eccles., i, 3,  
 
For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it 
ceaseth for ever. Ps.xlix, 8. 
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
Verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and 
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. MT 18.3 
 
The references to the children's "belief," to scandals, 
etc., show that the writer in part, at least takes the word 
"children" in the not uncommon Jewish sense of 
converts. McCabe 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
My soul is even as a weaned child. Ps. cxxxi, 2.  
 
Be not ashamed to instruct the unwise and foolish. 
Ecclus., xlii, 8. 
 
THE GOSPELS 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
31 
If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast,and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven: and come and follow me.  
 
Verily, I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto 
you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of 
God. MT 19.20-22 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
Wakefulness that cometh of riches consumeth the flesh. 
Ecdus., xxxi, 1. 
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first 
and great commandment. And the second is like unto it: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two 
commandments hang all the law and the prophets. MT 
22.37-39 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Deut., vi, 
5.  
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18. 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye 
pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have 
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
32 
mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not 
to leave the others undone. MT 23.22-24 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
[Not speaking of scribes or Pharisees.] 
 
When ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your 
hands are full of blood…. Wash you, make you clean 
learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, 
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Is., i, 15-17. 
 
Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and 
that write grievousness which they have prescribed: to 
turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away 
the right from the poor of my people, that widows may 
be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. Is., 
x, 1-2.  
 
What doth the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and 
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah, 
vi, 8.  
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I 
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me 
in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited 
me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall 
the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty,and gave thee 
drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? 
or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, 
or in prison, and came unto thee? MT 25.33-36 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
33 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT  
 
Give thy bread to the hungry, and of thy gar-  
ments to them that are naked. Tobit, v, 16.  
 
Be not slow to visit a sick man. Ecclus., vii, 34. 
 
 
THE GOSPELS  
 
LUKE.  
 
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath 
appointed me to preach the gospel to the poor : he hath 
sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach 
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to 
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to 
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. LK 4.17-19 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek: 
he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to 
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound: to proclaim the 
acceptable year of the Lord to comfort all that mourn. 
Js., lxi, 1-2.  
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
Take heed and beware of covetousness: for a man's life 
consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he 
possesseth. LK 12.15 
 

JEWIS MORALS IN THE GOSPELS 
34 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
Gold hath been the ruin of many, and their destruction 
was present. Ecclus., xxxi, 6.  
 
THE GOSPELS 
 
But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the 
maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shalt be blessed: 
for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be 
recompensed at the resurrection of the just. LK 14.12-
14 
 
THE OLD TESTAMENT 
 
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I was 
a father to the poor. Job, xxix, 15.  
 
He that giveth to the rich shall surely come to want. 
Prov., xxii, 16.  
 

 
35 
CHAPTER 2 THE MORAL TEACHINGS OF THE 
GOSPELS ARE FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS. 
 
“Personality in the Gospels (Ch 10) from The Sources of 
the Morality of the Gospels, 1914), Joseph McCabe 
correctly argues that the moral teachings ascribed to 
Jesus are not unique to Christ. He argues that these 
morals were common in the ancient world.  
 
The comparative scheme given in the previous chapter 
seems to be conclusive as regards the question of the 
originality of the Gospel ethic. There is no shade of 
moral idealism in the discourses attributed to Christ 
that had not found expression in the Old Testament 
centuries before, was not familiar among the Jewish 
teachers who spent their lives in meditation on the Old 
Testament, and was not put forward by some, if not all, 
of the great non-Christian and non-Jewish moralists of 
the time.Indeed, a fifth column might have been added 
to show that the sentiments were familiar in more 
ancient Persia,Egypt, and Babylonia; and a sixth to 
show their currency in India and China. What we have 
seen, however, suffices to discredit the claim that Jesus 
brought a single new element of moral idealism into the 
world. Whatever amount of distinctive phrasing or 
conceiving we may find in the Gospels, the moral 
sentiment which is put in these distinctive ways was 
common to the whole religious and ethical world of the 
time. There is no advance whatever upon current 
morality in the Gospels.  
 
It is not necessary to show this in detail by examining 
the various claims that have been put forward. These 
claims are usually urged by men who do not trouble 
even to make a patient study of the morality of the Old 
Testament, to say nothing of the Talmud and the Greek 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
36 
moralists. There is, for instance, a stubborn belief that 
Christ was the first to deduce that subtle refinement of 
moral principle, the love of one's enemies, as the Gospel 
seems to claim. Whether Christ or any of his followers 
ever did, in the literal sense, love his enemies; how far 
the counsel is consistent with the precept to follow God 
as a pattern, who, on the Christian teaching, assuredly 
does not love his enemies; whether the maxim is of the 
least practical use -- these things we need not examine. 
It is enough to have shown that the counsel was not 
novel.  
 
A learned Austrian Jesuit has recently written a work in 
in defence of the old claim, and it is characteristic of 
"the will to believe." The most desperate efforts are made 
to show that Plutarch and Seneca may, in some 
mysterious way beyond the imagination of ordinary 
historians, have studied gospels which even Christian 
writers of their time never notice; or to persuade us that 
the rabbinical tradition was distorted into harmony with 
the teaching of Christ. Yet the plain words of Socrates 
and Plato, and the words of Exodus, of Proverbs, and 
other ancient Jewish writers, insist, centuries before the 
time of Christ, on the duty of kindly feeling and kindly 
action even towards one's enemies. If a quibbler be 
disposed to point out that the word "love" is not found in 
the parallel texts, I would remind him that the Christian 
injunction to love your enemies because you would be 
rewarded for doing so, and the belief that Christ himself, 
as God, condemned his enemies to eternal fire, would 
have revolted a pagan moralist.  
 
The counsel to turn the other cheek to the smiter is in 
the same position. It goes back to Isaiah and Jeremiah 
on the Jewish side, and it is expressly formulated by 
Plato, and was a common-place in Epictetus, on the 
pagan side. Even archbishops do not find the counsel 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
37 
commendable in modern times, and the social historian 
might 
draw 
up 
an 
appalling 
indictment 
of 
its 
consequences (in the modified form in which the 
Church urged it on the oppressed) in Europe. Such as it 
is, however -- and few will fail to recognize the grace of 
personal character which the counsel involves -- it was 
a familiar teaching of moralists of the first century, and 
began much earlier.  
 
That internal purity is as essential as outward 
conformity with law is another of the supposed 
distinctions of Christ's ethic. In this case the claim is 
flagrant. How any man can think that the older Jewish 
writers, to say nothing of Hillel and Shammai and their 
followers, or that Plato and Zeno, to say nothing of 
Plutarch and Epictetus, regarded an immoral desire as 
guiltless, 
is 
not 
easily 
understood. 
Persian 
and 
Buddhist, Greek and Jew, were clear and emphatic on 
the point. It is a moral truism in the only sense in which 
it is defensible; for to say that the desire of adultery is 
as bad as actual adultery, in the literal sense, is to 
ignore considerations of the gravest character.  
 
However, the maxim was, as I have shown, general at 
the time, and the earlier chapters trace it in ancient 
Egypt and Babylon.  
 
Humanity is said by others to be distinctive of Christ's 
message, and again the claim is monstrous. One finds 
incessant exhortations to humility, modesty, and 
meekness in the Old Testament and the pagan 
moralists, and in the rabbinical discourses it seems to 
have been one of the most familiar themes. It might be 
claimed that Christ is unique in commending children 
as a model (either because of their purity or their lack of 
self-consciousness, or both), but one sees at a glance 
that the well-known texts in which he refers to children 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
38 
are, at least in part, metaphorical. Love of children is 
hardly a distinction in a Jew. The wisdom-books of the 
Old Testament reflect those rich parental instincts 
which are found in the race. Indeed, apologists must be 
hard put when they lay stress on the mere fact that 
Jesus loved children! Nevertheless, it is clear that the 
words in the Gospels are largely metaphorical. To speak 
of children as "believing in me" and having received a 
revelation which was hidden from "the wise and 
prudent" is, if it be taken literally, nonsense. We 
recognize the hand of a later Christian writer who 
wishes to denounce those who scandalize converts. On 
the other hand, Christ has scarcely a word about the 
love of parents (probably because of his estrangement 
from his mother) and the respect due to the aged, which 
are so constantly and finely enjoined by all other Jewish 
moralists. His ascetic ideal, in fact, is destructive of 
family sentiment, and had disastrous consequences in 
Europe.  
 
It may be said, in a word, that the most prominent 
elements of the Gospel ethic, sound or unsound, were 
the characteristic elements of that stage of moral 
development. Long before Christ's time they were 
preached and practised among the followers of Buddha 
and the followers of Pythagoras, among the Essenians 
and the Serapians; and the Stoic philosophy and the 
more austere rabbis impressed them on their pupils 
with no less sincerity than constancy. One does not 
need to wander over the whole literature of the time in 
search of parallels; from either Plutarch, or Seneca, or 
Epictetus alone, you can take a complete series, and 
there is every reason to think that the lost teaching of 
Pythagoras or of Apollonius would have been found to 
coincide.  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
39 
But the most important point to remember, and the one 
which I have taken especial care to establish, is that the 
supposed teaching of Jesus is no advance whatever on 
the later and finer teaching of the Old Testament. 
Glancing over the first two columns of the scheme in the 
last chapter, I find that the only sentiments to which the 
books of the Old Testament afford no parallel are the 
injunctions (1) to cut out an eye, or cut off a limb, which 
occasions temptation, (2) to let the dead bury their 
dead, and (3) to distribute all your goods to the poor. If 
these be literally urged, they form no part of a moral 
code. The only Christian who ever obeyed the first 
injunction, Origen, has been unanimously condemned 
by divines; and the pitiful story of medieval monasticism 
sufficiently condemns the other two. Insofar as these 
maxims are paradoxical expressions of a real moral or 
religious feeling, that feeling was well known both in 
Judaism and beyond. The second part of Isaiah, many 
of the Psalms, Proverbs, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus 
contain and repeatedly impress all the sound moral 
maxims of the New Testament.  
 
Nor can it be said that Christ at least differed from 
rabbis and philosophers in appealing to the outcast, the 
poor, and the sinner. Poverty excluded none either from 
the schools of the rabbis or the schools of the Stoics. 
Lowliness, unworldliness, and a genial attitude towards 
the poorest were enjoined by all moralists. Christians 
love to conceive the rabbis as learned and affluent 
gentlemen, like high-caste Hindus, who carefully 
preserved the fringes of their garments from contact 
with "the common people" and sinners. Compare with 
this the true picture of two of the most famous of the 
rabbis who earned a slender and laborious living (as 
many of them did) by making shoes, not disdaining to 
make the shoes of women who were sinners in the city, 
yet preserving a grave and gentle modesty in their 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
40 
relations with such customers. It seems, on the other 
hand, that the story of Christ's relations with the 
converted sinner, Mary Magdalene, is historically very 
doubtful, while the story of the woman taken in adultery 
is rejected outright by many theologians.  
 
There are two chief elements of freshness in the 
Gospels. The first is, as theologians justly claim, the 
insistence on "the kingdom of heaven." This phrase has 
given considerable trouble to students of the New 
Testament, and it is plainly used in several different 
senses. Broadly speaking, it has two main significations: 
the coming rule of the Messiah over a transfigured 
earth, and the internal conditions of virtue which entitle 
a man to a share in that kingdom. The second meaning 
is derivative, and may not have been used by Christ at 
all; though the point matters little. The chief and 
fundamental idea is, of course, a familiar Jewish idea; 
but it seems to me that theologians, in discussing it, do 
not sufficiently attend to Persian influence. The 
expectation of such a kingdom is plainly expressed in 
Micah (iv, 7) and Zechariah (xiv, 9), and it won universal 
acceptance in Judaism. We saw that there was just 
such an expectation among the zealots of the Persian 
religion, and at least three centuries before Christ the 
Persian religion had a deep influence on the Jewish. 
This intensification of the Messianic hope is especially 
apparent among the Essenians, and it is not improbable 
that Jesus received it from them. In any case, it was a 
common Jewish and Persian attitude to believe that God 
would not long delay the establishment of his "kingdom" 
on earth and the triumph of the good over the evil.  
 
Jesus, like others, believed that the kingdom was close 
at hand, and it is this belief which gives a character to 
many of his sayings. He taught no new virtue, and no 
new moral heroism; but he (or the Gospel writer) taught 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
41 
the familiar virtues in language which glows with the 
ardour of this false expectation. If there was to be in a 
few years a judgment of the whole earth, a sorting of the 
sheep from the goats, an assignment of positions for all 
eternity, it mattered little about worldly things. It was 
an excellent investment to sell all your goods, and offer 
the other cheek to the smiter, and disown your parents 
and brethren, and deny your body the most elementary 
gratification. There never was a more utilitarian ethic in 
history than that of Jesus; though his modern followers, 
who shrink from his heroic deductions, profess to scorn 
utilitarianism. There is not a page of the Gospels that 
fails to remind the reader of the vast reward in the world 
to come. Stoics rejected that idea of virtue, and even 
rabbis taught their followers that it was an inferior 
motive. But Jesus saw the clouds already breaking to let 
the fire of heaven upon the earth, and he rose to 
passionate excesses in the recommendation of virtue. 
He was not alone in this, as John the Baptist and the 
Essenes remind us; and it is profoundly interesting to 
see how a Pythagoras or an Epictetus reaches the same 
heroic conclusions without such a motive. However, it is 
this burning expectation, this utter error, which gives a 
kind of inspiration to some of the language of the 
Gospels, and enables the liberal-minded student to 
understand their excesses.  
 
The second, and sounder, element of freshness in the 
Gospels is the revolt against an outworn creed. In this 
case, however, we have every reason to suppose that the 
actual Gospels go far beyond the teaching of Christ. 
When we find them affirming on one page that not a 
tittle of the law shall pass, or that the people must do all 
that the rabbis enjoin, and on another that Christ has 
come to teach a higher law; on one page that the 
disciples of Jesus do not keep the prescribed fasts, and 
on another that Jesus tells his hearers how to behave 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
42 
during the fasts; we can scarcely hesitate to judge the 
situation. Christ may have, like the Essenes, refused to 
offer sacrifice in the Temple, but he generally respected 
the Mosaic law. In the generation after Paul, when 
Christianity became a Gentile religion opposed to the 
Jews, the healthy energy of the revolt against a dead law 
was felt, and it inspires some of (from the literary point 
of view) the finer passages of the Gospels. Jesus is 
transformed into a God introducing a new dispensation, 
and appropriate language is put into his mouth. Every 
"reformation" has this inspiration.  
 
These elements of freshness make the Gospels much 
finer reading than the Talmud, and even, in my opinion, 
than the works of the Stoics. I do not mean from the 
ethical point of view, for I agree with the ethic of neither. 
How many do to-day? But there is a vigour and 
originality of phrase in much of the Gospels which 
reconciles us to the exaggerations and aberrations more 
easily 
than 
we 
are 
reconciled 
to 
the 
similar 
exaggerations of Epictetus or Marcus Aurelius. We feel 
that the Gospels are more logical than the philosophers. 
Their foundation is the hundred-fold reward in the 
approaching kingdom; the philosophers build on 
something equally erroneous, but less substantial in its 
error.  
 
And here a last word must be said about the idea that, 
whether or no the Gospels bring a unique morality, they 
do reflect a unique personality, or a personality of great 
power and insight. This very common claim of liberal 
theologians can only be understood as the outcome of a 
desperate effort to recover something from the wreck of 
the Christian tradition. I see no reason why a non-
Christian historian should have any bias, or even 
unconscious prejudice, against such an idea. Indeed, it 
is on general historical considerations that I feel that 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
43 
the man who made this deep, if limited, impression on 
his fellows -- the man before whose memory the 
masterful Paul bowed to the dust -- the man about 
whom such a rich growth of legends gathered -- 
probably was a gifted and impressive personality. But to 
say that this personality is reflected in the Gospels is 
surely to play fast and loose with the results of 
research.  
 
I would recall a few considerations from an earlier 
chapter. The canticles of Zecharias, Mary, and Simeon, 
in the early chapters of Luke, are literary pieces as fine 
as any in the New Testament. Even the orthodox 
believer will hardly suppose that they were really 
uttered, and taken down in shorthand; in the case of 
Mary, indeed, there was no hearer. They do not reflect 
three personalities, but one; and it is confessedly not 
the personality of Christ. Then there are all the 
anachronistic passages, and even long discourses, 
which I have previously mentioned. The lamentations 
over Jerusalem in Matthew and Luke are just as fine, 
but they were not spoken by Christ. The constant 
references to coming or actual persecution contain some 
of the finer sentences of the Gospels; yet it is an 
anachronism, to say the least, to ascribe them to Christ. 
The parables which refer to the execution of Christ by 
the Jews, or the substitution in God's favour of the 
Gentiles for the Jews, are not a whit inferior to the best 
of the other parables; and these again a purely 
historical consideration must dissociate from Christ. In 
fact, it is, historically, quite unreasonable to suppose 
that any lengthy discourse attributed to Christ in 
Matthew was really spoken and learned by heart, or 
committed at once to parchment; while of the short 
pregnant sayings one must surely say that they are not 
superior to the sayings of the unknown authors of 
Proverbs and Ecclesiasticus, or the second part of 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
44 
Isaiah. Finally, the personality reflected in Matthew is 
not the personality reflected in Mark, and that set forth 
in John is still more diverse. In each case it is the 
personality of the author.  
 
The conclusion is not a matter of prejudice, but of 
simple historical inference. If the same character is 
found in the later and the earlier elements of the 
Gospels, the things that Christ is supposed to have said 
and the things that he is not supposed to have said (or 
said with no human audience), it is useless to say that 
they reflect the personality of Christ. The limit I have 
conceived for this essay is reached, and I must invite 
the reader to examine the point for himself. Run 
through the Gospel sayings reproduced in the previous 
chapter (and there are further anachronisms among the 
doctrinal sayings), and ask yourself whether there is 
any difference between the sayings that might be of 
Christ and those that are not.  
 
In point of fact, many theologians now admit that it is 
not likely that we have the actual words of Christ at all -
- a conclusion that would have been reached long ago if 
candid historical considerations had been applied to the 
matter. At the most, a few aphoristic sentences may 
survive with little or no change. The discourses are a 
later 
literary 
product: 
even 
short 
and 
detached 
discourses. One example may be given. There is the fine 
passage, so often quoted as most characteristic of 
Christ, in Matthew (xi, 28-30):  
 
Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke 
upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is 
light.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
45 
 
But we may say with confidence that Christ never spoke 
those words. The doctrinal implication of divinity is late: 
the words are inconsistent with his constant insistence 
that his burden is heavy and grievous (to sell all one's 
property, to separate from one's family, to take up one's 
cross, etc.); and, most decisive of all, the words are 
simply 
borrowed, 
with 
little 
alteration, 
from 
Ecclesiasticus (li, 23-27). The reader will notice many 
such in the previous columns. It is, therefore, extremely 
difficult to say anywhere that we have the actual words 
of Christ; and it is quite certain that many of the 
passages we cannot attribute to him are as fine and 
impressive as the doubtful passages. The attempt to 
build up the character of Christ from the Gospels is 
utterly futile. We can but say that the phenomenon of 
Christianity itself suggests a strong and eloquent 
personality, a kind of Essene without the robe, a man 
exalted by a firm conviction that the end of the world 
was at hand.  
 
Instead of one personality, the Gospels, with their 
various strata yet similarity of tone, suggest a number 
of like-minded, exalted personalities; as in the work of 
the Esdras school. And our last consideration must be 
of the value of this Christian synthesis of the first or 
second century. Granted that it only gathers together 
the moral commonplaces of the age, what is the value of 
the synthesis as such? May we suppose that it is in 
itself an achievement which, apart from doctrine or from 
the question of a great human personality, gives a 
raison d'etre to Christianity in our own time?  
 
It is difficult to see how any candid historian can claim 
for it more than an academic historical interest. It 
admirably preserves for us the notes of one of the stages 
in religious and moral evolution: it is just as clearly 

MORAL TEACHINGS FALSELY ATTRIBUTED TO JESUS 
46 
unsuitable for our age. The dominant conception of an 
impending end of the world, which energizes it, cannot 
be abandoned without weakening the whole structure. 
The counsels which were quite logical under that 
conception -- to cast away one's possessions, disown 
one's relatives, empty one's pockets to the thief, crucify 
the flesh, etc. -- are now so illogical that divines hardly 
know what to make of them. The modern divine scarcely 
even regards them as counsels of perfection; in spite of 
the moral genius he ascribes to Christ, he thinks that 
the prophet was quite mistaken in saying that, "if you 
would be perfect," you must live in abject poverty, not 
make any provision for the morrow, and not marry. Yet 
these are the most characteristic elements of the Gospel 
ethic. 
The 
remaining 
conceptions 
-- 
hospitality, 
brotherly love, conjugal fidelity, honesty, truthfulness, 
etc. -- are platitudes of the ethical life, as old as Ptah-
hotep. The more important of them, such as justice, are 
least developed of all in the Gospels; the less important 
or more individual, such as humility and chastity, are 
preponderantly developed. The whole system, moreover, 
is informed by a mercantile spirit -- the reward in the 
life to come -- which is repugnant to the finer sentiment 
of our time, and which places the foundation of 
character in a hazardous speculation. How many 
educated people now believe in the naive heaven of 
Jesus?  
 
Our age needs a new winnowing, and a new synthesis. 
Christ's conception of conduct is inaccurate, archaic, 
narrow, vexatious, and impracticable in a score of ways. 
The 
Gospels 
represent 
a 
distortion 
of 
moral 
development. By their fruits -- the Middle Ages -- you 
shall know them; I mean that the grossness and descent 
of the Middle Ages were an inevitable reaction on an 
impracticable standard, and an inevitable result of 
belittling culture and human interests. The imposition 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
47 
of this archaic and erroneous code of morals on children 
is as stupid as it is mischievous. They learn its 
weaknesses in later years and despise their training. 
The modern world has no real sympathy with the 
system. It is defended for doctrinal and ecclesiastical 
reasons. Morality would perish in the twentieth century 
if we insisted on this ascetic code. Its errors, however, 
and its ineffectiveness do not properly concern me. It is 
enough to have shown its lack of originality and its 
failure to reveal to us the personality of the founder of 
Christianity. 


 
49 
 
 
 
PART 2   CHRISTIANS ON PAGAN 
PHILOSOPHIES 
 


 
51 
 
CHAPTER 3 MOST ANCIENT CHRISTIAN 
WRITERS BELIEVED THAT ALL PAGAN 
PHILOSOPHIES HAVE SOME CHRISTIAN TRUTH. 
 
 “All Pagan Philosophies Have a Germ of Truth.” -- The 
Christian, Clement Of Alexandra  
 
Nearly all ancient Christian writers argued that all truth 
comes from God – and so there is some Christian truth 
in all pagan philosophies. 
 
PAGAN PHILOSOPHY AND CHRISTIANS  
 
Many people know that educated Romans admired 
philosophy but the reader might wonder why we spend 
so much time arguing that Christians were strongly 
influenced by pagan philosophy. The reason is that 
most people assume that all ancient Christians hated 
everything pagan. This chapter will show that this is not 
true. The Stoic, Seneca, was much admired by the early 
Christians; some of whom wrongly thought that he was 
a secret Christian. That's how close his ethics were to 
those of the New Testament. (The Christians added Hell 
and Heaven.)  
The Christian admiration for pagan philosophy was 
nearly universal, provided that it was subordinated to 
the teachings of the New Testament and the church. As 
evidence of this we will in this chapter take a look at the 
writings of Justin Martyr and Clement of Alexandria, 
etc., as well as the New Testament. The early Christian 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
52 
writers believed that all pagan philosophies, though 
written before the coming of Christ, contained germs of 
Christian truth.  
 
Before turning to Christians that admired, in a limited 
way, pagan philosophy, let us first look at those 
Christians who were against pagan philosophy.  
CHRISTIANS WHO WERE AGAINST PAGAN PHILOSOPHY 
 
JESUS 
I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise [philosophers 
and the educated] and prudent, and hast revealed them 
unto babes (the uneducated). MT 11.25, cf LK  10.21 
 
For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and 
righteous men have desired to see those things which ye 
see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things 
which ye hear, and have not heard them. MT 13:17  
 
Jesus thanks God that only the ignorant and foolish will 
listen to him.  
PAUL 
 
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and 
vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.  COL 2:8 
For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after 
wisdom:  But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews 
a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness…. 1 
COR 1:22-23 
 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
53 
 
 
 
Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you 
seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, 
that he may be wise. (Become a Christian.) For the 
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is 
written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness. 1 
COR 3.18-19 
Other Christians: 
Many of them also which used curious arts brought 
their books together, and burned them before all men: 
and they counted the price of them, and found it was 
fifty thousand pieces of silver. ACTS 19:19 
Paul's converts at Ephesus burned 50,000 pieces of 
silver worth of books.  
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God … and it 
shall be given him.  James 1.5 
These Christian quotes appear to be quite anti-pagan 
philosophy. Next we will look at what Paul has to say 
about pagan philosophy. Then we will review Clement of 
Alexandria who believes that Paul defends “true” 
philosophy in so far as it defends the Faith. 
PAUL 
Paul in Athens Acts 17.15, 18, 22-24, 26-38:: 
And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens 
…. Acts 17.15 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
54 
Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the 
Stoics, encountered him. And some said, What will this 
babbler say? others said, He seemeth to be a setter forth 
of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, 
and the resurrection. Acts 17.18 
Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill, and said, Ye 
men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too 
superstitious. Acts 17.22 
 
[Paul, the man who raised people from the dead and 
drove out devils from people who touched his apron!]  
 
For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found 
an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. 
Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I 
unto you. [Epicureans were atheists and the Stoics were 
pantheists; they thought that God was Nature or 
Reason. Neither worshipped gods nor were they 
searching for Gods.] God that made the world and all 
things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and 
earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands ….  
Acts 17 23-24 [Educated Greco-Romans, especially 
philosophers, generally believed in one God with many 
names and they did not think that the gods dwelt in 
temples.] 
 
(God) hath made of one blood all nations of men for to 
dwell on all the face of the earth …. Acts 17.26 
[The Stoic philosophers believed in the kinship of all 
human beings.  Christians believed that God created 
human beings (Adam and Eve). Nevertheless, they 
believed that God adopted the Christians. Thus, all 
outsiders were doomed to Hell.]   

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
55 
That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel 
after him, and find him, though he be not far from every 
one of us: For in him we live, and move, and have our 
being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For 
we are also his offspring. Acts 17.27-28 
[That we are the children of God (or Reason or Nature) 
was a common belief among Stoics.] 
 
For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we 
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or 
silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device. Acts 
17.29 
 
[Epicureans, Stoics and other philosophers strongly 
criticized those who identified their God or gods with 
graven art.]     
 
And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now 
commands all men everywhere to repent :  Because he 
hath appointed a day, in which (Jesus) will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath 
ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all 
men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. Acts 
17.30-31 
 
And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, 
some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again 
of this matter. Acts 17.32  
[Romans, especially educated Romans, found the idea of 
physical resurrection repulsive. This would include 
Epicureans or Stoics who rejected the idea of life after 
death.] 
So, Paul departed from among them. Howbeit certain 
men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
56 
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named 
Damaris, and others with them.  Acts 17.33-34 
 
EDITORIAL COMMENT: 
Acts of the Apostles, the Gospels and the letters of Paul 
all make a common attack on pagan religions. The 
Christians attacked the characteristics of religion as 
practiced by the masses with the approval of the state. 
Temples are condemned since the Christians at this 
early time could not afford to construct church 
buildings, but rather used home residences. They 
attacked blood sacrifices since they were poor and did 
not have the money for such expensive rituals. The 
pagan masses believed in many gods but educated 
Romans generally believed in one God with many names 
or no God at all. 
In short, the New Testament attacks what educated 
Romans already criticized as superstition. 
 
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA  
(c. 150 - c. 215 CE), A Christian writer 
 
Clement’s analysis of Colossians 2:4, 8 and Acts 17.18 
as to the truth of pagan philosophy. 
Quotes from The Stromata (Miscellaneous or Patchwork) 
The Stromata (Στρώματα) is the third in Clement of 
Alexandria's trilogy of works on the Christian life.  
Chapter 11. What Is The Philosophy Which  
The Apostle [Paul] Bids Us Shun? 
This, then, the wisdom of the world is foolishness with 
God, and of those who are the wise the Lord knows their 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
57 
thoughts that they are vain. 1 Corinthians 3:19-20  Let 
no man therefore glory on account of pre-eminence in 
human thought.  
Colossians 2:4, 8 And again, Beware lest any man spoil 
you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the 
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and 
not after Christ; Colossians 2:8 branding not all 
philosophy, but the Epicurean, which Paul mentions in 
the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 17:18 which abolishes 
providence and deifies pleasure, and whatever other 
philosophy honours the elements, but places not over 
them the efficient cause, nor apprehends the Creator. 
But seeking ends in finding, driving out the empty 
trifling, and approving of the contemplation which 
confirms our faith.  
 
[Divine Providence: An important belief in Roman 
Stoicism. The Stoics believed that God (nature or 
reason) showers humanity only with good things. 
Clement 
here 
seems 
to 
be 
attacking 
atheistic 
Epicureanism which denied Providence, thinking that 
all things, good or bad, come from nature.]  
COMMENTS BY EDITORS  
Clement and Paul in Colossians 2:4, 8 and in Acts 
17.18, that all pagan philosophies have germs of truth 
Being a Christian apologist, Clement distorts Colossians 
2.4,8 and Acts 17.18 by implying that it is the 
Epicureans who are the bad philosophers. Actually, 
Colossians 2.4,8 does not mention Epicureans. And 
Acts 17.18 states that “some” Epicureans and Stoics 
thought he was a “babbler” and others that he seems “to 
be a setter forth of strange gods….”  Verse 32 states:  
“And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
58 
some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again 
of this matter.” It is odd that even some “Athenians and 
strangers” would be responsive to Paul's idea of the 
resurrection of the dead since Greco-Romans in general 
would be repulsed by this idea.  
In his writings Clement holds that pagan philosophers 
often prepare Christians for the Gospels, as he believed 
that there were germs of truth in all philosophies. For 
example, he believed (wrongly) that Plato had partial 
truth as regard the true God as he had read the Jewish 
Scriptures (the Old Testament). Some Christians 
believed that the Holy Spirit or the Logos had visited 
ancient pagans. Or, wrongly, that they had read the Old 
Testament. 
Clement, strongly defends “true philosophy,” but equally 
condemns “bad or false” philosophy, and believes that 
Paul also does so. But it is hard to see where Paul 
defends “true philosophy.”  Paul leaves the scene (verse 
33). Verse 34 states that “certain men clave unto (Paul), 
and believed.” But it is not stated who they were:  
philosophers or those “in the market that met with 
him.” (v 17) . In any case, Paul is capable of using pagan 
sources when he wants to: For in him we live, and 
move, and have our being; as certain also of your own 
poets have said, For we are also his offspring. Acts 
17.28  
 
Conclusions 
Justin and Clement, etc., were pro-pagan philosophy in 
so far as it could be used to defend their Christian faith. 
Paul was less inclined to defend his faith in this way but 
he does sometimes. In this limited sense they were pro-
pagan philosophy. 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
59 
However, they were all against real philosophy. Justin, 
Clement, Paul or any other Christians were not true 
philosophers since they were not engaged in an 
independent search for truth. If a statement was 
contrary to the Bible or church teaching, they rejected it 
as false.  
TWO EARLY CHRISTIANS WHO WERE  
AGAINST PAGAN PHILOSOPHY 
TERTULLIAN (C. 160 BCE – C. 225 CE)   
Tertullian was a prolific early Christian author from 
Carthage in the Roman province of Africa.  
General character 
Though thoroughly conversant with the Greek theology, 
Tertullian 
was 
independent 
of 
its 
metaphysical 
speculation…. He despised Greek philosophy, and, far 
from looking at Plato, Aristotle, and other Greek 
thinkers whom he quotes as forerunners of Christ and 
the Gospel, he pronounces them the patriarchal 
forefathers of the heretics (De anima, iii). However, note 
his praise for the pagan Stoic, Seneca. [Tertullian From 
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia] 
Apologeticus: 
The soul of man, which by nature is inclined to 
Christianity, bears witness. (Similarly, the pagan Stoics 
believed that humans were born with an inclination to a 
central Stoic tenet, namely that we should be good to 
humankind.) [newadvent.org] 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
60 
Tertullian is the church father who more than any other 
has been taken to epitomise the anti-intellectualism of 
the early Church. [earlychurch.org.uk:] 
 Tertullian wrote:  
Indeed 
heresies 
are 
themselves 
instigated 
by 
philosophy… What indeed has Athens to do with 
Jerusalem? What has the Academy to do with the 
Church? What have heretics to do with Christians? … 
Away with all attempts to produce a Stoic, Platonic, and 
dialectic Christianity! We want no curious disputation 
after possessing Christ Jesus, no inquisition after 
receiving the gospel! When we believe, we desire no 
further belief. For this is our first article of faith, that 
there is nothing which we ought to believe besides.(12) 
Tertullian, Heretics, 7 (Stevenson, 166-167). … 
Tertullian 
himself 
made 
use 
of 
philosophical 
(particularly Stoic) ideas in his writings. He agreed with 
Plato on the matter of the immortality of the soul. He 
even claimed (as Philo and Justin Martyr had before 
him) that the philosophers borrowed from the Jewish 
Scriptures. [Tertullian, Apology 47.1; Flesh 9.2 Ante-
Nicene Fathers, Vol. 3, 51-52, 531-532. Norris, 86.] 
His principle for identifying the presence of allegory was 
that it was present if the literal sense resulted in 
nonsense; it is not present when the literal meaning 
makes sense.  In this he did not differ significantly from 
Origen’s principle.  [earlychurch.org.uk] 
Tertullian has been accused of going to an unhealthy 
extreme in his counsels of asceticism; for example, 
about ejaculatory orgasms he wrote: In that last 
breaking wave of delight, do we not feel something of 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
61 
our very soul go out from us. [From Wikipedia, the free 
encyclopedia] 
HIPPOLYTUS   (d. 240 CE)    
He was as harsh and uncompromising a foe of 
philosophy as Tertullian. [earlychurch.org.uk] 
Christian “praise” for pagan philosophy, provided that it 
was subordinated to the teachings of the NT and the 
Church: 
“The very same thing which now is called Christianity 
existed among the ancients and was not absent from the 
beginning of mankind until Christ appeared in the flesh, 
whence the true religion, which already existed, began 
to be called Christian.”  St. Augustine   
Why did Augustine and many other ancient Christians 
believe that Christianity came before the coming of 
Jesus Christ? They believed this because they thought 
that God was eternal and therefore his truth had no 
beginning. Thus, Christianity would have existed long 
before Christ. Of course, the Christians believed that the 
full and clear meaning of it would have to wait for the 
revelation of the Son of God. 
 
Well, how anti-pagan were the early Christians? Let’s 
look at the views of the ancient Christians from the 2nd 
century through the early 5th century CE, that is from 
Justin Martyn through St Augustine and Theodore of 
Mopsuestia (350-428). Note, that the vast majority of 
these Christians believed that some germs of Christian 
truth were contained in all pagan philosophies prior to 
the coming of Jesus Christ!  

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
62 
EXCURUS 
Philo of Alexandria (c.20 BC - c. AD 50) 
[earlychurch.org.uk] 
Although not a Christian, we have included Philo in this 
list of those who were friendly to pagan philosophy. We 
have done so as Philo was used by early Christians in 
the development of their theology.  
Philo's works were not preserved by the Jews but were 
treasured by Christian writers who seized upon his 
concept of the Logos, thinking that it was the same as 
the Logos of the prologue of John's Gospel. To Philo the 
Logos was "the instrument by which God makes the 
world and the intermediary by which the human 
intelligence as it is purified ascends to God again". 
However, Philo's Logos is not Divine nor is it a person 
and it has no existence apart from the role it performs. 
So important was Philo to the early church writers that 
some, such as Eusebius and Jerome even went so far as 
to claim that he was a (secret) Christian. Eusebius 
records a legendary (fictional) meeting between Philo 
and Peter in Rome and both writers argue that Philo's 
work concerning Jewish ascetics (On the Contemplative 
Life) is a first hand report of the church (and 
monasteries!) founded by Mark in Alexandria. It is true 
to say that by the fourth century "Pious legend would 
allow no writer so influential on early Christian exegesis 
to remain unconverted."  (They were often considered 
secret Christians.)  [earlychurch.org.uk] 
Philo was deeply influenced by Middle Platonism, 
Aristotle, the Neo-Pythagoreans, the Cynics and the 
Stoics. He stood at the end of a long Jewish tradition 
whose thoughts he developed, as evidenced by his 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
63 
references to the works of his predecessors. Like them 
he attempted to interpret the Old Testament Scriptures 
in such as way as to bridge the gap between Judaism 
and intellectual paganism rather than attempting to 
produce his own philosophical system. (Very much like 
early Christian writers.) [earlychurch.org.uk]  
Philo (like the Christians) made extensive use of allegory 
in his writings …. 
This appears most clearly in the Questions and Answers 
on Genesis and Exodus. In both of these works, literal 
and allegorical interpretations lie side by side. Philo is 
obviously 
more 
interested 
in 
the 
allegorical 
interpretation, but, for the most part, the literal 
interpretations are also considered valid and valuable 
(Unlike the Christians who often found allegory 
everywhere.) [earlychurch.org.uk] 
Similarly, the Christian writers of the New Testament 
allegorized the OT, symbolically interpreting it. They 
needed to show that the Jewish Scriptures (which knew 
nothing about Christ) predicted the coming of Jesus 
Christ. For example, a tree predicted the death of Christ 
on a wooden cross, etc. The purpose was to show that 
because “the Jews” had engineered the death of Christ, 
Gentiles had replaced Jews as the chosen people of God, 
that Christianity had replaced Judaism. See our 
previous book, Jesus Christ: A Pagan Myth - Evidence 
That Jesus Never Lived.   
CHRISTIANS WHO ACCEPTED PAGAN PHILOSOPHY AS TRUTH 
JUSTIN MARTYR (c.100-c.165)  
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia       

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
64 
Justin Martyr, also known as just Saint Justin (103–
165), was an early Christian apologist. (Born at Flavia 
Neapolis, near Jerusalem.) Most of his works are lost, 
but two apologies and a dialogue did survive. He is 
considered a saint by the Roman Catholic Church and 
the Eastern Orthodox Church.  
Life 
(A Christian convert, he) arrived in Rome in the reign of 
Antoninus Pius (138-161), where he started his own 
school…. Justin was tried together with six companions 
by Junius Rusticus, who was urban prefect from 163-
167, and was beheaded, probably in 165. 
Conversion and teachings 
Justin had, like others, the idea that the Greek 
philosophers had derived, if not borrowed, the most 
essential elements of truth found in their teaching from 
the Old Testament. But at the same time he adopted the 
Stoic doctrine of the "seminal word," and so philosophy 
was to him an operation of the Word—in fact, through 
his identification of the Word with Christ, it was brought 
into immediate connection with him. [He accepted the 
Old Testament and pagan philosophies as sources of 
truth.] 
Thus he does not scruple to declare that Socrates and 
Heraclitus were Christians (Apol., i. 46, ii. 10) [and over 
300 years before Christ!]. His aim, of course, is to 
emphasize the absolute significance of Christ, so that all 
that ever existed of virtue and truth may be referred to             
(Christ). The old philosophers and law-givers had only a 
part of the Logos, while the whole appears in Christ. 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
65 
While the gentile peoples, seduced by demons, had 
deserted the true God for idols, the Jews and 
Samaritans possessed the revelation given through the 
prophets and awaited the Messiah. [The vast majority of 
the Jews were not expecting a Messiah. Neither Philo 
nor the first century Jewish historian, Josephus, make 
any mention of an expected Messiah.]  
The idea of an economy of grace, of a restoration of the 
union with God which had been destroyed by sin, is not 
foreign to him. It is noteworthy that in the "Dialogue" he 
no longer speaks of a "seed of the Word" in every man, 
and in his non-apologetic works the emphasis is laid 
upon the redeeming acts of the life of Christ rather than 
upon the demonstration of the reasonableness and 
moral value of Christianity, though the fragmentary 
character of the latter works makes it difficult to 
determine exactly to what extent this is true and how 
far the teaching of Irenaeus on redemption is derived 
from him. 
[Justin’s 
early 
view 
seems 
to 
have 
been 
“the 
reasonableness and moral value of Christianity,” the 
moral influence of Christianity saves Christians, not 
that Christ saves us from our sins through his death on 
the cross – as in Paul’s letters.] 
Doctrine of the Logos 
Justin's use of the idea of the logos has always attracted 
attention. It is probably too much to assume a direct 
connection with Philo of Alexandria in this particular.  
… Philo's Logos is not Divine, nor is it a person and it 
has no existence apart from the role it performs.  
Quotes from Justin 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
66 
The First Apology: 
Chapter 14. The demons misrepresent Christian 
doctrine. 
For we forewarn you to be on your guard, lest those 
demons whom we have been accusing should deceive 
you, 
and 
quite 
divert 
you 
from 
reading 
and 
understanding what we say.  
Chapter 21. Analogies to the history of Christ 
And when we say also that the Word, who is the first-
birth of God, was produced without sexual union, and 
that He, Jesus Christ, our Teacher, was crucified and 
died, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, we 
propound nothing different from what you believe 
regarding those whom you esteem sons of Jupiter. For 
you know how many sons your esteemed writers 
ascribed to Jupiter : Mercury, the interpreting word and 
teacher of all; Æsculapius, who, though he was a great 
physician, was struck by a thunderbolt, and so 
ascended to heaven; and Bacchus too, after he had been 
torn limb from limb; and Hercules, when he had 
committed himself to the flames to escape his toils; and 
the sons of Leda, and Dioscuri; and Perseus, son of 
Danae; and Bellerophon, who, though sprung from 
mortals, rose to heaven on the horse Pegasus. For what 
shall I say of Ariadne, and those who, like her, have 
been declared to be set among the stars? And what of 
the emperors who die among yourselves, whom you 
deem worthy of deification, and in whose behalf you 
produce someone who swears he has seen the burning 
Cæsar rise to heaven from the funeral pyre? [Justin 
flatly states that the Christians share many ideas with 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
67 
the pagan mythologies, poets and philosophers, virtually 
all of which preceded Christianity.] 
Chapter 22. Analogies to the sonship of Christ 
Moreover, the Son of God called Jesus, even if only a 
man by ordinary generation, yet, on account of His 
wisdom, is worthy to be called the Son of God; for all 
writers call God the Father of men and gods. And if we 
assert that the Word of God was born of God in a 
peculiar manner (virginal conception), different from 
ordinary generation, let this, as said above, be no 
extraordinary thing to you, who say that Mercury is the 
angelic word of God. … And if we even affirm that He 
was born of a virgin, accept this in common with what 
you accept of Perseus. And in that we say that He made 
whole the lame, the paralytic, and those born blind, we 
seem to say what is very similar to the deeds said to 
have been done by Æsculapius. 
Chapter 54. Origin of heathen mythology  
But those who hand down the myths which the poets 
have made, adduce no proof to the youths who learn 
them; and we proceed to demonstrate that they have 
been uttered by the influence of the wicked demons, to 
deceive and lead astray the human race. [Here, Justin 
proves that those Christian apologists who argue that 
the Christian myths were stolen by the pagans are not 
correct. The pagan myths may have been produced by 
demons but even Justin concedes that they existed 
before Christianity!] 
Chapter 59. Plato's obligation to Moses 
And that you may learn that it was from our teachers— 
we mean the account given through the prophets— that 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
68 
Plato borrowed his statement that God, having altered 
matter which was shapeless, made the world ….  
[Made, not created out of nothing? It was a common 
pagan belief in the ancient world that God or the gods 
designed the universe from pre-existing eternal matter, 
had not created it out of nothing. Also, no modern 
scholar believes that Plato read the Jewish Scriptures – 
the Old Testament. But that Plato and other pagans 
read the Scriptures was a common belief among ancient 
Christian 
writers. 
This 
explains 
why 
all 
pagan 
philosophies had germs of truth, according to the 
Christians. Another popular explanation was that the 
Word or Logos or the Holy Spirit visited these ancient 
pagans and gave them some Christian truths, as much 
as they could understand. Of course, the complete truth 
is understood once Christ arrived on Earth.] 
Chapter 60. Plato's doctrine of the cross   
If you want to know how far allegory or symbolic 
interpretation of the OT can go, consider Justin’s effort 
to find in Plato reference to a cross in the Old Testament 
that predicts the crucifixion of Jesus some hundreds of 
years in the future:  
And the physiological discussion concerning the Son of 
God in the TIMÆUS of Plato, where he says, He placed 
him crosswise in the universe, (Plato) borrowed in like 
manner from Moses … by the inspiration and influence 
of God, took brass, and made it into the figure of a 
cross, and set it in the holy tabernacle, and said to the 
people, If you look to this figure, and believe, you shall 
be saved thereby. [Stolen from the OT by Plato who had 
never read the Jewish Scriptures!] 
Second Apology: 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
69 
Chapter 9. Eternal punishment not a mere threat.  
And that no one may say what is said by those who are 
deemed philosophers, that our assertions that the 
wicked are punished in eternal fire are big words and 
bugbears, and that we wish men to live virtuously 
through fear, and not because such a life is good and 
pleasant …. [Of course that is exactly what the 
Christian writers of NT write. They encourage “men to 
live virtuously through fear, and not because such a life 
is good." The Stoics taught that virtue was its own 
reward; they were not to do good out of fear of 
punishment or loss of rewards. The NT teaches that we 
should fear the loss of Heaven and eternal punishment 
in Hell.] 
Chapter 10. Christ compared with Socrates 
For no one trusted in Socrates so as to die for this 
doctrine, but in Christ, who was partially known even 
by Socrates (for He was and is the Word who is in every 
man …. [Note, that Justin sees Socrates as partially 
knowing Christ for the Logos or “the Word is in every 
man.” Also, Justin goes on to say that no one thought 
that Socrates would die for his doctrine but that 
everyone of all classes thought that Christ would die for 
his.] 
Chapter 5. The soul is not in its own nature immortal  
(See the New Testament where some “perish” if they 
don't accept Jesus as their Savior.) 
Chapter 70. So also the mysteries of Mithras are 
distorted from the prophecies of Daniel and Isaiah. 
IRENAEUS (c.115-c.202) 
earlychurch.org.uk : 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
70 
Leaving Asia Minor for Rome (Irenaeus) joined the 
school of Justin Martyr before being made bishop of 
Lyons in Southern Gaul in about AD 178. In contrast to 
Justin - whose writings he used and respected - 
Irenaeus 
rejected 
the 
philosophical 
approach 
to 
Christianity, which for him as a child of the Church 
“rested on revelation, tradition, and on the power of the 
Holy Spirit.” Despite this he did not abandon philosophy 
completely and many of his works are indebted to it.  
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA (c.150 - c. 215) 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
Clement 
of 
Alexandria 
(Egypt), 
was 
a 
Christian 
theologian who taught at the Catechetical School of 
Alexandria. A convert to Christianity, he was an 
educated man who was familiar with classical Greek 
philosophy and literature. … Clement was influenced by 
Hellenistic philosophy to a greater extent than any other 
Christian thinker of his time, and in particular by Plato 
and the Stoics…. 
Among his pupils were Origen and Alexander of 
Jerusalem. 
Clement is regarded as a Church Father, and he is 
venerated as a saint in Orthodox Christianity, Eastern 
Catholicism and Anglicanism. He was previously revered 
in the Roman Catholic Church, but his cult was 
suppressed in 1586 by Pope Sixtus V due to concerns 
about his orthodoxy.  
"Miscellanies" (STROMATEIS):  
(Clement) starts with the importance of philosophy for 
the pursuit of Christian knowledge. …   He shows how 
faith is related to knowledge, and emphasizes the 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
71 
superiority of revelation to philosophy. God's truth is to 
be found in revelation, another portion of it in 
philosophy. It is the duty of the Christian to neglect 
neither.   
 Clement was ready to find allegory everywhere. The 
facts of the Old Testament became mere symbols to 
him. …  
And here Clement's teaching is undoubtedly colored by 
Stoicism. [Catholic Encyclopedia] 
Quotes from the Stromata [miscellaneous or patchwork]  
The Stromata is the third in Clement of Alexandria's 
trilogy of works on the Christian life. 
All Sects of Philosophy Contain a Germ of Truth.  
Chapter 7. The Eclectic Philosophy Paves the Way for 
Divine Virtue 
The 
Greek 
preparatory 
culture, 
therefore, 
with 
philosophy itself, is shown to have come down from God 
to men,…. 
Chapter 9. Human Knowledge Necessary for the 
Understanding of the Scriptures 
 
Some, who think themselves naturally gifted, do not 
wish to touch either philosophy or logic; nay more, they 
do not wish to learn natural science. They demand bare 
faith alone …. [This sounds like the religious right wing 
fundamentalists in the United States today. All they 
need is the Bible.] 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
72 
So also here, I call him truly learned who brings 
everything to bear on the truth; so that, from [pagan] 
geometry, and music, and grammar, and philosophy 
itself, culling what is useful, he guards the faith against 
assault. 
Chapter 12. The Mysteries of the Faith Not to Be 
Divulged to All. 
…so to deliver them to whom it is requisite; but not 
enjoining us to communicate to all without distinction, 
what is said to them in parables. [Jesus teaches in 
parables so people will not be converted and saved.] 
Chapter 13. All Sects of Philosophy Contain a Germ of 
Truth 
So, then, the barbarian and Hellenic philosophy has 
torn off a fragment of eternal truth not from the 
mythology of Dionysus, but from the theology of the 
ever-living Word.  
Chapter 19. That the Philosophers Have Attained to 
Some Portion of Truth 
Greeks gave forth some utterances of the true 
philosophy 
The Stromata Book II 
Chapter 11. The Knowledge Which Comes Through 
Faith (is) the Surest of All 
Chapter 18. The Mosaic Law the Fountain of All Ethics, 
and the Source from Which the Greeks Drew Theirs 
[Untrue. The Greek philosophers had not read the 
Jewish Scriptures.] 
The Stromata (Book V) 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
73 
Chapter 13. The Knowledge of God a Divine Gift, 
According to the Philosophers 
Chapter 5. The Greeks Had Some Knowledge of the True 
God 
Chapter 10. The Gnostic (the true Christian) Avails 
Himself of the Help of All Human Knowledge [Christian 
and pagan]. 
Chapter 11. The Mystical Meanings in the Proportions of 
Numbers, Geometrical Ratios, and Music 
Chapter 13. Degrees of Glory in Heaven Corresponding 
with the Dignities of the Church Below  
[As there are classes of people here on the Earth, 
Clement believed there are also divisions in heaven!] 
Here follows a list of other Christian writers who praised 
Philosophy; provided, of course, that these pagan 
writings could be used to defend the faith, otherwise 
they were rejected as false. 
ORIGEN (c.184/185-c.253/254)  
Origen was an early Christian Alexandrian scholar and 
theologian, and one of the most distinguished writers of 
the early Church. From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  
[Editors: Origen was the most influential writer, exegete 
and theologian of the third century CE. He had an 
enormous influence on Augustine, Jerome and Rufinus.] 
In 
Origen, 
Christianity 
blended 
with 
the 
pagan 
philosophy in which lived the desire for truth and the 
longing after God.   
The Forged Pauline Letters. Origen. 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
74 
Eusebius, in Ecclesiastical History 6.25.7, strongly 
implies Origen disputed the authenticity of the Letters of 
Paul when he wrote that Paul did not write to all the 
churches that he taught and even to the ones he wrote 
he only sent a few lines. [See the nineteenth century 
Dutch School who argued that all or most of the Pauline 
letters were late forgeries. See also our previous book, 
Jesus Christ: A Pagan Myth - Evidence That Jesus Never 
Lived.] 
Many passages of the Scriptures are false. Origen  
There are several specific reasons that we can deduce 
from Origen's writings that led him to the conclusion 
that the straightforward historical meaning of many 
passages of Scripture were simply not true.  
Most can be found in Book 4 of On First Principles. 
earlychurch.org.uk  
[Origen argues that the literal meaning of many 
passages in the Gospels is simply false. Allegory is in.]  
METHODIUS (d. 311)   
The Symposium was a manual of Christian doctrine 
styled as an imitation of one of Plato’s dialogues. 
earlychurch.org.uk 
 
LACTANTIUS (c. 250 -c. 325)   
 
The stated purpose of Lactantius’ writings was to 
present Christianity in a form that would be attractive 
to philosophical pagans. In practice this resulted in an 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
75 
uneasy amalgam of Christianity, Platonism, Stoicism 
and Pythagorianism. His views led to his posthumous 
condemnation as a heretic. earlychurch.org.uk 
HILARY, Bishop of Poitiers (315 – 367)  
Hilary enjoyed fine facilities for education. In the 
introduction to his treatise on the Trinity he describes 
the stages a Pagan passes through in reaching the 
knowledge of God, which heathen philosophy reveals 
dimly, Christianity clearly. earlychurch.org.uk 
GREGORY OF NYSSA (330-394) 
Firsthand study of the works of Plato and Plotinus. 
Gregory's theology was the result of a subtle blending of 
Platonism and the Scriptures.  
AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO (354-430)  
Aurelius Augustinus was born in the town of Thagaste 
in North Africa, the son of Patricius and Monica. His 
father was a pagan until near the time of his death, but 
his mother was a devoted follower of Catholic 
Christianity. 
Having 
left 
Africa 
for 
Rome, 
Augustine 
became 
increasingly dissatisfied with the teachings of the 
Manichees and turned instead to Neo-platonism. 
However, attending the church (in Rome) brought him 
under the ministry of the bishop, Ambrose. Ambrose's 
allegorical 
and 
Platonising 
interpretation 
of 
the 
Scriptures in the tradition of Origen made a great 
impression on Augustine, who had been unimpressed 
by the literal interpretation practised by his mother …. 
earlychurch.org.uk 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
76 
ST. AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO (present-day Annaba, 
Algeria, North Africa) (350-430 CE)   
"The very same thing which now is called Christianity 
existed among the ancients and was not absent from the 
beginning of mankind until Christ appeared in the flesh, 
whence the true religion, which already existed, began 
to be called Christian." [He believed in the All Sects of 
Philosophy Contain a Germ of Truth School.] From 
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
PAGANS ON PHILOSOPHY  
The Syncretistic Seneca: 
Syncretism …is the combining of different (often 
contradictory) beliefs, often while melding practices of 
various schools of thought. From Wikipedia, the free 
encyclopedia 
Note Seneca’s severe criticism of the rational mysticism 
of Plato in the quote below. Nevertheless, generally 
Seneca wished to protect reason from attack, especially 
reason as found in philosophy. 
Will Plato's imaginary ideas make me an honest man? 
There is neither certainty in them, nor substance. “A 
mouse is a syllable; but a syllable does not eat cheese: 
therefore a mouse does not eat cheese.” Oh! these 
childish follies!” SENECA 
  
Teach me my duty to Providence, to my neighbor, and to 
myself: to dispute with Socrates; to doubt with 
Carneades; to set up my rest with Epicurus; to master 
my appetites with the Stoics; and to renounce the world 
with the Cynic. SENECA 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
77 
What a deal of business there is, first, to make Homer a 
philosopher; and, secondly, in what classes to range 
him! One will have him to be a Stoic, a friend to virtue, 
and an enemy to pleasure; preferring honesty even to 
immortality itself: another makes him an Epicurean; 
one that loves his quiet, and to spend his time in good 
company: some are positive in it that he was a 
Peripatetic [follower of Aristotle]; and others, that he was 
a Sceptic. But it is clear that, in being all these things, 
he was not any one of them. These divided opinions do 
not at all hinder us from agreeing, upon the main, that 
he was a wise man. SENECA Philosophers Epistle 7  
 
The Stoic Musonius Rufus writes in Must One Obey 
One’s Parents Under All Circumstances? (30-100 CE), 
“Your father forbids you to study philosophy, but the 
common father of all men and gods, Zeus, bids you and 
exhorts you to do so.” He also says that if your father 
forbids you to study philosophy, you may disobey him. 
[Mt 10.37 He that loveth father or mother more than me 
is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter 
more than me is not worthy of me. Also, See Mt 12.46-
49 where Jesus says that the members of his family are 
those that follow him, that is those who believe in what 
he teaches them.] 
 
A wise man, in what condition soever he is, will be still 
happy; for he subjects all things to himself, because he 
submits himself to reason, and governs his actions by 
counsel, not by passion. SENECA On a Happy Life 
[Replace “submits himself to reason” with “submits 
himself to faith” and you get Christianity.) 
It is agreed upon at all hands, “That right reason is the 
perfection of human nature,” and wisdom only the 
dictate of it. SENECA On a Happy Life  
 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
78 
Let us not therefore follow, like beasts, but rather 
govern ourselves by reason, than by example. SENECA 
On a Happy Life  
 
Nature has brought us into the world naked and 
unarmed; we have not the teeth or the paws of lions or 
bears to make ourselves terrible; but by the two 
blessings of reason and union, we secure and defend 
ourselves against violence and fortune. This it is that 
makes man the master of all other creatures…. SENECA 
Of Benefits 20-202-203  
 
It is philosophy that must bring us to a contempt of 
death, which is the remedy of all diseases. In poverty it 
gives us riches, or such a state of mind as makes them 
superfluous to us. It arms us against all difficulties : 
one man is pressed with death, another with poverty; 
some with envy, others are offended at Providence, and 
unsatisfied 
with 
the 
condition 
of 
mankind; 
but 
philosophy prompts us to relieve the prisoner, the 
infirm, the necessitous, the condemned; to show the 
ignorant their errors, and rectify their affections. It is 
philosophy that gives us a veneration for God, a charity 
for our neighbor, that teaches us our duty to Heaven….  
Seneca On a Happy Life  
 
(PHILOSOPHY:) Not to make us live only, but to live 
happily. She teaches us what things are good, what evil, 
and what only appear so…. She clears our minds of 
dross and vanity; she raises up our thoughts to heaven, 
and carries them down to hell….  SENECA On a Happy 
Life  
 
(Philosophy or reason) “retrieves the truth of all: she 
searches nature, gives laws to life…. It is not enough to 
know God, unless we obey him.” SENECA On a Happy 
Life  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
79 
 
CONCLUSION FOR THIS CHAPTER: 
 
The reader should keep in mind that most ancient 
Christian writers did not hate everything pagan. Indeed, 
virtually all of them believed that there was a germ of 
divine truth in every pagan philosophy. If the reader 
keeps this in mind, he or she will find it easier to accept 
the thesis that the New Testament writers borrowed a 
good deal of stuff from pagans like Seneca and Plato. 
STOICISM AND THE THEOLOGY OF PAUL 
Stoic morals equal that of the Christians who then 
added Hell and Heaven. Paul's theology is pagan. 
Quotes on the Importance of Stoicism to early 
Christianity: 
Bruno Bauer  (1809-1882) 
Christianity is essentially "Stoicism triumphant in a 
Jewish garb." Christ & the Caesars: The Origin of 
Christianity from Romanized Greek Culture by Bruno 
Bauer and Frank E. Schacht - Jan 1999. 
“What is most remarkable about this book is that Bruno 
Bauer goes down to text-by-text comparisons of the New 
Testament and the Epistles of the great Stoic writer, 
Lucius Seneca (tutor to Nero Caesar), in order to 
research keywords and key phrases common to both. … 
However, Bruno Bauer cited the latest 19th century 
scholarship to show that if there were identical words 
and phrases between the writings of Seneca and the 
writings of the New Testament, the copying was all on 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
80 
the New Testament side, because Seneca wrote his 
Epistles a full generation before St. Paul wrote his.” 
Amazon.com - Customer review 
Rudolf Bultmann argued that New Testament authors, 
including Paul, took a lot from Stoicism, as regard style 
as well as content. Seneca’s works were studied by 
everybody from Justin to Augustine of Hippo and 
Jerome. 
Mithraism, Neoplatonism, Stoicism, Cynicism, and the 
local cults of municipal or rustic gods... these mystic 
ideas left their mark on the apostles Paul and John. 
(Will Durant, The Story of Civilization, The Age Of Faith, 
ch 1, p 9) 
Christianity did not destroy paganism; it adopted it ... 
(The Story of Civilization, Caesar and Christ, Will 
Durant, Part III, 1944, p. 595). 
Give or take Hell and Heaven, the Christians borrowed 
their ethics from the Roman Stoics. For that reason we 
need to review the beliefs of Roman Stoicism, which 
were essentially the same as classical Stoicism. 
The Birth of Stoicism  
Wikipedia the free encyclopedia  
With the fall of the Greek city states and the 
Alexandrian Empire, Stoics and the Cynics provided the 
individual with personal salvation.  
Zeno of Citium (c. 334 BC–c. 262 BC) was a philosopher 
from Citium, a Greek city on Cyprus. Zeno was the 
founder of the Stoic school of philosophy, which he 
taught in Athens from about 300 BCE. Stoicism laid 
great emphasis on living in accordance with nature or 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
81 
reason and thus achieving a life of virtue (by avoiding 
sin). It flourished as the dominant philosophy through 
the Roman era. 
Zeno did not object to using the names of the traditional 
Greek gods. He simply argued that there was one God 
with many names. Thus, from the beginning, the stoics 
used common religious language, as regard prayer, etc.  
Stoic Concepts: 
Conflagration Ekpyrosis (Ancient Greek ἐκπύρωσις 
ekpurōsis, conflagration) is a Stoic belief in the periodic 
destruction of the cosmos by a great conflagration every 
Great Year. The cosmos is then recreated (palingenesis) 
only to be destroyed again at the end of the new cycle.    
Cosmos. In the general sense, a cosmos is an orderly or 
harmonious system. It originates from the Greek term 
κόσμος (kosmos), meaning "order" or "ornament" and is 
antithetical to the concept of chaos. 
Logos… is an important term in philosophy, psychology, 
rhetoric and religion. Originally a word meaning "a 
ground", "a plea", "an opinion", "an expectation", "word," 
"speech," "account," "reason," it became a technical term 
in philosophy, beginning with Heraclitus (ca. 535–475 
BC), who used the term for a principle of order and 
knowledge.  
Natural law, or the law of nature (Latin: lex naturale), is 
any system of law which is purportedly determined by 
nature, and is thus universal. Classically, natural law 
refers to the use of reason to analyze human nature and 
deduce binding rules of moral behavior.  
[The Roman Stoics were Pantheists. There was only one 
God which they called God, Nature or Reason. Roman 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
82 
Stoicism confined itself almost entirely to the subject of 
ethics. Nature is kind to humanity so we should follow 
(obey) Nature and be kind to humanity, using reason 
and observation and conscience to determine what is 
right and wrong. Roman Stoics thought that the 
problem was how to minimize "sin."  Editors] 
 
SENECA (1 CE - 65 CE)  
Seneca, 
Lucius 
Aenaeus, 
philosopher. 
A 
wealthy 
Spanish Roman, high civic official and tutor of Nero, 
who in the end compelled him to take his own life. He is 
usually quoted as a Stoic but was guided in his well-
known ethical treatises by the Roman blend of Stoicism 
and Epicureanism [atheism]. He has the greatest 
veneration for Epicurus, whom the Stoics detested, and 
constantly quotes him. Joseph MacCabe 
Note on Seneca and the New Testament 
As representative of Roman Stoicism we have used the 
writings of Seneca (ca. 1 BCE – 65 CE) as he was a 
highly influential pagan Roman Stoic philosopher, one 
much admired by ancient Christians. 
In this book we do not claim that Seneca had any direct 
influence on the writings of the New Testament, as the 
Stoic philosopher was writing too late to have influenced 
the NT. However, Stoicism had been around for about 
300 years before Seneca wrote and was a common 
influence on both Seneca and the early Christians. 
Religious Language 
From the beginning (ca. 300 BCE) stoicism caused some 
confusion due to its use of religious language. The stoics 
used religious language, perhaps to discourage the State 
from charging them with the criminal act of impiety 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
83 
(denying the existence of the gods or disrespecting 
them). The rare use of language by Seneca pertaining to 
future life and prayer may have attracted a larger 
audience. 
 
Seneca on God or Nature 
 
For most modern people the word God indicates a 
personal being, an all knowing, all intelligent, all 
powerful, all loving, who created the cosmos and us, 
who can answer prayers and provide an afterlife for 
human beings.  
The stoics used a number of words for the deity: Nature, 
Reason, Zeus, God etc. However, the bulk of the 
writings of Seneca indicate an impersonal God: Nature 
or Reason. 
 
Nature is an impersonal force; it is not a living entity; it 
has no gender, no consciousness and no intelligence. 
Nature designed but did not create the cosmos out of 
nothing nor human beings as a conscious act. Stars 
and human beings are the result of natural laws, of 
material cause-and-effect. This is the view of Epicurus, 
the atheist. It is also a view that is compatible with 
modern scientific theory. The only real difference 
between Stoicism and modern science is Divine 
Providence. Whereas the Stoics felt that nature was 
beneficent and bestowed nothing but good things on 
human beings, modern science, like ancient atheists, 
sees nature as neutral as regard human beings. But 
we'll get back to that later. 
 
For the Stoics, Nature or God is unaware of human 
existence. It can not hear prayers, much less answer 
them. Future life contradicts the Stoic idea that the soul 
is mortal and comes to an end when the body dies. 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
84 
There is no future life, no personal survival after death. 
Thus, Nature or Reason is a better term for the Stoic 
deity than God or Zeus.  
However, whether Seneca believed in a personal God or 
not, would not affect the theme of this book, namely 
that the pagan philosophies of Stoicism and Platonism 
had a large influence on the New Testament and early 
Christianity. Roman Stoicism was the major source of 
New Testament moral thought. If one argues that the 
Stoics believed in prayer or life after death this would 
simply make this pagan philosophy even more attractive 
to early Christians.  
Christian praise for Seneca 
Tertullian, an intensely anti-philosophy Christian, on 
the pagan, Seneca: 
“The early Christian Church was very favorably 
disposed towards Seneca and his writings, and the 
church leader Tertullian called him "our Seneca".  
(Moses Hadas. The Stoic Philosophy of Seneca, 1958. 1.) 
Tertullian writes “Seneca… whom we so often find on 
our side.”  ... He describes (Seneca) as 'almost one of us' 
(De anima 20).  
Indeed, some of the Christian fathers even thought 
Seneca was a secret Christian! Modern scholars and 
most of the ancient Christian fathers rejected the idea 
that Seneca was a Christian but his ethics fit well with 
the New Testament -- if you add eternal punishment in 
Hell for most and the reward of Heaven for the few. 
The only reference to a Seneca in all the works of 
Eusebius (Book 4, Chapter 5) is to a supposed 1st 
century Bishop Of Jerusalem – a curious name for a 
Jew, to be sure!  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
85 
Seneca and Jesus on Moralality 
Once again, we can see the influence of the Stoics on 
Christian ethics and theology. The German philosopher 
and Christian, Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) argued that 
virtue or morality is good in and of itself. An action is 
moral because it benefits the recipient with no benefit to 
the giver. Kant is much like a Stoic. Intention is all that 
counts. 
Neutrals or Indifferents 
 
If you die trying to save a child from drowning in a river 
that is a moral good; if you did so that you may get a 
reward from the mayor for rescuing the child, it is not a 
moral action. Neither is it a virtuous act if you do it to 
avoid punishment. Virtue is a good in and of itself. As a 
matter of fact, it is the only good; all else are neutrals. 
Intention to benefit the child is all that counts. This is 
the view of Seneca and other Stoics. 
What else are moral neutrals or indifferents? Just about 
everything. It is not relevant whether you are sick or 
healthy, whether you lose your life or not, or whether 
you are free or are a slave, male or female, Jew or 
Gentile, rich or poor, happy or not.  
Virtue is accompanied by happiness but does not cause 
it. The evil person is unhappy, miserable.  
 
EPICTETUS (ca 50 CE-135 CE) 
A Stoic and a favorite among Christians.  
(Epictetus was a) Phrygian slave who became one of the 
most notable of the many moralists of the Greek Roman 
world. The Encheiridion (Manual) and Discourses that 
we have were very probably taken down by a pupil, as 
shorthand was then well known. His teaching was 

ANCIENTS BELIEVE PAGAN PHILSOPHIES HAVE SOME TRUTH 
86 
ascetic and impracticable and in many respects very like 
the more ascetic counsels ascribed to Jesus (the golden 
rule, voluntary poverty, passive resistance, etc.) He 
belonged to the small religious wing of the Stoic 
movement and his extravagances of virtue illustrate 
again the danger of introducing any mysticism into 
ethics. The absurd suggestion that he borrowed from 
Christ is refuted by the dates. His chief interest is to 
remind us that all the moral sentiment attributed to 
Jesus in the gospels were familiar in the first century.   
Joseph McCabe  

 
87 
 
 
PART 3   Christian and Pagan Stoic Morals 
  


 
89 
 
CHAPTER 4 JESUS AND PAUL AND PAGAN 
STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS.   
Part 1 Does Sexual Morality Save? Family, Marriage and 
Sex   
Many Christians and Stoics believed they were saved 
from sin because they felt that they had developed a 
supreme morality.  Let us compare Christian and Pagan 
views on family, marriage and sex.  (We will deal with 
other moral matters in later Chapters.)   
 
Family, Against The   
 
And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, 
and the father the child: and the children shall rise up 
against their parents, and cause them to be put to 
death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s 
sake: but he that endures to the end shall be saved. MT 
10:21-22  
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I 
came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to 
set a man at variance against his father, and the 
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law 
against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be 
they of his own household. He that loves father or 
mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that 
loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of 
me. MT 10.34-37 
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in 
heaven, the same is my brother, and my sister, and my 
mother. MT 12.50 
 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
90 
People have been saying that Jesus is crazy. The mother 
and brothers of Jesus attempt to reach him in order to 
restrain him. Mk 3.21  
And he looked round about on the, which sat about 
him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For 
whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my 
brother, and my sister, and mother. (MK 3:34-35) 
Jesus insults his mother and family when he indicates 
that his real mother and brethren are his followers who 
do the will of God.  
Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, 
and have followed thee. And Jesus answered (Peter) and 
said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath 
left house, or brethre, or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel’s, 
But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, 
houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and 
children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world 
to come eternal life. MK 10:28-30 
 
Those who abandon their wives and families will get 
great rewards.  
For I am come to set a man at variance against his 
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the 
daughter in law against her mother in law. MT 10.35 
Males, the Holiness of 
As it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male that 
opens the womb (is born) shall be called holy to the 
Lord….) LK 2.23 
To God males, not females, are holy.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
91 
Jesus and Paul on Sexual Morality   
Note: It should be noted is that while Seneca is 
reasonably consistent in his ethical thought, Jesus and 
Paul often speak in inconsistent or even contradictory 
ways. This is due to the fact that early Christians had a 
variety of moral beliefs which were often times 
inconsistent or even contradictory. They were not 
guided by God, the Holy Spirit, or the Son of God. 
Despite the praise that New Testament writers gave to 
those who follow the teachings of God, “not men,” 
nevertheless the writings of the New Testament make it 
quite clear that those sacred, holy writings were 
produced by human beings. We think this explains why 
the writings of the New Testament are plagued by so 
much controversy, inconsistencies and contradictions.   
Some of the writers in the New Testament believed that 
Christ had resolved the problem of sin by delivering a 
set of moral values, a set which they considered vastly 
superior to that of the Stoics, indeed, a perfect morality 
which would save Christians. Let us compare Christian 
and Pagan views on family, marriage and sex.   
 
For Jesus’ teachings on sexual morality we have used 
Jesus 
as 
portrayed 
in 
the 
Gospel 
of 
Matthew, 
traditionally dated to about 85 CE. 
Paul and his Letters  
Paul (Saul of Tarsus) was an early Christian missionary; 
the Apostle to the Gentiles lived from ca 5 CE to ca. 67 
CE. 
The Letters of Paul: From Jesus Christ : A Pagan Myth  - 
Evidence That Jesus Never Lived. Chapter 9 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
92 
“Virtually all modern scholars believe that of the 
thirteen letters attributed to Paul, only seven are 
genuine: 1 Thessalonians, Galatians, Romans, 1 & 2 
Corinthians, Philippians, and Philemon. Traditionally 
they are thought to have been written between 45 and 
62 CE. These letters were edited, that is material was 
added to or subtracted from them as the needs of the 
church changed. In The Journal of Higher Criticism, 
Hermann Detering briefly reviews some of the evidence 
offered by the Dutch school in the 19th-century as 
regard the integrity of the Pauline letters. 
 
“There are a number of anachronisms in Paul’s epistles. 
The 
highly-developed 
theology 
and 
international 
organization of the church which is apparent in Paul’s 
letters assumes “a longer period of incubation and could 
not possibly have been arrived at within two decades” of 
Jesus’ death (Detering’s ital.). Paul writes that he fought 
at Ephesus with wild animals (1 Cor 15.32), but we 
have no evidence that Christians were fed to the lions 
until the letters of Ignatius of Antioch written about 117 
CE, more than 50 years after Paul's death. 
 
“There are other problems with the Apostle's letters. 
Apologists argue that Paul wrote to individual churches, 
but 1 Corinthians is addressed to the church in Corinth 
at 1 Cor 1.2a, and to the churches “everywhere” at verse 
2b. Also, scholars claim that Paul deals with specific 
problems of individual churches, but the subjects of his 
letters are universal in nature. The Apostle deals with 
faith versus works, morality, the theological meaning of 
Christ’s crucifixion and resurrection; he writes of false 
apostles, false gospels and false “Christs,” and of the 
end times, divorce, and ascetic practices, among other 
broad subjects. These topics are so general in scope, 
they could have been addressed to the church in general 
and at any time.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
93 
 
“Another 
problem 
with 
the 
historicity 
of 
Paul’s 
correspondence is that the situation in which the letters 
were produced is confused. Often we do not know when 
or why Paul wrote a given letter, whether he is in prison 
or not, etc. Paul claims to be Jewish, but his letters 
“have 
in 
many 
places 
a 
completely 
non-Jewish 
character.” Van Manen argued that Paul was a “Gentile 
Christian.” 
 
“Nearly every subject that Paul writes about is treated in 
an ambiguous and often contradictory manner. For 
example, there have been two centuries of debate about 
who the opponents of Paul are in Galatians (54-55 CE). 
Some of the guesses are: 1) Jews, 2) Christians of 
Jewish background, 3) gentiles who observed the ritual 
laws of Judaism, 4) Gnostics of pagan background, 5) 
Gnostics 
of 
Jewish 
background, 
6) 
spirit-filled 
enthusiasts. Another problem with Galatians is that the 
accounts of the Jerusalem meeting in Galatians 2 and 
Acts 15 have long been seen as inconsistent and even as 
fiction. 
 
“1 Corinthians (ca 56-57 CE) is believed by some 
scholars to be a composite document that has been 
interpolated. (Most think that this is true of 2 
Corinthians as well.)”  
 
Paul's epistles are hard to understand. And those who 
try to understand them, as with the other scriptures, do 
so "unto their own destruction." 2 Peter 3.16 
MARRIAGE & DIVORCE 
Jesus and Paul are not very consistent in their 
teachings on marriage, divorce and remarriage. 
 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
94 
And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and 
mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain 
shall be one flesh.  Wherefore they are no more twain, 
but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, 
let not man put asunder. MT 19.5-6 
  
(Jesus)  says unto them, Moses because of the hardness 
of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but 
from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, 
Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for 
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery: 
and who so marries her which is put away does commit 
adultery. His disciples say unto him, If the case of the 
man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry. But he 
said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save 
they to whom it is given. MT 19: 8-11 
 
7:10 And unto the married I command, yet not I, but 
the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband: 
7:11 But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried or 
be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband 
put away his wife. 1 COR 7.10-11 
 
It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let 
him give her a writing of divorcement; but I say unto 
you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for 
the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery; 
and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits 
adultery. MT 5.31-32, MT 19.9 
 
REMARRIAGE 
 
For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the 
law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if the 
husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her 
husband.  So then if, while her husband lives, she be 
married to another man, she shall be called an 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
95 
adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free from 
that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be 
married to another man. Rom 7.2-3 
 
ADULTERY IN THE MIND 
 
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time: Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. But I say unto you, That 
whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her hath 
committed adultery with her already in his heart (mind). 
MT 5.27-28 
 
Paul and others 
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have 
his own wife, and let every woman have her own 
husband. But if they can not contain [abstain from sex] 
let them marry: for it is better to marry than to burn. 1 
COR 7:8-9 [Let them marry to avoid the sin of sex 
outside of marriage.] 
WIFE SHOULD SUBMIT TO HUSBAND 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as 
unto the Lord.  
For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ 
is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the 
body.  Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so 
let the wives be to their own husbands in everything.   
EPH  5.22-24 
 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it 
is fit in the Lord. COL 3.18 
 
That they may teach the young women to be sober, to 
love their husbands, to love their children, to be 
discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
96 
their own husbands, that the word of God be not 
blasphemed. TITUS 2.4-5 
 
BE KIND TO EACH OTHER   
 
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: 
and likewise also the wife unto the husband. 1 COR 7.3 
 
SHOULD NOT WITHHOLD SEX FROM EACH OTHER 
 
The wife hath not power of her own body, but the 
husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power 
of his own body, but the wife.   Defraud (deny) you not 
one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that 
ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come 
together again, that Satan tempt you not for your 
incontinency 
(abstinence). 
But 
I 
speak 
this 
by 
permission, and not of commandment.  1 COR 7.4-6 
 
CHRISTIAN-PAGAN MARRIAGES   
But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any brother hath 
a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell 
with him, let him not put her away. And the woman 
which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he be 
pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him. For the 
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the 
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were 
your children unclean; but now are they holy. [Pagan 
children are unclean unless the  pagan parent is 
married to a Christian.] But if the unbelieving depart, let 
him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage 
in such cases: but God hath called us to peace. For 
what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shall save 
they husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether 
thou sall save thy wife? 1 COR 7:12-16   

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
97 
What happened to the hatred that Paul is said to have 
had for all things pagan? It is wrong for a Christian to 
marry a pagan. But you may sleep with one in marriage 
on the grounds that this person may convert to 
Christianity.  
HUSBAND: HONOR THY WIFE 
 
Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to 
knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the 
weaker vessel…. 1 PETER 3.7 
 
NO MARRIAGE IN HEAVEN 
 
For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given 
in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.  MT 
22.30 
 
SEX 
 
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that 
ye should abstain from fornication…. 1 THESS  4:3 
 
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It 
is good for a man not to touch a woman. [Paul prefers 
that you be a celebate as he is.]  1 COR 7:1-2  
 
 For I would that all men were even as I myself. But 
every man hath his proper gift of God, one afthei 
manner, and another after that. I say therefore to 
unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they abide 
even as I. [Do not get married.]  1 COR 7.7-8 
 
 
VIRGINS AND CELIBATES 
 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
98 
Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the 
Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained 
mercy of the Lord to be faithful.  1 COR 7:25  
 
But if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin 
marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall 
have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you. 1 COR 7:28 
 
But I would have you without carefulness (anxieties). He 
that is unmarried cares for the things that belong to the 
Lord, how he may please the Lord: But he that is 
married cares for the things that are of the world, how 
he may please his wife. 1 COR 7:32-33 
 
There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The 
unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that 
she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that 
is married cares for the things of the world, how she 
may please her husband. 1 COR 7:34 
 
And this I speak for your own profit (benefit); not that I 
may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is 
comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without 
distraction. 1 COR 7:35 
 
So then he that gives her in marriage doeth well; but he 
that gives her not in marriage does better. 1 COR 7:38   
 
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present 
distress (end times?) I say, that it is good for a man  to 
be [a virgin or celebate.] Art thou bound unto a wife? 
seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek 
not a wife. 1 COR 7:26-27 
  
But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remains, 
that both they that have wives be as though they had 
none; And they that weep, as though they wept not; and 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
99 
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they 
that buy, as though they possessed not; And they that 
use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this 
world passing away. 1 COR 7.29-31 [Did Paul think that 
the world was to end soon?]  
 
CASTRATION 
 
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it 
from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy 
members should perish, and not that thy whole body 
should be cast into Hell. And if thy right hand offend 
thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable to 
thee that one of thy members should perish, and not 
that thy whole body should be cast into hell. MT 5.28-
29 [The subject here is sexual lust. The solution as to 
sexual sin for males seems to be castration.]  
EUNUCHS  
For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from 
their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, 
which were made eunuchs [by] men: and there be 
eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the 
kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, 
let him receive it. MT 19.12 [Only some shall be 
castrated? The Stoics, like Romans in general, would 
have found this practice repulsive.]   
 
WOMEN 
 
Women and the Church  
 
But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp 
authority over the man, but to be in silence.  For Adam 
was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, 
but the woman being deceived was in the transgression. 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
100 
Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if 
they continue in faith and charity and holiness with 
sobriety. 1 TIM 2.12-15 
 
Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is 
not permitted unto them to speak; but they are 
commanded to be under obedience as also saith the law.  
And if they will learn anything, let them ask their 
husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak 
in the church. 1 COR 14.34-35 
Women as Sexual Objects for Men 
And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of 
the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; 
men with men…. ROM 1.27 
 
Women Submit to Men 
 
But I would have you know, that the head of every man 
is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and 
the head of Christ is God. 1 COR 11:3 
 
Was there a woman apostle? ROM 16:7       
"Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church." ROM 
16.1-2  
The 
Revised 
Standard 
Version 
calls 
Phoebe 
a 
"deaconess", making her a church leader which 
contradicts Paul when he says that women must be 
silent in church. 1 COR 14.34-35  
Honor the Widows:  1 TIM  5.3-10     
You should help a widow only if she:  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
101 
 Has no children or nephews at home  
 Is desolate, trusts in God, and prays all the time  
 Is 
not 
living 
in 
pleasure  
(a widow living in pleasure is the living dead)  
 Is over 60 years old  
 Had only one husband  
 Has raised children  
 Has lodged strangers  
 Has washed the saints’ feet 
 Has relieved the afflicted 
 Has diligently followed every good work 
 
PAGAN STOICS ON WOMEN AND MARRIAGE  
Women and religion 
Roman women were present at most festivals and cult 
observances. Some rituals specifically required the 
presence of women, but their active participation was 
limited. As a rule women did not perform animal 
sacrifice, the central rite of most major public 
ceremonies. In addition to the public priesthood of the 
Vestals, some cult practices were reserved for women 
only. The rites of the Bona Dea excluded men entirely. 
Because women enter the public record less frequently 
than men, their religious practices are less known, and 
even family cults were headed by the paterfamilias. A 
host 
of 
deities, 
however, 
are 
associated 
with 
motherhood. Juno, Diana, Lucina, and specialized 
divine attendants presided over the life-threatening act 
of giving birth and the perils of caring for a baby at a 
time when the infant mortality rate was as high as 40 
percent. 
Literary sources vary in their depiction of women's 
religiosity: some represent women as paragons of 
Roman virtue and devotion, but also inclined by 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
102 
temperament to self-indulgent religious enthusiasms, 
novelties and the seductions of superstitio. [Religion in 
ancient Rome; From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia]  
The Vestals 
The Vestals were a public priesthood of six women 
devoted to the cultivation of Vesta, goddess of the 
hearth of the Roman state and its vital flame. A girl 
chosen to be a Vestal achieved unique religious 
distinction, public status and privileges, and could 
exercise considerable political influence. Upon entering 
her office, a Vestal was emancipated from her father's 
authority. … A Vestal's dress represented her status 
outside the usual categories that defined Roman 
women, with elements of both virgin bride and 
daughter, and Roman matron and wife. Unlike male 
priests, Vestals were freed of the traditional obligations 
of marrying and producing children, and were required 
to take a vow of chastity that was strictly enforced: a 
Vestal polluted by the loss of her chastity while in office 
was buried alive. Thus the exceptional honor accorded a 
Vestal was religious rather than personal or social; her 
privileges required her to be fully devoted to the 
performance of her duties, which were considered 
essential to the security of Rome. [Religion in ancient 
Rome; From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia] 
PAGAN STOICS 
Adultery  
It is infamous for a man to exact chastity of his wife and 
corrupt the wives of others. Seneca, Letter xciv, 26   
Adultery in the Mind 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
103 
(He) knows well enough the injury he does his wife in 
the keeping of a wench, and yet has lust. Seneca On the 
Happy Life Chapter 5   
 
It is the intention, not the outward act, which makes the 
wickedness. Seneca On the Happy Life, xvi. 
 
If a man lie with his own wife, imagining her another, he 
is an adulterer. Seneca, On Constancy, vii, 4. 
 
Sins of the Flesh 
The Stoics were mildly ascetic. They were against 
excessive emphasis on emotions, money, sex, power and 
so forth. 
When we come once to value our flesh above our 
honesty, we are lost…. Seneca, On the Happy Life  
Philosophy, Women and Men 
It is betwixt the Stoics and other philosophers as 
betwixt men and women; they are both equally 
necessary for society; only the one is born for 
government, and the other for subjection. Seneca 
Epistle 19 
Family  
If such a thing as wife or child be granted thee, there is 
no objection; but if the Captain calls, run to the ship, 
and never look behind. Epictetus, Enchiridion, vii. 
(Family is important provided it does not interfere with 
the pursuit of truth – philosophy.]    
 
Demetrius, upon the taking of Megara, asked Stilpo the 
philosopher what he had lost. “Nothing,” says he, “for I 
had all that I could call my own about me.” And yet the 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
104 
enemy had then made himself master of his patrimony, 
his children, and his country: but these he looked upon 
as only adventitious goods, and under the command of 
Fortune. Seneca On the Happy Life   
 
That is, the family is of value but fate decides when 
children are to suffer or die. We can only control virtue 
which is the only absolute good. The body of the slave 
belongs to the master but his or her mind (soul) belongs 
to the slave. Or, as a Christian might say, an enemy 
might kill your body but that does not determine the 
fate of your soul or for the Stoic, moral virtue.  
Quotes from our previous book, Jesus Never Lived: Jesus Christ: A 
Pagan Myth, Chapter 9: 
Seneca writes that one should love one’s country, father, and 
wife. He writes that the wise man “remains self-content even 
when he marries, even when he brings up his children.” He 
would rather not live at all than to give up human 
companionship. Of Musonius Rufus (30-101 CE) it was said, “...he 
is the clearest of any ancient writer on the equality of man and 
woman (Frgs. Nos 3 and 4); he believed marriage to be a 
complete partnership” with sex being confined to marriage for 
the purpose of procreation. 
Epictetus states that men get married and beget children 
because they wish to be happy. Family feeling is good and 
natural. He also says that the man who commits adultery 
destroys friendly feeling toward his neighbor, destroys 
friendship, and the country [cf. 1 Cor 6.9-12, adulterers will not 
inherit the kingdom.] 
 
Judaism celebrates life. Stoic-Cynics varied as to the value they 
put on marriage but most accepted it if it was not perceived as 
an obstacle to the pursuit of virtue. 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
105 
Paul’s view on marriage is similar to Stoic-Cynics in that he does 
not explicitly forbid it, yet like some Stoics, he writes that the 
people should be celibate as he is (cf. 1 Cor 7.7-8) and that a man 
should not touch a woman (1 Cor 7.1). He also says that women 
should be silent in church and subordinate to the husband, a 
view that many Greco-Romans would find acceptable.   
 
COMMENTS BY EDITORS ON MARRIAGE AND WOMEN  
  
It is not possible in the New Testament to find quotes on 
marriage as positive as the Stoic quotes above. It is hard 
to find anything in the Stoics that would compare to 
Paul's negative views on sex and marriage. For some 
Roman Stoics marriage would be a taboo if it would 
interfere with the pursuit of virtue or philosophy. But 
for Paul it is sex in and of itself which is sinful. You 
should get married lest the devil tempt you to fornicate.  
Paul accepts “sister marriages.” Sex and other fleshy 
sins are big negatives as regards salvation. With Roman 
Stoics sex is not sinful. Some Stoics thought the duties 
involved with marriage (supporting children, etc.) might 
interfere with the search and practice of virtue. On the 
other hand, Seneca was married twice. Christian heroes 
in the New Testament and for several centuries 
afterwards were routinely pictured as unmarried. For 
about 1500 years marriage was considered inferior to 
the celibate state. Eventually, all Roman Catholic 
priests took vows of celibacy and could not marry; as 
they do to this day.  
The Church taught that the sin of Adam and Eve, the 
Original Sin, was passed on to all of humanity through 
sexual intercourse. Sex even inside of marriage was a 
sin.  
CONCLUSIONS 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
106 
Note 
the 
similarities 
between 
Seneca 
and 
New 
Testament morals -- except for the punishment in Hell 
and the rewards in Heaven in the afterlife. However, the 
Stoics came close to reward and punishment in that 
they believed that virtuous people lived happy lives and 
evil persons lived miserable lives of unhappiness. Unlike 
the Christians, the reward or punishment was not 
eternal and did not depend upon the sacrament of 
baptism or communion.          
The quotations below from Sources of the Morality of the 
Gospels [1914] by Joseph Mccabe is meant to 
supplement our earlier work, Jesus Christ: A Pagan 
Myth – Evidence That Jesus Never Existed in which we 
argued that Jesus was a literary creation of the pagan 
world. 
As we were concerned with the alledged events of his 
life, we did not examine his moral or ethical teachings. 
In Sources, McCabe’s thesis is that the moral teachings 
of Jesus were not unique but common in the ancient 
world. We feel that his book presents good evidence for 
the influence of the Greco-Roman world on the creation 
of the Gospels, especially the influence of Roman 
Stoicism. 
Thus, when we edited the book we kept the chapters on 
Greek and Roman morality and his chapter on the 
Gospels. We kept his chapter on the pagan parallels to 
the ethical teachings ascribed to Jesus in Matthew. 
MaCabe lists about 100 moral teachings of Jesus taken 
mostly from the Gospel of Matthew. Along side these 
sayings he lists over 400 pagan parallel teachings, many 
from Roman Stoics.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
107 
[As to why we omitted the Jewish parallels, see our 
previous book, Jesus Christ: A Pagan Myth, where we 
argue that a pagan background for the myth of Jesus is 
a better fit than a Jewish one.] 
McCabe mainly derives the pagan ethical teachings from 
three Roman stoics: Lucius Annaeus Seneca (ca. 4 BCE 
– 65 CE): the statesman and philosopher (born in Spain 
but arrived in Rome (ca. 5 CE) as a young boy), 
Epictetus (55 – 135 CE) and the Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius (121-180 CE). 
Modern scholars do not think that these Stoics 
borrowed from the Gospels nor that the evangelists 
borrowed from the stoics. Indeed, since Seneca died in 
65 CE, the Gospel Writers and Paul would not have had 
much time to become familiar with the writings of the 
Stoic philosopher. 
However stoicism preceeded Christ by nearly 300 years. 
The philosophy was founded in Athens by Zeno of 
Citium around 301 BCE and flourished in Greco-Roman 
culture long before the Christian era. 
Christian writers have conceded that the Gospels and 
Paul were influenced by Stoicism. Augustine was greatly 
influenced by Stoicism. Tertullian called Seneca “our 
Seneca.” 
Before 
Augustine 
(fl 
400 
CE), 
ancient 
Christians forged letters between Seneca and Paul. 
Medieval writers falsely believed that Seneca was 
converted to Christianity by Saint Paul (who used much 
stoic technical language and a great deal of stoic 
teachings in his letters.) However, modern Christian 
writers ignore the connection between stoicism and the 
origins of Christianity. 
THE RELIGION OF WOMAN – AN HISTORICAL STUDY  

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
108 
(Chapters 2 through 6) by Joseph McCabe.  Edited by 
the Daltons. 
CHAPTER II.  
The Woman of Pagan Culture ...  
Rome 
Into the development of woman's position in Rome we 
must inquire more closely. It is here most precisely that 
the effect of the coming to power of Christianity will be 
felt, and where it has to be chiefly appraised. The 
majority of religious people know two things, and little 
else, about Roman life and thought in this connection. 
They know that in the stern, puritanic, earlier days of 
the Republic woman was the slave of her father until 
she married, and then the slave of her husband for the 
rest of her life; and they know that at the time of the 
coming of Christianity woman(and man, too) led a life of 
general and, in some respects, sordid licentiousness and 
cruelty. They vaguely ascribe the disappearance of both 
evils to Christian influence, and so look with suspicion 
on every proposal to subvert it. This is a familiar pulpit 
account of the moral history of humanity. It is a 
complete distortion of the facts.   
Thus, long before there could be any question of 
Christian influence on Roman society or Roman law, 
woman had attained in the Empire a position of almost 
complete liberty and distinction. The woman of the 
wealthier class had practically no grievances, and she 
was conscious of a power to secure whatever further 
ambition she might entertain. It is, therefore, wholly 
absurd to speak as if Christianity had delivered her 
from the despotism of earlier Roman law. But we must 
go further. The Christian Church must tell us how it 
came about that, whereas we find woman in Rome 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
109 
1,800 years ago on the eve of complete independence, 
we have had to fight the battle all over again in the 
nineteenth century; how it came about that in the 
intervening 1,800 years, and particularly during that 
period when the power of the Church was paramount — 
the Middle Ages — woman fell to a lower position in law 
than she had ever occupied under the Greek or Roman 
system.  
The truth is, as I will show, that it is the explicit and 
emphatic teaching of the great Christian leaders that 
brought about this unhappy result. Woman was thrust 
back into the gynaeceum by the official action of the 
Church, under the clear direction of its most sacred 
writings.  
Greek philosophy had, as I said, been transferred from 
Athens to Alexandria, and there it took almost the 
character and fervour of a religion. It had an appreciable 
influence, in this form of neo-Platonism, on the moral 
temper of the age. The Emperor Julian was a follower of 
it. Saint Augustine and several others found it the ante-
chamber to Christianity. Its last great teacher, the 
brilliant Hypatia, shows that its spirit was one not only 
of abstract justice, but also of justice to woman. On the 
other hand, the Stoic philosophy was even more 
effective, both in improving the general moral temper of 
the Empire and in securing justice for the woman and 
the slave.Its chief Roman writers, Seneca, Epictetus, 
and Marcus Aurelius, are teachers for all time. It had 
completely altered the tone of Roman society before the 
middle of the second century. The vicious luxury and 
gluttony of the Augustan age, the crucifixion of slaves, 
the licentiousness of the emancipated women, and other 
disorders of the "pagan" world, were healed by purely 
pagan influences.  

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
110 
Then every other moral agency was swept out of Europe 
by a politically triumphant Christianity — and the 
hopes and ambitions of women were sealed up for 1,500 
years in the tomb of paganism. Let us see how this dire 
result came about.  
CHAPTER III  
WOMAN in the Early Christian Teaching  
In the introduction to her Woman's Bible, Mrs. E. Cady 
Stanton says; "The canon and civil law,Church and 
State, priests and legislators, all political parties and 
religious denominations, have alike taught that woman 
was made after man, of man, and for man, an inferior 
being, subject to man." 
Polygamy only began to disappear among the Jews in 
the fifth century B.C. And so curious was the influence 
of the Old Testament on the early Christian Church that 
several of the Fathers could not bring themselves to 
condemn it, and it was not officially suppressed by the 
Church until 1060 A.D. Luther and the Reformers 
allowed it even later. Yet polygamy was one of the surest 
signs of a disdain of woman, and had been rejected by 
Greeks, Romans, and barbarians long before the 
Hebrews began to perceive its enormity.  
I have said that Christianity was not really in a position 
to influence the Roman social order until three 
centuries later. During those three centuries the 
Fathers raised the structure of Christian teaching which 
was to command the absolute allegiance of Europe until 
the Reformation at least. It is a matter of no less interest 
than importance to trace the growth of a religious 
contempt for woman through the patristic literature. 
But it is a sad page for any Christian woman to read. I 
begin with the Greek fathers, as these were not only 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
111 
earlier in time, and therefore present the theory of 
woman's inferiority in a slight and immature form, but 
they were also, through Alexandria, in closer touch with 
the humanist culture of the neo-Platonists.  
Clement of Alexandria, the subtlest of the school, 
exhibits the ordinary improved feeling of the educated 
Greek of his time, as regards women, when he writes as 
a philosopher. When he is asked if she may study 
philosophy like her brothers, he answers at once in the 
affirmative.She has the "same nature" as man. But as 
soon as he is confronted with the familiar texts from the 
Epistles of St. Paul, his humanism begins to waver. 
Moreover, we find already in Clement of Alexandria that 
contempt of marriage which was soon to become one of 
the great errors of the Church. It interests us because it 
ever either springs from or leads to a contempt of 
woman. He says in the Stromateis that "fornication is a 
lapse from one marriage into many." 
The early Romans had themselves looked with disfavour 
on second marriages, but this was on the ground of 
sentiment and loyalty of memory — on principles which 
were in themselves most commendable. The Fathers 
renewed the attack on second marriage, but on grounds 
which were socially mischievous. They had granted a 
first marriage as a concession to the weakness of the 
flesh, and drew an ascetic line at second marriage. This 
not only encouraged immorality, but tended always to 
obscure the dignity of woman and her love.  
The other great trio of the Greek Fathers was St. Basil, 
St. Gregory of Nyssa, and St. Gregory of Nazianzum. 
St. Basil, of strong and trenchant mind, insists that 
woman is "man's equal in mental power, only less in 
bodily strength." When, however, he comes to deal with 
the Old Testament, he is prevented by his religious 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
112 
regard for all its books from setting its awful teaching 
aside. He can only murmur that its treatment of woman 
is "a mystery." 
St. Gregory of Nyssa, though a married bishop, 
furnishes to the monasteries of a later date a great deal 
of that religious depreciation of marriage of which I have 
spoken. He dwells constantly and morbidly on the 
praise of virginity. It was no part of God's primitive 
design that the race should be continued by sexual 
union. Marriage is the outcome of sin.  
St. Gregory of Nazianzum, the sweetest singer and most 
eloquent and emotional of the Greek Fathers, takes us a 
step lower in this devolution of Christian culture as 
regards woman. In his poem to Olympias he expresses 
the growing feeling of woman's inferiority. Shall the 
maid Olympias learn philosophy? By no means. 
"Woman's philosophy is to obey the laws of marriage." 
She must refrain even from going to weddings and 
christenings; must not give a thought to public affairs — 
"Let thy house be thy city." Then the usual concern for 
virginity appears: "Blessed is the one who leads a 
celibate life, and soils not the divine image within him 
with the filth of concupiscence." And it has the 
inevitable ending in a contempt of woman; —  
 
   “Fierce is the dragon, and cunning the asp;  
 
   But woman has the malice of both.” 
Finally, we have in St. John Chrysostom a continuance 
of this unhappy tendency. A great and popular 
preacher, with crowds of women always hanging on his 
lips in one of the chief cities of the Empire, he is 
nevertheless thoroughly Pauline.He sees symptoms of 
the feeble revolt that even Christian woman is ever 
raising against this new despotism of man, and he 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
113 
insists that "she shall not demand equality, for she is 
under the head." But Chrysostom never breaks into 
expressions of contempt.  
When, however, we pass from the Greek to the Latin 
branch of the Church, and examine the writings of 
those Fathers who were the absolute guides of opinion 
for the next thousand years, this pious misogyny at 
once takes a more sombre, though at times a most 
amusing, form. A gulf was beginning to yawn between 
profane culture and sacred culture. A constant brooding 
over the Scriptures was accounted the only desirable 
form of learning; and the consequences were disastrous 
for the cause of woman.  
Tertulian, the first of the Latin Fathers, a sternly ascetic 
figure, opens the chapter with the most violent 
phraseology. The first sentence of his work, On the 
Adornment of Women, runs: "If your faith were as firm 
as its eternal reward, my beloved sisters, no one of you, 
after learning of the living God and her own condition as 
a woman, would dare to seek gay apparel, but would 
dress in rags and remain in dirt as a sorrowful and 
penitent Eve.” “Thou,” he says a few lines afterwards, 
"thou art the devil's gate, the betrayer of the tree, the 
first deserter of the divine law!” He, more than any 
others, praises virginity, until at length he is moved to 
tell the virgin that marriage is “not far removed from 
fornication.” The second great African Father, St. 
Cyprian, is more moderate in his phrases, though he 
forbids women to teach when a fresh effort is made to 
secure that outlet for the activity of Christian women.  
When we pass to St. Augustine, however, the tendency 
becomes at once painfully apparent…. Saint Augustine, 
by nature one of the most humane as he was one of the 
ablest of his day, never loses an opportunity to express 
his disdain for woman. "After the manner of her sex," he 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
114 
observes in a sermon when speaking of a woman's 
anger. "What does it matter whether it be in the person 
of mother or sister; we have to beware of Eve in every 
woman," he writes to a youth who hesitates to join his 
monastery because his mother implores him to remain 
at home. 
But it is chiefly in his final and mature commentary on 
Genesis that the working of St. Augustine's mind is 
seen. Why was woman created at all? he asks himself, 
and he can find no answer but the painful need to carry 
on the race. Perhaps, he suggests to himself, she was 
made to be a companion to man. No, he replies at once, 
for "how much better two men could live and converse 
together than a man and a woman." Later, however, he 
discovers a peculiar reason for the creation of woman. 
He asks himself how this glorious being, as he has 
described Adam, could be deceived by the clumsy 
trickery of the serpent. Possibly, he goes on, God 
created a being of inferior intelligence and will — woman 
— with a view to the carrying-out of this pre-arranged 
drama of the Fall. So it is when St. Augustine comes to 
deal with the polygamous lives of the patriarchs of the 
Old Testament. As a heretic, he had boldly ridiculed 
them as barbaric types. As a convert, he had taken 
refuge in the broad harbour of "mystery." Now, in his 
new conviction of woman's absolute inferiority, he sees 
polygamy to be a perfectly defensible arrangement. In 
one of his works (De bono conjugali) he is ready to allow 
a man a second wife in his own time if his first is 
barren, though still alive. 
The two other leaders of Latin Christianity, St. Ambrose 
and St. Jerome, are little more favourable to woman. St. 
Ambrose does not, indeed, show any deliberate 
contempt. Woman must be obedient, but not servile, to 
her husband. In one place he makes an amusing 
attempt to find a ground for the restriction of her work 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
115 
and education. She is more fitted for bodily work, he 
says, because "remember that God took a rib out of 
Adam's body, not a part of his soul, to make her." And 
when he is asked why she must veil herself in the 
churches, while her husband does not, he answers, 
because "she was not made to the image of God, like 
man."  
St. Jerome, who through most of his life had a circle of 
noble Roman ladies in daily intercourse with him, has 
nevertheless a fine theoretical contempt for woman. A 
great Scriptural scholar, he never fails to endorse and 
amplify the disdainful references to woman in the Old 
Testament, such as that she is "the root of all evil." He 
points out with some complacency how rarely the saints 
of the Old Testament are described as having daughters, 
though they have many sons, and how the reverse is 
true of the wicked kings.  
In his attacks on Jovinian — a Luther of the fourth 
century — he habitually depreciates woman for the 
purpose of discrediting marriage; "but marriage is good 
for those who are afraid to sleep alone at night," he 
says. In a letter to Heliodorus, who hesitates to join him 
in the desert, he says:  
"Though thy father cling to thee, and thy mother rend 
her garments and show thee the breasts thou hast 
sucked, thrust them aside with dry eyes to embrace the 
cross." This letter is said to have been learned by heart 
by Jerome's lady pupils.  
We thus see that while, as I described in the preceding 
chapter, a remarkable advance was being made in the 
cultured mind of the age with regard to the treatment of 
women, the Christian Church was preparing a terrible 
reaction. Stoic and neo-Platonist thinkers, and educated 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
116 
Romans in general, were forming a more enlightened 
judgment. 
By the end of the fourth century "paganism" was in its 
agony. By the middle of the fifth century it was dead, 
and Christianity was all-powerful. The writings of 
Augustine and Ambrose and Jerome ruled the life of 
Europe. Their ideas about women enter into the Church 
life and social life and the legislation of every country, as 
it settles down into orderly administration. 
In the fifth century the Councils began to close the door 
of 
the 
ministry 
effectually 
against 
women. 
Few 
deaconesses can be found after that time. One by one 
the public functions were reserved for the clergy. 
Women were forbidden, successively, to teach, to 
baptise, to preach, or take any order whatever. Councils 
of bishops began to dispose of women in a curious 
fashion. At the Council of Macon, in 585, a bishop was 
found to hold the opinion that woman had no soul. He 
was immediately corrected, but the appearance of a 
bishop with such a theory is significant. At the Council 
of Auxerre, in 578, the bishops forbade women, on 
account of their "impurity," to take the sacrament in 
their hands as men did. On every side woman was 
forced to retire from the position she had won.  
The dignity which the Stoics had at length granted her 
was flung to the winds once more. The whole of the 
ground won in Greece and Rome was lost. Woman, as 
Mr. Lecky says, sank to a lower legal position than she 
had ever occupied under paganism. "In this union of 
Church and State," says Mrs. Cady Stanton, "mankind 
touched the lowest depth of degradation."  
It is true, again, that the Christian Church brought a 
severe ideal of marriage, and so far rendered a social 
service, and a service to woman. But the Church took 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
117 
away with the left hand what it gave with the right. 
While sustaining the rigour it destroyed the dignity of 
marriage. It set itself, as St. Jerome expressed it, to "lay 
the axe of virginity at the root of the tree of matrimony." 
It never declared marriage sinful, but it went as near to 
such a declaration as was possible. It strongly and 
persistently, by all its great teachers, advocated 
abstinence from marriage. It denounced divorce with an 
irrational zeal — though the Fathers said it was not 
absolutely unjustifiable for the husband to re-marry 
when the wife had sinned — and it used violent 
language of second marriages. It represented sexual love 
to be an outcome of sin; strictly forbade indulgence in it, 
even for married folk, for its own sake, and on the eve of 
holy days; condemned it as incompatible with the holy 
offce of the priest; and generally ascribed to it an odour 
of the pit. No great social service, and no advantage to 
woman, could result from a gospel which was marred by 
such eccentricities.  
In this wise, therefore, came and passed a great crisis in 
the affairs of women, 500 years ago. We have seen that 
the notion of woman being uniformly oppressed or 
degraded under pagan ideas, and of her condition 
beginning to improve as soon as Christianity came to 
power, is the reverse of the truth. 
The life of the Middle Ages has clothed it with idle 
weeds, so that we only recover it with difficulty to-day. 
Woman has had to wait for the new paganism of our 
time — our Condorcets, and Robert Owens, and J. S. 
Mills — to stretch a hand back across the gulf of the 
Christian domination, and take up afresh the work of 
Plutarch and Seneca and Hypatia. 
 
CHAPTER IV  

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
118 
Woman in the Middle Ages ....  
The period through which I am now going to follow the 
fortunes of woman, in so far as they were influenced by 
the Church, stretches from the fifth century to the 
fifteenth.Medieval Europe arose from the fusion of the 
dissolving Roman Empire with the invading Celts and 
Teutons. On both sides there was, to begin with, or 
before conversion to Christianity, a fair ideal of 
womanhood. What was the result of the fusion as 
regards the general esteem of woman and her work? 
And how far was the Church responsible for the result? 
After all that we have seen, from Sir Henry Maine and 
Mile. Chauvin and other legal writers, it is hardly 
necessary to linger over the question of woman's 
position in law. It became worse than it had been in any 
civilised nation for many a century.  
By the end of the eleventh century the dominance of the 
Church or Canon Law was supreme, and it determined 
the common law, whose barbarities we have only lately 
repealed. 
Nuns 
St. Jerome and St. Augustine had urged their friends to 
thrust 
aside 
their 
mothers 
with 
stern 
disdain. 
St.Catherine of Siena assured her contemporaries, who 
believed her to be inspired, that the blessed in heaven 
were so united with God that "if a father or mother sees 
her son in hell, or the son his father or mother, they will 
not be troubled." Often enough this kind of piety took 
the form of the patristic contempt of woman. 
We have a letter (No. III) written by St. Bernard in the 
name of one of his monks to parents who were 
imploring him to return to them. There is no question 
but that it was written by St. Bernard himself, the 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
119 
greatest spiritual ruler of the Middle Ages. It contains 
passages such as this: — What have I to do with you? 
What have I received from you but sin and misery? Only 
this corruptible body that I bear do I confess that I hold 
from you. It is not enough for you that you have brought 
me into this miserable world; that you, being sinners, 
have begotten me in sin, you have nourished me in sin; 
but you must envy me the mercy of God I have 
obtained, and wish to make me a son of hell? You may 
choose to neglect your own salvation, but why should 
you wish also to destroy mine?  
Marital Sex 
Peter Lombard, one of the most weighty of the 
schoolmen, laid it down that it was a venial sin only for 
married folk to have intercourse, when children were 
impossible, for the purpose of avoiding incontinence, 
but a mortal sin to do it for the pleasure alone.  
St. Thomas, and practically all the theologians, held 
(and hold to-day) that the pleasure attaching to 
procreation was not part of God's original design, but a 
direct consequence of sin. A woman was made to kneel 
outside the church to be "purified" after child-birth 
before she could again share in the worship. Naturally, 
the people at large felt this conception of love to be 
unnatural and untrue, and they followed their own 
inclinations. Prostitution assumed terrible proportions, 
and was virtually sanctioned by Church and State at 
times. Burckhardt says that there were found to be 
6,800 prostitutes (besides innumerable concubines) in 
Rome alone in 1490. In German cities foreign princes 
were greeted with bands of them provided by the 
municipality; and the Church was content to enact that 
they must attend worship at times. When venereal 
disease was introduced from America, it spread through 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
120 
all classes, from pope to peasant, with the most 
appalling rapidity.  
The licence of the Middle Ages : 
I am loth to enter in detail on the question of the 
unrestrained licence of the Middle Ages, but there are 
still one or two respects in which it concerns our subject 
— namely, the culpability of the Church and the 
mischief wrought by its reactionary conception of 
woman and the family. The first is the right of the 
baron, and at times of the ecclesiastical potentate, to 
the newly married woman for one or more days. The 
second important point was the enforcement of 
obligatory confession in the thirteenth century. It is 
unnecessary to enlarge on this. The third was the fateful 
and fatal enforcement of sacerdotal celibacy. Lea's 
History of Sacerdotal Celibacy must instruct those who 
desire fuller information about the effect of this. I will 
only quote the conclusion of Mr. Lecky, that "the writers 
of the Middle Ages are full of the accounts of nunneries 
that were like brothels, of the vast multitude of 
infanticides within their walls, and of that inveterate 
prevalence of incest among the clergy which rendered it 
necessary again and again to issue the most stringent 
enactments that priests should not be permitted to live 
with their mothers and sisters."  
When Hildebrand failed to induce the civil and 
ecclesiastical authorities to enforce celibacy among the 
clergy, he sent emissaries to stir up the people against 
them, and frightful disorders ensued. Urban II gave 
nobles permission to enslave the wives who would not 
surrender their priest-husbands. Other nobles levied a 
tax on the clergy of their districts under the title of 
permission to keep concubines. The whole proceeding 
was in itself a contempt of woman, and it had for one of 
its chief consequences an increase of her medieval 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
121 
degradation. The terrible growth of unnatural vice 
among the clergy — described in a work of the eleventh 
century written by a cardinal and warmly commended 
by the pope — does not concern us.  
But the growth of concubinage was a frightful comment 
on the Church's claim to have uplifted woman. Things 
came to such a pass that parishioners, for the 
protection of their own families, compelled their clergy 
to keep concubines. Even when the higher clergy met 
sometimes for ecumenical councils, the occasion was 
marked by a notable concourse of women.  
Witches 
The subject would not be complete without a formal 
reference to the treatment of witches. It is possible to 
exaggerate the culpability of the Church in this matter. 
The age was intensely superstitious, and it was a part of 
the almost universal practice of men, in or out of 
Christian times, to regard an injury as the work of 
malicious deities, or evil genii, or devils. When 
Christianity had, as is usual with triumphant religions, 
turned all the old pagan deities into devils, this practice 
was 
inevitably 
increased 
without 
any 
direct 
encouragement; but that the distinctive teaching of the 
Christian Bible and Church was particularly responsible 
for this awful chapter of medieval history cannot be 
questioned. 
Mrs. Hill goes so far as to claim that "the Church was 
largely responsible for the terrible persecutions inflicted 
on women, and chiefly on the poorest and most 
helpless, on the ground of witchcraft," through its 
"dissemination of the theory of woman's inherent vice." 
Most certainly this side of the teaching of the Church 
had a great deal to do with it. There is ample evidence 
for this in the language of the time. The painfulness of 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
122 
the facts is not mitigated when we remember that these 
"witches" were among the very few who brought relief to 
the sick poor in those days. 
Summary 
In summing up, therefore, we must say that through the 
whole of this strange and chequered period we find the 
patristic depreciation of woman sinking into the mind of 
Europe and breaking out in its social life. In the better 
features of the time women have, as a rule, no part. 
They are not benefited by the quest of the Holy Grail; 
they have very little share in the vivid intellectual 
movement of the twelfth century, and none in that of 
the thirteenth, or in the artistic movement that sprang 
up beside it and formed the chief glory of the Middle 
Ages. Like the Jews, they are gradually driven from 
every profession and public office.  
Theologians and ecclesiastical jurists obtain supreme 
power, and these are the most deadly enemies of 
women. Life-long seclusion in the inner apartments of a 
man she has not chosen, or interment in a nunnery that 
is either degraded or unnatural, is the choice (within 
limits) of the daughter of the wealthy. Life-long 
drudgery, with few and coarse pleasures, with a long 
vista of sticks and whips, and scolds-bridles, and 
ducking-stools, with, perhaps, the brutal ordeal on the 
slightest suspicion, or the ghastly death of the witch, is 
the prospect of the daughter of the poor. Let us see what 
the next stage of Christian development will do for her.  
CHAPTER V  
The Effect of the Reformation ...   
The fact is that, on the one hand, the Christian Church 
did nothing for woman which the Stoic and neo-
Platonist moralists were not doing — except to build 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
123 
nunneries; and, on the other, it re-introduced the ideas 
they were successfully uprooting, undid the whole of 
their reform of the law with regard to her, suffered the 
most violent and unjust usage of her to spread, and by 
its absurd conception of love and marriage and celibacy 
occasioned a vast amount of disorder.  
By the fourteenth century woman (on the average) was 
not morally higher than in the fourth, and she was 
much lower in all other respects. We now begin to 
ascend once more from the valley of the Middle Ages, 
and we must see how much Christianity had to do with 
this tardy return to the path of progress.  
The Reformation being above all a concentration on the 
Bible and a protest against paganism and philosophy, 
its general bearing on the woman-question can be 
almost determined in advance. 
Protestantism 
Protestantism shrank in horror from the new Greek 
culture, or any culture that was not Biblical. Hence, as 
the New Testament laid down no principles on the 
subject, and certainly did not undo the harshness and 
injustice of the Old, it was to the very clear teaching of 
the latter that the Reformers turned. Luther had no 
personal vein of refinement to correct or moderate the 
impression of woman left by his assiduous study of the 
Old Testament. He was frankly contemptuous. "No gown 
worse becomes a woman than the desire to be wise," he 
said. So fully did he and the other reformers submit to 
the Old Testament, where the New did not expressly 
abrogate it, that they were willing to permit polygamy. 
Milton, on our side, pointed out that the New Testament 
had not withdrawn this privilege of the saints. It seems 
indisputable that the Reformers held that low estimate 
of woman in herself which we should naturally expect 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
124 
their constant brooding over the Old Testament to 
engender.  
But, partly owing to the perverse Biblical idea of woman, 
partly owing to economic changes which now set in, or 
were increased, woman does not seem to have gained 
much by the Reformation. Whether, as Professor 
Pearson goes on to say, it had the effect of driving more 
women than ever into public disorder is very much 
disputed. This, at least, is clear: it robbed the life of 
woman of much of its remaining colour and variety, and 
it reduced her to the position of a mere breeder of 
children. Moreover, with the closing of the convents, 
and the prohibition of earning money in respectable 
fashion, a larger number of women had to remain 
unmarried, yet dependent on their male relatives.  
On the whole, then, the Reformation made little 
difference to the cause of woman, and it is a stern 
indication of its failure to do so that "for three centuries 
after the Reformation the history of woman in Germany 
was a blank," as Professor Pearson says. German 
women lagged far behind their English and American 
sisters in demanding justice, though they make up for 
that to-day. 
But the coming of Puritanism again "obscured the 
clearer thought which the Renaissance had brought," as 
Mrs. Hill says. Once more the grim Biblical idea of 
woman prevailed. The Old Testament had greater 
influence than ever now that printing had been 
invented. 
In every single instance of the improvement of woman's 
position during the Christian era the change was 
effected by a departure from the principles which men 
were understood to hold.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
125 
Anything more profoundly unsatisfactory and more 
mischievous socially it would be difficult to conceive. 
The attitude of man towards woman must be grounded 
on principle; and it must be a principle that admits the 
dignity and full humanity of woman. Throughout all 
these changes of outward bearing towards woman, the 
fact of her legal, civic, political, and professional 
inferiority remained unchanged. It may seem to many 
women who are happily married a sweet thing to depend 
wholly on the love of the stronger sex, but all men are 
not angels, and the temptation to selfishness is strong; 
nor can anyone question the evil of virtually compelling 
women to seek marriage as a livelihood, or reason away 
their desire to have a voice in public affairs. "I do not 
like women to meddle with politics," said Napoleon 
unctuously to Madame Condorcet. "You are right. 
General," she answered; "but in a country where it is 
the custom to cut off the heads of women it is natural 
that they should wish to know the reason why." 
The transfer of inspiration from the Fathers and 
Schoolmen back to the Bible had made no difference to 
the cause of woman. The sex still waited for some strong 
voice to take up the cry where it had died away on the 
lips of the dying paganism. This was done in the earlier 
part of the nineteenth century. In country after country 
the strain was taken up. The old injustice must be 
abolished. The insult and the wrong of woman's legal 
and political disabilities must be righted, and the 
restrictions on her education and her activity must be 
swept away, or at least placed on that ground and in 
that 
measure 
which 
careful 
experience 
should 
recommend — if it recommended any restriction at all. 
Was this long-delayed cry for reform due, in the cant 
phrase of our day, to the fact that the preceding 
seventeen centuries had misunderstood the Christian 
doctrine of woman, and the Christian Church of the 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
126 
nineteenth century had tardily realised it? Did the 
clergy at last perceive and avow the injustice of their 
long-drawn error? Did they take up the new-born 
demand for truth and equity, and throw themselves 
with a moral zeal into the task of undoing the evil they 
had wrought? How far have the women of our day, who 
cling so strangely to the Churches, to thank them for 
the great advance made in the course of the nineteenth 
century? It is the last stage of the first part of my 
inquiry into the attachment of women to traditional 
religion, and I approach it in a fresh chapter.  
CHAPTER VI 
The Churches and the Modern Woman Movement  
The nineteenth century has been chiefly remarkable, on 
its moral or social side, for two tendencies — the decay 
of religion and the sturdy growth of justice and 
humanity. For the moment I do not say that these were 
connected tendencies; but of the fact that they are 
characteristic of "the wonderful century" it seems hardly 
possible to doubt. The proper authorities on each 
subject assure us of it. The clergy declare the one, and 
humanitarians gladly proclaim the other. These two 
tendencies are wholly concerned with the inquiry we 
now enter upon. For among the wrongs which the 
knights-errant of the last century set out to redress the 
subordination of woman was not the least.  
Men were busy undoing the industrial evils which the 
creation of machinery had caused. They were looking 
abroad to the condition of the blacks; they were 
shuddering at the horrors of warfare; they were stooping 
to consider the lot of the lower animals; they were 
setting the Turk's house in order; they were flashing the 
new search-light of a zeal for justice on the Hill-tops and 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
127 
in the deep valleys everywhere. And suddenly a voice 
rang out with the peal of the clarion: —  
The social subordination of women stands out as an 
isolated fact in modern social institutions; a solitary 
breach of what has become their fundamental law; a 
single relic of an old world of thought and practice 
exploded in everything else, but retained in the one 
thing of most universal interest; as if a gigantic dolmen, 
or a vast temple of Jupiter Olympus, occupied the site of 
St.Paul's, and received daily worship, while the 
surrounding Christian churches were only resorted to 
on feasts and festivals.  
Then men turned their search-light upon their own 
homes, and a long struggle began. It is not my place to 
study the new woman or the advanced woman, or in 
any way the discrepancy of ideals among the women of 
our time. I have to deal with the generally admitted fact 
that a great injustice has been partly remedied, and to 
determine the part the clergy have played during the 
fight. No doubt there are few who will expect to find that 
this great reform was initiated or very strongly 
supported by the clergy. A few years ago the Women's 
Suffrage Society published a little work that was made 
up of quotations from eminent living clerics in favour of 
women's suffrage. A very interesting companion volume 
might be issued containing the expressions of the clergy 
of fifty years ago. However, the little work was 
instructive enough. It assumed that there is still a 
widespread feeling among Christian women that the 
clergy object to their having a voice in the appointment 
of the administrators of their country. 
The first part of my inquiry is at an end. I have 
investigated the ground for the contention that 
Christianity has laid on woman a burden of gratitude, 
and that we may find in this some explanation of her 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
128 
peculiar clinging to its hierarchy and its institutions. I 
have examined the position that woman occupied in 
Europe, and the prospect that lay before her at the time 
when Christianity began to influence legislation and the 
social order. I have studied closely the conception of 
woman's nature and education and work which the 
most influential leaders of the Church presented. I have 
sought the immediate effect of this teaching on the 
position and ambition of the women of Europe, and I 
have traced the development of its influence as the 
centuries passed and the power of the Church rose to 
absolute despotism. Finally, I have described the tardy 
revolt against the long injustice, and determined the 
part which the Church played in relation to it. It seems 
fair to give this summary of the story.  
Summary 
In what is called the "pagan" world the position of 
woman, which had fallen low, was steadily and solidly 
improving. The pagan moralists had come to recognize 
and proclaim that woman was unduly subordinated. 
Public opinion at Rome was strongly against the old 
restrictions on her life. The jurisconsults and legislators 
were removing the old disabilities. The Empire had 
passed beyond the period of licence, and in its more 
sober mood still upheld the reform. But the old religion 
was quite dead as a moral force, and had clearly to be 
replaced. A half-dozen religions, all spiritual and 
elevating, were ready to take up the moral and social 
action it had ceased to exercise. All of these, except 
Christianity, seemed to be in sympathy with the new 
turn of woman's fortunes. They had issued from Greece, 
or Persia, or Egypt, while Christianity came forth from a 
country where woman was despised. But Christianity 
contrived to win the power, and it used the military 
force of the converted emperors to crush the last pulse 
of life out of its rivals. 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
129 
Meantime its leaders had erected the inspiration of the 
Old Testament into a dogma, and the shadow of the 
Hebraic ideal fell upon Europe. The efforts of the pagan 
moralists were decried and rejected; the excellent ideal 
of the Teutonic tribes was allowed to perish.  
From the chaotic mixture of the disrupted Empire and 
the invading peoples emerged at last the strange and 
semi-barbaric structure of feudal and Christian Europe. 
From the new legal system the elements which had been 
more favourable to woman in the Germanic customs 
and the later Roman code were gradually expelled. 
Woman fell to a lower position in law than she had 
occupied in Greece and Rome, or in the Germanic 
systems. Competent authorities like Sir Henry Maine 
attribute this to the influence of Church law, which was 
grossly unjust to and biassed against woman. Monastic 
and priestly writers and the decrees of episcopal 
councils had the same influence on public opinion and 
social life. 
The increasing stress laid by the Church on asceticism 
and celibacy, with the widespread disorder which 
followed by a very natural reaction, still further 
prejudiced the position of woman. The theological theory 
of her inferiority became a fixed principle in the law and 
literature and life of Europe. Here and there her lot was 
relieved for a time by the gaiety of troubadours, orthe 
devotion of knights-errant, or admission into the 
medieval guilds and crafts, or a share in the growing 
culture or the glamour of court-life. These were hours of 
sunshine in a long, grey day.They were always won in 
defiance of the ruling creeds, and generally associated 
with a relaxation of morals or a revival of pagan culture. 
The Reformation 

JESUS, PAUL, PAGAN STOICS ON SEXUAL MORALS 
130 
The Reformation brought no material change in her 
condition. Her insulting legal disabilities, her habitual 
exclusion from the means of self-support and of culture, 
and her utter exclusion from civic or political rights, 
lasted from the sixth to the nineteenth century.  
At the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning 
of the nineteenth a determined attack was made on the 
unjust system of disabilities. In nearly every case the 
campaign 
was 
begun 
by 
radical 
heretics 
or 
Freethinkers. In no case was it begun by clergymen. In 
most cases the clergy gave no word of sympathy until 
the first odium and bitterness of the struggle had been 
lived down.  
In all countries the opposition was largely placed on 
religious grounds, and was, to a painful extent, led by 
the clergy; though the question then was of little more 
than a vague and elementary claim on the part of 
women to draw public attention to their position and 
discuss the justice or injustice of it.  
To-day, although even Christian scholarship has 
denuded the Old Testament of all authority to rule us, 
there is an extraordinary unwillingness among the 
clergy to undo what remains of the evil that their 
groundless dogmas had caused.  
Conclusion 
I conclude that the suggestion that gratitude is due to 
the Church from women is little short of grotesque. Only 
a reckless perversion of their social history could suffer 
it to be entertained for a moment. The clergy have been 
the worst enemies of women. … Women are their best 
friends to-day.  
If women lent them no more support than men do, they 
would cease to be a serious influence in Europe. …  

 
131 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 COMMENTS ON MORALS BY 
PAGANS AND JESUS 
We hope what follows will help the reader see the 
connection 
between 
Roman 
stoicism 
and 
early 
Christianity.  
ADULTERY 
 
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time: Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. MT 5.27 
 
But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman 
to lust after her hath committed adultery with her 
already in his heart. MT 5.28 
 
It is the intention, not the outward act, which makes the 
wickedness. Seneca, On the Happy Life, xvi  
Live as if God beheld thee. Seneca, Letter x 
 
If a man lie with his own wife, imagining her another, he 
is an adulterer. Seneca, On Constancy, vii, 4 
 
ALMS  
 
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be 
seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your 
Father which is in heaven. Therefore, when thou doest 
thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the 
hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that 
they may have glory of men. Verily, I say unto you, They 
have their reward. But when thou doest alms, let not 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth; that 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
132 
thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father which seeth 
in secret himself shall reward thee openly. MT 6.1-4 
 
He who hath done some good and laudable action, and 
then telleth it to others, showeth that he still looketh 
without, and desireth glory, and hath not yet a true 
vision of virtue. Plutarch, On Progress in Virtue, x  
 
Whatsoever I do, either by myself or with some other, 
ought to be directed to this -- only to that which is 
useful and well suited for society. How many, after being 
celebrated by fame, have been given up to oblivion? M. 
Aurelius, vii, 5-6  
 
How sweet and precious a thing it is if a giver will take 
no thanks, and hath already, in giving, forgotten his 
deed. Seneca, On Benefits, ii, 6  
MACCABE: The stress which Christ constantly lays on 
the reward of good deeds should be noted and 
contrasted with the exhortations of rabbis and pagans. 
 
ANGER  
 
And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be 
in danger of the council; but whosoever shall say, Thou 
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. MT 5.22 
 
Anger at another's sin is base and petty: virtue will 
never imitate the vices she reproveth. Seneca, On Anger, 
ii, 6 
 
Yield not to hatred and anger. Epictetus, i, 63 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
133 
Let us not moderate anger, but suppress it entirely; for 
how can there be moderation of an evil thing? Seneca, 
On Anger, iii, 42  
 
Nature doth produce two, or three, or more brothers 
from one seed and principle, not that they may quarrel 
and dispute, but that they may give each other 
assistance. Plutarch, On Fraternal Love, ii 
 
It is forbidden to hurt a man; for he is thy fellow citizen 
in the city of the world. Seneca, On Anger, ii, 31  
 
Wilt thou not bear with thy own brother, who hath God 
for his Father? Epictetus, Discourses, i, 52 
CHARITY 
 
And he looked up and saw the rich men casting their 
gifts into the treasury. And he saw also a certain poor 
widow casting in thither two mites. And he said: Of a 
truth I say unto you, that this poor widow hath cast in 
more than they all: for all these have of their abundance 
cast in unto the offerings of God; but she of her penury 
hath cast in all the living that she had. LK 21.1-4 
 
The good who offer but a little flour and a vessel are 
held to be religious: the wicked escape not impiety, if 
they deluge the altars with blood. Seneca, On Benefits, i, 
6 
 
It is the part of a great mind to despise injury. Seneca, 
On Anger, ii, 32 
 
When Diogenes was asked, How shall I avenge myself on 
my enemy? he said, By living virtuously and honestly. 
Plutarch, On the Usefulness of Enemies, iii 
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
134 
CONSCIENCE 
 
Conscience giveth joy, even when it is oppressed. 
Seneca, On Benefits, iv, 21 
 
No man seemeth to me to have a higher regard for 
virtue, none to be more devoted to it, than he who hath 
forfeited the repute of a good man in order to save his 
conscience. Seneca, Letter lxxxi, 20 
 
DEATH 
 
May not he who is truly a man cease to care about living 
a certain time? … He leaveth all that with God. Plato, 
Gorgias, 51 
 
DIVINE PROVIDENCE 
Therefore I say unto you take no thought for your life, 
what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your 
body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than 
meat, and the body than raiment? MT 6.31 
 
I do nothing but go about persuading you all, old and 
young alike, not to take thought for your persons or 
your properties, but first and chiefly to care about the 
greatest improvement of the soul. Plato, Apology, 30  
 
Make not an idol of thy clothes, and thou wilt not be 
enraged with the thief. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 64  
 
Despise the flesh as if thou wert now dying. M. Aurelius, 
ii, 2 
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do 
they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly 
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
135 
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his 
stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider 
the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, 
neither do they spin; and yet I say unto you, That even 
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of 
these. MT 6.26-29 
 
Must a philosopher be more helpless and anxious than 
the brute-beasts? each of which is self-sufficient, and 
wants neither proper food, nor any suitable and natural 
provision. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 35  
 
Any one thing in creation is sufficient to demonstrate a 
Providence to a humble and grateful mind. Epictetus, 
Discourses, i, 16  
 
It is a mark of want of intellect to spend much time in 
things relating to the body Epictetus, Enchiridion, xli 
 
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which 
to-day is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he 
not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? MT 6.30 
 
Does any good man fear that food shall fail him? It doth 
not fail the blind; it doth not fail the lame. Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 115  
 
There is not anything necessary to us but we have it 
either cheap or gratuitous: and this is the provision 
which our Heavenly Father hath made for us. Seneca, 
On the Happy Life, xv 
 
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? 
or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be 
clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek; 
for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of 
all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
136 
and his righteousness; and all these things shall be 
added unto you. Take therefore no thought for the 
morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the 
things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof.  MT 6.31-34  
 
Keep thy divine part pure, as if thou shouldst be bound 
to give it back immediately. M. Aurelius, iii, 12  
 
In contemplating thyself never include the vessel which 
surrounds thee, and these instruments which are 
attached to it. M. Aurelius, x, 38 
 
When thou hast had enough to-day, thou dost sit 
weeping about to-morrow, in regard to how thou shalt 
get food. Why, if thou hast it, slave, thou wilt have it; if 
not, thou wilt go out of life. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 36  
 
He who hath great riches hath likewise need of many 
things and the richest must be in the worst condition, 
since they seem to be most in want of such things. 
Plato, Eryxias, 406  
 
It is shameful that man should begin and end where the 
irrational creatures do. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 6 
 
DIVORCE 
 
It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let 
him give her a writing of divorcement; but I say unto 
you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for 
the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit 
adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced 
committeth adultery. MT 5.31-32 
 
It is infamous for a man to exact chastity of his wife and 
corrupt the wives of others. Seneca, Letter xciv, 26 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
137 
 
Live as if God beheld thee. Seneca, Letter x 
 
If a man lie with his own wife, imagining her another, he 
is an adulterer. Seneca, On Constancy, vii, 4 
FAITH 
Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven. MT 5.3 
 
What disease shall we say that the rich man suffereth 
from but spiritual poverty? Plutarch, On Covetousness, 
iv 
 
Any person may live happy in poverty, but few in wealth 
and power. Epictetus, Fragments, cxxviii 
 
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast 
ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them 
under their feet, and turn again and rend you. MT 7.6 
 
Do not make much talk among the ignorant about thy 
principles, but show them by thy actions. Epictetus, 
Enchiridion, xlvi 
 
FAMILY  
 
I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-
in-law against her mother-in-law. And a man's foes 
shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father 
and mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he 
that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy 
of me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth 
after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
138 
shall lose it; and he that loseth his life, for my sake, 
shall find it. MT 10.33-? 
 
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in 
heaven, the same is my brother, and my sister, and my 
mother. MT 12.50 
 
FAST 
Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a 
sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they 
may appear unto men to fast. Verily, I say unto you, 
they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, 
anoint thy head and wash thy face; that thou appear 
not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in 
secret, and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall 
reward thee openly. Mt 6.16-18 
 
Many people shed tears only in order that they may 
show them. Seneca, On Tranquillity, 15 
 
The reality, and not the appearance, of virtue is to be 
followed above all things, as well in public as in private 
life. Plato, Gorgias, 527 
  
FLESH 
 
In this present life I reckon that we make the nearest 
approach to knowledge when we have the least possible 
intercourse or communion with the body … but keep 
ourselves pure until the hour when God himself is 
pleased to release us. Plato, Phædo, 67 
  
FORGIVENESS 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
139 
Her sins, which are many, are forgiven: for she loved 
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth 
little. LK 7.47 
 
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, and he 
forgiveth sins. Ecclus., ii, 11  
 
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.  
LK 23.34 
 
I am not angry with my condemners, or with my 
accusers; they have done me no harm, although they 
did not mean to do me any good; and for this I may 
gently blame them [Socrates to his judges]. Plato, 
Apology, 41 
 
GOD  
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in 
heaven is perfect. Mt 5.48 
 
God ought to be to us the measure of all things He who 
would be dear to God must, as far as possible, be like 
Him and such as he is. Plato, Laws, iv, 716 
The good man is the pupil and follower, and real child of 
God. Seneca, On Providence, i, 5 
 
No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate 
the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the 
one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and 
Mammon. MT 6.24 
If thou findest in human life anything better than 
justice, truth … turn to it with all thy soul ….If nothing 
appears to be better than the deity which is planted in 
thee, give place to nothing else. M. Aurelius, iii, 6 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
140 
 
Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you; for I 
am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 
MT 11.28-30 
 
Do not return to philosophy as if she were a master, but 
act like those who have infirm eyes. M. Aurelius, v, 9  
 
It is the nature of the gods to be meek and placid. 
Seneca, On Anger, ii, 27  
 
The gods are not fastidious: they lend a hand to the 
man who would rise. Seneca, Letter lxxiii, 15 
 
Leave me to fulfil the will of God, and to follow whither 
he leads. Plato, Crito, 54  
 
Great is the mind that is wholly subject to God. Seneca, 
Letter cvii, 12 
 
GOLDEN RULE  
 
Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall 
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for every 
one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; 
and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Or what 
man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he 
give him a stone? Or, if he ask a fish, will he give him a 
serpent? If ye, then, being evil, know how to give good 
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
Father which is in heaven give good things to them that 
ask him? Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is 
the law and the prophets. MT 7.7-12 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
141 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18  
 
God hath not merely provided for our needs; we are 
loved even to delight. Seneca, On Benefits, iv, 5  
 
Doing this, and living after this manner, we shall receive 
our reward from the Gods and those who are above us. 
Plato, Laws, iv, 718  
 
The Gods like good parents who smile at their ill-
natured children, cease not to heap benefits even on 
them who doubt the existence of their benefactors, but 
scatter their favours with equal hand among all nations. 
Seneca, On Benefits, vii, 31  
 
If thou wouldst be well spoken of, learn to speak well of 
others. Epictetus, Enchiridion, vi  
 
What thou avoidest suffering thyself, seek not to impose 
on others. Epictetus, Fragments, xxxviii 
 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first 
and great commandment. And the second is like unto it: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two 
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.    
MT 22.37-40 
 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Deut., vi, 5  
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18 
 
What is sufficient? Why, what else than to venerate the 
Gods and bless them, and to do good unto men. M. 
Aurelius, v, 33  
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
142 
Reverence the Gods, and help men. Short is life. M. 
Aurelius, vi, 30  
 
Think of God oftener than thou breathest. Epictetus, 
Fragments, cxiv  
 
Thou must live for another, if thou wouldst live for 
thyself. Seneca, Letter xlviii, 2 
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy; but I say unto 
you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you and persecute you; that ye may be 
the children of your Father, which is in heaven; for he 
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and 
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. MT 5.43-45 
 
MACCABE: “Nowhere in the Old Testament is a man 
told to hate his enemy, and a Jew can hardly have said 
or written this. Rodrigues calls it ‘a lying interpolation.’” 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18  
 
Nothing is nobler than magnanimity, meekness, and 
philanthropy. Epictetus, Fragments, xlvi  
 
It is peculiar to man to love even those who do wrong. 
M. Aurelius, vii, 22  
 
Shall any man hate me? Let him look to it. But I will be 
meek and benevolent towards every man. M. Aurelius, 
xi, 13 
 
GOOD WORKS 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
143 
Therefore whoever heareth these sayings of mine, and 
doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which 
built his house upon a rock: and the rain descended, 
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon 
that house; and it fell not; for it was founded upon a 
rock. And everyone that heareth these sayings of mine, 
and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish 
man, which built his house upon the sand; and the rain 
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, 
and beat upon that house; and it fell; and great was the 
fall of it. Mt 7.21-27 
 
The good man will stand firm, and bear, not only 
patiently but gladly, whatever happens; he will know 
that every adversity is a law of nature; and, just as the 
good soldier bears wounds and counts his scars, and 
even in death loves the emperor for whom he falls, he 
will ever bear in mind that old precept: Follow God. 
Seneca, On the Happy Life, xv  
 
It is the part of a great man to conquer the calamities 
and terrors of morals. Seneca, On Providence, iv, 1  
 
He that lifteth himself above great adversity, and 
beareth the evils which crush others, is consecrated by 
his sufferings. Seneca, To Helvia, xiii, 6  
 
All good men will show mercy and humanity. Seneca, 
On Clemency, v  
 
Man is formed by nature to acts of benevolence. M. 
Aurelius, ix, 42 
 
HELL  
 
Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and 
broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
144 
there be which go in thereat. Because strait is the gate, 
and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it. MT 7.13-14 
 
Wherefore I say, let a man be of good cheer about his 
soul, who, having cast away the pleasures and 
ornaments of the body has arrayed the soul, not in 
some foreign attire, but in her own proper jewels, 
temperance and justice and courage and nobility and 
truth in these adorned, she is ready to go on her 
journey to the world below. Plato, Phædo, 115 
 
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's 
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall 
know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of 
thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree 
bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth 
forth evil fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by 
their fruits ye shall know them. MT 7.15-20  
 
MACCABE: These and the following are obviously not 
words of Christ; they are related to the later dissensions 
among his followers. 
 
If the companion be corrupt, he who converses with him 
will be corrupted likewise. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxxiii  
 
Virtue looketh with unfaltering eyes on the torments 
that are prepared for her: she betrayeth no change of 
countenance 
whether 
fortune 
offer 
prosperity 
or 
adversity. Seneca, On Constancy, v, 5 
 
Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of 
my Father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
145 
name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy 
name done many wonderful works? And then will I 
profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, 
ye that work iniquity.  
 
The unholy do only waste their much service upon the 
Gods. Plato, Laws, iv, 717 
 
Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I 
was an hungered,and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me 
in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited 
me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall 
the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave 
thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee 
in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee 
sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the king 
shall answer and say unto them, Verily, I say unto you, 
In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of 
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall 
he say also unto them on his left hand, Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil 
and his angels; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me 
no meat:I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a 
stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed 
me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then 
shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or 
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then 
shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, 
Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye 
did it not to me. And these shall go away into 
everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life 
eternal.  MT 25.37-46  

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
146 
 
HOLINESS 
 
Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God. 
MK 5.8 
 
Those who have been pre-eminent for holiness of life are 
released from this earthly prison, and go to their pure 
home, which is above. Plato, Phædo, 114 
 
HOSPITALITY 
 
How a man ought to order what relateth to his 
descendants, his kindred, his friends, and his fellow-
citizens, and the rights of hospitality taught by Heaven 
… these things the laws will accomplish and will thus 
render the State, if the Gods co-operate with us, 
prosperous and happy. Plato, Laws, iv, 718  
 
The stranger who cometh from abroad shall be received 
in a friendly spirit he shall depart, as a friend taking 
leave of friends, and be honoured by them with gifts and 
suitable tributes of respect. These are the customs 
according to which our city should receive all strangers 
of either sex showing respect to Zeus, the God of 
hospitality. Plato, Laws, xii, 953  
 
The evil are won by persistent goodness. Seneca, On 
Benefits, vii, 31 
 
HUMILITY 
 
Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your master, even 
Christ: and all ye are brethren. And call no man your 
father upon earth: for one is your Father, which is in 
heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your 
master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
147 
shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself 
shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall 
be exalted. MT 23.8-12 
 
What is the first business of a man who studies 
philosophy? 
To 
part 
with 
self-conceit. 
Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 172  
 
God only is wise. Plato, Apology, 23  
 
Admit that you are nobody, and know nothing. 
Epictetus, Discourses, ii, 1  
 
Let us satisfy our consciences, and do nothing for the 
sake of reputation. Seneca, On Anger, iii, 41  
 
Seek not good from without; seek it within yourselves, 
or ye will never find it. Epictetus, Discourses, iii, 24  
 
Nothing is so much to be avoided in doing good as pride. 
Seneca, On Benefits, ii, 11 
 
When thou art bidden of any man to a marriage feast, 
sit not down in the chief seat, lest haply a more 
honourable man than thou be bidden of him, and he 
that bade thee and him shall come and say to thee, Give 
this man place; and then thou shalt begin with shame 
to take the lowest place. But when thou art bidden, go 
and sit down in the lowest place; that when he that hath 
bidden thee cometh, he may say to thee, Friend, go up 
higher; then shalt thou have glory in the presence of all 
that sit at meat with thee. For every one that exalteth 
himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth himself 
shall be exalted. LK 14.8-11 
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
148 
Is anyone preferred before you at an entertainment? If 
these things are good, you ought to rejoice that he hath 
them. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxv  
 
Two things must be rooted out in men: conceit and 
diffidence. Epictetus, Discourses, iii, 14 
 
Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. 
MT 5.5 
 
I will be meek and yielding to my enemies. Seneca, On 
the Happy Life, xx, 5 
HYPOCRISY 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye 
pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have 
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, 
mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not 
to leave the others undone. Ye blind guides, which 
strain at a gnat and swallow a camel. Woe unto you, 
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the 
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are 
full of extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, 
cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, 
that the outside of them may be clean also. Woe unto 
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like 
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful 
outward, but are within full of dead men's bones and of 
all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear 
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy 
and iniquity. MT 23.23-28 
 
Why do we deceive ourselves? Our evil is not external: it 
is within us, in our very hearts; and so we shall hardly 
attain unto health, for we know not that we are sick. 
Seneca, Ep. 1, 4  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
149 
Fraud appeareth with the pleasant face of virtue, and a 
benignant countenance concealeth depraved thoughts. 
Seneca, Fragments, xcvi  
 
God saith: What complaint against me have ye who 
follow righteousness? Others I have surrounded with 
false goods, and have deluded their vain minds with a 
long and deceptive dream but within they are miserable, 
sordid, base, adorned only outwardly like their walls. 
Theirs is not a solid and genuine happiness: it is 
encrusted, and that but thinly. Seneca, On Providence, 
vi, 3 
 
JUDGEMENT  
 
If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell 
him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall 
hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will 
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that 
in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may 
be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell 
it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, 
let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. 
MT 18.15-17 
 
Show him his error, admonish him. If he listeneth, thou 
wilt cure him, and there is no need of anger. M. 
Aurellus, v, 28  
 
My love breedeth another love: and so, like the stork, I 
shall be cherished by the bird whom I have hatched. 
Plato, Alcibiades 1, 135  
 
Thou oughtest not to be affected contrary to nature by 
the evil deeds of another; pity him rather. Epictetus, 
Discourses, i, 18  
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
150 
An adviser ought in the first place to have a regard to 
the delicacy and sense of shame of the person 
admonished. Epictetus, Fragments, cl  
 
How much finer it is to show a gentle and paternal mind 
to the erring: not to reprove them, but to lead them 
back. Seneca, On Anger, i, 15 
 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what 
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. 
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy 
brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in 
thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let 
me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and, behold, a 
beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out 
the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see 
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.  MT 
7.1-5 
 
When thou art offended with any man's transgression, 
presently reflect upon thyself, and consider what thou 
thyself art guilty of in the same kind. M. Aurelius, x, 30  
 
Take care that thou be far removed from the things thou 
findest fault within another. Plutarch, On the Usefulness 
of Enemies, iv  
 
Whenever Plato was among evil-doers, he was wont to 
ask himself: Do I myself perchance have the same vice? 
Plutarch, On the Usefulness of Enemies, iv  
 
Thou wilt commit the fewest faults in judging if thou art 
faultless in thy own life. Epictetus, Fragments, lvii  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
151 
If we would be righteous judges, let us first persuade 
ourselves that none of us is blameless. Seneca, On 
Anger, ii, 28 
 
LOVE 
 
Love is a mighty god, wonderful among gods and men 
the source of the greatest benefits to us. Plato, 
Symposium, 178 
 
The immortal Gods love us, and -- which is the greatest 
honour we could have -- have placed us next to 
themselves. Seneca, On Benefits, ii, 29 
 
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have 
ye? Do not even the publicans the same? And if ye 
salute your brethren only,what do ye more than others? 
Do not even the publicans so? Mt 5.46-48 
 
How many men are unworthy of the light, yet the sun 
riseth on them. Seneca, On Benefits, i, 1  
If thou wouldst imitate the gods, render service even to 
the ungrateful; for the sun riseth on the wicked. Seneca, 
On Benefits, iv, 26  
To forgive an enemy, when a man hath the opportunity 
to avenge, is a token of magnanimity; but who doth not 
love for his humanity, and admire for his probity, the 
man who showeth mercy to an enemy in affliction, who 
helpeth him when he is in want, and giveth aid to his 
children and family in adversity? Plutarch, Of The Use of 
Enemies, ix  
 
He is an ungrateful man, … yet I will not give more 
grudgingly on that account, but more generously. 
Seneca, On Benefits, vii, 32  

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
152 
 
The stranger, having no kindred and friends, is more to 
be pitied by gods and men. Plato, Laws. v, 729  
 
He who conferreth benefits, imitateth the gods: he who 
seeketh them, the traffickers. Seneca, On Benefits, iii, 
15 
 
MERCY  
 
If ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy 
and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the 
guiltless. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath 
day. The sabbath was made for man, not man for the 
sabbath. What man shall there be among you, that shall 
have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath 
day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out? How much 
then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is 
lawful to do well on the sabbath day. MT 12.7-8, 11-12 
 
The idea is inconceivable that the Gods have regard, not 
to the justice and purity of our souls, but to costly 
processions and sacrifices. Plato, Alcibiades II, 150 
 
Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. 
MK 5.7 
 
It is the mark of a generous and lofty mind to give aid, 
to do service. Seneca, On Benefits, iii, 15  
 
Forgiveness is better than punishment: for the one is a 
proof of a gentle, the other of a savage, nature. 
Epictetus, Fragments, lxiii 
  
OATHS 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
153 
Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of 
old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt 
perform unto the Lord thine oaths: but I say unto you, 
Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's 
throne. MT 5.33-34   
 
Be neither a man of many words, nor busyabout too 
many things … having need neither of oath nor of any 
man's testimony. M. Aurelius, iii, 5  
Avoid taking oaths, if possible, altogether; at any rate, 
as far as thou art able. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxxiii 
We need not raise our hands to heaven, nor beseech the 
keeper to admit us to the ear of the image, as though 
thus we might be better heard; God is near thee, is with 
thee, is within thee. Seneca, Letter xli, 1 
 
OUTCASTS 
 
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath 
appointed me to preach the gospel to the poor: he hath 
sent 
me 
to 
heal 
the 
brokenhearted, 
to 
preach 
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to 
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to 
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. LK 4.18-19 
 
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek: 
he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to 
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound: to proclaim the 
acceptable year of the Lord to comfort all that mourn. 
Is., lxi, 1-2  
 
The wise man will give hospitality to the exile and alms 
to the needy; he will restore children to their weeping 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
154 
mothers, loose the chains of the captive, release the 
gladiator from his bondage, and even bury the body of 
the criminal. Seneca, On Clemency, vi 
 
PEACE 
 
Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called 
the children of God. MK 5.9 
 
A wise and good person neither quarreleth with any 
man, nor, as far as is possible, suffereth another to do 
so. The life of Socrates giveth is an example of this, as of 
other things; since he did not only avoid quarrelling 
himself, but did not even suffer others to quarrel. 
Epictetus, Discourses, iv, 5 
PRAYER  
And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the 
hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the 
synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they 
may be seen of man. Verily, I say unto you, They have 
their reward. 
 
But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet and 
when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which 
is in secret; and thy father which seeth in secret shall 
reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain 
repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they 
shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye 
therefore like unto them; for your Father knoweth what 
things ye have need of before ye ask him. Mt 6.5-8 
 
Cannot He who made and moveth the sun perceive all 
things? Epictetus, Discourses, i, 54 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
155 
We prefer to invoke the Gods, to whom we make fitting 
supplication, silently and in our hearts. Seneca, On 
Benefits, ii, 1 
Wait not for applauses, and shouts, and praises, in 
order to do good. Epictetus, Fragments, lxxxiii 
Make thyself worthy of the help of the divinity. M. 
Aurelius, xii, 14 
When thou hast shut thy doors and darkened thy room, 
remember never to say that thou art alone. God is 
within, and thy genius is within; and what need have 
they of light to see what thou art doing? Epictetus, 
Discourses, i, 54 
 
God seeth the minds of all men bared of the material 
vesture. M. Aurelius, xii,  
 
After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which 
art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom 
come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. MT 
6.9-10 
We ought not to pray at all, or we ought to pray in this 
simple and noble fashion. M. Aurelius, v, 7 
Wilt thou not feel thyself to be ennobled on knowing 
thyself to be the son of God? Epictetus, Discourses, i, 2  
 
Have no will but the will of God, and who shall restrain 
thee? Epictetus, Discourses, I, 17 
Give us this day our daily bread.And forgive us our 
debts, as we forgive our debtors.And lead us not into 
temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever. Amen. 
MT 6.11-13 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
156 
 
MCCABE: The "Lord's Prayer" is much shorter in Luke, 
and is unknown in Mark. It is commonly regarded by 
theologians as a composition not due to Christ. 
 
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men 
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your 
trespasses. Mt 6.14-15 
 
Virtue cometh to the virtuous by the gift of God. Plato, 
Meno, 100  
 
REWARDS 
 
When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy 
friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy 
rich neighbours: lest they also bid thee again, and a 
recompense be made thee. But when thou makest a 
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, 
and thou shalt be blessed: for they cannot recompense 
thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection 
of the just. LK 14.12-14 
 
It is a base traffic to expect a return for a benefit. 
Seneca, On Benefits, i, 2  
 
Some there be who, when they have done a good turn to 
any, are ready to set them on the score for it, and to 
require retaliation thou must be one of those who, what 
they do, do without further thought, and are in a 
manner insensible of what they do. M. Aurelius, v, 7  
 
When thou art feasting at table, thou shouldst give 
among the servants part of what is before thee. 
Epictetus, Fragments, xxx 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
157 
Like wise ye, when ye shall have done all those things 
which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable 
servants; we have done that which was our duty to do.   
LK 17.10 
 
As a horse when he hath run, and a dog when he hath 
tracked the game, or a bee when it hath made honey, so 
a man when he hath done a good act doth not call out 
for others to come and see, but goeth on to another act. 
M. Aurelius, V, 6 
 
RIGHTEOUSNESS 
 
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness; for they shall be filled. MT 5.6 
 
He who doeth well must of necessity be happy and 
blessed. Plato, Gorgias, 507  
 
Virtue alone bringeth secure and perpetual joy. Seneca, 
On the Happy Life, xx, 5  
RITUALS 
 
Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead. MT 8.22 
 
Go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, 
and not sacrifice; for I am not come to call the 
righteous, but sinners to repentance.  MT 9.13  
 
For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice. Hosea, vi, 6 
 
It was vain for them to sacrifice and offer gifts, seeing 
that they were hateful to the Gods, who are not, like vile 
usurers, to be gained by bribes. Plato, Alcibiades, ii, 149 
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
158 
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, 
adulteries, 
fornications, 
thefts, 
false 
witness, 
blasphemies; these are the things which defile a man: 
but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man. MT 
15.19-20 
 
God is not worshipped by the slain bodies of bulls, nor 
by offerings of gold and silver, nor by the squandering of 
treasures, but by a pious and upright will. Seneca, 
Letter cxv, 5  
 
RULERS  
 
Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise 
dominion over them, and they that are great exercise 
authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; 
but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your 
minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let 
him be your servant: even as the Son of Man came not 
to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his 
life a ransom for many. MT 20.25-28 
 
Nothing is more becoming in a ruler than to despise no 
one, and never to be insolent. Epictetus, Fragments, 
cxxvii  
 
He who is lifted up with pride, or elated by wealth or 
rank or beauty is left deserted by God. Plato, Laws, iv, 
716  
 
If thou dost happen to be placed in some high station 
wilt thou not remember what thou art, and over whom 
thou bearest rule that they are by nature thy relatives, 
thy brothers that they are the offspring of God? 
Epictetus, Discourses, i, 14 
 
SIN  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
159 
 
Verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and 
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble 
himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the 
kingdom of heaven. And whosoever shall receive one 
such little child in my name receiveth me. But who 
soever shall offend one of these little ones which believe 
in me, it were better for him that a millstone were 
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in 
the depth of the sea. Woe unto the world because of 
offences! For it must needs be that offences come, but 
woe to that man by whom the offence cometh. MT 18.3-
7 
 
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; 
for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always 
behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. For the 
Son of Man is come to save that which was lost. Mt 
18.10-11 
The light of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine 
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If 
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great 
is that darkness? MT 6.22-23 
 
If thou dost act unrighteously, thy eye will turn to the 
dark and godless, and, being in darkness and ignorance 
of thyself, thou wilt probably do deeds of darkness. 
Plato, Alcibiades, i, 134 
 
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it 
from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy 
members should perish, and not that thy whole body 
should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend 
thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable to 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
160 
thee that one of thy members should perish, and not 
that thy whole body should be cast into hell. MT 5.29 
 
Is it for one paltry leg, wretch, that thou dost accuse the 
universe? Canst thou not forego that, in consideration 
of the whole? Canst thou not gladly yield it to Him who 
gave it? Epictetus, i, 49 
 
SOUL 
 
The soul doth not apprehend God unless it be pure and 
holy. Seneca, Letter lxxxvii, 21 
 
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give 
in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come 
in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he 
shall reward every man according to his works.  MT 
16.26-28 
 
The soul doth not apprehend God unless it be pure and 
holy. Seneca, Letter lxxxvii, 21 
 
Consider that thou dost not thrive merely by the food in 
thy stomach, but by the elevation of thy soul. For the 
former is evacuated, and carried off altogether; but the 
latter, though the soul is parted, remains uncorrupted 
through all things. Epictetus, Fragments, xxvi  
 
Souls find their way easiest to the Gods when they have 
been withdrawn early from the society of men, for they 
are the least soiled. Seneca, To Marcia, xxiii 
 
SPIRITUAL TREASURES 
 
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where 
moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
161 
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in 
heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and 
where thieves do not break through nor steal; for where 
your treasure is, there will your heart be also. MT 6.19-
21 
 
Know that thief and robber cannot reach the things that 
are properly thy own. Epictetus, Discourses, i, 18  
 
What tyrant, what robber, what thief, or what court can 
be formidable to those who count the body and its 
possessions as nothing? Epictetus, Discourses. i, 35  
 
The perfect man, full of divine and human virtues, can 
lose nothing: his goods are guarded by solid and 
unshakable walls. Seneca, On Constancy, vi, 8 
 
SUFFERING  
 
Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be 
comforted. MT 5.4 
 
Shall not the having God for our maker, and father, and 
guardian, free us from griefs and alarms? Epictetus, 
Discourses, i, 9 
 
SUFFERING-PERSECUTION 
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; 
be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.  
MT 10.16 
 
But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or 
what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that 
same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that 
speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
162 
you … but he that endureth to the end shall be saved. 
MT 10.19-20, 22 
 
 MACCABE: The lengthy speech preparing the disciples 
for persecution is clearly a later composition, based on 
experience.  
 
Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse 
thee. What then can these things do to prevent thy mind 
from remaining pure, wise, sober, just? M. Aurelius, viii, 
51 
 
Dare to look up to God, and say, Make use of me for the 
future as thou wilt. I am of the same mind: I am one 
with thee. Lead me whither thou wilt. Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 16  
 
When the good man seeth his faith tried by the torments 
of perfidy, he descendeth not from his height, but riseth 
above his torment, and saith: I have what I willed, what 
I sought: I withdraw not, and will not withdraw. Seneca, 
On Benefits, iv, 21 
And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able 
to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to 
destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two 
sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not 
fall to the ground without your Father? But the very 
hairs of your head are numbered. Fear ye not, therefore, 
ye are of more value than many sparrows. Whosoever 
therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess 
also before my Father which is in heaven. But 
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also 
deny before my Father which is in heaven. MT 10.24-33 
 
Be of good cheer about death, and know of a certainty 
that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
163 
after death. He and his are not neglected by the Gods. 
Plato, Apology, 41  
 
Why may not such an one call himself … a son of God? 
And why shall he fear anything that happens among 
men? Epictetus, Discourses, i, 9  
 
God neglecteth not one of the smallest things. Epictetus, 
Discourses, iii, 24  
 
If thou dost always remember that God standeth by as a 
witness of whatever thou dost either in soul or body, 
thou wilt never err, either in thy prayers or actions, and 
thou wilt have God abiding with thee. Epictetus, 
Fragments, cxv 
 
THOUGHTS AND WORDS 
 
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else 
make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt; for the tree 
is known by his fruit. Generation of vipers, how can ye, 
being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance 
of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the 
good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things; 
and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth 
evil things. But I say unto you, That every idle word that 
men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the 
day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.  
MT 12.33-37 
 
Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such also will be the 
character of thy mind; for the soul is dyed by its 
thoughts. M. Aurelius, v, 16  
 
This thought will suffer nothing sordid, nothing base, 
nothing cruel, to remain in the mind. The Gods are 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
164 
witnesses of all things, and before them we are on trial. 
Seneca, Letter cii, 29  
 
These [vices, etc.] can be no otherwise expelled than by 
looking up to God alone as our pattern. Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 17  
 
The body must be treated with severity, lest it obey not 
the mind readily. Seneca, Letter viii, 5  
 
What is once said and done thou canst not recall. 
Epictetus, Fragments, xcvi 
 
Let us speak what we think, and think what we speak; 
let our speech accord with our life. Seneca, Letter lxxv, 4   
 
TRUTH 
 
The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant 
above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as 
his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much 
more shall they call them of his household? Fear them 
not therefore; for there is nothing covered that shall not 
be revealed, and hid that shall not be known. What I tell 
you in darkness, that speak ye in light; and what ye 
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. MT 
10.24-? 
 
What madness it is to fear a charge of infamy from the 
infamous. Seneca, Letter xci, 20  
 
One would not think that ye would need an instructor to 
rear up young menof such a spirit that, knowing their 
affinity to the Gods, and that we are, as it were, fettered 
by the body and its possessions they should resolve to 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
165 
throw them all off, and depart to their divine kindred. 
Epictetus, Discourses, i, 9  
 
We must live as if we were ever in sight: our minds must 
be as though someone could ever penetrate to our 
inmost thoughts. And this is so. What avails it that 
something be hidden from men? From God nothing is 
concealed. Seneca, Letter lxxxiii, 1 
 
TURN THE OTHER CHEEK 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you that ye resist 
not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will 
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him 
have thy cloke also. And whosoever shall compel thee to 
go a mile, go with him twain. MT 5.38-41 
 
When Cato was struck on the mouth, he was not angry, 
and sought no vengeance: he denied the deed. Seneca, 
On Constancy, xiv, 3  
 
The best way of avenging thyself is not to become like 
the wrong-doer. M. Aurelius, vi, 6  
Never mind if someone doth despise thee as a fool, and 
insult thee, if he hath a mind; let him strike thee, by 
Zeus, and do thou be of good cheer, and do not mind 
the insulting blow, for thou wilt never come to any harm 
in the practice of virtue. Plato, Gorgias, 527 
There is this fine circumstance connected with the 
character of a Cynic that he must be beaten like an ass, 
and yet, when beaten, must love those who beat him, as 
the father, as the brother of all. Epictetus, Discourses, 
ii, 12  

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
166 
 
VIRTUE 
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill 
cannot be hid.  MT 5.14 
 
Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, 
but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are 
in the house.MT 5.15 
 
Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. MT 5.16 
 
Virtue, 
however 
obscure, 
cannot 
be 
hidden; 
it 
givethproof of itself. Seneca, On Tranquillity, iii, 7 
 
Live as on a mountain….Let men see, let them know a 
real man who liveth according to nature. If they cannot 
endure him, let them kill him. For that is better than to 
live as others do. M. Aurelius, x, 15  
 
If you always remember that God standeth by as a 
witness of whatever you do, either in soul or body, you 
will never err. Epictetus, Fragments, cxv 
 
WEALTH 
 
If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven: and come and follow me. Mt 19.21 
 
Democritus cast aside his wealth, deeming it a burden 
to the good mind. Seneca, On Providence, vi, 2  
 
Poverty will bring thee joy, as thou wilt be free from 
many cares. Plutarch, On Covetousness, iv  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
167 
 
Verily, I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto 
you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of 
God. Everyone that hath forsaken homes, or brethren, 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 
lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, 
and shall inherit everlasting life. But many that are first 
shall be last; and the last shall be first. MT 19.23-24, 
29-30  
 
Very rich and very good at the same time a man cannot 
be. Plato, Laws, v, 742  
 
It is a great thing not to be corrupted by the nearness of 
wealth: great is the man who is poor amid wealth. 
Seneca, Letter xx, 10  
 
Riches are not among the number of things which are 
good...... It is difficult therefore for a rich person to be 
modest, or for a modest person to be rich. Epictetus, 
Fragments, xviii  
 
Wealth is dangerous to the foolish, since vice groweth 
with wealth. Epictetus, Fragments, xciv  
 
No one who is a lover of money, a lover of pleasure, or a 
lover of glory, is likewise a lover of mankind. Epictetus, 
Fragments, x 
 
Woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your 
consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall 
hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall 
mourn and weep. Woe unto you when all men shall 
speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false 
prophets. LK 6.24-26 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
168 
 
Woe to them that are at ease in Zion. Amos, vi 1  
 
Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: 
behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: 
behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be 
ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, 
but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for 
vexation of spirit. Is., Ixv, 13  
 
Avarice is the worst pest of the human race. Seneca, To 
Helvia, xiii, 2  
 
Let parents bequeath to their children, not a heap of 
riches, but the spirit of reverence. Plato, Laws, V, 729  
 
Fix thy desire or aversion on … health, power, honours, 
thy country, friends, and children … and thou wilt be 
unfortunate. But fix them on Zeus, on the Gods … and 
how canst thou be any longer unprosperous? Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 17 
 
Take heed and beware of covetousness: for a man's life 
consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he 
possesseth. LK 12.15 
 
Covetousness is the root of all evil. Seneca, On 
Clemency, i  
 
It were better to die of hunger, exempt from grief or fear, 
than to live in affluence with perturbation. Epictetus, 
Enchiridion, xii 
 
MISC  
 
Freely ye have received, freely give. Provide neither gold, 
nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip for your 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
169 
journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; 
for the workman is worthy of his meat [hire]. MT 10.9-
10 
 
No mind is good without God. Seneca, Letter lxxiii, 16  
 
Provide things relating to the body no further than 
absolute need requireth. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxxiii  
 
Why must I any longer seek good and evil in externals? 
Epictetus Discourses, iii, 20 
 
He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that 
receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. He that 
receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall 
receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a 
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall 
receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall 
give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold 
water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto 
you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. MT 10.33-42 
 
The rites of hospitality are taught by Heaven. Plato, 
Laws, iv, 718 
 
The stranger who cometh from abroad shall be received 
in a friendly spirit … showing respect to Zeus, the god of 
hospitality. Plato, Laws, xii, 953 
 
What sort of a man is he who giveth the name of brother 
to his friend and will not walk the same way with him? 
Plutarch, On Fraternal Love, iii  
 
The wise man will stretch out his hand to the 
shipwrecked, and will give hospitality to the exile and 
alms to the needy. Seneca, On Clemency, vi 
 

COMMENTS ON MORALS BY PAGANS AND JESUS 
170 
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the 
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached to 
them. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended 
in me. MT 11.5-6 
 
I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father; for 
so it seemed good in thy sight. MT 11.25-26 
 
What is the first business of a man who studieth 
philosophy? 
To 
part 
with 
self-conceit. 
Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 172  
 
I am a sort of gad-fly, given to the State by God 
[Socrates].Plato, Apology, 30  
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. MT 13.43 
 
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man, but 
that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a 
man. MT 15.11 
 
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and 
take up his cross, and follow me. MT 16.24 
 
Nothing is more unhappy than the man who hath never 
known adversity. Seneca, On Providence, iii, 3  
 
We have to struggle against this flesh with all pure 
minds. Seneca, To Marcia, xxiv, 5  
Never value anything as profitable to thyself which shall 
compel thee to break thy promise, to lose thy self-
respect, to suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite. M. 
Aurelius, iii, 8 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
171 
 
Simple and modest is the work of philosophy. Draw me 
not aside to insolence and pride. M. Aurelius, ix, 28  
 
Keep thyself simple, good, pure, serious, free from, 
affectation, a friend of justice, a worshipper of the Gods, 
kind, affectionate, strenuous in all proper acts. M. 
Aurelius, vi, 30  
 
Who is there whom bright and agreeable children do not 
attract to play, and creep, and prattle with them? 
Epictetus, Discourses, i, 216  
 
A sensible legislator will rather exhort the elders to 
reverence the younger, and above all to take heed that 
no young man sees or hears one of themselves doing or 
saying anything disgraceful. Plato, Laws, v, 729  
 
The Gods are not fastidious: they lend a hand to the 
man who would rise. Seneca, Letter lxxiii, 15 
 
Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on 
earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall 
be done for them by my Father which is in heaven. For 
where two or three are gathered together in my name, 
there am I in the midst of them.  MT 18.19-20 
  
If such a thing as wife or child be granted thee, there is 
no objection; but if the Captain calls, run to the ship, 
and never look behind. Epictetus, Enchiridion, vii  
 


 
173 
 
CHAPTER 6 MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN 
MORALS COMPARED   
 
ANGER TO WAR 
 
Most ancient Christians did not believe that ethical 
behavior itself would lead to salvation.     
JESUS 
 
O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I 
suffer you? MT 17.17 
And when he (Jesus) had looked round about on them 
with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their 
hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. 
And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored 
whole as the other.  Mark 3:5  
PAGAN 
Let us not moderate anger, but suppress it entirely; for 
how can there be moderation of an evil thing? Seneca, 
On Anger, iii, 42  
 
We are here to encounter the most outrageous, brutal, 
dangerous, and intractable of all passions (anger) ; the 
most loathsome and unmannerly; nay, the most 
ridiculous too; and the subduing of this monster will do 
a great deal toward the establishment of human peace. 
Seneca, On Anger Ch 1  
 
When Diogenes was asked, [while angry] How shall I 
avenge myself on my enemy? he said, By living 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
174 
virtuously and honestly. Plutarch, On the Usefulness of 
Enemies, iii  
 
A good and a wise man is not to 2be an enemy of wicked 
men, but a reprover of them; and he is to look upon all 
the drunkards, the lustful, the thankless, covetous, and 
ambitious, that he meets with, not otherwise than as a 
physician looks upon his patients; Democritus laughed, 
and Heraclitus wept, at the folly and wickedness of the 
world, but we never read of an angry philosopher. 
Seneca, On Anger Ch 5  
 
Anger at another's sin is base and petty:  virtue will 
never imitate the vices she reproves. Seneca, On Anger, 
ii, 6 
 
Show him his error, admonish him. If he listens, thou 
wilt cure him, and there is no need of anger. M. 
Aurellus, v, 28 
 
How much finer it is to show a gentle and paternal mind 
to the erring: not to reprove them, but to lead them 
back. Seneca, On Anger, i, 15  
 
In what form or degree however it appears, all anger, 
without exception, is vicious. Seneca, On Anger Ch 5    
 
Justice cannot be angry; nor is there any need of an 
angry magistrate for the punishment of foolish and 
wicked men. The power of life and death must not be 
managed with passion [excessive, destructive emotion]. 
Seneca, On Anger Ch 5   
 
There is no surer argument of a great mind than not to 
be transported to anger by any accident.  And whoever 
considers the foulness and the brutality of this vice, 
must acknowledge that there is no such monster in 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
175 
Nature as one man raging against another …. Seneca, 
On Anger Ch 6   
 
A wise and good person neither quarrels with any man, 
nor, as far as is possible, suffers another to do so. The 
life of Socrates gives us an example of this, as of other 
things; since he did not only avoid quarrelling himself, 
but did not even suffer others to quarrel. Epictetus, 
Discourses, iv, 5 
 
Yield not to hatred and anger. Epictetus  
 
When Cato was struck on the mouth, he was not angry, 
and sought no vengeance: he denied the deed. Seneca, 
On Constancy, xiv, 3 
 
Never mind if someone doth despise thee as a fool, and 
insult thee, if he hath a mind; let him strike thee, by 
Zeus, and do thou be of good cheer, and do not mind 
the insulting blow, for thou wilt never come to any harm 
in the practice of virtue. Plato, Gorgias, 527 
 
CHARITY AND REWARDS  
 
JESUS 
 
…and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of 
a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward. 
MT 10.41 
 
PAGAN 
 
The Stoics, unlike Jesus and Paul, taught that virtue 
was its own reward. They believed neither in Hell or 
Heaven.   
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
176 
It is a mean and dishonorable thing to give for any other 
end than but giving's sake. He that gives for gain, profit, 
or any by-end, destroys the very intent of bounty 
(charity)…. Seneca, On Benefits  
 
He that does good to another man does good also to 
himself; not only in the consequence, but in the very act 
of doing it: for the conscience of well-doing is an ample 
reward. Seneca, On Benefits  
 
If we give only to receive, we lose the fairest objects for 
our charity: the absent, the sick, the captive, and the 
needy. Seneca, On Benefits Ch 5  
 
Hercules conquered nothing for himself, but made his 
business to vindicate and to protect the miserable, 
without any private interest or design…. Seneca, On 
Benefits 6-78 
 
It is a mean and dishonorable thing to give for any other 
end than but giving's sake. He that gives for gain, profit, 
or any by-end, destroys the very intent of bounty 
[charity]…. Seneca, On Benefits  
 
GIVE PUBLICLY  
 
JESUS 
  
Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. MT 5.16 
  
PAGAN 
 
How sweet and precious a thing it is if a giver will take 
no thanks, and hath already, in giving, forgotten his 
deed. Seneca, On Benefits, ii, 6 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
177 
 
Virtue, however obscure, cannot be hidden; it gives 
proof of itself. Seneca, On Tranquillity, iii, 7 
 
If you always remember that God stands by as a witness 
of whatever you do, either in soul or body, you will never 
err. Epictetus, Fragments, cxv. 
 
GIVE PRIVATELY 
JESUS 
Take heed that ye do not [give] your alms before men, to 
be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your 
Father which is in heaven. MT 6.1-4   
 
PAGAN 
 
He who hath done some good and laudable action, and 
then telleth it to others, shows that he still looks 
without, and desires glory, and hath not yet a true 
vision of virtue. Plutarch, On Progress in Virtue, x   
 
GIVING MUCH 
   
 
JESUS 
 
And he looked up and saw the rich men casting their 
gifts into the treasury. And he saw also a certain poor 
widow casting in thither two mites. And he said: Of a 
truth I say unto you, that this poor widow hath cast in 
more than they all: for all these have of their abundance 
cast in unto the offerings of God; but she of her penury 
hath cast in all the living that she had.  LK 21.1-4 
 
PAGAN 
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
178 
The good who offer but a little flour and a vessel are 
held to be religious: the wicked escape not impiety, if 
they deluge the altars with blood. Seneca, On Benefits, i, 
6 
 
CONSCIENCE 
 
Christian 
 
And they which heard it, being convicted by their own 
conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the 
eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and 
the woman standing in the midst.  John 8:9 
 
And herein do I exercise myself, to have always a 
conscience void to offence toward God, and toward men.  
Acts 24:16 
 
 Paul 
 
Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, 
their conscience also bearing witness ….  Rom 2:15 
 
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also 
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost …. Rom 9:1 
If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye 
be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, 
asking no question for conscience sake.  1 Cor 10:27 
 
Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.  1 
Tim 3:9 
 
Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that 
are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even 
their mind and conscience is defiled. Tit 1:15 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
179 
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our 
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not 
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have 
had 
our 
conversation 
in 
the 
world, 
and 
more 
abundantly to toward you.  2 Cor 1.12  
 
So powerful is virtue, and so gracious is Providence, 
that every man has a light (conscience) …within him for 
a guide (to moral action); which we do all of us both see 
and acknowledge, though we do not pursue it.   Seneca, 
On A Happy Life  
  
ENEMIES 
 
JESUS  
 
But those mine enemies, which would not that I should 
rule over them, bring them here, and slay them before 
me. LK 19:22, 27 
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for 
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; 
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in 
heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on 
the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the 
unjust. MT 5:44-45 
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy; (This is not in the 
OT) but I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you and persecute you; 
that ye may be the children of your Father, which is in 
heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on 
the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
180 
unjust. MT 5.43-45   (Rain falling on both the just and 
unjust, is a central Stoic teaching.) How many men are 
unworthy of the light, yet the sun riseth on them. 
Seneca, On Benefits, i, 1 
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you that ye resist 
not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will 
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him 
have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to 
go a mile, go with him twain. MT 5.38-41 
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto 
you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you, and persecute you…. MT 5.43-44  
 
JEWISH SCRIPTURES 
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Levit,19.18  
 
The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be as one born 
among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself. 
Levit, 19.34 
PAGAN 
 
There is this fine circumstance connected with the 
character of a Cynic that he must be beaten like an ass, 
and yet, when beaten, must love those who beat him, as 
the father, as the brother of all. Epictetus, Discourses, 
ii, 12 
 
FORGIVENESS  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
181 
JESUS 
 
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will 
your Father forgive your trespasses. Mt 6.14 
 
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and 
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven 
unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the 
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever 
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven 
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.  
MT  12.31-32  The early church taught that God speaks 
through the church via the Holy Spirit. Thus, one could 
not challenge the teachings of the church. 
 
Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall 
my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven 
times?  Jesus says to him, I say not to thee, Until seven 
times: but, Until seventy times seven. MT 18.21-22  
[Telling Christians to love one another or forgive one 
another encouraged unity in the churches but what 
happens to non-christians? Hell.]  
 
(Jesus on the cross says) Father, forgive them, for they 
know not what they do. LK 23.34 
 
 
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men 
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your 
trespasses. Mt 6.14-15 
 
Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own 
blood, he entered at once into the holy place, having 
obtained eternal redemption for us. Hebrews 9:12 
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
182 
And for this cause he is the mediator of the new 
testament, that by means of death, for the redemption 
of the transgressions that were under the first 
testament, they which are called might receive the 
promise of eternal inheritance. Heb 9:15 
 
And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; 
and without shedding of blood is no remission. Heb 9:22  
 
 
[God will not forgive anyone unless there is a bloody 
sacrifice.] 
PAGAN 
The humanity and excellence of this virtue (clemency or 
forgiveness) is confessed at all hands, as well by the 
men of pleasure, and those that think every man was 
made for himself, as by the Stoics, that make "man a 
sociable creature, and born for the common good of 
mankind:" for it is of all dispositions the most peaceable 
and quiet. Seneca, On Clemency  
 
We must be careful not to confound clemency with pity; 
for as religion worships God, and superstition profanes 
that worship, so should we distinguish betwixt clemency 
and pity…. Seneca, On Clemency 
 
We should have neither judges nor accusers; none 
either to grant a pardon or to ask it. More or less, we are 
all sinners; and he that has best purged his conscience, 
was brought by errors to repentance. Seneca, On 
Clemency 
 
Let him so deal with his own subjects as he desires God 
should deal with him. If Heaven should be inexorable to 
sinners, and destroy all without mercy, what flesh could 
be safe? But as the faults of great men are not presently 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
183 
punished with thunder from above, let them have a like 
regard to their inferiors here upon earth. He that has 
revenge in his power, and does not use it, is the great 
man. Seneca, On Clemency 
 
I am not angry with my condemners, or with my 
accusers; they have done me no harm, although they 
did not mean to do me any good; and for this I may 
gently blame them (Socrates to his judges). Plato, 
Apology, 41 
 
JUDGMENT 
JESUS 
 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. Mt 7.1 
 
JEWISH SCRIPTURES 
 
Judge of thy neighbor by thyself and be discreet in every 
point. Ecclus., xxx, 15 
 
GLADIATORS AND DEATH 
 
 
There are a sort of men that take delight in the spilling 
of human blood, and in the death of those that never 
did them any injury, nor were ever so much as 
suspected for it. ….The whole business was only murder 
upon murder: the (gladiatorial) combatants fought 
naked, and every blow was a wound. They do not 
contend for victory, but for death; and he that kills one 
man is to be killed by another. By wounds they are 
forced upon wounds which they take and give upon 
their bare breasts. Burn that rogue, (the crowds). 
Seneca 
  

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
184 
Luxury runs into avarice, and when the reverence of 
virtue is extinguished, men will stick at nothing that 
carries profit along with it. Man's blood is shed in 
wantonness, his death is a spectacle for entertainment, 
and his groans are music. Private cruelties, it is true, 
cannot do much mischief, but in princes they are a war 
against mankind. Seneca 
 
 
GOLDEN RULES: 
LOVE YOUR NEIGHTBOR AS YOURSELF 
JESUS 
Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the 
second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law 
and the prophets. Mt 22.37-40 
How much more shall your Father which is in heaven 
give good things to them that ask him? Therefore all 
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, 
do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the 
prophets. Mt 7.7-12 
 
Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a 
question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is 
the great commandment in the law?  Jesus said unto 
him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the 
first and great commandment. And the second is like 
unto it: Thou, shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On 
these two commandments hang all the law and the 
prophets. Mt 22.35-40 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
185 
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have 
ye? Do not even the publicans the same? And if ye 
salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? 
Do not even the publicans so? Mt 5.46-48 
 
Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy 
fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee? And his lord 
was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he 
should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise shall 
my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive not everyone his brother their trespasses 
MT 18.33-35 
   
For I (Jesus) say unto you, That except your 
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the 
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. Mt  5:20 
 
JEWISH SCRIPTURES 
 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Levit., xix, 18 
  
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Deut., vi, 5  
 
PAUL 
 
For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt 
not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false 
witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other 
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this 
saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself. Rom 13.9 
 
PAGAN 
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
186 
Thou must live for another, if thou wouldst live for 
thyself. Seneca, Letter xlviii, 2 
 
What is sufficient? Why, what else than to venerate the 
Gods and bless them, and to do good unto men. M. 
Aurelius, v, 33 
 
Reverence the Gods, and help men. Short is life. M. 
Aurelius, vi, 30 
 
What thou avoid suffering thyself, seek not to impose on 
others. Epictetus, Fragments, xxxviii 
 
Shall any man hate me? Let him look to it. But I will be 
meek and benevolent towards every man. M. Aurelius, 
xi, 13 
 
It is peculiar to man to love even those who do wrong. 
M. Aurelius, vii, 22 
 
GOVERNMENT--Support the State 
JESUS 
 
Jesus tells Peter to pay (their taxes) with a coin he'll find 
in the mouth of the first fish that he catches from the 
sea, “…lest we should offend them (the rulers)….” Mt 
17.24-27 [Not a rousing example of patriotism.] 
Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give 
tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceived their 
wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?  
Show me the tribute money. And they brought unto him 
a penny. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image 
and superscription? They say unto him, Caesar's. Then 
saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
187 
things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that 
are God's. Mt 22.17-21 
 
PAUL  
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For 
there is not power but of God: the powers that be are 
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, 
resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall 
receive to themselves damnation (Hell) Rom 13.1-2 
 
Pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers…. 
Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom 
tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom 
fear; honour to whom honour (is due).  Rom 13.6-7 [Pay 
tribute and honor the Emperor Nero for he was 
ordainded by God!]    
  
PAGANS 
 
A prince should behave himself generously in the power 
which God has given him of life and death …. Seneca, 
On Clemency 
 
All governments tend to favor morals which encourage 
harmony within a society. So, the laws make criminal 
actions like murder, theft, taking the law into your own 
hands against your neighbors, etc. Philosophies and 
religions also teach us to obey the rulers, pay taxes and 
so forth. Encouraging civil harmony can lead to 
exaggerations. For example we see Jesus and others 
teaching turn the other cheek, love your enemies, etc. 
GRIEF 
JESUS   

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
188 
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be 
comforted. Mt 5.4   
PAGAN 
Some accidents there are, which I confess may affect 
him, but not overthrow him; as bodily pains, loss of 
children and friends; the ruin and desolation of a man's 
country. One must be made of stone, or iron, not to be 
sensible of these calamities; and besides, it were no 
virtue to bear them, if a body did not feel them. Seneca, 
On A Happy Life 
The Stoics, according to their critics, discouraged any 
emotions. This is not true; they were simply against 
passion, that is, excessive, distructive emotions.  
How can that man resign himself to God, or bear his lot, 
whatever it be, without murmuring, and cheerfully 
submit to Providence, that shrinks at every notion of 
pleasure or pain? It is virtue alone that raises us above 
griefs, hopes, fears, and chances; and makes us not 
only patient, but willing, as knowing that whatever we 
suffer is according to the decree of Heaven. Seneca, On 
A Happy Life 
He that lifteth himself above great adversity, and 
beareth the evils which crush others, is consecrated by 
his sufferings. Seneca, To Helvia, xiii, 6  
 
The good man will stand firm, and bear, not only 
patiently but gladly, whatever happens; he will know 
that every adversity is a law of nature; and, just as the 
good soldier bears wounds and counts his scars, and 
even in death loves the emperor for whom he falls [dies], 
he will ever bear in mind that old precept: Follow God. 
Seneca, On the Happy Life, xv 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
189 
It is the part of a great man to conquer the calamities 
and terrors of morals. Seneca, On Providence, iv, 1 
 
HUMILITY OF JESUS 
    
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. 
Mt 5.5 
The meek shall inherit the earth. Ps 37.11 
And said, Verily I (Jesus) say unto you, Except ye be 
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore 
shall humble himself as this little child, the same is 
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whoso shall 
receive one such little child in my name receiveth me. 
Mt 18:3-5  
 
And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and 
was moved with compassion toward them, and he 
healed their sick. Mt 14.14 
 
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you; for I 
am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 
Mt 11.28-30 
 
But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that 
the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, 
and they that are great exercise authority upon them. 
But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be 
great among you, let him be your minister;  And 
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your 
servant: Even as the Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a 
ransom for many. Mt 20.25-28 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
190 
 
Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your master, even 
Christ: and all ye are brethren. And call no man your 
father upon earth: for one is your Father, which is in 
heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your 
master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you 
shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself 
shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall 
be exalted. Mt 23.8-12 
 
NON-HUMILITY OF  JESUS   
 
(Jesus to Jews): Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, 
how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Mt 23:33 
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast 
ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them 
under their feet, and turn again and rend you. Mt 7.6 
 
NON-HUMILITY AND OTHER TRAITS OF PAUL 
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. 1 Cor  
11:1 [Followers of Paul, not Christ?]  
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note 
that man, and have no company with him, that he may 
be ashamed. 2 Thess 3.14 
But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was 
preached (by) me is not (from) man. For I neither 
received it (from) man, neither was I taught it, but by 
the revelation of Jesus Christ.  Gal 1.11-12 
For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chief 
apostles. 2 Cor 11.5 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
191 
As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach 
any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, 
let him be accursed. [Go to Hell.] Gal 1.6-9 
 
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the 
weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by 
all means save some. 1 Cor 9.22 
 
Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of 
Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Gal 4:1 
 
From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my 
body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Gal 6:17 [No, we 
don't know what this means.] 
"Being crafty, I (Paul) caught you with guile." 2 Cor 
12.16      
I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them, to do 
you service. 2 Cor 11:8   
 
And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, 
and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. 
And immediately there fell on him a mist and a 
darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him 
by the hand.  
Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, 
being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord. Acts 13.11-
12 [Paul physically blinds a man to convert another.]   
PAGAN  
Nothing is so much to be avoided in doing good as pride. 
Seneca, On Benefits, ii, 11 
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
192 
Admit that you are nobody, and know nothing. 
Epictetus, Discourses, ii, 1  
 
Let us satisfy our consciences, and do nothing for the 
sake of reputation. Seneca, On Anger, iii, 41 
 
Simple and modest is the work of philosophy. Draw me 
not aside to insolence and pride. M. Aurelius, ix, 28 
 
An adviser ought in the first place to have a regard to 
the delicacy and sense of shame of the person 
admonished. Epictetus, Fragments, cl 
 
Nothing is more becoming in a ruler than to despise no 
one, and never to be insolent. Epictetus, Fragments, 
cxxvii 
 
JUDGING 
JESUS 
Do not be Judgemental 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what 
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Mt 
7.1-2 
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own 
eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote 
out of thy brother's eye. Mt 7.3,5 
 
Be Judgemental   
 
Beware of false prophets … which come to you in 
sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 
… Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn 
down, and cast into the fire (Hell). Wherefore by their 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
193 
fruits ye shall know them. Mt 7.15-20 [A bit 
judgemental.] 
 
Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of 
my Father which is in heaven. Mt 7.21    
 
And whosoever shall not receive you (apostles), nor hear 
your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, 
shake off the dust of your feet.  Verily I say unto you, It 
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and 
Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. Mt 
10.14-15 
Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his 
mighty works were done, because they repented not: Mt 
11.20   
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, 
shalt be brought down to hell…. Mt 11:23 [Jesus damns 
whole cities to Hell because they did not repent.]   
Jesus preaches: "He that is not with me is against me." 
Mt 12.30 
Jesus teaches: “He that believes (in me) and is baptized 
shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be 
damned.” Mk 16:16 
He that believes on him is not condemned: but he that 
believes not is condemned already, because he hath not 
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Jn 
3:18  
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life: and he 
that believes not the Son shall not see life; but the 
wrath of God abide on him. Jn 3:36 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
194 
Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the 
life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. Jn 14:6 
[Non-Christians go to Hell.] 
The Lord's Prayer (Matthew) 
After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which 
art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. 
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in 
heaven. Mt 6.9-10 
Give us this day our daily bread. Mt 6.11 
Jewish Scriptures 
 
Thou, O Lord, art our Father. Is., Ixiii, 16. 
 
Our God is in the heavens. He hath done whatsoever he 
hath pleased. Ps. cxv, 3 
 
Feed me with food convenient [properly, apportioned] for 
me. Prov., xxx, 8. 
 
OATHS 
 
JESUS 
 
Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of 
old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt 
perform unto the Lord thine oaths: but I say unto you, 
Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's 
throne….Mt 5.33-34  
 
PAGANS  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
195 
Be neither a man of many words, nor busy about too 
many things … having need neither of oath nor of any 
man's testimony. M. Aurelius,. iii, 5  
 
Avoid taking oaths, if possible, altogether; at any rate, 
as far as thou art able. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxxiii 
 
OUTCASTS 
 
JESUS  
  
(Jesus, teaching in the synagogue in Nazareth) And 
there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet 
Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the 
place where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is 
upon me, because he hath appointed me to preach the 
gospel to the poor: he hath sent me to heal the 
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, 
and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty 
them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of 
the Lord. Lk 4.16-19 
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the 
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to 
them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be 
offended in me. Mt 11.5-6 
JEWISH SCRIPTURES 
 
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek: 
he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to 
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound: to proclaim the 
acceptable year of the Lord to comfort all that mourn. Is 
lxi, 1-2 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
196 
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears 
of the deaf shall be unstopped.Then shall the lame man 
leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing. Is., 
xxv, 5-6 
 
PAGANS 
  
The wise man will give hospitality to the exile and alms 
to the needy; he will restore children to their weeping 
mothers, loose the chains of the captive, release the 
gladiator from his bondage, and even bury the body of 
the criminal. Seneca, On Clemency, vi. 
Peace 
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called 
the children of God. Mt 5.9 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
Nation shall not lift up Sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more; but they shall sit every 
man under his vine and under his fig-tree. Micah, iv, 3. 
Seek peace and pursue It: the eyes of the Lord are upon 
the righteous. Ps. xxxiv, 14 
Peace of Mind  
Paul  
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God through our Lord Jesus Christ ….  ROM 5.1   
And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, 
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. 
PHIL 4.7   

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
197 
For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually 
minded is life and peace. ROM 8.6   
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in 
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the 
power of the Holy Ghost.  ROM 15.13   
PAGAN 
He that has dedicated his mind to virtue, and to the 
good of human society, whereof he is a member, has 
consummated all that is either profitable or necessary 
for him to know or to do toward the establishment of his 
peace.  Seneca, On A Happy Life  
 
Tranquillity is a certain quality of mind, which no 
condition of fortune can either exalt or depress enjoys a 
perpetual calm he has a benevolence in his nature; … 
he squares his life according to reason; and draws to 
himself love and admiration.  Seneca, On A Happy Life 
 
The true felicity of life is to be free from perturbations; 
to understand our duties toward God and man: to enjoy 
the present without any anxious dependence upon the 
future. Seneca, On A Happy Life 
[But Christians seem to be anxious about whether they 
will go to Heaven or Hell after death.] 
Liberty and serenity of mind must necessarily ensue 
upon the mastering of those things which either allure 
or affright us; when instead of those fleshy pleasures. 
Seneca, On A Happy Life 
 
He that can look death in the face, and bid it welcome; 
open his door to poverty, and bridle his appetites; this is 
the man whom Providence has established in the 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
198 
possession of inviolable delights. …  " The foundation of 
it is wisdom and virtue; the knowledge of what we ought 
to do, and the conformity of the will to that knowledge. 
Seneca, On A Happy Life 
PERSECUTION AND SUFFERING  
JESUS 
Blessed 
are 
they 
which 
are 
persecuted 
for 
righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against 
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: 
for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted 
they the prophets which were before you. MT 5.10-12 
While Stoics taught that one ought to be willing to suffer 
or even die for one’s beliefs, note that the Christians 
made a virtue out of persecution and suffering and 
death (martyrdom). Also, as opposed to the Stoics, note 
the emphasis by Jesus on rewards. For the Stoics, 
virtue is its own reward.  
Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called 
Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, 
while I go and pray yonder.  
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of 
Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.  
Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding 
sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch 
with me. Mt 26.36-38   
 
Jesus 
speaking 
to 
disciples: 
But 
take 
heed 
to 
yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils; and 
in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
199 
brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them. MT 13:9 
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be 
comforted.  Mt 5.4 
Other Christians 
The apostles left the council and were happy, because 
God had considered them worthy to suffer for the sake 
of Jesus. Acts 5.41 
You don’t gain anything by being punished for some 
wrong you have done. But God will bless you, if you 
have to suffer for doing something good. 1 Peter 2.20 
PAUL 
Even until this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, 
and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain 
dwellingplace…. And labor, working with our own 
hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we 
suffer it:  Being defamed, we (do kind deeds):  we are  
(seen) as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of 
all things unto this day. 1 COR 4:11-13  
In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of 
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by 
the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the 
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false 
brethren…. 1 COR 4:11:26 
But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of 
God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in 
distresses, In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in 
labours, in watchings, in fastings…  By pureness, by 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
200 
knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy 
Ghost, by love unfeigned …. 2 COR 6.4-6 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice 
I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in 
the deep…. 
 
In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in 
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and 
nakedness. 2 COR 11.23-25, 27  
 
 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me to comfort all that 
mourn. Is., Ixvi, 13 
 
PAGAN  
 
Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse 
thee. What then can these things do to prevent thy mind 
(soul) from remaining pure, wise, sober, just? M. 
Aurelius, viii, 51 
 
I know it is my duty to be content in all conditions …. 
Seneca, On A Happy Life 3-244 
 
Why may not such a one call himself … a son of God? 
And why shall he fear anything that happens among 
men? Epictetus, Discourses, i, 9  
 
If thou dost always remember that God stands by as a 
witness of whatever thou do either in soul or body, thou 
wilt never err, either in thy prayers or actions, and thou 
wilt have God abiding with thee. Epictetus, Fragments, 
cxv 
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
201 
Dare to look up to God, and say, Make use of me for the 
future as thou wilt. I am of the same mind: I am one 
with thee. Lead me whither thou wilt. Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii, 16  
 
When the good man sees his faith tried by the torments 
of perfidy, he descends not from his height, but rises 
above his torment, and saith: I have what I willed, what 
I sought: I withdraw not, and will not withdraw. Seneca, 
On Benefits, iv, 21  
 
Conscience gives joy, even when it is oppressed. Seneca, 
On Benefits, iv, 21 
 
Shall not the having God for our maker, and father, and 
guardian, free us from griefs and alarms? Epictetus, 
Discourses, i, 9 
 
After seven-and-twenty years spent in arms, (Socrates) 
fell under a slavery to the thirty tyrants, and most of 
them his bitter enemies: he came at last to be sentenced 
as "a violater of religion, a corrupter of youth, and a 
common enemy to God and man." After this he was 
imprisoned, and put to death by poison, which was all 
so far from working upon his mind, that it never so 
much as altered his countenance. Seneca, On A Happy 
Life    
 
[Like Jesus, Socrates dies a stoic death to save the souls 
of his followers, that is to help them achieve moral 
virtue.] 
A gem cannot be polished without friction, nor a man 
perfected without trials. Seneca  
Persecution of Pagans by the Christian Roman Empire:   

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
202 
The first episodes started late in the reign of 
Constantine the Great (early fourth century CE), when 
he ordered the pillaging and the tearing down of some 
pagan temples. The first anti-Pagan laws by the 
Christian 
state 
started 
with 
Constantine's 
son 
Constantius II, who was an unwavering opponent of 
paganism; he ordered the closing of all pagan temples, 
forbade Pagan sacrifices under pain of death, and 
removed the traditional Altar of Victory from the Senate. 
Under his reign ordinary Christians started vandalizing 
many of the ancient Pagan temples, tombs and 
monuments….  
Under Ambrose's zealous pressure, Theodosius issued 
the infamous 391 "Theodosian decrees," a declaration of 
war on paganism, the Altar of Victory was removed 
again by Gratian, Vestal Virgins disbanded, access to 
Pagan temples prohibited. [Religious persecution in the 
Roman Empire; From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia] 
(THE) RICH AND THE POOR 
JESUS 
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto 
you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, It is 
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, 
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 
MT 19.23-24 
 
If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven: and come and follow me. Mt 19.21 
 
The rich man says that he has observed … moral laws 
from his youth. Jesus tells him to go and “sell what you 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
203 
own and give the money to the poor….” The man goes 
away grieving: “for he had great possessions.” MK 
10.20-22 The Marcan Jesus and his disciples seldom 
give money to the poor, and this is one of the few times 
where Jesus advises anyone to do so. See chapter 5 of 
our Jesus Christ: A Pagan Myth - Evidence That Jesus 
Never Lived. 
Take heed and beware of covetousness: for a man's life 
consists not in the abundance of the things which he 
possesses. LK 12.15 
Woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your 
consolation. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall 
hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall 
mourn and weep. LK 6.24-26 
No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate 
the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the 
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon. Mt 6.24 
But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, 
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to 
enter into the kingdom of God! Mark 10.24 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
He that loveth gold shall not be justified: and he that 
followeth corruption shall have enough thereof. Ecclus, 
xxxi, 5. 
 
…for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly 
away as an eagle towards heaven. Prov., xxiii, 4 
 
Give to him that asketh thee, and Turn not away thine 
eye from one that asketh of thee. Ecclus., iv, 5 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
204 
 
PAGAN 
 
To a wise man poverty is rather a blessing than a 
misfortune. Seneca, On A Happy Life Chapter 23 
 
Covetousness is the root of all evil. Seneca, On 
Clemency, i 
 
Provide things relating to the body no further than 
absolute need requires. Epictetus, Enchiridion, xxxiii. 
 
It were better to die of hunger, exempt from grief or fear, 
than to live in affluence with perturbation. Epictetus, 
Enchiridion, xii. 
 
Fix thy desire or aversion on … health, power, honours, 
thy country, friends, and children … and thou wilt be 
unfortunate. But fix them on Zeus, on the Gods … and 
how canst thou be any longer unprosperous? Epictetus, 
Discourses, ii 
 
Avarice is the worst pest of the human race. Seneca, To 
Helvia, xiii, 2. 
 
Democritus cast aside his wealth, deeming it a burden 
to the good mind. Seneca, On Providence, vi, 2  
 
Poverty will bring thee joy, as thou wilt be free from 
many cares. Plutarch, On Covetousness, iv  
 
No one who is a lover of money, a lover of pleasure, or a 
lover of glory, is likewise a lover of mankind. Epictetus, 
Fragments, x 
 
Very rich and very good at the same time a man cannot 
be. Plato, Laws, v, 742  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
205 
 
It is a great thing not to be corrupted by the nearness of 
wealth: great is the man who is poor amid wealth. 
Seneca, Letter xx, 10  
 
Riches are not among the number of things which are 
good...... It is difficult therefore for a rich person to be 
modest, or for a modest person to be rich. Epictetus, 
Fragments, xviii  
 
Wealth is dangerous to the foolish, since vice grows with 
wealth. Epictetus, Fragments, xciv 
 
What disease shall we say that the rich man suffers 
from but spiritual poverty? Plutarch, On Covetousness, 
iv 
 
Any person may live happy in poverty, but few in wealth 
and power. Epictetus, Fragments, cxxviii 
 
He that is not content in poverty, would not be so 
neither in plenty; for the fault is not in the thing, but in 
the mind [soul]. Seneca, On A Happy Life Chapter 25  
 
It is not the augmenting of our fortunes, but the abating 
of our appetites, that makes us rich. Seneca, On A 
Happy Life Chapter 25 
 
It is a shame to place the happiness of life in gold and 
silver, for which bread and water is sufficient …. 
Seneca, On A Happy Life Chapter 25 
  
For the honor of poverty, it was both the foundation and 
the cause of the Roman empire; and no man was ever 
yet so poor but he had enough to carry him to his 
journey's end. Seneca, On A Happy Life Chapter 25  
 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
206 
SICKNESS: CAUSED BY SIN  
And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the 
palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said 
unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy 
sins be forgiven thee. MT 9.2 
SIN  
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine 
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If 
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great 
is that darkness! Mt 6.22-23 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES   
The wise man's eyes are in his head, and the fool 
walketh in darkness. Ecchs., ii, 14 
 
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that 
put darkness for light, and light for darkness. Is., v, 20 
SINLESS (PURE) 
Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.   
Mt 5.8 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? He that hath 
clean hands and a pure heart. Ps. xxiv, 3-4 
SLAVERY  
 
JESUS  
 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
207 
Jesus cures the centurion's slave. LK 7.2-10 [No 
objection is made to slavery by Jesus.]  
PAUL 
 
Servants (slaves), obey in all things your masters 
according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as 
menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God. 
And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and 
not unto men; Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive 
the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord 
Christ. Col 3.22-24  
[The apostle does not object to slavery but rather says 
the slave should do what he is ordered to do "heartily." 
And then you will get the reward: inheritance (eternal 
life).] 
Let as many servants (slaves) as are under the yoke 
count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the 
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. 1 Tim 
6.1   
 
Art thou called being a servant (slave)? care not for it 
(stay a slave): but if thou may be made free, use it 
rather. 1 COR 7:21 [God calls people to be slaves!] 
  
Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein 
abide with God. 1 COR 7:24 [God calls (forces) people to 
be slaves. God, his son and Paul approve of slavery and 
Christians will do so for more than 1500 years.]  
 
Approving of slavery, Paul returns the runaway slave 
(Onesimus) to his master.  Philemon. 1, 10, 12   
PAGAN   

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
208 
(Conduct) yourself humanely and tenderly toward your 
servants (slaves). It is the part of a wise and a good 
man, to deal with his inferior as he would have his 
superior deal with him; for servants are not only men, 
but a kind of humble friends…. Seneca Epistle 19  
 
But we live as if a servant were not made of the same 
materials with his master, or to breathe the same air, or 
to live and die under the same conditions. The body of a 
servant may be bought and sold, but his mind is free. 
Seneca Epistle 19 
 
(The slave’s) body, it is true, is his master's, but his 
mind is his own: and there are many commands which 
a servant ought no more to obey than a master to 
impose. Seneca On Benefits  
 
TURN THE OTHER CHEEK  
JESUS 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you that ye resist 
not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will 
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him 
have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to 
go a mile, go with him two. MT 5.38-41 
 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto 
you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do 
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be 
the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he 
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and 
sends rain on the just and on the unjust. MT 5.43-45 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
209 
 
PAUL 
 
Paul writes to “overcome evil with good” Rom 12.17,19-
21 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
Let him give his cheek to him that smiteth him. Lament, 
iii, 30 
 
PAGANS     
 
There is this fine circumstance connected with the 
character of a Cynic that he must be beaten like an ass, 
and yet, when beaten, must love those who beat him, as 
the father, as the brother of all. Epictetus, Discourses, 
ii, 12 
 
When Cato was struck on the mouth, he was not angry, 
and sought no vengeance: he denied the deed. Seneca, 
On Constancy, xiv, 3 
 
Never mind if someone doth despise thee as a fool, and 
insult thee, if he hath a mind; let him strike thee, by 
Zeus, and do thou be of good cheer, and do not mind 
the insulting blow, for thou wilt never come to any harm 
in the practice of virtue. Plato, Gorgias, 527. 
 
We should give good for evil. Plutarch (45-125 CE) 
VIRTUE 
JESUS   
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul? MT 16.26  

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
210 
PAGAN 
 The Stoic distinction between valuable and good things 
is at the center of Seneca's Letters. So-called preferred 
indifferents—health, wealth, and so on—have value 
(their 
opposites, 
dispreferred 
indifferents, 
have 
disvalue). But only virtue is good. All else is determined 
by fate.  
What is good is that I choose well (Letter 92.11-12). In 
response to the question ‘What is virtue?’, Seneca says 
“a true and immovable judgment” (Letter 71.32; tr. 
Inwood). Attributing any real importance to indifferents, 
Seneca argues, is like preferring, among two good men, 
the one with the fancy haircut (Letter 66.25). 
To the Stoic it is not the transfer of an object that is 
justly called a beneficium. Rather, the favor consists in 
the state of mind of the giver—that he wants to benefit 
us.  
 
PAUL    
 
Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such 
like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told 
you in time past, that they which do such things shall 
not inherit the kingdome of God. GAL 5:21   
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, 
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor 
abusers of themselves with mankind, Nor thieves, nor 
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, 
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Flee fornication. COR 
6:9-10, 18 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
211 
 
For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwells no 
good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to 
perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I 
would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. 
ROM 7:18-19 
 
…there is none that doeth good, no, not one. ROM 3.12 
 
WAR 
Jesus  
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also 
deny before my Father which is in heaven. Think not 
that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to 
send peace, but a sword.  MT 10:33-34 
Then (Jesus) said to (his disciples), But now, he that 
hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and 
he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and 
buy one. LK 22.36  
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called 
the children of God. MT 5.9 
PAGAN  
To take a farther view, now, of the miserable 
consequences and sanguinary effects of this hideous 
distemper (anger); from hence come slaughters, and 
poisons, wars, and desolations, the razing and burning 
of cities; the unpeopling of nations, and the turning of 
populous countries into deserts ….   Seneca, On Anger 
Chapter 5 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 

MORE CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN MORALS COMPARED 
212 
JESUS 
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but 
that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a 
man. Mt 15.11 
But those things which proceed out of the mouth come 
forth from the heart; and they defile the man. For out of 
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, 
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: These 
are the things which defile a man: but to eat with 
unwashen hands defileth not a man. MT 15.18-20 
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast 
ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them 
under their feet, and turn again and rend you.  Mt 7.6 
PAGAN 
Consider that thou dost not thrive merely by the food in 
thy stomach, but by the elevation of thy soul. For the 
former is evacuated, and carried off altogether; but the 
latter, though the soul is parted, remains uncorrupted 
through all things. Epictetus, Fragments, xxvi 
 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 
Speak not in the ears of a fool; for he will despise the 
wisdom of thy words. Prov, xxiii, 9 
JESUS 
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's 
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Mt 7.15 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
213 
Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet. 
Deut, xiii, 3 
 
JESUS 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye 
pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have 
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, 
mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not 
to leave the other undone.  Mt 23.23 
JEWISH  SCRIPTURES  
When ye make many prayers, I will not hear your hands 
are full of blood. Wash you, make you clean learn to do 
well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the 
fatherless, plead for the widow. Is., i, 15-17. 
 


 
215 
 
Chapter 7 THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS   
All quotes are the King James Version of the Bible, unless 
otherwise noted. 
The liberal image of the loving Jesus is quite admirable. 
Maybe that is why your humble editors get along so well 
with some liberal Christians.  
There is, of course, one fundamental problem with this 
loving Jesus. Does he bear any resemblance to the 
Jesus of the Gospels? 
THE GOSPEL OF MARK 
To answer this question we have largely used the Gospel 
of Mark. We have used this Gospel as it is the earliest 
narrative, having been written about 70 CE, about 40 
years after the supposed death of Jesus. 
Mark was the source material for the Gospels of 
Matthew (ca 80 CE), Luke (ca 85 CE) and John (ca 90 - 
100 CE. Thus, the latter three Gospels are likely to 
contain material added to the Jesus myth of Mark. 
Nobody knows who the author was of any of the 
Gospels. 
In Mark 16.9-20, the resurrected Jesus appears to 
people after his death. These verses were added to Mark 
in the second century CE or later.  
For the historicity of Mark's Gospel, etc., See Volume 1 
Jesus Christ: A Pagan Myth (3rd expanded edition) of 
this series on the nonexistence of Jesus.  
Let us compare the liberal image of the loving Jesus 
with that of Jesus in the Gospel of Mark. 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
216 
Jesus Does Not Love Everyone    
Liberal Christians today picture Jesus as loving and 
inclusive. Who does Jesus say goes to Hell? Nearly 
everyone. Most Orthodox Christians, all heretics, and all 
non-Christians! 
Mt 11.27 All things are delivered unto me of my 
Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the 
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal 
him.  
1 Cor 12.12-13 For as the body is one, and hath 
many members, and all the members of that one 
body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. 
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one 
body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we 
be bond or free; and have been all made to drink 
into one Spirit.  
Jews and pagans can be saved – if they convert to 
Christianity. Otherwise, they get a trip to Hell. This 
includes un-baptized babies. 
When defending universal salvation, most people use 
John 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his 
only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.  
Well, God may have loved the world but was not willing 
to save them from Hell unless they became orthodox 
Christians. See John 3.17 … he that believeth not is 
condemned …. It would have been simpler for an all 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
217 
forgiving and all loving God with infinite power to forgive 
all and send all to Heaven. 
Mk 10.45 has Jesus say but Christ came “to give his 
life, a ransom for many,” not for all.  
As for orthodox Christians, Jesus said only a few people 
will be saved.  
Matthew 22.14 For many are called, but few are 
chosen. 
Mk 6.11 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor 
hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the 
dust under your feet for a testimony against them. 
Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for 
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, 
than for that city. 
Any city that does not receive the followers of Jesus will 
be punished worse than Sodom and Gomorrah. The 
followers of Jesus would be a reference to early 
Christian missionaries. The Gospel writers sought to 
justify many of the later beliefs and practices of the 
early church. 
Mk 8.1-2 In those days the multitude being very 
great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his 
disciples unto him, and saith unto them, I have 
compassion on the multitude, because they have 
now been with me three days, and have nothing to 
eat…  

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
218 
This is a really rare occasion when Jesus says he has 
compassion for anyone. 
The modern ‘’Liberal’’ Image of Jesus Christ is seen as a 
loving human being. He is all inclusive. Jesus loves 
women, the poor, the ill (lepers etc.) those possessed by 
Devils. Despite the Gospels, some Christians say that he 
also loves Jews! 
Publicans and Sinners 
Mk 2:15 And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat 
in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also 
together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were 
many, and they followed him.  
 
Mk 2:16 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him 
eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his 
disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with 
publicans and sinners? 
 
 
  
The Poor 
Mk 14.3-7 And being in Bethany in the house of 
Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a 
woman having an alabaster box of ointment of 
spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, 
and poured it on his head. (Lepers were not 
allowed within cities.) 
And there were some that had indignation within 
themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the 
ointment made? 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
219 
For it might have been sold for more than three 
hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. 
And they murmured against her.  
This is the only passage that indicates that Jesus or his 
disciples gave any money to the poor. In the rich man 
story Jesus merely indicates that he should give his 
money to the poor and then follow Jesus, not that the 
money should be given to the group who would then 
give it the poor. 
Mk 14.6-7 And Jesus said, Let her alone; why 
trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on 
me. 
For ye have the poor with you always, and 
whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me 
ye have not always.  
The poor will always be with you; there is here no 
concern for eliminating poverty. Anointing Jesus is more 
important than feeding the poor. 
       Children 
Mk 9:36 And he took a child, and set him in the 
midst of them: and when he had taken him in his 
arms, he said unto them,  
Mk 9:37 Whosoever shall receive one of such 
children 
in 
my 
name, 
receiveth 
me: 
and 
whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but 
him that sent me.  

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
220 
 
Mk 9:42 And whosoever shall offend one of these 
little ones that believe in me, it is better for him 
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and 
he were cast into the sea. 
Mk 10:13 And they brought young children to 
him, that he should touch them: and his disciples 
rebuked those that brought them.  
Mk 10:14 But when Jesus saw it, he was much 
displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little 
children to come unto me, and forbid them not: 
for of such is the kingdom of God.  
Mk 10:15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall 
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he 
shall not enter therein.  
Mk 10:16 And he took them up in his arms, put 
his hands upon them, and blessed them.  
Apologists have long used these passages about 
children so that children could be seen as among the 
special people loved by Jesus. However, for a long time 
children had been used as symbols for religious purity. 
       Women  
Women and the Empty Tomb 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
221 
Mk 16:7 But go your way, tell his disciples and 
Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there 
shall ye see him, as he said unto you.  
This is sometimes used by liberals and feminists to 
show the prominent role that women played in early 
Christianity.  
But look at the next verse: 
Mk 16.8 And they went out quickly, and fled from 
the sepulchre; for they trembled and were 
amazed: neither said they anything to any man; 
for they were afraid. 
True, at Mk 16.9 we see that Jesus first appears to 
Marry Magdalene. But as we pointed out above, 16.9-20 
was not written by Mark. Also, it is impossible to 
reconcile the resurrection appearances of the four 
Gospels (Mk 19.9, Mt 28.1,9, Lk 24.13-31, Jn 20.11-14) 
to say nothing of Paul in 1 Cor 15.4-5. 
Jesus Sends People to Hell 
Liberals don't talk much about the fascination of Jesus 
with Hell; some even deny the existence of Hell. Some 
liberals even maintain that non-Christians go to heaven. 
We do not know if they believe that atheists go to 
Heaven. We asked a fundamentalist Christian whether 
atheists would go to Hell. She merely said that would be 
up to God. 
Mk 4:10-12 And when he was alone, they that 
were about him with the twelve asked of him the 
parable. And he said unto them, Unto you it is 
given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
222 
but unto them that are without, all these things 
are done in parables: That seeing they may see, 
and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and 
not understand; lest at any time they should be 
converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. 
Mk 10-12  
[Jesus deceives people so they will go to Hell.] 
Mk 8:38 Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of 
me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful 
generation; of him also shall the Son of man be 
ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his 
Father with the holy angels. [Hell] 
Mk 9:47 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: 
it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of 
God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into hell fire:  
Mk 9:59 Where their worm dieth not, and the fire 
is not quenched.  
The Morals of Jesus:  
Anger 
Mk 9.17-19 And one of the multitude answered and 
said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which 
hath a dumb spirit; And wheresoever he taketh him, he 
teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his 
teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that 
they should cast him out; and they could not. He 
answereth him, and saith (of the disciples), O faithless 
generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall 
I suffer you? bring him unto me.  
Animals 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
223 
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean 
spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the 
herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they 
were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea. 
Mk 5.13 (Mk 5.11-17). [Eds. Rough on animals.] 
Charity 
And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld 
how the people cast money into the treasury: and many 
that were rich cast in much. 
And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in 
two mites, which make a farthing.  
And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath 
cast more in, than all they which have cast into the 
treasury:  
For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of 
her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living. 
Mk 12:41-44 
 
Family 
There came then his brethren and his mother, and, 
standing without, sent unto him, calling him. And the 
multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, 
Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for 
thee. And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, 
or my brethren? And he looked round about on them 
which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and 
my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the 
same is my brother, and my sister, and mother. Mk .31-
35 [Rough on mothers and other family members.] 
Forgiveness 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
224 
Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the 
sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they 
shall blaspheme:  
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost 
hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal 
damnation. Mk 3:28-29 
 
 
Jesus on sending out his disciples with power over 
unclean spirits: And whosoever shall not receive you, 
nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust 
under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I 
say unto you. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and 
Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. Mk 
6:11-12 
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought 
against any: that your Father also which is in heaven 
may forgive you your trespasses.  
But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is 
in heaven forgive your trespasses. Mk 11:25-26 
The Greatest Commandment 
And one of the scribes came, and having heard them 
reasoning 
together, 
and 
perceiving 
that 
he 
had 
answered them well, asked him, Which is the first 
commandment of all?  
And Jesus answered him, The first of all the 
commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is 
one Lord: 
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all 
thy strength: this is the first commandment.  
And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour 
as 
thyself. 
There 
is 
none 
other 
commandment greater than these. Mk 12:28-31 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
225 
The Rich 
10:17 And when he was gone forth into the way, there 
came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, 
Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal 
life?  
10:18 And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me 
good? there is none good but one, that is, God.  
10:19 Thou knowest the commandments, Do not 
commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear 
false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and 
mother.  
10:20 And he answered and said unto him, Master, all 
these have I observed from my youth. 
10:21 Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said 
unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell 
whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the 
cross, and follow me.  
10:22 And he was sad at that saying, and went away 
grieved: for he had great possessions.  
10:23 And Jesus, looking around, said to His disciples, 
“How hard it will be for those who are wealthy to enter 
the kingdom of God!”  
10:24 the disciples were astonished at his words. But 
Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, 
how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into 
the kingdom of God!  
10:25 It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of 
God.  
10:26 And they were astonished out of measure, saying 
among themselves, Who then can be saved?  
10:27 And Jesus looking upon them saith, With men it 
is impossible, but not with God: for with God all things 
are possible. 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
226 
10:28 Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have 
left all, and have followed thee.  
10:29 And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto 
you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 
lands, for my sake, and the gospel's,  
10:30 But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this 
time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, 
and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the 
world to come eternal life. Mk 10:17-30 
 
 
 
[A hundred mothers? Eternal life? So, are all souls 
mortal? Do all souls perish or go to Hell if they do not 
convert to Christianity?] 
Sex, Marriage, Divorce  
 No sex or marriage in heaven. 
Mk 12.25 For when they shall rise from the dead, 
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but 
are as the angels which are in heaven. 
Mk 6.3b Is not this the carpenter, the son of 
Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of 
Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here 
with us? And they were offended at him. (But the 
Catholic church holds that Mary was a perpetual 
virgin.)  
Divorce  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
227 
No Divorce: 
Mk 10.11 And he saith unto them, Whosoever 
shall put away his wife, and marry another, 
committeth adultery against her. 
Mk 10.12 And if a woman shall put away her 
husband, and be married to another, she 
committeth adultery. 
Mt 19:6 Wherefore they are no more twain, but 
one flesh. What therefore God hath joined 
together, let not man put asunder. 
Lk 16.18 Whosoever putteth away his wife, and 
marrieth 
another, 
committeth 
adultery: 
and 
whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her 
husband committeth adultery. 
Divorce only when wife commits adultery: 
Mt 5.32 But I say unto you, That whosoever shall 
put away his wife, saving for the cause of 
fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and 
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced 
committeth adultery. 
Mt 19.9 And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put 
away his wife, except it be for fornication, and 
shall marry another, committeth adultery: and 
whoso marrieth her which is put away doth 
commit adultery. 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
228 
Pagan/Christian Marriage: 
1 Cor 7.15 But if the unbelieving (pagan) depart, 
let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under 
bondage in such cases: but God hath called us to 
peace. 
Note in verse 14 that the Christian partner in the 
interfaith marriage makes the children of such a 
marriage clean. I guess that makes pagan children 
unclean.  
And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it 
lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him.  
And (Jesus) answered and said unto them, What did 
Moses command you?  
And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses 
command you? 
And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of 
divorcement, and to put her away.  
And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the 
hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.  
But from the beginning of the creation God made them 
male and female.  
What therefore God had joined together, let not man put 
asunder.   
And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his 
wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against 
her. Mk 10:2-11 
 
Jesus on the State 
And they brought it. And he saith unto them, Whose is 
this image and superscription? And they said unto him, 
Caesar's.  

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
229 
And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar 
the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that 
are God's. And they marvelled at him. Mk 12:16-17 
One Last Moral Issue 
Jesus on Jews and the rest of non-Christians    
       Criticism of Jews   
And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, 
He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils casteth 
he out devils. Mk 3:22 
And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took 
counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might 
destroy him. [After he cures the man with the withered 
hand.] Mk 3:6 
Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain 
of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem.  
And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with 
defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they 
found fault. Mk 7:1-2 
 
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk 
not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, 
but eat bread with unwashen hands?  
He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias 
prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This 
people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is 
far from me.  
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men.  Mk 7:5-7 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
230 
 
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk 
not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, 
but eat bread with unwashen hands? 
He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias 
prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This 
people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is 
far from me.  
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men.  
 
For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the 
tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and 
many other such like things ye do.  
And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the 
commandment of God, that ye may keep your own  
For Moses said, Honour they father and thy mother; 
and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him died the 
death. [Mk 7.9-10: “Jesus criticizes the Jews for not 
killing their disobedient children according to Old 
Testament law.” SAB] 
 
And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question 
with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting 
him. And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why 
doth this generation [of Jews] seek after a sign? verily I 
say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this 
generation. Mk 8:11-12 
Fate of Jews 
And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the 
scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love 
salutations in the marketplaces, And the chief seats in 
the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts: 
Which devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
231 
long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation. Mk 
12:38-40 
Killing God: The Mission of Jesus 
Jews, by engineering the death of Jesus in Jerusalem, 
will cause the replacement of Judaism by Christianity 
(Supersessionism).  
The Third Prediction by Jesus of His Death. 
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and 
Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as 
they followed, they were afraid. And he took again the 
twelve, and began to tell them what things should 
happen unto him,  
Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of 
man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto 
the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and 
shall deliver him to the Gentiles:  
And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and 
shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third 
day he shall rise again. Mk 10:32-34 
Jesus enters Jerusalem 
Jesus is fulfilling biblical prophecy by writing an ass 
etc. Thus, the people are tricked by Jesus into believing 
that he is the expected Messiah and is a political one, a 
king.  
 
And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, 
saying, Hosanna; Blessed is he that cometh in the name 
of the Lord: Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, 
that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the 
highest. Mk 11:9-10 Supersessionism 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
232 
The Parable of the Vineyard Mk 12.1-11 
Jesus is a supersessionist; he has come to replace 
Judaism with Christianity. When the Jews engineer the 
death of Jesus, non-Jews will replace them as the 
people of God. This is God's plan which Jesus is 
carrying out. Mk 12.1-11 
And he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain 
man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and 
digged a place for the winefat, and built a tower, and let 
it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.  
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a 
servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of 
the fruit of the vineyard.  
And they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away 
empty.  
And again he sent unto them another servant; and at 
him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, 
and sent him away shamefully handled.  
And again he sent another; and him they killed, and 
many others; beating some, and killing some.  
Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent 
him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my 
son.  
But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is 
the heir; come,  
And they took him, and killed him, and cast and cast 
him out of the vineyard. 
What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? He will 
come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the 
vineyard unto others. 
And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which 
the builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 
This was the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our 
eyes? 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
233 
And they [… the scribes and chief priests Mk 11:18] 
sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for 
they knew that he had spoken the parable against them: 
and they left him, and went their way. Mk 12:1-12 
 
The End of the World. When ?  
 
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there 
be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste 
of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come 
with power. Mk 9:1 
 
But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not 
the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the 
Father.  
Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the 
time is. 
For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, 
who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, 
and to every man his work, and commanded the porter 
to watch.  
Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of 
the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the 
cockcrowing, or in the morning:  
Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.  
And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch. Mk 
13:32-37 
Last Supper  
The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but 
woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! 
good were it for that man if he had never been born.  
And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and 
brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is 
my body.  

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
234 
And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he 
gave it to them: and they all drank of it.  
And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new 
testament, which is shed for many. Mk 14:21-24 
Spiritual cannibalism. His bloody death on the cross is 
the ultimate blood sacrifice. In any case, the humble 
Jesus has gone. This sort of God creates the sacrament 
which Christians will observe at the holy mass. 
The Nature of Jesus Christ  
Humanity of Christ  
In Mark, unlike Matthew and Luke, there are no birth 
scenes  indicating that Jesus is a semidivine being, has 
a divine father. The Markan Jesus has a mother and 
father and several brothers and sisters. In Mark there is 
no virginal conception. The Holy Spirit is not the father 
and thus Jesus is not divine or semi-divine.  
And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue 
had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and 
said, Who touched my clothes? Mk 8:30 [Jesus is not 
divine since his not all-powerful. And he is not all 
knowledgeable because he has to look around to find 
out who touched his clothes.] 
Because of the weak faith of the people in his 
hometown, Jesus … could there do no mighty work, 
save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and 
healed them. Mk 6:1-5 
And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of 
Caesarea Philippi: and by the way he asked his 
disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I 
am? And they answered, John the Baptist (risen from 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
235 
the dead); but some say, Elias; and others, One of the 
prophets. Mk 8:27-29 
And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? 
And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the 
Christ. 
Divine or Semidivine 
Some liberal Christians deny the divinity of Jesus as did 
Isaac Newton.  
And when they could not come nigh unto him for the 
press, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when 
they had broken it up, they let down the bed wherein 
the sick of the palsy lay.  
When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the 
palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. 
 
But there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and 
reasoning in their hearts, 
Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can 
forgive sins but God only?  
And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that 
they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, 
Why reason ye these things in your hearts?  
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy 
sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy 
bed, and walk?  
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power 
on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the 
palsy,) 
I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy 
way into thine house.  
And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went 
forth before them all; insomuch that they were all 
amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on 
this fashion. Mk 2:4-12 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
236 
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath. 
Mk 2:28 
And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was 
a man there which had a withered hand. [Jesus cures 
the man on the Sabbath thus “breaking the law of God” 
by curing on the Sabbath. Actually, in Judaism there is 
no law against curing a person on the Sabbath.] Mk 3:1-
3, 6 
And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down 
before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 
Mk 3:11 
… the country of the Gadarenes. 
And when he was come out of the ship, immediately 
there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean 
spirit … .  
But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped 
him,  
And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do 
with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I 
adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not.  
For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou 
unclean spirit.  Mk 5:1-8 
Was Jesus God?  
YES 
John 1:1 In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God.  
John 1:14 And the Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the 
glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of 

THE PAGAN MORALS OF JESUS CHRIST 
237 
grace and truth. [The only begotten of the Father - 
a second God? The second person of the Trinity?] 
John 10:30 I and my Father are one.  
John 20.28 And Thomas answered and said unto 
him, My LORD and my God.  
John 20:31 But these are written, that ye might 
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; 
and that believing ye might have life through his 
name. 
NO  
Mk 10.18 And Jesus said unto him, Why callest 
thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, 
God. 
Mk 15.34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with 
a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? 
which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me? 
Mk 16.19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto 
them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on 
the right hand of God. 
John 20:17 Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; 
for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to 
my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto 
my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and 
your God. 
We hope that this chapter has made it clear that one 
should not project the modern image of Jesus back 
nearly 2000 years into the past into the gospel of Mark. 

THE “LIBERAL” IMAGE OF JESUS 
238 
Conclusion: Christian ethics were derived from the 
pagan world – from Roman Stoicism. There is no reason 
to posit the existence of Jesus Christ in order to explain 
the morals of the Gospels. 


