

Optical Imaging and Sensing


Optical Imaging and Sensing
Materials, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu

Editors
Prof. Dr. Jiang Wu
Institute of Fundamental and Frontier
Sciences, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, No.4,
Section 2, North Jianshe Road, 610054,
Chengdu, P.R. China
Prof. Dr. Hao Xu
School of Physics, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of
China, No.2006, Xiyuan Ave, West
Hi-Tech Zone, 611731, Chengdu,
P.R. China
Cover Image: © Yuichiro Chino/Getty
Images
All books published by WILEY-VCH are carefully
produced. Nevertheless, authors, editors, and
publisher do not warrant the information
contained in these books, including this book,
to be free of errors. Readers are advised to keep
in mind that statements, data, illustrations,
procedural details or other items may
inadvertently be inaccurate.
Library of Congress Card No.: applied for
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library.
Bibliographic information published by
the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists
this publication in the Deutsche
Nationalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic
data are available on the Internet at
<http://dnb.d-nb.de>.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH, Boschstraße 12,
69469 Weinheim, Germany
All rights reserved (including those of
translation into other languages). No part of
this book may be reproduced in any form – by
photoprinting, microfilm, or any other
means – nor transmitted or translated into a
machine language without written permission
from the publishers. Registered names,
trademarks, etc. used in this book, even when
not specifically marked as such, are not to be
considered unprotected by law.
Print ISBN: 978-3-527-34976-0
ePDF ISBN: 978-3-527-83518-8
ePub ISBN: 978-3-527-83519-5
oBook ISBN: 978-3-527-83520-1
Typesetting
Straive, Chennai, India

v
Contents
Preface
ix
1
Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials,
Devices, and Applications
1
Qimiao Chen, Hao Xu, and Chuan S. Tan
1.1
Optoelectronic Material Systems
1
1.1.1
Si Platform
1
1.1.2
Two-dimensional Materials and Their van der Waals
Heterostructures
3
1.1.2.1
Graphene
3
1.1.2.2
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
4
1.1.2.3
2D Heterostructures
5
1.2
Challenges and Prospect of Nano-optoelectronic Devices
5
1.2.1
III–V Compounds
6
1.2.2
Perovskites
7
1.2.3
Organic Optoelectronic Materials
7
References
8
2
2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
11
Wenshuo Xu, Zhuo Wang, and Andrew T. S. Wee
2.1
Introduction
11
2.2
Visible-Light Photodetectors
15
2.3
Infrared Photodetectors
21
2.4
Broadband Photodetectors
26
2.5
Plasmon-Enhanced Photodetectors
36
2.6
Large-Scale and Flexible Photodetectors
44
2.7
Summary
49
References
50
3
Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared
Photodetectors
55
Boyang Xiang, Guiru Gu, and Xuejun Lu
3.1
Introduction
55

vi
Contents
3.2
Brief Review of Basic Concepts of SPR and SPR Structures
56
3.2.1
Plasma Oscillations in Metals
56
3.2.2
Complex Permittivity and the Drude Model
56
3.2.3
Surface Plasmonic Waves at the Semi-infinite Dielectric and Metal
Interface
57
3.2.4
Prism-Coupled Surface Plasmonic Wave Excitation
59
3.2.5
Surface Grating-Coupled Surface Plasmonic Wave Excitation
60
3.3
Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
61
3.3.1
Two-Dimensional Metallic Hole Array (2DSHA)-Induced Surface
Plasmonic Waves
61
3.3.2
2DSHA Surface Plasmonic Structure-Enhanced QDIP
64
3.4
Localized Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
68
3.4.1
Localized Surface Plasmonic Waves
68
3.4.2
Near-Field Distributions
68
3.4.3
Nanowire Pair
69
3.4.4
Circular Disk Array for Broadband IR Photodetector Enhancement
71
3.5
Plasmonic Perfect Absorber (PPA)
72
3.5.1
Introduction to Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
72
3.5.2
Plasmonic Perfect Absorber-Enhanced QDIP
74
3.5.3
Broadband Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
76
3.5.4
2DSHA Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
76
3.6
Chapter Summary
76
References
78
4
Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
83
Shiva Khani, Ali Farmani, and Pejman Rezaei
4.1
Introduction
83
4.2
Graphene Optical Switch
85
4.2.1
DC Mode of the Gate Capacitor
87
4.2.2
AC Mode of the Gate Capacitor
89
4.3
Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
93
4.3.1
Situation 1: n2L ≫n2H
95
4.3.2
Situation 2: n2H ≫n2L
96
4.3.3
Situation 3: n2H ≃n2L
96
4.4
Modulation Characteristics
104
4.5
Summary
115
References
115
5
Optical Interferometric Sensing
123
Hailong Wang and Jietai Jing
5.1
Introduction
123
5.2
Nonlinear Interferometer
124
5.2.1
Experimental Implementation of Phase Locking
125
5.2.2
Quantum Enhancement of Phase Sensitivity
131
5.2.3
Enhancement of Entanglement and Quantum Noise Cancellation
136

Contents
vii
5.3
Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
143
5.3.1
Nonlinear Sagnac Interferometer
143
5.3.2
Hybrid Interferometer with a Nonlinear FWM Process and a Linear
Beam-splitter
151
5.3.3
Experimental Implementation of a Phase-Sensitive Parametric
Amplifier
155
5.3.4
Interference-Induced Quantum-Squeezing Enhancement
160
5.4
Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
164
5.5
Summary and Outlook
173
References
173
6
Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on
Micro/nanomaterials
175
Mingwei Tang and Qing Yang
6.1
Introduction
175
6.2
The Principle of SFS Super-resolution Imaging Based on
Micro/nanomaterials
177
6.3
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Nanowires and Polymers
178
6.4
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic Waveguides
184
6.4.1
Label-free Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic
Waveguides
184
6.4.2
Labeled Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic Waveguides
186
6.5
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
189
6.5.1
Principle of Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
189
6.5.2
Label-free Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
194
6.5.3
Labeled Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
195
6.6
Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
197
6.6.1
SPP-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
199
6.6.1.1
Metal–Dielectric Multilayer Metasubstrate PSIM
200
6.6.1.2
Graphene-assisted PSIM
202
6.6.2
Localized Plasmon-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
203
6.6.3
Metamaterial-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
204
6.7
Summary and Outlook
206
References
208
7
Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers:
Toward the Future of Integrated Microwave Photonics
215
Jin Li and Tao Pu
7.1
Introduction
215
7.2
Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser
(MI-MSSL) Device
219
7.2.1
Monolithically Integrated Optical Feedback Lasers (MI-OFLs)
219
7.2.1.1
Passive Feedback Lasers (PFLs)
220
7.2.1.2
Amplified/Active Feedback Lasers (AFLs)
224

viii
Contents
7.2.2
Monolithically Integrated Mutually Injected Semiconductor Lasers
(MI-MISLs)
225
7.3
Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
229
7.3.1
Modulation Response Enhancement
229
7.3.2
Nonlinearity Reduction
237
7.3.3
Chirp Suppression
238
7.4
Photonic Microwave Generation
238
7.4.1
Tunable Single-Tone Microwave Signal Generation
240
7.4.1.1
Free-Running State
240
7.4.1.2
Mode-Beating Self-Pulsations (MB-SPs)
242
7.4.1.3
Period-One (P1) Oscillation
244
7.4.1.4
Sideband Injection Locking
245
7.4.2
Frequency-Modulated Microwave Signal Generation
248
7.4.3
High-Performance Microwave Signal Generation Optimizing
Technique
250
7.5
Microwave Photonic Filter (MPF)
254
7.6
Laser Arrays
256
7.7
Conclusion
259
Funding Information
261
Disclosures
261
References
261
Index
271

ix
Preface
To enable conversion between optical and electrical signals, optoelectronic devices
that rely on light–matter interactions are gaining much attention and are ubiquitous
in modern society. Typically, they can be fabricated using either conventional Si
and compound semiconductors (like GaAs, InP, and GaN) or emerging materials,
such as graphene, transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and perovskites, or
even using a combination of these materials. Optoelectronic devices for imaging
and sensing are integral components of many photon-involved applications, such
as optical communications, public security warning, smart city monitoring, clinical
imaging, and personal healthcare checking. Considering the rapid development
of the Internet of Things, 5G-based techniques, and beyond, optoelectronic imag-
ing and sensing devices are ever increasingly important for these applications.
Thereupon, they are facing tough challenges and high demands in terms of device
properties and parameters.
High-performance optoelectronic imaging and sensing devices, such as optical
sensors, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers, and flexible devices,
are indeed desired for practical use. For instance, photodetectors and optical sensors
in the near-infrared (IR) and mid-infrared (MIR) regions have a huge number of
applications, ranging from telecommunications to molecular spectroscopy. Nowa-
days, the quest for high photoresponsivity, high detectivity, high photogain, low
dark noise, fast photoresponse, and complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
(CMOS)-compatible room temperature photodetectors in these spectral regions is
ongoing. Moreover, recently there have been significant developments in on-chip
integration using emerging two-dimensional (2D) materials and/or plasmonic
structures to extend the wavelength range of silicon-based photodetectors beyond
1100 nm. There has also been a lot of interest in building MIR detectors based on
2D material design. In order to achieve further developments based on traditional
materials and device structures, new concepts regarding emerging materials and
device configuration design can also be adopted. Accordingly, this book covers
topics including nanomaterial-based photodetector arrays for imaging, plasmonic
photodetectors, optical resistance switches for optical sensing, optical interfer-
ometric sensing, novel materials for super-resolution imaging techniques, and
nanomaterial advances and on-chip integration.

x
Preface
Chapter 1 describes the material systems and heterostructures for optoelec-
tronics, device components, challenges, and prospects of nano-optoelectronic
devices. 2D materials are an expanding family of atomically thin crystals, repre-
sented by semimetallic graphene, semiconducting black phosphorus, metallic and
semiconducting transition-metal (di)chalcogenides, insulating boron nitride, and
so on. They exhibit fascinating characteristics, including tunable bandgap, high
carrier mobility, efficient light absorption, good structural stability, and mechanical
flexibility. In particular, their excellent photodetecting properties render them
attractive for optoelectronic devices. Different strategies have been investigated to
further enhance the photodetection capabilities of 2D materials, such as chem-
ical doping, surface modification, defect and strain engineering, and plasmonic
nanostructure assisting. Moreover, 2D van der Waals heterostructures have been
developed to enrich the optical functionalities, such as fast response over a broad
spectral range. Advanced synthesis techniques are desired to realize industrial-scale
integration. Chapter 2 focuses on the design and performance of 2D material-based
photodetectors for imaging applications.
IR photodetectors and imaging focal plane arrays (FPAs) are critical devices
for sensing and imaging applications. Various techniques have been developed
to enhance the performance of IR photodetectors and FPAs, including resonant
cavities, surface gratings, surface plasmonic resonances (SPRs), optical antennas,
and plasmonic perfect absorbers. Chapter 3 reviews the concepts of SPR, its exci-
tation (i.e. resonant conditions), dispersion relations, and near-field profiles and
enhancement. The applications of SPR resonance in IR photodetection will also be
discussed. Specifically, various SPR structures are discussed, including the metallic
2D sub-wavelength hole array (2DSHA) and localized SPRs in metallic circular
disks and nanowires. Plasmonic perfector absorbers (PPA) and their enhancement
effect on IR photodetectors will be discussed as well. In Chapter 4, representative
publications regarding optical switches for optical sensing applications have been
studied. The main properties of the structures are given. Such features are the
setup and topology of the optical devices, their mechanism operation, dimensions
(2D/3D), and isolated waveguides. Also, whether the time-domain simulations are
performed has been investigated. In summary, based on the mentioned properties,
these structures have the potential to be used as optical sensors.
In Chapter 5, the nonlinear interferometer is discussed, including experimental
implementation of phase locking, enhancement of phase sensitivity, experimental
realization of entanglement enhancement, and quantum noise cancellation (QNC).
Meanwhile, other types of nonlinear interferometers are described, including a
nonlinear Sagnac interferometer, a hybrid interferometer consisting of a nonlinear
four-wave mixing (FWM) process and a linear beam splitter, a phase-sensitive
FWM process acting as a nonlinear beam splitter, and interference-induced
quantum-squeezing enhancement. Afterwards, a nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensor has been theoretically proposed and its sensing advantages were demon-
strated by using sensing parameters such as degree of intensity-difference squeezing,
estimation precision, and signal noise ratio. In Chapter 6, recent achievements
of this emerging and fast-growing field have been reviewed. The diffraction limit

Preface
xi
substantially impedes the resolution of the conventional optical microscope.
Under traditional illumination, the high-spatial-frequency light corresponding
to the subwavelength information of objects is located in the near-field in the
form of evanescent waves and thus not detectable by conventional far-field objec-
tives. Recent advances in micro/nanomaterials and metamaterials provide new
approaches to break this limitation by utilizing large-wavevector evanescent waves
with the spatial frequency shift (SFS) method. The current super-resolution imaging
techniques based on evanescent-waves-assisted SFS method, using nanomaterials,
photonic waveguides, wafers, and metamaterials, are illustrated. They are promis-
ing in investigating unobserved details and processes in fields such as medicine,
biology, and material research.
Recent advances in monolithically integrated multisection semiconductor lasers
(MI-MSSLs) have propelled microwave photonic (MWP) technologies to new
potentials with a compact, reliable, and green implementation. Much research
has examined that MI-MSSLs can realize the same or even better MWP func-
tions compared to discrete lasers by taking advantages of enhanced light–matter
interactions. Here, we review these recent advances in this emerging field and
discuss the corresponding photonic microwave applications. Three main kinds of
MI-MSSL structures are demonstrated in general, including passive feedback laser,
active/amplified feedback laser, and monolithically integrated mutually injected
semiconductor laser. The focus of this paper is on MWP techniques based on the
nonlinear dynamics of MI-MSSLs. The primary MWP applications considered
in this paper cover from electro-optic conversion characteristics enhancement,
photonic microwave generation, MWP filter, to multiwavelength laser array for
wavelength division multiplexing radio-over-fiber (WDM-RoF) networks. Espe-
cially, the four special dynamic states of free-running oscillation, mode-beating
self-pulsations (MB-SPs), period-one (P1) oscillation, and sideband injection locking
are considered and demonstrated in detail for photonic microwave generation. In
Chapter 7, the authors take a look at the future prospects of the research directions
and challenges in this area.
We acknowledge all the contributors and sincerely hope this book can help read-
ers better understand materials, devices, and applications for optical imaging and
sensing.
Hao Xu
Jiang Wu
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
Chengdu, China
28 December 2022


1
1
Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials,
Devices, and Applications
Qimiao Chen1, Hao Xu2, and Chuan S. Tan1
1Nanyang Technological University, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Singapore 639798,
Singapore
2University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, School of Physics, Chengdu 610054, China
1.1
Optoelectronic Material Systems
Typically, optoelectronic devices for sensing and imaging can be fabricated by either
group IV (Si, Ge, Sn, and their alloys) or compound semiconductors (like GaAs, InP,
and GaN). Recently, there have been significant developments in on-chip integra-
tion using emerging two-dimensional (2D) materials and/or plasmonic structures
to extend the wavelength range of silicon-based photodetectors beyond 1100 nm.
1.1.1
Si Platform
Si is not only the dominant material for the modern Information Age (also known
as Silicon Age), which is driven by Si electronics, but also one of the most promising
platforms for photonics to construct sensing or imaging systems. Si photonics, which
is compatible with the current Si electronic industry, will share the benefits of Si
technologies in terms of monolithic electronic–photonic integration, scaling, and
low cost, which may result in a Si-based optoelectronic revolution in the future. Si
photonics have been developed for various applications in the near-infrared (NIR)
and shortwave infrared (SWIR) ranges.
Si photonics is a rapidly developing field. Recently, it has achieved a breakthrough
with Ge-related materials (SiGeSn). As shown in Figure 1.1, the SiGeSn material
system has some interesting optical properties that are ideal for constructing opto-
electronic devices for sensing and imaging: (i) the lattice constant and bandgap can
be tuned independently to form high-quality heterostructures to control the carri-
ers; (ii) bandgap can be converted from indirect to direct; (iii) coverage of NIR, SWIR,
and mid-infrared (MIR) wavelengths; (iv) the compatibility of growth temperature
(<400 ∘C) with complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) process; and
(v) high mobility, low Auger, and nonpolar.
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

2
1 Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications
5.4
–0.5
5.6
5.8
6.0
0
Lattice parameter (Å)
6.4
6.2
6.6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
20
40
Sn content (at.%)
60
80
100
Bandgap (eV)
AIP
GaP
AIAs
AISb
ZnTe
CdTe
PbTe
HgTe
Sn
X
L
Si
Ge
1.5 μm
3 μm
8 μm
14 μm
InAs
GaAs
InP
GaSb
InSb
Γ
Figure 1.1
Bandgap
versus of lattice constant of
group IV, III–V and II–VI
semiconductors. Source:
Reproduced with
permission from
Moutanabbir et al. [1].
Early proposals to utilize SiGeSn materials for photonics date back to the 1990s.
However, the actual development of practical devices has been hampered by the
technical challenges of growing high-quality SiGeSn materials. While the thermal
expansion coefficient mismatch between the epitaxial layer and Si substrates showed
a positive effect on the epitaxial Ge layer, the large lattice mismatch between the
elements (4.2% for Ge and Si, 14.7% for Sn and Ge, and 17% for Sn and Si) makes
the grown layer tend to be defective and rough. For example, when the Ge or GeSn
layer is epitaxially grown on Si substrates, misfit will inevitably be generated at the
interface and propagate to the surface of the epitaxy layer as threading dislocations,
which degrades the material quality and hinders the practical application of Ge or
GeSn optoelectronic devices. Besides, it is challenging to incorporate Sn into Ge due
to the extremely limited solid solubility of Sn (<1% in Ge), and Sn is prone to segrega-
tion at higher concentrations and growth temperatures. Therefore, GeSn alloys are
unstable and require nonequilibrium growth. Fortunately, the device-level-quality
SiGeSn materials have been grown recently by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) or
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) with various Ge and Sn precursors. We will intro-
duce the growth of GeSn alloys and Ge by commercial CVD systems, which are of
higher material quality and compatible with the industry for mass production.
To solve the first issue of lattice constant mismatch between epitaxial layers and
Si substrates, relentless efforts have been made. Using a fully relaxed, thick-graded
buffer layer can reduce the lattice constant mismatch between the Ge epitaxial layer
and Si substrate. However, this method suffers from the issue of wafer bow as the
graded buffer layer is usually too thick (∼10 μm), so it could not be grown by indus-
trial CVD tools. The second approach is the selective area growth (SAG) technique.
The Si substrate is patterned, followed by epitaxial lateral overgrowth. Threading
dislocations do not slide parallel to the growth direction, and they can slide to the
window sidewalls and annihilate. The third more practical approach is the two-step
growth method. A thin Ge seed layer was grown at low temperatures to restrict the

1.1 Optoelectronic Material Systems
3
mobility of Ge adatoms, thereby preventing 3D nucleation of Ge. Afterward, a thick
Ge film is grown under high-temperature conditions for a higher growth rate and
better Ge crystallinity.
For the growth of (Si)GeSn alloys, currently, the main Sn precursors are tetram-
ethyl tin [Sn(CH3)4] and stannic chloride (SnCl4). The main Ge precursors are GeH4,
Ge2H6, and Ge3H8. There are two approaches to obtaining GeSn layers with high
Sn concentrations: (i) the spontaneous relaxation-enhanced (SRE) Sn incorporation
process and (ii) the GeSn virtual substrate approach. When GeSn is grown on a Ge
buffer using a fixed Sn concentration recipe, the Sn concentration will increase from
the GeSn/Ge interface to the GeSn surface due to the strain relaxation. Thus, the
grown layer will normally show two distinct layers, with the first strained layer being
defective and the second relaxed layer having low defect density. Using the GeSn
layer obtained by the SRE method as the virtual substrate to grow GeSn layers, an
Sn concentration of up to 22.3% has been achieved. In addition to GeSn or Ge on Si
substrates, some advanced engineered substrates, such as Ge(Sn) on insulator (GOI)
and Ge on SiN (GON), have been proposed for the benefits of the smaller device area,
increased packaging density, and high mobility.
Since the breakthrough in material growth, many devices have been developed for
silicon photonics, including light emitters, amplifiers, photodetectors, waveguides,
modulators, couplers, and switches. Progress has also been made in the most chal-
lenging components of Si light sources, and a complete set of components is being
delivered for silicon photonics.
1.1.2
Two-dimensional Materials and Their van der Waals
Heterostructures
Graphene was discovered in 2004 and the discoverers won the Nobel Prize due to
its attractive 2D properties. Since then, many atomically thin 2D layered materials
have been discovered, ranging from metallic (graphene and TaSe2), semiconducting
(WSe2 and MoS2), superconducting (NbSe2 and FeSe) to topological insulators
(Bi2Se3 and Sb2Te3). Through the combination of quantum confinement and
enhanced electronic interactions, these atomically thin materials become strongly
renormalized. Besides, different 2D materials can form various heterostructures
by weak van der Waals forces. Figure 1.2 illustrates the available 2D materials
and their electronic band structures covering a wide range of the electromagnetic
spectra, from ultraviolet, visible, infrared to microwave, which would have different
applications such as sensing, optical communication, and thermal imaging. We will
introduce the properties of some typical individual 2D materials, followed by their
van der Waals heterostructures.
1.1.2.1
Graphene
Graphene is a zero-gap semimetal with a single layer of 2D honeycomb carbon
atoms. The resistivity will be reduced exponentially by adding electron/hole car-
riers. The interaction of the surrounding electrons around the honeycomb carbon
atoms leads to the quasiparticles of massless Dirac fermions. Graphene has many

4
1 Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications
Wavelength (nm)
Conventional
semiconductors
2D semiconductors
Energy (eV)
5000
FIR MIR
NIR
VIS
NUV
2500
1250
625
312.5
156.25
0
Graphene
0.25
0.5
Thermal imaging
LWIR
MWIR
Thermoelectric
Telecom
Photovoltaics
blue LEDs
SWIR
1
Black phosphorus
2
4
8
CdSe
CdTe
ZnTe
ZnS
ZnSe ZnO
GaSb
GaP
GaN
Si
Ge Si1–xGex
b-AsxP1–x
TiS3
InSe, In2S3
HfS3
ZrS3
WTe2
WSe2
MoTe2
MoSe2
MoS2
WS2
h-BN
GaSe
GaTe
GaS
GaAs
InAs
PbTe
PbSe
PbS
InSb
CdS
Figure 1.2
2D materials with potential applications in different wavelength regimes.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Castellanos-Gomez [2].
attractive properties, such as high electron mobility (up to 2.5 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1),
high thermal conductivity (>3000 W mK−1), high intrinsic strength of 130 GPa, and
Young’s modulus of 1 TPa.
1.1.2.2
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
Transition metal dichalcogenides are atomically thin semiconductors with the for-
mula MX2, with M, a transition metal element (Mo, W, or Nb), and X, a chalcogen
element (S, Se, or Te). A pane of transition metal atoms is sandwiched by two lay-
ers of chalcogen atoms, as shown in Figure 1.3. The electrical and optical properties
can be tuned by incorporating different transition metal elements. Transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs) can vary from semiconducting to metallic characteristics,
and some even demonstrate superconductivity characteristics (NbS2 and TaSe2).

1.2 Challenges and Prospect of Nano-optoelectronic Devices
5
Figure 1.3
Structure of 2D
molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) layers.
M atoms are in grey and X atoms are
in yellow. Source: Reproduced with
permission from Jariwala et al. [3].
M
X
Among various TMDs, MoS2 is a semiconductor with an indirect bandgap of
1.3 eV. The MoS2 will be converted into a direct bandgap with an energy of 1.8–1.9 eV
when it is reduced to a monolayer, which is proved by photoluminescence (PL)
measurements. Modified MoS2 has demonstrated the ability to maintain permanent
valley polarization, which is promising for valleytronics. Monolayer MoS2 is
also a candidate for spintronics due to its strong spin-orbit splitting. Monolayer
TMDs have been applied in high-efficiency 2D optoelectronics devices such as
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and lasers.
1.1.2.3
2D Heterostructures
Within the wide range of materials available, the ways in which they can be
combined are virtually limitless, each with its own unique properties and phe-
nomena. For example, a tunneling device demonstration uses a thin layer of
insulating hBN as a tunnel barrier between graphene sheets. 2D quantum wells
can be formed by sequentially stacking different semiconducting transition metal
dichalcogenides. Graphene/hBN heterostructure has been used to fabricate tunable
LEDs. The development of nanoscale metamaterials has been achieved by coupling
2D materials with repeating nanostructures, revealing interesting plasmonic
properties. The demonstrated applications of 2D heterostructures are in the fields
of light detection, light generation, electronics, and some emerging directions
such as single-photon emitters, quantum dot qubits, superconducting qubits, and
topological quantum computing components.
1.2
Challenges and Prospect of Nano-optoelectronic
Devices
Miniaturization of optoelectronic devices to the nanoscale offers enormous per-
formance gains. As the volume of photoactive materials decreases, optoelectronic
performance increases, including the operating speed, signal-to-noise ratio, and
internal quantum efficiency. Over the past decades, the volume of photoactive
materials in optoelectronic devices has been reduced by orders of magnitude.
Relentless efforts have been made to overcome the limitations of further minia-
turization. Among them, replacing Si with a new class of nanomaterials, such
as 2D materials or heterostructures, is a promising candidate method. However,

6
1 Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications
due to the lack of scalable fabrication methods, this direction is mostly limited to
proof-of-concept research. Efforts are made toward the scalable fabrication of 2D
heterostructures. CVD and metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
are promising candidate methods. Nonetheless, the growth kinetics has not been
fully understood. Large-scale and high-quality 2D HS with high controllability is
also needed. Besides, the environmental stability of the device is a great challenge.
To enable further development of nanodevices, new concepts regarding emerging
materials and device configuration design need to be employed. Accordingly, the
book will cover topics including (i) nanomaterials-based photodetector arrays
for imaging, (ii) plasmonic photodetectors for sub-wavelength photodetection,
(iii) optical resistance switch for optical sensing, (iv) optical interferometric sensing,
(v) novel materials for clinical applications, (vi) computational imaging/sensing
based on nanomaterials, and (vii) nanomaterial advances and on-chip integration.
1.2.1
III–V Compounds
Si is the most widely used semiconductor material due to its rich reserves, mature
technology, and low cost, but it has an indirect band gap. Compared with Si, III–V
compound semiconductors (such as GaAs, InP, GaN, and GaSb) and their alloys have
direct band gaps. That is to say, the top of the valence band and the bottom of the
conduction band are located at the same position in the wave vector space, and the
electron–hole recombination does not need to exchange momentum, so it has high
internal quantum efficiency and is predominantly used in optoelectronic devices [4].
GaAs is a typical III–V compound semiconductor material and is widely used in
many optoelectronic fields, such as remote control, mobile phones, and lighting.
Its band gap width is 1.42 eV (300 K), which can just absorb the high-energy part
of the solar spectrum. Therefore, it is an ideal material for preparing solar cells.
Researchers from the US Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Labo-
ratory (NREL) have developed a six-junction III–V solar cell with a 47.1% conversion
efficiency rate under 143 suns of concentration. Its quaternary systems InGaAsP
and InGaAlAs just cover the O band (1260—1360 nm, 1310 nm in the center) or
C + L band (C band: 1530—1565 nm, 1550 nm in the center; L band: 1565—1625 nm)
commonly used in optical communication. InxGa1−xAs photodetector can be used
from 400 to 3600 nm, which is suitable for a wide range of applications, includ-
ing optical communication, analysis, and measurement. Flexible InGaAs thin film
materials have great potential in optoelectronic field. For practical fiber quantum key
distribution (QKD), InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiodes are the NIR light detector
of choice because they are compact and low cost, and allow cryogenic-free or even
room-temperature operation [5].
Direct epitaxy on silicon is the most direct method to produce III–V compound
semiconductors. However, the lattice mismatch between silicon and III–V com-
pounds is very large (the mismatch between silicon and GaAs and InP is 4%
and 8%, respectively), and this causes strain in the materials. In addition, silicon
is a nonpolar crystal, whereas III–V compounds are polar. When the two are
combined, an antiphase domain will exist at the interface. Therefore, obtaining

1.2 Challenges and Prospect of Nano-optoelectronic Devices
7
high-quality epitaxial layers of III–V materials directly determines the performance
of semiconductor optoelectronic devices. To solve these problems, buffer layers
are usually introduced to reduce the defect density caused by the growth of III–V
semiconductors on silicon. For example, the mismatch between Ge and GaAs is
0.08%, and the thermal expansion coefficient is relatively close. In order to suppress
the antiphase domain, a silicon substrate with a certain deflection angle can be
used, and the substrate can be pretreated at high temperature in the gas of V
group elements. By this method, the diatomic steps can be formed on the silicon
substrate and the surface reconstruction can be realized, which can suppress the
antiphase domain.
1.2.2
Perovskites
Perovskite is a crystal material with the general molecular formula ABX3, which is
octahedral in shape and has excellent structural properties. Perovskites have been
intensively studied in many fields and applications owing to their excellent pho-
toelectric efficiency and PL [6]. Especially as a promising photoelectric material,
they have a wide range of applications in perovskite photovoltaic (PV) cells, LEDs
[7, 8], low-threshold lasers [9, 10], electroluminescent devices [11–13], photodetec-
tors [14], and photocatalysts [15]. Perovskite structure has strong designability and
excellent photovoltaic performance, which has been a hot research direction in pho-
tovoltaics in recent years. Due to their high PL quantum efficiency, perovskites were
reported as potential luminescence probes for cell imaging after overcoming the
challenge of hypertoxicity by external encapsulation. Perovskite structure material
is an important development path for next-generation LEDs for lighting or display.
Perovskite is also the representative of the third-generation high-efficiency thin-film
battery. In particular, organic perovskite is considered as a promising optoelectronic
photoelectric semiconductor material. The explorations in photoelectric devices and
bioscience broaden the application of perovskite. However, due to the difficulty in
repetitively preparing high-quality perovskite thin films, low coupling efficiency of
optical output, lead pollution, and other problems, there is still a certain distance
from commercial application.
1.2.3
Organic Optoelectronic Materials
Organic optoelectronic materials are usually organic molecules rich in carbon
atoms with large 𝜋-conjugated systems, which can be divided into four categories:
conjugated conducting polymers, organic conjugated small molecules, phospho-
rescent heavy metal complexes, and aggregation-induced enhanced luminescence
materials. Compared with inorganic optoelectronic materials, organic optoelec-
tronic materials have lower costs, are thin in thickness, are light in material, and
usually with higher light absorption coefficient. The material manufacturing pro-
cess is simple and can be prepared in large areas and on flexible devices by solution
method. In addition, organic materials have diversified structure compositions and
wide property manipulation, which can obtain the required performance through

8
1 Introduction of Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications
molecular design. We can prepare nanodevices and molecular devices through
bottom-up device assembly methods such as self-assembly. Organic optoelectronic
materials are mainly used in organic solar cells, organic LEDs (OLEDs), and other
display screens. Organic light-emitting materials are the key core materials of OLED
panels, which directly determine the luminous characteristics of panels and are
also one of the areas with the highest technical barriers. The application of organic
optoelectronic materials in biomedicine has developed from early biosensors and
detection to biological imaging and tumor treatment in recent years, especially
high-resolution photoacoustic imaging and NIR imaging, providing a new method
for the diagnosis of brain tumors and vascular tumors. Organic photovoltaics (OPV)
will become an excellent candidate for energy supply on the Internet of Things (IoT)
and intelligent wearable devices because of its unique mechanical flexibility, print-
ability, and adjustable light absorption. However, organic photoelectric materials
also have many disadvantages, such as low photoelectric conversion efficiency,
short life, low mobility of carriers, high resistance, and poor durability. In addition,
the synthesis steps of organic optoelectronic materials are cumbersome and not
suitable for large-scale production. In organic semiconductors, the diffusion length
of excitons is generally short, ranging between 10 and 20 nm [16]. This reduces
efficiency, since the electrons accumulated as a result of solar energy conversion
cannot easily flow through the photovoltaic semiconductor. Many of the advantages
of organic solar cells are overridden by their relatively low efficiency, since this is
the most important factor with respect to electricity generation by the cell.
References
1 Moutanabbir, O., Assali, S., Gong, X. et al. (2021). Monolithic infrared silicon
photonics: the rise of (Si) GeSn semiconductors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 118 (11):
110502.
2 Castellanos-Gomez, A. (2015). Black phosphorus: narrow gap, wide applications.
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6 (21): 4280–4291.
3 Jariwala, D., Sangwan, V.K., Lauhon, L.J. et al. (2014). Emerging device
applications for semiconducting two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenides. ACS Nano 8 (2): 1102–1120.
4 Sweeney, S.J. and Mukherjee, J. (2017). Optoelectronic materials and devices.
In: Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials (ed. S. Kasap and
P. Capper) (Chapter 35), 897. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
5 Comandar, L.C., Fröhlich, B., Dynes, J.F. et al. (2015). Gigahertz-gated
InGaAs/InP single-photon detector with detection efficiency exceeding 55% at
1550 nm. J. Appl. Phys. 117: 083109.
6 Fu, Y., Zhu, H., Chen, J. et al. (2019). Metal halide perovskite nanostructures for
optoelectronic applications and the study of physical properties. Nat. Rev. Mater.
4: 169–188.
7 Jana, A., Park, S., Cho, S. et al. (2022). Monodispersed perovskite quantum wells
for efficient LEDs. Matter 5: 384–386.

References
9
8 Pacchioni, G. (2021). Highly efficient perovskite LEDs. Nat. Rev. Mater. 6: 108.
9 Yan, D., Shi, T., Zang, Z. et al. (2020). Stable and low-threshold
whispering-gallery-mode lasing from modified CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum
dots@SiO2 sphere. Chem. Eng. J. 401: 126066.
10 Wang, C., Dai, G., Wang, J. et al. (2022). Low-threshold blue quasi-2D perovskite
laser through domain distribution control. Nano Lett. 22: 1338–1344.
11 Xie, P., Hang, H., Wang, S. et al. (2019). Perovskite bifunctional device with
improved electroluminescent and photovoltaic performance through interfacial
energy-band engineering. Adv. Mater. 31: 1902543.
12 Hang, J., Ren, B., Deng, S. et al. (2020). Voltage-dependent multicolor
electroluminescent device based on halide perovskite and chalcogenide
quantum-dots emitters. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30: 1907074.
13 Liu, D., Liu, X., Gan, Y. et al. (2022). Perovskite/organic hybrid white
electroluminescent devices with stable spectrum and extended operating lifetime.
ACS Energy Lett. 7: 523–532.
14 Ren, H., Chen, J.D., Li, Y.Q., and Tang, J.X. (2021). Recent progress in organic
photodetectors and their applications. Adv. Sci. 8: 2002418.
15 Zhu, Y., Liu, Y., Miller, K.A. et al. (2020). Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals
as photocatalysts for PET-RAFT polymerization under visible and near-infrared
irradiation. ACS Macro Lett. 9: 725–730.
16 Sajjad, M.T., Ruseckas, A., and Samuel, I.D.W. (2020). Enhancing exciton
diffusion length provides new opportunities for organic photovoltaics. Matter
3: 241–354.


11
2
2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Wenshuo Xu1,2,3, Zhuo Wang1, and Andrew T. S. Wee2,4
1Shenzhen University, SZU-NUS Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Science & Technology,
International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of
Ministry of Education, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, 3688 Nanhai Street, Shenzhen Guangdong
518060, China
2National University of Singapore, Department of Physics, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117551, Singapore
3University of Cambridge, Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, 27 Charles Babbage Road,
Cambridge CB3 0FS, United Kingdom
4National University of Singapore, Centre for Advanced 2D Materials, 6 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117546,
Singapore
2.1
Introduction
Advanced photodetectors play an important role in high-quality imaging. Figure 2.1
shows the key photodetection mechanisms. The photocurrent can be generated
either by the excitation of charge carriers or by the heat produced as a result of
exposure to light. In the former case, the optical transition is ascribed to pho-
tovoltaic, photoconductive, or photogating effect. The photovoltaic effect occurs
when the energy of the absorbed photons is greater than the bandgap, so that the
electron–hole pairs are excited and separated under the built-in electric field at
the metal–semiconductor junction or p–n heterojunction (Figure 2.1a). The pho-
toconductive effect refers to the situation where the photoinduced carriers lead to
an increased density of charges and a decreased resistance of the semiconducting
material. The excess carriers are drifted in the presence of applied bias, thereby
forming photocurrent (Figure 2.1b). As a particular example, the photogating
effect happens when the photocarriers are localized at the surface or defect sites
of the semiconductor. Their trap states act as a gate, regulating the conductance
of the channel. Light irradiation can also increase the temperature of photoactive
materials. The photobolometric effect originates from uniform temperature change
(ΔT) across the channel. The sign of the photocurrent is dependent on the induced
variation in the resistivity, which is a function of temperature (Figure 2.1c).
The photothermoelectric effect would happen if the light is illuminated at the
junction of two materials with different thermoelectric properties or if the spot size
of the incident light is smaller than the channel width (Figure 2.1d). A temperature
gradient can be formed when the photon absorption is uneven across the channel,
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

12
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Photovoltaic effect
Photobolometric effect
ΔR
Heat sink
ΔT
ΔT
Photothermoelectric effect
S1
S2
Photoconductive effect
Built-in field
Source
Drain
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.1
Photodetection mechanisms. (a) Photovoltaic effect. (b) Photoconductive effect.
(c) Photobolometric effect. (d) Photothermoelectric effect. S1 and S2 represent two
semiconductors with different thermoelectric properties.
giving rise to a photovoltage and driving a current through the detector. The sign
of the photocurrent is related to the carrier polarity and the difference of Seebeck
coefficients between the adjacent illuminated regions. The driving force to form
a potential difference is built-in electric field for photovoltaic effect, while it is
temperature gradient for the photothermoelectric effect. Both of them are based on
the spontaneous transport of electrons and holes toward the two ends of the chan-
nel, offering access to self-driven photoresponse. In contrast, for photoconductive,
photogating, and photobolometric effects, the photocurrent cannot be generated
without an external bias voltage.
The performances of photodetectors are evaluated by several figure-of-merits,
including photoresponsivity (R), external quantum efficiency (EQE), photoconduc-
tive gain, response speed, detectivity (D), or specific detectivity (D*), and so on. R is
the ratio of photogenerated voltage or photocurrent to the incident light power,
expressed as R = Iph/Pin, where Iph represents the photocurrent and Pin is the power
of the incident light. Its value depends on the light wavelength because the photon
absorption is correlated with the bandgap of the semiconductor. EQE is the number
of collected electron–hole pairs divided by the number of incident photons, i.e.
EQE = (Iph/e)/(Pin/Eph), where e is the charge of an electron and Eph is the energy
of a photon. Photoconductive gain evaluates the capability of a photodetector in

2.1 Introduction
13
generating charge carriers in response to a single photon. Response speed is usually
characterized by the rise and decay/fall times with the light pulse switched on
and off, i.e. the time intervals needed for the output signal to increase from 10%
to 90% and decrease from 90% to 10% of its on-state maximum, respectively. D is
defined as the inverse of the noise-equivalent power. Its normalization result to
the active detecting area and the detection bandwidth, known as D*, has been
widely used to quantify the sensitivity of a photodetector to signals against the
noise. D* = R/(2eJd)1/2, where Jd is the dark current density, and the unit is Jones
or cm Hz1/2 W−1.
The detection range is categorized according to the light wavelength. The absorp-
tion spectrum includes ultraviolet (UV) (10–400 nm), visible (400–750 nm), infrared
(IR, 0.75–30 μm), and terahertz (THz) (30 μm to 3 mm) bands. Specifically, the UV
range is further divided into UV-A (320–400 nm), UV-B (280–320 nm), and UV-C
(100–280 nm), and the IR range is further divided into near-infrared (NIR, 750 nm
to 3 μm), mid-infrared (MIR, 3–5 μm), long-wave infrared (LWIR, 8–12 μm), and
very long-wave infrared (VLWIR, 12–30 μm). The full electromagnetic spectrum is
shown in Figure 2.2, where the visible region is specified. For certain incident light,
it is important to choose a photodetector with appropriate response wavelength.
In Sections 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4, we will discuss about the visible, IR, and broadband
photodetectors that are composed of two-dimensional (2D) materials.
Traditional thin-film materials fail to meet the increasing demands of modern
device manufacture because of the limited detection wavelength, strict working
conditions, high cost, and difficult fabrication. For instance, electronics and opto-
electronics based on silicon play a leading role in the integrated circuit industry.
Increasing wavelength
Increasing energy
10–13 m
750
675
630
590
525
510
460
380
400
445
475
510
570
590
650
780
3.1
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.1
1.9
1.6
10–11 m
10–8 m
10–6 m
10–4 m
10–2 m
100 m
102 m
γ-rays
X-rays
UV
C B A
N
M
LW VLW
IR
Radio waves
Visible
Violet
Frequency
(THz)
Wavelength
(nm)
Photon
energy
(eV)
Indigo
Blue
Green
Yellow Orange
Red
Figure 2.2
Electromagnetic spectrum. The wavelength for each region is indicated.

14
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
However, the indirect energy gap of silicon (1.12 eV) constricts its response to
light within the visible–NIR regime [1]. GaAs and InSb have been employed for
IR photodetectors, which often operate at cryogenic temperatures [2, 3], while
the cooling requirement increases the expense and volume of the systems. Other
examples include InGaAs and HgCdTe thin films, the growth procedures of which
are complicated [4]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop some alternatives to
overcome the above challenges.
A variety of 2D materials-based photodetectors have been reported in the past few
years, including graphene, transition-metal chalcogenides (TMCs), transition-metal
oxides (TMOs), black phosphorus (BP), arsenic phosphorus (AsP), and indium
selenide (InSe). They can also form van der Waals heterostructures without the
limitation of lattice matching. Many of these materials can interact with light and
convert the photons to an electrical signal dictated by their unique band structures.
Although graphene has large electron mobility (≈105 cm2 V−1 s−1), only ≈2.3%
of the incident visible and IR light can be absorbed in monolayer thickness [5].
Furthermore, the zero-gap of graphene results in short lifetime of the photoinduced
carriers, which are not favorable for efficient yield of photocurrents. As compared
with graphene, the van Hove singularities in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDs) contribute to stronger light–matter interactions in visible and IR light
ranges, and their tunable band gap by varying their layer number allows the
detection of light with different wavelengths [6]. A promising method to exploit the
properties of both graphene and TMD is to create hybrid devices where graphene is
used as the electrodes and TMD acts as the photoactive channel. Moreover, owing
to the atomic thickness and absence of dangling bonds, 2D materials often exhibit
fast carrier transport and outstanding gate modulation ability. Previous works have
demonstrated that 2D materials and their heterostructures are superior to con-
ventional semiconducting materials in terms of the spectral coverage, mechanical
flexibility, transparency, ease of processing, etc.
High photoresponsivity, fast response, low dark current, and large ON/OFF ratio
are highly desired for advanced photodetectors. However, some pristine 2D materi-
als cannot meet such demands. To enhance the device performance, several methods
have been proposed [7]. Quick charge extraction is believed to assist the photodetec-
tion. For example, contacting the semiconductor with highly conductive 2D layers,
usually graphene, accelerates the separation of electrons and holes, and reduces the
contact resistance. Another strategy is building up vertical 2D TMD heterostruc-
tures to modify the band structure and match the cutoff wavelength of the incident
light. In these heterostructures, adding a dielectric barrier layer can reduce the dark
current and therefore improve the detectivity. In addition, plasmonic nanostruc-
tures, which support surface plasmons, can strengthen the light–matter interaction
in materials, so they are used to improve the photoresponsivity of photodetectors
based on 2D materials. Regarding the preparation methods, chemical vapor deposi-
tion (CVD) and molecular beam epitaxy are advantageous in producing clean inter-
faces. The strong interlayer coupling guarantees efficient charge transfer across the
heterojunction. In addition to the structural design and performance improvement
of 2D materials-based photodetectors, recent studies also focus on their large-scale

2.2 Visible-Light Photodetectors
15
manufacturing from single to arrayed devices and extension of their detection range
from narrowband to broadband. All of these aspects are crucial for the development
toward imaging applications and hence will be covered in this chapter.
2.2
Visible-Light Photodetectors
Silicon and germanium compounds with bandgaps of ≈1 eV have been used for
visible-light photodetectors. Nevertheless, short-channel effects often take place
when the channel length is approximately equal to the depletion layer widths of
the source and drain junctions. Typical resultant phenomena may include barrier
lowering, velocity saturation, quantum confinement, and hot carrier degrada-
tion [8]. In addition, the manufacturing costs of Si and Ge semiconductors are
relatively high. These disadvantages have restricted the further miniaturization and
large-scale integration of conventional photodetectors. The absorption wavelengths
of many 2D TMDs are also in the visible-light spectrum, such as molybdenum
dichalcogenides (MoX2, X = S, Se, Te), tungsten dichalcogenides (WX2, X = S, Se),
tin dichalcogenides (SnX2, X = S, Se), gallium chalcogenides (GaX, X = S, Se, Te),
and indium selenides (InSe, In2Se3). They can thus be promising supplements to
the traditional materials and have attracted much research interest.
The earliest demonstration of a 2D TMD-based phototransistor was reported by
Yin et al. in 2012 [9]. Utilizing mechanically exfoliated monolayer MoS2 as the
channel, the device exhibits a photoresponsivity of 7.5 mA W−1 upon laser excitation
at 488 nm with a response time of ≈50 ms. Follow-up studies were centered on the
factors affecting the photoresponse [10].
First, the photoresponsivity is influenced by the external conditions, including
the incident light wavelength, excitation power density, and applied electric field.
The absorption of light is dependent on the intrinsic energy-band structure and
absorption coefficient of semiconducting materials. When the photon energy is
larger than the bandgap, photocarriers, i.e. electron–hole pairs, are formed via the
transition of electrons from the valence band to the conductance band. An increase
in the concentration of photocarriers due to the enhanced absorption corresponds
to a higher responsivity. Although more photocarriers can be produced as the
excitation power increases, the reduced efficiency of carrier excitation and the
enhanced Coulomb scattering may have a dominant effect on the generation of
photocurrent. Therefore, the responsivity generally decreases with increasing light
power density. The power dependence can be explained by Auger recombination,
i.e. a nonradiative process in which electron–hole pairs recombine and give off
energy to another electron in the same conduction band [11]. This effect is enhanced
at high power density. It influences the lifetime of photocarriers and, thus, the
efficiency of the device. Implementation of a gate bias can vary the carrier density
in the semiconductor via modulation of the Fermi surface. This enables restriction
of the dark current and improvement in the responsivity.
Second, the responsivity is dependent on the layer number of TMDs. Changing
their layer number can modulate the bandgap and hence tune the response

16
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
wavelength of the photodetector. For example, the bandgap of BP shows direct
characteristics. Its value increases from ≈0.35 eV for the bulk to ≈2.0 eV for the
monolayer [12]. Many TMDs also present increasing bandgaps as the layer number
decreases, yet unlike BP, they undergo an indirect-to-direct transition when thinned
down to the monolayer limit as a result of quantum confinement effects [13].
The layer-dependent bandgap dictates the cutoff wavelength in the absorption
spectrum and influences the photodetection range. Lee et al. studied top-gate
phototransistors based on mono-, bi-, and three-layer MoS2 flakes. Mono- and
bi-layer MoS2 with optical energy gaps of 1.82 and 1.65 eV, respectively, exhibit
maximal photoresponse in the red-light spectrum, whereas three-layer MoS2 with
an optical energy gap of 1.35 eV shows the best green-light detection capability [14].
Increasing thickness within a certain range often leads to enhanced optical absorp-
tion and responsivity. 2D ReS2 has a direct band gap with a constant value (1.5 eV)
irrespective of its layer number. The photodetector based on 30-nm ReS2 can reach
a high responsivity of 2.5 × 107 A W−1, which is among the record-high values
achieved by 2D materials [15]. This outstanding performance can be attributed to
the combination of the relatively large thickness and the direct bandgap, which
brings enhanced light absorption. As in other special cases, bulk PtS2 and PtSe2
are semimetals, whereas they become semiconductors with bandgap opening at
reduced thicknesses below a few nanometers (≈3 nm for PtS2 and ≈4 nm for PtSe2).
These enable photodetection in visible-light spectrum [16, 17].
Third, the photoresponse of TMDs is influenced by charge trapping in the TMD
layers or at the TMD–substrate interface. Kufer and Konstantatos [18] encapsulated
monolayer and bilayer MoS2 with atomic layer-deposited HfO2 to isolate them from
environmental adsorbates. The increased carrier mobility due to the reduction in
extrinsic impurities and the additional electrons induced by the positive charges
in the top HfO2 layer contribute to the observation of a high photoresponsivity
(≈104 A W−1). Jo et al. [19] enhanced the performance of a WSe2 phototransistor
via conversion of the device type from p- to n-channel with triphenylphosphine as
the dopant. Further improvement was achieved by intercalating a hexagonal boron
nitride (hBN) film underneath the WSe2 to provide a charge-free environment
and increase the carrier mobility. Wang et al. [20] reported a ferroelectric-driven
MoS2 photodetector with a poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) film as the
top gate. The remnant polarization of this polymer induces a strong electrostatic
field, maintaining the MoS2 in a fully depleted state and largely suppressing the
generation of dark current. As a result, a responsivity of 2570 A W−1 along with
a D* of ≈2.2 × 1012 Jones was achieved at zero bias. The performance of the 2D
TMD photodetector is also dependent on its surrounding atmosphere. This is
ascribed to the charge transfer between the TMD and the absorbed gas molecules,
which modulates the doping level and the carrier density in the TMD. Auger
recombination can happen at increased carrier density, usually leading to higher
response speed but lower photoresponsivity. Moreover, the adsorbates can serve as
the recombination centers of photocarriers, thereby increasing the photocurrent
relaxation rate and decreasing the response time. Lan et al. [21] demonstrated
a sharp increase in the responsivity of multilayer WS2 photodetector in vacuum

2.2 Visible-Light Photodetectors
17
(18.8 mA W−1) compared with that in air (0.2 μA W−1) where the oxygen acts as
an electron acceptor. The response times of these WS2 photodetectors are on the
order of sub-seconds in vacuum and <4.5 ms in air [21]. The preparation and
processing methods of 2D materials also have crucial influences on their charge
states and photodetecting properties. Solution-processed TMDs usually contain
higher concentrations of defects and charge impurities, therefore displaying more
charge-scattering centers and inferior performances to mechanically exfoliated and
CVD-grown samples. Shim et al. studied the effect of oxygen plasma treatment
on the optoelectronic properties of few-layer ReS2 phototransistor. They showed
decreases in the rise and decay times due to the formation of trap states within the
bandgap of the surface ReS2. Lu et al. [22] showed that the S vacancies in 2D GaS
could lead to reduced optical responses and stability. Moreover, its photodetection
range can be shifted from visible-to-UV (stoichiometric GaS) to UV-discriminating
(GaS0.87) via control of the defect concentration.
Fourth, the photoresponse is affected by the structure of the device. Kwon
et al. [23] demonstrated that the multilayer MoS2 phototransistor with a local
bottom gate is superior to that with a global bottom gate. The former geometry,
shown in Figure 2.3a, facilitates the trapping of the photoexcited holes in the
channel region. Due to the accumulation of holes (Figure 2.3b), the potential
barrier is reduced for the injection of electrons, delivering a larger thermionic
current and a higher photoresponsivity (Figure 2.3c).
Fifth, the contact between the channel and the electrodes also strongly affects
device performance. The work functions of the metal and the semiconductor are
not identical to each other, so when they contact each other, their misaligned
Fermi levels would result in band bending and formation of a Schottky barrier.
The transport of carriers within the device is therefore restricted. The surface states
in the bandgap of the semiconductor “pin” its Fermi-level position independent of
the metal, known as Fermi-level pinning. Zhang et al. [25] investigated the effect
of metal contacts on the photodetection performances of monolayer WSe2 grown
by CVD. The responsivity of the Pd-contacted device is as high as ≈1.8 × 105 A W−1,
while the value decreases by several orders of magnitude for the Ti-contacted
device. However, the response time for the Ti contacts is <23 ms, much shorter
than that for the Pd contacts (>5 seconds). These large variations result from the
differences in the Schottky barriers between the metals and the WSe2. Semimetallic
graphene has also been utilized as the electrodes to provide good carrier mobility,
and its high transparency can guarantee the optical transmission. The responsivity
of the graphene-sandwiched WS2 photodetector is about 4 orders of magnitude
higher than that with Ti/Au contacts under 532-nm laser [26, 27]. Semimetallic
and transparent graphene have also been used as the contact electrodes for other
2D semiconductors, such as perovskites, to improve their photodetection perfor-
mances. Tu et al. [28] demonstrated a graphene/(C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4/graphene
photoconductor, showing narrowband responses at 517 nm with ultralow dark
current (10−14 A), high D* (1013 Jones), large ON/OFF ratio (106), and short rise time
(102 μs). The photoresponse can be further enhanced by adopting direct CVD growth
to construct graphene/semiconductor/graphene heterostructures. The epitaxial

18
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Source metal
Large SBH
Top gate
AIOx/AI
WS2
Graphene
In atom
Sapphire
Light
h+
h+
e–
e–
Source
Drain
Small SBH
In adatoms
WS2
Gr
D
S
EF
ϕB
Gate underlap
Gated channel
Tunneling
Thermionic
In/G–WS2–G
Ec
μs
μs
Ec
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
(d)
Figure 2.3
(a) Schematic 3D view of a MoS2 photodetector with a local bottom-gate
structure. (b) Energy band diagram in which the holes are accumulated and the low barrier
for the generation of large photocurrent. (c) Tunnelling (upper) and near-thermionic
emission (lower) through the gate underlap with a large and a small SBH, respectively, at
the metal–MoS2 interface. 𝜇s is the chemical potential at the source and Ec is the
conduction band edge of MoS2. (d) Cross-sectional view of a WS2 photodetector with
graphene contacts and chemisorbed In atoms. AlOx/Al was used as the top gate. (e) Band
diagram of the In/graphene–WS2–graphene device, which illustrates the In-induced
photogating effect. Source: (a–c) Reproduced with permission [23]. Copyright 2015,
Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d, e) Reproduced with permission [24]. Copyright 2019, American
Chemical Society.
graphene–semiconductor interfaces exhibit decreased Schottky barrier and contact
resistance in comparison with that made via conventional layer-by-layer transfer,
thus displaying higher electron transfer efficiency [29]. Another preparation
method to obtain superior performances is introducing heteroatoms. Yeh et al. [24]
enhanced the photogating effect in graphene–WS2–graphene photodetector by
covering the lateral junction with In atoms (Figure 2.3d). The photogenerated
holes remain trapped in the In adatoms, during which the electrons are transferred
from the In to the WS2 channel and recirculate through the device (Figure 2.3e).
The fast carrier dynamics results in a short response time of 40–65 μs, achieved
simultaneously with a high responsivity of 2.6 × 103 A W−1. Efficient photodetection
was also achieved in TMD–TMD homojunctions. Wang et al. [30] employed two
degenerately p-doped WSe2 thin films as the drain and source to form an ohmic
contact with the pristine WSe2 channel. A fast photoresponse was realized as a
result of the low RC time constant and high carrier transit speed across the interface.
Since metallic TMDs have similar work functions to semiconducting TMDs, the

2.2 Visible-Light Photodetectors
19
Schottky barrier height (SBH) is smaller at 2D TMD metal–2D TMD semiconductor
junctions compared with pure metal–2D TMD semiconductor junctions, delivering
lower contact resistance and larger gain. However, the response time could be
relatively longer than that of a junction with a higher Schottky barrier. Zhang
et al. [31] synthesized 2D TMD metal/2D TMD semiconductor vertical stacks
of NbS2/MoS2 by CVD. Epitaxial growth was achieved due to the small lattice
mismatch between NbS2 and MoS2. The responsivity of the NbS2-contacted MoS2
photodetector is 4 orders of magnitude higher than that for its Ti/Au-contacted
counterpart, which was attributed to the Schottky barrier and the contact resistance
of the NbS2/MoS2 heterostructure.
The responsivity of 2D materials-based photodetectors can also be improved
by facilitating the carrier transport via formation of van der Waals interfaces. Lee
et al. [32] utilized conducting NiOx as the top gate on a few-layer MoS2 channel
(Figure 2.4a,b). This Schottky electrode can suppress interfacial electron scattering
at the NiOx–MoS2 junction, allowing the MoS2 to show near-intrinsic mobility of
1200 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Figure 2.4c). Vertical p–n homojunctions can be formed by stack-
ing TMDs with the same chemical composition but different doping levels. Such
structures have limited densities of carrier trap sites due to the continuous band
alignment and exhibit low contact resistance, giving high carrier transport efficiency
through their interface. Li et al. [33] fabricated a multifunctional device based
on p-MoS2/n-MoS2, where the p-type and the n-type MoS2 were prepared using
AuCl3 and benzyl viologen as the dopants, respectively (Figure 2.4d). In contrast to
unipolar MoS2, this homojunction exhibits ambipolar transport behavior and can
function as the channel of a phototransistor that shows photoresponse under biasing
conditions (Figure 2.4e). Low Schottky barrier has been verified at graphene–TMD
interfaces. Tan et al. [34] reported a hybrid photodetector based on a WS2/MoS2
heterobilayer with graphene contacts (Figure 2.4f). Type II band alignment is
formed at the WS2/MoS2 junction, which leads to the separation of the photoexcited
electrons and holes into different layers (Figure 2.4g). This can suppress the
electron–hole recombination, and the photoinduced excitons tend to dissociate
into spatially isolated carriers. The transfer curve indicates n-type behavior of this
device (Figure 2.4h), suggesting that MoS2 works as the main conductive channel.
At forward biases, holes tend to accumulate near the graphene–TMD heterojunction
at the source region due to the trapped states in the WS2/MoS2, leading to a positive
photogating effect and a reduced Schottky barrier. The thermionic emission is
increased as a consequence, thereby facilitating the electron transport from the
graphene electrode to the WS2/MoS2 channel. Owing to the efficient circulation of
carriers, this device exhibits a high responsivity of 2340 A W−1 with a large gain over
3.7 × 104, outperforming most lateral TMD-based photodetectors investigated so far.
In addition to TMDs, groups IIIA, IV-A, IV-B, and ternary metal chalcogenides
have also demonstrated potential in photodetection. GaS phototransistors exhibit
high D* in the range of ≈1012–1013 Jones, which surpasses that of commercial
InGaAs devices [35]. The responsivity of GaTe photodetectors up to 104 A W−1
is 3–4 orders of magnitude higher than the values of GaS and GaSe devices,
owing to its larger photon absorption coefficient [36]. In2Se3 compounds exist in

20
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Gate voltage (V)
VD = 1 V
Forward Reverse
Laser off
Laser on
VD = 1 V
VG (V)
MoS2
532 nm
532 nm
3D view
Side view
TMD (B)
TMD (A)
Graphene
WS2
Cr/Pd
p-Si
Cr/Pd/Cr
p-Type doping by AuCl3
SiO2
MoS2
VG (V)
EF
h+
h+
h+
e–
e–
e–
Vds = 0.5 V
μe = 3.16 cm2 · V–1 · s–1
ION/IOFF = 104
SS = 7.6 V dec–1
⎪Ids⎪ (A)
Ids (μA)
ID (A)
Ilight/Idark ∼ 2.85 × 103
NiOx
Au/Ti
Forward bias (+)
Channel open
Channel close
Substrate
Substrate
S
D
G
MoS2
MoS2
Depleted
S
D
Reverse bias (–)
Few-layer MoS2
Dark
Green LED
[2.13 mW cm–2]
Drain current (A)
–2
10–14
10–12
10–11
10–10
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–11
10–10
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–13
10–12
10–11
10–10
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
–1
0
1
2
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
–60
–80
–40
–20
0
20
40
80
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
60
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 2.4
(a) Perspective and (b) cross-sectional views of a NiOx-gated MoS2
photodetector. (c) Transfer curves of this device under dark and illuminated conditions.
Light source: 520-nm green light-emitting diode (LED). (d) 3D schematic of a photodetector
based on p-MoS2/n-MoS2 vertical homojunction and (e) its transfer curves with applied
forward and reverse biases. Inset: logarithmic dependences in the ON and the OFF states.
Excitation source: 655-nm monochromator. (f) 3D view of a graphene-contacted
photodetector based on WS2/MoS2 vertical heterojunction. (g) Schematic diagram of the
type II band alignment in the WS2/MoS2 bilayer stack. (h) Transfer curves of the
graphene/WS2/MoS2/graphene device under dark and illuminated conditions on
logarithmic (green) and linear (blue) scales. Light source: 532-nm laser. Source:
(a–c) Reproduced with permission [32]. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.
(d, e) [33]/Springer Nature/Licensed under CC BY 4.0. (f–h) [34]/Reproduced with
permission from John Wiley & Sons.
multiple structural phases. The most common form, α-In2Se3, has a direct bandgap
of 1.3 eV and shows good visible-light-harvesting performance. Island et al. [37]
demonstrated that the photodetection mechanism of multilayer α-In2Se3-based pho-
totransistor is a combination of the gate-independent photoconductive effect and
the photogating effect that is gate-modulable. The dominant mechanism responsi-
ble for the photocurrent generation can be tuned with bias voltages, giving rise to

2.3 Infrared Photodetectors
21
fast conduction in the OFF state and efficient gating in the ON state. Lei et al. [38]
realized an avalanche effect in ultrathin InSe-based photodetectors by exploiting the
large SBH between InSe and Al electrodes. This allows multiplication of the carriers
and reduction in the dark current to pA scale as a function of the applied bias, lead-
ing to enhanced photoresponse. In contrast to most TMDs, group IVA chalcogenides
with 1 : 1 stoichiometry are p-type semiconductors. They can form ohmic contacts
with n-type metal dichalcogenides, offering promise for high-performance device
applications of 2D heterostructures. Afzal et al. [39] studied the electronic and
optoelectronic properties of vertically stacked p-GeSe/n-PdSe2. The low Schottky
barrier results in good rectification characteristics with a ratio up to 5.5 × 105.
Photovoltaic measurements showed a high photoresponsivity of 1 × 103 A W−1 and
ultrafast response within 2 μs. Ternary metal chalcogenides can provide multiple
degrees of freedom to tailor their properties by altering the stoichiometric ratio. For
instance, the bandgaps of SnxGe1−xS, SnxGe1−xSe, GeSxSe1−x, and SnSxSe1−x can
be continuously tuned via control of their compositions [40]. Perumal et al. [41]
optimized the performance of SnSxSe1−x-based phototransistors by changing the Se
contents in SnS and showed the highest responsivity of 6 × 103 A W−1 achieved by
SnS0.8Se1.2.
2.3
Infrared Photodetectors
IR photodetectors can be employed in many fields, such as military communication,
remote monitoring, and thermal imaging. Their applications have been dominated
by InAs, InSb, InGaAs, and HgCdTe alloys in the last few decades [42]. Nonetheless,
the development of these devices is limited due to the high manufacturing costs,
strict operation requirements, and environmental toxicity. Many traditional
semiconductors also have severe short-channel effects. The scaling of Si-based
transistors is supposed to fail when the gate length is below 5 nm. Such limit brings
about challenging integration problems in achieving minimization while retaining
good performances [43]. Considering these issues, 2D materials with bandgaps
beyond silicon are desirable candidates for IR photodetection and can be fabricated
using affordable techniques. Typical synthesis approaches include mechanical and
liquid-phase exfoliation, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and CVD growth, pulsed
laser deposition, and magnetron sputtering [44].
2D semiconductors with narrow bandgaps (<1 eV) are potential candidates for
IR detection. BP and AsP are typical examples. Buscema et al. [12] conducted a pio-
neering study on the NIR photodetector based on few-layer BP, yet the responsivity
is low (<1 mA W−1). The following work demonstrated that the photocurrent could
increase several times when the temperature is decreased from 300 to 20 K [45].
The enhancement is ascribed to the more efficient carrier generation and transport
at low temperatures. However, the cryogenic operation is impractical for real BP
devices. Other methods to improve the photoresponse include surface modification
and chemical doping. Xiang et al. [46] demonstrated the improvement in the respon-
sivity by functionalizing BP with MoO3 and Cs2CO3, which gives rise to n- and

22
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
p-type doping, respectively. Surface charge transfer was verified at the BP–dopants
interfaces. The increased electron or hole mobility enhances the ambipolar
transport behavior of BP. Xu et al. [47] synthesized centimeter-scale Se-doped BP
nanosheets. With Se dopants, the Fermi level of BP shifts toward the conduction
band, resulting in lowered Schottky barrier and decreased contact resistance. The
Se doping also reduces the bandgap of BP. This may result in a larger absorption
coefficient. As a consequence, the responsivity is increased to 15.33 A W−1 at
room temperature, 20 times higher than that of the pristine BP. Yu et al. [48]
treated a selected region of the intrinsically p-type BP with electron dopants
(benzyl viologen), forming an in-plane p–n junction. The large built-in potential
at the p-BP/n-BP interface facilitates carrier transport and leads to improved
responsivity.
Noble-metal dichalcogenides, such as PtX2 and PdX2 (X = S, Se, Te), can also
be materials of choice for high-performance IR photodetection. The bandgap of
atomically thin PtSe2 is tunable via thickness control and defect engineering.
Yu et al. [49] utilized different methods to prepare PtSe2 nanosheets, including
chemical vapor transport, CVD, and selenization of Pt films, and fabricated a bilayer
PtSe2 photodetector with the detection wavelength extended to the MIR region
(10 μm). Its responsivity of ≈4.5 A W−1 is on par with the commercial HgCdTe and
quantum well-based devices. The role of defects in the photoresponse of 2D PtSe2
is investigated through argon plasma treatment with controlled dosages. The X-ray
photoelectron spectra and Fourier-transform IR spectra indicate the generation of
Se vacancies, the concentration of which governs the bandgap evolvement of the
PtSe2. The absorption cut-off wavelength shows blue shifts with the defect concen-
tration, corresponding to a decrease in the photon energy. Xu et al. [50] synthesized
ultrathin PdSe2 nanosheets (a few-nm-thick) by CVD. The as-grown PdSe2 displays
n-type behavior. Its electron mobility is on the order of 102 cm2 V−1 s−1 and can
remain stable over months. The PdSe2 photodetector exhibits a photoresponsivity
of 660 A W−1 in the NIR regime (914 nm).
The ultranarrow bandgaps of semimetallic 2D materials allow them to exhibit
absorption in the IR spectrum. As a typical example, 2D PtSe2 displays a
semiconductor-to-semimetal transition when its layer number increases. The
bandgaps of monolayer and bilayer PtSe2 are ≈1.2 and ≈0.3 eV, enabling them
to show NIR and MIR photoresponses, respectively. The detection range can
be extended toward the LWIR region by further increasing its layer number or
introducing Se vacancies [49]. Moreover, the high electron mobility of PtSe2 leads to
fast IR photoresponse. Wang et al. [51] demonstrated that the rise and decay times
of few-layer PtSe2 photodetector are down to ≈29 and ≈156 ps, respectively, when
the device is illuminated using 1560 nm light. Integrating these 2D semimetals
with other materials can also increase the response speed of the photodetectors.
Zhang and coworkers [52] integrated multilayer PtSe2 into Cs-doped FAPbI3 and
obtained the fastest 2D perovskite photodetector. The rise/decay times of the
self-powered device are 78/60 ns at the wavelength of 808 nm. The fast photore-
sponse can be attributed to the built-in electric field at the PtSe2/FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3
junction, which can efficiently separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and

2.3 Infrared Photodetectors
23
to the high carrier mobilities of both constituting materials that allow short transit
time of the photocarriers across the channel. Semimetallic graphene has also been
utilized to achieve fast IR detection by forming heterointerfaces with TMD semi-
conductors. Tao et al. [53] constructed a graphene/MoS2 vertical stack, the response
time of which was estimated to be a few tens of nanoseconds under 905 nm light illu-
mination. The atomically thin MoS2 nanosheet between graphene and Si substrate
not only acts as a tunneling layer for the photoexcited carriers but also passivates
the interface trap states. However, the high dark current, short carrier lifetime, and
low optical absorption efficiency often give rise to relatively low responsivity. The
responsivity can be increased by sandwiching the MoS2 with graphene. The top
graphene exposed to air is more p-doped than the bottom graphene supported by
SiO2/Si. The different doping levels lead to the creation of an internal field. Asym-
metric potential barriers are consequently formed between top graphene–MoS2
and bottom graphene–MoS2 junctions, which promote carrier tunneling and
facilitate photocurrent generation. However, this effect is attenuated as the layer
number of MoS2 increases because of the reduced difference in the effective barrier
heights [54].
IR photodetection has also been realized by fabricating 2D semiconductor/2D
semiconductor or 2D semimetal/2D semiconductor heterojunctions with type II
band alignment that gives rise to low-energy interlayer excitons (<1.65 eV) upon
light excitation. For example, WS2 and MoS2 show responses to visible light because
of their relatively wide bandgaps (>2 eV), while photoresponse at 1030 nm has been
observed in WS2/MoS2 heterostructures [55]. The IR response originates from the
shrunk energy interval of electrons transition induced by strong interlayer coupling,
which enables the heterostructure to detect light with longer wavelength. Long et al.
fabricated IR photodetectors based on AsP/MoS2 [56] and PdSe2/MoS2 [57] vertical
stacks (Figure 2.5a,b). The strong built-in electric fields at the interfaces efficiently
reduce the dark noise currents. This enables the AsP/MoS2 and PdSe2/MoS2 devices
to show high sensitivities with the D* on the order of 109 Jones at 3–5 μm (MIR) and
beyond 10 μm (LWIR), respectively, surpassing many conventional IR materials.
The comparisons are shown in Figure 2.5c. However, the indirect bandgaps are not
favorable for optical generation. In contrast, the WSe2/ReS2 heterojunction shows a
near-direct bandgap [59]. The photoexcitation is more efficient because almost no
phonon-assisted processes are involved in the optical transition. Moreover, the large
band offsets between WSe2 and ReS2 allow prompt dissociation of the photocarriers
toward the contacts, resulting in a short response time (5 μs).
Mixed-dimensional heterostructures are alternatives to achieving extraordinary
IR photoresponses. Jin et al. [60] reported the epitaxial growth of 0D PbS nanocrys-
tals from 2D PbI2 nanosheets through a liquid-phase sulfuration process. The
PbS/PbI2 photodetector exhibits a wide detection range up to 2 μm, a fast response
within ≈400 μs, and a high D* over 1012 Jones. The outstanding performances are
mainly attributed to the role of the PbI2 layer in passivating the defect states of
the PbS crystals. Moreover, the photoresponse dynamics is improved via struc-
tural design of the device. When the PbS/PbI2 heterostructure is placed on top
of the Au electrodes, Au/PbI2 Schottky contacts are formed, which can depress

24
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Wavelength (μm)
x (μm)
Unit: μA
z (μm)
Pd
5 μm
PdSe2
PdSe2
SiO2
MoS2
Si
MoS2
Se
Ag
GeNCs
–2
0
–0.5
0.5
1
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
D* (Jones)
InAs/GaSb
InSb
Bolometer
HgCdTe
PbSe
PbSe2/MoS2
AsP/MoS2
PtSe2
AsP
PbSe2
1
10
107
108
109
1010
1011
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(c)
In/Ga
PdSe2
HfO2
Figure 2.5
2D/2D and 2D/3D heterojunction photodetectors. (a–c) PdSe2/MoS2.
(a) Schematic diagram and (b) optical microscopic image of the device. (c) Room-
temperature D* versus illumination wavelength of various 2D materials and conventional
IR-detecting materials. (d–g) PdSe2/Ge nanocone arrays. (d) Schematic diagram of the
device. (e) Simulated electric-ﬁeld density distribution under 1550 nm illumination.
(f) Schematic diagram of the measurement setup for IR image sensing and the
(g) resultant photocurrent map under 1550 nm illumination. Source: (a–c) Reproduced
with permission [57]. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d–g) Reproduced
with permission [58]. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH.
the dark current and expand the depletion region. Liang et al. [58, 61] proposed
2D/3D heterojunctions consisting of multilayer PdSe2 and arrayed Ge nanocones
(Figure 2.5d) or Si nanopyramids. The 3D geometric structures effectively confine
the incident IR. The enhanced optical absorption is verified by the electric-field

2.3 Infrared Photodetectors
25
Table 2.1
Key ﬁgures of merit for room-temperature IR photodetectors based on traditional
semiconductors, 2D materials, and 2D/2D heterostructures.
Traditional
material
Wavelength
(𝛍m)
Rmax
Bias
Gain or
EQE
Rise and
fall times
D* (Jones)
InAs [62]
4.1
4.6 × 10−2 A W−1
2 V
35%
6.7 × 107
InGaAs
1.6
6.5 × 103
0.5 V
5.04 × 105%
70 ms,
280 ms
InAsSb [42]
10.6
3 × 10−5 V cm2 W−1
1.5 × 108
InAs/GaSb [42]
11
2 × 10−3 A W−1
1 V
1.3 × 108
HgCdTe [42]
10.6
<1 ns
2 × 108
PbSe [63]
4.4
6 × 102 V W−1
<2 μs
3.1 × 109
VOx
(bolometer)
[64]
8–12
9.2 × 103 V W−1
28 μA
1.68 × 108
2D material
Wavelength
(𝛍m)
Rmax (A W−1)
Bias (V)
Gain or
EQE
Rise and
fall times
D* (Jones)
BP [65]
7.7
2.2 × 10−3
1.2
AsP [56]
3.66
1.8 × 10−1
0
6.1%
1.8 × 108
MoS2.15 [66]
7.8
2.2 × 10−2
AsP/MoS2 [56]
2.36
2.2 × 10−1
0
11.36%
9.2 × 109
WSe2/ReS2
[59]
1.77
3
0
600%
5 μs,
5 μs
8.39 × 1010
PtSe2 [49]
10
4.5
0.1
17.5
1.1 ms,
1.2 ms
7 × 108
PdSe2 [67]
1.064
708
1
8.27 × 104%
220 ms
1.31 × 109
PdSe2/MoS2
[57]
4.012
28.83
1
1010
“G” represents graphene. For each material system, we only show the case of the highest R or D achieved to
date.
energy density distribution, as shown in Figure 2.5e. Such light-trapping effect can
facilitate the photoelectric conversion, thereby delivering improved photodetection
capability.
These studies indicate that IR photodetection can be realized by employing 2D
semimetals with narrow bandgaps or constructing type II heterojunctions with
low interlayer exciton energy. The performance can be improved by fabricating
mixed-dimensional heterostructures. As compared in Table 2.1, the D* of 2D
materials-based photodetectors surpasses the traditional counterparts. Further
development would be desired in achieving ultrafast response at little expense
of the responsivity. The advanced IR photodetectors bring new opportunities for
biomedical and thermal imaging (Figure 2.5f,g).

26
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
2.4
Broadband Photodetectors
2D materials show variable bandgaps from 0 (graphene and metallic TMDs) to ≈6 eV
(hBN) [68]. Broadband photodetection can be realized by employing materials that
display strong absorption over a wide spectral range or constructing heterostructures
with interlayer transitions.
BP has a direct bandgap, the value of which is strongly dependent on its layer
number (0.35 eV for the bulk and 2.0 eV for a monolayer) and in-plane strain [69].
Its mobility is as high as 1 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 [70]. The disadvantages of BP mainly
include the weak light absorption relative to traditional optoelectronic materials,
large contact resistance with metals, and poor stability in air. To address these issues,
Huang et al. [71] integrated Si photonics with BP photodetectors (Figure 2.6a,b), and
exploited the optical confinement in the waveguide of Si to enhance the light–matter
interactions (Figure 2.6c). Consequently, an increased responsivity of 23 A W−1 with
a noise-equivalent power of <1 nW Hz−1/2 was attained at 3.68 μm. Wang et al. [72]
encapsulated the BP channel with a passivated layer of Al2O3 to inhibit the degra-
dation, and the photoresponse can be retained for more than six months. Zhong
et al. [75] improved the stability of BP via As doping. They investigated the opto-
electronic properties of the As-doped BP (As0.084P0.916) and showed the photode-
tecting performances of this AsP-based device in the visible–NIR spectrum, with
the highest responsivity of 37 A W−1 at 532 nm. In addition, BP exhibits anisotropic
transport behavior. This leads to different responsivities along zigzag and armchair
directions (Figure 2.6d). The photodetection range can be extended by synthesizing
AsP alloys. The cutoff wavelength is tunable (from 3.8 to 4.6 μm) by adjusting the
As content (from 0% to 91%) [76]. High sensitivities of the AsP photodetectors have
been obtained in the MIR and LWIR regions. The values of D* are on the order of
1010 and 108 Jones, respectively, both higher than those of the commercially avail-
able counterparts [56, 76]. Liu et al. [77] covered the BP with graphene both to
inhibit the degradation of BP and to improve the performance of the photodetec-
tor. The graphene not only serves as a protection layer but also promotes the carrier
transport owing to its high mobility. As a result, the Schottky barrier is reduced
between the BP channel and the metal electrodes, leading to efficient photocurrent
extraction. The graphene/BP heterostructure device presents a long-term photore-
sponse at visible–NIR wavelengths (635–1600 nm), with a high photoresponsivity up
to 3.3 × 103 A W−1 and a large photoconductive gain of 1.13 × 109.
The wide detectable range, however, poses a challenge to realize high wave-
length selectivity. One feasible solution is hybridizing BP with other 2D materials
that possess variable bandgaps. Yan and coworkers [73] fabricated a BP/MoS2
photodiode, where the MoS2 nanosheets act as an electrical contact and the top
dielectric. Excellent wavelength selectivity with the full width at half-maximum
(FWHM) down to 0.42 μm was realized in the range of 2–4 μm by adjusting the
thickness of MoS2 (Figure 2.6e). Xu et al. [78] created a p–n homojunction in a BP
photodetector, where the n-type BP was formed by covering a SixNy film on top
of the p-type BP. The built-in electric field, which is gate-tunable, can facilitate
the separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. This device exhibits

5
3
1
–1
–3
–80
0.1
0.01
1E–3
1E–4
1E–5
1E–6
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Wavelength (μm)
Responsivity (A W–1)
Normalized photoresponse
Armchair/zigzag
Wavelength (μm)
X-Position (μm)
Height (nm)
1
2
84.1 nm
36.7 nm
12.3 nm
0
30
60
90
1000
0.42 μm
1
0
2
4
6
100
10
1
3.0
3.5
Armchair
Zigzag
4.0
1E–7
–60
0
5
10
–40
–20
0
20
X (μm)
x–y scan
Object
Image
Laser light
Black phosphorus
detector
Ey
Z (μm)
40
60
80
–5
(a)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.6
Ultrathin BP-based photodetectors. (a) Schematic of the Si waveguide-integrated device. (b) Zoomed-in view of (a) and side view of the
(c) light distribution in this system. (d) Dependences of the responsivity on the direction and wavelength. (e) Spectral features of BP/MoS2 diodes with
different MoS2 thicknesses. Inset: 3D structure of the device (upper) and atomic force microscopy height proﬁles of the MoS2 layers (lower). (f) Simpliﬁed
setup for imaging. Scale bar: 4 μm. Source: (a–c) Reproduced with permission [71]. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with
permission [72]. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission [73]. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.
(f) Reproduced with permission [74]. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.

28
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
higher performance compared to the pristine BP counterpart. Moreover, it shows
dual-band photoresponse in both visible and IR regimes, providing access to
high-resolution multispectral imaging (Figure 2.6f).
In terms of TMCs, broadband photodetection can be realized by layer number
control, doping, and creation of van der Waals heterostructures. The bandgap of
PdSe2 is thickness-dependent and can be widened from 0 (bulk) to 1.3 eV (mono-
layer). Based on this exceptional characteristic, Liang et al. [67] demonstrated the
ultrabroadband photoresponse of PdSe2 across the visible–MIR spectrum. The
highest responsivity of ≈700 A W−1 is obtained at the wavelength of 1064 nm.
This superior performance is ascribed to the photogating effect, which causes
trapping of the photogenerated electrons or holes into the localized states and
therefore a prolonged recombination lifetime of the other type of photocarriers.
In particular, the unique pentagonal structure of 2D PdSe2 crystal endows it
with anisotropy. As a result, the photoresponse of the device is highly sensitive
to the polarization angle. Molecular doping can modify the structure, electronic
and optical properties, as well as stability of diverse materials. This controllable
method has been used to optimize the photodetection capabilities of 2D TMCs.
Kang et al. showed performance improvements of MoS2 and WSe2 photodetectors
via n- and p-doping with aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) and octadecyl-
trichlorosilane (OTS) molecules, respectively. For the APTES-doped MoS2, a
larger population of negative trions are formed owing to the increased electron
density. This restricts the production of neutral excitons that dominate radiative
recombination. In contrast, the radiative recombination in WSe2 mainly originates
from negatively charged trions, the formation of which is suppressed due to the
OTS-induced p-type doping. Quenched photoluminescence intensities confirm
that the carrier recombination probabilities are decreased in both cases, leading
to enhanced generation of photocurrents. As another example, the function-
alization with didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) can effectively
dope InSe and then heal the Se vacancies (Figure 2.7a), leading to an ultrahigh
photoresponsivity up to 106 A W−1 [79]. The defects at the InSe–SiO2 interface may
limit the electron transport by introducing localized states and participate in the
Coulomb scattering. Such effects can be attenuated using a trap-free polymer as
the gate dielectric, such as divinyltetramethyl disiloxanebis(benzocyclobutene)
(BCB), thereby increasing the mobility and channel conductance (Figure 2.7b,c).
As a result, the responsivity is 3–4 orders of magnitude higher than the InSe
supported by SiO2 (Figure 2.7d) [79]. Following this, a BP–InSe p–n junction was
constructed to achieve faster response. While the InSe is n-doped by DDAB, the
transport region for holes is protected by an insulating hBN film. The built-in
electric field promotes the separation of photocarriers, giving rise to ≈5- and
10-fold decreases in the rise and fall times, respectively, at a small power den-
sity of 5 μW cm−2 (Figure 2.7e). To further extend the detection range, Ahmad
et al. [80] fabricated a type-II InSe/PdSe2 stack with strong interlayer transition.
According to the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the bandgap
of the heterojunction is as narrow as 0.85 eV, which allows NIR excitation up
to 1650 nm (Figure 2.7f). Alongside these studies, investigations have been

BCB dielectric  
DDAB
InSe
InSe on SiO2
InSe on BCB
InSe/DDAB on BCB
300
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
103
104
400
500
Wavelength (nm)
Responsivity (A W–1)
Responsivity (A W–1)
600
0
20
0
100
600
×200
800
InSe/PdSe2
Pin = 3 mW cm–2
Vds = 1 V
PdSe2
InSe
1000
1200
1400
Wavelength (nm)
1600
1800
200
300
0.0
5
30
60
100
300
hBN/InSe/BP
hBN/DDAB-InSe/BP
600
1480
4120
0.4
0.8
Time (s)
Id (nA)
1.2
1.6
40
60
80
h-BN
BP (bottom)
InSe (top)
100
Major charge carrier
Charge trap
Trapped charge carrier
SiO2
InSe
SiO2
BCB
100 nm BCB
270 nm SiO2
Si
Si
Si
Br
O
Ids
Vds
Vg
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.7
2D InSe-based broadband photodetectors. (a) Schematic illustration of the device along with the structures of a DDAB molecule and BCB
polymer. (b, c) Schematic illustrations showing the carrier transport of InSe in contact with trap-containing SiO2 (b) and trap-free BCB (c). (d) Spectral
responses of InSe on SiO2, InSe on BCB, and DDAB-functionalized InSe on BCB. (e) Time-resolved photoresponse at increasing power densities
(5–4120 μW cm−2) of hBN/InSe/BP and hBN/DDAB-InSe/BP heterostructures. Inset: optical microscopic image of InSe/BP partially covered by hBN.
(f) Photoresponsivities of InSe/PdSe2, InSe, and PdSe2. Source: (a–e) [79]/Reproduced with permission from John Wiley & Sons. (f) Reproduced with
permission [80]. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH.

30
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
conducted on diverse 2D materials and 2D/2D heterostructures for broadband
photodetection. Those exhibiting superior responsivities are summarized in
Table 2.2.
Broadband photodetection has also been achieved in mixed-dimensional struc-
tures. Based on the high carrier mobility and transparency of graphene, it can be
employed in photodetectors via integration with other semiconductors. Previous
studies have demonstrated the broad spectral response of 2D/3D hybrid photode-
tectors based on graphene/Si. For photodiodes, the electron–hole pairs are mainly
generated in Si, while graphene functions as light-transmitting Schottky electrodes
that extract the carriers. Nevertheless, the photoresponsivity is usually poor due to
the absence of gain. For photogating devices, the photoexcited electrons or holes
are transferred to graphene, while the oppositely charged carriers are trapped in the
localized states. These lead to a large responsivity accompanied by a high dark cur-
rent and a low response speed. To improve the overall performance, Guo et al. [107]
optimized the structure of graphene/Si photodetector. As illustrated in Figure 2.8a,
the integration of a wide Si ridge allows space between the signal and the ground
electrodes, thus increasing the light absorption in the graphene layer. Figure 2.8b
manifests the strongly localized and enhanced electric field near the metal strip.
Moreover, the plasmonic waveguide in this hybrid device leads to an extended detec-
tion wavelength beyond 1.55 μm. The photocurrent derives from the photothermo-
electric effect at 0 V, yet bolometric and photoconductive effects are dominant when
a bias voltage is applied (Figure 2.8c).
The narrow light-sensitive spectral region of 2D TMDs restricts their applications
in broadband photodetectors. For these materials, a broad range of detection can
be achieved by integrating them with 3D semiconductors, forming 2D/3D p–n
junctions. Wu et al. [108] demonstrated the utilization of WS2/Si for a broadband
self-driven photodetector (Figure 2.8d). The specific type II band structure dictates
the interlayer optical excitation (Figure 2.8e), enabling the WS2/Si device to show
photodetection from deep UV (200 nm) up to mid-IR (3043 nm) (Figure 2.8f). The
response speed increases with the light frequency. The rise and fall times are only
3.8 and 11 μs at 30 kHz, shorter than those of most 2D materials-based broadband
photodetectors. In addition, the anisotropic absorption of the WS2 film leads to high
polarization sensitivity (Figure 2.8g). Yao et al. [110] proposed a heterojunction of
SnS/Si, and demonstrated its broadband photoresponse (370–1064 nm, i.e. UV to
NIR) with high responsivity (273 A W−1), large EQE (4.2 × 104%), and outstanding
D* (7 × 1013 Jones). The excellent performance can be a result of the synergistic
effects in the SnS ultrathin films due to their blended configuration, involving the
efficient carrier separation across the dangling-bond-free interfaces of the lateral
nanosheets, the fast carrier transport through the vertical components, and the
carrier multiplication (i.e. multiple electron–hole pairs are generated with a single
photon) induced by collision ionization.
Ultrathin TMCs can also function as an interfacial layer to improve the
performances of graphene/Si-based photodetectors. He et al. [111] achieved a
high responsivity of 8.96 × 104 A W−1 by intercalating a WS2 film between Si
and graphene. Since the WS2 can provide additional trap states for holes, the

2.4 Broadband Photodetectors
31
Table 2.2
Key ﬁgures of merit for advanced broadband photodetectors based on 2D
materials and 2D/2D heterostructures.
Traditional
material
Wavelength
(nm)
Rmax
Bias
(V)
Gain or
EQE
Rise and
fall times
D* (Jones)
Sia
350–1100
(970 nm)
0.725
5
65 ns,
65 ns
(632 nm)
Gea
800–1800
0.88
3
600 ns,
600 ns
InAs [81]
300–1100
4.4 × 103 A W−1
15
1.0 × 106%
2.6 × 1011
InSb [3] (77 K)
600–8000
1.0 × 103 V W−1
−1.5
40%
2.8 × 1010
InGaAsb [82]
400–1700
6.5 × 103 A W−1
0.5
5 × 105%
70 ms,
280 ms
1012
HgCdTe
[83, 84]
(200–212 K)
600–5000
8 A W−1
−0.1
1.8 ns
3 × 1010
2D
material
Wavelength
(nm)
Rmax (A W−1)
Bias
(V)
Gain or
EQE
Rise and
fall times
D* (Jones)
BP [45]
400–900
7 × 106 (20 K)
−1
AsP [75]
450–2200
37
1
0.37 s,
0.40 s
1.24 × 109
MoS2
(n-doped) [85]
520–850
5.75 × 103
5
WSe2
(CVD-grown)
[25]
500–900
1.8 × 105
2
3.5 × 105
<23 ms
1 × 1014
PdSe2 [67]
532–4050
708
1
8.27 × 104%
220 ms
1.31 × 109
GaSe [86]
400–800
5 × 103
8
0.27 ms,
0.55 ms
InSe (n-doped,
on BCB
dielectric) [79]
300–690
106
1
5.7 × 108%
4.9 ms,
28.6 ms
1013
In2Se3 [37]
405–940
9.8 × 104
0.05
9 s
3.3 × 1013
hBN/InSe
(n-doped)/BP
(on BCB
dielectric) [79]
300–690
103
1
3.4 × 105%
0.96 ms,
2.97 ms
1011
Fluorine-G/G
[87]
255–4290
6.2 × 103
1
2 × 105
80 ms,
200 ms
5 × 1010
Fluorine-G/
MoS2 [88]
350–850
8 × 103
0.3
1.35 s,
1.41 s
1013
BP/G [77]
635–1600
3.3 × 103
1
1.13 × 109
3 ms
BP/MoS2 [89]
532–1550
24
3
1.2 × 103%
G/MoS2 [53]
400–1120
3 × 104
5
5.8 × 104
17 ns,
1.1 μs
(Continued)

32
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Table 2.2
(Continued)
2D
material
Wavelength
(nm)
Rmax (A W−1)
Bias
(V)
Gain or
EQE
Rise and
fall times
D* (Jones)
G/MoSe2 [90]
550–950
1.3 × 104
1
G/MoTe2 [91]
532–1064
970.82
1
4.69 × 108
78 ms,
375 ms
1.55 × 1011
MoS2/MoTe2
[92]
550–1550
0.046
0
60 μs,
25 μs
1.06 × 108
MoS2/ReS2
[93]
400–1100
42.61
1
6.6 × 103%
20 ms,
19 ms
2.81 × 1013
ReS2/ReSe2
[94]
405–1310
6.78 × 106
−5
0.28 s,
1.14 s
MoS2/G/WSe2
[95]
400–2400
104
1
53.6 μs,
30.3 μs
1015
G/SnS2 [96]
365–2240
7.76 × 103
2
6 s
8.9 × 1013
WSe2/SnS2 [97]
400–900
244
−1
13 ms,
24 ms
WSe2/SnSe2
[98]
532–1550
588
−3
1367%
16 ms,
45 ms
4.4 × 1010
G/Bi2Te3 [99]
400–1550
35
1
83
8.7 ms,
14.8 ms
G/MoS2/WS2
[100]
400–2000
6.64 × 107
−3
2.06 × 108
21.86 ms,
7.01 ms
G/hBN/MoS2
[101]
400–886
180
3
1.67 × 103
0.23 s,
0.25 s
2.6 × 1013
G/MoS2/G
[102]
405–2000
414
−1
9.67 × 104%
692.5 ms
3.2 × 1010
G/WS2/GaSe/G
[103]
270–740
149
2
37 μs,
43 μs
4.3 × 1012
G/InSe/GaSe/
G [104]
270–920
350
2
BP/PdSe2 [105]
532–1310
9.6 × 105
−4
9.4 × 106
6 s, 20 s
5.8 × 1013
InSe/PdSe2
[80]
532–1650
270
1
6.4 × 104%
53 ms,
72 ms
4.6 × 1010
hBN/MoTe2/G/
SnS2/hBN
[106]
405–1550
105
1
106%
17.6 ms,
72.3 ms
1013
Traditional material-based broadband photodetectors are shown as benchmarks. For each material system,
we only show the case of the highest responsivity achieved to date. These photodetectors work at room
temperature, unless indicated otherwise.
a)
https://www.thorlabs.com/.
b)
https://www.sensorsinc.com/.

250
V m–1
107
106
105
y
x
200
150
100
200
400
600
800
1000
0
20
40
60
80
100
980 nm
120
5
10
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
15
20
25
1200
Wavelength (nm)
Mask
Chopper
Photodetector
Pulsed laser
270
300
330
30
60
90
120
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
150
180
210
240
0
Oscilloscope
Computer
Normalized photocurrent
Laser
X–Y scan
Lock-in amplifier
Number of pixel
Number of pixel
Responsivity (mA w–1)
Absorption (a.u.)
1400
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Responsivity
Absorption
50
0
EF
Evac
EC
EV
Si
WS2
1.4 eV
1.1 eV hv
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.8
(a–c) Graphene/Si photodetector. (a) Schematic illustration of the hybrid device. (b) Side and top views of the electric-ﬁeld distribution. (c)
Photocurrent map as a function of the gate voltage (V G) and the bias voltage (V b). PTE, photothermoelectric; PC, photoconductive; BOL, bolometric. (d–g)
WS2/Si photodetector. (d) Schematic illustration with a pulsed laser. (e) Energy band diagram of the heterojunction upon light excitation. (f) Wavelength
dependences of the responsivity and absorption. (g) Normalized photocurrent versus the polarization angle. (h, i) PdSe2/Si photodetector. (h) Schematic of
the setup for imaging and the (i) result under NIR illumination. Source: (a–c) [107]/Springer Nature/Licensed under CC BY 4.0. (d–g) Reproduced with
permission [108]. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h, i) Reproduced with permission [109]. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.

34
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
responsivity and D* first increase with the thickness of WS2, while decreasing at
large thicknesses because of the much lower light transmittance. The rise and fall
times monotonically increase with the WS2 thickness, which is attributed to the
longer electron transport paths and the slower recombination of photogenerated
carriers. This graphene/WS2/Si device exhibits broad spectral photoresponse in
the range of 400–1100 nm. Lu et al. [112] coupled graphene with 2D In2S3 and
constructed a double heterojunction of In2S3/graphene/Si. The In2S3 serves to
enhance the light absorption of graphene/Si, reduces the dark current, facilitates
the separation of photoexcited carriers, and delivers a photoconductive gain. Based
on combined photogating and photovoltaic effects, In2S3/graphene/Si photodetec-
tor exhibits both ultrahigh photoresponsivity (4.53 × 104 A W−1) and fast response
speed (rise and fall times: ≈33 and 40 μs, respectively). The photogain exceeds
1.4 × 105, which is 1 order of magnitude larger than that of the graphene/Si device.
In particular, semimetallic 2D TMDs may exhibit distinct photodetection behavior
due to their ultranarrow bandgaps. Zeng et al. [113] synthesized wafer-scale PtTe2
nanosheets via epitaxial growth on Si. This was achieved by tellurization of a Pt
thin film that had been predeposited onto the substrate. The single-crystalline PtTe2
domains with a preferential orientation along the [001] zone axis show reduced
interfacial defects and efficient out-of-plane carrier transportation. Transparent
bilayer graphene was used as the top electrode to enhance the carrier collection,
and In/Ga alloy was employed as an ohmic contact to the Si substrate. 2D PtTe2
possesses a highly tilted Dirac cone. This unique band characteristic is favorable
for the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and can suppress their
recombination. These render the PtTe2/Si Schottky heterojunction capable of
ultrabroadband photodetection from UV to MIR regions. At wavelengths in the
range of 200–1100 nm (UV–visible–NIR), the incident light is absorbed in both the
PtTe2 layer and the Si substrate, after which the photoexcited carriers are separated,
driven by the in-built potential. The electrons drift from PtTe2 to Si, whereas the
holes drift in the opposite direction and are collected by the graphene electrode,
forming a photocurrent. At wavelengths beyond 1100 nm, Si is not able to absorb
the light due to its limited bandgap, and the photoresponse solely originates from
the PtTe2. Benefiting from the ultrathin depletion layer at PtTe2–Si heterointerface,
the electrons in PtTe2 can tunnel directly to the conduction band of Si, giving
pronounced photocurrent in a wide spectral range up to 10.6 μm.
Apart from Si, Ga-based semiconductors can also couple with 2D TMDs as a
3D support to extend their detection spectra. Jain et al. [114] reported the broad-
band photoresponse of 2D MoS2/3D GaN. Such a van der Waals heterostructure
presents complementary light absorption profiles for MoS2 (visible) and GaN (UV).
Moreover, the type II band alignment enables photodetection in the NIR regime
via the generation of interlayer excitons. High responsivities were obtained across
the UV–visible–NIR region. Geum et al. [115] showed the fast responses and good
detectivities of MoS2/In0.53Ga0.47As photodetectors at wavelengths ranging from
400 (visible) to 1550 (NIR) nm. They also demonstrated the imaging capability of
the device array with a scanning laser, suggesting that the MoS2/In0.53Ga0.47As
heterostructure can be used as a broadband imager in focal plane apparatus.

2.4 Broadband Photodetectors
35
Pristine 2D perovskites usually display superior photoelectric properties within
the visible spectrum. Their detection wavelength can be extended through com-
positional variation or chemical doping. The optical bandgap of (CH3NH3)0.5
(NH2CHNH2)0.5Pb1−xSnxI3 is narrowed from 1.55 to 1.17 eV as the Sn content
increases from 0 to x = 0.5 [116], rendering it capable of NIR photodetection [117].
Such bandgap narrowing and visible-to-NIR detection range extension was also
been realized for (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 via incorporation of Sn ions, whereby
the photocurrent is derived from the dissociation of excitons in the self-trapped
states that are introduced by the Sn dopants [118]. However, these photodetectors
that consist only of 2D perovskite(s) exhibit low responsivities in the IR regime,
inspiring the fabrication of hybrid photodetectors.
The broadband photoresponse of 2D materials-based devices can also be improved
by incorporating 1D nanostructures. Graphene exhibits ultrafast dynamics in pho-
todetecting processes due to the short carrier lifetime, high intrinsic carrier mobility,
and Auger-induced charge multiplication effects. However, its single-atom thickness
limits the absorption of photons. Single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are effec-
tive light absorbers, while SWCNTs-based devices show either poor photoresponsiv-
ity or slow response. Given their complementary properties and photoresponses in
a wide spectral range, Liu et al. [119] hybridized graphene with SWCNTs to achieve
high-performance broadband photodetection. The large inbuilt potential, along with
the efficient charge transfer at the graphene/SWCNT junction, enables fast sepa-
ration of the electron–hole pairs and suppresses the recombination of dissociated
carriers. As a result, the hybrid photodetector exhibits a large photogain of ≈105
along with a fast response time of ≈100 μs across visible to NIR region. Wu et al.
[109] fabricated a 2D/1D heterostructure constituting PdSe2 nanosheets and verti-
cally aligned Si nanowires. The PdSe2/Si device exhibits outstanding photovoltaic
behavior with a large D* (3.19 × 1014 Jones) and a wide detection wavelength range
(0.2–4.6 μm), ascribed to the broadband light absorption of PdSe2 and the strong
light confinement induced by Si nanowire arrays. In addition, the device shows high
polarization sensitivity owing to the unique asymmetric crystal structure of PdSe2.
The fast response speed allows monitoring of nanosecond pulsed signals. Moreover,
this device can be utilized for high-resolution IR imaging (Figure 2.8h,i). The con-
trast ratios are over 103 for 980 nm (NIR) and over 102 for 4.6 μm (MIR). Apart from
such metal dichalcogenides, elemental Te is a new member of layered materials
and also an intrinsic p-type semiconductor with a tunable bandgap (0.35–1.2 eV).
It shows high mobility, strong light absorption, and good stability in air. The pho-
toresponse of Te can be enhanced by forming a p–n or Schottky junction. Yao et al.
[120] integrated 2D Te flakes with 1D CdS nanobelts and utilized the heterostructure
for a self-powered photodiode. The response spectrum ranges from 520 (visible) to
980 (NIR) nm. The recombination of carriers is suppressed due to the type II band
alignment, giving a high photo-to-dark current ratio of 9.2 × 103.
Enhanced charge transport has also been realized at 2D/0D junctions. Selamneni
et al. [121] constructed a 2D/0D homojunction consisting of MoS2 ultrathin flakes
and MoS2 quantum dots. Localization of the electric field was also observed in
this hybrid structure due to the misaligned Fermi levels of 2D MoS2 and 0D MoS2

36
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
at their unipolar interface. The coupling with 0D Pb-based chalcogenides (e.g.
PbS, Pb1−xSnxSe, and Pb1−xSnxTe) can enable various 2D materials to show broad-
band photodetection capabilities. Kufer et al. [122] presented a 2D MoS2/0D PbS
phototransistor. The light absorption is strong throughout the visible–NIR region,
with the peak value tailorable by controlling the size of the colloidal PbS quantum
dots. In addition, due to the efficient carrier separation at the p–n (PbS–MoS2)
interface and fast carrier transport through the MoS2 channel, the device exhibits
a high photoresponsivity of 106 A W−1 along with backgate-dependent detectivity.
Luo et al. [123] demonstrated a 2D Bi2O2Se photodetector sensitized with 0D
PbSe quantum dots. Type II band alignment was formed at the Bi2O2Se–PbSe
interface. The incorporation of PbSe quantum dots into Bi2O2Se nanosheets extends
the detection spectrum from 660 nm (visible) to >2 μm (NIR). In spite of this,
Bi2O2Se photodetectors usually exhibit slow response time (≈4 ms) as a result of
the bolometric effects. Hossain et al. [124] resolved these issues by combining 2D
nonlayered Bi2O2Se nanosheets with 0D CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. This device shows a
comparable responsivity (≈103 A W−1) but much shorter rise/fall times (≈12/24 μs)
in the visible–NIR range. The excellent performance is attributed to the strong and
broadband absorption of CsPbBr3, along with the high carrier mobility of Bi2O2Se.
Experimental and theoretical investigations verified the efficient charge transport
across the type I heterojunction. This work implies the potential of 0D halide
perovskites as a light-harvesting component in hybrid photodetectors to achieve
high responsivity.
2.5
Plasmon-Enhanced Photodetectors
2D materials are promising candidates for next-generation ultrathin photodetectors
in different spectral regions. However, being atomically thin results in much
shorter light–matter interaction length in 2D materials than that in bulk materials,
which hinders their optoelectronic performance. To improve the light–matter
interactions, plasmonic nanostructures which support surface plasmon resonance
have been introduced into 2D material photodetectors [125–127]. Over the past
10 years, significant developments, including device performance and physical
mechanisms in plasmon-enhanced photodetectors, have been achieved. In this
section, we present basic concepts in plasmonic nanostructures, an introduction of
light–matter interaction between plasmonic nanostructures and 2D materials, and
a discussion of current advances in plasmon-enhanced photodetectors.
Plasmonic nanostructures (e.g. metal nanospheres, nanorods, nanocubes, arrays
of nanopatterns, slits, and gratings) have attracted considerable attention because
of the significantly boosted light–matter interaction by a localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) effect in optoelectronic devices. The principle of LSPR can be
understood in a simple model of a harmonic oscillator. As shown in Figure 2.9a,
an oscillating optical electric field illuminating the metal nanostructures acts as an
applied force and drives the electrons of the metal to move along the direction of
the electric field [128]. The delocalized electron cloud and the positive nuclei of the

2.5 Plasmon-Enhanced Photodetectors
37
Wavelength (nm)
Scattering (a.u.)
400
0
0.4
0.8
2.5
1.5
0.5
1.2
500
100 nm
Metal sphere
Electric field
Electron cloud
600
700
800
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.9
(a) Schematic of localized surface plasmons in metal spheres.
(b) Logarithmic-scale electric-ﬁeld intensity enhancement contours of differently shaped Au
nanocrystals. The nanocrystals have different shapes but the same volume. The nanoplate
(left) in an equilateral triangle has an edge length of 87 nm and a thickness of 10 nm. The
length and diameter of the nanorod (middle) are 102 and 30 nm, respectively. The
nanosphere (right) has a diameter of 50 nm. (c) Scanning electron micrographs of individual
Ag nanobars with different aspect ratios and their corresponding dark-ﬁeld scattering
spectra. Source: (a) Reproduced with permission [128]. Copyright 2007, Annual Reviews.
(b) Reproduced with permission [129]. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Wiley,
Benjamin J. et al. 2007/with permission of American Chemical Society.
metal have strong Coulombic attraction, which acts as a restoring force. When the
oscillating electric field becomes in phase with the Coulombic attraction at a cer-
tain frequency, the incident light is largely absorbed by the metal, and a very strong
electric field is concentrated at the edges or gaps of the metal nanostructure [131].
The resonant properties such as field distribution and resonant wavelength of the
LSPR effect can be efficiently modified by changing material composition, shape,
size, and spacing of the metal nanostructures. Typically, noble metals such as Au, Ag,
and Al with high free electron concentration (>1021 cm−3) are used for fabricating
plasmonic nanostructures in the visible and NIR spectral range [132]. Au nanos-
tructures with different shapes show different extent of increase in field intensity
(Figure 2.9b) [129]. Compared to Au nanospheres, nanoprisms, and nanorods show
stronger field enhancements, especially around the tip regions. The maximum field
enhancement for plasmonic metal nanostructures reported from theoretical calcu-
lations ranges from c. 50 to c. 10 000. The resonant wavelength is also affected by the
geometry of the metal nanostructures, which can be calculated by Mie theory ana-
lytically solving Maxwell’s equations or simulated by finite-difference time-domain
(FDTD) and COMSOL software. It can also be experimentally characterized by mea-
suring the absorption, scattering, or reflectance spectra. As shown in the scatter-
ing spectra of Ag nanobars with different aspect ratios (Figure 2.9c), there are two
resonance peaks, with one transverse plasmon resonance peak in the blue region
at ≈460 nm and one longitudinal plasmon resonance peak in the visible or NIR
region [130]. Both resonance peaks undergo a red shift as the size of Ag nanobars
increases, indicating that the resonant response can be easily tuned by geometrical
tailoring.

38
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
2D materials
+
Plasmonic nanostructures
Enhanced light-matter interaction
Light absorption
Photodetectors
Enhanced light scattering
Strengthened near-field intensity
Plasmonic hot electron doping
Strong coupling
...
Enhanced responsibility
Spectral selectivity
Broadband detection
Fast response
...
Figure 2.10
A list of the
mechanisms that contribute to
the enhanced light absorption
in the hybrid system of
plasmonic nanostructures and
2D materials and the enhanced
parameters of photodetectors.
Plasmonic nanostructures can significantly enhance the light–matter interaction
of nearby materials that have matched absorption window with plasmon resonance.
2D materials are a promising candidate to make full use of this plasmonic effect, as
their thin structure enables them to efficiently utilize the highly localized electro-
magnetic field, which exponentially decays along the perpendicular direction with a
decay length on the order of 10 nm [133]. The interplay of plasmonic nanostructures
and 2D materials has been extensively reported in plasmon-enhanced light absorp-
tion and photodetectors. Figure 2.10 summarizes the mechanisms that contribute to
the enhanced light absorption in the hybrid system and the enhanced parameters of
photodetectors based on them. The enhanced light–matter interaction in the hybrid
structure features in enhanced light absorption, owing to the enhanced light scat-
tering, strengthened near-field intensity, plasmonic hot electron doping, and strong
coupling. These effects will bring in enhanced photoresponsivity, spectral selectivity,
broadband detection, and fast response in photodetectors.
With advances in preparation techniques for plasmonic nanostructures by chem-
ical methods, electron beam lithography, and focused ion beam, various plasmonic
nanostructures have been used to improve the photodetection performance of 2D
materials. The following paragraphs will discuss the mechanism and performance
of plasmon-enhanced photodetectors based on graphene, transition-metal dichalco-
genides, InSe, and so on. The hybrid system of surface plasmon and 2D materials
was first reported in graphene. Graphene has intrinsically weak light absorption
(≈2.3% for pristine graphene). Its short photocarrier lifetime leads to poor photore-
sponsivity (5 × 10−4 A W−1) and internal quantum efficiency (6–16%) [131]. An effi-
cient method to enhance light absorption is to utilize the near-field enhancement
from the excitation of the plasmonic effect induced by the metal nanostructures.
By placing the plasmonic nanostructures close to the graphene, the photoresponse
of graphene-based photodetectors can be efficiently improved. Figure 2.11a shows
the schematic illustration of the process to couple Au nanoparticles with graphene
devices [125]. After the Au nanoparticles are introduced, the photocurrent exhibits

2.5 Plasmon-Enhanced Photodetectors
39
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.11
(a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes to integrate plasmonic
nanoparticles with graphene. Gold nanoparticles are obtained by thermally annealing
4 nm-thick gold ﬁlm on the SiO2 substrate. PMMA is spin coated on the substrate, followed
by a lifting-off process using buffered oxide etching to obtain free-standing PMMA/Au-
nanoparticle thin ﬁlm. PMMA/Au-nanoparticle thin ﬁlm is ﬁshed by premade back-gate CVD
graphene transistors. PMMA is dissolved away to leave gold nanoparticles on the surface of
the graphene devices. Gray, blue, yellow, and white represent silicon, silicon dioxide, gold
nanoparticles, and gold electrode, respectively. (b) Photocurrent generated as a function of
laser power. The red and black lines indicate the responses of a typical device with and
without Au nanoparticles, respectively. (c) Photocurrent enhancement as a function of laser
wavelength. The black squares represent the experimental data points, and the solid line is
the guide to the eye. Source: Reproduced with permission [125]. Copyright 2011, Nature
Publishing Group.
a 15-fold enhancement compared to the pristine graphene photodetectors at laser
power of 10 μW (Figure 2.11b). The increase in the photocurrent is attributed to
plasmon-enhanced carrier excitation of graphene electrons. The spectral-dependent
photocurrent enhancement shows an obvious peak around 530 nm, which is close
to the extinction peak of graphene–nanoparticle conjugate and strongly suggests
that the enhancement is indeed originating from the plasmon resonance-enhanced
absorption in graphene devices (Figure 2.11c).
In addition to the localized surface plasmon-enhanced photodetectors of graphene
in visible light range, other types of plasmon-enhanced graphene photodetectors

40
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
have been reported. One is utilizing the propagating surface plasmon. Ferrari and
coworkers coupled graphene with a plasmonic grating and exploited the resulting
surface plasmon polaritons to deliver the collected photons to the junction region
of a metal–graphene–metal photodetector [134]. This gives a 400% enhancement
of responsivity and a 1000% increase in photoactive length, combined with tunable
spectral selectivity. The interference between surface plasmon polaritons and the
incident wave introduces new functionalities, such as light flux attraction or repul-
sion from the contact edges, enabling the tailored design of the photodetector’s spec-
tral response. The other is using the intrinsic plasmon resonance of graphene itself.
Graphene’s interband absorption is a frequency-independent constant 𝜋𝛼≈2.3% in
the visible and MIR ranges, where 𝛼is the fine structure constant [135]. Cai et al.
[136] showed a room-temperature THz detector based on large-area arrays of epi-
taxial graphene microribbons contacted by metal electrodes, whose responsivity is
significantly improved by the plasmon-enhanced absorption via graphene microrib-
bons. In recent years, a Ge nanodot array was also reported to be integrated with
graphene to construct a plasmon-enhanced photodetector [137]. Owing to the LSPR,
light scattered by an individual Ge nanodot is collected by the adjacent nanodots to
increase the photocurrent of the graphene photodetector and shorten the response
time (18.7 μs).
Transition-metal dichalcogenides such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 have
enhanced light absorption in the visible light range as compared with graphene, due
to the opening of electronic band gap. Their absorption in light and performance in
photodetectors are further improved by incorporating plasmonic nanostructures.
Miao et al. [138] demonstrated a large enhancement of photocurrent response
obtained by coupling few-layer MoS2 with Au plasmonic nanostructure arrays
(Figure 2.12a). At the plasmon resonance wavelength (620 nm) of the Ag arrays, a
sevenfold enhancement in the photoresponsivity is observed (Figure 2.12b,c). Lan
et al. [139] reported gate-tunable plasmonic photodetectors that consist of mono-
layer MoS2 photodetectors with Ag nanoarrays (Figure 2.12d–f). The plasmonic
photodetector has an ultrahigh photoresponsivity of 2.7 × 104 A W−1, achieving a
sevenfold enhancement in the photocurrent compared to pristine photodetector.
This predominately benefits from the combination of the enhancement of the
photon absorption rate via the strongly localized electromagnetic field, and the
gate-tunable plasmon-induced photocarrier-generation rate in the monolayer MoS2.
Plasmonic nanostructures are also useful in expanding the response wavelength
range of photodetectors. For instance, WS2 and MoS2 individually have no response
to IR light. Wang et al. [55] reported that heterostructures formed by these two
materials can detect longer wavelengths compared to individual components due to
the interlayer coupling, but this IR detection ability is limited (Figure 2.12g,h). The
heterostructures with Au nanoparticles can enhance the IR detection at 1030 nm
by ≈25-fold due to the plasmon resonance (Figure 2.12i).
As the rising star of 2D III–VI compounds semiconductor, InSe attracts a lot of
attention due to its smaller electron effective mass (m* = 0.143m0) compared with
MoS2 (m* = 0.45m0), and high mobility over 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature
[140]. One challenge for InSe photodetectors is to increase their quantum efficiency

Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Reflection
Responsivity (A W–1)
Responsivity (a.u.)
Absorption (a.u.)
Reflection
Wavelength (nm)
Intensity (a.u.)
Iphoto (nA)
400
450
540
Original
Au nanoarray
630
720
0.0
0.5
Light
V
S
G
D
SiO2
Si
0.0
400
400
500
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
700
650 nm
200 nm
Au NPs pattern
P 100 nm
D 80 nm
H 22 nm
900
1100
600
800
1000
500
600
700
800
400
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Plasmonic photoFET
1L-MoS2 photoFET
∼ 7.2
10 000
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
500
VG = 70 V
600
B
A
700
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AgND arrays on SiO2/Si
SiO2/Si
AgND arrays
1.0
150
300
450
1.0
600
MoS2
WS2
SiO2/Si
Au nanoarray
800
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 2.12
(a) Schematic of few-layer plasmon-enhanced MoS2 phototransistors. (b) Plasmonic resonance absorption of periodic Au nanoarrays on
few-layer MoS2. (c) Photocurrent of MoS2 phototransistors with and without Au nanoarrays as a function of illumination wavelength. (d) Schematic of
monolayer MoS2 plasmonic photodetector that consists of a monolayer MoS2 and square arrays of Ag nanodisks. (e) Reﬂection spectra of the designed 2D
plasmonic crystals on a SiO2/Si substrate (blue line) and the SiO2/Si substrate (black dashed line). (f) Photoresponsivity of the plasmonic photodetector
and pristine photodetector as a function of illumination wavelength. (g) Schematic of photodetector fabricated on heterostructures of WS2 and MoS2.
(h) Wavelength response curve of photodetector in visible and infrared range. (i) Absorption spectrum of Au nanoparticles pattern, inset is the scanning
electron microscopy image of Au nanoparticles. Source: (a–c) Reproduced with permission [138]. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d–f) Reproduced
with permission [139]. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (g–i) Reproduced with permission [55], © 2018, John Wiley & Sons.

42
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
and generate as many photocarriers as possible. Halas et al. realized an avalanche
effect in an InSe photodetector by exploiting the large Schottky barrier formed
between InSe and Al electrodes, and they used Al disk nanoantennas to enhance
the light absorption of the device (Figure 2.13a) [38]. The scattering peak of
Al nanodisks overlaps with the peak of the photoresponse spectrum of layered
InSe (≈510 nm), so the photoresponse in this wavelength region is enhanced
(Figure 2.13b,c). With 543 nm incident laser light, the quantum efficiency is
increased from 108% (without Al disks) to 866% (with Al disks). This is attributed to
the local electromagnetic field enhancement that contributes to carrier generation
in the InSe, and hot electrons generated by the decay of the surface plasmons of
the Al nanodisks provide additional photogenerated carriers. Another challenge
for InSe photodetectors is that most of the devices can only operate with a high
responsivity in the short wavelength region, limiting their ability of photodetection
in visible or NIR region. Dai et al. [141] reported visible to NIR photodetection in an
InSe photodetector using Au plasmonic nanoparticles (Figure 2.13d). This intrigu-
ing phenomenon is attributed to the wavelength-selective enhancement of pristine
responsivities by hybridized quadrupole plasmons resonance of Au nanoparticles.
In addition, the response time can be decreased by depositing Au nanoparticles
on the surface of InSe nanosheets (Figure 2.13e). This may arise from the effective
surface plasmon–exciton coupling process. The maximum enhancement ratio in
responsivity reaches up to ≈1200% at a wavelength of 685 nm (Figure 2.13f).
In the plasmon-enhanced photodetectors discussed above, the plasmonic nanos-
tructure and 2D materials are generally in direct contact. In this case, the 2D
materials can be placed in a position that makes full use of the enhanced local
field and results in strong light–matter interactions. Furthermore, the interfacial
charge-transfer transition by directly exciting hot electrons of plasmonic nanos-
tructures into the coupled semiconductor acceptor benefits the enhancement of
photocurrent. However, the metal–semiconductor junctions in such systems have
strong thermionic emission, which may elevate undesirable dark current. Sun et al.
[142] fabricated novel SnSe photodetectors by noncontact plasmonic nanoparticles,
consisting of a hybrid structure of few-layer SnSe2 transferred onto a fused silica
(SiO2) plate with embedded Ag nanoparticles (Figure 2.13g). The dark current of the
2D photodetector does not increase obviously because of the extra surface barrier
and decrease of interface states. Moreover, after incorporation of Ag nanoparticles
(NPs), the response time of photodetectors decreases considerably at excitation of
405 nm, i.e. only 11% of that of the pristine SnSe2 photodetectors (Figure 2.13h).
The responsivity of the photodetector is enhanced by about 900 times with the bias
voltage of 0.1 V, due to the well-preserved intrinsic features of SnSe2 and LSPR
effect (Figure 2.13i).
In summary, plasmon-enhanced photodetectors typically combine metal nanos-
tructures, for example, nanoparticles, nanoarrays, or grating with a light-active 2D
material. The properties of surface plasmons are exploited to impart specific char-
acteristics to a photodetector, such as spectral selectivity, or enhance the perfor-
mance of the photodetector by increasing its absorption at certain wavelengths. We
summarize the enhancement factors of plasmon-enhanced photodetectors based on

(a)
(d)
(e)
Au
In
InSe/Au
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(b)
(c)
Wavelength (nm)
InSe
InSe/Au
Time (s)
Wavelength (nm)
Enhancement ratio (%)
Current (pA)
0.0
0
600
0
400
800
1200
0 V
1200
0
60
τr = 61 ms
τr = 23 ms
τd = 50 ms
τd = 25 ms
120
0.1
10.0
10.1
10.2
350
500
650
800
950
Bias (V)
Photoresponse (a.u.)
Photocurrent (nA)
500
600
InSe
InSe with AI disks
AI disks scattering spectrum
Dark current
44 mW cm–2 laser W/O AI disks
44 mW cm–2 laser W/ AI disks
700
800
0
10
0
3
0
50
100
0
20
0.0
0.3
0.6
40
SnSe2/SiO2
SnSe2/Ag:SiO2
SnSe2/SiO2
SnSe2/Ag:SiO2
SnSe2
SiO2
Ag NPs
Cr/Au
Cr/Au
P (mW)
Time (s)
Intensity (a.u.)
R (mA W–1)
60
80
150
200
6
9
12
15
20
30
Figure 2.13
(a) Schematic of InSe avalanche photodetector patterned with an array of Al nanodisks. (b) Photocurrent spectra of InSe (blue), InSe
decorated with Al nanodisks (red), and the dark-ﬁeld scattering spectrum of the Al nanodisk arrays (green). (c) Photocurrent response of InSe device with
(red hollow circle) and without (blue hollow circle) Al nanodisks at different laser intensities. The solid black square is the measured dark current.
(d) Schematic diagram of the device structure of InSe/Au surface plasmon photodetector. (e) Time-resolved photoresponse of InSe photodetector with and
without Au surface plasmon upon 685 nm light illumination at 0 V. (f) Responsivity enhancement of InSe surface plasmon photodetector via surface
plasmon resonance with illumination wavelengths ranging from 350 to 950 nm. (g) Schematic of the photodetector structure based on SnSe2/AgNP:SiO2.
(h) Response time of SnSe2 nanosheets with and without embedded Ag ions at wavelength of 405 nm. (i) Photoresponsivity of SnSe2/AgNP:SiO2 and
SnSe2:SiO2 versus incident power at 405 nm. Source: (a–c) Reproduced with permission [38]. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced
with permission [141]. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g–i) Reproduced with permission [142]. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH.

44
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
Table 2.3
Comparison of plasmon enhancement factors of 2D materials-based
photodetectors.
Hybrid structure
Wavelength
(nm)
Voltage
(V)
Enhancement
factor (fold)
Rmax (A W−1)
Graphene/Au NP [125]
530
/
4–15
2.2 × 10−3
Au NP/MoS2 [138]
632
1
3
Ag nanowire/MoS2 [126]
532
5
1192
59.6
Au NP/MoS2 [143]
980
15
≈30
6.4 × 10−2
Ag NP/MoS2/Au array [144]
532
10
8.8
287.5
Au NP/WS2 [145]
590
2
30
1050
Al NP/InSe [38]
543
30
8
Au NP/InSe [141]
685
0
12
0.244
SnSe2/Ag:SiO2 [142]
405
0.1
881
graphene, MoS2, WS2, InSe, and SnSe in Table 2.3. The enhancement factor ranges
from several-fold to over 1000-fold, but the total photoresponsivity for these photode-
tectors is still not satisfactory. To further improve the performance, more judiciously
designed plasmonic nanostructures with high enhancement in electromagnetic field
and low loss are required.
2.6
Large-Scale and Flexible Photodetectors
Scalable integration of advanced photodetectors holds much prospect for industry
adoption. Efforts have been made to realize low-cost, controllable production of
the active materials. In parallel, high flexibility of light-sensitive 2D nanosheets is
desired for the development of wearable optoelectronics. Given the large optical
absorption coefficient, high mobility, and good flexibility of Sn chalcogenides (e.g.
SnS2, SnS, SnSe, and SnTe), these materials are proper selections to construct
high-performance flexible devices. In terms of the synthesis approach, Su et al.
[146] demonstrated the controlled growth of SnS2 crystal arrays via CVD, before
which thin metal pads (Pd/Cr) were patterned as seeds at designated positions
(Figure 2.14a). Zheng et al. [148] combined microetching technique with van
der Waals epitaxial growth to pattern diverse 2D metal chalcogenides on mica
substrates. Organic solvents (e.g. acetone or ethanol) containing polydimethylsilox-
anes (PDMS) oligomers can be used as the ink, which is pipetted onto the surface
of a PDMS stamp with microwell arrays. The mica substrate is then placed on
top of the stamp and is removed after the solvent is dried. Precise control of the
layer thickness and crystal orientation has been achieved. The patterned In2Se3
arrays were integrated into flexible photodetectors, reaching a high responsivity of
≈1650 A W−1. These methods offer access to fabricating a batch of devices on one
chip with predesigned layout.

2.6 Large-Scale and Flexible Photodetectors
45
0
100
0.0
0.3
0.25
0.00
0.0
0.1
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
1000 cyclic bending
2000 cyclic bending
Initial
On
Off
500
0
100
200
300
Times (s)
(a)
CVD
Au electrode
SnS2
PI substrate
Crystalline
part
e
e
a
b
c
Amorphous
part
SiO2
SnS2
Seed
Si
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Current (mA)
400
500
Figure 2.14
(a) Schematic diagram showing the growth of SnS2 2D crystals with the
locations predeﬁned by the patterned seed arrays. (b) Schematic of the ﬂexible SnS2
photodetector on a polyimide (PI) substrate. (c) Photocurrents at 0, 1000, and 2000 bending
cycles. (d) Mixed structure of crystalline/amorphous SnS2 thin ﬁlms and its maintained
photoresponse after bending. (e) Photograph of the wearable device. Source: (a) Reproduced
with permission [146]. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b–e) Reproduced with
permission [147], © 2020, American Chemical Society.
Another challenge is to obtain atomically thin 2D nanosheets with strong inter-
layer coupling, such as SnS, PtS2, PtSe2, and so on. This could be achieved by using a
molten-phase precursor that has weaker van der Waals interactions. Krishnamurthi
et al. [149] developed a novel method to prepare SnS films with the thickness down
to 0.8 nm (a single-unit cell) and a lateral dimension of several millimeters by touch
printing the naturally sulfurized surface of Sn liquid onto arbitrary substrates. Fur-
ther increase in the sample area is likely to be achieved by MBE and CVD techniques
[150]. Such materials can find applications in flexible photodetectors by using poly-
mer substrates (Figure 2.14b). The SnS2 [147], SnSe [151], and SnTe [152] photode-
tectors exhibit high stability over cyclic bending tests. The SnS2 thin films prepared
by thermal evaporation and postannealing can retain at least 91.7% of their initial
photoelectric responsivity after 1000 bending cycles with a small radius of 1 mm
(Figure 2.14c) [147]. The excellent durability was attributed to the mixed phases con-
sisting of both crystalline and amorphous SnS2 (Figure 2.14d), showing potential for
application-wearable devices (Figure 2.14e).
Flexible devices are typically made on top of polymers with high bendability.
The choice of substrate may dictate the photodetecting performances. For example,
the responsivity of few-layer InSe photodetector on a rigid SiO2/Si chip can reach
12.3 A W−1, while the value decreases to 3.9 A W−1 when the device is supported

46
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
by a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film [153]. Dielectric polymer substrates
that are free from traps can suppress the hysteresis of 2D materials. In this regard,
BCB is an ideal candidate because of its solution processability, facile preparation,
excellent thermal and chemical resistance, and adaptability to electron beam
microfabrication. It is advantageous compared with other trap-free dielectrics,
including polyimide (PI, complex precursor-involved synthesis), poly(methyl
methacrylate) (PMMA, soluble in organic solvents), and hBN (costly for large area
growth). Negative photoconductivity was demonstrated in PI-supported BP devices
[154], which results from the strong photothermal effect induced by the PI. Due
to the low thermal conductivity of PI, the heat generated upon IR illumination
efficiently enhances the phonon scattering and decreases the carrier mobility in the
BP, giving rise to a negative photocurrent. This phenomenon cannot be observed if
utilizing high-thermal-conductivity substrates such as SiO2/Si.
To evaluate the performances of flexible photodetectors, it is important to under-
stand the effects of strain on the properties of the photoactive materials. The spectral
coverage of many TMD-based devices is restricted within the visible range owing to
their bandgap (1.65–3.10 eV). In-plane strain can modulate the electronic structures
of 2D semiconductors. The shrinkage of the bandgap can enhance the photorespon-
sivity in the visible region and extend their sensing capabilities beyond fundamental
limits. Thai et al. [155] presented the biaxial strain-dependent photoresponse of
graphene-contacted MoS2 devices up to the NIR regime, in which the MoS2 film
was subject to a controllable pneumatic bulging pressure (Figure 2.15a,b). Linear
array of the strained MoS2 photodetectors shows visible–NIR imaging functionality
in a line-scanning system (Figure 2.15c,d). However, the NIR photoresponsivity
achieved using this method is relatively low (e.g. 407 and 23.5 mA W−1 under
785 and 904 nm illumination, respectively, with 1.19% tensile strain). Kim et al.
[156] demonstrated the strain-induced continuous and reversible variation of the
operating wavelengths of BP from 0.22 to 0.53 eV. Compressive and tensile strains
were applied in sequence by thermally quenching the preannealed polyethy-
lene terephthalate glycol (PETG) substrate and mechanically bending it in a
two-point apparatus. The peak responsivity is 2.5 A W−1 at 2.5 μm with 0.7% tensile
strain.
External strain can also interact with the built-in electric field and regulate the
behavior of photoinduced carriers. Wu et al. [157] first revealed the piezophototronic
effect in 2D crystals, i.e. monolayer MoS2. Under tensile strain, positive polarization
charges are generated in the MoS2 near the Pd/Au–MoS2 interface. The resultant
piezoelectric field decreases the conduction band energy of MoS2. Hence, the Schot-
tky barrier is reduced, and the depletion region is shrunk. Such band tilting hinders
the separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs while facilitating the pro-
duction of dark current, resulting in lower sensitivity of the photodetector. In con-
trast, increased photoresponse could be expected when the device is subject to small
compressive strain. Yet, large compressive strain causes significant upward bending
of the valence band maximum and formation of a new energy barrier at the drain
contact. The holes are therefore trapped in the vicinity of the Pd/Au–MoS2 junction,
making it unfavorable for the circulation of free carriers.

2.6 Large-Scale and Flexible Photodetectors
47
Bulging pressure
Strain (%)
Fog
NIR light source
Strained linear
MoS2 PD array
Readout circuit
Reconstructed image
Incident light
Target object
Rotation
direction
Reflected
light
0.85
PET/PDMS
Au/Cr
MoS2
PI
1.2
(a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.15
Graphene/MoS2 photodetector arrays with strain-induced spectral extension
to the NIR regime and its imaging application. (a) Schematic illustration of device under
bulging pressure. (b) Finite element analysis-simulated strain distribution in a bulged PI
ﬁlm. The geometric deformation is magniﬁed by 10 times. (c) Microphotograph of a
line-scanning apparatus. (d) Schematic illustration of the NIR-imaging system that can
operate even in foggy environment. Source: Reproduced with permission Thai et al. [155], ©
2021, American Chemical Society.
Based on the piezotronic properties of ZnO, Du et al. [158] investigated the
strain effects on the performance of WSe2/ZnO photodetector (Figure 2.16a,b).
The discrepancy is due to the type II band alignment and the role of WSe2 in light
absorption. When tensile strain is applied, positive piezopolarization charges are
generated in the ZnO, and negative charges are thus accumulated in the WSe2 near
the heterointerface (Figure 2.16c,e). The increased band slope provides extra driving
force for the transport of the photoexcited carriers, similar to the voltage-gating
effects. Therefore, a larger photocurrent can be obtained in a self-powered mode
(Figure 2.11g). When compressive strain is applied, negative piezo charges are
generated in the ZnO, and the band of WSe2 is up-tilted (Figure 2.16d,f). This recon-
struction suppresses the carrier transport, thereby decreasing the photoresponse
(Figure 2.16g). Maiti et al. [159] wrapped few-layer MoTe2 with a nonplanarized Si
waveguide structure to introduce uniaxial tensile strain. The bandgap of MoTe2 is
modified from 1.04 (unstrained) to 0.80 eV (4% strained) due to the coupling with
the waveguide’s optical mode at 1550 nm, which enables wavelength-selective light
absorption.
Dai et al. [160] investigated the stacking symmetry-determined piezoelectricities
in 2D InSe. The direction of the in-plane polarizations is identical in the adjacent
layers for γ-phase InSe with ABC-stacking sequence, whereas reverse direction was
observed for β-InSe that presents AB-stacking sequence. The noncentrosymmetry
of γ-InSe was confirmed by evident second-harmonic generation characteristics,
and this structural feature is responsible for the different strain dependences of the

Tensile
strain
hv
hv
WSe2
ZnO
WSe2
ZnO
Compressive
strain
(c)
(b)
(a)
(e)
(g)
(f)
Light
Experiment
Exponential fit
Experiment
Exponential fit
0
2
4
6
8
10
EC
EC
hv
hv
EV
EC
EC
EV
EV
EV
c-axis
c-axis
ZnO
p-WSe2
p-WSe2
n-ZnO
n-ZnO
Strain (%)
R (mA W–1)
Isc (pA)
–0.4
–1
0
1
2
0.0
0.4
0.8
ZnO
WSe2
10 μm
Cr/Au
Au/Pd
Pd/Au
WSe2
Vds
Ids
(d)
Figure 2.16
Strain effects on the performance of the photodetector based on few-layer WSe2 nanosheet and ZnO nanobelt. (a) Operation schematic with
an external circuit and light illumination. (b) Optical microscopic image of the ﬂexible integrated device under tensile strain. Inset: magniﬁed view.
(c, d) Schematics of photogenerated carriers and (e, f) energy-band diagrams under compressive (c, e) and tensile (d, f) strains. Black circles: electrons;
dark blue dots: holes; red and blue marks: positive and negative piezopolarization charges, respectively. Black dotted line: initial band structure; red and
blue lines: band structures under tensile and compressive strains, respectively. (g) Strain dependence of short-circuit current (left axis) and
photoresponsivity (right axis). Source: Reproduced with permission Du et al. [158], © 2019, Elsevier.

2.7 Summary
49
photoresponse. Piezoresistive effect is induced by tensile strain in β-InSe photode-
tector. The carrier density is increased owing to the red shift of the bandgap, and the
barrier heights of both Schottky junctions are decreased at the same time. For γ-InSe
photodetector, the piezo charges stem from coupled piezoresistive/piezoelectric
effect. The piezopotential further increases the energy difference between the
two Schottky junctions, whereby facilitating the production of photocurrent. As a
result, the applied strain can more effectively modulate the performance of the
γ-InSe device. A small tensile strain of 0.62% brings 7- and 10-fold increments
in the responsivity and response speed, respectively. These studies open up new
opportunities for the scalable integration of 2D materials-based photodetectors and
indicate great promise for next-generation wearable (opto)electronics.
2.7
Summary
In summary, 2D materials feature unique characteristics, including atomic thick-
ness, high room-temperature carrier mobility, and excellent flexibility. These
enable them to outperform the conventionally used semiconductor thin films in
photodetection and can promote the minimization and integration of photodetec-
tors. Broadband photoresponse from IR to UV regions has been achieved due to
their tunable bandgaps over a wide spectral range. Various strategies have been
developed to enhance the photodetecting performances in terms of the responsivity,
response speed, detectivity, etc. As regards the photoactive materials, the layer
number control, surface modification, chemical doping, strain and defect engi-
neering, and ferroelectric modulation have crucial impacts on their light-detection
capabilities. For the device, the channel–electrode conductance, structural design,
and environment are of importance for achieving high performances. In addition,
the good mechanical flexibility renders 2D materials promising in wearable and
biointegrated devices. These open up prospects for versatile applications such as
multicolor imaging and optical communications.
There remain some issues for the commercialization of 2D materials-based
photodetectors. The light absorption of 2D nanosheets (e.g. graphene and TMDs)
with atomic thicknesses is relatively low compared to conventional photodetecting
materials. In addition, Auger scattering could be significant due to the strong
Coulomb interaction, and the attenuated electrostatic shielding effect would result
in large exciton-binding energy. These pose difficulties in achieving high quantum
efficiencies and are likely to be circumvented by exploring new 2D materials (e.g. 2D
perovskites) that display both low exciton-binding energy and long carrier-diffusion
pathlengths. 2D III–V and II–VI semiconductors exhibit high charge-carrier mobil-
ities and large optical absorption coefficients. However, cost-effective techniques
are under investigation for the wafer-scale synthesis of these materials with high
uniformity and crystallinity, which could meet industry demands. In another
aspect, many 2D semiconductors have wide bandgaps, while those with narrow
bandgaps (e.g. BP and AsP) are prone to oxidation under ambient environment.
Noble-metal dichalcogenides present excellent air stability, but their large-scale

50
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
synthesis is still challenging and expensive. The fabrication and optoelectronic
properties of stable narrow-bandgap 2D materials are therefore worth of further
studies to achieve long-wavelength photodetection. More research is also needed
to combine high quantum efficiency with fast response in a single photodetector.
Improvement in the overall performances may be realized by constructing hybrid
devices based on novel 2D heterostructures. These will inspire future work toward
the development of 2D functional materials-based photodetectors for advanced
imaging applications.
References
1 Dyck, R.H. and Weckler, G.P. (1968). IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 15: 196.
2 Levine, B.F., Bethea, C.G., Hasnain, G. et al. (1990). Appl. Phys. Lett. 56: 851.
3 Michel, E., Xu, J., Kim, J.D. et al. (1996). IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 8: 673.
4 Seo, S.W., Jokerst, N.M., Cho, S.Y. et al. (2004). IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum
Electron. 10: 686.
5 Nair, R.R., Blake, P., Grigorenko, A.N. et al. (2008). Science 320: 1308.
6 Britnell, L., Ribeiro, R.M., Eckmann, A. et al. (2013). Science 340: 1311.
7 Yan, F., Wei, Z., Wei, X. et al. (2018). Small Methods 2: 1700349.
8 Veeraraghavan, S. and Fossum, J.G. (1989). IEEE Trans. Electron Devices
36: 522.
9 Yin, Z., Li, H., Li, H. et al. (2012). ACS Nano 6: 74.
10 Omkaram, I., Hong, Y.K., and Kim, S. (2018). Two-Dimensional Materials for
Photodetector. London: IntechOpen.
11 Steiauf, D., Kioupakis, E., and Van De Walle, C.G. (2014). ACS Photonics 1: 643.
12 Buscema, M., Groenendijk, D.J., Blanter, S.I. et al. (2014). Nano Lett. 14: 3347.
13 Zhang, L. and Zunger, A. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 949.
14 Lee, H.S., Min, S.W., Chang, Y.G. et al. (2012). Nano Lett. 12: 3695.
15 Shim, J., Oh, A., Kang, D.H. et al. (2016). Adv. Mater. 28: 6985.
16 Das, T., Yang, E., Seo, J.E. et al. (2021). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13: 1861.
17 Zhang, L., Yang, T., Sahdan, M.F. et al. (2021). Adv. Electron. Mater. 7: 2100559.
18 Kufer, D. and Konstantatos, G. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 7307.
19 Jo, S.H., Kang, D.H., Shim, J. et al. (2016). Adv. Mater. 28: 4824.
20 Wang, X., Wang, P., Wang, J. et al. (2015). Adv. Mater. 27: 6575.
21 Lan, C., Li, C., Yin, Y., and Liu, Y. (2015). Nanoscale 7: 5974.
22 Lu, Y., Chen, J., Chen, T. et al. (2020). Adv. Mater. 32: 1906958.
23 Kwon, J., Hong, Y.K., Han, G. et al. (2015). Adv. Mater. 27: 2224.
24 Yeh, C.H., Chen, H.C., Lin, H.C. et al. (2019). ACS Nano 13: 3269.
25 Zhang, W., Chiu, M.H., Chen, C.H. et al. (2014). ACS Nano 8: 8653.
26 Tan, H., Fan, Y., Zhou, Y. et al. (2016). ACS Nano 10: 7866.
27 Lan, C., Zhou, Z., Zhou, Z. et al. (2018). Nano Res. 11: 3371.
28 Tu, Y., Xu, Y., Li, J. et al. (2020). Small 16: 2005626.
29 Chen, T., Sheng, Y., Zhou, Y. et al. (2019, 6430). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
11: 6421.

References
51
30 Wang, T., Andrews, K., Bowman, A. et al. (2018). Nano Lett. 18: 2766.
31 Zhang, P., Bian, C., Ye, J. et al. (2020). Sci. China Mater. 63: 1548.
32 Lee, H.S., Baik, S.S., Lee, K. et al. (2015). ACS Nano 9: 8312.
33 Li, H.M., Lee, D., Qu, D. et al. (2015). Nat. Commun. 6: 6564.
34 Tan, H., Xu, W., Sheng, Y. et al. (2017). Adv. Mater. 29: 1702917.
35 Hu, P., Wang, L., Yoon, M. et al. (2013). Nano Lett. 13: 1649.
36 Liu, F., Shimotani, H., Shang, H. et al. (2014). ACS Nano 8: 752.
37 Island, J.O., Blanter, S.I., Buscema, M. et al. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 7853.
38 Lei, S., Wen, F., Ge, L. et al. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 3048.
39 Afzal, A.M., Iqbal, M.Z., Mumtaz, S., and Akhtar, I. (2020). J. Mater. Chem. C
8: 4743.
40 Feng, F., Wu, J., Wu, C., and Xie, Y. (2015). Small 11: 654.
41 Perumal, P., Ulaganathan, R.K., Sankar, R. et al. (2016). Adv. Funct. Mater.
26: 3630.
42 Piotrowski, J. and Rogalski, A. (2004). Infrared Phys. Technol. 46: 115.
43 Desai, S.B., Madhvapathy, S.R., Sachid, A.B. et al. (2016). Science (80-. ) 354: 99.
44 Yao, J. and Yang, G. (2020). Nanoscale 12: 454.
45 Huang, M., Wang, M., Chen, C. et al. (2016). Adv. Mater. 28: 3481.
46 Xiang, D., Han, C., Wu, J. et al. (2015). Nat. Commun. 6: 6485.
47 Xu, Y., Yuan, J., Fei, L. et al. (2016). Small 12: 5000.
48 Yu, X., Zhang, S., Zeng, H., and Jie, Q. (2016). Nano Energy 25: 34.
49 Yu, X., Yu, P., Wu, D. et al. (2018). Nat. Commun. 9: 1545.
50 Xu, W., Jiang, J., Ma, H. et al. (2020). Nano Res. 13: 2091.
51 Wang, Y., Yu, Z., Tong, Y. et al. (2020). Appl. Phys. Lett. 116: 211101.
52 Zeng, L.H., Chen, Q.M., Zhang, Z.X. et al. (2019). Adv. Sci. 6: 1901134.
53 Tao, L., Chen, Z., Li, X. et al. (2017). npj 2D Mater. Appl. 1: 19.
54 Yu, W.J., Vu, Q.A., Oh, H. et al. (2016). Nat. Commun. 7: 13278.
55 Wang, G., Li, L., Fan, W. et al. (2018). Adv. Funct. Mater. 28: 1800339.
56 Long, M., Gao, A., Wang, P. et al. (2017). Sci. Adv. 3: e1700589.
57 Long, M., Wang, Y., Wang, P. et al. (2019). ACS Nano 13: 2511.
58 Luo, L.B., Wang, D., Xie, C. et al. (2019). Adv. Funct. Mater. 29: 1900849.
59 Varghese, A., Saha, D., Thakar, K. et al. (2020). Nano Lett. 20: 1707.
60 Jin, Z., Hu, C., Lan, Y. et al. (2020). Adv. Opt. Mater. 8: 2001319.
61 Liang, F.X., Zhao, X.Y., Jiang, J.J. et al. (2019). Small 15: 1903831.
62 Lim, H., Tsao, S., Zhang, W., and Razeghi, M. (2007). Appl. Phys. Lett. 90:
131112.
63 Johnson, T.H., Cozine, H.T., and McLean, B.N. (1965). Appl. Opt. 4: 693.
64 Chen, C., Yi, X., Zhang, J., and Zhao, X. (2001). Infrared Phys. Technol. 42: 87.
65 Chen, X., Lu, X., Deng, B. et al. (2017). Nat. Commun. 8: 1672.
66 Xie, Y., Liang, F., Wang, D. et al. (2018). Adv. Mater. 30: 1804858.
67 Liang, Q., Wang, Q., Zhang, Q. et al. (2019). Adv. Mater. 31: 1807609.
68 Xia, F., Wang, H., Xiao, D. et al. (2014). Nat. Photonics 8: 899.
69 Liu, H., Neal, A.T., Zhu, Z. et al. (2014). ACS Nano 8: 4033.
70 Li, L., Yu, Y., Ye, G.J. et al. (2014). Nat. Nanotechnol. 9: 372.
71 Huang, L., Dong, B., Guo, X. et al. (2019). ACS Nano 13: 913.

52
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
72 Wang, J., Rousseau, A., Eizner, E. et al. (2019). ACS Photonics 6: 3092.
73 Bullock, J., Yan, W., Shresha, V.R. et al. (2020). ACS Nano 14: 13645.
74 Engel, M., Steiner, M., and Avouris, P. (2014). Nano Lett. 14: 6414.
75 Zhong, M., Meng, H., Ren, Z. et al. (2021). Nanoscale 13: 10579.
76 Amani, M., Regan, E., Bullock, J. et al. (2017). ACS Nano 11: 11724.
77 Liu, Y., Shivananju, B.N., Wang, Y. et al. (2017). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
9: 36137.
78 Xu, Y., Liu, C., Guo, C. et al. (2020). Nano Energy 70: 104518.
79 Wang, Y., Wang, H., Gali, S.M. et al. (2021). Adv. Funct. Mater. 31: 2103353.
80 Ahmad, W., Liu, J., Jiang, J. et al. (2021). Adv. Funct. Mater. 31: 2104143.
81 Liu, Z., Luo, T., Liang, B. et al. (2013). Nano Res. 6: 775.
82 Tan, H., Fan, C., Ma, L. et al. (2016). Nano Micro Lett. 8: 29.
83 Rogalski, A. (2020). HgCdTe Photodetectors. Elsevier Ltd.
84 Madejczyk, P., Gawron, W., Piotrowski, A. et al. (2011). Infrared Phys. Technol.
54: 310.
85 Kang, D.H., Kim, M.S., Shim, J. et al. (2015). Adv. Funct. Mater. 25: 4219.
86 Cao, Y., Cai, K., Hu, P. et al. (2015). Sci. Rep. 5: 8130.
87 Du, S., Lu, W., Ali, A. et al. (2017). Adv. Mater. 29: 1700463.
88 Sharma, R., Sharma, P., Sahoo, K.R. et al. (2021). Mater. Today. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.mattod.2021.06.012.
89 Ye, L., Li, H., Chen, Z., and Xu, J. (2016). ACS Photonics 3: 692.
90 Liu, B., You, C., Zhao, C. et al. (2019). Chin. Opt. Lett. 17: 020002.
91 Yu, W., Li, S., Zhang, Y. et al. (2017). Small 13: 1700268.
92 Chen, Y., Wang, X., Wu, G. et al. (2018). Small 14: 1703293.
93 Wadhwa, R., Agrawal, A.V., Kushavah, D. et al. (2021). Appl. Surf. Sci. 569:
150949.
94 Jo, S.H., Lee, H.W., Shim, J. et al. (2018). Adv. Sci. 5: 1700423.
95 Long, M., Liu, E., Wang, P. et al. (2016). Nano Lett. 16: 2254–2259.
96 Zhao, Y., Tsai, T.-Y., Wu, G. et al. (2021). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13: 47198.
97 Zhou, X., Hu, X., Zhou, S. et al. (2018). Adv. Mater. 30: 1703286.
98 Xue, H., Dai, Y., Kim, W. et al. (2019). Nanoscale 11: 3173.
99 Qiao, H., Yuan, J., Xu, Z. et al. (2015). ACS Nano 9: 1886.
100 Xiong, Y.F., Chen, J.H., Lu, Y.Q., and Xu, F. (2019). Adv. Electron. Mater.
5: 1800562.
101 Vu, Q.A., Lee, J.H., Nguyen, V.L. et al. (2017). Nano Lett. 17: 453.
102 Gao, S., Wang, Z., Wang, H. et al. (2021). Adv. Mater. Interfaces 8: 2001730.
103 Lv, Q., Yan, F., Wei, X., and Wang, K. (2018). Adv. Opt. Mater. 6: 1700490.
104 Yan, F., Zhao, L., Patanè, A. et al. (2017). Nanotechnology 28: 27LT01.
105 Afzal, A.M., Dastgeer, G., Iqbal, M.Z. et al. (2020). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
12: 19625.
106 Li, A., Chen, Q., Wang, P. et al. (2019). Adv. Mater. 31: 1805656.
107 Guo, J., Li, J., Liu, C. et al. (2020). Light Sci. Appl. 9: 29.
108 Wu, E., Wu, D., Jia, C. et al. (2019). ACS Photonics 6: 565.
109 Wu, D., Jia, C., Shi, F. et al. (2020). J. Mater. Chem. A 8: 3632.
110 Yao, J., Zheng, Z., and Yang, G. (2018). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10: 38166.

References
53
111 He, T., Lan, C., Zhou, S. et al. (2021). J. Mater. Chem. C 9: 3846.
112 Lu, J., Zheng, Z., Yao, J. et al. (2019). Small 15: 1904912.
113 Zeng, L., Wu, D., Jie, J. et al. (2020). Adv. Mater. 32: 2004412.
114 Jain, S.K., Low, M.X., Taylor, P.D. et al. (2021). ACS Appl. Electron. Mater.
3: 2407.
115 Geum, D.M., Kim, S., Khym, J.H. et al. (2021). Small 17: 2007357.
116 Hao, F., Stoumpos, C.C., Chang, R.P.H., and Kanatzidis, M.G. (2014). J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 136: 8094.
117 Xu, X., Chueh, C.C., Jing, P. et al. (2017). Adv. Funct. Mater. 27: 1701053.
118 Pan, Y., Wang, H., Li, X. et al. (2020). J. Mater. Chem. C 8: 3359.
119 Liu, Y., Wang, F., Wang, X. et al. (2015). Nat. Commun. 6: 8589.
120 Yao, J., Chen, F., Li, J. et al. (2021). Nanotechnology 32: 415201.
121 Selamneni, V., Ganeshan, S.K., and Sahatiya, P. (2020). J. Mater. Chem. C
8: 11593.
122 Kufer, D., Nikitskiy, I., Lasanta, T. et al. (2015). Adv. Mater. 27: 176.
123 Luo, P., Zhuge, F., Wang, F. et al. (2019). ACS Nano 13: 9028.
124 Hossain, M.T., Das, M., Ghosh, J. et al. (2021). Nanoscale 13: 14945.
125 Liu, Y., Cheng, R., Liao, L. et al. (2011). Nat. Commun. 2: 579.
126 Bang, S., Duong, N.T., Lee, J. et al. (2018). Nano Lett. 18: 2316.
127 Sun, B., Wang, Z., Liu, Z. et al. (2019). Adv. Funct. Mater. 29: 1900541.
128 Willets, K.A. and Van Duyne, R.P. (2007). Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 58: 267.
129 Jiang, R., Li, B., Fang, C., and Wang, J. (2014). Adv. Mater. 26: 5274.
130 Singh, J., Kaurav, N., Choudhary, K.K., and Okram, G.S. (2007). Nano Lett.
7: 1032.
131 Li, X., Zhu, J., and Wei, B. (2016). Chem. Soc. Rev. 45: 3145.
132 Tao, L., Chen, Z., Li, Z. et al. (2021). InfoMat 3: 36.
133 Yang, A., Wang, D., Wang, W., and Odom, T.W. (2017). Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.
68: 83.
134 Echtermeyer, T.J., Milana, S., Sassi, U. et al. (2016). Nano Lett. 16: 8.
135 Mak, K.F., Sfeir, M.Y., Wu, Y. et al. (2008). Phys. Rev. Lett. 101: 2.
136 Cai, X., Sushkov, A.B., Jadidi, M.M. et al. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 4295.
137 Gao, M., Tian, Z., Tang, S. et al. (2020). Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7: 2001122.
138 Miao, J., Hu, W., Jing, Y. et al. (2015). Small 11: 2392.
139 Lan, H.Y., Hsieh, Y.H., Chiao, Z.Y. et al. (2021). Nano Lett. 21: 3083.
140 Feng, W., Zheng, W., Cao, W., and Hu, P. (2014). Adv. Mater. 26: 6587.
141 Dai, M., Chen, H., Feng, R. et al. (2018). ACS Nano 12: 8739–8747.
142 Sun, X., Sun, J., Xu, J. et al. (2021). Small 17: 2102351.
143 Guo, J., Li, S., He, Z. et al. (2019). Appl. Surf. Sci. 483: 1037.
144 Wu, Z.Q., Yang, J.L., Manjunath, N.K. et al. (2018). Adv. Mater. 30: 1706527.
145 Liu, Y., Huang, W., Chen, W. et al. (2019). Appl. Surf. Sci. 481: 1127.
146 Su, G., Hadjiev, V.G., Loya, P.E. et al. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 506.
147 Lei, Y., Luo, J., Yang, X. et al. (2020). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12: 24940.
148 Zheng, W., Xie, T., Zhou, Y. et al. (2015). Nat. Commun. 6: 6972.
149 Krishnamurthi, V., Khan, H., Ahmed, T. et al. (2020). Adv. Mater. 32: 2004247.
150 Li, S., Wang, Y., Cheng, P. et al. (2021). Small 17: 2101154.

54
2 2D Material-Based Photodetectors for Imaging
151 Xu, H., Hao, L., Liu, H. et al. (2020). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12: 35250.
152 Liu, J., Li, X., Wang, H. et al. (2020). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12: 31810.
153 Tamalampudi, S.R., Lu, Y.-Y., Kumar, U.R. et al. (2014). Nano Lett. 14: 2800.
154 Miao, J., Song, B., Li, Q. et al. (2017). ACS Nano 11: 6048.
155 Thai, K.Y., Park, I.J., Kim, B.J. et al. (2021). ACS Nano 15: 12836–12846.
156 Kim, H., Uddin, S.Z., Lien, D.-H. et al. (2021). Nature 596: 232.
157 Wu, W., Wang, L., Yu, R. et al. (2016). Adv. Mater. 28: 8463.
158 Du, J., Liao, Q., Hong, M. et al. (2019). Nano Energy 58: 85.
159 Maiti, R., Patil, C., Saadi, M.A.S.R. et al. (2020). Nat. Photonics 14: 578.
160 Dai, M., Chen, H., Wang, F. et al. (2019). ACS Nano 13: 7291.

55
3
Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared
Photodetectors
Boyang Xiang1, Guiru Gu2, and Xuejun Lu1
1University of Massachusetts Lowell, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, One University
Avenue, Lowell, MA 01854, USA
2Stonehill College, Department of Physics, 320 Washington Street, Easton, MA 02357, USA
3.1
Introduction
Infrared (IR) photodetectors and focal plane arrays (FPA) are key components for
numerous sensing and imaging applications, including standoff chemical and bio-
logical sensing, IR target detection and tracking, night vision, multispectral imaging,
light detection and ranging (Lidar), and computer vision for autonomous driving.
Tremendous improvement has been achieved in both IR photodetector materials
and optics systems as well as device structures (e.g. resonant cavities [1–3] and sur-
face gratings [4]) to improve the performance of IR photodetectors.
The advancement of nanofabrication technologies such as electron-beam
(E-beam) lithography and deep ultraviolet (DUV) stepper photolithography enables
the fabrication of high-precision nanostructures with low surface roughness-
induced scattering loss. This allows the fabrication of high-quality surface
plasmonic resonance (SPR) [5–12] structures and their integration onto photonics
devices [10, 13–20].
SPR [7, 21] (also referred to as surface plasmon polaritons, SPPs) had been utilized
for a long time in stained glass, such as the rose windows of Notre Dame Cathedral,
before its principle was discovered by Ritchie in 1957 [21]. Engineering the SPR res-
onance and the electric field (E-field) offers a promising emerging technology to
provide strong surface confinement of electromagnetic (EM) energy. Such strong
surface confinement leads to significant near-field enhancement [5, 9] for sensor and
photodetector sensitivity improvement, such as SPR-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
[22–24]. It also enables high absorption using a thin absorption layer and thus leads
to significant enhancement in IR photodetectors [5, 6, 8, 11, 25–27]. This chapter
focuses on the SPR enhancement of IR photodetectors.
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

56
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
3.2
Brief Review of Basic Concepts of SPR and SPR
Structures
3.2.1
Plasma Oscillations in Metals
Metals contain free-electron gases. The electron-density fluctuation and the
Coulomb-restoring force result in plasma oscillations. The frequency of the plasma
oscillations is the plasma frequency 𝜔p, which is related to the electron density n0
and the permittivity of the metal 𝜀by:
𝜔p =
√
e2n0
m0𝜀
(3.1)
where n0
is the electron density, 𝜀is the permittivity of the material,
e = −1.6 × 10−19(C) is the charge of an electron, and m0 is the static mass of
a free electron, which will be replaced by the effective mass of an electron if it is in
metal or semiconductor materials.
3.2.2
Complex Permittivity and the Drude Model
The complex permittivity 𝜀c of isotropic conductive EM materials can be written as:
𝜀c = 𝜀
(
1 + 𝜎
j𝜔𝜀
)
= 𝜀
(
1 −e2n0
𝜔2m𝜀
)
= 𝜀
(
1 −
𝜔2
p
𝜔2
)
(3.2)
where 𝜎is the conductivity of the EM material. The detailed derivation of Eq. (3.2) is
presented by Gu et al. in Ref. [10, 28]. Equation (3.2) is derived under the assumption
of frictionless electron motion (i.e. the lossless condition). The electron motions with
the friction force can be expressed as:
m0̈x = −m0𝛾̇x + e⃗E
(3.3)
where x is the position of the electrons and the −m0𝛾̇x term represents the friction
force, and the e⃗E term is the Coulomb electric force. The current density ⃗J can be
written as:
⃗J = ne ̇x
(3.4)
Combining Eqs. (3.3) and (3.4) and changing it to the phasor domain, one gets:
j𝜔m0
ne
⃗J = m0𝛾
ne
⃗J + e⃗E
(3.5)
Plugging in ⃗J = 𝜎⃗E, one gets:
𝜎= ne2
m0
(
j𝜔
−𝜔2 −j𝜔𝛾
)
(3.6)
From Eq. (3.6), one can rewrite Eq. (3.2) as:
𝜀c = 𝜀
(
1 + 𝜎
j𝜔𝜀
)
= 𝜀
(
1 −
𝜔2
p
𝜔2 + j𝜔𝛾
)
(3.7)
Equation (3.7) is the well-known Drude model [29]. It shows that permittivity
depends on frequency. When the frequency 𝜔is much smaller than the plasmonic

3.2 Brief Review of Basic Concepts of SPR and SPR Structures
57
Dielectric
y
x
z
Interface
Metal
εd
εm
→
Hdi = yHdie– jkdxx – jkdzz
^
Hdr = yHdr e– jkdxx + jkdzz
^
Hmt = yHmt e– jkdxx – jkmzz
^
Figure 3.1
Scheme of TM wave incidence on the dielectric and metal interface from the
dielectric material.
frequency 𝜔0, the metal has a large negative permittivity 𝜀c, whereas when the
frequency 𝜔is much larger than the plasmonic frequency 𝜔0, the metal behaves
like regular dielectric materials. At certain frequencies, the permittivity can reach
close to zero, which is referred to as epsilon near-zero materials [30–32].
3.2.3
Surface Plasmonic Waves at the Semi-inﬁnite Dielectric
and Metal Interface
The analysis of plasmonic waves at a dielectric/metal interface was given by Raether
[33]. A brief summary of the surface plasmonic waves at the semi-infinite dielectric
and metal interface is presented as follows.
Figure 3.1 shows the incidence of a transmagnetic (TM) plane wave from the
dielectric material on a dielectric/metal interface with the H-field in the y-direction.
The dielectric and the metal materials are semi-infinite with permittivities of 𝜀d and
𝜀m, respectively. The permittivity of metal 𝜀m is the complex permittivity. The H
fields of the incident wave (i.e. ⃗Hdi), the reflection wave (i.e. ⃗Hdr), and the trans-
mission wave (i.e. ⃗Hmt) are marked on the figure.
The E-fields are related to the magnetic fields by:
⃑E =
𝟏
j𝝎𝜺𝛁× ⃑H
(3.8)
From Eq. (3.8), the Ex can be expressed as:
⃗Edi = ̂x
jkdz
j𝜔𝜀d
Hdie−jkdxx−jkdzz
(3.9)
⃗Edr = ̂x
−jkdz
j𝜔𝜀d
Hdre−jkdxx+jkdzz
(3.10)
⃗Emt = ̂x
jk2z
j𝜔𝜀m
Hmte−jkmxx−jkmzz
(3.11)
where kdx and kdz are the x and z components of the propagation constant
kd, respectively. kmx and kmz are the x and z components of the propagation

58
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
constant km, respectively.
k𝟐
dx + k𝟐
dz = k𝟐
d = 𝝎𝟐𝜺d𝝁d
(3.12)
k𝟐
mx + k𝟐
mz = k𝟐
m = 𝝎𝟐𝜺m𝝁m
(3.13)
where 𝜇d ≈𝜇m ≈𝜇0 are the permeability of the dielectric, metal, and vacuum, respec-
tively. The boundary conditions are: Hy and Ex continuous at the dielectric/metal
interface (i.e. z = 0).
Applying the boundary conditions and defining r = Hdr/Hdi and t = Hmt/Hdi, one
gets:
1 + r = t
(3.14)
kdx = kmx
(3.15)
kdz
𝜀d
(1 −r) =
kmz
𝜀m
t
(3.16)
From Eqs. (3.14) and (3.16), the coefficients t and r can be obtained in terms of kdz,
kmz, and 𝜀m and 𝜀d:
t =
2kdz𝜀m
kdz𝜀m + kmz𝜀d
(3.17)
r =
kdz𝜀m −kmz𝜀d
kmz𝜀d + kmz𝜀d
(3.18)
Under certain excitation conditions to be discussed in Section 3.2.4, the reflection
can be zero if kdz𝜀m −kmz𝜀d = 0, i.e.
kdz
𝜀d
=
kmz
𝜀m
(3.19)
Combining Eqs. (3.12), (3.13), and (3.19), one gets:
k𝟐
dx + k𝟐
mz = k𝟐
dx + 𝜺𝟐
m
𝜺𝟐
d
k𝟐
dz = 𝝎𝟐𝜺m𝝁𝟎
(3.20)
k𝟐
dx + k𝟐
dz = 𝝎𝟐𝜺d𝝁𝟎
(3.21)
k𝟐
dz = 𝝎𝟐𝝁𝟎
𝜺𝟐
d
𝜺d + 𝜺m
(3.22)
k𝟐
mz = 𝝎𝟐𝝁𝟎
𝜺𝟐
m
𝜺d + 𝜺m
(3.23)
kdx = kmx = k𝟎Re
[√
𝜺mr𝜺dr
(𝜺dr + 𝜺mr)
]
+ jk𝟎Im
[√
𝜺mr𝜺dr
(𝜺dr + 𝜺mr)
]
(3.24)
kmz = k𝟎
√
𝜺𝟐
mr
(𝜺dr + 𝜺mr)
(3.25)
where 𝜀dr = 𝜀d
𝜀0 and 𝜀mr = 𝜀m
𝜀0 are the relative permittivity, 𝜀0 is the permittivity of
vacuum, and Re(.) and Im(.) are taking the real and the imaginary parts, respectively.

3.2 Brief Review of Basic Concepts of SPR and SPR Structures
59
Table 3.1
Complex permittivity 𝜀mr of gold at different wavelengths.
𝝀(𝛍m)
𝜺mr, re
𝜺mr, im
kx, re
kx, im
kmz, re
kmz, im
10.0
−5.05E+03
1.09E+03
k0
0
7.6k0
71.5k0
5.0
−1.31E+03
1.41E+02
k0
0
1.9k0
36.3k0
3.0
−4.75E+02
3.07E+01
k0
0
0.7k0
21.8k0
0.95
−37.2
2.32
1.01k0
0
0.19k0
6.2k0
0.80
−23.4
1.55
1.02k0
0.002k0
0.16k0
4.9k0
0.5
−2.68
3.09
1.07k0
0.12k0
0.69k0
2.1k0
Figure 3.2
Dispersion
relationship of the surface
plasmonic waves.
ω/ωp
1.0
0.7
Re(kx)
0.0
ω = k0c
The complex permittivity 𝜀mr of gold at different wavelengths is listed in Table 3.1
[34]. The real (kx, re) and imaginary (kx, im) parts of kspp and kmz, re and kmz, im are also
included in Table 3.1 for 𝜀dr = 1 (i.e. vacuum or air).
From Table 3.1, since the kx, re ≥k0, the surface plasmonic wave cannot be
directly excited from air with zero reflection field. Figure 3.2 shows the dispersion
relationship of the surface plasmonic waves. The dashed line is the k0 and 𝜔relation
in free space.
3.2.4
Prism-Coupled Surface Plasmonic Wave Excitation
Surface plasmonic waves can be excited by the prism-coupling techniques with
the Otto or Kretschmann configurations [35, 36] or through grating-coupling.
Figure 3.3a,b shows the coupling schemes of the Otto and the Kretschmann
configurations, respectively. The Otto configuration has a small air gap between
the prism and the metal film, whereas the Kretschmann configuration makes the
thin metal film in close contact with the prism. The Otto configuration is analyzed
below.
For the Otto configuration, when the incidence angle is 𝜃larger than the criti-
cal angle 𝜃0 = sin−1 (
1
nd
)
with nd = √𝜀dr as the refractive index of the prism, total
internal reflection occurs and generates an evanescence wave traveling along the

60
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
Kx
εd
εm
εair
Kspp
X
Z
Metal
SPR
(a)
(b)
θ
Kx
εd
εm
εair
Kspp
X
Z
Metal
SPR
θ
Figure 3.3
Surface plasmonic excitation by prism-coupling with the Otto or Kretschmann
conﬁgurations. Source: Otto [35] and Shalabney and Abdulhalim [36]. (a) Otto conﬁguration;
(b) Kretschmann conﬁguration. The Otto conﬁguration has a small air gap between the
prism and the metal ﬁlm, whereas the Kretschmann conﬁguration makes the thin metal ﬁlm
in close contact with the prism.
bottom surface. The x component kax and the z component kaz of the evanescence
wave are:
kax = kdx = k0
√𝜀dr sin 𝜃
(3.26)
kaz = k0[(𝜀0 −𝜀dr sin2 𝜃)]1∕2
(3.27)
To excite surface plasmonic waves on the metal surface under the air gap
(Figure 3.3a), the x-component the wave vector in the air kax must equal to that of
the x wave vector of the surface plasmonic wave kmx, i.e.
kax = k𝟎
√𝜺dr sin 𝜽= kmx = k𝟎Re
[√
𝜺mr
(𝟏+ 𝜺mr)
]
(3.28)
The incident angle of the light to excite the surface plasmonic wave is thus:
𝜃= sin−1
(
Re
[√
𝜀mr
𝜀dr(1 + 𝜀mr)
])
(3.29)
3.2.5
Surface Grating-Coupled Surface Plasmonic Wave Excitation
In addition to the prism coupling, surface plasmonic waves can also be excited by
providing an additional wave vector through a grating coupler. Figure 3.4a,b shows
the surface plasmonic wave excitation through a grating coupler and the matching
of the wave vectors, respectively.
For the TM wave, the incident ⃗H field can be expressed as:
⃗H1i = ̂yH1ie−jk1xx−jk1zz
(3.30)
where k1x = k0 sin 𝜃, k1z = k0s cos 𝜃, and 𝜃is the incidence angle. The reflection and
the transmission ⃗H fields are:
⃗H1r = ̂yH1re−jk1xx+jk1zz
(3.31)
⃗H2t = ̂yH2te−jk2xx−jk2zz
(3.32)

3.3 Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
61
y
x
z
(a)
(b)
2
1
H1i
→
H1r
θ
ω
ω = k0c
k0 sinθ
Re(kx)
Λ
→
H2t
→
Figure 3.4
Surface plasmonic excitation by a grating coupler: (a) Schematic illustration of
the surface plasmonic excitation and the H vectors; (b) diagram for the wave
vector-matching.
The corresponding x-components of the ⃗E fields are:
⃗E1i = ̂x
jk1z
j𝜔𝜀1
H1ie−jk1xx−jk1zz
(3.33)
⃗E1r = ̂x
−jk1z
j𝜔𝜀1
H1re−jk1xx+jk1zz
(3.34)
⃗E2t = ̂x
jk2z
j𝜔𝜀2(x)H2te−jk2xx−jk2zz
(3.35)
where 𝜀2(x) is the periodical grating-induced permittivity variation, which can be
expressed using Fourier series expansion, i.e.
𝜀2(x) =
∞
∑
m=−∞
𝜀mei 2m𝜋
d x
(3.36)
Taking the first-order approximation of Eq. (3.35) and applying the ⃗E field boundary
condition at the interface, one gets the wave vector-matching condition shown in
Figure 3.4b, i.e.:
k2x = kspp = k1x + Λ
(3.37)
where Λ = 2𝜋
d is the grating vector and d is the grating period. The surface plas-
monic wave can be excited when Eq. (3.37) is met, i.e. the wave vector of the surface
plasmonic wave matches that of the incident wave.
3.3
Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
3.3.1
Two-Dimensional Metallic Hole Array (2DSHA)-Induced Surface
Plasmonic Waves
Another well-known structure to excite surface plasmonic waves is metal film per-
forated with periodical holes with the diameter of the holes smaller than the wave-
length of the incidence light [7], also known as the two-dimensional metallic hole

62
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
x
dx
dy
y
Metal film
z
Figure 3.5
2DSHA structure for surface plasmonic wave excitation. The 2DSHA structure is
a rectangular lattice with the grating periods of dx and dy in the x- and y-directions,
respectively.
array (2DSHA) structure [7]. Figure 3.5 shows the schematic view of the 2DSHA
structure of a rectangular lattice with the grating periods of dx and dy in the x- and
y-directions, respectively.
From Eq. (3.37), for the normal incidence light, the fundamental wavelengths
of the excited surface plasmonic waves for the polarization of x- and y-directions
are [11]:
𝜆x = dxRe
[√
𝜀mr𝜀dr
(𝜀dr + 𝜀mr)
]
(3.38)
𝜆y = dyRe
[√
𝜀mr𝜀dr
(𝜀dr + 𝜀mr)
]
(3.39)
From Eqs. (3.38) and (3.39), by choosing different periods in the x- and y-directions,
one can achieve polarimetric detection where the polarizations are differentiated by
the plasmonic resonant wavelengths [11, 26].
The transmission profiles of the 2DSHA structure are the Fano-type transmission
profile [37], which can be generally expressed as [8, 38]:
T = |tB|2 (𝜉+ q)2
𝜉2 + 1
(3.40)
where tB is the transmission coefficient of direct nonresonant background transition
and 𝜉is a dimensionless ratio of the energy offset to the energy loss, which can be
expressed as [8]:
𝜉=
E −(Espp + ℏΔ)
ℏΓ∕2
(3.41)
where Γ is the linewidth of the Fano-type line profile, which also represents the
energy loss rate, ℏΔ corresponds to the resonant energy shift [8], and q2 defines the
resonant transition to the nonresonant transition probability ratio [37]. Fano-type
transmission profiles can be found in many photonic devices [39]. The mechanism
of the Fano-type transmission lies in the interference of nonresonant and resonant
transmissions [37]. The Fano-type profile formula was originally developed for

3.3 Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
63
transitions among atomic energy levels [37]. To our best knowledge, there is no
derivation of the Fano transmission formula for the 2DSHA structure. In this
chapter, we present a simplified derivation of the Fano transmission formula for
the 2DSHA structure. For simplicity, we only consider the modes in the x-direction
under the linearly x-polarized light excitation. Similar approach can be applied to
the y-direction as well. The fundamental mode of the surface plasmonic wave is:
⃗Espp,0 = ⃗xE0eiksppx
(3.42)
where E0 is the magnitude of the fundamental mode. The resonant conditions for
the SPR modes are:
kspp,md = 2m𝜋
(3.43)
Due to hole-induced scattering, the surface plasmonic waves experience multiple
reflections in the multipath traveling. The total surface plasmonic wave is thus:
⃗Espp = ⃗x
∑
m
E0(rs)meimksppx
(3.44)
where rs is the scattering coefficient. Equation (3.44) can be rewritten as:
⃗Espp = ⃗xE0
eiksppx
1 −rseiksppx
(3.45)
Equation (3.45) is the total surface plasmonic waves on the top surface. For a thin
metal, the E-M waves can transmit to the back surface with an attenuation factor
e−𝛼L, where L is the thickness of the metal film. The nonresonant transmission wave
⃗En is thus:
⃗En = ⃗xE0e−𝛼L
(3.46)
The surface current ⃗J = 𝜎⃗Espp driven by the surface plasmonic waves will induce
an electric dipole ⃗D across the holes in the x-direction, which will generate surface
plasmonic waves on the back surface with a certain phase delay determined by the
conductivity 𝜎and the phase shift in the hole. Assuming a 90∘phase shift, the back-
side surface plasmonic waves generated through the holes can be written as:
⃗Espp,r = ⃗xE0
itheiksppd
1 −rseiksppd
(3.47)
where th is the transmission ratio through the hole. Combining Eqs. (3.46) and (3.47),
the E-M waves ⃗Et at the backside hole, which is a sum of the non-resonant transmis-
sion (E.q. 3.46) and the resonant transmission (E.q. 3.47). It can be expressed as:
⃗Et = ⃗xE0e−𝛼L
(
1 −rs cos(ksppd) −e𝛼Lth sin(ksppd) −irs sin(ksppd) + ie𝛼Lth cos(ksppd)
1 −rseiksppd
)
(3.48)
Assuming large scattering coefficient, i.e. rs ≈1, 𝛼≈0, and taking the first-order
approximation, the intensity It = |⃗Et|2 can be simplified as:
It = |⃗Et|2 ≈e−2𝛼LE2
0t2
h
[sin(ksppd)]2 + [rs∕th sin(ksppd) + 1]2
1 −2rs cos(ksppd) + r2
s
(3.49)

64
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
Equation (3.49) can be expressed for an off-resonant k by replacing the kspp with k:
It = |⃗Et|2 ≈e−2𝛼LE2
0t2
h
[sin(kd)]2 + [rs∕th sin(kd) + 1]2
1 −2rs cos(kd) + r2
s
(3.50)
One can evaluate a k vector that is slightly off-resonance, i.e. k = kspp + Δk.
At near resonance, i.e. ksppd = 2𝜋, cos(kd) ≈1 −(Δkd)2 = 1 −(ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔0)2
ℏ2c2∕d2 , and
sin(kd) ≈Δkd = (ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔0)
ℏc∕d
.
Equation (3.50) can be expressed as:
It = |⃗Et|2 ≈e−2𝛼LE2
0
(rs)2[
(ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔0)
(ℏc∕d)(1+rs)∕
√
2rs +
th∕rs
(1+rs)∕
√
2rs
]2
1 +
(ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔0)2
[ℏ2c2∕d2][(1+rs)2∕2rs]
= I0|tB|2 [q + 𝜉]2
1 + 𝜉2
(3.51)
where 𝜉=
(ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔0)
(ℏc∕d)(1+rs)∕
√
2rs , q =
th∕rs
(1+rs)∕
√
2rs , and |tB|2 = e−2𝛼LE2
0(rs)2.
3.3.2
2DSHA Surface Plasmonic Structure-Enhanced QDIP
Metallic 2DSHA structures show extraordinary optical transmission (EOT) of over
100% due to the excitation of resonant surface plasmonic waves [7]. The surface plas-
monic structure can also function as a band spectral filter with properly designed
surface plasmonic structures. The resonant conditions in Eq. (3.43) can be expressed
in terms of the wavelengths:
𝜆sp =
d
√
i2 + j2 Re
{[ 𝜀m𝜀d
𝜀m + 𝜀d
]1∕2}
(3.52)
where d is the lattice constant, (i, j) are the orders of the grating vectors, 𝜀m and
𝜀d are the dielectric constants of the metal and GaAs, respectively. The peak trans-
mission wavelength varies linearly with the period d of the plasmonic structure.
Figure 3.6 shows the simulated transmission spectra with different periods d using
CST Microwave Studio®.
Figure 3.7 shows the simulated near-field E-field profile at a 2DSHA structure with
an incident plane wave illuminated from the top and traveling in the z-direction. The
polarization of the E-field is in the x-direction, and the E-field amplitude is set to
1 V m−1. The E-field is much stronger near the hole regions, i.e. the majority of the
energy is confined near the 2DSHA/dielectric interference [12]. The extended region
of the E-field depends on the diameters of the holes [12]. One can exploit such sur-
face energy confinement effect to achieve photodetector enhancement with a thin
active absorption layer such as quantum dots (QD) [8, 11, 12, 26, 40]. By engineer-
ing the diameters of the holes, one can control the overlap of the E-field with the
active light absorption below the 2DSHA/dielectric interference and thus achieve
the highest light absorption [12].
Figure 3.8a,b shows the schematic structure of the 2DSHA plasmonic
structure-enhanced quantum dot IR photodetector and an scanning electron

3.3 Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
65
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
4
6
8
Wavelength (μm)
d = 1.4 (μm)
d = 2.2 (μm)
d = 2.4 (μm)
d = 2.6 (μm)
d = 2.8 (μm)
Transmission
10
12
Figure 3.6
Simulated transmission of the 2DSHA structures with different periods d. The
transmission peak wavelengths increase linearly with the periods d.
D
V m−1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
z
Figure 3.7
Simulated E-ﬁeld proﬁle of the 2DSHA structure at a top plane-wave
illumination with the x-polarization and the amplitude of 1 V m−1.
microscopy (SEM) image of the 2DSHA structure, respectively. As shown in
Figure 3.8a, the 2DSHA is fabricated on the 10 layers of QDs. The light illumination
is from the top 2DSHA side, i.e. top illumination. Backside-configured 2DSHA struc-
tures have also been developed and show higher performance enhancement [5, 6].
Figure 3.9 shows the measured photocurrent of the 2DSHA-enhanced quantum
dot infrared photodetector (QDIP) (red curve) compared with the reference pho-
todetector (referred to as REF, hence force) without the 2DSHA plasmonic structure
(blue curve). The period of the 2DSHA plasmonic structure is 1700 nm, correspond-
ing to i = 1 and j = 1 in Eq. (3.52). The measured enhancement peak wavelength is
at 5.4 μm. The peak wavelength is consistent with the peak wavelength calculation
from Eq. (3.52).

66
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
IR incidence
Au
Period d
Hole diameter
D
Top contact
2DSHA
plasmonic structure
10 QD layers
GaAs
n+  GaAs contacting layer
GaAs substrate
Bottom
contact
n+ GaAs contacting layer
Top contact
0.1 μm
0.85 μm
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8
2DSHA structure-enhanced QDIP: (a) Schematic cross-section of the 2DSHA
structure-enhanced QDIP. The 2DSHA is fabrication on top of the QD layers. The light
illumination is from the top, i.e. top illumination; (b) SEM picture of the top 2DSHA
structure.
2.0E–08
1.6E–08
1.2E–08
8.0E–09
4.0E–09
0.0E+00
2
4
6
8
Wavelength (μm)
Bias = –1.75 REF
Bias = –1.75 P = 1700 nm
Photocurrent (A)
10
12
Figure 3.9
Comparison of the photocurrents of the 2DSHA structure-enhanced QDIP and
the reference QDIP (REF). Red trace: photocurrent of the 2DSHA structure-enhanced QDIP;
blue trace: REF QDIP. 2DSHA structure-enhanced QDIP shows a large photocurrent
enhancement at the wavelength of 5.4 μm, which is consistent with the calculation using
Eq. (3.52) with i = 1 and j = 1.
Figure 3.10 shows the measured photocurrent of the different 2DSHA-enhanced
QDIP (pink curve) compared with the REF photodetector. The period of the 2DSHA
plasmonic structure is reduced to 1450 nm. The measured enhancement peak
wavelength is shifted to at 4.6 μm. From the experiments, it is confirmed that the
plasmonic enhancement peak wavelengths can be engineered by designing the
periods of the 2DSHA plasmonic structures.
Such selective spectral enhancement capability allows one to achieve a multi-
spectral imaging array by fabricating the 2DSHA structures with different periods

3.3 Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
67
1.6E–08
1.2E–08
8.0E–09
4.0E–09
0.0E–00
2
4
6
Wavelength (μm)
Bias = –1.75 REF
P 1450 nm
Photocurrent (A)
8
10
12
Figure 3.10
Photocurrents of a different 2DSHA structure-enhanced QDIP (pink trace)
compared with the REF QDIP. The period of the 2DSHA structure is reduced to 1450 nm,
whereas the photocurrent enhancement peak wavelength is shifted to 4.6 μm.
on top of a QDIP photodetector array. Since one can design a photomask containing
2DSHA structures with various periods, multispectral imaging can be fabricated
in one-step photolithography, avoiding the yield reduction problems in typical
multistep fabrications.
The spectral bands can be configured in a snapshot “mosaic” mode or in a snap-
shot “tile” mode. Figure 3.11a shows the layout for the snapshot mosaic mode. In this
mode, N × N multispectral pixels with different spectral bands form a superpixel unit
that can sense N2 spectral bands. Figure 3.11b shows an example of a 4 × 4 superpixel
unit that can obtain 16 bands. The 2048 × 2048 FPA will give 16-band spectral images
λ15
λ14
λ12
λ11
λ15
λ14
λ12
λ11
λ16
λ13
λ10
λ9
λ8
λ7
λ3
λ2
λ6
λ5
4 × 4 mosaic, 16 bands
2048
2048
λ4
λ1
λ16
λ13
λ10
λ9
λ8
λ7
λ3
λ2
λ6
λ5
λ4
λ1
λ3
λ4
λ1
λ2
Figure 3.11
Example snapshot mosaic hyperspectral FPA. The 4 × 4 pixels form a unit that
can sense 16 bands within the superpixel unit. The 2048 × 2048 FPA gives 16-band spectral
images with a resolution of 512 × 512 for each band.

68
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
with a resolution of 512 × 512 for each band. Such a type of multispectral imaging
FPA can be monolithically integrated devices without the need of optical filters. This
can reduce the device’s size and weight and enhance the device’s reliability.
3.4
Localized Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
3.4.1
Localized Surface Plasmonic Waves
When surface plasmonic waves propagate along small finite metallic surfaces such
as nanodisks, nanowires, and nanoparticles, they are confined within the nanometal
surfaces and form localized surface plasmonic waves (LSPR) [41], which propagate
within the nanostructure and reflect at the boundary. Strong SPR can build up when
the following resonant condition can be met.
kspp,md = m𝜋
(3.53)
Equation (3.53) can also be expressed in terms of the resonant wavelength 𝜆spp, m:
𝜆spp,m = 2d
m Re
(√𝜀rm𝜀rd
𝜀rm + 𝜀rd
)
(3.54)
Figure 3.12a shows a schematic structure of the surface current induced by
the surface plasmonic waves excited by the incident light in a metallic nanowire.
Figure 3.12b shows the simulated current density along the nanowire with a width
of 0.1 μm and a length of 2.0 μm. The resonant wavelengths of 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm and
𝜆spp, 3 = 4.6 μm are consistent with the calculation from Eq. (3.54).
3.4.2
Near-Field Distributions
Due to the sinusoidal surface electrical current distribution, the E-field profiles
of the nanowire plasmonic structure follow the E-field distribution of a standard
dipole antenna [42]. Figure 3.13a,b shows the simulated E-field distribution
1.4E+05
1.2E+05
1.0E+05
8.0E+04
6.0E+04
4.0E+04
2.0E+04
0.0E+00
y
x
z
–1.5
–1
–0.5
Position (μm)
(a)
(b)
λ = 4.6 (μm)
λ = 13.8 (μm)
J (A m−1)
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 3.12
(a) Schematic structure of the surface current induced in a metallic nanowire;
(b) simulated surface current density versus the positions of the nanowire for different
incident wavelengths.

3.4 Localized Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
69
λ = 13.8 (μm)
(a)
(b)
V m−1
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
z
x
λ = 4.6 (μm)
Figure 3.13
E-ﬁeld distributions of the nanowire plasmonic structure at the y = 0
cross-section: (a) incident light wavelength 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm; (b) incident light wavelength
𝜆spp, 3 = 4.6 μm. The E-ﬁeld is strong close to the plasmonic structure.
of the nanowire plasmonic structure at the y = 0 cross-section at the incident
light wavelengths of 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm and 𝜆spp, 3 = 4.6 μm, respectively. The
plasmonic structure changes the near-field E-field distribution and enhances
the near-field close to the plasmonic structure. Similar to the 2DSHA plasmonic
structure, such E-field enhancement provided by the localized plasmonic structure
allows one to achieve strong optical absorption using a thin active absorption
layer [9, 10].
3.4.3
Nanowire Pair
By placing two nanowires close to each other, one can form a nanowire pair
array with localized plasmonic waves in each of the array elements. Figure 3.14a
illustrates the schematic structure of a nanowire array aligned in the x-direction
with a gap g between the array elements. Figure 3.14b shows the simulated E-field
distribution at the y = 0 cross-section with the gap of g = 0.4 μm. The E-field is
strong in the gap region.
Figure 3.15a,b shows the simulated amplitude of the x-component of the E-field
(i.e. |Ex|) along the center of the nanowire (i.e. y = 0) for different gap values at the
incident light wavelengths of 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm and 𝜆spp, 3 = 4.6 μm, respectively. The
smaller gaps give a much higher E-field in the gap region. Such a strong E-field can
be used to enhance the photodetector performance.

70
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
(a)
(b)
Gap
g
λ = 13.8 (μm)
V m−1
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
z
x
Figure 3.14
Nanowire plasmonic structure array: (a) schematic view; (b) simulated E-ﬁeld
at the y = 0 cross-sections with the incident light wavelength 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm and the gap
dimension g = 0.4 μm. The E-ﬁeld is strong in the gap region.
60.0
50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
–2.5
(a)
(b)
–1.5
–0.5
λ = 13.8 (μm)
g = 0.05 (μm)
g = 0.4 (μm)
0.5
Position (μm)
|Ex| (V m−1)
1.5
2.5
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
–2.5
–1.5
–0.5
0.5
Position (μm)
1.5
2.5
|Ex| (V m−1)
λ = 4.6 (μm)
g = 0.05 (μm)
g = 0.4 (μm)
Figure 3.15
Simulated for different gap values (pink traces: g = 0.05 μm, blue traces:
g = 0.4 μm). (a) The incident light wavelength 𝜆spp, 1 = 13.8 μm; (b) the incident light
wavelength 𝜆spp, 1 = 4.6 μm. The smaller gap gives a much higher E-ﬁeld.

3.4 Localized Surface Plasmonic Wave-Enhanced QDIPs
71
1.5E+04
λ = 13.8 (μm)
λ = 13.8 (μm)
λ = 4.6 (μm)
λ = 4.6 (μm)
1.2E+04
9.0E+03
6.0E+03
3.0E+03
0.0E+00
y
z
x
–3.5
(a)
(b)
–2.5
–1.5
–0.5
Position (μm)
J (A m−1)
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
Figure 3.16
Localized surface plasmonic waves in circular disk array: (a) schematic
structure of the metallic circular disk array; (b) simulated surface current density along the
x-direction at y = 0, i.e. the center of the circular disk at different incident wavelengths
(pink traces: incident light wavelength 𝜆= 13.8 μm, blue trace: 𝜆= 4.6 μm).
3.4.4
Circular Disk Array for Broadband IR Photodetector Enhancement
LSPRs can also be excited by periodic circular disk array plasmonic structures [9, 10].
Figure 3.16a shows the schematic structure of the circular disk array plasmonic
structures. The incident light can excite surface plasmonic waves and surface cur-
rents on the circular disks. Figure 3.16b shows the simulated surface current along
the x-direction at the position y = 0, i.e. the center of the circular disk.
For the incident light with the polarization in the x-direction, the plasmonic res-
onant condition of the circular disk is determined by the diameter of the circular:
kspp,md + 𝜙0 = m𝜋
(3.55)
where d is the diameter of the circular disk and 𝜙0 represents the phase shift at the
edge of the circular disk. The first-order resonant wavelength 𝜆spp, 1 can be written as:
𝜆spp,1 =
2𝜋d
𝜋−𝜙0
Re
[√
𝜀mr𝜀dr
(𝜀dr + 𝜀mr)
]
(3.56)
Figure 3.17 shows the simulated transmission profile of the circular disk array with
the period p = 5.0 μm for various disk diameters. The resonant wavelengths (i.e. the
dips on the transmission profile) shift to the short wavelengths as the diameters of
the circular disk decrease.
Figure 3.18 shows the resonant wavelengths as a function of the disk diameters.
A linear relation is obtained, which is consistent with Eq. (3.56).
The E-field radiation from the edge point of one circular disk can interact with the
E-field of the adjacent disk. When the phase delay of the E-field radiation is 𝜙= 2𝜋,
the E-field is enhanced, whereas if the phase delay is 𝜙= 𝜋, the E-field enhancement
is reduced. The radiation phase delay 𝜙can be written as:
𝜙= 2𝜋
𝜆0
g√𝜀rd
(3.57)
where g is the gap between the two adjacent circular disks. Figure 3.19 shows the
simulated x-component of the E-field along the x-direction at y = 0. For large gaps
g > 1 μm, g = 4 μm gives a higher enhancement, corresponding to the radiation phase

72
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
8
d = 1.6 μm
2.0 μm
2.5 μm
9
10
11
Wavelength (μm)
Transmission
12
13
14
15
Figure 3.17
Transmission proﬁles of the circular disk arrays with various disk diameters.
The resonant wavelengths (i.e. dips in the proﬁles) shift to short wavelengths with smaller
disk diameters. The resonant wavelengths have a linear relationship with the disk
diameter d.
15.0
13.0
11.0
9.0
7.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Disk diameter (μm)
Resonant wavelength (μm)
2.5
3.0
Figure 3.18
Resonant wavelengths as a function of the disk diameters. The resonant
wavelengths vary linearly with the disk diameters d.
delay 𝜙= 2𝜋, whereas g = 2 μm shows the lowest enhancement, corresponding to
the radiation phase delay 𝜙= 𝜋for destructive interference.
3.5
Plasmonic Perfect Absorber (PPA)
3.5.1
Introduction to Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
As discussed in the Sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.4, when the surface plasmonic wave is
excited, the reflections from the plasmonic structures are significantly reduced

3.5 Plasmonic Perfect Absorber (PPA)
73
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
5 μm
4 μm
3 μm
2 μm
1 μm
2 μm
3 μm
4 μm
g = 5 μm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Position (μm)
|Ex| (V m−1)
Figure 3.19
Simulated Ex ﬁeld along the x-direction at y = 0. The gap g = 4 μm gives the
radiation phase delay 𝜙= 2𝜋and thus shows the highest enhancement, whereas gap
g = 2 μm provides the radiation phase delay 𝜙= 𝜋and thus creates destructive interference
between the adjacent disk and thus shows the lowest enhancement.
[7, 21], i.e. R(𝜔) ≅0, where 𝜔is the angular frequency of the plasmonic resonant
frequency. When a bottom reflector is added, a plasmonic perfector absorber (PPA)
cavity [19, 20] is formed between the top plasmonic structure and the bottom
reflector.
Figure 3.20a shows the schematic structure of the circular disk-based per-
fect absorber with the disk diameter d. The absorption spectrum depends on
the disk diameter d. By varying the diameter d, one can tune the absorption
spectrum. Figure 3.20b shows the simulated reflection light-intensity spectra
of perfect absorbers with different diameter d. The bottom reflector makes the
(a)
(b)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
7
8
9
Wavelength (μm)
Reflection
10
d = 1.50 μm
d = 1.45 μm
d = 1.40 μm
d = 1.35 μm
d = 1.30 μm
d = 1.25 μm
d = 1.20 μm
11
12
Figure 3.20
(a) Schematic structure of the perfect absorber; (b) simulated reﬂection
spectra of perfect absorbers with different diameter d. The reﬂection spectra can be tuned
by varying the disk diameter d.

74
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
λ = 8.2 μm
PPA cavity
Reflector
PPA cavity
Reflector
(a)
(b)
λ = 7.5 μm
V m−1
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
z
x
Figure 3.21
Simulated E-ﬁeld in the PPA cavity with the period p = 4 μm and the disk
diameter d = 1.2 μm: (a) at the resonant wavelength of 𝜆= 8.2 μm; (b) at the off-resonant
wavelength of 𝜆= 7.5 μm. The E-ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly enhanced at the resonant wavelength.
The primary E-ﬁeld direction is in the z-direction inside the PPA cavity.
transmission through the cavity close to zero, i.e. T(𝜔) ≅0. Thus, the total absorption
A(𝜔) = 1 −R(𝜔) −T(𝜔) is close to 100%, i.e. a perfect absorber [19].
Figure 3.21a,b shows the simulated E-fields of a PPA cavity with d = 1.2 μm
and period p = 4 μm at the resonant wavelength (i.e. 𝜆= 8.2 μm) and off-resonant
wavelength (i.e. 𝜆= 7.5 μm), respectively. The incident light is x-polarized with the
magnitude of |E| = 1 V m−1. At the resonant wavelength, the E-field is significantly
enhanced. The E-field direction is changed from the x-direction to the z-direction
inside the PPA cavity.
Figure 3.22 shows the simulated reflection light-intensity spectra of the perfect
absorber with different period p. For d = 1.2 μm, period p = 4.8 μm gives the lowest
reflection. This corresponds to p = 4d, i.e. the gap between the disks g = 2d. This
is consistent with the analysis in Section 3.4.4, Figure 3.19, where g = 2d gives the
strongest plasmonic enhancement.
3.5.2
Plasmonic Perfect Absorber-Enhanced QDIP
Perfect absorbers [19, 43–46] with near-zero in both reflection and transmission
have been developed in the microwave, tera-Hertz (THz), IR, and visible spectral
regimes [19, 43–46]. Perfect absorbers have been used in numerous applications in
thermal imaging, bolometers, photovoltaic, IR spectroscopy, and terahertz stealth
[19, 47, 48]. PPA cavity-enhanced quantum dot IR photodetectors [20] can be
obtained by embedding an MWIR/LWIR quantum dot IR photodetector inside
a PPA cavity. The detailed fabrication steps have been reported [20]. Figure 3.23
shows the measured photocurrent spectra of the PPA cavity-enhanced LWIR QDIP
compared with a reference QDIP without the PPA structure. Other than the PPA

3.5 Plasmonic Perfect Absorber (PPA)
75
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
–35
7.6
7.8
8.0
8.2
Wavelength (μm)
Reflection (dB)
8.4
p = 5.0 μm
p = 4.9 μm
p = 4.8 μm
p = 4.7 μm
8.6
Figure 3.22
Simulated reﬂection spectra of perfect absorbers with different period p for
the disk diameter d = 1.2 μm. Period p = 4.8 μm, i.e. p = 4d, gives the lowest reﬂection.
6.0E-08
5.0E-08
4.0E-08
3.0E-08
2.0E-08
1.0E-08
0.0E-00
2.0
4.0
77 K
Reference
QDIP
Bias = –1.3 V
Perfect absorber-enhanced
 QDIP
6.0
Wavelength (μm)
Photocurrent (A)
8.0
10.0
12.0
Figure 3.23
Measured photocurrent spectrum of the PPA QDIP compared to that of a
reference QDIP with the PPA structure. The reference QDIP was made from the same
material through the same fabrication processes. The PPA QDIP shows a much higher
photocurrent than that of the reference QDIP.
structure, the material and the fabrication processes of the reference QDIP and
the PPA QDIP were the same. The PPA QDIP shows a much higher photocurrent
than that of the reference QDIP, indicating the effectiveness of the PPA cavity in
enhancing the photodetection.
Due to the PPA enhancement, the PPA QDIP can achieve a high quantum effi-
ciency (QE) of 50% [20]. The experiment measurement indicates the high absorption
of the PPA cavity provides an effective approach to achieve high QE using a thin light
absorption layer.

76
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
(a)
(b)
7
8
9
10
11
12
Wavelength (μm)
Reflection
Figure 3.24
(a) Top view of the broadband absorber. Each unit contains circular disks with
three different diameters; (b) reﬂection spectrum. It combines the low individual reﬂection
proﬁles into a broadband low reﬂection.
3.5.3
Broadband Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
In addition to tuning the enhancement band by varying the circular disk diameter
d, one can also achieve a broader band perfect absorber by incorporating multiple
circular disks with different diameters d in one unit cell. Figure 3.24a shows the
top view of the broadband perfect absorber. Each unit cell contains circular disks
with different diameters. Figure 3.24b shows the simulated reflections of this perfect
absorber. The perfect absorber combines the low reflection profiles into a broadband
low reflection, i.e. high absorption.
3.5.4
2DSHA Plasmonic Perfect Absorber
In addition to the circular disk-based PPA, the 2DSHA plasmonic structure can also
be used to form a PPA cavity by adding a reflector to the back of the 2DSHA structure.
Figure 3.25a shows the schematic structure of the 2DSHA PPA cavity. Figure 3.25b
shows the simulated reflection spectra of 2DSHA PPAs with various periods. Reflec-
tion minimums occur at the plasmonic resonances.
Figure 3.26 shows the plasmonic resonant wavelengths as a function of the periods
d of the 2DSHA plasmonic structure. A linear curve is obtained.
Figure 3.27a,b shows the simulated |Ez| and |Ex| at the y = 0 cross-section of the
2DSHA PPA cavity at the resonant wavelength. The E-field inside the PPA cavity is
primarily in the z-direction.
3.6
Chapter Summary
This chapter reviews basic concepts of SPRs and their excitation techniques in the
IR spectral region, including prism and grating-coupling and the 2DSHA structure
excitation. The SPRs in the 2DSHA structure show a Fano-type transmission

3.6 Chapter Summary
77
2DSHA
d
p
2DSHA PPA cavity
1.0
(a)
(b)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
Wavelength (μm)
Reflection
8.5
9.0
p = 2.2 μm
p = 2.3 μm
p = 2.4 μm
p = 2.6 μm
9.5
Reflection
Figure 3.25
(a) Schematic structure of the 2DSHA perfect absorber; (b) simulated
reﬂection spectra for 2DSHA PPA with various periods.
9.5
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Period p (μm)
Resonant wavelength (μm)
2.6
2.8
Figure 3.26
Resonant wavelength versus the period of the 2DSHA PPA plot. The Resonant
wavelengths vary linearly with the periods of the 2DSHA PPA.

78
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
(a)
2DSHA
PPA cavity
2DSHA
PPA cavity
|Ez| (V m–1)
|Ex | (V m–1)
V m–1
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
z
x
d
d
(b)
Figure 3.27
Simulated E ﬁelds at the y = 0 cross section of the 2DSHA PPA cavity at the
resonant wavelength: (a) |Ez|; (b) |Ex|.
profile, which is explained using the standard EM theory. LSPRs in nanowires,
nanodisks, and the array are discussed together with the resonant conditions
and the near-field profiles. The SPR- and LSPR-enhanced QDIP photodetectors
are presented with the experiment results, which verify the enhancement by the
SPRs and LSPRs. The chapter also discusses two types of PPA cavities, namely
the nanodisk PPA cavity and the 2DSHA PPA cavity together with their resonant
conditions and the near-field profiles. The nanodisk PPA-enhanced QDIP is also
presented with experimental data, which show the effectiveness of the PPA cavity
in the photodetector performance enhancement.
References
1 Arnold, M., Zimin, D., and Zogg, H. (2005). Resonant-cavity-enhanced photode-
tectors for the mid-infrared. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87 (14): 141103. https://doi.org/10
.1063/1.2061855.
2 Letka, V., Bainbridge, A., Craig, A.P. et al. (2019). Resonant cavity-enhanced pho-
todetector incorporating a type-II superlattice to extend MWIR sensitivity. Opt.
Express 27 (17): 23970–23980. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.27.023970.
3 Murtaza, S.S., Anselm, K.A., Hu, C. et al. (1995). Resonant-cavity enhanced
(RCE) separate absorption and multiplication (SAM) avalanche photodetector
(APD). IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 7 (12): 1486. https://doi.org/10.1109/68
.477291.

References
79
4 Vasinajindakaw, P., Gu, G., and Lu, X. (2013). Broadband photocurrent enhance-
ment in longwave infrared quantum dot photodetectors by sub-wavelength
surface gratings. Opt. Photonics Lett. 6 (1): 1350002. https://doi.org/10.1142/
s1793528813500020.
5 Gu, G., Vaillancourt, J., Vasinajindakaw, P., and Lu, X. (2013).
Backside-configured surface plasmonic structure with over 40 times photocurrent
enhancement. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 28 (10): 105005.
6 Vaillancourt, J., Mojaverian, N., and Lu, X. (2014). A longwave infrared focal
plane array enhanced by backside-configured plasmonic structures. IEEE Photon-
ics Technol. Lett. 26 (8): 745–748. https://doi.org/10.1109/LPT.2014.2303118.
7 Ebbesen, T.W., Lezec, H.J., Ghaemi, H.F. et al. (1998). Extraordinary optical
transmission through sub-wavelength hole arrays. Nature 391 (6668): 667–669.
https://doi.org/10.1038/35570.
8 Vasinajindakaw, P., Vaillancourt, J., Gu, G. et al. (2011). A Fano-type interference
enhanced quantum dot infrared photodetector. Appl. Phys. Lett. 98 (21): 211111.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3593128.
9 Gu, G., Vaillancourt, J., and Lu, X. (2014). Analysis of near-field components
of a plasmonic optical antenna and their contribution to quantum dot infrared
photodetector enhancement. Opt. Express 22 (21): 24970–24976. https://doi.org/10
.1364/OE.22.024970.
10 Kemsri, T., Gu, G., Zhang, Y. et al. (2017). Angular-dependent photodetection
enhancement by a metallic circular disk optical antenna. AIP Adv. 7 (2): 025013.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4975705.
11 Lee, S.J., Ku, Z., Barve, A. et al. (2011). A monolithically integrated plasmonic
infrared quantum dot camera. Nat. Commun. 2 (1): 286. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms1283.
12 Liu, R., Vasinajindakaw, P., Gu, G. et al. (2012). Optimizing light absorption in
quantum dot infrared photodetectors by tuning surface confinement of surface
plasmonic waves. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46 (1): 015102. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0022-3727/46/1/015102.
13 Krasnok, A.E., Maksymov, I.S., Denisyuk, A.I. et al. (2013). Optical nanoanten-
nas. Phys. Usp. 56 (6): 539. http://stacks.iop.org/1063-7869/56/i=6/a=539.
14 Neda, M., Guiru, G., and Xuejun, L. (2015). A plasmonic dipole optical antenna
coupled quantum dot infrared photodetector. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 48 (47):
475102. http://stacks.iop.org/0022-3727/48/i=47/a=475102.
15 Xuejun, L., Neda, M., Lin, L. et al. (2017). A back side configured pointed dipole
plasmonic optical antenna array enhanced quantum dot infrared photodetector.
Semicond. Sci. Technol. 32 (12): 125017. http://stacks.iop.org/0268-1242/32/i=12/
a=125017.
16 GhafaryAghdam, A., Xiang, B., Li, L. et al. (2018). Double-pointed opti-
cal antenna in the longwave infrared (LWIR) spectral regime. In: NAECON
2018 – IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference, Dayton, OH, USA
(23–26 July 2018), 465–469. https://doi.org/10.1109/NAECON.2018.8556820.
17 Novotny, L. and van Hulst, N. (2011). Antennas for light. Nat. Photonics 5 (2):
83–90. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2010.237.

80
3 Surface Plasmonic Resonance-Enhanced Infrared Photodetectors
18 Giannini, V., Fernández-Domínguez, A.I., Heck, S.C., and Maier, S.A. (2011).
Plasmonic nanoantennas: fundamentals and their use in controlling the radiative
properties of nanoemitters. Chem. Rev. 111 (6): 3888–3912. https://doi.org/10
.1021/cr1002672.
19 Liu, N., Mesch, M., Weiss, T. et al. (2010). Infrared perfect absorber and its appli-
cation as plasmonic sensor. Nano Lett. 10 (7): 2342–2348. https://doi.org/10.1021/
nl9041033.
20 Lu, X., Vaillancourt, J., and Gu, G. (2017). A plasmonic perfect absorber
enhanced longwave infrared quantum dot infrared photodetector with high
quantum efficiency. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 50 (13): 135101. https://doi.org/10
.1088/1361-6463/aa5126.
21 Ritchie, R.H. (1957). Plasma losses by fast electrons in thin films. Phys. Rev. 106
(5): 874–881. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.106.874.
22 Lu, L., Kobayashi, A., Tawa, K., and Ozaki, Y. (2006). Silver nanoplates with
special shapes: controlled synthesis and their surface plasmon resonance and
surface-enhanced Raman scattering properties. Chem. Mater. 18 (20): 4894–4901.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cm0615875.
23 Nie, S. and Emory, S.R. (1997). Probing single molecules and single nanopar-
ticles by surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Science 275 (5303): 1102–1106.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5303.1102.
24 Campion, A. and Kambhampati, P.Y. (1998). Surface-enhanced Raman scattering.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 27 (4): 241–250. https://doi.org/10.1039/a827241z.
25 Chang, C.-C., Sharma, Y.D., Kim, Y.-S. et al. (2010). A surface plasmon
enhanced infrared photodetector based on InAs quantum dots. Nano Lett. 10
(5): 1704–1709.
26 Vasinajindakaw, P., Vaillancourt, J., Gu, G., and Lu, X. (2012). Surface plasmonic
enhanced polarimetric longwave infrared photodetection with band pass spectral
filtering. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 27 (6): 65005–65009.
27 Gu, G., Mojaverian, N., Vaillancourt, J., and Lu, X. (2014). Surface plasmonic res-
onance induced near-field vectors and their contribution to quantum dot infrared
photodetector enhancement. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 47 (43): 435106. http://stacks
.iop.org/0022-3727/47/i=43/a=435106.
28 Guiru Gu, X.L., Kemsri, T., and Zhang, Y. (2017). Surface plasmonics and its
applications in infrared sensing. In: Nanoplasmonics Fundamentals and Applica-
tions (Chapter 9) (ed. G. Barbillon), 195–214. London: IntechOpen Limited.
29 Drude, P. (1900). Zur Elektronentheorie der Metalle. Ann. Phys. 306 (3): 566–613.
https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.19003060312.
30 Reshef, O., De Leon, I., Alam, M.Z., and Boyd, R.W. (2019). Nonlinear optical
effects in epsilon-near-zero media. Nat. Rev. Mater. 4: 535–551.
31 Niu, X., Hu, X., Chu, S., and Gong, Q. (2018). Epsilon-near-zero photonics: a
new platform for integrated devices. Adv. Opt. Mater. 6 (10): 1701292. https://doi
.org/10.1002/adom.201701292.
32 Alú, A., Silveirinha, M.G., Salandrino, A., and Engheta, N. (2007).
Epsilon-near-zero metamaterials and electromagnetic sources: tailoring the
radiation phase pattern. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter 75: 155410.

References
81
33 Raether, H. (1988). Surface Plasmons on Smooth Surfaces. Berlin: Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg.
34 Ordal, M.A., Long, L.L., Bell, R.J. et al. (1983). Optical properties of the metals
Al, Co, Cu, Au, Fe, Pb, Ni, Pd, Pt, Ag, Ti, and W in the infrared and far infrared.
Appl. Opt. 22 (7): 1099–1119. https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.22.001099.
35 Otto, A. (1969). Streustrahlung von Silber durch Anregung von Oberflächen-
plasmaschwingungen. Z. Angew. Phys. 224 (1): 65–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01392234.
36 Shalabney, A. and Abdulhalim, I. (2011). Sensitivity-enhancement methods for
surface plasmon sensors. Laser Photonics Rev. 5 (4): 571–606. https://doi.org/10
.1002/lpor.201000009.
37 Fano, U. (1961). Effects of configuration interaction on intensities and phase
shifts. Phys. Rev. 124 (6): 1866–1878. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.124.1866.
38 Genet, C., van Exter, M.P., and Woerdman, J.P. (2003). Fano-type interpretation
of red shifts and red tails in hole array transmission spectra. Opt. Commun. 225
(4): 331–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2003.07.037.
39 Limonov, M.F., Rybin, M.V., Poddubny, A.N., and Kivshar, Y.S. (2017). Fano
resonances in photonics. Nat. Photonics 11 (9): 543–554. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nphoton.2017.142.
40 Vasinajindakaw, P., Lu, X., Qian, X., et al. (2011). High-operating temperature
(HOT) broadband quantum-dot infrared photodetector. SPIE Defense, Security,
and Sensing, Orlando, FL. SPIE.
41 Mayer, K.M. and Hafner, J.H. (2011). Localized surface plasmon resonance
sensors. Chem. Rev. 111 (6): 3828–3857. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr100313v.
42 Jackson, J.D. (1998). Classical Electrodynamics. Wiley.
43 Fante, R.L. and McCormack, M.T. (1988). Reflection properties of the Salisbury
screen. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 36 (10): 1443–1454. https://doi.org/10
.1109/8.8632.
44 Hu, C., Liu, L., Zhao, Z. et al. (2009). Mixed plasmons coupling for expanding
the bandwidth of near-perfect absorption at visible frequencies. Opt. Express 17
(19): 16745–16749. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.17.016745.
45 Landy, N.I., Sajuyigbe, S., Mock, J.J. et al. (2008). Perfect metamaterial absorber.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (20): 207402. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100
.207402.
46 Kats, M.A., Sharma, D., Lin, J. et al. (2012). Ultra-thin perfect absorber employ-
ing a tunable phase change material. Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 (22): 221101. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.4767646.
47 Chen, K., Adato, R., and Altug, H. (2012). Dual-band perfect absorber for mul-
tispectral plasmon-enhanced infrared spectroscopy. ACS Nano 6 (9): 7998–8006.
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn3026468.
48 Liu, K., Hu, H., Song, H. et al. (2013). Wide-angle and polarization-insensitive
perfect absorber for organic photovoltaic layers. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 25
(13): 1266–1269. https://doi.org/10.1109/LPT.2013.2264047.


83
4
Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
Shiva Khani1, Ali Farmani2, and Pejman Rezaei1
1Semnan University, Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, HCRJ+4F9, Semnan, 35131-19111, Iran
2Lorestan University, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Falakol’ Aﬂak Street, Khorramabad,
Lorestan, 44316-68151, Iran
4.1
Introduction
Optical components [1–3] are superior to semiconductor electronic ones [4, 5] in
terms of higher computational speeds and lower noise values. Consequently, the
development of optical devices is growing in prosperity. Photonic crystal (PC) struc-
tures [6–8] can be a suitable candidate for the realization of different passive and
active optical devices such as PC filters [9, 10], sensors [11–13], splitters [14, 15],
slow lights [16], demultiplexers [17, 18], switches [19–21], modulators [22, 23], and
logic gates [24, 25]. PCs are periodic arrangements of dielectric layers with alter-
nating refractive indexes. The distribution of the dielectric layers’ refractive index is
periodic in one, two, or three dimensions [26]. Due to their remarkable capability
to appear as photonic band gaps (PBGs) with sharp transient edges, PCs are consid-
ered an efficient basis for the realization of optical switches and sensors [27]. In the
frequency range of the PBG, no optical wave is allowed to propagate through the PC
structure. The refractive index and structural parameters of the PC structure deter-
mine the PBG frequency range [28]. The relatively large size (micrometer size) of
the PC structures is their main drawback compared to other optical structures, such
as plasmonic [29–31] and graphene [32, 33] structures.
Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), due to their remarkable capabilities to
overcome the diffraction limit and manipulate light in a nanoscale domain, are
considered as an efficient basis for the realization of highly integrated optical
circuits [34–36]. SPPs are created at the interface between an insulator and a
metal layer with different signs of dielectric constants through the interaction of
surface electrons and incident photons [37]. Accordingly, all of the conventional PC
components can be redesigned based on SPPs with more miniaturized footprints.
Over the last few years, a variety of devices based on SPPs have been proposed, i.e.
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

84
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
plasmonic filters [38, 39], Bragg reflectors [40, 41], sensors [42–44], demultiplexers
[45, 46], Mach–Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) [47], and switches [48–51]. Another
advantage of metal–insulator–metal (MIM) plasmonic structures is the possibility
of integrating such configurations with microwave circuits [52, 53]. It is because
MIM structures have also been used for the realization of previous microwave
microstrip components [54, 55].
Due to the large negative real part and small imaginary part of permittivity of noble
metals such as silver and gold in optical frequencies, such metal materials have been
widely used in plasmonic devices [56]. However, plasmonic components designed
using these metals have some drawbacks. First of all, such structures are inherently
lossy [57]. Secondly, these structures cannot be tuned freely when their geometry
parameters are fixed [58–60]. This motivates researchers to use other materials with
low ohmic losses and tunability property such as graphene structures [33, 61, 62].
Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) monolayer sheet of carbon atoms packed
into a honeycomb lattice [63, 64]. Graphene can behave like a thin metal film with
negative permittivity by means of chemical doping, electric and magnetic fields
[65, 66]. Meanwhile, graphene structures have remarkable advantages compared
to noble metals. Such features include ultralow ohmic losses of graphene, much
thinner thickness of graphene than metal layers, tunability of graphene’s complex
conductivity, and mechanical strength of graphene structures. The mentioned
properties of graphene make it an appropriate choice to design highly integrated
graphene-plasmonic (GP) devices [67–70].
Among the various optical devices, optical switches [71, 72] and sensors [73–75]
are popular topics and have a wide range of applications. Up to now, various
approaches based on different structures, such as PC [76, 77], plasmonic [78, 79],
and graphene [80, 81], have been adopted to design optical switches and sensors.
An all-optical switch based on a directional coupler structure in a 2D PC lattice
with Kerr optical nonlinearity has been proposed in [21]. In the proposed structure
reported in [21], the high switching speed and low reflection coefficient for the con-
trol signal make the presented switch suitable for all-optical integration purposes. In
other approaches [2, 29, 48, 50], novel plasmonic topologies using two isolated MIM
waveguides to pass the data and control signals have been proposed for all-optical
switching applications. Using such a method (isolated data and control paths)
prevents the intermodulation between the data and control signals and reduces
harmonic distortion. Other methods, including optical switches using a deposited
graphene nanoribbon on a silica (SiO2)/silicon (Si) substrate [82], a terahertz switch
based on a graphene monolayer, poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA) [83], and an
all-optical multi-channel switch using square ring resonators [84], have also been
presented.
Over the last few years, there have also been various suggestions for realizing opti-
cal sensors using different structures. Due to the sharp edge of the Fano resonance
shape, such a resonance mode can improve the sensitivity and figure of merit (FOM)
of optical sensors. As a result, many resonators and optical configurations have been
presented to obtain the Fano resonance shape, including an asymmetric MIM waveg-
uide structure [85], splitting ring resonator and tooth-shaped resonator [86], and

4.2 Graphene Optical Switch
85
dual ring resonators [87]. Another method that has been used in [88, 89] is using
optical structures with plasmon-induced transparency (PIT) resonance modes.
In addition to the mentioned published optical switch and sensor structures, there
are also reports on structures to realize the function of both optical switches and sen-
sors simultaneously. In such structures, multifunctional devices are used as optical
switches and sensors using two different insulator materials [81, 90–93]. The exten-
sive design of dual-functional devices (optical switch and sensor) includes plasmonic
nanodisk resonators [90], dumbbell-shaped cavity slots [91], rectangular resonators
[92], two pairs of graphene nanorings and a graphene nanoribbon [93], and a plas-
monic graphene-based structure [81].
In this chapter, first as a case study, graphene and nanomaterial heterostructures
(combination of plasmonic and PC structures) are used to design optical switches.
Thereafter, to study the modulation characteristics, an optical modulator has been
designed using plasmonic structures. Finally, the summary and conclusions are dis-
cussed in Section 4.5.
4.2
Graphene Optical Switch
Optical switches are used for light routing and switching. Accordingly, they have
found wide applications in many optical systems. On the other hand, optical
switches can also be used for optical sensing applications. It is mainly due to
the high wavelength shifts of optical switches. Such devices have been presented
in [94–96]. Among the most important optical structures that have found wide
application for switching mechanisms are graphene structures.
The optical features of graphene can be tuned by varying its Fermi level. The
Fermi level and therefore the chemical potential (𝜇c) and the surface conductivity
of graphene can be changed by applying an external voltage. When the chemical
potential is higher than the threshold value, graphene acts as a metal layer, while
graphene can be considered as a dielectric layer for the chemical potential lower than
the threshold value. The surface conductivity of graphene (𝜎), which is composed of
intraband and interband parts, can be calculated by the Kubo formula [97, 98].
𝜎(𝜔) = 𝜎intra(𝜔) + 𝜎inter(𝜔)
(4.1)
where 𝜎intra and 𝜎inter are the intraband and interband transitions, respectively, and
they can be expressed as:
𝜎intra =
2ie2kBT
𝜋2(𝜔+ i𝜏−1)
ln
(
2 cosh
( Ef
2kBT
))
(4.2)
𝜎inter = e2
4
{
1
2 + 1
𝜋arctan
(𝜔−2Ef
2kBT
)
−i
2𝜋ln
(
(𝜔+ 2Ef )2
(𝜔−2Ef )2 + (2kBT)2
)}
(4.3)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, Ef demonstrates the Fermi level of graphene,
 shows the reduced Planck constant, and 𝜏is the carrier relaxation time. In [99],

86
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
GaAs
Silver
SiO2
Graphene
VDC
x
z
y
Control
light
Light
d4
d3
d2
d1
d6
d7
d8
d9
d5
Figure 4.1
General structure of the proposed all-optical graphene plasmon switch.
all-optical switches based on graphene plasmon structures were proposed. The
general structure of the designed graphene plasmon switch is shown in Figure 4.1.
This structure is composed of a novel combination of insulator–metal–insulator
(IMI) and graphene waveguides designed in the form of a MZI topology. In this
structure, the metal material in the MZI structure is silver. The complex relative
permittivity of silver is described by the accurate Drude–Lorentz model [100]:
𝜀m(𝜔) = 1 −
𝜔2
p
𝜔(𝜔+ j𝛾) +
5
∑
n=1
fn𝜔2
n
𝜔2
n −𝜔2 −j𝜔𝛾n
(4.4)
where
𝜔p
=
2002.6 × 1012
Hz
is
the
bulk
plasma
frequency
of
metal,
𝛾= 11.61 × 1012 Hz is a damping constant, and 𝜔is the angular frequency of
the incident light. Also, values of resonant frequencies (𝜔n), damping constants
(𝛾n), and weights (f n) are given in Table 4.1. The real and imaginary parts of the
silver permittivity are shown in Figure 4.2a.
The insulator material around the MZI structure is a Kerr nonlinear material,
which is chosen to be GaAs. The bottom layer (black area) is a graphene layer that
is placed on a silica substrate. The graphene permittivity is characterized by [66]:
𝜀g(𝜔) = 1 + i
(
𝜎(𝜔)
𝜀0𝜔tg
)
(4.5)

4.2 Graphene Optical Switch
87
Table 4.1
Parameters of the Drude–Lorentz model for silver.
N
𝝎n (THz)
𝜸n(THz)
f n
1
197.3
939.62
7.9247
2
1083.5
109.29
0.5013
3
1979.1
15.71
0.0133
4
4392.5
221.49
0.8266
5
9812.1
584.91
1.1133
(a)
(b)
0
–50
–100
–150
Re (εm)
Re (εg)
Im (εm)
Im (εg)
–200
1
0.5
0
–0.5
400
800
1200
Wavelength (nm)
× 1016
× 10–6
f (Hz)
μc = 0.5 ev
1600
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
9
6
3
0
20
15
10
5
0
Figure 4.2
Real and imaginary parts of (a) silver permittivity and (b) graphene permittivity.
where tg is the graphene thickness and 𝜀0 is the permittivity of vacuum. Figure 4.2b
shows the real and imaginary parts of the graphene permittivity. The structural
parameters of the proposed optical switch (Figure 4.1) are as follows: d1 = 300,
d2 = 3000, d3 = 3000, d4 = 350, d5 = 50, d6 = 500, d7 = 600, d8 = 1000, and d9 = 100
(all in nm).
Figure 4.1 shows that there is a metal layer in the shape of an MZI above the
graphene sheet so that the graphene region under the metal plate turns into waveg-
uides by applying the DC voltage. It means that when the DC voltage is applied
between two layers (metal and graphene), a capacitive structure in the form of the
MZI is generated. The created capacitor is studied in two modes of DC and AC in
the following. After applying the DC voltage, the chemical potential of the created
MZI structure on the graphene layer is modulated from 0 to 0.31 eV. Accordingly,
surface plasmon waves can propagate in the graphene MZI structure, while these
waves cannot excite in other sections of the graphene layer (𝜇c = 0 eV).
4.2.1
DC Mode of the Gate Capacitor
Figure 4.3a shows the order of the created capacitor layers in Figure 4.1. As seen
in Figure 4.1, two insulator materials of SiO2 and GaAs exist between the two
capacitor plates (metal and graphene plates). It is because graphene is created
by the plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) method on a silica

88
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
Graphene
1.6 × 10–4
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
–30–20
Air
GaAs
Silver
SiO2
Graphene
–10 0
10
Z (nm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Z (μm)
20 30
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
SiO2
GaAs
E intensity
0.8
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
E intensity
Silver
Figure 4.3
(a) Order of the created capacitor layers in Figure 4.1, (b) light penetration
depth of the graphene (main) waveguide, and (c) light penetration depth of the metal
(control) waveguide.
layer, and the nonlinear material of GaAs is used for light modulation. As a result,
the equivalent capacitance includes two series capacitors. Such an equivalent
capacitance can be obtained as:
Cox =
1
1
CSiO2
+
1
CGaAs
=
𝜀0
dnm
SiO2
𝜀SiO2
r
+
dnm
GaAs
𝜀GaAs
r
(4.6)
As seen in Eq. (4.6), the capacitance value depends on four parameters of the
heights of the insulator layers (dnm
SiO2 and dnm
GaAs) and the permittivity values of
the insulator materials (𝜀SiO2
r
and 𝜀GaAs
r
). To achieve the appropriate dimensions of
the two insulator materials (dnm
SiO2 and dnm
GaAs), the vertical propagation length of the
generated surface plasmon waves in the main and control waveguides (graphene
and metal waveguides) should be considered. The penetration depth in z-direction
for two waveguides is shown in Figure 4.3b,c. According to Figure 4.3b,c, values
more than 500 and 20 nm should be considered for the heights of GaAs and SiO2
layers, respectively. It is because of two reasons. First, there exists the possibility
of light modulation in the metal waveguide and secondly to avoid interferences
between the two main and control waveguides.
As mentioned, two parameters of the permittivity values of SiO2 and GaAs also
affect the capacitance value. As a result, the 𝜀SiO2
r
and 𝜀GaAs
r
values should be deter-
mined. In all conditions, the permittivity of SiO2 is constant and equal to 3.9. There-
fore, the capacitance value can be expressed as:
Cox =
𝜀GaAs
r
𝜀0
20 nm + d1
3.9
× 𝜀GaAs
r
+ 500 nm + d2
(4.7)
When light is not modulated inside the GaAs material, the permittivity of GaAs is
equal to 12.9. By considering dnm
SiO2 = 100 and dnm
GaAs = 500nm, the DC gate capacitor

4.2 Graphene Optical Switch
89
can be calculated from Eq. (4.7). The obtained CDC
ox
is equal to 137.4 μF. The
calculation procedure shows that the material type of the nongraphene gate is not
important in this section. To achieve a chemical potential of 0.31 eV in graphene
MZI structure, the applied voltage value can be calculated from Eq. (4.8), which is
equal to 82 V.
|VDC| =
(
e
𝜋CDC
ox
) (
𝜇c
vf
)2
(4.8)
In addition, by applying the obtained DC voltage, the gate capacitance should be
equal to 128.8 μF for the chemical potential of graphene to be equal to 0.3 eV. This
change in capacitance value is created by the light modulation in the AC mode of
the gate capacitor.
4.2.2
AC Mode of the Gate Capacitor
The use of surface plasmons between the nongraphene capacitor plate and insulator
material is one of the techniques to change the capacitance value. The important
point is that the calculation of the capacitance which changes the chemical potential
level in switching structure. In the micrometer frequency range, the refractive index
of GaAs changes as:
n2 −1 = 4.372 514 +
5.466 742𝜆2
𝜆2 −(0.443 130 7)2 +
0.024 299 6 𝜆2
𝜆2 −(0.874 645 3)2 +
1.957 522 𝜆2
𝜆2 −(36.9166)2
(4.9)
The permittivity variations of GaAs versus wavelength are shown in Figure 4.4a.
Figure 4.4a is obtained from Eq. (4.9). The wavelength range of 1150–1550 nm is
among the most important frequency ranges in telecommunication applications and
optical integrated circuits. Consequently, this range is considered for GaAs permit-
tivity variations. The capacitance value in the range of 1150–1550 nm is calculated
using Eq. (4.8), and its variations are shown in Figure 4.4b. Also, Figure 4.4c shows
the relationship between the wavelength of the control waves and the variation of
13
131
0.31
0.3
0.29
130
129
128
127
12.5
12
11.5
εGaAs
Cox (μF)
μc (eV)
11
0.9
(a)
(b)
(c)
1.2
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
1.5
1.8 2
1.15 1.25 1.35 1.45 1.55
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8 2
× 103
× 103
× 103
Figure 4.4
(a) GaAs permittivity, (b) variations of the waveguide capacitance, and (c)
variations of the chemical potential for the proposed switch.

90
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
x
y
Light
Graphene
SiO2
z
Figure 4.5
Main waveguide of the optical switch (Figure 4.1).
200
100
0
–100
–200
0
Y (nm)
X (nm)
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
Figure 4.6
Field proﬁle of Ex at 1.42 μm for the main waveguide (with the chemical
potential of 0.31 eV for both arms).
the chemical potential. Based on the obtained results, the best wavelength for the
control light is equal to 1300 nm.
After studying the created capacitor in two DC and AC modes, the operation of the
proposed optical switch based on the main and control waveguides is investigated in
the following. As mentioned above, the main waveguide includes air, graphene, and
silica layers. Figure 4.5 shows this structure. In Figure 4.5, control light is not applied
to the structure. Accordingly, the chemical potential of the total MZI structure is
0.31 eV. It is worth mentioning that the chemical potential of other places (black
places) in the graphene layer is equal to 0 eV.
Figure 4.6 shows the field profile of the main waveguide by applying the main light
source. As seen in Figure 4.6, when the chemical potential level of two arms of the
MZI structure is the same, the phase difference of waves between these two arms is
0∘. Consequently, the waves can transmit to the output port of the MZI structure.
The next is that the main and control light sources be applied simultaneously. In
this case, the control signal induces the Kerr effect in the nonlinear medium (GaAs
material), and one of the arms has a different chemical potential compared to the
whole main waveguide. Figure 4.7 shows the mechanism of wave propagation for the

4.2 Graphene Optical Switch
91
200
100
0
–100
Y (nm)
X (nm)
–200
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
Figure 4.7
Field proﬁle of Ex at 1.42 μm for the main waveguide (with the chemical
potential of 0.31 eV for the upper arm and 0.3 eV for the lower arm).
10
12
14
16
18
20
Wavelength (nm)
× 103
× 103
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Transmittance (%)
10
12
14
16
18
20
Wavelength (nm)
(b)
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Transmittance (%)
Unequal WGs
Identical WGs
Figure 4.8
Transmission spectrum of main waveguide for (a) the same chemical potentials
of two arms and (b) the different chemical potentials of two arms.
different chemical potential levels for the two arms of the main waveguide (0.31 eV
for the upper arm and 0.3 eV for the lower arm). As seen, after spending almost
2 μm from the arms, the phase difference of waves between two arms is equal to
180∘. Accordingly, the waves cannot be transmitted to the output port.
To provide a better view of the switching operation of the proposed optical switch,
the transmission spectra of the main waveguide for the same and different chemical
potentials of two arms have also been presented in Figure 4.8. By comparison of two
cases (Figure 4.8a,b), the wavelength range of 1300–1700 nm is the best range for
the main waves. It is because, in this wavelength range, the transmittance values
are more than 40% and less than 10% for the identical and unequal waveguides,
respectively.
Based on the obtained results, to achieve a phase difference of 180∘between two
arms of the graphene MZI structure, it is necessary that a suitable control waveguide
be designed. In other words, the control light should affect only one of the arms.
For this purpose, two different techniques are proposed. The first one is that by
grating one of the arms, the propagation of the surface plasmons is prevented
in this arm. Figure 4.9a shows this structure (switch I). The presented structural
parameters in Figure 4.9a are as follows: d10 = 500, d11 = 750, d12 = 20, and d13 = 500
(all in nm). In the second technique, different plasmon frequencies are used for two

92
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
VDC
x z y
x z y
VDC
GaAs
d11
d12
d10
d13
Light
Control
light
Control
light
Light
Silver
SiO2
Graphene
Vanadium
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9
The proposed all-optical graphene plasmon switch using a control waveguide
with (a) a grating structure in one of the arms (switch I) and (b) different metal material in
one of the arms (switch II).
0.3
|Hy|
|Hy|
0
–0.3
0.3
0
–0.3
–1.4
–0.6 –0.2
x (μm)
(a)
(b)
x (μm)
0.2
0.6
1
1.4
–1.4
–0.6 –0.2
0.2
0.6
1
1.4
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
–1
–1
Figure 4.10
Field proﬁle of |Hy| for the (a) simple arm and (b) grating arm.
1.5
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
Wavelength (nm)
0
2
4
Transmittance (%)
1.5
1.51
1.52
1.53
1.54
1.55
× 103
× 103
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Transmittance (%)
Simple arm
Grating arm
Figure 4.11
Transmission spectrum of the main waveguide for the (a) simple arm and (b)
grating arm.
arms of the metal MZI structure. Accordingly, one of the MZI arms is filled with
vanadium material. The proposed structure (switch II) is shown in Figure 4.9b. In
the following, each of the mentioned methods has been studied separately.
Figure 4.10 shows the field profiles of the proposed switch I for both arms
(simple and grating arms) with two main and control light sources. As seen in
Figure 4.10a, the waves can propagate through the simple arm. For the grating
arm, the incident light cannot reach the end of the arm. Also, Figure 4.11 shows

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
93
–2.1  –1.5 –0.9
x (µm)
0.3
0
Hy
Hy
–2.1 –1.5  –0.9  –0.3 0.3
0.9
1.5
2.1 .
x (µm)
0.3
0
–0.3
–0.3
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
(a)
(b)
–0.3   0.3   0.9   1.5     2.1
Figure 4.12
Field proﬁle of |Hy| for the (a) silver arm and (b) vanadium arm.
the transmission spectra of the main waveguide for the simple and grating arms.
As seen, the transmission values for the simple and grating arms are almost equal
to 55% and 2%, respectively. Although the first proposed structure (switch I) has
a suitable switching operation, it should be noted that the designed structure has
some drawbacks. First of all, light propagation cannot be stopped at the beginning
of the grating arm, and it passes through about 1 μm of the arm. Secondly, due to
the small size of d12, the fabrication process for this structure is difficult. Therefore,
the second method has also been proposed (Figure 4.9b).
As mentioned above, in the second method (switch II), two different metal mate-
rials of silver and vanadium, which have different plasmon frequencies, are used for
two arms of the control waveguide. Due to the good electrical conductivity of vana-
dium, this metal is replaced in one of the silver arms. This causes the incident light
to not propagate at the boundary of GaAs–vanadium. Figure 4.12 shows the field
profile of this case. As seen, light propagation can be stopped at the beginning of the
vanadium MZI arm.
4.3
Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
To benefit from the advantages of different optical structures, the combination of
such structures can be used to design optical switches. The idea of using two dif-
ferent optical structures (plasmonic and PC configurations) has been used to design
an all-optical switch in [101]. The design process of the proposed switch in [101] is
discussed in the following.
The proposed heterostructure all-optical switch is shown in Figure 4.13. As seen
in Figure 4.13, the 1D PC structure used in this configuration is located at the
intersection of MIM plasmonic and insulator waveguides. The insulator and metal
materials in the horizontal MIM plasmonic waveguides are air and silver, respec-
tively. The complex relative permittivity of silver is described by the Drude–Lorentz
model (Eq. (4.4)) [102]. In addition, the material used in the insulator waveguides
is assumed to be SiO2.
The zoomed view of the central section of the proposed switch (PC section) is
shown in Figure 4.14a. This 1D PC structure is composed of the alternating non-
linear insulator layers with the high refractive index of nH = 3.4 (layers with the
thickness of l1) and the low refractive index of nL = 1.77 (layers with the thickness of
l2). The structural parameters of the proposed switch are as follows: l1 = 120, l2 = 290,

94
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
Air
Silver
SiO2
Kerr 1
Kerr 2
x
z
y
Output 2
Output 1
Input 1
Input 2
Figure 4.13
Proposed heterostructure all-optical switch.
l3 = 700, l4 = 100, and l5 = 3836 (all in nm). Also, the lattice constant of the 1D PC
structure is l, which is equal to l = l1 + l2.
The obtained band diagram of the used 1D PC structure using the plane wave
expansion (PWE) method is shown in Figure 4.14b. As seen, there is a PBG at the
wavelength range of extended from 1534 to 2320 nm. To verify the performance
of the used 1D PC structure, its transmission spectrum is also obtained using the
finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (Figure 4.14c). It can be seen that the
transmission value is equal to zero at the mentioned PBG wavelength range. Accord-
ingly, the sharp edges of the created PBG can be used for the switching mechanism.
Based on the obtained results, the horizontal and vertical waveguides (MIM plas-
monic and insulator waveguides) are used for data and control signals, respectively.
Suitable isolation between two signals can be achieved using this method.
After investigating the performance of the used 1D PC structure located at the
center of the proposed topology (Figure 4.13), the switching mechanism of the
designed all-optical switch is studied. For this purpose, the transmission spectra of
the designed switch for data (from input 1 to output 1) and control signals (from
input 2 to output 2) are obtained. Figure 4.15a shows the transmission spectrum of
the data signal when only the data signal source (located at input 1) is “on.” As seen,
the created sharp PBG edge (low edge) can be selected for the data wavelength.
Also, the transmission spectra of the control signals for transverse magnetic (TM)
and transverse electric (TE) modes are shown in Figure 4.15b and c, respectively. In
this case, only the control signal source (located at input 2) is applied. As seen in
Figure 4.15b,c, the wavelengths of 1606 and 1427 nm for fundamental TM and TE

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
95
3000
(a)
(b)
(c)
nL
nH
z
y
x
1
l1
l2
l
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2500
2000
1500
1000
–0.5–0.4–0.3–0.2
Wave vector (2 π/a)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Transmittance
–0.1 0
0.1
Bandgap
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
1200
1600
2000
2400
2800
Figure 4.14
(a) Proposed structure of 1D PC, (b) its band diagram, and (c) its transmission
spectrum.
modes can be suitable choices for the control wavelengths. It is because these two
wavelengths can propagate from input 2 to output 2 almost completely, and they
are located at the PBG of the data signal.
At the next step, both data and control signal sources are simultaneously applied
to inputs 1 and 2, respectively. In this case, the refractive indexes of Kerr materials
(Kerr 1 and 2) change, and the transmission spectrum of the data signal shifts to
higher wavelengths. According to the used Kerr material type, three situations can
occur. These three situations are as follows.
4.3.1
Situation 1: n2L ≫n2H
When the nonlinear refractive index coefficient (n2) of the wide layers (layers with
the thickness of l2 and the refractive index of nL) is much more than that of the nar-
row layers (layers with the thickness of l1 and the refractive index of nH), only the
refractive indexes of the wide layers change. As a result, in this situation, the data
transmittance shift is only due to the refractive index changes of nL. This case is
shown in Figure 4.16a. As seen by changing the refractive index of nL (ΔnL = 0.01

96
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
1400
1600
1800
2000
Wavelength (nm)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Transmittance
1400
1600
1800
2000
Wavelength (nm)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Transmittance
Fundamental TM mode
Fundamental TE mode
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.15
Transmission spectrum of the proposed switch (Figure 4.13) (a) from input 1
to output 1, (b) from input 2 to output 2 for TM mode, and (c) from input 2 to output 2 for
TE mode.
and ΔnH = 0), the data signal can propagate to the output port. In other words,
the transmittance value at the data wavelength (1429 nm) increases from 0.15 (blue
curve) to 0.698 (red curve). As a result, the switching operation can occur in this case.
4.3.2
Situation 2: n2H ≫n2L
Based on the mentioned explanations in the previous case, when n2H ≫n2L, the data
transmittance shift is only caused by the refractive index changes of nH. Figure 4.16b
shows this case (ΔnH = 0.01 and ΔnL = 0). As seen in Figure 4.16b, by increasing the
refractive index of nH, the data signal shift is very imperceptible. Accordingly, the
switching operation cannot occur in this case.
4.3.3
Situation 3: n2H ≃n2L
In the last situation, the nonlinear effect in the narrow layers is equal to the nonlinear
effect in the wide layers of the PC structure. Consequently, by applying the control

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
97
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
nL = 1.78
nH = 3.4
nL = 1.77
nH = 3.41
nL = 1.78
nH = 3.41
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.16
Transmission spectra of the proposed switch (Figure 4.13) without and with
control signal source for situations (a) 1, (b) 2, and (c) 3.
signal source, both refractive indexes of nH and nL increase simultaneously. This case
is shown in Figure 4.16c (ΔnH = 0.01 and ΔnL = 0.01). Figure 4.16c shows that the
transmittance value of the data signal increases from 0.15 to 0.7, and the switching
operation occurs.
To give a better view of the refractive index changes on the switching mecha-
nism of the proposed structure, the field profiles of Ey magnitude for two moods
of “off” and “on” states of the designed switch are presented in Figure 4.17. As seen
in Figure 4.17a, when only the data signal source is applied, the data wavelength
cannot propagate from input 1 to output 1. In other words, the designed switch is at
the “off” state. As reviewed, by applying two data and control signal sources for two
situations 1 and 3, the switching operation can occur. The field profiles of the two
situations are shown in Figure 4.17b and c, respectively. As seen in Figure 4.17b,c,
the incident light can pass through the structure in these cases.
After investigating the general switching operation of the proposed structure, its
switching mechanism is studied using practical Kerr materials with the mentioned
properties. Transmission spectra of the designed switch using different practical

98
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
1000
0
–1000
–2000
(a)
(b)
(c)
–3000
nL = 1.77, nH = 3.4
–2000
X (nm)
Y (nm)
–1000
Switch off
0
1000
2000
3000
1.5
1
0.5
1000
0
–1000
–2000
–3000
nL = 1.78, nH = 3.4
–2000
X (nm)
Y (nm)
–1000
Switch on
0
1000
2000
3000
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
1000
0
–1000
–2000
–3000
nL = 1.78, nH = 3.41
–2000
X (nm)
Y (nm)
–1000
Switch on
0
1000
2000
3000
1.4
1.2
0.8
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
Figure 4.17
Field proﬁle of |Ey| at the data wavelength (1429 nm) (a) with only data signal
source (“off state”), (b) with both data and control signal sources for situation 1 (“on state”),
and (c) with both data and control signal sources for situation 3 (“on state”).
Kerr materials are shown in Figure 4.18. In the first, second, and third switches
(S1, S2, and S3), the Kerr materials with the nonlinear properties of n2(CS2) ≃n2(Si) ,
n2(AuSiO2) ≫n2(GaAs), and n2(GGS-Au10) ≃n2(Si) are used, respectively. Also, Table 4.2
shows the features of such switches. As seen in Table 4.2, based on the transmittance
values of the “on” and “off” states of such switches (Ton and Toff ), the switching
operation occurs in all three cases.
To provide a better view of the proposed switch operation, its time-domain behav-
ior is also presented. In this section, two nonlinear Kerr materials with the refractive
indexes of 1.77 and 3.4 and the 𝜒(3) values of 2 × 10−18 and 4.8 × 10−18 m2 V−2 are
used to fill the PC structure to achieve an all-optical switch. Figure 4.19a shows the
time-domain data and control signal sources inserted into the input ports (inputs 1
and 2) of the proposed switch. Here, the wavelengths of the data signal and the con-
trol signal (fundamental TE mode) are chosen to be 1926 and 1427 nm, respectively.
As seen in Figure 4.19a, the data signal source is a continuous-wave signal. Also,
the time-domain control signal source is a continuous-wave signal with an input
power of 29.3 MW cm−1. This signal is at the “on” state from 2.75 to 4.25 ps. The
transition time of 500 fs is considered for the rising and falling edges. Figure 4.19b
shows the time-domain output signal derived from data and control input sources.
As seen, when only the data signal source is on, the output power is more than 0.6.

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
99
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(S1)  Kerr 1: CS2 and Kerr 2: Si
Control off
Control on
1340
1360
1380
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
λd = 1359 nm
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1140
1170
1200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1200
1225
1250
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1810
1840
1870
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
λd1 = 1189 nm λd2 = 1242 nm λd3 = 1837 nm
(S2)  Kerr 1: AuSiO2 and Kerr 2: GaAs
Control off
Control on
(b)
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
2100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(S3)  Kerr 1: GGS-Au10 and Kerr 2: Si
Control off
Control on
1550
1570
1590
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
λ = 1571 nm
(a)
(c)
Wavelength (nm)
Transmittance
Wavelength (nm)
Transmittance
Wavelength (nm)
Transmittance
Figure 4.18
Transmission spectra of the proposed switch (Figure 4.13) without and with
control signal source for two Kerr materials of (a) CS2, Si, (b) AuSiO2, GaAs, and (c)
GGS-Au10, Si.

100
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
Table 4.2
Mechanism of the heterostructure all-optical switch (Figure 4.13) with different
Kerr materials.
Switch
Kerr
material
n0
n2 (cm2 W−1)
𝝌(3) (m2 V−2)
𝝀d (nm) Ton
Toff
I (MW cm−2)
S1
CS2
Si
1.63
3.5
0.3 × 10−13
0.43 × 10−13
4 × 10−20
2.8 × 10−19
1359
0.525
0.09 232 000
S2
AuSiO2
GaAs
1.47
3.4
2.7 × 10−9
1.59 × 10−13
2.37 × 10−15
9.7 × 10−19
1189
1242
1837
0.692
0.454 0.53
0.14
0.06
0.16
22.2
S3
GGS-Au10
Si
2
3.5
1.8 × 10−13
0.43 × 10−13
3.8 × 10−19
2.8 × 10−19
1571
0.72
0.19 66 600
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time (ps)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Power (a.u.)
0
(a)
(b)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time (ps)
Power (a.u.)
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
Control signal on  
Control signal off 
Control signal off 
Figure 4.19
Time-domain representations of (a) data and control signals and (b) output
signal for the proposed heterostructure all-optical switch.
In 2.75–4.25 ps (when both data and control signal sources are on), the transmitted
power to the output port decreases. The main drawback of the time-domain output
signal is its low contrast ratio value. To improve the contrast ratio value, a suppres-
sion filter should be added to the output port, which is discussed in the following.
Figure 4.20 shows the proposed heterostructure all-optical switch with its sup-
pression filter. The designed filter is composed of seven unequal stubs coupled to a
MIM plasmonic waveguide. The structural parameters of the designed suppression

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
101
Air
Silver
SiO2
Kerr 1
Kerr 2
x
y
z
Input 1
Output 1
Output 2
W1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
W2
Input 2
Figure 4.20
Proposed heterostructure all-optical switch with the suppression ﬁlter at the
output port.
filter are as follows: s1 = 400, s2 = 360, s3 = 320, s4 = 280, s5 = 240, s6 = 200, s7 = 160,
w1 = w2 = 50 (all in nm).
Figure 4.21 shows the time-domain input and output signals of the proposed
heterostructure all-optical switch with the suppression filter at the output port
(Figure 4.20). It is worth mentioning that the data and control input signals are
similar to Figure 4.19a. As seen, here the switching operation also occurs, but the
output power for the “off” state reduces due to the existence of the suppression
filter. As a result, the contrast value increases. Figure 4.21b shows that the values of
the rise and fall times are equal to 250 fs.
To achieve higher transmittance values in edges and out of the PBG, tapered
resonators are added to the first proposed all-optical switch. The schematic of
the improved proposed all-optical switch is shown in Figure 4.22. The values
of the structural parameters of the tapered resonators are equal to d6 = 117 and
d7 = 250 nm. Other parameters have already been explained.
The transmittance spectra of the data and control signals are shown in Figure 4.23.
According to Figure 4.23a, the transmittance values in all of the wavelengths (obvi-
ously, except for the PBG) increase. Increasing the transmittance values in the PBG
edges provides all-optical switches with more transmittance values for the “on” state,
which is because there is more coupling strength between MIM plasmonic waveg-
uides and the PC structure in this all-optical switch. As known, there is a trade-off

102
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time (ps)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Power (a.u.)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time (ps)
Power (a.u.)
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
Control signal on  
Control signal off 
Control signal off 
(a)
(b)
tfall
trise
Figure 4.21
Time-domain representations of (a) data and control signals and (b) output
signal for the proposed heterostructure all-optical switch with the suppression ﬁlter at the
output port.
Air
Silver
SiO2
Kerr 1
Kerr 2
x
y
z
Output 2
Output 1
Input 1
Input 2
l6
l7
Figure 4.22
Improved proposed heterostructure all-optical switch.

4.3 Nanomaterial Heterostructures-Based Switch
103
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
1400
1600
1800
2000
Wavelength (nm)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Transmittance
1400
1600
1800
2000
Wavelength (nm)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Transmittance
Fundamental TM mode
Fundamental TE mode
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.23
Transmission spectrum of the improved proposed switch (Figure 4.22) (a) from
input 1 to output 1, (b) from input 2 to output 2 for TM mode, and (c) from input 2 to output
2 for TE mode.
between designing parameters of all-optical switches. Increasing the coupling effect
between MIM plasmonic waveguides and PC leads to slower sharpness in transition
from the maximum transmittance to the minimum transmittance.
Since the existing coupling between the insulator waveguides and PC structure
does not change, the transmittance spectrum of the pump signal (from input 2 to out-
put 2) is similar to the previous all-optical switch (Figure 4.15b,c). Here the switching
mechanism of the improved proposed all-optical switch for different three situations
is also investigated.
Figure 4.24 shows the transmittance spectra for three different situations, includ-
ing n2L ≫n2H, n2H ≫n2L, and n2L ≈n2H for the improved proposed all-optical
switch. As mentioned, for two modes of n2L ≫n2H (Figure 4.24a) and n2L ≈n2H
(Figure 4.24c), the switching operation occurs. On the contrary, the switching
operation for n2H ≫n2L cannot be obtained (Figure 4.24b) because the higher
refractive index layers have a lower effect on the data signal transferring from input
1 to output 1. It should be noted that due to the lower sharpness of the PBG edges

104
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
nL = 1.79
nH = 3.4
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
nL = 1.77
nH = 3.42
1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
nL = 1.79
nH = 3.42
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.24
Transmission spectra of the improved proposed switch (Figure 4.13) without
and with control signal source for situations (a) 1, (b) 2, and (c) 3.
for the improved proposed all-optical switch, more control light intensity is needed
to increase the refractive index of Kerr layers by a value of 0.02.
The switching wavelength for the improved proposed all-optical switch in
Figure 4.24a,c is equal to 1432 nm. The maximum transmittance values at the “on”
state of the improved all-optical switch are equal to 0.74 and 0.735 for situations 1
(Figure 4.24a) and 2 (Figure 4.24c), respectively. Also, the transmittance value at the
“off” state of the switch is equal to 0.185, which is close to zero. Finally, providing
suitable isolation between data and control signals, and requiring lower control
intensities cause that the proposed structure can be a good candidate for use in
other integrated optical circuits.
4.4
Modulation Characteristics
To bring electrical signals to the optical domain, optical systems usually require
an optical modulator. As a result, optical modulators have found wide application

4.4 Modulation Characteristics
105
in many optical systems. By applying the control signal, the phase, frequency,
or amplitude of the data signal can be modulated in optical modulators. This
mechanism can produce phase modulators, frequency modulators, and amplitude
modulators, respectively. In addition, the classification of optical modulators is
performed based on the different methods that are used to design them. These
methods are the electro-optic method [103, 104], thermo-optic method [105], and
exploration of nonlinear effects [106]. Since the optical nonlinearity is used for the
active control of optical signals in all-optical modulators, such modulators have high
modulation speeds. Consequently, numerous optical topologies have been used to
design all-optical modulators so far [107–109]. The main drawbacks of the most
designed optical modulators in the literature can be summarized as follows. First, in
most of them, the time-domain behaviors of modulators have not been investigated.
However, to prove the correct operation of modulators, it is necessary to present
time-domain simulations when the nonlinear Kerr effect is used. Also, most of them
use a common path for both data and control signals, whereas an ideal modulator
should be able to provide suitable isolation between the data and control signals.
One of the most applied optical structures to design optical modulators is
plasmonic structures. In [110], a novel and simple topology has been proposed to
design a plasmonic all-optical amplitude modulator. This structure tried to reform
the mentioned disadvantages. The step-by-step designing procedure of the designed
all-optical amplitude modulator is investigated in the following.
Figure 4.25 shows the proposed structure of the designed basic filter, which is used
in the realization of the proposed all-optical modulator. As seen in Figure 4.25, the
filter structure consists of a nonlinear nanodisk resonator, surrounded by a silicon
ring-shaped resonator located inside a circular air resonator, and a horizontal MIM
plasmonic waveguide. The metal and Kerr materials used in this structure are silver
and InGaAsP, respectively. Silver is characterized by a comprehensive and accurate
Drude–Lorentz model (Eq. (4.4)). Also, the third-order nonlinear susceptibility
Air
Silver
Kerr
Si
x
y
z
Input
Output
r1
r2
r3
h
Figure 4.25
Proposed structure of the designed basic ﬁlter.

106
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
600
(a)
(b)
(c)
700
800
900
1000
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transmittance
680
700
720
740
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
850 860 870 880 890 900
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
Figure 4.26
(a) Transmission spectrum of the designed basic ﬁlter, (b) zoomed view of the
selected mode for the control wavelength, and (c) zoomed view of the selected mode for
the data wavelength.
(𝜒(3)) and the linear dielectric constant (𝜀0) of the Kerr material (InGaAsP) are
equal to 1 × 10−18 m2 V−2 and 2.25, respectively. The structural parameters values of
the proposed filter are as follows: r1 = 517, r2 = 570, r3 = 650, and w = 50 (all in nm).
Figure 4.26a shows the transmission spectrum of the designed basic filter using
FDTD simulations in the wavelength range of 600–1000 nm. As seen in Figure 4.26a,
the transmission spectrum has several resonance modes due to the presence of
different resonance wavelengths at the designed resonator. Based on the obtained
results, two of the generated resonance modes should be chosen for the data and
control signals. Since it is necessary that the control signal should pass almost
completely through the structure and have gradual transitions, the resonance mode
located at the wavelength of 702 nm can be a suitable choice for the control signal.
Figure 4.26b shows the zoomed view of the selected control mode. Furthermore,
the data signal should have a sharp edge and a high difference between its notch
and peak transmittance values. Therefore, the Fano-resonance mode located at the
wavelength of 702 nm is selected for the data signal. The zoomed view of this signal
is also shown in Figure 4.26c.
As mentioned above, the goal of this design is that two isolated paths be used for
data and control signals. As a result, it is necessary that there be another waveg-
uide to pass the control signal. Due to the symmetrical structure of the proposed
resonator, another waveguide can be vertically coupled to the resonator. Accord-
ingly, the selected data and control modes that pass through the horizontal and
vertical waveguides, respectively, should guarantee minimum cross-talk between
two waveguides. For this purpose, the field profiles of the basic filter at the selected
data and control wavelengths are studied.
Figure 4.27a,b shows the field profiles of the proposed basic filter at the wave-
lengths of 702 and 878 nm, respectively. As seen, both data and control wavelengths
have even and odd symmetry along the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively.
Therefore, each of the two selected wavelengths can pass through a waveguide (hor-
izontal or vertical) without any leakage to another waveguide.
By adding the vertical waveguide to the basic filter, an all-optical amplitude mod-
ulator can be designed. Figure 4.28 shows the general structure of the proposed
all-optical amplitude modulator. As seen in Figure 4.28, the horizontal and vertical

4.4 Modulation Characteristics
107
800
800
× 10–3
× 10–3
600
400
200
–200
–400
–600
–800
0
600
400
200
0
–200
–400
–600
–800
–500
(a)
(b)
0
X (nm)
X (nm)
Y (nm)
Y (nm)
500
–500
0
500
2
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
1.5
0.5
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
0
1
Figure 4.27
Field proﬁle of Re(Hz) for the basic ﬁlter at the resonance modes of (a) 702 nm
and (b) 878 nm.
x
y
z
Air
Silver
Kerr
Si
Data 
input
Data 
output
Control 
input
Control 
output
Figure 4.28
Proposed structure of the all-optical amplitude modulator.
waveguides are considered to pass the data and control signals, respectively. Using
this method, an all-optical amplitude modulator with suitable isolation between the
data and control signals can be achieved.
The transmission spectra of the data signal (from data input to data output port)
with only the data signal source and control signal (from control input to control
output port) with only the control signal source are shown in Figure 4.29a and b,
respectively. It is worth mentioning that the transmittances of the data and control
signals be compared with the selected data and control signals of the basic filter in
Figure 4.29a,b. As seen, the transmission spectra of the designed modulator almost
match the transmittances of the basic filter. In other words, the data and control
wavelengths pass through the horizontal and vertical waveguides, respectively,
without any leakage. The next step to investigate the modulation operation of

108
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
680
700
720
740
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
850
860
870
880
890
900
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
850
860
870
880
890
900
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmittance
Filter
Modulator
Modulator
Control on
Control off
Filter
Figure 4.29
Transmission spectra of (a) the proposed modulator (from data input to data
output) with only data signal source and basic ﬁlter, (b) the proposed modulator (from
control input to control output) with only control signal source and basic ﬁlter, and (c) the
proposed modulator with both signal sources.
the proposed amplitude modulator is that the data and control signal sources be
applied, simultaneously. This case is shown in Figure 4.29c. As seen in Figure 4.29c,
the transmittance value of the data wavelength (878 nm) modulates from 1.2% to
72.2% by applying the control signal source. It is because the control signal induces
the Kerr effect in the nonlinear medium.
The field profile of Hz magnitude is also shown in Figure 4.30 to clarify the oper-
ating mechanism of the proposed amplitude modulator. Figure 4.30a shows that
the data wavelength cannot transmit to the output port by applying only the data
signal source. In addition, as expected, by applying only the control signal source,
the control wavelength can propagate through the structure. As discussed, the data
wavelength can pass through the structure in the presence of both data and control
signal sources. Figure 4.30c shows this case.

4.4 Modulation Characteristics
109
800
4
3
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
600
400
200
0
–200
–400
–600
–800
–500
(a)
(b)
(c)
× 10–3
× 10–3
× 10–3
0
500
X (nm)
–500
0
500
X (nm)
–500
0
500
X (nm)
Y (nm)
800
600
400
200
0
–200
–400
–600
–800
Y (nm)
800
600
400
200
0
–200
–400
–600
–800
Y (nm)
Figure 4.30
Field proﬁle of Re(Hz) at (a) the data wavelength of 878 nm with only the data
signal source, (b) the control wavelength of 702 nm with only the control signal source, and
(c) the data wavelength of 878 nm with both data and control signal sources.
After designing the proposed all-optical amplitude modulator, to provide a better
view of the designed modulator operation, its time-domain behavior is presented.
For this purpose, the values of the input power of the data and control signal
sources need to be specified. To determine the input power of the data signal
source (Pdata), a continuous wave at the wavelength of 878 nm is applied to data
input port. Figure 4.31a shows the normalized transmission of the data signal
versus the variations of Pdata (input power of the data signal source). As seen
in Figure 4.31a, when Pdata increases from 0.195 to 0.78 W μm−1, the maximum
normalized transmission value does not change significantly, while by increasing
Pdata higher than 0.78 W μm−1, the maximum normalized transmission value starts
to increase. As discussed, the data wavelength cannot propagate through the data
output port by applying only the data signal source. As a result, the best value for
the input power of the data signal source is equal to 0.78 W μm−1.
To adjust the input power of the control signal source (Pcontrol), the data and control
signal sources are applied to the input ports (data and control input ports) simulta-
neously. The control signal source is a continuous-wave signal at the wavelength of
702 nm. The variations of the extinction ratio for different values of Pcontrol are also

110
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
0
(a)
(b)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
PData (W µm−1)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Transmittance
18
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
PControl (W µm−1)
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Extinction ratio (dB)
Figure 4.31
(a) The transmittance of the data wavelength for different values of Pdata and
(b) the extinction ratio of the output signal for different values of Pcontrol.
shown in Figure 4.31b. The extinction ratio of the proposed amplitude modulator
can be defined as:
ER = 10 log Ton
Toff
(4.10)
where Ton and Toff are the transmittances in the presence and absence of the control
signal source, respectively. As seen in Figure 4.31b, the extinction ratio increases ini-
tially and then decreases by increasing Pcontrol. Therefore, Pcontrol = 34.3 W μm−1 for
the highest extinction ratio value of 18.53 dB is an appropriate choice for designing
the proposed amplitude modulator.
After determining the input power of the data and control signal sources
(Pdata and Pcontrol), the time-domain behavior of the output signal is studied. The
time-domain data and control signal sources inserted into the proposed modulator
are shown in Figure 4.32a and b, respectively. Figure 4.32a shows that the data
signal source is a continuous-wave signal at the data wavelength of 878 nm with the
selected input power of 0.78 W μm−1. In addition, the time-domain control signal
source is a continuous-wave signal at the control wavelength of 702 nm and the

4.4 Modulation Characteristics
111
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Power (W µm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
10
20
30
40
Power (W µm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
1
2
3
4
Power (W µm−1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.32
Time-domain representations of (a) data signal, (b) control signal, and (c)
output signal for the proposed all-optical amplitude modulator (Figure 4.28).
input power of 34.3 W μm−1. As seen in Figure 4.32b, this signal is “off” from 0 to
4 ps and 8 to 12 ps and it is “on” from 4.5 to 7.5 ps. The transition time of 500 fs is
considered for the rising and falling edges.
The time-domain output signal derived from data and control signal sources is
shown in Figure 4.32c. As seen in Figure 4.32c, at 0–4 and 8–12 ps (when only the
data signal source is “on”), the output power is close to zero. When both data and
control sources are “on” (in 4.5–7.5 ps), the amplitude of the data signal increases. In
other words, the modulation operation occurs by applying the control signal source.
An important point for designing optical modulators is that the control signal
should modulate the data signal and should not leak to the output port. For this
purpose, the Fourier transform of the time-domain output signal is also obtained

112
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Power (W µm−1)
Figure 4.33
Fourier transform of the time-domain output signal for the proposed
all-optical amplitude modulator (Figure 4.28).
(Figure 4.33). As seen in Figure 4.33, the control wavelength of 702 nm leaks to
the output port. Consequently, the control wavelength should be filtered at the
output port.
Figure 4.34 shows the designed suppression filter and its transmission spectrum.
This filter is composed of five unequal stubs coupled to a MIM plasmonic waveguide.
The structural parameters of the proposed suppression filter are as follows: a1 = 100,
a2 = 97, a3 = 94, a4 = 91, a5 = 88, w = 60, and g = 100 (all in nm).
The transmission spectrum of the suppression filter (Figure 4.34b) shows that the
data wavelength can pass through the designed filter, while the control wavelength
is blocked to the output port. As a result, by coupling the suppression filter at the
data output port of the proposed modulator, the control wavelength cannot propa-
gate at the output port. The operating mechanism of the suppression filter can also
be explained by presenting the field profile. Figure 4.35 shows the field profile of
Re(Hz) at both wavelengths of 702 and 878 nm. As seen, there is no light transmission
between the input and output ports at the wavelength of 702 nm, while the incident
light at the wavelength of 878 nm can pass through the plasmonic suppression filter.
By the combination of the designed all-optical amplitude modulator (Figure 4.28)
and suppression filter (Figure 4.34a), the improved all-optical amplitude modulator
is formed. Figure 4.36 shows this structure.
Here, the time-domain behavior of the improved modulator is also investigated.
The continuous-wave signals for the data and control signal sources are shown in
Figure 4.36a and b, respectively. As seen, such signals are similar to Figure 4.32a,b.
Figure 4.36c shows the output signal derived from these two input signals. As
seen in Figure 4.36c, the amplitude modulation with a lower output power value
also occurs in this case. It is because of the existence of the suppression filter at the
output port.
To better analyze the results, the Fourier transform of the output time-domain sig-
nal of Figure 4.37c is presented in Figure 4.38. As seen, after adding the suppression
filter, which passes the data wavelength and prohibits the propagation of the control
wavelength, only the data wavelength can transmit to the output port. As a result,
the mentioned problem is solved using this method (coupling the suppression filter
and all-optical modulator).

4.4 Modulation Characteristics
113
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Transmittance
Input
Output
Silver
Kerr
h
a1
g
a2 a3 a4 a5
(a)
(b)
w
Figure 4.34
(a) Proposed structure of the suppression ﬁlter and (b) its transmission
spectrum.
200
100
0
–100
–200
200
100
0
–100
–200
–300
–200
–100
0
100
X (nm)
(a)
(b)
Y (nm)
Y (nm)
200
300
400
0
2
1
0
–1
–2
–5
–10
× 10–4
–300
–200
–100
0
100
X (nm)
200
300
400
× 10–3
Figure 4.35
Field proﬁle of Re(Hz) at the wavelengths of (a) 702 nm and (b) 878 nm.

114
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
Air
Silver
Kerr
Si
x
y
z
Data 
input
Data 
output
Control 
input
Control 
output
Figure 4.36
Proposed structure of the improved all-optical amplitude modulator.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Power (W μm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
10
20
30
40
Power (W μm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (ps)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Power (W μm−1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.37
Time-domain representations of (a) data signal, (b) control signal, and (c)
output signal for the proposed improved all-optical amplitude modulator (Figure 4.36).

References
115
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
Wavelength (nm)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Power (W μm−1)
Figure 4.38
Fourier transform of the time-domain output signal for the proposed
improved all-optical amplitude modulator (Figure 4.37).
Table 4.3
Summary of optical structures performance.
References
Setup
Topology
Mechanism
operation
2D/3D
Isolated
waveguide
Time
simulation
[99]
Graphene
and
plasmonic
MZI
All-optical
switch
3D
Yes
Yes
[101]
Plasmonic
and PC
Cross
waveguides
All-optical
switch
2D
Yes
Yes
[110]
Plasmonic
Disk resonator
and cross
waveguides
All-optical
amplitude
modulator
2D
Yes
Yes
4.5
Summary
Since the discovery of optical structures and initial studies on the optical switches
for optical sensing, there have been a lot of publications in the literature on this
topic, far more than those cited here. Optical switches can be good candidates
for optical sensing applications. In this chapter, some of the publications have
been studied. Finally, the main properties of the discussed structures in Sections
(4.2–4.4) are given in Table 4.3. Such features are the setup and topology of the
optical devices, their mechanism operation, dimensions (2D/3D), and isolated
waveguides. Also, whether the time-domain simulations are performed or not has
been investigated. In summary, based on the mentioned properties, these structures
have the potential to be used as optical sensors.
References
1 Miller, K.J., Hallman, K.A., Haglund, R.F., and Weiss, S.M. (2017). Silicon
waveguide optical switch with embedded phase change material. Opt. Express
25 (22): 26527–26536.

116
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
2 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2021). Plasmonic all-optical
metal–insulator–metal switches based on silver nano-rods, comprehensive
theoretical analysis and design guidelines. J. Comput. Electron. 20 (1): 442–457.
3 Sani, M.H., Saghaei, H., Mehranpour, M.A., and Tabrizi, A.A. (2020). A novel
all-optical sensor design based on a tunable resonant nanocavity in photonic
crystal microstructure applicable in MEMS accelerometers. Photonic Sensors 11
(4): 1–15.
4 Shenai, K. (2018). The figure of merit of a semiconductor power electronics
switch. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 65 (10): 4216–4224.
5 Picard, J.F., Schaub, S.C., Rosenzweig, G. et al. (2019). Laser-driven semicon-
ductor switch for generating nanosecond pulses from a megawatt gyrotron.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 114 (16): 164102.
6 Danaie, M., Nasirifar, R., and Dideban, A. (2017). Design of adjustable
T-shaped and Y-shaped photonic crystal power splitters for TM and TE polar-
izations. Turk. J. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci. 25 (5): 4398–4408.
7 Farmani, A., Mir, A., and Irannejad, M. (2019). 2D-FDTD simulation of
ultra-compact multifunctional logic gates with nonlinear photonic crystal. J.
Opt. Soc. Am. B: Opt. Phys. 36 (4): 811–818.
8 Tavousi, A., Rakhshani, M.R., and Mansouri-Birjandi, M.A. (2018). High sensi-
tivity label-free refractometer based biosensor applicable to glycated hemoglobin
detection in human blood using all-circular photonic crystal ring resonators.
Opt. Commun. 429: 166–174.
9 Foroughifar, A., Saghaei, H., and Veisi, E. (2021). Design and analysis of a
novel four-channel optical filter using ring resonators and line defects in pho-
tonic crystal microstructure. Opt. Quantum Electron. 53 (2): 1–12.
10 Rakhshani, M.R. and Mansouri-Birjandi, M.A. (2013). Realization of tunable
optical filter by photonic crystal ring resonators. Optik 124 (22): 5377–5380.
11 Rahman-Zadeh, F., Danaie, M., and Kaatuzian, H. (2019). Design of a highly
sensitive photonic crystal refractive index sensor incorporating ring-shaped
GaAs cavity. Opto-Electron. Rev. 27 (4): 369–377.
12 Aly, A.H., Zaky, Z.A., Shalaby, A.S. et al. (2020). Theoretical study of hybrid
multifunctional one-dimensional photonic crystal as a flexible blood sugar
sensor. Phys. Scr. 95 (3): 035510.
13 Okamoto, K., Tsuruda, K., Diebold, S. et al. (2017). Terahertz sensor using
photonic crystal cavity and resonant tunneling diodes. J. Infrared, Millimeter,
Terahertz Waves 38 (9): 1085–1097.
14 Danaie, M., Nasiri Far, R., and Dideban, A. (2018). Design of a high-bandwidth
Y-shaped photonic crystal power splitter for TE modes. Int. J. Opt. Photonics 12
(1): 33–42.
15 Xu, L., Wang, Y., El-Fiky, E. et al. (2019). Compact broadband polarization
beam splitter based on multimode interference coupler with internal photonic
crystal for the SOI platform. J. Lightwave Technol. 37 (4): 1231–1240.
16 Kondo, K., Tatebe, T., Hachuda, S. et al. (2017). Fan-beam steering device using
a photonic crystal slow-light waveguide with surface diffraction grating. Opt.
Lett. 42 (23): 4990–4993.

References
117
17 Mohammadi, M., Seifouri, M., Olyaee, S., and Karamirad, M. (2021). Optimiza-
tion and realization all-optical compact five-channel demultiplexer using 2D
photonic crystal based hexagonal cavities. J. Comput. Electron. 20 (2): 984–992.
18 Tavousi, A. (2019). Wavelength-division demultiplexer based on hetero-structure
octagonal-shape photonic crystal ring resonators. Optik 179: 1169–1179.
19 Ghomashi, M., Kaatuzian, H., and Danaie, M. (2016). Design and simulation of
normally open and normally closed all-optical switches based on photonic crys-
tal triple-waveguide directional coupler. Opt. Quantum Electron. 48 (1): 35.
20 Shiramin, L.A., Xie, W., Snyder, B. et al. (2017). High extinction ratio hybrid
graphene-silicon photonic crystal switch. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 30 (2):
157–160.
21 Danaie, M. and Kaatuzian, H. (2011). Improvement of power coupling in a
nonlinear photonic crystal directional coupler switch. Photonics Nanostruct.
Fundam. Appl. 9 (1): 70–81.
22 Moradi, M., Mohammadi, M., Olyaee, S., and Seifouri, M. (2021). Design and
simulation of a fast all-optical modulator based on photonic crystal using ring
resonators. Silicon 14: 1–7.
23 Furukado, Y., Abe, H., Hinakura, Y., and Baba, T. (2018). Experimental simula-
tion of ranging action using Si photonic crystal modulator and optical antenna.
Opt. Express 26 (14): 18222–18229.
24 Salimzadeh, A. and Alipour-Banaei, H. (2018). An all optical 8 to 3 encoder
based on photonic crystal OR-gate ring resonators. Opt. Commun. 410: 793–798.
25 Moradi, M., Danaie, M., and Orouji, A.A. (2019). Design of all-optical XOR and
XNOR logic gates based on Fano resonance in plasmonic ring resonators. Opt.
Quantum Electron. 51 (5): 1–18.
26 Rezaee, S., Zavvari, M., and Alipour-Banaei, H. (2015). A novel optical filter
based on H-shape photonic crystal ring resonators. Optik 126 (20): 2535–2538.
27 Scholz, S., Hess, O., and Rühle, R. (1998). Dynamic cross-waveguide optical
switching with a nonlinear photonic band-gap structure. Opt. Express 3 (1):
28–34.
28 Liu, Z., Zhou, J., and Li, B. (2013). Photonic band gap effect on energy transfer
in Tb3+, Eu3+ CO-doped TiO2 inverse opal films. Mod. Phys. Lett. B 27 (14):
1350099.
29 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2019). All-optical plasmonic switches
based on asymmetric directional couplers incorporating Bragg gratings. Plas-
monics 15: 1–11.
30 Mansuri, M., Mir, A., and Farmani, A. (2019). Numerical modeling of a nanos-
tructure gas sensor based on plasmonic effect. J. Optoelectron. Nanostruct. 4 (2):
29–44.
31 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2018). Realization of single-mode plas-
monic bandpass filters using improved nanodisk resonators. Opt. Commun. 420:
147–156.
32 Ghahari, F., Walkup, D., Gutiérrez, C. et al. (2017). An on/off Berry phase
switch in circular graphene resonators. Science 356 (6340): 845–849.

118
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
33 Farmani, H. and Farmani, A. (2020). Graphene sensing nanostructure for exact
graphene layers identification at terahertz frequency. Physica E 124: 114375.
34 Barnes, W.L., Dereux, A., and Ebbesen, T.W. (2003). Surface plasmon subwave-
length optics. Nature 424 (6950): 824–830.
35 Bozhevolnyi, S.I., Volkov, V.S., Devaux, E. et al. (2006). Channel plasmon
subwavelength waveguide components including interferometers and ring
resonators. Nature 440 (7083): 508–511.
36 Gramotnev, D.K. and Bozhevolnyi, S.I. (2010). Plasmonics beyond the diffrac-
tion limit. Nat. Photonics 4 (2): 83–91.
37 Chen, Z. and Yu, L. (2014). Multiple Fano resonances based on different waveg-
uide modes in a symmetry breaking plasmonic system. IEEE Photonics J. 6 (6):
1–8.
38 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2019). Tunable single-mode bandpass
filter based on metal–insulator–metal plasmonic coupled U-shaped cavities. IET
Optoelectron 13 (4): 161–171.
39 Kokabi, M., Ghorbani, S., and Moayed, S.H. (2021). Tunable bandpass plas-
monic filter based on graphene as the nonlinear Kerr material. Laser Phys. 31
(2): 026201.
40 Pathiranage, S.P.Y., Gunapala, S.D., and Premaratne, M. (2021). Tunable
plasmonic resonator using conductivity modulated Bragg reflectors. J. Phys.
Condens. Matter 33: 245301.
41 Zhuang, H., Zhuang, J., Kong, F., and Li, K. (2020). Tunable Bragg reflector
with parallel bulk Dirac semimetals at terahertz frequencies. J. Mod. Opt. 67
(11): 1010–1016.
42 Mansouri, M., Mir, A., Farmani, A., and Izadi, M. (2021). Numerical modeling
of an integrable and tunable plasmonic pressure sensor with nanostructure
grating. Plasmonics 16 (1): 27–36.
43 Khani, S. and Hayati, M. (2021). An ultra-high sensitive plasmonic refractive
index sensor using an elliptical resonator and MIM waveguide. Superlattices
Microstruct. 156: 106970.
44 Rakhshani, M.R. (2020). Optical refractive index sensor with two plasmonic
double-square resonators for simultaneous sensing of human blood groups.
Photonics Nanostruct. Fundam. Appl. 39: 100768.
45 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2018). Double and triple-wavelength plas-
monic demultiplexers based on improved circular nanodisk resonators. Opt.
Eng. 57 (10): 107102.
46 Khani, S., Farmani, A., and Mir, A. (2021). Reconfigurable and scalable 2,
4-and 6-channel plasmonics demultiplexer utilizing symmetrical rectangular
resonators containing silver nano-rod defects with FDTD method. Sci. Rep. 11
(1): 1–13.
47 Ghosh, S. and Rahman, B.M.A. (2019). Design of on-chip hybrid plasmonic
Mach–Zehnder interferometer for temperature and concentration detection of
chemical solution. Sens. Actuators, B 279: 490–502.

References
119
48 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2020). Compact and low-power all-optical
surface plasmon switches with isolated pump and data waveguides and a rect-
angular cavity containing nano-silver strips. Superlattices Microstruct. 141:
106481.
49 Farmani, A., Zarifkar, A., Sheikhi, M.H., and Miri, M. (2017). Design of a
tunable graphene plasmonic-on-white graphene switch at infrared range. Super-
lattices Microstruct. 112: 404–414.
50 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2020). Realization of a plasmonic optical
switch using improved nano-disk resonators with Kerr-type nonlinearity: a the-
oretical and numerical study on challenges and solutions. Opt. Commun. 477:
126359.
51 Negahdari, R., Rafiee, E., and Emami, F. (2019). Realization of all-optical plas-
monic MIM split square ring resonator switch. Opt. Quantum Electron. 51 (7):
1–14.
52 Khani, S. and Hayati, M. (2017). Compact microstrip lowpass filter with wide
stopband and sharp roll-off. Microwave J. 60 (11): 86–92.
53 Valizade, A., Rezaei, P., and Orouji, A.A. (2015). Design of reconfigurable active
integrated microstrip antenna with switchable low-noise amplifier/power ampli-
fier performances for wireless local area network and WiMAX applications. IET
Microwaves Antennas Propag. 9 (9): 872–881.
54 Khani, S., Danaie, M., Rezaei, P., and Shahzadi, A. (2020). Compact ultra-wide
upper stopband microstrip dual-band BPF using tapered and octagonal loop
resonators. Frequenz 74 (1–2): 61–71.
55 Mousavi, S., Makki, S., and Siahkamari, H. (2016). Design of microstrip lowpass
filter using bend configuration with excellent sharpness in transition band. Fre-
quenz 70 (5-6): 237–243.
56 Pitarke, J.M., Silkin, V.M., Chulkov, E.V., and Echenique, P.M. (2006). Theory of
surface plasmons and surface-plasmon polaritons. Rep. Prog. Phys. 70 (1): 1.
57 Jablan, M., Buljan, H., and Soljaˇci´c, M. (2009). Plasmonics in graphene at
infrared frequencies. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter 80 (24): 245435.
58 Li, S., Liu, H., Sun, Q., and Huang, N. (2016). Multi-channel terahertz wave-
length division demultiplexer with defects-coupled photonic crystal waveguide.
J. Mod. Opt. 63 (10): 955–960.
59 Zhang, L., Tang, L., Wei, W. et al. (2016). Enhanced near-infrared absorption in
graphene with multilayer metal-dielectric-metal nanostructure. Opt. Express 24
(18): 20002–20009.
60 Dai, D., Wang, J., Chen, S. et al. (2015). Monolithically integrated 64-channel
silicon hybrid demultiplexer enabling simultaneous wavelength-and
mode-division-multiplexing. Laser Photonics Rev. 9 (3): 339–344.
61 Hamouleh-Alipour, A., Mir, A., and Farmani, A. (2020). Analytical modeling
and design of a graphene metasurface sensor for thermo-optical detection of
terahertz plasmons. IEEE Sens. J. 21: 4525–4532.
62 Milaninia, K.M., Baldo, M.A., Reina, A., and Kong, J. (2009). All graphene elec-
tromechanical switch fabricated by chemical vapor deposition. Appl. Phys. Lett.
95 (18): 183105.

120
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
63 Novoselov, K.S., Geim, A.K., Morozov, S.V. et al. (2005). Two-dimensional gas
of massless Dirac fermions in graphene. Nature 438 (7065): 197–200.
64 Zhang, Y., Tan, Y.W., Stormer, H.L., and Kim, P. (2005). Experimental obser-
vation of the quantum Hall effect and Berry’s phase in graphene. Nature 438
(7065): 201–204.
65 Koppens, F.H., Chang, D.E., and Garcia de Abajo, F.J. (2011). Graphene plas-
monics: a platform for strong light–matter interactions. Nano Lett. 11 (8):
3370–3377.
66 Vakil, A. and Engheta, N. (2011). Transformation optics using graphene. Science
332 (6035): 1291–1294.
67 Aghaee, T. and Orouji, A.A. (2020). Reconfigurable multi-band, graphene-based
THz absorber: circuit model approach. Results Phys. 16: 102855.
68 Hamzavi-Zarghani, Z., Yahaghi, A., Matekovits, L., and Farmani, A. (2019).
Tunable mantle cloaking utilizing graphene metasurface for terahertz sensing
applications. Opt. Express 27 (24): 34824–34837.
69 Aghaee, T. and Orouji, A.A. (2021). Dual-band terahertz absorber based on
graphene periodic arrays of disks and ribbons: circuit model approach. J. Com-
put. Electron. 20 (1): 611–625.
70 Khosravian, E., Mashayekhi, H.R., and Farmani, A. (2020). Tunable plasmonics
photodetector in near-infrared wavelengths using graphene chemical doping
method. AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun. 127: 153472.
71 Tian, X., Luo, H., Wei, R. et al. (2018). An ultrabroadband mid-infrared pulsed
optical switch employing solution-processed bismuth oxyselenide. Adv. Mater.
30 (31): 1801021.
72 Monfared, S.A., Seifouri, M., Hamidi, S.M., and Mohseni, S.M. (2021).
Electro-optical switch based on one-dimensional graphene-plasmonic crystals.
Opt. Mater. 115: 111051.
73 Sahoo, P.K., Sarkar, S., and Joseph, J. (2017). High sensitivity
guided-mode-resonance optical sensor employing phase detection. Sci. Rep.
7 (1): 1–7.
74 Ismail, M., Khan, M.I., Akhtar, K. et al. (2018). Biosynthesis of silver nanopar-
ticles: a colorimetric optical sensor for detection of hexavalent chromium and
ammonia in aqueous solution. Physica E 103: 367–376.
75 Jiang, W.S., Xin, W., Xun, S. et al. (2017). Reduced graphene oxide-based optical
sensor for detecting specific protein. Sens. Actuators, B 249: 142–148.
76 Rajasekar, R., Parameshwari, K., and Robinson, S. (2019). Nano-optical switch
based on photonic crystal ring resonator. Plasmonics 14 (6): 1687–1697.
77 Ahmed, A.M. and Mehaney, A. (2019). Ultra-high sensitive 1D porous silicon
photonic crystal sensor based on the coupling of Tamm/Fano resonances in the
mid-infrared region. Sci. Rep. 9 (1): 1–9.
78 Nozhat, N. and Granpayeh, N. (2014). All-optical nonlinear plasmonic ring
resonator switches. J. Mod. Opt. 61 (20): 1690–1695.
79 Khodadadi, M., Moshiri, S.M.M., and Nozhat, N. (2020). Theoretical analy-
sis of a simultaneous graphene-based circular plasmonic refractive index and
thickness bio-sensor. IEEE Sens. J. 20 (16): 9114–9123.

References
121
80 Liang, C., Niu, G., Chen, X. et al. (2019). Tunable triple-band graphene refrac-
tive index sensor with good angle-polarization tolerance. Opt. Commun. 436:
57–62.
81 Nejat, M. and Nozhat, N. (2020). Sensing and switching capabilities of a
graphene-based perfect dual-band metamaterial absorber with analytical meth-
ods. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B: Opt. Phys. 37 (5): 1359–1366.
82 Li, J., Tao, J., Chen, Z.H., and Huang, X.G. (2016). All-optical controlling
based on nonlinear graphene plasmonic waveguides. Opt. Express 24 (19):
22169–22176.
83 Luo, L., Wang, K., Ge, C. et al. (2017). Actively controllable terahertz switches
with graphene-based nongroove gratings. Photonics Res. 5 (6): 604–611.
84 Zhang, Z., Yang, J., He, X. et al. (2018). All-optical multi-channel switching
at telecommunication wavelengths based on tunable plasmon-induced trans-
parency. Opt. Commun. 425: 196–203.
85 Wang, M., Zhang, M., Wang, Y. et al. (2019). Fano resonance in an asymmetric
MIM waveguide structure and its application in a refractive index nanosensor.
Sensors 19 (4): 791.
86 Zhang, Y., Kuang, Y., Zhang, Z. et al. (2019). High-sensitivity refractive index
sensors based on Fano resonance in the plasmonic system of splitting ring
cavity-coupled MIM waveguide with tooth cavity. Appl. Phys. A 125 (1): 1–5.
87 Shi, X., Ma, L., Zhang, Z. et al. (2018). Dual Fano resonance control and refrac-
tive index sensors based on a plasmonic waveguide-coupled resonator system.
Opt. Commun. 427: 326–330.
88 Shahamat, Y., Ghaffarinejad, A., and Vahedi, M. (2020). Plasmon induced trans-
parency and refractive index sensing in two nanocavities and double nanodisk
resonators. Optik 202: 163618.
89 Farmani, A. (2019). Three-dimensional FDTD analysis of a nanostructured plas-
monic sensor in the near-infrared range. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B: Opt. Phys. 36 (2):
401–407.
90 Bian, Z.Y., Liang, R.S., Zhang, Y.J. et al. (2015). Multifunctional disk device for
optical switch and temperature sensor. Chin. Phys. B 24 (10): 107801.
91 Bazgir, M., Jalalpour, M., Zarrabi, F.B., and Arezoomand, A.S. (2020). Design of
an optical switch and sensor based on a MIM coupled waveguide using a DNA
composite. J. Electron. Mater. 49 (3): 2173–2178.
92 Shahamat, Y. and Vahedi, M. (2019). Mid-infrared plasmonically induced
absorption and transparency in a Si-based structure for temperature sensing
and switching applications. Opt. Commun. 430: 227–233.
93 Jiang, X., Chen, D., Zhang, Z. et al. (2020). Dual-channel optical switch, refrac-
tive index sensor and slow light device based on a graphene metasurface. Opt.
Express 28 (23): 34079–34092.
94 Ghafari, S., Forouzeshfard, M.R., and Vafapour, Z. (2019). Thermo optical
switching and sensing applications of an infrared metamaterial. IEEE Sens. J. 20
(6): 3235–3241.
95 Shahamat, Y. and Vahedi, M. (2017). Pump-tuned plasmon-induced trans-
parency for sensing and switching applications. Opt. Commun. 401: 40–45.

122
4 Optical Resistance Switch for Optical Sensing
96 Poorgholam-Khanjari, S., Razavi, Z., and Zarrabi, F.B. (2021). Reconfigurable
optical rectangular particle array absorber based on metal–DNA–metal structure
as a refractive index sensor and optical switch. Opt. Commun. 489: 126866.
97 Drachev, V.P., Chettiar, U.K., Kildishev, A.V. et al. (2008). The Ag dielectric
function in plasmonic metamaterials. Opt. Express 16 (2): 1186–1195.
98 Falkovsky, L.A. (2008). Optical properties of graphene. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 129
(1): 012004. IOP Publishing.
99 Armaghani, S., Khani, S., and Danaie, M. (2019). Design of all-optical graphene
switches based on a Mach–Zehnder interferometer employing optical Kerr
effect. Superlattices Microstruct. 135: 106244.
100 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2019). Design of a single-mode plasmonic
bandpass filter using a hexagonal resonator coupled to graded-stub waveguides.
Plasmonics 14 (1): 53–62.
101 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2020). Hybrid all-optical infrared
metal–insulator–metal plasmonic switch incorporating photonic crystal bandgap
structures. Photonics Nanostruct. Fundam. Appl. 40: 100802.
102 Ahmed, I., Khoo, E.H., Kurniawan, O., and Li, E.P. (2011). Modeling and sim-
ulation of active plasmonics with the FDTD method by using solid state and
Lorentz–Drude dispersive model. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B: Opt. Phys. 28 (3): 352–359.
103 Haffner, C., Chelladurai, D., Fedoryshyn, Y. et al. (2018). Low-loss
plasmon-assisted electro-optic modulator. Nature 556 (7702): 483–486.
104 Bhasker, P., Norman, J., Bowers, J., and Dagli, N. (2020). Low voltage, high
optical power handling capable, bulk compound semiconductor electro-optic
modulators at 1550 nm. J. Lightwave Technol. 38 (8): 2308–2314.
105 Li, F., Tang, T., Li, J. et al. (2020). Chiral coding metasurfaces with integrated
vanadium dioxide for thermo-optic modulation of terahertz waves. J. Alloys
Compd. 826: 154174.
106 Liao, C., Li, C., Wang, C. et al. (2019). High-speed all-optical modulator based
on a polymer nanofiber Bragg grating printed by femtosecond laser. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 12 (1): 1465–1473.
107 Gardes, F.Y., Brimont, A., Sanchis, P. et al. (2009). High-speed modulation of a
compact silicon ring resonator based on a reverse-biased pn diode. Opt. Express
17 (24): 21986–21991.
108 Moradiani, F., Seifouri, M., Abedi, K., and Gharakhili, F.G. (2021). High extinc-
tion ratio all-optical modulator using a vanadium-dioxide integrated hybrid
plasmonic waveguide. Plasmonics 16 (1): 189–198.
109 Sun, F., Xia, L., Nie, C. et al. (2019). An all-optical modulator based on a
graphene–plasmonic slot waveguide at 1550 nm. Appl. Phys Express 12 (4):
042009.
110 Khani, S., Danaie, M., and Rezaei, P. (2021). Fano resonance using surface plas-
mon polaritons in a nano-disk resonator coupled to perpendicular waveguides
for amplitude modulation applications. Plasmonics 16: 1–18.

123
5
Optical Interferometric Sensing
Hailong Wang1,2 and Jietai Jing1
1State Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, Joint Institute of Advanced Science and Technology, School
of Physics and Electronic Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
2College of Optical and Electronic Technology, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
5.1
Introduction
Optical interferometer is the basis for optical interferometric sensing because dif-
ferent kinds of sensors, such as temperature, strain, refractive index, and humidity
sensors, can be prepared based on the optical interference principle. In general,
traditional optical interferometers such as Mach–Zehnder interferometer (MZI)
consist of two linear beam splitters (BSs), with one acting as wave splitter and
the other as wave combiner, while their corresponding phase sensitivity is always
bounded by standard quantum limit (SQL) due to Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
In order to surpass this limit, in 1986, Yurke et al. proposed a so-called SU(1,1) inter-
ferometer, which can be constructed by replacing the linear beam splitters in MZI
with nonlinear parametric processes, and compared with MZI, its corresponding
phase sensitivity can reach the ultimate quantum limit of phase measurement, that
is Heisenberg limit (HL) [1]. Due to the fact that maximum fringe intensity of the
output beams in SU(1,1) interferometer depends quadratically on the intensity of
the phase-sensing field, an SU(1,1) interferometer can also be known as nonlinear
interferometer. The proposal of nonlinear interferometer has attracted extensive
attention; e.g. Plick et al. proposed the injection of a coherent state to boost the
sensitivity of nonlinear interferometer [2].
More than 20 years later, in 2011, Jing et al. experimentally realized this nonlinear
interferometer with four-wave mixing (FWM) processes acting as nonlinear beam
splitters to split and recombine an incoming optical field [3]. Amplification pro-
cess is actively involved in the interferometer, leading to enhanced sensitivity for
phase measurement compared to MZI. Benefiting from the major advantages of non-
linear interferometer, it can realize phase-sensitivity enhancement, entanglement
enhancement, quantum-noise cancellation (QNC), high-sensitivity interferometric
surface–plasmon–resonance (SPR) sensing, and so on. These facts indicate a non-
linear interferometer can find potential applications in quantum metrology.
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

124
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
To give the comprehensive descriptions about nonlinear interferometric sensing,
this chapter is organized as follows: in Section 5.2, we will discuss the above non-
linear interferometer, including experimental implementation of phase-locking,
enhancement of phase sensitivity, experimental realization of entanglement
enhancement and QNC; in Section 5.3, we will describe other types of nonlinear
interferometers, including a nonlinear Sagnac interferometer (NSI), a hybrid
interferometer consisting of a nonlinear FWM process and a linear beam split-
ter, a phase-sensitive FWM process acting as a nonlinear beam splitter, and
interference-induced quantum-squeezing enhancement so on; in Section 5.4, a
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor has been theoretically proposed and demon-
strated to have its sensing advantages by using sensing parameters such as degree of
intensity-difference squeezing (IDS), estimation precision, and signal–noise ratio;
in Section 5.5, we will give a summary and outlook of this chapter.
5.2
Nonlinear Interferometer
As discussed above, nonlinear interferometer can be constructed by replacing the
linear beam splitters in MZI with nonlinear FWM processes; its corresponding
conceptual sketch is shown in Figure 5.1. As shown in Figure 5.1, nonlinear
interferometer consists of two FWM processes. The first FWM (FWM1) process
amplifies the input “signal” beam and meanwhile produces a conjugate “idler”
beam. Thus, the first FWM serves as an equivalent beam splitter and splits the
input beam into two. The second FWM (FWM2) process serves as a beam combiner,
which mixes the amplified signal beam and the idler beam. The action of a FWM
process is well written by
Aout
s
= GAin
s + gAin∗
i
;
Aout
i
= GAin
i + gAin∗
s
(5.1)
where s and i stand for signal and idler beams, respectively. G is the amplitude gain
of the FWM process and G2 −g2 = 1.
Therefore, if there is no idler beam input at FWM1, the beams after FWM1 are
As1 = G1As0;
Ai1 = g1A∗
s0
(5.2)
Here, As0 is the input signal beam. Note that when amplitude gain is large enough,
i.e. G1 ≈g1 ≥1, we have a nearly equal splitting of As0, but the splitting beams are
amplified from the input beam. Assuming the idler beam is subjected to a phase
shift of 𝜑, we obtain the outputs of FWM2 from Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) as
As2 = G(𝜑)As0;
Ai2 = g(𝜑)A∗
s0
(5.3)
with
G(𝜑) = G1G2 + g∗
1g2e−i𝜑;
g(𝜑) = G∗
1g2 + G2g1ei𝜑
(5.4)
In the case when both FWM processes have the same gain: G1 = G2 = G0,
g1 = g2 = g0, we have
G(𝜑) = 1 + g0
2(1 + e−i𝜑);
g(𝜑) = G0g0(1 + ei𝜑)
(5.5)

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
125
G0
φ
G0
I0
IS2
IS1
Ii2
Ips(Iil)
FWM2
FWM1
Pump
Figure 5.1
A nonlinear interferometer with two FWM processes as two equivalent beam
splitters. I0 is input signal beam; Ips(Ii1) and Is1 are the ampliﬁed idler and signal beams,
respectively; G0 is amplitude gain for FWM1 and FWM2 processes, respectively; Is2 and Ii2
are the output signal and idler beams from nonlinear interferometer, respectively.
From Eq. (5.2), we find the intensity of the phase-sensing beam inside the
nonlinear interferometer as
Ii1 = Ai1
2 = g0
2I0
(5.6)
with I0 = As0
2 as the input intensity. The intensities of the output beams can also be
easily obtained as
Is2 = I0
[1 + 2G0
2g0
2(1 + cos 𝜑)] ,
Ii2 = 2I0G0
2g0
2(1 + cos 𝜑)
(5.7)
So both the output beams show interference fringes when the phase is scanned.
From Eq. (5.7), we find the maximum output intensity at the idler output to be
IM
i2 = 4G0
2g0
2I0 = 4G0
2Ips =
4(Ips + I0)Ips
I0
(5.8)
Here Ips = Ii1 is the intensity of phase-sensing beam. For a large gain and a fixed
input I0, we have Ips ≥I0 and IM
i2 ∝I2
ps. Thus, Eq. (5.8) is the main feature of this
nonlinear interferometer, which is obviously different from the traditional linear
interferometer (MZI). After the above basic principle about nonlinear interferome-
ters is discussed, we will discuss the experimental implementation of phase-locking,
quantum enhancement of phase sensitivity, enhancement of entanglement, QNC,
and so on in detail in Sections 5.2.1–5.2.3.
5.2.1
Experimental Implementation of Phase Locking
In this section, phase-locking of nonlinear interferometer will be experimen-
tally implemented [4]. Phase-locking techniques are widely used in many fields,
including electronics and optics, such as frequency demodulators and frequency
synthesizers. As the fields of fundamental quantum optics and quantum infor-
mation science develop, phase-locking technique has become an indispensable
experimental tool for the generation, manipulation, and detection of quantum
states. For example, it has been utilized to stabilize the relative phase between
multiple squeezed states to prepare multipartite entanglement and cluster states. It
can also manipulate the behavior of quantum squeezing and entanglement in both
single-mode and two-mode phase-sensitive FWM processes based on rubidium
vapor. Phase-locking techniques are also a critical part of balanced homodyne
detection systems, which can be used to measure the quadrature variance of a
quantum state. In addition, phase-locking technique is required for the use of

126
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
an interferometer in real applications. For example, gravitational wave detectors
operate close to a dark fringe, which not only cancels the common mode noise of
the system but also maximizes the signal-to-shot noise ratio.
Our group has experimentally implemented a nonlinear interferometer and
investigated its nonlinear character and visibility dependence on system param-
eters. More importantly, we studied the quantum nature of its performance and
demonstrated a 4 dB improvement in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for the phase mea-
surement that results from an increase in signal and the cancellation of quantum
noise. In this case, nonlinear interferometer is operated on its dark fringe caused by
destructive interference via the control of the internal phase. On the other hand, the
interferometer can also be operated on its bright fringe by modifying the internal
phase. As a result, the quantum correlations generated in the first FWM stage can be
further enhanced by the second stage. Consequently, different physical phenomena
can be observed at different phase-locking points of our nonlinear interferometer.
From this point of view, the ability to phase lock this nonlinear interferometer is
important for its use in real applications. Thus, here we investigate the physical
implementation of phase-locking in such a nonlinear interferometer.
There are several methods for phase-locking: beat note locking (BNL), coherent
modulation locking (CML), and quantum noise locking (QNL). CML and BNL can
be mainly used to lock the relative phase of bright optical fields, such as coherent
states and squeezed coherent states, whereas the QNL can lock the relative phase
between a squeezed vacuum state and a coherent state. Here we investigate the
phase-locking of nonlinear interferometers using two different methods, i.e. BNL
and CML.
As shown in Figure 5.2, entangled twin beams, called probe and conjugate, are
generated in the first cell by the FWM process. The second cell plays the role of the
second beam splitter in an interferometer and leads to interference by mixing the
probe, conjugate, and pump2. The relative phase between these three beams needs
to be stabilized in order to lock the interferometer.
Pump1
PBS
PBS
Seed
Cavity
532 nm
Rb
Ti:Sapphire
Pump2
M4
M6
M5
M1
M3
AOM
SMF
L1
L2
GL
GT
L3
L4
Nonlinear
Interferometer
GL
GT
Probe
PZT
Conjugate
Cell1
Rb
Cell2
5S1/2
5P1/2
F = 2 F = 3
Pr
C
P
PZT
M2
H2
M7
H1
Figure 5.2
Experimental setup for nonlinear interferometer. PBS, polarizing beam splitter;
AOM, acousto–optic modulator; SMF, single-mode ﬁber; L1–4, lens; H1–2, half-wave
plates; M1–7, mirrors; GL, Glan laser polarizer; Cell1 and Cell2, atomic vapor cells; GT,
Glan–Thompson polarizer; and PZT, piezo-electric transducer.

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
127
Rb
Rb
Optics section
Electronics section
PS
Mixer
S
OSC
ibn
ibn
Mixer
PID
PID
PD3
PBS
PZT
Pro
PZT
M
Cell2
â4
â3
â2
â1
Conj
M
Cell1 GT
GL
PD2
PD1
HVA
HVA
LPF
LPF
RS
Feedback
Feedback
Figure 5.3
Detailed experimental layout for phase-locking nonlinear interferometer using
BNL method. In the optics section: PD1, PD2, broad bandwidth photodiodes; PD3,
monitoring photodiode. In the electronics section: OSC, oscilloscope; Mixer, frequency
mixer; PS, phase shifter; RS, radio frequency source; LPF, low-pass ﬁlter; PID,
proportional-integral-derivative controller; and HVA, high-voltage ampliﬁer.
To implement phase-locking, it is straightforward to set up two sets of
phase-locking systems, one for probe and pump2, and the other for conjugate
and pump2. This is the basic idea of BNL method. As shown in Figure 5.3, we first
pick off a small portion of each beam inside the interferometer. Then, we overlap
the portion of the probe or conjugate that we picked off with pump2 using a
beam splitter. In this way, with high-bandwidth detectors, two beat note signals at
3.04 GHz (one for the probe and one for the conjugate) are obtained and are given as
ibn = Γcos[(𝜔pro(conj) −𝜔pump2)t + (𝜙pro(conj) −𝜙2)]
(5.9)
where Γ depends on the field amplitudes of the probe or conjugate and pump2 beams
at the position of the photodiode. 𝜔pro(conj) −𝜔pump2 is equal to ±3.04 GHz, which is
determined by the hyperfine splitting of the two ground states of Rb85. 𝜙pro(conj) is
the phase of the probe (conjugate) beam, and 𝜙2 is the phase of pump2. What we
care about in phase-locking is the phase difference term 𝜙pro(conj) −𝜙2. To obtain
this term, we mix the beat note signal with an electronic local oscillator, which has
the same frequency of 3.04 GHz. After the mixing process, we use two low-pass
filters (LPFs) to filter out the high-frequency terms at about 6.08 GHz. This results
in a low-frequency signal that depends on the phase difference between the probe
or conjugate and pump2. This gives us the error signal of the BNL method
𝜁= Γcos(𝜙pro(conj) −𝜙2)
(5.10)
which has zero crossings at
𝜙pro(conj) = 𝜙2 ± 𝜋
2
(5.11)
In order to lock the phase difference between pump2 and the probe or conjugate,
we introduce a phase shifter (PS) in one of the beat note signals before the frequency
mixer (Mixer). The phase-locking results for BNL method are shown in Figure 5.4.
In Figure 5.4a, the black curve (trace A) shows the interference fringes when we scan
the two piezo-electric transducers (PZTs) shown in Figure 5.3. This signal is used to

128
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0.5
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1.0
Time (s)
A
C
B
Interference signal
Error signal of conj-pump2
Error signal of probe-pump2
(a)
Voltage (V)
1.5
2.0
10
0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
20
Time (s)
A
C
B
Interference signal
Error signal of conj-pump2
Error signal of probe-pump2
(b)
Voltage (V)
30
40
Figure 5.4
The phase-locking results for BNL method. (a) Signals when scanning the
phase of the interferometer. (b) Signals when the interferometer is not scanned. Trace A:
interference signal used for monitoring; Trace B (C): error signal used for locking the
conjugate and pump2 (probe and pump2).
monitor the stability of the phase-locking method due to its phase-sensitive nature.
The blue curve (trace B) is the error signal of the phase lock loop for the conjugate
and pump2, whereas the red curve (trace C) is the error signal of the phase lock loop
for the probe and pump2. We then stop scanning the two PZTs and enable the phase
lock loop by feeding back the error signal to the PZT (its bandwidth of several tens of
kHz determines the locking bandwidth) through a proportional-integral-derivative
controller (PID) and a high-voltage amplifier (HVA), as also shown in Figure 5.3.
The result is shown in Figure 5.4b. The three curves (traces A, B, and C) that
we obtain without scanning correspond to the same curves with scanning in
Figure 5.4a. From 0 to 14 seconds, both phase-locking systems operate without
feedback. The fluctuations of the two error signals and the interference signal are
large. After 14 seconds, we enable only one locking system (probe-pump2). As we
can see, the fluctuations of the interference signal have become smaller. We enable
both locking systems at 28 seconds; however, this does not significantly improve the
locking quality. Figure 5.4b shows that BNL method does not phase lock nonlinear
interferometer successfully. This is due mainly to the fact that the beat note signals
are derived at the positions of photodiodes PD1 and PD2 instead of at the center of
cell2, where the interference occurs. That is to say, BNL method is trying to use a
“virtual” locking position (PD1 and PD2) instead of the real locking position (the
center of cell2), which is not part of the phase-locking loop. In this case, only when
the optical paths after the polarization beam splitter (PBS) used to pick off the beams
to obtain the beat note signal are stable enough, would the BNL method result in
a stable lock. However, these optical paths cannot be made short enough to ensure
the required stability in our current experimental setup because of the optical
elements of the nonlinear interferometer. In principle, the phase-locking quality
of BNL method could be further improved by redesigning nonlinear interferometer
in a compact configuration. However, it is important to note that this technique
cannot directly stabilize the FWM process in cell2. To overcome this limitation of
BNL method, other more suitable techniques are needed to achieve stable operation
of nonlinear interferometer. In order to do this, it is necessary to directly stabilize
the FWM process. This involves phase-locking three beams at different frequencies

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
129
Rb
Rb
Optics section
Electronics section
RS
S
OSC
i3
Mixer
PID
Modulation
PZT
Probe
PZT
M
Cell2
â4
â3
â2
â1
Conj
M
Cell1 GT
GL
PD2
PD1
HVA
LPF
Feedback
Figure 5.5
Detailed experimental layout for phase-locking nonlinear interferometer using
CML method.
with only one phase-locking loop. The CML method allows us to do so and achieve
much better stability for nonlinear interferometers, as discussed below. In addition,
compared with BNL method, CML method, as shown in Figure 5.5, does not require
any extra optical elements for picking off beams inside the interferometer. In this
way, it avoids insertion losses that introduce vacuum noise and deteriorate the
quantum correlations between the two arms of the interferometer. As shown in
Figure 5.5, we first detect the optical field ̂a3 using photodiode PD1, whose output
can be expressed after making a linear approximation as
i3(t) = |G2|2a2
2 + |g2|2a1
2 + 2a1a2G2g2 cos 𝜃
(5.12)
where G2 is the gain of cell2 and g2 satisfies the relationship |G2|2 −|g2|2 = 1. a1 and
a2 are the mean values of the optical fields ̂a1 and ̂a2, and 𝜃is the relative phase
between the three beams.
To obtain the error signal for CML method, it is necessary to introduce a relative
phase modulation between the input fields. We include this in the phase difference
of the input fields as
𝜃= 2𝜙2 −𝜙pro −𝜙conj = 𝜃0 + 𝜃1 sin Ωt
(5.13)
the dependence of 𝜃on the phases of the probe, conjugate, and pump beams is deter-
mined by the FWM process. 𝜃0 is the average phase of the phase difference between
the three beams, 𝜃1 is the modulation depth, and Ω is the modulation frequency.
For our case, this modulation depth is very small (𝜃1 ≪𝜃0), so we can make the
approximation
ei𝜃1 sin Ωt ≃J0(𝜃1) + J1(𝜃1)eiΩt −J1(𝜃1)e−iΩt
(5.14)
where J0(𝜃1) and J1(𝜃1) are the zero and first-order Bessel functions. We substitute
this approximation into Eq. (5.12) to obtain
i3(t) = |G2|2a2
2 + |g2|2a1
2 + 2a1a2G2g2[J0(𝜃1) cos 𝜃0 −2J1(𝜃1) sin 𝜃0 sin Ωt]
(5.15)
we then mix the above photocurrent with an electronic local oscillator, which has
the same frequency of Ω with a Mixer and use an LPF to filter the high-frequency

130
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
–0.10
–0.05
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0.00
Time (s)
A
B
Interference signal
Error signal when scan
(a)
Voltage (V)
Voltage (V)
0.05
0.10
0
50
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
100
Time (s)
A
B
Interference signal
Dark
Bright
Dark
Error signal
(b)
150
200
Figure 5.6
The phase-locking results for CML method. (a) Signals when scanning the
phase of the interferometer. (b) Signals when the interferometer is not scanned. Trace A:
interference signal used for monitoring; Trace B: error signal for the CML method.
components. In this way, the error signal reduces to
𝜁= −2a1a2G2g2J1(𝜃1) sin 𝜃0
(5.16)
From Eq. (5.16), we can see that the error signal of CML method is proportional
to J1(𝜃1), the gain of cell2, and the mean value of fields ̂a1 and ̂a2. At the same
time, it has zero crossings at 𝜃0 = 0, 𝜋, which correspond to the bright and dark
fringes of nonlinear interferometer, respectively. Consequently, the nonlinear
interferometer can be locked to the bright and dark fringes by using CML method.
The phase-locking results for CML method are shown in Figure 5.6. In Figure 5.6a,
the black curve (trace A) shows the interference fringe when we scan one of the
two PZTs shown in Figure 5.5. The red curve (trace B) shows the error signal of
the phase-lock loop for nonlinear interferometer. As we can see, the zero crossings
of the error signal almost perfectly correspond to either the bright or dark fringes
of the interference signal. This makes it possible for CML method to provide an
accurate and stable lock. We then stop scanning the PZT and enable the phase-lock
loop by feeding back the error signal to the PZT through a PID and a HVA, as
shown in Figure 5.5. The results are shown in Figure 5.6b, where trace A and trace B
correspond to the same curves as in Figure 5.6a but without scanning. When we first
let the system operate without feedback for about 38 seconds, the acquired inter-
ference signal and error signal showed large fluctuations, indicating large-phase
fluctuations inside the interferometer. We then enable the feedback system for
about 78 seconds, and nonlinear interferometer is locked to the dark fringe. In this
way, the large fluctuations of the interference signal and the error signal are largely
suppressed, showing very good phase stability. Then, we lock the interferometer
to the bright fringe simply by switching the sign of the proportional term in
the PID.
We can obtain an estimate for the phase stability of the interferometer when
locked by using the error signal when the system is locked as well as the slope
around the locking points (zero crossings). With this analysis, we can estimate that
for CML method, phase stability is Δ𝜃∼0.05 rad at the dark fringe and Δ𝜃∼0.10 rad

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
131
at the bright fringe. The level of stability obtained at the dark fringe will enable,
under certain conditions, the study of the SU(1,1) interferometer well within
the operational phase region where it is possible to obtain an enhancement in
phase estimation below standard quantum limit (SQL) or shot noise limit (SNL).
A similar analysis can be done for BNL method; however, in this case, the locking
stability does not provide a direct measure of the stability of the interferome-
ter, as this method does not provide a direct stabilization of the FWM process
in cell2.
The fluctuations of the interference signal when it is locked to the bright fringe
seem noisier than the ones for the dark fringe. This results in part from the locking
stability, as described above, and from the different levels of noise added by the
nonlinear interferometer at its different operating points. The output states of
nonlinear interferometer when locked to the bright fringe are thermal states with
significant excess noise due to the amplification from the cascaded FWM processes.
However, the output states are coherent when the interferometer is locked to the
dark fringe due to QNC. As we can see, the stability of the phase lock with CML
method is long enough for quantum correlation and entanglement measurements
at both dark and bright fringes.
In conclusion, we have locked the internal phase of a nonlinear interferometer
to a level that will make it possible to study its operation for phase estimation in
the sub-shot noise regime. We studied two types of phase-locking techniques, i.e.
BNL and CML. Compared with the BNL method, the CML method can achieve
much better phase-locking stability. The CML method used in our current work
could also be applied to more complicated processes that require phase-locking mul-
tiple beams with different frequencies. For example, we can use CML technique to
lock the relative phase between multiple beams of a phase-sensitive N-wave mixing
process or an N-port nonlinear interferometer. This will make it possible to control
the relative phase of a complex nonlinear system. Our results pave the way for real
applications of a nonlinear interferometer in precision measurement and quantum
manipulation, for example, phase control in phase-sensitive amplifiers (PSAs) and
quantum-enhanced real-time phase tracking.
5.2.2
Quantum Enhancement of Phase Sensitivity
Although we have experimentally implemented the phase-locking of nonlinear
interferometer in Section 5.2.1, in this section we use a more general method to
measure phase sensitivity [5]. Phase sensitivity as another important physical
quantity, is used to character the uncertainty in the internal phase estimation of
an interferometer. Figure 5.7a and 5.7b show the phase-sensitivity measurement
scheme of MZI and bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer. The equal photon number
(Ns) inside them can provide a fair comparison premise. Due to the amplification
nature of the first parametric process, the seed intensity of MZI should be increased
to balance the internal photon number from the two different interferometers.

132
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
BS1
∣o⟩
∣a2⟩
ϕ
(a)
BS2
–
ain, 1
ain, c
ain, p
ain, 2
aout, 2
S1–2
aout, 1
PA1
∣o⟩
∣ap⟩
ϕ
(b)
PA2
Sc
G, g
G, g
aout, c
aout, p
Figure 5.7
The two types of interferometer. (a) MZI and (b) bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer. G is the amplitude gain of the parametric process, 𝜙is the internal phase
difference, S1−2 is the interference fringe obtained by subtraction from the two arms in MZI,
and Sc is the interference fringe of the conjugate arm in bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer.
Firstly, the input-output relation of the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer
can be expressed as
̂aout,p = (G2 + g2e−i𝜙)̂ain,p + Gg(1 + e−i𝜙)̂a†
in,c
̂aout,c = Gg(1 + ei𝜙)̂a†
in,p + (G2ei𝜙+ g2)̂ain,c
(5.17)
in which p and c represent the probe and conjugate beams, G is the amplitude
gain and has the relation of g2 = G2 −1, and 𝜙is the internal phase variation in
the conjugate beam path. The phase sensitivity Δϕ of the interferometer can be
expressed as
Δ𝜙2 =
⟨(Δ̂O)2⟩
|𝜕⟨̂O⟩∕𝜕𝜙|2
(5.18)
where ̂O stands for some measurement combinations of the output fields. Due to
the importance role of the measurement method and thus the different strategies
may lead to different phase sensitivities. For a coherent state |𝛼p⟩injection of the
probe port (bright-seeded) and a vacuum state |0⟩injection of the conjugate port,
the interference fringe of the conjugate field is chosen as the measurement strategy.
As shown in Figure 5.7b, ̂Oc = ⟨̂Nout,c⟩+ Δ̂Nout,c, where ̂N represents the photon
number operator of the fields. Here ⟨̂Nout,c⟩and Δ̂N2
out,c denote the average intensity
and intensity noise of the conjugate field, respectively. On the basis of this mea-
surement strategy, the interference fringe slope corresponding to the denominator
in Eq. (5.18) is amplified by the second PA process. Then, based on Eq. (5.18),
the phase sensitivity of such a conjugate-port direct measurement strategy can be
expressed by
Δ𝜙c =
√
4G4g4(cos 𝜙+ 1)2(2N + 1) + 2G2g2(cos 𝜙+ 1)(N + 1)
2G2g2| sin 𝜙|(N + 1)
(5.19)

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
133
in which N =
⟨
̂a†
in,p̂ain,p
⟩
. For the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer (N ≫1), the
Eq. (5.19) can be further approximated as
Δ𝜙c =
√
[8G4g4(cos 𝜙+ 1)2 + 2G2g2(cos 𝜙+ 1)](G2 + g2)
2G2g2| sin 𝜙|
√
Ns
(5.20)
in which Ns = (G2 + g2)
⟨
̂a†
in,p̂ain,p
⟩
is the total internal photon number inside
the interferometer. To corroborate the quantum enhancement of phase sensi-
tivity brought by the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer, its phase sensitivity
should be compared with regard to SQL. The SQL is normally measured by
direct subtraction of the photocurrents from the two output fields in MZI. In this
way, the phase sensitivity of MZI is given by Δ𝜙MZI = 1∕(| sin 𝜙|
√
Ns), where
Ns =
⟨
̂a†
in,2̂ain,2
⟩
. The corresponding SQL is the minimum value of Δ𝜙MZI, which
is given by Δ𝜙SQL = 1∕
√
Ns. From Eq. (5.20), we can see that the phase sensitiv-
ity for bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer reaches its minimum when 𝜙= 𝜋.
It is given by
Δ𝜙c,min =
√
G2 + g2
4G2g2
1
√
Ns
(5.21)
It can be seen that the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer will beat the SQL
for any G2 > 1.32 in the dark fringe. Such quantum enhancement of the phase
sensitivity increases with the gain increase. Such SQL beating is due to the factor
√
4G2g2∕(G2 + g2), and the scaling of such a bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer is
still 1/
√
Ns. Secondly, the detailed experimental arrangement for measuring phase
sensitivity of interference fringes Sc and S1−2 is shown in Figure 5.7 [5]. Here, i1
and i2 represent the photocurrent signals from the two detectors, i3 (i5) is the dc
component of i1 (i2), and i4 is the subtraction result of rf components of i1 and i2
for the detection of S1−2. For the detection of Sc, i4 is the rf component of i1. An
oscilloscope with a 28 ms acquisition time and a 50 MHz sampling rate records i3,
i4, and i5. To experimentally implement the above theoretical proposal, the detailed
experimental arrangement is shown in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.9 shows a group of typical experimental data when we keep Ns equal for
the MZI and the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer. Here we set the gain values
of both cells at G2 = 2.28. Figure 5.9a shows i3–i5 and i4 for the MZI, which are
displayed in dark red (trace i) and light red (trace ii), respectively. The corresponding
data for the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer are depicted in Figure 5.9b, where
i3 and i4 are displayed in dark blue (trace i) and light blue (trace ii), respectively.
In order to obtain the phase sensitivity of the two interferometers, we must obtain
both the intensity noise term (numerator) and the slope term (denominator) in
Eq. (5.18). First, we divide the 1.4 × 106 points in traces i and ii from Figure 5.9a,b
into 250 groups along the time axis. Then, to calculate the intensity noise of the
interferometer, fast Fourier transform (FFT) is used to implement the spectrum
analysis for each group in trace ii. Considering the quantum correlation from the

134
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Pump1
PZT
PZT
MZI
SU(1,1)
FM
HRM
AOM
PBS HWP
Ti : Sapphire
Pump2
Pump
L1
c1
c2
p1
p2
i2
i1
i5
i3
i4
GT
GT
AMP
PS
rf
dc
BT
OS
BT
–
Rb–85
5S1/2F = 2
5S1/2F = 3
5P1/2
L2
Conjugate
Probe
Cell1
Cell2
p0
Figure 5.8
Detailed experimental arrangement. AMP, ampliﬁer; AOM, acousto–optic
modulator; FM, ﬂip mirror; GT, Glan–Thompson polarizer; HRM, high reﬂectivity mirror;
HWP, half-wave plate; L1–2, lens; OS, oscilloscope.
–2
–1
0
1
2
–0.20
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0
0.10
0.05
0.15
0.20
Time (ms)
ii
i
(a)
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.6
dc (V)
–4
–2
0
2
4
–0.20
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0
0.10
0.05
0.15
0.20
Time (ms)
ii
i
(b)
rf (V)
rf (V)
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.6
dc (V)
–3
–2
–1
× 10–6
0
1
3
2
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
8
Phase (rad)
MZI
SNL
ii
i
(c)
Phase sensitivity (a.u.)
–6
–4
–2
× 10–6
0
2
6
4
1
2
3
4
6
5
7
8
Phase (rad)
SU(1,1)
SNL
ii
i
Phase sensitivity (a.u.)
(d)
Figure 5.9
Typical experimental data and corresponding phase sensitivity for MZI and
bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer. (a) Traces i and ii represent the dc and rf components
respectively of the interference fringe for MZI. (b) Traces i and ii represent the dc and rf
components respectively of the interference fringe for the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer. (c) The phase sensitivity of the MZI (trace ii) versus the phase; trace i
denotes the corresponding SQL. (d) The phase sensitivity of the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer (trace ii) versus the phase. The dashed blue lines are the corresponding
theoretical predictions. Trace i denotes the corresponding SQL.

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
135
FWM process has optimal values in the frequency range between 1 and 1.5 MHz,
we treat the average value of the FFT spectrum obtained in this range as the
intensity noise of each group. Since the interference fringe in our experiment is
acquired by scanning the phase 𝜙in time inside the interferometer, one phase
point corresponds to one time point. In this sense, the time-dependent data are
actually the phase-dependent data. The corresponding interference fringe slope of
each group can be obtained from the average value of the above-mentioned group
in trace i and the corresponding phase of each group. Finally, we use Eq. (5.18)
to calculate the phase sensitivity of each phase point for the two interferometers,
as shown in Figure 5.9c,d. As shown in Figure 5.9c, the red curve (trace ii) gives
the phase sensitivity versus the phase inside the MZI. The red line (trace i) gives
the corresponding SQL of the MZI. The corresponding data for the bright-seeded
SU(1,1) interferometer are shown in Figure 5.9d, where the blue curve (trace ii)
gives the phase sensitivity of the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer. This curve
clearly shows the phase-sensitivity enhancement of the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer compared with the SQL in the dark fringe due to direct intensity
detection. The enhancement factor is about 1.28, which is calculated by comparing
the best phase sensitivity in traces i and ii as shown in Figure 5.9d. The correspond-
ing theoretical prediction is also shown in Figure 5.9d (dashed blue lines), which
gives an enhancement factor of 1.81. As shown in Figure 5.9d, the experimental
result and the corresponding theoretical prediction have very similar trends, and
the slight difference may be the result of the loss from atomic absorption and
imperfect detection. To show the phase-sensitivity scaling, we perform a series of
measurements as shown in Figure 5.9 with different Ns by changing the power of
the seeded beams for both the two interferometers. The phase-sensitivity scaling
of the SQL (trace i) and that of the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer (trace ii)
are plotted in red and blue curves respectively in Figure 5.10a on a 10log10–10log10
scale. As shown in Figure 5.10a, the sensitivity of the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer (trace ii) increases with increasing power of the seeded beam. Trace
i is about 1.15 ± 0.16 dB above the phase-sensitivity scaling of the bright-seeded
SU(1,1) interferometer (trace ii); that is, the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer
has beaten the SQL by an amount of about 1.15 dB. The corresponding theoretical
predicted curves are shown as traces i and ii in Figure 5.10b. The experimental
enhancement factor (1.15 dB) compared with the SQL is less than the theoretical
prediction (2.6 dB). The main reason is that our theory does not include the losses
existing in the system, which can affect the performance of the interferometer to
some extent.
In this section, by using direct intensity detection, we experimentally demon-
strate the quantum enhancement of the phase sensitivity for the bright-seeded
SU(1,1) interferometer with reference to SQL. It is this direct detection scheme
that ensures the quantum enhancement in real-time and broadens its appli-
cations in quantum metrology, such as a nonlinear interferometer based on
quantum-enhanced real-time phase tracking and detection of an N-port interfer-
ometer with quantum-correlated outputs.

136
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–63
–62
–61
–59
–60
–58
–57
10 log10 Iav
10 log10 Iav
SNL
SU(1,1)
ii
i
(a)
Phase sensitivity (dB)
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–63
–62
–61
–59
–60
–58
–57
SNL
SU(1,1)
ii
i
(b)
Phase sensitivity (dB)
Figure 5.10
The phase-sensitivity
scaling of the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer and the SQL. (a) Traces i
and ii denote the phase sensitivity of SQL
and the bright-seeded SU(1,1)
interferometer respectively versus the
average intensity (Iav) of the ﬁelds inside
the interferometers. (b) The theoretical
prediction corresponding to (a).
5.2.3
Enhancement of Entanglement and Quantum Noise Cancellation
After phase sensitivity of nonlinear interferometer has been experimentally mea-
sured in Section 5.2.2, based on similar experimental setup, enhancement of entan-
glement [6] and QNC [7] will be discussed in this section. Here we will take enhance-
ment of entanglement as the first example, i.e. more than 3 dB enhancement of joint
quadrature squeezing compared with one of the single FWM process is observed.
By varying the pump power of the cascaded system, we also show how the gain
affects the entanglement enhancement. Theoretical predictions with the considera-
tions of losses in the experiment process are also investigated and a similar trend in
the low-gain regime can be found with the experimental results. The scheme of cas-
caded FWM processes is shown in Figure 5.11. For two vacuum fields, respectively,
named as “probe” (̂ain,p) and “conjugate” (̂ain,c) entering into the first FWM process,
the input–output relation for a single FWM process can be given by
̂Ap = Ĝain,p + ĝa†
in,c, ̂Ac = Ĝain,c + ĝa†
in,p
(5.22)
where ̂Ap and ̂Ac are the probe and conjugate fields after the first FWM process, G is
the amplitude gain, and we have the relation g2 = G2 −1. To describe the quantum
entanglement between two fields such as ̂a and ̂b, joint quadrature operators
̂X−,ab = ̂Xa −̂Xb and ̂Y+,ab = ̂Ya + ̂Yb are defined, where ̂Xa(b) = ̂a†(̂b†) + ̂a(̂b) and
̂Ya(b) = îa†(̂b†) −îa(̂b) are the quadrature amplitude phase of the corresponding
fields. For the fields of ̂Ap and ̂Ac, the corresponding SQL is the noise of the joint

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
137
Figure 5.11
Scheme of cascaded FWM
processes for entanglement enhancement.
FWM
FWM
Ac
aout, p
ain, p
ain, c
aout, c
Ap
ϕ
quadratures of two vacuum states
(⟨
Δ̂X2
−,vv
⟩
and
⟨
Δ̂Y 2
+,vv
⟩)
, which gives an upper
bound for the entanglement criterion. For a single FWM process, the noise of the
joint quadratures can be calculated and given by
⟨
Δ̂X2
−,pc
⟩
=
⟨
Δ̂Y 2
+,pc
⟩
= 2(G −g)2
(5.23)
the value of Eq. (5.23) is smaller than 2 (the corresponding SQL) for any G2 > 1.
That is to say the twin beams (̂Ap and ̂Ac) output from the single FWM process have
the properties of inseparability or entanglement, which has been demonstrated in
the previous experiment. In order to obtain a larger degree of entanglement, the
cascaded FWM processes are used by seeding the two entangled fields ̂Ap and ̂Ac into
the second FWM process, as shown in Figure 5.11. With the control of the internal
phase (𝜙) between ̂Ap and ̂Ac, the output fields (̂aout,p and ̂aout,c) after the second
FWM process can be written as
̂aout,p = ĜAp + ĝA†
ce−i𝜙, ̂aout,c = ĜAcei𝜙+ ĝA†
p
(5.24)
Similar to the single FWM process, the noise of the joint quadratures of cascaded
FWM processes can be calculated and given by
⟨
Δ̂X2
−,pc
⟩
=
⟨
Δ̂Y 2
+,pc
⟩
= 2 −4Gg(G −g)2(1 + cos 𝜙)
(5.25)
From Eq. (5.25), it can be found that for the scheme of the cascaded FWM processes,
the noise of the joint quadratures is phase-dependent. In addition, the minimal
value, which happen at 𝜙= 2k𝜋, where k is an integer, of the
⟨
Δ̂X2
−,pc
⟩
and
⟨
Δ̂Y 2
+,pc
⟩
are both 2 −8Gg(G −g)2, which is smaller than the one of the single FWM process
in Eq. (5.23) for any G2 > 1. In other words, a larger degree of entanglement can
be obtained through the cascaded FWM processes, with reference to the single
FWM process.
The detailed experimental layout is similar to that in Figure 5.8, and the typical
experimental results are shown in Figure 5.12. As shown in Figure 5.12, the noise
⟨
Δ̂X2
−,pc
⟩
of the joint quadrature ̂X−,pc for the scheme of the cascaded FWM processes
is shown by the minimum value of trace i. To show the entanglement enhancement
of the scheme of the cascaded FWM processes, the noise (the minimum value of
trace ii) of the joint quadrature of single FWM process is also measured by block-
ing the pump beam of the second FWM process in the experiment process. Trace
iii gives the corresponding SQL for the two schemes of single and cascaded FWM
processes when we block the two pumps of the cascaded FWM processes. As shown
in Figure 5.12, it is clear that both the two minimal values of both traces i and ii
are below trace iii, which is sufficient to claim the inseparability or entanglement
between the probe and conjugate beam output from both single and cascaded FWM
processes. By comparing the traces i and iii in Figure 5.12, the maximal quadrature

138
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Time (s)
Trace ii
Trace iii
Trace i
Noise level (dB)
0
0.05
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure 5.12
Group of
typical experimental data.
See the details in the main
text.
squeezing of −6.6 dB can be obtained by the scheme of the cascaded FWM processes,
which is about 2.8 dB better than the one of single FWM process. That is, a higher
degree of entanglement is experimentally obtained by the scheme of cascaded FWM
processes compared with the single FWM process.
In order to experimentally study the maximal quadrature squeezing that can
be obtained by the scheme of the cascaded FWM processes, we make a series of
measurements, as shown in Figure 5.13, with different G2 by changing the power of
the pump beams of the FWM processes. For simplicity, we always keep both FWM
processes with the same gains. In each measurement, the minimal values of traces
i and ii in Figure 5.12 and the mean value of trace iii are picked up, which gives
us the quadrature squeezing of the single and cascaded FWM processes versus the
gain, as shown by traces i and ii in Figure 5.13a. In Figure 5.13a, it can be found that
the entanglement enhancement of the cascaded FWM processes can be obtained
for any 1.1 < G2 < 3.1 and the maximal degree of about 3.1 dB entanglement
enhancement happens at G2 = 2.1. Moreover, a maximal joint quadrature squeezing
of −6.8 ± 0.4 dB is obtained at the same gain point. However, by comparing our
experimental results with the theoretical predictions from Eqs. (5.23) and (5.25), as
shown by traces i and ii in Figure 5.13b, we find that the experimental results are
far from achieving the theoretical predictions. This discrepancy can be explained
by the effect of losses and pump beam scattering, such as the conical emission from
the FWM process.
It is well known that entanglement is fragile and can be easily degraded by the
loss of systems. For the entanglement based on the cascaded FWM processes, the
losses, such as the absorptions of the atomic vapor cells and the unavoidable losses
in light path, will introduce extra vacuum noise into the entangled beams, which
is also amplified by the successive FWM processes. As a result, the entanglement
between the probe and conjugate beams will be experimentally degraded and
cannot reach the theoretical predictions. The detailed theoretical descriptions can
be seen in Ref. [6], in which the losses are considered. In summary, our experiment

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
139
Gain
Gain
Noise level (dB)
Noise level (dB)
1
1.5
1
1.5
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
2.5
3
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
2
2.5
Trace iii
Trace iii
Trace v
Trace iv
Trace ii
Trace ii
Trace i
Trace i
3
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13
Experimental and theoretical results of the quadrature squeezing versus the
gain for both schemes of single and cascaded FWM processes. See the details in the main
text.
provides a scheme for entanglement enhancement by phase manipulation. In this
way, our scheme with strongly enhanced entanglement may help to detect these
physical quantities with high sensitivities better than SQL. In addition, our scheme
provides a method to overcome the gain limitation in generating continuous
variable entanglement from a single FWM process.
Next, as the second example, QNC is an effective method to control the noise of
the quantum system, which reduces or even eliminates the noise of the quantum
system by utilizing destructive interference in the quantum system [7]. However,
QNC can be extremely dependent on the losses inside the system. Along this line,
we experimentally and theoretically study how the losses can affect the QNC in
nonlinear interferometer. We find that losses in the different arms inside nonlinear
interferometer can have different effects on QNC in the output fields from nonlinear
interferometer. And QNC in nonlinear interferometer can almost be insensitive to
the losses in some cases.
The typical experimental results, under the condition of keeping the gains of both
two FWM processes at G2 = 2, are depicted in Figure 5.14. As shown in Figure 5.14,
traces i and ii denote the noise levels of aout, p and aout, c, respectively, when the phase
is scanned. The amplified vacuum noise levels on the output probe field coming from
the first and second FWM processes are also shown as traces iii and iv in Figure 5.14,
respectively, which almost overlap with the corresponding traces of conjugate fields
(not shown in Figure 5.14 for clarity). Traces v and vi show the vacuum noise levels
double-amplified by the two FWM processes when we block the probe and conjugate
fields inside nonlinear interferometer, respectively. Trace vii is SQL when we block
all the pump beams in nonlinear interferometer. As shown in Figure 5.14, traces i
and ii can be lower than traces iii and iv and close to trace vii when the phase is
scanned, that is to say QNC happens. However, it can also be demonstrated that the
noise levels of aout, p and a aout, c cannot be reduced back to SQL as the minimum val-
ues of traces i and ii are 1.24 ± 0.07 dB and 1.96 ± 0.15 dB higher than the mean value
of trace vii. It is due to the losses inside the quantum system, e.g. the absorptions of
the atomic vapor cells. Actually, the losses will introduce extra vacuum noise, which

140
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Time (s)
Noise level (dB)
0.0
–94
–92
–90
–88
–86
–84
–82
–80
–78
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Trace i
Trace ii
Trace v
Trace vi
Trace iv
Trace iii
Trace vii
Figure 5.14
Typical experimental data. Traces i and ii, quantum noise levels of the output
ﬁelds from nonlinear interferometer when the phase is scanned. Traces iii and iv, quantum
noise levels of the vacuum ﬁelds ampliﬁed by the ﬁrst and second FWM processes,
respectively. Traces v and vi, quantum noise levels of the vacuum noise levels double
ampliﬁed by the two FWM processes when we block the probe and conjugate ﬁelds,
respectively. Trace vii, SQL.
is uncorrelated with Ap or Ac but is also amplified by the second FWM process. As a
result, the deterioration to the quantum correlation between Ap and Ac cannot can-
cel completely the quantum noise of the two fields aout, p and aout, c. On the other
hand, it seems that QNC in aout, p is more effective than the one in aout, c, which may
depend on the different absorption levels of the Rb cells for the probe and conju-
gate beams, which are 21% and 10% in the current experiment, respectively. In order
to experimentally study how the losses in the probe and conjugate beams can differ-
ently impact QNC happened on aout, p and aout, c, a variable attenuation is introduced
on the probe and conjugate fields inside the interferometer. First, we introduce an
attenuation on the probe arm to study how the loss can affect QNC in aout, p and aout, c.
To theoretically explain the lossy mechanism in the system, the fictitious beam split-
ters with the reflectivities of 𝜂and L are used to simulate the losses. Then, the probe
(̂A′
p) and conjugate (̂A′
c) fields after the first FWM process can be expressed as
̂A′
p =
√
1 −𝜂a
(√
1 −Lp̂Apei𝜙+
√
Lp̂vL
)
+ √𝜂âva
(5.26)
̂A′
c =
√
1 −𝜂b̂Ac + √𝜂b̂vb
(5.27)
in which 𝜂a and 𝜂b are the absorption losses of the two Rb cells for the probe and
conjugate fields, and Lp represents the attenuation in the probe field. ̂vL, ̂va, and ̂vb
are vacuum-state operators. Then, the quantum noise levels of the two fields aout, p

5.2 Nonlinear Interferometer
141
and aout, c can be given by
⟨
Δ̂X2
p,p↓
⟩
= G4(1 −Lp)(1 −𝜂a) + g4(1 −𝜂b)
+ G2g2(1 −𝜂b) + G2g2(1 −Lp)(1 −𝜂a)
+ g2𝜂b + G2Lp(1 −𝜂a)
+ G2𝜂b + 4G2g2√
1 −Lp
√
1 −𝜂a
√
1 −𝜂b cos 𝜙
(5.28)
⟨
Δ̂X2
c,p↓
⟩
= G4(1 −𝜂b) + g4(1 −Lp)(1 −𝜂a)
+ G2g2(1 −𝜂b) + G2g2(1 −Lp)(1 −𝜂a)
+ G2𝜂b + g2Lp(1 −𝜂a) + g2𝜂a
+ 4G2g2√
1 −Lp
√
1 −𝜂a
√
1 −𝜂b cos 𝜙
(5.29)
in which Xp, p↓(Xc, p↓) is the quadrature-phase amplitude of the probe (conjugate)
field, as attenuation is applied on the probe field.
Similarly, the quantum noise levels (⟨Δ̂X2
p,c↓⟩and ⟨Δ̂X2
c,c↓⟩) of the two fields aout, p
and aout, c, when the attenuation (Lc) is applied on the conjugate field can be given by
⟨
Δ̂X2
p,c↓
⟩
= G4(1 −𝜂a) + g4(1 −Lc)(1 −𝜂b)
+ G2g2(1 −𝜂a) + G2g2(1 −Lc)(1 −𝜂b)
+ g2𝜂b + G2Lc(1 −𝜂b) + G2𝜂a
+ 4G2g2√
1 −Lc
√
1 −𝜂a
√
1 −𝜂b cos 𝜙
(5.30)
⟨
Δ̂X2
c,c↓
⟩
= G4(1 −Lc)(1 −𝜂b) + g4(1 −𝜂a)
+ G2g2(1 −𝜂a) + G2g2(1 −Lc)(1 −𝜂b)
+ G2𝜂b + G2Lc(1 −𝜂b)
+ g2𝜂a + 4G2g2√
1 −Lc
√
1 −𝜂a
√
1 −𝜂b cos 𝜙
(5.31)
in which Xp, c↓(Xc, c↓) is the quadrature-phase amplitude of the probe (conjugate)
field as the attenuation is applied on the conjugate arm.
Figure 5.15 shows the experimental data and theoretical simulations about the
effect of losses on QNC. The vertical axis is the excess noise, which can be obtained
by subtracting the vacuum noise level from the minimum quantum noise level of
the output fields. The horizontal axis is the attenuation level. The effects of the losses
on QNC of the probe field when attenuation is applied on the conjugate (p, c↓) and
probe (p, p↓) fields are shown as traces i and ii in Figure 5.15a, respectively. The solid
and dashed lines are the experimental results and theoretical results, respectively,
in which the absorptions of the two Rb cells for probe (𝜂a) and conjugate (𝜂b) fields
are 21% and 10%. The corresponding results for the effect of losses on QNC of the
conjugate field when attenuation is applied on the probe (c, p↓) and conjugate (c,
c↓) fields are shown as traces iii and iv in Figure 5.15b, respectively. As shown in
Figure 5.15, the experimental and theoretical results have similar trends, and the
difference can be explained by the other losses from the system, such as propagation

142
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Losses
Quantum noise (dB)
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
0.1
c, c
c, p
p, c
p, p
0.2
0.3
Trace iii
Trace i
Trace ii
Trace iv
0.4
Losses
Quantum noise (dB)
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15
Experimental and theoretical data for the effect of losses on QNC inside
nonlinear interferometer. Trace i (iii) labeled as p, c↓(c, p↓) is the loss-sensitive case in
probe (conjugate) ﬁeld by introducing the loss on the conjugate (probe) ﬁeld; trace ii (iv)
labeled as p, p↓(c, c↓) is the loss-insensitive case in probe (conjugate) ﬁeld by introducing
the loss on the probe (conjugate) ﬁeld. The dashed lines are the corresponding theoretical
simulations.
losses from the optical path and the imperfect detection from the detectors. It can
be found that the larger the losses are introduced, the more difficult QNC can be
realized in aout, p and aout, c. It is mainly because the losses will introduce the vacuum
noise, which is completely random and uncorrelated with the internal fields (Ap,
Ac) inside nonlinear interferometer. As a result, the vacuum noise amplified by the
second FWM process cannot be cancelled completely and deteriorates QNC in the
two fields aout, p and aout, c to a certain extent. By comparing the curves as shown in
Figure 5.15, the most interesting thing is that QNC in the cases of p, p↓and c, c↓is
less sensitive to the losses than the cases of p, c↓and c, p↓. Especially for the case
of c, c↓, it can be found that QNC is almost insensitive to the losses in the case of c,
c↓as shown in Figure 5.15b. This can be simply explained by the fact that the losses
inside the interferometer can not only degrade the quantum correlations between
the internal probe and conjugate fields but also reduce their thermal noise levels.
The former makes the performance of QNC worse, nevertheless the latter makes it
better. For some special cases, such as p, p↓and c, c↓, the constraint between the
degradation of the quantum correlations and the reduction of the thermal noise
levels of the twin beams output from the interferometer makes QNC insensitive
to the losses inside the interferometer. If the cases of p, p↓and c, c↓are called the
“parallel cases,” whereas p, c↓and c, p↓are the so-called “cross cases,” then we have
our conclusion that in nonlinear interferometer, QNC in the parallel cases is less

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
143
sensitive to the losses than the one in the cross cases, which is quite different from
the assumption that losses in either field inside the quantum system are catastrophic
to the quantum characteristics of the output fields. Herein, we have completed the
basic descriptions of nonlinear interferometers; other types of nonlinear interferom-
eter will be discussed in Section 5.3, which will undoubtedly broaden and enrich our
knowledge about nonlinear interference from various nonlinear interferometers.
5.3
Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
Nonlinear interferometer discussed in Section 5.2 comprises two cascaded FWM
processes, that is, two linear beam splitters in MZI are replaced with two nonlinear
FWM process. Then phase-locking technique, high phase sensitivity, enhancement
of entanglement, and QNC have also been discussed. However, many other nonlin-
ear interferometers can also be obtained by replacing the linear elements in basic
interferometer with nonlinear FWM processes. For example, a NSI can be realized
by replacing the beam splitter in the traditional Sagnac interferometer (TSI) with
a FWM process [8], and a hybrid interferometer can also be constructed by using a
FWM process as a wave splitter and beam splitter as a wave combiner [9]. Therefore,
in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2, these two nonlinear interferometers will be discussed
in detail.
5.3.1
Nonlinear Sagnac Interferometer
When two electromagnetic waves travel oppositely along a closed circular path with
rotation, there will be a phase difference between these two counter-propagating
waves. This phenomenon is called the Sagnac effect, which has been widely used
in the high precision measurement of rotation, such as in fiber-optic gyroscopes and
global navigation systems. A TSI can be simply viewed as a combination of a circular
ring and a 50:50 beam splitter (BS), as shown in Figure 5.16a. As a beam is seeded
into the TSI, it can be calculated that the phase difference (𝜙) between the two output
beams from the interferometer is
𝜙= 8𝜋NAΩ
c𝜆
(5.32)
where N is the number of the turns, A the effective area of the TSI, Ω the angular
velocity of the rotation, c the speed of light in vacuum, and 𝜆the wavelength of
the light.
Figure 5.16
The schemes of the TSI
and NSI. (a) The TSI; (b) the NSI.
ain
ain
bout
bout
(a)
(b)
Ω
Ω

144
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Angular velocity sensitivity, the uncertainty in the estimation of the angular veloc-
ity of the Sagnac interferometer, is one of the most important physical quantities
characterizing the performance of a Sagnac interferometer. In recent years, sub-
stantial researches have been done to improve the angular velocity sensitivity of the
Sagnac interferometer. Quantum input, such as the Fock state, has been proposed
to improve the measurement precision of the Sagnac interferometer. Atom-based
Sagnac interferometer, which uses the wave character of atoms instead of light, has
found its advantages over the optical Sagnac interferometer.
Here, a new NSI that can be constructed by replacing the BS in the TSI with a
FWM process [8]. Such a NSI has better angular velocity sensitivity than the one of
TSI. SQL can be beaten, and HL can even be reached for the ideal case by NSI. We
also study the effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI and find
that the optimal angular velocity, where the best angular velocity sensitivity can be
obtained, of NSI may be dependent on the losses of the interferometer.
Figure 5.16 shows the schemes of TSI and NSI. It can be found that the BS in the
TSI is replaced by the FWM process in NSI. Consider coherent state ain entering into
both of TSI and NSI, while vacuum states bin (not marked in Figure 5.16) enter into
the other ports. For TSI, the output fields (aBS and bBS) from the 50:50 BS can be
given by
(
̂aBS
̂bBS
)
= UBS
(
̂ain
̂bin
)
=
1
√
2
(1 1
1 −1
) (
̂ain
̂bin
)
(5.33)
where UBS is the transformational matrix of the 50:50 BS. As aBS and bBS pass
through the circular ring, there will be a phase difference 𝜙between them based on
the Sagnac effect as mentioned above. This process can be written as
(
̂aSG
̂bSG
)
= TSG
(
̂aBS
̂bBS
)
=
(1 0
0 ei𝜙
) (
̂aBS
̂bBS
)
(5.34)
where TSG is the transformational matrix of the Sagnac effect, aSG and bSG the fields
after the aBS and bBS pass through the circular ring, and 𝜙= 8𝜋NAΩ/(c𝜆) from
Eq. (5.32). Then the output fields (aout and bout) from TSI can be given by
(
̂aout
̂bout
)
= UBSTSGUBS
(
̂ain
̂bin
)
=
(
ei𝜙cos 𝜙
2 ̂ain −iei𝜙sin 𝜙
2̂bin
−iei𝜙sin 𝜙
2 ̂ain + ei𝜙cos 𝜙
2̂bin
)
(5.35)
Angular velocity sensitivity ΔΩ, the minimal angular velocity difference that
can be detected, is one of the most important quantities characterizing the perfor-
mance of a Sagnac interferometer, which can be defined by the error propagation
formula
ΔΩ2 =
⟨(Δ̂N)2⟩
|𝜕⟨̂N⟩∕𝜕Ω|2
(5.36)
where N consists of some measurement combinations of the output fields. For
the direct measurement of the bout, ̂N = ̂Nb = ̂b†
out̂bout denotes the photon number
operator of the corresponding field. For the coherent state ain and vacuum state bin

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
145
entering into the TSI, the intensity noise ⟨(Δ̂Nb)2⟩and the slope 𝜕⟨̂Nb⟩∕𝜕Ω of the
interference fringe of bout can be calculated from Eq. (5.35) and given by
⟨
Δ̂N2
b
⟩
= sin2 𝛽Ω
2
⟨
a†
inain
⟩
(5.37)
𝜕̂Nb
𝜕Ω = 𝛽
√
2
(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)Ns
(5.38)
where 𝛽= 8𝜋NA/(c𝜆). Then the angular velocity sensitivity ΔΩTSI of TSI can be easily
derived from Eqs. (5.36)–(5.38) and written as
ΔΩTSI = 1
𝛽
√
2
(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)Ns
(5.39)
where Ns = ̂a†
in̂ain is the total intensity of the fields inside TSI. For the NSI, as shown
in Figure 5.16b, the output fields (aFWM and bFWM) from the FWM process can be
written as
(
̂aFWM
̂b†
FWM
)
= UPA
(
̂ain
̂b†
in
)
=
(G g
g G
) (
̂ain
̂b†
in
)
(5.40)
where UPA is the transformational matrix of the FWM process, G the amplification
gain of the FWM process, and we have the relation G2 −g2 = 1. Similar to the TSI, the
output fields from the NSI can be derived from Eqs. (5.34) and (5.40) and written as
(
̂aout
̂bout
)
=
(
(G2 + g2e−i𝜙)̂ain + Gg(1 + e−i𝜙)̂b†
in
Gg(1 + ei𝜙)̂a†
in + (G2ei𝜙+ g2)̂bin
)
(5.41)
For the coherent state ain and vacuum state bin entering into NSI, the intensity
noise and the slope of the interference fringe of the bout can be calculated from
Eq. (5.41) and given by
⟨
Δ̂N2
b
⟩
= 4G2g2(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)2 (
2
⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
+ 1
)
+ 2G2g2(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)
(⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
+ 1
)
(5.42)
𝜕⟨̂N⟩
𝜕Ω
= −2𝛽G2g2 sin 𝛽Ω
(⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
+ 1
)
(5.43)
By neglecting the small items due to
⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
≫1 in Eqs. (5.42) and (5.43), the angu-
lar velocity sensitivity ΔΩNSI of NSI can be easily derived from Eqs. (5.36), (5.42), and
(5.43), and we find that
ΔΩNSI = 1
𝛽
√
4G2g2(G2 + g2)(1 −cos 𝛽Ω) + G2 + g2
2G2g2Ns(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)
(5.44)
where Ns = (G2 + g2)
⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
is the total intensity of the fields inside the NSI.
Figure 5.17 shows the comparison of the angular velocity sensitivity versus
the angular velocity between the TSI and NSI with Ns = 104. It is convenient to
nondimensionalize ΔΩ with the substitution of 𝛽= 1. The black line in Figure 5.17
is the angular velocity sensitivity of TSI, whereas the green and blue lines are the

146
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0
0.2
TSI
NSI  G2 = 3
NSI  G2 = 10
SQL
HL
–0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.4
0.6
Ω
ΔΩ
0.8
1
Figure 5.17
The comparison of the angular velocity sensitivity versus the angular velocity
between TSI and NSI, where it is assumed that the total intensity of the ﬁelds inside both
two interferometers is Ns = 104. The black line is the angular velocity sensitivity of the TSI.
The green and blue lines are the corresponding ones of the NSI with G2 = 3 and G2 = 10.
The dash lines colored by purple and red are the corresponding SQL and HL, which are
characterized by the angular velocity sensitivity scalings of 1∕
√
Ns and 1/Ns, respectively.
Here it should be noted that the value of the HL (ΔΩ = 1/Ns = 10−4) is too small to be
distinguished from the zero line in this ﬁgure.
corresponding ones of NSI with G2 = 3 and G2 = 10. The dashed lines colored
purple and red are the corresponding SQL and HL, which are characterized by the
angular velocity sensitivity scalings of 1∕
√
Ns and 1/Ns, respectively. As shown in
Figure 5.17, the angular velocity sensitivity of both TSI and NSI depends on the
angular velocity. In other words, both TSI and NSI cannot work well at all angular
velocities. It is because the angular velocity sensitivity characterized by the error
propagation formula, as shown by Eq. (5.36), is determined by both the intensity
noise and the intensity interference slope. When the angular velocity deviates from
the best sensitivity point, the increasing intensity noise will dominate and lead to
the degradation of the angular velocity sensitivity for both TSI and NSI. Therefore,
it is natural to ask whether the dependence of the angular velocity sensitivity
on the angular velocity for both TSI and NSI is a consequence of the intensity
measurement being utilized or the properties of the interferometers themselves
in general. In order to further study the fundamental properties of TSI and NSI,
quantum Fisher information (Q) should be considered, which gives the bound
(
ΔΩ ≥1
𝛽
1
√
Q
)
of the estimation uncertainty of the angular velocity sensitivity. The
Q for TSI (QTSI) and NSI (QNSI) can be calculated and expressed as QTSI = 2Ns and
QNSI = 8G2g22Ns/(G2 + g2), respectively, from which it can be found that both the
QTSI and QNSI do not depend on the angular velocity. Therefore, the dependence
of the angular velocity sensitivity on the value of the underlying angular velocity

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
147
being estimated for both TSI and NSI is merely due to the intensity measurement
being utilized. In order to obtain the best angular velocity sensitivity, the angular
velocity has to be manipulated. And the optimal angular velocity Ωopt, where
the best angular velocity sensitivity can be obtained, happens for both of the two
interferometers at the dark interference fringe Ω = 2k𝜋, where k is an integer. From
Eqs. (5.39) and (5.44), it can be calculated that with the optimal angular velocity
Ωopt = 2k𝜋, the ratio of the ΔΩTSI to ΔΩNSI is
√
4G2g2
G2+g2 , which is larger than 1 for
any G2 > 1, that is to say the best angular velocity sensitivity of NSI can always be
better than the one of the TSI. For SQL, it can be found that SQL cannot be beaten
by TSI at all angular velocities, while for NSI, it can be beaten in some regions
near the dark interference fringe Ω = 2k𝜋. By comparing the green and blue lines
in Figure 5.17, it can be found that the best angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI
decreases with the increasing of the gain (G) of the FWM process. Therefore, it can
be inferred that the HL can even be reached by NSI if G is large enough.
To further study the performance of the NSI, a particular situation is considered
where there is no input into the NSI, i.e.
⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
= 0 in Eqs. (5.42) and (5.43). Then
the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI in Eq. (5.44) becomes
ΔΩNSI = 1
𝛽
√
Ns(Ns + 2)(1 −cos 𝛽Ω) + 2
Ns(Ns + 2)(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)
(5.45)
where Ns = 2g2 is the total intensity of the fields inside NSI. Figure 5.18 shows the
angular velocity sensitivity scalings of the NSI for the case of no input into the inter-
ferometer. The green, blue, brown, and black lines represent the angular velocity
0
0.5
NSI Ω = 0
NSI Ω = 0.1
NSI Ω = 1
NSI Ω = 1.5
SQL
HL
–2
–1.8
–1.6
–1.4
–1.2
–1
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
0.2
1
1.5
log Ns
log ΔΩ
2
Figure 5.18
The angular velocity sensitivity scalings of NSI for the case of no input into
the interferometer. The green, blue, brown, and black lines are the angular velocity
sensitivity of NSI versus Ns with different Ω. The dashed lines colored purple and red are
the corresponding SQL and HL, respectively.

148
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
sensitivity of the NSI versus Ns with different Ω. The dashed lines colored by purple
and red are the corresponding SQL and HL. As shown in Figure 5.18, in the case of
no input into the interferometer, the performance of NSI is also dependent on the
angular velocity, which is similar to the case of seeding coherent state as shown in
Figure 5.17. And the best angular velocity sensitivity of NSI also happens at Ω = 2k𝜋.
More interestingly, when Ω = 2k𝜋, the Ns terms will only exist in the denominator
of Eq. (5.45), which leads to the characteristic of an asymptote, as shown by the
green line in Figure 5.18. Otherwise, when Ω ≠0 and Ns is large enough, Eq. (5.45)
will only depend on the angular velocity Ω and approach a certain value for a given
angular velocity Ω, as shown by blue, brown, and black lines in Figure 5.18. In this
sense, we could name this phenomenon as saturation effect of the angular velocity
sensitivity.
It is well known that loss is one of the most important factors that can extremely
affect the performance of an interferometer. Also, the angular velocity sensitivity of
NSI can be strongly dependent on the losses of the interferometer. To interpret the
losses of the NSI, fictitious beam splitters with reflectivity of 𝜂are modeled on the
input fields (ain and bin), inside the NSI (aFWM and bFWM), and on the output fields
(bout) of the interferometer. For one beam splitter, the input–output relation can be
expressed as
̂a′ =
√
1 −𝜂̂a +
√
𝜂̂v
(5.46)
where ̂a is the input field, ̂a′ the output field, and 𝜈the vacuum field.
Similar to the study of the NSI with ideal case, we start by investigating the effect
of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI with the entering of the
coherent state ain and vacuum state bin. From Eqs. (5.34), (5.36), (5.40), and (5.46),
the angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI can be calculated and given by
ΔΩNSI = 1
𝛽
√
(G2 + g2)[4(1 −𝜂2)(1 −𝜂3)G2g2(1 −cos 𝛽Ω) + 1 −𝜂2𝜂3 + 2g2𝜂2(1 −𝜂3)]
2G2g2Ns(1 −𝜂1)(1 −𝜂2)(1 −𝜂3)(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)
(5.47)
where Ns = (G2 + g2)
⟨
̂a†
in̂ain
⟩
is the total intensity of the fields inside the NSI, 𝜂1,
𝜂2, and 𝜂3 stands for the losses on the input fields, inside the NSI, and on the output
fields of the NSI, respectively.
Since the functional form of Eq. (5.47) is similar to the ones of Eqs. (5.44) and
(5.45), it can be easily inferred that the angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI will
become better with a larger gain (G) of the FWM process, and the best angular
velocity sensitivity will be obtained at Ω = 2k𝜋, which has been discussed above.
Therefore, for simplicity, the effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity
of NSI is studied on the assumption of G2 = 3 and Ω = 2k𝜋. Figure 5.19 shows
the effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI with the entering
of the coherent state ain and vacuum state bin. The green, yellow, blue, and black
lines are the angular velocity sensitivity scalings of NSI with different 𝜂1, 𝜂2, and
𝜂3. The dashed lines colored purple and red are the corresponding SQL and HL,
respectively. By comparing the green and yellow lines in Figure 5.19, it can be
found that the losses on the input (𝜂1 = 0.1) and output (𝜂3 = 0.1) fields of the NSI,
.

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
149
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
NSI  η1 = 0  η2 = 0  η3 = 0
NSI  η1 = 0.1  η2 = 0  η3 = 0.1
NSI  η1 = 0.1  η2 = 0.2  η3 = 0.1
NSI  η1 = 0.1  η2 = 0.6  η3 = 0.1
SQL
HL
–3
–2.8
–2.6
–2.4
–2.2
–2
–1.8
–1.6
–1.4
–1.2
–1
log ΔΩ
log Ns
Figure 5.19
The effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI for the case
of seeding coherent state where Ω = 2k𝜋. The green, yellow, blue, and black lines are the
angular velocity sensitivity scalings of NSI with different 𝜂1, 𝜂2, and 𝜂3. The dashed lines
colored purple and red are the corresponding SQL and HL, respectively.
such as the detection inefficiency, do affect the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI.
Here we also study the loss inside NSI, which can be caused by atomic absorptions
and unavoidable losses in the optical fiber. As shown by yellow, blue, and black
lines, the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI becomes worse with the increasing
loss 𝜂2 inside the interferometer. However, all three types of losses cannot change
the functional form of the angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI, which has a
characteristic of 1∕
√
Ns. For the SQL, it can be beaten by NSI over a wide range of
losses (for example, 𝜂1 = 0.1, 𝜂2 < 0.43, and 𝜂3 = 0.1).
Next, we study how the losses can affect the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI for
the case of no input into the interferometer. Similar to the above cases, for the case
of no input into the interferometer, the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI with the
consideration of the losses can be given by
ΔΩNSI = 1
𝛽
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
1 −cos 𝛽Ω
1 + cos 𝛽Ω +
2(Ns𝜂2 + 1 −Ns𝜂2𝜂3)
Ns(Ns + 2)(1 −𝜂2)(1 −𝜂3)(1 + cos 𝛽Ω)
+ 𝜂2(Ns𝜂2 −Ns𝜂2𝜂3 + 2 −2𝜂3 + 2𝜂2𝜂3)
Ns(Ns + 2)2(1 −𝜂2)2(1 −𝜂3)sin2𝛽Ω
(5.48)
where Ns = 2g2 is the total intensity of the fields inside NSI. Here it should be pointed
out that, in the case of no input into the interferometer, the loss on the input field 𝜂1
does not affect the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI due to the fact that the vacuum
state cannot be affected by any losses. From Eq. (5.48), it can be found that for the
case of no input into the interferometer, the functional form of the angular velocity
sensitivity of NSI has been changed by the introduction of the losses, which is dif-
ferent from the case of seeding coherent state in Eq. (5.47). Figure 5.20 shows the
effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI with no input into the

150
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
NSI  η2 = 0  η3 = 0  Ω → 0
NSI  η2 = 0  η3 = 0.2  Ω → 0
NSI  η2 = 0.01  η3 = 0.2  Ω → 0
NSI  η2 = 0.1  η3 = 0.2  Ω → 0
NSI  η2 = 0.1  η3 = 0.2  Ω = 0.04
SQL
HL
–3
–2.5
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
00
0.5
0.05
0.1
log ΔΩ
Ωopt
log Ns
η2
Figure 5.20
The effect of the losses on the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI with no
input into the interferometer. The green (yellow) line is the angular velocity sensitivity of
NSI with Ω →2k𝜋and 𝜂2 = 0 for the case of 𝜂3 = 0 (𝜂3 = 0.2). Here it should be noted that
green line is too close to the yellow line, such that it is hard to distinguish the green line
from the yellow one. The blue (brown) line is the corresponding one with 𝜂3 = 0.2 and
Ω →2k𝜋for the case of 𝜂2 = 0.01 (𝜂2 = 0.1). The black line is the corresponding one of NSI
with Ω = 0.04 for the case of 𝜂2 = 0.1 and 𝜂3 = 0.2. The dashed lines colored purple and red
are the corresponding SQL and HL. The inset of this ﬁgure shows the optimal angular
velocity versus different 𝜂2.
interferometer. The green (yellow) line is the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI with
Ω →2k𝜋and 𝜂2 = 0 for the case of 𝜂3 = 0 (𝜂3 = 0.2). The blue (brown) line is the
corresponding one with 𝜂3 = 0.2 and Ω →2k𝜋for the case of 𝜂2 = 0.01 (𝜂2 = 0.1).
The black line is the corresponding one of NSI, with Ω = 0.04 for the case of 𝜂2 = 0.1
and 𝜂3 = 0.2. The dashed lines colored purple and red are the corresponding SQL and
HL, respectively. From the green and yellow lines in Figure 5.20, it can be found that
the loss on the output field of the interferometer 𝜂3 can affect the angular velocity
sensitivity of NSI. By comparing the green, blue, and brown lines in Figure 5.20, it
is clear that the angular velocity sensitivity of NSI is much more sensitive to the loss
𝜂2 than the case of seeding coherent state as shown in Figure 5.19. This is because
for Ω →2k𝜋, the third term of Eq. (5.48) becomes significantly large with 𝜂2 > 0.
As a result, NSI is extremely sensitive to the loss (𝜂2) inside the system, and HL
cannot be reached by NSI with the introduction of 𝜂2. By comparing the black and
blue lines in Figure 5.20, the most interesting thing is that for the cases of 𝜂2 = 0.1,
𝜂3 = 0.2, and Ω = 0.04, the angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI can be better than
the one with 𝜂2 = 0.01, 𝜂3 = 0.2, and Ω →2k𝜋, which is different from all the cases
mentioned above where the optimal angular velocity is Ωopt = 2k𝜋. It seems that
with the introduction of the losses, a new optimal angular velocity Ωopt is required
to be searched in order to obtain the best angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI. The
inset of Figure 5.20 shows the optimal angular velocity Ωopt versus different 𝜂2. It can

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
151
be found that in order to obtain the best angular velocity sensitivity of the NSI, the
angular velocity is required to be far away from Ω = 2k𝜋with the increasing 𝜂2. From
this point of view, the manipulation of the angular velocity can be used to compen-
sate the effect of the loss (𝜂2) in such a NSI. Since losses are always unavoidable in
the real system, our results here are valuable for the real applications of the NSI.
In summary, in this work we propose a new NSI by replacing the BS in TSI with a
FWM process. Such a NSI has better angular velocity sensitivity than the one of TSI.
The SQL can be beaten, and the HL can even be reached in the ideal case by NSI.
The effect of the losses inside the interferometer on the angular velocity sensitivity
of NSI is also studied, and we find that the optimal angular velocity of NSI may
be dependent on the losses of the interferometer. Such a NSI may find its potential
applications in quantum metrology.
5.3.2
Hybrid Interferometer with a Nonlinear FWM Process and a
Linear Beam-splitter
Section 5.3.1 discussed a NSI, and a hybrid interferometer composed of a nonlinear
FWM process and a linear beam splitter will be discussed in the present section [9].
Here, nonlinear FWM process is a frequency-degenerate four-wave mixing (DFWM)
process, in which one only needs to split a small portion of the pump beam using
a linear beam splitter to obtain the seed beam. On the contrary, the seed beam of
the NDFWM is obtained by double passing a small portion of pump beam through
a GHz-level acoustic–optic modulator (AOM). This is determined by the double-Λ
energy-level configuration of their NDFWM process. Therefore, the DFWM can be
realized more easily than NDFWM due to its frequency degeneracy. As shown in
Figure 5.21a, a weak-signal beam with the same frequency as the pump is crossed
with the strong pump beam in the center of the Rb-85 vapor cell at a small angle.
During this process, the seed (signal) field is amplified, and a phase conjugate (idler)
field is generated in the meantime. On account of the phase-matching condition,
the pump-idler angle is identical with the pump-signal angle on the other side of
the pump. Due to energy conservation, the idler beam has the same frequency as
both the signal beam and pump beam. This is different from the non-degenerate
four-wave mixing (NDFWM) as shown in Figure 5.21b, where the idler beam has a
6.08 GHz frequency shift from the signal beam.
Figure 5.21
Comparison
between the scheme of DFWM
and the scheme of NDFWM. (a)
The scheme of DFWM, where
all the three output beams have
the same frequency. (b) The
scheme of NDFWM, where all
the three output beams have
different frequencies. Is, out, Ii, out,
Ip, out, the intensities of the
output beams; 𝜔s, 𝜔i, 𝜔p, the
frequency of the output beams.
Signal
Ii,out, ωp
Ip,out, ωp
Is,out, ωp
Ii,out, ωi
Ip,out, ωp
Is,out, ωs
Pump
Idler
Signal
Pump
Idler
(a)
(b)

152
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
Temperature (°C)
One-photon detuning (GHz)
Pump (mW)
Seed (µW)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Power (µW)
Power (µW)
Gain
Power (µW)
Power (µW)
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Signal
Idler
Gain
Signal
Idler
Gain
Signal
Idler
180
0
50
100
100
0
50
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
100
150
200
250
150
200
250
300
350
400
Signal
Idler
450
500
150
200
250
105
300
400
20
40
60
80
100
500
600
700
800
110
115
1200
5
10
15
20
25
30
Gain
0
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
Figure 5.22
The relationships between the power of two output ports of DFWM and
various system parameters. (a) The relationship between the power of two output ports
(signal beam, blue dot and idler beam, green diamond) and the seed power. (b) The
relationship between the power of two output ports (signal beam, blue dot and idler beam,
green diamond) and the pump power. (c) The power of two output ports (signal beam, blue
dot and idler beam, green diamond) as a function of the one-photon detuning. (d) The
power of two output ports (signal beam, blue dot and idler beam, green diamond) as a
function of the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell. Both (c) and (d) ﬁgures include the
traces for the gain of the system (red square).
In order to prove that the above-mentioned DFWM can be used as a PA for con-
structing the hybrid interferometer, we study the relationships between the power
of the two output ports and different system parameters, such as the seed power, the
pump power, the one-photon detuning, and the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell.
Firstly, we set the pump power at 900 mW, maintain the temperature of Rb-85 vapor
cell at 120 ∘C by using a digital temperature controller, set the one-photon detuning
at 0.9 GHz, and change the seed power from 18 to 105 μW. As shown in Figure 5.22a,
we find that the output power of the signal and idler beams approximately have
linear dependences on the seed power. And the difference between the power of
signal and idler beams is approximately equal to the input seed power. Secondly,
while keeping the seed power at 50 μW, the temperature of Rb-85 vapor cell at
120 ∘C, the one-photon detuning at 0.9 GHz, and varying the pump power from
300 to 800 mW, we record the power of the signal and idler beams at the output.
As shown in Figure 5.22b, the signal and idler power of two output ports increase
with the increasing pump power. The power difference between the signal and idler
beams almost keeps constant and is approximately equal to the input seed power.
Thirdly, we fix the seed power at 5 μW, the pump power at 1 W, the temperature of
Rb-85 vapor cell at 120 ∘C, and scan the one-photon detuning from 0.2 to 1.8 GHz.
The result is shown in Figure 5.22c. When the one-photon detuning is 0.7 GHz, the

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
153
system gain reaches its maximum of about 32. The system gain is determined by
calculating the ratio between the output signal power and the input seed power.
Finally, we vary the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell from 100 to 120 ∘C and
set the seed power at 5 μW, the pump power at 1 W, and the one-photon detuning
at 0.9 GHz to study the influence of the temperature. As shown in Figure 5.22d, it
clearly shows that the power of both the two output ports increases as the temper-
ature increases. Based on all the experimental results as shown in Figure 5.22, we
can see that DFWM can work as a PA, and, therefore, it can be used to construct
the hybrid interferometer involving both the nonlinear PA and linear beam splitter.
When the wave splitter is completed, a linear beam splitter will be used as the wave
combiner to interfere with the signal and idler beams with the identical frequency.
As interference visibility is a direct measure of how perfectly the two interfering
waves can cancel due to destructive interference and gives the degree of coherence
between the waves, it is worth studying the dependence of interference visibilities
on the different system parameters, such as the gain of the PA, the one-photon
detuning, and the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell. Firstly, in order to explore the
relationship between the interference visibility and the gain of the PA, we vary the
pump power from 300 to 1100 mW, which ranges the gain from 1.5 to 26. In this case,
we keep the frequency of the pump beam unchanged at blue, detuned about 0.9 GHz
from the D1 line Rb-85 (5S1/2, F = 2 →5P1/2), which is called one-photon detuning
(Δ). The seed beam has the same frequency as the pump, and its power is fixed
at about 5 μW. The temperature of Rb-85 vapor cell is kept at 120 ∘C. As shown in
Figure 5.23a, the blue dot line represents the relationship between the interference
visibility and the gain for D1 output port, and the green diamond line is for D2 output
port. Both of the interference visibilities of the D1 and D2 output ports increase as
the gain increases. The two visibilities are almost identical and can be above 90% for
a gain larger than about 12. Secondly, we investigate how the interference visibility
depends on the one-photon detuning of the PA. In order to study this effect, we set
the seed power at 5 μW, the pump power at 1 W, the temperature of Rb-85 vapor cell
at 120 ∘C, and scan the one-photon detuning from 0.2 to 1.8 GHz by changing the
frequency of the pump beam. As shown in Figure 5.23b, the blue dot line represents
the relationship between the interference visibility and the one-photon detuning
for D1 output port, and the green diamond line is for the D2 output port. The red
square line represents the gain of the PA. We find that the interference visibilities
of D1 and D2 output ports maintain above 90% for the range of the one-photon
detuning from 0.7 to 1.2 GHz. And when the one-photon detuning is 0.9 GHz, the
interference visibility reaches its maximum of about 95%. Thirdly, we fix the seed
power at 5 μW, the pump power at 1 W, the one-photon detuning at 0.9 GHz, and
vary the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell from 100 to 120 ∘C. The result is shown
in Figure 5.23c. The interference visibility of D1 and D2 output ports increases with
the increasing temperature. Within the range of the temperature from 115 to 120 ∘C,
the interference visibilities for both output ports are all about 90%.
The frequency degeneracy of our hybrid interferometer ensures that the signal
and idler fields experience same levels of self-focusing and optical losses. There-
fore, the visibility of our hybrid interferometer will not be affected by these two

154
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
5
10
15
Gain
(a)
D1
D2
Visibility
20
25
30
0.2
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
One-photon detuning (GHz)
(b)
D1
D2
Gain
Visibility
1.4
1.6
1.8
100
0.76
0.78
0.82
0.84
0.80
0.86
0.90
0.88
0.92
0.94
0
5
10
15
20
25
105
110
115
Temperature (°C)
(c)
D1
D2
Gain
Visibility
120
Figure 5.23
The dependence of the interference visibilities on various system parameters.
(a) The interference visibilities of the two output ports as a function of the gain of the PA.
(b) The relationship between the interference visibilities of the two output ports and the
one-photon detuning. (c) The relationship between the interference visibilities of the two
output ports and the temperature of the Rb-85 vapor cell. Both (b) and (c) ﬁgures include
the traces for the gain of the PA.
experimental imperfections. However, the visibility of nonlinear interferometer can
be affected by these two experimental imperfections due to the fact that the signal
and idler fields at different frequencies experience different levels of self-focusing
and optical losses. Thus, the hybrid interferometer is more suitable for finding
potential application in precision measurement when amplification, robustness,
and conciseness are required.

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
155
5.3.3
Experimental Implementation of a Phase-Sensitive Parametric
Ampliﬁer
The previous mentioned interference phenomena involve the twice utilization of
a FWM process; can the interference phenomenon happen when a FWM process
is utilized only once? This section will give the answer to this question [10]. FWM
process, as another type of nonlinear beam splitter, can combine two incoming opti-
cal fields in coherent state with different frequencies. This is actually the proposal
for two-mode PSA. As shown in Figure 5.24a, a normal beam splitter combines two
input beams of the same frequency and induces interference phenomena at the two
output ports. Considering the schematic shown in Figure 5.24b, two beams with dif-
ferent frequencies are injected into a nonlinear beam splitter, which is based on PA
process. The input–output relationship of a PA is well described by
̂aout =
√
Ĝain + ei𝜙√
G −1̂b†
in
̂b†
out = e−i𝜙√
G −1̂ain +
√
Ĝb†
in
(5.49)
where G is the intensity gain, and ̂a (̂b) indicates the signal (idler) field. Here, we
assume that the idler beam is subject to a phase shift of 𝜙, while the phases of the
signal and pump beams are fixed.
When both input ports are seeded by coherent fields, the intensities of the output
fields are given by
Is,out = GIa + (G −1)Ib + 2
√
G(G −1)IaIb cos 𝜙
Ii,out = GIb + (G −1)Ia + 2
√
G(G −1)IaIb cos 𝜙
(5.50)
where Ia and Ib indicate the intensities of the input fields. Here, we have neglected
the spontaneous emission term G −1, since both input beams (in μW order,
corresponding to photon number of 4 × 1012 within one second) are bright in
the experiment. From Eq. (5.50), one can easily find that the output fields can
Beam 1
BS
(a)
Beam 2
I1
ϕ
I2
Signal
PA
(b)
Idler
ϕ
Ii,out
Is,out
Figure 5.24
(a) A normal beam splitter combining two beams. (b) A nonlinear beam
splitter based on a PA. BS, beam splitter; PA, parametric ampliﬁer; 𝜙, the phase shift of
beam 2 or idler beam; I1; I2; Is, out; and Ii, out, the intensities of the output beams.

156
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
be amplified or de-amplified under varying phases, leading to the interference
phenomena at the two output ports. The interference visibilities for both output
ports are calculated
Vs = 2
√
𝛽
√
G(G −1)
𝛽G + G −1
Vi = 2
√
𝛽
√
G(G −1)
𝛽G + G −𝛽
(5.51)
where 𝛽= Ia/Ib. The interference phenomenon can be explained as two individ-
ual PAs seeded only by the signal or idler field interfering with each other. Each PA
amplifies or generates its own signal and idler beams, respectively. The two output
signal beams of the same frequency are well overlapped under our current sym-
metric geometry and so are the two output idler beams. Thus, these two output
signal (idler) beams will interfere with each other, leading to the amplification or
de-amplification of the beams. From this point of view, our nonlinear beam splitter
induces interference phenomena at each output port.
The experimental layout is shown in Figure 5.25. The nonlinear beam splitter is
based on a double-Λ configuration FWM process in a Rb-85 vapor cell (as shown in
Figure 5.25b). We use an external cavity diode laser (ECDL) and a tapered amplifier
(TA) as our laser system. The linewidth of the ECDL is 100 kHz, and the frequency
is blue-detuned about 0.8 GHz to the 5S1/2, F = 2 →5P1/2 transition. A PBS is used to
split the beam into two. One is sent to the TA to generate the pump beam, which is
vertically polarized. The other one is passed through an AOM 1. A weak-signal beam
tuned 3.04 GHz to the red side of the pump is derived. Afterwards, the zero-order
beam passed through the first AOM is sent to the second AOM. In the same way,
a weak idler beam tuned 3.04 GHz to the blue side of the pump is produced. Both
signal and idler beams are horizontally polarized. All these beams are combined
with a Glan laser polarizer and crossed at the center of the Rb vapor cell, whose
(a)
(b)
Nonlinear beam splitter
Signal
Idler
Pump
5P1/2
5S1/2
F = 2
F = 3
AOM
+3 GHz
PZT
GL
BB
OS
GT
D1
D2
HWP
HWP
ECDL
HWP
HWP
Rb–85
PBS
TA
2
AOM
–3 GHz
Δ
1
δ
Figure 5.25
Experimental layout. (a) ECDL, external cavity diode laser; HWP, half-wave
plate; PBS, polarization beam splitter; TA, tapered ampliﬁer; AOM, acousto–optic
modulator; PZT, piezo-electric transducer; GL, Glan laser polarizer; GT, Glan–Thompson
polarizer; BB, beam blocker; D1, D2, photodetectors; OS, oscilloscope. (b) Double-Λ scheme
of the D1 line of Rb-85. Δ, one-photon detuning; 𝛿, two-photon detuning.

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
157
10
8
6
Intensity (a.u.)
Signal
4
2
1
0
130
135
140
Scanning time (ms)
(a)
(b)
145
150
10
8
6
Intensity (a.u.)
Idler
4
2
1
0
130
135
140
G = 1
G = 2.6
G = 1
G = 3
Scanning time (ms)
145
150
Figure 5.26
Interference fringes at the output ports of the nonlinear beam splitter. (a)
Signal output. (b) Idler output. The green lines, the output of signal/idler without the pump
beam.
temperature is stabilized at 116 ∘C. The beam waist of the signal (idler) beam is 200
(215) μm, and 500 μm for the pump beam. A Glan–Thompson polarizer with an
extinction ratio of 105 : 1 is placed after the cell to filter out the residual pump beam.
The output signal and idler beams are sent to two photodetectors (D1 and D2).
As shown in Figure 5.26, the typical interference fringes of the two outputs are
obtained by scanning the PZT mirror on the input idler beam path. The interference
visibilities of the signal and idler output ports are 91.6% and 90.0%, respectively. It
should be pointed out that the data on visibility of the signal and idler beams are
not measured at the same time. The two interference fringes are modulated in sync,
in principle. The output fields can be amplified (above the straight green lines) or
de-amplified (below the straight green lines) by this nonlinear beam splitter depend-
ing on the value of phase 𝜙. The measured intensities of the two output beams when
the pump beam is blocked are defined as units and denoted by the straight green
lines in Figure 5.26. The interference pattern intensities of both output beams are
normalized to the two straight green lines, respectively.
In order to investigate the influence of intensity ratio 𝛽between the two input
beams on the visibilities of the two output ports, we keep the idler beam power
(10 μW) unchanged and vary the signal beam power from 2.5 to 40 μW. At the same
time, we change the intensity gain of the system by varying the pump beam power.
The other parameters are set as follows: 𝛿= 4 MHz and Δ = 0.8 GHz. The experimen-
tal results (b) and theoretical predictions (a) agree very well, as shown in Figure 5.27.
For the experimental results, the maximal visibilities for both the signal and idler
beams are limited by absorption losses and imperfect spatial mode matching

158
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
1.0
0.8
Visibility
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.0
1
2
3
Gain
(a)
β  = 1.0
β  = 2.0
β  = 4.0
β  = 0.5
β  = 0.25
Signal
4
6
5
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.0
1
2
3
Gain
β  = 1.0
β  = 2.0
β  = 4.0
β  = 0.5
β  = 0.25
Idler
4
6
5
1.0
0.8
Visibility
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.0
1
2
3
Gain
(b)
β  = 1
β  = 2
β  = 4
β  = 0.5
β  = 0.25
Signal
4
6
5
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.0
1
2
3
Gain
β  = 1
β  = 2
β  = 4
β  = 0.5
β  = 0.25
Idler
4
6
5
Figure 5.27
The intensity ratio and intensity-gain dependence of the two output port
visibilities. (a) the theoretical simulations from Eq. (5.51), (b) the experimental results for
the signal and idler outputs.
between the input beams at the center of the vapor cell. At large-intensity gain
regime, the better intensity balancing of the two input beams gives better visibilities.
The one-photon detuning and two-photon detuning of the system can affect
the behavior of the nonlinear beam splitter. Therefore, the visibilities also will be
influenced by these two parameters. To study this effect, we fix the signal and idler
beam powers at 20 μW. First, we set the two-photon detuning at 4 MHz and scan the
one-photon detuning from 0.4 to 2.0 GHz. At the same time, we record the intensity
gains and visibilities of two output ports. The results are shown in Figure 5.28a. The
red diamond trace is for the signal visibility as a function of one-photon detuning,
and the blue diamond trace is for the idler. The green and yellow dot traces are for
the intensity gains of the signal and idler beams, respectively. Within the range
from 0.5 to 1.0 GHz, the visibilities for both channels are all above 90%. Both of the

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
159
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
One-photon detuning (GHz)
(a)
Signal
Idler
G_signal
G_idler
β = 1, δ = 4 MHz
Visibility
0
5
10
15
20
Gain
0
5
10
15
20
Gain
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
Two-photon detuning (MHz)
(b)
Signal
Idler
G_signal
G_idler
β = 1, Δ = 0.8 GHz
Visibility
1.0
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 5.28
(a) The visibilities of the signal and idler fringe as a function of one-photon
detuning. (b) The visibilities of the signal and idler fringe as a function of two-photon
detuning. The intensity gains for both beams are also depicted in both ﬁgures.

160
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
intensity gains decrease as the detuning increases. Second, we set the one-photon
detuning at 0.8 GHz and scan the two-photon detuning from −5 to 65 MHz. We
vary the frequencies of both signal and idler beams symmetrically to change the
two-photon detuning. The results are shown in Figure 5.28b. We find that the
visibilities keep above 90% within a wide range from 0 to 30 MHz. The best visibility
for both output ports is achieved at about 4 MHz.
It must be pointed out that the nonlinear beam splitter described here is different
from both stages of our previous SU(1,1) interferometer. In our previous SU(1,1)
interferometer, the first PA works in phase-insensitive configuration, amplifying
the signal beam and generating a new idler beam. The signal and idler beams
are quantum-correlated and very noisy after this amplification (well above their
corresponding SQLs). The second PA is injected with signal, idler, and pump beams
and thus becomes phase-sensitive. The gain of the second PA will depend on the
phase of the three beams. Under amplification condition, quantum correlation
shared between the two output ports of the PSA stage will be enhanced. Under
de-amplification condition, the second PA can recover the signal and idler beams
back to the initial states (coherent state and vacuum). Instead of being seeded by
two noisy signal and idler beams, the current system described here is seeded by
two coherent states. When the system operates at amplification condition, it will
generate two output beams with IDS, and at de-amplification condition, these two
outputs will show intensity sum squeezing as predicted by our theoretical study. We
believe it is worth studying how the sensitivity of the interferometer changes if we
apply the system studied here to the first stage of the SU(1,1) interferometer.
5.3.4
Interference-Induced Quantum-Squeezing Enhancement
After classical behaviors of nonlinear beam splitter are analyzed in Section 5.3.3,
in this section, quantum-squeezing enhancement induced by interference will be
discussed [11]. Following Eq. (5.49), the IDS degree between the signal and idler
beams from Figure 5.25 with respect to SQL can be expressed as:
IDS =
Var(̂Na,out −̂Nb,out)PSA
⟨̂Na,out⟩+ ⟨̂Nb,out⟩
=
1
(2G −1) +
2(G −1)
⟨̂Na,in⟩+ ⟨̂Nb,in⟩
+ 4
√
G(G −1)
√𝜂
1 + 𝜂cos 𝜙
(5.52)
where ⟨̂Na,in⟩(⟨̂Na,out⟩) and ⟨̂Nb,in⟩(⟨̂Nb,out⟩) represent the average input (out-
put) photon number of the signal and idler fields, respectively. 𝜂is the input
signal–idler power ratio. 𝜙= 2𝜙c −𝜙a −𝜙b, where 𝜙a and 𝜙b are the phase of
the signal and idler fields, respectively. For convenience, we define 𝜙as the
phase of the PSA. In our experiment, the two input beams have powers of about
10 μW, i.e. ⟨̂Na,in⟩= ⟨̂Nb,in⟩≈4 × 105 per unit coherence time (about 10 ns) of the
FWM process, allowing the “bright beam” approximation ⟨̂Na,in⟩+ ⟨̂Nb,in⟩≫1
to be made. Therefore, for the two-beam PSA in our experiment, the term

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
161
(2G −1)∕⟨̂Na,in⟩+ ⟨̂Nb,in⟩in the denominator of IDS can undoubtedly be ignored.
Taking this into account, from Eq. (5.52), the IDS of a two-beam PSA can be given by
IDS ≈
1
(2G −1) + 4
√
G(G −1)
√𝜂
1+𝜂cos(𝜙)
(5.53)
When we seed a vacuum field to the signal port (𝜂= 0), the IDS degree becomes
1/(2G −1), which gives the quantum squeezing of the phase-insensitive amplifier
(PIA). Compared with this, one can find that there is a phase-sensitive term
in the denominator of Eq. (5.53). It is this phase-sensitive term, which brings
the possibility of IDS manipulation for two-beam PSA. One can also see that
the quantum-squeezing enhancement is dependent not only on the gain G but
also on the input signal–idler power ratio 𝜂and the phase of PSA 𝜙. When we
simultaneously seed coherent fields to the signal port and idler port (𝜂≠0, ∞),
the IDS between signal and idler beams will be enhanced for any cos(𝜙) > 0.
When cos(𝜙) = 1 and 𝜂= 1, such enhancement of quantum squeezing reaches
its maximum, which can approach to 3 dB with G ≫1 in principle. In fact, such
enhancement is already 2.96 dB for G = 3. This clearly shows that the intrinsic
interference nature of the two-beam PSA enables its ability to enhance the IDS.
Figure 5.29 shows the typical measured results of the two output ports of our
PSA. For the phase-locking point 𝜙= 0, the corresponding intensity-difference
noise power (IDNP) spectrum of our two-beam PSA is shown in Figure 5.29a. The
trace A (green trace) is the normalized IDNP spectrum for the range of 0–2 MHz,
while the trace B (blue trace) is the corresponding SQL. The black straight line at
0 dB, which corresponds to the mean value of data points on trace B, is taken as a
reference. As we can see from Figure 5.29a, the IDNP of the PSA is 10.13 ± 0.21 dB
below the SQL. In order to verify the theoretically predicted IDS enhancement
induced by the interference of the PSA, we measure the noise power spectrum of
the PIA under the same experimental conditions just by blocking the seeding signal
beam or idler beam. The results of the PIA are shown in Figure 5.29b (blocking the
seeding idler beam) and Figure 5.29c (blocking the seeding signal beam). As shown
in Figure 5.29b, the IDS of signal-seeded PIA is 8.97 ± 0.24 dB. For the idler-seeded
PIA, the IDS is 8.76 ± 0.26 dB, as shown in Figure 5.29c. It means that by changing
the normal PIA process to a two-beam PSA process, the IDS of the system is
enhanced from 8.97 ± 0.24 or 8.76 ± 0.26 to 10.13 ± 0.21 dB. In order to verify that
the IDS enhancement is induced by the interference of the PSA from another
aspect, we slightly walk off the seeding idler beam by an amount of about 3.5 mrad
along the yellow arrow direction, as shown in Figure 5.29d. Such slight change
makes the interference fringe of the PSA shown in Figure 5.26 disappear (become
a straight line) while keeping the IDS of two single-seeded PIAs unchanged. The
measured IDS of such signal–idler-seeded PIA is 8.86 ± 0.38 dB, which is almost
equal to the squeezing level of the signal-seeded or idler-seeded PIA, clearly
showing the decisive role of its intrinsic interference nature for quantum-squeezing
enhancement in the two-beam PSA.
As mentioned above, we can see that the IDS enhancement of the two-beam PSA
is dependent not only on the gain G but also on the input signal–idler power ratio

162
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0
–15
–5
–10
0
5
10
15
20
0.5
Frequency (MHz)
(a)
Noise power (dB)
A
B
Two-beam PSA
1.5
1
2
0
–15
–5
–10
0
5
10
15
20
0.5
Frequency (MHz)
(b)
Noise power (dB)
A
B
Signal-seeded PIA
1.5
1
2
0
–15
–5
–10
0
5
10
15
20
0.5
Frequency (MHz)
(c)
Noise power (dB)
A
B
Idler-seeded PIA
1.5
1
2
0
–15
–5
–10
0
5
10
15
20
0.5
Frequency (MHz)
(d)
Noise power (dB)
A
B
Signal-idler–seeded PIA
1.5
1
2
Figure 5.29
Observation of IDS enhancement. (a) Normalized IDNP spectrum of twin
beams generated from two-beam PSA process when the phase of the PSA is locked at 𝜙= 0
(A) and the corresponding SQL (B). (b) Normalized IDNP spectrum of the twin beams
generated from signal-seeded PIA process (A) and the corresponding SQL (B). (c)
Normalized IDNP spectrum of the twin beams generated from idler-seeded PIA process (A)
and the corresponding SQL (B). (d) Normalized IDNP spectrum of the two twin beams
generated from signal-idler–seeded PIA process (A) and the corresponding SQL (B). The
inset shows the output beams of the signal-idler–seeded PIA process in the far ﬁeld
captured by charge coupled device (CCD) camera.
𝜂and the phase of the PSA 𝜙. Thus, it is worthwhile to study how they influence
the performance of the PSA. First, in order to explore the effect of gain on the IDS
enhancement, we vary the pump power from 80 to 350 mW, which ranges the gain
from 3 to 16, as shown in Figure 5.30a. In this case, we lock the phase of the PSA
at 0 and keep 𝜂≈1. The green line at 0 dB is the normalized SQL. The theoretically
predicted IDNP (red curve for PSA and blue curve for PIA) and the experimental
results (red dot curve for PSA, yellow dot curve for signal-seeded PIA, and blue dot
curve for idler-seeded PIA) have similar trends. The differences can be explained by
including the imperfections of the system, such as the losses from atomic absorption
and imperfect detection. The IDS of signal-seeded PIA is almost the same as the one
of idler-seeded PIA. The degree of IDS of the two-beam PSA is always better than the
one of PIA, clearly showing the squeezing enhancement. The corresponding inter-
ference visibility of PSA versus the gain is given as black triangle curve.
Second, we investigate how the IDS enhancement of PSA depends on the input
signal–idler power ratio 𝜂. In order to study this effect, we set the gain of system at 16,

5.3 Other Types of Nonlinear Interferometers
163
–15
4
6
8
10
Gain
PSA
Signal-seeded PIA
Idler-seeded PIA
SNL
Theoretical result of PSA
Theoretical result of PIA
Visibility of PSA
(a)
12
14
16
–10
–5
0
0.4
0.2
0
Visibility
0.6
0.8
1
–15
0
0.5
1
1.5
η
PSA
Signal-seeded PIA
Theoretical result of PIA
Theoretical result of PSA
SNL
Visibility of signal port in PSA
Visibility of idler port in PSA
(b)
Noise power (dB)
Noise power (dB)
2
2.5
3
–10
–5
0
0.4
0.2
0
Visibility
0.6
0.8
1
–15
0
0.5
1
1.5
Phase
PSA
Signal-seeded PIA
Theoretical result of PIA
Theoretical result of PSA
SNL
(c)
Noise power (dB)
2
2.5
3
–10
–5
0
Figure 5.30
The dependence of IDS enhancement on various system parameters. (a) The
IDNP of the two-beam PSA and PIA as a function of the gain of the system. (b) The
relationship between the IDNP of the two-beam PSA and the input signal–idler power ratio
𝜂. (c) The relationship between the IDNP of the two-beam PSA and the phase. Both (a) and
(b) ﬁgures include the visibility for the PSA. The curves circled by ellipses with a
right-facing arrow correspond to the axis of “Visibility.” The other curves and lines without
ellipses correspond to the axis of “Noise power.”
the phase of the PSA at 0 and scan the ratio 𝜂from 0 to 3. As shown in Figure 5.30b,
the red dot curve gives the measured IDNP of PSA versus 𝜂. The corresponding the-
oretical prediction is shown as red curve. The yellow dashed line is the measured
IDNP of signal-seeded PIA. The corresponding theoretical prediction is shown as
blue dashed line. The normalized SQL is the green line at 0 dB. We find that the
experimental results have the similar trend as the theoretical simulation. We can
see that once the interference appears, quantum-squeezing enhancement will occur.
This clearly proves that the IDS enhancement of the two-beam PSA is induced by its
intrinsic interference nature. The IDS enhancement reaches its maximal value at
𝜂≈1, which agrees with the theoretical simulation. The corresponding measured
visibility of signal (idler) port in PSA is shown as yellow (blue) dot curve.
Third, in order to explore how the phase of PSA 𝜙influences the squeezing
enhancement performance of the PSA, we fix the gain G of system at 16, the input
signal–idler power ratio 𝜂≈1, and change the phase-locking point of the PSA
from 0 to 2.69 in radian. The result is shown in Figure 5.30c. The red dot curve
is the IDNP dependence relation on the phase of the PSA. The corresponding
theoretical simulation is shown as a red curve. The yellow dashed line is the
measured IDNP of signal-seeded PIA. The corresponding theoretical simulation is
shown as a blue dashed line. The normalized SQL is the green line at 0 dB. We find
that the IDS enhancement appears when 𝜙< 𝜋/2. The maximal squeezing level of
intensity difference is obtained when 𝜙= 0. These results are consistent with the
theoretical simulations. The present results clearly show that IDS manipulation
is largely dependent on the phase point of the interference fringe, indicating that
the physical mechanism of IDS manipulation is the intrinsic interference nature
of the two-beam PSA. These results clearly show that the physical mechanism
inducing the IDS enhancement of the two-beam PSA is its intrinsic interference
nature. These results also prove that our method is an efficient way to enhance
quantum squeezing, which can find potential applications in improving the fidelity
of quantum information processing and the precision of quantum metrology.

164
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
5.4
Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
The Section 5.2 discussed the basic configurations of different nonlinear interferom-
eters; here, in the present section, nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor-combining
nonlinear interferometers and conventional SPR sensors will be discussed [12].
Before nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors are discussed, the operational
principle for the conventional SPR sensors should be exhibited first, as shown in
Figure 5.31a, an attenuated total reflection prism setup based on the Kretschmann
configuration consists of three layers: prism, gold film, and sample. When the
surface plasmon wave is excited, the reflection coefficient rspr of the reflected light
from the Kretschmann configuration can be expressed as
rspr =
rpg + rgse2ikgzd
1 + rpgrgse2ikgzd
(5.54)
where d is the thickness of gold film, and the reflection coefficient between the l-th
and m-th layers rlm can be given by
rlm =
klz𝜀m −kmz𝜀l
klz𝜀m + kmz𝜀l
(5.55)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
61
Incident angle (°)
Prism
Sample
Gold
(b)
60 nm
40 nm
50 nm
(a)
∣rspr∣2
∣rspr∣2
θ
63
62
64
65
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
61
Incident angle (°)
1.301
(c)
1.302
∣rspr∣2
63
62
64
65
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.290
Refractive index (RIU)
(d)
∣rspr∣2
1.3001.305
1.295
1.310 1.315
Figure 5.31
(a) An attenuated total reﬂection prism setup based on the Kretschmann
conﬁguration for the conventional SPR sensors. (b) The reﬂected light intensity as a
function of the incident angle 𝜃for the three different thicknesses of gold ﬁlm: d = 40 nm
(red curve), d = 50 nm (cyan curve), and d = 60 nm (blue curve). Here the refractive index is
set to equal to 1.301. (c) The intensity of the reﬂected light as a function of the incident
angle 𝜃for the two different samples: ns = 1.301 (black curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve).
Here the thickness of gold ﬁlm is set to 40 nm. (d) The reﬂected light intensity as a function
of refractive index of the sample in the range of 1.288 ≤ns ≤1.319. Here the incident angle
and thickness of gold ﬁlm are set to 62∘and 40 nm, respectively. Other details can be seen
in the main text.

5.4 Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
165
where l, m = (p [prism], g [gold], and s [sample]), klz is the normal component of the
wave vector in the gold film layer and can be written as
klz = 2𝜋
𝜆
√
𝜀l −𝜀p sin 𝜃2
(5.56)
with the incident angle 𝜃, the permittivities of prism 𝜀p and gold film 𝜀g for a
795 nm incident light are 1.5112 and (0.181 + i5.126)2, respectively. To choose an
optimal thickness of the gold film, the intensity of the reflected light as a function
of the incident angle 𝜃for the three different thicknesses of gold film: d = 40 nm
(red curve), d = 50 nm (cyan curve), and d = 60 nm (blue curve) is depicted in
Figure 5.31b. The reflection coefficient |rspr|2 for d = 40 nm shows the highest
attenuation contrast compared with the other two thicknesses, and thus d is set to
40 nm in the following analysis. With a fixed thickness of gold film, the intensity of
the reflected light as a function of the incident angle 𝜃for the two different samples,
ns = 1.301 (black curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve), is shown in Figure 5.31c. From
Figure 5.31c, it can be seen that a change of the refractive index can be identified
by observing a shift of the resonance angle 𝜃, or alternatively, the change of the
reflected light intensity is observed for a given incident angle 𝜃= 62∘in the refractive
index range of 1.288 ≤ns ≤1.319 (see Figure 5.31d), which also indicates that there
is a point-to-point relationship between the reflected intensity and refractive index.
Therefore, Figure 5.31c and d shows angle demodulation technique and intensity
demodulation technique, respectively, for the conventional SPR sensors, because
the information of refractive index of the sample can be identified by observing the
change of resonant angle and reflected intensity, respectively, which constitute the
basic operational principle of the conventional SPR sensors.
The Section 5.4 described the basic operational principle of conventional SPR
sensors; nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors based on a nonlinear interferometer
will be discussed in this section. As shown in Figure 5.32a, the amplified seed
beam from FWM1 process with the power gain G1 interacts with the sample via
the conventional SPR sensors, the reflected beam and idler beam are both seeded
into the FWM2 process with the power gain G2, and the two output beams are
analyzed using different evaluation parameters. Different from the corresponding
case in Figure 5.32a, the output beam ̂a1 from nonlinear interferometer is directly
illuminated to the Kretschmann configuration and then also analyzed with the
(a)
(b)
âin
âin
â2
â2
â1
â1
v0
v0
G1
G1
FWM1
G2
FWM2
G1
FWM1
G2
FWM2
η1
η1
η2
η2
Pump
Pump
Figure 5.32
Nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors. (a) I-type nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensor; (b) II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor. ̂ain is coherent input beam, ̂v0
is vacuum input, ̂a1 and ̂a2 are the two output beams. Gi is the power gain for FWMi process,
𝜂i is the attenuation for the beams ̂ai (i = 1, 2). For the sake of comparison, a quantum SPR
sensor based on a single FWM process with the power gain Gs is also shown in the red
dashed box in (a).

166
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
help of the other beam ̂a2. The former and latter schemes are called I-type and
II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors, respectively. For the simplicity of
the following discussions, the reflection coefficient |rspr|2 can be replaced with
𝜂1; meanwhile, 𝜂2 represents the attenuation for the other beam ̂a2, which can
be easily realized by inserting variable neutral density filter in the corresponding
optical path. To obtain the quantitative description of nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensors, the input–output relation of Figure 5.32a can be expressed as
̂a2 =
(√
G2g1𝜂2ei𝜑+
√
G1g2𝜂1
)
̂a†
in +
(√
G1G2𝜂2ei𝜑+ √g1g2𝜂1
)
̂v0
+
√
G2(1 −𝜂2)ei𝜑̂v1 +
√
g2(1 −𝜂1)̂v†
2
̂a1 =
(√
G1G2𝜂1ei𝜑+ √g1g2𝜂2
)
̂ain +
(√
G2g1𝜂1ei𝜑+
√
G1g2𝜂2
)
̂v†
0
+
√
g2(1 −𝜂2)̂v†
1 +
√
G2(1 −𝜂1)ei𝜑̂v2
(5.57)
where Gi is the power gain for FWMi process, and gi = Gi −1 (i = 1, 2), 𝜑is interfer-
ence phase inside nonlinear interferometer. ̂v1 and ̂v2 are vacuum fields due to the
introduction of the attenuations 𝜂1 and 𝜂2.
Let us evaluate the first parameter, i.e. the degree of intensity-difference
squeezing (DS) between the two output beams, which is given by the ratio of the
variance on the intensity difference Var[̂N1 −̂N2] to the same variance at SQL
Var[̂N1 −̂N2]SQL = ⟨̂N1 + ̂N2⟩, a ratio value smaller than 1 means the presence of
quantum correlation between the two output beams. In I-type nonlinear interfer-
ometric SPR sensor given by Figure 5.32a, the DS value between the two output
beams can be calculated as
DSa = (G𝜂1 −g𝜂2)2 + Gg(𝜂2 −𝜂1)2 + g𝜂2(1 −𝜂2) + G𝜂1(1 −𝜂1)
(G + g)(G𝜂1 + g𝜂2) + 4Gg√𝜂1𝜂2 cos 𝜑
(5.58)
where G1 is assumed to be equal to G2 in the following discussions; thus, Eq. (5.58)
will be reduced to a simplified form of 1/[4Gg(1 + cos 𝜑) + 1] when no losses are
present in Figure 5.32a. Following similar procedures, the DS between the two
output beams in Figure 5.32b can be calculated as
DSb = DSbn
DSbd
(5.59)
where the numerator DSbn and denominator DSbd of DSb are
DSbn = [2Gg𝜂2(1 + cos 𝜑) −𝜂1(G2 + g2 + 2Gg cos 𝜑)]2
+ (𝜂2 −𝜂1)2Gg(G + g)2(1 + cos 𝜑)2 + (𝜂2 −𝜂1)2Gg sin 𝜑2
+ 2Gg𝜂2(1 −𝜂2)(1 + cos 𝜑) + 𝜂1(1 −𝜂1)(G2 + g2 + 2Gg cos 𝜑) (5.60)
and
DSbd = 2Gg𝜂2(1 + cos 𝜑) + 𝜂1(G2 + g2 + 2Gg cos 𝜑)
(5.61)
respectively. Similarly, Eq. (5.59) will also be reduced to the simplified form of
1/[4Gg(1 + cos 𝜑) + 1], when no losses are present in Figure 5.32b. In order to make

5.4 Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
167
a direct comparison with a quantum SPR sensor based on a single FWM process in
the red dashed box in Figure 5.32a, its DS can also be expressed as
DSS =
2G2
S(𝜂1 −𝜂2)2 + GS𝜂1(1 −2𝜂1) + gs𝜂2(1 −2𝜂2) + 2GS𝜂2(2𝜂1 −𝜂2)
GS𝜂1 + gs𝜂2
(5.62)
where Gs is the power gain in a single FWM process and gs = Gs −1. To make
a fair comparison, the intensities of the sensing beams involving the plasmonic
interaction should be equal. Specifically, the intensities of the sensing beams
from a quantum SPR sensor based on a single FWM process, I-type, and II-type
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors are Gs𝜂1, G2𝜂1 + g2𝜂2 + 2Gg√𝜂1𝜂2 (𝜑= 0),
and 𝜂1(G2 + g2 + 2Gg) (𝜑= 0), respectively. For the sake of simplicity, firstly, 𝜂1 = 𝜂2
is assumed, and this assumption can also preserve the quantum correlations
that existed in the three different sensors; secondly, if the seed beam is amplified
by a single FWM process with power gain Gs = 3, then the amplification factor
G2 + g2 + 2Gg from nonlinear interferometer should also be equal to 3; thus, the
power gain G of each single FWM process in nonlinear interferometer is equal
to (1+
√
3)/2 ≈1.366. Doing this can guarantee that the intensities of the three
sensing beams are always equal. In this sense, the values of Eqs. (5.59) and (5.62)
are equal, which means that quantum performance of a single FWM process with
power gain Gs = 3 is equivalent to the one of II-type nonlinear interferometer with
G = 1.366. Therefore, the quantum performance of a quantum SPR sensor based on
a single FWM process with power gain Gs = 3 can be fully replaced with the one of
II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor with G = 1.366 in Figure 5.32b, and
thus the sensing performances will be mainly compared between I-type nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensor and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
Based on the above discussions, the sensing principle of DS values with respect
to refractive index will be shown as follows. As is depicted in Figure 5.33a, the DS
values of I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors are always below
SQL (the cyan dashed line), while the DS value of I-type nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensor (the red curve) is much smaller. This is because the two beams generated
from FWM1 process still preserve quantum correlation after experiencing the iden-
tical attenuation, and their correlation degree will be enhanced by the next FWM2
process. While for II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor, the quantum cor-
relation shared by the two output beams will only be degraded by the attenuation
process. Similarly, the dependence of I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensors on the incident angle for the two different samples: ns = 1.301 (black
curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve) is shown in Figure 5.33b, it can be seen that both
of the DS values obtain the maximum values near resonance angle due to the higher
loss and the minimum values far from resonance angle due to the lower loss. This
phenomenon can be explained as follows. As shown in Figure 5.31b,c, based on the
operational principle of a conventional SPR sensor, the reflected beam will expe-
rience more attenuation near resonance angle than far from resonance angle, and
more attenuation means the introduction of more loss to the reflected beam; this
will inevitably lead to the disappearance of more quantum correlations. Meanwhile,

168
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.6
1.0
1.2
0.0
(a)
η1
(B)
(A)
DS
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.6
1.0
1.2
61
(b)
Incident angle (°)
(B)
1.301
(A)
1.302
DS
64
63
62
65
66
Figure 5.33
(a) The DS values of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of attenuation 𝜂1. (b) The DS values of I-type (A) and II-type (B)
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors as a function of incident angle for two different
samples: ns = 1.301 (black curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve). The cyan dashed line: SQL.
Other details can be seen in Figure 5.31.
quantum correlation is characterized by DS value; a lower (higher) quantum cor-
relation corresponds to a larger (smaller) DS value. Thus both of the DS values are
totally different between near resonance angle and far from resonance angle. Note
that the maximum DS values of I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors are 0.3462 and 0.9989, respectively; this means that near resonance angle,
the correlation degree of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor is improved by
a factor of 10 log(0.9989/0.3462) = 4.6 dB compared with that obtained with II-type
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
The aforementioned sensing principle is based on angle demodulation, intensity
demodulation as the other demodulation technique, i.e. the dependence of the
DS value on refractive index will be shown as follows. As shown in Figure 5.34,
the DS values decrease with the increase of refractive index. Such behaviors can
be explained as follows. As shown in Figure 5.31d, a low (high) refractive index
corresponds to a low (high) reflection coefficient and a high (low) loss, and a high
(low) loss indicates the decreasing (increasing) quantum correlations. To sum
up, the correlation degree of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor near
resonance angle is improved by a factor of 10 log(0.9989/0.3462) = 4.6 dB compared
with that obtained with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
The first sensing parameter, i.e. the DS values of the two output beams generated
from I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors as a function of refrac-
tive index, has been analyzed. In this section, the estimation precision 𝛿ns as the
second sensing parameter can also be used to characterize the sensing performance,
which can be obtained through an error propagation analysis, such that
𝛿ns = ⟨Δ̂S⟩
||||
𝜕⟨̂S⟩
𝜕nS
||||
(5.63)
where ̂S consists of some measurement combinations of the two output beams
and ⟨…⟩denotes the mean value. In general, this parameter is used to study
the estimation ability of refractive index via a sensor. A smaller value indicates a

5.4 Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
169
Figure 5.34
The DS values
of I-type (A) and II-type (B)
nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of
refractive index. The cyan
dashed line: SQL.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.290
ns (RIU)
(B)
(A)
DS
1.300
1.295
1.305
1.310
1.315
reduction in the uncertainty of the estimation and thus an increase in the sensitivity.
For the two-mode squeezed state, the signal ̂S can be written as the form of intensity
difference between the two output beams. So the denominator of Eq. (5.63) ||||
𝜕⟨̂S⟩
𝜕nS
||||
can be simplified as NS
||||
𝜕|rspr|2
𝜕nS
||||
, where Ns is the intensity of the sensing beam.
Note that the intensities of all the sensing beams are set to be equal, and thus the
sensing performance of the different SPR sensors only depends on the numerator,
i.e. nonclassical features existed in the different SPR sensors. Therefore, to quantify
the effect of nonclassical features, i.e. quantum correlations, on the estimation
precision enhancement, it is necessary to define a ratio of the precision based on
SQL to the precision from quantum correlations. The ratio is defined as
ℜ=
𝛿ns(SQL)
𝛿ns
=
⟨Δ̂S⟩(SQL)
⟨Δ̂S⟩
(5.64)
where ℜgreater than 1 reveals an enhancement in the estimation precision 𝛿ns, or
equivalently, a quantum noise reduction compared with the classical scenario. For
the cases of I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors, their estima-
tion precision ratios ℜs are the reciprocal of the square root of the corresponding DSs,
i.e. ℜ=
1
√
DS. As shown in Figure 5.35a, the ℜvalues of I-type nonlinear interfero-
metric SPR sensor are always greater than that obtained with II-type nonlinear inter-
ferometric SPR sensor, resulting from a much stronger quantum noise reduction
existed in I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor mentioned before. Similarly,
the ℜvalues of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors as a
function of incident angle for the two different samples: ns = 1.301 (black curve) and
ns = 1.302 (red curve), are also shown in Figure 5.35b, a tiny change in the refractive
index from 1.301 (black curve) to 1.302 (red curve) can be identified with the higher
ℜvalues by observing a shift in the resonance angle using I-type nonlinear inter-
ferometric SPR sensor compared with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
However, I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor show the estimation precision
enhancement even in the high loss condition, i.e. near resonance angle, in which
I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor shows the distinct differences compared

170
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.8
1.6
2.0
2.2
0.0
(a)
η1
(B)
(A)
R
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
1.0
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.8
1.6
2.0
2.2
61
(b)
Incident angle (°)
(B)
1.301
(A)
1.302
R
64
63
62
65
66
Figure 5.35
(a) The ℜvalues of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of 𝜂1. (b) The ℜvalues of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensors as a function of incident angle for the two different samples:
ns = 1.301 (black curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve). The cyan dashed line: 1.
with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor. This is mainly due to the fact that
two beams involving plasmonic interaction in I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensor will still preserve quantum correlation after experiencing identical attenua-
tion and will be further enhanced by the next FWM2 process. While the quantum
correlation shared by the two beams’ output from II-type nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensor will only be degraded after the plasmonic interaction. This point can also
be confirmed in Figure 5.33a; meanwhile, estimation precision ratio is defined as
the reciprocal of the square root of the corresponding DS, and thus I-type nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensor will show estimation precision enhancement compared
with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor in the high loss condition. In other
words, the minimum values from I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric sen-
sors are 1.7 and 1.0, respectively, which means that the ability of the estimation
precision enhancement of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor near reso-
nance angle is enhanced by a factor of 10 log[1.7/1.0] = 2.3 dB compared with the
one of II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
If the intensity demodulation instead of angle demodulation is involved in the
discussions of the estimation precision enhancement (the results are shown in
Figure 5.36), the ℜvalues from both I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric
SPR sensors increase with the increase of refractive index, while they show the
distinct differences in the low refractive index range mentioned before, and their
values saturate at the value of 2.24 in the high refractive index limit. In a word, the
estimation precision ratio of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor under the
high loss condition can obtain a maximum 2.3 dB enhancement compared with
II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.
After DS and estimation precision ratio from both I-type and II-type nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensors are discussed, the third sensing parameter, i.e. SNR, will
be studied in this section. For two-mode squeezed states, its SNR can be defined as
the ratio of the sensing beam intensity to the intensity-difference noise between the
two output beams. This definition has the following advantages: firstly, the sensing
beam intensity rather than intensity-difference between the two beams as the signal

5.4 Nonlinear Interferometric SPR Sensing
171
Figure 5.36
The ℜvalues of
I-type (A) and II-type (B)
nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of
refractive index. The cyan
dashed line: 1.
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.0
1.8
2.2
1.290
ns (RIU)
(B)
(A)
R
1.300
1.295
1.305
1.310
1.315
can obtain a maximum value; secondly, intensity-difference noise between the two
output beams can obtain a minimum value compared with the noise of the single
sensing beam because each beam from the twin beams has a thermal noise level
above SQL. Thus, such cooperation between high signal and low noise level enables
the SNR from nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors to be further enhanced than
that obtained with classical scenario. Following this basic idea, the SNR values of
I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors can be given by
SNRa =
G2𝜂1 + g2𝜂2 + 2Gg√𝜂1𝜂2 cos 𝜑
(G𝜂1 −g𝜂2)2 + Gg(𝜂2 −𝜂1)2 + g𝜂2(1 −𝜂2) + G𝜂1(1 −𝜂1)
(5.65)
and
SNRb = 𝜂1(G2 + g2 + 2Gg cos 𝜑)
DSbn
(5.66)
respectively. Under the condition 𝜂1 = 𝜂2, the SNR of the classical scenario is 0.5,
which can be realized by splitting a beam in a coherent state with a power equal to
the total power of the two correlated beams, using one beam as the sensing beam to
interact with the attenuated total reflection setup using the Kretschmann configu-
ration, and the other beam experiencing the identical attenuation as the reference
beam, then directing them both to a differential detector. Thus, this balanced detec-
tion system makes it possible to cancel all the sources of classical noise and obtain an
accurate measure of the SNR of classical scenario. As shown in Figure 5.37, the SNR
values of both I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors are greater
than that obtained with classical scenario, while the SNR value of I-type nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensor is always greater than that obtained with II-type non-
linear interferometric SPR sensor. The maximum differences in SNR values can be
seen from the high-loss situation, similar to the discussion of estimation precision
enhancement. Specifically, the minimum SNR values from I-type and II-type non-
linear interferometric SPR sensors are 1.73 and 0.60, respectively; this corresponds
directly to a 10 log10[1.73/0.60] = 4.6 dB SNR improvement from I-type nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensor under the high-loss condition compared with II-type
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor.

172
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
0.0
0.5
1.0
2.0
1.5
2.5
3.0
0.0
(a)
η1
(B)
(A)
SNR
0.0
0.5
1.0
2.0
1.5
2.5
3.0
SNR
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
1.0
61
(b)
Incident angle (°)
(B)
1.301
(A)
1.302
64
63
62
65
66
Figure 5.37
(a) The SNR values of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of 𝜂1. (b) The SNR values of I-type (A) and II-type (B) nonlinear
interferometric SPR sensors as a function of incident angle for the two different samples:
ns = 1.301 (black curve) and ns = 1.302 (red curve). The cyan dashed line: 0.5.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
3.0
1.290
ns (RIU)
(B)
(A)
SNR
1.300
1.295
1.305
1.310
1.315
Figure 5.38
The SNR values
of I-type (A) and II-type (B)
nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensors as a function of
refractive index. The cyan
dashed line: 0.5.
The SNR values as a function of refractive index are shown in Figure 5.38. Similar
to the dependence of estimation precision enhancement on refractive index, here
the SNR values of both I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors also
increase with the increase of refractive index, but their values saturate at the value of
3.0 in the high refractive index limit. In conclusion, the SNR value of I-type nonlin-
ear interferometric SPR sensor under the high-loss situation is enhanced by a factor
of 4.6 dB compared with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor, while this
advantage will disappear in the high refractive index limit.
In conclusion, we have theoretically characterized the sensing performance of
I-type and II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensors and demonstrated the
equivalence between II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor with power gain
G = 1.366 and a quantum SPR sensor based on a single FWM process with power
gain Gs = 3. The distinct advantages of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor
near resonance angle are presented as follows. Firstly, the DS as the first evaluation
parameter, the DS value of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor is improved
by a factor of 4.6 dB than that obtained with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR
sensor; secondly, estimation precision ratio as the second evaluation parameter,

References
173
the estimation precision ratio of I-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor is
enhanced by a factor of 2.3 dB than that obtained with II-type nonlinear interfer-
ometric SPR sensor; lastly, SNR as the third parameter, the SNR value of I-type
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor is improved by a factor of 4.6 dB than that
obtained with II-type nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor. The results presented
here may find other potential sensing applications based on a nonlinear interfer-
ometer, i.e. nonlinear interferometric bending, pressure, and temperature sensors.
5.5
Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, firstly, we give the comprehensive descriptions about SU(1,1)
interferometer, including experimental implementation of phase-locking, enhance-
ment of phase sensitivity, experimental realization of entanglement enhancement,
and QNC; secondly, we also describe other types of nonlinear interferometers,
including a NSI, a hybrid interferometer consisting of a nonlinear FWM process
and a linear beam splitter, a nonlinear beam splitter, and interference-induced
quantum-squeezing enhancement; lastly, a nonlinear interferometric SPR sensor
has been theoretically proposed and demonstrated its sensing advantages by using
the sensing parameters such as DS, estimation precision, and SNR.
The above discussions about the different kinds of nonlinear interferometers
enrich the background knowledge about optical interferometric sensing, especially
for nonlinear interferometric sensing. Based on these basic configurations, different
sorts of nonlinear interferometric sensors (bending, temperature, pressure sensors,
etc.) can also be efficiently constructed to improve the sensing parameters, e.g. DS,
estimation precision, and SNR.
References
1 Yurke, B., McCall, S.L., and Klauder, J.R. (1986). SU(2) and SU(1,1) interferome-
ters. Phys. Rev. A: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33: 4033.
2 Plick, W.N., Dowling, J.P., and Agarwal, G.S. (2010). Coherent-light-boosted,
sub-shot noise, quantum interferometry. New J. Phys. 12: 083014.
3 Jing, J., Liu, C., Zhou, Z. et al. (2011). Realization of a nonlinear interferometer
with parametric amplifiers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99: 011110.
4 Wang, H., Marino, A.M., and Jing, J. (2015). Experimental implementation of
phase locking in a nonlinear interferometer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107: 121106.
5 Liu, S., Lou, Y., Xin, J., and Jing, J. (2018). Quantum enhancement of phase
sensitivity for the bright-seeded SU(1,1) interferometer with direct intensity
detection. Phys. Rev. Appl. 10: 064046.
6 Xin, J., Qi, J., and Jing, J. (2017). Enhancement of entanglement using cascaded
four-wave mixing processes. Opt. Lett. 42: 366–369.
7 Xin, J., Wang, H., and Jing, J. (2016). The effect of losses on the quantum-noise
cancellation in the SU(1,1) interferometer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109: 051107.

174
5 Optical Interferometric Sensing
8 Xin, J., Liu, J., and Jing, J. (2017). Nonlinear Sagnac interferometer based on the
four-wave mixing process. Opt. Express 25: 1350–1359.
9 Liu, S. and Jing, J. (2017). Hybrid interferometer with nonlinear four-wave
mixing process and linear beam splitter. Opt. Express 25: 15854–15860.
10 Fang, Y., Feng, J., Cao, L. et al. (2016). Experimental implementation of a non-
linear beam splitter based on a phase-sensitive parametric amplifier. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 108: 131106.
11 Liu, S., Lou, Y., and Jing, J. (2019). Interference-induced quantum squeezing
enhancement in a two-beam phase-sensitive amplifier. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123:
113602.
12 Wang, H., Fu, Z., Ni, Z. et al. (2021). Nonlinear interferometric
surface-plasmon-resonance sensor. Opt. Express 29 (7): 11194–11206.

175
6
Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on
Micro/nanomaterials
Mingwei Tang1,2 and Qing Yang1,2
1Zhejiang University, College of Optical Science and Engineering, International Research Center for
Advanced Photonics, State Key Laboratory of Extreme Photonics and Instrumentation, 38 Zheda Road,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310027, China
2Zhejiang Lab, Intelligent Perception Research Institute, Zhongtai Street, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 311100,
China
6.1
Introduction
Optical microscopy is probably one of the most significant technical accomplish-
ments in the history of humankind. Since its invention by Hans Lippershey and
Zacharias Janssen around 1590, optical microscopy has revolutionized many
aspects of science and technology, especially in life sciences, for its superiority in
minimal invasiveness and excellent compatibility with live-cell imaging. However,
classical linear optical microscopy is still restrained by the optical resolution
limitation formulated by Abbe in his revolutionary paper published in 1873 [1]. Von
Helmholtz derived a more general expression of this concept, stating that resolution
under conventional illumination is described by the illumination wavelength (𝜆0)
and the numerical aperture (NA) of the system: R =
𝜆0
2NA [2]. The resolution of a
traditional optical microscope (i.e. the smallest distance at which two point-like
objects could be discriminated) under visible light illumination can only reach
∼200 nm in the lateral dimensions and ∼500 nm in the axial dimension using an
objective lens (NA = 1.4) at 550 nm wavelength. These values are fundamentally
restricted by optical diffraction (or uncertainty principle from the perspective of
quantum physics), which leads to the absence of subwavelength information about
the object. The increasing demand for improved resolution has been inspiring
numerous attempts to break the resolution limit. However, it was not until recently
that fruitful developments emerged. In this chapter, we focus on the discussion of
lateral super-resolution microscopy.
The confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) invented in the 1960s utilizes
focused laser for excitation and a pinhole for detection to shape the point-spread
function (PSF) of the system and increases the resolution of a microscope down to
around 1∕
√
2 of the diffraction limit [3–5]. The combination of CLSM and fluores-
cent microscopy has become a powerful and indispensable tool for life science and
material science since its invention [6].
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

176
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
By
further
advancing
the
confocal
system,
super-resolution
fluorescent
microscopy circumvents the diffraction limit by distinguishing the fluorescent
emission of different areas or fluorophores in an additional dimension, e.g.
spectroscopic characteristics or time [7]. Reversible saturable optical fluorescence
transitions (RESOLFT) microscopy represents a typical class of this absolute far-field
strategy, which reversely silences fluorophores at the predefined diffraction-limited
region and shrinks the PSF [8–14]. Several newly invented methods share this prin-
ciple, e.g. stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy [8, 10], ground-state
depletion (GSD) microscopy [15, 16], saturated pattern excitation (SPE) microscopy
[17], and dynamic saturation optical microscopy (DSOM) [18]. Another category
of the method relies on the precise location of the single emitter by activating
individual molecules stochastically within the diffraction-limited region at different
time intervals. Such single-molecule localization microscopy (SMLM) includes
stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM) [19, 20], photoactivated
localization microscopy (PALM) [21], and fluorescence photoactivation localization
microscopy (FPALM) [22]. Similar to these methods, super-Resolution Radial Fluc-
tuations (SRRF) [23] extracts the superresolution information from fluorescence
fluctuations rather than localization. The methods mentioned above rely heavily on
special fluorescent markers [24, 25], thus limiting their employment in label-free
and fluorescent-probes-limited scenarios [26–28]. A detailed description of these
methods can be found in other reviews [29–36]. Another intriguing attempt worth
noting is to employ the carefully designed amplitude or phase zone plate to achieve
sub-diffraction limit focusing in the far field, that is, the so-called super-oscillatory
lens [37–41]. Through the judiciously designed diffractive unit, the focal spot
size in a certain region of the target plane is controllable in lateral (from infinite
small to 0.38𝜆/NA) [42] and longitudinal directions [43]. Combined with the
confocal technique, both labeled and label-free super-resolution microscopy could
be realized in a purely noninvasive manner [37, 43, 44]. However, the decreased
focus spot is usually accompanied by increased sidelobes, which imposes practical
difficulties in its applications in super-resolution imaging. For more information on
this planer diffractive lens, please refer to the latest reviews [38, 45].
To enhance the lateral resolution in far-field microscopy without the slow
scanning process, people innovatively turn to manipulation in the spatial-
frequency (SF) domain instead of the spatial domain. This method, termed as
spatial-frequency-shift (SFS) method [46], can realize high-speed and wide-field
high-resolution imaging. The classical technique is structured illumination
microscopy (SIM), which uses the Moiré effect to improve the imaging resolu-
tion by illuminating the sample with patterned light [17, 47–50]. Limited by the
pattern periodicity realized by the interference of two free-space light, the lateral
resolution can only reach down to approximately 𝜆/4. Another way of increasing
the resolution is Fourier ptychographic microscopy (FPM) [51–53], which recovers
high-resolution images from multiple low-resolution images taken under oblique
illuminations [54–56]. By shifting the high-SF information into the collectible area
in the SF space defined by the objective NA, these methods operate in SF space,
stitching together several variably illuminated low-resolution images. Although

6.2 The Principle of SFS Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
177
these methods have many advantages, including low illumination density, good
biocompatibility, simple sample preparation process, fast imaging speed, and
wide field of view (FOV) compared with other super-resolution imaging methods
[7, 57–63], deep subwavelength super-resolving ability was not provided due to the
limited SFS range restricted by free-space light illumination. Thus, evanescent-wave
illumination, instead of free-space light, is necessary to further break the diffraction
limit in order to cover larger SF range in the SF space.
Evanescent waves were first employed by the microscopy community in the
1940s [64]. The in-plane wavevector of an evanescent wave is larger than that of
a propagating wave and corresponds to finer details of the object. In other words,
the sub-diffraction-limited details could be visualized once evanescent waves are
collected. Near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) is the first technique
invented to capture the evanescent waves in the near-field region, which uses
nanometer-sized probes to scan point by point and collect the corresponding
evanescent waves on the specimen’s surface [65–73]. However, this technique
has a relatively low throughput and requires postprocessing of massive scanning
data. Super-resolution microscopy benefits from evanescent-wave illumination
combined with SFS method. Generally speaking, super-resolution microscopy
utilizes mainly two kinds of evanescent waves for illumination: evanescent fields
at dielectric waveguide boundaries [74] and surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) or
localized plasmons (LPs) at metal/dielectric interfaces [75, 76]. Several papers have
reported evanescent-wave-assisted SFS methods using delicately designed struc-
tures [46, 77, 78], including evanescent-fields-illuminated SFS label-free microscopy
[55, 78, 79], evanescent-fields-illuminated SFS-labeled microscopy [80, 81], plas-
monic structured illumination microscopy (PSIM) [56, 82–84], localized plasmonic
structured illumination microscopy (LPSIM) [85, 86], and metamaterial-assisted
illumination nanoscopy [87, 88].
This chapter aims to provide a systematic discussion on the evanescent-wave-
assisted SFS super-resolution microscopy techniques based on micro/nanomaterials
and metamaterials. It should be noted that some techniques, such as nonlinear
effects, are beyond the scope of this paper, although they are very prospective
methods that can fundamentally break the diffraction limit [47, 49].
6.2
The Principle of SFS Super-resolution Imaging
Based on Micro/nanomaterials
For SFS methods, evanescent-wave illumination provides a significant SFS of the
object’s spatial spectrum, as shown in Figure 6.1 [46]. The detected spatial spectrum
of objects can be described as:
Ffs(⃗k) = Fo(⃗k −⃗ks) ⋅TF(⃗k)
(6.1)
where Fo(⃗k), TF(⃗k) are the Fourier spectrum of the object and the transfer function
(TF) of the imaging system, ⃗ks is the SFS provided by the evanescent-wave illumina-
tion. It should be noted that the TF should be adapted to optical transfer function

178
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
Figure 6.1
Mechanisms of
evanescent-waves-assisted SFS
method. SFS methods shift the high
spatial spectrum of objects step by
step to the detectable region of the
objective and stitch them together in
the SF space with the reconstruction
algorithm. The blue circle represents
the SF space detected by the
conventional objective, while the
orange one represents the SF space
detected by the SFS method.
(OTF) or coherent transfer function (CTF) in different imaging systems, e.g. we use
the CTF in evanescent fields-illuminated SFS label-free microscopy, while in the case
of evanescent-fields-illuminated SF-labeled microscopy we use the OTF. As shown
in Figure 6.1, the spatial spectrum centered by ⃗ks will be shifted to the lower SF
region and transferred to propagating modes, thereby presenting super-resolution
information to the far field. The final resolution of SFS methods is then Rfs =
2𝜋
kc+ks .
Evanescent fields occupy the near-field region of dielectric waveguides due to the
imaginary transverse wavevector [89]. The magnitude of the in-plane wavevector
can be tuned by the waveguide geometry and can thus provide the SF required to
break the diffraction limit for SFS-based new microscopy techniques.
Employing evanescent-wave illumination allows the super-resolution imaging
based on SFS method. To date, a variety of approaches utilizing specially designed
substrates to generate evanescent waves for illumination and shift undetectable
SF signal into the passband of conventional microscope have been proposed.
These super-resolution imaging substrates include nanowires (NW) [55, 90],
polymers [79], photonic waveguides [81, 91–96], wafers [97], SPPs [56, 82, 83, 98],
LPs [85, 86, 99], and metamaterials [87, 88]. Evanescent-waves illumination SFS
microscopy can be easily constructed using on-chip techniques and has excellent
potential for practical applications.
6.3
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Nanowires
and Polymers
In 2013, Hao et al. [100] utilized evanescent fields along a micro-optical fiber
as a near-field illumination source and achieved super-resolution imaging in
the direction perpendicular to the microfiber. The laser-guiding microfiber was
precisely positioned on the sample surface using a piezoelectric positioning stage.
It provided a SFS magnitude proportional to the effective refractive index of the
guided mode. Based on the SFS effect, a slot pair structure of 225-nm central

6.3 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Nanowires and Polymers
179
Nanowire
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Highest detectable
order of Fourier
component in
NWRIM
Highest detectable order
of Fourier component
under conventional
illumination
2πfx
2πfy
NA × k0
2NA × k0
keva
–keva
–kc
k′eva
k′c
1
NA = 0.6–0.9
Figure 6.2
Evanescent-wave illumination SFS microscopy. (a) Schematic of the
conﬁguration and imaging process. (b) Evanescent-wave illumination SFS images (bottom
left) and SEM (bottom right) of an arbitrary ZJU pattern on an Al2O3 ﬁlm. NA = 0.85. (c) The
underlying mechanism of the evanescent-wave illumination SFS method is represented in
the spatial-frequency space. The blue and yellow solid circles in (c) indicate the optical
transfer function (OTF) of the conventional microscope system and that of the
evanescent-wave illumination SFS microscopy. Source: Reproduced with permission [55],
© 2017, American Physical Society.
width was successfully resolved under 600 nm-wavelength light illumination using
a 0.8 NA objective (0.61 𝜆/NA = 457 nm). However, the 1D geometry limits the
practical 2D imaging due to the difficulty in microfiber positioning.
In 2017, Liu et al. [55] proposed an on-chip evanescent illumination design
for label-free 2D sub-diffraction-limited imaging with a large FOV. This NW
ring illumination microscopy (NWRIM) configuration enables omnidirectional
evanescent-wave illumination and is compatible with standard microscopes for
efficient super-resolution imaging.
Figure 6.2a shows the schematic of the NWRIM, in which a CdS NW serves as the
local light source [101–103]. When the NW is pumped by a 405-nm continuous-wave
laser, the excited fluorescent light (center wavelength of ∼520 nm) could efficiently
couple into the 200-nm-thick TiO2 film waveguide beneath the NW and illuminate
the samples on the waveguide. Thus, scattered light can be collected by a far-field
objective, contributing sub-diffraction-limited spatial information to the final
image. As shown in Figure 6.2b, the system successively resolved predefined line
patterns with 152-nm center-to-center distance slots using a 0.85 NA objective
(0.61𝜆/NA = 373 nm). Figure 6.2c shows the detectable SF components in NWRIM
and conventional microscopy, respectively. For conventional microscopy, both the
wavevector of illumination and detection are confined by the NA of the objective.
Consequently, the detectable Fourier components in far field are limited to a circle
with a radius of 2NA × k0. While in NWRIM with an illumination wavevector of ks,
the highest detectable Fourier components are expanded to ks + NA × k0, where the
illumination wavevector is expressed as:
ks = k0 × Neff
(6.2)
here, Neff is the effective refractive index of the evanescent illumination waves,
which could be larger than the NA of the objective lens if a high-refractive-index

180
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
waveguide is adopted, so that a higher resolution can be achieved correspondingly.
They have also employed an Al2O3–SiO2 double-layer waveguide further to extend
the propagation length of the evanescent wave and thus the FOV. Later, by opti-
mizing the fabrication process of both the TiO2 waveguide and the CdS NW, they
realized an NWRIM with ∼6000 μm2 FOV and 122-nm center-to-center resolving
ability [90]. However, due to the lack of control over the illuminating directions and
spectrum calculation, frequency-aliasing (the spatial spectrum for different direc-
tions and SFSs are mixed) is inevitable in the NW-ring illumination arrangement.
Therefore, we can’t get the correct super-resolution imaging using this way.
The same group [79] reported an improved set-up in 2019, using a polygonal-
geometry waveguide chip to reduce the frequency-aliasing problem. A fluorescent
polymer film beneath the TiO2 waveguide illuminates the sample with evanescent
waves traveling in 16 precisely controlled directions. A 2D distortion-less image over
∼200 μm2 FOVs can be reconstructed due to the combination of oblique illumination
and multiwavelength evanescent-wave illumination, which ensures wide coverage
of the SF space.
The fabrication process of the polymer film-based substrate is shown in
Figure 6.3a. A 90-nm-thick poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT)
film was first spin-coated on the surface of a 0.5-mm-thick, 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm K9
substrate and dried using a heating stage at 80 ∘C for 5 minutes. Next, laser direct
writing technique was used to fabricate an array of polygonal patterns. Wavelength
of the pulsed laser was 780 nm, and its duration was less than 120 fs with a repetition
rate of 80 MHz. Measured laser power was about 310 mW, and machining precision
of the system was smaller than 100 nm. Then a 70-nm-thick titanium dioxide
film was deposited by electron-beam (E-beam) evaporation at room temperature
to form a planar waveguide on the glass substrate. The refractive index of the
deposited titanium dioxide film was 2.05, which supports an evanescent wave with
a lateral wavevector of ks = 2.05k0. An array of chips can be fabricated in a batch, as
schematically shown in Figure 6.3c.
To reduce the frequency-aliasing problem, the film is excited to produce illumi-
nation evanescent fields with multiple wavevector components (Figure 6.3b). The
directions of the wavevector are controlled by exciting the edges of the polygonal
patterns of the film. To achieve the tunability of the wavevector magnitude, the
SFS raw images of the wide spectrum illumination are filtered using band-pass
filter at 500 ± 2 nm (FWHM = 10 ± 2 nm) or 632.8 ± 2 nm (FWHM = 10 ± 2 nm).
Vertical and oblique illumination are also applied to illuminate the sample, making
sure there is enough coverage of frequency information from low-frequency range
to high-frequency range (Figure 6.3d). Compared with microfiber and NW light
sources, the fluorescent polymer films have superior luminescence and cost efficien-
cies; they are facile to fabricate; and scale-up for mass production is feasible. The
wideband fluorescence emission of F8BT (from 480 to 700 nm for excitation in the
blue) covers a large SF range, which is vital for the reconstruction of distortion-free
images from the sample.
The principle of the SFS label-free recovery process is retrieving the phase map
from multiple-intensity images, which alternates between the spatial domain (x–y)
and the SF domain (kx – ky), as shown in Figure 6.4.

6.3 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Nanowires and Polymers
181
(I) Spin-coating
Image
Filter
Objective
Sample
NA = 0.85/100 x
Orientational illumination
z
x
θ
α
λeva.2
Kcobl.
Ky
Kx
Kc
Kceva.2
–Keva.2
Kceva.3
–Keva.3
–Kobl.
λeva.2
λobj.
λeva.1
y eva.
obj.
(II) Direct laser writing
(III) E-beam evaporation and sample placement
TiO2 film
F8BT film
Glass substrate
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.3
(a) Fabrication procedures for SRCs to produce evanescent waves at multiple
wavelengths/directions. (b) Schematic diagram of the evanescent ﬁeld illumination and
oblique illumination process. Under a given illumination direction, the object (here a
circular ring pair) is partially resolved at different wavelengths using appropriate bandpass
ﬁlters. In the diagram, 𝜃represents the illumination direction, and 𝛼is the incidence angle
for oblique illumination. And obl. Means oblique illumination, and eva. represents
evanescent illumination. (c) Schematic and microscopic image of the chip. (d) Schematic of
reconstruction method. Kc, Kcobl., Kceva.2, and Kceva.3 are the cut-off wavenumbers of the
microscope system for different illumination modes and wavelengths; Kobl is the
wavevector under oblique illumination; Keva.2 and Keva.3 are wavevectors for evanescent ﬁeld
illumination at wavelengths of 𝜆2 and 𝜆3, respectively. Source: [79], © 2019, John Wiley &
Sons, CC BY 4.0.
(Step 1): The recovery process begins with making a guess of the super-resolution
image in the spatial domain:
√
Ihei𝜑h. The initial guess will not fail the reconstruc-
tion, but a good guess will affect the convergence rate and the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of the final image. Usually the wide-field, low-resolution image is used to
get a fast convergence, but this will bring many noises in the background of the

182
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
Fourier space. Here we use the all-one image as the guess to get a clean SF back-
ground.
(Step 2): Second, we use the CTF to select the specific spatial spectrum and apply
inverse Fourier transformation to generate a new low-resolution target image
√
Ilei𝜑l. This process also keeps noise from outside the passband of the objective.
(Step 3): The phase 𝜑l of the low-resolution image is used as an estimate for
the phase map 𝜑h of the sample S(x). Therefore, only the amplitude of the
low-resolution image is updated by the intensity measurement Iks,𝜙, that is
√
Ilei𝜑l →
√
Iks,𝜙ei𝜑l. The complex image is then applied with Fourier transfor-
mation and used to replace the subregion in the spatial spectrum. This step can
be expressed as:
Fm+1(k) = Fm(k) × (1 −CTF (k −ks)) + CTF (k −ks) × 
(√
Iks,𝜙ei𝜑l(k −ks)
)
(6.3)
(Step 4): In the next step, we repeat steps 2 and 3 to update the spatial spectrum
with all the raw images. The images number is the product of the number of SFS
magnitudes N(kS) and the number of azimuthal angles N(𝜙).
(Step 5): Finally, steps 2–4 were repeated several times until the convergence condi-
tion was satisfied. To get the intensity of the sample, we inverse Fourier transform
the spatial spectrum and get the sample’s complex field
√
Ihei𝜑h. The intensity dis-
tribution of the thin sample is the amplitude
√
Ih. The presented algorithm was
tested on simulated data, as displayed in the top of Figure 6.4 for a ground truth
input and a successful intensity reconstruction.
We demonstrated the practical capabilities of our super-resolution chip (SRC)
to image irregular samples, such as multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs).
We deposited bundles of MWCNTs (diameter: 10–20 nm; length: 200–250 μm)
on the waveguide surface. The sample was illuminated with evanescent waves
at wavelengths of 532 and 632.8 nm from 16 directions. Figure 6.5a presents a
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of MWCNTs sample 1. As demon-
strated in Figure 6.5b, subwavelength details in Figure 6.5a are not resolved by
conventional wide-field microscopy. Figure 6.5c shows an image of sample 1 under
evanescent illumination along the direction of the white arrow at 532 nm, in
which some details are already visible. As demonstrated in Figure 6.5d, MWCNTs
sample 1 is well reconstructed using our method. However, the penetration depth
of evanescent waves restricts the imaging depth, as demonstrated in sample 2
(Figure 6.5e–h). Figure 6.5e represents an SEM image of MWCNT sample 2, and
clearly, some fibers are crossing over others and therefore not in contact with
the substrate. Thus, the evanescent illumination mode does not contribute any
information to those parts of the sample (Figure 6.5g), and high SF detail will
be omitted in the reconstruction (Figure 6.5h). The intensity profiles are pre-
sented in Figure 6.5i, validating good agreement between SEM and reconstruction
results.

Figure 6.4
Iterative recovery procedure of TVSFS label-free imaging. The reconstruction algorithm is illustrated in ﬁve steps. Step 1: initialize the
high-resolution image,
√
Ihei𝜑h. Step 2: low ﬁlter in the Fourier space and inverse Fourier transform to generate the low-resolution image
√
Ilei𝜑l. Step 3:
replace the intensity
√
Il with the intensity measurement Iks,𝜙, that is,
√
Iks,𝜙ei𝜑l, and update in the Fourier space. Step 4: repeat steps 2–3 for other
plane-wave incidences (total of N(ks) • N(𝜙) intensity images). Step 5: repeat steps 2–4 until the convergence.

184
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Normalized intensity
Normalized intensity
Normalized intensity
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
1
0
0
Position
0.1
0.2 (μm)
149 nm
SEM
Reconstruction
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 6.5
(a) SEM image of multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). (b) Optical image
under vertical illumination. (c) Image for evanescent-wave illumination at 532 nm along
directions of white arrow. (d) Reconstructed image using all illumination modes. Panels
(e–h) show corresponding images for another sample with two MWCNT strands crossing
over one another. Norm. intensity denotes normalized intensity. (i) Normalized intensity
proﬁles along white dashed lines in (a) and (d). Source: [79], © 2019, John Wiley & Sons,
CC BY 4.0.
6.4
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic
Waveguides
Photonic waveguide is an effective approach toward integration and high-throughput
imaging, which is important and very useful for practical applications in materials,
biology, and medicine. Recently, photonic waveguide-based microscopy that con-
fines the guided light using a high refractive index material on a silicon (Si) chip
has attracted more and more interest due to its low cost, high compatibility, and
capability to be integrated with existing circuit design and fabrication processes.
The subwavelength evanescent field on the top of the waveguide offers uniform
illumination to the sample, which extends over a wide FOV only limited by the
attenuation of the light in the waveguide. The waveguide-based evanescent field
excitation microscopy decouples the illumination and detection paths, signifi-
cantly reducing the complexity of the optical imaging system and demonstrating
the advantages of high integration, large FOV, and high-throughput for both
fluorescent-labeled imaging and label-free super-resolution imaging.
6.4.1
Label-free Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic
Waveguides
Similar to super-resolution imaging based on polymers described in Section 6.3, the
label-free super-resolution imaging can also be implemented using photonic waveg-
uide (such as Si3N4) in conjunction with a multispectral illumination. This concept
[91] was first proposed by our group and further experimentally demonstrated by
another group [92, 104].
As is shown in Figure 6.6a, the working region is designed to be octagonal with
eight input waveguide channels connected to each edge of it. The samples are put on

6.4 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic Waveguides
185
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6
(a) The scheme of photonic waveguide for label-free super-resolution imaging.
The coupling system and the octagon-viewing area of the multiwavelength-illuminated
waveguide. Source: Reproduced with permission [91] Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing.
(b) The photonic waveguide chip fabricated by our group.
0
500
Loss (dB/cm)
1000
1500
(a)
(b)
R = 500 μm
500
Bend radius (μm)
1000
650 nm 1st
405 nm 1st
405 nm 2nd
532 nm 1st
532 nm 2nd
0
500
0.5
1
1.5
× 10–6
Figure 6.7
(a) Bending loss of the fundamental mode (the solid line) and the second-order
mode (the dashed line) for three employed wavelengths in the rib waveguide. The
second-order mode is not supported for 780 nm. (b) Schematic of the bend waveguide
structure with radius of 500 μm as mode ﬁlter. Source: Reproduced with permission [91]
Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing.
the working region with the single-mode evanescent-wave illumination from eight
input waveguide channels. Figure 6.6b shows images of the fabricated chip.
The waveguide needs to be designed for single-mode operation due to the require-
ment for accurate frequency shift for image reconstruction. We simulated and found
that high-order modes will change the wave front and effective refractive index of the
illumination, which results in superposition of the frequency spectrum with differ-
ent SFS orientation and magnitude. For the visible regime, the single-mode condi-
tion is about hundreds of nanometers wide for Si3N4 waveguide, which is difficult for
achieving with the photolithography. To simplify the fabrication process, rib waveg-
uide structure was utilized to make it possible for single-mode propagation with
relatively wider waveguide (up to 1 μm). The mode control is realized using bend
structure in rib waveguide. Figure 6.7a shows that the bending loss for fundamen-
tal TE mode (the solid line) is much lower than that of the second-order mode (the

186
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
dashed line) in rib waveguide. Thus, 500-μm-radius bend structure (Figure 6.7b) can
work as an excellent mode filter for all three applied wavelengths. The single-mode
behavior of the waveguide provides illumination with narrow frequency band and
approximately plane wave front with certain incident angle. These features help to
improve the accuracy of frequency shift and acquire images with high SNR, making
our multiwavelength evanescent-wave illumination waveguide a feasible platform
for label-free super-resolution imaging.
To improve the FOV, a wider waveguide for illumination is achieved by adiabati-
cally tapering the waveguide from 1 to 50 μm. As long as the taper length is longer
than the adiabatic tapering length, the single-mode behavior will be maintained
despite the waveguide width’s change. The effective FOV is the overlap area of the
eight incident directions, which is an octagonal region in the center of the waveguide
with an area of around 2000 μm2. From the simulation, we conclude that a 10 mm
length tapering can bring single-mode behavior (more than 99%). As shorter wave-
length leads to stronger diffraction, the 405 and 532 nm wavelength light request
for shorter adiabatic tapering length than 780 nm light. After a lithography process,
a SU-8 photoresist layer is spin-coated on it, with a window region at the working
region. The SU-8 layer will protect the chip from propagation loss caused by scatter-
ing of the dust.
The imaging process includes the switching of three wavelengths, for example,
780, 532, and 405 nm, which correspond to fundamental TE modes with effective
refractive indexes of 1.78, 1.85, and 1.91 in the Si3N4 waveguide. For each wave-
length, we turn on each channel of the waveguide and collect the SFS raw images,
and finally reconstruct the super-resolution image using the method described in
Figure 6.4.
6.4.2
Labeled Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic
Waveguides
In conventional SIM and total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF)-SIM, the
same objective lens is used for excitation and collection. Therefore, a large FOV and
high resolution cannot be simultaneously obtained (see Figure 6.8a). Besides, the
commercial liquid immersion objective lens has a limited NA of ∼1.7, which restricts
the resolution of TIRF-SIM to around 80 nm [105]. The chip-based SIM (cSIM)
breaks this limitation by using a waveguide to generate standing evanescent-wave
interference pattern for SIM. The SFS is no longer limited by the objective lens but
rather depends on the effective refractive index of the waveguide (usually larger
than 2.0), and a larger FOV can be obtained by choosing a low-NA objective lens
(see Figure 6.8b).
To avoid the missing band in large-SFS imaging under evanescent illumination
of large wavevector, the shift value needs to be tuned broadly. Through wavevector
manipulation based on interfering two evanescent waves propagating along differ-
ent azimuthal directions, the superposed effective wavevector can be tuned broadly,
which is determined by the sine of the half-angle between the two propagation direc-
tions (Figure 6.9). The SFS of cSIM can be expressed as: ks = 2nf sin 𝜃
2∕𝜆ex, where 𝜆ex

6.4 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Photonic Waveguides
187
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.8
Conventional SIM and TIRF-SIM use the same objective lens for excitation and
collection (a), while chip-based SIM uses the photonic waveguide for excitation and any NA
objective for collection (b).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.9
Large and tunable SFS of STUN in the lateral dimension. (a) Schematic setup of
a STUN chip based on GaP decagon waveguide. The FOV is circled by a red dashed line.
(b, c) Examples of the interference patterns with different input ports on, showing the period
modulation and direction modulation, respectively. (d) The detected spatial-frequency
ranges in STUN. Different colors represent the detectable components with different input
ports on i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; 𝜆illu = 561 nm; 𝜆emis = 600 nm; neff = 3.38; NA = 0.9. Scale bars in
(b) and (c): 200 nm. Source: Reproduced with permission [93] Copy right 2021, Springer
Nature.

188
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
is the excitation wavelength, nf is the effective refractive index of the guided mode,
and 𝜃is the angle of interference. The effective refractive index of the guided mode is
usually a little less than the refractive index of the waveguide material. By using nat-
ural dielectric materials with a high refractive index, like Si3N4 (n = 2) [81, 92], Ta2O5
(n = 2.1), TiO2 (n = 2.6), SiC (n = 2.6), or even GaP (n = 3.4) [93, 97, 106], the reso-
lution of cSIM can be potentially reduced to ∼50 nm (e.g. TiO2 waveguide, NA = 1.7,
𝜆ex = 405 nm).
Helle et al. [81] reported a cSIM demonstration using Si3N4 waveguide (nf = 1.7).
They reported a 1.2 times resolution enhancement compared with TIRF-SIM, cor-
responding to a lateral resolution of 117 nm (NA = 1.2, 𝜆ex = 660 nm). To obtain uni-
form illumination over a large FOV, a single-mode waveguide is adiabatically tapered
[107, 108] to a wide waveguide (theoretically applies for waveguides with over sev-
eral mm2 areas). By integrating phase modulation (such as on-chip thermo-optical
modulation) [81], cSIM may have opened an avenue for high-throughput, large-scale
producible, and miniaturized super-resolution imaging.
Our group demonstrated the potential to achieve a resolution down to 65 nm using
GaP waveguide combined with a 0.9-NA objective [93]. Besides, we propose a 3D
super-resolution imaging method, called the SFS tunable nanoscopy (STUN), based
on photonic waveguide by using the SFS effect in the vertical dimension, as illus-
trated by Figure 6.10a. The vertical SF of the evanescent illumination covers a range
much wider than the vertical SF passband of the objective and is mixed with the
spatial frequencies of the object, which provides the basis to achieve the ultrahigh
resolution in the vertical dimension. Figure 6.10b shows the intensity distribution
of the evanescent wave on the GaP waveguide chip, and Figure 6.10c shows its SF
spectrum. The red dot line in Figure 6.10c represents the position of the axial cutoff
SF(0.56/𝜆) of a 0.9 NA objective. The ultrawide range of the SF spectrum shown in
Figure 6.10c infers that deep subwavelength vertical resolution is possible.
Consequently, the high-SF spectrum information in the vertical dimension of the
object has been shifted to the passband of the objective by the illumination. To extract
the high-SF information of the object, we introduce a sectional saturation effect.
The saturation effect is a nonlinear process, which can change the line shape of the
vertical intensity distribution of evanescent illumination. It is possible to saturate
the surficial fluorophores by increasing the input laser intensity, and in this saturated
region, the SF of the “effective illumination intensity distribution” is down-tuned, as
shown by the orange zone in Figure 6.10d. The high-SF region is moved away from
the surface, which is like a vertical scanning process to enable sectional imaging. The
“effective illumination intensity distribution” can be considered as the coefficients in
the equation set formed by tens of images captured at different saturation intensities,
and the unknown vertical spatial distribution within the penetration depth of the
evanescent wave can be solved [106].
This sectional method has compatibility with chip-based illumination, which is
difficult with the commonly used methods that require modulation of the incident
angle to the total internal reflection interface [109, 110]. Pulsed excitation with dura-
tions shorter than the lifetime of fluorophores can be utilized for the sectional satu-
ration effect, promising fast acquisition and low phototoxicity.

6.5 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
189
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Figure 6.10
Mechanism of the SFS tuning in vertical dimension based on sectional
saturation effect for super-resolution sectional imaging. (a) The schematic diagram. One
port is chosen for input. (b, c) The exponential intensity distribution of the evanescent wave
on a GaP chip and its spatial-frequency spectrum. The red dotted line represents the
position of the axial cutoff SF (∼0.56/𝜆) of the objective. (d) Emission intensities (or
effective illumination intensities) along the vertical dimension with the surﬁcial objects
saturated. Objective NA = 0.9. 𝜆illu. = 561 nm. 𝜆emis. = 600 nm. “SF” denotes “spatial
frequency.” Source: Reproduced with permission [93] Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.
6.5
Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
6.5.1
Principle of Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
Continued research in fields such as materials science and biomedicine requires the
development of a super-resolution imaging technique with a large FOV and deep
subwavelength resolution that is compatible with both fluorescent and nonfluores-
cent samples. Existing on-chip super-resolution methods focus exclusively on either
fluorescent or nonfluorescent imaging, and, as such, there is an urgent requirement
for a more general technique that is capable of both modes of imaging. To realize
labeled and label-free super-resolution imaging on a single scalable photonic chip,
Tang et al. [97] proposed a universal super-resolution imaging method based on the
tunable virtual-wavevector SFS (TVSFS) principle. Using this principle, imaging
resolution can be improved more than threefold over the diffraction limit of a linear
optical system. Here, diffractive units are fabricated on the chip’s surface to provide
wavevector-variable evanescent-wave illumination, enabling tunable SFSs in the
Fourier space. A large FOV and resolutions of 𝜆/4.7 and 𝜆/7.1 were achieved for

190
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
label-free and fluorescently labeled samples using a gallium phosphide (GaP) chip.
With its large FOV, compatibility with different imaging modes, and monolithic
integration, the proposed TVSFS chip may advance fields like cell engineering,
precision industry inspection, and chemical research.
For deep subwavelength imaging resolution, the magnitude of the illumination
wavevector should be large. However, when the SFS magnitude (ks, which equals the
magnitude of illumination wavevector divided by 2𝜋) is more than double the radius
of the maximal detection range of the collection objective in the frequency domain
(kc), a gap is observed in the Fourier space (top-right corner of Figure 6.11a), leading
to artifacts in the final image, and sometimes even causing image reconstruction to
fail [93]. This gap can be filled through wavevector tuning, using either wavelength
tuning for label-free imaging [79] or multi-angle tuning [81, 93] for labeled imaging.
To date, no tuning methods compatible with both labeled and label-free samples, or
capable of producing a tunable SFS vector with magnitude more than 2
𝜆for label-free
imaging and 4
𝜆for labeled imaging, have been reported. In this study, we develop a
deep wavevector tuning method (with SFS magnitude tuning range beyond the limit
of 2
𝜆for label-free imaging and 4
𝜆for labeled imaging) that is compatible with both
fluorescent and nonfluorescent super-resolution imaging.
The improved resolution obtained with the TVSFS method can be understood
by analyzing the Fourier space. The bottom of Figure 6.11b,c depicts the Fourier
space for label-free imaging and labeled imaging, respectively. The colored circles
represent spectra obtained using different SFS illuminations, while the circle at the
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.11
Physical scheme of chip-based TVSFS super-resolution imaging. (a) Schematic
illustration of chip-based TVSFS super-resolution imaging. Top right: gap in the Fourier
space obtained with high-refractive-index materials, explaining the necessity for multilevel
tuning for SFS imaging. kc and ks are the cutoff and SFS wavevectors. (b, c) Illustration of
TVSFS imaging in the Fourier space and the principle of SFS tunability. (d) Single-beam
illumination for label-free imaging. (e) Double-beam illumination for labeled imaging.

6.5 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
191
center (in solid lines) represents the spectrum of an image taken with conventional
microscopy. The latter spectrum contains only information from spatial frequencies
less than NA/𝜆em for label-free imaging, and 2NA/𝜆em for labeled imaging, where 𝜆em
is the wavelength of the emission light. To achieve isotropic and distortion-less deep
super-resolution imaging, the Fourier space needs to be enlarged and filled using
omnidirectional SFS tuning, performed with enough spectral overlap. From the
theoretical calculations, the spectral overlap between two successive illuminations
should exceed 25%. At least three successive SFSs are required to obtain a resolution
of 𝜆/4.7 for label-free imaging and 𝜆/7.1 for labeled imaging. For omnidirectional
label-free imaging, each SFS magnitude requires at least 16-directional illumination,
while 8-directional illumination is needed for omnidirectional labeled imaging.
On our chip, multilevel tuning is obtained using gratings with different periods
and orientations. As shown in Figure 6.11a, well-designed and period-tunable
subwavelength gratings are fabricated at predefined locations on the surface of the
chip. A sample region is defined on the other side of the chip, where illumination
from different directions overlaps. The lateral distance between the grating and
the sample region, r, should increase with the thickness of the chip substrate (T)
and the angle of the light deflected by the gratings (𝜃), since r = T ⋅tan(𝜃), as
shown in the coupling map in Figure 6.11b,c. The gratings on the chip’s surface
deflect the incident, propagating light, introducing evanescent waves with different
wavevectors illuminated on the sample region. The SFS magnitude of an evanescent
wave introduced by the gratings is defined as ks = nPC⋅sin 𝜃
𝜆ex
for label-free imaging and
ks = 2nPC⋅sin 𝜃
𝜆ex
for labeled imaging, where nPC is the refractive index of the photonic
chip and 𝜆ex is the wavelength of the excitation light. Hence, small SFS magnitudes
are obtained by the large-period gratings close to the center of the chip, which
can deflect the input light at a small angle. Conversely, for large SFS magnitudes,
the corresponding gratings have a small period and are located near the edge of
the chip. Sixteen gratings were designed for multi-angle directional illumination.
Hence, label-free and labeled subwavelength resolution imaging can be realized
using the same chip by switching between single-beam illumination (Figure 6.11d)
and double-beam illumination (Figure 6.11e). The process for reconstructing a
complete TVSFS image consists of combining spectra from different orientations,
from low SFS to high SFS. For label-free TVSFS imaging, plane wave evanescent
illumination with 3 SFS magnitudes and 16 rotational angles is made incident on
the sample. The coherent interaction between this illumination and the sample
generates a scattering pattern correlated to a specific part of the sample’s spectrum.
Label-free TVSFS imaging of a single frame requires acquisition of 49 images (one
acquisition for every SFS illumination and one for vertical illumination) of scattered
patterns. With labeled TVSFS imaging, two evanescent illumination beams meet
at the center of the top surface of the chip and interfere with each other to form
periodic structured light for illumination (Figure 6.11e). Illumination from eight
angles is enabled through fabrication of an array of gratings with differing orienta-
tions, while the phases of the interference arms are controlled such that three raw
images (three phases) are required for one SFS magnitude per rotational angle. The

192
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
number of SFS directions required for labeled imaging is halved compared to the
number needed for label-free imaging because the radius of the transfer function
for incoherent imaging is doubled to make overlapping easier.
For every frame acquired, the detected spatial spectrum can be described as:
Fd = Fo(⃗k −⃗ks) ⋅TF(⃗k)
(6.4)
where ⃗k = (kx, ky) represents the SF in the lateral plane, Fo(⃗k) is the Fourier spec-
trum of the object, and TF(⃗k) is the transfer function of the imaging system, which
is bound by the NA of the objective lens. ⃗ks represents the SFS vector used in acqui-
sition, and the magnitude can be expressed as:
ks = 1
p = 1
𝜆ex
nPC sin 𝜃= 1
𝜆ex
nPC
r
√
r2 + T2
(6.5)
for label-free imaging, and
ks = 2
p = 2
𝜆ex
nPC sin 𝜃= 2
𝜆ex
nPC
r
√
r2 + T2
(6.6)
for labeled imaging, where T is the thickness of the substrate, r is the lateral dis-
placement between the grating and the center of the chip, 𝜆ex is the wavelength of
the illumination source, and p is the period of the gratings. Here, the refractive index
of the substrate nPC changes with the wavelength of the incident light. The illumi-
nation wavevectors can be scaled by modifying the design parameters.
Imaging resolution is determined by both the maximal aperture of the system,
kc, and the SFS magnitude that is provided by the evanescent illumination module,
ks, as,
𝛥xy =
1
kc + ks
(6.7)
where kc is NA/𝜆em and 2NA/𝜆em for label-free and labeled imaging, respectively. For
label-free imaging, the illumination wavelength equals the imaging wavelength (i.e.
𝜆em = 𝜆ex).
Therefore, the theoretical resolution limit with TVSFS can be formulated as:
𝛥xy =
𝜆em
(NA + nPC ⋅sin 𝜃)
(6.8)
for label-free imaging, and
𝛥xy =
𝜆em
2
(
NA + nPC⋅sin 𝜃⋅𝜆em
𝜆ex
)
(6.9)
for labeled imaging. If the SFS magnitude is larger than kc, the resolution exceeds
that of conventional wide-field and SIM microscopy. Compared with conventional
FPM, which uses real wavevector for multi-SFSs, TVSFS exploits tunable virtual
wavevector for deep SFSs and can achieve a resolution three times better than the
Abbe diffraction limit.
The FOV of TVSFS is determined by the area of the evanescent wave, which is
regulated by the area of the fabricated gratings. In the present work, we obtained
40 μm × 40 μm gratings by etching with a focused ion beam (FIB), a size that can

6.5 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
193
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.12
Wafer-scale fabrication of a TVSFS super-resolution imaging chip.
(a) Schematic explanation of the wafer-scale chip-fabrication process. (b) Optical
microscopy image of the bottom surface of the chip. Insets: gratings with periods of 500 nm
(g1), 290 nm (g2), and 220 nm (g3), corresponding to the labels in the main ﬁgure. (c) Optical
microscopy image of the top surface of the chip. Inset: enlarged view of the sample region.
(d) Array of super-resolution imaging chips fabricated on a 2 in. GaP wafer.
be increased to greater than 100 μm × 100 μm in future attempts. As the illumina-
tion module and the collection objective are decoupled in the TVSFS method, a
low-NA objective lens can be combined with a large-wavevector illumination mod-
ule to simultaneously achieve a high resolution and a large FOV.
In this work, we created arrays of TVSFS chips on a 2-in. wafer using standard pho-
tolithography and lift-off processes. Background light suppression is the crucial step
in successful TVSFS imaging, as the coupling of light with the gratings introduces
stray reflections. To achieve this suppression, we developed a light-blocking chip,
fabricated using dual-surface lithography followed by metal deposition, as summa-
rized in Figure 6.12a. The bottom surface of the chip is for SF shifting, achieved with
the multilevel gratings, while the top surface is for imaging. All areas on the chip
surfaces other than the sample or grating regions are covered with metal to block
the background light. Besides blocking the stray light, the metal film also absorbs
the evanescent wave that incidents onto it. Therefore, the light that bounces back at
boundaries outside the FOV can be neglected, and we can get raw images with high
contrast. In addition to providing an unlimited FOV, the transparency of the GaP
substrate for visible wavelengths makes a dual-surface lithography process using a
standard lithography machine possible. We used FIB to fabricate the different grat-
ings at the predesigned positions. Optical images of the top and bottom surfaces of a
chip following fabrication are shown in Figure 6.12b,c. With this process, more than
100 chips can be fabricated in a batch and separated for use.

194
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
6.5.2
Label-free Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
To investigate the label-free imaging capability of our TVSFS chip, we simulated
multilevel tuning of the illumination wavevector. Here, a pattern of Zhejiang
University’s eagle logo, defined with a double-line profile with line-to-line distance
set at 215 nm, was selected as the imaging sample. The spatial distribution of this
pattern under multilevel wavevector illumination provided by a 660 nm source
is presented in Figure 6.13a. Here, ks1–ks3 represents SFS vectors with increasing
magnitudes (1.3k0, 2.3k0, and 3.1k0), and k0 =
1
𝜆ex is the magnitude of SFS vector
in free space. These SFS vectors were selected such that there was enough overlap
between them in the Fourier space to ensure good convergence during image recon-
struction. A conventionally acquired image of the eagle logo, obtained with vertical
illumination through a 0.85-NA objective, is shown in Figure 6.13b, while the image
in Figure 6.13g depicts a reconstruction covering the low-SFS, middle-SFS, and
Figure 6.13
Simulation of label-free TVSFS imaging. (a) Spatial domain representations of
different angles of the Fourier spectrum of a pattern of Zhejiang University’s eagle logo.
(b) Conventionally acquired wide-ﬁeld image containing only low-frequency information.
(c–g) TVSFS reconstruction with different parts of the Fourier spectrum. Scale bars:
(a): 2 μm; (b–g) 1 μm.

6.5 Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
195
high-SFS spectrum bands. Only the latter image reproduces the double-line details,
highlighting the improved resolution obtained with multilevel tuning. In contrast,
omitting parts of the spectrum, i.e. without multilevel tuning, results in images
with poorer resolution (Figure 6.13c,d), or false reconstruction of the actual sample
(Figure 6.13e,f).
To confirm this behavior, we conducted practical experiments recreating the
simulations, using the same parameters for comparison. The eagle logo was etched
on the surface of a GaP wafer using FIB, as shown in an SEM image in Figure 6.14b.
We used a 660-nm-wavelength laser diode for illumination. Diode excitation was
modulated using a sawtooth wave, and the resulting laser beam was spatially filtered
to suppress speckle noise and improve the SNR of the raw images. Experimentally
acquired images (Figure 6.14a) matched well with those obtained in simulations
(Figure 6.13a). The minor mismatches between experimental and simulated images
can be explained by fabrication defects, since the uniformity of grating fabrication
and the refractive index of the photonic substrate are crucial for obtaining a perfect
raw image. The final high-resolution image of the sample (Figure 6.14d) was
obtained using our spatial spectrum-splicing algorithm (see Figure 6.4). A 4.5×
resolution enhancement relative to the resolution of images acquired directly with
wide-field illumination can be observed with the label-free TVSFS images (see the
Fourier spectra at the bottom-right corner of Figure 6.14b–d). There is an excellent
match between the line profiles of the SEM and TVSFS images (Figure 6.14f),
validating our method. The image of missing spectrum band SFS (MB-SFS) presents
false reconstruction and inferior match with the SEM image (Figure 6.14e,f). Image
resolution can be increased further using a shorter wavelength. This is demonstrated
in Figure 6.15, which depicts a sample etched with four lines imaged with 561 nm
illumination, such that resolution of lengths as small as 120 nm were achieved.
6.5.3
Labeled Super-resolution Imaging Based on Wafers
Unlike label-free imaging where uniform evanescent waves provide coherent
illumination, labeled fluorescent imaging requires periodic patterns formed by
the interference between two counter-propagating evanescent waves [111]. The
counter-propagating evanescent waves used in our experiments were obtained
by stimulating grating couples. Both beams were TE-polarized, corresponding
to the orientation of the gratings, to enhance the contrast of the interference
pattern, which determines the resolution of the final reconstructed image. SFS
magnitude is adjusted by changing the grating period. The photonic chips were
fabricated with an empty sample region and three periods of gratings. Each period
has eight gratings with equally distributed azimuthal angles. The gratings were
distributed at predefined positions to ensure that light with SFS magnitudes of
1.8k0, 3.2k0, and 4.8k0 overlapped in the sample region. The SFS magnitudes were
designed to ensure enough spectrum overlap between the adjacent shift values. A
1.1-NA water-immersion objective lens was used to collect the raw TVSFS images.
Light-splitting and phase-shifting (three phases per orientation per SFS magnitude)
between the two light paths were achieved by controlling the laser beam using

196
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
Figure 6.14
On-chip label-free TVSFS imaging of etched “ZJU” eagle logo. (a) Raw,
label-free TVSFS images acquired from eight different directions using three wavevectors of
varying magnitude. Colors indicate the magnitude of the wavevector used for image
acquisition (ks1, ks2, and ks3 indicate SFS magnitudes of 1.3k0, 2.3k0, 3.1k0, respectively).
(b–e) Images of the eagle logo taken using (b) SEM, (c) conventional wide-ﬁeld microscopy
under vertical illumination, (d) label-free TVSFS imaging, and (e) label-free MB-SFS. Insets
in the bottom-right corner of these ﬁgures correspond to the Fourier spectra of the acquired
images. (f) Line proﬁles of the region indicated by the dashed line in (b–e). The intensity
proﬁles of the SEM and wide-ﬁeld images were inverted for better correspondence to the
dark-ﬁeld TVSFS image. Details of the etched lines that are not resolved in the wide-ﬁeld
image (green line) and MB-SFS image (gray line) are clearly resolved in the TVSFS image
(red line). The line proﬁle of the latter image matches well with that of the SEM image
(magenta line). Scale bars: (a): 2 μm; (b–e) 1 μm.
a spatial light modulator (SLM). For isotropic resolution, the SLM pattern has to
be rotated to have four equally spaced orientations. For higher resolutions, the
distance between the two beams should be adjusted to fit the gratings with smaller
periods (distributed at the margin of the photonic chip).
To demonstrate labeled TVSFS imaging, we conducted experiments using
fluorescent 40-nm beads. Samples were illuminated by periodic patterns with
varying fringe spacings and reconstructed sequentially to incorporate higher SFS
magnitudes. Conventionally acquired images of the fluorescent beads are shown

6.6 Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
197
Figure 6.15
Resolution calibration of TVSFS label-free imaging using the 561 nm laser
and 1.49-NA objective. (a–c) The images of a four-line slits taken under wide ﬁeld, TVSFS
label-free, and SEM, respectively. The four-line slits were fabricated using FIB and have a
120-nm center-to-center distance. (d) The line comparison between (b) and (c) shows a
good correspondence between TVSFS label-free and SEM, which could not be achieved by
the wide ﬁeld.
in Figure 6.16a, whereas Figure 6.16b–d depicts reconstructed images. The line
profiles (Figure 6.16e) from the regions marked with the white dashed lines in
Figure 6.16a–d illustrate how resolution improves as larger wavevectors are consid-
ered. Finer details can be observed clearly in the TVSFS reconstruction in a region
that appears as a single feature in the diffraction-limited image (Figure 6.16a). The
intensity profiles indicate that image contrast is improved when the SFS magnitude
increases from 1.8k0 to 3.2k0, and individual beads can be resolved when the SFS
magnitude reaches 4.8k0. Based on the line profile in Figure 6.16e, the two beads in
Figure 6.16e are separated by 93 nm.
6.6
Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs
and Metamaterials
To further increase the resolution, illumination with higher SF is needed. High-
refractive-index dielectric materials have demonstrated a successful choice to

198
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.16
Resolving ﬂuorescent beads with labeled TVSFS imaging. (a) Diffraction-
limited image of a sample of ﬂuorescent 40 nm beads. (b–d) TVSFS reconstruction of the
images using the TVSFS method with maximum SFS magnitudes of 1.8k0, 3.2k0, and 4.8k0.
Insets in the bottom left corners of these ﬁgures show the corresponding Fourier spectra.
(e) Line proﬁles of the region indicated by the white line in (a–d). Two beads located 93 nm
apart are resolved individually in the labeled TVSFS image with a maximum SFS magnitude
of 4.8k0 but not in the diffraction-limited image. All images were obtained with
excitation/emission wavelengths of 639 nm/661 nm.
enhance the resolution by generating evanescent-waves illumination in SFS
microscopy, as aforementioned. Plasmonic material is another excellent candidate
to form excitation illumination with a large SF, i.e. the SPPs and LPs. SPPs and LPs
are demonstrated electromagnetic oscillations generated by collective oscillations
of electrons in resonance with a light wave at a conductor/dielectric interface
[112, 113]. Once excited, SPPs and LPs can be confined to a deep subwavelength
scale, leading to a remarkable enhancement of the local field and allowing the
manipulation of light far below the diffraction limit [114]. They are attractive for
wide-ranging applications, including subwavelength imaging [115–117], sensing
[118–128], subwavelength waveguides [129–133], plasmonic lithography [134–136],
photovoltaics [137–140], optical tweezers [141–146], and optical analog computing
[147–150].
SPPs were employed in superlens experiments for SFS-based super-resolution
microscopy as early as 2007 [151, 152]. In the near-field superlens, the large-
wavevector evanescent waves of the sample are resonantly enhanced by the
plasmonic superlens slab, thereby generating a super-resolution image on the
other side [153]. To bring the near-field information into the propagating far-field
regime, the far-field superlens was designed with a sub-wavelength grating on top
to downshift the spatial spectrum of the sample [151, 152]. Plasmonic waves could
also be applied in FPM to provide a better resolution [52]. In this work, SPPs are
excited by Kretschmann setup using a 1.4 NA objective, and 2D super-resolution
imaging is realized (sample: grating structure with 240-nm period width) under
640-nm-wavelength light illumination (0.61𝜆/NA = 279 nm). Recently, methods
using patterned surface plasmons to illuminate the samples have been theoreti-
cally proposed and experimentally demonstrated, like PSIM [56, 82] and LPSIM

6.6 Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
199
[85, 154]. The principle, as well as detailed experimental implements of PSIM and
LPSIM, has been discussed in a book edited by Zhaowei Liu [155]. These methods,
combined with fluorescent imaging, demonstrate the biocompatibility and will find
applications in future research in biomedical study.
6.6.1
SPP-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
Sharing a similar mechanism with SIM, PSIM uses surface plasmon interference
(SPI) [156] instead of conventional laser interference to illuminate the sample.
Generally, PSIM has a better resolution compared with SIM due to the much
smaller period of SPI, which can bring a higher SFS in the SF space. The SFS ks of
PSIM is determined by kspp, which can be tuned by the permittivity of metal and the
surrounding dielectric at a specific illumination wavelength. For a metal/dielectric
interface, the dispersion relationship of SPPs can be described as:
|kspp| = |k0|
√𝜀m𝜀d
𝜀m + 𝜀d
(6.10)
where |kspp| and |k0| represent wavevectors of SPPs and free-space light propagating
in vacuum, and 𝜀m and 𝜀d are the permittivity of metal and dielectric. A compar-
ison of the typical dispersion curves of the SPPs and photons in air and dielectric
materials, as plotted in Figure 6.17, shows that kspp is always greater than k0 and
can be extremely large at the surface plasmon resonant frequency 𝜔sp. Thus, this
large wavevector of SPPs can provide a more substantial SFS and a higher resolu-
tion compared with conventional SIM and evanescent field- illuminated SIM. For
insulator–metal–insulator (IMI), the coupling of propagating modes on different
interfaces will split the dispersion relationship of SPPs into odd modes and even
modes as the metal thickness decreases to tens of nanometers [157, 158]. It is worth
noting that the |kspp| of even modes will increase inversely with the metal thickness,
which is advantageous for super-resolution imaging applications. Different modes
can be excited individually or simultaneously to form large-wavevector interference
patterns that can be used in PSIM.
To launch SPPs, the momentum mismatch between excitation photons and
plasmons should be compensated. Existing SPP excitation methods include prism
coupling, grating coupling, edge/slit coupling, objective coupling, and near-field
excitation [112]. Among these methods, grating coupling [159], edge/slit coupling
[82], and objective coupling excitation [98, 160, 161] are mostly used in PSIM
configuration for their convenience in implementation and possibility of generating
regular SPP interference patterns, which are superior to irregular ones in terms of
resolution and signal-to-noise improvement in the imaging [111].
The Implementation of PSIM requires illumination patterns to be tuned with mul-
tiple directions and multiple phase shifts. Although the coupling structure geometry
is fixed, the SPI direction can be tuned by the illumination polarization since the
SPP-coupling efficiency for polarization perpendicular to the coupling structure is
more significant than that parallel to the coupling structure [162]. To realize the
multiple phase shifts in the SPI, controlling the optical delay in individual excitation

200
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
Figure 6.17
Concept of resolution enhancement by structured illumination. Resolution
improvement representation in SF space of SIM, evanescent-ﬁelds-illuminated SIM, and
PSIM. Typical dispersion curves of SPPs on a thick-metal-ﬁlm/dielectric interface (pink
curve) and a dielectric/thin-metal-ﬁlm/dielectric interface (orange curve). The SPP of
dielectric/thin-metal-ﬁlm/dielectric interface splits into the odd mode and even mode
when the thickness of the metal decreases to around 50 nm. The pink circle corresponds to
the spatial information within the passband of conventional microscopy with kc
representing its cutoff wavevector. The maximum resolution in conventional SIM, as
deﬁned by the sum of the cutoff frequency kc and the spatial-frequency shift kair, is
approximately twice that of wide-ﬁeld imaging (the red line represents the dispersion curve
of photons in the air). The evanescent-ﬁelds -illuminated SIM, either TIRF-SIM or cSIM, has
a spatial-frequency shift deﬁned by the kdi, exceeding that of conventional SIM (the green
line represents the dispersion curve of photons in dielectric materials). The wavevector of
SPPs is nonlinear with photon energy. Thus, it is possible to recover information from an
area more than twice the size of the normally observable region using PSIM. kair, kdi, ksp,
and kev represent the spatial-frequency shift obtained in air, dielectric material,
single-interface SPPs, and even-mode SPPs. 𝜔sp is the surface plasmon frequency.
beams [159] and controlling optical vortices with topological charges for objective
coupling [160] are possible solutions. For edge/slit excitation with multiple periods
on the order of micrometers, it is more practical to adjust the angle of incident light to
introduce a phase difference 𝜙(𝜃) between two adjacent edges/slits. This angle vari-
ance could translate to a phase difference in the excited SPP waves and thus lateral
shift of the interference patterns.
6.6.1.1
Metal–Dielectric Multilayer Metasubstrate PSIM
The substrate of PSIM is mainly composed of metal/dielectric multilayer films.
In 2012, Wang et al. [159] first experimentally demonstrated the super-resolution
imaging of nanoparticles using plasmonic standing waves. A 2D PSF full width at

6.6 Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
201
Figure 6.18
Demonstration of resolution improvement in PSIM and LPSIM. (a) Schematic
of the PSIM. Green patterns on the top of the substrate are near-ﬁeld intensity patterns on
an object plane generated by p-polarized laser beams in two orthogonal directions.
(b) Conventional ﬂuorescence image. (c) Reconstructed PSIM image. Fourier spectra are
shown in the top-left corner of (b, c), respectively. The yellow dashed circles in (b) and (c)
indicate the optical transfer function (OTF) of the conventional microscope system and that
of the PSIM system. Source: Reproduced with permission [82], © 2014, American Chemical
Society. (d) Schematic of the LPSIM. Generated near-ﬁeld intensity patterns on an object
plane created by TM-polarized laser beam incident on the 60 nm hexagonal silver disc array
on the sapphire substrate at angles of −60∘, 0∘, and 60∘, along one of the three symmetry
axes. (e) Diffraction-limited image of green microtubules. (f) Corresponding LPSIM image of
(e) with signiﬁcantly improved resolution. Fourier spectra are shown in the bottom-left
corner of (e, f), respectively. Source: Reproduced with permission [86], © 2018, American
Chemical Society.
half maximum (FWHM) of 172 nm was demonstrated with fluorescence centered
at 645 nm under a 1.42 NA objective lens. In 2014, Wei et al. [82] completed another
demonstration of PSIM using a silver film with a thickness of 250 nm and periodic
slit array spaced by 7.6 μm to launch counter-propagating SPPs. The propagating
SPPs form interference patterns and excite the fluorescence beads with diameters of
100 nm distributing randomly on the silver film surface. Six images with different
illumination polarization and angles were recorded and spliced in the SF space to
form a large Fourier domain. The FWHM of a single 100-nm-diameter fluorescent
bead decreases from 327 to 123 nm after SFS processing, yielding a ∼2.6-fold
resolution improvement (Figure 6.18a–c).
Further efforts have been devoted to improving the resolution of PSIM with more
complex substrates, e.g. the metal–dielectric multilayer. Modes in a metal–dielectric
multilayer can be represented by the linear combination of individual surface modes.
Thus, as the number of metal films increases, the maximum of the modal index
will increase accordingly [163]. The usage of metal–dielectric multilayer to launch

202
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
deep-subwavelength patterns can be applied in photolithography [164]. Similarly,
the metal–dielectric multilayers can also be adopted in PSIM for the generation of
large wavevector |kspp|.
However, the energy transmission rate is limited due to the significant loss
of multilayered metal films. To overcome this problem, Yu and coworkers [165]
proposed a six-layer structure (with 1 μm2 cross-section area) consisting of
Ag–Al2O3–Ag–SiO2–Ag–H2O to decrease the number of metal films. FDTD simu-
lation and theoretical calculation demonstrated an interference SPP pattern with a
period of 84 nm could be generated at the surface of the substrate. The postprocess-
ing includes illumination with different incident angles and polarization controls.
Finally, the image of a 10-nm-diameter quantum dot was reconstructed as a spot
with FWHM of 41 nm, which translates to a 5.3-fold improvement compared with
conventional epi-fluorescence microscopy. Different from this work, in ref. [166],
the symmetrical coupling of two short-range SPP modes in the dielectric film is
used, therefore generating SPPs with ultralarge wavevector. The simulation shows
the proposed Ag/Al2O3/Ag/H2O multilayer films could have a high resolution
of 16 nm when applied in PSIM, which is 13.6-fold compared with conventional
epi-fluorescent microscopy. The multilayer structure also has excellent tunability
for SPPs by varying the thickness and permittivity of dielectrics.
6.6.1.2
Graphene-assisted PSIM
Graphene has been widely investigated for its several unique properties, such as
ultrahigh carrier mobility and excellent tunability in conductivity [167–174]. Sim-
ilar to noble metals supporting collective free electron oscillations, the electrons
in doped graphene can also respond to the electromagnetic field resonantly, lead-
ing to graphene plasmons (GPs). Compared with the metal case, the energy loss of
the tightly confined GPs is lower, and the propagation length is about a few dozens
of wavelengths in the excited mode. Most importantly, the propagation length and
the effective refractive index can be dynamically tuned by adjustment of the chem-
ical potential of graphene through applying temperature field [175], magnetic field
[176], or electrical field [172]. Thanks to these inherent properties, research on GPs
has made remarkable progress [177, 178] and found comprehensive applications
in transformation optics [179, 180], nanoimaging [84, 181–183], and tunable meta-
materials [175, 184, 185]. Besides, the developments on up-conversion fluorescent
nanoparticles that converse near-infrared (NIR) light to visible wavelengths [186,
187] have made it easier to facilitate visible super-resolution imaging using GPs
in the NIR range. Graphene can be combined with designed substrates to realize
ultrahigh-resolution PSIM.
For the graphene layer, the surface conductivity 𝜎g can be calculated:
𝜎g =
ie2kBT
𝜋2(𝜔+ i∕𝜏)
( 𝜇c
kBT + 2 ln
(
e
−𝜇c
kBT + 1
))
+ ie2
4𝜋 ln ||||
2𝜇c −(𝜔+ i∕𝜏)
2𝜇c + (𝜔+ i∕𝜏)
||||
(6.11)
where e represents electron charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the Kelvin
temperature, ℏis the reduced Planck constant, 𝜔is the radian frequency, 𝜇c is the
chemical potential, and 𝜏is the electron–phonon relaxation time, respectively. The

6.6 Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
203
relative permittivity 𝜀g can be represented as:
𝜀g = 1 + i
𝜎g
𝜀0𝜔Δ
(6.12)
where 𝜀0 is the permittivity of vacuum and Δ denotes the graphene thickness.
From Eqs. (6.11) and (6.12), the permittivity of graphene depends on the chemical
potential, which can be externally tuned by the bias voltage, thus leading to
wavevector-tunable GPs.
The graphene-assisted PSIM was first proposed by Zubairy and coworkers [84].
In their scheme, GPs were launched by the grating on a dielectric-monolayer
graphene-dielectric substrate, and a wavevector of 45.7k0 was obtained. By opti-
mizing parameters like the Fermi energy, wavelength of the incident light, and
permittivity of the dielectrics, they obtained a 10-nm resolution compared with
conventional microscopy.
To further increase the resolution and make it suitable for practical application,
another scheme termed as hybrid graphene on metasurface structure (GMS) was
proposed [182]. The physical mechanism of GMS is based on localized surface
plasmon enhancement and GPs. The GMS structure consists of a single layer
of graphene deposited on a SiO2/Ag/SiO2 multilayer. The 10-nm-thick silver
film enables a highly localized SPP as the excitation source for GPs lying above.
Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation finds that standing-wave GPs
with a period of 11 nm can be achieved on graphene for 980-nm-wavelength
excitation light, and the resolution could theoretically reach 6 nm.
6.6.2
Localized Plasmon-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
Different from PSIM, which uses propagating SPPs, the LPSIM uses patterned LPs to
illuminate the sample (Figure 6.18d) [85, 86, 99, 154, 188]. The illumination patterns
are generated by an array of localized plasmon antennae fabricated by electron-beam
lithography. Different from SIM or PSIM, whose SFS is limited by the free-space
or propagating SPP dispersion relations, the period of the structured illumination
patterns in LPSIM is only limited by the antenna-size geometry, thus an arbitrary
SFS in the Fourier space could be obtained. Suppose the pitch of the antenna array
is p, then the SFS ks can be described as: ks = 2𝜋/p.
In 2017, Ponsetto et al. [85] first experimentally confirmed the super-resolution
ability of LPSIM. The chip is made of silver nanodiscs hexagonally distributed
on silica or sapphire substrates. A thin protective layer covered on the silver
nanodiscs was used to protect the silver from oxidation and separate the silver
from the biological samples, while the thickness was small enough to keep the
sample in the range of the evanescent plasmonic field. The size and pitch of
nanodiscs were optimized through simulation. In the experiment, the antenna
has a diameter of 60 nm and a pitch of 150 nm. They used this chip to image
fluorescent polystyrene beads (emission wavelength of 500 nm) and achieved a
resolution of 74 nm (𝜆/(5.6NA)). The collected images are far-field fluorescent
emission modulated by the localized plasmon-generated near-field patterns. To

204
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
reconstruct the final image, the near-field illuminating patterns should be varied
by changing the incident angle. Also, to excite the LPs in the desired direction, the
polarization of the incident light should be controlled correspondingly. In 2018,
Bezryadina et al. [86] demonstrated a wide-field LPSIM with 50 nm (𝜆/(6NA))
spatial resolution at video-rate speed (30–40 Hz) with comparatively low light
intensity (100–150 W cm−2). The 60-nm-diameter silver discs with 125 nm pitches
were used to achieve the best resolution. The microtubules stained with green
fluorescence were imaged in transmission mode with a 100 × 1.65 NA high-index
oil immersion objective, demonstrating the compatibility with live-cell imaging
(Figure 6.18e,f). To further improve the resolution, the LPSIM could be combined
with the SF-compression method. Bezryadina et al. [188] employed optical tweezers
to control the microsphere lens on top of the LPSIM substrate with fluorescent
objects and obtained a resolution of 57 nm (𝜆/10) with a low NA objective lens.
The LPSIM can provide a large shift in the SF space by using nanoantenna
arrays and further decreasing the pitch. However, when the pitch is smaller than
𝜆
2NA, a missing gap will appear in the SF space, which leads to distortion in the
final reconstructed image. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the blind-SIM
algorithm is superior to the standard SIM algorithm in the case of information
missing in SF space [99]; however, an oversampling should be sacrificed. The
blind-SIM algorithm reconstructs the super-resolution image in the real space using
a cost-minimization approach. With more information provided, the resolution of
the reconstructed image will be better. Nevertheless, it is still hard to achieve the
theoretical resolution beyond 𝜆/(6NA). In the experiment, they used 27 sub-images
in six directions to obtain an imaging resolution of 81 nm (𝜆/(5.8NA)), while the
theoretical resolution is 52 nm using an array pitch of 135 nm with a collecting
objective lens of 1.2 NA. Further, the missing SF could also be filled by designing
quasi-periodic structures, each excited by a different illumination wavelength.
Compared with PSIM, the SFS of LPSIM is independent of the wavelength and
permittivity character. However, to improve the SNR and the imaging speed, the
wavelength and permittivity should be carefully chosen to ensure resonant plas-
monic enhancement. The illumination of LPSIM is a paralleled point scanning using
nanoantenna fields, separating the illumination and detection lens; thus, a large SFS
imaging with a large FOV could be obtained at high speeds. The limit of the LPSIM
is large-scale fabrication, the imperfection of which will bring wrong sampling and
generate a distorted image. Similar to other near-field illumination super-resolution
imaging methods, LPSIM can only detect sample structures with a thickness within
the depth of the evanescent waves. From another point of view, the sectioning ability
will bring a better imaging contrast by cutting off the out-of-focus noise.
6.6.3
Metamaterial-assisted Illumination Nanoscopy
To further improve the resolution, researchers turn to multilayer metamaterials,
which support ultrahigh-SF waves [189]. Hyperbolic metamaterials (HMMs) are
the most widely used examples and, benefiting from their anisotropic hyperbolic
isofrequency curve, are capable of carrying much higher SF contents than most

6.6 Super-resolution Imaging Based on SPPs and Metamaterials
205
–10
–10
–5
–5
0
0
kx/k0
kz/k0
5
10
5
(a)
(b)
Objective
Object
HMM
coating
Glass substrate
z y
x
Speckle pattern
10
Air
HMM (EMT)
HMM (Bloch)
E (θ, λ)
polarization
Figure 6.19
(a) A HMM-coated substrate projects ultraﬁne structured speckles onto
objects lying on its top surface. (b) An isofrequency curve of air, an ideal HMM by effective
medium theory (EMT), and a practical HMM consist of periodical layered structures of Ag
and SiO2 (Bloch) at wavelength of 488 nm. Both the wavevectors kx and kz are normalized
to the wavevector in air k0. The allowed k-bandwidth is highlighted in gray (air) and in
orange (practical HMM).
materials that can be found in nature. The ideal HMM has an unlimited k-space,
while a practical HMM has a k-space limitation from its layer periodicity, as shown
in Figure 6.19b. For example, a practically achievable Ag/SiO2 multilayer with a
period of 20 nm can support a highest k mode of around 10k0 working at 488 nm
wavelength.
Zhaowei Liu’s group reported the speckle metamaterial-assisted illumination
nanoscopy (speckle-MAIN) [88], which uses the Ag–SiO2 multilayer HMM to
generate speckle-like sub-diffraction-limit illumination patterns in the near-field
with improved SF. Such patterns, similar to traditional SIM, are then used to excite
objects on top of the surface. The HMM, fabricated by sputtering deposition method,
consists of three pairs of Ag and SiO2 layers. To convert the incident plane wave to
high-k vector waves and generate ultrahigh-resolution speckle on the top surface,
they took advantage of intrinsic surface scattering as well as volumetric scattering
caused by nonperfect multilayers. To have enough distinguishable speckles, they
illuminated the HMM with a random, diffraction-limited optical field generated
by either a diffuser or a multimode fiber. The complex fields (diffraction-limited
speckles), equal to a composite of plane waves at different angles and phases, will be
converted into sub-diffraction-limited speckles after passing through the HMM and
excite the fluorophores in a specimen. The fluorescence images excited by different
speckle patterns are then directly collected by a standard inverted microscope
system (Figure 6.19a). Finally, blind-SIM algorithm was adopted, with the consider-
ation of a statistical prior that the averaged speckle illuminations are homogeneous,
to reconstruct the final super-resolution image, similar to but with better resolution
than speckle-SIM [190]. They have demonstrated that speckle-MAIN can bring the
resolution down to 40 nm by imaging different samples, such as fluorescent beads,
quantum dots, and Cos-7 cells.

206
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
To achieve a higher resolution, larger wavevector should be provided, which is
restricted by the limited unit cell size of HMM. Natural hyperbolic materials such
as Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and GaTe could circumvent some of the limitations but were also
limited by the large loss. Zhaowei Liu’s group proposed a low-loss organic hyperbolic
material (OHM) to support remarkably high-k optical modes in the visible frequency
[87]. The fabricated OHM has a periodicity of 1.6 nm, the hyperbolic dispersion of
which supports a frequency kcutoff = 54k0 at 𝜆= 465 nm, and they demonstrated
the OHM-based SIM method with 30 nm resolution capability. Compared to their
inorganic counterparts, the OHMs not only provide better deep-SFS illuminating
field in visible spectral range but also offer many advantages, such as enhanced pho-
tostability of fluorophores near the OHM, easy fabrication process, and excellent
biocompatibility for bioimaging applications.
6.7
Summary and Outlook
Just a few years after the first implementation, super-resolution techniques are
transforming our understanding of optical physics along with the microscopic biol-
ogy world. Ongoing developments suggest that an impressive diversity of biological
and medical questions could be answered using optical nanoscopy. As complemen-
tary techniques to existing far-field nanoscopy like STED and STORM, evanescent
wave-assisted super-resolution methods have shown us their power in resolution,
imaging speed, and FOV. Compared with conventional imaging methods used for
the detection of subwavelength details that rely on relatively sophisticated, cum-
bersome, and expensive microscopy systems, chip-based super-resolution methods
provide new avenues toward cost-effective and easy-to-use super-resolution imag-
ing. The single photonic chip can be integrated with a small optical collection
system (such as a smartphone with a camera), to function as a light-weighted
super-resolution imaging system. Besides, super-resolution methods based on
large-wavevector electromagnetic evanescent waves put less requirement on
special fluorescent dyes and will find wide applications in biology, medicine, and
semiconductor industry.
Resolution and imaging quality are the priorities of a super-resolution system. For
surface wave-based super-resolution methods, the key to improving the resolution
and image quality is finding new materials with high refractive index and low
optical loss. Metamaterials fill in the gaps by providing the ability to generate
large-wavevector evanescent waves or collect evanescent waves efficiently. The real-
ization of a theoretically perfect super-resolution device is possible with judicious
design processes. However, the limits in fabrication accuracy and throughput of
current technologies, e.g. electron beam lithography [191] and FIBs [192], should be
further enhanced to meet the ever-increasing demand for precision and large-scale
fabrication [193].
The resolution of the SFS method is closely related to two parameters: the max-
imum lateral wavevector magnitude of the illumination and the SNR of collected

6.7 Summary and Outlook
207
raw images. Similar to other super-resolution methods like STORM, the ultimate
resolution of the SFS method is only limited to the SNR of the images we can
acquire.
Practically, the high-SFS signal for normal samples is much weaker than that
of low-SFS, and the quality of collected raw images will be affected by the photon
noise. A lower photon number will cause an unsmooth connection in the Fourier
space and for both labeled and label-free imaging. The input power of the illumi-
nation could be increased to achieve a better SNR, which may bring the problem of
camera saturation to the low-SFS raw images. Therefore, for low-SFS and high-SFS,
the illumination intensity should be adjusted and the spectrum signal rescaled
accordingly in the final spectrum-splicing process. Another concern regarding
the method is that, although resolution can be improved by increasing the lateral
illumination wavevector, the resultant shallower field penetration depth would
limit the capability for volumetric imaging. Thus, the resolution and imaging depth
need to be optimized together, according to the specific application. From another
perspective, the shallow illumination depth also brings the advantage of reduced
defocus noise, making the SFS method suitable for imaging structures located near
the chip surface, for example, the cell membrane.
The SFS super-resolution technique can be improved further in a number of
ways. Firstly, the number of SFS magnitudes required for good image reconstruc-
tion can be reduced with the adoption of better reconstruction methods, such as
deep-learning techniques [194–196], thus decreasing the number of raw images to
be captured. This consequently reduces the cost of chip fabrication and increases the
speed of imaging. Secondly, the errors in the necessarily imperfect geometries of the
waveguide (in different situations, we all use waveguide to transmit the evanescent
wave for illumination) may cause two effects: the nonuniformity of the illumination
intensity and the introduction of impure wavevectors, which will reduce the
resolution and introduce artifacts using the conventional reconstruction algorithm.
However, these effects on the image can be relieved by using pattern-estimation
reconstruction methods, such as blind-SIM [190]. Thirdly, advanced fabrication
techniques may also improve the performance of the SFS super-resolution chips.
With minor design changes, an on-chip evanescent light source can be imple-
mented on the device to replace the off-chip light source. Commercial LEDs or
vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) chips [197] can be bonded to the
photonic chip, thereby providing cheap, mass-producible, microscope-compatible
super-resolution imaging. Finally, the chip-based super-resolution imaging method
will give full play to its superiority if combined with integrated technologies.
For example, a field-portable super-resolution imaging device can be obtained if
we can develop a lightweight and compact optomechanical adaptor to make the
super-resolution chip adapt to the existing camera module of a cell phone [198].
In the future, these SFS super-resolution chips may serve as a multifunctional
platform on which many functions (e.g. electrical stimulation, microfluidics, and
sensing) can be integrated for application in fields such as the medical point of care
(POC) [199, 200], biology, materials science, and chemical research.

208
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
References
1 Abbe, E. (1873). Arch. Mikrosk. Anat. 9: 413.
2 von Helmholtz, H. (1874). Ann. Phys. 557.
3 Minsky, M. (1961). Microscopy apparatus. US Patent 3,013,467, filed 7 Novem-
ber 1957 and issued 19 December 1961.
4 Brakenhoff, G.J., Vandervoort, H.T.M., Vanspronsen, E.A. et al. (1985). Nature
317: 748.
5 Sheppard, C.J.R., Mehta, S.B., and Heintzmann, R. (2013). Opt. Lett. 38: 2889.
6 Pawley, J. (2010). Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy. New York:
Springer Science & Business Media.
7 Sahl, S.J., Hell, S.W., and Jakobs, S. (2017). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18: 685.
8 Hell, S.W. and Wichmann, J. (1994). Opt. Lett. 19: 780.
9 Willig, K.I., Harke, B., Medda, R., and Hell, S.W. (2007). Nat. Methods 4: 915.
10 Klar, T.A. and Hell, S.W. (1999). Opt. Lett. 24: 954.
11 Willig, K.I., Rizzoli, S.O., Westphal, V. et al. (2006). Nature 440: 935.
12 Hofmann, M., Eggeling, C., Jakobs, S., and Hell, S.W. (2005). Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 102: 17565.
13 Waeldchen, S., Lehmann, J., Klein, T. et al. (2015). Sci. Rep. 5: 15348.
14 Laissue, P.P., Alghamdi, R.A., Tomancak, P. et al. (2017). Nat. Methods 14: 657.
15 Hell, S.W. and Kroug, M. (1995). Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 60: 495.
16 Donnert, G., Keller, J., Medda, R. et al. (2006). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103:
11440.
17 Heintzmann, R., Jovin, T.M., and Cremer, C. (2002). J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
19: 1599.
18 Enderlein, J. (2005). Appl. Phys. Lett. 87: 097105.
19 Rust, M.J., Bates, M., and Zhuang, X. (2006). Nat. Methods 3: 793.
20 Jones, S.A., Shim, S.-H., He, J., and Zhuang, X. (2011). Nat. Methods 8: 499.
21 Betzig, E., Patterson, G.H., Sougrat, R. et al. (2006). Science 313: 1642.
22 Hess, S.T., Girirajan, T.P., and Mason, M.D. (2006). Biophys. J. 91: 4258.
23 Han, Y., Lu, X., Zhang, Z. et al. (2019). Opt. Exp. 27: 38337.
24 Han, Y., Zhang, Z., Liu, W. et al. (2021). Front. Chem. 8: 601436.
25 Han, Y., Li, M., Zhang, M. et al. (2019). J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 94: 2040.
26 Masters, B.R. (2015). Super-Resolution Microscopy Techniques in the Neuro-
sciences. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
27 Kim, E., Baaske, M.D., Schuldes, I. et al. (2017). Sci. Adv. 3: 8.
28 Subramanian, S., Wu, H.Y., Constant, T. et al. (2018). Adv. Mater. 30: 21.
29 Hell, S.W. (2007). Science 316: 1153.
30 Blom, H. and Widengren, J. (2017). Chem. Rev. 117: 7377.
31 Baddeley, D. and Bewersdorf, J. (2018). Annu. Rev. Biochem. 87: 965.
32 Sigal, Y.M., Zhou, R.B., and Zhuang, X.W. (2018). Science 361: 880.
33 von Diezmann, A., Shechtman, Y., and Moerner, W.E. (2017). Chem. Rev. 117:
7244.
34 Schermelleh, L., Heintzmann, R., and Leonhardt, H. (2010). J. Cell Biol.
190: 165.

References
209
35 Galbraith, C.G. and Galbraith, J.A. (2011). J. Cell Sci. 124: 1607.
36 Vicidomini, G., Bianchini, P., and Diaspro, A. (2018). Nat. Methods 15: 173.
37 Rogers, E.T.F. and Zheludev, N.I. (2013). J. Opt. 15: 094008.
38 Chen, G., Wen, Z.-Q., and Qiu, C.-W. (2019). Light Sci. Appl. 8: 56.
39 Berry, M.V. and Popescu, S. (2006). J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39: 6965.
40 Huang, F.M. and Zheludev, N.I. (2009). Nano Lett. 9: 1249.
41 Huang, F.M., Zheludev, N., Chen, Y., and de Garcia, Abajo, F.J. (2007). Appl.
Phys. Lett. 90: 091119.
42 Huang, K., Ye, H., Teng, J. et al. (2014). Laser Photonics Rev. 8: 152.
43 Qin, F., Huang, K., Wu, J. et al. (2017). Adv. Mater. 29: 1602721.
44 Rogers, E.T.F., Lindberg, J., Roy, T. et al. (2012). Nat. Mater. 11: 432.
45 Huang, K., Qin, F., Liu, H. et al. (2018). Adv. Mater. 30: e1704556.
46 Tang, M., Liu, X., Wen, Z. et al. (2020). Laser Photonics Rev. 14: 1900011.
47 Gustafsson, M.G. (2005). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102: 13081.
48 Gustafsson, M.G.L., Shao, L., Carlton, P.M. et al. (2008). Biophys. J. 94: 4957.
49 Rego, E.H., Shao, L., Macklin, J.J. et al. (2012). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109:
E135.
50 Han, Y., Li, M., Qiu, F. et al. (2017). Nat. Commun. 8: 1307.
51 Zheng, G., Horstmeyer, R., and Yang, C. (2013). Nat. Photonics 7: 739.
52 Liu, Q.L., Fang, Y., Zhou, R.J. et al. (2016). Opt. Lett. 41: 5373.
53 Tian, L., Li, X., Ramchandran, K., and Waller, L. (2014). Biomed. Opt. Express
5: 2376.
54 Lu, D. and Liu, Z. (2012). Nat. Commun. 3: 1205.
55 Liu, X.W., Kuang, C.F., Hao, X. et al. (2017). Phys. Rev. Lett. 118: 076101.
56 Wei, F. and Liu, Z. (2010). Nano Lett. 10: 2531.
57 Saxena, M., Eluru, G., and Gorthi, S.S. (2015). Adv. Opt. Photonics 7: 241.
58 Wu, Y. and Shroff, H. (2018). Nat. Methods 15: 1011.
59 Dan, D., Lei, M., Yao, B. et al. (2013). Sci. Rep. 3: 1116.
60 York, A.G., Chandris, P., Nogare, D.D. et al. (2013). Nat. Methods 10: 1122.
61 Hirano, Y., Matsuda, A., and Hiraoka, Y. (2015). Microscopy 64: 237.
62 Komis, G., Mistrik, M., Šamajová, O. et al. (2015). Nat. Protoc. 10: 1248.
63 Wegel, E., Gohler, A., Lagerholm, B.C. et al. (2016). Sci. Rep. 6: 27290.
64 Di Francia, G.T. (1952). Il Nuovo Cimento (1943–1954) 9: 426.
65 Rotenberg, N. and Kuipers, L. (2014). Nat. Photonics 8: 919.
66 Kim, J. and Song, K.B. (2007). Micron 38: 409.
67 Bek, A., Vogelgesang, R., and Kern, K. (2006). Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77: 043703.
68 Hecht, B., Sick, B., Wild, U.P. et al. (2000). J. Chem. Phys. 112: 7761.
69 Dunn, R.C. (1999). Chem. Rev. 99: 2891.
70 Zenhausern, F., Martin, Y., and Wickramasinghe, H.K. (1995). Science
269: 1083.
71 Xie, X.S. and Dunn, R.C. (1994). Science 265: 361.
72 Betzig, E. and Trautman, J.K. (1992). Science 257: 189.
73 Pohl, D.W., Denk, W., and Lanz, M. (1984). Appl. Phys. Lett. 44: 651.
74 Hecht, E. (2016). Optics. London, UK: Pearson Education.
75 Gay, G., Alloschery, O., De Lesegno, B.V. et al. (2006). Nat. Phys. 2: 262.

210
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
76 Hutter, E. and Fendler, J.H. (2004). Adv. Mater. 16: 1685.
77 Pang, C., Liu, X., Tang, M. et al. (2022). Sci. Bull. 67: 1317.
78 Liu, X., Meng, C., Xu, X. et al. (2018). Chin. Phys. B 27: 118704.
79 Pang, C., Li, J., Tang, M. et al. (2019). Adv. Funct. Mater. 29: 1900126.
80 Cragg, G.E. and So, P.T. (2000). Opt. Lett. 25: 46.
81 Helle, Ø.I., Dullo, F.T., Lahrberg, M. et al. (2020). Nat. Photonics 14: 431.
82 Wei, F., Lu, D., Shen, H. et al. (2014). Nano Lett. 14: 4634.
83 Zhang, C., Du, L., Xin, Z. et al. (2018). Laser Photonics Rev. 12: 1800148.
84 Zeng, X., Al-Amri, M., and Zubairy, M.S. (2014). Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
90: 235418.
85 Ponsetto, J.L., Bezryadina, A., Wei, F. et al. (2017). ACS Nano 11: 5344.
86 Bezryadina, A., Zhao, J., Xia, Y. et al. (2018). ACS Nano 12: 8248.
87 Lee, Y.U., Posner, C., Nie, Z.Y. et al. (2021). Adv. Sci. 8: 2102230.
88 Lee, Y.U., Zhao, J., Ma, Q. et al. (2021). Nat. Commun. 12: 1559.
89 Jiang, X., Song, Q., Xu, L. et al. (2007). Appl. Phys. Lett. 90: 233501.
90 Pang, C., Liu, X., Zhuge, M. et al. (2017). Opt. Lett. 42: 4569.
91 Xu, X., Liu, X., Pang, C. et al. (2019). J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 52: 284002.
92 Ye, D., Tang, M., Liu, X. et al. (2021). J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54: 315101.
93 Liu, X., Tang, M., Meng, C. et al. (2021). Sci. China Phys., Mech. Astron. 64:
294211.
94 Diekmann, R., Helle, Ø.I., Øie, C.I. et al. (2017). Nat. Photonics 11: 322.
95 Archetti, A., Glushkov, E., Sieben, C. et al. (2019). Nat. Commun. 10: 1267.
96 Priyadarshi, A., Dullo, F.T., Wolfson, D.L. et al. (2021). Commun. Mater. 2: 85.
97 Tang, M., Han, Y., Ye, D. et al. (2022). Adv. Sci. 9: 2103835.
98 Wei, S., Lei, T., Du, L. et al. (2015). Opt. Express 23: 30143.
99 Bezryadina, A., Zhao, J., Xia, Y. et al. (2019). Opt. Lett. 44: 2915.
100 Hao, X., Liu, X., Kuang, C. et al. (2013). Appl. Phys. Lett. 102: 013104.
101 Xu, P., Liu, S., Tang, M. et al. (2017). Appl. Phys. Lett. 110: 201112.
102 Tang, M., Xu, P., Wen, Z. et al. (2018). Sci. Bull. 63: 1118.
103 Duan, X.F., Huang, Y., Agarwal, R., and Lieber, C.M. (2003). Nature 421: 241.
104 Ströhl, F., Opstad, I.S., Tinguely, J.-C. et al. (2019). Opt. Express 27: 25280.
105 Li, D., Shao, L., Chen, B.-C. et al. (2015). Science 349: aab3500.
106 Tang, M., Liu, X., Yang, Q., and Liu, X. (2020). Chip-Based Wide-Field
3D Nanoscopy Through Tunable Spatial-Frequency-Shift Effect, vol. 11549.
SPIE/COS Photonics Asia. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2575355.
107 Tinguely, J.C., Helle, O.I., and Ahluwalia, B.S. (2017). Opt. Express 25: 27678.
108 Fu, Y., Ye, T., Tang, W., and Chu, T. (2014). Photonics Res. 2: A41.
109 Boulanger, J., Gueudry, C., Muench, D. et al. (2014). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 111: 17164.
110 Chen, Y., Liu, W., Zhang, Z. et al. (2018). Nat. Commun. 9: 4818.
111 Chakrova, N., Heintzmann, R., Rieger, B., and Stallinga, S. (2015). Opt. Express
23: 31367.
112 Maier, S.A. (2007). Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications. New York:
Springer.
113 Barnes, W.L., Dereux, A., and Ebbesen, T.W. (2003). Nature 424: 824.

References
211
114 Zayats, A.V., Smolyaninov, I.I., and Maradudin, A.A. (2005). Phys. Rep.
408: 131.
115 Willets, K.A., Wilson, A.J., Sundaresan, V., and Joshi, P.B. (2017). Chem. Rev.
117: 7538.
116 Simkhovich, B. and Bartal, G. (2014). Phys. Rev. Lett. 112: 056802.
117 Kawata, S., Inouye, Y., and Verma, P. (2009). Nat. Photonics 3: 388.
118 Li, M., Cushing, S.K., and Wu, N. (2015). Analyst 140: 386.
119 Krupin, O., Wong, W.R., Mahamd Adikan, F.R., and Berini, P. (2017). IEEE J.
Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 23: 103.
120 Singh, P. (2016). Sens. Actuators, B 229: 110.
121 Spackova, B., Wrobel, P., Bockova, M., and Homola, J. (2016). Proc. IEEE 104:
2380.
122 Soler, M., Estevez, M.C., Villar-Vazquez, R. et al. (2016). Anal. Chim. Acta
930: 31.
123 Yesilkoy, F., Terborg, R.A., Pello, J. et al. (2018). Light Sci. Appl. 7: 17152.
124 Rifat, A.A., Ahmed, R., Mahdiraji, G.A., and Adikan, F.R.M. (2017). IEEE Sens.
J. 17: 2776.
125 Zijlstra, P., Paulo, P.M., and Orrit, M. (2012). Nat. Nanotechnol. 7: 379.
126 Anker, J.N., Hall, W.P., Lyandres, O. et al. (2008). Nat. Mater. 7: 442.
127 Schlucker, S. (2014). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53: 4756.
128 Saha, K., Agasti, S.S., Kim, C. et al. (2012). Chem. Rev. 112: 2739.
129 Lu, H., Gan, X., Mao, D., and Zhao, J. (2017). Photonics Res. 5: 162.
130 Gramotnev, D.K. and Bozhevolnyi, S.I. (2010). Nat. Photonics 4: 83.
131 Zenin, V.A., Choudhury, S., Saha, S. et al. (2017). Opt. Express 25: 12295.
132 Vetrone, F. and Rosei, F. (2017). Science 357: 452.
133 Wang, Y., Ma, Y., Guo, X., and Tong, L. (2012). Opt. Express 20: 19006.
134 Luo, J., Zeng, B., Wang, C. et al. (2015). Nanoscale 7: 18805.
135 Gao, P., Yao, N., Wang, C. et al. (2015). Appl. Phys. Lett. 106: 093110.
136 Liang, G., Chen, X., Zhao, Q., and Guo, L.J. (2018). Nanophotonics 7: 277.
137 Cheng, K., Wu, Y.Q., Meng, J. et al. (2015). Sci. Bull. 60: 541.
138 Atwater, H.A. and Polman, A. (2010). Nat. Mater. 9: 205.
139 Linic, S., Christopher, P., and Ingram, D.B. (2011). Nat. Mater. 10: 911.
140 Schuller, J.A., Barnard, E.S., Cai, W. et al. (2010). Nat. Mater. 9: 193.
141 Bradac, C. (2018). Adv. Opt. Mater. 6: 26.
142 Gao, D., Ding, W., Nieto-Vesperinas, M. et al. (2017). Light Sci. Appl. 6: e17039.
143 Garces-Chavez, V., Quidant, R., Reece, P.J. et al. (2006). Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter 73: 5.
144 Volpe, G., Quidant, R., Badenes, G., and Petrov, D. (2006). Phys. Rev. Lett. 96:
238101.
145 Pang, Y. and Gordon, R. (2012). Nano Lett. 12: 402.
146 Grigorenko, A.N., Roberts, N.W., Dickinson, M.R., and Zhang, Y. (2008). Nat.
Photonics 2: 365.
147 Zhu, T., Zhou, Y., Lou, Y. et al. (2017). Nat. Commun. 8: 15391.
148 Ruan, Z.C. (2015). Opt. Lett. 40: 601.
149 Pors, A., Nielsen, M.G., and Bozhevolnyi, S.I. (2015). Nano Lett. 15: 791.

212
6 Spatial-frequency-shift Super-resolution Imaging Based on Micro/nanomaterials
150 Silva, A., Monticone, F., Castaldi, G. et al. (2014). Science 343: 160.
151 Liu, Z., Durant, S., Lee, H. et al. (2007). Nano Lett. 7: 403.
152 Xiong, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, C., and Zhang, X. (2007). Nano Lett. 7: 3360.
153 Fang, N., Lee, H., Sun, C., and Zhang, X. (2005). Science 308: 534.
154 Ponsetto, J.L., Wei, F., and Liu, Z. (2014). Nanoscale 6: 5807.
155 Liu, Z. (2017). Plasmonics and Super-Resolution Imaging. Jenny Stanford Pub-
lishing.
156 Luo, X.G., Tsai, D.P., Gu, M., and Hong, M.H. (2018). Adv. Opt. Photonics
10: 757.
157 Economou, E.N. (1969). Phys. Rev. 182: 539.
158 Luo, X. (2015). Sci. China Phys., Mech. Astron. 58: 594201.
159 Wang, Q., Bu, J., Tan, P. et al. (2012). Plasmonics 7: 427.
160 Tan, P., Yuan, X.-C., Yuan, G., and Wang, Q. (2010). Appl. Phys. Lett. 97:
241109.
161 Zhang, C., Min, C., Du, L., and Yuan, X.C. (2016). Appl. Phys. Lett. 108: 201601.
162 Liu, Z., Wang, Y., Yao, J. et al. (2009). Nano Lett. 9: 462.
163 Avrutsky, I., Salakhutdinov, I., Elser, J., and Podolskiy, V. (2007). Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter 75: 241402.
164 Xiong, Y., Liu, Z., and Zhang, X. (2008). Appl. Phys. Lett. 93: 111116.
165 Cao, S., Wang, T., Xu, W. et al. (2016). Sci. Rep. 6: 23460.
166 Cao, S., Wang, T., Yang, J. et al. (2017). Sci. Rep. 7: 1328.
167 Novoselov, K.S., Geim, A.K., Morozov, S.V. et al. (2004). Science 306: 666.
168 Novoselov, K.S., Geim, A.K., Morozov, S.V. et al. (2005). Nature 438: 197.
169 Geim, A.K. and Novoselov, K.S. (2007). Nat. Mater. 6: 183.
170 Liu, X.Z., Galfsky, T., Sun, Z. et al. (2015). Nat. Photonics 9: 30.
171 Dong, Y.F., Wu, Z.S., Ren, W.C. et al. (2017). Sci. Bull. 62: 724.
172 Pang, C., Lu, H., Xu, P. et al. (2016). Opt. Express 24: 17069.
173 Xu, P., Zhang, H., Qian, H. et al. (2017). Opt. Commun. 395: 76.
174 Qian, H., Ma, Y., Yang, Q. et al. (2014). ACS Nano 8: 2584.
175 Low, T. and Avouris, P. (2014). ACS Nano 8: 1086.
176 Tymchenko, M., Nikitin, A.Y., and Martin-Moreno, L. (2013). ACS Nano
7: 9780.
177 Hu, H., Yang, X., Zhai, F. et al. (2016). Nat. Commun. 7: 12334.
178 Huang, L., Liu, J., Deng, H., and Wu, S. (2018). Adv. Opt. Mater. 6: 1701378.
179 Vakil, A. and Engheta, N. (2011). Science 332: 1291.
180 Zhang, R.R., Lin, X., Shen, L. et al. (2014). Opt. Lett. 39: 6739.
181 Yang, J., Wang, T., Chen, Z. et al. (2016). Sci. Rep. 6: 37898.
182 Cao, S., Wang, T., Sun, Q. et al. (2017). Opt. Express 25: 14494.
183 Cheng, B.H., Chang, K.J., Lan, Y.C., and Tsai, D.P. (2014). Opt. Express 22:
28635.
184 Ju, L., Geng, B.S., Horng, J. et al. (2011). Nat. Nanotechnol. 6: 630.
185 Iorsh, I.V., Mukhin, I.S., Shadrivov, I.V. et al. (2013). Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter 87: 075416.
186 Idris, N.M., Gnanasammandhan, M.K., Zhang, J. et al. (2012). Nat. Med.
18: 1580.

References
213
187 He, M., Pang, X., Liu, X. et al. (2016). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55: 4280.
188 Bezryadina, A., Li, J.X., Zhao, J.X. et al. (2017). Nanoscale 9: 14907.
189 Narimanov, E. (2016). ACS Photonics 3: 1090.
190 Mudry, E., Belkebir, K., Girard, J. et al. (2012). Nat. Photonics 6: 312.
191 Chen, Y. (2015). Microelectron. Eng. 135: 57.
192 Kim, C.-S., Ahn, S.-H., and Jang, D.-Y. (2012). Vacuum 86: 1014.
193 Moser, H.O. and Rockstuhl, C. (2012). Laser Photonics Rev. 6: 219.
194 Jin, L., Liu, B., Zhao, F. et al. (2020). Nat. Commun. 11: 1934.
195 Nguyen, T., Xue, Y., Li, Y. et al. (2018). Opt. Express 26: 26470.
196 Zhang, Q., Liang, C., Tang, M. et al. (2023). Opt. Exp. 31: 3719.
197 Mei, Y., Weng, G.E., Zhang, B.P. et al. (2017). Light Sci. Appl. 6: e16199.
198 Wei, Q., Qi, H., Luo, W. et al. (2013). ACS Nano 7: 9147.
199 Zhu, H., Isikman, S.O., Mudanyali, O. et al. (2013). Lab Chip 13: 51.
200 Cetin, A.E., Coskun, A.F., Galarreta, B.C. et al. (2014). Light Sci. Appl. 3: e122.


215
7
Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor
Lasers: Toward the Future of Integrated Microwave
Photonics
Jin Li and Tao Pu
College Of Communications Engineering, Army Engineering University of PLA, Nanjing, 210007, China
7.1
Introduction
Microwave photonics (MWP) is a cross-discipline combining both the advantages of
microwave technology and photonics technology, in which microwave signals are
generated, processed, transmitted, and controlled by optical methods [1–3]. Dur-
ing last decades, with deeply researching on microwave signals in optical domain, it
has attracted a lot of attention because of the unique characteristics of the photons
such as wide bandwidth, low-loss transmission, and anti-electromagnetic interfer-
ence, resulting in an extensive application in telecommunication, radar, and sonar,
as well as electronic warfare [4]. However, at the same time of sharing its advan-
tages, what impresses the researchers and industries most are high cost and poor
stability, heavily limiting its practical usage in the abovementioned domains. To be
specific, basically, all the demos of the MWP systems are designed and accomplished
by utilizing relatively expensive, large-volume, and power-consuming discrete opto-
electronic components, which are critically sensitive to complex external environ-
mental disturbances, such as vibration and temperature gradients. Therefore, they
can’t fully take the place of mature electronic instruments, i.e. electronic integrated
circuits (EICs), in many designed applications like the generation of microwave sig-
nals. However, limited by the nature of electrical circuits, all the electrical methods of
generating, processing, as well as transmitting high-frequency microwave signals are
rather challenging. The operation of microwave signals in optical domain compared
with electrical domain is still recognized as the better candidate for the scenarios
of high-frequency and high-quality microwave signals requirement, though MWP
systems composed of discrete devices bring about some unavoidable problems men-
tioned before. In consequence, for future high-performance and large-bandwidth
microwave applications, it is the urging requirement to resolve the imperfections in
the reliability, convenience, as well as the cost of MWP systems. Fortunately, with
the rapid development of photonic integration circuits (PICs) technology, making
discrete optoelectronic components toward the direction of integration on one chip
is a promising approach to overcoming these problems.
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

216
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
Integration of MWP systems is an inevitable trend for a better use of MWP
[5–7]. As a novel field, integrated microwave photonics (IMWP) converging the
advantages of both MWP and the PICs, has been appearing with great charm since
it was proposed. It aims at the incorporation of MWP subsystems in PICs, such as
laser sources, external modulators, optical amplifiers, and photodetectors, which
is crucial for the implementation of low-cost, high-stability, and advanced analog
optical front-ends and, therefore, be conductive to achieve the aforementioned evo-
lution goals [5]. Actually, the benefits it brings about are not merely the reduction
of the footprint, power consumption, and the physical complexity. Compared to
the two schemes above, i.e. EICs and the discrete MWP systems, IMWP combines
the strengths of both schemes, which can realize a great performance improvement
and simultaneously keep the entire system within a highly integrated configuration
[4]. For example, by confining light to a very small space, the interaction between
the photons and the matter can be enhanced greatly, and this is usually realized
through nonlinear optical processes, and thus could be beneficial to bring about
new technologies applied for the IMWP [6]. Until now, based on the IMWP, a large
number of multifunctional and reconfigurable PICs applied for microwave signal
generation, processing, transmission, and control have been developed, which are
significant to push MWP systems from laboratory demonstrations toward practical
applications and finally promote further development of MWP [7].
Since IMWP has so many potential advantages, the use of PICs will focus on tech-
nologies that can be used with integrated waveguides, and in the IMWP research, the
first component supposed to be considered would be the laser source. Laser sources,
as active devices, are of great importance in all optoelectronic components because
they are not only portable suppliers of optical waves but also equipped with distinct
electro-optic conversion properties. The nature of the MWP is the interconversion
between the light wave and microwave based on the optoelectrical devices, and the
capability of the interconversion usually determines the properties of the MWP sys-
tems. Specifically, the semiconductor laser is considered as the most universal and
attractive light source among various lasers, which is attributed to the unique char-
acteristics of small SWAP (size, weight, and power), a high degree of stability, and
especially easy integration [8, 9].
Owing to the inside mechanism of optical gain dependent on the interaction
of photon and carrier, the semiconductor lasers belong to inherently nonlinear
optoelectronic devices and thus, rich varieties of nonlinear dynamics, including
stable locking [10, 11], period oscillation [12, 13], self-pulsation [14], quasi-periodic
pulsation [15, 16], frequency locking [17], and chaotic oscillation [18, 19], can be
observed once the semiconductor lasers suffer from the external disturbance, such
as optical injection, optical feedback, as well as current modulation. During the
last two decades, by adjusting the semiconductor lasers to operate under appro-
priate working conditions, people have investigated extensively and thoroughly in
realizing high efficient electro-optic conversion (modulation response enhance-
ment, chirp suppression, nonlinear reduction, and analog signal transmission)
[20–67], tunable and wideband microwave and millimeter-wave signal generation
(single-tone or frequency-modulated microwave waveforms) [56, 68–118], as well

7.1 Introduction
217
as microwave signal processing (filtering, true time delay, frequency conversion,
signal format conversion, and so on) [116, 119–124].
Integration of semiconductor lasers is an unavoidable trend for the development
of conventional configurations using discrete lasers. Despite the unique character-
istic improvement in optical injection or optical feedback systems, they are mostly
researched and applied based on at least two discrete semiconductor lasers or
one semiconductor laser accompanied by a reflective mirror. Thus, a large bulk,
high power consumption, and complex structures are unavoidable. These defects
naturally exist in discrete configurations and are hard to overcome. Furthermore,
the polarization state and environmental disturbance are also inevitable obstacles,
which are destabilizing elements highly affecting the performances of optical
systems. These questions mentioned above largely limit the practical usage of
semiconductor lasers, leading to them only being studied deeply in the laboratory.
The integration is a great solution in terms of these shortcomings.
Integration of semiconductor lasers is also beneficial for the development of
IMWP [20]. As an important light source module, the advancement of the mono-
lithially integrated multi-section semiconductor lasers (MI-MSSLs) can greatly
promote the development of IMWP. Firstly, attributing to the integration on one
chip, they are equipped with some natural advantages including light weight, com-
pact size, low power consumption, high reliability, and efficient reconfigurability.
Secondly, in theory, basically, all MWP functions can be attained with the help of
MI-MSSLs and are even better compared with conventional single-section lasers. So
far, many researches have convinced that optimizing the laser structural design and
replacing the conventional single-section lasers with MI-MSSLs can allocate more
prominent improvement in the whole optoelectrical performances. For example,
large-bandwidth analog link transmissions with high linearity can be easily
realized with the enhanced direct modulation response by making full use of the
photon–photon resonance (PPR) effect in the MI-MSSLs [45, 56, 63]. What’s more,
multiple MWP functions can be realized simultaneously by using one monolithically
integrated laser chip, indicating its great flexibility and widespread applicability.
Last but not least, due to the laser structure variation induced more irritative inter-
action between photons and photons, as well as photons and electrons, MSSLs own
more abundant nonlinear dynamics than traditional single-segment semiconductor
lasers, and hence, they have more enormous potential in the practical applications,
prompting itself a promising candidate applied into the IMWP. In view of these
innate advantages, they will be the necessary trend of technology development and
would be excellent candidates for many significant application prospects ranging
from broadband wireless access networks to emerging MWP-based radars.
Usually, different kinds of MI-MSSLs are composed of diverse sections, including
active feedback section, phase tuning section, and distributed feedback (DFB) laser
section. They share the same substrate and can be realized on one chip passively
and actively based on the maturity of semiconductor integration process. It is worth
mentioning that based on the reconstruction equivalent chirp (REC) technique,
monolithically integrated mutually injected semiconductor lasers (MI-MISLs) can
be fabricated just by following the similar procedures of standard semiconductor

218
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
lasers, thus making it possible to be a more efficient and cost-effective choice for
realizing various MWP functions. Until now, there have been many successful
researches reporting the novel MI-MSSLs at length and simultaneously considering
their potential applications in MWP, including electro-optical conversion effect
enhancement, photonic microwave generation, and MWP processing. Moreover,
the monolithically integrated distributed feedback multi-section multi-wavelength
semiconductor laser arrays (MI-DFB-MS-MW-SLAs) are also discussed intensely
for the fact that they can parallel integrate several discrete multichannel semicon-
ductor lasers with complex structures in an array chip, which are well-suited to
realize multiple MWP functions at the same time, especially in the transmission
application of wavelength division multiplexing radio-over-fiber (WDM-ROF)
networks nicely. However, to the best of our knowledge, a comprehensive overview
of the current state-of-the-art in this field is still vacant. Hence, in this chapter, our
aim is to review the basic laser structures of the MI-MSSLs, describe their main
photonic measures applied in the field of microwaves, and report on some of the
most salient advances obtained during the last years in this emergent field.
This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 7.2, three major types of MI-MSSLs,
including passive feedback lasers (PFLs), active/amplified feedback lasers (AFLs),
as well as MI-MISLs, will be analyzed and discussed. Their distinctive advantages
and limitations are compared separately. In Section 7.3, the electro-optic conversion
capability enhancement utilizing the PPR effect instead of the carrier–photon
resonance (CPR) effect is discussed, especially in aspects of increasing modulation
bandwidth, reducing nonlinearity, and suppressing chirp. Additionally, some
analog photonic microwave transmission experiments are enumerated and exam-
ined, verifying the feasibility of the MI-MSSLs in the application of ROF systems.
Within Section 7.4, a considerable amount of review of previous work on the topic
of main optical techniques for generating single-tone microwave signals based
on the nonlinear dynamics of MI-MSSLs is given, including free-running state,
mode-beating self-pulsations (MB-SPs) state, period-one (P1) oscillation, and side-
band injection locking. In addition, the generation of specific frequency-modulated
microwave waveforms, such as linearly chirped microwave waveforms (LCMWs),
frequency-hopping (F-H) microwave waveforms, and triangular wave signals, are
presented as well, which have been widely applied in the radar and solar scenarios.
Furthermore, in view of the MHz-level linewidth, the generated microwave signals
are worthy of being further optimized. The desirable method of adding extra
feedback loops (covering optical–electrical feedback or all-optical feedback loops) is
also explored to boost the microwave signal quality. Section 7.5 outlines the existing
methods available for the generation of tunable microwave photonic filters (MPFs)
as a significant photonic microwave processing technique. Ulteriorly, Section 7.6
pays special attention to the MI-DFB-MS-MW-SLAs, which are considered as one
of the most predominant light sources in future PICs and WDM-ROF networks.
Finally, Section 7.7 concludes this chapter with several perspectives on the future
prospects and challenges of the MI-MSSLs.

7.2 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
219
7.2
Monolithically Integrated Multi-section
Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
During the last 20 years, a great number of MI-MSSLs have been proposed to realize
better performances in comparison with the conventional single-section semicon-
ductor laser over MWP applications. Various MI-MSSLs with different laser struc-
tures, distinctive lengths of each section, as well as varying materials have been
fabricated, presenting diverse dynamic properties. They are not only analyzed theo-
retically but also verified by experiments. According to the compositions of the laser
structures, we divide them into three categories in general, i.e. PFLs as in [47, 53],
AFLs as in [56, 88, 97], and MI-MISLs as considered in [58, 61, 82]. In this section,
some of the essential or seminal developments on the three kinds of MI-MSSLs are
reviewed, and their pros and cons would be deeply demonstrated as well.
7.2.1
Monolithically Integrated Optical Feedback Lasers (MI-OFLs)
Figure 7.1 shows a typical schematic diagram of a delayed optical feedback system,
which is well known for the fact that the structure is the prototype of the mono-
lithically integrated optical feedback lasers (MI-OFLs). In such an optically delayed
system, a semiconductor laser source is subject to optical feedback from an exter-
nal cavity through a mirror and the performances of the semiconductor laser will be
accordingly changed with the optical feedback signal.
The feedback optical signal can be characterized by the following relation [90]:
Ein(t) = Kei𝜙Eout(t −𝜏)
(7.1)
The real number K and 𝜙are the separate representations of the strength and phase
of the feedback optical field when the light goes back to the initial laser source. The
delay time 𝜏is another characteristic parameter, which is related to round-trip time
of the photons dependent on the length of the external cavity, i.e. the twice distance
between the mirror and the semiconductor laser. Once the three parameters change,
the optical feedback signal will change correspondingly, leading to a drastic varia-
tion inside the semiconductor laser. Herein, numerous nonlinear behaviors such as
chaos [125] and pulsations [126] can be observed in such an OFL system. Due to
its vivid dynamics as well as wide application, this configuration has been studied
extensively in many literatures [125–128]. However, as a result of discrete device
composition, the optical feedback system is significantly sophisticated and heavily
Figure 7.1
Scheme of one
delayed optical feedback
system.
Laser
Mirror
External cavity (EC)
LEC
Ein
Eout

220
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
unstable, largely limiting the system’s practical usage. MI-OFLs are proposed on the
basis of this model by integrating external cavity with DFB laser source on one chip
to settle the shortcomings of discrete components and by depending on whether
there exists an additional amplifier section, we can divide the MI-OFLs into two
categories, including PFLs and the AFLs.
To get a further understanding of the dynamic mechanisms in the MI-OFLs, we
can describe the internal dynamic variation in the DFB laser section by the following
set of delay differential equations.
dE
dt = 1
2(1 + i𝛼)g(N −Nth)E + K
𝜏in
E(t −𝜏)e−i𝜙
dN
dt = I
eV −𝜏−1
c N −Γg(N −N0)|E|2
(7.2)
E is the amplitude of the complex optical field Eei𝜔t. I and N denote the injection
current and carrier density in DFB laser section, respectively. Nth, N0, 𝛼, 𝜏in, 𝜏c, g,
V, and Γ represent the carrier density at threshold point and at transparent point,
linewidth enhancement factor, round-trip time in laser cavity, carrier lifetime, gain
coefficient, volume of active region, and the confinement factor for the laser section,
separately. Based on the above equations, abundant nonlinear dynamic behavior can
be achieved by numerical simulation, and the corresponding change relationships
of the parameters are all available [91]. Also, some theoretical analysis and research
have been undergone in [55, 97], but the simulation tool they used is the mature
commercial package VPI-transmission Maker.
7.2.1.1
Passive Feedback Lasers (PFLs)
The PFL is the simplest configuration of multi-segment semiconductor lasers. It only
needs to integrate a passive reflection section after the active section to obtain addi-
tional optical reflection in laser’s physical structure, and thus the short cavity length
of the active luminescent segment can be allowed, which is recognized as the easiest
way to advance the maximum of the relaxation resonance frequency.
Figure 7.2 shows the original structure of the PFL, which is composed of a DFB
section and one integrated feedback (IFB) section without grating structures. Here,
the IFB section is only made up of one phase tuning section. In practical work, the
DFB section is driven by direct current (DC) to bring about the light oscillation. The
cleaved facet of the phase tuning section acts as an end mirror in external cavity
regime to provide passive optical feedback. The counter-propagating optical field is
not coupled to the carriers or to each other in the phase tuning section, but only
experiences some losses and a phase shift. Consequently, by changing the current
Eout
Integrated feedback section
DFB laser section
E
+
E–
AR
HR
Figure 7.2
Scheme of one PFL, consisting of a DFB section and an IFB section.

7.2 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
221
injection into the phase tuning section, the strength and the phase of the feedback
optical signal can be controlled through the indirect influence of the effective refrac-
tive index neff
IFB, leading the PFLs to enter new oscillation states, from hysteresis
effects, regular self-pulsations to chaotic output [129]. Besides, similar to the dis-
crete OFL system, the length of the IFB section lIFB is also an affecting factor, which
is supposed to be selected properly to guarantee an effective tunability of K as well
as 𝜙. To be specific, the equations of the K and 𝜙in PFLs are given as follows [45].
R represents the reflectivity at the facet of the IFB section. From the formulas, we
can find that the K and 𝜙cannot be tuned independently, which largely restricts the
maximum of the feedback strength and the operating regions.
K = R ⋅e−2lIFB𝛼IFB
(7.3)
𝜙= 2𝜋
2lIFBneff
IFB
𝜆0
(7.4)
To achieve a better understanding of the mechanisms governing the laser dynam-
ics in a typical PFL, the theoretical investigations and the corresponding experi-
mental identifications of the behavior of the PFL have been carried out in [45–48,
126, 129–131]. The optical feedback signal generated from the IFB section could
significantly improve the modulation properties of the laser under the influence of
PPR effect [45]. A high 3-dB modulation bandwidth up to 30 GHz was achieved,
underlining the potential of the PFL concept for analog direct modulation in ROF
links [49]. Although the PFL presents nice performance improvements [125, 126,
129], they also reveal the following defect in terms of low feedback strength, which
corresponds to a low-frequency pulsation generation. Generally, in PFLs, the feed-
back strength is usually very small in the realized devices because of the huge opti-
cal loss arising in the IFB cavity. It is original from the imperfect coupling at the
active–passive interface, scattering losses in the passive feedback section, as well as
the reflectivity induced by the refractive index discontinuity between the semicon-
ductor waveguide and air (≈0.3) at the rear facet [45]. To overcome this limitation,
an appropriate high-reflection (HR) coating at the facet of the IFB section edge is
usually adopted to allocate a high feedback strength [132]. Furthermore, an addi-
tional advantage brought about is that more light extraction output from the side
of the DFB section can be achieved due to breaking out the symmetrical light out-
put structure, largely advancing the efficiency of the PFL device. Unfortunately,
the single-longitudinal-mode (SLM) yield will be degenerated and the wavelength
accuracy will be deteriorated because the reflection phase at the HR-coated facet is
unavoidably randomized and cannot be accurately controlled [53, 54]. It is reported
that the DFB lasers integrated with passive distributed-reflector (DBR) mirrors func-
tioned as IFB section can achieve accurately controlled reflection phase and thus,
they have 100% SLM yield in theory [41]. However, in the fabrication process, the
upper waveguide and the active layer are usually removed by dry etching in the fabri-
cation of the passive section. Hence, the abovementioned DFB lasers integrated with
passive waveguides all need butt-joint regrowth process to realize the fine connec-
tion between the active waveguide and passive waveguide, which heavily increases

222
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
(b)
(a)
 
AR
AR
Laser
Grating
MQW
Active section
λ/4 phase shift
P-electrode
Gratings
MQWs
n-InP sub
N-electrode
p-InP
cladding
Reflection section
AR coating
AR coating
GR section
LGR
Active DFB section
LDFB
Optical confinement layer
Figure 7.3
Multiple schemes of the PFL structure: (a) Source: Zhang et al. [52], (b) Source:
Liu et al. [54].
the fabrication complexity, especially in the condition that aluminum-containing
quantum wells are utilized for high differential gain [54].
To solve this imperfection, recent work by [52–54] extends techniques to supply
the sufficiently strong delayed optical feedback, great single-mode characteristic,
as well as simple fabrication process, whose structure is depicted in Figure 7.3.
The work is built conceptually on the approach of [45] but differs in the way by
comprising an active single-mode complex-coupled DFB laser used as light source
and one phase tuning section with grating reflection (GR). The active section length
is still shortened in order to achieve high relaxation oscillation frequency as well as
modulation bandwidth. Both sections share the same wafer structure, such as the
multi-quantum wells (MQWs) and the same upper and lower optical confinement
layers. Consequently, the fabrication process is expected to be much easier due to
the neglection of the butt-joint regrowth technology. It should be noted that the GR
section acting as a distributed reflector is unbiased without any current injection
when the novel GR laser is normally working. In spite of no extra current being
provided into the GR section, the GR section will be optically pumped to near
transparency with the help of the optical emission from the DFB section in practical
use, and thus, the loss derived from absorption can be eliminated basically, pro-
moting a higher reflection strength. Additionally, both gratings in the two sections
are designed with the same grating period, and the phase is continuous across the

7.2 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
223
1.2
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1544
+1 side-mode
–1 side-mode
Main mode
Stop-band
Reflection spectrum of GR
Transmission spectrum of DFB grating
1546 1548
1550 1552
Wavelength (nm)
Transmission
Reflection
1554 1556
1558 1560
Figure 7.4
Reﬂection spectrum of GR section and transmission spectrum of the DFB
grating.
interface between the two adjacent sections. Therefore, it can be found that the
stop-band width of GR section is narrower than that of the grating in the active DFB
section owing to its longer grating length, and, the main optical mode is exactly
right located at the center of the stop-band of the grating reflection spectrum, while
the side modes lie outside of the gain zone, as Figure 7.4 shows [52]. Hence, the
reflectivity for the main optical mode is higher than that of other optical side modes.
In other words, we can consider the GR section as a built-in optical bandpass filter
and much higher side mode suppression ratio (SMSR) would be achieved under this
influence, leading to a great SLM yield. An experiment was designed to demonstrate
the functionality of the GR section and above 55-dB SMSR was achieved. They also
found that the GR section could bring along other advantages, such as increasing
the slope efficiency by about 34% and decreasing the threshold current by about
34% compared with the standard DFB laser besides enhancing the SMSR [54].
Concurrent work [57] has also considered a similar approach based on the same
multi-section laser structure in which further results of increasing slope efficiency
from 0.15 to 0.23 mW mA−1 and the decreasing threshold current from 33 to 24 mA,
as well as SMSR > 60 dB, were observed. These data can prove that in a well-designed
PFL, both the output slope efficiency and the threshold current can be significantly
improved. Furthermore, the notable bandwidth enhancement is also recorded due
to the light re-injection into the DFB section from the side of GR section.
Further, a more efficient implementation has been proposed by [51] to increase
the output efficiency of GR semiconductor lasers by injecting the dc currents into
both the DFB section and passive GR section. In this scheme, the bias current of
the passive grating reflector is always set below the transparent current in order to
avoid any possible laser oscillation and meanwhile guarantee the DFB section with
high reflectivity. Experimental results showed that the output optical power had a
significant improvement with a fixed current of DFB section when the GR section

224
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
was equipped with current injection. In addition, as the current of GR section goes
up, the slope efficiency of the curve of the output power relative to the current of
DFB section can be further advanced, which greatly improves the practicability of
GR lasers. In [51], further improved results of 39% increase of slope efficiency and
>10 mA decrease of threshold current were successfully recorded.
7.2.1.2
Ampliﬁed/Active Feedback Lasers (AFLs)
As emphasized above, the PFL is the simplest MI-MSSLs to advance the whole per-
formance of single-section conventional laser. However, an important but inevitable
problem within all PFLs is the absence of separate control of the feedback strength
and the feedback phase, which usually leads to limited nonlinear dynamic regions,
relatively small relaxation resonance frequency, as well as low-frequency microwave
signal generation [90]. Consequently, a new laser structure is described for address-
ing this issue based on the PFLs, which is named as AFLs.
Generally, an AFL chip is designed with reference to the Lang–Kobayashi (L–K)
model [89]. The new laser structure is similar in principle to PFLs. It is composed
of one DFB laser section with a compound optical feedback cavity but uses an addi-
tional amplifier section combined with the phase tuning section to form the IFB
cavity, as Figure 7.5 shows. Both of them are independently biased just like the DFB
laser section. The free-carrier transitions-induced refractive index modification can
DFB
DFB section
(A)
(B)
Phase section
Phase section
Grating
Front DFB section
AR
Laser
Output
50:50
Splitter
PD
OSC
OSA
Electrical path
Optical path
MQW
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
Rear DFB section
Equivalent π
phase-shift
Rear DFB section
Front DFB section
(Sampling grating with equivalent phase-shift) (Sampling grating with equivalent phase-shift)
Equivalent π
phase-shift
Λ
Λ
κ
κ
Pr
Pf
L3
L2
L1
AR
Amplifier section
1
2
IDFB + iM
IDC1
IDC2 + IRF
IP
E0
E1
E2
R
IP
IA
L
Phase
Amplifier250 μm
Figure 7.5
(A) Schemes of the AFL structure. (B) (a) Experimental setup using the laser
module, (b) schematic of laser structure, (c) REC grating structure, and (d) photograph of the
laser chip: (a) Source: Yu et al. [55], (b) Source: Li et al. [56]/with permission of Optica
Publishing Group.

7.2 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
225
be achieved by tuning the injection current in the phase tuning section, while the
optical feedback signal in AFLs is amplified by utilizing an active medium in the
amplifier section, whose design is overall the same as the DFB laser section except
for the grating structure [91]. The increasement of the amplifier section can not
only compensate for the optical losses but also allow for the control of feedback
strength via injecting current into the amplifier section. Therefore, the most out-
standing advantage of AFLs compared to PFLs is the separate control of adjusting the
phase and strength of the feedback to the emitted light oscillated from DFB section,
owing to the introduction of an amplifier section as a special feature. For a better
understanding of the mechanisms of AFLs, a series of reasonable functional expres-
sions of the feedback strength and the feedback phase in the AFLs is provided [55].
R is the reflectivity at the facet of the amplifier section and gA is the mean amplifier
gain, which can be adjusted through the current of the amplifier feedback section.
K =
√
Re[−𝛼pLp+(gA−𝛼A)LA]
(7.5)
𝜙= arg(
√
R) + 𝜙p + 𝛼HgALA
(7.6)
Obviously, for a well-designed AFL with fixed length of each section, the core
parameters K and 𝜙can be adjusted easily by varying the currents in the amplifier
section and phase tuning section. More importantly, as a result of the addition of
the amplifier section, the feedback strength owns a wider tuning range than that in
PFLs. By tuning the two parameters to different combinations, distinct operation
states in AFLs, including single-mode lasing, multi-mode beating, and chaos, can be
recorded. Especially, MB-SPs oscillation interests researchers most for its potential
application in generating high-frequency microwave signals, which will be stressed
in detail in Section 7.4.
An in-depth and systematic theoretical understanding, as well as experimental
analysis of various nonlinear dynamics of the AFLs, were concluded, and it has been
verified that there exists a self-adjusting effect based on the additional changes of car-
rier density when the carrier density in the active feedback is high [89]. Attributing
to the self-adjustment in the feedback strength and the feedback phase, the AFLs
are convinced to be more stable in the generation of high-frequency pulsations than
the PFLs. Despite the success of this laser structure in certain aspects, AFLs also
have their own shortcomings. At first, the active layer in the passive phase tuning
section is supposed to be removed by means of dry etching for fabricating the passive
section between two adjacent active sections during the fabricating process of the
AFLs, which increases the complexity of production. Subsequently, some of them
also need the butt-joint growth technique between the adjacent active and passive
waveguides, which has the same limitation just like the PFLs [95].
7.2.2
Monolithically Integrated Mutually Injected Semiconductor
Lasers (MI-MISLs)
Optical injection systems have long been widely researched for the advanced char-
acteristics of improving the direct modulation bandwidth, stability, and linearity

226
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
of semiconductor lasers [38]. Besides, semiconductor lasers, which are subject
to optical injection, are deeply analyzed for numerous dynamic characteristics,
experiencing from stability (S), P1, period-two (P2), four-wave-mixing (FWM),
quasi-period (QP) to chaos (C). In the light of the various natural performances,
people have carried out lots of experiments and made huge progress in three
key domains of MWP, including microwave signal generation, processing, and
transmission. Unfortunately, they also expose many problems due to the discrete
system structures. First, external modulators are often applied in optical injection
systems to achieve the injection locking state, leading to more complex system
structures, larger volume as well as higher power consumption. Second, the
operating wavelength and the polarization of the oscillating light in the master laser
(ML) and the slave laser (SL) must be carefully controlled, or the optical injection
system can only be employed in a limited usage scenario. Third, in a typical optical
injection system, the light from the ML is unidirectionally injected to the SL by
optical isolators or optical circulators, whose isolation is on the order of 30–40 dB
with an insertion of 1–3 dB. Thus, the maximum injection ratio, which is correlated
to the working state of the optical injection systems, is confined due to the huge
isolator loss and low optical coupling efficiency. Often, an optical amplifier is
used to boost the optical power from the ML to achieve a high injection ratio, but
the system complexity also increases. To overcome these issues, another class of
MI-MSSLs with built-in mutual injection system is proposed.
Originally, the proposed structure of MI-MISLs only consisted of two back-to-back
DFB semiconductor laser sections, which were first invented in Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency RF Lightwave Integrated Circuits (DARPA RFLICs)
program, as Figure 7.6a shows [58, 59]. Six years later, W.W. Chow et al. proved
the feasibility of implementing injection locking systems without optical isolator
through the strong-coupling theory, as Figure 7.6b shows [39]. That is to say,
Slave
DFB
Master
DFB
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
LD#2
Cr/Au
electrode
DFB laser
section
Y-branch
section
p+-InGaAs
n+-InP substrate
p-InP
SiO2
AlGalnAs
MQW
Grating
Laser A
DFB side
facet
Laser B
Y-branch
Y-branch side
facet
LD#1
AR
Pm
Ps
Λ0
AR
Laser
output
Master laser
Master laser
Slave laser
Slave laser
Im
Lm
Ls
Is
IDC2
IDC1
IT
Figure 7.6
Multiple schemes of MI-MISL structure: (a) Source: Jung et al. [58], (b) Source:
Zhang et al. [64], (c) Source Liu et al. [60], (d) Source: Adapted from Xie et al. [82].

7.2 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Laser (MI-MSSL) Device
227
MI-MISLs can eliminate the optical isolation and the optical circulator. In addition,
due to the rather short distance between the two DFB lasers, their polarizations
are automatically matched, making the polarization controller not necessary in
MI-MISLs. Hence, both the simplification and reliability improvement of the sys-
tems are guaranteed. Due to the shortage of the optical isolation/circulator, the light
derived from two individual DFB laser sections will drastically interact with each
other, and thus, the MI-MISLs can enter a new state of mutual injection. Under this
condition, both lasers will try to force the other to operate at their own wavelength,
and there is no obvious distinction between the ML and SL. In most cases, for the
sake of differentiating each twin from the other for convenience, we recognize the
laser modulated by the radio frequency (RF) signal as the front (slave) laser section
and the laser with only dc bias as the rear (master) laser section. The oscillating light
is output from the facet of the front (slave) laser section in the MI-MISLs besides
the Y-branch structures in practical use. Conventionally, the working wavelength
of the oscillating light is controlled by adjusting the corresponding control current
or working temperature of the semiconductor laser through the effect of heat and
carrier density variation. Unluckily, this method does not work in MI-MISLs for
the reason that the two DFB laser sections are fabricated together on the same
Peltier refrigerating tablet and packaged in one chip, and thus both temperatures of
two DFB laser sections are fixed strictly by an external temperature control source,
sharing the same value. Though the laser wavelength in this device can only be
tuned independently by the respective injection current, a better environmental
stability of the MI-MISLs is ensured when compared with the conventional optical
injection system constituted by separated DFB lasers. In addition, it should be noted
that due to thermal crosstalk, the other laser section would also be influenced, and
the relevant oscillation wavelength will be shifted subsequently besides changeable
output power once one of the laser section currents is adjusted.
Unlike the case of unidirectional optical injection, the operating behavior of the
MI-MISLs is mainly determined by the combined effects of the coupling strength
𝜅, coupling time delay 𝜏as well as the detuning frequency Δf between the two
lasers. The time delay 𝜏corresponds to the necessary time that the emitting light
from one laser section travels to the other one. Ulteriorly, different from the discrete
optical injection systems subject to the long coupling regimes, the optical transmis-
sion path between the two DFB laser sections is quite small on a scale of hundreds of
micrometers, leading to an ultra-short coupling time delay, and thus the MI-MISLs
are classified into ultra-short coupling regimes, where the coupling time delay is
comparable to the resonance frequency period (1/Δf) and the various nonlinear
dynamics are generally decided by the detuning frequency and the relaxation oscil-
lation frequency under mutual injection. Actually, in the MI-MISLs, not only the
detuning frequency between the two DFB sections but also the relaxation oscilla-
tion frequency is different from that in the free-running state and constantly varies
in terms of different working conditions as a result of the mutual injection-induced
frequency shift, leading to the complicated dynamic characteristics. However, it is
difficult for researchers to extract these parameters to judge the working condition

228
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
of the MI-MISLs. In most studies, the injection currents are given and considered
because they can provide more perceptual intuition.
In 2013, a novel development of one three-section MI-MISL is presented in
[60, 61], whose structure is depicted in Figure 7.6c. Compared to the previous
structure just composed of only two DFB laser sections, one more 400-μm-long
grating-less phase-tuning section is added to tune the coupling strength and the
coupling time delay between the two 400-μm-long DFB lasers, which are found to
have significant influences on determining the locking or unlocking behavior of the
MI-MISLs sensitively. By tuning the current of the phase-tuning section to make
sure the MI-MISLs are under appropriate coupling conditions, the selectivity of the
dynamic lasing modes can get an enhancement, arising from the constructive and
destructive interferences of the optical fields in the two coupled laser cavities. It is
worthwhile to point out that, just like the variation when regulating the currents of
two DFB laser sections, as the control current of the phase-tuning section increases,
the lasing modes of both DFB laser sections will shift to longer wavelength simul-
taneously, owing to the heating effect. In addition, due to the thermal-induced
refractive index change, the coupling time delay will change and the coupling phase
will also alter accordingly, showing up different dynamical scenarios.
To get a further understanding of the dynamic mechanisms in the MI-MISLs, the
following set of delay differential equations is established to describe the internal
particle variations within two DFB laser sections under mutual optical injection
[60, 61].
dE1
dt = 1
2(1 + i𝛼)g(N1 −Nth)E1 + 𝜅
𝜏in
E2(t −𝜏)ei(𝜔2𝜏+Δ𝜔t)
dN1
dt
= I1
eV −𝜏−1
c N1 −Γg(N1 −N0)|E1|2
dE2
dt = 1
2(1 + i𝛼)g(N2 −Nth)E2 + 𝜅
𝜏in
E1(t −𝜏)ei(𝜔1𝜏−Δ𝜔t)
dN2
dt
= I2
eV −𝜏−1
c N2 −Γg(N2 −N0)|E2|2
(7.7)
Δ𝜔= 𝜔1 −𝜔2 means the frequency separation of the two lasers at the free-running
condition, and the other parameters defined here are same as mentioned before
in MI-OFLs. Generally, in the numerical analysis, the two mutually injected laser
sections are viewed to have the same structural parameters as well as a symmetrical
coupling, except for the initial frequencies at the free-running state. Based on the
above equations, one numerical simulation model is demonstrated in [60] and rich
varieties of dynamics are reproduced from the stable mutual locking state, FWM, P1
oscillation, P2 oscillation, QP to C. Just like the MI-OFLs, all these so-called optical
instabilities stem from the delayed optical injection from a laser to its counter-laser.
Y-branch integrated dual-wavelength laser diode is another specific laser structure
belonging to MI-MISLs, in which the two angled DFB lasers are associated with a
Y-branch coupler as Figure 7.6d presents [82–86]. As a result of the symmetric geom-
etry, the output of each laser merges into the Y-junction coupler section, and thus,
light injection can be realized from one DFB laser into another DFB laser by reflec-
tion at the end facet of the Y-branch section. Light is exported through the Y-branch

7.3 Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
229
section of the MI-MISLs. The injection level is controlled by adjusting the current
of the Y-branch section, which has an important influence on the tuning range of
the generated microwave signal frequencies. The wavelength difference between the
DFB sections can be tuned by changing the heat sink temperature or by varying the
injection currents of two DFB laser sections as well as the Y-branch section.
Based on these MI-MISLs, researchers have made great progress in the genera-
tion of high-quality microwave signals and tunable MPFs with huge bandwidth.
Additionally, when the two DFB sections are in the state of optical injection lock-
ing, the modulation response of the MI-MISLs can show a broad 3-dB modulated
bandwidth with a good flatness, which is a significant figure-of-merit in the ana-
log fiber link transmission. It is also seen that for a fixed initial frequency detuning,
the resonance peak shifts to a higher frequency with an increased coupling strength
when the absorption in the phase tuning section is reduced [65]. Moreover, great per-
formances, i.e. better SLM operation, frequency-chirp reduction under direct mod-
ulation, as well as improved nonlinear distortion can be allocated easily, making
this type of structure more suitable for analog ROF applications. Furthermore, light
injection means fewer carriers are required to reach threshold gain, leading to a
lower relative intensity noise (RIN).
Table 7.1 summarizes some comparisons within the three representative laser
structures in terms of some of the most important characteristics. It can be seen
that though MI-MISLs are equipped with numerous advantages, the inevitable fact
impossible to ignore is that these devices subject to mutual injection require not
only two DFB sections with precise wavelength detuning but also an additional
mode coupler, which greatly increases the fabrication process and finally leads to a
low device yield [95].
7.3
Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
7.3.1
Modulation Response Enhancement
Compared with external modulation, directly modulated semiconductor lasers are
of great interest in fiber communication systems, especially in very-short-reach
(VSR) ROF links due to their compactness and low cost [20]. However, in a typical
single-section semiconductor laser, once the modulation frequency applied to
lasers is beyond 10 GHz, the direct modulation characteristics are heavily limited
because of the low relaxation oscillation frequency. Furthermore, it is well-known
that analog link transmission with central subcarrier frequency up to 20 GHz has
been already common as the frequency resources become more and more nervous
in recent years. To meet the urgent need for greater speed, much progress has
been carried out to improve the modulation performance of the directly modulated
semiconductor lasers. Primarily, the modulation bandwidth in directly modulated
lasers is supposed to be enhanced, and to realize this goal, it is essential to make the
relaxation oscillation frequency as high as possible.
The following formula demonstrates the calculation expression of relaxation res-
onance frequency [53]. D, W, and L are the thickness, width, and length of the

230
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
Table 7.1
Comparison of different MISLs including PFLs, AFLs, and MI-MISLs.
Laser
structures
Composition
Advantages
Shortcomings
Nonlinear
dynamics
PFLs
Passive feedback
section + DFB
laser section
The simplest laser
structure
K: limited,
Not separate
control of K and
𝜙,
Butt-joint
growth process
Single-mode steady
state,
DQS-SPs,
MB-SPs,
Chaos
AFLs
Active feedback
section + phase
tuning
section + DFB
laser section
0 < K < 1,
Separate control of
K and 𝜙
Butt-joint
growth process
(some)
Single-mode steady
state,
DQS-SPs,
MB-SPs,
Period doubling,
Chaos
MI-MISLs
At least two
DFB laser
sections
Natural
dual-wavelength
mechanism,
No optical
isolator/circulator,
Automatic
polarization match
and optical
alignment,
Environmentally
robust
Precise
wavelength
detuning,
An additional
mode coupler
between two
DFB lasers
Stable locking,
P1 oscillation,
Frequency locking,
Quasi-periodicity,
Chaos
Function. DQS-SPs, dispersive Q-switching self-pulsations; MB-SPs, mode-beating self-pulsations;
P1, period-one; G, generation; T, transmission; P, processing.
active DFB semiconductor laser, respectively. dg/dn is the material differential gain.
Ith is the threshold current of the laser. By adjusting the relevant parameters, the
relaxation oscillation frequency can be improved effectively.
fr ∝
√
Γdg∕dn
DWL (I −Ith)
(7.8)
Conventionally, one favored approach to broaden the relaxation oscillation
frequency is utilizing the enhancement effect of CPR by optimizing the standard
semiconductor laser parameters, such as curtailing the laser cavity length and
increasing the differential gain of the MQW active layer as well as RC time constant
[43]. Especially, it is widely believed that reducing the laser cavity length is the
simplest way to increase the relaxation resonance frequency, thus leading to a
high 3-dB modulation bandwidth. However, it is also relatively challenging to
make DFB semiconductor lasers with short cavity lengths for that it means small
equivalent reflection, resulting in high threshold gain and finally degrading the
direct modulation bandwidth [54]. Thus, it should be compromised between the

7.3 Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
231
reasonable threshold gain and a high modulation bandwidth when related to design
a desired laser. Moreover, it is relatively rigorous and hard to fabricate lasers with
short cavity lengths as far as conventional cleavage technology is concerned. In
addition, it is a pity that further investigations have shown the advancement of
modulation bandwidth based on the principle of CPR frequency does not have a
qualitative improvement, which is typically in the range of 8–12 GHz.
In order to overcome the CPR frequency limitation of the direct modulation lasers
and further strengthen laser modulation bandwidth far beyond the CPR frequency,
another alternative method is proposed, which involves enhancing the relaxation
resonance frequency by taking advantage of the interaction of the neighboring opti-
cal longitudinal cavity modes. This technique with much potential is recognized as
PPR effect [44]. Until now, PPR effect has been exploited extensively through optical
feedback with the help of an integrated optical waveguide [40, 42, 45–48, 53–56],
or by means of optical-injection locking with ML and SL sources [58, 59, 62–65].
As to the optical feedback mechanisms, there exist two kinds: passive feedback and
active feedback. Actually, no matter in MI-MISLs, or MI-OFLs, a drastic interaction
between the photon and photon can be ensured, and a high PPR frequency can be
realized simultaneously, which potentially exceeds the usual CPR frequency a few
times and largely relaxes the CPR effect induced high-speed frequency limitation
to a great extent. Therefore, the approach of utilizing the MI-MSSLs instead of
one-section semiconductor lasers is recognized as a promising candidate to signif-
icantly enhance the direct modulation bandwidth with much flexibility nowadays.
Until now, there has been a large body of literature surrounding the modulation
characteristics enhancement. In 2011, one PFL with a flat modulation response and
high modulation bandwidth of more than 30 GHz was reported well for moderate
injection currents of DFB laser sections ranging from 50 to 70 mA [47]. The highest
−3 dB modulation bandwidth was observed at 37 GHz, which is largely enhanced
by a factor of 3 compared with the initial CPR-induced modulation bandwidth
of 12 GHz as Figure 7.7 shows. Similar result has also been obtained in [40] for a
two-section buried-heterostructure passive feedback laser (BH-PFL) device with a
flat modulation response and high modulation bandwidth up to 34 GHz at lower
DFB driving currents in 2012. Additionally, an in-depth theoretical analysis as
well as the experimental verification were carried out in the PFL with the focus of
improving the modulation bandwidth in semiconductor lasers by passive feedback
[45, 50]. State-of-the-art results described that the PPR frequency can be tuned
efficiently with the feedback phase and the feedback strength of the reflected
optical signal by changing the injection current imposed on the IFB section. The
feedback phase plays a role in the generation of the PPR frequency. The feedback
strength, which depends on the field loss within the IFB section, at the facet of
the IFB section, and at the interface of both sections, is responsible for getting
a dominance of the PPR frequency. Within each 2𝜋phase region, the increase
of the phase tuning current is accompanied by an enhancement of the feedback
strength, corresponding to an increased modulation bandwidth. An operation of
the PFL with the PPR frequency of 28–40 GHz was found with the phase current
of 13–18 mA [45]. However, it doesn’t work for the position of PPR in different 2𝜋

232
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
10
37 GHz
PFL
–3dB
CP resonances
PP resonances
12
IA:
0
–3
–12
(1) 0 mA
(3)
(1)
(2)
(4)
(5)
(2) 12 mA
(3) 14 mA
(4) 25 mA
(5) 70 mA
–24
0
–10
–20
70 mA
60 mA
50 mA
Modulation response (dB)
Normalized response (dB)
0
(a)
(b)
10
20
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
No feedback
60 mA DFB
Figure 7.7
(a) The comparison diagram of the enhanced modulation response of a PFL
based on the CPR effect (dotted line) and the PPR effect (solid lines) separately, and (b) the
enhanced modulation response in an AFL with the variation of control current of the
ampliﬁed section.
phase periods, which can be explained by a reduced feedback strength resulting
from the high carrier and thermal effects induced higher optical losses. Attributing
to the natural limitation of the tunable range of the feedback strength in PFLs, the
tuning range as well as the maximum of the PPR frequency are greatly narrowed.
Thus, it is a wise choice for PFLs to control the cavity length properly in order to
obtain a higher feedback strength. Moreover, an additional coating with HR at the
facet of the feedback section is a beneficial choice to obtain a high PPR frequency
by strengthening the optical feedback.
Different from the limited feedback strength in PFLs, AFLs are famous for their
higher modulation bandwidth arising from the improved feedback strength due
to the existence of an additional amplified feedback section in the constitution.
Attributing to the PPR effect, one AFL with an enhanced −3-dB modulation band-
width ranging from 12.8 to 19.1 GHz was achieved successfully with the aid of a
normal low-frequency wafer [56]. Some similarities can be found between this work
and the work of [55], which thoroughly reported both theoretical simulations and
experimental verifications to explore the effect of PPR on the enhancement of the
modulation bandwidth in an AFL. An enhanced −3 dB bandwidth of 27 GHz with
an in-band flatness of ±3 dB was successfully demonstrated at 13 ∘C, which is nearly
two times its original bandwidth determined by CPR frequency. If the PPR peak is
selected properly by means of tuning the injection currents, the modulation band-
width can be further enhanced to greater than 40 GHz in theory. It is found that when
the phase tuning section and DFB section currents are fixed, the increasing feedback
strength can result in the increasement of the optical mode spacing, corresponding
to the enhanced PPR frequency peaks as the control current of the amplified feed-
back section increases. Figure 7.7b depicts the corresponding simulation results that
by varying the current of amplified feedback section from 0 to 70 mA, the PPR peak
will increase from 15 to 32 GHz and the modulated bandwidth can be enhanced from
20 to 35 GHz in the meantime. In comparison, the PFL with the same section lengths
except an amplified feedback section only has a limited frequency tuning range of
less than 4 GHz by theoretical simulation. Hence, it can be concluded that the tuning
range of the PPR frequency is largely improved with an optimized feedback strength.

7.3 Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
233
Another study conducted by [55] also found that while the PPR frequency is
relatively high and far away from the CPR frequency, it will inevitably exist a
damped gap between the CPR frequency and PPR frequency in the frequency
response. Seriously, for the application in analog communication systems, the
modulation response should not only have a high 3-dB modulation bandwidth but
also have a flat S21 frequency property. Therefore, further optimization of the device
structure will be indispensable to ensure flat behavior in a wide tuning range and
get a balanced damping between the CPR frequency and the PPR frequency. In
other words, a compromise should be considered between the in-band flatness and
the high PPR frequency. By selecting a proper current combination, the gap between
the CPR and PPR peaks can be filled and a flat response curve will be obtained.
Besides the optical feedback through an integrated optical waveguide, optical
injection locking technique is another potential candidate to improve the mod-
ulation bandwidth [62]. In this case, the relaxation resonance frequency can be
tuned by changing the detuning frequency of the ML relative to the SL. Thus, it has
been recognized that with the help of the MI-MISLs under proper conditions, the
modulation bandwidth can be significantly increased in the same way. Actually,
in MI-MISLs, owning to the heating effect, the wavelengths of the front DFB laser
section and the rear DFB laser section drift to the longer wavelength simultaneously
when one of the DFB section currents is increased. They travel different distances,
and thus different detuning frequencies are generated. The relaxation resonance
frequency can be changed subsequently, resulting in a variable 3-dB modulation
bandwidth. This issue was explored by [63] using one monolithic injection-locked
DFB laser with two gain sections, and the resonance frequency ranging from 11 to
23 GHz under injection-locked state was successfully demonstrated. Here, the fre-
quency of enhanced resonance peak is defined as the frequency difference between
the main lasing mode of the SL section under mutual injection locking and a weak
sidelobe resulting from the red-shifted cavity mode of SL section. More recent work
by [64] with relaxation resonance frequency changing from 26.8 to 20.9 GHz, was
also reported by using the same two-section MI-MISL structure when the current
of the rear laser section rises from 110 to 170 mA. The particular phenomenon of
the relaxation resonance frequency not being correlated positively to the injection
current results in the frequency detuning here, which is defined as the wavelength
separation between the ML mode and the side-mode of SL. Among them, the maxi-
mum modulation bandwidth of the MI-MISLs increases to 31.6 GHz, which is about
20 GHz higher than that under the free-running state. Altering the phase tuning
section current can also have an indirect influence on the modulation response by
changing the coupling strength in the three-section MI-MISLs. Since the coupling
strength between the two DFB lasers is positively correlated with the phase tuning
section current on account of the reduced absorption, the modulation response
of the MI-MISLs is significantly enhanced with the phase tuning section current
increasing, indicating an enhanced modulation bandwidth. However, something
needs to be clarified that, just like the PFLs and AFLs, the coupling phase also has an
effect on the working state of the MI-MISLs, which is changeable with the current
injected into the phase tuning section. Conceptually similar work has also been

234
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
carried out by [65] in which a tunable resonance frequency of about 20–34.3 GHz
was recorded with the phase tuning section current altered from 5 to 23 mA under
mutual injection locking state. Special emphasis should be placed on the fact that
the highest resonance frequency of 34.3 GHz observed is more than fivefold of that
under free-running state. However, it is a pity that a flat modulation response with
enhanced 3-dB modulation bandwidth has not been reported until now.
Photonic microwave transmission named as ROF links is one of the impor-
tant hotspots in the application of MWP, which can also benefit from MISLs
for extremely dependent on the enhanced modulation bandwidth characteristic
[27, 48, 49, 66–69]. Historically, microwave signals are directly generated, transmit-
ted, and distributed in electrical circuits through electrical transmission lines, such
as the coaxial cable for customers. However, due to the high propagation loss with
a typical value of 360 dB km−1 @ 2 GHz, microwave signals are only transmitted
over a finite distance, which is rather impractical when applied in the long-haul
link. More importantly, the propagation losses increase with the signal frequency.
The contradiction between the increasing urgent demand for large bandwidth and
high capacity and the limited reach of transmission is apparently exposed with the
arrival of 5G/6G era. Based on the mature photonic microwave signal generation
techniques as well as the low loss fiber with a typical value of 0.2 dB km−1, the
novel method of transmitting microwave signals by utilizing high-frequency optical
carriers called as ROF link has been proposed to circumvent the dilemma in distri-
bution distance limitations of microwave signals in the electric domain. However,
cost and size of the needed optical sources as well as external modulators are
important issues when the transmission system refers to the external modulation,
which restricts the practical application of transmission system. Utilizing direct
modulation mode to load RF signals onto the optical carrier provides an optional
choice capable of reducing the insert loss, power consumption, and complexity. Yet,
direct modulation single-section semiconductor lasers are heavily limited in their
practical use as a result of the narrow modulation bandwidth. Luckily, the question
can be settled extraordinarily by using the PPR effect in multistage integrated lasers
due to the enhanced electro-optic conversion characteristic. Thus, next, we will
focus our attention on the photonic microwave transmission experiments on the
condition of MI-MSSLs and verify the feasibility in the application of link transmis-
sion by discussing and analyzing some experimental results. A considerable amount
of review of previous work in the subject area is given below as listed in Table 7.2.
A 5.3545 Gbaud differential 16-quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM)
half-cycle Nyquist single-cycle subcarrier modulation (SCM) signal with a 3.5-GHz
subcarrier is applied to the PFL to test specific transmission performance in [66].
The error vector magnitude (EVM) measurement results of back-to-back and after
61-km optical fiber transmission are 5% and 13%, respectively, manifesting the
feasibility of the passive feedback module. Similar transmission work has also been
pursued in [56] based on one directly modulated AFL, whose schematic of ROF link
and analysis of the received signal are displayed in Figure 7.8. One 20 M Symbol s−1
32-QAM signal with 19 GHz carrier is delivered via 25 km fiber transmission and the
ultima result of the EVM of the whole link is 3.91%, indicating an excellent received

7.3 Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
235
Table 7.2
Overview of MISLs for modulation bandwidth enhancement and ROF link
transmission.
Achievements
Integrated
structure
Modulation bandwidth
enhancement
ROF link
transmission (EVM/BER)
Year and
reference
PFL
25–40 GHz (simulation)
30–37 GHz (experiment)
×
2011 [47]
PFL
28–40 GHz (experiment)
×
2007 [45]
PFL
29 GHz (experiment)
13% (5.3545 Gbaud
16-QAM, 3.5 GHz, 61 km)
2013 [66]
AFL
27 GHz (experiment)
20–35 GHz (simulation)
×
2015 [55]
AFL
12.8–19.1 GHz (experiment)
3.91% (20 M symbol s−1
32-QAM, 19 GHz, 25 km)
2017 [56]
MI-MISL
23 GHz (experiment)
×
2003 [63]
MI-MISL
20–34.3 GHz (experiment)
×
2015 [65]
MI-MISL
31.6 GHz (experiment)
2.94% (40 M symbol s−1
32-QAM, 6 GHz, 50 km)
2017 [64]
MI-MISL
4.72 GHz (experiment)
3.76 × 10−6 (10 Gbit s−1
OFDM, 25 km)
2011 [67]
constellation diagram. Performance improvement of transmitting orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) signal by one MI-MISL over differing
transmission lengths is also experimentally verified by C. Browning et al. [67]. It has
been shown that after 25 km of standard single mode fiber (SSMF), the bit error ratio
(BER) decreases from 1.3 × 10−3 to 3.76 × 10−6 when mutual injection is used, which
is improved significantly by 3 orders of magnitude than that before optical injection
in the MI-MISL. The observed result corresponds to a reduction of 3.83% in average
EVM, indicating a viable and reliable transmission. Another study conducted by
[64] also achieved a similar finding. In this literature, the front DFB laser section is
directly modulated by a 40 M Symbol s−1 32-QAM signal with 6 GHz carrier. After
50 km of transmission, a better result is achieved in that the EVM of the system is
reduced from 5.25% to 2.94% when the MI-MISL is switched from free-running state
to injection-locked state (Is = 50 mA, Im = 150 mA). This decrease clearly indicates
that the received constellation diagram under the injection-locked state is more
superior to that of the free-running state. Furthermore, the comparison diagram of
the measured EVMs with different received optical powers between injection locked
state and free-running state is also investigated. It can be concluded that the received
32-QAM signal is improved significantly by utilizing the mutual injection state in
the case of the same received optical power. All the outstanding performances above
prove the feasibility and reliability of the monolithic integrated multi-stage lasers
in the application of ROF link. The internal schemes of optical feedback-induced
PPR effect as well as mutual injection can account for this variation.

Vector
signal generator
RF
signal generator
Signal
analyzer
(a)
(b)
Detector
Optical
attenuator
25 km SMF
Reflection
Phase
DFB
0.5 GHz 20 Msymbol/s
32QAM
19 GHz 20 Msymbol/s
32QAM
IDC + 32QAM
IP
IR
Mixer
19.5 GHz RF
Figure 7.8
(a) Schematic of ROF link using the laser module, and (b) analysis of the received signal.

7.3 Electro-optic Conversion Characteristics
237
7.3.2
Nonlinearity Reduction
Nonlinear distortions are crucial factors in the electro-optic conversion charac-
teristics, and they also determine the transmission performance of the directly
modulated semiconductor lasers [27, 68]. With respect to this specific subject, this
has also been extensively discussed in the MI-MSSLs [63–65]. Some issues mainly
including the 1-dB compression point, the second harmonic distortion (2HD), the
third-order intermodulation distortion (IMD3) as well as spurious free dynamic
range (SFDR) are well covered in the literature. All of them are essentially generated
from the interaction between electrons and photons. Especially, as the modulating
frequency approaches the relaxation resonance frequency, the interaction becomes
more and more severe. Now, attributing to the mutual optical injection and optical
feedback-induced enhanced modulation bandwidth, the nonlinear distortions can
be suppressed in the MI-MSSLs.
Commonly, the output of RF power is in direct proportion to the input RF power.
But, once the input power is too high, the output RF power will deviate from the
original linear curve, attributing to the RF link gain compression. Generally, the
1-dB compression point, where the output RF power decreases by 1 dB from the
linear curve, is proposed to describe the linearity work region of the semiconductor
lasers. It has been reported that the 1-dB compression point of the MI-MISLs had
a remarkable improvement of more 3 dBm than that in free-running state [64].
Besides, high-order harmonics, covering the second and third-order as well as the
fourth-order harmonics, were also investigated in [63–65], when the microwave
signal with the frequency close to the relaxation resonance frequency is modulated
on the MI-MISLs [65]. The power of the second and the third-order harmonics
are reduced by 17 and 23 dB, respectively, indicating a great improvement in
nonlinear distortions. Moreover, it is worthy of being noted that the noise near
the fundamental frequency is also suppressed by about 4 dB due to the reducing
RIN under mutual injection locking, which defines the fluctuations in the optical
power of lasers and mainly determines the ground noise level. The entire evolution
process of RIN under different current states can be also found in [56] with a
reference to an AFL, which is the same as that in MI-MISLs. As the current of the
reflector section increases, the RIN peak position moves to higher frequencies and
the corresponding RIN value is reduced. This phenomenon can be explained by the
increasing relaxation resonance frequency induced by PPR effect.
As one of the most vital factors for directly modulated lasers in analog optical
links, the IMD3 of two closely spaced RF signals determines the linearity of the
device. A two-tone signal with the frequency gradually close to the relaxation
resonance frequency was modulated to investigate whether the IMD3 can be
improved in MI-MISLs [64]. The spectra of the IMD3 signal in free-running
state and injection-locked state are given, respectively, in Figure 7.9, showing a
significant improvement of 24.54 dB in the suppression of IMD3 after utilizing
the injection-locked state. Another report demonstrated the reduction of IMD3
at various frequencies ranging from 0 to 4 GHz due to mutual injection in detail
in [67], clearly revealing how nonlinearity is reduced to a greater extent as the

238
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.9
IMD3. Source: Zhang et al. [64].
performed frequency approaches the nonlinear operation range of the SL. For
further investigation, the SFDR of the multi-section laser is also measured by the
functions of fundamental and IMD3 signals respective to the input RF signal power
[56, 64, 65]. Compared with the free-running condition, SFDR is improved by
about 9.1 dB from 80.7 to 89.8 dB Hz2/3 [64], attributing to the combined effect of
nonlinear distortion reduction and RIN suppression. Conceptually identical work,
utilizing a similar method, was proposed by [56] based on the AFL, in which perfect
SFDR is calculated to be 102.8 dB Hz2/3 around 19 GHz.
7.3.3
Chirp Suppression
In semiconductor lasers, frequency modulation (FM) is inherently accompanied by
intensity modulation as a result of the carrier and photon density variation as well as
the subsequent change of refractive index. The properties of frequency chirp induced
by the current modulation play an important role in an optical link since it can heav-
ily limit the transmission distance due to the effect of power fading, especially in
dispersive systems [23]. According to whether the photon density is changed with
time, we can separate the chirp process into transient and adiabatic chirp. It was
reported in [47] that both the transient and adiabatic chirps can be managed and
suppressed by adjusting the feedback strength and the feedback phase. Just like the
high-speed digital transmission, the chirp also exists in analog transmission links
[65]. The same phenomenon of chirp reduction can be also achieved in the case of
the MI-MISLs as a result of the injection locking. One 40-km-long SSMF was inserted
in an analog optical link to test the performance of the integrated laser under mutual
injection locking. The measured results depicted in Figure 7.10 manifest that an
improvement of more than doubled frequency-length product was achieved for the
fiber analog optic link, indicating a perfect suppression in the frequency chirp.
7.4
Photonic Microwave Generation
Microwave waveform generation has received intense attention in recent years.
It is found that high-frequency microwave signals can support a large range of

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
239
Figure 7.10
RF power fading after
40 km SMF.
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–400
5
10
15
20
Frequency (GHz)
Free running
Mutually locked
Normalized RF response (dB)
applications in radar systems, 60-GHz wireless communication access, and so on.
Lots of types of microwave generators have already been spurred and developed.
Traditionally, high-frequency microwave signals we desired are achieved by means
of frequency multiplication based on complicated and costly electronic circuits.
However, due to the limitations of the electronic bottlenecks, once the signal
frequency is beyond about 10 GHz, the phase noise performance of microwave
waveforms will deteriorate sharply at a rough rate of 6-dB reduction with the
frequency doubling, leading to a large degree of restriction in the maximum of the
microwave frequency. Moreover, the high loss of copper cables is also unfriendly to
long-haul transmission. Aiming at these existing questions in electrical domain, a
large number of corresponding photonic microwave generation techniques based
on single-section DFB lasers, which mainly include optical heterodyne technique,
external modulation, optoelectronic oscillators (OEOs), and P1 oscillation state,
have been proposed to generate high-frequency microwave signals with the help of
the photon’s unique dominances such as high speed and wide bandwidth. Among
these methods, optical waves at different frequencies, which are provided by two
laser sources, are detected to generate microwave signals through one photodetector
in the optical heterodyne technique. The approach can generate no matter how high
frequency you want in the absence of considering the maximum response frequency
of the photodetector. The beating frequency up to several hundred gigahertz bands
could be easily realized without a hitch. Yet, the phase noise of the microwave signal
is terrible because the two lights are not phase correlatively. External modulation is
another important photonic technique to achieve microwave signals by heterodyn-
ing the different optically carried microwave sidebands derived from modulation.
The generated microwave signals are not only high-frequency but also of a relatively
low phase noise as a result of the totally correlated optical spectral sidebands. How-
ever, due to the existence of external modulator, the operation schemes are often
subject to high insertion loss and large volume. The approach of OEO systems is also
attractive for the fact that they can generate high-quality microwave signals with
extremely low phase noises, but it is a pity that the similar question of the complex
structures is also exposed in OEO schemes. Besides, the technique of utilizing the
nonlinear behavior of semiconductor lasers themselves, subject to optical injection
and optical feedback systems is of great interest and has been explored thoroughly,

240
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
like self-pulsations, P1 oscillation state, P2 oscillation state, during the last 10 years.
Especially, when adjusting the optically injected semiconductor laser system to
operate in P1 state, a broadly tunable microwave waveform, whose frequency is
supposed to be up to 300 GHz far exceeding the intrinsic relaxation resonance
frequency of the semiconductor laser, can be realized with no difficulty. However,
in previous studies, the realization of optical injection and optical feedback systems
always required at least two discrete single-section laser sources besides one optical
isolator or circulator or one DFB laser with an additional mirror, and thus these
methods are facing the common challenges of costly and complex system structures.
Moreover, the precise control of polarization state is not well acquired.
Recently, microwave signal generation realized via MI-MSSLs has attracted much
research interest for the superior performances of more compactness, lower power
consumption, lower cost, and higher reliability than the conventional microwave
generation techniques based on single-section lasers. In this section, the previous
and current attempts at photonic microwave generation techniques based on
MI-MSSLs are described. In special, some of the most pertinent papers in the
subject field are reviewed and listed in Table 7.3. Besides the single-tone microwave
signals, the generation of frequency-modulated microwave waveforms, such as F-H
and LCMWs, which are widely applied in radar and solar systems, are described
as well. In the end, one optimizing method of boosting the signal quality and
narrowing the linewidth is demonstrated.
7.4.1
Tunable Single-Tone Microwave Signal Generation
7.4.1.1
Free-Running State
The frequency heterodyning of two optical modes coming from two independent
DFB lasers and separated at a desired microwave frequency is a well-suited
microwave generation method in the MI-MISLs due to their natural two DFB lasers
structure. In this approach, both DFB lasers operate in the free-running state and
oscillate on their own. By independently altering the corresponding drive currents
to change the wavelength deviation between the two oscillating optical modes, the
beating microwave signal frequency can be changed correspondingly according to
the following equation.
f = cΔ𝜆∕𝜆2
(7.9)
Here, c is the light velocity in vacuum, 𝜆is the Bragg wavelength, and Δ𝜆is the dif-
ference between the two modes. Based on this method, the continuous adjustment
of optical microwave signals from 13 to 42 GHz has been reported with the help of
two parallel DFB lasers integrated with Y-branch waveguide coupler, and the cor-
responding wavelength differences when fixing one injected current and scanning
another one are depicted in Figure 7.11 [82]. Another electrical signal with frequency
tuning range from microwave (∼10 GHz) to millimeter wave (∼50 GHz) was also
reported in [83] based on the same Y-branch laser structure. The frequency of the
generated microwave signal can be extremely high if not considering the bandwidth
of the measurement setup. The signal quality is also ensured to some extent for the

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
241
Table 7.3
Overview of diverse experimental results optical generation technique based on
different types of MI-MSSLs.
Integrated
laser
structure
Optical
generation
technique
Frequency
tuning range
Signal quality
(3 dB linewidth,
SSB phase noise)
Year and
reference
MI-MISLs Free-running state
10–50 GHz
∼10 MHz
1999 [83]
MI-MISLs Free-running state
13–42 GHz
∼10 MHz
2007 [82]
AFL
MB-SPs
17–35 GHz
—
2004 [94]
AFL
MB-SPs
28–41 GHz
∼8 MHz (28–41 GHz)
2002 [88]
AFL
MB-SPs
12–45 GHz
—
2003 [90]
AFL
MB-SPs
11–40 GHz
—
2014 [97]
AFL
MB-SPs
46.8–72 GHz
—
2015 [96]
AFL
MB-SPs
75–109 GHz
<4.5 MHz
2016 [95]
AFL
MB-SPs + sideband
injection locking
19.87–26.3 GHz
30 kHz @ 22.70 GHz
2009 [99]
AFL
MB-SPs + direct
modulation
15–33 GHz
−77.8 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz @ 26 GHz
(original 13-GHz
driven RF signal
(−84 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz))
2015 [102]
AFL
MB-SPs + dual
all-optical feedback
loop
30–38 GHz
<2 kHz (30–38 GHz)
2014 [118]
AFL
MB-SPs + single
all-optical loop
29–37.6 GHz
1.8–4.0 kHz
2014 [117]
AFL
MB-SPs + OEO +
self-injection locking
32–41 GHz
<−97 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz (32–41 GHz)
−101.6 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz @ 36 GHz
2015 [115]
AFL
MB-SPs + OEO +
self-injection locking
28–41 GHz
<−106 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz (28–41 GHz)
<−115.93 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz @ 33.5 GHz
2015 [133]
MI-MISLs Sideband injection
locking
42 GHz (eight
times
frequency)
−94.6 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz, −98.5 dBc Hz−1
@ 100 kHz
2009 [101]
MI-MISL
Self-pulsation + OEO
8 GHz
−108 dBc Hz−1 @
5 kHz
2012 [114]
MI-MISLs P1
14.15–35 GHz
∼3 MHz
2014 [61]
MI-MISL
OEO
17.3–21.7 GHz
−115.3 dBc Hz−1 @
10 kHz @ 20.3 GHz
−92.8 dBc Hz−1 @
1 kHz @ 20.3 GHz
2019 [116]

242
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
–40
–60
Relative intensity (dB)
1564.4
1564.6
I2 = 80 mA
I2 = 84 mA
I2 = 88 mA
I2 = 92 mA
I2 = 96 mA
I2 = 100 mA
Wavelength (nm)
Δλ
Figure 7.11
Wavelength difference when ﬁxing one injected current and scanning another
one.
two lasing wavelengths sharing the same laser cavity in MI-MISLs when compared
with that generated based on discrete DFB lasers. However, an important constraint
on all the work discussed in this method is that a Lorentzian-shaped microwave sig-
nal with a linewidth on the order of 10 MHz can be still observed in the electrical
spectrum due to the lack of phase correlation between the two DFB lasers. Good
consistency has been observed with a linewidth of 10.7 MHz full width half maxi-
mum (FWHM) at 15.187 GHz in [86], which exceeds the minimum requirement in
many photonic microwave applications.
7.4.1.2
Mode-Beating Self-Pulsations (MB-SPs)
The state of the MB-SPs in discrete optical feedback semiconductor laser systems
has been studied intensely both in theory and experiment in the last two decades for
their application in high-frequency microwave generation. Similarly, MB-SPs can
be also obtained in MI-OFLs when one section is operated as a saturable absorber.
High-speed MB-SPs in one two-section DFB laser were observed firstly in the giga-
hertz range in 1992 [87]. By adjusting an appropriate current injection, the MB-SPs of
MI-MSSLs can be established reproducibly from a common gain medium, in which
two compound cavity modes coexist and share the same threshold gain [95]. The
frequency separation of the two main lasing optical modes defines the frequency of
the beating signal.
For a certain IFB laser system, the beating frequency is mainly determined
by two main parameters, i.e. the feedback strength K and the delay time 𝜏. The
corresponding function between them is listed as followed according to [90, 92].
K = K0
||||
𝜋f𝜏
sin(𝜋f𝜏)
||||
=
1
2Cf
LDFB
LEC
||||
𝜋f𝜏
sin(𝜋f𝜏)
||||
(7.10)
The factor K0 represents the minimum feedback strength, which is the basic
requirement for the emergence of MB-SPs. Its size is determined by three param-
eters, including the effective lengths of DFB laser (LDFB) and external cavity (LEC)
as well as the feedback sensitivity Cf of the DFB section [92]. The delay time 𝜏is
decided by LEC and the group index (ng). One thorough image analysis of the rela-
tionships between beating frequencies and variables such as K/K0 and LEC is shown

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
243
140
200
400
600
1000
K = K0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
140
Calculated tuning range (K/K0 = 1.5–5)
External cavity length: LEC (μm)
Beating-frequency (K/K0 = 3)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
200
400
600
800
1000
External cavity length (μm)
Feedback strength (K/K0)
(a)
(b)
Beating frequency (GHz)
Beating frequency (GHz)
Figure 7.12
Calculated beating frequency as functions of feedback strength (a) as well as
external cavity length (b).
in Figure 7.12. It can be seen that the beating frequency increases with the growing
feedback strength under the condition of a fixed external cavity length. Moreover,
when feedback strength is fixed, the tuning range of the beating frequency is
gradually smaller with an increasing LEC. In especial, not only the maximum
available beating frequency (f max ∝1/𝜏= c/(2ngLEC)), but the minimum beating
frequency is determined by LEC. Hence, it can be concluded that a short external
cavity length is more attractive to result in high-frequency microwave signals as well
as a large tuning bandwidth [92, 93]. An optimized laser structure with a very short
feedback cavity of 230 μm was successfully designed to obtain high frequencies
around 100 GHz in [95], almost covering the entire W-band (75–110 GHz).
As the simplest MI-OFLs, PFL is firstly discussed to realize the MB-SPs. How-
ever, the fact of relatively low feedback strength is an inevitable shortcoming, heav-
ily limiting the development of the PFLs in terms of high-frequency generation.
Generally, the microwave signals generated based on MB-SPs are always at low fre-
quencies below 20 GHz in PFLs. One possible solution is to substitute the universal
anti-reflection (AR) coating at the side of the feedback section with an appropriate
high-reflection coating to promote the frequency of the generated microwave signals
through the improved feedback strength. Yet, the shortcoming of not controlling the
feedback strength separately is still remaining in PFLs, which is the fundamental
factor in limiting the size of the feedback strength.
AFLs, in which an additional amplifier section is integrated into the feedback cav-
ity, are proposed to compensate for the optical losses and obtain a higher feedback
strength, and hence higher beating frequencies. Especially, the independent control
of the feedback strength and the feedback phase can be allowed. In an AFL, it has
been found that the oscillation frequency decreases with the increase of the phase
current, attributing to the decrease feedback strength induced by free carrier absorp-
tion in the phase tuning section. Also, when the current of the amplifier section is
fixed, the MB-SP oscillations occur periodically with the phase current, which results
from the change in the feedback phase due to the refractive index change in the
feedback cavity [94]. In special, with the increasement of the current of amplifier
section, the injection current in phase section has a more vital effect on the MB-SP
frequency. More importantly, the areas, where MB-SP states occur, increase with the

244
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
increasing amplifier section current, and the extra changes of carrier density acting
in the added amplifier section induced a self-adjusting effect of the optical feedback
amplitude and phase, which can account for this phenomenon. Hence, AFLs work-
ing under MB-SP state can provide not only higher frequencies but also a wider
tuning range of the generated frequency, offering a more stable method to generate
high-frequency microwave pulse signals compared with the PFLs. It has been shown
experimentally that a continuous tuning of the self-pulsation frequency from 28 to
41 GHz can be adjusted via changing only the feedback level, i.e. by changing the
current in the active section [88]. Next year, the later work of [90] further optimized
the frequency tunability ranging from 12 to 45 GHz based on the same method. Sim-
ilar work has also been pursued by others [96] in which beating-frequency tuned
from 46.8 to 72 GHz was recorded. The frequency tuning range can cover most fre-
quencies of U-band (40–60 GHz) and V-band (50–75 GHz), which is very suitable for
the future millimeter wave over fiber networks.
Obviously, MB-SPs oscillation state can provide a possibility to generate
microwave signals at different pulse frequencies only utilizing a single DFB laser
device. However, the method is flawed for that in the operation of a MI-OFL, a pre-
cise and careful adjustment of the optical path length in the laser cavity is supposed
to be guaranteed for that the MB-SPs phenomena are sensitively dependent on
the feedback phase, or it will be difficult for us to observe these pulsations during
the experiment. Multiple studies have confirmed the problem. In addition, most
of the available experiments in literature carry notable limitations related to the
3-dB linewidth of the generated microwave signal, which is wide at MHz level [95].
Thus, the quality of microwave signals is worthy of being further optimized, and
it is recognized to reduce the linewidth to the kilohertz or even millihertz level by
adding extra optoelectronic feedback or all-optical feedback loops.
7.4.1.3
Period-One (P1) Oscillation
Besides the MB-SPs in the optical feedback systems, the P1 oscillation is also
an attractive microwave generation technique based on the nonlinearity of the
semiconductor laser itself. The so-called P1 state means that the temporal waveform
shows constant intensity and the pulsing period is consistent with the beating
signal frequency. In the OFL systems, the physical mechanism of the P1 state is
dispersion-Q-switching (DQS) self-pulsation. The microwave frequency generated
by this method is heavily limited, approximately equivalent to the relaxation
oscillation frequency of the laser device [97]. Accordingly, P1 state is more com-
monly studied for microwave generation in optical injection systems, because the
generated microwave frequency employing this method far exceeds the intrinsic
relaxation resonance frequency of the semiconductor laser. However, one matter
should be noted that most investigations of P1 state have been made based on
unidirectional optical injection in a discrete optically injected semiconductor laser
system, which originates from the beating between the injected optical mode
provided by the ML and the shifted cavity mode of SL. While in MI-MISLs, due
to the shortage of optical isolation/isolator, the two laser sections are mutually
injected. As a result, it is inferred that the P1 oscillation in this condition attributes

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
245
0
–40
–80
1547.0
1547.2
1547.4
1547.6
1547.8
1548.0
–40
–80
–120
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Frequency (GHz)
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
(b)
Power (dBm)
Power (dBm)
Current (mA)
60
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
Current (mA)
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
Figure 7.13
(a) Measured optical spectrum with IDC2 being varied from 60 to 92 mA while
IDC1 being ﬁxed at 77 mA, (b) measured electrical spectrum with IDC2 being varied from 60
to 92 mA while IDC1 being ﬁxed at 77 mA.
to the beating between cavity modes of both two coupled DFB laser sections [61].
One microwave signal generation at the frequency ranging from 14.15 to 35 GHz
was observed experimentally, and the measured optical spectrum with IDC2 varying
from 60 to 92 mA and IDC1 fixed at 77 mA is demonstrated in Figure 7.13a [56].
The largest frequency can be up to hundreds of gigahertz, if not limited by the
bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer as well as the photodetector. However, the
linewidth of the generated microwave signal is terrible at a level of MHz level just
like the discrete optical injection systems, as shown in Figure 7.13b. Furthermore,
it is a pity that to the best of our knowledge, the study about applying the P1
oscillation to single side band (SSB) transmission has not been reported so far,
which is recognized as a potential application prospect in ROF systems, especially
with the advent of 5G time.
7.4.1.4
Sideband Injection Locking
Among various photonic methods for mm-wave generation, sideband injection lock-
ing technique is a promising approach for generating high-frequency microwave
signals. The technique of sideband injection locking has two advantages. The first,
attributing to the optically carrier sidebands are derived from the same optical
source, different optical modes are totally correlated in phase and thus, the phase
noise of the generated microwave signals by beating multi-stage carrier sidebands
is of great improvement. Secondly, microwave frequency multiplication can be
achieved with the corresponding beating frequency at n ⋅f when the ML is modu-
lated with a low frequency of f and the oscillating wavelength of the SL is adjusted
to be locked to the high-order (+n) sideband of the ML. As a result, high-frequency
microwave signals with low phase noises can be easily accomplished [83].
External
Injection
Locking Photonic microwave generation utilizing external
injection locking is an important method of realizing high-frequency photonics.
Attributing to the optically carrier sidebands from external modulation are derived

246
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
from the same optical source, different optical modes are totally correlated in phase
after modulation. However, in the conventional discrete DFB laser structures,
the spectrum purity of the microwave signals generated by the sideband injection
locking is always suffering from phase decorrelation because, after the modulator,
the two beating optical signals undergo different optical paths between the ML
and the two SLs [84, 98]. Now, this problem can be settled when the two discrete
SLs are substituted by one MI-MISL because the optical path difference can be
neglected for the short distance between the two DFB lasers integrated on one
single chip. Microwave carrier generation based on external injection locking
has been experimentally reported in [85]. In this system, the ML is a tunable
laser source and the Y-branch integrated dual-wavelength laser plays a role of
the SL. The multi-optical carrier sidebands are generated by utilizing a LiNbO3
modulator. When injecting the modulated signals to the SL, i.e. an integrated
dual-wavelength laser diode, the oscillated lights of two DFB laser diodes (LDs)
in dual-wavelength laser diode can be respectively locked to the +1st and −1st
order modulation sidebands of the ML by tuning control currents. Thereby, one
frequency-doubled microwave signal of 24 GHz was generated after applying a
12-GHz RF signal into external modulator. Compared to the generated microwave
signal in the free-running state in MI-MISLs, the high spectral purity of the
microwave carrier was also ensured due to the sideband injection locking that
induced high correlation between the two heterodyning lights. In addition, if the
two oscillating optical modes in the Y-branch integrated laser are tuned to be locked
to the higher stage modulation sidebands of external injection signal, a greater
frequency signal with a low phase noise can be achieved incidentally. Similar
work has also been pursued by others [99] based on an AFL in which by utilizing
the external optical injection locking, the linewidth of the locked RF was 30 kHz
while the linewidth of the unlocked mode was 3 MHz. Simultaneously, quadruple
frequency at 22.88 GHz microwave signal was obtained by injecting the 5.72 GHz
modulated signal. However, prior work does not address the issue of complex
structures and high cost due to the existence of the external modulator as well as an
additional ML.
Self-Injection Locking Besides the external injection locking, direct modulation
of the MI-MSSLs to realize the self-injection locking is a simpler and lower-cost
method for eliminating the need for a ML and an external modulator. Attributing
to the combined effect of amplitude modulation (AM) and FM, a series of optical
sidebands can be generated on both sides of the optical carrier when one of the
DFB lasers is modulated. One pure 36-GHz microwave signal with high power and
high fidelity was generated in [100] by RF modulation of the SL section with a
12-GHz RF signal. The third sideband of the modulated SL was locked to the ML,
and thus the noise induced by random phase of two DFB oscillating modes was
eliminated, leading to a low phase noise. To our knowledge, it is the first time to
utilize monolithic sideband injection locking of a two-section DFB laser without
any external optical element to generate microwave signals. Another microwave
signal with a frequency up to 42 GHz has been experimentally recorded as well,
corresponding to eight-times the modulation frequency by utilizing the Y-branch

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
247
Optical
Optical
spectrum
–2nd
–2nd
+2nd
+2nd
–1st
–1st
+1st
+1st
–20
–40
–60
–80
RBW: 1 MHz
Injection locked
Free-running
25.5
26.0
26.5
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency offset from carrier (Hz)
Phase noise (dBc Hz−1)
RF power (dBm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Modulation
sidebands
Frequency
λ1
λ2
Power (dBm)
carrier
Figure 7.14
(a) Electrical spectra measured at the Y-branch facet (with/without injection
locking) [101]. (b) Phase noise spectra of the optically generated 42-GHz carrier and the
modulation signal. Source: Huang et al. [101]. (c) Illustration of the operation of the
electrical injection locking scheme [102]. (d) The RF spectra of the free-running AFL and
the injection-locked AFL. (a, b) Source: J. Huang, et al., [101]. (c, d) Source: Yu et al. [102]/
with permission of Elsevier.
integrated dual-wavelength laser diode, as Figure 7.14a shows [101]. The result of
obtaining a high-frequency mm-wave signal from one low-frequency modulation
signal was accomplished by taking advantage of the enhanced modulation nonlin-
earity around the relaxation resonance frequency. Compared with the modulation
signal, the phase noise of optically generated mm-wave signal at 42 GHz exhibited
only about 18 dB degradation, which was in accord with eight-time frequency multi-
plication as Figure 7.14b depicts. The phase noise at 10 kHz offset is −94.6 dBc Hz−1
and no Lorentzian-shaped noise floor was observed, indicating excellent phase
correlation between the two lasers. However, this result is limited by the bandwidth
of the electrical spectrum analyzer (ESA), or higher frequencies at multiples of
the modulation frequency can be observed, though the signal intensity decreases
with the increasing frequencies. The drawback of this method here is that due
to the limited modulation response intensity, large modulation current is often
required to realize high-order frequency multiplication, which may bring about
abundant nonlinear dynamics, such as period doubling and chaos, and finally
severely degrade the quality of the generated microwave signal.
Frequency tunability is also an important aspect in practical applications, which
can be also allocated in the technique of self-injection locking. By varying the ini-
tial modulation signal frequency and adjusting the detuning frequency between the
two DFB lasers, the frequency of the microwave signals can be easily tuned accord-
ingly [20]. There has been reported that a tuning range of over 4 GHz was realized

248
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
by adjusting the modulation frequency of the ML and the bias currents of both DFB
lasers in [101]. In addition, no significant variations in the RF power as well as the
spectral purity of the generated microwave signals were observed, indicating high
stability and tunability in the high-frequency microwave generation. Furthermore,
it is believed that the tunable range can be made wider by improving the DFB laser
structure to increase the flatness around the relaxation frequency.
Utilizing the sideband injection locking technique to suppress the chaos induced
by the large-signal direct modulation in MI-MISLs is another novel and simple
method for high-frequency signal generation [60]. In conventional single-section
laser, such large-signal modulation-induced chaos not only limits the intensity
of the high-order harmonics but also severely degrades their spectral purity. But
in MI-MISLs, the broadband chaos can be greatly reduced, and due to optical
coupling, the rear DFB laser section is also under modulation, though the modu-
lation signal is only applied into the front DFB laser section. Thus, the modulation
sidebands of the two DFB lasers are mutually locked, and the front DFB laser is
pulled from chaos to a stable state. After the photodetector, high-order microwave
signals with great spectral purity can be significant by carefully controlling the key
parameters. It has been reported that after the optical injection, about 20 sidebands
with comparable intensities are mutually locked due to the sideband injection
locking. The chaos was significantly suppressed, and high-frequency signals with
many times the modulation frequency began to stand out gradually. Harmonics
at 10 times the modulation frequency were generated, and one 33-GHz mm-wave
signal, corresponding to sixfold multiplication of the 5.5 GHz modulation signal
with the phase noise of −95.2 dBc Hz−1 at 10 kHz offset and −100 dBc Hz−1 at
100 kHz offset was recorded experimentally.
Identically, the technique of sideband injection locking different optical modes to
improve the quality of beating signals can be applied equally in the dual-wavelength
AFL [102]. The operation principle of the injection locking scheme is depicted in
Figure 7.14c. It can be seen that with the driven electrical signal injected into the
AFL, whose frequency corresponds to the 1/2 subharmonic frequency of the mode
spacing of the AFL under free-running state, the 𝜆1-mode optical carrier will be
locked by the −2nd order sideband 𝜆2-mode optical carrier, while 𝜆2-mode optical
carrier will be locked by the +2nd order sideband 𝜆1-mode optical carrier. Thus,
after the sideband injection locking, the dual modes of the AFL are synchronized
in phase, and a beating signal with low phase noise will be obtained. Meanwhile,
frequency-doubled photonic microwave waveforms are generated. Results demon-
strate that the beating frequency ranging from 15 to 33 GHz was achieved. In addi-
tion, microwave signals with the frequency of 26 GHz were recorded, as Figure 7.14d
shows, in which after injection locking, a dramatic beating linewidth narrowing
from a few megahertz to hertz level was observed.
7.4.2
Frequency-Modulated Microwave Signal Generation
LCMWs are extensively applied in radar and sonar systems due to their unique
characteristics in long-distance detection, high degree of resolution, and potential

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
249
imaging recognition of the target. Especially in the military field, LCMWs with a
wide bandwidth and large time-bandwidth product (TBWP) are in more urgent
demand for advancing the performance of radar and sonar systems. Conventionally,
lots of electric and photonic methods based on discrete devices have been proposed
to research how to advance the performances of LCMWs in the past decades,
such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCO) [103], surface acoustic wave (SAW)
[104], direct digital synthesizer technique (DDS) [107], and spectral shaping and
frequency-to-time mapping technique (SS-FTT) [108]. Due to the limitations of
electric bottleneck, all these electric methods usually suffer from a large degree of
restrictions in the maximum of the central frequency, bandwidth, and TBWP. As
for the photonic-based approaches, although these methods have the advantage
of a good tunability in any central frequency, bandwidth, and high compression
ratio, the most obvious conundrum in these approaches is that the systems used
are bulky and costly because of the application of numerous discrete photonic
components [107, 108]. Moreover, the stability of the systems in many aspects, such
as polarization and temperature, is supposed to be seriously considered.
Recently, some solutions based on MI-MSSLs have been put forward to solve
these problems. An LCMW with a pulse duration of 1 μs and bandwidth of 3.3 GHz
centered around 31.5–34.8 GHz was realized by using an AFL working on the
MB-SPs state [109]. By controlling the chip to work in the region where beating
frequency changes linearly with the feedback strength, a linear chirped microwave
signal will be obtained if a sawtooth sweeping signal is applied to the amplifier
section because the feedback strength is linear to the input signal voltage. The
method is simple and cost-effective due to the photonic integration component.
However, the generated LCMWs only have a small bandwidth of 3.3 GHz due to
the limited linear region. To improve the detection ability of LCMWs, which is
inversely proportional to the bandwidth, another method based on the intrinsic
P1 oscillation state of the MI-MISL was proposed [56]. This method also takes
the advantage of the changes in the relationship between the injection current
imposed on the front DFB section and the generated microwave signal frequency
in essence. After optical-to-electrical conversion in photodetector, the generated
LCMW reaching up to a bandwidth of 6.7 GHz together with a temporal duration
of 77 μs can be realized by injecting optimized sweeping signal, whose bending
tendency is compensated with the help of inverse fitting. As Figure 7.15a shows,
the corresponding TBWP achieved as high as 5.159 × 105. The excellent results give
the credit to the advantage of P1 state in large tunability in frequency. However,
the phase noise of the generated LCMW by above two approaches is supposed to be
improved further. Fourier-domain mode locking (FDML) technique is considered
as the best candidate to narrow the linewidth and boost the signal quality to obtain
significant arbitrary waveforms we desired, which has been successfully applied in
the discrete devices [110, 111]. In addition, the bandwidth of the LCMW requires a
further increasement for the early realization in future radar systems.
Besides linearly chirped microwave signals, triangular microwave signal is also
extremely attractive in radar and electronic warfare, for it can not only measure the
relative distance of the target but also can judge the relative velocity of the object.

250
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
30
30
25
20
15
10
15
0
–15
–20
Amplitude (mV)
Amplitude (mV)
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
–40
0
20
40
24
18
12
–300
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
50
100
150
200
0
11
22
33
44
16.2–22.9 GHz
15.8 G 18.2 G
Time (μs)
Time (μs)
(a)
(b)
Time (μs)
55
66
77
Figure 7.15
(a) Measured LCMW in one period as well as the calculated instantaneous
frequency. Source: Li et al. [56]. (b) Measured two-mode FH microwave signal. Source:
Adapted from Li et al. [113].
One triangular wave signal was experimentally achieved in [109] when the injection
sweeping current was triangular wave signal. The adopted principle is just the same
as that of the first method of generating an LCMW mentioned before. In the mean-
time, based on the P1 principle, the F-H microwave waveforms generation can be
achieved successfully as well, which is widely used in military radar systems for its
strong anti-jamming capability [112, 113]. Two or more frequency modes with a hop-
ping rate of 1 MHz have been reported in [113] based on the integration mode and
one two-mode F-H signal is shown in Figure 7.15b. Furthermore, it is convinced that
utilizing the two methods referred before can also achieve perfect F-H microwave
signal as well as triangular microwave signal with only need to alter the pattern of
injection current. More importantly, there are also reasonable grounds to believe that
more complex arbitrary waveform generation can be available without any difficulty.
7.4.3
High-Performance Microwave Signal Generation Optimizing
Technique
OEOs, which can generate high-quality microwave signals with low phase noises
and narrow linewidths, have attracted lots of attention among photonic tech-
niques of microwave generation. Conventionally, OEOs are incorporated with one
continuous-wave laser source, an external modulator, a long-delay-fiber loop, RF
amplifiers, as well as an electronic band-pass filter (EBPF). The quality of the
generated microwave signal is dependent on the fiber length, and the oscillator
frequency of the generated microwave signal is determined by the EBPF. However,
due to the existence of external modulators, most of OEOs are suffering from

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
251
high costs and complex configurations. Moreover, an RF amplifier with a gain of
at least 60 dB is typically necessary to compensate for the link losses including
the optical-to-electrical and electrical-to-optical conversion losses and the fiber
propagation loss in the feedback loop. Only while the loop gain is larger than all of
the losses, the loop begin to oscillate, and eventually, a low-phase-noise microwave
signal will be generated. In addition, the frequency tuning property is limited
heavily by the EBPF.
Recently, simple OEOs are proposed to generate widely tunable microwave signals
with superior performance by utilizing directly modulated MI-MISLs to replace
the synergistic functions of both laser sources and external modulators. In 2012, an
8-GHz OEO signal with a phase noise of −108 dBc Hz−1 at a 5-kHz offset based on
the self-pulsation state was reported successfully [114]. The OEO configuration is
greatly simplified for the reason that the need for the external modulator is elim-
inated. Additionally, due to the advantage of enhanced laser modulation response
around the relaxation resonance frequency subject to monolithic optical injection,
the RF threshold gain for loop oscillations and the requirement of RF amplifier are
both greatly reduced simultaneously. One should be noted that the beating of the
two main oscillating optical modes will greatly promote the initial oscillation of the
OEO, while in the traditional OEOs, the oscillation is built up from the lower tran-
sient noise in the loop constantly [115]. However, this scheme is still equipped with
an EBPF and thus the output microwave signal has only a single-tone frequency,
which limits the tuning range of the generated microwave signals largely. More
importantly, when considering high frequencies, it is not easy to find appropriate
EBPFs with sufficiently narrow 3-dB bandwidth and wide frequency tuning range to
define the desired frequencies. In addition, there was a ramp-up of the phase noise
at multiples of around 20-kHz offset in the spectrum image as a result of the side
modes from the free spectral range of the 10-km-long fiber loop. To further improve
the performance of the OEO, another simple frequency-tunable OEO based on an
integrated multi-section DFB semiconductor laser with the help of dual-loop struc-
ture was proposed [116]. By adding an extra optical-to-electronic loop of different
fiber length, one high-performance microwave signal at the frequency of 20.3 GHz
was generated through vernier caliper effect, whose SSB phase noise of the gener-
ated signal at the frequency offset of 10 and 1 kHz were −115.3 and −92.9 dBc Hz−1,
respectively. Here, the two parallel fiber loops with different lengths were used to
suppress the unwanted side modes, as Figure 7.16a depicts. Longer fiber can result
in a high Q-factor, leading to a smaller linewidth of the laser, and the shorter fiber
loop was adopted to filter the desired mode to guarantee the single-mode oscillation.
The SMSR was 60.94 dB, which had a 40-dB improvement compared with a single
loop. In this method, a built-in MPF based on the sideband injection locking effect of
the rear and front section lasers under mutual injection was adopted to replace the
EBPF without no additional loss except for the coupling loss, making the structure
simpler and more flexible besides the direct modulation. The central frequency
of MPF can be tuned electrically through current tuning of the MI-MISL. Thus,
microwave signals with diverse frequencies can be achieved easily only by adjusting
the bias currents of two DFB laser sections. Limited from the electrical amplifier, the

Rear
Phase
PC1
PC3
PC2
OSA
ESA
EC
EA
PD
PBS
PBC
AFL
OSA
PD
ESA
AFL
Electrical
output
–80
–85
–90
–95
–100
–105
–110
–115
17
18
19
20
21
22
Frequency (GHz)
(a)
(b)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
108
107
106
105
104
103
102 
30
32
34
36
38
Frequency (GHz)
Without self-injection
With self-injection
3-dB Linewidth (Hz)
1 kHz
10 kHz
Phase noise (dBc/Hz)
Circulator
PC
VOA
1 km
2
3
5 km
10/90
1
60/40
PD
Electrical path
Injection locked
Dual-mode AFL
Self-delayed
injection
locking
PD
EA
OE loop
O loop
AFL
RF
Optical path
Optoelectronic loop
All-optical loop
LNA(27dB)
Optical path
Circulator
Fiber loop 1: 20 m
PC1
PC2
VOA1
VOA2
Fiber loop 2: 50 m
30 m
Fiber
2
3
1
50:50
50:50
90:10
50:50
Electrical path
2.9 km
1.1 km
99%
50%
50%
1%
Front
IDC1
Iphase IDC2 + IRF
EC
Figure 7.16
Different schematic diagrams with optical-to-electrical/all-optical feedback loops as well as their outstanding results, or the principle (a)
Source: Zhang et al. [116]/Optica Publishing Group, (b) Source: Pan et al. [118], (c) Source: Adapted from Pan et al. [133].

7.4 Photonic Microwave Generation
253
OEO was tuned ranging from 17.3 to 21.7 GHz. In addition, the phase noise is heavily
restricted for using two cascaded power amplifiers with high noise figure and it can
be foreseeable that the phase noise will get further improved if the low-noise-figure
electrical amplifier is used. However, there are two deficiencies in this OEO scheme.
First, two polarization beam splitters and three polarization controllers are required
to make sure the polarization alignment due to the utilization of dual fiber feedback
loop. Second, the link loss is increased with the increasement of the total fiber
length, which will make an unreasonable demand upon the RF amplifier.
Besides the optical-to-electronic loop, the method of improving the quality of the
generated microwave signal through increasing an additional all-optical feedback
loop is also attractive for reducing the linewidth of each oscillating wavelength
and, in the meantime, avoiding the conversion loss between optical domain and
electric domain. A photonic microwave generation scheme based on monolithic
dual-wavelength AFL under single all-optical feedback loop has been reported.
Optical microwave generation tunable from 29 to 37.6 GHz with a linewidth reduced
from 3.7–7.5 MHz to 1.8–4.0 kHz was experimentally demonstrated [117]. However,
a narrow-bandpass microwave filter is required to achieve single-mode output. To
further compress the linewidth of each wavelength of the AFL and suppress the
unwanted side modes accompanied with a single external fiber loop, Pan et al.
proposed the dual optical feedback loops scheme, as shown in Figure 7.16b, in
which the two fiber loops functioned as the external cavity. In the tuning range
from 30 to 38 GHz, all of the linewidth was below 2 kHz, indicating more than 3
orders of magnitude reduction compared with free-running state [118]. Though the
significant linewidth narrowing characteristics, the all-optical feedback approach
is still troublesome for the real application due to the following imperfections.
Firstly, polarization controllers are necessary in each all-optical feedback loop to
adjust the polarization state of the signal injected to the AFL, largely increasing the
complexity of systems. Secondly, due to the lack of synchronization between the
two oscillating wavelengths, the beating microwave signal will fluctuate with time
during the whole operation. For cases where stability is a priority consideration,
the all-optical feedback loop scheme is not suitable. To make the two wavelengths
stay in phase with each other and increase the phase correlation between the
two beating optical modes, a widely tunable OEO based on a self-injection-locked
monolithic dual-mode AFL has been proposed and the schematic diagram is shown
in Figure 7.16c [133]. Roughly same as above scheme [115], the directly modulated
AFL functions not only as a seeding laser source but also can be equivalently recog-
nized as an active tunable MPF, an optical amplifier, and an intensity modulator for
the OEO, and therefore, it is obvious that neither a high-speed external modulator
nor a tunable EBPF is required. By sending the modulated lights back to the directly
modulated AFL, two kinds of injection locking will happen inside the AFL. One
is the self-injection locking of an individual mode by its own fiber-delayed replica,
and another is the mutual injection locking between the laser emitting modes and
subsequently injected modulation sidebands. With the optical loop closed, the com-
bination of two kinds of effects will result in two coherence laser modes oscillating in
AFL with narrowed linewidth down to kHz and finally lead to a much better beating

254
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
signal than conventional OEO structures with one optical–electrical loop. Moreover,
by taking advantage of the PPR effect, the beating frequency will be far beyond the
intrinsic modulation bandwidth of the laser itself. Therefore, stable microwave sig-
nals that were continuously tunable from 28 to 41 GHz with SSB phase noise below
−106 dBc Hz−1 @10 kHz and threshold electronic gain of no more than 27 dB were
obtained by tuning the injection currents of the laser sections [133]. The minimum
phase noise of −115.93 dBc Hz−1 was also achieved at 33.5-GHz frequency.
Though adopting extra optical-to-electronic or optical-to-optical feedback loop
can greatly improve the quality of generated microwave waveforms, it should
be noted that this original multimode operation stems from MB-SPs state or P1
oscillation dynamic in the MI-MSSLs at least in the current programs. Thus,
optical-to-electronic or optical-to-optical feedback loop can be only considered as
one of optimizing measures of overcoming original schemes’ limitation in linewidth
at MHz level. High-quality microwave signals with kHz-scale linewidth will be
achieved through continuous cycle oscillation in the feedback loop.
It is a pity to find that until now, the investigations concerning the theoretical anal-
ysis of the phase noise characteristics of the generated microwave waveforms have
not been reported. The phase noise of the microwave waveforms signal is extremely
important in deciding whether it can be successfully applied. It is supposed to be
the key question of the next research. Though the optimizing method has been uti-
lized to promote the phase noise performances of the generated microwave signals in
optical approaches, there still exists a big gap compared with that generated in elec-
tronic methods. As we know, high-quality microwave signals generated by OEwaves
can already reach at least −140 dBc Hz−1 at 10 kHz offset by traditional electronic
method. Merely, the carrier frequency is only tuned from 10 to 12 GHz and the elec-
tronic bottlenecks remain a problem hard to jump. Thus, the advantages of MWP
are quite obvious when at high frequencies. According to the experimental results
reported, many factors affect phase noise. First, no matter whether in MI-MISLs or
MI-OFLs, the coupling/feedback strength and the coupling/feedback phase should
be adjusted carefully, in which different combinations would lead to different phase
noise performances just like in discrete systems. Especially in MI-MISLs, phase syn-
chronization is supposed to be stressed. Although there is some correlation due to
the coexistence in one integrated chip, it is not completely synchronous. Second, the
RIN and the phase noise of the laser itself are also non-negligible factors, which are
influenced by the laser design parameters.
7.5
Microwave Photonic Filter (MPF)
Besides the photonic generation of microwave waveforms, frequency-tunable and
high-selectivity microwave filter is another key function device in the MWP sys-
tems. Conventionally, to achieve any microwave frequency we desired and dislodge
undesired clutter, an EBPF is of the essence. However, with the increasement of the
favorite frequency, continuing to utilize EBPFs to pick out microwave signals means
higher central frequency, leading to more expensive cost. In addition, the tunability

7.5 Microwave Photonic Filter (MPF)
255
–20
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
–30
–40
–50
–60
–70
–8020
25
(a)
(b)
30
35
40
45
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
Response (dB)
Response (dB)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 7.17
Experimentally measured microwave photonic ﬁlters (a) Source: Pan et al.
[133], (b) Source: Zhang et al. [116].
of the whole MWP system is degraded once the EBPF is fixed. The method of
utilizing photonic technique to realize filter function is an attractive orientation for
a large tunable range. Within the scope of research on MI-MSSLs, there are two main
built-in MPF generation techniques, according to their diverse principles at present.
One built-in MPF is realized by taking advantage of the PPR effect, in which the
central frequency is defined by the beating frequency [133]. Due to the PPR oscil-
lation, the modulation response will exhibit strong resonance frequency and res-
onance peak, and hence when the MI-MSSL is modulated around the frequency
at the resonance peak point, higher modulation efficiency will be achieved, cor-
responding to a higher filter frequency response at the frequency near relaxation
resonance frequency compared with other frequency signals. Since the phenomenon
only happens for those frequencies around the resonance frequency, a corresponding
single-passband MPF with a 3-dB bandwidth of MHz level can be obtained, whose
amplitude response shape strictly follows the modulation response curve and the
homologous central frequency is dependent on the resonance peak frequency. More-
over, as inferred before, the modulation response resulting from the PPR effect can
be changeable when the currents imposed on the multi-sections are altered. There
has been reported that one tunable MPF with the central frequency ranging from 28
to 41 GHz just by injecting different combinations of currents into the laser sections,
as Figure 7.17a shows.
Another photonic method of generating the MPF is based on the sideband injec-
tion locking process of two DFB laser sections in MI-MISLs [116]. As mentioned
before, the cavity modes of the two DFB laser sections will move to the longer
wavelength, respectively, and oscillate at their new red-shifted cavity resonance
frequencies due to the anti-guidance effect of the semiconductor laser gain medium
with the increasing currents. Meanwhile, in the vicinity of new red-shifted cavity
frequencies, there will appear an ultra-narrow gain spectrum within the region of
the injection locking and the pulling bandwidth. In this area, the sideband would
get a resonance amplification from the injecting mode due to the ultra-narrow
gain spectrum. Thus, when the external RF signals are modulated to the front
DFB section and the weak +1st sidemode of the optically modulated signal exactly
right fall into the range of the gain spectrum by tuning the corresponding current,

256
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
the +1st sidemode will get amplified and at the same time, undesired sidemodes
are set outside the bandwidth of the gain spectrum. Subsequently, the red-shifted
rear section cavity mode will be locked by the amplified sidemode, attributing to
the small frequency difference. Because the phenomenon only happens for those
frequencies falling in the gain spectrum, a corresponding single-passband MPF
can be generated afterward. The amplitude response of the MPF exhibits the same
shape as the gain spectrum, which can be tuned by adjusting the injection currents
of active DFB lasers. The experimental results, which are shown in Figure 7.17b,
reveal that one MPF with a large frequency tuning range of 16.9–34.7 GHz is gen-
erated based on the mutually injected three-section laser, indicating about 20-GHz
tuning bandwidth. Moreover, the 3-dB bandwidth of the MPF at different central
frequencies is excellently limited to around 10 MHz ranging from 6 to 18 MHz.
These methods to generate MPFs are based on the characteristics of MI-MSSLs
themselves, suggesting novel photonic measures to realize the function of MPF with
extensive simplicity and flexibility.
7.6
Laser Arrays
WDM-ROF networks, which combine advantages of ROF link and the WDM tech-
nique, can efficiently improve the carrying capacity of wireless access networks and
thus have become an ideal wired platform for the development of high-speed and
large-capacity information systems. While in WDM-ROF networks, large-scale laser
arrays such as DFB multi-wavelength semiconductor laser arrays (DFB-MW-SLAs)
are considered as the predominant light sources for their notable figure-of-merits
of small size, low energy consumption, high reliability, and so on compared with
several discrete laser sources. They are accomplished by integrating multiple lasers
with different wavelengths onto a single chip. Hence, multi-photonic microwave
transmission links can be achieved by only requiring one laser array. However, in
spite of their tremendous potential, the implementation of DFB-MW-SLAs has been
hampered by a number of issues, particularly a poor wavelength precision, and a
low SLM yield because the production of the laser array will rapidly decrease as
the channel number in one laser array gradually increases [51, 52, 57]. Thus, both
of them are essential parameters, which are supposed to be highly guaranteed, or
the entire laser array will break down. Usually, phase-shift gratings with antireflec-
tion/antireflection (AR/AR) coatings as well as the REC fabrication technique are
employed to guarantee DFB-MW-SLAs precise wavelengths and great SLM yields.
Thus, high reproducibility can be obtained at a remarkably low fabrication cost. One
packaged eight-channel directly modulated DFB-MLA transmitter module in [134]
has been successfully reported. For the corresponding small-signal modulation
response of each laser in the laser array. It can be observed that for all eight lasers,
the 3-dB modulation bandwidth is approximately 10 GHz when setting the whole
biasing currents of directly modulated lasers to be 55 mA, indicating excellent
operation for multi-wavelength analog ROF link transmission. Nevertheless, it
is difficult to obtain high-efficiency working state due to the symmetrical laser

7.6 Laser Arrays
257
structures inducing 50% optical output. HR coatings are often applied to one of
the facets to break the balance and obtain high efficiency operation. However, the
wavelength precision as well as the SLM yield will be deteriorated unavoidably with
the cleavage process, which attributes to the random phase change of the HR-coated
facet [135]. Changing the position of phase shift to the side of the output port is
another option to advance the optical output efficiency, but the movement distance
is limited to a narrow range due to the degraded SMSR as the asymmetry increases.
Hence, simple-effective methods to fabricate DFB-MW-SLAs with improved wave-
length accuracy, good SLM performance as well as high output efficiency are highly
desired.
On account of the great significant performance improvement from the
multi-section DFB laser, for further optimization of the characteristics of inte-
grated laser arrays, a novel approach of utilizing MSSLs instead of conventional
single-segment DFB semiconductor lasers to be integrated onto a single chip is
a bright alternative. A four-channel DFB-MLA integrated with passive grating
reflectors has been reported in [52]. Due to the increasement of additional GR
section, the symmetrical structure of each multi-section laser is naturally broken
and an improved laser output efficiency can be ensured without changing the
pattern of DFB laser section. Meanwhile, as a result of the fact that the reflectivity
of the GR for the main oscillating mode is much higher than that of the other
side modes, the SMSR will be promoted dramatically and the lasing wavelength
can be controlled with high accuracy. As Figure 7.18 shows, after incorporating a
grating reflector, 40% increase of slope efficiency, about 10 mA decrease of threshold
current, and 7 dB increase of SMSR are achieved. Compared to the design value of
3.2 nm between the adjacent lasers, the average error and the maximum deviation
of wavelength spacing are separately 0.027 and 0.07 nm. Moreover, the SMSRs of
all the lasers are higher than 60 dB. Furthermore, in order to study the dynamic
characteristics of the two-section DFB laser array in one WDM-ROF link, the
laser array is packaged using a commercial 10-GHz butterfly housing. Compared
with conventional one-section DFB lasers, the 3-dB modulation bandwidth of
the two-section DFB lasers is 1.9 GHz larger than that of the one-segment DFB
lasers, indicating an improved modulation bandwidth. Moreover, the modulation
response curves are much flatter, and the relaxation resonance peaks are sup-
pressed significantly under different control currents, which is of great benefit to
WDM-ROF transmission systems. In addition, SFDR is also considered. Two-tone
frequency signals of 10 and 10.02 GHz are generated to modulate the DFB lasers.
The experimental result clearly shows the SFDR of the two-section DFB laser and
the conventional single-section DFB laser are 92 and 87 dB Hz2/3, respectively,
indicating a better performance in terms of suppressing the nonlinear distortion.
Finally, one 50-MSymbol s−1 64-QAM signal accompanied by a 10 GHz carrier is
modulated on one of the lasers in the laser array and the corresponding schematic
is just like that shown in Figure 7.8a. After a 40-km SMF transmission, the average
EVM of the received signal is 2.97%, indicating an excellent constellation diagram.
These results manifest that good characteristics can be achieved in the four-channel
DFB-MLA integrated with passive grating reflectors, which may provide new ideas

258
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
–70
–80
–90
–100
4
TS-DFB@l1 = 50 mA, l2 = 0 mA
TS-DFB@l1 = 60 mA, l2 = 0 mA
TS-DFB@l1 = 70 mA, l2 = 0 mA
TS-DFB@l1 = 80 mA, l2 = 0 mA
TS-DFB@l1 = 90 mA, l2 = 0 mA
OS-DFB@90 mA
8
Frequency (GHz)
Intensity (dB)
12
16
20
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.18
Improved characteristics of the four-channel TS-DFB laser, (a) SMSR, (b) P–I
curve, (c) wavelength spacing, (d) frequency response, (e) schematic of ROF link using the
TS-DFB laser, (f) analysis of the received signal when the injection current of the TS-DFB
laser.
and methods for solving the drawbacks in existing schemes. More importantly,
it is convinced that the analog performances of the two-section DFB laser array
can be improved greatly by optimizing the key parameters in each laser, such
as the cavity length, grating and waveguide structure, package, and epitaxial
material.
It is also found that wavelength spacing accuracy can be further optimized by tun-
ing the injection current of the GR section [51, 136]. Due to the thermal crosstalk
between the adjacent lasers in a laser array, when changing the control current of
the No. 1 laser of the four-channel two-section DFB laser array, not only the wave-
length of the No. 1 laser, but also the oscillating wavelength of the adjacent section
is red-shift as Figure 7.19 depicts. The internal mechanism is that the extra heat pro-
duced by the increasing current of the GR section of the No. 1 laser changes the
temperature of the adjacent laser. Consequently, the refractive index of the adjacent
laser is varied, resulting in the variation of the lasing wavelength. Meanwhile, pre-
cisely because of the difference in slope efficiencies, the wavelength spacing accuracy
can be altered slightly by changing the control current of the adjacent laser, which is
beneficial to further improve the wavelength spacing accuracy. In the proposed laser
arrays, the maximum wavelength residual reduction to 0.096 nm is realized.

7.7 Conclusion
259
1543.68
1543.64
1543.60
1543.56
1543.52
0
5
10
Injection current of I2 (mA)
0.0045 nm/mA
0.01 nm/mA
Wavelength tuned by its own I2 
Wavelength tuned by I2 of the adjacent laser
Wavelength (nm)
15
Figure 7.19
The wavelengths of the No. 01 laser in the four-channel TS-DFB-LAs as a
function of its own I2 and I2 of the adjacent laser.
7.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, the three main MI-MSSLs types, including AFLs, PFLs, and
MI-MISLs, are described. The advantages and restrictions of each laser structure are
identified and discussed. Their key properties relevant to practice applications, such
as high-efficiency electro-optic conversion characteristics, photonic microwave
signal generation, frequency-variable MPFs, and the DFB-MW-SLAs for WDM-ROF
systems, are demonstrated as well.
The focus of this chapter is on modulation properties enhancement utilizing the
PPR effect. Lots of experiments cited in Section 7.3 have reported that the modu-
lation bandwidth based on the PPR frequency can be enhanced up to a range of
30–40 GHz, far beyond three times that determined by CPR frequency in the con-
ventional single-section semiconductor lasers. Moreover, the nonlinearity reduction
and chirp suppression are discussed. Another topic of this chapter is the photonic
microwave generation based on the nonlinear dynamics of MI-MSSLs, mainly con-
sisting of four dynamic states, namely free-running state, MB-SPs state, P1 oscilla-
tion state, as well as sideband injection locking. The photonic approaches to gen-
erating tunable microwave signals utilizing the MI-MSSLs are beneficial from com-
pact devices and flexible control when compared with conventional single-segment
semiconductor lasers. Furthermore, common radar waveforms such as F-H signals,
LCMWs, as well as triangular microwave waveforms are discussed by injecting the
corresponding control currents with specific patterns into the MI-MSSLs. Last but
not least, extra optical-to-electronic or all-optical feedback loops are described to
further decrease the phase noise and significantly improve the quality of the gen-
erated microwave signal. Considering the characteristics of the nonlinear dynamics

260
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
of MI-MSSLs and the urgent demands required for potential applications, several
future prospects are forecasted as follows:
(1) To further improve the laser packaging technology and advance the electrical
isolation between the adjacent sections in MI-MSSLs are sophisticated prob-
lems, especially in DFB-MW-SLAs, which have a great effect on the perfor-
mance of the direct modulated laser module. Usually, to ensure the MI-MSSLs
convenient use and inhibit oxidation of aluminum surface layer, MI-MSSLs are
usually packaged in the form of butterfly. However, laser characteristics, espe-
cially direct modulation response, are limited and heavily subject to RC par-
asitic. Hence, for future wide-bandwidth application scenarios, especially in
WDM-ROF networks, a more excellent laser packaging technology is suggested.
On the other hand, excellent electrical isolation is of great significance in decid-
ing the independent work characteristics of each section in MI-MSSLs, but in
the actual manufacturing process of the device, the isolation resistance between
the adjacent areas is not infinite, leading to an unavoidable offset current leak-
age. More importantly, the leak current at mA level is high enough to change
the working state of the device. Therefore, striving to improve the isolation resis-
tance between two areas is also an urging problem to be addressed.
(2) To promote the MI-MSSLs from laboratory research stage to being commer-
cially available is need to be further explored. Many aspects attribute to this
consequence. The first, MI-MSSLs, sharing the same laser structure, but
with different section lengths could present specific characteristics. Hence,
it is an unavoidable problem about how to balance multi properties (cavity
length, materials of laser, etc.) of MI-MSSLs and make the produced lasers to
be excellent as far as possible for the different scene demands. The second,
limited to the high precision requirements throughout the entire fabrication
process, it is difficult to achieve the MI-MSSLs with expected parameters such
as the SLM operation, suffering from a low yield. Luckily, one new manu-
facturing technology of waveguide grating, i.e. REC technique, which can
achieve the fine structure of nanometer level resolution by the large micron
grade operation is proposed and is recognized to effectively alleviate this
problem [51, 52, 56, 57, 64, 116]. Attributing to its superiority in reducing the
high requirement in process dimension, it is an important method to fabricate
complex grating structure nowadays. Therefore, the frequency stability and
repeatability of microwave signals can be ensured. Thirdly, though we can
achieve plenty of nonlinear dynamics in using well-designed MI-MSSLs, there
still exists an undeniable fact that people do not have a complete and constant
verdict concerning how to accurately control the multi-section lasers to work in
exactly right dynamic states we desired by tuning relevant variables including
drive currents as well as working temperature to concrete values.
(3) To further understand, study, and make full use of the nonlinear dynamics
of MI-MSSLs and expand their applications in the future, IMWP is a very
important aspect. Despite a large range of accomplishments that have been
realized based on the discrete devices, extremely limited applications have

References
261
been achieved based on the MI-MSSLs due to the limited depth of integration,
fabrication process, cognitive deficit, and so on. A large range of MWP
functions, such as up converter, channelized reception, and frequency mea-
surement, is still in the blanks and can be worthy of being studied. In addition,
with the development of 6G research as well as the consumer demands
for bandwidth-intensive applications, the photonic microwave frequency is
expected to be extended into the THz band and the ROF link is expected to
be replaced with the THz over fiber (TOF) link. Novel photonic microwave
techniques, which can efficiently and effectively generate and transmit high
frequencies into the THz range based on the MI-MSSLs are also an important
area of research.
(4) To effectively integrate the laser chips with other optical chips, such as silicon
chips, would be a challenging and important work. For specific applications,
mature PICs are more attractive toward the future IMWP because of their
higher integration and more stability. For instance, HI-QTM OEOs patented by
OEWAVE company can generate microwave-to-millimeter signals with the
same low-spectral purity at all RF frequencies, whose size is only analogous
to a coin. However, in some applications, such as optical link transmission
networks, especially in WDM-ROF systems, MI-MSSLs are the better choices
as light sources. In the future, how to tie these two technologies together to
realize more perfect photonic microwave functions is a promising area of
future research.
Funding Information
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (61974165).
Disclosures
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1 Capmany, J. and Novak, D. (2007). Microwave photonics combines two worlds.
Nat. Photonics 1: 319–330.
2 Seeds, A.J. and Williams, K.J. (2007). Microwave photonics. J. Lightwave Tech-
nol. 24: 4628–4641.
3 Yao, J. (2009). Microwave photonics. J. Lightwave Technol. 27: 314–335.
4 Li, M. and Zhu, N. (2016). Recent advances in microwave photonics. Front.
Optoelectron. 9: 160–185.
5 Marpaung, D., Roeloffzen, C., Heideman, R. et al. (2013). Integrated microwave
photonics. Laser Photonics Rev. 7: 506–538.

262
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
6 Marpaung, D., Burla, M., and Capmany, J. (2018). Editorial special issue on
advances in integrated microwave photonics. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 30:
1813.
7 Zou, X., Zou, F., Cao, Z. et al. (2019). A multifunctional photonic integrated
circuit for diverse microwave signal generation, transmission, and processing.
Laser Photonics Rev. 13: 1800240.
8 Chow, W., Koch, S.W., and Sargent, M. (1994). Semiconductor-Laser Physics.
Berlin: Springer.
9 Ohtsubo, J. (2017). Semiconductor Lasers and Theory. Berlin: Springer.
10 Simpson, T.B. and Liu, J.M. (1997). Enhanced modulation bandwidth in
injection-locked semiconductor lasers. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 9:
1322–1324.
11 Lau, E.K., Wong, L., and Wu, M.C. (2009). Enhanced modulation characteristics
of optical injection-locked lasers: a tutorial. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron.
15: 618–633.
12 Hwang, S.K., Liu, J.M., and White, J.K. (2004). Characteristics of period-one
oscillations in semiconductor lasers subject to optical injection. IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Quantum Electron. 10: 974–981.
13 Hwang, S.K. and Liang, D.H. (2006). Effects of linewidth enhancement factor
on period-one oscillations of optically injected semiconductor lasers. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 89: 061120.
14 Lee, C.H. and Shin, S.Y. (1993). Self-pulsing, spectral bistability, and chaos in
a semiconductor laser diode with optoelectronic feedback. Appl. Phys. Lett. 62:
922–924.
15 Tang, S. and Liu, J.M. (2001). Chaotic pulsing and quasi-periodic route to
chaos in a semiconductor laser with delayed opto-electronic feedback. IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. 37: 329–336.
16 Zhao, Y.G. (1992). Simulation studies of frequency locking, quasi-periodicity,
subharmonic bifurcation, and chaos in modulated semiconductor lasers. IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. 28: 2009–2015.
17 Lin, F.Y. and Liu, J.M. (2002). Harmonic frequency locking in a semiconduc-
tor laser with delayed negative optoelectronic feedback. Appl. Phys. Lett. 81:
3128–3130.
18 Kovanis, V., Gavrielides, A., Simpson, T.B., and Liu, J.M. (1995). Instabili-
ties and chaos in optically injected semiconductor-lasers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 67:
2780–2782.
19 Eriksson, S. and Lindberg, A.M. (2001). Periodic oscillation within the chaotic
region in a semiconductor laser subjected to external optical injection. Opt. Lett.
26: 142–144.
20 Zhu, N.H., Shi, Z., Zhang, Z. et al. (2018). Directly modulated semiconductor
lasers. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 24: 1–19.
21 Mogensen, F., Olesen, H., and Jacobsen, G. (1985). Locking conditions and sta-
bility properties for a semiconductor laser with external light injection. IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. 21: 784–793.

References
263
22 Simpson, T.B., Liu, J.M., and Gavrielides, A. (1995). Bandwidth enhancement
and broadband noise reduction in injection-locked semiconductor lasers. IEEE
Photonics Technol. Lett. 7: 709–711.
23 Lin, C. and Mengel, F. (1984). Reduction of frequency chirping and dynamic
linewidth in high-speed directly modulated semiconductor lasers by injection
locking. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 20: 1073–1075.
24 Iwashita, K. and Nakagawa, K. (1982). Suppression of mode partition noise by
laser diode light injection. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 82: 1657–1662.
25 Mogensen, F., Olesen, H., and Jacobsen, G. (1985). FM noise suppression and
linewidth reduction in an injection-locked semiconductor laser. IEEE Electron
Device Lett. 21: 696–697.
26 Chrostowski, L., Chang, C.H., and Chang-Hasnain, C. (2003). Reduction of
relative intensity noise and improvement of spur-free dynamic range of an
injection locked VCSEL. In: The 16th Annual Meeting of the IEEE Lasers and
Electro-Optics Society, Tucson, AZ, USA (27–28 October 2003), 706–707. Piscat-
away, NJ, USA: IEEE.
27 Meng, X.J., Chau, T., and Wu, M.C. (1999). Improved intrinsic dynamic distor-
tions in directly modulated semiconductor lasers by optical injection locking.
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 47: 1172–1176.
28 Wang, J., Haldar, M.K., Li, L., and Mendis, F.V.C. (1996). Enhancement of mod-
ulation bandwidth of laser diodes by injection locking. IEEE Photonics Technol.
Lett. 8: 34–36.
29 Simpson, T.B., Liu, J.M., Huang, K.F. et al. (1995). Cavity enhancement of reso-
nant frequencies in semiconductor lasers subject to optical injection. Phys. Rev.
A: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 52: 4348–4351.
30 Sung, H.K., Lau, E.K., and Wu, M.C. (2007). Optical properties and modulation
characteristics of ultra-strong injection-locked distributed feedback lasers. IEEE
J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 13: 1215–1220.
31 Sung, H.K., Lau, E.K., and Wu, M.C. (2007). Optical single sideband modula-
tion using strong optical injection-locked semiconductor lasers. IEEE Photonics
Technol. Lett. 19: 1005–1007.
32 Hong, C., Zhang, C., Li, M. et al. (2010). Single-sideband modulation based
on an injection-locked DFB laser in radio-over-fiber systems. IEEE Photonics
Technol. Lett. 22: 462–464.
33 Xiong, J., Wang, R., Pu, T. et al. (2013). A novel approach to realizing SSB mod-
ulation with optimum optical carrier to sideband ratio. IEEE Photonics Technol.
Lett. 25: 1114–1117.
34 Chan, S., Hwang, S., and Liu, J. (2007). Period-one oscillation for photonic
microwave transmission using an optically injected semiconductor laser. Opt.
Express 15: 14921–14935.
35 Sung, H. (2006). Strong Optical Injection Locking of Edge-Emitting Lasers and Its
Applications, vol. 158. University of California.
36 Jung, T., Liou, K., Sung, H., et al. (2005). Semiconductor injection locked lasers
and method. US 2005/0013337 A1. filed 27 May 2004 and issued 20 January
2005.

264
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
37 Lau, E.K., Zhao, X., Sung, H. et al. (2008). Strong optical injection-locked semi-
conductor lasers demonstrating >100-GHz resonance frequencies and 80-GHz
intrinsic bandwidths. Opt. Express 16: 6609–6618.
38 Qi, X. and Liu, J. (2011). Photonic microwave applications of the dynamics of
semiconductor lasers. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 17: 1198–1211.
39 Chow, W.W., Yang, Z.S., Vawter, G.A., and Skogen, E.J. (2009). Modulation
response improvement with isolator-free injection-locking. IEEE Photonics
Technol. Lett. 21: 839–841.
40 Kreissl, J., Vercesi, V., Troppenz, U. et al. (2012). Up to 40 Gb/s directly mod-
ulated laser operating at low driving current: buried-heterostructure passive
feedback laser (BH-PFL). IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 24: 362–364.
41 Matsuda, M., Uetake, A., Simoyama, T. et al. (2015). 1.3-μm-wavelength
AlGaInAs multiple-quantum-well semi-insulating buried-heterostructure
distributed-reflector laser arrays on semi-insulating InP substrate. IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Quantum Electron. 21: 241–247.
42 Hou, L., Tan, M., Haji, M. et al. (2013). EML based on side-wall grating and
identical epitaxial layer scheme. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 25: 1169–1172.
43 Akram, M.N., Silfvenius, C., Kjeborn, O., and Schatz, R. (2004). Design opti-
mization of InGaAsP–InGaAlAs 1.55 μm strain-compensated MQW lasers for
direct modulation applications. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 19: 615–625.
44 Reithmaier, J., Kaiser, W., Bach, L. et al. (2005). Modulation speed enhance-
ment by coupling to higher order resonances: a road towards 40 GHz band-
width lasers on InP. In: International Conference on Indium Phosphide and
Related Materials, Glasgow, UK (08–12 May 2005), 118–123. Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE.
45 Radziunas, M., Glitzky, A., Bandelow, U. et al. (2007). Improving the modula-
tion bandwidth in semiconductor lasers by passive feedback. IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Quantum Electron. 13: 136–142.
46 Kreissl, J., Troppenz, U., Rehbein, W., et al. (2008). 40 Gbit/s directly modu-
lated passive feedback laser with complex-coupled DFB section. International
Conference on Indium Phosphide & Related Materials. 2008 20th International
Conference on Indium Phosphide and Related Materials, Versailles, France
(25-29 May 2008). 1-4, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
47 Möhrle, M. and Schell, M. (2011). 40 Gbit/s directly modulated lasers: physics
and application. Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 7953: 79530F-1–79530F-10.
48 Troppenz, U., Bornholdt, C., Kreissl, J. et al. (2009). 1.3 μm passive feedback
laser for 28 Gb/s and 40 Gb/s transmission over uncompensated SSMF links.
In: 2009 35th European Conference on Optical Communication, Vienna, Austria
(20–24 September 2009), 1–2. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
49 Bornholdt, C., Troppenz, U., Kreissl, J. et al. (2008). 40 Gbit/s directly modu-
lated passive feedback DFB laser for transmission over 320 km single mode
fiber. In: 2008 34th European Conference on Optical Communication, Brussels,
Belgium (21–25 September 2008), 1–2. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
50 Uusitalo, T., Virtanen, H., Bardella, P., and Dumitrescu, M. (2017). Analysis of
the photon–photon resonance influence on the direct modulation bandwidth of
dual-longitudinal-mode distributed feedback lasers. Opt. Quantum Electron. 49:
1–14.

References
265
51 Zhang, Y., Zheng, J., Shi, Y. et al. (2015). Study on two-section DFB lasers and
laser arrays based on the reconstruction equivalent chirp technique and their
application in radio-over-fiber systems. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 21:
232–240.
52 Zhang, Y., Zheng, J., Zhang, F. et al. (2015). Study on DFB semiconductor laser
array integrated with grating reflector based on reconstruction-equivalent-chirp
technique. Opt. Express 23: 2889–2894.
53 Zhao, G., Sun, J., Xi, Y. et al. (2016). Design and simulation of two-section DFB
lasers with short active-section lengths. Opt. Express 24: 10590–10598.
54 Liu, G., Zhao, G., Sun, J. et al. (2018). Experimental demonstration of DFB
lasers with active distributed reflector. Opt. Express 26: 29784–29795.
55 Yu, L., Guo, L., Lu, D. et al. (2015). Modulated bandwidth enhancement in an
amplified feedback laser. Chin. Opt. Lett. 13: 051401.
56 Li, J., Pu, T., Zheng, J. et al. (2018). Photonic generation of linearly chirped
microwave waveforms using a monolithic integrated three-section laser. Opt.
Express 26: 9676–9685.
57 Zhang, Y., Zheng, J., Shi, Y., et al. (2015). High efficiency and SMSR dis-
tributed feedback laser array integrated with passive grating reflector based
on reconstruction-equivalent-chirp technique. 2015 Optical Fiber Communica-
tions Conference and Exhibition, Los Angeles, CA, USA (22–26 March 2015).
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
58 Jung, T., Sung, H., Wu, M.C., et al. (2003). Demonstration of monolithic opti-
cal injection locking using a two section DFB laser. Conference on Lasers and
Electro-Optics/Quantum Electronics and Laser Science Conference, Technical
Digest (Optica Publishing Group, 2003), paper CThC4.
59 Sung, H., Lau, E.K., Wu, M.C., et al. (2005). Large-signal analog modulation
response of monolithic optical injection-locked DFB lasers. Conference on Lasers
and Electro-Optics/Quantum Electronics and Laser Science and Photonic Appli-
cations Systems Technologies, Technical Digest (CD) (Optica Publishing Group,
2005), paper CTuV7.
60 Liu, D., Sun, C., Xiong, B., and Luo, Y. (2013). Suppression of chaos in inte-
grated twin DFB lasers for millimeter-wave generation. Opt. Express 21:
2444–2451.
61 Liu, D., Sun, C., Xiong, B., and Luo, Y. (2014). Nonlinear dynamics in inte-
grated coupled DFB lasers with ultra-short delay. Opt. Express 22: 5614–5622.
62 Lau, E.K., Xiaoxue, Z., Chang-Hasnain, C., and Wu, M.C. (2008). 80-GHz
intrinsic 3-dB bandwidth of directly modulated semiconductor lasers under
optical injection locking. In: 2008 IEEE 21st International Semiconductor Laser
Conference, Sorrento, Italy (14–18 September 2008), 171–172. Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE.
63 Sung, H.K., Jung, T., Wu, M.C. et al. (2003). Modulation bandwidth enhance-
ment and nonlinear distortion suppression in directly modulated monolithic
injection-locked DFB lasers. In: International Topical Meeting on Microwave
Photonics, Budapest, Hungary (10–12 September 2003). Piscataway, NJ, USA:
IEEE.

266
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
64 Zhang, Y., Li, L., Zhou, Y. et al. (2017). Modulation properties enhancement
in a monolithic integrated two-section DFB laser utilizing side-mode injection
locking method. Opt. Express 25: 27595–27608.
65 Sun, C., Liu, D., Xiong, B. et al. (2015). Modulation characteristics enhance-
ment of monolithically integrated laser diodes under mutual injection locking.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 21: 628–635.
66 Karar, A.S., Rezania, M.A., Deb, N., and Cartledge, J.C. (2013). 5.3 GHz mod-
ulation passband for fiber lengths up to 100 km using a directly modulated
passive feedback laser. In: 39th European Conference and Exhibition on Optical
Communication, London (22–26 September 2013), 1–3. Savoy Place, London,
England: IET.
67 Browning, C., Shi, K., Latkowski, S. et al. (2011). Performance improvement
of 10 Gb/s direct modulation OFDM by optical injection using monolithically
integrated discrete mode lasers. Opt. Express 19: 289–294.
68 Chrostowski, L., Zhao, X., and Chang-Hasnain, C.J. (2006). Microwave perfor-
mance of optically injection-locked VCSELs. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech. 54: 788–796.
69 Hong, C., Li, M., Zhang, C., et al. (2008). Millimeter-wave frequency tripling
based on four-wave mixing in sideband injection locking DFB. 2008 Interna-
tional Conference on Microwave & Millimeter Wave Technology, Nanjing (21–24
April 2008). IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
70 Juan, Y.S. and Lin, F.Y. (2011). Photonic generation of broadly tunable
microwave signals utilizing a dual-beam optically injected semiconductor laser.
IEEE Photonics J. 3: 644–650.
71 Zhu, H., Wang, R., Xiang, P. et al. (2017). A novel approach to photonic gener-
ate microwave signals based on optical injection locking and four-wave mixing.
Opt. Commun. 400: 101–105.
72 Fan, L., Wu, Z., Deng, T. et al. (2014). Subharmonic microwave modulation
stabilization of tunable photonic microwave generated by period-one nonlinear
dynamics of an optically injected semiconductor laser. J. Lightwave Technol. 32:
4058–4064.
73 Suelzer, J.S., Simpson, T.B., Devgan, P., and Usechak, N.G. (2017). Tunable,
low-phase-noise microwave signals from an optically injected semiconductor
laser with opto-electronic feedback. Opt. Lett. 42: 3181–3184.
74 Hung, Y. and Hwang, S. (2015). Photonic microwave stabilization for
period-one nonlinear dynamics of semiconductor lasers using optical modu-
lation sideband injection locking. Opt. Express 23: 6520–6532.
75 Zhuang, J. and Chan, S. (2013). Tunable photonic microwave generation using
optically injected semiconductor laser dynamics with optical feedback stabiliza-
tion. Opt. Lett. 38: 344–346.
76 Sung, H.K., Zhao, X., Lau, E.K., and Parekh, D. (2009). Optoelectronic oscilla-
tors using direct-modulated semiconductor lasers under strong optical injection.
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 15: 572–577.

References
267
77 Chen, G., Lu, D., Guo, L. et al. (2018). Frequency-tunable OEO using a DFB
laser at period-one oscillations with optoelectronic feedback. IEEE Photonics
Technol. Lett. 30: 1593–1596.
78 Zhou, P., Zhang, F., Zhang, D., and Pan, S. (2018). Performance enhancement
of an optically injected semiconductor laser based optoelectronic oscillator by
subharmonic microwave modulation. Opt. Lett. 43: 5439–5442.
79 Wang, P., Xiong, J., Zhang, T. et al. (2015). Frequency tunable optoelectronic
oscillator based on a directly modulated DFB semiconductor laser under optical
injection. Opt. Express 23: 20450–20458.
80 Zhang, T., Xiong, J., Wang, P. et al. (2015). Tunable optoelectronic oscillator
using FWM dynamics of an optical-injected DFB laser. IEEE Photonics Technol.
Lett. 27: 1313–1316.
81 Zhuang, J., Li, X., Li, S., and Chan, S. (2016). Frequency-modulated microwave
generation with feedback stabilization using an optically injected semiconductor
laser. Opt. Lett. 41: 5764–5767.
82 Xie, H., Wang, L., Zhao, L. et al. (2007). Optical microwave generation using
two parallel DFB lasers integrated with Y-branch waveguide coupler. Chin.
Phys. 16: 1459.
83 Laperle, C., Svilans, M., Poirier, M., and Tetu, M. (1999). Frequency multi-
plication of microwave signals by sideband optical injection locking using a
monolithic dual-wavelength DFB laser device. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech. 47: 1219–1224.
84 Huang, J., Sun, C., Xiong, B. et al. (2008). Phase noise characteristics of opti-
cally generated microwave by sideband injection locking. In: 2008 International
Nano-Optoelectronics Workshop, Shonan Village (02–15 August 2008), 301–302.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
85 Luo, Y., Huang, J., Sun, C., and Xiong, B. (2010). Optical generation of low
phase noise microwave by Y-branch integrated dual wavelength laser. In: The
19th Annual Wireless and Optical Communications Conference, Shanghai, China
(14–15 May 2010), 1–4. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
86 Laperle, C., Svilans, M., Poirier, M., and Tetu, M. (1997). Microwave generation
with monolithic dual-wavelength DFB lasers. In: 1997 Digest of the IEEE/LEOS
Summer Topical Meeting, Montreal, QC, Canada (11–13 August 1997), 17–18.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
87 Mohrle, M., Feiste, U., Horer, J. et al. (1992). Gigahertz self-pulsations in 1.5 μm
wavelength multisection DFB lasers. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 4: 976–979.
88 Bauer, S., Brox, O., Kreissl, J., and Sahin, G. (2002). Optical microwave source.
Electron. Lett. 38: 334–335.
89 Lang, R. and Kobayashi, K. (1980). External optical feedback effects on semi-
conductor injection laser properties. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 16: 347–355.
90 Brox, O., Bauer, S., Radziunas, M. et al. (2003). High-frequency pulsations in
DFB lasers with amplified feedback. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 39: 1381–1387.
91 Bauer, S., Brox, O., Kreissl, J. et al. (2004). Nonlinear dynamics of semiconduc-
tor lasers with active optical feedback. Phys. Rev. E 69: 016206.

268
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
92 Tager, A. and Petermann, K. (1994). High-frequency oscillations and self-mode
locking in short external-cavity laser diodes. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 30:
1553–1561.
93 Favre, F. (1987). Theoretical analysis of external optical feedback on DFB semi-
conductor lasers. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 23: 81–88.
94 Yee, D., Leem, Y., Kim, S. et al. (2004). Loss-coupled distributed-feedback lasers
with amplified optical feedback for optical microwave generation. Opt. Lett. 29:
2243–2245.
95 Pan, B., Guo, L., Zhang, L. et al. (2016). Widely tunable monolithic dual-mode
laser for W-band photonic millimeter-wave generation and all-optical clock
recovery. Appl. Opt. 55: 2930.
96 Pan, B., Lu, D., Yu, L. et al. (2015). Widely tunable dual-mode amplified
feedback laser with mode separation covering 60-GHz band. In: 2015 14th
International Conference on Optical Communications and Networks (ICOCN),
Nanjing, China (03–05 July 2015), 1–3. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
97 Yu, L., Lu, D., Pan, B. et al. (2014). Monolithically integrated amplified feed-
back lasers for high-quality microwave and broadband chaos generation. J.
Lightwave Technol. 32: 3595–3601.
98 Huang, J., Sun, C., Song, Y. et al. (2009). Influence of master laser’s lineshape
on the optically generated microwave carrier by injection locking. Appl. Phys.
Express 2: 072502.
99 Sun, Y., Pan, J., Zhao, L. et al. (2009). Widely frequency tunable amplified
feedback laser as 20 GHz optical microwave source. J. China Univ. Posts
Telecommun. 16: 50–53.
100 Hyuk, K., Jung, T., Wu, M.C. et al. (2003). Optical generation of
millimeter-waves using monolithic sideband injection locking of a two-section
DFB laser. In: The 16th Annual Meeting of the IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics
Society, Tucson, AZ, USA (27–28 October 2003), vol. 2, 1005–1006. Piscataway,
NJ, USA: IEEE.
101 Huang, J., Sun, C., Xiong, B., and Luo, Y. (2009). Y-branch integrated dual
wavelength laser diode for microwave generation by sideband injection locking.
Opt. Express 17: 20727–20734.
102 Yu, L., Lu, D., Sun, Y., and Zhao, L. (2015). Tunable photonic microwave gen-
eration by directly modulating a dual-wavelength amplified feedback laser. Opt.
Commun. 345: 57–61.
103 Kwon, H. and Kang, B. (2005). Linear frequency modulation of
voltage-controlled oscillator using delay-line feedback. IEEE Microwave Wireless
Compon. Lett. 15: 431–433.
104 Johnson, D.G. and Brooker, G.M. (2008). Wide band linearization of a
millimetre-wave, linear frequency modulated radar employing a surface acous-
tic wave, delay line discriminator. In: Smart Sensors and Sensing Technology
(ed. S.C. Mukhopadhyay and G.S. Gupta), 153–164. Springer.
105 Adler, E., Viveiros, E., Ton, T., and Kurtz, J. (1995). Direct digital synthesis
applications for radar development. In: IEEE International Radar Conference,
Alexandria, VA, USA (08–11 May 1995), 224–226. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.

References
269
106 Wang, C. and Yao, J. (2009). Chirped microwave pulse generation based on
optical spectral shaping and wavelength-to-time mapping using a Sagnac loop
mirror incorporating a chirped fiber Bragg grating. J. Lightwave Technol. 27:
3336–3341.
107 Zhou, P., Zhang, F., Ye, X. et al. (2016). Linearly chirped microwave waveform
generation with large time-bandwidth product by optically injected semiconduc-
tor laser. Opt. Express 24: 18460–18467.
108 Zhou, P., Zhang, F., Guo, Q. et al. (2017). Reconfigurable radar waveform gen-
eration based on an optically injected semiconductor laser. IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Quantum Electron. 23: 1.
109 Guo, L., Lu, D., Pan, B. et al. (2017). Linearly chirped microwave generation
using a monolithic integrated amplified feedback laser. IEEE Photonics Technol.
Lett. 29: 1915–1918.
110 Cen, Q., Dai, Y., Yin, F. et al. (2017). Rapidly and continuously frequency-
scanning opto-electronic oscillator. Opt. Express 25: 635.
111 Zhou, P., Zhang, F.Z., Guo, Q.S., and Pan, S.L. (2017). Linear
frequency-modulated waveform generation based on a tunable optoelectronic
oscillator. In: International Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics, Beijing,
China (23–26 October 2017), 1–4. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE.
112 Zhou, P., Zhang, F.Z., Ye, X.W. et al. (2016). Flexible frequency-hopping
microwave generation by dynamic control of optically injected semiconductor
laser. IEEE Photonics J. 8: 5501909.
113 Li, J., Pu, T., Zheng, J., et al. (2018). Frequency hopping microwave signal
generator based on three-stage integrated semiconductor laser. 18th National
Conference on Optical Fiber Communication and 19th National Conference on
Integrated Optics, Changchun, Jilin, China (13–16 July, 2018).
114 Cho, J. and Sung, H. (2012). Simple optoelectronic oscillators using direct mod-
ulation of dual-section distributed-feedback lasers. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett.
24: 2172–2174.
115 Lu, D., Pan, B., Chen, H., and Zhao, L. (2015). Frequency-tunable optoelec-
tronic oscillator using a dual-mode amplified feedback laser as an electrically
controlled active microwave photonic filter. Opt. Lett. 40: 4340–4343.
116 Zhang, X., Pu, T., Zheng, J. et al. (2019). A simple frequency-tunable opto-
electronic oscillator using an integrated multi-section distributed feedback
semiconductor laser. Opt. Express 27: 7036–7046.
117 Pan, B., Lu, D., Zhang, L., et al. (2014). Tunable photonic microwave generation
using self-injection-locked monolithic dual-wavelength semiconductor laser.
2014 Asia Communications & Photonics Conference, Shanghai, China (11–14
November 2014). IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
118 Pan, B., Lu, D., Sun, Y. et al. (2014). Tunable optical microwave generation
using self-injection locked monolithic dual-wavelength amplified feedback laser.
Opt. Lett. 39: 6395.
119 Chan, S., Liu, Q., Wang, Z., and Chiang, K. (2011). Tunable negative-tap pho-
tonic microwave filter based on a cladding-mode coupler and an optically
injected laser of large detuning. Opt. Express 19: 12045–12052.

270
7 Monolithically Integrated Multi-section Semiconductor Lasers
120 Xiong, J., Wang, R., Pu, T. et al. (2014). A novel approach to realizing a widely
tunable single passband microwave photonic filter based on optical injection.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 21: 1500706.
121 Hsieh, K., Hwang, S., and Yang, C. (2017). Photonic microwave time delay
using slow- and fast-light effects in optically injected semiconductor lasers. Opt.
Lett. 42: 3307–3310.
122 Fu, X., Cui, C., and Chan, S. (2010). Optically injected semiconductor laser for
photonic microwave frequency mixing in radio-over-fiber. IEEE J. Electromagn.
Waves Appl. 24: 849–860.
123 Chan, S., Hwang, S., and Liu, J. (2016). Radio-over-fiber AM-to-FM upconver-
sion using an optically injected semiconductor laser. Opt. Lett. 31: 2254–2256.
124 Li, M., Deng, Y., Tang, J. et al. (2016). Reconfigurable optical signal processing
based on a distributed feedback semiconductor optical amplifier. Sci. Rep. 6:
19985.
125 Mørk, J., Tromborg, B., and Mark, J. (1992). Chaos in semiconductor lasers
with optical feedback: theory and experiment. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28:
93–108.
126 Heil, T., Fischer, I., Elsäër, W., and Gavrielides, A. (2001). Dynamics of semi-
conductor lasers subject to delayed optical feedback: the short cavity regime.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87: 1–4.
127 Lang, R. (1982). Injection locking properties of a semiconductor laser. IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. 18: 976–983.
128 Tartwijk, G. and Lenstra, D. (1995). Semiconductor lasers with optical injection
and feedback. Quantum Semiclassical Opt. 7: 87.
129 Korneyev, N., Radziunas, M., and Wuensche, H. (2003). Bifurcations of a DFB
laser with short optical feedback: numerical experiment. Proc. SPIE Int. Soc.
Opt. Eng. 4986: 480–489.
130 Radziunas, M., Wünsche, H., Brox, O., and Henneberger, F. (2002). Excitability
of a DFB laser with short external cavity. Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 4646:
420–428.
131 Simpson, T., Liu, J., Huang, K., and Tai, K. (1997). Nonlinear dynamics induced
by external optical injection in semiconductor lasers. Quantum Semiclassical
Opt. 9: 765.
132 Kobayashi, W., Ito, T., Yamanaka, T. et al. (2013). 50-Gb/s direct modulation of
a 1.3-μm InGaAlAs-based DFB laser with a ridge waveguide structure. IEEE J.
Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 19: 1500908.
133 Pan, B., Lu, D., Zhang, L., and Zhao, L. (2015). A widely tunable optoelectronic
oscillator based on directly modulated dual-mode laser. IEEE Photonics J. 7:
1–7.
134 Wang, J., Liu, Y., Chen, X. et al. (2014). Compact packaging for
multi-wavelength DML TOSA. Chin. Sci. Bull. 20: 29–32.
135 Orfanos, I., Sphicopoulos, T., Tsigopoulos, A., and Caroubalos, C. (1991). A
tractable above-threshold model for the design of DFB and phase-shifted DFB
lasers. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27: 946–956.
136 Klepser, B. and Hillmer, H. (1998). Investigations of thermal crosstalk in laser
arrays for WDM applications. J. Lightwave Technol. 16: 1888–1894.

271
Index
a
advanced photodetectors
11, 14, 44
amplification process
123
amplified/active feedback lasers (AFLs)
224, 225
angular velocity sensitivity
144–151
b
beat note locking (BNL)
126
broadband photodetectors
26
electron-hole pairs
30
enhanced charge transport
35
Ga-based semiconductors
34
light-sensitive spectral region
30
mobility
26
semimetallic 2D TMDs
34
2D materials-based devices
35
ultrathin BP-based photodetectors
27
wide detectable range
26
c
carrier–photon resonance (CPR) effect
218
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
2, 6,
14, 87
Chirp suppression
216, 238, 259
coherent modulation locking (CML)
126
coherent transfer function (CTF)
178
confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM)
175
d
data signal source
94–98, 107–111
density functional theory (DFT)
28
detectivity (D)
12, 14, 36, 49
Drude model
56–57
e
electromagnetic spectrum
13
electro-optic conversion characteristics
229–238, 259
EM materials
56
evanescent-waves
177–182, 184–186,
188, 189, 191–193, 195, 198, 206,
207
external injection locking
245–246
f
fabrication process
39, 75, 93, 180, 184,
185, 193, 206, 221, 222, 229, 260,
261
far-field microscopy
176
finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
method
37, 94, 203
flexible photodetectors
44–49
fluorescence photoactivation localization
microscopy (FPALM)
176
focal plane arrays (FPA)
55
Fourier ptychographic microscopy (FPM)
176
frequency-modulated microwave signal
generation
248–250
Optical Imaging and Sensing: Materials, Devices, and Applications, First Edition.
Edited by Jiang Wu and Hao Xu.
© 2023 WILEY-VCH GmbH. Published 2023 by WILEY-VCH GmbH.

272
Index
g
graphene optical switch
85–87
AC mode of the gate capacitor
89–93
DC mode of the gate capacitor
87–89
optical features
85
graphene-assisted PSIM
202–203
h
heterostructure all-optical switch
93, 94,
100–102
high-performance microwave signal
generation optimizing technique
250–254
hyperbolic metamaterials (HMMs)
204
i
infrared (IR) photodetectors
21–25,
55–78
integrated microwave photonics (IMWP)
215–261
intensity-difference noise power (IDNP)
161
k
Kerr effect
90, 105, 108
l
laser arrays
218, 256–259
localized plasmonic structured
illumination microscopy (LPSIM)
177
localized plasmon-assisted illumination
nanoscopy
203–204
localized surface plasmonic waves (LSPR)
36, 68
circular disk array
71–72
nanowire pair
69–71
near-field distributions
68–69
low-pass filters (LPFs)
127
m
Mach–Zehnder interferometer (MZI)
84, 123
metal–dielectric multilayer metasubstrate
PSIM
200–202
metamaterial assisted illumination
nanoscopy
204–206
microwave photonic filter (MPF)
218,
254–256
microwave photonics (MWP)
215
characteristics
215, 216
integration
216
mixed-dimensional heterostructures
23,
25
mode-beating self-pulsations (MB-SPs)
218, 242–244
modulation response enhancement
216,
229–236
monolithically integrated multi-section
semiconductor lasers (MI-MSSLs)
215–261
monolithically integrated mutually
injected semiconductor lasers
(MI-MISLs)
217, 225–229
monolithically integrated optical feedback
lasers (MI-OFLs)
219–220
multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)
182, 184
n
nanofabrication technologies
55
near-field scanning optical microscopy
(NSOM)
177
noble-metal dichalcogenides
22, 49
nonlinear distortions
229, 237, 238, 257
nonlinear interferometer
124–143
entanglement
136–143
hybrid interferometer
151–155
interference-induced quantum
squeezing enhancement
160–163
phase locking
125–131
phase sensitivity
131–136
phase-sensitive parametric amplifier
155–160
quantum noise cancellation
136–143
types
143
nonlinear interferometric SPR sensing
124, 164–173
nonlinear refractive index coefficient (n2)
95

Index
273
nonlinear Sagnac interferometer (NSI)
124, 143–151
nonresonant transmission wave
63
numerical aperture (NA)
175
NW ring illumination microscopy
(NWRIM)
179
o
optical devices
83, 84, 115
optical injection systems
225–227, 244,
245
optical interferometer
123
optical microscopy
175–177, 193
optical modulators
85, 104, 105, 111, 112
optical nonlinearity
84, 105
optical resistance switch
graphene
85–93
modulation characteristics
104–115
nanomaterial heterostructures based
switch
93–104
optical signal
105, 219, 221, 231, 246
optical transfer function (OTF)
177–179,
201
Otto configuration
59, 60
p
parallel cases
142, 143
passive feedback lasers (PFLs)
218,
220–224, 231
phase-locking techniques
125, 131, 143
photoactivated localization microscopy
(PALM)
176
photobolometric effect
11, 12
photoconductive effect
11, 12, 20, 30
photodetection mechanisms
11, 12, 20
photonic band-gaps (PBGs)
83
photonic crystal (PC)
83
photonic integration circuits (PICs)
technology
215
photonic microwave
218, 234, 238–254,
256, 259, 261
photoresponsivity
12, 14–17, 21, 22, 26,
28, 30, 34–36, 38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 46,
48
photothermoelectric effect
11, 12, 30
photovoltaic effect
11, 12, 34
piezo-electric transducers (PZTs)
126,
127, 156
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition (PECVD) method
87
plasmonic perfect absorber (PPA)
72–76
plasmon-enhanced photodetectors
fabrication processes
39
InSe avalanche photodetector
43
nanostructures
36–38
preparation techniques
38
resonant properties
37
2D materials
36, 44
plasmonic perfect absorber (PPA)
72
broadband
76
enhanced QDIP
74–76
2DSHA
76
plasmonic structured illumination
microscopy (PSIM)
177
point-spread function (PSF)
175
polarization beam splitter (PBS)
128,
156, 253
pristine 2D perovskites
35
q
quantum dots (QD)
5, 35, 36, 64, 65, 74,
202, 205
quantum-noise cancellation (QNC)
123,
136–143
quantum noise locking (QNL)
126
quick charge extraction
14
r
reversible saturable optical fluorescence
transitions (RESOLFT) microscopy
176
s
Schottky barrier height (SBH)
19
self-injection locking
246–248, 253
semiconductor lasers
215–261
semimetallic 2D materials
22
single-molecule localization microscopy
(SMLM)
176

274
Index
single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)
35
spatial frequency shift (SFS)
label-free recovery process
180
photonic waveguide
184–189
principle of
177–178
super-resolution imaging
178–184
SPP-assisted illumination nanoscopy
199–203
standard quantum limit (SQL)
123
stochastic optical reconstruction
microscopy (STORM)
176
structured illumination microscopy (SIM)
176, 177
super-resolution imaging
labeled
195–197
label-free
194–195
principle of
189–193
SPPs and metamaterials
197–206
super-resolution microscopy
175–177,
198
surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs)
40,
55, 83, 177
surface plasmonic resonance (SPR)
55
complex permittivity
56–57
grating-coupled
60–61
plasma oscillations
56
prism-coupled
59–60
two-dimensional metallic hole array
61–64
waves
57–59
t
traditional Sagnac interferometer (TSI)
143
traditional thin-film materials
13
transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
40
photoresponse
16, 17
responsivity
15
transition-metal oxides (TMOs)
14
transmagnetic (TM) plane wave
57
tunable single-tone microwave signal
generation
free-running state
240–242
mode-beating self-pulsations
242–244
period-one (P1) oscillation
244–245
sideband injection locking
245–248
2D materials-based photodetectors
14,
19, 25, 44, 49
two-dimensional metallic hole array
(2DSHA)
61–64
2D semiconductors
17, 21, 23, 46, 49
v
van der Waals heterostructure
3–5, 14,
28, 34
visible-light photodetectors
15–21

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

