JOHN CROWLEY
 
Missolonghi 1824
 
 
One of the most acclaimed and respected authors of our
day, John Crowley is perhaps best known for  his fat and
fanciful
 novel
 about
 the
 sometimes
 dangerous
interactions between Faërie and our own everyday world,
 Little,  Big,  which  won  the  prestigious  World  Fantasy
Award.  His  other  novels  include  Beasts,  The  Deep,
Engine Summer, AEgypt, and a collection,  Novelty.  His
most  recent  books  are  Antiquities,  a  collection,  and  a
new  novel,  Love  and  Sleep.  His  short  fiction  has
appeared
 in
 Omni,
 Asimov
 s
 Science
 Fiction,
Else-where,  Shadows,  and  Whispers.  He  lives  in  the
Berkshire Hills of western Massachusetts.
 
Crowley doesn’t write many short stories, but when
he  does,  they  are  usually  worth  waiting  for—as  is  the
subtle and lyrical story that follows, in which a man of the
smugly rational nineteenth-century  “modern”  world  has a
curious  and  unsettling  encounter  with  a  survivor  of
Ancient Times. . . .
 
* * * *
 
The English milord took his hands from the boy’s shoulders, discomfited
but unembarrassed. “No?” he said. “No. Very well, I see, I see; you must
forgive me then…”
 
The boy, desperate not to have offended the Englishman, clutched at
the milord’s tartan cloak and spoke in a rush of Romaic, shaking his head
and near tears.
 
“No, no, my dear,” the milord said. “It’s not at all your fault; you have
swept me into an impropriety. I misunderstood your kindness, that is all,
and it is you who must forgive me.”
 
He went, with his odd off-kilter and halting walk, to his couch, and
reclined there. The boy stood erect in the middle of the room, and
(switch-ing to Italian) began a long speech about his deep love and respect

for the noble lord, who was as dear as life itself to him. The noble lord
watched him in wonder, smiling. Then he held out a hand to him: “Oh, no
more, no more. You see it is just such sentiments as those that misled me.
Re-ally, I swear to you, I misunderstood and it shan’t happen again. Only
you mustn’t stand there preaching at me, don’t; come sit by me at least.
Come.”
 
The boy, knowing that a dignified coldness was often the safest
demeanor to adopt when offers like the milord’s were made to him, came
and stood beside his employer, hands behind his back.
 
“Well,” the milord said, himself adopting a more serious mien. “I’ll tell
you what. If you will not stand there like a stick, if you will put back on your
usual face—sit, won’t you?—then ... then what shall I do? I shall tell you a
story.”
 
Immediately the boy melted. He sat, or squatted, near his
master—not on the couch, but on a rag of carpet on the floor near it. “A
story,” he said. “A story of what, of what?”
 
“Of what, of what,” said the Englishman. He felt the familiar night pains
beginning within, everywhere and nowhere. “If you will just trim the lamp,”
he said, “and open a jar of that Hollands gin there, and pour me a cup with
some limonata, and then put a stick on the fire—then we will have ‘of what,
of what.’“
 
The small compound was dark now, though not quiet; in the court-yard
could still be heard the snort and stamp of horses arriving, the talk of his
Suliote soldiers and the petitioners and hangers-on around the cookfires
there, talk that could turn to insults, quarrels, riot, or dissolve in laughter.
Insofar as he could, the noble foreign lord on whom all of them depended
had banished them from this room: here, he had his couch, and the table
where he wrote—masses of correspondence, on gold-edged crested
paper to impress, or on plain paper to explain (endless the explanations,
the cajolings, the reconcilings these Greeks demanded of him); and
another pile of papers, messy large sheets much marked over, stanzas of a
poem it had lately been hard for him to remember he was writing. Also on
the table amid the papers, not so incongruous as they would once have
struck him, were a gilt dress-sword, a fantastical crested helmet in the
Grecian style, and a Manton’s pistol.
 
He sipped the gin the boy had brought him, and said: “Very well. A
story.” The boy knelt again on his carpet, dark eyes turned up, eager as a
hound: and the poet saw in his face that hunger for tales (what boy his age

in England would show it, what public-school boy or even carter’s or
ploughman’s lad would show it?), the same eagerness that must have been
in the faces gathered around the fire by which Homer spoke. He felt al-most
abashed by the boy’s open face: he could tell him anything, and be
believed.
 
“Now this would have happened,” he said, “I should think, in the year
of your birth, or very near; and it happened not a great distance from this
place, down in the Morea, in a district that was once called, by your own
ancestors a long time ago, Arcadia.”
 
“Arcadia,” the boy said in Romaic.
 
“Yes. You’ve been there?”
 
He shook his head.
 
“Wild and strange it was to me then. I was very young, not so many
years older than you are now, hard as it may be for you to imagine I was
ever so. I was traveling, traveling because—well, I knew not why; for the
sake of traveling, really, though that was hard to explain to the Turks, who
do not travel for pleasure, you know, only for gain. I did discover why I
traveled, though: that’s part of this story. And a part of the story of how I
come to be here in this wretched marsh, with you, telling you of it.
 
“You see, in England, where the people are chiefly hypocrites, and
thus easily scandalized, the offer that I just foolishly made to you, my dear,
should it have become public knowledge, would have got both us, but
chiefly me, in a deal of very hot water. When I was young there was a fellow
hanged for doing such things, or rather for being caught at it. Our vices are
whoring and drink, you see; other vices are sternly punished.
 
“And yet it was not that which drove me abroad; nor was it the ladies
either—that would come later. No—I think it was the weather, above all.” He
tugged the tartan more closely around him. “Now, this winter damp; this rain
today, every day this week; these fogs. Imagine if they never stopped:
summer and winter, the same, except that in winter it is…well, how am I to
explain an English winter to you? I shall not try.
 
“As soon as I set foot on these shores, I knew I had come home. I
was no citizen of England gone abroad. No: this was my land, my clime, my
air. I went upon Hymettus and heard the bees. I climbed to the Acropo-lis
(which Lord Elgin was just conspiring to despoil; he wanted to bring the
statues to England, to teach the English sculpture—the English being as

capable of sculpture as you, my dear, are of skating). I stood within the
grove sacred to Apollo at Claros: except there is no grove there now, it is
nothing but dust. You, Loukas, and your fathers have cut down all the trees,
and burned them, out of spite or for firewood I know not. I stood in the
blowing dust and sun, and I thought: l am come two thousand years too
late.
 
“That was the sadness that haunted my happiness, you see. I did not
despise the living Greeks, as so many of my countrymen did, and think
them degenerate, and deserving their Turkish masters. No, I rejoiced in
them, girls and boys, Albanians and Suliotes and Athenians. I loved Athens
and the narrow squalid streets and the markets. I took exception to nothing.
And yet... I wanted so much not to have missed it, and was so aware that I
had. Homer’s Greece; Pindar’s; Sappho’s. Yes, my young friend: you know
soldiers and thieves with those names; I speak of oth-ers.
 
“I wintered in Athens. When summer came, I mounted an expedition
into the Morea. I had with me my valet Fletcher, whom you know—still with
me here; and my two Albanian servants, very fierce and greedy and loyal,
drinking skinfuls of Zean wine at eight paras the oke every day. And there
was my new Greek friend Nikos, who is your predecessor, Loukas, your 
type I might say, the original of all of you that I have loved; only the
difference was, he loved me too.
 
“You know you can see the mountains into which we went from these
windows, yes, on a clear cloudless day such as we have not seen now
these many weeks; those mountains to the south across the bay, that look
so bare and severe. The tops of them are bare, most of them; but down in
the vales there are still bits of the ancient forests, and in the chasms where
the underground rivers pour out. There are woods and pasture: yes, sheep
and shepherds too in Arcady.
 
“That is Pan’s country, you know—or perhaps you don’t; sometimes I
credit you Greeks with a knowledge that ought to have come down with your
blood, but has not. Pan’s country: where he was born, where he still lives.
The old poets spoke of his hour as noon, when he sleeps upon the hills;
when even if you did not see the god face-to-face—woe to you if you
did—you could hear his voice, or the sound of his pipes: a sorrowful music,
for he is a sad god at heart, and mourns for his lost love Echo.”
 
The poet ceased to speak for a long moment. He remembered that
music, heard in the blaze of the Arcadian sun, music not different from the
hot nameless drone of noontide itself, compounded of insects, exha-lation

of the trees, the heated blood rushing in his head. Yet it was a song too,
potent and vivifying—and sad, infinitely sad: that even a god could mistake
the reflection of his own voice for love’s.
 
There were other gods in those mountains besides great Pan, or had
been once; the little party of travelers would pass through groves or near
pools, where little stelae had been set up in another age, canted over now
and pitted and mossy, or broken and worn away, but whose figures could
sometimes still be read: crude nymphs, half-figures of squat horned
bearded men with great phalluses, broken or whole. The Orthodox in their
party crossed themselves passing these, the Mussulmen looked away or
pointed and laughed.
 
“The little gods of woodland places,” the poet said. “The gods of
hunters and fishermen. It reminded me of my own home country of
Scot-land, and how the men and women still believe in pixies and kelpies,
and leave food for them, or signs to placate them. It was very like that.
 
“And I doubt not those old Scotsmen have their reasons for acting as
they do, as good reasons as the Greeks had. And have still—whereby
hangs this tale.”
 
He drank again (more than this cupful would be needed to get him
through the night) and laid a careful hand on Loukas’s dark curls. “It was in
such a glen that one night we made our camp. So long did the Alba-nians
dance and sing around the fire—’When we were thieves at Targa,’ and I’m
sure they were—and so sympathetic did I find the spot, that by noon next
day we were still at ease there.
 
“Noon. Pan’s song. But we became aware of other sounds as well,
human sounds, a horn blown, thrashings and crashing in the glen beyond
our camp. Then figures: villagers, armed with rakes and staves and one old
man with a fowling-piece.
 
“A hunt of some sort was up, though what game could have been in
these mountains large enough to attract such a crowd I could not imag-ine;
it was hard to believe that many boar or deer could get a living here, and
there was uproar enough among these villagers that they might have been
after a tiger.
 
“We joined the chase for a time, trying to see what was afoot. A cry
arose down where the forest was thickest, and for an instant I did see some
beast ahead of the pack, crashing in the undergrowth, and heard an
ani-mal’s cry—then no more. Nikos had no taste for pursuit in the heat of

the day, and the hunt straggled on out of our ken.
 
“Toward evening we reached the village itself, over a mountain and a
pass: a cluster of houses, a monastery on the scarp above where monks
starved themselves, a taberna and a church. There was much excitement;
men strutted with their weapons in the street. Apparently their hunt had
been successful, but it was not easy to determine what they had caught. I
spoke but little Romaic then; the Albanians knew none. Nikos, who could
speak Italian and some English, held these mountain people in con-tempt,
and soon grew bored with the work of translating. But gradually I conceived
the idea that what they had hunted through the groves and glens was not an
animal at all but a man—some poor madman, apparently, some wild man of
the woods hunted down for sport. He was being kept caged outside the
town, it seemed, awaiting me judgment of some village headman.
 
“I was well aware of the bigotries of people such as these villagers
were; of Greeks in general, and of their Turkish masters too if it come to
that. Whoever started their fear or incurred their displeasure, it would go
hard with them. That winter in Athens I had interceded for a woman
con-demned to death by the Turkish authorities, she having been caught in
illicit love. Not with me: with me she was not caught. Nonetheless I took it
upon myself to rescue her, which with much bluster and a certain quan-tity
of silver I accomplished. I thought perhaps I could help the poor wretch
these people had taken. I cannot bear to see even a wild beast in a cage.
 
“No one welcomed my intervention. The village headman did not want
to see me. The villagers fled from my Albanians, the loudest strut-ters
fleeing first. When at last I found a priest I could get some sense from, he
told me I was much mistaken and should not interfere. He was
tremen-dously excited, and spoke of rape, not one but many, or the
possibility of them anyway, now thank Christ avoided. But I could not credit
what he seemed to say: that the captive was not a madman at all but a man
of the woods, one who had never lived among men. Nikos translated what
the priest said: ‘He speaks, but no one understands him.’
 
“Now I was even more fascinated. I thought perhaps this might be
one of the Wild Boys one hears of now and then, abandoned to the and
raised by wolves; not a thing one normally credits, and yet... There was
some-thing in the air of the village, the wild distraction of the
priest—com-pounded of fear and triumph—that kept me from inquiring
further. I would bide my time.
 
“As darkness came on the people of the village seemed to be
readying themselves for some further brutishness. Pine torches had been

lit, lead-ing the way to the dell where the captive was being held. It seemed
pos-sible that they planned to burn the fellow alive: any such idea as that of
course I must prevent, and quickly.
 
“Like Machiavel, I chose a combination of force and suasion as best
suited to accomplishing my purpose. I stood the men of the village to a
quantity of drink at the taberna, and I posted my armed Albanians on the
path out to the little dell where the captive was. Then I went in peace to see
for myself.
 
“In the flare of the torches I could see the cage, green poles lashed
together. I crept slowly to it, not wanting whoever was within to raise an
alarm. I felt my heart beat fast, without knowing why it should. As I came
close, a dark hand was put out, and took hold of a bar. Something in this
hand’s action—I cannot say what—was not the action of a man’s hand, but
of a beast’s; what beast, though?
 
“What reached me next was the smell, a nose-filling rankness that I
have never smelled again but would know in a moment. There was
some-thing of hurt and fear in it, the smell of an animal that has been
wounded and soiled itself; but there was a life history in it too, a ferocious
filthiness, something untrammeled and uncaring—well, it’s quite impossible,
the language has too few words for smells, potent though they be. Now I
knew mat what was in the cage was not a man; only a furbearer could retain
so much odor. And yet: He speaks, the priest had said, and no one
un-derstands him.
 
“I looked within the cage. I could see nothing at first, though I could
hear a labored breath, and felt a poised stillness, the tension of a creature
waiting for attack. Then he blinked, and I saw his eyes turned on me.
 
“You know the eyes of your ancestors, Loukas, the eyes pictured on
vases and on the ancientest of statues: those enormous almond-shaped
eyes, outlined in black, black-pupiled too, and staring, overflowing with
some life other than this world’s. Those were his eyes, Greek eyes that no
Greek ever had; white at the long corners, with great onyx centers.
 
“He blinked again, and moved within his cage—his captors had made
it too small to stand in, and he must have suffered dreadfully in it—and drew
up his legs. He struggled to get some ease, and one foot slid out be-tween
the bars below, and nearly touched my knee where I knelt in the dust. And I
knew then why it was that he spoke but was not understood.”
 
At first he had thought there must be more than one animal confined

in the little cage, his mind unwilling to add together the reaching, twitch-ing
foot with its lean shin extended between the bars and the great-eyed
hard-breathing personage inside. Cloven: that foot the Christians took from
Pan and Pan’s sons to give to their Devil. The poet had always taken his
own clubbed foot as a sort of sign of his kinship with that race—which,
however, along with the rest of modern mankind, he had still supposed to
be merely fancies. They were not: not this one, stinking, breathing, waiting
for words.
 
“Now I knew why my heart beat hard. I thought it astonishing but very
likely that I alone, of all these Greeks about me here, I alone perhaps of all
the mortals in Arcadia that night, knew the language this creature might
know: for I had been made to study it, you see, forced with blows and
implorings and bribes to learn it through many long years at Harrow. Was
that fate? Had our father-god brought me here this night to do this child of
his some good?
 
“I put my face close to the bars of the cage. I was afraid for a
moment that all those thousands of lines learned by heart had fled from me.
The only one I could think of was not so very appropriate. Sing, Muse, I
said, that man of many resources, who traveled far and wide…and his
eyes shone. I was right: he spoke the Greek of Homer, and not of these
men of the iron age.
 
“Now what was I to say? He still lay quiet within the cage, but for the
one hand gripping the bars, waiting for more. I realized he must be
wounded—it seemed obvious that unless he were wounded he could not
have been taken. I knew but one thing: I would not willingly be parted from
him. I could have remained in his presence nightlong, forever. I sought his
white almond eyes in the darkness and I thought: I have not missed it after
all: it awaited me here to find.
 
“I would not have all night, though. My Albanians now discharged their
weapons—the warning we’d agreed on—and I heard shouts; the men of the
village, now suitably inflamed, were headed for this place. I took from my
pocket a penknife—all I had-and set to work on the tough hemp of the
cage’s ropes.
 
“Atrema, I said, atrema, atrema—which I remembered was ‘quietly,
quietly.’ He made no sound or movement as I cut, but when I took hold of a
bar with my left hand to steady myself, he put out his long black-nailed hand
and grasped my wrist. Not in anger, but not tenderly; strongly, pur-posefully.
The hair rose on my neck. He did not release me until the ropes were cut

and I tugged apart the bars.
 
“The moon had risen, and he came forth into its light. He was no taller
than a boy of eight, and yet how he drew the night to him, as though it were
a thing with a piece missing until he stepped out into it, and now was whole.
I could see that indeed he had been hurt: stripes of blood ran round his
bare chest where he had fallen or rolled down a steep decliv-ity. I could see
the ridged recurving horns that rose from the matted hair of his head; I
could see his sex, big, held up against his belly by a fold of fur, like a dog’s
or a goat’s. Alert, still breathing hard (his breast flutter-ing, as though the
heart within him were huge) he glanced about himself, assessing which way
were best to run.
 
“Now go, I said to him. Live. Take care they do not come near you
again. Hide from them when you must; despoil them when you can.
Seize on their wives and daugh-ters, piss in their vegetable gardens, tear
down their fences, drive mad their sheep and goats. Teach them fear.
Never never let them take you again.
 
“I say I said this to him, but I confess I could not think of half the
words; my Greek had fled me. No matter: he turned his great hot eyes on
me as though he understood. What he said back to me I cannot tell you,
though he spoke, and smiled; he spoke in a warm winey voice, but a few
words, round and sweet. That was a surprise. Perhaps it was from Pan he
had his music. I can tell you I have tried to bring those words up often from
where I know they are lodged, in my heart of hearts; I think that it is re-ally
what I am about when I try to write poems. And now and again— yes, not
often, but sometimes—I hear them again.
 
“He dropped to his hands, then, somewhat as an ape does; he turned
and fled, and the tuft of his tail flashed once, like a hare’s. At the end of me
glen he turned—I could just see him at the edge of the trees—and looked
at me. And that was all.
 
“I sat in the dust there, sweating in the night air. I remember thinking
the striking thing about it was how unpoetical it had been. It was like no
story about a meeting between a man and a god—or a godlet—that I had
ever heard. No gift was given me, no promise made me. It was like free-ing
an otter from a fish trap. And that, most strangely, was what gave me joy in
it. The difference, child, between the true gods and the imaginary ones is
this: that the true gods are not less real than yourself.”
 
It was deep midnight now in the villa; the tide was out, and rain had

begun again to fall, spattering on the roof tiles, hissing in the fire.
 
It wasn’t true, what he had told the boy: that he had been given no gift,
made no promise. For it was only after Greece that he came to pos-sess
the quality for which, besides his knack for verse, he was chiefly fa-mous:
his gift (not always an easy one to live with) for attracting love from many
different kinds and conditions of people. He had accepted the love that he
attracted, and sought more, and had that too. Satyr he had been called,
often enough. He thought, when he gave it any thought, that it had come to
him through the grip of the horned one: a part of that being’s own power of
unrefusable ravishment.
 
Well, if that were so, then he had the gift no more: had used it up,
spent it, worn it out. He was thirty-six, and looked and felt far older: sick and
lame, his puffy features grey and haggard, his moustache white—foolish to
think he could have been the object of Loukas’s affection.
 
But without love, without its wild possibility, he could no longer
de-fend himself against the void: against his black certainty that life
mattered not a whit, was a brief compendium of folly and suffering, not
worth the stakes. He would not take life on those terms; no, he would trade
it for something more valuable ... for Greece. Freedom. He would like to
have given his life heroically, but even the ignoble death he seemed likely
now to suffer here, in this mephitic swamp, even that was worth something:
was owed, anyway, to the clime that made him a poet: to the blessing he
had had.
 
“I have heard of no reports of such a creature in those mountains
since that time,” he said. “You know, I think the little gods are the oldest
gods, older than the Olympians, older far than Jehovah. Pan forbid he
should be dead, if he be the last of his kind…”
 
The firing of Suliote guns outside the villa woke him. He lifted his
head painfully from the sweat-damp pillow. He put out his hand and thought
for a moment his Newfoundland dog Lion lay at his feet. It was the boy
Loukas: asleep.
 
He raised himself to his elbows. What had he dreamed? What story
had he told?
 
NOTE: Lord Byron died at Missolonghi, in Greece, April 19, 1824. He
was thirty-six years old.
 
* * * *

