www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions

www.ebook3000.com

edited by
Edward Wolf
Gerald Arnold
Michael Gurvitch
John Zasadzinski
Josephson Junctions
History, Devices, and Applications

Published by
Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
Penthouse Level, Suntec Tower 3
8 Temasek Boulevard
Singapore 038988
Email: editorial@panstanford.com
Web: www.panstanford.com
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to
be invented, without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying
fee through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy is not
required from the publisher.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
Printed in the USA
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Foreword
xi
Preface
xv
1
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
1
B. D. Josephson
1.1
The Background
1
1.2
The Phase of a Superconducting Current
4
1.3
Boundaries and Junctions
6
1.4
Detailed Origin of the Theory of Weakly Coupled
Superconductors
7
1.5
Testing for Predictions
10
2
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
17
E. L. Wolf
2.1 Review of Physical Aspects
17
2.2
History of the Josephson Program
22
2.3
Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions
on Niobium
25
2.4
Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions
on Niobium Nitride
30
2.5
Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and Generalized
Josephson Devices
34
2.5.1
Shapiro Steps, Highly Hysteretic Junctions,
and Josephson Voltage Standards
36
2.5.2
Josephson Junction Arrays
38
2.5.3
Josephson Devices for RSFQ Computing
41

vi
Contents
3 Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum: Experiment
47
J. F. Zasadzinski
3.1
Fabrication Methods
51
3.2
Gap Region Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al Tunnel
Junctions
52
3.3
High-Bias Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al Tunnel
Junctions
58
3.4
Point Contact Tunneling Studies of Nb
59
4 Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum: Theory
67
Gerald B. Arnold
4.1 Proxity Effect in Thin N Layers on Thick S Layers
68
4.2
Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
71
4.3
Effects of Elastic Scattering in the N Metal Layer
76
4.4
Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers with Elastic
Scattering in the N Layer
78
4.5
The Josephson Current in S’INS Tunnel Junctions with
Thin N Metal Layers
79
5 The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips: Development of
Nb/Al–Oxide–Nb Technology
83
Michael Gurvitch
5.1
Bell Labs Empire
84
5.2
Starting at Bell Labs: Thin-Film Deposition System
88
5.3
Superconducting Supercomputer Project at IBM
and Its Extensions
95
5.4
Josephson Junctions in 1980
103
5.5
Making Semi-soft Tunnel Junctions
115
5.6
Metallic Superlattices and Tunneling into Nb/Al
118
5.7
The Sad Story of Our Patent Application
124
5.8
Nb/Al Refractory Junctions Are Emerging
125
5.9
The Whole-Wafer Process: SNEP-SNAP
127
5.10
Uniformity, Stability, and Cycling
133
5.11
Combination of Tunneling and Surface Studies;
Wetting and Al Disappearance; Junctions with
Y, Mg, and Er
134
5.12
Questions of Credit
137
5.13
Who Did What, Where, and When
139
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
vii
6 Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions
and Applications
147
Jean-Claude Villegier
6.1
Early Niobium Nitride Devices
149
6.1.1
Applied SIS Josephson Tunnel Junctions
Until 1983
149
6.1.2
Success and Limitations of Refractory
Trilayer Processes
151
6.2
Niobium Nitride Tunnel Josephson Junctions
153
6.2.1
Introduction of NbN Film Textures
154
6.2.2
Use of Templates in NbN Heterostructures
156
6.2.3
NbNOx Barriers in NbN SIS Junctions
157
6.3
NbN Junctions for IC Applications
159
6.3.1
From NbNOx to MgO and AlN Barriers in NbN
SIS Junctions
159
6.3.2
NbN and NbTiN SNS and SS’S Junctions
162
6.4
NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
166
6.4.1
First Digital Circuits Based on NbN–Oxide–NbN
Junctions
166
6.4.2
HF Applications of NbN–MgO (or AlN)–NbN
Junctions at 2 K and 10 K
167
6.4.3
Internally Damped NbN Junctions Applied to
RSFQ Technologies
168
6.4.4
NbN Devices Offer Wider Applications Than
Nb Ones
171
6.4.5
Scaling of NbN Josephson Junction Size
173
7 Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators:
Toward Integrated Receivers
185
P. N. Dmitriev, L. V. Filippenko, and V. P. Koshelets
7.1
Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS
Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
186
7.1.1
Niobium Tunnel Junctions with an AlOx Barrier 187
7.1.2
Niobium-Based Tunnel Junctions with AlN
Barrier
193
7.1.3
NbN Tunnel Junctions with MgO Barrier
200
7.2 Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
204
7.2.1
Nb-Based Flux-Flow Oscillators
204

viii
Contents
7.2.2
Linewidth of the Flux-Flow Oscillator and Its
Phase-Locking
210
7.2.3
Sub-Terahertz Sound Excitation and Detection
by Long Josephson Junctions
213
7.3
Superconducting Integrated Receivers
222
7.3.1
The SIR Channel Design and Performance
224
7.4
Conclusions
232
8 Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference
Devices SQUIDs
245
D. Drung and J. Beyer
8.1
SQUID Fundamentals
246
8.1.1
Basic SQUID Function
246
8.1.2
SQUID Noise
251
8.1.3
Inductance and Effective Area
256
8.2
Making the SQUID a Practical Device
260
8.2.1 The Bare SQUID
260
8.2.2
Low-Inductance Current Sensors
261
8.2.3
High-Inductance Current Sensors
266
8.2.4
Magnetic Field Sensors
271
8.3 SQUID Readout
275
8.3.1
Flux-Locked Loop Basics
276
8.3.2
Flux Modulation Readout
282
8.3.3 Direct Readout
285
8.4
SQUID Applications
290
8.4.1
Introductory Discussion
290
8.4.2
Biomagnetism
293
8.4.3
Metrology
300
8.4.4 Readout of Superconducting Detectors
307
8.5
Conclusions
316
9 Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
331
Siyuan Han
9.1
Introduction
332
9.2
Superconducting Flux Qubit
337
9.3
Robust and Scalable Flux Qubit
341
9.4 Coupler
342
9.5
Control and Measurement Circuit
344
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
ix
9.6
Scalable Architecture
346
9.7
Does It Work?
347
9.8 Future Prospects
350
9.9 Summary
352
10 Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
359
J. Kohlmann
10.1
Introduction
359
10.2
Conventional DC Josephson Voltage Standards
361
10.2.1
Design: Demands and Targets for
Conventional Josephson Voltage Standards
363
10.2.2
Fabrication Technology and Results for
Conventional Josephson Voltage Standards:
A Brief Survey
366
10.3
AC Josephson Voltage Standards
367
10.3.1
Design: Demands and Targets for
Overdamped Josephson Junctions and
Series Arrays
370
10.3.2
Realization of Binary-Divided Josephson
Voltage Standards
372
10.3.3
Realization of Pulse-Driven Josephson
Voltage Standards
375
10.4
Conclusions
377
Index
385

www.ebook3000.com

Foreword
Following the half-century interval since the discovery of supercon-
ductivity in 1911, the diverse ﬁeld of superconducting electronics
was created in a remarkably short time, 1961 to 1964. The ﬁrst key
step, in 1961, was the experimental observation that the magnetic
ﬂux in a closed superconducting loop is quantized in units of the
ﬂux quantum, 0. About a year later, Brian Josephson published his
celebrated paper predicting the coherent tunneling of Cooper pairs
of electrons via a tunnel barrier separating two superconductors.
This eﬀect was observed experimentally in 1963. Finally, quantum
interference between two Josephson junctions connected in parallel
on a superconducting loop—the dc superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID)—was observed in 1964.
It is important to realize, however, that the ﬁrst observation
of Josephson tunneling by Anderson and Rowell was made on a
junction consisting of two thin ﬁlms of tin and lead separated by an
oxide layer. Not only is the superconducting transition temperature
of tin, 3.7 K, below the boiling point of liquid helium at atmospheric
pressure, 4.2 K, a serious inconvenience in some applications, but
thin ﬁlms of tin—a soft superconductor—tend to be rather short-
lived and in particular to cycle poorly between room and liquid
helium temperatures. Thus, the Josephson devices of the ﬁrst two
decades of their history were based on technologies that were crude
by today’s standards, ranging from machined niobium (Nb) point-
contacts and blobs of tin–lead solder on Nb wires to Nb silicon Nb
and Nb niobium–oxide lead junctions. Although much pioneering
science was performed with these early devices, the ﬁeld required
two decades to realize the highly reproducible, manufacturable Nb
aluminum–oxide Nb junction—the trilayer junction—that drives
today’s technology. The transition temperature of niobium is about

xii
Foreword
9.5 K, so that its energy gap is almost fully developed at 4.2 K. The
evolution of this junction and a discussion of its broad range of
applications are the subjects of this book.
The ﬁrst chapter, appropriately, is Brian Josephson’s story of his
invention of the eﬀect that bears his name, along with a brief account
of his attempts to demonstrate it experimentally. He brings out much
of the little-known contemporary thinking on the subject, which I
found fascinating. In the next chapter, Ed Wolf provides us with an
overview of the rest of the book, and introduces us to the other
important refractory tunnel junction, namely one involving NbN. He
also gives us our ﬁrst glimpse of applications. In chapter 3, John
Zasadzinski describes experiments on quasiparticle tunneling into
Nb ﬁlms overlaid with Al that may or may not have been oxidized to
completion, while in the next chapter Gerald Arnold elucidates the
associated theory. Such studies were important in the development
of the trilayer junction because the aluminum ﬁlm deposited on the
base electrode is generally not oxidized to completion, so that one
has to account for the proximity eﬀect—superconductivity induced
in the metallic aluminum ﬁlm by the underlying niobium ﬁlm.
Michael Gurvitch, in chapter 5, presents a detailed historical
account of the development of the Nb aluminum–oxide Nb junction
and of the many people involved as well as of early days of Bell
Telephone Laboratories. In chapter 6 Jean-Claude Villegier describes
junctions based on NbN—most commonly—NbN–MgO–NbN. Since
niobium nitride has a transition temperature of about 16.5 K, these
junctions operate well at temperatures up to 10 K.
The last four chapters are concerned with devices and appli-
cations. Valery Koshelets and colleagues describe state-of-the art
superconductor–insulator–superconductor (SIS) mixers and local
oscillators used as terahertz and submillimeter detectors for both
ground-based and balloon-based radioastronomy. In chapter 8,
Dietmar Drung and J¨orn Beyer describe the theory and practice
of dc SQUIDs. Applications of SQUIDs include biomagnetism—
for example, magnetoencephalography and ultralow-ﬁeld magnetic
resonance imaging—geophysics, metrology—for example, ther-
mometry and cryogenic current converters—ampliﬁers to read
out transition edge sensors for astronomy and cosmology, and a
commercially available magnetic property measurement system.
www.ebook3000.com

Foreword
xiii
Siyuan Han, in chapter 9, discusses one approach to quantum com-
puting known as quantum annealing, which has been demonstrated
using rf-SQUID-based ﬂux qubits based on Nb-trilayer junctions.
Finally, Johannes Kohlmann summarizes the development of today’s
Josephson voltage standard, in which the standard volt is deﬁned in
terms of frequency using the Josephson voltage–frequency relation.
Remarkably, arrays of 100,000 or more trilayer junctions are
required for some of these standards.
I cannot emphasize too strongly that the realization of these
various applications has depended utterly on the extraordinarily
high yield and reproducibility of niobium-based Josephson tunnel
junctions, the maturing of which has involved a very large number
of people over some three decades. The development of this ﬁeld is
admirably illuminated in the pages that follow.
John Clarke
Department of Physics
University of California, Berkeley

www.ebook3000.com

Preface
The Josephson junction is a key element in the broader area of
“superconducting devices,” an area that was reviewed in 1990 in
the excellent volume of that name edited by S. T. Ruggiero and
D. A. Rudman. The present edited volume is further specialized, to
deal primarily with the development and applications of the class
of Josephson junctions made of refractory materials, mostly those
made of niobium and its compound niobium nitride, that are now
dominant in Josephson junction technology. These materials, having
transition temperatures, respectively, of 9.2 K and approximately
16 K, can be formed, as we will see, into junctions of superior
durability and closely controllable device parameters. Excellence in
the latter regard, especially, has made them much more applicable
in technology than the originally promising high-Tc oxide materials.
The surprising range of scientiﬁc applications of this class of
Josephson junctions, growing over the past 25 years, now make
the successful refractory devices and their applications well worth
review.
As we will see, the applications of the refractory Josephson
junctions, often as central components in the SQUID supercon-
ducting quantum interference devices, now range from voltage
standards, to devices for detecting submarines, to detectors in
infrared astronomy, to ampliﬁers in radio telescopes such as the
South Pole Telescope, to medical devices for treating epilepsy, and
to qubits and other circuits in more than one class of possible
computing technology. The history of the refractory junctions,
initially made only on elemental niobium, by overcoming substantial
materials science problems, is an initial topic in this book. To start
our review of Josephson junctions, we are pleased to have an account
from Brian Josephson of his original theoretical discovery in 1962 of

xvi
Preface
the coupled superconductor eﬀect that bears his name and led to his
Nobel Prize in Physics, shared with I. Giaever and L. Esaki, in 1973.
In preparation of the present volume we have beneﬁted
from useful communication with a number of people, including
Gene Hilton, Sherry Cho, David Rudman, Samuel Benz and Jonas
Zmuidzinas. Others who have helped in the work described or in the
production of this book are D. K. Finnemore, B. N. Harmon, W. Kent
Schubert, K.-W. Ng, S. Han, R. J. Noer, Hongjie Tao, L. Y. L. Shen, W. J.
Gallagher, J. M. Rowell, L. M. Folan, DeShane Lyew, Aditya Kaushal,
Cornell Anthony, and Pratyush Mishra. We thank Sarabjeet Garcha
at Pan Stanford Publishing for editing assistance. One of us, E.L.W.,
wishes to thank his wife, Carol, for support and assistance over many
years and during the preparation of this book.
February 2017
E. L. Wolf
G. B. Arnold
M. A. Gurvitch
J. F. Zasadzinski
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 1
The Theoretical Discovery of the
Josephson Effect
B. D. Josephson
University of Cambridge, Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
bdj10@cam.ac.uk
The present chapter is closely based on an earlier article, “The
History of the Discovery of Weakly Coupled Superconductors,”a in
turn based on my response to an earlier request of the History
of Physics Group of the Institute of Physics (Great Britain) on the
historical background of the work I did in 1962 on weakly coupled
superconductors [1, 2], and resulting in my talk on 12 November
1986 to the IOP History of Physics Group at University College,
Cardiﬀ, Wales.
1.1 The Background
I very much regret to say that, despite my personal involvement, the
amount of historical accuracy I can give is not as high as I would
wish, as although in the course of my searches I have found a certain
aChapter 20 in Physicists Look Back: Studies in the History of Physics, ed. John Roche
(Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1990), pp. 366–377. Used with permission.
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

2
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
amount of material relating to that period of time, a lot of the ideas
were worked out in my head, and seem not to have been written
down on paper at all.
I should perhaps, as some readers may not be familiar with this
work, say a little bit about what it is. At very low temperatures
some materials become perfect conductors of electricity—this
is called superconductivity—and we now understand that the
superconducting state is a state of order which is very similar to that
found in a laser, there being coherent electron waves where in a laser
you have coherent electromagnetic waves, and the phenomenon
involves something which is closely connected with the waves.
The basic equations which apply to superconducting barriers are
shown below. A barrier between superconductors can be regarded
as a two-dimensional system, whose behaviour (if dissipative
processes are neglected) is governed by the following set of
equations:
∂Hy
∂x −∂Hx
∂y = 4π
c jz + 4πC
c
∂V
∂t
(1.1)
∂ϕ
∂x = 2ed
ℏc Hy
(1.2a)
∂ϕ
∂y = −2ed
ℏc
Hx
(1.2b)
∂ϕ
∂t = 2e
ℏV
(1.3)
jz = j1 sin ϕ
(1.4)
These equations apply for a barrier which occupies the xy
plane. ϕ is the diﬀerence between the values of the phase of the
superconducting order parameter on the two sides of the barrier, j1
the critical current density of the barrier, C its capacitance per unit
area, d its thickness plus the sum of the penetration depths in the
superconductors on the two sides, and V the potential diﬀerence
across the barrier. Gaussian units have been used. Equation 1.1
(essentially one of Maxwell’s equations) describes the eﬀect of the
supercurrent through the barrier on the electromagnetic ﬁeld, 1.2
www.ebook3000.com

The Background
3
and 1.3 describe the eﬀects of the electromagnetic ﬁeld on the
superconducting order parameter, and ﬁnally 1.4 relates the barrier
current to the order parameter [3].
To cut a long story short, Eq. 1.4 is the main result I discovered.
Appearing on the right is a phase diﬀerence. The system which my
work was involved with was where you have two superconductors
that can exchange electrons, and the calculation I did showed that
under those conditions you get a current given by that equation
(1.4), which depends on the sine of the phase diﬀerence. So that was
the eﬀect, and now I will describe the background to it.
Surprisingly, perhaps, my oﬃcial Ph.D. research project was not
a theoretical one but an experimental one. My view at that time in
my life was that I wouldn’t ﬁnd sitting at a desk spending most of my
time thinking too congenial, although it’s what I do now more or less,
and so I decided I would do an experiment instead. I ultimately got
my experiment to work, though it wasn’t until 1974, about 10 years
afterwards, that I got round to writing it up [4]. The experiment
dealt with a phenomenon that had been of particular interest to
my supervisor Professor Pippard (the late Sir Brian Pippard). He
believed that second sound, a phenomenon that was well known
in liquid helium, might also be found in superconductors (however,
during the course of my Ph.D. work I managed to convince myself
that a published calculation claiming to demonstrate the existence
of second sound in superconductors [5] must be wrong, and at
the present time no one seems to believe that second sound can
actually occur in superconductors). There were anomalous results in
the non-linear electrodynamics of superconductors which Pippard
thought might be indicative of a resonance associated with second
sound, and the proposed experiment involved looking in a new
frequency range to see what happened there. It was because I was
doing this experiment that I started looking into the theories of
superconductivity.
As a consequence of the contacts between David Shoenberg,
the director of the Mond Laboratory, and Soviet scientists, my
ﬁrst acquaintance with the theory of superconductivity was with a
formidable book, A New Method in the Theory of Superconductivity,
by N. Bogoliubov, V. Tolmachev and D. Shirkov [6], which it was
suggested I try to understand. I found this book almost totally

4
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
incomprehensible, which was hardly surprising in view of the way
it assumed knowledge of topics such as many-body theory, second
quantisation and diagram expansions, which neither I nor anyone
else at the Cavendish at that time knew anything at all about.
In the course of time through my browsings in the literature I
came across explanations of these matters, and the mysteries of
superconductivity theory started to become a little clearer. I found
that there were a number of approaches to the problem, all of which
were in some sense equivalent since they all implicitly assumed
that a superconducting state was a state of pairing of electrons of
equal and opposite momentum and spin like that hypothesised by
J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper and J. R. Schrieﬀer [7], who worked more or
less directly with the actual wavefunction. The Bogoliubov theory [6]
used a transformation to convert a situation that couldn’t be treated
by perturbation theory into one that could, while the Gor’kov theory
[8, 9] used the very powerful Green function technique. Finally,
there was the approach of P. Anderson [10], who described the
superconducting state in terms of interacting pseudospins.
1.2 The Phase of a Superconducting Current
Both the Gor’kov and the Anderson theories contain something
corresponding to a phase (in the Anderson theory the pseudospins
lie in a plane through the relevant axis of symmetry whose
orientation is otherwise arbitrary, and which is related to the phase
in the Gor’kov picture), and these theories started me thinking about
phases in superconductors. I have some scribblings in a notebook
which suggested that I was attempting at that time to understand
the structure of the superconducting state and the nature of its
long-range order in terms of the kind of correlation functions that
appeared in the Gor’kov theory. And there was something in the
Gor’kov theory—the so-called anomalous Green function—which
did have a phase attached to it. This phase allows one to understand
certain properties of superconductors and in particular implied the
phenomenon of ﬂux quantisation, a phenomenon with a somewhat
curious history. It is manifested ﬁrst as a suggestion in the famous
book of F. London [11], and later as a prediction in a paper by A.
www.ebook3000.com

The Phase of a Superconducting Current
5
Abrikosov [12] based on the 1951 Ginzburg-Landau theory [13],
which prediction Landau himself had forbidden to be published
at the time on account of the result being ‘clearly unphysical’,
although he later changed his mind about this. The Ginzburg-Landau
theory itself, despite its ability to give a simple picture of many of
the features of the superconducting state, was virtually unknown
in the West at that period because of the language problem and
the poor communications between Eastern and Western scientists.
Thus the experimental demonstration of the existence of ﬂux
quantisation (Deaver and Fairbank [14], Doll and Nabauer [15])
came as somewhat of a surprise.
In Gor’kov’s theory the phase comes over as something more
mathematical than physical: it is related to the phase of a matrix
element between two states with diﬀerent numbers of electron
pairs and is essentially arbitrary because the two states could be
chosen with arbitrary phases. Anderson made use of diagonal matrix
elements instead, computed in states which did not have a deﬁnite
number of electrons. In this approach the phase is a property of
the speciﬁc state of the system and seems less of a mathematical
thing, although it could well be argued that such states involving
coherent combinations of states with diﬀerent numbers of electrons
are themselves unphysical. It would take some further analysis to
sort this problem out, but in the meantime I found it very fruitful
to think of the phase as something that was ‘in principle real’, real
enough in fact to produce the phenomenon of ﬂux quantisation.
If the phase was real, this implied that there might be a way of
exploring its existence more directly. The conditions under which
an eﬀect could occur were regulated by the existence of symmetry
principles. From these you could show that only phase diﬀerences
could be observed, not the phases themselves. Furthermore, even
phase diﬀerences could not be physically signiﬁcant unless a process
of electron exchange, which would have to be one that did not
lose any phase information, occurred between the two regions
concerned.
The ultimate answer to the conundrum about the reality of the
phase (discussed in some detail in my Trinity College fellowship
dissertation [2]) was that, whatever may be the case for the phases
themselves, phase diﬀerences are perfectly respectable entities (i.e.

6
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
entities related to operators with non-trivial expectation values even
for perfectly reasonable and physical kinds of quantum state).
It was not clear at that time that the possibility of setting up the
kind of situation envisaged could be more than a dream, although in
fact at around that time experimenters were actually busy creating
such situations in experiments using thin ﬁlms.
1.3 Boundaries and Junctions
A line of investigation that led me towards the actual discovery
sprung from Pippard’s interest in the question of what happened at
the boundary between a normal metal and a superconductor. This
was interesting because superconductors can be put into what is
known as an ‘intermediate state’, where there are fairly macroscopic
regions of normal metal and superconductor that alternate with
each other. If you measure the electrical resistance and thermal
resistance in such materials you ﬁnd it is quite low, suggesting that
there is not the amount of scattering at the boundaries that you
would expect. That was a little bit mysterious. In fact it wasn’t too
clear even how the electric current could ﬂow at all through such
materials at low temperatures, because the current ﬂow carried by
the individual particles in a normal metal has somehow got to turn
into current in a superconductor, and at very low temperatures,
because of the energy gap, there are hardly any particles around
to carry the current, unless there is a mechanism by which the
ordinary electrons in a normal metal can be transformed into
superconducting electrons.
Thinking about this and trying to apply some of the concepts that
were around, I succeeded in producing a qualitative understanding
of what went on at a normal-to-superconducting boundary. The
detailed calculations would have been very complex and I did
not pursue them, but subsequently Andreev [16] was to publish
calculations based on exactly such concepts. He had enough energy
to go through the calculations, which were somewhat messy, and
I didn’t. In fact, I don’t think I’ve ever done any very messy
calculations. I tend to go for problems that won’t involve such
calculations. In any event, I was as a result accustomed to using the
www.ebook3000.com

Detailed Origin of the Theory of Weakly Coupled Superconductors
7
self-consistent ﬁeld method to think about this kind of problem. A
notebook in which I wrote a bird’s-eye view of my whole research
project contained the following entry:
Meanwhile we turned our minds to the question of transport
properties of superconducting boundaries. A self-consistent ﬁeld
equation for quasi-particles, treating them as two-component
electron-plus-hole wave functions, was developed and the conse-
quences explored. However, curious diﬃculties arise when treat-
ing SIS junctions and SNS junctions. An approximate treatment
was thought up and seems to imply oscillatory eﬀects. It seems
to be rather diﬃcult to persuade experimentalists that these are
more than a mathematical ﬁction, but we hope to publish a paper
on the eﬀects, and then someone may try the experiments . . . And
so it came to pass that the cautiously entitled paper ‘Possible new
eﬀects in superconductive tunnelling’ was published in Physics
Letters of July 1st 1962 [1].
Brian Pippard had a somewhat sceptical attitude to theoretical
manipulations, and insisted on the incorporation of the word
possible into the title of the paper.
1.4 Detailed Origin of the Theory of Weakly
Coupled Superconductors
Let me now go a little into the details. The most important thing
was that the various approximations that people introduced had
the feature that not only could electrons scatter into electrons,
but they could also scatter into holes (a hole is the absence of an
electron). The apparent violation of charge conservation involved
here is dealt with by treating the background of Cooper pairs as a
reservoir which can supply or absorb pairs of electrons as needed
without having to be put explicitly into the equations. You then ﬁnd
that to a ﬁrst approximation all the electron–electron interactions
that are important have become miraculously incorporated into the
processes of the scattering of single particles already described. To
calculate anything you then have to ﬁnd out what the normal modes
of this kind of system are, and these then correspond to mixtures of

8
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
electrons and holes which you can then regard as being independent
of each other.
There was, however, an awkward technical problem involved in a
situation where you had two superconductors. The approximations
that people introduced had the feature that not only could electrons
be scattered from one state to another, but also electrons could be
scattered into holes (a hole is the antiparticle to an electron in a
metal) and vice versa, i.e. charge was apparently not conserved.
The requirement that charge really should be conserved was taken
into account by invoking the reservoir of superconducting electrons
(a situation that was in due course clariﬁed by Anderson [1958]).
Now, in order to get this to work properly, you had to take the
energy of the electrons in the reservoir, which is the Fermi energy,
as your origin of energy (otherwise you would have problems
with energy conservation, since the energy of the electrons in the
reservoir would not have been taken into account). This creates
no problem if you have only one region of superconductor, but
what do you do if there are two regions and their Fermi levels are
diﬀerent? Fortunately for me, other people who were thinking about
two-superconductor systems regarded this diﬃculty as something
not really signiﬁcant and failed to follow it up. In particular,
at about this time Cohen, Falicov and Phillips [17] had applied
perturbation theory to treat tunnelling involving superconductors
by perturbation methods. They treated the case where only one side
was superconducting correctly but omitted discussion of the two-
superconductor case from their paper. I learnt afterwards that one of
them had been asked to examine the two-superconductor case and
had found terms equivalent to those I had found later, but couldn’t
understand their signiﬁcance and had decided that they probably
had no eﬀect.
Because they had not dealt with the problem of the energy origin
their formalism was inadequate to deal with the problem in any
case. I managed to invent a rather esoteric formalism to handle
the situation (which has rightly gone into oblivion now), involving
putting in explicitly into the Bogoliubov operators the transfer of
electron pairs from the background reservoir. Although that was a
rather awkward method, I did it in preference to a Green function
method because I wasn’t familiar with Green functions and I thought
www.ebook3000.com

Detailed Origin of the Theory of Weakly Coupled Superconductors
9
I’d have more chance of getting it right if I kept to the Bogoliubov
operator method instead.
The interest in doing these calculations in the ﬁrst place
stemmed from the fact that Ivar Giaever, inventor of the tunnelling
method for studying the properties of superconductors, had given
a very simple-minded theory of the tunnel junctions that had the
merit of agreeing with experiment (Giaever 1960 [18], Fisher and
Giaever 1961 [19]). But it was not at all clear (as had been observed
by Pippard) why Giaever’s calculation should give the right answer,
because it ignored the ‘coherence factors’ that normally have to be
taken into account in a situation involving superconductors.
The Cohen et al. [17] calculation justiﬁed Giaever’s formula
for the single-superconductor case, which was, however, the case
where the coherence factors turn out to cancel out anyway. What
I expected would happen in the two-superconductor case was that
there would be a non-zero coherence contribution which would
have no DC component (so that Cohen et al. were in a sense
correct to believe that the extra terms didn’t contribute) because it
would be multiplied by a factor depending on the phase diﬀerence
which would average out to zero. The physical reality of this
component was linked to the physical reality of the phase, and my
physical intuition told me that both were real, although this was a
controversial idea at the time.
My calculations conﬁrmed my expectations, but they predicted
an additional term that I had not expected. This term was the
one that came from the delta-function contribution to the energy
denominators, and had the unexpected feature of not vanishing
when the applied voltage was set equal to zero. I checked my
calculation several times trying to ﬁnd a sign error whose existence
would have prevented the terms from cancelling each other out, but
had to conclude in the end that the contribution that did not vanish
at zero voltage really did exist.
The presence of such a term at some order of approximation
was not surprising, since it merely indicated the presence of a
supercurrent. I had not expected it to occur in my calculation to
second order because of the following argument due to Pippard [20]:
a supercurrent will involve pairs of electrons tunnelling, so that the
matrix element for the process will be proportional to the square of

10
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
the matrix element for the tunnelling of a single electron. The rate at
which the pairs will tunnel will be proportional to the square of this
again, and so to the fourth power of the single-electron tunnelling
matrix element. In due course I realised where this argument was
in error: the tunnelling supercurrents are a coherent ﬂow process,
and so the usual rule that its rate is proportional to the square
of the matrix element does not apply. I was then satisﬁed that my
calculation was correct and went ahead and submitted the paper
for publication. (Incidentally, my original calculation was not quite
correct. In it I had managed to introduce two extra factors of two,
through taking two integrals over the whole real line instead of just
for positive values of the energy as should have been done. Thus
the result given in my ﬁrst paper was too large by a factor of four. I
discovered the error when writing up the calculation for my Trinity
College fellowship dissertation [2] a couple of months later, while a
correct value was obtained also by Ambegaokar and Baratoﬀ[21]
who repeated the calculation using Green’s functions).
If you look at my paper [1] you will see that there was
considerable concern on my part with making a convincing case that
the concepts I was using were valid ones. This raises an interesting
issue. I think this is something that’s liable to happen in the history
of science when a diﬀerent way of looking at things comes about.
Now everyone accepts that you can just write down the phase of the
wave in a superconductor because this is what all the experiments
conﬁrm, but then the experimenters were inclined just to think
of it as just a bit of mathematics, and were very doubtful about
it. Fortunately Phil Anderson was spending a year’s sabbatical in
Cambridge and he said, ‘Yes, this is certainly right and an important
and interesting result.’ So I had some back-up.
1.5 Testing for Predictions
Although I found the theoretical arguments for the eﬀects con-
vincing, it was rather worrying that the theory made deﬁnite
predictions of how much supercurrent there should be, and these
predictions didn’t seem to ﬁt the experiments. Theory predicted
that for an average sort of junction you should get something
www.ebook3000.com

Testing for Predictions
11
like some hundreds of microamperes of supercurrent; indeed the
supercurrent should be of the same order of magnitude as typical
normal currents. I noted with interest a published paper by Nicol
et al. [22] that showed a clearly visible zero-voltage blip, but this
was not typical and such events when they did occur were normally
ascribed to superconducting shorts across the insulating barrier. I
tried to think up coherence-destroying mechanisms for reduction
of the supercurrent, such as the eﬀects of magnetic impurities, so
as to bring theory and experiment into line. If such eﬀects were
signiﬁcant, it might mean that the eﬀects would be unobservable.
One possible source of non-observation of the eﬀects that
could be investigated, which had been proposed by Anderson,
was that of magnetic ﬁeld, since the theory indicated that the
junctions should be highly sensitive to such ﬁelds. An amount of
ﬂux in the junction corresponding to one ﬂux quantum would
have a drastic eﬀect on the magnitude of the critical supercurrent.
Anderson’s suggestion was that only the ﬂux in the insulating
region would be eﬀective, but using the Ginzburg–Landau theory
to calculate the eﬀects of the ﬁeld I convinced myself that the ﬂux
penetrating into the superconducting regions also contributed, and
this implied that the earth’s ﬁeld could be important. So I set up
compensating coils to reduce the local ﬁelds to a few milligauss,
and looked for zero-voltage currents using an electronic ammeter
sensitive to a nanoampere, smaller by a factor of around 105
than the supercurrents predicted by the theory. Disappointingly, no
supercurrents, even at this level, showed up, even though I was able
to obtain junctions with good normal characteristics.
The predictions in my paper were quite controversial, and John
Bardeen in particular asserted that my predictions were in error
[23] because, according to him ‘the pairing does not extend into the
barrier’. I did not believe in this criticism, since it seemed to involve
the assumption that the situation could be treated on the basis of
local equations, which did not seem to me to be correct, but the fact
that the supercurrents had not been observed argued in favour of
Bardeen’s theories. He and I debated the issue at a special session
(not published in the proceedings) during the International Low
Temperature Conference held at Queen Mary College later that year.
My view was supported by a theoretician there, de Gennes I believe.

12
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
Figure 1.1
Experimental veriﬁcation of the Josephson eﬀect. Current–
voltage characteristics for a tin–tin oxide–lead tunnel structure at ∼1.5 K
(a) for a ﬁeld of 6 × 10−3 gauss and (b) for a ﬁeld of 0.4 gauss. Reproduced
with permission from Anderson, and Rowell [24].
It took nine months from the publication of my theoretical
paper before convincing evidence for the reality of the phenomenon
was obtained by Phil Anderson and John Rowell at Bell Labs [24]
(Fig. 1.1). They used lower-resistance junctions made from lead
instead of the aluminum that I had used, and observed zero-voltage
currents whose maximum value before a voltage appeared was
highly sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds. Such low-resistance junctions
were liable to have metallic shorts through the barrier, which
was why I had used aluminum instead, but the way the currents
depended on magnetic ﬁelds provided very good evidence for the
existence of a genuine eﬀect.
Why had the Anderson–Rowell junctions showed an eﬀect
whereas mine had not? The explanation involved something that
www.ebook3000.com

References
13
I had clearly seen, but there was an unexpected twist as well.
The coupling energy across the barrier is given by −(ℏ/2e) Iccos
(ϕ), and I had worked out that this was large compared with
kBT if T is taken to be the sample temperature and concluded
that thermal ﬂuctuations would not be large enough to destroy
the phase coupling process. But what I had failed to realise is that
room-temperature electrical noise which is two orders of magnitude
greater than the noise at helium temperature, comes down the leads
to the specimen, and that for my samples with their low Ic this was
enough to destroy the phase coupling and with it the zero-voltage
supercurrents.
The Anderson–Rowell paper meant that the eﬀect was real and
its prediction could really be celebrated at last. It was only a matter
of time before the other eﬀects predicted in my original paper were
conﬁrmed experimentally, and practical applications of the eﬀects
were developed over the years as well.
For a comprehensive review of subsequent developments, see
A. Barone and G. Paterno (1982), Physics and Applications of the
Josephson Eﬀect (New York: Wiley). Later chapters in the present
book describe more recent developments that are primarily based
on the refractory Josephson junctions typically made of Niobium.
References
1. Josephson, B. D. (1962). Possible new eﬀects in superconductive
tunneling. Phys. Lett. 1, 251–253.
2. Josephson, B. D. (1962). The relativistic shift in the M¨ossbauer eﬀect and
coupled superconductors, Dissertation for the Annual Election of Fellows,
Trinity College, Cambridge.
3. Josephson, B. D. (1966). Superconducting barriers: the plasma reso-
nance and related properties, Quantum Fluids. Proceedings of the Sussex
University Symposium 16–20 August 1965 ed. D. F. Brewer (North-
Holland, Amsterdam) pp. 174–175.
4. Josephson, B. D. (1974). Magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the surface
reactance of superconducting tin at 174 MHz. J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. 4,
751–756.

14
The Theoretical Discovery of the Josephson Effect
5. Thouless, D. J., and Tilley, D. R. (1961). Collective modes in the theory of
superconductivity. Proc. Phys. Soc. 77, 1175–1181.
6. Bogoliubov, N. N., Tolmachev, V. V. A., and Shirkov, D. V. (1959). A New
Method in the Theory of Superconductivity (Consultants Bureau, New
York).
7. Bardeen, J., Cooper, L. N., and Schrieﬀer, J. R. (1957). Theory of
superconductivity. Phys. Rev. 108, 1175–1204.
8. Gor’kov, L. P. (1958). On the energy spectrum of superconductors. Sov.
Phys.-JETP 34, 505–508.
9. Gor’kov, L. P. (1959). Microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau
equations in the theory of superconductivity. Sov. Phys.-JETP 36, 364–
367.
10. Anderson, P. W. (1958). Random-phase approximation in the theory of
superconductivity. Phys. Rev. 112, 1900–1916.
11. London, F. (1950). Superﬂuids (Wiley, New York).
12. Abrikosov, A. (1957). The magnetic properties of superconductors of the
second group. Sov. Phys.-JETP 5, 1174–1182.
13. Ginzburg, V. L., and Landau, L. D. (1965). On the Theory of Superconduc-
tivity. Collected Papers of L D Landau ed. D. Ter Haar (Gordon and Breach,
New York) pp. 546–568.
14. Deaver, B. S., Jr., and Fairbank, W. M. (1961). Experimental evidence
for quantized ﬂux in superconducting cylinders. Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 43–
46.
15. Doll, R., and Nabauer, M. (1961). Experimental proof of magnetic ﬂux
quantization in a superconducting ring. Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 51–52.
16. Andreev, A. F. (1964). The thermal conductivity of the intermediate state
in superconductors. Sov. Phys.-JETP 19, 1228–1229.
17. Cohen, M. H., Falicov, L. M., and Phillips, J. C. (1962). Superconductive
tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 8, 316–318.
18. Giaever, I. (1960). Energy gap in superconductors measured by electron
tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 147–148.
19. Fisher, C., and Giaever, I. (1961). Tunneling through thin insulating
layers. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 172–177.
20. Pippard, A. B. (1961). Recent experiments on the electrical properties
of superconductors, Proc. Seventh Int. Conf. Low Temp. Phys. ed. G. M.
Graham and A. C. Hollis Hallett (North-Holland, Amsterdam) pp. 320–
327.
www.ebook3000.com

References
15
21. Ambegaokar, V., and Baratoﬀ, A. (1963). Tunneling between supercon-
ductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 486–489 (and errata Phys. Rev. Lett., 11,
104).
22. Nicol, J., Shapiro, S., and Smith, P. H. (1960). Direct measurement of the
superconducting energy gap. Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 461–464.
23. Bardeen, J. (1962). Tunneling into superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 9,
147–149.
24. Anderson, P. W., and Rowell, J. M. (1963). Probable observation of the
Josephson superconducting tunnel eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 230–232.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 2
Introduction to Refractory Josephson
Junctions
E. L. Wolf
Department of Applied Physics, New York University Tandon School of Engineering,
6 MetroTech Center, Brooklyn, New York 11201, USA
ed.wolf@nyu.edu
As explained in the previous chapter by Dr. Josephson, the Josephson
coupled-superconductor eﬀect is inherent in any superconductor–
insulator–superconductor tunnel junction if the insulating tunnel
barrier is suﬃciently thin to allow the coupling energy between su-
perconducting pairs on the two sides to exceed thermal ﬂuctuations.
2.1 Review of Physical Aspects
The Josephson eﬀect entails a tunneling supercurrent density
J = J0 sin ϕ
(2.1)
at zero voltage; proportional to sinϕ, where
ϕ = θ1 −θ2
(2.2)
is the diﬀerence between the phases of the pair states on each
side. In this book we focus on refractory Josephson junctions, dating
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

18
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
IMA
IMV
Figure 2.1
Current–voltage characteristic at 4.2 K of refractory Josephson
junction of the form Nb/Al–Al–oxide–Nb shows supercurrent and quasi-
particle branch at onset 2.95 mV. This junction of dimensions 8 × 8 μm2
had nominal Al metal thickness on Nb/Al electrode of 50 A and gives a
supercurrent density of 1300 A/cm2. Reproduced with permission from
Gurvitch et al. [1].
from around 1983, that now completely dominate applications.
The dominance of refractory Josephson junctions comes from their
robust nature, allowing frequent temperature cycling, and from the
generally higher critical temperatures, exempliﬁed by Nb (∼9.2 K)
and its compound NbN (16.6 K) compared to Pb (7.2 K). The physics
is the same for both types of structure, and in the following we
occasionally take examples from soft superconductor devices to
illustrate relevant points of the Josephson junction physics. The
materials-related technical diﬃculties in changing tunnel junction
and Josephson junction fabrication from soft superconductors to the
now widely applied refractory superconductors are a central theme
in this book. The overall I–V characteristic of a Josephson junction
is shown in Fig. 2.1 on a Nb/Al–oxide–Nb junction in the work of M.
A. Gurvitch et al. [1] of 1983.
This curve approaches an ideal characteristic also from the
point of view of the expected strength of the Josephson critical
current. That value was given by Ambegaokar and Baratoﬀ[2],
who immediately conﬁrmed the original Josephson result using a
diﬀerent theoretical method. Their expression for the product of
the critical current times the junction resistance, for a symmetric
www.ebook3000.com

Review of Physical Aspects
19
junction, is
IcRn = π
2 ,
(2.3)
where Ic is the critical current, Rn the resistance in the normal state,
and  is the gap parameter, half the energy gap of the superconduc-
tor. The measured value for the junction of Fig. 2.1 is IcRn = 1.71
mV [1], while the theory value, taking  as half the sum-gap voltage
2.95 mV, is nominally 2.31 mV, and in the range 1.95–2.1 mV in a
more accurate estimate made by Gurvitch et al. based on [2].
From an experimental view, the Josephson eﬀect is best
distinguished from artifacts in the nature of short circuit paths
by the dependence of the superconducting phase diﬀerence ϕ on
the local magnetic vector potential A, such that B =  × A. This
magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity, of great importance in applications, arises
from the generalized electron-pair momentum p + 2eA in a pair
wavefunction P,
P ≈exp i(p + 2eA) · r
ℏ,
(2.4)
where, for a superconducting pair of charge 2e, p = 0. Requiring that
such a wavefunction be single-valued in traversing a closed path in
the superconductor gives a derivation of the ﬂux quantum,
0 = h
2e = 2.068 × 10−15 Wb
= 2.068 × 10−7 gauss cm2
(2.5)
This is well veriﬁed experimentally, even though the value is
exceedingly small, conﬁrming the notion of phase coherence in the
macroscopic paired state, as implied in Eq. 2.4. John Bardeen was
quoted as commenting that (the phase) is coherent “over miles of
dirty lead wire,” suggesting what can be meant by a “macroscopic
quantum state.” As shown by Josephson [3] the variation of phase
diﬀerence ϕ across the junction with magnetic ﬁeld B in the barrier
of eﬀective thickness d+ 2λ, with λ the superconducting penetration
depth, satisﬁes
gradϕ =
2e
ℏ

(d + 2λ)(B × n),
(2.6)
where n is a unit vector normal to the barrier, ℏ= h/2π, and d is
the barrier thickness. This leads to a characteristic Fraunhofer-like

20
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the maximum supercurrent, IC, of the
Josephson tunnel junction:
IC = IC(0)


sin
π
0
 π
0
 .
(2.7)
Here IC(0) is maximum current in absence of magnetic ﬂux, and
 and 0, respectively, are the magnetic ﬂux through the eﬀective
junction barrier thickness, and the ﬂux quantum, h/2e. If the in-
plane magnetic ﬁeld B is parallel to dimension b of a rectangular
junction of area ab, with insulating barrier thickness d, then  =
Bb(2λ + d), where λ is the magnetic ﬁeld penetration depth into the
superconductor.
Beautiful data illustrating this characteristic dependence are
shown in Fig. 2.2, due to R. C. Dynes and T. A. Fulton [4]. Note in
the ﬁgure that the ﬁrst data points from B = 0 are plotted at 1/5
2                      4                       6                       8
3
2
1
B (GAUSS)
Ic (B) (MILLIAMPS)
Sn - I -Sn
Figure 2.2
Typical Fraunhofer-like dependence of Josephson critical
current on magnetic ﬁeld, that underlies many applications. Experimental
plot of critical supercurrent IC vs. magnetic ﬁeld B parallel to Sn–I–Sn
Josephson junction at 1.43 K. The average spacing between nodes is 0.695
gauss, corresponding to 1140 A for 2λ + d, where λ is the penetration depth
of the magnetic ﬁeld into the Sn and d is the barrier thickness. Between
nodes one additional ﬂux quantum ﬂows through area set by junction length
and the width of the tunnel barrier augmented by two penetration lengths,
(2λ + d). Reproduced with permission from Dynes, and Fulton [4].
www.ebook3000.com

Review of Physical Aspects
21
height relative to later data points, and that the + symbols show
the peak heights and positions predicted by the Fraunhofer function
(2.7). For the junction shown, having dimensions a = 0.26 mm by b
= 0.41 mm, the measured average spacing of minima, 0.695 gauss,
implies (2λ + d) = 1140 A, a reasonable value for Sn.
As will be discussed later in this book, in a parallel connection
of two Josephson junctions, a device known as a SQUID, or
superconducting quantum interference device, the eﬀective area for
intercepting ﬂux, described for the single junction as b(2λ + d),
with b the dimension of the rectangular junction parallel to
the ﬁeld, becomes the macroscopic area enclosed by the circuit
loop containing the junctions. The corresponding critical current
becomes, in the limit of small SQUID inductance, L,
IC = 2IC(0)
cos
π
0
 ,
(2.8)
where  ≈BA is the ﬂux intercepted by the macroscopic circuit
loop of area A containing the two junctions. This much larger
intercepting area A makes the SQUID device, commonly now
constructed with refractory Josephson junctions, a most sensitive
detector of magnetic ﬁeld, and by simple extensions, of electric
current and voltage. The SQUID is the basis of several of the most
important applications of refractory Josephson junctions, and this
topic is reviewed below in Chapter 8 of this book by D. Drung and J.
Beyer. (Equation 2.8 is formally valid in the limit bL →0, where bL is
the inductance parameter according to Eq. 8.3 in the SQUID chapter).
The beautiful data of Dynes and Fulton in Fig. 2.2 was analyzed
to provide, by an inversion method, an experimental mapping of the
thickness d of the basic tunnel barrier. The tunnel barrier in soft
superconductors such as Al, Sn, Mg, and Pb was easily provided by
exposure of the soft superconductor metal to air or oxygen, perhaps
in a plasma, via self-limiting growth of the native oxide. As Dynes
and Fulton showed, the resulting tunnel barrier can be more than
satisfactory.
A primary diﬃculty in extending fabrication of high-quality
tunnel junctions to refractory superconductors, notably Nb, was in
the failure of their grown oxides to provide similarly satisfactory
tunnel barriers. Approaches to this technical diﬃculty, that ﬁnally
led to the ﬁrst high-quality refractory Josephson junction as shown

22
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
in Fig. 2.1, from the work of Gurvitch et al., are a central theme of the
early chapters in this book.
Returning to the nature of the full Josephson junction I–V
characteristic in Fig. 2.1, one sees at once the basic bistability that
oﬀers a basis for application of the Josephson junction as a binary
computer element. The supercurrent state gives way abruptly
to the voltage state, when the supercurrent is destroyed by an
overcurrent or a magnetic perturbation. The origin of the current–
voltage characteristic in the voltage state, the state of quasiparticle
tunneling, is suggested in Fig. 2.3 [5], where, for simplicity, the
supercurrent has been omitted.
The upper portion of Fig. 2.3 schematically shows opened energy
gaps, 21 and 22, and density-of-states peaks characteristic
of most superconductors, as conﬁrmed by methods of electron
tunneling spectroscopy [5]. The lower portion of the ﬁgure shows
the basic quasiparticle current onset at the “sum-gap” voltage
(1 + 2)/e. The diﬀerence gap feature is seldom of importance
and will not appear in a symmetric junction as shown in Fig. 2.1.
Comparing the current onset here to that in Fig. 2.1, there is a small
“overshoot” feature at the sum gap in the experimental data that is
associated with the actual Nb/Al bilayer structure. The origin of this
small feature, not detrimental to applications, will be discussed in
the following two chapters.
2.2 History of the Josephson Program
Before going into the issues in the technical development of
refractory tunnel junctions, we mention that a large eﬀort was
made at the IBM Corporation to develop a computer technology
using Josephson junctions based on Pb alloys, including Bi and
Au. The supercurrent and voltage states of such junctions, similar
to those shown in Fig. 2.1, were the binary zero and one of this
technology. Review of this major eﬀort [6] in 1980 was followed
by announcement of its termination in September 1983 [7]. It was
stated [7] that the IBM eﬀort had been at the level of $20 million per
year and employed 115 workers.
www.ebook3000.com

History of the Josephson Program
23
Figure 2.3
(Upper) Sketch of quasiparticle states and their occupation at
ﬁnite temperature in junction at bias voltage V between superconductors
of energy gap parameter values 1 and 2. (Lower) Current vs. voltage plot
shows basic quasiparticle tunneling onset at sum gap voltage (1 + 2)/e.
Supercurrent at V = 0 is not shown. Reproduced with permission from Wolf
[5].

24
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
By 1986, as reviewed by Hayakawa [8], important work in Japan
on refractory Josephson junctions, based in part on work by Kroger
et al. [9] in 1981 using amorphous Si barriers, and by Gurvitch
et al. [1] in 1983 (the Nb/Al trilayer technology; see Chapter 5),
showed improvements over the earlier soft superconductor tech-
nology, which was by then largely abandoned. Hayakawa’s paper
showed a good Josephson I–V characteristic from a refractory
NbN/MgO/NbN junction, where the MgO is regarded as an artiﬁcial
barrier, in extension of work by Kroger et al. [9], where amorphous
Si (am-Si) was deposited on sputtered Nb as an artiﬁcial tunnel
barrier. The fully refractory NbN/MgO/NbN Josephson junctions
ﬁrst reported in [8] have been extended to epitaxial form by
Kawakami et al. [10]. Extensions of the work on NbN junctions are
treated later in Chapter 6 below by J.-C. Villegier.
After the demise of the soft superconductor IBM Josephson
program, Likharev and Semenov [11] suggested that a reason for
the failure, beyond the fragility of the junctions, was that the I(V ) of
the unshunted Josephson junction, as shown in Fig. 2.1, is inevitably
of the latching type, meaning that the junction will remain in the
switched state near V = 2/e (that is determined by the load line,
i.e., the outside resistor in series with the junction) unless reset by
a pulse from the outside. The resetting is done by the clock in the
digital Josephson technology. As was emphasized by Likharev and
Semenov [11] the maximum clock rate in such a system is limited
to the order of 1 GHz, because at higher rates the probability of
spontaneous change was increased, rendering the logic unreliable.
While 1 GHz was initially an acceptably high frequency, with later
improvements in the semiconductor logic, the JJ technology limit on
clock rate became a disadvantage. This speed diﬃculty was avoided
in a shunted junction technology, known as RSFQ or SFQ [9], for
rapid single ﬂux quantum, that has survived, and now has almost
completely replaced the initial latching logic technology. The original
introduction of the RSFQ technology was an important advance,
increasing the available frequency by a factor of 100. It is important
to note that the RSFQ technology is now typically implemented in the
Nb/Al trilayer technology. The early history of these developments
in switching circuitry was summarized by Hayakawa [6] as well as
by Likharev and Semenov [11].
www.ebook3000.com

Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions on Niobium
25
2.3 Development of Tunnel and Josephson
Junctions on Niobium
We ﬁrst focus on the tunnel junction technology needed for the
refractory metals, of which the most important is Nb, having the
highest transition temperature, 9.26 K, among the elements. (This
value is observed in clean bulk crystals and the best not-very-
thin ﬁlms, but in 100 nm ﬁlms the observed value is often slightly
lower, 9.1 K or 9.0 K.) The diﬃculty in making good oxidized
tunnel barriers on Nb was suggested in 1975 in the work of
Okaz and Keesom [12], who showed that NbO is not an insulator,
but a superconducting metal of Tc 1.61 K. In exposure of Nb to
air or oxygen one may ﬁnd some NbO as well as the insulating
oxide Nb2O5, as was summarized later by Halbritter [13]. Indeed,
anomalous results from tunneling spectroscopy of oxidized Nb
tunnel junctions were reported by Bostock and MacVicar [14] in
1976. They reported obtaining anomalous negative values of the
parameter μ* and in their paper questioned whether Nb could be
treated by the conventional electron–phonon strong coupling theory
of superconductivity. Their paper raised the question that Nb might
represent an entirely diﬀerent form of superconductivity. This idea
was very controversial, and the research community ﬁnally agreed
that the anomaly arose from the complicated thermal oxide grown
on Nb rather than from an unusual form of superconducting pairing
in that metal. In fact a resolution of this controversy, by preparing
improved Nb tunnel junctions not containing the problematic
niobium oxide, was one of the aims of the “Ames tunneling group,”
whose work is now described.
An extended eﬀort to make excellent tunnel junctions on Nb
in the “tunneling group” of the Ames Lab at Iowa State University
from 1976 to 1985, starting in 1977 [15, 16] and summarized
at length in [17, 18] 1980, focused on the use of Nb/Al bilayers,
the Al subsequently being oxidized to provide a reliable insulating
tunnel oxide. The use of Al as an overlayer, subsequently oxidized,
was not new at that time; see the work of Hauser et al. [19] in
1966 and references therein, and p. 507 in Ref. [5]. The focus of
the “tunneling group” was to make excellent tunnel junctions on

26
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
0              10             20             30             40              50
eV – ΔS (meV)
d2 V/dI2 (arb units)
NbT
NbL
AlLA
+
–
0
Figure 2.4
Tracing of d2V /dI 2 spectrum for In/Al2O3/AlNb junction at
1.4 K in 400 Gauss parallel ﬁeld, applied to simplify the spectrum by
suppressing the superconductivity of In. Arrows mark positions of expected
phonon peaks corresponding to transverse and longitudinal Nb modes,
and to longitudinal Al mode. Reproduced with permission from Wolf, and
Zasadzinski [15].
Nb (see Fig. 2.4) and use them to infer the detailed mechanism
of superconductivity in that metal. The junctions were termed
proximity junctions because the superconducting pairing in Nb
induced pairing in the Al, as paired electrons ﬂow from Nb to
Al. The proximity junctions are described in detail in Ref. [18].
The Eliashberg theory of superconductivity, an extension of the
successful BCS theory, shows in detail how metal vibration modes or
phonons can couple electrons into pairs and leave a detailed picture
www.ebook3000.com

Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions on Niobium
27
of this interaction in the measured quantity dI/dV . This spectrum
can be inverted, using the McMillan–Rowell computer program (as
was done in Ref. [14]), to extract the eﬀective phonon density of
states. These technical aspects are described in Ref. [5] and the
extension of the method to bilayers such as Nb/Al is the main topic
of Ref. [18].
The Josephson eﬀect is inherent in any tunnel junction between
superconductors (although, as explained by Dr. Josephson in the
previous chapter, it can be absent if there is external electrical
noise), but the Josephson eﬀect in itself was not the focus of the
Ames Lab tunnel group. Single crystals of Nb were produced by
recrystallizing Nb foils from 1800◦C to near the Nb melting point
(∼2460◦C) in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) 2.6 × 10−12 Bar or less.
(The cryogenic UHV vacuum system with extremely high pumping
speed was designed by L. Y. L. Shen at Bell Labs [20] and later
donated to the Ames tunnel group. L.Y. L. Shen in his paper [20]
thanks J. M. Rowell “for many helpful discussions” in the work). In
these atomically clean conditions, after the foil had melted across,
and abruptly cooled to room temperature, thin layers of Al were
thermally evaporated, in variable thicknesses, across sections of the
centimeter-wide foils. It was later found [21] that the recrystallized
Nb foil typically had a (110) surface, with at least millimeter-size
grains, and that the Al layer was (111), epitaxially related to the Nb.
Under such atomically clean conditions the Al would be expected
to smoothly spread out across the Nb to maximize its contact area,
since the cohesive energy of Nb greatly exceeds that of Al.
The “wetting” of the Nb with the Al, avoiding any kind of
“pinholes,” was conﬁrmed from the tunneling results, ﬁrst shown in
[15] (Fig. 2.4).
The tunneling results that clearly show the wetting of the Al on
the Nb are the feature near 37 mV bias in Fig. 2.4 and Figs. 7, 8, 9, and
10 of [17], on junctions for 27 A and 50 A deposited Al thickness.
The feature near 37 mV comes from the longitudinal acoustic LA
phonon of metallic Al. The wetting of the Nb was also indicated
by surface analysis. Page 36 of [17], published in 1980, states that
“above 30 A deposited thickness of Al the ﬁlm is continuous. This
conclusion is supported by Auger analysis of freshly coated Nb/Al
sandwiches which for tAl>30 A showed Al Auger peaks but no lower

28
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
energy Nb peaks.” Wolf and Zasadzinski [15] (see also p. 48 of [17])
state, “We also thank . . . L. Y. L. Shen and J. M. Rowell and Bell
Laboratories for the donation of a vacuum system.” There were in
fact two cryogenic UHV systems, designed by and built for L. Y. L.
Shen at Bell Laboratories and shipped to Ames, IA, the ﬁrst in 1975,
with the approval of John Rowell, after Lawrence Shen was unable to
use them at Bell.
In fact, John Rowell visited the Ames Lab tunneling group in the
fall of 1979, and on that day, before giving a seminar talk, intently
inspected direct dV /dI–V chart recorder curves for the indication
of the Al phonon at 37 mV, which all knew indicated the wetting
of the Nb by Al under atomically clean conditions, down to the
thinnest layers. Also discussed on that day was the ongoing work on
tantalum foils that was published in 1981 [22] as IV in the series
in the Journal of Low Temperature Physics on proximity electron
tunneling spectroscopy. An earlier connection of the Ames Lab
tunnel program with John Rowell, beyond donation of the vacuum
systems, was the visit in 1976 to Ames of Bennett Robinson, whose
Ph.D. thesis in physics at Stanford University, dated 1976, under
the supervision of T. H. Geballe, was titled “Tunneling into Quench
Condensed Transition Metals” and was in fact partially supervised
by John Rowell, who was on sabbatical at Stanford in 1976. Bennett
Robinson and Ames tunnel group members compared his data on
Nb to the Ames results, and the consensus was that the Ames data
(see Fig. 2.4) were deﬁnitely superior. Bennett Robinson agreed that
the proximity tunnel method, based on single-crystal bilayers, and
using the ﬁrst vacuum system donated by Bell Labs, slightly rebuilt
and already extensively in use, was superior to quench condensing,
to learn about the superconductivity in Nb.
As noted by Dr. Josephson in Fig. 1.1, J. M. Rowell, with P. W.
Anderson, ﬁrst experimentally conﬁrmed the Josephson eﬀect, and
J. M. Rowell obtained a U.S. patent [23] for such devices. Shortly
after fall in 1979, when J. M. Rowell visited the Ames Lab tunneling
group, three experimental papers, [24] in 1981, [25] in 1982 and
[1] in 1983, were published from Bell Laboratories, in a new
Josephson junction eﬀort. (The new Bell eﬀort, while encouraged by
J. M. Rowell, was partially in a diﬀerent laboratory from his, as is
explained by M. A. Gurvitch in Chapter 5. These works, culminating
www.ebook3000.com

Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions on Niobium
29
in 1983 with the Josephson characteristic shown in Fig. 2.1, utilized
DC sputtering systems with Nb and Al targets, so that deposition
of Nb could be quickly followed by deposition of Al. (The ﬁrst
encouraging all-refractory I(V ) appeared in 1981, as explained in
Chapter 5 by M. A. Gurvitch.) The paper by Rowell, Gurvitch, and
Geerk [24] conﬁrmed that the same wetting of clean Nb by Al that
was shown in the published Ames Lab works [15–17], starting in
1977, could be obtained using sequentially sputtered thin ﬁlms.
This was good news from the point of view of making Josephson
junctions, but the observed “wetting” could hardly have been
“surprising” (see p. 2278 of [24]), at least to the lead author. This
paper failed to reference any of the published Ames Lab works on
the directly relevant Nb/Al, including the personal communication
that had occurred. In the second paper [25] devoted to oxidation
of Al on Nb/Al bilayers, again based on sputtered bilayers using the
same parameters as employed in [24], the authors Kwo et al. thanked
J. M. Rowell for suggesting their research project.
Kwo et al. [25] found that with the sputtered Nb ﬁlms under
clean conditions the Al layer could ﬂow around the grains, leaving
a diminished amount on the front surface, and that by heating the
substrate to enlarge to size of the Nb grains, this eﬀect could be
diminished. But enough Al was typically left wetted to the Nb to
allow good oxidation for the tunnel barriers. This paper referenced
[17] of 1980 as indicating that Al would spread out over the surface
of clean Nb, as evidenced by strong proximity eﬀect tunneling, as
shown in Figs. 7–10 of [17]. The 1983 paper [1] of Gurvitch et al.
shows excellent Josephson junction tunnel characteristics (Fig. 2.1)
for devices made in a similar but separate DC sputtering system, now
with three sputtering targets. This paper refers only to Ref. [24] as
a reason to expect wetting of the Nb by Al, with no reference to the
prior Ames work.
The structures in this paper [1] are of the form Nb/Al-AlOx-
Nb, made by sequential sputtering and thermal oxidation, and
the process is now referred to as the Nb/Al trilayer Josephson
junction process, and is widely used to the present. See, for
example, Berggren et al. [26] describing arrays of junctions of
critical current density 1.7 kA/cm2. The term SNEP (selective
niobium etching process) following the terminology of Kroger et al.

30
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
[9] was used by Gurvitch et al. These authors referenced earlier
work by Laibowitz and Mayadas, using 800 A Al layers on Nb
to make “trilayer” Josephson junctions [27] with critical current
density about 12 A/cm2. This early Nb/Al “trilayer” process, using
sequentially electron-beam-evaporated ﬁlms of Nb and Al, clearly
did not allow full coverage of the Nb below 800 A thickness of
Al, and one speculates that the vacuum conditions, even though
conventionally competent, did not leave a suﬃciently clean Nb
surface for the Al to ﬂow around the grains as was observed in the
Ames work starting in 1977 and in the later, 1981 work of Rowell,
Gurvitch, and Geerk [24] and Kwo et al. [25]. Gurvitch et al. [1]
acknowledged advice from, and a reading of their manuscript by,
J. M. Rowell. The developments at Bell Labs, starting shortly after
1980, leading to the important 1983 paper [1] are described in detail
by M. A. Gurvitch in Chapter 5. Improvements in the performance
of the sputtered Nb/Al trilayer junctions, including lower subgap
current and critical current densities up to 4600 A/cm2, were
reported by Morohashi et al. [28] in 1985. The several applications
of the Nb/Al trilayer junctions, and of other refractory junctions
such as NbN/MgO/NbN [8] and Nb0.62Ti0.38N/TaxN/Nb0.62Ti0.38N
devices [29] are summarized in later chapters of this book.
2.4 Development of Tunnel and Josephson
Junctions on Niobium Nitride
Following the work of Gurvitch et al. on Nb junctions, the next
important advance in refractory junctions may well have been the
work of Shoji et al. [30], which was the key reference in [8].
Junctions of the form NbN/a-MgO/NbN were made by sequential RF
sputtering from Nb and MgO targets.
The NbN ﬁlms were RF sputtered from a Nb target in a 6% N2–
Ar gas mixture at 1.1 Pa, while the MgO layer was RF sputtered
from an MgO target in 1.3 Pa of argon gas. The MgO barrier ﬁlm
was determined to be amorphous by appearance of halo rings
in reﬂection high-energy electron diﬀraction RHEED measurement
and an absence of any peak in x-ray diﬀraction. The sum gap
www.ebook3000.com

Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions on Niobium Nitride
31
voltage of these devices was typically 5.1 mV, suggesting a gap
parameter value 2.55 meV. Critical current densities in the range
600–1400 A/cm2 were observed, with IcRn product values of
3.15–3.25 mV, compared to an ideal value of 4 mV based on the
Ambegaokar–Baratoﬀrelation, using  = 2.55 meV [2]. The subgap
leakage parameter Vm is in the range 30–50 mV. The speciﬁc
capacitance was inferred to be in the range 7–8 μF/cm2. The
advantage of using NbN is the higher transition temperature. On the
basis of the strong coupling relation
2 = 4.0kBTC (Thouless)
(2.9)
rather than the BCS relation
2 = 3.52kBTC
(2.10)
(see Thouless [31], also p. 100 in [5]), one predicts that TC = 14.8 K
for the NbN fabricated by Shoji et al., very close to the observation.
The actual temperature dependence of the critical current for the
junction shown in Fig. 2.5 is shown in Fig. 2.6. This dependence is
very close to that predicted by Ambegaokar and Baratoﬀ, ([2] in the
Erratum) namely,
IC(T ) = π/2 R−1
N (T ) tanh[(T )/2kBT ].
(2.11)
This expression leads [2], near TC, to
IC/IC(0) = 2.67(Tc −T )/Tc, T ≈TC
(2.12)
assuming the BCS dependence
(T ) = 1.8(0)

1 −T
TC
1/2
, near TC
(2.13)
and noting that tanh(x) ≈x for small x. The predicted linear slope
with prefactor 2.66 ≈2.67 was observed in weak-coupling Sn/I/Sn
Josephson junctions by Fiske [32].
The linear dependence near TC is also nicely shown in Fig. 2.6,
but these data for the strong coupling superconductor NbN near TC
ﬁt more closely to
IC/IC(0) = 2.19(TC −T )/TC, T ≈TC.(observed, see Fig. 2.6)
(2.14)

32
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
Figure 2.5
Dependence of Josephson critical current at 4.2 K on parallel
magnetic ﬁeld for the ﬁrst NbN Josephson tunnel junctions, of the form
NbN/MgO/NbN from the work of Shoji et al. in 1985. These nearly ideal
Josephson junctions were fabricated by RF sputtering of Nb and MgO targets
(see text), and the Josephson current persisted up to 14.5 K. Reproduced
with permission from Shoji et al. [30].
This observed slope value (2.18) is in acceptable agreement with
the slope, 2.26, obtained from the Thouless strong coupling theory
[31] that gives
(T ) = 1.73(0)

1 −T
TC
1/2
near TC,
(2.15)
and 2(0) = 4 kBTC. So these refractory NbN tunneling Josephson
junctions [30] behave consistently as expected for a strong coupling
superconductor.
The higher critical temperature of the NbN devices is important
to applications, in that it makes possible cooling by refrigerators
rather than by liquid helium, but their fabrication may be more
diﬃcult than the trilayer Nb/Al junctions described earlier.
The route to these superior NbN/MgO/NbN junctions, with
directly deposited barriers, perhaps started in the 1979 work of
Kroger et al. [33] (see also [9]) on oxidized amorphous Si, followed
by work of Rudman and Beasley [34] on the same subject. Rudman
and Beasley conclude that the oxidized amorphous Si barriers
www.ebook3000.com

Development of Tunnel and Josephson Junctions on Niobium Nitride
33
Figure 2.6
Temperature dependence of the maximum critical current for
a NbN/a-MgO/NbN junction similar to that shown in Fig. 2.5. The critical
temperature for the device is near 14.8 K. Reproduced with permission from
Shoji et al. [30].
work well provided the “native oxide of the base electrode has a
suﬃciently low conductance to block pinholes.” So the am-Si process
lacked any “wetting” character to fully cover the base electrode, such
as the Nb/Al process that was being worked on at the same time
[15–18]. “Pinhole” defects could lead to excessive subgap leakage
in such devices. The am-Si process, nonetheless, led in 1980 to
workable early NbN/am-Si/NbN junctions [35]. These devices were
surpassed in 1985 in the same group by the excellent NbN devices
described in [30].
The next advance in this area appears to be the discovery that
entire NbN/MgO/NbN epitaxially crystalline structures could be
sequentially grown using sputtering methods on single-crystal MgO
substrates, culminating around 2001 in excellent junctions as de-
scribed in [10]. The epitaxial NbN Josephson junction development
may have started with the work [36] of Kerber et al. in 1989. These
researchers reported that if NbN were sputtered onto a thin layer

34
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
of MgO, deposited on an oxidized Si substrate, rather than directly
onto the oxidized Si, the NbN TC rose from about 14.8 K to 15.7 K.
The NbN layer in this case was found to be oriented. This work was
extended as described in 1991 by Shoji [37] who reported, using
single-crystal NbN electrodes with MgO barriers, sum gap voltages
5.6–5.8 mV, and by Wang et al. [38] in 1997, who reported Josephson
current densities up to 54 kA/cm2 using AlN barriers.
Finally, Kawakami in 2001 [10] described fully epitaxial
NbN/MgO/NbN structures grown on single-crystal MgO substrates
with critical current densities in the range 0.2–70 kA/cm2. The NbN
electrode TC was reported as 15.7 K and gap voltages in the range
5.6–5.9 mV were reported for those junctions with critical current
densities up to 15 kA/cm2.
The same authors explained the motivation of their work in
application of these excellent, fully epitaxial, devices as Josephson
oscillators and SIS mixers for use above 700 GHz in [38]. They
performed experiments with these devices to indicate low losses
up to 1.2 THz. Pioneering work on NbN ﬁlms and devices
grown on sapphire Al2O3 is described by Villegier et al. [39]. A
review of work on SIS mixers and oscillators based on refractory
Josephson junctions is given by Dmitriev, Filippenko, and Koshelets
in Chapter 7.
2.5 Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and
Generalized Josephson Devices
Fabrication of non-hysteretic shunted Josephson junctions is of
interest to exploit the RSFQ computing circuitry mentioned above
[11] as a successor to the latching circuitry investigated earlier
at IBM. The bulk of RSFQ circuits remove the bi-stable nature of
the I(V ) of Nb/Al trilayer junctions, by applying an external shunt
resistor [11]. To make a smaller overall device, eﬀorts have been
made to incorporate the shunt into the Josephson junction itself.
The details of the I(V ) of Josephson junctions with shunt
resistor R were investigated by Stewart [40] and by McCumber [41].
These descriptions are found to apply to a wider class of weakly
www.ebook3000.com

Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and Generalized Josephson Devices
35
coupled superconductor junctions, where the original tunnel barrier
coupling in an SIS structure may be replaced with a resistive layer,
for example, to make an SNS junction [42], or even SINIS structures
[43, 44], found to exhibit supercurrents and other Josephson
phenomena. These generalized structures are now fabricated in
refractory forms, for use in contemporary Josephson junction
applications including Josephson voltage standards. The degree
of shunting needed to give a single-valued I(V ) for a Josephson
junction is established by the Stewart–McCumber parameter,
βc = 4πeIcR2C/h,
(2.16)
where R is the shunt resistance, C the capacitance, and h is Planck’s
constant. The overdamped non-hysteretic regime corresponds to
βc ≤1.0.
For example, the paper of Senepati and Barber [45] (see also
references therein) describes internally shunted NbN/MgO/NbN
devices. A typical set of I(V ) curves is shown in Fig. 2.7, illustrating
the behavior predicted by Stewart and McCumber. The maximum
supercurrent IC for the device is 0.37 mA at 4.2 K and the product.
ICRN ≈0.15 mV at 4.2 K. The shunt resistance itself is estimated
as 0.45 	, while the RN value measured on similar, but unshunted,
junctions is ∼3.5 	. The estimated capacitance C is 1.3 pF and βc =
0.23 at 4.2 K.
The ICRN ≈0.15 mV is much reduced from what is available
in unshunted junctions, e.g., values ICRN = 3.15–3.25 mV for the
NbN/MgO/NbN junctions of Kawakami et al. [30]. The authors [42]
point out that in the RSFQ logic the inherent speed is proportional
to ICRN, based on [11]. Nonetheless, the authors suggest that
their shunted devices remain workable for RSFQ logic. Since their
device has a parallel current path, the shunt resistor, to the
supercurrent path, the authors have been at pains to establish that
the total current is dominated by the Josephson supercurrent. This
is established as shown in the inset to Fig. 2.7, where the total
measured supercurrent is plotted vs. temperature, and shown, by
comparison to the theory curve based on the Ambegaokar–Baratoﬀ
relation (2.11), to be in excellent agreement. In their application of
the Ambegaokar–Baratoﬀformula (2.11) the authors [45] have used
an interpolation formula for temperature dependence of the BCS gap

36
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
Figure 2.7
I(V ) measured at temperatures 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, and 8.2 K
for sidewall-shunted NbN/MgO/NbN overdamped Josephson junction of
dimensions 30 μm2 and estimated Stewart–McCumber parameter βc =
0.23 [40]. I(V ) is single-valued as consistent with reduced value of βc.
Inset shows temperature dependence of the critical current as compared
to theory. Reproduced with permission from Senapati, and Barber [45].
(T ) that is not limited to the region near TC: this formula [46] is
(T ) = (0) tanh[4.8(TC −T )/T ]1/2.
(2.17)
Using this formula excellent agreement to the data is found, note the
oﬀset zero on the current scale in the inset to Fig. 2.7.
2.5.1 Shapiro Steps, Highly Hysteretic Junctions, and
Josephson Voltage Standards
As described by Dr. Josephson in Chapter 1, and in his ﬁrst published
paper, when the junction is biased at voltage V the usual DC current
appears, but there is also an AC supercurrent of frequency
f = 2eV/h(483,597.9 GHz/V),
(2.18)
where h is Planck’s constant. If a junction is exposed to microwave
rf radiation it is predicted by Josephson and observed [47] that
www.ebook3000.com

Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and Generalized Josephson Devices
37
the I(V ) will be interrupted by constant voltage (Shapiro) steps
occurring at quantized voltages
Vn = n
 h
2e

f, where n = 1, 2, 3 . . .
(2.19)
In the current range of a given step, the phase of the Josephson
oscillating current is locked to the phase of the applied rf ﬁeld. There
has been a longstanding and well-published international eﬀort to
use this relation to establish voltage standards, making use of agreed
high precision frequency standards. Chapter 10 of this book, by
Johannes Kohlmann, is devoted to this eﬀort, which has reached an
extremely high level of sophistication. In the present chapter we
are primarily concerned with the underlying refractory Josephson
junctions that have dominated the voltage standard ﬁeld since
perhaps 1990 [48]. An advance in the voltage standard ﬁeld, which
involves series arrays of Josephson junctions, was the prediction,
based on accurate modeling at βc = 500, of Levinson et al. [49], that
high βC junctions provide “zero crossing steps,” where each Shapiro
step extends from negative to positive current. Such steps are more
amenable to forming a voltage standard. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.8,
taken from the review in 2000 of Clark A. Hamilton [50].
Zero-crossing Shapiro steps of the type illustrated in Fig. 2.8b
were clearly shown in the 1990 work of Popel et al. [48],
demonstrating 1 V and 10 V standards, based, respectively, on
series arrays of 2000 and 20,160 Nb/Al trilayer Josephson junctions,
to produce stable quantized-voltage steps up to 1.5 and 14.5 V.
In describing their method, Popel et al. point out that with their
input frequency f of 70 GHz, the ﬁrst step will appear at about
0.145 mV. A single junction will provide about seven steps, up to
about 1 mV, in their mode of operation. To achieve 1 V, the entire
series array must be biased on the 7000th step, and to achieve 10 V
the entire series array is biased onto the 70,000th step. The method
of controlling the bias voltage and the bias impedance to select a
particular quantized step was earlier described by Hamilton et al.
in 1987 [51] in connection with a soft-superconductor array. The
capability of reaching any one of the 70,000 steps in the range 14.5 V,
using refractory Josephson junctions at 70 GHz, was demonstrated
in the Popel paper [48] of 1990.

38
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
Figure 2.8
(a) Shapiro steps for a non-hysteretic, low βc, junction. (b) Zero-
crossing Shapiro steps, desired for voltage standard arrays, appear in high
βc high-capacitance junctions, as predicted by Levinson et al. [49]. After
Hamilton [50].
2.5.2 Josephson Junction Arrays
A general feature of the Josephson arrays is design such that the
linear array of junctions also serves as a stripline for the microwave
propagation to the junctions. This is suggested in Fig. 2.9. In such
striplines, according to Hamilton [50], the junction’s capacitive
impedance (about 1 m	) is so small compared to the stripline
impedance, about 3 	, that each junction has only a minor eﬀect
www.ebook3000.com

Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and Generalized Josephson Devices
39
Figure 2.9
Schematic layout of series array of Josephson junctions on
insulator above a ground plane, thus serving as a low-loss stripline
propagating microwave radiation. After Hamilton [50].
on the propagation of the microwave power. Typically each junction
absorbs 0.02–0.04% of the power propagating through it. Thus it is
possible to have an array of several thousand junctions with a power
uniformity of ± 1.5 dB. Strings of up to 4800 junctions have been
used in this way [50].
According to the review of Hamilton in 2000, voltage standard
systems of the general type demonstrated by Popel et al. were
installed by year 2000 in about 50 standards laboratories around
the world, and such DC systems were commercially available.
An alternative advanced design of the voltage standard arrays
was described by Hamilton et al. in 1995 [52], with the important
advantage that access times to individual voltage steps could be
reduced to microseconds. Detailed speciﬁcations on the required
junctions for the rapid-access standards were given, now allowing
shunted junctions, rather than highly hysteretic junctions as were
earlier advocated by Levinson et al., shown in Fig. 2.8b and
incorporated in the working 1 and 10 V refractory standards
described by Popel et al. (1990). The more rapid access time is
clearly desirable for many applications.
Following the suggestion of [52] for rapid access arrays, SNS
structures were demonstrated for use in the rapid access Josephson
voltage standards, for example, Nb/PdAu/Nb junctions as reported
by Benz [53]. These junctions, referred to as “trilayer SNS” devices,
were deployed in arrays up to 8192 junctions, and were judged
suitable for voltage standards using the alternative advanced design

40
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
described by Hamilton et al. [52] in 1995 (and also described in the
review by Hamilton [50]).
Returning to novel types of refractory Josephson-like junctions,
suitable for the rapid access voltage standards of the alternative
advanced design, stacked SNS structures using MoSi2 as nor-
mal metal N, with inherently shunted I(V ) curves, have been
studied by Chong et al. [54]. Five-layer structures of the type
Nb/MoSi2/Nb/MoSi2/Nb, where the middle Nb layer varied in
thickness from 5 nm to 80 nm, were fabricated, each unit considered
as two stacked Josephson junctions. Doubly stacked junctions mean
that the stripline need only be half as long if two junctions can be
incorporated at each location marked “Junctions” in Fig. 2.9. In the
voltage standard array format, series arrays of the doubly stacked
devices were fabricated by Chong et al., containing 4100 stacks
(8200 junctions in series).
Figure 2.10 shows the I(V ) of the series array of 4200 stacks
(8400 junctions) in the absence of irradiation and with microwave
Voltage (mV)
Current (mA)
Figure 2.10
Characteristic I(V ) of series array of 4100 stacks (8200
Josephson junctions, with middle Nb electrode thickness 20 nm) under
variable irradiation and simple current bias. Inset shows detail of n = 1 step
at 339.2 mV with 20 GHz microwaves, stable in current range 11–14 mA; see
text. After Chong et al. [54].
www.ebook3000.com

Non-hysteretic Josephson Junctions and Generalized Josephson Devices
41
radiation at 12, 16, and 20 GHz and under simple current bias.
The inset to the ﬁgure shows, at 339 mV across the whole array,
the ﬁrst step obtained over a current range of 3 mA with 20 GHz
irradiation. The voltage across the whole array, for current in the
range 11–14 mA, can be predicted as 8200 × 20 GHz/483.598
GHz/mV = 339.12 mV, in agreement with the data in the inset of
the ﬁgure. More elaborate bias conditions, the alternative advanced
rapid access Josephson array design, as explained in [52], would be
needed to quickly stabilize and display individual examples of the
full complement of voltage steps inherent in such an array.
The present state of the sophisticated voltage standard ﬁeld is
described by Johannes Kohlmann in Chapter 10.
2.5.3 Josephson Devices for RSFQ Computing
The default devices for RSFQ computing have been the Nb/Al trilayer
tunnel junctions with external shunt resistors, with some attention
to devices based on NbN. Research has been reported aimed at
internally shunted devices. One suggestion for a replacement for
an externally shunted Josephson junction is shown in Fig. 2.11
[55]. This proposed structure is in the category of an SNS junction
based on NbN, where the electrodes are Nb1−xTixN, an alloy with
a slightly larger energy gap and transition temperature than NbN.
The Ta1−xNx middle layer is resistive depending on the composition
Figure 2.11
Pentalayer NbN-based SNS junction design for “drop-in
replacement” of shunted Nb/Al trilayer tunnel junctions in Nb integrated
circuits. Reproduced with permission from Van Duzer et al. [55]. This type
of structure can be conveniently deposited on a conventional Si wafer using
sequential sputtering methods.

42
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
chosen. This layer is made by sputtering from a Ta target in an
atmosphere of argon with a small percentage of nitrogen. The
authors display the 4.2K I(V) of a 2 × 2 μm2 junction of this type with
IC = 2 mA, ICRN = 2.3 mV, J C = 50 kA/cm2 and a slightly hysteretic
characteristic. The design is intended for “drop-in replacement” of
shunted Nb/Al trilayer junctions in Nb integrated circuits.
Internally shunted Josephson junctions with barriers tuned near
the metal–insulator transition for RSFQ logic applications have been
reported [29] in an extension of the above-mentioned work [55]. A
full summary of work based on NbN is contained in Chapter 6 by J.-C.
Villegier.
References
1. Gurvitch, M., Washington, M. A., and Huggins, H. A. (1983). High quality
refractory Josephson tunnel junctions utilizing thin aluminum layers.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 42, 472–474.
2. Ambegaokar, V., and Baratoﬀ, A. (1963). Tunneling between supercon-
ductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 486–489 (and erratum Phys. Rev. Lett. 11,
104).
3. Josephson, B. D. (1964). Coupled superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 36,
216–220.
4. Dynes, R. C., and Fulton, T. A. (1971). Supercurrent density distribution
in Josephson junctions. Phys. Rev. B 3, 3015–3023.
5. Wolf, E. L. (2012). Electron Tunneling Spectroscopy, 2nd Ed. (Oxford
University Press, Oxford).
6. Anacker, W. (1980). Josephson computer technology: an IBM research
project. IBM J. Res. Dev. 24, 107–111.
7. Robinson, A. L. (1983). IBM drops superconducting computer project.
Science 222, 492–494.
8. Hayakawa, H. (1986). Josephson computer technology: recent advances
on the road to superconducting computers include novel operating
designs and memory circuits as well as stable and reliable devices made
entirely from refractory materials. Phys. Today 39, 46– 57.
9. Kroger, H., Smith, L. N., and Jillie, D.W. (1981). Selective niobium
anodization for fabricating Josephson tunnel junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett.
39, 280–282.
www.ebook3000.com

References
43
10. Kawakami, A., Wang, Z., and Miki, S. (2001). Fabrication and character-
ization of epitaxial NbN/MgO/NbN Josephson tunnel junctions. J. Appl.
Phys. 90, 4796.
11. Likharev, K. K., and Semenov, V. K. (1991). RSFQ logic/memory family: a
new Josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency
digital systems. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 1, 3–28.
12. Okaz Ali, M., and Keesom, P. H. (1975). Speciﬁc heat and magnetization
of the superconducting monoxides: NbO and TiO. Phys. Rev. B 12, 4917–
4928.
13. Halbritter, J. (1987). On the oxidation and on the superconductivity of
niobium. Appl. Phys. A 43, 1–28.
14. Bostock, J., Diadiuk, V., Cheung, W. N., Lo, K. H., Rose, R. M., and Mac Vicar,
M. L. A. (1976). Does strong-coupling theory describe superconducting
Nb?. Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 603–606.
15. Wolf, E. L., and Zasadzinski, J. (1977). On the observation of supercon-
ducting phonon structure in proximity tunneling. Phys. Lett. A 62, 165–
167.
16. Arnold, G. B., Zasadzinski, J., and Wolf, E. L. (1978). A resolution of the
controversy on tunneling in Nb. Phys. Lett. A 69, 136–138.
17. Wolf, E. L., Zasadzinski, J., Osmun, J. W., and Arnold, G. B. (1980).
Proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy. I. Experiments on Nb. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 40, 19–49.
18. Arnold, G. B., Zasadzinski, J., Osmun, J. W., and Wolf, E. L. (1980).
Proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy. II. Eﬀects of the induced N-
metal pair potential on calculated S-metal properties. J. Low Temp. Phys.
40, 225–246.
19. Hauser, J. J., Bacon, D. D., and Haemmerle, W. H. (1966). Energy gap of
V3Si. Phys. Rev. 151, 296–298.
20. Shen, L. Y. L. (1972). Design and performance of a high-speed
economical ultrahigh vacuum chamber utilizing titanium sublimation.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 43, 1301–1306.
21. Tao, H. J., Gibson, E. D., Verhoeven, J. D., and Wolf, E. L. (1984). Combined
tunnelling and SEM channelling analysis of metallic bilayers Al(111)
epitaxed on Nb(110). Philos. Mag. B 50, L55–L61.
22. Wolf, E. L., Burnell, D. M., Khim, Z. G., and Noer, R. J. (1981). Proximity
electron tunneling spectroscopy. IV. Electron-phonon coupling and
superconductivity of tantalum. J. Low Temp. Phys. 44, 89–118.
23. Rowell, J. M. (1966). Cryogenic supercurrent tunneling devices. U. S.
Patent 3,281,609.

44
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
24. Rowell, J. M., Gurvitch, M., and Geerk, J. (1981). Modiﬁcation of tunneling
barriers on Nb by a few monolayers of Al. Phys. Rev. B 24, 2278–2281.
25. Kwo, J., Wertheim, G. K., Gurvitch, M., and Buchanan, D. N. E. (1982).
X-ray photoemission spectroscopy study of surface oxidation of Nb/Al
overlayer structures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 675–677.
26. Berggren, K. K., Macedo, E. M., Feld, D. A., and Sage, J. P. (1999). Low Tc
superconductive circuits fabricated on 150-mm-diameter wafers using
a doubly planarized Nb/AlOx/Nb process. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond.
9, 3271–3274.
27. Laibowitz, R. B., and Mayadas, A. F. (1972). Josephson junctions with
Nb/Al composite electrodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 20, 254–256.
28. Morohashi, S., Shinoki, F., Shoji, A., Aoyagi, M., and Hayakawa, H. (1985).
High quality Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junction. Appl. Phys. Lett. 46,
1179–1181.
29. Yu, L., Gandikota, R., Singh, R., Gu, L., Smith, D. J., Meng, I., Zeng, X.,
Van Duzer, T., Rowell, J. M., and Newman, N. (2006). Internally shunted
Josephson junctions with barriers tuned near the metal-insulator
transition for RSFQ logic applications. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 19, 719–
731.
30. Shoji, A., Aoyagi, M., Kosaka, S., Shinoki, F., and Hayakawa, H. (1985).
Niobium nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with magnesium oxide
barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 46, 1098–1100.
31. Thouless, D. J. (1960). Strong-coupling limit of the theory of supercon-
ductivity. Phys. Rev. 117, 1256–1260.
32. Fiske, M. D. (1964). Temperature and magnetic ﬁeld dependences of the
Josephson tunneling current. Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 221–222.
33. Kroger, H, Potter, C. M., and Jillie, D. W. (1978). Niobium Josephson
junctions with doped amorphous silicon barriers. IEEE Trans. Magn.
MAG-15, 488–489.
34. Rudman, D. A., and Beasley, M. R. (1980). Oxidized amorphous–silicon
superconducting tunnel junction barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 36, 1010–
1013.
35. Shinoki, F., Shoji, A., Kosaki, S., Takada, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1980).
Niobium nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with oxidized amorphous
silicon barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 38, 285–288.
36. Kerber, G. L., Cooper, J. E., Morris, R. S., Spargo, J. W., and Toth, A. G.
(1989). NbN/MgO/NbN Josephson tunnel junctions fabricated on thin
underlayers of MgO. IEEE Trans. Magn. 25, 1294–1297.
www.ebook3000.com

References
45
37. Shoji, A. (1991). Fabrication of all-NbN Josephson tunnel junctions using
single crystal NbN ﬁlms for the base electrodes. IEEE Trans. Magn. 27,
3184–3187.
38. Kawakami, A., Wang, Z., and Miki, S. (2001). Low-loss epitaxial
NbN/MgO/NbN trilayers for THz applications. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond. 11, 80–83.
39. Villegier, J. C., Bouat, S., Cavalier, P., Setzu, R., Espiau de Lamaestre, R.,
Jorel, C., Odier, P., Guillet, B., Mechin, L., Chauvat, J. P., and Ruterana,
P. (2009). Epitaxial growth of sputtered ultra thin NbN layers and
junctions on sapphire. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 19, 3375–3378.
40. Stewart, W. C. (1968). Current-voltage characteristics of Josephson
junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 12, 277–280.
41. McCumber, D. E. (1968). Eﬀect of ac impedance on dc voltage-current
characteristics of superconductor weak-link junctions. J. Appl. Phys. 39,
3113–3118.
42. Barnes, S. E. (1980). Validity of the resistively shunted Josephson
junction model for small area superconductor-normal-superconductor
junctions in a magnetic ﬁeld. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 6438–6440.
43. Kuprianov, M. Yu., and Lukichev, V. F. (1997). Inﬂuence of boundary
transparency on critical current in “dirty” SS’S structures. Sov. Phys.-
JETP 70, 3603–3605.
44. Maezawa, M., and Shoji, A. (1997). Overdamped Josephson junctions
with Nb/AlOx/Al/AlOx/Nb structures for integrated circuit applica-
tions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 3603–3605.
45. Senapati, K., and Barber, Z. H. (2009). Sidewall shunted overdamped
NbN-MgO-NbN Josephson junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 173511-
173511-3.
46. Sergeenkov, S. A. (2002). Electric ﬁeld dependence of the thermal
conductivity of a granular superconductor: giant ﬁeld-induced eﬀect
predicted. JETP Lett. 76, 170–174.
47. Shapiro, S. (1963). Josephson currents in superconducting tunneling:
the eﬀect of microwaves and other observations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 80–
82.
48. Popel, R., Niemeyer, J., Fromknecht, R., Meier, W., and Grimm, L. (1990).
1- and 10- V series array Josephson voltage standards in Nb/Al2O3/Nb
technology. J. Appl. Phys. 68, 4294–4303.
49. Levinson, M. T., Chiao, R Y., Feldman, M. T., and Tucker, B. A. (1977). An
inverse ac Josephson eﬀect voltage standard. Appl. Phys. Lett. 31, 776–
778.

46
Introduction to Refractory Josephson Junctions
50. Hamilton, C. A. (2000). Josephson voltage standards. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
71, 3611–3623.
51. Hamilton, C. A., Kautz, R. L., Lloyd, F. L., Steiner, R. L., and Field, B. F.
(1987). The NBS Josephson array voltage standard. IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas. 36, 258–261.
52. Hamilton, C. A., Burroughs, C. J., and Kautz, R. L. (1995). Josephson D/A
converter with fundamental accuracy. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 44,
223–225.
53. Benz, S. P. (1995). Superconductor-normal-superconductor junctions
for programmable voltage standards. Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 2714–2716.
54. Chong, Y., Dresselhaus, P. D., Benz, S. P., and Bonevich, J. E. (2003). Eﬀect
of interlayer thickness in Nb/(MoSi2/Nb)N stacked Josephson junctions.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 2467–2469.
55. Van Duzer, T., Zheng, L., Meng, X., Loyo, C., Whiteley, S. R., Yu, L., Newman
N., Rowell, J. M., and Yoshikawa, N. (2002). Engineering issues in high-
frequency RSFQ circuits. Physica C 372–376, 1–6.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 3
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using
Aluminum: Experiment
J. F. Zasadzinski
Department of Physics, 3101 S. Dearborn Street, Illinois Institute of Technology,
Chicago, Illinois 60616, USA
zasadzinski@iit.edu
Modern Josephson electronics [1] (e.g., high-speed digital logic
circuits, qubits, SQUIDS, photon detectors) utilize multilayer
superconductor–insulator–superconductor (SIS) thin-ﬁlm, tunnel
junctions of the form Nb/Al-Al2O3/Nb or Nb/Al-Al2O3/Al/Nb where
the self-limiting Al oxide serves as a high-quality, reproducible,
insulating tunnel barrier. The Al overlayer approach has been
the key advance to Josephson technology, allowing thermally and
mechanically stable tunnel junctions with the refractory metal Nb,
while at the same time mitigating the various problems associated
with the native Nb oxides [2]. These problems, discussed in more
detail later, include defects, conducting sub-oxides, and magnetism.
The residual, non-oxidized Al, which wets the Nb, serves as a capping
layer, protecting the Nb base layer surface from the deleterious
eﬀects of air exposure. Quantum tunneling involves electron states
within a Fermi wavelength of the barrier (approximately a few
angstroms) and thus it is the local density of electron states (DOS) at
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

48
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
the surface of the Al ﬁlm adjacent to the oxide layer that determines
the properties of the Josephson junction. At the typical temperatures
of operation the Al is in the normal state and the Nb/Al bilayer
is of the superconductor/normal metal (S/N) type and therefore
the junctions should more accurately be described as SNIS or
SNINS. To support a Josephson current the Al must be induced
into the superconducting state, allowing Cooper pair tunneling, and
therefore the junction properties relevant for device performance
depend critically on the detailed nature of the proximity eﬀect
between Nb and Al.
In this chapter we focus on the experimental quasiparticle (or
single electron) characteristics from tunneling into the N side of such
S/N bilayers which have elucidated the proximity eﬀect. Speciﬁcally,
junctions of the type Nb/Al-Al2O3/C are reviewed, where C is a
convenient counterelectrode such as In, which can be switched
easily between superconducting and normal states via a small
magnetic ﬁeld with minimal eﬀects on the Nb superconductivity.
These junctions, developed at Ames Laboratory (at Iowa State
University) between 1976–1979 [3–6], were the ﬁrst to reveal
what might be called a technologically ideal proximity eﬀect, i.e.,
the normal Al is induced into a superconducting state with an
eﬀective gap for quasiparticle excitations, (E), and a Cooper pair
density, nS, that closely mimic the underlying Nb. The following
chapter by G. B. Arnold focuses on the theoretical proximity eﬀect
model used in the analysis of these tunneling conductance data.
The combined experimental and theoretical approach opened a ﬁeld
known as proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy (PETS). The
PETS technique (in some cases just the theoretical analysis) was
used to unveil quantitative, spectral details about the electron–
phonon interaction in a variety of superconductors, e.g., Nb, V, Ta,
NbZr, Nb3Sn, V3Ga, and normal metals including Al and Mg [7].
It might seem surprising that this monograph on Josephson
junctions (devices that explicitly involve dynamics of Cooper pairs)
would have two chapters dedicated primarily to the quasiparticle
tunneling characteristics, including of non-Josephson SIN junctions.
However, such junctions demonstrated the feasibility and utility of
the Al overlayer method and are thus of historical signiﬁcance. But
more importantly, the quasiparticle tunneling conductance, dI/dV
www.ebook3000.com

Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
49
vs. V , in SIN junctions, appropriately normalized, is a measure
of the local, tunneling DOS, NT(E), and such spectral information,
combined with the appropriate theoretical analysis, provides a
detailed physical description not only of the proximity eﬀect
between Nb and the Al overlayer but of the tunnel junction itself. The
relevant parameters, such as Al thickness and uniformity, electron
mean-free-path, tunneling momentum selectivity, possible spin-ﬂip
channels, as well as N/S interface transmission and scattering,
play a critical role in the performance and reproducibility of the
Josephson junction. These physical quantities can be deduced from
the quasiparticle dynamical conductance.
It should be noted that during the initial, exploratory period
of proximity eﬀect tunneling in the 1970s there was no way to
know, a priori, whether this approach would yield satisfactory
results, either for determination of the electron–phonon interaction
in the superconductor or for Josephson junction devices. Early
attempts at IBM in 1971 to fabricate Nb/Al Josephson junctions
[8] did not seem promising. The Al thickness, dN, required for
“pinhole-free” overlayers was larger than expected; i.e., reported
values were ∼800 ˚A, the energy gap was much smaller than the
bulk value of Nb, and subgap quasiparticle currents were relatively
large (∼25% of the normal state at V = 2.0 mV) and of unknown
origin. The prevailing model of the proximity eﬀect at that time
was due to McMillan (1968), and it assumed, for practical reasons,
that the interface between S and N was inherently a disordered,
nonconducting layer [9]. For example, it might be imagined that even
a brief exposure of a fresh Nb ﬁlm to ambient pressure prior to Al
deposition, under typical thin-ﬁlm vacuum conditions, might lead
to patches of poorly conducting sub-oxide on the surface. As a rule
of thumb, at a pressure of 10−6 torr, a monolayer of ambient air
strikes a surface each second. The McMillan model thus solved the
proximity eﬀect problem within perturbation theory, assuming the
N/S interface allowed only a diﬀuse, weak, tunneling-type coupling
between electron states in the S and N layers. As will be shown, had
the Nb/Al fabrication process been constrained to be in the McMillan
limit, it is safe to say that the present Josephson junction industry
likely would not exist.

50
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Here we review selected, representative spectra of the Ames
Lab junctions [3–5] which showed, convincingly, that the Nb/Al
bilayer could be fabricated in the “Arnold limit” where the N/S
interface is clean and the coupling between N and S is strong. A
principal assumption of the Arnold model (highlighted in Chapter 4),
which allows an exact, one-dimensional solution, is that the N/S
interface is specularly transmitting and reﬂecting. This leads to
an important eﬀect that is quite relevant for Josephson junction
circuits. Quasiparticle excitations above the induced gap in the N
layer, N ≪S, are prohibited by coherent Andreev reﬂections
up to a bound state energy, E0, which is very close to S. This
provides low subgap quasiparticle currents, which, for Josephson
junctions, are a critical performance criterion. The early Ames Lab
junctions provided the necessary “proof-of-principle” and laid the
groundwork for the successful extension of the Al overlayer method
to all-Nb, SNIS, Josephson junctions developed by Gurvitch and
Rowell (see Chapter 5). A focus here is on experimental results that
indicate the presence of this Andreev bound state. Another result
of the Arnold model is that in the limit where dN is relatively small,
i.e., less than characteristic coherence lengths (ξS, ξN). All terms
containing N(E) either have a very small prefactor or cancel out
exactly for E ≫S(E). Thus in the region where one expects to
observe phonon structure (E = 10–40 meV) due to strong coupling
eﬀects, as described by Eliashberg theory and ﬁrst observed in
Pb [10], it will be shown that the inﬂuence of Al phonons can be
made negligible by decreasing dN, again a conﬁrmation of the Arnold
model. This was another discovery of the Ames Lab proximity
eﬀect studies, that Al overlayers as thin as ∼30 ˚A could be made
continuous and pinhole free. The ability of Al to wet the Nb surface
has been veriﬁed by high-resolution TEM studies [11].
In the ﬁnal section of this chapter we return to the issue of
the Nb oxides and their deleterious eﬀects on the quasiparticle
tunneling conductance, showing some recent results. While the Al
overlayer mitigates such problems in the Josephson junction, there
are still free Nb surfaces in Josephson devices, e.g., SQUID loops,
which may be aﬀected by the Nb oxides. Also, for SNIS trilayer
Josephson junctions, the top Nb ﬁlm is in contact with the Al oxide
and any diﬀusion of oxygen into the Nb may lead to sub-oxide
www.ebook3000.com

Fabrication Methods
51
formation with potential consequences. There is also evidence that
Nb oxides may be aﬀecting large-scale superconducting devices such
as superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavities. Thus, there has
been a resurgence of interest in the properties of the Nb oxides. A
tunnel junction is a natural way to probe this layer. We report key
results of extensive point contact tunneling (PCT) studies of SIN-
type junctions on Nb using the native oxide as the barrier and a gold
tip [12, 13]. These junctions reveal that Nb oxides are sometimes
paramagnetic, leading to zero bias conductance peaks in SIN tunnel
junctions due to spin-ﬂip, Kondo tunneling. Such magnetic moments
may be the source of the two-level systems that produce 1/ f noise in
SQUIDS as well as enhanced decoherence in superconducting qubits.
3.1 Fabrication Methods
The approach at Ames Lab was to attempt to make Nb/Al bilayers
with a near-perfect interface, i.e., atomically ﬂat, abrupt, and clean,
without any oxidation of the Nb. Commercial foils of the highest-
purity grade of Nb were resistively heated to the melting point
in a specially built, ultrahigh vacuum chamber that maintained a
pressure of low 10−9 torr during annealing [5]. A large fraction of the
stainless steel chamber was immersed in liquid nitrogen, preventing
outgassing during the foil annealing, and vacuum was maintained by
a titanium sublimation pump coating the large surface area of the
chamber. After annealing, the Nb foils exhibited an RRR of ∼385.
Signiﬁcant recrystallization of the Nb foil occurred, with grains
up to a few millimeters in diameter, a more recent example of
which is shown in the inset of Fig. 3.2b. As revealed by −2 x-
ray diﬀraction, high-symmetry orientations (100), (110), and (111)
were found but also other orientations, e.g., (210), suggesting no
clear evidence of preferential orientation. Given the large grains,
tunnel junctions were often conﬁned to a single-crystal region,
allowing an investigation of gap anisotropy in Nb. No clear evidence
of gap anisotropy was observed.
After the foil broke, interrupting the current, the external Cu
leads were quickly cooled by contact to attached Cu braid in a liquid
nitrogen bath. Base pressure quickly returned to low 10−9 torr or

52
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
mid 10−10 torr. Vapor deposition of high-purity Al was achieved
with a nearby Ti wire basket boat. After a reasonable deposition
rate (of approximately a few ˚A/s) was established, as monitored
by a calibrated quartz crystal microbalance, a shutter, connected to
a linear motion feedthrough, was opened in sequential steps. In a
typical run, various Al thicknesses from 20 to 250 ˚A were obtained
over discrete, micrometer-size sections of the Nb foil. The chamber
was ﬁrst vented with dry, high-purity N2 gas, and then the foils were
removed and exposed to laboratory air for several hours, oxidizing
the Al surface. The discrete regions of the Nb foil coated with Al
layers of varying thickness were visible by optical inspection. The
foil, after masking with collodion, could be oriented onto a metal
mask, and coated with an In cross-strip counterelectrode at a base
pressure of 10−7 torr, in a way that at least two junctions could
be made on each Al thickness. Up to 10 junctions were obtained
on each of the separate sections of the broken Nb foil. In this way,
Nb/Al junctions, prepared in identical fashion, could be studied
with a single adjusted variable, the Al thickness. Current–voltage
(I–V ) measurements were obtained by d.c. methods, while dynamic
resistance, dV /dI vs. V , was obtained by standard a.c. harmonic
detection methods, utilizing a Kelvin bridge and lock-in ampliﬁer.
Typical junction area was ∼0.5 mm2 with d.c. resistance ∼1−100 .
3.2 Gap Region Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al
Tunnel Junctions
Before reviewing the S/N/I/C data of the Ames Lab junctions, it
is worth discussing the predicted tunneling DOS, NT (E), from the
McMillan and Arnold models, which span the extremes of weak
and strong N/S coupling, respectively. The basic geometry of the
N/S bilayer is shown in the inset to Fig. 3.1a, where an assumed
abrupt change in the pairing gap parameter is indicated. Leakage
of Cooper pairs from S leads to superconducting oﬀ-diagonal order
and resulting pair density function, F (x), in the N layer and an
induced gap parameter N(x) = λNF (x), where λN is the electron–
phonon coupling strength in the N layer. For dN ≪(ξS, ξN) it can
www.ebook3000.com

Gap Region Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al Tunnel Junctions
53
be assumed that N is constant, and enhanced from its bulk value;
however, both gap parameters, S and N, must be determined self-
consistently. For the McMillan model, the presumed delta function
tunnel barrier at the N/S interface leads to a discontinuity in F (x)
and thus the induced gap N(x) will in general be smaller than
obtained in the Arnold model. Quasiparticle excitations above N
are inside a potential well of height S–N on one side and a normal
barrier given either by the work function of the N layer for a vacuum
interface or the tunnel barrier in a SNIC junction on the other side.
At the vacuum interface, in addition to the reﬂection oﬀthe real
potential, there can be an Andreev reﬂection oﬀthe superconducting
step potential, N. This leads to two independent types of oscillatory
terms mixing the quasiparticle wave functions [5].
In the Arnold model, only those excitations are allowed which
satisfy the boundary conditions imposed by the phase-preserving
reﬂections oﬀthe two potential steps. This leads to coherent bound
states, similar to the standard quantum well problem; however, the
reﬂections oﬀthe superconducting potential step involve Andreev
processes whereby an electron-like quasiparticle gets reﬂected back
as hole-like excitation. For thin N layers there is only one Andreev
bound state at energy E0 ∼= S. In the McMillan model the N/S
interface barrier provides diﬀuse, incoherent scattering. Thus there
are no coherent bound states and all quasiparticle excitations above
N(E) are allowed. The McMillan DOS exhibits a pronounced BCS
singularity at N ≪S and this type of Nb/Al proximity junction
would be unsuitable for Josephson devices. The diﬀerences in N(E)
between the two models are considerable, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
It turned out that the Ames Lab junctions were completely
described by the Arnold theory, not only in the gap region but
also in the higher-bias phonon region. An example is shown in
Fig. 3.2, where one of the junctions with dN = 27 ˚A is presented
from the very ﬁrst processed Nb foil. The I–V characteristic reveals
a single gap feature near 2.0 mV when the In counterelectrode is
superconducting (In = 0.53 meV) consistent with a gap parameter
close to that of bulk Nb. Subgap currents with In normal are small,
leading to a d.c. conductance I/V at zero bias < 0.2% of the normal
state value observed for V > 2 mV. The self-consistent solution
[6] leads to N = 0.78 meV, but there is no direct observation

54
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1
(a) Arnold DOS (see Chapter 4, Fig. 4.3) and (b) McMillan
DOS for tunneling into the N side of an N/S proximity bilayer with
phenomenological quasiparticle scattering rate term, . In both cases the
S layer gap parameter chosen is close to that of Nb (S = 1.51 meV). For the
Arnold DOS the induced gap parameter, N = 0.78 meV (determined self-
consistently), is not observed. Only the Andreev bound state E0, indicated as
dashed line in (a) satisﬁes the boundary conditions inside the potential well
of the N layer. For the McMillan DOS in (b) the induced gap N is chosen to be
0.46 meV, where a pronounced BCS singularity is observed. In (a) the Arnold
model displays the bound state as a vertical dashed line, essentially a delta
function peak in DOS at E0. The is what would be found in the tunneling
DOS, NT (E), assuming 1-d tunneling perpendicular to the barrier. With
thermal smearing the bound state, being so close to S, appears similar to
a BCS singularity. If the tunnel junction supports random tunneling then a
continuum of bound states is observed below E0 (solid line).
of this Al gap, a consequence of the coherent Andreev reﬂections,
as explained above. Figure 3.2b shows the normalized dynamical
conductance dI/dV , compared to a BCS model and the Arnold
model. The reasonable agreement with a BCS model with N =
1.49 meV shows that with small dN and thermal smearing, there is
little diﬀerence between the Arnold theory and BCS.
More striking evidence of the Andreev bound state is found for
thicker N layers where E0 is farther below S. The resulting gap in
NT(E) between E0 and S leads to a dip feature in the tunneling
conductance, dropping below the normal state conductance, a
feature not found in the McMillan DOS. To minimize the eﬀects
www.ebook3000.com

Gap Region Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al Tunnel Junctions
55
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2
(a) I–V characteristics of Nb/Al-Al2O3/In junction with the In
in the superconducting (H = 0) (solid line) or normal state (H = 300 Oe)
(dashed line). (b) Normalized dynamic conductance (solid line) compared
to BCS and Arnold ﬁt. Inset of (b) shows typical recrystallization pattern of
UHV annealed foils with grains up to a few mm diameter. Reproduced with
permission from Cao [16].
of thermal smearing and observe the dip feature, it is required
that the counterelectrode be superconducting. In this case the
BCS singularity of the counterelectrode sharpens the thermal
convolution function arising from Fermi factors [7]. In Fig. 3.3 are
shown normalized dynamic resistance data for a V/Al-Al2O3/In
junction, where the Al thickness is 230 ˚A [14]. A pronounced dip

56
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 3.3
Normalized dynamic resistance dV /dI of V/Al-Al2O3/In junc-
tion (dots) and Arnold ﬁt (solid line). The spectral dip drops below unity
conductance, indicating a gap in the DOS, N(E), between E0 and S.
feature (reduced conductance) is observed and a reasonable ﬁt
using the Arnold theory can be found with the parameters indicated
in the ﬁgure legend. Here R =
2dN
ℏv∗
FN where v∗
FN is the renormalized
Fermi velocity in the N layer. While a full examination of the
parameter space in the Arnold theory was not undertaken [14], it
is nevertheless clear that the model successfully accounts for a dip
feature of characteristic size and shape that drops below unity in
the normalized conductance. Here a small imaginary term to the
gap parameter in the superconducting In counterelectrode has been
used to account for any gap inhomogeneity.
The presence of a gap in the Arnold DOS between E0 and S
has an eﬀect on the I–V quasiparticle characteristics of Nb trilayer
Josephson junctions, giving rise to the well-known “knee” feature,
most easily observed at very low temperatures [15], as displayed in
Fig. 3.4. This can be explained as follows. The jump in current close
www.ebook3000.com

Gap Region Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al Tunnel Junctions
57
Figure 3.4
Current–voltage (I–V ) characteristic of Nb/Al/Al2O3/Nb
Josephson junction [15] displaying the characteristic “knee” feature
indicated by the circled region. Inset shows subgap currents of ∼0.02 μA
at V = 2.0 mV, signiﬁcantly below the 10 μA current near the gap voltage of
∼3 mV.
to 2Nb (often referred to as the Nb gap) corresponds to a voltage
where the two N(E) singularities of each Nb electrode, one for ﬁlled
quasiparticle states and the other for empty states, are matched in
energy. An increase in voltage will correspond to a relative shifting
of the N(E) peaks, such that a peak of one electrode is matched
to the gap in the N(E) between E0 and S in the other electrode.
This gives rise to a ﬁxed, or even decreasing current (negative
dI/dV ), with increasing voltage, with an associated hysteresis. The
ability of the Arnold model to explain this commonly observed
phenomenon in Nb trilayer Josephson junctions demonstrates that
it is the appropriate model for junction analysis.
At this point a reasonable question to ask is, What is the
quasiparticle gap, generally referred to as 2, in SIS proximity
Josephson junctions? Figure 3.4 indicates that Vgap = 2.93 mV,
determined from the sharp upturn in current, and the relevant value
for this particular Josephson device. But this is below the expected
value based on the bulk gap of Nb, which should be closer to
3.1 mV. In the Arnold model, there are three parameters relevant to
this issue: the bound state, E0, the superconducting gap parameter
at the N/S interface, S, and the bulk energy gap parameter of

58
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Nb, bulk
S
. The bound state, E0 <S, bulk
S
is the minimum energy
for quasiparticle excitations and that corresponds to the Vgap/2 of
Fig. 3.4, and explains why it is reduced from the expected gap. The
value of S can be obtained directly from ﬁtting of the dynamic
conductance using the Arnold theory and is in the range where the
“knee” is found, above 3 mV in Fig. 3.4. However, S is reduced from
the bulk value due to the presence of the N layer.
Using a straightforward correction, the theory can predict the
expected bulk value of the gap of Nb. This correction has the form
bulk
S
∼= S (1 + π RS) For the Ames Lab Nb/Al junctions [5]
this correction leads to a bulk gap parameter of Nb, bulk = 1.57–
1.61 meV.
3.3 High-Bias Spectra of the Ames Lab Nb/Al
Tunnel Junctions
Another success of the Arnold proximity eﬀect model is its ability
to quantitatively ﬁt the measured high-bias tunneling conductance
where strong-coupling eﬀects (phonon structures) from both gap
functions, S(E) and N(E), enter the DOS. Details are presented
elsewhere [5, 6]. Here we are interested in a particular limit,
relatively small dN, where an important result is obtained. For typical
phonon energies (10–40 meV), one is in the limit where E ≫S(E)
and the Arnold NT(E) becomes
N(E) = 1 + 1
2Re2
N(E)
E 2
+ 1
2Re[S(E) −N(E)]2
E 2
exp(2iKdN)
+ReN(E)[S(E) −N(E)]
E 2
exp(iKdN)
(3.1)
where KdN = 2dNE
ℏv∗
FN + idN/l.
This form highlights the two oscillatory terms arising from
Andreev reﬂections oﬀthe potential step, S(E)–N(E), described
earlier. The ﬁrst term of KdN can be written as RE, where, as shown
in Fig. 3.2b, R is relatively small for dN = 27 ˚A, such that even for
www.ebook3000.com

Point Contact Tunneling Studies of Nb
59
quasiparticle energies E = 50 meV, the term RE ≈0.35 ≪π. Thus
the Re part of KdN leads to exp(iKdN) ∼= 1. The Im part is dN/l
where l is the quasiparticle mean free path in N. For clean N layers,
dN/l is also ≪1. Taking the leading terms of the expansion, one
ﬁnds that terms containing N either cancel exactly or have small
prefactors of the form [1–exp(–d/l)]. Thus in the small dN limit,
Eq. 3.1 becomes
N (E) = 1 + 1
2Re2
S(E)
E 2
e−d/l
(3.2)
Equation 3.2 implies that for thin N layers, the tunneling DOS in the
N layer at characteristic phonon energies is that of the underlying
superconductor, scaled by e−d/l, a term close to unity. Equation 3.2
is the expansion of the strong coupling version of the BCS DOS
[10] in the limit d/l = 0. Evidence for this eﬀect has been shown
in Fig. 2.4 for the second derivative spectrum d2V /dI 2 showing
minimal contribution from Al phonons. In Fig. 3.5a we show the
high-bias reduced normalized conductance for the same junction
shown in Fig. 3.1.
The ﬁtting of the data using Eq. 3.2 and the McMillan inversion
procedure leads to the dashed line in Fig. 3.5a and the resulting
α2F (ω) for Nb is shown in Fig. 3.5b. This indicates clearly that
the principle structures observed are due to the transverse and
longitudinal phonon modes of Nb. Corrections to the ﬁt can be
obtained to reﬁne this analysis using the calculated N(E) [6]. This
conﬁrms the suitability of the Arnold theory to explain the entire
tunneling conductance spectrum.
3.4 Point Contact Tunneling Studies of Nb
While the Al overlayer method has played a pivotal role in the
development of Josephson junction technology, there is still a need
to understand in more detail the problems of the native Nb oxide
layer, as it enters the free Nb surfaces in such devices, including
SQUID loops. There is also evidence that the Nb oxides are playing a
role in the RF surface impedance of superconducting radiofrequency
(SRF) cavities [12, 13] and thus may be related to decoherence in
superconducting qubits.

60
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5
(a) Reduced normalized conductance at high bias (solid line)
along with Arnold model ﬁt (dashed line) using dN = 25 ˚A and d/l = 0.03.
Weak phonon feature between 35 and 40 meV arising from the Al acoustic
phonon mode peak as a strong coupling eﬀect in N(E) has been ignored in
the initial ﬁtting. (b) Resulting α2F (ω) for Nb from the ﬁtting in (a).
A pristine Nb surface exposed to air develops a complex set of
oxides including NbO, NbO2, and Nb2O5. Each of these oxides is
thermodynamically stable with substantial oﬀ-stoichiometry. The
topmost Nb2O5 layer is an ordinary band insulator with an energy
gap > 4 eV in bulk. However, tunneling studies utilizing the native
Nb oxide typically display barrier heights of 300–400 mV and such
a low value may originate in the amorphous, defective nature of this
www.ebook3000.com

Point Contact Tunneling Studies of Nb
61
Figure 3.6
PCT normalized conductance for a particular region of a Nb SRF
cavity cold-spot. The ﬁt indicates a near-ideal BCS DOS. The ﬁt uses the BTK
model, and the high value of the barrier strength Z = 20 indicates the Nb
oxide is a good insulator. Inset shows a statistical distribution of gap values
peaked near 1.6 meV. Reproduced with permission from Cao [16].
oxide [2]. Point contact tunneling (PCT) utilizing a Au tip oﬀers a
chance to study junctions of area <1 μm2 over a wide area of a Nb
surface utilizing the native oxide. Such surface mapping has been
particularly useful for the study of processed Nb samples and SRF
cavity cutouts [14]. By varying the tip pressure one can change from
tunneling to ohmic regimes and thus the analysis utilizes the theory
of Blonder–Tinkham–Klapwijk (BTK) (Sections 3.8 and 5.2 of [7]).
An example of tunnel junction from a cold spot of an SRF cavity, i.e.,
a region with no excess RF losses, is shown in Fig. 3.6.
The normalized dynamic conductance data display a near-ideal
ﬁt to a BCS DOS at 1.35 K with a S = 1.60 meV consistent with
a low RF dissipation region. This gap value is consistent with bulk
S
obtained from the Nb/Al proximity junctions suggesting a minimal
native proximity layer. BTK analysis leads to Z = 20, a high barrier

62
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
strength. Such behavior indicates that locally the Nb oxide may be
suﬃciently insulating and thick to provide a suitable tunnel barrier.
The processing of Nb SRF cavities involves deep drawing, chemical
etching, and annealing. The ﬁnal step of the standard processing is
a mild bake at 120 C for 24–48 hours. This ﬁnal step is similar to
some of the early tunneling studies of single-crystal Nb by Bostock
and MacVicar (see [4] and references therein). However, while gap
region spectra may not display any obvious evidence of a proximity
layer, Eq. 3.2 shows that the phonon structure can be reduced even
with a small value of d/l and this feature of the Arnold theory
helped resolve a controversy about the electron–phonon interaction
in Nb [4].
The spectra on SRF cavity cold spot regions, e.g., Fig. 3.6,
are not typical of processed Nb. Spectra from hot spot regions
of an SRF cavity generally displayed smaller gaps and broader
gap features [12, 14]. Cavity grade Nb crystals subjected only to
the electropolishing and mild baking processing steps revealed
considerably broader spectra, and the gap region analysis indicated
that magnetic pair breaking, including Shiba states, might be
responsible [13]. More striking evidence of magnetism on the
surface of hot spot regions is shown in Fig. 3.7. Numerous spectra
showed a zero bias conductance peak (Fig. 3.7a) that displayed
a logarithmic T -dependcnce (Fig. 3.7b) and Zeeman splitting in
a magnetic ﬁeld (Fig. 3.7c) that identiﬁed this feature with a
Kondo tunneling channel [16]. This clearly indicates the presence
of localized magnetic moments in the Nb oxide layer.
The origin of magnetic moments Nb oxide is likely due to oxygen
vacancies. In the work of Cava et al. [17], it was shown that
the introduction of 3% oxygen vacancies into Nb2O5 changes this
material from an insulator into a conductor with Curie–Weiss (1/T )
magnetic susceptibility. This is not surprising. The pentavalent
Nb in Nb2O5 has ﬁlled core levels and an empty d-band and is
nonmagnetic. An oxygen vacancy introduces two electrons into
the formula unit allowing a d-orbital and spin moment to the Nb.
The presence of such moments in an oxide region with higher
conductivity means that Cooper pairs can communicate with such
moments and this leads to pairbreaking and quasiparticle states
near the Fermi level even at T = 0 and intrinsic RF losses [12].
www.ebook3000.com

Point Contact Tunneling Studies of Nb
63
Figure 3.7
(a) Representative PCT spectra from SRF cavity hot spot region
revealing a zero bias conductance peak (ZBCP). (b) T dependence of ZBCP,
which is logarithmic in 1/T . Reproduced with permission from Proslier
et al. [12]. (c) Zeeman splitting of ZBCP indicative of a Kondo tunneling
channel. Reproduced with permission from Cao [16].
More recent studies of Nb tunnel junction SQUIDS by McDermott
et al. revealed the presence of magnetic moments [18]. They
characterized the temperature dependence of the ﬂux threading
dc SQUIDs cooled to millikelvin temperatures. The ﬂux increases
as 1/T as temperature is lowered; moreover, the ﬂux change
is proportional to the density of trapped vortices. The data are
compatible with the thermal polarization of surface spins in the
trapped ﬁelds of the vortices. In the absence of trapped ﬂux, they
observe evidence of spin-glass freezing at low temperature (Fig. 3.8).
These results suggest an explanation for the longstanding problem
of universal 1/ f ﬂux noise in SQUIDs and superconducting qubits
as due to a two-level system originating from the localized moment.
The PCT measurements strongly suggest such moments originate in
the defective Nb oxide.

64
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 3.8
Temperature dependence of the ﬂux threading narrow (2 μm)
linewidth Nb/Al oxide/Nb SQUIDs with inductances 160 and 870 pH. SQUID
loop geometry is shown in the inset. Curie–Weiss behavior indicates surface
spins [18].
References
1. Fourie, C. (2014). Superconducting electronics. Wiley Encyclopedia of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering. pp. 1–18.
2. Halbritter, J. (1987). On the oxidation and on the superconductivity of
niobium. Appl. Phys. A 43, 1–28.
3. Wolf, E. L., and Zasadzinski, J. (1977). On the observation of supercon-
ducting phonon structure in proximity tunneling. Phys. Lett. A 62, 165–
167.
4. Arnold, G. B., Zasadzinski, J., and Wolf, E. L. (1978). A resolution of the
controversy on tunneling in Nb. Phys. Lett. A 69, 136–138.
5. Wolf, E. L., Zasadzinski, J., Osmun, J. W., and Arnold, G. B. (1980).
Proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy. I. Experiments on Nb. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 40, 19–49.
6. Arnold, G. B., Zasadzinski, J., Osmun, J. W., and Wolf, E. L. (1980).
Proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy. II. Eﬀects of the induced N-
metal pair potential on calculated S-metal properties. J. Low Temp. Phys.
40, 225–246.
7. Wolf, E. L. (2012). Electron Tunneling Spectroscopy, 2nd Ed. (Oxford
University Press, Oxford).
www.ebook3000.com

References
65
8. Laibowitz, R. B., and Mayadas, A. F. (1972). Josephson junctions with
Nb/Al composite electrodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 20, 254–256.
9. McMillan, W. L. (1968). Tunneling model of the superconducting
proximity eﬀect. Phys. Rev. 175, 537–542.
10. McMillan, W. L., and Rowell, J. M. (1969). Tunneling and strong-coupling
superconductivity, in Superconductivity, ed. Parks, R. D. (Marcel Dekker,
New York), Vol. I, pp. 561–614.
11. Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1991). Cross sectional transmission electron
microscopy observation of Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 58, 645–647.
12. Proslier, T., Kharitonov, M., Pelin, M., Zasadzinski, J., and Ciovati, G.
(2011). Evidence of surface paramagnetism in niobium and conse-
quences for the superconducting cavity surface impedance. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond. 21, 2619–2622.
13. Proslier, Th., Zasadzinski, J. F., Cooley, L., Antoine, C., Moore, J., Norem,
J., Pellin, M., and Gray, K. E. (2008). Tunneling study of cavity grade Nb:
possible magnetic scattering at the surface. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 212505–
212508.
14. Zasadzinski, J. F. (1980). Superconducting tunneling study of V and
V3Ga, Iowa State University Retrospective Theses and Dissertations.
Paper 7361.
15. Kaiser, Ch., Bauch, T., Lombardi, F., and Siegel, M. (2011). Quantum
phase dynamics in an LC shunted Josephson junction. J. Appl. Phys. 109,
093915-1–093915-6.
16. Cao, C. (2014). Surface characterization of niobium for superconducting
RF cavities, Chicago, IL: Illinois Institute of Technology, PhD thesis,
THESIS.ST3h792eb.
17. Cava, R. J., Batlogg, B., Krajewski, J. J., Poulsen, H. F., Gammel, P., Peck, W.
F., and Rupp, L. W. (1991). Electrical and magnetic properties of Nb2O5
crystallographic shear structures. Phys. Rev. B 44, 6973–6981.
18. Sendelbach, S., Hover, D., Kittel, A., Muck, M., Martinis, J. M., and McDer-
mott, R. (2008). Magnetism in SQUIDS at Millikelvin temperatures. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 100, 227006–227009.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 4
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using
Aluminum: Theory
Gerald B. Arnold
Department of Physics, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado, 80309, USA
gbarnold46@gmail.com
As explained in the previous chapter, superconducting tunnel
junctions which utilized the oxidation of niobium to form a tunnel
barrier presented a variety of problems. When an aluminum
overlayer was evaporated onto the niobium and that layer was
oxidized before evaporating the counter-electrode, however, the
tunneling characteristics were markedly improved. Ideally, one
would like to oxidize all of the aluminum, thereby attaining a good
S’IS tunnel junction. In practice, it was found that some aluminum
was not oxidized, leading to an S’INS junction, where N signiﬁes
the thin layer of aluminum. Due to the superconducting proximity
eﬀect, superconductivity is induced in the aluminum by the S layer
of niobium. This leads to the theoretical problem of describing the
tunneling characteristics of S’INS junctions wherein a thin layer
of N metal is induced to be superconducting by a thick layer of
superconducting S metal. In this chapter, I will summarize the
theoretical facts concerning these tunnel junctions.
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

68
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Much of the research which I report on in this chapter was
done in connection with the development of proximity electron
spectroscopy [1], which is concerned with extracting detailed
information on the electron–phonon interaction in the N and S
layers of an N’INS junction. Of primary interest in that research
was the energy dependence of the gap functions arising from
this interaction, which produces the so-called phonon structure in
the tunneling density of states. In this work, I focus instead on
those aspects of NS bilayers which aﬀect the gap region in the
tunneling density of states, the region most important for Josephson
tunneling.
4.1 Proxity Effect in Thin N Layers on Thick
S Layers
Consider a thin (in a sense which will be deﬁned) N metal layer in
ideal (epitaxial) contact with a semi-inﬁnite S metal layer. In this
section, I will also assume that there is negligible elastic scattering
in the N metal. Later on, I will discuss the eﬀects of elastic scattering
in the N metal. The N metal will be presumed to be thin if its
thickness is very much less than the characteristic length scale for
spatial variations in the induced N metal pair density. If this were
a bulk N metal at zero temperature, then this length scale would be
ξN = ℏvF/π(bulk)
N
, the BCS coherence length. What is the appropriate
length scale for the NS proximity eﬀect sandwich?
First, note that the self-energy for the NS sandwich is spatially
dependent. There are two contributions to this self-energy: a pair
function φ(x) and a renormalization function Z(x). The equations
for these are given in Ref. 1 as
φ(x) =
 ∞
0
dE ′Re[ f (E ′, x)]K+(E, E ′ · x)
(4.1)
Z(x) =
 ∞
0
dE ′Re[N(E ′, x)]K−(E, E ′ · x)
(4.2)
The “pair density function,” Re[ f (E ′, x)], and the “normalized
density of states”, Re[N(E ′, x)], are given by
www.ebook3000.com

Proxity Effect in Thin N Layers on Thick S Layers
69
f (E, x) =
 1
0
d cos θ

−1
2ℏvF cos θ

Im[G(x, x, E)12] (4.3)
N(E, x) =
 1
0
d cos θ

−1
2ℏvF cos θ

Im[G(x, x, E)11] (4.4)
where G(x, x, E) is the Nambu matrix Green function for the NS
bilayer, as obtained in Ref. 1, and vF is the bare Fermi velocity
(assumed, for simplicity, to be the same in N and S). The electron–
phonon interaction kernels, K+(E, E ′, x) and K−(E, E ′, x) are given
by
K+(E, E ′, x) =
 ∞
0
dν α2(ν, x)F (ν, x)[(E + E ′ −ν)−1
+ (E −E ′ −ν)−1] −μ∗(x)	(Ec(x) −E ′)
(4.5)
K−(E, E ′, x) =
 ∞
0
dν α2(ν, x)F (ν, x)[(E + E ′ −ν)−1
−(E −E ′ −ν)−1]
(4.6)
The interaction kernels, K+(E, E ′, x) and K−(E, E ′, x), change in a
step-like way at the NS interface, since the interactions are spatially
local. However, the pair density function and the normalized density
of states vary smoothly across the NS interface, because the Green’s
function varies smoothly across the interface. In the S metal, the
Green’s function (and therefore the pair density function) varies
signiﬁcantly only over the BCS coherence length in the S metal, ξS =
ℏvF/πS. This variation carries over into the N metal, by continuity,
implying that the N metal gap function also varies over the BCS
coherence length of the S metal. Hence, the thin N metal limit is
that in which the N metal thickness, d, is much less than the BCS
coherence length in the S metal. The relevant length scale for the NS
system in the thin N metal limit is thus ξS.
The spatial dependence of the pair potential, (x) = φ(x)/Z(x),
is sketched in Fig. 4.1. In Ref. 2 it is shown that the depression
of the pair potential is approximately equal to the ratio of the N
metal thickness to the BCS coherence length in the S metal times
the bulk value of the pair potential in the S metal, (d/ξS)S. When
the ratio is negligibly small, as in the thin N metal limit, the pair
potential at the NS interface is equal to the bulk S pair potential. In
addition, the pair density function is equal to the bulk pair density

70
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 4.1
Sketch of spatial dependence of (x).
function in the S metal in this limit. Therefore, from the theory of
bulk superconductivity, in the thin N metal limit we ﬁnd (
S =
(E 2 −2
S)1/2 and 
′
S = ((E ′)2 −2
S)1/2 )
lim
d→0 Re[ f (E, x)] = Re[S/
S]
(4.7)
lim
d→0 Re[N(E, x)] = Re[E/
S]
(4.8)
lim
d→0 N(E) = lim
d→0 φN(E)/Z N(E)
= (1/Z N(E))
 ∞
0
dE ′ Re[S/
′
S]K+(E, E ′)N
(4.9)
lim
d→0 Z N(E) = E −
 ∞
0
dE ′ Re[E ′/
′
S]K−(E, E ′)N
(4.10)
lim
d→0 S(E) = lim
d→0 φS(E)/Z S(E)
= (1/Z S(E))
 ∞
0
dE ′Re[S/
′
S]K+(E, E ′)S
(4.11)
lim
d→0 Z S(E) = E −
 ∞
0
dE ′ Re[E ′/
′
S]K−(E, E ′)S
(4.12)
These equations describe the proximity eﬀect in thin N metal NS
bilayers. They are strictly correct in the limit as the N metal thickness
approaches zero. In this limit, the induced pair potential in the
N metal, N, is spatially constant, as is the pair potential in S.
www.ebook3000.com

Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
71
Corrections to these pair potentials are smaller by a factor equal
to the ratio of the N metal thickness to the S metal BCS coherence
length, (d/ξS).
4.2 Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
In this section, I will continue to assume that the N metal is clean.
Consistent with the thin N metal limit, I will also assume that the pair
potentials in N and S are constant. The tunneling density of states
will simply be the normalized density of states presented above. In
the thin N metal limit, this is simply the normalized density of states
in the bulk S metal. In this section, I will discuss this function in the
regime wherein the N metal thickness is not necessarily negligible
relative to the BCS coherence length in S, so that I can consider the
nature of corrections to the thin N metal limit. I will continue to
assume spatially constant pair potentials—the “step model,” shown
in Fig. 4.2.
At the NS interface, the pair potential has a step of height S−N.
Quasiparticles in N having energies greater than N but less than
S are conﬁned in an unusual bound state by means of Andreev
scattering from the pair potential step. Because of the induced gap in
N, there are no quasiparticle states with energies below N. Between
N and S, however, one can have one or more “Andreev bound
states.” Imagine a quasiparticle propagating perpendicular to the
NS interface in N at an energy E (>0) between N and S. As it
reaches the NS interface, it forms a Cooper pair propagating into
the S metal by pairing with a quasiparticle state of energy −E from
the N metal, leaving behind a hole which propagates back to the N
metal surface, reﬂects from that, thereafter reaching the NS interface
taking half of a Cooper pair from the S metal, leaving a quasiparticle
at E propagating back to the N metal surface where it interferes
constructively provided the energy has the appropriate bound state
energy value, E0. In Fig. 4.2 I show the result for an N metal
with thickness much less than the BCS coherence length in S. For
quasiparticles not propagating perpendicular to the NS interface, the
distance traveled in these processes before constructive interference
occurs is greater, hence the energy of the bound state is lower.

72
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 4.2
The step model for the thin N metal limit, indicating the single
quasiparticle bound state at E0.
In Ref. 2 I calculated the exact Nambu matrix Green function for
the step model illustrated in Fig. 4.2. I found that the quasiparticle
density of states is (εN(E) = E/(E 2 −2
N)1/2, δN(E) = N/(E 2 −
2
N)1/2, with corresponding deﬁnitions for εS(E) and δS(E)):
(−1/π) Im G(0, 0)11 = (−2/πℏvFx) Im(η(E)/D(E))
(4.13)
where
η(E) = εN[i(εNεS −δNδS) cos(KNd) + sin(KNd)]
+ iδN(εNδS −δNεS)
D(E) = i(εNεS −δNδS) sin(KNd) −cos(KNd)
KNd = 2dZ N(E 2 −2
N)1/2/ℏvFx
(4.14)
In Fig. 4.3, I show the resulting density of states in the N metal.
The density of states relevant for tunneling will be diﬀerent
from that shown in Fig. 4.3 because the insulating tunnel barrier
www.ebook3000.com

Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
73
Figure 4.3
Density of states in N for a thin N metal in an NS bilayer for S
= 1.51 (Nb), and d/ξS = 0.1. The dashed curve is the tunneling density of
states in N. Note that only the bound state region is aﬀected by the selection
of quasiparticles moving nearly perpendicular to the tunnel barrier.
is preferentially traversed by quasiparticles with wave vectors
perpendicular to the barrier-N metal interface, exponentially
decreasing the contribution of wave vectors not perpendicular.
This has the eﬀect of exponentially attenuating the bound state
contributions from wave vectors not perpendicular to the barrier-
N metal interface. The normalized (to the normal state) tunneling
density of states is therefore given by
NT(E) =
 1
0
d(cos θ)(−1/π) Im G(0, 0)11D(cos θ)(πℏvFx/2)
(4.15)
where D(cos θ) is the “normalized probability distribution of
tunneling electrons,” which is very sharply peaked at cos θ = 1.
This probability distribution noticeably aﬀects only the bound
state region, resulting in the dashed curve in Fig. 4.3. In Fig. 4.4,
I show the tunneling density of states on a much ﬁner energy
scale (with some smoothing applied to simulate the eﬀect of
temperature).

74
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 4.4
Tunneling density of states for an NS bilayer with d/ξS = 0.05
and N/S = 0.2, and normal counter-electrode. The results were
smoothed to simulate the eﬀect of ﬁnite temperature.
Figure 4.5
The current vs. voltage for tunneling into the NS bilayer of
Fig. 4.4.
In Fig. 4.5, I show the current vs. voltage for tunneling into an
NS bilayer for the NS bilayer of Fig. 4.4. This is just the integral of
the tunneling density of states in Fig. 4.4. Note the “ski jump” for
the ﬁnite N metal thickness case. The presence of this “ski jump” is
indicative of a thin N metal layer and is a useful diagnostic, as such.
www.ebook3000.com

Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
75
Figure 4.6
The tunneling density of states for a superconducting counter-
electrode for an NS bilayer with d/ξS = 0.1 and N/S = 0.2, and
kBT = 0.0001S.
For energies large compared to S, the tunneling density of
states may be expanded to yield the expression (cf. Ref. 2)
NT(E) ≈1 + 2
N/2E 2 + (S −N)2/2E 2I((4d/L(E))
+ S(S −S)/E 2I((2d/L(E))
(4.16)
where
L(E) = ℏvF/Z N(E)E
(4.17)
where I(x) is a damped oscillatory function of x, with I(0) = 1. It
is easy to see that for d = 0, this reduces to the density of states
for tunneling into bulk S metal, as it must. The oscillatory functions
give rise to the Tomasch–Rowell oscillations [2]. In the region of
energies where phonon structure in the gap functions is present and
E ≫S, this shows that the phonon structure observed in tunneling
will be dominated by that of the S metal provided that the thickness
of the N metal is such that the integrals are near unity. This provides
a foundation for proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy, as noted
in the previous chapter.
In Figs. 4.6 and 4.7 I show the tunneling density of states
for a superconducting counter-electrode, and the corresponding
current vs. voltage curve, respectively, for an NS bilayer. With a
superconducting counter-electrode, the current vs. voltage curve

76
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 4.7
The current vs. voltage for tunneling into an NS bilayer for the
NS bilayer of Fig. 4.6. The graph on the right gives an expanded view of the
“gap region.”
strongly resembles the tunneling density of states in the NS bilayer
with a normal electrode, in the bound state region.
4.3 Effects of Elastic Scattering in the N Metal
Layer
In a bulk superconductor, the Anderson theorem [3] states that
elastic scattering has no eﬀect on the gap function. In the N layer
of an NS sandwich, however, I showed [4] that such scattering does
aﬀect the induced gap in the N metal. I will now brieﬂy summarize
the argument.
We will assume that the N metal region is smaller than the BCS
coherence length in the S metal region, so that the pair function
www.ebook3000.com

Effects of Elastic Scattering in the N Metal Layer
77
and the renormalization function can be replaced by their averages
over the thickness of the N metal. This yields the equations for
the phonon contributions to the pair density and renormalization
function in N:
< φph(x) >N = φph
N
=
 ∞
0
dE ′ < Re[ f (E ′, x)] >N K+(E, E ′)N
(4.18)
< Z ph(x) >N E = Z ph
N E
= E −
 ∞
0
dE ′ < Re[N(E ′, x)] >N K−(E, E ′)N
(4.19)
where < >N indicates the spatial average over the N metal layer.
The self-energies φph
N and Z ph
N are the electron–phonon interaction
self-energies, which are obtained from Eqs. 4.1–4.6 above. The
elastic scattering contribution is obtained by replacing the kernels
K±(E, E ′)N in Eqs. 4.1 and 4.2 by
K±(E, E ′)N →±(iℏ/2τ)δ(E −E ′)
(4.20)
This yields the equations for the full pairing self-energy and
renormalization functions:
φ(E)N = φph
N (E) + (iℏ/2τ) < f (E, x) >N
(4.21)
Z(E)NE = Z ph
N (E)E + (iℏ/2τ) < N(E, x) >N
(4.22)
The induced energy gap function in N is then given by
N = [φph
N + (iℏ/2τ) < f (E, x) >N]/[Z ph
N (E)
+ (iℏ/2τ) < N(E, x) >N /E]
(4.23)
The Anderson theorem states that in a bulk superconductor
N = φph
N /Z ph
N
(4.24)
By deﬁnition
N = φN/Z N
(4.25)
so that, using Eqs. 4.4 and 4.5, the Anderson theorem would require
that
N = E < f (E, x) >N / < N(E, x) >N
(4.26)

78
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
This will hold, according to Eq. 4.6, only in the extreme limit wherein
τ →0, i.e., the limit of inﬁnitely strong scattering.
In the limit as d →0, in Ref. 4, I found that the solution for the
induced gap is
lim
d→0 N(E) = [ph
N + iN(E)S/
S]/[1 + iN(E)/
S]
(4.27)
where
N(E) = ℏ/2Z ph
N (E)τ
(4.28)
This result is the same as that found by McMillan [5] in his treatment
of an NS bilayer with a tunnel barrier separating the N and S layers. In
McMillan’s theory, N is ℏ/2Z ph
N (E)τN, where τN is the average time
spent by a quasiparticle in the N layer. In our case, τ is the elastic
scattering lifetime of a quasiparticle in the N layer. This similarity
between the two diﬀerent theories is due to the fact that both
assume the relaxation of tunneling wave vector selection rules due
to scattering in the N layer.
4.4 Tunneling Density of States in NS Bilayers
with Elastic Scattering in the N Layer
In Ref. 4 I have calculated the tunneling density of states in NS
bilayers in the limit (ℓis the mean free path in N)
ℏvF/(2Z ph
N N) ≫ℓor d/ℓ≫(2d/ℏvF)Z ph
N N
(4.29)
which is the “dirty limit” for the N layer.
In Fig. 4.8 I plot the real and imaginary parts of the solutions
for N for four diﬀerent values of R = 2d/ℏvF (in inverse milli-eV).
Note that N is independent of mean free path in the dirty limit. In
Fig. 4.9 I plot the tunneling density of states for these four cases,
taking d/ℓ= 3.
In Fig. 4.9, the solid curve which has an energy gap just below
E = 0.4 is reminiscent of tunneling densities of states obtained in the
McMillan tunneling model, while that corresponding to the thinnest
N metal layer resembles those obtained in the previous section.
www.ebook3000.com

The Josephson Current in S’INS Tunnel Junctions with Thin N Metal Layers
79
Figure 4.8
Real and imaginary parts of N, for ph
N = 0.3, Z ph
N = 1.2, S =
1.4, and d/ℓ= 3. The larger of the two solid lines at E = 1.4 corresponds to
d/ξS = 2.2, the other solid line to d/ξS = 0.22. The dashed lines are for d/ξS
= 1.1, the dash-dotted lines for d/ξS = 0.55.
4.5 The Josephson Current in S’INS Tunnel
Junctions with Thin N Metal Layers
In Ref. 6 I derived the following expression for the zero bias
Josephson current (in the tunneling Hamiltonian limit):
IR = −2ekBT nB(iωn)δL(iωn) sin(ϕ)
(4.30)
where R is the junction resistance, ϕ is the Josephson phase
diﬀerence across the tunnel barrier, and (εN(iωn) = ωn/(ω2
n+2
N)1/2,
δN(iωn) = −iN/(ω2
n + 2
N)1/2, with corresponding deﬁnitions for
εS(iωn) and δS(iωn) and δL(iωn)):
B(iωn) = Q(iωn)/P(iωn)
(4.31)

80
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
Figure 4.9
Tunneling density of states for the four cases in Fig. 4.8. The
solid line which is largest near E =
1.4 corresponds to d/ξS = 0.22. All
other lines are as given in the caption of Fig. 4.8.
where
Q(iωn) = δN[i(εNεS −δNδS) cos(KNd)
+ sin(KNd)] + iεN(εNδS −δNεS)
P(iωn) = i(εNεS −δNδS) sin(KNd) −cos(KNd)
KNd = i2d/(πξSS)(ω2
n + 2
N)1/2
(4.32)
It is easy to see that in the limit as d approaches 0, B(iωn) =
−iS/(ω2
n + 2
S)1/2 as expected. The new information which can be
obtained from this result is the dependence of the Josephson critical
current on the thickness of the N metal layer, d.
In the graph of Fig. 4.10, one can see that the critical current is
relatively rapidly depressed with increasing N metal thickness. The
asymptotic value of this ratio as d →∞is just the value for the ratio
of the critical current in an SIN junction to that for an SIS junction.
The actual curves will decrease even faster because as the N metal
www.ebook3000.com

References
81
Figure 4.10
Ratio of Josephson critical current for a SINS tunnel junction
with N thickness d to that for a SIS tunnel junction, as a function of d/ξS.
thickness increases the value of the S metal gap at the NS interface
will also decrease. For d/ξS ≤0.1, however, the junction is in the thin
N metal limit and the calculation should be accurate.
References
1. Wolf, E. L., and Arnold, G. B. (1982). Proximity electron tunneling
spectroscopy. Phys. Rep., 91, 31–102.
2. Arnold, G. B. (1978). Theory of thin proximity eﬀect sandwiches. Phys.
Rev. B, 18, 1076–1100.
3. Anderson, P. W. (1959). Theory of dirty superconductors. J. Phys. Chem.
Solids, 11, 26–38.

82
Tunnel Junctions on Niobium Using Aluminum
4. Arnold, G. B. (1981). Theory of thin proximity eﬀect sandwiches. II.
Eﬀects of s-wave elastic scattering. Phys. Rev. B, 23, 1171–1178.
5. McMillan, W. L. (1968). Tunneling model of the superconducting
proximity eﬀect. Phys. Rev., 175, 537–542.
6. Arnold, G. B. (1985). Superconducting tunneling without the tunneling
Hamiltonian. J. Low Temp. Phys., 59, 143–183.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 5
The Trace That Launched a Thousand
Chips: Development of Nb/Al–Oxide–Nb
Technology
Michael Gurvitch
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-3800, USA
michael.gurvitch@stonybrook.edu
Having been asked to write about the emergence of the Nb/Al–
oxide–Nb technology, I have no choice but to put on a historian’s
hat. Becoming such an accidental historian, I will try to describe
how refractory Josephson junction (JJ) technology was born, where
it was born, of what parents, and why it was conceived in the ﬁrst
place, attempting to make a detailed “case study” of this particular
innovation. As almost all new technologies in our time, it was a
collective undertaking not limited to a single individual, to a single
group, or even to a single institution. I will “name names” of those
who were most involved in it at Bell Labs, and of those who most
inﬂuenced our work from the outside of Bell, and will try to assign
credit. In that, I may be subjective, although I will try to curb my
subjectivity as best I can. Relevant technical detail without which the
story would be less clear will be provided. To make it interesting on
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

84
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
a human level, I will venture into a bit of reminiscence about the
people I knew and the happy years at Bell Labs when this work was
done. This inevitably requires extensive use of pronoun “I,” which
is normally avoided in scientiﬁc papers, and for which we (that is,
I) apologize. The story would be incomplete without saying a few
words about Bell Labs, where it took place, and that is where we will
start.
5.1 Bell Labs Empire
Prior to Bell Labs, I was working on my thesis at Brookhaven
National Lab. The Ph.D. program was at the Physics Department at
Stony Brook, but the actual work, mainly on A-15 superconducting
compounds, I did at Brookhaven, where I had a good fortune to learn
from a scientist of the highest caliber and of the greatest devotion
to physics that I have ever seen—my thesis advisor, the late Myron
Strongin (1936–2013). I graduated in 1978 and started looking for
a job. In the meantime, Stony Brook professor and well-known solid
state theoretical physicist Phil Allen said something nice about me
to his former coauthor, Bell Labs physicist and one of the stars of
superconductivity world, Bob Dynes. As a result, in late summer
or early fall of 1978, I was invited for an interview to Bell Labs in
Murray Hill, New Jersey. It was the ﬁrst time I saw that place, and it
impressed me very much.
At that time “Ma Bell” was still at the height of her powers,
this being six years before the fatal legislative breakup of 1984.
Even though mortally wounded in 1984, Bell Labs kept its scientiﬁc
traditions for a few more years. I was lucky to work there from 1979
through 1989, and not longer. That Orwellian year, 1984, marked the
beginning of the end, the real end arriving a quarter century later,
in 2008, when the owners of Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent, announced
that they were pulling out of scientiﬁc research altogether. By then,
research at Bell Labs had been reduced to a trickle anyway.
When I came for my interview, Bell Labs was undisputedly the
best solid state physics lab in the world. It consumed only about
2% of the total American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) budget,
but this 2% constituted 2 billion dollars a year, which in 1979 was
www.ebook3000.com

Bell Labs Empire
85
still a lot of money. There were about 25,000 employees in all of
the Labs spread around New Jersey and Pennsylvania, with about
3000 of them stationed at Murray Hill, the site of the leading lab
and the seat of the top management. The total number of AT&T
employees at that time was, I believe, close to 600,000, constituting
the largest private enterprise in the world. The Bell empire had
its own ocean ﬂeet, its own communication satellites, its own
manufacturing facility (Western Electric), and, of course, its world-
famous scientiﬁc laboratories ﬁrst established by the inventor of the
telephone, Alexander Bell, in 1880. The labs were christened Bell
Telephone Laboratories in 1925, when the business became part of
AT&T. The word telephone was later dropped, the name becoming
AT&T Bell Labs. Simultaneously with that (it may have happened in
1984), the company’s logo was changed from the depiction of a bell
(a nice play on the name of the founder) to a striped circular symbol
that was supposed to look like a globe, but, according to Tony Fiory,
my friend and collaborator at Bell, looked a lot like a “ﬁnished Death
Star” of the then appearing Star Wars movies, in which, as the reader
may recall, the Death Star was unﬁnished.
I was told that AT&T organization had 13 levels of management,
and that salaries in the adjacent levels increased on the average
by a factor of √2. At Bell Labs the lowest of those managerial
levels consisted of Members of Technical Staﬀ(MTS). MTS were
scientists and engineers of all denominations, mostly with Ph.D.
degrees: physicists, chemists, pure and applied mathematicians,
materials scientists, computer scientists, electrical engineers, even
some biologists and astrophysicists. In the basic research area of
Bell Labs, Area 11, each MTS supervised a personal technician
called Senior Technical Assistant, or STA, thus earning the title
of a “manager,” albeit at the lowest level (this concerned only
experimentalists; theorists did not have technicians, and so were not
managers). The second managerial level consisted of supervisors or
group leaders, groups consisting of a few MTS (group leader level
existed mostly in Area 52, the development area of Bell Labs). Then
there were department heads, a department in Area 11 containing
a dozen MTS and approximately the same number of STAs, then
lab directors, labs consisting of ﬁve to seven departments, then
executive directors in charge of subdivisions (Physics, Chemistry).

86
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
The executive director in charge of Area 111, Physics Division, was a
solid state theorist and a whip-clever man, Bill Brinkman; above him
was Arno Penzias, vice president of research. Penzias assumed that
high position after getting in 1978 a Nobel Prize, which he shared
with another Bell Labs man, Robert Wilson, the prize being awarded
for their 1964 discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation
from the Big Bang—in retrospect, one of the greatest scientiﬁc
discoveries of the 20th century (and, therefore, of all times). Above
Penzias was Bell Labs president, in my time, Ian Ross.
At Bell Labs, good, often truly distinguished scientists were
promoted to the managerial positions. So far we counted seven
levels, so, in Dante’s classiﬁcation, we are not out of Hell yet. The
top six levels of AT&T management were invisible from Murray Hill;
they were somewhere in Manhattan (I assume), and generally much
closer to St. Peter than to us.
By 1979, the number of Nobel Prize winners who worked at
various times at Bell Labs was eight, three of them still working
there during my tenure (Anderson, Penzias, and Wilson). Before
the end, this number increased by six, bringing the total number
of Nobel laureates at Bell Labs to fourteen, those fourteen sharing
in eight physics Nobel prizes awarded from 1937 through 2014.a
Few countries can claim such statistics. A good chunk of the 20th
century’s high technology was invented at Bell Labs, and even more
technologies were perfected there. To name a few highlights from
diﬀerent ﬁelds, without any claim on completeness:
• Practical vacuum tube ampliﬁers (improved De Forest’s
triodes) used as repeaters in long telephone lines (Harold
Arnold, 1913–1915)
• Wave nature of matter (diﬀraction of electrons on crystals)
(C. Davisson and L. Germer, 1927; Davisson received the
Nobel Prize in physics in 1937)
aOne of these Nobel prizes, for fractional quantum Hall eﬀect, was awarded in 1998 to
Dan Tsui, who at the time of his prize-winning research was MTS in our department
11151. He shared the prize with H. Stormer (department head of 11134) and
R. Laughlin. Another Nobel Prize to someone we knew well and sometimes had lunch
together was awarded to Steven Chu in 1997.
www.ebook3000.com

Bell Labs Empire
87
• Concept of negative feedback in electronics (Harold Black,
1927)
• Thermal noise in resistors (J. Johnson and H. Nyquist, 1928)
• Motion pictures with sound and high-ﬁdelity (hi-ﬁ) mono
and stereo recordings (Arthur Keller, 1925–1932)
• Radio Astronomy (radio waves from the Milky Way; Karl
Jansky, 1933)
• Identiﬁcation of n and p conduction in semiconductors; a
notion of positive holes (S. Scaﬀ, H. Theurer, R. Ohl, 1939)
• First p-n junction in Silicon (R. Ohl, 1941)
• Patent on solar cell (R. Ohl, 1946)
• First mobile (cellular) wireless telephone system (from
1946)
• The ﬁrst (point-contact) transistor, the crown jewel of all
Bell Labs achievements (J. Bardeen and W. Brattain, 1947;
Nobel Prize in 1956)
• Bipolar junction transistor, BJT (a much more practical
transistor; W. Shockley, 1948; Nobel Prize in 1956, shared
with Bardeen and Brattain)
• Information theory (Claude Shannon, 1948)
• Digital transmission of information (PCM, or pulsed code
modulation) (B. Oliver, C. Shannon, J. Pierce, 1946–1948)
• Reliable solid-state diodes (late 1930s–1950)
• Eﬃcient silicon solar battery (photovoltaic, or the solar cell)
(C. Fuller, G. Pearson, D. Chapin, 1954)
• Zone-reﬁning of semiconductor crystals (W. Pfann and H.
Theurer, 1950–1955)
• High critical current superconducting wires (B. Matthias
and T. Geballe, 1954)
• Replacing Ge with diﬀusion-doped Si in bipolar junction
transistor (M. Tanenbaum, 1955)
• Principle of a laser (C. Townes, A. Schawlow, 1958; Townes
shared a Nobel Prize with Basov and Prokhorov in 1964)
• Metal–oxide–semiconductor ﬁeld-eﬀect transistor, MOSFET
(D. Kahng and M. Atalla, 1959)
• Experimental discovery of Josephson eﬀect (P. W. Anderson
and J. M. Rowell, 1963)
• CO2 laser (K. Patel, 1964)

88
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
• Molecular beam epitaxy, MBE (R. Arthur and A. Cho, late
1960s – early 1970s)
• UNIX operating system and C programming language
(D. Ritchie and K. Thompson, 1970–1972); C++ program-
ming language (B. Stroustrup, 1986)
• Charge-coupled devices, CCDs (W. Boyle and G. Smith, 1969;
Nobel Prize in 2009)
• Modulation doping (H. Stormer, 1980)
• Fractional quantum Hall eﬀect (H. Stormer and D. Tsui,
1981–1983; the 1998 Nobel Prize was shared by Stormer
and Tsui with R. Laughlin)
• Refractory Josephson junction Nb/Al–oxide–Nb technology
(M. Gurvitch and J. M. Rowell, 1981–1983)
• Laser cooling of atoms (Steven Chu, 1985; 1997 Nobel Prize
shared with W. D. Phillips and C. Cohen-Tannoudji)
I immodestly included in that list our refractory JJ technology,
also known as the trilayer process, the workhorse of all He-cooled
superconducting electronics to this day, and the subject of this
book. Here I listed only two names of the principal inventors of
that technology. Signiﬁcant contributions of others, both inside and
outside of Bell Labs, are detailed in subsequent sections. And, no—I
do not think that Nb/Al technology can be compared in importance
to the experimental discovery of waves of matter, or to the invention
of a transistor. Still, it is a nice technology.
5.2 Starting at Bell Labs: Thin-Film Deposition
System
As I said, in late summer or early fall of 1978, I came to Bell Labs
for an interview, knowing little about its history. The Murray Hill
building situated at the back of a front lawn was large, modern,
and impressive. One entered through the high and spacious lobby
housing the small but interesting Bell Labs museum, an exhibit of
artifacts relating to some of the major Bell Labs achievements: a
replica of the ﬁrst transistor (the one we see reproduced in so
many books); pages from Phil Anderson’s notebook containing the
www.ebook3000.com

Starting at Bell Labs
89
description of one of his famous theories (it was either the theory
of dirty superconductors or the localization theory); disks with ﬁrst
stereo recordings, and many other things. On the other side of the
lobby, at the bottom of a wide staircase, there was a control post
with guards checking Bell Labs passes which contained employees’
names and photographs. Some years later, the future Nobel laureate
Horst Stormer ﬁxed a picture of a monkey over his own photograph,
but was eventually caught by the guards and admonished for
this little practical joke. The central building also contained two
cafeteria, regular and special (the latter with waiter service, for top
management and for treating lab’s visitors), the oﬃces of the highest
company brass (Bell Labs president, vice president of research),
and the great technical library rivaling best university libraries. On
the sides of the central building were older long wings; as you
faced the main entrance, Research Area 11 was located in the right
wing, and Applied Area 52 in the left wing. I learned most of this
local geography later. In the ﬁrst day, I remember seeing the great
staircases, mile-long corridors, and the special service cafeteria
to which my hosts took me for lunch as a candidate. That fancy
cafeteria, with tall slanted windows overlooking an inner garden,
resembled, I thought, one of the Wonders of the World, the Hanging
Gardens of Semiramis.
My two-day interview was hosted by Ted Fulton, who, as I found
out, was heading a small group working on Josephson junction
technology (the group was formed in Area 11, which, as I said, did
not have the group leader position, so Ted, while heading the group,
was a normal MTS). Ted explained to me that, should I be hired,
I would have to devote at least some of my time to improving the
existing Josephson junction (JJ) technology. The rest of the time, said
Ted, I could use for anything I wanted to do. The exact allocation of
time was not speciﬁed: Bell Labs were famous for allowing scientists
considerable freedom in choosing the subjects of their research;
at least it was so in Area 11, at the end of 1970s. I remember
Ted explaining to me how a Josephson junction, when supercurrent
exceeds the critical value, switches in about a picosecond from the
supercurrent branch to the normal branch of its I–V characteristic.
He drew I–V curves on a little blue notepad the stack of which,
as I found later, was on every desk at Bell, used mostly for scrap

90
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
paper. Ted Fulton, who had a great sense of humor, once said,
“Boy, will the management regret the day they gave us these little
blue pads.” I knew something about Josephson eﬀect, of course, but
nothing about its applications. Nonetheless, I remember praising the
elegance of this switching scheme (what can I say; I really wanted
that job). I gave a talk based on our work at Brookhaven, and later
I was passed around the building, on a typical exact-to-the-minute
Bell Labs schedule, talking for exactly 30 minutes to each person,
including Bob Dynes and John Rowell. John is the famous expert
in tunneling and experimental discoverer, with P. W. Anderson, of
the Josephson eﬀect (see Dr. B. D. Josephson’s chapter and Dr. E. L.
Wolf’s chapter). It all went remarkably well, and at the end of the
second day I was oﬀered a permanent MTS position in Fulton’s
unoﬃcial group, which was part of the Electronics and Photonics
Materials Research department #11151, headed at that time by Dick
Slusher, a well-known physicist, expert in the so-called squeezed
optical states. This department was part of Lab #1115, at that time
headed by director Joe Giordmaine (an expert in nonlinear optics). I
was also oﬀered, as an alternative, a postdoctoral position with J. M.
Rowell, who headed Solid State and Physics of Materials Research
department 11112. I was happy about that, too, because at Bell,
as I learned, the closer were all the digits in the departmental
number to 1’s, the more fundamental was the research. The most
basic of them all, Theoretical Physics Research department, which
had P. W. Anderson as a member, was assigned number 11111.
Notwithstanding higher digits, I wisely chose a permanent position
in 11151.
One of the people I talked to in that interview (or possibly
later, when I was already hired) was Gerry Dolan, whom I met
before at Stony Brook, where he was a postdoc with Professor Jim
Lukens. Gerry was either in Bob Dynes’ or John Rowell’s department
(I do not remember which); he said to me something like “Take
seriously the request to improve Josephson technology, and if you
will succeed, you will do well for yourself here.” This was good
advice—except that, as will be detailed below, we succeeded in
improving JJ’s just at the time when IBM abruptly stopped its
supercomputer project in 1983, this decision taken, at least in part,
in view of the very problems that we just resolved so successfully!
www.ebook3000.com

Starting at Bell Labs
91
Bell Labs followed suit in winding down its Josephson eﬀort as
well. This was most unfortunate for me: I did not get a chance to
rest on my laurels. In fact, my laurels were moving to Japan at that
time, where large-scale projects using our JJ technology were just
starting. Bell, like Moscow in the old Russian saying, did not believe
in tears; at Bell past achievements did not mean much. So, after 1983,
I was under the increasing pressure to leave superconductivity
altogether, and to do something “useful,” such as dreadful II–VI
semiconductors, this pressure ending only at the end of 1986, when
high-Tc superconductivity broke out. That started the second happy
and exciting period at Bell, from the end of 1986 to 1989, of which I
will not write here.
At the Research Area of Bell Labs, Area 11, every experimentalist
MTS had a separate lab room, a personal assistant, and an
unspeciﬁed budget to ﬁll this room with whatever was needed
and desired, from screwdrivers to MBE systems. You could ask for
anything, in principle, if you had a good proposal for a new project,
and it would be up to the management to say yes or no. However,
when planning to ask for expensive items, one would do well by
ﬁrst ﬁnding out what is available in-house. More often than not,
instead of asking for millions of dollars, you ended up asking for
the room and telephone number of a colleague who had what you
wanted. This promoted collaborations, which were the order of the
day at Bell Labs. The ability to mingle with all kinds of experts
and to ﬁnd among them potential collaborators, usually the best
in the world at what they did, was probably the strongest point
of being at Bell Labs, famously envisioned and implemented by
pre-WWII research director and post-WWII president of Bell Labs,
the legendary Mervin Kelly. It is said that he insisted on designing
Murray Hill buildings, those older wings with their incredibly
long corridors, individual scientist’s labs positioned along them, to
promote chance interactions between people. It is true that you
could not walk that corridor on your way to the library or to the
cafeteria without meeting somebody well worth conversing with. In
the cafeteria, people joined established or semi-established lunch
groups, each large round table ﬁtting up to perhaps six or eight
people. So, at lunch, you would be sometimes sitting with your
friends and colleagues, and sometimes with people you did not

92
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
know before. If you could interest a potential collaborator with your
project, you got instant access to the unique expertise, equipment,
and materials. Sometimes it took only an hour or two from the
moment you asked, “Who do I talk to about . . .” to the moment
when some valuable advice was received or a new collaboration was
established, and something be actually tried in the lab. The same was
true if you had a theoretical question. The number of very clever
people surrounding you at Bell was just incredible. When all else
failed, people would say, “Go talk to P. W.,” meaning Nobel laureate
P. W. Anderson, the sage of solid state physics.
I had never been able to ask for a lot of money for a research
project, in part because a large commitment ties you down (if you
own an MBE system which costs a million dollars, you are married
to it, and if it can make II–VI semiconductors, then you are in real
trouble). At Bell, my excuses for not asking for a big new investment
were (a) readily available good collaborations and (b) the existence
of a large basement at Murray Hill, which was full of unwanted
equipment—something a university experimentalist would sell his
or her soul to have access to. I got there a few things for my lab,
including a giant electromagnet, so heavy that the ﬂoor had to be
reinforced with a steel plate to place it in my room. To my shame, I
never used it at all, and at some point, it was removed from my lab by
a team of workers with dollies, while I was trying to look the other
way and not to think about it.
The room I was assigned was 1D-321, which meant building 1
(Basic Research Area 11), section D, third ﬂoor. The location was
great, some of the best in Murray Hill. My lab happened to be one
ﬂoor down and perhaps some 50 meters to the side from 1E-455,
the old Walter Brattain’s lab, where the ﬁrst transistor had been
famously demonstrated in December 1947. History apart, it was
close to the labs of the people I collaborated with, as well as to
the oﬃces of the theorists from 11111. In that room I found an old
vacuum system for making thin ﬁlms and without a delay started
retroﬁtting it with three DC sputter guns made by the company Basic
Sputtering Inc. (“US guns,” taking 2 inch diameter ﬂat targets), and
the rotating table that would pass a substrate under these guns. I
decided that the table had to be water-cooled to prevent deposited
ﬁlms from overheating and thus from unwanted interdiﬀusion of
www.ebook3000.com

Starting at Bell Labs
93
metallic layers. This indeed proved to be useful, but to make such
a rotating and simultaneously water-cooled table inside a high-
vacuum chamber, its movements precision-controlled by a stepping
motor, was not a trivial engineering problem.
Soon after I started, my department head, Dick Slusher, told me
that I could hire an assistant. I hired a very able one, with high-
vacuum experience, Harold Huggins. With Harold’s expert help we
soon not only outﬁtted the deposition system with the water-cooled
rotating table (we purchased an ingenious ferroﬂuidics rotating
high-vacuum feedthrough to achieve this), but also inserted into
the deposition chamber a liquid nitrogen–cooled shroud, called
Meissner trap, similar to the ones used in MBE systems. Liquid
nitrogen shroud works most eﬀectively when its surfaces are
covered with Nb, which acts as an excellent getter for residual gases
when it is cold. This signiﬁcantly (by about a factor of 10) improved
the base pressure (vacuum), dropping it to the low 10−8 Torr range,
and in some instances even to the upper 10−9 Torr range. Of course
ﬁlms were deposited by sputtering, in the low-pressure atmosphere
of research-purity Ar. This required a partial closing of the pump
opening. So the real relevant vacuum was a bit higher: when the
pump was partially closed (throttled), the pressure rose to the
low 10−7 Torr range. Our Nb ﬁlms had very decent TC’s over 9 K
(sometimes TC was even higher than the book value of 9.2 K, which
indicates the presence of signiﬁcant strain in a Nb ﬁlm). As people in
the ﬁeld know, Nb ﬁlm is a “canary in the coal mine,” its TC signaling
the quality of the vacuum system. This is because Nb is sensitive to
oxygen, exhibiting about 1 degree drop in TC per 1 atomic percent
of oxygen incorporated in a ﬁlm. Of course, the amount of oxygen
that will get into the ﬁlm also depends on the deposition rate: the
faster is the deposition, the cleaner is the ﬁlm; our rates were close to
1 nm/s when a substrate was held stationary directly under the gun.
This was only one of the options: having this versatile system, we
had a variety of options as to how to make ﬁlms and stacks of ﬁlms,
multilayers. The Nb ﬁlm could be deposited with a substrate on a
stationary table directly under the gun, or while the table was slowly
rotating, passing the substrate under the Nb gun in each turn. This
latter technique resulted in signiﬁcantly lower average deposition
rate, but it improved thickness uniformity, and allowed the substrate

94
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
US’ Guns
Aluminum Plate
Pyrex Collar
Meissner Trap
S.S. Vacuum
Chamber
Deposition
Shield
Rotating
Substrate
Table
Figure 5.1
Magnetron deposition system, from Ref. 1. Meissner trap
consists of two sections separated by a gap that admits a shutter (not
shown). Provisions for water-cooling of the rotating table are also not
shown.
to cool down while it was away from the gun, as substantial heating
occurs at such high rates of deposition. To further decrease ﬁlm’s
heating, we could thermally sink the substrate to the table while
running cold water through the table. This proved particularly
important later, when we deposited Al overlayers and second Nb
electrodes: cold substrates prevented interdiﬀusion of Nb and Al and
allowed for more controllable oxidation of the Al overlayer.
With three guns and the rotating table, the system was truly
versatile, allowing for the simultaneous or sequential deposition of
three diﬀerent metals, or, if we wanted, three diﬀerent alloys. We
could also make multilayers of individual metals or even multilayers
of alloys, if we wanted to. One system limitation was that having DC
(rather than RF) sputter guns, we could not deposit dielectrics, but
we did not plan to deposit them anyway, knowing that attempts to
directly deposit tunneling oxide were futile, due to the extremely
small oxide thickness of about 1 nm that was required in a tunnel
junction. There was no way a deposited 1 nm oxide (or any other
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Supercomputer Project at IBM and Its Extensions
95
dielectric) could cover the base electrode uniformly and without
pinholes. Thus, we were obtaining tunnel junctions by oxidation of
a base electrode, as most people in the ﬁeld. Oxidation is a self-
limiting process (not always, but often, when an oxide is nice), with
the resulting oxide thickness being in part determined by the same
tunneling process that operates in a tunnel junction: when tunneling
stops, oxide growth stops. This is as beautiful a mechanism for
obtaining the right oxide thickness as one can imagine. In case of
pure Nb, before Al overlayer came along, people resorted to RF-
assisted growth of the tunneling oxide, mainly out of desperation,
trying to ﬁght Nb oxide problems (see below). With aluminum
overlayer, there was absolutely no need for an RF-assisted oxide
growth.
I started my work at Bell by learning how to make and measure
semi-soft Nb–oxide–(Pb–Bi) junctions. To understand why these
junctions were of interest, I have to say a few words about IBM’s
superconducting supercomputer project and the status of Josephson
tunnel junctions in 1979–1980.
5.3 Superconducting Supercomputer Project at
IBM and Its Extensions
In 1979, when I joined Bell Labs, a big Josephson supercomputer
project was ongoing at IBM; it was called Josephson signal processor
(JSP), and it was already in its 12th year, employing at that time well
over 100 people.
IBM became interested in digital applications of Josephson
junctions in 1964, only two years after Brian Josephson’s famous
theoretical prediction [2] and one year after its experimental
veriﬁcation at Bell Labs by J. M. Rowell and P. W. Anderson [3].
John Rowell in 1964 ﬁled for a patent in which he suggested
that switching of a Josephson junction between zero-voltage and
ﬁnite-voltage states can be used in logic circuits [4], but Bell
did not pursue the idea further. However, at IBM, a computer
company, this was taken seriously. In 1966, at IBM, Juri Matisoo
demonstrated subnanosecond switching in a Josephson junction [5].
Later it became clear that in low-capacitance junctions switching

96
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
could occur on a picosecond scale, which was experimentally
veriﬁed by the end of 1970s [6]. This was faster than any of the
existing transistors at the time. In 1967 Matisoo proposed a ﬂip-
ﬂop based on Josephson junctions [7] which could perform basic
logic functions of AND and OR. The diﬀerence between Rowell’s
single junction switch and Matisoo’s gate was that the latter was
based on two junctions in a superconducting loop, an arrangement
known as SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device).
The close similarity of the behavior of a SQUID and of the two-
slit light interferometer is the reason why SQUIDs are often called
interferometers. Switching in a single junction and in a SQUID can be
triggered by supercurrent exceeding its critical value called IC. This
can be achieved either by injecting additional current (a preferred
scheme at the time), or by application of a magnetic ﬁeld (the latter
created by passing current through the nearby current line). Once
the junction switches to the ﬁnite voltage state, it will stay there,
unless it is reset; that is why this type of logic is called “latching
logic.” Resetting involves changing current direction. In the IBM
project, the bunch of logic operations was performed during a cycle,
and resetting of all of the gates was done at the end of a cycle with
the use of an AC power supply.
Encouraged by fast switching, and facing serious power dis-
sipation problems with semiconductor technology, in 1967 IBM
established a program to study JJ technology with the aim of building
a superfast computer (mainframe) based on it. The program grew
steadily, and by 1979, they have been looking at all aspects of
this technology, from materials to circuit design to packaging, and
preliminary solutions (good or not so good) have been found for
all these challenges. In the beginning of 1980, the status of the
project was summarized in the March issue of the IMB Journal of
Research and Development by its head, W. Anacker [8] and by the
project’s principal scientist, J. Matisoo [9], as well as by others. IBM
circuits were made with (Pb–In–Au)–oxide–(Pb–Bi) junctions, i.e.
both electrodes were soft, made of alloys of Pb; tunneling oxide
was formed by a combination of thermal oxidation and RF-assisted
oxidation [10]. We will discuss Josephson junctions and materials
issues involved in their preparation in the next section.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Supercomputer Project at IBM and Its Extensions
97
By 1980, IBM circuits contained up to 102 gates (JJ interferom-
eters); they were fabricated in 5 μm and, later, in 2.5 μm linewidth
technology [11]. Memory cells were also based on superconducting
interferometers, storing indeﬁnitely (until they were read out) a
single magnetic ﬂux quantum 0, persistent currents circulating in
such a memory cell without dissipation [9]. While this was probably
the most elegant feature of the JSP design when taken in isolation,
construction of a working memory chip with a large number of
identical memory cells (speciﬁcally, for cache memory) proved to be
very diﬃcult and was not achieved even by the end of the project
[12]. While JSP, the way it was initially envisioned [8], was never
built, a small prototype based on soft Pb alloy junctions was built
in 1981–1982 (it was called cross-sectional model, or CSM) [12]. In
that prototype, the cycle time was 3.7 ns, corresponding to clock rate
of 270 MHz. Due to problems with cache memory, the memory in
CSM was simulated.
Soft Pb alloy junctions were far from ideal; the main problem
with them was in the high failure rate when they were subjected to
repeated thermal cycling between 4.2 K and 300 K (see next section).
Recognizing this and other problems, IBM researchers additionally
developed more stable junctions with hard Nb base electrode and
soft Pb alloy counterelectrode [13]. These were edge junctions, made
at the edges of Nb ﬁlms, for the reasons that will be made clear
in the next section. These junctions were demonstrated in 1980,
and this relatively late-stage development did not make it into the
already quoted project summary published in March of 1980, nor
were these semi-soft junctions used in the CSM prototype. They
were more stable than their soft predecessors, but they carried with
them old problems associated with Nb oxide tunnel barrier (see next
section).
The eﬀort at Bell was much smaller than at IBM, involving only
half a dozen people. Bell’s activity was established to “keep up
with the Joneses” (or rather with the Watsons, in view of IBM’s
“Thomas Watson Research Center”). “Keeping up” meant having in-
house expertise and access to the latest developments, to take oﬀ
quickly, when the time came for this promising new technology to be
commercialized (alas, this time never came). Of course, despite this

98
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
small eﬀort, Bell Labs would not be Bell Labs if people there would
not be trying to do things better than in other places; in that instant,
better than at IBM. At the end, what Bell indeed did better turned out
to be our refractory junction technology. However, that development
happened too late to be incorporated in the IBM project which closed
down in September 1983. According to later accounts [12], the main
reason for closing of the JSP project was insuﬃcient speed advantage
compared to rapidly developing silicon technology. Nonetheless, one
cannot help but think that material problems with soft and semi-soft
junctions also played a role. With respect to these material problems,
our refractory JJ technology, which matured in 1983, the year when
IBM eﬀort was closed, was like a delivery of a life-saving antibiotic
at the time of a funeral.
In 1979–1980, Japanese computer companies were worried
about IBM gaining an early start on Josephson supercomputer. As a
result, Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)
organized a large Japanese supercomputer project similar to IBM’s
that ran from 1981 to 1989. Several large companies participated:
Fujitsu, Hitachi, Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (NTT), NEC, and
Electro-Technical Lab (ETL). At the close of IBM project in 1983, the
Japanese MITI-run project also came under scrutiny. Shinya Hasuo,
the head of Fujitsu Laboratories JJ program, told me that what
saved their project was our robust and reliable Nb/Al technology.
After 1983, as IBM dropped out, for a while Japan became the
main player in large-scale superconducting electronics. Nonetheless,
many researchers in other countries, including USA, continued their
work on a smaller scale, or even entered the ﬁeld just at that
time. For example, Sadeg Faris, IBM scientist who worked on the
JSP project, decided to utilize our refractory junctions in his new
company, Hypres, Inc., which he founded close to IBM Thomas
Watson Center, in upstate New York, in 1983. His ﬁrst product
was to be ultrafast superconductivity-based sampling oscilloscope
(which, as I recall, has been built but not sold in appreciable
numbers). Hypres since then moved to many other specialized
superconducting circuits, such as very fast A/D converters and the
primary voltage standard, and today, in 2016, it still maintains
excellent JJ fabrication facility (the foundry) and technical expertise
in designing JJ circuits. Other chapters in this book will be the
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Supercomputer Project at IBM and Its Extensions
99
best guide to the present-day worldwide status of refractory JJ
technology and its applications.
Why were IBM, and later Japanese companies, interested in a JJ
computer? Short switching delay in a JJ was only part of the story.
Equally important was the prospect of avoiding the problem faced
by all large and densely packed semiconductor mainframes: namely,
the problem with power dissipation. According to W. Anacker [8], a
computer with parameters projected at the time for the Josephson
machine (speciﬁcally: 1 ns processor, 2 ns cache, and 10 ns
main memory, constructed in IBM 3033 system architecture), but
implemented in a semiconductor version, would require removing
20 kW of power (!) from a volume of 640 cm3, which was impossible,
even with forced water and/or liquid nitrogen cooling. In contrast,
Josephson mainframe with the same performance would dissipate
less than 10 W of power [8], which could be comfortably handled by
the liquid helium bath in which it would be immersed.
Indeed, superconductors and semiconductors operate at energy
scales diﬀering by a factor of about 102–103. A switching semicon-
ductor passing current I (typically in the mA range) will dissipate
power of the order of P = EgI/e, where Eg ≈1 eV is typical energy
gap in a semiconductor (e.g., 1.1 eV in Si). Thus, power dissipated
in a semiconductor gate is in milliwatts. In a superconductor such
as Nb or Pb, the superconducting gap is 2 ≈3 meV. Consequently,
dissipation per gate in JSP project was between 3 and 5 μW [9, 11].
Furthermore, the advantage of small energy gap in superconducting
logic can be realized in practice, because superconductors operate
at 4.2 K where thermal energy kBT is about 100 times smaller
than at room temperature, allowing for the reliable millivolt-scale
operation, provided that the critical current IC is not smaller than
0.1 mA [12].
Anacker’s projections made in 1980 painted a rather bleak
picture for fast semiconductor computers. It seemed that supercon-
ducting JJ technology might be the only way out. Yet, as we know,
today in 2016, JJ supercomputers with superconducting memory
still do not exist (although superconducting processors exist), while
semiconductor computers routinely run with clock rates at several
GHz. Why is the situation diﬀerent today from what it was in 1980?
I think the short answer is “because of the availability of CMOS gates

100
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
with reduced power consumption.” Silicon technology had a few
tricks up its sleeve, tricks that were not yet known in 1980.b
Power dissipation prevents fast-switching transistors from being
placed too close to each other, which implies larger processor
size. The physical size of a processor, together with the transistor
switching time, determines its ultimate speed. Even if switching
delay were zero, there would be a propagation delay, which implies
that a fast processor has to be small. Indeed, the time it takes a
signal traveling in transmission lines with approximately 1/3 of the
speed of light in vacuum to cross, for example, the distance from
the processor to the memory and back, limits the rate at which
computer can perform its operations, limits the clock rate. In 1979
it was believed that Si is limited to at best about 0.5 GHz clock rates.
Of course, today, with computers routinely having 10 times higher
clock rates, the arguments and estimates made back then seem less
convincing. Nonetheless, in 1979, the appeal of superconducting
supercomputer was strong, mainly because of fast switching and
much lower power dissipation.
As we said, 270 MHz clock rate was demonstrated in the CSM
prototype in 1981–1982. In the meantime, silicon technology was
pushing its own clock rates, threatening to catch up with these
numbers. What is more, there was a serious issue with respect to
the maximum clock rate achievable with latching logic. It was known
that high clock rates could produce uncontrollable switching known
as punchthrough, ﬁrst predicted by Bell Labs scientists Ted Fulton
and Bob Dynes in 1971 [14]. In a Josephson computer, punchthrough
implies a failure of logical operations. For 10 years since 1971, it
was assumed that this detrimental eﬀect has a sharp cutoﬀ, that it
does not take place at all at clock rates below a certain threshold.
It was, however, realized in 1981 [15] that there is low but ﬁnite
probability of uncontrollable switching at all clock rates, that there
is a probability “tail” extending below that threshold. Therefore,
the punchthrough could be detrimental for a large system, like a
bMartin Lepselter, at the time, Bell Labs director in charge of advanced chip
development (essentially, all Si technology eﬀort), once said to my friend Serge Luryi,
in a context of comparing GaAs technology with Si technology: “Silicon is like a great
white shark; it swims with its jaws wide open and just eats everything on its way;
you cannot beat silicon!”
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Supercomputer Project at IBM and Its Extensions
101
computer, where the large number of switching elements is making
that small probability signiﬁcant. In 1980 T. R. Gheewala estimated
that punchthrough would become important in the IBM latching
logic (speciﬁcally, in the AND gate) if it would switch with time
delay of less than 250 ps, or with frequency above 4 GHz [11]. After
publications [15], this estimate was revised, predicting trouble at
about 1 GHz. Realization of this clock-rate limitation was one of the
main reasons why IBM decided to end its JSP project [12].
In retrospect, it is clear that materials problems also contributed
to the closing of the IBM project. Indeed, if the only problem were
with the narrowing technical advantage of a JJ computer in view of a
fast-developing silicon, then Japanese companies would not institute
any meaningful continuation of the IBM project. However, they had
such a continuation, and in fact, some of the goals of the IBM project
were realized in Japan, using our Nb/Al–oxide–Nb technology. A
1.1 GHz clock 4 bit microprocessor was demonstrated in 1988 by
Fujitsu [16], a 1 Kbit memory chip was demonstrated in 1987 by
NEC [17], and a 4 Kbit memory in 1988 again by Fujitsu [18]. Shinya
Hasuo, the head of Fujitsu Josephson eﬀort, has been a Japanese
champion of our technology from the very beginning.c In 1993, he
wrote [19]:
Although present Josephson microprocessors are not large, they
can be operated over ten times faster than similar semiconductor
microprocessors. This kind of performance is due largely to
the reliability of Josephson junction technology. The niobium
Josephson junction (Nb/AlOx/Nb) has served as the base upon
which high-speed digital circuits have been developed because of
its uniform, stable characteristics. Using niobium junctions, we
can fabricate microprocessors having a few thousand gates and
memory of a few kilobits.
It is interesting to note that, just as our breakthrough with
junction materials appeared at the very end of the JSP project, a bit
too late to make a diﬀerence, the punchthrough “speed limit” was
cI met Dr. Hasuo in 1983 at a conference where I reported on our new Josephson
junctions. He then told me that the whole Japanese Josephson program was taking
oﬀbecause of our Nb/Al technology, and he said, “If we succeed, we will erect your
statue made of niobium.” Sorry for mentioning this ﬂattery here, but I liked the way
he put it.

102
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
also overcome at approximately the same time, at least conceptually.
Ideas concerning the use of single ﬂux quantum (SFQ) pulses (pulses
which have an area equal to one ﬂux quantum 0 = 2 mV ps) in logic
operations date back to mid-1970s. K. K. Likharev, V. K. Semenov, and
O. A. Mukhanov developed a complete logic family based on these
ideas, rapid single ﬂux quantum (RSFQ) logic, in the mid-1980s in
Moscow State University [20]. In contrast to the latching logic, the
1’s and 0’s in RSFQ are not voltage states but instead the presence
or the absence of an SFQ pulse in a given time interval. That new
logic removed the suﬀocating clock-rate limit of the latching logic,
opening entirely new horizons. Clock rates approaching hundreds
of gigahertz became possible. For example, an astounding 770 GHz
operation of a small logic circuit (T ﬂip-ﬂop) has been demonstrated
at Stony Brook in 1999 [21]. This new logic, appearing in the mid-
1980s, also came too late for the JSP project, but not too late for the
future of JJ technology as a whole, which used that method for over
20 years, and now is using its extensions. Most SFQ logic circuits
are fabricated in the same refractory Nb/Al–oxide–Nb technology
that we are describing, the junctions being shunted by a resistor in
parallel, to provide for the correct generation of 0 pulses.
I am not qualiﬁed to review the present-day status of SFQ
logic and the more recent impressive computational projects that
have sprung up in various places. Today the world has moved
beyond RSFQ, driven by the need to further improve energy
eﬃciency. People are considering the exascale supercomputer, which
will operate with 1000 petaﬂops, or with 1018 operations per
second [22]. For such a machine, RSFQ’s power dissipation, minute
compared to that of CMOS, and even to latching Josephson logic, is
still too high. The energy dissipated in each SFQ switching event
(pulse generation) is fundamentally given by 0IC, which for typical
IC = 50 μA constitutes 10−19 J [22]; with typical logic gate consisting
of ﬁve JJs, the switching energy per gate is then 5 × 10−19 J. In
comparison, at 4.2 K, kBT = 6 × 10−23 J. Several orders of magnitude
diﬀerence between these two numbers guarantees suﬃciently small
logic error rates. In RSFQ, this dynamic switching energy is a small
part of the total energy budget. The static (standby) operation
requires bias currents passing through the resistive bias network.
As a result, the static bias power is about 0.8 μW per gate, which, at
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
103
20 GHz, is 60 times higher than the dynamic power associated with
switching. New SFQ designs, such as energy-eﬃcient rapid single-
ﬂux quantum (ERSFQ) or reciprocal quantum logic (RQL) reduce or
completely remove that static power [22].
A superconducting processor has other important advantages
beyond the low power dissipation: superconducting transmission
lines are much better than normal-metal lines for transmitting high-
frequency signals without distortions [20], and working at 4.2 K
provides an advantage in terms of greatly reduced thermal noise
compared both to room temperature and to liquid nitrogen boiling
temperature of 77 K.d
So, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, it was assumed that
superconducting interconnects and JJs would resolve problems
faced by silicon technology; they were the way of the future, at least
for the fastest supercomputers.
5.4 Josephson Junctions in 1980
Aluminum, which is quite hard (melting point of 660 C) is known
to grow a beautiful self-limiting, pinhole-free tunneling oxide [23].
The Al–Al oxide–Pb junction was the ﬁrst in which Ivar Giaever
performed tunneling and discovered superconducting gap in lead in
1960 [24], the work for which he shared 1973 Nobel Prize with Esaki
and Josephson. If Al had suﬃciently high TC, so that Al junctions
could work in liquid helium, we would not be writing this book, as
all junctions would be made of Al–oxide–Al, end of story. Alas, Al has
transition temperature into superconducting state of 1.2 K (a little
higher when it is disordered or amorphous). Using all-Al junctions
requires reaching temperatures at least twice lower than TC, which
would require the use of special refrigeration techniques, making
such junctions impractical. To operate in liquid He, at 4.2 K, only Pb
and Nb among elemental superconductors have high-enough TC’s of
7.2 K and 9.2 K, respectively. Of these two, Pb is soft, with a melting
dI recall how at the end of the 1980s, when high-TC superconductivity was the talk of
the town, people discussed various digital logic schemes based on high-Tc junctions
operating at 77 K. Listening to one of these discussions, Ted Fulton grumbled,
“Wouldn’t you want to have Nb junctions instead.”

104
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
point of 327◦C, while Nb is a strong, refractory metal with a melting
point of 2468◦C.
Pb–oxide–Pb junctions were made at IBM and elsewhere from
the beginning of times. They exhibited decent I–V curves, but were
very fragile and plastic, a particularly troubling aspect being their
inability to tolerate even minimal thermal cycling between room
temperature and liquid Helium. In the course of addressing these
problems at IBM, soft junctions were made somewhat stronger
with additions of In, Au, and Bi. Much research went into these
matters, and JSP project zeroed in on the base electrode made of
Pb–In (12 wt%) and Au (4 wt%), and counterelectrode made of Pb
(29 wt%) and Bi [10]. The oxide layer was formed by a combination
of thermal and RF-assisted oxidation of the base electrode, and it
turned out to consist mostly of In2O3, with a small admixture of
PbO. Such junctions could withstand 100 cycles with about 5%
failure rates [10]. While this was better than the behavior of pure
lead junctions that would show close to 100% failure rates even
in one cycle, clearly these alloyed junctions still had a long way
to go before they would be acceptable for a serious processor
technology. In addition, soft junctions could be easily destroyed,
either by mechanical scratching during fabrication or in handling
or by exposure to water, or even by exposure to humid air. Gerry
Dolan once announced, with some glee, that he discovered that
“lead dissolves in water”: counterelectrodes in the junctions he
made completely disappeared when immersed in water (lead oxides
being water-soluble). Semi-soft Nb–oxide–Pb alloy junctions that
were developed at IBM in 1980 [13] were much better in terms of
cycling stability, but still suﬀered from the mechanical softness of
the counterelectrode, as well as from the high dielectric constant of
Nb oxide (see below).
A natural inclination then would be to explore Nb–oxide–Nb
junctions. This proved to be diﬃcult, as these junctions tend to
come out as shorts: Nb, being a very reactive metal, interacts with
its own oxide, devouring it as Saturn (Cronos) devoured his own
children. With care, either with very long oxidation times, or with
RF-assisted oxidation, it was possible to make non-shorted Nb–
oxide–Nb junctions. However, all-Nb junctions, even if they could be
made, were of inferior quality in terms of their I–V characteristics.
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
105
IC 
Ifan-out = IC – I(2 mV) 
1 
0 
2 
3 
4 
V, mV 
I, mA 
Load line 
Figure 5.2
Schematics of Josephson zero-voltage and ﬁnite-voltage
branches of a tunneling I–V . The load line is shown crossing I–V at the
2 mV point. Vm of this curve is approximately 12 mV. The fan-out current
Ifan-out deviating from the junction upon its switching is equal to IC–I(2 mV).
The quality of Josephson junction I–V is often characterized
by the ﬁgure of merit Vm = IcR (2 mV), where IC is the critical
Josephson current (maximum supercurrent) and R (2 mV) = 2
mV/I(2 mV) is the resistance at 2 mV, in the gap region, in ohms;
here current is in mA. Thus we can rewrite that ﬁgure of merit as
Vm = 2IC/I(2 mV), where Vm is in mV. Why Vm characterizes the
quality of a junction? In latching logic, the signiﬁcance of Vm lies in its
relation to the fan-out current, i.e., the current that will be deviated
from the junction upon its switching. Indeed, a junction, when it
switches from the zero-voltage state to the ﬁnite-voltage state, ends
up at a point on the I–V curve determined by the load line I = IC–
V /RL, where load resistance RL is plugged in parallel to the junction.
In latching logic, the point of intersection of the load line and the
junction I–V is chosen in the gap region, just below the (1 +2)/e
current upturn, i.e., close to 2 mV. The junction switches from the top
of the Josephson branch, at the point [0; IC], to the point of its I–V
characteristic at 2 mV; I(2 mV). The current that will be deviated
away from the junction, the fan-out current, will be therefore
equal to the diﬀerence between IC and I(2 mV), as shown in
Fig. 5.2.

106
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
The relative fan-out current (in relation to IC), Ifan-out/IC = [IC–
I(2 mV)]/IC = 1–I(2 mV)/IC = 1–2/Vm. Now we understand why
higher Vm is better: it increases the fan-out current.
At 4.2 K, theoretical BCS value of Vm in a junction with Nb gap
reaches approximately 100 mV; at 2 K, it increases to thousands
of millivolts [1], because R(2 mV) increases greatly at lower T . In
contrast with the BCS value, in Nb–oxide–Nb junctions prepared
at IBM, Vm was ranging between meager 1.5 mV and 8 mV [25],
the latter ﬁgure obtained with considerable eﬀort that included RF
oxidation and two RF cleaning steps. Thus in the best IBM all-Nb
junctions, the fan-out current would be equal to 1 −2/8 = 3/4 of
IC. Additionally, the IC itself was reduced from the ideal BCS value by
about a factor of 2 [25]. In terms of using such junctions in a latching
logic, these aspects by themselves probably could be tolerated. The
real problem (often unspoken) was with reproducibility: imperfect
junctions (i.e., junctions with low values of Vm) are hard to make
identical, hard to reproduce.
What causes low Vm in Nb junctions? Nb oxidation is notoriously
complex: the layers adjacent to the tunneling oxide in both Nb
electrodes are damaged by oxygen (bottom layer during oxidation,
top layer due to Nb interacting with its own oxide), resulting in a
gradient of properties. Detailed XPS and AES studies of oxidized
Nb surfaces revealed a roughly layered system of oxides and sub-
oxides, with Nb2O5 on top, NbO and, possibly, NbO2 under it, and
Nb with dissolved oxygen, NbOx, x = 0.02, under NbO [26]. This
picture provides the physical basis for the imperfect I–V and the
low Vm. Indeed, a gradient of properties in the vicinity of the
tunneling barrier, within the depth comparable to the coherence
length of Nb (the latter being about 40 nm in bulk pure Nb and about
10 nm in small-grain Nb ﬁlms), implies deviation of the density
of quasiparticle states from the BCS shape. States appear in the
superconducting gap [1, 27], which in the BCS picture supposed
to be clean, free of quasiparticle states. These states in the gap
will allow tunneling current to ﬂow in the range of voltages where
it could not have ﬂown if the gap were clean. This is especially
clear in Nb–oxide–Pb junctions, where the excess current shows
up in the energy range Pb < eV < Pb + Nb [1]. If leaky oxide
were responsible for the appearance of excess current, such current
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
107
would exist at all bias voltages, from 0 to (Pb + Nb)/e, not just
above the Pb gap. The upturn of excess current at Pb/e is the
telltale sign of the states in the gap eﬀect. In Nb–oxide–Nb junctions,
additionally the top electrode has its own imperfect layer adjacent to
the tunnel barrier. The structure of that layer has been less studied
than that of the bottom one, this top layer being buried under the top
electrode, surface techniques thus being unable to access it directly.
Nonetheless, it also contributes to excess current in tunneling. Thus
in an all-Nb junction, with two unclean gaps, the excess current
will be observed for all biases, from zero to the sum-gap. This has
been often misinterpreted as the result of a leaky oxide, but in all
likelihood, it is the result of the presence of quasiparticle states in
both gaps, in the base electrode and in the counterelectrode.
It is hard to expect such complex phenomena to be reproducible;
the exact form of the density of states and the resulting features of an
I–V would be prone to variation from one batch of junctions to the
other, even if they were nominally made in the same technology. Leo
Tolstoy expressed the same thought in the famous opening line of
Anna Karenina: “All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is
unhappy in its own way.” In other words, happiness is reproducible,
while unhappiness is irreproducible.
Another serious problem with Nb junctions was the dielectric
constant of native Nb oxide. The insulating (tunneling) oxide in
Nb junctions is Nb2O5, niobium pentoxide. It has a high dielectric
constant, ε = 30 [28]. This ε is about 3 times higher than the value
found in the oxide grown on Pb–In–Au base electrode adopted in the
IBM project: as we mentioned above, it was predominantly indium
oxide In2O3 with ε ≈10. Higher ε implies proportionally larger
speciﬁc capacitance and thus three times slower logic—which was
unacceptable for the JSP project. IBM’s Nb oxide–Pb alloy junctions
[13] were implemented as edge junctions to reduce the junction
capacitance, in order to ﬁght the high dielectric constant of Nb oxide;
thus they were made on a Nb ﬁlm edge, which has small area (small
width in one direction).
Despite these problems, Nb was very appealing. Considerable
body of work exists on semi-soft Nb–oxide–Pb junctions, which
are much easier to make than Nb–oxide–Nb ones. I. Giaever and
K. Megerle were the ﬁrst to make tunnel junctions with Nb in

108
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
1961 [29]. Two years later, Giaever made Nb–oxide–Sn junctions on
improved Nb ﬁlms with near-bulk TC [30]. The credit for making
the ﬁrst Nb–oxide–Pb Josephson junctions goes simultaneously to
J. E. Nordman [31] and to L. O. Mullen and D. B. Sullivan [32],
who published their papers side by side in 1969. All of them
noted large excess current below the sum gap Pb + Nb that
was not present in all-Pb junctions. Nordman believed (incorrectly)
that this excess current was the result of non-uniform junction
surfaces. Nordman also noted the prominent “knee” structure above
Pb + Nb. He studied junction stability in aging and found it to
be improved over the stability of soft Pb junctions; yet parameters
of his Nb–oxide–Pb junctions also changed with time. Mullen and
Sullivan speculated that excess currents have something to do with
the presence of NbO. That was generally correct, even though they
oﬀered no clear explanation as to how NbO produced that excess
current; presumably they envisioned parallel tunneling paths into
the superconducting Nb gap and into the normal metal NbO. Next
K. Schwidtal published his impressive, detailed work on Nb–oxide–
Pb Josephson junctions in 1972 [33]. He also noted characteristic
excess current at Pb < eV < Pb + Nb and the “knee” structure
just above the sum gap Pb + Nb. Schwidtal has shown that
junctions were uniform, and correctly ascribed these features to the
damaged near-barrier layer, interpreting them, for the ﬁrst time, in
a proximity-eﬀect model. Schwidtal also noted great improvements
in terms of storage and cycling stability of these semi-soft junctions
compared with soft Pb–oxide–Pb junctions. R. F. Broom [34], his
work becoming something of a classic in the ﬁeld, made a careful
study of temperature-dependent characteristics of Nb–oxide–Pb and
Nb–oxide–Nb junctions in 1976.
The number of publications devoted to Nb–oxide–Pb (or Pb
alloy) Josephson junctions is very large, and I will not attempt to list
or review them here. Overall, these junctions had decent I–V curves;
when Josephson currents were present, reasonably high values of
Vm in the range 10 mV–20 mV were generally found, and, owing to
the strong Nb base electrode, such junctions exhibited decent cycling
stability. Needless to say, the problem with high dielectric constant of
Nb oxide remained in all of them. As we said above, IBM’s technology
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
109
of such junctions, developed in 1980, was based on edge junctions
with small area and thus small capacitance [13].
This review of the junction technology in 1980 would be
incomplete if I did not mention several attempts at improving Nb
and some other junctions with the use of additional layers deposited
over the base electrode, or over the tunnel barrier, or instead of an
oxide tunnel barrier. As subsequent developments have shown, that
was the promising direction. The intent was to improve tunneling
spectroscopy in junctions of the Giaever type and, in some cases,
to improve Josephson junctions. In the latter class of junctions,
the class we are primarily interested in here, additional layers
did not yet produce the desired improvements by 1980, and, as a
result, these early attempts at resolving Nb problems in Josephson
junctions were not highly publicized. In fact, I learned about them
only when we did a literature search for our patent with J. M. Rowell
towards the end of 1981, and when I prepared the bibliography for
our article written with J. Kwo, published in 1984—Ref. 1 here.
Here is the brief discussion of overlayer studies before 1980
covering both types of junctions: Giaever junctions and Josephson
junctions.
As far as I know, the earliest use of Al overlayer on top of a
problematic base electrode was that of J. J. Hauser, D. D. Bacon, and
W. H. Haemmerle in 1966 [35]; work performed at Bell Labs. The
team addressed the problem of low gap values previously found in
tunneling measurements on Nb3Sn and V3Si. It was suspected that
the reason for reduced gaps was the damaged or oﬀ-stoichiometric
near surface layer a few nanometers thick. With extremely short
coherence length in A-15 superconductors, this presented a problem
for tunneling which probes near-barrier layer to the depth of the
order of coherence length. V3Si ﬁlms were made by sputtering,
and covered with 8 nm of Al, which was then oxidized. Using
Pb counterelectrode, I–V s and their derivatives were measured.
The correct V3Si gap commensurate with the high TC of this
compound was determined. The authors of Ref. 35 concluded that
superconducting gap of V3Si was induced in a thin Al layer by
proximity eﬀect.
Years later, in 1978, at Stanford University, David Moore and
coworkers also studied tunneling into A-15 compounds, including

110
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
V3Si [36]. One of the coauthors of D. F. Moore was J. M. Rowell,
who has spent some time in the Department of Applied Physics at
Stanford. Ref. 36 describes Giaever junctions with 1.6–16 nm-thick
Si overlayer on V3Si. Resulting characteristics of V3Si/Si–oxide–
Pb junctions were improved compared with junctions without Si
overlayer. The authors stated that they were unable to determine
whether oxidized Si provided the whole barrier, or the barrier was
formed by a combination of Si oxide and the native oxide of V3Si
(whatever that native oxide may have been—probably Si oxide as
well?), the latter plugging the pinholes in a silicon layer. I give these
details here to show that it was characteristic of the times to think
that a 2 nm overlayer could not possibly be continuous. D. A. Rudman
and M. R. Beasley additionally studied Nb, Nb–Sn alloy and several
A-15 compounds covered with 2–3 nm of amorphous silicon [37].
They found reduced speciﬁc capacitances in these junctions. In [36,
37] silicon was used as an overlayer, to be oxidized for the formation
of a tunnel barrier. In the work done at Sperry Research, Si was used
as an artiﬁcial barrier. We will talk of this work a little later.
Over the years, after the work of Hauser et al. [35], Al overlayer
technique was employed in a few tunneling gap measurements. For
example, V gap was measured by covering V (which does not by
itself produce a usable native oxide) with 5–7 nm of Al [38], where
the Al overlayer was deposited at a lowered temperature, with the
substrate cooled by liquid nitrogen.
The proximity tunneling study of Nb foils covered with 5–
10 nm of Al is described in detailed experimental and theoretical
papers published in 1979–1980 by E. L. Wolf, J. Zasadzinski,
J. W. Osmun, and G. B. Arnold [39; see also chapters in this
book written by E. L. Wolf, G. B. Arnold, and J. Zasadzinski]. The
experimental study was performed on ultrahigh vacuum-cleaned,
zone-reﬁned, and electro-polished Nb foil covered in high vacuum
with Al overlayer. Oxidized Nb/Al base electrode was then ﬁn-
ished with indium counterelectrode. Measurements included direct
I–V as well as dV /dI vs. V and d2V /dI 2 vs. V . The results were
excellent, resolving problems previously encountered by others
when tunneling into thermally oxidized Nb. Complete coverage of
Nb by Al overlayer (wetting) was conﬁrmed both by tunneling and
by surface Auger analysis. The value of Nb gap found in that study,
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
111
Nb = 1.57 mV, was probably the highest value yet reported. As
described in the E. L. Wolf’s chapter in this book, J. M. Rowell visited
Ames Laboratory in the fall of 1979 and scrutinized the results.
We are now turning to Josephson junctions with Al overlayers.
In 1972, R. B. Laibowitz and A. F. Mayadas of IBM published a
paper [40] in which they described Josephson junctions with the
structure Nb/Al–oxide–Nb, where Al overlayer thickness ranged
from 40 nm to 160 nm. The junction quality was rather poor. We
can estimate Vm = ICR(2 mV) = 2 IC/I(2 mV) ≈3 mV from Fig. 1
of Ref. 40 showing an I–V curve of a nominal Nb/Al(80 nm)–
oxide–Nb junction. There is no doubt that this disappointing result
stopped IBM team from pursuing this line of research further—a
big mistake, in retrospect. The reason Nb/Al–oxide–Nb structure
had such a disappointing debut was probably having to do with
the incorrect way in which it was made into a Josephson junction.
The authors of [40] commented themselves that the edges of Nb
base electrode stripe were poorly, if at all, covered with Al overlayer,
and as a result tunneling probably proceeded through the Nb oxide
formed at the edges, apparently totally dominating the Al oxide
tunneling. It is unclear why this obvious ﬂaw was not corrected. In
reading [40], one gets a feeling that, despite being based on the great
concept, the work was performed poorly, and was unﬁnished and
abandoned. There are features in that paper that do not correspond
to what would be expected from having an Al overlayer 40 to 160 nm
thick. Indeed, our experience with Al overlayers of such considerable
thickness (in our case, Al layers of up to 100 nm were studied
[1]) was that the shape of the tunneling I–V changes dramatically,
reﬂecting proximity eﬀect tunneling in SN–I–S or SN–I–NS structure.
For one thing, one expects to ﬁnd a greatly reduced sum gap 1 +
2 in structures with thick N layers. Yet nothing of the sort was
observed in Ref. 40; the sum gap was 2.72 mV, which is close to the
typical all-Nb junction sum gap at 4.2 K, supporting the view that
what was really studied in [40] was a Nb–oxide–Nb edge junction,
with Al overlayer playing no role whatsoever. The authors did not
measure junction capacitance, which would tell them whether they
are dealing with Nb or Al oxide.
There were two legal disclosures by Laibowitz and Mayadas, both
in IBM Technical Disclosure Bulletin. That bulletin was a conduit

112
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
for ideas IBM wanted to protect but did not feel like spending
time and money patenting. The ﬁrst disclosure [41] preceded the
Applied Physics Letters [40] we just discussed by two years. Another
[42] appeared in that bulletin one year after the APL, in 1973.
These disclosures described similar junction structures: ﬁrst Nb/Al–
oxide–Nb, and then the structure with two Al layers, one covering
Nb base electrode, and another deposited over the oxide formed on
the ﬁrst Al layer, forming a nominally symmetrical Nb/Al–oxide–
Al/Nb structure. Such symmetrical junctions were drawn in [42],
but they have not been actually made. These disclosures, serving
only a legal purpose, contained no more technical information. Still,
it is interesting to realize that R. B. Laibowitz and A. F. Mayadas
envisioned the potential beneﬁts of Nb/Al–oxide–Nb and Nb/Al–
oxide–Al/Nb structures way back in 1970–1973. Should they have
pursued the subject further and fabricated good refractory junctions
in the early 1970s—which was well within their reach—the fate of
the IBM supercomputer project could have been very diﬀerent, at
least in terms of materials (but that would imply—also in terms
of on-chip uniformity and margins, which were so important for
the latching logic based JJ computer). And should we at Bell Labs
have known in 1980 about these disappointing 1972 results with
Al overlayers, we would probably avoid tackling this structure
altogether . . .
Al overlayers were also used in semi-soft Josephson junctions.
For example, J. T. C. Yeh and C. C. Tsuei of IBM, in 1978,
prepared Josephson junctions that had an alloy Nb1−xAlx base
electrode, compositions ranging from Nb79Al21 to Nb65Al35, and
Pb counterelectrode [43]. Their hope was that Al would oxidize
while Nb would not, thus forming a good tunnel barrier with low
dielectric constant. Yet, for some reason, the dielectric constant
was still high. This prompted Yeh and Tsuei to deposit a 2 nm Al
overlayer over the base electrode, which was thermally oxidized,
and then dielectric constant markedly decreased. The quality of the
tunneling I–V also improved. Strangely, while Nb1−xAlx–oxide–Pb
junctions showed decent Josephson current (Fig. 1 in Ref. 43), the
I–V of the Nb1−xAlx/Al(2 nm)–oxide–Pb junction (Fig. 2 in Ref. 43)
does not show any Josephson current. Overall impression from that
short publication is somewhat similar to the one we get reading
www.ebook3000.com

Josephson Junctions in 1980
113
the above-mentioned publications of Laibowitz and Mayadas: great
start, promising direction of research, golden opportunity within
reach . . . and then the work appears unﬁnished and abandoned.
An example of an overlayer deposited over the barrier is
provided in [44], where 0.8–2 nm of Cu was evaporated over the
tunneling oxide, forming Nb–oxide–Cu/Nb junction. This prevented
the formation of super-shorts, but the quality of the I–V was still
very poor.
A. M. Goldman and coworkers used Al overlayers [45] on Nb3Ge;
they deposited 10 nm of Al, most of which was subsequently
ion-milled away, and then oxidized what remained. In 1981, A.
M. Goldman and coworkers [46] prepared semi-soft Nb, Nb3Ge,
ErRh4B4, and Au junctions with rare earth overlayers made of Er and
Lu. This last publication followed our work on Nb/Al junctions, and
so it cannot be considered part of the background.
In some cases, the tunneling oxide was eliminated altogether,
whether native or that of the deposited overlayer, being replaced
with artiﬁcial deposited barrier. In 1973, W. H. Keller and J. E.
Nordman (that same Nordman who made some of the ﬁrst Nb–
oxide–Pb Josephson junctions [31]) made Nb Josephson junctions
with Ge and InSb barriers and Pb counterelectrodes, obtaining good
characteristics [47].
A considerable body of work describes Si artiﬁcial barriers. We
have already referenced Stanford work on A-15s and on Nb that
was published in 1979, the interest there being in measuring the
gaps. Strictly speaking, those junctions should be characterized as
having oxidized overlayers. At approximately the same time, an all-
refractory Nb technology using Si artiﬁcial barriers was coming out
of Sperry Research Center [48]. In that case, the barrier was formed
from hydrogenated Si, which was additionally doped with n- and
p-type impurities. Junction I–V s in that early work coming out of
Sperry were horrible; the Vm from Fig. 2 in [48] is approximately
2 mV, possibly the lowest I have ever seen in a publication. Then,
in 1981, the Sperry group achieved a real breakthrough. They came
up with what is known by the name “the whole wafer process”
[49]. They deposited a blanket Nb–Si:H–Nb sandwich structure
covering the whole wafer; here Si:H designates tunnel barrier made
of hydrogenated silicon 7 nm thick. The deposition system was

114
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
not opened until this structure was completed, which allowed for
a degree of cleanliness and control that was unknown in the old
junction fabrication techniques. All processing that deﬁned tunnel
junctions was done later, and it was done in an ingenious way,
using what they called “selective niobium anodization process”
(SNAP). Controllable anodization of Nb was used to the advantage,
something that could not be done with Pb. The quality of the I–V
curve of a resulting refractory junction was very decent, with Vm ≈
12 mV when Vm was deﬁned as ICR(1.7 mV) [49]; using our standard
deﬁnition, with Vm = ICR(2 mV), the ﬁgure of merit would be about
9 mV. The authors of [48, 49] did not provide speciﬁc capacitance
measurements, but it was clear that a thick Si barrier would have
very low capacitance (and it did, as they showed later).
The idea of the clean whole-wafer deposition with subsequent
patterning was a powerful one, a game changer for the refractory
technology. The ﬁrst Sperry publication describing this idea [49]
more or less coincided with the start of our own work on Nb/Al–
oxide–Nb system in 1981. We took that idea from the Sperry group
and applied it, with some modiﬁcations, to our structure. This was
perhaps the single most important outside inﬂuence that shaped our
own project and made it attractive for technology. I will talk some
more about whole-wafer processing when describing our work.
To summarize, there were three categories of problems encoun-
tered with Nb–oxide–Nb junctions:
(1) Problems that arise because of the messy and complex Nb
oxidation of the base electrode, manifesting itself in the
appearance of excess currents in the gap region and resulting
in reduced quality I–V (low Vm)
(2) Problems that arise because Nb counterelectrode reacts with
the tunneling oxide resulting in both reduced quality I–V and
in the high likelihood of obtaining shorted junctions
(3) Problem with high dielectric constant of native Nb oxide, which
was important for fast Josephson digital circuits
A solution suitable for Josephson integrated circuit technology
would have to address all three problems at once. By 1980, such
a satisfactory all-refractory solution has not been found (although
www.ebook3000.com

Making Semi-soft Tunnel Junctions
115
IBM’s semi-soft Nb–oxide–Pb edge junction technology [13] was
quite acceptable and could serve the JSP project if it continued
beyond 1983). Given what we just described, the good solution
may have been found in 1981, in the work of the Sperry group; it
was also found, as will be described below, in our work on Nb/Al–
oxide–Nb junctions, which have shown the ﬁrst promising results
in 1981.
5.5 Making Semi-soft Tunnel Junctions
I knew about problems with Nb, but I had to start somewhere,
to learn how to make Josephson junctions and how to measure
them. So in 1979 I started by making relatively large Nb–oxide–
Pb0.9Bi0.1 junctions, with 0.2–0.5 mm2 area, making them “by
hand,” with shadow masks, as opposed to making much smaller,
micrometer-scale junctions using lithographic techniques and clean
room processing. Making large junctions “by hand” is conducive
to exploration of new materials and their combinations, compared
with the more rigid and more disciplined lithographic deﬁnition of
micrometer-scale junctions.
The junctions were made in stages. First, 2.5 cm long and
3 mm wide Nb base electrode stripe was deposited through the
shadow mask in the magnetron deposition system I described in
Section 5.2. Then Nb base electrode was exposed for hours or even
days to air or to oxygen to form the tunneling oxide. The ﬁrst
mask was removed, and the edges of the base electrode stripe
were painted with organic insulator (DUCO cement) to prevent
tunneling into these edges, and ﬁnally the sample was covered
with the second, orthogonal shadow mask for counterelectrode
deﬁnition, and several Pb0.9Bi0.1 counterelectrodes (cross stripes)
were evaporated through that second mask in a vacuum evaporator.
We did not want to contaminate Nb system with soft metals, using a
separate evaporator for Pb0.9Bi0.1. From the end of Nb deposition to
the start of the pumping down in the second evaporator system, the
Nb base was exposed to ambient atmospheres: ﬁrst to dry oxygen
that was admitted to the deposition chamber, but then, inevitably,
to room air, which could be very humid, especially during the New

116
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
Jersey summer. I used to say that “tunneling season” in New Jersey
lasts approximately from September to May. The quality of junctions
noticeably decreased in the summer, when humidity was high.
The oxidized Si substrate containing several junctions was
mounted on a low-temperature probe, which was pre-cooled in
liquid nitrogen, and then lowered into a cryostat with liquid He at
4.2 K; one could also pump on He and get the temperature down to
about 1.5 K, making tunneling characteristics a bit sharper than at
4.2 K.
In large junctions, the zero-voltage Josephson current is sup-
pressed; it may be still visible, but it is smaller than the value
predicted by the theory. However, even in large junctions one
can still observe the detailed shape of the normal tunneling
characteristic exhibiting the strong current rise at the sum of the
gaps 1 + 2, and a smaller feature at the gap diﬀerence 1 −2
(see Fig. 2.3 in E. L. Wolf’s Chapter 2).
Like everyone who worked in superconductivity, from the
beginning of my thesis at BNL, I was already “hooked” on observing
the resistive phase transition, when resistance suddenly and
mysteriously drops to zero at TC. Now Josephson junctions added
to it a new thrill of observing on the I–V the perfectly vertical (zero
resistance) Josephson current at zero voltage, and, upon exceeding
the critical current, seeing how the voltage jumps to a ﬁnite 1 +2
value of about 3 mV, where 1 and 2 are the gaps of Nb and
Pb-Bi. I knew that a Nobel Prize was awarded in 1973 to Brian
Josephson for the prediction and the theory of that zero voltage
super-current (see Chapter 1 written by the great man himself),
and to Ivar Giaever, for observing the gap in tunneling. Beyond
prizes, you knew that you are privileged to observe something
incredibly subtle. That zero resistance occurs despite electron pairs
passing through the layer of insulating oxide; that jump from zero-
voltage to ﬁnite-voltage state occurs intrinsically in a time interval
approaching 10−12 seconds; the “normal” tunneling characteristic
appears despite superconductivity in both electrodes, reﬂecting the
shape of the density of states and exhibiting the superconducting
energy gap. Above all, it was exciting to remind yourself that what
you are seeing is pure quantum mechanics in action, as there is no
way to explain any of that classically.
www.ebook3000.com

Making Semi-soft Tunnel Junctions
117
Once I mastered semi-soft Nb–oxide–Pb alloy junctions, the time
came to try something new. The ﬁrst idea that came to mind was to
replace Nb with another decent TC superconductor that would be
strong mechanically and would form a better oxide. It would have to
be a compound or an alloy, as there is no elemental superconductor
with suﬃciently high TC besides Pb and Nb. My collaborator on
that work was Mark Levinson, like myself, newly hired young MTS.
Our choice fell on Zr2Rh, a material with TC = 11.3 K, and, we
hoped, the good and stable ZrO2 oxide. Nobody had made ﬁlms
of Zr2Rh before us, and nobody had tunneled into them, so it
seemed interesting enough. Mark was making the ﬁlms in his diode
sputtering system, where he deposited Zr2Rh onto a substrate held
on a specially made heater, as cold ﬁlms made in my system did not
form the correct crystalline structure and were not superconducting.
The best ﬁlms were prepared at temperatures between 550 and
650◦C (which was bad already—as this temperature is too high
for applications). Then they were oxidized inside the deposition
system in O2 atmosphere, and post annealed, and eventually I
ﬁnished the junctions with the Pb-Bi counterelectrode deposited
in my evaporator. The best tunneling I–V s were obtained when
we capped the Zr2Rh base electrode with Zr overlayer about 1 nm
thick. I do not remember now if this was done before or after the
ﬁrst appearance of Al overlayers—probably after. Even the best
I–V showed a signiﬁcantly reduced gap in Zr2Rh, and the estimated
Vm was low, perhaps about 5 mV. So, overall it was not an exciting
result; the material turned out to be capricious, and even with
considerable care produced poor junctions. That is perhaps why,
while we did most of this work in 1981, we published the results
only in 1983 [50], even though by that time this line of research was
made obsolete by the success of the Nb–Al system.
In 1979–1981, I also made and studied junctions with alloyed
base electrodes hoping to substitute Nb oxide with a better oxide
of the second alloy ingredient (an idea that apparently occurred
approximately at the same time to C. C. Tsuei of IMB [43]). I
made junctions with NbxTa1−x, NbxZr1−x, NbxAl1−x (the same alloy
as in Ref. 43), NbxHf1−x, TaxZr1−x, NbxHf1−x, and NbxTayZr1−x−y,
ﬁnishing all of them with Pb–Bi counterelectrodes. It pains me to say
that nothing came out of this work; the data, some of it quite decent

118
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
and interesting, was not even published. The reason all of this work
was forgotten and abandoned was the success of the Nb/Al system.
5.6 Metallic Superlattices and Tunneling into
Nb/Al
In 1980 along came metallic superlattices. They were at ﬁrst
seemingly unrelated to refractory JJs, but they turned out to lead us
right to them.
It was the time when several researchers started making
stacks of metal layers, so-called metallic superlattices. After all,
semiconductor superlattices such as GaAs/GaAlAs were the great
success at the time (and still are), and “metal people” wanted
their 15 minutes (or more) of fame too. One of the pioneers of
this activity was Ivan Schuller, who made Nb/Cu multilayers [51].
Ivan was very proud of his multilayers, calling them LUCS, which
stood for “layered ultrathin coherent structures” (Ivan thought
that this abbreviation was close enough to the word “luck”). He
and Charlie Falco studied these multilayers electrically, including
superconductivity, and structurally, with X-rays [52], and found that
individual layers were continuous even at the smallest thicknesses
of the order of a few nanometers (hence the word “ultrathin” in
LUCS). This was unexpected, and therefore interesting.
Indeed, in a couple of preceding decades, in the 1960s and 1970s,
thin metal ﬁlms were mostly deposited on insulating substrates,
such as sapphire, or quartz, or silicon, or on semiconductors such
as PbTe. The latter was done by my thesis advisor Myron Strongin,
who researched ultrathin superconducting ﬁlms while looking for
exitonic superconductivity. It was found that inevitably, when the
thickness dropped to a few nanometers (a few atomic layers),
ﬁlms became discontinuous; they formed “islands.” So the fact that
a metal can grow in a continuous manner in a stack, on top of
another metal, was of interest. It was believed that metals growing
on metals “wet” the surface, while metals growing on insulators
and semiconductors do not. That was the general explanation for
those ultrathin continuous layers. Note that metallic superlattices
did not form true epitaxy, but showed instead some coherence, or
www.ebook3000.com

Metallic Superlattices and Tunneling into Nb/Al
119
partial crystallographic reference between the layers (hence the
word “coherent” in LUCS).
So we started doing the same, but with a twist. We wanted to
make superconducting superlattices, then to study their resistivity,e
and to study the evolution of their TC as a function of individual
layer thickness, invoking proximity eﬀect, superlattice eﬀects, etc.,
and, ﬁnally, to tunnel into them, to perhaps ﬁnd superlattice eﬀects
in tunneling.
People initially involved in that were John Rowell, Denis McWhan,
and I. I was making multilayers, Denis provided expert and
sophisticated X-ray analysis and structural modeling [53], and
John was studying multilayers by tunneling. We tried diﬀerent
combinations of elements, starting with Nb/Cu, which had been
already studied by I. Schuller [51]. We also made Mo/Al and Mo/Zr
multilayers, but eventually our interest focused on Nb/Al, the two
superconductors with very diﬀerent TC’s and very diﬀerent gap
values, and one of them, Al, forming a good tunneling oxide.f
A little later John delegated tunneling measurements to Jochen
Geerk, a brilliant experimentalist from the German government lab
at Karlsruhe, who was visiting John’s lab at Bell Labs for a few
months. Jochen, like John, was an expert in tunneling. They both
could use the celebrated W. L. McMillan’s inversion procedure, which
allowed one to interpret tunneling data in terms of Eliashberg
function α2F (ω), and to get from it the coupling parameter λ and
the Coulomb pseudopotential μ*. The inputs from tunneling into the
McMillan–Rowell unfolding procedure [54] were the ﬁrst and the
second derivatives dV /dI and d2V /dI 2 vs. V . This is described in
more detail in E. L. Wolf’s chapter, in the context of doing this for Nb
foils covered with Al.
So, I was making multilayers (superlattices) in my system, with
varying thicknesses of individual layers, and then I was measuring
eI was always interested in resistivity of metals, and in 1986 I published a paper, Phys.
Rev. 34(3), 540, in which I deduced mean free paths in individual layers from the
measurements of the total stack resistivity. I analyzed the data taken on our Nb/Al
multilayers, and the data on Nb/Cu that was generously provided by Ivan Schuller.
fIt is possible—although I do not recall such a discussion—that John Rowell was
interested in Nb/Al system because he saw Nb/Al tunneling results in Edward Wolf’s
group, in Ames, in the fall of 1979, as I have said already.

120
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
their resistivity as a function of temperature between He and
room temperature, and their resistive TC, Denis was modeling their
structure, and John and Jochen, and sometimes I, were tunneling
into these superlattices. The junctions on multilayers were prepared
in a manner I have described above for Nb–oxide–PbBi junctions,
except that John and Jochen ﬁnished their samples with normal
metal Ag counterelectrode, which was the standard practice when
dealing with McMillan–Rowell inversion. While making samples, I
was keeping record of how the stacks were made, and so we knew
the exact number of layers and their order, including which layer
was laid down last; not that we cared about this detail initially.
This project started, I believe, around September or October of
1980. Looking at the old data, I see that I was measuring TC’s and
even doing some tunneling into Nb/Al multilayers in October and
November of 1980.
One day, either at the end of 1980, or perhaps in the ﬁrst days
of January of 1981, John Rowell showed up at the door of my lab
and said to me something like this: “Jochen is tunneling into Nb/Al
superlattices, and he noticed that when the top layer is Nb, tunneling
is lousy as usual; but when the last layer is Al, it is beautiful. So
why don’t you make a thick ﬁlm of Nb and cover it with a thin layer
of Al, and we will tunnel into it.” That was certainly an “eureka”
moment, and the credit for it goes entirely to Jochen and to John,
perhaps especially to John, for quickly making a logical leap from
multilayers to a single Nb ﬁlm. I did just that; on January 7, 1981, I
prepared a sample covering thick Nb ﬁlm (about 300 nm) with 5 nm
of Al. When I made tunneling measurements, I saw the near-perfect
tunneling characteristic, and the cleanest gap that I have ever seen.
Soon afterwards, I made other Nb/Al(dAl)–oxide–PbBi samples, with
dAl ranging from a fraction of nanometer to a few nanometers. It
is tempting to reproduce here a copy of one of those tunneling
I–V traces, which I still keep; in that case Al layer was only 0.72 nm
thick; the sample was measured on January 19, 1981, data taken in
pumped He, at T = 1.7 K.
I also supplied Nb(300 nm)/Al(dAl) base electrodes to John
and Jochen; after 16 hour room-air oxidations, their samples were
ﬁnished with Ag counterelectrodes. Later, in the summer of 1980,
I explored much thicker Al layers as well, being intrigued by the
www.ebook3000.com

Metallic Superlattices and Tunneling into Nb/Al
121
Figure 5.3
Original trace of an I–V of one of the ﬁrst samples with thin
Al overlayers. Here dAl = 0.72 nm, measurement taken at 1.7 K. Nb gap is
1.54 mV, and excess current at 2 mV is only 0.4% of the current at 4 mV.
changes in the tunneling I–V that were clearly associated with
proximity eﬀect.
For a pure Nb ﬁlm, the oxidation rate was so slow that it took
the whole day to obtain a tunnel junction with useful tunneling
resistance. With Al overlayer, the required oxidation time was much
shorter, about half an hour; the high bias (up to about 0.5 V)
behavior of the dynamic resistance dV /dI also changed markedly
[55], exhibiting curvature previously found in pure Al junctions.
This change of the tunneling behavior was already obvious at the
remarkably small Al coverage of 0.18 nm; in other words, the
marked changes were occurring with Al coverage corresponding to
as little as one monolayer [55]. We speculated in [55] that at the
smallest Al thicknesses, the tunneling oxide had to be a mixture of
Al2O3 and Nb2O5. Later surface studies have shown that in fact Nb
oxidation was completely suppressed even in such ultrathin layers
(see Section 5.11).
We presented our tunneling studies of Nb/Al multilayers in
the March Meeting of the American Physical Society [56] and

122
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
submitted a paper describing tunneling into Nb/Al multilayers
and into Nb with Al overlayers to the Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Low Temperature Physics, LT-16, which
took place in August 1981 in Los Angeles; the proceedings were
published in 1982 [57]. Among other results, in that paper, John
and Jochen described tunneling spectroscopy of Nb performed with
dAl up to 4 nm; they performed unfolding of the α2F (ω) and
obtained λ = 0.97 and μ* = 0.15, all without a need to make
corrections associated with proximity eﬀect. In other words, at these
Al thicknesses, none of the metallic unoxidized Al seemed to remain
on the Nb surface, which was a little surprising (see Section 5.10).
Although I obtained ﬁrst excellent tunneling characteristics of
Nb/Al–oxide–Pb junctions, shown in Fig. 5.3, in January 1981, these
I–V curves were not published until the end of that year, the reason
being that John and I were required to ﬁst ﬁle for a patent (see
Section 5.7). Eventually they were published in the Proceedings of
the International Electron Device Meeting in December 1981 [58].
In this paper we included a ﬁgure showing tunneling I–V curves of
Nb/Al–oxide–Pb0.9Bi0.1 junctions with Al overlayer thicknesses, dAl,
ranging from zero (i.e., for the pure Nb base electrode) to 36.4 nm. I
used the same ﬁgure in [1], which was published in 1984. It is rather
informative, so I am also reproducing it here as Fig. 5.4.
As can be seen, there is a fairly large excess current in the pure
Nb base electrode junction, this current starting at about 1.2 mV
and increasing approximately linearly from that voltage to the sum-
gap voltage of about 3.0 mV. It is important to note that there is
no excess current at V < 1.2 mV. As we discussed in Section 5.3,
and as is discussed in a little more detail in Ref. 1, this excess
current should be therefore associated with imperfect layer of Nb
adjacent to the tunnel barrier, rather than with a leaky oxide barrier.
In junctions with Al overlayers, excess currents are signiﬁcantly
suppressed. The Nb gap is much cleaner under the Al overlayer.
What is truly remarkable is that this happens even for dAl as thin
as 0.36 nm (3.6 ˚A), the point that was also stressed in Ref. 55
based on I–V curves at large bias voltages: a single monolayer of
Al strongly modiﬁes the tunnel barrier and cleans up the underlying
Nb, suppressing its messy oxidation. The last two curves in Fig. 5.4
corresponding to dAl of 11 nm and 36.4 nm show strong proximity
www.ebook3000.com

Metallic Superlattices and Tunneling into Nb/Al
123
dAl = 0
dAl = 17.6 Å
dAl = 110 Å
dAl = 364 Å
dAl = 7.2 Å
Current (Arb. units)
Voltage (Millivolts)
0      1       2       3      0       1       2       3      4
dAl = 3.6 Å
Figure 5.4
I–V characteristics of Nb/Al–oxide–Pb0.9Bi0.1 junctions mea-
sured at T = 2 K. Each curve shows ×10 expansion of the current scale.
The junction with dAl = 0 (pure Nb) was oxidized for 4 days; the rest
for 20 minutes. All junctions have areas of approximately 2 × 10−7 m2 =
0.2 mm2 (Scale: 1 ˚A = 0.1 nm).
eﬀect features: the knee structure at Nb+PbBi, the sloping current
upturn, and the reduced but very clean gap.g
gI wanted to make a detailed study of proximity eﬀect tunneling in junctions with
Al overlayers in a wide range of thicknesses, treating both quasiparticle proximity
tunneling (shape of I −V ) and much less studied Josephson proximity tunneling
(reduction of ICRn). Vladimir Kresin, a theorist I knew well, in 1983 published a
paper treating Josephson proximity tunneling, and I used some of his calculations.
He predicted that ICRn would depend on the coupling constant λ in the N layer, which
made this study particularly interesting. I wanted also to interest Gerry Arnold in
participating in this project. At the time, we had unique refractory junctions showing
these eﬀects very clearly (some of them described in Ref. 60). We published a short

124
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
5.7 The Sad Story of Our Patent Application
Prompted by the management (as I recall, it was my lab director
who raised the alarm and prevented us from immediately publishing
good tunneling curves of semi-soft junctions with Al layers), in the
summer to fall months of 1981 John Rowell and I worked on a patent
application. I had not yet made all-refractory junctions. At least that
is how I remember it. We were assigned one of the patent attorneys
from the patent oﬃce at Murray Hill; I forgot his name. We tried
to think of all possible combinations of materials that would make
Josephson junctions with easily oxidizable overlayers. Aluminum
was, of course, at the center of our attention, but we also included
Y, Zr, Ta, and various rare earths. We also legally covered additional
aluminum (or other metal) layer above the tunneling oxide, thinking
that perhaps it will be needed to protect the oxide from interacting
with the hard counterelectrode.
In the process of writing a patent, the attorney performed
the usual patent search, and this search exposed much earlier
publications by Laibowitz and Mayadas [40–42] in which they
described junctions with Nb/Al–oxide–(Al)/Nb structures. As I have
said already, we did not know about that IBM work, and at ﬁrst
were somewhat taken aback. However, upon closer examination, we
saw that Laibowitz and Mayadas used very thick Al layers, their
minimum Al thickness being 40 nm. This of course contrasted with
our thin overlayers. Secondly, we saw that they did not in reality
see tunneling that was assisted by the Al overlayer and Al oxide, as
was discussed in Section 5.3. That last aspect, whether the structure
described in [40] actually worked or did not work, however, would
not be relevant to the legal status of our patent claim. Therefore,
we limited our patent to thin Al overlayers; I think we speciﬁed
dAl < 10 nm, the argument being that thicker layers were
unnecessary and even detrimental to junction quality because of the
proximity eﬀect.
paper (conference proceedings) on Josephson proximity tunneling with Huggins
(I cannot ﬁnd the reference now), but the big paper never materialized. I had to
abandon this project, the reason being, in part, post-September 1983 pressure at
Bell Labs to leave superconductivity altogether. It would have been a beautiful paper.
www.ebook3000.com

Nb/Al Refractory Junctions Are Emerging
125
The fate of that patent was unusual. It was never properly ﬁled
in the US, or if it was ﬁled, the patent attorney later abandoned it.
He looked like an unhappy and nervous fellow; he left his position
at Bell Labs abruptly, sometime in 1982, leaving our patent (and
probably some other patents) unattended. Yet by some miracle it
was ﬁled in Japan; I still do not know how this happened. Some years
later I actually saw our Japanese patent, translated into Japanese, so
I am sure it really existed.
In 1990 or 1991, shortly after I moved from Bell to Stony Brook,
I received a call from a Japanese man named Dr. Goto. He called from
New York, and he wanted to visit me at Stony Brook University, to
talk about my patent. I said yes, please come. So he came from New
York City, and we sat down in my oﬃce. And Dr. Goto said, “I am
working for a company called Seiko, the one that makes watches. Our
company wants to enter the business of Josephson digital circuits,
and so we would like to purchase rights to your Japanese patent
on Nb/Al junctions.” To which I answered, “Dr. Goto, you should
not be talking about this to me, but to AT&T Bell Labs, because
we, as employees of Bell Labs, signed all our legal rights to the
company.” That was the end of that very short conversation. I took
Dr. Goto, who was a very nice man, to lunch, and we parted. When
I described this story to some of my friends, they told me that I
was an idiot. They said that Bell routinely allowed inventors to have
some proﬁt from their patents, and that all I had to do was to contact
the intellectual property people at Murray Hill and to negotiate the
terms. Unfortunately, it was too late. Sometimes I wonder if indeed
John Rowell and I could have got some money out of this if I had
acted more reasonably.
5.8 Nb/Al Refractory Junctions Are Emerging
It became pretty clear that there might be beneﬁts for JJ technology
coming out of these Al overlayers. However, it was not obvious that
one can get rid of a soft counterelectrode. We counted on that,
and in the patent, we of course included Nb counterelectrode, but
there was no experimental proof of that, nor was it known how
to approach the problem of geometrically deﬁning such refractory

126
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
junctions. So here came a moment when I could ﬁnally do what I
was hired to do: I decided to replace the soft counterelectrode with
Nb, to make a refractory Nb/Al–oxide–(Al)/Nb junction. While John
Rowell, Ted Fulton, and others were supportive of this, it was no
longer John’s ﬁrst priority, and all the subsequent work on refractory
technology was done essentially without his participation (see also
Section 5.12).
The ﬁrst demonstration that this actually works, that the Nb
counterelectrode no longer shorts the junction, I obtained with large
“hand-made” JJs. I made these junctions sometime in the fall of
1981. To replace Pb–Bi with Nb counterelectrode, I had to develop
a completely new procedure: indeed, DUCO cement insulation was
no longer viable, as it would not survive the second Nb electrode
deposition. Nevertheless, the junction area had to be deﬁned away
from the edges. We always covered the edges with insulators to avoid
tunneling into potentially inferior material. This was especially
important now, when a ﬁlm of Nb was deposited and then covered
with a thin layer of Al via sequential depositions through the same
shadow mask. Clearly, the tapering edges of such a structure would
likely have a problem with Al coverage. I do not recall now whether
I knew then about the problems encountered by Laibowitz and
Mayadas in Ref. 40—the problems which were the direct result of
ignoring this edge exclusion rule. But how to deﬁne the junction
area? I designed a system of three shadow masks shown in Fig. 2 of
Ref. 1. The aim of these masks was to provide Ge insulation coverage
over everything but the small square area in the middle of Nb/Al
base electrode. Finally, the junction was ﬁnished with the deposition
of Nb counterelectrode over that square. The results were most
encouraging: junctions were not shorted, with very decent I–V
curves (being large junctions, they did not show full Josephson
current, so Vm could not be measured; assuming normal values of
ICRn ≈1.85 mV, the Vm at 4.2 K could be estimated as ∼20 mV). One
such I–V curve, measured at 1.55 K, is shown in Fig. 5.5.
The I–V shown here was measured in November 1981, yet I
published it only in 1984, because at the end of 1981 we already
made the ﬁrst small junctions deﬁned by lithography, and my
“large” Ge-protected junctions, having served their role as a proof of
principal, were put aside in favor of the technologically interesting
www.ebook3000.com

The Whole-Wafer Process
127
Current (Arb. units)
Voltage (mV)
Current  × 20
0                               1                                2                               3                                4
T = 1.55 K
Δ2
Δ1
Figure 5.5
Tunneling I–V curve of one of the ﬁrst all-refractory junctions
with two Al overlayers, Nb/Al(2.5 nm)–oxide–Al(2.5 nm)/Nb, junction area
deﬁned with Ge insulator depositions through the system of shadow masks
described in Ref. 1. The I–V was measured at 1.55 K; the base and
counterelectrode gaps are 1 = 1.53 ± 0.03 mV and 2 = 1.32 ± 0.03 mV.
ones. The all-refractory curves published at the very end of 1981
[58] were obtained on 20 × 20 μm2 junctions.
5.9 The Whole-Wafer Process: SNEP-SNAP
Once I was convinced that Al oxide survives the second Nb
deposition, and that I–V quality is reasonably good, the next step
was to make it into a real technology, to deﬁne small junctions
lithographically, and to develop a process for laying out junctions
and their connections on a chip. My collaborators at that stage
became my assistant Harold Huggins, who was very helpful in

128
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
working out the process details, and Morris Washington, who was
hired almost simultaneously with me to our department and was
previously involved with making Josephson Pb alloy circuits. Morris
was also helping to develop process details, and he was skilled
in doing photolithography in a clean room. As I said at the end
of Section 5.3, we were strongly inﬂuenced by the work of Harry
Kroger and his group at Sperry Research. We were convinced that
the way to go with our Nb/Al junctions was the whole wafer process,
in part because of the cleanliness and control it oﬀered, and in
part because Nb could be very nicely anodized. Our initial whole-
wafer activity was similar to Sperry: we deﬁned junctions by placing
photoresist pads over the areas where they will eventually appear,
and anodized the unprotected areas of the Nb/Al–oxide–(Al)/Nb
wafer through the Al oxide, but not all the way through the base
electrode. Upon the removal of the photoresist this produced small
islands (future junctions) sticking out of the Nb oxide sea produced
during anodization. Then we cleaned the top surfaces of these
junction islands by RF sputtering or ion milling, and deposited Nb
connections to the individual junctions.
At this time—it must have been some time in 1982—we
decided to modify the Sperry process, in order to move away from
deﬁning junctions with wet anodization, which in SNAP had to
be done to a considerable depth. Thick anodic oxide was swelling
in all directions, undercutting the junction area, making junction
deﬁnition less precise. We wanted to deﬁne junctions by dry plasma
etching instead.
The reader may remember how I described in Section 5.1 the
ready availability at Bell Labs of great experts in every aspect of
experiment or technology. This was one such instant. I asked my
friend Nadia Lifshitz, and she immediately directed me to an expert
in plasma etching who worked in her lab. To my shame, I cannot
recall the name of the plasma-etching expert we consulted with.
What is worse, I failed to thank him in our subsequent publications
for his valuable advice. The advice was indeed valuable: we were told
that Nb can be very nicely etched in the atmosphere of CF4. What
is more, when we explained that our structure contains an Al oxide
layer, the expert said, “That is great, because Al oxide will act as a
very eﬀective etch stop; CF4 does not etch Al2O3.” We said, “But the
www.ebook3000.com

The Whole-Wafer Process
129
Photoresist
Plasma Etching
R. F. Sputtering
Anodic Oxide
Nb Contact
Nb2
Nb2
Nb2
Nb2
Nb1
AlxOy
Nb1
Nb1
Nb1
Figure 5.6
SNEP-SNAP process [1, 59]. R. F. sputtering operation is
optional, as formation of a second junction at that surface is unlikely.
thickness of that Al2O3 is exceedingly small; it is a tunneling oxide
only about 1 nm thick.” No matter, said the expert, plasma etching
in CF4 will stop dead at that oxide layer. And it did! This was an
unexpected gift, which made worrying about the right etching depth
unnecessary, as stopping was automatic, just at the right depth, as
soon as the top electrode was removed.
We still needed to perform an anodization, to create an insulating
layer around the junction; however, this layer could be much
thinner than the original anodization layer in SNAP; it presented
no problems in terms of junction deﬁnition. We called the resulting
selective niobium etching and anodization process SNEP-SNAP (I
was of course thinking of a somewhat obscure expression “snip-
snap,” which means “quick, short, sharp, or smart” according to
the dictionary). The SNEP-SNAP process is schematically shown in
Fig. 5.6.
I want to show only one tunneling I–V of a typical good junction
made by SNEP-SNAP; it has Vm = 48 mV at 4.2 K, which is very
close to the theoretical Vm of an ideal BCS junction. After 1983, such
I–V s could be found in many papers, but to us, at the time (probably

130
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
at the end of 1982, beginning of 1983) they still looked amazingly
beautiful:
Figure 5.7
I–V measured at 4.2 K; junction size 10 μm × 10 μm;
layer structure: Nb(300 nm)/Al(5 nm)–oxide–Nb(300 nm); critical current
density jc = 480 A/cm2; Vm = 48 mV.
Christopher Marlowe’s Doctor Faustus, when seeing (I believe, in
Heaven) the Helen of Troy, says, “Was this the face that launched
a thousand ships . . .?” Well, then, this is the trace that launched a
thousand chips.
In September 1982, we submitted, with M. A. Washington and
H. A. Huggins, the paper [59] that was published in March 1983
and was later quoted more than any other of our papers. In it we
summarized the SNEP-SNAP process and described Nb/Al–oxide–
Nb and Nb/Al–oxide–Al/Nb junctions, dAl = (5 ± 0.5) nm, junction
sizes 10 μm × 10 μm and 20 μm × 20 μm, critical current densities
from 600 A/cm2 to 1300 A/cm2, and Vm from 15 mV to 35 mV
(up to 260 mV at 2.0 K). Higher values of Vm were associated with
symmetrical junction structures. The tunnel barrier was formed by
in situ oxidation in the deposition system in 1 Torr of pure oxygen
for 1–2 hours. We provided in [59] some of the details of SNEP,
including our experience with Al oxide as a very eﬀective etch stop
(so that was the paper in which we should have acknowledged
www.ebook3000.com

The Whole-Wafer Process
131
and thanked that plasma-etching expert). The base electrode gap
ranged between 1.50 mV and 1.55 mV; that of the counterelectrode,
between 1.25 mV and 1.45 mV. ICRn product (the characteristic of
the size of the critical current; see also E. L. Wolf’s chapter) was
found to be 1.71 ± 0.06 mV in junctions with single Al layer and
1.49 ± 0.06 mV in junctions with two Al layers, which was 20–
25% lower than the theoretical weak-coupling value; most of this
lowering could be ascribed to strong coupling in Nb. We stated in
[59] that IC vs. magnetic ﬁeld B (the “diﬀraction pattern”) had an
ideal theoretical shape, indicating perfect uniformity of the critical
current over the area of a junction. From that pattern we determined
the value of the magnetic penetration length in Nb, λ = (120 ±
20) nm, which was slightly larger than the literature Nb value of
(86 ± 5) nm. Measuring Fiske steps and using both these values of
λ, we determined junction capacitance per unit area C/A = (0.06
± 0.02) pF/μm2, which should be compared to the pure-Nb value
of 0.14 pF/μm2 [13]. If we assumed the normal Al2O3 dielectric
constant ε = 8, this gave us barrier oxide thickness in the range
of 0.88 nm to 1.68 nm, which was most reasonable and consistent
with independent estimates from tunneling [55] and from surface
studies. We also commented on junction stability: storage of some of
the junctions for a full year and several room temperature to 4.2 K
cycles produced no detectable changes in the I–V s, and, what was
very important for applications, the structures survived baking of
the photoresist at 150◦C for 30 minutes. In other words, we showed
that all the problems with Nb junctions that we cited in Section 5.3
were now resolved.
This APL [59] came out in March 1983, and ﬁve months later, in
September, when I arrived at Fallen Leaf Lake (near Lake Tahoe in
California), to the Josephson meeting organized, I believe, by IBM, I
saw the “long faces” of my friends and colleagues and learned that
IBM had just announced that they were closing the supercomputer
project. I brought my beautiful new results to a funeral.
Over a year later, in July 1984, Harold Huggins and I submitted
another good paper [60], which was also much quoted. Hinting
at the recent closing of the IBM project, and in view of Japanese
activity in the ﬁeld, particularly using our new Nb/Al junctions, I
opened that paper with the phrase, “Whether or not all-refractory

132
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
Josephson tunnel junctions will serve as switching elements in
future (Japanese) supercomputers, they are of considerable inter-
est . . .,” etc. In [60] we reported the much-improved yield of good
junctions and good junction parameters reproducibility from run to
run. The single most important step leading to this improvement
was heat sinking of the substrates to the water-cooled table in
the deposition system—that is when my insistence of building a
system with such a table paid oﬀ. Heat sinking to the table was done
with thermal grease under the substrate and indium foil under the
sample holder. I checked that small pieces of gallium, which melts
at 26◦C, did not melt when placed on the heat-sunk substrate. We
even stopped using oxidized silicon chips for substrates, believing
that stripping SiO2 and using pure Si substrates further improved
thermal contact between the growing structure and the table.
Single-overlayer junctions were now as good as double-overlayer
(symmetrical) ones; our Vm values ranged from 25 to 56 mV (!) at
4.2 K. In other words, the best junctions showed essentially ideal
BCS characteristics. And, as all happy families, they were now alike.
We also studied evolution of junction I–V s and of critical currents
in the range of Al thicknesses, dAl, from 5 to 200 nm (that is when
we obtained good proximity junctions that were mentioned above).
Tunnel barrier was formed in situ in the deposition chamber, with
table and the substrate held at approximately 15◦C because of the
water-cooling. The time of oxidation was always 10 minutes. The
only parameter controlling the thickness of the tunneling oxide (and
thus the critical current) was O2 pressure, which was varied from
0.01 to 1 Torr, i.e., by a factor of 100. The corresponding critical
current density varied from 4 × 104 to 103 A/cm2, i.e., by a factor
of 40. Note that way back in 1984 we were already making JJs
with fairly high critical current densities of 40 kA/ cm2. Later Alan
Kleinsasser with his coworkers at IBM was able to push current
densities in Nb/Al junctions to 400 kA/cm2 [61].
While performing anodization of Nb, Harold Huggins monitored
anodization voltage. One day he showed me a feature on the
voltage vs. time trace that presumably indicated the instant when
anodization proﬁle was crossing the Al oxide and the remaining
Al metal in the middle of the junction structure. We improved
resolution of this feature by measuring dV /dt vs. t, and found that
www.ebook3000.com

Uniformity, Stability, and Cycling
133
we can even clearly see the diﬀerence in the sharpness of that
feature between the case of a substrate being heat-sunk or not
being heat-sunk to the water-cooled table. We saw that we have
a new spectroscopic tool, very simple and easy to use. We called
it “anodization spectroscopy” (we even said in the paper “poor
man’s anodization spectroscopy”) [60]. It was later explored by
many, including measurements of anodization proﬁles of metallic
superlattices; I cannot give detailed references on this interesting
subject here.
5.10 Uniformity, Stability, and Cycling
At ﬁrst we made chips with 8 junctions. On the basis of our
experience with such samples, we mentioned preliminary results
in terms of junction uniformity, reproducibility, and stability in
our papers [59, 60]. However, serious testing of these properties
requires making large arrays of identical junctions and their batch
measurements. This we did with Morris Washington and John Gates,
a young MTS from Area 52, who actually came to me and proposed
that study. This was done in 1983, results appearing in print in 1984
[62]. The structure consisted of 15 series arrays of 50 junctions each;
a single junction was included with each array for an individual
measurement. The I–V s were recorded using computerized test
station developed by John Gates. The chips were subjected to 4900
thermal cycles between room temperature and 6 K, to storage at
room temperature for two months, and ﬁnally to prolonged heating
(annealing) performed in stages, with temperature held for 2 to 4
hours ﬁrst at 100◦C, then at 150◦C, then at 200◦C, then at 225◦C,
then at 250◦C, and ﬁnally at 275◦C. The overall results of this
study were excellent. They were not only incomparably better than
for Pb junctions, but also much better than the known results for
Nb–oxide–Nb junctions [25], showing that the advantage, at least
in part, resided in Al oxide rather than in the strength of the
Nb electrode alone. It was interesting that junctions annealed at
temperatures up to 250◦C were stabilizing at a reduced value of the
critical current, this reduction of IC reaching –20% at 250◦C. The
amazing thing was that this decrease of the critical current was not

134
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
accompanied by increased spread of IC values among the junctions.
In addition, despite this uniform decrease of critical current in all of
the junctions subjected to annealing, the quality of I–V s (Vm) was
remarkably unchanging. This was so for temperatures up to 250◦C.
However, at 275◦C, the critical current kept decreasing without
showing a tendency to stabilize; this temperature was apparently
over the threshold of a run-away behavior. We speculated that at
this temperature oxygen was continually diﬀusing through the Nb
towards the barrier. This indicated the limits for future thermal
processing of such junctions. Our Nb/Al junctions were remarkably
resilient.
5.11 Combination of Tunneling and Surface
Studies; Wetting and Al Disappearance;
Junctions with Y, Mg, and Er
Nb junction problems were evident in tunneling I–V curves, and
surface studies of Nb oxidation [26] helped to understand the
physical causes of these problems. Likewise, surface studies of
Nb covered with Al overlayers contributed to a more detailed
understanding of how these problems were resolved, illuminating
some peculiarities that would remain a mystery if not for those
surface studies.
Our success with Nb/Al junctions attracted the attention of Bell
Labs experts in ﬁelds other than superconductivity and tunneling.
Raynien (J.) Kwo, a young Bell Labs colleague, easily convinced me
that we can beneﬁt from X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS)
study of our Nb/Al structures, and she further engaged in that study
an expert in XPS, G. K. Wertheim.
There were two puzzling aspects of tunneling into Nb/Al: one
had to do with junction resistance, another with proximity eﬀect.
If we ﬁxed the way base electrode was oxidized (e.g., in air) and
the time of oxidation (e.g., 30 minutes), and if we used the same
counterelectrode material (Pb0.9Bi0.1), then the only remaining
parameter that inﬂuenced junction resistance per unit area was the
thickness of Al overlayer, dAl. Theoretically, if Al indeed completely
wetted the Nb surface and stayed at that surface, one would expect
www.ebook3000.com

Combination of Tunneling and Surface Studies
135
junction resistance vs. dAl to quickly saturate and remain constant.
The threshold value of dAl above which junction resistance is not
expected to change could be 1 nm, or perhaps 1.5 nm, but not much
greater, this threshold corresponding to the thickness of Al overlayer
such that all of it converted into Al2O3. Instead, junction resistance
saturated only above dAl = 8 nm [Ref. 1, Fig. 10; also see Ref. 55].
This was puzzling.
The second mystery had to do with expected I–V modiﬁcations
at greater dAl: we would expect to see familiar features associated
with proximity eﬀect with metallic Al once dAl exceeded the said
threshold value and some metallic Al have remained on the surface
of Nb. And again, instead of 1–1.5 nm, the threshold was observed
at about 10 nm; there was no visible proximity eﬀect at lower Al
thicknesses. This suggested that there was a lot less Al on the surface
than what would be expected. But where did excess unoxidized
metallic Al go?
These issues have been illuminated in XPS studies and accom-
panying near-surface structure modeling [1, 63], which indicated
that for thicker nominal Al layers, substantial amount of Al was
indeed missing from the surface. For example, in a sample with
dAl = 11.2 nm, about 9.6 nm of metallic Al was missing. The only
reasonable assumption was that Al wetted all of the surfaces, not
only the geometrical ﬂat Nb ﬁlm surface, but also internal surfaces
of Nb grains. Our Nb ﬁlms had ∼10 nm size grains; we assumed
that Al diﬀused down these grain boundaries, soaking into the
depth of the 300 nm thick Nb base electrode. Thus, Nb–Al geometry
was a lot more complicated than the simple layered structure we
had envisioned before the XPS study. Raynien Kwo found a nice
justiﬁcation for this behavior in the theory of surface segregation in
binary alloys [64], which, when applied to the Nb–Al system, indeed
predicted Al segregation to the surface, which we took as another
way of stating that Al will wet all available Nb surfaces, including
grain boundary surfaces. An elegant demonstration that this was
indeed the case was obtained by preparing a Nb ﬁlm at 650◦C, this
ﬁlm having three times larger grains than the ﬁlms prepared in my
system at room temperature. In that case, when covered with Al, a lot
less Al was missing from the geometrical surface [63]. In the study

136
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
by E. L. Wolf et al. on recrystallized Nb foils [39], grains were so large
(about 1 mm) that none of the Al was apparently missing.
This ﬁnding of the rapid grain boundary diﬀusion was making
our system a bit less predictable, less well deﬁned, at least in terms
of the layer geometry. At the time, we span the story presenting
it to be favorable to technology: we were saying that this eﬀect
relaxed requirements for the Al layer thickness control [63], which
was true too. Later, when we realized the beneﬁts of preparing
junctions at a ﬁxed cold water temperature of about 15◦C [60], we
revisited the surface study and found that grain boundary diﬀusion
of Al was greatly reduced in such junctions [1]. The temperature
during the Nb deposition onto freely placed substrates could rise
to about 200◦C, while in heat-sunk substrates it was close to 15◦C.
It was unlikely that Nb grain size would strongly depend on this
modest temperature diﬀerence, suggesting that apparently the Al
diﬀusion process itself was thermally activated: we speculated that
Al diﬀusion down the grain boundaries was slow at 15◦C, and much
faster at about 200◦C.
Later, in 1986, I teamed up with another group of surface
scientists, this time using Auger electron spectroscopy, transmission
electron spectroscopy, and scanning electron microscopy as tools.
The paper that we have written [65] attempted to contrast the two
pictures corresponding to “warm” and “cold” samples. The results
contradicted some of the conclusions we reached earlier on the basis
of XPS [1, 63]. Yet I do not have a complete trust in the conclusions
of [65], as some of them appeared convoluted and not entirely self-
consistent.
About a year later, the same team that studied XPS explored
other reactive overlayers: Mg, Y, and Er [1, 66]. By that time, Alan
Goldman and coworkers have also reported their study of erbium
overlayers [46]. We found that Mg and Y were very similar to Al: they
completely wetted Nb, and they also performed the “disappearing
act,” leaving little on the geometrical surface. Er was diﬀerent: it
allowed some Nb oxide to grow together with Er oxide; apparently
it did not completely wet the Nb surface. The best junctions were
with Y: they had the smallest excess current, marginally exceeding in
I–V quality the Al and Mg results, and they exhibited the largest Nb
gap of 1.57 mV [66], the same gap value that has been seen by Wolf
www.ebook3000.com

Questions of Credit
137
and coworkers [39]. I never tried to make hard junctions with Nb
counterelectrode using Y overlayer, one reason being that yttrium
oxide has high dielectric constant, and such junctions would be of
less interest to Josephson technology than the Nb/Al ones. They may
be of interest for other applications of Josephson junctions; I do not
know if they were ever made.
5.12 Questions of Credit
As I said, John Rowell was quick to recognize that improved
tunneling into the last Al layer in Nb/Al superlattice identiﬁed by
Jochen Geerk implied new vistas for Nb tunnel junctions. Then
he and I were working on a patent application, listing in it all
kinds of possible counterelectrodes, including the hard ones, and
including an obvious choice of a second Nb. But none of that has
been yet shown to work; all-refractory junctions with Al overlayers
have not been made yet. Towards the end of 1981, John Rowell,
satisﬁed with the resolution of long-standing problems with Nb
tunneling, was no longer participating in the development of all-
refractory technology. As I said above, publication of excellent
I–V s of Nb/Al–oxide–Pb0.9Bi0.1 junctions was delayed due to a legal
requirement of not putting the information into the public domain
before the ﬁling of Gurvitch–Rowell patent. The paper in which we
were ﬁnally permitted to publish these I–V s appeared at the very
end of 1981 [58]. In that paper I also included the ﬁrst I–V curves
of Nb/Al–oxide–(Al)/Nb junctions that were prepared with the Nb
anodization process (SNAP), as was described in Section 5.8. Even
though John was not involved with all-refractory junction work, it
was natural to include him as a coauthor in that paper because of
the semi-soft junction data that was appearing there for the ﬁrst
time. In subsequent all-refractory papers [59, 60], which contained
development of a SNEP-SNAP process and showed beautiful I–V s of
lithographically deﬁned junctions of interest to technology, John did
not participate at all, and his name was not in the lists of authors.h
hThere was one more publication describing all-refractory technology, the paper
published in IEEE Transactions on Magnetics MAG-19, No. 3, May 1983 (submitted

138
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
That is why I was surprised and saddened to read John’s version
of the story in Supercurrents [67], written by him 10 years later, in
1991, when I was already at Stony Brook and he also was no longer
at Bell, having just left his high position at Bellcore to become a
president of Conductus, Inc. In that article in Supercurrents, John
describes his whole carrier in physics. Among his achievements
he presents the story of the Nb/Al:Al2O3/Nb trilayers (on p. 13).
He talks about Nb/Al multilayer tunneling (without mentioning my
name), and how Jochen told him about good tunneling when Al was
the last layer, and he immediately realized that this was the solution
for the Nb technology. Then he mentions my name for the ﬁrst time
and he says (I quote): “Mike Gurvitch had an ideal deposition system
for Nb/Al:Al2O3/Nb studies; he and Morris Washington fabricated
ﬁne Josephson junctions.”
I think it should be clear from what I said above that my role was
a bit more signiﬁcant than to have an ideal deposition system for the
job. I was told that this article in Supercurrents is not the only one in
which John pointed to the development of refractory Nb technology as
one of the highlights of his career, suggesting that it was essentially
his achievement. John’s reputation in superconductivity is rightfully
very high. His contribution to the inception of Nb/Al technology
with soft counterelectrodes is most signiﬁcant and undisputed, as
I think I described above honestly and precisely. Results obtained
on semi-soft junctions with Al overlayers paved the way for the
development of the refractory technology. However, John did not
actually develop that all-refractory Nb/Al technology (the only one
of interest to the industry, I might add). As was described above in
some detail, I initiated this stage of the work, single-handedly made
the ﬁrst “large” refractory junctions, and then, with Washington and
Huggins, developed SNEP-SNAP process for small, lithographically
deﬁned junctions. Here, I said it, and I do not wish to dwell on this
any longer.
Nov. 30, 1982). That paper was essentially identical in its content to our ref. 59; it
was written for the conference proceedings. In it, I included J. M. Rowell in the list of
authors one more time, just out of respect. I remember very well how I brought an
internal Bell Labs memo (which preceded all outside publications) to John’s oﬃce
for his signature, and how he said to me, signing the memo, “Mike, you ought to stop
putting my name on these papers with which I had nothing to do.”
www.ebook3000.com

Who Did What, Where, and When
139
5.13 Who Did What, Where, and When
The emergence of refractory Nb/Al JJ technology had many roots
and involved, as we said above, many contributions from inside and
outside of Bell Labs. Let me summarize these contributions, as I see
them.
• General knowledge that oxidized Al forms good tunnel junc-
tions. Here there were numerous contributions; by 1980 and
for 20 years prior to that, it was common knowledge in the
ﬁeld. The ﬁrst to make Al tunnel junction for tunneling into a
superconductor was I. Giaever in 1960 [24].
• Quality Nb ﬁlms made by sputtering; good, stable semi-soft
junctions with Nb base electrode: common knowledge by 1980;
I listed some of the contributions in Section 5.3.
• Early attempts at making junctions with Nb counterelectrode;
work of Broom, Laibowitz, and their coworkers on Nb–oxide–Nb
junctions at IBM [25]. Perhaps this activity can be qualiﬁed as
deﬁning the problem rather than resolving it; still, it formed an
essential background. I should also mention here the early work
of Laibowitz and Mayadas [40–42], which can be summarized
as “bad junctions, right structures.” As I said repeatedly, we did
not know of that work until we wrote our patent with J. M.
Rowell. Still, it preceded our work by 10 years and should not
be forgotten.
• E. L. Wolf, J. Zasadzinski, J. W. Osmun, and G. B. Arnold:
Nb tunneling spectroscopy [39] demonstrating good tunneling
into Nb foils with thin Al overlayers, which were shown to
completely wet Nb surface. This work could inﬂuence J. M.
Rowell to pick the Nb/Al system for multilayered tunneling
studies; if so, through him it inﬂuenced all of us working on
refractory junctions at Bell.
• I. K. Schuller, C. M. Falco [51, 52], our own work [53]: metallic
multilayers demonstrating ability of metals to cover other
metals in very thin continuous layers.
• J. M. Rowell, J. Geerk, and M. Gurvitch: junctions with soft
second electrode; very good tunneling results (I–V s published
later), barrier looking like Al oxide for very small thicknesses
of Al overlayer [55]; resolution of problems with Nb tunneling

140
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
spectroscopy [56, 57], similar to what was found in [39], but
with thinner Al overlayers.
• M.
Gurvitch:
ﬁrst
Nb/Al-oxide–(Al)/Nb
“hand-made”
all-
refractory junctions with Ge insulation; ﬁrst decent all-
refractory I–V s; existence proof for Nb/Al/Nb trilayers without
which we would not venture into a lithographically deﬁned
junction process. Although done in 1981, before any SNAP work,
this work was ﬁrst described in print in 1984, in Ref. 1.
• Kroger and coworkers at Sperry Research [49]: all-wafer
process for all-refractory junctions with amorphous Si barriers;
use of Nb anodization (SNAP)—this work showed us the way of
all-wafer processing for Nb/Al; in that it was very important.
• M. Gurvitch, H. A. Huggins, and M. A. Washington [59, 60]:
modiﬁcation of Sperry all-wafer process for our all-refractory
junctions with Al; SNEP-SNAP; excellent quality junctions; gas
phase CF4 etching of Nb, Al oxide (tunnel barrier) as a stop etch;
anodization spectroscopy.
• J. V. Gates, M. A. Washington, and M. Gurvitch [62]: early testing
of junction arrays for uniformity, cycling stability, stability in
aging, and stability at elevated temperatures.
• J. Kwo, M. Gurvitch, and others [1, 63, 65, 66]: XPS and other
surface studies that helped to clarify some of the mysteries of
Nb/Al structures. Demonstration that other reactive metals can
also form useful overlayers on Nb.
Others did much since then: thousands of Josephson circuits;
thousands of papers; diverse applications such as very fast A/D
converters; the voltage standard based on Josephson junctions (over
105 Nb/Al/Nb junctions in a 10 V standard, see Chapter 10 written
by J. Kohlmann); SQUIDs, including biomagnetic applications in
heart and brain diagnostics and in disease localization; SIS mixers
used in sub-millimeter wavelength radio astronomy; Josephson
processors (currently up to 105 JJs); quantum computing. Much
work went into process improvements: high current density
junctions (we quoted [61]), low current density junctions, sub-
micrometer junctions, excellent uniformity and reproducibility.
Sergey Tolpygo and coworkers at MIT Lincoln Lab developed
a 10-layer process based on Nb/Al/Nb sandwich (JJ) structure
www.ebook3000.com

References
141
uniformly covering 8′′ (200 mm) Si wafers, with down to 200 nm
circuit features, including junctions, circuits deﬁned using 248 nm
(deep UV) lithography [68]. According to [68], VLSI JJ densities
with over 106 junctions per cm2 are within reach. Impressive
Nb/Al processes were also developed in other foundries in the
USA (Hypres, TRW), in Japan (ISTEC), and in Europe (FLUXONICS
foundry).
In the years following 1983, people in the ﬁeld referenced our
papers [mostly ref. 59 and 60], citation indexes running in the many
hundreds. In more recent publications (e.g., in Ref. 68), our initial
work is no longer remembered, the authors referencing more recent
versions of the technological processes. Perhaps this is also a sign
of recognition, and of maturity, inevitable in a ﬁeld which is now
33 years old, and which is healthy and still developing.
I admire the work done by others on the Nb/Al system, and the
work that led to using these junctions in various applications, but
this chapter is already too long as it is. Activity outside of Bell was
ﬁrst directed at reproducing our results, then at incorporating them
in large integrated circuits. It started shortly after the appearance
of our ﬁrst Nb/Al publications, and it seems to continue to this day.
Wonderful work on the Nb/Al system has been done in the USA, in
England, in France, in Germany, in Holland, in Sweden, in Ukraine,
in Japan—probably especially in Japan. I am sure I missed some of
the countries and some of the interesting applications. The reader
will ﬁnd many of the activities and applications having to do with
refractory junction technology described in other chapters of this
book.
References
1. Gurvitch, M., and Kwo, J. (1984). Tunneling and surface properties of
oxidized metal overlayers on Nb, in Advances in Cryogenic Engineering,
eds. Clarks, A. F., and Reed, R. P. (Plenum Publishing Corporation), 30,
pp. 509–533.
2. Josephson, B. D. (1962). Possible new eﬀects in superconductive
tunneling. Phys. Lett., 1, 251; also see Chapter 1 in this book.
3. Anderson, P. W., and Rowell, J. M. (1963). Phys. Rev. Lett., 10, 230; also
Rowell, J. M. (1963). Phys. Rev. Lett., 11, 200.

142
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
4. Rowell, J. M. (1966). Supercurrent tunneling devices. U.S. Pat. No.
3,281,609 (ﬁled in 1964 and granted in 1966).
5. Matisoo, J. (1966). Subnanosecond pair-tunneling to single-particle
tunneling transitions in Josephson junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett., 9, 167.
6. Dhong, S. H., and Van Duzer, T. (1980). Minimum width control-current
pulse for Josephson logic gates. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 27(10),
1965; McDonald, D. G., Peterson, R. L., Hamilton, C. A., Harris, R. E.,
and Kautz, R. L. (1980). Picosecond applications of Josephson junctions.
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-27, 1945.
7. Matisoo, J. (1967). Proc. IEEE (Lett.), 55, 2052; also, in Proc. IEEE, 55,
172.
8. Anacker, W., (1980). Josephson computer technology: an IBM research
project. IBM J. Res. Dev., 24(2), 107.
9. Matisoo, J. (1980). Overview of Josephson technology logic and memory.
IBM J. Res. Dev., 24(2), 113; also, The superconducting computer. Sci.
Am., 242(5), 50–65.
10. Ames, I. (1980). An overview of materials and process aspects of
Josephson integrated circuit fabrication. IBM J. Res. Dev., 24(2), 188–
194.
11. Gheewala, T. R. (1980). Design of 2.5-micrometer Josephson current
injection logic. IBM J. Res. Dev., 24(2), 130.
12. Gallagher, W. J., Harris, E. P., and Ketchen, M. B. (2012). IEEE/CSC & ESAS
European Superconductivity News Forum, No. 21.
13. Broom, R. F., Oosenbrug, A., and Walter, W. (1980). Josephson junctions
of small area formed on the edges of niobium ﬁlms. Appl. Phys. Lett., 37,
237; also Broom, R. F., Raider, S. I., Oosenbrug, A., Drake, R. E., and Walter,
W. (1980). Niobium oxide-barrier tunnel junction. IEEE Trans. Electron.
Devices, ED-27, 1998.
14. Fulton, T. A., and Dynes, R. C. (1971). Switching to zero voltage in
Josephson tunnel junctions. Solid-State Commun., 9, 1069.
15. Jewett, R. E., and Van Duzer, T. (1981). Low-probability punchthrough
in Josephson junctions. IEEE Trans. Magn., 17, 599; Harris, E. P., and
Chang, W. H. (1981). Punchthrough in Josephson logic devices. IEEE
Trans. Magn., 17, 603.
16. Kotani, S., Fujimaki, N., Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1988). A Josephson
4b microprocessor. Digest of Tech. Papers of 1988 Int. Solid-State
Circuit Conf., 150–151; Kotani, S., Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1990). A
subnanosecond clock Josephson processor. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits,
25, 117–124.
www.ebook3000.com

References
143
17. Wada, Y., Nagasawa, S., Ishida, I., et al. (1988). A 570 DS. 13 mW
Josephson 1 Kbit RAM. ISSCC Digest of Technical Papers, 84; Nagasawa,
S., Wada, Y., Hidaka, M., et al. (1989). 570-ps 13-mW Josephson 1-Kbit
NDRO RAM. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 24, 1363–1371.
18. Suzuki, H., Fujimaki, N., Tamura, H., et al. (1989). A 4K Josephson
memory. IEEE Trans. Magn., 25, 783–788.
19. Hasuo, S. (1993). Josephson microprocessors, in New Superconducting
Electronics, eds. Weinstock, H., and Ralston, R. W., NATO ASI series, 251,
pp. 363–399.
20. Likharev, K. K., Mukhanov, O. A., and Semenov, V. K. (1985). Resistive
single ﬂux quantum logic for the Josephson-junction technology, in
SQUID-85, de Gruyter, W., Berlin, pp. 1103–1108; also in Likharev, K. K.,
Semenov, V. K. (1991). RSFQ logic/memory family: a new Josephson-
junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency digital systems.
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 1(1), 3–28.
21. Chen, W., Rylyakov, A., Patel, V., Lukens, J., and Likharev, K. (1999). Rapid
single ﬂux quantum T-ﬂip ﬂop operating at 770 GHz. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 9(2), 3212–3215.
22. Guest Editor’s column by MIT Lincoln Laboratory (2014). The New
Wave, 20(3), 1–11 (the NSA review of emerging technologies).
23. Mott, N. F. (1947). Trans. Faraday Soc., 43, 429; Knorr, K., and Leslie, J. D.
(1973). Solid State Commun., 12, 615.
24. Giaever, I. (1960). Energy gap in superconductors measured by electron
tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett., 5, 147.
25. Broom, R. F., Laibowitz, R. B., Mohr, Th. O., and Walter, W. (1980).
Fabrication and properties of niobium Josephson tunnel junctions. IBM
J. Res. Dev., 24(2), 212–222. [Note that values of Vm listed on p. 217
should be in mV, not in V].
26. Grundner, M., and Halbritter, J. (1980). XPS and AES studies on oxide
growth and oxide coatings on niobium. J. Appl. Phys., 51(1), 397–405;
Lindau, I., and Spicer, W. E. (1974). J. Appl. Phys., 45, 3720.
27. Rowell, J. M., and Feldman, W. L. (1968). Excess currents in supercon-
ducting tunnel junctions. Phys. Rev., 172, 393.
28. Basavaiah, S., and Park, K. C. (1975). IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, MAG-
11, 774; Basavaiah, S., and Greiner, J. H. (1976). J. Appl. Phys., 47(9),
4201–4202.
29. Giaever, I., and Megerle, K. (1961). Study of superconductors by electron
tunneling. Phys. Rev., 122, 1101.

144
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
30. Neugebauer, C. A., and Ekvall, R. A. (1964). Vapor-deposited supercon-
ductive ﬁlms of Nb, Ta, and V. J. Appl. Phys., 35(3), 547; the authors thank
I. Giaever for performing tunneling measurements, I-V-s shown in the
paper.
31. Nordman, J. E. (1969). Thin-ﬁlm Josephson junctions using getter-
sputtered niobium. J. Appl. Phys., 40(5), 2111–2115.
32. Mullen, L. O., and Sullivan, D. B. (1969). Fabrication of tunnel junctions
on niobium ﬁlms. J. Appl. Phys., 40(5), 2115–2117.
33. Schwidtal, K. (1972). DC and AC Josephson eﬀect in sputtered Nb–NbOx–
Pb junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 43, 202.
34. Broom, R. F. (1976). Some temperature-dependent properties of
niobium tunnel junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 47, 5432.
35. Hauser, J. J., Bacon, D. D., and Haemmerle, W. H. (1966). Energy gap of
V3Si. Phys. Rev., 151, 296.
36. Moore, D. F., Zubeck, R. B., Rowell, J. M., and Beasley, M. R. (1979). Energy
gaps of the A-15 superconductors Nb3Sn, V3Si, and Nb3Ge measured by
tunneling. Phys. Rev. B, 20(7), 2721–2738.
37. Rudman, D. A., and Beasley, M. R. (1980). Oxidized amorphous-silicon
superconducting tunnel junction barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett., 36(12),
1010–1013.
38. Rybal’chenko, L. F. (1979). Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys., 5(11), 610–615.
39. Wolf, E. L., Zasadzinski, J., Osmun, J. W., and Arnold, G. B. (1979). Solid
State Commun., 31, 321; also by the same authors (1980). J. Low Temp.
Phys. 40(1/2), 19–49.
40. Laibowitz, R. B., and Mayadas, A. F. (1972). Josephson junctions with
Nb/Al composite electrodes. Appl. Phys. Lett., 20(7), 254–256.
41. Laibowitz, R. B., and Mayadas, A. F. (1970). IBM Technical Disclosure
Bulletin, 13(5), 1197–1198.
42. Laibowitz, R. B., and Mayadas, A. F. (1973). Multilayer Josephson
memory device. IBM Technical Disclosure Bulletin, 15(11), 3316–3317.
43. Yeh, J. T., and Tsuei, C. C. (1979). Tunneling studies on thin ﬁlm Nb-Al
alloys. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-15, 1.
44. Hawkins, G., and Clarke, J. (1976). J. Appl. Phys., 47, 1616.
45. Buitrago, R. H., Goldman, A. M., Toth, L. E., and Cantor, R. (1979). IEEE
Trans. Magn., MAG-15, 589.
46. Umbach, C. P., Goldman, A. M., and Toth, L. E. (1982). Appl. Phys. Lett.,
40(1), 81.
www.ebook3000.com

References
145
47. Keller, W. H., and Nordman, J. E. (1973). Nb thin-ﬁlm Josephson junctions
using a semiconductor barrier. J. Appl. Phys., 44(10), 4732–4738.
48. Kroger, H., Potter, C. N., and Jillie, D. W. (1979). IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-
15, 488.
49. Kroger, H., Smith, L. N., and Jillie, D. W. (1981). Appl. Phys. Lett., 39, 280;
Smith, L. N., Kroger, H., and Jillie, D. W. (1983). IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-
19, 787.
50. Levinson, M., and Gurvitch, M. (1983). J. Appl. Phys., 54(8), 4683–4685.
51. Schuller, I. K. (1980). Phys. Rev. Lett., 44, 1597.
52. Schuller, I. K., and Falco, C. M. (1982). Microstructure Science and
Engineering/VLSI, ed. Einspruch, N. G. (Academic Press, New York),
p. 183.
53. McWhan, D. B., Gurvitch, M., Rowell, J. M., and Walker, L. R. (1983).
J. Appl. Phys., 54(7), 3886–3891.
54. McMillan, W. L., and Rowell, J. M. (1969). Superconductivity, ed. Parks, R.
D. (Marcell Dekker, New York), Chapter 11.
55. Rowell, J. M., Gurvitch, M., and Geerk, J. (1981). Modiﬁcation of tunneling
barriers on Nb by a few monolayers of Al. Phys. Rev. B, 24(4), 2278–
2281.
56. Geerk, J., Gurvitch, M., McWhan, D. B., and Rowell, J. M. (1981). Bull. Am.
Phys. Soc., 26, 441.
57. Geerk, J., Gurvitch, M., McWhan, D. B., and Rowell, J. M. (1982). Proc. of
the 16th International Conference on Low Temperature Physsics, LT-16,
Physica, 109–110B, 1775.
58. Gurvitch, M., Rowell, J. M., Huggins, H. A., Washington, M. A., and Fulton,
T. A. (1981). Nb Josephson tunnel junctions with thin layers of Al near
the barrier. IEDM-81, 115–117.
59. Gurvitch, M., Washington, M. A., and Huggins, H. A. (1983). High quality
refractory Josephson tunnel junctions utilizing thin aluminum layers.
Appl. Phys. Lett., 42(5), 472.
60. Huggins, H. A., and Gurvitch, M. (1985). Preparation and characteristics
of Nb/Al-oxide-Nb tunnel junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 57(6), 2103.
61. Miller, R. E., Mallison, W. H., Kleinsasser, A. W., et al. (1993). Niobium
trilayer Josephson tunnel junctions with ultrahigh critical current
densities. Appl. Phys. Lett., 63, 1423.
62. Gates, J. V., Washington, M. A., and Gurvitch, M. (1984). Critical current
uniformity and stability of Nb/Al–oxide–Nb Josephson junctions. J. Appl.
Phys., 55(5), 1419–1421.

146
The Trace That Launched a Thousand Chips
63. Kwo, J., Wertheim, G. K., Gurvitch, M., and Buchanan, D. N. E. (1982).
X-ray photoemission spectroscopy study of surface oxidation of Nb/Al
overlayer structures. Appl. Phys. Lett., 40(8), 675.
64. Miedema, A. R., and den Broeder, F. J. A. (1979). On the interfacial energy
in solid-liquid and solid-solid metal combinations. Z. Metallkunde, 70,
14.
65. Chang, C. C., Gurvitch, M., Hwang, D. M., and Blonder, C. W. (1987).
Auger electron spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and
scanning electron microscopy studies of Nb/Al/Nb Josephson junction
structures. J. Appl. Phys., 61(11), 5089–5097.
66. Kwo, J., Wertheim, G. K., Gurvitch, M., and Buchanan, D. N. E. (1983). XPS
and tunneling study of air-oxidized overlayer structures of Nb with thin
Mg, Y and Er. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-19(3), 795–798.
67. Rowell, J. M. (1991). Do the experiment anyway. Supercurrents, 13.
68. Tolpygo, S., Bolkhovsky, V., Weir, T., Johnson, L., Gouker, M., Oliver, W.
(2015). Fabrication process and properties of fully planarized deep-
submicron Nb/Al–AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions for VLSI circuits. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 25(3), 1101312.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 6
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN
Josephson Junctions and Applications
Jean-Claude Villegier*
INAC CEA-Grenoble, Grenoble Alpes University,
1 Allee des Chaumes, 38640 CLAIX, France
jc.villegier@hotmail.fr
The refractory nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with NbN
superconducting thin-ﬁlm base electrode (Tc ≈16.5 K) were
studied after 1982 using thermal or plasma oxide tunnel barriers,
showing attractive I–V nonlinear characteristics only when a
superconducting soft metal (Pb–In) was used as counterelectrode. A
few years later, introduction of in situ deposited tri-layers including
MgO or AlN tunnel barrier permitted a large improvement in the
junction quality, yield, and reproducibility, opening new application
ﬁelds. Thereafter, NbN (or one of its parent compounds such as
Nb1−xTixN) was established as a possible alternative to refractory
Nb Josephson devices (operating at or below 4.2 K) for building
superconductive electronic circuits achieving higher frequencies,
up to the THz range for SIS mixers or oscillators as well as
operating temperature up to 10 K. “Self-shunted” nitride SNS and
SS’S junctions, such as NbN–TaNx–NbN JJs, are taking advantage
*Former Senior Adviser.
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

148
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
of large RNIC products induced by eﬃcient quasi-particle diﬀusion
and good nitride barrier matching at interfaces with nitride
electrodes, which solve frequency limitation problems induced by
the capacitance of SIS junctions. RF front ends, MUX, ADC, and
digital RSFQ nitrides circuits have been demonstrated, some of them
optimized to operate near 10 K inside closed-cycle refrigerators
for minimizing energy dissipation in space satellite applications.
But NbN circuits are today still less mature than the established
Nb–Al–AlOx–Nb JJ state-of-art technology (∼20k JJs with J J ≈
8 kA/cm2, ∼1 μm2) suitable to achieve prototypes of low dissipation
integrated circuit SFQ processors described in [1] and the references
inside. However, important properties of NbN technology seem more
economically relevant for the future: conventional Si–CMOS foundry
factories should be used to establish a NbN–SiO2 stack-layered
process, stable up to ∼350◦C, not sensitive to hydride species
diﬀusion, while present Nb trilayers are degraded above 180◦C and
hydrogen diﬀusion is detrimental to junction yield. A recent NbN
IC processing demonstration (0.5 μm linewidth) has been done
on 8-inch silicon wafers at the CEA-LETI CMOS facility, making it
possible to integrate further NbN ADC and processors chips reliably
designed and fabricated with high yield at reasonable cost in any
CMOS foundry. Another advantage of NbN thin and very thin (few
nanometers thick) ﬁlms and nanowires with very short electron–
phonon relaxation time leads to fast, light, or current-sensitive self-
resetting disjunctions switches with jitter of a few picoseconds and
fast heat dissipation in the substrate. On-chip integration of nitride
front-end circuits such as resonators, microwave ﬁlters, registers,
highly sensitive and fast photosensors (KIDs, SNSPD, HEB, etc.),
and superconducting–semiconducting interfaces circuits widen the
ﬁeld of superconductive electronics applications from mK up
to 10 K.
Moreover, recently, deep submicrometer size (∼0.01 μm2),
very low capacitance NbN–MgO–NbN SIS and SQUID circuits were
achieved using a self-aligned process. Such junctions, beside their
attractive properties for nitride IC, are able to emit or detect in
a controllable way single microwave photons and could be a new
building block of quantum information circuits.
www.ebook3000.com

Early Niobium Nitride Devices
149
6.1 Early Niobium Nitride Devices
6.1.1 Applied SIS Josephson Tunnel Junctions Until 1983
Following Chapter 2 by E. L. Wolf on the refractory Josephson junc-
tion theory and further chapters on circuits developments oriented
towards superconducting niobium, we introduce a short and not
exhaustive development on the speciﬁc interest found to apply the
B1-cubic refractory phase of niobium nitride (NbN) electrodes ﬁlms
whose critical temperature (Tc) is close to 17 K and others parent
nitride compounds such as Nb1−xTixN (Tc ≈15.5 K) for achieving
alternate superconducting electronic and optoelectronic devices.
In most cases, the circuit integration success relies on the
development of reliable and reproducible Josephson junctions of
superconductor–insulator–superconductor (SIS), superconductor–
normal metal–superconductor (SNS), or superconductor–lower
Tc
superconductor–superconductor (SS’S) types described in
Chapter 2.
Experimentally the insulating tunnel barrier of a SIS junction
could be a native oxide formed thermally or in an oxidizing plasma
on the base electrode or an oxide layer formed on a very thin
“overlayer” deposited on the base electrode such as Nb–Al–AlOx–Nb
trilayer junctions widely applied today, described by M. A. Gurvitch
in Chapter 5, whose theory is developed in Chapter 4 by G. B. Arnold.
The good Al (6–8 nm) surface coverage is due to the aﬃnity of Al for
Nb.
Alternately, an in situ deposited dielectric or semiconductor
nanolayer barrier should be a solution for SIS junctions, requiring a
very uniform conformal coating of the base electrode and the built-
up of an uniform barrier potential interfaced with both refractory
Nb or NbN electrodes. Several barrier materials have been studied
without complete success, as shown by S. T. Ruggiero, in the period
1970–1990 [2]. For example, in the early 1970s, Cardinne et al. [3] at
Air Liquide, took barrier modeling arguments for using low barrier
potential materials such as amorphous semiconductor ﬁlms to
improve the barrier transmission and the high-frequency coupling
to Josephson junctions (see Fig. 6.1). They were fabricating Nb–aGe–
Nb SIS junctions where the ∼8 nm thick amorphous germanium

150
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
(a)
(b)
E
c
E
c
E
r
E
v
E
v
E
t
S
2
S
2
Acceptor
states
S
1
S
1
Figure 6.1
Energy barrier models in the case of a low-gap semiconductor
(Ev and Ec are the valence and conduction band energies, respectively)
or insulator. (a) Ideal barrier: S1 and S2 are superconductive electrodes.
(b) Cardinne et al. model of an amorphous semiconductor without surface
states [3].
barrier should have Fermi and barrier potentials pinned by the
large amount of defects (∼1021 cm−1) in the bulk but also by
the Nb–aGe–Nb interface states. However, pursuing their study in
the same deposition equipment, we found by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), that the Ge barrier layer sputtered on Nb in
the range of 20–200◦C substrate temperature was amorphous but
not uniform in thickness and present pinholes making most of the
junction short-circuited [4]. Even oxidizing the aGe barrier to ﬁll
pinholes with NbOx was not successful due to generation of stress
and formation of poor Ge oxides.
So before 1983, applications-driven studies were mostly done
on SIS junctions and SQUIDs circuits where at least the counter-
electrode was made of a soft metal such as lead alloys (Pb–In, Pb–
Bi, etc.). Pb(In)–PbOx–Pb alloy and Nb–NbOx–Pb(In) SIS Josephson
tunnel junctions and circuits were improved step by step, still facing
major issues both in storage, thermal cycling, poor reliability, as
www.ebook3000.com

Early Niobium Nitride Devices
151
well problems of logic gates operation, memory cell integration, and
so on.
These problems unsolved by large research teams had led to the
closing of major Josephson projects in 1983–1985 (IBM, Bell Labs,
CEA-LETI, etc.) [5].
However, in 1980, G. Dousselin and G. Rosenblatt showed that
growing the oxide barrier on the edge of a superconducting Nb or
NbN base electrode (∼0.3 nm thick) rather than on its ﬂat surface
could lead to very-small-area Josephson-“edge” (or “ramp-edge”)
junctions and greatly improve the circuit downsize scaling and
integration [6]. This technology was used later for achieving three-
terminal devices as other superconducting nanocircuits [7] and,
more recently, for achieving ramp-edge-type HTS YBCO Josephson
circuits with the junction of both electrodes oriented toward a–b
crystal planes across native or others types of barriers [8].
6.1.2 Success and Limitations of Refractory Trilayer
Processes
Then came the breakthroughs of introducing the refractory Nb
trilayer junction processing based on the selective niobium ano-
dization process (SNAP-1981) of H. Kroger et al., reactivating the
amorphous a-Si(H) barrier junctions (Nb–aSi–Nb) [9, 10] and on the
selective niobium etching process (SNEP-1983) of M. Gurvich et al.
for Nb–Al–AlOx–Nb SIS junctions [11].
SNEP, closely associated with the use of a thin Al overlayer
oxidized, is still today successfully applied to most Josephson circuit
fabrications described in Chapter 5 by M. Gurvich. One year later, we
introduced the selective niobium overlap process (SNOP) during the
1984 Applied Superconductivity Conference in San Diego [12]. The
SNOP was applied to NbN trilayer junctions and recently again for
achieving very-small-area NbN–MgO–NbN SIS junctions and SQUIDs
circuits described in paragraph 6.4.5 [13].
In situ elaboration of a SIS trilayers in a sputtering or other
physical vacuum deposition (PVD) equipment without breaking the
vacuum is a big advantage to achieve uniform and reproducible
junction barrier nanolayers interfacing with electrodes ﬁlms. Such
a SIS (or SNS) multilayer coating is collectively patterned over

152
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
SNOP
a
d
d
e
e
f
c
b
a
f
b
c
SNEP
Josephson junction
Josephson
 junction
Self-aligned insulator
(SiN, MgO or SiOx)
Figure 6.2
Comparison of selective niobium overlap process (SNOP) using
three photomasks (or e-beam levels) and SNEP trilayer processing (4
photomasks) applied to NbN–MgO–NbN Josephson tunnel junctions [15].
a wafer containing several chips. Each chip may be transformed
in a more or less large network of interconnected Josephson
junctions (together with inductors, capacitors, resistors elements).
In such superconducting integrated circuits (SICs), a low dispersion
(σ value) of functional elements parameters is mandatory. The
junction areas (about 10 μm2 in the 1990s, ∼1 μm2 in 2015, and
estimated to be ∼0.1 μm2 near 2025) and linewidth should be
deﬁned accurately by lithography [14]. Junction area is determined
by a window patterned in a SiO2 or others dielectric layers in
SNEP, by anodic Nb2O5 in SNAP or by direct electrodes overlap
in SNOP. Processing of SNEP and SNOP applied to NbN–MgO–
NbN junctions is described on Fig. 6.2 [15]. More recently, the
planarized all-refractory technology for superconductors (PARTS)
was introduced at IBM [16]. It permits the use of lithographic tools
and techniques of semiconductor microelectronics to scale down
junction size and linewidths uniformly on large Si (or glass, sapphire,
etc.) wafers. Such kind of planarized processing by chemical–
mechanical polishing (CMP) is presented in Fig. 6.3 when applied to
a NbN stack processed on 8-inch Si wafers in the CEA-Grenoble LETI
www.ebook3000.com

Niobium Nitride Tunnel Josephson Junctions
153
Figure 6.3
Cross section of the stack of planarized layers applied to the
realization of NbN–NbTiN RSFQ circuits on 8-inch Si (+SiO2) wafers. Right:
Detail of the chemical–mechanical polishing (CMP) process applied here to
a self-shunted (SS’S) Josephson junction with TaNx barrier and whole-wafer
photo. Reproduced with permission from Villegier [17].
C-MOS platform [17]. Earlier, such planarized circuit fabrication has
been applied to the fabrication of most of the Nb ICs, but necessitates
specialized foundries because of the constraints in temperature and
speciﬁcities of niobium–aluminum junction processing [18, 19].
6.2 Niobium Nitride Tunnel Josephson Junctions
SIC circuit fabrication requires to build a multilayer stack of
patterned dielectric, resistive, and superconducting elements such
as a ground-plane, DC and HF interconnecting wirings, junction and
resistor levels. Processing SIC with a high enough yield becomes a
critical issue which requires speciﬁc foundries or ﬁnding common
grounds with semiconductor circuit foundries’ capabilities [17].
One of the drawbacks of Nb–Al–AlOx–Nb refractory junctions
shown by Pavolotski et al. [20] and other authors [19, 21] is poor
junctions’ aging properties during storage at room temperature,
leading to a change in the junction normal resistance Rn combined

154
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
with a change of sub-gap resistance Rj and in a degradation of
the junction quality factor RJ/RN. This is particularly due to the
large diﬀusion channels inside the Nb BCC crystal structure, leading
to inclusion of hydrogen (or oxygen) atoms at barrier interface
[21]. So, the progress of the Nb IC integration and of the SFQ
circuit fabrication, according to microelectronics facilities’ rules
and capabilities, suggests strong modiﬁcations in the choice of the
Nb junction barrier (such as introduction of self-shunted barriers
[22] and/or increase in SIS barrier transparency). The removal of
aluminum overlayers and of Nb anodic oxide layers, the introduction
of better dielectric quality insulator layers and of nitride thin
layers to prevent hydrogen diﬀusion inside the layer stack [19],
and the improvement of dry etching processing conditions should
be mandatory in the future Nb SIC. Such Nb junction and circuit
technology issues are described in more detail in Chapters 4, 5, 6,
7, and 11. Here we introduce the niobium nitride (NbN) technology
bringing alternate fabrication solutions and higher-performance
devices for some of the SIC applications.
6.2.1 Introduction of NbN Film Textures
The superconductive properties of cubic phase of niobium nitride
were observed with a Tc of 16 K in 1941. It is interesting to note that
a superconducting columbium nitride ribbon (columbium was the
old name of niobium) was demonstrated in 1946 by Robert M. Milton
from John Hopkins University as a sensitive and fast (transition edge)
bolometer device operating in infrared detection [23]. So, before
the discovery of the BCS theory, before the Josephson eﬀects, and
two years before the invention of the “transistor” or any integrated
circuit (IC), a tiny ribbon of NbN was proved to be “a sensitive high
speed bolometer operating at about 16 K.”
Among diﬀerent superconducting refractory nitrides compounds
which can be obtained by diﬀerent technics in thin ﬁlms, NbN is a
type II superconductor in the dirty limit which presents the highest
Tc in the FCC cubic-B1 phase with pmm4 isotropic properties.
NbN nitrogen-deﬁcient cubic structure ﬁlms are often granular with
large grain boundaries resistances. They show a single energy gap
with strong electron–phonon coupling (2/kBTc ≈4.2), a ratio
www.ebook3000.com

Niobium Nitride Tunnel Josephson Junctions
155
ρ300K/ρ20K < 1.3 conduction of poor metallic type, a low value of
the product Fermi surface wave vector times elastic electron mean
free path (kF.l), and a large value of London penetration depth [2,
24–26].
Cathodic RF sputtering and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
were used to deposit among the ﬁrst NbN superconducting thin
ﬁlms in the 1970s with controlled polycrystalline columnar mostly
(111) texture oriented and good Tc values [27–29]. However, at that
time the NbN deposition conditions under RF sputtering or CVD,
the diﬃcult choice of the substrate materials, the large substrate
heating during deposition, the defects due to ion bombardment in
RF sputtering, the uncontrolled carbide precipitates inclusions, and
so on, did not favor the feasibility of practicable Josephson tunnel
junctions or of other applied NbN thin ﬁlms devices.
The study of the role of sputtering conditions and substrate
material on NbN cubic ﬁlm texture and epitaxy at low enough
substrate temperature was a clue in the 1980s [24, 30]. The
crystalline matching of NbN with hexagonal sapphire orientations
was studied by Noskov et al. [31] and a documented study of NbN
epitaxy or textured ﬁlms on diﬀerent substrates was reported by
A. I. Braginski and J. Talvacchio [24]. As shown by a TEM picture in
Fig. 6.4 (left), very thin (from 2 to 20 nm thick) NbN epitaxial layers
Figure 6.4
Left: TEM cross section of single-crystal NbN ﬁlm sputtered at
600◦C on R-plane sapphire substrate [32, 33]. Right: TEM cross section and
diﬀraction of a [MgO–NbN](×4) multilayer sputtered on an underlayer Nb
ﬁlm (275 nm) [33].

156
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
can be grown uniformly by DC magnetron sputtering at ∼600◦C
on noncubic substrates such as R-, A- or M-plane orientations of
sapphire wafers. We show that thin epitaxial NbN ﬁlms are (135)
oriented on R-plane Al2O3 and paved by twin domains [32, 33].
On the contrary, NbN on M-Al2O3 is untwined, leading to a lower
resistivity, an increased critical current density at 4.2 K, and a
higher critical temperature (Tc ≈13 K for a very thin 4 nm ﬁlm).
Fortunately, the cubic B1 structure of NbN is more tolerant to
defects than the close hcp NbN phase, which presents a much lower
critical temperature. However, it is diﬃcult to optimize the grain
texture and the resistive and superconducting properties when the
NbN ﬁlms are sputtered on unmatched substrates like silicon or
amorphous SiO2 more common in microelectronics. The Bruce van
Dover group at Bell labs sputtered the ﬁrst good-quality NbN ﬁlms at
low temperature by DC magnetron sputtering, a PVD method which
is easy to manage in thin ﬁlm stacks [34].
6.2.2 Use of Templates in NbN Heterostructures
Using moderate substrate temperatures, Kosaka and Onodera in
1974 showed that it is possible to epitaxially grow cubic B1 NbN
on cubic MgO (100) single-crystal suitably polished and surface
cleaned [35]. Taking into account this possibility, Yamashita et al.
[36] demonstrated the epitaxial growth of a NbN ﬁlm on top of
a cleaned silicon wafer covered with a MgO buﬀer layer or with
an Al2O3 buﬀer. More recently, TiN [37] and Nb5N6 [38] were also
used as buﬀer layers on Si. For example, a better (100)-oriented
NbN texture observed by X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) (Table 6.1) shows
the improvements in the resistivity, in the surface resistance at
10 GHz, and in the gap frequency of a 250 nm DC magnetron-
sputtered NbN ﬁlm which is epitaxial on MgO (100) single crystal,
(100) polycrystalline textured on a RF-sputtered MgO (20 nm thick)
layer deposited on Si (100) wafer and with a columnar (111) self-
texture when deposited on a (100) oriented cleaned silicon wafer
[39, 40].
Three directions of successful research were issued from such
results:
www.ebook3000.com

Niobium Nitride Tunnel Josephson Junctions
157
Table 6.1
Crystal texture and DC and RF resistance of 250 nm NbN ﬁlms
deposited at 20◦C on MgO (100) and Si (100) wafers covered with or
without an RF-sputtered 20 nm MgO buﬀer [40]
Layers
NbN/MgO (100)
NbN/MgO/Si(100)
NbN/Si (100)
XRD:I(200)/I(111)
>100
8
0.07
ρ300K(μcm)
60
100
140
RS-4K (at 10 GHz)
7 μ
10 μ
10 μ
ν(0) (THz)
1.4
1.3
0.9
(a) The possibility of growing hetero-epitaxial rock-salt structure
stacks based on NbN (a = 0.439 nm) on cleaned Si (100) wafers
[a45◦= 0.384 nm = 0.543 nm/21/2], using buﬀer layers, such
as MgO (a = 0.419 nm) [36] or TiN (a = 0.425 nm) [37].
This leads to epitaxial superconducting NbN junction circuits
integrating low RF resistance wirings and resonators with
low speciﬁc inductances. This makes it possible to integrate
detectors, microwave ﬁlters, and readout circuits (see Fig. 6.11).
(b) The achievement of all-epitaxial SIS NbN–MgO–NbN mixers and
circuits on MgO (100), using also a thin epitaxial MgO barrier
[41].
(c) The use of a 8–20 nm thick (100) oriented self-textured MgO
ﬁlm RF-sputtered on any amorphous substrate or on Si wafers
covered by silica (SiO2) was applied by several laboratories to
improve the (100) texture of NbN ﬁlms, which are smoothers
with a lower resistivity than the (111) self-textured NbN layer
wiring and junction electrodes [2, 24, 42].
6.2.3 NbNOx Barriers in NbN SIS Junctions
For Josephson IC applications one of the main challenges in
the 1980s was in the fabrication of reproducible micrometer
or submicrometer SIS Josephson tunnel junctions, inductively
and capacitively matched with transmission lines and resistors
integrated in a reliable stack of layers. Besides the development
of lead alloys junctions followed by the Nb–NbOx ones, the H.
Hayakawa ETL team reported on the completion of high-quality

158
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Figure 6.5
SEM picture of addressable 100 DC SQUIDs memory with 6 μm
control lines and 10×10 μm2 junctions. Current–voltage characteristics at
4. 2 K of 100×NbN–NbNOx–Pb(In) junctions SQUIDs (<J C>= 1.74 kA/cm2)
in series. Reproduced with permission from Villegier [12].
NbN–NbNOx–Pb SIS junctions and DC SQUIDs. They deposited a ZnO
ﬁlm mask before NbN RF-sputtering deposition at 500◦C, followed
by the sputter-etching cleaning of NbN base-electrode and thermal
oxidation [43, 44].
As observed by X-ray photoemission (XPS) [45] and junction
conductance [12], the (NbN)2O5−X thermally or RF-plasma [46]-
formed barriers at room temperature in an oxygen gas partial
pressure were similar to the Nb2O5−X barrier of the Nb–NbOx–Pb
junctions, showing an eﬀective barrier potential of about 0.3 eV
[12]. As shown in Fig. 6.5, during that period of time, NbN–
oxide–Pb(In) and NbN–oxide–NbN junction arrays and DC SQUID
memory arrays with control lines (4 or 6 μm linewidths) were also
developed at CEA LETI with a dispersion on Josephson currents
and on tunnel resistances of a few percent [12], mainly due
to lithographic dispersion and to ﬂux trapping. NbN–oxide–NbN
junction and SQUIDs arrays were also fabricated [12], but the
ratio of the sub-gap resistance RSG measured at 3 mV to normal
resistance RN (RSG/RN) was decreased in comparison to those of
NbN–oxide–Pb(In) junctions. Prof. John Bardeen, during his visits
to CNRS-Grenoble in 1983–84 and to CEA-LETI, was curious about
the attractive developments of NbN (instead of Nb) Josephson
tunnel junction applications to voltage standard, SIS mixers, SQUID
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Junctions for IC Applications
159
magnetometers, and logic gates. During the same period, others
groups were developing high-quality NbN–oxide–PbIn junctions
[47, 48]. Even ETL achieved integrated NbN–oxide–NbN Josephson
logic circuits (i.e., 8-bit ripple carry adder) with Nb wirings [49] and
Hitachi high-quality NbN–oxide–NbN junctions and a 3 kBit logic
gate array, comprising 22,000 junctions [50].
In parallel, stimulated by H. Kroger [51] and by others [3], several
groups were studying amorphous semiconductor barriers. NbN–
aSi–NbN and NbN–aSi–Nb junctions were obtained with quality
factors of the same order to those of NbN–oxide–NbN SIS [52–55],
often better than in Nb–NbOx–Nb SIS.
For most applications, it is important to deposit in a con-
trollable and reproducible way, thin and smooth polycrystalline
NbN or Nb1−xTixN [56] junction electrodes and wiring lines in
the thickness range 200–350 nm with low enough resistivity, low
kinetic inductance, and large critical temperature. Good dielectric
SiO2 or Si3N4 layers deposited by reactive sputtering or plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD) at low temperature
must separate electrodes and lines [17].
6.3 NbN Junctions for IC Applications
6.3.1 From NbNOx to MgO and AlN Barriers in NbN SIS
Junctions
As explained above, it is attractive to use high-frequency quality (low
loss tangent at low temperature in the microwave frequency range)
single-crystal substrates such as MgO (100) or sapphire, matching
more or less with cubic B1 nitride or to RF-sputter (or deposit by
pulse laser [PLD]) a MgO buﬀer layer on Si+SiO2 wafers to improve
NbN or NbTiN ﬁlm texture and quality. The study of in situ MgO
artiﬁcial tunnel barrier deposition, then, comes naturally with the
interest to achieve NbN–MgO–NbN SIS “trilayers” grown epitaxially
or at least textured [2].
Several laboratories were developing such NbN–MgO–NbN
junctions since 1983 that were fabricated with SNEP, SNOP, or other
processes with Josephson current densities J c ranging from 1 to

160
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6
NbN–MgO–NbN junction characteristics on MgO/SiO2–Si sub-
strate. (a) Current–voltage characteristics of a 0.5 μm2 SIS at 4 K. (b) A
30×30 μm2 SIS at diﬀerent temperatures ranging from 4.2 to 12.3 K [39,
60].
40 kA/cm2 [39–41, 56–64]. Typical current–voltage characteristics
of SNOP NbN-MgO-NbN SIS with a ∼200 nm thick MgO or SiO2 self-
aligned insulator ﬁlm, RF-sputtered, are presented in Fig. 6.6.
Experimental conditions for optimizing the junction energy gap
(i.e., BE + CE), the sub-gap leakage current, and the Josephson
current density lead to diﬀerent quantitative results depending on
the junction trilayer deposition conditions and on post-deposition
temperature during processing [2, 60].
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Junctions for IC Applications
161
From these experimental studies, one should emphasize on
diﬀerent factors inﬂuencing the MgO barrier properties and
consequently the junction properties:
(a) The substrate choice (MgO template) and NbN base-electrode
deposition conditions (temperature, Ar-N2 plasma type, etc.) [2,
60].
(b) The MgO barrier conductance is often dominated by high-
transparency channels, associated with excess Josephson and
sub-gap currents signed by a subharmonic gap structure, as
shown in Fig. 6.6(b) [60]. Dieleman et al. [64] and other
groups demonstrate that it is due to multiple Andreev reﬂection
(MAR) mechanisms. Contrary to Nb–Al–AlOx–Nb junctions, a
post-annealing of the NbN–MgO–NbN patterned junction (or
unpatterned trilayer) a few hours in the temperature range of
200–300◦C has the beneﬁc eﬀect of removing those conduc-
tance extra-channels, decreasing apparent Josephson current,
but more eﬃciently sub-gap conductance and improving the
overall current–voltage characteristics [39, 60]. The value of
the energy gap is not aﬀected by the junction annealing up to
350◦C (when current density J c is not aﬀected by self-heating).
Figure 6.7 shows that the eﬀective MgO barrier height observed
at about 1.3 eV is increased inside the trilayer after annealing
for a few hours and tends to reach the expected 2.8 eV MgO
bulk barrier height [60]. One also can observe similar MAR
origin behavior with other artiﬁcial barriers deposited on NbN
or MgB2 electrodes [65–67].
(c) We observed like in NbN–oxide–NbN junctions [12, 66] that the
values of the energy gaps of the NbN base electrode and of
the NbN counterelectrode are diﬀerent [60]. The base-electrode
gap BE ≈3 meV can be sharp according to Tc ≈16 K, but
the polycrystalline granular nature of the NbN counterelectrode
(with low electronic mean free path) grown in contact with
the barrier leads to a depressed superconductivity close to the
barrier interface associated with in-plane dispersion of grains
gaps CE ≈1.5–2.5 meV, later observed by scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) [68, 69]. The challenge is to improve the
growth conditions and (100) texture of NbN CE.

162
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Figure 6.7
Josephson current density IJ0 (A/cm2) or junction conductance
G (S/cm2) of NbN–MgO–NbN tunnel junctions vs. MgO-deposited barrier
thickness, before and after wafer post-annealing at 250◦C for 2 hours [39,
60].
Nb1−xTixN [for x = 0.4, Tc ≈15.4 K] ﬁlms presents a slightly
lower Tc than NbN ﬁlms (∼16 K), but they are attractive for
their lower RF losses and surface resistance up to 1 THz in the
submillimeter wave receivers applications and good-quality NbTiN–
MgO–NbTiN tunnel junctions were fabricated [56].
High-quality NbN tunnel junctions were also fabricated using
AlNx as barrier [70–72]. Radical nitridation of an Al layer deposited
on a base NbN layer is the most successful to form the barrier [70]
with low sub-gap leakage currents, and high critical current density
(J c) of up to 15.6 kA/cm2. The maximum-to-minimum spread in Ic
was ±1.5% for a series array of 200 junctions with a J c of 4.4 kA/cm2
[70].
It was also observed that MgO/AlN/MgO heterostructure barrier
can be tuned to high current density and RSJ characteristics between
9 and 14 K [17].
6.3.2 NbN and NbTiN SNS and SS’S Junctions
As described by E. L. Wolf in Chapter 2, SNS junctions whose
barrier is either a normal diﬀusive metal or a superconductor
or a constriction could deliver Josephson current with interesting
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Junctions for IC Applications
163
properties with regards to applications. They rely on a diﬀerent
mechanism named Andreev reﬂection, described ﬁrst by Andreev
[73] and in the same period by De Gennes et al. [74].
When the barrier is a dirty superconducting material with a
smaller T ′
c than the electrodes, the induced coherence length ξN(T )
in the barrier of diﬀusion constant D should be in the form (for
T < T ′
c):
ξN(T ) =

ℏD
2πkBT

1 +
2
ln T
T ′c
and Josephson critical current:
I0(T ) =
π2
0
4eRNkBTc

1 −T
Tj
2
L/ξN
sinh L/ξN
Likharev [75, 76] gave developments related to the diﬀerent
parameter conﬁgurations of Josephson weak-links. The approximate
relation between junction current density, energy gap, junction
length, and coherence length is
J c(T ) ∝(T )2√
T e(L/ξn(Tc))√T /Tc.
Various barrier materials associated with NbN electrodes have
been studied with limited applied interest [2]. A breakthrough was
achieved in 2000 by Kaul et al. [77], obtaining internally shunted
NbN Josephson junctions with a sputtered TaNx barrier. The TaNx
ﬁlm resistance has been tuned to obtain a large value of RNIC
(>0.5 mV at 4.2 K) and substitution of NbN to NbTiN electrodes
more suitable for nonlatching logic applications at 4.2 K [78, 79].
Such NbN–TaNx–NbN “self-shunted” nitride SNS or SS’S junc-
tions, depending on the resistivity of TaNx and barrier thickness,
have been studied by Setzu in comparison to NbN–MgO–NbN
junctions [15].
The resistivity of DC magnetron sputtered TaNx ﬁlms developed
at CEA-INAC could be varied from a few hundred micro-ohms to
a few hundred milliohms by increasing the N2 pressure during
reactive sputtering in Ar–N2 gas mixture, from a pure Ta target [15,
17, 80]. By adjusting the TaNx barrier thickness, nonhysteretic I–V
characteristics of such NbN–TaNx–NbN junctions are presented in
Fig. 6.8, showing a parabolic shape with up-turn curvature at 4.2 K

164
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.8
Current–voltage characteristics at 4 K (a) and 9 K (b) of
refractory Josephson junctions of the form NbN–TaNx–NbN showing large
RNIC values of about 3.9 mV at 4.2 K and 2 mV at 9 K from Setzu [15] and
Villegier et al. [17].
[78, 79], as expected for the RSJ model (see Chapter 2). As shown in
Fig. 6.8, RNIC values of 3.9 mV were observed at 4.2 K and of 2 mV
at 9 K, with J C and RN of magnitudes that are suitable for single-ﬂux
quantum digital circuits [15, 17].
Large RNIC products are induced by eﬃcient quasi-particles
diﬀusion and good crystalline matching of nitride barriers (TaNx
or TiNx [81]) at interfaces with NbN (or NbTiN) electrodes
in the same cubic B1 crystalline phase, which solve frequency
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Junctions for IC Applications
165
limitations induced by external shunt of the large capacitance of SIS
junctions.
The temperature dependence of RNIC of the junctions with
∼10 mcm barrier resistivity was measured for various barrier
thicknesses and the coherence length of the barrier was determined
to be about 5 nm [15].
The high resistivity superconducting TaNx barrier and the
dielectric MgO tunnel barriers are compared in Fig. 6.9: for example,
to obtain a Josephson critical current density of J c ≈8 kA/cm2, one
has to deposit ∼0.8 nm of MgO or about 12 nm of TaNx. The TaNx
barrier thickness is easy to control accurately and the slope δJ C/δd
is much lower than for the MgO tunnel barrier. The reproducibility
of TaNx resistivity and of barrier conductance is, however, more
critical, but across a 2×2 cm2 chip all the junctions are internally
damped with a large RNIC and a small spread is observed when a
CMOS foundry process is applied with a good control of nitride ﬁlms
uniformity and lithography [17].
Figure 6.9
Comparison of TaN and MgO barrier transmission given as
Josephson current density J c (kA/cm2) or conductance G (S/cm2) versus
barrier thickness (the TaN scale is [10×] the MgO barrier scale) of self-
shunted NbN–TaN–NbN and NbN–MgO–NbN junctions from Setzu [15] and
Villegier [42].

166
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
6.4 NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
6.4.1 First Digital Circuits Based on NbN–Oxide–NbN
Junctions
The ﬁrst applications of NbN (substituted to Nb) Josephson
tunnel junctions integrate lead alloys as junction counterelectrode
and wiring levels, as described in the ﬁrst paragraph. So ap-
plications were limited due to the drawback of the mechanical
properties of lead alloys generating hillocks during storage and
thermal cycling [5]. Research studies were limited to Josephson
integrated circuit demonstrators [30] and to HF circuits: voltage
standard and SIS heterodyne mixers (see Chapters 7 and 10)
[39].
A more promising solution comes when a reliable NbN “trilayer
dry process” could be achieved with NbN–oxide–NbN junctions,
even if the energy gap was decreased below theoretical expectations
and sub-gap current could not be reduced to a low value [12]. In
Japan, remarkable demonstrations were ﬁrst accomplished using
thermal or plasma oxidized NbN junction base-electrodes and dry-
etching processing [49, 50]:
• An 8-bit logic adder (four junction logic [4 JL], 2.5 μm linewidth)
of 2800 NbN–oxide–NbN junctions with Nb wiring levels was
successfully achieved in 1984 at Electrotechnical Laboratory
[49].
• Two years later, Hitachi was developing 1.5 μm square
NbN–oxide–NbN junctions and fabricating 3K-logic-gate array
using 23,000 junctions demonstrating successful operation
[50].
But these very promising demonstrations occurred, unfortunately, at
the time when mostly all research eﬀorts and teams were switched
towards the newly discovered HTS materials and they focused their
studies on the diﬃcult task of getting uniform YBaCuO Josephson
junctions (see IEEE papers’ content of Applied Superconductivity
conferences of 1986, 1988, and 1990).
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
167
6.4.2 HF Applications of NbN–MgO (or AlN)–NbN
Junctions at 2 K and 10 K
Since 1986, the analog NbN (or NbTiN) SIS junction circuits have
been beneﬁtting immensely from the introduction of MgO (or thin
AlN) barriers instead of NbNOx.
Several laboratories have developed NbN/MgO/NbN SIS junction
mixers for radio-astronomy, operating in a larger bandwidth and at
higher frequencies than Nb SIS mixers mostly limited to the Nb gap
frequency near 650 GHz [60, 61].
Typically, NbTiN/MgO/NbTiN SIS junction mixers have been
achieved at JPL-CALTEC with a receiver noise temperature of 250 K
DSB near 1 THz [56], even better than the results reported at that
time with NbN devices at similar frequencies. The production of a
large number of optimized NbTiN (and NbN) SIS receivers (tuned in
the band 750–950 GHz) is still an important task for the Atacama
Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) of telescopes [82].
An overview and a description of the NbN, NbTiN SIS receivers
and also ﬁgures of merit of hot-electron bolometer (HEB) THz
receivers based on thin NbN or other nitride microbridges are given
in Chapter 7 by Valery Koshelets et al.
It should be emphasized that the domain of metrology described
in Chapter 10 by Johannes Kohlmann also beneﬁts from NbN
junctions, thanks to the uniformity of NbN/TiNx/NbN junctions
and to the possibility of stacking NbN junctions in a mixed 2D–
3D conﬁguration well coupled to a microwave structure. A 10 V
programmable Josephson voltage standard circuit, made of 327 680
NbN/TiNx/NbN/TiNx/NbN junctions uniform in double-junction
stacks, in collaboration with ETL (now AIST) and NIST, has been
successfully demonstrated [81].
Before the year 2000, the most original and promising NbN IC
technology focused on space applications was in TRW [59, 83, 84].
NbN–MgO–NbN Josephson junction and circuits were developed
in parallel to the TRW Nb multilevel technology [84]. TRW was able
to demonstrate a 60 GHz NbN single-ﬂux quantum (SFQ) counter
circuit in 1991 [85] and later developed 12 mask-level NbN circuits
[84].

168
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
One of the speciﬁc characteristics of NbN circuits was to operate
at 10 K in RF front-ends packaged in a space satellite or rocket,
inside a cryogenic remote system, with lower energy and lower
weight levels (a factor 4 to 10) than expected for Nb RF front-ends
operating at 4 K.
The successively published NbN operating IC devices were as
follows:
• The design in collaboration with JPL of a 10 K NbN A/D
converter for readout of large Si:As BIB, 128×128 IR focal plane
array sensors [86].
• The design and fabrication of the NbN ADC was later improved
to 12-bit SFQ counter operating at 10 Msps and reading
IR images at 100 frames/s at 9 K and dissipating 0.3 mW
[87].
• A further improvement in the system bandwidth concerns the
cryopackaging using a dedicated superconducting multichip
module (MCM) and the implementation of a NbN digital signal
processor (DSP) located behind the ADC, all circuits operating
at 10 K [88].
• Finally a 16-bit, 10 K SFQ ADC counter was successfully
optimized associated with several NbN DSP modules including
ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) memory registers (∼2000 JJ each) and
published in 2001 [89], after the TRW Redondo Beach Super-
conducting Laboratory was fused with Northrop Grumman
Laboratories (NGST).
6.4.3 Internally Damped NbN Junctions Applied to RSFQ
Technologies
In order to produce eﬃcient rapid single-ﬂux quantum logic circuits
(RSFQs), following a logic concept of quantiﬁed Josephson voltage
(or current) impulsion carrying a single-ﬂux quantum (
0 =
2.07 mV ps) proposed by K. K. Likharev et al. [1] (see references
inside the paper), a reliable and reproducible process based on
refractory superconductors is mandatory. It should be compatible
with very large scale integrated (VLSI) multilevel circuit fabrication
rules [84]. Details on RSFQ circuit schemes and functions can be
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
169
Figure 6.10
Basic SQUID gate in rapid single ﬂux quantum logic (left)
and current density–voltage characteristics at diﬀerent temperatures (from
5.6 to 15.1 K) of an internally damped NbN–TaNx–NbN Josephson tunnel
junction suitable for RSFQ applications.
found in [90, 91], together with recent examples of state-of-the-art
circuit fabrication made of Nb junctions [92] and IC realization [93].
A typical SFQ SQUID gate should only be made of critically
damped RSJ Josephson junctions with a large enough RNIC (i.e., cut-
oﬀfrequency) value, acting as nonlinear inductors, interconnected
by simple inductors, as shown in Fig. 6.10. Internally damped
junctions. such as NbN–TaNx–NbN [17, 77] or NbTiN–TaNx–NbTiN
[78, 94] junctions presented above, are especially suitable for
making compact and scalable to μm2-scale SFQ logic gates.
The development of useful nitride RSFQ circuits integrating
internally damped junction was limited until now to a few
demonstrations, such as MUX and DEMUX, new HF SFQ circuits
[78], which should operate at 4.2 K, using either an Nb junction
technology upgraded to higher RNIC values or the “penta-level”
Nb/NbTiN/TaNx/NbTiN/Nb junction and Nb wirings proposed by
van Duzer et al. [78].
Recently, an analytical head containing a sigma–delta NbN ADC
was designed at Savoy University and implemented at CEA for the
French Centre d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) to operate at 9–10 K in a
closed-cycle refrigerator devoted to Space Telecoms satellites [17,
95]. The circuit, fabricated on 8-inch Si wafers at CEA (LETI-CMOS

170
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Table 6.2
Stack layers of a NbN IC circuit fabrication (from CEA [17])
Layer
Thickness (nm)
ρ20K(μ.cm)
Deposition
NbTiN
650
250
DC-mag
Mo
45
∼200
DC-mag
SiO2
300
Insulator
PE-CVD
NbTiN
350
250
DC-mag
SiO2
300
Insulator
PE-CVD
NbTiN–NbN
150–150
250
DC-mag
TaNx
8
104
DC-mag
NbN–NbTiN
150–150
250
DC-mag
SiO2
300
Insulator
GE-CVD
NbTiN (GP)
550
250
DC-mag
and INAC) platforms, integrates internally damped submicrometer
NbN–TaNx–NbN planarized junctions and 0.7 μm linewidth wirings.
The layer stack is shown in Fig. 6.3 and Table 6.2. A penta-layer
NbTiN–NbN–TaNx–NbN–NbTiN is in situ DC magnetron sputtered
(DC-mag) in order to eﬃciently couple NbTiN wirings (with lower
inductivity than the NbN lines) to the junction NbTiN–NbN bilayer
electrodes. Figures 6.8 and 6.10 show typical I–V curves at 9–10 K
and Fig. 6.12 (left) a toggle ﬂip-ﬂop (TFF) SFQ gate.
As explained above, internally damped NbN, NbTiN Josephson
junctions (without adding external damping resistor) are attractive
for VLSI digital or mixed analog/digital SFQ circuits. Internally
damped junctions and issued logic gates lead to a natural down-size
scalability and to larger cut-oﬀfrequency due to large RNIC values
mostly independent of critical current density J c, in comparison
to the externally damped junctions by resistors whose cut-oﬀ
frequencies are strongly reduced by the resistor, as discussed in [96].
The eventually found drawback of too large speciﬁc inductance of
NbN ﬁlms due to large penetration depth and kinetic inductance can
be reduced by introducing Nb layers or NbTiN extralayers inside the
stack.
The use of a semiconductor foundry to fabricate NbN super-
conductive electronics circuits (which is not possible for Nb IC
without strong processing conditions and tool modiﬁcations) ensure
the reliability of submicrometer lithography and cost-eﬃcient
techniques such as statistical process control. This could be used
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
171
Figure 6.11
Main classes of applications of Nb or NbN superconducting
electronic devices and integrated circuits (SIC). Because of a shift of the
gap S toward higher frequency, NbN analog and digital devices bring a
possible shift to a higher bandwidth, frequency, and operating temperature
in comparison to Nb. Moreover, some of the detector devices based on fast
disjunctions (e.g. SSPD) are more speciﬁc to NbN [42].
to optimize fabrication costs, to track derives and defects in the
process, and to ensure the long-term availability of superconductive
electronics chips.
6.4.4 NbN Devices Offer Wider Applications Than Nb
Ones
Forecasting superconductive electronics technology is not an easy
task, but it is again, as in 1980 with IBM project, and in 1987
with new high-Tc superconductivity, an actual subject in 2015 [97],
where refractory NbN or other nitride junctions and emerging
nanostructures should have speciﬁc advantages for diﬀerent devices
and applications tentatively listed in a frequency (or bandwidth)
scale in Fig. 6.11 [42]. What should be the beneﬁts of substituting
nitrides with Nb-based junctions or to introduce new nitride active
or passive devices?
(a) Recent logic and memory programs are focused on large-
scale integrated circuits for developing energy-eﬃcient green
supercomputers and data centers [98]. Greatly improved energy
eﬃciency gates, such as reciprocal quantum logic (RQL),

172
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Figure 6.12
Left: Toggle ﬂip-ﬂop (TFF). Right: Top view of an SNSPD pixel
(0.35 μm linewidth) interconnected on chip by an array of 24 NbN–TaNx–
NbN Josephson tunnel junctions (0.5 μm diameter) plus an injector gate,
above a ground plane.
eﬃcient SFQ (ERSFQ, eSFQ), LR-RSFQ, and low-voltage RSFQ,
have been designed and are now developed [99]. SFQ ICs and HF
front-ends should have the beneﬁt of higher areal density, higher
frequency bandwidth, and lower jitter of internally damped NbN
junctions.
(b) Nanowires and nanobridges, patterned in a few nanometers
thick NbN or NbTiN, epitaxially grown ﬁlms, operate under
superconducting DC current bias as fast controllable (∼100
ps) disjunctions, sensitive to a single photon, a current pulse,
or an HF wave modulation [68]. NbN advantage resides in its
very short electron–phonon time of a few picoseconds with
low jitter [68, 100]. NbN superconducting nanowire single
photon detectors (SNSPDs) are widely developed and can
be integrated on chip (see Fig. 6.12, left) and read by SFQ
circuits [101]. Low-noise THz hot-electron bolometer mixers
(HEBs), pulse discriminators [102], and new “nanocryotron”
(nTron) made of superconducting NbN nanowire as a three-
terminal electrothermal device [103] are presently developed.
The domain of quantum computation should also beneﬁt from
NbN qubits [104].
www.ebook3000.com

NbN Digital Circuits and Other Applications
173
6.4.5 Scaling of NbN Josephson Junction Size
One example of successfully down-scaling NbN–MgO–NbN SIS
junction size was obtained to achieve single-photon emission [13].
A simple DC voltage bias (V) on a small-capacitance Josephson
junction leads to emission of microwave radiation via inelastic
Cooper-pair tunneling. In this process a tunneling Cooper pair emits
one or several microwave photons with a total energy of 2 eV
[105]. The observed average photon emission rate is well explained
within the so-called P(E) theory [106], but this theory does not
predict the statistics of the emitted photons. Alexander Grimm at
CEA INAC achieved very-small-area, good-quality NbN–MgO–NbN
junctions and DC SQUIDs using an e-beam patterning variant of
the SNOP process [12, 13] (Figs. 6.13 and 6.14) and was able to
Figure 6.13
(a) Step in the trilayer with self-aligned spacer covered by an
NbN layer forming the top electrode before (left) and after (right) etching.
(b) SEM view of a SQUID. (c) SEM micrograph of a Josephson junction. The
Si3N4 spacer extends well beyond the lower NbN of the trilayer, insulating it
from the NbN top electrode, reproduced with permission from Grimm [13].

174
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Figure 6.14
Typical current voltage characteristic of a SQUID consisting
of two 150 nm×150 nm NbN-MgO-NbN Josephson junctions in parallel,
reproduced with permission from Grimm [13] (DC Josephson current has
been suppressed by applying a magnetic ﬁeld through the SQUID loop).
emit single photons, detect them, and study the statistics of their
quantum emission.
Future applications of such single microwave photon emission
sources up to the THz range to quantum information are straightfor-
ward.
In conclusion, taking advantage of recent demonstrations of
processes, such as at CEA, it is possible to forecast NbN Supercon-
ducting Processors integrating other on-chip HF devices fabricated
onto 8-inch Si wafers in any medium-size classical Si-CMOS facility.
Future implementation of ULSI refractory nitride processors (NJJ ≈
109/cm2) supposes further down-scaling of NbN junction size
(∼0.1 μm2) with a large cut-oﬀfrequency (RNIC >1 meV) and low
spread (σ ≈1%). This looks achievable in a CMOS foundry as soon
as compact, energy-eﬃcient logic circuits, dense memory gates, and
fast three-terminal ampliﬁers are designed.
www.ebook3000.com

References
175
Acknowledgments
The author thanks numerous former collaborators from CEA-
Grenoble, including M. Aurino, E. Baggetta, S. Bouat, P. Cavalier, R.
Chicault, R. Espiau, N. Hadacek, V. Larrey, M. Levis, L. Maingault, M.
Reymermier, R. Setzu, and L. Vieux-Rochaz. The author also thanks
several CEA, university, and CNRS colleagues, especially C. Antoine,
A. Grimm, M. Hofheinz, and P. Febvre, as well as Fluxonics colleagues.
References
1. Likharev, K. K. (2012). Superconductor digital electronics, Physica C,
482, 6–18.
2. Ruggiero, S. T. (1990). Artiﬁcial tunnel barriers, in Superconducting
Devices, eds. Ruggiero, S. T., and Rudman, D. A. (Academic Press,
Boston), Chapter 10, pp. 373–390.
3. Cardinne, P., Nordman, J., and Renard, M. (1974). On the use of low
barrier potential materials to improve high frequency coupling to
Josephson tunnel junctions. Rev. Phys. Appl., 9, 167–171.
4. CEA LETI Internal Report, DRET Contract (1974).
5. Robinson, A. L. (1983). IBM drops superconducting computer project.
Science, 222, 492–494.
6. Dousselin, G., and Rosenblatt, J. (1980). Behavior of edge-grown low-
capacitance superconducting tunnel junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 51, 802–
804.
7. Buhrman, R. A. (1984). Superconductor microstructures. Physica,
126B, 62–69.
8. Fujimaki, A., Kawai, K., Hayashi, N., Horibe, M., Maruyama, M., and
Hayakawa, H. (1999). Preparation of ramp-edge Josephson junctions
with natural barriers. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 9(2), 3436–3439.
9. Kroger, H., Smith, L. N., and Jillie, D. W. (1981). Selective niobium
anodization process for fabricating Josephson tunnel junctions. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 39, 280.
10. Kroger, H., Potter, C. M., and Jillie, D. W. (1978). Niobium Josephson
junctions with doped amorphous silicon barriers. IEEE Trans. Magn.,
MAG-15, 488–489.
11. Gurvitch, M., Washington, M. A., and Huggins, H. A. (1983). High quality
refractory Josephson tunnel junctions utilizing thin aluminum layers.

176
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
Appl. Phys. Lett., 42, 472–474; Gurvitch, M., Washington, M. A., Huggins,
H. A., and Rowell, T. M. (1983). Preparation and properties of Nb
Josephson junctions with thin Al layers. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-19,
791–794.
12. Villegier, J.-C., Vieux-Rochaz, L., Goniche, M., Renard, P., Vabre, M.
(1985). NbN tunnel junctions. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-21, 498–504.
13. Grimm, A. (2015). Josephson photonics: Statistics of photons emitted
by inelastic Cooper pair tunneling. PhD thesis, Grenoble Alpes
University.
14. Anders, S., et al. (2010). European roadmap on superconductor
electronics - status and perspectives. Physica C, 470(23–24), 2079–
2126.
15. Setzu, R. (2007). Etude et r´ealisation de jonctions Josephson en NbN
`a barri`ere semi-m´etallique en TaxN, PhD thesis, J. Fourier Grenoble
University.
16. Ketchen, M. B., Pearson, D., Kleinsasser, A., et al. (1991). Sub-
μm, planarized, Nb-AlOx-Nb Josephson process for 125 mm wafers
developed in partnership with Si technology. Appl. Phys. Lett., 59,
2609–2611.
17. Villegier, J.-C., Bouat, S., Aurino, M., Socquet-Clerc, C., and Renaud, D.
(2011). Integration of planarized internally-shunted submicron NbN
junctions. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 21, 102–106.
18. Hinode, K., Nagasawa, S., Sugita, M., Satoh, T., Akaike, H., Kitagawa, Y.,
and Hidaka, M. (2003). Pattern-size-free planarization for multilayered
large-scale SFQ circuits. IEICE Trans. Electron., E86-C(12), 2511–2513.
19. Tolpygo, S. K., Amparo, D., Yohannes, D. T., Meckbach, M., and
Kirichenko, A. F. (2009). Process-induced variability of Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb
junctions in superconductor integrated circuits and protection against
it. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 19(3), 135–139.
20. Pavolotsky, A., Dochev, D., and Belitsky, V. (2011). Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb
junction properties variations due to storage and mounting. Proc. of
the 22nd Int. Symposium on Space Terahertz Technology, Tucson, USA,
pp. 1–5.
21. Hinode, K., Satoh, T., Nagasawa, S., and Hidaka, M. (2008). Hydrogen-
inclusion-induced variation of critical current in Nb/AlOx/Nb Joseph-
son junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 104, 023909-1–023909-6.
22. Olaya, D., Dresselhaus, P. D., and Benz, S. P. (2010). Niobium-silicide
junction technology for superconducting digital electronics. IEICE
Trans. Electron., E93C, 463–467.
www.ebook3000.com

References
177
23. Milton, R. M. (1946). A superconducting bolometer for infrared
measurements. Chem. Rev., 39, 419–433.
24. Braginski, A. I., and Talvacchio, J. (1990). MBE growth of supercon-
ducting materials, in Superconducting Devices, eds. Ruggiero, S. T., and
Rudman, D. A. (Academic Press, Boston), Chapter 8, pp. 273–324.
25. Gurvitch, M., Remeika, J. P., Rowell, J. M., Geerk, J., and Lowe, W. P.
(1985). Tunneling, resistive and structural study of NbN and other
superconducting nitrides. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-21(2), 509–513.
26. Lamura, G., Villegier, J.-C., Gauzzi, A., Le Cochec, J., Laval, J. Y.,
Placais, B., Hadacek, N., and Bok, J. (2002). Granularity-induced
gapless superconductivity in NbN ﬁlms: evidence of thermal phase
ﬂuctuations. Phys. Rev. B, 65, 104507 (1–4).
27. Keskar, K. S., Yamashita, T., and Onodera, Y. (1971). Superconducting
transition temperatures of RF sputtered NbN ﬁlms. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.,
10(3), 70; Oya, G., and Onodera, Y. (1974). Transition temperatures
and crystal structures of single-crystal and polycrystalline NbN ﬁlms.
J. Appl. Phys., 45, 1389–1397.
28. Shy, Y. M., Toth, L. E., and Somasundaram, R. (1973). Superconducting
properties, electrical resistivities and structure of NbN thin ﬁlms.
J. Appl. Phys., 44, 5539.
29. Aubert, A., and Spitz, J. (1975). Structure and composition of thin ﬁlms
of niobium nitride and carbone nitride obtained from reactive cathodic
sputtering. Le Vide, 30(175), 1–7 (In French).
30. Villegier, J.-C., and Veler, J-C. (1983). Investigation of high rate
magnetron sputtering of niobium ﬁlms for Josephson integrated
circuits. IEEE Trans. Magn., 19(3), 946–950.
31. Noskov, V. L., Titenko, Y. V., Korzhinskii, F. I., Zelenkevich, R. L., and
Komashko, V. A. (1980). Heteroepitaxial layers of niobium nitride on
sapphire. Sov. Phys. Crystallogr., 25, 504–508.
32. Espiau de Lama¨estre, R., Odier, Ph., and Vill´egier, J.-C. (2007).
Microstructure of NbN epitaxial ultrathin ﬁlms grown on A-, M-, and
R-plane sapphire. Appl. Phys. Lett., 91, 232501-1–232501-3.
33. Villegier, J.-C., Bouat, S., Cavalier, P., Setzu, R., Espiau de Lama¨estre, R.,
Jorel, C., Odier, P., Guillet, B., Mechin, L., Chauvat, M. P., and Ruterana,
P. (2009). Epitaxial growth of sputtered ultra-thin NbN layers and
junctions on sapphire. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 19(3), 3375–
3378.
34. Bacon, D. D., English, A. T., Nakahara, S., Peters, F. G., Schreiber, H.,
Sinclair, W. R., and van Dover, R. B. (1983). Low temperature deposition

178
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
and properties of superconducting NbN by reactive DC magnetron
sputtering. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 1, 365.
35. Kosaka, S., and Onodera, Y. (1974). Epitaxial deposition of niobium
nitride by sputtering. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 13(Suppl 1), 613.
36. Yamashita, T., Hamasaki, K., Kodaira, Y., and Komata, T. (1985). Nano-
meter bridge with epitaxially deposited NbN on MgO ﬁlm. IEEE Trans.
Magn., 21(2), 932–934.
37. Zhang, J. J., Su, X., Zhang, L., Zheng, L., Wang, X. F., and You, L. (2013).
Improvement of the superconducting properties of NbN thin ﬁlm on
single-crystal silicon substrate by using a TiN buﬀer layer. Supercond.
Sci. Technol., 26, 045010 (1–6).
38. Jia, X. Q., Kang, L., Gu, M., Yang, X. Z., Chen, C., Tu, X. C., Jin, B. B., Xu,
W. W., Chen, J., and Wu, P. H. (2015). Fabrication of a strain-induced
high performance NbN ultrathin ﬁlm by a Nb5N6 buﬀer layer on Si
substrate. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 27, 035010 (1–6).
39. Villegier, J.-C., Radparvar, M., Yu, L. S., and Faris, S. M. (1989). RF-
sputter-deposited magnesium oxide ﬁlms as high quality adjustable
tunnel barriers. IEEE Trans. Magn., 25(2), 1227–1230.
40. Villegier, J.-C., Delaet, B., Larrey, V., Febvre, P., Tao, J. W., Angenieux,
G. (1999). Extraction of material parameters in NbN multilayer
technology for RSFQ circuits. Physica C, 326–327, 133–143.
41. Kawakami, A., Wang, Z., and Miki, S., (2001). Low-loss epitaxial
NbN/MgO/NbN trilayers for THz applications. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 11, 80–83.
42. Villegier, J.-C. (2011). Tutorial: microelectronic issues & prospects in
disruptive superconducting integrated circuits. Colloquium Microelec-
tronics August 30th 2011; Joao Pessoa Brazil.
43. Shinoki, F., Takada, S., Kosaka, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1980). Fabrication
of high quality NbN/Pb Josephson junction. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 19(1),
591–594.
44. Kosaka, S., Shinoki, F., Takada, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1981). Fabrication
of NbN/Pb Josephson tunnel junctions with a novel integration
method. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-17, 314.
45. Darlinski, A., and Halbritter, J. (1987). Angle-resolved XPS studies of
oxides at NbN, NbC, and Nb surfaces. Surf. Interface Anal., 10, 223–237.
46. Broom, R. F., Raider, S., Oosenbrug, A., Drake, R. E., and Walter, W.
(1980). Niobium oxide-barrier tunnel junction. IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, 27(10), 1998–2008.
www.ebook3000.com

References
179
47. Hikita, M., Takei, K., and Igarashi, M. (1983). Ar ion bombardment
eﬀects of NbN/Pb Josephson junctions with plasma oxidized barriers.
J. Appl. Phys., 54, 7066.
48. van Dover, R. B., Bacon, D. D. (1983). Properties of NbN/Pb Josephson
tunnel junctions. IEEE Trans. Magn., 19(3), 951–953.
49. Kosaka, S., Shoji, L., Aoyagi, M., Shinoki, F., Tahara, S., Ohigashi, H.,
Nakagawa, H., Takada, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1985). An integration of
all refractory Josephson logic LSI circuit. IEEE Trans. Magn., 21, 102–
109.
50. Yano, S., Tarutani, Y., Mori, H., Yamada, H., Hirano, M., and Kawabe,
U. (1987). Fabrication and characteristics of NbN-based Josephson
junctions for logic LSI circuits. IEEE Trans. Magn., 23(2), 1472–1475.
51. Kroger, H. (1980). Josephson devices coupled by semiconductor links.
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 27(10), 2016–2026.
52. Shoji, A., Shinoki, F., Kosaka, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1981). Tunneling
characteristics of NbN/NbN Josephson junctions with glow-discharge-
produced amorphous silicon barriers. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 20, L587.
53. Shinoki, F., Shoji, A., Kosaka, S., Takada, S., and Hayakawa, H. (1981).
Niobium nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with oxidized amorphous
silicon barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett., 38, 285–286.
54. Jillie, D. W., Kroger, H., Smith, L. N., Cukauskas, E. J., and Nisenoﬀ,
M. (1982). Niobium nitride-niobium Josephson tunnel junctions with
sputtered amorphous silicon barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett., 40, 747–749.
55. Kuriki, S., and Matsuda, M. (1987). DC SQUIDs made of NbN/a-Si/NbN
tunnel Junctions. IEEE Trans. Magn., MAG-23(2), 1064–1067.
56. Kooi, J. W., Stern, J. A., Chattopadhyay, G., Le Duc, H. G., Bumble, B., and
Zmuidzinas, J. (1998). Low-loss NbTiN ﬁlms for THz SIS mixer tuning
circuits. Int. J. Infrared Millimeter Waves, 19(3), 373–383.
57. Shoji, A., Masahiro, A., Kosaka, S., Shinoki, F., and Hayakawa, H. (1985).
Niobium nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with magnesium oxide
barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett., 46, 1098–1100.
58. Le Duc, H. G., Khanna, S. K., and Stern, J. A. (1987). All NbN tunnel
junction fabrication. Int. J. Infrared Millimeter Waves, 8(10), 1243–
1248.
59. Kerber, G. L., Cooper, J. E., Morris, R. S., Spargo, J. W., and Toth, A. G.
(1989). NbN/MgO/NbN Josephson tunnel junctions fabricated on thin
underlayers of MgO. IEEE Trans. Magn., 25(2), 1294–1297.

180
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
60. Larrey, V., Villegier, J.-C., Salez, M., Miletto-Granozio, F., and Karpov, A.
(1999). Processing and characterization of high Jc NbN superconduct-
ing tunnel junctions for THz analog circuits and RSFQ. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 9(2), 3216–3219.
61. Kawakami, A., Uzawa, Y., and Wang, Z. (2003). Development of epitaxial
NbN/MgO/NbN-superconductor-insulator-superconductor mixers for
operations over the Nb gap frequency. Appl. Phys. Lett., 83(19), 3954–
3956.
62. Senapati, K., and Barber, Z. H. (2009). Sidewall shunted overdamped
NbN-MgO-NbN Josephson junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett., 94, 173511-1–
173511-3.
63. Thakoor, S., et al. (1987). Insulator interface eﬀects in sputter
deposited NbN/MgO/NbN tunnel junctions. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 5,
1721.
64. Dieleman, P., Bukkems, H. G., Klapwijk, T. M., Schieke, M., and Gundlach,
K. H. (1997). Observation of Andreev reﬂection enhanced shot noise.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 79(18), 3486–3489.
65. Chen, K., Cunnane, D., Shen, Y., Xi, X. X., Kleinsasser, A. W., and
Rowell, J. M. (2012). Multiple Andreev reﬂection in MgB2/MgO/MgB2
Josephson junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett., 100, 122601 (1–3).
66. Chicault, R., and Villegier, J.-C. (1987). New phonon structures
observed by tunneling in granular NbN ﬁlms. Phys. Rev. B, 36(10),
5215–5224.
67. Blaugher, R. D., Przybysz, J. X., Talvacchio, J., and Buttyan, J. (1987).
Processing of All-NbN tunnel junction series arrays. IEEE Trans. Magn.,
23(2), 673–675.
68. Romestain, R., Delaet, B., Renaud-Goud, P., Wang, I., Jorel, C., Villegier,
J.-C., and Poizat, J.-Ph. (2004). Fabrication of a superconducting
niobium nitride hot electron bolometer for single-photon counting.
New J. Phys., 6, 129 (1–15).
69. Escoﬃer, W., Chapelier, C., Hadacek, N., and Vill´egier, J.-C. (2004).
Anomalous proximity eﬀect in an inhomogeneous disordered super-
conductor. Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 217005 (1–4).
70. Akaike, H., Funai, T., Naito, N., and Fujimaki, A. (2013). Characterization
of NbN tunnel junctions with radical-nitrided AlNx barriers. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 23(3), 1101306 (1–6).
71. Makise, K., Terai, H., and Wang, Z. (2012). Resistively shunted
NbN/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions for single ﬂux quantum circuits. Phys.
Proc., 36, 116–120.
www.ebook3000.com

References
181
72. Makise, K., Terai, H., and Uzawa, Y. (2016). NbN/AlN/NbN/TiN tunnel
junctions on Si (100) substrate for superconducting devices. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 26(3), 1–3.
73. Andreev, A. F. (1964). Thermal conductivity of the intermediate state
of superconductors. Sov. Phys.-JETP, 19(5), 1228–1231.
74. De Gennes, P. G., and Guyon, E. (1963). Phys. Lett., 3, 168; De Gennes,
P. G. (1964). Rev. Mod. Phys., 36, 225.
75. Likharev, K. K. (1979). Superconducting weak links. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
51, 101–159.
76. Golubov, A. A., Kupriyanov, M. Yu, and Il’ichev, E. (2004). The current-
phase relation in Josephson junctions. Rev. Mod. Phys., 76(2), 411–469.
77. Kaul, A. B., Whiteley, S. R., Van Duzer, Th., Lei, Yu, Newman, N., and
Rowell, J. M. (2001). Internally shunted sputtered NbN Josephson
junctions with a TaNx barrier for nonlatching logic applications. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 78, 99.
78. van Duzer, T., Zheng, L., Meng, X., Loyo, C., Whiteley, S. R., Yu, L.,
Newman, N., Rowell, J. M., and Yoshikawa, N. (2002). Engineering
issues in high-frequency RSFQ circuits. Physica C, 372–376, 1–6.
79. Yu, L., Newman, N., Rowell, J. M., and Van Duzer, T. (2005). Incorpo-
ration of a frequency-dependent dielectric response for the barrier
material in the Josephson junction circuit model. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 15(3), 3886–3900.
80. Setzu, R., Baggetta, E., and Villegier, J.-C. (2008). Study of NbN
Josephson junctions with a tantalum nitride barrier tuned to the metal-
insulator transition. J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 97, 012077 (1–6).
81. Yamamori, H., Ishizaki, M., Shoji, A., Dresselhaus, P. D., and Benz, S. P.
(2006). 10 V programmable Josephson voltage standard circuits using
NbN/TiNx/NbN/TiNx/NbN double-junction stacks. Appl. Phys. Lett.,
88, 042503.
82. Uzawa, Y., Fujii, Y., Gonzalez, A., Kaneko, K., Kroug, M., Kojima, T.,
Miyachi, A., Makise, K., Saito, S., Terai, H., and Wang, Z. (2015). Tuning
circuit material for mass-produced terahertz SIS receivers. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 25(3), 2401005 (1–5).
83. Kerber, G. L., Abelson, L. A., Elmadjian, R. N., and Ladizinsky, E. G.
(1999). Characteristics of junctions and resistors fabricated using
an all-NbN superconductor integrated circuit foundry process. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 9(2), 3267–3270.
84. Abelson, L. A., and Kerber, G. L. (2004). Superconductor integrated
circuit fabrication technology. Proc. IEEE, 92(10), 1517–1533.

182
Refractory Niobium Nitride NbN Josephson Junctions and Applications
85. Spargo, J. W., Cooper, J. E., Kerber, G. L., King, G. R., Morris, R. S., and
Toth, A. G. (1991). A 60-GHz NbN single-ﬂux quantum counter circuit.
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 26(6), 884–886.
86. Eaton, L. R., Durand, D. J., Sandell, R., and Spargo, J. W. (1995). Design of
a 10K NbN A/D converter for IR focal plane array sensors. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 5(2), 2457–2460.
87. Durand, D., Dalrymple, B., Eaton, L., Spargo, J., Wire, M., Dowdy, M.,
and Ressler, M. (1998). 10K NbN ADC for IR sensor applications. Appl.
Supercond., 6(10–12), 741–750.
88. Johnson, M. W., Durand, D., Eaton, L., Leung, M., Spooner, A., and Tighe,
T. (1999). NbN circuits and packaging for 10 Kelvin IR focal plane array
sensor signal processing. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 9(2), 4357–
1360.
89. Sun, A. G., Dalrymple, B., Durand, D. J., Herr, Q. P., Johnson, M. W.,
Luine, J. A., and Spooner, A. (2001). 10K NbN DSP module for IR sensor
applications. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 11(1), 312–317.
90. van Duzer, T., and Turner, C. W. (1998). Principles of Superconductive
Devices and Circuits, 2nd ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ).
91. Gross, R., and Marx, A. (2005). Digital electronics, in Applied Supercon-
ductivity: Josephson Eﬀect and Superconducting Electronics (Walther-
Meißner-Institut, Garching), Chapter 5, pp. 215–268.
92. Tolpygo, S. K., Bolkhovsky, V., Weir, T. J., Oliver, W. D., and Gouker, M. A.
(2015). Fabrication process and properties of fully-planarized deep-
submicron Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions for VLSI circuits. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 25, 1101312.
93. Herr, A. Y., Herr, Q. P., Oberg, O. T., Naaman, O., Przybysz, J. X., Borodulin,
P., and Shauck, S. B. (2013). An 8-bit carry look-ahead adder with
150 ps latency and sub-microwatt power dissipation at 10 GHz. J. Appl.
Phys., 113(3), 033911 (1–6).
94. Yu, L., Gandikota, R., Singh, R. K., Gu, L., Smith, D. J., Meng, X., Zeng, X.,
Van Duzer, T., Rowell, J. M., and Newman, N. (2006). Internally shunted
Josephson junctions with barriers tuned near the metal–insulator
transition for RSFQ logic applications. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 19,
719–731.
95. Villegier, J.-C. (2008). Report on fast NbN SFQ analytical head
fabrication. R&T. CNES-Toulouse Fr.
96. Hadacek N. (2002). Etude de Films Minces et de Jonctions Joseph-
son en Nitrures Supraconducteurs (TiN et NbN). Application `a la
Logique RSFQ. PhD thesis, Joseph Fourier Grenoble University.
www.ebook3000.com

References
183
97. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory. (2014).
Forecasting superconductive electronics technology. The Next Wave,
20(3), 1–10.
98. Scott Holmes, D., Ripple, A. L., and Manheimer, M. A. (2013).
Energy-eﬃcient superconducting computing - power budgets and
requirements. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 23, 1701610 (1–10).
99. Herr, Q. P., Herr, A. Y., Oberg, O. T., and Ioannidis, A. G. (2011). Ultra-low-
power superconductor logic. J. Appl. Phys., 109(10), 103903 (1–8).
100. Delacour, C., Pannetier, B., Villegier, J.-C., and Bouchiat, V. (2012).
Quantum and thermal phase slips in superconducting niobium nitride
(NbN) ultrathin crystalline nanowire: application to single photon
detection. Nano Lett., 12, 3501−3506.
101. Miki, S., Yamashita, T., Wang, Z., and Terai, H. (2014). A 64-pixel NbTiN
superconducting nanowire single-photon detector array for spatially
resolved photon detection. Opt. Express, 22, 7811.
102. Ejrnaes, M., et al. (2011). Characterization of superconducting pulse
discriminators based on parallel NbN nanostriplines. Supercond. Sci.
Technol., 24, 035018.
103. McCaughan, A. N., and Berggren, K. K. (2014). A superconducting-
nanowire three-terminal electrothermal device. Nano Lett., 14,
5748−5753.
104. van Woerkom, D. J., Geresdi, A., and Kouwenhoven, L. P. (2015). 1
minute parity lifetime of a NbTiN Cooper-pair transistor. Nat. Phys., 11,
547–550.
105. Hofheinz, M., et al. (2011). Bright side of the Coulomb blockade. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 106, 217005.
106. Ingold, G.-L., and Nazarov, Y. V. (1992). In Single Charge Tunneling, eds.
Grabert, H., and Devoret, M. H. (Plenum, New York).

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 7
Applications in Superconducting SIS
Mixers and Oscillators: Toward
Integrated Receivers
P. N. Dmitriev, L. V. Filippenko, and V. P. Koshelets
Kotelnikov Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics (IREE),
Mokhovaya Street 11, Building 7, 125009 Moscow, Russia
pavel@hitech.cplire.ru, lyudmila@hitech.cplire.ru, valery@hitech.cplire.ru
Currently, Nb-based tunnel junctions are basic elements of most
low-Tc superconducting electronic devices and circuits. In particular,
the superconductor–insulator–superconductor (SIS) mixers that
employ high-quality Nb-based tunnel junctions have the noise
temperature limited only by the fundamental quantum value hf /2kB
[1–13], where h is Planck’s constant, f is frequency, and kB is
Boltzmann’s constant. The SIS receivers are presently used in
both ground-based and space millimeter and submillimeter radio
telescopes. At higher frequencies, the lack of compact and easily
tunable local oscillators (LO) motivates the direct integration of
a superconducting local oscillator with the SIS mixer. A super-
conducting integrated receiver (SIR) [14–17] comprises on one
chip all the elements needed for heterodyne detection. Being
lightweight and having low power consumption, in combination
with nearly quantum-limited sensitivity and a wide tuning range
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

186
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
of the superconducting local oscillator, the SIR becomes a perfect
candidate for many practical applications. In this chapter, an
overview of the Nb-based tunnel junction’s technology at Kotelnikov
IREE in Moscow (as well as the SIR and the superconducting LO
developments) is presented. By improving on the fully Nb-based SIR,
we have developed and studied Nb–AlN–NbN circuits that exhibit an
extended operation frequency range. Continuous frequency tuning
for the phase-locked superconducting LO has been experimentally
demonstrated in the range of 350–750 GHz. These achievements
enabled the development of a 480–650 GHz integrated receiver
for the atmospheric-research instrument TELIS (TErahertz and
submillimeter LImb Sounder) [18–21]. Further developments of
the Nb-based SIS junction technology, along with examples of its
laboratory applications, will be also presented.
7.1 Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS
Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
To realize a quantum-limited performance, the SIS tunnel junctions
with a high current density, high energy gap, and extremely small
leakage currents are required. In this section, the technological
aspects for fabrication of high-quality Nb-based tunnel junctions
with parameters required for low-noise SIS are discussed. The
fabrication technology of the Nb–AlOx–Nb tunnel junctions is based
on the fact that a very thin Al layer can completely cover the
base Nb electrode [22–24], somehow “planarizing” the column-like
structure of the Nb ﬁlm. This Al layer is subsequently oxidized
and the top Nb electrode is deposited on the oxidized layer to
form a so-called trilayer structure. The SIS tunnel junctions were
fabricated from the trilayer structure by using the selective niobium
anodization process (SNAP) [25] or the selective niobium etching
and anodization process (SNEAP) [23, 26]. The stress, surface
morphology, superconducting characteristics, and crystal structure
of sputtered Nb ﬁlms, as well as the surface coverage of thin Al layers
deposited on Nb ﬁlms with diﬀerent sputtering parameters, were
evaluated in order to judge their applicability for fabrication of high-
quality Nb-AlOx–Nb junctions [27–30].
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
187
7.1.1 Niobium Tunnel Junctions with an AlOx Barrier
For low-noise operation, the SIS tunnel junctions with a small
leakage current Il(V ) under the gap voltage and minimal energy
gap spreading δVg are required. This is especially important for
relatively low-frequency devices ( f ≈100–300 GHz), since δVg
has to be much smaller than the frequency quantum hf /e and the
leakage current at a bias voltage of about Vg—hf /2e determines the
noise of the mixer. Any additional structure on the IVC of the junction
considerably decreases the operation range of the mixer. According
to the procedure described above, a thin Al layer covers the Nb base
electrode [22, 23]. As a consequence, a residual Al layer appears
between the Nb and the isolator barrier, and the tunnel structure
is Nb/Al/AlOx/Nb. It results in suppression of the Nb gap and the
appearance of the so-called knee structure due to the proximity
eﬀect. A study of the knee’s dependence on the thickness of the base
Nb electrode and the additional Al layer was performed [31]; the
experimental results were compared with numerical calculations
based on the microscopic theory of the proximity eﬀect.
The SIS tunnel junctions were fabricated [31] by using SNEAP
on the crystalline Si substrates covered by a buﬀer layer of Al2O3
(d = 80 nm). A trilayer structure, Nb–Al/Al2O3–Nb, was deposited
in a single vacuum run by using DC magnetron sputtering for both
Nb and Al ﬁlms (PAr = 1·10−2 and 5·10−3 mbar; the deposition
rate was approximately 2 and 0.2 nm/s for Nb and Al, respectively)
[32]. The substrates were thermally attached to the holder under
temperature control. Pure oxygen at an appropriate pressure was
used for the formation of the tunnel barrier (oxidation temperature
300 K, time = 20 min). The SIS junction area was deﬁned by RIE
followed by anodization; the thermally deposited SiO layer of about
270 nm was used as an insulator.
According to the Werthamer tunnel theory, the IVC of the Nb–
Al/Al2O3–Nb (S-S’-I-S) tunnel junction depend on the quasiparticle
density of states (DOS) in the S’ layer (Al). The DOS can be calculated
on the basis of the microscopic proximity eﬀect model for S-S’
bilayers [33]. The model assumes a short electron mean free path
(dirty limit conditions) in both S (Nb) and S’ (Al) materials, resulting

188
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
in the following parameters:
γ = ρsξs
ρs′ξ ∗
s′ =

Ds′
Ds
Ns′(0)
Ns(0) , γB =
RB
ρs′ξ ∗
s′ .
Here, ξs = √Ds/2πTcs, ξ ∗
s′ = √Ds′/2πTcs, Ds,s′, ρs,s′, and Ns,s′(0) are
the coherence lengths, the diﬀusion coeﬃcients, the normal state
resistivities, and the electronic densities of states in the normal
states of S and S’ metals, Tcs is the critical temperature of S metal,
and RB is the product of the resistance of the S-S’ boundary and its
area. The best ﬁt with the experiment gave [31] the following set
of parameters: ξNb = 15 nm, ξAl = 40 nm, γ = 0.3, and γB = 1.
Calculations in the model above show that the DOS in the S’ layer
has an energy gap of g < bulk
Nb with a large weight of ﬁlled subgap
states within the energy range g < E < bulk
Nb . That leads to the
appearance of the knee structure on the IVC.
The deﬁnition of the knee value is illustrated in Fig. 7.1a [31].
The knee current Ik is deﬁned as the point of maximum deﬂection of
the IVC from the Rn line. Ik is normalized to the quasiparticle current
jump Ig at the gap voltage Vg. The value of Ig is evaluated as a current
at Vg between the lines of Rn and leakage resistance Rj. The value of
Vg is determined at the crossing of the bisector between Rn and Rj
with the measured IVC (see Fig. 7.1a).
The experimentally measured IVCs at diﬀerent thicknesses of the
base Nb electrode for dAl = 9 nm are presented in Fig. 7.1b, and
the currents are normalized to I(4 mV). The values of the knee
determined from both theoretical and experimental curves, as well
as the measured values of Vg, are listed in Table 7.1 [31].
Table 7.1
Parameters of Nb–AlOx–Nb junctions (area A = 7200 μ2)
for dAl = 9 nm [31]
dNb, nm
I∗
k/I∗
g (theory for dAl = 8 nm)
Ik/Ig
Vg, mV
35
0.04
0.055
2.75
50
0.85
0.075
2.77
75
0.145
0.105
2.79
100
0.185
0.17
2.82
150
0.245
0.195
2.84
200
0.285
0.245
2.86
350
0.325
0.21
2.86
500
0.325
0.225
2.86
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
189
V
I
Ik
Vg
Ig
Rn
Rv
Rj
2,5
3,0
3,5
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
dNb =
   35 nm
   75 nm
  200 nm
3
2
1
t
n
e
rr
u
C
 
d
e
zil
a
m
r
o
N
Voltage (mV)
b)
a)
Figure 7.1
(a) Deﬁnition of the main parameters for the model SIS IVC. (b)
Experimentally measured IVCs at dAl = 9 nm for three diﬀerent thicknesses
of the base electrode. Reproduced with permission from Dmitriev et al. [31].
The normalized knee value KNb = Ik(dNb)/Ik (200 nm) is shown
in Fig. 7.2. One can see that the experimental dependence coincides
well with the theory up to dNb = 200 nm. At further increase of
the Nb thickness, the surface morphology of the sputtered Nb ﬁlms
changes considerably [29]. As a result, the Al layer is not uniform
and the measured knee (averaged over the junction area) is lower
than the calculated one.
To avoid the morphology eﬀect, a thin Nb base electrode (dNb =
50 nm) was used to study the knee’s dependencies on the Al
thickness. The experimental IVCs for diﬀerent Al thicknesses are
shown in Fig. 7.3 [31]. It should be noted that the Al thickness
decreased with oxidation; therefore, 1 nm was subtracted from the

190
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
0
100
200
300
400
500
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
1,2
 Experiment, dAl = 9 nm
   Theory, dAl = 8 nm
K
 
e
u
la
v 
e
e
n
k 
d
e
zila
m
r
o
N
Nb
Thickness of Nb layer (nm)
Figure 7.2
Calculated and measured values of the knee (normalized to the
value at dNb = 200 nm) versus the thickness of the Nb base electrode.
Reproduced with permission from Dmitriev et al. [31].
initial value in the calculations (see Fig. 7.2). The obtained data are
summarized in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2
Parameters of Nb–AlOx–Nb junctions
(A = 1700 μ2) for dNb = 50 nm [31]
dAl, nm
I∗
k/I ∗
g (theory)
Ik/Ig
Vg, mV
2
0
–
–
3
0.016
0
2.86
4
0.031
0.01
2.85
5
0.041
0.02
2.84
6
0.05
0.03
2.83
7
0.056
0.04
2.81
8
0.060
0.05
2.78
9
0.062
0.07
2.77
10
0.065
0.085
2.73
15
0.07
0.115
2.66
The SIS junctions with a thin Nb base electrode have almost ideal
IVCs but are not suitable for high-frequency application since dNb <
λNb
L
= 90 nm, which considerably increases the inductance of the
microwave elements. To overcome this problem, an additional Al
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
191
2,6
2,8
3,0
3,2
0,00
0,25
0,50
0,75
1,00
 dAl = 
 15 nm
 10 nm
   8 nm
   6 nm
   3 nm
t
n
e
rr
u
C
 
d
e
zila
m
r
o
N
Voltage (mV)
Figure 7.3
Experimentally measured IVCs at dNb = 50 nm for ﬁve diﬀerent
thicknesses of the Al layer. Reproduced with permission from Dmitriev et al.
[31].
layer was introduced in the Nb base electrode to realize a “knee-
free” IVC for a reasonably thick base Nb [31]. The introduction
of an additional Al interlayer into Nb/Al/AlOx/Nb structures leads
to a steeper IVC and disappearance of the knee structure. The
reason is that with the introduction of such a layer, the order
parameter in a thin Nb–Al bilayer near to the barrier becomes
spatially homogeneous, and thus the density of states in this bilayer
becomes BCS-like, with a smaller energy gap. The experimental IVC
for Nb/Aladd/Nbadd–Al2/AlOx–Nb structure is shown in Fig. 7.4.
As a result of Nb–AlOx–Nb technology optimization and extensive
analysis of the SIS receiver designs, a number of low-noise receivers
have been designed and tested [6, 15]. The results of a quasi-
optical 500 GHz SIS receiver are presented below [6]. The receiver
consists of a double dipole antenna SIS mixer, with integrated tuning
elements. It was designed as a reference system to measure the
ultimate performance of an integrated receiver [4, 5]. The tuning
circuit consists of an end-loaded stripline connected to the double
dipole antenna via a matching stripline transformer [6, 15]. The SIS
junction is an Nb–AlOx–Nb junction with an area of 1.5 μm2 and a
normal resistance of Rn = 14 ; Rj/Rn = 30. The Josephson eﬀect is

192
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Nb-Al-Nb-Al/AlOx-Nb
Rj/Rn = 40  Ik/Ig = 0.02
Vg = 2.6 mV,  δVg = 150 mV
(  t
n
e
rr
u
C
μA)
Voltage (mV)
Figure 7.4
The IVC of the Nb/Ala/Nba–Al/AlOx–Nb junction at the
thickness of the additional Al layer dAla = 5 nm and dNba = 50 nm.
Reproduced with permission from Dmitriev et al. [31].
Figure 7.5
I–V curves and IF output of the receiver. (a) Unpumped I–V
curve. (b) Pumped I–V curve, identical for hot and cold loads. (c) IF output
for a 295 K load (at optimal LO power). (d) The same as in (c) for a 78 K
load. (e) IF output for zero LO power [6].
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
193
Figure 7.6
DSB receiver noise temperature for two diﬀerent temperatures,
uncorrected for the beam splitter. For comparison, the photon-noise ﬂoor of
hf /2kB is included (represented by the dashed line) [6].
suppressed by an integrated magnetic ﬁeld control line. The receiver
chip (4 × 4 × 0.5 mm3) is mounted on a silicon elliptical lens
covered with an antireﬂection coating. A back reﬂector is mounted
behind the antenna. The measured unpumped and pumped junction
I–V curves, as well as the dependence of the IF output power
on bias voltage, are shown in Fig. 7.5 [6]. The measured double-
side-band (DSB) receiver noise temperature vs. the LO frequency
is presented in Fig. 7.6 [6] and must be compared with the dashed
line that indicates the photon noise limit hf /2kB, with hf /2 being
the photon energy. The best noise temperature, uncorrected for the
beam splitter, of 40 ± 3 K was measured at 471 GHz. This is only
approximately three times the zero-point ﬂuctuation’s noise level of
11.4 K.
7.1.2 Niobium-Based Tunnel Junctions with AlN Barrier
To realize the ultimate performance of the SIS mixers at sub-
THz frequencies, tunnel junctions with very high tunnel barrier
transparencies are required. Unfortunately, there is a limit for the

194
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
increasing of the AlOx barrier transparency (of approximately 10–
15 kA/cm2); at a higher current density, abrupt degradation of
the junction’s quality takes place. The idea of utilizing SIS tunnel
junctions for heterodyne mixing at THz frequencies has received
remarkable support due to developments of Nb–Al–AlN–Nb tunnel
junctions with very high current densities of up to 100 kA/cm2. That
corresponds to low RnS values down to 2  · μm2 (where Rn and S
are junction the normal-state resistance and area, respectively) [34–
38].
We produce Nb–Al–AlN–Nb tunnel junctions [39] in an oil-free
UHV sputtering system with a base pressure of 10−6 Pa, which
is provided by a combination of turbo-molecular and cryogenic
pumps. This system is equipped with 5-inch DC and RF magnetron
sources, an ion gun, and a grounded water-cooled substrate table.
Wafers are ﬁxed to the copper chucks using vacuum grease and are
attached to the substrate table. The Nb–AlN–Nb junction fabrication
procedure [39] follows the well-known recipe for conventional Nb–
AlOx–Nb junction production, and is described elsewhere [31]. The
only diﬀerence in our case is the substitution of an oxidation step by
a nitridation one. As in the case of the conventional Al oxide process,
we deposited Nb and Al thin ﬁlms using DC magnetron sputtering in
an Ar atmosphere with a working gas pressure of 1 Pa. The dielectric
layer for junction insulation consists of 250 nm SiO2, deﬁned in a
self-aligned lift-oﬀprocedure. The wiring layer is deﬁned by lift-oﬀ.
It is well known that by using a simple exposure of sputtered
Al surface in an N2 atmosphere, one cannot acquire a continuous
AlN layer of suﬃcient thickness to be used as a tunnel barrier [35].
Several successful attempts of Al nitridation have been made using
a glow discharge in a nitrogen atmosphere [35–38]. Following this
idea, we grew an AlN tunnel barrier immediately after Al deposition
by using RF magnetron discharge. Samples were attached to the
grounded substrate table and maintained at 20◦C. To obtain a
density of nitrogen ions capable of producing an AlN tunnel barrier,
the sample holder was positioned directly above a ﬁve-inch Al
magnetron RF source with a holder-source distance of 14 cm. The
electrical scheme of the nitridation process is presented in Fig. 7.7.
We initiated a plasma discharge using a very small power density of
0.5–0.75 W/cm2. The nitrogen pressure was kept constant at 4.5 Pa.
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
195
Figure 7.7
The electrical scheme of the nitridation process. Reproduced
with permission from Dmitriev et al. [39].
The total duration of the nitridation process varied within the range
of 100–300 seconds. The use of such conditions, the small power,
large source-sample distance, and dense plasma, permitted us to
avoid both exposure of the samples to an energetic ﬂux of ions and
signiﬁcant sputtering of the Al target during AlN growth.
A set of Nb–AlN–Nb junction IV characteristics is presented in
Fig. 7.8. The critical current is suppressed by a magnetic ﬁeld.
The RnS value changes from 24  · μm2 for the curve (a) to 0.9
 · μm2 for the curve (d). The increase of the subgap leakage
follows the increase of the critical current density. Moreover, a self-
heating in the junctions can be clearly seen in this ﬁgure. It causes
both gap voltage reduction and back bending of the gap singularity.
Figure 7.8b presents the IV characteristic of an Nb–AlN–Nb junction
exposed to the nitrogen plasma for 300 seconds at 60 W of RF
power. This junction with low RnS of 10 *μm2 demonstrates
excellent tunnel characteristics with Rj/Rn = 16. From other IV

196
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Voltage, mV
Voltage, mV
Voltage, mV
Voltage, mV
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Rj/Rn = 12
Rj/Rn = 8
Rj/Rn = 16
Rj/Rn = 20
Figure 7.8
IVCs of Nb-AlN-Nb junctions with (a) 24 ·μm2, (b) 10 ·μm2,
(c) 2.7  · μm2, (d) RnS = 0.9  · μm2; the critical current is suppressed by
the magnetic ﬁeld. Reproduced with permission from Dmitriev et al. [39].
curves presented in Fig. 7.8 it is clear that the RnS value can be easily
lowered down to 5–7 without signiﬁcant degradation. Dependences
of the junction quality parameter Rj/Rn on tunnel current density
for Nb/AlOx/Nb junctions [39] are shown by asterisks in Fig. 7.9.
The implementation of an AlN tunnel barrier in combination with
a NbN top superconducting electrode is expected to give a signiﬁcant
improvement in SIS THz mixer performance. To explore this idea
we produced an Nb–AlN–NbN tunnel junction. NbN was deposited
by DC reactive magnetron sputtering at ambient temperature with
1.8 W/cm2 power density using Ar + 9% N2 gas mixture. Otherwise
the fabrication procedure was the same as described above for Nb–
AlN–Nb junctions. The IV characteristic of this junction is presented
in Fig. 7.10. RnS = 100  · μm2, Rj/Rn = 32, and the gap voltage
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
197
1
10
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Rj/Rn
Jg, kA/cm
2
 Nb-AlOx-Nb
 Nb-AlN-Nb
 Nb-AlN-NbN
Figure 7.9
The dependencies of the Rj/Rn ratio vs. tunnel current density
J g for junctions fabricated at IREE using diﬀerent techniques. Reproduced
with permission from Dmitriev et al. [39].
is 3.7 mV. From this value and the voltage of the singularity
corresponding to the diﬀerence of the superconducting gaps of the
junction contacts Vδ = (NbN – Nb)/e = 0.9 mV we can estimate
the gap voltage of our NbN ﬁlm as V NbN
g
= 2.3 mV. The dependency
of the ratio of subgap to normal state resistance (Rj/Rn) vs. tunnel
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
 
 t
n
e
rr
u
C
 
S
I
S
(mA)
SIS Voltage (mV)
T3-061#01 (Vg=3.7 mV, Rn=19 Ohm, Rj/Rn=33)
Figure 7.10
IV characteristic of the Nb–AlN–NbN junction (S = 2 μm2, Vg
= 3.7 mV, RnS =37  · μm2, J g = 6.5 kA/cm2); the Josephson supercurrent
is suppressed by the magnetic ﬁeld. Reproduced with permission from
Torgashin et al. [40].

198
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
current density (J g) for diﬀerent types of the Nb-based junctions
fabricated at IREE is presented in Fig. 7.9. One can see that the Nb–
AlN–NbN junctions have very good quality at high current densities
that is important for implementation in THz mixers.
High-quality Nb–AlN–NbN tunnel junctions were successfully
used for development of the superconducting local oscillators and
fully integrated superconducting receivers (see Sections 7.2 and
7.3). These junctions were also employed [41] to upgrade the 790–
950 GHz CHAMP+ heterodyne array receiver [42] for the APEX
(Atacama Pathﬁnder EXperiment) telescope [43]. The frequency of
950 GHz corresponds to a 3.9 mV photon step, which exceeds the Vg
of “classical” SIS junctions with Nb electrodes (Vg = 2.8 mV, or even
lower for extremely high current density junctions). Consequently,
the voltage range available for the SIS mixer’s operation is
considerably wider for the Nb-AlN-NbN mixers as compared to the
Nb ones. An additional interest is to gain experience with high-
gap mixer technology for later use at frequencies above 1 THz, for
example, in the Millimetron project [44] in the 950–1150 GHz range.
In order to make a wide band receiver, twin SIS junctions [45,
46] (each with an area of 0.5 μm2) were used, which were coupled
by a waveguide probe to the E ﬁeld of a rectangular waveguide of
300 × 75 μm (Fig. 7.11). Due to the high current density of the
produced AlN barrier, the lower Rn gives a higher 1/RnC ratio for the
Figure 7.11
Photo of the SIS mixer (including the waveguide probe and
ﬁlter structure) installed in a waveguide. The central part, with a SIS twin
junction, is magniﬁed. Reproduced with permission from Khudchenko et al.
[41].
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
199
Figure 7.12
Cross section of the Nb/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions incorpo-
rated into a microstrip line consisting of a 300 nm thick bottom electrode
(ground plane) made of NbTiN and a 500 nm thick top electrode made of Al.
junctions (C being the junction capacitance), thus providing a wider
receiver band. The design of the tuning structure and waveguide
mount is conceptually similar to the original design of the CHAMP+
high-band devices. The SIS junctions were embedded in a 4.5 μm
wide microstrip line with a 6.5 μm interjunction distance, and
coupled to the antenna by a 7 × 27 μm impedance transformer
tuned for the high current density junctions.
The SIS mixer was based on high critical current density
Nb/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions incorporated into a microstrip line
consisting of a 300 nm thick bottom electrode (ground plane) made
of NbTiN and a 500 nm thick top electrode made of Al [7]. The
microstrip electrodes were separated by a 250 nm SiO2 isolator
(see Fig. 7.12). The Nb layer of the SIS junction was deposited
onto the NbTiN ﬁlm, while the NbN layer was in contact with
the Al top electrode. First, an NbTiN ﬁlm was deposited onto a
fused quartz substrate at room temperature, using DC sputtering
with an NbTi target in a nitrogen atmosphere. For the NbTiN ﬁlm,
the critical temperature Tc was measured to be 14.1 K, and the
room temperature resistivity was estimated to be 85 μ · cm. The
geometry of the ground electrode was determined by a reactive ion
etching (RIE) process. The tunnel junctions were fabricated from
an Nb/AlN/NbN trilayer [40] with a normal state resistance–area
product RnA = 7  ·μm2, which corresponds to a current density of
J c = 30 kA/cm2; the Nb and NbN layers had thicknesses of 100 nm.
An AlN tunnel barrier was grown immediately after deposition onto
a 7 nm Al layer using an RF magnetron discharge. The samples were
attached to the grounded substrate table maintained at 20◦C, which

200
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
was positioned directly above a 5-inch Al magnetron RF source
with a holder-source distance of 14 cm. For fabrication of the high
current density trilayer, we initiated a plasma discharge using a
power density of 0.7 W/cm2 at a nitrogen pressure of 4.5 Pa; the
nitridation time was approximately 40 seconds. Afterwards, the NbN
was deposited by DC reactive magnetron sputtering at an ambient
temperature, with 1.8 W/cm2 power density using an Ar + 9% N2
gas mixture. Circular-shape junctions with an area of approximately
0.5 μm2 were deﬁned by deep ultraviolet photolithography. The
SIS junctions were patterned from the Nb/AlN/NbN trilayer by
successive RIE of the NbN layer using CF4, by RF sputtering of
AlN/Al ﬁlm in Ar plasma and, ﬁnally, by RIE of the Nb layer using
CF4. The dielectric layer for junction insulation consists of 250 nm
SiO2, deﬁned in a self-aligned lift-oﬀprocedure. In the ﬁnal step, a
500 nm thick top microstrip electrode made of Al was deposited via
DC magnetron sputtering. Afterwards, the thickness of the quartz
substrate was reduced to 40 μm by mechanical polishing.
The Nb/AlN/NbN junctions fabricated onto an Si substrate with
a 200 nm Nb layer and a 100 nm NbN ﬁlm have a gap voltage
Vg = 3.7 mV and a quality factor (the ratio of the subgap to
the normal state resistance) Rj/Rn > 30 for RnA approximately
30  · μm2, while showing Vg = 3.4 mV and Rj/Rn = 23 for the
higher current density (RnA = 7  · μm2) and the submicrometer
(0.5 μm2) junction area. In contrast, the current SIS junctions
with considerably thinner Nb electrodes (100 nm) and which were
fabricated onto the NbTiN ﬁlm have Vg = 3.2 mV for RnA = 7 ·μm2
(see Fig. 7.13). We cannot completely explain yet the cause of such a
decrease of the junction gap voltage.
7.1.3 NbN Tunnel Junctions with MgO Barrier
For many years, tunnel junctions based on niobium nitride (NbN)
have been attracting interest as an alternative to Nb junctions for
high-frequency applications because NbN has a large gap energy.
There have been many reports on the development of NbN tunnel
junctions using diﬀerent tunnel barrier materials [47–50]. Initially,
only NbN/MgO/NbN junctions exhibited reasonably good quality,
because both NbN and MgO have the same crystal structure with
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
201
Figure 7.13
IVC of the twin Nb–AlN–NbN mixer element fabricated onto an
SiO2 substrate for APEX (area of each tunnel junction S = 0.37 μm2, Vg =
3.22 mV, RnS = 7  · μm2, J g of approximately 34 kA/cm2). The Josephson
supercurrent is suppressed by the magnetic ﬁeld.
a lattice mismatch of less than 5%. Recently, high-quality epitaxial
NbN/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions with a wide range of current
densities have been demonstrated [51–54]. Although previous
works have proven the possibility of producing high-quality, all-
NbN tunnel junctions, we have developed a new technique to
fabricate NbN/MgO/NbN circuits. Our approach [17] resembles the
“classical” technique proposed many years ago for the production of
Nb/AlOx/Nb junctions [23], which are the basic building blocks for
most devices of modern superconducting electronics. According to
our approach, a very thin Mg layer (approximately only 1.5 nm) is
DC-sputtered on the NbN layer, and the Mg is then oxidized in the
O2 plasma (this is similar to the Al nitridization process used for the
fabrication of Nb/AlN/NbN junctions [39, 55]).
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 7.14)
shows the layered structure of the junction area of the sample. The
MgO substrate, the bottom and top NbN electrodes, and the MgO

202
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Figure 7.14
The transmission electron microscopy image of the layered
NbN/MgO/NbN structure. Reproduced with permission from Koshelets
et al. [17].
barrier are visible. The bottom electrode consists of the epitaxial
70 nm NbN monitor layer covered by a 150 nm thick NbN ﬁlm,
which is polycrystalline due to the lift-oﬀstructuring of this and all
subsequent layers. The top NbN electrode is polycrystalline and has
a thickness of 70 nm. A high-resolution TEM image of the 1.5 nm
thick MgO barrier layer is shown in the insert of the picture. It
was observed that the orientation of the crystal structure of NbN
electrodes is maintained across the MgO barrier.
By using the developed technique, it is possible to fabricate
high-quality junctions with a quasiparticle tunnel current density
J g in the range of 0.05–80 kA/cm2. The IVC of the NbN/MgO/NbN
junction (J g = 2 kA/cm2) is shown in Fig. 7.15; the dependencies
of the gap voltage Vg and the quality factor Rj/Rn (the ratio of the
leakage resistance Rj and the normal state resistance Rn) on the
current density are presented in Fig. 7.16. To summarize, a new
technique for fabrication of high-quality SIS tunnel junctions based
on epitaxial NbN ﬁlms with an MgO barrier has been developed;
junctions with a gap voltage Vg = 5.3 mV and a quality barrier
www.ebook3000.com

Nb-Based Tunnel Junctions for Low-Noise SIS Receivers and Superconducting Oscillators
203
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-0,8
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
)
A
m
( t
n
e
rr
u
C
Voltage (mV)
Figure 7.15
IVC of the NbN/MgO/NbN junction (Ic is suppressed by the
magnetic ﬁeld): S = 18 μm2, J g = 2 kA/cm2, Vg = 5.3 mV, Rn = 11.7 ,
Rj(2 mV)/Rn = 80, Rj(4 mV)/Rn = 19.5. Reproduced with permission from
Koshelets et al. [17].
0,1
1
10
100
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
)
V
m
( 
g
V
Jg (kA/cm2)
 Vg
 Rj(4mV)/Rn
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
 Rj(4mV) / Rn
Figure 7.16
Dependencies of the NbN/MgO/NbN junction’s parameters on
the current density J g. Experimental points are connected by lines as a guide
for the eye. Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al. [17].
parameter Rj(4 mV)/Rn > 25 have been fabricated. Such junction
parameters are very promising for the development of an SIR for
frequencies well above 1 THz.

204
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
7.2 Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
Josephson junctions have been considered as natural terahertz
oscillators for more than half a century, ever since Josephson
discovered the eﬀects named after him [56, 57]. Since that time,
many quite diﬀerent types of Josephson oscillators have been
proposed and studied [58–68], but only a few of them were
developed at level suitable for real applications. Let us consider
one of the most attractive applications: the direct integration of a
Josephson local oscillator (JLO) with the most sensitive heterodyne
SIS mixer. There are a number of important requirements of the
JLO’s properties to make it suitable for application in the phase-
locked superconducting integrated receiver (SIR). The continuous
frequency tuning of the JLO over a wide frequency range (usually
more than 100 GHz) and a possibility of the JLO’s phase stabilization
at any frequency in the operation range are required for most
applications. The output power of the JLO should be suﬃcient to
pump the matched SIS mixer within a wide frequency range and
it can be electronically adjusted. Obviously, the JLO should emit
enough power to pump an SIS mixer (of about 1 μW), taking into
account a specially designed mismatch of about 5–7 dB between the
JLO and the SIS mixer, which was introduced to avoid leakage of the
input signal to the LO path. It is a challenge to realize the ultimate
performance of the separate superconducting elements after their
integration into a single-chip device. Another very important issue is
the linewidth of the JLO. Even for wideband room-temperature PLL
systems, the eﬀective regulation bandwidth is limited by the length
of the cables in the loop (about 10 MHz for a typical loop length of
two meters). This means that the free-running JLO linewidth has to
be well below 10 MHz to ensure stable JLO phase locking with a
reasonably good spectral ratio (SR)—the ratio between the carrier
and the total power emitted by the FFO [75].
7.2.1 Nb-Based Flux-Flow Oscillators
The Josephson ﬂux ﬂow oscillators (FFOs) [69–74] based on Nb–
AlOx–Nb and Nb–AlN–NbN junctions have proven [15, 16, 75]
to be the most developed superconducting local oscillator for
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
205
Figure 7.17
Schematic view of a ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator. Reproduced with
permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
integration with an SIS mixer in a single-chip submicrometer-
wave superconducting integrated receiver [14–21]. The FFO is
a long Josephson tunnel junction of the overlapped geometry
(see Fig. 7.17) in which an applied DC magnetic ﬁeld and a DC bias
current, IB, drive a unidirectional ﬂow of ﬂuxons, each containing
one magnetic ﬂux quantum, 	0 = h/2e ≈2*10−15 Wb. Symbol
h represents Planck’s constant and e is the elementary charge. An
integrated control line with the current ICL is used to generate the DC
magnetic ﬁeld that is applied to the FFO. According to the Josephson
relation, the junction oscillates with a frequency f
= (1/	0)∗V
(about 483.6 GHz/mV) if it is biased at voltage V . The ﬂuxons repel
each other and form a chain that moves along the junction. The
velocity and density of the ﬂuxon chain, and thus the power and
frequency of the submicrometer-wave signal emitted from the exit
end of the junction due to the collision with the boundary, may be
adjusted independently by the appropriate settings of IB and ICL.
The FFO diﬀers from the other members of the Josephson oscillator
family by the need for these two control currents, which in turn
provides the possibility of an independent frequency and power
tuning.
We experimentally investigated [16, 75] a large number of the
FFO designs. The length, L, and the width, W, of the FFO used in our
study were 300–400 μm and 4–48 μm, respectively. The value of the
critical current density, J C, was in the range of 4–8 kA/cm2, giving
a Josephson penetration depth of λJ ≈6–4 μm. The corresponding
value of the speciﬁc resistance was R∗
nL∗W is ∼50–25 ∗μm2. For

206
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
the numerical calculations we used a typical value of the London
penetration depth, λL ≈90 nm, for all-Nb junctions, and a junction-
speciﬁc capacitance Cs ≈0.08 pF/μm2. The active area of the FFO
(i.e., the AlOx or the AlN tunnel barrier) is usually formed as a long
window in the relatively thick (200–250 nm) SiO2 insulation layer,
sandwiched between the two superconducting ﬁlms (the base and
wiring electrodes). The so-called idle region consists of the thick
SiO2 layer adjacent to the junction (on both sides of the tunnel
region) between the overlapping electrodes. It forms a transmission
line parallel to the FFO (not shown in Fig. 7.17). The width of the
idle region (WI = 2–14 μm) is comparable to the junction width.
The idle region must be taken into account when designing an FFO
with the desired properties. In our design, it is practical to use the
ﬂat-bottomed electrode of the FFO as a control line in which the
current ICL produces the magnetic ﬁeld, which is mainly applied
perpendicular to the long side of the junction.
Previously, the Nb–AlOx–Nb or Nb–AlN–Nb trilayers were suc-
cessfully used for the FFO’s fabrication. Traditional all-Nb circuits
are constantly being optimized but there seems to be a limit for
linewidth optimizations at certain boundary frequencies due to
the Josephson self-coupling (JSC) eﬀect [76], as well as a high
frequency limit, imposed by the Nb gap frequency (∼700 GHz).
This is the reason to develop novel types of junctions based
on materials other than Nb. We reported on the development
of the high-quality Nb–AlN–NbN junction-production technology
[39]. The implementation of an AlN tunnel barrier in combination
with an NbN top superconducting electrode provides a signiﬁcant
improvement in the quality of the SIS junction. The gap voltage of
the junction Vg = 3.7 mV. From this value, and the gap voltage of
the Nb ﬁlm Nb/e = 1.4 mV, we have estimated the gap voltage
of our NbN ﬁlm as NbN/e = 2.3 mV [40]. The use of Nb for
the top “wiring” layer is preferable due to smaller losses of Nb
when compared to NbN below 720 GHz. Furthermore, the matching
structures developed for the all-Nb SIRs can be used directly for
the fabrication of receivers with Nb–AlN–NbN junctions. The general
behavior of the new devices is similar to that of the all-Nb ones; even
the control currents, necessary to provide magnetic bias for the FFO,
were nearly the same for the FFOs of similar designs.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
207
Figure 7.18
IVCs of the Nb–AlN–NbN FFO, measured at diﬀerent magnetic
ﬁelds produced by the integrated control line. The color scale shows the
level of the DC current’s rise at the HM induced by the FFO. The red area
marks the region of the FFO’s parameters where the HM current induced by
the FFO exceeds 25% of the Ig. This level is well above the optimal value for
an SIS-mixer operation. Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al.
[16].
A family of the Nb–AlN–NbN FFO IVCs, measured at diﬀerent
magnetic ﬁelds produced by the integrated control line, is presented
in Fig. 7.18 (L = 300 μm, W = 14 μm, WI = 10 μm). A single
SIS junction with an inductive tuning circuit was employed as a
harmonic mixer (HM) for the linewidth measurements. The tuning
and matching circuits were designed to provide “uniform” coupling
in the frequency range of 400–700 GHz. Measured values of the HM
current induced by the FFO oscillations (HM pumping) are shown in
Fig. 7.18 by the color scale. The HM pumping for each FFO bias point
was measured at a constant HM bias voltage of 3 mV (pumping is
normalized on the current jump at the gap voltage, Ig = 140 μA).
From Fig. 7.18, one can see that an FFO can provide a large enough
power over the wide frequency range, which is limited at higher
frequencies only by the Nb superconducting gap in transmission line

208
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
electrodes (base and wiring layers) and below 400 GHz by the design
of the matching circuits.
The feature at approximately 600 GHz where the curves get
denser is a JSC (Josephson self-coupling) boundary voltage. It
was initially observed for all-Nb FFOs [76]. The JSC eﬀect is the
absorption of the FFO-emitted radiation by the quasi-particles in
the cavity of the long junction. It considerably modiﬁes the FFO’s
properties at the voltages V ≈VJSC = 1/3*Vg (VJSC corresponds
to 620 GHz for the Nb–AlN–NbN FFO). Just above this voltage, the
diﬀerential resistance increases considerably; that results in an FFO-
linewidth broadening just above this point. This, in turn, makes it
diﬃcult or impossible to phase-lock the FFO in that region. For an
Nb–AlOx–Nb FFO, the transition corresponding to VJSC = Vg/3 occurs
around 450 GHz. Therefore, by using the Nb–AlN–NbN FFOs we
can cover the frequency gap from 450 to 550 GHz that is imposed
by the gap value of all-Nb junctions. The feature in Fig. 4 around
1 mV is very likely due to a singularity in the diﬀerence between the
superconducting gaps NbN −Nb.
Continuous frequency tuning at frequencies below 600 GHz for
the Nb–AlN–NbN FFOs of moderate length is possible, although the
damping is not suﬃcient to completely suppress the Fiske resonant
structure at frequencies below Vg/3. For short junctions with a small
α (wave attenuation factor), the distance between the steps in this
resonant regime can be as large, so that it is only possible to tune
the FFO within a certain set of frequencies. For a 300–400 μm long
Nb–AlN–NbN junction, this is not the case—the quality factor of the
resonator formed by a long Nb–AlN–NbN Josephson junction is not
so high at frequencies > 350 GHz. Therefore, the resonance steps
are slanting and the distance between them is not so large (see
Fig. 7.18). This allows us to set any voltage (and any frequency)
below VJSC, but for each voltage, only a certain set of currents should
be used. Therefore, in this case, we have the regions of forbidden
bias-current values, which are speciﬁc for each voltage below VJSC,
instead of the forbidden voltage regions for the Fiske regime in
Nb–AlOx–Nb FFO [40]. Special algorithms have been developed for
automatic working-point selection in ﬂight.
The typical current–voltage characteristics (IVCs) of an Nb–AlN–
NbN SIS junction of an area approximately 1 μm2 is given in Fig. 7.19,
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
209
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
 
SIS Voltage (mV)
FFO Frequency:
  0 GHz
  400 GHz
  500 GHz
  600 GHz
  700 GHz
HD13-09#26 (Vg=3.7mV, Rn=21 Ohm)
SIS Current (mkA)
Figure 7.19
The IVCs of the SIS mixer: unpumped = solid curve; pumped at
diﬀerent frequencies = dashed and dotted lines (color online). Reproduced
with permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
which represents both the unpumped IVC (the solid line) and the
IVC when pumped by an Nb–AlN–NbN FFO at diﬀerent frequencies
(dotted lines). One can see that the FFO provides more than enough
power for the mixer pumping. In this experiment, we used the test
circuits with low-loss matching circuits tuned between 400 and
700 GHz. Even with the specially introduced 5 dB FFO/SIS mismatch
(required for the SIR operation), the FFO delivered enough power
for the SIS mixer’s operation in the frequency range of 400–700
GHz. An important issue for the SIR’s operation is a possibility to
tune the FFO’s power, while keeping the FFO frequency constant.
This is demonstrated in Fig. 7.20, where the IVCs of an SIS mixer
pumped at the FFO frequency of 500 GHz are shown, while they were
being pumped at diﬀerent FFO bias currents (diﬀerent powers). Our
measurements demonstrated [16, 75] that the FFO power can be
adjusted in the range of 0–15 dB while keeping the same frequency,
by proper adjustment of the FFO control line current.

210
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
 t
n
e
rr
u
C
 
S
I
S
(mA)
SIS Voltage (mV)
FFO Frequency = 500 GHz
   
      Ib = 0 mA
   
      Ib = 13 mA
   
      Ib = 15 mA
   
      Ib = 17 mA
   
      Ib =  20 mA
   
      Ib =  30 mA
Nb-AlN-NbN 
  Vg=3.7mV
Rn=21 Ohm
  Rj/Rn=23
Figure 7.20
The IVCs of the SIS mixer: unpumped = black solid curve;
pumped at diﬀerent FFO bias currents (diﬀerent powers) = lines with
symbols; FFO frequency = 500 GHz (color online). Reproduced with
permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
7.2.2 Linewidth of the Flux-Flow Oscillator and Its
Phase-Locking
The FFO linewidth (LW) has been measured in a wide frequency
range from 300 GHz up to 750 GHz by using a specially developed
experimental technique [77–80]. A specially designed integrated
circuit incorporates the FFO junction, the SIS harmonic mixer and
the microwave matching circuits (see Fig. 7.21). Both junctions are
fabricated from the same Nb/AlN/NbN or Nb/AlOx/Nb trilayer. A
block diagram of the set-up for the linewidth measurements is
shown in Fig. 7.22 [78]. The FFO signal is fed to the harmonic mixer
(a SIS mixer operated in Josephson or quasiparticle mode) together
with a 17–20 GHz reference signal from a stable synthesizer. The
required power level depends on the parameters of the HM; it is
about of 1 μW for a typical junction area of 1 μm2. The intermediate
frequency (IF) mixer product ( fIF = ±( fFFO −n · fSYN) at ∼400 MHz
is ﬁrst boosted by a cooled HEMT ampliﬁer (Tn ≈5 K, gain = 30 dB)
and then by a high-gain room-temperature ampliﬁer.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
211
Figure 7.21
The central part of the microcircuits used for FFO linewidth
measurements [79].
In order to accurately measure the FFO line shape, the IF signal
must be time-averaged by the spectrum analyzer. To remove low-
frequency drift and interference from the bias supplies, temper-
ature drift, etc., we used a narrow band (<10 kHz) Frequency
Discriminator (FD) system with a relatively low loop gain for the
frequency locking of the FFO. With the FD narrow-band feedback
system that stabilizes the mean frequency of the FFO (but which
does not aﬀect FFO’s line shape), we can accurately measure the
free-running FFO linewidth, which is determined by the much faster
internal (“natural”) ﬂuctuations (see Fig. 7.23). The measured data
are symmetrized relative to the center’s frequency; these data are
shown by diamonds. The proﬁle of the FFO line recorded when
biased at the steep Fiske step (FS), where the diﬀerential resistance
is extremely small, can be diﬀerent from the one measured on the
smooth ﬂux-ﬂow step. Theoretically [58], the shape is Lorentzian
for wideband ﬂuctuations, while for narrow-band interference, at
frequencies smaller than the autonomous FFO linewidth δfAUT, the
proﬁle will be Gaussian; the theoretical curves are also shown in
Fig. 7.23 for comparison. The theoretical lines providing the best ﬁt
near the peak are shown by the solid line and the dashed line for
the Lorentzian and Gaussian proﬁles, respectively. The coincidence
between the calculated curve and the symmetrized experimental

212
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Figure 7.22
Block diagram of the PLL circuit and set-up for linewidth
measurement. Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al. [78].
data is excellent, and actually better than 5% in the emitted power,
if a minor ampliﬁer’s nonlinearity of about 0.4 dB is taken into
account.
The resulting IF signal is also supplied to the phase-locking loop
(PLL) system. The phase-diﬀerence signal of the PLL is fed to the
FFO control-line current [15, 16, 75, 78–81]. Wideband operation
of the PLL (10–15 MHz full width) is obtained by minimizing the
cable loop’s length. A part of the IF signal is delivered to the
spectrum analyzer via a power splitter (see Figs. 7.24 and 7.25).
All instruments are synchronized to the harmonics of a common
10 MHz reference oscillator. Dependencies of the free-running FFO
linewidth and the Spectral Ratio (SR) for the phase-locked FFO on
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
213
431,56
431,58
431,60
431,62
431,64
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
 Experimental Data
 Symmeterizated Data
 Lorentzian
 Gaussian
)
m
B
d
( r
e
w
o
P
 
O
F
F
FFO Frequency (GHz)
Figure 7.23
The FFO spectrum measured when biased on the Fiske step
(VFFO = 893 μV, Rd = 0.0033 , RCL
d
= 0.00422 , δfAUT = 1.2 MHz) is
represented by the dash-dotted line. The symmetrized experimental data
are shown by diamonds. The ﬁtted theoretical Lorentzian and Gaussian
proﬁles are shown by solid and dotted lines, respectively. The inset shows
a close-up view of the central peak with the frequency axis multiplied ﬁve
times. Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al. [80].
frequency for two diﬀerent FFO technologies (Nb–Ox–Nb and Nb–
AlN–NbN) are presented in Fig. 7.26. One can see that SR > 70% can
be realized for Nb–AlN–NbN FFO in the range of 250–750 GHz.
7.2.3 Sub-Terahertz Sound Excitation and Detection by
Long Josephson Junctions
Interaction between phonons and electrons has attracted the
attention of researchers over the years. Such interaction has been
demonstrated by the use of an AC Josephson current for phonon
generation in superconducting tunnel junctions [82, 83]; in these
papers, a few possible mechanisms for phonon generation were
considered. Direct generation of acoustic waves by the AC Josephson
oscillations occurs when the tunnel barrier is piezoelectric. On the

214
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
360
380
400
420
440
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
  Span - 100 MHz 
    Resolution 
Bandwidth - 1 MHz
)
m
B
d
( r
e
w
o
P
 t
u
p
t
u
O
 
F
I
Down-converted FFO Frequency (MHz)
  
    Phase locked 
 at 605 GHz (SR = 92 %)
 
  Frequency locked 
   Linewidth = 1.7 MHz
Figure 7.24
Spectra of the Nb–AlN–NbN FFO operating at 605 GHz (blue
dashed line = frequency locked by FD; red solid line = phase-locked).
Linewidth = 1.7 MHz; spectral ratio = 92% (color online).
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
)
m
B
d
( r
e
w
o
P
Offset from carrier (Hz)
Spectrum analyzer
Resolution Banwidth 
RBW = 1 Hz
Figure 7.25
Spectra of the phase-locked Nb-AlN-NbN FFO operating at
605 GHz. Span = 100 Hz, RBW = 1 Hz, signal-to-noise ratio = 87 dB as
measured in a bandwidth of 1 Hz.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
215
300
400
500
600
700
0
20
40
60
80
100
   SR  Nb-AlN-NbN
    δf  Nb-AlN-NbN
   SR  Nb-AlOx-Nb
    δf  Nb-AlOx-Nb
FFO Frequency (GHz)
)
%
( 
O
F
F
 
L
P
 
e
h
t f
o
 
o
it
a
R
 l
a
rt
c
e
p
S
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FFO Linewidth (MHz)
Figure 7.26
Dependencies of the free-running FFO linewidth and the
spectral ratio for the phase-locked FFO on frequency. Data are presented
for two diﬀerent FFO technologies: Nb–Ox–Nb (represented by diamonds)
and Nb–AlN–NbN (asterisks).
other hand, the need for an alternative explanation was suggested
in reference [83] because the eﬀect was observed in junctions with
an amorphous barrier, and amorphous materials are typically not
piezoelectric (although some materials may become piezoelectric
in the amorphous state because amorphization can remove the
inversion symmetry [84]). Therefore, it was suggested that, in the
disordered material, the AC electrical ﬁeld may instead act on
uncompensated static charges with a ﬁnite dipole moment [83, 85,
86], resulting in the coherent generation of acoustic waves. The
coupling strength of this process depends on the oxide properties; it
can be comparable to (or even be well above the state of) Werthamer
processes [87], which are basically the absorption of AC Josephson
radiation energy by the quasiparticles and consequent photon-
assisted tunneling—the so-called eﬀect of Josephson self-coupling
(JSC) [76, 87, 88].
The reverse eﬀect—phonon-induced increase in the critical
current of Josephson junctions [89] and appearance of the constant-
voltage steps in the IVCs of the SNS junctions [90]—has been
observed experimentally under low-frequency phonon excitation.

216
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Interaction of the AC Josephson current and phonons was also found
for intrinsic HTc Josephson junctions [91–94]; it was observed as
the occurrence of speciﬁc subgap structures in the form of current
peaks (resonances) in the IVCs of these junctions. The obtained
results have been explained [94–97] by the coupling between the
intrinsic Josephson oscillations and phonons. Some time ago, a quite
unusual superﬁne resonance structure (SFRS) was observed [98] in
the IVCs of the Nb–AlOx–Nb ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator (FFO); at that time,
no reasonable explanation was proposed.
For comprehensive analysis of the superﬁne resonance structure
[99], we have studied Nb–AlOx–Nb and Nb–AlN–NbN FFOs. The
length, L, and the width, W, of the tunnel junctions used in our study
are 400 μm and 16 μm, respectively. The value of the critical current
density, J c, is in the range of 4–8 kA/cm2—giving a Josephson
penetration depth of λJ = 6–4 μm. The active area of the FFO (i.e.,
the AlOx or the AlN tunnel barrier) is formed as a long window in
the relatively thick (200 nm) SiO2 insulation layer that is sandwiched
between two superconducting ﬁlms (base and wiring electrodes).
The FFOs were fabricated from a high-quality trilayer structure
[39] on the monocrystalline silicon substrate of (001) orientation.
We used commercially available double-side polished silicon wafers
(room temperature resistivity > 10 k*cm, thickness dS = 0.3 ±
0.01 mm).
For wideband measurements of the FFO spectra, a super-
conductor–insulator–superconductor (SIS) mixer has been inte-
grated on the same chip with the FFO [77]—see the previous
section; a simpliﬁed sketch of the device under the test is presented
in the inset to Fig. 7.27a. The FFO and the SIS junction are connected
by a specially designed microstrip circuit that provides RF coupling
in the range of 300–800 GHz, while the break at DC gives us a
possibility to bias and measure both devices independently; this
circuit is presented schematically in the inset to Fig. 7.27a by a
dashed line and the capacitor. Due to the strong nonlinearity of the
SIS mixer, it was utilized as a high-number harmonic mixer (HM)
[30], in which the FFO signal under investigation beats with the n-
th harmonic of an applied reference signal (of about 20 GHz), which
was fed to the SIS mixer via a coaxial cable from a synthesized signal
generator. Signals at down-converted frequencies fIF = fFFO−n· fref
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
217
360
380
400
420
440
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
Down-converted FFO Frequency (MHz)
  720 GHz
IF output (dBm)
360
380
400
420
440
 414 GHz
 504 GHz
 576 GHz
 648 GHz
 720 GHz
10 dB
10 dB
360
380
400
420
440
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
Down-converted FFO Frequency (MHz)
  414 GHz
IF output (dBm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.27
(Color online) [99]. Down-converted spectra of the Nb–AlOx–
Nb FFO measured at diﬀerent FFO frequencies at T = 4.2 K by a spectrum
analyzer in the regime “Max Hold” (see text) with resolution band width
(RBW) = 1 MHz at ﬁne tuning of the bias current; the frequency-locked FFO
spectra measured at the FFO frequencies 720 and 414 GHz are presented
by solid lines in graphs “a” and “c.” A sketch of the experimental sample is
shown as an inset to Fig. 7.27a (see text).

218
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
can be analyzed using a conventional spectrum analyzer. The down-
converted signals measured at the FFO frequencies ranging from
414 to 720 GHz are presented in Fig. 7.27.
The spectrum of the frequency-locked FFO [77] operating at
720 GHz is shown in Fig. 7.1a by the solid line. The spectrum
recorded at ﬁne FFO frequency tuning in the range of 100 MHz is
presented by the dash-dotted line. This spectrum was measured by
using the so-called “Max Hold” regime, when the maximum value
in each spectral channel of the analyzer (601 points per range)
is memorized over a long enough period, providing that the FFO
frequency is tuned by ﬁne adjustment of the bias or CL current. The
amplitude of the down-converted signal is almost constant for the
FFO frequency 720 GHz (the dash-dotted line in Fig. 7.27a), while
for the decreasing of the FFO frequency, a well-deﬁned resonant
structure appeared in the down-converted spectra (Fig. 7.1b).
At low FFO frequencies, the SFRS is very pronounced and the
down-converted power in the dips is at least 1000 times (30 dB)
smaller than in the case of the maximum level (see Fig. 7.1c);
actually, the minimum level in this case is determined by the
noise level of the HM. One can see that the FFO frequency can be
continuously tuned only within a small range, while frequencies
between these stable regions cannot be obtained. Even a small
change of the bias current near the edge of the stable region results
in a “jump” of the FFO voltage (frequency) to the next stable region.
The distance between resonances is equal to 14.1 MHz; exactly the
same resonance spacing was measured for all FFO frequencies and
for all tested FFOs fabricated on the 0.3 mm-thick silicon substrates
described above. Very similar behavior was also measured for the
Nb–AlN–NbN junctions.
We attribute this superﬁne structure to the manifestation of
resonant interaction of the acoustic waves with the Josephson
oscillator. A few diﬀerent mechanisms were proposed that may
couple electron oscillations and phonons: (i) excitation of phonons
in a tunnel barrier due to the electromagnetic interaction between
the ionic charges and the charges of conduction electrons [82,
83, 85, 86, 93, 96, 97], or via the ac-Josephson eﬀect in a tunnel
barrier made from a piezo and ferroelectric materials; (ii) emission
of phonons via non-equilibrium quasiparticle relaxation in the
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
219
electrodes (not the barrier) caused by electron–phonon interaction
[94, 100–102] and (iii) the dependence of the tunneling-matrix
element on lattice displacements [31, 95]. The mechanism for the
generation of phonons in Josephson junctions [103] is based on
the excitation of the long wavelength acoustic resonance modes in
the dielectric layer of the contact, which can inﬂuence the shape
of the IVC of the junction in the same way as the excitation of
electromagnetic cavity modes. This approach was extended [95] by
including in consideration all optical phonons in superconductors
(not only in the intermediate dielectric layer). To distinguish
between these mechanisms, additional research is required, but that
is outside the scope of this chapter.
According to our explanation, the experimentally measured IVCs
are caused by excitation of the standing acoustic waves in the
Si substrate. It is known that a considerable part of the power
emitted by the FFO is reﬂected back; at low damping, these
oscillations may reach the entry end of the FFO, raising the standing
waves that manifest themselves as the Fiske steps. The standing
electromagnetic waves of large amplitude (existing at least on the
emitting end of the junction) excite acoustic waves. Note that even
at higher voltages (V > Vg/3,Vg is the gap voltage of the FFO), where
the Fiske steps could be suppressed [76] due to higher dumping
caused by the JSC eﬀect, the standing electromagnetic waves still
exist at the emitting end of the junction and can excite acoustic
waves of considerable amplitude.
Since ﬂatness (parallelism) of the Si substrates is fairly good
(thickness variation is well below 5 μm over 100 mm wafer
size), the acoustic wave is reﬂected back to the point of emission
with an accuracy much better than 0.1 μm. At frequencies where
the Si substrate’s thickness is equal to the integer number of
acoustic wavelengths, the reﬂected wave will arrive in phase with
electromagnetic oscillations, resulting in an increase of the current
amplitude, while in between these resonances, the oscillations will
be suppressed.
At least two experimental facts lead to such a conclusion. Firstly,
the frequency distance between two adjacent resonances coincides
with the distance between sound resonances in the silicon substrate:
f = VL/d∗
S2, where VL is the longitudinal speed of sound in Si along

220
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
360
380
400
420
440
-50
-40
-30
-20
Down-converted FFO Frequency (MHz)
  SFRS before treatment
a)
360
380
400
420
440
-50
-40
-30
-20
b)
  411 GHz
Down-converted FFO Frequency (MHz)
  MaxHold after treatment
IF output (dBm)
IF output (dBm)
Figure 7.28
(Color online) [99]. Down-converted spectra of the Nb–AlOx–
Nb FFO fabricated on the 0.3 mm thick Si substrate before (a) and after
abrasive treatment (b), measured at diﬀerent FFO frequencies at T =
4.2 K using a spectrum analyzer in the “Max Hold” regime (see text). The
frequency-locked FFO spectrum measured at the FFO frequency of 411 GHz
is presented by solid lines in graph “b.”
the [001] direction. For VL = 8480 m/s [104] and ds = 0.3 mm,
the calculated resonance spacing is 14.1 MHz, which corresponds
precisely to experimentally measured data. The frequency distance
between two adjacent resonances is inversely proportional to the
substrate thickness ds; for the FFOs fabricated on a thicker Si
substrate (ds = 0,525 mm), the resonance spacing was about 8 MHz,
which again corresponds well to the calculated value.
Secondly, after treatment of the opposite (bottom) substrate
surface with an abrasive powder, the superﬁne resonant structure
disappeared completely (see Fig. 7.28). We used a set of powders
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Terahertz Oscillators
221
with particle sizes from 1 to 10 μm, resulting in a root mean
square (RMS) surface roughness that was measured by an atomic
force microscope (AFM) to be 30–280 nm, which is well above the
wavelength of the acoustic wave at 500 GHz of about 13 nm (note
that for a polished Si surface, the RMS is approximately 0.1 nm;
see, e.g., [105]). It seems that the acoustic waves that are reﬂected
from a rough Si surface arrive at the FFO plane in an arbitrary
phase. That fact makes the establishment of standing acoustic waves
impossible, giving us the possibility to phase lock the FFO [81]
at any desirable frequency, which is vitally important for most
practical applications. It was found that chemical etching of the
bottom surface of the Si substrate (RMS roughness of approximately
250 nm) also completely eliminates the appearance of the SFRS.
Such Si substrates with a chemically etched bottom surface are
commercially available and were used for the fabrication of an
integrated receiver with a phased-locked FFO [39, 40], which was
successfully implemented for atmosphere monitoring from a high-
altitude balloon [15, 16, 20]. On the other hand, the roughness of the
etched Si substrate is negligibly small at sub-THz frequencies, and
allows good RF coupling of the integrated receiver that is installed
on the ﬂat surface of the synthesized elliptical Si lens [15, 16, 20].
This explanation of the SFRS was conﬁrmed by a preliminary
theoretical consideration [106], in which coherent phonon radiation
and detection due to the interaction of Josephson’s electromagnetic
oscillations with a mechanical displacement ﬁeld were analyzed.
The Josephson tunneling structure together with a silicon substrate
constitute a high overtone composite resonator for bulk acoustic
waves that propagate normally to the layers. Resonant generation
of coherent acoustic waves revealed itself as a superﬁne structure in
IVC, similar to the usual Fiske steps that are caused by reﬂection of
electromagnetic waves in the junction resonance cavity.
An ability of the Josephson junction to generate and to detect the
coherent acoustic waves has been demonstrated experimentally at
frequencies up to 800 GHz. Frequency resolution well below 1 MHz
can be realized for the frequency (or phase-locked) FFO, and that
opens new possibilities for solid-state physics research and phonon
spectroscopy. The superﬁne resonant structure in the FFO IVCs is
attributed to acoustic wave generation by the FFO and the excitation

222
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
of acoustic wave resonances in a thick Si substrate. The SFRS eﬀect
can be avoided by proper treatment of the bottom surface; on the
other hand, this eﬀect can be employed for high-resolution phonon
spectroscopy at well-deﬁned frequencies without additional FFO
locking.
7.3 Superconducting Integrated Receivers
A superconducting integrated receiver (SIR) [14, 15] was proposed
more than 10 years ago and has since then been developed up
to the point of practical application [16–21]. Our approach [15,
16, 19] consists in developing a single chip heterodyne receiver,
which is smaller and less complex than traditional devices. Typically,
such a receiver consists of a number of main components (local
oscillator, mixer, antenna structure, phase-lock circuit, etc.), which
are usually built as separate units and are complex (and thus costly).
According to our concept (see Fig. 7.29), we have integrated all
these components into a single chip, reducing the overall system
complexity in exchange for increased on-chip and lithographic
fabrication complexity. An SIR comprises on a single chip all of
the key elements needed for heterodyne detection: a low-noise SIS
mixer with quasi-optical antenna, a ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator (FFO) [69–
81] acting as a local oscillator (LO) and a second SIS harmonic mixer
LHe Cryostat
SIR microcircuits
SIS mixer
with planar 
antenna
(FFO) local 
oscillator
450 – 700 GHz
Computer-controlled 
data acquisition 
system IRTECON
HEMT
amplifier 1
Back-end 
(digital 
autocorrelator 
or FFTS)
IF amplifier 1
PLL
Synthesizer
Harmonic SIS mixer for 
FFO phase stabilization
HEMT
amplifier 2
IF amplifier 2
Figure 7.29
Block diagram of the superconducting integrated receiver.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Integrated Receivers
223
(HM) for the FFO phase locking. The concept of the SIR looks very
attractive for many practical applications due to its compactness
and the wide tuning range of the FFO; a bandwidth up to 35% has
been achieved with a twin-junction SIS mixer design. Recently, the
frequency range of most practical heterodyne receivers was limited
by the tunability of the local oscillator; nowadays, commercially
available multipliers cover the band up to the 40% of the center’s
frequency [107], and the best SIS receivers (see, e.g., [108]) oﬀer
a bandwidth of 15–30%. Another potential advantage is the use of
arrays of SIR channels within a single cryostat that could operate at
the same or diﬀerent LO frequencies.
One of the important practical applications of the SIR is
TELIS (TErahertz and submillimeter LImb Sounder) [20, 109,
110]—a three-channel balloon-borne heterodyne spectrometer
for atmospheric research that was developed in a collaboration
between four institutes: Deutsches Zentrum f¨ur Luft- und Raumfahrt
(DLR), Germany; Rutherford Appleton Laboratories (RAL), United
Kingdom; and SRON—Netherlands Institute for Space Research,
the Netherlands (in tight collaboration with Kotel’nikov Institute
of Radio Engineering and Electronics, IREE, Moscow). All three
receivers utilize state-of-the-art superconducting heterodyne tech-
nology and operate at 500 GHz (by RAL), at 480–650 GHz (by SRON
+ IREE) and at 1.8 THz (by DLR). TELIS is a compact, lightweight
instrument capable of providing broad spectral coverage, high
spectral resolution, and long ﬂight duration. The TELIS instrument
also serves as a test bed for many novel cryogenic technologies and
as a pathﬁnder for satellite-based instrumentation.
TELIS is mounted on the same balloon platform (payload weight:
1200 kg) as the Fourier transform spectrometer MIPAS-B [111],
developed by IMK (Institute of Meteorology and Climate Research
of the University of Karlsruhe, Germany) and is operated in the
mid-infrared range (680–2400 cm−1). Both instruments observe the
same air mass simultaneously, and together they yield an extensive
set of stratospheric constituents that can be used for detailed
analysis of atmospheric chemical models, such as ozone destruction
cycles. In particular, the 480–650 GHz TELIS channel is able to
measure vertical proﬁles of ClO, BrO, O3, and its rare isotopologues,
O2, HCl, HOCl, H2O, and its three rare isotopologues, HO2, NO, N2O,

224
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
NO2, HNO3, CH3Cl, and HCN. In this paper, the design and technology
of the 480–650 GHz channel as used in the ﬂight conﬁguration
are presented in conjunction with the test results and the ﬁrst
preliminary scientiﬁc results.
7.3.1 The SIR Channel Design and Performance
A key element of the 480–650 GHz channel is the SIR [14–21] that
comprises within a single chip (with a size of 4 mm*4 mm*0.5 mm,
see Fig. 7.30) a low-noise SIS mixer with quasi-optical antenna, a
superconducting FFO acting as an LO and a second SIS harmonic
mixer (HM) for FFO phase-locking. To achieve the required instan-
taneous bandwidth of 480–650 GHz, a twin-SIS mixer with 0.8 μm2
junctions and a new design of the FFO/SIS matching circuitry were
implemented. A microscope photograph of the central part of the
SIR chip with a double-dipole antenna is presented in Fig. 7.31. All
components of the SIR microcircuits were fabricated from a high-
quality Nb-based trilayer on an Si substrate [14, 15].
Figure 7.30
Photo of the SIR microcircuit with a double-slot antenna.
Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Integrated Receivers
225
Figure 7.31
Central part of the SIR chip with a double-dipole antenna, a
twin SIS-mixer, and a harmonic mixer for FFO phase locking. Reproduced
with permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
The receiver chip was placed on the ﬂat back surface of the
elliptical silicon lens (forming an integrated lens-antenna) with ac-
curacy of 10 μm, determined by the tolerance analysis of the optical
system. As the FFO is very sensitive to external electromagnetic
interferences, the SIR chip was shielded by two concentric cylinders:
the outer cylinder was made from cryoperm and the inner one
from copper with a 100 μm coating of superconducting lead. All
SIR channel components (including input optical elements) were
mounted onto a single plate inside a 240 mm × 180 mm × 80 mm
box, which was cooled by the thermo-straps to a temperature of
approximately 4.2 K.
The resolution of the TELIS back-end spectrometer is 2.160 MHz,
suﬃcient to resolve the exact shape of atmospheric lines. The FFO
line shape and spectral stability should ideally be much better than
this. However, the free-running linewidth of the FFO can be up to
10 MHz; therefore, a phase-lock loop (PLL) has been developed
to phase lock the FFO to an external reference oscillator [75–80].
For this, a small fraction of the FFO power was ﬁrst directed to
a so-called harmonic mixer (HM) placed on the SIR chip. The HM
was pumped by an oﬀ-chip local oscillator source unit (LSU), which
has a tunable reference frequency in the range of 19–21 GHz. The
frequency of the LSU was chosen such that the diﬀerence frequency
of the nth harmonic of the LSU, generated by the HM and the
FFO, was about 4 GHz. This diﬀerence signal was then ampliﬁed
by a cryogenic low-noise HEMT ampliﬁer and down-converted to

226
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
400 MHz by using a second reference at 3.6 GHz. Finally, the
frequency and phase of this 400 MHz signal was compared to yet
another reference frequency of 400 MHz, and the resulting error
signal was fed back to the FFO. The LSU and the reference signals at
3.6 GHz and at 400 MHz were all phase-locked to an internal, ultra-
stable 10 MHz Master Oscillator.
The TELIS-SIR channel has been characterized in eight microwin-
dows that have been selected for the ﬂight in (Sweden). These
microwindows have the following LO frequencies:
• 495.04 GHz for H18
2 O
• 496.88 GHz for HDO
• 505.60 GHz for BrO
• 507.27 GHz for ClO
• 515.25 GHz for O2, pointing, and temperature
• 519.25 GHz for BrO and NO2
• 607.70 GHz for ozone isotopes
• 619.10 GHz for HCl, ClO, and HOCl
Initial ﬂight values for the parameters for the FFO, SIS, and HM
mixers have been determined for each microwindow. Dedicated
algorithms allowing for fast switching between LO frequencies and
for in-ﬂight optimization of the SIR have been developed. It takes
approximately 1 minute of stabilization and optimization to switch
between two LO settings. All experimental results presented here
have been obtained using the SIR ﬂight device. After optimization of
the FFO design, the free-running linewidth between 7 and 0.5 MHz
was measured in the frequency range of 350–750 GHz, which allows
the phase-locking of 35–95% of the emitted FFO. Examples of the
free-running (frequency-locked) and the phase-locked spectra of the
FFO, measured for the ﬂight SIR at the FFO frequency 605 GHz, are
presented in Fig. 7.24.
The measured double sideband (DSB) receiver’s noise temper-
ature TR, uncorrected for any loss, is presented in Fig. 7.32 as
a function of LO frequency. As can be seen, the noise is well
below 200 K at all frequencies of interest, with a minimum of
120 K at 500 and 600 GHz. The noise peak around 540–575 GHz
is partially spurious, caused by the absorption of water vapor
in the path between the calibration sources and the cryostat,
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Integrated Receivers
227
450
500
550
600
650
700
0
200
400
600
800
1000
)
K
( 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
 
e
s
i
o
N
 r
e
v
i
e
c
e
R
FFO Frequency (GHz)
     Full SIR IF = 4 - 8 GHz
   IF =  8 GHz; BW = 80 MHz
Figure 7.32
Measured DSB receiver noise temperature of the SIR device
selected for ﬂight at an 8 GHz IF frequency (red solid line) and integrated
into the 4–8 GHz IF range (blue dashed line)—color online. Reproduced
with permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
and partially real—due to the properties of the SIS-mixer tuning
circuitry. The relatively high noise in this band is of no concern for
scientiﬁc observations, since this part of the atmospheric spectrum
is obscured by a highly saturated water-vapor line, rendering it
virtually useless for atmospheric science. The noise as a function of
IF is fairly ﬂat in the frequency range of 4–8 GHz, as can be seen
in Fig. 7.33, where the (DSB) receiver noise temperature is plotted
as a function of IF frequency. The dependence of the receiver noise
temperature on the SIS bias voltage is shown in Fig. 7.34 for the
modiﬁed IF system; one can see that for Nb–AlN/NbN circuits there
is very wide range of SIS bias voltages where TR is almost constant.
The TELIS instrument had four successful ﬂights: three in Kiruna,
Sweden (2009, 2010, and 2011) and one in Timmins, Canada
(2014); see Fig. 7.35. During all those ﬂights, the shortest of which
lasted 10 hours on ﬂoat, thousands of limb spectra were measured.
Examples of recently elaborated spectra measured by the SIR-TELIS
channel at diﬀerent LO frequencies are presented in Figs. 7.36 and
7.37 [17].

228
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
4
5
6
7
8
0
50
100
150
200
250
)
K
( 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
 
e
s
i
o
N
 r
e
v
i
e
c
e
R
SIR Intermediate Frequency (GHz)
  FFO Frequency = 497 GHz
  FFO Frequency = 601 GHz
Figure 7.33
DSB receiver noise temperature as a function of the IF
frequency, taken at two FFO frequencies: 497 and 601 GHz (color online).
Reproduced with permission from Koshelets et al. [16].
Figure 7.34
Receiver noise temperature as a function of the SIS bias voltage
measured at the LO frequency 507 GHz in the full 4–8 GHz IF range.
Reproduced with permission from Kiselev et al. [21].
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Integrated Receivers
229
Figure 7.35
TELIS-MIPAS launch at Esrange, Sweden; March 2009. Balloon
size: 400,000 m3.
The ﬂights in northern Sweden focused on catalytic-ozone loss by
halogens in the Arctic region, which is similar to processes causing
the infamous ozone hole over the Antarctic. The spectra depicted
in Figs. 7.36 and 7.37 [17] cover some core molecules to address
these processes: namely, ozone itself and the Cl-bearing species HCl
and ClO. ClO is the main form of active chlorine that is causing
the catalytic destruction of ozone. HCl, on the other hand, is a so-
called reservoir species as it is mostly inert in ozone chemistry.
The ozone’s destruction depends on the ClO concentration, which
strongly depends on altitude. Limb sounding provides a tool to
gain insight into the vertical distribution of these concentrations.
A single recording of a spectrum mostly contains information on
molecules at a tangent point, which is the lowest point in the
atmosphere of the light path. By combining several spectra recorded
at diﬀerent tangent heights, a vertical proﬁle can be constructed. The
integration time of a single spectrum is 1.5 seconds and a typical
limb scan typically contains 10–20 diﬀerent recordings, covering
tangent heights between 10 and 35 km, for a total measurement
time, including calibration measurements, close to one minute. In
the ﬁgures, only a few spectra from a given limb scan are shown to
prevent cluttering.

230
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Figure 7.36
Spectra of two HCl isotopes, ozone and ClO. The LO frequency
is 619.1 GHz. Spectra for tangent heights 22–31 km and upward looking
6◦measured in Kiruna, 2010, are presented in the graph. Corresponding
estimated concentrations of observed gases are shown. Reproduced with
permission from Koshelets et al. [17].
Figure 7.37
Spectra of ClO, ozone, and N2O. The LO frequency is 507.52
GHz. Spectra for tangent heights 19–31 km and up-looking 6◦measured in
Kiruna, 2010, are presented in the graph. Reproduced with permission from
Koshelets et al. [17].
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Integrated Receivers
231
For the results presented in Figs. 7.36 and 7.37 [17], limb
scans’ data were averaged 10 and 23 times, respectively. This
calculation gives the total averaging time for one tangent height:
about 16 seconds (in Fig. 7.36) and 35 seconds (in Fig. 7.37). To
provide the same signal-to-noise ratio for the semiconductor-based
receivers, which have noise temperatures not lower than 1800 K
[112] in the same frequency range, the measurement time should
be increased by two orders of magnitude, at least. The wideband
coverage of the FFO gives the advantage that a huge number of
molecules, whose absorption lines lie in the FFO-tuning range, can
be measured during one campaign. The TELIS-SIR channel has been
characterized in eight microwindows covering the FFO frequency
range from 495.04 GHz (for H18
2 O) to 619.10 GHz (for HCl, ClO,
and HOCl); in combination with a short integration time, this gives
an opportunity to provide vertical proﬁles for many molecules for
almost the same air mass.
The ﬁnal product of those measurements is presented in several
papers concerning atmospheric chemistry [113–116]. Analysis of
all the ﬂight data is an ongoing process, where post-ﬂight charac-
terization of the SIR (for example, precise laboratory measurement
of the SIR sideband ratio) gave a new input to the processing of
the ﬂight data with higher accuracy. Already analyzed data proved
the SIR to be one of the most sensitive sub-THz spectrometers,
allowing us to measure concentrations of trace gases lower than
1 ppbv.
In summary, the capability of the Superconducting Integrated
Receiver for high resolution atmospheric spectroscopy has been
successfully proven during four scientiﬁc balloon ﬂights. During
these missions, the phase-locked SIR operation and frequency
switching in the 480–650 GHz frequency range has been realized.
An intrinsic spectral resolution of the SIR well below 1 MHz has
been conﬁrmed by CW signal measurements in the laboratory.
An uncorrected double-sideband noise temperature below 120 K
has been measured for the SIR when operated with a phase-
locked FFO at an intermediate frequency bandwidth of 4–8 GHz. To
ensure remote operation of the phase-locked SIR, several software
procedures for automatic control have been developed and tested.
The ﬁrst tentative HCl proﬁle has been presented, and its quality

232
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
looks promising for future data reduction. Diurnal cycles of ClO
and BrO have been observed at diﬀerent viewing conﬁgurations
(altitude), with a BrO line level of only approximately 0.5 K [16, 17,
19, 21].
The Superconducting Integrated Receiver can be considered as
an operational device that is ready for many applications. The high
sensitivity and spectral resolution of the integrated spectrometer
enables the analysis of multi-component gas mixtures. Possibilities
to use the SIR devices for analysis of exhaled air in medical surveys
have been demonstrated [16, 19]. Recently the SIR was successfully
implemented for the ﬁrst spectral measurements of THz radiation
emitted from intrinsic Josephson junction stacks (BSCCO mesa) at
frequencies up to 750 GHz [17, 117]. Application of the SIR has
allowed us to measure radiation emitted from intrinsic Josephson
junction stacks in both regimes with a spectral resolution better
than 1 MHz for the ﬁrst time [117]. While at low bias, we found that
linewidth is not smaller than 500 MHz, at high bias, the emission
linewidth turned out to be in the range of 10–100 MHz. We attribute
this to the hot spot acting as a synchronizing element; a linewidth as
narrow as 7 MHz has been recorded at high bias. The phase-locked
SIR has been used for the locking of the BSCCO oscillator during
the test [17]. This ﬁrst successful attempt to phase-lock a BSCCO
oscillator to a stable microwave reference opens up prospects for
its practical application.
7.4 Conclusions
The extremely high characteristic frequency, unique nonlinearity
and very low intrinsic noise of niobium-based tunnel nanostruc-
tures, caused by their nature and cryogenic-operating temperatures,
provide the possibility of developing unbeaten THz range detectors.
The SIS mixers are certainly the best input devices in the sub-
THz range; their noise temperatures are limited only by quantum
eﬀects. The technology of high-quality Nb-based tunnel junctions
that were developed at Kotelnikov IREE primarily for the fabrication
of low-noise SIS receivers, has been successfully used for a number
of physical experiments in quite diﬀerent areas. For example,
www.ebook3000.com

References
233
the developed technology was implemented in the fabrication of
superconducting metamaterials [118–120].
We proposed and developed the superconducting integrated
receiver (SIR) that comprises in a single chip a planar antenna
combined with a superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS)
mixer, a superconducting ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator (FFO) acting as a local
oscillator (LO), and a second SIS harmonic mixer (HM) for the FFO
phase-locking. Improving on the fully Nb-based SIR, we developed
and studied Nb–AlN–NbN circuits that exhibit extended operation
frequency ranges. Continuous tuning of the phase-locked FFO was
experimentally demonstrated at any frequency in the range of
250–750 GHz. The FFO free-running linewidth was measured as
being between 1 and 5 MHz, which allows us to phase-lock up
to 97% of the emitted FFO power. The output power of the FFO
is suﬃcient to pump the matched SIS mixer. These achievements
enabled the development of a 480–650 GHz integrated receiver
for the atmospheric-research instrument TELIS (TErahertz and
submillimeter LImb Sounder). We demonstrated for the ﬁrst time
the capabilities of the SIR technology for heterodyne spectroscopy in
general, and atmospheric limb sounding in particular. At present, the
SIR is probably the most functionally complex fully superconducting
device that was already successfully implemented in practical
applications. New techniques for the fabrication of high-quality SIS
tunnel junctions with a gap voltage Vg > 5 mV, as well as an approach
for phase-locking of the cryogenic oscillators with linewidths up to
50 MHz [17, 121], have been developed to extend the operation
frequency of the SIR beyond 1 THz.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank the following colleagues for their support, help,
and assistance in the development of the SIR technology: A Baryshev,
A. B. Ermakov, M. I. Faley, H. Golstein, A. Golubov, T. de Graauw,
L. de Jong, K. V. Kalashnikov, A. V. Khudchenko, N. V. Kinev,
O. S. Kiselev, J. Kooi, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, A. de Lange, G. de Lange,
I. L. Lapitskay, A. L. Pankratov, D. G. Paveliev O. M. Pylypenko,
K. I. Rudakov, S. V. Shitov, M. Yu. Torgashin, A. V. Ustinov, V. L. Vaks,
H. Wang, W. Wild, and P. Yagoubov.

234
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
References
1. Tucker, J. R. (1979). Quantum limited detection in tunnel junction
mixers. IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 15, 1234–1258.
2. Tucker, J. R., and Feldman, M. J. (1985). Quantum detection at
millimeter wavelengths. Rev. Mod. Phys., 57, 1055–1113.
3. Kooi, J. W., Chan, M., Phillips, T. G., Bumble, B., and Leduc, H. G. (1992).
A low noise 230 GHz heterodyne receiver employing a 0.25 μm2
Nb/AlOx/Nb tunnel junction. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 40,
812–815.
4. Karpov, A., Blondell, J., Voss, M., and Gundlach, K. H. (1995). Four
photons sensitivity heterodyne detection of submillimeter radiation
with superconducting tunnel junctions. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond.,
5, 3304–3307.
5. Gaidis, M. C., Leduc, H. G., Bin, M., Miller, D., Stern, J. A., and Zmuidzinas,
J. (1996). Characterization of low noise quasi-optical SIS mixers for the
submillimeter band. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 44, 1130–
1139.
6. Baryshev, A. M. (2005). Superconductor-insulator-superconductor
THz mixer integrated with a superconducting ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator. PhD
thesis, Delft University of Technology, ISBN 90-9019220-4.
7. Jackson, B. D., de Lange, G., Zijlstra, T., Kroug, M., Klapwijk, T. M., and
Stern, J. A. (2005). Niobium titanium nitride-based superconductor-
insulator-superconductor mixers for low-noise terahertz receivers. J.
Appl. Phys., 97, 113904.
8. de Graauw, Th., Whyborn, N., Caux, E., Phillips, T. G., Stutzki, J.,
Tielens, X., G¨usten, R., Helmich, F. P., Luinge, W., Pearson, J., Roelfsema,
P., Schieder, R., Wildeman, K., and Wavelbakker, K. (2006). The
Herschel-heterodyne instrument for the far-infrared (HIFI). Available
at: herschel.esac.esa.int/Publ/2006/SPIE2006 HIFI paper.pdf
9. de Lange, G., Jackson, B. D., Jochemsen, M., Laauwen, W. M., De Jong, L.,
Kroug, M., Zijlstra, T., and Klapwijk, T. M. (2006). Performance of the
ﬂight model HIFI band 3 and 4 mixer units. Proc. SPIE, 6275, 627517.
10. Honigh, C. E., Haas, S., Hottgenroth, D., Jacobs, K., and Stutzki, J. (1997).
Low-noise broadband ﬁxed tuned wave-guidemixers at 660 and 800
GHz. IEEE Appl. Phys., 7(2), 2582–2586.
11. Kooi, J. W., Kov´acs, A., Sumner, M. C., Chattopadhyay, G., Ceria, R., Miller,
D., Bumble, B., Le Duc, R., Stern, J. A., and Phillips, T. G. (2007). A 275–
425 GHz tunerless waveguide receiver based on AlN SIS technology.
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 55(10), 2086–2096.
www.ebook3000.com

References
235
12. Kooi, J. W. (2008). Advanced receivers for submillimeter and far
infrared astronomy. PhD thesis, Groningen State University, ISBN 978-
90-367-3653-4.
13. Uzawa, Y., Fujii, Y., Gonzalez, A., Kaneko, K., Kroug, M., Kojima, T.,
Miyachi, A., Makise, K., Saito, S., Terai, H., and Wang, Z. (2015). Tuning
circuit material for mass-produced terahertz SIS receivers. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 25(3), 2401005.
14. Koshelets, V. P., Shitov, S. V., Filippenko, L. V., Baryshev, A. M., Golstein,
H., de Graauw, T., Luinge, W., Schaeﬀer, H., and van de Stadt, H. (1996).
First implementation of a superconducting integrated receiver at 450
GHz. Appl. Phys. Lett., 68, 1273.
15. Koshelets, V. P., and Shitov, S. V. (2000). Integrated superconducting
receivers. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 13, R53–R69.
16. Koshelets, V. P., Birk, M., Boersma, D., Dercksen, J., Dmitriev, P.
N., Ermakov, A. B., Filippenko, L. V., Golstein, H., Hoogeveen, R., de Jong,
L., Khudchenko, A. V., Kinev, N. V., Kiselev, O. S., Kudryashov, P.
V., van Kuik, B., de Lange, A., de Lange, G., Lapitsky, I. L., Pripolzin,
S. I., van Rantwijk, J., Selig, A., Sobolev, A. S., Torgashin, M. Yu., Vaks,
V. L., de Vries, E., Wagner, G., and Yagoubov, P. A. (2011). Integrated
submm wave receiver: development and applications, in Nanoscience
Frontiers - Fundamentals of Superconducting Electronics, ed. Sidorenko,
A. Springer Series: NanoScience and Technology (Springer Berlin
Heidelberg), pp. 263–296.
17. Koshelets, V. P., Dmitriev, P. N., Faley, M. I., Filippenko, L. V., Kalashnikov,
K. V., Kinev, N. V., Kiselev, O. S., Artanov, A. A., Rudakov, K. I., de
Lange, A., de Lange, G., Vaks, V. L., Li, M. Y., and Wang, H. B.
(2015). Superconducting integrated terahertz spectrometers. IEEE
Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol., 5, 687– 694.
18. Koshelets, V. P., Ermakov, A. B., Filippenko, L. V., Khudchenko, A.
V., Kiselev, O. S., Sobolev, A. S. Torgashin, M. Yu., Yagoubov, P.
A., Hoogeveen, R. W. M., and Wild, W. (2007). Integrated submillimeter
receiver for TELIS. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 17, 336–342.
19. Koshelets, V. P., Ermakov, A. B., Filippenko, L. V., Kinev, N. V., Kiselev, O.
S., Torgashin, M. Yu., de Lange, A., de Lange, G., Pripolzin, S. I., and Vaks,
V. L. (2010). Proc. SPIE, 7854, 78540J.
20. de Lange, G., Boersma, D., Dercksen, J., Dmitriev, P. N., Ermakov, A.
B., Filippenko, L. V., Golstein, H., Hoogeveen, R., de Jong, L., Khudchenko,
A. V., Kinev, N. V., Kiselev, O. S., van Kuik, B., de Lange, A., van Rantwijk,
J., Sobolev, A. S., Torgashin, M. Yu., de Vries, E., Yagoubov, P. A.,
and Koshelets, V. P. (2010). Development and characterization of the

236
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
superconducting integrated receiver channel of the TELIS atmospheric
sounder. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 23(4), 045016 (8pp).
21. Kiselev, O., Birk, M., Ermakov, A., Filippenko, L., Golstein, H., Hoogeveen,
R., Kinev, N., van Kuik, B., de Lange, A., de Lange, G., Yagoubov, P.,
and Koshelets, V. (2011). Balloon-borne superconducting integrated
receiver for atmospheric research. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 21,
612–615.
22. Rowell, J. M., Gurvitch, M., and Geerk, J. (1981). Modiﬁcation of
tunneling barriers on Nb by a few monolayers of Al. Phys. Rev. B, 24,
2278–2281.
23. Gurvitch, M., Washington, W. A., and Huggins, H. A. (1983). High quality
refractory Josephson tunnel junctions utilizing thin aluminum layers.
Appl. Phys. Lett., 42, 472–474.
24. Huggins, H. A., and Gurwitch, M. (1985). Preparation and characteris-
tics of Nb-AlOxide-Nb tunnel junctions. J. Appl. Phys., 57, 2103–2109.
25. Kroger, H., Smith, L. N., and Jillie, D. W. (1981). Selective niobium
anodisation process for fabrication Josephson tunnel junctions. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 39, 280–282.
26. Morohashi, S., and Hasuo, S. (1987). Experimental investigations and
analysis for high-quality Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions. J. Appl.
Phys., 61, 4835–4849.
27. Morohashi, S., Shinoki, F., Shoji, A., et al. (1985). High quality Nb/Al-
AlOx/Nb Josephson junction. Appl. Phys. Lett., 46, 2103–2109.
28. Imamura, T., Shiota, T., and Hasuo, S. (1992). Fabrication of high quality
Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions: I - Sputtered Nb ﬁlms for junction
electrode. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2, 1.
29. Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1992). Fabrication of high quality Nb/AlOx-
Al/Nb Josephson junctions: II - Deposition of thin Al layers on Nb
layers. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2, 84.
30. Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1992). Fabrication of high quality Nb/AlOx-
Al/Nb Josephson junctions: III – Annealing stability of AlOx tunneling
barriers. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2, 222.
31. Dmitriev, P. N., Ermakov, A. B., Kovalenko, A. G., Koshelets, V. P., Iosad,
N. N., Golubov, A. A., and Kupriyanov, M. Yu. (1999). Niobium tunnel
junctions with multi-layered electrodes. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond.,
9, 3970–3973.
32. Koshelets, V. P., Kovtonyuk, S. A., Serpuchenko, I. L., Filippenko, L. V.,
and Shchukin, A. V. (1991). High quality Nb-AlOx-Nb tunnel junctions
for microwave and SFQ logic devices. IEEE Trans. Magn., 27, 3141–
3144.
www.ebook3000.com

References
237
33. Golubov, A. A., Houwman, E. P., Gijsbertsen, J. G., Krasnov, V. M., Lokstra,
J. F., Rogalla, H. (1995). Proximity eﬀect in superconductor-insulator-
superconductor Josephson tunnel junctions: theory and experiment.
Phys. Rev. B, 51, 1073–1089.
34. Shiota, T., Imamura, T., and Hasuo, S. (1992). Nb Josephson junctions
with an AlNx barrier made by plasma nitridation. Appl. Phys. Lett., 61,
1228–1230.
35. Kleinsasser, A. W., Mallison, W. H., and Miller, R. E. (1995). Nb/AlN/Nb
Josephson-junctions with high critical current density. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 5, 2318–2321.
36. Kawamura, J., Miller, D., Chen, J., Zmuidzinas, J., Bumble, B., Le Duc,
H. G., and Stern, J. A. (2000). Very high-current-density Nb/AlN/Nb
tunnel junctions for low-noise submillimeter mixers. Appl. Phys. Lett.,
76, 2119.
37. Bumble, B., Le Duc, H. G., Stern, J. A., and Megerian, K. G. (2001).
Fabrication of Nb/AlNx/NbTiN junctions for SIS mixer applications.
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 11, 76–79.
38. Iosad, N. N., Ermakov, A. B., Meijer, F. E., Jackson, B. D., and Klapwijk,
T. M. (2002). Characterization of the fabrication process Nb/Al-
AlNx/Nb tunnel junctions with low RnA values up to 1 μm2.
Supercond. Sci. Technol, 15, 945–951.
39. Dmitriev, P. N., Lapitskaya, I. L., Filippenko, L. V., Ermakov, A. B., Shitov,
S. V., Prokopenko, G. V., Kovtonyuk, S. A., and Koshelets, V. P.
(2003). High quality Nb-based tunnel junctions for high frequency
and digital applications. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 13(2), 107–
110.
40. Torgashin, M. Yu., Koshelets, V. P., Dmitriev, P. N., Ermakov, A.
B., Filippenko, L. V., and Yagoubov, P. A. (2007). Superconducting
integrated receivers based on Nb-AlN-NbN circuits. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 17, 379–382.
41. Khudchenko, A., Baryshev, A. M., Rudakov, K., Koshelets, V., Dmitriev, P.,
Hesper, R., and de Jong, L. (2016). High gap Nb-AlN-NbN SIS junctions
for frequency band 790–950 GHz. IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol.,
6(1), 127–132.
42. Kasemann, C., Gu’sten, R., Heyminck, S., Klein, B., Klein, T., Philipp, S.
D., Korn, A., Schneider, G., Henseler, A., Baryshev, A., and Klapwijk, T.
M. (2006). CHAMP+: a powerful array receiver for APEX. Proc. SPIE,
6275, 62750N.
43. Gu’sten, R., Booth, R., Cesarsky, C., and Menten, K., et al., (2006).
Ground-based and airborne telescopes. Proc. SPIE, 6267, 626714-1.

238
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
44. Smirnov, A. V., Baryshev, A. M., de Bernardis, P., Vdovin, V. F., Goltsman,
G. N., Kardashev, N. S., Kuzmin, L. S., Koshelets, V. P., Vystavkin, A. N.,
Lobanov, Yu. V., Ryabchun, S. A., Finkel, S. A., and Khokhlov, D. R. (2012).
The current stage of development of the receiving complex of the
Millimetron space obseratory. Radiophys. Quantum Electron., 54(8–9),
557–568.
45. Zmuidzinas, J., LeDuc, H. G., Stern, J. A., and Cypher, S. R. (1994).
Two-junction tuning circuits for submillimeter SIS mixers. IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., 42(4), 698–706.
46. Belitsky, V. Yu., Jacobsson, S. W., Filippenko, L. V., and Kollberg, E. L.
(1995). Broadband twin-junction tuning circuit for submillimeter SIS
mixers. Microwave. Opt. Technol. Lett., 10, 74–78.
47. Shoji, A., Kosaka, S., Shinoki, F., Aoyagi, M., and Hayakawa, H. (1983).
All refractory Josephson tunnel junctions fabricated by reactive ion
etching. IEEE Trans. Magn., 19, 827–830.
48. Shoji, A., Aoyagi, M., Kosaka, S., Shinoki, F., and Hayakawa, H. (1985).
Niobium nitride Josephson tunnel junctions with magnesium oxide
barriers. Appl. Phys. Lett., 46, 1098–1100.
49. Blaugher, R. D., Przybysz, J. X., Talvacchio, J., and Battyan, J. (1987).
Processing of all-NbN tunnel junction series arrays. IEEE Trans. Magn.,
23(2), 673–675.
50. Talvacchio, J., and Braginski, A. I. (1987). Tunnel junctions fabricated
from coherent NbN/MgO/NbN and NbN/Al2O3/NbN structures. IEEE
Trans. Magn., 23, 859–862.
51. Wang, Z., Uzawa, Y., and Kawakami, A. (1997). High current density
NbN/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions for submillimeter wave SIS mixers.
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 7(2), 2797–2800.
52. Uzawa,
Y.,
Wang,
Z.,
and
Kawakami,
A.
(1998).
Terahertz
NbN/AlN/NbN mixers with Al/SiO/NbN microstrip tuning circuits.
Appl. Phys. Lett., 73(5), 680–682.
53. Wang, Z., Terai, H., Kawakami, A., and Uzawa, Y. (1999). Interface and
tunneling barrier heights of NbN/AlN/NbN tunnel junctions. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 75, 701.
54. Wang, Z., Terai, H., Qiu, W., Makise, K., Uzawa, Y., Kimoto, K., and
Nakamura, Y. (2013). High-quality epitaxial NbN/AlN/NbN tunnel
junctions with a wide range of current density. Appl. Phys. Lett.,
102(14), 142604-1–142604-5.
55. Zijlstra, T., Lodewijk, C. F. J., Vercruyssen, N., Tichelaar, F. D., Loudkov,
D. N., and Klapwijk, T. M. (2007). Epitaxial aluminum nitride tunnel
www.ebook3000.com

References
239
barriers grown by nitridation with a plasma source. Appl. Phys. Lett.,
91, 233102–233105.
56. Josephson, B. D. (1962). Possible new eﬀects in superconductive
tunneling. Phys. Lett., 1, 251–253.
57. Josephson, B. D. (1964). Coupled superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys., 36,
216–220.
58. Likharev, K. K. (1986). Dynamics of Josephson Junctions and Circuits,
Gordon and Breach: London.
59. Varmazis, C., Sandell, R. D., Jain, A. K., and Lukens, J. E. (1978).
Generation of coherent tunable Josephson radiation at microwave
frequencies with narrowed linewidth. Appl. Phys. Lett., 33, 357.
60. Jain, A. K., Likharev, K. K., Lukens, J. E., and Sauvageau, J. E. (1984).
Mutual phase-locking in Josephson junction arrays. Phys. Rep., 109,
309–426.
61. Dueholm, B., Levring, O. A., Mygind, J., Pedersen, N. F., Soerensen, O.
H., and Cirillo, M. (1981). Multisoliton excitations in long Josephson
junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 46, 1299.
62. Joergensen, E., Koshelets, V. P., Monaco, R., Mygind, J., Samuelsen, M. R.,
and Salerno, M., (1982). Thermal ﬂuctuations in resonant motion of
ﬂuxon on a Josephson transmission line: theory and experiment. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 49, 1093–1096.
63. Cirillo, M., and Lloyd, F. (1987). Phase lock of a long Josephson junction
to an external microwave source. J. Appl. Phys., 61, 2581.
64. Booi, P. A. A., and Benz, S. P. (1994). Emission linewidth measurements
of two-dimensional array Josephson oscillators. Appl. Phys. Lett., 64,
2163.
65. Barbara, P., Cawthorne, A. B., Shitov, S. V., and Lobb, C. J. (1999).
Stimulated emission and ampliﬁcation in Josephson junction arrays.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 1963–1965.
66. Salez, M., and Boussaha, F. (2010). Fluxon modes and phase-locking
at 600 GHz in superconducting tunnel junction nonuniform arrays. J.
Appl. Phys., 107, 013908.
67. Song, F., M¨uller, F., Scheller, T., Semenov, A. D., He, M., Fang, L., H¨ubers,
H.-W., and Klushin, A. M. (2011). Compact tunable subterahertz
oscillators based on Josephson junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett., 98, 142506.
68. Galin, M. A., Klushin, A. M., Kurin, V. V., Seliverstov, S. V., Finkel, M.
I., Goltsman, G. N., M¨uller, F., Scheller, T., and Semenov, A. D. (2015).
Towards local oscillators based on arrays of niobium Josephson
junctions. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 28, 055002 (7pp).

240
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
69. Nagatsuma, T., Enpuku, K., Irie, F., and Yoshida, K. (1983). Flux-
ﬂow type Josephson oscillator for millimeter and submillimeter wave
region. J. Appl. Phys., 54, 3302.
70. Nagatsuma, T., Enpuku K., Sueoka, K., Yoshida, K., and Irie, F. (1984).
Flux-ﬂow type Josephson oscillator for millimeter and submillimeter
wave region. II. Modeling. J. Appl. Phys., 56, 3284.
71. Nagatsuma, T., Enpuku, K., Yoshida, K., and Irie, F. (1985). Flux-
ﬂow type Josephson oscillator for millimeter and submillimeter wave
region. III. Oscillation stability. J. Appl. Phys., 58, 441.
72. Qin, J., Enpuku, K., and Yoshida, K. (1988). Flux-ﬂow type Josephson
oscillator for millimeter and submillimeter wave region. IV. Thin-ﬁlm
coupling. J. Appl. Phys., 63, 1130.
73. Zhang, Y. M., and Wu, P. H. (1990). Numerical calculation of the height
of velocity-matching step of ﬂux-ﬂow type Josephson oscillator. J. Appl.
Phys., 68, 4703–4709.
74. Zhang, Y. M., Winkler, D., and Claeson, T. (1993). Detection of mm and
submm wave radiation from soliton and ﬂux-ﬂow modes in a long
Josephson junction. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 3, 2520–2523.
75. Koshelets, V. P., Dmitriev, P. N., Ermakov, A. B., Sobolev, A. S., Torgashin,
M. Yu., Kurin, V. V., Pankratov, A. L, Mygind, J. (2005). Optimization
of the phase-locked ﬂux-ﬂow oscillator for the submm integrated
receiver. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 15, 964–967.
76. Koshelets, V. P., Shitov, S. V., Shchukin, A. V., Filippenko, L. V., Mygind, J.,
and Ustinov, A. V. (1997). Self-pumping eﬀects and radiation linewidth
of Josephson ﬂux ﬂow oscillators. Phys. Rev. B, 56, 5572–5577.
77. Koshelets, V. P., Shitov, S. V., Shchukin, A. V., Filippenko, L. V.,
and Mygind, J., (1996). Linewidth of submillimeter wave ﬂux-ﬂow
oscillators. Appl. Phys. Lett., 69, 699–701.
78. Koshelets, V. P., Shitov, S. V., Shchukin, A. V., Filippenko, L. V., Dmitriev,
P. N., Vaks, V. L., Mygind, J., Baryshev, A. M., Luinge, W., and Golstein,
H. (1999). Flux ﬂow oscillators for sub-mm wave integrated receivers.
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 9, 4133–4136.
79. Koshelets, V. P., and Mygind, J., (2001). Flux ﬂow oscillators for
superconducting integrated submm wave receivers, in Studies of
High Temperature Superconductors, ed. Narlikar, A. V., NOVA Science
Publishers: New York, 39, pp. 213–244.
80. Koshelets, V. P., Ermakov, A. B., Dmitriev, P. N., Sobolev, A. S., Baryshev,
A. M., Wesselius, P. R., and Mygind, J. (2001). Radiation linewidth of ﬂux
ﬂow oscillators. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 14, 1040–1043.
www.ebook3000.com

References
241
81. Koshelets, V. P., Shitov, S. V., Filippenko, L. V., Vaks, V. L., Mygind, J.,
Baryshev, A. B., Luinge, W., and Whyborn, N. (2000). Phase locking of
270-440 GHz Josephson ﬂux ﬂow oscillator. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 71(1),
289–293.
82. Berberich, H., Buemann, R., and Kinder, H. (1982). Monochromatic
phonon generation by the Josephson eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., 49, 1500.
83. Kinder, H., Berbctich, P., and Schick, A. (1984). High resolution phonon
spectroscopy using the Josephson eﬀect. Physica B+C, 127, 210–213.
84. Ehre, D., Lyahovitskaya, V., Tagantsev, A., and Lubomirsky, I. (2007).
Amorphous piezo- and pyroelectric phases of BaZrO3 and SrTiO3. Adv.
Mater., 19, 1515–1517.
85. Schlomann, E. (1964). Dielectric losses in ionic crystals with disor-
dered charge distributions. Phys. Rev., 135, A413–A419.
86. Kozub, V. I. (1983). Possible explanation of monochromatic phonon
emission by the Josephson junction. Phys. Rev. Lett., 51, 1498.
87. Werthamer, N. R. (1966). Nonlinear self-coupling of Josephson
radiation in superconducting tunnel junctions. Phys. Rev., 147, 255–
263.
88. Hasselberg, L.-E., Levinsen, M. T., and Samuelsen, M. R. (1974).
Theories of subharmonic gap structures in superconducting junctions.
Phys. Rev. B, 9, 3757–3765.
89. Tredwell, T. J., and Jacobsen, E. H. (1975). Phonon-induced enhance-
ment of the superconducting energy gap. Phys. Rev. Lett., 35, 244–246;
Tredwell, T. J., and Jacobsen, E. H. (1976). Phonon-induced increase
in the energy gap of superconducting ﬁlms. Phys. Rev. B, 13, 2931–
2942.
90. Volodin, A. P., Logvenov, G. Yu., Ryazanov, V. V., and Fal’kovskii, I. V.
(1987). Acoustoelectric eﬀect at a Josephson SNS junction. Sov. Phys.
JETP Lett., 46, 48–51.
91. Schlenga, K., Hechtﬁscher, G., Kleiner, R., Walkenhorst, W., and
Muller, P. (1996). Subgap structures in intrinsic Josephson junctions
of Tl2Ba2Ca2Cu3O10+δ and Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 4943–
4946.
92. Yurgens, A., Winkler, D., Zavaritsky, N., and Claeson, T. (1996). Gap
and sub-gap structures of intrinsic Josephson tunnel junctions in
Bi2Sr2CaCu2Ox single crystals. Proc. SPIE, 2697, 433–451.
93. Helm, Ch., Preis, Ch., Forsthofer, F., Keller, J., Schlenga, K., Kleiner, R., and
M¨uller, P. (1997). Coupling between phonons and intrinsic Josephson
oscillations in cuprate superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 737–740.

242
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
94. Krasnov,
V.
M.
(2006).
Quantum
cascade
phenomenon
in
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ single crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 97, 257003(1–4).
95. Maksimov, E. G., Arseev, P. I., and Maslova, N. S. (1999). Phonon assisted
tunneling in Josephson junctions. Solid State Commun., 111, 391–395.
96. Helm, Ch., Preis, Ch., Walter, Ch., and Keller, J. (2000). Theory for
the coupling between longitudinal phonons and intrinsic Josephson
oscillations in layered superconductors. Phys. Rev. B, 62, 6002–6014.
97. Katterwe, S.-O., Motzkau, H., Rydh, A., and Krasnov, V. M. (2011). Co-
herent generation of phonon-polaritons in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x intrinsic
Josephson junctions. Phys. Rev. B, 83, 100510R (1–4).
98. Koshelets, V. P., Ermakov, A. B., Shitov, S. V., Dmitriev, P. N., Filippenko,
L. V., Baryshev, A. M., Luinge, W., Mygind, J., Vaks, V. L., and Pavel’ev,
D. G. (2001). Superﬁne resonant structure on IVC of long Josephson
junctions and its inﬂuence on ﬂux ﬂow oscillator linewidth. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 11, 1211–1214.
99. Koshelets, V. P. (2014). Subterahertz sound excitation and detection by
long Josephson junction. Supercond. Sci. Technol., 27, 065010 (7pp).
100. Eisenmenger, W., and Dayem, A. H. (1967). Quantum generation and
detection of incoherent phonons in superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
18, 125–127.
101. Eisenmenger, W. (1976). Superconducting tunnel junctions as phonon
generators and detectors, in Physical Acoustics: Principles and Methods,
Academic Press: New York, pp. 79–153.
102. Bron, W. E. (1980). Spectroscopy of high-frequency phonons. Rep. Prog.
Phys., 43, 301–352.
103. Ivanchenko, Yu. M., and Medvedev, Yu. V. (1971). Exitation of sound in
a Josephson junction. Sov. Phys. JETP, 33, 1223–1228.
104. McSkimin, H. J., and Andreatch, P. (1964). Elastic moduli of silicon vs
hydrostatic pressure at 25.0◦C and −195.8◦C. J. Appl. Phys., 35, 2161–
2165.
105. Teichert, C., MacKay, J. F., Savage, D. E., Lagally, M. G., Brohl, M., and
Wagner, P. (1995). Comparison of surface roughness of polished silicon
wafers measured by light scattering topography, soft x-ray scattering,
and atomic force microscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett., 66, 2346–2348.
106. Polzikova, N. I., Mansfeld, G. D., Tokpanov, Y. S., and Koshelets, V.
P. (2011). Resonant subterahertz coherent acoustic waves excitation
by Josephson junction. Proc. 2011 Joint Conference of the IEEE
International Frequency Control Symposium & European Frequency and
Time Forum, ISSN: 1075–6787, 483–485.
www.ebook3000.com

References
243
107. http://vadiodes.com/index.php/en/products/full-band-multipliers-
wr-series
108. http://www.almaobservatory.org/en/about-alma/how-does-alma-
work/technology/front-end
109. Hoogeveen, R. W. M., Yagoubov, P. A., de Lange, A., Selig, A. M., Koshelets,
V. P., Ellison, B. N., and Birk, M. (2005). Proc. SPIE, 5978, 440.
110. Hoogeveen, R. W. M., Yagoubov, P. A., de Lange, G., de Lange, A.,
Koshelets, V., Birk, M., and Ellison, B. (2007). Proc. SPIE, 6744, 67441U-
1.
111. Friedl-Vallon, F., Maucher, G., Seefeldner, M., Trieschmann, O., Kleinert,
A., Lengel, A., Keim, C., Oelhaf, H., and Fischer, H. (2004). Appl. Opt., 43,
3335.
112. Sobis, P., Drakinskiy, V., Wadefalk, N., Karandikhar, Y., Hammar, A.,
Emrich, A., Zhao, H., Bryllert, T., Tang, A.-Y., Nilsson, P.- ˚A., Schleeh,
J., Kim, H., Jacob, K., Murk, A., Grahn, J., and Stake, J. (2014). Low
noise GaAs Schottky TMIC and InP Hemt MMIC based receivers
for the ISMAR and SWI instruments. Micro-and Millimetre Wave
Technology and Techniques Workshop 2014, ESA-ESTEC, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands.
113. de Lange, A., Birk, M., de Lange, G., Friedl-Vallon, F., Kiselev,
O., Koshelets, V., Maucher, G., Oelhaf, H., Selig, A., Vogt, P., Wagner,
G., and Landgraf, J. (2012). HCl and ClO in activated Arctic air; ﬁrst
retrieved vertical proﬁles from TELIS submillimetre limb spectra.
Atmos. Meas. Tech., 5, 487–500.
114. Xu, J., Schreier, F., Vogt, P., Doicu, A., and Trautmann, T. (2013).
A sensitivity study for far infrared balloon-borne limb emission
sounding of stratospheric trace gases. Geosci. Instrum. Methods Data
Syst. Discuss., 3, 251–303.
115. Kasai, Y., Sagawa, H., Kreyling, D., Dupuy, E., Baron, P., Mendrok,
J., Suzuki, K., Sato, T. O., Nishibori, T., Mizobuchi, S., Kikuchi, K., Manabe,
T., Ozeki, H., Sugita, T., Fujiwara, M., Irimajiri, Y., Walker, K. A., Bernath,
P. F., Boone, C., Stiller, G., von Clarmann, T., Orphal, J., Urban, J.,
Murtagh, D., Llewellyn, E. J., Degenstein, D., Bourassa, A. E., Lloyd,
N. D., Froidevaux, L., Birk, M., Wagner, G., Schreier, F., Xu, J., Vogt,
P., Trautmann, T., and Yasui, M. (2013). Validation of stratospheric
and mesospheric ozone observed by SMILES from International Space
Station. Atmos. Meas. Tech., 6, 2311–2338.
116. Sagawa, H., Sato, T., Baron, P., Dupuy, E., Livesey, N., Urban, J., von
Clarmann, T., de Lange, A., Wetzel, G., Kagawa, A., Murtagh, D., and

244
Applications in Superconducting SIS Mixers and Oscillators
Kasai, Y. (2013). Comparison of SMILES ClO proﬁles with other satellite
and balloon-based measurements. Atmos. Meas. Tech. Discuss., 6(1),
613–663.
117. Li, M., Yuan, J., Kinev, N., Li, J., Gross, B., Gu’enon, S., Ishii, A., Hirata,
K., Hatano, T., Koelle, D., Kleiner, R., Koshelets, V. P., Wang, H., and
Wu, P. (2012). Linewidth dependence of coherent terahertz emission
from Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 intrinsic Josephson junction stacks in the hot-spot
regime. Phys. Rev. B, 86, 060505(R).
118. Butz, S., Jung, P., Filippenko, L. V., Koshelets, V. P., and Ustinov, A.
V. (2013). A one-dimensional tunable magnetic metamaterial. Opt.
Express, 21(19), 22540–22548.
119. Vidiborskiy, A., Koshelets, V. P., Filippenko, L. V., Shitov, S. V., and
Ustinov, A. V. (2013). Ultra-compact tunable split-ring resonators. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 103, 162602.
120. Jung, P., Butz, J., Marthaler, M., Fistul, M. V., Lepp¨akangas, J., Koshelets,
V. P., and Ustinov, A. V. (2014). A multi-stable switchable metamaterial.
Nat. Commun., 5, 3730.
121. Kalashnikov, K. V., Khudchenko, A. V., and Koshelets, V. P. (2013).
Harmonic phase detector for phase locking of cryogenic terahertz
oscillator. Appl. Phys. Lett., 103, 102601-1–102601-4.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 8
Application in Superconducting
Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
D. Drung and J. Beyer
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Abbestr. 2–12, 10587 Berlin,
Germany
dietmar.drung@ptb.de, joern.beyer@ptb.de
The superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) is a
highly sensitive detector for magnetic ﬂux or any quantity that
can be eﬃciently converted into ﬂux. Comprehensive overviews
of the fundamentals, technology, and applications of SQUIDs and
SQUID systems are found in the literature (for example [1–6]).
In this chapter, a short introduction into the basic function of a
SQUID, its operation, and its design for magnetic ﬁeld and current
sensing is given. It is shown by several examples that the device is
very versatile and important for a variety of applications such as
biomagnetism, astronomy, low-temperature physics, and metrology.
Due to the focus of the book on Nb-based devices, the large ﬁeld of
devices with high critical temperature (high-Tc SQUIDs) will not be
considered here.
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

246
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
8.1 SQUID Fundamentals
A SQUID basically consists of a superconducting loop interrupted
by one or more Josephson junctions. Depending on the number of
junctions, it is named rf SQUID (one junction) or dc SQUID (two
junctions), respectively. This classiﬁcation results from the basic
mode of operation: the rf SQUID is driven by a high-frequency
signal (tens or hundreds of megahertz typically) applied to a tank
circuit magnetically coupled to the SQUID, whereas the dc SQUID
is biased with a direct current. The dc SQUID was discovered by
Jaklevic et al. [7], only a few years after Josephson’s predictions of
superconducting tunneling. The rf SQUID was introduced shortly
afterwards [8]. In those days, it was extremely diﬃcult to fabricate
reliable Josephson junctions with thin-ﬁlm techniques. As a result,
early SQUIDs were equipped with “point contacts” consisting of a
Nb screw pressed against a Nb body, thereby forming an adjustable
Josephson junction.
It is obviously much more demanding to obtain two point
contacts with similar parameters than to adjust only one. Therefore,
although the dc SQUID generally allows a lower overall noise, the
rf SQUID became the standard device in the following years. The
situation changed after reliable thin-ﬁlm processes were developed
in the 1970s and 1980s, and the dc SQUID began to replace the
rf SQUID. Nowadays, the dc SQUID is dominant in the ﬁeld of Nb-
based sensors, and the rf SQUID is practically obsolete. Therefore,
this chapter deals with the dc SQUID only; the rf SQUID is extensively
discussed in literature (see for example [4]).
8.1.1 Basic SQUID Function
The dc SQUID is based on two eﬀects: ﬂux quantization and
superconducting tunneling. Its function is schematically illustrated
in Fig. 8.1. The simplest circuit is assumed: a superconducting
loop interrupted by two Josephson junctions. The junctions have
parallel-connected resistors R to eliminate hysteresis in their
current–voltage characteristics [9, 10]. We ﬁrst consider the case
in Fig. 8.1a, where a quasi-static current I is passed through
the SQUID but no magnetic ﬁeld is applied. Due to symmetry,
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
247
(a) 
I
I
I/2
I/2
Ic
R
V
R
Ic
 (b) 
B≠0
I
I
I/2
I/2
Iscr
Iscr
R
V
R
(c)
Φ
V
0
V
I
0
Φ0/2
2Ic
IcR
Φ0
I>2Ic
Φ=0,Φ0
I<2Ic
R/2
Figure 8.1
Basic SQUID circuit with (a) zero and (b) nonzero applied
magnetic ﬂux density B. The resulting voltage–current and voltage–ﬂux
characteristics are schematically shown in (c). The dashed line shows
the resistance that would be obtained without tunneling. To remove
hysteresis in their characteristics, the two Josephson junctions (black
regions incorporated into the superconducting loop) are shunted by
resistors R connected in parallel.
the current splits into two equal halves I/2 that ﬂow through
the two Josephson junctions. The corresponding current–voltage
characteristic is shown in Fig. 8.1c. Neglecting noise rounding, the
total critical current of the SQUID 2Ic is the sum of the two junction
critical currents Ic.
If a magnetic ﬁeld is applied perpendicular to the SQUID loop,
the resulting ﬂux in the loop  = BA (assuming that the ﬂux density
B is constant over the area A of the loop) will cause a screening
current Iscr to circulate. As we will see later, Josephson junctions
are commonly made as small as possible, so that the eﬀect of the
applied ﬁeld on the junction critical currents can be neglected. For
example, in Fig. 8.1b, the screening current is added to I/2 in the
left junction, but subtracted from I/2 in the right one. Therefore, the
critical current of the left junction is already reached at I/2 < Ic and
hence the critical current of the SQUID is reduced with applied ﬂux.
If the magnetic ﬂux caused by the screening current exceeds ±0/2,

248
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
the ﬂux state of the SQUID changes by one ﬂux quantum 0 ≈2.068
× 10−15 V·s and the screening current changes its direction because
this is energetically more favorable than a further increase in the
screening current. This way, the total ﬂux in the loop is always kept
equal to an integer number of ﬂux quanta (ﬂux quantization) and the
critical current of the SQUID changes periodically with the applied
ﬂux.
As illustrated in Fig. 8.1c, the ﬂux dependence of the critical
current leads to a periodic voltage–ﬂux characteristic if the SQUID
is biased at constant current I. The period is exactly equal to one
ﬂux quantum 0. For I ≤2Ic, the zero-voltage state is included in
the voltage–ﬂux characteristic, whereas for I > 2Ic the SQUID is
always in the voltage state with a ﬁnite dc voltage across the device.
Note that in the voltage state, due to the ac Josephson eﬀect, a high-
frequency ac voltage is always superimposed with a fundamental of
483.6 MHz per microvolt of dc voltage. In Fig. 8.1 it was assumed that
this ac Josephson voltage is outside the measurement bandwidth
and ﬁltered out by the measurement setup (which is always the
case in practice). Finally, in the above discussion we have neglected
thermal noise. In practice, the characteristics in Fig. 8.1 are rounded
near zero voltage due to thermal noise.
The SQUID function is determined by four basic quantities: the
inductance of the SQUID loop L, the junction critical current Ic,
the shunt resistance per junction R, and the parasitic junction
capacitance C. The tunnel junctions may be intrinsically shunted
or equipped with parallel-connected resistors. Strictly speaking,
in the latter case the quasiparticle tunneling would slightly
contribute to the eﬀective shunt resistance R; however, this eﬀect is
commonly negligible. The speciﬁc junction capacitance is relatively
high because of the plate-capacitor-like structure with the very
thin (a few nanometers typically) tunnel barrier between the
electrodes. For window-type junctions, C includes the eﬀect of the
overlap area around the tunnel barrier. For cross-type junctions,
the overlap contribution is practically eliminated [11]. Extremely
small junctions are used in nanometer-sized SQUIDs, the so-called
nanoSQUIDs [12]. Here, the parasitic capacitance from the vicinity
of the junctions can dominate the total capacitance.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
249
R
Ic
IJ
R
SI
 = 4kBT/R
C
LJ = 2πIc
Φ0
Figure 8.2
Simpliﬁed equivalent circuit of a resistively shunted junction
with small Josephson tunnel current IJ ≪Ic. The eﬀect of superconducting
tunneling was approximated by an inductance LJ = 0/(2π Ic).
The SQUID is a strongly nonlinear device. Analytical solutions
for the corresponding mathematical equations are available in
a few special cases only, but unfortunately for parameters less
suitable for practical devices. Intensive computer simulations were
performed beginning in the mid-1970s to understand the device
and to ﬁnd design rules for optimum SQUID function [1, 13–16].
These simulations yielded conditions for the three major SQUID
parameters that will be discussed and made plausible here on the
basis of the simpliﬁed junction circuit depicted in Fig. 8.2. For small
supercurrents IJ ≪Ic through the tunnel junction, the sine function
in the dc Josephson eﬀect can be approximated by the linear term of
its Taylor series. As a result, in this case the eﬀect of superconducting
tunneling can be taken into account by an equivalent inductance
LJ = 0/(2π Ic). For larger tunnel currents IJ approaching ±Ic,
the higher-order terms in the sinusoidal current–phase relation
become dominant. Therefore, the eﬀective inductance increases
nonlinearly with IJ, becomes inﬁnite at IJ = ±Ic and even negative if
IJ exceeds ±Ic. This clearly shows that the device dynamics are very
complicated. However, the simpliﬁed circuit in Fig. 8.2 is helpful for
understanding some basic relationships.
Thermal noise in the shunt resistance can be taken into account
by a current source in parallel to the junction having a power
spectral density SI = 4kBT /R, where kB ≈1.38 × 10−23 J/K is the
Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. Integrating
over frequency, the total rms noise current ﬂowing through LJ is
found to be IJ,rms = (kBT /LJ)1/2. Obviously, to avoid thermal noise
“wiping out” the superconducting tunnel eﬀect, it is required that
IJ,rms ≪Ic. Thus we obtain a condition for the noise parameter
 = (IJ,rms/Ic)2 = 2πkBT /(0Ic) ≪1.
(8.1)

250
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
The parameter  describes the rounding of the junction characteris-
tics due to thermal noise and is a measure for the apparent reduction
of the critical current in the presence of thermal noise [17]. For a
typical critical current Ic = 10 μA, one obtains LJ = 33 pH and
an rms noise current IJ,rms = 1.33 μA at liquid helium temperature
(T = 4.2 K), resulting in  ≈0.018. Equation 8.1 is fulﬁlled at 4.2 K
for critical currents above about 1 μA.
Due to the parasitic capacitance C, the Josephson junction forms
a parallel resonant circuit. For the simpliﬁed circuit in Fig. 8.2 we
ﬁnd a quality factor QJ = R(C/LJ)1/2. Generally, it is advisable to
keep the quality factor of resonant circuits in nonlinear systems
below about unity to minimize excess noise from down-mixing
eﬀects. In the case of a Josephson junction, hysteresis occurs in
the current–voltage characteristic for QJ above about unity (without
noise the hysteresis limit is QJ ≈0.84 [1]). QJ can be set for given
Ic and C by selecting R appropriately. However, R should not be
chosen too low because this would result in a small peak-peak
output voltage Vpp of the SQUID (typically Vpp ≈0.4 IcR). Therefore,
in practice a good compromise is
βC = Q2
J = 2π IcR2C/0 ≈1.
(8.2)
At 4.2 K and relatively low critical currents Ic ≈3.5 μA (correspond-
ing to  ≈0.05) minimum SQUID noise is obtained for βC between
1 and 2 [1]. In contrast, for very low  < 0.01 typically obtained at
millikelvin temperatures, it is advisable to keep βC < 0.5 to improve
damping. This is particularly important if the eﬀective junction
capacitance is higher than expected due to parasitic capacitance in
the SQUID layout [16]. Although a slight hysteresis in the SQUID
characteristics might not be visible due to thermal noise, it can
degrade the noise performance substantially at low values of .
As discussed above, the ﬂux dependence of the critical current of
the SQUID results from the screening current Iscr interacting with
the Josephson junctions. Obviously, Iscr decreases with increasing
SQUID inductance L. Thus, the modulation depth of the critical
current and the resulting output voltage modulation V
are
maximized for small SQUID inductance L ≪LJ. In the limit
L/LJ →0, the critical current of the SQUID as a function of applied
ﬂux becomes 2Ic|cos(π/0)|, i.e., it is completely suppressed at
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
251
 = (n+ 1/2)0 (n is an integer). However, simulations show that
for too low L/LJ the SQUID noise increases, leading to the design rule
[13]
βL = L/(π LJ) = 2LIc/0 ≈1.
(8.3)
Combining Eqs. 8.3 with Eq. 8.1, one obtains a practical limit for the
SQUID inductance Lmax ≈1 nH at 4.2 K.
The design rules Eqs. 8.2 and 8.3 are helpful guides in practice.
One ﬁrst selects the SQUID inductance according to the intended
application (typically L≈100 pH) and assumes the smallest junction
size to minimize capacitance (typically C ≈0.4 pF). Next, Eq. 8.3
is used to determine Ic from the given L. With the help of Eq. 8.2
one obtains the required R and the resulting number of squares
in the shunt resistor layout for the nominal sheet resistance of the
shunt material (e.g., 4  per square for 70 nm thick AuPd). The ﬁnal
optimization is preferably done during routine fabrication by ﬁne-
tuning the critical current density of the Josephson junctions and the
ﬁlm thickness of the shunt resistors.
8.1.2 SQUID Noise
Achieving a low noise level is the most important issue in the ﬁeld of
SQUID sensors. As discussed above, the period in the voltage–ﬂux
characteristic is exactly equal to the ﬂux quantum 0. Therefore,
the ﬂux sensitivity of the SQUID is automatically “calibrated” and
the measured output noise can easily be converted into 0/√Hz.
However, in most cases the signal applied to the SQUID is not
magnetic ﬂux directly, but rather magnetic ﬁeld or current, the latter
being passed through a coil inductively coupled to the SQUID loop.
In any case, it is necessary to specify the noise ﬁgure of the sensor in
units of the quantity to be measured, for example the ﬂux density in
the pickup coil B or the input current Ii. The corresponding power
spectral densities are related to the ﬂux noise density S by
SB = S/A2
eﬀor SI = S/M2
i .
(8.4)
Here, Aeﬀis the eﬀective ﬁeld-sensitive area of the SQUID magne-
tometer; often, the inverse of Aeﬀin units of T/0 is referred to as
ﬁeld sensitivity. In the case of current sensing applications, Mi is the
mutual inductance between the input coil and the SQUID loop.

252
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
The ﬂux noise in the SQUID is caused by thermal noise in the
shunt resistors, that is accounted for in Fig. 8.2 by the current
source SI = 4kBT /R. As a result, the dc voltage V across the SQUID
shows ﬂuctuations VN that are interpreted as ﬂuctuations in ﬂux
N = VN/V (V = ∂V/∂ is the transfer coeﬃcient at the chosen
working point in the voltage–ﬂux characteristic). It is important
to note that the ﬂux noise √S is a superposition of a “true” ﬂux
noise component (i.e., ﬂuctuations in the screening current IN,scr)
and a voltage noise component that represents “apparent” ﬂux noise
only. When operating the SQUID as a high-frequency ampliﬁer by
coupling an input coil inductively to the SQUID loop, the noise in
the screening current induces a noise voltage in the input coil [18,
19]. This causes backaction of the SQUID on the signal source, makes
the noise analysis more complicated, and can degrade the signal-
to-noise ratio. Fortunately, in most SQUID applications this eﬀect is
small or even completely negligible, so that it is commonly suﬃcient
to know the total ﬂux noise density S only.
A useful ﬁgure of merit for characterizing SQUIDs is the noise
energy per bandwidth ε referred to the SQUID inductance L. To
derive it, we substitute the ﬂuctuations in ﬂux N by equivalent
current ﬂuctuations IN = N/Land calculate the noise energy LI2
N/2
= 2
N/2L. We then replace 2
N by the spectral density S and obtain
the noise energy per bandwidth ε = S/2L that is often quoted
in units of Planck’s constant h ≈6.63 × 10−34 J/Hz. For the near-
optimum case βL ≈1 and βC ≈1 numerical simulations [13, 14] yield
the white noise level
εw ≈9kBTL/R or εw ≈16kBT (LC)1/2.
(8.5)
Due to the strongly nonlinear SQUID characteristics and the
“inherent local oscillator” (the Josephson ac voltage at typically
5 GHz with a rich spectrum of harmonics), thermal noise in the
shunt resistors is mixed down from the microwave regime into the
signal frequency range. A small-signal analysis without nonlinear
eﬀects yields εw ≈2kBTL/R [20], i.e., more than three-fourths of the
noise energy in Eq. 8.5 is caused by down-mixing. Equation 8.5 was
obtained for a “bare” SQUID without including parasitic capacitance
in the SQUID layout—for example, due to a multiturn input coil
coupled to the SQUID or the transmission line connecting the SQUID
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
253
with the bonding pads. If parasitic high-Q resonant circuits in
the SQUID design are driven by thermal noise, excess noise from
down-mixing can become a severe problem and Eq. 8.5 can sub-
stantially underestimate the noise energy. Fortunately, in practice
this excess noise can be strongly reduced by proper resonance
damping, although the ﬁnal noise energy will be always higher than
without parasitic capacitance due to thermal noise in the damping
resistors.
The general design rule for minimum noise energy is that
parasitic capacitance should be kept as small as possible [16] and
that, if parasitic resonant circuits cannot be avoided, appropriate
damping by extra resistors or resistor–capacitor series shunts
should be implemented [21–23]. This is particularly important
when operating a SQUID at millikelvin temperatures because of
the reduced noise level. At higher temperatures, hysteresis eﬀects
caused by parasitic capacitance are “wiped out” to a certain extend
by thermal noise, which can somewhat relax the issue of resonance
damping.
The white noise energy εw has a minimum when βC is varied via
the shunt resistance R for ﬁxed SQUID inductance L and junction
capacitance C. Below the optimum value of R, the noise energy
degrades due to the increased thermal current noise 4kBT /R, while
above optimum the down-mixing noise rises due to insuﬃcient
damping. The second expression in Eq. 8.5 shows a practical limit
if L and C are ﬁxed by SQUID layout and fabrication process. It
assumes that R is optimally selected, typically near βC ≈1. The ﬁrst
expression in Eq. 8.5 can be used if R and L are given. It implies
that the βL is optimally chosen via the critical current Ic and that
the junctions are suﬃciently well damped. It is also applicable for
strongly overdamped junctions with βC ≪1.
The white noise of well-designed Nb-based SQUIDs is typically
in fair agreement with theory. Figure 8.3 shows an example of a
SQUID with strongly overdamped Josephson junctions (βC ≈0.2 and
βL ≈0.5). The measured white noise energy of 28 h at 4.2 K is a
factor of 1.75 above the value of 16 h calculated with Eq. 8.5 for
L = 110 pH and R = 5.4 , corresponding to a deviation of 32%
in rms ﬂux noise √S. Cooling the SQUID to 310 mK improves
the white noise energy by a factor of 12 to 2.3 h. Note that for

254
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
100
101
102
103
4.2 K
ε / h
f  (Hz)
310 mK
Figure 8.3
Example of noise spectra for a SQUID with strongly overdamped
Josephson junctions (device C214G05 in [24], reproduced with permission).
Solid lines show the measured noise at 4.2 K and 310 mK, and dashed lines
are calculated from Eqs. 8.5 and 8.6 for L = 110 pH and R = 5.4 . The
exponent α was determined from the measured noise spectra: α = 0.53 at
4.2 K and α = 0.7 at 310 mK, respectively. The good agreement between
measured and calculated low-frequency data at 310 mK is coincidental.
operation at very low temperatures, the noise temperature of the
shunt resistors (and correspondingly the SQUID noise) saturates
at typically 300 mK due to self-heating (hot-electron eﬀect [25]).
Large cooling ﬁns attached to the resistors improve the situation,
but it is commonly diﬃcult to reduce the eﬀective resistor noise
temperature below about 100 mK.
As observed in virtually all electronic devices (semiconducting
as well as superconducting), also the SQUID noise rises at low
frequencies. This additional low-frequency noise is called ﬂicker
noise or 1/ f noise, the latter name resulting from the typical scaling
of the power spectral density S ∝1/ f . In contrast to the white
noise, the low-frequency noise is less well understood and can
generally not be predicted from the SQUID design. There are noise
contributions from low-frequency critical current ﬂuctuations that
can be suppressed by special modulation schemes involving bias
reversal (for a review see Chapter 4 in [4]). Fortunately, in contrast
to high-Tc junctions, modern Nb–AlOx–Nb trilayer-based junctions
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
255
show very small levels of critical current ﬂuctuations and bias
reversal schemes are commonly not required. This simpliﬁes the
readout electronics, which is helpful in particular for multichannel
systems. However, there is another low-frequency noise component
which reveals as a “true” ﬂux noise and cannot be eliminated by
bias reversal. Unfortunately, this excess low-frequency ﬂux noise
increases when the operation temperature is reduced below about
2 K, in contrast to the eﬀect of critical current ﬂuctuations that
decreases with temperature [26].
A special peculiarity of the excess ﬂux noise is a weaker scaling
with frequency, S ∝1/ f a with α typically around 0.6 for low-noise
devices [24, 26, 27]. The increase in the noise at low temperatures is
accompanied by a rise in the exponent α. Recently, the noise energy
of a large variety of SQUIDs at 4.2 K and <320 mK was reported,
and an approximate equation for the noise energy including low-
frequency excess noise was empirically found for α ranging between
about 0.5 and 0.9 [24]
ε ≈εw + 0.09 h × ( f/200 kHz)−α.
(8.6)
Equation 8.6 gives an estimate of the excess ﬂux noise between
about 1 Hz and 100 kHz. It is applicable to SQUIDs when
other sources of low-frequency noise (e.g., due to critical current
ﬂuctuations or picked-up environmental noise) do not noticeably
contribute. At very low frequencies ≲0.1 Hz, the common 1/ f
scaling (α ≈1) is typically observed. The dashed lines in Fig. 8.3
are calculated with Eq. 8.6 for the experimentally observed α values
of 0.53 at 4.2 K and 0.7 at 310 mK, respectively. The agreement
between the calculated and measured noise spectra is adequate
considering that Eqs. 8.5 and 8.6 are approximate formulas only. To
conclude, the white noise decreases with temperature as expected.
Cooling the SQUID to ≲300 mK helps to improve the noise energy
by typically about one order of magnitude compared to operation
at 4.2 K. However, it is generally observed that the low-frequency
noise degrades when lowering the temperature below about 2 K. For
the particular device in Fig. 8.3, the noise at 310 mK exceeds that
at 4.2 K for frequencies below about 40 Hz. Therefore, operation at
millikelvin temperatures is usually not favorable for low-frequency
applications.

256
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
8.1.3 Inductance and Effective Area
The basic equations for designing a SQUID sensor are summarized
in Chapter 5 of [4]. In this section, we present equations for
calculating the inductance and the eﬀective ﬁeld-sensitive area
of two representative superconducting structures. The polygonal
structure in Fig. 8.4a is commonly used for thin-ﬁlm pickup coils
or for the SQUID loop [28]. A narrow slit, indicated in Fig. 8.4a
by a vertical solid line, interrupts the loop to enable connection
with other elements, for example the two Josephson junctions. For
simplicity, we ﬁrst neglect the contribution of the slit to the total
inductance and eﬀective area of the polygonal loop. In practice,
the slit’s contribution can be made small by covering it with a
superconducting plate, however, at the expense of additional stray
capacitance [29]. The coplanar line in Fig. 8.4b typically serves as an
interconnect line, for example between pickup coils in planar thin-
ﬁlm gradiometers [30], or as a “spoke” in multiloop magnetometers
[20]. It has a larger parasitic inductance and eﬀective area than the
microstrip geometry (where one strip is placed on top of the other),
but a substantially reduced capacitance. The latter is beneﬁcial
because stray capacitance should always be minimized in SQUID
design.
(a) At
Aeff
Ah
w
d
w
 (b) 
deff
w
w
d
Figure 8.4
Top view of two basic superconducting structures: (a) polygonal
loop, (b) coplanar line. Superconducting ﬁlms are marked in gray. In (a), the
hole area Ah is deﬁned by the inner perimeter of the polygonal loop and At
is the total area (gray region plus Ah). The eﬀective area Aeﬀand eﬀective
slit width deﬀare indicated by dotted lines for the depicted case w = 2d.
When applying a homogeneous ﬂux density B to the supercon-
ducting loop in Fig. 8.4a, magnetic ﬂux is focused into the hole, in
particular if the hole diameter d is much smaller than the linewidth
w [31]. The eﬀective area Aeﬀis deﬁned by Aeﬀ= h/B where h is
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
257
the total ﬂux focused into the hole area Ah. In other words, Aeﬀis the
area that a superconducting loop with w →0 should have to collect
the same total ﬂux for given B. Similarly, ﬂux is focused into the slit
of the coplanar line in Fig. 8.4b. The eﬀective slit width deﬀis equal
to the slit width d of an equivalent coplanar line with w →0.
Unfortunately, analytical equations for Lh and Aeﬀof the
polygonal loop in Fig. 8.4 exist in special cases only [31]. At
PTB, we are using the following approximate equations that were
deduced from numerical calculations under the assumption of
idealized superconducting structures (i.e., ﬁlm thickness t and
London penetration depth λL are much smaller than the linewidth
w and spacing d) [32]. The equations were derived for a regular
polygon with N corners, but are useful for other shapes as well (e.g.,
the optimized multiloop magnetometer in [33]). For the inductance
of the polygonal loop we ﬁnd
Lh = γLμ0c/π with γL = [ln(d/w+2.8)+0.2+2.7d/c]/2.07, (8.7)
where μ0 = 4π × 10−7 H/m is the vacuum permeability and c is
the perimeter of the hole. The inductance is proportional to the hole
perimeter c multiplied by a geometry factor γL. This geometry factor
depends on the ratio d/w, but also on the shape of the loop due to
the term 2.7d/c in Eq. 8.7. For a regular polygon one obtains the
perimeter
c = N tan(π/N)d.
(8.8)
For a square loop (N = 4) in the limit d/w →0, the hole inductance
Lh = 1.25 μ0d numerically calculated by Jaycox and Ketchen [29] is
about 7% larger than the result Lh = 1.17 μ0d obtained from Eq.
8.7. However, the numerical result Lh = 1.19 μ0d reported in [34]
is in good agreement with Eq. 8.7. For an octagonal loop in the limit
d/w →0, a hole inductance Lh ≈1.05 μ0d was quoted in [28], which
agrees well with Lh = 1.04 μ0d resulting from Eqs. 8.7 and 8.8.
The eﬀective area of the polygonal loop is given by
Aeﬀ= γA(AhAt)1/2 with γA = 1 −0.68/(d/w + 2.07)1.75.
(8.9)
The geometry factor γA depends on the ratio d/w, but is independent
of the shape of the loop. Ah and At are the area of the hole and the
total area of the loop, respectively. For a regular polygon we obtain
(AhAt)1/2 = (N/4) tan(π/N)d(d + 2w).
(8.10)

258
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
In the limiting cases of square (N = 4) or circular (N →∞)
shapes, Eq. 8.10 simpliﬁes to (AhAt)1/2 = d(d+2w) or d(d+2w)π/4,
respectively. For a circular loop, the eﬀective area was analytically
calculated in the limit d/w →0 [31]. Equation 8.9 diﬀers from the
analytical result γA = 8/π2 by less than 0.12%. For a square loop,
the numerical result γA = 0.81 in [34] is in excellent agreement
with Eq. 8.9. However, the experimental value γA ≈1.1 reported by
Ketchen et al. [31] is 36% higher than Eq. 8.9 predicts. In Ketchen’s
experiments, the slit had been covered by a superconducting plate.
The increase in eﬀective area was probably caused by the residual
stray ﬂux coupled into the loop via the slit.
The inductance per length L′ and eﬀective slit width (eﬀective
area per length) deﬀof an inﬁnitely long coplanar line according to
Fig. 8.4b can be analytically calculated, yielding L′ = μ0K(k)/K(k′)
[35] and deﬀ= 0.5π(d+2w)/K(k′). Here, K(k) is the complete
elliptic integral of the ﬁrst kind with modulus k = d/(d+2w) and
k′ = (1 – k2)1/2. Simpliﬁed but still accurate approximate formulas
without elliptic integral [32] are given here:
L′ = γL′μ0 with
γL′ = [ln(4d/w + 22)/ ln(8w/d + 4.9)]/1.98,
(8.11)
deﬀ= γd(d + 2w) with γd = 0.5π/ ln(8w/d + eπ/2).
(8.12)
The term eπ/2 ensures that Eq. 8.12 yields the correct result deﬀ→d
in the limit w/d →0. Neglecting the inﬂuence of the line ends, the
total inductance and eﬀective area of a coplanar line of ﬁnite length
l are given by L= L′l and Aeﬀ= deﬀl, respectively.
The geometry factors according to Eqs. 8.7 to 8.12 are plotted
in Fig. 8.5 versus the aspect ratio w/d in a wide range, 10−3 to
102. Due to the logarithmic terms in the equations, the dependence
on w/d is relatively weak. For large aspect ratios w/d ≫1, the
geometry factors of the polygonal loop become independent of w/d
as reported in literature [29, 31]. For comparison, the geometry
factor γw = 0.5ln(8d/w) −1 for the inductance Lw = γwμ0d of a
circular wire-wound coil in the limit w/d ≪1 is shown in Fig. 8.5 as
green line [36]. In this case, w denotes the wire diameter and d the
coil diameter.
The polygonal loop is commonly contacted at the outer edge, for
example to the Josephson junctions or to an interconnect line. So far
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Fundamentals
259
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
0
1
2
3
Coplanar Line
Geometry Factor
w / d
Polygonal Loop
Figure 8.5
Calculated geometry factors of the structures in Fig. 8.4 plotted
versus the aspect ratio w/d. Solid lines show the inductance (γL and γL′),
dashed lines the eﬀective area and slit width (γA and γd). The inductance of
the polygonal loop also depends on the shape due to the term 2.7d/c in Eq.
8.7; here, the two limiting cases of square (N = 4, lower trace) and circular
(N →∞, upper trace) shape are shown, respectively. For comparison, the
geometry factor of a circular wire-wound coil is indicated as green line [36].
we have neglected the eﬀect of the slit; that is, we have assumed an
inﬁnitely narrow slit. A ﬁnite slit width will add parasitic inductance
Lsl and increase the eﬀective area by Asl,eﬀ. This can be estimated
by approximating the slit by a piece of coplanar line and using Eqs.
8.11 and 8.12 to calculate Lsl and Asl,eﬀ. As L′ and deﬀof the coplanar
line depend only weakly on the aspect ratio w/d, the actual choice of
w/d is not crucial. For example, a typical value for the inductance of
a slit L′ = 300 nH/m was quoted in [28]. This value is obtained from
Eq. 8.11 for w/d = 86. Decreasing or increasing w/d by a factor of 2
changes L′ by only +12% or –10%, respectively.
Finally, the presented equations can also be applied to calculate
an elongated loop with dlong > dshort. For this, the loop is approx-
imated by a combination of a coplanar line of length dlong–dshort,
“capped” on both ends by half a polygonal loop with inner dimension
dshort. The total inductance and eﬀective area are estimated from
Eqs. 8.7–8.12 as the sum of the contributions from coplanar line
and polygonal loop. This approach is used at PTB to estimate the
inductance and eﬀective area of the SQUIDs shown as examples in
the following sections.

260
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
8.2 Making the SQUID a Practical Device
8.2.1 The Bare SQUID
So far we have discussed a “bare” SQUID, i.e., a device without
coupling structures that just consists of a superconducting loop
with two resistively-shunted Josephson junctions as schematically
shown in Fig. 8.1a. Figure 8.6a shows an implementation of such
a device that was intended as a miniature magnetometer for
analyzing the residual magnetic ﬁeld in cryogenic setups. The
SQUID loop was designed to achieve a ﬁeld sensitivity of 2 μT/0
corresponding to an eﬀective area of 1034 μm2. A single-turn coil
on top of the loop allows one to apply a feedback current IF to the
device (this is required for operation; see Section 8.3). The mutual
inductance between this coil and the SQUID loop is MF = 47.5 pH,
corresponding to a current sensitivity 1/MF = 43.5 μA/0.
The lower trace in Fig. 8.6b shows the ﬂux noise measured
with a superconducting shield enclosing the device. The white noise
(b)
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
100
101
102
103
SQUID unshielded
f  (Hz)
Cryoperm/Pb shield
√SΦ  (μΦ0/√Hz)
(a)
Figure 8.6
(a) Micrograph and (b) ﬂux noise spectrum of a basic SQUID
with a nominal ﬁeld sensitivity of 2 μT/0 (corresponding to an eﬀective
area of 1034 μm2). The two Josephson junctions are indicated by black
squares. The noise was measured at T = 4.2 K with and without a
superconducting shield enclosing the device. The increased noise level
without shield is due to pickup of environmental magnetic noise. The roll-
oﬀabove about 10 Hz results from the screening eﬀect of the metal liquid-
helium transport dewar used for the measurement.
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
261
level of 0.65 μ0/√Hz corresponds to a ﬂux density noise level
of 1.3 pT/√Hz, which is just comparable to a low-noise ﬂux-gate
magnetometer. Although this noise level is achieved with a very
small device (which can be advantageous in some applications) one
sees that the bare SQUID is not really a sensitive magnetometer. In
Section 8.2.4 we will discuss how the magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity of
the SQUID can be improved by three to four orders of magnitude to
achieve noise levels down to below 1 fT/√Hz.
Besides magnetometry, the other main application of SQUIDs
is current sensing. For this, the signal current to be measured is
passed through the single-turn feedback coil (now used as an input
coil) and the resulting ﬂux change in the SQUID loop is sensed via
the SQUID voltage. The ﬁgure of merit for a current sensor is the
current noise referred to the input coil. With the measured current
sensitivity one obtains a current noise level of 28.3 pA/√Hz. This
is too high for most applications. Furthermore, as shown by the
upper trace in Fig. 8.6b, the low-frequency noise rises by orders
of magnitude when operating the SQUID without magnetic shield.
This results from the SQUID’s sensitivity to magnetic ﬁelds. Although
being too small for magnetic ﬁeld sensing applications, it is by far
too high for unshielded operation in current sensing applications.
In the following section we will show, how the current noise can be
improved while making the device less sensitive to environmental
magnetic noise. Note that in Fig. 8.6b the ﬂux noise without shield of
about 300 μ0/√Hz at 1 Hz corresponds to a ﬂux density noise of
0.6 nT/√Hz. Values around 1 nT/√Hz at 1 Hz are quite common
at the PTB site located in an urban area (Berlin). This is about
six orders of magnitude larger than the intrinsic noise level of
an optimized SQUID magnetometer. The peak-to-peak power-line
interference typically lies in the range of 100 nT to 1 μT.
8.2.2 Low-Inductance Current Sensors
The noise of a SQUID-based current sensor can be reduced by
connecting a large number NS of SQUIDs in series [37]. Provided that
all devices in a SQUID series array (SSA) are identical and that the
signal current is equally well coupled to all of them, the SSA behaves
like a single SQUID with increased output voltage. As the noise

262
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
(b) 
(a) 
(c) 
rf Filters
+IN
-INR
R02
R2
R20
R200
A
-F
+F
-V
+V
-INR
+R
Feedback Coil
Shunted 16-Element SSA
Bias Resistors
18
1.8
0.2
180
+IN
-INR
R02
R2
R20
R200
B
-F
+F
-V
+V
-INR
+R
Feedback Coil
Shunted 16-Element SSA
Bias Resistors
18
1.8
0.2
180
 
Figure 8.7
(a) Micrograph and (b) simpliﬁed equivalent circuit of a sensor
chip with two separate 16-element SSAs and integrated bias resistors Rb
between nominally 0.2 m and 200 m (PTB type X16FA). The displayed
area is 3 mm × 3 mm. In (b) the SQUIDs are drawn as circles with two
crosses indicating the Josephson junctions, and nominal resistance values
are quoted in m. In (c), a magniﬁcation is shown with three individual
SQUID cells. The displayed region is marked in (a) by a black frame.
The SQUIDs are conﬁgured as ﬁrst-order series gradiometers as indicated
by a bold black line. The diﬀerent colors in (a) and (c) result from the
microscopes used.
voltages across the individual SQUIDs of the array are uncorrelated,
the total rms noise voltage scales with √NS. In contrast, the voltage
changes caused by the input signal add coherently and, hence, the
total output voltage of the SSA increases linearly with NS. Therefore,
the signal-to-noise ratio of the SSA improves with √NS, i.e., the
eﬀective rms ﬂux and current noise levels scale with 1/√NS.
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
263
To make the SSA insensitive to magnetic ﬁelds, the individual
SQUID loops may be conﬁgured as so-called ﬁrst-order gradiome-
ters, i.e., two equally large loops with diﬀerent orientation are
connected in series to get zero net ﬂux if a homogeneous magnetic
ﬁeld is applied. An example of a chip containing two independent
arrays of 16 SQUIDs each is depicted in Fig. 8.7 along with a
simpliﬁed circuit diagram. The chip is an improved variant of
the initial version described in [38]. First-order gradiometers are
implemented as indicated by a bold black line in the magniﬁcation
Fig. 8.7c. Elongated SQUID loops are used to obtain a good magnetic
coupling with the single-turn input and feedback coils. A total
SQUID inductance L ≈145 pH is estimated using the analysis
described in Section 8.1.3. The input inductance of the array is
<3 nH. Inductor-resistor ﬁlters between the individual SQUID cells
and shunt resistors across the input coils were implemented to
obtain smooth and well-behaved array characteristics, in particular
at millikelvin temperatures. Integrated bias resistors Rb between
nominally 0.2 m and 200 m are intended for the readout of
superconducting detectors (Section 8.4.4). The required resistor can
be selected by wire-bonding to the corresponding pad. All lines to
the room temperature electronics (left side of the chip) are passed
through on-chip rf ﬁlters.
A critical issue for SSAs is ﬂux trapping during cool-down. If the
background ﬂux in the individual SQUIDs diﬀers due to the stray
ﬁeld of vortices trapped in the ﬁlms, the voltage–ﬂux characteristics
do no longer add coherently and the overall characteristic can be
severely distorted. Therefore, the linewidth in the critical parts of
the array should be chosen such that vortices cannot enter the
ﬁlm during cool-down, and closed superconducting loops should
be avoided which can trap ﬂux due to screening currents or
noise. The latter issue implies that arrays of parallel gradiometer
SQUIDs [39] have strongly reduced cooling ﬁelds compared to series
gradiometers and are therefore not recommended. It was shown
[40] that complete vortex expulsion from narrow superconducting
strips of width w occurs if the cooling ﬁeld Bcool is kept in the
range
Bcool ≲0/w2.
(8.13)

264
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
Thus, to reliably cool down a SQUID array in the Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld (∼50 μT) a maximum linewidth of about 5 μm should be
used. For a 2.5 μm technology this means that only a single-turn
input coil can be realized. Therefore, the input coils of the devices
in Fig. 8.7 are just 2.5 μm wide lines on top of the narrow SQUID
loops. The feedback lines (where the magnetic coupling needs not
to be maximized) are located on both sides of SQUID the loops in a
coplanar structure.
In the above considerations, we have assumed that for optimum
performance all SQUIDs in the array should be identical. However,
varying the loop size or input coil mutual inductance intentionally,
one can obtain a nonperiodic transfer characteristic with a unique
peak at zero ﬂux [41–43]. These irregular arrays can be used to
measure the absolute magnetic ﬁeld in contrast to single SQUIDs
or regular arrays that detect ﬁeld changes only due to the 0
periodicity in their characteristics. However, both regular and
irregular SQUID arrays suﬀer from ﬂux trapping which is an
important issue for absolute ﬁeld sensors. In this chapter, only
regular arrays are discussed because they are much more common
than irregular ones.
Figure 8.8 shows the ﬂux noise obtained at 4.2 K with a 32-
element SSA. This device is similar to the one in Fig. 8.7, but involves
twice the number of SQUIDs and an extra circuit to reduce the
current noise contribution of the room temperature preampliﬁer. A
low white noise level of 0.17 μ0/√Hz is found, corresponding to
about 1 μ0/√Hz in the individual SQUIDs. This is a typical value
for well-designed SQUIDs with L ≈145 pH and implies a noise
energy ε ≈22 h. Due to the low ﬂux noise, the input-referred current
noise of about 4.5 pA/√Hz is a factor of 6 lower than that of the
bare SQUID in Fig. 8.6. Furthermore, the eﬀective area is only about
1 μm2 in all three spatial directions (in-plane and perpendicular to
the chip), corresponding to a ﬁeld sensitivity of about 2 mT/0.
This is a factor of 1000 improvement over the bare SQUID in
Fig. 8.6, and leads to a substantially smaller noise degradation when
operating the SSA unshielded (upper trace in Fig. 8.8). Note that SSA
current sensors are generally more susceptible to environmental
noise pickup than single SQUIDs. This results from the fact that
environmental noise (when homogeneous over the area of the SSA)
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
265
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
10-1
100
101
f  (Hz)
Cryoperm/Pb shield
SQUID array unshielded
√SΦ  (μΦ0/√Hz)
Figure 8.8
Flux noise spectrum of a 32-element SSA (PTB type X216FB)
measured at T = 4.2 K with and without a superconducting shield enclosing
the device. The SSA was optimized for current sensing applications and
involves on-chip current feedback to reduce the eﬀect of preampliﬁer
current noise (see Section 8.3.3). The individual SQUIDs are of the same
design as those in Fig. 8.7.
is added coherently, so that the resulting total excess ﬂux noise is
identical to that of a single SQUID. In contrast, the intrinsic ﬂux
noise of the SSA improves with increasing NS compared to a single
SQUID and, hence, the signal-to-noise ratio of the SSA degrades more
strongly by noise pickup.
So far we have implied the common way of SQUID operation
called current bias, where a constant current is passed through the
device and the voltage across it is measured. Alternatively, the SQUID
can be operated with voltage bias by connecting a voltage source in
parallel to the device and sensing the current change through the
SQUID caused by the applied magnetic ﬂux. For sensing this output
current, the SSAs described above are well suited because they
have an adequate noise level, a low magnetic ﬁeld sensitivity, and
zero dc input impedance due to the superconducting input coil. The
voltage source can be implemented by a low-value resistor through
which a current is passed. Integrating all components on a single
chip, a compact two-stage sensor can be realized that has overall
characteristics like a single SQUID [38]. An example of such a sensor
will be shown in the following Section 8.2.3. The SQUID bias modes
and the dimensioning of a two-stage setup are discussed in detail in
literature (for example in Chapter 2 of [3]).

266
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
8.2.3 High-Inductance Current Sensors
The SSAs described in the previous section are well suited for the
readout of superconducting detectors (see Section 8.4.4) or as low-
noise preampliﬁers in two-stage setups. However, the current noise
is in the pA/√Hz range, and the input inductance is far below
1 μH. A large input inductance and a considerably increased current
sensitivity can be achieved by using a multiturn input coil. Early
SQUID devices in the 1960s and 1970s were equipped with wire-
wound Nb coils. At around 1980, thin-ﬁlm coupling schemes were
introduced [29, 44–46]. The most widely used scheme is depicted
in Fig. 8.9. A SQUID loop with a large linewidth w serves a so-called
“washer” onto which a spiral multiturn coil is placed. As shown in
Fig. 8.5, the inductance of a polygonal loop becomes independent of
the aspect ratio w/d if the linewidth w is made much larger than
the hole dimension d. Thus the design of the structure in Fig. 8.9 is
relatively straight-forward: One selects the hole dimension to obtain
the desired hole inductance Lh, and expands the outer dimension of
the washer to accommodate the required number of turns Ni for the
intended input coil inductance Li.
Figure 8.9
Thin-ﬁlm coupling scheme developed by Ketchen and Jaycox
[29]. In the original design the slit was covered by a superconducting plate,
requiring three superconducting layers. Here, a simpliﬁed variant with two
superconducting layers is shown. An input coil with three turns is drawn; in
practice, up to about 100 turns are common. The shunt resistors in parallel
to the Josephson junctions (JJs) are omitted for clarity.
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
267
For typical parameters, a high coupling constant k = Mi/
(LiL)1/2 ≈0.9 is easily achieved. Neglecting coupling losses (k ≈1),
the mutual inductance between input coil and SQUID Mi and the
input coil inductance Li are given by
Mi ≈NiL, Li ≈N2
i L.
(8.14)
More detailed and accurate equations are given in [29]; however,
Eq. 8.14 is often suﬃcient for dimensioning the SQUID. In practice,
there is not much degree of freedom in the design. Once the hole
size is ﬁxed, one can basically only adjust the number of turns for
obtaining the desired input inductance.
In Fig. 8.9 the tunnel junctions are located at the outer edge of
the washer where the magnetic ﬁelds are low. The layout involves
two superconducting layers only, which is achieved by wiring the
return line of the input coil through the slit. This increases the
inductance contribution of the slit, but the eﬀect on the overall
performance is modest as the input coil partially couples ﬂux
into the slit, thereby increasing the mutual inductance Mi together
with the total SQUID inductance L. The slit can be covered by a
superconducting plate to minimize its inductance contribution, but
this introduces signiﬁcant parasitic capacitance and requires a third
superconducting layer [29]. Generally, microwave resonances in the
structure are a severe problem. They can strongly distort the SQUID
characteristics and increase the noise level substantially by down-
mixing. As mentioned in Section 8.1.2, proper resonance damping
is crucial to achieve a low noise level in practice [21–23]. Although
low-noise operation was reported even without resonance damping
(e.g., in [46]), resonance damping is strongly recommended because
it makes the device more robust and tolerant against parameter
variations.
To give an example, 71 turns are required according to Eq. (8.14)
for coupling a 1 μH input inductance to a 200 pH SQUID loop. For
a conventional fabrication process with 2.5 μm minimum linewidth
and spacing, a 5 μm pitch in the spiral input coil and a total width
w ≈355 μm are obtained. Assuming L′ ≈0.3 pH/μm for the slit
[28], the total contribution to the SQUID inductance Lsl ≈107 pH is
about half the intended SQUID inductance. This example shows that
with a 2.5 μm fabrication technology, the SQUID inductance cannot

268
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
be lowered below about 100 pH when using the design in Fig. 8.9.
As mentioned above, the slit could be covered, but this increases
the parasitic capacitance and requires an extra superconducting
layer. The increase in capacitance can easily undermine the
beneﬁt of a reduced SQUID inductance. When connecting several
washers in parallel (typically two or four) and their input coils in
series, the total SQUID inductance is reduced and the total input
inductance increases [28, 47]. This relaxes the problem of large
inductance ratios Li/L. Gradiometric conﬁgurations with multiple
washers are beneﬁcial to reduce the sensitivity to external magnetic
ﬁelds.
An elegant way to couple a large input inductance to a small
SQUID inductance is to use an extra input transformer [23, 38,
48]. In the double-transformer scheme, the spiral coil on top of
the SQUID washer is connected to the secondary (low-inductance)
side of the input transformer, whose primary (high-inductance)
side is used for the input coil. Typically, the input transformer is
designed in the same way as the SQUID transformer, i.e., its low-
inductance side acts as a “washer” for the multiturn input coil.
Without coupling losses in the two individual transformers, the
overall coupling is also ideal, k = 1. However, for ﬁnite coupling
losses in the transformers, the overall coupling degrades relatively
strongly. Unfortunately, the equations for the overall coupling
constant are somewhat cumbersome. Assuming for simplicity that
both transformers have the same coupling constant k0 and that the
inductance of the spiral coil on the SQUID washer is equal to the
low-inductance side of the input transformer, the overall coupling
constant is given by k = k2
0/(2 −k2
0) [38]. Thus, for relatively high
individual coupling constants k0 of 90% or 80% the overall coupling
constant k degrades to 68% or 47%, respectively. On the other hand,
in the double transformer scheme the transformers require fewer
turns, leading to reduced parasitic capacitance. The degradation in
coupling is (partially) compensated by smooth, well-behaved SQUID
characteristics and a low noise level.
An example of a practical SQUID with double-transformer
coupling is shown in Fig. 8.10. It is an improved version of the
device described in [38], and was fabricated using a Nb–AlOx–Nb
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
269
(b) 
(a) 
+FIN
-FIN
Z
-F
+F
+I
-V
+V
-IFX
+FX
-FQ
+FQ
-IN
-Q
+Q
+IN
Shunted
SQUID
With Current
Feedback
Intermediate Loop
Feedback Transformer
Bias
Resistor
rf Filters
Shunted 16-Element
SSA Amplifier
Unshunted
16-Element SSA
Current Limiter
 
Figure 8.10
(a) Micrograph and (b) simpliﬁed equivalent circuit of a
current sensor with an input inductance of about 1.8 μH (PTB type
XXL116T). The integrated two-stage sensor involves double-transformer
coupling and is equipped with an optional input current limiter (reproduced
with permission from Drung et al. [38]). The displayed area is 3 mm × 3 mm.
trilayer process with two superconducting layers and a minimum
lithographic feature size of 2.5 μm. It has a high input inductance
Li ≈1.8 μH which is coupled to the SQUID inductance L≈80 pH with
an overall coupling constant k ≈0.72. Two large input transformers
(each with a 40-turn input coil shunted by a resistor–capacitor

270
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
series circuit) are wired as a ﬁrst-order series gradiometer in order
to reduce the sensitivity to homogeneous magnetic ﬁelds. Variants
with fewer turns (down to 4 on each input transformer) were also
implemented to cover the input inductance range down to about
24 nH. An additional feedback transformer in series to the input coil
is intended for applications where the feedback current is applied
to the input circuit (nulling the input current minimizes crosstalk in
multichannel magnetometer systems [49]).
To protect the input against large currents in magnetic resonance
experiments, an optional on-chip current limiter (Q spoiler [50])
may be used. It is realized in Fig. 8.10 by a series array of 16
unshunted 20 pH SQUIDs connected in series to the input coil.
All lines connecting the sensor chip with the room temperature
readout electronics are passed through on-chip rf ﬁlters. The SQUID
is designed with four parallel loops, arranged as a second-order
gradiometer. A 16-element SSA is integrated on the chip to act
as a low-noise preampliﬁer. Current feedback between the SQUID
sensor and the SSA is utilized to increase the overall gain (see
Section 8.3.3). A typical white ﬂux noise of 0.8 μ0/√Hz is achieved
at 4.2 K, resulting in a current noise level (referred to the input
coil) of ∼0.2 pA/√Hz for the nominal current sensitivity 1/Mi =
0.24 μA/0. At ≲300 mK, the white noise typically drops to
0.25 μ0/√Hz.
An important ﬁgure of merit for superconducting current
sensors is the coupled noise energy εc referred to the input
inductance Li rather than to the SQUID inductance L. Using the
current noise density referred to the input coil SI = S/M2
i one
obtains
εc = SILi/2 = S/(2k2L) = ε/k2.
(8.15)
The input-referred noise energy εc of the device in Fig. 8.10 is
typically 50 h at 4.2 K and 5 h at ≲300 mK, respectively. Note that
at 4.2 K single-stage sensors (devices without the SSA preampliﬁer)
achieve nearly the same noise level; however, when operating a
current sensor at millikelvin temperatures, a two-stage readout
is required to avoid the noise being dominated by the room-
temperature readout electronics (see Section 8.3).
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
271
8.2.4 Magnetic Field Sensors
The “traditional” way of realizing a sensitive magnetic ﬁeld sensor is
to connect a superconducting wire-wound pickup coil to the input
coil of a SQUID current sensor. This scheme was introduced soon
after the invention of the SQUID and is still widely used. Figure 8.11
shows two examples, a magnetometer and a ﬁrst-order gradiometer.
In the case of a magnetometer, the magnetic ﬂux in the pickup coil,
P = BAP, causes a screening current P/(LP + Li) which ﬂows
through the input coil, thereby generating a change in the magnetic
ﬂux  in the SQUID. The ﬂux transfer coeﬃcient is
/P = Mi/(LP + Li) ≈0.5k(L/LP)1/2.
(8.16)
For the optimization we assume that for given SQUID inductance
L the input coil inductance Li is varied by the number of input
coil turns Ni while the coupling constant k = Mi/(LiL)1/2 remains
constant. Under this condition, the ﬂux transfer /P is maximized
for matched inductances Li = LP. The approximation on the right
side of Eq. (8.16) is obtained for the optimum case Li ≈LP. Note
that in practice it is not very crucial to exactly keep the matching
condition because the optimum is quite wide. Being a factor of two
away from optimum (Li/LP = 0.5 or 2), reduces the ﬂux transfer
by 5.7% only. Furthermore, when considering the resulting ﬁeld
noise, one has to include the fact that the eﬀective SQUID inductance
is reduced in the presence of the pickup coil by screening eﬀects.
The detailed optimization is rather complicated [23]. Fortunately, in
practice the straight-forward condition Li ≈LP is generally suﬃcient
for dimensioning a magnetometer.
Knowing the ﬂux transfer coeﬃcient, the eﬀective area of the
magnetometer Aeﬀ= AP × /P can be calculated from the pickup
coil area Ap. The resulting noise is given by
SB = S/A2
eﬀ≈εc8LP/A2
P.
(8.17)
The approximation on the right side is valid for the matched case
Li ≈LP. For ﬁxed pickup coil parameters LP and AP, the noise
scales with the coupled noise energy εc. The self-inductance of the
wire-wound pickup coil can be calculated with the approximation
LP ≈μ0dP[0.5ln(8dP/wP) – 1] given in [36] (dP and wP are the
diameters of the coil and the wire, respectively). The inductance

272
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
(a)
L
Li
Mi
SQUID Current Sensor
Φ
Pickup Coil
LP
B
ΦP
Screening Current
(b)
L
Li
Mi
SQUID Current Sensor
Φ
ΦP2
ΦP1
ΦP = ΦP1
 - ΦP2
Ref. Coil
Signal Coil
Figure 8.11
Coupling a wire-wound pickup coil to a SQUID current sensor:
(a) Magnetometer and (b) axial ﬁrst-order gradiometer.
contribution of the interconnect lines between pickup coil and
SQUID can be included in the total pickup coil inductance LP.
Assuming for example a circular single-turn pickup coil with 20 mm
coil diameter, 0.1 mm wire diameter, and a 16 cm twisted pair with
L′ = 4 nH/cm between pickup coil and SQUID, the total pickup coil
inductance amounts to 132 nH. Coupling this to a SQUID with εc
≈50 h will result in a noise level √SB ≈0.6 fT/√Hz according to
Eq. 8.17. In this example, the dimensioning was suboptimal because
the contribution of the twisted pair was relatively high (about a
quarter of the total inductance LP + Li). Using a multiturn pickup
coil and a correspondingly increased input coil inductance would
reduce the noise even further. Thus we conclude that with modern
dc SQUIDs it is relatively straight-forward to achieve noise levels
well below 1 fT/√Hz. In practice, the system noise level is usually
limited by thermal noise currents in the superinsulation of the
dewar containing the magnetometer (see Section 8.4.2).
Magnetometers are useful in extremely well shielded environ-
ments only. With moderate shielding, the eﬀect of environmental
interference can be reduced by wiring two identical pickup coils
to a ﬁrst-order gradiometer as shown in Fig. 8.11b. The source to
www.ebook3000.com

Making the SQUID a Practical Device
273
be measured (e.g., the human brain or heart) is located as close
as possible to one of the coils, the signal coil. Due to the strong
decrease of the source’s magnetic ﬁeld with distance, the other coil
(the reference coil) will “see” only a weak signal, i.e., the net ﬂux will
be only slightly reduced compared to a magnetometer. In contrast,
the eﬀect of a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld is suppressed because
the ﬂux contributions P1 and P2 in the two pickup coils cancel
each other out. Thus a gradiometer strongly reduces the eﬀect of
remote noise sources that have small spatial derivatives compared
to those of the local signal source. The SQUID itself is commonly
housed in a well shielded package, suﬃciently far away from the
pickup coils to avoid distortion of the magnetic ﬁelds. An example
of a practical realization is given in Fig. 8.12. The remote location
of the SQUID package is beneﬁcial in applications where the object
under investigation is exposed to large magnetic ﬁelds that would
distort the SQUID function (for example in magnetic resonance
experiments).
First-order gradiometers are often adequate in moderate mag-
netic shielding (for example a chamber with two layers of high-
permeability material plus one eddy-current screen of Al). Higher
order gradiometers (second or third) are required for magnetically
unshielded measurements. Generally, an “ideal” gradiometer of
n-th order is sensitive to the n-th and higher spatial derivatives
of the applied ﬁeld, but suppresses all lower spatial derivatives
including the homogeneous ﬁeld component. In practice, imbalance
occurs due to slightly diﬀerent coil areas or tilt angles, so that
a “real” gradiometer is also sensitive to the homogeneous ﬁeld
component in all three spatial directions. In multichannel systems,
the imbalance can be compensated by adding a set of reference
channels (magnetometers and lower-order gradiometers).
Gradiometers cannot only be realized “in hardware” as depicted
in Fig. 8.11, but also electronically by combining the analog
outputs of diﬀerent channels [51] or “in software” after digitizing
the output signals of the SQUID readout electronics. The latter
approach is very powerful and eﬃcient, and typically used in large
biomagnetic multichannel systems. Considering the dynamic range
of the associated electronics, a suitable combination of passive and
active methods (i.e., shielded room and gradiometric conﬁgurations)

274
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
Figure 8.12
Example of a commercial SQUID package. The superconducting
connection to the input coil is realized via screw contacts. For low-noise
operation, the SQUID carrier is enclosed by a Nb shield. On the left side, the
socket for the wiring to the room temperature electronics is visible. Picture
courtesy of Magnicon GmbH, Hamburg.
yields the best overall performance and can suppress environmental
interference by about ﬁve orders of magnitude. A comprehensive
review of shielding and noise cancellation issues with the focus on
biomagnetic applications is found in Chapter 3 of [3].
The wire-wound pickup coil can be substituted by a thin-ﬁlm coil
in order to get a compact single-chip magnetometer or gradiometer.
For integrated devices, the sensitivity can be maximized by applying
the multiloop concept rather than the transformer coupling of
Fig. 8.9. The basic idea is quite simple: the SQUID loop is directly
used for collecting ﬂux, but a large number of loops is connected in
parallel to reduce the eﬀective SQUID inductance to an acceptable
level. The eﬀective area of the complete device is given by the area
of the individual loops. A theoretical description and several device
examples are given in [20]. The approach of fractional-turn loops
was ﬁrst implemented in bulk Nb SQUIDs in the early 1970s [52].
It was later attempted as an alternative to the washer structure
[45], but has not become established for SQUID current sensors.
In the early 1990s, the concept was successfully applied to thin-
ﬁlm magnetometers [53]. A few years later, record noise levels of
1.13 fT/√Hz were obtained with a device implemented on a 7.2 mm
× 7.2 mm chip [33]. The lowest noise reported so far is 0.33 fT/√Hz
for a 12.5 mm × 12.5 mm device involving sub-micrometer cross-
type tunnel junctions [54].
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
275
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.13
Examples of integrated multiloop devices. (a) Magnetometer
(PTB type WM) with a ﬁeld sensitivity of 3 nT/0, (b) concentric
gradiometer (PTB type WN) intended for noise thermometry. The displayed
area is 3 mm × 3 mm.
Figure 8.13 shows two examples of multiloop SQUIDs, a
magnetometer and a concentric gradiometer. The magnetometer
uses eight parallel-connected loops, yielding an eﬀective SQUID
inductance of about 120 pH. In spite of its small size (2.8 mm outer
dimension, 6.5 mm2 area), the device achieves an eﬀective area
of 0.69 mm2 corresponding to a ﬁeld sensitivity of 3 nT/0. The
typical white noise level is 3 fT/√Hz. The gradiometer in Fig. 8.13b
was optimized for noise thermometry (cf. Section 8.4.3). It involves
a total of 8 inner loops and 16 outer loops. Each inner loop is
connected in series with two parallel-connected outer loops. The
resulting eight coil combinations are connected in parallel, resulting
in a low eﬀective SQUID inductance of about 130 pH. The nominal
ﬁeld sensitivity of the inner loops is 9.7 nT/0.
8.3 SQUID Readout
In this Section, we describe the two most common concepts for
operating a SQUID, ﬂux modulation and direct readout. Digital
SQUIDs are not discussed because they are rarely used in practice.
Bias current reversal schemes for the suppression of critical current

276
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
ﬂuctuations are also omitted because modern Nb–AlOx–Nb tunnel
junctions typically do not require them. Other types of all-refractory
junctions may show large levels of excess low-frequency noise from
critical current ﬂuctuations, for example NbN junctions with MgO
barrier [55] or Nb junctions with barriers from amorphous silicon
[56] or HfTi [57]. SQUIDs involving these junctions often require
bias reversal schemes for low-frequency applications. Also, high-
Tc SQUIDs are almost always operated with bias current reversal.
Detailed reviews on SQUID readout including the various bias
reversal schemes are found in literature [4, 58].
8.3.1 Flux-Locked Loop Basics
In principle, a SQUID can be operated in a small-signal mode around
the optimum working point W which is typically located near the
steepest part of the V – characteristic (the inﬂection point). As
illustrated in Fig. 8.14a, a small change in the applied ﬂux δ will
produce a proportional change in the voltage δV = Vδ (V =
∂V /∂ is the transfer coeﬃcient at the working point). However,
the proportionality between voltage and ﬂux is maintained only for
very small δ, and the output becomes strongly distorted if the
applied ﬂux exceeds the linear ﬂux range lin, which is typically
a few percent of a ﬂux quantum only. As SQUIDs are commonly
applied to measure weak signals, this small dynamic range might
just be suﬃcient. However, in practice there are usually much larger
disturbing signals (e.g., the 50 Hz or 60 Hz power line interference)
superimposed to the measurement signal, which makes a small-
signal readout usually impossible unless the SQUID is very well
shielded. Further disadvantages of the small-signal readout are that
the transfer coeﬃcient V depends on the bias settings of the SQUID,
and that the SQUID noise increases if the applied ﬂux shifts the
working point too far away from optimum.
The dynamic range can be considerably increased by negative
feedback. The basic circuit of the so-called ﬂux-locked loop (FLL)
is depicted in Fig. 8.14b. The SQUID is biased at the working
point W as in the small-signal readout. The deviation of the SQUID
voltage V from that at the working point Vb is ampliﬁed, integrated,
and fed back into the SQUID via a feedback resistor RF and a
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
277
(a)
Vpp
W
Φ
V
Φ0
δV
δΦ
Φ pp
(b) 
VF
Preamp
Integrator
MF
RL
Vb
RF
V
Φ
IF
ƒ
Figure 8.14
Fundamentals of SQUID readout: (a) V – characteristic and
(b) basic ﬂux-locked loop (FLL) circuit. The SQUID is drawn as a circle with
two crosses indicating the resistively-shunted Josephson junctions, and the
bias current source is omitted for clarity.
feedback coil that is magnetically coupled to the SQUID via a mutual
inductance MF. Commonly, feedback resistances in the k range are
used, making the impedance of the feedback coil negligible in the
frequency range of interest. For inﬁnite integrator gain, the ﬂux in
the SQUID is kept constant by the negative feedback and the voltage
VF across the feedback resistor depends linearly on the applied ﬂux.
In this case, the transfer coeﬃcient of the ﬂux-locked SQUID
GFLL = ∂VF/∂ = −RF/MF
(8.18)
becomes independent of the working point. The noise does not
degrade with applied ﬂux because the SQUID is always kept at
the chosen working point. However, the integrator gain decreases
with frequency, and deviations occur at high frequencies due to the
reduced open-loop gain GOL. For the analysis of the FLL dynamics
we assume the most common case of an integrator with a single
pole in the frequency response (other types of integrators are
described in [3, 4]). In this case, the room temperature electronics
(preampliﬁer plus integrator) has an overall gain |∂VF/∂V | =
fGBW/ f and is fully characterized by the gain-bandwidth product
fGBW. The SQUID can be considered as a current-to-voltage converter
with a transresistance
ATR = ∂V/∂IF = VMF/(1 + Rdyn/RL),
(8.19)
where Rdyn is the dynamic resistance of the SQUID at the working
point and RL is the input resistance of the readout electronics. Often
the term in parentheses can be neglected because Rdyn ≪RL. For
wideband systems, however, the transmission lines between the

278
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
SQUID and the room temperature ampliﬁer should be terminated
(or at least be resistively shunted). The electronics in [59] has RL =
50  (realized by negative feedback for minimum noise) which is
comparable to the Rdyn of PTB’s 16-element SSAs. In this case, the
complete Eq. 8.19 has to be used.
To analyze the FLL dynamics, we ﬁrst assume that the feedback
loop is opened (for example by disconnecting the feedback resistor
from the integrator output). Knowing ATR, the overall gain of the
open feedback loop can be calculated as
|GOL| = f1/f with f1 = fGBW ATR/RF.
(8.20)
The open-loop gain |GOL| scales inversely proportional to frequency.
It falls to unity at the unity-gain frequency f1. Now we assume that
the feedback loop is closed to obtain FLL operation. The idealized
FLL in Fig. 8.14b exhibits a ﬁrst-order low-pass response with a 3 dB
bandwidth f3dB = f1. The 3 dB bandwidth is the frequency at which
the amplitude falls to 1/√2 or –3 dB. Note that Eq. 8.20 was derived
for the common case of a current-biased SQUID. With voltage bias,
a similar analysis can be performed by describing the SQUID as
a current-to-current converter and the feedback electronics as a
current-to-voltage converter with a transresistance proportional to
1/ f . The expression for f1 will diﬀer from Eq. 8.20, but once f1 is
ﬁxed, the dynamic behavior of the FLL is given independent of the
way the SQUID is biased. Furthermore, the noise is generally not
inﬂuenced by the SQUID bias mode. Therefore, all considerations
hereinafter will apply for both bias modes.
In the basic FLL circuit in Fig. 8.14b, the 3 dB bandwidth can
be made arbitrarily large by increasing f1. In practice, however,
an upper limit is imposed by phase lag in the transmission lines
and the readout electronics. A simple but eﬃcient model describes
the combined parasitic eﬀects in the FLL by an eﬀective dead time
td [3, 4]. It was shown that with ﬁnite dead time the unity-gain
frequency is limited to
f1,max = 0.08/td ≈f3dB,max/2.25.
(8.21)
For larger values of f1, the FLL exhibits a peak in the frequency
response or even becomes unstable (oscillation at ≈0.25/td).
According to Eq. 8.21, the maximum FLL bandwidth f3dB,max is a
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
279
factor of 2.25 larger than f1,max. A relative increase in f3dB,max/ f1,max
of up to a factor of 3 is common for wideband systems with feedback
(not only for SQUIDs). Note that f1 determines the open-loop gain
and hence the linearization eﬀect, not the FLL bandwidth f3B.
Unfortunately, commonly f3B is quoted rather than f1 which gives a
too optimistic view of the dynamic performance. For example, if one
likes to have an open-loop gain of >4, the highest signal frequency
would be f1/4 = f3dB/9. Thus, in this example the maximum signal
frequency is about one order of magnitude smaller than the FLL
bandwidth f3dB. Generally, for signal frequencies close to f3dB, FLL
operation is not recommended because the feedback loop does
not reduce the nonlinear distortion due to phase lag, but rather
increases it. In such cases, the high-frequency signal of interest is
preferably measured in a small-signal readout, and a “slow” FLL
could be used to suppress environmental interference at frequencies
much below that of the signal.
For a typical separation of 1 m between SQUID and room
temperature electronics, the dead time in the cables amounts to
td ≈10 ns. The resulting limits according to Eq. 8.21 are f1,max ≈
8 MHz and f3dB,max ≈18 MHz, respectively. State-of-the-art readout
electronics allow FLL dynamics close to these limits [59]. In 2006, a
prototype FLL with SiGe transistors was operated in liquid helium
nearby a 16-element SSA [38]. Due to the short distance and the
wideband setup, a very small dead time td ≈0.65 ns was achieved.
The measured small-signal bandwidth of 350 MHz was even higher
than f3dB,max ≈280 MHz predicted from Eq. 8.21, suggesting
that the ratio f3dB,max/ f1,max was probably about 2.8 instead of
2.25. Two years later, the cold semiconductor feedback loop was
substituted by a large series-parallel array of 640 SQUIDs acting as
a current ampliﬁer [60]. A low-frequency open-loop gain of about
20 and a unity-gain frequency f1 >200 MHz were reported. In both
experiments, coaxial lines between 4.2 K and room temperature
were mandatory. Although these experiments clearly conﬁrm the
dead time model, such high bandwidth is commonly not needed.
In most cases, the commercial variant of the electronics in [59]
provides suﬃcient bandwidth ( f3dB,max ≈20 MHz), even when
connecting the SQUID to the readout electronics via 1 m long twisted
wires.

280
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
In the above discussion it was implied that fGBW can be selected
suﬃciently high to reach f3dB,max. For wideband systems, very high
values of fGBW may be required depending on the SQUID. For
example, the electronics in [59] allows one to select fGBW up to
7.2 GHz. The full bandwidth can be achieved at acceptable feedback
resistances in the range of 10 k even for SQUIDs with a small ATR.
Decreasing the feedback resistance to boost the bandwidth lowers
the output signal amplitude and increases the demands on the data
acquisition system following the analog output of the FLL.
Another important parameter is the slew rate, i.e., the maximum
temporal change in the feedback ﬂux |∂F/∂t|max. In practice, the
slew rate is often more critical than the bandwidth of the FLL. It
is commonly measured by applying a sinusoidal signal ﬂux and
increasing the amplitude until the FLL becomes unstable or the
output saturates. Here, we discuss the slew rate at high signal
frequencies, i.e., in the regime where it is not limited by the static
feedback range. For the basic FLL with one-pole integrator one
obtains
˙F,max = πpp f1 ≲0 f1 with pp = Vpp/|V| ≲0/π.
(8.22)
The maximum slew rate with one-pole integrator is frequency-
independent. It is proportional to the unity-gain frequency f1 and
the peak–peak ﬂux pp calculated from the peak–peak voltage
Vpp according to the right side of Eq. 8.22. One sees that a high
slew rate requires a high intrinsic linearity. For a sinusoidal V –
 characteristic (which is often a useful ﬁrst approximation) one
obtains the practical upper limit pp = 0/π and a resulting slew
rate 0 f1, i.e., in the best case one obtains about 1 0/μs per
megahertz of bandwidth. Note that the usable linear range lin
for the small-signal readout is much smaller than pp deﬁning
the “intrinsic linearity” for calculating the slew rate. Driving a
SQUID to ± pp would cause very high dynamic distortions. In
fact, the error ﬂux in the SQUID becomes large when approaching
the slew rate limit, but the net eﬀect with feedback is strongly
reduced if the open-loop gain is high at the chosen signal frequency.
The sinusoidal characteristic depicted in Fig. 8.14 has symmetric
voltage swings ±Vpp/2 around the working point W. For asymmetric
characteristics, Vpp in Eq. 8.22 has to be replaced by twice the
smaller voltage swing.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
281
Beside linearization of the transfer function, another important
task of the readout electronics is to amplify the weak signal from
the SQUID without adding (too much) noise. The preampliﬁer in the
readout electronics is characterized by a noise voltage VN,amp and a
noise current IN,amp at its input. The corresponding power spectral
densities are SV,amp and SI,amp, respectively. It is commonly assumed
that voltage noise and current noise are uncorrelated, which is not
exactly true but a reasonable assumption to simplify noise analysis.
The ampliﬁer’s noise voltage is superimposed to the measured
SQUID voltage which increases the total noise. The ampliﬁer’s noise
current ﬂows through the SQUID, thereby generating a voltage drop
via the dynamic resistance Rdyn of the SQUID at its working point.
To describe the eﬀect of preampliﬁer current noise, it is often
convenient to use the current sensitivity
Mdyn = Rdyn/V ≈±(1 . . . 2)L.
(8.23)
Mdyn depends less strongly on the working point and on parasitic
eﬀects in the SQUID (e.g., due to resonances in the input coil) than
Rdyn. Roughly speaking, Mdyn scales with the SQUID inductance L.
One obtains values of |Mdyn| between L and 2L for low-Tc SQUIDs
covering a wide range of SQUID inductances between 7 pH and
400 pH [3]. The total noise of the SQUID including preampliﬁer noise
is given by
S,t = S + SV,amp/V 2
 + SI,ampM2
dyn.
(8.24)
In Eq. 8.24 the eﬀect of ampliﬁer voltage and current noise is
expressed as eﬀective ﬂux noise contributions via V and Mdyn.
It is convenient to measure V and Mdyn in the FLL mode by
superimposing small test signals to the SQUID bias voltage and
current, respectively, and calculating the resulting ﬂux change
from the FLL output voltage change. This way, V and Mdyn
are determined under the conditions of the noise measurement
(that is always performed in the FLL mode) and the preampliﬁer
noise contributions can be accurately determined. The transfer
coeﬃcients V and Mdyn are also applicable to more complex
circuits, for example a two-stage SQUID setup. In practice, one
considers the SQUID as a “black box” and measures V and Mdyn
without regarding the actual type of circuit.

282
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
From Eq. 8.24 the requirements for the preampliﬁer can be
deduced. Assuming a typical Nb-based SQUID at 4.2 K with V =
100 μV/0 and 1/Mdyn = 10 μA/0, the preampliﬁer voltage and
current noise levels should be <0.1 nV/√Hz and <10 pA/√Hz for
keeping the ampliﬁer contributions below the typical SQUID noise
of 1 μ0/√Hz. The current noise requirement is easily met, but
the ampliﬁer’s voltage noise is a severe issue. For arrays with NS
SQUIDs in series, the ﬂux noise density S of the SSA scales with
1/NS, V is proportional to NS and Mdyn is independent of NS. As a
result, the ampliﬁer voltage noise term in Eq. 8.24 falls with N2
S but
the current noise term remains constant and becomes the limiting
contribution to S,t for large value of NS. We see that ampliﬁer
noise can substantially degrade the overall noise performance. In the
following sections we will describe the two most common methods
to minimize the ampliﬁer’s noise contribution.
8.3.2 Flux Modulation Readout
Ampliﬁer noise eﬀects are conveniently discussed on the basis of
the noise temperature [58]. For a resistive source, the total eﬀect of
ampliﬁer noise is converted into an equivalent increase in the source
resistor’s temperature. For given voltage and current noise levels,
the ampliﬁer noise temperature depends on the source resistance.
It has a minimum Tmin for an optimum source resistance Ropt
for which the contributions from ampliﬁer voltage and current
noise are equal: Ropt = (SV,Amp/SI,amp)1/2. For lowest noise, the
ampliﬁer should be designed such that Ropt is matched to the
dynamic resistance of the SQUID Rdyn. The resulting ampliﬁer
noise temperature should be suﬃciently low compared to the noise
temperature of the SQUID, which is about four times its operation
temperature according to simulations [13, 14].
The achievable Tmin and Ropt depend of the type of transistors
used in the input stage of the ampliﬁer. Bipolar transistors allow
low values Ropt ≈50 , but have a relatively a high Tmin between
about 30 K and 100 K (about 200 K are possible for Ropt ≈10 ).
These noise temperatures are acceptable for the readout of high-Tc
SQUIDs, but for low-Tc SQUIDs special measures have to be adopted
to boost the SQUID output (Section 8.3.3). In contrast, ampliﬁers
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
283
based on junction-ﬁeld eﬀect transistors (JFETs) allow very low
noise temperatures down to Tmin ≈1 K at source resistances
above about 1 k. Therefore, the noise of JFET-based ampliﬁers is
suﬃciently low for SQUID readout, but there is a large mismatch
between Ropt and typical values of Rdyn.
The straightforward method for impedance matching is the
utilization of a cold transformer in a ﬂux-modulated readout scheme
[61, 62]. As shown in Fig. 8.15, a square-wave modulation ﬂux
mod(t) is applied to the SQUID to toggle between two working
points W+ and W−placed at adjacent slopes of the V – characteris-
tic. Without applied ﬂux (δ = 0), zero voltage across the SQUID
is obtained. Applying a positive ﬂux δ > 0 results in a square-
wave SQUID voltage V (t) which is out-of-phase to the modulation
ﬂux mod(t), as illustrated in Fig. 8.15a. Accordingly, a negative ﬂux
δ < 0 leads to a SQUID voltage in phase with the modulation ﬂux.
Thus, the applied ﬂux can be sensed by synchronously detecting
the SQUID voltage at the modulation frequency. This is commonly
done with a synchronous switch (or a mixer in the case of wideband
systems) after amplifying the SQUID output with a cold transformer
followed by the room temperature preampliﬁer. The output of the
lock-in detector is integrated and send back as a current into a
feedback coil in order to counterbalance the ﬂux applied to the
SQUID. As for the basic FLL circuit in Fig. 8.14, the output voltage
VF represents the linearized output signal.
The resistance “seen” by the room temperature ampliﬁer
increases with the square of the transformer’s turn ratio. For a
suitably chosen turn ratio, the low SQUID impedance is noise-
matched to the ampliﬁer, resulting in minimum overall noise. A small
resistance may be placed between the SQUID and the transformer
primary to avoid that the SQUID is shorted by the transformer (the
SQUID is operated with voltage bias rather than current bias).
The ﬂux-modulation technique was introduced soon after the
invention of the SQUID [61] and was the only practical readout
method until the early 1990s when direct readout schemes emerged.
The cylindrical dc SQUID of Clarke et al. [62] (which was a ﬁrst
milestone in the development of reliable thin-ﬁlm devices) involved
a cold inductor–capacitor resonant circuit. However, this is presently
uncommon due to the reduced bandwidth compared to transformer

284
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
(a)
W+
Φ
V
V(t)
Φmod(t)
W-
RF
(b)
Ref
Step-Up
Transformer
MF
Integrator
Oscillator
Lock-in
Detector
Preamp
⌠
⌡
VF
Φ
δΦ > 0
δΦ = 0
Figure 8.15
SQUID readout with ﬂux modulation: (a) V – characteristic
and (b) FLL circuit. A square-wave modulation ﬂux mod toggles the SQUID
periodically between working points W+ and W−with positive and negative
transfer coeﬃcient V. Components inside the dashed box are at cryogenic
temperature. The dc source for biasing the SQUID is omitted for clarity.
coupling. Flux-modulation is an eﬃcient way to read out SQUIDs
with smooth, well-behaved V – characteristics. In practice, the
noise might increase if the characteristics are strongly asymmetric
due to parasitic resonances in the input coil structure. Typical
modulation frequencies range between 100 kHz and 500 kHz
where FET ampliﬁers have excellent noise performance. At higher
frequencies, the current noise rises due to parasitic capacitance
in the transistors, and the noise temperature correspondingly
degrades. Square-wave modulation is ideal in terms of noise because
the SQUID is always biased at points with best noise. However,
in particular at high modulation frequencies, switching spikes can
increase the noise due to down-mixing. Sinusoidal modulation
circumvents these problems but increases the noise because the
SQUID dynamically passes through points with reduced and even no
sensitivity.
The main restriction of ﬂux-modulation readout is a limited
FLL bandwidth. Obviously, the maximum FLL bandwidth is lower
than the modulation frequency, which also results in a reduced
slew rate. Early systems used modulation at 100 kHz. In 1984,
a ﬁrst wideband system with 500 kHz square-wave modulation
was reported involving two transformers (one cooled and the
other at room temperature) [63]. In the mid-1990s, wideband
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
285
SQUID electronics with 16 MHz ﬂux modulation were developed
using a resonant superconducting thin-ﬁlm transformer [64] or
a nonresonant terminated transmission-line transformer [65]. A
closed-loop bandwidth exceeding 2.5 MHz and a slew rate greater
than 1 0/μs at frequencies up to 1 MHz were reported in [64],
which are roughly consistent with the dead time td ≈100 ns
deduced from the measured phase response. An even higher
modulation frequency of 33 MHz was reported for a high-Tc system
involving two transformers and 56 cm long 50  cables between
77 K and 300 K [66]. This high modulation frequency enabled
an FLL bandwidth of 10 MHz and slew rates of up to about
10 0/μs which are record values for ﬂux modulated systems.
However, modulation frequencies substantially above 1 MHz are
inconvenient in practice due to increased complexity and high
demands on the wiring between the cryogenic part and the room
temperature electronics. Therefore, ﬂux-modulated SQUIDs are
commonly operated at modulation frequencies well below 1 MHz.
8.3.3 Direct Readout
In the early 1990s, direct readout schemes without ﬂux modulation
were developed, stimulated by the need to simplify the electronics
of biomagnetic multichannel systems [51, 53, 67, 68]. Nowadays,
direct readout is widely used, in particular when applying SQUIDs as
preampliﬁers for superconducting detectors. Over the past decades,
various concepts for ampliﬁer noise reduction were introduced
by diﬀerent research groups. This has led to a quite confusing
diversity of acronyms and notations. Recently, a general approach
for understanding and analyzing direct readout schemes for SQUIDs
was published [69]. It was pointed out that all existing methods
for suppression of room temperature ampliﬁer noise are based
on feeding the SQUID voltage and/or current back into the SQUID
loop. Voltage and current feedback were introduced in the early
1990s under the names additional positive feedback (APF) [53] and
bias current feedback (BCF) [51], respectively. It was further shown
in [69] that direct SQUID readout schemes can be conveniently
analyzed by considering the SQUID and the ampliﬁer separately. This
approach allows an intuitive understanding of the various readout

286
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
concepts reported in literature, and leads to simple mathematical
expressions for the expected overall behavior.
It was stressed in [69] that the noise suppression does not
depend on the way the SQUID is biased (constant current or
voltage). The bias mode can be selected independently from the
noise optimization according to the requirements in dynamic range
and linearity. Current bias is more straightforward, but voltage bias
yields a better intrinsic linearity of the SQUID and thus a better slew
rate at given bandwidth. For wideband systems, the cable between
the SQUID and the ampliﬁer should be terminated (or at least be
resistively shunted). This means that wideband systems commonly
apply neither ideal current bias nor ideal voltage bias, but rather a
mixture of both.
Preampliﬁer voltage noise commonly makes direct readout of
single SQUIDs impossible. To circumvent this problem, voltage
feedback was introduced in 1990 under the name APF and applied
to a current-biased SQUID magnetometer [53]. Subsequently, it was
utilized for a voltage-biased SQUID [67] and later named noise
cancellation (NC) scheme [68]. The basic voltage feedback circuit
is depicted in Fig. 8.16a. It consists of a resistor RA and a coil LA
in series, both connected in parallel to the SQUID. The coil LA is
magnetically coupled to the SQUID via a mutual inductance MA.
Assuming that the SQUID is biased at a working point W at the
positive slope of the V – characteristic, a positive change in ﬂux
δ will cause a positive voltage change δV . The resulting increase
of the current in the coil LA induces an additional, positive ﬂux in
the SQUID via MA which increases the SQUID voltage further and
leads to an enhanced transfer coeﬃcient V. Similarly, the transfer
coeﬃcient is lowered when W is located at the negative slope of
the V – characteristic. Therefore, the V – characteristic becomes
strongly asymmetric as schematically shown in Fig. 8.16a. The I–
characteristic, however, is not aﬀected by voltage feedback since it
is measured at constant SQUID voltage and thus at constant current
through the feedback coil LA.
With voltage feedback, the transfer coeﬃcient V can be
suﬃciently boosted to make the ampliﬁer voltage noise contribution
smaller than the intrinsic SQUID noise. The peak–peak voltage swing
Vpp is somewhat reduced because RA resistively loads the SQUID.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
287
Voltage feedback → V-Φ characteristic is tuned
Current feedback → I-Φ characteristic is tuned
(a)
(b)
W
V
W
Φ
I
Φ
I
W
W
V
Fixed I
Fixed V
Fixed V
Fixed I
MB
LB
I
Φ
V
MA
LA
RA
I
Φ
V
Figure 8.16
Basic circuits for (a) voltage feedback and (b) current feedback.
The SQUID characteristics without feedback (dotted lines) and with
feedback (solid lines) are schematically depicted on the right side. With
voltage feedback the swing in the V – characteristic is reduced because RA
resistively loads the SQUID, whereas with current feedback the full swing is
preserved. The working points W yield positive feedback in both cases (a)
and (b). The ﬂux oﬀsets are chosen such that the working points without
and with feedback coincide.
Thermal noise in RA causes some extra ﬂux noise in the SQUID which
is acceptable if RA has the same operation temperature as the SQUID
(typically RA is integrated on the SQUID chip). It was shown that
for adequate dimensioning (RA ≈2.5R) the increase in the noise
energy ε due to voltage feedback is about half the theoretical value
according to Eq. 8.5 [3].
As generally the case, positive feedback leads to a bandwidth
reduction. This is not a severe limitation in practice since the
feedback circuit is commonly integrated on the sensor chip and
has a suﬃciently high bandwidth. For a current-biased SQUID, the
reduction in the intrinsic linearity pp leads to a degradation in
slew rate. However, this is often acceptable because the bandwidth
with direct readout is rather high. With voltage bias the slew rate is
not degraded because the I– characteristic is not aﬀected. If the
voltage feedback is made too strong, hysteresis occurs in the V –

288
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
characteristic. Due to wideband noise “smearing” out the hysteresis,
the onset of hysteresis might not be recognized in the experimental
setup and a too high feedback gain might be chosen. This can result
in excess noise from random switching, although the measured V –
characteristic may look smooth and nonhysteretic.
There are other methods to obtain a large voltage transfer coef-
ﬁcient, for example using SQUIDs with weakly shunted Josephson
junctions operated near the hysteresis limit [59, 70] or SQUIDs
with unshunted junctions based on relaxation oscillations [71].
Although the V – characteristics remain symmetric in these cases,
the intrinsic linearity pp is reduced compared to a standard
SQUID. Only SSAs oﬀer large transfer coeﬃcients combined with
highest possible linearity. If it is unavoidable to increase the transfer
coeﬃcient at the detriment of linearity, the feedback gain should
not be chosen unnecessarily high but just high enough to obtain an
acceptable ampliﬁer noise contribution.
For direct readout of single SQUIDs, preampliﬁer current noise is
generally not critical except in the low-frequency regime or at very
high frequencies where the current noise of semiconductor ampli-
ﬁers typically increases. Current noise was completely disregarded
in the early phase of direct SQUID readout [53, 67]. However, a few
years later it became an issue at PTB due to relatively high-ohmic
SQUID magnetometers and a high 1/ f noise level of the ampliﬁers
used at this time (Linear Technology LT1028). As a countermeasure,
current feedback was introduced under the name BCF [51]. The
corresponding circuit is depicted in Fig. 8.16b. A coil LB (which is
connected in series to the SQUID) is magnetically coupled to the
SQUID loop via a mutual inductance MB. For the analysis we assume
positive feedback at the chosen working point W. If the current
changes by a small amount δI, the resulting voltage change via
the magnetic coupling VMBδI will be added to the voltage change
−RdynδI resulting from the SQUID’s dynamic resistance. Converting
the total voltage change into ﬂux one obtains δ = (MB −Mdyn)δI.
The total ﬂux change becomes zero for MB = Mdyn, which means
zero dynamic resistance of the SQUID with current feedback and
complete suppression of ampliﬁer current noise. In other words, the
transfer coeﬃcient of the I– characteristic I = ∂I/∂ becomes
inﬁnite.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Readout
289
We conclude that both voltage and current feedback lead
to strongly asymmetric characteristics with substantially boosted
transfer coeﬃcient V or I at the slope with positive feedback. Note
that in Fig. 8.16 the direction of the current I is reversed as in [69]
contrary to the normal convention. With reversed current direction
optimum ampliﬁer noise suppression always occurs for positive
feedback so that the similarity of voltage and current feedback can
be demonstrated more clearly.
Complementary to voltage feedback, current feedback modiﬁes
the I– characteristic but does not aﬀect the V – characteristic.
In contrast to voltage feedback, there is no reduction in the current
swing and no excess ﬂux noise. However, wideband noise may
distort the SQUID characteristic similar to the case with voltage
feedback (in particular for SQUIDs with high inductance). It is
advisable to connect a resistor RB in parallel to the feedback coil LB
in order to limit the feedback bandwidth [51]. The extra ﬂux noise
due to thermal noise in RB is typically insigniﬁcant. Feeding the bias
current asymmetrically into the SQUID has a similar eﬀect as current
feedback. In this case, half of the SQUID inductance L acts as an
“intrinsic” feedback coil with an eﬀective mutual inductance MB =
±L/2 [72]. Most SQUID sensors developed at PTB are equipped with
this technique to reduce the dynamic resistance at “no expense.”
Current feedback is also well suited for a two-stage SQUID to
increase the ﬂux gain between the ﬁrst and the second stage. This
was ﬁrst demonstrated in [38] under the somewhat misleading
acronym APF (which was at this time not considered as a synonym
for voltage feedback but rather used to indicate that the additional
feedback was positive). PTB’s two-stage sensor are normally
equipped with current feedback (see Fig. 8.10). Using negative
instead of positive current feedback, the linearity of a SQUID or SSA
can be increased to enable operation without room temperature
FLL. This technique was introduced independently by two research
groups under the names output current feedback (OCF) [60] and
current-sampling feedback [73].
Voltage and current feedback can be combined for maximum
suppression of ampliﬁer noise. This was ﬁrst demonstrated in
1993 for an integrated multiloop magnetometer with current bias
[51]. This particular device involved a special design where the

290
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
feedback resistor RA is merged into the junction shunt resistors
and only one feedback coil is used to realize the functions of LA
and LB. A combination of voltage and current feedback was recently
applied to a voltage biased SQUID and published under the name
SQUID bootstrap circuit (SBC) [74]. A description of the diﬀerent
implementations is given in [69].
With direct readout a high bandwidth can easily be obtained
because there is no limiting modulation frequency and the loop
delay can be made very small. The ﬁrst system with voltage
feedback, published in 1990 [53], achieved a bandwidth of 0.5 MHz.
Five years later, the bandwidth was increased to 5 MHz [75],
comparable to the fastest systems with ﬂux modulation at this
time. Another factor of 3 improvement to 15 MHz was achieved
in the following two years [76]. Since then, there was only slight
improvement to 20 MHz bandwidth [59] because the overall FLL
performance is limited by the loop delay in the wiring between
the cryogenic part and the room temperature electronics. Several
100 MHz bandwidth were demonstrated with “cold” FLL electronics
[38] or on-chip feedback by large SQUID arrays [60], but these
techniques have not become established. In contrast, direct readout
electronics with a bandwidth ≳5 MHz are nowadays commercially
available and widely used. The noise spectra shown as examples
in this chapter were measured with the commercial variant of the
electronics in [59] (XXF-1 from Magnicon GmbH, Hamburg) and
include the noise contribution from the preampliﬁer.
8.4 SQUID Applications
8.4.1 Introductory Discussion
As shown in the previous sections, the SQUID is a very sensitive
magnetic ﬂux detector. A common phrase is that “it is well suited
for the measurement of magnetic ﬂux or any quantity that can be
converted into magnetic ﬂux.” Due to this feature and the low SQUID
noise, the device has found a large number of applications since its
invention half a century ago, ranging from ultrasensitive laboratory
setups involving a single SQUID to multichannel instruments with
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
291
hundreds of SQUIDs. Comprehensive reviews of the various SQUID
applications are found in literature (e.g., [3, 5, 6]). To give an
impression of the versatility of the SQUID, we brieﬂy summarize
the main application ﬁelds. Some more detailed examples of SQUID
work at PTB are presented in the following sections.
In medicine, SQUIDs are used for non-invasive diagnostics of
organs (most common brain and heart) based on measuring their
magnetic ﬁeld (biomagnetism) or the response to applied magnetic
ﬁelds (susceptometry, low-ﬁeld magnetic resonance). Geophysical
exploration is another large ﬁeld (see Section 9.3.4 in [6]). The
ﬁeld inhomogeneity at the surface of the Earth is mapped with
SQUIDs to prospect for oil or minerals. Magnetic exploration has
also been applied to detect archaeological objects or unexploded
ordnance and mines. In transient electromagnetics (TEM), a large
current through a transmitter coil is switched on and oﬀ, and the
resulting secondary magnetic ﬁeld is sensed to get information
about the resistivity of the subsoil. In astronomy, SQUIDs are
employed in large telescopes as ampliﬁers for superconducting
detectors (e.g., [77]). In nondestructive evaluation of materials, ﬂaws
in the tested material (for instance aircraft wheels and fuselage) can
be detected by measuring the inhomogeneity of the distribution of
a current-induced magnetic ﬁeld [78]. The widely used magnetic
property measurement systems (MPMSs) allow the measurement
of remnant ﬁeld, magnetization, or magnetic susceptibility of small
samples with a SQUID magnetometer as a function of applied ﬁeld
or temperature. Scanning SQUID microscopes can be utilized to
measure the local magnetic ﬁeld just above the surface of a sample.
In metrology, SQUID-based noise thermometers are established
tools for the measurement of the absolute temperature, and
cryogenic current comparators (involving a SQUID as a null
detector) are commonly applied for the measurement of resistance
or electric current ratios with highest accuracy. SQUIDs are also
applied in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy at low
and ultralow ﬁelds [79–85], in quantum computing [86] and in
nanotechnology [12]. They have been used to measure extremely
small mechanical displacements for gravitational wave detection
[3, 87] or in free-fall experiments to test Einstein’s equivalence
principle at an improved level of sensitivity [88]. Finally, some

292
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
important physical experiments involve SQUIDs such as the space
experiment Gravity Probe B for testing two fundamental predictions
of Einstein’s theory of general relativity [89], the search for a
permanent electric dipole moment of the neutron [90] or for axion
dark matter (where a microstrip SQUID ampliﬁer [91, 92] acts as
a nearly-quantum-limited rf detector), the investigation of Hawking
radiation [93], or the observation of the dynamical Casimir eﬀect
[94].
The most obvious application of SQUIDs is to replace other types
of magnetometers in order to improve existing setups. However,
in contrast to other magnetic ﬁeld sensors, the SQUID has to
be cooled to very low temperatures. In some applications (for
example magnetic property measurement systems), cryocoolers
may be employed to obtain a user-friendly system and wide
acceptance. However, in demanding magnetometry applications
such as biomagnetism or geophysical exploration, cryocoolers
typically produce too much vibrational noise, and cooling with liquid
helium (or liquid nitrogen in the case of high-Tc SQUIDs) is required
for best noise performance. However, this substantially reduces the
acceptance by the users. Of course, if the signal source has to be
operated at cryogenic temperature anyway, the SQUID is a natural
choice as long as it can be suﬃciently well coupled to the source.
There are many of such applications in low-temperature physics and
low-temperature particle detection (see Section 8.4.4).
If the SQUID has to compete with existing sensors (e.g., in
geophysics), a substantial beneﬁt in performance is required to
compensate for the above-mentioned complications from cooling.
When considering upgrading a sensor by a SQUID in an existing
setup or using a SQUID in an experiment for the ﬁrst time, a detailed
noise analysis of the setup is recommended to obtain a realistic
(or better a conservative) estimate of the ﬁnal performance. There
should remain enough “headroom” in performance compared to the
competing (commonly room-temperature) technologies. One should
bear in mind that, although the ﬂux noise of the SQUID in a well
shielded environment is excellent, the signal-to-noise ratio in the
true experiment might be degraded due to problems in coupling
the SQUID to the signal source and/or excess noise picked up by
the SQUID.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
293
When relying on data from literature for predicting the overall
performance of a new SQUID application, one should consider
that published information is sometimes too optimistic or even
misleading. For example, in a recent paper [95], the authors
presented high-Tc magnetometers based on SSAs and claimed that
these devices are “ideal candidates to replace single-SQUIDs in
many applications.” They compared the best ﬂux noise of their
SSAs (0.25 μ0/√Hz) with that of a typical single Nb-based device
(1 μ0/√Hz). Besides the fact that the total ﬂux noise of an SSA
is always lower than that of a single SQUID, a correct comparison
has to be done on the basis of the quantity to be measured, for a
magnetometer the ﬂux density B rather than the ﬂux . Taking a
ﬁeld sensitivity of about 4 μT/0 from Fig. 2 in [95], a ﬂux density
noise √SB ≈1 pT/√Hz is obtained for the high-Tc SSA. Single Nb-
based integrated magnetometers optimized for ﬁeld sensing have
demonstrated a factor of 1000 lower noise levels of about 1 fT/√Hz
already in 1993 [33]. Even the bare low-Tc SQUID in Fig. 8.6 has a
white noise level comparable to the high-Tc SSA in [95], but superior
performance in the 1/ f regime.
8.4.2 Biomagnetism
In biomagnetism, the magnetic ﬁeld produced by movements of ions
inside the human body is measured outside, and the localization
of the source (approximated by a current dipole in the simplest
and most common assumption) is deduced from the measured
magnetic ﬁeld distribution by solving the inverse problem. Spatial
resolutions in the range of several millimeters and temporal
resolutions in the millisecond range are obtained. Biomagnetism
is a contact-free, completely non-invasive technique and has no
inﬂuence on the subject. The ﬁeld distribution is not distorted by
the human tissue, which is an advantage over the measurement
of electric surface potentials with electrodes (electrocardiogram,
electroencephalogram). Due to their low noise levels, SQUIDs
are well suited and widely used for biomagnetic measurements.
Comprehensive reviews on biomagnetic SQUID applications are
found in literature [5, 6, 96–101].

294
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
Since the heart generates the strongest magnetic signal among
the human organs, biomagnetic research started with magneto-
cardiography (MCG). About ﬁve years after the invention of the
SQUID, a ﬁrst magnetocardiogram was measured with a point-
contact rf SQUID to which a second-order wire-wound pickup
coil was coupled [102, 103]. Since then, SQUIDs were applied
to record the magnetic ﬁeld of numerous other body organs,
for example from the brain (magnetoencephalography, MEG), the
fetal heart (fMCG) and brain (fMEG), the eye (magnetooculogram,
MOG), the peripheral nerves (magnetoneurogram, MNG), the liver
(liver susceptometry), the stomach (magnetogastrogram, MGG), the
small intestine (magnetoenterogram, MENG), the skeletal muscles
(magnetomyogram, MMG), and the lungs.
Today, large biomagnetic systems that are designed for clinical
applications have become common. They typically involve hundreds
of SQUID channels. Basically, two geometrical conﬁgurations are
used: helmet-type sensor arrays optimized for MEG and nearly ﬂat
sensor arrays designed for MCG (which are also well suited for most
other human organs of interest). It was estimated in Chapter 11 of
[5] that by the end of 2004 the number of SQUIDs installed in MEG
and MCG applications alone was over 20000. The most intensive
biomagnetic application, MEG, is gradually moving from research
laboratories to clinical practice. It is currently routinely used to map
sources of epileptic activities in pre-surgical evaluation of epilepsy
[100]. A current research focus is to combine MEG with ultralow-
ﬁeld magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), i.e., to use the SQUID
sensor array also for recording MRI data. Combining those two
methods could improve source localization accuracy by restricting
the available source space by anatomical knowledge. Another
research goal of ultralow-ﬁeld MRI is the direct measurement
of stimulated brain currents by MRI. Here, the shift in the local
resonance frequency caused by the magnetic ﬁeld of the brain
currents is measured directly and thus the inverse problem is
avoided.
In the past decade, low-noise optical magnetometers came up
that oﬀer the potential to replace SQUID sensors in biomagnetic
applications (see, e.g., [104, 105]). This would remove the obstacle
of cryogenic cooling and remove the limiting noise contribution
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
295
from the dewar. However, one should not be too euphoric in
thinking that this will make the breakthrough of biomagnetic
methods and bring them rapidly into clinics. Firstly, there is a big
diﬀerence between demonstrating a suﬃciently low noise level
with a few sensors in a laboratory environment and implementing
a complete and reliable measurement system with hundreds of
channels for clinical use. One should not forget that the ﬁrst
demonstrations of biomagnetic measurements were done soon after
the invention of the SQUID, but that it took decades to get robust
biomagnetic multichannel systems. Secondly, the shielding issue still
remains and it has to be demonstrated that the established noise
cancellation methods are equally well suited for new magnetometer
technology. For highest performance, a shielded room is typically
required which is expensive and occupies a large space. Thirdly, to
establish biomagnetism for clinical use, the inverse problem (i.e., the
localization of the source from its magnetic ﬁeld distribution outside
the body) has to be solved eﬃciently and accurately with adequate
source models. This ﬁeld has advanced in the recent decades, but
there is still a lot to do.
We conclude that, even if the SQUID is replaced by a non-
cryogenic sensor, biomagnetic multichannel systems remain quite
expensive and that the main barrier for a widespread clinical use
is the clear demonstration of suﬃcient diagnostic beneﬁts over
existing methods. The latter aspect also holds for less expensive
small-scale systems intended for the use in doctor’s oﬃces or
bedside applications in clinics (for example in MCG where the
competing technology of electrocardiography is very old and well
established). Nevertheless, biomagnetism is a very important ﬁeld
in research, and reliable and low-noise Nb-based dc SQUIDs are still
the most widely used sensors in commercial systems.
Biomagnetic research has a long tradition at PTB. In 1980, a ﬁrst
heavily shielded room was built, the Berlin magnetically shielded
room (BMSR). This room consists of six layers of mu-metal plus
one eddy-current shield of 15 mm thick Cu, and has a total weight
of 25 tons. The shielding factor is 104 at 0.1 Hz and increases to
>105 above 2 Hz. Twenty years later, an even larger and more
heavily shielded room with further improved shielding factor (two
to three orders of magnitude with active shielding) was completed,

296
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
the BMSR-2. This room consists of seven mu-metal layers plus one
eddy-current shield of Al [106]. It is surrounded by an extra rf shield.
The obtained shielding factors of both rooms are high enough to
enable the use of magnetometers. For this reason, between 1980
and 2000 the SQUID research at PTB was focused on magnetometers
rather than the commonly used (mostly wire-wound) gradiometers.
Several biomagnetic multichannel systems involving integrated
multiloop magnetometers were manufactured at PTB, a 37-channel
system in 1991, an 83-channel system in 1994, and a 304-channel
system in 2003. The 83-channel magnetometer was operated in
a moderately shielded room in a Berlin clinic. Due to the rapid
progress in sensor technology in the early 1990s, the 83-channel
system achieved a record noise level of typically 2.5 fT/√Hz, which
was about a factor of two lower than that of the best commercial
systems at this time [107]. This low noise level made it possible to
detect the very small signals from the peripheral nervous system
(about 5 fT when studying the nervous propagation in the spinal
cord). For comparison, the brain signals are about 100 fT to 1 pT
and the heart signal is about 100 pT, respectively.
Figure 8.17 depicts two magnetocardiograms as example of
biomagnetic signals. They were recorded in the BMSR to compare
the noise levels of high-Tc and low-Tc magnetometers under normal
operation conditions. The high-Tc device shows a larger signal due
to the smaller cold-warm distance of the dewar. Although the noise
level of this magnetometer (18 fT/√Hz at 100 Hz) was substantially
higher that of the low-Tc device, both magnetocardiograms are
quite clear and exhibit a high signal-to-noise ratio. The sensor noise
is suﬃciently low to enable much more demanding biomagnetic
applications like recording brain signals with high quality or the
very weak signals of the peripheral nervous system. We see that
with state-of-the-art SQUID sensors the intrinsic sensor noise
is commonly not the main limiting factor. Even high-Tc devices
would yield acceptable signal-to-noise ratios, but unfortunately
their reliability is still a critical issue.
One of the most demanding applications of SQUID magnetome-
ters is ultra-low-ﬁeld MRI, where pulsed ﬁelds of up to about
100 mT are applied and signals down to the lower femtotesla
range are subsequently measured. Due to these large pulsed ﬁelds,
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
297
(a) 4.2 K
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
B
)
T
p
(  
5 pT
Zoom x 5
(b) 77 K
100
80
60
40
20
0
-200
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
B
)
T
p
(  
t  (s)
Zoom x 5
Figure 8.17
Magnetocardiograms of one of the authors (DD) recorded in
the mid-1990s for characterizing the noise levels of diﬀerent types of SQUID
magnetometers. (a) Low-Tc multiloop magnetometer at 4.2 K, (b) high-
Tc magnetometer at 77 K (ﬂip-chip device in [108]). The measurements
were performed in the BMSR. Raw data are shown without averaging
(measurement bandwidth 0.016–200 Hz). A × 5 magniﬁcation window
shows the base noise level during a “quiet” phase in the magnetocardiogram.
PTB’s integrated multiloop magnetometer can no longer be used.
For this reason, PTB is currently developing a ﬁeld-tolerant vector
magnetometer based on SQUID current sensors with wire-wound
pickup coils [109]. This system will be operated in the BMSR-2.
A prototype module with 18 magnetometer channels is depicted
in Fig. 8.18. There are coils with two diﬀerent sizes, located at two
levels separated by a baseline of 90 mm. The bottom coils form the
sensor array, while the top ones are mainly intended as references
to optionally realize software gradiometers if this improves the
signal-to-noise ratio. The eﬀective diameters of the pickup coils are
17.1 mm and 74.5 mm, respectively. The quoted diameter of the
large coils corresponds to an equivalent circle with the same area
as the polygonal loop. The diﬀerent coil sizes aim at improving

298
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
Figure 8.18
Photograph of the prototype module of PTB’s vector mag-
netometer involving 18 magnetometer channels. On the right side, the
arrangement of the 16 small and two large pickup coils is sketched.
the signal-to-noise ratio depending on the depth of the source
with respect to the coil diameter. In the complete system, seven
modules with a total of 126 channels can be arranged in a hexagonal
conﬁguration, covering an area with an equivalent diameter of about
210 mm. The pickup coils of the channels measuring the horizontal
ﬁeld components are arranged in the module such that they are also
forming regular hexagonal grids in the complete system [109].
The SQUID current sensors are single-stage variants of the device
depicted in Fig. 8.10. They are enclosed by superconducting shields.
To minimize the eﬀect of ﬁeld distortion due to the shields, the
SQUID packages are located relatively far away from the pickup
coils. The distance was deduced from numerical simulations. The
input coil inductances were selected to match the inductance of
the small and large pickup coils, respectively. The use of integrated
voltage and current feedback (APF and BCF) enables direct readout.
The feedback current is passed into the feedback transformer
(contact pads ±FIN in Fig. 8.10) to keep the current in the input
coil constant which minimizes crosstalk between channels. The
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
299
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
17.1 mm pickup coils
74.5 mm pickup coil
√SB  (fT/√Hz)
f  (Hz)
Figure 8.19
Noise spectra of the eight bottom z-channels (sensitive to
the vertical component BZ) of the prototype module of PTB’s vector
magnetometer operated in the BMSR-2 [109]. A software ﬁrst-order
gradiometer conﬁguration was realized by subtracting the output of the top
large magnetometer as a reference from all z-channels. One of the channels
has an atypically high low-frequency noise, another one is probably
distorted by a magnetic contamination in the ﬁberglass dewar, resulting in
excess low-frequency and vibrational noise.
integrated current limiters protect the input coils against large
currents in magnetic resonance experiments.
Figure 8.19 shows noise spectra obtained with the prototype
module in the BMSR-2. Software ﬁrst-order gradiometers were built
(with the upper large magnetometer used as a reference) to remove
the environmental magnetic noise contribution of about 0.6 fT/√Hz
at 100 Hz and vibrational noise distorting the measurement in the
frequency range between 3 Hz and 30 Hz. The environmental noise
contribution was increased most likely because the sensor array
was placed nearer to the walls of the shielded room than usual.
The white noise levels are dominated by the dewar’s contribution
of about 1.1 fT/√Hz and 0.5 fT/√Hz for the small and large coils,
respectively. It is well known that the dewar noise contribution
decreases for larger coils due to the mismatch between the coil size
and the spatial distribution of the thermal noise currents in the
superinsulation foils of the dewar [110].
The intrinsic magnetometer noise levels in Fig. 8.19 are typically
0.7 fT/√Hz and 0.07 fT/√Hz for the two coil sizes. The prototype
module was operated with the commercial variant of the electronics

300
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
in [59], allowing the lowest possible magnetometer noise. For a
single module, the relatively large size and high power consumption
of this electronics are acceptable. The ﬁnal system will be equipped
with a newly designed and much more compact readout electronics
being battery powered thanks to a substantially reduced power
consumption. This will remove the strong power line interference
visible in Fig. 8.19 (an artifact of the experimental setup due to
ground loops in the wiring). However, the ﬁnal sensor noise will be
somewhat higher. Assuming a typical V = 1 mV/0, the intrinsic
noise levels are expected to be typically 1 fT/√Hz and 0.1 fT/√Hz
for the two coil sizes. Nevertheless, the increase in the intrinsic
sensor noise will have only minor eﬀect on the overall system
performance due to the dewar’s limiting noise contribution.
8.4.3 Metrology
In metrology, highest accuracy is always the most important issue.
Therefore, costs play a minor role and the need of cryogenic tem-
peratures is commonly no reason for exclusion if the improvement
in performance justiﬁes the extra eﬀorts. We brieﬂy discuss two
metrology applications of SQUIDs in which PTB is involved for many
years: thermometry and metrology of electrical units.
SQUIDs can be used to design powerful thermometers for
temperature measurements in the low and ultralow temperature
range. For a practical thermometer, a good thermal contact to the
location where the temperature has to be measured and negligible
heating eﬀects by the thermometer itself are crucial, in particular
at millikelvin temperatures. Resistance thermometers are based
on measuring the temperature-dependent resistivity of the sensor.
They have to be calibrated and need an excitation signal for
operation which can cause heating problems. External excitation
can be omitted and consequently heating eﬀects be minimized if
the thermal noise in a conducting sensor is measured rather than
the resistivity. Such noise thermometers relate the measured noise
voltage or current to the thermodynamic temperature via the well-
known Nyquist formula. Due to its low intrinsic noise, the SQUID is
well suited for noise thermometry (for a review see Chapter 9.4 in
[6]).
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
301
There are diﬀerent types of SQUID-based noise thermometers.
In 1971, Kamper and Zimmerman introduced the resistive SQUID
(RSQUID) where the noise-generating resistor is an integral part
of the SQUID loop [111]. This device was implemented as a bulk
rf SQUID with adjustable point contact. It is working as a voltage-
to-frequency converter, i.e., it transforms the voltage across the
resistor into a frequency via the ac Josephson eﬀect. The noise
voltage, which is a measure of the temperature, is obtained from
the frequency ﬂuctuations. Unfortunately, the inconveniently long
measurement times and additional problems with parasitic noise
sources restricted the use of the RSQUID noise thermometers to a
very few metrology laboratories. Nevertheless, noise thermometry
utilizing this type of sophisticated mechanical SQUID played an
important role in extending the International Temperature Scale
of 1990 (ITS-90) to lower temperatures and establishing the
Provisional Low Temperature Scale 2000 (PLTS-2000). The ITS-
90 ranges down to 0.65 K, while the PLTS-2000 covers the range
between 0.9 mK and 1 K.
In the late 1990s it was attempted to combine the RSQUID
concept with thin-ﬁlm dc SQUIDs technology in order to signiﬁcantly
simplify the thermometer operation [112]. From the technological
point of view, the most challenging issue was the integration of a
low-value resistor (a few 10 μ) into the SQUID loop. Although
the fabrication, experimental setup, and operation of the new
generation of dc RSQUIDs were much more simple and reliable
compared to the traditional bulk devices, the required measurement
times were still quite long and the use in the typical temperature
range of dilution refrigerators was impaired by inherent thermal
problems. Because of these reasons, integrated RSQUIDs have
neither gained signiﬁcant recognition from potential users nor
reached marketability.
Another more practical device, the current-sensing noise ther-
mometer (CSNT), was introduced by Giﬀard et al. in the early
1970s [113, 114]. In this type of thermometer, the noise resistor
is connected to the input coil of a SQUID current sensor. In early
devices, bulk Nb rf SQUIDs with point contacts were used. They
were later replaced by reliable Nb-based dc SQUIDs [115]. The
temperature is determined from the noise spectrum measured at

302
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
the output of the SQUID. For constant input coil sensitivity and
temperature-independent resistance the measured power spectral
density is exactly proportional to temperature. In contrast to the
RSQUID, the CSNT is a semi-primary thermometer, i.e., has to be
calibrated at a known temperature. On the other hand, the CSNT
allows much shorter measurement times due to the high sensitivity
of modern dc SQUIDs. For example, a relative uncertainty of about
1% at 100 mK can be achieved in a very short measurement
time of 100 ms [116]. An important issue is to minimize contact
resistances between the normal conducting noise resistor and the
superconducting input coil.
Yet another thermometer, the magnetic-ﬁeld ﬂuctuation ther-
mometer (MFFT) was introduced about ten years ago [117]. Instead
of galvanically connecting a noise resistor of bulk Cu with a SQUID
current sensor, the magnetic ﬁeld of the noise currents in the
Cu block is measured with a SQUID magnetometer. This avoids
electrical contacts to the noise resistor (temperature sensor) and
eliminates potential problems with contact resistances. As for
the CSNT, the temperature is deduced from the measured noise
spectrum, and calibration at one known temperature is required
[118]. Recently, a prototype of a calculable MFFT was developed
aiming at operating the device in a primary mode without the
need for calibration [119]. This device involved an integrated
conductivity measurement of the Cu temperature sensor and
applied a correlation-based SQUID readout with two independent
magnetic ﬁeld sensors [120].
In the original MFFT approach [117], a wire-wound pickup coil
was used. At PTB, the integrated concentric multiloop gradiometer
depicted in Fig. 8.13b was developed as an improved magnetic ﬁeld
sensor for the MFFT. Figure 8.20 shows a commercially available
version of the MFFT. The high-purity copper temperature sensor has
a volume of 1.2 cm3. The multiloop gradiometer chip is directly glued
onto the Cu body. The chip thickness is reduced to about 0.1 mm to
enhance the SQUID’s sensitivity to the nearby thermal noise currents
in the Cu block underneath the chip. The module is easily mounted,
for instance to the mixing chamber plate of a dilution refrigerator,
with a threaded stud at the end of the Cu body.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
303
Figure 8.20
Sensor module of a commercial MFFT. The multiloop gra-
diometer in Fig. 8.13b is used to measure the thermal noise currents in
the temperature sensor, a solid block of high-purity Cu. Picture courtesy of
Magnicon GmbH, Hamburg.
Another important SQUID application is the cryogenic current
comparator (CCC), which was invented by Harvey in 1972 [121].
A CCC is basically a superconducting transformer, which keeps the
ratio of two currents constant with ultimate accuracy (the relative
error is typically below 10−10). It commonly involves wire-wound
coils with a large number of turns (typically several thousands
in total) to obtain a high sensitivity and to enable large current
ratios.
A convenient technical realization is the so-called binary CCC
involving a set of windings with turn numbers scaling in powers of
two. Figure 8.21 shows a 12-bit CCC where the individual windings
range from 20 = 1 to 211 = 2048 turns [122]. Completed by some
additional windings, 18 windings with a total of 4647 turns are
accessible at the room temperature side of the probe stick. The
high accuracy of the CCC is achieved by enclosing the coils in a
superconducting shield that overlaps itself like a snake swallowing
its tail. Using Pb foil for the shield, the multilayer shield can be
implemented by successively soldering a layer, isolating it with
heat-resistant Kapton tape (yellow part in the torus in Fig. 8.21),
soldering the next layer, isolating it, and soldering the ﬁnal layer.
A SQUID magnetometer mounted in the hole of the torus detects
the net ampere-turns balance and keeps it at a constant level via
a feedback loop. As a result, the current ratio is exactly equal to
the inverse of the turns ratio. For eﬀective suppression of external
magnetic ﬁelds (six orders of magnitude are typically required), the

304
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.21
Photographs of a 12-bit CCC torus (a) before and (b) after
mounting it into the probe stick. The inner and outer diameters of the torus
are 18.4 mm and 31.4 mm, respectively. In (b) the circular carrier with the
3 mm × 3 mm SQUID chip is visible. The single-turn pickup coil is placed on
the rear side of the carrier in a groove at the outer edge (reproduced with
permission from G¨otz et al. [122]). The CCC support is made of laminated
fabric.
sensitive components CCC and SQUID are placed inside a two-layer
shield consisting of an inner Nb and an outer Cryoperm layer.
CCCs are used at national metrology institutes for resistance
calibration [122–124]. In this application, the two resistors R1 and
R2 to be compared and the CCC primary/secondary windings N1
and N2 are incorporated into a bridge circuit. Two currents I1 and
I2 are passed through the resistors to produce nearly identical
voltage drops across the resistors (typically 0.5 V). The diﬀerence
between the voltage drops is measured by a nanovoltmeter. It is
used to determine the resistance ratio R1/R2 from the current ratio
I2/I1 with an accuracy down to about 10−9. To suppress the eﬀect
of thermal drifts, I1 and I2 are periodically reversed. At PTB, a
repetition frequency of 0.05 Hz is typically chosen. Therefore, in CCC
applications a good low-frequency noise of the SQUID is crucial.
The discovery of the quantum Hall eﬀect (QHE) by von Klitzing
in 1980 revolutionized resistance metrology and was honored with
the 1985 Nobel Prize in physics. Soon after his discovery, the
QHE was introduced as primary resistance standard with quantum
accuracy [125]. Due to the low temperatures and high magnetic
ﬁelds involved (typically T ≈1 K and B ≈10 T), the QHE
is normally not directly used for resistance calibration. Rather,
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
305
national metrology institutes have a set of highly stable and accurate
standard resistors which are occasionally calibrated against the
quantum Hall resistance, typically a few times a year depending
on the drift in the resistors. Due to their high accuracy, CCC-based
resistance bridges have become a vital tool in this traceability
chain of standard resistors, and the SQUID is a small but essential
component. Today, CCC-based resistance bridges are commercially
available as complete, ready-to-use solution for high-end resistance
calibration.
The CCC is also involved in the redeﬁnition of the unit ampere.
The present deﬁnition (based on the force between two current-
carrying wires) is diﬃcult to realize with high accuracy in practice.
The new deﬁnition is based on the elementary charge of the electron
e ≈1.602 × 10−19 A·s. A known electric current can be generated
with high accuracy by clocking the ﬂow of single electrons through
so-called single-electron pumps. Unfortunately, the resulting current
is small. Assuming a typical clock rate of 1 GHz, a current of 109 e/s ≈
160 pA is obtained. It was suggested to use a CCC with ≳10000 turns
as an accurate current ampliﬁer [126]. Due to the large number of
turns, a high current sensitivity and a resulting low noise level down
to a few fA/√Hz can be achieved, which is necessary to measure
the small currents from single-electron pumps with suﬃciently low
statistical uncertainty.
Figure 8.22 shows a current noise spectrum obtained with
PTB’s new 14-bit CCC, which has the best low-frequency noise
performance reported for a CCC so far [127]. Connecting seven CCC
windings in series to form an “input coil” of 17,152 turns, one
obtains an overall mutual inductance Mi ≈3.2 μH and a current
sensitivity of 0.65 nA/0. This is a factor of 370 more sensitive than
the SQUID current sensor depicted in Fig. 8.10. The current noise
level is correspondingly low, for example 2 fA/√Hz at 0.4 Hz. The
coupling constant k ≈0.17 between the input inductance Li ≈4.5 H
and the SQUID inductance L ≈80 pH is substantially lower than for
a well-coupled SQUID current sensor. However, for the application
as a direct current ampliﬁer this does not matter.
The SQUID is a strongly nonlinear device. It was recently argued
that mixing-down eﬀects in the SQUID can lead to systematic errors
in CCC-based ampliﬁers when measuring small currents [127]. To

306
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
100
101
102
14-Bit CCC @ 17152 turns
√SI  (fA/√Hz)
f  (Hz)
ULCA 3GΩ
Figure 8.22
Low-frequency noise spectra of (a) PTB’s 14-bit CCC and (b)
the ultrastable low-noise current ampliﬁer (ULCA). The current noise of the
CCC was obtained from the measured ﬂux noise for an input coil with 17152
turns having a current sensitivity of 0.65 nA/0. The light red line shows the
CCC noise corrected for the thermal noise in the damping circuit connected
across the 8192-turn winding (series shunt of Rd = 2 k and Cd = 0.9 μF)
[127].
avoid this potential problem, a novel approach was introduced,
the ultrastable low-noise current ampliﬁer (ULCA) [128]. The
ULCA is a noncryogenic, high-accuracy current ampliﬁer based on
specially designed operational ampliﬁers and resistor networks. Its
transfer coeﬃcient is extremely stable versus time, temperature and
amplitude within the full dynamic range. Due to a high feedback
resistance of 3 G in the ﬁrst ampliﬁer stage, the ULCA achieves
a very low current noise level of 2.4 fA/√Hz. Below about 0.2 Hz,
the ULCA’s noise is even lower than that of the 14-bit CCC (see
Fig. 8.22). However, the ULCA needs calibration, and this is done
with a very small uncertainty of <10−7 by using the CCC. Thus,
the new approach combines the best of two technologies: the CCC
calibrates the ULCA at high currents of about 10 nA where mixing-
down eﬀects in the SQUID are suﬃciently low, and the ULCA is
applied to measure the small currents from single-electron pumps
with excellent low-frequency noise and maximal user-friendliness.
This example shows how superconducting and room temperature
electronics can be combined to obtain best possible solution for a
measurement task.
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
307
8.4.4 Readout of Superconducting Detectors
SQUID sensors have enabled the development of two categories of
superconducting low-temperature detectors for radiation and par-
ticles, namely power-sensitive detectors (bolometers) and energy-
dispersive detectors (calorimeters) that are based on transition
edge sensors (TESs) or magnetically coupled calorimeters (MCCs).
These thermal detectors are highly sensitive and versatile. They
can achieve noise-equivalent power levels or energy resolutions
that are signiﬁcantly lower than conventional semiconductor-based
radiation detectors. As an example, silicon drift detectors (SDDs)
that are widely used as detectors in energy dispersive X-ray
spectrometry provide an energy resolution of typically 120–150 eV
at 5.9 keV. TES- and MCC-based calorimeters enable at the same
energy a spectral resolution that is up to two orders of magnitude
better than that of SDDs. SQUIDs have signiﬁcantly contributed to
this success. They are essential for TES/MCC applications and there
are practically no alternatives to using SQUIDs for the readout of
these low-temperature detectors.
In a TES the steep resistive transition of a superconducting
material at its critical temperature Tc is utilized to form a highly
sensitive thermistor. The TES output signal is a change in the
current through the thermistor. MCCs include metallic magnetic
calorimeters (MMCs) and magnetic penetration thermistors (MPTs).
In an MMC the temperature dependence of the magnetization of a
paramagnetic metallic material exposed to a magnetic ﬁeld is used to
detect a temperature rise upon absorption of a photon or energetic
particle. Here, the measured signal is the change in magnetization
δM of the detector material. The MPT operational principle is very
similar, except that the paramagnetic metallic material of the MMC is
replaced by a type-I superconducting material. Well below its Tc this
superconductor becomes a near-perfect diamagnet. The magnetic
ﬁeld the superconductor is exposed to is slightly below its critical
magnetic ﬁeld at the MPT operation temperature. An increase in
temperature caused by an absorption event then induces a magnetic
transition of the superconducting detector material. For reviews
on the operational principles and properties we refer to [129] for

308
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
TES-based detectors and to [130, 131] for MMC- and MPT-based
detectors.
Over the last two to three decades, the development of TES-
and MCC-based detectors for radiation and particles has been
mainly driven by eﬀorts to improve the sensitivity of precision
measurement instruments for cosmology, astronomy and fun-
damental physics (see references in [132]). Examples of other
applications of TESs and MCCs are passive THz security cameras
[133], photon counters in the near-infrared and visible range for
quantum optics [134, 135], high resolution X-ray spectrometers for
materials analysis [136] or photo-biophysics [137], and gamma-
ray spectrometers for radionuclide metrology [138, 139] or nuclear
materials analysis [139, 140]. These examples illustrate the very
broad energy range of existing and emerging applications of these
two detector types. TESs, in particular, can be used for a wide
range of energies, from bolometric detection of sub-millimeter
waves to calorimetric detection of X- and gamma-rays. The operation
temperature of TES bolometers and calorimeters for these very
diﬀerent applications ranges from around 1 K down to about
50 mK. MCCs typically address high-energy applications, namely
spectrometry of soft and hard X-rays with the highest energy
resolution demonstrated, so far. They are mostly operated in the
temperature range below 50 mK.
SQUIDs are the natural choice to read out these detector types:
they can provide suﬃciently high sensitivity, exhibit low power
dissipation and are principally compatible with the low operating
temperatures of TESs and MCCs. In the following we discuss the
main similarities and diﬀerences of SQUID readout of single TESs
and MCCs and give an example of a SQUID sensor developed at PTB
that is suitable for both.
TESs and MCCs set somewhat diﬀerent requirements with
regards to their readout with SQUID sensors. The simpliﬁed
schemes in Fig. 8.23 depict a TES and an MCC from the readout
perspective. A TES in operation can be regarded as a current source
with an internal resistance RTES at the working point. The various
implementations of TES detectors cover a wide range for RTES,
below 1 m up to a few ohms. The TES signal current δITES upon
absorption of radiation or particles can diﬀer, as well. It can range
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
309
(a) 
δRTES
δITES
Li
Mi
(b) 
LP
B
δM
δIMCC
Li
Mi
Figure 8.23
Simpliﬁed scheme of the SQUID readout conﬁguration for two
superconducting detectors: (a) TES and (b) MCC. The TES is symbolized by
a current source with an internal variable resistance. A change in resistance
δRTES upon absorption of radiation or particles is measured by a SQUID
current sensor via the resulting change in current δITES. In the case of the
MCC, the detector material (yellow) is exposed to a static magnetic ﬁeld B
and magnetically coupled to a superconducting pickup coil with inductance
Lp. This coil forms a superconducting ﬂux transfer loop with the SQUID
input coil. An absorption event causes a change in the magnetization of
the detector material. The corresponding current change δIMCC in the ﬂux
transfer loop is measured with the SQUID sensor.
from tens of nA to tens of μA. TESs show current noise levels
typically in the range of 10 to 100 pA/√Hz. For the TES readout
the SQUID sensor is a “genuine” current sensor. That is to say the
relevant parameter with regard to the sensitivity of this readout
conﬁguration is the current noise √SI referred to the SQUID input.
Obviously, √SI needs to be suﬃciently below the TES current noise
level in order to avoid degradation of the TES signal-to-noise ratio.
As discussed in Section 8.2.3, it is possible to achieve a necessary
√SI for a SQUID with a given ﬂux noise level by choosing the
appropriate number of turns of the input coil resulting in the value
of the SQUID input inductance Li according to Eq. 8.14. The choice
of Li can be made to a certain extent independent of the TES
parameters RTES and δITES and the TES current noise. One has to
keep in mind, however, that the TES/SQUID input circuit forms an
R–L circuit that acts as a low-pass ﬁlter. Li is often the dominant
inductive component of this R–L circuit. Naturally, the bandwidth
of this ﬁlter needs to suﬃciently exceed the TES signal bandwidth of
interest. Furthermore, electrothermal stability of the TES operation
requires the ﬁlter bandwidth to be at least a factor of about 6 larger
than the TES bandwidth. As long as this condition is fulﬁlled, the
input inductance is not an important parameter for the choice of a
SQUID current sensor to read out a TES. Given the wide range of

310
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
TES designs and corresponding thermal and electrical parameters,
SQUID current sensors with input inductances from a few nH to
hundreds of nH are employed for their readout.
MCCs diﬀer from TESs in this respect. Here, the detector
material is inductively coupled to a superconducting pickup coil with
inductance LP. The pickup coil and the SQUID input coil form a fully
superconducting circuit. This conﬁguration is conceptually identical
to the SQUID magnetometer formed by a SQUID current sensor
to the input of which a superconducting pickup coil is connected.
Therefore, as discussed in Section 8.2.4, ﬂux coupling to the SQUID
loop is maximal for Li ≈LP for a given LP and δM. This means that for
the MCC readout conﬁguration the SQUID input inductance is more
stringently determined by the detector design and dimensioning.
Existing MCCs require relatively low SQUID input inductances,
typically a few nH to about 20 nH. In conjunction with the
requirement Li ≈LP, the relevant parameter with regards to the
SQUID sensitivity in MCC readout conﬁgurations is the coupled
energy sensitivity εc = LiSI/2. Although not shown in Fig. 8.23,
parasitic inductances in the ﬂux coupling loop would degrade the
ﬂux coupling and are to be avoided. As a consequence, the SQUID
sensor is often located in close vicinity to the MCC. Here, thermal
loading from the SQUID sensor to the MCC detector can be an
issue. A low SQUID power dissipation as well as a solid thermal
anchoring of the SQUID sensor (chip) are then necessary. MCCs
are nonresistive and nondissipative detectors. However, as thermal
detectors they exhibit thermodynamic energy ﬂuctuations between
the detector and the thermal bath as well as between subsystems of
the detector (e.g., between spins and electrons in the case of MMCs).
These thermal noise contributions fundamentally determine the
MCC intrinsic noise. Given the lower temperature of operation the
readout of MCCs typically requires lower SQUID noise as compared
to TES readout.
At PTB, a range of SQUID sensors have been developed specif-
ically for TES and MCC readout. Beyond suﬃcient sensitivity and
dynamic performance, these sensors also address system aspects,
for example easy operability in millikelvin refrigerators in which
TESs or MCCs are mostly operated. As an example, Fig. 8.24a shows
a TES/SQUID module that combines two TES detectors made from
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
311
(b)
(a)
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
  
  
δITES (nA)
  
t  (μs)
Figure 8.24
(a) TES/SQUID module with two TES-based, number-resolving
photon counters for the near-infrared and optical range. The detectors are
coupled to the inputs of two SQUID current sensors (PTB type X114HW). (b)
Measured detector current change in response to the absorption of a single
photon with a wavelength of 810 nm.
superconducting tungsten with Tc ≈150 mK and PTB SQUID current
sensors for their readout. The module can be directly placed onto
the experimental platform of a millikelvin refrigerator and is usually
operated at temperatures below 0.1 K. The TES detectors have been
developed at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) as highly sensitive, number-resolving counters of single to
a few optical photons [134]. The detector design and its coupling
to an optical ﬁber (leading to room temperature) allow a detection
eﬃciency of close to 100% [141, 142].
The two TESs depicted in Fig. 8.24 are directly connected to the
input coils (Li ≈2 nH) of two SQUID current sensors that are on
one chip. Each current sensor is a two-stage SQUID conﬁguration: a
single front-end SQUID (to which the input coil is connected) is read
out by a 14-element SSA integrated on the current sensor chip. Their
current noise level √SI is below 2 pA/√Hz for frequencies larger
than 1 kHz. Note that the SQUID sensor chip is located directly on
the gold-plated copper module body. Doing so enables easy thermal
anchoring of the SQUID chip. However, the magnetic ﬁeld noise
arising from the module body below (in the MFFT this noise is used
as the temperature signal) would degrade the current sensor noise if
both the front-end SQUID as well as the SSA would not be of compact
gradiometric design (cf. Fig. 8.7) The diagram in Fig. 8.24b shows
the measured TES current in response to the absorption of a single

312
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
photon with a wavelength of 810 nm. This compact TES/SQUID
conﬁguration has proven very suitable for measurements where
single photons in the near-infrared and visible range need to be
detected with high eﬃciency. For instance, it has been recently used
to experimentally prove the eﬀect of quantum entanglement (here
of two photons) as predicted by quantum theory [143].
The comparably small input inductance and low current noise
level of the SQUID sensors of PTB type X114HW (or type X114W
without integrated bias resistors for TES operation) correspond
to a coupled energy sensitivity of about 6 h. This very low noise
level make these devices also very suitable for the readout of MCCs.
Figure 8.25 shows a photo of an MMC detector chip containing
four detectors coupled to current sensors. The MMC detectors
shown are being developed for the high-resolution measurement
of the energy spectrum following the electron capture process of
163Ho [144]. The interconnection between the detectors and the
SQUIDs are made by short Al wires that are superconducting at the
detector operation temperature of below 50 mK. This results in a
low parasitic inductance (less than 1 nH) in the superconducting
ﬂux transfer loop. The very low operation temperature of the
conﬁguration requires both the MMC chip and the SQUID sensor
chips to be well thermally anchored. This is achieved by means of Au
wires that provide a link to the refrigerator base temperature with
low thermal impedance.
A speciﬁc aspect of the SQUID readout of TESs and MCCs is
multiplexing [139, 145]. Many of the above-mentioned TES and
MCC applications involve hundreds or even thousands of detector
channels. In such large-format detector setups constraints on wiring
and circuit complexity and on the cooling power of the refrigerator
often prohibit the readout of every detector channel by a dedicated
SQUID sensor channel. The basic idea of multiplexing is to combine
signals of more than one detector into one common readout
channel. In order to identify the detectors, their signals need to
be individually encoded, for instance by modulating the detector
signals themselves, the coupling to the SQUID, or the SQUID output
signal.
Multiplexing techniques have been primarily developed to
operate large format TES detector arrays. The multiplexing schemes
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
313
Figure 8.25
Chip with four MMC detector pixels coupled to SQUID current
sensors (PTB-type X114W). The interconnection between the detectors and
the SQUIDs are made by short superconducting Al wires. Both the MMC chip
and the SQUID sensor chips are thermally anchored via Au wires (photo
courtesy of S. Kempf, University of Heidelberg).
practically always cause degradation of the input-referred noise
or coupled energy sensitivity compared to a given nonmultiplexed
SQUID sensor. As mentioned above, TESs typically set lower SQUID
noise requirement compared to MCCs. This noise margin makes
multiplexed readout of TESs simpler. A multiplexing scheme that
may prove suitable also for the readout of large format arrays
of MCCs is microwave SQUID multiplexing [146, 147]. Here,
nonhysteretic rf SQUIDs are coupled to superconducting microwave
resonators with diﬀerent resonance frequencies. Magnetic ﬂux
coupled to an rf SQUIDs via its input coil shifts the resonant
frequency of the corresponding resonator. The rf SQUID does not act
as a sensor that provides ampliﬁcation of the detector signal, but
rather as a ﬂux-dependent inductance.
The three schemes developed for multiplexed readout of TES
arrays are frequency-division (FD), time-division (TD) and code-
division (CD) multiplexing [139]. In FD multiplexing [148] the
TES signals are modulated at diﬀerent frequencies via a particular
ac biasing scheme. The amplitude modulated signals are then
combined into the inputs of conventional SQUID current sensors
(basically the same type can be used as for the readout of single,
conventionally operated TESs). Hence, FD multiplexing of TESs does

314
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
not require speciﬁc SQUID multiplexer circuits as in TD and CD
multiplexing and is, therefore, not further discussed here.
The use of ac bias for the TESs is not necessary in TD and
CD multiplexing. In these schemes the multiplexing is achieved by
modulating the output signals (TD) of the readout SQUIDs or their
input coupling (CD). In TD multiplexing, the modulation is done with
boxcar functions (unipolar, low-duty cycle square waves) that switch
on and oﬀindividual SQUID channels. An example for a SQUID
TD multiplexer that illustrates this multiplexing scheme is shown
in Fig. 8.26. This circuit represents a 4:1 TD SQUID multiplexer
developed at PTB [149]. It is formed by a series connection of four
identical SQUID current sensors, speciﬁcally the 16-element SSA
discussed in Section 8.2.2. The TESs are connected to the input
coils of the current sensors. A switch is placed in parallel with
each SQUID current sensor. The switch state can be changed from
superconducting (S) to normal conducting (N). A SQUID current
sensor is disabled or enabled when its corresponding switch is in
S or N state, respectively. The multiplexer function is obtained by
addressing the switches so as to activate exactly one SQUID at a
given time. This way only the output signal of that particular current
sensor channel is present at the voltage output of the multiplexer.
Therefore, the TESs are measured in a sequence deﬁned by the
boxcar functions that are used to address the switches. A particular
aspect of this multiplexer is that the switches are implemented
by arrays of low-inductance SQUIDs. This makes it possible to
address the switches inductively and without additional power
dissipation.
As already discussed, the channels of an N:1 TD multiplexer
need to be switched on and oﬀ. A given TES is, hence, read out
only a fraction 1/N of the time. As a result, the eﬀective rms
current noise of a SQUID channel in a TD multiplexer is degraded
proportional to √N. However, despite this so-called noise penalty
TD multiplexing is comparably simple and the most widely used
scheme for multiplexed TES readout.
The CD multiplexing scheme avoids noise degradation [150,
151]. Here, the input coupling to a SQUID current sensor is mod-
ulated. The modulation is done with orthogonal Walsh functions
(bipolar square waves with 50% duty cycle at diﬀerent frequencies).
www.ebook3000.com

SQUID Applications
315
+F
+V
-S1
+S1
+S2
-S2
+S3
+S4
-F
-V
-S3
-S4
-INR1
+IN1
+R1
-INR2
+IN2
+R2
-INR3
+IN3
+R3
-INR4
+IN4
+R4
+F
+V
-S1
+S1
+S2
-S2
+S3
+S4
-F
-V
-S3
-S4
-INR1
+IN1
+R1
-INR2
+IN2
+R2
-INR3
+IN3
+R3
-INR4
+IN4
+R4
Figure 8.26
Circuit scheme of a 4:1 time-domain SQUID multiplexer
(PTB-type X416FLM). The four SQUID current sensors are 16-element
SSAs. Flux-actuated SQUID-based superconducting-to-normalconducting
switches [149] are connected in parallel to the SSAs. Low-value resistors in
series to the SSAs avoid closed superconducting loops when the switches
are in the superconducting state. Connections to the room temperature
readout electronics are via ±V (SSA voltage), ±F (feedback), and ±S1 to ±S4
(addressing currents).
These modulation functions encode the TES signals individually
without the need for the above-mentioned TES ac bias in FD
multiplexing. The SQUID current sensor itself is active at all times.
Hence, there is no noise degradation as in TD multiplexing. Flux-
actuated SQUID-based switches are an elegant way to implement
Walsh function modulation of the signals coupled to the SQUID
sensor.
SQUID multiplexer circuits have been employed for the readout
of large-format TES arrays in a variety of science instruments. A
prominent example is the SCUBA-2 instrument at the James Clerk
Maxwell Telescope [152]. This camera in the sub-millimeter range

316
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
uses more than ten thousand TES bolometer pixels that are read
out by a complex three-stage TD SQUID multiplexer [153]. The
multiplexing ratio is 40:1. The practical implementation of CD SQUID
multiplexers is progressing and multiplexing ratios similar to TD
multiplexers are foreseeable [154].
8.5 Conclusions
We are looking back to half a century of SQUID history. The initial
devices were made from machined bulk Nb with point contact
junctions realized by screws. A big step forward was the advent
of reliable thin-ﬁlm tunnel junction processes in the 1980s, pre-
dominantly the Nb–AlOx–Nb trilayer technology. In the beginning,
the development of SQUIDs was mainly driven by biomagnetism.
The need for large biomagnetic multichannel systems initiated a
rapid development of SQUID concepts and readout schemes, in
particular in the 1990s. At the same period another important ﬁeld
emerged, the use of SQUIDs as preampliﬁers for superconducting
detectors.
Today, SQUID technology has become mature. Modern Nb-
based devices are extremely sensitive, versatile and robust, but
their main restriction is the need for cryogenic temperatures.
Nevertheless, SQUIDs are widely used in biomagnetism, astronomy,
geomagnetism, material sciences, and metrology. Many interesting
experiments in fundamental research became possible thanks to
the SQUID’s ultimate sensitivity. SQUID current sensors are used as
preampliﬁers for large detector arrays, for example SCUBA-2 with
more than ten thousand TES bolometer pixels [152]. Numerous
large biomagnetic multichannel systems with sophisticated noise
cancellation techniques are operated worldwide, partially in clinical
environment. These systems are commercially available as well
as small-scale laboratory SQUIDs, where the user can individually
design the pickup circuit for his speciﬁc application. Although being
a small component in the whole system, the SQUID decisively
determines the overall system performance. An example is the
magnetic property measurement system, probably the best-seller
in SQUID-based instruments. Being equipped with a cryocooler, the
www.ebook3000.com

References
317
user has not to care about cryogenic cooling. The user-friendliness
of SQUID-based instruments has also been greatly improved in
the past decades. Nowadays, systems are inevitably fully computer
controlled and operable even for non-scientists.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Marianne Fleischer-Bartsch for noise mea-
surements and micrographs of the described SQUID sensors, Jan-
Hendrik Storm and Rainer K¨orber for sharing unpublished material
on the robust multichannel magnetometer currently under devel-
opment at PTB (Figs. 8.18 and 8.19), Eckart Pesel for measuring
the inductance of the 14-bit CCC, and Martin Burghoﬀfor valuable
comments on the biomagnetism part of the manuscript.
References
1. Ryh¨anen, T., Sepp¨a, H., Ilmoniemi, R., and Knuutila, K. (1989). SQUID
magnetometers for low-frequency applications. J. Low Temp. Phys. 76,
287–386.
2. Barone, A., ed. (1992). Principles and Applications of Superconducting
Quantum Interference Devices (World Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore).
3. Weinstock, H., ed. (1996). SQUID Sensors: Fundamentals, Fabrication
and Applications, NATO ASI Series E: Applied Sciences, Vol. 329
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht).
4. Clarke, J., and Braginski, A. I., eds. (2004). The SQUID Handbook, Vol. I:
Fundamentals and Technology of SQUIDs and SQUID Systems (Wiley-
VCH, Weinheim).
5. Clarke, J., and Braginski, A. I., eds. (2006). The SQUID Handbook, Vol. II:
Applications of SQUIDs and SQUID Systems (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim).
6. Seidel, P., ed. (2015). Applied Superconductivity, Vol. 2, Chapter
9: Superconducting Quantum Interference (SQUIDs) (Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim), pp. 949–1110.
7. Jaklevic, R. C., Lambe, J., Silver, A. H., and Mercereau, J. E. (1964).
Quantum interference eﬀects in Josephson tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett.
12, 159–160.

318
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
8. Zimmerman, J. E., and Silver, A. H. (1966). Macroscopic quantum
interference eﬀects through superconducting point contacts. Phys. Rev.
141, 367–375.
9. Stewart, W. C. (1968). Current-voltage characteristics of Josephson
junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 12, 277–280.
10. McCumber, D. E. (1968). Eﬀect of ac impedance on dc voltage-current
characteristics of superconductor weak-link junctions. J. Appl. Phys. 39,
3113–3118.
11. Anders, S., Schmelz, M., Fritzsch, L., Stolz, R., Zakosarenko, V., Sch¨onau,
T., and Meyer, H.-G. (2009). Sub-micrometer-sized, cross-type Nb-AlOx-
Nb tunnel junctions with low parasitic capacitance. Supercond. Sci.
Technol. 22, 064012 (4 pp).
12. Granata, C., and Vettoliere, A. (2016). Nano superconducting quantum
interference device: a powerful tool for nanoscale investigations. Phys.
Rep. 614, 1–69.
13. Tesche, C. D., and Clarke, J. (1977). dc SQUID: noise and optimization.
J. Low Temp. Phys. 29, 301–331.
14. Bruines, J. J. P., de Waal, V. J., and Mooij, J. E. (1982). Comment on: “dc
SQUID: Noise and optimization” by Tesche and Clarke. J. Low Temp.
Phys. 46, 383–386.
15. de Waal, V. J., Schrijner, P., and Llurba, R. (1982). Simulation and
optimization of a dc SQUID with ﬁnite capacitance. J. Low Temp. Phys.
54, 215–232.
16. Ryh¨anen, T., Sepp¨a, H., and Cantor, R. (1992). Eﬀect of parasitic capaci-
tance and inductance on the dynamics and noise of dc superconducting
quantum interference devices. J. Appl. Phys. 71, 6150–6166.
17. Voss, R. F. (1981). Noise characteristics of an ideal shunted Josephson
junction. J. Low Temp. Phys. 42, 151–163.
18. Tesche, C. D., and Clarke, J. (1979). dc SQUID: current noise. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 37, 397–403.
19. Martinis, J. M., and Clarke, J. (1986). Current noise measured in the dc
SQUID. J. Low Temp. Phys. 65, 459–468.
20. Drung, D. (1995). Theory for the multiloop dc superconducting quan-
tum interference device magnetometer and experimental veriﬁcation.
J. Appl. Phys. 77, 4088–4098.
21. Enpuku, K., Yoshida, K., and Kohjiro, S. (1986). Noise characteristics
of a dc SQUID with a resistively shunted inductance. II. Optimum
damping. J. Appl. Phys. 60, 4218–4223.
www.ebook3000.com

References
319
22. Knuutila, J., Ahonen, A., and Tesche, C. (1987). Eﬀects on dc SQUID
characteristics of damping of input coil resonances. J. Low Temp. Phys.
68, 269–284.
23. Knuutila J., Kajola, M., Sepp¨a, H., Mutikainen, R., and Salmi, J. (1988).
Design, optimization, and construction of a dc SQUID with complete
ﬂux transformer circuits. J. Low Temp. Phys. 71, 369–392.
24. Drung, D., Beyer, J., Storm, J.-H., Peters, M., and Schurig, T. (2011).
Investigation of low-frequency excess ﬂux noise in dc SQUIDs at mK
temperatures. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 21, 340–344.
25. Wellstood, F. C., Urbina, C., and Clarke, J. (1994). Hot-electron eﬀect in
metals. Phys. Rev. B 49, 5942–5955.
26. Wellstood, F. C., Urbina, C., and Clarke, J. (1987). Low-frequency noise
in dc superconducting quantum interference devices below 1 K. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 50, 772–774.
27. Kempf, S., Ferring, A., Fleischmann, A., and Enss, C. (2015). Direct-
current superconducting quantum interference devices for the read-
out of metallic magnetic calorimeters. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28,
045008 (12 pp).
28. Ketchen, M. B., Stawiasz, K. G., Pearson, D. J., Brunner, T. A., Hu,
C.-K., Jaso, M. A., Manny, M. P., Parsons A. A., and Stein K. J. (1992).
Sub-μm linewidth input coils for low Tc integrated thin-ﬁlm dc
superconducting quantum interference devices. Appl. Phys. Lett. 61,
336–338.
29. Jaycox, J. M., and Ketchen, M. B. (1981). Planar coupling scheme for
ultra low noise dc SQUIDs. IEEE Trans. Magn. 17, 400–403.
30. Ketchen, M. B. (1987). Integrated thin-ﬁlm dc SQUID sensors. IEEE
Trans. Magn. 23, 1650–1657.
31. Ketchen, M. B., Gallagher, W. J., Kleinsasser, A. W., and Murphy, S.
(1985). dc SQUID ﬂux focuser, SQUID ’85, Superconducting Quantum
Interference Devices and their Applications, eds. Hahlbohm, H. D., and
L¨ubbig, H. (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin), pp. 865–871.
32. Drung, D., Beyer, J., Matz, H., Lindstr¨om, M., Ludwig, F., and Schurig,
T. (1998). Magnetic coupling, eﬀective area, and inductance of SQUID
sensors: New theoretical description and comparison with exper-
iment, presented at Applied Superconductivity Conference ASC1998,
Palm Desert, CA, USA (unpublished).
33. Drung, D., and Koch, H. (1994). An integrated dc SQUID magnetometer
with variable additional positive feedback. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 7,
242–245.

320
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
34. Jansman, A. B. M. (1999). High-Tc dc SQUIDs for use in a background
ﬁeld, Dissertation (University of Twente, Low Temperature Division,
The Netherlands).
35. Yoshida, K., Hossain, M. S., Kisu, T., Enpuku, K., and Yamafuji, K. (1992).
Modeling of kinetic-inductance coplanar stripline with NbN thin ﬁlms.
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 31, 3844–3850.
36. Grover, F. W. (1962). Inductance Calculations: Working Formulas and
Tables (Dover, New York).
37. Welty, R. P., and Martinis, J. M. (1991). A series array of dc SQUIDs. IEEE
Trans. Magn. 27, 2924–2926.
38. Drung, D., Assmann, C., Beyer, J., Kirste, A., Peters, M., Ruede, F., and
Schurig, T. (2007). Highly sensitive and easy-to-use SQUID sensors.
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 17, 699–704.
39. Stawiasz, K. G., and Ketchen, M. B. (1993). Noise measurements of
series SQUID arrays. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 3, 1808–1811.
40. Stan, G., Field, S. B., and Martinis, J. M. (2004). Critical ﬁeld for complete
vortex expulsion from narrow superconducting strips. Phys. Rev. Lett.
92, 097003 (4 pp).
41. Carelli, P., Castellano, M. G., Flacco, K., Leoni, R., and Torrioli, G. (1997).
An absolute magnetometer based on dc superconducting quantum
interference devices. Europhys. Lett. 39, 569–574.
42. H¨aussler, Ch., Oppenl¨ander, J., and Schopohl, N. (2001). Nonperiodic
ﬂux to voltage conversion of series arrays of dc superconducting
quantum interference devices. J. Appl. Phys. 89, 1875–1879.
43. Beyer, J., and Drung, D. (2008). A SQUID series array dc current sensor.
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 21, 095012 (6 pp).
44. Dettmann, F., Richter, W., Albrecht, G., and Zahn, W. (1979). A
monolithic thin ﬁlm dc-SQUID. Phys. Status Solidi A 51, K185–
K188.
45. Cromar, M. W., and Carelli, P. (1981). Low-noise tunnel junction dc
SQUIDs. Appl. Phys. Lett. 38, 723–725.
46. Ketchen, M. B., and Jaycox, J. M. (1982). Ultra-low-noise tunnel junction
dc SQUID with a tightly coupled planar input coil. Appl. Phys. Lett. 40,
736–738.
47. Carelli, P., Castellano, M. G., Torrioli, G., and Leoni, R. (1998). Low
noise multiwasher superconducting interferometer. Appl. Phys. Lett.
72, 115–117.
www.ebook3000.com

References
321
48. Muhlfelder, B., Johnson, W., and Cromar, M. W. (1983). Double
transformer coupling to a very low noise SQUID. IEEE Trans. Magn. 19,
303–307.
49. ter Brake, H. J. M., Fleuren, F. H., Ulfman, J. A., and Flokstra, J.
(1986). Elimination of ﬂux-transformer crosstalk in multichannel
SQUID magnetometers. Cryogenics 26, 667–670.
50. Hilbert, C., Clarke, J., Sleator, T., and Hahn, E. L. (1985). Nuclear
quadrupole resonance detected at 30 MHz with a dc superconducting
quantum interference device. Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 637–639.
51. Drung, D., and Koch, H. (1993). An electronic second-order gradiome-
ter for biomagnetic applications in clinical shielded rooms. IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond. 3, 2594–2597.
52. Zimmerman, J. E. (1971). Sensitivity enhancement of superconducting
quantum interference devices through the use of fractional-turn loops.
J. Appl. Phys. 42, 4483–4487.
53. Drung, D., Cantor, R., Peters, M., Scheer, H. J., and Koch, H. (1990). Low-
noise high-speed dc superconducting quantum interference device
magnetometer with simpliﬁed feedback electronics. Appl. Phys. Lett.
57, 406–408.
54. Schmelz, M., Stolz, R., Zakosarenko, V., Sch¨onau, T., Anders, S., Fritzsch,
L., M¨uck, M., and Meyer, H.-G. (2011). Field-stable SQUID magnetome-
ter with sub-fT Hz−1/2 resolution based on sub-micrometer cross-
type Josephson tunnel junctions. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 24, 065009
(5 pp).
55. D¨ossel, O., David, B., Fuchs, M., Kullmann, W. H., and L¨udeke, K. M.
(1991). A modular low noise 7-channel SQUID-magnetometer. IEEE
Trans. Magn. 27, 2797–2800.
56. Daalmans, G. M., B¨ar, L., B¨ommel, F. R., Kress, R., and Uhl, D. (1991).
Ultra low noise all niobium dc-SQUIDs. IEEE Trans. Magn. 27, 2997–
3000.
57. Bechstein, S., Ruede, F., Drung, D., Storm, J.-H., Kieler, O. F., Kohlmann,
J., Weimann, T., and Schurig, T. (2015). HfTi-nanoSQUID gradiometers
with high linearity. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 072601 (4 pp).
58. Drung, D. (2003). High-Tc and low-Tc dc SQUID electronics. Supercond.
Sci. Technol. 16, 1320–1336.
59. Drung, D., Hinnrichs, C., and Barthelmess, H.-J. (2006). Low-noise ultra-
high-speed dc SQUID readout electronics. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 19,
S235–S241.

322
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
60. Drung, D., Beyer, J., Peters, M., Storm, J.-H., and Schurig, T. (2009). Novel
SQUID current sensors with high linearity at high frequencies. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond. 19, 772–777.
61. Forgacs, R. L., and Warnick, A. (1967). Digital-analog magnetometer
utilizing superconducting sensor. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 38, 214–220.
62. Clarke, J., Goubau, W. M., and Ketchen, M. B. (1976). Tunnel junction dc
SQUID: fabrication, operation, and performance. J. Low Temp. Phys. 25,
99–144.
63. Wellstood, F., Heiden, C., and Clarke, J. (1984). Integrated dc SQUID
magnetometer with a high slew rate. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 55, 952–957.
64. Koch, R. H., Rozen, J. R., W¨oltgens, P., Picunko, T., Goss, W. J., Gambrel,
D., Lathrop, D., Wiegert, R., and Overway, D. (1996). High performance
superconducting quantum interference device feedback electronics.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67, 2968–2976.
65. Penny, R. D., Lathrop, D. K., Thorson, B. D., Whitecotton, B. R., Koch,
R. H., and Rosen, J. R. (1997). Wideband front end for high-frequency
SQUID electronics. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 7, 2323–2326.
66. Matlashov, A., Espy, M., Kraus, Jr., R. H., Ganther, Jr., K. R., and Snapp, L.
D. (2001). Electronic gradiometer using HTc SQUIDs with fast feedback
electronics. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, 876–879.
67. Sepp¨a, H., Ahonen, A., Knuutila, J., Simola, J., and Vilkman, V. (1991). dc-
SQUID electronics based on adaptive positive feedback: experiments.
IEEE Trans. Magn. 27, 2488–2490.
68. Kiviranta, M., and Sepp¨a, H. (1995). dc SQUID electronics based on the
noise cancellation scheme. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 5, 2146–2148.
69. Drung, D. (2010). Simpliﬁed analysis of direct SQUID readout schemes.
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 065006 (7 pp).
70. Polushkin, V., Glowacka, D., Hart, R., and Lumley, J. (1999). Eﬀect of an
input coil microwave resonance on dynamics and noise properties of
a dc superconducting quantum interference device operating close to
the hysteretic mode. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70, 1713–1718.
71. Adelerhof, D. J., Nijstad, H., Flokstra, J., and Rogalla, H. (1994).
(Double) relaxation oscillation SQUIDs with high ﬂux-to-voltage
transfer: simulations and experiments. J. Appl. Phys. 76, 3875–
3886.
72. Uehara, G., Matsuda, N., Kazami, K., Takada, Y., and Kado, H. (1993).
Asymmetric bias injection technique for Drung-type superconducting
quantum interference devices. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32, L1735–L1738.
www.ebook3000.com

References
323
73. Kiviranta, M. (2008). SQUID linearization by current-sampling feed-
back. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 21 045009 (6 pp).
74. Xie, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Wang, Y., M¨uck, M., Dong, H., Krause,
H.-J., Braginski, A. I., Oﬀenh¨ausser, A., and Jiang, M. (2010). Voltage
biased superconducting quantum interference device bootstrap cir-
cuit. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 065016 (4 pp).
75. Drung, D., Matz, H., and Koch, H. (1995). A 5-MHz bandwidth SQUID
magnetometer with additional positive feedback. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 66,
3008–3015.
76. Drung, D. (1997). Improved dc SQUID read-out electronics with low
1/ f noise preampliﬁer. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68, 4066–4074.
77. Ruhl, J. E., et al. (2004). The South Pole telescope. Proc. SPIE 5498, 11–
29.
78. Jenks, W. G., Sadeghi, S. S. H., and Wikswo Jr., J. P. (1997). SQUIDs for
nondestructive evaluation. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 30, 293–323.
79. Greenberg, Ya. S. (1998). Application of superconducting quantum
interference devices to nuclear magnetic resonance. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70,
175–222; Erratum Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 329 (2000).
80. McDermott, R., Trabesinger, A. H., M¨uck, M., Hahn, E. L., Pines, A., and
Clarke, J. (2002). Liquid-state NMR and scalar couplings in microtesla
magnetic ﬁelds. Science 295, 2247–2249.
81. K¨orber, R., Casey, A., Shibahara, A., Piscitelli, M., Cowan, B. P., Lusher,
C. P., Saunders, J., Drung, D., and Schurig, T. (2007). Nuclear magnetic
resonance on room temperature samples in nanotesla ﬁelds using a
two-stage dc superconducting quantum interference device sensor.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 142501 (3 pp).
82. Levitin, L. V., Bennett, R. G., Casey, A., Cowan, B. P., Lusher, C. P.,
Saunders, J., Drung, D., and Schurig, T. (2007). A nuclear magnetic
resonance spectrometer for operation around 1MHz with a sub-10-mK
noise temperature, based on a two-stage dc superconducting quantum
interference device sensor. Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 262507 (3 pp).
83. Espy, M., et al. (2010). Ultra-low-ﬁeld MRI for the detection of liquid
explosives. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 034023 (8 pp).
84. Hartwig, S., Voigt, J., Scheer, H.-J., Albrecht, H.-H., Burghoﬀ, M., and
Trahms, L. (2011). Nuclear magnetic relaxation in water revisited. J.
Chem. Phys. 135, 054201 (4 pp).
85. Kraus, Jr., R., Espy, M., Magnelind, P., and Volegov, P. (2014). Ultra-
Low Field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance: A New MRI Regime (Oxford
University Press, New York).

324
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
86. Ruggiero, B., Delsing, P., Granata, C., Pashkin, Y. A., and Silvestrini,
P., eds. (2006). Quantum Computing in Solid State Systems (Springer
Science & Business Media, New York).
87. Podt, M., Gottardi, L., de Waard, A., Frossati, G., and Flokstra, J. (2003).
A spherical gravitational wave detector readout by nearly quantum
limited SQUIDs. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 16, 1531–1535.
88. Vodel, W., Koch, H., Nietzsche, S., Glyscinski, J. V. Z., Neubert, R., Pilz,
M., Dittus, H., Lochmann, S., Mehls, C., and Lockowandt, D. (1999).
Application of high performance LTS SQUID systems in gravitational
experiments. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 9, 4119–4122.
89. Everitt, C. W. F., et al. (2011). Gravity Probe B: Final results of a
space experiment to test general relativity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 221101
(5 pp).
90. Gemmel, C., et al. (2010). Ultra-sensitive magnetometry based on free
precession of nuclear spins. Eur. Phys. J. D 57, 303–320.
91. M¨uck, M., Andr´e, M.-O., Clarke, J., Gail, J., and Heiden, C. (1998). Radio-
frequency ampliﬁer based on a niobium dc superconducting quantum
interference device with microstrip input coupling. Appl. Phys. Lett. 72,
2885–2887.
92. M¨uck, M., Kycia, J. B., and Clarke, J. (2001). Superconducting quantum
interference device as a near-quantum-limited ampliﬁer at 0.5 GHz.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 967–969.
93. Nation, P. D., Blencowe, M. P., Rimberg, A. J., and Buks, E. (2009).
Analogue Hawking radiation in a dc-SQUID array transmission line.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 087004 (4 pp).
94. Wilson, C. M., Johansson, G., Pourkabirian, A., Simoen, M., Johansson, J.
R., Duty, T., Nori, F., and Delsing, P. (2011). Observation of the dynamical
Casimir eﬀect in a superconducting circuit. Nature 479, 376–379.
95. Chesca, B., John, D., and Mellor, C. J. (2015). Flux-coherent series SQUID
array magnetometers operating above 77 K with superior white ﬂux
noise than single-SQUIDs at 4.2 K. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 162602.
96. H¨am¨al¨ainen, M., Hari, R., Ilmoniemi, R. J., Knuutila, J., and Lounasmaa,
O. V. (1993). Magnetoencephalography—theory, instrumentation, and
applications to noninvasive studies of the working human brain. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 65, 413–497.
97. Del Gratta, C., Pizzella, V., Tecchio, F., and Romani, G. L. (2001).
Magnetoencephalography - a noninvasive brain imaging method with
1 ms time resolution. Rep. Prog. Phys. 64, 1759–1814.
www.ebook3000.com

References
325
98. Koch, H. (2001). SQUID magnetocardiography: status and perspec-
tives. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, 49–59.
99. Andr¨a, W., and Nowak, H., eds. (2007). Magnetism in Medicine, 2nd Ed.
(Wiley-VCH, Weinheim).
100. Supek, S., and Aine, C. J. (2014). Magnetoencephalography: From Sig-
nals to Dynamic Cortical Networks (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg).
101. Hobbie, R. K., and Roth, B. J. (2015). Intermediate Physics for Medicine
and Biology, Chapter 8: Biomagnetism (Springer International Publish-
ing, Switzerland), pp. 213–238.
102. Silver, A. H. (2006). How the SQUID was born. Supercond. Sci. Technol.
19, S173–S178.
103. Cohen, D., Edelsack, E. A., and Zimmerman, J. E. (1970). Magnetocar-
diograms taken inside a shielded room with a superconducting point-
contact magnetometer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 16, 278–280.
104. Budker, D., and Romalis, M. (2007). Optical magnetometry. Nat. Phys. 3,
227–234.
105. Shah, V., Knappe, S., Schwindt, P. D. D., and Kitching, J. (2007).
Subpicotesla atomic magnetometry with a microfabricated vapour cell.
Nat. Photonics 1, 649–652.
106. Bork, J., Hahlbohm, H.-D., Klein, R., and Schnabel, A. (2001). The 8-
layered magnetically shielded room of the PTB: design and construc-
tion, Biomag 2000: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Biomagnetism, eds. Nenonen, J., Ilmoniemi, R. J., and Katila, T. (Helsinki
University of Technology, Espoo, Finland), pp. 970–973.
107. Drung, D. (1995). The PTB 83-SQUID system for biomagnetic applica-
tions in a clinic. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 5, 2112–2117.
108. Drung, D., Dantsker, E., Ludwig, F., Koch, H., Kleiner, R., Clarke, John,
Krey, S., Reimer, D., David, B., and Doessel, O. (1996). Low noise
YBa2Cu3O7−x SQUID magnetometers operated with additional positive
feedback. Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 1856–1858.
109. Storm, J.-H., Drung, D., Burghoﬀ, M., and K¨orber, R. (2016). A modular,
extendible and ﬁeld-tolerant multichannel vector magnetometer
based on current sensor SQUIDs. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 29, 094001
(9 pp).
110. Nenonen, J., Montonen, J., and Katila, T. (1996). Thermal noise in
biomagnetic measurements. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67, 2397–2405.
111. Kamper, R. A., and Zimmerman, J. E. (1971). Noise thermometry with
the Josephson eﬀect. J. Appl. Phys. 42, 132–136.

326
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
112. Menkel, S., Drung, D., Greenberg, Ya. S., and Schurig, T. (2000).
Integrated thin-ﬁlm dc RSQUIDs for noise thermometry. J. Low Temp.
Phys. 120, 381–400.
113. Giﬀard, R. P., Webb, R. A., and Wheatley, J. C. (1972). Principles and
methods of low-frequency electric and magnetic measurements using
an rf-biased point contact superconducting device. J. Low Temp. Phys.
6, 533–610.
114. Webb, R. A., Giﬀard, R. P., and Wheatley, J. C. (1973). Noise thermometry
at ultralow temperatures. J. Low Temp. Phys. 13, 383–429.
115. Lusher, C.P., Li, J., Maidanov, V. A., Digby, M. E., Dyball, H., Casey, A.,
Ny´eki, J., Dmitriev, V. V., Cowan, B. P., and Saunders, J. (2001). Current
sensing noise thermometry using a low Tc dc SQUID preampliﬁer.
Meas. Sci. Technol. 12, 1–15.
116. Casey, A., et al. (2014). Current sensing noise thermometry: a fast
practical solution to low temperature measurement. J. Low Temp. Phys.
175, 764–775.
117. Netsch, A., Hassinger, E., Enss, C., and Fleischmann, A. (2006). Novel,
non-contact noise thermometer for Milli-kelvin temperatures. AIP
Conf. Proc. 850, 1593–1594.
118. Beyer, J., Schmidt, M., Engert, J., AliValiollahi, S., and Barthelmess,
H.-J. (2013). Reference measurements of SQUID-based magnetic-
ﬁeld ﬂuctuation thermometers. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 065010
(11 pp).
119. Kirste, A., Regin, M., Engert, J., Drung, D., and Schurig, T. (2014). A cal-
culable and correlation-based magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuation thermometer.
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 568, 032012 (7 pp).
120. Rothfuß, D., Reiser, A., Fleischmann, A., and Enss, C. (2013) Noise
thermometry at ultra low temperatures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 052605
(4 pp).
121. Harvey, I. K. (1972). A precise low temperature dc ratio transformer.
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 43, 1626–1629.
122. G¨otz, M., Drung, D., Pesel, E., Barthelmess, H.-J., Hinnrichs, C., Aßmann,
C., Peters, M., Scherer, H., Schumacher, B., and Schurig, T. (2009).
Improved cryogenic current comparator setup with digital current
sources. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 58, 1176–1182.
123. Drung, D., G¨otz, M., Pesel, E., Storm, J.-H., Aßmann, C., Peters, M.,
and Schurig, T. (2009). Improving the stability of cryogenic current
comparator setups. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 22, 114004 (8 pp).
www.ebook3000.com

References
327
124. Williams, J. M., Janssen, T. J. B. M., Rietveld, G., and Houtzager, E. (2010).
An automated cryogenic current comparator resistance ratio bridge
for routine resistance measurements. Metrologia 47, 167–174.
125. Jeckelmann, B., and Jeanneret, B. (2001). The quantum Hall eﬀect as an
electrical resistance standard. Rep. Prog. Phys. 64, 1603–1655.
126. Gay, F., Piquemal, F., and Genev`es, G. (2000). Ultralow noise current
ampliﬁer based on a cryogenic current comparator. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
71, 4592–4595.
127. Drung, D., G¨otz, M., Pesel, E., and Scherer, H. (2015). Improving the
traceable measurement and generation of small direct currents. IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64, 3021–3030.
128. Drung, D., Krause, C., Becker, U., Scherer, H., and Ahlers, F. J. (2015).
Ultrastable low-noise current ampliﬁer: a novel device for measuring
small electric currents with high accuracy. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 86, 024703
(10 pp).
129. Irwin, K. D., and Hilton, G. C. (2005). Transition-edge sensors, Cryogenic
Particle Detection, Topics in Applied Physics, Vol. 99, Enss, C., ed.
(Springer, Berlin), pp. 63–150.
130. Fleischmann, A., Enss, C., and Seidel, G. M. (2005). Metallic magnetic
calorimeters, Cryogenic Particle Detection, Topics in Applied Physics,
Vol. 99, Enss, C., ed. (Springer, Berlin), pp. 151–216.
131. Bandler, S. R., Irwin, K. D., Kelly, D., Nagler, P. N., Porst, J. P., Rotzinger,
H., Sadleir, J. E., Seidel, G. M., Smith, S. J., and Stevenson, T. R. (2012).
Magnetically coupled microcalorimeters. J. Low Temp. Phys. 167, 254–
268.
132. Enss, C., ed. (2005). Cryogenic Particle Detection, Topics in Applied
Physics, Vol. 99 (Springer, Berlin).
133. May, T., Heinz, E, Peiselt, K., Zieger, G., Born, D., Zakosarenko, V., Br¨omel,
A., Anders, S., and Meyer, H.-G. (2013). Next generation of a sub-
millimetre wave security camera utilising superconducting detectors.
J. Instrum. 8, P01014 (11 pp).
134. Rosenberg, D., Lita, A. E., Miller, A. J., Nam, S., and Schwall, R. E.
(2005). Performance of photon-number resolving transition-edge
sensors with integrated 1550 nm resonant cavities. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond. 15, 575–578.
135. Fukuda, D., Fujii, F., Yoshizawa, A., Tsuchida, H., Damayanthi, R. M. T.,
Takahashi, H., Inoue, S., and Ohkubo, M. (2008). High speed photon-
number resolving detector with titanium transition edge sensor. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 151, 100–105.

328
Application in Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices SQUIDs
136. Wollman, D. A., Irwin, K. D., Hilton, G. C., Dulcie, L. L., Newbury,
D. E., and Martinis, J. M. (1997). High-resolution, energy-dispersive
microcalorimeter spectrometer for X-ray microanalysis. J. Microsc.
188, 196–223.
137. Uhlig, J., et al. (2013). Table-top ultrafast X-ray microcalorimeter
spectrometry molecular structure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 138302 (5 pp).
138. Loidl, M., Leblanc, E., Bouchard, J., Branger, T., Coron, N., Leblanc, J.,
de Marcillac, P., Rotzinger, H., Daniyarov, T., Linck, M., Fleischmann, A.,
and Enss, C. (2004). High energy resolution X-ray, gamma and electron
spectroscopy with cryogenic detectors. Appl. Radiat. Isot. 60, 363–368.
139. Ullom, J. N., and Bennett, D. A. (2015). Review of superconducting
transition-edge sensors for X-ray and gamma-ray spectroscopy. Super-
cond. Sci. Technol. 28, 084003 (36 pp).
140. Horansky, R. D., Ullom, J. N., Beall, J. A., Hilton, G. C., Irwin, K. D.,
Dry, D. E., Hastings, E. P., Lamont, S. P., Rudy, C. R., and Rabin, W.
R. (2008). Superconducting calorimetric alpha particle sensors for
nuclear nonproliferation applications. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 123504
(3 pp).
141. Lita, A. E., Miller, A. J., and Nam, S. W. (2008). Counting near-infrared
single-photons with 95% eﬃciency. Opt. Express 16, 3032–3040.
142. Miller, A. J., Lita, A. E., Calkins, B., Vayshenker, I., Gruber, S. M., and
Nam, S. W. (2011). Compact cryogenic self-aligning ﬁber-to-detector
coupling with losses below one percent. Opt Express 19, 9102–9110.
143. Giustina, M., et al. (2015). Signiﬁcant-loophole-free test of Bell’s
theorem with entangled photons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 250401 (7 pp).
144. Gastaldo, L., et al. (2014). The electron capture 163Ho experiment
ECHo. J. Low Temp. Phys. 176, 876–884.
145. Irwin, K. D. (2002). SQUID multiplexers for transition-edge sensors.
Physica C 368, 203–210.
146. Irwin, K. D., and Lehnert, K. W. (2004). Microwave SQUID multiplexer.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2107–2109.
147. Kempf, S., Gastaldo, L., Fleischmann, A., and Enss, C. (2014). Microwave
SQUID multiplexer for the readout of metallic magnetic calorimeters.
J. Low. Temp. Phys. 175, 850–860.
148. Yoon, J., Clarke, J., Gildemeister, J. M., Lee, A. T., Myers, M. J., Richards,
P. L., and Skidmore, J. T. (2001). Single superconducting quantum
interference device multiplexer for arrays of low-temperature sensors.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 371–373.
www.ebook3000.com

References
329
149. Beyer, J., and Drung, D. (2008). A SQUID multiplexer with super-
conducting-to-normalconducting switches. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 21,
105022 (5 pp).
150. Niemack, M. D., Beyer, J., Cho, H. M., Doriese, W. B., Hilton, G. C., Irwin,
K. D., Reintsema, C. D., Schmidt, D. R., Ullom, J. N., and Vale, L. R. (2010).
Code-division SQUID multiplexing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 163509 (3 pp).
151. Irwin, K. D., Niemack, M. D., Beyer, J., Cho, H. M., Doriese, W. B., Hilton,
G. C., Reintsema, C. D., Schmidt, D. R., Ullom, J. N., and Vale, L. R. (2010).
Code-division multiplexing of superconducting transition-edge sensor
arrays. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 034004 (7 pp).
152. Holland, W. S., et al. (2013). SCUBA-2: the 10000 pixel bolometer
camera on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope. Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society 430, 2513–2533.
153. Kent, D. I., Audley, M. D., Beall, J. A., Beyer, J., Deiker, S. D., Doriese, W. B.,
Duncan, W., Hilton, G. C., Holland, W., Reintsema, C. D., Ullom, J. N., Vale,
L. R., and Zu, Y. (2004). In-focal-plane SQUID multiplexer. Nuc. Instr.
Meth. A 520, 544–547.
154. Irwin, K., Cho, H., Doriese, W., Fowler, J., Hilton, G., Niemack, M.,
Reintsema, C., Schmidt, D., Ullom, J., and Vale, L. (2012). Advanced
code-division multiplexers for superconducting detector arrays. J. Low
Temp. Phys. 167, 588–594.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 9
Application in Adiabatic Quantum
Annealing
Siyuan Han
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA
han@ku.edu
One of the emerging applications of Josephson tunnel junctions
is quantum computation [1]. Quantum computation can solve
mathematical problems that are intractable to conventional com-
puters. For example, the amount of classical computing power
required to factorize an N-bit integer into two prime numbers, upon
which the most widely used RAS cryptosystem [2] is based, grows
exponentially with N and thus is intractable to the conventional
computers. Furthermore, the need to have new paradigms of
computation is made more urgent as the 50-year-old Moore’s law
is expected to the end set by the fundamental laws of physics
as the size of transistors—the basic units of digital information
processing—approaches a few nanometers. This chapter intends to
give a concise review on the application of Nb Josephson junctions
(JJs) in quantum annealing (QA) [3]. It should be noted that many
practical technological and engineering problems confronted in the
development of a large-scale superconducting quantum annealing
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

332
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
processor (QAP) [4, 5] are also of great concern to those interested in
implementing gate-model quantum computing (GMQC) processors
[1] using superconducting technologies.
The chapter begins with a brief introduction to diﬃdent
strategies for implementing quantum computation (QC) with an
emphasis on quantum annealing. Section 9.2 presents the basic
physics of the simplest superconducting ﬂux qubit: RF-SQUID.
Section 9.3, 9.4, and 9.5 give a brief description on the design
and realization of scalable ﬂux qubits, couplers, and control and
measurement circuitry using Nb Josephson junctions, respectively.
Section 9.6 describes a scalable architecture upon which quantum
annealing processors consisting up to 1024 superconducting ﬂux
qubits made of more than 104 Nb Josephson junctions. Section
9.7 discusses evidence on whether D-Wave 2X, which is the
latest quantum annealing processor available, works as expected.
Section 9.8 is on the future prospect of the quantum annealing
processors made of Nb ﬂux qubits. The ﬁnal section is a short
summary. It should be pointed out that the scope of the materials
presented and references cited is by no means comprehensive and
complete.
9.1 Introduction
Conventional (i.e., classical) computers store and process digital
information in the form of bit, which is either 0 or 1 but cannot
be both 0 and 1 at the same time. Unlike the classical bit, a
quantum bit (qubit) can be 0 and 1 simultaneously because of the
principle of quantum state superposition. Combined with quantum
entanglement, which originated from nonclassical correlations
between qubits and unitary transformations that lead to reversible
state evolution, quantum computers built with qubits oﬀer the
potential to be exponentially faster than conventional computers.
In 1994 Peter Shor discovered that the time required to ﬁnd the
primes of an integer on a quantum computer scales as polynomial
as the size of the problem (i.e., the number of bits of the integer)
[6]. In 1995 Lov Grover showed that using a quantum computer
one can reduce the amount of time needed to search through an
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
333
unstructured database of N items from O(N) to O(N1/2) [7, 8]. The
discoveries of Shor’s and Grover’s quantum algorithms has since
attracted widespread interest in the physical realization of quantum
computers.
Another area in which quantum resources can be explored to
turn impossible into probable is quantum simulation. Because the
dimension of the Hilbert space of an N-particle quantum system
increases exponentially as N grows, it is extremely hard to study
the static and dynamic properties of such systems analytically and
practically impossible numerically using conventional computers.
For example, for a system consisting of interacting N qubits (i.e.,
quantum two-level systems such as electron spins) the Hilbert space
is 2N-dimensional, which cannot be tackled even with the world’s
most powerful supercomputers as N becomes greater than a few
hundreds. In 1982 Richard Feynman raised an interesting idea
of using quantum computers [9] to simulate the physics of such
quantum systems. Feynman showed that while simulators based
on classical computing would encounter an exponential slowdown,
the proposed quantum simulators would not. In 1996, Seth Lloyd
showed that a universal quantum simulator can be programmed
to simulate any quantum system with polynomial amount of
time [10].
At the present time there are two main approaches to quantum
information processing. The ﬁrst and more extensively studied is the
gate-model, also called circuit-model, quantum computing. GMQC
works very much like the conventional digital computers. Informa-
tion is coded in qubits and is processed by applying a sequence of
preprogrammed 1- and 2-qubit unitary transformations to produce
solutions. It has been shown that any unitary transformations of
multi-qubit state can be realized by a series of 1- and 2-qubit gates
(i.e., unitary transformations of states), so that it is suﬃcient to
operate quantum computers on 1- and 2-qubit gates at a time. It
is in this sense that 1- and 2-qubit gates are said to be universal
for quantum computation [11]. The greatest challenge to GMQC
is decoherence caused by the unavoidable interaction between
environment and the qubits which ultimately renders a coherent
quantum superposition of qubits into a mixture of classical bits.

334
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
The characteristic time describing the process of losing quantum
coherence is called coherence time τc while the time required to
execute a typical quantum gate is called gate time τG. It is generally
accepted that scalable quantum computing requires qubits with
quantum quality factor τc/τG greater than the 104 threshold so that
errors caused by decoherence can be corrected eﬃciently using
various error correction schemes [12–17].
The second approach is adiabatic quantum computing (AQC),
which is also known as ground state quantum computing. AQC
can be considered as the quantum counterpart of classical analog
computing. It has been shown that AQC is equivalent to gate-model
quantum computation [4, 18, 19]. Thus, in principle any problems
that can be solved eﬃciently by GMQC can also be solved eﬃciently
by AQC. In the adiabatic approach, the Hamiltonian of the quantum
simulator and its wave function |ψ⟩undergo adiabatic evolution in
such a way that while the transformations of |ψ⟩represent some
meaningful computation, this state also remains the instantaneous
ground state of HS throughout the process. This is achieved by
starting the evolution from a suﬃciently simple initial Hamiltonian,
the ground state of which can be reached directly and readily, e.g.,
by energy relaxation, and evolving into a ﬁnal Hamiltonian, which
provides solution to some complex computation problem. One of the
main advantage of doing computation this way is that the energy
gap separating the ground and excited states of the Hamiltonian
HS ensures some measure of protection against decoherence. In
particular, |ψ⟩maintains its coherence properties in time far beyond
what would be the single-qubit decoherence time which limits the
gate-model quantum computation and thus is expected to be more
robust against noise and control errors [20, 21]. The cost one pays
for this advantage of AQC is the need for more complex Hamiltonians
required to implement universal computations in the ground-state
mode.
While the task of building a universal adiabatic quantum
computer is daunting, it is within the capability of present-day
technology to build a special type of quantum simulator which
is based on adiabatic quantum annealing (AQA). Annealing is a
process for a system initially out of equilibrium to reach equilibrium
(the state with minimum energy allowed by physics). The process
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
335
is said to be classical (quantum) if it is driven primarily by
thermal (quantum) ﬂuctuations. Annealing can be used to solve hard
problems. For example, the ground state of a particle in a two-
dimensional (2D) potential landscape with numerous local potential
minima separated by potential energy barriers can be found by
starting the system at a temperature T ∼U /kB, where U is
the typical barrier height and kB is the Boltzmann constant, then
slowly let T goes to zero. It is obvious that for systems with deep
local potential minima classical simulated annealing (SA) is not
eﬀective because once the particle falls into one of these potential
minima the probability of escaping from it via thermal activation
over the top of the barrier is quite low. In contrast, quantum
annealing, which allows the particle to escape from local minima
by tunneling, could be much more eﬃcient for solving optimization
problem [3].
A prototypical system used to demonstrate AQA is Ising spin
glass (ISG), which describes the behavior of N interacting spin 1/2
particles in a magnetic ﬁeld [22]. The Hamiltonian of a general Ising
spin glass can be written as
Hisg = −
N

i=1

εiσ z
i + iσ x
i

+

i̸= j
J ijσ z
i σ z
j
(9.1)
where, σ x
i
and σ z
i
are the Pauli-X and Z operators of the ith
spin, εi and i are proportional to the strength of the longitudinal
and transverse magnetic ﬁelds on the ith spin, respectively. J ij
is the coupling between the ith and the jth spins. Because each
spin can have two conﬁgurations, there are a total of 2N possible
conﬁgurations for a system of N Ising spins. In general, analytical
solution of ISG is not attainable and thus numerical methods, such
as simulated classical and quantum annealing protocols, have to be
used. In 2002 Santoro et al. showed that QA is more eﬀective than SA
in ﬁnding the lowest energy conﬁguration of the Ising spin glasses
[5].
Hamiltonian (9.1) can be reorganized into the following form:
Hisg =
⎧
⎨
⎩−
N

i=1
εiσ z
i −

i̸= j
J ijσ z
i σ z
j
⎫
⎬
⎭+
N

i=1
iσ x
i ≡HP +
N

i=1
iσ x
i

336
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
where, HP is the Hamiltonian of the classical Ising model whose
ground state corresponding to the solution of the problem is to be
solved. QA can be performed by slowly varying the time-dependent
system Hamiltonian
H (t) = A(t)HP + B(t)
N

i=1
iσ x
i
(9.2)
The ground state conﬁguration of HP can be found by starting
the system from a quantum superposition of all possible states
(candidate states) with equal weights. This initial state of the Ising
spin glass can be obtained by setting all εi and J ij to zero and
i to maximum at t = 0, which is equivalent to have A(0) = 0
and B(0) = 1. By slowly decreasing i(t) to zero while at the
same time gradually increasing εi and J ij to values speciﬁed by
the ﬁnal problem Hamiltonian HP (i.e., to A = 1 and B = 0).
The process causes the probability amplitudes of all candidate
states keep evolving according to the time-dependent local ﬁelds
and coupling causing quantum tunneling between states. If the
rate of changing i(t) is suﬃciently slow (adiabatic), the system
stays close to the ground state of the instantaneous Hamiltonian.
When i(t) ﬁnally becomes zero, the system is expected to reach
the ground state of HP, which corresponds to the solution to
the original optimization problem. In 1999 Brooke et al. reported
an experimental demonstration of the quantum annealing for
random magnets [23]. In December 2015, a team of researchers
at Google announced that using a D-Wave 2X quantum annealer
[13], consisting of 1024 superconducting ﬂux qubits based on Nb
Josephson tunnel junctions, they are able to outperform a single
processor core by 108 times that runs either quantum Monte
Carlo (QMC) or classical simulated annealing (SA) algorithm for
solving instances of nearly 1000-binary-variable global optimization
problem crafted to have tall and narrow energy barriers between
local minima [24]. Furthermore, it has been proposed that a
quantum annealer with 2N2 qubits can be used to factor 2N-bit
integers. Thus, a 2048-qubit D-Wave-type quantum annealer will
be able to factor 32-bit integers. It is reasonable to expect that
practically useful quantum annealers will come to fruition ahead of
its GMQC counterpart.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Flux Qubit
337
9.2 Superconducting Flux Qubit
The basic building block of quantum computers and simulators,
either digital or analog, is qubit—any objects that have two
distinguishable quantum states well separated from other states.
It is generally recognized that a physical system should meet the
so-called DiVincenzo criteria to be a good candidate of qubits,
of which the most important ones are long coherence time and
large qubit quality factor, ability to prepare initial states, to control,
and to measure the states of individual qubits. Another important
requirement is that one must be able to scale up the size of the
quantum circuits to contain tens of thousands or even millions of
physical qubits.
Any quantum systems having two states that can be eﬀectively
separated from the other states can be used as qubits. Examples
of physical qubits include nature-made systems such as the polar-
ization states of optical photons, electron and nuclear spins, energy
eigenstates of ions and neutral atoms, etc., and engineered systems
such as superconducting devices based on Josephson junctions and
semiconducting quantum dots. The nature-made qubits are usually
microscopic objects with identical property. These microscopic
objects in general interact weakly with the environment, which
leads to long coherence times. However, the weak coupling to the
external world also makes it diﬃcult to control and measure the
states of individual qubits. In addition, there does not seem to have
a clear path to scale up quantum circuits made from nature-made
qubits such as nuclear spins, ions, and atoms. Because engineered
qubits are solid state devices that can be fabricated by integrated
circuit technology it is straightforward to scale up circuits made of
engineered solid state qubits. It is also much easier to control and
measure the states of individual engineered qubits because their
coupling to environment can be designed and controlled. The ﬂip
side of the strong qubit-environment coupling also induces strong
decoherence, which might be more harmful to the gate model than
ground state quantum computing [25].
There are three broad categories of superconducting qubits
depending on whether the electric charge, the phase diﬀerence
across a Josephson junction, or the magnetic ﬂux enclose by

338
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
a superconducting loop, respectively, is the relevant quantum
mechanical observable [26]. Among them the ﬂux qubit is the
best to implement ISG Hamiltonian (9.1) because it is relatively
straightforward to couple a ﬂux qubit with its neighbors. Since the
Nb/AlOx/Nb trilayer Josephson tunnel junction has superior man-
ufacturability and excellent controllability of device parameters, is
durable with respect to thermal cycles and environmental elements,
and compatible with advanced integrated circuit technology, it has
been chosen as the top candidate for building analog quantum
simulators. Furthermore, because the fundamental building blocks
of the most advanced quantum annealers demonstrated so far
are variations of superconducting ﬂux qubits with one Josephson
junction [27], a.k.a. the radio frequency superconducting quantum
interference devices (RF-SQUID), this chapter will focus on the
physics and application of RF-SQUID ﬂux qubits.
An RF-SQUID consists of a superconducting ring of inductance
L interrupted by a Josephson junction, as shown schematically in
Fig. 9.1a. The junction is characterized by its critical current Ic, shunt
capacitance C, and shunt resistance R. For the simple sinusoidal
phase-current relationship given by the DC Josephson equation
(1.4), the potential energy of the SQUID is given by
U () = ( −e)2
2L
−EJ cos
2π
0

(9.3)
(a)                                                
(c)  
L                                                     L
L
j x
 
j 
I
Φe
Φe
Δ
Φ
Δ
Φ
Φe
(b)
Figure 9.1
Circuit schematics of (a) RF-SQUID. The black cross represents
the Josephson junction (JJ). The blue cross enclosed by a circle represent
the applied magnetic ﬂux e. L indicates inductance, and the red arrow
indicates current ﬂow. The longitudinal ﬁeld term ε is proportional to e. (b)
Replacing the single junction in (a) by a small DC-SQUID (a.k.a. compound
Josephson junction, or CJJ) enables the tuning of transverse ﬁeld term  in
Eq. 9.4 by varying magnetic ﬂux . (c) Split each JJ into a CJJ resulting in a
so-called CCJJ (compound-compound-JJ) RF-SQUID. By adjusting the ﬂuxes
inside each CJJ (unlabeled for clarity), the critical current of the two CJJs
can be made practically identical. The novel CCJJ ﬂux qubit eliminates ε −
crosstalk discussed in the text.
www.ebook3000.com

Superconducting Flux Qubit
339
(a) 
                                                   
(b) 
 
Φe = Φ0/2 
 
 
Φe = 0.502 Φ0 
10
5
0
)
K
( 
U
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Ω
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
ε
10
5
0
)
K
( 
U
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Φ (Φ0)
Φ (Φ0)
(c)
Figure 9.2
(a) Symmetric RF-SQUID potential at e = 0/2. (b) Quantized
energy levels of RF-SQUID. Only the lowest four levels with corresponding
wavefunctions in the  space are shown. The supercurrent circulating the
SQUID loop is counterclockwise (clockwise) when the “ﬂux particle” is in
the left (right) well. The state with counterclockwise (clockwise) circulation
current can be mapped to the spin-up (-down) states of the σ z operator
represented by the up (down) arrow. (c) Energy of the ground state (black
line) and the ﬁrst excited state (green line) of the SQUID ﬂux qubit as a
function of external magnetic ﬂux.
This potential energy is the sum of the magnetic energy stored in the
inductor and the Josephson coupling energy of the tunnel junction,
where EJ = ℏIc/2e is the Josephson coupling energy, while  and
e are the total and external magnetic ﬂux threading the SQUID ring,
respectively.
For e = 0/2 the SQUID potential (9.3) is symmetric as shown
in Fig. 9.2a. The barrier height depends on L and the value of the
dimensionless parameter βL = 2πLIc/0. Changing e slightly away
from 0/2 creates an energy diﬀerence ε between the left and the
right potential minima. For e = (e – 0/2) ≪0 the energy

340
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
bias is ε = 2Ipe, where Ip is the superconducting circulation
current (a.k.a. persistent current) in the SQUID loop.
The Hamiltonian of an RF-SQUID is
H = Q2
2C + ( −ex)2
2L
−EJ cos
2π
0

,
(9.4)
where Q is the charge on junction’s shunt capacitance satisfying
[, Q] = iℏ. According to (9.3) the eigen-energy spectrum of
RF-SQUIDs is quantized. The validity of RF-SQUID Hamiltonian
was conﬁrmed by Rouse et al. [28] in 1995 by matching the
experimentally measured positions of the resonant tunneling peaks
with that of obtained by diagonalizing H . Additional experiments
by Han et al. and Friedman et al. demonstrated a number of
unique quantum phenomena, ranging from population inversion to
coherent superposition of states, in Nb Josephson tunnel junction
based RF-SQUIDs [29, 30]. The result of these experiments showed
that RF-SQUIDs are quantum objects and can be treated as artiﬁcial
atoms. These early works laid the foundation for the use of RF-
SQUIDs as ﬂux qubits for scalable AQA.
For energy bias ε smaller than the intra-well-level spacing, the
two lowest-lying levels are very well isolated from the other states
due to the strong anharmonicity of the SQUID potential and thus
can be utilized as the computational states of the ﬂux qubit. The
truncated Hamiltonian in the subspace spanned by these two states
can be written conveniently as
Hq = −1
2 (εσ z + σ x) ,
(9.5)
where  is the level spacing of the ground and excited states
at e = 0. This Hamiltonian is identical to that of a spin
1/2 particle in a longitudinal ﬁeld ε, which can be adjusted by
varying the external ﬂux e applied to the RF-SQUID loop, and a
constant transverse ﬁeld . The eigenenergies of the ﬂux qubit
as a function of ε is given by 
± = ±
√
ε2 + 2 as depicted in
Fig. 9.2c. However, in order to implement the QA protocol  also
needs to be adjustable, which can be realized by replacing the
single junction by a double-junction DC-SQUID of inductance much
smaller than L. The resulting device is equivalent to a RF-SQUID
whose eﬀective critical current can be tuned in situ by changing the
www.ebook3000.com

Robust and Scalable Flux Qubit
341
external magnetic ﬂux applied to the DC-SQUID loop [31], as shown
in Fig. 9.2b. The critical current tunable low-inductance DC-SQUID is
also referred to a compound Josephson junction and has been used
widely in applications where it is necessary to have devices with
tunable Josephson coupling energy such as the frequency-tunable
superconducting ﬂux, transmon, and Xmon qubits [32, 33]. Notice
that for qubits with typical parameters, separation between adjacent
energy levels in the same potential well is about 10 GHz. It is thus
necessary to cool qubits to below about 30 mK to ensure the system
remains in its ground state.
9.3 Robust and Scalable Flux Qubit
For the precise control of single qubit parameters ε and , it is highly
desirable to have minimal crosstalk between them. For example,
ideally the current targeted for changing ε should not cause changes
in  of the qubit. In principle, linear crosstalk can be completely
eliminated by properly compensating the eﬀect of crosstalk with
the help of carefully measured inductance matrix M that relates
the source currents to the target ﬂuxes. In practice this approach
is not eﬃcient because the time and hardware resource required
grows quadratically with the number of qubits N. In theory, at the
single qubit level, perfect “orthogonality” between ε and  can be
achieved by exploring the symmetry property of the -tunable ﬂux
qubit assuming the two junctions could be made identical [34]. The
problem is that the device parameters of Josephson junctions, such
as critical current, are always not as uniform as one desires due to
fabrication variability. Therefore, even if one is able to design circuits
with diagonalized inductance matrices M, there would still be an
eﬀective crosstalk between ε and  that has originated from, for
instance, spreads in junctions’ critical currents.
In 2010 Harris et al. designed and tested a novel type of ﬂux
qubit aimed at solving the problem of eﬀective ε– crosstalk [27]
arising from fabrication variations in Josephson junction critical
currents. The new design uses four Josephson junctions, which could
have a few percent critical current variation, in place of the two
junctions in the -tunable ﬂux qubit. It essentially replaced each

342
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
Josephson junction in the original -tunable ﬂux qubit by a smaller
two-junction DC-SQUID (a.k.a. compound Josephson junction or CJJ),
so that the critical currents of the two CJJs can be made equal by
setting properly the ﬂuxes applied to the CJJs, thus reducing ε–
crosstalk to negligible levels.
The design is shown to be robust in that the undesirable
eﬀects from realistic levels of fabrication variations can be readily
compensated in situ. In addition, the design is deemed to be
scalable in two respects. First, the signals needed to compensate for
fabrication variations are static ﬂux biases, as opposed to custom-
tuned time-dependent ﬂux biases. This is a signiﬁcant advantage
as the qubit can then be controlled by static on-chip magnetic
memory devices that are programmed using a scalable control signal
architecture based on single ﬂux quantum (SFQ) superconducting
logic circuitry [35]. Such a scheme makes economical use of what
will inevitably be a limited number of on-chip bias lines in any
practical processor. Second, the design allows one to compensate
for fabrication variations both within single qubits and between
multiple qubits, thus providing a means of homogenizing qubit
parameters across a multiqubit device. It is emphasized that this
latter issue is of critical importance in the development of useful
large-scale quantum information processors that could potentially
involve thousands of qubits.
9.4 Coupler
One approach to implement the spin–spin interaction energy J ij
between spins to run AQA involves setting up a network of
inductively coupled ﬂux qubits. A simple way to couple two ﬂux
qubits is to have them both inductively coupled to a ﬂux transformer
(a.k.a. coupler), which is just a superconducting loop. The problem
of this simple coupler design is that the coupling strength is ﬁxed
while the AQA protocol described above requires the adjustment
of J ij in situ. In 2005, Maassen van den Brink et al. proposed the
use of an RF-SQUID to implement tunable J ij [36]. Experiments
on systems of coupled ﬂux qubits veriﬁed that such couplers did
perform as expected [37]. However, additional work not reported
www.ebook3000.com

Coupler
343
in the literature revealed two serious drawbacks: ﬁrst, the tuning
mechanism involves threading ﬂux through the RF-SQUID (coupler)
loop, thus inducing a large persistent current that, in turn, biases
the qubits. This is a signiﬁcant problem if the qubit biases need
to be controlled to high precision atop what can be a very large
nonlinear crosstalk imparted by the coupler. Second, J ij = 0 can only
be achieved if LC/LJC < 1 where LC, LJCLJC = 0/2π I0 and I0 are the
RF-SQUID coupler’s geometric inductance, Josephson inductance,
and critical current, respectively. On the other hand, in order to
achieve appreciable nonzero coupling, it proved necessary to design
couplers with LC/LJC > 0.9. Such devices were acutely sensitive to
fabrication variations, where higher than expected critical current
density of the Nb/AlOx/Nb trilayer could make J ij = 0 unattainable.
Thus the simple RF-SQUID coupler design proved troublesome in
practice. Note that the dc-SQUID [36, 38] and the unipolar [39]
couplers suﬀer from similar deﬁciencies. The challenge was then to
design a tunable J ij that invokes minimal persistent current in the
coupler loop and is robust against fabrication variations.
To address the challenge Harris et al. [40] proposed and
demonstrated a new form of coupler, based on the CJJ RF-SQUID
(Fig. 9.1b). The diﬀerence between a CJJ RF-SQUID coupler and a CJJ
RF-SQUID ﬂux qubit is that the geometric inductance-to-Josephson
inductance ratio of the coupler is less than, while that of the qubit
is greater than, unity. Figure 9.3 shows the circuit schematics of two
CJJ RF-SQUID ﬂux qubit coupled by a CJJ RF-SQUID coupler.
This coupler provides both sign- and magnitude-tunable mutual
inductance in a manner that invokes minimal nonlinear crosstalk
from the coupler tuning parameter to the qubits. Furthermore,
this crosstalk can be reduced to negligible levels with improved
fabrication uniformity and subtle improvements in device layout.
Modulation of the qubit inductance via changes in the coupler
settings has been characterized and shown to be predictable using
an eﬀective one-dimensional model of the coupler potential. The
eﬀective mutual inductance between the qubit is
Meﬀ= Mco,1Mco,2χ(1),
(9.6)
where χ(1) is the ﬁrst-order (linear) susceptibility of the coupler.
Since the derivation of the dependence of χ(1) is quite lengthy, we

344
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
Qubit 1
Qubit 2
Coupler
Mact
x
x
x
x
x
x
Φact
Φact
Φcjj,2
Φcjj,1
Φq2
Φq1
Mco
Mco,1
Mco,2
Figure 9.3
Schematic of a CJJ RF-SQUID coupler interacting with two CJJ rf-
SQUID qubits. The coupler is controlled via bias currents that are coupled
to the device through mutual inductances Mco and Mact, respectively. These
give rise to the ﬂuxes x
co and x
act. The transverse and longitudinal ﬁelds 
and ε of the qubits are controlled via ﬂuxes x
cjjα and x
qα (α = 1, 2). The
qubits interact with the coupler via mutual inductances Mco,α.
will not repeat it here. Those who are interested in the detail are
referred to Ref. [40].
9.5 Control and Measurement Circuit
The ε- and -adjustable ﬂux qubits together with the sign and
magnitude tunable coupler provides a good starting point to
the development of scalable superconducting quantum simulators.
However, the operation of a quantum simulator also requires the
ability to precisely control εj, j, and J ij (i, j = 1, 2, ..., N) and
to read out the states of all ﬂux qubits at the end of the annealing
process. Since εj, j, and J ij are all current-driven, each of them
can be controlled by a room temperature source through a bias line
running from ∼300 K to the qubit circuit cooled to about 20 mK.
This simple approach requires at least two wires for each qubit and
one wire for each coupler, which is okay for circuits having no more
than a few tens of qubits, but quickly becomes unmanageable for
a large number of qubits because of the limited cooling power of
the dilution refrigerator. An elegant solution is to use SFQ on-chip
www.ebook3000.com

Control and Measurement Circuit
345
programmable integrated superconducting digital circuits (e.g., XY-
addressable arrays, digital-to-analog converters, demultiplexers),
so that each line going into the fridge can be used to control
multiple qubits and/or couplers and a few hundred control lines are
suﬃcient to control many thousands of qubits as demonstrated by
Johnson et al. [41].
One of the critical problems of developing scalable quantum
annealers is to read out the states of all qubits truthfully. The state
of a ﬂux qubit is represented by the direction of superconducting
circulation current in the RF-SQUID ring. The usual way of
measuring small magnetic signal using DC-SQUID running in either
the ﬂux-locked loop mode or small signal mode would not work,
because for both methods the DC-SQUID is operated in the ﬁnite
voltage branch of the current–voltage characteristics (IVC), which
not only generate on-chip heat but also microwaves with frequency
in the range of 10–102 GHz, enough to excite the qubits out of the
ground state, due to the AC Josephson eﬀect (Eq. 1.2). An alternative
way is to measure the state of the qubit using an underdamped
hysteretic DC-SQUID inductively coupled to the qubit. Because the
critical current of the DC-SQUID depends on the magnetic ﬂux
threading its loop, the state of the qubit can be inferred by measuring
the critical current of the DC-SQUID. However, the sudden jump
from the zero voltage to the ﬁnite voltage state generates a large
transient pulse. The jolt is so severe that it can randomly ﬂip the
states of other qubits, thus destroying the ground state of the ISG
system reached at the end of adiabatic quantum evolution. To solve
this so-called readout destruction problem, Berkley et al. developed
a scalable XY-addressable readout system for superconducting
adiabatic quantum annealer [42]. The readout system is designed
speciﬁcally for reading out the states of the superconducting ﬂux
qubits in an adiabatic quantum annealer. For an N-qubit adiabatic
quantum annealer, this readout system uses N hysteretic DC-SQUIDs
and N hysteretic (LJ/L ≫1) RF-SQUIDs operated as quantum ﬂux
parametrons (QFPs). The qubits are coupled to QFPs, which then
couple to the DC-SQUIDs. This readout architecture not only solves
the problem of readout destruction but also has signiﬁcantly higher
ﬂux sensitivity than DC-SQUIDs directly coupled to ﬂux qubits. The
readout system has been tested and demonstrated successfully and

346
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
was subsequently deployed in D-Wave 1 (128-qubit), 2 (512-qubit),
and 2X (1024-qubit) quantum annealers [24, 43].
9.6 Scalable Architecture
A scalable architecture is critical to the development of quantum
annealers built upon superconducting ﬂux qubits. Researchers at D-
Wave invented a scalable architecture tailored to the CCJJ RF-SQUID
qubits (Fig. 9.1c) and CJJ RF-SQUID couplers (Fig. 9.1b and Fig. 9.3)
described above. The architecture is based on 8-qubit unit cells that
form an expandable network. In each unit cell the eight qubits are
divided into two 4-qubit groups. One group consists of four qubits
with vertical skinny long loops (q1, q2, q3, q4) and the other group
consists of four qubits with horizontal loops (q5, q6, q7, q8) as shown
in Fig. 9.4a. Inter-qubit couplers are placed at the intersections of
(b)
Josephson Junction
qi
→ Jij
qj
x
x
x
x
x
→ s
→ s
q5
q1
Φqi
Φqj
Φccjj
Φqf
Φoo,ij
Φcc,ij
Φqj
q6
q2
q2
q8
q3
q7
q7
q4
(d)
(c)
(a)
→ hj
→ hi
Figure 9.4
(a) Left: Photograph of a QA processor. Right: The eight-
qubit unit cell. The bodies of the qubits are extended loops of Nb wiring
(highlighted with red rectangles). Inter-qubit couplers are located at the
intersections of the qubit bodies. (b) Schematic diagram of a pair of coupled
superconducting ﬂux qubits with external control ﬂux biases and with
ﬂux through the body of the ith qubit. An inductive coupling between the
qubits is tuned with the bias co,ij. (c, d) The two- and eight-qubit systems
investigated by Lanting et al. [44] were programmed to have the topologies
shown. Qubits are represented as gold spheres, and inter-qubit couplers are
represented as silver lines. Adapted from Lanting et al. [44].
www.ebook3000.com

Does It Work?
347
the vertical and horizontal qubit bodies. Therefore, within a unit
cell each vertical (horizontal) qubit is coupled to four horizontal
(vertical) qubits but not to other vertical (horizontal) qubits. The
topology corresponding to maximum intra-unit cell connectivity is
depicted in Fig. 9.4d. In addition, each vertical (horizontal) qubit
is coupled to its counterpart in the upper (left) and lower (right)
nearest neighbor cells. Therefore, a unit cell can be coupled to a
maximum of four nearest neighbor unit cells. With this architecture
one can construct a 32-qubit quantum annealing processor (QAP)
with 4 unit cells, a 128-qubit QAP with 42 = 16 unit cells, etc.
It is easy to show that a 22k+3-qubit QAP can be put together
using a square lattice of 4k unit cells with essentially the same
technology. In this sense, the architecture is scalable. For example,
the ﬁrst generation 128-qubit D-Wave 1 QAP has 16 unit cells,
the second generation 512-qubit D-Wave 2 purchased by Google
and NASA jointly a few years ago has 64 unit cells, and the latest
model available is a 2.5 generation 1024-qubit D-Wave 2X acquired
recently by Google.
9.7 Does It Work?
The QAP hardware developed by D-Wave over the last 10 years
is truly impressive. For example, the parameters of Nb Josephson
tunnel junctions are tightly controlled, the latest generation QAP
contains tens of thousands Josephson junctions, and the integration
of on-chip SFQ superconducting logic circuitry. However, coherence
time of superconducting qubits made from Nb junctions is typically
on the order of 102 ns, which is much shorter than their Al junction
counterparts. It is considered that for GMQC the coherence time of
typical superconducting qubits should be on the order of 10−1 ms
to implement error correction that is indispensable for scalable
digital quantum processors. Although it is not entirely clear about
the minimum coherence time required for running QA the fact
that Nb qubits’ coherence timescale is orders of magnitude shorter
than the adiabatic evolution time signiﬁcantly does not seem to
inspire conﬁdence. Thus, the question in the minds of many people,
especially in academic circles, is whether the D-Wave type of QAP

348
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
built upon Nb qubits works or not. As discussed below, this question
has three levels of meaning.
At the lowest level “does it work” means “Does it work as
an annealer that can actually ﬁnd solutions for problems it is
designed to solve?” At the intermediate level the question means
“Is it quantum?” or “Does the process involves quantum physics?”
The question ultimately means “Does it show quantum speedup?”
Tests performed on D-Wave QAPs of various sizes have answered
the ﬁrst two questions positively [24, 44–47]. In particular, the
work of Denchev et al. [24] showed that the 1024-qubit D-Wave
QAP is not only capable of solving ISG and computationally more
diﬃcult multivariable global optimization problems but also the
critical role played by ﬁnite range quantum tunneling. In addition,
the experiments of Johnson et al. [45], Boixo et al. [46], and Lanting
et al. [44] demonstrated quantum coherence and entanglement
across the 8-qubit unit cells investigated. These experimental
studies provide strong evidence that during the process of quantum
annealing all of the qubits in the unit cell were coherent and
entangled and that the unit cell-scale coherence and entanglement
persisted even as the system reached thermal equilibrium with
its environment. It is noted that the unit cell-scale coherence and
entanglement were observed during a signiﬁcant portion of the
QA process. Furthermore, it also observed that QA is surprisingly
robust against environment noise, qubits parameter variations, and
perturbations in ﬂux biases. Because the total run time of the
process tQA ∼10 −102 μs and the coherence time of the Nb
ﬂux qubits, though not measured directly by the standard time
domain techniques [26], is most likely much less than 1 μs these
results support the notion that ground state quantum computing
(e.g., QA) in general is more robust with respect to decoherence
[20].
One important question that remains open is how environment-
induced decoherence aﬀects ground state quantum computing.
Theoretical [20, 48–50] and experimental [44–46] evidence indicate
decoherence is less harmful to AQC than to GMQC. The robustness
of ground state quantum computing can be understood intuitively
with the following argument: during adiabatic evolution of adiabatic
www.ebook3000.com

Does It Work?
349
quantum computation the system stays closely to its instantaneous
ground state. Energy relaxation which produces errors in GMQC
might actually assist ground state quantum computing by reducing
the probability of occupying excited states. Furthermore, staying
in the ground state also makes the eﬀect of dephasing much
less relevant. Overall, the role of decoherence in ground state
quantum computing is not well understood and more theoretical
and experimental studies are needed to clarify this problem of
fundamental importance.
The latest experimental result demonstrated that for prob-
lems whose potential energy landscape have many local minima
separated by high and thin barriers QA has signiﬁcant runtime
advantage, about a factor of 108 in fact, over SA and QMC [24]. To an
ordinary person this is a remarkable speedup. However, to experts
working in quantum information science it may or may not be the
evidence for “quantum speedup,” which refers to the qualitative
improvement in the scaling of the total run time versus the problem
size of a quantum algorithm over that of the best classical algorithm.
For example, the famous Shor’s factoring algorithm is said to have
exponential quantum speedup while Grover’s search algorithm
achieves polynomial quantum speedup.
According to this formal deﬁnition of “quantum speedup” D-
Wave QAPs have not shown deﬁnitive evidence of quantum speedup,
despite the demonstrated 108 performance improvement over a
single core processor running either SA or QMC. So the jury is still
out on whether without global coherence and entanglement of all
ﬂux qubits in a QAP over a signiﬁcant portion of the annealing
time quantum speedup is expected. On one hand, if quantum
speedup indeed requires global scale coherence and entanglement,
in contrast to the local scale ones observed in 8-qubit unit cells
of D-Wave QAPs, then even the best Nb qubit technology currently
available may not be suﬃcient to reach the required coherence
timescale. On the other hand, the 108 so called “constant speedup”
in solving the special class of problems tested indicate that at the
equivalence of less than a dollar per single core level D-Wave QAPs
could have a competitive performance/price edge over classical
computing technology.

350
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
9.8 Future Prospects
The progress made in the last ten years on the development
of quantum annealing processors based on superconducting ﬂux
qubits made of trilayer Nb Josephson junction technology is
remarkable. It is expected that the 3rd generation 2048-qubit D-
Wave QAP will come out soon and according to recent trend of
doubling the qubit count every 12 months we may have a QAP
with more than 16,000 qubits before year 2020. In addition to
solving hard optimization problems this type of QAPs could also
be used for pattern recognition, ﬁnancial analysis, and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Furthermore, it will be very interesting to see if prime
factoring algorithm is implementable on QAPs. However, it is clear
that acceptance and adoption of superconducting Nb QAPs depends
on several critical issues.
The most fundamental issue that obviously needs more theo-
retical understanding and/or experimental demonstration is the
importance of global coherence and/or entanglement to ground
state QC. It is easy to see from the quantum annealing Hamiltonian
(9.3) that at t = 0, the system is in the product state |(0)⟩= |+⟩1 ⊗
|+⟩2 . . . ⊗|+⟩i . . . ⊗|+⟩N, where |+⟩i is the eigenstate of σ x
i operator,
and at the end of annealing t = tf in the ground state, which encodes
the solution of the optimization problem, must be separable. Thus,
neither entanglement nor quantum coherence of processor scale
is required for the entire annealing process. Nevertheless, the lack
of global coherence and/or entanglement during the critical stage
of annealing may very well lead to no quantum speedup over
classical computers. The work of Dickson et al. [51] and Lanting
et al. [44] provide empirical evidence indicating that quantum
coherence and entanglement in the tested 8- and 16-qubit systems
persisted well beyond the single qubit coherence time. It is found
even with annealing times many orders of magnitude longer than
the estimated single-qubit coherence time the performance, in terms
of the probability of ﬁnding the correct ground state of the problem
Hamiltonian, is similar to those expected for a fully coherent
system.
www.ebook3000.com

Future Prospects
351
In practice, increasing coherence time of Nb ﬂux qubits will
improve the performance QAPs and the probability of achieve
quantum speedup. Currently, the coherence time of Nb qubits is
about 103 less than that of Al qubits. Because there does not seem
to be a fundamental microscopic mechanism limiting the coherence
time of Nb qubits [27] the huge performance gap between the Nb
and Al superconducting qubits could be originated from material
and processing issues. It is noticed that the almost all of the present-
day technology used to fabricate Nb JJs and integrated circuits are
based on the Nb/AlOx/Nb trilayer process invented by Gurvitch
et al. (Chapter 5 and references therein). The Nb and Al ﬁlms are
usually deposited by DC sputtering in argon plasma of a few times
of 10−1 Pa. After sputtering Al the chamber is evacuated to the base
pressure of a few times of 10−6 Pa. High purity oxygen gas is then
introduced to react with Al to form the tunnel barrier. In comparison,
Al JJs used in all of the long coherence time superconducting
qubits are fabricated in vacuum systems having base pressure on
the order 10−9 Pa. The much lower base pressure signiﬁcantly
reduces the probability of contaminating the tunnel barrier and
the superconducting electrode/barrier interfaces. The contaminant
most likely result in microscopic two-level ﬂuctuators inside the
barrier and/or at the superconductor/oxide interface which have
been identiﬁed as a major source of decoherence [52]. By making Nb
trilayers in ultrahigh vacuum systems one may signiﬁcantly improve
the coherence time of Nb qubits.
As the qubit count of future generations of QAP and the problem
size increase the run time for reach the ground state of the problem
Hamiltonian by quantum annealing increase as well. Therefore, the
run time of future QAP will be orders of magnitude greater than
the coherence time of the best Nb qubits and error correction
[53, 54] must be incorporated into the design and operation of
the quantum processors. The is a tough theoretical and practical
challenge that must be overcome to build scalable ground state
quantum computers that can harness the power of quantum
speedup.
Finally, in order to moving beyond QA to universal adiabatic
quantum computing one must be able to implement Heisenberg spin

352
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
interaction terms in the system Hamiltonian of Ref. [55]. Because
for CJJ and CCJJ RF-SQUID qubits the realizable range of σ x
i σ x
j
interaction strength is much smaller than that of σ z
i σ z
j new types of
superconducting qubits need to be invented to implement universal
AQC.
9.9 Summary
Adiabatic quantum computing is a viable alternative to gate model
quantum computing. In AQC the system stays closely to the time-
dependent instantaneous ground state and thus is expected to be
more robust than GMQC against environment noise which ultimately
destroy quantum coherence and entanglement. Quantum annealing
is a special type of ground state quantum computing. Although QA
is not equivalent to universal GMQC it is an eﬀective strategy for
solving diﬃcult optimization problems such as ISG and problems
with a large number of binary variables.
Quantum annealers have been developed and demonstrated
using RF-SQUID-based ﬂux qubits and couplers made of Nb
junctions as the building blocks. The architectural complexity
of QAPs, the need for SFQ on-chip control and measurement
circuitry, and the demand for durability and highly uniform junction
parameters makes the Nb Josephson junction the top candidate
for the implementation of quantum annealing processors. The
debut of D-Wave 1 a few years ago represents a milestone in
the development of practically useful superconducting quantum
annealing processors. Tests performed on a 1024-qubit D-Wave
2X programmable spin simulator revealed some very interesting
results. The most noticeable is the demonstration of a factor of
108 “constant speedup” over optimized QMC or SA algorithms
running on a single core processor for solving optimization problem
instances with 945 binary variables. However, the performance
gap between QA and QMC or SA did not widen indicating a lack
of quantum speedup. It is interesting to ﬁnd out what types of
problems will show evidence of quantum speedup when solved on a
QAP.
www.ebook3000.com

References
353
References
1. Nielsen, M. A., and Chuang, I. L. (2000). Quantum Computation and
Quantum Information (Cambridge University Press).
2. Rivest, R. L., Shamir, A., and Adleman, L. (1978). A method for obtaining
digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Commun. ACM 21,
120–126.
3. Finnila, A. B., Gomez, M. A., Sebenik, C., Stenson, C., and Doll, J. D. (1994).
Quantum annealing: a new method for minimizing multidimensional
functions. Chem. Phys. Lett. 219, 343–348.
4. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S., Lapan, J., Lundgren, A., and Preda,
D. (2001). A quantum adiabatic evolution algorithm applied to random
instances of an NP-complete problem. Science 292, 472–475.
5. Santoro, G. E., Martoˇn´ak, R., Tosatti, E., and Car, R. (2002). Theory of
quantum annealing of an ising spin glass. Science 295, 2427–2430.
6. Shor, P. W. (1994). Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete
log and factoring. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on
Foundation of Computer Science, Goldwasser, S., ed. (IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA), pp. 124–134.
7. Grover, L. K. (1996). A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database
search. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory
of Computing (ACM Press, New York), pp. 212–219.
8. Grover, L. K. (1997). Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle
in a haystack. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 325–328.
9. Feynman, R. (1982). Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor.
Phys. 21, 467–488.
10. Lloyd, S. (1996). Universal quantum simulators. Science 273, 1073–
1078.
11. DiVincenzo, D. P. (1995). Two-bit gates are universal for quantum
computation. Phys. Rev. A 51, 1015–1022.
12. Kribs, D., Laﬂamme, R., and Poulin, D. (2005). Uniﬁed and generalized
approach to quantum error correction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 180501.
13. Knill, E., Laﬂamme, R., and Viola, L. (2000). Theory of quantum error
correction for general noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2525–2528.
14. Barnes, J. P., and Warren, W. S. (2000). Automatic quantum error
correction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 856–859.
15. Steane, A. M. (1996). Error correcting codes in quantum theory. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 77, 793–797.

354
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
16. Laﬂamme, R., Miquel, C., Paz, J. P., and Zurek, W. H. (1996). Perfect
quantum error correcting code. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 198–201.
17. DiVincenzo, D. P., and Shor, P. W. (1996). Fault-tolerant error correction
with eﬃcient quantum codes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3260–3263.
18. Mizel, A., Lidar, D. A., and Mitchell, M. (2007). Simple proof of
equivalence between adiabatic quantum computation and the circuit
model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 070502–070504.
19. Aharonov, D., van Dam, W., Kempe, J., Landau, Z., Lloyd, S., and Regev,
O. (2008). Adiabatic quantum computation is equivalent to standard
quantum computation. SIAM Rev. 50, 755–787.
20. Childs, A. M., Farhi, E., and Preskill, J. (2001). Robustness of adiabatic
quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 65, 012322.
21. Roland, J., and Cerf, N. J. (2005). Noise resistance of adiabatic quantum
computation using random matrix theory. Phys. Rev. A 71, 032330.
22. Ising, E. (1925). Beitrag zur Theorie des Ferromagnetismus. Z. Phys. 31,
253–258.
23. Brooke, J., Bitko, D., Rosenbaum, T. F., and Aeppli, G. (1999). Quantum
annealing of a disordered magnet. Science 284, 779–781.
24. Denchev, V. S., Boixo, S., Isakov, S. V., Ding, N., Babbush, R., Smelyanskiy,
V., Martinis, J., and Neven, H. (2015). What is the computational value of
ﬁnite range tunneling?. Phys. Rev. X 6, 031015.
25. Amin, M. H. S., Averin, D. V., and Nesteroﬀ, J. A. (2009). Decoherence in
adiabatic quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 79, 022107–022104.
26. Clarke, J., and Wilhelm, F. K. (2008). Superconducting quantum bits.
Nature 453, 1031–1042.
27. Harris, R., Johansson, J., Berkley, A. J., Johnson, M. W., Lanting, T., Han, S.,
Bunyk, P., Ladizinsky, E., Oh, T., Perminov, I., Tolkacheva, E., Uchaikin, S.,
Chapple, E. M., Enderud, C., Rich, C., Thom, M., Wang, J., Wilson, B., and
Rose, G. (2010). Experimental demonstration of a robust and scalable
ﬂux qubit. Phys. Rev. B 81, 134510.
28. Rouse, R., Han, S., and Lukens, J. E. (1995). Observation of resonant
tunneling between macroscopically distinct quantum levels. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75, 1614.
29. Han, S., Rouse, R., and Lukens, J. E. (1996). Generation of a population
inversion between quantum states of a macroscopic variable. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 76, 3404.
30. Friedman, J. R., Patel, V., Chen, W., Tolpygo, S. K., and Lukens, J. E. (2000).
Quantum superposition of distinct macroscopic states. Nature 406, 43–
46.
www.ebook3000.com

References
355
31. Han, S., Lapointe, J., and Lukens, J. E. (1989). Thermal activation in a two-
dimensional potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1712.
32. Koch, J., Yu, T. M., Gambetta, J., Houck, A. A., Schuster, D. I., Majer, J., Blais,
A., Devoret, M. H., Girvin, S. M., and Schoelkopf, R. J. (2007). Charge-
insensitive qubit design derived from the Cooper pair box. Phys. Rev. A
76, 042319.
33. Barends, R., Kelly, J., Megrant, A., Sank, D., Jeﬀrey, E., Chen, Y., Yin, Y.,
Chiaro, B., Mutus, J., Neill, C., O’Malley, P., Roushan, P., Wenner, J., White,
T. C., Cleland, A. N., and Martinis, J. M. (2013). Coherent Josephson qubit
suitable for scalable quantum integrated circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
080502.
34. Han, S., Lapointe, J., and Lukens, J. E. (1993). Thermally activated
barrier crossings in superconducting quantum interference devices. In
Activated Barrier Crossing, Fleming, G. R., and Hanggi, P., eds. (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore), pp. 241–267.
35. Likharev, K. K., and Semenov, V. K. (1991). RSFQ logic/memory family: a
new Josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency
digital systems. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 1, 3–28.
36. Maassen van den Brink, A. (2005). Hamiltonian for coupled ﬂux qubits.
Phys. Rev. B 71, 064503.
37. Harris, R., Berkley, A. J., Johnson, M. W., Bunyk, P., Govorkov, S., Thom,
M. C., Uchaikin, S., Wilson, A. B., Chung, J., Holtham, E., Biamonte, J. D.,
Smirnov, A. Y., Amin, M. H. S., and Maassen van den Brink, A. (2007).
Sign- and magnitude-tunable coupler for superconducting ﬂux qubits.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 177001.
38. Hime, T., Reichardt, P. A., Plourde, B. L. T., Robertson, T. L., Wu, C.-E.,
Ustinov, A. V., and Clarke, J. (2006). Solid-state qubits with current-
controlled coupling. Science 314, 1427–1429.
39. Castellano, M. G., Chiarello, F., Leoni, R., Simeone, D., Torrioli, G., Cosmelli,
C., and Carelli, P. (2005). Variable transformer for controllable ﬂux
coupling. Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 152504.
40. Harris, R., Lanting, T., Berkley, A. J., Johansson, J., Johnson, M. W., Bunyk,
P., Ladizinsky, E., Ladizinsky, N., Oh, T., and Han, S. (2009). Compound
Josephson-junction coupler for ﬂux qubits with minimal crosstalk. Phys.
Rev. B 80, 052506.
41. Johnson, M. W., Bunyk, P., Maibaum, F., Tolkacheva, E., Berkley, A.
J., Chapple, E. M., Harris, R., Johansson, J., Lanting, T., Perminov, I.,
Ladizinsky, E., Oh, T., and Rose, G. (2010). A scalable control system for a
superconducting adiabatic quantum optimization processor. Supercond.
Sci. Technol. 23, 065004.

356
Application in Adiabatic Quantum Annealing
42. Berkley, A. J., Johnson, M. W., Bunyk, P., Harris, R., Johansson, J., Lanting,
T., Ladizinsky, E., Tolkacheva, E., Amin, M. H. S., and Rose, G. (2010).
A scalable readout system for a superconducting adiabatic quantum
optimization system. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 105014.
43. Rønnow, T. F., Wang, Z., Job, J., Boixo, S., Isakov, S. V., Wecker, D., Martinis,
J. M., Lidar, D. A., and Troyer, M. (2014). Deﬁning and detecting quantum
speedup. Science 345, 420–424.
44. Lanting, T., Przybysz, A. J., Smirnov, A. Y., Spedalieri, F. M., Amin, M.
H., Berkley, A. J., Harris, R., Altomare, F., Boixo, S., Bunyk, P., Dickson,
N., Enderud, C., Hilton, J. P., Hoskinson, E., Johnson, M. W., Ladizinsky,
E., Ladizinsky, N., Neufeld, R., Oh, T., Perminov, I., Rich, C., Thom, M.
C., Tolkacheva, E., Uchaikin, S., Wilson, A. B., and Rose, G. (2014).
Entanglement in a quantum annealing processor. Phys. Rev. X 4, 021041.
45. Johnson, M. W., Amin, M. H. S., Gildert, S., Lanting, T., Hamze, F., Dickson,
N., Harris, R., Berkley, A. J., Johansson, J., Bunyk, P., Chapple, E. M.,
Enderud, C., Hilton, J. P., Karimi, K., Ladizinsky, E., Ladizinsky, N., Oh,
T., Perminov, I., Rich, C., Thom, M. C., Tolkacheva, E., Truncik, C. J. S.,
Uchaikin, S., Wang, J., Wilson, B., and Rose, G. (2011). Quantum annealing
with manufactured spins. Nature 473, 194–198.
46. Boixo, S., Albash, T., Spedalieri, F. M., Chancellor, N., and Lidar, D. A.
(2013). Experimental signature of programmable quantum annealing.
Nat. Commun. 4, 2067.
47. Boixo, S., Ronnow, T. F., Isakov, S. V., Wang, Z., Wecker, D., Lidar, D. A.,
Martinis, J. M., and Troyer, M. (2014). Evidence for quantum annealing
with more than one hundred qubits. Nat. Phys. 10, 218–224.
48. Amin, M. H. S., Love, P. J., and Truncik, C. J. S. (2008). Thermally assisted
adiabatic quantum computation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 060503–060504.
49. Kamleitner, I., Cresser, J., and Twamley, J. (2008). Adiabatic information
transport in the presence of decoherence. Phys. Rev. A 77, 032331–
032310.
50. Deng, Q., Averin, D. V., Amin, M. H., and Smith, P. (2013). Decoherence
induced deformation of the ground state in adiabatic quantum
computation. Sci. Rep. 3, 1479.
51. Dickson, N. G., Johnson, M. W., Amin, M. H., Harris, R., Altomare, F.,
Berkley, A. J., Bunyk, P., Cai, J., Chapple, E. M., Chavez, P., Cioata, F., Cirip,
T., deBuen, P., Drew-Brook, M., Enderud, C., Gildert, S., Hamze, F., Hilton,
J. P., Hoskinson, E., Karimi, K., Ladizinsky, E., Ladizinsky, N., Lanting,
T., Mahon, T., Neufeld, R., Oh, T., Perminov, I., Petroﬀ, C., Przybysz, A.,
Rich, C., Spear, P., Tcaciuc, A., Thom, M. C., Tolkacheva, E., Uchaikin, S.,
www.ebook3000.com

References
357
Wang, J., Wilson, A. B., Merali, Z., and Rose, G. (2013). Thermally assisted
quantum annealing of a 16-qubit problem. Nat. Commun. 4, 1903.
52. Simmonds, R. W., Lang, K. M., Hite, D. A., Nam, S., Pappas, D. P., and
Martinis, J. M. (2004). Decoherence in Josephson phase qubits from
junction resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 077003–077004.
53. Jordan, S. P., Farhi, E., and Shor, P. W. (2006). Error-correcting codes for
adiabatic quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 74, 052322–052325.
54. Lidar, D. A. (2008). Towards fault tolerant adiabatic quantum computa-
tion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 160506–160504.
55. Biamonte, J. D., and Love, P. J. (2008). Realizable Hamiltonians for
universal adiabatic quantum computers. Phys. Rev. A 78, 012352–
012357.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 10
Application to Josephson Voltage
Standards
J. Kohlmann
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Bundesallee 100,
38116 Braunschweig, Germany
johannes.kohlmann@ptb.de
As already mentioned in Chapter 2, Josephson junctions are, among
others, the basic element of Josephson voltage standards. This
chapter summarizes the development of modern Josephson voltage
standards, a development that is closely linked to the availability of
Josephson junctions made of refractory materials.
10.1 Introduction
The point of origin for Josephson voltage standards is located
in Josephson’s ﬁrst paper [1]. On the basis of the AC Josephson
eﬀect, Brian Josephson predicted that the irradiation of external
microwaves with frequency
f
can phase-lock the Josephson
oscillating current over a certain bias current range and thus can
generate constant-voltage steps Vn:
Vn = n · (h/2e) · f
(10.1)
Josephson Junctions: History, Devices, and Applications
Edited by Edward Wolf, Gerald Arnold, Michael Gurvitch, and John Zasadzinski
Copyright c⃝2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-47-5 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36452-0 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

360
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
where n denotes the integer step number (n = 1, 2, 3 ...), h is
Planck’s constant, and e is the elementary charge. All Josephson
voltage standards are based on this equation relating voltages to
frequencies, which can be ﬁnely controlled with high precision
and accurately referenced to atomic clocks. However, a single
Josephson junction operated on the ﬁrst-order constant-voltage step
generates a voltage of only 145 μV when irradiated by 70 GHz
microwaves. Highly integrated junction series arrays are therefore
needed to achieve practical output voltages of 1 V or even 10 V.
These series arrays consist of more than 10,000 or even 100,000
junctions. Advanced fabrication technologies are therefore required
for reliable fabrication processes of this huge number of junctions.
In addition, the use of durable materials for the fabrication is
absolutely necessary. The invention of the Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology
by Gurvitch et al. in 1983 [2] (cf. Chapter 5) and its adaption to
the fabrication of Josephson voltage standards [3] were a main
breakthrough in a reliable fabrication process for robust and durable
Josephson voltage standard circuits.
The area of applications for Josephson voltage standards have
been changed over years. For many years, Josephson voltage
standards have been used for DC applications. These conventional
Josephson voltage standards based on underdamped Josephson
junctions are commercially available since the mid-1990s. At this
time, the increasing interest in highly precise AC voltages stimulated
attempts to develop measurement tools based on Josephson
junction series arrays for AC applications. Diﬀerent attempts have
been suggested and partly realized. The main important ones
are programmable Josephson voltage standards based on binary
divided series arrays, pulse-driven series arrays and digital-to-
analog converters based on the dynamic logic of processing single-
ﬂux quanta (SFQ) (cf. [4]). The ﬁrst two versions are described more
detailed in this chapter (cf. Section 10.3), as most research activities
have been focused on these two and promising results have been
achieved.
This chapter describes the development of Josephson voltage
standards from conventional DC to modern AC standards focused
on refractory Josephson junctions based on the Nb/Al–Al2O3
technology and its enhancements for Josephson voltage standards.
www.ebook3000.com

Conventional DC Josephson Voltage Standards
361
Numerous review papers have been published in the course of
time covering diﬀerent topics of Josephson voltage standards; cf.
for example DC standards [5–8] and its underpinning physics
[9], the transition from DC to AC standards [10–15], the physics
underpinning AC standards [16], and an overview of the historical
developments [17].
10.2 Conventional DC Josephson Voltage
Standards
The development of conventional DC Josephson voltage standards
for output voltages up to 10 V was performed over a period of
about 25 years. Although Brian Josephson mentioned constant-
voltage steps in his ﬁrst paper [1], the use of Josephson junctions for
voltages standards was ﬁrst suggested and demonstrated by Taylor
et al. in 1967 [18]. At that time, the deployed junctions (weak links)
consisted of point contacts, microbridges, SNS or SIS junctions (S,
Superconductor; I, Insulator; N, Normal metal). For example, Taylor
et al. used Josephson junction made of Sn/Sn oxide/Sn operated at
10 GHz [18].
Within the next 15 years until the early 1980s, Josephson voltage
standards became more and more widespread. A few millivolts were
delivered by a single underdamped Josephson junction operated
on higher order constant-voltage steps at a microwave frequency
around 10 GHz. To increase the output voltage, series arrays of a
few individually biased Josephson junctions were used. An output
voltage of 100 mV was demonstrated by Endo et al. in 1983 using 20
Josephson tunnel junctions composed of Pb(In, Au)–oxide–Pb(Au)
[19].
The chapter of modern Josephson voltage standards was opened
by two novel ideas around 1980: First, Levinson et al. suggested in
1977 the use of zero-bias constant-voltage steps generated in highly
underdamped Josephson junctions operated at low microwave
power instead of the use of normal steps observed at high
microwave power used so far [20]. For the ﬁrst time series arrays
of Josephson junctions could be operated by a single bias source

362
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
only, because the current ranges of the constant-voltage steps do
overlap one another for small bias currents. Second, the series array
of Josephson junctions was embedded into an adapted microwave
transmission line (microstripline, cf. Fig. 2.9) as ﬁrst suggested by
the group at the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) in
Germany (cf. [21]). The Josephson junctions were arranged as part
of a periodic superconducting microstripline with low impedance
terminated by a matched load to avoid reﬂections and standing-
wave patterns. This integrated microwave circuit allows a series
connection of the Josephson junctions for the DC bias and a parallel
connection of several microstripline paths with respect to the
microwave drive and is still used to date for 70 GHz circuits in
both conventional and programmable Josephson voltage standards.
As more than 1000 Josephson junctions are already required for
1 V arrays, this progress is also intimately linked with signiﬁcant
improvements of the thin-ﬁlm technology, to enable the fabrication
of integrated circuits containing a large number of Josephson
junctions similar to procedures of semiconductor industry.
First, 1 V arrays consisting of 1474 SIS junctions were realized
within a cooperation between the National Bureau of Standards
(NBS; now National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST)
in the USA and the PTB by Niemeyer et al. in 1984 [22]. The
junctions for operation at 90 GHz were fabricated in lead/lead alloy
technology with the junction barrier made by RF sputter oxidation of
the base electrode. Another fabrication technology at that time was
based on Josephson junctions made of Nb/Nb2O5/PbBi (cf. [23]).
First 10 V arrays containing a further increased number of junctions
were realized within few years later [23, 24]. A crucial problem of
lead alloy circuits was its susceptibility to damage by humidity and
thermal cycling. In addition to the challenging fabrication process,
the circuits worked well only for a rather limited period. The main
breakthrough in a reliable process for fabrication of more robust and
durable circuits was the invention of the Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology
by Gurvitch et al. in 1983 [2] and its adaption to the fabrication of
Josephson voltage standards.
The Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology combines the use of the durable
and chemically stable metal Nb with the high critical temperature
of about 9.2 K, the outstanding covering of thin Al layers on Nb,
www.ebook3000.com

Conventional DC Josephson Voltage Standards
363
and the formation of a very homogeneous and stable oxide of Al
by thermal oxidation. The thickness of the oxide barrier is about
1 nm, that one of the superconductive layers more than 150 nm
and therefore roughly twice the superconducting penetration depth
at least, which ensures appropriate microwave behavior for the
superconducting microstriplines. For a reliable process, the trilayer
deﬁning the junctions is deposited as a sandwich structure without
breaking the vacuum. The adaptation of this process made possible
the fabrication of ﬁrst 1 V series arrays consisting of Nb/Al–
Al2O3/Nb Josephson junctions in 1986 [3]. Gradually, this process
was used for fabrication of 1 V and 10 V arrays [24]. Nowadays,
all series arrays for Josephson voltage standards are fabricated in
processes fundamentally based on the invention of the Nb/Al–Al2O3
technology.
These conventional Josephson voltage standards for operation
at 70 GHz became more and more widespread and are nowadays
operated in more than 50 labs worldwide for DC measurements (cf.
[6, 15]). Their widespread use has signiﬁcantly been supported by
the commercial availability of turn-key systems. Presently, two com-
panies oﬀer such DC systems: Hypres Inc., USA (www.hypres.com)
and Supracon AG, Germany (www.supracon.com).
10.2.1 Design: Demands and Targets for Conventional
Josephson Voltage Standards
As already discussed in Chapter 2.5, the dynamics of a Joseph-
son junction is often described using the resistively-capacitively-
shunted-junction (RCSJ) model ﬁrst proposed by Stewart and
McCumber in 1968 [25, 26]. Within this model, the real Josephson
junction is considered as a parallel shunting of an ohmic resistance
R, a capacitance C, and an ideal Josephson element. In the linear
approximation, the resonance frequency is given by the plasma fre-
quency fp = (e· jc/π·h·Cs)1/2 ( jc denotes the critical current density,
Cs = C/A the speciﬁc junction capacitance, and A the junction area).
Details of the behavior depend on the kind of junction, which can be
characterized by the dimensionless McCumber parameter βc = Q2
being equal to the square of the quality factor Q = 2β · fp · R · C of
the junction. Underdamped junctions with βc > 1 show a hysteretic

364
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
current–voltage characteristic, overdamped junctions with βc ≤1 a
nonhysteretic one.
Conventional DC Josephson voltage standards are based on
highly underdamped Josephson junctions typically realized by SIS
junctions in Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology. The hysteretic current–voltage
characteristic of these junctions caused two problems: (i) As the
steps are hysteretic, a particular step cannot be selected by a
simple manipulation of the DC bias. (ii) The junctions are likely to
switch from one constant-voltage step to another if noise disrupts
the phase-lock condition, which is the cause of the constant-
voltage steps. The ﬁrst problem was solved by appropriate bias
electronics. The second problem was got under control by carefully
optimising the design of the junctions and series arrays with respect
to the materials used for the Josephson junctions. The stability
requirements are in fact extreme, as was investigated by Kautz et
al. in the 1980s and summarized in review papers in 1987 [27] and
1996 [9].
Zero-bias constant-voltage steps are limited to voltages below
roughly half the gap voltage Vg, which typically results in output
voltages of 1 mV per junction at most for Nb-based Josephson
junctions. The microwave frequency for the operation of Josephson
junctions should be high, as has been proved by estimations of the
critical current density and further calculations of the activation
energy for loss of the phase lock performed by Kautz et al. (cf.
[27]). At present, most conventional DC Josephson voltage standards
are therefore operated at frequencies between 70 and 100 GHz,
a range where oscillators are available with an output power of
about 100 mW. For example, operation of the junctions at 70 GHz
corresponds to the 7th step for an output voltage of about 1 mV. For
large series arrays the junctions are typically operated on the 4th or
5th step on average, resulting in an output voltage of about 580 or
725 μ V per junction, respectively. This kept the number of junctions
required for a speciﬁc voltage level at an acceptable value for the
fabrication technology of that time.
When the microwave frequency and the junction materials have
been chosen, only three parameters must be adjusted to maximize
the stability of the phase lock and to assure the generation of stable
constant-voltage steps. These parameters are the critical current
www.ebook3000.com

Conventional DC Josephson Voltage Standards
365
density jc, the length l, and the width w of the junction, as was
described by Kautz et al. (cf. [27]).
The critical current density follows from the requirement that
the microwave frequency
f must be higher than the plasma
frequency fp of the junctions. Simulations by Kautz et al. (cf. [27])
have shown that the ratio f / fp should be at least ∼3. They regarded
the average time between phase slips induced by Johnson noise as
a measure of stability. The maximum value of the critical current
density is then given by
jc = ( f/3)2 · π · h · Cs/e
(10.2)
The limitations of the length l and the width w of the junction follow
from the requirement of spatial uniformity of the phase between the
superconductors. The optimum length eﬀects maximization of the
phase-lock stability (cf. [27]):
l = λJ · (3 jc/π · f · Cs · Vn)1/2
(10.3)
where λJ = {h/[4π · e · μ0 · jc · (d + λL1 + λL2)]}1/2 denotes the
Josephson penetration depth, μ0 the magnetic permeability of the
vacuum, d the barrier thickness, and λL1 and λL2 the London
penetration depth of the junction electrodes. The width of the
junction is limited to avoid excitation of Fiske resonances. This leads
to an upper limit of the width (cf. [27]):
w = (1/2 f ) · [μ0 · Cs · (d + λL1 + λL2)]−1/2
(10.4)
These equations deliver the following parameters for Josephson
junctions fabricated in Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology and operated at
70 GHz on the 5th step: jc = 42 A/cm2, l = 23 μm, w = 65 μm. The
design of Josephson series arrays was based on these parameters
with typical sizes of the Josephson junctions of 20 μm × 50 μm.
The critical current density was often further reduced to about
10 A/cm2, as the constant-voltage steps of these arrays were more
stable. Typical widths of the constant-voltage steps are between
20 and above 50 μA (cf. [6, 8]).
While real 1 V arrays typically consist of about 2000 Josephson
junctions, 10 V arrays contain between about 14,000 and 20,000
junctions (cf. [28–32]). An essential requirement for the design
of these large series arrays is the uniform microwave power

366
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
distribution over all junctions, in order to enable the generation of
wide and stable constant-voltage steps. The Josephson junctions of
most voltage standard circuits are embedded into a microstripline
with a low impedance around 5  (cf. Fig. 2.9). Another microwave
line was recently suggested and demonstrated for 10 V arrays
by Schubert et al., who integrated the Josephson junctions into a
coplanar stripline (CPS) with an impedance of 50  [33].
The microwave behavior of the SIS Josephson junctions embed-
ded into the microstripline is estimated using the RCSJ model. The
ohmic resistance Rn of SIS junctions in the subgap region is about
50 , while the impedance of the capacitive branch Z d = 1/(2π ·
f · C) is about 50 m for a junction capacitance of 50 pF. High-
frequency currents therefore ﬂow mainly capacitively, resulting
in a very low attenuation of the microwave power from about
1 dB/1000 junctions to 2 dB/1,000 junctions. A single branch of the
microstripline can therefore contain a lot of junctions (about 3500
junctions in the real PTB design [28]) without losing the uniform
microwave power distribution to all junctions. For 10 V arrays, the
microstripline is split in a few stages forming parallel branches for
the microwave; 10 V arrays typically consist of 4 to 16 parallel
branches (cf. [28–32]).
10.2.2 Fabrication Technology and Results for
Conventional Josephson Voltage Standards:
A Brief Survey
Circuits for Josephson voltage standards are nowadays fabricated
in processes fundamentally based on the Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology
[2, 28–32]. Standard silicon wafers (3 inch, 100 mm, or 150 mm
in diameter) are used as substrate for deposition of the diﬀerent
layers in thin-ﬁlm technology. The SIS structure for the Josephson
junctions is typically deposited in an in situ trilayer process without
breaking the vacuum. Sputtered Nb is used for the superconductive
layers with a thickness of typically above 150 nm, which is roughly
twice the superconducting penetration depth; the Nb layers are
therefore thick enough, to ensure appropriate microwave behavior.
A thin sputtered Al layer with a thickness of about 10 nm is
thermally oxidized to form the insulating layer of the SIS structure.
www.ebook3000.com

AC Josephson Voltage Standards
367
The required low critical current density of about 10 A/cm2
is achieved with a high oxygen exposure being the product of
oxygen pressure and oxidation time (e.g., 200 mbar O2, 18 h at
30◦C [8]). Most dielectric layers are realized by SiO2 typically
deposited by PECVD (plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition).
Lithography is mostly made optically and in some cases by electron
beam. The diﬀerent layers are patterned by adapted ﬂuorine-
based dry etching processes using CF4, SF6, or C4F8 for Nb and
CHF3 for SiO2. Sometimes O2 and/or Ar are added depending on
vertical or nonvertical sidewalls. The Al–Al2O3 layer is patterned
by physical sputter etching or ion beam etching sometimes in
combination with wet etching. The in situ trilayer process requires
an additional wiring layer for connecting neighboring junctions
by a window technology; this wiring layer is also made of Nb. A
careful cleaning of the surface of the Nb top electrode is required to
avoid additional weak links between both Nb layers. The dielectric
of the microstripline is typically formed by a SiO2 layer with a
thickness between about 1.5 and 2 μm. The groundplane of the
microstripline is made by Nb. The matched load for termination of
the microstripline is realized by a resistive metal layer, e.g., Pd or
AuPd.
Figure 10.1 shows the current voltage characteristics of a 10 V
array fabricated at PTB without and with irradiation of 70 GHz
microwaves. Arrays of this kind are nowadays operated as DC
voltage standards in more than 50 labs worldwide. Typical 10 V
Josephson voltage standards provide a combined uncertainty of a
few parts in 1010 to a few parts in 1011 for measurements at room
temperature [34, 35].
10.3 AC Josephson Voltage Standards
In spite of their successful operation, conventional DC Josephson
voltage standards suﬀer from two main drawbacks because of the
ambiguity of the constant-voltage steps: (i) It is not possible to
rapidly select a particular step. (ii) The steps are only semistable so
that electromagnetic interference can cause spontaneous switching
between steps. Therefore these Josephson voltage standards do

368
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
Figure 10.1
Current–voltage characteristic of a 10 V series array without
and with (inset) irradiation of 70 GHz microwaves. The series array
fabricated at PTB contains 13,924 SIS Josephson junctions. The inset
shows the range of zero-bias constant-voltage steps between –12 and 12 V
generated under microwave irradiation.
not enable systems that allow fast switching between diﬀerent
voltage levels or even generation of AC voltages. On the other hand,
highly precise AC voltages gained increasingly in importance in the
1990s. This interest stimulated the development of corresponding
measurement tools based on Josephson junctions. Two versions
have been suggested and demonstrated by the NIST group in the
USA, namely programmable Josephson voltage standards based
on binary-divided series arrays [36] and Josephson arbitrary
waveform synthesizers (JAWS) based on pulse-driven series arrays
[37]. Caused by diﬀerent operation principles, both versions have
advantages and limitations. Promising results have been achieved
using both versions that are described more detailed in this
section.
The limitations of conventional DC Josephson voltage standards
are mainly caused by the hysteretic current–voltage characteristic
of the underdamped SIS Josephson junctions resulting in overlap-
ping constant-voltage steps. AC Josephson voltage standards are
therefore based on overdamped Josephson junctions showing a
nonhysteretic current–voltage characteristic, which remains single-
valued under microwave irradiation. The constant-voltage steps
www.ebook3000.com

AC Josephson Voltage Standards
369
are consequently inherently stable and can rapidly be selected
by external biasing. The overdamped Josephson junctions are
typically realized using SNS or SINIS junctions (S, Superconductor;
I, Insulator; N: Normal metal). As all junctions are operated on
the same constant-voltage step (typically the ﬁrst-order one),
the number of junctions needed for 1 V or even 10 V arrays
have signiﬁcantly increased compared to conventional SIS arrays.
Depending on the drive frequency, 10 V circuits consist of nearly
70,000 junctions (70 GHz drive) [38] and about 265,000 junctions
(18 GHz drive) [39, 40], respectively. A signiﬁcantly improved
fabrication technology as well as sophisticated microwave designs
has been required for the successful development of these giant
series arrays.
Programmable Josephson voltage standards based on binary-
divided arrays are operated by a sinusoidal microwave drive. In
order to enable the generation of diﬀerent voltage levels, the
series array of junctions must be divided into segments. These
segments contain numbers of junctions belonging, e.g., to a binary
sequence of independently biased smaller arrays. Any integral
number of constant-voltage steps permitted by the sequence of
junctions can consequently be generated by these binary-divided
arrays, which are therefore often called programmable Josephson
voltage standards. The Josephson array is hence operated as
a multi-bit digital-to-analog (D/A) converter, which results in
some limitations, however. A major drawback is caused by the
transients between the constant-voltage steps. As the voltage is not
determined by the Josephson equation during the transition, the
transients signiﬁcantly contribute to the uncertainties. To reduce
these uncertainties, programmable Josephson voltage standards are
often operated using sampling measurement methods, which enable
diﬀerent applications of their very successful use as AC voltage
standards (cf. [12, 14]). However, as the spectra of synthesized
waveforms contain a lot of higher harmonics because of the
operation as a D/A converter, binary-divided arrays are not the best
choice for synthesizing AC waveforms.
A very successful method for synthesizing spectrally pure
waveforms is based on pulse-driven Josephson junctions [37]. The
junctions are operated by a train of short current pulses, the rate of

370
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
which varies with time. A high pulse repetition rate generates high
voltages; the voltage decreases with a decreasing pulse repetition
rate. Arbitrary waveforms can be synthesized by modulating the
pulse train using a commercial pulse pattern generator. Sometimes
this version of pulse-driven Josephson arrays is therefore called
Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer (JAWS). Spectrally pure
waveforms from a few hertz up to the megahertz range have been
demonstrated. For a long time, the output voltages were limited
to about 275 mV because of the complex operation principle. A
major breakthrough for pulse-driven series arrays was the demon-
stration of waveforms with RMS output voltages of 1 V in 2014
[41, 42].
10.3.1 Design: Demands and Targets for Overdamped
Josephson Junctions and Series Arrays
The demands for overdamped Josephson junctions used in AC
voltage standards partly diﬀer from that for underdamped junctions
used in conventional standards. The frequency range for best
operation of overdamped Josephson junctions is determined by
their dynamic characteristics. The most important parameter here is
the characteristic voltage Vc = Ic · Rn (Ic denotes the critical current
of the junction and Rn its normal state resistance). The characteristic
voltage is related to the characteristic frequency of the junction by
the Josephson equation: fc = (2e/h)·Vc = (2e/h)· Ic · Rn. Simulation
by Kautz showed that the frequency of the external microwave drive
should be near the characteristic frequency for best operation of the
Josephson junction, i.e., wide and stable constant-voltage steps at
moderate microwave power [16].
The series arrays of AC Josephson voltage standards are operated
in diﬀerent frequency ranges. The required microwave circuit
designs are based on three diﬀerent microwave lines. While low-
impedance microstriplines are typically used for operation at
70 GHz, Josephson arrays operated between 10 and 20 GHz are
mainly based on 50  coplanar waveguide transmission lines (CPW)
and 50  coplanar striplines (CPS). Microstriplines require a more
complex fabrication technology because of an additional ground
plane and a dielectric layer. On the other hand, they oﬀer excellent
www.ebook3000.com

AC Josephson Voltage Standards
371
transmission characteristics around 70 GHz and a simple splitting of
a single high-frequency line in two parallel ones.
The microwave behavior of overdamped Josephson junctions
embedded into a microstripline completely diﬀers from that of
underdamped Josephson junctions. Now, Rn and Z d are comparable
(about 50 m each), leading to a signiﬁcant dissipation of
the microwave current and thus to a signiﬁcant attenuation of the
microwave power of about 50 dB/1000 junctions (cf. [14]). The
high attenuation is, however, compensated in part by an active
contribution of the junctions; the junctions act as oscillators. 1 V
series arrays for 70 GHz operation realized at PTB consist of 8192
junctions arranged in 64 parallel microwave branches with 128
junctions each. For 10 V arrays, up to 582 junctions each are
embedded into 128 parallel microwave branches resulting in 69,632
junctions altogether (cf. [14, 43]).
The microwave behavior is completely diﬀerent when the
overdamped Josephson junctions are embedded into a 50  CPW
or CPS. Now, the large ratio of the impedance of the 50  line to
the low junction impedance of about 50 m leads to conditions,
which are similar to that of the microstripline for conventional SIS
arrays: the attenuation of the microwave power is low, because
the junctions are loosely linked to the CPW or CPS, respectively.
The integration of many junctions in a single microwave path is
therefore possible. Typical numbers for 1 V (10 V) arrays realized
at NIST are 8 (32) branches containing 4096 (8400) junctions
each, resulting in 32,768 (265,116) junctions altogether (cf. [39,
44]). To ensure a homogeneous microwave power distribution along
8400 junctions in each branch, the microwave design was further
improved including tapered CPWs and modiﬁed power dividers at
the splitter stages (cf. [39]).
While chaos can occur in underdamped junctions, it is sup-
pressed in overdamped junctions so that the limitations for their
sizes are less strict. Typical junction sizes are between a few
μm and a few tens of μm. Critical current densities between
some kA/cm2 and a few 10 kA/cm2 result in critical currents of
some mA up to nearly 10 mA and step widths of several mA (cf.
[10–16]).

372
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
10.3.2 Realization of Binary-Divided Josephson Voltage
Standards
Diﬀerent kinds of Josephson junctions have been investigated
for programmable Josephson voltage standards. For the proof-of-
concept experiment, Hamilton et al. at NIST used 2048 junctions of
an array containing 8192 externally shunted SIS junctions operated
at 75 GHz and delivering DC voltages up to about 300 mV and
AC voltages in the kHz range at ±77 mV with 150 μV resolution.
As design restrictions of externally shunted SIS junctions limit
the critical current and consequently the step width to a few
hundred microamperes, other junction types have subsequently
been investigated. The ﬁnal breakthrough for programmable voltage
standards was enabled by the implementation of SNS junctions
by Benz in 1995 [45] on the basis of calculations by Kautz [16].
However, the resistivity of most normal metals is very low, so
that the required characteristic voltage is not achieved. Only a few
metals, binary alloys, or other materials show a resistivity that
results in a characteristic voltage of about 30 μV, which allows an
operation around 15 GHz.
The ﬁrst practical 1 V arrays were realized by Benz et al. at NIST
in 1997 [44]. A total of 32,768 SNS junctions containing PdAu as
the normal metal were embedded into the middle of a CPW with an
impedance of 50 . Under microwave operation at 16 GHz, the width
of the constant-voltage steps exceeded 1 mA. Diﬀerent materials
have been subsequently investigated and used for the normal metal
of SNS junctions, for example AuPd [44], Ti [46], TiNx [40], or MoSi2
[47]. The superconducting layers of these SNS junctions are typically
made by Nb.
The low drive frequency around 16 GHz requires roughly
32,000 Josephson junctions to achieve 1 V and even about 300,000
Josephson junctions for 10 V, which causes enormous challenges for
the microwave design and the fabrication technology. In order to
decrease the number of junctions needed for a speciﬁc voltage, the
operation frequency has to be increased, which requires junctions
with a higher characteristic voltage. A promising approach for
operation at 70 GHz like conventional Josephson voltage standards
was the use of SINIS junctions (Nb/Al2O3/Al/Al2O3/Nb) by Schulze
www.ebook3000.com

AC Josephson Voltage Standards
373
et al. at PTB in 1998 [48]. The fabrication is comparable to that
of conventional SIS junctions with slight oxidation processes of the
Al layers. 1 V and ﬁrst 10 V arrays containing 8192 and 69,120
SINIS junctions, respectively, were subsequently fabricated [49, 50],
and later signiﬁcantly improved for AC applications [51]. The SINIS
junctions are embedded into low-impedance microstriplines as
SIS junctions. Because of the microwave behavior of overdamped
Josephson junctions, the number of parallel branches was increased
to 64 (1 V) and 128 branches (10 V), respectively. In spite of
their successful operation, a serious drawback of SINIS junctions is
their sensitivity to particular steps in the fabrication process often
resulting in a very few shorted junctions of a SINIS series array
(typically between 0 and 2 of 10,000 junctions) probably caused by
the very thin insulating oxide barriers (cf. [52]).
In search of other materials showing a high resistivity, a new
type of junction has increasingly gained in importance recently: its
barrier consists of a semiconductor such as Si doped with a metal
and being near a metal insulator transition [53]. Although these
junctions mainly behave like SNS junctions, their characteristics are
more determined by the semiconductor and its interfaces to the
superconductive layers. A promising version of these junctions for
Josephson voltage standards was ﬁrst realized by an amorphous
Si barrier doped with Nb at NIST in 2006 [53]. Nb and Si are co-
sputtered from two sputter targets; the Nb content is varied by
adjusting the power for sputtering. If the niobium content x is tuned
to a value near the metal–insulator transition around 11.5% [54],
NbxSi1−x barriers with a thickness between 10 and 30 nm combine
a high resistance and a suﬃcient conductivity.
The characteristic voltage of these NbxSi1−x barrier junctions
can be tuned over a wide range for operation from 15 GHz to
more than 70 GHz by adjusting the Nb content between about
20% and 11%. To increase the integration density of large series
arrays and thus to reduce the size of the circuits, double- and
triple-stacked junctions have been successfully realized. Instead of
an SNS trilayer, multilayers of SNsNS or SNsNsNS are deposited
as sandwich structures without breaking the vacuum (s denotes
a thin superconducting layer with a thickness of about 30 nm)
[38–40].

374
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
Burroughs et al. demonstrated 10 V arrays containing three-
junction stacks with 268,800 NbxSi1−x barrier junctions arranged
in 32 parallel branches (CPW) with an improved microwave design
for operation near 20 GHz in 2009 [55]. After further improvements,
10 V arrays containing 265,116 triple-stacked junctions showed step
widths up to about 2 mA [39]. While pure metallic SNS junctions are
not suitable for operation at 70 GHz, NbxSi1−x barrier junctions also
allowed the fabrication of 10 V arrays for operation at 70 GHz, as
ﬁrst demonstrated by Mueller et al. in 2008 within a cooperation
between NIST and PTB [52]. Some 10 V arrays consisting of 69,632
junctions embedded into a microstripline were realized without
any shorted junction, an array quality which had never been
achieved with SINIS junctions. Step widths above 1 mA for 10 V
arrays have been achieved. Figure 10.2 shows the current–voltage
characteristics of a 10 V array fabricated at PTB. Using double-
stacked junctions, ﬁrst series arrays delivering output voltages of
20 V have also been realized [38].
The fabrication process for NbxSi1−x barrier junctions is similar
to that of conventional Josephson voltage standards except the
deposition of the barrier. NbxSi1−x barrier junctions currently
enable the most reliable technology for AC Josephson voltage
standards. A junction yield analysis by Fox et al. conﬁrmed the high
quality of this technology; the average number of defects per million
junctions was 32.5 considering series arrays from 9 wafers with
a total of 25,346,652 junctions corresponding to a total average
junction yield of 99.9967% [39].
Some other kinds of junctions have been also investigated over
the years. An approach for operation in a cryocooler at 10 K is
based on NbN for the superconductive layers and TiN for the barrier.
Although the large magnetic penetration depth of NbN limited the
width of the constant-voltage steps [56], an output voltage up to
17 V was demonstrated by Yamamori et al. using an array containing
about 524,000 JJs operated at 18 GHz [40]. Other versions for
70 GHz operation are based on Josephson junctions fabricated in
Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology. Output voltages up to 1 V were achieved
by Lacquaniti et al. using 8192 SNIS junctions based on a slightly
oxidized thick Al layer (up to 100 nm) as the barrier [57]. Externally
shunted SIS junctions have been already used for the ﬁrst realization
www.ebook3000.com

AC Josephson Voltage Standards
375
Figure 10.2
Current–voltage characteristics of a 10 V Josephson array
without (grey) and with (black) microwave irradiation at a frequency of
71 GHz. The width of the constant-voltage step exceeds 1 mA. The series
array consists of 69,632 NbxSi1−x barrier Josephson junctions.
of a binary-divided array by Hamilton et al. [36]; later, Hassel
et al. developed a series array of 3315 junctions that delivered an
output voltage up to 1 V when operated on the third-order step
[58]. As design restrictions limits the critical current of externally
shunted SIS junctions and consequently the widths of the constant-
voltage steps, other junction types as NbxSi1−x barrier junctions are
nowadays widely used for AC Josephson voltage standards.
10.3.3 Realization of Pulse-Driven Josephson Voltage
Standards
A direct modulation of the output voltage by simply changing
the frequency of an external sinusoidal microwave drive over
a wide frequency range is not possible, as the constant-voltage
steps nearly disappear, when the junctions are not operated
near the characteristic voltage (cf. [16, 37]). The operation of
Josephson junctions by a train of short current pulses, however,
enables that the variation of the external drive over time (i.e.,
the pulse repetition frequency) directly generates voltages that
vary over time. The width of the constant-voltage steps remains

376
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
nearly independent from the pulse repetition frequency between
zero and the characteristic frequency, if rise and fall time of the
pulses are short compared to the characteristic frequency (10 GHz
corresponds to 100 ps) (cf. [37]). These pulse-driven Josephson
junctions allow the synthesis of spectrally pure arbitrary waveforms
and are therefore of particular importance for high-precision AC
measurements.
Diﬀerent kinds of Josephson junctions have also been investi-
gated for these pulse-driven Josephson voltage standards suggested
and ﬁrst demonstrated by Benz and Hamilton at NIST in 1996
[37]. For the proof-of-concept experiment, an array of 512 SNS
junctions with a AuPd barrier was operated by unipolar pulses
delivering constant-voltage steps up to 265 μV. The junctions were
placed along the center conductor of a 50  CPW, which assure
a broadband performance required for the transmission of the
broadband frequency components of the pulse train. Continuous
enhancements of both the measurement setup as well as the
Josephson series arrays gradually improved the spectra of the
synthesized signals and increased the output voltages (cf. [11, 12,
14, 15]). The overdamped Josephson junctions now operated at
clock frequencies around 15 GHz have been predominately realized
by SNS junctions based on diﬀerent materials for the barrier such as
AuPd [37], HfTi [59], or NbxSi1−x [41, 42, 60]. SINIS junctions have
also been used for some time [61, 62].
The complex pulse operation presently requires one pulse
source for each single array; a simple splitting into several parallel
microwave branches is not possible. As typical commercial pulse
pattern generators contain only two output channels, only two
series arrays could be operated, which limited for a long time
the maximum output voltage to about 275 mV by operation of
two arrays containing 6400 NbxSi1−x barrier junctions each [60].
A major breakthrough for pulse-driven series arrays was the
demonstration of 1 V waveforms in 2014 by the groups at NIST and
at PTB [41, 42]. Novel pulse pattern generators with four or even
eight output channels allowed the simultaneous operation of four or
eight arrays containing altogether about 51,000 or 63,000 NbxSi1−x
barrier junctions, respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

Conclusions
377
Figure 10.3
Frequency spectrum of a synthesized sine wave (inset) with
an RMS output voltage of 1 V at a frequency of 250 Hz. Higher harmonics
are suppressed by more than 120 dB. The sine wave is synthesized using 8
Josephson arrays consisting of 63,000 NbxSi1−x barrier Josephson junctions
in total (cf. [42]).
The pulse train for operation of the Josephson arrays is typically
created by use of a ﬁrst- or second-order sigma-delta modulation
(cf. [11, 14]). This procedure reduces the digitization harmonics
at low frequencies and shifts the noise to high frequencies; noise
contributions are then removed by appropriate ﬁltering. Josephson
arbitrary waveform synthesizers enable the synthesis of spectrally
pure waveforms with higher harmonics suppressed by more than
120 dB [41, 63]. Its accuracy at 1 V has been evaluated with
an AC quantum voltmeter demonstrating an excellent agreement
between both quantum standards of better than 1 part in 108 with
an uncertainty of 1.2 parts in 108 (k = 1) for measurements at a
frequency of 250 Hz [63]. As an example from the PTB, Fig. 10.3
shows a synthesized sine wave with an RMS output voltage of 1 V
and the corresponding frequency spectrum.
10.4 Conclusions
Josephson voltage standards are nowadays well established as
an important application of the Josephson eﬀects for voltage
measurements at ultimate precision. A long time of developments
was needed to progress from single Josephson junctions delivering
a few millivolts at most to highly integrated series arrays containing
thousands of Josephson junctions for output voltages of more than

378
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
10 V. Conventional 10 V DC Josephson voltage standards with SIS
junctions fabricated in Nb/Al–Al2O3 technology are commercially
available since two decades. Binary-divided and pulse-driven series
arrays based on NbxSi1−x barrier Josephson junctions opened up
the world of AC applications and, hence, have been the next step
in the exciting story of the applications of the Josephson eﬀects in
metrology. Pulse-driven and binary-divided series arrays containing
up to 300,000 junctions have been demonstrated for output voltages
up to 1 V and 10 V or even 20 V, respectively. Their use as AC
Josephson voltage standards is increasingly gained in importance
currently. Advanced fabrication technologies and their permanent
improvements have been essential prerequisites for this remarkable
progress. The use of durable materials as Nb instead of susceptible
materials has also played an important role in the fascinating story
of Josephson voltage standards.
Acknowledgments
The developments described in this chapter are a result of many
researchers. I would like to thank Ralf Behr, Oliver Kieler, the
whole Josephson voltage standard team at PTB, and national
and international colleagues in this ﬁeld for many discussions,
comments, and support. The work has been also supported in part
within national and international research projects.
References
1. Josephson, B. D. (1962). Possible new eﬀects in superconductive
tunnelling. Phys. Lett. 1, 251–253.
2. Gurvitch, M., Washington, W. A., and Huggins, H. A. (1983). High quality
refractory Josephson tunnel junctions utilizing thin aluminium layers.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 42, 472–474.
3. Niemeyer, J., Sakamoto, Y., Vollmer, E., Hinken, J. H., Shoji, A., Nak-
agawa, H., Takada, S., and Kosaka, S. (1986). Nb/Al-oxide/Nb and
NbN/MgO/NbN tunnel junctions in large series arrays for voltage
standards. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 25, L343–L345.
www.ebook3000.com

References
379
4. Semenov, V. K., and Polyakov, Yu. A. (2001). Circuit improvements for a
voltage multiplier. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, 550–553.
5. Niemeyer, J. (1998). Josephson voltage standards. In Handbook of
Applied Superconductivity, Seeber, B., ed. (IOP, Bristol, UK), pp. 1813–
1834.
6. Hamilton, C. A. (2000). Josephson voltage standards. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
71, 3611–3623.
7. Yoshida, H. (2000). Application of the ac Josephson eﬀect for precise
measurements. IEICE Trans. Electron. E83-C, 20–26.
8. Kohlmann, J., Behr, R., and Funck, T. (2003). Josephson voltage
standards. Meas. Sci. Technol. 14, 1216–1228.
9. Kautz, R. L. (1996). Noise, chaos, and the Josephson voltage standard.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 59, 935–992.
10. Benz, S. P., and Hamilton, C. A. (2004). Application of the Josephson
eﬀect to voltage metrology. Proc. IEEE 92, 1617–1629.
11. Jeanneret, B., and Benz, S. P. (2009). Application of the Josephson eﬀect
in electrical metrology. Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 172, 181–206.
12. Benz, S. (2010). Synthesizing accurate voltages with superconducting
quantum-based standards. IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag. 13, 8–13.
13. Kaneko, N., Maruyama, M., Urano, C., and Kiryu, S. (2012). Review
of Josephson waveform synthesis and possibility of new operation
method by multibit delta-sigma modulation and thermometer code for
its further advancement. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 010116 (7 pp).
14. Behr, R., Kieler, O., Kohlmann, J., M¨uller, F., and Palafox, L. (2012).
Development and metrological applications of Josephson arrays at PTB.
Meas. Sci. Technol. 23, 124002 (19 pp).
15. Kohlmann, J. (2015). Quantum standards for voltage. In Applied
Superconductivity - Handbook on Devices and Applications, Seidel, P., ed.
(Wiley-VCH, Berlin, Germany), pp. 807–827.
16. Kautz, R. L. (1995). Shapiro steps in large-area metallic-barrier
Josephson junctions. J. Appl. Phys. 78, 5811–5819.
17. Harris, R. E., and Niemeyer, J. (2011). Quantum metrology. In 100 Years
of Superconductivity, Rogalla, H., and Kes, P., eds. (Taylor & Francis, Boca
Raton, FL, USA), pp. 515–557.
18. Taylor, B. N., Parker, W. H., Langenberg, D. N., and Denenstein, A.
(1967). On the use of the ac Josephson eﬀect to maintain standards of
electromotive force. Metrologia 3, 89–98.

380
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
19. Endo, T., Koyanagi, M., and Nakamura, A. (1983). High-accuracy
Josephson potentiometer. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 32, 267–271.
20. Levinson, M. T., Chiao, R. Y., Feldman, M. J., and Tucker, B. A. (1977). An
inverse ac Josephson eﬀect voltage standard. Appl. Phys. Lett. 31, 776–
778.
21. Niemeyer, J. (2011). How the DC array standards were developed. In 100
Years of Superconductivity, Rogalla, H., and Kes, P., eds. (Taylor & Francis,
Boca Raton, FL, USA), pp. 528–535.
22. Niemeyer, J., Hinken, J. H., and Kautz, R. L. (1984). Microwave-induced
constant-voltage steps at one volt from a series array of Josephson
junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett. 45, 478–480.
23. Lloyd, F., Hamilton, C. A., Beall, J., Go, D., Ono, R. H., and Harris, R. E.
(1987). A Josephson array voltage standard at 10 V. IEEE Electron Device
Lett. 8, 449–450.
24. P¨opel, R., Niemeyer, J., Fromknecht, R., Meier, W., and Grimm, L. (1990).
1- and 10-V series array Josephson voltage standards in Nb/Al2O3/Nb
technology. J. Appl. Phys. 68, 4294–4303.
25. Stewart, W. C. (1968). Current-voltage characteristics of Josephson
junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 12, 277–280.
26. McCumber, D. E. (1968). Eﬀect of ac impedance on dc voltage-current
characteristics of superconductor weak-link junctions. J. Appl. Phys. 39,
3113–3118.
27. Kautz, R. L., Hamilton, C. A., and Lloyd, F. L. (1987). Series-array
Josephson voltage standards. IEEE Trans. Mag. MAG-23, 883–890.
28. M¨uller, F., P¨opel, R., Kohlmann, J., Niemeyer, J., Meier, W., Weimann, T.,
Grimm, L., D¨unschede, F.-W., and Gutmann, P. (1997). Optimized 1 V and
10 V Josephson series arrays. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 46, 229–232.
29. Hamilton, C. A., and Burroughs, C. J. (1995). Perfomance and reliability
of NIST 10-V Josephson arrays. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 44, 238–240.
30. Endo, T., Sakamoto, Y., Murayama, Y., Iwasa, A., and Yoshida, H. (1995).
1-V Josephson-junction-array voltage standard and development of 10-
V Josephson junction array at ETL. IEICE Trans. Electron. E78-A, 503–
510.
31. Radparvar, M. (1995). Superconducting niobium and niobium nitride
processes for medium-scale integration applications. Cryogenics 35,
535–540.
32. Meyer, H.-G., Wende, G., Fritzsch, L., Thrum, F., Schubert, M., M¨uller, F.,
Behr, R., and Niemeyer, J. (1999). Improved primary Josephson voltage
www.ebook3000.com

References
381
standard with a new microwave driving source. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond. 9, 4150–4153.
33. Schubert, M., May, T., Wende, G., Fritzsch, L., and Meyer, H.-G. (2001).
Coplanar strips for Josephson voltage standard circuits. Appl. Phys. Lett.
79, 1009–1011.
34. Wood, B., and Solve, S. (2009). A review of Josephson comparison
results. Metrologia 46, R13–R20.
35. BIPM database [Online]. Available at: http://kcdb.bipm.org.
36. Hamilton, C. A., Burroughs, C. J., and Kautz, R. L. (1995). Josephson D/A
converter with fundamental accuracy. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 44,
223–225.
37. Benz, S. P., and Hamilton, C. A. (1996). A pulse-driven programmable
Josephson voltage standard. Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 3171–3173.
38. M¨uller, F., Scheller, T., Wendisch, R., Behr, R., Kieler, O., Palafox, L., and
Kohlmann, J. (2013). NbSi barrier junctions tuned for metrological
applications up to 70 GHz: 20 V arrays for programmable Josephson
voltage standards. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 23, 1101005 (5 pp).
39. Fox, A. E., Dresselhaus, P. D., R¨ufenacht, A., Sanders, A., and Benz, S.
P. (2015). Junction yield analysis for 10 V programmable Josephson
voltage standard devices. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 25, 1101505
(5 pp).
40. Yamamori, H., Yamada, T., Sasaki, H., and Shoji, A. (2008). 10 V
programmable Josephson voltage standard circuit with a maximum
output voltage of 20 V. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 21, 105007 (6 pp).
41. Benz, S. P., Waltman, S. B., Fox, A. E., Dresselhaus, P. D., R¨ufenacht, A.,
Howe, L., Schwall R. E., and Flowers-Jacobs, N. E. (2015). Performance
improvements for the NIST 1 V Josephson arbitrary waveform synthe-
sizer. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 25, 1400105 (5 pp).
42. Kieler, O. F., Behr, R., Wendisch, R., Bauer, S., Palafox, L., and Kohlmann, J.
(2015). Towards a 1 V Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond. 25, 1400305 (5 pp).
43. M¨uller, F., Scheller, T., Lee, J., Behr, R., Palafox, L., Schubert, M., and
Kohlmann, J. (2014). Microwave design and performance of PTB 10
V circuits for the programmable Josephson voltage standard. World J.
Condens. Matter Phys. 4, 107–122.
44. Benz, S. P., Hamilton, C. A., Burroughs, C. J., Harvey, T. E., and Christian,
L. A. (1997). Stable 1-Volt programmable voltage standard. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 71, 1866–1868.

382
Application to Josephson Voltage Standards
45. Benz, S. P. (1995). Superconductor-normal-superconductor junctions
for programmable voltage standards. Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 2714–2716.
46. Schubert, M., Fritzsch, L., Wende, G., and Meyer, H.-G. (2001). SNS
junction on Nb-Ti base for microwave circuits. IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond. 11, 1066–1069.
47. Chong, Y., Burroughs, C. J., Dresselhaus, P. D., Hadacek, N., Yamamori,
H., and Benz, S. P. (2015). Practical high-resolution programmable
Josephson voltage standards using double- and triple-stacked MoSi2-
barrier junctions. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 15, 461–464.
48. Schulze, H., Behr, R., M¨uller, F., and Niemeyer, J. (1998). Nb/Al/AlOx/
Al/AlOx/Al/Nb Josephson junctions for programmable voltage stan-
dards. Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 996–998.
49. Behr, R., Schulze, H., M¨uller, F., Kohlmann, J., and Niemeyer, J. (1999).
Josephson arrays at 70 GHz for conventional and programmable voltage
standards. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 48, 270–273.
50. Schulze, H., Behr, R., Kohlmann, J., M¨uller, F., and Niemeyer, J. (2000). De-
sign and fabrication of 10 V SINIS Josephson arrays for programmable
voltage standards. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 13, 1293–1295.
51. M¨uller, F., Behr, R., Palafox, L., Kohlmann, J., Wendisch, R., and Krasnop-
olin, I. (2007). Improved 10 V SINIS series arrays for applications in ac
voltage metrology. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 17, 649–652.
52. Mueller, F., Behr, R., Weimann, T., Palafox, L., Olaya, D., Dresselhaus, P.
D., and Benz, S. P. (2009). 1 V and 10 V SNS programmable voltage
standards for 70 GHz. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 19, 981–986.
53. Baek, B., Dresselhaus, P. D., and Benz, S. P. (2006). Co-sputtered
amorphous NbxSi1−x barriers for Josephson-junction circuits. IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond. 16, 1966–1970.
54. Hertel, G., Bishop, D. J., Spencer, E. G. Rowell, J. M., and Dynes, R. C.
(1983). Tunneling and transport measurements at the metal-insulator
transition of amorphous Nb:Si. Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 743–746.
55. Burroughs, C. J., R¨ufenacht, A., Dresselhaus, P. D., Benz, S. P., and Elsbury,
M. M. (2009). A 10 Volt “turnkey” programmable Josephson voltage
standard for DC and stepwise-approximated waveforms. NCSLI Meas. 4,
70–75.
56. Yamamori, H., Urano, C., Maruyama, M., Sasaki, H., and Kohjiro, S. (2010).
Large constant voltage generated with a single array including 65?536
Nb/TiN/Nb Josephson junctions. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 075011
(5 pp).
www.ebook3000.com

References
383
57. Lacquaniti, V., De Leo, N., Fretto, M., Sosso, A., M¨uller, F., and Kohlmann, J.
(2011). 1 V programmable voltage standards based on SNIS Josephson
junction series arrays. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 24, 045004 (4 pp).
58. Hassel, J., Helist¨o, P. Gr¨onberg, L., Sepp¨a, H., Nissil¨a, J., and Kemppinen, A.
A. (2005). Stimulated power generation in ES-SIS junction arrays. IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 54, 632–635.
59. Hagedorn, D., Kieler, O., Dolata, R., Behr, R., M¨uller, F., Kohlmann,
J., and Niemeyer, J. (2006). Modiﬁed fabrication of planar sub-μm
superconductor-normal metal-superconductor Josephson junctions for
use in a Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer. Supercond. Sci.
Technol. 19, 294–298.
60. Benz, S. P., Dresselhaus, P. D., R¨ufenacht, A., Bergren, N. F., Kinard, J.
R., and Landim, R. P. (2009). Progress toward a 1 V pulse-driven ac
Josephson voltage standard. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 58, 838–843.
61. Kohlmann, J., M¨uller, F., Behr, R., Hagedorn, D., Kieler, O., Palafox, L., and
Niemeyer, J. (2006). Development of Josephson junction series arrays
for synthesis of ac voltages and arbitrary waveforms. J. Phys. Conf. Ser.
43, 1385–1388.
62. Urano, C., Maruyama, M., Kaneko, N., Yamamori, Y., Shoji, A., Maezawa, M.,
Hashimoto, Y., Suzuki, H., Nagasawa, S., Satoh, T., Hidaka, M., and Kiryu, S.
(2009). Operation of a Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer with
optical data input. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 22, 114012 (4 pp).
63. Behr, R., Kieler, O., Lee, J., Bauer, S., Palafox, L., and Kohlmann, J. (2015).
Direct comparison of a 1 V Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer
and an ac quantum voltmeter. Metrologia 52, 528–537.

www.ebook3000.com

Index
absorption 208, 215, 226,
307–309, 311
AC applications 360, 373, 378
AC Josephson voltage
standards 367–378
acoustic waves 213, 215,
218–219, 221
AC voltages 360, 368, 372
AC voltage standards 369–370
adiabatic quantum annealing
(AQA) 331–332, 334–336,
338, 340, 342, 344, 346, 348,
350, 352
adiabatic quantum computing
(AQC) 334, 348, 352
ALMA, see Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter
Array
AlN tunnel barrier 147, 194, 196,
199, 206, 216
ampliﬁers 222, 282–283,
285–286, 288, 291
amplitude 218–219, 278, 280,
306, 313
Anderson theorem 76–77
applications
contemporary Josephson
junction 35
current sensing 251, 261, 265
nonlatching logic 163
superconductive electronics
148
AQA, see adiabatic quantum
annealing
AQC, see adiabatic quantum
computing
arbitrary waveform
synthesizer 368, 370, 377
architecture, scalable 332, 346
Arnold model 50, 52–54, 57
Arnold theory 53–54, 56, 58–59,
62
arrays, binary-divided 369, 375
Atacama Large Millimeter/
submillimeter Array (ALMA)
167
barrier thickness 19–20, 163, 165,
365
eﬀective junction 20
base electrode 33, 95, 104, 107,
109, 112, 114, 120, 128, 134,
149, 189, 362
base Nb electrode 186–188
base pressure 51–52, 93, 194, 351
BCS coherence length 68–69, 71,
76
Berlin magnetically shielded room
(BMSR) 295–297
biomagnetic applications 140,
274, 294, 296
biomagnetism 245, 291–293, 295,
316
BMSR, see Berlin magnetically
shielded room
bound state 50, 53–54, 57–58,
71–72
coherent 53

386
Index
bound state region 73, 76
CCC, see cryogenic current
comparator
chemical–mechanical polishing
(CMP) 152–153
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
155, 159, 367
circuits, epitaxial superconducting
NbN junction 157
CMP, see chemical–mechanical
polishing
coherence, global 349–350
coherence time 347–348, 351
long 337
coil sizes 297, 299–300
constant-voltage steps 215,
361–362, 364–365, 367–369,
372, 374–376
stable 364, 366, 370
control lines, integrated 205, 207
converter, current-to-voltage
277–278
counterelectrode 53, 55–56, 104,
107, 131, 137, 147
coupled ﬂux qubits 342
couplers 332, 342–345, 352
inter-qubit 346
coupling constant 123, 268–269,
271, 305
critical current densities 2, 29–31,
34, 130, 165, 195, 205, 216,
251, 363–365, 371
critical currents 132, 247, 250,
341–342, 371
critical temperature 18, 32–33,
149, 156, 188
cryogenic current comparator
(CCC) 291, 303–306
CSNT, see current-sensing noise
thermometer
current ampliﬁer, ultrastable
low-noise 306
current bias 40–41, 172, 265, 283,
286, 289
current density 34, 132, 160, 163,
194, 196, 198–202
current feedback 265, 269–270,
285, 287–290, 298
current ﬂuctuations, critical 255,
276
current noise 253, 261, 266,
281–282, 284, 288, 306, 309,
314
current-sensing noise
thermometer (CSNT)
301–302
current sensors 261, 264,
269–272, 274, 297–298,
301–302, 305, 309–316
CVD, see chemical vapor deposition
damping, resonance 253, 267
DC magnetron sputtering 156,
187, 194, 200
detectors 157, 291, 307–308,
310–313
dewar 272, 295–296, 299–300
double-side-band (DSB) 167, 193,
226–227
DSB, see double-side-band
eﬃcient rapid single-ﬂux quantum
(ERSFQ) 103, 168, 172
electron pairs 5, 7–8
energy gap 6, 19, 41, 49, 60, 78,
99, 161, 163, 166, 188, 191,
334
entanglement 348–350, 352
ERSFQ, see eﬃcient rapid
single-ﬂux quantum
excess ﬂux noise 255, 289
excess noise 250, 253, 288, 292
www.ebook3000.com

Index
387
FD, see frequency discriminator
feedback coil 262–263, 277, 283,
286, 289–290
feedback loop 278–279, 303
FFO, see ﬂux ﬂow oscillators
phase-locked 212, 215, 231,
233
FFO frequencies 209–210,
217–218, 220, 226, 228
ﬁeld sensitivity 251, 260, 264,
275, 293
Fiske step (FS) 131, 211, 213, 219,
221
FLL, see ﬂux-locked loop
FLL dynamics 277–279
ﬂux ﬂow oscillators (FFO)
204–209, 211, 216, 219–223,
225–226, 231, 233
ﬂux-locked loop (FLL) 276–280
ﬂux noise 63, 252, 255, 260–261,
264, 292
ﬂux quantisation 4–5
ﬂux quantum 11, 19–20, 102, 248,
251, 276
ﬂux qubits 338, 340–342,
344–345, 349
scalable 332, 341
tunable 341–342
frequency discriminator (FD) 211,
214, 313
FS, see Fiske step
gate-model quantum computing
(GMQC) 332–334, 336,
347–349, 352
Giaever junctions 109–110
GMQC, see gate-model quantum
computing
gradiometers 273–275, 296
ﬁrst-order 263, 271–273, 299
ground state quantum computing
334, 337, 348–349, 352
harmonic mixer (HM) 207, 210,
216, 218, 223–225, 233
HM, see harmonic mixer
hole inductance 257, 266
hysteresis 246–247, 250, 287–288
impedance 277, 366, 371–372
inductance 64, 157, 170, 190,
248–249, 256–259, 266, 268,
271, 298, 317, 338, 340
total 256, 258–259
input coil 251–252, 261, 263–264,
266–268, 270–271, 274, 281,
299, 301, 305–306, 309, 311,
314
input inductance 263, 266–267,
269, 309–310
input transformer 268, 270
integrated circuits 41–42, 154,
171, 351, 362
integrator 277, 284
ISG, see Ising spin glass
Ising spin glass (ISG) 335–336,
352–353
JFETs, see junction-ﬁeld eﬀect
transistors
JJs, see Josephson junction
JLO, see Josephson local oscillator
Josephson arrays 38, 369–370,
375, 377
Josephson computer technology
42
Josephson coupling energy 339
Josephson currents 79, 108, 158
Josephson equation 369–370
Josephson junction (JJs) 17–18,
20–22, 24–42, 47–50,
101–103, 107–109, 111–113,
147–150, 152–158, 166–170,
172–174, 245–247, 337–338,
359–366, 368–378

388
Index
Josephson junction circuits 50
Josephson junction devices 49
Josephson junction fabrication 18
Josephson junction physics 18
Josephson junctions 20–22,
29–31, 33–35, 47–50, 95–96,
107–109, 111, 152–153,
245–247, 337–338, 341–342,
359, 361–366, 368–370, 372
compound 338, 341–342
operation of 364, 375
refractory NbN tunneling 32
resistively-shunted 260, 277
series array of 362
shunted 34, 41–42, 288
single 360, 377
stacked 40
trilayer 30
underdamped 360–361, 364,
371
Josephson junction series arrays
37, 360
Josephson junction technology 59,
89, 101
Josephson local oscillator (JLO)
204
Josephson self-coupling (JSC) 206,
208, 215
Josephson signal processor (JSP)
95, 97
Josephson tunnel junction
applications 158
Josephson tunnel junctions 20, 95,
132, 155, 166, 331, 361
long 205
refractory 42
refractory nitride 147
JSC, see Josephson self-coupling
JSP, see Josephson signal processor
junction capacitance 107, 199,
248, 363, 366
junction conductance 158, 162
junction deﬁnition 128–129
junction electrodes 157, 159, 365
junction fabrication techniques
114
junction-ﬁeld eﬀect transistors
(JFETs) 283
junction insulation 194, 200
junction materials 101, 364
junction properties 48, 161
junction resistance 18, 79,
134–135
junctions
all-refractory 124, 127, 137,
140, 276
coupled superconductor 35
damped 169–170
edge 97, 107, 109
high current density 140,
198–199
micrometer-scale 115
single 21, 37, 96, 133, 338, 340
small 126–127, 248
soft 104
trilayer-based 254
triple-stacked 373–374
junction sizes 130, 371
junction structures 112, 132
junction switches 96, 105
junction technology
refractory 98, 141
semi-soft Nb–oxide–Pb edge
115
trilayer Nb Josephson 350
junction types 372, 375
knee structure 123, 187–188, 191
Kondo tunneling channel 62–63
large series arrays 364–365, 373
local oscillator 185–186, 198, 204,
222–223, 233
logic, latching 96, 100, 102,
105–106, 112
long Josephson junctions 213
www.ebook3000.com

Index
389
low-frequency noise 254–255,
261, 276
magnetically coupled calorimeters
(MCCs) 307–310, 312–313
magnetic ﬁeld 11–12, 19–21,
195–197, 201, 203, 206–207,
245–247, 251, 261, 263, 267,
291, 293–294, 302, 307
magnetic-ﬁeld ﬂuctuation
thermometer (MFFT) 302,
311
magnetic ﬂux 20, 245, 247, 251,
256, 271, 290, 313, 337–338
applied 265, 338
external 339, 341
magnetic penetration thermistors
(MPTs) 307
magnetic property measurement
systems (MPMSs) 291–292,
316
magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) 294
magnetocardiograms 294,
296–297
magnetometers 159, 271–273,
275, 292–293, 296
MCCs, see magnetically coupled
calorimeters
readout of 310, 312
metal interface 73
metal layers 68, 74, 76–80,
118
metallic magnetic calorimeters
(MMCs) 307–308, 310
metallic superlattices 118, 133
MFFT, see magnetic-ﬁeld
ﬂuctuation thermometer
microstripline 362, 366–367,
370–371, 374
microwave design 369, 371–372
microwave frequency 361,
364–365
microwindows 226, 231
MMCs, see metallic magnetic
calorimeters
MPMSs, see magnetic property
measurement systems
MPTs, see magnetic penetration
thermistors
MRI, see magnetic resonance
imaging
multichannel systems, large
biomagnetic 273, 316
niobium 25, 27, 29, 47–50, 52, 54,
56, 58, 60, 62, 64, 67–68, 70,
72, 74
niobium Josephson junctions 101
niobium nitride 30–31, 33, 149,
154, 200
niobium nitride devices, early
149–153
niobium tunnel junctions 187
NMR, see nuclear magnetic
resonance
noise 13, 51, 187, 226–227, 246,
250, 252, 254–255, 260–261,
263, 265, 272, 277–278, 281,
283–284
ampliﬁer 282, 289
environmental magnetic
260–261
white 253–255, 260, 270
noise energy 252–253, 255, 264,
287
noise levels 218, 261, 265, 267,
270, 272, 288, 296–297
current 261, 270, 282, 305, 309,
311
low 251, 267–268, 293,
295–296, 312
noise resistor 301–302
noise temperatures 185, 231–232,
254, 282, 284
noise thermometry 275, 300–301

390
Index
nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) 291
open-loop gain 278–280
oscillations, intrinsic Josephson
216
overdamped Josephson junctions
36, 253–254, 368–371, 373,
376
overlayer method 48, 50, 59
overlayers 25, 49–50, 94–95,
109–113, 117, 121–125, 127,
134–135, 137–140, 149, 151
aluminum 67, 95, 154
overlayer thicknesses 111, 122
oxidation 29, 51, 67, 95, 106, 132,
134, 189
oxide layer 48, 104, 128–129, 149
parasitic capacitance 248, 250,
252–253, 268, 284
PCT, see point contact tunneling
PETS, see proximity electron
tunneling spectroscopy
phase diﬀerences 3, 5, 9, 19, 337
phase lock 221, 225, 364
phase-locking loop (PLL) 212,
222, 225
phonons 26–28, 50, 59, 213, 216,
218–219
phonon structure 50, 58, 62, 68,
75
photons, single 172, 174, 311–312
physical vacuum deposition (PVD)
151
pickup coils 251, 256, 271–273,
297–299, 310
wire-wound 271–272, 274,
297, 302
piezoelectric 213, 215
plasma etching 128–129
PLL, see phase-locking loop
point contact tunneling (PCT) 51,
59, 61, 63
polygonal loop 256–259, 266, 297
preampliﬁers 277, 281–282, 285,
288, 290, 316
programmable Josephson voltage
standards 167, 360, 362,
368–369, 372
programmable voltage standards
372
proximity eﬀect 48–49, 70, 109,
121–122, 124, 134–135, 187
proximity electron tunneling
spectroscopy (PETS) 28, 48,
75
proximity junctions 26
punchthrough 100–101
PVD, see physical vacuum
deposition
QA, see quantum annealing
QAP, see quantum annealing
processor
QC, see quantum computation
QHE, see quantum Hall eﬀect
QMC, see quantum Monte Carlo
quantum annealers 336, 346, 352
quantum annealing (QA) 331–332,
335–336, 348, 351–353
quantum annealing processor
(QAP) 332, 347, 349–352
quantum annealing
processors 332, 350, 352
quantum computation (QC) 172,
331–333, 349, 353
quantum computers 332–333,
337
quantum Hall eﬀect (QHE) 304
quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) 336,
349, 352
quantum simulator 333–334, 344
quantum speedup 349–352
quantum systems 333, 337
www.ebook3000.com

Index
391
quasiparticle excitations 48, 50,
53, 58
quasiparticle states 23, 62, 71,
106–107
radiation 41, 307–309
rapid single ﬂux quantum (RSFQ)
24, 102, 168–169
RBW, see resolution band width
reactive ion etching (RIE) 187,
199–200
readout electronics 255, 277–279,
281
readout schemes, direct 283,
285
receiver noise temperature 167,
193, 227–228
reciprocal quantum logic (RQL)
103, 171
refractory junctions 30, 98, 139,
153
refractory superconductors,
applied 18
reproducible junction barrier
nanolayers interfacing
151
resistivity 119–120, 156, 159,
163, 291, 300, 372
resolution band width (RBW) 214,
217
RIE, see reactive ion etching
room temperature electronics
263, 274, 277, 279, 285, 290,
306
RQL, see reciprocal quantum logic
RSFQ, see rapid single ﬂux
quantum
RSFQ logic applications 42
RSFQ technology 24
scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) 161
selective niobium anodization
process (SNAP) 114, 128–129,
137, 140, 151–152, 186
selective niobium overlap process
(SNOP) 151–152, 159
semiconductors 87, 99, 118, 373
semi-soft junctions 97–98, 108,
124, 138
sensors 251, 265, 292, 295, 300,
310, 313
series arrays 37, 39–40, 133, 162,
270, 360–361, 363–364,
368–371, 374–376, 378
integrated junction 360
SFQ, see single ﬂux quantum
shadow masks 115, 126–127
shorted junctions 373–374
shunt resistance 35, 248–249,
253, 338
shunt resistors 34–35, 251–252,
254, 263, 266
SICs, see superconducting
integrated circuits
signal-to-noise ratio 214, 231,
252, 262, 265, 292, 296–298,
309
silicon technology 100, 103
single-electron pumps 305–306
single ﬂux quantum (SFQ) 24, 102,
167, 169, 342, 360
single-overlayer junctions 132
single SQUIDs 261, 264–265, 286,
288, 290, 293
SIR, see superconducting
integrated receiver
SIS, see superconductor-insulator-
superconductor
SIS Josephson junctions 366, 368
SIS Josephson tunnel junctions and
circuits 150
SIS junctions 80, 148–149, 165,
190–191, 199–200, 206–207,
216, 361–362, 366, 373, 378
shunted 372, 374–375

392
Index
SIS mixers 34, 140, 147, 158, 185,
193, 198–199, 204–205,
209–210, 216, 222, 232
SIS tunnel junctions 81, 186–187,
194
slew rate 280, 285, 287
SNAP, see selective niobium
anodization process
SNOP, see selective niobium
overlap process
SNS junctions 7, 35, 41, 162, 215,
372–373, 376
SNSPDs, see superconducting
nanowire single photon
detectors
spectral ratio (SR) 204, 212–215
SQUID, see superconducting
quantum interference
individual 262–265
SQUID series array (SSAs)
261–266, 270, 288–289, 293,
311, 315
SQUID voltage 261, 276, 283,
285–286
SR, see spectral ratio
SSAs, see SQUID series array
16-element 262, 270, 278–279,
314–315
step model 71–72
step widths 371–372, 374
STM, see scanning tunneling
microscopy
striplines 38, 40
sub-oxides 47, 49–50, 106
superconducting barriers 2
superconducting counter-
electrode 74–75
superconducting detectors 263,
266, 285, 291, 307, 309, 316
superconducting devices 233, 337
superconducting electrons 6, 8
superconducting ﬂux-ﬂow
oscillator 233
superconducting ﬂux qubits 332,
336–339, 345–346, 350
superconducting integrated
circuits (SICs) 152
superconducting integrated
receiver (SIR) 185–186,
203–205, 222–227, 229,
231–233
superconducting layers 266–267,
269, 372
superconducting loop 96, 246–247,
256–257, 260, 338, 342
superconducting materials 307
superconducting nanowire single
photon detectors (SNSPDs)
148, 172
superconducting order parameter
2–3
superconducting pairs 17, 19
superconducting pickup coil
309–310
superconducting plate 256, 258,
266–267
superconducting proximity eﬀect
67
superconducting quantum
interference (SQUID) 21, 63,
96, 140, 158, 173–174,
245–255, 259–265, 267–295,
297–298, 300–302, 304–316,
338–340
superconducting qubits 51, 59, 63,
337, 347, 351–352
superconducting shield 260, 265,
298, 303
superconducting state 2, 4–5, 48,
103, 315
superconducting tunnel junctions
67, 213
superconductive electronics
technology 171
superconductivity 2–3, 25–26, 28,
67, 91, 116, 118, 124, 134, 138
theory of 3–4
www.ebook3000.com

Index
393
superconductor-insulator-
superconductor (SIS) 47, 149,
151, 185, 216, 226, 233
superconductors 2–4, 6, 8–10,
19–20, 22–23, 27, 42, 48–49,
59, 99, 152, 307, 361, 365, 369
bulk 76–77
supercurrents 2, 9–11, 18, 22–23,
35, 89, 96, 138, 339
temperature dependence 31, 33,
35–36, 63–64, 165, 307
TESs, see transition edge sensors
TFF, see toggle ﬂip-ﬂop
thermal noise 248–250, 252–253,
289, 300, 306
thermal noise currents 272, 299,
302–303
thermal smearing 54–55
thermometer 300–302
thin ﬁlms 6, 92, 154–155, 194
toggle ﬂip-ﬂop (TFF) 170, 172
transfer coeﬃcient 252, 276–277,
281, 286, 288, 306
transformers 268, 283–285
transistors 87–88, 92, 96, 100,
154, 282, 284, 331
bipolar junction 87
transition edge sensors (TESs)
307–314
treatment 78, 220, 222
trilayer structure 186–187
tunnel barrier 20–21, 62, 67, 73,
78–79, 107, 109–110, 122,
130, 132, 187, 213, 218, 248,
351
tunneling characteristics 67,
116
tunneling group 25
tunneling oxide 95–96, 106,
111, 113–115, 121, 124, 129,
132
tunneling spectroscopy, proximity
electron 28, 48, 75
tunneling studies 60, 121
tunnel junctions 9, 27, 47, 49, 51,
54, 61, 67, 94–95, 107, 121,
187, 193, 199–201, 248–249
superconductor–insulator–
superconductor 17
two-superconductor systems 8–9
unitary transformations 332–333
vacuum 51, 93, 100, 151, 363,
365–366, 373
vacuum systems 28, 92–93, 351
very large scale integrated (VLSI)
168, 170
vibrational noise 292, 299
VLSI, see very large scale
integrated
voltage bias 265, 278, 283,
286–287
voltage curve 75
voltage feedback 286–287,
289–290
voltage–ﬂux 248, 251–252
voltage standards
fabrication of Josephson 360,
362
modern Josephson 359, 361
voltage states 22, 102, 248
wafers 41, 113, 141, 152–153,
156–157, 169, 174, 194, 374
washer 266–268
wetting 27–29, 110, 134
whole-wafer process 127, 129,
131

394
Index
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) 30,
156–157
XRD, see X-ray diﬀraction
ZBCP, see zero bias conductance peak
zero bias conductance peak (ZBCP)
51, 62–63
www.ebook3000.com

