 
Conscience Allan Odegaard heard a brittle tinkling, a loud warning sounded by elfin chimes, as his
pur-suer brushed a crystalline flowering plant. He stopped at the end of a small clearing and turned to
con-front the danger. This deaf hunting animal had been on his trail for sev-eral minutes.
It was going to be close. The vege-tation was thick and the carnivore would appear only a few
meters away. Allan drew the spare pistol with his left hand and held it ready for a second shot. Bodies
composed of siliceous tissue resisted even the cutting heat of a laser, and the small crystal in a handgun
had to cool five seconds between pulses. Cappy Doyle had told him the scientists at this isolated
research station always carried two weapons when working in the jungle. The ability to fire twice had
saved lives that would have been lost in five seconds.
The powerful infrared lamp on the helmet of Allan's protective cov-erall sent a broad beam across
the small open space, illuminating the wall of brush on the opposite side. His goggles, ground to accept
wavelengths in a narrow band around the 1012 frequency, kept out all visible light. The infrared beam did
not reflect off crystalline, or glass surfaces, as badly as white light, and he could see clearly.
The sounds of pursuit stopped. There was a slow movement at the rear of the clearing as a large
head approached the edge of the brush.
The hunter paused, testing the wind, unaware that it could be seen by its intended prey. The huge
mouth was open, and Allan saw a round silver tongue curling over pyramid-shaped teeth of unbreakable
glass. And then a strong breeze started behind the human's back and carried his odor directly to the
animal. They were so close he could see the skin crinkling around the flaring nostrils, hear the snuffling
sound of heavy intakes. And then the wrinkled flesh smoothed out, and Allan knew with the certainty
gained from encounters with strange beasts on a hundred worlds that it was not going to at-tack. To the
carnivore his strong scent indicated a mistake. It signaled that he was not only alarmingly strange, but
inedible.
Allan had a sudden dangerous im-pulse and yielded to it immediately, before reflection cost him his
chance. He bolstered the left-hand gun and pulled down his goggles.
It was like opening a doorway into the softly lighted heart of a diamond. This planet had no moon,
but stars hanging thick and close in the clear night sky provided a diffused illumi-nation. Crystal was a
unique world, where life had evolved with silicon instead of carbon as the anchor ele-ment. The
proportions of hydrogen and nitrogen in living tissue were similar to his own, but the oxygen content had
dropped from 76 to 68 percent and been replaced by metal-lic elements. Physically the planet was a
virtual twin of Earth, and the structure and activity of its flora and fauna amazingly similar. But what on
Earth would have been a tree became on Crystal a giant chandelier, with a trunk of shimmering crystal
and leaves of tinted glass. The wind-rippled branches covered with innu-merable tiny jewels, bending
plant tissue where the metallics in every scale of bark colored the light and reflected it from a thousand
glisten-ing facets. In the daylight it was blinding, a visual fury of changing light of every color and intensity.
A minute of open-eye exposure would burn out the color receptors in the fovea; five would blind a
person. No one went outdoors without goggles similar to the ones he was wearing, ground to admit only
a few wavelengths.
Even in the softer starlight the dis-play was dazzling. After a few sec-onds Allan recognized the head
of the hunter by the pattern of the teeth, glittering like diamond pyra-mids in what to the animal's
pro-tected eyes seemed shadow. And as Allan watched the mouth, that could cut him in two with one
bite, slowly closed and the head receded, fading from view. There was a low sibilant rustling as hanging
vines of vitreous crystal parted, and the fading sounds of padded feet on blades of glass.
Reluctantly, Allan pushed the gog-gles back over his eyes, and the vis-ually dangerous beauty around
him faded. The silence also died as the small jungle creatures who had qui-etly awaited the outcome of
the stalk went back to their nightly business. And Allan had to return to his. He lived for moments like
these, when some strange beauty burst on senses dulled by the monotony of months in space, or his
work threw him into a situation so startling and new it surpassed previous human ex-perience. But as a

Practical Philosopher he had a job to do, and little time in which to accomplish it. A Space Service
neverlander was due next day, bringing World Council Member Celal Kaylin of Turkey, chairman of a
subcommittee check-ing on the work of the P.P. Corps. Allan had been on his way to Earth for a needed
vacation prior to testifying before the committee when he was unexpectedly ordered to Crystal. The
scientists there had reported that an elusive creature they had been unable to capture was possibly
in-telligent. And Council Member Kay-lin was going to accompany Allan on this assignment and observe
a "Con-science" in action.
As Allan started forward again, hearing the brittle crunch of small plants breaking beneath his thick
boots, the Crier called from close ahead.
Cappy Doyle, the station director, had played several recordings of the thin, plaintive voice for Allan.
It sounded like a high-pitched child who understood a few words of En-glish and used them interspersed
throughout a string of gibberish. But one word that had been consistently repeated was "help," and
another was "leave." Once they had recorded a clearly heard, "Help us; leave." The voice always spoke
from the same area, at night, and when the wind was still. Limited vision and numerous carnivores who
killed be-fore they realized their prey was in-edible kept night work in the jungle to a minimum. Two
heavily armed parties had sought the elusive voice without success, and several daylight searches of the
area revealed noth-ing. Allan was no braver than the resident biologists, but he had dared the night jungle
alone because ex-perience had taught him shy crea-tures on the verge of intelligence were less likely to
flee from a single person. And he did not want to keep the subcommittee chairman waiting while he made
that first careful con-tact with the frightened Crier.
The sound came again, and Allan pushed away yielding fronds of spun glass and moved slowly
ahead. He made no attempt to walk quietly be-cause it was impossible. What on Earth would have been
a silent walk sounded on Crystal like a mad giant trampling on greenhouses. But the local fauna were
equally noisy; every bird that landed on a branch, every insect blundering into a leaf, spread its own small
circle of sound. It hardly mattered for most of them; only a few had hearing organs.
The wind died and the Crier called again, a long wail that lasted over a minute. Allan stopped and
lis-tened carefully. He picked out the words "leave" and "difficult" in the jumble of sounds . . . and
received a strong impression there were syl-lables of other words in the mixture.
Allan took a few more careful steps, stopping when he judged him-self within a few meters of the
crea-ture. He waited, light focused directly ahead. He saw nothing, and heard only the crystalline chiming
of vegetation shaking in the breeze. The vagrant wind gradually faded, and almost immediately the sound
came again, so close it startled him. He was facing a bush a little taller than himself. Out of its shadows a
high voice cried, "Leave us!"
Allan felt the hand still holding a laser tremble, and eased his finger back from the trigger. The distinct
words were followed by nonsense, and he strained his eyes to find the speaker. When he still saw
nothing he took a step forward. The bush he was searching had a slender trunk and straight branched
limbs with only a moderate number of leaves. No animal larger than a very small bird could be hiding
there.
Another gentle wraith of a night wind appeared, and the voice stopped. Allan strained his eyes, and
when the breeze faded and the sound came again he finally saw the Crier.
At almost eye level with the hu-man one branch crossed beneath another. A saucer-shaped leaf,
laced with silver threads, hung from the upper limb and grew into the lower; the normal growth pattern on
both branches was upward. Two thick coils of silver wire, spun fine as spi-der silk, hung suspended in
the air on both sides. The supple limbs, when not disturbed by the wind, kept the leaf pulled taut to form
a crude but workable diaphragm. As Allan stared, almost unable to be-lieve his eyes, the leaf vibrated
and the thin voice uttered a string of gib-berish.
The leaf and coils formed an elec-trically operated speaker. The Crier was the bush itself.
"A mountain of silver?" Allan asked, astonished.
Cappy Doyle laughed, his thin form shaking slightly in the locally-made glass chair. A supply ship had
failed during the station's first year and the personnel had almost starved. Cappy, who had arrived
middle-aged and plump, had chosen not to regain the lost weight. "Yes, a mountain, according to our

seismic readings. This little hill we are sitting on is just the top of the peak, with the rest deep
underground. We've done some mining and smelting as hobby work. By using silver instead of lead in
stained glass you can get some very beautiful effects, as you see in our windows."
The research station windows jus-tified the director's pride. The stan-dard dome of poured foamfab
had been modified by adding thick but narrow panes of stained glass. If the vibration barrier that
surrounded the hilltop failed and a large animal got through, the narrow embrasures be-hind the windows
would not admit it. The heavy coloring in the glass kept the chaotic light reflected by the crystal jungle
from penetrating too strongly. From inside, the human eye saw a constant play of movement and color on
the exterior of each window, a chromatic, living mosaic almost hypnotic in its intensity.
"We've found silver used in vari-ous ways in plant tissue," Cappy went on, "but the one you describe
is unique. I suppose you realize that as hard-headed biologists we will have to see this speaker operate
before we can accept it."
"I saw it and still don't believe it," said Allan, smiling. "But you'll have to perform your recordings and
mea-surements in a hurry tonight. I want to substitute a better speaker for the makeshift one and try to
establish communication."
The thin director shook his head, as though to clear it of incredulity, and got to his feet. "It's your
show. But you realize, Conscience Odegaard, that the data we've al-ready accumulated on silicon-based
life will keep three Earth labora-tories busy for a decade. And now you throw in a wild factor like
pos-sible plant intelligence . . ."
"The hazard of your profession," said Allan, also rising. "Mine is to determine whether a questionable
species has developed the basics of intelligence. From the evidence so far this is going to be an easy
deci-sion. Now I'd like to get some sleep before our Council Member ar-rives."
"I'll have a crew ready to support you tonight," Cappy promised as Al-lan slid open the cloudy glass
rec-tangle of his office door and stepped into the open community room. A few late risers were finishing
their breakfasts at a long crystal table. Al-lan spoke to several of the men and women, but ignored an
obvious overture to draw him into conversa-tion. He was too tired. The Corps of Practical Philosophers
was a semi-military organization and required its members to keep fit, but he was forty-one, a little on the
plump side, and had landed out of cycle with Crystal and already behind on his sleep. And he was
worried. The mes-sage from P.P. Administrator Wilson had been blunt and clear. Unless Kaylin could be
convinced of an ur-gent need for the organization his subcommittee would recommend to the World
Council that it be abolished. The official "Conscience of Mankind" had made numerous enemies by ruling
that many poten-tially rich planets could not be colo-nized or exploited.
The P.P. Corps had been estab-lished as a civilian branch of the Space Service at the beginning of
in-terstellar exploration. Its function was to determine if a questionable species was intelligent. No true
civ-ilization had been discovered on the thousands of worlds already ex-plored in the Hyades, Ursa
Major and Scorpio-Centaurus clusters, but many of the species ruled intelligent had very rapid growth
potential. The Seals of Sister, indigenous to a planet ninety-nine percent water-covered, were linked by
telepathy and together had a very powerful in-tellect. No simple yes or no sufficed in their case, and
Allan had ruled that Sister could be colonized and the seas lowered, but the colonists must form working
alliances with the Seals and help them emerge onto the land. There were many similar com-plex cases in
the P.P. files. They were performing a vital function that pre-vented Man from repeating some of the
atrocities simple greed had caused on Earth.
Allan tumbled into bed without bathing and slept soundly until called for dinner. In the dining room
Cappy introduced him to Council Member and Mrs. Kaylin, who had arrived earlier. The C.M. from
Tur-key was a short, sturdy, dark-haired man, surprisingly young for such an important political
appointment. His wife, Gilia, was a small, blond, and very beautiful Russian. This unusual field
investigation made more sense to Allan when he learned they had signed their trial marriage contract just
before leaving Earth, and that Gilia had been and still was on the C.M.'s staff. They were enjoying a
honeymoon trip at World Council expense that only the very rich could afford on their own.
"Conscience Odegaard, I have heard much about your work," Giliasaid as they shook hands. "Yours
must be the most interesting job in the galaxy."

"And one of the most difficult to justify," Kaylin said dryly. "Each time you throw Earthmen off a
planet the demand to abolish the P.P. Corps grows stronger."
"The returns will more than pay for all sacrifices in the long run, as I hope to demonstrate here," said
Al-lan. "Are you going to accompany us tonight?"
"We certainly are!" Gilia said im-mediately. Kaylin only sighed.
They ate a meal of carefully pre-pared concentrates—not an ounce of edible food grew on
Crystal—and af-terwards Allan met Carlson and Ma-nabe, the two biologists who were to accompany
them. Cappy had chosen for youth, strength, and a good shooting eye. Carlson was a large blond with
long hair and a drooping moustache who looked more like a displaced Viking than a scientist. Manabe, a
small, lithe Asian, was a specialist in bioelectric systems, and Allan asked his help in preparing some
special equipment. It took only a few minutes to assemble the simple device they needed. An hour after
dark the small expedition was ready.
Cappy Doyle had decided to per-sonally safeguard his important vis-itors, and joined them to make
a party of six. All were wearing the protective coveralls and helmets that shielded tender skin from the
cutting edges on a great deal of the glass ve-getation. Allan led them down the hill to the vibration barrier
at its foot, where Cappy used his key to deactivate a gateway. All the men, except Kaylin, were carrying
por-table equipment. Allan swung his head to both sides as they passed through the safe area. The
infrared lamp revealed several surface roots, mindlessly pressing to the edges of the low wire coils. Their
tips were being oscillated into free molecules as they grew. The barrier could dis-integrate even a large
animal, but there was no portable equivalent for a personal weapon.
They had barely entered the heavy vegetation outside the barrier when a carnivore appeared. The
wind was blowing, creating such a cacaphony of small noises Allan did not at first recognize the
purposeful sound of a large approaching body. When he realized they were in danger it was almost too
late to fight. A long snout suddenly thrust through the vegeta-tion only a few meters away, two eyes like
giant rubies staring down at them from a head twice Allan's height off the ground.
"Hold your fire!" Allan called quickly, cutting through Gilia's star-tled scream. His order was
unneces-sary; the biologists had all noticed the flaring nostrils above the two long U-shaped rows of
pointed teeth. They waited, while the dim-witted creature's eyes and nose argued over their edibility. The
nose won and it turned away; the noise of its passage gradually faded into the constant small sounds
around them.
"That was a close one," Cappy Doyle said, his voice shaking slightly. "We call that large lad the
elacroc, unofficially. He's big as an elephant and has teeth like a croco-dile."
`The Kaylins both laughed ner-vously, but Allan heard what seemed real fear in the C.M.'s voice.
The short walk to the speaker-equipped plant, which was near the barrier but halfway around the hill, did
nothing to relieve that fear. As the humans were approaching their destination they filet a second hungry
night prowler. This one launched itself from a tree where it had crouched in waiting, bowling over
Carlson. Allan heard the sound of metallic claws ripping at the fabric of the downed man's coverall, and
saw diamond-hard teeth close on the thin metal of the helmet. Then a beam from the laser ready in his
hand cut into the lucent flesh of the neck, and two more from Cappy and Manabe hit it in the side. Three
burns were too much even for the silicate flesh of the tree climber. It leaped away, threshing violently in
its death agony, and the cacaphony of sound created by shattering vegetation al-most deafened the
humans. The ani-mal was a catlike creature about twice the size of a man. When it stopped moving Allan
lowered his goggles for a moment, and told Gilia to try it. He heard her gasp when she saw a slim pointed
head of what seemed sparkling quartz, filled with teeth like two curved rows of pyramidal crystals.
When they arrived at the bush it took the three biologists five minutes to get over the awe, and two
hours to film, record, and measure. Allan vol-unteered to stand guard, and Kaylin and Gilia at first
watched the three men work. When they grew bored the visitors from Earth lowered their goggles, and
at once were standing in a fairyland beautiful beyond words. Allan noticed the normal jungle noises
slowly returning as the smaller denizens resumed their inter-rupted nighttime routines. He kept his infrared
beam in constant mo-tion, scanning both nearby trees and the ground, but saw nothing dan-gerous.
"If you could transport a section of this jungle back to Earth, it would be quite an attraction," said

Kaylin, bending to examine a closed flower of fragile beauty. A huge insect with gossamer wings as large
as Allan's hand fluttered to a landing on the same bush. The C.M. stared at it, ut-terly absorbed. Gilia
uttered a low cry of appreciation.
The three men finally finished, and Carlson replaced Allan as guard. Using a field-sensitive meter
Ma-nabe had brought Allan made a few simple measurements of his own, ob-taining readings on the
operating current to the silver magnetic coils. The wind had been blowing inter-mittently since their arrival
and the speaker had uttered some gibberish in the quiet period, but no dis-cernible words. Kaylin paid
little at-tention to the biological speaker af-ter an initial inspection, but Gilia seemed fascinated.
It was the work of a minute to ad-just the speaker and microphone on the unit Allan and Manabe
had pre-pared to operate on the very low plant voltage. Manabe muttered that so little power would
hardly move the diaphragm, and started tying in a spare preamplifier stage on the input side.
Allan was carefully checking the wire in the silver coils; it was in-sulated by a layer of silicon-based
tissue only a few molecules thick. The upper wires emerged from a layer of bark, formed the coils, and
disappeared beneath the bark of the lower limb. Allan scraped off in-sulation and connected the leads
from his input speaker on both sides of one coil. A breeze had started and there was no current flowing
at the moment. He hesitated, and then hooked the leads from his micro-phone to the opposite coil in the
same way. This was the procedure in which he had the least confidence. The plant should learn quickly
that the diaphragm in the new speaker had an automatic return to neutral, and the primitive device of a
magne-tic coil on both sides was unneces-sary. Whether or not it could recog-nize signals coming in on
what to it had been half of a coordinated out-put was another matter.
The breeze died, and almost im-mediately the receiving speaker on Allan's unit muttered some low
sta-tic.
There was a pause and then the sound came again, a little louder; the leaf-speaker was also rattling.
Allan took a measured risk and quickly clipped the tiny wires below his at-tachments from the input
speaker, pulling the silver coil free. The speaker sounded again, now much stronger. The noise continued
for a moment while the sounds subtly changed, gained form and substance, became syllables, became
words. The speaker said, "You have pro-vided an air-vibration device."
Allan felt his heart racing and knew his hands were trembling. He heard a harsh intake of air as
some-one resumed breathing, but the other humans were locked in silence. He reached and cut the silver
wires to the plant's second coil, laying it on the ground. Bending his face to the microphone that would
feed a signal to whatever circuitry existed inside the plant, he said, "Yes, we have provided you with an
air-vibration device, called a 'speaker.' This signal is generated by a similar device called a 'microphone.'
"
The plant was silent, and he re-peated the message. There was no doubt of the plant's intelligence,
but seeing how quickly it could recog-nize the incoming signal and inter-pret the content would be a
measure of its adaptability. Allan knew a mo-ment of near exaltation when the speaker said, "I have
made the ne-cessary changes to accept your signal. With the two air-vibration de-vices you have
provided we may now freely communicate."
There was a low murmur from the three biologists, and Gilia laughed; she sounded on the verge of
hysteria. Allan had not realized until then how great the tension had become, or that Carlson was
neglecting his guard duty. There were so many questions it was difficult to know where to start. He finally
settled on the most basic of all and asked, "What have you been trying to tell us with your improvised
speaker."
"My extraction roots cannot cross beneath the killing barrier you have placed around the local supply
of sil-ver. The next source is far away and I must expend great energy to trans-port from there. Help;
remove the barrier."
"Ask it why it needs the silver!" Cappy said quickly.
Allan did, and the voice replied, "I am a multiple-body entity. All forms such as the one before you
are a part of my Unity. Each form in the circle of my being connects with all others through a system of
underground nerves made of silver protected by my tissue. All young growing parts require silver for the
communications and storage matrix that ex-ists in every individual. I must have more silver for young

growths in this area."
"Conscience! Ask it if all its indi-vidual forms are identical in struc-ture!" Carlson demanded, unable
to restrain himself. The voice they were hearing was toneless and mechanical, without in-flection or
intonation other than pauses for periods. The excited sci-entist had spoken loudly enough for the speaker
to hear. The mono-tonous voice said, "All my parts are not identical. Some are grown to produce
electricity which is dis-tributed to all. Others grow with trunks much larger than the one be-fore you. The
extra space in these is supplied with silver in matrix form and used for the storage of accumu-lated
knowledge. Unity draws upon any part as necessary."
"How did you learn to speak En-glish?" demanded Kaylin loudly. Al-lan had forgotten the politician
was there. He looked at Gilia. Her lovely face was almost ecstatic with the joy of discovery. She felt his
stare, lifted her rapt gaze to meet his, and Allan experienced a sudden and intense moment of sadness.
This woman should have become a Conscience. Instead she would finish her govern-ment-paid
honeymoon and become a politician's wife on Earth. It seemed a terrible waste of potential.
"All my individual forms have leaves sensitive to slow vibrations transmitted through the air. Other
leaves and roots are sensitive to tem-perature-electrical potential-touch- and kinesthetics. I am aware of
my own structure down to the level you think of as molecular. When your vi-brations appeared in the air
I real-ized they were a new form of slow communication. I transformed all slow vibrations to the faster
ones that could be stored in my memory and accumulated them. Analysis re-vealed the structure of the
communication and over several years I slowly learned the meaning of indi-vidual words. When I felt
ready to communicate with you I changed the growth pattern of the form before you to create an
air-vibration device. It is of poor quality and I have had difficulty in producing the correct sounds. The
one you have provided is much more efficient. The signaling device you have attached to my nerves
enables me to receive your communication in the electrical form which is acceptable without
transfor-mation."
"Why did you operate your air-vi-bration device only at night?" asked Cappy Doyle.'
There was a moment of silence. Allan sensed that the question posed a strain for the plant's still
limited vocabulary. After a moment the speaker said, "I do not possess the quality you think of as
intelligence when my forms are receiving sun-light. All my sensors and storage banks function but the
Unity that is speaking to you does not exist while each individual form accumulates energy. When the
sunlight ends and the energy cycle reverses Unity resumes from the previous night."
Crystal had only one small conti-nent in the temperate zone; most of the planet's surface was hidden
be-neath water or ice. Unity was re-stricted to one plant form on the single warm land mass. So far as
Al-lan knew this creature, like its world, was unique. It was not only the first intelligent plant, it was the
first life form that covered an entire conti-nent with what must be millions of interconnected individuals.
Unity spoke again; "Will you re-move the barrier and permit my roots to reach the silver I need?"
"Certainly!" and "Of course!" Cappy and Allan said simultaneously. They glanced at each other, and
Allan gestured for Cappy to speak. The thin biologist said, "To-morrow we will deactivate small
sec-tions of our barrier at frequent inter-vals around the circle. You may send roots in through all of
them. If it would help you, we will bring pure silver here."
"I cannot utilize the process you call smelting," Unity replied. "My roots must absorb silver as it is
found in small quantities in the natural state. Open places in the barrier will serve my needs."
"Hadn't we better be getting back?" Kaylin asked suddenly. "You people are paying no attention to
guarding us, and I don't want one of those glass-toothed monsters taking a bite out of Gilia."
"Celal!" Gilia protested immedi-ately. "I've never been so enthralled in my life!"
The C.M. was right; they were being inexcusably careless. Allan glanced at Cappy, who nodded.
"We will return tomorrow night and talk with you again," Allan said into the microphone. "You have
learned a great deal from listening to us; we wish to learn from you. In return we will provide you with
better access to our knowledge, which is greater per-haps than you can store in your memory trees. For
now we will say good-bye."
"Good-bye," said Unity tonelessly. The term could have no meaning for a creature whose sepa-rate
parts were always connected by an electrical system, but Unity had learned something of human

cus-toms during its eavesdropping.
Allan disconnected his leads from the silver nerves, examined the deli-cate wires, and decided not to
at-tempt to replace the fragile magnetic coils. After he left, Cappy could pro-vide Unity with a permanent
com-munications system, wired directly into the research station.
There were no attacks by car-nivores on the return trip. Allan glanced at his chronometer as they
entered the door and saw to his amazement that it was barely mid-night on Crystal. The slow walk and
the talk with Unity had seemed to last many hours. The Kaylins said good night and retired to their
quar-ters immediately, but Allan and the three biologists gathered in the deserted community room for
some shop talk. Allan's decision was a forgone conclusion Crystal could not be colonized or turned into a
vaca-tion resort but there was no harm in the research station remaining in-definitely. Cappy wanted
Allan to press for a larger appropriation in his report, and he had no choice but to agree. The P.P. budget
and that of the research group were determined by different Council agencies, but a recommendation by
a Conscience al-ways carried weight.
At the community breakfast Allan learned to his surprise that the Kay-lins were leaving that morning.
The Space Service neverlander that had brought them was waiting overhead, and the C.M. wanted to
make sev-eral other stops on planets where P.P.'s were at work.
The Kaylins left to pack and Allan started preparing his report. He had two more weeks before a
nev-erlander scheduled for Earth would stop for him, two weeks to enjoy honest gravity without the
constant side-pull of rotation. He wanted to get this decision off and enjoy it.
When Kaylin and Gilia were ready Allan and Cappy carried their luggage to the shuttle, waiting in a
clear area behind the station. The C.M. stood fidgeting as the shuttle pilot stored their gear, something
ob-viously troubling him. When the pi-lot sealed the compartment door and it was time to board, Kaylin
abruptly said, "I hope you two don't really think you've fooled me all that eas-ily."
Allan felt a sudden coldness along his spine. Cappy looked a startled in-quiry at Kaylin. "Oh, I don't
really blame you for trying to preserve the P.P. Corps, Allan, or Cappy for wanting his budget enlarged.
Every-one does it, though not many come up with as elaborate a game as you two played last night. But,
if you think I really believed all that about an intelligent plant that covers this continent . . . gentlemen, I'm
not that naive!"
Allan saw the expression of half-angry cynicism on Kaylin's dark face, the weary look of a man
subject to constant pressures who had learned not to believe even his own eyes. The C.M. went on, "It
couldn't have been very hard to make those coils and that bent leaf, and, of course, someone was hiding
in the jungle and speaking into a mike on the other end of those silver wires. I'll admit it was very
impressive, and Gilia certainly enjoyed the show, but I'm not convinced."
"Celal!" said Gilia, distress in her voice. Kaylin patted her hand, and abruptly turned and started
climbing the steep metal ladder to the air lock. She stared after him, perplexed, and Allan saw the
struggle on her face as she tried to decide if her husband were right. The battle was quickly resolved. She
impulsively stepped to
Allan, took his hand, and said rap-idly, "I'll work on him; between now and home I have four weeks
in which to change his mind. He's doing you an injustice, but I hope you can forgive him. If you saw some
of the schemes people pull to trick him, you'd understand."
Allan bent and kissed her cheek. "Don't worry about it. I'll be at that hearing when it convenes. I've
an idea I think will convince both Celal and all the other committee mem-bers that we are really worth
our money."
Gilia turned and quickly followed Kaylin. She waved at the airlock door and disappeared inside.
Allan and Cappy moved back to watch the shuttle lift off, then walked to the station in silence.
"I'll be going back to the speaker plant tonight, and I'd like to go alone," Allan said as they entered.
Cappy gave him a sharp look, but said nothing.
Shortly after dark Allan was on his way through the now familiar but al-ways dangerous jungle, laser
ready in his hand. This time he reached the Crier without incident, and carefully connected the speaking
device to the silver nerves.
"Are you ready to communicate?" Allan spoke into the microphone.

"I am ready. I have found the in-active areas in the vibration barrier. Some of my roots are already
near the silver."
"Good; I hope the harm we have done you will be swiftly overcome," Allan said. "I have a question
that is very important to me. Can you im-press enough knowledge on one of your storage forms to
enable it to live, speak and think as if it were a small version of Unity?"
There was a short silence, as though electrical impulses were rushing from nerve center to nerve
center, through a million plants and across an entire continent. The speaker said, "I can accomplish this
within six activity periods."
"Will you do this for me, and al-low me to remove that individual and take it to my home planet, if I
guarantee that it will be returned and reconnected into the Unity un-harmed?"
This time the silence was shorter. The speaker said, "I will."
Allen lowered his goggles and looked at the dazzling beauty of crystal for the first time that night. All
the desk-bound committee mem-bers should have come with their chairman. But perhaps they would be
like Kaylin, unable to believe their eyes and ears.
Unity had said it understood the structure of its forms down to the molecular level. Introducing a plant
as a hearing witness, and having it submit obviously valuable new knowledge as a justification for the
work of the P.P. Corps, was a means of bringing something of Crystal to the committee.
Allan chuckled; it was going to be another unique experience. 
 
 

