
Jungian Film Studies
Jungian film studies is a fast-growing academic field, but Jungian and post-Jungian 
concepts are still new to many academics and film critics. Helena Bassil-Morozow and 
Luke Hockley present Jungian Film Studies: The Essential Guide, the first book to bring 
together all the different strands, issues and arguments in the discipline, and guide the 
reader through the various ways in which Jungian psychology can be applied to moving 
images.
Bassil-Morozow and Hockley cover a range of Jungian concepts including the collec­
tive unconscious, archetypes, the individuation process, alchemy, and signs and symbols, 
showing how they can be used to discuss the core cinematic issues such as narrative 
structure, gender, identity, genre, authorship and phenomenology. The authors argue that, 
as a place where the unconscious and conscious meet, cinema offers the potential for 
imagery that is psychologically potent, meaningful, and that plays a role in our personal 
psychological development.
This much-needed book, which bridges the space between Jungian concepts and 
traditional film theory, will be essential reading for scholars and students of Analytical 
Psychology, psychoanalysis, Jungian film studies, media, film and cultural studies, psycho­
social psychology and clinical psychology. It will also appeal to analytical psychologists, 
psychotherapists and readers with an interest in film analysis.
Helena Bassil-Morozow, PhD, is a cultural philosopher, media and film scholar, and 
academic writer whose  many  publications  include  Tim Burton: The Monster and the 
Crowd, The Trickster in Contemporary Film and The Trickster and the System: Identity 
and Agency in Contemporary Society (all Routledge). She is currently working on several 
other Routledge projects. She is a Lecturer in Media and Communication at Glasgow 
Caledonian University, UK. www.hbassilmorozow.com.
Luke Hockley, PhD, is Research Professor of Media Analysis at the University of 
Bedfordshire, UK. He is a practising psychotherapist and is registered with the United 
Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP). Luke is joint Editor in Chief of the 
International Journal of Jungian Studies (IJJS) and a member of the Advisory Board 
for the journal Spring. His publications include Jung and Film 2, Somatic Cinema: The 
Relationship Between Body and Screen – a Jungian Perspective and The Happiness 
Illusion: How the Media Sold Us a Fairy Tale (all Routledge). He lectures widely. www.
lukehockley.com.

Jung: The Essential Guides
Series Editor: Luke Hockley
International Consultant: Susan Rowland
Accessing and understanding the work of C. G. Jung presents several challenges 
to readers who aren’t formally trained in Analytical Psychology, from decid­
ing which of his many volumes is most useful to them, to identifying and using 
the key concepts appropriately. The Essential Guides approach these challenges 
head-on. They offer those new to Jung an accessible and engaging introduction 
to the relevant theories and ideas in their discipline that are written by leaders in 
the field. The books also provide readers familiar with Jungian concepts with an 
insight into how his ideas can be applied outside the consulting room, to the arts, 
sciences and humanities.
www.routledge.com/mentalhealth/series/JEG 
Jungian Film Studies
The essential guide 
Luke Hockley and Helena Bassil-Morozow

Jungian Film Studies
The Essential Guide
Helena Bassil-Morozow and 
Luke Hockley

First published 2017
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
 2017 H. Bassil-Morozow and L. Hockley
The right of H. Bassil-Morozow and L. Hockley to be identified as author 
of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and 
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Names: Bassil-Morozow, Helena Victor, 1978- author. | 
Hockley, Luke author.
Title: Jungian film studies : the essential guide / 
Helena Bassil-Morozow and Luke Hockley.
Description: Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY : Routledge, 
2016. | Includes bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016027089| ISBN 9780415531443 
(hardback : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780415531450 (pbk. : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781315622231 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Motion pictures—Psychologoical aspects. | 
Jungian psychology.
Classification: LCC PN1995 .B2948 2016 | DDC 791.4301/9—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016027089
ISBN: 978-0-415-53144-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-53145-0 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-62223-1 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UK

This book is dedicated to the memory of Don Fredericksen – a 
pioneer and dear friend. 1946–2015.


Contents
Acknowledgements	
ix
	
Introduction	
1
HELENA BASSIL-MOROZOW AND LUKE HOCKLEY
PART I
Methods	
13
1	
The context of Jungian film studies	
15
HELENA BASSIL-MOROZOW AND LUKE HOCKLEY
2	
Using Jung to analyse visual narratives: tools and concepts	
27
HELENA BASSIL-MOROZOW
3	
Jungian psychology: signs and symbols	
63
LUKE HOCKLEY
PART II
Applications	
83
4	
Combining different methodologies in visual 
narrative analysis	
85
HELENA BASSIL-MOROZOW
5	
The auteur theory: a Jungian view	
106
LUKE HOCKLEY

viii  Contents
6	
Film genres and archetypes	
118
LUKE HOCKLEY
7	
Jungians vs. Freudians: gender, identity and 
sexuality on screen	
136
HELENA BASSIL-MOROZOW
8	
The body: phenomenology and cinema	
167
LUKE HOCKLEY
Bibliography	
181
List of names	
189
Index	
191

Acknowledgements
There are many people we are grateful to and who have helped us in the prepa­
ration of this book. First a vote of thanks and gratitude go to Kate Hawes and 
Susannah Frearson at Routledge who have been unrelenting in their support of this 
project. As ever the unsung heroes of the publishing industry are owed a special 
thank you – our copyeditor Jonathan Hoare, our proofreader Julian Webb and our 
indexer Hilary Faulkner. To the designer of our amazing cover, Nigel Turner, we 
are truly grateful.
On a personal note Luke thanks Mary, his wife, for not grumbling over the 
missed weekends, and the sound of clattering computer keyboards late into the 
night resuming with the dawn chorus the following day.
Finally, our thanks go to the Research Institute of Media, Art and Performance 
(RIMAP) at the University of Bedfordshire, UK, who have so generously supported 
this research.


Introduction
Helena Bassil-Morozow and Luke Hockley
Jungian film studies is a fast-growing academic field. However, Jungian and 
post-Jungian concepts are still new to most academics and film critics. More often 
than not (and unsurprisingly) they neglect them in favour of the more familiar 
Freudian and Lacanian critical tools that they have been using for decades. Lacanian 
terminology in particular has become de rigueur in the academy as one of the 
primary frameworks that film theorists should know well (and employ systemati­
cally) despite its inherent and seemingly intentional lack of precision. Since the 1970s 
Lacanian film analysis has solidified into what amounts to an analytical establish­
ment, while other psychoanalytic frameworks have been left relatively unexplored. 
This means that using the theories of C. G. Jung to analyse film narratives and 
the structures of cinema is the equivalent of thinking outside the academic box. It 
means to challenge the established norm of film theory. Throughout, this book will 
use the terms ‘Jungian psychology’ and ‘Analytical Psychology’ interchangeably. 
Jung coined the latter to distinguish his ideas from those of Freud’s earlier psycho­
analytic formulations. By finding points of correspondence and divergence with the 
established approaches, while at the same time emphasising the distinctive insights 
offered by Jungian approaches, this book will demonstrate the versatility and utility 
of Jungian theories as tools for the critical analysis of cinema.
Jungian film studies really took root at the start of the twenty-first century. 
Since 2001, the intervening years have seen the publication of numerous mono­
graphs that collectively have come to form the corpus of Jungian film theory. 
While hardly extensive, these volumes now exceed over thirty sole authored 
books and explore themes as diverse as directors, auteur theory, national identity, 
tricksters, phenomenology, production, textual analysis and reception theories. 
Indeed, we might say that Jungian film theory has dipped its toe into most of the 
areas that have been the concern of traditional film theory. The issue of diversity, 
coherence and the establishment of a definable body of knowledge with allied 
methodological approaches is one that will be returned to later in this introduction 
and repeatedly throughout the book. At this point it suffices to note that, as an 
expanding field, the volume of work in Jungian film studies is increasing, and the 
number of PhD theses concerned with Jung and cinema also continues to grow. 
As a subject, we are in a state of rude health.

2  Introduction
Or are we? While not wishing to downplay the importance of this substantial 
body of work, in terms of sheer quantity it is dwarfed by the books that have been, 
and continue to be, concerned with psychoanalytic film theory in general, and in 
particular its Lacanian variation. Without doubt, in the academy the intricacies 
of Lacan, the striking parallels between his elaboration of le stade du miroir (the 
‘mirror phase’) and the activity of watching a film continues to exert a fascination 
for the academic mind. This is not due to any hostility towards Jungian-orientated 
film theory; as noted above, it is more that Jungian concerns do not register on the 
intellectual radar of academic film studies. Here is not the place to assess why that 
is the case but psychoanalytic film theory has the advantage that it has a relatively 
well-defined set of terms and the objects of its study are reasonably well demar­
cated. It incorporates a series of theoretical approaches that, through Freudian 
and Lacanian lenses, sets out to understand and deconstruct the operations of the 
cinematic apparatus, the construction and encoding of films themselves, and their 
subsequent affective impact at the moment of reception. By contrast, Jungian film 
theory seems diffuse and unfocused – a miasma that floats alongside the more 
concrete and structural presence of psychoanalysis. It is enormously difficult to 
get any purchase on the subject and the answer to the dreadfully penetrating and 
simple question ‘What is Jungian screen theory?’ remains decidedly elusive.
Over the course of this book we will try to answer that question. We will do so 
in a decidedly Jungian manner, not by attempting a head-on definition but by cir­
cumambulating the question, by amplifying its themes and by gradually creating a 
web of interconnected meanings. As part of this undertaking we will also bring the 
different strands of Jungian film analysis together, and in so doing position it as a 
school of thought rather than a diffused set of ideas. Our intention is to allow new 
patterns to emerge, to offer fresh perspectives that provide useful and productive 
ways to understand films and our experiences of them.
Part I, ‘Methods’, contains chapters outlining the current state of Jungian film 
studies, and explains the importance of core Jungian concepts for cinema, televi­
sion and media criticism, both popular and academic. Chapter 1, ‘The context of 
Jungian film studies’, deals with the history of the field, highlights its main issues 
and gives a brief overview of the career and research interests of several promi­
nent Jungian film scholars.
Chapter 2, ‘Using Jung to analyse visual narratives: tools and concepts’, 
introduces key Jungian ideas and shows their significance for film studies: the 
individuation process, archetypes, alchemy, etc., which are invaluable concepts 
when dealing with the narrative aspect of films. The structuralist approaches of 
Joseph Campbell and Christopher Vogler are used to draw parallels between tra­
ditional narrative structures and Jung’s theory of individuation – the process of 
becoming an individual in society. We will discuss the interpretive and symbolic 
value of such a structure, and show its positive qualities while also acknowledging 
its limitations. The chapter also includes a discussion of Jung’s view of modernity 
and his assessment of the complexities of individuation in an age of mass com­
munication. We argue that his writings on contemporary individuation (such as 

Introduction  3
‘Modern Man in Search of a Soul’) are indispensable for film studies, primarily 
because many cinematic narratives attempt to define the individual while at the 
same time providing a commentary on his or her relationship with society.
In addition, ‘Tools and concepts’ incorporates a Jungian angle on the ideas of 
the unconscious, projections and the nature and importance of images. With his 
emphasis on the psychological role of the image, Jung placed the visual above the 
linguistic. His ‘Romantic’ view of the unconscious throws light on the cinematic 
experience in general, and on the viewer’s projective-introjective exchange with 
the moving image in particular. It shows how the fluid, ever-changing world of 
cinema and television is not unlike the fragmented, dissociated state of contempo­
rary psychological life. This approach is also effective in explaining the affective 
power of cinema as a creative medium, as a ‘collective experience’ with powerful 
emotion-eliciting qualities.
Chapter 3, ‘Jungian psychology: signs and symbols’ explores Jung’s under­
standing of signs and symbols and compares his views on this subject with those 
of Freud and the post-Freudians such as Jacques Lacan. We use James Hillman’s 
interpretation of the symbolic, as well as Don Fredericksen’s discussion (1979; 
1980) of Jung’s treatment of signs and symbols, to explain the difference between 
Jung’s ‘symbols’ and Freud’s metaphors/signs – a distinction that is ingrained 
in their respective psychologies. The symbol/metaphor dichotomy is the central 
point of discussion of the relationship between Jungian theories and semiotics. It 
is argued that this distinction can be used effectively to examine on-screen semi­
otic structures such as visual metonymies and synecdoches. In defining ‘Jungian 
semiotics’, we compare it to the ideas of several leading Western semioticians.
Part II, ‘Applications’, shows concrete ways of using Jungian theory to ana­
lyse moving images. In this part we take a Jungian look at the cornerstones of 
traditional film studies: genre, auteur theory, gender and stereotype, intertex­
tuality, narrative structure, etc. and their interrelationships. Setting the scene, 
Chapter 4, ‘Combining different methodologies in visual narrative analysis’, 
endeavours to define the place of Analytical Psychology amongst other theories. 
Jungian concepts can be successfully applied to visual narratives in conjunction 
with anthropology, sociology, psychoanalytic theories, literary criticism and tra­
ditional film theory. We argue that Jungian film analysis neither replaces these 
methodologies nor directly competes with them, but can serve to fill the existing 
gaps and thus enrich the interpretive experience. For instance, while Jung and his 
early followers wrote extensively on the figure of the trickster, Victor Turner and 
Arnold Van Gennep’s rites of passage concept takes the analysis of cinematic 
tricksters to an entirely new level. Both frameworks can be used to complement 
each other in the creation of a coherent and clear idea of the trickster figure as 
a psycho-anthropological driving force. Similarly, Jung’s concepts of the indi­
viduation and collective unconscious provide an interesting angle on the so-called 
‘cinematic apparatus theory’ (Jean-Louis Baudry, Christian Metz, etc.).
Chapter 5, ‘The auteur theory: a Jungian view’, focuses on the ‘auteur’ and looks 
at the parallels between existing theories of authorship and Jungian approaches 

4  Introduction
to film directors. It also reflects on the appeal of the auteur theory to a Jungian 
film critic. Importantly, it reveals Jungian film theory’s profound interest in the 
personal vision of particular directors, despite its reputation as a body of theory 
that deals exclusively with popular narratives. We will explore the implications 
of using Jungian psychology to look at the work of individual directors, as in the 
Jungian studies of Nicolas Roeg (Izod, 1992), Howard Hawks (Branson, 1987) and 
Tim Burton (Bassil-Morozow, 2010).
In Chapter 6, ‘Film genres and archetypes’, we discuss the ways in which genre 
theory and archetype theory might usefully be used to interrogate each other. 
We also draw parallels between archetypes, symbols and film/television genres. 
Questions of intertextuality are reconceptualised using the idea of ‘institutional 
amplification’ in which the imagery and the themes of a film are regarded as 
‘amplified’ in marketing material, movie posters, interviews and websites. In so 
doing, we show how these paratexts refer back to the source material and shape our 
understanding of the films.
Chapter 7, ‘Jungians vs. Freudians: gender, identity and sexuality on screen’, 
offers an opportunity to compare post-Freudian and non-psychoanalytic critiques of 
cinematic representations of gender, identity and sexuality (Laura Mulvey and other 
feminists, Mary Ann Doane, Kaja Silverman, etc.) with those offered by Jung and 
the post-Jungian camp. It is often thought that Jungian film analysis cannot offer 
an effective critique of the social because it is rooted in psycho-anthropological 
abstractions such as archetypes and the collective unconscious. We attempt to for­
mulate a coherent framework of Jungian and post-Jungian concepts of the social 
and its influence on the individual. In doing so, we touch on questions of national, 
as well as personal, identity, and explore the dynamic between the social and the 
personal. The screenwriting industry is now significantly influenced by Christopher 
Vogler’s The Writer’s Journey (1998), which probably explains why more female 
protagonists in film and television than ever undertake journeys previously reserved 
for the male sex. We argue that Jungian theory is the right theoretical tool for the 
discussion of this new phenomenon.
Chapter 8, ‘The body: phenomenology and cinema’, looks at the human per­
ception of moving images and the ways in which we assign meaning to cinematic 
narratives. The Jungian phenomenological approach concerns the ambiguity of 
the moving image and our ‘layered’ perceptions of it. This chapter examines the 
existing academic writing on phenomenology in film. Augmenting those estab­
lished arguments, we argue that the intersubjective space – the distance between 
the screen and the viewer – is filled with ‘the third image’ that constitutes our own, 
unique and profoundly personal perception of the events happening on screen.
Why Jungian theory?
Psychoanalytic and psychological theories have occupied a significant place in 
film and media criticism almost from the beginning of the twentieth century, 
when both psychoanalysis and the moving image were becoming established. 

Introduction  5
Products of modernity, both have reflected the state of the modern psyche in their 
own unique ways. A rich and diverse vocabulary has been developed to describe 
various aspects of both the form and content of visual narratives. The Oedipus 
complex is Freud’s biggest contribution to visual image analysis, but the subse­
quent work of Melanie Klein, Jacque Lacan, Wilfred Bion and others has also 
permeated film criticism for decades. Terms such as, ‘the other’, transference, 
repetition, sublimation, the gaze, the mirror stage and so forth have been divorced 
from their therapeutic contexts and used to discuss narratives, visuals and the 
socio-political aspect of films and cinema. Film criticism has employed Freudian 
terminology alongside definitions and concepts borrowed from semiotics and lin­
guistics, to cover some of the gaps in the professional jargon that was still under 
construction, still lacking confidence and precision of expression. Psychoanalytic 
and linguistic terms made film studies sound more serious and ‘scientific’ and 
they gave it a credibility that was important for the budding discipline.
In addition, filmmakers themselves have been actively employing psychoana­
lytic findings to inform their practice from the 1920s onwards. For instance, when 
devising their courageous and shocking project, Un Chien Andalou (1929), the 
young Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí kept in mind Freud’s definitions of sexual­
ity and aggression. Besides, psychoanalysis allowed them to discuss the political 
aspect of all these issues, and the ways in which the repression of instincts is 
rooted in capitalist ideology and is carefully managed by it. Human passions are 
dangerous and difficult to control once they escape, which means that political 
systems needs to deal with them before any trouble starts. The merger of Marxism 
with Freudian philosophy proved particularly attractive to the creative class in the 
first half of the twentieth century because it showed the socio-political roots of 
repression. This perspective revealed how limitations to personal freedom started 
early in the individual’s life and continued into adulthood, affecting all areas of 
existence: family life, workplace, gender relations, social conditions and political 
participation. In short, it revealed how repression dominated the individual’s life. 
As a tool of analysis, Freudian psychology has therefore been proved of value 
for examining various aspects of film: from technical issues to narrative structure 
and content. Theorists like Christian Metz and Laura Mulvey used it to discuss, 
amongst other issues, the attraction of the imaginary and the exploitation of this 
attraction by the capitalist machine, and sexism and obsessions on screen. In 
Freudian film studies, the unconscious is politicised. Far from being a personal 
issue, it becomes a wider problem, a communal issue, shaped and directed by 
social forces.
Psychoanalytic film theory has historically been grounded in Freud and Lacan, 
and more recently British Object Relations has also found new favour. Of course, 
neither of these two founding fathers wrote much about film. Moreover, Freud 
was openly hostile towards Hollywood, and in particular its representation of the 
work of clinical psychoanalysis. Really, what we are referring to here as psycho­
analytically informed film theories are the post-1970s structuralist and semiotic 
reworkings of psychoanalytic concepts in ways which honed them and which also 

6  Introduction
rendered productive tools for the interpretation of media texts. These tools were 
used in the breaking of cultural codes and deconstructing ideologies, and they 
aimed to show that what appeared natural and unproblematic, in fact, was cultural 
and troubling.
However, by the early 1980s psychoanalytic cultural criticism was running 
out of steam despite the fact that there remain cadres of scholars who continue 
to wave the psychoanalytic flag. There began to emerge some early signs that a 
renaissance in Freudian and Lacanian thinking was beginning. It was also in that 
period that Jungian film studies began to take shape. Don Fredericksen published 
‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film’ in the Quarterly Review of Film Studies (1979; 1980). 
Early in the 1990s, John Izod wrote a Jungian analysis of the films of Nicolas 
Roeg, and as his research student at that time, Luke Hockley was working on one 
of the first PhDs that used Jungian film theory, revised and published much later 
as the book Cinematic Projections (2001b). At that time the field was coming to 
terms with the complexities of Jung’s writing. The task of unpicking his think­
ing was, and remains, quite an undertaking, never mind the question of how it 
might be applied productively to analyse films and to think about the institution 
of cinema.
Today, Jungian-orientated film and media theories are infused with a range of 
psychoanalytic concepts, and in particular they embody a number of central ideas 
that have been derived directly from Analytical Psychology. Specifically, there 
is a rhizome of interconnectedness between the psychological and clinical, and 
the ways in which that is coming to inform film theory is rich and productive. In 
understanding what lies beneath the surface of films, Jungian film theory relies 
on the deep mycological transmission of psychological ideas and concepts to per­
meate the work at an almost chemical and subterranean manner, and in so doing 
to suffuse the soil and earth of our film theory: psychoanalytic ideas (including 
Jung’s) are central to the ‘ground’ of understanding.
Yet, there is a parallel process and what many do not know is that for nearly 
twenty years (since the publication of Christopher Vogler’s book, The Writer’s 
Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers [1998]), the film industry has been stead­
ily absorbing Jungian ideas and related ways of approaching symbols and 
narratives. Vogler’s text aimed to teach a commercial approach towards narra­
tives using a highly structured outline. Today we can even speak of ‘the Vogler 
effect’ when filmmakers and screenwriters refer to films using a particular mix of 
Jung, Campbell and Freud (Vogler occasionally mentions elements of Freudian 
psychology too).
In distinction to psychoanalytic film theory instead of the power of the word 
and the rhetoric of language mobilised in the act of structural deconstruction, what 
Jungian-orientated film and media analysis offers is a set of conceptual modes of 
engagement whose roots are in the dynamic and developmental ideas of Jungian 
Analytical Psychology. As will become clear throughout this book, one of the 
issues with Vogler’s approach is that, like psychoanalytical film theory itself, it 
is too structural and too conscious. In promoting an alternative approach, we are 

Introduction  7
suggesting that we avoid the all too neat and easy solution of taking a Jungian 
concept and then applying it to a film, a television programme, a computer game 
or whatever might be our current interests.
Here are a few pitfalls to avoid. Jung pioneered the idea of archetypes, so 
let’s go and find archetypes in films, for example the shadow, the anima and the 
wise old man. Jung wrote about dreams as depicting the current situation in the 
unconscious, so let’s analyse films as dreams that depict the current situation in 
the unconscious of society. Jung thought that symbols had a ‘third not logically 
given’ – let’s take images from films and make interpretations that don’t appear to 
stem logically from the films themselves. Jung wrote about alchemy and change, 
let’s treat films as alchemical elements and look at personal and cultural change. It 
is important not to oversimplify Jung’s ideas, and not to use them as tools for the 
reductive analysis of film texts which could otherwise be amplified – i.e. examined 
in a ‘respectful’ manner taking into consideration the complexity and independ­
ence of unconscious processes behind both filmmaking and film viewing.
If we are to eschew such an overly literal and structural approach then what 
comes in its place? Analytical Psychology provides a number of vantage points 
that offer a fresh look at the media landscape and which can offer some new 
insights into the psychological aspects of mediation. On the way to these view­
points, it is worth noticing how individual Jungian ideas exist in something of a 
field and operate as a hermeneutic matrix of understanding. Here it is helpful to 
note that in the consulting room the meaning of the client’s psychological material 
is not something that is fixed. Instead the depth psychological perspective regards 
meaning as arising from the relationship between client and therapist, between 
analyst and patient. Importantly, it is co-created, unstable, partly conceptual and 
partly felt. It is not that this concept or that concept pins down the elusive mean­
ing of a dream, for example. It is more that the transient and shifting meaning of 
a dream itself is something that needs to be held; a dream that had one meaning at 
the start of therapy comes to mean something rather different after several years. 
Put simply, the meaning of an image is not fixed. The Jungian approach to images, 
and films in particular, seeks to preserve such unstable and shifting qualities – it 
is polysemic in orientation and regards meaning as a process in which the film 
itself, its viewers and film theorists are together engaged in a hermeneutic activity 
through which meaning is constellated and brought into being.
It might appear that following this, Jungian film studies a priori cannot be politi­
cal or discuss social issues, for Jungian psychology lacks the tools for analysing 
‘the wider issues’. Perhaps the best it can do is provide a framework for construct­
ing, categorising, labelling and analysing narratives: the hero myth consisting of 
multiple steps, in which the hero invariably undergoes a transformation and gets 
resurrected in one way or another. However, as a tool of analysis the hero myth 
is indeed itself shallow and reductionist. Once the characters are categorised as 
‘shadows’, ‘animas’, ‘animuses’, ‘old wise men’ and ‘representations of the self’, 
it becomes difficult to see the bigger picture beyond this reductionist description. 
All meaning in such a structure centres on the vague heroic achievements of the 

8  Introduction
protagonist and his or her encounters with various parts of the self. All the while, 
the social aspect of the hero’s journey merely frames the narrative: at the start of his 
journey the protagonist leaves his community, and then re-joins it as a ‘changed’ 
man after his adventures. This is a general, fairy tale structure, which apparently 
cannot accommodate the complexities of the modern world. Seemingly, it there­
fore cannot be used to analyse narratives beyond Disney creations or Hollywood 
blockbusters. However as will be discussed in Chapter 1, this is an erroneous view. 
Despite the ‘general’ character of the structure, it is possible to use it to analyse 
socio-political issues – because the hero’s journey is never fully his or her own, but 
is also a part of the social process. Further, the psychological worth of an image 
does not necessarily stem from its aesthetic and intellectual qualities – it is quite 
possible, even normal, to find something of psychological worth in images that 
lack cultural sophistication.
Unlike Freudian psychology, Jungian thought never looked like it could be 
used to solve social problems. To this day it is all too frequently viewed as a 
mystical philosophy, medievally apolitical, dealing with the deeper problems of 
existence, but almost totally uninterested in anything beyond UFOs, alchemy, 
poltergeists and the vague multi-step process called individuation. Moreover, 
individuation, with its shadows, old wise people, and animas and animuses, is 
regularly illustrated with the dreams and visions of medieval monks, and with 
tales about witches, wizards, magical animals and so on and so forth. Surely, so 
the argument runs, nothing could be further from our social and psychological 
reality than the analysis of mermaids and the examination of the philosopher’s 
stone. At a time of armed conflict, mass murders, cataclysmic social change, 
political upheavals and ecological concerns such arcane imagery is the last prob­
lem on people’s minds. Therefore, most film theorists seem to conclude, Jungian 
psychology is only suitable for discussing the hero’s mythological journey into a 
world of princesses, towers, talking fish, magic swords and so forth. From such 
a perspective it appears that Jungian psychology is only suitable for encoding 
personal change into symbolic terms as a means to make it look more attractive in 
ways that are escapist and delusional.
However, what is not often taken into consideration is that Jung was in fact 
interested in politics, and apart from supernatural events and magical mandalas, 
he did write about the problems of society at some length. Yes, he often omitted 
the details and wrote about politics in general terms, but he was in reality deeply 
concerned with what was happening around him. He was concerned with the indi­
vidual’s relationship with those in power, and was particularly interested in ways 
in which people form an unthinking mass and so can become a destructive crowd.
Moreover, it turns out that Jung’s interest in arcane and esoteric ideas such as 
synchronicity, alchemy, UFO sightings and magic were also geared up towards 
an analysis of the psychological relationship between the individual and society. 
For Jung, these curious and unusual phenomena were all linked to what he 
termed individuation – the process of becoming oneself and finding one’s place 
in society. He regarded individuation as a life-long teleological process in which 

Introduction  9
personal identity is bound up with a coming to terms with life’s difficulties and 
frustrations. While inexplicable events and poltergeists may not be the most effec­
tive ways of explaining complex social and political problems, and are certainly 
different from the apparently scientific ones employed by the post-Freudian camp 
or encoded in the Lacanian framework, such psychological fantasies, events and 
experiences can still be seen as effective and colourful metaphors of personal 
and collective change. In short, such phenomena can be usefully interpreted and 
understood in psychological terms.
Further, such creative fantasies are kindred spirits of the cinema whose ori­
gins are partly in the magic lantern shows of the seventeenth century and the 
nineteenth-century optical entertainment of the phantasmagoria. There is some­
thing ‘otherworldly’ about watching a film in the cinema for we enter a world of 
ethereal images that, while lacking in physical substance, have the capacity to 
evoke powerful physical and emotional responses. In this sense, the cinema is one 
way that contemporary society keeps the symbolic life and mythological world 
alive. As a place where the unconscious and conscious meet, cinema offers the 
potential for imagery that is psychologically potent, meaningful and that plays a 
role in our personal psychological development. It is not at all unusual for people 
to have strong attachments to individual films, or for films to crop up in personal 
therapy to good psychological effect. In short, cinema can be part of the process 
of individuation.
However, individuation is not only a personal process, it is also very much 
about society. Importantly, in Jung’s view, individuation is not about narcissistic 
impulses, and is not about always doing what you want regardless of what others 
think. Every individual has to strike a certain balance between personal interests 
and the interests of his or her family, community and society. Only then are they 
able to function, and to be creative. Personalities cannot develop by themselves, 
without any outside influences: they form themselves in relation to, and in con­
flict with, their environment. The task of the individual, on the one hand, is not 
to get engrossed into the collective and, on the other, not to become so narcis­
sistically individualistic that life will stop making sense. Only by interacting with 
others does the individual see the difference between self and environment, and 
only by building oneself into the social structure does one become fully human. 
As Jung puts it:
In general, [individuation] is the process by which individual beings are 
formed and differentiated; in particular, it is the development of the psycho­
logical individual as a being distinct from the general, collective psychology. 
Individuation, therefore, is a process of differentiation, having for its goal the 
development of the individual personality.
(CW6: 757 – emphasis as original)
Obviously, this balance is very difficult to find. Jung doubted the modern individ­
ual’s ability to control his own unconscious impulses. In fact, he had two concerns: 

10  Introduction
that modern people were not as independent-thinking as they thought; secondly 
that they were quickly becoming individualistic (in other words, un-individuated) 
and too removed from their communal roots. On the surface of it, these two issues 
contradict each other. Yet, deep down they concern the same phenomenon – the 
modern human’s ability to maintain independent thinking in the face of societal 
pressures without detaching from society completely. Jung saw this as one of the 
key problems of modernity and the times in which the communal mostly takes the 
form of the bureaucratic and the systemic. We are still unable to tell the difference 
between the group and ourselves; the individual and the crowd.
The dichotomy between the social and the personal is also one of the key 
issues of film studies – for example, how does one derive personal (and profound) 
meanings from what essentially is a mass form of entertainment? How does one 
distinguish between one’s own feelings, affects and desires, and those encoded 
into the film by the producer, director or writer? Equally, what of the feelings of 
the people watching this film with you and discussing it afterwards? How do we 
know that these emotions are ‘ours’ and not programmed into us by someone else, 
or that you are crying when watching a sad or sentimental movie scene because 
you feel like it, and not because the person in the seat next to you started crying?
Jung had a lot to say about the individual’s relationship with society. As social 
creatures, we feel pressurised into being like everyone else; into behaving ‘in 
accordance with’, into complying with rules and regulations which replaced the 
rituals binding together pre-industrial communities. He comments:
we see every day how people use, or rather, abuse the mechanism of imitation 
for the purpose of personal differentiation: they are content to ape some emi­
nent personality, some striking characteristic or mode of behaviour, thereby 
achieving an outward distinction from the circle in which they move. We 
could almost say that as a punishment for this the uniformity of their minds 
with those of their neighbours, already real enough, is intensified into an 
unconscious, compulsive bondage to the environment.
(CW7: 242)
As the twentieth century progressed, Jung famously wrote about the ways in which 
the State was being transformed in the minds of its subjects into a kind of idol: 
it is invoked, made responsible, grumbled at and perceived as ‘the inexhaustible 
giver of all good’ (CW10: 554). Many critics, in particular Christian Metz and 
Jean-Louis Baudry, emphasised the dangers of blindly following the Hollywood 
machine, which is not only capable of, but relies on the manipulation of human 
emotions for the sake of making a financial profit and ideological purposes. While 
systems offer ready-made solutions, and this can be attractive for someone who 
struggles with genuine intellectual and emotional independence, they also con­
strain, while apparently helping us to make the right decisions.
In his writings, Jung kept warning about the dangers of solutions offered by 
systems in which society is elevated to the rank of a supreme ethical principle 

Introduction  11
(CW10: 554). Although human beings lost some of their contact with ritual at 
the onset of modernity, they still look for structures and systems through which 
to provide the emotional and ideological backbone for their lives. As humans we 
are still ritual animals, and knowingly or not we look for someone to organise our 
lives and thoughts for us. Far from being independent individuals and happy with 
this state of affairs, modern humans are unhappy. In fact, we are in despair with­
out a supporting structure, and consider ourselves fortunate when we are allowed 
to join one. Thus, bureaucratic and corporate structures replaced what used to 
be communal ties, and now provide us with ‘meaning’ and ‘direction’. Such is 
the power of the impersonal forces in the human psyche – we want to belong, to 
be part of a social group, even if the social group takes artificial and superficial 
forms. Moreover, not only do we happily merge with the mass and the structural, 
we are also blissfully unaware of it:
There is indeed reason enough for man to be afraid of the impersonal forces 
lurking in his unconscious. We are blissfully unconscious of these forces because 
they never, or almost never, appear in our personal relations or under ordinary 
circumstances. But if people crowd together and form a mob, then the dyna­
misms of the collective man are let loose – beasts or demons that lie dormant in 
every person until he is part of a mob. Man in the mass sinks unconsciously to 
an inferior moral and intellectual level, to that level which is always there, below 
the threshold of consciousness, ready to break forth as soon as it is activated by 
the formation of a mass.
(CW11: 23)
Individuation, Jung implied, was the means though which it was possible to coun­
teract this pernicious, alluring influence of undifferentiated social behaviours and 
attitudes. In distinction to Freud, he thought that, apart from the personal layer of 
the conscious existed another, collective layer, and it is this collective layer that 
made the call of the crowd so irresistible, even for the most enlightened individu­
als. It is not that Jung did not have hope for the modern man – he did; but he was 
also aware that the words ‘freedom’, ‘independence’ and ‘democracy’ were often 
unable to rebuff the magic of collective thinking. Paradoxically, cinema is both an 
alluring collective apparatus and a solution for the individuation problem, offering 
us collective (and often ‘standardised’) narratives which we can use to individuate 
and to illuminate our own, sometimes complex and convoluted, emotional life.
To conclude, despite going almost unnoticed by mainstream film studies, the 
birth of a Jungian way of approaching film and media theory is of necessity prov­
ing a rather bloody one that involves the murky business of dispatching Freud and 
Lacan. To draw on an image that is enjoying something of a renaissance, such pat­
ricide is a bloody delight and our particular richness is that we have three fathers 
that, vampire-like, we can feed on.
We have characterised the role of the central ideas of a Jungian informed 
screen studies as rhizomic and mentioned some of the ones that Jungian film and 

12  Introduction
media scholars have sought to work with: individuation, complex, archetype, 
affect, the teleological understanding of the psyche, the tension between the indi­
vidual and the social, intersubjectivity, projection, symbol and so forth. Implicit 
in these is the inheritance from Freud and Lacan, as we cannot escape the idea of 
the look, the scopic regime, the cinematic apparatus and the Oedipal. Nor should 
we leave these founding ideas behind as they retain a use and a utility. Likewise, 
the mirror phase and its relation to cinematic structures and cultural ideology 
remains an important part of the picture.
A Jungian-informed approach to cinema does not offer a prescription. Nor 
is it a set of tools for analysis. Rather, it is a set of sensitivities that offers a dif­
ferent framework within which to go about the work of understanding how it is 
that meaning is made in, by and, crucially, with media artefacts. The complexity 
and sophistication of this framework will emerge over the course of this book. 
In this introduction we have not presented the details of the paradigm that is the 
Jungian orientation to the screen. This is not out of perversity; it is more that 
no such paradigm exists. Indeed it is questionable whether such a model can, 
or should, ever exist. It is sometimes remarked in Jungian analytic circles that 
there is no such thing as Jungian analysis as its practice varies so much from 
analyst to analyst. What Jungian analysts share is not technique but an ethos. 
So too as Jungian film studies begins to come of age it meanders in and around 
more established film theory and in so doing serves generally to enrich the land 
in which our theoretical endeavours are rooted.

Part I
Methods


Chapter 1
The context of Jungian film 
studies
Helena Bassil-Morozow and Luke Hockley
Jungian film studies is a relatively young field, and many of its postulates have been 
borrowed from Jungian literary criticism (briefly discussed later in this chapter). It 
has primarily taken two main directions: narrative analysis (John Izod, John Beebe, 
Terrie Waddell, Helena Bassil-Morozow, Catriona Miller, Andrew McWhirter) 
and phenomenological criticism (Luke Hockley, Greg Singh). Christopher Hauke 
explores both how films are made and their effect on the audience, both their 
narrative and phenomenological aspects. Of course, there is considerable overlap 
between the two areas. With Hockley offering detailed textual readings and Izod 
seeking to understand the attributes of the cinematic experience, for example, it 
follows that the distinction offered here is one of degrees.
The group exploring the application of Jungian ideas to screen media has 
primarily focused on the narrative structure, individuation, archetypes, symbols 
and signs while the phenomenological circle has explored the issue of meaning 
in moving narratives and the therapeutic properties of images. Yet, as alluded 
to above, both the angles are complementary and draw inspiration from Jung’s 
concepts of individuation, archetypes and the ‘dual unconscious’ consisting of 
the personal and collective parts. In other ways, both the groups examine the 
impossibility of completely separating conscious and unconscious experiences, 
and telling the definite difference between the personal and the collective in the 
individual’s life. Cinema, which acts as a mass mirror, offers fantastic opportuni­
ties for reflecting on the fluid border between the individual and the collective, 
the personal and the social. Its structures, as well as their meanings, reflect the dif­
ficulty of drawing a clear line between individuals and their unconscious, between 
individuals and their society. A highly visual medium, cinema questions the very 
idea of an independent individual.
Don Fredericksen was one of the first academics to explore the applicability of 
Jungian theory to screen media. In his article ‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film’ (2001), 
Fredericksen compares the Freudian and Jungian takes on signs and symbols. He 
argues that Freud’s analysis of works of art is essentially semiotic (and, as such, reduc­
tive), while Jung’s treatment of creativity and its products is symbolic (i.e. allowing 
interpretive freedom). A sign has only one possible meaning while a symbol can have 
a whole hierarchy of interpretations. Fredericksen demonstrates ‘our need and our 

16  Methods
capacity to be open to meaning – filmic and otherwise – of a kind and in places where 
semiotic attitudes have not previously found it’ (2001: 17). He also points out that, by 
attaching ourselves to particular critical opinions, ‘we are denying ourselves a sense of 
meaning – and a wisdom – at once very old and very alive in the contemporary world, 
including the world of film’ (2001: 17).
Fredericksen criticises the existing – and predominant – semiotic approaches 
in film studies (influenced and shaped by linguistics, literary criticism, psychoa­
nalysis and Marxism), including works by Peter Wollen (Signs and Meaning in 
the Cinema), Christian Metz (Film Language: A Semiotics of the Cinema) and 
Jurij Lotman’s Semiotics of Cinema. He also rejects Metz for using a range of 
pseudo-scientific concepts such as ‘code’, ‘message’, ‘system’, etc. (Fredericksen, 
2001: 24). Jung, Fredericksen argues, did not emphasise the systemic in inter­
pretation. This goes against the normal instincts of a Western thinker which are 
to make a rational construction allowing one to explain things in an ordered and 
clear way. For Jung, such an approach seemed reductive. He did not shy away 
from the inexplicable, the irrational and the mysterious, which, on the one hand, 
negatively influenced his reputation, and, on the other, allowed him to create 
a fluid description of human development. Like many other Jungian theorists, 
Fredericksen traces the roots of this ‘loose’, democratic attitude towards imagery 
and narrative to the concept of the collective unconscious as an unfathomable, 
pre-human entity which needs to be respected. No human mind should aspire to 
uncover the mystery of its symbols. As symbolism is a more powerful tool in 
film than it is in a printed text, it is important to ‘amplify’ rather than interpret 
film images (Fredericksen, 2001: 34). This is a point that will be explored further 
in Chapter 3, ‘Jungian psychology: signs and symbols’.
In this book we will argue that the semiotic approach, even though only par­
tially compatible with the Jungian critical angle, is nevertheless a useful tool that 
can be used in conjunction with the Jungian approach. Moreover, together with 
psychoanalysis, it can be employed to fill the gaps in Jungian film theory – the 
gaps that are detrimental and that make it difficult for it to receive a wider dis­
semination. In the academic world Jung has the reputation of a ‘mystic’ and a 
‘shaman’, for which the notion of the collective unconscious with its irrational 
unfathomability is mostly often the cause. One of the main ideas of this book is 
to show that Jungian thinking is not only compatible with the ‘normal’ Western 
‘semiotic approach’, but that it can also have a fruitful and mutually enriching 
dialogue with it. Even though ‘the semiotic vs. the symbolic’, generally speaking, 
was the main reason for the split between Jung and Freud back in 1913, the two 
approaches do not necessarily exclude each other.
Fredericksen also warns Jungian film studies against becoming a reductive 
approach only interested in decoding archetypal structures and individuation 
patterns instead of regarding moving images from a variety of perspectives. 
He is worried by the tendency of Jungian film scholars to write about popular 
and schematic narratives, thinking that it might lead to ‘archetypal literalism’: 
‘Jungian criticism can feed off a kind of archetypal literalism when it abstracts 

The context of Jungian film studies   17
any archetypal register from the concrete peculiarities of a film’ (Fredericksen, 
2011: 102). The way out of this would be close textual analysis of cinematic 
narratives while curbing the instinct to generalise and to look for ‘archetypes’ in 
every single film or television series.
Instead, Fredericksen suggests, Jungian film analysis should focus on therapeu­
tic goals: to combat ‘the corruption of consciousness’ and to ‘nurture psychological 
life’ (2011: 102–105). The first task entails challenging the audience rather than 
pleasing it; and the second enlightening the viewers, helping them understand 
themselves. Ultimately, Fredericksen argues, ‘we are at the service of something 
deeper than the popular, something deeper than the semiotic register of living, 
something beyond the literal’ (2011: 107). In other words, Jungian film studies 
should concentrate on the conscious elaboration of symbols, thus promoting their 
deeper understanding and enhancing their educational and therapeutic value.
John Beebe is a Jungian analyst who has had a long-standing interest in films, 
and in how to approach them with integrity and depth. Perhaps he is best known 
for the ways in which he has used Jungian typology (Jung’s theory of personal­
ity type) to analyse characters in films. His article ‘The Wizard of Oz: A Vision 
of Development in the American Political Psyche’ (2011) set out to do just that 
but also succeeded in placing that analysis in a broader political landscape. Beebe 
is also particularly interested in Jung’s concept of the anima, which, in broad terms, 
is the culturally ascribed ‘feminine’ aspects of largely unconscious behaviour that 
occur in men. (The equivalent trait for women is termed the animus.) His most 
extensive work on the subject is The Presence of the Feminine in Film which is co-
written with Virginia Apperson (2008). Ranging over films as diverse as Notorious 
(1946) and The Lives of Others (2006), the book charts what the ‘feminine’ means 
as it is experienced in the cinematic context. As such, the authors assert that film 
gives body to Jung’s conception of the feminine.
The line of succession is perhaps closer between Fredericksen and John Izod, 
than Beebe. Izod is another of the founding fathers of Jungian film studies. His 
more recent publications include Myth, Mind and the Screen: Understanding the 
Heroes of Our Time (2001), Screen, Culture, Psyche: А Post-Jungian Approach 
to Working with the Audience (2006) and Cinema as Therapy (2015; co-authored 
with Joanna Dovalis). Izod has offered a range of in-depth interpretations of films, 
tracing individuation, archetypes and the hero myth in moving image narratives. 
For instance, in Screen, Culture, Psyche he explores the protagonists’ quest for 
self-understating throughout Stanley Kubrick’s Eyes Wide Shut (1999), Bernardo 
Bertolucci’s Stealing Beauty (1996), The Dreamers (2003) and Besieged (1998), and 
Andrew Niccol’s S1MONE (2002). He also examines old myths and the use of arche­
types in Westerns as a genre and discusses the therapeutic value of screen media.
Izod draws on Jung’s idea that the psyche of the individual is inseparable from 
the psyche of his or her society, and that the process of individuation and spiritual 
progress are only as successful as society allows them to be. In other words, we 
are back to the central problem of Jungian psychology: the psychological state of 
the individual directly depends on the state of society. Films directly reflect this 

18  Methods
interdependence and render the struggle of the contemporary urban dweller to 
individuate. Cinema is nothing more than just another cultural form, and for the 
purpose of psychosocial dynamics it is as good as any other. It links the collective 
unconscious, with its symbolic language, to the outward world – to society and 
culture. Izod writes:
In common with all cultural forms, films are vehicles for symbolic energy 
charged not only with collective consciousness but also with shared, irrational 
material that has its source in the unconscious. . . . symbols found in screen 
texts (like other cultural forms) must indeed, to conform to Jung’s meaning 
of the word, have a dimension that received energy from the unconscious.
(Izod, 2006: 18)
He also notes that the concept of individuation is particularly applicable to 
Western cinema because it is based ‘on the exaltation of the individual’ and is 
aimed at solving the problems of personal development. The individual is the 
focus and the centre of Western culture (Izod, 2006: 11).
Moreover, individuation suits the type of narrative adopted by mainstream 
cinema: linear, realistic, plausible, with a clear personal history and a traceable 
psychological development of the protagonist. Characters
should have not only an outer life of words and deeds, but also an inner one to 
which audience members give their assent. That assent is commonly won by an 
interplay between outer and inner life governed by narrative cause and effect. 
Typically, something that happens in the story world affects a protagonist. The 
character’s inner response to that occurrence changes his or her mental state 
and causes a reaction that motivates the way he or she reacts.
(Izod, 2006: 11)
This is the type of narrative to which most audience members can relate – the 
story of challenge, struggle and victory – the story of personal development, 
the story which gives hope for the ordinary person living in a complex and 
unpredictable modern world. This focus on the individual and his or her path in 
life is exactly what Christopher Vogler capitalised on in his book The Writer’s 
Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers (1998), which will be discussed in detail 
in the chapters that follow.
Terrie Waddell too is interested in the role of the individual and society and 
is a prominent representative of the ‘narrative’ school. She has published numer­
ous monographs and edited collections in which she explored archetypes and 
gender in screen media. Her most notable works include Mis/takes: Archetype, 
Myth and Identity in Screen Fiction (2006) and Wild/Lives: Trickster, Place and 
Liminality on Screen (2009). For instance, in Mis/takes Waddell examines the 
connection between Analytical Psychology and myth. She is primarily inter­
ested in the trickster archetype, and the state of liminality in which it exists. 

The context of Jungian film studies   19
She traces liminality to a number of moving image narratives, including The 
X-Files (1993–2002; 2016–), The Sopranos (1999–2007) and the BBC sitcom 
Absolutely Fabulous (1992–2012). She claims that ‘to examine the way that 
identity is disrupted and developed in contemporary film and television involves 
drawing on the core archetypal patterns central to [Jung’s] understanding of the 
psyche and mythology’ (Waddell, 2006: 1).
Waddell argues that Analytical Psychology offers a good set of tools for the 
analysis of visual images:
The three major concepts integral to Jung’s ‘analytical psychology’ provide 
an obvious framework for analysing the visual media: first, images com­
mon in dreams, myth and creative art are often projections of unconscious 
archetypal patterns; second, there is a ‘collective unconscious’ where these 
patterns are constellated; and third, the gradual conscious unravelling of these 
structures promotes the development of a more aware sense of self.
(Waddell, 2006: 1)
In her books she examines the way archetypes (primarily the trickster and the 
child) are manifested in films and television programmes. For instance, in Mis/
takes she discusses the psychopomp incarnation of the trickster in Alejandro 
Amenabar’s The Others (2001) and the female trickster spirit in the BBC sitcom 
Absolutely Fabulous (1992–2012).
In Wild/Lives: Trickster, Place and Liminality on Screen Waddell further 
explores the various incarnations the trickster takes on screen, using as exam­
ples (amongst others) the television series Deadwood (2004–2006) and Lost 
(2004–2010), Steven Soderbergh’s Solaris (2002), Werner Herzog’s documen­
tary Grizzly Man (2005) and a US reality show The Biggest Loser (2004–). She 
astutely concentrates on television series and reality shows rather than traditional 
film because, although fleeting and perishable, TV programmes and media items 
reflect the collective unconscious more fully as they are often made in direct 
response to consumer preferences.
Like Waddell, Helena Bassil-Morozow concentrates on the role individua­
tion and archetypes play in moving image narratives. Her publications include 
the monographs Tim Burton: The Monster and the Crowd (2010), The Trickster 
in Contemporary Film (2012) and The Trickster and the System: Identity and 
Agency in Contemporary Society (2014). The overarching theme of her research 
is the relationship between the individual and society, and particularly the ways 
in which individual identity is formed. She uses screen media narratives as meta­
phors to explore and examine this relationship.
Bassil-Morozow’s first book, Tim Burton: The Monster and the Crowd organ­
ises the films of Tim Burton around the concept of the child archetype, and traces 
its various incarnations in his films. She argues that his male (and some of his 
female) characters are variants of the puer aeternus. The child in Burton’s films 
never stays the same and takes a range of forms: the monster, the superhero, the 

20  Methods
maniac and the genius. These guises overlap and amalgamate as the cultural mani­
festations of the archetype are never solid but always fluid. Burton’s protagonists 
often combine a range of roles: Edward Scissorhands (Edward Scissorhands, 1993) 
and Willy Wonka (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, 2005) are childish geniuses 
and Bruce Wayne (Batman, 1989; Batman Returns, 1992) is a superhero who feels 
like a monster. In fact, his ‘monster’ side, the Joker – the shadow of the modern 
individual – is split off and keeps haunting him in the streets of Gotham City.
Bassil-Morozow’s second book, The Trickster in Contemporary Film, also 
focuses on a single archetype – this time the trickster. In her monograph she regards 
the trickster as a psycho-anthropological figure, a metaphor of change, and groups 
the qualities demonstrated by tricksters in myths and fairy tales – shape-shifting, 
licentiousness, control issues, scatology and association with the animal world. 
She then shows how these motifs manifest themselves in contemporary comedy 
film – and particularly movies featuring Jim Carrey, including Dumb and Dumber 
(Peter and Bobby Farrelly, 1994), Chuck Russell’s The Mask (1994) and Peyton 
Reed’s Yes Man (2008). Interestingly enough, both Waddell and Bassil-Morozow 
concentrate in their works on the trickster figure as it reflects the spirit of the post-
industrial times and shows the changes in the collective psyche more faithfully 
than any other image. The trickster is pure change, pure movement, which makes 
him a suitable metaphor for the description of the fast-paced environments and 
lifestyles of Western societies.
More recently, Bassil-Morozow has been extending the trickster metaphor to 
the analysis of the relationship between the individual and society. In The Trickster 
and the System: Identity and Agency in Contemporary Society she focuses on 
the dynamics between the individual and civilising structures, and on the ways 
in which human identity is formed and managed. The book traces the trickster’s 
machinations to a number of political and social phenomena, including the capi­
talist economy, mass media and the creative impulse. The trickster and the social 
forces controlling and shaping the individual’s behaviour exist in a kind of sym­
biosis which allows the system to renew itself by using the trickster’s energy and 
inventiveness. Thus, every successful social structure should have an in-built 
trickster whose vitality and thirst for change keep it alive, and ensure progress and 
improvement. By contrast, the stifling and silencing of the trickster (any dissenting 
voices) means solidification of structural elements of society. This inevitably leads 
to oppression, stagnation and eventual dissolution of the system.
Christopher Hauke, too, is interested in the question of structure and system 
but primarily in relation to the production and reception of films. Hauke’s pro­
fessions inform his vision of moving image narratives: he is an academic author 
and lecturer, a game developer, an enthusiastic filmmaker and a Jungian ana­
lyst. The two collections he co-edited with his colleagues, Ian Alister and Luke 
Hockley, are, respectively, Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on the Moving 
Image (2001) and Jung and Film II: The Return (2011). Hauke’s general view 
on cinema and its interpretation are quite in line with the rest of the Jungian 
film coterie: symbols should be left be, and not over interpreted. Looking for a 

The context of Jungian film studies   21
definitive meaning in a film is not a mature attitude because it gives an illusion 
of safety and control. True meaning is unpredictable, exciting or even dangerous, 
and is linked to that moment in space and time when the film is being watched 
by this particular audience. There is nothing clear or universal about the meaning 
of film texts. Hauke writes:
In any psychological analysis of film it is all too tempting to become reductive 
and to look for the ‘meaning’ of movies and their narratives in a psycho-
biography of the directors and writers concerned. Too many film critics fol­
low this type of analysis when a psychological perspective is not otherwise to 
the fore . . . I think this only goes to demonstrate how the culture of psychoa­
nalysis and the cultural fantasy of the aetiology of childhood have taken such 
a grip throughout the twentieth century – one which shows no sign of abating.
(Hauke, 2001: 160)
Hauke’s book Jung and the Postmodern: The Interpretation of Realities (2000) 
outlined a whole range of issues that post-Jungians have been trying to solve 
for decades: the role of Jungian psychology in our time, its place among other 
psychologies, the pluralism of Jung’s theory, the semiotic versus the symbolic, 
mass media and identity, postmodern gender from a Jungian perspective, etc. 
Ultimately, Hauke argues, Jungian psychology is a response to modernity which 
‘brings it in line with many aspects of the postmodern critique of contemporary 
culture’ (Hauke, 2000: 1). In this sense, Jung is a theorist of culture as a whole 
who still retains the psychotherapeutic aim of healing (Hauke, 2000: 1).
In his most recent book, Visible Mind: Movies, Modernity and the Unconscious 
(2014), Hauke discusses films in terms of their mythological value for the con­
temporary individual. Today’s heroes, when lost on their spiritual journeys in 
the coldness and sterility of soulless urban landscapes, inevitably turn for help to 
stories that spring from the collective layer of the psyche. Atomised modern indi­
viduals still share the collective psychological ground that ‘makes itself known 
largely in projection’ (Hauke, 2014: 5). Cinema becomes the mirror that brings 
together the various elements of the broken psyche; it is a voice-giving device for 
making sense of the individual’s experiences. As such, it is deeply therapeutic.
In Chapter 8 of his book – titled ‘Unusual Suspects’ – Hauke examines the 
therapeutic value of films. For him, movies are as useful a material in a psycho­
therapy session as any other (photographs, dreams, drawings). Films take to the 
surface everything that is hidden; they make visible the workings of the mind, for 
images are more eloquent and easily processed than words. A client may come 
in searching for words to describe her problem with her husband, or looking for 
a pattern to describe his behaviour, and end up comparing him to Bill Murray’s 
character in Groundhog Day (1993). Another client may feel dissociated from his 
anger, and then find its realisation on screen, in Fight Club (1999) – Brad Pitt’s 
portrayal of the brutal and tricksterish rebel Tyler Durden living on the margins 
of the capitalist society (Hauke, 2014: 155). Movies speak to us, Hauke shows, in 

22  Methods
ways that are simultaneously universal and personal, individual and communal. 
We encounter similar issues in the hope of mending our psychological brokenness 
and lack of self-understanding. It is this common archetypal base that allows us 
to empathise with each other. It is also this base that ensures a film’s popularity 
and commercial success, for it makes a narrative understandable to a wide range 
of people all around the world. The magic of the film lies in its ability to bring the 
fragments of the psyche together, to unite the audience – but also to make each 
member of it feel ‘whole’ – the process that Jung referred to as ‘individuation’.
In an attempt to discover where the magic originates, Hauke visits the other 
camp and interviews people who give us movies: an actor, a cinematographer, a 
director, a set designer, an editor and a screenwriter. Contemporary films tend to 
be unwieldy creations made by many different people, none of whom has the final 
say. All of the interviewees describe filmmaking as a mysterious, almost alchemi­
cal process, which is not to be explained rationally. At the same time, they do 
their best to make sense of the creative activity behind filmmaking. For instance, 
the British writer and director Paul Morrison (famous for his 1969 footage of 
John Lennon at home with Yoko Ono and the white piano) admits that he is still 
‘fighting to allow space for something that you don’t know in advance – for the 
unexpected to happen’ (Hauke, 2014: 147). You can only make creativity work 
for you if you fight for it, if you leave gaps in the filmmaking process through 
which the unconscious can enter it (Hauke, 2014: 147).
Another Jungian film theorist, Catriona Miller, identifies a different type of gap, 
or fissure in the text and is particularly interested in gender in moving image narra­
tives analysed from a Jungian point of view. She has published a range of articles 
challenging gender representations in contemporary television and cinema. Her pub­
lications include, among others, ‘Dracula Was a Woman’ (2009; in Treat or Trick?, 
edited by Hugh O’Donnell and Malcolm Foley), ‘“I Feel Like a Failure”: In-House 
Feminism’ (2011a, in House: The Wounded Healer on Television, edited by Leslie 
Gardner and Luke Hockley) and ‘Twilight: Discourse Theory and Jung’ (2011b, in 
Jung and Film II: The Return, edited by Christopher Hauke and Luke Hockley). In 
her texts, Miller focuses on the potential of Jungian theory for film studies as well as 
on the applicability of Jung’s ideas to the analysis of gender in screen media.
Miller is particularly interested in the ways in which the distribution of power 
between genders is presented in cinema and television narratives. In ‘Dracula Was 
a Woman’ she discusses the ways in which female power is presented in vampire 
narratives. In ‘“I Feel Like a Failure”: In-House Feminism’ she analyses how the 
‘heroic, white, male doctor’ (2011a: 189) myth is both challenged and perpetuated 
in contemporary medical dramas, especially in the popular television series House 
(2004–2012). In many ways, Dr Gregory House (Hugh Laurie) is a difficult yet bril­
liant man bent on overcoming numerous difficulties set out before him during the 
narrative, and he expects the female characters to remain on the side-lines of this 
myth or serve to endorse it. Yet, there are several female characters in the series that 
challenge his status or doubt his intellectual supremacy. They belong to the ‘foxy, pro­
fessional female’ type and demonstrate leadership qualities (Miller, 2011a: 189–199). 

The context of Jungian film studies   23
Yet, as Miller notes, the problem of female leadership in screen media narratives is 
structurally problematic. While ‘the hero’s journey . . . is a familiar cultural trope’, 
the feminine one ‘is far less well described’ (Miller, 2011a: 199). Moreover ‘the real 
problem with applying the monomyth to a female hero’s journey is that her “return” 
is particularly problematic. There is no leadership role for her to step into. There is no 
kingdom (queendom) for her to rule over’ (Miller, 2011a: 199).
Traditional individuation narratives, abundant in Hollywood, lend themselves 
particularly well to Jungian film criticism. For instance, the British media scholar 
Andrew McWhirter outlines the individuation narrative in The Matrix trilogy 
(The Wachowskis, 1999–2003). He argues that,
with any basic knowledge of Jung one could draw parallels with archetypal 
figures and motifs, from the circular narrative beginning and ending with 
the spiritual ‘Heart of the City’ hotel to a cast running order: Neo as Hero’s 
Journey, Trinity as Anima, Morpheus or Oracle as Old Wise Man, Agent 
Smith as Shadow, or the Trickster as shape-shifting agents.
(McWhirter, 2014: 271)
The entire trilogy can be seen as the individuation process ‘whereby Neo success­
fully integrates the unconscious and the conscious realms of the psyche’ (McWhirter, 
2014: 272). Importantly, McWhirter shows the importance of Jungian theory for 
the narratives reflecting the ordeal of the individual having to negotiate his or her 
individuality in capitalist modernity. Chapter 2 discusses in more detail the ‘con­
temporary hero’ narratives that express the anguish of the postmodern individual.
Shifting to the more phenomenologically orientated aspects of Jungian film 
theory, Luke Hockley and Greg Singh both explore the ways in which screen 
media influence the audience, and the formation of meaning in the moving image 
narratives. In their texts they discuss cinema as a form of therapy, how viewers 
negotiate meanings with films, the role of active imagination in the consumption 
and enjoyment of images, cinephilia, bodily manifestations of the viewer–screen 
relationship, among other topics.
Hockley is a psychotherapist as well as a film scholar, which means that he incor­
porates his knowledge of psychotherapeutic processes into his analysis of screen 
media and vice versa. In his books he explores the therapeutic potential of moving 
image narratives. In Frames of Mind: A Post-Jungian Look at Cinema, Television 
and Technology (2007) Hockley draws attention to the fact that traditional film theory 
surprisingly paid little attention to viewers’ emotional relationship with the moving 
image (Hockley, 2007: 35). In Somatic Cinema (2014) he investigates the limitations 
of Lacanian film theory for film analysis and regards ‘the pleasure of looking’ from 
a Jungian point of view. He argues (in line with Jung’s view of symbols) that any 
meaning produced by on-screen imagery is both powerful and personal:
Cinema audiences have a relationship with films in which meanings are not 
just transmitted from the screen to the viewer. Rather, individuals negotiate 

24  Methods
meanings with films. Sometimes this happens consciously when, for example, 
we work hard at interpreting a film, at being sensitive to its cinematic and 
aesthetic qualities and at becoming attuned to its use of metaphor, symbol and 
subtleties of its narrative. However, this negotiation of meaning can also take 
place at an unconscious level. In such cases a personal complex is activated, 
and our cultural and aesthetic sensibilities are overwhelmed by the strength 
of the affect. When this happens the meaning and values that are found and 
placed in a film can be a mystery to others. . . . We can find powerful mean­
ings in the most unlikely of places.
(Hockley, 2014: 39)
Hockley also transposes one of the central issues of Jungian psychology – the con­
trast between the collective nature of symbols and their personal meaning – onto 
film viewing. When an individual encounters a collective fantasy material, the 
effect is unpredictable and fleeting (Hockley, 2014: 47). This process ‘is analo­
gous to the manner in which individual analysis can allow for an encounter with 
the collective as a means for the individual to become more fully the person he or 
she is’ (Hockley, 2014: 37).
Hockley notes that if we pause for a moment to think about those most funda­
mental of psychological images – dreams – then a therapist does not discriminate 
between a client’s dream on aesthetic grounds (though clients often do – it’s not a 
very interesting dream they say, only to discover that despite the initial resistance, 
their dream turns out to be more fascinating than had been anticipated). Nor do 
therapists say to clients: ‘Go away and have a more beautiful dream, have a more 
sophisticated dream, have a more complicated dream for us to work on’. Instead 
in therapy we work with what the unconscious produces, and the reality is that the 
unconscious lives in the everyday stuff of life that is human experience.
For Hockley, these statements about the everyday qualities of psychological 
experience and insight have the effect of shifting the locus of attention away from 
the conceptual sophistication of the filmmaking itself to refocus on the appeal of 
films themselves. Of course films are popular for a variety of reasons. Yet, it is the 
underlying psychological attraction of mainstream films that is of interest to many 
film scholars interested in Jung. The intrinsic value, or otherwise, of the film itself 
is not the main object of concern. In Somatic Cinema Hockley explores the ways 
in which the psychological meaning that viewers find in films is a result of an indi­
vidual relationship in which personal psychological responses intermingle with the 
images and sounds of the film to create a new meaning that is not part of the narra­
tive of the film. He refers to this as the ‘third image’ – not the image on the screen, 
nor the image that arises from the work of interpretative activity, but a third image 
that exists in the space between viewer and screen – analogous to the intersubjective 
space between client and therapist.
Hockley examines how, from the perspective of textual analysis, the shifting 
meaning of media products is a curious idea. Of course textual studies too assert 
the unstable meaning of texts whose literary or film structures break down under 

The context of Jungian film studies   25
the weight of close textual analysis and in so doing reveal either new meanings, 
or alternatively the lack of meanings. But what film and media studies does not 
embrace so readily is the sheer complexity of the psychological relationships we 
have with media artefacts. For Hockley the interwoven form of these matrices of 
meaning is enmeshed to the point where it is almost impossible to conceive of 
a film, television programme, computer game as single artefact – such artefacts 
exist only in relation to other artefacts – so too, while meaning is bound into the 
text it is at the same time outside it. Meaning is both inside the text and outside 
it; it arises from our personal relationship with the text and is also in the cultural 
consumption of the text; it is conscious and unconscious, historical and contem­
porary, material and immaterial – all at the same time.
Hockley notes how from the clinical perspective this is altogether less remark­
able. Illustrating the point, he notes how a dream that is recounted to two therapists 
will result in two different meanings as the fabric of the interaction between client 
and therapist has the effect of altering the material of the lived experience. So too it 
follows that a range of meanings will emerge as the product of different relationships 
in different settings. So too a dream might very well have one meaning at the start of 
therapy yet years later it comes to mean something quite different. One of the chal­
lenges which Jungian-informed screen studies offers to the clinical perspective is 
to accept the deep psychological value that arises from the cultural consumption of 
contemporary media. This requires the therapist to suspend their desire to pin down 
meaning and to put on hold the desire to ‘understand’ what the client is saying. 
This, of course, is impossible, but what is manageable is to hold the interpretative 
imperative with the knowledge that insight is relative – to acknowledge our desire to 
master the material of our clients, while knowing that it needs to be resisted. Just as 
with media artefacts, meaning is inside and out, personal and cultural, historical and 
contemporary, material and immaterial, conscious and unconscious, thought and 
felt, all at the same time.
For Hockley, the issue of felt meaning as one part of the matrix of meaning 
relations is one of the distinctive qualities that a Jungian orientation to such expe­
riences affords the emphasis it has on affect and the feeling-tone of the image. In 
other words, in making and finding meaning in films viewers bring themselves, 
their psyches, their personal preoccupations and concerns, and in doing so forge 
a unique and personal relationship with the film. This is one of the deep rhizo­
matic patterns that Hockley thinks infuses our understanding of media artefacts. 
Interestingly, he notes that psychoanalytic film studies have not been overly con­
cerned with the experience and phenomena of affect. It does get the occasional 
mention but it is an area that is under-theorised, at least in terms of screen criti­
cism. Instead, psychoanalytic approaches have tended to be more structural in 
their orientation and are concerned with examining the apparatus of the text, the 
physical conditions of reception in the cinema and the ways they encode cultural 
values and ideologies. The role of psychoanalysis in that setting is to decode the 
images. Much as Freud used psychoanalysis to burrow underneath the defences of 
consciousness, to unearth early sexual trauma, so too psychoanalytic film theory 

26  Methods
attempts to expose the workings of patriarchal ideology and demonstrate how 
something apparently neutral is actually heavily cultural and often repressive.
Greg Singh also focuses on the emotional and affective nature of film viewing, 
and particularly on the role of affect produced by screen media on both identity 
formation and collective discourse. For instance, in Feeling Film: Affect and 
Authenticity in Popular Cinema (2014b), Singh argues that cinema is an ideal can­
didate ‘for thinking through the expressive potential of cultural production from a 
psychological perspective’ because, being ‘psychomimetic’, it reflects the relation­
ship human beings have with the outside world (Singh, 2014b: 11). Singh carefully 
dissects the process of watching (or, rather, experiencing), a film by analysing both 
its ‘noticeable’ and ‘incidental’ aspects, and by carefully considering the
discrepancy between individual instances of viewing, collective discourse in 
the popular imagination, and how the narrative image of the film . . . tends to 
be composed of more general ideas of spectacle and emotional impact gath­
ered from ephemera such as marketing materials, poster art, trailers and the 
popular review system.
(Singh, 2014b: 34)
In their works Singh and Hockley both focus on more than the text. This decentring 
of the text in theory is important for a Jungian-informed approach. Of course, Jungian 
approaches to texts can and do help with the interpretation of a text. It is possible and 
profitable to look at the formal elements of film (or other artefact) in which a Jungian 
sensibility helps to make sense of material in ways that other approaches might not. 
But it is also the case that increasingly there is an attempt to see films as part of a 
matrix of meaning, in a relational manner with viewers, films and culture more gener­
ally. The intention is to preserve the fluidity of meaning within a film, regarding it as 
a site of change, contestation and as in flux. By contrast, the work of textual interpre­
tation sometimes attempts to ‘fix’ meanings by offering ever more compressive and 
convincing insights into the narrative, its imagery, its characters and themes.
The recent work by Hockley and Fadina (2015) The Happiness Illusion: How 
the Media Sold Us a Fairytale illustrates the direction of this more free-flowing 
type of approach. Arguing against fixed certainty in text and in psychological life 
more generally the psychological concept of happiness is interwoven with a variety 
of approaches – some Jungian, others post-Jungian, still others from age studies, 
feminism, film theory – as a means to explore how media texts are complicated 
sites of meaning. As a whole, the book attempts to maintain its fluidity, using the 
motif of the fairy tale to contain changing meanings and conceptual concerns.
As we can see, Jungian film theorists are generally concerned with the same issues 
as Jungian literary critics: the semiotic/symbolic division, the dichotomy between the 
universality of the symbol and the personal meanings it generates, the fleeting nature 
of meaning and affect, the psychological value of the hero myth, the relationship 
between the social and the personal in cinematic narratives, and the nature of the 
creative process – be it the process of making a film or the process of watching one.

Chapter 2
Using Jung to analyse visual 
narratives
Tools and concepts
Helena Bassil-Morozow
This chapter explores the ways in which Jungian psychology can be employed to 
analyse visual narratives. It shows the usefulness of the key concepts of Jung’s 
Analytical Psychology (individuation, archetypes, the hero myth, collective 
unconscious, etc.) for film and television criticism. It also deals with Jungian and 
post-Jungian psychology’s assessment of modernity and postmodernity, and explain 
how these views can be applied to the analysis of screen media. Finally, it presents a 
Jungian angle on the unconscious and the projective-introjective processes in com­
munication, and links these processes to the human perception of cinematic images.
Human beings tend to organise information about the world and themselves 
into accessible and continuous information sequences called narratives. We make 
meaning of the events and happenings in our lives by reconstructing them into 
stories. Such a reconstruction implies transformation and change. We become 
someone else, we create our own doubles, and we have more control over their 
lives than we have over our own. As Fireman et al. argue, ‘personal narration gives 
continuity to self and meaning to action as it locates and values present activity in 
the context of past experiences and projected outcomes’ (Fireman et al., 2003: 5).
Moreover, through narratives (both personal and external), we connect our­
selves to our society, and find our place in our community and culture. One 
overarching theme of myths and fairy tales, for instance, is the boundary between 
the individual and his or her community; between the acquired cultural values, 
and personal desires and decisions. The protagonist ‘goes to seek his fortune’ 
when he wants to find his own path in life, to separate himself from his surround­
ings. In other words, when he wants to become an individual.
Narratives feature prominently in Analytical Psychology. In fact, individu­
ation and the archetypes – the core concepts of Jungian psychology – are none 
other than a flexible narrative framework and its changeable contents. In this 
sense, Jung’s Analytical Psychology is more suitable for analysing narratives 
than any other psychotherapy theory. Unlike Lacan, Jung did not think that the 
unconscious is structured like a language. Its language is visual – it consists of 
images, of pictures, of archetypes. The unconscious is pre-civilised, pre-cultural 
and pre-linguistic. Only its ‘personal’ layer is affected by culture, but its deep­
est layer and its collective one is shared by all, regardless of their backgrounds. 

28  Methods
Jungian psychology is also progressive and forward-looking as it is geared up for 
the creation of meaning in human narrative instead of being obsessed with the 
past roots of present problems.
Thanks to its emphasis on collective, vague, general experiences, Jungian psy­
chology is particularly (but not exclusively, as is often mistakenly thought!) suitable 
for the analysis of narratives belonging to the fantastic genres. In this sense, there 
has never been a better time in the history of film criticism for Jungian Analytical 
Psychology. The emergence of technology-dependent genres in the past twenty years 
including CGI, 3D and IMAX has led to the proliferation of fantasy, sci-fi, epic and 
high-powered action films. All these can be called ‘individuation genres’. This in its 
turn generally led to the emphasis of structure and action over psychological detail 
or relationship intricacies between characters. Jungian psychology is often criticised 
for its acute interest in the supernatural over the real, and in the spiritual, abstract 
meaning of life over everyday situations and events. By contrast, Freudian and post-
Freudian ideas are traditionally regarded as practically applicable and referring to 
concrete events in the individual’s past and present. Similarly, popular, ‘low brow’, 
genres such as action films are traditionally criticised for being escapist and simplis­
tic, not reflecting the complexity and richness of the human experience, and gliding 
over and/or barely touching upon childhood problems and relationship issues.
Every time has its heroes; and heroes tend to mirror the psychology and realities 
of their time. The superhero narrative is the myth of our time – no less psychological 
or important than mythological gods and heroes of the past such as Prometheus and 
Achilles. One cannot dismiss popular films as meaningless and empty just because 
they are loved and watched by the masses. Popular entertainment has the same 
psychological depth as ‘elite’ narratives. In fact, non-realistic genres follow the hero 
myth schema in its purest form. At their base are progression and transformation, 
however unrealistically and schematically presented. They become mirrors in which 
viewers see themselves – often idealised and distorted by the magic of cinema. Yet, 
no self-analysis and self-reflection are possible without a mirror, without an exter­
nalisation of some sort; and cinema, being a visual and therefore an immediately 
accessible medium, offers a route to such self-analysis.
Jung writes about the tendency of human beings to learn about themselves and 
the outside world by looking in the mirror, via all kinds of projections. Without 
an external object reflecting your inner self and reiterating your psychological 
contents, no such learning is possible:
All the mythologized processes of nature, such as summer and winter, the 
phases of the moon, the rainy seasons, and so forth, are in no sense allegories 
of these objective occurrences; rather they are symbolic expressions of the 
inner, unconscious drama of the psyche which becomes accessible to men’s 
consciousness by way of projection – that is, mirrored in the events of nature. 
The projection is so fundamental that it has taken several thousand years of 
civilization to detach in it some measures from its outer object.
(CW9, I: 7)

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  29
In fact, cinema is based on the mechanism of projection. It is also a mass event 
because projection, despite its personal aspects, also tends to be both a social 
phenomenon and a social event. A stream of moving images gives viewers the 
opportunity to reflect upon themselves as individuals as well as participants in 
their society; as actors and agents of social forces. Individuals (and this is a very 
Jungian idea) only feel alive when participating in communal life.
The personal and the collective unconscious
Jung hypothesised that archetypes, the building structures of personal and 
collective narratives, reside in the collective unconscious. Jung defines the col­
lective unconscious as a suprapersonal yet objective system, unknowable in its 
vastness. Even so, one should attempt to know oneself as fully as possible pre­
cisely because the biggest regions of one’s psyche are submerged below the 
conscious level and it is beneficial for them to be made as conscious as possible. 
As Jung comments:
the collective unconscious is anything but an encapsulated personal system; 
it is sheer objectivity, as wide as the world and open to all the world. 
There I am the object of every subject, in complete reversal of my ordinary 
consciousness, where I am always the subject that has an object. There I am 
utterly one with the world; so much a part of it that I forget all too easily 
who I really am. ‘Lost in oneself’ is a good way of describing this state. But 
this self is the world, if only a consciousness could see it. That is why we 
must know who we are.
(CW9, I: 46)
The collective unconscious is therefore always there as a semi-forgotten but 
omnipresent layer of the psyche. It manifests itself in dreams and fantasies, and 
through projections and in therapy in the transference between therapist and 
client. Consciousness and civilisation often neglect its manifestations. Hence, 
Jung writes, all man’s strivings ‘have been directed towards the consolidation 
of consciousness. This was the purpose of rite and dogma; they were dams and 
walls to keep back the dangers of the unconscious; the “perils of the soul”’ (CW9, 
I: 47). Importantly, collectivity is both internal and external: on the one hand, one 
is connected with the whole of humankind via the collective unconscious, and 
on the other the individual is influenced and shaped by his or her environment. 
In this sense, individual consciousness is sandwiched between the two types of 
collectivity. This makes for a precarious position in which one has constantly to 
assert one’s intellectual and emotional independence.
Unlike the collective unconscious, which is the ‘historical soul’ of human­
kind, its personal counterpart contains concrete information about human beings, 
from uniquely personal attributes (such as tastes and temperament) to his or her 
social and familial background. It also harbours childhood complexes (to which 

30  Methods
Freudian psychology attaches such a major importance). By contrast, for Jung the 
personal unconscious, with its individual issues, is a small part of a much larger 
unconscious structure.
Jungian theory emphasises the importance of the collective as both impersonal 
and interpersonal in the life of the individual. Consciousness, Jung reminds us, is 
only the tip of the iceberg, and it is no match for the unconscious which, in spite 
all our efforts to re-associate repressed contents with consciousness, ‘calmly goes 
on producing dreams and fantasies’ (CW7: 205). These dreams and fantasies also 
tend to throw themselves onto external objects in order to solve the conflict and 
unite the psychic opposites outside the conflict zone, so to say. When real people 
(for instance, psychotherapists) become such objects, they often end up carrying 
heavy projections on their shoulders, yet ‘one would have to be a demigod at least 
to sustain such a role without a break, for all the time one would have to be the 
giver’ (CW7: 206). A successful resolution of the conflict would thus involve 
someone (or something) becoming a sort of container handling the transference 
and enabling the ‘alchemical’ transformation of another’s unconscious contents 
to happen. A successful transference, Jung continues, can cause (if temporarily) 
the whole neurosis to disappear, ‘and for this reason it has been rightly recognised 
by Freud as a healing factor of first-rate importance, but, at the same time, as a 
provisional state only, for although it holds out the possibility of a cure, it is far 
from being the cure itself’ (CW7: 206).
Transference (the transposition of one’s feelings onto another, often infantile 
in origin) and projection (relocating one’s own difficulties onto another person or 
object) ease human suffering by emptying the problematic corners of the uncon­
scious of its brooding contents. Surely, there should be other ways of dealing with 
such psychological concerns. And there are. Cinema offers vast therapeutic pos­
sibilities and opportunities for self-reflection for those in need of mediating their 
problems, or filtering them through a third party. These problems and feelings can 
be projected or transferred onto on-screen characters, which, due to the mechani­
cal nature of the moving image (it is infinitely replicable, and the actors as human 
beings are distanced from the final project), provides safe, disposable vessels for 
containing and possibly transforming any festering psychological problems.
Screen media are mass phenomena, and a vehicle by which the individual 
can get access to the collective unconscious and its symbols. During the projective-
introjective exchange which is part of the experience of film watching, the 
individual’s unconscious is activated – that is, both its personal and collective 
aspects. It is this dual structure of the unconscious that makes it possible for 
human beings to transpose their personal issues onto films, and to recognise 
their personal lives in rather generalised narratives made for mass consumption. 
Yet, despite their blatantly collective nature, moving image narratives touch 
each individual in a unique way, and allow projections (and introjections) to 
take a variety of forms reflecting particular moments and aspects of the indi­
vidual’s life. This universality, reflected – paradoxically – as a unique set of 
feelings, thoughts and emotions in each viewing experience, is due to the fact 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  31
that universal patterns in narratives in general and, in cinematic ones in particular, 
get coloured by distinctive individual experiences.
Like the Jungian vision of the psyche, cinema is a medium based on relativist 
principles. Nothing is ever set in stone in cinema. From its emergence at the end 
of the nineteenth century, it has questioned and negated the notions of truth and 
reality by its very existence, and by the fact that it is a form of mass entertainment. 
Cinema does not deal with ‘facts’ – arguably, even documentary cinema is less 
interested in truth than in the entertainment potential of the story. Documentary 
narratives are (more often than not) about human nature, about how it manifests 
itself in a narrative; they concern the story, not the fact. Like the psyche, cinema 
is a distorted, approximate depiction of reality rather than its faithful representa­
tion. Moreover, even though physically being a barrier, the screen also represents 
the absence of all barriers between fantasy and reality as it ‘becomes’ the site of 
projection; it ‘comes to life’, so to say.
The overarching theme of screen media is the blurring of all boundaries (a typical 
postmodern ploy); these include the boundaries between fantasy and reality, between 
the audience and the film, between genres, between cinematic codes and sub-codes, 
and between the different aspects of the narrative. This blurring of boundaries further 
leads to the loss of the ‘actual’ reality. Closer to us than the stage, which physi­
cally separates the fictional event from the public, the screen is subtler in its enticing 
flicker. A relativist phenomenon capable of creating and erasing realities, the moving 
image is the ultimate medium of impermanence; the ultimate proof of the non-
existence of ultimate proofs. Everything shown on screen can be questioned and 
nothing is purely and ultimately factual. It may be argued that moving image nar­
ratives are anti-authoritarian as (despite the claims of auteur theory) they do not 
support the idea of the author, the concept of ‘high’ and ‘low’ forms. All cinema, 
even in its most ‘highbrow’ auteur versions, is ultimately a form of entertainment 
that is made to be enjoyed and which aims to cause emotional affect in the audience.
Similarly, there are no ‘high’ and ‘low’ brow archetypes. Indeed, popular 
screen media cannot be ‘highbrow’ because it is by definition a mass-aimed phe­
nomenon. It lacks the foundations of exclusivity and specialness that characterise 
the arts made by hand; those arts are more ‘material’, and although replicable, still 
boast the ‘original’ from which all the copies are made. Cinema does not have 
such an original; it is infinitely replicable – particularly today, in the age of mul­
tiple platforms and digital marketing. It links individuals to each other, ensuring 
collectivity and consensus where they seemingly do not exist.
Whatever one’s unique path in life, it is next to impossible for the individual 
to circumvent the collective. After all, all human beings go through the same life 
experiences and phases: separation from parents, initiation, maturation, finding a 
partner, dealing with one’s negative traits, establishing relationships with others, 
finding one’s true vocation, dealing with the mid-life crisis and growing old. This 
explains the attractiveness of familiar and repeating patterns in narratives, both 
literary and cinematic, for specific details embellishing the narrative skeleton do 
not obscure its commonplace, ritualistic and enduring base. Self-reflection is only 

32  Methods
possible when it bounces off another object that acts as a mirror for the contents 
of our psyche. In this sense narratives become like mirrors as we learn about our­
selves in a safe and indirect way.
In the moment of film watching, the emic (internal participant) and the etic 
(external observer) positions merge on the basis of the universality of human 
experiences, thus blurring boundaries between the internal and the external, and 
creating a fluid vision of the situation being experienced. Seeing oneself on screen, 
being transformed into someone else, being transposed into another’s body, losing 
the sense of self, brings about self-awareness as it drags the individual out of her, 
often stale, vision of herself. Importantly, because of cinema’s multiple focalisation 
practices, the moving image acquires a certain psychological three-dimensionality 
as we are allowed to see the same problem from different perspectives. The nar­
ratologists Vera Nünning and Jan Rupp argue that when the same motif is taken 
up on several levels of narration, these levels become ‘related to each other in 
multiple ways through mirroring and confirmation as well as through contrast and 
subversion’ (Nünning et al., 2013: 14). Moreover, such mirroring and confirmation 
amount to a projective–introjective exchange that happens in a safe environment, 
by proxy, via the characters. This means the viewers do not have to go directly 
through the pain and suffering experienced by the protagonist.
Another issue associated with the seductiveness of the collective unconscious and 
over-identification with its primordial contents in relation to the moving image is the 
sheer addictiveness of cinematic narratives. Jung theorised that transference and pro­
jection are temporary solutions to the problem of individuation, and cannot replace 
‘thinking for yourself’. They cannot become a sort of external brain. While narra­
tives offer the possibility of illuminating one’s psychological condition, they cannot 
become an individual’s fantasy second life – some kind of externalised individuation.
The process of becoming an individual involves making independent deci­
sions rather than being a copy-and-paste existence whereby one uses segments of 
someone else’s narrative, real or fictional, instead of thinking for oneself. Indeed, 
watching a film can induce in the individual a false sense of accomplishment 
because of the sheer powerfulness of the feeling of identification with the charac­
ters. This kind of identification is a lazy path to self-understanding as it dupes the 
individual into thinking that he or she has achieved something without actually 
attaining it. Addiction to this process comes as a result of the lack of emotional 
and intellectual satisfaction when the illusory nature of cine-individuation process 
becomes apparent as one needs more when the previous instalment of cinematic 
narratives comes to an end. Cinematic and television narratives are only useful 
when they are treated as guides, not as complete substitutes for the actual indi­
viduation process. They are not solutions or ideal recipes.
The hero of our time
We perceive superheroes on many levels because, even sharing the same basic 
human experiences (growing up, initiation, finding a partner, establishing a 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  33
family, discovering our identity and our path in life) and the same environment 
(urban landscapes, an office job, mass media and the social networks), we nev­
ertheless regard the world in unique ways shaped by the relationships with our 
parents and siblings, our genetic predisposition, our childhood experiences, etc. 
In this way, a film is simultaneously seen on both the personal and collective 
levels, the superficial and archetypal. For example, if one narrows down Batman 
as a hero rooted in his time, one gets the image of the modern individual trying to 
deal with a whole hierarchy of issues: personal, social and collective.
Yet, on the basic universal level, Batman is the protagonist of a traditional hero 
myth. In this sense, he is no different from the stock mythological heroes with 
superhuman abilities and unusual birth such as Achilles, Aeneas or Beowulf. Like 
them, he kills evil creatures, fights for justice, tries to define his identity in relation 
to society, protects his community and seeks eternal glory. Any hero of this scale 
symbolises the universally recognisable themes of power and control, achieve­
ment and failure, maintaining the balance between individualism and socialisation, 
and between narcissism and adaptation. Myths of modernity reproducing specific 
problems of industrialised Western societies such as environmental concerns 
and the ruthlessness of the capitalist system, superhero narratives nevertheless 
follow traditional narrative structures and act as mirrors aiding the viewers in self-
reflection and better understanding of their environment.
Any image, figure or symbol permeates different levels of the psyche, the col­
lective (universally understood individuation quest), the contemporary collective 
(Batman as a fighter with the dark side of modernity – urban crime, mass media 
influence, loneliness and psychological fragmentation) and the personal (you 
want to be a superman in order to impress the girl of your dreams, or to prove 
something to your friends or your parents). As individuals are inseparable from 
their background and cannot be regarded in isolation from the specific concerns of 
their community, the universal, the culturally specific and the uniquely individual 
in superhero narratives form the three layers that outline the complex psychoso­
cial existence of an ordinary person in a fast-changing society. They are ways in 
which contemporary individuals make sense of the world – and themselves.
At the same time, the democratisation of the hero myth, exemplified in super­
hero narratives, has another side to it: the precarious boundary between fantasy 
and reality, the dangerous moment of withdrawal of projections, the ability to bal­
ance one’s narcissistic ambition with one’s everyday persona. Not surprisingly, 
in a bout of self-reflection, the superhero industry has spawned a number of dark 
parodies such as Kick-Ass (directed by Matthew Vaughn, 2010) and Birdman 
(Alejandro González Iñárritu, 2015), exploring the threshold between the invin­
cible persona of the hero and the ordinary person adopting it and attempting to 
live in it.
This new trend points at a deep-seated cultural unease about the loss of realistic 
perspective in favour of mythologisation of one’s life. One of the reasons narra­
tives exist is in order to make us think about our place in society, not to submerge 
us into the fantasy life forever. The ‘superhero complex’ comes out of the danger 

34  Methods
of identification with the collective psyche. It is far too easy to lose oneself in the 
collective unconscious, and to start thinking that one’s human frame is only a rep­
resentative of some kind of divine force on Earth – it is too easy to start thinking 
that one is superhuman. An ordinary man always wants to be something bigger 
than a small insignificant person. Yet, he possesses a fair share of ‘ambition, van­
ity and misplaced naiveté’ and is tempted by ‘prophetic inspiration and desire for 
martyrdom’ that is a form of ‘regressive longing’ (CW7: 260). This often leads to 
inflation by identification with the primordial images from the collective psyche – 
the hero being one of the most common ones. This is a special case of persona 
identification, where the ego becomes wedded to the outer mask of the persona, 
and seemingly cannot shake it off. Here the key role of the persona in assisting in 
social adaptation is lost and the individual becomes stuck in the outer world and 
is consequently unable to gain further access to the unconscious – at least until the 
persona identification is dissolved.
Kick-Ass (2010) is an initiation narrative that follows the adventures of Dave 
Lizewski (Aaron Johnson), a high school student who buys a superhero costume 
and attempts to develop superhuman abilities, but has to deal with the limitations 
of his physical frame when assorted villains repeatedly remind him that he is only 
human – and therefore mortal. Birdman (2010) harbours an even darker message: 
the superhero myth is a narcissistic project, a malaise of our time, and a very tem­
porary solution for otherwise realistic problems. Not surprisingly, the protagonist 
is an ageing Hollywood actor Riggan Thomson, who used to play the superhero 
Birdman, and is portrayed by Michael Keaton, famous for playing Batman in 
Tim Burton’s Batman (1999) and Batman Returns (1992). Thomson is given 
a chance to revive his career by writing and directing a Broadway play. Yet, 
Birdman the hero stubbornly refuses to leave as Thomson hallucinates that he is 
levitating, hears Birdman’s voice telling him about the good old days when they 
used to be ‘superheroes’, and daydreams about setting cars aflame with a snap 
of his fingers. The battle between fantasy and reality reaches its apogee in the 
last scenes of the film when Thomson apparently forgets about his mortality and 
humanness altogether, and imagines that he can fly.
Conceiving the collective unconscious as an ocean ‘thinking’ in images is a 
powerful idea, and some directors familiar with Jung and Campbell admit ‘fish­
ing’ universal patterns out of it and fleshing them out in accordance with the 
culture of their time. For instance, the author of the Mad Max franchise, George 
Miller (Bravin, 2015), insists that the figure of the lone warrior – a universal 
archetype that changes shape in line with the culture into which he is born (thus 
becoming an archetypal image) – came to him from the collective unconscious. 
The culture in question is the dark, inhuman side of the post-industrial society 
that in the films has destroyed itself by its greed and reckless use of the planet’s 
resources.
Moreover, Miller sees himself as a vehicle for the symbols coming from the 
collective unconscious, and says that he listens to its images carefully – ‘makes 
a sincere effort’ to realise its vision. According to Jung, the unconscious thinks 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  35
in symbols – not in words. Not surprisingly for a director drawing his inspiration 
directly from the unconscious, the Mad Max films (1979–2015) are highly visual 
with limited dialogue and precision storyboarding. As alluded to in Jess Bravin’s 
interview (2015), Miller was careful to preserve the unconscious imagery and he 
did not want to obscure it by dialogue. The image, he says, exists all around the 
world in different incarnations: ‘In Japan they said Max is a samurai, in Europe, 
they said it’s a western on wheels, in Scandinavia they said he’s a lone Viking 
warrior and so on’ (Bravin, 2015). Eventually Miller realised that he ‘tapped into 
a kind of Joseph Campbell collective unconsciousness . . . and made a very sin­
cere effort, unconsciously, to tell that kind of story’ (Bravin, 2015).
The imagery used by Miller as a unique pattern (archetypal images) on his uni­
versal narrative canvas (archetypes) is that of a post-apocalyptic barbarism, with 
people dressed in rags and battered leather fighting for meagre resources in dusty, 
relentless desert. The main resource is gasoline, and people driving rusty cars, rigs 
and motorcycles will fight to the death for a drop of it. Throughout the tetralogy, 
Miller’s vision of survival and loss of humanity is fleshed out in similar images 
and colours: fiery hot desert sun, blood mixed with dirt and dust, basic, ‘steam-
punk’ vehicles that crafty humans fashioned out of what remained of their science 
and technology, dog food instead of proper food, burning tyres and exploding 
cars, contaminated water instead of rivers, etc. By the fourth film (Mad Max: Fury 
Road, 2015) this vision became so magnificent that it reached the proportions of a 
large-scale post-apocalyptic ballet, orchestrated with admirable precision.
Yet, despite their visual originality, the stories told in the tetralogy are univer­
sal (the hero myth), as well as raise awareness of global ecological issues. They 
are simultaneously contemporary and historical, and aim to prompt the discussion 
of what it means to be human in the contemporary industrialised world.
Individuation and archetypes
Film critics traditionally see Jungian psychology as a source of structural devices 
such as the individuation/hero myth and the archetypes that are its contents. 
Imperfect as it is, Christopher Vogler’s book The Writer’s Journey clearly showed 
the applicability of Jungian ideas for both screenwriting and film criticism. The 
individuation process is essentially an optimistic concept that presupposes a cer­
tain degree of balance, progressivity, maturation and hope in an individual’s life. 
We have this hope for ourselves, and we also find it appealing when it is reflected 
in cinematic narratives. This too is what we want to see in films – a story, a 
development, a progression, a tale of transformation. Individuation – the hero 
myth – is an ideal metaphor for the description of psychological transformation 
in a person’s life.
Unlike Freudian psychology, which is backward-looking and searching for 
answers to present problems in the individual’s past, Jungian theory is more about 
the future: it is about evaluating one’s present position in life and trying to plan the 
future with this knowledge. The past is important, but not decisive. One learns about 

36  Methods
oneself as one goes along the path of life, and this process is progressive and aimed 
at the attainment of psychological wholeness. Although this wholeness can never be 
fully achieved, one could – in theory – approach some kind of peace with oneself, a 
pact with one’s psyche by appeasing the inner demons. If not peace, then individu­
ation offers the potential for a state of equanimity with ourselves, how we are in the 
world and the ability to cope with the challenges and difficulties of everyday life.
There is nothing wrong with having inner demons, though – indeed, they are 
unavoidable. Everyone individuates, and, since human beings share the collective 
unconscious, we all have similar individuation milestones. These milestones are 
expressed in metaphors and metaphorical situations – or archetypes and arche­
typal situations, as Jung preferred to call them. All human beings have issues with 
parents or parental figures, initiate, struggle with their undesirable character traits 
such as envy, greed and aggression, deal with instincts and sexuality, try to find 
their path and place in life, look for love and acceptance, and try to achieve some­
thing significant before death. In other words, individuation is the basic skeleton 
which is then filled out with personal details: all parents (and the issues associated 
with them) are different; and the ways in which human beings experience sexual 
feelings are also very individual. Cinematic narratives provide frameworks for 
reflecting on a variety of individuation moments, and, as the interaction with the 
screen is one-way, they are also pliable canvasses for one’s fantasies and projec­
tions. They are ideal providers of objects for one’s individuation narrative.
Although individuation is analysable, it is mostly a creative, spontaneous pro­
cess, a ‘natural process within the psyche’ that is ‘potentially present in every man, 
although most men are unaware of it’ (Jacobi, 1973: 107). It is driven by what Jung 
called the centre of personality – the Self which stands for psychological wholeness 
(not perfection) and a freedom from all worldly conflicts and peace with oneself. 
This centre is more of a guideline and a phantom rather than something that can be 
really achieved. One can dream of achieving wholeness, but this might never happen. 
There is nothing tragic in this state of things, however. Having inner conflicts is only 
human, and while it is possible to integrate some of these issues, it is not possible to 
get rid of them completely. Arguably, nor is it entirely desirable as the resolution of 
psychological conflict is one of the spurs to creativity. Meanwhile, narratives show 
us our unique problems while, at the same time, making us realise that we do not 
suffer alone, and that our problems are as personal as they are universal.
Whereas the Self is the unattainable personality centre uniting the different 
parts of the psyche, the ego is responsible for our conscious being. It contains 
one’s unique personality traits and defines who one is as an individual. As such, it 
is the centre of consciousness. Jung writes:
The ego is, by definition, subordinate to the Self and is related to it like a 
part to the whole. Inside the field of consciousness it has, as we say, free 
will. . . . it finds its limits outside the field of consciousness in the subjective 
inner world, where it comes into conflict with the facts of the Self.
(CW9, II: 9)

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  37
The Self is connected with the collective while the ego distinguishes the individual 
from collectivity, both internal and external.
Jung writes in ‘Psychological Types’:
In general [individuation] is the process by which individual beings are 
formed and differentiated; in particular, it is the development of the psycho­
logical individual as a being distinct from the general, collective psychology. 
Individuation, therefore, is a process of differentiation, having for its goal the 
development of the individual personality.
(CW6: 757, emphasis as original)
In this sense, the individuation process truly joins together the individual and the 
collective, the personal and the social. It emphasises the fact that there is no indi­
vidual without society, and no singularity without culture. Every human being is 
a product of his or her environment; or, as the anthropologist Clifford Geertz puts 
it, men have a psychological necessity to belong to a collective identity – ‘Dobuan 
or Javanese, Hopi and Italian, upper-class and lower-class, academic and com­
mercial’ (1973: 49). Only through their culture can individuals attain completion 
because culture is there to fill the ‘information gap’ between ‘what our body tells 
us and what we have to know in order to function’ (1973: 49).
Archetypes, as Jung envisaged them, are the constituents (as well as stages) in 
the individuation process. Because they represent different human experiences, 
they more or less define what it means to be human. Jung singled out a range of 
archetypes, all corresponding to particular psychological issues in the life of the 
individual: the shadow, the anima, the animus, the child, the trickster, the old wise 
man, the old wise woman and the self. There are many others, and indeed it is a 
point of some debate as to the extent to which the number of archetypes is fixed – 
certainly, the variation in the images assumed by archetypes seems at the same 
time to be endless and yet they are immediately familiar.
Archetypes are essentially clusters of unconscious content and are ‘invisible’ 
for consciousness. In this way, Jung distinguishes between the ‘original’ arche­
types and their concrete realisations, archetypal images – the shapes and forms 
they take in particular cultures and in individual minds. He writes:
there is a considerable difference between the archetype and the historical for­
mula that has evolved. . . . Their immediate manifestation, as we encounter it 
in dreams and visions, is much more individual, less understandable and more 
naïve than in myths, for example. The archetype is essentially an unconscious 
content that is altered by becoming conscious and by being perceived, and it 
takes its colour from the individual consciousness in which it happens to appear.
(CW9, I: 6)
Unlike complexes that inhabit the personal level of the unconscious, archetypes 
reside in its collective part. Jolande Jacobi explains that they:

38  Methods
make up the actual content of the collective unconscious; their number is 
relatively limited for it corresponds to ‘the number of typical and fundamen­
tal experiences’ incurred by man since primordial times. Their meaning for 
us lies precisely in the ‘primordial experience’ which is based on them and 
which they represent and communicate. . . . We find them recurring in all 
mythologies, fairy tales, religious traditions and mysteries. . . . Prometheus 
the stealer of fire, Heracles the dragon slayer, the countless creation myths, 
the fall from paradise, the mysteries of creation, the virgin birth, the treacher­
ous betrayal of the hero, the dismembering of Osiris, and many other myths 
and fairy tales represent psychic processes in symbolic images. Similarly, the 
figures of the snake, the fish, the sphinx, the helpful animals, the Tree of the 
World, the Great Mother, the enchanted prince, the puer aeternus, the Mage, 
the Wise Man, Paradise, etc., stand for certain motifs and contents of the col­
lective unconscious.
(Jacobi, 1973: 47)
The archetype, according to Jung, has a numinous effect – i.e. it is emotionally 
powerful and overwhelming for the one who is experiencing it. In fact, it is so 
powerful that it is almost out of human control – ‘the subject is gripped by it as 
though by an instinct’. It is even more potent than an instinct as ‘instinct itself can 
be restrained and even overcome by this power’ (CW5: 225).
Not surprisingly, the term ‘archetype’ has been appropriated by popular cul­
ture and used to describe the idea of an object or phenomenon being a typical 
representative of its class; a sort of golden standard. Today ‘archetypal’ and ‘the 
archetype’ are used as umbrella terms to describe a range of cultural common­
places – something that is recognised by all consumers of popular culture as a 
‘typical’ representative of its group. Thus, there are archetypal cowboys, arche­
typal princesses, archetypal villains and even archetypal journalists. In fact, this 
popular definition of archetype is now used in place of ‘stereotype’. Anything or 
anyone fitting into a particular cultural role can be described as being ‘archetypal’ 
or ‘archetypical’.
This popular vision of the archetype as a recognisable representative of a 
particular culture is what Jung would call ‘archetypal image’. Archetypes them­
selves are ideas or structures that are unrelated to any concrete or specific culture. 
Archetypal images, by contrast are more concrete realisations of archetypes. 
Unlike archetypes, which exist in the collective unconscious and represent gen­
eral ideas and situations: the great mother, the shadow, the child, the trickster, 
etc., archetypal images belong to a particular culture. For instance, Cruella de Vil 
is a pop culture version of the great mother archetype (its negative aspect), Harry 
Potter is a version of the child archetype, and the Joker from the Batman myth 
is usually presented as a shadow (sometimes with the elements of the trickster). 
Archetypal situations are universal patterns, which in myth, dreams and the life of 
the individual take slightly personalised forms. For instance, birth, initiation, fall­
ing in love, fighting with evil and searching for truth are all archetypal situations.

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  39
The shadow
According to the classical Jungian scheme, archetypes are encountered during 
the individuation process in a particular order. More contemporary Jungian 
thinking sees archetypes working in clusters, and in a more unpredictable manner. 
Jolande Jacobi upholds the classical order in her book about the basics of Jungian 
psychology. The shadow, according to this sequence, is the first figure that the 
emerging individual encounters on her or his individuation path.
The primary position of the shadow in the individuation process, in fact, echoes 
Freudian and post-Freudian theory’s preoccupation with narcissism and the ways 
in which the child deals with its own selfish impulses and instincts before it can 
be accepted as an individual into the social order. Although Jung never compared 
the shadow with narcissism (and his psychology did not inherit Freud’s interest in 
it), in many ways this archetype can be seen as a ‘mythological’ equivalent of it.
Jung defined the shadow as primarily ‘a moral problem that challenges the 
whole ego-personality, for no one can become conscious of the shadow without 
considerable moral effort. To become conscious of it involves recognising the 
dark aspects of the personality as present and real’ (CW9, II: 14). As such, the 
shadow is the ‘dark brother’ in whom all the negative aspects of human nature are 
stored. It is home to greed, aggression, envy, jealousy, fear and hatred.
Humans’ relationship with the shadow has always been a key leitmotif of 
art and literature. Human struggle with it is brilliantly described, for instance, 
in Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1886) and Oscar 
Wilde’s Picture of Dorian Gray (1890). Morality and civilisation fight with the 
shadow, and human beings usually try to forget about its existence because its 
qualities are shameful and unacceptable in a civilised society. These qualities 
are not conducive to peaceful human interaction and coexistence, and certainly 
go against the Kantian categorical imperative. Jung uses colourful metaphors 
to describe this archetype: it is ‘a tight passage, a narrow door, whose painful 
constriction no one is spared who goes down to the deep well’ (CW9, I: 45). 
The doppelganger is the mirror of our ‘good selves’, and, as such, it is always 
inside us:
Whoever looks into the mirror of the water will see first of all his own face. 
Whoever goes to himself risks a confrontation with himself. The mirror does 
not flatter, it faithfully shows whatever looks into it; namely, the face we 
never show to the world because we cover it with the persona, the mask of the 
actor. But the mirror lies behind the mask and shows the true face.
(CW9, I: 43)
The shadow, Jung theorised, comes in two versions: the personal and the col­
lective. The collective version is particularly terrifying because it emerges when 
personal negative feelings become multiplied and transform into collective nega­
tive feelings, when hatred, envy and rage express themselves on a mass scale. 

40  Methods
This is why it is important to recognise and deal with one’s own personal shadow 
lest it becomes seduced by the power of the mass:
It is a frightening thought that man also has a shadow side to him, consisting 
not just of little weaknesses and foibles, but of a positively demonic dyna­
mism. The individual seldom knows anything of this; to him, as an individual, 
it is incredible that he should ever in any circumstances go beyond himself. 
But let these harmless creatures form a mass, and there emerges a raging mon­
ster; and each individual is only one tiny cell in the monster’s body, so that for 
better or worse he must accompany it on its bloody rampages and even assist 
it to the utmost. Having a dark suspicion of these grim possibilities, man turns 
a blind eye to the shadow-side of human nature. Blindly he strives against the 
salutary dogma of original sin, which is yet so prodigiously true. Yes, he even 
hesitates to admit the conflict of which he is so painfully aware.
(CW7: 35)
One cannot get rid of the shadow entirely, but one can learn to manage it. As such, 
it is an important part of the individuation process. As Christopher Hauke notes 
in Jung and the Postmodern, for Jung, individuation means integrating neglected 
parts of the psyche in the hope to become ‘fully oneself’:
nothing more or less than being fully oneself. This means including parts 
of oneself that have been lost or neglected not only due to circumstances 
or personal history – parents, upbringing and so on – but have also been 
lost or neglected due to the collective conditions of the era and culture . . . . 
However, the personal and the collective, as well as the past and the present, 
are difficult to differentiate and separate in any final way.
(Hauke, 2000: 109)
Cinematic narratives often employ the shadow to show the split personality of 
the modern individual. For instance, Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt) in Fight Club 
(1999, directed by David Fincher) is the nameless protagonist’s doppelganger 
who represents his repressed, split-off personality traits. Tyler is a social ter­
rorist who professes his disdain towards society, and who does everything the 
narrator does not dare to do: urinates in the food at restaurants where he works 
as a waiter; makes soap out of liposuction fat and sells it to posh perfumeries; 
destroys an Apple store; and has outrageous sex with the protagonist’s girlfriend 
Marla (Helena Bonham Carter). As the film progresses, the double gets madder 
and more dangerous in his plans to destroy the global financial system while the 
spineless protagonist makes half-hearted attempts to control his runaway ‘second 
nature’. Like many doppelganger narratives, the film ends with the protagonist 
killing his double, nearly dying himself as a result (because the shadow is an 
inseparable part of human nature; one cannot just ‘kill it off’), and redeeming the 
world by releasing it from the grip of capitalist greed and globalisation.

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  41
The anima and the animus
In the classical model of individuation after the encounter with the shadow, the 
individual has to deal with the anima or the animus – the contrasexual ‘soul image’ 
residing in the person’s psyche and defining his or her relationships with the oppo­
site sex. In myths and fairy tales these archetypal images can be presented in both 
their positive (helping, kindly, useful) and negative (demonic) incarnations. As a 
rule, men have to deal with two types of the anima: the domestic (passive) angel, 
and the sexual or intellectual (proactive) whore. Women are endowed with more 
than one animus: in fact, some are possessed by a chorus of animuses, all so loud 
that they make the women in question impossible to manage. It is clear from this 
outline of Jungian theory that Jung’s view, and that of the early Jungian analysts, 
on the animus and the anima were quite inflexible, for they only wrote about het­
erosexual people, and theorised about the ‘treacherous’ anima that lures men into 
trouble, and the ‘loud’ animus that turns women into impossible, uncontrollable 
creatures (both are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6). Notwithstanding these 
descriptions none of the archetypes can be completely integrated into conscious­
ness, or made ‘safe’ and innocuous. The best an individual can do is to try and 
illuminate the archetypes, who come to us in the more personalised and anthro­
pomorphic form of archetypal images, thus allowing them to speak via various 
narratives: dreams, fantasies, literature, cinema and television.
The old wise man and the old wise woman
Parental issues (and beyond) are reflected in the figures of the old wise man and 
the old wise woman. Like any archetypes, they can be ‘good’ or ‘bad’. The old 
wise man, who often materialises in fairy tales in the form of magicians, father 
figures or helpful (or evil) elves, stands for meaning, and often brings to the ail­
ing or confused hero some calcification about his or her desperate situation. This 
archetype, Jung writes, represents ‘knowledge, reflection, insight, wisdom, clev­
erness, and intuition on the one hand, and on the other, moral qualities such as 
goodwill and readiness to help, which make his “spiritual” character sufficiently 
plain’ (CW9, I: 406). Yet, in its negative incarnation it may appear as a wicked 
villain who ‘does evil for evil’s sake’: a ruthless king, a concocter of poisons or a 
horrid water spirit. This ambivalence reflects the dynamic character of the psyche 
in which nothing is ever set in stone, all views are relative and should be balanced 
out by the opposite. ‘Too much of a good thing’ can also be bad.
Similarly, the wise old woman (who has a certain affinity with the great mother 
archetype, discussed in more detail in Chapter 6) can appear to the protagonist 
as a helpful motherly figure or a wicked witch, and can symbolise now ‘wisdom 
and spiritual exaltation’ and ‘helpful instinct and impulse that . . . cherishes and 
sustains’, and now ‘anything secret, hidden, dark; the abyss, the world of the 
dead, anything that devours, seduces and poisons’ (CW9, I: 158). The mother is 
ambivalent as she is both ‘the loving and the terrible mother’ (CW9, I: 158).

42  Methods
Both the old wise man and the old wise woman go way beyond the figures of 
the individual’s actual parents, and symbolise more universal issues: primarily, 
growing up, establishing a balance between consciousness and the unconscious; 
getting in trouble and looking for help during this process. These ‘wise’ arche­
types, despite the possibility of them turning into evil figures, represent the ability 
of the psyche to self-direct, self-train and self-heal. For instance, Luke Skywalker 
in Star Wars (1977, directed by George Lucas) is advised by Obi-Wan Kenobi, 
but also externally motivated by Darth Vader, the two father figures illuminating 
the two sides of the protagonist’s own nature and guiding him towards better self-
understanding and self-reflection.
The child
According to Jung, in fairy tales and myths the child archetype is linked to the 
archetype of the self. The child is a future hero, and many mythological saviours 
are child gods. In the individuation process, the wonder-child ‘paves the way for a 
future change of personality’ and ‘anticipates the figure that comes from the syn­
thesis of conscious and unconscious elements in the personality. It is therefore a 
symbol which unites the opposites; a mediator, bringer of healing, that is, one who 
makes whole’ (CW9, I: 278). In myths, the (usually male) child prodigy possesses 
miraculous abilities: he can casually kill dangerous snakes as he lays in his cot 
(Heracles), survive numerous assassination attempts like Dionysus, or, like Harry 
Potter, play a trick or two on the evil members of his adopted family.
As a rule, his birth is unusual. He is a child of a god or a goddess, and in 
many cases his high status parents prefer to remain anonymous. This element of 
the motif implies that a godlike infant cannot be produced by ordinary parents; 
surely his unusual abilities come from very special people. Yet, despite his spe­
cial abilities and influential parents, the child’s life is fraught with danger. He 
has merciless and ruthless enemies: for instance, the goddess Hera who tried to 
destroy the unborn Dionysos out of jealousy because he was the child of Zeus 
and a mortal woman, Semele, or King Herod who according to the Gospel of 
Matthew ordered the murder of all the infants in Bethlehem hoping that the baby 
Jesus would be among them.
Jung theorised that the child motif corresponded to the birth of the personality 
and its development and eventual survival in the world. It represents the ‘infancy’ of 
the individuation process, its fragile, humble beginnings. Growing out of the uncon­
scious, and into an unsafe world, is a heroic process. The hero-ego, the conscious 
psyche ‘emerges’ from the primordial darkness, and tries to establish itself in its 
surroundings and to gain a unique identity. Attainment of a recognisable personality 
marks the birth of the individual as someone separate from the crowd, as well as 
someone relatively independent from the unconscious, from ‘mother nature’:
The Hero’s main feat is to overcome the monster of darkness: it is the long-
hoped-for and expected triumph of consciousness over the unconscious. . . . The 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  43
coming of consciousness was probably the most tremendous experience of 
primeval times, for with it a world came into being whose existence no one had 
suspected before. ‘And God said: “Let there be light!”’ is the projection of that 
immemorial separation of the conscious from the unconscious. . . . Hence the 
‘child’ distinguishes itself by deeds which point to the conquest of the dark.
(CW9, I: 284)
The abandonment motif is an integral aspect of the child myth because, trans­
lated back into the language of individual development, it symbolises personal 
independence, even when it has been achieved through isolation and hardship. 
Abandonment, Jung writes, is necessary because it triggers the birth of the indi­
vidual as a separate entity (CW9, I: 285). Moreover, the child
is all that is abandoned and exposed and at the same time divinely powerful; 
the insignificant, dubious beginning, and the triumphant end. The ‘eternal 
child’ in man is an indescribable experience, an incongruity, a handicap, and 
a divine prerogative; an imponderable that determines the ultimate worth or 
worthlessness of a personality.
(CW9, I: 300)
The child is a future hero, a future individual, and becoming an individual is a 
difficult task.
Many directors utilise the child archetype in their films. For instance, Tim 
Burton’s outcast protagonists are all versions of the child archetype. This ‘misfit’ 
image can appear in various forms in Burton’s movies: the persecuted monster, 
the mad genius, the maniac, the dishevelled teenager living in his own Gothic 
castle on a hill, and the disturbed superhero who fights his horrible shadow. These 
guises often overlap (‘the child’ is also ‘the genius’ and ‘the maniac’, etc.), creat­
ing a complex picture of the typical Burtonian male character – a weird, isolated 
little boy who grows up to be a lonely artist. The childish protagonist invariably 
has a dark imagination and is never accepted by the ordinary people who often 
hate him or even want him dead (Batman, Edward Scissorhands, Willy Wonka). 
More recently, Burton has been making narratives with female protagonists in 
them, notably Alice in Wonderland (2010) and Big Eyes (2015). Both the female 
protagonists – Alice (Mia Wasikowska) and the painter Margaret from Big Eyes 
(Amy Adams) fit into the ‘dark child’ pattern characteristic of Burtonian individu­
ation: both are creative, different, oppressed, battling against societal prejudice 
and defending their right to be individuals amongst ‘normal people’.
Although Burton’s protagonist is in conflict with his or her environment – the 
notorious crowd of commoners who fail to understand him or her – he or she still 
attempts to give something back to society, and is keen to transform it to the best 
of his or her abilities. Despite the split personality and the ‘monstrous’ darkness 
they harbour, Bruce Wayne, the assorted Edwards, Victor, Vincent and Alice still 
function as human beings; they are able to empathise with others; they are able to 

44  Methods
relate (albeit badly and in their own way). Edward Scissorhands epitomises the 
Burtonian protagonist as he used to be – creative, dishevelled, immature, funny 
and lovingly mad. This kind of protagonist is eclectic yet harmonious. He can 
transform his anguish and pain into tree sculptures (Edward Scissorhands), funny 
mechanical contraptions (Pee Wee), crime-fighting devices (Batman), innovative 
chocolates (Willy Wonka), science (Ichabod) and silly B-movies (Ed Wood). The 
conflicting sides of his personality work well together because his creativity keeps 
him afloat and allows him to connect with others.
The trickster
In his essay ‘On the Psychology of the Trickster Figure’, Jung gives this archetype 
a whole range of contradictory definitions. To a large extent, this contradictori­
ness is inevitable because the trickster’s role in social structure can be regarded as 
either, or both, positive or negative depending on whether you see it from the point 
of view of society or from the position of the freedom-seeking individual. The 
trickster is both ‘subhuman and superhuman, a bestial and divine being, whose 
chief and most alarming characteristic is his unconsciousness’ (CW9, I: 472). The 
trickster, Jung writes, is a creature of the unconscious, the wise fool, the clown 
and the delight-maker. He has a dual nature: half-animal, half divine. Tricksters 
reverse the hierarchic order, are shapeshifters and are famous for their malicious 
tricks and pranks. Jung also mentions the strong link between the trickster figure 
and the tradition of carnival, where the Devil appeared as simia dei – the ape of 
God (CW9, I: 465–472). It is also ‘a faithful reflection of an absolutely undif­
ferentiated human consciousness, corresponding to a psyche that has hardly left 
the animal level’ (CW9, I: 465). This archetype will be discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 4.
The self
The archetype of the self stands for the never-achievable psychological whole­
ness. Jung writes that ‘wholeness can be realised for one moment only – the 
moment that Faust was seeking all his life’ (CW12: 321). The self encompasses 
all the elements of the psyche, both ‘reachable’ and ‘unreachable’; it com­
prises ‘consciousness first of all, then the personal unconscious, and finally an 
indefinitely large segment of the collective unconscious whose archetypes are 
common to all mankind’ (CW9, I: 634). Unlike the other archetypes, which can 
become personalised and ‘are permanently or temporarily included within the 
scope of the personality’, the self is both simple and extremely composite, and 
largely impersonal.
The idea of a hero’s journey is to bring the quester nearer to this unity, 
the psychic perfection which eliminates all conflicts and problems. Although 
the achievement of this inner peace and absolute perfection is impossible, the 
hero during the journey attempts to solve at least some of the problems (such 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  45
as dealing with the shadow, for instance – or coming to terms with the great 
mother). In narratives, the self is the driving force of the story, and the protago­
nist’s main motivation vehicle.
The archetype of the alien
The alien is one of the most popular characters in contemporary film and 
television – so popular, in fact, that it has almost become a new archetype. Its 
biggest competitor and antagonist is the urban superhero, and both are linked to 
the spiritual crisis of the technologically advanced civilisation. Extra-terrestrial 
invaders have dominated science fiction and horror genres even since Georges 
Méliès Trip to the Moon (1902), and their firm presence in moving image nar­
ratives was mirrored in the UFO obsession and invasion fantasies that proved 
enduring in popular imagination throughout the twentieth century.
Alien invasion is a good umbrella metaphor that covers a whole set of con­
temporary anxieties. The alien figure possesses distinct characteristics: it is 
highly intelligent, mysterious, omniscient, confident and can read minds. These 
features render themselves particularly well to the stock sci-fi themes of mind 
control, conspiracy and paranoia – the traditional sublimation of political fears 
of such a diverse scope as totalitarian communist governments, capitalist mind-
manipulation, colonialist occupation, the hidden power of the media, secret ser­
vice conspiracies and other forms of ‘big brother’ control and surveillance. Not 
surpassingly, the theme of alien invasion is closely linked to conspiracy theories 
and to rumours that governments are hiding information about extra-terrestrial 
visitors. Such conspiracy theories and their accompanied paranoid and persecutory 
affects are also commonplace fantasies for people with borderline personalities. 
In turn this suggests the proximity of these fantasies to the collective unconscious.
Some cinematic aliens invade from the inside by stealing human minds and 
invading their bodies; others arrive on Earth openly and destroy its cities by fire. 
Monsters from the Alien franchise (1979–1997, directed by Ridley Scott, James 
Cameron, David Fincher and Jean-Pierre Jeunet) would belong to the first group; 
and mass invaders from Independence Day (1996), directed by Roland Emmerich, 
Tim Burton’s Mars Attacks! (1996), Steven Spielberg’s The War of the Worlds 
(2005) or Edge of Tomorrow (2014, Doug Liman) would belong to the second. 
In both the narrative types, human beings lose control over themselves and their 
habitat while a more powerful force takes over.
In the middle of the twentieth century, at the height of the Cold War and after 
the horrors of the Second World War, alien obsession was a big part of the cultural 
climate. In his book The Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror (1993), 
David Skal demonstrates how the threat of physical annihilation shaped horror 
entertainment in the US:
Most Americans found it easier not to face the invasion/annihilation anxie­
ties directly; they found indirect expression in McCarthyism, UFO hysteria, 

46  Methods
and perhaps, most pointedly, in the popular medium of lurid and sensational 
comic books that had been growing steadily since the end of World War II.
(Skal, 1993: 230)
Thus, the war gave creative industries new imagery, themes and symbolism 
because it ‘had introduced two radical new forms of mechanized death – the 
atomic bomb and the extermination camp’ (Skal, 1993: 229). In this sense, 
the alien is an ‘estranged’ version of a human being; it is the ultimate other, 
the doppelganger, the shadow who serves as a mirror for reflecting conflicting 
human qualities back to the audience. Patrick Luciano explores these themes in 
detail in his 1987 book Them or Us: Archetypal Interpretation of Fifties Alien 
Invasion Films.
Jung had his own explanation of the alien obsession phenomenon. In his 
essay, ‘Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Sky’ (1958), 
he explores a number of UFO sightings, and compares them to similar psy­
cho-spiritual experiences that took place in the Middle Ages. The collective 
unconscious, as we remember, looks for suitable symbols to express itself. 
These symbols (archetypal images) are culturally determined, unlike their 
core contents (archetypes). Jung suggests that the image of the spaceship is the 
contemporary version of the archetype of the Self – the psychological unity, the 
image of godlike perfection which we aim to become but will never achieve. 
The UFOs became a powerful mass dream image partly because, in Jung’s 
words, ‘anything that looks technological goes down without difficulty with 
modern man’ (CW10: 624).
Jung explains the round shape of flying saucers in terms of universal religious 
symbolism; in his view,
the circular symbols have played an important role in every age . . . . There is 
an old saying that ‘God is a circle whose centre is everywhere and circumfer­
ence nowhere’. God in his omniscience, omnipotence, and omnipresence is a 
totality symbol par excellence, something round, complete, and perfect. . . . On 
the antique level, therefore, the UFOs could easily be conceived as ‘gods’.
(CW10: 622)
By the 1950s alien invasion had already become a collective dream theme, with 
people reporting cases of spotting shiny globes in the sky, being abducted by 
aliens, of extra-terrestrials carving out patterns on crops or aliens sharing wisdom 
with their ‘less intelligent brothers’. In fact, the figure’s ambiguity – its unpredict­
ability and aggression offset by advanced intellect and superhuman abilities – 
make it an ambivalent projection of humanity’s battle with its own shadow.
Even after the two world wars, Jung argues, there was still a belief in the peo­
ple’s intrinsic goodness and the power of human consciousness to control its 
animal impulses. This belief ‘thrust itself to the forefront in the form of a symbolic 
rumour, accompanied and reinforced by the appropriate visions’ and therefore 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  47
activated an archetype ‘that has always expressed order, deliverance, salvation 
and wholeness’ (CW10: 624). In contemporary Western society, Jung writes 
somewhat optimistically, ‘consciously rationalistic enlightenment predominates’ 
and that ‘belief in this world and in the power of man has, despite assurances to 
the contrary, become an . . . irrefragable truth’ (CW10: 623). Every age has its 
symbols reflecting the same eternal conflicts and universal problems. The UFO 
thus becomes a saviour, a Christ-like visitor coming to planet Earth to redeem its 
inhabitants from themselves, or, alternatively, in the form of the angry God from 
the Old Testament, punishing human beings for their sins and wrongdoings.
In the past fifty years, the alien has become such a stock feature in television 
and cinema that it has transcended its ‘alienness’. Comedies about visitors from 
outer space, such as Mars Attacks! (2000), the Men in Black (1997–2012) fran­
chise, My Stepmother Is an Alien (1988; Richard Benjamin), Spaceballs (1987; 
Mel Brooks) and Paul (2011; Greg Mottola), prove that we are prepared to laugh 
at ourselves, our incompleteness and our dreams of godlike ‘perfection’. The alien 
has almost been recognised as a projection, as a vessel onto which humans project 
their fears of themselves, and their hope that the higher nature in them prevails 
over the dark impulses and traits.
Christopher Vogler’s The Writer’s Journey 
and Joseph Campbell’s monomyth
The screenwriter and development executive Christopher Vogler particularly 
capitalised on the founding concepts of Jungian psychology: the individuation 
process and archetypes. In his book, The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for 
Writers (1998) Vogler transforms the ideas of Joseph Campbell and Carl Jung into 
a sort of Hollywood cookbook aimed at helping screenwriters create commercial 
yet spiritually meaningful narratives. The Writer’s Journey is an interesting phe­
nomenon in the world of writing guides and psychoanalytic criticism. It blatantly 
defies the prevalence of Freudian thinking in the cinematic arena, both in its style 
and content, and asserts the usefulness and supremacy of the Jungian approach to 
screen narratives.
It is not just the structure that Vogler borrows from Jung and Campbell. In the 
introduction to the book, he is very particular about infusing visual images with 
meaning and spirituality – he firmly believes that the goldmine, the structure he 
discovered, is not only commercial, but also capable of making people think and 
improve their lives. The motivation behind the book was to create a template for 
personally meaningful stories. His working as a story analyst for Fox 2000 taught 
him that good films were affecting the organs of his body ‘in various ways, and 
really good ones were stimulating more than one organ’ (Vogler, 2007: x). Even 
his writing style has elements of ‘new age’ thinking in it:
A book goes out like a wave rolling over the surface of the sea. Ideas radiate 
from the author’s mind and collide with other minds, triggering new waves that 

48  Methods
return to the author. These generate further thoughts and emanations, and so 
it goes. The concepts described in The Writer’s Journey have radiated and are 
now echoing back interesting challenges and criticisms as well as sympathetic 
vibrations. This is my report on the waves that have washed back over me from 
publication of the book, and on the new waves I send back in response.
(2007: xiii)
Having imbibed the Jungian idea of the collective unconscious – which has also 
become a significant part of the book’s philosophy – Vogler also claims that his 
cookbook is not an artificial invention, that he was not trying to judge the uncon­
scious by rational means, but instead listened to its waves and eventually elicited 
from it The Writer’s Journey.
Vogler takes different archetypes – the hero, the trickster, the shadow, the men­
tor (wise old man or woman), etc. – and analyses each of them with examples 
from (mostly popular Hollywood) films. He also separates the hero’s journey into 
phases or steps (call to adventure, refusal of the call, meeting with the mentor, the 
ordeal reward, the road back, etc.), and discusses each of them in detail. Curiously, 
Vogler mixes Jung’s and Freud’s ideas in an attempt to create his own analytical 
language, for instance: ‘In psychological terms, the archetype of the Hero repre­
sents what Freud called the ego – that part of the personality that separates from 
the mother, that considers itself distinct from the human race’ (2007: 29).
Vogler’s proposed narrative structure follows that outlined by Campbell in 
A Hero with a Thousand Faces rather faithfully. Underlying Campbell’s mono­
myth (the common pattern found in most narratives all around the world) is the 
anthropological concept of the rites of passage: separation – initiation – return 
(Campbell, 2008: 23). The only trait that unites all monomyth heroes is ‘being 
different’ from the rest of their community. In other words, they attract extreme 
reactions from the people in their surroundings. In everything else they are com­
pletely different: they can be very stupid or very intelligent; complete failures or 
very successful; very handsome or, by contrast, not at all attractive. Yet, the pro­
tagonist remains unfulfilled because he or she does not comply with the norms of 
his or her community. The composite hero of the monomyth, Campbell argues:
is a personage of exceptional gifts. Frequently he is honoured by his society, 
frequently unrecognised or disdained. He and/or the world in which he finds 
himself suffers from a symbolical deficiency. In fairy tales this may be as 
slight as the lack of a certain golden ring, whereas in apocalyptic vision the 
physical and spiritual life of the whole earth can be represented as fallen, or 
on the point of falling into ruin.
. . .
Whether the hero be ridiculous or sublime, Greek or barbarian, gentile or 
Jew, his journey varies little in essential plan.
(2008: 29–30)

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  49
According to Campbell, narrative is a way of organising the often confusing sig­
nals coming from the unconscious. Without structure (and narrative provides a firm 
structure for often subliminal life experiences) we would drown in impressions, 
fears, choices and instinctive reactions. Narratives hold together the experience of 
being human. Echoing Jung, Campbell writes:
The unconscious sends all sorts of vapours, odd beings, terrors and deluding 
images up into the mind – whether in dream, broad daylight, or insanity; for 
the human kingdom, beneath the floor of the comparatively neat little dwelling 
that we call our consciousness, goes down into unsuspected Aladdin caves.
(2008: 5)
Narratives also save us from insanity by collecting, arranging and managing the 
unconscious urges. At the same time, in the Aladdin caves not only jewels but also 
a dangerous jinn abides:
the inconvenient or resisted psychological powers that we have not thought or 
dared integrate into our lives. And they may remain unsuspected, on the other 
hand, some chance word, the smell of a landscape, the taste of a cup of tea, or 
the glance of an eye may touch a magic spring, and then dangerous messen­
gers may appear in the brain. They are dangerous because they threaten the 
fabric of security into which we have built ourselves and our family. But they 
are fiendishly fascinating too, for they carry keys that open the whole realm 
of the desired and feared adventure of the discovery of the self.
(2008: 5)
In other words, we like stories and find them fascinating because they bring us 
meaning and self-discovery despite that a journey into the depths of oneself can 
be both dangerous and threatening to the existing psychological layout of our 
lives. Interestingly enough, and despite the overall Jungian hue of his writings, 
Campbell argues that Freudian concepts are more suitable for examining the first 
part of the individual’s life whereas Jung’s ideas are better for dealing with what 
happens after the mid-life crisis. In fact, Campbell is astute in his observations and 
in his assessment of the overall directions of these two schools of psychological 
thought: he notices that Freudians are more interested in personal psychology, and 
Jungian writing tends to be more general and vague, and concerns larger issues: 
life and death, the meaning of life, spirituality and social processes. He writes:
Sigmund Freud stresses in his writings the passages and difficulties of the first 
half of the human cycle of life – those of our infancy and adolescence, when our 
sun is mounting towards its zenith. C.G Jung, on the other hand, has emphasised 
the crises of the second portion – when, in order to advance, the shining sphere 
must submit to descend and disappear, at last, into the night-womb of the grave.
(2008: 8)

50  Methods
Narratives also provide a safe way of dealing with unconscious contents and 
urges. Not everyone is born a hero, and not everyone is capable of belonging to 
one of the two ‘hero extremes’ – different and accepted or different and rejected. 
For millennia, fairy tales, myths and rituals have been providing ‘normal people’ 
(the ones who do not wish to be different, to become ‘heroes’ and to forge their 
own path) with meaning and ways of organising their experiences and instincts:
The multitude of men and women choose the less adventurous way of the 
comparatively unconscious civic and tribal routines. But these seekers, too, 
are saved – by virtue of the inherited symbolic aids of society, the rites of 
passage, the grace-yielding sacraments, given to mankind of old by the 
redeemers or handed down through millennia.
(Campbell, 2008: 17)
Interestingly, Campbell distinguishes between the heroic ‘inner call’ and the 
external call of a ‘doctrine’ – a communal, religious, social or political structure 
provided to the individual by the governors of the community. He does not give 
preference to either because, in his view, both are equally valid ways of using 
narratives to organise and manage one’s life experiences. Much more perilous is 
the condition of the modern man who is left without myths and therefore without 
guidance; spiritually hanging ‘in mid air’:
It is only those who know neither an inner call nor an outer doctrine whose 
plight is truly desperate; that is to say, most of us today, in this labyrinth without 
and within the heart. Alas, where is the guide, that fond virgin, Ariadne, to sup­
ply the simple clue that will give courage to face the Minotaur, and the means 
then to find our way to freedom when the monster has been met and slain?
(2008: 17)
Ultimately, Campbell claims that the man or woman we call modern is a lonely crea­
ture plucked from his or her culture and left exposed to a changing and fast-paced 
lifestyle. Neither Jung nor Campbell had any idea what kind of psychological change 
would occur in the minds of individuals at the beginning of the twenty-first century, 
but the first half of the twentieth century already looked ‘too much’ to them. Without 
myths, Campbell writes, the modern man follows the narratives left to him – the 
personal narratives called dreams. Psychoanalysis is there to help him analyse these 
dreams. In this sense, psychoanalysis is a replacement of the old communal structures 
which played the role of providing the individual with meaning via myth and ritual:
Freud, Jung and their followers have demonstrated irrefutably that the logic, 
and the deeds of myth survive into modern times. In the absence of an effec­
tive general mythology, each of us has his private, unrecognised, rudimentary, 
yet secretly potent pantheon of dream.
(2008: 2)

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  51
Campbell writes about personal mythology via dream work, but he does not make 
the obvious connection between cinema and dreams. The result of this omission is 
that it misses the collective element of contemporary mythology. It transpires that 
Campbell insists on the personal and intimate aspects of modern narratives, but 
seems to forget that radio and cinema had been producing immediately accessible 
narratives for at least fifty years. Campbell’s individual is torn from his roots and 
his psychological survival depends on the ability of psychoanalysis to interpret his 
private dreams. The public, easily accessible forms of dreams – such as films – are 
not mentioned.
Vogler who proceeds to fill in the obvious gap picks up this connection. 
The hero’s journey embeds both our general life principles and guidelines for 
screenwriters and Hollywood executives. This means that films become our 
dreams, aimed at fulfilling our psychological needs and acting as our mirrors 
without any mediators – no need for psychoanalysis or philosophy. It is possible 
to manipulate the audience’s emotions, Vogler argues in the ‘Ordeal’ section, 
by making the hero’s path thorny and unpredictable, by making them empa­
thise with the hero throughout his or her numerous ordeals, by giving them 
the opportunity to experience extreme emotions in the safety of their homes or 
movie theatre:
People pay good money for a taste of death. Bungee-jumping, skydiving 
and terrifying amusement park rides give the jolt that awakens fuller appre­
ciation of life. Adventure films and stories are always popular because they 
offer a less risky way to experience death and rebirth, through heroes we 
can identify with.
(Vogler, 2007: 160)
Cinema is individuation personified. More so than fiction thanks to its visuality, 
it has always been a sort of condensed and accelerated individuation process, a 
kind of commercial version of the hero myth. Jung’s writings on contemporary 
individuation are indispensable for film studies, primarily because most cin­
ematic narratives attempt to define the individual and to provide commentary on 
his or her relationship with society. In fact, cinema is a form of mass individu­
ation, a form of self-reflection for large groups of people. In cinema, cultural, 
social and political problems become apparent as it provides a platform fortheir 
discussion.
There is a shadow side to all this and as a result of Vogler’s further commer­
cialisation of the individuation structure, cinema and television have become 
machines generating individuation narratives for busy viewers who are no longer 
aware of their psychological processes, their place in the environment or ways of 
connecting with other human beings. This kind of viewer does not have time for 
musing over things or thinking about ‘life, the universe and everything’. In this 
way, individuation becomes externalised and is presented in a processed form, 
rather like nicely packaged supermarket products.

52  Methods
The symbol: between the personal and the collective
The symbol is one of the central concepts of Jungian narrative criticism, for sym­
bols are the language in which the otherwise ‘mute’ collective unconscious speaks 
(see Chapter 3, ‘Jungian psychology: signs and symbols’). They help this vast 
ocean express itself, turning the collective into the personal, providing ways for 
human beings to deal with the complexity of internal life as well as with the 
necessity to be part of society. Importantly, symbols should be respected and not 
over-interpreted; they are not signs with a fixed meaning, but have multiple mean­
ings. This view is rooted in Jung’s theoretical conception of the symbol. It lacks 
Freud’s pseudo-scientism in that is does not attempt to sound like a finished sys­
tem of thought, complete with precise definitions and rational explanations of 
psychological phenomena.
Jung stressed the supremacy and independence of symbols, which differ 
from both metaphors and signs. Symbols, Jung implies in his writing, should 
be respected in that they are not subject to precise analysis or exact definitions. 
In order to function and exist, they need breathing space, and this precludes the 
application of the scientific approach to them. The products of the collective 
unconscious, symbols defy interpretation. They demand to be respected and not 
dismantled, deciphered or ‘explained away’.
The ultimately unknowable meaning of a symbol and the way it fits an 
individual’s situation are the main points of difference between Freudian 
and Jungian approaches. Freud’s ‘semiotic’ attitude requires an exact inter­
pretation while Jung’s approach of amplification (or deferred interpretation) 
adopts a more creative and tentative approach to the meaning of creative and 
dream-imagery. Jung does not see the unconscious as being linguistically 
structured, hence his rejection of semiosis in favour of amplification. He writes 
in ‘Psychological Types’:
The concept of symbol should in my view be strictly distinguished from that 
of sign. Symbolic and semiotic meanings are entirely different things . . . . 
A symbol always presupposes that the chosen expression is the best pos­
sible description or formulation of a relatively unknown fact, which is none 
the less known to exist or is postulated as existing . . . . Every view which 
interprets the symbolic expression as an analogue or an abbreviated desig­
nation for a known thing is semiotic. . . . The symbol is alive only so long 
as it is pregnant with meaning. But once its meaning has been born out of 
it, once that expression is found that formulated the thing sought, expected, 
or divined even better than the hitherto accepted symbol, then the symbol is 
dead, i.e., it possesses only an historical significance . . . . An expression that 
stands for a known thing remains a mere sign and is never a symbol. It is, 
therefore, quite impossible to create a living symbol, i.e., one that is pregnant 
with meaning, from known associations.
(CW6: 814–817, emphasis as original)

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  53
The symbol in the Jungian world is everything; it is the biggest piece of the cul­
tural puzzle as well as the most important element in works of art and dreams. 
As Steven Walker observes, ‘By emphasising the image over the word, Jungian 
psychology differentiates itself radically from Freudian, Lacanian and other psy­
chologies that stress the task of interpreting the language of the unconscious’ 
(Walker, 2002: 3). Thus, a symbol is a relative and ‘immediate’ thing, rather than 
a permanent, ready-made set of meanings. In a symbol, the relationship between 
the signifier and the signified is, indeed, highly arbitrary. The symbolic, from the 
point of view of Jungian psychology, constitutes the base of all meaning-making 
in the life of the individual.
Here then is one of the rhizomatic structures mentioned in the Introduction to 
this book. Psychoanalytic interpretation is predicated on the oedipal sexual aetiol­
ogy of neurosis. In order for an image to be understood a stripping back of layers 
of psychic and cultural encoding is required to reveal what happened in child­
hood. This is a type of psychological archaeology in which the ‘truth’ behind a 
psychological symptom has to be unearthed, even in the face of resistance and the 
conscious defences of the patient. By contrast, a Jungian orientation sees meaning 
as something that is much less certain, as subject to change, as something that is 
as much made by society and through our individual responses as it is inscribed 
and intrinsic to the image itself.
One of the reasons for the relatively unfixed meaning of images (and by exten­
sion media products) is that the Jungian model of the psyche is teleological, which 
is to say it is both forward looking and possesses purpose or intent. Whether this 
should be understood in a literal or metaphorical manner is outside the scope 
of this discussion but what is significant is that this offers a somewhat different 
approach to that offered by the Freudian models of the psyche, which tend to 
see the current state of the psyche as the result of historically accruing events. In 
Freudian models, the task of analysis, personal and cultural, is to decode the work­
ings of the psyche, working through its defence mechanisms to bring the original 
trauma(s) into the light of day. Of course Jungian thinking is not without such 
developmental aspects, particularly where British Object Relations and the work 
of Melanie Klein have played an important role and Helena Bassil-Morozow has 
started to incorporate these ideas into her work on the state of modernity.
Because Jung divided the unconscious into the personal and the collective, his 
vision of ‘what it is made of ’ was radically different from the linguistic approach 
of the Freudian and post-Freudian school. The collective unconscious is an ocean 
of impulses and instincts, and by definition it cannot be structured like a language. 
Rather, it is a floating sea of experiences. In a way, Jung argues, it is similar to a 
film – a series of moving images inhabiting the human frame, realising itself and, 
essentially, making itself visible in projection. As he comments:
The psyche consists essentially of images. It is a series of images in the 
truest sense, not an accidental juxtaposition or sequence, but a structure 
that is throughout full of meaning and purpose; it is a ‘picturing’ of vital 

54  Methods
activities. And just as the material of the body that is ready for life has 
need of the psyche in order to be capable of life, so the psyche presupposes 
the living body in order that its images may live.
(CW8: 618)
By ‘images’ Jung means both symbols and archetypes – and in his writings he 
often does not distinguish between the two. Moreover ‘images’ for Jung can be 
further subdivided into those that are ‘personalised’ concrete realisations and 
those that are ‘collective’ abstract ideas. An archetype is an irrepresentable idea, 
whereas archetypal images are concrete realisations of archetypes in dreams, 
fantasies, myths, etc. In Jung’s own words, ‘the perceptible archetypal image is 
not identical with the inherited form [i.e. archetype], which allows an indefinite 
number of empirical expressions (Jung, Letters, quoted in Walker, 2002: 12). For 
instance, ‘dying-and-rising god’ is an archetype, but Osiris, Dionysus and Jesus 
are archetypal images. Similarly, female initiation of sexual contact is an arche­
type, whereas stories of the beauty and the beast, Little Red Riding Hood and 
Bluebeard’s castle are archetypal situations.
By itself, the collective unconscious is speechless. It is dark, passionate and 
confused, and needs a language to make itself clear and understood. Its free-
floating impulses can be turned into narratives with the help of symbols. Being 
human – having to deal with the mind-body dichotomy – means processing complex 
emotional experiences As Christopher Hauke puts it in his book, Visible Mind: 
Movies, Modernity and the Unconscious (2013),
popular forms such as cinema can provide holding necessary for intense expe­
riences, making them more accessible and more bearable. When an intensity 
of emotions is mixed with the less intense it becomes more bearable, bringing 
with it the possibility for psychological and emotional repair and growth.
(Hauke, 2014: 4)
These more bearable experiences take root in the personal unconscious – the place 
where the vague experiences of the collective unconscious acquire shapes and 
narrative lines. The personal layer of the unconscious is structured by culture and 
by language. The amorphous contents of the collective unconscious transform 
into ‘words’ and ‘phrases’ of particular cultural constructs. As Oliver Davies puts 
it, ‘Whereas the Lacanian unconscious is composed of potentially word-forming 
linguistic structures, the Jungian (collective) unconscious is made up of structures 
with a potential for image formation’ (Davies, 2004: 66–67). It is images, not 
words, that hold the primary importance for Jung.
Symbols are the building bricks of all narratives whether they are in the dreams 
of psychic life, myths and fairy tales or fiction, and films. We need symbols to 
deal with the otherwise confusing depth of pre-civilised emotions experienced by 
all people. Thus people, to help the unconscious express itself and to make the 
experience of existing and relating more bearable, create symbolic images. Such 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  55
images make us aware of ourselves and others and assist in creating a meaningful 
narrative out of our lives. Symbols make us human; they are part of being human. 
Importantly they stand at the threshold between the unconscious and conscious­
ness and are the language of creativity – an unconscious and often unpredictable 
force which helps people deal with everyday experiences.
Symbols differ from both signs and metaphors in that they are capable of 
holding multiple – and often opposing – meanings. In a symbol, the relationship 
between the signifier and the signified is, indeed, highly arbitrary. Drawing upon 
Jung’s democratic position of ‘anti-exactness’, Don Fredericksen argues:
We must understand that Jung’s distinction between sign and symbol ulti­
mately elaborates two distinct modes of apprehending and explaining the 
psyche and its products – not just two distinct psychologies but two distinct 
ontologies and philosophies of value.
This point is succinctly illustrated by Jung and Freud’s differing explana­
tions of, and attitudes toward, incest fantasy and symbolism. Freud inter­
preted the incest fantasy concretely. . . . Freud labels the distorted or disguised 
expressions of the incest wish ‘symbols’, incorrectly so according to Jung. 
For the latter, Freud’s ‘symbols’ are in fact signs, standing for the putatively 
known, albeit repressed, desire of the patient to have physical intimacy with 
a parent. Their meaning can be completely explained by Freudian analytic 
procedures that reduce them to their underlying cause.
(Fredericksen, 2001: 19)
For Jung, the symbol is always bigger than the sum of the dreamer’s (or the 
author’s) biographical details, and significantly deeper than any literal or pre-
existed meaning. The unconscious, Jungian psychology implies, would not want 
to be interpreted in any other way – and especially given a fixed explanation. 
Leonardo’s childhood dream of being visited in his cradle by a vulture which 
opened his mouth with its tail demonstrates the difference between the literal­
ness of Freudian interpretations and the Jungian symbolic approach. In the essay 
‘Leonardo Da Vinci and a Memory of His Childhood’, Freud famously inter­
prets the dream in sexual terms – as a metaphor for fellatio – and expresses his 
amazement that ‘phantasy is so completely passive in character’ (2001: 86). By 
contrast the Jungian Erich Neumann criticises Freud’s personalistic treatment of 
Leonardo’s bird fantasy. For Neumann, even though Freud’s interpretation makes 
sense and is partially correct, it is still too narrow and does not take into account 
many other aspects of Leonardo’s creative life:
In connection with the infant lying in his cradle, the bird’s tail is primarily 
a symbol of the maternal breast; but at the same time, Freud correctly inter­
preted it as the male genital organ. From this basic constellation emerging 
in the childhood memory, he attempted to derive both the personal mother 

56  Methods
complex of the fatherless Leonardo and a passively homosexual tendency 
in his love life. Both derivations are false and require a correction, since the 
‘vulture fantasy’ is a transpersonal, archetypal constellation, and not one that 
may be derived personalistically from Leonardo’s family romance.
(Neumann, 1974: 8–9)
His treatment of the symbols in Leonardo’s dream is more respectful than Freud’s – 
both towards the artist and his creativity. In his interpretation, Neumann opens up 
the depth of the symbol by arguing that the nature of the dream is suprapersonal – 
it is the great man fed by the unconscious, by mother nature, by the spirit:
The mother represents also the uroboric, i.e., male-female, greatness of the 
mother in relation to the child she bears, nourishes and protects. In this func­
tion, her life-giving breasts . . . often become phallic symbols, in relation to 
which the child takes the attitude of receiving and conceiving.
(1974: 9)
In Neumann’s analysis, the bird symbol acquires a wide spectrum of meanings: it 
is a breast, a penis, a mother, a father, the uroboric world of the child, the uncon­
scious, creativity and renewal. It is a symbol of empowerment rather than rape 
(which was implied in Freud’s interpretation). Leonardo was given a sign that he 
was going to be special; that he was going to be led and fed by the forces of crea­
tivity welling up from the unconscious and seeking expression.
Man, Neumann says, creates symbols because they help him make meaning 
out of the messy, unpredictable, impulsive, dark whirlwind of unconscious forces:
The psychic undercurrents which determine man’s feeling and image of the 
world are manifested through colours and forms, tones and words, which 
crystallize into symbolic spiritual figures expressing man’s relation both to 
the archetypal world and to the world in which he lives.
(Neumann, 1974: 84)
Moreover, man is the co-creator of his narratives: he helps the unconscious 
shape them:
In the original situation man’s emotion in the presence of the numinosum 
leads to expression, for the unconscious, as part of its creative function, car­
ries with it its own expression. But the emotional drives which move the 
group and the individual within it must not be conceived a dynamic without 
content. For every symbol, like every archetype, has a specific content, and 
when the whole of a man is seized by the collective unconscious, this means 
his consciousness too. Consequently we find from the very start that the crea­
tive function of the psyche is accompanied by a reaction of consciousness, 
which seeks, at first in slight degree but then increasingly, to understand, to 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  57
interpret, and to assimilate the thing by which it was at first overwhelmed. 
Thus at a very early stage there is a relative fixation of expression and style, 
and so definite traditions arise.
(Neumann, 1974: 85)
The symbol is the soul of the narrative, and is linked to the archetype. Symbols are 
transpersonal, and the transpersonal is the archetypal, Neumann argues (1974: 15). 
Although we cannot really understand the vastness of symbols, to grasp the whole 
scope of what, say, the archetypal feminine means to mankind, we can at least 
gain some general idea of it (1974: 15). Any creative man ‘travels the archetypally 
determined way’, expressing the unconscious in symbols and weaving narratives 
out of them as he goes along (1974: 21).
Jungian individuation and the modern age
Cinema is one of the most prominent creations of modernity. Its birth coincided 
with the acceleration of modern life. In a way, it symbolised the devaluation of 
reality at the expense of all things unconscious – dreams and fantasy. Cinema 
provided an escape from the strains and fast pace of modern life; its narratives 
brought meaning and structure to the hectic metropolitan world. The moving 
image became the mirror of modernity that reflected the individual’s life back to 
him- or herself, thus helping him or her to bring together the fragments.
Narratives have been providing individuals with meaning since time immemo­
rial. In this sense, cinema was simultaneously different and similar to previous 
media forms. Similar because it still worked with the linguistic code, and different 
because the presence of other codes – movement, lighting, sound, acting – made it 
ever more powerful and influential. It became an all-enveloping experience, capable 
of drawing the individual in, emotionally influencing her – and even changing her as 
a person. More than just a form of entertainment, it became a tool, an instrument, an 
emotional and ideological weapon. Since its birth at the beginning of the twentieth 
century it has existed on the border between personal experience and social life.
Christopher Hauke notes that modernity – the age of psychoanalysis and 
improved ways of self-reflection – also ‘developed the technology that could 
reflect their lives back to themselves, framed on the cinema screen’. Cinema and 
psychoanalysis, both providing people with tools for analysing their subjectivi­
ties, have always walked hand in hand:
The first films were screened publicly in 1895, the same year that Freud was deliv­
ering his initial findings and Jung was turning his reading of Nietzsche into what 
would become his psycho-social theories of analytical psychology . . . . Judging 
by its huge popularity, the invention of film came at exactly the right moment. 
The arrival of moving pictures seems to coincide with a general need for self-
reflexivity and self-knowledge already being generated elsewhere in the culture.
(Hauke, 2014: 7)

58  Methods
Thus, moving images give the contemporary individual plenty of opportunities to 
make up for the hectic lifestyle of the modern world and the lack of spirituality 
and ritual. They also serve as an outlet for passions that are capable of absorbing 
a range of projections, which otherwise would have remained unconscious and 
dangerously repressed or hidden. Hauke writes:
In ancient, medieval and pre-Enlightenment times, human beings bridged 
their inner and outer worlds by the use of symbols. . . . cinema now consti­
tutes both a site and a vehicle for our projections, especially the projection of 
archetypes of the collective unconscious. The making and viewing of films 
is vital in an age that has, in Jung’s words, abandoned the gods of Olympus.
(2014: 5–6)
Many contemporary films that on the surface are schematic and have no value 
beyond basic entertainment in fact turn out to reflect the psyche of society as much 
as – if not better than – their high-brow, serious and psychologically detailed 
counterparts. Take, for instance, ‘end of the world’ blockbusters, in which a super­
human protagonist (or a group of them) saves the human race from extinction: 
the Matrix trilogy (1999–2003); Spielberg’s War of the Worlds (2005), films 
based on Marvel superheroes, the Resident Evil films (2010; 2012), The Avengers 
(2012), Interstellar (2014), etc.. These movies, with their apocalyptic visions and 
impressive visuals, express a deep-seated anxiety in the individual surrounded 
by technology and alienated from his fellow human beings. In the anxiety-driven 
world of the city, in which relationships are unavoidably subjected to objectifica­
tion, and emotional closeness is a temporary or even unattainable state, fantasies 
of destruction and annihilation replace the hopefulness that comes with normal 
human connection. Modernity (and the acceleration of the speed of life) had been 
associated with technogenic and natural catastrophes as a punishment for break­
ing the laws of nature à la Victor Frankenstein. These films betray a deep-seated 
doubt in humankind’s rationality and objectivity, as well in its ability to control the 
collective shadow in the form of envy, greed, aggression and other basic survival 
impulses that are triggered by the necessity to fight for resources. Many of these 
films – including Interstellar (2014) and Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) – emphasise 
the ‘fighting for resources’ motif while, at the same time, showing that human 
beings are also social creatures, and that they are capable of thinking about others 
alongside protecting their own interests.
The new type of superhero – a hero who redeems the psychological fragmenta­
tion and the loneliness of the contemporary individual – saves his species from 
extinction by saving himself from his own shadow and by attempting (but not 
always succeeding) to relate to others and to overcome his loneliness. Importantly, 
Neo, Batman, Spiderman, Superman and the Iron Man are prepared to sacrifice 
themselves for their society. The contemporary hero is as much about redemption 
of primarily social ills and sins as his or her classical and religious predecessors. 
The way he or she seeks for personal glory is inseparable from his or her desire 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  59
to save the world, and to redeem it from ‘common humanity’ and from his or her 
own selfishness and greed, the character traits which in a group of individuals 
become the collective shadow.
Temenos
The concept of temenos, which Jung used extensively in his writings to denote 
a transformational place and an atmosphere in which change can happen, can be 
applied to cinema as both a physical space in which people share an experience, 
and as an emotional process. For Jung, temenos is a place that contains. It holds, 
nurtures and transforms various psychological experiences. Importantly, any psy­
chological transformation of this kind in which segments of individuation take 
place is a sort of ritual enclosure, and has an aura of magic and unpredictability 
around it. For instance, Jung writes in Psychology and Alchemy that temenos is 
‘a taboo area where [the man] will be able to meet the unconscious’ (CW12: 63) 
and where a drama, a ceremonial takes place (CW12: 170). It is what the anthro­
pologist Victor Turner calls a liminal space, a transitional spatial and temporal 
enclosure, a psychological arena where boundaries are crossed, and the trickster 
is released, which means that this space should be particularly guarded and con­
trolled lest it become a vortex of uncontrollable experiences instead of being a 
useful experience which can be integrated into the individuation process.
Cinematic narratives are contemporary versions of eternal myths. People have 
always used tales as meaning-making devices, and moving images are particularly 
good for this purpose. Cinema as temenos has the possibility ‘of becoming an imagi­
nal space’ and film watching offers ‘a special place where psyche can come alive, be 
experienced and be commented upon’ (Hauke, 2014: 4). Cinema provides contain­
ment for what would have otherwise been clouds of experiences, dumb, unexpressed 
clusters of unconscious contents. Movies give them a voice and a language:
by engaging with films a version of active imagination is stimulated which 
can then engage the unconscious – potentially in as successful a fashion as 
our conscious attention to dream imagery and other fantasies. . . . Often the 
experience sought and encountered in therapy can be both intense and pain­
ful, and for this reason they are often defended against and avoided in daily 
life. Popular cultural forms such as cinema can provide the holding necessary 
for such experiences, making them more accessible and more bearable. When 
an intensity of emotion is mixed with the less intense it becomes bearable, 
bringing with it the possibility of psychological and emotional repair and 
growth. As in therapy, the raw material offered by cinema is made available 
in a form that the psyche can work upon more consciously.
(Hauke, 2014: 4)
‘Containment’ also hints at maternal behaviour, at unconditional acceptance 
and love, at the good version of the great mother (the ‘good mother’ of Object 

60  Methods
Relations) whose affection can transform and transcend any issues and problems 
an individual might have. The moving image as a mother, as a kind of contain­
ing vessel and a womb, as a transitional object which absorbs, holds, and keeps 
projections, offers space for maturation and transformation just by the virtue of it 
being displayed on ‘a silent screen’, of not engaging in a dialogue; by the virtue of 
being a copy, a highly reproducible medium, a form of mass entertainment. For, 
originals speak loudly and copies remain silent.
Being temenos, cinema as both a darkened movie theatre and a form of mass 
entertainment is thus capable of accepting individual projections, which then 
become personal fantasies and individuation templates. It is a true merger of the 
personal and the collective, of multiplied narratives, collectively experienced, and 
individual perception of them, which then becomes therapeutic, and absorbs and 
transforms the painful and complex experience of being human.
Alchemy
Jung often used intricate, multi-layered metaphors to describe a whole range of 
psychic processes. These metaphors include individuation, alchemy, the uroboros, 
archetypes, syzygy, mandala, etc. These are vague and somewhat indeterminate 
concepts that contrast sharply with those of other Western theorists (and par­
ticularly his psychoanalytic rivals) who have chosen instead to create apparently 
scientific networks that are held together by seemingly precise terms and coherent 
theory. Jung’s approach was deliberate and intentional, and he avoided precise 
terminology because it has the effect of diminishing the autonomy of the uncon­
scious and in so doing creating an illusion of control over it.
Alchemy is one such metaphor, and he used it to describe many things from 
therapy to relationships to creativity. As a metaphor, alchemy loosely outlines any 
process involving transformational change and the birth of something new out of 
raw materials, be they physical or psychological. For Jung, alchemy, which in 
actuality was a pseudo-science preoccupied with creating an idealised, unrealistic 
substance (the philosopher’s stone or an elixir of life), was the ultimate expres­
sion of the transformative powers of the human psyche. Any process can thus 
become alchemical: dreams (and their analysis), psychotherapy, relationships, 
self-discovery, writing and painting, or even more mundane activities such as 
gardening or masonry.
James Hillman writes in Re-Visioning Psychology (1975) that alchemy was 
‘depth psychology of an earlier age’ (Hillman, 1975: 90). Moreover:
The materials, vessels, and operations of the alchemical laboratory are per­
sonified metaphors of psychological complexes, attitudes, and processes. 
Every one of the alchemist’s operations upon things like salt, sulphur, 
and lead were also upon his own bitterness, his sulphuric combustion, his 
depressive slowness. The fire he tended and regulated with careful exact­
itude was the intensity of his own spirit, his failing or burning interest. 

Using Jung to analyse visual narratives  61
By means of concretely physical fantasies, the alchemical psychologists 
worked at the same time on both the soul in his materials and the soul in 
himself. In the depth of the soul there was also psychopathology, and in fact 
the substances and processes themselves were conceived in pathologized 
language, so that in alchemy we find pathologizing as an integral, necessary 
aspect of soul-making.
(Hillman, 1975: 90)
Alchemy is essentially a metaphor for transformation. Interestingly, Jung describes 
the symbolic process that is personal change as experienced through archetypes of 
transformation almost as though it were a cinematic narrative. The process resem­
bles pictures found in alchemy that are full of obscure and complex, yet significant 
images containing encoded meaning. As Jung notes, the symbolic process ‘is an 
experience in images and of images’ and is permeated by
a rhythm of negative and positive, loss and gain, dark and light. Its beginning 
is almost invariably characterised by one’s getting stuck in a blind alley or in 
some impossible situation; and its goal is, broadly speaking, illumination or 
higher consciousness, by means of which the initial situation is overcome on 
a higher level.
(CW9, I: 82)
Like a film, it can span months or even years – or come in a flash of illumination.
This magic is not accidental. The analytical process, which involves the dis­
cussion between the conscious and the unconscious parts of the psyche, has a 
goal as it advances towards some meaning, however perplexing this process (or 
the resultant meaning) may be (CW12: 3). Moreover, this process seeks its own 
goal independently of external factors (CW12: 4). The way to finding this mean­
ing ‘seems chaotic and indeterminable at first, and only gradually do the signs 
increase that it is leading anywhere’ (CW12: 34). As Terrie Waddell writes in 
Mis/takes: Archetype, Myth and Identity in Screen Fiction, ‘like the metaphors the 
alchemists set up to explain the process of individuation, . . . films and television 
programmes . . . also contain images that suggest a reworking of the same desire 
for integration, utopian “wholeness”, or genial inner dialogue’ (Waddell, 2006: 
18). Characters strive
to come to terms with uneasy ‘truths’ about their lives and in the process 
begin to either realise (or fail to realise) that only by recognising and accept­
ing these unnerving aspects of themselves, are they able to discover an 
identity beyond misplaced/mistaken façades.
(Waddell, 2006: 18)
The alchemical change happening on screen, in characters’ lives, reflects the 
transformation in each individual member of the audience. The reason why we 

62  Methods
seek narratives (and visual narratives are particularly good for the purpose of 
triggering the process of alchemical transformation in us) is because we have an 
instinct to move on as we weave meaning out of psychological chaos and look 
for signposts that would eventually take us to our goal. Alchemy is a practice of 
hope aimed at generating solutions and meaning. Moving images, too, have the 
potential to transform and to give meaning.
Filmmaking itself can be seen as an alchemical process. In a way, it should feel 
like magic to those creating movies, for it entails the emergence of a picture seem­
ingly out of nowhere, out of the darkness of the camera box, be it the traditional 
film camera, or its digital version. Nothing is as easy in the process of creating a 
movie as it looks to the audience: for instance, cinematography involves a range 
of rough, physical manipulations including heavy cameras, lenses and lighting 
equipment, to say nothing of the precise knowledge involved in writing, planning, 
arranging, lighting and filming a scene. When all this precision, all this knowledge 
comes together live on screen, the result is unbelievable – has this perfection come 
out of nowhere? Cinema is the kind of magic that creates life out of crude or life­
less matter.

Chapter 3
Jungian psychology
Signs and symbols
Luke Hockley
Introduction
This chapter develops some of the concerns of the previous one by focusing on the 
basic distinctions between signs and symbols as they are understood in the context 
of film theory. It does so as a means of highlighting some of the distinctive quali­
ties of the Jungian approach to films and also to underscore some of the pitfalls 
inherent in it. In the early part of the chapter there are some basic definitions of 
sign and symbol, signifier and signified. Subsequently, the argument contextual­
ises and fractures those seemingly clear distinctions. Toward the middle and end, 
this chapter presents a more nuanced argument as a means to locate the distinctive 
qualities of a Jungian conception of the symbolic. In so doing it mounts a critique 
of Lacanian and Deleuzian ideas.
The last chapter introduced a Jungian view of symbols. Developing that under­
standing and reflecting the polyvalent character of the terms sign and symbol, 
this chapter is deliberately wide-ranging and more media focused. It encompasses 
semiotic elements and psychoanalytic concepts alongside post-Freudian and 
Jungian interpretations. The hope is that these terms become sites of contestation 
and in so doing they resist fixed secure meanings and usage. It would be a mistake 
to assume that the Jungian orientation towards films offers certitude, or that it 
provides interpretations that are always superior to other theoretical approaches. 
Indeed we maintain that to approach films accepting the Jungian lens distorts 
as much as it clarifies is profoundly Jungian for, as Jung repeatedly states, the 
unconscious evades definition and interpretation – it is as much experienced as 
it is understood. As he puts it, ‘The unconscious is not this thing or that; it is the 
Unknown as it immediately affects us’ (Prefatory Note to the 1958 revision of The 
Transcendent Function CW8: 1916/1958: p. 68).
With this in mind, on first appearances at least, it might seem the meeting of 
semiotics with Jungian psychology is akin to introducing matter to antimatter – 
the end result is predictable and explosive. Semiotics is the ‘scientific’ study of 
signs and how they convey meaning. With its origins in the work of the American 
philosopher C. S. Pierce and the structural linguistics of Ferdinand Saussure, 
semiotics sets out to provide a logical approach to understanding how language 

64  Methods
and images convey meaning. It was Saussure who first introduced the distinction 
between signifier and signified in the sign. His conceptualisation revealed how 
the meaning of a sign (in our case an image, but for Saussure a linguistic sign – or 
word) is more than it depicts. (Of which more in a moment.) That idea was taken 
up by Roland Barthes and developed into the cultural side of semiotics, most nota­
bly in his book Mythologies (1957). By contrast, Jungian psychology values the 
non-rational and the intuitive as a means to gain an insight into how images func­
tion as purveyors of psychological meaning. This chapter will not reconcile such 
differences, as this would be a foolhardy and impossible undertaking. Instead, it 
is going to use some of the insights of a structural and broadly semiotic approach 
as a way to elucidate some of the strengths of the Jungian position. In so doing, it 
will show the limitations of both.
At its most basic, semiotics makes a distinction between the signifier and signi­
fied. For example, the word apple (signifier) while looking nothing like an actual 
apple, nonetheless refers to the signified – apple. There is therefore a closed sys­
tem of relationships between signifier and signified in which the signifier refers 
to the signified. Such a relationship is based on a code that, once learnt, ensures 
a stable association between the different elements in the linguistic system. This 
idea of a closed system of stable meanings whose significance has to be learnt 
can be transferred from the linguistic realm to other channels of communication. 
At a meta-level, images (as a medium) can be analysed in terms of signifier and 
signified, and burrowing down so too can individual images, or films, or television 
programmes, as can other media such as plays and so forth. Each ‘text’ offers a 
closed world (play, film, image) in which the differing elements can be analysed. 
The problem with this approach perversely rests in its strength, namely that the 
system of meaning is self-referential, and so it is impossible to locate the meaning 
of the images as part of a historical discourse. Thus diachronic analysis is out of the 
question in this type of textual criticism, while synchronic analysis is its strength. 
It is by deconstructing the synchronic chains of meaning that it is possible to reveal 
the current cultural meaning of the image. While images might well rely on our 
knowledge of similar images for their meaning, semiotic analysis focuses on the 
internal construction of the image, and how the different elements relate to each 
other to create meaning. Such detailed textual readings break an image down (or 
deconstruct a text) into signifying elements for example colour, text, typography, 
spatial relationships, in order to identify which elements convey what meaning. 
For example in an image of an apple, is it red or green? Small or large; whole or 
with a bite taken out of it; positioned where in the image? And so forth. A semiotic 
analysis is much less likely to look at the image of the apple in mythology – though 
it might, if other elements of the images suggest that – a snake, or fig leaf or naked 
body picking an apple from a tree in a garden, for example.
The whole set of signifying elements is referred to in semiotic terminology as 
the paradigmatic set and the individual signifying units into which the elements 
are combined are termed syntagms. As an illustration, a wardrobe is a paradig­
matic set, which combines the individual elements (garments) that can be worn 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  65
(combined) according to certain rules into a syntagm (socks go on feet not hands). 
It follows that films are composed at a meta level of shots that are combined to 
form meaningful sequences. It is also possible to think of the conventions of a 
genre as a type of paradigmatic set from which each individual film chooses cer­
tain elements, which are subsequently combined according to genre specific rules 
or codes and conventions.
Another way of approaching this distinction between signifier and signified is to 
approach the image in terms of denotation and connotation. The denotive aspect to 
the image is assessed in terms of its accurate representation of an object. Connotation 
refers to the meaning that is bought to the denotive image. For example, the flag of 
Scotland, the Saltire, does not look like Scotland but it connotes Scotland. Even 
more importantly it also invokes a notion of Scottishness – a series of myths of 
Scotland, and what it means to be Scottish.
Jungian psychology has its codes and conventions too. For example, water 
stands as a symbol for the unconscious, as do forests. Up tends to be spiritual 
while down suggests descent into the unconscious. The search for lost treasure 
of some sort evokes the search for the individuated self. Thus the link between 
the denotation and connotation is highly codified. There is a strong argument 
for resisting these rather mechanistic and reductionist interpretations, and many 
Jungians will do just that. However it is rather difficult to find examples of Jungian 
textual criticism that propose alternative connotative meanings. While the Jungian 
view of images appears to be flexible, intuitive and non-rational, in fact it is highly 
codified, constrained and structured. Jungian psychology has its own paradig­
matic set and its own rules and conventions about how the different elements may 
be combined syntagmatically. In this respect, Freudian and Jungian views of the 
image and symbol are actually much closer than they first appear, and much closer 
than Jung himself allows for.
Freud and the symbolic
From a psychoanalytic perspective it is possible to argue that while Freud’s the­
ory of symbols emerged in his mature writing, these ideas were already latent in 
the early stages of his thinking. (Laplanche and Pontalis [1988] provide a con­
cise summary of the evolution of Freud’s views about symbols.) Irrespective of 
whether symbols appear in culture or in dreams, Freud is rather cautious about 
their psychological role and function. On the one hand he warns against the 
ancient methods of dream interpretation while at the same time he notes in those 
practices some similarities to his own method. In particular, he comments on 
the way in which an image stands for something else – in other words, while the 
image is denotative he notes how its meaning lies in its connotations.
Freud also stresses the mediating role that language plays between the uncon­
scious and consciousness. Here language has a symbolic function – not in the 
semiotic sense of symbol, but in the way that it can symbolise an unintended mean­
ing. This is the theory that underpins the famous Freudian Slip, otherwise referred 

66  Methods
to as parapraxis, in which an unconscious wish, or repressed desire, slips through 
the defences of consciousness, despite our best attempts to repress it. The basic 
idea that language has a proximity to the unconscious is something that is crucial 
to the ideas of Jacques Lacan, and here we have an early inkling of this connection.
Freud was particularly interested in the occurrence of symbols in dreams. He 
thought that typically dreams express a fantasy or conflict that in a disguised way 
give voice to forbidden sexual desires and/or, wishes. Freud posits two layers to 
the dream: manifest content and latent content, to which he adds a process he 
terms ‘dream work’ in which latent content is turned into manifest content. In 
essence, the dream work takes sexual desire, often connected to the impossibility 
of the Oedipal situation, and through a series of mechanisms renders the fantasy 
in a more culturally and personally acceptable manner. Freud identified three 
distinct parts of the process of dream work: visualisation (in which a thought 
becomes an image), condensation (in which two ideas become conflated in a 
single object) and displacement (an idea or thought is attached to an iconically 
different object, thereby avoiding the defences of consciousness and the desire 
to censor our unacceptable fantasies – this is the root of sexual perversion.) The 
work of dream interpretation is to elicit the patient’s associations to the dream 
image. Alternatively the analyst might apply an ‘objective’ interpretation to the 
dream by utilising skills in deconstructing the dream work, to reveal the latent 
sexual meaning of the dream’s imagery.
One of the curious aspects of ‘psychoanalytic symbols’ is that there is a consid­
erable range of objects that can take on symbolic form. Freud came to the realisation 
that latent sexual content could be ‘worked’ into manifest content, in a way that 
rendered the sexual dimension in a seemingly non-sexual manner. In order for this 
to happen he thought there needed to be an analogy in terms of shape or function. 
Thus everyday objects can stand for (or connote) either the sexual organs or the 
sexual act itself. The transition of ubiquitous objects into sexual symbols is the 
product of ‘censorship’ and such censorship is not restricted to dreams but occurs 
in our cultural lives too. However, Freud reserved a special place for the interpreta­
tion of dream symbols, and indeed the importance of dreams is part of the legacy 
inherited by Jung and passed down to today’s analysts. True, psychotherapy can 
also involve the interpretation of patients’ dreams and the subsequent elucidation 
of associations, but it is psychoanalysis itself which puts the dream centre-stage in 
an almost reverential manner.
It is tempting at this point to apply these ideas of manifest and latent content 
and the ubiquity of sexual dream symbols directly to films. Perhaps the process 
of making a film is like the act of dream work in which disguised sexual material 
becomes transformed into more socially acceptable images. If so, the pleasure 
we get when watching a film is a type of disguised sexual pleasure in which the 
desire to look is a sublimation of the psyche’s libidinal energy. However, a few 
words of caution are in order before undertaking such an enterprise. First, there is 
no reason to assume that dreams and films can be analysed in the same way. The 
interpretation of a patient’s dreams is a personal psychological activity, whereas 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  67
interpreting a film is a cultural undertaking that only secondarily has a psycho­
logical aspect. (This idea will be developed and somewhat contested later on in 
this chapter and again in the chapter on Phenomenology (Chapter 8), in particu­
lar by Hockley’s idea of The Third Image.) Next, films are collective products 
designed for entertainment with mass appeal and their ostensible meanings are 
readily accessible. Dreams, on the other hand, are individual and bespoke, they do 
not set out to entertain and their meanings are often difficult to discern. Finally, 
the structure of dreams and films is different, as are their conditions of reception. 
Perhaps the fullest exposition of these ideas is found in the work of Christian Metz 
and in particular his book, The Imaginary Signifier: Psychoanalysis and Cinema 
(1982). In that work, Metz tracks the similarity between the cinematic apparatus 
(the physical conditions of the production of films and their exhibition) and the 
internal psychic apparatus that governs the Oedipal dynamic. While not claiming 
that films are dreams, he asserts that they are somewhat dreamlike. The act of 
watching a film involves the activation of internal psychological structures as, in 
a transgressive voyeuristic act, it becomes possible to see what is normally kept 
behind closed bedroom doors – the primal scene. (The primal scene is the act of 
the child, either real or imagined, in which parents are seen during sex.) Metz 
makes the interesting claim that in no small part the power of cinema comes from 
the way it activates such primal fantasies not while we are asleep but as part of 
our waking life. He argues that cinema is particularly powerful as a psychological 
medium because its ‘delusions’ occur while we are conscious.
Post-Freudians and Jacques Lacan
More than any other figure it is Jacques Lacan and his development of Freud’s 
ideas that holds the strongest influence on contemporary psychoanalytic film 
theory. Indeed by the early 1980s in European universities Lacan had become 
synonymous with psychoanalytic theory and Freud was only studied, if he was 
at all, as a precursor to Lacan’s ideas. Here is not the place to try and attempt to 
assess Lacan’s work, its coherence or even the evidence that he draws on in sup­
port of his theoretical elaborations – that has been done elsewhere and in great 
detail (see Homer, 2004). Instead we shall focus on one of the central concepts 
of his theoretical approach. At the very core of Lacanian theory is the idea of the 
mirror stage or stade du mirror – sometimes also referred to as the mirror phase. 
It is important not only as a stage of psychological development but also because 
it illustrates the role that image plays in the Lacanian view of the world.
In summary, Lacan suggests that while an infant the child goes through several 
phases in which he or she separates from the mother and becomes aware they 
are a being in their own right. This is concerning for the child as what was once 
a unity between mother and baby is now broken. More worrying still is the new 
awareness of the infant’s own body and that it is composed of body parts – legs, 
hands and so forth – ‘Just how do they join up?’, the child muses. According to 
Lacan, this is where the mirror stage has a decisive role to play. At somewhere 

68  Methods
between six and eighteen months old the child sees its own reflection in a mirror 
and misrecognises itself as a perfectly whole body – an ego ideal. For Lacan this 
opens up one of the central fissures in the human psyche, namely the desire for 
perfect psychic wholeness as reflected in the unity of the body, and the solidity of 
our ego. However, this is accompanied by the inability to achieve such rock solid 
cohesion because, put simply, such perfection is an illusion, a reflection if you 
will. It is important to note that Lacan is not suggesting that the child sees their 
actual reflection in a mirror (although that is not ruled out), it is more that they 
find their behaviour mirrored by those around them. Lacan allows for this process 
to also be symbolic in some way. As he notes:
This jubilant assumption of his specular image by the child at the infans 
stage, still sunk in his motor incapacity and nursling dependence, would seem 
to exhibit in an exemplary situation the symbolic matrix in which the I is 
precipitated in a primordial form, before it is objectified in the dialectic of 
identification with the other, and before language restores to it, in the univer­
sal, its function as subject.
This form would have to be called the Ideal-I. But the important point 
is that this form situates the agency of the ego, before its social determina­
tion, in a fictional direction, which will always remain irreducible for the 
individual alone, or rather, which will only rejoin the coming-into-being (le 
devenir) of the subject asymptotically, whatever the success of the dialecti­
cal syntheses by which he must resolve as I his discordance with his own 
reality.
(Lacan, 1977: 2)
Film theory has seized on the ideas of reflection, misrecognition and fragmenta­
tion as a means through which to understand the function of cinema. Perhaps like 
the mirroring gestures of adults around children, in the cinema we find our own 
interiority mirrored in the apparatus of cinema. In many ways the cinema projects 
an image of the idealised whole and perfect body that, through the diegetic mecha­
nism of filmmaking, viewers are encouraged to identify with. Yet at the same time 
these whole bodies are also fragmented through the intervention of technical and 
formal filmic elements including camera framing and editing. The body is in a 
sense dissected through these operations and then combined again by the viewer 
as the film is watched. Of course, this process of temporary wholeness is disrupted 
as soon as the next edit occurs or the shot is reframed in some way, and so the 
cinematic body is in a constant state of wholeness and fragmentation – a condition 
that mirrors our own.
There are a few problems with this approach. Perhaps the main one is that 
despite the intellectual appeal of the proposition that the mechanisms of cinema 
replicate our internal psychological mechanisms, the experience of watching a 
film is not one of constantly shifting between wholeness and fragmentation. One 
solution to this problem can be found in the suggestion that the process is in fact 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  69
an unconscious one. Of course, that is hard to dispute but it does raise the question 
as to how it would be possible to know about it all if it, and all its effects, remained 
completely unconscious. Perhaps then this process is largely unconscious. This is 
no more help in solving the problem because again there is a disjuncture between 
the experience and the theory. In one sense none of this needs to be too much 
of a problem. Lacan himself did not offer much, if any, evidence for his theory. 
So too we can take the theory and apply it, noting ‘it is as if ’. We ask ourselves 
what would happen if we reframed cinema to see it through the lens of Lacanian 
psychology – ‘it is as if’ the cinema screen acts as an analogue of the early child­
hood mirror stage, reminding us of our fragmented condition and our desire for 
unity – something that is both promised and frustrated by the cinema, as it is by 
language itself.
Yet somehow this explanation does not feel adequate either. Is there a way to 
understand the psychological function of cinema that sits rather more readily with 
the actual experience of watching a film? For that, we turn to Jung and his theories 
about the psychology of the image.
Jung: sign and symbol
The symbol/sign dichotomy is one of the central points in the discussion of the 
relationship between Jungian theories and semiotics. It will be argued that this 
distinction can be used effectively to examine on-screen semiotic structures such 
as visual metonymies and synecdoches. In other words, that a Jungian conception 
of symbols does not preclude a semiotically nuanced reading or interpretation of 
a film. In semiotics a symbol is something that does not visually correspond to 
its meaning. As mentioned earlier in this sense, words are symbols as they look 
nothing like their linguistic meaning. However, when Jung refers to semiotics it is 
not this particular definition that he has in mind. Instead Jung makes a distinction 
between sign and symbol in psychological terms. In semiotic terms, the symbol 
is indexical because it points to something else – a knock on the door is indexical 
as it indicates that someone is outside and wants our attention. For Jung in his 
sign/symbol paradigm, that is a sign, as a sign stands for something concrete. By 
contrast, the psychological symbol goes much further. In the semiotic example the 
connection between the index and its meaning can be learnt and exists as a cul­
tural code or convention. By contrast, the psychological meaning of the symbol 
can never be fully understood, a point that we will return to in a moment.
In the trio, sign-metaphor-symbol, a sign has the most stable meanings while the 
symbol is the least fixed. Metaphor has a relatively recognizable meaning yet still 
with a degree of interpretative indeterminacy. Further symbols can form semiotic 
systems when their meanings are ‘pinned down’, as in the Jungian reductionist 
approach mentioned above. Basically, we are moving along the scale of the fixed­
ness of meaning here and its degree is always socially and culturally determined. 
The less fixed the meaning, the less indexical the sign/symbol is as indexicality 
is lost in proportion to the loss of the link between the signifier and the signified.

70  Methods
For Jung the symbol is a psychological image that encapsulates the current psy­
chological situation. As such, it is at least partly comprehensible to the conscious 
part of the psyche. However, it also contains a strong unconscious component and 
it is this proximity to the unconscious that gives the symbol its affective charge 
and power. Put another way: the sign points to (or is indexical of ) something 
that consciousness can readily comprehend, while the symbol provides a psycho­
logical insight that consciousness needs to comprehend. In this model the link 
between signifier and signified can be, at best, tenuous. As Jung puts it:
The method is based, rather, on evaluating the symbol (i.e., dream-image or 
fantasy) not semiotically, as a sign for elementary instinctual processes, but 
symbolically in the true sense, the word ‘symbol’ being taken to mean the 
best possible expression for a complex fact not yet clearly apprehended by 
consciousness.
(CW8: 148, emphasis as original)
Jung is careful to note that semiotic interpretations have their place. In doing 
so it is highly likely that he had in mind Freud’s psychoanalytic interpretative 
conventions. Freud creates an elaborate if ‘closed’ semiotic system in which the 
chains of signification lead back to some form of sexual neurosis that has been 
repressed but which still manages to find expression. In The Interpretation of 
Dreams (1976), he sets up a series of interpretations in which images in dreams 
of objects that are long and thin in shape symbolise the penis, while enclosing 
shapes represent the womb, especially if they have an opening corresponding to 
the vagina. However, these are not really symbols (at least in a Jungian sense) 
but are instead better thought of as signs that point to the childhood aetiology of 
sexual disturbances. While the patient might not understand such causative links 
the idea is that the doctor is able to comprehend them and also to explain them to 
the patient in a clinically useful manner. Freud’s paradigmatic case studies such as 
‘Dora’, ‘The Ratman’, ‘The Wolf Man’, ‘Anna O.’ and ‘Little Hans’ all provide 
cogent and compelling examples of this method in action.
Freud thought that the unconscious mechanisms by which the psyche sought to 
protect itself could be understood and that analysis was in no small part about the 
conscious understanding of unconscious contents as a means by which to release 
affect and restore psychological harmony. While accepting the value in such an 
interpretation, for Jung symbols work in a quite a different manner. As he repeats 
time and time again, and as we noted at the start of this chapter, the unconscious 
can never be fully understood. It follows that a semiotic method and paradigm is 
always going to be of limited use. Not without utility to be sure, but certainly not 
comprehensive. As Jung observes:
I am far from suggesting that the semiotic interpretation is meaningless; it 
is not only a possible interpretation but also a very true one. Its usefulness 
is undisputed in all those cases where nature is merely thwarted without any 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  71
effective work resulting from it. But the semiotic interpretation becomes 
meaningless when it is applied exclusively and schematically – when, in 
short, it ignores the real nature of the symbol and debases it to a mere sign.
(CW8: 88)
Philipson, in his book on Jungian aesthetics, provides a neat summation: The sym­
bol does something while the sign is a dead end (Philipson, 1963: 15). This is why 
Jung describes the symbol as a corpus et anima – a body with spirit, and as such he 
regards it as alive in ways which Freudian conceptions of the symbol do not. In the 
Freudian model of the psyche, the meaning of symbols is always, in the last resort, 
personal. Further, the ubiquity of the Oedipal complex, the consistent structure 
and function of dream work, and the relationship between sexual content and its 
imagery are relatively fixed and individual – they are not cultural, at least not in the 
way Jung uses the term. The Freudian view of the unconscious is that it contains 
personal sexual material and that all symbolic expressions relate to an underlying 
personal neurosis. Jung came to the view that actually the unconscious is more cul­
tural than Freud suggested. It intrigued Jung that in both the dreams of his patients 
and in their psychological fantasies it seemed that similar mythological imagery 
cropped up and that these images, themes and motifs were something about which 
they had no conscious knowledge. From this basis Jung interpolated the existence 
of a part of the psyche that was transpersonal and he referred to it variously as the 
‘objective psyche’, the ‘collective unconscious’ and even the ‘psychic organ’.
The existence of the objective psyche is one of the distinguishing characteris­
tics of Jungian psychology, particularly as he suggests that this part of the psyche 
involves more than just having an element that is common to all of us – as is the 
case with the Oedipal complex. Instead, the objective psyche is something that 
cannot be fully contained or comprehended. It is also the repository of the shared 
psychological structures of humanity that Jung refers to as archetypes. In turn, 
these structures find a partial expression in the form of images and in particular as 
symbols. This is how Jung’s thinking comes together: from clinical observation 
it appeared to him that there is collective and unconscious aspect to the psyche; 
this is expressed and culturally inflected in images including dreams and creative 
acts, fantasies and in particular symbols; these can never be fully understood as 
they relate to a vast and deeply buried part of ourselves. From this it follows that 
Jung could not agree with Freud’s formulation of the psyche as predominantly 
individual and sexual. Nor could he agree to a semiotic and reductionist mode for 
interpreting symbols because the proximity of symbols to the unconscious means 
they cannot be fully understood. Philipson summarises this neatly:
Thus, the principle which Jung has put into question is the Freudian assump­
tion that all ‘symbolic’ expressions can be reduced to the structure of the 
personal unconscious. If the Freudian position were adequate, then it would 
follow that all non-literal expressions – particularly, in the light of our ulti­
mate consideration here: all art-works – are reducible to the fundamental 

72  Methods
instinctual processes, namely, of the libido. But Jung opposes this assump­
tion in the effort to save such content as characterises culture, most especially 
religion and art, from being reduced to (i.e., ‘explained away’ by) a casually 
reductive analysis in the one-sided service of ‘nature’.
(Philipson, 1963: 16)
This leads us to another of the distinctions between Freudian and Jungian 
approaches. As mentioned, Freud conceived of libidinal energy in the psyche as 
either displaced or sublimated sexual energy. For Jung libidinal energy is more 
helpfully thought of as all psychological energy that derives primarily from 
the unconscious, however it is expressed. In particular, libidinal energy aids 
in the movement of material that is unconscious into consciousness; it is that 
process which fuels the creation of images, and symbols. As Jung observes:
The transformation of libido though the symbol is a process that has been 
going on ever since the beginnings of humanity and continues still. Symbols 
were never devised consciously, but were always produced out of the uncon­
scious by way of revelation or intuition.
(CW8: 92)
This is why we are able to have unconscious affective relationships with images – 
they mean something to us and can move us in ways that the rational and conscious 
part of our minds is unable to comprehend. Indeed, once we do understand the psy­
chological meaning of an image or symbol, it ceases to ‘affect’ us in quite the same 
way. This symbolic and largely conscious dimension to images helps to understand 
the diversity of emotional responses that viewers have to films. Of course, in one 
sense we all have unique relationships with the people and things that we encounter 
in our daily lives. But the cinema seems particularly well set up to replicate the 
conditions of dreaming – not only is the environment warm, dark and comfortable, 
but like dreams it is also immersive as diegetically it is as though we become part 
of the film. We certainly respond in an emotional manner to characters in films as 
if they were real people, and consequently we project our unconscious selves onto 
them, in the way in which we do in the rest of our lives. What makes that process 
particularly curious is that at the same time as responding to films as though their 
events and characters were physical, we know that films are simply image and 
sound. The contradictory part is that these cinematic phantasms give us access to 
a level of psychological reality that is otherwise difficult to attain. These are the 
psychological conditions of the image, as understood by Jung – it is conscious and 
unconscious, bodily and outside the body, felt and partly understood, composed of 
me and something other than myself and as containing the psychological situation 
in the unconscious as it is right now. It follows that while films have relatively 
fixed narrative meanings, they also have shifting, changing personal meanings.
It is therefore necessary to make a distinction between narrative and textual 
interpretations of films, and the personal psychological meanings of films. 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  73
While these two interpretative foci are not necessarily connected, at least in a 
rational or obvious manner, neither are they hermetically sealed. Personal inter­
ests and concerns, along with individual psychological traits, will inflect every 
interpretative act as we inevitably project aspects of our unconscious selves on 
the world. No matter how rational or objective we think we are the world is none­
theless reshaped by the overlay of our unconscious processes. That said, to use 
psychological techniques to understand the motivations of characters in a film, 
or indeed to elucidate deep psychological structures and concerns, is to engage 
in an act of textual analysis, while using the same framework to understand our 
individual and emotional reactions to films is to engage in a personal empiricism. 
The debate between rationalism and empiricism is enriched by the perspective 
offered by Analytical Psychology that while recognising the separation between 
the two orientations, it also wants to see them as co-existing. For example, in 
therapy when a client presents a dream the therapist might well have an ‘objec­
tive’ interpretation of its meaning. This provides the lens through which the dream 
is viewed while at the same time the therapist will attempt to elucidate in work­
ing with the client the dream’s personal and subjective meaning. In this way the 
distinction between the rational and the empirical is preserved, while at the same 
time it is also eroded. It follows that the psychological topography of the cine­
matic experience shifts depending on our focus. If our concern is the film, then we 
are inclined towards a more objective and detached analytical approach. On the 
other hand, if our interest is on the viewer and affective and emotional responses, 
then we will be more subjective in our concerns. In summary, we might say that 
this encapsulates the distinction between the sign as a semiological orientation 
and the symbol that exists as part of the psychological perspective, while at the 
same time noting that such a division cannot, and indeed ought not, be absolute.
James Hillman and the symbolic
James Hillman, the founder of the School of Archetypal Psychology, explores the 
hermeneutic operation of the psychological image from a usefully different per­
spective. While it is the case that the roots of archetypal psychology are partly 
found in the works of Carl Jung, the approach developed by Hillman is in a number 
of important ways quite different to that of Jung’s Analytical Psychology. One of 
the key distinctions is that Jung focused on the relationship between the ego and the 
self, particularly as constellated within psychological maturation, the process that 
Jung termed individuation. By contrast, Hillman deliteralises these psychological 
constructs. For him there is no such thing as individuation, and the ego and the self 
along with other attempts to render and fix unconscious material are at best seen 
as metaphorical, and at worst serve to rob images of their psychological potency. 
It follows that while Hillman writes about classical gods and goddesses that these 
images should be treated in a poetic and playful manner. Hillman sees such images 
as rather like overtones that emanate from a deep fundamental note in the psyche. 
Actually it transpires that this is not so very different to the way that Jung describes 

74  Methods
the image. However, Hillman’s followers and Jung’s alike sometimes have a ten­
dency to literalise what is more helpfully regarded as metaphorical.
The danger is that the mythological constructs which both Jung and Hillman 
use to amplify and illustrate psychological insights and psychological principles 
can be taken too literally, and when this happens they turn into embodied examples 
of psychological processes. Theoretically and clinically this is a mistake as what 
is psychologically beneficial for the psyche (which Hillman terms soul) is to hold 
the ambiguity of an image and to accept that its meanings cannot be discerned. What 
psychotherapy (care of the soul) needs to do is to help the client retain the affect of 
the image, and in so doing to let the image do its work. Of course, the temptation 
is to try and understand the image and to apply it in a meaningful way to the life 
of the client – with the best of intentions for the client, this disservice literalises 
what should remain symbolic and psychological. Understandable though this turn 
to interpretation is, it misses the point. Worse, in an act of reverse alchemy, it trans­
mutes the affect-laden symbolic quality of the image into a leaden literal depiction.
This raises some interesting questions about how best to approach cinema. Our 
normal starting point is that we want to understand what the narrative of a film 
is about. However that is a different activity to understanding what a film means 
psychologically and it is also different to understanding what the psychological 
meaning of a film is for its viewers both collectively and individually. There is 
therefore a subtle interplay in our psyche in which the image on screen and our 
psychological and affect-laden responses exist together. In one sense the on-screen 
image is a narrative image, and part of the diegetic construction of the interiority 
of the film’s structure. But the psychological affect as individually experienced 
requires interplay between our personal psychology and the collective image on 
the screen. While this might seem curious, in fact all that is happening is that the 
fantasy of our interior worlds is projected onto the outer world. This is a common 
precept in psychodynamic thinking and there is nothing particularly remarkable 
about this state of affairs. Indeed, we make these types of projections all the time. 
Interestingly, in the process of projection we come to the view that flaws in our­
selves actually reside in other people and the consequence of this is that in the 
cinema we can have psychological responses that are quite at odds with the nar­
rative meaning of the film. In this instance, meaning lies not in the dissolution 
of psychological projections but can be found in those moments where we gain 
psychological insight, even when forming a meaning that might be at odds with 
the narrative meaning of the film. As Hillman suggested, psychologically what we 
hear is the overtone, and not the fundamental note itself. It is in these resonances 
that are rich with sonorous affect and which ring out with psychological clarity 
that the voice of the unconscious can be heard. From the perspective of archetypal 
psychology, the representational meaning of an image is much less important than 
how it chimes with our psychology. As Hillman comments:
The images are where the psyche is. People say, ‘I don’t know what the soul 
is,’ or ‘I’ve lost my soul’, or whatever. To me the place to look when you 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  75
feel that way is immediately to the images that show where you are with your 
soul in dreams . . . the place to look not only to your feelings, not to your 
interpretations not ask help from a third person necessarily, but ask yourself 
what were you in the images? Where’s your imagination? That immediately 
locates you somewhere, in your own psyche.
(Hillman, 1990b: 75)
This offers us two of the fundamental questions in a Jungian approach to the 
cinema – where is the image and where is meaning? These are significant ques­
tions as the two (image and meaning) are not necessarily connected. Ostensibly 
both image and meaning reside on the screen, yet the interplay of the uncon­
scious with a film results in the creation of a new image. This new psychological 
image has a different relationship to the film – the psychological image created 
by the passage of the film’s images and sounds as they awaken unconscious com­
plexes and traumas of viewers is of a different order. The film’s imagery belongs 
to its internal world, while the reception of the film gives the film a life off screen 
created by the life of the viewer. To escape the cinematic frame the film sheds its 
narrative mantel as it adopts a psychological attire that is fashioned by a viewer’s 
unconscious personal and archetypal processes. To see the cinematic experience 
in this light is to attribute a profound meaning and purpose to the activity of 
watching films.
An approach derived from Hillman’s ideas provides an important variation on 
this theme. Watching a film, as in dreaming, is without meaning, or more accu­
rately, meaning and image are condensed in the creative act through which a new 
image is formed and whose purpose is not hermeneutic but psychological. The 
imbuing of the image with psychological qualities does little to explain the image. 
Indeed, according to Hillman such understanding should be avoided. Instead he 
suggests we should sit with images, and let them do their psychological work. As 
he puts it:
To see the archetypal in an image is thus not a hermeneutic move. It is an 
imagistic move. We amplify an image by means of myth in order not to find 
its archetypal meaning but in order to feed it with further images that increase 
its volume and depth and release its fecundity. Hermeneutic amplifications 
in search of meaning take us elsewhere, across cultures, looking for resem­
blances which neglect the specifics of the actual image. Our move, which 
keeps archetypal significance limited within the actually presented images, 
also keeps meanings always precisely embodied. No longer would there be 
images without meaning and meaning without images. The neurotic condition 
that Jung so often referred to as ‘loss of meaning’ would now be understood 
as ‘loss of image,’ and the condition would be met therapeutically less by 
recourse to philosophy, religion, and wisdom, and more by turning directly to 
one’s actual images in which archetypal significance resides.
(Hillman, 1990a: 60)

76  Methods
The location of oneself in relation to the experience of cinematic affect is certainly 
one way of holding the image and not translating the image into a concept. Yet, 
it also seems problematic for as humans, we seem driven to make sense of the 
world, both material and psychological, in which we find ourselves. The propen­
sity for storytelling as a hermeneutic activity is after all what underpins myths 
and fairy tales. Admittedly popular cinema starts from a different point and its 
roots are in the commercial imperative. However, as a medium its proximity to 
the unconscious and also to the dream-state means that its economy is as much 
psychological as it is financial. How then can we account for films in a psycho­
logical manner that acknowledges their existence as both materialist commodities 
and as modern myths through which to make sense of ourselves and how we 
are in the world? To use a Jungian metaphor, we might observe that watching 
films is an alchemical process in which the base materials of image and sound are 
transformed into the gold of the cinematic experience – films are both material­
ist commodity and psychological. Let us pose this as a question: is it possible to 
reconcile films as conveyors of material signifiers with their capacity to express 
and create psychologically potent and living symbols?
Signs and symbols in films
A partial answer to that question can be found in two articles first published in 
1979 and 1980 when Don Fredericksen wrote ‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film’ Parts One 
and Two in the Quarterly Review of Film Studies (republished in a new edition, 
Hauke and Alister [eds], Jung and Film, 2001). This early piece on Jungian ideas 
and their relevance to understanding the meaning of films explores the intersec­
tion between semiotic and symbolic orientations towards films. Fredericksen sets 
out in the opening paragraph of the first article his concern with both the meaning 
of films themselves and, significantly, the meaning ‘we behold’ in films. In other 
words, he is declaring that he is as much concerned with the experience of films 
as he is with their textual meanings.
Importantly, Fredericksen reminds us that the terms ‘sign’ and ‘symbol’ do not 
have fixed meanings. In particular what Fredericksen emphasises is that, when 
viewed through a Jungian lens, those images that Freud regarded as symbols are in 
fact signs as these images point to something that can be known and understood. 
(A point already explored above.) This act of interpretation, or of understanding a 
symbol, in Freudian thinking becomes something of an exercise in code breaking 
which as that term suggests is a rather semiotic activity. By contrast Fredericksen 
proposes adopting a Jungian symbolic attitude towards films. As he comments:
Within modern American and European film study there are three major 
semiotic approaches: film semiotics as such, Freudian and Lacanian psycho­
analyses, and the various Marxist approaches. In their various guises, they 
have set the agenda in the field for the last thirty years. . . . If here are films 
partially or wholly symbolic in Jung’s sense, for which a symbolic attitude 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  77
is appropriate, if not compelling, then it follows that the notions of meaning 
used in semiotic approaches are too narrow and in need of augmentation.
(Fredericksen, 2001: 21)
Fredericksen’s article contains a compelling critique of the different approaches. 
His underlying argument is that all three modes of analysis locate both symbols 
and signs as part of a set of cultural and social practices. Understanding the con­
struction of these cultural symbols and their assemblage into cultural codes is of 
course important. However, Fredericksen’s suggestion is that in so doing such 
interpretative interventions fail to recognise the deeper layers of psychological 
signification that are contained within the symbol. Put another way, the uncon­
scious origins of the symbol and its associated affective power are left undisturbed 
by conventional film semiotics.
It is Fredericksen’s contention that the semiotic approaches offered by the 
three modes of analysis he identifies are well matched to the majority of films that 
for him are semiotic in character (2001: 27). What he quite reasonably proposes 
is to marry up the appropriate analytical mode with the film under consideration. 
For example, while it is perfectly possible to conduct a Lacanian analysis of, for 
example, Police Academy 4 (Dir. Drake, 1984) it is unlikely to be particularly 
rewarding in the interpretative insights it yields. Similarly, Fredericksen asserts 
that the symbolic attitude should be reserved for those films that are rich in sym­
bolic material and which speak in a personal voice. Fellini, Bergman, Herzog, 
Buñuel and Tarkovsky are among the directors who Fredericksen identifies as 
having such a voice, while a bridge between ‘art’ cinema and the commercial film 
is offered by the films of Nicolas Roeg, which in turn leads Fredericksen to direc­
tors such as Kubrick and eventually Spielberg.
For Fredericksen, what remains of the utmost importance is the expression of 
a personal voice in film, It follows that for him it is perfectly reasonable to shift 
between fiction films and documentaries. In this vein, Fredericksen goes on to 
offer one of the very few accounts that exist of a Jungian reading of a documen­
tary film, namely Basil Wright’s Song of Ceylon (1935). He does so as a means to 
demonstrate a symbolic and hermeneutic reading of the film. In part, this provides 
a demonstration of the validity and utility of his approach to ‘personal voice’ 
films, but it also illustrates a salient and often overlooked part of Jung’s symbolic 
method – namely amplification. Amplifying an image involves finding similar 
occurrences of that image in different myths. The hope is that this will bypass 
our conscious defences. In so doing the implicit meaning of the image is rendered 
with greater clarity as its meaning is ‘amplified’. Fredericksen provides the fol­
lowing quotation from the collected works (2001: 38):
It does not . . . suffice simply to connect a dream about a snake with the 
mythological occurrence of snakes, for who is to guarantee that the functional 
meaning of the snake in the dream is the same as in the mythological set­
ting? In order to draw a valid parallel, it is necessary to know the functional 

78  Methods
meaning of the individual symbol, and then to find out whether the appar­
ently parallel mythological symbol has a similar context and therefore the 
same functional meaning. Establishing such facts not only requires lengthy 
and wearisome researches, but is also an ungrateful subject for demonstra­
tion . . . one has to launch forth into exhaustive descriptions, personal as well 
as symbological.
(CW9, I: 103)
As Fredericksen comments, ‘Wearisome as this constraint is, it is absolutely nec­
essary if we are not to find ourselves in the situation where everything becomes 
everything else’ (2001: 38–39). He also notes that any such amplification around 
the meaning of a symbol should be stopped once that symbol’s meaning has 
been sufficiently elucidated – a necessary rejoinder if the amplification is not to 
continue until it embraces myth after myth after myth. Fredericksen effectively 
deploys these two precepts for the amplification of filmic symbolic material dur­
ing his hermeneutic engagement with a short sequence from The Song of Ceylon. 
In his analysis he explores the meaning behind the ‘symbolic’ appearance of 
several in-flight birds at ‘Adam’s Peak’ (the location at which the Buddha left 
the earth, leaving behind his footprints). Fredericksen’s suggestion is that this 
sequence has more than a semiotic quality and that a representational reading 
of the sequence does little to explain the meaningful and significant narrative 
inconsistencies in it such as: How can trees suddenly be growing at the top of 
the mountain?; Why are all the birds flying to the left of the screen? In answer­
ing these questions Fredericksen identifies three locations that are symbolically 
intercut to create a new filmic and symbolic location – the mountaintop, the statue 
of Buddha, the sanctuary where the birds are in flight – put simply, the film has 
created and placed its viewers in a symbolic realm.
Fredericksen notes that at this point in the film, as indeed at many others – not 
least of which is the opening sequence – we have left the documentary mode 
behind. There’s no commentary about the teaching of the Buddha, we do not 
know anything about the pilgrims, and there is no information about the habitat. 
We learn nothing about tea production or the conditions of the tea-pickers. In fact 
nothing that the Empire Tea Marketing Board and the Ceylon Tea Board, both of 
whom were sponsors of the film, might have expected. Fredericksen’s amplifica­
tion of the sequence is illuminating and detailed, and in it he argues the case for 
a symbolic reading as a means to understand just what it is that Song of Ceylon is 
actually documenting.
Extending Fredericksen’s analysis it is important to note the role the remarkably 
experimental soundtrack has in enhancing the symbolic and affect-laden quali­
ties of the film. The state of film production technology in the 1930s meant that 
location recording of sound was not easy, and that synchronised sound recording 
was almost impossible. Working within these technologically imposed constraints, 
Wright recreated the soundtrack in studio with composer Walter Leigh (and also 
the uncredited involvement of Alberto Cavalcanti) in which the sound for the 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  79
film was electronically treated and manipulated to give it a rather artificial quality. 
Electronic waves were mixed with industrial sounds and the electronically hardened 
timbre of a gong was incorporated into the mix. The outcome was to create a dis­
sonance between sound and image reminiscent of musique concrète. The result is the 
creation of a poetic space in which it is possible to glimpse something of an inner 
psychic world, where the ‘primitive’ and the technological wrap around the viewer in 
a never-ending Möbius strip. Developing this theme, Wright provides a fascinating 
account of the ways that sound and image work together in Song of Ceylon, noting:
The [sound] track had a life of its own; and when it was allied to the picture it 
was clear that Leigh had achieved a new and important synthesis. The picture 
said one thing; the track said something else. Together, the two produced a 
third quality denied to either of them separately.
(Wright, 1948: 17)
Seen in terms of film theory this type of montage technique is based on the ideas 
and practices of Soviet filmmakers and theorists of the 1930s and in particular 
those of Eisenstein and Kuleshov. However, those with a Jungian orientation 
cannot help noticing how Wright in his description of the ways in which the com­
bination of sound and image can give rise to a new third meaning provides a 
description of something that is very similar indeed to the Jungian symbol. Of 
course, both Eisenstein and Kuleshov write about the emergence of ‘thirds’ too, 
as did their contemporaries Vertov and Dovshenko. But those filmmakers had a 
different conception of the third as a technique that was designed to make con­
scious something that was previously unconscious. For them the third meaning 
had an ideological and educative function while for Wright the filmic third offers 
something more poetic. His third does not provide an exposition of the plight of 
tea workers, nor does it deconstruct the colonial legacy of the British Empire, 
as a more ideologically motivated documentary might. Instead Wright provides 
viewers of Song of Ceylon with a portal through which to enter into a cinematic 
experience of the symbolic realm.
It is also worth adding the following gloss to Fredericksen’s reading of the 
film. Basil Wright had an interest in Jungian psychology. As Wright comments in 
his lengthy and personal account of film history, The Long View:
I wish Jung had paid more attention to cinema, especially in terms of the 
filmic illogicalities which are often . . . only acceptable in terms of [a] 
dream . . . but can, perhaps, be accepted as signals reaching us from inner 
rather than outer space.
(Wright, 1976: 11)
This comment comes shortly after an earlier remark in which he wonders about 
the similarities between dreams and films. In particular, the ability of films to give 
voice to the collective unconscious:

80  Methods
If, as he [Jung] suggests, dreams are capable of arousing in individuals ‘not 
only the contents of personal conflicts but also manifestations of the collec­
tive unconscious’, might not films, if only to a degree, have something of the 
same ability?
(Wright, 1976: 9)
Of course, it is not entirely clear whether Wright has in mind a type of cultural 
unconscious or the unconscious of the filmmaker, or perhaps even some form or 
unconsciousness that is constellated as part of a creative outpouring during the film 
production process. However, what he seems to be exploring is the tension that 
exists between the individual and the collective, or between the personal and the 
social – a fault line that runs through the early British Documentary film movement 
positioned somewhere as it is between socialism on the one hand and the call for the 
individual to act in good faith on the other. While keeping this tension in mind, is 
there a way in which a filmic reading of the film that renders its stylistic and ideo­
logical debt to the legacy of Soviet formalism can be reconciled with a more Jungian 
view of Song of Ceylon? Unfortunately there is no neat interpretative trick that can 
square this particular circle. After watching Song of Ceylon what the viewer is left 
with is a ‘sense impression’ of the film, which certainly resonates with Grierson’s 
attitude that documentaries need to appeal not to the reason of the public but to its 
animal instincts. Grierson’s somewhat elitist attitude sits rather uneasily with his 
socialist politics, although it is perhaps less surprising when viewed in the light of 
his rhetorical skills that had been honed over a couple of years as a lay preacher in 
the Church of Scotland. As Wright remarked, ‘when Grierson talks, you can’t stop 
him, even if you want to, (he is the worst listener I have ever met)’ (Wright, cited in 
Ellis, 2000: 14). Clearly, there are numerous contradictions and tensions in British 
documentary film making of the 1930s. On the one hand there is the sermonis­
ing of the documentary form that is coupled with the appeal to the heart of social 
conscience. It also draws on the intellectual motivation of the mind that in turn is 
combined with an injunction to social change – a motivation that is shared with 
Soviet filmmakers. However, by contrast, for Basil Wright what is of particular 
significance is the expression of a poetic sensibility in filmmaking. It was through 
that mode that he sought to communicate his own sense of what it was to be in the 
world and thereby change our relationship with it. To borrow a phrase from Jung, 
Wright sought to dream the myth onward (CW9, I: 271) and it was a myth that was 
both personal and transpersonal.
Conclusion
The intricacies of this discussion about sign and symbol mean that it is all too 
easy to forget the underlying psychology and the clinical origins on which this 
argument rests. While not wanting to lose sight of the value of critical theory it 
is important to remember that the function of therapy is, in Jungian terms, to live 
life in a way where we make sense of ourselves in the world. Therapists work 

Jungian psychology: signs and symbols  81
with the individual as a microcosm of the collective as it holds the idiosyncrasies 
of personal psychology alongside the presence of archetypal forces. The hope is 
that, like Basil Wright, we find our own way to dream the myth onward, and with 
our clients we too gather the world to ourselves as we become more fully engaged 
with it, and through that activity become still more fully ourselves. Of course, 
there is trauma, hurt and pain in each one of us. But too often psychotherapy 
focuses on those distressing aspects of our lives and blots out our more celebra­
tory moments. Working exclusively with hurt is similar to only watching films 
that will distress us. Of course, sometimes it is helpful to be challenged by a film 
and such experiences show how we can shed new light on our lives but it is not 
tenable or desirable to live life in constant pain. We would think it odd to meet 
someone who only went to films that were upsetting for them – yet in therapy it is 
a badge of honour to work through negative fantasies about the world and indeed 
the therapist his- or herself. There is something back to front here. And the pleas­
ure of the cinema in all its cathartic release alludes to it – in this way, cinema can 
be of assistance to therapy. Deleuze and Guattari put it as follows:
How odd the psychoanalytic venture is. Psychoanalysis ought to be a song of 
life, or else be worth nothing at all. It ought, practically, to teach us to sing 
life. And see how the most defeated, sad song of death emanates from it: 
eiapopeia. From the start, and because of his stubborn dualism of the drives, 
Freud never stopped trying to limit the discovery of a subjective or vital 
essence of desire as libido . . . the product of analysis should be a free and 
joyous person, a carrier of the life flows, capable of carrying them all the way 
into the desert and decoding them – even if this idea necessarily took on the 
appearance of a crazy idea, given what had become of analysis.
(Deleuze and Guattari, 1984: 364)
If psychoanalysis can teach us practically to sing life and be a joyous carrier of the 
flows into the desert of contemporary culture, can the same be said of the cinema? 
There are hints of this in our everyday experiences of watching films. For example, 
on leaving the cinema we often feel as though the film has altered our psychologi­
cal state – temporarily at least we are buoyed up or weighed down by the affect 
accrued during the cinematic experience. This fades quickly, like the memory of a 
dream on waking where, as our unconscious defences quickly seek to restrain the 
dream’s influence on us, we return all too readily to our waking lives. So too in 
therapy when clients talk about films they do so in a manner that is heartfelt, and 
this is because some unknown complex or forgotten trauma has been reactivated. 
While the release of such affect is not divorced from the ‘semiotic’ meaning of the 
film it nonetheless retains a crucial difference. As Deleuze comments:
The cinema is always narrative, and more and more narrative, but it is dys­
narrative in so far as narration is affected by repetitions, permutations and 
transformations which are explicable in detail by the new structure. However, a 

82  Methods
pure semiotics is unable to follow in the tracks of this semiology, because there 
is no narration (nor description) which is as ‘given’ of images. The diversity of 
narrations cannot be explained by the avatars of the signifier, by the states of a 
linguistic structure which is assumed to underlie images in general. It relates to 
perceptible forms of images and to corresponding sensory signs which presup­
pose no narration but from which derives one narration rather than another. 
Perceptible types cannot be replaced by the processes of language.
(Deleuze, 2005: 132–133)
Films cannot be understood in semiotic terms alone because the experience of a 
film cannot be separated from its meaning. Nor, as we have seen, is the defini­
tion of image which Deleuze alludes to adequate. However what is implicit in his 
argument, which is rather Jungian in tone, is that language is not enough. Further, 
the psychological image is more than the literal image, and it is our attempts at 
description that rob the image in all its manifestations of the very qualities that 
give it potency. As Hillman might put it, such a description is a failure to hold the 
image in mind.
The semiotic image and the psychological image are often at odds with 
each other and it is precisely this tension which gives rise to the formation 
of the psychological symbol and the activation of the transcendent function, 
which is Jung’s term for the ability to hold opposites together, as we ‘rise 
above’ the tensions. This provides the means though which the symbol can 
be contained. It is the illogicality of films that is the very key to understand­
ing their psychological significance and the variety of their meanings. If films 
were unproblematic (if they were denotative only) then we would have no 
need for them to be symbolic. However a psychological and symbolic concep­
tion of cinema is necessary as it shows how the cinematic experience contains 
the illogical emotional excess of finding a psychological value in what is an 
elaborate commercial fiction. Cinema is a medium of illusion. Its shimmering 
chimera, its lapses of temporality, its geospatial instability and its narrative 
illogicality all invite us to treat it as dream-like. We leave the material world 
behind and, as we look into its surface, we find ourselves partly reflected not 
in an act of Lacanian misrecognition, but in an act of image making in which 
the spectral embodies the felt reality of our current unconscious situation. This 
is the central paradox of cinema: that its immateriality gives rise to embod­
ied psychological insight. In an act of enantiodromia (the running together 
of opposites) the screen reveals as much as it protects; it is both illusion and 
reality – material and phantasm, it takes us outside the walls of the cinema 
auditorium and into an imaginary world, while at the same time granting us 
access to the reality and depth of our own inner being.

Part II
Applications


Chapter 4
Combining different 
methodologies in visual 
narrative analysis
Helena Bassil-Morozow
Jungian Analytical Psychology has a lot to offer to film theory and film analysis, 
from the psychology and functioning of narrative structure to the discussion of the 
projective–introjective relationship between the audience and the screen. Yet, it 
still does not cover certain aspects of film analysis. For instance, Jungian psychol­
ogy traditionally overlooks personal interaction in favour of ‘the bigger picture’ 
(individuation). In this sense, the personal is obscured by the abstract and the spir­
itual whereby relationships are transposed into the archetypal sphere. Yet, this does 
not always prove effective when discussing the interaction between characters on 
screen. Translating all relations into archetypal ‘language’ is as reductive and limiting 
a technique as looking for the Oedipus complex in every narrative, as theories work 
best in combinations and not on their own.
This chapter endeavours to define the place of Analytical Psychology amongst 
other methodologies used in narrative analysis as Jungian concepts can be suc­
cessfully applied to visual narratives in conjunction with anthropology, sociology, 
psychoanalytic concepts and traditional film theory. Jungian film analysis nei­
ther replaces these methodologies nor directly competes with them, but instead 
can serve to fill in existing gaps and thus enrich the interpretive experience. For 
instance, while Jung and his disciples wrote extensively on the figure of the trick­
ster, Victor Turner and Arnold Van Gennep’s rites of passage concept takes the 
analysis of cinematic tricksters to an entirely new level. Both frameworks can be 
used in ways that can complement each other in the creation of a coherent and clear 
idea of the trickster figure as a psycho-anthropological driving force. Similarly, 
the apparatus theory, which traditionally focuses on the manipulation of the audi­
ence by the movie-making machine, can provide an interesting parallel to the 
Jungian analysis of mass hypnosis and the concept of the collective shadow. All 
these parallels, hopefully, will result in a dialogue between Analytical Psychology 
and existing film theory, and end the isolation of Jungian film criticism.
Jung and Freud: the mother
Certain films call for the integrative approach as if the author could not decide 
whether to emphasise the spiritual or the sexual, the eternal or the basic, the poetic 
or the everyday. Andrei Tarkovsky’s films belong to this category.

86  Applications
The Mirror (1975) is a study of a man’s relationship with the mother in its 
various incarnations – as a woman, a symbol, an object, a reflection in the mirror; 
as tempestuous force of nature, as the unconscious which gives birth to creativity 
and inspires men and, finally, as mother Russia – the goddess who needs protec­
tion yet also demands sacrifice. These different mothers are almost inseparable 
from each other as the whole film is an extended metaphor of a search for the 
ideal parent, for the non-existent picture of a loving and accepting woman that 
has been imprinted in the male hero’s mind since he was a baby. In this quest, the 
protagonist, Aleksei, encounters all kinds of mothers as projected onto different 
women. Yet the perfect one, the lost one, remains missing.
The Mirror switches between three different time frames: before the Second 
World War (1930s), wartime (1940s) and post-war (1960s). The protagonist 
remains behind the scenes for most of the film and is only present in the frame 
as an extra-diegetic voice. The film starts with the footage of a stuttering young 
man being hypnotised by a female therapist and then waking up ‘healed’ from 
his speech disorder, and it ends with the protagonist on his deathbed, holding a 
freshly hatched chick in his hand. Throughout the film, Aleksei remembers his 
childhood before and during the war, his parents, their separation, his mother 
raising two boys on her own, the spooky country house, the military training, his 
wife Natalia and son Ignat, and the elderly mother (played by the director’s own 
mother, Maria Vishnyakova).
This is a curious but organic combination of Jungian and Freudian imagery. 
On the one hand, the film clearly foregrounds ideas traditionally discussed using 
the language of Freudian and post-Freudian psychology: the mother, the mirror, 
the Oedipus complex, the primal scene and the absent father. The mother, Maria 
(Margarita Terekhova), is presented as beautiful, sexual, flirty, playful and myste­
rious; the images of the mother from Aleksei’s childhood are almost tactile, which 
renders the idea of the boy’s attachment to her. On the other hand, Tarkovsky’s 
symbolism – and particularly his fascination with Russian nature and water – 
have an undeniable Jungian hue. The way Maria’s appearance is presented – her 
hair, her face, her arms and hands – make her look like an icon, like someone 
impersonal, ephemeral, otherworldly, not least because Tarkovsky was inspired 
by Leonardo’s ‘Portrait of a Young Woman with a Juniper Twig’. This means that 
the mother figure in The Mirror is both Oedipal archetypal, physical and poetic, 
sexual and mysterious.
The ‘Freudian mother’ crops up throughout The Mirror, and is particularly 
noticeable in the pre-war scenes of Aleksei’s childhood. The impression she 
gives is that of a mystical seductress: she is aware of her attractiveness, has large, 
dreamy grey eyes and often plays with stray strands of her long blond hair. She is 
clearly aware of her power as a woman. Aleksei (as both the child and the grown-
up) is consistently used to focus the narrative, and it is through his eyes that we 
see the Oedipal female who will remain the uncatchable objet petit a of his life.
Importantly, Aleksei sees her as a strange but attractive object, and not as a 
person. For him, she is a fantasy, a ghost. His early memories of her are often 

Combining different methodologies  87
shown in black and white, and in slow motion. One of the scenes is a variant of 
‘the primal scene’: the little boy gets up in the middle of the night and witnesses 
the father (Oleg Yankovskiy) washing his wife’s hair in a basin. The mother’s 
face is hidden behind the veil of her wet hair, while the father is pouring water 
from a jug to wash away the soap. The son is shocked, and freezes to observe the 
moment of ‘forbidden’ intimacy between the two parents. Yet, he cannot voice 
his despair, and his feelings about the parents are expressed metaphorically in the 
‘apocalyptic’ destruction of the house at the end of the scene. The ceiling begins 
to collapse, and water starts flooding through the roof. This is the collapse of the 
boy’s fantasy of the maternal object belonging exclusively to him, and the begin­
ning of the loss. Both the house and the exclusivity of the boy’s position in the 
house are gone forever with the introduction of the father figure into the picture.
Another uncanny slow-motion sequence shows the mother in a white night­
dress that reveals her legs, floating over a messy bed. A white pigeon crosses the 
top right-hand corner of the frame. The mother appears seductive and terrifying, 
dangerous yet passive, dead and alive, a vaguely remembered and misrepresented 
Oedipal object. There is a discernible Gothic hue in these two sequences: even 
though they contain nothing particularly terrifying. Their uncanniness stems 
from the perception of the Oedipal dynamic, and from his desire (and inability) 
to ‘pinpoint’ the maternal object. His fragmentary recollections of his mother are 
insufficient for an exhaustive, ‘whole’ picture of her. Throughout the film Aleksei 
is driven by loss as he is trying to remember the times when the mother was his, 
and no one else’s.
In one of the opening scenes (shot in real time and in colour) the child is look­
ing anxiously at a well-dressed man flirting with his mother. The man (Anatoly 
Solonitsyn) sees her sitting on a fence and smoking, and asks for a cigarette. He 
has guessed that Maria is separated, and decided to try his luck. He says he is a 
doctor implying that he is a good catch. Yet, the mother glances at her son sleep­
ing in a hammock before returning any favours to the doctor. The son wakes up, 
and it is clear that he wishes the doctor to go away, to leave his mother alone. Now 
that the father is gone, the boy does not want another man to take his place, and to 
steal his mother’s affections away from him – the child. As the rival retreats, we 
feel the protagonist’s relief at the outcome of the encounter.
In the post-war scenes, the protagonist transfers his Oedipal tension onto his 
former wife, Natalia. Interestingly enough, the wife and the mother are played by 
the same actress, Margarita Terekhova. This enables Tarkovsky to show Aleksei’s 
obsession with objet a and his inability to tell the difference between the female 
objects in his life. Aleksei is unable to understand them as real people, and even­
tually cuts both the women off. He is also a selfish father – for years he has 
neglected his son Ignat who is now failing school.
In one of the post-war scenes, the mother tells the son of her friend’s death. The 
aged Maria expects comfort and empathy from the son, but gets none. The pro­
tagonist, who is too self-absorbed to deal with other people’s problems, quickly 
brushes the subject aside. Symbolically, the conversation takes place in an empty 

88  Applications
room, where both characters are just disembodied voices and the camera is the 
only actor. This scene epitomises the mother–boy relationship and paradoxically 
shows their connection as profound and superficial, existing and non-existent. 
The old Maria is not the mother he wants – ‘his’ mother is the one who under­
stands him telepathically, who sacrifices herself for him. She does not annoy him 
with her problems because only his problems matter in the world in which only 
two of them exist.
Similarly, Aleksei’s wife Natalia accuses him of being selfish, of behaving as 
if he is above everyone, of being self-obsessed, of being utterly immature. Natalia 
naturally associates herself with the mother because the two are playing the same 
role in the protagonist’s life, and both end up being ‘not perfect enough’ for him. 
Neither of the two women manage to become the ‘good enough mirrors’ reflect­
ing his broken self.
However, not all that is happening in the film can be described in Freudian 
terms. Moreover, Freudian psychology’s insistence on the centrality of sexuality 
in the human psyche is in direct conflict with Tarkovsky’s vision of cinema and 
cinematic symbolism. In Tarkovsky’s view, images have to be neither precise nor 
easily decipherable. Throughout his book, Sculpting in Time, he insists that it is 
not always possible to predict the unfolding of the creative process or the birth of 
symbols in the artist’s psyche. Images remain vague and mysterious:
It is hard to imagine that a concept like artistic image could ever be 
expressed in a precise thesis, easily formulated and understandable. It is 
not possible, nor would one wish it to be so. I can only say that the image 
stretches out into infinity, and leads to the absolute. And even what is 
known as the ‘idea’ of the image, many dimensional and with many mean­
ings, cannot, in the very nature of things, be put into words. But it does find 
expression in art. . . .
The artist tries to grasp [the principle that makes the image, or a life 
moment, unique], new each time; and each time he hopes though in vain, to 
achieve an exhaustive image of the Truth of human existence. The quality of 
beauty is in the truth of life, newly assimilated and imparted by the artist, in 
fidelity to his personal vision.
(Tarkovsky, 2008: 104)
Here Tarkovsky’s philosophy of filmmaking agrees with Jungian psychology. For 
Jung, the symbol is always bigger than the sum of the dreamer’s (or the author’s) 
biographical details, and significantly deeper than any literal or pre-existed mean­
ing. In contrast to Freud and the post-Freudians, Jung’s additional ‘layer’ of the 
psyche – the collective unconscious – permitted him to detach the work of art from 
the Oedipal, sexual or any other personal issues the artist may possess. The work 
of art grows out of its creator rather like a tree that draws its nourishment from 
the artist’s psyche. It is a force ‘that achieves its end either with tyrannical might 
or with the subtle cunning of the nature herself, quite regardless of the personal 

Combining different methodologies  89
fate of the man who is its vehicle’ (CW15: 114). The work of art is a ‘living thing 
implanted in the human psyche’ (CW15: 114). When he feels the need to create, 
the artist only answers the call of the collective unconscious. Through the artist, the 
unconscious speaks and the collective expresses itself.
According to Jung, the creative impulse is a living thing, an autonomous 
complex, a split-off portion of the psyche. When activated, it can be so powerful 
that the artist loses the ability to control it. This means that artists are often mere 
vehicles for the symbols of the unconscious which then attempt to escape. As he 
puts it, ‘The divine frenzy of the artist comes perilously close to a pathological 
state, though the two things are not identical’ (CW15: 122).
Similarly, Tarkovsky describes the creative process as something springing 
from the totality of the psyche, but which also involves the artist as a whole per­
son. As he comments, when one hears its call one has no other choice but to 
answer it:
The artist’s inspiration comes into being somewhere in the deepest recesses 
of his ‘I’. It cannot be dictated by external, ‘business’ considerations. It is 
bound to be related to his psyche and his conscience; it springs from the totality 
of the world-view. If it is anything less, then it is doomed from the outset to 
be artistically void and sterile. It is perfectly possible to be a professional 
director or a professional writer and not be an artist: merely a sort of executor 
of other people’s ideas.
(Tarkovsky, 2008: 188)
For instance, there are many mother images in The Mirror that are symbolic in the 
Jungian rather than the Freudian sense. For instance, Mother Nature is unpredict­
able, tempestuous, dangerous. Tarkovsky often uses long, black and white shots 
of Russian nature, sometimes in slow motion. They act as metaphors for Maria 
as a woman and a mother, as the site of the feminine enigma. Tarkovsky’s depic­
tions of nature emphasise the wind in the grass, the depth and darkness of water 
in a pond, the fierce movement of a bird’s wings, the persistence and harmony of 
raindrops. This is the archetypal mother that is both cruel and kind: the mother 
that gives birth to the boy, and the terrible mother that overwhelms the dying 
protagonist; mother womb and the caring mother. The little bird, newly hatched, 
presents the protagonist’s unbroken self; it stands for the descent into the world of 
the mother, and the protagonist’s recreation of her in metaphors and images. He is 
going back ‘into the womb’ and being reborn simultaneously.
This is confirmed in the final sequence of the film, straight after the deathbed 
scene. Maria and the father (still together) are relaxing on the grass, and discussing 
their future baby. Maria flirts with the camera; she is aware of it. It is as if the invis­
ible protagonist is residing in the camera, as if the unborn baby wants her undivided 
love, her endless attention and her perfect reflection of his self. The scene is fol­
lowed by the shots of the old Maria, walking in the field with the two boys. In a way, 
it contains the distilled essence of the film: the mother grew old, but the boy did 

90  Applications
not grow up. He rejected the idea of maturity, and chose to remain a child forever, 
locked in the emotional safety of the pre-war world. The focus in this sequence, 
however, is not on the boys, but on the association of Maria with Mother Nature: 
both young and old Marias are shown against the magnificence of the windy fields, 
the darkened forests, against the distant, milky swirls of fog. The shots of the age­
ing mother are intercut with close-ups of decaying trees, an abandoned well full of 
rubbish, the empty house. The chick that flies off at the end of the deathbed scene 
is released back into the wild. It represents the protagonist’s confined and suffering 
soul, which is now reborn, resurrected, freed from the stifling influence of urban 
existence, from the oppressive repetitiveness of life. His soul returns to the parental 
embrace of nature – the terrible, mysterious and beautiful mother.
Similarly, Tarkovsky’s ‘mother Russia’ is a mighty goddess. This is a very tradi­
tional, archetypal vision of Russia: she is female, she is a mother and she is so strong 
that she does not need a man to support her. She prides herself on her strength and 
fearsomeness, on her lack of femininity. In the scenes portraying wartime, Aleksei 
and a group of other boys are shown undergoing military training with a strict drill 
sergeant. In freezing conditions, in the snow, the boys learn how to use firearms and 
to throw grenades. The sergeant is not impressed with the boy who keeps question­
ing his instructions. He sees that the boy is not yet a man because he is too selfish 
and individualistic; he does not respect his country and refuses to defend it; he does 
not want to sacrifice himself. In this context a Russian man, by contrast, is not an 
individual – he belongs to his motherland who then decides his destiny.
This view is confirmed in the newsreel footage to which the military training 
scene cuts. Tarkovsky watched thousands of metres of film before he found the 
footage he wanted: the Red Army crossing Lake Sivash in 1943. What impressed 
him most was the poignancy of the piece: it was ‘an image of heroic sacrifice and 
the price of this sacrifice; the image of a historical turning point brought about at 
incalculable cost’ (Tarkovsky, 2008: 130). The men knew that they were likely 
to die soon, yet they kept moving; they kept going on, defying tiredness, defying 
mud, defying physical pain. Common men became heroes. Tarkovsky continues:
The film affected you with a piercing, aching poignancy, because in the shots 
were simply people. People dragging themselves, knee deep in wet mud, 
through an endless swamp that stretched out beyond the horizon, beneath a 
whitish, flat sky. Hardly anyone survived. The boundless perspective of these 
recorded moments created an effect close to catharsis. Later I learned that the 
army camera-man who had made the film, with such extraordinary penetra­
tion into the events taking place around him, had been killed on that same day.
(2008: 130–131)
What Tarkovsky admires most is the man’s ability to create and to make films in the 
harshest of conditions, when physical survival rather than creativity should be the 
focus of attention. When the artist keeps creating in the most difficult of circumstances, 
he is supported by the great mother, the mother of creativity – the unconscious.

Combining different methodologies  91
This mother is expressed in a powerful metaphor. The film opens with the scene 
(a television programme watched by the protagonist) in which a psychotherapist 
is hypnotising a teenager suffering from a severe form of stuttering. The woman is 
unattractive and almost rude; her voice is firm and commanding. She is confident. 
Because she manipulates the young man both physically and psychologically, 
the scene is quite disturbing. However, this is redeemed by the result we witness 
at the end of the session when her patient regains his ability to speak. At first he 
is shocked to hear his own voice, but is not afraid of it, and he is finally able to 
express himself. The fearsome therapist is a version of the archetypal mother who 
takes the young man in and renews him – gives him his voice back.
This scene reflects Tarkovsky’s perception of creativity as a force that is simul­
taneously benevolent, ecstatic and dangerous. James Hillman echoes Jung’s ideas 
when he describes the creative impulse as a wild energy that poses potential psy­
chological dangers for its vehicle. It is neither good nor bad. Its power can even 
make the artist suicidal, and this is almost normal when someone attempts to deal 
with an impulse of this scale coming from the depths of the psyche. The human 
frame is far too frail to contain and control something so daemonic:
The creating Gods are the destroying Gods. As Jung said, ‘Creation is as 
much construction as destruction’ (CW3: para. 245). The ectopsychic instinc­
tual force, because it comes from beyond the psyche, is more than human 
and mightier than its possessor. Its possessor is, in fact, always in danger of 
possession. Working as a compulsion, the force is always ‘too much’. One 
spends one’s life trying to slow it, tame it, give it enough time and space, 
because its haste is the destructive devil within the creative impulse itself. 
Suicide always remains the fundamental possibility of psychological crea­
tivity, as its reversal, since the destruction of soul is the counterpart of the 
creation of the soul.
(Hillman, 1998: 36)
In Sculpting in Time, Tarkovsky echoes Hillman’s view that creativity is neither 
good nor bad, being a neutral force, rather like Mother Nature. For Tarkovsky 
depression is the price to pay for the honour of being the pathway used by the 
unconscious to communicate its information in images, ideas and music:
True artistic inspiration is always a torment for the artist, almost to the point 
of endangering his life. Its realisation is tantamount to a physical feat. That 
is the way it has always been, despite the popular misconception that pretty 
well all we do is tell stories that are as old as the world, appearing in front of 
the public like old grannies with scarves on our heads and our knitting in our 
hands to tell them all sorts of tales in order to keep them amused. The tale 
may be entertaining or enthralling, but will do only one thing for the audi­
ence: help them pass the time in idle chatter.
(Tarkovsky, 2008: 188)

92  Applications
Going back to the scene with the youth regaining his voice – creativity demands 
sacrifice, and it is expected that the artist will suffer in some way for his talent. 
The creative process is a form of psychological birth, and suffering is its insepara­
ble part. The relationship with the mother of creativity is bound to be tempestuous.
The same can be said of all mothers portrayed in The Mirror: the little boy, the 
soldier, the filmmaker, the artist, the father, the husband – he is trying to reconnect 
with the cunning feminine spirit which somehow always escapes him and flies 
away. She pretends to be owned by him, yet disappears the minute he attempts to 
capture her; like a bird or like the wind moving the grass and caressing the water 
in the pond. She is forever lost yet is eternally present in his psyche, and she gives 
him the strength to create and to move on even in difficult times.
Jung and Lacan: the daughter
Tarkovsky’s admirer, the Danish director Lars Von Trier, is another filmmaker 
combining the themes of spirituality with explorations of sexuality and pre-
Oedipal bonds. His notorious film Nymphomaniac (2013) can be analysed using 
a combination of approaches, including Jungian theory. In relation to this film, 
the concepts of the animus and individuation work particularly well when used 
in conjunction with Lacanian ideas (the mirror stage, object petit a, jouissance, 
between the two deaths, ideal ego, imaginary order, etc.). This is particularly 
true because Von Trier is a big fan of the works of Tarkovsky who habitually 
combined archetypal poeticism with what could be called ‘pro-Freudian’ ideas: 
mirroring, the Oedipus complex, narcissism and objectification. Moreover, I will 
conduct two analyses simultaneously rather than in parallel, for my task is to 
show how harmoniously Jungian ideas can be interwoven with other modes and 
techniques of analysing cinematic narratives.
Trier traditionally likes to toy with his audience, to shock it, to take it past the 
comfort zone and to thwart its expectations. Any poeticism that appears in his 
films (often as a homage to Tarkovsky) is usually thwarted at some point in the 
narrative and replaced with his trademark callousness.
Nymphomaniac’s female protagonist, Joe, is a sex addict. Joe does not feel 
whole, and no man in the world can fill her inner emptiness. She is like one 
black hole herself, empty and eternally hungry, and nothing can bring her pieces 
together again. She is visited by as many as eight different partners per night. 
She has sex with random people she meets on public transport and on the street. 
She upsets others, destroys families and breaks hearts. She abandons her husband 
and son because her family cannot fill the gaping hole in her heart. She resorts to 
sadomasochistic practices in order to learn to feel when nothing else can make her 
feel anything. Nothing makes her happy, and nothing is enough. She is immature, 
unable to grow up and is ultimately narcissistic.
On the one hand, this is an interesting and original move on Lars Von Trier’s part. 
The male Oedipus complex has been exhaustibly explored in literary and cinematic 
narratives. The boy who is attached to the mother, refuses to grow up and only gives 

Combining different methodologies  93
in to the pressures and demands of social reality under the threat of castration from 
the father, is the kind of storyline with which we are over-familiar. Much of the visual 
imagery is explicitly Freudian (or what is traditionally called Freudian). For instance, 
after nearly two minutes of black screen, the film opens with a montage of vagina-
like shapes such as holes and openings in the wall, windows, narrow corridors and 
doorways, and pieces of steel wire woven into round ‘O’ shapes. Trier often uses 
these internal frames as the centrepieces of the shot. The two-minute darkness and 
silence that open the film echo the unknown, chilly depth of the industrial hole in the 
wall into which the camera goes at the end of the first (street) sequence. Throughout 
the film, Von Trier exhausts all possible metaphors for the vagina. He even includes – 
rather unexpectedly – automatic double doors, which remind the protagonist of her 
sensitive vagina letting in and out hordes of people on a regular basis. Quite often he 
does not bother to use a metaphor, and shows the actual anatomy.
Yet, ever the trickster, Trier challenges the traditional Freudian-Lacanian vision 
of the object as being (almost exclusively) female. Joe’s objet a – the source 
of her wild, maddening desire and the cause of her obsessive, painful hunt for 
jouissance – is the father. Subsequently, she turns all her sexual partners into dis­
posable objects who fail to fit into the impossible high standards of the lost objet 
a. Some of the flashbacks in the frame narrative refer to her days as a child (played 
by Maja Arsovic) enjoying a perfect emotional and intellectual unity with her 
father (played by Christian Slater). Together they used to look at magnificent trees, 
collect herbarium specimens and talk about the wonders and brilliance of nature. 
These flashbacks are poetic if a little clumsy and out of place in the film. Trier 
inverts the tale of the Oedipal boy – traditional in narratives written by men – and 
creates the story of a girl attached to her father, and never leaving behind the initial 
parental ideal. The father is the one who used to satisfy her emotional needs, and 
she remains faithful to him. He is also the only man for whom she has real feel­
ings instead of lies or empty words. Her (Lacanian) loss is literally shown in the 
prolonged hospital scene in which the father dies a slow and painful death, and the 
daughter agonises over her impotence and wrestles with her grief.
Meanwhile, the jealous mother’s attempts to break this perfect bond fail. True 
to the inverted Oedipal storyline, the mother is presented as icy and unloving, 
despising both the father and the daughter since she cannot compete with the 
daughter for the father’s affections. She eventually leaves him. Joe has no emo­
tional connection with her, and thinks she is a ‘cold bitch’. The Oedipal girl, Joe 
realises that she would never have the same closeness with a man that she used to 
have with her father who ‘made her’ in more than one sense. She is prepared to 
have sex with men, but she would not cheat on her father emotionally – that is, she 
does not want to fall in love. Whenever she falls in love, however, she loses sexual 
drive. For her, love cannot exist alongside sex because this would mean belonging 
wholly to another human being. She has only ever belonged to her father, who 
understands her as a woman and as a daughter.
A Jungian view can offer a more balanced outlook on the subject. What is 
called pre-Oedipal in Freudian psychology, in Jungian thought is referred to as 

94  Applications
the uroboric state. In part this is a state before the onset of consciousness, before 
gender, before civilisation – a purely unconscious, instinctive state. A serpent 
biting its tail is a good symbol for pure unconsciousness because it depicts com­
plete lack of awareness of boundaries between the subject and the outside world. 
A baby is said to exist in the uroboric world, in which there is no boundary 
between itself and the mother. The two of them, Neumann points out, ‘form a 
dual union’ (Neumann, 2002: 12). In this phase, there is ‘minimum discomfort 
and tension and maximum of well-being and security’ because the oppositions 
and tensions of reality do not yet exist (2002: 14). Tension arrives when the child 
has to develop the ego – the centre of conscious personality – and learn to man­
age his or her relationship with the outside world. Once the uroboric paradise is 
gone, the newly-formed human being retains the memory of this blissful exist­
ence devoid of sorrow and doubt, and full of joy and pleasure.
Technically, Neumann’s description is almost identical to Lacan’s (although the 
two formed them completely independently from each other). Both describe the 
primal relationship as the one that happens between the mother and the child. 
The difference lies in Neumann’s treatment of sexuality. In his view, the uroboric 
phase is pre-sexual and pre-genital. It is dominated by the alimentary drive which is 
a mixture of basic survival instincts: feeding, sucking and swallowing, being cared 
for, excretion, etc. It is also related to spirituality, as ‘the symbolism of the ali­
mentary uroboros extends linguistically to the highest levels of spiritual life’. The 
basic instincts experienced by the child are ‘fundamental alchemical conditions of 
all child growth’ and are metaphorically linked to ‘creation and transformation’ 
(2002: 37). Neumann also emphasises the intensity of physical sensations in this 
phase, and the fact that they are undistinguishable from one another.
This angle on Nymphomaniac takes the emphasis away from Joe’s sexuality 
and puts in the spotlight the spiritual nature of her experiences. In Joe’s case, 
however, this primal parent who nourishes her in the paradise of pre-conscious 
existence is the father rather than the mother. He then extends this bliss into her 
conscious development by becoming her first teacher, the giver of knowledge and 
the enabler of feelings. He also happens to be the only man she does not see as 
an object, and with whom she truly empathises. Joe, who seeks the lost uroboric 
unity with her father, rejects maturity and the social pressure to settle down with 
one partner and to have a proper family. As far as she remembers, this was a state 
of wonderful spiritual unity with the world, which she also experiences as sensual.
Von Trier chooses not to juxtapose but instead opts to blend the bodily and 
the spiritual repeatedly in the film. For instance, in several scenes there is an 
Orthodox-looking icon of the Virgin Mary. The icon looks like something that 
could have been painted by Andrey Rublev (a nod towards Tarkovsky, of course), 
a notoriously chaste Russian mediaeval artist who saw his creativity as some­
thing bigger than personal ambition, personal life or physical comfort. Seligman 
(Stellan Skarsgård) keeps the icon prominently on the wall, and when Joe notices 
it, she reminisces about a religious vision she once had as a child, when on a field 
trip she dreamt of being visited by two women, styled as saints but famous for 

Combining different methodologies  95
their promiscuity: Valieria Messalina and the whore of Babylon. Joe recounts 
this experience as oxymoronic, as a mixture of sexual-spiritual – and at one with 
Mother Nature (since it happened when she fell asleep in the field).
This leads Seligman to interpret her fantasy as a blasphemous version of the 
Transfiguration of Jesus on the Mount, a New Testament episode in which Jesus 
shows his celestial nature to his companions, ‘And he was transfigured before 
them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became dazzling white’ 
(NRSV, Matthew 17:3). Peter, James and John are suitably impressed, but what 
happens next really stuns them: ‘While he [Jesus] was still speaking, suddenly a 
bright cloud overshadowed them, and from the cloud a voice said “This is my Son, 
the Beloved, with him I am well pleased. Listen to him!”’ (NRSV, Mathew 17:5).
While Joe sees these parallels as neither blasphemous nor narcissistically 
inflated, Seligman is shocked because he is used to separating the spiritual (associ­
ated with abstinence) from the corporeal (associated with sex). Seligman himself 
is a virgin and a scholar, and he sees himself as asexual. Joe gradually realises that 
the world in which she is trying to keep the sacred unity with the uroboric dimen­
sion is made for normal, mature people, who have clear boundaries between the 
physical and the spiritual (usually delineated by morality and civilisation – by the 
Law, to use the Lacanian parallel). In her chase for the lost archetypal masculine, 
the powerful force that makes her feel attractive and sensual, she forgets that the 
rules of reality restrict the influence of the uroboric. What used to be the indivis­
ible union of the sacred and the physical, in the ‘civilised’ world has become two 
separate spheres: the moral and the sexual.
Joe’s inability to accept this state of things can be discussed from both Lacanian 
and Jungian perspectives. A Lacanian feminist view might emphasise her refusal 
to give in to patriarchal formulae of living, and to settle down. Marriage and 
motherhood make her frigid, and therefore very unhappy. Instead of peace and 
satisfaction with life, Joe despises her new roles and attempts to escape her prison 
by continuing to have sex with strangers and by visiting a professional sadist. She 
is trapped – not personally, but socially. Society has little variety in terms of what 
it can offer to women as far as female self-expression is concerned. Joe’s extreme 
addiction can be seen as a form of rebellion against the rigidity of social norms 
concerning gender roles and sexual conduct.
Whereas the Lacanian analysis draws attention to social inescapability, a 
Jungian explanation emphasises the split in the mind of the so-called civilised 
Western person between the moral and the physical aspects of human existence. 
The protagonist refuses to put aside her uroboric fantasy because her memory of 
how it feels to be alive – the memory of true love and true union with ‘the other’ 
(before it had become ‘the other’) – contradicts the vision of love propagated by 
society. In her view, the sexual and the divine are the same and are inseparable. 
Yet, the existing norms of morality are devised to make her feel bad about her 
habits and to feel guilty about not preferring motherhood to sexual gratification. 
(At one point, in pursuit of pleasure, she leaves her son alone in the flat and the 
boy nearly falls off the balcony). Joe is unable to accept reality not only because it 

96  Applications
does not account for her pleasure as a woman – reality does not account for guilt-
free pleasure altogether. Social reality codes human relationships in prescribed 
ways. It does not account for ‘spiritual pleasure’ – the oxymoron which is forever 
left in the pre-conscious world – the world of the great mother.
Combined, these two visions paint the portrait of the female individual who 
has her own version of reality and attempts to override the official, coded social 
reality out there. The official version views the human body as something that 
has to be managed and controlled, not allowed to celebrate its pleasure, and the 
freedom of instincts. Under the influence of morality, Joe sees herself as a ‘bad 
person’, and her dream of ideal unity with the object turns into a pseudo-confes­
sion. Ultimately, she has to choose between fantasy and reality, and leaves society 
by becoming a debt collector and joining the criminal world. Her illusory world of 
‘real pleasure’, which she sees as the highest truth that had been revealed to her as 
a child because she is special, different and the chosen one, is incompatible with 
the normal existence expected of an ordinary citizen.
Jung and the apparatus theory
It can be argued that by writing a narrative cookbook, Christopher Vogler 
created a perfect way of realising the worst nightmares of apparatus theorists 
(Jean-Louis Baudry, Jean-Louis Comolli, Christian Metz, Peter Wollen, etc.). 
The principal postulate of the apparatus theory is that the film industry is a pow­
erful and malevolent machine that is able to control unsuspecting viewers and is 
capable of influencing their unconscious. It follows that once the unconscious of 
the masses is successfully harvested, the minds of the individuals can be filled 
with ideological content.
In his article ‘The Imaginary Signifier’, Christian Metz attempts to make sense 
of the narcissistic processes of identification, mirroring and relating through using 
Lacanian theory. Film, Metz writes, is like a mirror – it facilitates identification 
(both primary – with the act of looking itself – and secondary identification with 
particular characters) in the world of difference and unfamiliarity:
The camera is ‘trained’ on the object like a firearm (= projection) and the 
object arrives to make an imprint, a trace, on the receptive surface of the 
filmstrip (= introjection). The spectator himself does not escape these pincers, 
for he is part of the apparatus, and also because pincers, on the imaginary 
plane (Melanie Klein), mark our relation to the world as a whole and are 
rooted in the primary figures of orality. During the performance the specta­
tor is the searchlight I have described, duplicating the projector, which itself 
duplicates the camera, and he is also the sensitive surface duplicating the 
screen, which itself duplicates the filmstrip. There are two cones in the audi­
torium: one ending on the screen and starting both in the projection box and 
in the spectator’s vision insofar as it is projective, and one starting from the 
screen and ‘deposited’ in the spectator’s perception insofar as it is introjective 

Combining different methodologies  97
(on the retina, a second screen). When I say that ‘I see’ the film, I mean 
thereby a unique mixture of two contrary currents: the film is what I receive, 
and it is also what I release, since it does not preexist my entering the audi­
torium and I only need close my eyes to suppress it. Releasing it, I am the 
projector, receiving it, I am the screen; in both these figures together, I am the 
camera, which points and yet which records.
(Metz, 1977: 50)
Another prominent apparatus theorist, Jean-Louis Baudry, uses Plato’s famous 
metaphor of the cave to show the extent of media enslavement of the masses. In 
his essay ‘Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic Apparatus’ (1970), 
Baudry is worried by the apparatus’s ability to produce a mirror – a distorted, 
delusionary reflection of reality – which captivates the audience, enslaves their 
imagination and does it using tried and tested marketing methods. Cinema 
becomes an extension of the capitalist machine as industry executives try to work 
out what brings the most money, and what kind of entertainment will produce the 
maximum effect on the audience:
Projection and reflection take place in a closed space and those who remain 
there, whether they know it or not (but they do not), find themselves chained, 
captured or captivated. . . . And the mirror, as a reflecting surface, is framed, 
limited circumscribed. An infinite mirror would no longer be a mirror. The 
paradoxical nature of the cinematic mirror-screen is without doubt that 
it reflects images not ‘reality’ . . . . In any case, this ‘reality’ comes from 
behind the spectator’s head and if he looked at it directly he would see noth­
ing except the moving beams from an already veiled light source.
The arrangement of the different elements – projector, darkened hall, 
screen – in addition from reproducing in a striking way the mise-en-scène 
of Plato’s cave . . . reconstructs the situation necessary to the release of the 
‘mirror stage’ discovered by Lacan.
(Baudry, 1986: 286)
The most dangerous thing about this kind of substitution of off-screen reality with 
cinematic fantasy is that the process of identification with the moving image is 
intentionally seamless; we subscribe to it without thinking about the psychologi­
cal consequences of such self-delusion:
Everything happens as if, the subject himself being unable – and for a reason – to 
account for his own situation, it was necessary to substitute secondary organs, 
grafted on to replace his own defective ones, instruments or ideological forma­
tions capable of filling his function as subject. In fact, this substitution is only 
possible on the condition that the instruments themselves be hidden or repressed.
(Baudry, 1986: 287)

98  Applications
Cinema is thus an apparatus ‘corresponding to the model defined by dominant 
ideology’ (Baudry, 1986: 287).
The viewer is not seen by the apparatus theory as someone making independ­
ent decisions about his or her constructions of the self, but rather as a brainwashed 
individual swallowing any information offered by the ideology and its extensions 
(including cinema). This primarily happens because the individual chases the illu­
sion of wholeness, and is too lazy to construct his or her own identity. Instead he 
or she prefers to be taken back to the imaginary and plied with mirror images of 
the pre-Oedipal perfection which in reality had never existed. The apparatus fools 
the audience with false promises of bringing back the lost paradise, and delivers 
empty fantasies which do not last long and have to be substituted with fresh fanta­
sies as soon as the novelty wears out. As a result, the viewer becomes addicted to 
the mirror, and dependent on the constant supply of narcissistic prostheses for his 
or her various psychological functions.
Apparatus theorists also bitterly realised that the mature, independent-thinking 
individual was itself an illusion as human beings are always happy to get rid of 
responsibility for their own identity-making decisions, and to regress to the state 
of ‘early childhood’, when things are decided for them by a parental figure – in 
this case an ideological apparatus. Besides, it is easier to imagine oneself to be a 
superhero than to accept one’s own ‘normality’ and humanness.
Apparatus theorists have not used Jung’s concept of the collective unconscious to 
prove their point, yet it perfectly suits their purpose. In fact, Jung even had a term for 
submerging into the imaginary (which could be used to describe cinema spectator­
ship): abaissement du niveau mental. It becomes felt when the intensity of conscious 
interests and activities gradually diminish, leading ‘either to apathy – a condition 
very common to artists – or to a regressive development of the conscious functions, 
that is, they revert to an infantile and archaic level and undergo something like a 
degeneration’ (CW15: 123). If the viewer chases the illusion of wholeness, Vogler 
implies in The Writer’s Journey, by all means let’s give it to him. Let’s create an 
epic fantasy, a giant fantasy, a most impressive fantasy – and supply it to the masses.
This is when Jung’s concepts of the collective unconscious and the Self come 
into play. Vogler bases his argument that the masses need a particular type of 
entertainment on the idea of the existence of a common layer of the psyche – the 
Jungian collective unconscious. The reason why popular films (and mass culture 
in general) exist and the reason why individual viewers with their unique life 
experiences and their different backgrounds can enjoy the same films is because 
they share the same psychic layer. Archetypes are universal entities residing in 
the collective unconscious, echoing general experiences, general life milestones 
through which every individual has to live. As a result, it is relatively easy to 
predict what kind of narrative the audience will like: something with adventures, 
difficulties and struggles at the end of which the hero will achieve a change of 
status – i.e. he will get nearer to perfection.
Vogler firmly believes that the apparatus only follows the natural proclivity of 
the psyche towards wholeness – towards the unachievable Self:

Combining different methodologies  99
The Hero’s Journey is not an invention, but an observation. It is a recognition 
of a beautiful design, a set of principles that govern the conduct of life and 
the world of storytelling the way physics and chemistry govern the physi­
cal world. It’s difficult to avoid the sensation that the Hero’s Journey exists 
somewhere, somehow, as an eternal reality, a Platonic ideal form, a divine 
model. From this model, infinite and highly varied copies can be produced, 
each resonating with the essential spirit of the form.
(2007: xiii)
Unlike Lacan, Jung imbued the pre-conscious universe with spiritual signifi­
cance, and even singled it out into a separate archetype – the Self. The hero’s 
journey is the journey towards the Self which is an archetype symbolising psychic 
wholeness. Jung writes that ‘wholeness can be realised for one moment only – 
the moment that Faust was seeking all his life’ (CW12: 321). In Vogler’s hands, 
however, the apparatus and its perfect cookbook become an integral part of the 
universe’s spiritual plan of giving the individual back the lost happiness.
Moreover, Vogler claims, so much more than just a writing guide, his book is 
a kind of spiritual guide; it is ‘nothing less than a handbook for life, a complete 
instruction manual in the art of being human’ (2007: xiii). It can also be read
as a guide to the life lessons that have been carefully built into the stories of 
all times. Some people have even used it as a kind of travel guide, predicting 
the inevitable ups and downs of making a physical journey.
(2007: xiv)
This view can be seen as an interesting take on the apparatus theory. It follows 
from his argument that the film industry can exploit the propensity of the human 
psyche to ‘think’ in archetypes, and to see a reflection of itself in images of 
wholeness – often in idealistic and non-existent images. It also exploits the impulse 
to individuate by showing the hero’s journey on screen. In fact, such individuation 
by proxy can become addictive and even take away the need to individuate in 
real life. The perfection the audience sees in superheroes and other unrealistic 
characters is an illusion and, as such, is dangerous, as it aims to replace the world 
outside. It cancels the individual’s impulse to act, to change things, to become an 
agent. ‘The apparatus’ numbs the masses’ senses, and puts them to sleep by plying 
them with hero stories and fantasy scenarios which replace reality and, ultimately, 
protect the apparatus from being subverted or challenged.
Jung and anthropology: the trickster
The trickster describes the process of individual development and meaning-making 
in relation to socializing and civilizing structures. As a psycho-anthropological 
phenomenon, it is of paramount importance to the balance between the social and 
the personal in the individual’s life. Many scholars recognise the trickster’s role in 

100  Applications
identity formation as by challenging the structure, by rejecting it and by laughing at 
it, we find our own unique way of living and of doing things.
Jung designated the trickster as an archetype – i.e. as one of the essential ele­
ments of the individuation process. Jungian analyses of the trickster work well in 
combination with anthropological definitions of it. Together, they form a theory 
that presents the trickster as an important part of the narrative structure, as a trig­
ger which sets the events of the story in motion and changes the established order, 
of which the protagonist is a part. In the course of such a narrative the protagonist 
goes through a complete transformation, a trial by chaos, and ends up re-establish­
ing the order in his or her life on new terms.
Jung saw the individuation process as a sort of liveable combination of a 
self-narrative and a series of ritualised personal transformations. This explains 
his interest in anthropology, which has traditionally been interested in the link 
between narratives and religious rituals. Both narratives and rituals provide frame­
works for spiritual and physical change in an individual’s life as well as in the life 
of his or her society. As Nünning et al. argue, both these structuring devices
create specific worlds; worlds which provide meaning as well as order. . . . Apart 
from the actual performance of ritual, there is an additional performative quality 
to both rituals and narratives, in the sense that they picture possible alternatives 
to the narrative’s or ritual’s referential context and thereby develop a trans­
formative potential.
(Nünning et al., 2013: 15)
Individuation (including as a narrative) consists of a series of psychological trans­
formations and self-illumination moments dressed up as physical adventures and 
encounters with mythical figures. It would be impossible without the trickster – 
the trigger of change and the enemy of stagnant peace. The trickster is thus a big 
part of any systemic and personal revival, even though, to get the best results, it 
is advisable to manage it lest it gets out of control and becomes pure chaos. This 
meaning-making framework contains and houses the trickster, and exists in a kind 
of unstable symbiosis with it.
The duality of the trickster’s nature and his mutability are also emphasised 
by several cultural anthropologists among whom Paul Radin, who writes in the 
preface to The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology (1956), the 
trickster ‘knows neither good nor evil yet he is responsible for both. He possesses 
no values, moral or social, is at the mercy of his passions and appetites, yet 
through his actions all values come into being’ (Radin, 1972: xxiii). He also 
foreshadows ‘the shape of man’ (1972: xxiv).
Like Radin, Karl Kerényi calls attention to that paradoxical ‘creation through 
destruction’ quality of the trickster. Mythological tricksters are silly and irrespon­
sible; they can walk into an existing order of things and thoughtlessly ruin it – yet 
out of their careless actions a new life is born. As Kerényi notes in his analysis 
of tricksters in Greek mythology, often the folk prankster ‘approximates to the 

Combining different methodologies  101
figure of a beneficent creator and becomes what the ethnologists call ‘a culture 
hero’ (Kerényi, 1972: 180–181). Greek tricksters combine the sly and the stupid 
in themselves; in their behaviour we can discern both intention and lack of it. 
They symbolise the twilight of human consciousness:
Prometheus, the benefactor of mankind, lacks self-interest and playfulness. 
Hermes has both, when he discovers fire and sacrifice before Prometheus did – 
without, however, bothering about mankind. In the playful cruelties which 
the little god practiced on the tortoise and the sacrificial cows at his first theft, 
and which conferred no benefit on mankind, . . . we see the sly face of the 
trickster grinning at us, whereas in the deeds of Prometheus we see the sly 
and the stupid at once.
(Kerényi, 1972: 181)
Most trickster narratives (mythological, literary or cinematic) share a number of stock 
themes and motifs that serve as the backbone for the plot. Usually, a trickster narra­
tive starts with the cunning creature being or feeling restricted (often physically), 
goes on to describe the trickster’s escape and its adventures, and ends with the 
dissolution/transformation of the trickster. The most common structural elements 
of trickster narratives are being trapped, boundary-breaking, licentious behaviour, 
scatological humour, bodily transformations, the presence of animals (which I 
prefer to call ‘the animal connection’), naming issues, loss of control over one’s 
body and mind, and the trickster’s dissolution/death/transformation at the end of 
the story. Not all of the elements can be present in one story, film or myth, and 
their place in the narrative sequence are certainly not fixed. However, the ‘end 
result’ of trickster narratives is, invariably, forced transformation of the protago­
nist via chance and loss of control. In other words, the protagonist achieves a new 
‘status’ via sudden loss of shape and change.
Perhaps not surprisingly, human agency is one of the central problems of 
cultural anthropology. From the point of view of the British anthropologist 
and semiotician Gregory Bateson, the individual is permanently caught in the 
developmental tug of war – the process of fission and fusion (which he termed 
schismogenesis), the rivalry between individual initiative and cultural imperatives 
(Bateson, 1936: 195–196).
Another British anthropologist, Victor Turner (1920–1983), also explored 
the relationship between the individual and the system. He theorised that all sys­
tems were structures with an in-built internal conflict, triggered by communitas, 
or counter-structures. Communitas is ‘over and above any formal social bonds’ 
(Turner, 1975: 45). It can be organised and led by a group of disgruntled individu­
als whose vision of the system’s operation and functioning differs from that upheld 
by those in power. The psycho-anthropological task of communitates (sic) is to 
counter-balance the solidifying actions of the official structure. As a result of this 
destabilising tension – the cultural equivalent of the trickster – the system renews 
itself as the fresh ideas ‘feed back into the “central” economic and politico-legal 

102  Applications
domains and arenas, supplying them with goals, aspirations, incentives, structural 
models and raisons d’etre’ (Turner, 1979: 21). Communitas is an inhabitant, and 
spokesperson, of liminal situations in which ‘new symbols, models, paradigms, 
etc., arise – as the seedbeds of cultural creativity in fact’ (Turner, 1979: 21).
Turner employed the term liminal to describe the situations in which the struc­
ture was challenged, altered or destroyed. Liminality (from Latin limen – threshold) 
was initially mentioned by the French ethnographer Arnold Van Gennep in his 
work, The Rites of Passage (1909), and later developed by Turner into a set of 
political and social concepts. It denotes lack of stability, temporary absence of 
order – a transitional, twilight state. In his analysis of liminality, Turner uses van 
Gennep’s tripartite rite of passage: separation, transition and incorporation.
The first phase, separation, marks the end of the old state of things and the 
beginning of a new ‘order’. The second phase is the liminal period during which 
‘the ritual subjects pass through . . . an area of ambiguity, a sort of social limbo 
which has few . . . of the attributes of either the preceding or subsequent profane 
social statuses of cultural states’ (Turner 1979: 16). The third phase is the time 
of healing of the developmental rift, when ‘the ritual subjects’ (initiates, candi­
dates, whole communities in social, political or economic transition) return to 
their new, ‘relatively stable, well-defined position in the total society’ (1979: 16). 
‘Liminality’, Turner points out, refers to ‘any condition outside or on the peripher­
ies of everyday life’ (Turner, 1975: 47).
In the narrative structure, the trickster represents an unpredictable element 
which is introduced into an existing order of things, then challenges or demolishes 
this order, and the new order is introduced at the end of the narrative – often after 
the trickster’s disappearance. The trickster also changes the status of the characters 
in the narrative (particularly the protagonist). In this sense, the structure is remi­
niscent of the tripartite ritual consisting of separation, transition and incorporation. 
These narrative elements also hold good for the cinema where the trickster is often 
introduced a few minutes after the beginning of the film, after the main order is 
established and the principal relationships between the characters are outlined. 
The trickster’s lessons (i.e. the lessons learned by the characters during the liminal 
period of the story) are chaotic but life-changing. Being a-social, anti-social and 
ultimately anti-structural, the trickster creates change messily and unpredictably, 
by introducing liminality into the existing order. It also uncovers the reverse side 
of normality and social reality, which consists of stagnation, predictability and lack 
of fresh perspective.
Paddington (Dir. Paul King, 2014), loosely based on the famous children’s book 
series by Michael Bond, is a typical trickster narrative in that it follows a storyline 
in which a chaotic and unpredictable element is introduced into the seemingly stable 
lives of ‘normal people’. A bear from ‘darkest Peru’ arrives in London, at Paddington 
Station, with a note around his neck saying ‘Please look after this bear. Thank you’. 
He is spotted by the kindly Mrs Brown (Sally Hawkins), and invited to stay with 
the Brown family who soon realise that he is quite a liability. Lacking understand­
ing of the local rules and customs, and being clumsy, Paddington keeps getting into 

Combining different methodologies  103
trouble and creating mess when he cleans his ears with toothbrushes, falls off the 
escalator or floods the bathroom. Most of these mishaps are as endearing as they 
are annoying. Little does he know that he is being hunted by a vicious taxidermist, 
Millicent (Nicole Kidman), who believes that her father’s career was ruined because 
of him. Her father, Montgomery Clyde, was an explorer and was expected to pre­
serve a specimen of a bear from Peru for the Natural History Museum, but refused 
as he was reluctant to kill (rather human) bears. After many more adventures, and 
having overcome numerous dangers and difficulties, Paddington becomes an offi­
cially accepted member of the Brown family.
Paddington Bear has all the traditional attributes of the trickster. Many mytho­
logical tricksters are animals, often anthropomorphic. Animals are frequent guests 
in trickster myths. In fact, they symbolise the trickster’s connection with the 
‘underworld’ of instincts and animal behaviour. Many mythological and folkloric 
tricksters are animals, and even when they are not, some association with the ani­
mal kingdom is often present. The African trickster club boasts a spider (Kwaku 
Anansi), a hare and a tortoise; the Northern American group includes a raven, a 
coyote, a rabbit and Wakdjunkaga’s numerous animal transformations. The fox is 
the main trickster in Russian fairy tales; Indian mythology has the monkey called 
Hanuman (one of the heroes of the Ramayana); the most-known Chinese trickster 
is also a monkey – the hero of the novel Journey to the West (1590); in Peruvian 
fairy tales the trickster’s role is played by a guinea pig; Argentinean folklore has 
Tokwah, who is neither human nor animal; Japanese folktales mention Hare and 
Badger as clever shapeshifters. Their anthropomorphism also emphasises their 
boundary-crossing skills as well as their ability to transform into other creatures, 
for they don’t have a permanent state, do not belong to any system and therefore 
lack physical, moral or social continuity.
Paddington also introduces what one character in the film terms ‘a pinch of 
chaos’ into an otherwise routine and measured family life. This fulfils the ‘lack of 
control’ condition of trickster characters. Not only can they not control their own 
bodies (they are also shapeshifters, remember), they cause others to lose control 
over theirs. Paddington brings irrational and a-systemic elements into a super-
controlled environment. The Browns are a well-run family presided over by the 
father, who is a risk analyst by profession. Mr Brown (Hugh Bonneville) makes 
sure that every object in his flat is insured. He also opposes the idea of bring­
ing home a bear – a stranger and a homeless creature. The father is the paragon 
of normality and order – he has to be, for he feels responsible for the safety of 
his family. Paddington’s task (as a narrative element) is to derail the controlling 
order, and thus to introduce (ultimately, creative) change into the otherwise stag­
nating system.
The problem of control is symbiotically connected with the issue of shame. The 
social order uses shame to shape and control the individual. Mythological trick­
sters, being metaphorically pre-individual, do not claim to have mastery over their 
bodies or actions. When tricksters play their tricks on humans, gods and ‘powerful 
persons’, they show the power of chance and choice over rational frameworks 

104  Applications
and established orders. They also remind people that the individual is never truly 
perfect or complete, and that control over one’s mind and body – as well as over 
one’s surroundings – has to be constantly revised, maintained and observed.
Importantly, Paddington is an immigrant. This fulfils a whole range of trickster 
attributes – boundary-crossing, the problem with the name, being trapped and the 
fear of difference (which is essentially the fear of the loss of control over one’s 
quiet and measured life). The immigrant bear crosses borders (he crosses several 
oceans), is initially nameless (the Browns call him Paddington because they find 
him on the platform at Paddington station) and is trapped at the beginning of the 
narrative (he is a stowaway who arrives in England on board a cargo ship). His 
behaviour is unpredictable, and he often causes chaos inadvertently. He ends up 
shaking up a whole range of systems, including the Browns’ family habits and Mr 
Brown’s faith in not taking risks.
Fear of chaos and losing control over one’s current existence are the usual 
ingredients in anti-immigrant sentiments. Foreignness is one of the key themes of 
the film – almost its moral and social premise, in fact. Fear of all things foreign is 
epitomised in the character of Mr Curry (Peter Capaldi) who, despite his name, is 
deeply xenophobic and has nightmares about his lovely street eventually getting 
covered in ‘their fur’. Not surprisingly, Mr Curry is also the kind of individual 
who rarely leaves his flat and avoids human contact. This is because, as the film’s 
narrative goes, he had a cold and uncaring mother. His careful behaviour protects 
him from any risks, change or challenge. Having a stale and boring life, he never­
theless protects himself from any tricksters that could threaten it and Paddington 
is one such trickster. Any difference is disturbing because it breaks up the homo­
geneity of a particular community or the smooth working of a locally accepted 
order of things. Naturally, according to Mr Curry, bringers of difference should be 
captured and eliminated. For this purpose he teams up with Millicent Clyde, who 
openly empathises with his xenophobic complaints.
Paul King and his team may have toyed with the storyline, but they faithfully 
followed Bond’s principal message. Bond admits that he got his inspiration for the 
character of Paddington from the images of Jewish children arriving at Reading 
station before the Second World War:
I remember their labels round their necks and then I remember going to the 
cinema and seeing on the newsreel that Hitler had moved into some new 
country and seeing footage of elderly people pushing prams with all their 
belongings in them. Refugees are the saddest sight, I still think that.
(Llewellyn Smith, The Telegraph, 23 November 2014)
A trickster-immigrant, Paddington shakes up the system by virtue of being differ­
ent as well as being unfamiliar with the local customs. The bringer of chaos and 
the prince of liminality, the trickster’s aim in narratives is revival of creativity 
and renewal of ruling structures. True to this role, Paddington takes the Browns 
through the liminal zone and to a more creative existence as Mr Brown re-learns 

Combining different methodologies  105
to be creative (at some point he even dresses as a cleaning lady in a classic trans­
vestite comedy twist), and family members are finally able to act together, thus 
rediscovering their unity.
At the end of the film they get a live-in trickster, fully integrated and managed 
(and thus no longer feared or seen as ‘the other’) into the family. Paddington the 
trickster guarantees them a non-stop delivery of liminal challenges and an endless 
stream of entertainment. Regular renewal guarantees the stability of any system 
while the total absence of a trickster leads to the structure’s stagnation and death. 
‘The spirit of disorder and the enemy of boundaries’ (to use Barbara Babcock-
Abrahams’ expression [1975: 147]), in controlled and measured quantities, ensures 
the longevity of the system, be it a person’s mind, a family unit or a social structure.

Chapter 5
The auteur theory
A Jungian view
Luke Hockley
Introduction
The remaining chapters of this book move from the eclectic and synthesising 
approach of the previous chapter to explore Jungian approaches to four individual 
established areas of film theory. Two of these involve theories that have made the 
transition from the technical lexicon of the academy to become part of our every­
day vocabulary, namely auteur theory and genre theory. While auteur theory is 
primarily concerned with the creation of films and the role of the director, genre 
theory examines the interrelationships between the films themselves, the studios 
that have produced them and how viewers ‘read’ such genre films. The third the­
ory deals with questions of sexuality and representation. Finally, the book closes 
with a consideration of phenomenological film theory. This somewhat specialist 
area is included because it sets out to understand the experience of watching a 
film and what it is that is happening when viewers experience the unfolding flow 
of images and sounds in the auditorium. These are the four approaches: auteur 
theory (creation); genre theory (production and exhibition); sexuality (representa­
tion) and phenomenological theory (reception).
Providing an overview of the specific insights that a Jungian orientated 
approach to films can provide, each chapter examines the relationship between 
Analytical Psychology and the texts, structures and institutions of cinema. Each 
chapter has a similar structure and starts by introducing the central debates of 
each film theory before exploring how Analytical Psychology can inflect the ways 
that the auteur theory, genre theory, sexuality and phenomenological film theory 
can be understood psychologically. In so doing they will suggest the direction 
of travel of Jungian-orientated film theory and identify future avenues for fur­
ther exploration. Informing this investigation is the following question: what is 
distinctive about the Jungian approach and its relationship to classical psychoa­
nalysis, its structural variant as promoted by the journal Screen and subsequent 
Lacanian developments?
Psychoanalytic film theory has sought to find points of correspondence 
between the structural operation of the psyche and the machinery of cinema. In 
some cases such investigations were optically driven and concerned with the 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  107
function of the ‘scopic regime’ (Metz, 1977). Put another way, psychoanalytic 
theory has attempted to identify just what it is that the act of looking stands for – 
psychologically what does it mean to look? For Freud looking was a source of 
pleasure and he thought of it as a sublimation of the psyche’s libidinal sexual 
energy. Psychoanalytic film theory has wondered about the extent to which such 
pleasure is related to the ideological location of looking, and the objects intended 
to be looked at. Specifically, it has tied the scopic regime to the dominant ideol­
ogy of Western culture and in so doing locates ‘the look’ as part of a patriarchal 
system of oppression in which women are objectified for the pleasure of the male 
spectator (Mulvey, 1975). Though rather different, arguably, there are aspects of 
the Lacanian position, and particularly its emphasis on the ‘mirror phase’, that 
fit into this same ocular-centric category. Others have sought to avoid such an 
ocular-centric approach and instead have explored how the cinematic apparatus in 
its projection, screen, reflection and immersive sound creates the optimal condi­
tions for the reception of a film (Baudry, 1986). In short, such theory examines 
the apparatus of cinema and how it is related to our internal psychological and 
biological structures of perception.
By way of contrast, phenomenological theory has tended to emphasise the 
experience of the film as a moment where it is possible to differentiate between 
the narrative meaning of the film and the point of reception where other mean­
ings come into play. The concluding chapter of this book will explore the extent 
to which it is legitimate, and indeed productive, to introduce the idea of the 
unconscious into such considerations. Historically phenomenological theory 
has been antagonistic to the idea of an unconscious that possesses purpose and 
intent, preferring instead to describe experience in terms of what is known, and 
what is unknown (Fuchs, 2012). While phenomenology regards the idea of the 
unconscious as superfluous, Analytical Psychology finds the idea of the phenom­
enology appealing as its focus on experience dovetails well with its interest in 
the relationship between deep structures and psychological imagery. Clearly, this 
raises the question as to the extent to which it is possible to reconcile these two 
rather different ways of describing the psychology of the cinematic experience.
Jungian-orientated film theory is concerned with understanding the ways in 
which the experience of affect has an integral part to play in the viewing experi­
ence of films and it wonders how it might influence our understanding of the films 
we watch. For example, how do affects relate to narrative and textual understand­
ing of films themselves? What is the role of affect in the para-textual life of films, 
as they escape the confines of the cinema auditorium as movie posters, trailers, 
memorabilia, fan sites, DVDs and so on? Here, affect can be used to illuminate 
individual viewing experiences as well as means to understand films more fully. It 
is interesting that the concern with the structure of the psyche and the structure of 
film that has preoccupied much psychoanalytic film theory has meant that the cru­
cial issue of affect has been marginalised in those discussions. Jungian-orientated 
film theory provides a useful corrective to that state of affairs with its emphasis 
on the identification of unconscious processes which are understood through the 

108  Applications
experience of affects – often unlooked for and unexpected. In turn, this provides 
the link to phenomenological theory as it too is intimately concerned with the 
experience of affect – not an intellectual appreciation of affect but its manifesta­
tion in the body as part of a hermeneutic system.
What is the auteur theory?
Outside the academy films are often identified by their directors. It is now such a 
normal part of our daily language that we rarely pause to think about this curious state 
of affairs. To routinely talk about the latest Spielberg film, or the new Fincher 
movie is quite normal and unproblematic to us. When the term auteur is used 
colloquially it refers to a director who has a personal style, or who seems to pro­
duce films that are in some way distinctive. For example James Cameron, George 
Lucas, Ridley Scott, Peter Jackson and Steven Spielberg are familiar directors 
who produce powerful narrative films. Arguably, Dave Fincher, Christopher 
Nolan, David Lynch, David Cronenberg, Woody Allen, Quentin Tarantino, 
Darren Aronofsky, Martin Scorsese all make more personal films.
Yet a moment’s thought shows that of course it is quite possible to catego­
rise films by producer, or writer, or any one of a number of other production 
personnel – yet this almost never happens. The exception to this concerns actors 
who have ‘star’ status, though even then they are often linked with the direc­
tor, as in ‘Scarlett Johansson in Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin’ (2013). The 
development of the director as a key taxonomic category for the classification of 
films emerged as the outcome of specific historical circumstances. But there are 
also psychological explanations that illuminate why it is that directors as power­
ful creative individuals have come to figure prominently in the ways we think 
about films – however, such psychological reasons are talked about much less 
frequently. This section explores the rise of the director as the author of a film, 
examines how Jungian-orientated film studies has utilised this development and 
finally looks at some of the psychological ramifications in adopting a psychologi­
cal orientation to the auteur theory.
From early on in the history of cinema the director of a film has held a special 
place in the imagination of the public. Filmmaking is of course a collective enter­
prise as the lengthy credits at the end of any film bear testament. The complexity 
of commercial movie making is such that it requires vast teams of creative, techni­
cal, logistic managerial personnel. Even smaller independent productions that are 
not likely to be known to audiences outside of film festivals, and that might not 
even manage a DVD release, have significant sized production teams. For example, 
The Strange Little Cat (Das merkwürdige Kätzchen) (Dir. Zürcher, 2013) had a 
crew of over fifty people. Yet somehow the idea that the director is the equivalent 
of the author of a novel is a proposition of such immediate simplicity and appeal 
that it is hard to shake off. It is as though psychologically we need the myth of 
the individual creative genius. Intellectually we know that filmmaking is not a 
solitary activity yet somehow we hold on to the belief that in this technologically 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  109
sophisticated and increasingly mediated age, the spirit of the individual survives. 
Perhaps this too speaks to the appeal of social media, which certainly provides the 
illusion that an individual and distinctive voice can be heard above the clamour 
of the social crowd. In the final chapter of this book we return to the role of the 
individual in finding and making psychological meaning in cultural products. For 
present purposes it is enough to register that one of the psychological functions 
that a ‘myth’ of the auteur performs culturally is to preserve the idea of individual 
identity and to foster a belief in personal creativity.
The idea that the director is the controlling and creative force behind a film 
was around almost from the start of the film industry. Directors such as Auguste 
and Louis Lumière (1862–1954 and 1864–1948) and Méliès (1861–1938) gave 
way to D. W. Griffiths (1875–1948), Erich Stroheim (1885–1957) and Josef von 
Sternberg (1894–1969). However it was really the post-Second World War period 
that saw the emergence of a theory of cinema that centred on the creative impor­
tance of the director. There is a historical reason for this development. During 
the Second World War, the Nazi occupying powers prohibited the distribution 
and exhibition of American fiction films. Shortly after the end of the war in 1946 
America formed the Motion Picture Export Association (MPEA) (Segrave, 1997) 
to oversee the distribution of the American back-catalogue from the war years to 
thirteen different European countries. The MPEA was effective in its undertaking 
and subsequently Italy, France and West Germany became some the largest post-
war markets for American films. For somewhat different reasons, the UK was 
another key market for Hollywood.
However, it was in France that the writers of the influential publication Cahiers 
du Cinéma identified an issue that they wanted to solve. The contributors to Cahiers 
who included André Bazin (its founder) and filmmakers such as Éric Rohmer, 
Jacques Rivette, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol and François Truffaut came to 
the view that in this sea of American product, some films stood out as islands of 
excellence. For reasons that were not immediately apparent, some films seemed 
to be more compelling as works of art than the others. Formalising this observa­
tion, Cahiers made a distinction between the metteur en scène and the auteur. The 
former term relates to the mise-en-scène of a film. There are numerous definitions 
of this term but the one offered by Bordwell and Thompson (2003) identifies the 
following elements involved in the arrangement of the events in front of the cam­
era as contributing to the formal properties of film: composition, props, actors, 
costumes and lighting (Bordwell and Thompson, 2003). Directors who mastered 
the formal elements of film production but who according to Cahiers failed to 
convey a personal meaning or individual vision were designated as metteurs en 
scène. On the other hand, the status of auteur was afforded to those directors who 
not only fully controlled all the elements of the film, but who also managed to 
explore and convey a personal set of concerns repeatedly, film after film. This 
distinction between metteur en scène and auteur, as promoted by Cahiers, had an 
evaluative function as for that group of critics it separated out ‘good’ films from 
those that were merely routine or everyday. The auteurs that the Cahiers critics 

110  Applications
particularly admired included: Alfred Hitchcock, Orson Welles, John Ford and 
Howard Hawks.
Published in 1981 John Caughie’s edited collection Theories of Authorship pro­
vided one of the earliest assessments of the various strengths and pitfalls of the 
auteur theory and it remains a seminal account. The articles in that volume are as 
salient today as when they were first written, as they explore the central debates that 
surround questions of cinematic authorship. The book is arranged in three sections 
and the final section deals with ‘Fiction of the author/author of the fiction’ – it is the 
neat use of the solidus in that construction which in no small part contributes to the 
longevity of the formulation. Much of this book too is in different ways concerned 
with the creation of fictions and from a Jungian position it questions who actually 
is their author. Is it just the director who oversees the creation of image and sound 
for the screen? Perhaps we should instead focus on the institutional determinates 
which shape fiction films so that they are able to make a good financial return at 
the box office – it is all to easy to forget that the primary function of films is to 
make money as investors do not commit large sums on speculative ventures just to 
entertain themselves for a couple of hours in the cinema. Perhaps in this sense the 
industry itself is the author of a film – a point that is echoed in some of the writings 
of Andrew Sarris (1968). A third possibility is that the author of a film is actually 
the viewer and that the psychological meaning and its authorship rests with each 
individual viewer, as he or she develops a personal relationship with a film. The 
more likely scenario is that all three elements interact in different ways to inflect our 
understanding of films, their authorship and their resulting psychological meanings.
Earlier in the 1960s the American film theorist Andrew Sarris had memorably 
commented, ‘the auteur theory is not so much a theory as an attitude, a table of 
values that converts film history into directorial autobiography’ (Sarris, 1968: 34). 
And to this it is reasonable to add that in no small way, the values that convert film 
history into directorial autobiography belong to the viewer. In this vein, Robert 
Stam argues: ‘Auteur studies now tend to see a director’s work not as the expres­
sion of individual genius but rather as the site of encounter of a biography, an 
intertext, an institutional context and a historical moment (Stam, 2000: 6).
While accepting this is not Stam’s intention, it remains important to note that 
one of the intertexts is the psychological intertext that arises in the act of watching 
a film. Stam has in mind institutional intertexts of the type that will be considered 
in the next chapter on genre. But given the psychological focus of this volume, 
for our purposes any theory of authorship needs to include a consideration of the 
extent to which the viewer’s psychological authority interacts with the narrative 
meaning of the film to create something new, that is not inherent in the just the 
viewer of the film or the film itself, but which arises from the interaction of the two. 
Looking is not a passive activity. It is a hermeneutic activity in which the subject 
exists in a reflexive relationship with the object. Subject and object are not sepa­
rate categories as the one needs the other. As we look at film, so too it looks back 
at us and in so doing the co-constellation of the gaze sets up an iterative dynamic 
in which ever-changing meanings circulate from screen, to viewer and back to 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  111
screen and this generation of meanings is the site of the psychological vortex of the 
viewer–viewing relationship.
Jungian approaches to film directors
Jungian-orientated film scholars have been drawn to the idea that Jungian insights 
can offer fresh perspectives on the work of well-known directors. To date there 
have been book-length studies on Howard Hawks, Nicolas Roeg and Tim Burton. 
Additionally, there have been scholarly articles and chapters that have explored, 
amongst others, the work of Baz Luhrmann, Federico Fellini, Derek Jarman and 
Ingmar Bergman. The next part of this chapter considers if this interest in direc­
tors might find its origins in something other than the prevalence of the auteur 
theory – perhaps there are psychological reasons too for wanting to focus on the 
creative work of (male) individuals.
One of the first books to attempt such an auteur-based Jungian analysis of 
the films of a single director was Clark Branson’s Howard Hawks: A Jungian 
Study (1987). It consists of a series of short analyses of each of Hawks’ films. It 
makes for an interesting read as Hawks’ work is famously diverse with very little 
apparently linking films as disparate as Only Angels Have Wings (1939), His Girl 
Friday (1940), The Big Sleep (1946) and Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953). The 
eclecticism of Hawks’ work was one of the areas that the auteur theorists strug­
gled with, as it is difficult to spot the thematic consistency and personal themes 
that they were seeking to identify. Often when looking at the work of an ‘auteur’ 
it is possible to detect motifs that run across the films and it is not unusual for sim­
ilar characters and narrative concerns to reoccur – the films of Alfred Hitchcock 
are a good example of just that. In a way, Branson’s Jungian readings attempt to 
reveal psychological threads that are woven into the body of his films and in so 
doing answer a question that the French theorists of the 1950s were unable to.
Branson sets out in the early chapters of the book the classical Jungian approach 
that he is about to adopt. However, he does not really pull the directorial and psy­
chological strands together for the reader, who is left with the gauzy impression that 
there is something important here but that it lies behind a veil. Some of the analyses 
are rather short (sometimes just a paragraph) while others go into more detail. What 
gradually becomes clear in Branson’s analysis is how Hawk’s films repeatedly deal 
with the emergence of a male peer group with all the opportunities for heroism and 
comedy that this suggests. What is unclear is why a Jungian method is needed as this 
insight could have emerged from any number of close textual readings. Somehow the 
reader is left with the impression that in this seemingly diverse body of films there 
is something further that needs to be excavated. Branson notes (1987: 274) that even 
though Jungian psychology can use grandiose terms, it is nonetheless concerned with 
intimate relations. That observation does actually provide a way into Hawks’ films, 
each of which seeks to reconcile big themes such as love, war and identity with 
more intimate and personal relationships and experiences – the idea that what we 
find in the personal is an expression of the collective is a very Jungian idea indeed.

112  Applications
The film theorist Don Fredericksen offers a rather different take in his approach 
to studying auteurs and it is one that is redolent with psychological reflections. He 
is particularly interested in personal voice filmmaking which, of necessity, means 
that the psychological life of the director is bound into the films themselves. He 
has conducted a book-length study of Ingmar Bergman’s film Persona (1966), 
and at the time of his death was working on another book about Illumination 
(1973) by the Polish director Krzysztof Zanussi. This would have complemented 
his existing work on Fellini and in particular 8½ (1963), and an early piece that 
while not auteurist in its orientation analyses the poetic documentary film Song of 
Ceylon (1934), directed by Basil Wright (see Chapter 3), one of the key members 
of the British Documentary Film Movement (BDFM).
For Fredericksen, all these films fall into a special category that he refers to as 
‘liminal cinema’. It is his contention that such films exhibit a particular proxim­
ity to the unconscious mind. The etymology of the word ‘liminal’ is found in the 
Latin word ‘limen’, meaning threshold. Thus it refers to the start of something, to 
a crossing over into a new project or phase of life. In that sense it is rather like a 
doorway into a home, where we cross from the outside world into the domestic 
interior. However these threshold spaces are not always as fixed as a doorway – 
for example, the boundary between the sea and seashore changes depending on 
the tides. Fredericksen uses the term in both senses, as something starting and also 
in a more permeable manner, to explore how some films seem to exist in a space 
somewhere between the conscious world and the unconscious.
His revealing analysis of 8½ locates it as a work of midlife in which the direc­
tor is crossing from one part of life towards another. Fredericksen undertakes 
what he refers to as ‘a functional analysis’. He elects not to explore any of the 
dream sequences in the films, nor does he produce a detailed textual reading. 
Consequently he eschews any reflection on the tempting and famous Asa Nisi 
Masa motif which is a thinly disguised rendering of the Jungian term ‘anima’ 
(AsaNIsMAsa). Instead he choses to interweave into his analysis of the film 
speculations about Fellini’s childhood that are based on comments made by the 
director himself, and in particular the lack of parental mirroring that Fredericksen 
infers took place in Fellini’s early life.
In his analysis of Persona, Fredericksen undertakes a similar process of moving 
between the life of the director and the film itself, though this time the focus is very 
much more on the text, and he produces an insightful account of the film in which 
its Jungian themes are revealed. In particular he uses the idea of liminality to very 
good effect to reveal how doors, windows, mirrors, etc. support the idea of transition 
as one moves from each psychological state to the next. There is a thin line to walk 
here between using biographical information to inform textual interpretations and the 
much more problematic use of films to make psychological claims about a director’s 
psychological life. In his analysis of Persona Frederick stays on the interpretative side, 
whereas with 8½ he arguably adopts a more interpretative and ‘liminal’ approach.
In her monograph Tim Burton: The Monster and the Crowd (2010), Helena 
Bassil-Morozow is in similar territory, though here the lines are more clearly drawn. 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  113
Bassil-Morozow clearly sets out to locate films not as just the creation of an auteur, 
but as social and psychological sites of meaning that exist in relationship with one 
another. In fact she states that her study is not attempting to find a correlation between 
the personal psychology of a director and the films, but rather that it is establishing a 
more intertextual approach that, as it unfolds, uncovers something meaningful about 
the psychological condition of post-modernity. For her, films have as much to say 
about our cultural condition as they do about the psychological state of their direc­
tors. As Bassil-Morozow comments:
I deliberately eschewed extensive use of the psychobiographical approach 
because, in a way, Tim Burton’s art and his vision are bigger than any number 
of childhood complexes that he may harbour. Edward Scissorhands, Batman 
and Sweeny Todd, far from reflecting a narrowly personal set of problems, 
map out the psychological face of the contemporary world.
(Bassil-Morozow, 2010: 178)
The particular significance of her work is encapsulated in the final sentence, in 
which Bassil-Morozow makes it clear that the function of her auteur analysis 
is only in part to understand the films. More significantly what she is actually 
attempting is to see what the films reveal about the psychological and ideologi­
cal state of society, as mediated through the figure of the director, in this case 
Tim Burton. What is it, then, that Bassil-Morozow uncovers? What her percep­
tive analysis of Tim Burton’s films reveals is an enduring preoccupation in the 
films with the threat to individuality in which the agency of the individual is 
something fragile and frail, and in which the unthinking, unaware social col­
lective threatens to drown out individual voices – something that is enacted by 
many of Burton’s characters.
Tellingly, in the preface to her book, Bassil-Morozow comments on how grow­
ing up in the Soviet Union there was a collective mentality in which the life of 
the individual is actually not personal but belongs to the community. This gives 
her analysis of the characters in Burton’s films a particular personal relevance. It 
also gives a different take on why Burton as a ‘maverick’ creative director, who 
produces films that are different to the mainstream product that comes out of the 
American film industry, is a figure of such importance for her. The director, and 
the psychology of his films, is ideologically inflected. In this world, it becomes 
increasingly important for strong individuals to stand out against the collective, 
even if those characters are fundamentally flawed. Arguably, it is precisely those 
flaws, or, to use a more psychological language, complexes, which are what give 
Burton’s central characters both agency and affect. As Bassil-Morozow reminds 
us, they are embodiments of the trickster and child archetypes – the future hero 
whose life from his or her early days is full of all kinds of dangers and adven­
tures. Moreover, it is in this imperfect childhood, with imperfect, often wounding 
parents, that the unstoppable drive to survive and to create, characteristic of true 
heroes, is born. Being flawed also means being able to recreate one’s life – and the 

114  Applications
life of others – despite all the pain, loss and unfairness. Ultimately, it is the effort 
and the ability to get up and move on that helps one win.
John Izod sets up a similar, yet significantly different, set of parameters in 
his analysis of the films of Nicolas Roeg. In the introduction to his unjustly little 
known 1992 study, Izod first elucidates the Jungian dichotomy between the inner 
world of the unconscious psyche and that of our more conscious daily life:
[the] juxtaposition of the universe with the microcosm of the individual 
psyche typifies a structure which embodies major themes [in Roeg’s films]. 
Since the films employ myth to relate the outer and inner worlds, they are 
peculiarly well suited to an analysis that uses Jungian methods.
(Izod, 1992: xiv)
It is worth pausing here to note that for Izod, at least at this point in his writing, the 
inner and outer (conscious and unconscious) are indeed separate worlds. As we 
will see in a moment, while he posits such a differentiation he was already begin­
ning to question if the distinction is quite so clear-cut as it might appear. Izod is 
also setting up a typically Jungian view of the psyche in which each individual 
carries with him or her something of our contemporary collective experience and 
also a collective history as represented in the world of myth. The idea might seem a 
curious one, yet we know that ideologically we are impregnated with cultural 
attitudes and that these cultural values and beliefs are the result of an historical 
accretion that is formed as the sediment of social experience and its contingent 
values are gradually laid down to form the bedrock of our being.
In an intriguing and insightful moment Izod wonders what would happen if 
we struck a fissure through this stratum and the accumulated cultural meanings 
of films were cracked open? Put another way, just what is it that occurs when we 
read against the grain? Izod attempts just that as in a bold move he sets out to 
interpret Roeg’s films in the light of Jungian sensitivities. This is curious because 
on the face of it these films appear to be rather Freudian in much of their imagery 
and in their thematic concerns. The oedipal dynamics of Don’t Look Now (1973) 
the sexual perversions of Bad Timing (1980), the unrelenting images of trains 
going into tunnels (!) in Track 29 (1988) all suggest that a Jungian reading of these 
films is not likely to be a promising undertaking. Again, Izod’s intention is to use 
the Jungian perspective to reveal something that other ways of looking at these 
films have missed. The intention is not to remedy the deficiencies of the auteur 
theory itself, but rather to offer a set of different perspectives on these films to the 
ones that are afforded by more Freudian psychoanalytic interpretations.
Yet, informative though Izod’s interpretations of each film are, what shines 
through is the prescient strength of the analytical position that he adopts. Izod 
is keen to differentiate between ‘Roeg’ the director as a mediated presence and 
Roeg the man who exists outside the immediacy of the mediated frame. This is a 
crucial distinction as in Jungian terms it distinguishes between persona and self. 
The director’s mask, his persona, is the archetype of social adaptability that is 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  115
needed to transform the film from script to finished product. Just as the persona 
that each and every one of us has is a part of who we are, it is also just the surface, 
the patina of the psyche.
If it were to transpire that Roeg turned out to be no more than the sum of his 
films, then he would be stuck in a form of persona identification. Thus, semioti­
cally the distinction is made between ‘Roeg’ as director (persona) and Roeg as an 
ego identity that exists in relation to, but different from, his films.
However, as viewers we are inquisitive and keen to get behind the surface 
of the films, to tear off the director’s mask and to find out more about the film 
and the man himself. Izod suggests that the lifting of the authorial mask comes 
with the interpretative impulse and that it complements the drive to understand a 
film in all its theoretical, aesthetic and psychological complexity. Along with this 
viewers project their own needs and desires into the film. Izod notes:
we ourselves actively construct the idea of an author. Such a figure (‘Roeg’ 
rather than Roeg, to pick up [Peter] Wollen’s distinction) is a compound 
firstly of elements encoded into the film texts together with, secondly, our 
own inscription of the psychological and moral characteristics that seem to us 
to explain those traces and, thirdly, our projection of our own needs and emo­
tion into the text. To these diverse forms of knowledge we add whatever we 
can glean from sources outside the cinema such as interviews and reviews.
(Izod, 1992: 249–250)
Izod’s is a neatly multi-layered analysis. It reveals how the meanings that accrue 
in films are the result of three elements: the structure of the films themselves; 
knowledge of the films from sources other than the films (intertexts) and finally 
the individual psychology of viewers. (This approach to the psychology of cinema 
will be given further consideration in the chapter on phenomenology – Chapter 8.)
Auteur as father
What then is it that underlies the psychological appeal of the auteur theory to the 
Jungian-inclined film theorist? Of all the areas of film studies the auteur theory 
has attracted the attention of Jungian film scholars like no other. Curiously, some 
aspects of film theory have gone untroubled by Jungian concerns. There is almost 
no writing on film stars, just a little on genre and almost nothing on the institu­
tional aspects of film production. To help in exploring the significance of the 
auteur here we will co-opt the Lacanian concept of the nom du père (the name of 
the father). It is used to indicate the role of the father in the symbolic realm. (The 
symbolic realm is one of the three Lacanian orders of being – the other two are the 
‘imaginary’ and the ‘real’. These technical terms are highly specified in Lacanian 
thinking and have meanings that are rather different to the ways in which they 
are used colloquially, and the Lacanian symbolic should not be confused with 
either the Freudian understanding of symbols or indeed the Jungian.) For Lacan 

116  Applications
the symbolic order is the determining order of being. It is roughly equivalent to 
an order of ‘culture’. In turn, this cultural order is expressed through language. As 
Lacan notes in Écrits: ‘It is in the name of the Father that we must recognize the 
support of the symbolic function which, from the dawn of history, has identified 
his person with the figure of the law’ (1977: 67).
Here Lacan is implicitly acknowledging the father’s role in the oedipal dynamic 
that, as he puts it, has existed ‘from the dawn of history’. In so doing he plays with 
the term’s phonological similarity to le non du père (the ‘no’ of the father) and as 
a result he emphasises the legislative and prohibitive functions of the father and 
also the need to extricate oneself from the prescribed vision that is enacted when 
the world is seen solely through the father’s paternal eyes. Of course such a shift 
is not simple for, as Lacan implies, we cannot make such a clean-cut escape as 
we remain perpetually both inside and outside the nom du père. To use a more 
Jungian language, as Anthony Stevens reminds us, the work of the father is cen­
trifugal in that it moves the child from home out into society while at the same 
time the child remains within the matrices of familial relations.
Psychologically speaking, as well as conceptually, Freud, Lacan and Jung are 
the founding fathers of our discipline. It is therefore understandable that in an 
oedipal manner it would be necessary to ‘murder’ or dispose of their intellectual 
inheritance. Yet, as Stevens pointed out, it is impossible to escape our familial 
relations. And so Jungian-orientated film studies become a site of contestation 
with more established approaches, with more mature approaches or as we might 
put it, more ‘adult’ views of the world. As the relative newcomer, the angry child 
needs to both kill the father and retain the positive aspects of family lore. The field 
of Jungian film theory is then both the non and nom du père.
In place of our psychological fathers we have reinstated our cinematic fathers – 
the directors who, like us, have undergone a crisis of identity. It is surely no 
accident that Tim Burton, Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman are all intimately 
concerned with questions of being and of identity. In their films they each explore 
issues of personal transformation, of what it means to be in a state of tension with 
society, and what it means to find one’s own path through the world. In short, they 
are all concerned with individuation and arguably all use films as part of their own 
individuation process too. This, then, is how Jungian-informed film studies has 
co-opted auteurs to aid the individuation of the subject itself.
However, this psychological take on the auteur also provides a rather different 
perspective on the personal vision of the auteur. Alongside an auteur’s ability to 
exercise control over the medium (the metteur en scène) and the use of the medium to 
give personal voice to individual creative concerns (auteur) we need to add the psy­
chological significance of the films themselves. Here, it is important to distinguish 
between the psychological potency of the films and the psychology of the director. 
Of course the personal life of the director is intertwined with the films. Naturally 
it is significant that Fellini was in Jungian analysis while he was making 8½ and it 
would be a mistake to ignore such biographical information, especially when Fellini 
left a dream journal (2007). However, it would be no lesser mistake to make the 

The auteur theory: a Jungian view  117
error of trying to psychoanalyse a director through his or her films. First, as we have 
seen, unlike dreams, which are bespoke and individual, films are collaborative and 
cultural. Second, there is very little opportunity to open up a dialogue with a film’s 
director – either they are no longer alive or they are for other reasons inaccessible to 
us. Thirdly, there is little reason to assume that the personal psychological traces left 
in films are a reliable indication of the director’s psychological state.
Yet it remains significant that a Jungian approach to films has been particularly 
interested in the creative work and personal vision of film directors. Central to a 
Jungian conception of the world and the psychological development of individu­
als is the idea of individuation. This is the psychological task, often associated 
with mid-life, of being more fully ourselves. It is the point in life when typically 
careers and families are established and so perversely it is also the time when it 
is necessary to escape from such societal norms and to forge a personal way of 
being in the world. Of course, this is a somewhat romantic notion and Paul Bishop 
(2009) has explored how intertwined Jung’s psychological ideas are with those of 
nineteenth-century German romantic aesthetics and philosophy. Nonetheless, and 
laden as it is with this cultural history, individuation remains a central and distin­
guishing quality of classical Jungian psychology.
One of the contributions of Jungian-orientated film studies (romantic though it 
is) is a reminder of just how important personal creativity is and of the ways that it is 
central to our individual understanding of both who we are and how we are, in the 
world. Yet, significantly, Jung also stressed the limitations of such an approach:
The essence of a work of art is not to be found in the personal idiosyncrasies 
that creep into it – indeed, the more there are of them, the less it is a work of 
art – but in its rising above the personal and speaking from the mind and heart 
of the artist to the mind and heart of mankind. The personal aspect of art is a 
limitation and even vice.
(CW15: 156)
Here, then, is a good example of one way in which Jungian psychology can be 
helpfully contradictory. On the one hand it identifies the importance of individual 
psychology in both the creation and interpretation of films, while on the other it 
stresses the importance of the collective appeal of film as a medium that tran­
scends the personal. The tensions between individual and collective qualities 
that run throughout Jungian psychology accurately reflect the way that watching 
a film is both a personal and collective activity. There is an enantiodromia (a 
running together of opposites) that is central to how films are understood psycho­
logically. In terms of production, while the auteur might well direct films with 
a personal voice, his needs must sit alongside the collective appeal of films and 
also accommodate the individual psychological meanings they evoke. Thus the 
psychological meanings of films are not fixed but instead are liable to change as 
our personal and cultural perspectives alter – an observation that we will explore 
more fully in the next chapter.

Chapter 6
Film genres and archetypes
Luke Hockley
Introduction
This chapter is concerned with the idea of film genres. It will explore the extent 
to which the emphasis on the creative role of the individual as exemplified by the 
auteur theory is actually a reactionary view that fails to account for the complexi­
ties that are intrinsic in the production of films. To adopt the auteur theory is to 
adopt a polemical position and arguably the same holds good for many of the major 
film theories. However the auteur theory is distinctive in the way that it seeks to 
privilege the creative contribution of one person in the production process, namely 
the director. By doing so it evokes the somewhat romantic notion of the individual 
creative ‘genius’ who while railing against the commercial constraints of the film 
industry itself nonetheless manages to bring something that is both personal, crea­
tive and of artistic value to the cinema screen. As we have seen, this is to caricature 
the argument and actually when seen from a more psychological perspective the 
question of ‘authorship’ becomes more supple and sophisticated. As mediated 
through the lens of Jungian psychology, authorship is not just about production, it 
is also concerned with reception as shown through the psychological relationships 
viewers have with films in which they are re-authored repeatedly, as each viewer 
constructs afresh the notion of authorship on each viewing of a film.
From this vantage point it becomes clear that every film has numerous authors, 
only one of whom is the director of the film. This is somewhat different to the point 
made by structuralist theory (Barthes, 1977) as the emphasis here is not so much 
on the hermeneutic activity of reading but instead on the emotional responses 
viewers have with films and the psychological ramifications of such experiences. 
Barthes proclaimed the ‘death of the author’ but this does not necessitate the death 
of the director. Instead what the current argument emphasises is the importance of 
the complexities of the individual and cultural psychological relationships that we 
have with films – in other words we position films as part of a matrix of personal 
and collective meanings that might very well all be in tension with each other. The 
containment of such irreconcilable tensions, pulls and even opposites is one of 
the key psychological tasks of life and Jungian theory terms this role ‘the trans­
cendent function’.

Film genres and archetypes  119
As a result the question becomes the extent to which it is desirable to foreground 
the director and to privilege his or her contribution over and above the other par­
ticipants in the production process, including those involved in its financing, its 
distribution and, crucially, in its reception. Further, the longevity of films outside 
the immediate contexts of their production and their subsequent translation into 
other media requires something more than a theory of authorship if such shifts 
and changes are to be adequately accounted for. The proposition is that while not 
without its strengths, the auteur theory fails to account fully for the new ways we 
have of interacting with films and other media, be these questions of distribution 
(DVD, on-demand services, Web-based distribution etc.), or the relationship of 
the original film to related ancillary artefacts such as computer games, fan media, 
websites and so forth. Finally, while the auteur theory is productive in the ways 
it establishes connections within a director’s body of work, it is less successful in 
establishing links with other related films from other directors. The danger is that 
the intricacies of the ways in which meanings are circulated in culture along with 
the complexities of media consumption are marginalised by a view of films that is 
predominantly concerned with the question of authorship.
An alternative way of thinking about how meanings are created by films is 
offered by genre theory. The idea of film genres provides a means to see how an 
apparently common-sense idea is actually more complicated than it first appears – 
after all, we all know when we are watching a Western, or a war movie, or a com­
edy, don’t we? Following the introductory section, Jung’s definition of the image 
is added to the established debates about film genres. This provides a more psycho­
logical account of how meaning is constituted with genre systems and in so doing it 
offers a particularly Jungian understanding of the role of ‘image’ in the creation of 
meaning. With that psychological foundation established the idea of intertextuality 
emphasises the ways that films can usefully be seen as constituting a relationship 
both with other films and also with other media artefacts. Providing another explic­
itly Jungian take on genre and intertextuality, the idea of ‘amplification’ is used 
to see how these ‘intertexts’ shed psychological light on the original source text, 
and also on each other. As will become clear, the Jungian concept of amplification 
offers an intuitive and playful way to bypass our conscious defences and to tease 
out deep psychological meanings. Finally, the role of the audience in the creation 
of meaning is once again woven into the fabric of our discussion.
What is a film genre?
If the auteur theory sought to evaluate and analyse films according to their direc­
tors, then the genre theory attempts to classify films by their themes. It seems 
quite an obvious way to think about films. We have all seen detective movies, 
horror films, musicals and so forth, and can identify them. For example, we know 
what to expect in a Western film, in terms of characters, the look and feel of the 
location and to some extent the plots too. The landscape is familiar to us, the 

120  Applications
clothing, the weaponry and we know the stock characters even before we meet 
them in the film, and these narrative tropes and visual motifs reoccur as a theme 
and variation across numerous films. In other words, what we understand by the 
genre ‘Western’, relies on our previous experiences of watching similar films 
(Grant, 1986). It follows that it is impossible to have a genre that is composed of 
a single film. This is a great help to producers in the marketing of films, who can 
promote them by invoking their genre. When the marketing of Alien (Dir. Scott, 
1979) stated ‘In space no one can hear you scream’ the audience knew without 
doubt what type of film it was. Therefore there is a match that marketers have 
fostered between the genre of a film and the expectations of film viewers. After 
all, clearly it helps to sell a product when the customer knows what the product 
is – it is an unusual customer who hands over money without having a pretty good 
sense of what it is that they are purchasing. The trick, however is to meet some of 
those expectations, while subverting others, thereby balancing predictability with 
an element of surprise and innovation (Buscombe, 1977).
Thus, the marketing of a film by genre describes to potential viewers the type 
of film they are going to see. However, film theorists use the term ‘genre’ for a 
different purpose, namely as an aid to the analysis and interpretation of a film. 
Pat Berry neatly summarises the difference, noting:
Current debates on the status of film genres arise, in part, because of the 
different reasons for invoking them: film scholars tend to define genres for 
purposes of interpretation and critical analysis, while producers, publicists, 
and audiences may use them as descriptive tools.
(Berry, 1999: 26)
Film theory notes how genres are built up from an assemblage of character, iconog­
raphy and narrative theme. So in film noir audiences know to expect a detective who 
is a loner, normally investigating a murder in a city. The lighting will be low key and 
high contrast, with the darkness of the shadows reflecting both the grim nature of the 
crime and the off-kilter state of the detective himself. A romantic comedy, by con­
trast, will be naturalistically lit, have bright and breezy characters, and witty dialogue. 
Curiously, what genre theory reveals about both Westerns and romantic comedies is 
that the social order needs to be restored by the end of the film. In Westerns the fig­
ure of the outsider who arrives unbidden has to restore order to a community by the 
end of the film, only to leave that community or marry into it. In some ways his 
special ability to overcome danger needs to be relinquished. In a similar manner, 
the female lead in a romantic comedy needs to have her sexuality constrained and 
normalised by getting married (Brook, 2015). In both cases the genre serves to 
contain something that threatens to upturn social norms. Genre theory allows the 
identification of deep structural patterns that might otherwise have gone unnoticed. 
The reader familiar with Jungian theory might already be alert to the similarity here 
to Jung’s archetype theory – in both genre theory and archetype theory, imagery 
clothes deeply concealed formal patterns and structures, of which more later.

Film genres and archetypes  121
It follows that there is a connection between social values and attitudes and 
genres. In the ways that film genres give expression to social beliefs, or we might 
say embody ideology, they have an affinity with myths. Genre theory has not 
ignored these similarities and as Berry puts it: ‘Early genre theorists often argued 
that, like myths, genres have an organic relation to social consciousness – an 
assumption arises from traditional literary studies as well as art history’ (Berry, 
1999: 29–30).
Alongside the textual elements of film genres, and the ways in which they 
provide cues for viewers before and while watching a film, genre theory is also 
concerned with the cultural circulation of meanings and the manner in which gen­
res accumulate and change meanings as a result. As we have been exploring, one 
way to understand this interaction is in terms of text and how viewers read and 
respond to genre cues – in other words, how viewers respond to the codes and 
conventions of a given genre.
In film studies genre theory makes a useful distinction between the semantic 
and the syntactic aspects of a genre (Altman, 1984). The semantic elements can be 
conceptualised as the building blocks of genre – very roughly they approximate to 
the words in a sentence that will subsequently be combined according to syntac­
tical rules and linguistic conventions. Typically in a film the semantic elements 
include: character roles, settings or locations, imagery (often symbolic in quality), 
plot and story, and themes and values.
For example, in the Western genre characters include: the Outsider, who will 
save the day; the Sheriff, old fashioned and out of his depth; the Old Timer, comic 
relief with flashes of wisdom; the Barmaid with a heart of gold and so forth. 
The setting is typically a frontier town or the plains of Monument Valley on the 
Colorado plateau with its now iconic wind-shaped rocky outcrops; the imagery 
includes: stagecoaches, six-guns, the landscape itself. The plot and story of this 
genre asks: What are the problems? – Being attacked by ‘Indians’. Who solves 
the problem? – The ‘Outsider’. By what means? – Violence. To what end? – It 
doesn’t pay to attack a frontier town. Themes and values: What is the problem? – 
White man’s civilisation is under threat. Who solves the problem? – The Heroic 
Outsider with the co-operation of the townsfolk. By what means? – Galvanising 
the innate heroic qualities of the town. To what end? – To show that white man’s 
civilisation will always triumph.
No small part of the appeal of genre films rests in the ways in which these 
semantic elements are combined syntactically, either to meet the genre-informed 
expectations of viewers or to subvert such expectations. This suggests that genre 
films presuppose an ideal viewer who will be sufficiently familiar with the genre 
to gain pleasure from watching the genre system in operation. More technically, 
as Steve Neale (1990) points out, genres are not systems per se but are more use­
fully thought of as processes of systemisation. It follows that they exist in a state 
in which they are always coming into being. Perhaps some of the points of contact 
with Jung’s theory of archetypes are already clear. Archetypes, like film genres, 
are structures that change and evolve over time. These patterns take on visual 

122  Applications
images that are culturally and ideologically inscribed. In some ways, individual 
archetypes (trickster, hero, shadow) represent a sort of psychological genre – the 
more familiar we are with each archetype the more it is possible to see the subtlety 
of each instance of its appearance. Put succinctly, archetypes are like genres in so 
much as they are dynamic patterns of meaning that are never fully realised and 
which are embedded in a mythological context.
To these semi-linguistic and formal concerns it is necessary to add the institutional 
dimension of film production. Here, then, are the three interlocked components of 
traditional genre theory: audience, institution and text, and the locus of concern 
in genre theory is around how these different aspects of a genre interact to create 
genre systems, which in turn circulate in culture as ever changing forms. By far the 
least understood and analysed of these areas concerns the institutional aspect. This 
is because such information is difficult to come by. The ways that film production 
companies finance films, shape them during production and market them on release, 
before ushering them into the post-cinema release arena is shrouded by a cloak of 
commercial secrecy. Less conspiratorially the decisions that are made surrounding 
the production of films are often simply not recorded. That said, the extras that 
accompany many DVD releases can include behind-the-scenes footage, and also 
scene-by-scene audio commentaries from the creative team. However, the extent to 
which such commentaries can be taken at face value varies enormously from film to 
film, with some serving mainly to reinforce the mythology of the director as auteur.
However, where films have been in circulation for some time it is interesting to 
see how they take on an intertextual life that would not have been predicted dur­
ing the production of the original film. If we encounter ‘Rick’s Bar’, or hear ‘You 
must remember this . . .’, the image of Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman in 
Casablanca (1942) come instantly to mind. Interestingly, not many will think of the 
original stage play on which the film was based Everybody Comes to Rick’s – partly 
because Warner Bros. implemented a tough contract in which the authors of the 
play, Murray Burnett and Joan Allison, were prohibited from staging their work – it 
would be understandable if the refrain, ‘you must remember this’ struck a sour note 
with them for some time. Here, then, we do have an instance of how institutional 
determinates come to shape a media product directly. Some films, such as Woody 
Allen’s Play It Again Sam (1972), require familiarity with the original film – not 
that the phrase ‘play it again Sam’ actually appears in Casablanca, which pro­
vides an example of how genres can be self-perpetuating and how they contribute 
to their own mythology. The intertextuality of Casablanca is so widespread that it 
is almost impossible to know where a reference to the film will crop up next: there 
is a perfume, comic books (The Bogie Man), Diane Shah’s novel As Crime Goes 
By, a biography of Ingrid Bergman more predictably titled by Laurence Lerner As 
Time Goes By, a board-game and so it goes on and on. What is significant here is 
the way in which our knowledge of the original film serves to cue, frame and in 
part shape our understanding of both the original and its many intersections, as 
meanings circulate and accrue though culture and over time. There is a difference 
between Casablanca the film and ‘Casablanca’ the generic intertext.

Film genres and archetypes  123
Genre: foreknowledge, expectation and dreams
Steve Neale provides a helpful summation of the way in which film genres and 
their viewers are tied together in a complicated system of hermeneutic mutual 
reliance. He notes how genres need viewers, and how viewers need to be knowl­
edgeable about genres if the viewing experience is to be meaningful:
genres are not simply bodies of work or groups of films, however classified, 
labelled, and defined. Genres do not consist only of films: they consist also, 
and equally, of specific systems of expectation and hypothesis that spectators 
bring with them to the cinema and that interact with films themselves during 
the course of the viewing process. These systems provide spectators with 
a means of recognition and understanding. They help render films, and the 
elements within them, intelligible and therefore explicable.
(Neale, 1990: 46)
It is important to note how Neale stresses the ways in which meaning is tied to 
expectation. To provide an example, in the horror genre when the camera frames 
a character’s head to one side of the screen, leaving a large space on the other side 
viewers are cued via that generic convention to expect that something unpleas­
ant might well fill the empty part of the frame. The same framing in a romantic 
comedy does not elicit the same genre-specific response. There is something 
important in the idea that the meaning of a film comes out of the relationship that 
viewers have with films, and that viewers are in no small part cued to understand 
highly specific generic conventions in particular ways. In other words, viewer and 
film collude to establish meaning. The insight that meaning arises within a cultur­
ally inflected relationship is something that Jungian theory has not emphasised. 
Instead it tends to suggest that meaning is created psychologically in a realm that 
exists outside of culture and ideology. The idea that Analytical Psychology itself is 
a type of ideology and that it too has its own cultural expectations is not often dis­
cussed. However, it is only necessary to open The Book of Symbols (Ronnberg and 
Martin, 2010) published by the Archive for Research in Archetypal Symbolism 
(ARAS) to see how a Jungian world view with its own codes and conventions 
shares and promulgates very particular interpretations of images.
Indeed, the idea that psychoanalytic interpretations are free of cultural conven­
tions and expectations is in many senses a problematic one. Yet that statement 
seems a world apart from the daily work, say, of dream interpretation in the con­
sulting room where hours can be spent discerning how the bespoke meaning of a 
dream is fitted to the life of a particular client. Despite the desire to provide highly 
individualised interpretations of dreams, in many ways the interpretations that are 
made are influenced by ‘generic’ expectations. This is not a definitive taxonomy 
but here are some of the expectations which underpin the process of Jungian dream 
interpretation: the assumption that dreams are of relevance to the life of the person 
whose dreams they are; that the meanings of dreams are primarily psychological; 

124  Applications
that elements in dreams can be thought of as parts of either the life of the dreamer 
or as representing something from the unconscious. There is nothing wrong with 
these interpretative conventions, provided that we know that is what they are and 
that client and therapist are together entering into a relationship with the dream 
image and setting out to interpret it, according to prior knowledge, experience and 
assumptions. Just as a genre film exists in a system of expectation with its viewers, 
so too the analytical work of interpreting dreams involves the adoption of codes 
and conventions.
Interestingly, genre films like dream imagery evolve in sequences over time. 
Each new film needs to be sufficiently like its predecessors to cue the correct 
generic expectations, yet it also has to be sufficiently different to ensure novelty. 
Therefore there is a relationship between each film in a genre. In some ways 
this is not unlike the ways in which motifs and themes span a series of dreams, 
sometimes over years and even decades. In such sequences the understanding 
of a particular dream can influence how the others are understood. Additionally 
a dream that occurred early on in therapy that had one meaning at that time can 
come to mean something else when viewed with hindsight.
The suggestion is that far from being strange or unique in the way they commu­
nicate (a claim that is sometimes made in psychodynamic theory) dreams actually 
perform in a fashion that is somewhat similar to the ways in which film genres 
operate. In both cases, images give expression to deep structures the understanding 
of which is governed by systems of expectation that are in turn highly cultur­
ally codified. Genres exist in series and so too dreams exist one with another. Of 
course there are differences too, not least that genre films are collective cultural 
products that exist to make money, while dreams are individual and bespoke, and 
are not financially motivated. However, both exist as part of an unfolding series, 
the understanding of which arises from the interplay of experience, interpretative 
conventions and cultural location.
Image: a Jungian reformulation
Genre theory can usefully give pause to consider some of the limitations of the 
ways in which dreams are understood clinically. But Analytical Psychology offers 
up a useful addition to film theory in the way it understands that most basic of 
terms, namely ‘image’. In Jungian theory the image exists somewhere in the space 
between the unconscious and consciousness, and in many ways it can be thought 
of as existing in a liminal territory between unconscious contents and outer reality. 
Jung puts it as follows:
When I speak of ‘image’ in this book, I do not mean the psychic reflection of 
an external object, but a concept derived from poetic usage, namely, a figure 
of fancy of fantasy-image, which is related only indirectly to the perception 
of an external object. This image depends much more on unconscious fantasy 
activity, and as the product of such activity it appears more or less abruptly 

Film genres and archetypes  125
in consciousness, somewhat in the manner of a vision or hallucination, but 
without possessing the morbid traits that are found in a clinical picture. The 
image has the psychological character of a fantasy idea and never the quasi-
real character of an hallucination, i.e., it never takes the place of reality, and 
can always be distinguished from sensuous reality by the fact that it is an 
‘inner’ image.
(CW6: 743)
It follows that such images need not be pictorial; rather, they are metaphorical, 
like the image ‘heard’ in a piece of music, a point developed by Nagari in his 
formulation of the music-image (2016). In other words the image exists not just 
on the screen but also somewhere in the space between the viewer and the screen. 
This is consistent with the view that meaning in genre films comes not just from 
the text, but also from what the reader brings to the text – a process which, while 
largely codified in genre films, is indicative of the more general process that takes 
place while watching a film.
Jung maintained that images are central to the construction of the psyche. Put 
another way, the psyche is image:
the psyche consists essentially of images. It is a series of images in the tru­
est sense, not an accidental juxtaposition or sequence, but a structure that is 
throughout full of meaning and purpose; it is a ‘picturing’ of vital activities. 
And just as the material of the body that is ready for life has need of the psy­
che in order to be capable of life, so the psyche presupposes the living body 
in order that its images may live.
(CW8: 618)
The structure to which Jung alludes in the preceding quotation is the structural 
makeup of the archetypes within the unconscious. He is at pains to note that these 
structures have meaning and purpose. He claims that they put us in touch with the 
unconscious and that they act as guides to our inner life, and that they do so as 
we come to realise how aspects of our unconscious selves can affect our every­
day relationships and our engagement with the world, including the films that we 
watch. As such the image captures the psychological reality of a given situation as 
it encapsulates the complex dynamics that arise from the interplay of archetypal 
forces and their relationship with consciousness, as the psyche attempts to come 
to an informed understanding of what is at hand.
The inner image is a complex structure made up of the most varied mate­
rial from the most varied sources. It is no conglomerate, however, but a 
homogenous product with a meaning of its own. The image is a condensed 
expression of the psychic situation as a whole, and not merely, nor even pre­
dominately, of unconscious contents pure and simple . . . . Accordingly the 
image is an expression of the unconscious as well as the conscious situation 

126  Applications
of the moment. The interpretation of its meaning, therefore, can start neither 
from the conscious alone nor from the unconscious alone, but only from their 
reciprocal relationship.
(CW6: 745, emphasis as original)
This is, as Jung puts it, a ‘vital activity’ as the drive within each one of us towards 
individuation requires us to understand the complexities of the contradictions that 
are housed within us. In his book Re-Visioning Psychology James Hillman devel­
ops this theme:
Since we can know only fantasy-images directly and immediately, and from 
these images create our worlds and call them realities, we live in a world that 
is neither ‘inner’ nor ‘outer’. Rather the psychic world is an imaginal world, 
just as image is psyche. Paradoxically, at the same time these images are in 
us and we live in the midst of them. The psychic world is experienced empiri­
cally as inside us and yet it encompasses us with images.
(Hillman, 1992: 23)
The important points to focus on are firstly that the psyche is imagistic, and 
secondly that such images are both inner and outer, at the same time. At first 
this may sound a little confusing. To shed some light on the situation we need to 
understand what Jung means by the term ‘projection’. For Jung, the projection of 
unconscious material happens partly as a defence mechanism and is something 
over which we have very little control. It is the psyche’s way of taking a complex 
(an unresolved psychological problem) and bringing it to the attention of con­
sciousness, often through an experience of intense affect. In the cinema too it is 
quite possible to have an unlooked-for outpouring of affect. This happens partly 
as a response to the film itself, but it is also the result of a personal psychologi­
cal response to the film. In other words, meaning is co-created between a film 
and its viewers. These co-created meanings are partly a response to the way the 
film is made, its codes and conventions, but they also arise from the interplay of 
personal unconscious concerns with the cinematic construction of the film itself.
Institutional amplification
One of the distinguishing features of Analytical Psychology is its use of an inter­
pretative technique termed ‘amplification’. Admittedly this is not an area that 
Jungian-orientated film scholars have been particularly concerned with, though 
Hockley’s (2001b) analysis of Blade Runner (Dir. Scott, 1982), in which he traces 
the individuation of the film’s central character, the detective Deckard (Harrison 
Ford), is a notable exception. (The same book also contains a lengthy amplifica­
tion of the zombie ‘B’ Movie, Trancers aka Future Cop [Dir. Band, 1984].) The 
purpose of amplification is to bypass our conscious and unconscious defences as 
a means to explore the possible psychological meaning of images. These images 

Film genres and archetypes  127
might be dream images, found images, or images created by the client. However, 
there is no reason why the technique can not be used to explore the psychological 
meaning of feature films. The process of amplification is reasonably straightfor­
ward though it does require a good working knowledge of mythological themes 
and motifs. In essence, a selected image is compared to its appearance in other 
mythological material. As the images build up it is sometimes possible to see the 
emergence of psychological themes. For example, the mise-en-scène of Blade 
Runner is that of neo-noir, and it is a dark city setting. It also rains almost all 
the time. In amplifying the image of ‘rain’ it would be necessary to look at rain 
in mythology, and perhaps water symbolism more generally. Coming straight to 
mind is the story of Noah in which rain symbolises both death and renewal. Might 
it be that the psychological theme of death and renewal has a greater relevance in 
understanding Blade Runner than might be immediately obvious?
The problem with this type of analysis is that it can lead in rather unpredictable 
directions, and great care has to be taken to ensure that the amplification does 
indeed shed some light on the film, and that mythological parallels are not forced 
onto the text in an attempt to make it fit a preconceived psychological idea (see 
Fredericksen, 2001). In other words, great sensitivity to the fidelity of the text is 
needed and any possible interpretations should be seen in the light of the actual 
contents of the film. Here it is important to note that in this context amplifica­
tion is being used to understand the text of a film while in a clinical setting it is 
used to understand the psychology of the client. This is a significant distinction 
and it is why any interpretative claim that arises from amplification must be 
tested against the film itself. Just because there is iconic similarity between 
several images it does not necessarily follow that such a resemblance will be 
a guarantee of interpretative insight and relevance. A further potential issue is 
that as an intuitive method, any analysis of a film might actually become more 
about the psychology of the interpreter than the psychology of the film itself. Of 
course, this is entirely appropriate in a clinical setting and many clients find it 
helpful to talk about their personal understanding of films, and their emotional 
responses to them. Whether this is quite so helpful in promoting a scholarly 
understanding of a film is more debatable.
On a related note it is interesting to wonder if the intertextual life of films can 
be understood as a type of unwitting amplification. Perhaps the imagery and the 
themes of a film are as ‘amplified’ in marketing material, movie posters, inter­
views and websites. To regard such paratexts as part of a system of institutional 
amplification would position them as products in their own right and also explore 
their relationship to the original material, thereby revealing something that was 
not immediately obvious. For example, ‘slash fiction’ focuses on the sexual attrac­
tion of fictional same-sex characters, who are not engaged in sexual relationships 
in their fictional worlds. The question arises whether such fantasies help to illu­
minate the original texts – does such fiction, perhaps about Kirk and Spock in the 
Star Trek world, reveal anything that is relevant to the films, or does it remain a 
quite separate fantasy? To provide a somewhat different example, do the various 

128  Applications
ways in which we identified paratexts of the film Casablanca shed any light on 
the original film? It is certainly the case that such paratexts do influence how we 
understand Casablanca. The prevalence of imagery and music derived from the 
film has come to influence how we see the original – to the extent of inventing 
dialogue. In a way, they all become part of the ‘myth’ of Casablanca, a myth that 
is of course no more or less real than its purely celluloid incarnation.
To ignore such paratexts is akin to a therapeutic process that ignores dreams, 
or the client’s creativity. When the movie poster of Edward Scissorhands 
(Dir. Burton, 1990) proclaimed ‘His story will touch you, even though he can’t’, 
it was partly setting out to tell potential viewers what to expect but in another 
way the paratext also functions as part of a psychological system that influences 
how the film is understood. Similarly, the marketing of Inception (Dir. Nolan, 
2010) stated, ‘Your mind is the scene of the crime’ and in so doing it blurred the 
distinction between the viewer and the characters in the film in a way that, while 
suggested by the film, is not explicit in its narrative. The film is concerned with 
the mind of its characters, and not its viewers – at least ostensibly. The tagline 
removed the ambiguity and in so doing it inflected the psychological relationship 
of the viewer, and the result is that those viewers who know the tagline of the film 
approach it differently to those who do not.
Regarding paratexts as part of the system of amplification that sheds light 
on both the paratext and the original film itself is an area that requires further 
development. In many ways the existing work on intertextuality, as originated 
by Genette (1982) established the importance of understanding how texts work 
together to create complicated matrices of cultural meanings. However, Genette 
did not include a psychological dimension to his analysis and so the idea that 
amplification might do so has been mentioned here as part of a sign-posting exer­
cise for the field. While it has not been developed, this is an aspect of ‘therapy 
thinking’ that offers a fresh way to understand how contemporary mythologies are 
made, and through which to comprehend their shifting psychological significance.
A particular type of paratext that is closely related to the genres is composed 
of what can be thought of as ‘movie star’ genres and such films open up the pos­
sibility of a different type of amplification. Here it is important to remember that 
C. G. Jung regarded the persona as one of the most accessible and readily identifi­
able archetypal patterns of the psyche. The function of the archetype is literally 
to put a mask over the individual’s psyche as a means to fit into a social situation. 
Each one of us has many masks: parent, employee, friend and so forth. The danger 
is that it is possible to become overly identified with a particular role and take it 
home with us, so to speak. That would be a case of the policeman who enforces 
the law at work and at home. In such an instance the persona ceases to be helpful 
and our sense of self has to separate from what should be a temporary role
For example the persona of John Wayne is clearly identified with the 
Western genre. Over forty years or so from about 1930 to the late 1960s viewers 
came to identify Wayne with roles in films such as The Searchers (Dir. Ford, 
1956), Rio Bravo (Dir. Hawks, 1959), The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance 

Film genres and archetypes  129
(Dir. Ford, 1962) and The Alamo (Dir. Wayne, 1960). When he appeared in war 
movies like Sands of Imo Jima (1949), Operation Pacific (1951), The Wings of 
Eagles (1957) the inter-fictional carryover was clear. The mythologem (underly­
ing central myth themes) of the Western were transported into a different genre. 
Psychologically we might say that while the mythology (genre) had changed, the 
underlying ideological values as encapsulated in the mythologems remained the 
same. The persona of Wayne and the ideological values for which it came to 
stand played an important role facilitating the shift of values from one genre to 
another. Of course, other factors are important too, not least of which are the plot 
and story elements in the films themselves. However, the role of the persona as 
the archetype of social adaptation confers on each of these genres an ideological 
perspective which at first sight seems natural – the persona of the film star fits 
between culture and ideology in such a manner that what in other circumstances 
would appear troubling is now socially acceptable and normative.
Two brief case studies: film noir and the Western
The idea that film genres operate in ways that are partly unconscious or psycho­
logical has not escaped the attention of film theorists. However, the application of 
that insight has resulted in an approach that tended to be somewhat structural. The 
reason for this is that structuralist approaches were seen as ways of interrogating 
the transmission and development of cultural codes and values. Put another way, 
to approach culture structurally, semiotically and using postmodern insights is to 
deconstruct how media artefacts contribute to ideology. Of course it is the case 
that the narrative of genre films that textually might appear regressive, actually 
turn out to be more ideologically subversive and expressive than they might on 
first sight appear to be. Berry provides a neat summation, noting:
The notion that genres can manifest ‘unconscious dynamics’ which contra­
dict the ideological values implied by their narratives suggest that they are 
both symptomatic and ideologically structured. Such an account rests on 
Althusser’s notion of overdetermination, whereby texts are seen as sites of 
unconsciously conflicting structural forces.
(Berry, 1999: 37)
However, an alternative perspective on this issue of conflicting structural forces 
in genres is offered by a more straightforwardly psychological explanation. Of 
course any genre will be full of ideological inconsistencies. The reason for such 
inconsistences is that genres are partly unconscious forms and do not conform to 
the rational logic of the thinking mind. There is an interesting and complicated 
relationship that exists between implicit acquired knowledge about film genres 
and the explicit rendering of such knowledge in a film. From a depth psycho­
logical perspective, it is inevitable that every creative product will be tinged with 
unconscious elements. Genres represent deep structures that underpin and give 

130  Applications
meaning to the narrative of films. As we have seen, this act of interpretation is 
itself a creative process and it is one that is also inflected by psychological con­
cerns. In part these arise from the narrative of the film, but they also stem from our 
personal psychology and also our collective cultural complexes.
Before moving on to two examples of film genres, the Western and film noir, 
it is worth pointing out the relative instability of generic categories. On the one 
hand it is tempting to cookie-cutter film genres – a war movie is a war movie, 
clear and simple. However, actually genre boundaries are more plastic and elas­
tic (Neale, 1990 and Altman, 1999) than this suggests. This echoes the point 
made by the Russian theorist Boris Tomashevsky (1925) that it is not possible to 
make clear, firm and fixed logical classifications of genres. While he was writ­
ing about literature, and also from the explicit position of Russian Formalism, 
this insight can nonetheless be usefully extended to film genres. For example, 
a film such as Apocalypse Now (Dir. Coppola, 1979) is in part a war movie 
but it is also about a quest, and an inner journey as much as it is concerned 
with outer and more explicitly ideological engagements. Good Morning Vietnam 
(Dir. Levinson, 1987) is a comedy, a war film and a film about personal 
psychology. Films such as Inglourious Basterds (Dir. Tarantino, 2009), in an act 
of cultural cross-fertilisation, deliberately seek to combine generic conventions, 
in this case between the Western and the war genres. Berry notes:
The instability of generic labels thus arises not only from the Bakhtinian ‘het­
eroglossia’ of generic allusion that limits any attempt at film classification, 
but from the fact that genres function as tools for predicting and regulating 
the reception of texts.
(Berry, 1999: 40)
However, it might also be that because genre structures function rather like arche­
typal structures that something more psychological is occurring. If the premise 
that genres are inherently psychological is accepted then it is not unreasonable to 
expect genres to behave in a manner that is psychological: they will be non-rational, 
polysemic, polyvalent and consequently resistant to definitive and reductionist 
interpretations. A single archetypal pattern finds expression in a variety of images, 
each of which is influenced by its cultural location. There is therefore a relation­
ship between the deep unconscious structure and its expression in consciousness. 
So too, the pattern of a film genre finds numerous ways of expressing an underly­
ing concern. Of course, this does not exclude a more structural and ideological 
understanding of genres. Rather, it sees the ideological and the psychological as 
enmeshed in the fabric of the cinema – it is not a question of either or, but of both.
Film noir
In the article Film Noir: Stereotype or Archetype? Hockley (2001a) begins to 
outline some of his thinking in relation to the Hollywood detective films of the 

Film genres and archetypes  131
1940s and early 1950s. In it he identifies how many of the formal elements of 
the genre have their origins in the stylistic practices of 1920s and 1930s German
Expressionistic filmmaking. In particular Hockley notes how canted camera angles 
and lighting that is low key and high contrast (which ensures dark shadows and 
piercing white highlights) combine to provide a set of genre conventions that are 
well suited to exploring psychological themes. It might at first sight seem odd that 
Hollywood should adopt German film production techniques while it was at war 
with that same country. In fact the adoption of these elements of film production 
is explained when it is realised that it was done by German Jewish émigrés who 
came to work in Hollywood in the 1930s. In so doing they unsurprisingly brought 
with them their professional knowledge and skills as film directors, cameramen, 
composers and suchlike.
The fortuitous part, some might suggest synchronistic aspect, was that those 
professional skills in film production would chime so well with the narrative 
content of the hard-boiled detective story. Popularised by the authors Raymond 
Chandler and Dashiell Hammett, the figure of the tough, but psychologically iso­
lated detective had a cultural resonance for a country that found itself for the 
second time in just a few decades embroiled in a European war that was outside 
of its own making. The persona of the detective became a familiar figure in the 
filmic night-time, rain drenched city streets. So too his wise-cracking patter with 
the insightful and often cutting put-down became as much a part of the clothing of 
the private eye as his iconic trench coat. Always flawed in some way, through an 
over reliance on alcohol or some other drug, the psychology of the tough detective 
was emblematic of the broken state of a culture that had become over reliant on its 
materialistic achievements.
In part, the potency of the private eye came from his independence. He is not 
a policeman and more often than not he is in a state of considerable tension with 
the official structures of law and order who regard him as quite a challenge to their 
own investigations – which of course, he is. The private detective won’t be found 
in a police station (unless he has been arrested) and instead operates at the mar­
gins of Western culture and is as likely to be found in Chinatown as he is actively 
tracking down the murderer. Those foreign cities within a city symbolise the need 
for something of the ‘other’ as means by which to comprehend the cultural condi­
tions of the present moment. There is something of the unconscious, or at least 
a fantasy of the unconscious, in Chinatown. Seen sociologically, the depictions 
of Chinatown in classic film noir verge on the racist and orientalist. However, 
taken psychologically, Chinatown symbolises how in the very midst of that great 
materialist achievement of the twentieth century, the city with its skyscrapers and 
thriving downtown area, something else has been kept alive – something alto­
gether more ancient and less rational.
What that image of Chinatown, as a city within a city, expresses is the Jungian 
insight that we are composed not of just one character but of numerous sub-
personalities. Often these aspects of ourselves remain unconscious. However, 
that does not mean they do not have an effect on our conscious lives as these 

132  Applications
unconscious components are projected onto people and places. From this 
perspective, Chinatown is a sub-personality of the psyche of the city. It represents 
both its shadow side and its intuitive qualities. If downtown represents thinking 
materialist achievement, then Chinatown embodies the reflective and intuitive 
aspects of the city’s inner life. While not wanting to ignore the ideological issues 
surrounding the representation of Chinatown, such imagery also speaks to the 
Jungian process of looking in the forgotten, rejected and seemingly ‘unimportant’ 
parts of our lives for the psychological gold of insight and transformation. In this 
regard, Chinatown challenges the presumption that the materialist and capitalist 
culture has the answers to life’s problems.
While the process of detection, of solving the crime, appears to be a rational one, 
in fact the systematic following of clues is the stuff of police work. The ‘shamus’ 
(a term that might have its origins in the Yiddish shammes, which also lexically 
possesses a certain similarity to shaman) has an altogether more intuitive approach 
and it is one where each clue appears to lead to the next. In fact the detective relies 
on his intuitive ‘hunches’ to do what an overly rational society cannot – but of 
course it comes at some personal cost. The detective embodies the psychological 
‘truth’ that the process of ratiocination is insufficient and that the intellect alone 
will always prove inadequate when it comes to psychological understanding. The 
forensic work of thinking is best left to the police, even if they are one of the insti­
tutional structures that contributed to the problem in the first place.
Ostensibly, the work of the private detective is to solve murders and normally 
those are committed in the city. But actually this masks his true purpose, that is to 
try and make sense of a world that actually makes no sense; his search is for truth 
and it is as much existential and psychological as it is criminological. As such, the 
figure of the hard-boiled detective is emblematic of a mood in which it seemed 
that there was no escape from war and destruction. With that in mind, from the 
Jungian perspective it is unsurprising that the figure of the femme fatale should 
play such a prominent role in the film noir genre and in the life of the detective. 
Psychologically she is the figure the detective needs, as she connects him to the 
intuitive part of himself that he is going to be important if he is to get the job done 
and to get the crime solved. Yet he is also deeply resistant to her, recognising 
that there is danger in this split-off form of his own being. The femme fatale is 
as likely to destroy the detective as she is to be of assistance to him. As an agent 
of social change, it is this type of duality that the detective needs to hold onto as 
it points to the unknowing opposition of the contemporary dominant values that 
drive society.
What film noir offers as genre, and, as others have argued, as a style of film­
making more generally (see Silver and Ursini, 1999), is an example of how 
cultural and ideological values become intertwined in fiction films. Some of the 
explanation for this lies in the transmigration of filmmaking techniques and prac­
tices. But there is a more unconscious aspect too in which a complicated system 
of interactions is set up between the Hollywood studio system, the influx of new 
creative talent and the political conditions of the time. Film noir did not set out 

Film genres and archetypes  133
to suggest the need for a more female approach to the issues of the day, yet the 
figure of the femme fatale, at once glamorous and also deadly in her seduction of 
the detective, presented part of the remedy for the psycho-social upheaval that 
was central to the 1940s.
The Western
Film noir is, of course, not the only genre to intertwine psychological and ideo­
logical concerns. In his book of 2006, Screen, Culture, Psyche: A Post-Jungian 
Approach to Working with the Audience, John Izod devotes a chapter to the 
Western in which he undertakes just such an integrated analysis by exploring the 
contemporary rendering of the Western genre. In many ways the chapter is an 
audacious piece of writing as it seeks to find connections in the Western genre 
by going backwards into its literary origins, and in turn, back still further into the 
religious underpinnings of the genre. At the same time, Izod locates the genre in a 
more contemporary political landscape and in so doing he explores how it weaves 
in and out of psychological concerns that while deeply historical find a particular 
relevance in the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
It is Izod’s contention that the Western as a genre contains one of the cen­
tral psychological myths of contemporary times. This is not in and of itself a 
particularly striking claim as film studies has long held that the Western is an 
important site of cultural myth making (Carter, 2014; Cawelti, 1999; Kitses, 2007; 
Kitses and Gregg, 1998; Wright, 1977). However what remains distinctive about 
Izod’s claim is the psychological emphasis he places on the genre and its ability 
to express not just ideological and political concerns but also deeply unconscious 
qualities. As he puts it:
If Western movies do indeed constitute a primary locus in which the strug­
gle for the collective soul of the USA has been fought out and that struggle 
implicates its characters, how does it involve the deep psychology of the 
audience? Does the Western of the early twenty-first century differ from its 
predecessors in ways which reflect changes in the audience’s circumstances 
and reveal psychological shifts associated with those societal changes?
(Izod, 2006: 181)
For Izod the roots of the Western can partly be found in the literature of James 
Fennimore Cooper’s 1823 novel The Pioneers. That much is not particularly 
surprising. But more significant for him is the way they reworked older English 
pastoral concerns and specifically the English literature of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. Such writing was concerned with an exploration of the idea 
of the rural idyll, and the ownership of land. Importantly, the main readership for 
this literature was not the relatively few landowners, but those who worked on 
the land that they could never hope to possess. The writing embodies a myth of 
paradise that Izod identifies as a re-imagining of the Edenic myth.

134  Applications
Izod goes on to tease out the interplay between shadow and anima in the Western, 
giving the land a certain topos that has the capacity, albeit unfulfilled, to unite think­
ing and feeling, logos and eros. His analysis is careful and convincing in the way it 
moves between the imagery of the Western, its themes and variations across a range 
of films and in the emergence of a critical perspective that is revealing about both the 
psychological and political aspects of the genre. As the piece concludes, Izod brings 
the Western into alignment with the imagery that conjuncturally and synchronically 
surrounded the representation of Osama Bin Laden in North American-mediated 
political discourse. In so doing the landscape of the Western becomes the land­
scape of political and ideological power. He positions the Western as a new type 
of revisionist genre. The Western has a long tradition of revisionism, notably the 
way in which in the 1970s the Western inverted many of its traditional tropes. 
A marked example of this is the film Soldier Blue (Dir. Nelson, 1970) in which rape 
and murder are committed by the cavalry. The saviours of the traditional Western 
have become the villains. The violence of white people, once shown pursuing the 
advancement of civilisation, is now shown as repugnant and racist.
To return to Izod’s point, he conjectures that a less mythic and demonising dis­
course around Bin Laden would have had benign effects – his claim is a bold one: 
that media imagery can have a positive effect on the popular conception of world 
political events, and that it can psychologically contain difference and ambiguity, 
good and evil. He argues that genre films are particularly well placed to act as 
such a container, noting:
A more ambivalent picture emerges in the case of genre films. Such films, 
because of their ritual quality, are more likely than any others to engage ener­
gies active not too far beneath consciousness in the cultural unconscious. 
Where the cultural unconscious is stirred, a film may arouse strong emotions 
in large numbers of the audience or touch on a collective repression. The 
force of emotional arousal or repression may then be such that it does not 
wholly lie within the power of the filmmakers to control or even direct it . . . . 
Some spectators will take the force of archetypal and symbolic representa­
tions more or less as the filmmakers intended; others will appropriate a film 
to their own world view.
(Izod, 2006: 218)
Film genres are socially and psychologically organised through the structuring 
agencies of audience, institution and text. As such they allow a psychological 
relationship to come into being between the viewer and the film. The personal 
history of the viewer is significant here in coming to an understanding of how the 
textual cues of films are read through familiarity with genre-specific conventions. 
Film genres are organised both semantically and syntactically, which results in a 
type of genre grammar with which viewers are familiar. Indeed, the knowledge of 
the codes and conventions of individual genres is indispensable if the viewer is to 
engage fully with a genre film.

Film genres and archetypes  135
Conclusion
Archetypes function rather like genres – as expressed in an image, they circu­
late meanings between the text itself, the institutional conventions of Analytical 
Psychology and the viewer of the image. It is therefore quite legitimate to think of 
the archetype of the shadow, for example, as a type of psychological genre – its 
meanings are institutionally framed, we rely on previous similar experiences to 
understand the shadow and yet we have a unique and personal relationship with 
it. Just as archetypes cannot be fully understood, so too genres cannot be fully 
defined as both are quasi-organic psycho-social structures. It is in the interaction 
of these psychological structures with the filmic that the richness of the generic 
experience rests.
We should not underestimate the complexities of this process. It is important 
to be clear that the suggestion is not that processes through which genre systems 
come into being and change are identical to archetypal processes. Rather, it is 
more that it is productive to explore the interaction between the psychology of 
the archetype’s image and the psychology of genre images. In so doing genre and 
archetype are eased into a relationship in which similarities and differences can 
be productive for both parties.
In the above statement Izod points to the ways in which the narrative of films, 
and in particular genre films, interacts with other narratives, both personal and 
cultural. Jungian-orientated film theory frequently finds itself engaging in psy­
chological archaeology. Sometimes this involves the excavation of the recent 
past, though just as often this only serves to unearth the complexities of historical 
archetypal images whose origins are often deeply buried. The work of this type 
of psychological and cultural criticism is to bring to life what other forms of film 
theory leave untouched. The difficulty is that it is all too easy to get drawn into the 
mythological past. The Jungian antennae are well tuned for such an undertaking 
and can quickly detect the ancient archetypal signals in contemporary media texts 
even though they are less well suited to holding such historical resonances with 
the lived reality of contemporary social and cultural events.

Chapter 7
Jungians vs. Freudians
Gender, identity and sexuality on screen
Helena Bassil-Morozow
This chapter compares the Freudian and Jungian ways of looking on women 
as actors, agents, spectators and individuating agents. Particularly in the past 
twenty years or so moving image narratives have been confused as to the nature 
and structure of female individuation. Traditional cinematic narratives present 
women as mesmerising things, as passive objects of desire, as fragile yet danger­
ous creatures; they are shown by men who make films to men who watch films, 
whereas women, both as actresses and as spectators, are largely excluded from 
the creative and decision-making processes as well as disregarded as spectators. 
Up until relatively recently, female passivity in cinematic narratives has only 
been questioned and challenged theoretically rather than practically. These out­
dated practices are now contrasted with the new breed of female protagonists 
who are happy to wield a sword, master the art of archery, fight a bloody battle 
or approach a man sexually.
As Freudians were analysing films and explaining the political importance of 
the moving image well before Jungians discovered the field, Freudian theories are 
outlined in this chapter first. Then the applicability of Jungian theory to feminist 
film criticism is discussed. Finally, this chapter gives an overview of ‘woman as 
a man on screen’ – a phenomenon which emerged in cinema and television fairly 
recently, and which is likely to become mainstream sooner or later.
The question of female individuation
Judging by myths and fairy tales in which the protagonist is a woman, female indi­
viduation is structurally different from the traditional hero myth. Most traditional 
fairy tales present the woman either as a mysterious part of the male individuation 
process, or as a helpless creature in need of support, guidance and protection (all 
of which, predictably, are provided by men). Cinematic narratives grapple with 
the same issues regarding the feminine as the other art forms: activity and pas­
sivity, objectification and identification. If the woman is passive, does she mirror 
male activity and become an object to be consumed and admired? If she is active, 
is she not a threat to the man who would feel inadequate next to her? If the man’s 
position as a result of the hero activities changes from dependent (uninitiated) 

Jungians vs. Freudians  137
to independent (initiated), could the same be true for a woman? Or does she just 
‘change hands’: her parents pass her on to her husband?
A traditional female individuation narrative, as exemplified by Little Red 
Riding Hood, Bluebeard, Beauty and the Beast, Sleeping Beauty or the Russian 
fairy tale Morozko, shows a young woman at the mercy of a tyrant (male or 
female) who tries to destroy her, and being rescued by a kind man (a stranger, a 
brother or a prince) at the end. The young woman is often sent on a dangerous 
journey that is beyond her physical or moral strength, and cannot endure it due 
to her fragility and lack of experience. Her inability to make decisions and to 
be independent is emphasised. For instance, Little Red Riding Hood is far too 
small for a journey through the forest, the Beauty’s dangerous task is to tame 
wild masculinity, and Nastenka from Morozko, who is thrown outside by her 
cruel stepmother one freezing winter night, mentally prepares to die because 
she can no longer fight both the severity of the Russian winter and the cruelty 
of human nature. Both in the Eastern and the Western European traditions the 
young woman is often bullied by some kind of evil mother figure (rarely by a 
father figure), and is pushed to go on a journey that she has not chosen. This 
implies a certain passivity, which stands in contrast with the activity of the mas­
culine hero in traditional narratives.
In one of her famous reworkings of traditional fairy tales with female protago­
nists, The Bloody Chamber, Angela Carter gives a voice to the otherwise silent 
‘new wife’ of the rich old man who is going to murder her like he murdered all his 
previous wives. The heroine of the tale notes that her journey from the moment 
when she leaves the parental home will be lonely and heavy. Contrasted with the 
typical male journey, which entails seeking freedom (including the freedom of 
self-expression) by going away and trying to become psychologically and physi­
cally independent, the aim of the woman’s journey entails finding a suitable man, 
establishing a new family and finding a sense of belonging and community. In 
other words, the transition is from one family to another; from the old to the new.
The meaning of the female journey is ‘relating’ (as opposed to ‘discovering’, 
which is the focus of the male journey). When a female attempts to copy the 
masculine journey model (such as, for instance, Little Red Riding Hood), she is 
immediately warned of the dangers of seeking independence (and particularly of 
seeking a personality that is not dependent on a community), and sent back home 
accompanied by a ‘male guardian’. Shortly before she marries the old Marquis, 
Carter’s heroine laments her single life, and is mentally preparing for eternal lone­
liness and ‘exile’ (Carter, 1995: 7).
Carter mocks the classic female individuation pattern: changing hands, signing 
a contract to be someone else’s property, getting yourself into a trap, losing (or 
even never tasting) independence, being passive and expecting to be saved by a 
man. Surprisingly, in her feminist version of the tale, Carter changes the finale, 
and instead of being rescued by her brothers, the heroine is saved by her mother 
who breaks into the castle and shoots the Marquis who is about to cut his unruly 
wife into shreds. In this and other tales in The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories, 

138  Applications
Carter attempts to find a new path for the individuating female, a path that would 
not involve victimisation, objectification, silence or stereotypes.
The female characters in the other stories are allowed to be aggressive or sexual. 
They can even be evil, for instance, Little Red Riding Hood from ‘The Werewolf’ 
who kills her grandmother; or Vampirella from ‘The Lady of the House of Love’ 
who preys on young men. Carter is showing that a woman does not have to be a 
victim; and she does not always have to ‘belong’ in a community or family. Her 
individuation goal is not ‘getting into a relationship’ in which she would have 
a passive role. She can be a loner who cannot and will not learn ‘social graces’ 
for the sake of losing her animal nature. In fact, Carter implies that women do 
have animal nature, only centuries of training in relational skills had blunted and 
repressed it, turned it into a seat of shame and fear.
Can there be a balance between the ‘passive’ and the ‘active’ positions? In 
other words, can a woman represented on screen ‘be herself’ and ‘individuate’ 
without simply becoming a man and adopting male strategies for dealing with the 
world such as proactive behaviour, aggression and attack? This is what we will try 
to find out in this chapter by comparing the Freudian and Jungian ways of dealing 
with this issue.
The female journey on screen: psychoanalysis
Freudian and post-Freudian feminist film criticism focuses on the fact that women 
(both on and off screen) are silent and silenced, their roles and behaviour dictated 
by directors, managers and other ‘owners’. From its early days, Hollywood has 
been a male-dominated industry, and to expect gender equality from it would be 
too hopeful. Women on screen, the Freudian film circle maintains, have always 
been regarded as mere objects, as having no reference point of their own, lost and 
waiting to be directed, as having no gaze – or even no right to have a ‘gaze’. They 
are ‘things’ whose role is to be consumed. They have to present themselves, physi­
cally and behaviourally, in such a way as to maximise the enjoyment of the males 
looking at them. Preferably, they should only move when told to, and say the things 
included in the script. They should be dolls with a limited number of choices and 
options, pre-destined to perform prescribed roles and to follow certain patterns.
Many theorists of feminist cinema (perhaps unsurprisingly) have approached 
the difficult subjects of women on screen and women as spectators from psycho­
analytic points of view, using the concepts of the gaze, voyeurism, fetishism, the 
mirror, scopophilia, objectification, phallus, etc. Theorists such as Laura Mulvey, 
Mary Ann Doane, Jacqueline Rose and Kaja Silverman have written extensively 
on the issue of the silent, passive female both as an object and as a spectator. In 
their texts they have particularly focused on the subject of looking, and being 
looked at – on the concept of the gaze and obsessions associated with it. Moreover, 
they argue that the industry is simply not interested in the female spectator as it 
assumes that she wants the same as the male spectator, and does not have psycho­
logical needs of her own.

Jungians vs. Freudians  139
Traditionally, male philosophers of culture using Freudian and post-Freudian 
theories have presented a limited at best, and sexist at worst, view of women, their 
sexuality, self-expression and place in society. In this sense, Freudian-Lacanian 
feminists have always been torn between the usability and applicability of Lacan’s 
theories and his marked refusal (or inability) to see woman as equal to man, or to 
abstract himself from the importance of the phallus in all its incarnations in culture. 
Despite the claims that Lacan de-biologised Freud, his stereotyping of women is 
quite visible in his philosophy. For instance, Lacan writes in On Jouissance that 
the woman’s ‘sexual organ is of no interest’ and she is defined as ‘not whole’ in 
respect to jouissance. Regarding her sexual characteristics, ‘it is those of the mother 
that take precedence in her’ (Lacan, 1998: 7). His famous controversial proposition, 
repeated in many of his essays, that ‘the woman does not exist’ (1998: 57) can be 
interpreted in a number of contradictory ways, including the refusal to objectify 
the feminine, and the insistence that women are of no importance because of their 
‘castrated’ sexual organs. In any case, in this phrase Lacan emphasises the ‘absence’, 
the ‘lack’, the incompleteness inherent in female nature and determined by her body.
The woman is excluded from the nature of things for being not-whole, and 
even her jouissance has a ‘supplementary function’ (Lacan, 1998: 72–73). Yet, 
despite this lack of phallus and ‘proper’ jouissance, the woman is the one who 
controls the man with her sexuality:
contrary to what people say, it is nevertheless they who possess men. . . . He is 
the one who obeys orders, not her. Since Rabelais, we have known that phallus, 
her man, as she says, is not indifferent to her. But, and this is the whole point, 
she has different ways of approaching that phallus and keeping it for herself.
(1998: 73–74)
His ideas about what constitutes women’s manipulative ways of ‘keeping the 
phallus for themselves’ are echoed and elaborated by Jean Baudrillard in the 1984 
interview with Salavatore Mele and Mark Titmarsh. Baudrillard notes:
In itself, the masculine doesn’t seem to be seductive. Perhaps it is powerful, 
strong. Perhaps it holds in some way the controls – those distinctive opposi­
tions in the order of the world. For the feminine it is the matter of dissolving 
this order, of bringing everything down to zero. In the end it ensures that 
everything is played ironically, seductively, and so on. For the masculine, 
nothing plays, things must function; it is different.
(Gane, 1993: 86)
In another interview, he extends his views on seduction and the power, and ben­
efits that come with it:
I am not in agreement with hardline feminist ideology which says that woman 
as seducer is a degrading role. In my view the strategy of seduction is a happy, 

140  Applications
liberating power for women. It feeds into the simulation. Unfortunately, in 
feminism everything that happens to be female is defended . . . . It seems 
to me that the feminine strategy of seduction is not an alienation of woman, 
as the feminists believe. One must rise above the battle of the sexes and get 
away from sexist alienation. Men and women should not oppose each other. 
I believe one can regain feminine seductiveness as a positive virtue and that 
this is one way to rise above it.
(Gane, 1993: 154)
Although Baudrillard keeps adding disclaimers such as ‘the “feminine” is not 
strongly connected with “woman”’ and ‘I risk being misunderstood’, his state­
ments exemplify a typical male view of imaginary female seductiveness – as a 
product that is comfortably consumed, and therefore should be kept unchallenged 
and unchanged (1993: 86–154). Seen in this light, the woman is an object of 
desire, a seductress who sells her body in exchange for power. As such, she is not 
expected or even allowed to be the generator of power, or the builder of an order.
Baudrillard sees seductiveness as a form of activity, albeit a rather passive one. 
In his view, it leads to subverting the existing order created by men. Ultimately, he 
asserts, seductiveness leads to reducing the male power to zero. Applied to women 
on screen, this argument simply does not hold. A woman on screen is almost 
always beautiful, and in traditional Hollywood narratives – also passive. Is she 
capable of bringing down the social order with the very fact of being seen, of being 
looked at, of being admired, of having the power of sexuality? It can be argued that 
Marilyn Monroe had more social and political power, and was more influential, 
than the men with whom she slept, the men who made films with her, or the men 
who enjoyed watching her ethereal, childlike beauty on screen. The epitome of the 
traditional Hollywood actress, she was a successful object, a professional object, in 
fact, whose real voice was not welcome, on or off screen. Her seductiveness was 
not just in her looks, but also in her roles, which included a wide range of sensuous 
and provocative females, and some beautiful mothers and wives.
Seduction is closely related to the dichotomy of activity and passivity, the 
silence and the gaze, when the object is being watched and expected to absorb 
projections in order to be accepted into the social order. The logic of Baudrillard’s 
argument would lead us to think that seductiveness is powerful precisely because 
it is all about sex, and that sex, being the most basic of all instincts, is capable of 
bringing down the social order, the civilised froth on the top of our unconscious 
lives. Both Lacan and Baudrillard imply that the force of sexuality is so strong that 
men could become obsessed with the object, and give up parts of their power in 
order to keep it and to enjoy it. In other words, one should pay for a good object 
in order to claim ownership of it. Likewise, a good object should feel ‘not-whole’ 
and seek a phallus-saviour for completeness and protection. It should be suitably 
passive and have space for male projections of power and control.
Freudian film feminists primarily discuss female behaviour on screen in 
terms of passivity. They see women as disenfranchised, stereotyped, objectified, 

Jungians vs. Freudians  141
branded as castrated (and therefore defective and incomplete) and enslaved within 
the linguistic framework of the patriarchal order. In other words, women are seen 
as victims whose rights to be individuals and to make their own life choices are 
limited and controlled. This line of criticism stems from Lacan’s analysis of objet 
petit a – the object of desire – as an imaginary thing, as ‘no being’, as ‘the void 
presupposed by a demand’ (1998: 126). This means that the desire is based ‘on no 
being’, and that in every demand ‘there is but the request for objet petit a, for the 
object that could satisfy jouissance’ (1998: 126). Worse even, the object’s role in 
the relationship boils down to basic pre-Oedipal functions:
the partner of this ‘I’ that is the subject, the subject of any sentence that con­
stitutes a demand, is not the Other, but that which is substituted for it in the 
form of the cause of desire – that I have diversified into four causes, insofar 
as the cause is constituted diversely, according to the Freudian discovery, on 
the basis of the object of sucking, the object of excretion, the gaze, and the 
voice. It is as substitutes for the Other that these objects are laid claim to and 
made into the cause of desire.
(1998: 126)
The object’s power, however, is rather dubious. As it is not a real person, it could 
be replaced by another object at any moment if that new object better reflects the 
owner’s inner core, or better absorbs his projections (including sexual fantasies). 
Moreover, the object is replaced the very moment it dares to show its real per­
sonality, its real wishes and desires, which are always a challenge to the owner’s 
claim of control. The object has no individuation of her own – her individuation 
is in belonging, either to a person or a community. Luis Buñuel’s 1977 film, That 
Obscure Object of Desire, brilliantly outlines the unstable relationship between 
the owner and the object in Lacanian terms: a wealthy middle-aged man Mathieu 
(played by the Spanish actor Fernando Rey) attempts to purchase an eighteen-
year-old woman from her Catholic mother. The girl, Conchita, is played by two 
actresses, Carole Bouquet and Angela Molina. They are used interchangeably in 
different scenes. Yet, the protagonist is so inflamed with the idea of possessing 
Conchita sexually that he does not even notice her radically changing appearance. 
In Buñuel’s language this means that women exist for Mathieu only as things, and 
the pretty ones could be bought and discarded depending on the circumstances. 
Although Conchita’s constant rejection of Mathieu makes him madly obsessed 
with her, and does give her a certain power, the real power – money, social status, 
decision-making – still remains with the man. In fact, Mathieu even buys her a 
house in an attempt to melt her heart and finally enjoy her body. Conchita accepts 
the house but does not let him in, and even has sex with a young man while 
Mathieu is watching, horrified.
The tale is a reworking of the Bluebeard tale, only in Buñuel’s version the 
woman, in the absence of all other sources of power, uses seduction as a way both 
to gain status and to bring down the man who attempts to use her. Her seduction 

142  Applications
turns into poison, and is eventually replaced by open insults such as having sex 
with a young man in plain sight of the older suitor who bought the property. She 
is not a victim, but an active and decisive female, a fatal hunter as predatory and 
dangerous as her suitor. Although at some point Mathieu beats her up, leaving her 
bruised, she soon retaliates by pouring a bucket of water over him. Her seduction 
is a torturous mimicry of Mathieu’s desires. Instead of the perfect mirror and the 
perfect object, the protagonist got a very imperfect, distorted mirror ridiculing and 
insulting him. This kind of mirror is not silent but brave in its insolence. Its aim 
is to show the extent of the male obsession with the controllable object and the 
extent of masculinity’s obsession with itself.
Mulvey’s analysis of the traditional Hollywood approach to depicting females 
on screen, although out of date, is still influential in feminist film criticism. 
Writing about the classical Hollywood cinema of the 1940–1950s in her article 
‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’, she famously outlines the ways in which 
the silent female is manipulated and commodified by the industry. In her view, 
cinema is only a reflection of the general social attitude towards women as the 
bearers of meaning, not the makers of meaning, condemned to be silent, both on 
and off screen:
the function of woman in forming the patriarchal unconscious is two-fold, she 
first symbolises the castration threat by her real absence of a penis and second 
thereby raises her child into the symbolic. Once this has been achieved, her 
meaning in the process is at an end, it does not last into the world of law and 
language except as a memory which oscillates between memory of maternal 
plenitude and memory of lack. Both are posited on nature (or on anatomy in 
Freud’s famous phrase). Woman’s desire is subjected to her image as bearer 
of the bleeding wound, she can exist only in relation to castration and cannot 
transcend it. She turns her child into the signifier of her own desire to possess 
a penis (the condition, she imagines, of entry into the symbolic).
(Mulvey, 1975: 6)
Mulvey sums it up by describing cinema as generating an illusion of reality 
created by the symbolic order for the purpose of enjoyment of objects without 
responsibility or obligation – rather like a strip-club. Women are mere props for 
male fetishism, unwilling participants in male scopophilia:
During its history, the cinema seems to have evolved a particular illusion of 
reality in which this contradiction between libido and ego has found a beau­
tifully complementary phantasy world. In reality the phantasy world of the 
screen is subject to the law which produces it. Sexual instincts and identifica­
tion processes have a meaning within the symbolic order which articulates 
desire. Desire, born with language, allows the possibility of transcending the 
instinctual and the imaginary, but its point of reference continually returns 
to the traumatic moment of its birth: the castration complex. Hence the look, 

Jungians vs. Freudians  143
pleasurable in form, can be threatening in content, and it is woman as repre­
sentation/image that crystallises this paradox.
(Mulvey, 1975: 10)
Feminist film criticism focused on the issue of proximity and availability of the 
object via the concepts of the gaze (‘looking’), the voice (‘speaking’) and curi­
osity (‘looking’, ‘investigating’). All these are linked to the woman’s Oedipal 
position in society. If she speaks or looks, she will cease to be a mirror, she will 
be misrecognised, will become ‘the other’ – a potentially traumatic experience 
for the man.
Kaja Silverman writes that, as a castrated object, women are not allowed to 
speak because they represent ‘an alien and unwanted quality’ (Silverman, 1988: 17). 
They are desired, but from a distance, in a fetishist way so as to prevent the fearful 
male subject from getting affected by ‘castration’. A castrated object who speaks 
is a male nightmare personified. It is important that women remain silent, which 
proves to be difficult in real life. The screen therefore provides an ideal safe dis­
tance for such consumption of the silent object, for it is a fantasy life in which 
the male can look but not be looked at; in which he can consume females without 
having to deal with the actual woman and in which the woman is guaranteed to 
be silenced without any chance of her being out of control. The woman is absent 
from the process of signification as she represents lack. Lack, loss and castration, 
film feminists have argued, are at the base of both the production and consump­
tion processes of the film industry.
Silverman notes in The Acoustic Mirror (1988) how the female voice is 
manipulated by the industry to match the fetishised screen image, while the 
authentic woman is never heard. Silverman evokes the silent cinema star Lina 
Lamont (Jean Hagen) in Singin’ in the Rain (1952), who is not allowed to give 
interviews by the studio for which she works, Monumental Pictures, because 
she has a shrilly annoying voice. Lamont was perfect for the silent cinema, but 
in the wake of the sound era she suddenly became a liability, and the discrep­
ancy between her silly voice and polished appearance needed to be concealed 
(Silverman, 1988: 45). Voice, Silverman notes, significantly changes the mean­
ing of the image as it makes it all too real, it destroys the beautiful illusion (and 
the illusion of control over the object): ‘When the voice is identified . . . with 
presence, it is given the imaginary power to place not only sounds but meaning 
in the here and now’ (Silverman, 1988: 43).
The silent woman is not just the woman who does not speak – she also 
does not look. In other words, she does not act. Throughout her texts, Mulvey 
keeps exploring the link between proactive behaviour (traditionally criticised in 
females) and the act of looking, which reflects the desire to penetrate, to inves­
tigate, to set something free, to uncover the hidden. One investigates first, and 
then voices one’s opinion – and women are not expected to do any of these. An 
active female is the woman who directs her look at the objects; she is a detective, 
acting out of stubborn curiosity. By so doing, she defies male orders and wards 

144  Applications
off male attempts to direct the gaze at her. She does not accept the fact that she 
is ‘castrated’ – that (as the patriarchal order would have it) she has nothing to 
penetrate the mystery with.
Mulvey explains this exclusion of the female from the cinematic space using 
the allegory of Pandora’s box. In the myth, Pandora, out of curiosity, opens the 
box containing all the evils of the world. Her drive to discover and to investigate 
‘is directed at a culture in which woman has not, traditionally, been the possessor 
of knowledge and which has, traditionally, tended to consider femininity as an 
enigma’ (Mulvey, 1995: 4). Pandora’s compulsive desire to look and to explore 
instead of passively mirroring the male gaze is a serious threat to male dominance, 
and thus is presented as ‘the end of the world’. This mythological character, 
Mulvey argues, represents feminist defiance of objectified passivity expected of 
women in male-dominated cultures:
While curiosity is a compulsive desire to see and to know, to investigate 
which is secret and to reveal the contents of a concealed space, fetishism is 
born out of a refusal to see, a refusal to know, and a refusal to accept the dif­
ference that the female body symbolises. Out of this series of turnings away, 
of covering over, not the eyes but understanding, of looking fixedly at any 
object that holds the gaze, female sexuality is bound to remain a mystery, 
condemned to return as a symbol of anxiety while overvalued and idealised 
in imaginary. Hollywood cinema has built its appeal and promoted its fas­
cination by emphasising the erotic nature of the female star concentrated in 
a highly stylised and artificial presentation of femininity. . . . The myth of 
Pandora and the box are similarly imbricated with the structure of fetishism. 
But Pandora opens the box containing everything that fetishism disavows. 
The box is, in this sense, a fetish that fails.
(Mulvey, 1995: 18)
Curiosity, Mulvey notes, sets up a ‘configuration of space through its associa­
tion with investigation’ (1995: 9). The box lures Pandora, and prompts her to 
act and to discover, thus breaking down the ‘regime of fetishism’ (1995: 18). 
Transgressing the rules of the regime, exposing it to unsafe objects, forcing it to 
look at the horror of castration without the distance, is seen by the patriarchy not 
just as a mere act of defiance as it creates an association between the feminine and 
fear of evil (1995: 18).
Like Pandora, other women in traditional narratives are either politely asked to 
comply with the rules of the male world or, failing that, threatened into submis­
sion. Such narratives are full of warnings about the dangers of curiosity expressed 
by women:
Although Eve’s story highlights the knowledge theme, the epistomophelia, as 
it were, inherent in the drive of curiosity, the myth associates female curiosity 
with forbidden fruit rather than with forbidden space. The motif of space and 

Jungians vs. Freudians  145
curiosity can be found again symptomatically in the fairy story Bluebeard. 
The story is about his last wife, a young girl who is given the free run of his 
vast palace with the exception of one room which her husband forbids her to 
enter. Its little key begins to excite her curiosity until she ignores the luxury 
all around her and thinks of nothing else. Then, one day, when she thinks her 
husband is away, she opens the door and finds the bodies of all his former 
wives still bleeding magically from terrible wounds and tortures.
(Mulvey, 1995: 9)
In her essay ‘Woman’s Stake: Filming the Female Body’, Mary Ann Doane writes 
that ‘to those who still ask, “What do women want?” (a paraphrase of Freud’s 
famous line), the cinema seems to provide no answer’ (Doane, 1988: 216). She 
also equates ‘the simple gesture of directing a camera toward a woman’ with 
‘a terrorist act’ because ‘cinematic images of woman have been . . . consistently 
oppressive and repressive’ (1988: 216). This state of affairs, which is:
the result of a history which inscribes woman as subordinate – is not simply 
to be overturned by a contemporary practice that is more aware, more self-
conscious. The impasse confronting feminist filmmakers today is linked to 
the force of a certain theoretical discourse which denies the neutrality of the 
cinematic apparatus itself. A machine for the production of images and sounds, 
the cinema generates and guarantees pleasure by a corroboration of the specta­
tor’s identity. Because that identity is bound up with that of the voyeur and the 
fetishist, because it requires for its support the attributes of the ‘noncastrated’, 
the potential for illusory mastery of the signifier, it is not accessible for the 
female spectator, who, in buying her ticket, must deny her sex. There are no 
images either for her or of her.
(Doane, 1988: 216)
Similarly, Joan Copjec notes that women are
the external, who are repeatedly excluded by the homeostatic system – the 
constant reproduction of the male by the patriarchal mechanisms of film, 
language. . . . the point of view and the structures of voyeurism, exhibition, 
identification which follow from it are always, repeatedly, male. Women, 
therefore, cannot look, cannot be represented – as women.
(1988: 233)
Freudian and Lacanian film feminists emphasise that women are banned from 
participating in male activities – i.e. activities that involve investigating and dis­
covering, speaking one’s mind, killing and conquering, and pursuing the grail 
awaiting at the end of the journey. Their discussion of women’s position both on 
screen and in society is also deeply politicised, and their psychological analysis of 
the situation is linked to social and political issues.

146  Applications
Female individuation on screen: 
the Jungian approach
Jungian discussion of women as actresses and spectators differs significantly from 
the one employed by the Freudian and post-Freudian theorists. Firstly, Jungian 
feminist analysis is not as politicised as its Freudian counterpart. Andrew Samuels 
rightly notes that Jungian discourse on the feminine is ‘directed away from politi­
cal and social action’ (Samuels, 2015: 102). This is also generally true of Jung’s 
writings, for he was more interested in the spiritual than in the socio-political 
applications of psychological phenomena – though, as noted in the Introduction 
to this book, he was also concerned with the relationship of the individual to soci­
ety at large. As with all Jung-influenced analyses, a Jungian feminist approach to 
women on screen is bound to be mildly spiritualised and discussed in terms of the 
woman’s transcendental journey instead of being a closely focused examination 
of the social and political conditions that oppress her.
This, however, does not mean that Jungian concepts are completely apolitical 
or could not be used to discuss social issues such as the position of women in soci­
ety or gender fluidity. Jung’s concepts of the anima, the animus and the mother 
are certainly useful in the discussion of the cinematic representation of women as 
well as female spectatorship. Moreover, with Jung’s emphasis on the feminine, 
his psychology may even be more relevant for the study of women on screen. 
Unlike Freud’s psychology, which is explicitly patriarchal and father-centred, 
Samuels argues, Jung provided ‘a mother-based psychology in which influence is 
often traced back much earlier, even to pre-natal events’ (2015: 213).
Moreover, Jungian thought has never stressed gender differences the way its 
Freudian counterpart did. Rather than emphasising the ‘lack’, sexed or sexless, 
Jung writes about both the genders lacking something on their own, without each 
other. Hence his extensive use of the gnostic idea of syzygy – the divine unity, the 
double-gendered nature of God. Psychological wholeness is a matter of equality 
and enlightenment, not a retrospective exercise in eliminating difference or an 
immature search for similarity and perfect mirroring.
For Jung, gender differences were more symbolic than social, or of actual 
importance. Susan Rowland writes:
where a Freudian interpretation reduces visual pleasure to a sexuality organ­
ised around the phallus as the significant organ of pleasure and meaning, Jung 
regarded psychic energy as essentially neutral and hence not privileging one 
gender. Where Freud (and Lacan after him) considers the Oedipus myth to pos­
sess an originating role in the structuring of the psyche, Jung makes room for 
many potential myths of being. Some of them can even emphasise the feminine!
(Rowland, 2011: 148–149)
Secondly, Jungian discourse on the feminine tends to be structuralist – it is con­
cerned with the peripeties of female individuation and how they compare to the 

Jungians vs. Freudians  147
stages of the traditional hero myth. This approach inevitably involves the discus­
sion of archetypes and their role in the woman’s journey of self-discovery. The 
anima, the animus and the great mother are particularly pertinent to this approach. 
The issues of the female voice and her right ‘to look’ are also included in this 
discussion.
In an attempt to ward off accusations in sexism, one of the key figures in ‘indi­
viduation screenwriting’, Christopher Vogler, explains that his version of the 
individuation process, The Writer’s Journey, has unjustly been viewed as a mas­
culine theory, ‘cooked up by men to enforce dominance, with little relevance to 
the unique and quite different journey of motherhood’ (Vogler, 2007: xxi). He 
emphasises the universality of the process rather than any differences the hero’s 
gender may bring to the journey:
There may be some masculine bias built into the description of the hero cycle 
since many of its theoreticians have been male, and I freely admit it: I’m a 
man and can’t help seeing the world through the filter of my gender. Yet I 
have tried to acknowledge and explore the ways in which the woman’s jour­
ney is different from the man’s.
(Vogler, 2007: xxi)
Vogler insists that, since the call for better self-understanding is universal, gender 
differences are not as important as the essence of the journey, which is learning 
about yourself in the world: ‘I believe that much of the journey is the same for 
all humans, since we share many realities of birth, growth, and decay, but clearly 
being a woman imposes distinct cycles, rhythms, pressures, and needs’ (2007: xxi).
In fact, what Vogler is trying to do here is circumvent the issue which has 
never been properly resolved in any approach to gendered narratives: a formalist 
narrative analysis of female self-discovery. What is it that constitutes a ‘female’ 
narrative? What are the specifics of ‘female individuation’? Moreover, are the 
schemes offered by Jung, Campbell and Vogler applicable to women? Or if they 
are not, since at the centre of the hero myth lie what traditional societies regard 
as ‘male qualities’ – activity (often accompanied by aggression), decisiveness, 
independence, assertiveness, power (achieved by any means), endurance, ability 
to overcome obstacles –  how can this original scheme be changed to incorporate 
the ‘female qualities’?
First, what are these mysterious female qualities? The hero myth, for instance, 
is packed with action which forms the base of all the ‘spiritual’ elements of the 
male journey: self-reflection, self-knowledge, individuation, maturation all happen 
via being proactive and spreading your influence. By contrast, a typical female 
individuation narrative emphasises ‘modest’ character traits: patience, passivity, 
dependence on some kind of ‘master’ or ‘parental figure’, helplessness, fear of 
sexuality, fear of male aggression, dependence on male benevolence, fantasy of 
being rescued (usually by a prince), etc. Vogler proposes, in a rather muddled way, 
that women’s journeys are not as linear and clear as a typical male hero myth:

148  Applications
men’s journeys may be in some sense more linear, proceeding from one 
outward goal to the next, while women’s journeys may spin or spiral 
inward and outward. The spiral may be a more accurate analogue for a 
woman’s journey than a straight line or a simple circle. Another possible 
model may be a series of concentric rings, with the woman making a jour­
ney inward towards the center and then expanding it again. The masculine 
need to go out and overcome obstacles, to achieve, conquer, and possess, 
may be replaced in the woman’s journey by the drives to preserve the fam­
ily and the species, make a home, grapple with emotions, come to accord, 
or cultivate beauty.
(2007: xxi–xxii)
A male hero, as described in Campbell’s and Vogler’s narrative schemes, is sum­
moned on a journey either by an inner voice or some kind of external mentor 
figure – usually an old wise man (such as Obi Wan in George Lucas’s Star Wars). 
He may initially refuse the call (step two in Campbell’s seventeen-stage journey), 
but he nevertheless overcomes his fear, and eventually sets out on a journey for 
enlightenment and individuation.
In The Heroine’s Journey: Woman’s Quest for Wholeness (1990), Maureen 
Murdock notes that preoccupation with the masculine narrative structures in the 
West is caused by the fact that society is still not interested in a woman who can 
see, speak and act:
We live in an androcentric society, which continues to view the world from a 
masculine perspective. Despite women’s advances in academia, business and 
the professions, stereotypes persist that impede women’s economic, political 
and professional progress into top leadership roles. Research from psycholo­
gists about stereotypes informs us that there is still a double standard when 
it comes to human behaviour. Behaviours such as being active, independent, 
objective and logical are still equated with males, while more dependent, 
subjective, emotional and illogical behaviours characterise females.
(Murdock, 2013: 1)
Murdock notes, in an understandably annoyed tone, that Campbell himself had 
little interest in the nuances of female individuation,
My desire to understand how the woman’s journey relates to the journey of 
the hero first led me to talk with Joseph Campbell in 1981. I knew that the 
stages of the heroine’s journey incorporated aspects of the journey of the 
hero, but I felt that the focus of the female spiritual development was to heal 
the internal split between woman and her feminine nature. I wanted to hear 
Campbell’s views. I was surprised when he responded that women don’t need 
to make the journey. ‘In the whole mythological tradition the woman is there. 
All she has to do is to realise that she’s the place that people are trying to get 

Jungians vs. Freudians  149
to. When a woman realises what her wonderful character is, she’s not going 
to get messed up with the notion of being pseudo-male.’
(Murdock, 2013: 7)
True, in traditional female quest narratives, the individuating woman does not 
choose to go on a journey; she is pushed out of the house. Her initiation and matura­
tion are associated with remaining weak, fragile and dependent on other, stronger 
people. The task of her individuation, it seems, is to find nice people on whom to 
depend (a prince, a brother, a kind stranger) instead of nasty ones (nasty elder sisters 
or a cruel stepmother). An attempt at independence results in yet another affirma­
tion of physical or emotional fragility in the face of the cruel world in the form of 
big animals (a wolf, a monster), extreme weather conditions, envious older women 
(stepmother, half-sisters) or a horrible new husband (a maniac or a murderer).
The other option for the individuating female is to copy the male maturation 
scheme, i.e. to become a ‘hero’ and to follow the path of adventures, monster exter­
mination and treasure hunting. This would mean abandoning the ‘fragile’ feminine 
nature, as well as dependency on others and relational (as opposed to forceful) 
ways of dealing with conflicts. Yet, as Murdock notes, her years of experience as 
a therapist show that direct transposition of the male version of the hero myth onto 
a woman’s life would not necessarily make her happy. She witnessed all kinds of 
emotional consequences of this kind of transposition, which has become normal in 
contemporary Western societies: ‘a sense of sterility, emptiness and dismember­
ment, even a sense of betrayal’ caused by the fact that the original male goal is 
to ‘attain a success in the marketplace’ (Murdock, 2013: 10). The boon, at which 
women who adopt the male model aim, is associated with exhaustion, oversched­
uling and suffering from stress-related ailments. They end up asking themselves 
‘What is all of this for?’ (2013: 10). This model, just like its passive counterpart, 
denies ‘who [the women] are’ (2013: 10). In other words, Murdock advocates com­
bining the relational with the heroic in the feminine journey towards self-discovery.
In a way, Campbell’s and Vogler’s views on what constitutes female individu­
ation are quite similar. The woman does not have to ‘go somewhere’ in order to 
achieve some kind of self-fulfilment or to gain a change of status, for this would 
mean an initial sense of self-dissatisfaction, a sense of non-belonging, an ambition, a 
desire to influence the environment. Meanwhile, as Vogler puts it, the true vocation 
of the woman is to ‘preserve the family and the species’, ‘to grapple with emotions’ 
and ‘to cultivate beauty’ (Vogler, 2007: xxii). In this sense, their views are in line 
with psychoanalytic thought in general, which tends to regard female narratives as 
coming from the passive position, lacking an aggressive impulse, and achieving a 
change of status – essentially a liminal change – with the help of a man (or men).
Vogler attempts to preserve some semblance of equality in his book by using 
examples of female protagonists in cinematic narratives alongside examples of 
male protagonists. Predictably, he uses Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz (1939; 
directed by Peter Fleming). Yet, Dorothy’s individuation, either in L. Frank 
Baum’s novel or in MGM’s famous adaptation, still has recognisable ‘female’ 

150  Applications
attributes: motherly behaviour towards others, community-making, kindness and 
endearing naivety.
In other words, the girl from Kansas’s ‘hero myth’ is more relational than 
heroic per se; or maybe it is a kind of combination of the two, the very ‘third way’ 
which Murdock advocates. Murdock also proposes her own version of female 
individuation, which entails the integration of masculine qualities with feminine 
values. This version begins with the stage called ‘separation from the feminine’, 
and ends with the integration of masculine and feminine qualities (Murdock, 
2013: 12). The realisation of the importance of feminine qualities, according to 
Murdock, happens somewhere in the middle of the journey, and in this the heroine 
makes a decision to unite the two parts of her psyche through heroic effort. This 
happens, Murdock insists, because the heroine, having started her journey as a 
male hero and met the unavoidable dragons and ogres, decides that being a man 
is neither satisfying nor brings her closer to her personal goals – which are self-
realisation, spiritual growth and wholeness.
On the one hand, novels such as Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland (1865) 
and Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900) symbolised a turning point in 
female individuation narrative: the woman is finally allowed to ‘travel’ in pursuit 
of self-actualisation, albeit presented as a dream in a frame narrative. On the other 
hand, these narratives, influenced by modernity as they were, were still focusing 
on the relational attributes of the female quest. The heroine is still not the one who 
fights but the one who creates links with others; she achieves her goal of self-dis­
covery by being kind and patient. In this sense, her self-actualisation proceeds by 
winning people over with her ‘mother hen’ qualities. It mostly happens via others, 
via connecting, relating, helping and being sympathetic. By listening to others and 
by taking their problems seriously, she becomes ‘herself’.
Dorothy, Vogler writes, meets her miserable companions during the hero myth 
stage which he calls ‘Tests, Allies and Enemies’, when the protagonist figures out 
who can be relied upon and who cannot be trusted:
Dorothy encounters her Tests, Allies, and Enemies on the Yellow Brick 
Road. Like Psyche or the heroes of many fairy tales she is wise enough to 
know that requests for aid should be honoured with an open heart. She earns 
the loyalty of the Scarecrow by getting him unhooked from his post and by 
helping him learn to walk. . . .
Dorothy wins the affection of another Ally, the Tin Woodsman, by oiling 
his joints and listening sympathetically to his sad story of having no heart. . . .
She protects her dog Toto, Dorothy stands up to the blustering of the 
Cowardly Lion, a potential Enemy or Threshold Guardian, and ends up making 
him an Ally.
(Vogler, 2007: 137–141)
The main problem of this analysis is that Dorothy’s ‘quest for wholeness’ is based 
on her qualities as a motherly female: she looks after all the broken men she finds 

Jungians vs. Freudians  151
on her way. Even better – she mends them with her kindness, optimism and purity 
of heart. No male approach would have cured the Scarecrow (Ray Bolger), the 
Tin Woodman (Jack Haley) and Cowardly Lion (Bert Zahr) from their respective 
complexes. As such, Dorothy is a ‘good mother’ in the making.
Another problem is that Vogler compares Dorothy to Psyche rather than to a 
male mythological or folk hero. Far from being an individuating fighter, Psyche, 
from Apuleius’s Metamorphoses, is a martyr condemned to suffer for love and to 
pursue a man while also being punished for her beauty by the jealous and envi­
ous Venus. This is certainly not a favourable comparison. It is also incorrect, for 
Dorothy is not looking for her lost love, but her lost home.
Looking for a home, or going through a liminal, transitional state between 
losing the ‘old’ home’ and acquiring a ‘new’ one, is a typical component of 
the traditional female individuation myth. It is presumed that homemaking is 
a large part of the woman’s life in which family is her main aim, and therefore 
her maturation process consists of moving away from her parents and establish­
ing a family of her own. True to this scheme, Dorothy’s trials mostly teach her 
to solve problems by love and empathy instead of tackling them head-on. Her 
change of status (both in the book and in the film) is achieved via suffering and 
motherly behaviour.
The good news, however, is that at least she is allowed to travel the road by 
herself and to act decisively and independently. This is a far cry from the tradi­
tional female individuation narratives in which girls venturing outside the house 
get into trouble, and are eventually saved by men. At least Dorothy, who calls 
herself ‘small and meek’, is the one who saves men, while the main man, the god 
figure, the carrier of the world wisdom, the Wizard of Oz, happens to be a fake and 
a ‘a good man but a bad wizard’. He is exposed and deposed in his narcissistic, 
overinflated guise while Dorothy triumphs as the leader of her tribe. Her tactics 
of overcoming obstacles, however, are communal rather than individualistic – she 
summons the strengths of everyone in her circle to solve problems instead of rely­
ing on herself. Her quest is a sort of triumph of the ‘feminine’ way of doing things, 
the victorious female quest for wholeness in which the said wholeness is achieved 
by gathering everyone around you instead of relying solely on yourself, and by 
befriending the monsters instead of fighting them.
The silenced woman and her hidden 
voice: the Jungian perspective
The issues of the voice and the gaze have also been tackled by Jungian and post-
Jungian authors. Although their theoretical framework is different from that 
employed by their Freudian colleagues, they touch upon similar themes such as 
the female voice in a society that does not encourage women to have opinions, or 
to be proactive. Jungian psychology does not operate with traditional psychoana­
lytic terms such as castration, fetishism or the gaze to express the male fear of the 
woman as an agent. Instead, it uses archetypes called the animus and the anima, 

152  Applications
which represent ‘the image of the other sex that we carry with us as individuals 
and also as members of the species’ (Jacobi, 1973: 114).
Jungian psychology has traditionally been biased in its representations of 
these ‘soul images’: the anima has been depicted either as a dangerous seductress 
(Circe, a siren, a water nymph) or as a beautiful and passive angel waiting to be 
saved (Cinderella, the Sleeping Beauty or the Frog Princess). Both the ‘angel’ and 
the ‘whore’ versions of the anima are part of the male individuation: one is to be 
subdued and conquered, the other protected (and often represents the ‘boon’ at the 
end of the journey).
The good thing about Jungian psychology, however, is that it accounts for the 
active, aggressive and masculinised forms of female behaviour when it discusses 
the ‘whore’ aspect of the anima. Although it still objectifies the feminine and 
brands it ‘mysterious’ or ‘dangerous’, it nevertheless does not try to diminish its 
importance or restructure it to suit the patriarchal order. Jung’s approach to the 
feminine, although largely tainted by the general patriarchal attitude to women 
prevalent at the time, nevertheless accounted for its power – not passive power, but 
the active and unpredictable type of power. This is largely due to Jungian psychol­
ogy’s emphasis on the spiritual and its relative neglect of the physical, the bodily, 
the difference between the sexes on which Freudian psychology is practically built. 
As Susan Rowland argues,
where the Oedipus complex is the Freudian first principle, the idea that is 
productive of the whole psychology, Jung’s originating principle is that 
the unconscious is independently creative of the ego and in part unknow­
able. Such a belief means that the human body cannot fix meaning. Gender 
becomes a dialogical process between the creative unconscious . . . and the 
cultural meanings bestowed upon the sexed body.
(Rowland, 2011: 149)
At the same time, it is undeniable that Jung, both as a man and as a psychologist, 
was burdened with prejudices of his time. For instance, his views of the anima are 
quite romantic:
If the encounter with the shadow is the ‘apprentice piece’ in the individual’s 
development, then the encounter with the anima is the individual’s develop­
ment, then with the anima is the ‘master-piece’. The relation with the anima 
is again a test of courage, an ordeal by fire for the spiritual and moral forces 
of man. We should never forget that in dealing with the anima we are dealing 
with psychic facts which have never been in man’s possession before, since 
they were always found ‘outside’ his psychic territory, so to speak, in the form 
of projections. For the son, the anima is hidden in the dominating power of 
the mother, and sometimes she leaves him with a sentimental attachment that 
lasts throughout his life and seriously impairs the fate of the adult. On the other 
hand, she may spur him on to the highest flights. To the men of antiquity the 

Jungians vs. Freudians  153
anima appeared as a goddess or a witch, while for medieval man the goddess 
was replaced by the Queen of Heaven and Mother Church.
(CW9, I: 61)
Jung’s writings, particularly about the contrasexual ‘soul image’, imply that male 
narcissism is rarely individuated to the point when the mystical aura of the anima 
dissolves and real women take her place:
She [the anima] is not a shallow creation, for the breath of eternity lies over 
everything that is really alive. The anima lies beyond all categories, and can 
therefore dispense with blame as well as with praise. Since the beginning of 
time man, with his wholesome animal instinct, has been engaged in combat 
with his soul and its daemonism.
(CW9, I: 60)
Even worse than the seductive anima is the little demonic, opinionated man who 
lives inside the female psyche and occasionally escapes to nag everyone in the 
vicinity. This man is called ‘the animus’. Marie-Louise von Franz writes that the 
animus is ‘the male personification of the unconscious in woman’ which ‘exhib­
its both good and bad aspects, as does the anima in man’ (Jung and von Franz, 
1964: 198). It is akin to a loud, stubborn voice in a woman’s head and it needs 
to be restrained:
the animus does not so often appear in the form of an erotic fantasy or mood; 
it is more apt to take the form of a hidden ‘sacred’ conviction. When such a 
conviction is preached with a loud, insistent masculine voice or imposed on 
others by means of brutal emotional scenes, the underlying masculinity in a 
woman is easily recognized. However, even in a woman who is outwardly 
very feminine the animus can be an equally hard, inexorable power. One 
may suddenly find oneself up against something in a woman that is obstinate, 
cold, and completely inaccessible.
(Jung and von Franz, 1964: 198)
Moreover, it is not a single figure, but a whole chorus of men ready to argue and 
to fight at any moment. These men, Jolande Jacobi argues, are full of
uncritically accepted opinions, prejudices, principles, which make women 
argue and bicker. . . . They seem to make up a fairly high percentage of their 
sex, though there may have been some change since the turn of the century, 
perhaps as a result of the emancipation of woman.
(Jacobi, 1973: 121)
It is interesting that Jacobi links the rise in the power of the animus to female 
emancipation. Both Jacobi and von Franz imply in their respective analyses of the 

154  Applications
animus that women should always be ‘supervised’ by a man who would be able 
to control, manage and direct their ‘inner voice’ should they start expressing any 
‘uncritical opinions’. Meanwhile, both of them worked under Jung’s supervision, 
were part of his school of thought and expanded his ideas. In a way, Jung played 
the role of their animus whose ‘stubborn voice’ sounded in their heads.
Their teacher’s opinion of the animus was no more favourable than their own. 
For Jung, the animus expresses itself in ‘opinionated views, interpretations, insin­
uations and misconstructions, which all have the purpose (sometimes attained) of 
severing the relationship between two human beings’ (CW9, II: 32). Shockingly, 
in extreme cases Jung even advocates applying physical force to the woman 
whose animus ‘just would not shut up’:
No matter how friendly and obliging a woman’s Eros may be, no logic on 
earth can shake her if she is ridden by the animus. Often the man has the 
feeling – and he is not altogether wrong – that only seduction or a beating or 
rape would have the necessary power of persuasion. He is unaware that this 
highly dramatic situation would instantly come to a banal and unexciting end 
if he were to quit the field and let a second woman carry on the battle (his 
wife, for instance, if she herself is not the fiery war horse). This sound idea 
seldom or never occurs to him, because no man can converse with an animus 
for five minutes without becoming the victim of his own anima.
(CW9, II: 29)
Yet, the animus also plays a positive role in a woman’s life. For instance, it is in 
charge of creativity, being ‘a psychopomp, a mediator between the conscious and 
the unconscious, and a personification of the latter’ (CW9, II: 33). It also ‘gives 
to a woman’s consciousness the capacity for reflection, deliberation, and self-
knowledge’ (CW9, II: 33). It follows from this analysis that female creativity is 
something that has to be controlled and managed by a male guide.
The woman is thus both the anima and the container of the animus. Either way, 
she is the victim: patriarchal culture sees her animus as ‘the loud evil thing’, and, 
as the anima she is not even a real woman – she is a cluster of someone else’s 
fantasies. The animus needs to be restrained lest its uncritical opinions destroy the 
aura of mystery surrounding the feminine; and the anima needs to be maintained 
in order to keep the woman a suitable vessel for projections.
Amongst male directors, Hitchcock is particularly adept at showing the ‘female 
enigma’ which is usually stalked, investigated, deciphered or violated in some 
other way, physically or psychologically. Traditionally analysed from a Freudian 
perspective with the use of such terms as voyeurism, scopophilia, objectification, 
phantasy and narcissism, Hitchcock’s films have been regarded by feminist criti­
cism as perverse, extreme examples of Hollywood’s treatment of women as well 
as faithful reflections of society’s moral brutality towards the feminine. Yet, his 
films equally lend themselves to Jungian analysis which, although not as blunt or 
straightforward, still clearly shows the patriarchal biases.

Jungians vs. Freudians  155
Hitchcock’s heroines, who have since become archetypal, are inexplicable 
enigmas that male protagonists attempt to solve. Thus, the role of the aggressive 
and penetrating one – the role of the investigator – is exclusively played by a 
man. As a rule, Hitchcock’s protagonists have ‘penetrating’ professions, hob­
bies or criminal proclivities: detective, photographer, policeman or even maniac. 
For instance, the protagonist of Vertigo (1958), Scottie (James Stewart), is 
a retired detective. He is asked by an old friend to spy on his wife, Madeleine 
(Kim Novak), who has recently been behaving in a strange way: leaving home 
and going to various places all by herself. The friend (Tom Helmore) claims that 
she is possessed, and that she needs help. Scottie starts following Madeleine, who 
indeed appears to be possessed by a ghost of Carlota Valdes, a woman who hap­
pens to be her great-grandmother and who had committed suicide. Throughout 
the film, Kim Novak’s character says very little, thus solidifying her status as a 
fantasy figure. Scottie becomes obsessed with the silent object on the brink of 
hysteria and in need of male intervention. Only a man, a rational creature, the one 
who takes charge and makes decisions, can save her from madness.
Madeleine’s silence both positions her as Scottie’s seductive anima and empha­
sises her silenced yet stubborn ‘animus’. Her very desire ‘to see’ is suicidal, as the 
film’s narrative would have it. By contrast, as Mulvey puts it, Hitchcock’s male 
protagonist ‘does see precisely what the audience sees’ as well as ‘takes fascination 
with an image through scopophilic eroticism as the subject of the film’ (Mulvey, 
2013: 65). A woman who wanders inexplicably in the streets, and visits hotels and 
cemeteries when she is supposed to be at home waiting for her businessman hus­
band (even though his wealth was her dowry), evokes certain cultural connotations. 
The investigating spirit working within her must be following a shadow, an illu­
sion. Her desire to investigate, to penetrate, to go on a journey must be misguided, 
for a woman’s journey is different; it is supposed to be about passive waiting and 
victimhood. Being active, going outside the confines of her home, are the elements 
absent from the ‘traditional’ structure of the ‘female’ journey. If a woman sets out 
on such a journey, she is likely to run into difficulties or face danger (fairy tales 
such as Bluebeard present us with good examples of this), and that’s when she 
needs to be rescued by a man. In fact, it is even better if a male guardian follows 
her everywhere in case something bad happens (and it will, because of the narrative 
necessity: the woman has to be returned ‘home’ and handed back to her ‘owner’).
Male aggression towards ‘the anima’, as well as male attempts to silence the rival 
voice ‘the animus’, are consistently shown in Hitchcock’s films. In Rear Window 
(1954) the protagonist, a journalist played by James Stewart, is stuck in his flat with 
a broken leg. This temporary disability is usually interpreted in Freudian terms – as 
a metaphor of castration. In fact, this is exactly how he feels. An adventurer and 
investigator, he is used to being proactive and to taking risks, but is now immobile 
and looked after by two women. Ever the hunter, he channels his adventure spirit 
into spying on his neighbours from his windows. He sees his beautiful girlfriend 
Lisa (Grace Kelly) as a nuisance who is trying to tie him down until he will ‘never 
be able to go anywhere’. In fact, he finds more fun in watching other people’s lives: 

156  Applications
‘Miss Torso’, a sexy showgirl entertaining hoards of men in her flat; a lonely lady 
who dreams of having a lover, and sometimes enacts scenes of affection with an 
imaginary male guest; a middle-aged sculptor; a married couple who like to sleep on 
the balcony; two female friends who take off their pyjamas and sunbathe, etc. This 
kind of fantasy life fuels Jeff’s imagination, and fills his hero journey.
Jungian theory deals with the question of reality versus narcissism by contrast­
ing projections with real people. Often archetypes, and particularly the anima and 
the animus, become the false standards, the formulas, the ideals by which we 
measure others. Being mature, and growing up, means learning to separate one’s 
own projections from real people out there. Jeff’s life is one long hero myth, full 
of adventures, danger and escape from reality. By contrast, Lisa exists in reality 
and makes demands on him. Worse, she is a successful woman in her own right, 
a writer and a socialite whereas Jeff wants someone ordinary who would accept 
his lifestyle as her own and would follow him anywhere. Lisa is many a man’s 
fantasy anima, but not his. She eventually earns a ticket into his life by helping 
him investigate the murder of a woman by her husband. She risks her life by doing 
this, but it brings her closer to Jeff.
Hitchcock’s most famous work, Psycho (1960), invites Oedipal interpretations, 
but can equally be approached from a Jungian point of view; for instance, by refer­
ring to the archetype of the mother. The mother archetype, even more so than 
the anima, symbolises the power of the feminine. Unlike in Freudian psychology, 
Jung did not see the mother as something silent, innocuous or dominated by the 
masculine. In Jungian psychology this archetype is regarded as a real force, as a 
metaphor for power. Moreover, Jung is not prescriptive in his assessment of the 
mother, either real or metaphorical. She is not only the one who cares but also the 
one who destroys. Although the terminology he uses is still rather sexist, Jung does 
not downplay the influence of the feminine. He writes in ‘Psychological Aspects 
of the Mother Archetype’:
The qualities associated with [the mother archetype] are maternal solicitude 
and sympathy; the magic authority of the female; the wisdom and spiritual 
exaltation that transcend reason; any helpful instinct or impulse; all that is 
benign, all that cherishes and sustains, even fosters growth and fertility. The 
place of magic transformation and rebirth, together with the underworld and its 
inhabitants, are presided over by the mother. On the negative side the mother 
archetype may connote anything secret, hidden, dark, the abyss, the world of 
the dead, anything that devours, seduces, and poisons, that is terrifying and 
inescapable like fate.
(CW9, I: 158)
Thus, the mother is both ‘loving’ and ‘terrible’, and the two aspects of this arche­
type are often inseparable. The mother is ‘unsafe’, and it’s fine for her to be 
unsafe. Like the unconscious, the feminine is something that should be reckoned 
with, something untameable and potent.

Jungians vs. Freudians  157
Possession by an archetypal figure is one of the key motifs of Hitchcock’s films; 
and possession by a mother is a particularly prominent moment. The protagonist 
of Psycho, Norman Bates (Anthony Perkins), thinks that he must kill people on 
behalf of his mother. He also dresses like his mother when he murders his victims. 
Some time ago Norman murdered her and her lover out of jealousy. Then he 
assumed her guise in order to be as close to her as possible. Like a spider, he waits 
at his hotel hoping for a suitable victim to appear. One such victim is Marion 
Crane (Janet Leigh) who is on the run from her employer after embezzling 40,000 
dollars from him. She takes the wrong turn, and the road takes her to Bates’s 
motel. She does not suspect that the shy and youthful proprietor is a maniac who 
sees her every move through a hole in the wall. In the famous ‘shower scene’, 
Bates, dressed as his mother and brandishing a giant knife, murders Marion in the 
bathroom. In the last scene but one, Bates is sitting at the police station, wrapped 
in a large shawl and ‘thinking’ in his mother’s voice who is telling the audience 
that she is not even capable of harming a fly. The final shot is a double exposure 
showing Norman’s face merging with the face of his dead mother.
From a Freudian perspective, this looks like a typical Oedipal dynamic. Bates 
murders his mother and her boyfriend because he is jealous and cannot stand the 
thought of the mother ‘replacing’ him with another man. He also tells Marion 
that ‘a boy’s best friend is his mother’ and admits that he cannot leave his mother 
even though he sometimes wants to curse her. Meanwhile, Marion is fooled into 
thinking that the mother is still alive and that she is a disturbed tyrant mistreating 
her nice son. In reality, Norman is so attached to his parent that he behaves like 
a shy, compliant boy (and calls himself a ‘boy’ with no outside friends). He can­
not overcome the trauma of separation from the mother or accept the pressures of 
reality which demand that he becomes an independent man. In order to preserve 
the pre-Oedipal unity with the parent, he chooses to murder her. He also murders 
other women because they remind him of the treacherousness and volatility of the 
feminine which cannot be trusted, and which needs to be kept under lock and key. 
The woman should be controlled; she should not have a will of her own. Bates 
finds that the best way of ensuring a woman’s constancy is by murdering her and 
keeping her corpse, seated on a rocking chair, in the house, in a room of her own.
Yet, a Jungian perspective reveals something entirely different about the 
movie. Whereas the Freudian perspective paints women as helpless victims of 
male objectification, a Jungian analysis shows the dark power and the anger of 
the repressed feminine. Far from being helpless, women in the film are capable 
of being proactive, of retaliating, of being aggressive, sexual and disloyal.
True, the film depicts a patriarchal society in which women are mothers, secre­
taries and subordinates whereas men are in charge: the masculine, in the form of 
the boss, the policeman or a resident maniac controls the woman and administers 
punishment if she oversteps the boundaries of expected behaviour. The boss, the 
policeman and the car salesman all follow or chase Marion, and Bates murders 
her. Yet, it is the feminine that has the real influence in the film. Through the lay­
ers of patriarchal oppression, the great terrible mother rises and shows her power. 

158  Applications
On the one hand, Marion and Mrs Bates are victims of male control. On the other, 
both the characters display a degree of defiance to the patriarchal system, and in 
both this defiance comes out via emotional excess and illegal behaviour because 
‘legality’ in the social system is defined and guarded by men.
First of all, Marion has a lover, Sam (John Gavin). ‘A lover’ here is opposed to 
‘a husband’ who, supposedly, would be able to support her financially. Sam has 
debts, that’s why the two cannot get married. Marion’s stealing and lying make 
her a criminal and yet they also represent the ability to take charge of the situation. 
Moreover, after breaking the law, she sets out on a dangerous quest of her own, 
trying to break free from dependence on the society. Marion has sex with a man of 
her choice and enjoys it, steals, lies and goes on a road trip on her own. No wonder 
she triggers the suspicion of the policeman (who starts behaving like a stalker): a 
lonely woman on the road is an unusual sight, unlike a lonely man. When Marion 
is speaking with Norman, she comes across as mature and confident, in contrast 
to Bates who is boyish, bashful and immature.
Through Marion’s victim shroud, her true nature is visible – that of the woman 
who wants to make her own decisions. As Fred Botting writes in his book Gothic 
(1995), Hitchcock’s reworking of Bloch’s novel
draws a linear narrative of transgression and punishment of a sexually attrac­
tive and independent single woman drawn into the gloom of a decaying 
family house and isolated motel . . . the maternal figure is felt to be oppres­
sively alive . . . the killer is also a victim.
(Botting, 2013: 176)
Similarly to Marion, Norman’s mother ‘refuses’ to be branded a victim. Prior to 
her death at the hands of her own son, she also used to be an independent, sexually 
active female. In terms of symbolism, she is also depicted with a large knife in 
her hands – a phallic symbol as well as a symbol of aggression. Symbolically, she 
is associated with the great mother hermaphrodite described by Erich Neumann 
in his essays on the feminine as well as in his book The Origins and History of 
Consciousness (Neumann, 1989: 46). Neumann writes:
the uroboric character of the great mother is apparent wherever she is wor­
shipped in androgynous form, for instance, as the bearded goddess in Cyprus 
and Carthage. The woman with a beard, or with the phallus, betrays her uro­
boric character in the nondifferentiation between male and female. Only later 
will this hybrid be replaced by sexually unequivocal figures, for its mixed and 
ambivalent character represents the earliest stage from which the opposites 
will subsequently be differentiated.
(1989: 46)
Neumann also evokes the Swiss nineteenth-century anthropologist Johann Jacob 
Bachofen whose chief research interest was prehistoric matriarchy. In his analysis 

Jungians vs. Freudians  159
of the feminine, Bachofen emphasises the power of the feminine as a giver of life 
and asserts that the masculine principle is subordinate to its feminine counterpart:
The first earthly manifestation of masculine power takes the form of the son. 
From the son, we infer the father; the existence and nature of masculine power 
are evidenced only by the son. On this rests the subordination of the masculine 
principle to that of the mother. The man appears as creature, not as creator; 
as effect, not cause. The reverse is true of the mother. She comes before the 
creature, appearing as cause, the prime giver of life, and not as effect. She is 
not to be inferred from the creature, but is known in her own right.
(Bachofen, cited in Neumann, 1989: 48)
Similarly, in Psycho, although there are attempts to quell the power of the mother, 
ultimately her influence is unquestionable. Bates assumes his mother’s guise; he 
also fails to grow out of the immature, uroboric state of unity with her. Women 
in Psycho are sexually active, decisive and confident. On the surface, they are 
punished (murdered) by men for being all these, but deep down, the power of the 
great mother – the female power – endures. Mrs Bates has the last word when she 
appears as a voice-over in the last scene but one. Ultimately, it is the terrible great 
mother who is in charge while the man himself is silent and compliant. The son 
is ‘subordinated’ to the mother while her numinous power is seeping through the 
surface of the patriarchal society.
Woman as a man on screen
In the last twenty or so years there has been a proliferation of ‘women as men’ both in 
films and in television. In these narratives, the proactive female protagonist is neither 
a fragile maiden waiting for a prince to save her nor a mother hen tending to men’s 
weaknesses and being patient with everyone. In other words, she is neither the anima 
nor the great mother. She is a man. She does everything traditional mythological 
female protagonists are not supposed to do: goes on quests, actively uses her sword 
or gun, drives cars and lorries, trains for difficult times ahead, has physical strength 
and endurance, often gets in trouble, gets hurt and recovers, and is relentless towards 
her enemies. Often her curiosity leads her to dark and dangerous places, and she is 
not afraid to enter them. This new heroine fights, murders, investigates and pen­
etrates. Nothing can stop her if she gets curious. Her instincts are to chase, to seek, to 
find, and not to look for a new home and a partner, or to be maternal towards ‘broken 
things’. As early Jungians would have put it, she is possessed by her animus.
Charismatic, powerful and mysterious, heroines of this kind quickly enter 
the cultural imagination: Lara Croft, famously portrayed by Angelina Jolie 
(Lara Croft: Tomb Raider, 2001; developed from the video game series Tomb 
Raider [Eidos Interactive/Square Enix]); Beatrix Kiddo (Uma Thurman) from 
Quentin Tarantino’s Kill Bill (2003–2004), Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) from The 
Wachowskis’ The Matrix Series (1999–2003), Lisbeth Salander (Noomi Rapace), 

160  Applications
the protagonist of the trio of films based on Stieg Larsson’s Millennium series, 
Imperator Furiosa (Charlize Theron) in Mad Max: Fury Road (2015), Rey (Daisy 
Ridley) in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015) and many others. Even Tim 
Burton made a film with a defiant female protagonist going on a quest of self-
discovery (Alice in Wonderland, 2010). Many of these action heroines came to 
screen from video games, comic books and novels. They also come from a variety 
of genres, from high fantasy to martial arts and procedural.
Of course, the contemporary action heroine has older role models such as Ridley 
Scott’s Ripley (Alien, 1979) and Jordan O’Neill (G.I. Jane, 1997). Another early 
prototype is Jodie Foster’s character in The Silence of the Lambs (1991, directed 
by Jonathan Demme). Clarice Starling is a detective who is entrusted with the task 
of dealing with two serial killers: Jame Gumb/‘Buffalo Bill’ (Ted Levine) and Dr 
Hannibal Lector (Anthony Hopkins), a former psychiatrist turned cannibal. Clarice 
regularly has to interview Lector in prison in the hope of finding out more about 
Buffalo Bill. In exchange for bits of information about the maniac, Lector demands 
that she tells him more about herself, and often torments her with his insight and 
shrewd offensiveness. Even though Clarice manages to shoot Gumb, through­
out the narrative she is not entirely in control of the situation. She is nervous in 
Lector’s presence, and is more or less like Little Red Riding Hood dealing with, 
despite his incarceration, a still dangerous and manipulative Wolf. Lector remains 
in control through to the end of the film when he calls Clarice to ‘reassure’ her that 
she is safe, and asks for a similar guarantee concerning himself. Moreover, rather 
than being independent, the young detective keeps relying on the dangerous man’s 
insight and experience, which implies that she would not have caught Buffalo Bill 
without Lector’s help.
Television, which in this instance is more progressive than Hollywood, 
abounds in examples of ‘women as men’ in individuation quests: Xena: Warrior 
Princess (1995–2000), Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997–2003), La Femme Nikita 
(1997) and Nikita (2010–2013), Nordic Noir series Forbrydelsen (The Killing, 
2007–2012) and The Bridge (2011–), the international ‘high fantasy’ blockbuster 
Game of Thrones (2011–), Orange Is the New Black (2013–) and Jessica Jones 
(2015). Again, the genres are varied and include both fantastic and realistic nar­
ratives. Yet, they are united by the theme of independent women on a quest for 
self-realisation. Their female protagonists are confident and prefer adventures to 
family life. Lone fighters rather than community-makers, they often pursue their 
quest regardless of what others might say, and the ‘grail’ they hunt is placed higher 
than their personal life, their own wellbeing, or even the safety of their family. 
Focused and sharp, when the time comes, they see nothing but the goal ahead. 
Netflix seems to be particularly keen on creating narratives that have strong females 
in the lead (Jessica Jones) or explore taboo social issues that do not correspond to 
gender stereotypes, such as female crime and aggression (Orange Is the New Black).
A good example of the almost total loss of feminine qualities in a heroine 
is Tarantino’s Kill Bill. Tarantino himself struggled to define the film’s genre, 
calling it a mixture of giallo (a sort of Italian noir) and a Japanese Yakuza film 

Jungians vs. Freudians  161
(Latham, BBC Website, 6 October 2003). Its protagonist is Beatrix Kiddo, devoid 
of any empathy for or patience with others. Her behaviour is the opposite of what 
is traditionally expected of women: she is ruthless, focused on her goal and is a 
martial arts genius wielding her knife and sword better than any man would.
Beatrix is on a mission to kill Bill (David Carradine), the former leader of 
an assassination group to which she used to belong. In the past, Bill murdered 
Beatrix’s unborn child (who, Beatrix insisted, was his), and also tried to kill her. 
When Beatrix wakes up after four years in a coma, she finds her former squad 
members and kills them one by one. The last one to kill is the notorious Bill, who 
is a tough nut, but she accomplishes her mission successfully.
Beatrix is an interesting character in terms of gendered behaviour. It could be 
argued that she is traumatised into becoming a man, and that she goes on her brutal 
quest – the killing spree, during which she leaves behind blood-splattered walls and 
rooms full of body parts and dead enemies – because she had lost her potential fam­
ily, and because her lover had betrayed her. Since the woman in her feels offended and 
betrayed, she has no choice but to adopt male behaviour. Her injured femininity 
pushes her to the limits of endurance and violence. Beatrix’s looks still betray her 
former femininity – she is lithe, pretty and has long blond hair. In a way, she does 
not choose her quest – she is pushed into it by a man whom she – symbolically – 
murders in the end. Since she cannot be a woman, she will be a man.
By contrast, Tim Burton’s colourful and radical version of Alice in Wonderland 
(2010) has as its protagonist a woman who chooses a male quest not because she 
failed on a female one, but because she wants to be like her father – an explorer and 
adventurer who died when she was a child. For this purpose, Burton and the writer 
Linda Woolverton completely reworked Carroll’s linguistically puzzling original. 
A rebellious nineteen-year-old who feels stifled by Victorian high society and its 
conventions replaces the hyper-imaginative girl. A frame narrative is wound around 
the core storyline telling us why exactly Alice (Mia Wasikowska) fell through the 
rabbit hole: it was her surprise engagement party; she did not like her ridiculous 
fiancé Hamish (Leo Bill), even though he was a lord; and suddenly, in the midst of 
the engagement ceremony, when she was expected to say ‘yes’ in front of the crowd 
of overdressed Victorians, her mind went into a kind of overdrive. She was strug­
gling to find the answer within herself, and, speaking metaphorically, fell into her 
unconscious. The unconscious did not give her the answer straight away. It took the 
girl and umpteen bodily transformations, monster battles, nonsensical conversations 
and aristocratic encounters, to regain her ‘muchness’, and to answer the question 
she inherited from the original Alice – ‘Who am I?’ This question suits Burton’s 
experimental protagonist very well because it is not just Alice who is going through 
a crisis – the Burtonian hero is looking for a new definition and a new direction.
In his search for a new direction, Burton attempts to transform Carroll’s lost 
little girl into a Victorian feminist. ‘Defamiliarisation’ (‘the world upside down’) 
is both Carroll’s and Burton’s narrative device of choice to show the artificiality 
of social norms. Woolverton’s frame narrative idea – marriage and sexual 
initiation – might have come from Beauty and the Beast (1991), on which she had 

162  Applications
previously worked for Disney, but Carroll’s original text is also abound in references 
to female identity – and its crisis. Being too small or too big for your surround­
ings, not being able to fit in, being a pawn in someone else’s game, being forced 
to accept the rules without questioning them – this is what Burton responded to, 
and made the film about. Johnny Depp’s Mad Hatter and Helena Bonham-Carter’s 
Red Queen are transformed into two warring figures on the female quester’s path. 
The outcome of their conflict determines Alice’s future in the real world. Alice’s 
‘empowerment story’ is lovingly embellished with Burton’s favourite visual sym­
bols that he traditionally uses to illustrate male quests: an assortment of cutting 
and piercing objects, a narrow staircase, gloomy castles and weird topiaries. The 
dragon Jabberwocky is promoted to the rank of the arch-villain, with whom our 
heroine, dressed in shiny armour and equipped with a magical sword, has an arche­
typal climatic hero-fight. Burton’s masculinised Alice, with the phallic sword in 
her hands, metaphorically severs herself from her Victorian contemporaries, with 
their prim eccentricity and thinly-veiled social games. She then emerges from the 
hole of her unconscious, ready to announce her decision to the distraught relatives.
Even Disney/Pixar followed suit, albeit reluctantly and somewhat acciden­
tally. Brave (2012), directed by Brenda Chapman and Mark Andrews, is a tale 
of Merida, a rebellious Scottish princess, who refuses to follow in her mother’s 
footsteps (i.e. get married and become a queen). The flame-haired Merida is her 
father’s daughter, a real tomboy who despises all things ‘feminine’ and ‘decent’, 
and loves riding, running in the woods, climbing trees and rocks, and shooting 
arrows at difficult targets. When expected to choose a husband from an array 
of silly-looking suitors, Merida outshoots them in an archery competition, and 
runs into the woods. There she encounters a witch (who does not like being a 
witch because ‘there are too many dissatisfied customers’), and asks her for a spell 
which would make her mother change her mind. The witch gives her an enchanted 
cake which turns her mother into a she-bear. Merida’s task now is to find a way to 
remove the spell and to help her mother regain her human form.
Chapman admits that sneaking such an innovative narrative into the Disney-
owned company was challenging. Even worse, the computer animation industry, due 
to its ‘techy’ reputation, traditionally has very few women. She was distressed when 
the story was taken away from her and given to Mark Andrews; particularly because 
the story is inspired by the relationship with her daughter (Chapman, The New York 
Times, 14 August 2012). In the end, however, her vision came through in the film:
So I kept my head held high, stayed committed to my principles, and was 
supported by some strong women (and men!). In the end, it worked out, and 
I’m very proud of the movie, and that I ultimately stood up for myself, just 
like Merida, the protagonist in Brave’
(Chapman, The New York Times, 14 August 2012)
Brave is revolutionary in many ways. It is the first Pixar film directed by a 
woman. It is also a masculinised female individuation narrative. This is very 

Jungians vs. Freudians  163
unusual for the children’s animation genre, which tends to be heavily gen­
der-coded. Merida is no typical Disney Princess with pretty hair and wearing 
dangling earrings, a shiny necklace and a pink ball gown. Neither is she a vic­
tim, oppressed or controlled by some evil witch like Ariel (The Little Mermaid, 
1989), Rapunzel (Tangled, 2010), Snow White (Snow White and the Seven 
Dwarves, 1937), Cinderella (appearing in a range of Disney films from 1950 
to 2015) and Aurora (Sleeping Beauty, 1959). Merida is self-reliant, and is not 
expecting to be saved by a prince. Throughout the film, she gets into difficult 
situations – but she also successfully solves them. Merida is capable of express­
ing anger, aggression and frustration. She does not like the idea of being weak, 
nice or polite. Importantly, even though the narrative starts with the traditional 
female individuation element (the oppressive mother figure stifling the younger 
female’s self-expression), Merida takes on the mother and attempts to destroy 
her before coming to her senses and seeking reconciliation. She deals with her 
beasts, witches and monsters herself. Killing (meaning integrating) the evil 
great mother and the beastly animus is the task of every hero-woman on the 
quest for self-actualisation.
Recently, the latest instalment in the Mad Max franchise, Mad Max: Fury 
Road (2015, directed by George Miller) made waves in the cinema world, and 
became an unusual platform for many a debate regarding the role of women 
in society. Charlize Theron’s character, Imperator Furiosa, is a fearsome rebel 
warrior, undaunted and unstoppable despite missing one hand. She enrages 
the cult leader Immortan Joe (Hugh Keays-Byrne) by stealing his five beauti­
ful wives (used for ‘breeding’), and taking them away in a war rig in the hope 
of settling in a place where women are respected more. Joe sends his army of 
brainwashed ‘war boys’ to kill Furiosa and to reclaim the wives, one of whom 
is pregnant with his child. The film’s title character, Mad Max (Tom Hardy), 
is almost side-lined by Furiosa who is as aggressive, angry and as capable as 
the embittered man accustomed to survival in the post-apocalyptic world. Her 
disability (which can be seen as a metaphor for her belonging to ‘the weaker 
sex’) does not make her a lesser soldier. Moreover, her disability, along with her 
shaved head, war paint and dusty face, visually challenges the traditional percep­
tion of the female character (and a Hollywood actress!) as someone ethereal in its 
feminine ‘completeness’. Furiosa eventually blows off Immortan Joe’s face and 
frees the cult members from oppression and humiliation.
This is certainly an unusual angle on the feminine, and a far cry from the tra­
ditional objectification of women in commercial cinema. In an interview with 
Vanity Fair Miller explains his choices by the gradual changes in the attitudes 
towards gender in Western societies: ‘We’ve gone from being very male domi­
nant to being surrounded by magnificent women. I can’t help but be a feminist’ 
(Rich, Vanity Fair, 14 May 2015). Theron herself salutes such a radical destruc­
tion of the double ‘mother-whore’ stereotype of women prevalent in screen media: 
‘You’re either a really good mother or you’re a really good hooker. The prob­
lem with how movies represent women goes right back to the Madonna/whore 

164  Applications
complex. You can’t be a really good hooker-mother. It’s impossible’ (Shoard, The 
Guardian, 14 May 2015).
Several recent television projects present a similarly radical reversal of gender 
roles and reworking of the female quest. Two Nordic Noir series, Forbrydelsen 
(created by Søren Sveistrup) and The Bridge (created by Hans Rosenfeldt) are 
police procedurals in which the detective is a woman who tackles the most dif­
ficult and dangerous cases. Although female detectives have existed in narratives 
since 1926, when Agatha Christie’s Miss Marple appeared in a short story for 
the first time, the Nordic Noir version of the investigating woman challenges the 
traditional notions of gender: the female protagonist looks and behaves like a 
man. Instead of using her ‘female’ qualities (patience, carefulness, intuition, wis­
dom) to solve problems, she tackles them head-on, often putting herself and others 
around her in danger. She thrives in adrenaline-infused atmosphere, and shoves 
any feelings or doubts into the furthest corner of her mind.
Throughout its three seasons, Forbrydelsen’s detective Sarah Lund (brilliantly 
played by Sofie Gråbøl) is so focused on catching the criminals that she neglects 
her teenage son (Eske Forsting Hansen) who, by season three (2012), tired of 
being rejected and ignored, cuts off all communication with her. In season one 
(2007) she drives away her boyfriend Bengt (Johan Gry) and regularly upsets her 
mother by being cold towards her. Sarah is a loner who cannot cultivate relation­
ships with others because it is both time consuming and requires being able to 
process and release one’s emotions. Relationships are risky, emotionally taxing 
and involve effort. Sarah does not know how to handle them. Besides, when an 
idea or a goal appears in her life, she becomes so obsessed with it that she cannot 
think about anything else. Her solution is cutting her family off, and concentrating 
on her work since pursuing both seems like an impossible task. She defies gender 
stereotypes and stays on her quest regardless of whether she is needed by her com­
munity. Moreover, the idea is that her goal, the treasure that one gets rewarded 
with at the end of the quest – catching the murderer – is higher and more valuable 
for the community than the treasures a ‘typical’ woman would be happy to get 
at the end of her quest: the love of others earned by patience, kindness and care.
Yet, being a detective – the penetrating one, the focused one – is not compat­
ible with ‘the vocation of the woman’. Sofie Gråbøl herself admits that playing 
a character who behaves like a man was both a difficult and a rewarding task. 
She says in an interview with BBC’s Newsnight that immersing in the role has 
changed her own perceptions of masculinity and femininity:
We all felt that the story of a woman in a dilemma between work and the 
family, work and love – there’s a whole battle which, of course, as a woman, 
I totally know how it is – we all thought that it’s not relevant, that it has been 
told so many times.
(Gråbøl, interview by Kirsty Wark, BBC Newsnight, 1 November 2011)

Jungians vs. Freudians  165
Forbrydelsen’s competition, the Danish/Swedish series The Bridge, has a simi­
larly obsessive woman detective who lacks pretty much any feminine qualities 
despite looking like a blond bombshell. Saga Norén (Sofia Helin) is incapable of 
analysing her feelings, prefers casual sex to relationships (which surprises and 
shocks men who sleep with her), is not planning to settle down or to have chil­
dren, takes her work home with her and stares at disturbing pictures from crime 
scenes until late in the night. As a questor, she is very male and very focused on 
catching the killer. Everything else falls out of the picture.
High fantasy is another rich ground for challenging gender stereotypes. The 
creators of Game of Thrones invert the traditional genre expectations which delin­
eate the man as the hero on a quest and the woman as the princess to be saved, 
the monster to be killed, the passive wife waiting at home or the treasure to be 
found. Based on George R. R. Martin’s fantasy series A Song of Ice and Fire and 
created by the screenwriters and producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, the 
show boasts an array of powerful and aggressive female characters, including 
Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey), the murderous, ambitious and beautiful Queen 
of the Seven Kingdoms; the naïve but charismatic Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia 
Clarke); the powerful and treacherous priestess Melisandre (Carice Van Houten); 
the deadly Sand Snakes; the shrewd and manipulative Margaery Tyrell (Natalie 
Dormer) and her grandmother, the clever, wise and political Olenna Tyrell (Diana 
Rigg). Women in Game of Thrones have real influence and power despite the fact 
that men still rule the world.
Notably, and very unusually for a medieval epic of this scale, several femi­
nine characters are completely masculinised and only ever follow the male quest: 
Arya Stark (Maisie Williams), a rebellious, angry and adventurous teenager who 
chooses her sword nicknamed ‘Needle’ and a vagabond life over any settled 
lifestyle; the redhead Ygritte (Rose Leslie), a ‘wildling’ and a fearless warrior; 
Yara Greyjoy (Gemma Whelan), whose father entrusts her with leading a bunch 
of brutal men of the Iron Islands into battle; and the knight Brienne of Tarth 
(Gwendoline Christie), a tall and muscular master swordsman who is fond of 
challenging men to fight with her, and almost always wins.
Such a concentration of female fighters is impressive, particularly coming 
from a male writer and two male producers. George R. R. Martin explains to The 
Telegraph’s Jessica Salter that, although deep down he considers himself to be 
a feminist, he cannot call himself one because of the restrictions contemporary 
feminists place on who can wear the badge:
There was a period in my life when I would have called myself a femi­
nist, back in the seventies, when the feminist movement was really getting 
going . . . I thought if the current crop of feminists believes that no man can 
be a feminist, then I guess I’m not one.
(Salter, The Telegraph, 1 April 2013)

166  Applications
Martin also says, in another interview:
It’s one of the things that please me most. I’m lucky that I’ve got such a big 
project; it means I can have lots of different types of female characters and so 
avoid stereotypes, which is what fantasy writers can end up doing.
(Salter, The Telegraph, 25 March 2013)
Most of Martin’s female warriors are ‘father’s daughters’ who want to be like their 
fathers; that’s why they learn sword fighting, archery and military leadership. Yet, 
amazingly, in Martin’s fantasy world, this is a normal and an almost accepted path 
for a woman. Ned Stark (Sean Bean) has nothing against his daughter having sword 
lessons, Balon Greyjoy (Patrick Malahide) raises his daughter as a man and a legiti­
mate heir to the throne (having lost his son to captivity), and Brienne of Tarth is the 
only surviving child of her father. During her wanderings, Arya keeps befriend­
ing scary-looking grown men who she views as both role models and brothers in 
arms: her fencing teacher Syrio Forel (Miltos Yerolemou), the ‘faceless man’ Jaqen 
H’ghar (Tom Wlaschiha) and the disenchanted knight Sandor ‘the Hound’ Clegane 
(Rory McCann). Not only does she think that having formidable men for friends is 
normal – she trusts them and wants to be one of them.
Far from being viewed as an anomaly or a sign of immaturity (the sign of 
maturity being the desire to settle and to have a family), the female fighter within 
this world is viewed as almost a common occurrence – if she can prove her ability 
to be one. This sets Game of Thrones apart from other fantasy creations, includ­
ing The Lord of the Rings (both the books and the films) in which the females are 
presented either as beautiful objects or as enemies – and both these incarnations 
are part of the typical male quest. As Charlotte Runcie notes in The Telegraph:
Before I watched Game of Thrones, I had come to accept that most women in 
fantasy fiction were just that – a fantasy. . . . How many women do you actu­
ally know who are immortal, beautiful and have a range of specific sexual 
needs that can be fulfilled only by a navel-gazing wandering hero?
(Runcie, The Telegraph, 15 April 2014)
Importantly, the behaviour of the female characters of Game of Thrones is not 
limited to a specific type of quest: male or female, a lone warrior or a passive 
beauty, a poisonous queen or a fragile wallflower. They are all different and por­
trayed with depth typical of multiple focalisation: each of them is shown as a 
human, breathing character with her own complexities and conflicts, and choos­
ing a unique and difficult path in the brutal world. This is true equality: equality in 
action; not everyone is fit to become a fighter, be it man or woman, but if you have 
enough pluck to take up your sword and put on your armour, your gender stops 
being a concern. Ultimately, what matters is your courage and your skill – such 
are the rules of the ruthless medieval world. Gender inequality is something only 
‘civilised’ societies can afford.

Chapter 8
The body
Phenomenology and cinema
Luke Hockley
Introduction
Bringing together the Jungian approach with that of phenomenology is, on the 
face of it, a rather curious undertaking. The way that Jung conceives of the psyche, 
and actually the world in general, is that it is imbued with unconscious activi­
ties that are purposeful and which have agency. For Jung the unconscious is 
structured in relationship to and with the world, as they exist in a reciprocal 
relationship. Much like the famous conundrum of which came first, the chicken 
or the egg, it is not clear whether for Jung meaning in the world is inscribed by 
the unconscious or whether the material world creates the conditions through 
which the unconscious may express itself. These two aspects of the conscious 
world, and the unconscious structures that enable psychological meaning to take 
place, are dependent one on the other. This type of relationship is a very long way 
indeed from the phenomenological approach, which has no need of the uncon­
scious as an idea at all.
In phenomenology something that is unconscious quite simply refers to some­
thing that is as yet not known or something we are not yet aware of. It certainly 
does not give a sense of purpose to that unknown aspect, and it is certainly not tel­
eological, at least not in the way that Jung understands the psychology of human 
development. However, it is the contention of this chapter that actually there are 
ways in which some of the central tenets of the phenomenological orientation 
towards film in particular can both inform and enhance a Jungian view of the cin­
ema. Such a combination is of particular assistance in examining just how it is that 
viewers find deep personal meanings in what they know to be fiction films – and 
that has been one of the themes of this book. Before we get to the issue of how 
to undertake this enmeshing of the depth psychological with the ultra-conscious 
phenomenological we need to map out a few of the core concerns of phenomenol­
ogy itself, and in particular the ways it has been applied to films.
It is by no means self-evident that phenomenology will be of any use when it 
comes to understanding the cinema psychologically. Daniel Frampton makes the 
point in his book Filmosophy (2006), where he suggests that phenomenology is 
not likely to be of much help when it comes to questions of ‘being’ in the cinema. 
This is largely because phenomenology is a philosophy of consciousness and as 

168  Applications
such it aims to understand the ‘lived experience’ that is the human condition. By 
contrast, the Jungian view of being, and hence being in the cinema, is that it does 
have an unconscious component. However, just as psychoanalytic film theory 
found similarities between cinema and the structure of the human psyche, so 
too, using the approach offered by phenomenology, it becomes possible to find 
a parallel between our experience of the world, and the ‘behaviour’ and/or being 
of films.
One of the keys to this is Merleau-Ponty’s claim that the act of looking is an 
act of gathering the world to oneself. As we look, so too we possess; a point not 
missed by psychoanalytic theory either, though there it has different repercussions. 
From a phenomenological perspective, to look is to possess, even if this possession 
takes place at a distance. Just as the act of looking turns the world into our personal 
possessions, so too the camera lens possesses the actors, the set, the lighting and 
so forth as they are turned into its world. In so doing each film becomes a type of 
being that has similar anatomical qualities to those of the human body: cinema 
hears (microphone), it sees (the lens), it talks (the loudspeaker), it touches (the 
sense of surface). In this regard, cinema films possess a body – of sorts.
Alternatively we might say that each film is situated in the world in a way that 
is distinctive. Each film gathers the world to itself in a way that is unique to itself 
but which is also aligned with the perceptual preconditions that contribute to our 
sense of lived experience. The cinematic experience is then composed of two 
aligned looks – the look of the camera and the look of the eye, and together they 
combine to form what I conceive of as the ‘cinematic vision’ – it is this that we 
experience in the cinema and which is central to our being in the cinema.
Yet, of course, the experience of film as it looks and creates the world is of 
necessity phenomenologically different to the act of human perception. Hence the 
problem that Frampton alluded to, namely that ‘being’ for film and ‘being’ for 
humans are rather different categories. In this respect, film does not make human 
being or thinking available to its spectators – such illumination comes only in the 
combined experience of the cinematic vision, not from the film per se. Yet it is 
precisely because there is a clear distinction between our human perception and a 
mechanical filmic perception that Merleau-Ponty suggests we find pleasure in art. 
For him, pleasure comes from difference, or more technically, in the space that 
exists between the two different types of perception. There would be little pleas­
ure in merely finding the world replicated as it is; it would be a pointless exercise 
in reproduction. Instead, what matters are the ways that art can offer back to us 
differing versions of our world in such a manner that is rearranged so that we may 
see the world, and the art, differently. In order for this arrangement to have mean­
ing it is necessary to establish the existence and the meeting of the two bodies that 
are implied, or indexed, through the two looks – the human and the filmic. (The 
question of the third body in the cinematic vision is something we will return to 
later.) For Merleau-Ponty what matters then is the meeting of two bodies in the 
act of making meaning – the human body and the film body – engaged in the act 
of mutual perception.

The body: phenomenology and cinema  169
The meaning of a film is incorporated into its rhythm just as the meaning of a 
gesture may immediately be read in that gesture: the film does not mean any­
thing but itself. The idea is presented in a nascent state and emerges from the 
temporal structure of the film as it does from the coexistence of the parts of a 
painting. The joy of art lies in its showing how something takes on meaning – 
not by referring to already established and acquired ideas but by the temporal 
or spatial arrangement of elements. As we saw above, a movie has meaning 
in the same way that a thing does: neither of them speaks to an isolated under­
standing; rather, both appeal to our power tacitly to decipher the world or 
men and to coexist with them. It is true that in our ordinary lives we lose sight 
of this aesthetic value of the tiniest perceived thing. It is also true that the per­
ceived form is never perfect in real life, that it always has blurs, smudges, and 
superfluous matter, as it were. Cinematographic drama is, so to speak, finer-
grained than real-life dramas: it takes place in a world that is more exact than 
the real world. But in the last analysis perception permits us to understand the 
meaning of the cinema. A movie is not thought; it is perceived.
(Merleau-Ponty, 1964: 57–58)
As Merleau-Ponty makes clear in the above quotation, the value of cinema lies 
in the way that it observes the world in exacting detail – it is phenomenologi­
cal in the way it records what it sees. It might at first seem that such a forensic 
approach to life would be overly scientific in how it captures the details of expe­
rience. However, it turns out that it is this very detail that allows us not to think 
but to perceive, and hence to be. Here, a clinical example is instructive. A father 
described in therapy how he always read his son a bedtime story. A touching 
scene, until it became clear that his son hated him sitting on the bed, or even being 
in the bedroom. Instead, he resorted to sitting on the stairs outside the bedroom, 
which annoyed the other family members as in so doing he blocked the way to 
the bathroom. In this vignette, a happy story becomes transformed. It becomes 
evident that the acts of detailed reconstruction and recording change the psycho­
logical affect and meaning of the situation. It is the perceptual veracity of the film 
that allows the two looks of the eye and the lens to coalesce, and in so doing form 
the cinematic vision as reconstruction and also to record change, understanding 
and affect. It is the perspicacity of that vision, and not the thought of viewers, 
that allows us to comprehend what it is to ‘be’ and the result is to enter into an 
awareness of how we are in the world, and to gain a fuller understanding through 
experience of what it means to be.
The film body
There are numerous theorists who have set out to reflect on film through the use 
of a phenomenological framework. Among the first was Casebier with his 1991 
work Film and Phenomenology. Other important contributions have been made 
by Marks (2000), Shaviro (1993) and Barker (2009). But without doubt one of the 

170  Applications
most significant theorists to have worked in this field is Vivian Sobchack with 
her two major interventions: The Address of the Eye (1992) and Carnal Thoughts 
(2004). Sobchack argues that the lived existence of film’s body is a fact. Here 
she does not mean to suggest that films have an actual corporal, fleshy body. Nor 
according to her should the film-body be though of as a metaphor. Rather, the 
film’s body is the location of the consciousness of film – it is where its sense of 
the world is located. This seemingly abstract way of positioning film derives from 
Sobchack’s desire to understand how it is that something that is clearly mechani­
cal and constructed can come to embody a particular way of seeing the world that 
viewers can relate to emotionally and viscerally. For her, film is an incarnation of 
Renaissance perspective. In this mode of representation the world is rearranged 
in a painting in such a way that the elements of the image coalesce around an 
imagined individual perspective. When transposed from painting to the cinema 
the result is the viewer comes to regard each film as having a purpose that is 
predicated on a subjective point of view. Sobchack’s is an ocular-centric view of 
the world that places at its centre the viewer’s subjectivity around which the world 
is re-arranged.
To momentarily divert, it is worth noting how different this is from the Jungian 
conception of image. Image for Jung is embodied and, importantly, it is not just 
something that is seen. Rather, image, or more particularly the psychological 
image, is felt. Jung’s clearest formulation of the psychological qualities of the image 
is what he terms the fantasy-image. By this he means to refer to an image that is 
a psychological fantasy but one that also encapsulates our sense of a situation and 
what it is that we feel about it. If the ocular-centric approach to perception suggests 
a split between body and world, then the Jungian view of perception locates image 
as a site of psychological meaning that is internalised within the body and where 
the body expresses and encodes the psychological situation. Such meanings often 
have strong unconscious components and, gradually, some branches of psychother­
apy are coming to see how complexes, and emotional responses to the world more 
generally, are encoded by and in our bodies. For example: a father complex (sic 
image) can become encoded in visceral felt sensations; unexpressed anger might 
be expressed in back pain and so forth.
This is at odds with the phenomenological position which argues that film 
is similar to human vision because it is both something to be looked at and it is 
also something that itself looks. In the act of looking, and to-be-looked-at-ness, 
the film is at the same time a voyeur and the object of voyeurism: through its 
representations it looks, while through its screen it presents itself to be looked at. 
Frampton puts it neatly, noting:
For Vivian Sobchack, following on from Merleau-Ponty, film is understood to 
be itself a ‘subject’, and ‘object-subject’ that sees and is seen. For her film is both 
presentational and representational, both viewing subject and a visible object for 
the film-goer – film is existentially embodied (mechanical) perception.
(Frampton, 2006: 41)

The body: phenomenology and cinema  171
The claim that film is ‘existentially embodied . . . perception’ is something that 
will be returned to momentarily, though as already suggested this is difficult to 
reconcile with a Jungian view of the situation. Before we explore this further, 
it is important to be clear about what Sobchack is arguing. Her position is that 
film does not just present an image to be seen by the viewer. Rather, she argues 
that film has a purpose or intention in the way it embodies its view of the world. 
Just as we as viewers have bodies and look with intention, so too film presents 
a framed view of the world, framed by choice in a meaningful and purposeful 
manner. (Here we have hints of Jung’s concept of the purposive qualities of the 
unconscious – even if Sobchack’s argument has a different focus.) There is a 
sense in which this is self-evident. Narrative films are of course constructed and 
made in a particular way, with the explicit intention of conveying a particular set 
of meanings – the narrative of the film. However, Sobchack is getting at some­
thing rather different to this view of film as constructed narrative and narration. 
For her film has a type of existence outside its narrative function. It is as though 
the film itself, not its creators, looks with intention, as if once created the film 
takes on a life of its own as it views and presents the world in its particular and 
individual way. Sobchack terms this act of looking with purpose the ‘viewing 
view’. To return to Frampton:
In both seeing and expressing its seeing, film is not just a view (an image or 
a scene) for Sobchack, it is a ‘viewing view’. The viewing view presents (the 
body-subject of vision). Film’s viewing view is its meaningful choice-making 
gaze, and thus a new organisation of the whole, a new mode of attention. This 
viewing view thus consists in having and expressing perception: that is, film 
simultaneously has vision and intention, it sees objects and expresses its inten­
tion about those objects.
(Frampton, 2006: 41)
However, film does not make human thinking visible to us and it is quite clear 
that both the perception of film and its representation of the world are different 
to human perception and thinking. For example, dream sequences in films do not 
bear much resemblance to actual dreams. Nor does the act of calling to mind a 
particular memory resemble a flashback in a film. However, it is of course the case 
that the nature of our bodies partly determines our understanding of the world. 
Our physical characteristics directly shape how we see the world, how we experi­
ence the world and the way we can ‘be’ in the world. Someone who is colour blind 
experiences the world differently to some who is not. So too the individual charac­
teristics of the film body shape its representation of the world. As Sobchack points 
out, when filming a man running a film can either follow him, let him run past the 
camera, or let him run towards the camera, keeping him the same size (through 
the use of a telephoto lens with a narrow depth of field that compresses perspec­
tive) or as he approaches the camera letting his image grow in size, with a deep 
focus wide angle lens. Again, the very argument that asserts that film has body 

172  Applications
requires that same body to be rather different to our own. While Sobchack does 
not want such devices to be expressive, they are. Indeed, the meaning of films 
in no small part depends exactly on the use of such expressive devices. While it 
is important to be clear about the techniques of film making and the difference 
between say, a shot that tracks in to its subject and one that zooms in, what matters 
most is not the description of the technique itself but rather it is the meaning of 
such devices within the narrative of the film. Sobchack terms the observations of 
these types of filmic mechanisms and techniques the ‘film’s attention’, the move­
ment of a lived body. However, it is actually much more than attention – as the 
formal properties of cinema encode its narrative and emotional intentions. It is not 
entirely clear why Sobchack wants to restrict the movement of film to the film’s 
attention. It seems to be an attempt to see the film-body as without agency in the 
way it acts as viewer and viewed. Yet to assert that looking is meaning making, 
would actually in some ways strengthen her argument, namely that film possesses 
a consciousness – a particular type of consciousness to be sure, but a conscious­
ness nonetheless.
What is still more problematic from the phenomenological position that 
Sobchack adopts is the very idea of a film-body itself, regardless of whatever its 
attributes and qualities might turn out to possess. Her idea is an anthropomor­
phic one in which our human qualities are projected onto something that is quite 
clearly not human. It is, if you will, a fantasy that we can animate the material 
world in ways that reflect our subjectivity. It raises some thorny questions: If film 
does indeed have a body, then where exactly is this body? If that body possesses 
a consciousness then what is the nature of the consciousness that film is supposed 
to have? Further, what is it possible to know about such a consciousness? The 
issue is that conceptualising film as body separates it from the filmic world, as 
the filmic body is to some extent situated outside the world of the film – in much 
the same way that the viewer is positioned outside the film. However, this is a 
problem as phenomenologically the film is its world and it cannot somehow be 
separated from it. As we have our own unique way of being in the world, mediated 
through the experience of our senses, so too film is situated in its own mediated 
view of the world. We cannot be in the world in any other way, and nor can film.
Another interesting aspect to Sobchack’s argument is the way that she sees 
film as having an existence outside the perception of the viewer and this is some­
thing she refers to as ‘other’. That film is constituted independently of the viewer 
is in one sense obvious. Films exist as digital data streams, as DVDs, as rolls of 
celluloid, as collections of still images and so forth. The materiality of film, irre­
spective of whether it is electronic or optical, is not what is at stake here. What is 
important is establishing if film constitutes a subject within its own terms and also 
where its meaning exists independently of the viewer. To put this another way: 
can film be the subject of its own vision? Certainly from Sobchack’s position it 
can. Film embodies a set of cultural representations that are encoded within the 
film itself. Questions of mise-en-scène, representation, narrative theme, i.e. the 
formation of the look and the subject of the look, strongly suggest a certain type of 

The body: phenomenology and cinema  173
identity for a film. Lens quality, film stocks, lighting techniques, digital enhance­
ments and so forth all evidence how the apparatus of cinema constitutes a certain 
sense of identity One only has to look at a Technicolor film of the 1950s to see 
how its materiality is historically located – the film’s body belongs to another era.
To amplify the point, currently film studies is particularly concerned with 
uncovering the production of both individual films and groups of films. This is 
of course an interesting undertaking that provides great opportunities for schol­
arship and the enhancement of the academic project. To be clear, the current 
argument is not intended to undercut or critique such an enterprise but equally 
the historical project is one that is markedly and significantly different to both 
phenomenological enquiry and Jungian psychology where the focus of attention 
is not on creation but on the volatile and ever-changing qualities of the site of 
reception. In this sense the historically orientated undertaking will only ever be 
partial and limited. It is a reductive approach. Just as psychoanalysis encouraged 
a return to the repressed life of childhood as a means to better understand adult 
life, so too historical materialist approaches refuse to let films grow up. Instead 
what comes to dominate is the site and context of production – the conception 
and birth of the film, if you will. The historical process involves a stripping 
back of our current ideological perspective as a means to understand more fully 
what has been hidden in the film. Much as Freud made a distinction between the 
manifest and latent content of a dream so too these historical undertakings peel 
away the audio-visual surface of films to uncover their latent cultural meanings. 
As such, the undertaking is both materialist and ideological. But it also robs 
film of its own bodily subjectivity as it attempts to attribute to film a series of 
somewhat fixed and stable meanings. However, as we are coming to see, film as 
a body changes – there is a way in which it matures and grows old. What seemed 
fresh and exciting at the time of its creation comes with the passage of time to 
seem either tired and clichéd or warmly nostalgic and comforting. Both the film 
itself and its viewers are no longer the same. The black and white movie from the 
1940s we watch on a Sunday afternoon is different to that same movie as it was 
originally released.
The preceding illustration serves to mount a critique both on Sobchack and 
also on the historical approach as the example demonstrates how it is that is 
that film comes into being only when watched. The implication is that each 
time a movie is watched, a different film comes into being. The meaning of 
a film is composed of more than just its narrative, as it also needs all that the 
viewer can bring to that narrative. Film needs the consciousness and uncon­
scious of the viewer in order for it to have meaning. Meaning, in this sense, 
is constantly negotiated between viewer and film, and it arises from, and in, 
a state of interplay between conscious forces and unconscious expectations. 
Established film theory has touched on this area, though here we are going 
considerably further in destabilising inscribed narrative meanings and assert­
ing the primacy of the viewer–film relationship as the container which holds 
the meaning of the ‘cinematic vision’. For example, as explored in a previous 

174  Applications
chapter, genre films are predicated on the previous film-going experiences of 
their viewers and, as we will see, this also holds good, albeit in a more general 
psychological sense, for other films too.
Film is its own reality, its own world, and the attention of any possible, con­
ceptual film-being, must be theorised as being part of that world, not separate 
and observational. We are subjective beings, but film seems more fluid in its 
place of intent.
(Frampton, 2006: 46)
Film does not mirror or replicate our human perception of the world in its own 
mechanical and audio-visual terms. Actually, film exceeds the human. In some 
regards at least it is super-human in the ways that it can do so much more than we 
can – we cannot zoom, shift our depth of field, have a split screen. Film can do 
that, with ease, and so much more. Yet at the same time, and this is what Sobchack 
is rightly driving at, in its cinematic devices film reveals how it sees the world. It 
does not replicate how we see the world. Rather, to use a visual metaphor, film 
exposes itself. It is in this lack of concealment, in this act of overexposure, that 
film provides viewers with the basis on which to reflect on their own experiences 
of the world. Films have no option as to what they reveal about themselves – it 
is there on the screen to for us to make of what we will. By contrast, as humans 
we constantly ‘screen’ the extent to which we reveal ourselves in the world. If the 
world is a surface onto which we project ourselves, then we regularly consider the 
degree to which we want to make ourselves public. Of course, the unconscious 
part of ourselves adjusts, shifts and compensates for our conscious decisions. But 
here it is clearly evident that the human body and the film body behave in quite 
different ways, for a central part of our human somatic existence involves the 
enactment of unconscious processes and fantasies.
From a depth psychological perspective, the person who is not at the whim of 
unconscious processes has become a robot – they have, as it were, become a film 
of their own lives in which they live out an overly rational fantasy about human 
existence. Film is different as it is a mechanistic and rationalistic fantasy, and it 
needs to be so if its voice is to be heard in the post-modern condition. It is a dia­
logue that talks to where we are right now. It meets us at the point at which we 
experience our own being, as prescribed by the conditions of post-modernity and 
post-modernist culture. Yet film somehow is also more than that and to understand 
why this is the case it is necessary to add to a phenomenological understanding 
a psychological point of view to clarify why it is that the designation of ‘image’ 
implies much more than the physical image.
Psychologically, while it is quite possible for us to empathise with a view of the 
world because it is similar to our own, it is also the case that we have intense emo­
tional reactions to views of the world because they are different to our own. It is not 
difficult to think of people we might dislike because we believe them to be differ­
ent to ourselves, or because they are actually rather like a part of ourselves that we 

The body: phenomenology and cinema  175
dislike – which admittedly is a slightly different type of difference, but it remains 
a difference nonetheless. In Jungian psychology, such reactions take the form of 
psychological images – these are the fantasy-images that were explored earlier in 
this section, which, as noted, are thought, felt, and embodied and laden with affect. 
While not necessarily actual images, they represent an image that contains the psy­
chological reality of the situation. It follows that the emotional and psychological 
meanings of images do not require something to be similar to us. Instead, images 
require that the context provide sufficient familiarity for us to recognise the image 
as a depiction of our world. The unconscious structures and beliefs that we hold 
about others, and about ourselves, will fill in the representational gaps in often 
surprisingly inaccurate ways. Curiously, it is actually these inaccuracies that can 
reveal a great deal about the psychological reality of what is happening when we 
watch a film. Put another way, ‘misreading’ a film has the potential to be psycho­
logically more instructive than accurately understanding its narrative.
It is not necessary to see a film as constituting, and constituted of, a body as 
we can find meaning in a view of the world that does not in and of itself consider 
itself to be either viewer or viewed. It is hard to see how abstract art demonstrates 
an awareness of a body, for example. It does not offer a changing view of the 
world as its gaze moves around its landscape. Yet, such art is quite capable of 
evoking strong psychological and emotional reactions. An image does not need 
to be representational for us to relate to it – what we do need is our expectation 
that the image in some way pertains to our world, and that it provides a type of 
commentary on it. Film does not need to have a ‘body’ – material or otherwise, in 
order for it to communicate to us psychologically.
The third image
Notwithstanding the above commentary, it is still possible to adopt a broadly phe­
nomenological stance towards the viewing of films. To do so requires shifting 
the critical attention away from the construction of the film itself towards the 
reception of films by their viewers. To help in this investigation a Jungian under­
standing of the psyche can usefully be supplemented with some insights derived 
from phenomenology.
The Jungian model of the psyche is predicated on the assumption that there are 
large tracts of the psyche of which we are unaware. Despite this lack of awareness 
the unconscious part of the psyche still effects and affects our daily lives. As we 
come to understand these subterranean forces we become increasingly conscious 
of them and in due course our intellect is increasingly able to comprehend what 
it is that is happening for us. However, in the Jungian version of the psyche it is 
important to move past this point of intellectual comprehension because a think­
ing and solely conscious understanding of our ourselves can only be partial. In its 
place what comes to matter is an awareness of our felt self in relationship in the 
world. As we saw in the discussion about Merleau-Ponty and cinema, conscious­
ness is an awareness of how we are in the world and it is composed of much 

176  Applications
more than thinking. It is these insights concerning the depth of the psyche and the 
limitations of thinking as means to psychological understanding that underpin a 
Jungian conception of image and specifically the fantasy-image.
In order to explicate the Jungian understanding of image Hockley (2014) devised 
a tripartite structure of the psychological image in the cinematic experience – the 
first image, the second image and the third image. This was an attempt to recon­
cile a Jungian view of image with a phenomenological account of the viewing 
experience. This is not without its problems because, as already noted, phenom­
enology does not see the need for any form of unconscious structuring agency. In 
its place phenomenology uses a more straightforward construction of what there 
is in experience, and what we are either aware of or unaware of. Yet the idea of an 
unconscious with purpose and intent is a pillar of Jungian psychology.
Why then bring these two rather different theories together in the first place? 
The strength of phenomenology in this context rests in its focus on the experience 
of watching a film. The emphasis is not on the narrative of the film itself, though 
of course that does play a role, but is instead on the reception of the film. This is 
significant as one of the curious aspects about watching a film is the very differ­
ent response that two people can have to the same film and it is commonplace for 
people to watch a film together and to have opposing views about it. A possible 
explanation is that one person might be more insightful or knowledgeable about 
films and has therefore seen something, good or bad, that has been missed by the 
other viewer. But what if both viewers are equally knowledgeable and still their 
views are polarised? In such a situation there is the possibility that the film itself 
has triggered something personal in one of the viewers – for example, someone 
who has just been in a car accident might well react negatively to such scenes in 
a film which would be less troubling to the other viewer. This takes us to the nub 
of the issue.
It is highly probable that our individual life experiences and our personal 
psychology interact with films in ways that are deeply unconscious – i.e. finding psy­
chological meanings is a purposive activity – the function of the cinematic vision is 
to open up previously repressed areas of experience with a view to engaging in psy­
chological insight and growth. In so doing we create and negotiate meanings with 
films that reflect our individual qualities. Many of these will be unconscious, and 
we might well find ourselves reacting to films in ways that we had not expected and 
also in ways that are unlooked for and which seem quite puzzling to us. Wherever 
there is a strong outpouring of affect, and whenever a film evokes a strong emo­
tional reaction, that provides the cue to look for unconscious processes. If we find a 
film boring, distasteful, excessive, dull, the most amazing film we have ever seen, 
hilarious, deeply sad, then all these are pointers for us to take time to reflect on 
what might be going on underneath these emotions. It is possible that such reactions 
might be an appropriate and proportionate response to the narrative of the film. But 
it is also possible for our emotional responses to be overwhelming and out of control 
and for them to invade our consciousness, even when the intellectual and thinking 
part of ourselves knows that such responses are disproportionate.

The body: phenomenology and cinema  177
Here then we have the conditions for deploying a Jungian phenomenological 
approach to understanding the personal meanings that a particular film might 
hold for us: we are deeply attached to the film in ways that cannot be explained 
by our rational mind alone; when thinking is not enough and when our feelings 
seem to evade our control. It is then that it is likely that we have been experienc­
ing something that has deep psychological qualities. This is an experience of the 
fantasy-image, with its personal and archetypal aspect that cinema evokes. To 
draw on Don Fredericksen’s (1979) terminology, this is to experience the liminal 
both in the cinematic experience itself and also in our own psyche – indeed, in 
an experience of the fantasy-image the cinematic and the psyche are inextricable.
In the tripartite taxonomy of the image the three categories that are proposed 
are in turn derived from the idea of the intersubjective field. According to psycho­
dynamic theory the intersubjective field is something that constellates between 
client and therapist in the consulting room. The field consists of an ‘image’ that is 
co-created and ‘felt’ to exist in the space between client and therapist. The image 
encapsulates what is happening for the client and is brought into being as a result 
of the therapeutic relationship – as such it approximates to the fantasy-image. It 
therefore is not really descriptive at all but instead it contains an interpretative 
quality as it provides a type of poetic commentary, or insight, into the client’s 
interior world. The suggestion is that something similar happens in the cinematic 
experience, particularly when viewers experience strong emotional responses that 
are unexpected and not proportionate to the narrative of the film itself. The three 
images I identify can be either treated separately or, as is more likely, seen as 
operating at the same time, perhaps with different degrees of emphasis – it is as 
though the viewer looks through these images to the cinema screen but the inten­
sity varies as the relative strength of each image changes.
The first image is the most straightforward and is concerned with the image 
on screen itself. This is the most conscious of the three images, and here intel­
lect and aesthetic sensibility are of the utmost help in coming to understand the 
effectiveness of how a film communicates. Focusing on this image, the viewer’s 
understanding of the film comes from a detailed reading of its images, both visual 
and aural. This is appreciating the film at the level of description. Noting, for 
example, such elements as the effectiveness of the lighting, camerawork, mise-
en-scène, acting and so forth. In so doing, an aesthetic orientation to the film is 
cultivated in which it becomes possible to become aware of what might otherwise 
go unnoticed in the technical and artistic rendering of the film’s narrative.
The second image involves the activity of seeking to interpret and understand 
films. While this is largely a conscious activity it also has a substantial uncon­
scious component. The activity of interpretation is both intellectual and intuitive 
in as much as it incorporates an aesthetic sensibility. It follows that the inter­
pretation of a film is something that requires the activity of both consciousness 
and the unconscious. Here, the viewer engages with the film conceptually yet is 
also sensitive to what it is that is being felt when the film is being watched. In so 
doing an understanding of the film is formed concerning its narrative and the way 

178  Applications
meaning is encoded in its structure – shooting, editing, lighting etc. The object 
of understanding is the film and the approach is one of conscious hermeneutic 
activity that deconstructs the film’s diegetic and representational aspects. This 
constitutes the second image as it is the image that we create in our mind of what 
the film is about, of what the film is trying to explore and how we understand it. 
Here we draw on our own subjectivity, our intuitive capacity and our ability to 
empathise with the on-screen characters to help in understanding the film. In the 
creation of the second image we pay particular attention to use of formal narrative 
devices such as metaphor, symbol and allegory in the film. We interpret the mean­
ing behind the editing, the framing and lighting etc. For example we might notice 
how music in the film reinforces the emotions of the scene, or subverts them, or 
how it alludes to emotions and characters other than those on the screen, to other 
genres or how it makes extra-textual references.
This brings us to the third image, but first a note of caution. It would be a mis­
take to see these three images in a hierarchical relationship as each image has an 
important role to play in appreciating and understanding the psychology of the 
cinematic experience, as each image needs the other. For example, without an 
appreciation of description it is hard to unpick what is happening in an experience 
of the third image, or in some particular, partial and personal interpretation based 
on the second image. Equally, a second image interpretation might point the way 
to something that is latent in the interpretation that has within it a more uncon­
scious aspect. The metaphor of the three images makes it possible to shift register 
between the aesthetic, the interpretive and the experiential while allowing for the 
simultaneous experience of all three. In some ways the idea of a third image might 
seem like a curious one, but the proposition is that the psychological meaning of 
an image lies not in its denotative qualities but arises from the interaction between 
an individual psyche and the image itself. It is, if you will, a type of psychological 
connotation that grows from the original image. To explain this idea it is helpful to 
draw on a piece of psychotherapy thinking that is concerned with the clinical set­
ting, namely transference and countertransference.
There is a vast clinical literature on this complicated subject. In its simplest 
form transference involves the transferring of the client’s previous feelings 
and beliefs onto the figure of the therapist. It is as though the therapist comes 
to stand for someone significant from an earlier period in the client’s life – 
typically, though not always, a parental figure. In one sense, this is a fairly 
unproblematic idea and it is quite possible to see how such a situation might 
arise. However, the theory goes a couple of steps further in suggesting that the 
emotions that related to the previous relationship are transferred onto and into 
the therapist. The work of the therapist is to attend to these feelings and to offer 
them back to the client in a meaningful form. What is odd about this is that while 
it is a cornerstone of psychodynamic work, very little is known about how such 
feelings leave the client and find their way into the therapist. Putting this prob­
lem to one side for the moment, it is clearly important that the therapist is able 
to distinguish between his or her feelings and those that belong to the client. 

The body: phenomenology and cinema  179
When some personal psychological disturbance happens to the therapist as a 
result of the client’s material this is termed ‘countertransference’.
When client and therapist are working particularly well, or to use a more psy­
chodynamic language, when they are attuned, there can be a strong sense that 
the meaning of what the client is talking about, as mutually understood, constel­
lates as a fantasy-image in the space between client and therapist. It is as though 
something momentarily comes to fill the inter-subjective space. These images are 
hard to understand, momentary and yet palpable too – they seem to encapsulate a 
shared understanding through a powerful, affect-laden bond.
The suggestion is that something similar can also happen in the cinema. To 
transpose the clinical setting to the cinema, the inter-subjective space is now the 
distance between the screen and the viewer and the third image comes to fill this 
gap. If this is so it would give one explanation of those moments when we find 
ourselves powerfully moved by a film, without knowing why. Such an under­
standing gives a different perspective on why it is that one person can be obsessed 
by a movie while it leaves others cold – at an unconscious level the viewer and the 
film become attuned. The contention is that personal psychological relationships 
with films are much more significant and prevalent than is often recognised.
It might seem that the third image is analogous to the process of suture, in 
which the unconscious of the viewer is stitched into the diegetic reality of the 
film. However, that is not the case, as the viewer forms an individual relationship 
with the film that might or might not have much to do with the actual narrative 
or technical construction of the film. This is not a process of being stitched into 
an imaginary world, rather the third image involves the creation of a new and 
personalised understanding of the film. In this way, phenomenologically, no two 
people have the same relationship or understanding of a film, and every screen­
ing of film is a fresh and potentially revelatory experience. It is important to also 
remember that in this taxonomy the three images work in consort with each other. 
Additionally, it is also worth underscoring such personal relationships and expe­
riences of the third image do not alter the actual narrative meaning of the film, 
which belongs, primarily, in the first and second images. What the third image 
helps to explain are those powerful emotional reactions we can have to films, 
which appear to be a complete mystery to others.
In summary, Jung’s conception of the psychological or fantasy-image is 
instructive in demonstrating how it is possible to adopt a fresh approach to under­
standing the cinematic experience. When the look of the eye and look of the 
camera are combined in the cinematic vision, it opens up the sense of difference 
and space between the two looks. Put another way, a new meaning arises from the 
space between viewer and screen – a meaning that is not predicated on similarity 
and representation but on difference and personal experience. Here, the personal 
meanings that arise from watching a film are quite often related to psychological 
difference – we are moved by seeing a life on screen that is quite unlike our own. 
Sometimes it offers a vision of a better and more contented life, while at other 
times there is relief and solace is being grateful that our life is not as tragic as 

180  Applications
the one being shown. However, more pertinent are those unlooked for and unex­
pected outpourings of affect that suggest the existence of some forgotten trauma 
or psychological complex that has been bought back to life through the passage of 
a film’s images and sounds.
Both the phenomenological perspective and the Jungian regard meaning as a 
complicated process in which relationship is central. While the phenomenologi­
cal position as outlined and explored particularly by Sobchack, but also others, 
remains interesting, it nonetheless possesses a level of complexity that seems to 
add little to aid in understanding what it is that happens when we watch films. 
Instead, the much more straightforward taxonomy of the first, second and third 
image suggests a different way to understand the emotional and psychological 
aspects of the cinematic experience. In particular it is third image moments that 
provide a useful example of just what Jung had in mind when he described how 
images encapsulate a fantasy that expresses the psychological reality of an indi­
vidual’s situation. The unconscious finds in films a way to express itself and in 
so doing to find individualised meanings with the collective commercial products 
that are fiction films. Adopting such an approach allows viewers and film theo­
rists alike to attend to their emotional reactions to films with a degree of fidelity 
and veracity that is not offered by other approaches. In seeing how the two looks 
of cinema constellate unconscious psychological meanings we allow ourselves 
to find profound psychological meanings in the seemingly mundane activity of 
watching a film – we only need to watch with care and attention, and to watch 
closely, to see what we have never seen before – that psychologically the film 
lives in us, as much as we in it.

Bibliography
Altman, Rick (1984) ‘A Semantic/Syntactic Approach to Genre’, The Cinema Journal, 23, 
3 (Spring): 6–18.
Altman, Rick (1999) Film/Genre, London: British Film Institute.
Apperson, Virginia and Beebe, John (2008) The Presence of the Feminine in Film, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Ashton, Paul and Bloch, Stephen (eds) (2010) Music and Psyche: Contemporary 
Psychoanalytic Explorations, New Orleans, LA: Spring Journal Books.
Babcock-Abrahams, B. (1975) ‘A Tolerated Margin of the Mess: The Trickster and His 
Tales Reconsidered’, Journal of the Folklore Institute, 11: 147–186.
Barker, Jennifer (2009) The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience, Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
Barthes, Roland (1977) Image, Music, Text, trans. S. Heath, London: Fontana.
Bassil-Morozow, Helena (2010) Tim Burton: The Monster and the Crowd, London: 
Routledge.
Bassil-Morozow, Helena (2012) The Trickster in Contemporary Film, Hove, UK: 
Routledge.
Bassil-Morozow, Helena (2014) The Trickster and the System: Identity and Agency in 
Contemporary Society, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Bateson, Gregory (1936) Naven: A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a Composite 
Picture of the Culture of a New Guinea Tribe Drawn from Three Points of View, 
Chicago, IL: Stanford University Press.
Baudrillard, Jean (1968; 2005) The System of Objects, London and New York: Verso.
Baudrillard, Jean (1981; 2000) Simulacra and Simulation, London: Routledge.
Baudry, Jean-Louis (1986) ‘Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic Apparatus’, 
in P. Rosen (ed.), Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A Film Theory Reader, New York: 
Columbia University Press, pp. 286–299.
Baumlin, James S., Baumlin, Tita French and Jensen, George H. (2004) Post-Jungian 
Criticism: Theory and Practice, New York: State University of New York Press.
Beebe, John (2011) ‘The Wizard of Oz: A Vision of Development in the American 
Political Psyche’, in Christopher Hauke and Luke Hockley (eds), Jung and Film II: 
The Return, Hove UK: Routledge, pp. 302–327.
Berger, John (1977) Ways of Seeing, Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Berry, Sarah (1999) ‘Genre’, in Toby Miller and Robert Stam (eds), A Companion to Film 
Theory, London: Blackwell, pp. 25–44.

182  Bibliography
Bishop, Paul (2009) Analytical Psychology and German Classical Aesthetics: Goethe, 
Schiller and Jung, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Bordwell, David and Thompson, Kristen (2003) Film Art: An Introduction, New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Botting, Fred (1995; 2013) Gothic, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1977; 2002) Outline of a Theory of Practice, London: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1992; 2003) The Logic of Practice, Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Branson, Clark (1987) Howard Hawks: A Jungian Study, Santa Barbara, CA: Capra Press.
Bravin, Jess (2015) ‘George Miller Returns to His Personal Wasteland in “Mad Max: Fury 
Road”’, Wall Street Journal Blog, http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2015/05/14/george-
miller-returns-to-his-personal-wasteland-in-mad-max-fury-road/ [accessed May 2015].
Brook, Heather (2015) ‘Engaging Marriage: Rom Coms and Fairy Tale Endings’, in Luke 
Hockley and Nadi Fadina (eds), The Happiness Illusion: How the Media Sold Us a 
Fairytale, Hove, UK: Routledge, pp. 145–161.
Buscombe, Edward (1977) ‘The Idea of Genre in American Cinema’, in Barry Grant (ed.), 
Film Genre: Theory and Criticism, Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, pp. 24–38.
Campbell, Joseph (1959) The Masks of Gods: Primitive Mythology, New York: Viking.
Campbell, Joseph (1968; 2008) The Hero with a Thousand Faces, Novato, CA: New 
World Library.
Carter, Angela (1995; 2012) The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories, London: Random 
House.
Carter, Matthew (2014) Myth of the Western: New Perspectives on Hollywood’s Frontier 
Narrative, Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
Casebier, Allan (1991) Film and Phenomenology, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
Caughie, John (ed.) (1981) Theories of Authorship: A Reader, London: British Film Institute.
Cawelti, John (1999) The Six Gun Mystique Sequel, Bowling Green, OH: Popular Press.
Chapman, Brenda (2012) ‘Stand up for Yourself, and Mentor Others’, The New York Times, 
14 August, http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/08/14/how-can-women-gain-
influence-in-hollywood/stand-up-for-yourself-and-mentor-others [accessed October 2016].
Chopra-Grant, Mike (2006) Hollywood Genres and Postwar America: Masculinity, Family 
and Nation in Popular Movies and Film Noir, London: I. B. Tauris.
Copjec, Joan (1988) ‘India Song/Son Nom de Venise dans Calcutta Desert: The Compulsion 
to Repeat’, in Constance Penley (ed.), Feminism and Film Theory, London and New 
York: BFI and Routledge, pp. 229–243.
Davies, Oliver (2004) ‘Theorizing Writerly Creativity: Jung with Lacan?’, in James 
S. Baumlin, Tita French Baumlin and George H. Jensen (eds), Post-Jungian Criticism: 
Theory and Practice, New York: State University of New York Press, pp. 55–75.
Deleuze, Gilles (2005) Cinema 2, London: Continuum.
Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (1984) Anti-Oedipus, London: Continuum.
Doane, Mary Ann (1988) ‘Woman’s Stake: Filming the Female Body’, in Constance 
Penley (ed.), Feminism and Film Theory, London and New York: BFI and Routledge, 
pp. 216–228.
Dorje, Rinjing (1997) Tales of Uncle Tompa, Barrytown, NY: Station Hill Arts.
Doty, W. (1993) ‘A Lifetime of Trouble-Making: Hermes as a Trickster’, in W. J. Hynes 
and W. Doty (eds), Mythical Trickster Figures: Contours, Contexts and Criticisms, 
Tuscaloosa, AL and London: University of Alabama Press, pp. 46–65.

Bibliography  183
Eagleton, Terry (1996; 1997) The Illusions of Postmodernism, Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Eagleton, Terry (2003) After Theory, London: Allen Lane and Penguin.
Easterling, P. E and Hall, Edith (2002) Greek and Roman Actors: Aspects of the Ancient 
Profession, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, Jack (2000) John Grierson: Life, Contributions, Influence, Carbondale and 
Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Fellini, Frederick (2007) The Book of Dreams, Milan: RCS, Libri Spa.
Fireman, G., McVay, T., Flanagan, O. and Duke, J. (2003) Narrative and Consciousness: 
Literature, Psychology and the Brain, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Foley, Malcolm and O’Donnell, Hugh (eds) (2009) Treat or Trick?: Halloween in a 
Globalising World, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Frampton, Daniel (2006) Filmosophy, New York: Columbia University Press.
Fredericksen, Don (1979) ‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film, Part One’, Quarterly Review of Film 
Studies, 4, 2: 167–192.
Fredericksen, Don (1980) ‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film, Part Two’, Quarterly Review of Film 
Studies, 5, 4: 459–479.
Fredericksen, Don (2001) ‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film’, in Ian Alister and Christopher Hauke 
(eds), Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on the Moving Image, London: Routledge, 
pp. 17–55. [Originally published as two essays in the Quarterly Review of Film Studies 
(1979, 1980).]
Fredericksen, Don (2005; 2012) Bergman’s Persona, Poznan, Poland: Wydawnictwo Naukowe 
UAM.
Fredericksen, Don (2011) ‘Jungian Film Studies: The Corruption of Consciousness and the 
Nurturing of Psychological Life’, in Christopher Hauke and Luke Hockley (eds), Jung 
and Film II: The Return, Hove UK: Routledge, pp. 99–108.
Freud, Sigmund (1960; 2001) ‘On Narcissism: An Introduction’, in J. Strachey (ed. and 
trans.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, 
Vol. 14, London: Vintage, pp. 67–102.
Freud, Sigmund (1960; 2001) ‘Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of His Childhood’, in 
J. Strachey (ed. and trans.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works 
of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 11, London: Vintage, pp. 59–139.
Freud, Sigmund (1976) The Interpretation of Dreams, The Pelican Freud Library, Vol. 4, 
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Fuchs, Thomas (2012) ‘Body Memory and the Unconscious’, in D. Lohmar and J. Brudzińska 
(eds), Founding Psychoanalysis Phenomenologically: Phenomenological Theory of 
Subjectivity and the Psychoanalytic Experience, London: Springer, pp. 69–82.
Gane, Mike (1993) Baudrillard Live: Selected Interviews, London: Routledge.
Gardner, Leslie and Hockley, Luke (2011) House: The Wounded Healer on Television, 
London: Routledge.
Geertz, Clifford (1964) ‘Ideology as a Cultural System’, in D. Apter (ed.), Ideology and 
Discontent, New York: The Free Press of Glencoe, pp. 47–76.
Geertz, Clifford (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures, London: Hutchinson.
Genette, Gérard (1982) Palimpsestes: La Littérature au second degré, Paris: Seuil.
Gilbert, Gerard (2011) ‘The Killing: When Celibacy and Sleuthing Make for a Fatal 
Attraction’, The Independent, 23 November.
Grant, Barry (ed.) (1986) Film Genre Reader, Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Hauke, Christopher (2000) Jung and the Postmodern: The Interpretation of Realities, 
London and Philadelphia, PA: Routledge.

184  Bibliography
Hauke, Christopher (2001) ‘“Let’s Go Back to Finding Out Who We Are”: Men, 
Unheimlich and Returning Home in the Films of Steven Spielberg’, in Christopher 
Hauke and Ian Alister (eds), Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on the Moving Image, 
Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge, pp. 151–174.
Hauke, Christopher (2005) Human Being Human: Culture and the Soul, Hove, UK: 
Routledge.
Hauke, Christopher (2014) Visible Mind: Movies, Modernity and the Unconscious, Hove, 
UK: Routledge.
Hauke, Christopher and Alister, Ian (eds) (2001) Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on 
the Moving Image, Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge.
Hauke, Christopher and Hockley, Luke (eds) (2011) Jung and Film II: The Return, Hove 
UK: Routledge.
Hillman, James (1975; 1992) Re-Visioning Psychology, New York: Harper Perennial.
Hillman, James (1990a) ‘Imaginal Practice: Greeting the Angel’, in The Essential James 
Hillman: A Blue Fire, Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge, pp. 50–69.
Hillman, James (1990b) ‘Therapy: Fictions and Epiphanies’, in The Essential James 
Hillman: A Blue Fire, Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge, pp. 71–92.
Hillman, James (1998) The Myth of Analysis: Three Essays in Archetypal Psychology, 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Hockley, Luke (2001a) ‘Film Noir: Archetypes or Stereotypes’, in Christopher Hauke and 
Ian Alister (eds), Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on the Moving Image, Hove, UK: 
Brunner-Routledge, pp. 177–193.
Hockley, Luke (2001b) Cinematic Projections: The Analytical Psychology of C. G. Jung 
and Film Theory, London: University of Luton Press.
Hockley, Luke (2007) Frames of Mind: A Post-Jungian Look at Cinema, Television and 
Technology, Bristol, UK and Chicago, IL: Intellect.
Hockley, Luke (2014) Somatic Cinema: The Relationship between the Body and Screen, 
Hove, UK: Routledge.
Hockley, Luke and Fadina, Nadi (eds) (2015) The Happiness Illusion: How the Media Sold 
Us a Fairytale, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Homer, Sean (2004) Jacques Lacan, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Izod, John (1992) The Films of Nicolas Roeg: Myth and Mind, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Izod, John (2001) Myth, Mind and the Screen: Understanding the Heroes of Our Time, 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Izod, John (2006) Screen, Culture, Psyche: A Post-Jungian Approach to Working with the 
Audience, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Izod, John and Dovalis, Joanna (2015) Cinema as Therapy: Grief and Transformational 
Film, London: Routledge.
Jacobi, Jolande (1942; 1973) The Psychology of C. G. Jung, 8th edition, trans. Ralph 
Manheim, New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
Jacobi, Jolande (ed.) (1953) Psychological Reflections: An Anthology of the Writings of C. 
G. Jung, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Jacobi, Jolande (1964) ‘Symbols in an Individual Analysis’, in Carl Gustav Jung and 
Marie-Louise von Franz (eds), Man and His Symbols, London: Picador, pp. 323–374.
Jacoby, Mario (1994; 1996) Shame and the Origins of Self-Esteem, London: Routledge.
Jacoby, Mario (2010) Individuation and Narcissism, Hove, UK: Routledge.
Jameson, Frederic (2009) The Cultural Turn: Selected Writings on the Postmodern, 
1983–1998, London: Verso.

Bibliography  185
Jung, Carl Gustav (1963; 1995) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, London: Fontana.
Jung, Carl Gustav and von Franz, M.-L. (eds) (1964; 1978) Man and His Symbols, London: 
Picador.
Kerényi, Karl (1956; 1972) ‘The Trickster in Relation to Greek Mythology’, in Paul Radin, 
The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology, New York: Schocken Books, 
pp. 171–192.
Kitses, J. (2007) Horizons West: The Western from John Ford to Clint Eastwood, London: 
British Film Institute.
Kitses, Jim and Rickman, Gregg (1998) The Western Reader, New York: Limelight 
Editions.
Lacan, Jacques (1977) Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan, London: Routledge.
Lacan, Jacques (1998) The Seminar of Jacques Lacan. Book XX: On Feminine Sexuality: 
The Limits of Love and Knowledge, New York: W. W. Norton and Company.
Laplanche, Jean and Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (1988) The Language of Psychoanalysis, 
London: Karnac Books.
Latham, Michaela, ‘Quentin Tarantino. Kill Bill: Volume 1. Interview’, BBC Website, 6 
October 2003.
Llewellyn Smith, Julia (2014) ‘Michael Bond: “I Was Worried That I’d Let Paddington 
down. . .”’, The Telegraph, 23 November.
Luciano, Patrik (1987) Them or Us: Archetypal Interpretation of Fifties Alien Invasion 
Films, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
McArthur, Colin (1992) The Casablanca File, London: John Libbey.
McWhirter, Andrew (2014) ‘Film Review: The Matrix’, International Journal of Jungian 
Studies, 6, 3: 268–274.
Marks, Laura (2000) The Skin of Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment and the Senses, 
Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1964) ‘The Film and the New Psychology’, in Sense and Non-
Sense, trans. H. L. Dreyfus and P. A. Dreyfus, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University 
Press, pp. 48–60.
Metz, Christian (1974) Film Language: A Semiotics of the Cinema, New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Metz, Christian (1977; 1982) The Imaginary Signifier: Psychoanalysis and Cinema, 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Miller, Catriona (2009) ‘Dracula Was a Woman’, in Hugh O’Donnell and Malcolm Foley 
(eds), Treat or Trick?: Halloween in a Globalising World, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing, pp. 227–237.
Miller, Catriona (2011a) ‘“I Feel Like a Failure”: In-House Feminism’, in Leslie Gardner 
and Luke Hockley (eds), House: The Wounded Healer on Television, London: 
Routledge, pp. 188–203.
Miller, Catriona (2011b) ‘Twilight: Discourse Theory and Jung’, in Christopher Hauke 
and Luke Hockley (eds), Jung and Film II: The Return, London: Routledge, 185–205.
Miller, Toby and Stam, Robert (1999) A Companion to Film Theory, London: Blackwell.
Moore, Thomas (ed.) (1990) The Essential James Hillman: A Blue Fire, Hove, UK: 
Brunner-Routledge.
Morris, Colin (1972; 2004) The Discovery of the Individual, Toronto, ON and London: 
University of Toronto Press.
Mulvey, Laura (1975) ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’, Screen, 16, 3 (Autumn): 
6–18.

186  Bibliography
Mulvey, Laura (1995) ‘The Myth of Pandora: A Psychoanalytic Approach’, in Laura 
Pietropaolo and Ada Testaferri (eds), Feminisms in the Cinema, Bloomington and 
Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. 3–19.
Mulvey, Laura (2013) ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’, in Constance Penley (ed.), 
Feminism and Film Theory, London and New York: BFI and Routledge, pp. 57–68.
Murdock, Maureen (1990; 2013) The Heroine’s Journey: Woman’s Quest for Wholeness, 
Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Nagari, Benjamin (2016) Music as Image: Analytical Psychology and Music in Film, 
Hove, UK: Routledge.
Neale, Steve (1990) ‘Questions of Genre’, Screen, 31, 1: 45–66.
Neumann, Erich (1949; 1969) Depth Psychology and a New Ethics, trans. Eugene Rolfe, 
London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Neumann, Erich (1949; 1989) The Origins and History of Consciousness, London: Karnac 
Books.
Neumann, Erich (1959; 1974) Art and the Creative Unconscious: Four Essays, Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Neumann, Erich (2002) The Child: Structure and Dynamics of the Nascent Personality, 
London: Karnac Books.
NRSV (New Revised Standard Version) (1995) The Holy Bible with Apocrypha: Anglicized 
Edition, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Nünning, V., Rupp, J. and Ahn, G. (2013) Ritual and Narrative: Theoretical Explorations 
and Historical Case Studies, Berlin: Transcript Verlag.
Penley, Constance (1988) Feminism and Film Theory, London and New York: Routledge.
Philipson, Morris (1963) An Outline of Jungian Aesthetics, Boston, MA: Sigo Press.
Radin, Paul (1956; 1972) The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology, New 
York: Schocken Books.
Rich, Katey (2015) ‘Mad Max: Fury Road Director George Miller: “I Can’t Help but Be a 
Feminist”’, Vanity Fair, 14 May.
Ronnberg, Ami (ed. in chief) and Martin, K. (ed.) (2010) The Book of Symbols: Reflections 
on Archetypal Images, Cologne: Taschen.
Rosen, P. (ed.) (1986) Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A Film Theory Reader, New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Rowland, Susan (2011) ‘The Nature of Adaptation: Myth and the Feminine Gaze in Ang 
Lee’s Sense and Sensibility’, in Christopher Hauke and Luke Hockley (eds), Jung and 
Film II: The Return, London: Routledge, pp. 148–163.
Runcie, Charlotte (2014) ‘Game of Thrones: Nowhere Else on TV Do You Get Women 
This Good’, The Telegraph, 15 April.
Salter, Jessica (2013) ‘Game of Thrones: Interview with George RR Martin’, The 
Telegraph, 25 March.
Salter, Jessica (2013) ‘Game of Thrones’s George RR Martin: “I’m a Feminist at Heart”’, 
The Telegraph, 1 April.
Samuels, Andrew (1985) Jung and the Post-Jungians, London: Routledge.
Samuels, Andrew (1993) The Political Psyche, London: Routledge.
Samuels, Andrew (2001) Politics on the Couch: Citizenship and the Internal Life, London: 
Karnac Books.
Samuels, Andrew (2015) Passions, Persons, Psychotherapy, Politics: The Selected Works 
of Andrew Samuels, London: Routledge.

Bibliography  187
Sarris, Andrew (1968) The American Cinema: Directors and Directions 1929–1968, 
London: Da Capo Press.
Segrave, Kerry (1997) American Films Abroad: Hollywood’s Domination of the World’s 
Movie Screens, Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Shaviro, Steven (1993) The Cinematic Body, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Shoard, Catherine (2015) ‘Charlize Theron on Mad Max: “We Live in a Very Toxic 
World”’, The Guardian, 14 May.
Silver, Alain and Ursini, James (eds) (1999) Film Noir Reader, New York: Limelight Editions.
Silverman, Kaja (1988) The Acoustic Mirror: The Female Voice in Psychoanalysis and 
Cinema, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Singh, G. (2014a) ‘Recognition and the Image of Mastery as Themes in Black Mirror 
(Channel 4, 2011–present): An Eco-Jungian Approach to “Always-on” Culture’, 
International Journal of Jungian Studies, 6, 2: 120–132.
Singh, G. (2014b) Feeling Film: Affect and Authenticity in Popular Cinema. Hove, UK: 
Routledge.
Skal, David (1993) The Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror, London: Plexus.
Sobchack, Vivian (1992) The Address of the Eye: A Phenomenology of Film Experience, 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sobchack, Vivian (2004) Carnal Thoughts: Embodiment and Moving Image Culture, 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Stam, Robert (2000) ‘Introduction’, in Robert Stam and Toby Miller (eds), Film and 
Theory: An Anthology, London: Blackwell, pp. 1–6.
Stam, Robert and Flitterman-Lewis, Burgoyne (1992) New Vocabularies in Film Semiotics: 
Structuralism, Post-Structuralism and Beyond, London: Routledge.
Stam, Robert and Miller, Toby (eds) (2000) Film and Theory: An Anthology, London: 
Blackwell.
Stevens, Anthony (1990) On Jung, London: Routledge.
Strachey, J. (ed. and trans.) (1960; 2001) The Standard Edition of the Complete 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, London: Vintage.
Tannen, Ricki Stefanie (2007) The Female Trickster: The Mask That Reveals, London: 
Routledge.
Tarkovsky, Andrey (2008) Sculpting in Time: Reflections on the Cinema, Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press.
Tomashevsky, B. (1925) Teoriya literatury. Poetika, Moscow and Leningrad: Krug. 
[Reprint: Letchworth, 1971].
Turner, Victor (1969; 2009) The Ritual Process, New Brunswick, NJ and London: Aldine 
Transaction.
Turner, Victor (1974) Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors: Symbolic Action in Human Society, 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Turner, Victor (1975) Revelation and Divination in Ndemby Ritual, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Turner, Victor (1979) Process, Performance and Pilgrimage, New Delhi: Naurang Rai.
Turner, Victor (1992) Blazing the Trail: Way Marks in the Exploration of Symbols, Tucson, 
AZ and London: The University of Arizona Press.
Van Gennep, Arnold (1909; 2004) The Rites of Passage, London: Routledge.
Vogler, Christopher (1998; 2007) The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers, 
London: Pan.

188  Bibliography
Von Franz, Marie-Louise (1964) ‘The Process of Individuation’, in Carl Gustav Jung and 
Marie-Louise von Franz (eds), Man and His Symbols, London: Picador, pp. 159–254.
Von Franz, Marie-Louise (1970; 1973) An Introduction to the Interpretation of Fairytales, 
Zurich: Spring Publications.
Waddell, Terrie (2006) Mis/takes: Archetype, Myth and Identity in Screen Fiction, Hove, 
UK and New York: Routledge.
Waddell, Terrie (2009) Wild/Lives: Trickster, Place and Liminality on Screen, Hove, UK: 
Routledge.
Walker, Stephen F. (2002) Jung and the Jungians on Myth, New York and Hove, UK: 
Routledge.
Welsford, Enid (1936) The Fool: His Social and Literary History, London: Faber and Faber.
Willeford, William (1969) The Fool and His Sceptre: A Study in Clowns and Jesters and 
Their Audience, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Wright, Basil (1948) The Use of the Film, Oxford: Bodley Head.
Wright, Basil (1976) The Long View: An International History of Cinema, London: Paladin.
Wright, Will (1977) Six-Guns and Society: A Structural Study, Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Wu, Cheng’en (1590; 1993) Journey to the West, Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.
Young-Eisendrath, Polly and Dawson, Terence (eds) (1997) The Cambridge Companion to 
Jung, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Television programmes
BBC Newsnight, 1 November 2011.

List of names
8½ (Fellini)  112
Absolutely Fabulous (Saunders/BBC)  19
The Alamo (Wayne)  129
Alice in Wonderland (Burton)  43, 160, 
161–2
Alien franchise (Scott)  45
Alien (Scott)  119–20, 160
Apocalypse Now (Coppola)  130
The Avengers (Whedon)  58
Bad Timing (Roeg)  114
Batman (Burton)  20, 34
Batman Returns (Burton)  20, 34
Beauty and the Beast (Trousdale and 
Wise)  162
Beseiged (Bertolucci)  17
Big Eyes (Burton)  43
The Biggest Loser (NBC)  19
Birdman (Iñárritu)  33, 34
Blade Runner (Scott)  126, 127
Brave (Chapman and Andrews)  162–3
The Bridge (Rosenfeldt)  160, 165
Buffy the Vampire Slayer 160
Casablanca (Curtiz)  122–3, 128
Deadwood (Milch/HBO)  19
Don’t Look Now (Roeg)  114
The Dreamers (Bertolucci)  17
Dumb and Dumber (Farrelly brothers)  20
Edge of Tomorrow (Liman)  45
Edward Scissorhands (Burton)  128
Eyes Wide Shut (Kubrick)  17
Fight Club (Fincher)  21, 40
Forbrydelsen (The Killing) 
(Sveistrup)  160, 164
Game of Thrones (Benioff and Weiss/
HBO)  160, 165–6
G.I. Jane (Scott)  160
Good Morning Vietnam (Levinson)  130
Grizzly Man (Herzog)  19
Groundhog Day (Ramis)  21
House (Attanasio/Fox)  22–3
Illumination (Zanussi)  112
Inception (Nolan)  128
Independence Day (Emmerich)  45
Inglourious Basterds (Tarantino)  130
Interstellar (Nolan)  58
Jessica Jones (Netflix)  160
Kick-Ass (Vaughn)  33, 34
Kill Bill (Tarantino)  159, 160–1
La Femme Nikita 160
Lara Croft:Tomb Raider (West)  159
The Little Mermaid (Disney)  163
The Lives of Others (von 
Donnersmarck)  17
Lost (Lieber, Abrams, Lindelof/ABC)  19
Mad Max: Fury Road (Miller)  35, 58, 
160, 163–4
Mad Max tetralogy (Miller)  34–5
The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance 
(Ford)  128
Mars Attacks! (Burton)  45, 47
The Mask (Russell)  20
The Matrix trilogy (Wachowskis)  23, 58, 159
Men in Black franchise (Sonnenfeld)  47
Millenium series (various)  159
The Mirror (Tarkovsky)  85–92
My Stepmother is an Alien (Benjamin)  47

190  List of names
Nikita 160
Notorious (Hitchcock)  17
Nymphomaniac (Von Trier)  92–6
Operation Pacific (Waggner)  129
Orange is the New Black (Netflix)  160
The Others (Amenabar)  19
Paddington (King)  102–5
Paul (Mottola)  47
Persona (Bergman)  112
Play It Again Sam (Allen)  122
Police Academy 4 (Drake)  77
Psycho (Hitchcock)  156–9
Rear Window (Hitchcock)  155–6
Resident Evil series (various)  58
Rio Bravo (Hawks)  128
Sands of Iwo Jima (Dwan)  129
The Searchers (Ford)  128
Silence of the Lambs (Demme)  160
SIMONE (Niccol)  17
Singin’ in the Rain (Donen)  143
Sleeping Beauty (Disney)  163
Snow White and the Seven Dwarves 
(Disney)  163
Solaris (Soderbergh)  19
Soldier Blue (Nelson)  134
Song of Ceylon (Wright)  77, 78–9, 112
The Sopranos (Chase/HBO)  19
Spaceballs (Brooks)  47
Star Wars (Lucas)  42, 148
Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
(Abrams)  160
Stealing Beauty (Bertolucci)  17
The Strange Little Cat (Das merkwürdige 
Kätzchen) (Zürcher)  108
Tangled (Disney)  163
That Obscure Object of Desire 
(Buñuel)  141–2
Track 29 (Roeg)  114
Trancers (Future Cop)  (Band)  126
Trip to the Moon (Méliès)  45
Un Chien Andalou (Buñuel and Dali)  5
Vertigo (Hitchcock)  155
War of the Worlds (Spielberg)  45, 58
The Wings of Eagles (Ford)  129
The Wizard of Oz (Fleming)  149–51
Xena: Warrior Princess  160
The X-Files (Carter/Fox)  19
Yes Man (Reed)  20

Index
abaissement du niveau mental 98
abandonment motif 43
academics, personal contexts 113
The Acoustic Mirror (Silverman) 143
activity – passivity dichotomy 140
The Address of the Eye (Sobchack) 170
agency: of individual 113; of psyche 167
alchemy 60–2; reverse 74; watching 
film 76
Alice 161–2
Alice in Wonderland (Carroll) 149–50
the alien 45–7
alien invasion 45; comedies 47
Althusser, L. 129
Altman, R. 121, 130
amplification 77–8, 119, 126–9; 
intertextuality as 127; through 
marketing 127–8
Analytical Psychology: contribution to 
film theory 124; as ideology 123
analytical tools 7–8
androcentrism 148
anima 152
anima, angel/whore 152
anima/animus 17, 41, 151–3; as false 
standards 156; male reactions to 155–6
animals, as tricksters 103
animus 153–4
apparatus theory 85, 96–9
application of Jungian theory 15–26
archetypal images 38, 54
archetypal literalism 16–17
archetypal psychology 73–6
archetype theory 4; and genre theory 120
archetypes 7, 37–47; the alien 45–7; 
anima 152; anima/animus 17, 41, 
151–3, 155–6; animus 153–4; the 
child 19–20, 42–4, 113; in collective 
unconscious 29; and culture 38; the 
daughter 92–6; as false standards 
156; as genres 122; the mother 
85–92, 156; as narrative framework 
27–8; numinous effect 38; order of 39; 
persona 128–9; popular use of term 
38; role in individuation 37; the Self 
44–5; the shadow 39; similarity to 
genres 135; structural makeup 125–6; 
the trickster 3, 18–19, 20, 44, 99–105; 
Vogler’s use of 48; wise old man/wise 
old woman 41–2
art, pleasure from 168
Asa Nisi Masa motif 112
attunement 179
audiences: as co-creators of meaning 119, 
123, 125, 173, 179–80; expectations 
119–20; mutual reliance with genres 
123; relationship with films 23–4
auteur: defining 108–11; myth of 108–9; 
use of term 108
auteur theory 3–4, 106–8, 118–19
auteurs: and collective appeal 117; 
concerns of 116; as distinct from 
metteur en scène 109–10; as father 
115–17; personal vision 116, 117
authors, construction of 115
babies, uroboric state 94
Bachofen, J.J. 158–9
Barker, J. 169
barriers, absence of 31
Barthes, R. 64, 118
Bassil-Morozow, H. 19–20, 53, 112–13
Bates, Mrs. 158–9
Bates, Norman 156–9
Bateson, G. 101
Batman 33

192  Index
Baudrillard, J. 139–40
Baudry, J.-L. 10, 97–8, 107
Beebe, J. 17
being 168
Berry, P. 120, 121, 129, 130
Bin Laden, O. 134
Bishop, P. 117
The Bloody Chamber and Other Stories 
(Carter) 137–8
The Book of Symbols (Ronnberg and 
Martin) 123
Bluebeard 141–2
blurring of boundaries 31
bodies, as determinants of understanding 
171–2
book: aims 2; approach taken 1, 2, 16; 
structure and chapter overviews 2–4; 
use of terms 1
Bordwell, D. 109
Botting, F. 158
boundaries: blurring of 31; fantasy and 
reality 33
brainwashing 98
Branson, C. 111
British Documentary film movement 80
British Object Relations 5, 53
Buñuel, L. 5, 141–2
Burton, T. 43, 112–13, 161–2
Cahiers du Cinema 109–10
Campbell, J. 2, 34–5, 48–51, 148–9
Carnal Thoughts (Sobchack) 170
Carrey, Jim 20
Carter, A. 137–8
Casebier, A. 169
castration 139, 140–1, 142–3, 144, 155
catastrophe, and modernity 58
categorical imperative 39
categorisation, films 108
Caughie, J. 110
cave metaphor 97
censorship 66
centre of self 36
Chandler, R. 131
Chapman, B. 162
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory 
(Burton) 20
the child 19–20, 42–4, 113; in Burton’s 
films 19–20; creativity 113
child development, mirror stage 67–8
children, in myths 42–3
Chinatown, depictions of 131–2
Cinderella 163
cinema: addictiveness 32; affective power 
3; Deleuze on 81–2; and dreams 51, 72; 
encoding 172; engaging with unconscious 
59; as entertainment 31; as individuation 
51; liminal 112; linked to psychoanalysis 
57–8; as medium 57; as part of capitalist 
machine 97–8; projection 58; as reflection 
of collective psyche 58; as reflection of 
social attitude 142; relativism 31; starting 
point for understanding 74; therapeutic 
potential 81–2
cinematic narratives, as means of 
reflection 36
cinematic vision 168
clinical practice, challenge of JFS 25
codes, in Jungian psychology 65
Cold War, effect on entertainment industry 
45–6
collective, as impersonal and 
interpersonal 30
collective identity 37
collective mentality 113
collective psyche: identification with 33–4; 
reflected in cinema 58
collective unconscious 3, 29–32; and 
creativity 88–9; imagery 71; as images 
53–4; losing oneself 33–4; and mass 
entertainment 98; Wright on 79–80
collectivity, internal and external 29
comedies, alien invasion 47
communitas 101–2
conflict, resolution of 30
connotation 65
conscious–unconscious dichotomy 114
consciousness 125, 154, 167, 170, 172, 
173, 175–6; layers of 11; as tip of the 
iceberg 30
conspiracy theories 45
containment 59–60
control 102–3; fear of loss of 104
conventions, in Jungian psychology 65
counter-structures 101–2
countertransference 178–9
Crane, Marion 157–8
creation, through destruction 100–1
creativity: and animus 154; and collective 
unconscious 88–9; dangers of 91; 
importance of 117; as living 89; and 
psychological conflict 36; and sacrifice 
92; Tarkovsky’s view 89, 91; as 
unpredictable 88

Index  193
cultural attitudes, and ideology 114
cultural contexts, of analytic approaches 
123–4
culture: archetypes in 38; and ideology 
132–3
culture heroes 101
curiosity 143, 144–5
Curry, Mr 104
Dalí, S. 5
dark child 43
darkness, overcoming 42–3
the daughter 92–6
Davies, O. 54
decentring, of text 26
defamiliarisation 161–2
Deleuze, G. 81–2
democratisation, of hero myth 33
denotation 65
depth psychological perspective 7
detective films 130–3
detective persona 131–2
diachronic analysis 64
directions in Jungian film studies 15
directors: creative importance 109; 
foregrounding 119; ideology 113; 
Jungian approaches to 111–15; motifs 
111, 112; public attitudes to 108–9; 
as selves and personae 114–15; as 
taxonomic categories 108
disability 163
divine unity 146
Doane, M.A. 145
doctrine 50
documentary narratives 31
doppelganger narratives 40
Dorothy 149–51
dream interpretation, expectations in 
123–4
dream work 66
dreams 7; and cinema 51; compared with 
film genres 124; evolution of 124; 
instability of meaning 25; personal 
mythology 51; responses to 24; as 
substitute for myth 50; symbols in 66
Durden, Tyler 40
Écrits (Lacan) 116
Edward Scissorhands (Burton) 20
ego 36
Eisenstein, S. 79
emic 32
empathy 174
enantiodromia 117
encoding 172
‘end of the world’ blockbusters 58
etic 32
Eve 144–5
Everybody Comes to Rick’s (Burnett and 
Allison) 122
expectations: audiences’ 119–20; in dream 
interpretation 123–4; and meaning 123
experiencing, of films 26
facts, in film 31
Fadina, N. 26
fairy tales, female individuation 137
fantasy-image 124–5, 170, 175, 177
father: auteur as 115–17; role of 116
fathers, of discipline 116
Feeling Film: Affect and Authenticity in 
Popular Cinema (Singh) 26
Fellini, F. 112, 116
female individuation 136–8
female journey 137, 138–45
female passivity 136
female qualities 147
female sexuality, as controlling 139
feminine, power of 152
feminist perspectives, women on screen 
138–9
femme fatale 132, 133
Film and Phenomenology (Casebier) 169
film-body 170, 171–2
film criticism, psychological/
psychoanalytic theories 4–5
film critics, view of Jungian psychology 35
film industry, influence of Jungian ideas 6
film noir 120, 130–3
Film Noir: Stereotype or Archetype? 
(Hockley) 130–3
film production, institutional dimension 122
film theory: contribution of Analytical 
Psychology 124; Lacan’s influence 67–9
film watching, and self-awareness 32
filmmakers, use of psychoanalytic theory 5
filmmaking: as alchemical 62; numbers 
involved 108–9; personal contexts 
116–17; women’s 145
Filmosophy (Frampton) 167
films: affective responses 179–80; 
appropriate analytical approaches 77; 
attitudes to facts 31; categorisation 
108; classification 119; co-creation 

194  Index
of meaning 119, 123, 125, 173, 179; 
complexity of understanding 82; 
consciousness 172; detail 169; existence 
as other 172; experiencing of 26; 
historical materialist perspective 173; 
identity 172–3; individual contexts 
and responses 176; institutional 
determinates 110; intention 171; issues 
in interpretation 66–7; longevity 119; 
as means of reflection 36; as mirrors 
96–7; as money-making enterprises 110; 
narrative vs. textual interpretation 72–3; 
origins of magic 22; otherworldliness 
9; personal contexts of analysis 113, 
127; reading against the grain 114; as 
self-exposing 174; semantic aspects 
121; situating 168; as super-human 174; 
symbols and signs in 76–80; syntactic 
aspects 121–2; therapeutic possibilities 
30; therapeutic value 21–2; view of the 
world 171; wartime prohibition 109
film’s attention 172
Fireman, G. 27
first image 177, 178
‘Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things 
Seen in the Sky’ (Jung) 46
flying saucers, religious symbolism 46–7
foreknowledge, and genres 123
founding fathers 116
Frames of Mind: A Post-Jungian Look 
at Cinema, Television and Technology 
(Hockley) 23
Frampton, D. 167–8, 170, 171, 174
Fredericksen, D. 3, 6, 15–17, 55, 76–7, 
112, 177
Freud, S. 25–6, 49; attitude to Hollywood 
5; on dreams 66; on incest fantasy 55–6; 
metaphors/signs 3; semiotic system 70; 
and symbols 65–7
Freudian and post-Freudian theory, 
applicability of 28
Freudian concepts, usefulness 49
Freudian mother 86–7
Freudian perspective, application of 5
Freudian psychology 35
Freudian Slip 65–6
Fuchs, T. 107
gaze 143, 151
Geertz, C. 37
gender 4; and anima/animus 41; associated 
qualities 147; and power 22–3
gender differences, Jung’s view 146
Genette, G. 128
genre conventions, film noir 131
genre films, evolution of 124
genre theory 4, 106, 119; and archetype 
theory 120; components 122; 
institutional dimension 122
genres: appeal of 121; archetypes as 
122; carryovers 129; case studies 
129–34; combining 130; context and 
overview 118–19; defining 119–22; 
development of 120; film noir 130–3; 
and foreknowledge 123; inconsistencies 
129; instability 130; institutional 
amplification 126–9; Jungian view of 
images 124–6; and meaning 129–30; 
mutual reliance with audiences 123; 
organisation of 134; as paradigmatic 
sets 65; and personae 128–9; as 
psychological 129–30; semantic 
aspects 121; similarity to archetypes 
135; social values and attitudes 121; 
structural forces 129–30; summary 
and conclusions 135; syntactic aspects 
121–2; Westerns 119–20, 121, 133–4
German Expressionism 131
good mother 59–60, 151
Gothic (Botting) 158
Gråbøl, S. 164
great mother 59–60, 90, 158
Grierson, J. 80
Guattari, F. 81
Hammett, D. 131
The Happiness Illusion: How the Media 
Sold Us a Fairytale (Hockley and 
Fadina) 26
Hauke, C. 3, 15, 20–2, 39, 54, 57–8
Hawks, H. 111
hero myth 7–8, 147
A Hero with a Thousand Faces 
(Campbell) 48
heroes 32–5; becoming 50; in monomyth 
48; overcoming darkness 42–3; place in 
time 28
heroines, as men 159–60
The Heroine’s Journey: Woman’s 
Quest for Wholeness (Murdock) 148
hero’s journey 44–5, 51, 99
Hillman, J. 3, 60–1, 73–6, 91, 126
historical materialism 173
Hitchcock, A. 111, 154–9

Index  195
Hockley, L. 6, 15, 23–6, 126, 130–3, 
176–80
homemaking 151
horror entertainment, as response to 
perceived threat 45–6
horror films, expectations 123
Howard Hawks: A Jungian Study 
(Branson) 111
humans, self-presentation 174
‘“I Feel Like a Failure”: In-House 
Feminism’ (Miller) 22–3
Ideal-I 68
identification, with image 97
identity 4; collective 37; of films 172–3
‘Ideological Effects of the Basic 
Cinematographic Apparatus’ (Baudry) 
97–8
ideology: Analytical Psychology as 123; 
cultural attitudes 114; and culture 132–3; 
directors’ 113; and genres 121
image: identification with 97; Jungian 
concept 170; Jung’s view 124–5; psyche 
as 125–6; psychological role of 3
imagery: collective unconscious 71; Mad 
Max tetralogy 35; The Mirror 86
images: archetypal 38; collective 
unconscious 53–4; creation of 75; 
denotation and connotation 65; 
interpretation of 7; Jungian view 
124–6; location of 75–6; locus 125; 
as metaphorical 125; personalised and 
collective 54; psychological 75; risks in 
interpretation 73–4; semiotic analysis 
64–5; as symbols and archetypes 
54; tension between semiotic and 
psychological 82; unconscious affective 
relationships 72; understanding 53
The Imaginary Signifier: Psychoanalysis 
and Cinema (Metz) 67, 96–7
immigrants, as tricksters 104
Imperator Furiosa 163
impersonal forces 11
incest fantasy 55–6
independent thought 10
individual, agency of 113
individualism 10
individuation 2–3, 8–9, 11, 35–7; 
applicability to Western cinema 18; 
cinema as 51; female 136–8; joining 
individual and collective 37; as life-
stage 117; male 152; milestones 36; 
as narrative framework 27–8; process 
100; role of archetypes 37; role of child 
archetype 42; role of film in 22; and 
society 9; women on screen 146–51
individuation genres 28
individuation narratives 23
inner call 50
inner demons 36
insight, as relative 25
institutional amplification 126–9
institutional determinates, of fiction 
films 110
institutional dimension, of film 
production 122
integrative approach 85–92
inter-fictional carryover 129
inter-subjective space 179
interdependence, body and psyche 53–4
The Interpretation of Dreams (Freud) 70
interpretation, starting point 74
intersubjective field 4, 177
intertexts 110
intertextuality 119, 122; as amplification 
127; Casablanca 122–3
intrinsic goodness, belief in 46–7
introjection, through film 30
invasion/annihilation, responses to threat 
45–6
Izod, J. 6, 15, 17–18, 114–15, 133–4, 135
Jacobi, J. 36, 37–8, 39, 151, 153–4
journeys: female protagonists 137, 138–45; 
heroes 44–5, 51, 99; women’s vs. men’s 
147–51
Jung and Film II: The Return (Hauke and 
Hockley) 20
Jung and Film: Post-Jungian Takes on the 
Moving Image (Hauke and Alister) 20
Jung and the Postmodern (Hauke) 40
Jung and the Postmodern: The 
Interpretation of Realities (Hauke) 21
Jung, C.G.: on abandonment 43; academic 
perspectives on 16; on alchemy 61; 
on anima 152, 153; on animus 154; 
on archetypes 37; areas of interest 
8–9; on the child 42–3; on collective 
unconscious 29, 53–4; directors’ use 
of 34–5; on ego 36; on flying saucers 
46; on image 124–5; on impersonal 
forces 11; on individual and society 
10; on individuation 9, 37; interpretive 
approach 16; on intrinsic goodness 46–7; 

196  Index
on libido 72; on the mother 156; psyche 
as image 125; on semiotic interpretation 
70–1; on the shadow 39, 40; structural 
makeup of images 125–6; on symbols 
52, 70, 77–8; on the trickster 44; on wise 
old man/wise old woman 41
‘Jung/Sign/Symbol/Film’ (Fredericksen) 
15–16, 76–7
Jungian approaches: areas of interest 117; 
Bassil-Morozow 112–13; Branson 111; 
Burton, T. 112–13; to directors 111–15; 
Fredericksen 112; Hawks, H. 111; Izod 
114–15; Roeg, N. 114–15
Jungian concepts, usefulness 49
Jungian film analysis: in combination 
92–6; position of 1, 2
Jungian film studies: as alternative 
approach 6–7; areas of interest 107–8; 
basic question 106; defining 2; early 
days 6; father role 116; as framework 
12; orientation 7; origin, development 
and scope 1; and phenomenological 
approach 176–80; possibilities of 
6; potential pitfalls 7; scope 7–8; 
theoretical structures 6
Jungian ideas: influence on film industry 
6; as matrix of understanding 7
Jungian phenomenological approach 
176–80
Jungian psychology: film critics’ view 
35; as future oriented 35–6; helpful 
contradiction 117; potential and 
limitations 85; and Tarkovsky’s 
philosophy 88–9
Jungian semiotics 3
Jungian theory 4; applicability of 28; 
application 3–4; application to 
screen media 15–26; overview 8–12; 
perceptions of 8
Kant, I. 39
Kerényi, K. 100
Kiddo, Beatrice 160–1
Klein, M. 53
Kuleshov, L. 79
Lacan, J. 66, 67–9, 94, 115–16, 139, 140, 141
Lacanian film analysis: dominance 2; as 
standard 1
Lacanian orders of being 115
Lamont, Lina 143
language, symbolic function 65–6
Laplanche, J. 65
le non du père 116
‘Leonardo Da Vinci and a Memory of His 
Childhood’ (Freud) 55
libido 72
life experiences: commonality and 
difference 36; commonality of 31
liminal cinema 112
liminal space 3
liminality 18–19, 102; experience of 177; 
Paddington Bear 104–5
Little Red Riding Hood 137
The Long View (Wright) 79–80
longevity, of films 119
looking: and activity 143–5; human and 
filmic 168; nature of act 168; nature of 
activity 110–11; as source of pleasure 107
Luciano, P. 46
Lund, Sarah 164
mainstream cinema, narrative in 18
male qualities 147
marketing material, as amplification 127–8
Marks, L. 169
Martin, G.R.R. 165–6
Marxism 5
masks 128
maternal behaviour 59–60
maternal exclusivity 87
McWhirter, A. 23
meaning: assigning 4; co-creation of 119, 
123, 125, 173, 179–80; and expectations 
123; felt 25; fixedness of 69; and genres 
129–30; instability and complexity 24–5; 
location of 75–6; negotiation of 23–4, 
173; as relational 7; as unfixed 53
men, as feminists 165
Merida 162–3
Merleau-Ponty, M. 168–9
Metamorphoses (Apuleius) 151
metaphors 36; as archetypes 36; Jung’s use 
of 60; semiotic approaches 69
methodologies: anthropology 99–105; 
apparatus theory 96–9; combined 
approach 92–6; context and overview 
85; the daughter 92–6; integrative 
approach 85–92; Jung and Lacan 92–6; 
the mother 85–92
metteur en scène, as distinct from auteur 
109–10
Metz, C. 5, 10, 67, 96–7, 107
Miller, C. 22

Index  197
Miller, G. 34–6, 163
mind split 95–6
mirror stage 67–8, 107
mirroring 32
Mis/takes: Archetype, Myth and Identity in 
Screen Fiction (Waddell) 18–19, 61
misfits 43
modernity 2; and catastrophe 58; myths of 
33; and technology 57
monomyth (Campbell) 48–51
Monroe, M. 140
The Monster Show: A Cultural History of 
Horror (Skal) 45–6
montage 78–9
Morozko 137
Morrison, P. 22
the mother 85–92, 156
mother–child relationship, as primal 94
Mother Nature 90
mother Russia 90
‘mother-whore’ stereotype 163–4
mothers, ambivalence of 41
motifs, directors’ use of 111, 112
Motion Picture Export Association 
(MPEA) 109
movie star genres 128
Mulvey, L. 5, 107, 142, 143–5, 155
Murdock, M. 148–50
music-image 125
mutual perception 168
mutual reliance, genres and audiences 123
mythologem 129
mythological value 21
Mythologies (Barthes) 64
mythologisation 33–4
mythology, personal 51
myths: children in 42–3; hero myth 7–8, 
147; of modernity 33; survival of 50
Nagari, B. 125
narcissism 39, 153, 156
narrative interpretation vs. textual 72–3
narratives: in Analytical Psychology 27–8; 
Campbell’s view of 49–50; co-creation 
of 56–7; doppelganger 40; female 
individuation 137; individuation 36; in 
mainstream cinema 18; as structuring 
devices 100; superheroes 33; symbols 
in 54–5; trickster narratives 101; uses 
of 27; visual narrative analysis see 
methodologies; 
Neale, S. 123, 130
Neumann, E. 55–7, 94, 158–9
nom du père 115
Norén, Saga 165
Nünning, V. 32, 100
Obi Wan Kenobi 148
objective psyche 71; see also collective 
unconscious
objet petit a 141
ocular-centrism 107, 170
Oedipus complex 5
On Jouissance (Lacan) 139
‘On the Psychology of the Trickster 
Figure’(Jung) 44
orders of being 115
The Origins and History of 
Consciousness (Neumann) 158
outcasts 43
Paddington Bear 102–5
Pandora’s box 144
paradigmatic sets 64–5
parapraxis 65–6
paratexts 127–8
past, attitudes to 35–6
perception 4; mutual 168
persona: detective 131; and genres 128–9; 
and self 114–15
persona archetype 128–9
persona identification 34
personal contexts: of academics 113; in 
film analysis 127; filmmaking 116–17; 
watching film 134
personal mythology 51
personal unconscious 29–30
personal voice films 77
personality, formation of 9
phenomenological approach 4, 23–6; 
application to films 167–75; context 
and overview 167–9; looking 168; 
reconciling with Jungian 176–80; 
strength of 176; third image 175–80
phenomenological theory 106, 107
Picture of Dorian Gray (Wilde) 39
Pierce, C.S. 63
The Pioneers (Fennimore Cooper) 133
pitfalls, in application of Jungian theory 7
pleasure, from art 168
poetic sensibility 80
Pontalis, J.-B. 65
popular entertainment, psychological 
depth 28

198  Index
post-Freudian approaches 67–9
Potter, Harry 42
power: of feminine 152–9; and gender 
22–3; masculine 158–9
pre-conscious universe, spiritual 
significance 99
The Presence of the Feminine in 
Film (Beebe and Apperson) 17
primal fantasies 67
primal relationship 94
primal scene 67
private eyes 131
projection: cinema 58; Jung’s concept 
126; onto film 30–1, 115; as temporary 
solution 32
projections, and self-learning 28–9
projective-introjective exchange 30
protagonists, in Tim Burton films 43–4
Psyche 151
psyche 114; agency 167; as image 125–6; 
Jungian model 175–6; levels of 33; 
objective 71; see also soul
psychoanalysis: Deleuze and Guattari on 
81; linked to cinema 57–8
psychoanalytic approaches: aim of 106–7; 
conventions and expectations 123–4; 
Freudian 65–7; post-Freudian 67–9; 
structural perspective 25–6
psychoanalytic film theory, as reworking 
of concepts 5–6
psychoanalytic frameworks, use of 1, 2
psychoanalytic interpretation, basis of 53
psychoanalytic symbols 65–6
psychoanalytic theories, position of 4–5
psychological conflict, and creativity 36
psychological images 75
psychological theories, position of 4–5
‘Psychological Types’ (Jung) 52
psychological wholeness 36, 44, 146
Psychology and Alchemy (Jung) 59
psychopomp, Waddell’s use of 19
psychotherapy, focus of 81
puer aeternus 19–20
qualities, male and female 147
Radin, P. 100
rationalism–empiricism debate 73
re-creation 113–14
Re-Visioning Psychology (Hillman) 60–1
reading against the grain 114
reality, vs. narcissism 156
reductive approaches, risk of 16–17
reflection, through film 36
regression, human tendency to 98
relativism 31
religious symbolism, flying saucers 46–7
Renaissance perspective 170
renewal, and stability 105
replicability 31
reverse alchemy 74
The Rites of Passage (Van Gennep) 102
rites of passage concept 85, 102
rituals: importance of 11; as structuring 
devices 100
Roeg, N. 114–15
romantic comedy, expectations of 120, 123
Romantic perspective, on unconscious 3
Rowland, S. 146, 152
Rublev, Andrey 94
Runcie, C. 166
Rupp, J. 32
Samuels, A. 146
Sarris, A. 110
Saussure, F. 63–4
schismogenesis 101
School of Archetypal Psychology 73–6
sci-fi, themes 45
Scissorhands, Edward 44
scopic regime 107
scopophilia 155
screen: as absence of barriers 31; as mirror 97
Screen, Culture, Psyche: A Post-Jungian 
Approach to Working with the Audience 
(Izod) 133–4
screen media: application of Jungian 
theory 15–26; blurring of boundaries 
31; as mass phenomena 30
Sculpting in Time (Tarkovsky) 88, 91
second image 177–8
seduction 139–40, 141–2
self: as driver of individuation 36; and 
persona 114–15
the Self (archetype) 44–5, 99
self-awareness, watching film 32
self-learning, through projection 28–9
self-reflection 31–2
semantic aspects, of films 121
semiotic approaches: authors’ perspective 
16; Fredericksen’s critique 16, 77; 
intersection with symbolic 76; Jung’s 
view 69–70; to symbols, signs and 
metaphors 69–70

Index  199
semiotic meaning 52
semiotic – psychological tension 82
semiotic system 70
semiotics: defining 63–4; signifier and 
signified 64–5
sense-making 76
sexuality 4, 106; female 139; as force 140
the shadow 39
shame 103
Shaviro, S. 169
signifier, and signified 64–5
signs 3; Jungian perspective 70; semiotic 
approaches 69
signs and symbols: comparison of 
perspectives 15–16; in films 76–80; 
Freudian perspective 65–7; Hillman’s 
perspective 73–6; Jungian perspectives 
69–73; overview 63; post-Freudians and 
Lacan 67–9; semiotics 63–5; summary 
and conclusions 80–2
silence: women on screen 151–9; women’s 
138, 143
Silverman, K. 143
Singh, G. 26
Skal, D. 45–6
Skywalker, Luke 42
slash fiction 127
Sobchack, V. 170–3
social inescapability 95
social, influence on individual 4
social/personal dichotomy 10
social reality 95–6
social values and attitudes, and genres 121
society, and ethics 10–11
Somatic Cinema (Hockley) 23–4
soul 74–5; see also psyche
soundtracks, Song of Ceylon 78–9
Soviet formalism 80
spirituality, pre-conscious universe 99
stability, and renewal 105
Stam, R. 110
Starling, Clarice 160
stars 108
starting point, in understanding cinema 74
stereotypes 38
Stevens, A. 116
The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and 
Mr. Hyde (Stevenson) 39
structural approaches 129
structuralism 146
structuralist theory 118
structuring devices 100
sub-personalities 131–2
superhero complex 33–4
superheroes 28; narratives of 33; 
perception of 32–3; as redemptive 58–9
support structures, need for 11
suture 179
symbol/metaphor dichotomy 3, 55
symbol/sign dichotomy 69
symbolic approaches, intersection with 
semiotic 76
symbolic realm 115–16
symbolism, The Mirror (Tarkovsky) 86
symbols 3, 52–7; as collective and 
personal 24; as corpus et anima 71; 
creation of 56; as distinct from signs 52, 
55; in dreams 66; Freudian perspective 
65–7, 71–2; Hillman’s view 73–6; 
Jungian perspective 69–72; multiple 
meanings 52, 55; in narratives 54–5; 
semiotic view 69; theoretical conception 
of 52; see also signs and symbols
synchronic analysis 64
syntactic aspects, of films 121–2
syntagms 64–5
syzygy 146
Tarantino, Q. 160–1
Tarkovsky, A. 85–92
technology, and modernity 57
technology-dependent genres 28
television, women as men 160
temenos 59–60
terminology, use of 1, 5
text, decentring of 26
textual interpretation vs. narrative 72–3
Them or Us: Archetypal Interpretation of 
Fifties Alien Invasion Films (Luciano) 46
themes, in sci-fi 45
Theories of Authorship (Caughie) 110
therapeutic goals, in JFS 17
therapeutic terms, use of 5
therapy, function of 80–1
Theron, C. 163–4
third image 24, 175–80
Thompson, K. 109
Tim Burton: The Monster and the Crowd 
(Bassil-Morozow) 19–20, 112–13
Tomashevsky, B. 130
tools and concepts: alchemy 60–2; 
archetypes 37–47; collective 
unconscious 29–32; context and 
overview 27; heroes 32–5; individuation 

200  Index
35–7, 57–9; symbols 52–7; temenos 
59–60
transcendent function 118
transference 30, 32, 178–9
Transfiguration of Jesus on the Mount 95
transformation 60–2
the trickster 3, 44, 99–105; as animal 
103; Bassil-Morozow’s use of 20; as 
destructive/creative 100–1; Waddell’s 
use of 18–19, 20
The Trickster in Contemporary Film 
(Bassil-Morozow) 20
The Trickster: A Study in American Indian 
Mythology (Radin) 100
The Trickster and the System: Identity 
and Agency in Contemporary Society 
(Bassil-Morozow) 20
trickster narratives 101
tricksters, creativity 113
tripartite model 176–80; first image 177, 
178; interdependence of images 178, 179; 
second image 177; third image 178, 
179, 180
Turner, V. 3, 59, 85, 101–2
unconscious: engaging with 59; expression 
in films 180; Freudian perspective 71; 
Jung’s view 27–8, 53, 71; Lacanian 54; 
phenomenological perspective 167; 
relationship to/with the world 167; 
Romantic perspective on 3; see also 
collective unconscious; personal 
unconscious
unconscious affective relationships 72
unhappiness 11
urban superheroes 45
uroboric character, of great mother 158
uroboric state 93–4
Van Gennep, A 3, 85, 102
viewer–film relationship, primacy of 
173–4
viewing view 171
Visible Mind: Movies, Modernity and the 
Unconscious (Hauke) 21, 54
visual narrative analysis see methodologies
‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’ 
(Mulvey) 142
vital activities 126
Vogler, C. 2, 4, 6, 18, 35, 47–8, 51, 96, 
98–9, 147, 149–51
Vogler effect 6
voice 143, 151–9
von Franz, M.L. 153–4
Von Trier, L. 92–6
Waddell, T. 18–19, 61
Walker, S. 53
war, effect on entertainment industry 45–6
watching film: as alchemical 76; as 
creative 75; personal contexts 134
Wayne, John 128–9
Westerns 133–4; expectations of 119–20; 
myth-making 133; semantic aspects 
121; shadow and anima 134
wholeness 36, 44, 146
Wild/Lives: Trickster, Place and Liminality 
on Screen (Waddell) 19
‘The Wizard of Oz: A Vision of 
Development in the American 
Political Psyche’ (Beebe) 17
wise old man/wise old woman 41–2
‘Woman’s Stake: Filming the Female 
Body’ (Doane) 145
women: as castrated 139, 140–1, 
142–3, 144; as controlling 139; 
curiosity 144–5; as filmmakers 145; 
as homemakers 151; as incomplete/
non-existent 139, 141; ‘mother-whore’ 
stereotype 163–4; not-active/active 
143–5; objectification 107; power 141; 
as seducers 139–40; silence 138, 143; 
stereotyping 139
women on screen: exclusion 143–4, 145; 
female individuation 136–8; feminist 
perspectives 138–9; Hitchcock, A. 
154–9; individuation 146–51; as men 
159–66; overview 136; overview of 
Jungian approaches 146–7; passivity 
140; psychoanalytic approaches 
138–45; silence and voice 151–9; 
television 160
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (Baum) 
149–51
Woolverton, L. 161–2
words, as symbols 64, 69
The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for 
Writers (Vogler) 4, 18, 35, 
47–8, 51, 99, 147
Wright, B 77, 78–80
xenophobia 104

