
My name is Cassie. 
And you wouldn't know it to look at me but 
I'm in the middle of a violent war to save Earth 
from an alien, parasitic species called the 
Yeerks. 
Well, most of the time I am. Right now I was 
kneeling in the barn, waiting for an injured 
mouse's curiosity to get the better of him. And 
when it did, when he crept out from beneath the 
cage he'd scurried under, I was going to scoop 
him up and take a look at his crooked, back leg. 
I guess that's just me. It's who I am. I don't 
like seeing an animal in pain if there's something 
I can do about it. And I usually am doing some-
thing about it, because my parents are vets and I 
1 

guess you could say I'm following in their foot-
steps. 
Except that in one way, I'm already way ahead 
of them. 
I'm an Animorph. An animal morpher. 
My friends and I were given the ability to ac-
quire the DNA of other creatures and morph 
them. This power is the only real weapon we have 
in our fight to save humanity. 
But it's more than that. For me, at least. 
Every time I morph an animal, I experience 
the world as that animal does, sensing it, sharing 
its instincts. That's knowledge my parents will 
never have. And I'm not sure not having it is such 
a bad thing. 
I mean, it's one thing knowing that a hump-
back whale can weigh thirty tons but it's a whole 
other story to actually weigh that much. To cruise 
the ocean with the certainty that you actually 
are that animal. The only way to really under-
stand is to become that creature, and they can't 
teach that in vet school. 
But this isn't just about becoming an animal. 
It isn't just about the morphing. See, we use our 
morphs to fight this war. To divert and battle the 
Yeerks. That's why Jake, our leader, doesn't like 
us using the morphs for our own purposes. I can't 
say I never have — there's nothing like frolicking 
2 
as a sleek playful dolphin, and being a horse has 
certainly come in handy on occasion — but I like 
Jake a lot — okay, maybe I feel even stronger 
than "like" — and what he says makes sense, so 
I try not to do anything that would put us at risk. 
But the risk isn't the worst of it. This is a war 
and people die. And using this power to destroy 
others is hard to get used to. But as much as I 
hate inflicting pain and sometimes death on the 
other Yeerk-infested species, I can't just sit back 
and allow their evil to consume us, the human 
race, too. 
The Yeerks are like a disease, except they 
spread with malice and intent. A Yeerk will 
squirm into your ear canal, flatten out its blind, 
deaf, sluglike body, and weave into the crannies 
of your brain. Tap into your thoughts. See through 
your eyes, speak with your voice. You are a 
hostage, trapped inside yourself. Screaming for 
help but no one can hear you. 
We call people infested by Yeerks Controllers, 
and there are more of them every day. Like I said, 
the Yeerks have taken over other species, too, and 
they're using some of them to wage this poiso-
nous war on Earth. 
We, the Animorphs, are the only active resis-
tance. Me. My best friend Rachel. Jake. His 
friend Marco. Tobias, who stayed in his red-tailed 
3 

hawk morph longer than the two-hour limit and 
now lives as a bird of prey. A nothlit, as Ax would 
say. 
Ax is an aristh, an Andalite warrior-cadet, and 
it was his brother Elfangor who gave us the blue 
morphing cube before Visser Three murdered 
him, so that we could continue the battle. 
That's pretty much it on our side. Well, unless 
you count the Chee, a nonviolent race of an-
droids, who help us by spying on the Yeerks and 
infiltrating their cover organization called The 
Sharing. But when it comes right down to it, 
we're the only ones out there aggressively de-
fending our species. 
So you can see why I need to work with 
wounded animals. To help heal them. And in 
some way, I think they help heal me, too. 
Movement. 
A tiny, twitching nose poked out from under 
the cage. 
The barn turned Wildlife Rehab Clinic was 
quiet today. We had only three patients and all 
were on the mend. 
Their snuffling and scrabblings were familiar 
sounds. 
But the distant, low-level drone thrumming 
through the air wasn't. 
Achainsaw? 
The buzzing grew louder. Sharper. Closer. 
4 
A low-flying plane? 
The mouse zipped out. Stopped. Nose twitch-
ing. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The drone was deafening now. 
The mouse tensed. 
My hand flashed out and scooped it up. 
"Nobody's going to hurt you," I said, but my 
voice was lost in the thundering noise. Some-
thing deep in the pit of my stomach stirred un-
easily. 
It didn't sound like a plane, it sounded like 
a . . . 
I stuck my head out of the open barn doors in 
time to see a helicopter pass and continue out 
over the woods. 
The droning faded. 
I shrugged and turned to put the mouse in a 
cage and nearly ran into Erek who was standing 
behind me. Erek is one of the Chee. 
"Whoa!" I said, startled. "I didn't see you 
come in." 
Erek nodded. "Good. You weren't supposed 
to. And neither were the Controllers in the heli-
copter. We have a major problem, Cassie." , 
"Uh, I'm the only one here right now," I said, 
realizing I was still holding the mouse. I gently 
put it in an empty cage and then waited to hear 
the rest of Erek's news. 
5 

"I'll notify the others, but we have to move on 
this. The Yeerks have managed to repair the Hel-
macron ship and they've reactivated the sensors 
that locate morphing energy." 
Oh, great. The Helmacrons. Again. 
The Helmacrons are an exceptionally tiny, ex-
ceptionally annoying species with delusions of 
grandeur and egos the size of Montana. Unfortu-
nately, they also have very advanced technology. 
Erek continued, "The Yeerks are tracking 
morphing energy." 
"But I haven't morphed —" 
The blue box. The Escafil Device. It was hid-
den here in the barn. 
"The ship's sensors aren't operating at full 
potential but the Yeerks have managed to hone in 
on a weak signal from somewhere in this area. 
That would be the energy from the morphing 
cube." Erek's voice was muted as the helicopter 
did another flyby. "They're making another pass. 
If we don't get that cube out of here —" 
"I'll get it," I said, heading to the darkest sec-
tion of the barn. I'd hidden the cube where it 
wouldn't be found by anyone who happened to 
be stumbling around, but I hadn't counted on 
the Yeerks being able to repair something so 
minuscule as the Helmacrons' damaged and 
abandoned ship. "But what good will it do to 
6 
move the cube, Erek? Won't the Yeerks just tar-
get it again?" 
"Yes. That's why you and the others have to 
keep it moving until the Helmacron ship can be 
destroyed," Erek said as the helicopter's shadow 
passed over us, blotting out the sunlight stream-
ing in through the doors. "If that cube falls into 
Yeerk hands . . ." 
"Don't even say it," I said, tucking the cube 
into the waistband of my jeans and pulling my 
dad's huge, old, college T-shirt down over it. 
"Okay, let's go —" 
But Erek had vanished. 
"Cassie?" my mother said, from the doorway. 
"I'm off to The Gardens. I have animal transports 
to oversee and —" 
"I'll go with you!" I blurted, while giving the 
barn a quick once-over for Erek. Was he that 
bucket? That bale of hay? The Chee were ex-
tremely good with holograms. 
The sunlight behind my mother shimmered 
and for an instant, Erek was Erek again and not a 
hologram of a brightly lit barn door. 
I looked at my mom. "Let's get going." 
7 

Have 
you ever had one of those horrible 
dreams where something is chasing you and no 
matter how fast you try to run, you're not getting 
anywhere? 
Well, that's exactly how I felt driving to The 
Gardens with my mother. 
The helicopter was buzzing back and forth 
over the woods. And we were getting nowhere 
fast because my mother was talking while she 
was driving, and when she does that, she always 
takes her foot off the gas pedal. She doesn't do it 
on purpose but it's still nerve-racking. 
Speed up. Slow down. Speed up. Slooowwww 
dooowwwnnnn. . . . 
BEEEEEEEPP! 
8 
"What's wrong with him?" my mother asked, 
scowling into her rearview mirror at the car be-
hind us; it was crawling right up our butts. "The 
speed limit's forty-five on this road." 
"Yeah, but you're only doing thirty, Mom," I 
said, gazing pointedly at the speedometer. 
C'mon, Mom, hurry! 
"Thirty?" my mother asked, pressing the gas 
pedal. The speedometer needle was on the rise. 
Sort of. "There. That's better." 
But it wasn't better because the car behind 
us floored it, passed us on a double line, then cut 
right back in front of us and promptly slowed 
down. 
"What are you doing!" my mother shouted, 
braking and glaring at the back of the driver's 
head. 
"Mom, don't say anything," I warned, watch-
ing as the driver finally sped up. 
"But he's driving erratically," my mother said, 
speeding up and then slamming on her brakes as 
he slowed down again. "What is he doing?!" 
"Mom, stop! He can't hear you!" I said. "Just 
back off. It's either road rage or. . ." 
Or a Controller sent to steal the blue box. 
I looked up at the sky. The helicopter was the 
size of a horsefly in the distance. If it had pin-
pointed us, it wouldn't send just one Controller 
for the box. No way. Stealing it would be a major 
9 

victory for the Yeerks and they'd send an army to 
do it, not one bald guy in a Ford Taurus. 
". . . or he's a complete imbecile?" my 
mother snapped, but backed off enough for him 
to pull ahead. "I don't know what is going on 
around here today." 
"You mean with all those helicopters?" I 
asked as casually as I could while keeping an eye 
on the car in front of us. It was on the move now 
and was pretty much history. "I thought maybe 
an animal had escaped from The Gardens or 
something." 
"No, they would have called me," my mother 
said. "And I haven't heard any news bulletins 
about any hikers lost in the area, either." She 
smiled. "I guess it's just one of those days, 
huh?" 
"I guess so." 
By the time we pulled into The Gardens, my 
neck was cramped and my stomach was twisted. 
One from watching the helicopter, the other from 
sheer worry. What if Erek hadn't gotten word to 
everyone? 
What if he had? 
Wouldn't the Helmacron sensors pick up 
three kids and an Andalite in morph? Of course 
they would. Tobias would be okay, but was get-
ting us all together really that great an idea? 
10 
The frantic fluttering in my stomach got worse. 
I left my mother in the employee parking lot 
and headed into the park. I told her I was going 
to check out a few of the new animals and then 
grab a bus back home. I tried to look as normal 
as I could in my baggy, dirt-stained jeans with a 
blue morphing cube hidden beneath my T-shirt. 
<Another bizarre fashion statement, huh, 
Cassie?> 
Thought-speak. Rachel was here somewhere. 
Good. Even though I wasn't in morph and 
couldn't answer her, I felt better. 
<She calls it cornfield casuals,> Marco 
smirked. <Bird poop-a-porter. We're in seagull 
morph, Cassie, so don't look up.> 
<Erek told us about the Helmacron morphing 
sensors,> Jake said. <We're going to have to find 
a way to disable that ship. You have the blue box, 
right?> 
I nodded slowly, paused by the American buf-
falo enclosure, and casually looked around — 
then up. 
A red-tailed hawk circled high above me. 
Two identical seagulls landed near the buffalo 
wallow. A third landed on a nearby Dumpster. A 
fourth strutted past, eyeing up a little girl eating 
french fries. 
That one had to be Ax. 
11 

The kid giggled and threw him a fry. 
He gobbled it down and screeched for an-
other. And another. 
<Hey, Ax-man, want to try and get a grip?> 
Marco quipped, swooping down and chasing Ax 
away from the kid. 
<The clock's ticking here,> Jake said quietly 
but firmly. 
I scanned the crowd, following one woman's 
gaze into the sky. Another helicopter had joined 
the first. 
I glanced back at the woman, who didn't look 
surprised or even curious. Just sort of. . . eager. 
She disappeared into the crowd. 
The knot in my stomach was back with a 
vengeance. 
The helicopters were circling closer and it 
wouldn't be long before they pinpointed a whole 
lot of morphing energy in one place. 
I didn't know what to do. I couldn't communi-
cate with anybody — 
<Helicopters heading this way,> Tobias called 
down. <And there's a couple of guys in suits jog-
ging toward Cassie.> 
< Cassie, move,> Jake said tersely. 
I stepped backward, away from the buffalo 
enclosure. Where? I mouthed silently. 
<Anywhere! They're coming through the park, 
so head back into the employee area or some-
12 
thing!> Jake shouted, taking off. <Everybody 
else, split up! We have to draw the sensors away 
from Cassie! Tobias, you stick with her since 
you're not in morph.> 
<Cassie,> Tobias said. <They're closing in 
fast.> 
And suddenly, I saw one of the guys in the 
suits. 
I didn't run. I didn't want to attract attention. 
I waited until he turned away. 
Then bolted. 
13 

<Nice,> Tobias said. <He didn't see you but 
the copters are still tracking you and feeding the 
ground guys info. Keep going.> 
I did, my heart pounding in my ears. My all-
too-human ears. 
I was so helpless as a human. I had brains 
but no brawn. No claws, no fangs, no wings. 
Nothing to give me even the slightest advantage 
over the Yeerk-infested human-Controllers track-
ing me. 
If only I could morph without attracting the 
sensors. 
If only the others could distract the Con-
trollers long enough for me to get away. 
14 
If only, if only! 
Deal with the realities, Cassie. Keep going. 
The alley finally led me to the loading area, 
where a couple of huge trucks were parked. 
<Watch out! There are two guys on the other 
side of that big black delivery truck, Cassie! 
They're looking around, talking into radios. 
They're splitting up!> Tobias yelled. <Get out of 
there!> 
Where was I supposed to go? I flattened my-
self up against a white transport truck, the only 
thing left between me and them. 
And if one of the helicopters buzzed over 
now, they'd see two Controllers not ten feet away 
from a terrified, trapped-looking kid plastered up 
against a truck, with the sharp corner of the mor-
phing cube poking up from beneath her grubby 
T-shirt. 
They would know it was me they were hunting 
for. 
This was it. There was no escape. 
No way out! 
I couldn't morph so I couldn't fight or fly. 
I couldn't drop the cube and run because if 
the Yeerks got the cube, it would all be over. 
My stomach pushed into my throat. 
<They're coming around the truck, Cassie! 
Wait, there's a driver getting into the cab. Your 
15 

mother's making him sign something. The Con-
trollers are at the back of the truck! If they look 
around the side —> 
He didn't have to say anymore. I already knew 
what would happen. They'd see me. Grab me. My 
mother would get involved and then it was down 
to the Yeerk pool for both of us and total annihi-
lation for my friends. 
Trying not to hyperventilate, I inched along 
the truck toward the cab. At that moment, I 
didn't know what I was going to do, but I had to 
get farther away from the back of the truck. 
Not that two or three feet would make that 
much of a difference, but it was all the space I 
had. 
Something jabbed me in the back. 
I flinched and glanced behind me. 
A door handle. 
There was a small, side entry door in the wall 
of the transport truck's bed. 
"Chopper's picking up a reading from this 
area," one of the men behind the truck said. "If 
we find the Andalite bandits and the morphing 
technology, Visser Three will be extremely 
pleased. If we don't —" 
"Don't even mention what'll happen if we 
don't," the other Controller said nervously. "The 
chopper pilot says the signal's strong in our ra-
dius. Let's just keep looking." 
16 
Panicking, I yanked on the door. 
Nothing. 
The truck started up. Idled. 
It was going to pull away and leave me here, 
exposed. 
I yanked again. Saw the pin. Pulled it out and 
pulled the door open, scrambled up into the back 
of the heavily fenced transport truck, and quietly 
closed the door behind me. Doubled over, pant-
ing, heart racing. 
I had made it. 
That's when something very large bellowed 
very loudly. 
I shot up and staggered back against the wall. 
There, looming in front of me, with its huge, 
broad head held low and its massive, curved 
horns, stood almost a ton of solid, muscled 
African Cape buffalo. 
Aka the widow-maker. 
17 

Several things happened at once. 
The truck rumbled and jerked to life. 
The Cape buffalo stumbled backward, bound 
by two ropes around its horns and two around its 
neck. The ropes were knotted into metal loops on 
the truck's walls. 
The ropes were frayed and flimsy-looking 
compared to the buffalo's massive head. But 
then again, most people wouldn't have to worry 
about the ropes because they would never, ever 
get into a truck with a widow-maker. 
"But the reading says the signal's honed in on 
this area!" someone shouted from outside. 
"Yeah, but it's also picking up four other 
readings in four other directions!" someone else 
18 
said. "If you ask me, this is some kind of wild-
goose chase." 
"Don't let the visser hear you say that," the 
first man said uneasily. "He just pulled up." 
The voices faded as the truck lurched for-
ward, picking up speed. 
<You're headed toward the back exit, 
Cassie,> Tobias was still around. Faint but 
around. Silence. <Uh-oh.> 
Uh-oh what? I thought. I held still and 
watched the Cape buffalo watch me. Not a good 
feeling. Trust me. 
It was hot and waves of the animal's thick, 
musky scent were nearly overpowering. Even for 
me. But the stench wasn't anything compared to 
the pure power in the broad, muscular body and 
the deadly threat of its massive horns. 
The buffalo snorted, blowing a rush of hot, 
moist air out through its nostrils. 
<They're going to stop you outside the gate, 
Cassie, at that stretch of road surrounded by 
woods.> Tobias was starting to sound a little 
frantic. <Visser Three's limo is right behind you 
and there's a bunch of other cars waiting around 
the bend.> 
The buffalo snorted again. Tossed its head in 
a threatening, hooking movement, pulling the 
ropes taut. 
The truck began to slow and lean into the bend. 
19 

The truck nose-dived, sending almost a ton of 
buffalo surging right at me. The ropes tightened 
as a rippling wall of muscle — 
SNAP! 
One of the ropes broke and pulled apart like a 
piece of thread. 
I whipped left and flattened myself against 
the wall of the truck as the buffalo skidded for-
ward and sideways, fighting the remaining re-
straints. 
The buffalo bellowed again, thrashing in 
anger. 
WHAP! 
Another restraint. Gone. 
The last two ropes were around the buffalo's 
neck. Somehow I figured they wouldn't be there 
for long. 
It whipped its head around in a frenzy. The 
buffalo was going to break loose, and either 
trample or gore me to death. Impale me on those 
wicked, gleaming horns. 
And then Visser Three would have the morph-
ing cube. 
There really was only one way out of this. 
I inched sideways, watching the buffalo 
watch me. It was tense, just seconds from erupt-
ing again. I was shaking. I had to get past those 
horns but I knew it'd never let me get behind it 
where it couldn't see me. 
20 
The truck braked harder. 
The buffalo stumbled forward, past me, to the 
ends of the remaining ropes. 
Trembling, I laid my hand on the buffalo's 
thick hide, right at its midsection, and began to 
acquire it. 
The buffalo gave one last thrash, then went 
into a kind of dreamy, semi-trancelike state. It 
happens to most animals when we acquire their 
DNA. Most, but not all. 
"Hey, what's with the roadblock?" The shout 
came from the truck's cab. 
The truck was barely creeping forward now. 
In a minute it would be stopped and searched. 
Would I have enough time? 
I stripped down to my morphing outfit. 
Jammed my clothes out of sight behind one of 
the truck's wide, wooden slats. Laid the blue box 
on the floor of the truck and focused on the Cape 
buffalo's DNA. 
Crrreeeaaaacccckkkk! 
My skull split straight down the center and 
began to thicken, dragging my head down with 
the weight and back into my bulging, beefy 
shoulders. 
Sproof! Sproof! 
The bones broadened, following the contours 
of my huge head, shot out, and flipped up into 
three-foot horns on each sharp, lethal side. 
21

My skin darkened and thickened into a tough, 
coarse-haired hide. 
My body was bloating, stretching and expand-
ing, bulking out further and further, piling on 
pound after pound of sheer muscle. 
My fingers melded together and were sucked 
back into my hands. Tough hooves banded around 
the edges like metal plates. 
"I'm telling you, don't open that! I'm hauling 
African Cape buffalo here, mister, and I don't 
think you want to —" 
"Never attempt to think for me." A cold, sin-
ister voice. A voice I had heard before. A voice I 
would never forget. 
Visser Three. 
My morphing had stopped when I'd lost con-
centration. 
I refocused. Fast. 
Schloop! Schloop! 
My ears elongated. Sort of stretched out, 
drooped, and grew fringed hair. 
The latch on the double doors clunked open. 
"I'm telling you guys, don't do this!" 
"Shut up and get out of my way!" Visser 
Three roared. 
S proof. 
A tail shot out of my hind end as the double 
doors swung wide. 
"See, I told you —" The driver stopped, his 
22 
eyes wide with horror. "The restraints broke!" He 
backed away. "Run!" 
"Don't be a fool," Visser Three snapped. "I —" 
The Cape buffalo gave an explosive snort 
through its wide, quivering nostrils. 
And immediately, without warning, my own 
buffalo instinct kicked in. 
23 

Fury. 
No fear. 
Fight to defend. Fight the threat. 
Protect the herd. 
I tossed my head, blew a harsh whoosh of 
air from my nostril, and surged forward, heart 
pounding, fueled by rage and adrenaline. 
"Run!" the driver shrieked, taking off. 
The pitch of his screams hurt my ears and my 
hair-trigger temper exploded. Hooves clattering, I 
burst out of the truck like a tornado, slashing and 
hooking, slamming into cars and trampling Con-
trollers beneath my powerful legs. 
More screams. Shouts. 
Human-Controllers fleeing in all directions. 
24 
Dashing between the crooked, haphazardly parked 
cars. Hiding behind them. Hiding in them. 
I saw them through a gray haze of fury, 
smelled their terror and followed it. No puny car 
could block my path. 
Howls of pain. 
I wheeled, broadsiding a human-Controller, 
sent him spinning. 
Attack the threat! Destroy the threat! 
Normally I was a calm, peaceful, grazing ani-
mal. 
Until I was threatened. Provoked. 
And then, nothing could stop me. 
"Call the cops!" someone yelled. "Call back 
to The Gardens and get a tranquilizer gun out 
here!" 
"Where's 'here'?!" another voice shouted. 
"The woods along the highway! Outside the 
back gate! Hurry!" the guy hollered, crouching 
on top of his car. 
<Cassie?> 
The word echoed faintly in my enraged brain. 
I ignored it. 
I was a pile driver, wrecking anything and 
everything in my path. 
<Cassie, I'm guessing that's you. Look, you 
have to get control,> Tobias said frantically. 
<They're calling your mom! She's bringing a tran-
quilizer gun! Cassie, where's the morphing cube?> 
25 

Huh? Who cares about some cube? Wait. 
Hang on. The box. Oh, yeah. 
I fought the powerful animal's fury for a mo-
ment. Struggled to subdue its instincts and pull 
my human self back into consciousness. 
"Two! There's two! Look out!" 
I turned and saw the Cape buffalo I'd ac-
quired pounding out of the truck, charging 
people with its horns and growing more agitated 
when it missed them. 
Then it whirled and stampeded straight for 
Chapman. The assistant principal of our school. 
Member of The Sharing. And a high-ranking Con-
troller. 
THUD! 
Chapman flew through the air and hit the 
ground with the same dull "whump" a water-
melon makes when you drop it. 
<Come on, Cassie!> Tobias yelled. <Get the 
cube and get moving!> 
I ran back toward the truck. Stopped. Pow-
ered up my short, stocky legs and body-slammed 
Visser Three's limo with everything I had. 
CRRRRUUUNNNCCCHHH! 
The car alarm went off. 
EEEUUUUU! EEEEUUUU! EEEEEUUUU! 
The real Cape buffalo was going berserk. 
Smashing cars. Goring headlights. Bellowing and 
snorting and roaring with rage. 
26 
Panting, I leaped back into the truck, 
grabbed the blue box in my mouth, and barreled 
back out onto the highway. 
I saw it all in one second. 
Chapman, down and out on the pavement. 
Cars wrecked and crumpled, Controllers sit-
ting on top of them, clutching the roofs and look-
ing petrified. 
Visser Three, surrounded by a protective wall 
of frightened Controllers, screaming out enraged 
orders. 
The original Cape buffalo, thundering across 
a field and into the woods. 
I ran. The buffalo's herd instinct surged and I 
ran. 
27 

I crashed through the underbrush, trampling 
saplings and ripping through sticker bushes 
without a second thought. 
The scent of the real Cape buffalo was thick 
in my nostrils. I followed it deeper and deeper 
into the woods until the screams and shouts of 
the Controllers back at the roadblock were com-
pletely lost. 
The buffalo's hearing — my hearing now — 
absorbed and gauged every sound, checking for 
any potential threat to my herd. 
My depth perception wasn't so great, but I 
had a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree, wide-angle 
range of vision, which was going to make it pretty 
tough for anyone to sneak up on me. 
28 
This was a good thing. 
I couldn't run very fast — nowhere near the 
speed of my wolf morph — but what the buffalo 
lacked in miles per hour, it definitely made up for 
in sheer bulk and muscle. Nobody, and I mean 
nobody— except maybe a lion — would take me 
on, and I could still outrun a lion if I had to. 
And then there was man. The most infuriating 
scent, the most unnatural threat. 
But the air was clean of man-scent. 
The buffalo's brain, so powerful in its fury, be-
gan to shift its concentration in the quiet woods. 
Sort of downgraded from an all-out, fight-to-the-
death attack mode to a standby alert that noted 
all sights, scents, and sounds, then dismissed 
them as nonthreatening. 
It was a relief. It allowed me to get a firmer 
grip on the buffalo's natural instincts. 
<Okay, Cassie, I told Jake you got away and 
you're all clear to demorph,> Tobias said, wheel-
ing high in the sky above me. <The helicopters 
are still back over The Gardens trying to track 
down the others. Chapman got up but they 
loaded him into an ambulance. The Controllers 
are going nuts because they had to call in a 
whole fleet of tow trucks and Visser Three's 
limo'sa total disasters 
<Yeah, I guess my buffalo buddy and I got a 
little carried away,> I said, kind of embarrassed. 
29 

I found a dense bramble thicket where I could 
demorph, then, thinking twice, moved on until I 
was in a small clearing surrounded by a few 
trees. The thorns and stickers might not have 
hurt the buffalo's tough hide but they would've 
ripped my skin to shreds. 
<Tobias, has anyone come up with a plan for 
destroying the Helmacron ship's sensors yet?> 
<No, but we're going to have to figure out 
something fast. Definitely before those heli-
copters decide to change their focus and come 
after the box again.> Tobias swooped down and 
landed on a nearby branch. 
I opened my mouth and dropped the slippery, 
spit-covered box on the ground. Then focused on 
my own DNA and felt the changes begin. 
Even though everyone says I have a talent for 
morphing — and I have to admit I usually can 
sort of control the process — it still doesn't fol-
low any real, precise pattern. So I wasn't sur-
prised when the first thing to go this time was my 
tail. It drooped slowly and then started to melt 
like hot wax, then — 
SCHLOOP! 
Was sucked right back up into my body. 
Bones began to grind and crunch, reshaping 
themselves. 
My eyes crawled closer together. My ears 
shriveled and shrank. 
30 
SPROOT! SPROOT! 
Ten human toes shot out of the crumbling 
hooves. My bones adjusted and reformed into an-
kles, then knees, then hips. My massive horns 
crumpled, deflated, and rolled back up toward 
the cleft at the center of my head. 
<Yuck,> Tobias said, ruffling his feathers and 
looking the other way. <No offense, Cassie, but 
that is really gross. I'm glad I haven't eaten any-
thing in a while.> 
I began to say, "I know," but it came out as, 
"waaaw waaw." 
"I know," I repeated, once my jaw finished 
shrinking. I flexed my fingers, bent down, and 
picked up the box. "And I know something else, 
too. We might want to steer clear of the real buf-
falo if we can. I, uh, don't think it trusts humans 
very much." 
<No problem,> Tobias said. <The last time 
I saw it was way ahead of you and still run-
nings 
"Good," I said, exhaling. "The Gardens'll 
send out a search party and probably a heli-
copter . . . " 
Oh, that was a nice picture. And just what we 
didn't need. My mother buzzing around the sky, 
searching for a lost Cape buffalo, while we 
dodged Yeerks in helicopters who were trying to 
kill us. 
31 

Tobias cocked his head. Listening. <Uh-oh.> 
"What?" 
<Tell you in a minute,> he said. I watched 
him lift off, make a quick circle. <Helicopter, 
Cassie. The Yeerks are expanding their search. 
We'd better get going.> 
"Are you sure it's the Yeerk helicopter, or is it 
the black one with a big 'The Gardens' logo on 
the side?" I asked. 
<Yeerks,> he said tersely. 
I took off at a trot, clutching the morphing 
cube and trying to keep to the soft carpet of pine 
needles since I was barefoot. 
Tobias glided along only a few feet above my 
head. Every couple of minutes he'd flap hard for 
altitude, land in a treetop and check out the heli-
copter's progress. 
<lt's getting closer but it hasn't pinpointed us 
yet,> he said, swooping back down and landing 
on a tree branch a few yards ahead of me. <l —> 
His head jerked and he fell silent. 
"What?" I said, huffing a little as I jogged 
toward him. "What, Tobias?" 
And then I broke into the clearing and I saw 
for myself. 
The Cape buffalo stood there, quivering. 
Twisting. Its eyes bulging with panic. Its mouth 
gaping in a silent scream. The scene was pretty 
32 
bizarre all by itself. But in our world things al-
ways had to be slightly more than weird. 
See, the Cape buffalo stood there, but in-
stead of a Cape buffalo head and face was our 
assistant principal's. 
Chapman. 
33 

A freak of nature. 
So help me, that's the first thought that swept 
into my mind, as I watched the buffalo stumble 
and squirm. 
It sprouted a human leg covered with coarse, 
black animal hair. 
Fringed, shaggy ears whipped out of Chapman's 
head, then shrunk into dachshund-sized ears. 
<What the . . .> Tobias finally blurted, sound-
ing a little nauseated. 
"It's morphing," I whispered. I covered my 
mouth with my free hand and fell back a step. It 
was really terrible. 
Chapman's skull split in the center and a pair 
of horns flowed from the crack like waves. 
34 
<How could it be morphing?> Tobias said, 
turning away and staring at me instead of the 
buffalo. 
"It must have touched the blue box," I said 
helplessly, thinking back. I had laid the box down 
in the truck while I morphed . . . 
"Oh, God. It saw me morph. In the truck. And 
then somehow, while I was out rampaging around 
the highway, it must have ripped free of its re-
maining restraints, brushed past the box, and 
then . . . It had plowed straight into Chapman 
and without even knowing it, had acquired his 
DNA." 
I fell silent, not even realizing that I'd been 
speaking aloud. 
<How could this happen?> Tobias asked, 
keeping his fierce, hawk's gaze fixed firmly on 
me. Like if he didn't see the buffalo, it wouldn't 
exist. <Cassie, we can't have an animal roaming 
around out here morphing Chapman! And what if 
it touches something else? What if it goes around 
acquiring, I don't know, everything, because it 
doesn't know any better!> 
"It could, because it doesn't even know 
what's happening to itself," I said quietly, watch-
ing as the morph to Chapman finally became 
complete. "Look." 
<l really don't want to,> he said, but did anyway 
The buffalo — Chapman — was down on all 
35 

fours, and though the human form was apparent 
it was covered in coarse hair — thankfully. Sud-
denly, it began tossing its head and making 
hooking movements even though it no longer had 
its horns. It snorted, then sniffed the air with its 
now-pitiful human nose. Slowly, watchfully, it 
lowered its head and bit off a mouthful of weeds. 
"It's grazing," I said, feeling nauseous. 
The buffa-human stiffened. It looked around, 
then spotted me. Issued a challenging snort and 
then a weak, warbling, "WAAAA!" 
"I can't watch this anymore," I said, as the 
buffa-human — or Chapman 
or whatever 
it 
was — crawled and lurched toward me on its 
hands and knees. It was trying to charge, to hook 
me with its nonexistent horns, to kill me. To pro-
tect and defend. 
I stepped aside as it lumbered past, its hu-
man head swinging and its tongue lolling out. 
Not even realizing it had missed me. 
<This isn't too weird,> Tobias said, as the 
buffa-human stopped. Turned. 
And slowly, creakily, straightened up onto its 
knees. 
Wrong. It was all wrong! This terrible, twisted 
creature made my skin crawl. An adult — an as-
sistant principal — was not supposed to huff 
and grunt and drool. Was not allowed to crawl 
36 
and snort and pant. It betrayed everything I knew 
to be true about — about — 
"It has a human brain, Tobias, but it doesn't 
have a clue as to what to do with it," I said, unable 
to stop staring at it, the way some people stare as 
they drive by car wrecks. It was grisly, it was 
gruesome, but I couldn't stop watching as the 
creature rose, wobbling and unsure, onto two legs. 
"Look, it's learning. It's watching me and learn-
ing!" The sight was both disturbing and exciting. 
<Yeah, well, that's great except that we've got 
to get out of here,> Tobias said, flapping to the 
top of the tree for another helicopter check. <Oh, 
yeah. There's a whole group of people fanned out 
across the edge of the field and they're making 
their way over here.> 
"We can't just leave it here," I said, watching 
as the buffa-human took a first shaky step toward 
me. 
<Well, we can't take it with us!> Tobias said. 
No we couldn't, not like this. But if I could 
get it to demorph back into its buffalo shape, 
then it would stop putting off so much morphing 
energy. 
<Come on, Cassie, the Yeerks know at least 
one of those buffalo is giving off morphing en-
ergy —> 
"Wait, Tobias. I'm going to morph back into 
37 

the buffalo to see if I can get it — him — to do 
it, too," I said. I focused on the powerful DNA 
swimming in my blood. 
The buffa-human watched me, unblinkingly, 
as I fell forward onto four short, muscular buffalo 
legs. 
My jaw ground and shifted into a long, hinged 
bovine one. My eyes slithered apart and my nose 
broadened. My nostrils stretched wide. Muscle 
upon muscle bulked up my body until I was huge 
and majestic and magnificent, with a tough hide 
and a hair-trigger temper. 
But this time I was prepared for the buffalo's 
aggressive defenses, and I controlled them. 
And then the other buffalo began to demorph. 
Chapman's pale, human skin darkened and 
sprouted coarse hair. The flesh covering his bones 
shivered, rippled, and bent, forming into four 
bovine legs. His gaze remained locked onto mine 
as he fell forward, as his neck bulged — 
And then the morph stopped. 
<Come on,> I urged in thought-speak. I 
pushed aside the rising dominance I felt and 
moved slowly forward. Went nose-to-nose with 
the buffa-human in a sociable greeting. <Come 
on!> 
The creature with Chapman's face stumbled 
backward, its legs thinning back to human's, fin-
gers and toes bursting from its fading hooves. 
<i don t get it. Why didn't it work? Two hours 
in morph and we'll have a really disturbing noth-
liton our hands,> Tobias called from the treetop. 
<Cassie! We have to leave him here. The Gardens 
search team'll find him sooner or later!> 
<What, as half-Chapman, half-buffalo? That's 
insane! We can't leave him! He doesn't even un-
derstand what's happening to him!> I cried. 
I was frustrated because what Tobias said was 
absolutely true. We did need to go, but how could 
I have created such a mutation, even by mistake, 
and then abandon it — him? 
I felt a little like a twenty-first-century Dr. 
Frankenstein and it was not a good feeling. 
<Cassie, if we wait any longer. . .> Tobias 
warned. 
<AII right!> I shouted, then was immediately 
ashamed. <Sorry, Tobias.> I demorphed, avoid-
ing the puzzled buffa-human's gaze, then, even 
though I was exhausted, immediately began to 
morph to wolf. 
Thick shaggy fur sprouted all over my body. 
My spine stretched and crackled. The palms of 
my hands puffed and hardened into thick, pro-
tective pads. 
* 
My skull shattered and ground into a canine 
skull. My snout shot out and my teeth grew into 
long, lethal fangs. 
The buffa-human snorted and tossed his hu-
39 
38 

man head. His torso was all bulky buffalo, his 
head and legs pathetically human. He was 
grotesque. 
He lumbered toward me but I was a wolf now, 
and I moved with easy grace and lightning quick-
ness. 
<Okay, Tobias,> I called, picking up the mor-
phing cube with my mouth. <l'm outta here. You 
fly back and get the others. I'll meet you guys up 
ahead.> 
<Alone,> Tobias said, glancing pointedly at 
the odd mix of buffalo and human, and then 
launching himself into the air. 
I looked at the creature, who was standing 
there, watching me. 
<Alone,> I whispered, turning away in shame. 
Because one way or another, his life as a nor-
mal African Cape buffalo was completely over. 
As a creature morphing, he would draw the 
Helmacron sensors. And if he exceeded the two-
hour limit in morph, he'd become some kind of 
hideous nothlit. Forever a mutant. Even if The 
Gardens found him, they wouldn't know what to 
do with him. 
And I knew I was leaving him to die. 
40 
I ran hard for a long time. Trying to put that 
last picture of the buffa-human out of my mind. 
Trying to forget how he'd started to follow me and 
how his plaintive, bewildered grunting still 
echoed through my head. 
Leaving him was wrong. But I had done it 
anyway. 
I had abandoned an animal with human DNA 
in its bloodstream. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
I glanced up. Spotted a lone helicopter with 
no logo on the side. 
The ominous drone was growing closer. 
I paused, trying to figure out what to do. 
In morph I was sending a stronger signal and 
41 

the helicopter could keep an easy lock on me. If I 
quickly demorphed back to human — besides 
that one fast burst of energy — I'd be giving off 
no signal except for the energy from the cube, 
and maybe I could lose them again. 
Hunkering down on my haunches, I crept into 
the hollow beneath a clump of bushes and de-
morphed in record time. 
Thwok! Thwok! Thwok! 
The trees stirred and the darkening sky vi-
brated with the dull, thundering rumble of the 
sharp, swishing blades. 
Time to run. 
I crawled out and took off, zigzagging 
through the forest. I was cold, clumsy, slow. Twi-
light had fallen and I couldn't see well in the 
growing darkness. My feet were battered and 
bruised. 
But what I was losing in miles I was making 
up for in confusion. The Yeerks in the helicopter 
kept losing the cube's signal and wheeling off in 
other directions, circling wider and wider until 
they were far enough away for me to pause, rest, 
and takeoff again. 
So this is how the hunters do it, I thought, try-
ing to catch my breath as I staggered through the 
shadows. They don't even have to get dirty or 
tired. They can just sit in helicopters, probably 
42 
drinking coffee, and chase their prey until it col-
lapses. 
The helicopter's ominous THWOK! THWOK! 
THWOK! had returned and it was directly above 
me now, running me ragged, beating me down 
until I had no strength left and my pounding 
heart seemed ready to explode. I felt the same 
sick, terrified desperation of the hunted, powerless 
to shake the ominous, stalking specter of death. 
I veered right in an effort to throw them off. 
Dragged myself under a rock ledge to re-
morph. 
I had to break the lock the Helmacron sensors 
had on me. Weaken the signal. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
If I didn't, the Yeerks would seize the blue box. 
They'd hold me down as a Yeerk slug slithered 
into my ear and wove through my brain. I'd be-
come a Controller, and then the Yeerks would 
know everything. That the "Andalite bandits" 
were really a bunch of human kids. They'd know 
where we lived, went to school, even what we ate. 
They'd know our families and take them, too. 
They might even kill us. But they wouldn't kill 
Ax. Ax would be given to a Yeerk up-and-coming 
in the ranks. We all knew that another Andalite 
body, even one that was really just a kid's, was a 
coup. 
43 

They would find out about the Chee and anni-
hilate them, extinguishing a race that had been 
around for millions of years. They would find out 
about the hidden colony of free Hork-Bajir and 
about the small but growing Yeerk resistance. 
If I didn't find a way to break this sensor lock 
we were all dead. 
I closed my eyes. Gathered up my shredded 
concentration. 
Thwok! Thwok! Thwok! 
I sat up and opened my eyes. Listened. 
No, I hadn't imagined it. The treetops had 
stopped shaking and the leaves had stopped 
swirling around me. 
The helicopter had moved off. 
Exhausted, trembling, I grabbed the blue box 
and crawled out from under the bushes. Lay back 
on the carpet of pine needles and listened to the 
helicopter's faint thrumming. Watched as an as-
sortment of owls and other birds of prey landed 
around me and began to demorph. 
"Cassie?" Jake said, when he'd finished de-
morphing. "Are you all right?" 
No, I definitely wasn't all right. I knew I was 
going to have to get up somehow, find the energy 
to morph again, and keep on running. 
"I'm fine," I lied. Being an Animorph had 
made lying a necessary evil. For all of us. 
"Good, because I've got some pretty decent 
44 
news," Jake said, smiling. "Erek rigged up a de-
vice that simulates morphing energy and planted 
it back at the far edge of the woods. Once the 
Yeerks find it they'll know it's a fake, but at least 
it'll buy us some time to figure out what to do." 
So. I hadn't saved us by demorphing that last 
time. The Yeerks had been lured away by a 
stronger signal in another direction. Figures. 
"The Chee are taking our places at home, so 
we're covered for the night," Rachel added, glanc-
ing around. "I should've stayed in owl morph. 
How are we supposed to find a place to hide 
while we make a plan if we can't even see where 
we're going?" 
"We should go wolf," I answered. "That way 
we can move quickly and I can carry the morph-
ing cube. I'm pretty sure there's a cave a few 
miles from here. The one I found when I was lost 
with Karen." The thought of Karen gave me a 
good feeling. She was a little girl who'd been in-
fested by a Yeerk. But now she was free and the 
Yeerk had become part of the Yeerk peace move-
ment. The thought also helped me remember 
that a few good things have happened to us since 
all this started. I guess that stands for some-
thing. 
The next voice I heard was Tobias's. <l filled 
them in on the buffalo, Cassie. They thought of 
something we didn't. Actually, Ax thought of it.> 
45 

I turned to look at Ax. 
He stared back with two of his four eyes. His 
stalk eyes were in constant movement, scanning 
the dark woods. His scorpion tail was curved high 
and ready to strike. 
"And?" I said wearily. 
<Tobias told us that this mutant learned to 
stand by observing you,> Ax continued. <And if 
he learns to speak, he will, most likely, be able to 
identify you.> 
"Forget learning to speak," I interrupted, re-
alizing what I hadn't realized before. "He's seen 
me morph! If the Yeerks infest him and are able 
to tap into his memories . . ." 
<Human or buffalo,> Tobias added quietly. 
<lt's seen you morph while it was in both forms.> 
46 
LjJolves can move. Quickly. Quietly. And for a 
very long time. The five of us blew through the 
woods until we finally found the cave. Tobias 
stayed overhead. Our own personal eye in the 
sky. 
The helicopter was a constant presence, beat-
ing through the night sky like a distant pulse, ris-
ing and falling, keeping us on edge and very, very 
aware of every movement. And every shadow. 
The cave itself was little protection from the 
Yeerk shock troops. But the feeling that* comes 
from being walled-in on three sides was false se-
curity enough for us to be able to rest for a little 
while. 
The sun set as we huddled in the gray light. 
47 

Well, I huddled. Rachel paced. Tobias perched 
on a low-hanging branch just outside the cave's 
entrance where Ax was keeping watch. Jake was 
sitting close by. 
"Have I mentioned to all of you how much I 
hate this?" Marco grumbled, his voice eerily dis-
embodied in the dim light. "I mean, it just 
doesn't stop." 
"Neither does your mouth," Rachel retorted 
automatically, "C'mon, Jake, we need a better 
plan than just playing Keep Away." 
"I know," Jake said, his fingers creeping over 
mine. "Any suggestions?" 
"Well, I guess we have to find a way to disable 
the Helmacron sensors or destroy the ship, be-
cause no matter where we hide the cube, the 
sensors will find it," I said. 
Marco snorted. "Do you think? You mean all 
we have to do is find a way to dodge the sensors 
and get up to the helicopter? All the while, we 
fight off the Yeerks' goon squad, find a puny, ultra-
microscopic device, and smash it before we're 
either killed or captured. No problem-o." 
<And don't forget about the buffa-human,> 
Tobias said. 
"That one's easy," Rachel said dismissively. 
"We just have to get rid of it." 
"But he's already acquired human DNA," I 
protested. 
48 
' So what? You're saying if we kill it, it's mur-
der?" Rachel asked. "Come on, Cassie, it's not 
a human any more than I'm a bear or you're a 
wolf —" 
"Or I'm a big monkey," Marco added. 
Silence. 
"Okay, so maybe Cassie does have a point," 
Jake said, obviously trying not to laugh. 
"Nice," Marco smirked. "Very nice, Prince 
Jake." 
Ax swiveled an eyestalk in Jake's direc-
tion. <Prince Jake, Marco and Rachel do make a 
valid point. I, too, have acquired human DNA. 
Does this make me a human rather than an An-
dalite?> 
Silence. 
"I hate these kinds of questions." Rachel. 
"There are never any concrete answers! I say we 
do whatever we have to do to protect ourselves 
and if that includes killing a buffalo, well, too 
bad. We know firsthand that cows die every day 
to make hamburgers —" 
"Not in the school cafeteria," Marco said. 
"I'm pretty sure that's roadkill." 
"Marco, let me ask you a question." 
"Shoot." 
"Is there any part of 'shut up' that you don't 
understand? 'Cause I'd be happy to explain it to 
you." 
49 

"C'mon, guys," Jake said impatiently. "We 
don't have a lot of time here." 
He was right. We didn't know where the buf-
falo was or if the Yeerks had already captured 
it . . . 
I shuddered. Forced myself not to mention 
the horrible possibility out loud. 
The helicopter's engine still pulsed through 
the night like a dull heartbeat. A little louder. A 
little closer. 
Jake sighed. "Yeah, well, we don't know any-
thing for sure right now, except that we have to 
destroy those sensors if we plan on seeing our 
next birthdays." 
<Okay, so how can we get inside the heli-
copter?> Tobias asked, sounding strained. 
Jake looked toward the cave entrance and 
then back to us. "Why go inside it?" 
"How are we supposed to destroy the sensory 
devices if we don't get inside the helicopter 
that's carrying them?" Rachel asked. 
"Maybe we should take down the whole heli-
copter," Jake said. "Don't even risk going inside. 
We already know we don't exactly want to get up 
close and personal with Taxxons or Hork-Bajir if 
we can avoid it." 
"I agree," I said. Hork-Bajir were lethal 
enough with their razor-bladed bodies, but the 
Taxxons — gigantic, cannibalistic centipedes with 
50 
incredibly sharp teeth — were just disgusting. 
The stuff nightmares are made of. 
"So, how do we take down a helicopter?" 
Rachel said. "We've totally lost the element of 
surprise." 
"No surprise," Jake said. "We give the Yeerks 
what they want. We let them get a good look at 
the morphing cube —" 
<Uh, Jake?> Tobias said. <lsn't that a little 
risky? I mean, you know that Visser Three wants 
this cube. What if once he's absolutely sure 
we've got it with us, he sends a whole Hork-Bajir 
army to get it? We're good, but we're not that 
good.> 
"Exactly, and here's where the fake-out 
comes in," Jake said. "Once the Yeerks pinpoint 
the source of the morphing energy, 'cause we let 
them 'catch us,' they're going to be on the look-
out for a trap, right?" 
"Oookay," Marco said. 
"So we give them one, only not from the di-
rection they expect." 
<Prince Jake, exactly what is the meaning of 
"fake-out"? I am not sure I understand^ Ax 
asked. 
"You're not the only one," Rachel muttered. 
"Okay, look," Jake said, sighing. "The guys 
in the helicopter are hunting the source of the 
morphing energy. We're it. We let the cube be 
51 

spotted and then take off. While they're trying 
to run us to ground, one of us hangs back and 
ambushes them." 
"Brilliant!" Marco stood up and applauded. 
"One of us against a bunch of Controllers in a he-
licopter. Which, I'm guessing, just guessing, is 
equipped with a bunch of weapons. What's the 
plan, morph a bird and peck the copter to death? 
Splatter poop all over the windshield and hope it 
crashes?" 
"We could try to lure it down to the ground," 
Rachel offered. "And then attack it and destroy 
the Helmacron ship." 
Marco shook his head. "Like they won't be ex-
pecting that." 
"Do you have a better idea?" Rachel snapped. 
"I kinda like the peck-'n'-poop thing, my-
self," he said brightly. 
"You know, birds get sucked into airplane en-
gines and cause crashes all the time," I said qui-
etly, tightening my grip on Jake's hand. 
<L)gh,> Tobias said uneasily. <Not a good way 
to go.> 
"So, you're saying we do a suicide run?" 
Rachel said. 
"Well —" Jake began. 
"No," Marco interrupted. "Not a suicide run, 
a cartoon run! Oh, man, I am so good! Listen, 
what does Wile E. Coyote do when he wants to 
squash the Road Runner?" 
"He straps one of those Acme rockets to his 
back," Rachel said. "Dive-bombs him or some-
thing." 
Marco slapped his forehead and groaned. 
"Noooo! Come on, am I the only one educated in 
cartoon combat?" We all stared at Marco. "Oh, 
for. . . He drops an anvil on him! Don't you get 
it? We need to drop an anvil on the helicopter!" 
"Ahhh," Jake said slowly. "Okay, yeah. It's 
perfect. We can't do it over the woods, though. 
The last thing we need is to cause a fire or some-
thing." 
Everything was falling into place. "We lure 
the helicopter out over the ocean. And then we 
drop the anvil," I said calmly. 
Jake smiled. "The sooner we get this done, 
the better. This is going to take split second tim-
ing to pull off." 
<Jake?> Tobias said urgently. <Someone's 
coming. Taxxons.> 
"Morph," Jake ordered. "Now!" 
52 
53 

J. morphed. 
I concentrated on the DNA and within a 
heartbeat, powerful horns popped through my 
scalp and were flowing and curving down the 
sides of my head and ending in sharp, deadly 
spears. 
My internal organs slithered and gurgled, 
swimming and settling into my expanding bulk. 
SPROOT! 
My tail shot out. 
My teeth grew, crowding my jaw and flatten-
ing into grinding molars. Coarse black hair 
sprouted and spread across my muscular tank 
body. 
And when the African Cape buffalo's mind 
54 
rose, I was ready. Got a lock on the aggressive, 
hair-trigger temper. 
<The Taxxon trackers have spotted the cave, 
Prince Jake,> Ax said tensely. <l would not ad-
vise getting trapped in here.> 
He was right. I glanced over at Jake, who'd 
morphed a sleek, deadly tiger. 
At Rachel, a massive, towering grizzly bear. 
Marco, a gorilla with enormous hands and the 
strength to tear a human apart limb from limb. 
At Ax and Tobias who'd chosen their own 
forms. An Andalite whose razor-tipped tail was as 
lethal as lightning and twice as fast. And a red-
tailed hawk with talons created to puncture, rip, 
and tear. 
<l'll go first.> Jake padded silently to the 
edge of the cave. 
I followed him, the blue box wedged tightly in 
my mouth. 
Clop clop clop! 
<C'mon, Cassie, let's get movin', ole girl,> 
Marco joked, slapping me on the rump. 
The buffalo temper flared and I twisted, toss-
ing my horns at him. 
<Whoa! Watch it, will you? You almost gutted 
me!> he said, leaping back just in time. 
<Sorry about that,> I muttered. 
I followed the others cautiously out of the 
cave, relying more on my sense of smell and 
55 

hearing than on my eyesight. I was listening for 
even the slightest whisper of sound. 
<We've got trouble,> Jake said. 
<No problems Rachel threw back her head 
and let out an enraged roar. 
"GGGGRRRRRRROOOAARRR!" 
The night erupted. 
The buffalo's overwhelming defense instincts 
kicked in and suddenly I was barreling through 
the weeds, tossing my horns, and impaling a 
Taxxon where it stood. 
"SSSKKKRRREEE!" It fell, writhing and 
twisting, foul-smelling blood pumping from its 
wounds. 
Immediately, two other Taxxons converged 
and tore it to shreds. 
I began to bellow, enraged by the scent of ag-
gression, by the invasion and threat to my herd. 
WHAM! 
I charged, slamming one of the feeding 
Taxxons into a tree. It burst, spewing guts every-
where. Frenzied, I trampled the second Taxxon, 
piercing its fat, squishy body with my hooves. 
It slashed at me, spasming in its death 
throes', but I barely felt its needle teeth. My heart 
was thundering and adrenaline powered my mas-
sive body. 
Nothing hurt. And nothing could stop me. 
"SSSRRREEEWAAAARRI!" 
56 
I whirled and saw Jake rake open a Taxxon. 
"RRRROOOOOWWWRRR!" 
Rachel, slashing and biting at a pair of Hork-
Bajir, her chest matted with blood. 
Fury rose and I stampeded a Hork-Bajir. 
WHUMPF! 
Its fiercely bladed arm split my shoulder. 
I gored it, trampled it. Backed off. 
It didn't move. 
FWAP! FWAP! 
Ax's tail blade was slicing and dicing, sever-
ing Hork-Bajir arms, hands, landing lethal blows, 
but there were too many and he was being driven 
back toward the cave. 
A furious, gray haze misted my vision and I 
barreled through the Hork-Bajir, a tank, a steam-
roller, hooking them, goring them, scattering 
them like bowling pins. 
More Hork-Bajir converged, wrist and arm 
blades slashing. 
"TSSSSEEEER!" Tobias screeched, raking 
his talons across a Hork-Bajir's eyes. 
It screamed. 
Everyone was screaming. 
Marco bellowed. Bringing down his huge fist 
onto a Taxxon. But his scalp was split, and one of 
his ears was missing. 
<There're too many!> he yelled. 
"GGRRROOOWWWWWR!" Rachel roared, as 
57 

a Hork-Bajir blade carved a deep swath through 
her shoulder. 
Jake leaped, grabbing a Taxxon and taking it 
down, ripping at it with his back claws. Leaped 
away and took down another one. <Keep fighting! 
If we retreat now, we're dead!> 
I slammed into another Hork-Bajir. And an-
other. Stomped them. Gored them. 
Their blades sank deep into my hide, slicing 
me open, nicking my bones and making me 
scream in pain, making me charge in fury, mak-
ing me fight to the death. 
<l'm losing it, Jake!> Marco yelled, clutching 
his head and reeling away from a downed Taxxon. 
<Prince Jake, we have to stop,> Ax said 
grimly, lopping the head off a slavering, chitter-
ing Taxxon. <We are severely outnumbered —> 
That's when I heard the familiar bellowing. 
The enraged bellow was fresh and furious. 
<lt's the buffalo, Cassie!> Tobias shouted. 
<The Yeerks didn't get it!> 
I sucked in lungfuls of air and let out a re-
sounding, answering snort. 
The buffalo went berserk. It was a whirlwind 
of destruction. Trampled, pierced, gored, and 
gouged huge, gaping holes in the Taxxons. Bat-
tered the Hork-Bajir. 
We all went a little crazy after that, on some 
58 
kind of sick, bloody rampage spurred on by the 
African Cape buffalo who annihilated the Hork-
Bajir ranks with sheer savagery. And finally, sent 
them howling, bent and broken, into the forest. 
And then it was over. 
59 

We were all pretty messed up. So with Ax 
and Tobias keeping a lookout and the buffalo fol-
lowing doggedly at our heels, we demorphed. 
The buffalo watched us, then began its own 
morph. 
Once again, unnervingly, the head developed 
first. 
"Of all the people around, it just had to ac-
quire Chapman?" Marco joked lamely, turning 
away. "That is so not cool." 
<l don't think there1 was a lot of choice in-
volved there,> Tobias said. 
"It's becoming human," I said quietly, watch-
ing as the buffalo's skin faded and lightened, as 
the coarse hairs were sucked back into its body. 
60 
<lt doesn t know what it's doing, Cassie,> To-
bias said. 
CCRRACK! 
The buffalo's legs reversed, stretched, and 
hinged into human knees. 
"There's something really gross about this," 
Rachel said, shaking her head. "It's so, I don't 
know, unnatural." 
"So are we," I said, watching as the buffa-
human wobbled up onto two feet. 
Jake shot me a concerned look. 
"That's different," Marco said. "We morph 
consciously. This buffalo's just mimicking what it 
sees. It doesn't know what the heck is going on." 
"But what if it could learn?" I said. "What if 
now that it has a human brain, he learns to use 
it? What if it learns how to reason, or —" 
"Nuh," the buffa-human grunted. "Guhhr-
nuh." It looked up at me and blinked. 
"It's learning to talk," I said, feeling a mixture 
of hope and nausea. 
"No way," Marco shot back. "That was just 
some kind of weird, random firing of neurons in 
the speech part of its brain." 
"You're wrong," I said, stepping slowly toward 
the buffa-human, who went very still. "Hi. I know 
you can't understand me yet —" 
"Nuh," it grunted, tossing its head. "Uhh-
hhnnn." 
61 

"Hi," I repeated. 
"Heeeeehhhhh," it said, looking puzzled. 
"I wouldn't push too hard to teach it to talk, 
Cassie," Jake warned. "If it becomes too human, 
it's gonna be a problem." 
"Trust me, Jake, it's not gonna live that long," 
Rachel snapped. "I'm not being handed to the 
Yeerks by some lame Chapman mutation." 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
<Helicopter,> Tobias said tensely. 
"We'll have to morph," Jake said, running a 
hand through his hair. "We don't have a choice. 
Everyone use your wolf morphs." 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
I concentrated on the wolf DNA. Immediately, 
a ruff of thick, lush fur sprouted around my neck. 
My legs dwindled in size but didn't weaken. My 
chest and shoulders swelled, and my face began 
to bulge. My teeth grew into long, deadly fangs. 
The buffa-human was morphing, too. Watch-
ing me as its defenseless, human body beefed up 
until it was a dark, massive rock. As the rolling, 
deadly horns sprouted from the center of its 
skull. 
Mimicking. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The trees whipped wildly and dirt flew. -
I scooped up the blue box in my mouth. 
62 
<Let's haul!> Jake ordered, streaking out of 
the clearing. 
We dashed after him, slipping away into the 
darkness just as a blinding shaft of light pierced 
the clearing from above. 
<Wait!> I shouted. <The buffalo!> 
<We can't wait!> Rachel said, tearing past 
me. 
<But we can't leave it!> I cried, pacing anx-
iously in the dense shadows. 
<Come on, Cassie! It's not in morph. If it runs 
away, it won't draw the Helmacron sensors. We 
will, so let's go!> Jake said. 
The real buffalo bellowed and snorted and 
barreled after me, bringing the searchlight with 
it. 
I couldn't kill it and I couldn't let it reach me. 
If it did, the Yeerks would see the morphing cube 
in my mouth. And that just wasn't going to hap-
pen. 
Whirling, I shot off after the others. 
I could hear the buffalo crashing along be-
hind me, snapping trees and crushing anything 
in its path. 
The helicopter blades sliced through the air 
but I was already pulling ahead of the buffalo, 
dodging and racing through the woods. 
TSSSEEEWW! 
63 

A pine tree behind me exploded. 
TSSEEWW! 
KA-BOOM! 
A huge boulder blew apart, winging fragments 
like shrapnel. 
<Bug fighters,> I heard Ax say grimly. 
<No kidding,> Marco said. 
"SSSSRRRREYYYAA SSSEEWWWITT!" 
A pair of Taxxons burst through the bushes in 
front of Tobias. 
"Grrr GrrOWWWRR!" I dropped the blue box 
and launched myself at the closest one. Felt its 
rows of tiny legs scrabbling through my fur. Sank 
my teeth into its disgusting body and twisted, 
yanking and tearing its flesh. 
It screamed. 
I bit it again, sinking my muzzle into its guts 
and ripping them out of its body. 
I left it dead, and helped Tobias finish off the 
other one. Trotted back and picked up the blue 
box. 
<Thanks,> Tobias said, running alongside 
me. <l didn't even see them coming.> 
<Don't do that again, Cassie,> Jake called 
back sternly. <Don't leave that morphing cube 
anywhere. There could have been another Taxxon 
waiting to grab it! And then what?> 
He was right, but his scolding tone still hurt. 
<Sorry,> I mumbled. 
64 
<Rachel, drop back behind Cassie,> Jake in-
structed. <And if there are any more attacks —> 
<l'll handle it,> Rachel promised, circling 
back around me. 
I felt like a total idiot. Like I should have 
known better. Only I couldn't have stood there 
and let the Taxxons rip Tobias apart, could I? No. 
<He's worried about you, Cassie,> Rachel 
said to me, in private thought-speak. 
<He should trust me to do the right thing,> I 
said. 
<He does, or he would've made somebody 
else carry the cube. That's why he put me back 
here. While you do the right thing, I do the nec-
essary thing. Get it?> 
<Well, when you put it that way,> I said, mol-
lified. 
SLASH!CCRRAAAAAAAACK! 
Hork-Bajir exploded out of the woods around 
us. 
And somewhere up ahead, I heard Jake howl 
in pain. 
65 

It was total mayhem. 
Screams. Shouts. 
Grunts of pain. 
Snarling. 
Rachel shot past me, a lethal blur of fur and 
teeth. Launched herself at the closest Hork-Bajir 
and ripped its throat out. 
That's when the buffalo came up from behind 
me and charged into the fray, slamming and 
trampling Hork-Bajir, mindless of its own open 
wounds. 
TSEEEEW! TSSEEEW! 
The clearing lit up with a blinding flash and 
another tree exploded. 
66 
I couldn't drop the blue box, so I couldn t 
fight. Couldn't help my friends. I was glad the 
buffalo had followed us, glad to see it take my 
place in battle, but I was afraid, too. If the Hork-
Bajir-Controllers noticed I wasn't fighting, no-
ticed my jaws weren't free to defend myself. . . 
I hunkered down and belly-crawled under a 
thick bush. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The helicopter hovered directly above us. The 
downwash pounded us with dirt and pine needles 
and rubble. The spotlight flooded the clearing. 
There really was no place to hide. 
It was a bloody, gruesome scene. 
Severed Hork-Bajir arms and legs twitching in 
the dirt. Growing pools of blood. Taxxons feast-
ing, drooling, like something out of a slasher 
movie — only this was real. 
TSEEEWWW! 
I bolted out from under the bush. 
The spot near where I'd been hiding exploded 
in a shower of rocks and dirt. 
<Run, Cassie!> Jake shouted. <Just go! 
Head for the beach! We're right behind you!> 
Leave them and run? I paused in the shad-
ows, torn. 
THWOK! THWOK! 
TSEEEW! 
67 

A pine tree shattered. 
The spotlight shifted toward me. Searching 
for the morphing energy. 
Searching for the blue box. 
We took off, zigzagged, and somehow man-
aged to lose the helicopter. The Bug fighters 
swooped and zipped through the sky, blasting 
anything and everything that moved, but at least 
they were still focused on the woods behind us. 
<For now I guess they think we should be too 
beat-up to run,> Marco said, limping. 
<Good,> Jake said, padding along beside me. 
<Let them keep thinking that.> He glanced at 
me. <You okay?> 
<Yeah,> I said shortly, tightening my jaws 
around the blue box. 
He must have noticed my tone, because he 
said in private thought-speak, <l'm sorry I yelled 
at you before. It kind of came out wrong.> 
<That's okay,> I said, too weary to hold a 
grudge. <l understand. We can't lose the blue 
box, no matter what.> 
<The forest is thinning and there is a road up 
ahead, Prince Jake,> Ax said, slowing. <Should 
we keep going?> 
<Yeah, we're going to have to cross it to get to 
the beach,> Jake said. 
<There's probably going to be a whole mess of 
them patrolling the road,> Tobias said quietly. 
68 
Controllers,> Rachel sneered. 
And probably even more Hork-Bajir, I thought. 
We crept beneath huge clumps of sticker 
bushes lining the edge of the road. 
<AII right, I'm open for suggestions,> Marco 
said. <How do we get across without being 
seen?> 
<Morph toflies,> Rachel said immediately. 
<Flies can't carry the blue box,> Jake pointed 
out. 
<Okay, so I'll morph elephant, kick some 
butt, and carry it across myself,> Rachel snapped 
back. 
<Not a good idea,> Marco said. <We've been 
doing okay so far because the goon squad's been 
so spread out searching for us. Now they know 
we're in the area and they're gonna swarm us. We 
don't need to advertise exactly where we are. 
Yet.> 
<Do you have a better idea?> Rachel said 
sweetly, which for Rachel usually means she'd 
like to punch you in the face. 
We shrank back from the road as a patrol car 
cruised slowly past, shining its spotlight into the 
woods. 
<Well, we'd better think of something be-
cause the longer we stay here, the better our 
chances of getting caught,> Jake said. Espe-
cially if that buffalo catches up to us again.> 
69 

<But when it's not morphing, it's not giving 
off any morphing energy,> I said. 
<No, but it's not exactly the quiet type, ei-
ther, Cassie,> Marco said. <lt just charges in 
like . . . well, like a big ole buffalo 
<Don't worry,> I said, with a confidence I 
didn't really feel. <We left it way behind us.> 
Marco looked at me. I turned away first. 
<We could break down the cube and each 
carry a piece across the road,> Tobias suggested, 
getting us back on track. 
<No, because we'd still have to use morphs 
big enough to be seen,> Jake said. 
And then it came to me. Pure. Simple. 
Ridiculously simple. 
<Throw it,> I said. 
<What?> Jake said, startled. 
<Rachel said it before. It's like playing Keep 
Away,> I said. <We morph into flies, cross the 
road and demorph. One of us stays behind, de-
morphs, and throws the box over the road when 
nobody's looking. The rest of us get it, the 
thrower morphs to fly, buzzes over, and we're 
gone! Simple.> 
<That's a lot of morphing energy in one 
place,> Tobias said uneasily. <We're bound to 
draw the Helmacron sensors and the helicopter. 
And then come the ground forces.> 
<But staying here will also allow the Hel-
70 
macron sensors to determine our locations Ax 
pointed out. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
The helicopter. 
<Okay, let's do it,> Jake said. <Sorry, Rachel. 
That's your line.> 
<l'll let it slide this time,> she said. <But 
don't let it happen again.> 
It was a simple plan and it should have been 
easy. 
I should have known better. 
71 
* 

r 
Demorph. 
Remorph to flies. Marco to human since he'd 
decided to be the one to toss the cube. 
Exhausting. 
But necessary. 
Huge, glittering, bulging compound eyes pop-
ping out of my sockets. 
Legs sprouting from my chest, gauzy wings 
tearing through my back and unfurling. 
Crunching, mushing, gurgling gut-shifting. 
And the long, tubular proboscis stretching out 
of the middle of my fly face. 
My wings beat two hundred times a second. I 
gave into the rush, zipped up, and landed on 
Marco's nose. 
72 
"Hey," he whispered, swiping at me. "Who's 
the wise guy?" 
<Sorry,> I said, buzzing circles around his 
head. 
<Okay, people,> Jake said. <Marco, I'll let 
you know when we get across and demorph. Then 
you throw the cube to us. We'll grab it, you 
morph to fly, and then we're out of here.> 
"Aye-aye, Captain," Marco said quietly, hun-
kering down in the bushes. 
<Spread out, guys,> Jake called, buzzing 
away. <Meet you on the other side!> 
I shot off after him. Now, a fly can only cover 
about four miles an hour, but when you're only^an 
eighth of an inch long, that's like major warp 
speed. I stifled the urge to dip and dive, and 
powered in a straight line across the road. 
Patrol car headlights cut through the darkness. 
I shot straight up about a millisecond before 
the lights swept past. 
<Made it,> Jake called, zipping down into a 
thick stand of weeds. 
<l think I'm right behind you,> I said, landing 
and immediately beginning my demorph. 
<We all here?> Jake asked, when he'd fin-
ished demorphing and had remorphed back into 
a wolf. 
<l think we are all here, Prince Jake,> Ax 
said, joining the rest of us. 
73 

Morphing is tiring and doing rapid morphing, 
like from a wolf to a human to a fly, then from a 
fly to a human to a wolf was more than we've ever 
had to do. But the wolf's sleek, powerful body 
was fresh and its senses keen, so the weariness 
wouldn't catch up with us until we were human 
again. 
And when that happened, we were all going to 
sleep for a week. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
<Okay, Marco, come on,> Jake called. <Wing 
it!> 
Marco couldn't respond because he had de-
morphed. 
<Two more patrol cars are coming,> Tobias 
said. <The helicopter must be picking up the 
morphing energy and radioing down to the cars.> 
<We'll have to chance it anyway,> Jake said. 
<Throw it high, Marco, and then get over here!> 
The blue box soared out of the bushes, up, 
up, up, arcing high over the center of the road. 
Thwok! Thwok! Thwok! 
The treetops began to sway in the downwash. 
<The helicopter's coming!> Jake yelled. <Get 
over here, Marco! Hurry!> 
A spotlight split the darkness, only feet from 
the soaring blue box. 
I held my breath. 
74 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The helicopter hovered above the trees, kick-
ing up whirling dirt devils and whipping the 
bushes into a frenzy. 
The human-Controllers piled out of the cars, 
heads bent and eyes scrunched against the bat-
tering downwash. 
<lt's blowing the box right toward us!> I 
watched as the cube picked up speed and hur-
tled toward the ground. And then I bunched up 
my muscles, took a flying leap, and snatched it 
in my powerful jaws right before it crashed. 
<Whoa! Nice catch!> Tobias said. 
<Ow,> I mumbled, my tongue numb from the 
impact. 
<l'm impressed,> Jake said. <Next time we 
play Frisbee, you're on my team.> 
And then, everything fell apart. 
The buffalo, nostrils twitching and head held 
high, stepped onto the road. 
<Guess it can run faster than you thought, 
huh, Cassie?> Marco said dryly. 
The buffalo gazed at the knot of human-
Controllers gazing at it. 
One of the cops made a quick motion and 
four or five Hork-Bajir stepped out of the woods 
and around the patrol cars. 
The buffalo snorted and tossed its head. 
75 

I now knew what that motion meant. I had ex-
perienced it firsthand. Aggression. It was going 
to fight them. Defend the herd it'd been follow-
ing all night. 
<Prince Jake, this buffalo is quickly becom-
ing a huge problem,> Ax said, his voice firm. 
<Look at it,> Rachel said. <lt's surrounded by 
Hork-Bajir? And it's going to fight them. I know a 
battle stance when I see one.> Grudging admira-
tion tinged her voice. <lt's going to fight them to 
the death.> 
<Wrong,> Marco said. <The human-Controllers 
won't let it be killed. Not if Visser Three thinks its 
an Andalite.> 
No winning this one. If the buffalo was killed 
in battle, we'd be safe. And our hands — my 
hands — wouldn't be stained with blood con-
taining human DNA. 
But I knew Marco was right. The Controller 
who caught a live "Andalite bandit" would proba-
bly be well rewarded. The Controller who killed it 
would be, well, probably dead himself. 
We were going to have to destroy the buffalo. 
If we we're closer to home, we might have been 
able to do it humanely, to euthanize it using my 
father's vet supplies. But I wasn't home. And 
now I didn't know when the chance would come, 
or what morph we would use to destroy such a 
76 
powerful animal, but my stomach turned at the 
thought of pitting buffalo against buffalo. 
<Cassie? I am sorry. But we cannot allow it to 
be captured,> Ax said quietly. 
<Okay,> Jake said wearily. <Let's go rescue a 
buffalo 
77 

Th 
he helicopter was coming straight toward us. 
The fighting stopped. 
<Watch out!> I yelled. I shot beneath the 
skids and head-butted Jake with everything I 
had. Which was just enough to make him stum-
ble out from beneath the rapidly descending he-
licopter. 
<Oof!> he grunted. <Uh, thanks, Cassie. I 
think.> 
<We're trapped,> Rachel said bitterly. <And 
all because of that stupid buffalo!> 
I looked at the buffalo. Its flanks were heav-
ing. It stood, head high, and stared at the figure 
emerging from the helicopter. 
78 
<Visser Three,> Ax announced coldly, in pub-
lic thought-speak, as the leader of the Yeerk in-
vasion leaped nimbly from the helicopter. 
<Ah, Andalite scum,> Visser Three said al-
most graciously, glancing at us and chortling to 
himself. <How thoughtful of you to group to-
gether so that the Helmacron sensors would have 
no trouble locating you!> His gaze lingered on 
the buffalo standing nearby. <You have caused 
me much inconvenience this day. Now, let's 
make this simple, shall we? Where is the de-
vice?> He stepped up to the buffalo and jabbed 
a slender finger down into one of its gaping 
wounds. <Answer me, Andalite!> 
The buffalo snorted and swung its head, its 
horn narrowly missing Visser Three. The visser 
moved away slowly, his main eyes half-mast. Al-
most as if he were drugged. 
<Figures,> Marco muttered. <That big boy's 
got more lives than a cat.> 
<Tell me where to find the morphing cube!> 
Visser Three roared. He'd obviously snapped out 
of his funk. 
The Hork-Bajir cringed. So did the. human-
Controllers left standing. So did we. 
I didn't look around. I stood with my head 
down, hiding the cube that was still tucked into 
my mouth. 
79 

<0r perhaps one of you has it with you now,> 
Visser Three said, in a suddenly low, silky voice. 
He turned away from the buffalo and glared at 
each of us. <Give it to me now or I will make you 
beg to die,> he said. 
<Prince Jake, the buffalo is morphing,> Ax 
said urgently. <lt acquired the visser!> 
<Oh, man, this is too good!> Marco crowed. 
While the real Visser Three was raging at 
the Hork-Bajir for not finding the cube, the 
buffalo was turning blue, growing eye stalks, 
and thin, almost graceful arms. Turning into 
an exact replica of the visser's stolen Andalite 
body. 
Including a curved and lethal Andalite tail. 
<lt's probably now or never,> Jake said 
tensely. <When Visser Three turns around and 
sees that buffa-Andalite, we get out of here! 
Head straight for the beach!> 
<What about the buffalo?> I asked. I watched 
as it experimentally flicked its tail, severing the 
arm of a Hork-Bajir in the process. <He doesn't 
know how to use that body!> 
<lt'll learn fast,> Jake said, as the Hork-Bajir 
cried out in pain. 
Visser Three turned toward the sound. 
<Now!> Jake shouted. 
"Grrr GrrrOWWWRR!" I plowed through the 
terrified human-Controllers. 
80 
TSEEW! TSEEW! 
<Get him!> Visser Three commanded, point-
ing imperiously at the buffalo in Andalite morph. 
The buffalo pointed back, mimicking. 
The Hork-Bajir-Controllers hesitated, torn be-
tween the two. 
Visser Three's Andalite tail came up. 
The buffa-Andalite's did, too. 
FWAPP! Visser Three's tail lopped off one of 
the buffalo's Andalite arms. 
The buffalo bellowed in open thought-speak 
and charged. Slapped and whipped its tail with 
little skill but with major fury. Drove Visser Three 
back. 
The Hork-Bajir and human-Controllers milled 
in helpless confusion, not daring to attack the 
wrong visser. 
<Now, now!> Jake yelled, charging into a 
knot of Hork-Bajir and plowing open a huge hole. 
He ran into the woods with us behind him, tram-
pling anything that got in our way. 
I wished I could call the buffalo after me. It 
had actually helped us fight and I didn't want to 
leave it behind to be killed. Or worse. 
• 
FWAPP! Visser Three's tail lashed out again. 
One of the buffalo's eye stalks fell to the 
ground. 
The buffalo's tail jerked forward, more of a 
pain reaction than anything, and the dull side of 
81 

his tailblade whacked Visser Three on the side of 
his head. 
He dropped like a stone. 
The Hork-Bajir stood silent, uncertain. 
The buffalo in the Andalite's body galloped 
through the Hork-Bajir and into the woods. 
Following us. 
82 
The beach was getting closer but we were 
wounded and tired. 
I could hear the Hork-Bajir behind us, not 
right on our tails but gaining fast. 
<Okay, guys.> Tobias had already demorphed 
and taken to the sky. <We're very close. We 
should hurry.> 
Jake sighed. <Okay. This is it. It's almost 
over. Is everyone ready? Cassie?> 
I shivered. So many things could go wrong. 
<Visser Three knows for sure now that we've 
got the morphing cube with us,> Jake continued. 
<And when he wakes up he's going to be on us 
like white on rice.> He looked straight at me. 
83 

<We need someone to hang back here in the 
ravine and buy us some time.> 
<l'll do it> Rachel — of course. 
<No, I will,> I said slowly. <l'm pretty sure 
the buffalo will stay and fight if I'm here in buf-
falo morph.> 
And probably be killed. I felt like the worst of 
all traitors. 
<Right,> Jake said. He nodded. <Okay, guys, 
we're out of here. Cassie?> 
<Yeah?> 
<See you at the water.> He took the cube in 
his mouth. 
/ hope so, I thought. But I didn't say it, not 
even in private thought-speak. Instead, I watched 
as they took off through the thinning forest. 
The buffa-Andalite shifted. 
I turned back to face it. It was wounded and 
bloody, its lone eye stalk drooping. Somehow, I 
had to get him to demorph back into his true buf-
falo self, where he was at his most lethal. 
Where I could use him most effectively. 
And I had to use my own buffalo morph so we 
could fight side by side with full power. 
I focused on my human DNA. Demorphed as 
rapidly as I could, trying not to give the buffalo 
time to mimic me. I went from tired, wounded 
wolf to puny, human girl and then bulked right 
84 
back up again, growing a fresh, thick hide and 
sharp, curving horns. 
The buffalo began to darken and swell, mim-
icking my shape, demorphing back into his true 
form. It eyed me warily for a moment, then the 
tension eased. It had followed me as a Cape buf-
falo before and by doing so, had already estab-
lished our hierarchy. 
A twig snapped. 
We both lifted our heads, noses twitching. 
Caught the scent of approaching danger. And 
knew to protect the herd. 
I snorted. 
It snorted. 
We tossed our horns and I lumbered into the 
tall bushes, the buffalo following. 
We would wait. And then we would ambush 
the Hork-Bajir. That's when I noticed the drop-off 
on the edge of the ravine. Not too far down but 
definitely far enough down to hurt. 
They started to come at us quietly, cautiously, 
and within minutes. 
We waited until they were almost equal with 
us and then . . . 
I bulldozed out of the bushes, knocking down 
trees, goring and slashing as I allowed the buf-
falo's defense instincts to kick in and send me 
into a wild, raging fury. 
85 

And still more Hork-Bajir fought their way 
through the narrow ravine. 
<Get out of my way!> Visser Three thundered 
at his troops. 
My blood ran cold. 
He was morphing. His stolen Andalite body 
bulging and melting, turning black and gooey. 
Oozing forward and tainting everything he 
touched. Making the nearby Hork-Bajir's skin siz-
zle and bubble like it was being dissolved with 
acid. Short, thick, dripping tentacles shot out of 
his body, and a huge, wet, red mouth with buzz-
saw teeth chomped and smacked, drooling the 
same smoking, sizzling acid. 
Time to go, I thought, as Visser Three pointed 
a tentacle at me. 
A stream of acid flew through the air. It splat-
tered the Hork-Bajir in front of me and sent it 
howling and writhing to the ground. 
The holes in its skin bubbled and stank. 
I wheeled. 
Powered up my short, muscular legs. 
And with a loud, snorting call to the buffalo, 
barreled"to the edge of the drop-off and jumped. 
86 
Terror. Sheer panic. 
Falling was nothing like flying. 
No control at all. 
My buffalo instincts went insane. 
I bellowed, legs scrabbling for something, 
anything, to hold on to. My heart slammed into 
my chest and panic froze my blood. 
I crashed down through a thick, brittle layer 
of scrub bushes, falling . . . 
The rocks shot up at me, hard and cruel 
and — 
WHUMPRCRRUNNCH! 
I couldn't breathe. Couldn't move. Pain was 
everywhere, pounding and tearing at me. 
WHUMPF! CRRAAACCCKKK! 
87 

The ground shook when the buffalo landed 
beside me. 
I opened my eyes, dazed. And through a hazy 
mist of agony saw the buffalo raise its head and 
look at me. It bawled piteously and struggled to 
rise. 
It couldn't. It had snapped a couple of 
legs; the bones jutted out through the torn, 
ragged skin. Blood pumped and stained the 
ground. 
It was in agony, but it wasn't dying. Yet. 
I was bleeding, too, from the branch that had 
speared into my stomach on the way down. 
. Infection's going to set in, I thought dimly. 
Someone had better cleanse this wound really 
thoroughly or — 
No. No one was going to cleanse my wounds. 
No one was going to save me. 
The world got smaller, then expanded. I 
blinked, fighting the wooziness. 
My blood was pumping out of my chest with 
every beat of my thundering heart. I would proba-
bly die before the buffalo did. If it did. 
The buffalo bawled again. Its unbroken legs 
churned the dirt. 
There was only one way to save us. 
<Watch me,> I said to the buffalo. 
Its head jerked and he focused its eyes upon 
me. 
88 
I began to demorph, slowly at first, then gain-
ing speed. 
My shattered bones ground and reformed. 
"Come on," I urged, as the buffalo groaned 
and began to shift shape. 
I crouched beneath the bushes beside it. 
Sickened by the transformation, yet unwilling to 
leave him there to die like this, or live on as a 
crippled bloody mess. Or be captured by the 
Yeerks. 
A human head. Nose stretching, slimming. 
Eyes crawling from the sides to the front of the 
face. Teeth shrinking, ears popping out. 
The buffa-human opened its eyes and looked 
at me. 
"Come on," I said, when the morph was com-
plete. I stood up. 
The buffa-human — Chapman —got to his 
knees. Shakily, he rose onto two feet and swayed. 
Took a wobbly step toward me. Snorted. 
I snorted back. "Come on." 
We traveled slowly, keeping close to the drop-
off base where the Hork-Bajir couldn't see us. We 
were safe for the moment. They weren't-coming 
down the same way we did. 
Visser Three knew it, too, and his enraged 
shouts echoed through the canyon. 
The buffa-human stiffened at the sound. 
Tossed its head. 
89 

"Don't listen," I said, motioning it on after 
me. "Come on, we have to find the others." 
But even as I said it, I was filled with a sick 
mixture of hope and dread. What was going to 
happen to this sad, messed-up creature when we 
did meet up with the rest of the "herd"? 
We couldn't let it live and yet everything in-
side me rebelled at the thought of killing it. I 
could have let it die back there — Marco and 
Rachel would probably say I should have and 
Jake had expected me to — but I just couldn't. 
And I was at least partially responsible for its 
awful situation. To have walked away and left it 
when I knew a way to help it. . . Well, I just 
couldn't. 
If it had to die, it had to die fast, without ex-
cess pain. Not lingering. Not inhumanely. 
"Guuuuhhh," it said, stumbling along behind 
me on its tender, human feet. "Goowwww." 
"You have to walk carefully," I said, pointing 
down at the smooth patch of rock I was standing 
on. "See?" I stepped on another smooth surface, 
avoiding a tangle of sticker bushes. "Like this." 
The buffa-human frowned but stepped where 
I'd stepped. Its face cleared. "Guuhh." 
"Yes, that's good," I said, my heart sinking 
right down to the bottom of my stomach. What 
was I doing? I shouldn't be talking to it — but I 
always talked to the wounded animals in my fa-
90 
ther's Wildlife Rehab, especially when I was 
changing their bandages or cleaning their cages. 
Calm words seemed to soothe them — 
But this was different and I knew it. 
"There she is! Cassie!" 
The shout was faint. 
I looked up and saw Jake waving. 
My spirits shot up and suddenly, buffa-human 
or no buffa-human, I was glad to be reunited with 
my friends. 
No matter what happened in the end. 
91 

How 
could it have survived that fall?" 
Marco asked, glancing pointedly at the buffa-
human and giving me a hard look. 
"It was pretty bad," I admitted, avoiding his 
cool gaze. "It saw me demorph, though and mim-
icked me. I guess that saved it." Sure. I guessed. 
How about I knew? 
"I just can't get right with this," Rachel said. 
"I mean, it's bad enough that we have this mu-
tant thing following us around, but did it have to 
go and acquire someone we know? I know I'll 
never be able to look at Chapman again without 
freaking out. It's too weird." 
The buffa-human had hunkered down at the 
edge of our circle. Its eyes were disturbingly 
92 
blank, absent of human recognition and intelli-
gence. It was watching us, though, and warily 
sniffing the air. It was listening, too, gauging the 
tones of our communication and on the alert for 
any type of alarm call. A buffalo in human skin. 
It was unnerving. 
"It's gross," Marco said, looking away. 
<lt is dangerous,> Ax looked at me with his 
main eyes while the ones on stalks surveyed the 
area. 
"Yeah," Jake said, weakly smiling at me as I 
sat down on the rocks next to him, keeping the 
blue box between us. "Glad you made it." 
"Me, too," I said, smiling back, faintly. "That 
drop-off was pretty bad." 
"Guhhhhd," the buffa-human said, tensing 
when all heads swiveled in its direction. "Guh-
hhd?" 
"No, not good, bad," Marco said, scowling. 
The buffa-human frowned and pressed its 
lips together. "Baaaaadd?" 
"I'm teaching my assistant principal to talk," 
Marco said. "Is this whacked or what?" 
<lt's not Chapman,> Tobias said. Remem-
ber that. It's not Chapman.> 
<lt's learnings I said, absently brushing a 
black ant from the morphing cube. It hit the 
ground and ran up my leg. 
"No, it's not, Cassie. It's only mimicking," 
93 

Rachel insisted, shaking her head. "Don't make 
this more than it is. It should have died a long 
time ago." 
"She's right," Marco said, giving me a know-
ing look. "You didn't do it any favors by keeping 
it alive, Cassie. Now one of us is going to have 
to . . . " 
There was an uncomfortable pause. 
"Well," Jake said, rising. "I think we'd better 
get moving again. The Yeerks are going to find 
us, no question about that, but we want to be in 
place when it happens." 
"Mee-meep," Marco said, jumping up. "Anvil 
time." 
I rose slowly. The buffa-human did, too. 
"You have to get it to morph back to buffalo," 
Jake said, avoiding my eyes. "It's probably safest 
that way. The rest of us will head out. We'll move 
slow enough for you to catch up, Cassie." 
And the buffalo? I wanted to ask. What about 
it? Am I supposed to lead it off another cliff, or out 
into the dangerous undertow and abandon it? 
What was I supposed to do with this poor, mutated 
animarthat never should have existed? And why 
was I the one who was going to have to kill it? 
But I didn't ask that last question because I 
knew what they would say. 
And they were right, only . . . 
94 
I turned away as the others began their 
morphs. 
"Ready?" I said in a low voice to the buffa-
human, blocking his view of the others. 
It cocked its head. "Guuuuhhhdd." 
"Yes, you're good," I whispered, closing my 
eyes and concentrating on the buffalo's' *Werful 
DNA. "Now, pay attention." 
I felt the changes begin. The usual. Bones 
grinding, contorting, wrenching backward and 
forward, stretching and disappearing. The feeling 
that your entire body is shot full of Novocain, so 
you're aware of the impossible crunches and gur-
gles, but you don't actually feel them. 
I opened my eyes and saw the buffa-human 
finishing its morph. Thick horns were crawling 
out of the center of its massive head, slithering 
down past its tufted ears, and curving back up 
with deadly accuracy. 
SPRROOT! 
Its tail sprouted and it flicked it. 
<Good,> I told him in thought-speak, watch-
ing his ears flick and twist, disturbed at the 
sound that made no sound outside his head. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
Jake picked up the blue box and held it tight 
in his jaws. <Cassie?> 
I moved behind a huge clump of bushes, 
95 

where the buffalo couldn't see me. Demorphed 
and remorphed into a wolf. 
I felt my teeth shifting in my gums, sprouting 
into long, gleaming fangs. Felt my body stretch 
and grow sleek with powerful muscles. Felt the 
thick ruff of fur ring my neck and ripple across 
my body. 
Thick pads bulged and hardened on my 
hands and feet. 
My skull cracked and remolded, expanding 
into a canine muzzle. 
<Ready?> Jake called impatiently. 
<Ready,> I said, as soon as the morph was 
fimshed. 
<Then let's—> Rachel began. 
<Do it!> Marco said in his best "superhero 
voice." 
The air stirred as the others raced out of the 
clearing. 
I smelled the buffalo's confusion. Heard the 
dull clop of its hooves against rock as it hurried 
after them, snorting and calling, puzzled at being 
left behind. 
And suddenly, I was overcome. Fear. Frustra-
tion. Panic. Exhaustion. 
Why had this happened! To us? To this poor 
creature? 
I didn't know and would never know. And I 
was tired of not having the answers. 
96 
With a whimper I bolted into the woods after 
the others. Bulleted past the lumbering buffalo. 
Ignored its plaintive calls. 
Ran and ran and ran until the faint scent of 
the salty ocean filled my nostrils. Ran until the 
buffalo's cries had faded to whispers, replaced 
by the dull, insistent throbbing of a distant, but 
approaching helicopter. 
97 

I could hear the others padding swiftly 
through the woods in front of me and the faint 
crashing of the surf against the shoreline. 
I didn't want to think about the buffalo lost 
somewhere behind me. 
<There's a helicopter doing a zigzag search 
back over the ravine,> Tobias called. <lt's defi-
nitely tracking us, Jake. Coming fast!> 
<Tlme for Operation Anvil to kick in,> Jake 
said. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
The helicopter was getting closer. 
The plan had to work. 
98 
I started to demorph. 
Something was moving in front of me. 
"Uhhh!" I backed up. 
Gaped at the ground in front of me. 
Something was growing. Fast! 
Black. Bulging. Three inches. Eight inches. 
Now it was a foot high. 
It was an ant, antennae waving and pincers 
snapping. 
And it was getting bigger. 
Two feet high. And counting. 
Demorph, I thought frantically, trying to 
scrabble away from the ant's sharp, snapping 
pincers. Demorph! 
And the ant was still growing, its arms 
and legs waving, hair sprouting from its bulby 
head — 
Hair? 
The tips of its top pair of legs swelled and fin-
gers erupted. 
Its segmented body melted and ran together, 
reshaping into a sturdy, human form. 
Wide, human eyes popped out of its head, 
flanking a strong, familiar-looking nose. 
SCHWIPP! SCHWIPP! 
Its pincers were jerked halfway back into its 
head, leaving the lethal tips spasming, and in be-
tween them, in some horrible, terrifying morph-
99 

ing disaster, the ant's face split vertically and 
lips formed. 
Opened wide in a silent scream as gleaming, 
white teeth erupted from the pink gums. 
Please, no. 
I was gazing at myself. 
100 
Somehow, 
and I don't know how, maybe 
through my own human survival instinct, I fin-
ished demorphing, shooting back up to my full 
height. Now I was looking the ant-Cassie square 
in the eye. 
It was horrible. Terrible. 
It writhed and jerked, body parts melting then 
hardening from ant to human and back. 
Antennae burst from its human ,tskull, were 
sucked back in, then shot out again. 
It looked around, eyes bulging with panic, 
and opened its mouth in a scream straight out of 
my worst nightmares. 
"AAAAAARRRRGGGGHHH!" Raw torment. 
101 

I staggered back, clapped my hands over my 
ears, tried to shut out the unearthly shrieks. 
How had this happened? Where had this sec-
ond abomination come from? How could an ant 
have gained the power to morph! 
There was only one way. 
The blue box. The ant must have touched it. 
Yes, it had, back when we had been resting 
on the rocks. The ant had been crawling on the 
box and I'd flicked it off. Then it had crawled up 
my leg. It must have acquired me without having 
any idea of what it was doing. 
I glanced back at it, watching it scream and 
writhe like it was in mortal agony. 
Why would it be in pain? Morphing didn't 
hurt. . . 
And then the memories I had of being an ant 
resurfaced and I knew why the ant-Cassie was so 
terrified. For the same reason, except in reverse, 
that I never wanted to morph an ant again. 
They were all part of a collective. Mindless, 
soulless beings without wills or thoughts of their 
own. 
When the ant had morphed to human it had 
become an individual with the freedom to 
choose. With free will. The human brain, with all 
its diversity and innate curiosity, must be com-
pletely overwhelming it. 
102 
Logically, I knew that. Emotionally, I was 
watching myself twist and squirm and double 
over in agony and I couldn't take it. 
"Stop it!" I shouted. 
Bad move. 
It reared up and focused on me. 
And then its pincers sprouted full-length on 
either side of its human mouth, and it attacked. 
I stood, frozen in horror as it flung itself at 
me, stumbling awkwardly on two legs. 
Pincers snapping. Grazing my leg. 
The pain woke me up. 
"No!" I screamed, darting sideways. 
The ant moved with me, waving its "arms, 
smacking and slapping at me. 
"No! No!" I sobbed. I tried to run, to get away 
from this hideous mutation of me, from this in-
sanity. But I tripped over a branch and went 
down hard on my back. 
Instantly, the ant sprang. Landed on top of me. 
Reared up, pincers opening and closing. 
Arms melting back into spindly ant legs, then re-
morphing into human ones. Blocking my frantic 
punches and kicks. Growing shiny white teeth in 
a wide, wet, keening mouth and then shifting 
back into ant mandible. 
The pincers clamped down on my arm. 
Squeezed hard. Harder. 
103 

It was going to snap my arm and the pain was 
unbearable. 
"NO!!" I screamed. 
That's when I heard the now-familiar bellow. 
The ant-Cassie jerked upright, dragging me 
with it. 
"Here! Here!" I cried hoarsely, kicking at the 
ant as the buffalo charged into sight. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
The buffalo lifted its head and scented the 
air. Tossed its horns. 
"EEEEEEEE!" the ant-Cassie screamed, drop-
ping me and wheeling to face it. 
Crying, cradling my torn and bloody arm, I 
dragged myself out of the way. 
The ant-Cassie, antennae waving madly and 
pincers snapping like the jaws of a steel trap, ran 
crazily at the buffalo. 
THUNK! 
The buffalo twisted its horns and gored it 
right through the stomach. 
"EEEEEAAAHHH!" it screamed, arching back-
ward, beating on the buffalo's head with its fists 
and finally, with a wet, popping sound, pulling it-
self free. 
It staggered backward, clutching its bloody 
abdomen, pincers snapping weakly and human 
mouth opening and closing. 
104 
I was watching myself die. Not as a human or 
an animal, but as a terrifyingly mindless drone. 
A nightmare. 
I threw up in the bushes. Sat up and wiped 
my mouth. 
The buffalo cried out, in triumph. 
But it wasn't really triumph, because instead 
of dying the ant-Cassie was shrinking. Demorph-
ing into a vile jumble of ant and human parts. 
Growing tinier and tinier. 
"No," I croaked. 
I staggered over. Stomped the ground. 
Stamped and crushed everything and every-
where. 
-
Slammed my bare feet down again and again 
and again until it had to be dead because such a 
hideous abomination could never, ever be al-
lowed to live. 
Thwok thwok thwok! 
The helicopter was closing in, drawn, un-
doubtedly by all the morphing energy. 
I had to go right now or our plan would be ru-
ined. 
The buffalo had relaxed a little and was 
eating the sparse grass at the edge of the 
woods. 
I stepped beneath a tree. Focused on the os-
prey DNA. 
105 

Instantly, I was yanked down toward the 
ground, falling at a dizzying rate of speed and 
then stopping short like a runaway elevator slam-
ming into its next floor. 
A lacy, dappled pattern etched across my skin 
and rose into feathers. 
My face stretched out, pursing my lips into a 
beak and hardening like quick-drying cement. 
My eyes crawled to either side of it and my vision 
sharpened. 
My bones ground and hollowed out. 
Tail feathers sprouted. 
The morph was completed. 
mapped my powerful wings and hopped up 
onto a rock. 
The buffalo looked at me, puzzled and uncer-
tain again. 
I looked back, not knowing what to say or 
do. 
It gave a questioning snort and stepped 
closer. 
THWOKTHWOKTHWOK! 
<l haveto go now,> I said, knowing it couldn't 
understand me. <Thank you for saving my 
life.> 
The buffalo's ears twitched. 
And then I knew what to say. 
<You are good,> I said softly. 
106 
Its ears came forward and it made a soft, al-
most friendly sound. 
The helicopter buzzed into sight. 
TSEEEEEW! 
And then the Dracon beam blew up the buf-
falo. 
107 

I shot out of the trees with dozens of other 
frightened, fleeing birds, flapping my powerful 
wings and fighting frantically for altitude against 
the helicopter's fierce downwash. 
The helicopter circled the clearing where 
smoking pieces of the buffalo lay. 
They had killed it and yeah, okay, they'd 
saved me from having to come back and do it 
myself. 
But that still didn't stop the feelings. Not at all. 
That buffalo had trusted me and for reasons it 
didn't understand, maybe would never have been 
able to understand, I'd let it down. 
Or maybe somewhere in its developing, learn-
ing human mind, it had understood. 
108 
I would never know. 
I escaped the helicopter's swirling air cur-
rents and headed out over the ocean in the dull, 
gray half-light of the approaching dawn, fighting 
to go higher and higher. 
Far below me, I could see five identical dol-
phins swimming out to sea. 
And now, not so far below me, swooped a Bug 
fighter followed by the helicopter. 
I was fighting to rise, flapping hard against 
the dead air. If Operation Anvil was going to work 
and we were going to destroy the Helmacron sen-
sors aboard the ship aboard the helicopter, I had 
to be high enough to drop the anvil. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
The Yeerks were firing Dracon beams at the 
dolphins. 
The dolphins dove, but I couldn't tell if they'd 
done it in time to avoid getting hit. 
Higher, Cassie, higher, I told myself, strug-
gling. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
<l'm hit!> Tobias cried faintly. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
The Bug fighter swooped and dipped, closing 
in, almost like it could smell blood. 
<Dive! Dive!> Jake yelled. 
The dolphins disappeared again. 
They were deliberately drawing all the fire, 
109 

distracting the Bug fighter and the helicopter so I 
could put the plan into effect. 
But was it going to work? 
While the Bug fighter swooped and buzzed 
low over the ocean, the helicopter was hovering 
like a giant dragonfly in one spot — directly 
above where the dolphins were last seen. 
In order for me to drop this anvil, I had to be 
directly above the helicopter. If it moved, the 
whole plan would be wrecked. 
A helicopter could outrun an osprey, no con-
test. 
But I couldn't think about that. If I did, I'd 
think even harder and see all the other things 
that could go wrong. And then I'd think about 
what would happen once everything did go wrong 
and I'd be lost. 
The dolphins resurfaced farther out. 
The helicopter moved again, hovering over 
them while the Bug fighter blasted away with the 
Dracon beams. 
<Jake, can you hear me?> I shouted, flapping 
and straining for altitude. <Don't move anymore! 
Stay where you are!> 
<Hurry, Cassie,> came his faint reply. <Tobias 
and Marco are hit and there's a lot of blood in the 
water!> 
My heart skipped a beat. 
110 
Blood meant sharks and they were the last 
thing we needed right now. 
<l'm going to drop the anvil, Jake!> I yelled 
back, leveling off high above the helicopter. 
<Just stay where you are! If you guys move then 
I'm going to miss the helicopter!> 
His answer was too faint to hear. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
The dolphins surfaced and dove again. 
I followed it until I was once again directly 
overhead. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
<. . . losing a lot of blood . . .> 
<. . . Cassie . . .> 
The thought-speak was faint, fragmented, 
and broken. 
I'd just have to risk it. Risk it all on this one, 
insane plan modeled after an old cartoon I didn't 
even like. 
And I'd have to do it fast because still distant 
but speeding closer and closing the gap, came 
the sharks. 
So there, way up in the vast, cloudless sky 
over the enormous ocean, above a Bug fighter 
teeming with Yeerks and a helicopter with lethal, 
slicing rotor blades and a deadly, sucking engine 
intake, I demorphed. 
Without a net. 
I l l 

Th he demorph should have been smooth. 
I should have been able to hold on to my 
wings until the last possible minute. But I was 
completely burnt out. 
The demorph went weird and instead of be-
coming an osprey-sized Cassie with wings, I lost 
the wings first and began plummeting down 
through the air, streaming and rolling head over 
heels, desperately trying to finish the demorph. 
I was rushing down, the wind sharp and hard, 
making me gasp for air. 
Concentrate! 
The feathers faded and skin spread across my 
body. I grew in one overwhelming surge to human 
112 
size. My beak shriveled and disappeared. Arms 
and legs shot out. 
Frantically, I focused on the humpback whale 
DNA coursing through my bloodstream. 
Yes, that was our plan. That was it. 
I'd morph to a gigantic whale — the anvil — 
and drop out of the sky down onto the helicopter, 
crushing it and sending it crashing down into the 
sea. It was sort of like an idea we'd used once be-
fore— and it had worked then. I was hoping it 
would work again. 
And hopefully, I wouldn't get sliced to ribbons 
in the process. 
Or trap the other Animorphs beneath the wreck-
age. 
But I was falling too fast, I could feel it. Not 
even my expanding mass could slow me down. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
I was bloating, bulging up and out. I was as 
big as a minivan but it wasn't big enough. 
The skin on the top of my head crawled and 
opened into a blowhole. 
My bones crunched, ground, and-knitted into 
a small but stretching whale skeleton. My arms 
flattened into flippers. 
The roar of the chopper was numbing my brain. 
I could feel the air trembling each time the 
slicing blades revolved. 
113 

I wasn't going to make it! 
I wasn't big enough and I wasn't going to be 
by the time I hit the helicopter. 
I was going to be sliced up like deli lunch-
meat and flung far and wide across the ocean to 
feed the sharks. 
That's when a movement caught my eye. 
At first I couldn't tell what it was. 
Then I realized it was just one of a few of the 
gulls frightened by the helicopter's downwash. 
And then the helicopter pilot below me 
glanced up. His eyes bulged and with one swift 
jerk, he yanked the helicopter out from under 
me. 
I was going to miss him! Even at my balloon-
ing rate I was still going to miss him! 
The mission had failed! 
I'd failed. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
The Bug fighter swooped in below the heli-
copter, blasting the wounded, surfacing dolphins 
again and again. 
It was all over now. 
Within seconds the others would be dead. If 
the Bug fighter didn't get them, then I'd end up 
crushing them to death. The Yeerks would have 
the morphing cube and the human race would be 
finished. 
SCHWOCK! 
114 
I couldn't believe it. 
One of the gulls had been sucked into the he-
licopter's powerful, jet engine intake like a hair-
ball into a vacuum hose. 
KA-BOOOOM! 
The helicopter exploded in a raging ball of 
fire. 
The impact hit me like a warp-speed eighteen-
wheeler. Sledgehammered the air from my lungs. 
Stunned me into shocked, deafened numbness. 
Then came the scorching heat from the explo-
sion, and the agony. 
I was flung away from the burning wreckage, 
down toward the ocean. 
And the last thing I thought in the millisec-
ond before it all went black was, After all this, all 
it took was one poor seagull. . . 
115 

<L— assie? Cassie? Can you hear me?> Jake 
said urgently. 
"No," I mumbled, shaking my head and im-
mediately breathing in a noseful of salt water. 
"Gak. Ugh." I coughed, floundered, and when I 
couldn't get a handhold, panic set in. My eyes 
popped open. 
The first thing I saw was a dolphin with the 
blue box in its mouth. 
The second thing was miles of choppy, gray 
water with a far-off outline of land. 
No wonder I was wet, shivering, and pruny. I 
was human again, and floating on my back in the 
middle of the ocean, surrounded by dolphins 
116 
who were gently supporting me with their snouts 
and nudging me along toward the shore. 
My brain kicked in and it all came back, the 
buffalo, the ant-Cassie, and the humongous, 
teeth-rattling explosion. Panicking, I started to 
thrash and sank like a stone. 
<Easy,> Rachel said, dipping down beneath 
me and pushing me back up to the surface. 
<What're you trying to do, drown yourself? It's all 
over now. We're okay.> 
"How?" I managed to croak, still hacking up 
bitter salt water and trying to get control of my 
normal, human brain long enough to calm the 
billowing fear. I mean, let's face it, the deean was 
vast, deep and had swallowed hundreds, no 
thousands of better swimmers than me. Not to 
mention being home to sharks. 
So, of course, I mentioned this fact. 
<Oh, them. You missed all the fireworks, 
Cassie,> Marco said, swimming circles around 
us. <One minute we're watching this whale the 
size of a FedEx truck dropping out of the sky and 
we're thinking, Uh-oh, she's not big,enough to 
take down that helicopter and live through it —> 
<You weren't thinking it, you were screaming 
it,> Rachel said sweetly. 
<Screeching like a bad set of brakes,> Jake 
teased. 
117 

<Emitting a loud and continual series of high-
pitched shrieks similar to an unauthorized entry 
into a Dome ship air lock,> Ax added. 
Silence. 
<Well, it was an accurate comparison^ Ax 
said defensively. 
<Yeah.> Marco giggled. <But it sure wasn't 
funny, Ax-man,> he said, poking his sleek head 
up out of the water and giving one of those crazy, 
Flipperesque cackles. 
<Your humor is highly overrated,> Ax muttered. 
<lt certainly is when Marco uses it,> Jake 
said. 
<Anyway,> Marco said loudly, <here you are, 
falling through the sky, and all of a sudden 
BOOM —> 
"A gull got sucked into the helicopter's en-
gine. But that was nothing compared to the ant-
Cassie that almost killed me back in the woods 
with its pincers." I stopped. "The buffalo saved 
my life." 
<You had an aunt who tried to kill you with her 
pincers?> Rachel said, giving me a playful nudge. 
<Boy, and I thought Tobias's family was bad.> 
"Not that kind of an ant," I said crossly. 
<l know,> Rachel said. <Geez, Where's your 
sense of humor?> 
<Probably caught back in the Dome ship's air 
lock with Ax's,> Marco muttered. 
• • » • 
118 
I zoned out for a minute while they bantered 
back and forth, thinking of the buffalo and how 
bravely it had fought side by side with us. Had it 
done it because the human DNA in his veins had 
stirred and somehow linked us together? Or had 
it simply been following his buffalo instincts and 
done whatever he had to do to protect its 
adopted herd? Or had it been a little of both? 
I'd never know for sure, but I did understand 
the buffalo better. Its survival and protective in-
stincts were strong, fiercely and powerfully 
strong, and in that way, we were the same. How 
many times had my friends and I fought to protect 
our species from the Yeerk invasion? "And how 
many times would the buffalo fight to protect its 
own from other predators, including humans? 
<Hey, you'd yell, too, if sharks were eyeing 
you up like sushi,> Marco retorted. 
<We were all in the water, remember?> 
Rachel purred. 
<But you weren't pumping out blood like a 
fire hydrant,> Marco said. 
"The helicopter blew up," I interrupted, teeth 
chattering. "The Helmacron sensors are de-
stroyed, right?" 
<Well, we're pretty sure they are,> Jake said 
slowly. 
"So, you're pretty sure the sensors are DOA," 
I said. Say yes, Jake, I begged silently. Say yes. 
119 

Please don't tell me the whole mission has been 
in vain. That I had to confront my physical self as 
an ant, as a mutant, a thing. . . 
<Yeah,> Jake said. <We're ninety-nine per-
cent sure, Cassie.> 
Oh, great. That left a one percent wild card. 
<Cassie, you did great, > Jake said, in private 
thought-speak. <And I have to tell you, when I 
saw you heading for that chopper's blades, well, 
Marco wasn't the only one freaking out. We 
moved out of the way and dove deep when you all 
came down, but when you hit the water you were 
burned pretty bad —> 
I closed my eyes, remembering the searing 
pain and the stench of sizzling whale blubber. 
<— and we were going crazy trying to get you 
to demorph. You were only, like, half-conscious but 
I guess that was enough. I'm glad,> he said simply. 
"Me, too," I said. 
Survival instincts. Funny, how our own ge-
netic programming would automatically kick in 
when our logical, reasoning, conscious human 
brains weren't around to jam them up. 
<Me, too, what?> Tobias asked. 
<lt's private thought-speak, Bird-boy,> Marco 
said. <Jake's getting all Dharma and Greg on us 
with Cassie.> 
I laughed but I was shivering so it came out 
ratchety and harsh. I wasn't embarrassed that 
120 
Marco had guessed what was going on. Jake and 
I like each other a lot and that's no secret. 
<Cassie, why don't you morph to dolphin and 
let's all get out of here,> Jake said, noticing my 
quaking. <l'm done with this day at the beach. 
How about you guys?> 
<Your wish is my command, Prince Jake,> 
Marco said. 
<Then I wish you'd be quiet,> Jake drawled. 
<Ha-ha!> Ax said. <Ha!> 
We all looked at him, amazed. 
<That was, I believe, the appropriate re-
sponse to human humor, correct?> he said 
calmly, then dove and, within seconds, had pow-
ered his sleek dolphin's body up out of the water 
and high into the air. 
<! quit,> Marco said, groaning. <lf Ax is 
gonna "ha-ha" after all of Jake's feeble jokes 
from now on, I swear I quit.> 
But he wouldn't and we knew it. 
None of us would. 
No matter how bad the odds. 
Or the humor. 
121 

