
Who am I? 
Marco. 
Not Tuan or Kevin or Rasheed. 
You know, "Hi, I'm Marco." 
If you yell out, "Hey, Marco!", chances are good 
I'll turn around. Respond. "What?" 
You could also say that who I am is far more 
than a name. That who I am depends on your 
perspective. On where you're standing when you 
yell out to me. 
Like, if you're standing out in the everyday 
world — in Red Lobster on all-you-can-eat shrimp 
night, on a downtown street corner, or in the 
mall — you'll see that I'm a slighty less than tall, 

All of which makes that "who are you" ques-
tion a whole lot more complicated for me than for 
say, about 99.9 percent of folks on this planet. 
That remaining .1 percent — those would be 
my friends. The other Animorphs. Jake. Cassie. 
Rachel. Tobias, the guy who lives as a hawk. Ax, 
Elfangor's younger brother. 
Obviously, there are a lot of issues we have to 
deal with. Issues far too complex for the six of us 
to waste a lot of time thinking about. Or maybe 
we've become far too complex for them to matter 
too much anymore. 
In almost every way you can imagine, we've 
pretty much been there. Done that and bought 
the T-shirt and poster. If anyone from Guardian or 
Prudential knew the truth about us, we'd never, 
ever get health insurance. Forget about life. 
Me and my friends, we are the definition of 
extreme living. 
We are the definition of high risk. We don't 
need to sign up for a class at the local commu-
nity college or pay some slick shrink 150 bucks 
an hour to tell us we're not realizing our poten-
tial. 
Our potentials have been realized up the wa-
zoo. 
See, this war comes down to life or death. 
Freedom or slavery. Dignity or abject humiliation. 
Failure is not an option. 
4 
Bottom line — we're here to serve. It's not 
only about us. It's about you, too. 
That's why, every once in a while, it's real nice 
to be alone. Shut out the world and do something 
just for me. Something totally and completely 
self-indulgent and soul-numbing. Something that 
requires almost no effort, physical or intellectual. 
The house was empty. Dad and Nora were at a 
PTA meeting. Euclid was spending the night at 
the vet, recovering from some minor doggie 
surgery. Jake and Rachel were off at a family 
thing. Cassie and her mom had gone to some big 
veterinary conference at The Gardens. And I 
guess Ax and Tobias were doing whatever red-
tailed hawks and aliens do on an off night. I just 
knew I was blissfully alone. 
I lay back on the living room couch. Stretched 
like a lazy old cat. Reached for the remote on the 
coffee table. 
Nothing good on the tube. Perfect. I channel-
surfed, past SpongeBob SquarePants and a mi-
nor league baseball game. Past Two Fat Ladies 
on the food channel. Past a documentary on bee-
tles. 
Ah! Unsolved Mysteries. Cool. The Loch Ness 
Monster. Bigfoot. Aliens from outer space . . . 
Mr. Fake-Spooky Host looked wide-eyed into 
the camera. "When we come back after these 
messages, we'll continue our in-depth investigation 
5 

of legendary creatures with an amateur video made 
just weeks ago, right here in . . ." 
I hit the mute button and waited. Hummed 
some Kid Rock. Yawned. Bit a hangnail. Seven 
commercials later, the show was back. 
And then the world fell apart. 
6 
•Lt was just a blue blur moving across the 
screen. Not much more than that. A small piece 
of videotape taken with an unsteady hand in ter-
rible light conditions. 
But it was enough. 
My foolproof danger alarm went off. Loud. 
"Could this be proof positive of the existence 
of the magical unicorn of medieval lore?" the host 
intoned. "Or could this strange blue creature be 
the mighty centaur of Greek mythology? Let's take 
another look." 
I hit the power button and the screen went 
gray. 
One look had been more than enough. 
The image was blurred but unmistakable. 
7 

Andalite! 
I scaled the stairs to my bedroom two at a 
time. 
This was bad. Really bad. A serious breach in 
security. The beginning of our end . . . 
A good bazillion citizens of the United States 
of America, and who knew how many people in 
how many other countries, had just gotten their 
first glimpse of a bona fide alien. 
Eighty, maybe ninety percent of those viewers 
would be excited for about thirty seconds — at 
least until the next silly monster after the next 
silly commercial. 
Ten, maybe twenty percent of those viewers 
would recognize the blue blur for what it was. 
Not a unicorn or a centaur. 
An Andalite. Here. On Earth. 
And it could only be Ax. 
Okay, Visser Three and every other Yeerk with 
a host knew of the "Andalite bandits." The ones 
who formed the small but unrelenting resistance 
to the Yeerk movement. 
But others — humans not controlled by 
Yeerks — didn't know. 
And they couldn't. 
Shouldn't. It was too dangerous, too risky. Bad 
for Ax to be taken prisoner by the visser. Worse 
for him to be taken for study by the government. 
Not everybody in "the agency" was as fair-
8 
minded as Scully or Mulder. Some were even 
Yeerks. 
Ax would not be taken. I would make sure of 
that. 
A thousand fears and anxieties ran through 
my head, almost as quickly as I ran up the steps 
and into my room. 
I had to get control. Focus. Maintain that fo-
cus. 
I went to the bed. Arranged the pillows under 
the blankets to look like a sleeping kid. So my dad 
and my stepmother wouldn't know I was gone. 
Again. 
I stripped down to my morphing suit. Tossed 
jeans, T-shirt, and sneakers into the pit that is 
my closet. Tore open the window. And began to 
morph. 
The goal: rapid transportation. 
PING! PING! 
I winced. The beginning of talons, where my 
toes had been only a few seconds ago. I watched 
as the rest of my feet and ankles withered, shrunk, 
and suddenly became the bird's incredibly strong, 
gripping feet. Three long fleshless talons facing 
front, one facing back. 
No way those feet could support my thick hu-
man legs. I was going down. 
THUMP! 
9 

I was definitely down. But I'd fallen on my 
back. I lifted my head and watched as my legs 
blackened and shriveled up into my body like two 
sticks of beef jerky being sucked up by a gnarly 
old cowboy. 
Right then I vowed never ever to eat a Slim 
Jim again. 
In spite of what you might think, morphing 
doesn't hurt. It's just disgusting. 
But still, I watched. As if I could hurry the 
process by witnessing it. Fingers — curling into 
my palm. Tanned human flesh lightening to 
gray and then disappearing under a flat, three-
dimensional tattoo of feathers. Then arms sprout-
ing feathers in a fury. At the same time, arm 
bones shrinking, hollowing, reshaping. Becom-
ing wings. 
My mouth and nose melded together, hard-
ened to form a curved and deadly beak. 
Internal organs? I felt approximately twenty-
five feet of human intestines smoosh and squish 
down to a bird's tiny digestive tract. My slow and 
steady human heart surge into the manic, puls-
ing heart of the bird of prey. 
No longer human. No longer tall enough to 
see the unopened notebooks scattered over the 
desk. The handful of empty bubble gum wrap-
pers I should probably throw away. Close enough 
10 
to the carpet to see boulders of cookie crumbs 
and single strands of curly poodle hair. Ugh. 
I was an osprey. The animal that had become 
one of my earliest morphs. Not a bird with the 
greatest night vision but vision a heck of a lot 
better than a human's. Vision good enough to get 
me where I was going. 
Ax's scoop. 
I hopped up onto the windowsill. Glanced 
sharply around with beady eyes to be certain the 
house wasn't being watched. And flapped into 
the night air. 
11 

Ax was at "home." 
And he had company perched on a nearby 
branch. 
<Tobias!> 
<What brings a guy like you to a place like 
this?> 
<Nothing good.> I flared my wings and landed 
on the soft grass and dirt. Started demorphing. 
<When is it ever good when one of us just 
shows up, all unexpected?> he added. 
I didn't answer. Tobias has been big on rhetor-
ical questions lately. 
Besides, at the moment, I didn't have any of 
what Ax would call "mouthparts." 
12 
But I did have eyes. Ax's TV was on. But not 
on the station I'd been watching. 
As soon as my lips were formed I looked di-
rectly at Tobias. Then at Ax. "Our buddy Ax here 
is a star," I said brightly, brushing dried-out pine 
needles off my bike shorts, wincing when a sharp 
stone bit into my tender human foot. 
I told them what I'd seen. When I'd finished, 
there was silence. 
It was Tobias who spoke first. <Well, Ax?> His 
thought-speak was hoarse. Almost anxious. <ls it 
possible?> 
Ax hesitated. Turned his main stalk eyes to 
look behind him, toward the deeper woods. 
<Anything is possibles he said. 
That was not what I wanted to hear. 
<l guess we need to get a copy of that 
episode,> Tobias said. 
"D'ya think? Really?" I said, rolling my eyes. 
"Okay. Listen. We don't have time to wait around 
for the rerun or to send a check to the station in 
order to buy a copy. We just can't risk waiting." 
<That's true,> Ax said as he stepped to his 
television setup. <But we don't have to wait.> 
"Did I miss something? 'Cause I'm definitely 
not understanding you." 
<Ax tapes everything,> Tobias explained. <On 
every channel. He's set up a CD-ROM thing to 
13 

the VCR —or something like that. Anyway, it 
works. > 
<Marco, I believe this is what you are looking 
for.> 
Ax stepped back from his small pile of equip-
ment. With a remote, he fast-forwarded through 
the thirty-minute show until he reached the 
segment. 
All twenty seconds of it. 
Ax froze the final frame. 
More silence. This time, I broke it. 
"Is it you, Ax?" 
Ax briefly focused all four eyes on the screen 
before sweeping those on stalks around the 
perimeter of the scoop. Wary now. 
<l cannot tell from that angle.> 
<Play it back in slow motion,> Tobias sug-
gested. <Frame by frame.> 
Ax did. To me it still didn't make any differ-
ence. 
It could have been Ax. 
It could have been any Andalite. 
But the only other Andalite we knew of on 
Earth was Visser Three. No way would he ever be 
careless enough to allow himself to be caught on 
film. Besides, he was never without a phalanx of 
bodyguards. 
Unless . . . unless he wanted to be seen by 
thousands of couch potatoes. But why? 
14 
"Ax-man. Is there any way to fine-tune the 
image?" I asked. 
<No. I cannot clear the resolution on a non-
original piece of film or video 
Tobias swooped off his perch and landed, 
gracefully, a few feet from the television screen. 
<You don't have to,> he said. <lt's not Ax.> 
"So it's the visser," I said. "Well, that's a little 
beyond weird." 
<No. Not the visser.> Tobias turned his in-
credibly intense hawk eyes on us. <Kids, I think 
we've just discovered another Andalite.> 
Ax pulled his shoulders back. <ls it. . .> 
<lt's not Estrid. Sorry, Ax. Not Arbat, either.> 
"Alrighty then. Who?" 
<This guy's new. And he's got one real obvi-
ous distinguishing feature. He's got only half a 
tail.> 
<A vecol\> There was disbelief in Ax's voice. 
Something else, too. More than his normal, well, 
arrogant tone. It sounded like disgust. 
"Excuse me?" I asked. 
<He is disabled. A cripple,> Ax answered 
coldly. <And his presence here will obviously be 
a problem.> 
"Yeah," I agreed, looking back to the hazy im-
age on the screen. "The Yeerks get ahold of him, 
they've got another morphing Andalite on the 
team. Not good." 
15 

<No. The Yeerks would have no use for his 
body. He is completely useless as a host.> Ax 
waved his frail hand in a dismissing motion. 
<Without a tail blade he cannot fight. And it is 
obvious this vecol is incapable of morphing or he 
would have restored his tail from his own healthy 
DNA.> 
"So, Ax, how do you really, really feel about 
this guy? Let me take a wild guess." It sounded 
nasty. I meant it to. 
<Marco,> Tobias said. <Seems to me this, 
uh, guy, could be useful to the Yeerks in another 
way. He's got to have information the visser 
wants. > 
"Which means wherever he is, we get to him 
first. Unless we're too late. Which I'm not even 
going to think about." 
<Right,> Tobias agreed. <Best-case scenario, 
he becomes an ally.> 
Ax made a sound that was way close to a 
snort. <A vecol as an ally? Marco, was that meant 
to be humorous? Because it was not.> 
I grinned. Folded my arms across my chest. 
"No, Ax. It wasn't meant to be 'humorous.' What's 
with you? What's your problem with this guy?" 
Tobias interrupted, <Let's get going. We're 
going to need to talk to Jake and the others. We 
can deal with this stuff later.> 
I took a deep breath. Gave my hair a good 
16 
yank, straight up. Spoke. "Yeah. It's time to find 
us an Andalite. Oh," I said, looking blandly at Ax. 
"Let's not forget one other possibility here. In 
spite of the famous-throughout-the-galaxy An-
dalite honor, this guy could, as we know, quite 
possibly be a traitor. The whole videotape thing 
might be a trap for us unsuspecting, bighearted 
humans, who respond to creatures less fortunate 
than us with empathy and kindness." 
<That is true,> Ax said, while staring back at 
me with his main eyes. <lt might very well be a 
trap.> 
17 

Tobias led us to the clearing that he was 
pretty sure was the same place the Andalite had 
been caught on tape. 
Something about the slope of the field and a 
pine tree partially destroyed by lightning had 
given him a clue. If Ax is our personal clock, To-
bias is our personal cartographer and wilderness 
guide. 
Maybe we should have tried to contact the 
others first. Waited until morning. But we didn't. 
Didn't even discuss the possibility of delay. It 
was starting to get dark. So, I went owl for some 
serious night vision capability and we were off on 
what was intended to be a simple reconnais-
sance mission. 
18 
We circled above the clearing, Tobias, the 
most experienced flyer, swooping as close to the 
ground as he dared. Alert to every movement. 
Every twitching blade of grass and swiftly disap-
pearing tail of mouse or vole or whatever skanky 
creatures run around after bedtime. 
<What, exactly, are we looking for?> I said. 
The world was lit up before me, amazingly clear. 
But I didn't see anything that shouted "danger!" 
<Anything out of the ordinary,> Tobias said. 
<Signs of a struggle. Trampled earth. Dried blood 
maybe.> 
But there was nothing. If anyone, man or 
beast, had made tracks there in the last few 
days, they'd since been swallowed by the ground, 
which was still damp from the previous night's 
heavy rain. 
No evidence of foul play. 
After almost twenty minutes of futile search-
ing, I suggested we head home. Get some sleep. 
Get in touch with Jake and the others. 
<We should demorph,> Ax suggested. <We 
have been in morph for almost ninety minutes.> 
I'm not big into taking unnecessary risks. The 
idea of morphing in such a dark and lonely place. 
Especially without having the others around to 
watch our backs. Nope. The thought did not thrill 
me. 
I was even less thrilled by the idea of getting 
19 

stuck with a flea-and-tick problem for the rest of 
my days. 
So while Tobias kept aerial guard, I landed on 
the ground, close to the west rim of twisted 
pines, and quickly began to demorph. Ax, on the 
other hand, was still descending, several yards 
away. We thought it safer to stagger our morph-
ing. 
SCHLOOP! SCHLOOP! 
Okay. No wings. But no arms yet, either. 
Great. 
SPLOOT! SPLOOT! 
Shriveled arms. Little stubs of fingers at the 
tip. Slowly, slowly filling out. 
With my still-owl eyes I saw Ax beginning to 
demorph. 
Decided I'd rather not watch. 
Flipped my eyes to the right. Saw a furry old 
possum. And . . . 
<Marco! Ax!> Tobias called frantically. <Get 
out of there, now!> 
Too late. I was three-quarters human. 
It had finally happened. We'd been too care-
less. Underestimated the enemy. 
We were really dead. 
And for some reason, I looked over at the pos-
sum. 
It doubled in size. 
Doubled again. Again! 
20 
Its gray fur began to turn blue, almost like the 
color was being poured down each strand from a 
zillion small vials. Or like one of those goofy pens 
that change color when you tilt it back and forth. 
It didn't take a rocket scientist to realize this 
was no ordinary possum. 
It was an Andalite. 
It was not Visser Three. 
And it was not the one we'd seen on televi-
sion, either. 
This Andalite had a monstrous tail, long and 
thick. And at its end, a blade that, to my terrified 
eyes, looked a lot like that scythe thing the Grim 
Reaper carries. 
I was barely finished demorphing when the 
Andalite started to walk toward Ax. His tail sliced 
the night air menacingly, blade glinting in the 
light of the almost full moon. Each hubcap-sized 
hoof clomping the dewy ground, sending little 
clods of soil flying. Field mice scurrying. 
This was no— vecol. This guy was massive. 
Bigger than any Andalite I'd ever seen. Bigger 
than Ax's brother, War Prince Elfangor-Sirinial-
Shamtul. Bigger than Aloth-Attamil-Gahar. Big-
ger even than Alloran-Semitur-Corrass, host body 
to Visser Three. 
Shoulders like a fullback. A chest that was 
cut like a competition-level bodybuilder. Arms 
that, except for the blue fur, could pass for those 
21 

of a middle-weight champion. Even the usually 
small and delicate many-fingered Andalite hands 
were broad and toughened. Like those of a car-
penter or construction worker. 
Most disconcerting: From the almost human 
waist to the rounded, deer or horselike haunches, 
the guy looked like a Clydesdale. A really big one. 
No way was Ax, a kid, an aristh, a match for 
this guy. Ax is good, a seasoned fighter, but you 
would have to have been downright dopey not to 
see that this guy could kick Ax's butt with one ca-
sual twitch. 
I'm not a betting kind of guy, but if I were, I'd 
have laid my money on Mr. Macho for a first-
round slice up. 
But the Andalite didn't strike Ax. Or me. 
He stood there, not five yards away. He was 
ignoring me but he was staring at Ax, who was 
now also back in his natural form, tail blade 
cocked. The big Andalite seemed to be waiting 
for something. For Ax to strike first? 
<Okay, guys, this is bad,> Tobias said pri-
vately, so the Andalite couldn't hear. <But I don't 
think he's seen me. I'm gonna try to catch him 
off guard. Before he makes a move.> 
Nervous and unable to answer Tobias, I shot a 
glance at Ax. 
He stood perfectly still, mimicking the ready 
stance of his opponent. Waiting for a first move. 
22 
<Tobias,> he said, his thought-speak calm 
and low. <l do not think . . .> 
Too late! 
"TSSEEER!" 
Tobias swooped down from the night sky! In 
the white light of the moon, talons suddenly ex-
tended for attack, he looked like a hellish feath-
ered demon. 
"TSEEER!" 
The Andalite flinched. Flinched! Took a 
slight, faltering step backward. Twitched his 
stalk eyes upward and kept his main eyes on Ax. 
Yes! Tobias was going to do it, hurt or distract 
him enough to allow us the advantage . . . 
FWAPP! 
With blinding speed and accuracy the An-
dalite's massive tail cut Tobias out of the sky. 
And then there was a sickening thud as To-
bias hit the ground. 
"TOBIAS!" 
23 

I started running toward Tobias's lifeless 
body. But a warning glance from Ax held me in 
my place. What was I going to do? Maybe, at 
least, retrieve Tobias before his body could be 
sledgehammered by those monstrous hooves. 
/ could morph, I thought wildly. / could . . . 
<Do not do anything, Marco. Do not say any-
thing.> 
Now Ax was a mind reader? Forget it. I'd go 
gorilla . . . 
CLOPCLOP CLOPCLOP! 
The Andalite galloped at Ax. 
CLOPCLOP CLOPCLOP! 
Ax galloped at the Andalite. 
Ax lunged. 
24 
FWAAAP! 
Swiped at his opponent's throat. 
And missed. 
Now the big Andalite had full advantage. Be-
fore Ax could set up another shot. . . 
THWAAAP! 
He was struck with the flat of the Big Blue's 
blade. And then Ax was on the ground. 
The Andalite stepped back to allow Ax to 
climb awkwardly to his feet. Then he calmly 
pressed his broad tail blade to Ax's throat. 
<Visser Three,> the warrior said, his thought-
speak thick with contempt. <At last we meet. I 
was unaware of the fact that you were such a 
puny, worthless adversary.> He tossed one eye 
stalk in the direction of Tobias, still motionless 
on the dew-soaked ground. <lt is no wonder you 
send your minions to do the work of a true war-
rior!> 
</ am not Visser Three,> Ax replied, with an 
admirable amount of dignity, considering the huge 
tail blade pressed to his throat. <l am Aximili-
Esgarrouth-lsthill.> 
Half a second passed. The Andalite appeared 
to be processing that bit of information. Grap-
pling with it. 
<Younger brother of Prince Elfangor-Sirinial-
Shamtul?> he said finally. Doubtingly. 
<The same.> 
25 

Now the Andalite's thought-speak became 
stronger. Challenging. <You were on the great 
Dome ship. In its last, fateful battle. You sur-
vived the crash?> 
What was this? I felt like a wallflower at some 
bizarre Andalite Academy reunion. And while 
they chatted, Tobias . . . 
<Yes,> Ax said. <Although I begged to be al-
lowed to fight, I was sent to wait out the battle in 
the dome. Until quite recently, I was under the 
impression I was the only one who had survived. 
Perhaps I have been mistaken. I witnessed the 
video of the vecol. . .> 
<The vecol\> 
The roar of the Andalite's angry thought-
speak was deafening. It actually made my head 
hurt. I watched helplessly as he pushed his tail 
blade even deeper into the skin of Ax's neck. Draw-
ing a small trickle of blood. 
<His name is Mertil-lscar-Elmand,> the An-
dalite went on, in a slightly more normal tone. 
<And you will do well to remember that, ahsth.> 
Ax is no fool. When he spoke, he kept the 
tone of his thought-speak neutral. <l have heard 
of this Mertil-lscar-Elmand. The fighter pilot. I 
have heard of the many honors he received while 
participating in various battles. And whom do I 
have the honor of meeting now?> 
This was insane. Ax definitely had a career as 
26 
an actor alongside Gwyneth Paltrow in Shake-
speare in Love. Or maybe as a diplomat. I was so 
freaked out that I was about to wet my pants, and 
Ax was acting like a hero in a witty drawing-room 
comedy or something. Talk about grace under 
fire. 
<l am Gafinilan-Estrif-Valad.> 
Ax's four eyes showed a sudden respect. His 
thought-speak revealed a note of excitement. 
<l have heard of you, also. Your reputation as 
a fighter pilot is one of the finest in the history of 
the academy. Your career sets an example every 
aristh would be well to follow.> 
Gafinilan removed his tail blade from Ax's 
neck. He looked embarrassed. Awkward. Not dis-
pleased by Ax's praise but not pleased, either. He 
averted his main eyes from Ax's own. 
<Commander Gafinilan,> Ax continued, excit-
edly, <recently, I was made aware of the fact that 
the Andalite fleet has been diverted from its mis-
sion to quell the Yeerk invasion on this planet. 
Instead, the fleet has been sent to deal with the 
Rakkam Garroo conflict in the Nine Sifter. There 
will be no special forces deployed to help my 
comrades stop the Yeerk conquest of planet 
Earth. You must help us . . .> 
<l mustdo nothing,> Gafinilan retorted bitterly. 
<l am no longer a warrior, Aximili-Esgarrouth-
Isthill. My sole purpose now — indeed, my duty 
2 7 

and my responsibility — is to care for Mertil. As 
you have noted,> he added, his tone darkening, 
<he was badly injured in our last battle. The one 
that stranded us on this planet, so far from our 
home.> 
Ax seemed about to protest. 
<Leave us in peace,> Gafinilan commanded. 
Quietly. No room for argument. <lf you do not, if 
you try to prevent me from fulfilling my task, I 
swear by the memory of my parents that you will 
die.> 
I stood as still as I'd ever stood. Almost at at-
tention. Stiller even than I'd stood at my own 
mother's funeral. Only this time, I was afraid that 
if I moved so much as a hair I'd be killed. 
Rebellious, nonmilitary-issue behavior from 
an Andalite should not have struck me — us — 
as unusual. Or disturbing. Not after the stories 
we'd heard about Alloran on the Hork-Bajir planet. 
Not after knowing that Elfangor had broken one 
of his society's strictest laws. And especially not 
after our recent encounter with Arbat-Elevat-
Estoni, a soldier and thinker driven mad by war. 
Still —there was something awful and dark 
and desperate emanating from this stranded alien 
soldier. I had no doubt whatsoever he meant 
what he'd said. That he'd kill us if we came look-
ing for him and Mertil. 
Unless . . . 
OR 
Out of the corner of my eye I saw Tobias stir. 
Was outrageously grateful he was alive. Willed 
him to be still, not to call attention to himself. 
<Now, go, Aristh Aximili. Take your — 
friend — and leave this place. Visser Three will 
be here at any moment. And he will not be as 
merciful as I have been, I assure you.> 
<Sir. . .> 
<For your own good, Aximili!> Gafinilan said 
harshly. <Forget that you ever saw me. Forget 
about Mertil. That is an order. Forget.> 
Gafinilan turned away from us, all four eyes 
forward as he walked back toward the dark woods. 
Away from the revealing light of the moon. 
At the edge of the woods, he stopped. He did 
not turn around, not even his eyes. 
<l wish you luck on your mission, Aximili. You 
and your comrades. Even though it is hopeless.> 
29 

We followed Gafinilan. Of course. He proba-
bly knew we would. 
And now I knew he wasn't going to do any-
thing to us. 
Gafinilan had us trapped and had knocked To-
bias out, but he had let us live. We wanted — 
needed — to know why. 
And there was something else. 
The Andalite had seen me demorph. At least, 
I was pretty sure he had. 
Maybe he hadn't seen the entire process. How 
great were a possum's eyes, anyway? I had no 
idea. Maybe he thought he'd missed something, 
that I'd already morphed from my natural An-
dalite body to human . . . 
30 
Who was I kidding? He had to have seen it all. 
My gut told me that. Besides, why would any guy 
with a tail blade morph to a weak-limbed, soft-
skinned thing in the face of trouble? 
It didn't matter much what he found out 
about me from this point on. As long as he didn't 
live long enough to tell it. 
I went wolf, fast. Ax went harrier. While we 
morphed, Tobias checked himself out and de-
cided he was okay. So, even though he was still a 
little wobbly, he took off after Gafinilan. 
<He's moving fast, guys. I can't get up too 
high or I'll lose him. Tree cover is too thick. And 
I'm having trouble manuevering in this low light.> 
I took off. With the wolf's superior sense of 
smell, with its amazing stamina and agility, we 
stood a decent chance of tracking Gafinilan. I 
hoped. 
<Just stay with him, Tobias,> I called. <We're 
on our way.> 
I tore through the dark mass of trees. It was 
like racing through a maze to reach the prize in 
the center — a prize you really didn't want 'cause 
you knew it was dangerous and maybe even 
lethal. A prize you'd have to destroy before it de-
stroyed you. But a prize you had to have, no mat-
ter what. 
Around and past dark green pines and 
small masses of rock. Under heavy, low-hanging 
31 

branches. The air chilly and damp, masking cer-
tain odors and altering others. Still, I was pretty 
sure the wolf's keen nose detected the big An-
dalite. I ran. 
Above me, Ax and Tobias did their best in the 
lousy flying conditions. 
But their best wasn't good enough. 
<He's gone!> Tobias cried suddenly. <l 
can't... he was just up ahead . . . then noth-
ing1^ 
I stopped under the branch where Tobias 
perched. Thrust my nose at the ground, desper-
ate to locate Gafinilan. Raised my head and 
sniffed the air. Ax came swooping down close by. 
<lt's like he just disappeared,> Tobias said. 
<l'm getting next to nothings I added. <At 
least, no clear directions 
<As much as I do not want to mention the pos-
sibility,> Ax said, <perhaps there is an entrance 
to the Yeerk pool complex hidden somewhere 
near. Perhaps Gafinilan passed through . . .> 
<Wait!> I said. I padded silently about a yard 
into the deeper wood, using all the wolf's senses. 
<He went this way. It's faint but . . . look!> 
It was some kind of cave or passage. About 
another three yards to the right. Not easy to spot 
unless you were looking for it. The entrance was 
low and narrow and almost completely hidden 
behind the sweeping branches of an evergreen. 
<Ten to one that's where our Andalite friend 
disappeared to,> I said. <Looks like you were 
right, Ax-man.> 
<And it looks like we're not alone,> Tobias 
said. 
Something was coming out of the cave. 
Someone. A human. A man. 
He stopped just outside the cave's entrance. 
Looked around carefully. Suspiciously. As if he 
were expecting to find spies hidden behind the 
trunks of trees. 
He was average. 
Nothing remarkable about him at all except 
his total and complete averageness. Good-looking. 
Average height and weight. Middle-aged, maybe 
thirty-five, maybe forty-five. Hair halfway be-
tween blond and brown, halfway between short 
and long. He wore a pair of nondescript jeans, a 
dark plaid shirt, scuffed white sneakers. 
He was the kind of guy who would disappear 
into a crowd instantly. The kind of guy who would 
blend. 
The kind of guy Jake might have become if 
fate hadn't chosen a spectacularly odd path for 
him. 
When the guy was satisfied no one was going 
to jump him, he headed off. Quickly and pur-
posefully through the nearly black forest. 
Ordinarily, we might have followed him. Espe-
33 

cially since we assumed he was a Controller, com-
ing up from the Yeerk pool. But Gafinilan was far 
more important to us now. 
Hunkered down to the damp ground, my belly 
touching pine needles and moss and soil, I 
moved closer to the cave opening and waited in 
case there were others. After a few minutes, I 
sniffed at the entrance. Yes, Gafinilan had been 
here. I was sort of prepared to go down to the 
Yeerk pool if we had to. To find the Andalite be-
fore he could reveal our secret. 
I wasn't prepared for what I found inside the 
cave. 
Nothing. No false panel or trapdoor or se-
cretly coded keypad. Nothing. Just a small, dusty, 
hollowed-out space in a big rock. 
I crawled out of the cave. <Nothing. No en-
trance. No nothing.> 
Ax, perched on one of the sturdy branches 
that protected the entrance to the cave, said, 
<Very clever. Obviously where Gafinilan hid his 
human clothing. For his human morph.> 
Of course. Second stupid mistake of the 
night. 
<l've got him,> Tobias called suddenly, from 
somewhere up above. 
I ran. At the edge of the woods, I demorphed 
and then went owl. 
We followed Gafinilan to a neighborhood near 
the university. 
An average neighborhood. 
We watched him walk up the driveway to the 
front door of an average-looking house. A small 
ranch, like every other house on the block. The 
name "H. McClellan" in gold letters on the stan-
dard-issue black mailbox. 
He stopped at the door. Looked around. Then 
reached into his pocket, took out a set of keys, 
and let himself in. 
We waited. Heard several locks turning and 
slipping into place. 
No lights went on inside the house, even after 
almost a full four minutes. 
<What now?> Tobias said. 
<Sneak a peek through a window?> 
<No,> Ax said. <Too dangerous. Gafinilan will 
be ultra careful from this point on. His guard will 
be up.> 
<Okay, guys,> I said. <l'm pretty sure it's 
time we took this to our fearless leader.> 
35 

Jake, the guy saw me demorph." 
Rachel jumped from her seat on a wooden 
rail. It was early the next morning, before school, 
which because of some teacher conference was 
starting late that day. As usual, we were gathered 
in Cassie's barn. "Great, Marco. Good job," she 
said sarcastically. 
"But," I went on, "he didn't even flinch. Didn't 
look at me again, didn't talk to me. Didn't ask Ax 
about me. It was as if he didn't care or some-
thing." 
"I guess then the question is, why?" Jake 
said. "Remember how Gonrod almost had a heart 
attack when he found out there were humans 
36 
with the morphing power. This guy's got to care. 
Maybe there's something bigger on his mind right 
now. Something else going on." 
"Oh, yeah. Has to be. Like I said before, the 
guy didn't ask questions," I said. "It didn't make 
any sense. He didn't ask how Ax knew what was 
going on with the Rakkam Garroo conflict. Didn't 
ask about me. Didn't ask how many 'comrades' 
Ax had. Who 'we' were. Come on. No one's that 
disinterested. That's selective attention. That's 
calculation." 
<He told us the visser was due to arrive mo-
mentarily^ Ax added. <As if he knew the visser's 
habits. As if he were waiting to meet with him.> 
<Or maybe to attack him,> Tobias said. <l 
don't think we should jump to conclusions. We 
don't know anything about the relationship be-
tween Gafinilan and Visser Three.> 
I laughed. "Yeah, we do. We know enough. We 
know there is a relationship. That combined with 
Gafinilan's telling us to get gone. And, of course, 
his threat to kill us if we didn't leave him and his 
buddy Mertil alone. In my book, if he's not with 
us, he's against us." 
Jake rubbed the back of his neck. "Let's re-
member he didn't stay to meet Visser Three. 
There's always the possibility that these two An-
dalites could become part of our team. So, we 
37 

should keep an eye on this guy. Make sure he's 
not working for a Yeerk-run company. Or heading 
off to the Yeerk pool once every three days." 
"I'm there," Rachel said. 
T i l go, too." Cassie. 
"Fine. Ax, what do you know about Gafini-
lan?" Jake asked. 
<His reputation is flawless,> Ax said simply. 
"He almost killed you for insulting his friend," 
I pointed out. "And he attacked you, a fellow 
Andalite." 
<He is a warrior, not a diplomats Ax replied. 
Perhaps it was me, but he didn't sound one-
hundred percent convinced of his argument. <l 
do not think it unusual for a trained soldier, par-
ticularly one stranded far from the home world, 
in a place under invasion by the enemy, to react 
as he did.> 
"With aggression. Okay, then, what's up with 
the videotape?" Rachel demanded. "Who took it? 
How could it have gotten to the show?" 
Cassie shrugged. "Lots of possibilities. It could 
be totally innocent. It might have been taken by 
some slimy guy out to make some money by sell-
ing it to TV. Or to those horrible magazines like 
the Star or Enquirer. Or some jerk's idea of a 
practical joke." 
"Or it might have been taken by Gafinilan," 
Rachel said tightly. "Maybe he's made a deal 
38 
with the Yeerks. The perfect way to lure the An-
dalite bandits to certain death." 
"But we're still alive," I replied. "So if what 
you're suggesting is true, I'm positive we would 
not be having this conversation." 
<What if Gafinilan isn't working with the 
Yeerks?> Tobias said. <What if he had nothing to 
do with that tape? What if he meant what he said 
about us leaving him alone? Forgetting about 
him and MertiL> 
"Too bad," Jake said dryly. "How often do An-
dalites come to Earth? We can't ignore the fact 
that Gafinilan and Mertil are holed up in subur-
bia. Our suburbia. We don't mean them any 
harm, but we're going to find out as much as we 
can." 
"I take it that means we're going in?" I said. 
Like I didn't already know. 
"Oh, yeah. Only 'we' means you and Ax," 
Jake said. "If this guy is a traitor, if he's with the 
Yeerks, we don't want him knowing any more 
about us than he already does. So, later today 
Marco as human, which is way too much infor-
mation already, and Ax as Andalite. He's seen To-
bias but we need him to fly surveillance while 
you two are inside. You are on a formal visit on 
behalf of your prince, Ax. The rest of us will back 
you up. Provide firepower if necessary." 
I grinned. "Just in case he meant that 'I'll kill 
39 

you if you don't leave me alone' thing. Thanks, 
big guy." 
Jake grinned back. "No problem. And when 
you leave, the rest of us will stay put. Watch 
where he goes, what he does. See if he contacts 
the Yeerks. Keep an eye out for Mertil, too." He 
turned to Rachel and Cassie. "But first, try to catch 
Mr H McClellan before he leaves the house this 
morning. Tobias, go with them. When they have 
to get to school, you take over." 
Tobias lifted from his perch in the rafters. 
<Sure, Jake. Meet you in the air, ladies.> 
"What am I supposed to do in the mean-
time?" I said to Jake after all the others had left. 
"Until Ax and I pay a visit to Batman and 
Robin?" 
, 
ht 
, 
Jake gave me a pained smile. "Uh, Marco, I 
think you've done enough already. You know, the 
three of you running off to find this Andalite 
without telling the rest of us. How about taking it 
easy for a few hours? Maybe say a prayer, or two? 
We're gonna need it." 
40 
I'm not much for prayers and supplication. 
Unless, of course, it involves getting a beauti-
ful girl to say "yes" to going out with me. Then, 
even begging and imploring are options. 
<Marco? That you?> 
<ln the flesh — uh — feathers.> 
I'd joined Tobias up above H. McClellan's 
neighborhood. Above blocks of two- and three-
bedroom ranches and split-levels, roofs and 
gables all cedar shake triangles and trapezoids. 
Above a collection of backyard pools, bright blue 
circles and squares, and front yards uniformly 
rectangular and green. A typically American kind 
of geometric pattern. Actually kind of cool from 
this perspective. 
41 

<Why aren't you in school with the others?> 
Tobias asked. 
<l'm thinking I really don't want to answer 
that question. So, what did you find out?> 
Tobias coasted into a lazy circle, letting the 
thermals support him. <Not much. We followed 
Henry — that's what the "H" stands for — to the 
university. Seems he's an assistant to some aca-
demic type. Some professor who works with par-
ticle physics. Whatever that is.> 
<Ax will know. What else?> 
<Well, except for when the guy went to the 
bathroom, probably to demorph, we pretty much 
watched him all morning. Cassie and Rachel got 
inside. Found out it's the perfect place to de-
morph. It's one of those private rooms, frosted 
windows, one stall. Anyway, he sat at his desk, 
chatted with some coworkers, ate a donut. Then, 
Rachel and Cassie went to school. I hung around. 
At about eleven, Henry got a phone call that 
seemed to shake him up. Next thing I know, he's 
hightailing it home. Unless he morphed some-
thing really small and took off again, I think he's 
still in there.> 
<Or in the greenhouse. I want to get a closer 
look,> I said. 
I glided down, closer to the roof of Henry Mc-
Clellan's ranch house. Closer to the large green-
A? 
house that was attached to the house itself by a 
fifteen-foot-long tunnellike extension. 
<Be careful, Marco,> Tobias warned. <He's 
gotta be nervous and definitely paranoid.> 
<And probably on the lookout for us, I know, I 
know.> 
<Maybe the call was about Mertil,> Tobias 
mused as we swooped to about twenty feet above 
the greenhouse. 
<Maybe it was the visser,> I said in a minorly 
sarcastic voice. <Don't romanticize this.> 
Tobias ignored my remark. <There he is,> he 
said instead. <ln Andalite form.> 
Gafinilan was barely visible, even to my os-
prey eyes, beneath the humid, curved glass of 
the greenhouse and the proliferation of green 
stuff growing inside. 
<According to Ax,> Tobias explained, gar-
dening is a very cool hobby for Andalites. It's an 
art, really.> 
<Great. I'll be sure to buy him a John Deere 
riding mower for Christmas. Any sign of Mertil?> 
Tobias landed in a huge old oak tree on Mr. 
Henry McClellan's property. <Not that I can see. 
Just Gafinilan pruning some leaves. Or doing 
something with garden shears. He seems pretty 
focused.> 
<Then I'm going in closer.> 
43 

<Uh, Marco, I'm not sure that's a great idea. 
What if he looks up?> 
<What if he doesn't?> I countered. <Look, this 
guy gives me the major willies. I want to know as 
much as I can before I meet him on his turf .> 
<Okay, but. . .> No buts. I was going to get 
up close and personal with the roof of the green-
house. 
I glided lower, lower, eyes straining to catch 
every detail I could when . . . 
ZZZZZAAAAAPPPPP! 
<Ahhhh!> 
I hadn't even touched the glass! But a nasty 
electric jolt sent me toppling over, almost upside 
down, less than a foot from the glass roof. I 
righted myself, flapped furiously, desperate not 
to touch the glass, not even to get as close as I'd 
come a second before. 
<Marco!> 
The greenhouse was surrounded by a force 
field. 
Only natural for Gafinilan to go to any lengths 
to protect himself. 
<Marco! Answer me!> 
I couldn't. The pain was excruciating. My hu-
man mind was numb with shock. 
Then I flew. Not toward anything, not even 
away from anything. The osprey's senses took 
44
over and I just flew, up, then down, flapping 
madly, lost in the pain. 
<Marco! What are you doing! Get out of there, 
now!> 
I didn't see the surveillance cameras pop up 
from the roof of the house. 
Until it was too late. 
<Look out! He's got a shredder!> 
Tobias's cries finally pierced my mindless 
panic. 
I looked back to see Gafinilan's head and 
weapon-wielding hands poking through a skylight 
in the flatfish roof of the house. 
He held a shredder aimed right at me. 
<Surrender!> he bellowed in my head. 
I didn't answer. Hoping that maybe, just 
maybe, if I kept quiet, he would think I was only 
some dumb bird. 
Not for the first time, I underestimated him. 
Tsseeewww! 
He fired! 
I saw the flash before I felt the pain. 
<Aaaggh!> 
One of my talons, completely gone. 
<That was a warning shot,> he said. 
Some warning. 
You can't imagine how disturbing it is to look 
down and see that one of your body parts is miss-
45 

ing. No matter what form you're in. See the blank 
space where it used to be. See the blood and 
gore oozing out of the stump. 
<Surrender,> he commanded. <Or die.> 
Not much of a choice there. 
<Get the others! Find Ax!> I told Tobias pri-
vately. <Hurry!> 
To Gafinilan: <What do you want me to do?> 
He kept the shredder aimed at me. Didn't 
seem to see Tobias winging off, or didn't care. 
<Land in the backyard, beside the green-
house^ he instructed. <Then, demorph.> 
46 
<So, my eyes did not deceive me.> Gafini-
lan stood there, all three gazillion muscled An-
dalite pounds of him. <When I first saw you it 
was night, the light was poor... but you are hu-
man. Not Andalite.> 
I climbed to my feet. No worse for the missing 
talon. Just a little muddy from rolling around on 
the ground. 
"It looks that way." 
Gafinilan poked the shredder at me like a 
scolding finger. 
<Who gave you the morphing technology?> he 
demanded. 
"What difference does that make?" 
<The difference between right and wrong,> 
47 

Gafinilan shot back. <The Andalite who gave you 
the power to morph broke the law of Seerow's 
Kindness. He is a criminals 
"The Andalite who gave me the power to 
morph is dead," I told him flatly. "And I'm not 
sure you should be calling anyone else a crimi-
nal. You know, let he who is without fault throw 
the first stone, and all." 
<What are you implying, human?> 
Suddenly, I was more mad than scared. "I'm 
not implying anything. I'm saying it outright. You 
made some kind of deal with Visser Three. I'm 
not sure of the details yet, or what you stand to 
get out of it. But this much I do know: Visser 
Three is a Yeerk. Now, you Andalites are a smart 
bunch. You tell me what that makes you." 
SWOOOSH! 
My hand flew to my neck. Came away bloody. 
Just a little nick. A warning shot. 
And then the blade was back at my throat. 
<l am no traitor,> Gafinilan said, his thought-
speak low and menacing. 
<Gafinilan!> 
Ax! 
Pushing his way through the tall hedges that 
surrounded McClellan's property. Tail poised, ready 
to fight. 
<lf you are a true Andalite,> Ax said, coming 
to a stop not ten feet away from where we stood, 
<you will not harm that human. He is one of us 
now. A warrior against the Yeerks. Strike him 
down, and you prove yourself a traitor.> 
Gafinilan swung his eye stalks to look at Ax. 
His main eyes bored into mine. 
<You dare to challenge me, little aristh?> 
<l do,> Ax replied. <The others in the resis-
tance know we are here. It was my prince who 
sent us to speak with you.> 
Gafinilan did not respond. Not right away. He 
stood perfectly still, regarding us separately, the 
expression on his face inscrutable. 
<l warned you not to approach me,> he said 
finally. <Your prince insults me by ignoring my 
command and sending human children.> Slowly, 
almost tauntingly, he withdrew his tail blade 
from my throat. <But I will speak with him or I 
will speak with no one.> 
I stepped back. Felt the stinging skin of my 
neck and said, "Then I guess this conversation is 
over." 
I took a step away from Gafinilan. Then an-
other toward Ax. 
<No!> 
Slowly, I turned my head and looked back at 
the big Andalite. 
And for a split second, thought I saw a trem-
bling race through his massive body. A slight 
tremor. Maybe I imagined it. 

<No,> he said again, his thought-speak more 
low and calm. <Please. Come inside.> 
<Marco? Ax? We're here. Front and back of 
the house.> 
Jake. Perfect. 
"Okay," I said to Gafinilan. "Let's talk." 
Gafinilan led Ax and me through a door in the 
side of the greenhouse's tunnel-like entranceway. 
From there, we entered the house itself through a 
very typical back door, screen and all. 
And stepped into a kitchen straight out of 
Martha Stewart Living or House Beautiful or Ar-
chitectural Digest. One of those lifestyle maga-
zines my stepmother is always reading. 
<Your home is an accurate and attractive ex-
ample of a human suburban dwellings Ax said 
formally. 
<l appreciate your assessment, Aximili,> 
Gafinilan replied, just as formally. <!t has been 
difficult, learning the many details of human cul-
ture. But it is important for Mertil and me to re-
main as inconspicuous as possible by hiding in 
plain sight. Although I must admit the relative 
lowness of this roof is at times disconcerting. 
Nothing like living under the open sky.> 
"That's a ranch house for you," I said. "Next 
time, go for a Cape Cod, at least. Or skylights in 
every room, not just the kitchen." 
Gafinilan chose to ignore my remark. He led us 
through the kitchen, a veritable shrine to modern 
domestic technology. A Sub-Zero fridge. Micro-
wave. Viking cooktop and oven. State-of-the-art 
Bosch dishwasher. Cuisinart. KitchenAid mixer, 
And everything was sparkling clean. Nora would 
have been in heaven. Okay. Maybe I've been 
spending too much time watching that kitchen 
show on the Food Network. 
"Yeah, great kitchen, Gafinilan," I said. "But 
it looks like it's never been used. No dirty dishes 
in the sink, no dustpan against the wall, no soak-
ing wet dish towels thrown on a counter, No way 
anyone's going to believe two guys live here." 
Gafinilan focused his main eyes on me. <Two 
"guys" do not live here,> he said. <At least as far 
as other humans are concerned. This house be-
longs only to a Henry McClellan and he resides 
alone. He lives quietly. He spends most of his 
time at his office at the university. He does not 
have friends. He is what humans call a "loner."> 
Well, that answered that question. Gafinilan 
led us through several other rooms in the house, 
each equally pristine, each obviously unused. I 
mean, white carpeting? Pink silk upholstery? For 
two guys with muddy hooves and no ability to sit? 
Clearly, Mertil and Gafinilan actually lived 
somewhere else in the house. 
The only disturbingly out-of-place items in 
the otherwise perfect house were a few pieces of 

artwork, obviously bought at some starving artist 
sale set up along a highway. You know, paint-
ings on black velvet, sold from the trunk of an old 
Cadillac. There were the requisite seascapes and 
even a sad-eyed clown. 
Before I could ask where the crying Elvis was 
hung, Gafinilan led us back to the kitchen. On 
the far wall was a keypad. The Andalite's massive 
shoulders blocked our view of it as he punched in 
the code. A concealed door to the left of the pad 
slid open. 
<Please. These are our private quarters.> 
In semiprivate thought-speak, Ax let Jake 
know our position. That we were entering a con-
cealed part of the house. That he and the others 
should be ready to come at our call. 
Then Ax and I stepped forward. I whistled. It 
was a mini Andalite home-away-from-home. 
<Mertil and I were fortunate to have salvaged 
many things after the crash,> Gafinilan explained. 
<Most important, a good power supply and a 
force field generator. The latter is particularly 
necessary for our survivals 
I smiled wryly. "You don't say." 
Computer stations. More than half a dozen of 
them. Each screen running a different program, 
none of which looked familiar to me at first glance. 
Several large-screen TVs. Each on and tuned 
to a different news program. Everything from 
Hollywood Style Report to CNN to the Bloomberg 
Report. 
The floor was covered in lush, well-tended 
grass. No chairs, but a long, fairly high table on 
which lay various handheld weapons. 
The walls were painted a creamy color. The 
ceiling, sky-blue. There seemed to be no other 
rooms beyond or off this large one. There might 
have been, of course. There might have been an-
other secret sliding panel. There probably was. 
Because we did not see Mertil. 
53 

<War Prince Gafinilan, I would like to under-
stand why you seem to have no interest in joining 
our fight against Yeerk dominations 
And things had been going so well. 
But instead of watching Ax's head roll across 
the grassy floor, I watched the expression in 
Gafinilan's face mutate from fury to despair to a 
typical Andalite inscrutability. All in the space of 
a few seconds. 
<Very well, young Aximili,> he said, slouching 
slightly into a more relaxed, less angry pose. 
<Perhaps you will find my story an unlikely one, 
but it is true. And it is mine. As I have told you,> 
he went on, <at one time, not so long ago, I was 
engaged in the war against the Yeerks. Assigned 
R/l 
to the Dome ship's forces, as was your esteemed 
brother, Elfangor.> 
<Yes.> 
<Mertil and I were fighter pilots. We came up 
through the academy together and each earned a 
reputation for excellence and bravery. However, 
no one is immune to the vagaries of war. During 
the battle with the Blade ship, the battle that de-
stroyed the Dome ship, my fighter was hit and 
the main engine was destroyed. Almost immedi-
ately I lost control and slammed into Mertil's al-
ready damaged fighter. Our wings somehow locked 
and, as one, the ships spiraled to the ground. I 
was sure we would both be killed.> 
He paused, then after a few tense moments, 
he continued. 
<lnstead, we became two more living casuali-
ties of war. For some reason, we both survived. 
Spent several excruciating months hiding in the 
woods, dodging prying eyes, until I was able to 
acquire a human morph and venture into the 
world. You see, I only sustained minor injuries. A 
few burns, easily healed broken ribs. Mertil, how-
ever, was more seriously hurt. In time, he recov-
ered from his other injuries. But his tail — it was 
severed. And because of his inability to utilize 
the morphing technology, there was nothing that 
could be done. He will never be restored to his 
normal self. And now, I am no longer a warrior in 
55 
55 

the service of the Andalite world. I am Mertil's 
protector and friend. After all,> he added, his 
thought-speak dark, <if I had been able to main-
tain control of my plane, Mertil might not have 
suffered as he has.> 
<Terrible,> Ax said. There was a trace of sym-
pathy in his thought-speak. Just a trace. <Mertil 
was deprived a hero's death and forced to live out 
the rest of his days as a vecol.> 
<l am happy Mertil is alive,> Gafinilan coun-
tered. 
I believed him. 
"So, where is he?" I asked. "I'd like to meet 
him." 
<lmpossible!> Ax. 
<No!> Gafinilan. 
"Oookay. So, can I ask why?" 
"It is unthinkable to intrude upon the isola-
tion of a vecol,> Ax explained. <His isolation is 
the only dignity he has.> 
"Well, it's not like I'm going to point and 
laugh or anything," I said. "I can't even say 'hey' 
to the guy?" 
No answer, from either Andalite. 
Maybe I should have kept my mouth shut. 
Probably. But there are some topics I just can't 
let alone. 
I faked a laugh. "You Andalites need some se-
56 
rious attitude adjustment when it comes to the 
differently abled." 
<We have our ways,> Ax said simply. 
<Aximili!> Gafinilan said heartily. Changing 
the subject. <Will you honor me by sharing some 
illsipar root?> 
Here's the thing. When Ax is in human morph 
he can't get enough of cinnamon buns. I mean, 
it's frightening. Well, I saw that same crazed look 
flit across his normally expressionless Andalite 
face. The look that says, "Give it to me now or I 
will be forced to hurt you." 
<Thank you,> he said carefully. <l have not 
had illsipar root since leaving the home world.> 
Gafinilan clomped through the back door and 
led us into the main section of the greenhouse. 
<You are an expert gardener, Gafinilan,> Ax 
said. 
<l have been studying the art of botanical cul-
tivation since my youth. It has been a challenge, 
but a rewarding one, to learn about the care and 
nurturing of Earth plants.> 
I know next to nothing about green things, 
but even I could see this Andalite had a green 
thumb. As it were. At least ten varieties of flow-
ers, in pots and in orderly beds on the ground. 
Two kinds of roses, purple peonies, orange day-
lilies— Gafinilan had been nice enough to pro-
57 

vide clearly labeled signs for the ignorant. Bushes 
and shrubs, leaves glossy green, some flowering. 
Several slim potted trees. Even a small section of 
Japanese rock garden, complete with neatly 
raked gravel. 
<l have grown the illsiparfrom seeds from my 
home world garden,> Gafinilan explained. In his 
oddly huge hand, he held five or six stalks of 
what looked a lot like scallions. Except pinkish. 
<lt is a hearty plant and grows well here.> 
I watched, almost fascinated, as both An-
dalites placed several stalks of the root on the 
ground and then proceeded to eat them in the 
normal Andalite fashion. Crushing the plant be-
neath their hooves and absorbing its nutrients. 
Then the almost-fascination ended. It seemed 
the Andalites had forgotten I was there. So I took 
a closer look at some of the more exotic-looking 
stuff Gafinilan was cultivating. Strolled down one 
narrow aisle and up the next, each littered with 
bags of potting soil, trowels, watering cans, and 
cacti in flatfish bowls. 
"Bzzzzz!" 
What the . . . 
I smacked the air with my hand. Stupid bee. 
"Bzzzzz!" 
Another one! Smack! 
But I was wasting my time. The bees weren't 
interested in me. They were interested in the 
PLB 
sweet and colorful flowers that filled the green-
house, 
Of course. Gafinilan relied on the bees to help 
fertilize his plants. 
Quickly, I checked to see if Ax and his host 
were still absorbed in the illsipar ritual. They 
were, 
Then checked out the greenhouse for a hive 
None. 
Checked my brain to see if I know anything 
about honeybees. Like, do they sting? Nothing 
there. 
But I was going to acquire a honeybee regard-
less. If the bees were coming from and returning 
to a hive somewhere outside the greenhouse — 
without getting zapped by the force field — that 
meant they knew a safe way in and out. 
Just what I needed. 
I stood still. Hoped I smelled my sweetest. 
And . . , 
"Bzzzzz!" 
Got it! Held the bee loosely in my fist and 
hoped I acquired it. 
<Thank you for the excellent illsipar root.> 
Ax! Still clutching the bee, I peeked around a 
potted plant to see the two Andalites had fin-
ished their snack. 
<You are welcome,> Gafinilan answered, one 
stalk eye pointed my way. 
59 

I smiled. 
<Perhaps now your prince will honor me with 
a visit?> Gafinilan said. <Now that you see I 
mean no harm. Will you tell him that I invite him 
to enjoy some of this home world specialty?> 
<l must explain . . .> 
"Yes, of course," I said, cutting Ax off. Hop-
ing he'd keep quiet. "We'll extend your invita-
tion." 
Ax looked back at me, slightly puzzled. I 
grinned crazily. 
The stupid bee had stung me! 
Owl I opened my fist, out of sight, and tossed 
the bee to the ground. 
Then I came forward to join the other two. 
<Excellent.> Suddenly, Gafinilan was all con-
viviality, the host with the most. <l look forward 
to your return and to meeting your prince!> 
60 
Ax's prince and my best friend was not go-
ing to pay a visit to Gafinilan before I did a little 
further investigation on my own. 
But I didn't tell him that. 
We met at the mall, Ax, in his human morph, 
and I strolling in together, stopping here and there, 
looking like a couple of normal guys hanging out 
at the mall. 
Jake on his own. Browsing through the Nike 
store, pretending to still be interested in some-
thing as harmless and normal as sports. 
Tobias with Rachel. She, carrying a bag from 
Express and one from Bebe. He, looking slightly 
awkward and out of place. 
61 

Finally, Cassie. In a pair of jeans that actually 
fit. 
Accidentally on purpose, we hooked up in the 
food court. Ax wanted to buy a box of cinnamon 
buns. Jake thought a Pepsi sounded good. What 
do you know? 
We gathered at an empty table and while Ax 
stuffed his face and I pretended to flip through a 
comic book I pulled out of my back pocket, we 
told the others what had gone down. 
"You know you took a huge — and I'll add, 
too, stupid — risk, Marco," Jake said, keeping 
his voice low and his expression bland. 
"Yeah, well, we got what we wanted," I said. 
"We got inside. And we got to confirm that 
Gafinilan is a bit of a loose cannon." 
"Yes," Ax agreed. Though it was hard to take 
him seriously with frosting on his chin. "His mood 
does not seem perfectly stable. Bui. But he is a 
fine gardener. And he has created an impressive 
human cover." 
"Yeah, down to the patterned paper towels," I 
muttered, tossing the comic book on the table. 
"The place is too perfect." 
Rachel leaned in to the conversation. "Sounds 
like he's overcompensating. Trying too hard. It's 
understandable. He's got to be scared." 
"Of who?" Tobias asked. "Us or the Yeerks?" 
Jake slurped down the rest of his soda. "He 
CO 
wants to meet Ax's prince. I say we pay him a 
visit." 
"Not a good idea, man. Look, I'm getting a 
very bad feeling about this guy. This situation. 
I'm not reading clear motives. I say we wait be-
fore sending you in." 
Jake shrugged. "For what? For the visser to 
grab him? For Gafinilan to tell the visser there's 
at least one human 'Andalite bandit'?" 
"It's risky," Cassie added. "Marco's right." 
"We take precautions, per usual. I go in with 
cover." 
Jake stood. "Gotta get home. My mom's cook-
ing one of my favorites tonight for dinner. If I'm 
late, she'll wonder." 
"I'll walk out with you," Cassie said. 
"Let's plan on my meeting Gafinilan as soon 
as possible," Jake said. "Maybe tomorrow night." 
"I'm out of here, too." Tobias stood and 
twitched his arms. "This place weirds me out. 
Ax-man? You coming?" 
Ax patted his stomach. "Yes, Tobias. I believe 
I am full for the moment." He stood and gath-
ered up the shredded remains of the Cinnabon 
box. 
It was me and Rachel, alone. 
I puffed out my chest and smiled. "Any par-
ticular reason you wanted to be alone with me, 
Rachel?" 
63 

"Yeah. So I could watch you act stupid. The 
usual." She leaned back in her seat. "I mean it, 
Marco. I'm not in the mood." 
I put my hands up, conceding defeat. 
"Okay, okay. So . . . ?" 
"A lot of times you're a major cynical freak, 
you know?" 
I barked a laugh. "Uh, thanks. I guess. 
"But you're also the best at knowing when 
something genuinely stinks. I can block out your 
lame jokes but I can't ignore your paranoid in-
stincts." 
"Gee, thanks, again," I said. 
Rachel frowned. "I mean it. Look, you're not 
letting Jake meet Gafinilan before you go back 
there yourself. Don't bother to deny it. You have a 
plan. I want to know what it is." 
Quickly, casually, I glanced around. "Why? So 
you can tell your Bird-boyfriend and screw me up 
with Jake?" 
"No, you moron," Rachel hissed. "So I can go 
with you. You'll need someone to cover your 
butt." 
"See! I knew you cared." 
WHAM! 
j , 
And that's when Rachel's foot connected 
squarely with my shin. 
I here wouldn't be time to do my bee morph 
before my "mission." So I spent a few minutes 
on the Internet, hoping to discover some perti-
nent facts about the bee's capabilities and weak-
nesses. Something that might help me know what 
to expect when the honeybee brain kicked in. 
And I learned something that scared the tar 
out of me: that honeybees, like ants, are social 
insects. Just not to the same extent as ants. But 
they function as part of a greater whole. Not indi-
viduals. Machinelike in their dedication to the 
survival of the colony. Devoted one hundred and 
fifty percent to the hive. 
Now you know where the saying "busy as a 
bee" came from. 
65 

This did not make me happy. Being an ant 
had been one of the most frightening experi-
ences of my otherwise already-bizarre life. 
I'd lost myself, going ant. So had Jake and the 
others. There had been no sense of self. Of in-
dividuality. Most people can't even imagine what 
losing that part of you feels like. It's one hundred 
times more intense than your worst nightmare. 
1 took a deep breath. I would have to avoid 
the actual hive if at all possible. 
I looked at my watch. Time flies when you're 
scared pee I ess. 
We met way too early in the morning. Rachel 
used her bald eagle morph and I went osprey. 
And we flew to Henry McClellan's house. 
<Now what?> she asked. 
<Land and survey.> 
We did. Before a full three minutes had passed, 
we spotted a honeybee. 
And it was headed toward the greenhouse. 
Perfect. Maybe I wouldn't need to find the 
colony after all. 
<What is it doing?> Rachel said. 
<l don't know. Just pay attentions 
Which wasn't very easy. The bee zipped along 
erratically. Up, then down. To the right, then 
down again. Left! Up! Slanting on a diagonal! 
Reversing direction, backtracking. 
66 
Then, in a final show of acrobatic skill, slip-
ping effortlessly through a tiny hole in a panel of 
glass. 
<Okay, Marco,> Rachel said. <There's your 
way in.> 
<Cripes. I'll never make it through that nu-
clear obstacle course without getting fried.> 
<Not unless you follow another bee,> Rachel 
pointed out. <l mean, really tailgate. Which means 
we need the hive.> 
She was right. Adopting the buddy system 
with a honeybee was my safest — not to mention 
only — chance of getting inside. 
We found the hive carefully hidden in a small 
cluster of trees at the far end of Henry McClel-
lan's backyard. 
<Where'd Gafinilan get the money for this 
place?> I grumbled. <The yard's got to be, like, 
three acres.> 
<Lotto?> Rachel landed on a branch of the 
live oak next to the partially rotted-out old tree 
that housed the resident honeybee community. 
<l'll cover you while you demorph. After you 
morph, I'll keep an eye on you as you get closer 
to the house. Anything goes wrong in there, 
Marco, you'd better call me,> she warned. <No 
being a h e r o 
<No danger of that,> I muttered. 
67 

I landed at the foot of Rachel's tree. Quickly 
demorphed and scurried over to stand just below 
the hive. Cut down on postmorph travel. 
None of us enjoy morphing anything really 
small. Particularly insects. Particularly ants, which 
are so, so not human. Honeybees are a lot cuter 
than ants. All fuzzy and stuff. Maybe this means 
they are less driven and simpleminded and vio-
lent. Right? 
Now or never. I crouched to minimize the in-
sane fall that would come as I shrank down to the 
size of a Gummy Bear. And I held the image of 
the honeybee in my mind. 
Morphing is not logical or orderly. It does not 
proceed in a preordained pattern. It is not pre-
dictable. 
This time, the first bit of me to go was the 
part of my torso that became the bee's thorax. 
Marco to about midway down my chest. Bee tho-
rax. Marco below. Ugh. 
Have I mentioned that the honeybee has an 
exoskeleton? Which precludes the need for an in-
ternal skeleton. So I'm pretty sure I was mostly 
ribless and partially spineless at the moment. 
<That is so nauseating,> Rachel remarked 
helpfully. 
I chose not to respond. 
Chitin. That's what the exoskeleton is made 
68 
of, a hard substance that protects the internal or-
gans and also keeps them from drying out. 
Fliip. Fliip. 
Two sets of flat, thin wings sprang from the 
bee's thorax. Membranes, really, lined with veins, 
the set in front, larger. Together, using a propeller-
like twisting motion, the two sets allowed the 
honeybee to fly. 
Poofpoofpoof . . . 
Hundreds, thousands of little hairs sprouted 
from all over my body. 
<Okay, that's a lot better,> Rachel noted. 
Also on the thorax, three pairs of segmented 
legs. When the morph was complete I would be 
able to walk and even use the frontmost legs to 
clean my antennae. 
Next to show up were the antennae. Segmented 
and coated with tiny hairs. Super-important sen-
sory organs. Sensitive to touch and odor. Attached 
directly to the brain. 
Cool. I could move the antennae because each 
was set in a socket on my head. 
Huh? Okay, human head was rapidly becom-
ing the kind of triangular head of the bee. 
My human mouth, suddenly sealed. 
My chin, splitting down the cleft. 
Shloop! 
And shooting out of that vertical mouth, a 
69 

proboscis. A long and hairy tongue that would al-
low the bee to drink liquids. 
Mandibles, a pair on either side of my head. 
Kind of like pliers. Useful for eating pollen and 
manipulating wax and snatching enemies. 
Okay, gross. I was blind, my human eyes gone. 
Then: Pop! Pop! Popopopopop! 
Vision. Thousands of teeny lenses showing 
me thousands of pieces of the world. All combin-
ing to make one huge-faceted mosaic or gridlike 
picture. 
The bee couldn't distinguish color as well as a 
human. That red birdhouse I'd spotted before 
morphing — not red to the bee. 
But boy, could I see movement! Forms were 
not as clear or obvious as was the fluttering of 
flowers on their stems or the flitting of a butterfly 
from leaf to leaf. 
Pop! Pop! Pop! 
Three more eyes, small, shot out above my 
compound eyes. They couldn't really distinguish 
anything, not movement or form. But the eyes 
did seem to detect light. 
And here came the abdomen. 
Oh, lucky me. I was a female. How did I know 
this? Because my abdomen was slimmer than 
the rounder abdomen of the male drone, for one. 
But mostly because I had a stinger. It was 
about one eighth of an inch long and at the end 
70 
of my abdomen. Kind of worked like a hypoder-
mic needle. Except the tip was barbed so that it 
would stick into the skin of the honeybee's vic-
tim. And it shot poison, not some vitamin for-
mula. 
Nice to have a weapon. But don't use it, 
Marco, the human brain in me reminded. If I 
stung an enemy, part of the stinger would remain 
in the enemy after I'd broken free. And I would 
die. Just like the bee I'd acquired. The bee who'd 
stung me. 
But as the morph came to completion, I 
wasn't thinking about cause and effect — sting 
and die. Thinking about cause and effect — that 
was a human brain thing to do. 
And right then, I was all honeybee. All ar-
mored flying insect with a vital mission — to 
work and work and work for the hive. For the 
queen. 
The hive! I had to get to the hive! 
71 

I shot up from the ground. 
<Marco! Get a grip!> A harsh sound. Mean-
ingless to the bee. <You're not supposed to go in 
the hive!> 
I landed on the lip of the hollowed section of 
the dead tree. Was met by a guard bee, another 
worker, like myself. I did not smell like the en-
emy. So round and round in circles, first this 
way, then that, the other bee twirled on its three 
sets of legs. Flicking its wings, my comrade told 
me the location of a new source of food for the 
hive. 
All for the hive! 
I would go and gather. . . 
72 
<Marco! What are you doing?> 
What. . . man. My brain finally shook itself 
back into place. What was I doing? 
I left my hive-mate and lifted off. Zoomed out 
and over to Rachel, still perched in the next tree 
in eagle morph. 
<What's wrong with you?> she snapped. <lt's 
a stupid honeybee!> 
<Sorry. But I'm not sure I'd call the bee stu-
pid. You need individuality and sentience to be 
stupid, don't you? As compared to smart or silly 
or whatever?> 
<l guess,> Rachel conceded. 
<Anyway, it's not nearly as bad as being an 
ant. You know how ants are just programmed 
parts of a whole? It's kind of like that, only not so 
aggressive. It's sort of like I'm part of a big farm 
family. All for one and one for all while we bring 
in the crop and feed the next generation and pay 
homage to the queen. That's what Communism 
is all about,> I mused. <l mean, Castro's like a 
king when you think about it.> 
<Yeah, well, Comrade Marco, just be sure you 
maintain control, okay?> 
<Yeah. Look, there's a couple of bees flying 
out of the hive. Might as well follow them and 
hope for the best.> 
<l'm on you.> 
73 

I zipped off after the two bees. One zoomed 
off the property, The other seemed headed for 
the greenhouse. 
So far, on a fairly straight path. 
ZZZZZZZZ! 
Not another bee. Not my bee. Another bug. 
Whoosh! 
It dropped straight down in front of me! Went 
right for the bee I was following! 
What the heck was it? 
Through what seemed like thousands of tiny 
TV screens i could see an insect larger than me, 
maybe twice my size. Its legs seemed to be cov-
ered in spines or spikes. Its nose looked like a 
big fat needle. 
<Marco! You'd better look out!> Rachel called. 
And then the monster insect hit the bee. 
Hard. Wrapped its horrible legs around it, captur-
ing the smaller insect in a spiny, iron maiden-like 
prison. 
Like one gigantic mutant insect they flew. The 
bee struggled but to no effect, 
And then the big bandit stabbed the bee with 
its needle-nose. Had to be sucking the life from 
the bee, because when the big insect released 
the carcass it was withered and dry. 
A terrible close call. But the killer insect had 
flown out of sight... 
<Marco! He's coming back for you!> 
74 
ZZZZZZZZZZZ-
<He's about a foot behind you; maybe six 
inches up. I'll try to get him but . . .> 
<Ahhhhh!> 
! felt one of his barbed legs pierce my ab-
domen. 
No no no no! 
A second leg impaled me from the other side 
I was a skewered snack for a seriously unat-
tractive insect. 
At least it would be quick. How long had it 
taken this thing to suck the life out of the other 
bee? 
I felt the proboscis against my back. The very 
tip of the deadly sucking needle. 
WHOOOOSSSHHH! 
A massive gust of wind sent me swirling, then 
falling toward the ground. 
Falling, but not dead. 
I tried to move my wings, get control. But 
they were still pinned against my body by the 
grip of the demon on my back. 
Thump! 
I hit the ground. Stunned but alive. 
<Marco!> Rachel cried. <Are you okay?> 
<l'm alive,> I said. <But not okay. The thing's 
still got me!> 
<Oh, you're fine,> she said. <l got him. Tore 
him right in half. Sorry I let you fall.> 
75 

<You're forgiven. Just get me the heck out of 
here, will you?> 
A bald eagle dive-bombing bugs in the back-
yard? Not too odd. 
With massive eagle claws, Rachel grabbed 
me and what was left of the killer. We flew into 
the dense trees back by the hive where, one at a 
time, we demorphed and remorphed. Got ready 
to try this insane thing again. 
This time, Rachel was on the lookout for winged 
hijackers. 
After about ten minutes, another few bees 
headed off toward Gafinilan's greenhouse. I fol-
lowed. 
<l see the force field,> I called out. 
<Be careful, Marco.> 
Let me tell you I more than realized I could 
definitely be fried in the force field, but it was a 
spectacular thing to actually see. A color I'd never 
seen as a human. Unbelievable. Indescribable. 
Something I later learned was called "bee-
purple." It's the color between yellow and ultra-
violet on the spectrum. Too intense for the 
human eye to see. 
Too bad. Because it was intense. And running 
right through it, easily marked, was a curving 
tunnel. Actually quite wide for a bee. And the 
tunnel led ultimately to a small hole in a glass 
panel of the greenhouse's back wall. 
76 
Cake. A piece of cake. 
<l'm almost in,> I called to Rachel. 
<Uh, Marco? Heads up. Gafinilan just came 
into the greenhouse.> 
Too late. Had to take the chance. I slipped in 
behind another honeybee. Frighteningly close to 
Gafinilan, who was peering intently at one of his 
plant labels, holding it close to his two main 
eyes. 
Suddenly, he swiveled his eye stalks toward 
us. Noted our appearance. And swiveled them 
back to his own business. 
<l'm okay so far,> I said. <Heading into the 
house.> 
I'd noted on my first visit that Gafinilan 
hadn't closed the back door of the house, the one 
that connected the kitchen to the greenhouse. 
Had counted on his not doing so again. 
Luck was with me. 
So far, anyway. 
I zipped through the open door. 
Flew through every room in the house. The 
immaculately kept living room. Unused dining 
room. Pristine kitchen. 
And I used the honeybee's eyes and antennae 
to try to pick up more information. 
I smelled the flowers, plants, and potting soil 
from the greenhouse. The chocolate and raisins 
of the cookies Gafinilan had stacked inside sev-
77 

eral glass Mason jars. A strong, disinfectant 
smell in the bathroom. Mr. Clean or Top Job or 
Comet. 
Throughout the house, in every room, Gafini-
lan's distinctive, not unpleasant odor. 
But there was one thing I distinctly did not 
see or smell or sense in any way. 
<What's in there?> Rachel asked. 
<l'll tell you what's not in here,> I said. <And 
what hasn't been here for a long time. Mertil.> 
78 
I don't get it. Where is Mertil?" Jake said. 
But only after he stopped telling me he was get-
ting really ticked at me and this whole Gafinilan 
thing. After he stopped glaring at Rachel. After 
he admitted the information about the missing 
Andalite was valuable. We were all in Cassie's 
barn. And things were getting consistently more 
confusing. "Did he ever exist? Was the guy on the 
video a fake?" 
<Prince Jake, I can confirm there was a Mertil-
Iscar-Elmand at the Andalite Academy. And that 
a fighter pilot by the same name won much honor 
afterward.> Ax paused thoughtfully. <Of course, I 
did not know he was morph incapable. I was un-
79 

der the impression the academy did not admit 
vecols.> 
"Yeah," I snapped, "you hate when your hero 
turns out to be a cripple. That's pretty crappy." 
"Back to the point," Jake said tightly. "Which 
is, what do we do about Gafinilan?" 
Rachel sprawled on a stack of hay bales. "He 
doesn't want to hurt us. Not yet, anyway. But he 
doesn't want to help us, either. He says he wants 
us to leave him alone, but then he asks to meet 
Jake. Doesn't make sense." 
<l don't think the guy knows what he 
wants . . .> 
<Yes, Tobias. Yes, he does,> Ax said excit-
edly. <lllsipar root. Why didn't I see before!> 
I shook my head. "See what?" 
<Gafinilan offered me illsipar root,> Ax ex-
plained. <lt is a mild intoxicant, taken in a man-
ner somewhat like humans take tea or coffee 
each morning.> 
"Okay, but. . ." 
<lllsipar root has a medicinal use, as well. In 
great quantities, it eases the pain of Soola's Dis-
ease. This is a genetically programmed disease. 
It causes increasing pain in the joints as well as 
the muscles, extreme at the end. In some, it 
causes progressive blindness. It strikes in the 
prime of life and is always fatal.> 
80 
"Okay," Jake said. "I still don't understand 
what this disease has to do with us." 
"And I don't understand," Rachel began, 
"why, if Gafinilan has the disease, he can't cure 
himself by morphing. Oh. Wait. Yes I do. His own 
DNA still has the disease. It's like he's trapped." 
Ax inclined his head. <Exactly. The only cure 
is to acquire, then morph, another Andalite. One 
without the defective gene that predisposes 
toward the disease. In other words, the victim of 
Soola's Disease must abandon his imperfect 
body. He must become a nothlit> 
Tobias looked at Ax with his intensely fierce 
hawk's eyes. <Sounds reasonable.> 
<No. In Andalite society, choosing to become 
a nothlit in such a situation or for such a purpose 
is considered an act of cowardice. Morally wrong. 
Despicable.> 
"If Gafinilan is sick, why haven't we seen 
signs of his being in pain? And if acquiring an-
other Andalite is what Gafinilan intends," Cassie 
mused, "why wouldn't he just have acquired 
Ax?" 
Ax had an answer for that, too. <Gafinilan is 
an adult with an impressive warrior's physique. 
He would never choose to adopt the body of a 
mere youth. He would waste years waiting for the 
new young body to grow to its maximum poten-
81 

tial. Besides, ! would never give my permission 
for such an act. As for Gafinilan's exhibiting no 
signs of pain In public, that Is only seemly. A 
warrior is trained not to show signs of physical 
weakness or mental strain.> Ax paused. <But the 
pain escalates the nearer death approaches, it is 
unlikely he will oe able to completely hide his 
agony. > 
!iSo, you think Gafinilan was- or !s, still — 
noping to acquire Visser Three's Andalite . . /' ! 
stopped. "Well, that wouldn't be too difficult or 
anything." 
"No. I'm pretty sure he wants me," Jake said 
suddenly. "At least, he wants who he thinks I am. 
A healthy adult Andalite." 
"But Ax said to become the nothlit is an act 
of cowardice," Cassie pointed out. 'You think 
Gafinilan is a coward? \ don't. Not the way he 
disregards Andalite custom to care for Mertil." 
"Nice, Cassie," ! snapped. "At the very least 
the guy's a liar. And he's big on keeping secrets, i 
don't trust him as far as I can throw him. Which 
is about one tenth of an inch. Maybe." 
"I have to agree," Rachel added. "Gafinilan is 
in a bad place, if he's after an Andalite body, who 
knows what he'll do when — if —•• he finds out 
Jake is human." 
"Same thing he did to Mertil," ! muttered. 
"I'm thinking it's not Mertil's happiness he's af-
82 
ter. I'm thinking he probably made that tape of 
his buddy himself. Put it out there to lure any other 
Andalites who might just be hanging around 
planet Earth. Then when Mertil did his part, 
Gafinilan put him out of his misery. The incredi-
ble disappearing Andalite." 
"Pretty harsh, Marco." Cassie. 
<But it could very well be the truth,> Ax said 
solemnly. <As much as it pains me to acknowl-
edge the possibility of such behavior on the part 
of a fellow Andalite.> 
<Loyalty,> Tobias said quietly, enigmatically, 
<isall there is.> 
"Ax?" It was Cassie, beginning to sound ex-
cited. "What about the morphing cube? The Es-
cafil Device? Could we use that on Mertil? Give 
him the power to morph?" 
"What difference would that make if he's 
dead?" Rachel said darkly. 
Ax hesitated. <lt is likely that Mertil is aller-
gic to, or has some disease or disorder which 
makes his body reject the morphing technology. 
In which case, what good is our forcing it upon 
him?> 
Jake stood abruptly. "Look, we're not getting 
any closer to the truth by sitting around speculat-
ing. Is Mertil dead or alive? Is Gafinilan a bad guy 
or isn't he? Only way to know is to get to him. 
And hope we're the first ones there." 
83 

So we went. I coached Tobias, Rachel, 
Cassie, and Ax on what to expect when they mor-
phed the honeybee. Warned them about clutch-
ing the bee too tight when they acquired it. 
Warned them also about what Cassie told me was 
a robber fly, the demon insect who'd tried to make 
me into a bee smoothie. 
The plan was for the five of us to sneak onto 
McClellan/Gafinilan's property. Acquire a bee 
from the resident hive. And fly through the force 
field and into Gafinilan's greenhouse. 
When we were in place, Jake would ring the 
front doorbell. I'd slip into the house and stick 
with Gafinilan and Jake. The others would hang 
84 
^ 
: — • — • 
back until — if — we got in trouble and needed 
major backup. 
And trouble could come from Gafinilan or the 
Yeerks. First, we had to make certain the house 
wasn't being watched before Jake went up the 
driveway. That meant concentrated surveillance. 
Beyond getting Jake inside to talk to the big 
Andalite, our plan was vague. Mostly contingent 
on Gafinilan's actions. 
When we were in morph, and safely in the 
greenhouse, I gave Jake the okay. 
A moment later, he rang the front doorbell. 
<Wish us luck, kids,> I said. 
Gafinilan put down the bottle of liquid fertil-
izer he was preparing and headed into the house 
through the back door. I followed him. Close but 
not close enough to arouse suspicion and be 
swatted to death. 
Once in the living room, Gafinilan morphed to 
Henry McClellan. Then walked to the front door. 
Opened it as far as the chain lock would allow. 
"Yes?" he said, keeping his body almost en-
tirely behind the door, allowing only part of his 
face to show. 
"Gafinilan?" Jake kept his voice low. 
"No. No, my name is Henry McClellan." 
Gafinilan began to close the door. 
"I know," Jake said quickly. "That's your hu-
man name. Aximili told me. I'm Jake." 
85 

Slowly, the door closed. Gafinilan undid the 
chain. Opened the door again. Stepped back. 
"Come inside," he said. 
Jake did. Gafinilan relocked the door behind 
him. 
"You are Aximili's prince?" 
"Yes," Jake answered. 
The Andalite's human morph relaxed slightly. 
I could hear it in his voice. 
"I am pleased that you have accepted the in-
vitation to meet with me," he said. "Perhaps it 
would be better if we spoke in surroundings more 
comfortable to both of us. Please, follow me." 
Gafinilan led Jake through the sparkling kitchen 
and into his private quarters. He stepped aside to 
allow Jake to enter first. 
"Very nice," Jake said. 
The Andalite followed and programmed the 
door shut behind them. Behind me, too. 
The three of us were alone. Cut off from the 
others, waiting in the greenhouse. 
"As I told young Aximili," Gafinilan said, con-
versationally, "Mertil and I were fortunate to have 
salvaged much from the wreckage of our fighters. 
Tell me, was there much to be salvaged of the 
Dome ship? Or did Earth's ocean destroy it all?" 
Whoa. Ax had already told Gafinilan he was 
the only survivor. Except for Gafinilan and Mertil. 
What was Gafinilan up to? 
86 
Jake looked steadily at Henry McClellan. 
"The Dome ship was almost completely de-
stroyed," he answered. Noncommittally. 
"Yes, yes." Henry's eyes darted around the 
room. Then he looked back to Jake. "Jake. It is a 
good name. Is it a shortened version of some-
thing else, like 'Ax' for Aximili?" 
"It's just what people call me." 
Jake was giving the guy nothing. 
Gafinilan spoke loudly. With false heartiness. 
"Please, make yourself comfortable. As will I." 
He stepped toward the center of the grassy 
room. Began to demorph. 
<Why haven't you demorphed?> he asked 
when he'd finished. 
Jake smiled. "I prefer to speak with you in 
this form." 
<But you insult a fellow Andalite by not re-
vealing your true self,> Gafinilan coaxed. His 
own eyes smiling the way Andalites do. 
"My true physical self is irrelevant." 
<Prince Jake.> Gafinilan's voice was forceful 
now, almost threatening. <l insist that you de-
morph from this ridiculous morph.> 
"After you explain what you really want from 
me," Jake countered. 
<Enough!> Gafinilan took a step toward Jake, 
tail blade raised high, arched forward over his 
back. 
87 

And then he stumbled, on nothing. Groaned. 
Closed all four eyes. 
No doubt about it. The guy was in pain. 
Ax was right. Soola's Disease. Or something 
else pretty serious and getting worse. 
Jake started to move forward. Instinctively, to 
help. 
<No!> I said. <Wait. Let him tell us what we 
need to know.> 
He stopped himself. Checked the impulse. 
Waited. 
"Gafinilan ..." 
The Andalite opened his eyes, the main ones 
first. Regained his composure. 
<No,> he said, his voice hard but low. <There 
will be no more talk.> 
He turned away from Jake. Stepped slowly to 
the table of weapons. Picked up a shredder. 
Turned and pointed it at Jake. 
<Now you will do as I say.> 
88 
<We've got a problem,> I called out to the 
others. <We need reinforcements in here. Now!> 
<What will it be, Prince Jake?> Gafinilan 
said. <lf you think I will show you mercy because 
you appear as a child, you are mistaken.> 
Jake stood perfectly still. "What if I am a 
child?" he said calmly. As if a shredder were not 
leveled a few feet from his face. 
<Backup on the way, Jake,> I said. 
Gafinilan's tail twitched. <You bore me with 
this game! For an Andalite warrior, you are not 
particularly clever.> 
"Hrrooooaaaarrr!!" 
From the direction of the greenhouse came 
89 

the menacing roar of a grizzly. The lonely howl of 
a wolf. The bloodcurdling screech of a raptor. 
Gafinilan jerked toward the sounds. 
And then there was one loud BABOOM! as 
Rachel crashed through one of the walls like a 
baseball crashing through a window. But making 
a lot more mess. 
Cassie, Ax, and Tobias followed almost dain-
tily through the rubble. 
"I'm sorry we bore you, Gafinilan," Jake said 
calmly. "But we're bored, too. Tired of your eva-
sions and half-truths. So if it's okay with you, this 
is the moment of reckoning. Time to come 
clean." 
<Four warriors against one?> Gafinilan blus-
tered. 
"Five, if I morph," I said, having demorphed 
behind the weapons table, walking around to 
face our host. "Six if Jake does." 
"But we're not here to fight, Gafinilan," Jake 
said. "Just to get some information." 
Gafinilan's two stalk eyes swiveled madly for a 
second. Then a look of shocked understanding 
came to them. <You, all of you — you are the An-
dalite bandits Visser Three fears. Are all of you 
but Aximili — human?> 
"Yes," Jake said. He shot a glance at Tobias. 
"More or less. We were enlisted by Prince Elfan-
gor to fight the Yeerks." 
90 
<You see,> Ax said matter-of-factly, <there is 
no adult Andalite for you to acquire so that you 
may escape Soola's Disease.> 
<What!> Gafinilan roared, pointing his shred-
der at Ax. <How dare you make such an accusa-
tion! I am a warrior. Never in a galaxy's age would 
I disgrace myself by acting with such base and 
selfish cowardice.> 
Silence. Gafinilan's hand began to shake and 
he lowered the shredder. And then Tobias spoke. 
<You know, in the Andalite world, it might be 
considered a moral failing or a crime against per-
sonal honor or something to seek to cure yourself 
in any way you can. But not here. Not on Earth.> 
<He's right,> Cassie added quickly. <We 
don't judge or condemn people who seek health 
through legitimate paths. We . . .> 
Gafinilan raised the shredder again. <You don't 
understand at all!> he cried, despairingly. <No-
body understands.> 
"Why don't you explain," Jake suggested qui-
etly. 
There was a moment of silence. A moment 
during which I thought it pretty likely Gafinilan 
would do something desperate. Tension radiated 
from every inch of him. And then he shuddered, 
like he'd made a decision, and the tension was 
replaced by what looked and felt a lot like ex-
haustion. 
91 

He lowered the shredder again and spoke. 
<lt is true. I have Soola's Disease. But what I 
have done I have not done for myself. I have 
done all for Mertil.> 
<Obviously, Mertil is not morph capable,> Ax 
said. <l do not understands 
The ghost of a small, self-mocking smile ap-
peared in Gafinilan's main eyes. <You see? No-
body understands. I suppose there is no reason to 
keep the truth from you,> he conceded. <Some 
human, some meddlesome, possibly innocent 
human stumbled upon Mertil feeding. Visser 
Three saw the tape — whether on television or 
in some other way, I do not know. But it was 
enough. Mertil was seized by the Yeerks. Only 
then did the visser discover that Mertil was a 
vecol.> Gafinilan's voice tightened. <Of course, 
the Yeerks have no use for a mere cripple. Espe-
cially one who is not morph-capable.> 
"Blackmail?" I guessed. 
<Yes. The visser used Mertil to find me and I 
offered to exchange myself for Mertil. After all, it 
was my fault that he was seen by a human. I should 
have protected him more carefully. But Mertil an-
ticipated my action. In an effort to save my life 
he informed the visser of my medical conditions 
Gafinilan laughed roughly. <The visser has no 
more use for an Andalite with a several-month 
life expectancy than he does for a vecol.> 
92 
<l suppose you could be grateful for that,> 
Cassie commented. 
Gafinilan turned an eye stalk in her direction. 
<We all want to be wanted,> he remarked qui-
etly. 
"The visser still wants something from you," 
Jake said. 
<Oh, yes. Visser Three is quite clever. And 
quite cruel. He has offered me a trade. If I bring 
him a healthy, morph-capable Andalite, he will 
release Mertil to me.> 
<And you trust him?> Rachel spat. 
<What choice do I have? Trust and act, or do 
nothing and wait for news of Mertil's murder. 
When I unexpectedly encountered young Aximili, 
I did not hesitate to bait my trap —> 
Ax interrupted. <You are willing to betray one 
of your own people to the Yeerks in exchange for 
your friend's life? For the life of a mere vecol?> 
<For me,> Gafinilan stated, <it is not about 
action traitorous to my world. For me, it is per-
sonal. It is about friendships 
93 

"Let's do it. Let's rescue Mertil and kick 
some Yeerk butt." 
Big guess who said that. 
We all demorphed and Jake introduced us to 
Gafinilan. He explained Tobias and strongly sug-
gested to Gafinilan — with a swift glance at all of 
us — that we join forces to recover Mertil. 
<There is no need for you to further involve 
yourselves in this situations Gafinilan replied, 
almost harshly. <Mertil is my responsibility^ 
I shook my head. I wasn't totally buying 
Gafinilan's story, not without proof, but I knew 
that his going in alone was ridiculous. And po-
tentially dangerous for us. My vote? Don't let this 
guy out of our sight. "What are you going to do all 
94 
by yourself?" I said. "Against Visser Three and 
masses of Hork-Bajir shock troops?" 
"No offense, Gafinilan," Jake added. "But 
you're in no shape to act alone. The odds are 
against you even without your being sick." 
"Besides," Cassie said gently, "you and Mer-
til are here on Earth because you were fighting to 
protect us. The human race. Consider it a favor if 
we help you rescue Mertil. Good karmic pay-
back." 
Tobias remained silent. Not unusual. He's un-
predictably moody lately. But I was sure he was 
with the program. 
Ax, too, declined to help convince Gafinilan 
to accept our assistance. I was pretty sure he was 
not with the program. 
<But. . .> Gafinilan hesitated. <l cannot al-
low children to fight my battle. It would be un-
conscionable^ 
Rachel rolled her eyes. 
"No disrespect, Gafinilan," Jake said, "but 
we're going with you. Actually, you're going with 
us. So now, you play by our rules or you sit this 
one out." 
If Gafinilan was stunned or offended by Jake's 
speech, he didn't show it. Exhaustion, depres-
sion — whatever it was — made him accept the 
situation with little or no resistance. 
<Mertil is moved throughout the day and 
95 

night,> he said after a moment. <As far as I can 
tell, he is never in the same place for more than 
an hour, and has never been in the same place 
twice.> 
"Why not just keep him in the Yeerk pool com-
plex?" Rachel asked. "Plenty of empty cages, 
torture equipment, stuff like that." 
<l imagine the visser is afraid of attack,> 
Gafinilan answered. <l imagine he does not trust 
me to complete our bargain. I imagine he half ex-
pects me to join up with the guerrilla forces that 
plague his efforts. Which, it seems, I have just 
done.> 
"So, Mertil's in some sort of transport vehi-
cle," Cassie said. "A truck, a horse trailer, some-
thing. How do we find it? Aerial surveillance . . ." 
Ax interrupted, <We cannot risk our lives for a 
vecoi> 
"Okay, Ax-man," I said, my voice a little less 
than steady. "I've been cutting you slack on this 
handicapped thing because you're part of the 
team. But when you talk like that, like this guy is 
some sort of dirty, worthless thing, I have to say 
you're just not one of us." 
<l do not and have never pretended to be hu-
man^ Ax stated. 
Rachel snorted. "You're so full of it, Marco. I 
seem to recall your calling that Hewlett Aldershot 
96 
guy who was in a coma a vegetable. No, wait, a 
carrot, to be exact." 
"Not the same thing," I shot back. "That was 
black comedy. Gallows humor. Not an open or 
implied insult." 
"Actions do speak louder than words," Cassie 
said quietly. 
"Thank you. I might not always say the right 
thing, but most times I do the right thing. Or try 
to, at least. My intentions," I added, smirking, 
"are good." 
<This is not about Marco,> Tobias said. <This 
is about Mertil. Mertil is Gafinilan's shorn), Ax. 
Can't you understand . . .> 
"Whether Ax understands or not," Jake inter-
rupted, "we're doing this. Is that understood? 
Good. Gafinilan, you've been in contact with 
Mertil?" 
During our verbal skirmish, Gafinilan had re-
mained silent. Maybe he was tired of having to 
defend his position. 
<Mertil and I have been the closest of friends 
since our childhood,> he said finally. <Unless we 
are on different planets, we can hear each other's 
thought-speak. Not perfectly. Often exact words 
are not clear. But the sound of Mertil's voice 
is always with me. It helps me to know he is 
alive.> 
97 

"So, what?" Rachel said. "Bird morphs, cover 
every inch of the town until we get close enough 
to Mertil for Gafinilan to hear specifics? Hope 
Mertil has been able, at least, to get a glimpse 
out a window or something." 
98 
I understand ruthless. 
I understand, maybe more than any of the 
others, what it means to be unsentimental. Cold, 
even. To see the end in the beginning and the be-
ginning in the end. 
I'm not denying that Jake, for example, 
doesn't make his share of tough decisions. That 
almost every day he isn't forced to choose be-
tween two seemingly impossible, equally degrad-
ing choices. That he doesn't feel the agony of 
those crisis moments. That too often he looks 
about fifty. 
All I'm saying is that I understand, immedi-
ately and on some instinctual level, the state of 
ruthlessness you have to reach — almost, to live 
99 

in — to be able to make those impossible choices. 
To see the right way to the right end. 
To accept being perceived as cruel and heart-
less. 
To live with the fact that people are afraid of 
getting too close to someone like me, like maybe 
it'll rub off, my ability to do what needs to be 
done. 
In spite of my incredible sense of humor, I am 
not always fun to be around. And there are a lot 
of reasons why. What would you be like if you had 
to decide whether to save what was left of your 
mother's life? Or let Visser One, the Yeerk, live? 
Calculated risk. I still don't know the results of 
that particularly agonizing decision, but I'd been 
able to do it. Been able to make the decision. 
So, on some level, I knew what Gafinilan was 
all about. How he'd made the impossible deci-
sion to do whatever it took to save his friend's 
life. Even if that meant sacrificing his own. Even 
if that meant handing over another Andalite, one 
of his own people, to the Yeerks. 
It was a pretty ruthless thing to do. And I was 
pretty sure he would do it again if he had to. 
I respected him for that. 
<Jake.> I spoke privately. <You'd better be 
aware we are in serious doo-doo if this guy de-
cides to trade loyalties . . .> 
<Marco. We're doing this.> 
100 
<Fme. I'm here. But let's be clear. What 
Gafinilan was saying is that he was ready to be-
tray us. What's changed? Okay, he can't fulfill his 
part of the bargain with the visser. Can't deliver 
an adult Andalite. But maybe he can cut a new 
deal, if things start going bad. Hand over the hu-
man "Andalite bandits" in exchange for Mertil.> 
<He said he'd work with us, not against us,> 
Jake said, tiredly. 
<You believe that. I'll believe the opposite. 
That way we have all bases covered.> 
<Fine. Let's get this over with.> 
Gafinilan was in an owl morph he'd picked up 
a while back. I was an owl. Cassie was osprey. 
Jake, peregrine falcon. Rachel, bald eagle and 
Ax northern harrier. Tobias, of course, was him-
self. 
For the past half hour we'd been flying north 
of town in a widespread group. Hoping to find a 
trace of Mertil. So far, radio silence. 
<Mertil says he is in some sort of graveyard.> 
Gafinilan's thought-speak was sudden and ex-
cited. 
impossible.> Rachel. <There are no grave-
yards out this way. That I know of, anyway.> 
<Warehouses, yes . . .> 
<He said that when his Hork-Bajir guards 
opened the door of his current prison, he was 
able to glimpse several large, boxlike, rectangu-
101 

lar vehicles, somewhat similar to the one in 
which he is being held. They are made of metal, 
but rusted. Mertil assumes they have been aban-
doned^ 
<Got it,> I said. <The old train yard. About a 
mile out from here.> 
The old train yard and final station stop had 
not been in operation since, like, my grand-
mother was a kid. Now, it was only a vast arena of 
sharp edges from which to get lockjaw. A place 
where teenagers hung and had wild parties and 
did things they could get arrested for. 
We reached the acre or so of dilapidated 
metal train parts. And saw nothing you wouldn't 
expect to see in such a place. Even with my su-
perior owl vision, I could make out no suspicious 
footprints in the dirt or tufts of blue fur stuck to 
jagged pieces of boxcar. 
And the place was quiet. Too quiet. 
I circled lower, hoping for some shred of evi-
dence that Mertil was being held on this site. 
Again, nothing. Hundreds of empty boxcars, each 
sixty feet long. The occasional caboose or flatcar. 
Some cattle cars lying on their sides. A locomo-
tive or two. 
<Nothing,> I said disgustedly. <Rust, rats, 
and empty cars.> 
<Gafinilan, do you still hear Mertil?> Jake 
asked. <Are you sure he's here?> 
102 
<Yes, yes. He is close.> 
<Okay then, people. We're going to have to 
land, morph some firepower, get our hands 
dirty.> 
<ls it me,> I asked generally, <or does Jake 
sound like a deranged camp director when he 
talks like that?> 
<lt's you.> Cassie. The girlfriend. Figured. 
Just then — 
<About three o'clock everyone!> I called. 
The door to one of the abused boxcars was 
sliding open. And the boxcar was disgorging 
about a dozen Hork-Bajir. 
Another car! And another dozen Hork-Bajir. 
Oh, yeah. There was definitely something 
there. 
103 

n 
i ight was falling fast. Maybe the mass of 
clustered, hulking railroad cars added to the 
sense of gloom that seemed to be descending 
over the old yard and station. 
The place had the eerie feel of all abandoned 
scenes of once-frenzied human activity. In a 
sense, Mertil was right when he called it a grave-
yard. No more hustling conductors and scurrying 
maintenance men. No more excited passengers 
and no more fretful family members, waiting for 
those passengers to disembark. 
Now it really was the end of the line. Thick 
with shadows thrown by a few dim and distant 
roadway lights. And within those murky shadows, 
huge, shuffling Hork-Bajir. 
104 
We landed on the far east of the yard, atop a 
right-side-up passenger car. From there, we could 
watch the Yeerk shock troops undetected. Watch 
as they streamed through the mazelike paths be-
tween rusted-out corpses and gathered in a small 
clearing almost exactly at the yard's center. 
Watch as they loosely surrounded a fifteen-
foot U-Haul truck, the self-rental kind. 
<l'm thinking Mertil's probably in that U-Haul. 
And that they're gonna be moving him pretty 
soon,> I said. 
<Yes.> Gafinilan paused. <Mertil believes 
this to be true. He has overheard some of his 
captors discussing the next destination. But he 
has no details.> 
<Tobias?> Jake said. <Stay up top. We're go-
ing to need you to guide us toward that clearing 
once we're on the ground. Everybody else? Battle 
morphs. I'm thinking we're going to have to bust 
Mertil out the hard way.> 
<What about Gafinilan?> Ax asked stiffly. 
<With all due respect, you are not well . . .> 
<l will fight. That is, if your prince will allow 
me to join you.> 
<Great,> Jake said. <But if you feel you can't 
hold out, lay low. I don't want to have to rescue 
two Andalites tonight. Ax? Keep close to Gafini-
lan in case he needs help.> Jake paused. <Or in 
case he decides to switch sides.> 
105 

Gafinilan didn't respond to Jake's statement. 
Either he really was a good soldier, acknowledg-
ing Jake as his prince. Or he was even more cal-
culating than I'd assumed. 
We glided off the roof of the car and de-
morphed. Then I went gorilla, with cinder-block 
fists. Jake to tiger, with deadly claws and teeth. 
Cassie to wolf, lithe and tireless. Rachel used 
her elephant morph, perfect for bulldozing and 
busting through pesky walls of metal. Ax and 
Gafinilan stayed Andalite. 
Suddenly . . . 
<You must go.> It was a thought-speak voice I 
didn't recognize. Soft and sad. A broken voice. 
The voice of someone after the boredom and 
shame of capture sets in. 
Mertil. 
Truth is, sure, leaving would have been no 
problem. I'm not stupid enough to get all excited 
about wading into bloody battle, four kids, a bird, 
two aliens — one mortally ill and possibly traitor-
ous — against a good hundred Hork-Bajir soldiers. 
I glanced at Gafinilan. He was holding tightly 
to the rusted axle of a caboose. Breathing shal-
lowly. 
<Gafinilan?> I said. <Tell Mertil we'll see him 
in a few.> 
<Tobias,> Jake said. <We're ready. Which way 
to the clearing?> 
106 
Way up in the dark sky, Tobias, our own per-
fect wilderness guide, said, <There's a red ca-
boose dead ahead. Circle it to the left. If I say it's 
clear, continue on past the next car.> 
We lumbered and stalked and trotted forward. 
Through the maze of looming abandoned hulks. 
Tobias guided us until we were within a few 
dozen yards of the clearing. And, by the light of a 
smallish bonfire the Hork-Bajir had just built, we 
could see all too clearly just how outnumbered 
we were. 
<Gee, Jake, have the odds ever been this 
bad?> I asked brightly. 
<Sure,> Jake answered. <But this time we've 
got the element of surprises 
"Andalite!" 
<Oh, crap.> 
Not even Tobias is perfect. Up on top of a rail-
way car stood a Hork-Bajir. Pointing a bladed 
arm down at us. 
<He must have scrambled up the other side!> 
Tobias called. <lt's too dark!> 
Sirens. Frenzied commands. The ominous 
sound of Hork-Bajir blades against metal. 
So much for the element of surprise. 
107 

'fh 
aahhh!" 
The Hork-Bajir hurled himself from the top of 
the car. 
<Rachel! It's your soulmate!> 
One lone Hork-Bajir, tearing at the seven of 
us, blades flashing. 
WHUMPF! 
He hit the ground when Gafinilan smacked 
him with the side of his enormous tail blade. 
<He is unconscious,> the Andalite said. <l 
believe he will remain so for some time.> 
<Duh.> 
<Everyone!> Jake. <We're not going to stand 
108 
here and wait for the rest of them to show up. 
Stick to the shadows. We move forward and sur-
round the clearing.> 
<Too late, man,> Tobias reported. <They're 
sending out a unit of Hork-Bajir. They'll be on 
you in a minute!> 
<Okay, new plan. Wait until they're close,> 
Jake snapped. <Then we take them down.> 
<What about the next batch, after them?> 
Cassie cried. 
<Take them down, too. We've got to keep 
pushing closer to the clearing.> 
<And Mertil,> Gafinilan said quietly. 
<Look out!> 
Out of the gloom, ten Hork-Bajir, charging 
ahead. Too late to hide. 
One came right at me. I ducked and slammed 
both fists into its belly. 
WWHUMP! 
He fell down. 
"Rrroooooooaaar!" 
Jake! With outstanding speed and agility he 
leaped forward. The force of the seven-hundred-
pound Siberian tiger slammed two more Yeerk 
warriors onto the ground. 
FWAAP! FWAAP! 
Ax. Fighting alongside Gafinilan, he was even 
more amazing than usual. 
109 

A wolf's howl! 
<Cassie, you okay?> 
<Yeah.> Trotting away from a fallen Hork-
Bajir. <He nicked me but I got him.> 
"Tseeeer!" 
Yes! Tobias. A howling Hork-Bajir clutched 
the red mess that had once been his eyes. 
Rachel. Wrapping her trunk around a Hork-
Bajir and . . . 
THUWUUUMP! 
Tossing him somewhere into the gloom. 
This was too easy. Something . . . 
More! Another five, ten warriors descending 
on us. 
<Spread out!> Jake ordered. <Make them 
think we've got them surrounded.> 
<Now that's optimistic,> I said. 
I dodged left. Slipped into the shadows. 
A moment later, leaped out onto the back of a 
Hork-Bajir. Wrestled him to the ground. 
<Aaahh!> 
Before I could get to my feet, my victim's 
buddy brought his elbow blade down onto my 
shoulder. 
It went deep. 
FWAAP! 
Gafinilan! 
<Thanks, man,> I said, wrenching the de-
110 
tached blade of the now incapacitated Hork-Bajir 
from tendon and muscle. 
<You are welcome, Marco,> he replied. <But 
I would advise you to watch your back more 
closely.> 
I swear if the guy had a mouth he would have 
been grinning. 
<l will,> I promised. 
The cut was bad but I'd lived through worse. 
<Marco!> Rachel cried. <A little help, please! 
I can't turn around in here!> 
I knuckle-ran over to Rachel. Somehow she'd 
gotten herself in a too-narrow alley between train 
cars. 
I tore the Hork-Bajir from her flank. Flung 
him behind me, into the side of a caboose. 
<Back out, Rachel. I'll watch your, uh . . .> 
<Don't say it,> she snapped. <Just don't say 
it.> 
But I was already gone, hurling oncoming 
Hork-Bajir left and right. The wound on my 
shoulder throbbing, my head now bleeding, too. I 
touched the damage and felt bone. 
It was so dark and suddenly, there were so, so 
many. 
I stumbled, backed away from the Hork-Bajir 
coming ever closer. Trapping me in a small cor-
ner from which there'd be no way out. 
111 

I realized I'd lost Jake and the others, though 
I could hear their grunts and howls through the 
terrible roar and brittle clash of battle. 
Okay, I thought crazily, I got myself into this. 
Now I 'II get myself out. 
The question was how. 
112 
<J. am Kong!> 
I bellowed! Pounded my fists against my 
gorilla chest. It was a display of totally false 
machismo. 
But it worked. 
Gave me the split second I needed to slip 
through the partially open door of a boxcar, slam 
it shut behind me. 
Scramble across the dirty floor, bumpy with 
rat droppings and crunchy with broken glass, and 
tear open the door on the other side of the car. 
Drop to the ground, slam the door shut be-
hind me. 
Take a deep breath . . . 
Uh-oh. 
113 

And realize I was facing another onslaught of 
Hork-Bajir. 
Hard to tell exactly how far away in the heavy 
dark. 
I leaned up against the side of the car. Held 
perfectly still. 
Hoped the gorilla's dark hair and skin would 
help camouflage me. Keep me hidden, just a 
darker spot in the shadows. 
When you're a kid, you know how you close 
your eyes and convince yourself that because 
you're blind you're also invisible? 
Well, it doesn't work when you're surrounded 
by seven-foot-tall, horned and bladed lizardlike 
enemies. 
Hork-Bajir vision isn't spectacular in the 
dark, but their hearing is keen. From the beating 
of my heart and the hot breaths pumping in and 
out of my nostrils, they'd know I was here. 
I got ready to start swinging. 
And then . . . 
Something made me glance to my right, al-
most over my torn shoulder. 
A ladder rung. Built into the train car wall. 
Maybe I could grasp it, swing out from it, 
adding force to my punches and kicks. 
Unless . . . 
A ladder rung is part of a ladder. 
114 
Ladders lead to places where you are not. 
The first two Hork-Bajir were on me! I grabbed 
them by the necks and smashed them together. 
The daggerlike horns on their heads stabbed into 
each other's flesh. Got stuck. 
Then, as the next two Hork-Bajir skidded to 
a stop a few feet from their fallen buddies, I 
scrambled up the ladder. 
Ignored the searing pain in my shoulder. 
And was almost immediately on top of the 
train car. 
Fantastic! From here I could see the clearing. 
The remains of the bonfire and the U-Haul truck, 
still parked. 
But not for long. 
<Everyone!> I screamed. <They're moving 
the truck!> 
And we were still too far from the clearing to 
stop it. 
Maybe . . . if we headed toward the main en-
trance, maybe we could cut it off before it hit 
open road. 
Maybe. 
<l'm going for the main gate!> I called. 
<Whoever can, meet me there!> 
<Where the heck is the main gate?> It was 
Rachel. 
Good question. I scanned the old train yard. 
115 

Spotted the dark hulk of the old station. Figured 
that the parking lot for cars would have been 
close to the station. Convenience. Figured the 
main entrance/exit would lead off the parking lot. 
<Okay,> I shouted, <all the way left. Probably 
behind the old station. Just go!> 
<l'll follow the headlights,> Tobias said. 
<Ax is back with Gafinilan,> Jake cried. <He's 
losing it. We're down two soldiers so look sharp.> 
Going overland was definitely the way. 
Thud thud thud thud . . . 
I made my way to the other end of the roof. 
The roof of the next train car to the left was about 
ten feet away. Too far for me to jump. 
I scanned. Okay. There was another way 
across the tops of the cars. A way that would get 
me close to if not right at the old station house. A 
slightly circuitous path, a weird, twisting metal 
road over a sea of battle. If I weren't stopped by 
Hork-Bajir, I could make it before the U-Haul left 
the yard. 
If. . . 
Thud thud thud thud . . . 
Closer. Roof to roof. Moving ahead, then, 
slowly, bit by bit, to the left, toward the station. 
<Marco!> Tobias called. <You're gonna inter-
cept the truck in about a minute. Hurry!> 
Thudthudthudthud . . . 
116 
<Marco, I'm just behind you, on the ground,> 
Rachel said. 
<You're on your own, Marco!> Jake. <Cassie 
and I got caught up by a few Hork-Bajir. 
We're . . .> 
Jake's thought-speak disappeared. 
A light. Two. Round and small. Yeah, there 
was the truck, moving slowly with only its own 
headlights to guide it. I dropped close against 
the roof of the train car. Crawled the last few feet 
to the edge. 
And prepared to drop onto the roof of the 
truck. 
<When I give the word, buddy,> Tobias called. 
<l'm on it> 
<Go! Go! Go!> 
I flew! Launched my big gorilla body down 
onto the metal roof of the U-Haul. 
WHUMMPF! 
Landed in a crouch and allowed my weight to 
fall quickly to the side. 
Safe. 
And still only going about twenty miles an 
hour. 
<Driver heard something,> Tobias reported. 
Well, duh. I'd left a big ole dent in the metal 
roofing. This was a surprise attack. 
I crawled forward across the cargo bay and 
117 

onto the roof of the truck's cabin. Peered over the 
side into the driver's seat. Saw a very nervous 
human-Controller. 
I tore open his door. Reached for him. 
Too slow! The driver slammed on the brakes. 
The truck stopped moving. 
I didn't. 
118 
Forty feet through the air! 
WHOOF! 
I hit the ground. Rolled another twenty. 
Finally, came to a stop. And not a pretty one, 
let me tell you. 
Hurt but alive. 
Thanked the stars for the helmetlike gorilla 
skull. 
SCREEEEEEE! 
The driver hit the gas! 
Now he was going to hit the gorilla. 
Closer! Closer! 
The grill of the truck loomed. 
The stench of burning rubber. 
I scrambled unsteadily to my feet. 
119 

Then . . . 
CRAAAAAASSSHHH! 
A train car! It smashed right into the path of 
the speeding truck, stopping it dead. 
Above the sizzling wreckage I heard Rachel's 
trumpet of triumph. 
<Nice, Rachel.> I knuckle-walked toward the 
smash. <Get Mertil into a train wreck.> 
<You're welcome for saving your life,> she 
replied. <Again.> 
The cab of the truck was completely im-
pacted. A twisted and bent remnant. The front 
two wheels were off the ground, resting on the 
top of the flattened boxcar. 
The driver's door was open. I don't know how 
he managed to survive the crash. But he had and 
he'd been Yeerk enough to get away. 
<Mertil!> I called, loping around to the back 
of the truck, now in real blackness again be-
cause the truck's headlights were destroyed. <You 
okay?> 
<l am as I was.> 
Great. Another Mr. Philosophy. 
<Let's get this open,> Rachel said. <Before 
the gas tank blows or something.> 
I wrapped my thick gorilla fingers around the 
gate latch on the back of the truck and pulled. 
Yanked. 
120 
Nothing. The muscles in my chest and arm 
strained as I tried again. 
Still nothing. Now my shoulder was really on 
fire. 
<Let me try my trunk,> Rachel said. 
<Be my guest,> I muttered. 
<Marco! Rachel!> 
It was Jake, slinking out of the shadows, 
bloody, but I'd seen him worse. Cassie, Ax, and 
Gafinilan were with him. Each bearing evidence 
of the fight. 
A second later, Tobias fluttered silently to the 
top of a nearby caboose. 
<We're trying to get Mertil out,> Rachel ex-
plained. 
Gafinilan stepped forward. <ls he . . . ?> 
<l am fine, Gafinilan,> Mertil answered. 
<Though still in this box.> 
<l will open the truck,> Gafinilan said. 
He moved into place directly behind and fac-
ing the rear door. 
CLAAAANG! 
I jumped. Couldn't help it, the sound was 
enormous. 
Gafinilan's battle-ax tail blade had punctured 
the steel door. 
The guy might be dying, but he was still in-
conceivably strong. 
121 

SKKREEEEEUUUUULLLL! 
Cassie's wolf whimpered involuntarily at the 
awful sound of Gafinilan's tail blade tearing a 
long gash down the steel door. 
<Very cool,> Rachel said. 
When he'd created a sort of tall, elliptical slit, 
Gafinilan stepped back. 
WHAM! WHAM! WHAM! 
And Mertil kicked his way out. 
122 
We had found Mertil. Probably saved his life. 
His dear friend Gafinilan had gone to terrible 
lengths to set him free. 
Mertil must have been pleased. On some 
level, in some way. But he didn't look all that 
happy. 
We were in the woods. Far safer than hanging 
around the train yard, waiting for a stray Hork-
Bajir-Controller to find us. 
<l am surprised,> Mertil said plainly, <that 
you were willing to risk your lives for me. As I 
am.> 
He held the stump of his tail down, as flat 
as it could go against his body. As if he were 
ashamed. The position had to be uncomfortable. 
123 

<We don't know what you mean,> Cassie said 
kindly. 
<l will explain,> Ax said. <He means he is 
surprised that we normal, healthy warriors risked 
our lives for a mere vecol.> He paused. Turned a 
stalk eye to me and added, <Or, as Marco says, 
someone who is "differently abled."> 
<Jeez, can't we just get over this issue, 
please?> Rachel said. <lt's not like it's Mertil's 
fault he got injured. Or that he has an allergy or 
something. Man, I can name a few people I know 
who are perfectly healthy and a total waste of 
oxygen. In my opinions 
<l'm down with that,> I murmured. 
Mertil and Gafinilan remained silent. 
<Ax,> Jake said. <You consider Gafinilan a 
hero of Andalite culture. Right?> 
Ax nodded. One of his favorite adopted hu-
man gestures. 
<Maybe the fact that he's able to overlook 
physical imperfection is one of the reasons he's a 
hero. What do you think?> 
<Prince Jake, I think the reason Gafinilan is 
able to overlook his friend's deformities is be-
cause he sees through the eyes of friendship. 
This is exceptional behavior. Under ordinary cir-
cumstances, in general Andalite society, it is 
simply not natural to show such concern for a 
vecol.> 
124 
<So, friendship 
isn't 
natural?> 
Rachel 
snapped. <lt's abnormal?> 
<What is "normal," anyway?> Cassie asked, 
rhetorically. 
<The norm. The standard. The average,> I 
said. 
Tobias glared. <Okay, I'm getting a complex 
over here. I'm a nothlit. A freak. Whatever. My 
best friend is an alien with blue fur. My girlfriend 
is human — when she isn't in morph. How about 
we don't talk about "normal" anymore. Or "aver-
age" or "natural." Please.> 
More weird silence. I, for one, was dying to 
hear what would happen next. 
<Mertil-lscar-Elmand,> Ax said. Respectfully. 
<lt has been an honor to meet you. I will always 
remember you as you were.> 
Well, it was a start. 
<We should get out of here,> Jake said. 
<Gafinilan, we'll help you and Mertil get back.> 
<Thankyou.> 
And again I saw the trembling I'd seen be-
fore. Only worse. And I remembered Gafinilan's 
not being sure he'd seen the human me that first 
night. Peering closely at his own printed labels in 
the greenhouse. He was going blind. 
When the trembling ceased, Gafinilan went 
on. <And then, you will be so kind as to let us be. 
My time is running out. I would like to end my 
125 

days honorably and in the company of my dearest 
friend.> 
Mertil, who was no lousy specimen of An-
dalite warrior himself, stood tall. <As Gafinilan 
has cared for me, so now I will care for him. It is 
my duty.> 
<The visser might not leave you alone,> Jake 
pointed out. 
<The visser has proven he has no use for ei-
ther of us,> Gafinilan retorted. 
<He's right, Jake,> I said. <lf the visser 
comes after anyone it'll be us. For spoiling his 
plans.> 
<Oh, goody,> Cassie said dryly. <You always 
know how to finish on a high note, Marco.> 
<Thankyou,> I said. 
126 
Tou know that old party game, "Who Am I 
This Time?" Or that nursery rhyme about a doc-
tor, lawyer, baker. Whatever. People tend to get 
identified by what kind of hat they wear during 
the day. By what is visible, noticeable, obvious 
about them. 
So, if you've got one arm or get around in a 
wheelchair or are blind, you're a handicapped 
person. Maybe you're also a poet or scholar, a 
sinner, or a saint. But first and foremost in 
people's minds, you're handicapped. 
Not a lot you can do about it, either. 
My mother is — was? — host to Visser One. 
Originator of the Yeerk invasion of Earth. 
127 

Everyone, including my dad and his new wife, 
thinks she's dead. 
Maybe she is. 
Maybe she isn't. 
Maybe she can be saved. 
Maybe she can't. 
I just don't know, after the last time we came 
face-to-face. In a Taxxon tunnel off the main Yeerk 
pool. During her trial by the Council of Thirteen. 
Most times, I don't even pretend to want to 
know. Though if a call comes again . . . 
Well, I'll wait until that happens to decide. 
And then I'll do what I have to do. 
Anyway, for the time being, I am "the boy 
with a dead mother" to people on the outside. To / 
my friends, I'm "the kid with the big mouth and 
mother stolen by aliens." 
Can't get away from it. 
Vecol, mentally challenged, handicapped. 
Dumb, psycho, gimp. 
You just learn to live with it. 
Jake's the responsible leader. 
Rachel's the gorgeous warmonger. 
Cassie's the tree-hugger. 
Tobias, Bird-boy. 
Ax, resident alien. 
Gafinilan is the one with the fatal disease. 
Mertil . . . 
So we rescued Mertil and agreed to leave him 
128 
and Gafinilan in peace. We were pretty sure the 
Yeerks were going to back away from them, too. 
At least for a while. 
I mean, like Gafinilan said, what had either 
Andalite done for them? Nothing. Except exhibit 
a depth of loyalty totally puzzling, totally incom-
prehensible to Visser Three and his minions. 
So given the fact that in the Yeerk opinion 
Gafinilan was, essentially, a dead man and Mertil 
useless, we figured they stood a fair chance of 
living unmolested. 
At least until Gafinilan died and Mertil was all 
alone in Henry McClellan's house. Unable to 
morph. A virtual prisoner in a foreign land. 
How would he survive? 
Maybe I shouldn't have done it. . . 
How often do I say that? A lot. 
Maybe I shouldn't have done it, but I did. 
Paid one last, unauthorized visit to the Mc-
Clellan house. In osprey morph, and while Gafini-
lan/Henry was at work. 
I am not totally stupid. 
I found Mertil in the greenhouse. Called out 
to him from a distance so he wouldn't be scared 
and zap me with a shredder or something. Identi-
fied myself as the handsome gorilla from the 
other night. 
<The others don't know I'm here, so, uh, I'd 
appreciate it if this visit is our little secret> 
129 

<0f course,> Mertil answered, his voice a bit 
strained. <l believe I owe you my life.> 
<Well, I don't know about that,> I said. <But, 
look. I just want you to know — I mean, we just 
want you to know that if. . . uh, when Gafinilan, 
you know, dies. That you should look us up. And, 
well, maybe I can check in on you, too. Play 
some video games, whatever. Being alone, man, 
it's not good and . . . well, we could use all the 
allies we can get.> 
Nothing. I shifted on my perch in the big old 
oak tree where Tobias had sat during our first 
visit to the house. 
Noted a honeybee winging its way toward the 
greenhouse. 
Waited. 
Maybe I'd offended the guy somehow. I hadn't 
meant to but sometimes my mouth gets in the 
way of sentiment. 
The silence was awful. 
And then, suddenly, his voice came booming 
out at me. Strong and energetic and quivering 
with something that sounded a lot like pride. 
<Thank you, Aristh Marco. Perhaps I will do 
so.> 
130 
D E E - D E E T ! DE-DEET! 
The alarm was like a jackhammer to the head. 
I groaned. 
DE-DEET! 
Enough, already! I felt for the clock radio. The 
snooze button. Just five more minutes. 
My hand patted the air vainly. No bedside 
table? I lifted my lids. Where was my . . . 
My heart stopped. 
I was staring into a triangular screen. A flat 
computer panel mounted flush in a peeling, 
white plaster wall across from the bed. Eerie cop-
per letters pulsed at the top of the glowing gray 
screen. 5:28:16 A.M. Below the time flashed the 
words "TO DO" and a single entry: "Report to 
work." 
This was not my room. Not even close. 
DE-DEET! DE-DEET! 
My body stiffened to warrior mode and I 
bolted out of bed. 
Don't miss 

