
Busy as a beaver ... 
I focused on the newest DNA I carried inside me. 
SCHLODP! 
My body began to shrink. Arms and legs sucked into my 
torso. 
FWUUMP! 
I hit the ground. 
PING PING PING . . . 
Thick brown fur sprouted all over my body. I felt suddenly 
warm, like I'd pulled on a wet suit. 
POOT. PODT. 
My back legs reappeared as short little flipper-feet. A heavy 
weight pulled on my rear end. 
I turned my head around. 
Stretching my spine almost two feet beyond my main body was a 
thick, flat, formidable mass. A paddle, a tool, a tail. 
Finally, my skull began to shrink, squeezing my brain into a 
new shape. Rock-hard skull bones, heavier than a human's, elon-
gated to form a very rugged jaw. And inside, my front teeth were 
growing. And growing . . . 
The beaver didn't have the raw, quick strength of a tiger. But 
it did have amazing stamina. And its mind was smart in a goal-
oriented, problem-solving kind of way. It also felt very anxious to 
get to its project. The beaver's mind was alive with a single 
thought. 
There are things to be done! Work! Work! Work! 

CHAPTER 1 
My name is Jake. 
But you already know who I am. 
Not "Commander Jake" or "Chief Jake" or 
even "Captain Jake." Just Jake. That's what 
everyone calls me, even now. 
Now that my entire life is devoted to strategy 
, and preparation and battle against the Yeerks. 
It's my job to keep us alive. It's my job to 
think about the moral and practical conse-
quences of our actions. 
I like to think I'm not one of those guys with a 
huge ego. But sometimes I feel like no one no-
tices what I'm doing. And it bothers me. Both 
that no one notices and that I care. 
OCRed By Arpit Nathany 
1 

Okay, I get "Prince Jake," but only from Ax. 
Definitely not at home. 
"Jake!" My mom. "Thank goodness you're 
home. It's about to storm and I'm late to pick up 
Homer from the vet. Where have you been?" 
Mom doesn't have a clue about the Yeerks. 
I'd like to keep it that way. 
"Out," I said. Exhaustion can make you act 
like a jerk. 
Truth is, it's been months since I slept a full 
night. There's no time for sound sleep anymore. 
Rachel, Cassie, and I barely make it to school 
these days. Marco and Tobias don't make it at 
all. 
Because the Yeerks are on the move. Big 
time. 
Ax monitors the Yeerks' Z-space transmis-
sions day and night. Most of the important stuff 
is too carefully encrypted for even Ax to decode 
using cobbled-together, human-made compo-
nents. But little pieces of casual conversation 
point to one thing. Something major. Something 
huge. 
As if we needed Z-space eavesdropping to tell 
us what was already abundantly clear. 
The end is near. 
We don't know when or how it will come. But 
we know it's coming. 
2 
When the Yeerks attacked a U.S. aircraft car-
rier not long ago, they took a huge and semi-
public step toward all-out, full-scale invasion. 
We managed to hurt the effort enough to 
make the Yeerks retreat. But they definitely 
haven't given up. 
"Listen carefully." Mom grabbed her keys, 
put them in her purse. "It's going to start raining 
any minute. I want you to close all the windows 
in the house right away. Then I need you to clear 
out the storage room in the basement." 
And I'd been hoping to catch five minutes on 
the couch. "Uh, Mom? Can't I do that tomorrow? 
Please?" 
"Nope. The contractor's coming first thing in 
the morning to give an estimate on the new rec-
room. Besides, it'll earn you twenty bucks." 
Mom pulled on her rain jacket. "I piled some 
storage boxes at the top of the stairs. If you want 
a cozy place for you and your friends to hang out, 
I suggest you get to work." 
Cozy place. I almost laughed out loud. There 
wasn't going to be a cozy place anywhere if we 
didn't come up with a plan to stop the Yeerk in-
vasion. 
I opened the door to the basement. A tall 
stack of cardboard boxes blocked my way. Fine. I 
was leader of a group of resistance fighters, 
3 

Earth's only hope for freedom, and I had to clean 
the basement to earn a lousy twenty bucks. Talk 
about irony. 
I gave the boxes a gentle nudge. Not mean-
ing for them to tumble to the bottom of the 
stairs. Which they did. 
"Jake!" Mom frowned and paused at the door. 
"I'm counting on you." Then she was gone. 
I began to close windows in the living room 
and kitchen. The sky was getting darker, heavy 
and threatening. Yeah, there was going to be a 
storm. 
I'm not a poetic kind of guy. Usually. But this 
afternoon I couldn't help but notice that today's 
weather situation was a good metaphor for my 
mood. 
I'd just come from an after-school meeting 
with the others. Rachel, Tobias, Cassie, Marco, 
and Ax. It was not a pleasant meeting. Tempers 
were blown. Time was running out and we still 
couldn't agree on anything. 
Ever since Marco had to morph in front of his 
dad, there's been talk of dropping our cover all 
together. Tell people who we are. Tell the media 
who we are and what's really happening on Earth. 
So that we can all start fighting back. Well, those 
of us who aren't Controllers. 
There is a definite plus to telling our secret. 
But there's a downside, too. 
4 
Rachel's dying to go public, kick butt, and 
never look back. Typical. Not that she's necessar-
ily wrong, but she doesn't always think about 
consequences. 
That's my job. 
As I see it, the only reason the Yeerks haven't 
yet made a full-scale, totally out-in-the-open at-
tack is because the stealthy approach is still 
working for them. It must be. 
So if we blew the Yeerks' cover, what would 
be their incentive for not obliterating every major 
city in the world? 
They could do it. We knew they weren't op-
posed to using human nuclear technology. But 
they wouldn't even need it. A couple of Blade 
ships could destroy a city, and the Yeerks would 
only lose a few million potential hosts in the 
process. 
And we couldn't risk that. 
But we had to do something . . . 
Because the infestation has been going on for 
a long time now. There are maybe thousands of 
Controllers in my hometown alone. Too many 
people pass in and out of the Yeerk pool for us to 
keep careful track of the evidence. 
Bottom line: Earth is losing its soul. People 
have to know. There's no doubt in my mind about 
that. They have to be made to see. But going 
public, taking that major step . . . 
5 

Sometimes, it's too much. The decisions, the 
pressure. The basement. . . 
I went down to the basement. Past the running 
washing machine. On to the back room, dragging a 
stack of boxes, a marker, and a tape gun. 
It was dark. A cotton pull cord brushed my 
arm and I yanked it. The single bulb that dangled 
at the center of the room brightened. The light 
made me squint and look away. 
Stacks of boxes overflowing with papers. 
My old bike. A broken lamp. A whole roomful of 
junk. 
I tripped over a pile of loose papers. Num-
bers, columns of figures, the words "Mutual 
Fund Allocation." I threw the papers in one of 
the empty boxes. Labeled it: MOM'S STUFF. 
I grabbed another stack of papers off the 
floor. At the top of the first page a kid had 
scrawled: "What I Did This Summer." In the cor-
ner were the stamped words: GOOD JOB! 
Tom's old schoolwork. From before he be-
came a Controller. I threw the stack into another 
box and started to write his name on the lid. 
Stopped and crossed it out. Printed: TRASH. I 
didn't have a brother anymore. 
That depressing fact made me think back to 
the afternoon's meeting. 
Ax favored continued secrecy, at least until 
the Andalite fleet arrived. 
6 
No one really believes the Andalites are com-
ing. Not even Ax. But hope, even false hope, is 
better than none at all. 
Over my head, another shelf of junk. 
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS went next to my mom's 
stuff. I reached above my head for the next box. 
It was almost too big to manage. I heaved it to 
the floor. A Post-it note on top said, For Jake 
from Grandpa G in Mom's handwriting. So this 
was the box he'd left me in his will? Mom must 
have been saving it for my next birthday or some-
thing. 
It was an old-fashioned chest covered in dark, 
moldy leather. Decorative tooling and metal trim 
made it look kind of fancy. The slightly curved lid 
displayed the name Fitzhenry in raised leather 
letters. 
The name was familiar. Had I met some Fitz-
henrys at a family reunion? Mom's cousins? 
I reached to open the lid of the chest and the 
light went out. 
The washing machine stopped. 
I could hear the wind and the rain beating 
against the panes of the small basement win-
dows, rattling them loudly. 
CRAAASSSSHHHH! 
I crept through darkness toward the source of 
the sound. 
Just enough light seeped in from outside for 
7 

me to see the large, fallen tree branch that had 
smashed the glass in the basement window. Wind 
and rain tunneled inside. 
Another crisis. 
It would be nice if they were all so small. 
CHAPTER 2 
I stumbled up the stairs, sneakers crunching 
broken glass. The rechargeable flashlight was in 
the kitchen, plugged in next to the stove. I 
grabbed it and the roll of duct tape from the 
kitchen drawer and ran back downstairs. 
I placed a sheet of cardboard over the broken 
window and taped the edges to the wall. The 
basement was completely dark now except for 
the flashlight beam. 
I went back to the antique chest. The raised 
leather tooling was thick with dust. I lifted the lid 
and aimed the flashlight inside. 
Some sort of suit coat, folded and packed on 
top. Dark blue wool. A row of large brass buttons 
9 
8 

nearly the size of quarters. I lifted it out of the 
box and set it, still folded, on the floor. 
Beneath the coat was an assortment of small 
objects. Old medals attached to faded pieces of 
colored fabric. A long, corroded knife with two 
edges. At the base, where a handle should have 
been, there was a curved metal ring and two 
holes. Like the knife was meant to attach to 
something. 
There wasn't much more in the box. A tin 
cup, a comb, a gross old toothbrush that looked 
handmade. I wondered which box to put this 
stuff in. The crumbling chest wasn't going to last 
much longer. 
BANG! The back door, slamming shut. 
"Mom?" I hollered. "Is that you? How's 
Homer?" 
No answer. I left the contents of the box on 
the floor and carefully made my way upstairs. 
The storm seemed to be quieting. 
"Mom," I called again. "The power went out 
and . . ." 
I turned and saw him standing there, in the 
doorway between the kitchen and the living 
room. Looking at me. Silent. 
"Whoa, man, you scared me," I said, trying 
not to sound as startled as I felt. 
Tom. Not my brother anymore. A Yeerk. I pre-
tended I didn't know that, pretended everything 
10 
was normal. My family's survival depended on my 
acting skills. 
"Some storm, huh?" I said. 
I smiled. Tom didn't. 
"If the power doesn't come back on, maybe 
we won't have school tomorrow." 
"It'll be back on in a few minutes," Tom said 
flatly. 
"Right. Hey, want to help me organize the 
basement? Lots of cool stuff down there." 
The last thing I wanted was to hang around 
with Tom. He really freaked me out. He was 
brother and alien, sibling and enemy. I always 
worried I'd let something slip, something that 
would give everything away. But the nice younger 
brother act was essential. 
"No," he said absently. "Tell Mom I won't be 
here for dinner. I have to be someplace." 
"Where?" 
He didn't answer. Just walked away. 
"Preparations," he muttered, heading down 
the hall. 
I tensed. His Yeerk was stressed. Talking to it-
self. I pretended I hadn't heard. 
"Okay. Later." 
Maybe he was just talking about school. 
Maybe I was the one cracking up. 
I went back down to the basement. Propped 
the flashlight against a cabinet so that it shone 
11 

on the wall behind the old chest. Picked up the 
blue jacket with the big brass buttons. 
THUNK! 
Something slipped from between the folds 
and hit the floor. 
I shook out the jacket, looking for more hid-
den objects. It was long. Just about my size in 
the shoulders, but reaching all the way down 
past my knees. With a tear in the left breast. 
I refolded it, placed it into the box, and picked 
up the object that had fallen on the floor. It was a 
book. Leather cover. Pages that didn't quite align 
at the edges. 
I crouched closer to the flashlight and opened 
the cover. The front leaf read, Lieutenant Isaiah 
Fitzhenry. I flipped to the first page. 
We know General Forrest and his cavalry are 
out there . . . 
Suddenly, I remembered where I'd heard the 
name Fitzhenry. He was the great-great-uncle 
Grandpa G had talked about. The Civil War hero. 
And this had to be his journal. 
All the stuff in the box made sense now. The 
coat was his uniform. And the knife. 
I thumbed through the pages. The handwrit-
ing was neat and straight. Fancier than people 
write today. Some of the letters took a second to 
recognize, but on the whole the writing was 
pretty easy to read. Words were neatly crossed 
12 
out in places. One entire page was smeared with 
ink and brown stains. I turned back to the first 
page. 
"Jake?" 
I heard Mom at the back door. Homer's claws 
skittering across the kitchen tiles. 
Then, a straining whine from the laundry 
room. The washing machine laboring back to life. 
The bulb overhead flickered twice, then shone 
brightly. 
"Jake?" Mom called again from the kitchen. 
I set the diary on top of the blue wool uni-
form. 
"Coming!" I called. 
I turned away from the box. Stopped short 
and turned back. The old journal lay open. 
We know that General Forrest and his cavalry 
are out there. But will he come? Will he ever 
come? And if he does, shall we be ready? 
I paused, then closed the book and shut the 
lid of the box. 
That was a different war. 
A long time ago. 
13 

CHAPTER 3 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
Sinkler's Ridge, Tennessee. 
December 23, 1864. 
Early morning. 
We know General Forrest and his cavalry are 
out there. But will he come? Will he ever come? 
And if he does, shall we be ready? 
When we went into camp two days ago, Major 
Charles Shaw held the command of our detach-
ment. Major Shaw died last night, struck down 
not by Rebel fire, but by fever. 
I, Lieutenant Isaiah Fitzhenry, command the 
detachment now. The mission is in my hands. 
"Lieutenant!" 
Sergeant Raines burst through the door and 
14 
strode toward me, boots crashing across the 
wood floor. His bootfalls sounded like the echo of 
artillery and I jumped to my feet with reflex ac-
tion. 
I pray that I, too, am not succumbing to 
fever. 
"Have we received an answer?" I asked 
quickly. 
I'd sent him to telegraph for new orders. 
Marching orders, I hoped. We had to move east, 
rejoin the regiment, get the sick men to safety. 
"No, sir," Raines replied. 
His anxious gaze shifted to the floor, then out 
the window, then back to the floor. His clenched 
jaw looked tight enough to break a tooth. 
"What then?" 
Raines's boots appeared at once wet and stiff. 
They were covered in mud, and frozen, no doubt. 
I glanced through the window of the tumbledown 
house we'd taken as headquarters. A vile mixture 
of rain and snow was falling outside. 
I wiggled my own toes. Only the faintest sen-
sation. And I know I am better off than most of 
the men. 
Raines raised his piercing blue eyes. 
"It's the telegraph line, sir," he said. "It's 
been cut." 
I felt blood drain from my face. 
We were cut off. 
15 

Raines shifted his weight. 
"It's General Forrest's Confederate cavalry, 
Lieutenant. One of Forrest's men cut the line." 
"How do you know?" I shot back. I prayed 
Raines was mistaken. "Can you be sure?" 
"Our boys on picket duty caught the Reb that 
done it, and brought him into camp." 
I looked back out the window. The mighty 
blue mist-shrouded mountains loomed like a 
silent approaching enemy. Sniffing us out, roping 
us in, preparing to strike. 
So Forrest was near! 
"Is the prisoner outside?" 
"At the hospital tent, sir. He tried to escape 
and took a shot in the arm." 
Sinkler's Ridge is a single street of drab clap-
board and log buildings. A worth-nothing town 
that we never would have seen. If it weren't for 
the junction. 
Two minor rail lines pass through here. Minor 
only in size, for they carry goods to General Sher-
man's army. Vital supplies like hardtack, coffee, 
coats, tents, rifles, shoes, socks, artillery, and 
ammunition. 
Everything necessary to sustain the cam-
paign. 
If we lose the junction, the Rebels could de-
stroy Sherman's army. Union victories at Vicks-
burg and Atlanta won't mean a thing. 
16 
"Keep the Sinkler's Ridge rail junction in 
Union hands." 
Oh, how simple those orders sounded two 
days ago when the men stood tall and sixty 
strong. 
One's circumstance can change so quickly. 
My men are dropping like flies, the fever is 
spreading, and it is cold. 
So cold. 
Of the many things we need, I would settle for 
blankets. 
"How many men are ready for service?" I 
asked. 
"Fewer than twenty-five, Lieutenant. If For-
rest comes this way with even a small force, we 
ain't going to be able to hold them and that's a 
fact." 
Today is my twentieth birthday. Two years in 
the army now and by all accounts a man, yet I 
do not look it. Though tall, I'm thin. Though an 
officer, my hair falls across my forehead like a 
baby's curls and no amount of combing keeps it 
back. 
The men must see me as more boy than man. 
Respect is earned. I know such regard takes 
time. 
But I feel I can prove my strength, show that 
my heart is free of fear and weakness, that I am 
built to serve the Union and prevail. 
17 

"If we can't telegraph for new orders, we 
must obey the orders we have." 
"Lieutenant?" I could hear the shock in 
Raines's voice. 
"Prepare to defend our position. If the Rebels 
want this junction, they have to fight for it and 
fight darn hard. Am I right, Raines?" 
Raines was a good man, resilient and hard. 
I'd never seen defeat in his face and I didn't see 
it now. 
"Yes, sir!" 
"Assemble the men and reassign duties. But 
first, alert the hospital tent that I'll be by directly. 
I will seethe prisoner." 
"Yes, sir," Raines repeated, saluting as he 
turned on his noisy heels. 
A tin whistle's jaunty tune filtered through the 
window. It was the town boy I'd seen before, and 
his friend with a drum. They marched back and 
forth on the main street, backs straight, heads 
high. Playing and drumming. 
"When Johnny comes marching home again, 
hurrah! Hurrah! . . ." 
They'd been practicing. 
They were ready. 
When we see action, I might have to call on 
them. 
18 
CHAPTER 4 
The biting wind cuffed my ears as I walked 
toward the tents. 
We'd set up at the end of the main street, just 
across the tracks from the depot. One large tent 
served as the hospital. A dozen dirty-white wedge 
tents formed two rows of flapping canvas shells. 
If the fever continues to spread, we won't need 
half the tents we've got. 
I tucked my journal into my right pocket and 
crossed the tracks. 
Ma sent the journal in her last package, in a 
box meant for Thanksgiving, but not received un-
til just days ago. The chocolate and potatoes 
were still good, but the turkey was rotten and the 
19 

cake had turned hard as mortar. I wish I had it 
now to add to munitions. 
Other men kept journals, but never me. Why 
remember all the things I wanted to forget? 
In her letter, Ma told me why. 
"You'll be an old man someday, Isaiah. You'll 
think back on this war — on the boys you knew 
and the towns you saw — and you'll need to re-
member." 
"Lieutenant!" 
Sergeant Raines appeared from behind the 
hospital tent, his face contorted in alarm and 
confusion. 
"There's some men coming into camp, sir." 
The intensity of his voice stopped my heart. For-
rest? 
"Who?" I yelled, falling into a run. "What ap-
proach?" 
"Not sure, sir." 
"For God's sake, Raines! Speak up." 
"I guess they must be runaway slaves been 
hiding back up in the hills." 
I started to breathe again, annoyed with 
Raines for getting so excited. For getting me so 
excited. We had no time for distractions. This 
would be a trivial matter, a corporal's job. 
"What do they want?" I said shortly. "Food?" 
"No, sir," Raines said weightily. "They say 
they've come to fight." 
A laugh escaped me before I could stop it. A 
nervous mix of surprise and annoyance at a pre-
posterous idea. 
I rounded the back corner of the hospital tent 
and froze in my tracks. 
Three dozen men, perhaps more, stood before 
me in an uneven line. Tall, short, wide, slight. 
Mismatched shirts and pants unified by a state of 
profound wear, as though each man had been 
born into the world with just one suit of clothes 
and was wearing it still. 
Such blistering sores on feet I've never seen 
even on my own ill-provisioned men. Mere sug-
gestions of boots. Near them on the dirt rested 
raggedy knapsacks tied to rickety sticks. 
I looked at the faces last, at features as di-
verse as those in our detachment, at dark skin of 
varied hues. 
"What'll we do?" Raines demanded, breaking 
the silence of my observation. "Use them as con-
trabands?" 
Contraband was what we called these people 
early in the war, back before the Emancipation 
Proclamation. Back when the Union first realized 
that it could employ former slaves. Not as sol-
diers, but as laborers. 
I didn't answer Raines, for there were more 
than thirty faces fixed on me, each wanting an 
answer. 
21 
21 
20 

Whom to address? Which face to look at? I 
met one tall man's eyes, but his gaze dropped in-
stantly to the dirt. 
So I moved toward the tattered wall of men 
and said, somewhat shakily, "I am Lieutenant 
Fitzhenry. I see you're here to help the Union 
cause. I am glad of that, for we need your help. A 
Rebel attack is imminent." 
At this, a wave of whispers rustled through 
the men. 
"We must prepare defenses. That is my sole 
concern," I continued. "There's no time to con-
struct gabions or chevaux-de-frise. We need 
earthworks, simple and straightforward. And we 
need them dug fast." 
A smallish man with a wide-brimmed hat 
stepped out of the line. 
"We're here to fight, sir." 
I ran my eyes up and down the line of men, 
pondering how to phrase my rejection in clearer 
terms. 
"Do you understand that soldiering takes 
many forms? That fatigue work is as much a part 
of victory as . . ." 
"We'll dig your defenses, Lieutenant. But 
when the attack comes, we want to fight." 
"What's your name?" I said. 
"It's Jacob." 
22 
"You will refer to me by my rank," I said 
sharply. 
"Yes, Lieutenant." 
"Surely you know you cannot fight," I said 
with rising frustration. "Surely you know it's im-
possible." 
"We're free men, Lieutenant. Everyone in this 
line would rather die than lose that freedom." 
Again, whispers ruffled the line, obvious sup-
port for Jacob's words. 
"And I know your men are sick with fever," 
Jacob continued. "You need men, Lieutenant. 
Here we are." 
"Fighting is out of the question!" I shot back, 
glancing at Raines. The presumption in Jacob's 
candor and logic disturbed me. "We can provide 
you with minimal provisions — boots, stockings, 
a bit of food — in exchange for labor. We need 
entrenchments dug! Raines will distribute shov-
els and pickaxes and whatever else he can find. 
Fatigue work is all I can offer you," I shouted, ex-
asperated. "It's all I can offer!" 
They couldn't fight. It was impossible. My own 
men would not stand for it. The townspeople, now 
only weakly pro-Unionist, would rebel. An armed 
force must be unified, not divided! 
And the men were untrained. They could not 
shoot muskets if they had them. 
23 

Yet we were in desperate need of men. With 
just twenty-five, we were a handful against a 
multitude. What did Forrest's force number? 
Hundreds? 
More? 
"Follow me, all of you!" Raines yelled, 
marching off toward the supply shed. 
Raines's order was premature. 
Jacob hadn't accepted. 
He stood still, staring at me with eyes dark as 
night. 
„ 
"We'll do a job to make Lincoln proud, he 
said finally, smiling faintly. Reluctantly, he 
marched away after Raines. The other men fell in 
after him. 
I feared I hadn't won the argument. Indeed, I 
felt it had only just begun. 
24 
CHAPTER 5 
J a k e 
Brrrr-ing! 
I snapped awake. Grabbed the phone before 
my eyes were open. Put it to my ear. Opened my 
eyes. 
"Hello?" 
"Oh, hi, Jake." Cassie. 
I groaned. The clock said 4:55 A.M. 
"Sorry. I must have hit the wrong speed dial. 
But while I have you, I've been meaning to tell 
you that Toby asked me to thank you for loaning 
her your history notes. I think she likes you." 
"Great," I said. "Okay. Go feed the chickens 
or whatever you vet types do at this hour of the 
morning." 
"Give the animals their meds, actually. 'Bye." 
25 

Cassie. Talking nonsense all so she could 
work in the code word "Toby." It meant one 
thing. There was trouble for the free Hork-Bajir. 
I had to get to their valley. Now. 
I crept from my room to the hall and listened. 
Not a sound. The house was chilly, the carpet 
cold under my bare feet. I neared Tom's room 
and carefully cracked open the door. A bulge of 
covers. He was asleep. 
I watched for a minute. No movement. I 
walked into the room. The floor creaked loudly. I 
froze. Still, Tom didn't stir. I reached out and 
touched the covers, my heart beating in my ears. 
What would I say if he woke up? 
I pressed gently. The covers rebounded softly. 
Pillows. The bed was stuffed with pillows. 
Tom was out on Yeerk business. 
Again. 
Quickly, quietly, I made my way down the 
hall, past my parents' bedroom. Both were sleep-
ing soundly. 
I moved silently down the stairs. Slugged 
down a glass of orange juice from the container 
and wrote my parents a note. 
Went running early. Going straight to school. 
Don't worry, I'll catch an Egg McMuffin. 
I stuck the note to the coffeemaker and 
walked out the back door. Climbed the maple 
26 
tree and in near darkness morphed a peregrine 
falcon. And in no time I rose high into the early-
morning sky. 
The predawn city spread beneath me. Every 
person on the street, in every car and every 
house, was suspect now. Anyone could be a Con-
troller. And Controllers could be anywhere. But 
there were fewer of them in the woods. As the 
houses and roads became less frequent and far-
ther apart, as the trees began to thicken, I began 
to breathe easier again. 
I always think I know how to get to the valley 
of the Hork-Bajir. But every time I'm almost 
there, I get lost. East is suddenly west and north 
is south until, all at once, the valley appears right 
in front of me. And I'm never quite sure how I 
found it. 
It was the same story this morning. I was fly-
ing in circles until, suddenly . . . 
I soared over a ridge and into the first rays of 
the rising sun. There, before me, breathtaking as 
always, stretched the valley. And the stream, 
slowly winding its way down from the ridge. I fol-
lowed the stream to the camp and alighted on a 
branch before dropping to the ground to de-
morph. 
The others were already waiting. 
<Hello, Prince Jake.> Ax kept his main eyes 
27 

down. His stalk eyes kept constant watch all 
around us. <The situation is very bad. The colony 
is in serious danger.> 
Ever since Ax acted alone in kidnapping 
Visser Two from the aircraft carrier — a desper-
ate act he hoped would make the visser call off a 
captured American sub scheduled to release nu-
clear weapons against China — he hadn't looked 
me straight in the eyes. And to be honest, I was 
almost glad. 
Yeah, Ax's gamble had worked. And in a 
strange way I was glad he'd relieved me of having 
to make the decision. Of having to choose death 
for thousands in order to save millions. 
I was proud of Ax. Mad at him, too. I missed 
the times when our friendship was easier. Hoped 
it would get better. But for now, we both kind of 
pretended nothing major had gone down be-
tween us. 
It's what we have to do. 
"Why?" I asked. "What's going on?" 
Marco nodded toward Toby, the young Hork-
Bajir with special powers. The "seer." She's 
pushing seven feet, nearly as tall as the largest 
male Hork-Bajir. 
Most Hork-Bajir aren't terribly bright. Toby is 
the exception. Some Hork-Bajir say she's clair-
voyant, that she sees the future before it hap-
28 
pens. All of the free Hork-Bajir look to her for 
guidance and advice. 
Toby stood in a circle with Ax, Marco, Cassie, 
and Rachel. Tobias was perched on Rachel's 
shoulder. The other free Hork-Bajir stood with 
Marco's parents, listening from a distance. 
"What is it, Toby? What happened?" 
"We raided a Yeerk facility yesterday, Jake," 
she said. "A day's journey from here. We rescued 
four of our people." She paused and looked down 
at the stream. "But one of our warriors was cap-
tured." 
29 
* 

A n awful silence followed Toby's words. 
This was bad. 
Capture is the stuff of nightmares, something 
we all fear. Unless you immediately escape or 
die, it means the betrayal of everyone you love 
and everything you value. 
Because a prisoner is infested by a Yeerk. His 
brain is probed. Every useful memory, all rele-
vant knowledge, is extracted and stolen for the 
Yeerks to use. 
The Yeerk with access to the once-free Hork-
Bajir's mind would have the knowledge to lead 
an army to the valley. Yeah, the Ellimist made it 
strangely difficult to locate the valley. But with a 
guide, the Yeerks would absolutely find their way. 
30 
"It's a no-brainer." Marco. "Haul butt before 
the Yeerks attack." 
"There's no other way," Cassie agreed. "Even 
with our help, Toby, you can't fight an army of 
Yeerks. They have sophisticated weapons. Lots of 
reinforcements. There are fewer than a hundred 
of you." Cassie gestured to the crowd of Hork-
Bajir. "Not more than sixty of you who are fit 
enough and old enough to fight." 
"It's not fair," Rachel said angrily. 
<No,>Tobias agreed. <But what choice isthere?> 
Toby was silent. Her expression showed noth-
ing. She turned to Ax. 
"The forest is too thick for the effective use of 
Bug fighters, isn't it?" she asked. "And the val-
ley's too narrow." 
Ax's stalk eyes scanned the closely spaced 
trees. <That is true. But that fact only improves 
the odds by a very small percentages 
Toby turned to me now. "Will you help us de-
fend our valley, Jake? Our home?" 
I was getting a little annoyed. Toby didn't 
seem to get it. If we tried to fight the Yeerks, 
we'd be slaughtered. 
"We want to help," I said. "But not if it 
means setting you up to lose." 
Toby looked up into the trees, then turned to 
survey the camp. She planted the stick she was 
holding into the yielding ground. 
31 
CHAPTER 6 

"This valley is our home," she said loudly. 
"We will not give it up. We'll stay and fight." 
Marco threw up his hands in exasperation. 
"Let me understand what I'm hearing, here. You 
all want to die, is that it?" He looked around at 
the other Hork-Bajir who remained politely with-
drawn from our discussion. "Don't be insane! 
Mom, Dad? You're with them?" 
Marco's parents were as diffident as the Hork-
Bajir. They stood impassive and expressionless, 
feet firmly planted on the hard-packed dirt. 
I rubbed my forehead and tried to think. Time 
was running out. The Yeerks were probably al-
ready on the way. Preparations had to be made. 
I climbed iTito the V of a nearby tree, up about 
ten feet so everybody in the camp could see and 
hear me. 
"Listen!" I shouted. "The Yeerks will probably 
be here by tomorrow morning, the latest. They 
will kill or infest all of you if you don't leave right 
now. Everyone must prepare to move out. We'll 
help you find a new camp." 
No one moved. 
"Jake," Toby said. "No Yeerk will drive us 
from this home. I am willing to stay and fight and 
so are my people." 
Grunts of accord rose from the free Hork-Bajir 
spectators. 
32 
I couldn't believe what I was hearing. 
"Wait!" I yelled. "You know the Yeerks have 
advanced weapons. You've seen the Dracon 
beams. Save yourselves!" I looked at Toby. "Es-
cape now. Live to fight another day!" 
No one answered. 
Marco strode angrily toward his parents, like 
he was about to give them a piece of his mind. 
Rachel glanced up at me with her trademark 
fearless look. She wanted me to reconsider. 
Fine, we were taking sides. The decision would 
come down to a vote. I jumped from the tree. 
"Come on!" I shouted, desperation pounding 
in my brain. "All those who want to live, stand 
over here with me. Those who want to die at the 
hands of the Yeerks, stand over there, with Toby." 
There was no mumbling, no movement. 
<This is your decisions Tobias said to the 
Hork-Bajir. <But I think you should listen to 
Jake. He only wants what's best.> 
"We all do," Cassie said. 
I glanced at Ax. He stood a bit apart, aloof. 
He wasn't giving his opinion. 
A serious question for Andalites, especially 
now for Ax. Meddle where you might not belong. 
Possibly save lives in the process. Or just walk 
away. Let a people decide its own fate. 
A young Hork-Bajir stepped out from the 
33 

crowd and walked toward Toby. He stood straight 
and tall at her side. Jara Hamee and Ket Helpek 
joined him. Others followed. 
Until every Hork-Bajir in the colony stood 
with their leader. 
34 
CHAPTER 7 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
I threw back the flap of the hospital tent and 
entered. Light became darkness. Cool, fresh air 
became a stifling, acrid stench. 
The smell of sickness and death. 
I moved forward, eyes straining to see. 
"Ah!" 
I bumped something warm and soft and drew 
back instantly as the object voiced a high-
pitched objection. 
"I beg your pardon!" I groped to find a tent 
pole. "Sally, is that you?" 
As my eyes adjusted, I saw a woman standing 
over a table, wringing out a bloodstained cloth 
into a bowl of water. 
35 

"'lis I, Lieutenant," Sally answered with 
more cheerfulness than I expected. "You'd be 
looking for the prisoner?" 
"That I would, Sally." Sally Miller is a woman 
from town. If Sinkler's Ridge is worth its place on 
the map, it is thanks to her. We'd have lost more 
men by now were it not for the morale boost the 
men found in Sally's excellent care. 
"This way," she said. "We sectioned him off 
so he wouldn't upset the others. He's restrained, 
of course, but I saw to his wound." 
"You're a wonder, Sally." 
"So my husband tells me on occasion. But 
these men need me, Lieutenant, and 1 believe in 
their cause." She pulled back a pitifully soiled 
sheet strung up between the tent wall and a post. 
"The Union cause," she emphasized, turning to 
leave me with the Confederate soldier who lay on 
the floor. 
His wrists and ankles were bound. The fresh 
white bandage wound around the left biceps had 
just begun to soak through with blood. 
He stared at me with defiant eyes. 
"So the Union has a kid in charge," he said 
softly. "Yankees got a boy commander." 
The derisive remark cut through my pride and 
struck anger. I was fully aware that I didn't look 
the part. I didn't need reminding. 
36 
"And yet," I answered, "my men have man-
aged to shoot and capture you. That's not bad for 
child's play." 
"I cut you off," he said to console himself. 
"With no telegraph, Yank, you're as forgotten as 
on a desert island. Only difference here is that 
you're about to take a pounding." 
"Is that right?" I mocked, intentionally disbe-
lieving. 
"Darn right!" he raged. "General Forrest has 
five hundred troopers in Springville, plus a re-
serve of —" 
He stopped short. 
His eyes grew wide as he realized what he had 
done. 
I now knew what the enemy's approach would 
likely be, their number, and their position. 
"I thank you, sir," I said, bowing my head. 
"You have been very helpful." 
He kicked the air and lunged as if to strike 
me, but the pain in his upper arm would not al-
low it. He fell back in a heap, cursing, sweating. 
And I forgot my anger long enough to em-
pathize. 
This low-ranking Rebel was fighting for a 
cause he thought was right. For his home, his 
people. 
He was badly mistaken. 
37 

But that didn't change his valiant spirit. Were 
our roles reversed, I hope I would rally in kind. 
I returned the soiled sheet to its position. 
"You'll be wanting to visit your own men 
now?" Sally asked, pointing at a canvas flap be-
yond which lay my men. 
No, I didn't want to see them. I didn't want to 
see suffering I could do nothing about. 
I hesitated. 
"It would be good for morale," Sally urged. 
"And your friend, Corporal Carson, has been in-
quiring after you." 
"Yes, of course," I said. I ducked through the 
canvas before I thought better of it. 
The bodies of my detachment lay motionless, 
packed tight in the tent like sleeping sardines. 
I walked down the narrow aisle, looking in 
vain for signs of recovery. 
"Isaiah," a slender voice called from knee-
level. 
Mac Carson's half-open eyes looked up into 
mine. Corporal Carson. We'd grown up together, 
been schooled together, and now fought side by 
side. Despite the new scar on his left cheek, he 
looked like the boy I'd always known. Big bones, 
white teeth, black hair, green eyes. 
I knelt and placed my hand against his fore-
head. It was on fire. 
"What news?" he whispered. 
38 
"Twenty-five men," I said flatly. "That's all we 
have. Forrest's force may be over five hundred." 
Mac wheezed. 
"Thirty men came down from the hills this 
morning," I continued. "They want to fight." 
"Thank God," Mac said firmly. His family was 
progressive on all counts, abolitionism among 
them. "You need the men and they've a right to 
fight. It's their war, too, now." 
"Be rational, Mac! You sound like the little 
man who leads them." 
"Jacob?" 
"How did you know of him?" I asked, aston-
ished. 
"I met him when we came into town. He 
came down alone, looking for work. We shared 
some soft bread." 
"You spoke to him?" 
"I should say! He's quite educated," Mac 
said. "Taught himself to read and write, but hid it 
from his former master who would have sold him 
South to be sure. He never knew his mother or 
father. They were sold or traded or some such 
abominable thing." 
"Has he been whipped?" 
"I imagine so, though probably not often. I've 
sometimes thought that living life under the 
threat of whipping and punishment would be just 
as bad as the thing itself. Perhaps worse." 
39 

"I suppose," I said absently, glancing around 
at my lifeless men. I was almost certain that the 
body next to Mac had ceased to breathe. 
"Can you cover my feet?" Mac asked. 
I moved to the end of his cot and nearly 
gasped. The first two toes on either foot were 
bloody and brown. 
"Frostbite," he said with a weak smile. 
I wrapped the wool blanket around them. 
"Raines doesn't think we'll be able to hold off 
the enemy," I said. 
Mac coughed and nodded. 
"Let the Negroes fight," he said. 
I rose to my feet in frustration. 
"Isaiah," Mac said, catching my arm. 
"They're our only hope." 
40 
CHAPTER 8 
J a k e 
They're going to fight with or without us," 
Cassie said, awed. As if maybe she'd suddenly 
changed her mind about what our role should be. 
"They're risking everything for their freedom." 
"We have to respect that," Rachel said. "And 
we owe it to the Hork-Bajir to help." 
I still couldn't believe what had just hap-
pened. 
<This is just plain amazing,> Tobias said to 
us privately. <These Hork-Bajir know who they 
are and what they want.> 
"Okay." I sighed. "We'll help you." 
Marco glanced at me with a mix of exaspera-
tion and resignation. He knew this was an argu-
ment we couldn't win. 
41 

Cassie flashed me a look that said I'd done 
the right thing. 
Toby smiled the strangely frightening Hork-
Bajir smile. 
"Tobias, as always, you're our eye in the sky. 
Check out the area and see if you can spot an es-
cape route. I have a feeling we're gonna need one. 
Marco, get in touch with Erek. See if a few Chee 
can cover back home for those of us who need it." 
Toby stared at me. 
"If we need to escape." I corrected myself 
and smiled. 
I began to draw a rough map of the area in the 
dirt with a stick. Toby walked over to where I was 
crouched down. 
"Thank you," she said. 
"Yeah, well . . . I just hope your people un-
derstand what they're getting into. It ain't gonna 
be pretty." 
"They understand much more than you give 
them credit for, Jake. They've been called upon 
to defend themselves before. They've been 
through a lot." 
I nodded sheepishly and looked back at the 
dirt map. 
After a while, I ventured further into the camp 
to check on the battle preparations. With advice 
from Rachel and Ax, the Hork-Bajir were posi-
tioning platforms in the trees. 
42 
A Hork-Bajir with a bundle of small tree limbs 
on his back and a coil of rope in his hand would 
scramble up a trunk, using heel and wrist blades 
to climb. Like a telephone repairman in fast for-
ward. When he'd get about thirty feet up, he'd 
dig his ankle blades in firmly, lock in with both 
knee blades, and lean back. With both hands 
free, he'd lash the branches together. In about 
ten minutes, there was an elaborate but perfectly 
camouflaged platform. 
When the builder finished, he'd climb onto the 
platform to test its strength. Then he'd descend 
quickly, move to another tree, and begin again. 
Younger Hork-Bajir then climbed to the com-
pleted platforms and stocked them with spears 
and arrows. Weapons the female Hork-Bajir were 
turning out with speed, efficiency, and skill. It 
was unbelievable to watch. 
Hork-Bajir elders, the few who weren't quite 
as quick at climbing as they used to be, dug 
pits and trenches all over the camp. After one was 
dug, the very smallest Hork-Bajir children were 
lowered into it to place pointed wooden spikes 
into the dirt. Whoever fell into these holes would 
come out looking like Swiss cheese. If they 
came out at all. With the spikes in place, the 
kids were hauled up to help cover the pits. First 
with twigs that spanned the opening. Then with 
leaves that formed a bed to conceal it completely. 
43 

Satisfied as I could be under the circum-
stances, I called the others and Toby to the map 
to discuss strategy. 
"We're here." I pointed to two long, parallel 
lines marking the narrow passage. "On either side 
of us are steep banks and cliffs. Impossible to 
climb without serious time and effort. So I think 
the Yeerks will come up the valley this way," I 
said, pointing. "From the south, uphill." 
"That's good for us," Marco said. 
<lt will slow their approach,> Ax agreed, <but 
it will also interfere with our retreat. Tobias said 
our only escape route will be up the valley to the 
north.> Ax pointed to a place where the valley 
widened, about a mile north of the camp. <The 
valley walls become easier to climb at this point, 
but will still be slow and difficulty 
I looked at Toby. 
"You'd be much better off to climb the valley 
walls now and fight from up there." 
"We will defend our home." 
<We've got another problem,> Tobias said. <l 
spotted a group of campers. And they're going to 
be in the Yeerks' way.> 
"I guess we'll have to try to convince them to 
get out of there," I said. 
Cassie put her hand on Toby's arm. "Even if 
you survive, you'll have to go into hiding. Where 
will you go?" 
44 
"If we're forced to withdraw temporarily," 
Toby said calmly, "we'll go to the hills." 
"But the trees in the hills aren't the same 
kind as the ones in the valley. And they won't 
provide great shelter. You'll have to adapt all over 
again." 
<And those hills are getting pretty close to 
the suburbs,> Tobias added. <lt wouldn't be safe 
to hang there very long. Eventually, you'd run 
into some humans.> 
"Maybe it's time the Hork-Bajir did run into 
some humans," Rachel said. "We can't count on 
the Ellimist to appear and help out just because 
we want him to. If the right people knew what 
was going on, all sort of things could happen — 
good and bad. 
Marco smirked. "News flash: Your average sub-
urbanite ain't gonna tolerate a seven-foot-tall 
bladed alien for a neighbor. I mean, carpooling? 
Toby as a soccer mom? Think about it." 
Toby's eyes dropped. 
"I'm sorry. We don't think of you as freaks, 
but the average guy on the street? Toby, humans 
can't even deal with other humans who root for a 
rival football team." 
"Yes," Toby said slowly. "I've learned that hu-
mans don't care for groups unlike their own." 
"That's not always true," I said. 
<My study of human history suggests that 
45 

Marco and Toby are both correct,> Ax said care-
fully. <Historically, humans are among the least 
tolerant species in the galaxy, set apart by the 
prevalence of violence and oppression." 
"So, what would you suggest, Ax?" Cassie 
asked. "Send the Hork-Bajir to some distant 
planet? All because humans are tolerance-
challenged? That can't be the only answer." 
"It stinks," Marco said. "But take a look at 
what humans have done to animals. If there's a 
chance to dominate, we grab it. I'd rather be a 
tiger or elephant on Neptune than a striped rug 
or an ivory box on Earth. The farther away you 
can get, Toby, the better off you'll be." 
For a moment, Toby said nothing. 
"But are we really that different from you?" 
she said finally. 
She turned toward camp. Toward a Hork-Bajir 
who bent low to the ground and scooped her cry-
ing child into her arms. 
The child had fallen. The mother carefully 
raised the child to her shoulder and gently patted 
its back. 
No, the Hork-Bajir weren't really that differ-
ent at all. 
46 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
A t sundown, Sergeant Raines and two other 
soldiers walked with me down the main street of 
Sinkler's Ridge. 
Sally Miller and her husband, Joe, were host-
ing a Christmas party. They'd been kind enough 
to invite us and we were happy to oblige. 
I detailed a number of men for picket duty 
and left Sergeant Spears in command until our 
return. Our pickets were spread out through the 
woods and hills skirting the town. Before the en-
emy attacked, we would be alerted. 
Several townsmen, Joe Miller among them, 
brought their own shovels and picks and joined 
us in the digging this afternoon. They wouldn't 
work near the black men, nor even within sight of 
47 
CHAPTER 9 

them. They said Jacob's men were a disgrace to 
the Union. 
Perhaps. But no one can deny the progress 
they made. Trees covering the entire south face 
of Topper Hill were felled and left lying, a formi-
dable defense when time is short. 
And the Negroes shaped the earthworks like 
seasoned engineers. Most of the men dug all af-. 
ternoon, and would dig all day tomorrow. 
We stopped before a white clapboard house 
with candles flickering warmly in the windows. Fid-
dle music filtered through the walls and under the 
door. I climbed the stairs and let the knocker fall. 
Scents of cinnamon and vanilla rushed out as 
the door opened. Sally greeted us warmly. "Lieu-
tenant. Hello, Raines. Welcome." 
Sally was resplendent with golden hair 
bouncing in ringlets and a red-trimmed dress to 
match her lips. She stepped back to let us enter 
and nodded as we passed. 
We were drawn in by the sound of music and 
voices. Raines hastened to the banjo case that 
stood in the corner, threw it open, and pulled out 
the instrument like a child opening a gift on 
Christmas morning. 
Private Tweed raised a tambourine. Corporal 
Fox unsheathed a pair of bones from his jacket 
pocket. No words were exchanged. They simply 
48 
joined the town fiddler, then started in on a new 
song, the words of which I'd heard before. 
"I hear the bugle sound the calls 
for reveille and drill, 
for water, stable, and tattoo, 
for taps — and all was still. 
I hear it sound the Sick-Call grim, 
and seethe men in line, 
with faces wry as they drink down 
their whiskey and quinine." 
The stress of the impending attack seemed to 
melt away. The townspeople present clapped and 
tapped their feet in time. The young tin whistler 
and drummer boy, the two I'd seen out my drafty 
window, watched from beside the roaring fire. 
"Good evening, Lieutenant," Joe Miller said. 
"Merry Christmas." He was a broad man, built 
for agricultural life. His beard and mustache 
were even redder than his hair. His wide smile 
matched his frame. 
"And to you, Miller," I answered. "As you see, 
my men are glad to put aside their duties." 
"Come." Miller took me by the arm and led 
me to a long table by the window. "Sample the 
foods my Sally has prepared." 
My mouth dropped open at the sight. 
49 

Spread across the table were the foods I 
dreamed of at night. Milk, cheese, cake, pre-
serves, boiled ham, turkey, pudding, pickles, and 
loaves of fresh-baked soft bread. 
"Eat up," Miller said. "Maintain the strength 
you need to save this town." 
I reached for a buttery cinnamon roll. 
"I wish that I alone could save it," I said 
solemnly. "As you know, our ranks are thin. We 
may need to arm the men that came into camp 
today. They're willing to fight, and they —" 
"Are you mad?!" The joviality drained from 
Miller's face. He bellowed as though addressing 
a plow horse. 
"I assure you I am not," I said quietly. 
Raines appeared beside me at the buffet 
table. The song had finished. The guests were 
clapping loudly. 
Miller appealed to Raines. 
"Your lieutenant says he would arm a band of 
runaway Negroes and let them fight the Rebels," 
Miller said, forcing unwilling laughter from his 
throat and patting Raines on the back. "Is he a 
jokester, Raines? Or does he take to the bottle in 
the evening?" 
"I assure you, sir," I said, loudly enough to si-
lence some of the guests. "There is no joke in-
tended, nor any drunkenness among the 
detachment." 
50 
Miller's face grew still, like a bull before the 
charge. 
"Once you arm those Negroes, what stops 
them from running wild?" 
"Have you met the men, sir?" I said. 
"I wouldn't go within fifty feet of those peo-
ple. I don't need to meet a wolf to know he'll 
cause all kinds of mischief. They'll take our 
chickens, our pigs, the house!" 
"The Rebels will do far worse if they take the 
town. The Negroes have offered to help. They've 
offered their lives." 
"If you treat them as equals, Lieutenant, 
they'll begin to believe it." The color in Miller's 
face was rising. "For God's sake! If you let them 
fight, they'll begin to believe they deserve other 
liberties. Where would it go from there? Would 
you have them living here in Sinkler's Ridge? In a 
house on Main Street?" 
Chuckles rippled through the group of towns-
people, most of whom had stopped their chatter 
now to listen in. 
Mac once told me integration was the course 
of the future, the only way. 
"You believe peaceful coexistence to be im-
possible?" I asked, knowing Miller's answer. 
"Darn right I do!" 
"Joe, calm yourself!" Sally cautioned. 
Raines spoke. "Lieutenant, these men, they've 
51 

never been trained. They'll only get in the way." 
The objection was a practical one. Raines can al-
ways be relied upon for pragmatism. "Besides, at 
the first shot, they'll run." 
"I think you're wrong, Raines," I said plainly. 
"You are wrong, Lieutenant," Miller argued. 
"The people of Sinkler's Ridge are of one mind 
on this issue." He waved a hand to include the 
observing group of guests. 
Heads nodded. 
"If you persist in this absurd support of slaves, 
you'll find that our support will disappear," Miller 
said stiffly. 
Sally turned abruptly and walked from the 
room. She understood her husband's meaning 
but obviously did not approve. 
"Come, men," I said. Fox and Tweed rose 
from their chairs. "It seems we've outstayed our 
welcome." 
We left the warm, white house for the cold, 
black night and walked in silence to the camp. 
Spears reported that the pickets had seen 
nothing but trees in the woods and hills. 
I climbed into my narrow makeshift bed and 
closed my eyes. 
All I saw were the colorful foods on the buffet 
table, the orange fire roaring in the hearth, and 
Sally's smiling eyes. 
And all I heard was music. 
52 
J a k e 
The more I looked at the makeshift map, the 
more I realized there weren't going to be any 
Hork-Bajir left to relocate after the Yeerks came 
through. 
I saw the battle in my mind. I saw the scouts 
storm the encampment and fire their Dracon 
beams on everything that moved. I saw the 
swarm of Taxxons. Hundreds of unstoppable 
mouths devouring anything with a pulse. 
We could slow the Yeerks, inflict sufficient ca-
sualties to make the visser in charge look bad. 
But in the end, defeat was inevitable. 
The thought of a total slaughter made me sick. 
I had to get away, get another look. Maybe 
there was something I'd missed. 
53 
CHAPTER 10 

I morphed peregrine falcon and flew down the 
valley to the south. The valley was like a wind 
tunnel. A steady stream of rushing air that kept 
me aloft almost as well as a thermal. 
My raptor eyes caught a flash of movement, 
something bright and oddly colored in the for-
est. I banked and dove, soaring close over the 
treetops. Through the canopy of leaves and 
branches, a cluster of tents. Three blue, one 
green, one yellow, one purple. I banked again 
and made another pass. 
A group of sixteen people. Four adults and a 
bunch of mostly high school kids. The campers 
Tobias had told us about. 
I dropped through the trees. I could smell 
meat cooking, hot dogs I think, and singed 
marshmallows. I landed and my talons bit firmly 
into the branch of a fallen tree. 
I was less than fifty feet from the group. I 
could see everything. Camping equipment scat-
tered everywhere. Metal plates and pans. Boots 
and wool socks drying on tree branches. Open 
backpacks, spilling their contents of brightly col-
ored camping gear onto the dirt. 
Given the amounts of garbage the campers had 
strung up in the tree branches, beyond the reach 
of bears, they'd been camped for more than three 
days. Unless these people had portable Kandrona 
pools in their tiny tents, they weren't Controllers. 
54 
I gave in to an irresistible urge to preen and 
caught the eye of a man in a puffy yellow vest. 
Watched him magnify and focus a pair of field 
glasses, then show the kid standing next to him. 
I looked directly at them. 
We had to get the campers out of there. 
I flew up along the edge of the valley and 
along the crest of the hill north of the colony. Fol-
lowed the stream that flowed down the valley, 
through the colony and beyond. 
WWHUUMPH! 
A small tree toppled. Rustled the brush along 
the stream. 
Who would be chopping down trees out here? 
I doubled back and landed on the top of a 
high pine. The small tree had fallen into the wa-
ter. Not into the rushing stream itself, but into an 
adjoining pond. 
I watched as two small brown heads pushed 
and tugged on the tree until it moved swiftly 
through the water toward the edge of the pond. 
Until it became entangled in a pile of other wood 
and debris. 
One of the animals lumbered up onto the 
bank. It was three feet long, covered in slick 
brown fur. A long, flat, paddle-shaped tail 
dragged along behind it. 
Beavers damming the stream. 
The wall of wood and brush that held back 
55 

the pond was leaking. The beavers were working 
hard to fix it. If the wall broke, all that dammed-
up water would rush down the hillside, into the 
Hork-Bajir colony, and on through the^ valley 
floor. 
It was too good to be true. 
A wall of water rushing toward the colony, 
tunneling toward the attacking Yeerks? 
I checked the size of the pond, and the dis-
tance the water had to travel to reach the colony 
and valley floor beyond . . . 
No good. 
The water in the pond would spread out and 
diminish by the time it reached the Yeerks. It 
would spill over the banks of the stream and rage 
for a while. But where it mattered, it would end 
up as little more than a puddle. 
My brilliant idea began to die. I was about to 
fly away when the beavers pushed another clus-
ter of tangled branches into position. The wall 
rose higher. The water level raised ever so 
slightly. 
That's when it hit me. 
If two beavers could dam a pond, five beavers 
could dam a whole lot more. 
56 
CHAPTER 11 
We're going to flood them out," I an-
nounced. "We're going to wash the Yeerks back 
down the valley. 
The beavers have already started things for 
us. We just have to expand their dam to hold 
back enough water to make a mini tidal wave." 
"Nap time!" Marco sang. "I think someone's 
a little overtired." 
"I'm fine." 
Tobias laughed. <You know, this mission is 
seriously important. I'm thinking the morph 
should be a little more, I don't know, glamorous. 
I mean, going beaver to save an entire colony of 
aliens is like putting James Bond behind the 
57 

wheel of a minivan. With a bumper sticker that 
says, "World's Greatest Mom." No offense.> 
"Very funny. Listen, we've gone mole." We've 
gone ant. You use what works." 
"But will this work?" Rachel asked. 
"Got any other ideas?" I answered. 
We didn't have to morph to travel to the 
beaver dam. It was only about an eight-minute 
jog up the valley. As we approached the pond . . . 
Whack! Whack! Sploosh! Sploosh! 
Thundering slaps loud as firecrackers, and no 
beavers to be seen. New ripples crossed the 
pond. 
"They must have heard us coming," Cassie 
said. "Beavers slap their tails on the water if they 
think they're in danger." 
The pond looked promising. It was bigger 
than it had seemed from the air. 
Attached to a lake, it would have made a re-
spectable fishing cove. 
In my backyard, it would have made a fantas-
tic swimming pool. 
But I knew we needed more. I just didn't 
know how much. 
<Three to four thousand cubic meters,> Ax 
said. <l believe that is what it will take to inun-
date the valley.> 
Marco batted his eyelashes. "Ax, you just 
make me all tingly when you talk all smart-like." 
58 
"How much water is that?" I asked. 
"We have to make this pool Olympic-sized," 
Marco answered. 
A beaver popped up in the middle of the 
pond, pushing a branch with his nose. He placed 
the branch in the dam and dove back under-
water. 
We waited. And waited. 
<Some lungs,> Tobias observed. 
"No," Cassie explained, "he's probably in the 
lodge. See that dome-shaped pile of branches 
and moss and mud sticking up above water level? 
There's air in there." 
"The lodge?" Marco echoed excitedly. "A 
roaring fire. Hot chocolate. Britney Spears. 
Brandy, maybe. The girl, not the drink. These 
dudes know how to live!" 
"The lodge is where they live," Cassie laughed. 
"Like bears have dens and birds have nests?" 
"How do we acquire a beaver while he's in-
side the lodge?" Rachel said. 
Cassie waded into the water. "Well, the en-
trances are underwater," she said. "Maybe we 
can catch a beaver on his way out." 
She reached the lodge and bent down toward 
its base. Murky water slapped her chin. 
"Found it," she said. "I think. Someone knock 
lightly on the side of the lodge to scare a beaver 
out." 
59 

"Are you kidding?" Marco said, wading after 
her into the water. Rachel, Ax, and I followed. 
"Gentle, thoughtful Cassie wants to scare a 
beaver out of its mind?" 
"Shut up and help. I'm not going to hurt 
him." 
Marco tapped the lodge with a fallen branch. 
"Got him!" Cassie cried. "Oowwwww! He 
bit me!" 
"Cassie, let go!" 
"I'm okay," she said quickly. Then she lifted 
the beaver to the surface. His body was still from 
the acquiring trance, buoyed weight. 
Good thing, because this guy had to weigh at 
least forty pounds, big and sturdy. The body of an 
industrious worker. One by one, including Tobias, 
we reached out to touch the slick, bristly coat. 
The beaver splashed away as soon as we were 
done. 
"You know," Cassie said, forcing a smile, 
blood dripping from the cut on her hand, "when 
your mother tells you not to stick your hand in a 
beaver lodge, you really should listen." 
60 
CHAPTER 12 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
December 24, 1864. 
Joe Miller's rooster crowed at half past five, 
leaving no question that it had survived the night 
despite his predictions of raid and plunder by the 
Negros. 
While the coffee boiled, I rummaged in my 
haversack for sugar. I found none, I had to drink 
my coffee black. 
It felt like an ominous omen. 
"Don't lag, men. Don't lag!" 
Sergeant Spears's husky voice roared through 
the frigid air. As I made my way across the 
stream and down the hill, I saw him standing 
statuesque in the morning fog, having staked out 
the highest point of the earthworks to supervise 
61 

Jacob and the other men, who labored dutifully 
below. 
Spears's rifle was propped against his shoul-
der. That was as it should have been, for I'd 
ordered all men to carry arms on every detail. 
But from my vantage point, Spears seemed to 
have his hand rather too close to the trigger. 
"They're lazy men, Lieutenant," Spears said, 
far too loudly, as he saw me approaching. "If our 
men was out working, we'd have finished by 
now." 
"The problem as I see it, Spears, is that the 
earth is frozen hard as granite." 
"No, sir," Spears said, chuckling, his Scot-
tish accent lengthening his vowels in a most defi-
ant way. "The earth is soft as butter, ain't it, 
boys? Soft as creamy butter." 
Jacob looked up, saw me, and dropped his 
shovel on the dirt. 
"Lieutenant!" he called, waving an arm and 
pushing toward me over piles of upturned soil. "I 
want to speak to you about —" 
"You!" Spears bellowed. 
Jacob froze. 
"Resume your position and your duty!" 
Jacob hesitated. 
"Lieutenant," he called to me. "It's about the 
placement of the —" 
BAM! 
62 
A rifle shot cracked the air. 
Jacob hit the ground. 
Spears began to chuckle again. He had fired 
into the sky. 
"Spears!" I yelled. 
He returned the gun to his shoulder. Jacob 
staggered to his feet. The eyes of all the black 
men turned to me. 
"Yes, sir?" Spears answered. 
"Ride out to scout for the enemy. Take a few 
men with you." 
"Are you relieving me of this detail?" 
"I will stand in until your return." 
"Very well, sir." 
Spears scampered down the earthworks and 
strode past me in silence. Though he was my 
subordinate, I couldn't very well question his be-
havior in front of the men. I had to back him. 
"Back to work, men!" I yelled. "Jacob, ap-
proach!" I said sternly, and retained a posture of 
severity until Spears was safely out of earshot. 
I sensed the reason Jacob wanted to speak to 
me. The placement of the entrenchments was all 
wrong. I'd realized it, too. If we moved them back 
a hundred yards toward town, we could place 
them behind the stream, a natural barrier to the 
Rebs. A God-made moat. 
"Jacob," I said gently. "You have an opinion 
to share?" 
63 

He nodded. 
"Yes . . . Lieutenant. This ain't the best posi-
tion. Rebs coming up from down there. Make 'em 
come all the way up, close to town. That way, you 
have more chance to shoot 'em down. Then, 
when they get to the stream, that slows them 
down some more." 
"I think you're right," I said. 
Spears and three privates trampled down the 
hill on horseback. When they reached the 
stream, Spears's horse reared up and whinnied 
loudly. 
"Bronco!" Spears cried. 
The horse finally plunged into the water, step-
ping awkwardly over rocks and mud. 
Jacob and I exchanged a glance of under-
standing. The stream was the barrier we needed. 
"Start your men digging again," I said. "But 
this time, according to your plan." 
I waited for Jacob to accept the new orders. 
"How about rifles?" he said instead, hope 
flickering in his eyes. 
"Why are you so set on fighting? Once you 
prepare these entrenchments, you can melt back 
into the hills and be safe. Haven't you heard 
what these same troopers did at Fort Pillow? 
Don't you know the name of Nathan Bedford For-
rest?" 
64 
Jacob's face grew hard and still. He did know 
the name. But I would drive home the reality. 
"Right here in Tennessee, just over those hills 
a few days, General Forrest's Confederate cavalry 
captured a Union-held fort on the Mississippi. 
The Negro soldiers inside surrendered. But For-
rest didn't take them prisoner. He murdered 
them in cold blood. Jacob, it was a massacre." 
"I know, Lieutenant. If they take us, they'll 
most likely kill us, too." 
His calm sent chills down my spine. He knew 
the truth, yet wanted to fight in spite of it. 
"The townspeople won't allow it," I said, 
changing tacks. "Neither will many of my own 
men. You know Spears. He won't fight beside 
you." 
Jacob looked at me stubbornly. 
"You need men," he said, echoing his words 
from the day before. "Here we are." 
I looked angrily at the camp and the town. 
Didn't Jacob see it was an impossibility? Yes, we 
were outnumbered. Yes, we needed his men. Yes, 
it was suicide to turn him down. 
"Give us a chance, Lieutenant." 
Wagons loaded with household treasures 
stood outside several houses in town. The white 
townspeople were loading their possessions and 
preparing to flee. 
65 

I looked at Joe and Sally Miller's house. There 
was no wagon there. 
Clop-clop. Clop-clop. Clop-clop. 
The pounding of hooves! 
Spears's red and sweating face, flailing coat, 
and screaming horse reared up before me. 
"Lieutenant!" he cried. "They're not a mile 
from here!" 
66 
J a k e 
J. put Ax in charge of the "dam expansion." 
He had a clear sense of the mechanics of the 
whole thing. Said something about how the nat-
ural curve of the beaver's dam was actually the 
most efficient shape to hold back the water. 
"Fluid mechanics was one of my specialties 
as an aristh," Ax said. 
Marco sighed. "What haven't you done?" 
"I have never constructed an organic cellu-
lose hydrological attack assemblage." 
"We speak English, dude." 
"No, I get it," Rachel said excitedly. "He's 
never made a dam out of wood, mud, and moss." 
Cassie was concerned about the beaver fam-
ily whose compound we were about to take over. 
67 
CHAPTER 13 

"They're scared. They think we're predators. 
We need to convince them we're friends." 
"What we need to do," Marco said, "is ex-
pand this dam and store up a whole lot of water. 
Fast." 
Marco morphed. There was a big splash as he 
dropped into the water. A resounding crack as he 
slapped his tail. 
<Awesome!> he shouted. <These front teeth 
are great. Let me at some trees, baby! I'm gonna 
build me a dam.> 
Cassie morphed next. Then Rachel. The 
beaver was kind of cute, except for the small 
beady eyes. And the enlarged front incisors, like 
curving ivory chisels. 
I later learned that beaver incisors never stop 
growing. If the beaver doesn't wear them down 
with use, they grow right down to the ground. 
<There is the beginning of a small canal on 
the far side of the pond,> Ax said. <lt leads to a 
growth of young trees, some of which have al-
ready been cut down. We need that material for 
the construction. Rachel and Cassie, stay with 
me. Marco?> 
<On my way.> 
Tobias and I had other business. I morphed, 
and together we flew out of range of the con-
struction below. It was a short flight to the camp-
site. We were careful to land far enough away so 
68 
that no one would see us demorph and morph in 
Tobias's case. 
Then we walked toward the brightly colored 
tents. Thank God we could finally morph some 
halfway decent clothes, the result of a whole lot 
of experience. Boys in T-shirts and jeans gener-
ally look a lot saner than boys in spandex. 
We approached the campsite. A tall kid with 
glasses spotted us first. 
"Hi," he said. 
"Hey," I answered. 
Then we just stood there. 
<Jake? Fearless leader? Do you have a plan, 
or are you just going to smile and look stupid in 
our morphing outfits?> Tobias said privately. 
"Just be cool. I'll handle it," I whispered. 
"I'm Jake," I said to the tall kid. 
"Lewis Carpenter. I've had blisters for five 
days." 
"Huh. Bummer." 
An adult stuck his head out of a tent. The guy 
who had sighted me in his binoculars. "What are 
you two boys doing so far out in the woods?" he 
asked, stepping outside. "Where's your equip-
ment?" 
<Good question, Jake.> 
"We're camped on the ridge," I said easily, 
pointing up the valley wall. 
"Right," Tobias added. 
69 

More silence and staring. This was getting 
ridiculous. 
"Look," I said. "We came to tell you we all 
have to get out of here. We just met a ranger and 
he told us the park is closed. There's a huge 
storm coming this way. Guy said they're predict-
ing straight-line winds and tons of snow, enough 
to strand us all. Everyone's got to pack up and 
get out of the area before sundown." 
A girl stood up from the group of kids sitting 
around the campfire and came closer to us. She 
was maybe Tom's age. 
"It never snows this early in the year." 
"Yeah, I know," I said quickly. "That's what's 
so dangerous about this storm. No one's pre-
pared. I mean, who's gonna have cold-weather 
gear? Right?" 
The girl grinned. 
"I'll be fine. I hiked Mount McKinley." 
"Emily, Lewis?" The adult binocular guy. "Let 
me handle this." 
<They're not buying it,> Tobias said privately. 
"Frostbite is bad news," I said, trying to 
sound all serious and worried. 
"Look," said binocular guy, "you boys need to 
learn a thing or two about hikers' etiquette. Peo-
ple need to trust one another in the wilderness. 
You don't make up stories just to get someone 
else's campsite." 
70 
The guy held out a tiny portable television 
flickering a commercial for an SUV. 
"The local news meteorologist predicts sunny 
skies and no wind for the next three days." His 
voice bristled with adult annoyance. And with 
confidence. "We're staying right where we are." 
I could feel my ears getting hot. They turn red 
sometimes when I'm embarrassed. 
Three more adults, two women and a man, 
came from their tents. Asked the kids what was 
going on. I started to feel a little sick. Like I was 
going to get sent to my room or earn a week's 
worth of detention. 
"Listen," Tobias said loudly, "you have to be-
lieve us. If you don't get out of this valley now, 
something really bad is going to happen. Your 
lives are in danger." 
The campers didn't respond. Emily looked 
at Lewis, then at the man. A kid near the 
campfire started to laugh. Pretty soon, all six-
teen people in camp were snickering. Four adults 
and twelve kids, laughing at the two pathetic 
losers. 
"Get a life," Emily said. 
I turned to Tobias. "Okay. We're desparate. I 
don't want to do this, but I don't think we have a 
choice." 
"Are you sure?" Tobias whispered. "What if 
one of them bolts? Or attacks us? Or runs straight 
71 

to the local media? If the Yeerks hear that two 
human boys were morphing . . ." 
"I know, Tobias," I snapped. "I know there 
are consequences." 
That was my job. To know the consequences. 
It was also my job to make the tough decisions. 
To lead. 
I started to morph. 
"It's okay," Tobias called. "What you're going 
to see will shock you, but don't panic. We're only 
trying to help." 
Lewis was the first to react. He clutched at 
his glasses and stepped back. Groped behind 
him with his free hand until he bumped into a 
tree. His mouth hung wide open. 
The man dropped his television in the leaves. 
His face went white. 
One boy by the campfire stumbled to his feet, 
then took off into the woods. 
"Don't be frightened," Tobias repeated. 
Morphing is not pretty. It's disturbing and 
grotesque. Of course the campers were fright-
ened. Anybody would be. 
My human body began to twist violently. Big, 
flesh-tearing teeth sprouted from my gums. Ears 
migrated to the top of my head. Shoulders 
hunched, spine expanded, skin toughened. Fur, 
orange with black stripes, spread across my flesh 
72 
like liquid spilled out of a jar. Until finally, I 
fell forward onto the dirt. All five hundred pounds 
of me. 
I was a male Siberian tiger standing before a 
group of whining, whimpering campers, in a 
place no Siberian tiger should be. 
I growled gently. Just enough to let them 
know the tiger was real. 
When Tobias started to demorph, I began to 
demorph to human, 
Emily backed up, tripped, fell to the forest 
floor. Tears streaked her face. 
The red-tailed hawk shrieked once, then 
morphed to human. 
"Who . . . what are you?" the man cried. 
"Its a long story," I said, fully human again. 
"I can't explain it all now, but you've got to be-
lieve we're not here to hurt you." 
The campers were silent. At least no one else 
ran. 
"Sometime before tomorrow noon," I said 
solemnly, "an army of aliens is going to march up 
this valley. If you're still here, they'll kill every 
single one of you." 
73 

CHAPTER 14 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
% ly heart stopped. 
Spears gasped for breath. 
"Not a mile from here! A good-sized detach-
ment of Forrest's cavalry. A hundred or more." 
"Sound the alarm!" I ordered. "Get the men 
down here with everything we've got! Bayonets, 
muskets, revolvers . . . Spears, we're not ready 
for them." 
Spears raced toward camp with a desperate 
look in his eye. 
Jacob was running down the hill to rejoin the 
digging men. They were still building up the de-
fensive position. 
"Jacob!" I shouted above the bugle cry. "You've 
done your part. Get your fellows out of here!" 
74 
My men on picket duty were streaming from 
the woods now, hollering and whooping, running 
toward the earthworks like the devil was at their 
heels. 
Jacob picked up his shovel. 
"I'll be staying, Lieutenant." 
He was a fool! 
The men from camp raced from their tents 
and rushed down the hill. They pulled on coats 
and parkas as they came, and fastened bayonets 
to muskets. 
"Take up your posts!" Raines cried, pulling a 
pistol from his belt. "Take aim, but do not fire!" 
One by one, the men in blue fell into line be-
hind the earthworks. Raines, Spears, Roth, 
O'Connell, McDonnell, Price . . . 
We were pitifully few. 
"Dear God," I breathed, drawing my own re-
volver. 
A Rebel drum beat in the woods. General For-
rest was upon us. 
I watched the trees. 
The tree trunks suddenly multiplied, dou-
bling . . . tripling in number! 
"Hold!" I cried, uncertain of the visual effect. 
All at once, the illusion vanished and I knew 
what it was that I saw. 
The forest was dense with brown horses, gray-
coated cavalrymen, and dully reflective carbines. 
75 

"Lieutenant." Raines turned to me. "They're 
forming up for a charge!" 
Jacob and his men were still piling up dirt. 
Still digging. 
"Get down, you fools!" I yelled. "You'll be 
shot!" 
A few of the men lay down against the dirt. 
One took off up the hill toward camp. 
But Jacob and the rest ignored my warning. 
"Prepare to fire. . . . " 
The woods erupted with whoops and shouts. 
Angry cries. 
"Yeeeeeee! Hah! Yooooop! Yeeeeeeeeeeeha!" 
The Rebel yell. 
"I'll answer you with lead!" Spears shouted 
down his gun barrel. 
The Rebs pulled out of the woods. Numbering 
only fifty or so, they screamed as loud as a regi-
ment. 
The galloping hooves grew louder and louder. 
The whoops and hollers tortured my ears. 
The Rebels jumped the trunks of the slashed 
trees, leaped over branches until they were so 
near I could almost see their faces. 
I could almost see the whites of their 
eyes. . . . 
I stepped up to the line and aimed my re-
volver at a snarling blond cavalryman who raised 
his carbine at me. 
76 
The order was rumbling inside my mind . . . 
waiting to explode! 
"FIRE!" I raged. 
"FIRE!" boomed the Rebel commander. 
The Union line pulled twenty-four triggers 
and riddled the air with lead. 
The Rebels replied in kind. 
"Ahh!" 
Blood spattered my face and sleeve. Private 
Foster clutched his neck. Blood poured through 
his fingers. He slumped and fell to the cold 
ground. 
"Ahhh!" 
A Negro was struck in the chest! He hit the 
dirt and rolled, screaming. Still, Jacob didn't 
take cover. He raised his shovel like a weapon. 
"RELOAD!" 
I hit my target in the thigh, but he kept gal-
loping. I shot again. Missed! 
Two Rebel horses down! A man falling from 
his mount. 
"FIRE!" 
My men shot again before the Rebels could 
reload, a difficult task while riding. 
Three Rebs down on the east flank. Six or 
more on the west. 
"BAYONETS!" I cried. No time for another 
shot. I picked up Foster's musket and gripped it 
hard. Fire coursed through my veins. 
77 

The hooves grew thunderous, racing, pound-
ing. Roaring up to the earthworks! 
"FORWARD!" I ordered. 
We stabbed the air, whooping like banshees. 
The Rebel horses faltered, reared up. The rid-
ers struggled to draw their sabers, but too late! 
We were upon them! 
Union men stabbed through Rebel trousers, 
pulled bodies from horses. Everywhere I looked, 
punching, stabbing, beating. 
One Rebel cleared his saber of its sheath. 
And skewered O'Connell. 
"STEADY, BOYS!" I ran for the man I'd struck 
with my revolver. I didn't realize until too 
late . . . 
BAM! 
He'd saved his carbine shot for me! 
"Ahh!" 
The bullet struck my stomach, threw me back! 
I hit the dirt and clutched my stomach. No 
air! 
The Rebel snarled, turned, and retreated. 
No air! 
My head was empty and full, calm and 
crazy. . . . 
"Lieutenant!" 
It was Jacob's voice. He told his men to drag 
me back behind the entrenchments. 
78 
Strong hands clasped my arms, lifted, raised 
me off the ground. 
All around, men locked in combat with the 
Rebs who'd fallen from their mounts. 
The Rebs on horseback were broken up, scat-
tering to retreat. 
Jacob heaved his shovel like a javelin. It 
struck a Rebel in the side. The man slumped and 
slid off the saddle. 
Four of the other men swarmed another caval-
ryman and dragged him off his horse. 
The men carrying me placed me on the ground 
and raced away to aid their fellows. 
I ripped open my coat and groped my stom-
ach, searching for the injury. My ribs and guts 
felt crushed and broken, but there was no blood, 
no bullet, no hole at all! 
How! 
My head was swimming. Footsteps stopped 
beside me. I looked up and saw Joe Miller's face 
against the sky. He had a shotgun in his hand, a 
revolver in his belt, a knife in his boot. He smiled 
and picked up the brass belt buckle I'd just 
thrown off. 
It was utterly deformed, nearly cut in two, and 
folded up around a point at its center. 
He handed me the buckle and I saw the flat-
tened lead bullet embedded in the buckle. 
79 

"You're a lucky man, Lieutenant. That buckle 
is lead-lined." 
I'd been shot in the gut and survived. No 
words would form. 
"Those slaves," Joe Miller said. "I'll give 
them credit for determination." He glanced at 
the battlefield, at the Union men rounding up 
Rebel prisoners, then looked back at me. 
"This was just a slight effort," I said hoarsely. 
"A testing of our defense. The Rebs will be back 
soon." 
Miller nodded. 
"That's why you need the help of every man 
you can find," he said, looking at the Negros. 
"Arm them, train them, and let them fight." 
80 
J a k e 
The campers believed. 
The initial terror on their faces softened to 
looks of curiosity and recognition. An adult re-
trieved the kid who'd run off into the woods. The 
rest glanced at one another, then back at us, 
and, suddenly, began to beam. 
I didn't get it. 
"We'll follow your instructions," one of the 
men said. About twelve of the others nodded in 
agreement. 
<Okay. That was too easy,> Tobias said pri-
vately. 
The man who'd spoken stepped delicately 
toward us. As if the snap of a branch would make 
us disappear. 
81 
CHAPTER 15 

"I've waited my entire life to make contact," 
he said suddenly. "My name is Richard Carpen-
ter. What do you call yourselves? What system do 
you call home?" 
"What system?" 
"What solar system are you from? Are you 
with the Federation? Is your ship in orbit or on 
land?" 
Unbelievable. I almost laughed. 
"Uh," I said, "we're from Earth, just like 
you." 
"Ah, yes," Richard said. "I always knew you 
lived among us. I have friends who've seen your 
ships." 
"We don't have any ships," Tobias said. 
Richard reached out, grasped Tobias's hand, 
and pumped it in a too-long handshake. Then he 
grabbed my hand. 
"I'm honored to meet you. So very, very, very 
honored." 
"Can you become anything you want?" Lewis 
said. 
"No, not anything, but a lot of things. Any an-
imal we touch," I said. 
Yeah, morphing was gross and uncomfort-
able. But it had been a long time since I remem-
bered it was also very, very cool. 
Lewis grinned. "So, like, what's your natural 
form?" 
82 
"We're just normal kids with a special 
power," Tobias said carefully. "We're not aliens." 
"If you don't want us to call you aliens, we 
won't call you aliens," Richard said with a wink. 
<Jake? These people spend way too much 
time watching Star Wars.> 
"Look," I said. "There are aliens taking over 
Earth, but we're just regular kids. You know, from 
here. Trying to stop them. The bad aliens." 
Emily's forehead scrunched with skeptical 
wrinkles. 
"It's a long story." Tobias sighed. "Just trust 
us. Please. You need to get out of here." 
"Can't you just beam us somewhere else?" 
Lewis asked. 
"Or you could generate a shield to surround 
us," said another kid with spiky blond hair and 
sunglasses. "You could cloak our entire campsite 
so we could watch all the action!" 
"Yeah!" That was one of the adult women. 
"Okay, look," I said, fed up. "This is real life. 
This is not a Star Trek episode. I'm not Captain 
Picard. I can't beam you anywhere." 
"Justin," Richard said to the blond kid. "They 
can't put that kind of technology in our hands. It 
would violate the Prime Directive." 
"Oh, right," Justin whispered loudly. "Of 
course." 
Richard looked at me. 
83 

"I know that revealing yourselves to us is a 
major violation of the Prime Directive. But you 
did the right thing. We're ready for contact." 
Tobias snorted. 
"Are you official Trekkies or something?" 
"Actually, yeah." Emily blushed. "Our par-
ents, too, like my dad here," she said, pointing at 
Richard. "This is the annual camping trip. You 
know, a few days away from computers and 
videos and stuff." 
"So you're not with the Federation?" Richard 
pressed. 
Tobias and I helped break camp. In less than 
an hour everyone had assembled, packs on their 
backs. 
"You need to take the quickest path out of the 
valley," I explained. "The Yeerks will be coming 
from the south, so you can't go that way." 
"Who are the Yeerks?" Emily asked. 
I looked at Tobias. He shrugged, then nod-
ded. 
"I'll tell you," I said, "but you have to 
promise not to tell anyone about anything you've 
seen or heard tonight. Secrecy is essential. For 
your safety and ours. For the, uh, Federation. 
Can we count on you?" 
"Absolutely," said a female adult. "If there's 
one thing we can do, it's keep an intergalactic 
secret." 
84 
I ignored the knot in my stomach. I was tak-
ing a risk with these people and I knew that. 
Their lives were in my hands. But times were 
desperate. Things had changed. 
"Okay. The Yeerks are parasites. In their nat-
ural form they're just slugs. Pretty much blind, 
deaf, and dumb. They need bodies through 
which they can live and be powerful. So they 
invade the brains of other species. Like Hork-
Bajir." 
"Hork-Bajir?" Lewis repeated. 
"A naturally harmless group of aliens. Almost 
completely enslaved by the Yeerks. The Yeerks 
are coming to destroy the small colony of free 
Hork-Bajir in this valley and infest any sur-
vivors." 
"'Infest'?" Justin. 
"Yeah, infest," I said. "The Yeerks crawl into 
your head through your ear canal. Then they at-
tach themselves to your brain. Enslave you. Take 
total control of your mind. You become what we 
call a Controller. A prisoner in your own head. 
Basically, you can say good-bye to free will. The 
Yeerk totally manipulates you to get other bodies 
for other Yeerks." 
Justin made a face. "Why don't people just 
say, like, no to these Controllers?" 
"It's not that easy," Tobias said. "Controllers 
look and act just like you and me, which makes 
85 

them seriously dangerous. Look, the Yeerks are 
all about betrayal. No one can be trusted." 
"No one," I emphasized. "Not neighbors, not 
relatives, not friends. That's why you need to 
keep your mouths shut about what you've just 
seen. And about anything else you might see. Be-
cause if a Controller overhears you, you're his-
tory." 
<Nice try,> Tobias said dryly. <But you know 
someone's going to blab.> 
"Well, I want to help," Emily declared. "We 
have to free the Hork-Bajir and crush the 
Yeerks!" 
Tobias grinned. "Remind you of anyone, 
Jake?" 
"Yeah," Lewis said. "Let's help the good 
aliens!" 
"Wait," Richard cried. "Your mother would 
have a fit." 
Lewis grabbed his dad's arm. 
"Real aliens, Dad." 
Richard looked down at his son's glowing 
face. 
"You're right, kid," he declared. "It's a once-
in-a-lifetime chance. We'll join your fight!" 
Tobias shot me a glance. <Jake, they just 
don't get it yet. You need to get graphio 
"I don't think you understand what this 
means," I said, looking hard at each camper. 
86 
"We're talking real battle. Real war. Pain and 
blood and even death," I said. "Spilled guts and 
severed limbs and psychological horror you won't 
ever get past. This isn't a trip to a theme park. 
It's not TV or some video game. It's an appoint-
ment with a seriously grim reality." 
"I understand," Justin said. "And I'm going 
home. Sorry, guys, but I'm no hero." He handed 
Lewis a small black case. "Take some pictures, 
okay, Lew? This stuff sounds perfect for our Web 
page." 
"Secrecy, remember!" I barked. 
Justin looked startled. "Oh. Right." 
Then two other campers walked off with him. 
The remaining thirteen, it seemed, were com-
ing with us. 
<ls this smart?> Tobias said. <l mean, can we 
do this? Can we take these people to the free 
Hork-Bajir? Can we involve them this way?> 
"We already have. And besides," I reasoned 
pathetically, "no one will believe reports of aliens 
from a bunch of Trekkies. I hope." 
We led the thirteen campers, ten kids and 
three adults, the mile or so back to the Hork-
Bajir settlement. 
We approached the outskirts of the colony. A 
dozen Hork-Bajir, eerily visible in the flickering 
torchlight, stood in two rows on either side of the 
path. Toby stood in the middle. 
87 

"Welcome," she said. "We're honored by your 
presence. We thank you for your help." 
The campers didn't speak. They just walked 
on through the canopy of branches and the tow-
ering, bladed extraterrestrials. 
"How did you know we were coming?" I asked 
Toby. 
"The trees whispered something about new 
friends who would take up our cause. Human 
friends who would join our fight," she said. "I see 
things, Jake. Many things." 
88 
CHAPTER 16 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
All told, the Union lost five men, the Rebels 
thirteen. 
It was fine fighting by our side. Accurate 
shooting and brave hand-to-hand. 
But we know it was a gift. A sweet, ephemeral 
moment of triumph. 
Forrest's cavalry will return and in full force. 
I do believe that anticipation of an event can 
be as powerful as the event itself, as Mac had 
said of whipping. We don't know when the attack 
will come and we surely can't prevent it. Yet we 
can live it in our minds a hundred times. 
Sinkler's Ridge is doomed. 
Everyone is aware of this truth, but no one 
will let on. Not even for a moment. 
89 

"Atten-SHUN!" 
I stared into the black faces of nearly thirty 
men. Their bodies stiffened tall before me. The 
sun beat down from the zenith of its path, but its 
rays weren't sufficient to warm us. Misted breath 
billowed and steamed from the noses and 
mouths of men seething with excitement. 
For they had just been armed. 
The rifles of the sick men, the rifles of the 
dead — together they numbered just enough. 
One of the Negros, a young man with a square 
jaw, couldn't contain himself. 
"I wish my massa could see me now!" 
He raised the rifle and made as if to shoot the 
older Negro next to him. 
"Atten-SHUN!" I repeated, stepping closer to 
the line. 
The young one lowered the weapon to his side 
and fixed an obedient stare on a distant point. 
"This is not a toy!" I snapped. "What's your 
name?" 
"Samson," he answered, avoiding my gaze. 
"Do you know what you hold at your side?" 
"A weapon, sir?" 
"The model '61 Springfield musket with ri-
fled bore and socket bayonet," I clarified for all 
to hear. I gripped my own weapon tightly. "Nine 
pounds and fifty-eight inches of hope. Your new 
90 
best friend. Your only chance against the enemy. 
Do you hear me, Samson?" 
He nodded. I stepped back from the line and 
Sergeant Raines moved forward. He would teach 
them how to load. 
"Most soldiers get days or weeks to drill," I 
added, looking down the line. "You men have 
minutes, and since ammunition is in short sup-
ply, only ten practice rounds." 
"Ten rounds!" Samson whined. "How we sup-
posed to learn to shoot a Rebel with only ten 
tries?" 
"Silence!" Raines bellowed. 
It was his turn now and I would leave him 
to it. 
"Don't speak until spoken to! Don't act until 
ordered! Don't load your weapon until I —" 
"Are these the bullets?" Samson suddenly 
said, disbelief widening his face as he looked at 
the .58 caliber conical balls in his hand. "These 
ain't no bigger than peas!" 
A raised vein pulsed across Raines's redden-
ing face. Jacob stepped in. 
"Shush, boy!" he called down the line to 
Samson. "The peas are lead. When they blast out 
the muzzle, they move fast enough to rip a hole 
through your guts." 
Raines took a deep breath. 
91 

"Samson, step up and load your gun!" 
"Sir?" 
"Load it!" 
Samson unhooked the copper powder flask 
that dangled from his belt and fumbled to 
open it. 
"I don't know how." 
"I'll guide you. Pour the premeasured powder 
charge down the barrel." 
Samson leaned the barrel awkwardly toward 
him, struggled to funnel down the powder. 
"Rip a patch of cloth. Place a lead ball on it." 
Samson drew a length of cloth from his 
pocket, ripped off a patch, opened his pouch, 
grabbed a ball, placed the lead and patch 
against the muzzle. 
"Ram it home!" 
Samson pulled the ramrod from the barrel, 
dropped it on the dirt, picked it up. The ball and 
patch fell to the ground. He reached down, 
picked them up, raised the ramrod, lowered it 
into the barrel, and pumped it so the ball would 
pack against the powder charge. 
"He looks like a fool!" said a man in line. 
"He won't look a fool when the Rebs are 
charging," Jacob shot back. 
"The percussion cap!" Raines boomed. 
Samson's fingers opened another pouch, 
92 
pulled out a cap, pulled back the hammer, in-
serted the cap, closed the frizzen. 
"Fire!" 
There was a line of tin cups on a fence post 
fifty yards off. 
Samson raised the gun, closed one eye, 
sucked in a breath and held it. 
BAM! 
A tin cup blew off the post. The men in line 
began to whistle. 
The kickback sent Samson staggering, eyes 
wide, but he saw that he'd struck his target. 
"Yeehah! If massa could see me —" 
"RELOAD!" Raines roared, slowly raising a 
revolver to point in the air over Samson's head. 
The men fell silent. 
Samson smiled nervously and lowered the 
gun, grabbed the barrel . . . 
"Ah!" 
The barrel was hot and Samson released it, 
but caught it before it fell. 
His fingers were shaking now. The powder 
spilled. He ripped the cloth, grabbed a ball . . . 
Ka-bamm! 
Raines shot his revolver into the air. 
Samson rammed home the patch ball, fum-
bled for a cap, pulled back the hammer. . . 
Ka-bamm! Raines fired again. 
93 

Samson's whole body trembled now. He 
raised the gun and it shook like a tree branch in 
the wind. 
BAM! 
The rifle fired. Samson missed. 
"RELOAD! FASTER!" Raines raged. 
Samson gaped at Raines as one might gape at 
a madman, but he reached for the powder flask, 
the barrel, the patch, the ball . . . 
BAM! 
Ka-bamm! 
Another charge released in the air over Sam-
son's head as he loaded and fired a third time. 
And missed. 
"Stop," Raines ordered, suddenly calm. 
Samson was panting, trembling, and sweat-
ing. He stood as still as he could, the rifle shak-
ing at his side. 
Raines let the echo of the gunshot die. 
"In the heat of battle, with guns firing in your 
ears and men exploding next to you, a good sol-
dier can load and fire three shots per minute, and 
make each of them count. Blood will spatter in 
your face, gentlemen. You may even take a bullet 
in the arm or leg. But you must fill your mind 
with only three words: Load. Fire. Reload. Gen-
tlemen, load your weapons!" 
I returned to headquarters and watched the 
remainder of the training through the window. 
94 
At the end of the drill, not one cup sat on that 
fence post. Indeed, the rail was fairly well de-
stroyed. These men learned faster than any en-
listed men I'd seen. 
Perhaps because for Jacob and his men the 
stakes were somehow higher. 
"Keep your powder dry!" Raines called to the 
men as they filed away for rations. Almost as he 
said this, the man in line in front of Samson lost 
hold of his powder flask. It rolled across the 
snow-dusted dirt. 
Samson bent down and retrieved it, then 
turned toward Sergeant Raines. 
"Keep your powder dry!" he repeated with a 
wary smile. 
95 

CHAPTER 17 
J a k e 
The Hork-Bajir welcoming committee walked 
after us. The campers kept their distance, fear 
and wonder on their moonstruck faces. 
"They don't bite," I told them. "At least, not 
the free Hork-Bajir. The blades are just for har-
vesting bark. They wouldn't hurt a fly." 
Richard was the first to approach a Hork-
Bajir. He stuck out his hand and said, "Greet-
ings." 
The Hork-Bajir slowly raised his hands and 
enclosed Richard's palm in a cage of blades. 
Richard flinched, but didn't move away. 
"Hallloooo," the Hork-Bajir grunted, shaking 
Richard's hand up and down several times. Once 
96 
released, Richard examined his hand. Not a 
scratch. 
A flash of light! 
"This is the greatest day of my life!" Lewis 
said, sticking Justin's camera back into his bag. 
Without a word, I reached into the bag. Re-
trieved the camera. Opened it. Ripped out the 
film. Placed the camera back in the bag. 
Lewis gulped. 
"Jake!" Marco's dad jogged up to our group. 
"So it's true? We've got people willing to help?" 
"Willing and ready," Richard replied, giving 
Marco's dad a hearty handshake. 
"Then come with us. We're running out of 
time!" 
The thirteen campers followed Marco's dad 
up the hill to where Marco's mom was waiting. I 
swear those two were made for wilderness living. 
They looked younger and happier than I'd ever 
seen them. Like helping stranded aliens with key 
concepts like organization and productivity was 
their destiny. 
I could hardly believe what I saw at the top of 
the hill. A hut with torchlight had become a kind 
of factory. 
This is how it went. The first Hork-Bajir in the 
assembly line grabbed a stick off a pile. Using 
his razor-sharp wrist blades, he stripped it of all 
97 

bark and knots. Then, he tossed it to the next 
Hork-Bajir in line. That Hork-Bajir inspected the 
stake and gave it a second straightening trim. If a 
stick was too bowed, the Hork-Bajir tossed it into 
a separate pile. That pile was given to the 
younger Hork-Bajir for sharpening. The bent 
sticks became the stakes at the bottom of the 
pits. 
I 
The sticks that passed inspection were 
handed on to several older Hork-Bajir. They fas-
tened sharpened stone arrowheads to the tips. 
Grooves had been carved in the tips during the 
stripping process so that twine could be easily 
tied around the arrows. A last group of Hork-Bajir 
| 
carried the completed spears up to the tree plat-
forms. 
Richard, Lewis, Emily, and a mother-daughter 
pair of campers named Meg and Chloe were as-
signed duties in this assembly line. I'd never 
seen such willing workers. 
"I've got to check the progress at the dam," I 
told Marco's dad. "I'll be back." 
Tobias had already demorphed and was flying 
lookout. We were taking no chances. It seemed 
unlikely, but the Yeerks might stage a night at-
tack. Might go for the element of surprise. 
j; 
I morphed owl and flew to the construction 
site. The owl's superior night vision, and the 
bright moonlight, allowed me to see the progress 
98 
from the air. A new layer of sticks and trees 
topped the original dam. The water level was at 
least two feet higher. Water spilled over a new 
section of the forest. 
<Where've you been, Prince Jake?> Marco, 
packing mud into the cracks with his tail. 
<You've missed all the fun with our new friends, 
Mr. and Mrs. Beaver.> 
I landed on the bank and began to demorph. 
<They've been excellent help,> Cassie said. 
<At first they were afraid of us. But they seem to 
have realized that we're just here to help, so 
they've gone back to work." 
"That's great," I said absently. 
I had to tell them. But suddenly, I wish I 
didn't have to say a word. 
" I , uh . . . Listen. Those campers from down 
the valley want to help the Hork-Bajir." 
<You mean, they know?> Rachel. <Jake, are 
you nuts?> 
"Drastic times call for drastic measures," I 
said evenly. "You used those words at the meet-
ing yesterday." 
"Oh. Okay, I did. Thanks for listening." 
<This could be the beginning of something 
big,> Cassie said reluctantly. <The first volun-
teers^ 
<Right,> Rachel said. <They'll tell others, en-
courage them to join the fight.> 
99 

<Exactly the problem!> Marco said angrily. 
<Jake, who decided it was okay to make public 
appearances?> 
"Well, you, actually," I said. "And that's not 
an accusation. It's a fact. When you told your 
dad about us. You did what you had to do and so 
did I." 
<That was different with my dad,> he said 
forcefully. <Maybe even with those sailors and 
marines on the aircraft carrier. I don't know. But 
come on, Jake. You don't even know these 
campers. Who they work for, who they're related 
to, where they're from.> 
"They're a bunch of sci-fi fanatics who be-
lieved in aliens before Tobias and I even showed 
them anything." I tried to smile, pretend I wasn't 
as worried as Marco. "They thought we were from 
the Federation. Can you believe it?" 
No one laughed. 
T h e c o u n t d o w n has begun. 
It will all be over very, very soon. 
100 
CHAPTER 18 
<Prince Jake.> Ax. <Time is running out. We 
need your help to finish the dam.> 
Not a word about what I'd done. With all that 
had happened between us, all that had gone 
down in this war, Ax still considered me his 
leader. Still followed my orders and accepted my 
decisions. 
Not that it really mattered what Ax, or anyone 
else, thought. As long as they acted with loyalty. 
As long as they also understood that I'd already 
taken full responsibility for revealing us to the 
pampers. Nobody else was to blame. Not even 
T5bias. 
I focused on the newest DNA I carried inside 
me. 
101 

SWZOOP! 
My body began to shrink. Arms and legs 
sucked into my torso. 
FWUMP! 
I hit the ground. 
PING PING PING . . . 
Thick brown fur sprouted all over my body. I 
felt suddenly warm, like I'd pulled on a wet suit. 
POOT. POOT. 
My back legs reappeared as short little flipper-
feet. 
THWUMP. 
A heavy weight pulled on my rear end. 
I turned my head around. 
Stretching my spine almost two feet beyond 
my main body was a thick, flat, formidable mass. 
A paddle, a tool, a tail. 
Morphing is unpredictable. The most dra-
matic changes often happen last. 
Finally, my skull began to shrink, squeezing 
my brain into a new shape. Rock-hard skull 
bones, heavier than a human's, elongated to 
form a very rugged jaw. 
And inside, my front teeth were growing. And 
growing. 
And growing . . . 
I opened and closed the jaw. Could feel the 
strength of the incisors, huge as carpenters' chis-
els, sprouting from my gums. 
102 
The beaver didn't have the raw, quick 
strength of a tiger. But it did have amazing sta-
mina. 
And its mind was smart in a goal-oriented, 
problem-solving kind of way. 
The beaver felt anxious to get to its project. 
Its mind was alive with a single thought. 
There are things to be done! 
It was the mind of a workaholic. 
There was a sapling. A dead branch just 
ahead. A vine beyond. Choose one and move! 
I was an enlightened worker bee. 
An ant with a college education. 
I slid off the shore into the dark pond. Swam 
with my head above the water. The beaver's oily 
fur repelled the water, keeping its skin dry. 
I paddled purposefully down a small canal. 
Away from the pond and toward the place where 
Ax was gnawing through a large tree. 
<We need this tree for the main spillway,> he 
said. 
I climbed out of the water and started to 
chew. 
Oh, it felt good to sink my teeth into the tree 
fibers. To efficiently rip them away. 
Scraping more layers with each pass! Carving 
through the growth rings! 
Suddenly, Ax cried, <Stop! Get back!> 
The tree quivered in the rising wind. 
103 

Creeeekkkkk! 
The wonderful sound of splintering wood. 
Ba-boom! 
The tree crashed to the ground. 
The beaver mind was pleased. But wait. . . 
The tree wasn't aligned with the canal. It had 
fallen across it. Ax and I stood up on our hind 
legs and pushed. The tree rocked but we couldn't 
dislodge it. 
<We need some help down here!> I shouted. 
Marco and Cassie joined us. The four of us 
pushed together. The tree rocked up and down 
the sides of the impression it had made when it 
fell. But it still wasn't going anywhere. 
The beaver was frustrated. It felt it had failed. 
Suddenly . . . 
"Rrrrroooaaaarrr!" 
In one sudden movement the tree rose off the 
ground! Twisted around in the air. Aligned with 
the canal and crashed into the water. Bobbed 
crazily, then calmed. 
<You just need the right tool for the job.> 
Rachel's grizzly snorted proudly in the moon-
light. <Now let's get this thing into place.> 
Mr. and Mrs. Real Beaver disappeared at the 
sight of Rachel. But the five of us pushed and 
pulled at the tree, like tugboats guiding an oil 
tanker into the harbor. 
The log moved easily into the pond and 
104 
toward the dam. Ax had shaped a place for it. We 
nudged it in. The current flowing over the top of 
the dam did the rest. 
<Are you ready?> Tobias, from overhead. 
<Almost,> Ax said proudly. <The water vol-
ume has exceeded my predictions.> 
<lt better have,> Tobias replied. <Because 
the Yeerks are less than an hour away. And, Jake? 
There are more of them than we thoughts 
105 

CHAPTER 19 
Isaiah 
F i t z h e n r y 
LJusk, and still no sign of Forrest's forces. 
Will he wait until dawn? 
Forrest has a reputation to uphold. That's 
hard to do in darkness. Strike at night and brav-
ery and flamboyance go unseen. 
The Negros drilled once more, then stacked 
their rifles and returned to the earthworks to fin-
ish the job. 
When I walked down to inspect the works, I 
found the men singing a low, rhythmic song. 
"Lieutenant," Jacob called. "My men are 
mighty happy with the training and the food." 
"We'd have won the war a year ago with more 
volunteers like you." I paused. "Jacob, do you 
and your men wish to be mustered in?" 
106 
"Sir?" 
"Sworn into service as Union soldiers. All the 
white men are and I thought that perhaps 
"Just tell us what we need to do," he said ea-
gerly. 
The singing stopped. Heads began to turn my 
way. 
"Just gather 'round, I suppose. I've, uh . . . 
I've never done this before." 
I had a copy of the oath in a beat-up pam-
phlet found among Major Shaw's effects. 
I pulled it from my pocket. 
The hardworking, sweat-covered men gath-
ered close. 
"Raise your right hands, I would guess." 
Thirty strong and calloused hands lifted into 
the air. 
"Now, I'll just read the oath a line at a time. 
You repeat it back, see? It starts with your name, 
so go ahead and fill that in yourself. . . . Let's 
see, now..." 
I cleared my throat and flipped to the water-
soiled page entitled "Oath of Muster." 
I imagined I was Lincoln. I summoned the 
most presidential voice I had. 
' " I , Isaiah Goodhue Fitzhenry, do solemnly 
swear that I will bear true allegiance to the 
United States of America, and . . .'" 
"Lieutenant?" 
107 

"Samson?" 
"Can you stop there?" 
"Of course." 
I let the men repeat back the phrase. They 
filled in their own names — a sound, to me, 
sweet as music. 
Jacob, Samson, Moses, Washington, Jackson, 
Jefferson, and Tennessee . . . 
Thirty men to replace my own. 
Tomorrow we would fight. 
And stand or fall together. 
I continued the oath. 
"'And that I will serve them honestly and 
faithfully against all their enemies and opposers 
I 
whatsoever. . .'" 
Is General Forrest in his tent now, playing 
cards, sipping gin, or writing home, perhaps? 
Confident that he will crush the boys in blue 
up on this mountain? 
'"And observe and obey the orders of the 
President of the United States, and the orders of 
the officers appointed over me . . 
The orders we have might be the last we ever 
receive. May it not be so. 
'"According to the rules and articles for the 
government of the armies of the United States.'" 
The men repeated back the last phrase. 
A momentary silence while I checked the 
page, then told them that was all. 
108 
They were soldiers. 
Wild cheers erupted. 
The men jumped and hollered and I lost my-
self in their joy. 
Let their clapping hands chase away the dread. 
Let their voices, which broke slowly into song, 
draw me home, until that's all I saw. 
The crackling fire. 
My sister, curled up with a book on the floor 
before the hearth. 
Ma in her rocking chair, with her mending 
bag. 
The smell of bread baking in the kitchen, the 
feel of Rover's fur on my fingers. The taste of ale. 
The sound of Ma's gentle soprano humming 
in the corner. 
I was home. 
If I fall in battle, I might be home again by 
sundown tomorrow. 
109 

We started to demorph. Based on their cur-
rent position, the Yeerks had chosen to attack at 
dawn. It was showtime. 
<Tobias, what did you see?> 
<You know my eyes aren't great at night. But I 
could make out at least one company of heavily 
armed Hork-Bajir. More than a hundred strong. 
And they have blue bands around their arms.> 
My heart began to pound. The Blue Bands. 
Visser One's own elite guards. 
"Tell me that's all you saw." 
<Can't lie, Jake. There are almost as many 
Taxxons.> 
My stomach knotted. 
<Oh. And one Andalite.> 
110 
Visser One. Our old nemesis, the former 
Visser Three. Andalite-Controller. Commander 
of every Yeerk on Earth. Only a mission of the 
highest importance draws Visser One to the 
scene. 
"It wouldn't be a party without the Earl of 
Evil," Marco said solemnly. 
I sent Tobias ahead to the Hork-Bajir camp. 
We followed, racing through the trees and down 
the hill. When we arrived, Tobias was announcing 
the news. 
<The Yeerks are coming and coming strong. 
Everyone take up battle positions.> 
Thought-speak was still new to the campers. 
Emily touched her hands to her head in confu-
sion. 
"No, you're not losing your mind," I said. 
"Morphs let us communicate telepathically. That 
was Tobias." I pointed up through the trees. 
<Hey, I can see those campers a mile away!> 
Tobias said privately. <Tell them to lose the yel-
low coats. They're sitting ducks.> 
"You people have to blend in," I said. "Bury 
your coats and anything else yellow or orange or 
fluorescent green. Then get some camouflage. 
Anything but earth tones will get you killed." 
The campers covered their gear. 
Lewis took up position on a battle platform 
with a Hork-Bajir warrior. A guy whose right arm 
J a k e 
CHAPTER 20 
111 

had been blown off during one of the free Hork-
Bajir's raids on Yeerk facilities. 
The air crackled with prebattle tension. Bodies 
gave off the strong smells of fear and adrenaline. 
Richard stared silently up at his son. 
"Move anyone who's hit up behind the boul-
ders," I shouted. "Anyone who's killed on the 
field, we'll have to leave until later. Until after." 
Richard walked over to me, still wearing his 
bright yellow vest, his face clean. 
"When you say 'killed,'" he asked quietly, 
"you mean 'killed' as in 'stunned' or 'captured,' 
right?" 
"Unfortunately, Mr. Carpenter, I mean killed 
as in dead." 
Richard's eyes widened, and I knew it was the 
first phase of panic. I'd made the dangers of this 
mission clear, hadn't I? Yes. This was just a guy 
who'd let the excitement overwhelm him. If he 
panicked, he could screw up everything. 
"Oh, my God," he whispered, voice harsh. 
Like he'd thought all along that my graphic warn-
ings were just part of some game, some dialogue 
from a Deep Space Nine episode. "I didn't real-
ize. I've seen enough. We're going home. Lewis! 
Emily! Get down from there!" 
I put a hand on his arm, tried to calm and si-
lence him. "It's too late," I said. "You can't leave 
now." 
112 
"I'm not going anywhere!" Lewis shouted 
from the tree platform. "These guys need our 
help." 
Richard shook off my hand. "Come down now 
or you lose all privileges for a month!" he 
shouted wildly. 
"No, Dad." Lewis's voice was strong. "I'm 
staying." 
<Quiet!> Tobias yelled. <They're close.> 
"Battle morphs. Now!" 
Richard stared at me. Paralyzed, panicked, 
scared. Waiting for me to save him. 
I started to go tiger. "Get out of here, 
Richard," I told him while I still had a mouth. 
"Get up behind those boulders. You'll be all 
right. Just stay out of the way." 
He glanced up at his son, then back at me. 
His mouth opened but nothing came out. Then 
he turned and ran up the hill. 
The sky in the east glowed a pale and bright-
ening blue. The sun would appear in minutes. 
Free Hork-Bajir were hunched in the trees and 
crouched low in trenches. We were in battle 
morph. Tiger, gorilla, grizzly, and wolf. Ax was 
stationed at the dam. 
There wasn't a sound in the camp except a 
gentle rustle of wind in the treetops. We waited. 
My heart pounded like a rock in my chest. 
This would be a losing battle. It had to be. 
113 

CHAPTER 21 
Near silence. The light from the sun grew 
brighter. A gray mist rose off the earth. 
Kwreeek! 
A snapping twig. 
<Quiet!> I commanded. Our defense de-
pended upon surprise. Without it. . . 
Movement! 
And another sound. 
Quick rhythmic footfalls striking moist earth. 
I searched through the mist. A glint caught my 
eye. A blade. Attached to a seven-foot-tall Hork-
Bajir. 
He paused at the edge of camp. Turned slowly, 
pointed his Dracon beam everywhere he looked. 
More footfalls. More blades. More Hork-Bajir 
114 
with blue bands on their arms until the edge of 
camp overflowed with soldiers. They paused and 
scanned. Searching. 
Then, a smaller Hork-Bajir walked toward the 
center of camp. It was the free Hork-Bajir cap-
tured on the raid and now infested. The Yeerk in 
his head had led the enemy here. It was his job 
to turn over the free Hork-Bajir. To betray his 
people. 
<Steady!> I warned. 
The weapons we had — spears and arrows, 
teeth and claws — would only work at close 
range. Our attack had to come at the last possi-
ble second. 
<On my word . . .> 
The Blue Bands began to move forward. In 
seconds they would fall into our camouflaged 
trenches. In moments, they would be close 
enough to touch. 
The newly infested Hork-Bajir brought some-
thing that looked like a cell phone to his mouth. 
"All gone, Visser." 
Unbelievable. He'd reported we weren't 
there! Maybe the soldiers would give up, turn 
away, retreat. . . 
But then he raised his eyes into the trees, and 
froze. We'd been spotted. 
<ATTACK!> 
Pthoo! Pthoo! Thoo, thoo, thoo, thoo! 
115 

A rain of heavy spears, arrows, and sharp 
rocks pelted the enemy before they could fire. 
"GhaaaaaLhaaaa!" 
Cassie bounded across the dirt. Clamped her 
wolf jaws around a Hork-Bajir ankle. 
<Ah!> 
A gash bloodied her flank. She didn't let go. 
<Heeyahhh!> 
Marco, a hulking gorilla charging into the ad-
vancing line of Blue Bands. 
Whoompf! Whoompf! 
His wrecking-ball fists slammed two warriors 
to the ground. 
Thwoosh! Thwoosh, thoosh, thoosh! 
Toby slashed into the fray, nimbly slicing the 
enemy with wrist, knee, and ankle blades. Skill-
fully anticipating strikes before they came. 
The free Hork-Bajir screamed. Jumped from 
tree platforms onto the backs of the enemy. 
Drove their ankle blades deep into the backs of 
the Blue Bands. 
ZING ZING ZING! 
The sound of blades whipping through the air 
as Hork-Bajir battled Hork-Bajir in a sad civil 
war. 
I lunged. Gripped the small Hork-Bajir in my 
jaw. Dragged him back behind our line. Two free 
Hork-Bajir were waiting with restraints. They 
would bring him to Marco's parents, tending the 
116 
wounded. They'd hold him. Hide him. Hope that, 
in the end, they could starve the Yeerk from his 
head. 
I raced back to the battle. 
Sprang at the biggest Blue Band I could find. 
Sank my fangs into the back of his neck. Felt his 
muscles slacken, watched him fall. 
Tseeew! 
The air over my head crackled with the sound 
of Dracon fire, flashing blue and white like light-
ning. 
I lunged for another Blue Band. 
Bam! 
Slammed him against the trunk of a tree. 
Thumph! 
We crashed to the dirt and rolled. 
Knocked into fallen Hork-Bajir. Bodies were 
beginning to cover the floor of the valley. Those 
with blue bands and those without. 
Rachel's grizzly galloped into view. Charged a 
Hork-Bajir pointing a Dracon beam into the 
trees. 
Wooomph! 
Tseeew! 
Bam! 
She clobbered him, drove him into a rock. 
But he'd discharged his weapon. The tree burst 
into flames. A battle platform incinerated! 
Agonizing cries, . . . 
117 

Another flood of arrows and spears pounded 
the ground. Bounced harmlessly off blades. Sank 
lethally into flesh. 
"Ghaaaaaah!" 
The air was thick with this deadly rain. Lewis 
and Emily. Meg and Chloe. The other campers 
and Hork-Bajir. Heaving spear after spear. 
And the Blue Bands ducked and ran . . . back 
the way they had come. 
Retreat? 
A moment of stunned silence. Then, the free 
Hork-Bajir began to shout. To jump up and down. 
To dance. 
Those on the ground emerged from the battle 
trenches. Cries of triumph filled the air. Warriors 
shook their spears above their heads. Even the 
campers began to smile. The few captured Dra-
con beams were fired into the air. 
I knew better. Marco, the others. We weren't 
celebrating. 
The victory dance was premature. 
I'd just spotted him, through the trees and 
mist, silently approaching as the Hork-Bajir and 
campers cheered. 
Visser One. In a morph I hadn't seen since all 
of this first began. Eight fire-breathing heads. 
Legs thick as trees. Serpentine necks. Eyes like 
gobs of molten lava. 
I staggered back. 
118 
Because behind the mammoth, monstrous 
visser came an undulating line of Taxxons. A 
lumbering line of death. 
<Positions!> I screamed above the naive yells 
of victory. <Stop! Look! They're coming again!> 
The joyous voices fell silent. Laughter tum-
bled into desperate, flustered cries as warriors 
rushed to ready their weapons. To draw fresh 
sticks and spears from piles. 
And then came the voice. That crackling, 
roaring, crushing voice. 
<You are outnumbered! Surrender at once. Or 
die!> 
119 

CHAPTER 22 
I s a i a h 
F i t z h e n r y 
Christmas morning. 
A shrill bugle call startled me from sleep. 
There was a pounding on the door of headquar-
ters where I slept, fully dressed, in the corner. 
I jumped to my feet, grabbed my long gun 
and revolver, and opened the door. 
"They're here," Raines said, eyes wide, face 
calm. "A small force in the trees, same as yester-
day." 
We threw our guns on our shoulders and ran. 
The bugle stopped and, for a moment, the only 
sound was the pounding of boots on the dirt as 
Union men converged on the works. Rifles rattled 
as they ran. Flasks and canteens knocked together. 
120 
Spears was already there, loading the one ar-
tillery piece we'd managed to tow with us. 
"Looks like a frontal attack, Lieutenant," he 
gasped as he and Price released the massive ball 
into the barrel. 
I raised my field glass and focused on the 
Rebel line formed in the trees. My heart began to 
hammer. I could see the panting horse noses, the 
gray flannel coats, the shining saber sheaths. 
Why weren't there more than yesterday? 
Could the Rebel prisoner have been wrong? 
Could the force not number more than the hun-
dred troopers Spears had seen? 
"Lieutenant!" 
I turned toward town. A group of ten men 
loped toward our line, shotguns and pitchforks in 
tow. Joe Miller waved. 
"This is our town and, by God, we'll fight to 
keep it." 
It was nearly all the men from Sinkler's 
Ridge. Even the drummer boy and penny whistler 
had revolvers in their hands. 
My smile was faint but genuine. "It's good to 
see you, Joe. It's a frontal attack. Would you 
serve as flankers?" 
Joe directed five men to the east end of the 
line and took the rest with him to the west. 
"TAKE AIM!" I ordered. 
121 

The Rebels edged out from the trees. Why 
didn't they charge? What were they waiting for? 
I raised my field glass again, ran it down the 
Rebel line, and picked out a face among the 
branches. A thin man, with dark hair and promi-
nent cheekbones that stretched his skin almost 
violently. Stars dotted his collar. The horse 
beneath him was the only equine not chafing at 
the bit. Shadows concealed the man's eyes. 
Strung across his chest was not one carbine, but 
two. 
Was it Forrest? 
Why didn't he charge? Why? 
"Raines? Spears? Are you ready?" 
"Yes, sir, Lieutenant!" 
"Jacob?" 
"Ready, sir." 
Would this be the day that Forrest fell? 
Joe Miller crouched behind the works, steady-
ing his aim against the piled dirt. 
We were ready. Yet I felt that something . . . 
something was wrong. . . . 
"CHARGE!" 
The Rebel troopers pulled out from the 
woods, whooping, hollering, galloping over and 
around slashed trees. 
"TAKE AIM!" I repeated nervously. 
The Rebs raised their guns. 
"SPEARS, FIRE!" 
122 
BA-BAMMM! 
The cannon whistled. 
Ka-boom! 
"Ahhh!" 
Two horses and troopers were thrown into the 
air. 
"FIRE!" 
BAMM! BAMM! 
For one instant, pride swelled my heaving 
chest. This was the largest force I had ever com-
manded. . . . 
"FIRE!" the Rebel commander yelled. 
Lead shot cut the frozen air. An indiscrimi-
nate wave of death. 
"Yahhh!" 
"Ahh!" 
"Ah-ahhhh!" 
Men were falling, crying, screaming. 
Samson was down. And Spears. 
"STEADY, MEN! RELOAD!" 
I heard the wild rattle of ramrod and hammer. 
"FIRE!" 
We shot again. The Rebels galloped on. 
Screams and cries met my ears as we brought 
the enemy to the ground. 
"RELOAD!" 
"FIRE!" 
The Rebels wavered, drawing back short of 
our trenches. 
123 

All at once it began to rain. Icy drops splat-
tered my face. 
"They're retreating!" Raines yelled. 
Was it possible? 
Forrest would sooner die than take defeat. 
No. Something in this was wrong. 
All wrong. 
124 
CHAPTER 23 
The rain came in a torrent now, turning the 
works to mud. 
The Rebel line broke and scattered back 
toward the trees. 
It couldn't be victory. 
Jacob poured a powder charge and ripped a 
patch from his shirt. 
"Jacob," I called. "You've done your fighting. 
You've shown you can stand with the white men 
and not fail. Now go! Escape to the hills!" 
Jacob continued loading. 
Men all around us, black and white, were 
moaning. 
All were bloody. Some were motionless. 
125 

The men who'd been spared did what they 
could. 
Tied makeshift bandages around the wounds. 
Offered drinks from canteens. 
"Listen to me, Jacob! Forrest will be back. 
He'll make prisoners of us, but he will kill you. 
Do you hear me? Save your men, Jacob. It's your 
duty as a leader." 
Jacob looked up now. I'd gotten through. 
"I want all you men who still can to choose 
life. Get back up into them hills and stay alive to 
fight another day." 
No one moved. 
"Move out!" he cried, shaking his arm. 
Still, no one moved. 
Suddenly, a drum beat from the east. 
We froze. Me, Jacob, everyone. 
Another drum beat from the west. 
To our east and west was nothing but craggy 
rock, terrain impossible to climb on horseback. 
"We'll be staying," Jacob said. 
"You'll die." 
"Lieutenant, the Lord may take me whenever 
he chooses. But I choose whether to die a free 
man fighting for what's mine, or a coward en-
slaved by fear." 
The Rebel yell rose like the cries of a thou-
sand demons. 
Through the curtain of rain, I watched horse 
126 
after horse strain and struggle up and over the 
rocky pass. 
"They're attacking on the west!" Miller yelled 
from the other end of our line. 
"And the south!" Raines shouted. "They're 
riding up from the south again!" 
"TAKE AIM!" 
The mud sucked at my boots, the rain 
pounded my back. 
"Aim where?" Raines yelled. 
"At the closest target!" 
The men raised their rifles. 
Townsmen raised their shotguns. 
Our line stood firm as Rebs galloped at us 
from three sides, powering through the rising fog. 
"FIRE!" I yelled. 
Our lead blasted east, west, south. 
There were cries from the enemy. We'd shot 
well. They were falling! 
But not enough. 
From the east alone, no less than a hundred 
troopers poured from the gap in the rock. 
"RELOAD!" 
The motion was almost futile in the rain. Wa-
ter poured down our barrels, soaking the powder. 
"FIRE!" the Rebel leaders cried. 
Suddenly, time stopped. 
I fired my revolver at the swarming mass of 
animals and men. 
127 

They were closing in on our melting fortifica-
tions . . . 
Closing in . . . 
WHAM! 
The impact threw me to the mud. 
My chest! 
I reached for it. No need to open my coat. The 
blood was there. Already on the surface. 
Just under my heart. 
Flowing through my fingers. 
Gushing down my ribs. 
"No," I breathed. 
I turned my head, looking for hope. 
For help . . . 
The Rebs had broken our line to the west. . . . 
I can see Jacob fighting. Swinging his musket 
like a club, like he swung his shovel on the first 
day. 
Striking the troopers streaming though. 
No, behind you! Jacob! 
Bamm! 
Jacob. Shot in the back. 
His eyes catch mine . . . 
As he falls . . . 
And I fall . . . 
Together. 
128 
J a k e 
The retreating Hork-Bajir-Controllers stopped 
just beyond the range of our spears. Turned. 
Aimed their Dracon beams at the trees and 
picked off one free Hork-Bajir at a time. 
Free Hork-Bajir screamed. Scrambled down 
from the platforms. Flames devoured tree after 
tree. Along with the brave warriors who didn't 
make it in time. 
Then . . . 
"Ssssssny-ssssnit-ssssnit-sssnnnaaaaaa!" 
Taxxons poured through camp. 
"Skreeeeeeeeeeeeee!" 
The first tumbled into the pits, impaled by 
the wooden spears. The skewered bodies, two 
and three layers deep, made a bridge for those 
129 
CHAPTER 24 

who followed. The Taxxons surged toward the 
fallen Hork-Bajir. Some stopped to feast on their 
own dead. Some didn't. 
"Rrrrrrrrroaaaagh!" 
I leaped. Sank my teeth into slippery, puffy 
skin. Disgusting. Like piercing a balloon filled 
with something hot and foul. 
I stumbled away from the deflated body. 
Saw Rachel squeeze a Taxxon until it burst. 
Heard Cassie snarling frantically. Marco bel-
lowing. 
<Tobias!> No answer. I broadcast my 
thought-speak as loud as I knew how. <The wa-
ter! Tell Ax. NOW!> 
Hork-Bajir elders and youth ran chaotically. 
Crying, howling. The forest burned around them. 
Sniper fire sprayed the trees, the ground. 
Everywhere, the free Hork-Bajir were falling. 
Dying. 
<Out of the camp!> I yelled. <Everyone get 
into the hills. The water's coming!> 
But how could I be sure? Why hadn't Tobias 
answered? Was he down? Would Ax get the mes-
sage? 
A Taxxon reared up behind me. I leaped into a 
turn. Sank my fangs into its miserable, bloated 
mass. 
The battle was a mess and I was responsible. 
I turned and raced up the valley, toward the 
130 
dam that Ax would open with his tail blade. If he 
ever got the order. 
Suddenly . . . 
ZWIIIP! ZWIMP! 
Streaks of blinding orange stuff raced 
through the air. Flying fireballs. 
Visser One! 
I froze. 
Eight colossal legs, thick as trunks, stormed 
through the woods. The ground shook! Full-
grown trees snapped like toothpicks. 
Eight horrific heads with simmering orange 
eyes belched balls of flame. 
Then . . . 
"Tseeer!" 
<Tobias! No!> 
Tobias, diving at the monster again and again. 
Scratching eyeballs with his talons. Ripping flesh 
with his beak. 
But he was no more than a flea to the visser's 
giant monster, inflicting more annoyance than 
pain. The monster's eight spindly arms clutched 
at the air. Unless Tobias flew to safety, the tenta-
cles were going to catch him! 
<Tobias, stop! That's an order!> 
I felt my throat closing. My mouth clenched 
with fear. I sent another desperate thought-speak 
message to Ax. Prayed he would hear. 
<Open the dam! Send the water! NOW!> 
131 

A horrible screech! 
Tobias was hit! Slapped off by a tentacle. 
Hurled into the trees! 
The visser's monster morph stomped closer to 
the fleeing Hork-Bajir. Fireball after fireball flew 
from its mouths. Young and old alike, instantly 
incinerated. 
No choice. I charged. Bounded over the fallen 
bodies of sagging Taxxons and burnt Hork-Bajir. 
And in one gigantic leap of pure power, all my 
strength and speed concentrated in one blow . . . 
I smashed into the visser. Sank my four-inch 
fangs into one of the monster's eight serpentine 
necks. 
<You're pitiful,> he growled. <You will die.> 
I bit harder, jaw tightening like a vice. Ex-
tended the claws on all four paws so they pierced 
the bleeding neck. 
Barely hung on as the neck whipped the tiger 
through the air like a rag. 
The monster's red-hot blood burned my 
mouth. 
But as long as I held on, the visser couldn't 
fire at me. If he did, he'd burn himself. 
He could, however, strike at me with the teeth 
of neighboring heads. Teeth that glowed hot as 
branding irons. 
Tssssss! 
132 
<Ahhh!> 
I twisted and dodged, dug deeper with my 
claws. Barely enough strength to hold on! 
Tssssssssss! 
Hot teeth burned a hole in my back! Flesh 
scalded! Muscle seared! It was agony! 
WWUMPH? 
I lost my grip. Fell to the ground. Rolled onto 
the bank of the stream. 
I struggled to get up, but a tremendous 
weight pushed me back down. Crushed me so I 
could barely breathe. 
<At last,> the visser roared. Two of eight 
clawed hands closed around my neck. Three of 
eight heads breathed scalding breath into my 
face. 
And I knew I was dead. 
133 

CHAPTER 25 
Thoooph! Thoooph! Thoooph! 
Fireballs shot from his mouth! 
I shut my eyes and screamed. 
<Ahhhhhhhhh!> 
Then . . . 
A cool, tingling sensation from the tiger's 
head to tail. 
And I was tumbling. Swept mindlessly away 
by a forceful current. 
Body spinning, out of control . . . 
Was this death by fire? Strange. Was this the 
end? 
<Aaaaaarrgh!> 
Visser One's voice, raging in my ear. What? 
I opened my eyes. Not flames. Water! 
134 
The opened dam! 
And then I saw the visser's monster swept off 
its feet. 
Eight ludicrous legs waved in the air. 
Eight long necks, whipped by the current into 
knots. 
The monster's fire was squelched. 
<Ahhhhhh!> 
His roar filled the valley, the forest. 
I had to save myself! 
Coughing. Choking. Drowning. 
The world rushing past like super-fast-speed 
film. 
Couldn't get a grip, couldn't slow down! 
The tiger spun and whirled. Gulping water, 
sipping air. 
The visser's monster was traveling down-
stream with me. Tentacle-like arms smacked me. 
Serpentine necks slapped. 
He'd entangle me again if he could. Pull me 
down! 
Even if we both drowned in the process. 
Get to the bank, Jakel 
Hork-Bajir tumbled in the water all around 
me. Blades grazed the tiger's stomach and back. 
It was a waterslide to hell. 
Then I saw . . . Coughed. Gasped. No! 
I was headed toward a massive tree trunk! 
But maybe . . . 
135 

<Yaaaah!> 
I stretched out my front legs. Gripped the 
trunk with extended claws. 
Had to hold on! But I was slipping! 
The current dragged my body forward. 
Had to find a way to use my back legs and 
claws, too. 
Hug the tree for life. 
WHAP! 
One of Visser One's tentacle arms smashed 
the tree just over my head. The arm fell away, limp. 
And the monster swept past me, fires extin-
guished, voice raging. 
Still I hung on. Back throbbing, mouth numb. 
Slowly. . . 
The force of the current began to lessen. 
The water level dropped until, finally, finally I 
could let go of my desperate grip. 
Found myself standing in mud. 
I dragged my body into the camp, splashing 
through mud and water and blood. 
Fallen Hork-Bajir lay everywhere. 
Drowned Taxxons sprawled like popped bal-
loons. 
Yeerk slugs slithered from their fallen hosts. 
I spotted Rachel, still in grizzly morph, climb-
ing to her feet in the mud. 
Out from under her massive legs crawled the 
youngest free Hork-Bajir. 
136 
Jara Hamee and Ket Helpek's newest child. 
Rachel had kept him alive. 
<Jake!> Cassie and Marco limped toward me. 
One of her legs was bleeding badly. The skin 
on his chest was raw and burned. 
We demorphed. 
"Ax did it," I said quietly, human again. "We 
did it." 
But it didn't feel like victory. 
How could it, with so many bodies from both 
sides lying lifeless? 
I spotted Lewis and Emily, struggling to their 
feet. 
A few of the other campers, holding each 
other tight. 
<Jake!> 
I looked up. A hawk circled overhead. 
"Tobias! You're alive!" 
<Yeah. I morphed. Ax is okay, too. But Jake? 
There are a lot who didn't make it. Mr. Carpenter, 
Jake. Richard. Emily and Lewis lost their dad.> 
137 

CHAPTER 26 
I he aftermath of battle. 
I heard sobbing up on the hill. Emily sat with 
her hands covering her face. Lewis stared at his 
sister, blank-faced and lost. 
Tobias and Cassie had broken the news. 
I wouldn't have known what to say. 
Toby had a diagonal slash across her chest 
and blood dripping from her fingers, but she was 
seeing to her people. 
Comforting, commending. 
Explaining that it was time to leave the valley. 
At least for a while. 
Marco's parents acted as the primary medics, 
tying tourniquets and organizing the uninjured to 
help the wounded. 
138 
Those warriors too hurt to walk were dragged 
in stretchers made of branches, bark, and rope. 
Everyone mourned the dead, but the colony 
knew it had to move out quickly. 
Now that the trees had burned, Visser One 
might be back with Bug fighters. He might be 
mad enough to risk detection. 
It would be a long and painful march up and 
out of the valley and into the hills. 
I pulled Toby away from her preparations. 
"You know they'll be back. Not today, but 
soon." 
She nodded. 
"I know, Jake. But we won today. It may not 
feel like victory, but the valley is ours now. For-
ever. We've paid for it." 
She took a deep breath. 
"We'll stay away until the war is over. We 
know we have to. We had our chance to fight for 
freedom. That's all we really wanted." 
"Toby," I said softly, "I don't know how the 
war will end." 
"No. But it will. And someday . . ." She hesi-
tated. 
She knew as well as I that if the Yeerks won 
out, she and the other free Hork-Bajir would be 
enslaved. 
I finished her thought for her. 
"Someday," I said, "you'll be able to return." 
139 

She looked at me, eyes full of hope. 
After the free Hork-Bajir headed out of the 
valley, Marco and his parents leading the way, I 
flew to Cassie'sfarm. 
Demorphed and walked home in the early af-
ternoon sun. 
Tobias had promised that by the time I got to 
my house, the Chee covering for me would be 
gone. Just. 
My parents — and Tom — would know noth-
ing. 
I was shaking and weak by the time I reached 
the front door. Yes, I was hungry and tired, but it 
was more than that. 
I slipped quietly in through the front door. 
Mom, Dad, and Tom were in the backyard, hang-
ing by the grill. 
I headed for the basement. It was dark and 
quiet. 
I felt safe there, among the boxes of accumu-
lated memories. 
Memories of times and battles past. 
I flipped to the last page of Fitzhenry's journal. 
"Hooves trampling the dirt all around. . . 
screams and wails of bloody, dying men ... un-
ending nightmare. Cannot get a full breath . . . 
numbness spreading down my arm. Vision blur-
ring . . . growing narrow like a field glass, a dark-
ening tunnel. . . . " 
140 
"Jake, honey? Lunch is ready." 
I jumped. Mom's voice had startled me. 
"Coming, Mom," I called. "I'll be right 
there." 
"You'd better, Midget," Tom yelled down the 
stairs. "Or I'll eat your burger." 
I looked at the diary's last words, where blood 
and rain had smeared the ink. 
"/ fear I am killed. I hope I have done my 
best. I hope..." 
Those were the last legible words. 
Fitzhenry had tried and lost. 
How would my last page read? 
How would my story end? 
"/ hope I have done my best." 
"Yeah," I whispered, closing the book. "Me, 
too." 
141 

