OCRed By Arpit Nathany 

The author wishes to thank Ellen Geroux for her 
help in preparing this manuscript. 
For Michael and Jake 
Cover illustration by David B. Mattingly 
Art Direction/Design by Karen Hudson/Ursula Albano 
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this 
book is stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the 
publisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has received any pay-
ment for this "stripped book." 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in part, or stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permis-
sion of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write to 
Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 555 Broadway, 
New York, NY 10012. 
ISBN 0-439-11517-5 
Copyright © 2000 by Katherine Applegate. 
All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Inc. 
SCHOLASTIC, APPLE PAPERBACKS, ANIMORPHS and associated logos 
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc. 
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
0 1 2 3 4 5/0 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
First Scholastic printing, July 2000 
My name is Tobias. Still a freak of nature. 
Part human. Part bird. Confused? Don't worry, it 
gets better. 
I am flying over the forest. The air is thick. A 
storm is approaching. It is only early afternoon, 
but the sky is growing black as the front moves in 
on the city. A towering wall of rain, wind, and cu-
mulus clouds. 
I had to find food before the storm. I was hun-
gry. But then, I'm always looking for food. That's 
life for a bird of prey. Hunger. 
A shrew stepped out from its burrow. It loi-
tered nervously, sniffing the moisture. We had the 
same thought, me and the shrew. Hunker down 
against nature's wrath, but fill your belly first. 
1 

I was higher on the food chain. I tucked into a 
dive. 
My wings pressed tight to my body. Air whis-
tled past. Mountains, forest, and sky. All a blur, a 
flashing streak. Everything but the shrew, shift-
ing agitatedly, chomping on a seed . . . 
My talons struck, embedded, and squeezed. 
Drained life instantly. 
Wonder what it's like? Dig your fingernails 
into a too-ripe peach. Rip sections off with your 
teeth. Gulp them without chewing. The kill is 
something like that. 
I downed the shrew and lifted off. 
I don't think about the kill anymore. I'm hawk 
and human. I'll explain later. Just try to under-
stand that the hawk must feed the human. It has 
to happen. 
I don't think about it anymore. 
That's a lie. 
"You vile little bird! Do you realize what 
you've done? Do you realize what you've become? 
You're trapped! You have to live out your life as a 
bird!" 
Her name was Taylor. My Yeerk torturer. Her 
voice screeching. Bruising my ears. Tormenting 
me after every kill. Other times, too. Still, after 
all this time . . . 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
A helicopter! Hovering low over the trees, dis-
2 
persing terrified crows in all directions. If I were 
a true hawk, I'd have cleared out with the other 
birds. Instead, I circled around and flapped 
toward the turbulence. 
My friends, the Animorphs, the ones who 
fight the Yeerk invasion of Earth, say that since 
my capture, I live too much of life in my head. 
They must be right. I'd almost missed every-
thing. 
Not just the helicopter. The humans below, 
streaming across rough forest floor, the tires of 
their ATV's scoring the soil. The searchlights 
streaking the trees in the daytime darkness, mak-
ing rabbits and deer dart in alarm. 
I flew to the nearest ranger station. It was 
ringed by squad cars and TV news vans. I swooped 
down, closer to the action. Landed on a low 
branch. A blond woman in a raincoat held a mi-
crophone close to her lips and swatted wind-
whipped hair away from her face. 
"Bobby Mclntire," she shouted above the 
noise of the vehicles, "missing now for two full 
days since he wandered away from his camping 
party. Hope that he'll be found alive is fading. 
But it's not just a race against time and the 
weather." Lightning struck the sky above her, 
imparting urgency to her words. "Little Bobby 
is deaf and can't hear the desperate calls of 
rescuers. Kelly King," she concluded, looking sky-
3 

ward, "reporting live." She held a frozen, concerned 
expression until the producer gave her the all 
clear. 
"I will break you." It was Taylor's voice again, 
whispering in my mind. "You can't win." 
I set a course for the storm front. A strange 
thing to do, to turn toward the lightning. To fly 
into the line of rain, the thunderclaps, the wind. 
But it made me feel like Lindbergh over the 
Atlantic. Fearless and strong. Maybe even a little 
heroic. 
I wanted those feelings. 
See, it wasn't long ago that the Yeerks cap-
tured me. A crazed and insane human-Controller 
made my life a hell for several excruciating hours. 
I survived. I even thought the torture was over. I 
didn't realize that torture doesn't end when you're 
freed. 
People think it does. People who've never 
been through torture think that when the phys-
ical injuries heal, you're healed, too. They're 
wrong. 
Torture plays tricks on your mind. "You're weak 
and scared," it says. "You think you're in control? 
Hah!" it says. "Doubt yourself. Worry, and ques-
tion, and fear," it tells you. 
Pain can be very convincing. 
Sometime during my capture, my mind was 
4 
assaulted with memories, images of all the times 
I've been weak. Or think I might have been . . . 
Like my first time at the Yeerk pool. 
My mind flashed back to it now, to the scene 
at Yeerk Central, that echoing underground dome 
with a sludgy pool churning at its core. The Yeerk 
pool. That's where the Yeerks do their dirtiest 
dirty work, where parasitic, sluglike aliens dunk 
your head in the muck and force one of their kind 
through your ear. 
The Yeerks squeeze your brain and wring out 
your freedom. They control all thoughts and move-
ments. They silence your howls and screams of 
grief until you are nothing but a slave. A stupid 
puppet. An unwilling soldier of the Yeerk Empire. A 
threat to all humanity. 
But you've probably heard about all this by 
now. Right? 
Tha-BOOM! Boom! 
A thunderclap roared and half brought me 
back to the present. The other half of me was 
still at the Yeerk pool that first, horrible time. 
Clinging to the rock face, praying for camouflage, 
searching the colossal cavern for a way to es-
cape. A way to get past Visser Three's men. 
<Where's Tobias?> I'd heard Rachel say, 
faintly. 
How long since I'd morphed to red-tailed 
5 

hawk? An hour and fifty minutes? An hour and 
fifty-five? 
How long?! 
The others had escaped already. The other 
Animorphs, I mean. They'd dodged the visser's 
fireball gauntlet. They'd slipped out to safety, 
back through the janitor's closet, back into the 
school. Rachel, Cassie, Marco, Jake. 
Had I missed the deadline? Had I been more 
than two hours in morph? 
Couldn't have. Can't have. No. I'd be trapped 
forever. A bird. 
Independent, free, alone. 
Forever. 
Images of the human life I'd led till then 
flooded my mind. The images were dark. My apa-
thetic aunt. My alcoholic uncle. 
Then, something brighter, something power-
ful surged through my mind. Something else. 
Shoring me up. Drawing me in. A wave of. . . 
What? What had I felt then, at that moment, 
with the seconds ticking down? With the dead-
line chasing me . . . 
Weakness or strength? 
"You'll never know," Taylor said. "You won't 
know who or what you are when I'm done with 
you." 
Bobby Mclntire needed to be found. 
6 
I let a fading thermal lift me into the atmos-
phere. 
My name is Tobias. I'm a human. I'm a hawk. 
If you want to find something in the forest, you'd 
do well to ask me. 
There's nothing I don't see. 
7 

Tha-BOOM! Boom! 
Thunderclaps. I let the warm air draw me up. 
Three hundred feet. Higher. I could see through 
the haze, from city's edge to the mountains. 
The national park is a very big place. You 
could hike for days and never see anyone. Spot-
ting a boy from a helicopter would be like finding 
the needle in the haystack. And the haystack was 
about to get really wet. 
Binoculars, infrared goggles, and laser sights 
flipped on. I don't mean to brag, but nature gave 
me excellent tools. I can see a hiker's broken 
shoelace. A robin's chicks. 
I can pick out deer poop. 
"You vile little bird!" Taylor's voice, always 
humming in my ear. 
8 
Quiet as a glider, my personal search plane 
swept huge, broad strokes above the trees. 
My friends, the other Animorphs — the other 
kids who knew the great Andalite warrior Elfan-
gor, who'd been there as he died, and who'd ac-
cepted the Yeerk-fighting Andalite technology to 
become any animal they can touch — they were 
expecting me to show up at Cassie's barn. There 
was a meeting scheduled for after school. If I 
wanted to make it, I had to travel east. 
I edged west, following the search party's tire 
tracks. Tracing the lines as they crossed and con-
verged in a half-mile section of sparse tree cover. 
I was guessing that this was the last place the 
boy was seen. Good place to start. I dove to fifty 
feet, skimming the treetops, looking for a sign, a 
clue. Anything. 
Nothing. 
A raindrop struck my wing. No, not yet! Three 
more drops hit me like BB's. 
A whistling gale pushed me back into the air 
and blew me away from the search party tracks. 
I flapped harder to fight the strengthening wind. 
It was pushing me toward mudflats. Forcing me 
toward a dried up stream. 
The raindrops were starting to feel like war-
game paint pellets. I remember. My uncle took 
me to do the paint-ball thing. I hated it, but it 
was one of the only things we'd done together. 
9 

Anyway, I was going to have to stop. The down-
pour was starting. 
Suddenly — a splash of red against brown. A 
shred of bright cloth caught on a bramble. 
Yes. 
<Bobby?> I chanced in open thought-speak. 
<lf you're here, show me where you are.> Brush-
ing the treetops, I scanned the mud. Nothing. 
The wind was absurd. Violent one minute, 
dead the next. 
Then — a single footprint. A kid's footprint. 
<Bobby!> I called again. <lf you can hear me, 
wave. Or move. Do something!> 
A faint rustling of brush. Then, more move-
ment. I circled in to land. A dirt clod shot 
straight up into the air, grazing my beak. 
<Whoa, okay! Great, Bobby. Good work.> 
I didn't see the giant sinkhole until I almost 
landed in it. It was a pit so invisible under the 
overgrowth, it would have taken searchers months 
to find it. 
I peered down at the kid. He was searching 
wildly for the source of my voice. His eyes were 
swollen from crying. His hands were raw from try-
ing to climb up the vertical, featureless sinkhole 
wall. He stood in stagnant water a foot deep. And 
a flash flood was on the way. 
<We're gonna get you out of there,> I said. 
But I didn't have a morph that could haul him 
10 
out. Hork-Bajir? I wasn't practiced enough with 
the blades not to lacerate the kid and I definitely 
couldn't let him see an alien. <Hang tight, Bobby. 
I'll be back soon. It'll be okay.> A lightning bolt 
sizzled the ground nearby. Not good. 
The trip to the ranger station was probably the 
worst flight of my life. The rain pummeled me. 
The wind screwed up my feathers. But the very 
worst part was the dead air. By the time I reached 
the ranger station, my body was burning liga-
ments for fuel. 
Through the windows I saw most of the search 
party, inside and drying off. Getting ready for an-
other round of wet and nasty searching. Then I 
saw a guy who looked like he needed a miracle. 
He was sitting outside on a stump, letting the 
rain drench him through. The ink from his name 
tag was running down his chest, but I could still 
read the letters. "Mr. Mclntire." Bobby's dad? He 
fixed his sad stare on the mountains. 
I touched down just feet from him. Didn't 
once think about the consequences. <Listen,> I 
said, <l know this is going to sound crazy. I know 
you'll think you're losing your mind. But I can 
take you to Bobby.> 
You can tell a lot about a person by the 
way they respond to a talking hawk. There's the 
run-away-screaming type. The bring-palms-to-
head-to-squeeze-out-demons reflex. Even the kill-
11 

the-animal maneuver. Most people don't do too 
well when their reality's challenged. 
But Bobby's dad was cool. I mean, he looked 
kind of freaked at first. His eyes bugged out and 
he spun around frantically, looking for the 
prankster who was fooling with him. But once the 
initial surprise faded, he quickly regained his 
composure. 
"Okay," he said. "Lead the way." 
He probably thought he was nuts, but I don't 
think it would have mattered whether he was 
hearing voices or talking with aliens. He just 
wanted his son back. 
That kind of love . . . it made me feel . . . 
strange. 
I flew from tree to tree, a few hundred feet at 
a time, waiting for Mr. Mclntire and three rangers 
he'd convinced to come along. All the while I 
gave him directions in private thought-speak. At 
least I could stay a good distance from the men, 
to keep it uncertain whether a hawk was really 
running the show. 
I pictured Bobby in the pit, the torrential rain 
tunneling into channels, forming a raging ar-
royo. Racing like a hungry, deadly snake. A mas-
sive, silent snake that Bobby's deaf ears wouldn't 
hear. 
"You will die, Andalite. "Taylor's hateful voice, 
droning in my head. 
12 
<Overthe hill,> I directed. 
Then we crested the rise and I saw something 
I didn't think was possible. Sheets of rain pun-
ished the earth to our right and our left, but over 
Bobby's sinkhole . . . unbelievable. A corridor of 
rainless clouds with two ends of a weak rainbow 
marking the borders. 
I was sure my mind was making the scene up. 
It couldn't turn out this well. Nothing ever did. 
Taylor wouldn't let it . . . 
<Bobby!> I called. I pumped my wings and 
found him, the water rising around his knees. I 
perched on a low branch and watched as three 
powerful rangers pulled him to safety. Watched 
as Bobby collapsed in his dad's arms, shaking, as 
joy replaced fear. 
Bobby's dad glanced up at me, gratitude in 
his eyes. 
Ever have something work out so perfectly, 
you feel you could fly? That's how I felt — and 
the cool thing was, I could actually do it. I could 
actually fly. 
I took off down the swath of rainless sky 
toward Cassie's barn. It felt so good. I played in 
the air like a pilot at an air show, awed the audi-
ence with my death-defying stunts. I cut my en-
gines, fell into a nosedive, ready to pull up just 
seconds before I hit the ground. 
And then . . . 
13 

A golden eagle, twice my size, screeching 
toward me like a wrecking ball . . . 
WHAM! 
And all was blackness. 
I never even had a chance. 
14 
This hawk's gonna feel that wing. Hero or 
not, when he wakes up, he'll hurt like crazy." 
My eyes snapped open. Through the links of 
my cage I spied the faces of two concerned, lab-
coated veterinarians. Both women. One brunette, 
one blond. The words University Clinic were 
stitched on their pockets. 
"Do you think Superbird needs an epidural?" 
I tensed my extremities. Right wing not re-
sponding. A sore and twisted neck. That nasty 
golden eagle had banged me up pretty bad. The 
memory of the impact got my hawk heart pump-
ing. Fear, territoriality, confusion. 
"No, I gave him enough medication to keep 
him comfy till morning. Hey, look, he's awake. 
15 

Feeling better, Mr. Hawk?" the blond one said, 
with the gentle condescension appropriate for 
wildlife who can't make it in the wild. 
I could have found both vets extremely annoy-
ing. But as it was, with an ugly vulture in the 
cage next to mine, and a prehistoric egret two 
doors down, I was actually glad to hear a human 
voice. 
How much time had passed? What day was it? 
"Seen the headlines?" the brunette asked 
me, as if in answer to my question. 
Sometimes, not always, if you ask questions 
you want answers to, the universe will respond. 
It was the evening edition newspaper that she 
held in her hands, and it confirmed that I'd been 
asleep way too long. "'Father Claims Hawk Led 
Searchers to Lost Boy.'" She smiled at me, then 
summed it up. 
"You da bird!" 
The vets chuckled. They didn't know this was 
no laughing matter. They didn't understand . . . 
It hit me, right at that moment. I'd messed up 
big time. That headline . . . the kiss of death . . . 
if the Yeerks found me first. . . 
I was stupid. So stupid! 
Any time you get an animal doing unusual 
stuff, you get Yeerks. To Yeerks, all animals are 
suspects, possible "Andalite bandits" disguised 
in morph. 
16 
This was bad. What was I thinking? 
My friends, they'd be looking for me, too. I'd 
endangered our own security. By trying to fight 
Taylor's ghost, I'd dragged my friends into danger. 
Stupid. Weak. 
I had to morph! Morph and get out before . . . 
But no. I couldn't morph in front of the vets. 
And there were video cameras, mounted up in 
the corners of the lab, recording everything. 
Who'd get to me first? 
"What's he doing? Flapping his wing? Hey, 
he's gonna get hurt. Chloe, quick! We need to se-
date him." 
Sedate me? 
I fell back to the floor of the cage and lay mo-
tionless. 
No way would I be sedated. 
Not with two groups looking for me. Two 
groups I knew would take that headline very seri-
ously. 
Group One: my friends. 
Group Two: my enemies. 
"Wait," the vet said. "Forget it. He calmed 
down. He's fine. I don't know what that was 
about." 
"Okay, Superbird. Stay out of trouble. We'll 
see you in the morning." 
They were going away? They were leaving me 
here! 
17 

Why did everyone leave? Why . . . 
They walked to the door, switched off the 
main fluorescent overheads, deadbolted the door 
behind them. 
They were going home. They had homes to 
goto. 
They were leaving me to face my fate alone. 
The room was cold and sterile. Sick and in-
jured birds squawked and cooed in the partial 
darkness. 
Alone. 
And all I could do was wait. 
18 
Sccreeeeech! 
The sound jarred me from a restless half-
sleep. I looked at the clock: 1:12 A.M. Scanned 
for the source of the sound. 
For a moment, glowing metal blinded my sen-
sitive hawk vision. When my sight returned, the 
lock on the door was sizzling. Evaporating . . . 
Behind the door, heavy, punishing footsteps 
slammed down the hallway. A sound that meant 
only one thing. 
Hork-Bajir. 
The door burst open. 
Tseew! Tseew! 
Seven-foot-tall bladed bodies charged into 
19 

the room! Video cameras disintegrated in flashes 
of Dracon fire. 
No time to morph! 
I pressed myself to the back of the cage. Tried 
to cover my reddish tail, tried to pretend I wasn't 
there. 
They were on me instantly, scowling with fiery 
eyes. Holding weapons to my head. 
"You mine, Andalite!" asserted the Hork-Bajir 
with the worst breath. "Visser Three will give 
praise." 
This guy obviously hadn't been on Earth very 
long. Getting praise from Visser Three would be 
like trying to stop a brushfire with a glass of wa-
ter. But I wasn't about to burst his bubble. 
He hefted my cage into the air and ran for the 
door, banging me roughly. His henchmen, two in 
front, two behind, surrounded him. Their weapons 
were drawn, their eyes were searching. They were 
tense as we moved into the hall. On guard. Almost 
as though they expected . . . 
Tseew. Tseew. 
Three humans appeared twenty feet down the 
corridor. Their Dracon rounds ricocheted off the 
walls. 
What was going on? 
Humans firing Dracons at Hork-Bajir! 
Controller versus Controller? 
20 
"Drop the bird," a man with a mustache or-
dered. "Now!" The Hork-Bajir snorted a laugh at 
the wiry man. "Bird is visser's. You rebel make 
mistake." Quick as lightning, he raised his arm 
and opened fire on the humans. 
The human-Controllers were agile and dove 
for cover. They just weren't agile enough. An ab-
breviated scream echoed down the hall. The 
mustached man vanished in a flash of light and 
heat, a silhouette scorched against the white-
washed wall. The other humans didn't seem to 
notice the loss of their comrade. Or else, they 
didn't care. 
Only Yeerks can lose a teammate and not bat 
an eye. 
BLAAAAM! 
Four more humans coming up from behind! 
Slamming the Hork-Bajir before they knew what 
hit them. 
I didn't know who to root for. Hork-Bajir or hu-
man? Visser Three or. . . who? Who were these 
people? 
A long, sharp, Hork-Bajir blade caught my 
cage and lifted it. He ran swiftly toward the exit. 
This guy could move! Smashed over a stainless 
steel medical cart. Crashed into empty cages 
stacked against the wall. 
Blocked! 
21 

Three more people! Large ones, dressed in 
dark leather, with straps and metal clasps cover-
ing their bodies. Bodies that blocked the exit. 
My captor halted, claws screeching across the 
polished floor. 
He turned back and moved toward a window. 
Three new Dracon-packing people moved in to 
block his path. 
Surrounded! 
My cage dangled precariously from the Hork-
Bajir's blade. Aliens and humans froze in a grim, 
momentary standoff. 
Suddenly, my captor leaped at the smallest 
person. A woman. It was a low move, a desperate 
attempt at escape. Foolish, too. The others were 
on him instantly. 
We crashed to the floor, my cage caving be-
neath the Hork-Bajir's weight until the cold steel 
bars pressed tight against my feathers. Around 
me swirled a sea of hands and claws, clutching 
wildly. For me. The prize. 
I couldn't keep track of what happened next. 
I just know that someone sent the cage careening 
across the floor. My frail, injured body tumbled 
like a rag in the dryer. The cage lodged under the 
large sink of a utility closet, my hawk body even 
more bruised and damaged. 
I heard frantic shuffling from the fight be-
yond, but from my position, I could see very lit-
22 
tie. Deafening Dracon fire was followed by a 
momentary stillness. Heavy footsteps marched 
my way. Four Hork-Bajir feet came to a halt be-
fore my cage. 
"Gafrash!" one roared. A hideous appendage 
reached for me. I cringed, waiting to be taken 
again, waiting to be seized. 
The Hork-Bajir arm jerked back. 
The feet tensed and turned to run, but there 
was nowhere to go. 
Because four more feet, twice as large, gigan-
tic and familiar, landed with a thunder-thud. 
Rachel! 
One Hork-Bajir was down. The other snatched 
up my cage. 
<Oh, no you don't!> Rachel cried, baring her 
massive, flesh-tearing teeth. Her wild grizzly bear 
claws flashed like giant steel rigatoni and lashed 
my captor's arm. 
<The cavalry's here, Tobias,> she huffed. 
<Hangon!> 
23 

"Ga 
Tafrash horlit!" 
The Hork-Bajir let go. My cage hit the floor 
with another painful crash. 
<Get Tobias!> Rachel cried. 
Marco, in gorilla morph, was the only one with 
an opposable thumb, an often undervalued ap-
pendage. He reached for me, but a downed Hork-
Bajir grabbed his leg and yanked him backward. 
So Rachel nudged me with her massive front 
paws, pushing my cage across the floor, down the 
hall, away from the fight. 
Suddenly, the cage stopped. We'd run into 
something. We'd hit human feet. 
Rachel froze, sniffing the air hard. I looked 
24 
up. Sleek, suede boots. Fashionably worn jeans. 
The torso and head were in shadow. Who was 
this? Some innocent vet student, trapped by the 
battle? 
Her arm appeared from behind her back. Her 
fingers clutched a Dracon beam . . . 
My heart stopped. 
The girl's fingers glistened and sparkled in 
the semidarkness. The way real flesh fingers 
never do. 
<Taylor,> Rachel hissed, her voice rough with 
rage. 
"Make one move, bear, and your next stop is 
the taxidermist." 
<Yeah, right!> Rachel leaped, claws slashing. 
Tseew! 
Taylor seared a hole in Rachel's flank. 
"HhhhoooRRRAAWWRRR!" Rachel dropped, 
groaning with pain. 
And Taylor grabbed my cage with her artificial 
hand. The hand she had accepted in exchange 
for her freedom. Taylor's story was a sad one. A 
story of a girl who'd lost her face, arm, and leg in 
a terrible fire. The Sharing, the Yeerk front orga-
nization, had been there for her. Offering her a 
new face and arm and leg. All she had to do was 
agree to be infested. A voluntary Controller. All 
she had to do was let a vile gray slug wrap around 
25 

her brain. But the Yeerk that infested Taylor was 
nuts. Taylor had pretty much lost it, too. Not a 
very stable situation. And there I was. 
I couldn't believe what was happening. My 
torturer had captured me. Again. 
No. 
The fingers of her real hand poked through 
the bars of my cage, threatening to touch me as 
she lifted the cage right up to her face. 
NO! 
She didn't speak a word but her icy stare said 
it all. Thought you'd seen the last of me, Andalite 
fool? Well, you thought wrong. 
Taylor straightened her pearly, plastic fingers. 
I knew what she was going to do. I'd known since 
the moment I recognized her in the shadows. 
"I love surprises," she whispered. And with-
out any further warning, snowy particles frothed 
from the fingertips of her prosthesis. 
Gas! 
She was gassing me just like the time she'd 
captured me under the grounds of The Sharing's 
new community center. In moments, I'd be para-
lyzed. The only difference was that she didn't re-
alize I was the same "Andalite" she'd previously 
captured. I could only hope she didn't remem-
ber. 
I stretched out my talon. I gripped the fleshy 
fingers of her real hand. Then I closed my eyes, 
26 
shut my ears, shut it all out. The animal screams, 
the grunts, the human shouts. The horror of reliv-
ing a nightmare. 
Acquire her. Acquire her. Become her. 
A nauseating idea. Necessary. 
I clutched her fingers tighter. To Taylor, it 
must have seemed like a pitiful attempt to fight 
back, but she didn't know the truth. She didn't 
know that I felt her DNA flow into me. Felt her 
body relax, slacken under the acquiring trance. 
The gaseous powder stung and tingled, prick-
ing my skin like invisible nettles. 
But Taylor, too, was immobile! Paralyzed! For 
an instant, I'd slowed her down. Incapacitated 
her. 
Not enough. Not nearly enough. 
My talon went limp. My body fell numb. Tay-
lor's eyes buzzed back to life just in time to 
watch me realize that this gas was different from 
the stuff I'd experienced before. 
"Version 2.0," Taylor laughed. "Enough gen-
eral anesthetic to knock you out completely." 
Blackness rushed in from all sides as my vi-
sion dimmed. 
<Rachel?> I called weakly. <Jake?> 
If they answered, I didn't hear them. 
Why me? What had I done to deserve this? 
Foolish questions, useless self-pity . . . I was a 
warrior. 
27 

All I could do was look straight ahead. Into 
the dismal depths of Taylor's mad, hypnotic eyes. 
In that moment, I saw clearly. I saw that I was 
just a blob of mud bobbing through the raging 
stream of her thoughts. The stream couldn't be 
stopped and it would destroy me. 
It would break me apart. 
28 
Skrrr-eeeek! 
The sound of a metal spoon dragged across 
the bottom of a pan. The smell of canned tomato 
soup warming on a stove. These ordinary things 
drew me out of darkness. I opened my eyes. 
I was still caged, but now there were half a 
dozen Dracon beams aimed at my head, clamped 
to my cage with vises. Not high-tech mecha-
nisms fresh off the Yeerk drawing board, but the 
kind of clamps you pick up at Ace Hardware. 
It didn't matter. Point was, I didn't have any 
hands. My captors knew that hawk beak and 
talons couldn't unscrew anything. 
Blinking beneath each mounted Dracon was a 
red light. A sensor? I didn't move. I didn't dare. 
29 

The thought of more torture set my bones 
knocking. I couldn't take any more. 
I started to tremble, uncontrollably. I watched 
the sensors with both minds, hawk and human. 
Each had been almost destroyed and both parts 
of me remembered . . . the pain, the hopeless-
ness! Impossible to escape . . . red light, blue 
light. Agony . . . endless . . . 
Morph. I could morph to something small and 
crawl away. Undetected. Steal away. Do it, To-
bias. Do it. 
"Morph, my friend," Taylor warned, her voice 
cold and confident, "and the beams will fire au-
tomatically." 
I hadn't seen her there, sitting at a kitchen 
chair, mug in hand, sipping soup. 
I'd felt her, though. Her evil had a way of 
dominating the very nature of a room, of coloring 
everything around her and stoking my fear. 
I couldn't escape. I never really thought I 
could. Not then, not now. Taylor was back, just as 
I guessed she would be. 
"The computer controlling the Dracon beams 
is sensitive to basic changes in shape. You can-
not escape." 
Wait. That wasn't true. I could escape. I could 
morph. Morph and die! 
"Yes, you could choose death," Taylor said, 
answering my thoughts. "I've deliberately given 
30 
you that option." She paused to take a slurp of 
soup, her eyes still fixed on me. 
I looked at the kitchen, and at the small, 
shoddily built, low-ceilinged structure. Something 
was definitely wrong with this picture. Yeerks 
choose the best. They take the best of everything 
we humans have, and when the best we have to 
offer isn't good enough, they use stolen alien 
technologies to make it shine. This was . . . 
what? Some sort of hovel. My cage rested on a 
Formica table scarred with cigarette burns. 
"Choose death," she repeated casually, "or. . . 
listen to what I have to say." She rose, dropped 
her mug in the sink of the strange little kitchen, 
and returned to her seat. "I have a deal for you, 
Andalite." 
She was so casual. Not the Taylor I'd known. 
What trick, what scheme did she have up her 
sleeve? 
"Good," she said, seeing that I'd decided to 
postpone death. "It would be much harder to so-
licit help from an Andalite who's dead." 
Help? 
Yeah, and Rachel will pass up a sale at Ex-
press, Crayak will win the Nobel Peace Prize, a 
Yeerk slug will turn down a promotion. 
What did she have up her sleeve? 
"Civil war is coming, Andalite," she began. 
"Yeerk versus Yeerk. We've had enough of the 
31 

petty visser fights, the favoritism, the punish-
ments . . . the Council makes us sick." 
Anger flushed her face. She'd said the last 
sentence with such vehemence that for a fleeting 
instant, I knew I could believe her. The Council 
did make her sick. 
But then, her guard went up again. The spark 
in her eye made her look part politician and part 
actor, part trial lawyer, and part scheming teen-
aged girl. It was a face shrouded in lies. 
"The Yeerks must move on as a race," she 
continued. "The time has come." She got up 
again and opened the ancient refrigerator. "We 
need to make a civilization with the hosts we 
have." She glanced at me. "Many of us realize 
that the eternal wars have to end and that the 
loss on Leera, the stalled offensive on Earth, and 
now the apparent bungling on the Anati planet 
have discredited the current leadership enough 
that it cannot survive." 
She pulled a bag of carrots from the fridge. 
Seriously bizarre. She was talking political strat-
egy while she snacked. Like we were hanging out 
at her house after school, planning the rigging of 
the homecoming queen election. 
She continued. "We want to be more like you, 
Andalite. We need a structure that will transform 
us from rebels to leaders. We want to be more 
like Andalite society. Even more like the hu-
32 
mans." Her teeth snapped a crisp carrot in two. 
Her eyes stared at me. "We want to move toward 
democracy and we need your help to do it." 
It was like the world's weirdest press confer-
ence. 
I didn't believe a word she said. 
Not a word. 
So I tested her. <l suppose all you need from 
me are the names and locations of the remaining 
Andalite bandits? You know, as a token of my co-
operation?> 
Taylor laughed. She was a violent, aggressive, 
and ruthless personality. Personalities don't 
change. Not much, anyway. I waited for her to 
prove me right. I waited for proof that she was 
still working for Visser Three. That this talk of 
rebels was all a ruse. 
"Nice to hear your voice again, Andalite. The 
Andalite with the power to stay in morph for more 
than the two-hour time limit. Your voice brings 
back such sweet memories." The tone in her voice 
set me shaking again. "I learned a lot about you 
during our time together, Andalite. I saw your 
mind. I saw your courage dribble away. I would 
enjoy finishing you now. Breaking you." She 
slinked toward my cage. "Right here and right 
now. You think you're strong, but I know you're 
weak. It would take seconds!" She paused just 
enough to let the thought rattle me. "But this 
33 

time, Andalite, it's your cooperation I require. I 
need you and your fellow Andalites. I need you to 
help me destroy Visser Three." 
She wasn't working for the visser. She was out 
to destroy him. That's what she'd said. 
Unguarded anger seethed from her face. If 
she was lying, it was impossible for me to tell. 
"You've fared badly as a bird." She looked at 
my bandaged wing, at my matted feathers, my 
twisted neck. "You have Visser Three to thank for 
that. His Hork-Bajir aren't big on gentle." 
She wanted me to become angry, too, and 
take revenge, get back at the visser, join forces 
with her. . . 
"Don't answer now." She pulled a scrap of 
paper from her pocket and pushed it through the 
bars of my cage. "Here." It was a Web address. 
"Talk things over with your comrades and leave 
me a message there. Sign it 'Bandits.'" 
Then she unlatched the cage door, threw 
open the nearest window, and disappeared be-
hind a curtain, leaving her dirty dishes in the 
sink. 
34 
The red sensors flickered out. 
I hobbled from the cage, hopped to the win-
dow. The ground was a few feet below me. I fell 
outside. Taylor. Visser Three. Civil war. Weak-
ness . . . 
She'd let me go. 
It was too much to sort out. I needed my 
friends. I needed Rachel. 
I dragged myself into the shadows, morphed 
and demorphed to repair injuries. Injuries which 
by this time were so painful they bordered on tor-
ture themselves. I lifted off. Free, but my mind 
was weighted. 
As I rose into the air, I saw the place I'd been 
held. An old trailer, parked by a junkyard. A rebel 
35 

hideout. Far from the city and the Yeerk pool. 
Could she be telling the truth? 
I flapped toward town, toward the lights, 
toward Rachel's. Over buildings topped by digital 
dishes and cell phone relays. Suddenly, I cut the 
gas, strained my wings, dropped to a roof. 
If she weren't telling the truth, if she were 
feeding me lies . . . 
She'd have planted a tracking device on my 
body. Of course! The Yeerks were tailing me. I 
was bringing them straight to my friends. Straight 
to the Andalite bandits. 
When I'd finished kicking myself, I picked the 
smallest morph I had. Flea. I focused on the tiny 
blood-sucking body. 
SCHWOOOP! 
The roof rushed at me. Slate shingles became 
slick and huge as glaciers. My vision fractured 
like light through a prism and my hearing cut. It 
was all about the other senses. Taste, smell. 
Feeling. I waited for the corner of a tiny chip 
to bust out of my skin. Any tracking device would 
fall away from a flea's body. It would prove that 
Taylor's words were meaningless. That I could 
write her off forever. I wanted to. 
I grew smaller and smaller. Nothing snagged, 
nothing stretched my stretchable skin. Nothing 
bulged from my body. No global positioning chip. 
I was unmarked. 
36 
Okay. Okay. No easy answers. Just complica-
tions. 
I demorphed and rocketed past street-
lights, car headlights, and neon signs to Rachel's 
house. Her window was open. I shot through and 
planted my talons on the bedpost, swishing my 
feathers as I came to a stop. She jolted out of 
sleep. 
"Thank God!" she whispered. I fluttered down 
next to her. She touched me gently. A smile filled 
her face, then was replaced by rage. "That jerk!" 
Her voice hardened. "That scum." 
<l'm okay,> I said. <Taylor let me go.> I felt 
safe in RacheJ's presence, but my voice still 
sounded raw. 
"We searched for you for hours. I wanted to 
kill her." 
<l think I wanted you to.> 
"What's her deal?" 
<She wants to work with us,> I said. My 
words sounded preposterous. I wondered for a 
second if I hadn't dreamed it all. <lt's weird. She 
says that if we give her help, she gives us Visser 
Three. > 
"Don't believe it," Rachel muttered, charging 
out of bed. "C'mon. Let's get the others." 
An hour later, we had all assembled in Cassie's 
barn. 
"A deal?! Come on. Our help?! Puh-leeze. If 
37 

some Yeerk contracts a democracy virus, I m 
supposed to care?" Marco said skeptically. "I 
don't think so." 
<l agree with Marco. I do not think her telling 
the truth is likely. We cannot forget that she was 
a sub-visser. She rose to her position by being 
ruthless. I do not believe the Yeerk,> Ax nearly 
sneered. 
"But what if she's telling the truth?" Cassie 
countered. Cassie was the only one of us who'd be-
friended a Yeerk before. Who'd actually morphed 
a Yeerk. I knew she, at least, would want to give 
my story some consideration. "Maybe she really 
does believe in a better way. She wouldn't be the 
first Yeerk to have a change of heart." 
"No, she'd be the last. That creep wouldn't 
even breathe if it didn't serve her," Rachel 
sneered. "She's not about to found a democratic 
leadership because it's a just philosophy. She 
wants something else." 
"Seems obvious to me," Marco answered. 
"It's the means, not the end, that interest her. 
She's keen on democracy because it's a process 
that will eject Visser Three." 
"Do you always assume ttie worst of people?" 
Cassie asked. 
"Always." Marco smiled. "People are who they 
are. My bet is that when Taylor fatted to break 
Tobias with torture, the visser sent her pack-
38 
ing. She's probably been plotting revenge ever 
since." 
For a second, nobody spoke. Jake glared at 
Marco and I was pretty sure I knew why. I was 
guessing it was probably also the reason no one 
had mentioned how I'd been recaptured in the 
first place. No one had mentioned that I'd made 
a huge mistake by rescuing the lost kid. Now I re-
alized why. Marco'd mentioned torture, some-
thing he was apparently not supposed to do when 
I was around, not even in passing. 
Their hypersensitivity made me mad. Did they 
think the memory would mess me up? Couldn't 
they see me getting stronger? Couldn't they tell 
I'd be fine? 
"Tobias, what's your take?" Jake said, break-
ing the silence. "You know more about her than 
anyone." 
What was my take, now that I wasn't locked in 
a cage, waiting to be tortured? Rachel looked at 
me. Her eyes gave me strength. 
<Power,> I said, suddenly knowing the truth. 
<Power is the one thing in the world I know Tay-
lor wants. Using me to get Visser Three must 
strike her as irresistible irony.> 
"Know what would be even more irresist-
ible?" Marco added. "Get Visser Three and the 
Andalite bandits both killed in the process. Two 
birds, one stone." 
39 

Rachel nodded. "Marco has a point. An irony 
in itself." 
"We've had other chances to get Visser Three 
and we've blown them," Jake said. "We might not 
get a shot like this again. Can we afford to pass 
it up?" 
<Civil war means Yeerk against Yeerk,> Ax ob-
served. <lt means confusion, betrayal within en-
emy ranks, a foe distracted by internal strife. It is 
a unique opportunity.> 
"Right," Marco agreed. "Capitalize on the 
chaos. Divide and conquer." 
"We tried that, remember?" Rachel said. 
"The time we pretended to help Visser One de-
stroy Visser Three. It didn't go over real well." 
"This is different," Marco replied flatly. "It's 
not about my mother this time. It's not personal." 
Not personal? Marco didn't know how wrong 
he was. 
"Tobias," Jake said. "I still think this should 
be your call." He looked up at my perch on the 
rafter. "Do we deal with Taylor or not?" 
I looked away from the group, out through the 
loft window. Out at the moon, gigantic on the 
horizon. 
People have told me that when the moon fills 
the sky like that, when it looms huge like a glow-
in-the-dark beach ball, it's really just an illusion. 
It's your mind playing tricks on you. And it's true. 
40 
If you look at the moon through a camera lens, 
it's just a dinky dot in the sky. Our minds make it 
bigger than it is. 
<She's dangerous,> I said after a moment, 
<but if we face her together. . .> 
I stopped. What if Taylor was all I knew she 
was and worse? I looked back at the orange-white 
moon. I knew it was just an illusion, but I 
couldn't take my eyes off it, immense and amaz-
ing. 
<l don't know,> \ said finally. <But I think we 
have to deal.> 
Win or lose, / had to deal. 
41 

I he freak and geek club. The middle of the 
night, deep in the forest. Four kids and a bird 
crowded around a laptop salvaged from a Dump-
ster and repaired by an alien kid and friend, Ax. 
An Andalite and brother of Elfangor. Ax's four-
teen fingers deftly powered up the unit and di-
aled up the Internet. 
"Ax, this is way cool," Rachel whispered, "but 
how did you do it? A cell phone? Internet access? 
That's more allowance than I'll ever see." 
"You mean because Macy's has you on that 
pesky outfit-per-week plan?" Marco sneered. 
"I'd like to think that an Andalite who once 
made contact with his home world could arrange 
Web access," Jake said. 
42 
<lt has not been easy,> Ax said somberly. He 
was using an old car battery for power. All the 
wires and tape patches spilling from the jerry-
rigged setup made Ax look pretty clever to me. <l 
reconditioned several other discarded computing 
modules and sold them to Computer Renais-
sance. I thought the money would be sufficient. I 
did not know that cell phones and Net access re-
quire a credit card.> 
"The bank wasn't reassured by the whole 
'unemployed alien' aspect of your application?" 
Marco said. 
"That's right," Cassie said. "So I'm helping 
him. You know the cell phone I'm supposed to 
take with me, for emergencies only? Well, Dad 
made a deal with me. I can talk for half an hour a 
week if I do Saturday morning meds." I watched 
her locate the cell phone. It was opened up and 
tangled in a nest of wires. "Ax, you can put that 
back together, right?" she said, a bit nervously. 
<l assure you, Cassie, I know what I am do-
ings The screen dimmed and revived. Rachel 
raised an eyebrow. But then, sure enough, the 
AOL welcome screen loaded. 
"Excellent," Marco said, smiling. "Oh, wait, 
wait! The James Bond home page! Play the 
teaser trailer. Ax. Listen to me!" 
Ax ignored him and typed in the address to 
Taylor's Web page: http://www.EarthlsOurs.com. 
43 

We got a message. "The URL cannot be 
found." 
<l do not understand. If this address existed, 
we would have located it,> Ax explained. 
"Uh, Ax-man?" Marco pointed to the flicker-
ing screen and sounded out the address. "You 
typed Earth-l-saurus.com. You made it a dino. 
It's Earth-ls-Ours." 
<Perhaps fourteen fingers are four too many.> 
Ax, being uncharacteristically funny. He typed in 
the right address. 
Taylor's Web page took a while to download and 
the image was fuzzy at first. Slowly, the screen 
became clearer. It was a picture of the earth from 
outer space, a beautiful blue-green sphere cov-
ered with clouds. There was a caption, "Triumph 
will be ours," and a box to send a message. 
Ax waited for my dictation. I thought about 
what to say. I wanted to intimidate her, cut her 
down to size, make her wonder if we'd bite, make 
her worry that we wouldn't. I wanted ambiguity. I 
wanted to see her squirm. 
In the end, all I wrote was, "Okay, we'll play." 
Jake signed off with the word "Bandits." Ax 
clicked "send." 
And then we waited. The others took turns 
playing minesweeper and solitaire. This time, 
Ax's extra fingers somehow gave him an edge. 
Taylor's reply came an hour later. "No time to 
44 
lose," it read. "The plan is to attack and seize 
the 'Pool.' Your special skills are needed. Meet 
me in a public place. Let's say Borders book-
store. The wildlife section seems appropriate." 
Everyone spoke at the same time. 
"Seize the Yeerk pool?" Jake repeated. 
"An attack?" Cassie. 
"I'm there!" Rachel, of course. 
"The wildlife section!" Marco. 
<The computer has, as you say, crashed,> Ax 
announced coolly. 
"We'll need a human morph that won't give 
us away," Marco echoed. "It ain't gonna be Ax. 
He attracts too many girls. And of course I can't 
go. Same reason." 
"Guys," I said, half-scared, half-thrilled by 
the meaning of my words, "I just happen to have 
the perfect morph." 
Six hours later, when its doors opened, I 
strolled into Borders bookshop. Strode past piles 
of self-help books and tiers of best-sellers. De-
spite Rachel's objections and Marco's security 
concerns, Jake had let me go. I needed to be the 
one to deal with Taylor. Jake knew that. 
But even Jake had some reservations about 
this morph. About the victim becoming the vic-
timizer. So for a variety of security reasons, 
watching from various stations both in and out-
side the store, were my friends. 
45 

Two seagulls on the roof, Ax and Cassie, 
watching the front door and the sky. A fluffy cat, 
prowling the back alley, keeping an eye on the 
back door. In the magazine section, a short kid 
with pants as wide as a tent, huge bug-eyed sun-
glasses, headphones, and a knit ski cap disguis-
ing nine-tenths of his face. And in a stall in the 
men's room, waiting for a signal, Jake, ready to 
provide immediate firepower if necessary. 
Rachel chose the outfit, so I was dressed to 
kill. And I would have looked great in rags. See, 
morphing uses DNA, and I'd morphed her body 
as it would have been before the fire, before the 
accident. No artificial arm. No reconstructed 
beauty. 
I was a cover girl who could give even An-
gelina Jolie a run for her money. I was . . . 
"Taylor," I said easily, coming up behind the 
tall blond wandering the wildlife section. She 
spun around, surprised and off guard. Her mouth 
dropped open. She was face-to-face with herself. 
And for a second, I'd trumped her. She was 
mine. 
"That's clever," she conceded, recovering 
quickly like a good detached Yeerk should. "Yeah, 
a nice touch. But how? Is there some new, im-
proved Andalite morphing technology that allows 
you to acquire while in morph?" 
I smiled on the outside. On the inside, I 
46 
seized up. I'd just given myself away. But she'd 
never figure it out. Would she? She'd never know 
the whole story, that my true form was hawk, that 
I was no Andalite. But already, I'd given her more 
than I'd wanted to. 
I searched the brain of my new body for a 
savvy reply. A strategic comeback. I searched it 
for the ruthless, crushing Yeerk. What I found 
was gentleness, fear, and joy. Very little cunning. 
Almost no hate. The human Taylor had once been 
an average kid. Like me. Like I'd been. 
The realization steeled me against the ner-
vousness that gnawed at my stomach. 
"You're not the only ones with scientists," I 
said guardedly. 
She accepted that answer. We walked toward 
the cafe. 
47 

The high school kid behind the counter 
stared wide-eyed. One, make that two very at-
tractive girls were closing in on him. 
"Uh, what can I get you?" he asked shakily. 
"Decaf latte with skim," Taylor purred. 
The kid turned to take my order. I smiled and 
he almost fell over. It was crazy to have such 
power. I'd been on the receiving end before. I'd 
just never been the source. Is this what Rachel 
experienced? Was this part of what made her so 
brave? 
"Triple espresso. Heavy on the cream and the 
sugar." 
Taylor turned to me. "You dare abuse my 
body, you filthy grass eater?" 
48 
The kid raised his eyebrows. "Grass?" he said. 
"I can juice you some wheat grass, but that's all 
we have." 
Taylor glared at the boy. I laughed. We were 
mirror images, literal carbon copies. But I was 
alive. Taylor wasn't. Not really. I had a sense of hu-
mor. Taylor had a coldness that enclosed her like 
a shield. The kid could see this. Anybody could. 
We brought our drinks to a table and sat in 
opposing chairs. Three college kids were study-
ing together nearby, but out of earshot. A writer 
was reading her work to an enraptured public 
thirty feet away. Salsa music spilled out of the 
speakers. 
Taylor gripped her mug like it was the enemy. 
"I suppose you want details," she said icily. 
"Of course." 
"Listen carefully," she began, her voice 
hushed. "There's a natural gas pipeline, a large 
one, that runs a half mile from the Yeerk pool. 
We need to dig a connecting tunnel from that 
pipeline to the pool." 
"Why?" 
Taylor huffed, arrogant and exasperated. "So 
that the pipe can be ruptured. So that thousands 
of tons of natural gas will spew into the Yeerk 
pool complex. And so that the gas, when ex-
ploded, will kill everyone exposed. The hosts. 
TheYeerks." 
49 

It was a disgusting plan. It was even more 
horrible than I expected. 
I took a sip of coffee, to keep it looking nat-
ural. Twin teens, probably comparing notes on 
last night's dates. "That's what you call a giant 
leap for democracy? I don't get it. You want to 
end the violence with a big bang of your own? 
You think the violence will end there?" 
"Surely you see that we need a bargaining 
chip," Taylor replied. "We have to take control of 
the place and oust Visser Three. We have to get 
some leverage. Without this plan — if the rebels 
tried a more peaceful protest — the Yeerks in or-
bit would oppose us. But if the plan works, we 
have a Yeerk pool full of hostages. They couldn't 
attack us without putting their own at risk." 
"That never stopped you Yeerks before," I re-
torted. 
"Well, the Yeerks in orbit have to feed, don't 
they?" she shot back angrily. "There's no way 
around that. Within three days every Yeerk will 
need Kandrona rays. They will be forced to ac-
cept rebel leadership. If they want to survive." 
I forced a false tone of admiration. A little 
flattery wouldn't hurt with this egomaniacal Yeerk. 
"This plan is your brainchild, isn't it? It's brutal, 
ruthless. Brilliant, really." 
"You know me well, Andalite." A smile washed 
over her face. 
50 
But then, suddenly, her face transformed. All 
at once, her blue eyes filled with desperation. 
Her pink lips parted in wordless horror. A different 
voice, a frightened, abused little voice, called 
across the table in a toneless whisper. 
"Don't listen," it said. "Don't listen to her!" 
I sat transfixed as Taylor's hand blazed across 
the tabletop, crashing into her latte, smashing 
the mug to the floor. There was a huge racket as 
ceramic clattered across tile. 
The writer stopped her public reading. The 
students raised their heads. The salsa music 
trumpeted on. 
"Miss, are you okay?" The high school kid 
was instantly at Taylor's side. She was crouched 
on the floor, her head in her arms. A second 
passed. Two seconds. Silence. On the third, her 
head snapped up. 
"I'm fine," she said, climbing back into her 
chair. "Get me a refill." Her face was strong again, 
controlled. And I knew what I'd just seen. 
Taylor the Yeerk had a rigid command over 
her host body. No longer did she let her human 
speak independently. No. Somehow, she'd sev-
ered their collaboration. Except they'd been part-
ners for so long, the host could still break in, on 
occasion. Taylor the girl could still break in. Did 
break in . . . 
Why? Why would the Yeerk watt until this mo-
51 

ment to fully enslave her host? She claimed to 
be interested in democracy and peace. It didn't 
compute. 
"Any questions?" Taylor inquired, as if noth-
ing had happened. As if the conversation hadn't 
been disrupted by a distinctly Yeerk version of 
multiple personality disorder. 
"Yeah," I said. "First one. A natural gas ex-
plosion as large as the one you're planning will 
collapse the Yeerk pool. And the city built above 
it. It will devastate everything for miles." 
"My allies are in control of the pumping sta-
tion," Taylor answered calmly. "The amount of gas 
will be carefully controlled. The Yeerk pool will 
not collapse." 
"Fine. Question two. Just how do you plan to 
tunnel through the earth, from the pipeline to the 
pool?" 
"I don't. That's where you come in." 
"That's absurd," I laughed. "No earth animal, 
no morph we Andalites have, could do that kind 
of job in less than weeks. And even then, it would 
just be a tiny tunnel. Not nearly enough to move 
the volume of gas you're talking about." 
"That's why I selected an animal for you to 
morph that can do the job in hours, not days or 
weeks." Her lips curled into a devilish smile. 
"You always underestimate me, Andalite." 
52 
"What morph?" I asked. She wrapped the fin-
gers of her artificial hand around my arm and 
started to squeeze. 
"I have a morph that will leave behind a tun-
nel at least as large in circumference as the pipe 
itself." 
"What morph?" I repeated. 
"Taxxon, my Andalite friend. Taxxon!" 
53 

"Is she insane?" Marco cried. He'd ditched 
the ski cap and sunglasses but the headphones 
still hung around his neck. 
"Yes. I believe we established that during our 
last encounter." Ax, of course. He'd gone from 
seagull to Andalite to eerily attractive human boy 
in a Dumpster conveniently located behind the 
bookstore. 
"Taxxon! I'd rather morph E. colt. I'd rather 
morph an ant again." 
"That's kind of what Taxxons are like, isn't 
it?" Jake said. "Brainless, driven, starved." 
"Who knows?" Rachel shrugged impatiently. 
In the time between demorphing from cat and 
joining the rest of us, Rachel had slipped into 
54 
The Gap and bought a couple of T-shirts. No moss 
grows on that girl. "But I can handle it. I'm in." 
"Whoa." Cassie held up an arm. "Wait a 
minute. Who says we're even gonna do this?" 
I'd demorphed in the Borders bathroom. Jake 
had left a bag of clothing behind a trash con-
tainer. I remorphed as my human self, and crossed 
the street to the mall. Now I sat in the food court 
listening to my friends freak out. 
"When do we have to give her an answer?" 
Jake asked me. 
"We don't. We just show up at the natural gas 
pumping facility tonight. Or we don't." 
"Answer me this," Marco said, rolling a plas-
tic straw between his palms. "If Taxxons are all 
Controllers, why doesn't She-Yeerk just ask a fel-
low Controller with a Taxxon host to do the dig-
ging?" 
I explained. "She says Yeerks are only ever 
partly in control of their Taxxon hosts. It's impos-
sible to master the Taxxon hunger, the murderous 
tendencies, the cannibalistic urges. Taxxon hosts 
are given only to low-ranking Yeerks and, big sur-
prise, soon they're more Taxxon than Yeerk." 
"But I've seen them take orders. I've watched 
Taxxons move on command," Marco persisted. 
"They fly Bug fighters for. . ." 
"Right. But no one would ever trust a Taxxon 
to be part of a conspiracy. You can't count on a 
55 

guy who'll sell out for a chunk of rotting meat. 
Most of her allies are human-Controllers, any-
way," I added. 
Ax broke in. "I was once told that controlling 
a Taxxon morph is like facing the ultimate temp-
tation. Tay-shun. The more you resist the tempta-
tion, the stronger it becomes, until it ends by 
carrying you so far beyond the realm of con-
scious, controllable thought you become lost in 
the Taxxon's most basic instincts." 
"Well then, what am I waiting for?" Marco 
said sarcastically. "Sign me up! An army of cold, 
power-hungry Yeerks can't control the Taxxons. 
Not to worry. The short kid who got a B-minus in 
gym won't have any problems." 
Rachel smirked. "You got a B-minus in 
gym?" 
Marco rolled his eyes and looked exasperated. 
"People, if the Yeerks can't control a Taxxon, how 
in the world can we?" 
"Taylor says we'd only stay morphed for short 
periods," I said, feeling like her press secretary. 
Like part of her team. It was definitely weird. 
"And we'd morph one at a time, surrounded by 
enough force to control any out-of-control behav-
ior." 
Jake frowned. Marco looked skeptical. Cassie's 
eyes were darkening with some serious issues. 
56 
We all needed to think. Ax wanted to eat. So, 
Marco and Jake volunteered to get food. 
Cassie, Rachel, and Ax sat silently. I looked 
around. It was Friday, so the food court was 
crowded. Packed with a bunch of normal people, 
leading normal lives. Ordinary, mundane, won-
derful lives. All these normal people — moms 
and dads, kids and grandparents — represented 
the very thing we were fighting for. Humanity. 
Marco returned and set nachos for me and Ax 
on the table. I wasn't very hungry. I wasn't used 
to eating with others around and there were 
people everywhere. Very different from my life as 
a hawk. When you're a hawk, you get nervous 
when you can't feed in peace. Someone could 
swoop in and steal your dinner. Or someone 
could swoop in and eat you. 
Jake reappeared and placed a large plastic 
tray piled with two hamburgers, three fries, a 
veggie wrap, and three large plastic cups on the 
table. 
"Cassie, veggie wrap and orange soda," he 
said, handing her one of the cups and the sand-
wich. "7-up, Rachel. Coke, me. So," he added, 
sitting, "where are we?" 
"Seems clear enough to me," Rachel said 
with a mouth half-stuffed with hamburger. "De-
stroying the Yeerk pool can only be a good thing. 
57 

It's the chance we've been waiting for. It could 
be the beginning of the end." She paused and 
swallowed. "Let's fry some Yeerk butt." 
"I agree with Rachel," Ax said, looking up 
from the plastic Radio Shack bag he was rum-
maging through and reaching for a tub of nachos. 
"Strategically speaking, this is a very interesting 
opportunity. Even in spite of the risk." 
Jake looked up at me with an encouraging 
nod. 
"Just remember, she can't be trusted," I re-
minded everyone. "She . . . " I paused. The oth-
ers were looking at me like they were being extra 
careful to be polite. Just like at the barn, they 
were waiting for me to finish. No interruptions. 
No snide remarks. 
The Borders meeting should have proved to 
them that I was over the fear! I'd handled it fine. 
I wasn't the one who'd broken down. 
I tried to sound extra calm and sure of myself 
so they would stop worrying, stop doubting. "Even 
if she doesn't have it in for us, our work is only 
going to make her more power hungry. You can 
count on it. It's not like she's suddenly had a 
change of heart. That democracy stuff has got to 
be BS." 
"Absolutely," Marco said. "A free Yeerk soci-
ety? Give me a break. Let's just imagine the sce-
nario for a second. Everyone in favor of having 
58 
his free will replaced by a slimy, stinking slug 
that will take over his brain, say, 'yea.' Those op-
posed say, 'nay.'" 
"Okay," Jake interrupted. "We get it. We all 
admit that Taylor can't be trusted. Marco and To-
bias saw her lose it at Borders. She's obviously 
got some problems. But even given the weird-
ness, I think we agree this could be one of the 
most important missions we've had." 
59 

No one said anything. Silent agreement. 
Except for Cassie. 
Her eyes got wide. She began to stand up. 
"None of you guys are really thinking about 
this," she said in a voice that made a couple of 
older kids sitting at the table next to ours look up. 
"Shhh." 
"No," she said. "It's wrong. I won't. I don't 
want to judge you guys, but you're talking about 
strategy and risk like this is some computer 
game. Like there aren't others involved. Have you 
forgotten that we're supposed to be in this to 
save lives?" 
Jake put his hand on her shoulder and gently 
60 
encouraged her to sit back down. No one seemed 
to know what to say. She continued. She spoke 
very quietly, but urgently. 
"Has anyone stopped to think that we'll be 
responsible for the death of hundreds, maybe 
thousands of people? People who already suffer 
the worst fate imaginable? And not that any of 
you care, but we'll be killing thousands of de-
fenseless Yeerks right along with them." 
"My God, you mean we'd be killing Yeerks?" 
Marco said with a straight face. "That's... 
that's unthinkable!" 
No one laughed. 
"Let her finish," Rachel whispered. 
"They're not all like Visser Three," Cassie went 
on. "We know that. Some of the Yeerks and Con-
trollers are just kids like us. They never had a 
choice. They participate or they're eliminated. 
And it's not like they get the information they 
need to make an informed decision. If you'd been 
raised since birth on empire propaganda, you'd 
fight to take over Earth, too." 
"You make an interesting argument," Ax said 
through a mouthful of nachos. "But there are a 
lot of inconsistencies between what you say and 
what you do." He swallowed noisily. "How can 
you make this argument knowing what you've 
done in the past?" 
61 

"That's different," Cassie responded forcefully. 
"I'm not against defending myself and you guys. 
I hate violence, but self-defense is justified, in 
all societies. Unlike murdering people . . ." 
"Killing slugs," Marco corrected. 
"Killing Yeerks when they're defenseless, 
when they're not engaged in battle, when they're 
not actively threatening our lives . . . no! You 
don't. . . why can't you . . . can't you see!" She 
stopped. I could almost feel the passion radiat-
ing from her body. "It's . . . it's just not right." 
"But they are threatening our lives," Rachel 
insisted. "Not just ours, everyone's. Just by being 
who they are." 
"Yeah, and why do you think they're at the 
Yeerk pool?" Marco put in. "I can tell you this 
much. It's not because they're planning Earth 
Day activities. 
"Look, during World War Two we bombed fac-
tories and highways and railroads. Even regular 
cities. Just because someone's not wearing a 
uniform or carrying a weapon doesn't mean 
they're not fighting a war. I know this plan is 
bad, Cassie, but we've gotta think of the big pic-
ture." He looked at her and touched her shoulder 
again. 
"Yes," Ax said calmly. "The Yeerk pool is a 
command and control center. It is central to 
62 
Yeerk military activity. They recharge there so 
they can continue their conquest." 
"Not true," Cassie insisted, regaining her 
voice. She leaned forward. "What about Tidwell, 
and others like him in the peace movement? 
They have to go to the pool because they'll die if 
they don't feed. For them, it's no different than 
eating." 
"The peace movement Yeerks are a small mi-
nority," Jake countered coldly. "We can't really 
consider them, except maybe to warn them." 
"Not consider them!" Cassie repeated disbe-
lievingly. "What if your brother's at the pool when 
the gas explodes?" 
Jake looked at his hands. "I guess it's a sac-
rifice I have to deal with in order to protect 
thousands more," Jake said, his voice now ex-
pressionless. 
"Jake, I don't believe you!" 
"You should," he said, looking back to Cassie. 
To me. "Besides, family involvement doesn't really 
come into play here. It can't. The Yeerk pool is a 
target. End of discussion. It's not like we're bomb-
ing a bunch of innocent people at the mall on a 
Friday afternoon . . . " 
Again, I looked at the people all around us. 
Families, couples, kids like us. Enjoying them-
selves. Here to see a movie, meet their friends, 
63 

shop for clothes. They'd done the jobs they had 
to do at work or at school. Now was their chance 
to relax. Have fun. 
Cassie looked around the food court, too, and 
then back at Jake. 
"Isn't it?" 
64 
That's pretty much when Cassie decided she 
couldn't do it. She decided to sit the mission 
out. I admired her. I even thought about pulling 
out myself. 
But who would be around to figure out Taylor? 
Who would be there to watch for sabotage? I'm 
not really sure how or why we decided I was the 
best one for the job. But I decided to do it. 
Early that evening Ax and I flew together, an 
owl and a red-tailed hawk, high up into the night 
sky so we could get a good look at the place be-
fore we landed. We wanted to be as sure as possi-
ble that we weren't flying into a trap. The natural 
gas pumping station came into view. 
65 

<The coast appears to be clear,> Ax relayed. 
<Why do humans refer to the "coast" when talk-
ing about a precarious situation?> 
<l don't know,> I said. <lt's just what we 
say.> 
There wasn't anything within a half mile of 
the structure. Just trees and bushes. I swooped 
low to check out an abandoned van left a few 
hundred feet from the pumping station. No hid-
den group of Hork-Bajir waiting for us. 
The pumping station was pretty small, just a 
square building almost as big as a house. Secu-
rity lights brightened it like a baseball stadium 
just before a night game. The lights made my 
hawk vision work almost as well as the owl's. 
Through the few windows, I could see a maze of 
pipes. 
We landed on the ground behind a line of 
heavy brush. It's hard to land directly on the 
ground. It's easier when you can grab on to some-
thing with your talons. I skidded a little. Ax was 
right behind me. 
<Well, Ax-man, I guess it's now or never — 
and, boy, do I wish it was never,> I said. 
I morphed and Ax demorphed. Two identical 
blue aliens began to sprout from the bushes. I 
like the way Andalite morph feels. It's about 
strength and agility. A focused yet playful mind. 
66 
An unwavering optimism that's invaluable when 
you're up against pure evil. 
We finished morphing and Ax trotted up be-
side me. His main eyes studied me. His stalk 
eyes scanned the area around us. Then, sud-
denly, his tail snapped and zipped across the 
blue-and-tan fur on my chest. 
<Hey, watch it! What are you doing?> 
<l am removing portions of your fur. We call it 
"unschweet." I believe you say haircut. I must 
make you look less like my genetic double.> 
<Fine,> I said. <But be careful. No razor 
burn.> 
<When an Andalite warrior is reprimanded for 
his conduct,> Ax continued, <a superior officer 
removes some of the offender's fur so that the 
transgression is not soon forgotten. In the ritual 
of unschweet, the wrongdoer is not punished in 
the traditional sense. He must live with the con-
stant reminder of his error, and the scrutiny of 
his peers. As his fur grows back, he is slowly re-
deemed until, finally, the incident is laid to rest 
and the warrior is whole again.> 
<l've had bad haircuts before but I never 
knew what to call them. So Ax, do I deserve un-
schweet? > 
<No,> Ax answered. <But it is the only way I 
know to cut fur. Sorry.> 
67 

<lt's cool. Let's just get this over with.> 
We walked cautiously toward the pumping 
station, staying out of the brightest lights and 
watching our backs with our stalk eyes. A tall cy-
clone fence topped with barbed wire ran all 
around the structure, but the rear gate was open 
a crack. Someone was expecting us. 
I pointed a slender finger toward the gate. 
Ax moved out in front. An eerie squeak cut 
the still air as we slipped through the gate. 
We moved quickly toward the shadows that 
clung to the wall of the building. 
"Evening, boys." 
She stepped out of nowhere. A dark, human 
form with a voice that sent chills down my spine. 
It was Taylor. 
"Nice to see you. I've been waiting." 
She'd been there the whole time. I couldn't 
believe it. We'd been so careful. How had we 
missed her? 
She was wearing dark leather from head to 
toe. Tall boots that came up to her knees. Her 
long blond hair was tucked into a high leather 
collar. It was a new look. Good-bye preppy. Hello 
soldier. We stared. 
"I'm not here to be gawked at. I'm here to de-
liver a present," she sneered. "I know how much 
you both like Taxxons. I found a choice one — 
68 
very big, very mean — to show my appreciation 
for your help. Follow me." 
She disappeared into the pumping station. Ax 
followed her. I followed Ax. 
We had to duck low to clear some of the pipes. 
The noise was unbearable, a constant clanging 
that made my head hurt. Taylor descended a 
twisting metal ramp into the basement. We fol-
lowed, stepping carefully on the slick surface. 
Downstairs it was considerably darker, though 
there were fewer pipes. Taylor stopped in a cor-
ner of the room and gestured to an iron handle 
protruding from the smooth concrete floor. Then 
she backed up, leaned against the wall, and 
crossed her arms over her chest. 
"He's in there." 
Ax and I looked more carefully. The iron han-
dle was attached to a large slab of concrete set 
into the floor. 
<This is it,> I said to Ax. Trying to forget I was 
in the same room with the monster who'd come 
close to destroying what little peace of mind I'd 
ever had. I bent down and grabbed the iron han-
dle with my relatively weak Andalite arm. It didn't 
budge. 
<l will assist you,> Ax announced. Together 
we pulled with all our strength. The slab rose 
out of the floor. With great effort, we set it to one 
69 

side. A snort from below sent us both jumping 
back. 
"How cute," Taylor said. "You're scared." 
<We are not frightened,> Ax said coldly. <We 
are cautious.> He stepped up to the hole and 
peered inside. <l see no sign of the Taxxon.> 
Taylor tilted her head to one side and looked 
at Ax mockingly. "Then go get him, silly." 
70 
The cavern was dark. I could just make out 
the bottom, about ten feet away. It seemed to 
curve slightly. I guessed it was a tank, an old fuel 
storage reservoir or something. 
The last thing I wanted to do was jump into a 
dark tank with a Taxxon waiting to eat me. 
Again, Ax led the way. If he wasn't fearless, 
he was putting on a good show. 
<lt is a long way down, Tobias,> he called 
from below. <Bend your knees on impact.> 
Taylor was watching, her beautiful face wear-
ing the look of perpetual disdain she'd perfected. 
I couldn't let her see my fear. I hopped over the 
edge and braced for impact. 
WHAAAMMM! 
71 

My hooves hit hard on the concrete bottom. 
Damp darkness enveloped me. I could just make 
out Ax at my side. 
<Where is he?> I asked. <What if there's no 
Taxxon at all? What if it's a trap?> I thought of 
the others waiting outside, hidden in various 
morphs, watching. They were ready to storm the 
place if we got into trouble. But how long would 
it take them to reach us? I looked up and imag-
ined being sealed in the tank. But then I remem-
bered that Taylor couldn't lift the cover alone. 
Or could she? How strong was that artificial 
arm? 
It didn't matter. No. Between the two of us, 
Ax and I could probably come up with a few 
morphs that would get us out. But that comfort-
ing thought came too late to stop my hearts from 
racing. We stared into darkness, searching for 
the Taxxon. 
Before he found us. 
Ax moved forward and disappeared. I strained 
to catch sight of him in the blackness. I saw 
slight movement to my right. 
<ls that you, Ax?> I reached out to make sure 
of where he stood and . . . 
<Ahhhhhhh!> 
Agony shot up my arm. 
<Ax!> 
The Taxxon bit down hard. A thousand razor 
72 
teeth shredded my flesh and muscle. He didn't 
sever my arm and have a quick snack. No. He 
sucked with iron jaws. Pulling me in. Dragging 
me closer to his stomach. 
I swung my tail blade, but lost my balance on 
the smooth, curved floor. My hooves skidded 
wildly as the vile mouth chewed. I was caught in 
a slow-motion wood chipper! 
Glowing red eyes, inching toward me . . . 
I whipped my tail blade frantically, slashing 
the blackness, missing the Taxxon. The force of 
his jaws would rip off my arm! 
<Ax!> 
FWAP! 
Razor teeth withdrew and I stumbled back, 
clutching my mutilated arm. I looked up. Dizzy. 
III. 
<Hurry,> Ax said. <We must move quickly. I 
fear I have mortally wounded the Taxxon.> 
Stupefying pain throbbed in what was left of 
my arm. I backed away. I could feel a wet, sticky 
ooze beneath my hooves. The Taxxon's vital fluids 
were spilling across the bottom of the tank. 
I bent down. Reached out my good hand and 
touched the Taxxon's side. His soft side heaved 
laboriously, up and down, as he struggled to 
breathe. Yes, he was dying. 
I could see Ax in the faint light, already ac-
quiring him. I began to demorph. When the tran-
73 

sition was complete, I reached out a talon and 
placed it on the disgusting flesh. 
I could feel life draining from his body, and 
the firm folds of bloated tissue collapsing like a 
torn hot air balloon. I concentrated on the acqui-
sition. 
Usually, you don't feel anything about an 
animal while you acquire it. This time, I sensed 
something. Fierce and elemental, like a scream 
of rage. 
I finished acquiring the Taxxon's DNA. And 
realized there was something inside me unlike 
anything I had ever known. 
Maybe it was just my own tormented mind at 
work. Or maybe it really was the DNA, screaming 
at me on some microscopic level. It was some-
thing terrible. 
Something dangerous. 
A tortured shudder moved the length of the 
Taxxon's body, from head to tail and back again. 
He shook for one violent instant, then stopped. 
And I realized that he now lived only in Ax 
and me. 
74 
<It's sure enough about time, Bird-boy.> 
Marco's thought-speak greeted me at about three 
hundred feet. He was flying in, too, and was just 
as late as I was. It was dawn. We were both work-
ing hard to stay up in the cool air. 
<Enjoying a leisurely breakfast while the rest 
of us get ready to work?> he continued. 
Actually, breakfast was why I was late. This 
morning, the meadow had been unusually still. 
Not a field mouse anywhere. Kind of ominous, 
like they knew something I didn't. Like they knew 
it was better to stay at home. 
I'd set out hungry, but along the way I'd spot-
ted a gray squirrel. It was bigger than I like, but 
food is all I think about. In nature, in my world, 
75 

hunger doesn't just mean you'll be crabby in the 
car on the way to Taco Bell. It carries undertones 
of death. 
I'd dived, silent and swift. With wide-open 
talons I snatched it, unsuspecting, from the 
power line it was making its way across. The 
squirrel was heavier than I'd guessed. It yanked 
on my legs, sent me tumbling for the ground. I 
held tight. I even regained control, feet above the 
ground, flapping like mad to stay aloft. 
But then, the squirrel's teeth pierced my leg. 
Sharp pain from the incision shot to my brain. I 
released one talon and let go of my would-be 
breakfast. 
<Some of us actually have to work for our 
food,> I called to Marco. <But then, it's probably 
a huge deal for you to get the Pop-Tart in the 
toaster. > 
I landed gently on a tree branch. Marco was 
already demorphing. The others had gathered a 
few feet away. All but Ax, who was hiding in the 
thick grass, keeping an eye on the pumping sta-
tion. 
Jake had changed plans on Taylor at the last 
minute. He had to balance the danger of not hav-
ing her accounted for as we dug with the risk of 
having our true identities discovered when we 
demorphed. 
So Jake had let Taylor know, by E-mail, that 
76 
she couldn't come within a mile of the dig or the 
pumping station before 8:00 A.M. If she did, the 
deal was off. When she did show up, she had to 
hang with us as we dug. 
She had agreed to Jake's conditions with an 
eagerness I found disconcerting. I didn't mention 
it to the others. I knew it was nerves. 
I could see the manhole cover next to where 
the others were standing. It was partly covered 
with sand and stuck out above the ground a few 
inches. This was a good place to work, with little 
chance of being seen. We weren't far from the 
pumping station but were concealed by trees 
and brush on all sides. Taylor knew what she was 
doing. 
The sewer cap was in a cul-de-sac, on the 
side of a gravel road that hadn't been paved. The 
concrete curbs were in place and the gravel was 
carefully compacted a few inches below, ready 
for a layer of asphalt. It had been this way for a 
while. The site was supposed to be a new indus-
trial park. But local residents didn't want the 
noise and the traffic, so construction had been 
temporarily stopped, leaving sewers and electric-
ity, but little else. 
"Your left talon's bleeding," Rachel said. 
I didn't answer at first. I didn't feel like ex-
plaining. But Rachel's concern was genuine. It 
wasn't fair to blow her off. 
77 

<Breakfast sometimes bites back,> I an-
swered. 
"You're telling me," Marco broke in. "I was 
looking in the toaster to see if my Pop-Tart was 
done and wham, the thing shot out and hit me in 
the eye." 
<l'll be fine,> I said, looking Rachel's way. 
"Let me have a look," Cassie said. She was 
still adamant about not going on this mission, 
but she wanted to know where we were digging. 
In case we didn't come back. 
Cassie's being there was a little awkward. 
Maybe least so for me, I don't know. She wasn't 
there to wish us luck. And although Jake always 
gives us the option, it's really rare that one of us 
decides not to fight. 
"You should morph to fix the cut," Jake said. 
"That thing's going to get infected. So I guess 
you'll go first." 
I'd go first? That slammed me into the reality 
I'd been trying to avoid. I wasn't looking forward 
to the work that lay ahead. Or to the creature I 
had to become. 
<The time is now 7:50.> Ax came trotting out 
of the bushes and stopped next to Jake. <The 
pumping station is clear, Prince Jake. We should 
start diggings 
Ax was wearing a Timex Triathlon timepiece 
around his front ankle. Rachel had picked it out 
78 
for him. He feared that his internal clock might 
be thrown off by the power of the Taxxon morph. 
He and I were going to take turns wearing it while 
Andalite. 
He moved briskly to the manhole cover, stuck 
the tip of his tail blade in the small hole intended 
for the crowbar and, with one swift, fluid twist of 
his tail, sent the fifty-pound steel cap tumbling 
through the air. It landed with dull resonance 
inches from Jake's feet. 
"Smooth," Jake commented dryly. "You should 
work for the city." 
I dropped from my perch to the edge of the 
hole. I could see that at the bottom of an eight-
foot shaft was a cylindrical chamber. 
<l think I'll morph when I get down there,> I 
said. <Wouldn't want to be responsible for any-
one spewing their breakfast.> 
I hopped over the edge of the hole into the 
darkness, falling slowly, with partially open wings. 
A real hawk would never drop into such a tight 
space. I could feel the raptor's anxiety. I landed 
softly on the surface of the curved concrete. 
"Take it easy, Tobias," Jake encouraged. "Nice 
and steady. If you have problems, we're here." 
<Remember that you may not be able to 
control it like other morphs,> Ax instructed. <lt 
might be too overwhelming to suppress. The few 
Andalites who have successfully used the Taxxon 
79 

morph speak of becoming one with the animals 
nature, of channeling the violent energy. It can-
not be stopped. But you can try to direct it. Use 
it, do not try to overcome it> 
"I'm right here, Tobias," Rachel called. 
"Be careful." Cassie. "And . . . I'll see you guys 
later." 
"Tobias . . ." Jake began. 
<l can handle it, you guys,> I said, assuring 
myself as much as my friends. <l'll be okay.> 
80 
I closed my eyes and focused on the DNA I 
carried within me. 
The changes started immediately. Continued 
concentration wasn't necessary. Once it began, 
the morph gained momentum on its own, like a 
rock dislodged from a hilltop. 
Hisssssss . . . 
I felt my bones disintegrating. No, melting. 
All the hard parts of my body — talons, beak, 
feather shafts — softened and liquefied. Usually 
when you morph, you feel the firm shape of new 
organs forming. This morph was exactly the op-
posite. Everything was dissolving, then congeal-
ing into one hideous continuum. 
I fell down on the cement as my legs melted 
81 

away, only to be lifted up again as hundreds of 
cone-shaped appendages shot out of a soft, rapidly 
extending belly. 
I was taking on the shape of a worm. Long 
and formless. 
Crystal-clear hawk vision blurred. Think about 
driving into the rain without turning on the wind-
shield wipers. Then this murky vision was traded 
for — 
Whoa! A thousand tiny fragments of my sur-
roundings. Visual shards, like a kaleidoscope im-
age with blurred edges. 
I knew that Taxxons had compound eyes, like 
flies. Each red eye is really a thousand smaller 
eyes, each scanning a small piece of the world. 
What I hadn't known was that Taxxon brains aren't 
quite sophisticated enough to put all the pieces 
together. 
The mouth formed last. The center of the 
Taxxon's existence. 
The changes stopped. 
Then, all at once, I felt it coming. An unstop-
pable tidal wave riding up the shore. 
Insane, insane hunger. 
Desperate, all-consuming hunger. Like noth-
ing you can begin to imagine. It reared up, larger 
than any urge I had ever experienced. Blocking 
out everything else. 
Everything. 
82 
I could smell the others. Up aboveground. I 
knew exactly where they stood. I heard vibrations. 
Their feet through the soil. 
I was over ten feet long. Long enough to crawl 
up and squirm through the hole. I pictured Marco. 
And the next thing I knew I imagined him in my 
mouth, his soft tan flesh, sawed up. Swallowed. 
And Ja&e. Bigger. And Ax . . . 
My worm body lunged for the hole. Before I 
could stop it. Before I could think. I didn't know 
what was happening/The smell was so strong. 
The imagined taste so real. The Taxxon mind so 
in need! 
Noxious digestive acid poured from my 
mouth. My soft head pushed against the iron 
cover Marco and Jake had put partially back in 
place. 
I would devour them. Lunge and devour. 
Marco and Jake and Ax and . . . 
Rachel. 
My Taxxon body twitched. The thought of 
even more food excited it. But something . . . 
something way in the back of my mind, way deep 
in there, spoke out. 
Rachel? 
I stopped. I heard something. The tiny, in-
significant voice of a kid. Tobias, the human in 
me, was struggling to make his presence known. 
Somewhere beneath the Taxxon's evil and unimag-
83 

inable power, the kid in me was ranting like a lu-
natic. Stop, he cried. Stop! Stop! Stop! 
I can't say that I regained control. That would 
be a lie. Like saying that the captain of a sailboat 
can take control of a storm. 
But somehow I steered the enormous beast 
away from the other Animorphs. Somehow. 
It was impossible to stop the hunger, impossi-
ble to slow it down, but Ax had told me I could 
focus it on something else. Okay. I turned it to 
the job at hand. 
We had heard that the Taxxon was a great dig-
ger. But that's not true. Not exactly. The Taxxon 
is great at one thing. Eating. 
Suddenly, ravenously, I began to devour the 
dirt beside the hole Taylor's people had jack-
hammered in the concrete pipe. I turned the full 
force of the Taxxon's hunger on the dirt. 
I was inhaling soil like I hadn't eaten in forty 
days. I bit off large chunks, coated them with di-
gestive enzymes, and swallowed the sticky gobs. 
Bite after bite. After bite after bite. The Taxxon 
was insatiable. 
In no time at all I had excavated a body-sized 
chamber. Dirt walls grew up around me as I 
lunged and gobbled and swallowed and secreted. 
That's right. Secreted. I was scarfing down 
pounds per second. I was the dump truck haul-
84 
ing away the excavated dirt. I was an all-in-one 
machine. Earthmover, waste disposal system. 
And that waste, that soil by-product, passed out 
of my Taxxon body as a thick, sludgy layer. A goo, 
that coated all surfaces of the tunnel that began 
to develop as I tried desperately to satisfy an un-
satisfiable hunger. 
"Tobias? Ugh! Man, what's that stench?" 
Jake's voice reached me as a weak distraction, a 
vague disturbance. "Tobias, are you okay down 
there?" 
I ignored him. I just kept eating. Or digging. 
Just like an earthworm, passing dirt right through 
my system to extract the organic material. Except 
that unlike an earthworm, I had a ring of razor 
teeth to speed things up. Multiply an earth-
worm's speed and size by about a million and you 
begin to get the picture. 
Except that with a Taxxon, there's no hope of 
satisfying the hunger with dirt, not even momen-
tarily. There aren't enough nutrients in the soil. 
Just enough to smell, to trigger the urge to eat. 
Just enough to keep me wanting more. 
"Look at him move!" It was Marco's voice. They 
were nearer now. They must have dropped into the 
sewer. "He can't get no . . ." Marco gasped, proba-
bly from the stink of my secretion. "Satisfaction." 
He gasped again. 
85 

The longer I dug, the hungrier and more fran-
tic I got. I didn't learn until later that a Taxxon 
will dig, starved and exhausted, until he dies. 
<Tobias,> Rachel called in thought-speak. 
She had already morphed. The others must be 
right behind her. <Answer us. Say something.> 
<More!> 
86 
< Tobias, time's up, man. Take a break. De-
morph.> 
Jake. 
The reminder of human flesh was more than I 
could resist. 
I sped backward, sloshing through the goo, 
racing toward the others. I flew out of the hole 
into the underground area. A slithering worm. 
Massive, starved, desperate. 
<Whoa,> Jake cautioned. 
<Whoahh!> Marco agreed. 
My compound eyes filled with the broken blue 
form of an Andalite, the hulking masses of a go-
rilla and a grizzly bear, the sharp stripes of a tiger. 
No pink flesh! No soft pink flesh! 
87 

I'd make do. 
The Andalite was nearest. I smelled the flesh 
under his fur, the muscles under his flesh. I was 
aware of his tail blade. It even triggered a danger 
alarm in the Taxxon mind. But the siren was faint, 
nearly insignificant. The tail blade could slash me 
in two, but I didn't care. I might get a bite in first! 
<Watch yourself, Ax-man!> Jake called. <He's 
coming at you. Tobias! Get a grip on the morph. 
Get a grip!> 
I rushed full speed at Ax. I'd body-slam him. 
Knock him to the ground. Lock my teeth in his 
skin and eat him whole! 
But then I saw something else. Something 
that made even the Taxxon stop. My legs froze. 
Taylor. Dressed in a tank top and soft, thin, 
cotton khakis. 
Her clothes would melt in my mouth. Her soft 
pink shoulders beckoned to be devoured. 
I heaved my bulk in her direction. Began to 
move toward her. Crawling. Slinking. 
"Just try, worm," she hissed, aiming a Dracon 
beam at my head, "and I'll fry you on setting 
six." 
<You gave us your word, Yeerk,> Ax objected, 
edging toward her. <You promised not to use a 
setting higher than three.> 
"Did I?" Taylor laughed. "Then try and stop 
88 
me." She turned back to me. "I'd love to have an 
excuse to finish you off." Her voice wavered 
slightly, almost nervously. I continued inching to-
ward her. "But then, if you're the coward I know, 
you'd rather be stuck as a Taxxon nothlit than die 
with courage." 
My Taxxon hunger fused with human hatred. I 
realized how much easier it would be to eat her 
than to fight the urge. How much easier it would 
be even to die than to face Yeerk-girl. This mon-
ster who haunted me day and night. With con-
tempt. Arrogance. Power over me! 
Had it been like this at the Yeerk pool? Deep 
beneath the murderous hunger, my mind won-
dered. Had I overstayed the two-hour time limit 
so I wouldn't have to face simple facts of life? 
Being a boy, living with foster parents, school, 
Rachel, Taylor. . . 
Marco grabbed me gently, attempting to stop 
me. I hissed and shook him off. 
<Tobias,> Rachel called. <Stop. Just stop!> 
But she didn't block my path. 
Was I a coward? 
In the wild, there's only life or death. You feed 
your belly or you die. Success is survival. Failure 
is death. It's simple. There's no middle ground. 
At least, not for very long. 
Was I a coward? 
89 

I hated Taylor. 
Because she knew the answer to that ques-
tion. 
Because she saw weakness in me. She saw it 
because she was weak herself. People recognize 
their own kind. She'd sold out to save face. Liter-
ally. She'd become a voluntary Controller and be-
trayed her own mother because she wanted to be 
pretty again. 
It was beyond sad. It was pathetic. 
Was I different, or was I just like her? 
I'd trapped myself. Why? 
I hated Taylor because she knew. 
I was going to destroy her. 
I rushed forward. Opened my mouth. Scram-
bled for her legs. 
Tseew! 
A bolt of Dracon fire knocked me down. Not 
strong enough to kill, but tough enough to para-
lyze the Taxxon body and keep me down long 
enough to regain control. And begin to demorph. 
I focused hard. The bloated worm began to 
disappear. I imagined the first signs of my famil-
iar hawk body emerging from the pool of Taxxon 
slime. And then I remembered . . . 
Taylor was watching this! She couldn't see me 
go from Taxxon to bird. She couldn't know I was a 
nothlit. She thought I was Andalite. A mighty An-
dalite. 
90 
I'd already slipped once, at Borders. Not 
again. 
I focused harder and tried to do something 
that can't really be done. Morph directly from 
Taxxon to Andalite. The instant my hawk parts 
emerged, I focused on remorphing them to An-
dalite. It was excruciating, exhausting. Probably 
not very convincing. 
Was she looking? Could she tell? Would she 
see what she shouldn't see? 
The others were smart. Smarter than I was. 
Rachel and Marco had backed Taylor against a 
wall, blocking her view with their gigantic bodies. 
As I demorphed and remorphed, Jake kept guard 
and talked. 
<l said you could carry a Dracon beam for 
protections Jake said firmly. <But we had an 
agreement. You would not fire above setting 
three.> 
"Yeah, well, it didn't even work. What's wrong 
with this beam?" 
<You're one lucky worm,> Jake said to me pri-
vately. <Ax saved your butt. He modified her 
weapon so it wouldn't fire beyond setting three.> 
<She lied,> Rachel said coldly in private 
thought-speak. <Strike one. She'd have fried you 
if she could, Tobias. You'd be a smoldering pile 
of slime if she'd had her way. I say we end this 
right here. She can't keep a deal.> 
91 

<Wait,> I said, finishing the morph to An-
dalite. <l'm fine. I'm okay. Maybe she knew 
you'd tampered with the Dracon. Maybe she was 
just playing it up to scare me.> 
<She did not know,> Ax said as Taylor threw 
the Dracon beam to the floor. He moved behind 
Jake to give my Andalite fur a quick tail-blade 
trim. 
<Well, I was about to take a bite out of her. 
She acted in self-defense.> 
<She knows that's why we're here,> Marco 
answered angrily. <To keep you under control. 
Even if it means killing you.> 
<Well . . .> Why was I making excuses for 
her? Why? I couldn't make any more. She wasn't 
my friend. She wasn't my kind. 
We'd made a deal with the devil and the devil 
had just shown herself for what she was. 
<She's gonna get us Visser Three,> I said. 
<Remember? That's what this is about.> 
92 
<Careful, Ax,> I reminded him. <lt's . . . 
well, it's worse than you said. Let the Taxxon smell 
the soil. Just let it dig and eat. Try not to think of 
us.> 
<l will try to keep control of the morph,> said 
Ax. <As a young cadet, I researched the recorded 
successes and failures of Taxxon morphing. I once 
gave a presentation on physiological mecha-
nisms for notallssith, the condition of being un-
able to control a morph.> 
<Why didn't you tell us this before?!> Marco 
asked. 
<The results of my research were not encour-
aging^ 
<Oooookay.> 
93 

Ax began to morph at the opening to the tun-
nel that I had started. Taylor watched with fasci-
nation. I was just grossed out. 
Andalite features melted into a blue-black 
pool until nothing was left but an oily slick. It 
was as if everything Andalite had to be forsaken 
before the Taxxon could be born. 
But then, out of the pool, the beast took 
shape. Four round, red, jiggling eyes shook in the 
pool like tiny internal organs. The body grew 
larger and larger. It was like watching time-lapse 
photography of a fungus. First it grew out, flat 
along the floor, then up. It was hideous. The 
strong, beautiful Andalite body transformed and 
corrupted. 
The bloated worm neared full size. 
We waited anxiously, silent, ready. 
Ax didn't move. The big Taxxon just stood 
there motionless, as if in a trance. 
<Hey,> Jake snapped, <let's get moving.> 
<Ax?> Rachel said, more kindly. <Everything 
all right?> She inched tentatively toward him, 
the way you'd approach a chained dog you didn't 
know. 
<Give him a little nudge,> Marco suggested. 
He sauntered up beside Rachel, toward the big 
worm, his ape arms dangling loosely. He looked 
at Ax with exaggerated puzzlement, strolled the 
length of him, then announced, <lt's a compre-
94 
hensive system failure. Can't be fixed on-site. 
We'll have to haul this beauty back to the shop.> 
<l am okay,> Ax protested, speaking at last. 
<l have been practicing control. By temporarily 
triggering Taxxon hibernation, I am able to resist 
the urge to eat you.> 
<Thanks for telling me about hibernation be-
fore, Ax-man,> I grumbled. 
<l did not understand it until now.> 
<Good,> Jake said tersely. <Now dig.> 
Before you could blink an eye, Ax shot down 
the tunnel. 
<Okay,> Marco said. <So I was wrong.> 
I held my breath, wanting to be sure he 
wasn't going to come racing back for a quick 
lunch. It was a good distance to where Ax was 
working, farther than you could see. But you 
could hear — no, you could feel — the sound of 
digging. A high-pitched, far-off ringing. The sound 
of teeth scraping dirt. Of dirt being devoured. 
The sound sneaked up on you because it was 
so soft, barely audible. But it filled your head un-
til all you could imagine was the Taxxon digging. 
And digging. Yard after stinking, slimy yard. 
I shook my Andalite head, trying to break the 
trance. Beads of sweat flew off. I hadn't realized 
how hot it was below ground. Four large animals 
make a cavern oppressive. 
"Did you like it, Andalite?" The voice came 
95 

from the far corner of the chamber where the gi-
gantic steel gas main intersected it. Taylor leaned 
against the pipe. She was the only one who looked 
relaxed. 
"Well?" 
<Did I like what?> I said. 
"Being a Taxxon, silly," she replied. "I bet you 
did. Some individuals are cut out to be lower life-
forms." 
<You'd know about that,> Rachel said angrily. 
<No living thing is lower than a Yeerk.> A low 
growl rumbled through her bared fangs. 
"You know I'm right," Taylor said to Rachel. 
"You know this one is weak." She gestured at me. 
<l'll show you weak!> Rachel slashed the air. 
"You wouldn't dare. Hurt me and there's no 
explosion. You won't let this opportunity pass. 
You won't let emotions get in the way. You An-
dalite bandits — you're too much like us." 
Rachel growled and snapped her jaws, but 
backed away. Taylor's words hung in my mind. 
This was a Yeerk plan. Every deadly detail was 
Yeerk. Mass destruction. No provisions to protect 
the innocent. That was to be expected, I guess. 
But we'd jumped on board. 
<ls she right?> I said privately to Rachel. 
<Are you crazy? The way you live, the things 
you do? I don't know anyone stronger. You're not 
weak.> 
96 
<No, not that. I mean about us being like her. 
Opportunists of the worse kind.> 
Rachel let out a small roar. She rolled her 
huge head from side to side. <l'm sick and tired 
of this are-we-doing-the-right-thing, self-doubt 
crap!> she announced in thought-speak that every-
one but Taylor could hear. <The Yeerks are killing 
people. They're destroying Earth. Hello! What's 
gotten into you guys? If someone starts shooting 
up your town and you shoot back in self-defense, 
do you ask if it's justified?> 
Marco was uncharacteristically silent. 
Jake paced back and forth, a big cat in a 
small, confining cage. I moved nearer to Rachel, 
brushing Jake in the process. He let out a re-
pressed snarl. 
<Watch it!> 
<What's wrong with everybody?> Rachel asked 
me. <Everyone's falling apart.> 
<lt could be her,> I said, looking at Taylor 
with both stalk eyes, keeping my main eyes on 
Rachel. <She has a way of setting the mood. Or 
maybe,> I said, <maybe we're in too deep and we 
know it.> 
<Don't talk like that. After tonight, it's going 
to be different. We'll fry the Yeerk pool. The bal-
ance will tip. We'll drive them out.> She was get-
ting excited again, the way she does when she 
talks about the fight. But she sounded a little des-
97 

perate, too. Like she needed to convince me. And 
herself. 
<Then what?> I said. 
<We could be together.> She paused. <AII of 
us, I mean. Do normal stuff.> 
<Yeah,> I said. <Rachel, do we know how 
many Yeerks there really are? On the Andalite 
home world? Invading other species? What if it's 
never over? Sure, maybe we pull this off today. 
But it doesn't change our numbers. There are 
still only six of us. One, two, three, four. . .> 
<Stop it!> she yelled suddenly. <Tobias, I 
can't get the image out of my head. The way it 
will play out tonight. A Yeerk pool full of hosts. 
Humans and Hork-Bajir. They smell natural gas. 
They feel it pouring in. They look around, up, con-
fused, puzzled. They start to worry. Panic. The 
smell gets so strong they can't breathe and they 
know . . . they know natural gas can blow . . . 
they run . . . too late. Suddenly . . . Ka-boom! 
A scorching, burning fireball destroys everything 
it touches. They're vaporized . . . Cassie was 
right . . > 
<They're Yeerks,> I said. 
<They're humans, too.> 
I thought of all the stories Ax had told us of 
entire planets enslaved. Of how what couldn't be 
enslaved was killed. Of great and peaceful soci-
eties destroyed by Yeerks. 
98 
A Yeerk was in the corner, not twenty feet away. 
A creature capable of the greatest evil, cowardly 
hiding inside a human so that no one would see 
the threat. How many were there now? Thou-
sands? Fewer? More? Every day there were more 
human slaves. It was my first thought in the 
morning and my last thought before I slept. 
They'd killed Elfangor, my father. The father I 
never knew. 
The day would come when there would be no 
one left. An entire planet erased. I couldn't let 
that happen. 
<They're Yeerks,> I repeated. <That's all.> 
99 

Rachel 
rose on hind legs and cautiously 
lifted the sewer cap just enough to peer out. 
Standing erect, she was taller than the ceiling. 
She pushed the cap aside. Jake followed her out 
with a lightning leap. Marco brought up the rear. 
Their time in morph was almost up. They 
needed to demorph and remorph, and Rachel 
needed to do a quick check-in at home. I'd been 
in morph about an hour and a half. Ax's turn at 
digging was almost up. 
They put the cap partially back and disap-
peared. It was just Taylor and me underground. 
"Your friends have left you," she observed. 
"What if they don't come back?" 
This was part of Taylor's fun. To play with my 
100 
head. I didn't answer. I wouldn't let her affect 
me. When she walked slowly up to me, I didn't 
move. When she reached out with her real hand 
and touched the fur just above my shoulders, I 
didn't breathe. 
"A handsome species," she complimented, 
sounding not like a teenage girl, but like a sly, 
sophisticated Yeerk. "You deserve more than your 
tradition allows." 
I backed away. 
"Your friends don't understand how power-
ful we Yeerks are," she continued. "But I know that 
you do. We will have no place for your friends in our 
new society, but you . . . every comfort you wish 
would be yours. We could rule together. Join us." 
I jerked away, shocked that I'd let her go on so 
long. She laughed. A long and confident laugh. 
<l thought you were moving toward democ-
racy^ I said quietly. 
"Of course we are. Of course we are. But 
think . . . democracies need leaders, and laws to 
protect the citizens. Someone has to make the 
laws . . . " 
<lt will never be me.> 
"You deserve more," she persisted, then 
grinned, turned, and walked away. It was an odd 
thing to say. I felt like a doomed mouse, poked 
and prodded by a clawed cat. I couldn't respond. 
I could only look away. 
101 

A crescent of light illuminated the chamber. I 
heard yelping and looked up to see two wolves 
pawing and pushing at the heavy iron cap. They 
slid it open and leaped down, landing very hard. 
<We wanted to be smaller,> Marco explained 
privately. <But we have to keep Taxxon-Ax in line, 
and Yeerk-girl intimidated.> 
Jake paced back and forth before the tunnel 
opening. The new morph allowed him eight 
paces before he had to turn around. Better than 
the five in tiger. He was silent for a minute, then, 
looking at the watch I wore, <Guys, uh, we've got 
a problem. Ax was due back by now. I've been 
calling him, but he doesn't answer. Did you 
change plans, Tobias?> 
<No.> I raised an arm to silence everyone. We 
listened. Marco pressed an ear to the side of the 
tunnel. I could just make out a very faint grating 
sound, much fainter than before. Maybe it was 
Andalite hearing. Or maybe Ax was . . . 
<He's still going at it,> Marco announced. 
<The boy's gonna dig to China.> 
I took a few steps into the tunnel. <Ax, can 
you hear me? You have to stop. You'll die of ex-
haustions There was no reply, thought-speak or 
otherwise. <He must be fixated. We have to stop 
him.> 
<Just what do you have in mind?> Marco 
asked. 
102 
I looked at Taylor. She sat with her back 
against the wall and glanced from me to Jake to 
Marco with casual suspicion. I looked hesitantly 
at the opening of the tunnel. It wasn't really large 
enough for our power morphs. 
<l have an idea,> I said. I took off the watch, 
checked the glow-in-the-dark numbers. Put it 
around Jake's right front leg. <Cover me.> I trotted 
several feet into the tunnel. When I saw, through 
swiveled stalk eyes, that Jake and Marco had 
planted themselves in front of the entrance and 
masked me from Taylor's view, I demorphed. Then 
I began to morph again. 
Feathers turned to thin skin that stretched 
tight as an umbrella over wing bones. Blindness 
banished all trace of light. It had been dark al-
ready, but now there was a vision void. A nothing-
ness that made my heart pound. 
Then, a new sense. A kind of hearing. The 
sharpest hearing you've ever known. I couldn't 
make out everything, but the higher sounds were 
crystal clear. 
Then suddenly, it was more than mere hear-
ing. I could tell exactly where all sounds came 
from. They formed a picture of my surroundings. 
So much like sight. So different, too. 
I was echolocating. I was a bat. 
<Jake, Marco, follow me,> I called. I flapped 
my thin wings far faster than a hawk ever does 
103 

and flew easily along the tunnel. The sonic chirps 
I emitted told me exactly where the sides were. 
The bat felt at home. 
<Ax?> 
No answer. I flew a long way, maybe a quarter 
mile, until I came to something strange. The tun-
nel became something else, something expanded. 
A hollowed-out space. A large cavern-room. Like 
maybe Ax had gone nuts and circled up and down 
ten or twelve times. 
I could hear Ax now. Closer. The high-pitched 
screeching of Taxxon teeth on dirt and small 
rocks was almost deafening to bat senses. Extra-
loud echolocation was necessary to see over the 
noise. The tunnel continued on the far side of the 
chamber. I flapped my wings and flew in. 
<Ax, is that you?> My chirps weren't return-
ing. They were being absorbed. By something 
soft, something . . . 
WHAP! 
I flew into Ax's backside and slapped to the 
tunnel floor. 
<Ax, stop!> I focused all my energy on that 
thought-speak command, trying to penetrate his 
trance. It worked. He stopped digging. 
<Cannot go on,> he groaned faintly. 
<Darn straight. You've got minutes left in 
morph, Ax-man. Let's clear out.> 
104 
<Too 
weak. 
Can . . . not. . . can . . . not 
move.> 
The tunnel had narrowed to barely bigger than 
the circumference of the Taxxon. Usually a Taxxon's 
vigor made its tunnel at least large enough for it to 
comfortably wiggle out. 
<Tobias, what's going on?> Jake, sounding 
understandably edgy. <We can't see anything.> 
<Follow the tunnel,> I said shortly. <Ax is 
stuck. An overeating stupor. He's dying here 
with, like, seven minutes left in morph. You have 
to pull him out.> 
<You want us to march straight toward a 
Taxxon? Whose side are you on?> 
<He's too weak to turn around or hurt you.> 
<l better get overtime for this,> Marco said. 
<Serious overtimes 
Marco and Jake crawled through the pitch-
black until they bumped into Ax. 
<0h, man!> Marco gasped. <Wolf sense of 
smell is way too good.> The stench was over-
whelming. 
They bit into the soft baggy flesh and pulled. 
"Skreeeee!" Ax cried involuntarily. 
<Hurry,> I said to Jake. <There's no time!> 
The hulking worm began to move. Marco 
strained and fought. Jake snarled and pulled. 
Inch by inch they dragged Ax out. By the watch 
105 

around Jake's leg, it took a full five minutes to 
reach the carved out, earthen cavern. 
Less than two minutes to go. 
<l think he's unconscious,> Jake said. 
<His skin has no bulge. It's like he's deflat-
ing^ 
<Demorph,> I urged. <Please, Ax, demorph!> 
No answer. 
<Ax, now!> Jake ordered. 
<We were too late,> Marco said flatly. <He's 
going to die.> 
106 
<Ax!> I cried. Panic gripped my tiny bat 
heart. <Ax! Ax! Ax!> 
<Yes, Tobias, it is me.> I caught the echo of 
something larger and more reflective than a Taxxon. 
A form that was changing. Becoming taller than a 
wolf. . . four legs . .. two arms . . . 
We collapsed in the darkness, exhausted and 
terrified, thankful to be together. 
I demorphed and prepared to dig again as a 
Taxxon. But then . . . 
"Hey, what's going on?" 
A faint light, way down the tunnel. It was 
coming nearer, bobbing as it came. 
Jake and Marco saw the light, too. We watched 
as it increased in size and brightness until at last 
107 

Taylor emerged into the earth-cavern. Rachel was 
in grizzly morph right behind her, her body wedged 
tight in the tunnel. 
Taylor crawled on hands and knees in the 
Taxxon goo. There was no question the Yeerk was 
in full control. It was the kind of thing Taylor-the-
girl would never do. Her hair was a mess, plas-
tered to her face by Taxxon slime. One hand 
gripped an electric fluorescent lantern. 
"What happened here?" Taylor demanded, 
looking at the cavern. When my eyes adjusted, I 
saw what a strange place the cavern was. It 
wasn't square or round or ovoid. Nothing normal. 
It was an undulating, chaotic intersection of 
many different, smaller tunnels. 
<l lost control of the morph,> Ax answered 
honestly. <l do not remember everything. I know 
that I became confused. I dug and ate in circles 
for many minutes before regaining focus.> 
<He ate himself to exhaustions Jake added, 
more for Rachel than for Taylor. <We had to drag 
him out.> 
<l do not remember,> Ax confessed. 
"Andalite incompetent," Taylor raged suddenly. 
<Watch yourself, Yeerk,> Rachel roared back. 
<lt's okay, Ax-man,> Jake said privately. <You 
dug about ten times farther than we expected. 
Tobias, take it easy this time. And, uh, don't 
morph or demorph near us, okay?> 
108 
I didn't need to be reminded. Jake didn't 
want me eating them. He also didn't want Taylor 
seeing me morph straight from hawk to Taxxon. 
I hopped to the opening of the tunnel Ax had 
dug and flapped a little to get out of sight. My 
wings scraped the tunnel sides and I crash-landed 
about fifty feet in. 
<l'm going Taxxon,> I warned. 
I was better prepared this time. I was ready 
when the instincts reared up and told me to fol-
low the smell of my friends. 
I turned my ravenous, empty belly to the tun-
nel instead. I rushed forward to the place where 
Ax had stopped. Fierce hunger propelled me into 
the soil wall. 
I was more aware this time. I felt what was 
going on around me. What was going on inside 
the Taxxon mind. It wasn't simple hunger. It wasn't 
pure rage. 
No. What drove the Taxxon to eat and dig was 
more complicated. It was something I under-
stood. A sort of insecurity or fear. 
Yes, a fear. . . grossly exaggerated ... be-
yond anything humans experience . . . a desper-
ate fear of not having enough . . . a terror of 
starvation . . . a horror that your essential needs 
will go unfulfilled . . . a horror demented and con-
torted by the Taxxon mind until it became a sick, 
murderous evil. 
109 

I wouldn't have understood, or even noticed, 
if I hadn't been hawk for so long. I've experi-
enced just enough of that feeling to recognize it. 
A whole species of terrified overeaters. It made 
me almost sorry for them. 
Almost. 
I dug and thought of Taylor. The Yeerk and the 
girl. What they'd let themselves become . . . 
Was anyone all evil? That couldn't be possi-
ble. I've heard that even Hitler was good to his 
dogs. 
Taylor had been too insecure to face her peers 
without her beauty. She'd done what she had to 
do to make the fear go away. 
Evil, even the worst evil, has banal origins every 
human can understand. 
Weakness. Fear. Insecurity. 
I understood Taylor. I understood the Taxxon. 
The realization frightened me as nothing ever 
has. 
Suddenly, the Taxxon's pace began to slow. I 
was getting tired, if you can call it that. A digging 
Taxxon doesn't get tired the way people do. It 
doesn't notice it's tired. It doesn't decide to slow. 
It just fades away, like a drained battery. 
I'd lost track of time. Must have been digging 
for over an hour. I pressed on. Eating. Expelling. 
The dirt tasted good. It wasn't flesh, but it wasn't 
bad. 
110 
Soon there were more and more rocks in the 
dirt. Small at first, then larger. Bigger than even 
a Taxxon could swallow. I pushed the rocks aside 
and continued until I hit a smooth, continuous 
surface. Probably the remnants of an old build-
ing foundation. 
I tried to go around. It curved up and up, like 
the crest of a dome. 
Then it hit me. I'd reached it. I'd found the 
Yeerk pool. 
I continued along the surface until it became 
almost flat and I found what I thought was the 
top. Taylor said we would strike fairly high. I never 
guessed we would strike at the center. 
There were no cracks or openings anywhere. 
It was completely continuous. How could I break 
through? 
The Taxxon knew what to do. 
I opened my Taxxon mouth wide. Full capac-
ity. I swiveled my teeth so they scraped the con-
crete like a drill. A hundred teeth screeched 
across the stone. Friction made my mouth hot. 
Caustic Taxxon spit burned and dissolved the rock. 
I gnawed deep into the shell of the dome, a 
hole four or more feet across and almost as deep. 
My body felt heavy and ill. And at last I saw a 
flicker of red light. 
111 

C-H--R-PT-E-R S D 
thousand horrors. A crazy, mixed-up hell 
right here on Earth. A melting pot of enslaved, 
alien races. A sea of two kinds of motion: the 
slow, deliberate movements of bodies who aren't 
free, and the wild, desperate spasms of doomed, 
caged prisoners. 
From my vantage point, the pool itself churned 
directly below. Hard to say how far down. Not more 
than a hundred feet. Then there was the infesta-
tion pier, built out above the slugs. Human after 
human cursed or spit or wailed before the Hork-
Bajir forced their head under to accept a Yeerk 
master. 
The cages that ringed the pool seemed to 
112 
have multiplied since I'd seen them last. It was 
like a bizarre sort of amphitheater. The specta-
tors were the people from town. Some of them I 
knew. Like Ms. Powell, my old math teacher, and 
Brent Starr, the anchor from the news. 
Others were strangers to me. Mothers and fa-
thers. Young kids. Bus drivers. Lawyers. Artists. 
Government employees. Everyone, from every walk 
of life. All screaming. Burning out their vocal 
cords. Tears pouring from eyes. Veins bulging from 
foreheads. Sweat coursing from brows. 
They wanted to be free! They wanted nothing 
more than to be free. 
Then I realized that a great number of the 
caged prisoners weren't crying out. They watched 
the proceedings with distaste, but they didn't 
rage with anger. They stood immobile and calm. 
I'd seen voluntary hosts before. Voluntary hosts 
enjoyed the show. These weren't voluntary. 
Who were they? What had happened to these 
hosts? It was like they'd passed a point beyond the 
point of caring. Like they were zombies or some-
thing. But that was impossible. Everyone fights for 
freedom to the bitter end. Everyone has to! 
These hosts had an air about them. They 
stared off into the vast space with a look of. . . 
pride? Conviction? They looked almost as if they 
had purpose. 
113 

Maybe they were Yeerks from the peace fac-
tion? So many of them here? Now? Oh, man, not 
now . . . 
"Beautiful, isn't it?" whispered a female voice 
inches from my head. I jerked against the tunnel 
wall. 
It was Taylor. Taylor! 
How did she crawl down the tunnel alone? 
How did she get away from the others? 
Who cared? 
Every inch of me wanted to bite her head off. 
She was a fleshy meal ready-made. Plus, she was 
the scum of the universe. Would it be so bad to 
get rid of her? 
I opened my mouth, moved in for the at-
tack . . . 
And was suddenly paralyzed. I couldn't move 
my mouthparts or upper body. How stupid was I? 
She'd zapped me. 
"Don't be dumb," she said. "Get control of 
your morph." 
Ax had said something about a hibernation 
state. I searched the Taxxon consciousness for a 
clue. I found it suddenly in a mental vision, an 
image of bodies mounded into an endless moun-
tain. The picture relaxed me. I could feast for-
ever. I didn't have to find food, I had enough 
right there. 
I was in control enough to speak. 
114 
<How did you get here? The others would 
never let you walk away from them.> 
"You don't think they trust me? I'm hurt. 
Really." 
<What did you do to them?> 
"You know me, Andalite. I wouldn't hurt a fly. 
I temporarily incapacitated them, yes. I needed 
to talk to you." 
<We're in,> I said. I began now to broadcast 
my thought-speak, hoping the others would hear 
me, wherever they were. 
"I can see that," she mocked. "But I don't care 
right now. I want to talk to you." I stayed quiet. I 
felt sick. It wasn't the Taxxon's problem. It was 
mine. Taylor had me cornered. 
"Relax," she continued. "You're shaking like 
one of Visser Three's personal guards. It's just 
me. Remember me?" 
<What do you want?> I asked. 
"Look down there," she said, glancing at the 
Yeerk pool. "We are so organized. We run with 
the precision of a Swiss watch. We are invincible. 
When I take command, we will reach new heights." 
<What are you talking about? Take command? 
You mean, when you introduce democracy.> 
"Yes, of course that's what I mean," she said, 
the corners of her mouth turning upward with a 
shocking lack of subtlety. "I want you to join me. 
I think you know how smart I am. I think you 
115 

know my will to succeed. I want you to cofound 
the new Yeerk society." 
Suddenly, Taylor's words seemed distant. Be-
cause I saw the hidden spot, down by the Yeerk 
pool. I saw the place where I had perched as the 
seconds counted down. The seconds before I be-
came a nothlit. 
"What do you get as an underling with An-
dalite bandits?" she went on, her voice seduc-
tive. "You are obviously not a leader. You are not 
even second-in-command. You are a nobody." 
I flashed back to that night at the Yeerk pool. 
Remembered how carefully I had weighed my op-
tions. Since then I'd been telling myself there 
was no choice. That if I'd demorphed, the visser 
would have been on me in a flash. He would have 
known that we were human. He would have 
found my friends. 
But there is always a choice. In any and every 
situation. It's usually the choice between bad 
and worse. But it's still a choice. 
"Come on," she said again. "Be my host. Of-
fer me your body and you can have anything you 
want." 
Choice. Traitor or. . . 
<Can I have freedom?> I asked. 
"It is a kind of freedom," she answered. 
<Can I be happy?> I asked. 
"It is a kind of happiness," she replied. 
116 
I looked back at the rock face, my nothlit birth-
place. I'd made a decision. Had I made a bad de-
cision? I didn't know. And suddenly, I realized that 
I would never know. I know that I stuck with my 
choice. And that I had followed it through to the 
very end. 
I looked at Taylor. For the first time, her phys-
ical beauty was difficult to see. Her hair and face 
were covered in dirt. Her expression was the 
twisted, power-hungry look of a dictator. The only 
thing that could have made her beautiful now 
was her inside. And there certainly wasn't any-
thing beautiful there. 
<l'm stronger than that,> I said slowly. <You're 
only out for power and control. That's it. And when 
you get it — if you get it — you'll only want more. 
I think that power as your only goal is pointless.> 
"You don't really believe that," she mocked. 
<Don't l?> I said. <lf I didn't, why would I 
find you so gross? How would I see that you're 
weak? All you're about is envy and power.> 
She looked at me, then at the pool, then back 
down the tunnel. "And it will be my pleasure," 
she rasped, "to prove you right." 
117 

She jabbed her synthetic fist in my still-
paralyzed throat and left me gagging. Then she 
turned away from the view of the Yeerk pool and 
shot off down the tunnel as fast as human legs 
would carry her. 
<Where are you going?> I choked out. Her 
lantern disappeared from view. 
"You'll know soon enough, Andalite!" she cried. 
I shed all thoughts of hibernation and sum-
moned the hunger that had been sitting on the 
edge of my consciousness. 
I focused on the image of the girl and my legs 
began to scratch and scrape against the rocky 
tunnel walls. I squished my body into an impos-
sible U-shape. I needed to turn around. Sure, I 
118 
could run just as fast backward. But I wanted my 
mouth, my weapon, to be ready. 
I called again. <Stop!> 
No answer. 
I powered my legs like there was a raw T-bone 
six inches from my face. With the speed of a 
greyhound and the mass of a tree trunk, I skittered 
into blackness, after my prey. 
My throat and neck were still numb. My tongue 
dangled from my mouth like a three-foot leash. 
<Hey!> I called to the others. <Taylor's com-
ing back through. Stop her!> 
My needle-legs continued to scrape through 
the dirt, like the gallop of a hundred tiny horses. 
<We can't move!> Jake yelled to me. <How 
long does this stuff last?> 
<Not long. Try. Try!> 
<Here she comes,> Rachel yelled. <Here she 
comes!> 
<Get her!> 
<We can't!> 
Whoooomp! 
My body burst from the tunnel like a cork 
from a bottle. I was in the cavern Ax had carved 
out. I slowed just enough to catch sight of the 
others. An Andalite, two wolves, and a bear, 
sprawled on the floor like they were taking a nap. 
<Go!> Rachel cried. 
I crossed the cavern and dove into the tun-
119 

nel's first half. I knew I was close. I could smell 
her shampoo. 
I was close. Her footfalls thumped the tunnel 
floor. Faint lantern light filled the darkness. Then 
more. 
<Stop!> I cried. 
"Never!" she screamed. 
I saw Taylor's form, and then I saw beyond 
her. The sewer chamber was just yards ahead. 
Her lantern reflected off the pipeline's polished 
steel. 
I suddenly knew what she meant to do. 
<No!> I lunged. Missed. I lunged again. Full 
feeling returned to my mouth. 
"Arghhh!" she cried. I clamped down on her 
heel. Not hard enough to sever her foot, but hard 
enough for her to feel that I was in control. Shark 
teeth? Bear fangs? Neither comes close to inflict-
ing the kind of agony a Taxxon inflicts. 
"Worm! Slime! Get off me!" With her real 
arm, she punched my face. Only a distraction. 
Out of the corner of one eye I saw a flash — her 
fake arm, her fake fingers. 
I released her foot, and twisted the upper 
third of my body so that it slapped her artificial 
arm. Paralyzing particulates shot from her fin-
gers. But not at me. They were wasted, flung at 
the far wall. 
120 
"Scum!" She was free and running for the 
pipeline. I revved my feet and shot forward. 
"Stop right there!" she cried. "Come an inch 
closer and I'll blow a hole through this steel." 
I froze. 
<You said that once the tunnel was dug, we'd 
have twenty minutes to get away.> 
"You believed me?" 
<l did and I do,> I lied. <You can't blow a 
hole in that pipe because you know. You know 
that if we die in this explosion, you die, t o o 
Her lips twisted into the now-familiar fiendish 
smile. Pure Yeerk and proud of it. "Wrong, An-
dalite. You forget that I am not bound to this 
body. I am the Yeerk inside. And a skull entirely 
replaced, bone by bone, by heat-proof, blast-
proof polymer protects me. This body will burn, 
but I will survive." 
I heard movement behind me. I glanced back. 
It was Rachel in the lead, followed by the others. 
Dragging their still partially paralyzed bodies out 
of the tunnel and into the sewer chamber. 
<Get her!> Rachel cried. <Tobias, get her!> 
Taylor's smile broadened. She turned toward 
the pipeline. She extended her artificial arm. 
<No!> Rachel yelled. 
Taylor blew a hole clean through the metal. 
And in an instant, reality changed. 
121 

Fwooooosh! 
A pressure wave of natural gas shot from the 
pipe. It ripped across the chamber and sent us 
tumbling through the air. Taylor. Me. The others. 
Tumbling . . . 
Straight for the tunnel! 
<Ahhhh!> 
Taylor blew right past me, propelled by the 
gas, a swirl of blond hair and pink flesh. 
And she was laughing. 
122 
F weeeeWOOOOOOOOS H! 
The force of a fire hose. A hurricane. 
<Ahhhhhh!> 
We were shoved down the tunnel at breakneck 
speed. We slapped the sides. Slipped on slime. 
Gasped for air. 
We were absolutely powerless! 
Dirt scratched my tender eyes, blinded me. 
Bammm! 
I slammed the dirt wall. It knocked the wind 
out of me so I couldn't breathe, couldn't think. 
<l cannot. . . stop!> Ax exclaimed. 
<Grab onto each other,> Jake yelled. <Bite 
into each other. Anything!> 
<No air!> Rachel gasped. 
123 

The tunnel was narrowing. The Yeerk pool was 
near. I was farthest down the tunnel, out in front. 
We were going to fly from a hole in the dome with 
me in the lead. We were going to burst from the 
opening. BASE jumpers with no chutes. 
We were going to die. 
It would end for me where it had all begun. That 
cavernous hell. In seconds, we'd be five blobs on 
the pavement, gobbled up by Taxxon guards. 
Ba-BAMMM! 
Marco slammed into my rump. 
<Ugh.'> 
Jake plowed into Marco. Rachel plowed into 
Jake. 
KA-bam! 
Ax careened into Jake's rib cage, crushing 
him. Crushing us all. 
My legs, dozens of sharp sticks, scraped the 
tunnel sides. I stretched them out as far as they 
would open. Strained to make them catch hold. 
<Can't breathe!> Marco gasped. 
Acute pain shot to my core. Momentum 
snapped off my legs. I was insane to think I 
could stop us.' It was like trying to stop a car trav-
eling seventy by opening the door and dragging 
your foot on the pavement. Not happening. 
But I had a hundred legs. And the tunnel was 
narrowing. 
<l see light.'> I yelled. There it was. The red 
124 
circle that glowed like a harvest moon. Coming 
nearer and nearer. It was now. Or it was never. 
<Ahhhhhl> I cried, and dug in what legs I 
had left. They punctured the dirt, scraped the 
stone, snapped like twigs. 
"Skreeeeeeyaaaaaa.'" A shrill scream from 
the Taxxon. A primal yelp of despair. 
But the legs were slowing me. They were 
slowing us! 
Still, the force of the gas, of the others press-
ing against me — I'd explode.' I was a balloon 
about to pop. My thin skin was being pushed to 
the limit. . . 
But the pressure of the wall was slowing us 
down. 
I felt blood vessels fail, blood course into my 
eyes. My head was even with the Yeerk pool hole. 
It was all a blur. We inched forward, against our 
will. Sheer agony. The march toward death. 
<Can . . . not. . . breathe,> Ax whispered. 
Six inches, five inches, four inches . . . 
Four inches and holding. 
The pressure didn't push us any farther. It 
eased. And then it disappeared. 
No one said anything. I called to them. Their 
one-word answers came in gasps. We all needed 
air. 
<Move, guys. Move.'> I said. <We have to get 
back.> I twisted my massive body up and around 
125 

and only then did I realize that the Taxxon was 
less affected by the gas. My alien physiology let 
me breathe in the noxious environment. 
<Lungs . . . buming!> Jake sighed. 
Their bodies, dark forms in the dim, distant 
light from the Yeerk pool, straggled lethargically 
along the tunnel. 
<l can't,> Rachel said slowly. 
<You have to!> I said. Marco dropped to 
the floor. The others stumbled like drunks. They 
weren't going to make it. 
The tunnel was slick with Taxxon slime. I de-
cided to use it for the one thing it was good for. 
<C'mon!> I roared, then I charged. I plowed 
into them and pushed them along. Slowly at first, 
then faster and faster. 
My hunger reemerged. 
There they were. Four weak, dying animals. 
Mine for the feasting. Their smells. Their warmth. 
It was the hardest thing I've ever done. 
<They're not food,> I chanted. <They're not 
food.> 
The legs I had left were on fire. My hunger 
was alive. I slid my friends along the tunnel with 
my big Taxxon head. 
<They're not food!> I screamed. 
After far too long, the dirt gave way to con-
crete. It was the sewer chamber. 
We'd made it. 
126 
We were conscious. We were breathing. We 
were alive. 
. Barely. 
No one needed to say, <Demorph.> No thought 
had ever been stronger in my mind. 
"The gas is off." Those were the first words 
out of Jake's mouth when he'd finished demorph-
ing, the only words anyone managed to form. 
"How?" he whispered. He stood for a minute, 
numb and dazed. Incredulous. "How?" 
Silently, we followed Jake up and out of the 
sewer chamber. He began to remorph to pere-
grine falcon. Marco, Rachel, and Ax followed his 
lead, went raptor. 
<Let's go,> Jake commanded. 
127 

There was only one place the gas could have 
been turned off. 
The pumping station. 
I got a funny feeling as we got closer to it. 
Flashing lights by the doors and on the roof 
doused the surrounding trees in red. I knew some-
thing was up, the way you do when a police car 
rockets past you on the street, no sirens, but 
lights flashing. There was definitely trouble. 
The others landed behind the bushes where 
Ax and I had morphed earlier. They demorphed, 
crouching low as their bodies rose from the earth. 
And even though I knew they were all exhausted, 
they slowly morphed again. Battle morphs. We 
weren't taking any chances. 
The plate glass door was shattered. A thou-
sand shards sparkled on the sidewalk. 
<Somebody charged this place,> I said. 
<Somebody wild.> 
<Come on. Who'd break into a pumping sta-
tion? No cash. No goods,> Marco said. 
<Maybe their gas bill was too much to take,> 
Rachel answered. 
The others stole along the perimeter single file, 
an absurd and unlikely circus troupe. I circled 
above. No one hiding in the bushes. No snipers 
posted on the roof. 
<Weird,> I said. <l don't see anyone.> I 
128 
landed on the pavement, morphed Andalite, and 
joined the others. We crunched over glass and 
stepped through what was left of the door frame. 
Moved into the building. 
<Oh, man,> I heard Rachel say. <Oh, man!> 
I stepped around her. My rear legs weakened. 
Then I saw the bodies. Human bodies. Maybe 
half a dozen. Male and female. Suited to look 
like gas company workers. 
Sprawled now every which way. They were 
alive — barely. They'd obviously been on the los-
ing end of one very fierce battle. None seemed 
conscious. 
Yeerk slugs wriggled and writhed helplessly 
on the floor. 
<Who could have done this?> Jake gasped. 
<l think why is the better questions Marco 
added. 
<Taylor,> Rachel said, her voice grim. <But 
no, that's impossible. 'Cause she was with us. 
This was her plan and she needed these people. 
Visser Three?> 
I moved forward, stepping carefully over the 
bodies with my four legs. I heard a police siren 
wail in the distance and I knew. I knew they were 
coming here. Maybe real cops. Maybe Controller-
cops. It didn't matter. No time either way. We 
had to get out. 
129 

But I kept going. I kept going because before 
the siren wailed, I'd heard a noise. A sound of 
life farther on in the building. 
<Tobias, we've gotta get out of here. We're 
not going to figure this out,> Rachel said. <At 
least not now.> 
I didn't turn back. I moved into the guts of 
the building, where compressors and pumps that 
once hummed smoothly sat silent and immobile. 
I followed the sound. There was a door to 
what looked like a little office. I peered in. 
And then I saw her, sitting with her elbows on 
a table, her head in her hands. 
Cassie. Crying. 
She had turned off the gas and saved our 
lives. She had done this. 
<Cassie, it's me.> She didn't look up. She 
didn't move. <Cassie.> 
With delicate Andalite arms, I tried to lift her 
from the chair. She stood but was limp in my 
arms. 
<C'mon, Cassie. We have to get out of here. 
It's okay. Everything's okay.> 
Her sobs stopped. Halting half-gasps took 
their place. She turned in my arms, turned so 
that she stood and faced me. Her eyes, red and 
wet, stared up at mine. Salt streaks dried on her 
face. 
"No," she said. "It will never be okay." 
130 
It was the next day. The sun beat down. And 
produced columns of rising hot air. I must have 
gone twelve minutes without flapping a wing. 
Rachel, too. Nature was giving us a free ride. 
We were way up. So high. You can't even see 
prey from that height. But what's cool is that we 
weren't the only birds up there. I guess true 
hawks need to get away, too, sometimes. 
Why? I don't know. Maybe they need the per-
spective. Maybe they need to feel that they're not 
tied to the world of their meadow. Maybe they're 
pushing the boundaries, seeing how high they 
can sail before the air gets too thin. 
Or maybejhey don't know why they do any-
thing. 
131 

<The beach?> Rachel called. 
<Yeah. How about the cove?> We turned like 
fighter planes and pulled out of our ascent. The 
trees and hills raced toward us, the ocean frothed 
not far beyond. 
I thought of the sinkhole where Bobby nearly 
drowned. The dirt flat where his father gripped 
him lovingly. 
I spotted the pumping station as we de-
scended. It was roped off by caution tape. Still 
buzzing with cops and investigators. 
I thought of the last second in which I'd seen 
Taylor, blown through the tunnel, Barbie doll hair 
streaming. Her image remained but her voice 
was gone. Maybe just for now, maybe forever. Too 
soon to tell. 
The cove is the closest thing to a secret beach 
that we know about. It's all jutting rocks and 
twenty-foot drops to the sea, so it's not too popu-
lar with the regular beach crowd. You practically 
have to be a bird to get to it. 
Rachel demorphed and I morphed to my hu-
man self. The sun was warm. The air was salty. 
We were together. 
"There was no way we could -have known," 
she said, sensing my mood, knowing where my 
mind was. "We were acting on the best informa-
tion we had." 
132 
"I'm not sure," I said. "Did you talk to Cassie? 
Did she tell you what happened?" 
"Yeah. Jake took her home last night, but I 
stopped by this morning." 
"Well?" 
"She contacted Tidwell because Jake said 
she could warn him. While we were digging the 
tunnel, Cassie talked to the Yeerk peace faction. 
Guess what Tidwell told her?" 
I raised my eyebrows. 
"Tidwell and all the peacenik Yeerks try to 
feed at the same time. They try to show up at the 
Yeerk pool together so they can exchange infor-
mation and make plans." 
"We know that," I interrupted. 
"Right. But we didn't know that they'd reor-
ganized their feeding schedule. We didn't know 
that they'd rescheduled so they'd predominate 
on Saturday afternoons." 
There was a long pause as I calculated just 
what that meant. 
"Somehow Visser Three got the news? He was 
going to kill off all his opposition in one day! The 
AndaTite bandits. The Yeerk peace faction. Two 
groups, one plan." 
"Yeah. And Cassie thinks he wanted more 
than our lives," she said. "She thinks Visser 
Three planned to pin the atrocity on the peace 
133 

faction. That he was going to weaken them by 
frying all their hosts, then discredit them by 
making it look like they were responsible for ar-
ranging the gas explosion and for engineering 
massive loss of Yeerk life." 
"That sounds like the visser we know and 
love." 
"And if he sacrificed some innocent Yeerks 
along the way," Rachel continued, "it would be a 
small price for a plan that would also, thanks to 
Taylor, annihilate us." 
"So Taylor was working with Visser Three all 
along. She pretended to be against him to get us 
to cooperate." I took a deep breath over the pain 
in my chest. "After all the clues! All the gut feel-
ings! I don't believe I didn't see more clearly. I 
should have looked at the bigger picture . . ." 
"Hey. No matter what you think, Tobias, Taylor's 
not your responsibility. Besides, how often is it pos-
sible to see the big picture, really?" Rachel said. 
"Things happen fast. You just have to make the 
best decision you can and then go for it. You know 
what? I'd do the same thing again, if I had to." 
"How can you say that?" 
"With me, it's about instinct. I knew we had 
to dig that tunnel. Turns out I was right, but for 
the wrong reasons. If we hadn't gotten involved 
with Taylor, Cassie wouldn't have known about 
the plan, wouldn't have talked to Tidwell, 
134 
wouldn t have worried about us. But she did. And 
it opened up a course of events that couldn't 
have occurred otherwise. It ended up saving the 
Yeerk peace faction. It was a good investment." 
"Cassie battled a bunch of humans. Alone. 
You're saying that's a good thing?" 
"Of course not," Rachel said emphatically. 
"But it was the lesser of two evils." 
I sat down on a rock slab. The waves crashed. 
The wind whipped. Rachel sat down next to me. 
Maybe I was weak, but at least I was free. My 
choices were my own. No matter what. 
Was it over for Taylor? Did she blow through 
the hole in the Yeerk pool dome? Lodge in a 
crevice of the tunnel till the gas pressure died? 
Catch a crag of rock and hang on? Did she live? 
Would Taylor-the-girl ever live again? 
Would I ever stop caring? 
"You never really know how some things will 
turn out," I said. A twig blew across the surface 
of ayrock, swept along by the wind. I reached out 
to catch it. Rachel moved to stop it, too. Our 
hands collided gently. I took her hand. The twig 
blew past us, and fell into a crack. 
"Yeah," she answered, smiling. "There's no 
real point in worrying about what you might have 
done. The past is the past, Tobias. Let it go." 
135 

