
The author wishes to thank Kim Morris for her 
help in preparing this manuscript. 
For Michael and Jake 
Cover illustration by David B. Mattingly 
Art Direction/Design by Karen Hudson 
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this 
book is stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the 
publisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has received any pay-
ment for this "stripped book." 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in part, or stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permis-
sion of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write to 
Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 555 Broadway, 
New York, NY 10012. 
ISBN 0-439-10677-X 
Copyright © 2000 by Katherine Applegate. 
All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Inc. 
SCHOLASTIC, APPLE PAPERBACKS, ANIMORPHS, and associated logos 
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc. 
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
0 1 2 3 4 5/0 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
First Scholastic printing, February 2000 
Crumph! Crumph! 
The thudding of fists against human flesh is 
not a pleasant sound. It is particularly sickening 
when heard through a metal pipe. The sound echoes 
and is magnified. 
"That's enough. Stop it," a human voice com-
manded. The sound was muffled, vague, indis-
tinct. I was feeling the voice through my six legs, 
through my antennae. 
"But he's told us nothing," a second human 
argued. 
I should not call them humans. They are human-
Controllers. 
There is a difference. 

Human-Controllers are humans whose bodies 
have become hosts to the Yeerk invaders. 
Yeerks! Foulest creatures of the universe. 
Gray slugs who enter the body through the ear, fit 
themselves into the human brain, and take over. 
Mind and body. 
Of course, not all hosts are human. 
Visser Three, leader of the Yeerk Earth inva-
sion, has an Andalite host. 
My name is Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill. I am 
not human. I am Andalite. The only Andalite 
among the group that calls itself the Animorphs. 
Four humans. A red-tailed hawk. Me. 
We are the resistance. We fight the Yeerk in-
vasion until help from my home planet arrives. Or 
until we die. 
The latter possibility seems ever more likely. 
It would be unwise to tell you very much 
more. The Animorphs and I have many secrets to 
keep. And I, as an Andalite, have the secret of 
my own race to keep. 
Crumph! 
The sound again. Had we not been on the 
pipe we would not have heard it. Roaches feel vi-
brations. The pipe carried those vibrations di-
rectly to us. 
We were making our way up a corroded, rusty 
metal pipe within the interior wall of a two-story 
office building. Our mission, to rescue our friend 
2 
and collaborator, Mr. King. We had all seen the 
front page article on The Sharing, the Yeerk front 
organization. We had been suspicious that the 
paper had become yet another Yeerk-run organi-
zation. Mr. King had thought it safe to break into 
the offices of The Chronicle and examine their 
computer data, find the truth. 
Apparently that was a mistake. 
"Talk!" human-Controller Two shouted. "What 
are you doing here? Who are you? Why are you 
snooping?" 
Crumph! 
"I said stop it!" human-Controller One re-
peated angrily. "If you kill him, Visser Three will 
execute us for wasting a potential host body." 
There was a long pause before human-Controller 
Two spoke again. "Visser Three will execute us 
for incompetence if he finds out we couldn't beat 
the truth out of a mere human. Let's kill him and 
incinerate the body. Visser Three will never learn 
that we failed." 
"Visser Three will wonder why we did not sim-
ply infest him and learn the truth." 
"I tell you there is something wrong with this 
human. I tried to enter the ear canal, but it's 
blocked in some way. You don't believe me, you 
try it!" 
<Ax? What happens if they hit the Chee with 
a Dracon beam? Can they fry him?> Prince Jake 
3 

asked me in the thought-speak language we use 
while in morph. 
<l am assuming that it would depend on the 
amount of power used. A low setting might only 
disturb the Chee's holographically projected body. 
It would reveal the android beneath. But a full-
power setting could very possibly destroy Mr. 
King entirely. Which would be worse from our 
own narrow perspective? It is an interesting ques-
tions 
<Thanks, Spock,> Marco said, using the hu-
man tone I've come to recognize as sarcasm. 
<Sure you're not a Vulcan?> 
<Vulcans are fictional creatures,> I replied. 
<And not a particularly convincing creation. Vari-
ations among real alien species tend to involve 
more than cosmetic variations in ear formation 
and eyebrow alignment. As I believe you may 
have noticed.> 
Marco said, <Hey! Who just crawled over my 
back?> 
<Sorry,> Cassie said. <Lousy visibility.> 
The sound of a new blow came echoing 
through the pipe again. "Talk! Talk or we'll kill 
you!" 
We were inside the wall. To one side, the tor-
ture. On the other side? We would have to find 
out. 
4 
Prince Jake's voice was sharp and urgent. 
<Follow me and get ready to morph.> 
<Why doesn't Mr. King just walk out of there 
and save us a whole lot of trouble?> Marco 
asked. 
<What's the problem, Marco, missing the 
Rugrats marathon?> That was Rachel. Rachel 
never found reason to resist action. 
For my own part I sympathized with Marco. 
The Chee were frustrating. Very useful allies. But 
also liabilities. My human friends have a certain 
sentimental sympathy for the pacifism of the 
Chee. I do not. 
<Rachel, have I mentioned that I consider 
you the most attractive cockroach around? Psy-
chotic, yet with a certain cockroach style.> • 
Rachel laughed. <Anyway, there's two of 
them and five of us. So don't wet yourself.> 
<We're here,> Prince Jake announced. 
<Any idea where "here" is?> Cassie inquired. 
<Here's where there's an eighth of an inch 
crack,> Prince Jake explained. <That's good 
enough for me.> 
Prince Jake navigated a bend in the pipe and 
crossed to the wall itself. Above him was a tiny 
thread of light. I followed. 
Prince Jake flattened his body. Disappeared 
between two boards. 
5 

I did the same. 
We emerged into the light. I fought the in-
stinct to panic and retreat back into the base-
board. I waved my antennae, checking for danger. 
<AII clear,> Prince Jake announced, although 
his roach senses were no better than mine. He 
had to be making an educated guess. <De-
morph!> 
<Let's rock and roll,> Rachel said. 
Rock and roll is a type of human music. Its 
relevance to the battle before us was a mystery to 
me. 
6 
Morphing is an odd and disturbing process. 
It is never the same twice. The last time I came 
out of cockroach morph, my hind legs were the 
first portions of my Andalite anatomy to emerge. 
This time, it was my eyes. 
The two that are on stalks. Not the ones on 
my face. I had no face at the moment so eyes 
would have been quite out of place. 
I felt the nub of both stalks pushing out 
through my hard, insect exoskeleton. My head 
split with an audible crack. 
It was not painful. At least not in the conven-
tional sense. But there was a sense that it should 
hurt. Therefore while there is no actual pain, 

there is the anticipation of pain. Which, in its 
own way, is quite painful. 
My two eye stalks emerged and I was able to 
see the others with far more clarity than the 
roach's dim senses allowed. 
Marco. Rachel. Cassie. And Prince Jake. All 
demorphingfrom roach to human. Neither transi-
tion, roach to Andalite or roach to human, is at-
tractive to watch. I try to be sensible about such 
things but it is simply disturbing to watch human 
flesh grow out of a roach's hard, caramel-colored 
exoskeleton. The melting of enlarged roach mouth-
parts to re-form as human mouthparts is particu-
larly unsettling. Possibly because for an Andalite 
all mouths seem alien. 
We were in a room filled with what appeared 
to be filing cabinets. There were newspapers 
piled high in stacks. The sound of torture came 
from the other side of the wall. 
<Still clear outside here,> Tobias reported. 
He sounded bored. <Just watching the moon go 
by overheads 
Tobias is a nothlit, a person who overstays the 
two-hour limit and becomes trapped in morph. 
He has, in fact, reacquired his power to morph 
and could, should he choose to do so, resume 
human form permanently. Assuming he would 
be willing to become a sort of human nothlit, 
8 
trapped forever in his original form, never able to 
morph again. 
He has chosen to remain a red-tailed hawk. 
He usually provides air surveillance for us during 
a mission. 
Prince Jake looked at the others. And then at 
me. "Ax, you go in as yourself. Everybody else, 
battle morphs. We're doing this fast. And we're 
doing it right." 
We heard the door to the next office open and 
close. 
"I brought in three Dracon beams," human-
Controller Two said. "Enough to reduce him to a 
little pile of ash." 
Prince Jake began the tiger morph. His eye-
teeth grew, surging forward like plunging dag-
gers. Two sharp tiger ears sprouted from his hair 
before his own human ears disappeared, creating 
a very odd appearance. 
His forearms bent at an odd angle, growing 
shorter and sprouting orange-and-black fur. 
The others were right behind him. Or, in 
Cassie's case, ahead of him. She is quite tal-
ented at morphing. I was soon in the company of 
a tiger, a wolf, a grizzly bear, and a gorilla. 
If someday an Andalite reads this and won-
ders what these animals represent, I should point 
out that the animals of Earth are often very pow-
9 

erful, capable of doing tremendous damage with 
a combination of claws, teeth, lightning reflexes, 
and highly acute senses. Among the animals of 
Earth, these four, each with its own strengths 
and weaknesses, formed a powerful force. 
For human readers I should explain that my 
own Andalite body is of course sufficient for bat-
tle situations. I have four eyes, four legs, two 
arms, and a tail blade that can slice a human in 
half with one swipe. 
Well, perhaps two swipes. I may perhaps have 
a tendency to overstate my capabilities. 
<They're right on the other side of that wallf> 
Cassie said. Her wolf senses could pinpoint our 
targets within a few feet one way or the other. 
<Too bad there's no door,> Prince Jake said. 
<Rachel? Marco? Ax? Make a door.> 
Rachel stood. Eight hundred pounds of loose, 
shaggy brown fur over massive muscle and bone. 
KABOOM! 
Rachel slammed into the wall. 
The flimsy drywall cracked from baseboard to 
ceiling in several places. 
"What the . . . ?" Before the human-Controller 
on the other side of the wall could finish his 
cry . . . 
SNAP! 
Marco grabbed the cracked wallboard and 
ripped it back. 
10 
Fwapp! Fwapp! 
I whipped my tail over my head and sliced the 
bent Sheetrock so that it fell away with a clatter 
and a puff of dust. 
Cassie was through the gap in a flash of gray 
fur, teeth bared. Jake was right behind her. 
"Andalites!" 
the 
two 
human-Controllers 
screamed. 
The Yeerks believe we are all Andalites. Actu-
ally there was just the one Andalite. Me. 
I felt that would be enough. 
11 

It was a small room. Badly lit. One wall was 
formed of reinforced glass and beyond that glass 
a dark office. 
I should have worried about that. We all 
should have. But our attention was drawn to what 
appeared to be a badly beaten human, barely 
holding onto consciousness, slumped on a chair. 
His arms were bound behind his back with metal 
chains called handcuffs. His ankles were like-
wise affixed to the legs of the chair. 
One of the human-Controllers was drawing a 
gun. He took aim at Cassie. Cassie's teeth found 
his arm in midair. The man screamed. 
BLAM! His shot went wild. 
BLAM! BLAM! 
12 
The second Controller fired two shots at 
Rachel. One missed. The other nicked her shoul-
der. It was badly aimed. Most likely because 
Marco was shaking him like a rag doll. 
Fwapp! Fwapp! 
I hit each of the Controllers with the flat of my 
tail. Both fell unconscious. 
The seemingly near-dead Mr. King sat up, 
suddenly whole, healthy, and unscarred, calmly 
snapped the handcuffs, and said, "Thanks for 
coming to get me." 
<Keep up the pretense,> I warned. <There 
may be others of the enemy around.> 
"Ah, yes." The wounds, the blood all reap-
peared instantly. He let out a very convincing 
groan and slumped. 
Marco dropped the human-Controller and 
picked up Mr. King. <Okay! Let's get out of 
here.> 
Rachel swung her arms from her enormous 
shoulders, impatient. <That was too easy,> she 
complained. <Maybe . . .> 
<Uh-oh!> Marco said. 
Something was moving beyond the reinforced 
glass. Several somethings. Hork-Bajir! And one 
shape that was terribly familiar. 
Visser Three! 
<lt's a trap!> Prince Jake shouted. 
I stared at the heavily muscled adult Andalite 
13 

body. At the tail blade that could kill with one 
swipe. Looked with hatred at the only Andalite-
Controller in the galaxy. 
Visser Three had no right to that body. No 
right to the eyes. The brain. The strength. The 
speed. No right to the morphing power. 
Visser Three is an evil thing. A Yeerk slug 
within the brain of an Andalite who had once 
been called Alloran-Semitur-Corrass. 
Alloran's was a hideous fate. He was still 
alive. His mind and memories intact. He was a 
slave of his own enemy. And he knew the depths 
of his own powerlessness. 
Crrrraaassshhh! 
The glass partition fell in splinters. 
The visser leaped. Straight for me. 
Fwapp! 
I blocked the blow. Barely. He was fast, very 
strong. Stronger than me. 
But I was not alone. 
"ROOAARRRR!" The tiger's roar shook the 
light fixtures! Their fluorescent glow flickered! 
Jake bounded over three desks and landed, 
claws extended, on the visser's back. 
His claws raked deep and drew blood. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
The Hork-Bajir were firing. All that saved us 
was the care the Hork-Bajir had to take not to hit 
their master. 
14 
Prince Jake rolled off the visser and onto the 
floor. His fur burned and smoked where a Dracon 
beam had penetrated the muscled shoulder. 
<To the door!> Prince Jake yelled. 
Marco yanked it open. 
An armed Hork-Bajir stood in the doorway. 
More behind him. How many? Too many. 
We were blocked in two directions. The only 
way out was the hole we had made to get in. 
No time to think. The visser was on me. 
Fwapp! 
He struck. I felt his blade bite. Felt my left 
front leg go numb from the blow. 
Fwapp! 
I blocked, but he knocked my tail, whipping 
back. Too strong! I was as fast, but he had power 
I couldn't match. 
Fwapp! 
I felt the wind of the blow on my exposed 
neck. 
I drew back and then made a lunatic feint. It 
threw him off balance. 
Small victory. And temporary. 
The visser ducked his upper body, clearing 
the firing line, and roared, <Fire!> 
<Down!> I yelled. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Beams singed the fur down both sides of my 
back. The wall behind me was all burning wall-
15 

board and wood, half-incinerated by the Dracon 
beams. 
<Rachel! Get the Chee out!> Prince Jake 
ordered. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
<Ahh!> Jake cried. One of his legs was simply 
gone, a sizzling, bleeding stump. 
<Marco! On me!> Rachel yelled. She charged 
toward the exit door, straight into the nearest 
Hork-Bajir blocking our path. The Hork-Bajir 
folded, crumpled. Marco was right behind Ra-
chel with the Chee on his shoulder. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
A hole the size of a fist burned through 
Rachel. But the grizzly is not easily stopped. 
<Out the way we came in!> Rachel yelled. 
They pushed back through our own doorway. 
Into the file room. 
<The hallway over here is clear,> Rachel 
yelled. <Comeon!> 
<Okay, bail out!> Jake ordered. 
But before I could run, a sound. My stalk eyes 
swung upward in response to the noise. Ceiling 
panels were being pulled up as if they were trap-
doors. 
Hork-Bajir began to drop like hailstones. 
16 
<l I larco! Take care of Mr. King!> Prince Jake 
ordered. <Rachel! Hang back with us. Tobias! If 
you're still out there, get ready to cover Marco!> 
We plowed down the hallway, staggering, 
bleeding, scared. Not fast enough. The Hork-Bajir 
were rushing up behind us, slashing, cutting into 
muscle and sinew. 
I killed one with a lucky swipe of my tail. He 
fell and tripped one of his brothers. The two of 
them sprawled, delaying the rush by a split sec-
ond. 
Down a dark hallway, walls all around, hem-
ming us-in, a tunnel, and with Hork-Bajir roaring 
after us. If they were ahead of us as well . . . 
Stairwell leading down. Freight elevator just 
17 

ahead. Hallway took a turn just past the elevator. 
Which way? Prince Jake's decision, but Prince 
Jake was weakening, stumbling. How much 
longer could he keep going on three legs? 
I wasn't much better off. Bleeding. Stagger-
ing. Hurt. 
"Sssree! Sssree!" 
A frenzy of squealing from below! 
Taxxons! 
Enormous voracious centipedes. Drawn by the 
carnage. Forcing their way up the narrow stairwell. 
Scrambling over the fallen Hork-Bajir, tearing 
limbs and pieces of flesh from their still-breathing 
bodies. 
Visser Three stepped into the hallway directly 
ahead. How? Some back way. We were surrounded. 
<The elevatorT> Prince Jake gasped. 
I slammed the button, willing it to come 
quickly. 
Where was Marco? He had gone down the 
hallway where the visser now appeared. Had he 
escaped? Or was he already a prisoner? 
<l knew a front-page article on The Sharing 
would bring the Andalite bandits from under-
cover^ Visser Three sneered. To his troops he 
said, <l don't want them dead. Lowest power set-
ting. Aim carefully.> 
The Hork-Bajir lifted their Dracon beams. 
18 
My chest was tight with panic. I could hardly 
breathe. 
My hearts ached for my parents. They had 
lost one son on this distant planet. I feared they 
would soon lose a second. 
DING! 
The doors to the freight elevator opened. The 
Hork-Bajir wavered, distracted. 
<DOWN!> Jake roared. 
<FIRE!> 
Tseeewww! Tseeewww! Tseeewww! 
Dracon beams burned. Inches above us. 
And now . . . 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Shredder fire! The sound, so like a Dracon 
beam, was different enough for any Andalite aristh 
to recognize. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Shredder fire, point-blank at the wall of tight-
packed Hork-Bajir. 
<More Andalites?!> Visser Three yelled, his 
thought-speak voice torn between outrage, fear, 
and simple disbelief. 
Four Andalites jumped from the elevator like 
bucks clearing a fence. They were everywhere at 
once. Firing. Whipping their tail blades with 
deadly precision. 
They were magnificent. 
19 

I fought beside a young female. 
She had impeccable timing. She was danger-
ous. She was beautiful. 
CRASH! 
The hallway wall collapsed and the battle spilled 
back into the interior office space of the build-
ing. 
The female kept up a steady stream of fire as 
we forced back the Hork-Bajir line. 
Windows shattered. Desks splintered. Plaster, 
tangles of wire, and debris poured from the ceil-
ing. 
The Yeerks were losing. 
Suddenly, the shrill sound of police sirens 
penetrated the noise of battle. 
<Hey, cops are on their way,> Tobias an-
nounced. <Get out!> 
<Did Marco make it out?> Prince Jake de-
manded, unwilling to run till he was sure we were 
all safe. 
<Yeah. Jumped out of a window and the Chee 
threw up a hologram, made it look like they were 
a parked car.> 
<Visser,> Prince Jake snapped. <Maybe those 
cops are your people, but maybe not. Walk away 
and you live, for now.> 
The visser did not deign to respond. He 
slammed his way past a Taxxon, leaving the crea-
ture oozing goo from a deep gash. 
20 
The battle was over. 
Shell-shocked Hork-Bajir began gathering up 
their dead. Taxxons waddled back down the stair-
well, dragging what meat they could take away 
with them, to disappear into some secret base-
ment hiding place. 
Then, through a cloud of plaster dust, I saw 
one of the Andalite warriors jump over the body 
of a fallen Hork-Bajir and land face-to-face with 
Visser Three. 
Of course! These Andalites were not under 
Prince Jake's orders. 
The Andalite lifted his shredder. It would be a 
point-blank killing. 
I felt a surge of hot joy in my heart. 
Visser Three looked at the Andalite. <Arbat!> 
The Andalite's eyes flickered and his finger 
hesitated on the shredder. 
Fwapp! 
With the flat of his tail blade, the visser 
smacked the weapon from his assailant's hand. 
<You never could see that one coming, could 
you, Arbat?> Visser Three laughed. <That's what 
comes of thinking too much and tail fighting too 
little.> 
The one he had called Arbat let out an An-
dalite curse. 
Visser Three leaped to safety behind a pha-
lanx of Hork-Bajir. 
21 

Prince Jake said, <l don't know who you guys 
are, but first: Thanks. Second: Get out of here. 
The cops get in on this and we'll have a massacre 
of innocent policemen.> 
• <Withdraw. Now!> one of the Andalites com-
manded. 
<Everybody out!> Prince Jake ordered. 
<Wait!> I cried as the Andalites galloped 
down what was left of the hall. <Who are you? 
Where can I find you?> 
The female turned. <l am Estrid-Corill-
Darrath. Do not worry. We will find you, Aximili-
Esgarrouth-lsthill.> 
22 
fl. 
n hour later, we were in Cassie's barn, 
Cassie's family runs the Wildlife Rehabilita-
tion Clinic. At any given time, the clinic houses 
several dozen wounded or ill creatures. Often ex-
otics. 
There are also squirrels, rabbits, pigeons, and 
grackles. Common creatures that come and go, 
drawn by the seeds and oats that lie scattered in 
and around the barn. 
"No doubt about it," Marco said, waving a 
copy of The Chronicle. "A propaganda mill for 
Yeerks. Part three in a five-part series on The 
Sharing." 
The Sharing exists to recruit human hosts, 
23 

willing and unwilling. It poses as an innocuous 
family-oriented group. 
For every Yeerk that has a host body, there are 
thousands of Yeerks that do not. They live in a 
dank pool where they feed on Kandrona rays. 
And wait. 
They wait for host bodies. 
They would not wait much longer. 
<lt seems obvious that the Andalite fleet has 
arrived,> I said. <The Yeerk invasion will soon 
cease to be a problems 
"Not so fast, Ax-man," Marco warned. 
<How can we lose when even our females 
fight like trained warriors!> I heard the old An-
dalite vainglory in my voice. I thought I had out-
grown the impulse to boast. But the thrill of 
fighting side by side with another Andalite had 
reawakened all the pride of my people. 
For the first time since I'd found myself 
stranded on Earth, I felt that the future might be 
hopeful. 
So I did not understand the look of wariness 
and pity transmitted from face-to-face. 
Cassie. To Rachel. To Prince Jake. To Tobias. To 
Marco. 
Marco spoke. "If I've learned one thing, it's 
this: It may walk like an Andalite. It may talk like 
an Andalite. But that don't mean it is an An-
dalite." 
9A 
"He's right, Ax." Cassie held a defanged pit 
viper she had found abandoned in the school-
yard. Gently she pried it from her arm and placed 
it in a large tub beneath a heat lamp. 
"We know it's hard for you, and that you're 
lonely a lot of the time," Cassie continued. 
"But. . ." 
"But we have to be realistic," Marco finished. 
"This might be the fleet. Or it might be some 
fresh hell." 
Prince Jake crossed his arms. "How do we 
know these new Andalites aren't Yeerks with An-
dalite host bodies?" 
<Right,> Tobias agreed. <Maybe a sub-visser 
and his posse looking to leapfrog to the top by 
taking out Visser Three.> 
<lmpossible!> I protested. 
"In a world where slugs can take over entire 
civilizations, anything is possible," Marco re-
minded me. 
<The female knew my name. The only way 
she could know that is via the message I trans-
mitted to the home planet, or through the forces 
we encountered on Leera.> 
"Funny you should mention Leera," Marco 
said. He did not say anything more. He did not 
have to. There, for the first time in my life, I had 
learned that even an Andalite may be a traitor. 
<These warriors are true Andalites,> I in-
25 

sisted. <l know this. When I fought beside the fe-
male, I felt a sense of connection unlike anything 
I have felt before.> 
Another look passed from face to face. This 
time, it appeared to be one of amusement. 
"Ax," Cassie said. "I think you have what is 
commonly known as a crush." 
<A what?> 
"A feeling that makes it hard for you to see 
the truth, if the truth is unpleasant," she ex-
plained. 
"Yeah, you know, like the way Cassie can't 
see that Jake is really just a pinhead," Marco 
said. 
Prince Jake threw a horse comb at Marco that 
Marco dodged. Marco and Prince Jake are best 
friends. This sort of behavior appears to be typi-
cal of male friendships. 
"Until we figure these guys out, let's just 
hang loose," Prince Jake said. 
"Yeah. Like maybe not change our minds 
about who is in charge and who isn't," Rachel 
said bluntly. 
I felt myself flush. In the Leera incident I had 
changed my allegiance from Prince Jake to the 
Andalite officer who betrayed us. 
I was still ashamed of this. But I had sworn 
never to abandon my prince again. Unless it was 
at his command. 
26 
Shame was quickly replaced by anger. 
<Doyou doubt my loyalty?> I demanded. 
"No, I don't," Prince Jake said firmly. And 
with a sharp look at Rachel he added, "Neither 
does Rachel. I just don't want you to do anything 
without talking it over with us first. Okay?" 
<l am a true Andalite warrior,> I said angrily. 
<And a true warrior never reneges on his oath to 
his prince.> 
I left the barn and galloped until both my 
hearts were pounding. I was angry, but that emo-
tion cooled quickly enough. The emotion that re-
placed it did not cool. 
She was beautiful. 
She was so beautiful. 
27 

f\EEERRRACCKKKK! 
I leaped out of range before the tree limb 
could fall on me. The limb I had severed with one 
blow of my tail. 
<Good shot!> Tobias circled downward, land-
ing in the tree. 
Tobias is interesting. A nothlit, but now an al-
most voluntary one. He has lost his human life, 
but not his human friends. He belongs. But at 
the same time, he does not belong. 
Like me. 
Perhaps that is why he is my true shorm. 
What humans would call a "best friend." Or 
"soul mate." That and the fact that my brother 
was Tobias's father. 
I assumed the attack position again. 
<Would you mind not doing that while I'm sit-
ting here?> Tobias asked. 
<They said they would find me, I may be 
called upon to fight at any moment. I must be 
ready. I must practices 
Even though I am only an aristh — what hu-
mans would call a cadet — in the Andalite mili-
tary, I had undergone rigorous training at the 
academy. Tail fighting is a sport, an art, and a 
deadly combat skill. 
I had a feeling that I was about to be tested. I 
did not want to disgrace myself. 
<Okay. But you know, it also wouldn't hurt 
to take a look around town. See if there's any 
sign of Andalite troop presence. You know, 
maybe a couple dozen of your folks down at the 
mall. Besides, I found twenty bucks this morn-
ing. Which sounds like a visit to the food court 
to me.> 
<Cinnabon?> 
<Cinnabon for you. Me, I'm a taco kind of 
guy. When I'm not enjoying fresh mouse.> 
Cinnamon buns! 
I paused. I am extremely fond of cinnamon 
buns. I am so fond of them, it is hard for me to 
restrain my joy in eating them. 
I have now had much practice eating cinna-
mon buns. But from time to time, I still have dif-

ficulty containing my enthusiasm for the taste 
sensations that come from these tasty treats. 
This is one of the things I must explain to my 
people: the incredible joys of acquiring human 
morphs and using the mouth to ingest intensely 
flavored items. 
I began to morph a northern harrier. The blue-
and-tan fur of my body began to grow longer and 
shingle. Layer upon layer of feathers appeared 
upon my shrinking body. 
<l take it that means yes — especially since 
I've already hidden our outer clothing on the mall 
roof,> Tobias said. 
We flew over the main part of town. Together. 
But not close. If Tobias and I were seen flying in 
tandem, it might attract attention. Yeerk atten-
tion. 
Once we had landed safely on the mall roof, 
Tobias began morphingto human. 
The sharp angles of his scowling hawk head 
blurred and rounded out. Flesh appeared on his 
face first. It swirled and rippled like dough as it 
arranged itself into human eyes, a human nose, 
and a human brow. 
His bird legs grew enormously long until what 
began to protrude was no longer bird leg, but 
bone. The bone formed a femur, a patella, and a 
tibia. Claws became toe bones. 
Flesh poured down the bones like liquid and 
molded thighs, calves, and feet. 
I concentrated. I would have to demorph to 
Andalite before morphing to human. 
Though we have agreed that it is immoral to 
acquire the DNA of sentient creatures, we also 
have agreed upon exceptions now and then. I ac-
quired a bit of DNA from Jake, Marco, Cassie, 
and Rachel. Thus, when I am human, I vaguely 
resemble all of them, but duplicate no one. 
It is a moral compromise. 
We have all learned to make them. 
The question was how I could make such op-
portunities available to my fellow Andalites once 
they landed and defeated the Yeerks. 
"Come on," Tobias said as soon as I had mor-
phed from Andalite to human and was properly 
dressed in my artificial skins. "Let's hit the 'Bon 
and the Taco Bell." 
I followed Tobias toward the small stairwell 
off the roof used by workmen. Through that door 
and down two flights of stairs was a door that led 
into the mall. 
We heard the commotion the moment we en-
tered the first floor. It was coming from the food 
court. 
"Beanzuh! Beanzuh! Zuh!" I heard a girl 
shout. 

"Somebody get security!" a woman yelled. 
"What's going on?" someone else asked. 
"Some girl went berserk in the food court," 
another person answered. "Eating everything in 
sight and yelling like a lunatic." 
Tobias raised an eyebrow. "Which answers the 
question of whether the Andalites have landed." 
We ran. 
3? 
C-H-FhPT-E-R 
7 
B eanzuh! Jelly beanzuh! Beanzuh! Zuh! 
Zuh!" 
We forced our way through the crowd that had 
gathered around the food court. 
A girl around Cassie's age sat crouched in 
front of bins of blue, green, yellow, red, and 
black jelly beans at the Candy Land store. She 
wore a Burger King tunic and slacks. Backward. 
A harassed-looking young woman was trying 
to persuade her to get away from the bin. 
"So sweet. So delicious!" The girl was almost 
weeping with joy. "The taste . . . overwhelming!" 
"Well. This is not good," Tobias said. "Your 
little friend Estrid?" 
"I believe that is likely." 
33 
(W 

Estrid ignored the Candy Land lady. She 
crammed more bright pellets into her mouth, 
rolled her eyes, seemed to be transported by 
pleasure. 
A mall security guard moved toward her. 
"Okay. Let's go." 
Tobias hurried forward and put his hand on 
the guard's arm. "No wait! She's my sister. She's 
having a bad reaction to her medication." 
"The green are the best!" Estrid said. 
The guard looked hard at Tobias. As if he 
weren't sure whether or not Tobias was telling the 
truth. "She's on drugs?" 
"It's a seizure thing. She was dropped on her 
head when she was a baby." 
"No, the blue! A blue that saturates the very 
soul with pleasure!" 
"Then we should call an ambulance," said 
the Candy Land lady. 
"I like the red ones," a kid in the crowd called 
out. 
"It's happened before," Tobias said. "We 
know what to do. She calms down . . ." 
"Yes! Red! Red-duh!" 
" . . . Eventually. We have some other medi-
cine at home. If we can just take her with us, 
everything will be fine." 
We both moved toward the shrieking girl. 
"But . . ." the security guard said. 
QA 
"We're fine," Tobias insisted. "Fine. Come 
on, sis. Let's go home." Tobias took one arm and 
I took the other. 
Estrid looked at each of us, and then let out a 
horrible, ear-piercing scream. "Nooooo! Bean-
zuh!" 
"Now, sis," Tobias soothed. "Don't make a 
scene." 
"Sssssseeene. Sssseeeeenuh. Nuh. Nuh. Nuh." 
While she was momentarily diverted by the 
novel sounds her mouth could make, I leaned 
close and whispered, "It is I, Aximili. You are 
having a reaction to mouth-pleasures. It will be 
fine. Come with us and be quiet." 
On our way to the door we used to access the 
mall, I saw a girl inside the doorway of Express. 
She was examining some artificial skins. 
And she was an exact replica of the girl we 
were half-carrying, half-dragging. Her long hair 
was red and very wavy. Her eyes were deep blue. 
And her face was covered with cinnamon-colored 
freckles. 
Cinnamon. Delicious. 
"Hey!" a male voice shouted behind us. 
"What are you doing with my sister?" 
Tobias turned. "Holy . . . come on!" 
In order to look behind in human morph it is 
necessary to turn one's head. A dizzying action 
on only two legs. 
35 

I did so and understood the cause of Tobias's 
alarm. 
A very large young man and four of his com-
panions were chasing us. 
"She must have morphed his sister. He thinks 
we're abducting her! Great," Tobias wheezed. 
"Haul buns." 
"Bunzzzzz," I repeated, unable to resist the 
impulse. "Zuh. Zuh. Zuh." 
"Please, Ax," Tobias yelled, breaking into a 
run. "Not now!" 
e escaped from the mall. It was not our 
most challenging escape. 
Estrid morphed to kafit bird and flew away. 
But not before I had arranged for a meeting with 
her superior. We needed to know what was hap-
pening with the Andalite invasion force. 
Or, at very least, we had to warn them about 
the dangers of morphing humans. 
A few hours later I was in the air, in harrier 
morph. 
<How much further?> Prince Jake asked. 
<lf the directions are accurate, less than a 
mile. There is a fence ahead.> 
Prince Jake was on the ground. Traveling in 
wolf morph. It would have been unwise for me to 
w 
37 

travel long distances through the woods in my 
own true body. I live in some fear that human 
hunters might see me and shoot me as a deer. 
Shooting deer is a human sport. Human hunters 
are apparently unaware of the fact that deer are 
harmless herbivores. 
In the distance ahead, beyond the fence, I 
could see thick trees around a shallow pond. The 
scene fit her description. 
Estrid had refused to guide me to the An-
dalite ship. She was not authorized to reveal its 
location. Commendable caution. But she had 
agreed to arrange a meeting with her commander 
in this spot. 
Estrid was waiting at the edge of the thicket. 
How odd that the sight of one of my own 
people should seem so strange. It was almost 
disturbing, somehow. It made me feel lonely, 
which made no sense. Why should the sight of 
this single, lovely female make me feel lonely? 
I flew a few hundred yards ahead of Jake 
and landed on the ground in front of her. I de-
morphed quickly. If this was all somehow a 
Yeerk ambush, then my presence would trigger 
the attack. Better me than my prince. 
I stood, awkward. Waiting, No Dracon beams. 
No Hork-Bajir. No Taxxons. No ambush. 
<Welcome, Aximili,> Estrid said. <My com-
mander is eager to meet you.> 
<Where is he?> 
<Near. He fears a trap.> 
Before I could respond, I saw her main eyes 
widen. One stalk eye whipped around. Jake had 
approached and begun to demorph. 
Estrid glared angrily. <l told you to come 
alone,> she said, 
<And I told him not to,> Prince Jake said in 
thought-speak just as he completed his demorph. 
<But he is human!> Estrid exclaimed. <And 
with the power to morph! How can this be? Wait, 
were those humans in the battle where we met? 
Morph-capable humans?> 
T i l discuss that with your commander," Jake 
said calmly. 
<This human is Jake. He is my prince,> I ex-
plained. 
Estrid looked as if she might laugh. To an An-
dalite the notion of an alien as a prince was hu-
morous. 
But she restrained herself. 
<l am honored to meet you, Jake.> 
"Likewise." 
Then Estrid put a hand on my arm and 
thought-spoke privately to me. My hearts flut-
tered at the touch. 
<May I ask you a favor? My experimentation 
with human morph was unauthorized. Will you 
refrain from mentioning it to my commander?> 
39 

For a moment, I was too stunned to answer. 
Such a breach of discipline! Perhaps females 
were allowed more latitude and thus felt free to 
take more liberties. 
I did not know. But I could see no harm in 
protecting her from what might be a harsh pun-
ishment. 
<l will say nothings I promised. 
We moved carefully through the dense trees 
until we reached the banks of the pond. Three 
Andalite warriors stood tense and watchful. 
I said nothing. Aristhsdo not speak until spo-
ken to. 
Most arisths. 
<This is Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill,> Estrid said. 
<These Andalite warriors are Commander Gonrod-
Isfall-Sonilli, Intelligence Advisor Arbat-Elivat-
Estoni, and Aloth-Attamil-Gahar.> 
I saw Commander Gonrod's face tense at her 
forwardness. But he did not reprimand her. Ar-
bat's eyes smiled slyly. 
<And this alien?> Commander Gonrod de-
manded. 
<This is Jake. My prince.> 
Gonrod snorted. <Your prince? You insult the 
highest ranking Andalite within light-years by an-
nouncing your allegiance to a human child?> 
Prince Jake did not react to the insult. But he 
AH 
did react to Gonrod's careless words. "Your rank 
is commander and you're the highest ranking An-
dalite commander within light-years?" He looked 
at me, questioning. 
I was almost too disappointed to respond. I 
did not abandon hope. But my optimism was 
sharply reduced. I could only confirm what 
Prince Jake suspected. <Commander is a rank 
most often held by an Andalite in command of a 
single ship. A single small ship.> 
"I see." 
<There goes our plan to bluff the enemy into 
thinking they are outnumbered.> Aloth let out a 
crack of laughter. Highly insubordinate. 
<Silence!> Gonrod looked only at me. He 
refused to acknowledge Prince Jake. <Aristh 
Aximili, inform this human that we are not pre-
pared to discuss strategic matters with him.> 
<Commander Gonrod, Prince Jake is the 
leader of the human resistance on Earth.> 
<Really? And how many warriors does he 
lead?> Commander Gonrod asked me. 
"Not enough," Prince Jake said bluntly. 
<No. Not enough. But morph-capable. I was 
briefed before we began this mission.> Gonrod 
reluctantly addressed Prince Jake. <l know you 
were involved in the war on Leera. I also know 
that an entire ship full of Andalite warriors died 
41 

and that you and your humans survived. Now, I 
asked, human, how many warriors do you com-
mand?> 
<Those warriors on Leera died because of —> 
I began, but Prince Jake silenced me with a 
raised hand. 
"We were on Leera. Let's leave it at that. I 
don't want to bring up anything embarrassing. 
No point. But you'll understand if I say that I'm 
not prepared to discuss my forces with you. Not 
yet." 
<You, a human, do not trust an Andalite com-
mander?1^ Gonrod cried. 
Aloth spoke. Mockingly. <Perhaps the human 
is not aware that Andalites are known throughout 
the galaxy for their integrity.> 
<Silence!> Gonrod roared again, 
<Perhaps we should proceed by outlining our 
common goals,> I suggested diplomatically. 
"Perhaps we should begin by finding out ex-
actly what we can count on in terms of Andalite 
support," Jake countered, staring fixedly at Gon-
rod. 
<Support?> Gonrod snorted again. <You con-
sider us support? Are all humans as ignorant and 
arrogant as you, man-child?> Gonrod began to 
pace. <You are an untrained human child, play-
ing at war. We are highly trained warriors. You 
and your band, whoever they may be, will cease 
to fight. That is an order.> 
"I don't take orders," Prince Jake snapped. "I 
give them. And now, this meeting is over." He 
turned and began to walk away. 
<Aristh Aximili!> Gonrod shouted. <Stay 
where you are.> 
<Commander Gonrod. I respectfully remind 
you that an Andalite's allegiance is to his prince.> 
<You are disobeying a direct order.> 
I followed Prince Jake. 
<Aloth! Arbat!> Gonrod shouted. <Shredders 
on lowest setting. Fire on Aristh AximilL> 
43 

<Unfortunately, Commander Gonrod, I am 
being prevented from using my weapon,> Arbat 
answered. <l believe Aloth is similarly situated.> 
Aloth had apparently not noticed. Now he 
looked down in horror. A pit viper wound itself 
around his right foreleg. Cassie, of course. And 
a cobra reared up just between Arbat's legs. 
Marco. 
Estrid took a step forward and reached for her 
own shredder. 
Fwapp! 
I brought my tail blade to a quivering halt mil-
limeters from her throat. Her eyes blazed in 
anger. 
"Andalites are very fast," Prince Jake said. 
"Those snakes are faster. One move from your 
boys and they will die." 
Gonrod said nothing. He seemed at a loss. It 
was shocking to see in an Andalite commander. 
But Arbat was so calm as to seem almost 
bored. <So, you've set a trap for us. Very clever. 
Now what?> 
Prince Jake seemed uncertain whether to 
continue addressing Gonrod or Arbat. "Now we 
stop playing games. You're not the Andalite fleet. 
And I'm not going to snap a salute and say 'yes, 
sir!' We deal as equals. Which, to be honest, is 
generous of us under the circumstances." 
Arbat half-closed his eyes in a smile. <What 
do you say, Commander Gonrod? As the Intelli-
gence expert I'd have to say we're not in a posi-
tion to bargain.> 
But Gonrod had recovered. <l command, 
here. Am I clear on that?> 
"No, sir. This is Earth. This is a human 
planet. We are not the Hork-Bajir. We know how 
you 'rescued them.' As long as you're on Earth, 
you'll get along with us. Am I clear on that?" 
Fool. An embarrassment. Gonrod was behav-
ing very badly. What was the point in this? I 
looked at Estrid. She refused to acknowledge 
me. But I could see the evidence on her face that 
she, too, was humiliated by this ludicrous dis-
play. 
45 

For his part, Aloth was a seemingly straight-
forward warrior. He was awaiting orders, his expres-
sion professionally blank. Whatever he thought of 
his commander, he concealed it. 
Arbat was a different matter. Arbat's con-
tempt for Gonrod was scarcely camouflaged. 
"Now," Prince Jake said, "who are you? Why 
are you here?" 
Gonrod nodded to Arbat and Aloth. They 
dropped their weapons. 
Cassie and Marco withdrew. Not far, but a lit-
tle, at least. Of course I knew that Rachel and To-
bias were still to be accounted for. 
I lowered my tail blade and Estrid lowered her 
shredder. 
Arbat stepped forward and spoke. He was an 
older Andalite. Much of his blue fur was tanned. 
<After the unexpected victory on Leera, major el-
ements of the fleet were ordered to Earth. But it 
was diverted to the Rakkam Garoo conflict in the 
Nine-Sifter system.> 
<What, are you people on call for every war in 
the galaxy?> Marco muttered. 
"So Earth waits. Again," Prince Jake said. 
"You're not the fleet, so who are you?" 
<Unit 0. A sabotage and assassination 
team,> Arbat explained. <Commander Gonrod is 
one of the ablest pilots in the fleet. Aloth is a 
warrior.> 
<An assassination team? Who is the assas-
sin?> 
<l am,> Aloth said. 
I tried not to stare at him. I had never met an 
assassin. I had not known any existed in the An-
dalite military. The notion of such a thing did not 
make me comfortable. 
<And I am an Apex Level Intelligence Advisor. 
Veteran of over twenty conflicts,> Arbat finished. 
<Gonrod is in overall command of the mission. I 
will direct the specific actions of terminating the 
target. > 
I automatically straightened my shoulders. 
Apex Level Intelligence is the highest level of ad-
visory to the War Council. Not soldiers, precisely. 
They are military adjuncts. Strategists. They 
plotted. They planned. 
And they knew everything. 
Did Arbat know the truth about Elfangor? 
About me? Likely. Our eyes met, but I could read 
nothing in their ironic, self-possessed gaze. 
Gonrod was a fool. Arbat was not. 
"What about Estrid?" Prince Jake asked. 
Gonrod looked slightly embarrassed. <Female 
arisths are a new addition to the military. She 
was assigned to this mission by accident.> 
Estrid's four eyes stared at blank space. 
Blinked rapidly. A sign of embarrassment. I felt 
sorry for her. 
47 

"In other words, she's a rookie?" Jake said. 
Estrid lifted her head. <l have trained hard,> 
she replied in a steely tone. <Make no mistake. I 
intend to carry my weight.> 
Fwapp! 
I reeled as the force of her small, female tail 
blade caught the side of my neck, knocking me 
off balance. 
While I struggled to keep my footing, a sec-
ond blow caught me behind the back legs, caus-
ing my knees to buckle. My rear end fell to the 
ground and pinned my tail beneath me. 
Fwapp! 
A third blow sent my front end sprawling. I 
tried to break my fall with my hands. But An-
dalite arms are not as strong as human arms. I 
fell, my chin scraping the grass. 
AQ 
TLstrid placed her front left hoof on my 
throat. <Any questions?> 
<Very impressive,> I conceded. 
It was a classic and beautifully executed 
hald-wurra. Old Andalite for "victory in three 
swipes." 
She removed her hoof and reached down to 
assist me. I took her hand. Sprang to my feet. 
Pulled her arm behind her back and lifted my tail 
blade just in time to block her defensive swipe. 
There was a loud clatter as our blades 
clashed. I released her arm and disengaged my 
tail. Sprang backward. 
<l am betting on Aximili.> Aloth eagerly 
stepped forward to get a better view. 

<You are a fool,> Arbat told him. <She will 
have him in two moves. But I accept the wager.> 
WHOOSH! 
I pulled my head back. Her tail blade, turned 
to present the dull edge, missed my throat by 
centimeters. 
"Ax?" Prince Jake's voice was full of genuine 
alarm. 
<Please do not interfere,> I said abruptly. I 
swung my tail hard. Not as hard as I could. 
She drew back her head, just as I expected, 
allowing my tail to double back with even more 
momentum and speed. As it neared her head, I 
turned it so that the flat side caught her. 
The blow caught her off guard. She tumbled 
to the ground. Rolled and sprang up nimbly again. 
She was not going to be easily defeated. <You 
have a good swing,> she said. <But mine is bet-
ters 
Fwapp! Fwapp! 
She was right. I had never seen a tail move so 
fast. In the blink of an eye, she caught me with 
the exact same move. This time I fell and rolled. 
Sprang up. Not as nimbly. 
<Ooh, that had to hurt,> Marco commented. 
<You did that very gracefully,> Estrid ob-
served. 
I was glad my fatigue had not shown. <Thank 
you. You will not see me do it again.> 
She laughed. <You hope.> 
CLANG! 
She blocked my tail blade with hers. The im-
pact of the blades rang out through the trees. 
I began to fear I might actually lose. It would 
be unbearably humiliating in front of Andalite of-
ficers. 
<Go, Ax-man!> Tobias yelled from wherever 
he was hiding. 
We sprang apart, both of us breathing hard. 
She lowered her head and raced straight at me. I 
leaped out of the way and she sideswiped me. I 
was knocked at an angle. 
It took me a moment to recover. And to re-
member something I had been taught on the first 
day of my training. 
Estrid bucked forward, preparing to pivot on 
her front legs and deliver another tail blow. I piv-
oted, too, turning out of the way. 
She missed me. Overshot. The weight and 
momentum of her tail sent her tumbling forward. 
She rolled over her head and neck and landed on 
her back with a cry of pain. 
Arbat ran forward. <Estrid!> 
She lay still for a moment. Then she began to 
laugh. <You beat me with the simplest move in 
the lexicons 
<Sometimes the simplest solutions are the 
most effectives I replied. 
51 

If she had been a male, I would have begun to 
boast. But it seemed less than gracious to boast 
about beating a female. Even one who was very, 
very good. 
Aloth chuckled happily. He had won his bet. 
Prince Jake watched me with a frown. He 
shook his head slightly and rolled his eyes up-
ward. It is a human expression with several in-
terpretations. In this case I believe my prince 
thought I was behaving foolishly. 
I would have helped Estrid, but Arbat was al-
ready pulling her to her feet. 
<l apologize,> she said to him. <You have lost 
your bet.> 
<You fought well,> he said proudly. He looked 
at me with new respect in his eyes. <But you 
fought better. You have not forgotten your acad-
emy training. And you show the sign of a great 
deal of experiences 
<There have been battles,> I said. 
Arbat gave me a speculative look. <l believe 
we have common goals, Aximili. I believe you 
and I have much in common. Visser Three killed 
your brother. What Visser Three did to my brother 
was worse than death.> 
"What did he do?" Prince Jake asked. 
Arbat's face betrayed no emotion. <My 
brother is Alloran. Host body to Visser Three.> 
I was not equally controlled. I jerked involun-
tarily. 
Prince Jake's eye narrowed. "So you're here 
to . . ." 
<To assassinate him,> Arbat answered. <Yes. 
Our mission is to kill Visser Three.> 
53 

Revenge is pointless and immoral," Cassie 
insisted. 
"Revenge is just another word for justice," 
Rachel said, her face hardening. 
"He's talking ibout killing his own brother," 
Cassie argued. 
"He had a chance. Back at the newspaper," 
Marco said. 
"He wasn't prepared," Rachel argued. 
"Visser Three doesn't give a lot of second 
chances," Marco said. "Maybe these guys are 
just blowing smoke. Maybe Arbat isn't as bad as 
he thinks he is. Although Aloth looks like trou-
ble." 
I watched a group of grackles pecking at 
some spilled seed. One appeared not to be hun-
gry. Instead of strutting and circling, he stood to 
the side, staring about him with an unwinking 
eye. 
<Does that grackle appear ill?> I asked 
Cassie. 
Cassie looked at the bird and frowned. "I 
can't tell." 
The bird flapped its wings and flew up into 
the rafters. Walked vigorously along the hayloft, 
pecking at stray straws. 
"Looks healthy to me," Rachel said. 
"Forget the birds," Marco snapped. "We have 
some stuff to deal with here." 
He was right, of course. At least about the im-
portance of the issue. I hoped he was not right 
about Arbat. 
Arbat had revealed that Visser Three occupied 
his brother's body. I understood why Arbat had 
hesitated when he had the chance to kill the 
visser. I understood. I sympathized. 
And yet, I worried. 
Any Andalite — and many humans — would 
rather die than continue to serve as host. But to 
perform the killing or not is an agonizing deci-
sion. As it should and must be. 
Marco's mother is a Controller. 
Prince Jake's brother, Tom, is also a human-
Controller. 
55 

I did not tell Arbat that I, too, had been un-
able to kill Alloran. Not even when the former war 
prince had begged me for death as the slug that 
was Visser Three temporarily abandoned Allo-
ran's poisoned body. 
I could not. To my unending shame, I could 
not bring myself to kill him. And just as Alloran 
had feared, the Yeerks had revived him. Visser 
Three had reinfested him. 
So we had listened as Arbat explained Unit 
O's mission. 
The War Council had ordered Visser Three killed. 
Visser Three was a continuing embarrassment to 
our people. We had allowed him to keep an An-
dalite host and had been unable to stop him. 
Visser Three was an enemy. We were at war. It 
made sense. 
But why had Arbat been chosen for the mis-
sion? Surely it must have occurred to someone 
that organizing and ordering the death of his 
brother was a particularly difficult thing for him 
to do. 
"War is one thing," Cassie said now. "Murder 
is another. What do we gain by helping Arbat and 
Aloth assassinate the visser?" 
I spoke. <By Andalite custom, the murder of 
a family member must be avenged. Perhaps to-
gether, Arbat and Aloth and I can succeed where 
each of us alone has failed.> 
R £ 
"Sounds like a plan to me," Rachel said. 
"It's a terrible plan. Don't help him, Ax," 
Cassie begged. "Alloran is still alive. Where 
there's life there's hope." 
"Great cliche," Marco sneered. 
<An Andalite warrior would rather die than 
serve as a Yeerk host,> I said. 
<l guess it's a live-free-or-die thing,> Tobias 
said quietly. He sat on a rail overhead. 
"Well, it's just cowardly," Cassie insisted, 
putting her hands on her hips. "The easy way 
out. If you're dead, you don't have to fight for 
your freedom, do you?" 
There was a long silence. No one said any-
thing. I looked to Prince Jake, but he was sitting 
with his head in his hands. 
"Jake?" Cassie said. 
No answer. 
Marco stood impatiently. "Are we all in denial 
or what? Why are we even arguing about this like 
it matters? I mean come on. We know what this is 
about. We're sitting here fighting out the same 
disagreements, asking ourselves what we should 
do next. There is no next. It's over. It's so over, isn't 
it? I mean, we fight because we think the Andalites 
are coming someday, someday. We've been carry-
ing out a delaying action. Slowing the Yeerks 
down so it wouldn't be too late by the time the 
big deal Andalites came along." 
57 

Rachel let out an exhausted sigh. "As much 
as I hate to admit it, Marco's right. The fleet is 
not coming to the rescue. The Andalites aren't 
here to help save Earth. They're here so Arbat 
and the Andalite command can settle their score 
with the visser. This isn't the Marines storming in 
to save us." 
"Exactly!" Cassie said. "It's personal. It's po-
litical. But there's no strategic value to the mis-
sion. No real military advantage. So that just 
makes it murder." 
"Hey, Cassie, you know what?" Marco snapped. 
"Who cares? I mean, who cares about all your 
moralizing? Are you even paying attention? What 
do you think, that the six of us are going to win 
this war? By ourselves? Four kids, a bird, and an 
alien? Six kids who can turn into animals, big 
deal! We've hurt the Yeerks, we've frustrated 
them, we've slowed them down, but we're peb-
bles in their shoes. This has always been about 
us being the resistance until the Andalites could 
do a D-Day and save our sorry butts." 
I had never heard Marco speak so harshly to 
Cassie. But more shocking still was that Jake did 
not step in to silence him. 
I had been so distracted by Estrid, by seeing 
my own people again that I had overlooked how 
devastating this news would be to my friends. 
They had hoped for salvation. Instead they were 
Rft 
presented with another complex problem, more 
dangers, more futility. 
I scanned each of their faces with my stalk 
eyes. These were not the humans I had known for 
so long. 
Prince Jake stood. "If the Andalites were seri-
ous about helping us, they'd have sent an invad-
ing force. And Cassie's right, they trade Visser 
Three for some other visser, how does that help 
us? And Marco's right, too. We're tired. We're so 
tired there are times I don't think I can get up 
the energy to breathe. And now, instead of help, 
big-time help, we have what are obviously the 
dregs of the Andalite forces. Gonrod's a fool. 
Aloth is just a foot soldier. Estrid's a rookie. And 
Arbat's a guy off on his own." 
"So what's our plan?" Rachel demanded. 
Prince Jake said nothing. 
It was sad. That is what I realized. Very sad. 
We had turned to Prince Jake so many times and 
always he had been there with an answer, a plan, 
or at least a hope. 
Marco slapped Rachel lightly on each cheek. 
"Wise up. Any plans we had — or have — are 
basically worth squat at this point. The war is 
over. Earth lost." 
The explosion was instantaneous. 
Rachel lunged for Marco. "Don't you EVER 
touch me again!" she screamed. 
59 

Marco fell to the ground and shielded his face 
with his arms. "Get off me. Get off me, you 
wacko!" 
"Stop it! Stop it!" Cassie cried. 
Tobias fluttered to the ground. Laughed bit-
terly. <That's it. I can't take this anymore. I'm 
losing my mind. I'm out. Out of here, out of this, 
I'm done, man.> Tobias flapped his wings and 
flew from the barn. 
cc\ 
""ft,, right, stop it, Rachel!" Prince Jake 
pulled her off Marco. Shook her hard. 
Rachel reeled back and raked her hair from 
her eyes. 
Marco stumbled to his feet. "Face facts," he 
panted. "The Andalites don't care. This isn't 
about Earth. It's about boosting Andalite morale 
by wasting the guy who made an Andalite a 
host." 
There was a long silence. Everyone looked at 
me. Staring as if they expected — hoped — that 
I would deny the truth of what Marco was saying. 
"Ax?" Prince Jake prompted. 
I shook my head. What was there to say? 
mm 
61 

Prince Jake frowned. "Then what do we want 
to do?" 
"I know what I'm going to do." Rachel angrily 
kicked a metal bucket. It clattered along the dirt 
floor of the barn. 
Two injured geese sent up an alarmed gabble. 
A small brown rabbit who had been sitting beside 
a bale of hay dove into a stall and disappeared 
from sight. 
Five or six grackles who had been pecking in 
the dirt squawked and flew up into the rafters. 
"Rachel/1 Cassie said quietly, putting her 
hand on Rachel's arm. "Please. We need you." 
Rachel jerked her arm from Cassie's grasp. 
"From now on I'm doing it my way. No more 
Geneva Convention warfare. If I'm going down, 
I'm taking out all the Yeerks I can before I go." 
She stalked toward the door. 
"Rachel!" Prince Jake shouted. 
Rachel whirled around. Her face red with 
anger. "I'm through taking orders from you," she 
said through clenched teeth. "I'm through with 
Marco and his stupid jokes. I'm through with 
Cassie's hypocrisy." 
Rachel lifted her fist and punched a lantern 
hanging from a hook. The glass splintered and it 
fell to the ground. 
"I'm through with all of you," she hissed. And 
stormed from the barn. 
an 
Cassie took a broom from the corner and be-
gan to sweep up the glass. "Count me out, too," 
she said softly. "If this war is unwinnable, how do 
we justify killing Hork-Bajir? Basically, they're 
prisoners of war. Innocent victims." 
"Cassie," Prince Jake pleaded. 
A tear rolled down her cheek. "I can't do it 
anymore." She dropped the broom and ran from 
the barn. 
Marco thrust; his hands into his pockets. 
"Guess I'm out, too. I'm going to enjoy what time 
I've got left. Acquire a surfer dude chick magnet. 
Hangout." 
"Marco," Prince Jake whispered. "Please." 
Marco put his hand on Prince Jake's shoulder. 
Let it slip off as he backed away. "Jake. Ax-man. 
Live long and prosper." 
Prince Jake and I were alone. 
We looked at one another. <l am still yours to 
commands I offered him my hand to shake as 
humans do. 
Prince Jake gripped it. His eyes were sad. "I 
can't hold you to your oath. The others are right. 
It's over. Go on. Do what you have to do. And if 
you can, go home." 
Prince Jake squeezed my hand tightly, for-
getting that Andalite hands are not as strong as 
human hands. I knew it was an expression of 
affection. I tried to return the pressure. 
63 

Prince Jake straightened his shoulders and 
lifted his chin. "Good-bye," he said. "And thank 
you. For everything." 
He walked slowly from the barn. His silhouette 
disappeared into the bright glare of the morning 
sun. 
I stood alone. 
Remembering. 
It was peaceful for the first time in a long 
time. No arguments or debates. Quite pleasant, 
really. 
<Estrid,> I said finally. <lf you are going to 
acquire Earth morphs, you must learn how to use 
them. Rabbits do not commonly chase large four-
footed creatures like myself across a field and 
then into a barn full of shouting humans.> 
Under the bottom slat of a stall gate, the 
small brown rabbit appeared. Estrid quickly de-
morphed and blinked with embarrassment at her 
mistake. <l have much to learn.> 
<l will teach you,> I said simply. 
Her four eyes looked at me and shone. <You 
will be happier with your own kind.> 
fid 
The Andalite ship was cloaked in a large 
empty field outside the fence of a family enter-
tainment center called The Gardens. I knew The 
Gardens well. Within it was a zoo where Prince 
Jake, the others, and I had acquired a number of 
useful morphs. 
We flew there from the barn. Before we left, 
Estrid acquired an Earth bird morph. A crow. We 
flew, but far enough apart to allay suspicion. 
As we descended, a square "hole" appeared 
in the sky. The upper hatch of the ship. We flew 
inside and it slid shut behind us. 
<This is the upper deck,> Estrid explained. 
<Let us demorph and I will take you down to the 
command deck.> 
65 

We demorphed and she led me through the 
hallways and corridors that connected what 
seemed to be several wings. It was large for a 
warship. Small for a transport. 
<This ship is designated the Crusader. It's an 
MSTL-37,> she explained. <A Mobile Science 
and Technology Lab ship. Pretty much obsolete 
by now.> 
<An odd choice of ship to send on such a 
missions 
She shrugged. <lt was what they could spare. 
The fighters and transports were needed in Nine-
Sifters 
We stood in front of a drop shaft and waited 
for the doors to open. <Estrid, I would like to ask 
a favor of you.> 
Her four eyes looked curiously at my face. 
<l still respect my former prince. We fought 
many battles together. I would appreciate if you 
would refrain from reporting that he was unable 
to maintain control of his warriors. I would not 
want the others to lose their respect for him. He 
has fought a good fight.> 
- <You kept my secret. I will keep yours.> 
The drop-shaft door opened and I stepped in 
beside her. 
I was uneasy. My request had been a test. But 
I was not sure whether she had passed or failed. 
66 
I felt grateful for her willingness to protect my 
prince. 
But what kind of an aristh would agree to 
withhold sensitive intelligence information from 
her superiors? 
Had she been instructed to gain my trust in 
order to spy on me? 
Or was she simply undertrained? Unsuited to 
the military because of her gender? 
I resolved to keep my guard up and my eyes 
open. I watched her fingers dance across a con-
trol panel as she programmed in an access code 
for me. 
Her hands were small. And graceful. When 
she was done, she turned her four eyes on me. 
My heart rates accelerated. 
I had noticed her four eyes staring at me 
quite a bit. 
That, too, was odd. 
The first lesson every aristh learned at the 
academy was: "Two eyes out front. Two eyes 
scanning." Always. A soldier never, ever, focused 
all his attention on the same spot. 
The shaft dropped us two decks and held us 
there. We stepped out onto the command deck. 
Gonrod, Aloth, and Arbat were waiting. 
<Aximili!> Arbat stepped forward to greet me. 
His voice was welcoming. 
67 

I saluted and made the traditional Andalite 
bow. <Commander Gonrod. My prince has re-
leased me and I now pledge myself to you.> 
Gonrod appeared mollified by the respect I 
showed him. 
<We are quite informal on this mission,> Ar-
batsaid. 
Gonrod bristled. <But the chain of command 
is clear.> 
<Of course. Of course,> Arbat said to Gonrod. 
<l did not mean to imply otherwises 
Arbat walked over to a workstation where 
Aloth calibrated a collection of handheld shred-
ders. <With one of these, I hope to destroy Visser 
Three.> 
<How can I help?> I asked him. 
Arbat took my arm. Guided me to the terraced 
perimeter of the deck where we could look out 
through the windows at the barren scrub grass 
outside. He thought-spoke to me privately. <l am 
willing to do anything it takes to destroy Visser 
Three. Are you?> 
<l look forward to the day when Visser Three 
no longer threatens free people,> I answered 
guardedly. 
<l trust you, Aximili. You have done well to 
survive here. I hope to benefit from your advice 
and experiences 
I shifted my weight uneasily. An Apex Level 
AR 
Intelligence Advisor is the highest rank in the 
intelligence division. An aristh the lowest rank 
in the regular military. On Earth I had followed, 
not led. Nor had I succeeded in killing Visser 
Three. Additionally, I had violated — by word 
and deed — more Andalite military codes than I 
could count. 
So why was Arbat treating me with such elab-
orate respect? Respect that I had not earned by 
Andalite standards. 
He wanted something from me. 
But what? 
69 

TTrbat broke off when he heard the heavy 
clop of Aloth's hooves approach. 
<Aristh Aximili,> said Aloth. <Commander 
Gonrod has asked me to show you around the 
ship.> 
<Excellent!> Arbat beamed. <Show our new 
comrade around.> 
I saluted Arbat and quickly followed the as-
sassin down the corridor. 
<lf I hear one more war story from that old 
wind machine I may have to self-destruct,> Aloth 
said when the shaft doors closed behind us. 
I was shocked. But I could not help chuck-
ling. <How can you talk that way about an Apex 
Level Intelligence Advisor?> 
70 
Aloth snorted. <And retired for the last six 
wars! He's a teacher now! A professor of techno-
logical history.> 
Like many soldiers, Aloth had little respect 
for anyone who was not a soldier. 
<He teaches at the academy?> I asked. 
<No! At the University of Advanced Scientific 
Theory.> 
The UAST was full of brilliant thinkers. But 
they were notorious for their impracticality. Not 
known for their battlefield skills. 
It seemed very strange that the War Council 
would send an aging professor of technological 
history to direct an assassination. 
But then, the military had obviously under-
gone many changes since I left the home planet. 
<Female arisths. Have they worked out well?> 
Aloth snorted again. <l keep waiting for Estrid 
to find some way of making herself useful.> 
<Does she have no duties?> 
Aloth shrugged. <None that seem necessary. 
Gonrod and I both tried to make a detour and 
drop her at a base. But Arbat was adamant that 
she remain on board.> 
<Why?> 
He shrugged. <l cannot think of any reason 
why he would want an inexperienced female 
aristh on a mission like this. Especially one who 
is not exactly regulation issue. She behaves more 
71 

like a princess than an aristh. And Arbat treats 
her that way.> 
Aloth's lazy insolence was gone now. He 
seemed lost in troubled thought. 
<Does her presence concern you?> I ven-
tured, prepared for him to snub me. He did not. 
Instead, he resumed his lazy warrior's swag-
ger. <l suppose not. She is probably here be-
cause inter-gender staffing is some pet project 
Arbat sold the War Council on. Or maybe she is 
somebody's niece and he got her fast-tracked 
through the academy.> 
Aloth gave me a significant look and laughed 
cynically. I had the feeling I had just missed 
something. But if that were true about Estrid, it 
would explain many things. 
<l guess none of us are exactly what you 
would call "regulation issue,"> Aloth added with 
awry laugh. 
<No? What do you mean by that?> 
<Nothing I feel like explaining to an aristh}> 
he said with a chuckle. <Not even the brother of 
Elfangor. Now stop asking me questions and lis-
ten for a change. You might learn something.> 
This was the dynamic I understood. The good-
natured snubbing a lowly aristh would expect 
from an experienced warrior. 
<We are on the third tier. There is the engine 
room. Storage. Quarters. Yours are at the end.> 
72 
<What is on the second tier?> 
<Nothing. Used to be a lab. Now it is sealed 
up so we do not have to waste energy on environ-
mental adaptation conversion. Think you can get 
around without getting lost?> 
<l believe I can. Where is my action station in 
the event the ship comes under attack?> 
Aloth shrugged. <This ship does not have 
enough firepower to stop a broken-down Skrit Na 
freighter. If a hot Bug fighter comes after us . . . 
put it this way: If we're attacked your action sta-
tion is kissing your tail good-bye.> 
Aloth laughed cynically. I did not see the hu-
mor. 
<Come on. That is the tour. Let us go back to 
the command deck. The old wheeze wants to 
"debrief you."> 
73 

I Moments later Gonrod, Aloth, Arbat, and I 
met on the command deck. Estrid was not pre-
sent. 
<Tell us about Visser Three.> Arbat seemed 
eager. Gonrod less so. <Where is he when he is 
not on his Blade ship?> 
<l do not know,> I answered. <How did you 
find him in the newspaper office?> 
<We did not,> Arbat said. <We found you. 
Our ship sensors were programmed to locate your 
DNA pattern. We were able to download it from 
your academy records.> 
<Could we not do the same with Alloran's?> I 
asked. 
74 
<AIIoran's from the old days. Back before we 
used DNA encryptions 
<| see. Then our most likely means of finding 
him would be at the next meeting of The Sharing 
at the Community Center. He often attends. Not 
always. But often. Failing that, he is often in the 
Yeerk pool complex.> 
I explained what The Sharing was, and how 
Visser Three was often present in human morph 
to address those who attended. I told them also 
about the location of the Yeerk pool. 
<How many Yeerks would be present at the 
meeting?> Arbat asked. 
<We are only interested in one Yeerk,> Gonrod 
snapped. <Our orders are clear and specific. One 
target. And then we are done. If Aloth can hit the 
target> 
<Aloth will hit the target,> Arbat said coldly. 
<Will I? It is not an easy thing to do,> Aloth 
said. <Take aim at a target, a living target, aim 
for the kill, fire, watch to see the damage. Take a 
life. And this is no ordinary target, Arbat, but 
your brother. J have a brother, too. I wonder, 
when the time comes, whether you will find it so 
easy to give the final order.> 
Arbat ignored Aloth. Or tried to. 
<lt is a question we would all like answered,> 
Gonrod said. 
75 

<lt is a question that will be answered when I 
give that order and rid the galaxy of the Abomina-
tion^ Arbat snapped. It was the first time I had 
seem him lose what my human friends would call 
"his cool." 
He recovered quickly. <l need as much infor-
mation as I can gather. May I continue with the 
questioning of this aristh?> 
<Very well.> Gonrod's permission was grudg-
ing. He peered nervously at the various surveil-
lance screens. It was something he did every few 
seconds. He seemed extraordinarily ill at ease for 
a commander. 
<The Yeerk pool? Would it be possible to gain 
access?> Arbat pressed. 
<We will not go there!> Gonrod insisted 
shrilly. 
Aloth suppressed a snicker. 
Gonrod threw Aloth a belligerent look. <The 
aristh has presented us with a perfectly good tar-
get. We will attack this meeting of The Sharing. 
Tomorrow morning. We will hit Visser Three. And 
we will leave.> 
Arbat opened his hands, as if appealing to 
Gonrod's reason. <CommanderT if the targets 
were enlarged, and we were to kill many, perhaps 
thousands, of Yeerks, surely that would be 
preferable.> 
76 
<There will be no enlargement of the target!> 
Gonrod snapped. <We carry out our orders. And 
then we leave.> 
I saw Estrid in the arched doorway that led to 
the exit corridor. <Commander Gonrod,> she an-
nounced. <l am going on a tour of The Gardens 
and would like Aximili to accompany me. He can 
familiarize me with Earth creatures.> 
I drew in my breath. I had never heard an 
aristh "announce" his plans and desires to a su-
perior officer. Typically, he waited for orders. 
Gonrod's eye stalks quivered angrily. 
Estrid appeared to have no idea she had com-
mitted a breach of military conduct. 
I watched unhappily. I hated to see her re-
buked. 
Strangely, Gonrod did not do so. <Very well,> 
he answered curtly. 
<Come, Aximili,> she said happily. 
I followed her to the exit hatch. The Earth 
hour was late. The Gardens were closed. There 
were no humans to watch us disembark and de-
scend to the ground on the cloaked ramp. 
Still, I was uneasy. 
Estrid was beautiful. She was a well-trained 
fighter. 
But she was no soldier. 
Who was she? 
77 

i.n the daytime pigeons and squirrels crowded 
the walkways of The Gardens. 
But at night the sidewalks are clear. There 
was no sound except our eight hooves clopping 
slowly along. Normally I might have worried 
about security personnel spotting us. But of 
course Estrid knew nothing about this. And I was 
confident that we would not be bothered. 
<Arbat says Earth has more variety of species 
than any other known planet. When we scanned 
DNA patterns for you the computers were nearly 
overwhelmed.> 
<Tell me about Arbat and Gonrod,> I said. 
<Arbat says Gonrod is an excellent pilot. And 
that Aloth scored the highest target impact rate 
78 
in the history of the academy. Arbat says he's a 
top sniper.> 
<Arbat says.> Again. 
Suddenly, I understood. How could I have 
been so obtuse? 
Estrid was Arbat's niece! Of course. That was 
what Aloth had been hinting. 
Arbat might now be a professor of technologi-
cal history, but he was still Apex Level Intelli-
gence. He whipped a big tail at the War Council. 
No wonder Estrid was allowed so much li-
cense. 
Estrid's four eyes looked to me. <l won-
der . . .> 
<Yes?> 
<The pellets called jelly beans. I would love 
to taste them again before leaving Earth.> 
<l believe we could find some pellets close by.> 
Side by side, we trotted through the cool, 
dark night toward the main building. The Visi-
tors' Center. Outside the building was something 
Jake and Marco called a "vending machine." A 
large glass box containing delicious foods. 
No cinnamon buns or jelly beans. But many 
other things that would delight Estrid. 
I turned and delivered a kick to the machine. 
Brightly colored packets fell from hooks inside 
the machine down into a bin into which I was 
able to reach. 
79 

It was probably not a good thing to do. Hu-
mans are very touchy about ownership. 
<What are they?> Estrid asked. 
<You will enjoy them,> I promised, beginning 
to morph to human. 
Estrid's eye stalks receded into her skull. Her 
legs and arms retracted. She lay on the ground, a 
round ball of blue-and-tan fur. 
The fur disappeared and became smooth and 
pink. Then, with one burst, the round ball be-
came a human. Fully clothed. In what humans 
would consider normal clothing. 
I was amazed. I had never seen such an effi-
cient morph. And the ability to morph something 
other than skintight bicycle shorts and T-shirts 
took almost supernatural powers of concentra-
tion. 
"You are an estreen . . . nuh," I said. 
"My mmmmmother. . . ruh. She was a 
morph . . . ph dan . . . dancer. . . ruh! Dancer-
uh. I learned much from herrrrr!" 
I opened one of the packets and poured the 
contents into her palm. 
She popped them into her mouth and her face 
began to glow. "Bright pellets . . . ssss. Wonder-
ful .. . ful-luh. Jelly beanssssuuhh. More. More." 
I poured the rest of them into her hand. "Not 
jelly beansuh. M&M's. The flavor is called choco-
late. Chock-lut" 
80 
She laughed. "Mouth-speaking is very amus-
ing. Uh Mew Zing." 
"Yes, mouths are very interesting. M&M's. 
Chock-lut. Watch this . . ." 
I stuck out my tongue and let it rest lightly on 
my upper lip. Then I blew out my breath. "Thhh-
hbbbbbbbbbbb!!!" 
Estrid shrieked with laughter. 
I did it again. "Thhhhbbbbbbbb!!!" 
"What does it mean?" she gasped. 
"It is called a raspberry," I said. "I do not 
know why." 
"It would be very hard . . . hard-duh to have a 
mouth all the time. Tie-yem. Time-uh. It would 
be very difficult to concentrate on a plintcona-
rhythmic equation for more than two minutes. 
One would be too busy tasting chocolate and 
making rasp . . . berries . . . suh!" 
"Thhhhhbbbbbbb!" The vibrations made my 
lips tingle. 
She leaned close, watching my mouth in-
tently. So close I could feel the tendrils of her hu-
man curls tickling my face. 
"They have another use for mouths," I said. 
"In addition to eating and making mouth-
sounds?" 
"Yes. Would you like to experience it?" 
"Is it pleasurable?" she asked. 
I shrugged my large human shoulders. "I do 
81 

not know. I have never performed the action be-
fore. It requires two individuals, each possessing 
a minimum of one mouth." 
"Let us experiment. Ment. Expeeeeriment." 
I took Estrid's face in my hands and I pressed 
my lips against hers. 
I have no words to describe the sensation, 
It did not tickle the mouth or cause my lips to 
tingle. 
It caused a chaotic flutter in my stomach. 
Small bumps broke out up and down my arms. I 
only had one heart now, but it thundered. 
I pulled away. 
"That was pleasant," Estrid said. "But not as 
pleasant as chocolate." 
"No. But pleasurable," I said. 
"Yes." 
"Yes." 
82 
Later, Estrid and I flew through the night. 
Side by side. This, too, was pleasurable. 
I almost wished we could spend the rest of 
our lives like this. Together. Free. No more war. 
No more duty. No more fear. 
It was possible. If we remained in morph be-
yond two hours, we would become nothlits, like 
Tobias. We could go where we would never be 
found. 
Not by the Yeerks. Not by the Andalites. And 
not by the Animorphs. 
For one brief moment, I considered it. 
<Where are we going?> she asked. 
I remembered the way she had looked at me 
83 

as we kissed. With admiration? Trust? Some 
other emotion? 
We could simply fly away. We could become 
something or someone else. Life would no doubt 
be simpler. Life would be a matter of life or 
death, survival or failure, simple, black or white 
choices. 
But in reality life seldom comes in simple 
shades of black and white. The choices in the 
real world, the choices we most often face, are 
all in shades of gray. And I lived in the real 
world. 
<l would like to see my old friends once 
more,> I said. 
<Why?> 
<We were together through more battles than 
I can count,> I said. <They are no longer my 
comrades in arms. But I am not indifferent to 
them.> 
<Loyalty is admirable,> she said. 
<Yes. It is,> I said dejectedly. 
We flew over town toward the barn. Over the 
mall. Past the school. Over a cluster of stores 
and restaurants. I took my time. 
Then, <Oh, no! Estrid, circle down with me, 
but remain at a safe distances 
A terrible spectacle was unfolding below. In 
the parking lot of a McDonald's a grizzly bear was 
terrorizing a group of humans. 
84 
<lt is Rachel,> I told Estrid sadly. <The angry 
one.> 
The teenagers ran screaming into the restau-
rant. 
Rachel lumbered through the parking lot. 
BLAM!BLAM!CRASH! 
One by one, she bashed in windshields and 
windows, slammed foot-deep dents into the sheet 
metal. Horns and alarms wailed. 
Whooo-OOP! Whooo-OOP! 
SKKareeeeee! 
Rachel raged through the restaurant door. 
The people inside screamed in terror. Broke 
windows. Poured back into the parking lot. 
<What is she doing?> Estrid asked. <Are 
those human-Controllers?> 
<The restaurant is managed by a human-Con-
troller^ I answered. <l do not know about the 
other humans. I fear her destruction is indiscrim-
inate. Prince Jake would never have allowed it.> 
I saw someone else come out of the restau-
rant. 
Cassie. 
She ran into the shadows and disappeared. 
Moments later, an owl emerged from the dark-
ness and swooped into the sky. 
<Hurry.> We followed Cassie from a distance. 
She flew back to the barn. 
Estrid and I flew quietly through a hole in the 
85 

roof and perched on a beam where we could 
watch without being seen. 
Marco lay on top of several bales of hay. He 
was drinking a soda and reading a magazine. 
"Marco!" Cassie cried, in human form now. 
"You've got to help me, Rachel's going totally 
postal at McDonald's." 
"Not my problem. Me, I like Burger King." 
Cassie snatched the magazine from Marco's 
hands. "She's going to kill somebody." 
"What's it to you? I thought you were out of 
this." 
"We can't just stand by while innocent people 
get hurt." 
Marco shrugged. "Speak for yourself." 
"Where is Jake?" Cassie demanded. "He'll 
help me." 
Marco took the magazine from Cassie's hand 
and reclined again. "Don't count on it." 
"Why? Where is he?" 
"I'm in here," a voice answered. 
Cassie peered over the door of one of the 
stalls. "Jake! What are you doing there?" 
Prince Jake's head emerged. "Hiding. Tom's 
been picking on me all afternoon. I can't take it 
anymore." 
"Then fight back!" Cassie cried. 
Marco snickered. "Whoaaa! What happened 
to our resident nonviolence advocate?" 
86 
"Shut up, Marco!" she yelled. "Jake! Are you 
going to help me or not?" 
Two grackles in the rafters attacked a third, 
driving it away. Jake jumped and dove back down 
into the stall. 
"Not." Marco smirked and continued reading. 
"What about Rachel?" Cassie cried, her voice 
breaking. 
Marco yawned. "Listen, if she shows at the 
beach tomorrow, I'll talk to her. Now, why spoil 
her fun?" 
Cassie stood for a moment, shaking with fury. 
"YOU JERKS!" she screamed. "GET OUT!" 
<l have seen enough,> I told Estrid. We qui-
etly made our way out of the hole in the barn 
roof, and took wing. 
<l pity you, Aximili,> Estrid said. <How did 
you endure it? How could you bear to live among 
such inferior creatures?> 
<They have fought well in the past. But they 
are demoralized by the prospect of certain de-
feats 
Her voice was skeptical. <Perhaps. But no 
Andalite would behave so. Even in defeat, we are 
proud.> 
She sounded arrogant and vain. 
Like me. 
87 

< I hat is the third time tonight I have seen 
that fierce-looking bird with the sharp beak!> 
Estrid said. 
We were approaching the ship. I looked to 
where a red-tailed hawk soared high overhead. 
Above a large grackle. 
<Earth has many species of birds,> I re-
minded her. <And each species can have hun-
dreds of thousands or even millions of members.> 
<lt looks familiar.> 
<Birds all look similar,> I said. 
We flew through the hatch. Demorphed and 
returned to the command deck. 
<Where have you been?> Gonrod demanded. 
<We went to look over the target site after 
88 
touring The Gardens,> Estrid told him. No men-
tion of the barn. 
Arbat clopped into the room. <What did you 
learn?> 
Estrid and I drew a simple map of the Commu-
nity Center. Then Gonrod ordered us to get a good 
night's rest. We would attack the next morning. 
<l would be honored to keep the first watch,> 
I said. 
Gonrod nodded. <Very well. But touch noth-
ings 
The crew left the deck and disappeared. 
The deep humming of the engine and atmos-
pheric adjusters thickened the silence. I was free 
to think now. 
I thought about Estrid. Her grace. Her intelli-
gence. How much I enjoyed watching her in bird 
morph. How much I enjoyed kissing her in hu-
man morph. 
I smiled, remembering her delight over the 
M&M's. 
Then my breath caught in my chest. 
I had missed something. Something impor-
tant. 
Probably because of my feelings for her. 
"It would be very difficult to concentrate on a 
plintconarhythmic equation for more than two 
minutes." 
Plintconarhythmic physics! 
89 

Cutting-edge biochemical engineering. Even 
Andalite intellectuals do not attempt to learn its 
elegant but complex formulae and postulates. 
They say that no one really understands it. It 
requires thinking coherently in n-dimensions. It 
is the plaything of geniuses. 
Why would Estrid be concentrating on a plint-
conarythmic equation? 
<lt means nothings I told myself. <lt is a 
saying. A pleasantry.> Like when Marco says that 
something "isn't exactly rocket science." Or when 
Rachel sneers that someone is a "regular Ein-
stein." Just a phrase to illustrate Estrid's point 
that taste can be distracting. 
Just a saying. 
Gonrod told me to touch nothing. Nonethe-
less, I approached the access unit on the main 
console. 
Estrid's four eyes had been on the control 
panel when she programmed in my access code. 
I had watched her fingers. 
I would use that code now. 
I pulled up the stats on the ship. Estrid was 
right. An old MSTL-37. Obsolete for scientific re-
search and pressed into service as a medical 
transport for the wounded and dead in the last 
two wars. 
I tried to call up the personnel records. 
A green light began to blink. <ENCRYPTED 
90 
DATA! AVAILABLE TO APEX LEVEL CLEARANCE 
ONLY! ENTER CODE.> 
Fwapp! 
A tail blade was pressed hard against my 
throat. 
<Spying is a capital offense.> Aloth. 
<l am not spying.> 
<Then what are you doing?> 
<l have forgotten much,> I lied. <l was trying 
to familiarize myself with the workings of the 
ship.> 
He released me and I let out a long breath of 
relief. 
His stalk eyes perused the screen. He saw the 
message. His eye stalks slowly turned back 
toward me. <Trying to familiarize yourself with 
the ship? Or with your comrades?> 
<Both. I would not regard that as spying.> 
Aloth slouched against the console. <So. It 
has begun to occur to you that you have fallen in 
with a bad crowd? Eh, brother of Elfangor?> 
<l am simply curious.> 
Aloth looked intensely at me. <l trained for a 
while under your brother. Different from most 
princes. Most of them . . . it is almost as if life 
has never handed them anything but easy graz-
ing. But Elfangor... he had lived. You could 
tell. He had seen things.> 
<Yes. He had.> I did not know what else to 
91 

say. I did not trust Aloth's intensity. The assassin 
was a dangerous person. 
Aloth laughed his cynical laugh. <You want to 
know the secrets? You want to know who we are? 
I will tell you, little Aximili. You know what I was 
doing before I "volunteered" for this mission?> 
<No.> 
<Sitting in military prison. Life sentences 
I took a step back. 
<Do not fear me, little aristh. I am no danger 
to you. My crime was that I had no use for 
hypocrisy.> 
<Hypocrisy is not illegal.> 
<Not all hypocrisy,> he agreed. <lf it were, 
what would we do for leaders? They would all be 
in jail. Now me, I was caught selling organs. Off 
the battlefield. They are of no use to the dead, 
right? Why should someone not make use of 
them? And why should I not receive something 
for my trouble?> 
The Andalite Battle Code prohibits the selling 
of organs off the battlefield. It might encourage 
the less scrupulous to hasten a comrade's end. 
Or cause it. 
A crack shot and a sniper could ensure a 
steady supply of organs. No wonder he had been 
sentenced to life. 
I was careful not to let my disgust show. 
92 
<Yes, you see, Aristh Aximili, I am not a hero 
of the people. But at least I am not a coward.> 
<Are you saying I am?> 
He laughed. Surprised. <You? No, I meant 
Gonrod. He was in the same prison as me, 
though he faced a lesser sentence. His crime was 
cowardice under fire.> 
A coward and a murderer. Both Andalite offi-
cers. Were these "my own kind"? 
<We were offered the promise of pardon if we 
successfully completed this mission,> Aloth con-
tinued. 
<And what about Arbat?> 
The assassin shook his head. <As far as I 
know, he is here to assassinate Visser Three. 
Gonrod is a coward, but an excellent pilot. His 
job was to get us here in a substandard ship. 
Mine is to kill Visser Three if Arbat can get me 
close enough to do so. With your help Arbat may 
succeed. Meaning that I succeeds 
<l see. That makes sense.> 
<Does it? I am not sure anything makes sense 
on this missions 
I did not have anything to say to that. But I 
had a question. <Aloth, who is really in com-
mand of this unit? Arbat? Gonrod? Or is it you?> 
Aloth laughed again. <Sometimes, little aristh, 
I think it is the female.> 
93 

<Treparefor landings Gonrod instructed. 
Our ship hovered over the park. Cloaked, of 
course. For the last hour we had watched people 
arrive. 
Visser Three's limousine had pulled up to the 
entrance five Earth minutes earlier. 
The ship's sensors had probed the building 
and given us a map of the Center's interior lay-
out, including one extremely large meeting room. 
The sensors had even located what we be-
lieved to be yet another entrance to the Yeerk 
pool. A room that seemed to have no floor. No fi-
nite measurable depth. 
<l remind you our mission is specific and lim-
ited^ Gonrod said. <Aloth and Arbat, go in through 
94 
the south door. Stop any guards before they raise 
the alarm. Aximili and I will do the same at the east 
entrance. Both halls are long. Any disturbance will 
not be heard in the main meeting room.> 
Aloth handed out shredders. When he gave 
Arbat his, Aloth said, <You know, Professor, if 
you get there before me, you can do the job.> 
Arbat answered coldly, <lf I do, I will.> 
<Shall we make a wager on it?> 
<No. We will do better than a wager, /will kill 
Visser Three. That is an order, Aloth. You will 
stand by unless I fail. Is that clear?> 
<Arbat, Aloth is a trained sniper. You —> 
Gonrod began. 
Arbat drew his shredder, twisted the power 
setting, and said, <Aristh? Grab that empty data 
disc. Throw it. Any direction, any speed.> 
I did not know whom to obey, what to do. But 
Gonrod did not countermand the order. 
I grabbed the disc. It was the size of a human 
coin. I threw it with a quick flick of my wrist. It 
flew over Arbat's shoulder. 
Arbat followed it with his stalk eyes, aimed, 
fired over his shoulder. The disc flamed. 
It was not an impossible shot. I might have 
made it. With practice. But it was an impressive 
shot nevertheless. 
<One does not rise to Apex Level without 
some basic skills,> Arbat said. 
95 

Aloth nodded. <You take the first shot, Pro-
fessors 
Aloth handed me a shredder and began care-
fully checking his own with the slow, practiced 
ease of a person who had done this many times 
before. 
<What about me?> Estrid said. 
<l have decided you will stay on the ship,> 
Arbat said. <That is to say, Commander Gonrod 
decided,> he amended. 
<l refuse!> she protested hotly. 
Gonrod whirled on her. <You refuse an order 
from your commanding officer?> he thundered. 
<But I . . .> 
<SILENCE! YOU WILL DO AS YOU ARE 
ORDERED!> 
There was a stunned pause. 
It was Arbat who had exploded. 
Estrid recoiled slightly. Trembled. But obeyed. 
<There is a first,> Aloth said. <The girl actu-
ally listening to someone.> 
I watched Estrid carefully. She was listening 
to some private thought-speak from Arbat. She 
was angry. And something else . . . scared? 
Gonrod may have been a failure as a com-
mander, but he was a genuinely great pilot. He 
laid the ship down to a perfect hover not six 
inches from the roof of the main building. Had 
96 
the ship been visible it would have made quite a 
bizarre sight, a large metal ovoid shape resting 
like some nesting bird atop the Community Cen-
ter. 
We descended the steep ramp to the gravel 
roof. The jump to the ground would be easy 
enough. 
It was risky to attack in our own Andalite 
forms. But it was the only way we could get to the 
building with our shredders. And there was a mil-
itary purity about attacking as the Andalite war-
riors we were. 
<Good fortune, everyone,> Gonrod said. 
<We will need it,> Aloth said mordantly. 
<Let us rock and roll,> I said, and laughed at 
the meaninglessness of the statement. 
Aloth and Arbat galloped swiftly to the south 
face and leaped over the parapet of the roof. 
Gonrod and I ran at right angles to them. I 
leaped, landed easily on the grass below. 
Two human-Controllers were on guard. 
"Anda —" 
Tseeewww! Tseeewww! 
They slumped. 
Gonrod jerked his head, indicating that I 
should follow him. I could hear Visser Three. He 
was in human morph. His powerful voice boomed 
through the facility. 
97 

<That is him,> I said. 
We made our way up thickly carpeted steps to 
the second floor. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Two more human-Controllers dropped before 
they could so much as yell. 
I began to wonder if we might, just might, 
manage to do this thing. 
The central meeting room was two stories 
high with a second-floor balcony surrounding it 
on four sides. 
A human-Controller heard us. Turned. 
Fwapp! 
I hit him, knocked him to his knees, and hit 
him again to make sure he stayed down for a 
while. 
We looked down from the balcony. Visser 
Three was on a stage, at the podium. No doubt 
the podium was shielded, armored. But the up-
per third of the visser's human morph was in 
plain view. 
I could kill him. I could. Should. 
But I felt relieved knowing that Arbat had 
taken the honor of the first shot. Relieved that I 
did not have to take aim, squeeze the shot, 
watch the visser's head flame. 
Across the room, on the balcony nearest 
Visser Three, just above him to his right, I saw 
98 
three human-Controllers drop. One. Two. The 
third spun and raised his weapon. And down he 
went. 
Impossible not to feel pride mixed with the 
fear. Within seconds this gaggle of Andalite re-
jects had penetrated the Yeerk security. All with-
out an alarm being raised. 
But now Visser Three was demorphing. This 
was a meeting of the Inner Sharing. Controllers 
all. There were none of the vague, simple fools 
who clustered in the swimming pool, the game 
room, the playground, and thought that this orga-
nization would give them a sense of belonging 
they lacked. 
These were not the "wanna-be's," as Marco 
would call them. These were the hard-core. 
Visser Three stood there now, an Andalite-
Controller. The Andalite-Controller. 
And Arbat was within twenty feet. An easy 
shot. A clear shot. He could kill the Abomination. 
And his brother. 
I knew suddenly, with the clarity that some-
times comes from moments of great stress, that 
Arbat would miss. 
I lifted my shredder and took careful aim. 
Tseeewww! 
Shredder fire streaked past Visser Three's 
head. 
99 

Arbat had fired. 
He'd blown a hole in the curtains gathered on 
the far side of the stage. 
An easy shot. 
A miss. 
100 
C-hff^FT-E-R 5 U 
! 
fll loth fired. 
Tseeew! 
Too late! The visser was down, whipped around 
behind the podium. 
Still in my view. Still in my sights. 
Had to fire. He'd murdered Elfangor. 
Had to fire. 
Aloth fired again. The podium sizzled and 
jumped with electrical discharge. 
Had to . . . 
Reinforcements coming. Two Hork-Bajir burst 
in through a side door. Why were the human-Con-
trollers not firing? 
Of course. They were disarmed. The paranoid 
leader could not stand up there and address a 
101 

meeting hall full of armed men, Controllers or 
not. 
Gonrod fired. 
The visser's back was seared by the beam. 
<Shoot, Aximili, shoot!> I screamed at my-
self. <Shoot!> 
I fired. Did not even know I had, did not real-
ize I had made the decision. 
I felt the warmth of the weapon in my hand. 
Saw the beam incinerate the stage floor where 
Visser Three had been just seconds before. 
Miss! 
No, not a miss. I had waited too long. I had 
let the moment pass. 
The visser was morphing something small. A 
part of me, a far-off, rational part of me noted 
that the visser had begun at last to learn that 
sometimes bigger was not better. 
Hork-Bajir bodyguards closed in around the 
podium. Screaming human-Controllers poured 
out of the meeting room, emptying it in seconds. 
But the meeting room did not stay empty for 
long. Five doors around the room opened, and in 
charged a battalion of Hork-Bajir. 
Gonrod let out a gasp. A battalion of Hork-Bajir 
is terrifying to behold. 
The Hork-Bajir spotted me and Gonrod on 
the balcony almost immediately. With surprising 
agility, they formed a pyramid. Other Hork-Bajir 
102 
scrambled up to the balcony using their com-
rades' various blades and horns as steps. 
Tseeewww! Tseeewww! Tseeewww! Tseeewww! 
Tseeewww! 
Gonrod fired wildly. In panic. His shots were 
doing damage, but not enough. 
And me? I stood frozen. 
Four Hork-Bajir propelled themselves over the 
balcony railing. 
Tseeewww! Tseeewww! Tseeewww! Tseeewww! 
Four Hork-Bajir dropped with neatly placed 
holes through their chests. The bodies fell heav-
ily. Gonrod must have shot. I turned my eye stalk 
to look. But he was no longer with me. 
Aloth! He had come running around the bal-
cony. 
Arbat? Where was he? And where was Gonrod? 
<Jump!> Aloth yelled. 
I snapped out of my trance. Side by side 
Aloth and I ran down the balcony and hurdled 
over the side. I landed badly, sprawled amidst 
chairs. I scrambled up. Nothing broken. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Aloth fired into the mass of Hork-Bajir. 
Above! 
Two Hork-Bajir dropping down onto Aloth. 
Tseeew! 
I fired and hit one in the arm. The other fell 
hard. I used my tail and dropped him. 
103 

Aloth gave me a curt nod. Then, <Let us get 
out of here, Aristh.> 
We ran, out through one of the doors. Out into 
a corridor. Arbat was there. He was firing me-
thodically from left to right, forcing back the 
Hork-Bajir. 
<Arbat! This way. We will cover you!> Aloth 
yelled. 
Aloth and I began to fire into the mass of the 
enemy. Arbat fell back to join us. The Hork-Bajir 
were taking cover in doorways. 
<Visser Three! He escaped!> Arbat cried. 
<Forget Visser Three. The mission is aborted.> 
<Where is Gonrod?> I asked. 
<l think he is . . .> Aloth looked to the left, 
momentarily diverting his eye stalks. 
Hork-Bajir, behind us! 
I spun. 
<Arggghhhhh!> Aloth fell heavily, both front 
knees slashed by a Hork-Bajir. He lifted his 
weapon but the Hork-Bajir brought his elbow 
blade down and slashed him from shoulder to 
hock. 
I fired. The Hork-Bajir fell. Then I advanced. 
Wading in and strafing as I had seen Arbat do. 
My tail snapped and whistled as it sliced the 
hands of a Hork-Bajir who attempted to grab my 
arm. Other Hork-Bajir drew back in alarm. 
Aloth was hurt. Badly. But he could survive. 
104 
All he needed was room so he could get up. And 
out. 
The Hork-Bajir began to retreat. 
With one eye stalk I watched Aloth climb to 
his feet. 
Tseeewww! 
Aloth sank to the floor. He was dead. Shot 
cleanly through the head. 
By Arbat. 
An accident? 
No. Impossible! 
<Retreat!> Arbat ordered, thundering past 
me. 
Aloth was dead. Gonrod probably as well. Ar-
bat was in charge. 
Murderer! 
My mind reeled. What could I do? The Hork-
Bajir were massing for a new charge. 
I retreated. 
Ran. Ran with my brain replaying it again and 
again. Arbat had shot Aloth! 
Out. Into the air of Earth. 
<l have you,> Estrid called tersely from the 
ship. <Keep going. Just ahead of you!> 
The cloaked ship shimmered and appeared, 
hovering above the playground. Two children and 
their parents would have a story to tell that no 
one would believe. 
I leaped for the ramp, Arbat right beside me. 
105 

The cloak came down. 
<Aloth?> Estrid demanded. 
<Get us out of here!> Arbat yelled. 
The ship powered up and away. 
When we reached the command deck, I drew 
in my breath. Gonrod was already on board. 
Working frantically at the controls, Estrid beside 
him. 
<l am throwing out plexine vapor over a two-
thousand-mile grid,> he said. <That should keep 
their Blade ship sensors from picking up our at-
mospheric disruption. Where is Aloth?> 
<Aloth is dead,> I told him tightly. <He 
looked away from the fight — looked for you — 
and was injured.> 
Gonrod yanked a lever. The ship made a sharp 
vertical ascent. <l thought it best to retreat for 
strategic reasons.> Gonrod's voice was defen-
sive. 
Retreated? Gonrod had run like a coward! 
<The record will reflect that you retreated for 
strategic reasons in order to allow us to escape,> 
Arbat said as we rocketed upward. <lt will also 
reflect that I terminated Aloth because he was 
too injured to escape,> he added, holding my 
gaze. 
<He was not!> I protested. <He could have 
gotten safely back to the ship. With our help.> 
<But we could not take that risk, could we?> 
106 
Arbat answered smoothly. <We could not take the 
chance that another Andalite body would be-
come a Yeerk host.> 
I shook. With anger. Fear. And with confu-
sion. 
Arbat had had two opportunities to kill Visser 
Three. He had failed in both instances. And he 
had killed the officer who had been ordered to 
kill the visser if he did not. 
What was going on here? What possible mo-
tive could he have for sabotaging his own unit's 
mission? 
Estrid spoke to me. <Aximili. You are upset. 
Calm yourself.> 
<She is right,> Arbat said. <Let us not mourn 
a fallen warrior. Let us honor his memory by 
avenging him.> 
He turned both eye stalks in my direction. 
<Now, tell me about the Yeerk pool.> 
107 

<LlJe will not attack the pool,> Gonrod in-
sisted as he expertly landed the ship near the 
pond where we had held our initial meeting. 
<We must,> Arbat told him. 
<Those are not my orders from the War Coun-
c i l ^ Gonrod's voice was almost tearful. <l am in 
command. I refuse to attack the pool without or-
ders. It is too risky. Do you understand? If we 
were captured, the Yeerks would have more An-
dalite hosts. You said so yourself. That is why you 
killed Aloth.> 
Arbat's answer was laced with menace. <Let 
me remind you that I am Apex Level Intelligence. 
If I chose to exercise my prerogatives and relieve 
you of command, you would then have no choice 
but to follow my orders.> 
<Relieve me? On what grounds?> 
<l believe you know.> 
Gonrod's voice quivered with indignation. <But 
the War Council . . .> 
<l will take full responsibility^ Arbat assured 
him. <The War Council and I have — an under-
standings 
It was a masterpiece of understatement. The 
Apex Level of Andalite Intelligence pretty much 
ran the War Council. 
<The aristh will lead us in,> Arbat told Gonrod. 
<Tonight> 
Gonrod did not argue. Estrid remained impas-
sive. She took neither side, but of course, in 
practical effect, that made her Arbat's ally. 
Gonrod landed the ship back at The Gardens. 
We all agreed that we needed rest. All we could 
possibly have agreed on at that particular mo-
ment. 
I went to my quarters. Moments later I was off 
the ship and in the air. 
I needed computer skills well beyond my own. 
It is one thing to penetrate human computer se-
curity — if you can even call it security — it was 
a different thing altogether to abrogate Apex 
Level Security measures. 
109 

I returned to the ship an hour later. In time 
for my own watch on deck. 
<l am your relief, Gonrod,> I told him. 
He seemed far away. Distracted. But he ac-
knowledged me and returned the ritual reply. <A 
most welcome relief. The ship is yours.> 
Gonrod left the deck. 
I took a deep breath. Entered myself in the 
computer as the officer on duty. Then I said, <lt 
is safe.> 
The panel of monitors before me shimmered. 
And out of the image stepped a thing that seemed 
to be made of steel and ivory. A machine whose 
form vaguely suggested that of an Earth canine. 
The android met my gaze, then shimmered 
again. Where the android had stood was now a 
man who called himself Mr. King. 
Mr. King. The Chee. Android. 
<Your holographic technology is genuinely 
impressive,> I said. <Thank you for your help.> 
"The Chee owe you," he said simply. "Now, 
let's see about this security system." 
He switched off his familiar appearance and 
reverted to his true form. 
<Can you not remain disguised while here? I 
am concerned that someone may come up here.> 
"It's a question of energy demand," he said. 
"I can stay 'human' and do it slow, or I can divert 
all energy to the job and get it done faster." 
110 
<Faster,> I said. 
He pressed a finger into one of the console 
ports and his joints whirred and clicked. "Here it 
comes." 
I saw the computer screen light up. 
<ENCRYPTED DATA! APEX LEVEL CLEAR-
ANCE ONLY! ENTER CODE.> 
The screen began to blink. Counters appeared. 
Images scrolled past in a blur. 
"Here we go. We're in. Who are we looking 
for?" 
<Start with Aloth-Attamil-Gahar.> 
There was a brief pause. Then Aloth's name 
and record appeared. He was already listed as 
"Killed in Action." 
<Request detail,> I instructed. 
A pause. 
"He was killed in action in some system called 
Rakkam Garoo," Mr. King said. "A ship called 
Ralek River. The ship was destroyed." 
<l see. NowGonrod-lsfall-Sonilli.> 
Pause. 
"Same story. Identical." 
<Arbat-Elivat-Estoni?> 
Pause. 
The android turned his canid face to me. "You 
have a bunch of unlucky friends. This one was 
also killed aboard the Ralek River." 
<Yes. Quite a coincidences 
111 

"Is that it?" 
<One more name: Estrid-Corill-Darrath?> 
Pause. 
"No record." 
<Try again.> 
"Says, 'No record of personnel by that name/" 
<Try accessing the academy files.> 
This time the pause was longer. 
"Nope," Mr. King said. "Nothing." 
I was feeling sick. Scared. Impossible. It was 
all impossible. 
A tired old ship sent on a vital mission staffed 
by misfits who were already listed as dead. 
My hearts began a dull, sickening thud. 
The Andalite War Council did not expect this 
ship to return. The Andalite War Council did not 
want this ship to return. 
This ship was on a suicide mission. 
n ? 
J. thanked Mr. King for his assistance and 
then left the command deck in search of some 
answers. 
I took the drop shaft to the third tier, moving 
slowly and cautiously. I passed Aloth's empty 
quarters. Gonrod's door was closed. So was 
Estrid's, but I knocked softly. 
No answer. 
I pressed my ear against the door to see if I 
could hear her stirring. I heard nothing. At least 
nothing from inside Estrid's room. 
A vibration in the wall. Sound conducted by 
the metal tubing that reinforced the seams of the 
ship. 
113 

I heard the clink of plex against plex. The 
faint rattle of metal. And then, the sound of 
hooves. 
The sound was traveling up from the second 
tier. The tier that was supposed to be sealed off. 
The lab. 
I stepped back into the shaft and off at the 
second tier. The hallway was dark. 
I stepped forward and felt the creepy crawly 
sensation of passing through a force field. 
It was easy to figure out what the force field 
contained. My stomach turned. It smelted like 
death on this floor. Sour. Putrid. The rot of dis-
eased flesh. The force field kept the stench from 
permeating the ship. 
And no wonder. The wall was lined with cas-
ket vaults. Empty now, but still redolent with the 
hideous odor of death. 
I picked up my hooves, careful to make no 
sound as I made my way toward the source of the 
faint noises. 
The smells of death receded and were re-
placed by the smell of decontaminant. I stopped 
outside a door. Yes, she was in there. 
I slid the door open manually to minimize 
noise. 
Estrid stood at a lab table, pouring the con-
tents of one plex vial into another. She dropped 
the first vial into a steaming container of de-
114 
contaminant and carefully began to place a cap 
on the second vial. 
She saw me. Jerked in surprise. The vial 
slipped from her hand. 
<NO!> 
Her terror galvanized me. I dove forward, my 
back legs skidding on the floor. I fell heavily but 
reached out my hands and caught the vial. 
Estrid groaned and her knees buckled. She 
sank down. Held a trembling hand out to me. 
<Give it to me.> Her voice shook. <Please. Care-
fully.> 
<What is it, Estrid?> 
Her expression hardened. <That is not your 
concerns 
I rolled to my feet, still holding the vial. 
<Careful!> she cried, scrambling up herself. 
I began to open the vial. 
<N0!> She lurched forward, 
I held it out of reach. <l have grown very tired 
of being lied to,> I said. <l want the truth.> 
<Go ask Arbat> 
<l am asking you.> 
<l cannot answer.> 
<Ah, but you can,> I said. I held the vial gin-
gerly and twisted open the cap. 
<No! You idiot!> 
<Question number one: You are not an aristh. 
Are you?> 
115 

Her eyes flickered. <No,> she said after a 
long pause. 
<Yes and noT> she amended. <l was made an 
honorary aristh for this mission. But I have never 
attended the academy.> 
I am ashamed to say that my first feeling was 
one of embarrassment. That a female, one that 
had never even attended the academy, had very 
nearly beaten me in one-on-one combat. <lf you 
did not attend the academy, where did you learn 
your tail fighting?> 
<l have a brothers she explained. 
My embarrassment was not alleviated. <l, 
too, had a brother with whom I tail fought. But it 
took years of academy training for him to achieve 
your level of skill.> 
<My brother is Ajaht-l_itsom-Esth,> she said. 
Ajaht-Litsom-Esth! I could not help laughing. 
Ajaht-Litsom-Esth is the highest scoring exhibi-
tion tail fighter on the Andalite planet. 
<And are you also Arbat's niece?> 
<No. His student. At the University of Ad-
vanced Scientific Theory.> 
I was astounded. <But you are . . .> 
<Young. Yes. I am a prodigy. A genius. I do 
not mean to sound immodest, but it is true. It 
has not been easy,> she said softly. <At the uni-
versity, they treated me as a joke when I arrived. 
116 
A young female! So, of course, they forced me 
into sub-particle fusion.> 
The eyes on her face flashed with anger. <l 
was so intellectually frustrated, I wanted to die. 
Then I met Arbat.> 
Now her eyes shone. <He saw past my youth 
and my gender. He saw what I could do if I had 
the freedom and the tools. His influence changed 
everything. I received my own lab. Permission to 
follow my own area of interests 
<Plintconarhythmic physics?> 
She nodded. 
<Theoretical or applied?> 
<Applied.> 
<Yes, of course.> Slowly. Carefully. I placed 
the vial on the counter. <What is it?> I asked, al-
most certain that I would rather not know. 
<A prion virus, of sorts. I would explain, but 
you . . .> 
<No. I would not understand^ I admitted. 
<l discovered it. By accident, really. When I 
confided in Arbat, he sealed off my lab to the rest 
of the faculty and my research was classified as 
Apex Level Weapons Intelligences 
<lt is a weapon?> 
She nodded. <Three benign particles. In 
combination, they form a quasi-virus. A program-
mable virus. Deadly to Yeerks.> 
117 

I shivered with revulsion. Germ warfare. 
Her eye stalks drooped. <There is one prob-
lem^ she continued. <One of the components is 
subject to . . . to simplify, it has a volatility that 
could cause it to mutate in a Yeerk with a human 
host.> 
<Meaning?> 
<Meaning it could become deadly to humans 
a l s o 
118 
n ow it was all clear. Crystal clear. 
Gonrod and Aloth were dupes. This mission 
was about Arbat and Estrid. Gonrod was an ex-
pendable pilot. Aloth? A thug. 
The War Council sent them to Earth with the 
understanding that their mission was to assassi-
nate Visser Three. 
The reality was that Estrid and Arbat were 
here on a genocidal errand for which no one on 
the War Council was willing to take official re-
sponsibility. Not after the disaster on the Hork-
Bajir planet. 
In fact, the War Council might know nothing 
of this mission at all. Was Arbat a renegade? 
No wonder Arbat had not wanted Visser Three 
119 

mental about one species. There is too much at 
stake. 
<Aximili, if you only understood the elegance 
of the equations. If you could grasp the mathe-
matical beauty. . . . We are on the verge of de-
ploying a weapon that, once it is perfected, will 
make us invulnerable! We will have absolute 
power throughout the galaxy! We can destroy the 
Yeerks. But not only the Yeerks. We can stop all 
wars, all destruction, annihilate all enemies of 
decency and goodness before they can carry out 
their evil!> 
<Estrid, if you are prepared to kill everyone, 
anyone that opposes you,> I asked her, <how are 
you different from the Yeerks?> 
<Weare Andalites!> 
<EstridT you cannot do this.> 
<Yes, she can,> said a voice in the doorway. 
<And she will.> 
122 
TTrbat stood in the doorway, holding a 
shredder on us. 
<l have relieved Gonrod of command,> Arbat 
answered. <He is confined to his quarters.> 
I said, <Arbat, have you told Estrid that her 
name, her presence here on this ship, her very 
existence, has already been wiped from the data 
banks?> 
That caught Arbat by surprise. <How —> But 
he caught himself quickly. <A security precau-
tions 
<No. Preparation for a suicide missions I 
turned my face to Estrid. <You may imagine that 
this terrible deed is approved of by the people. 
But it is not. The Andalite people would arrest 
123 

you and charge you as a criminal. That is why the 
people will never be told. It is why only the dregs 
of the Andalite military — Aloth and Gonrod — 
could be used.> 
<You have said enough, Aristh,> Arbat 
snarled. 
<They needed you, Estrid. They needed a per-
son of your genius to manage the "weapon." But 
you, like Aloth and Gonrod, will never survive. Ar-
bat cannot allow it. Only he can survive. The 
Apex Level Intelligence agent who passed him-
self off as a professor. Why? To find someone like 
you, Estrid.> 
Estrid focused her main eyes on Arbat. <ls it 
true what Aximili says?> she asked. 
Arbat glared at us both, but then his face 
softened when he looked at Estrid. <Yes. I am 
truly sorry. I have deceived you. If it is any com-
fort, it was to protect you.> 
<Protect me? From what? You brought me 
here to die.> 
<To protect you from history's judgments he 
said, his voice thick with emotion. <The people 
must be led by the few who are willing to make 
the very hard choices. The people are happy in 
their ignorance. But we in the Apex Level cannot 
allow ourselves to be sentimental.> 
He pressed a button. A control panel slid 
from the wall. Arbat quickly programmed it. 
124 
Bright green streaks shot from floor to ceiling, 
creating bars. A laser cage around the two of us. 
Arbat took the vial from the counter. <l am 
sorry. You will die, Estrid. But not in vain.> 
<Arbat! It is not too late. Do not do it,> I 
begged. 
To my surprise his old, world-weary eyes shone 
with emotion. <This war must end, Aristh. It has 
caused too much suffering. Too much killing. 
Think of all the bright young scientists, artists, 
and thinkers conscripted year after year to feed 
this war. So many brilliant and creative minds 
turned from decent pursuits to the job of killing. 
Good Andalites all. Good Andalites forced to 
make hard, cruel decisions.> 
I would have liked to tail-whip him. None of 
this was about the Yeerks, the humans, or even 
the Andalites. It was about what he saw as his 
duty. His right. The self-pity of the murderer. 
<This is not the way to end it,> I told him. 
He shook his head. <That is not for you to de-
cide. The strong must decide. The weak can only 
obey.> 
Arbat turned and galloped from the lab. 
Estrid tried to follow. 
ZZZZZZZ! 
The green laser bars erupted in a shower of 
sparks when Estrid made contact. She was 
knocked to the floor. 
125 

I leaned down. <Estrid!> 
<i am fine.> 
I helped her to her feet. 
<l am sorry, AximilL> 
<lt is not your fault.> 
<lt is. I betrayed you. And your human friends. 
I have been a fool. A criminal fool. Arbat con-
vinced me that humans were not worth the loss 
of more galactic life. Unwilling to carry their 
weight in the fight for freedom. Eager to give 
up.> 
She took my hands. <l did not tell Arbat 
about your friends. But I did not have to. He was 
in the barn, too. In a bird morph.> 
<Yes, I know,> I answered. 
Her stalk eyes whipped around in amaze-
ment. <You knew?> 
I nodded. <We all knew. Or at least, sus-
pected^ 
Marco walked calmly into view. "Hey, Ax-
man. You're looking slightly trapped." 
<Where are the others?> 
Marco made a sweeping gesture encompass-
ing the lab. "We're here. The place is crawling 
with Animorphs. Literally." 
In various places human forms were growing 
up out of tiny points. Flea morph. Fly morph. 
Roach morph. 
Cassie and Rachel and Prince Jake. 
126 
One morphing mass emerged as a bird rather 
than a human. 
<The bird with the red tail,> Estrid said. 
<Tobias. You met him. They all came aboard 
with me this afternoon. They have used my quar-
ters to demorph and remorph as necessary.> 
Tobias ruffled his wings. <Hey, Ax.> 
"Go, Tobias, stay on him," Prince Jake said. 
<Later, everyone. The Animorph Air Force has 
a missions 
Tobias flew out of the room and caught the 
breeze of the drop shaft. 
Estrid looked at me, half amazed, half angry. 
<lt was all a deception. You misled us. You lied 
to your own people.> 
I shook my head. <No. I have learned some-
thing, Estrid. These are my people. Anyone who 
believes in freedom, anyone who resists tyranny, 
anyone who pursues peace is "my people." An-
dalite, Hork-Bajir, or human.> 
"Yeah," Marco said. "Besides, we humans 
make a mean cinnamon bun." 
I laughed. <That is definitely true.> 
127 

e flew to the Community Center. It would 
be Arbat's most likely path into the Yeerk pool. 
But, unfortunately, it was only an educated guess. 
Tobias had been unable to follow him. Arbat, 
ever the intelligence professional, had morphed 
to human and entered a train station. 
Whether he had emerged, or in what shape, 
we could not tell. 
However we were soon certain of which way 
he had gone. 
It was very late at night but the Yeerks still 
kept up a guard. We found the first human-
Controller lying sprawled by the trash. Another 
slumped in the doorway. A third lay facedown in 
the hallway. 
128 
LU 
My human friends were in battle morph. 
Estrid and I had demorphed to Andalite. Tobias 
was somewhere outside, flying above, watching. 
No doubt berating himself unnecessarily for hav-
ing lost Arbat. 
<Tobias?> I called in private thought-speak. 
<Yeah, Ax-man?> 
<He is here.> 
We walked softly through the dark and empty 
Community Center. Maybe Arbat had eliminated 
all Yeerk security. Maybe not. 
<What are we looking for?> Jake asked me. 
<This.> I stopped in front of a door with a 
sign that said ORIENTATION ROOM, NEW MEMBERS 
ONLY. <This is where the ship's sensors showed a 
possible deep hole.> 
I looked at the door. There was a lock. But it 
had been broken. <Arbat,> I said. <He may not 
be in Andalite form. He may well be human.> 
Marco pushed the door open. A dark and 
seemingly endless staircase yawned before us. 
<Basement?> 
Cassie said, <No. I can hear screams. I know 
that sound.> 
Cassie's wolf morph is possessed of incredi-
bly acute hearing and sense of smell. 
<Yeah. I was afraid of that,> Marco said. 
<You know, I keep saying I'm never, ever going 
back down there.> 
129 

<Say it again,> Rachel said. <Maybe it'll 
make you feel better.> 
<l am never, ever going down there again.> 
<TicktockT people,> Prince Jake said. <We 
want to get Arbat before he reaches the pool. Let's 
move.> 
We ran down the stairs. Level after level. Tiger 
pads and bear paws and Andalite hooves all rush-
ing, tripping, rushing again. 
As we descended, the sounds of the Yeerk 
pool — the screams, the cries, the rumble of 
equipment, became loud enough for Andalite 
senses to hear. 
Estrid said, <Aximili, I am afraid.> 
<Soam L> 
Down. Faster and faster. Down. 
Suddenly I slipped. Fell. Rolled down several 
steps. 
The smell was awful. Part of the staircase was 
wet with slimy pool water. Gore. Chunks of flesh, 
piles of quivering entrails. Evidence of a recent 
Taxxon feeding frenzy. 
I jumped up, wiped the gore from my flanks. I 
tried not to think of it. Tried to focus on what 
mattered. Arbat had to be stopped. No time to 
think of the filth, no time to imagine the hor-
ror . . . 
Ahead the stairs emerged from the ground 
130 
into the vast openness of the Yeerk pool complex. 
After this point we would be visible to anyone 
looking up from below. 
<No Arbat,> Rachel said. 
<He's down there,> Prince Jake said. <No 
choice. We have to go after him. Demorph. It's 
the only way. Ax and Estrid? I think a pair of An-
dalites might be a little conspicuous.> 
I began to morph to human. Estrid did the 
same. The Yeerk pool complex would contain hu-
mans, Hork-Bajir, Gedds, and Taxxons. But only 
humans would be expected to come down this 
particular stairway at this time of night. 
"What natural weapons do these humans' 
bodies have?" Estrid asked. 
"Unless you've eaten a lot of beans, none," 
Marco said. 
"Keep your heads down, don't make eye con-
tact," Jake instructed. "We don't want to be 
ID'd. Don't move fast or seem to be looking 
around. Now, go!" 
We walked down the stairs again. On only two 
legs. 
We could see the pool now. Hork-Bajir and 
human guards stood watch as other Hork-Bajir 
and human-Controllers filed down the two steel 
piers that traversed the main part of the leaden 
pool. Each pier was lined with locking collars. 
131 

As guards supervised, the Controllers kneeled 
down and placed their necks in metal collars. 
When the collars snapped into place, a small 
gray slug crawled out of the Controller's ear and 
fell into the dank pool with a soft plop! 
The hosts were then momentarily free. Free at 
least to control their own mouths and eyes. They 
could cry. They did. They could beg. They did 
that, too. 
'This is obscene," Estrid whispered fiercely. 
"Pretend to be unconcerned," I said. 
"Spread out," Prince Jake muttered as we 
merged with a group of human-Controllers. 
Estrid and I stayed close, but drifted from the 
others. Human-Controllers everywhere. Some 
jocular as they hooked up with Yeerk friends. 
Most just businesslike. They were here to feed, 
not socialize. 
Faces everywhere. Hundreds. Which was Ar-
bat? Impossible to say. Impossible to guess 
where he would be in this . . . 
No. Not impossible. He would pursue his mis-
sion as swiftly as possible. He would deliver the 
virus into the pool. 
The pier. Of course. 
But how to spot him? He would look human. 
Would be human. Just like all these human-
Controllers. 
No. Not like them. The Controllers all had ac-
132 
cess to human experience, human knowledge. A 
human morph is only instinct. Harder to control, 
harder to understand easily. As I knew from expe-
rience. 
I tried to think. Time was running out. Arbat 
might already have struck. How to spot an An-
dalite in human morph? 
What was different? Two legs, not four. No tail. 
Two eyes, not four. 
"Estrid! Look for humans who turn their heads 
frequently." 
"What?" 
"We are accustomed to seeing in all direc-
tions at once. Humans are used to not knowing 
what is behind them. Look for —" 
I froze. A middle-aged man. Walking down 
the length of the crowded pier, escorted by a 
nonchalant Hork-Bajir. 
The man turned as a Taxxon passed behind 
him. Turned again. Turned. 
No proof. Not enough to be sure. A feeling . . . 
"There!" I started to run toward the pier. 
Estrid raced alongside me. 
<Jake!> I cried out in private thought-speak. 
<He's a middle-aged lightly colored male human. 
On the pier!> 
"Must be late for a feeding," a Controller 
laughed as I brushed past him. 
The middle-aged man knelt. Placed his 
133 

head into the collar beside a kneeling Hork-
Bajir. 
The Hork-Bajir guard leaned down to fasten 
the collar. The man reached into his pocket. 
Too far away! 
"Arbat! No!" Estrid yelled. 
The man jerked his head up. His movement 
was quick and unexpected. The Hork-Bajir guard 
was knocked off balance, teetered almost comi-
cally. 
Arbat reached to grab the Hork-Bajir. Or so the 
Hork-Bajir thought. Arbat grabbed the guard's 
Dracon beam from his holster with one hand and 
shoved the off balance Hork-Bajir off the pier. 
Arbat spun, raised his weapon, and aimed. 
134 
n -H --;•> T -E -R JBJE 
± dove forward. Tackled Estrid. We fell be-
hind a large, lumbering Taxxon. 
Arbat fired. 
Tseeewww! 
The bloated Taxxon broke open. The foul con-
tents of its stomach spewed in every direction. 
Blood. Bile. Entrails. 
<Battle morphs!> I heard Prince Jake yell. 
Faraway or near, I could not tell. 
"Estrid!" I dragged her to her feet, slipping in 
the gore. 
Another Taxxon was rushing in our direction, 
eager to eat what was left of his former comrade. 
Hork-Bajir guards, pounded along the steel 
pier, trying to locate the source of the trouble. 
135 

There was chaos but in seconds the Hork-Bajir 
might restore order. 
Then Estrid and I would be dead. 
"Andalites! Andalites!" I shouted. I yelled 
and waved my hands, pointing always down the 
pier. "Andalite bandits in Hork-Bajir morph! The 
Hork-Bajir are Andalites!" 
Estrid joined in. "Help! Help! Security! An-
dalites have morphed the Hork-Bajir!" 
Chaos would reign a while longer. 
But Arbat, too, took advantage of the confu-
sion. I spotted him running. 
<He is heading toward the cage area!> I 
yelled. 
<l see him! I'm on him!> Rachel yelled back. 
I had lost sight of Arbat. And I could not see 
Rachel. But I got a grim satisfaction from the 
thought of what the intelligence agent slash pro-
fessor would see when next he turned around to 
look. 
Estrid and I lurched, slipping and sliding, off 
the pier. Back onto packed dirt. We shoved our 
way through the crush of human-Controllers. 
"Cowards!" someone yelled at us. 
Then, <l lost him!> Rachel yelled in frustra-
tion. <Past the cages.> 
I had to get Arbat. He could demorph, re-
morph, and we would lose him permanently. And 
possibly lose much of the human species. 
136 
I yanked Estrid around behind a large wooden 
crate, pulled her down, dragged her after me as I 
crawled into the space between the crate and the 
side of the human-Controllers' cafeteria. 
"Estrid, demorph!" 
"They will kill us!" She was frightened. Fright-
ened deep down inside. Frightened in a way that 
was erasing any thought but the screaming, des-
perate need to live. 
I knew the feeling. 
"We have to stop Arbat and we need fire-
power," I said. 
"Why? To save these filthy Yeerks? Look what 
they do. Look at what they are! They are going to 
do that to us, Aximili! They will drag us down that 
pier, they will force us . . . NO! Kill them all!" 
"Estrid, you said the virus may mutate. You 
said it might affect humans as well." 
"Might. Maybe. But maybe I fixed it. Maybe 
my last adjustments eliminated the random flux. 
I do not care! They are not our people. I am not 
going to let the filthy slugs do that to me!" 
I was half demorphed. <Stay here,> I said. 
<Stay low, do not move.> 
"Do not leave me!" 
<Estrid, you are beautiful, you are brilliant. 
But I really do not think I like you very much.> 
I took a deep breath. Tried to steady my nerves. 
Impossible. 
137 

I leaped out. 
Fwapp! Hit a Hork-Bajir. 
The cages. The nearest was a hundred feet 
away. 
"Andalite!" a human-Controller screamed in 
my face. 
<Correct,> I said and knocked him down. 
I ran for the cages. 
Pandemonium! Dracon fire from three differ-
ent locations. Screams. Shouts. The roar of furi-
ous Hork-Bajir. The slithery squeaks of ravenous 
Taxxons. 
I ran. 
Tseeew! 
The shot missed, the human-Controller had 
been in too much of a hurry. 
Fwapp! Now he could take his time. 
ATaxxon blocked my way. I leaped. 
Ahead, a battle. A tiger, a wolf, a bear, a go-
rilla, surrounded, backs against a row of cages. 
Marco held a middle-aged human by the neck 
with one hand and fought with the other hand. 
Their backs were to the cages. It would have 
been child's play for the Yeerks to simply shoot 
them through the bars. Shoot them in the back. 
But the human hosts in that cage, slaves of 
the Yeerks temporarily free of those Yeerks, stood 
there, arms linked, blocking the shot. A human 
shield. 
138 
The Hork-Bajir could have burned them down. 
Those humans knew that. They were putting them-
selves between the supposed Andalites and the 
Yeerks, ready to face Dracon fire. 
The Hork-Bajir had no orders to massacre 
hosts. Visser Three was not in the pool. No one 
else would dare give the order. 
I attacked the force that hemmed in my 
friends. Struck left and right, took them by sur-
prise. But all for nothing. We could fight, but we 
could not win. 
I saw Cassie knocked unconscious. 
Saw Prince Jake slashing with one paw, the 
other front paw gone, a stump. 
Tseeew! 
A beam caught Marco full in the belly. A hole 
appeared in his rough black fur. He fell. Re-
leased his grip on Arbat. 
Arbat ran. No one stopped him. Why would 
they? He was a human-Controller being held by 
the Andalites. 
He ran, pushed through the attackers. Ran 
toward the reinfestation pier. I saw the green vial 
in his hand. 
<Prince Jake! Arbat. . .> 
<Go!> Prince Jake said. 
I hesitated. How could I leave my friends? 
They were dying. 
I turned, ran, raced after Arbat. 
139 

He made the pier. No one guarded it. All the 
Hork-Bajir had gone to the fight. Three Taxxons 
shuffled along its length. Voluntary hosts await-
ing reinfestation. 
Arbat raced to the end of the pier. He was pant-
ing, wheezing. The middle-aged human morph was 
not athletic. 
He fumbled, hastening to open the vial. 
<Arbat!> I yelled. 
"You!" 
One of the Taxxons noticed us at last. The red 
jelly eyes jiggled. But I was not concerned.with 
the Taxxon. No Taxxon would attack an Andalite. 
<Do not do it, Arbat.> 
"You are very fast, Aristh Aximili. But you are 
not fast enough to cover fifty feet before I can 
open my fist." 
<lt is wrong, Arbat.> 
"It is war, Aristh Aximili." 
He smiled at me. And he began to open his 
hand. 
140 
<l lo!> 
Tseeew! 
The beam passed so close to me that I felt it 
singe my stalk eyes. 
The beam hit Arbat's human hand. 
The hand, and the vial it held, sizzled and 
burned and disappeared in a wisp of smoke. 
I turned one stalk eye back to see Estrid. She 
lowered the Dracon beam. 
<Good shot,> I said. 
<Yes. I suppose it was.> 
Blood pumped from Arbat's stump. It didn't 
matter. Arbat had only to demorph to end the 
pain of the wound. 
<lt is all over, Arbat.> 
141 
fib 

<Now what?> Estrid asked me. 
I nodded toward the shore where part of the 
force besieging my friends peeled off to come 
roaring after us. 
<Now we die,> I said. <But we die as honor-
able Andalite warriors.> 
<Do not let them take me alive,> Estrid said 
to me. <Even if you do not approve of me, Axim-
ili.> 
A wave of Hork-Bajir rushed at us. I braced 
for the attack. Estrid beside me. 
Arbat chose not to join us. 
"Andalites!" he screamed, pointing at us with 
his remaining hand. "Andalites! Look what they 
did to me!" 
And then the Yeerk pool just to our left began 
to boil. There was a red circle, fifty feet in diame-
ter, projected on the roiling liquid and everything 
within that circle was boiling, steaming, hissing. 
I stared, transfixed. Estrid, always the physi-
cist, saw what I had missed. 
<No, up! Upthere!> 
I raised my main eyes to the domed roof of 
the Yeerk pool. There, at the highest point, a 
hole! Stars! I saw stars! 
The red beam stopped suddenly. The wide-
angle shredder beam on the Ralek River must 
have taken five minutes to slowly burn its way 
through the earthen dome. 
142 
<lt can't be done,> I whispered, not daring to 
hope. 
Through the hole, into the Yeerk pool flew the 
old ship, the tired, out-of-date relic named the 
Ralek Riven 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
The ship's shredders would never be a match 
for Bug fighters let alone the Blade ship, but they 
were more than enough to stop the onrushing 
Hork-Bajir. 
Ten feet of pier between us and the Yeerks 
sizzled and evaporated. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
A line of destruction burned between the 
half-dead Animorphs and their attackers. 
The ship flew low and slow, hovered directly 
above us. 
Tseew! Tseeew! Hork-Bajir were firing back 
with handheld Dracon weapons. Like trying to 
kill an elephant by throwing rocks. 
A ramp lowered. I pushed Estrid toward it and 
leaped aboard myself. 
"Wait!" Arbat yelled. 
I hesitated. 
"I am an Andalite, too! I am one of your own 
people!" 
He reached up toward me with his one human 
hand and his one bloody stump. 
<Go,> I told Gonrod. 
143 

The ship lifted and slid toward the cages. 
If Arbat had thought to demorph instantly he 
might have lived a while longer. He stood there, 
raging, trapped on a segment of pier, alone. 
Alone but for the Taxxons whose eternal hunger 
would not let them ignore the smell of his blood. 
144 
T\achel and Cassie went to the mall to buy 
Estrid a cinnamon bun. I gave it to her as a going-
away present. Told her to enjoy it on the long trip 
home to Andalite space. 
Gonrod had flown the ship back to its berth 
beside The Gardens. It made sense. After the 
daring assault on the Yeerk pool, every Yeerk ship 
in Earth space was on high alert. A day spent 
waiting would make escape easier. 
It might have been no great loss if the Ralek 
Riverwere destroyed, but a pilot like Gonrod, in-
sufferable as he might be, was a treasure. 
<ls this as delicious as the jelly beans?> 
Estrid asked, holding the warm paper box. 
<Even more,> I said. 
145 
4S 

<And this is why you care for these humans?> 
I thought of the human hosts who had made a 
shield of their bodies to protect my friends. Thought 
of the many, many, uncountable times Prince 
Jake or Rachel or Cassie or Marco or Tobias had 
risked death to help me. 
<Yes,> I said. <That is why I like humans. It 
is all about the cinnamon buns.> 
<Aximili, come home with me. Together, the 
two of us and Gonrod, we can make the people 
realize the truth.> 
I shook my head. <My fight is here,> I said. 
<ls it because you still do not like me?> She 
tried for a lighthearted tone. 
I nodded. <l still do not like you,> I said. 
I left the ship. Walked away from my chance 
to be home again. I rejoined my friends. 
The Ralek River took off. Did it escape Visser 
Three's dragnet? Did it make it safely into Zero-
space? 
I do not know. 
I walked away and did not look back. 
I morphed to human as we six walked to-
gether. Even Tobias became human, I think to be 
near me, to "hang" as the humans say. 
Cassie put her arm around my shoulder. It is 
a human gesture of comfort. "You okay?" she 
asked. 
146 
"Why wouldn't he be?" Marco said. "You heard 
him. He didn't even like her." 
Cassie said nothing but squeezed me a bit 
tighter. Cassie is not easily deceived. 
"Let's get something to eat, man, I'm 
starved," Rachel said. 
"Anything but McDonald's," Tobias said. 
"What, the mouse hunter is getting picky about 
burgers?" Marco said. 
"No, that's not it." 
Prince Jake raised an eyebrow. "Tobias? Is there 
something you need to tell me?" 
Tobias shrugged. "Well, you know, I saw Yeerk 
reinforcements pouring into the Community Cen-
ter so I knew you guys were in trouble, right?" 
"Right. So you went for Gonrod." 
"Exactly. I asked him if we could burn 
through into the Yeerk pool. He said, "Maybe, 
but only at the thinnest point." Anyway, late as it 
was, even the night cleanup crew was gone . . ." 
"No," Prince Jake said. "You didn't. You did 
not obliterate a McDonald's." 
"Like it was never there," Tobias said with a 
laugh. "The Yeerks will fill the hole before any-
one realizes what's down there underneath the 
ground, but if we want burgers, I'm thinking 
Burger King." 
"I would like a burger," I said. "Burrr-ger." 
147 

We walked along the dark streets, my friends 
and I. My more-than-friends. We laughed, so re-
lieved to simply be alive. We joked. 
Cassie held my hand, and in the darkness 
where no one could see, I cried. 
148 
I crashed through the underbrush, trampling 
saplings and ripping through sticker bushes 
without a second thought. 
The scent of the real Cape buffalo was thick 
in my nostrils. I followed it deeper and deeper 
into the woods until the screams and shouts of 
the Controllers back at the roadblock were com-
pletely lost. 
The buffalo's hearing — my hearing now — 
absorbed and gauged every sound, checking for 
any potential threat to my herd. 
My depth perception wasn't so great but I 
had a three-hundred-and-sixty degree wide-angle 
range of vision, which was going to make it pretty 
rough for anyone to sneak up on me. 
This was a good thing. 
I couldn't run very fast — nowhere near the 
speed of my wolf morph — but what the buffalo 
lacked in miles per hour, it definitely made up for 
in sheer bulk and muscle. Nobody, and I mean 

