My name is Rachel. 
And I was facing down a Controller in a purple-
and-pink Dunkin' Donuts uniform. He was hold-
ing a Dracon beam. Smirking. The little jerk. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
He fired at point-blank range. Hit me right be-
tween my three-foot-long tusks. 
"HhhhREEEEEuuuhhh!" I roared in pain and 
anger. Mostly anger. Like a couple of Dracon 
beam blasts are enough to take down a thirteen-
hundred-pound African elephant. 
Yeah, an elephant. I can morph into animals 
whenever I want. I can also morph a cat and a 
cockroach and lots of other animals and bugs. 
Sounds like fun, right? 
1 
OCR by Nihtelek 

Wrong. Like, about one percent of the time 
it's not seriously unpleasant. Mostly morphing is 
a weapon. A weapon in the most desperate battle 
ever fought by human beings. 
Here's the deal. Earth is under attack. The 
planet has been invaded by aliens called Yeerks. 
These guys aren't into exploring strange new 
worlds. They're into exploring strange new bodies. 
They're parasites. Like lice or ringworm. Only in-
tensely worse. 
In their natural state, Yeerks are nothing but 
gray slugs. Until they infest a host body, enter 
the brain, sink down into the little crevices, and 
take complete control. 
Once they have you, you can't focus your own 
eyes, or draw your own breath, or decide when to 
pee. You are powerless. A slave of the most com-
plete and hopeless kind. 
You can still do one thing. Just one terrible 
thing: You can watch in horror as the Yeerk in 
your head lies to your family, betrays your 
friends, plots to take over your planet. 
Frightening? 
Oh, yeah. And it gets worse. 
Me and my friends are all that actively stand 
between the Yeerks and their evil conquest of hu-
manity. Just a group of five kids and a young 
alien. 
2 
We're trying to hold on until help gets here 
from a few billion light-years away. See, the Yeerks 
have enemies. A race of amazingly advanced 
aliens called Andalites. 
Andalites look like deer. If deer had blue-
and-tan fur, humanoid arms, and scorpionlike 
tails tipped with wickedly sharp blades. An-
dalites also have two main eyes, on their face, 
and two on swiveling stalks that sprout from the 
top of their head. Beautiful and intelligent and 
cunning. 
Not too long ago — who am I kidding, what 
seems like a lifetime ago — an Andalite ship 
got fried right above Earth. Torn out of the sky 
while battling the Yeerks. My friends and I saw it 
fall. Saw the dying Andalite war prince named 
Elfangor crawl from the wreckage. Listened, 
stunned and just a little freaked out, as he gave 
us the technology that allows us to morph. To ac-
quire the DNA of any animal we touch and then 
to become that animal. But there was one rule 
we had to follow: Stay in morph for more than 
two hours and you stay there forever. Become 
what the Andalites call a nothlit Stuck in your 
morph for the rest of your life. Someone who 
means a lot to me knows about this firsthand. 
He'd stayed in morph too long and now he lives 
his life as a red-tailed hawk. He did regain his 
3 

morphing ability, but when he demorphs he's not 
a human. He's a bird. The sad part — at least for 
me — is that he seems to like his life the way it is 
now. 
But even though it seems futile, we've been 
fighting ever since. 
Trying to hold on even though we've just 
about given up waiting for any more help out of 
the sky. 
So here we are: Jake, our leader and my 
cousin; Cassie, my best friend; Marco, Jake's best 
friend and a totally annoying — never mind; To-
bias, a lost soul with the body of a bird; and 
Elfangor's younger brother, Aximili-Esgarrouth-
Isthill. We call him Ax. 
Oh, there's one important thing I forgot to 
mention: Yeerks feed on something called Kan-
drona rays. 
The Yeerks' need for Kandrona is the one flaw 
in their strategy. A weakness, an opening we can 
exploit. Every three days, thousands of Yeerks 
gather together at the enormous Yeerk pool com-
plex built under our town. 
Destroy the pool and the Yeerks will starve. 
We just found out from our android allies, the 
Chee, that the Yeerks were beginning mass pro-
duction of portable Kandronas. The heads of the 
Yeerk organization have had access to these for a 
4 
while now. But mass production? That meant 
each and every Yeerk, no matter how low down on 
the corporate ladder, would be able to feed in the 
privacy of his or her own home as easily as you 
nuke a frozen pizza. The Yeerk pool would be 
obsolete. Our enemies would be rid of their only 
flaw. 
We just couldn't let it happen. 
So we'd attacked their factory, a dingy old in-
dustrial building on the edge of town, windows 
painted black. The Yeerks had disguised it as a 
Dunkin' Donuts bakery. The human-Controllers 
were even dressed in the ever-so-stylish polyester 
fast-food uniforms. 
The Pepto-Bismol pink poly did not help my 
mood. Neither did the fact that we were way out-
numbered. 
Thirty human-Controllers were working on a 
crude assembly line in the back of the building. 
Four more were pretending to make donuts up 
front. There were at least a dozen guards. 
I wrapped my trunk around a Controller's 
waist, tossed my massive head, and let go. 
"Ahhhhhhhh!" he yelled, as he went flying. 
Then — 
THUMP! 
I didn't see where he landed. 
"HhhhREEEEEuuuuhhh!" I trumpeted. 
5 

Jake, Cassie, Ax, and Tobias were back by the 
assembly line, on the other side of a false wall. I 
couldn't see them but the elephant's ears were 
picking up moans and roars and cries and Dracon 
beam blasts. Also, something that sounded like 
equipment smashing to the floor. 
Marco was on my side of the wall, in gorilla 
morph. Three Controllers surrounded him. He 
lashed out with his ham-sized hands but the 
Controllers were slowly backing him against one 
of the three commercial ovens. 
<Marco! I'm on my way!> I shouted. 
<Just when I'm having so much fun.> 
The Controllers had their backs to me. Didn't 
see me coming. 
I grabbed the middle one. Tossed. 
"Aaaahhhhhhh!" he yelled. 
Now they knew I was there. 
The right one turned his handheld Dracon 
beam at me. 
Too slow. 
I grabbed him. Tossed. 
"Nnnnnoooooo!" he shouted. 
Marco moved forward. Knocked the Dracon 
beam out of the third Controller's hand. Whacked 
him a solid gorilla punch to the jaw. The guy 
went down. And stayed there. 
Marco and I looked around. Our part of 
6 
the factory was littered with downed human-
Controllers. Yeerks who wouldn't be causing us 
any headaches for a long, long time. 
<Let's bail!> Jake shouted. <Ax says we've 
got three minutes left to stay in morph!> 
I powered through the main entrance, taking 
most of the door frame with me. Three minutes 
to demorph or be stuck as an elephant for the 
rest of my life. 
The others were right behind me. Ax in his 
own Andalite body. Jake moving fluidly in his 
tiger morph. Cassie as a wolf, fast and low. To-
bias, the red-tailed hawk. And Marco, a gorilla, 
bringing up the rear. 
We ran. Down the deserted alleyway where 
we'd left our outer clothing. The pavement was 
damp. Strange misty halos ringed the sodium-
vapor lights way overhead. 
Not a minute to spare. Crowded in around the 
stinking Dumpsters and piles of oily, wet rags, we 
stopped. 
<Nice work, guys,> Jake said. <Let's get out 
of here.> 
I focused on my own body, and felt the 
changes begin. 
My tusks went flaccid, like two overgrown 
pieces of spaghetti. They slurped up into my face, 
slapping side to side as they retracted. 
7 

Morphing is not attractive. Actually, it's pretty 
much a freak show. 
My eyes sort of moved up and down as they 
traveled from the sides of my shrinking head to 
the front. Things went blurry for a second until 
human sight blinked on. And then — 
8 
"Hahooo wwwas that?" Cassie demanded 
with a mouth that was half-wolf and half-human. 
<A small explosion of light,> Ax said. <l be-
lieve it is part of a primitive visual recording de-
vice called a camera.> 
"WHAT?" Marco exploded. "Someone took a 
picture of me? Not cool. Do you see what I'm 
wearing? I'm Spandex-boy. Totally not cool." 
I heard a garbage can tumbling over. Squeaky 
footsteps on the wet pavement. Someone was 
running away! 
"Everyone stay put," Jake said. "We can't let 
anyone see us. Tobias?" 
9 

<l'm on it.> Tobias flapped his wings and rose 
up over Marco's head. 
"Well, this is great, isn't it?" Marco said. "We 
close down a Yeerk-run operation only to let some 
tabloid photographer sneak up on us. I bet we're 
on the cover of the National Enquirer tomorrow." 
"You don't know it was a professional photog-
rapher," Cassie argued. 
"A kid can hope, can't he?" 
"Not funny." Jake, his mouth pressed into a 
grim line. 
One of the reasons we've survived as long as 
we have is that the Yeerks don't know who we 
are. They think we're a group of "Andalite ban-
dits." 
If they found out we were a bunch of human 
kids we'd be dead or infested within hours. No 
doubt our entire families, too. 
"I'm going with Tobias," I said grimly. 
I concentrated on the bald eagle DNA buried 
somewhere deep inside me. Demorphing and 
morphing — especially after battle — is exhaust-
ing. But I couldn't just stand around and wait. So 
much easier to do something. Anything. 
The first thing to change was my mouth. My 
lips bulged out. Grew hard and stiff and turned 
yellow. 
THUD! I fell forward as my legs rapidly 
10 
shrank. The slimy bricks of the alleyway rushed 
up at me. 
A feather tattoo started at my fingertips and 
covered my arms in a few seconds. Suddenly, the 
pattern sprang up and my arms and legs were 
covered with actual feathers. The feathers were 
dark brown, except for the snowy-white ones that 
replaced my blond hair and the skin of my face 
and neck. 
My feet split open and formed yellow talons, 
each of which ended in a hooked claw. Claws 
that could grab a swimming fish out of a rush-
ing river. My human bones became hollow and 
light. 
Moments later, I was airborne, cruising sound-
lessly over the deserted streets. I could see the 
"Dunkin' Donuts" bakery a few blocks away. 
Rubble spilled out the door. Nobody was stirring. 
The whole neighborhood was quiet. Which 
was good. No commando force of Controllers. 
Not yet, anyway. 
There! I spotted Tobias maybe two hundred 
yards ahead and to my right, flying over some 
mid-rise buildings. 
<Tobias!> I called. <Who was it?> 
<Some kid,> he said. <About our age. He had 
one of those disposable cameras.> 
<Where is he?> I asked. 
11 

<l lost him,> Tobias said grimly. <He ran into 
that building with the pigeon cages on the roof.> 
<Let's go after him,> I said. 
<No sign of him through any of the windows. 
But it's getting dark and I don't have the best vi-
sion for this job at night.> 
Neither did the bald eagle. But by then I 
knew the others were on their way. When Jake 
felt it was safe they'd gone owl and followed us. 
The six of us circled the building, waiting for the 
kid to come back out or appear in a window. 
Nothing happened except that the strange mist 
turned into a steady downpour. 
Jake made the call. <We need to keep an eye 
on this kid,> he said. <But there's no need for 
all of us to be here. Ax, Tobias, take the first 
watch. > 
We arranged a quick schedule then split up. 
I didn't sleep well that night. I spent two 
hours dreaming I was on the cover of Time maga-
zine as a half-human, half-elephant freak. Not 
exactly the kind of fame that makes Mom and 
Dad proud. 
At three o'clock, I morphed owl and flew 
back to the apartment building. Tobias and Ax re-
ported that they hadn't seen anything. Cassie 
and I spent the next two hours flying in endless 
circles. 
12 
Jake and Marco relieved us at five. 
I went back to my bed and my nightmares of 
exposure and infestation. 
By eight-thirty Saturday morning, I was awake 
and heading to Cassie's barn for a meeting. I was 
tired and grumpy. The weather was rainy and 
cold. I wanted a nap. Maybe after we got the film. 
Tobias was in his usual spot in the rafters. 
Cassie was mucking out a stall. Marco was sitting 
on a stool, looking all conditioned and blown-dry. 
Jake kept yawning. He looked rumpled, like he'd 
just crawled out of bed. Which he probably had. 
Ax was back on watch at the kid's apartment 
building. 
"Let's try to keep this meeting short," Jake 
said. "I don't want Ax on surveillance alone." 
"I don't get it," Marco said. "What was that 
kid doing all night?" 
"Probably sleeping," I grumbled. 
<We need a plan,> Tobias said. 
"Easy. We steal the film," I suggested. 
"That's not a plan, 0 reckless one," Marco 
said snidely. "That's obvious. But I'm ready." 
Jake nodded. "I spotted the kid around dawn. 
His apartment is on the fifth floor. The bedroom 
faces an empty lot in back." 
"Did you see the camera?" Rachel asked. 
"I think so," Jake said. "On his desk." 
13 

"We get it now," I said. "Before he hands it 
over to someone or takes it to Photos 'R' Us." 
Cassie leaned against her rake. "Probably a 
hundred people live in that apartment building," 
she pointed out. "Some of them could be Con-
trollers." 
"Yeah," Marco said. "So maybe the kid is in 
the elevator with a neighbor and he just happens 
to mention these weird creatures he saw in a 
dark alleyway last night. Before you know it, 
there's a knock on your door. And it isn't some-
one with a check for a million dollars." 
<He could be a Controller himself,> Tobias 
said. 
"We've got to go in," Jake said with another 
yawn. "We could try —" 
ZZZZZiiiiipppppp! 
"What the — ?" Marco jumped to his feet. 
A radio-controlled toy car blew into the barn. 
More precisely, a slightly damp, pink-and-aqua 
Barbie 4x4. Only instead of Barbie, a very small 
spaceship sat in the driver's seat. The ship was 
three or four inches long, shaped like a baton 
with two big "engines" at the back and a death's-
head bridge in the front. 
The ship looked way too familiar. 
insignificant creatures! Give us the power 
source and learn to accept your fate as our eter-
14 
nal slaves! We will not crush and annihilate you 
as we will crush and annihilate all the inferior 
species of this planet!> 
"Oh, man," I said. "You've got to be kidding. 
Not these guys again." 
15 

O Most Powerful Emperor, Lord of the Galaxy! Bad 
news. Our ship's engines have again malfunctioned! 
The treacherous popinjay males pushed the red but-
ton instead of the blue one! Weaker and less worthy 
servants would be vanquished by this disaster! But 
the brave Helmacron females are undaunted! We 
alone will capture the blue box of transforming 
power! All the galaxy shall tremble before us, right-
ful leaders of our race! 
— From the log of the Helmacron Females 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
I felt two pinpricks on my neck. Like mini 
mosquito bites. "Ahhh! Owww!" 
Maybe it was the lack of sleep, but I was al-
16 
ready extremely ticked off. I wanted to pop those 
little jerks. 
"The Helmacrons," Marco said with an amazed 
shake of his head. "I can't believe someone hasn't 
blasted these maniacs out of the universe by now." 
The Helmacrons are a race of tiny aliens. 
About a sixteenth of an inch tall, tops. But it's a 
sixteenth of an inch of egomania. They sound 
pretty harmless, right? Wrong. They have this 
shrinking ray. The technology to make you very, 
very tiny. To bring you down to their size. 
This makes them both annoying and danger-
ous. 
<You would have the Lords of the Universe 
wait?> the Helmacron voice in my head blus-
tered. <We demand the power source! And we 
demand it now! Follow our orders and live as our 
debased swine! Or resist us and be blasted into 
twisted molecules! See our might. Learn to obey 
your new masters!> 
"I don't get it," Jake said. "We already gave 
them one jump start. Why are they here again?" 
"Who cares?" I asked. "Let's just get rid of 
them." 
"Maybe something went wrong with their ship," 
Cassie said. "Hey — where are they going?" 
The Barbie-mobile backed up, did a 180, and 
zipped toward the back of the barn. 
17 

"Let's go!" Marco said. 
We got up and trotted after them. I could hear 
Tobias flapping above us. We caught up in time 
to see the truck's rubber tires bounce off a bat-
tered freezer chest in one of the empty stalls. 
Jake met Cassie's eyes. "Is it in there?" 
"Yes." 
"It" was the blue box. That's what we call it. 
The Andalites have another name for it. Several 
actually. Anyway, it's the device they use to trans-
fer the morphing power to an individual. Kind of 
like a super-advanced alien battery. Elfangor 
used it on us. 
Last time we saw the Helmacrons, we made a 
deal with them. They could use the blue box to 
power up their engines. Then they had to get off 
Earth. Pronto. And stay off Earth. Forever. 
Obviously, they hadn't kept their half of the 
bargain. 
<They're cutting into the freezer!> Tobias an-
nounced. 
I couldn't see anything, but hawks have amaz-
ing vision. You'd have to have outstanding eye-
sight to see what the Helmacrons were doing 
with their tiny energy beams. 
Cassie shot a nervous look over her shoulder. 
"My dad doesn't need to see this." 
"No problem," I said. I grabbed a pitchfork 
18 
that was leaning up against the wall. "I'll get 
them." 
"I'll help." Marco grabbed a ceramic pot. 
"I'm gonna trap these weirdos like bugs under 
glass." 
We moved toward the freezer. 
The pink-and-aqua truck spun around and 
raced right between us. 
Marco pounced. 
I pounced and jabbed the pitchfork down on 
top of the truck. Vaguely aware that my elbow 
had hit Marco and that he was stumbling back-
ward, clutching his head. 
So what? The Helmacron ship had rolled off 
the truck and was tumbling toward the freezer. 
All I had to do was grab it. 
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Marco lose 
his footing and trip. 
"Get it!" Cassie screamed. 
"Lookout!" 
THUNK! 
Marco. Sliding down the side of the freezer. 
Slumping forward into the hay. 
"What happened?" I demanded. 
"Marco hit his head on the corner of the 
freezer," Jake said. 
Cassie had already rushed to Marco's side. 
"Marco? Marco? Can you hear me?" 
19 

No reply. He was out cold. 
"Man, these Helmacrons are bad news," I 
complained. 
Jake raised an eyebrow. "Rachel, you were 
the one who elbowed Marco in the head." 
"Because the little monsters were distracting 
me!" 
<They're getting away!> Tobias shouted. 
I glanced down. The Helmacron ship was 
right where it had fallen. I picked it up. "No wor-
ries," I said. "I've got them." 
Tobias swooped toward Marco's head and nar-
rowly missed grazing Cassie with his talons. 
"Hey, watch out!" Cassie yelled. 
<They're getting away,> Tobias repeated. 
Then I got it. The Helmacrons had bailed out 
of their ship. They were loose somewhere in the 
barn. 
"Where are they?" I demanded. 
<Heading straight for Marco's nose!> 
"What?" But I was already down on my knees, 
inches from Marco's face. 
Frantically, I scanned the hay and dirt. 
<Move!> Tobias ordered. <Get away from him 
so I can see.> 
Cassie and I scrambled back. 
<Oh, no,> Tobias said. <This is bad. Very, 
very bad.> 
"What?" Jake demanded. 
20 
<They went up his nose,> Tobias said. 
"How many?" 
<About a dozen.> 
<Hah-HAH!> one of the Helmacrons cried. 
<The vicious human attacks us with a mighty 
metallic weapon, but we are not defeated! Give 
us the power source now and we will kill you 
quickly! Hesitate and we will prod you with sharp 
sticks before you die!> 
"Give me one good reason why we should co-
operate with you pipsqueaks," I demanded. 
<Grovel and beg our forgiveness!> the Hel-
macron demanded. <Do as we say or your oblivi-
ous comrade will die!> 
"News flash," I said. "Keep threatening us 
and you'll never get off Earth alive." 
<Brave Helmacron females care nothing for 
their own safety!> the voice shouted. <We care 
only for glorious victory!> 
<As do we, the newly liberated and coura-
geous Helmacron males!> came another voice. 
<We will kill the gigantic alien!> the first 
voice shouted. 
<Not if we kill it first,> the second voice an-
swered. 
Then the Helmacrons fell silent. Probably be-
ginning their march deeper into Marco's nose. 
"What's this about male and female?" Jake 
asked. 
21 

•Ml 
Cassie shrugged. "Don't you remember? When 
the Helmacrons were here before, Marco and I 
kind of gave the males a little . . . pep talk. We 
didn't like the way the females were always boss-
ing them around." 
"Yeah. Okay. This is a good thing," Jake said. 
"Because now the Helmacrons have even more 
reasons to fight among themselves." 
22 
Marco woke up about two seconds later. He 
took one look at the three of us staring into his 
face and got real worried, real fast. 
"What happened?" he demanded, rubbing 
the back of his head and giving me a murderous 
look. 
"Well, not anything good," I said. "Not any-
thing you're going to like." 
"What's the matter?" Marco asked. 
"The Helmacrons kind of. . ." Jake started. 
<You're sort of. . .> Tobias said. 
"A hostage," Cassie provided. 
Marco's eyes went wide. But before he could 
ask any questions — 
23 

"Ah! Ah! AhCHOOOO!" He sneezed, cupping 
his hand over his mouth. 
"Did he sneeze them out?" Jake demanded. 
<l don't see them,> Tobias reported. <Marco, 
open your hand.> 
Marco glared at us and climbed to his feet. 
"What is the matter with you people?" he de-
manded suspiciously. "Why are you interested in 
my bodily fluids? Where are the Helmacrons?" 
Cassie came forward and slipped an arm 
around Marco. "They cleared out of their ship," 
she said calmly. "And they went up your nose." 
"To hide?" 
"Well, no," Jake said. "More like —and I'm 
just guessing—it's because they want to kill 
you." 
"No way!" Marco rubbed at his nose. Let out 
a snort. "That is so not okay with me!" 
"Calm down," Cassie said. 
"Calm down?!" Marco bellowed. "I have Hel-
macrons up my nose! Lunatics! And they want 
me dead! No, I most definitely will not calm 
down." 
"I just thought we could think more clearly 
without you shouting," Cassie said. 
"Think about what?" Marco demanded. "We 
have to get them out! They're armed. They might 
blow an artery or a, a — something else impor-
24 
tant! What exactly do we have to think about? Do 
something!" 
"We will!" I shouted. "Just give us time to 
think!" 
Marco frowned and flicked at his nose. 
"Tobias, you'd better get Ax," Jake said. "First, 
see if you can get Erek to keep watch for us. He 
won't be able to follow the kid with the camera if 
he leaves the building but at least we'll know 
where he is." 
Tobias flared his wings and was gone. 
"Can we go in after them?" Jake asked. 
Cassie made a face. "Smallest morph . . . I 
guess a flea is small enough to get into nasal pas-
sages. It might be tight, though. Maybe a tick?" 
"Ticks are useless in battle," I said. 
"Excuse me," Marco cried. "Are you planning 
to have a BATTLE in my NOSE?!" 
"You have a better suggestion?" I demanded. 
"No," Marco whimpered, slumping down on a 
bale of hay. 
"Ideas?" Jake demanded. 
Cassie sighed. "Well . . . we have the Hel-
macrons' ship. We could power it up with the 
morphing cube, get tiny, and go after the Hel-
macrons as humans. That is, assuming the con-
trols are still working." 
Nobody said anything for a few beats. 
25 

Considering. 
Pretending not to glance at Marco. 
I know Marco. Marco is a get-it-done guy. He 
has the strategic mind of a serious military man 
and he's never afraid to make unpopular deci-
sions for the good of the mission. He knew our 
going after the Helmacrons was the fastest way 
to solve the problem. He wasn't going to stand in 
the way of the goal. 
Still, we were talking about invading his body 
in an unbelievably intimate way. He had a right 
to be a jerk about it if he wanted to be. 
"That could work," Jake said tentatively. 
Nothing from Marco. 
<What could work?> Tobias asked. 
A red-tailed hawk and a northern harrier flut-
tered into the barn and settled into the rafters. 
Tobias and Ax. 
"We were just thinking about using the con-
trols aboard the Helmacron ship to shrink our-
selves and go after the aliens in Marco's nose," 
Jake explained. 
<Yes,> Ax said. <l believe it is the only way. 
We have to find the Helmacrons. They have too 
much informations 
Marco squeaked. "This is so Magic School 
Bus. Rachel, have I ever told you that you could 
definitely be my Ms. Frizzle?" 
I ignored him. 
26 
"What information?" Cassie demanded. 
But Marco had already figured it out. "The 
Helmacrons know we're humans with morphing 
power. From what we've seen, the Helmacrons 
hate the Yeerks and vice versa. But if the Hel-
macrons learn that Visser Three is looking for a 
group of morphing bandits, and there was some-
thing in it for them, the Helmacrons would sell 
us out in a minute." 
Jake sighed. "Okay, we go after them. No 
choice." 
"Isn't anyone going to ask me what I think?" 
Marco demanded, his arms wrapped around his 
belly. "The nose you're talking about happens to 
belong to me!" 
Like I said, I know Marco. He'd already ac-
cepted the plan. 
Jake gave Marco an impatient look. "Well?" 
"Oh, sure," Marco said weakly. "Make your-
self at home. Just try to be neat. Think of it as 
the National Nose Land. Keep it in good shape 
for generations to come." 
27 

Ax fluttered down from the rafters. 
Jake nodded. "Tobias?" 
<No problem.> 
Tobias would keep watch. Let us know if any-
one got close enough to the barn to see Ax do his 
thing. 
Ax began to change. His sharp raptor head 
ballooned up. His bright yellow harrier eyes mi-
grated to the top of his head, turned blue, and 
sprouted stalks. 
Total freak show. 
"Why did the Helmacrons have to show up to-
day?" Marco whined. "I already used my Honey, I 
Shrunk the Animorphs joke the last time they 
were around. I just can't get a break." 
?8 
Cassie went to the freezer and started digging 
for the morphing cube. I followed her. Mostly be-
cause the sick look on Marco's face was making 
me uneasy. 
"Why does your dad keep a freezer out here?" 
I asked her. 
"We store stuff in it," Cassie said. She handed 
me an unidentifiable lump of something. It was 
frozen solid, so cold my fingers started to ache. 
"Like what?" 
"Frozen grubs," Cassie said, leaning back down 
into the freezer. "Certain, urn, bodily fluids from 
the animals. Oh, and Popsicles. Dad likes grape." 
"Sorry I asked." I considered the frozen lump 
in my hand. Decided I didn't want to know. 
"I figured nobody in their right mind would go 
pawing through this freezer," Cassie said. "Be-
sides, I needed a place where no living creature 
could accidentally come into contact with the 
cube." 
"I'm with you on that one," I agreed. 
Ax went to work on the Helmacron ship. 
I watched for a while. He used some of the 
surgical equipment Cassie's dad kept in the 
barn. Held the precise instruments in his deli-
cate Andalite fingers and carefully manipulated 
control rods the size of human hairs. Squinting 
at the procedure for ten minutes was enough to 
give me a headache. 
29 

My eyes kept drifting to Marco. Still sitting on 
the hay, looking miserable. I wandered over to 
him. Sat next to him. Considered giving him a 
hug, but couldn't quite bring myself to actually 
doit. 
"You okay?" I asked. 
"Great. I always wanted to grow up to be a 
Helmacron Holiday Inn." 
It wasn't funny, but I smiled anyway. "We're 
going to get them," I told Marco. 
An hour later Ax was finished. 
<This device is very simple to operate,> Ax 
told us. <The target size has been set. All we 
have to do is touch this panel and it should en-
gage the shrinking ray.> 
I felt wired. Nervous energy. I was anxious to 
get moving. The Helmacrons had been in Marco's 
body for over an hour. Plenty of time to do plenty 
of damage. 
"Just show me which button to push," Marco 
told Ax eagerly. 
Jake looked at Marco. "You're going to shrink 
us?" 
"Who else?" 
"I thought Ax would do it." 
"Isn't he going, you know, on the mission?" 
Marco asked. 
"Well, we know there are at least twelve Hel-
macrons," I said. "Five of us. Even with Ax they 
30 
outnumber us more than two to one. I say he 
comes." 
<Operating the device is not difficulty Ax re-
peated. <l may be more useful up Marco's nose.> 
Marco giggled nervously. "That didn't sound 
too weird." 
Jake looked troubled. "Marco, don't you want 
to have someone here with you?" he asked. 
"You mean, in case I collapse?" Marco asked. 
"Pass out? Or, to make things crystal clear, drop 
dead?" 
Jake rubbed his eyes. "Right," he said wearily. 
"No." Marco shook his head. "If you don't 
mind, I'd rather have the maximum firepower 
working to make sure none of those things hap-
pen. What's Ax going to do for me here? Hold my 
hand?" 
"We still have the camera to deal with," Jake 
pointed out. 
"I'll handle the kid," Marco said. "One homey 
shutterbug is nothing compared to a tiny bunch 
of squabbling psychopaths from outer space." 
Jake's expression got serious. "Look, you can't 
take unnecessary risks while this mission is go-
ing on. Don't play hero. Just keep in touch with 
Erek or whoever he's got on surveillance." 
<Prince Jake,> Ax said, <l would also strongly 
advise Marco not to morph while we are inside 
his body. As far as I know, this is an unprece-
31 

dented event in the history of morphing technol-
ogy. There is no way to predict what the redistrib-
ution of his mass into Z-space and the 
substitution of a foreign DNA will do to our minia-
turized bodies.> 
Jake pushed his hair off his forehead. "Got 
that, Marco?" 
"Uh, not really. Ax, try English." 
"Look," Jake said. "No morphing, under any 
circumstances." 
"Don't worry," Marco snorted. "The thought 
sort of makes me sick." 
"Okay, Ax, you're with us," Jake said. "I'm 
hoping we won't be gone long. But Marco . . ." 
"Yeah, yeah, Erek's phone number is on the 
fridge. Listen, is it okay if I help myself to a 
snack after the kids go to bed?" 
"All of this strategic planning is fun and all," 
I said loudly. "But we're giving the Helmacrons a 
big honkin' head start." 
"Okay," Jake said. "In the words of my gung-
ho cousin, 'Let'sdo it.'" 
"We should hold hands," Cassie said. "That 
way we won't get separated when we shrink. 
Maybe." 
The five of us huddled together. I took 
Cassie's hand and gently held Tobias's wing. We 
watched as Marco hovered over the Helmacron 
ship, looking too big and clumsy. 
32 
<Simply place your hand on the panel and 
pull down the left rod,> Ax said. 
"Yeah, I got it," Marco said. "Ready, set —" 
<Make sure it is the left rod,> Ax said. <You 
do not want to touch the right one.> 
"I got it," Marco said, sounding annoyed. 
"Ready—" 
FLASH! 
A flashbulb brilliance. The light was green 
and shockingly bright, like looking into an emer-
ald sun. Then, with surprising speed, we all 
started to get very small. 
33 

Down. 
Down, and down, and down. 
We were shrinking. Fast. 
The Helmacron ship and the blue box were 
growing larger. Marco was positively enormous. 
"Hey, Marco," I said. "From this angle, you 
actually look tall." 
"Hey —cool!" 
"Too bad you can't shrink the whole school," I 
said. 
"Ha-ha. And, free this month only, a bonus 
ha!" 
Shrinking is something like morphing an in-
sect. But different, too. When I've been in fly 
34 
morph the fly instincts feel that being tiny is nat-
ural. 
Being a teeny-weeny human is just plain weird. 
I'd started out at five-foot-something. Now I 
was roughly the size of an American Girl doll. 
And getting tinier rapidly. 
We were the Littles. The Borrowers. Thumbe-
lina and friends. 
Marco was peering down on us. His face was 
the size of a billboard on Times Square. If he'd 
been wearing Calvin Klein briefs — and nothing 
else — the illusion would have been complete. 
Almost. 
"Remember, Marco," Jake called. "No mor-
phing." 
"What did you say?" Marco asked. "Small 
people are hard to hear." 
"I said, no morphing!" But at that point it 
probably sounded like, "i said, no morphing." 
"I can't HEAR you!" Marco was starting to 
sound like a cheerleader at one of those televised 
competitions. 
"Tell him," Jake said to Ax. 
<No morphing!> Ax yelled in thought-speak. 
"Okay!" Marco boomed. "Your puny lives de-
pend on my following orders." 
That was when the first wave of fear rippled 
through me. 
35 

Okay, morphing is creepy. But, in a strange 
way, you're in control. 
Concentrate hard enough and you can control 
the morph, at least to some extent. 
Concentrate hard enough and even when you 
think you're about to take your dying breath, you 
can get your own body back. 
But shrinking . . . 
I couldn't undo this on my own. 
In a very real and spooky way, my life was in 
Marco's hands. 
And, of course, Marco was infested with micro-
scopic lunatics that wanted him — and us — out 
of their way. 
Now we were flea-sized, and still shrinking. 
The workbench loomed overhead like a win-
dowless skyscraper. 
The treads on Marco's running shoes were 
like enormous purple sculptures. 
Down. 
Down, and down, and down. 
Down until rake marks in the dirt looked like 
hills. 
Down until bits of hay were huge, felled trees 
and grains of dirt were the size of soccer balls. 
And we were still shrinking. 
Marco's mammoth form was entirely filling 
my view. "I just thought of some —" 
His voice just blinked out mid-sentence. Like 
36 
a radio suddenly switched off. But I knew Marco 
was still talking. I could sense his words as sound 
waves breaking around me. 
Cassie gripped my hand a bit tighter. "What 
just happened?" 
<We are too small to hear sounds,> Ax said. 
"That didn't happen before," Cassie said. 
<Right,> Tobias agreed. <When the Helma-
crons shrunk me and Cassie and Marco, we could 
still hear. You couldn't hear us. But we could 
hear you.> 
Cassie looked at me. "Something's wrong." 
37 

H 
i, Marco here. 
You're expecting some sort of glib remark. A 
joke, a witty comment. Well, I wasn't in a Jim 
Carrey kind of space. 
The Helmacrons hadn't exactly charmed me 
the first time around. Basically, I'd decided they 
were insane. Now they were inside my body. 
In there with little unimportant things like my 
heart and my lungs. 
And my friends. 
The truth: I was thinking about scribbling out 
a little note. Telling Jake to take my stereo after I 
was gone. Explaining to Dad what really hap-
pened to Mom. Telling Rachel about the dream 
where she begged me to marry her. 
38 
Adding to the general creepiness factor was 
the fact that my friends weren't talking to me. 
I heard Ax say, <No morphing!> Then . . . 
nothing. 
Nothing for at least a minute. 
Then — 
<Marco, this is Ax. We have a problem. You 
will not be able to hear the others. Just Tobias 
and me in thought-speak.> 
"But you can hear me, right?" 
Another long pause. Then — 
<Cassie said I should explain that none of us 
can hear you, either.> Ax, of course. 
"Well, how annoying!" I said. "I mean, how 
am I supposed to keep up troop morale when no-
body can even hear my comic genius?" 
Nothing. 
Oh. Right. They couldn't hear me. 
<You need to pick us up and put us in your 
nose,> Ax said. 
Sure. Except — big problem: How was I sup-
posed to pick them up without squishing them? I 
had to squint just to see them. They were, like, 
the size of dandruff flakes. 
I leaned over and stared at the ground. Okay, 
second big problem: I'd lost them. Frantically, I 
scanned the dirt and hay. Nothing. 
Stupid, stupid, stupid. 
I was ticked. We hadn't thought of this. We 
39 
M a r c o 

should have arranged for everyone to hop on my 
hand when they got to about an inch high. Be-
cause finding my friends seemed totally impossi-
ble. 
Major feeling of dread. 
I'd faced death before. Each one of us had 
had at least one major close call. But this was 
different. This was everyone. As in, I would be 
the only Animorph left alive. Little me against all 
the bad guys. 
I felt like puking. 
Stress. 
Or. . . something else? Some strange little 
aliens marching through my . . . what? Nose? 
Lungs? Brain? Doing who knows what kind of 
damage. 
No time to freak out. 
Time to find my friends and stick them up my 
nose. 
<Ahhhhhhhhh!> Tobias suddenly screamed 
in my head. 
My stomach took a lurch. 
Definitely stress. 
<Marco, now would be an excellent time to 
remove us from the floor,> Ax said. 
"Fine, fine," I muttered. "Just tell me where 
you are!" 
Of course, they couldn't hear me. 
Then I saw it. A black bug with a hard shell. 
40 
Weird pincers in the front. Scary. Considering how 
panicked Tobias sounded, my friends were some-
where near that big, bad beetle. 
I dropped to my knees. At first nothing but 
dirt. Then — 
There! 
A few too-colorful grains of sand. I tried to 
count them. I couldn't smash the beetle if he 
had one of my friends. 
One. Two. Three. Four... Five. Okay. I reached 
out and snatched up the beetle by a back leg. 
Flung him toward the freezer. 
<Thanks,> Tobias said shakily. 
"You're welcome," I muttered, even though 
he wouldn't hear me. 
Okay, I could see the colorful specks. But I 
still had no idea how to pick them up. And I was 
afraid to look away. 
41 

R a c h e l 
O 
ur little vacation in the hay forest was nice 
but I was ready to leave. Especially after the bee-
tle episode. 
We could see Marco hovering overhead. His 
face was an entire landscape. Nose mountain. 
Cheek plains. 
He was a giant. 
"Why doesn't he pick us up?" Cassie asked. 
Marco wasn't doing anything except staring 
at us. 
"Maybe he's waiting for Jake to tell him what 
to do," I said nastily. Tiny is definitely not my 
thing. 
Ax looked at Jake. <Prince Jake, it is possible 
Marco is afraid of hurting us.> 
42 
"Right," Jake said. "Let's tell him how to pick 
us up. Er — how should he pick us up?" 
"Easy," I said. "We grab a piece of hay. He 
sticks it up his nose and we're off." 
Jake nodded. "That piece there." He pointed 
to a piece of hay a few paces away. 
Climbing it was easy. At our size the hay 
looked rough, like someone had taken a cheese 
grater to its sides. I grabbed a couple of hand-
holds and pulled myself up. No problem. 
"I feel like I could take on Schwarzenegger," I 
said. 
Cassie nodded as she scrambled up beside 
me. "Something about being small makes you 
stronger." We noticed it before. "Like ants lifting 
a thousand times their weight." 
Once we were all aboard, Ax told Marco to 
pick up the hay. Two fingers the size of sequoia 
trunks lowered, pinched, and lifted. 
"Ahhhhh!" Cassie screamed. 
"Ahhhhh!" I yelled. 
We were being blasted into space! The G-force 
knocked me on my butt. I just managed to hang on. 
The wind was whipping. I could barely breath. I saw 
something flash by. Could have been Marco's knee. 
<Slow down!> Tobias shouted. 
The wind died down. The landscape beneath 
us shifted from jeans-color to T-shirt-color to chin-
color. 
43 

"Fantastic Voyage," I said. "The voyage in-
side Marco." 
<That was an old sci-fi movie. This is a horror 
flick.> Tobias said. 
We passed into shadow. 
Apparently into — can I just say EWWW — 
Marco's nose. 
When my eyes adjusted to the dimness, I saw 
a widely spaced forest of rough, textured black 
hairs, sprouting out of what looked like a waxy, 
pink granite wall. The hairs were sapling-sized, 
long, criss-crossing high overhead. A shifting in-
termittent wind tossed them. 
"Okay, everybody off," Jake said. He reached 
for a nearby hair. 
Tobias fluttered above my head. 
<Prince Jake, I should morph first,> Ax said. 
<l think my hooves will slow me down in this 
"terrain."> 
"Do it." 
I reached out for a hair and pulled myself onto 
it. The hair sagged under my weight. Below . . . 
the void. I could see a bright oval spot of light. I 
was looking straight out of Marco's nostril. The 
ground was miles and miles away. I quickly 
scrambled toward the overhang. 
Ugh. The wall was oddly warm. Body temper-
ature. There was something really weird about 
44 
pressing myself into Marco's skin. Gave me a 
massive case of the heebie-jeebies. 
"You know," Jake said thoughtfully. "I think 
this is the most disgusting mission we've ever 
done. Something about being inside Marco 
makes me feel like a Yeerk." 
"Check it out," Cassie whispered. "You can 
feel Marco's breath. In —" 
A cool breeze blew up from the opening be-
low us. 
"And out —" 
Now a warmer moist breeze blew in the oppo-
site direction. 
I clung, staring up. The wall arched over my 
head at a forty-five-degree angle. I couldn't see 
the end of the overhang, but it went way, way up, 
disappearing into darkness. 
There was no sign of the Helmacrons. No 
footprints to tell us which way to go. 
"Now what?" I asked. 
"Climb?" Cassie suggested. 
I watched as Ax completed his morph to north-
ern harrier. As his stalk eyes withered and vanished. 
SLURP! His tail violently disappeared into his 
body like an electric cord into a vacuum. Tail 
feathers shot out. 
"Let's all get wings," I suggested. "Flying will 
be easier than trying to rock climb." 
45 

Hanging onto delicate nose hairs and the 
slick wall, we morphed. Tricky, but I felt much, 
much better as a bald eagle. Touching Marco's 
insides was wigging me out. 
Morphs complete, we put our backs to 
Marco's nostril and flew. A red-tailed hawk, a per-
egrine falcon, a northern harrier, a bald eagle, an 
owl. 
On and on. Like flying into a cave. Darker and 
darker the deeper we got. 
Flying was easier than climbing, but it was 
still hard work. Each time Marco exhaled, we lost 
ground. A bald eagle can hover for hours on a 
nice updraft. But there were no updrafts here. 
Soon I was exhausted from flapping my wings, up 
and down. 
Before long, a flat plain opened up beneath 
us. My raptor ears started to pick up sounds. 
<Helmacrons,> Tobias said. <Farther in.> 
They sounded angry. As if they were arguing. 
Finally, I could make out their forms. 
<Do you guys see what I see?> I asked. 
<The Helmacrons,> Jake said. 
<Yes, but —> I hesitated, uncertain. Bald ea-
gles see well during the day. They can spot a 
salmon swimming upstream from a mile up. But 
it was dark now, and I was practically blind. <lsn't 
something wrong?> 
46 
<The Helmacrons look kind of. . . big,> To-
bias said. 
Kind of big. As in — enormous. Huge. Gar-
gantuan. They were the size of giraffes. No — 
bigger. Twice as big. As big as air traffic control 
towers. I could morph elephant and still only 
come up to their calves. 
Another thing. These were some seriously 
ugly aliens. Heads: wide and perfectly flat on 
top. Eyes rolled around up there like big green 
marbles. Faces: upside-down pyramids. Chins: 
barbed. Teeth gnashed in from either side of 
their mouths. And an extra set of legs made them 
look like walking tables. 
<They appear to be exactly a hundred times 
our size,> Ax said calmly. 
<How?> Jake wondered. 
<lt is possible — perhaps I made a miscalcu-
lation when I calibrated the shrinking device.> 
Ax? Make a simple mathematical error? No. 
<More likely, the Helmacrons guessed we'd 
try to use the shrinking ray,> I said. 
<Guessed — and sabotaged it before they 
bailed out of their ship,> Jake said. 
<The little stinkers,> Cassie said. 
47 

O Great One, Most Courageous of all Leaders, we 
have bravely marched into a breathing hole of the gi-
ant alien! Triumph was within our grasp until one of 
the treasonable females wallowed into a sticky body 
excretion! But we, the noble knights of Helmacron, 
shall overcome this hardship and find the strength 
to silence the giant forever! 
— From the log of the Helmacron Males 
Ihe Helmacrons didn't seem to notice us as 
we flapped overhead. They were absorbed in 
themselves. As usual. 
<What are they doing?> Tobias said. The Hel-
macrons were standing in a circle like Boy Scouts 
48 
around a fire. Only there was a Helmacron where 
the fire belonged. 
<Consulting a map?> Cassie suggested. 
<Making dinner reservations?> 
<Quiet down, guys!> Jake ordered. <l can't 
hearthem!> 
<Why must we delay our glorious mission?> 
one of the Helmacrons demanded of the others. 
<A warrior who is stuck and cannot move dies a 
hero! Should we deprive her of a valiant death?> 
I heard what sounded like the rattle of swords. 
<March on! March on!> several Helmacron voices 
chanted. 
<l care not for our goo-encrusted knight!> an-
other voice said. <But we know not what lies 
ahead. Perhaps the muck extends through the 
entire alien!> 
<Excuse me,> Jake said. <But what?> 
<Goo and muck,> Tobias said. <What little 
boys are made of .> 
<Coward!> one of the Helmacrons shouted. 
<Fool!>said the other. 
More rattling of swords. I was beginning to 
think the Helmacrons were going to take each 
other out and save us a lot of trouble. 
Which kind of annoyed me. I mean, I was big-
time bugged with the Helmacrons for double-
crossing us. It was their fault I was no bigger than 
49 

a gnat. I wanted revenge! I wanted to launch an 
attack before there was no one left to attack. 
<Eavesdropping is rude(> I said. <Let's figure 
out how we're going to capture them.> 
<l think I've got it!> Cassie said. 
<Great!> Jake said. Then, <What?> 
<The human nose is lined with mucus,> 
Cassie said. <Mucus traps dust that floats into 
the nose. Marco's mucus must have trapped one 
of the Helmacrons!> 
I don't know why she sounded so happy. This 
whole thing was just so far beyond gross. 
<Most animals with lungs have mucus,> Ax 
said loudly. You wouldn't expect it, but trying to 
hear thought-speak over the huge debating Hel-
macrons and the wind was becoming difficult. 
<Andalites have it, t o o 
<lsn't that special?> I said. <Guys, could you 
focus here? We need to talk attack.> 
<Look. It's everywhere,> Tobias pointed out. 
He was right. Now that I focused my dim eye-
sight on the walls and floors and ceilings ahead 
of us, I could see the snot. Oozing. Dripping. 
Pooling. Collecting like wax under a candle. Must 
not have been as thick as wax, though. The wind 
was blowing up whitecaps on the surface of the 
pools. 
Whitecaps? 
<Hey — why is it getting so windy?> I shouted. 
50 
It happened suddenly. Gusts of cool, incom-
ing wind. In a totally different rhythm than be-
fore. 
With my excellent eagle hearing I heard a dis-
tant roar. My eagle brain panicked. Wanted to fly. 
Wanted out of the way of whatever was coming. 
Louder! 
Now the Helmacrons had noticed. 
They were all shouting at once. 
<This sudden storm will not defeat the mighty 
warriors of the Helmacron empire, just rulers of 
the universe!> 
LOUDER! 
The human part of me felt a bit jittery, too. The 
sound was like a freight train closing in on us. 
<Get in the snot!> Jake yelled. 
<What? No way!> 
Jake was already flapping toward the deepest 
pool. <Do it. Now!> he hollered. 
I flew. But it was practically impossible to 
make progress in the rushing wind. Like flying 
into the eye of a hurricane. I used all of my 
strength, pressed my wing muscles to the bone-
popping point. 
THUMP! And landed in a snot puddle. Stuck. 
THUMP! Tobias came in for a wet landing on 
my right. Stuck. 
THUMP! Cassie, farther up on the wall. 
THUMP! Ax. 
51 

The wind hit me like a brick wall. Knocked 
me off my talons. I landed beak-first in the sticky 
sea and then started to slide toward Marco's nos-
tril. 
Tobias grabbed my talon with his beak. 
I stopped just in time for me to see something 
tumbling toward us. Something big. 
A Helmacron! 
He, she, it — whatever — was bouncing head 
over foot like a tumbleweed. 
<l shall return!> the Helmacron shouted as 
the wind tossed him/her into somersaults. <l 
shall return to force your surrender, vile air-
breathing aliens!> 
Then he/she was gone. 
And so was the wind. 
52 
M a r c o 
I stood in Cassie's barn holding a piece of 
hay up my nose for about five minutes. Naturally, 
I felt like a complete idiot. As soon as Ax said it 
was okay to lose the hay, I dropped it, hid the 
Helmacron ship, and hauled butt out of there. 
I'd ridden my bike over to Cassie's earlier, so I 
grabbed it and started to pedal toward home. 
The weather was depressing, gray and over-
cast and misty. I knew I should probably just go 
home and hang out in my room. Wait for a mes-
sage from Ax or Tobias. Mission accomplished. 
We're heading out. 
If Jake and the others didn't show up by din-
nertime, I'd slip out and contact the Chee. Check 
53 
g 

on the camera situation. Arrange for some of them 
to play my friends while my friends were . . . away. 
I felt strangely abandoned. Weird when you 
consider three people, a Bird-boy, an Andalite, 
and a bunch of Helmacrons were holding a con-
vention in my sinuses. 
I peddled on. My mind wandered. 
Have you ever seen Fantastic Voyage? 
Dad and I caught it on the late-night movie 
once. Raquel Welch. Very hot. Anyway, in the 
flick this team travels into the bloodstream of 
some old dude. The doctors have him knocked 
out on drugs and lying perfectly still. Supposedly 
to make Raquel and her posse safer. 
Maybe, I thought, / should go home and lie 
perfectly still. 
On the other hand, I thought, if I'm going to 
kick, I don't want to go staring at the ceiling of 
my bedroom. 
I changed directions. Headed toward the in-
dustrial outskirts of town, toward the photogra-
pher kid's apartment. I had no idea how I was 
going to get the film. I couldn't morph. Jake and 
Ax had made that perfectly clear. No unneces-
sary risks. But I had promised Jake I'd keep tabs 
on the kid. 
I decided a direct approach would be best. 
Nothing was stopping me from climbing the fire 
escape, crawling in the kid's window, and taking 
54 
what I wanted. Burglars do it all the time. How 
hard could it be? 
I dropped my bike against the wall of an adja-
cent building, crumbling and abandoned. Spoke 
quietly to the filthy homeless man — a Chee — 
who was watching the front door of the building. 
Made my way around to the back. 
The kid's apartment building was kind of seedy. 
Peeling paint on the door. Dirty windows. Graffiti. 
Nobody lived in that part of town because they 
wanted to. I knew that firsthand. 
Maybe the kid was just a kid. Some bored guy 
who wanted to be a photographer. Well, if that 
was true it was time someone taught him to stay 
out of alleyways late at night. 
The fire escape descended into an abandoned 
lot full of broken concrete, weeds, and blowing 
trash. A chain-link fence surrounded the lot, but 
someone had knocked down one of the poles. 
Maybe hit it with a car. Anyway, the fence was 
sagging. I walked right over it and stood staring 
up at the building. 
I kept expecting someone to ask what I was 
doing. To challenge me. But the whole block 
was deserted. Deserted at 11:00 on a Saturday 
morning. The windows on the next building were 
bricked over. 
I picked my way over the crumbling concrete 
to the fire escape. It had a handle, maybe four 
55 

feet above my head. I jumped up six or seven 
times. Finally caught it. Pulled it down. 
CLAN Kcl ickCLAN KCLAN KCLAN K! 
The rusty fire escape made an incredible noise 
as it unfolded toward the ground. Okay, maybe 
breaking and entering in broad daylight wasn't 
the brightest idea. 
I got ready to run. Thought I saw a curtain on 
the third floor move. But nobody stuck a head out 
a window. Nobody yelled. 
Maybe they thought I was the fire escape re-
pairman. 
Yeah, right. 
For a moment I considered abandoning this 
plan. Going home and sitting tight. 
I was worried about more than just the local 
tenement rent-a-cop. The kid could be a Con-
troller. This could be a trap. Yeerks could be 
watching from the roof, or from the abandoned 
gas station across the street. Waiting for the An-
dalite bandits to make a move for the camera. 
I was also worried about police, the ones that 
weren't Controllers. They don't exactly encourage 
breaking and entering. Get caught, and I'd be do-
ing time in juvie hall. 
On the bright side, I might be dead before 
anyone could actually catch me. 
And, like Rachel, sitting tight is not my thing. 
Unfolded, the fire escape was a wobbly black 
56
metal ladder with an even wobblier railing. I put 
my foot on the bottom rung and started to climb. 
Jake had said the kid lived on the fifth floor. I 
went up, passing a bedroom on each floor. 
Floor one: bare futon on the floor. Floor two: 
empty. Floor three: flickering TV, empty beer 
cans. Floor four: stacks and stacks of books. 
Floor five — 
The room was furnished with a metal frame 
bed. Tossed sheets. A desk. Empty bag of sour-
cream-and-onion chips. Some notebooks and 
pens. And . . . a disposable camera. 
Bingo. 
The window itself was cracked, the frame splin-
tered. I easily hauled the window open with one 
hand. Stopped. Listened. All was quiet. Bent my 
head, stepped through, lowered myself into the 
room. Then — 
Click, click, click, click, click. 
A sound that was all too familiar. The sound 
of Euclid, my stepmom's annoying poodle, trying 
to run on linoleum. The door to the hallway was 
open. I lunged for it. 
"ARF! ARF! AR FAR FAR FAR F!" 
CLICKETY CLICKETY CLICKETY CLICKETY! 
This didn't sound like a poodle. 
Okay. I've been a dog. They are basically happy 
animals. Anxious to make friends. Even the an-
noying ones like Euclid. 
57 

"Nice doggie," I said shakily. 
Just then Fido poked his head into the room. 
He was short and stocky. All shoulders, head, neck. 
Small eyes. Evil, laughing mouth set with a row of 
serious teeth. Every one of which was on display. 
A pit bull. 
An angry pit bull. 
"Rrrrrrr," he growled low. A string of drool 
spilled out of his mouth. 
Too far to make a dive for the camera, so . . . 
Morph! But I couldn't. Couldn't without the 
possibility of hurting my friends. Not happening. 
That left one choice: Run. 
I started to back toward the window. 
Fido lunged. Jumped. 
"Ahhhhh!" I screamed. 
Snarling, snapping teeth — an inch from my 
nose! I heard Fido's teeth clank together. Smelted 
his hot doggy breath. 
I put up a hand. "Get away, Cujo!" 
Fido sank his teeth into my wrist. He shook his 
head, sending incredible waves of pain up my arm. 
"Get off! Get off!" 
Fido shook again. 
"Ahhhhhh!" I screamed. 
A baseball bat was leaning against a wall. A 
Louisville slugger. I slid toward it, Fido hanging 
from my arm like a very ugly charm bracelet. 
58 
Picked it up with the hand that wasn't be-
ing eaten. Whacked Fido across his haunches. 
Just hard enough to get his attention — not 
enough to really hurt him. Okay, so I'd broken 
into his home but he didn't have to amputate my 
arm. 
"Arrrr 
" Fido growled quietly, released, 
and dropped. 
I held up my mangled arm. 
Fido backed off about two feet, watching me 
hungrily. 
A neat semicircle of puncture holes marked 
my wrist. A little blood dripped toward my el-
bow. Bat under my injured arm, I grabbed an 
old T-shirt off the bed. Wrapped it around my 
wrist. 
Crap. Yeah, I could morph and demorph to heal 
the injury — except for the fact that I couldn't! 
Wasn't allowed to. But the pain was pretty intense. 
Fido hunkered down and growled low. 
Nobody had come running. The apartment 
must have been empty. Unless Fido's owners 
were off somewhere calling the police. 
I backed toward the window, still gripping the 
bat. No time to reach for the camera. I had just 
climbed out when the sirens started. I pounded 
down the slippery rungs of the fire escape, feel-
ing light-headed. 
59 

How did burglars do this? I wondered ab-
sently. 
I was running across the empty lot when I felt 
something tickling my nose. I put up my good 
hand and brought it away bloody. 
60 
R a c h e l 
We pulled ourselves out of the snot. 
My right wing was throbbing, hanging loose 
and broken. I was missing handfuls of feathers. 
Tobias hadn't been seriously injured. But Jake's 
beak was broken, Cassie's neck was twisted at an 
unnatural angle, and Ax was missing half his 
feathers. We started to morph back to our own 
bodies. 
The Helmacrons were only a few yards away, 
shouting and screaming like maniacs. They didn't 
seem too worried about their sneezed-out friend. 
<This mission may be more difficult than we 
thought,> Ax suggested. <We should try to deal 
with the Helmacrons as quickly as possibles 
<Do you think?> I snapped. 
61 

<How exactly can we deal with them?> Jake 
asked. <They're bigger than us.> 
<A hundred times bigger,> Cassie added. 
<We have the element of surprises I said. 
My lips softened as my yellow eagle beak 
turned into human lips. Talons turned into fin-
gers. I felt a distant itching as my feathers flat-
tened out, and the patterns they made on my 
skin faded like a bad bruise. I was getting bigger, 
much bigger. Five of me would have been a 
whole millimeter long. 
My broken wing snapped as it twisted and 
started to grow into a human arm. My insides 
sloshed and gurgled and turned back into human 
heart, kidney, liver, lungs. 
Suddenly, it was as if someone had turned 
out the lights. My bird-of-prey vision blinked 
out. 
"Hey," I said. "It's really dark in here." 
<That may be —> Cassie's thought-speech 
stopped as her head became more human than 
bird. "Another advantage," she continued. "We 
can morph animals that see well in the dark." 
<How do we know Helmacrons don't see well 
in the dark?> Tobias asked. 
"We don't," Jake said grimly. 
"I think I do," Cassie said. "Marco and I were 
inside a Helmacron ship. It was very brightly lit." 
62 
<So, we can assume Helmacrons need bright 
light to see,> Ax said. <Or, at least, that they do 
not like the dark.> 
Jake made the call: half battle morphs, half 
creatures that see well at night. 
We morphed. 
SPROOOT! 
Big leathery ears popped from the side of my 
head. 
SPRONG! 
My nose stretched until it was longer than my 
entire body had been. About a whole half a mil-
limeter. My legs grew massive. Two teeth twisted 
and grew into curved tusks. 
I was at least three times taller than I had 
been. 
A hundred and fifty times heavier. 
To the Helmacrons, I was a kitty-sized ele-
phant. Ax, in his own Andalite body, was smaller 
still. Tobias was a Hork-Bajir at Helmacron mouse 
scale. Jake and Cassie were fly-sized owls. 
<Maybe we should try to channel the Helma-
cron personality,> Tobias suggested. <They aren't 
afraid of being small.> 
<Maybe they think small is scary,> Cassie 
said. 
<Then they're going to be terrified of us.> 
<Now what?> 
63

<Let's try to reason with them first,> Jake said. 
<Oh, yeah.> I laughed. <That will work.> 
<We don't want them shooting Dracon beams 
if we can avoid it,> Jake said. <And Tobias, 
watch those blades.> 
We marched forward until we were standing 
right beneath the Helmacrons. They paid us zero 
attention. 
Jake addressed them. <Surrender now! Sur-
render, and we'll let you live as our defiled beasts 
of burden. Resist us and — and we'll sneeze in 
your general direction^ 
<Very original,> Tobias whispered. 
<You call that reasoning?> 
<Reasoning Helmacron-style,> Jake explained. 
<What are they doing?> I asked, elephant 
eyes useless in the dim light. 
<Looking for us,> Jake reported. <Uh-oh. One 
of them spotted Rachel. He's pointing his sword 
at her.> 
"Neep! Neep! Neep!" the Helmacrons cheered. 
<What's that?> I demanded. 
Cassie sighed. <l'm pretty sure they're cheer-
ing.> 
<Hah-HAH!> one of the Helmacrons crowed. 
<The insipid aliens fell into our crafty trap! Now 
they are the ones lacking great size. Victory is be-
fore us!> 
Congratulations,> I said. 
<Respect us,> Jake bellowed, <or we will tell 
our friend to bring the wind!> 
The Helmacrons started laughing or cheering 
or whatever that "Neep neeping" was. 
One of them took the flat of his sword and 
knocked me off my feet. 
"Neep! Neep! Neep!" 
Now, I was getting angry. Really angry. 
<Jake, this negotiation is going nowhere,> To-
bias said. 
<Okay, go for it,> Jake said. <Minimal dam-
age to Marco, please!> 
<Neep this!> 
I stumbled to my feet. Ran forward. 
So did Tobias and Ax. 
An ugly black Helmacron boot was right in 
front of us. Ax slashed at it with his tail. Tobias 
carved with his wrist and knee blades. I stood 
right on top of the boot. 
No reaction. 
<Hah-HAH! You think to crush the toe of a 
brave Helmacron warrior?> the foot's owner hol-
lered in my head. <Your weight is not enough to 
bruise the hilna of a mighty Helmacron!> 
I had no clue what a hilna was. But I wanted 
to pulverize some! 
I stepped off the boot. Then rammed my tusks 
straight into it. The Helmacron didn't flinch. He 
didn't bleed. He was, however, annoyed. 
65 
64 

<| will annihilate you, human!> He drew his 
Dracon beam. His very, very large Dracon beam. 
<Uh-oh!> Jake said. 
Tseeew! 
I dodged. 
The beam barely missed me. 
Hit the ground. 
And then something awful started to happen. 
Blood began oozing up under my elephant feet. 
Marco was bleeding. 
66 
<Stop!> Jake yelled. <Desist or you will be 
blown to your doom!> 
<Hah-HAH! Helmacrons never surrender! Give 
us the power source and we will spare your lives. 
Refuse and we will stop the heart of your com-
rade!> 
<What will that get you?> I demanded. <lf 
you make us mad, you'll never get the blue box.> 
<The human in the morph with the elongated 
nose tries to bluff! She is obviously unaware of 
our superior intelligence. Perhaps we shall de-
stroy her next!> 
<Can they really stop Marco's heart?> Jake 
asked Ax in private thought-speak that included 
us and not the Helmacrons. 
67 

<0f course. A few well-timed blasts from their 
Dracon beams could interrupt the heart's rhythm 
and stop it.> 
<From here?> 
<No,> Ax said. <They would have to be closer 
to the heart.> 
<How are they going to —> 
<Prince Jake,> Ax interrupted. <Perhaps we 
should offer them what they want.> 
<We can't give them the blue box!> I said. 
<l agree,> Ax said. <Andalite technology would 
be particularly dangerous in the hands of these 
beings. However, I am suggesting we deploy Hel-
macron tactics. What you humans call a double 
cross.> 
Ax, suggesting something underhanded? That 
made me nervous. Andalites are big on honor 
and honesty. If Ax was suggesting subterfuge, 
the situation was even worse than it appeared. 
<What's your idea, Ax?> Jake asked. 
<Tell them we will give them the blue box,> 
Ax said. <Get them out of Marco's body. Then do 
not give them the box.> 
<As simple as that?> 
<Yes.> 
<Okay, you win!> Jake told the Helmacrons. 
<We'll give you the box. Let's go get it.> 
The Helmacrons' marble eyes began to roll 
around madly. <Hah-HAH!> one of them exulted. 
68 
<This time you bend before the majesty of the 
Helmacron superiority! Now you will grovel be-
fore your new masters.> 
<That's right, we're bending,> Jake said. <Now 
let's go.> 
<Half of us will follow you out of this body,> 
the Helmacron said. <The other half will stay to 
guard the hostage and assure that you do not re-
nege on your end of the bargain.> 
<No deal,> Jake said. <AII of you come with 
us or we don't play.> 
<You think us fools?> The Helmacron sounded 
miffed. As if we'd insulted her — his? — intelli-
gence. <The time for debate is finished! The time 
for action is upon us. Brave Helmacron females, 
follow metoglory!> 
With a clanging of swords, the biggest, nastiest-
looking Helmacrons began to run away from us. 
Well, not away from us, but in the direction we 
weren't. 
<Would these jackanapes outrun us to vic-
tory?> came another Helmacron voice. Coura-
geous Helmacron males, follow me!> 
More clanging. More running. The smaller, 
gentler-looking males took off after the females. 
<Stop them!> Jake hollered from overhead. 
<They're heading for some sort of precipice.> 
I ran. 
Tried to wrap my trunk around a Helmacron's 
69 

leg and hold him back. But it was like a bunny 
trying to stop an eighteen-wheeler. 
Not happening. 
<Rachel! Let go!> Cassie hollered. <They're 
going to drag you over!> 
Over. . . what? 
I let go. 
Too late! 
One of my massive front legs tipped into an 
abyss. Momentum dragged my other front leg 
over. I slipped. Fell. 
<Aggggghhhhhh!> 
I tumbled wildly. 
Down, down, down into absolute darkness. 
70 
<Aaaaahhhhhhhh!> I yelled. 
Flipping trunk to tail. Over and over. Couldn't 
sense the bottom. Couldn't sense the shape of 
the tunnel through which I fell. 
<Rachel, it's okay!> Cassie's voice in my head. 
<You're falling down Marco's esophagus — > 
<Oh, gross !> 
<You should hit in a few seconds,> Cassie 
continued. <Don't panic, we're coming after you.> 
Above, beneath, beyond Cassie's voice — a 
deep, resonating — 
Thump thump. 
Thump thump. 
The slow rhythm vibrated through me the way 
the bass guitar does at a loud concert. Discon-
71 

certing. At the same time, something about the 
rhythm was comforting, like the hum of the 
fridge in a darkened kitchen. 
Also . . . I smelled something. Something that 
wasn't pleasant. Something sour. Like rotting 
food. No, not exactly. More like — 
Puke! 
Oh, man. What else would be in your stom-
ach? Half-digested food mixed with some sort of 
stomach juice. I didn't even like thinking about 
the stuff much less — 
KER-PLASH! 
I went under! 
Submerged into a pitch-black sea. 
My elephant body started to sink. And then I 
realized the fluid surrounding me was strangely 
hot. My leathery skin began to itch. To burn! 
Air! 
I flailed my big back legs. Rose higher. 
I hit something soft with my head. Something 
that gave under the impact and sprang back. 
The side of Marco's stomach? Or the top? 
My lungs were burning! 
Was there air inside a stomach? Good ques-
tion. And not one I had an answer to. I had to 
find the opening I'd fallen through! Somehow get 
back up . . . 
Morph! I told myself. 
No time! 
72 
I needed air now! 
I tried to see above me. Too dark! 
Air. . . 
I needed air. . . 
And then, through the panic, like a vision, came 
an image from the Discovery Channel. An ele-
phant . . . swimming. 
I let the elephant brain bubble up. My massive 
legs kicked. Slowly, I started to rise, I reached my 
trunk high, up toward where I thought the air 
should be. 
Yes! 
I broke the surface. Sucked air in through my 
trunk, filling my lungs. Ahhh . . . 
Rotten, stinking air. Glorious. 
Whoever says TV isn't worthwhile isn't watch-
ing the right shows. 
I looked around, dazed and disoriented. My 
weak elephant eyes more useless than before. 
But the sounds! Overwhelming sounds. Slosh-
ing. Bubbling. Far away, that low thump thump. 
Also — voices! 
<Look! One of the aliens has followed us!> 
Tseeew! 
I jerked sideways. 
The Dracon beam shot went wide. 
The Helmacrons! 
The beam had lit up the air pocket long enough 
for me to see I was sharing the cavernous space 
73 

with eight or ten of them. They were huddled to-
gether, way off to my left side. To me in my sub-
miniature state, they seemed about half a mile 
away. 
More media imagery. Now it was the drowning 
scene in Titanic. Only instead of Leonardo DiCaprio 
and Kate Winslet, this nightmare flick starred a 
pachyderm and a handful of marble-eyed aliens. 
Tseeew! 
That wild shot let me see that though the Hel-
macrons' legs were submerged, the rest of their 
bodies bobbed above the liquid. Treading water 
or floating? Couldn't tell. Couldn't see any effort 
to stay afloat. 
I could, however, hear them arguing. 
<We must blast through the left wall! That is 
the path to true glory!> 
<lmbecile! Do you think us morons? Only the 
right wall can feel the sting of the Helmacrons' 
wrath !> 
Tseeew! 
Missed. 
Tseeew! 
Missed. 
The Helmacrons' aim was way off. 
But I almost didn't care because the pain in 
my skin was intensifying. Hundreds, thousands 
of raw nerve endings were screaming madly. The 
ironic part about all this was that it wasn't the 
74 
first time I'd been nearly digested. But that's an-
other story. 
<Cassie!> I roared. <Where are you guys?> 
<We're coming!> Cassie replied. 
<What's taking so long?> I asked. 
<We had to morph.> 
<What's the big hurry?> Jake asked. 
<0h, no hurry. It's just that Marco is digesting 
me!> I shouted. 
<Does it hurt?> Cassie asked. 
<Remember in Batman when the Joker 
dropped his enemies into a vat of acid?> 
Jake: <I'll take that as a yes.> 
75 

Most Omnipotent Leader! Catastrophe has stucK 
our ranks! The alien is full of bizarre lightless cav-
erns and caustic fluids! Two of the weaker males 
have succumbed! But even though some of us are 
blinded, we are the boldest of the bold! We will march 
forward to the beating organ, stop it, and embark on 
our plan to conquer the universe! 
— From the log of the Helmacron Females 
I couldn't see my friends by the time they ar-
rived. The acid had splashed into my eyes, eaten 
away at the vulnerable eyeball, painfully blinding 
me. But I heard a clumsy flap, flap way overhead. 
Wings. Bat wings. The perfect morph for "see-
ing" in the dark. 
<Stay away from the acid!> I shouted to them. 
76 
Tseeew! 
Tseeew! 
<And the Helmacrons.> 
<Hey, that was close!> Cassie complained. 
<We've got to figure out a way to take the Hel-
macrons' toys away.> 
<What can you see?> I demanded. 
<There's only one way out,> Cassie reported. 
<We're going to have to go back up the esopha-
gus. You too, Rachel.> 
Great. That meant I had to morph a bird or bat. 
That meant passing through my human form — 
and hoping I wasn't burned alive in the process. 
I braced myself for a new phase of pain. 
<Okay, I'm going to morph out.> 
<Rachel, try to do it as fast as you can,> To-
bias said in private thought-speak. 
I began to shrink. My trunk collapsed into my 
face with shocking, slamming force. I fought to 
keep my half-formed nose and mouth up in the air. 
Vaguely, I was aware of the sound of Dracon 
beam blasts and my friends' thought-speak voices. 
I tried to focus on them. Anything to distract me 
from the blistering agony. 
<Prince Jake, I believe we have a problem,> 
Ax was saying. <l'm not sure we can go back the 
way we came. Some sort of circular muscle has 
closed off the passageway.> 
<A sphincter!> Cassie, of course. 
77 

<So, we'll tell Marco to open it,> Jake said. 
<Think again. That muscle keeps food from 
traveling up the esophagus. It's involuntary. Like 
breathing. Marco can't control it.> 
<We're trapped?> Jake said. 
<Trapped above a sloshing pool of acid,> 
Cassie confirmed. 
<Something else,> Tobias said. <A couple of 
the Helmacrons aren't moving.> 
<Dead?> Jake asked. 
<Digested.> 
"Agggghhhh!" I yelled. 
My leathery hide had smoothed, softened into 
human skin. Was I fully human? Must have been, 
because an intense agony hit me, made me gasp 
and swoon. 
My skin was burning! And it felt like I was be-
ing rubbed with red-hot sandpaper. Eaten away 
by flame and acid. Tightening, as if it were shrink-
ing away from the bone, shriveling into ash. 
I gritted my teeth. Morph! I ordered myself. But 
my brain was foggy with pain. I couldn't. . . con-
centrate. I was nauseous and sweaty and my 
heart was beating way too fast. 
<Keep going, Rachel!> Cassie cried some-
where far, far away. 
<l hear the humans over there!> one of the 
Helmacrons shouted. 
Tseeew! 
78 
Tseeew! 
Through the incredible pain seeped anger. I 
was starting to get incredibly ticked off. Marco 
slowly digesting me, Helmacrons shooting at me. 
No way was I dying here, like a piece of bacon in 
a frying pan. And that meant I couldn't pass out. 
Had to morph. 
Bat, bat, bat, I thought. 
<Go, Rachel!> Jake called. 
Then — 
Tseeew! 
79 

<Agggghhhh!> Jake yelled. 
KER-SPLASH! 
<Watch out, they're shooting at us!> Cassie 
shouted. 
Tseeew! 
<l have been hit!> Ax. 
KER-SPLASH! 
Tseeew! 
<Cassie, watch out!> Tobias called. 
KER-SPLASH! 
Tseeew! 
KER-SPLASH! 
<Aaaaahhhhh!> Cassie yelled. 
<Aaaaahhhhh!> Jake yelled. 
<Aaaaahhhhh!> Tobias yelled. 
<Aaaaahhhhh!> Ax yelled. 
"What is going on?> I asked foggily. But I 
could see. They were demorphing. Cassie quickly. 
The other three more slowly. 
<Don't — > Cassie yelled as her human lips 
and teeth began to form. "Morph!" 
"What!" I screamed wildly, kicking to keep my 
face above the acid, desperately chanting Bat, 
bat, bat in my head. "My skin is bubbling off!" 
"Give me a second," Cassie grunted in a 
strange, pain-filled voice. "Then, climb on my 
back." 
Cassie was growing. In the weird red half-
light, it looked as if a rock were rising out of the 
churning liquid. And then the rock was twice my 
size. Then double that. Bigger and bigger. 
Cassie was going humpback whale. 
Our own personal aircraft carrier appearing 
out of the sea. Maybe not impervious to the acid, 
but tougher-skinned than a human. 
Now fully human, Jake crawled onto Cassie's 
still growing back. Then he leaned down and 
pulled me up, my raw skin screaming at his 
touch. I lay back, gasping. Tobias was back in 
hawk form. He took to the air, hovering over us. 
Ax's hooves and weak Andalite arms weren't 
much use on the slippery back of the whale, so 
Jake held on to him. 
<l am beginning to think this mission was fool-
81 
80 

ish,> Ax said, glancing with stalk eyes at the 
patch of burned fur on his hindquarters. <Marco's 
body seems to be doing an excellent job of de-
fending itself .> 
<Against us,> Cassie said. 
"Two more of the Helmacrons are dead?" 
I asked, lips and teeth and tongue about the 
only part of me not fried. "And excuse me while 
I try to morph and demorph to get whole," I 
added. 
"Yeah," Jake answered, still panting. "Two 
more down." 
"Arrivederci and good-bye," I said bitterly. 
And then the changes began. Didn't matter what 
I became. So I chose grizzly. Just to feel like I 
hadn't been totally defeated. 
<Well, not dead, exactly,> Ax said now. <Re-
member, Visser Three told us the Helmacrons are 
fungible. Kill one, and his mind is absorbed by 
the rest of the species.> 
<Whatever,> Jake said. <The good thing is 
they're not shooting at us.> 
Tseeew! 
Tseeew! 
<Ouch!> Cassie said. <The bad thing is that 
you're wrong. And that I'm an awfully big tar-
gets 
<We've got to get out of here,> I said. Briefly 
bear and a little less horrified. <What's the plan?> 
82
<Capture the Helmacrons and leave,> Tobias 
stated, coming to land on the whale. 
"Great," Jake said. "How?" 
<Attack,> I said. 
"Attack with what?" Jake asked. "We tried. 
They're armed. We're not." 
<Morph shark?> Ax suggested. 
"Could work." 
<Look out.> Tobias. <The Helmacrons are up 
to something.> 
I squinted into the gloom. All I could see was 
a bright glow, like a welder's flame. Time to de-
morph, get some better eyesight. 
Tobias took off again, disappearing into the 
black. A moment later, he was back. <Looks like 
they're trying to blast through the cavern with a 
Dracon beam.> 
<You mean, blast through Marco's stomach,> 
Cassie said. 
<What's on the other side of the stomach lin-
ing?> I asked, balancing precariously on her big, 
curved back through the demorph. <Where do 
they think they're going?> 
<Should be —> Cassie hesitated. <Um. A 
blood vessel?> 
"Good." Jake sounded relieved. "Then we have 
nothing to worry about. The Helmacrons wouldn't 
go into a blood vessel. They're not fish. They'd 
drown." 
83 

<So they're stuck.> Tobias. 
"Stuck unless we ask Marco to throw up," I 
said, gingerly running whole fingers up an intact 
arm. 
Jake nodded. "Which means we'd be vomit, 
too. Maybe they'll surrender once they realize 
they're cornered." 
<Surrender is better than drowning or frying.> 
<Hang on!> Tobias shouted. <One just went 
into the blood vessel!> 
"What? No way!" Jake exclaimed. 
"We need to be closer!" I yelled. 
Cassie powered her tail and flippers. The rest of 
us held on, fingers and talons anxiously gripping. 
The Helmacrons were gathered around a long 
slice in Marco's stomach. The slice had closed, 
the way a cut automatically does. But I could 
half-see the skin oozing a red liquid. 
Blood. 
What was happening to Marco? Was he expe-
riencing intense pain? Lying in bed, at home or in 
a hospital, groaning, expecting a gruesome death? 
Whatever, he had to be lonely. And scared. 
And extremely angry. 
"Marco must have the worst case of heartburn 
in history," Jake said. A joke. But Jake sounded 
worried, too. 
The Helmacrons turned away from the open-
ing to face us. 
84 
Tseeew! 
<Agggghhhh!> Cassie shouted. <My eye!> 
"Stop shooting!" Jake shouted at the Hel-
macrons. "We can get you out of here. Surrender 
now before any more of you die!" 
<Brave and worthy Helmacrons do not surren-
der^ one of them yelled. <lt is you who must ca-
pitulate to us! Grovel, humans!> 
"Why?" Jake asked. "Without our help, you'll 
never get out of this stomach alive. If you refuse 
to cooperate, you're going to die here." 
"Neep! Neep! Neep!" <We will be victori-
ous^ one of them shouted. <And when we rule 
the universe, we will not spare your lives! Not 
even so you may scrape our boots!> 
The Helmacron stepped forward. He pulled 
apart the slice in Marco's stomach. Began to wig-
gle in through the flaps of skin. Then — 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
With an awful sucking sound, he disappeared. 
85 

< To victory!> 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
Another Helmacron disappeared through the 
stomach lining. 
<To glory !> 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
Another, gone. 
<To still the beating organ!> 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
Another. 
Now there were only five left. Four had al-
ready entered Marco's bloodstream as calmly as I 
would step onto an escalator at the mall. 
It was horrifying. 
86 
<What are they doing?> Cassie asked, trance-
like. 
I couldn't look away. None of us could. We 
were exhausted, from the rapid-fire morphing, 
the acid bath painfest, the utter strangeness of 
being inside the human body. 
We did nothing to stop the Helmacrons. 
<Maybe it's a kamikaze mission,> Tobias sug-
gested. <Maybe they don't care if they die as long 
as they kill M a r c o 
"But they're going to drown before they get to 
Marco's heart!" I said. 
"It's suicide," Jake agreed. "Pointless. Crazy. 
Doesn't make any sense." 
<Nothing these beings do makes any sense,> 
Ax pointed out. 
Two more Helmacrons wiggled through the cut. 
Only two were left in the stomach now. 
<To the cowardly heart of the swollen alien!> 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
That sound. I was going to hear it in my night-
mares. 
"Will it hurt Marco to have them in his blood-
stream?" Jake asked suddenly. 
<They should suffocate quickly,> Cassie said. 
<And then they should be broken down and 
washed out like any waste.> 
SLLLLLUUUSSSH! 
87 

The last of the Helmacrons disappeared 
through the cut. 
<Another possibility occurs to me,> Ax said. 
"What possibility?" Jake demanded. 
<Perhaps our basic assumption is incorrect.> 
<What assumption?> Tobias said. <You go 
into an airless environment, you suffocate. 
Where's the big debate?> 
<The bloodstream isn't airless,> Cassie said. 
<Blood contains oxygen. The main purpose of 
blood is to carry oxygen around the body.> 
"Yeah, but you'd have to be a fish to breathe it," 
Jake argued. 
<You'd need specialized lungs.> 
"How do we know Helmacrons aren't fish?" I 
asked, knowing in a flash that we'd royally screwed 
up. "The Helmacron home world could be an 
aquarium somewhere in Iowa for all we know." 
<They walk on dry ground,> Tobias said. 
"Maybe they're, you know, those animals that 
can live in water and on land," I suggested. "Like 
frogs. Or turtles." 
<Amphibians,> Cassie said. 
<Or maybe they do not breathe at all,> Ax said. 
"How can you be alive and not breathe?" 1 ar-
gued. 
Ax blinked his main eyes at me. <Trees are 
alive and they do not actually breathe.> 
88 
"If Helmacrons don't breathe, why do they 
have noses?" Jake. 
<lt is possible the organ has another use,> Ax 
said. <Although it is hard to imagine what it 
would be.> 
"This from a boy who eats with his feet," I 
said dryly. 
Jake sighed. "Are you telling me the Hel-
macrons we just saw walk through a hole in 
Marco's stomach aren't dead?" 
<They don't really die,> Cassie said miser-
ably. <Fungible, remember?> 
"Whatever!" Jake bellowed. "Are you telling 
me we have to go after them?" 
<The Helmacrons' physiology is unusual,> Ax 
mused. <l observed that they were unusually 
buoyant in the stomach fluids. It is almost as if 
they are —> 
"Cork," I interrupted. 
"Or mushrooms," Cassie said. 
Great. So, how do we go after a bunch of mush-
rooms?" 
"Dolphins?" I suggested. 
<Dolphins have to surface to breathe,> Cassie 
said. <And we won't be able to surface in a vein. 
The only possible morph is shark.> 
"Will we be able to breathe in blood?" Jake 
asked. 
89 

<l think so,> Cassie said uneasily. <l vaguely 
remember hearing some scientist interviewed on 
NPR once. She said plasma evolved from seawa-
ter. Plasma and seawater have the same basic 
properties.> 
<The shark's gonna be hard to control,> To-
bias said. <We're surrounded by blood, folks.> 
"We have to try," I said. "If Marco dies, so do 
we. We've got to stop the Helmacrons." 
Jake raised his eyebrows at me. "That didn't 
sound too self-serving." 
"I don't care if it did," I said harshly. "We've 
got to survive. The Yeerks, remember? That 
whole save humanity bit? The Helmacrons aren't 
the baddest aliens on Earth. Just the most an-
noying. And remember," I added, "we have no 
proof the Helmacrons aren't working with the 
Yeerks this time. Or that they won't decide to in 
the very near future. In which case, we are very 
ancient history." 
<Rachel is correct,> Ax said. <For all we know, 
Visser Three put the Helmacrons up to this fool-
ish scheme. Perhaps it is simply a way of divert-
ing our attention while something far more serious 
occurs in the outside world.> 
Silence. If what Ax and I were saying was 
true, we were finished. 
Okay, Rachel, block out the fear and deal with 
the Helmacrons. Now. 
90 
"Okay, we go shark," Jake said. "But I want 
everyone concentrating on controlling the morph." 
One by one, we tumbled down off Cassie's 
back. 
"Agh." I moaned as the acid hit my fresh, re-
newed skin. 
I heard the others gasp and groan as they hit 
the liquid. 
We began to morph, Cassie to demorph first. 
Almost immediately, my legs fused together right 
down the middle. I fought to stay afloat as my 
legs stretched out and out, forming a long, pow-
erful tail. 
Half-girl. Half-fish. Mermaid Rachel. 
Then the teeth began to grow. Row after row 
of small but very sharp teeth. My eyes migrated 
down to my cheeks. My cheeks exploded out-
ward, forming a dumbbell-shaped head. The pain 
of the acid bath drained away as the rough sand-
paper skin of the shark grew over my own tender 
human flesh. 
I was almost enjoying the morph. Liked the 
tough skin. Liked getting bigger. 
Then the shark's mind infiltrated my own. 
And I completely lost control. 
91 

"Blood! 
So close! 
Find the prey. Kill the prey! 
I powered my tail, swam rapidly toward the 
overpowering smell. Sharks can smell one drop 
of blood in a vast ocean reeking with life. But 
this smell! So rich, so strong. 
I turned tightly. Poked my strange head into a 
tight opening and pushed through. 
A narrow space. A few inches on one side. A 
few inches on the other. The shark didn't care. 
Sharks have no fear. 
And the smell! So much blood! 
I swam with the current, crossing frantically 
from one side of the confining space to the other. 
92 
The prey — where was it? I was confused. I should 
see the prey silhouetted against the sunlight 
above. 
But there was no sunlight. 
And the blood was everywhere! 
Imagine a drug addict awash in a sea of drugs. 
Ax anywhere near a Cinnabon. 
The prey is here! the shark brain shouted. It's 
everywhere! But.. . where? 
The shark could hear a low thump, thump. 
The stomach gurgling. It could see walls sloping 
above, sloping below. Contracting and expanding 
ever so slightly. 
The shark could sense the electricity given off 
by other living things. Could sense a strong, sur-
rounding hum. And four more weaker pulses. 
I twisted my head, spinning my entire body in 
the process. 
There! 
A shark surrounded by, immersed in, blood! 
Prey. 
I attacked! 
Lunged with my huge mouth open. Clamped 
down, tore with my teeth, tossed my head. 
<Aaaaahhhh!> something cried in my head. 
<Who's biting me? Geez, a chunk of my tail is 
gone! Hey, I was using that!> 
That voice — it sounded familiar. Jake. Jake! 
I'd attacked him! 
93 

Suddenly, I remembered who I was. Rachel. I 
struggled against the shark brain. Fought to re-
gain control. Tobias had warned us. Stupidly, ar-
rogantly, I'd thought he was being overly cautious. 
I'd been wrong. 
<Jake, you okay?> I asked. <l — I lost con-
trols 
<Yeah, I'm okay. I'm having a hard time calm-
ing the shark's mind, too,> Jake said. <The blood 
is driving it crazy.> 
<Cassie? Tobias? Ax? You guys in the driver's 
seat?> 
<l'm cool,> Tobias said. 
<l am in controls Ax. 
<We need to focus on something else,> Cassie 
said tensely. <Keep our own, human minds alert.> 
We swam on. First Jake. Then Cassie, Ax, To-
bias, and me. Concentrating on the goal — stop 
the Helmacrons — to avoid eating one another 
alive. 
The current dragged us along the narrow tun-
nel of blood. A tunnel not completely dark, but 
extremely dim. 
Globs of stuff floated along next to us. Brushed 
off the tunnel walls, bounced off our shark bod-
ies. Some were rod-shaped and about the size of 
grapefruit. Others, just shapeless pieces of mate-
rial. Still others, fuzzy balls, like Ping-Pong balls 
stuck all over with cotton. 
94 
<What's wrong with Marco's blood?> I asked. 
<lt's not red.> 
<You're seeing plasma,> Cassie explained. 
<Blood only looks red because it contains so many 
red blood cells.> 
<Oh.> 
<Hey, check it out,> Cassie said. <Those are 
red blood cells! The dark red ones pressing up 
against our gills. About the size of a serving plat-
ter. Somehow we're capturing the oxygen mole-
cules without sucking in the blood cells.> 
I'm not much of a sightseer. Generally, sight-
seeing puts me in a tedium-induced rage. 
This was different. 
I was happy to be a tourist, especially if it 
would keep me from going cannibal. Besides, 
how many suburban girls get to travel down a hu-
man vein as a tiny hammerhead shark? 
Disney has nothing on the Animorphs. 
Red blood cell. Red blood cell. Red blood 
cell. After I'd seen a few thousand, I stopped 
paying attention to them and started to focus on 
the other floating shapes. 
<What was that?> I demanded. 
Something seriously small passed in front of 
my eyes. To the sub-mini shark, it was about the 
size and shape of a pill bug. A pill bug with little 
spikes covering it. A 3-D millipede. 
<What?> Cassie asked eagerly. 
95 

The thing looked out of place. Sharp and 
pointed in a world where everything else was soft 
and oval. 
<Something strange.> 
<AII sorts of stuff travels in the blood,> 
Cassie said. <Food particles. Waste. Hormones.> 
<Hormones?> Jake interrupted. <We're swim-
ming in hormones?> 
Again, I spotted the spiny thing. It wasn't just 
bumping along in the current. It seemed to have 
a purpose. A mind or a will. I watched as it 
brushed up against a red blood cell, probed it, 
then bounced away. 
I'm not big on superstition or New Age crap. 
Don't read my horoscope. Never had my fortune 
told. But I had a feeling about that spiky thing. 
Some primitive, instinctual part of my human 
brain didn't like it. 
<Rachel?> Tobias called. <Come on. You're 
falling behind.> 
I powered my tail and caught up. 
<There's a branch up ahead,> Jake said. 
<Listen!> Cassie. <l think I can hear the Hel-
macrons.> 
<So they aren't dead,> Jake said grimly. 
<Arrrrrgggghhhh!> The pill bug from hell! It 
was on my morph. Probing me! 
<Get it off!> I yelled. 
<What?> Tobias asked. 
96 
<Pay attention! Small spiky vitamin pills. I 
think they could be dangerous!> 
<l see one,> Ax said. <Now it is gone.> 
<What happened?> 
<A large translucent blob surrounded and con-
sumed it,> Ax explained. 
<l saw it, too,> Jake said. <Blob ate it like 
Pac Man.> 
Silence. 
Then Cassie began to laugh. 
<What's so funny?> I said shakily. 
<This is amazing,> Cassie said. <Ax and Jake 
just saw Marco's immune system fight off an in-
vader. That Pac Man was a white blood cell.> 
<So, the spiky thing?> I asked. 
<A bacterium or a virus,> Cassie said. 
<What kind?> 
<How should I know?> Cassie replied. <The 
important thing is that Marco's immune system 
is working.> 
Oh, yeah. That's the important thing. 
97 

We continued down the tunnel that was 
Marco's vein. When we reached the branch Jake 
had pointed out, we followed the bloodstream 
into a wider tunnel. 
The Helmacrons' voices were growing slightly 
louder. 
Then, suddenly — 
Dead end! 
The vein just. . . stopped. 
We had stumbled into a fun house. Tunnels 
opened all around us, in every direction. Above 
the shark's head, below its belly. Each one seemed 
to be a different size and shape. Some big enough 
for us to pass through. Some far too small. 
The current had also stopped. I turned the 
98 
hammerhead to the right and swam in a small 
circle. Hovering without progressing. 
<Any idea which way we should go?> Jake 
asked. 
<l'm thinking,> Cassie said. 
The blood cells and miscellaneous blobs that 
had been washing along beside us were still with 
us, but no more joined them. 
<Where does human blood travel after it leaves 
the stomach?> Ax asked calmly, almost conver-
sationally. 
<That's what I'm trying to remember!> Cassie 
answered. 
<Are not these basic facts about your own 
physiology taught in human schools?> Ax said. 
<On the Andalite home world, the youngest child 
is able to —> 
<Ax. Would you please shut up?> I said. 
Bump. 
Tobias, knocking up against me. <And spread 
out, you guys!> 
<Touchy, touchy.> 
<Don'tyou feel it?> Tobias asked. <The . . . un-
easiness^ 
I bumped into Jake. Turned to the right, 
swam in another tight circle. 
<The hammerhead mind is uneasy,> Ax agreed. 
The shark sensed danger. Not fear. Sharks have 
no understanding of fear. The shark was calm, 
99 

confident. But it sensed some sort of change 
in the liquid surrounding us and it wanted to get 
out. 
Maybe this is how sharks feel swimming in 
polluted ocean waters. I don't know. The shark's 
mind didn't offer any explanation. It just said: 
Haul butt. Now. 
I clamped down on the shark's mind. Now 
wasn't the time to panic. 
<Acid?> Ax asked. 
I tuned into the shark's skin. But there was no 
pain. Just a dim sort of tingle that wasn't un-
pleasant. Nothing like the all-out agony of being 
in the stomach's violent digestive juices. 
<l don't think we —> 
<Look,> Tobias interrupted. <The globs.> 
One right in front of me. It wasn't any particu-
lar shape or color. A fat molecule? A tiny bit of 
adrenaline? No way of knowing. And then . . . 
<lt exploded!> I exclaimed. 
As if a bomb had gone off inside, the glob 
silently broke into a thousand pieces. 
<Watch one of the rod-shaped things,> 
Cassie said. 
I twisted my hammerhead and turned in an-
other tight, right-hand circle. Noted a rod-
shaped thing a few inches off to my right. And, 
then, suddenly, it was round and slightly green. 
<Presto chango,> Jake said. 
100 
<Something is transforming the cellular struc-
ture of the molecules around us,> Ax said. 
<l think we're in some kind of sorting device. 
Look. The round blobs go into that tunnel, there. 
But the rod-shaped ones go up there.> 
Weird, but true. Some of the molecules were 
lining up for the girls' bathroom; others, for the 
boys'. 
I bumped up against Ax. <Sorry,> I muttered. 
Turned to the right to swim out of his way. 
To the right. 
Again. 
<Okay,> I said. <l am seriously drawn to a 
particular tunnel.> 
<Yeah, me, too,> said Tobias. 
<The shark is definitely compelled.> Ax. 
<lt's like Rachel at a fifty-percent-off sale at 
The Gap,> Cassie said. <Resistance is futile. Oh. 
I think I know where we are.> 
<And that would be —> 
<ln the liver.> 
<What is a liver?> Ax asked. 
<An organ. The part of the human body that 
filters out impurities,> Cassie explained. As-
suming the liver thinks we're impurities — and it 
must — it's pushing us into the colon.> 
Suddenly, the current felt stronger. Maybe I 
was just more aware of it. <The colon? You mean, 
we're going to be waste?> 
101 

<Product,> Cassie confirmed. 
<Thanks a lot, M a r c o 
<lf we are expelled, we will not reach the 
heart.> Ax, calmly stating the obvious as only Ax 
can. 
<We've got to swim,> Jake said. 
<Fine,> I agreed. <But which way?> 
<Toward the heart,> Cassie said. 
<Which is — ?> I asked. 
<Above the liver,> Cassie said. 
<Who said you were directionally challenged?> 
About a dozen tunnels went up to the left 
and up to the right. One tunnel seemed to go 
straight up. 
<Eenie, meenie, minie, moe?> Ax said. 
<You really have been on Earth too long,> I 
told him. <You'll never fit in on the Andalite home 
world now.> 
<l would miss Saturday morning cartoons,> 
Ax said. 
Thump, thump. 
And then . . . 
Click! My brain made one of those sudden 
leaps. Like two puzzle pieces falling together. 
<Marco's heart!> 
Thump, thump. 
Thump, thump. 
Louder. Coming from all directions at once. 
<Can we follow the sound?> 
102 
<l can't tell exactly where it's coming from,> 
Jake said. 
<Think,> Cassie said. <What would the liver 
send to the heart?> 
<Blood,> I said. 
<Great. Follow that red blood cell!> 
103 

When I finally got home from my pathetic at-
tempt at breaking and entering, I put on a long-
sleeved sweatshirt. Couldn't let Dad see my wrist. 
Didn't want him to know I'd been trying to rob 
some kid when his deranged dog took a chunk 
out of me. 
I dabbed some hydrogen peroxide on the punc-
ture marks. Added a little Neosporin. Wished for 
ibuprofen. My whole arm throbbed. 
But so what? 
A little dog bite wasn't going to kill me. The 
Helmacrons had that under control. 
In a way, I welcomed the pain. It reminded 
me I was alive. For now. 
The afternoon dragged on. 
104 
And I had no idea what was going on inside me. 
Hours passed and all I heard from my friends 
were occasional strange orders. 
Don't sneeze. 
Don't eat or drink anything. 
I wanted to tell them to include me in their 
thought-speak. Maybe. I mean, did I really want 
to know what a group of morphing warriors and 
egomaniacal lunatics were doing to my delicate 
internal tissues? 
I contacted Mr. King. Had the Chee show up 
for dinner as Jake, Rachel, and Cassie. 
Dinner. 
I told my dad I was sick. 
Just after the sun went down, I fell asleep, 
sprawled across my bed. About an hour later I 
woke up feeling weird. Sweaty. Wild. Angry. 
Angry . . . at the Helmacrons! It wasn't fair 
that I couldn't protect myself. Stupid freakin'... 
The usual hang and chill routine was not go-
ing to happen. I was way too restless. Needed to 
do something. Got up and started to pace. Door 
to windows. Windows to door. Back. Forth. 
And the anger continued to grow. Welled and 
surged and wouldn't be held in check by my 
usual habit of black humor, transforming tragedy 
into comedy. There wasn't one joke in me. 
Maybe I just missed my audience. 
Anyway, I was in an exceptionally foul mood. 
105 
Marco 

A soft knock at the door. It opened. My dad 
stuck his head in. "Marco, hey, I thought I heard 
you moving around. How are you feeling?" 
"Urn, fine." 
Dad pursed his lips. Came in and put a hand 
against my cheek. "You're flushed. And you feel 
a bit hot." 
I turned away. "I said I was fine!" 
"Okay, okay." He was taken aback by my re-
action. "Well, if you're feeling better . . . Nora 
and I have that dinner party. It's a work thing. If 
you don't need me to stay with you." 
I immediately saw the opportunity. "Go," I 
said soothingly. "I'm just going to rest. Read that 
book for English." 
He probably didn't buy that last part, but he 
headed for the door. 
"Okay," he said. "Well, I'll leave the number 
on the refrigerator. Give us a call if you start to 
feel worse." 
"I'll be fine," I said again, through suddenly 
clenched teeth. 
Dad left. 
Ten minutes later I heard the car pull out of 
the driveway. 
I waited another couple of minutes. Then I 
went down to the basement. Rooted around in 
the freezer until I found a steak. Upstairs in the 
106 
kitchen, nuked it until it was defrosted and warm. 
Then I got my bike out of the garage. 
I was going to get the camera. 
So what if I couldn't morph? So what if my 
friends couldn't help me? So what if Cujo had 
practically ripped my arm off? 
That camera was mine. 
The ratty-looking Chee was still on guard. That 
meant that the camera, if not the kid, was still 
inside. 
For about half a second I wondered if I should 
ask for his help. Maybe he could throw a holo 
around me, make it easier to sneak into the 
apartment. 
Rejected the idea. It would probably violate 
the Chee's code of nonviolence. What a joke. 
I could do this alone. 
The kid's apartment building looked even 
more decrepit at night. But I felt no fear. I walked 
straight over the fence and across the concrete 
lot to the fire escape. It was still hanging down 
the way I'd left it. I charged up. 
Cujo was waiting. 
"Rrrrrrr!" He growled deep in his throat when 
he saw me on the fire escape. 
Then he flung himself madly against the win-
dow. Totally airborne. Toenails clicking on the 
wooden sill. Drool flying. Teeth gleaming. 
107 

I grabbed the bottom of the rickety window 
and yanked it up about halfway. 
"ArfARFARFARFARFARF!" Cujo's snapping 
jaws were inches from my throat. 
"Stuff it," I said, tossing the steak into the 
room. 
He lay down with it between his paws. Licked. 
Slobbered. Seemed to be having a hard time eat-
ing it. Something was wrong with his jaw. Maybe 
he'd lost a tooth gnawing my arm off. 
I heaved the window open farther. Dropped 
down onto the floor and eased around the slaver-
ing dog. The camera was a few feet away, still sit-
ting on the kid's desk. 
I'd just closed my fingers on the bright yellow 
box when I heard voices in the hallway, surpris-
ingly close. 
Cujo heard them, too. He rose to his feet and 
growled at me. Blocking my only exit. 
Door. People. Cops. Juvie hall. 
Window. Cujo. 
Two options. 
Both bad. 
Either way, I was going to get caught. 
108 
T hump, thump. 
Pause. 
Thump, thump. 
As we swam the beating grew louder and 
louder, until it was impossible to hear anything 
else. Impossible to know if the Helmacrons were 
near. 
Ax didn't ask questions. Tobias didn't make 
any dark observations. Jake didn't talk strategy. 
Cassie didn't point out landmarks. 
We were overwhelmed by the incredible rever-
berating noise surrounding us. The sound of 
Marco's heart beating. 
THUMP! THUMP! 
Pause. 
109 
R a c h e l 

THUMP! THUMP! 
Each beat vibrated through my body, over-
powering any human thought or emotion. We didn't 
have a plan for capturing the Helmacrons. I didn't 
try to think of one. 
Closer. Closer. Thump, thump. The sound be-
came so intense I felt it would blow me apart. 
But it was a wonderful sound. As long as we ex-
perienced that thump, thump Marco was still 
alive. 
The red blood cells we were chasing had 
changed color. They were darker now, maroon, 
the color of a scab. Cassie didn't need to explain 
what was happening. I'd read the Magic School 
Bus, too. 
Close to the heart, the level of oxygen in the 
blood cells was low. The cells would pass through 
the heart and then into the lungs to pick up more 
oxygen. 
Less oxygen in the blood cells meant less oxy-
gen for the sharks. But we couldn't turn back. We 
had to stop the Helmacrons from killing Marco. 
Do or die. 
The vein through which we were traveling 
grew larger. Other veins emptied into it and the 
current picked up. This time, it was like moving 
from a small street to a larger road to a busy 
thruway. And finally, to a six-lane superhighway. 
Ahead was a sort of aperture of flesh. As the 
110 
current swept us along, it opened wider, wider. 
Fluttering in front of the opening were three red 
sheets of flesh. They moved like curtains blowing 
in an open window. Like those felt strips at the 
beginning of a car wash. As the valve widened, 
they blew inside. 
The current was smooth but powerful. The 
heart was sucking us in. 
Closer . . . 
Closer... 
Closer! Then — 
SLLLUMP! 
The aperature closed. The curtains of flesh 
sealed together with a wet, sucking noise. 
We slowed, stopped. We were in a vast open-
ing just outside the heart, surrounded by an 
ocean of blood. 
<That's okay!> Cassie said. <That valve must 
be to keep the blood from flowing back this di-
rections 
THUMP! 
<How are we going to stay inside the heart? 
How are we going to stop ourselves from being 
swept out into the lungs?> Tobias called. <l'm 
not sure we can fight this current!> 
<We don't know if the Helmacrons can, ei-
ther. Just be ready to fight!> Jake shouted. As-
suming the Helmacrons are inside the heart 
now!> 
111 

THUMP! 
The valve began to open. The curtains began 
to billow in. 
Then —we flowed into the first chamber of 
the heart. 
Things happened fast. 
<Turn around!> I shouted. <Swim against the 
current!> 
Furious turbulence! Blood was flowing past so 
fast I could hardly suck in any oxygen. Imagine 
swimming up Niagara Falls. And the walls were 
contracting like a trash compactor! 
<Obey me, foolish male! Dracon beams will 
only fire in liquid if you increase the power to 
full!> 
<l grow weary of your meddling, female! I will 
blast on low if I choose!> 
<The Helmacrons!> Tobias shouted. 
<Where are they?> Cassie yelled. 
<Jake, they can't shoot!> I hissed. 
<Stop!> Jake cried in general thought-speak. 
<Put down your weapons and we will help you 
out of here. We will even let you use the power 
source.> 
<Hah-HAH!> one of the Helmacrons shouted. 
<Too late! We shoot on my count! One!> 
I couldn't see the Helmacrons. But I could 
smell them. Somewhere in the heart. Five of 
them. Maybe tangled in one of the tissue sprays 
112 
that connected the walls like chaotic gothic arches. 
Maybe bobbing in the thrashing ocean of blood. 
I didn't know. 
I didn't care. 
And I didn't care what had happened to the 
other four Helmacrons. Maybe the liver had taken 
them. Maybe they had been washed away by the 
last heartbeat. 
The Helmacrons were enormous compared to 
my shark morph. 
And armed. But I was going to stop them from 
shooting if it was the last thing I did. 
All of these thoughts passed in about one sec-
ond. 
I turned my flattened rudder of a head and 
began to swim. The excellent shark sense of 
smell told me one of the Helmacrons was to my 
left. 
<Prince Jake, we have to stop them now!> 
<Go!> Jake shouted. <Now!> 
Powering through a forest of tissue strands, 
an ocean of blood. Hunting for the Helmacrons! 
Tissue! 
Turn — left! 
<Two!> the Helmacron shouted. 
No! 
Frantically I fought the current. Pushed and 
strained with my tail, my flippers. Struggled for 
every paltry inch. 
113 

And meanwhile, the walls around me closed 
in as Marco's heart prepared to beat. 
Tissue! 
Turn — another left! 
Push, push, push! 
The shark was exhausted. And the Helmacron 
smell was only the faintest bit stronger. 
THUMP! 
The first part of Marco's heartbeat. 
The heartbeat that might be his last. 
114 
What's wrong with Buster?" A voice, just 
outside the door. Female. Maybe the photogra-
pher's mother, sister, aunt. 
Buster? 
Oh, come on. This dog was no Buster. 
Bruiser, maybe. Fang, Killer, Psycho. But not 
Buster. 
Buster's bloodshot eyes were on me. Blocking 
the window. My only escape. 
I could hide under the bed. Except the metal 
frame was only about six inches off the ground. 
No way. 
The door handle turned. 
I jumped for the closet and crashed into the 
flimsy sliding doors. Great. The woman in the 
115 
Jft 

hall had to hear that. Too late to run. What the 
heck had I been thinking! 
I closed the doors behind me, scooted down 
onto a pile of sweaty-smelling clothes, backed to-
ward the corner. 
"ARFARFARFARFARF!" 
Whooosh! Buster's head was a wedge, shov-
ing open one of the sliding doors. He bounded 
into the closet and went for my ankle. 
"Rrrrooo — ARFARFARFARFARF!" 
A strange rage filled me. I lifted the shoe. 
A very low voice in my head said: Dangerous 
dog. Be afraid. 
No. 
"Buster! Good dog!" 
Buster turned toward the sound of his master. 
A split second hesitation before biting off my 
head. That gave me just long enough to decide. 
Morph — or get caught. 
Morph — or get chewed up like a Milk-Bone. 
Yeah, I'd promised Jake I wouldn't morph. 
But I hadn't heard from my so-called friends in 
hours and hours. For all I knew they could be 
dead. 
A little voice in my head, that intangible but 
incredibly annoying thing called a conscience, 
was concerned. Marco, it said, can't you see some-
thing is wrong with you? With what you're do-
ne 
ing? Where's your compassion? It's just a dumb 
dog, doing what he's supposed to do. And your 
friends, their lives are valuable. 
Roach, I answered. 
I felt the changes begin at the same time I 
heard footsteps crossing the room. 
Each morph is different. I'd gone roach plenty 
of times before. But each experience is com-
pletely unique. 
This time, my skin hardened first. 
Then, vision pixilated. Compound roach eyes, 
with about two thousand lenses, ballooned up 
out of my eye sockets. 
Two thousand Busters. 
Two thousand sets of snapping teeth. 
Four legs exploded out of my sides and I 
fell forward. My arms fused to my sides, then 
reemerged as delicate wings. 
Buster tilted his head and moaned as I shrank 
down to the size of a quarter. 
Don't eat me, I warned him silently. / have 
enough problems already. 
My antennae twitched as the roach's amazing 
sense of smell surged to life. Roaches can smell 
anything. The closet smelled of sweat and dog 
pee and laundry detergent. 
Buster took a step back and moaned again. 
The closet door burst open. 
117 

"Oh — sick!" someone yelled. "I'm going to 
sue that filthy landlord! Honey, bring a shoe! I 
just caught the world's biggest roach!" 
Then came the change I had been waiting for. 
With a sickening lurch, my innards began to 
twist and change. 
<Aaaaahhhhhhhh!> someone yelled in my 
head. 
<Marco is morphing!> Cassie shouted. Some-
thing must be wrong! Marco must be in trouble!> 
Ah, so now I could hear them all. Must be in 
morph. 
<We do not know how this will affect us,> Ax 
said unnecessarily. <lt could be deadly.> 
<Marco, cut it out, now!> Rachel screamed. 
<That's an order!> Jake shouted. 
My friends were still alive. 
And they sounded terrified. 
Good for them. 
118 
n inch. 
One more inch and a Helmacron would be 
down to three legs. I pumped my tail hard. 
Opened my mouth to bite. Then — 
THUMP! 
I was yanked away from the Helmacron. Spun, 
head over tail. Another aperture — this one on the 
opposite side of the chamber — rapidly opened. 
It grew from a crack, to a hole, to a chasm. 
Blood started to flow out of the chamber, 
sweeping all of us along with it. 
<Are the Helmacrons being washed out, 
too?> Jake shouted. 
<l can't tell!> I answered. 
<Try to stay inside!> 
A 
119 

I strained. Tried with every cell to resist the 
sucking of the current. And still I lost ground. 
<l am unable to maintain my position!> Ax 
called. 
And then — 
The chamber all around me began to shift 
and blur! The forest of tissue melted like heated 
wax. 
But the changes continued. The chamber sur-
rounding us shrank down, down, down. Half the 
size it was. Half that. Then half that. Smaller, 
smaller, smaller. 
The rootlike tissues came unglued. Bounced 
like loose electrical cables, and then sucked up 
into the walls. 
<Fiendish alien! You will not destroy the Hel-
macron knights! We will ru — agggghhh!> 
SLOOONG! 
The walls separating this chamber of the heart 
from the next stretched like a rubber band and 
exploded. The red blood faded to rose, then pink, 
then white. 
Air! Would we still have air without the red 
blood cells? I gasped and found I could still 
breathe. 
The noise was deafening. I wanted to cover 
my ears, but I had no ears, no hands. 
An earthquake, a tornado, a volcano, a tidal 
wave, a monsoon! 
120 
SLLLURPPPP! 
<You will grovel for this!> 
<Marco,> Jake shouted, <you'd better be in 
serious trouble! Because things are not pretty in 
here!> 
Bong! Bong! Bong! Bong! 
<Ahhhhhh!> I screamed. An enormous night-
mare glob of pulsing organ bulged out in front of 
me. Then it did a fast-forward shrivel and disap-
peared. 
<Watch out!> Tobias shouted. 
What looked like a femur poked into the 
chamber and caught me on the head. I spun, 
knocking into Jake and one of the Helmacrons. 
<Just relax,> Cassie urged. <lt should be over 
soon!> 
Seconds later — 
Poof! The hurricane was over. Marco's morph 
was complete. 
<Hey, you guys?> Marco called with a laugh. 
<Still alive or what?> 
<Still alive,> Jake said shakily. 
We were squashed together in a tiny space 
filled with bluish-white liquid. The walls surround-
ing us were smooth — and they were squeezing 
together. Another trash compactor, only dollhouse-
sized. 
<Probably an insect of some sort. Marco, what 
kind of morph are we in?> Ax said. 
121 

<lsn't it obvious?> Marco said nastily. 
<Just tell us,> Tobias replied. 
<You haven't told me anything for hours! Now 
I'm supposed to be all Mr. Communication?> 
<Oh, very mature,> I snapped. 
Okay, so Marco had good reason to feel the 
way he did. Five of his friends up his nose, Dra-
con beams blasting his stomach lining, yada, 
yada, yada. But, come on. He sounded like a 
spoiled two-year-old. 
Marco was often annoying but never stupid. 
<Would you like to explain why you morphed?> 
Jake demanded. <Why you morphed when I told 
you it could kill us?> 
<l plead the fifth.> 
Jake, to us. <lf I were a real general, I'd court-
martial his sorry . . .> 
Then, from a jumble of alien parts, a Helma-
cron shouted. <Hah-HAH! No doubt you thought 
we were killed by the transforming of our pitiful 
hostage. But we are still alive! We shall rule the 
universe yet!> 
And before any of us — Jake or Cassie, Ax or 
Tobias, before even I—could do anything to 
stop them . . . 
The Helmacrons fired in unison. 
Tseeew! 
Tseeew! 
Tseeew! 
122 
Tseeew! 
Tseeew! 
<No!> I screamed. 
And then . . . silence. 
<Marco!> Cassie cried. <Marco, can you hear 
us?> 
Nothing. 
<Marco!> 
<Marco!> Cassie cried again. A wrenching 
sound, horrified, full of pain. 
<He can't answer you, Cassie,> Jake said, his 
voice strangely flat. 
Next I heard Tobias's voice. <Who would have 
predicted this? Who would have thought the Hel-
macrons were more dangerous than the Yeerks?> 
"Neep! Neep! Neep!" A cheer went up from 
the Helmacrons. 
A strange coldness swept through me. Not sad-
ness. Not exactly. In a way, I was prepared for this. 
We had been through so many missions, so much 
danger. That one of us should die seemed . . . 
inevitable. Unavoidable. 
And then — 
Fury. 
A wave of fury like a kick to the gut. 
I wanted those Helmacrons dead. 
123 

O Majestic Leader, Humans are a race of fools! We 
told them time and time again that Helmacrons do 
not surrender! And yet they delude themselves, be-
lieving that we uuould deal with them simply because 
me have suffered minor injury! Does it not make you 
laugh, and prove that we are the only fit rulers of the 
universe? 
— From the log of the Helmacron Males 
N 
eep! Neep! Ne —Aggggghhhh!" 
I attacked while the Helmacrons were still 
cheering Marco's death. I bit clear though a Hel-
macron's leg with my powerful shark jaw. 
The Helmacron jerked. He didn't lose his bal-
ance, but I felt something heavy fall near me. 
124 
<Cassie, Ax, grab the Dracon beam!> I shouted. 
<Jake, Tobias, hack through the walls.> 
<But Marco — > Tobias said. 
<Marco is dead!> I said savagely. <Do it!> 
<No!> Jake shouted. 
<We have to,> Cassie said quietly. 
<We must fight to save ourselves,> Ax said. 
<There will be time for mourning later.> 
<Fine,> Jake said bitterly. 
<The treacherous aliens have severed my 
limb!> the Helmacron cried. <But I shall still 
hobble on to victory!> 
<We must seize the power source!> another 
Helmacron shouted. <The brave Helmacron fe-
males shall lead the way!> 
<We got the beam!> Cassie shouted. <Now 
what?> 
<We'll tunnel through to the lungs,> I said. 
<You and Ax get inside, demorph, and turn that 
beam on them. The rest of us will bite a few 
holes in these creeps.> 
<One problem,> Cassie said. <That Dracon 
beam is bigger than the human me. How am I go-
ing to pick it up?> 
<Ant power,> I said. 
<Schwarzenegger, right.> 
Whoooosssh! 
A pillow of air escaped from Marco's lung. 
125 

<Bingo!> Jake yelled. 
<We got the lungs!> Tobias shouted. 
By then, the other four Helmacrons had lost a 
limb. Been forced to drop their weapons. Quieted 
down some. And when they realized we were now 
armed — well, they were suddenly interested in 
dealing. 
<Perhaps a strategic alliance is in order,> one 
of the Helmacron males said. <You will help us 
power up our ship.> 
<And you will?> Jake prompted. 
<Conquer all of the other planets in the uni-
verse before returning to crush Earth!> 
<Tempting,> Jake said. 
<Don't deal with these idiots,> I said angrily. 
<l say we waste them and bail.> 
<l've had enough death for one day,> Cassie 
said. <Letting them power up their ship won't do 
any harm. If we'd suggested that in the begin-
ning, Marco might still be alive.> 
<Okay, Helmacrons, you have two choices,> 
Jake said. <Choice one: We march out of here to-
gether. You unshrink us. We let you use the blue 
box once to power up your engines and get off 
our planet.> 
<Never! Helmacrons are the masters of the —> 
<Shut up and listen to your second choice!> I 
shouted. 
<We are listening to your unworthy scheme!> 
126 
<Choice two,> Jake said coldly. <Die.> 
<You killed our friend,> I added. <And let me 
tell you, payback is no fun.> 
The Helmacrons blustered and complained. 
But they agreed to surrender and unshrink us. 
They didn't really have a choice. 
In the lungs we demorphed. Tobias to hawk. 
Ax to Andalite. The rest of us to human. 
And then, we marched out of the body. Out 
through what Cassie later called spiracles, or the 
breathing holes on either side of a cockroach's 
body. We kept the Helmacrons under guard like 
prisoners of war. We moved fast, anxious to aban-
don the corpse. A corpse that was all that was 
left of Marco. 
Zombielike, I walked. Looked straight ahead. 
Didn't talk. Too busy processing. 
Marco, my fellow warrior and, yeah, even 
friend .. . gone forever. Killed. Not by the Yeerks, 
as we all half-expected to be, but by a race of 
tiny egomaniacs. 
There was no justice, poetic or otherwise, in 
that. 
127 

"This isn't the barn," Cassie said. 
Wherever we were, it was dark and vast. At 
least it seemed that way. Then again, we weren't 
much bigger than bacteria. 
"Does anyone see the Helmacron ship?" Jake 
asked. 
<No,> Tobias said. 
<lf we cannot find the ship we will not be able 
to return to our full size,> Ax said. 
"Duh." 
"Ax, just guard the Helmacrons," Jake said. 
<Yes, Prince Jake.> Ax held a Dracon beam 
on our little band of gimpy, marble-eyed prison-
ers. His tail hovered above his head, ready to 
strike. 
128 
"Tobias?" Jake said. 
<l'll try to figure out where we are,> Tobias 
said wearily. With difficulty, he gained some alti-
tude and was lost in the darkness. 
Jake shook his head. "Somehow I imagined 
we'd come out in the barn and the Helmacron 
ship would just be there." 
"Where did Marco go? He was supposed to 
stay put," I complained. Then felt bad for com-
plaining. 
<The ship may have been destroyed,> Ax said. 
"Now there's a happy thought." 
Cassie laughed grimly. "I wonder how long it 
will be before humans invent an antishrinking 
ray." 
<A long, long time,> Ax stated. 
"Look on the bright side," I said, manically. 
Desperately. "We're useless to the Yeerks. We're 
much too small to be Controllers now." 
"Useless to humans, too," Jake snapped. "We 
can't fight Visser Three when we're the size of a 
shredded fingernail clipping." 
"Don't worry about the fight," I said. "We're 
going to spend the rest of our lives just trying to 
get home." 
Tobias was back. <l didn't see the ship,> he 
reported. <But I think we may be in Marco's 
closet. I think that big cliff over there is a hiking 
boot.> 
129 

"What is he?" Jake asked, glancing over his 
shoulder to the dark, looming mass that had 
once been our friend. 
<Roach, I think.> 
"ARFARFARFARFARF!" A vicious-sounding 
dog, somewhere nearby. 
<We can hear a dog barking,> Ax said. <lt is 
likely a dog's voice has a different frequency than 
that of a human.> 
"That doesn't sound like Euclid," Cassie said 
musingly. 
"Roach," Jake said bitterly. "It's Marco's last 
joke. Roaches are, like, impossible to kill. Pretty 
ironic, huh?" 
"I think we should organize a search party," I 
said. "I'll go eagle. Tobias and I can try to deter-
mine if we really are in Marco's house." 
"Jake's right," Cassie said suddenly. "I did 
an oral report on roaches in the fourth grade. 
Nothing kills them. Cutting off their heads doesn't 
kill them. Submerging them in water doesn't kill 
them —" 
"Enough with the Animal Planet report," I 
said. "We're a fraction of an inch high and proba-
bly miles from home. It's time to focus." 
"I'm not just babbling," Cassie argued. "Lis-
ten. I'm saying: Nothing kills a roach. Not even 
stopping its heart. They have some sort of 
backup system." 
130 
"You think we can still reach him?" Jake de-
manded. 
"It's possible." 
This was too good to believe. A tiny breath of 
hope against the cold wall of death. 
Naturally, I was suspicious. "Hasn't he been 
in that morph for" more than two hours?" 
"Ax-man?" Jake asked. 
<One hour, fifty-five minutes,> Ax said, mov-
ing his stalk eyes toward us and keeping his main 
eyes on the strangely silent prisoners. 
"Five minutes," Cassie said. "There's hope." 
I looked up, up, up. On one side — an enor-
mous leg spiked with disgusting dirty hairs. On 
the other — a shiny smooth nut-case wall of ar-
mor. 
The roach was giving off a dusky, filthy 
smell. A roach smell. But at that moment, the 
highly evolved roach body looked beautiful to 
me. Marco had ultimately picked the perfect 
morph. 
And he just might be alive to gloat about it. 
We started to yell. 
"Marco — morph out!" Jake cried desperately. 
"Come on, Marco!" Cassie shouted. 
<You have only five Earth minutes left!> Ax 
yelled. 
<Morph out!> 
"Do it now!" 
131 

No response. 
<He's not moving,> Tobias said. 
"Maybe he's in a coma," Cassie said. 
"Or sleeping," Jake added, attempting a joke. 
Bad attempt. 
"Marco," Cassie said. "Come on, now. Listen 
to me. If you're in there, start to demorph. I'll 
help you through." 
<C'mon buddy, don't get stuck as a roach,> 
Tobias said desperately. 
"Dude," I said. "How dumb is it to live the 
rest of your life in a body that makes girls scream 
in terror? Your dating life is so over before it's 
even begun." 
<Four minutes,> Ax said. 
"Marco, man, come on," Jake pleaded. "We 
need you." 
"Yeah, we haven't had a good laugh all day." 
Who knows what finally reached him? Cas-
sie's gentle coaching. Tobias's too-real fear. Jake's 
pleading. My pathetic wisecracks. Maybe even 
Ax's cold countdown. I'm not even sure any of our 
puny voices, thought-speak or not, got through. 
All I know is that the hairy leg near me began 
to puff outward. Growing, growing — until it was 
a roach-colored wall. We ran to keep from getting 
squashed. 
<We have been viciously tricked!> a Helmacron 
132 
shouted. <The transforming alien is not really 
dead!> 
Ax pointed the Dracon beam. <Shut. Up,> he 
said calmly. 
The Helmacrons' marble eyes all turned to 
face Marco. 
Then — 
A rumbling of sound. 
<l believe Marco is awake,> Ax informed us. 
"Marco. Man! You are in serious doo-doo." 
Jake tried to sound serious, but he didn't. 
"Ax, he probably can't hear my voice, so ask 
him where we are!" I said. Then I smacked 
Marco on his growing human arm. Ridiculous. All 
less than an inch of me. 
<Marco, Rachel has just hit you in anger. And 
Jake demands to know why you morphed when 
he expressly forbade you to do so. However, at 
the moment there is no need to answer this 
question as I will be unable to hear your re-
sponses 
"ARFARFARFARFARF!" Cujo, in the hallway. 
Then, a rumbling of sound. A massive human 
voice. 
There was no way I could hear or understand 
Marco's words, but I bet he said something like 
this: "Oh, man. I'm getting it from both sides! 
Everybody's always blaming me! This whole thing 
133 

is Rachel's fault. If she hadn't hit me in the first 
place, I wouldn't have fallen and hit my head 
"Ax, tell Marco to stop whining and thank us 
for saving him from a life under the kitchen sink!" 
Ax did. Here's what I know Marco said: "Re-
mind me to send flowers after I save your sorry 
butts." 
134 
M larco morphed a gull. 
We clung to him. The five of us, and our five 
prisoners. 
<Prince Jake instructs that you not forget the 
camera.> 
Marco explained to us where we were as he 
bird-walked out of the closet, hopped up onto the 
desk, and grabbed the camera with his beak. 
Then, we flew through the open window and 
headed toward Cassie's barn. 
Now that he was in morph, Marco could en-
gage in two-way communication with Ax and To-
bias. 
135 

<That crappy dog attacked me!> he told us 
as we passed into bright sunshine. <Practically 
chewed my hand off.> 
"How'd you get away?" Cassie asked, via 
Ax. 
<Even though I was dripping copious amounts 
of blood, I performed like a brave and stalwart 
knight and marched down the ladder of rattling 
steel!> Marco said. <Then I rode home on my 
trusty purple steed.> 
"Please tell me you're not going to be imitat-
ing the Helmacrons for the next two months," 
Jake said. 
<Nah,> Marco said. <l'm going to be too busy 
conquering the universe.> 
Had we actually missed this guy? Hard to be-
lieve. 
<Dog bites can be nasty,> Cassie said. <Did 
you have a doctor look at it?> 
<Please, like I had the time? Besides, when I 
morphed and demorphed, the thing was gone. 
I'm perfect again.> 
"Yeah, and we'll talk later about your brilliant 
decision to disobey orders." Jake. "I just know 
you had a good reason." 
<Uh . . . yeah, I hope so.> 
"I wonder what's on that film," I said. 
Jake frowned. "We'll never know. Developing 
136 
it is too risky. We'll burn it as soon as we get to 
the barn." 
We did. 
Marco had hidden the Helmacron ship in the 
freezer, along with the blue box. Ax hooked every-
thing up and forced the protesting Helmacrons to 
unshrink us. 
Relief. 
Then we let them power up their ship and take 
off. 
"Promise us you'll never come back to Earth," 
Jake said as the Helmacrons hovered in front of 
the barn door. 
<You have our word, as honorable female ser-
vants of the Helmacron empire!> 
<A Helmacron male would never lie!> 
At the same time, I noticed the blue box 
beginning to elevate. I couldn't see the Hel-
macrons minuscule tractor beam, but I knew it 
was there. 
Marco and I both jumped to grab the box. I 
snagged it. We even managed not to hit our heads 
together. 
Cassie stowed the blue box somewhere safe. 
Again, for security, she didn't tell us where. Then 
we all headed home for a little quality time with our 
parents. I had piles of homework. I was research-
ing the Salem witch-hunts on the Internet when I 
137 

flashed on that strange spiky thing we saw in 
Marco's bloodstream. 
Ten minutes later I found it on the Web site 
from the Centers for Disease Control. 
A sketchy line drawing of the spiky thing. 
A rabies virus. 
The dog bite Marco had told us about.. . 
What I read about rabies didn't make me feel 
all warm and fuzzy inside. 
Rabies is not a pretty disease. Get it and you 
have two choices: Start a series of injections 
within three days. Or die. Die after going awfully, 
violently insane. 
Bottom line: If Marco hadn't morphed, to roach 
or anything else, he'd be dying. He wouldn't have 
known he had rabies so he wouldn't have started 
the treatment in time. When he'd morphed in the 
kid's closet, almost twelve hours had already 
gone by. 
Other bottom line: It was clear to me that 
Marco had morphed not to upset Jake or to save 
his own skinny butt. Not to betray us or because 
he valued his own life over ours. 
He'd morphed because the disease had al-
ready begun to twist his mind and distort his 
judgment. He'd morphed against direct orders 
because he was slowly going insane. 
This was good news. Marco wasn't dying 
138 
and with this interesting piece of information I 
could get him off the hook with Jake and the 
others. 
I reached for the phone. Stopped. 
Smirked. Maybe in the morning. 
139 

