
Help me." 
I tried to get up. There was a body lying 
on me. Hork-Bajir. His wrist blade was jammed 
against my side. 
I tried to lift up with all four legs, lift the dead 
thing off me. But I only had three legs. My left 
hind leg lay across the bright-lit floor, a curiosity, 
a macabre relic. Tiger's paw. 
I tried to slide. That was better. The floor was 
wood, highly polished. Slick with blood, animal, 
alien, human. I reached out with my two front 
paws, extended the claws, and dug them into the 
wood. They didn't catch at first. But then my 
right paw chewed wood and I gained traction. 
A voice said, "Help. Please help me." 
1 
OCRed By Arpit Nathany 

I dragged myself slowly, carefully, gingerly out 
from beneath the bladed alien. The pain in the 
missing leg was intense. Don't let anyone ever 
tell you animals don't feel pain. I've been a lot of 
animals. Mostly they feel pain. 
<Jake? Jake?> 
It was Cassie. <Yeah. I'm here.> 
With a lurch I was free of the weight press-
ing me down. I rose, shaky on three legs. Looked 
around through the tiger's eyes. 
It was a fabric-cutting room. A design house. 
You know, dresses no one actually wears. The 
kind of stuff you see on Style With Elsa Klensch 
as you're flipping channels. 
Fashion? Strange front organization for the 
Yeerks. Why? 
There were hugely wide, long tables covered 
in cloth. One tilted up weirdly, one leg had been 
broken off entirely. Kind of like me. There were 
big rolls of patterned fabrics on that end that 
weighed the table down and made it balance, 
like a seesaw, not up, not down. 
Overhead there were banks of brilliant fluo-
rescent lights. Splashes of stylish neon on the 
bare brick walls. Bodies everywhere. Blood. 
Slashes of it. 
<Cassie?> 
I saw the wolf limp out from behind an over-
turned cart. She was alive. 
2 
I felt a wave of relief. The last I'd seen of 
Cassie she was in trouble. 
In the distance, out through the big doors, 
down the dark hallway, I heard the hoarse vocals 
of a grizzly bear. Rachel. Not fighting, not any-
more, just raging, raging. Roaring with the frus-
tration of a mad beast looking for fresh victims 
and finding none. 
Marco was already demorphed. A kid. My age, 
but he looked so young to me. My best friend. 
He'd demorphed to human because the alterna-
tive was bleeding to death from the gash across 
his gorilla throat. 
Demorph to human. All better. No pain. 
"I'm cold. I'm cold, help me," the voice 
called. 
<Make sure he can't see you,> I warned Marco. 
Rachel came lumbering back into the room, 
eight hundred pounds of shaggy brown fur and 
railroad spike claws and a vaguely quizzical grin 
that hid sharp canines. <Where's Tobias?> 
I didn't answer. I didn't know the answer. 
Rachel began shoving and lifting Hork-Bajir 
bodies. She found Tobias, a crumpled hawk. He 
was breathing. 
<Tobias, morph!> 
I heard the clop, clop of delicate hooves. Ax 
was behind me. As alien as any of the dead lying 
around us. A dainty centaur. The body of a blue 
3 

deer or antelope, with an upper body not so dif-
ferent from humans. A head that was very differ-
ent, mouth less, with two extra eyes perched atop 
movable stalks. His long, dangerous tail was wet 
with gore. 
We'd been in many fights. This one was bad. 
This one would invade my sleep and wake me 
sweating and crying. 
<Tobias! Listen to me! Go to human!> 
"Someone . . . so cold . . . help . . ." 
Cassie trotted over to Rachel. She demorphed 
swiftly. 
So good to see her. Healthy. Whole. Beautiful 
in my eyes. 
"He's okay," Cassie assured Rachel. "I think 
he's just stunned." 
As if to prove her right Tobias ruffled a wing 
and said, <Hey! What? Oh. Oh. I'm alive.> 
<More or less,> Rachel growled. <That was a 
crazy thing to do, you idiot! You dive-bomb a 
Hork-Bajir?> 
<You know?> he said. <Thinking back now, it 
was crazy.> 
<ldiot,> Rachel said. But she managed to put 
an awful lot of affection into that one insult. To-
bias had saved her life, nearly ending his own. 
I limped over to the one injured human in the 
room. A human-Controller. An enemy. A man, 
4 
maybe twenty years old. A human with an alien 
slug in his head. 
"Help me," he said to the tiger's face looming 
above him. "I'm cold. Help me." 
He was cut. Badly. It was a Hork-Bajir slash. 
Friendly fire, that's what it's called when one of 
your own troops accidentally injures you. Kills 
you. Hork-Bajir in the middle of violence slashed 
one of their comrades. 
<Leave him, Yeerk,> I said. <Let him alone, 
at last. Get out of his head. Let him do this last 
thing as a free human being.> 
His face was pale. White. Waxy, like a white 
candle. Someone had smashed his head, man-
gled his ears. I recognized the marks of a tiger's 
claw. His brown eyes stared up at me. 
"I can't get out," the Yeerk inside his head 
said to me. "The ears are blocked. Can't get out. 
I'm trapped." 
<We have to get out of here,> Ax said. <They 
may send reinforcements.> 
"I'm cold," the human-Controller said. 
"Just. . . just get me a blanket or.. ." 
<Prince Jake,> Ax prodded. 
"I'm scared. Does that. . . does that make 
you happy, Andalite?" the dying man said. 
To the Yeerks we were Andalites. The morph-
ing technology is Andalite science, far beyond 
5 

anything a human was yet capable of. So to them 
we were Andalites, a misunderstanding we delib-
erately fostered. 
Ax was the only true Andalite in our group. 
<No. It doesn't make me happy,> I said. 
"The pain . . . can't you help me? Cold. Help 
me." 
<Come on, Jake.> It was Marco. He'd re-
morphed. To osprey this time. We needed to es-
cape. The air was our surest way out. Grow wings 
and fly. Fly and put it all behind us. Pretty soon 
we'd be joking. Laughing. Trying anything that 
would make us forget what we'd seen. 
What we'd done. 
"Help . . ." 
<Let's go,> I said. 
I demorphed. Out of sight of the doomed Con-
troller. Then I grew falcon's wings and flew out 
through a window Rachel opened with her fist. 
6 
My name is Jake. 
I live in a normal American city, in a normal 
American state. 
I love my mom and my dad. I even love my big 
brother, Tom. I like basketball and hate math and 
get a little down when it rains for more than one 
day. I think those little Audi TT's are cool but if I 
had the money, and was old enough, I'd probably 
drive a Jeep. 
I live on burgers and fries and have never vol-
untarily consumed a brussels sprout. 
My room is a mess. My homework is late. My 
class notes are so disorganized they cannot be 
read by anyone except Marco, who has been living 
7 

off my notes for five years or more, and some-
times has to interpret them for me. 
I cried the day Michael Jordan retired. And I 
can still tell you what time it was, what day, 
week, month, hour, minute, and second, what I 
was wearing and what I was eating when Mark 
McGwire banged his record homer. 
I'm a kid. A kid with a dog and parents and 
teachers and friends. Just a kid. 
I have these nightmares. Sometimes I'm a 
termite, trapped inside a piece of wood, can't get 
out and the clock is ticking, ticktock, ticktock, 
can't escape, wooden walls and blackness all 
around me, pressing me tight. 
Sometimes I'm falling. Flying and my wings 
just aren't there and I'm a mile up in the sky, 
falling, and thinking, / can't fly! I can't fly! 
Sometimes still, even now, I see the dark red 
eye of Crayak and feel his malice reaching for me 
all across the millions of light-years. 
But the worst dream is just me and Cassie. 
And we're standing in the forest somewhere. 
She's outlined in light. You know, like there's a 
bright light hidden behind her. And it's almost 
like she's shining. And there's this cave. And I'm 
telling her to go in, and she's looking at me with 
trust in her eyes, looking at me and loving me 
and believing in me and trusting me and I'm 
telling her to go into the cave. 
8 
I'm the leader of the Animorphs. I don't know 
how that happened. It was some doom pro-
nounced by Marco. Why me? Because, Marco 
said. Because it has to be. 
We were five kids taking a shortcut home from 
the mall at night. There was a ship. There was an 
alien. There was the destructive worm of knowl-
edge: You are not alone. You are not safe. Nothing 
is what it seems. No one is who they seem to be. 
The knowledge of betrayal and terror. The 
awareness of evil. 
And then, the power. 
The power made us responsible, see. Without 
the power the knowledge would have just been a 
worm of fear eating up our insides. 
Bad enough. But it was the power that turned 
fear into obligation, that laid the weight on our 
unready shoulders. 
We could become any animal we'touched, the 
Andalite told us. 
Power enough to win? No. Power enough to 
fight? Ah, yes. Just enough, little Jake, here is 
just enough power to imprison you in a cage of 
duty, to make you fight. 
"Help me. I'm cold." 
Another battle. Another horror. 
Couldn't anything make it end? Was there no 
way out? Was I trapped, fighting, fighting till one 
by one my friends died or went nuts? 
9 

I lay on my bed. Stared up at the ceiling. 
"Help me. Please. I'm cold." 
Into the cave, Cassie. 
All for what? For nothing. To delay the Yeerks, 
but never to win. And someday, to lose. 
Was there no way out? 
"There's always a way out, Jake the Mighty," 
a voice said. "My lord Crayak holds out his om-
nipotent hand to you, Jake the Yeerk Killer. Jake 
the El I i mist's tool." 
I sat up. I knew the voice. 
The Drode stood by my desk. It wasn't large. 
It perched forward like one of those small di-
nosaurs. It had mean, smart eyes in a humanoid 
head. It was wrinkled, dark green or purple 
maybe. So dark it was almost black. The mocking 
mouth was lined with green. 
The Drode was Crayak's creature, his emis-
sary, his tool. Crayak was . . . Crayak was evil. A 
power so vast, so complete that only the Ellimist 
could keep him in check. A balance of terror: evil 
and good checking each other, limiting each 
other, making deals that affected the survival of 
entire solar systems. 
"Go away," I said to the Drode. 
"But you called me." 
"Go back to Crayak. Leave me alone." 
The Drode smiled. He got up and moved 
10 
closer. Closer till his face was only inches from 
my own. 
"There is a way out," the Drode whispered. 
"Say the word and it never was, Jake. Say the 
word, Jake, and you never walked through the 
construction site. Say the word and you know 
nothing. No weight on your shoulders. Say the 
word." 
"Go away," I said through gritted teeth. 
"How long till your cousin Rachel loses her 
grip? You know the darkness is growing inside 
her. How long till Tobias dies, a bird, a birdl How 
can he ever be happy? How long till Marco is 
forced to destroy his own Controller mother? Will 
he survive that, do you think? How long, Jake, till 
you kill Tom? Then what dreams will come, Jake 
the Yeerk Killer?" 
"Get out of here. Crawl back under your 
rock." 
"It will happen, Jake. You know that. The 
cave. The day will come. You know what the cave 
is, Jake. You know what it means, that dark cave. 
You know that death is within. When she dies, 
when Cassie dies, it will be at your word, Jake." 
I covered my face with my hands. 
"My master Crayak offers you an escape. In 
his compassion Great Crayak has struck a deal 
with that meddling nitwit Ellimist. Crayak would 
11 

free you, Jake. Crayak would free you all. All will 
be as it would have been if you had simply taken 
a different path home." 
I saw that moment again. At the mall. Decid-
ing whether to take the safe, well-lit, sensible 
way home. Or the route that would take us 
through the construction site, and to a meeting 
that would change everything. 
Undo it. Undo it all. No more war. No more 
pain and fear and guilt? 
"Just one word, Jake," the Drode whispered. 
"No . . . no, two, I think. One must not sacrifice 
good manners. Two words and it never was. Two 
words and you know nothing, have no power, no 
responsibility." 
"What words?" 
"One is Crayak. The other is please." 
I wanted to say no. 
I wanted to say no . . . 
I wanted . . . 
12 
D A Y 
O N E 
We hooked up at the mall. I was there with 
Rachel. 
Rachel is my best friend. No one knows why, 
least of all either of us. We could not possibly be 
more different. 
Here are Rachel's priorities in order of impor-
tance: shopping and gymnastics. 
Me, I'm into animals. 
Rachel is every cover girl from every Made-
moiselle or Seventeen you've ever seen. Tall, 
thin, blond hair and flawless complexion, and ap-
proximately four hundred shiny white teeth. To 
make matters worse, she can't just be written off 
as another fashion bimbo. 
She's not mean. She's not a snob. She is not 
13 

a member of any clique. She is her own, one-girl 
clique. That's the power she has: to be everyone's 
vision of physical and intellectual perfection and 
not to care. 
Sometimes I wonder where she gets it from. 
Not the hair, or the clothing, or even her eerie 
ability to never be messy, dirty, or wet. I wonder 
where she gets the indifference. I wonder how 
she can have every boy in school throwing him-
self in her path, and be indifferent. 
Not that she's humble. No. You wouldn't call 
her humble. She knows she's special. But she's 
impatient with the whole idea of being popular or 
whatever. 
I get the feeling with Rachel that she's wait-
ing. Impatient. Looking for something more. Mov-
ing through life in search of a very different 
destiny. 
Her sports are gymnastics and shopping. She 
knows she'll never be a great gymnast; she's al-
ready about twice as tall as the average gymnast. 
That part of her interests me but not as much as 
her shopping. 
See, it's not about the stuff with her. It's hunt-
ing. 
I could never be friends with someone who 
went out and hunted animals. Sorry, but people 
who want to shoot deer are not going to be my 
friends. But when I'm with Rachel at the mall I 
14 
see the excitement in hunting: the combination 
of knowledge and instinct and the thrill of stalk-
ing and closing in for the kill. 
The girl makes the pursuit of a forty-percent-
off sweater in just the right size and just the right 
color seem like a safari to track down a man-
eating lion. 
"Twenty-five percent off at Express, that's fine," 
she said. "But, same basic sweater, better mix of 
fabrics, forty percent off at Structure? Plus, the 
point is, this sweater goes with the jeans on sale at 
The Gap or the jeans on sale at the department 
store, and the Express sweater only goes with The 
Gap jeans." 
"I know I'm going to be sorry I asked this," I 
said, "but how can one sweater that is almost 
identical to another sweater not go with a pair of 
basically identical jeans?" 
Rachel gave me the look. The look of in-
credulity and confusion. 
"Cassie, you know I love you, but did you just 
get in from Uzbekistan?" she asked. 
"Yes. Yes, Rachel, I just flew in from Uzbek-
istan." 
"Shape. Color. Cut. Waistline." She shook her 
head in mock pity. "How do you expect to get 
through life without an appreciation of what goes 
with what?" 
"I expect life will just be one long struggle." 
15 

Rachel laughed. No one was more amused by 
her obsession with shopping than she was. 
Like I said, Rachel was waiting for something 
else. She didn't know what. I sure didn't. 
"Don't look," I hissed. "It's Jake." 
"I can't look at my cousin?" 
"You can look, just don't look, that's all I'm 
saying." 
"You mean, don't look at him in a way that will 
somehow convey to him that you are hot for him? 
That you want his lips pressed against yours? That 
you want his big, strong arms wrapped all around 
you?" 
"Yeah, Rachel, that's what I meant. That is 
exactly what I meant." 
Jake is cute. Not cute in a little itsy-bitsy 
he's-so-cute kind of way. He's a big guy. Not 
hulking big, just like he's two years older than he 
really is. He's also smart and funny and modest. 
I think he likes me. We sit together on the bus 
sometimes. Sometimes we seem to accidentally 
end up near each other at assemblies, or in 
class. 
He's never asked me out. I've never asked 
him out. Needless to say Rachel finds all this 
touching, funny, and completely idiotic. 
I asked her once, "Do you think he's okay with 
me being African-American and all?" 
She said, "Cassie, I've known Jake all my life. 
16 
Believe me, he doesn't know you're black. That's 
how little he would care. Jake is the one guy out 
of a thousand who really does care about who you 
are, not what you look like." 
"So, how do I look?" I asked anxiously. 
"Like you should be singing eee-yi-eee-yi-oh. 
You're wearing Wal-Mart overalls with bird poop 
on the cuffs. You have no makeup on and there's 
dirt under your fingernails . . . that is just dirt, 
isn't it?" 
I looked down at my fingernails and tried to 
remember. "Probably dirt. Possibly manure." 
"Yeah, well, you compensate for your Old 
MacDonald clothing sense by being pretty, very 
smart, very cool, and the most completely real 
person I've ever met." 
"Thanks. Thanks for the last half, anyway." 
Jake was with his best friend, Marco. Marco 
and Jake were not as mismatched as Rachel and 
I, at least from what I knew. I don't know Marco 
much at all, just to say "hi" to. 
He's small, especially alongside Jake. He has 
fairly long, dark hair and an olive complexion and 
a permanently amused expression. 
Marco is a comedian. Not a class clown, not a 
guy who wants to make the teacher mad. He just 
seems to think the world is funny. I guess a psy-
chologist would call it a defense mechanism. His 
mom died a couple years ago. Anyway, maybe 
17 

that's it. Or maybe he's just funny. Anyway, if 
Jake likes him he must be okay. 
Yeah, I don't sound too much like someone 
with a crush. 
There was a third guy with them. This kid 
named Tobias. He's kind of an unknown to me. 
He seems like he's kind of latched onto Jake. 
Jake is too nice to ever tell him to go away, and I 
could see he was trying to include Tobias in the 
conversation and all. But Tobias was still stand-
ing a little apart. Looking a little uncomfortable, 
trailing a little behind. 
The three of them were coming out of the 
video game place. Marco looked like he was teas-
ing Jake. 
Jake spotted us. For a moment he had a deer-
in-the-headlights look. Then he put on his non-
chalance. 
"Hey, Rachel. Hi, Cassie." 
Rachel whispered, "Can I look at him now?" 
"You guys going home?" Jake asked. "You 
shouldn't go through the construction site by 
yourselves. I mean, being girls and all." 
This was a mistake. Jake knew it as soon as 
the words were out of his mouth, I could see it. 
But it was too late. 
"Are you going to come and protect us, you 
big, strong m-a-a-a-n?" 
18 
Jake started to form a word, but Rachel had 
him now. 
"You think we're helpless just because —" 
I cut her off. "I'd appreciate it if they did walk 
with us. I know you're not afraid of anything, 
Rachel, but I guess I am." 
Rachel shot me a harsh look. I was spoiling 
her fun. 
To get home from the mall we could either go 
a long way around, which is the safe way, or we 
could cut through this abandoned construction 
site and hope there weren't any ax murderers 
hanging around there. 
We took the long way. 
Ten minutes of mostly silent walking later, To-
bias said, "Hey, what's that?" 
I turned and looked in the direction Tobias 
was pointing. A streak of light, off to our right. 
"Meteorite?" Jake suggested. 
"Great," Marco muttered. "A meteorite falls 
out of the sky and totally misses the school. That 
is so not fair." 
We kept walking. 
But I had the strangest feeling. Like . . . like 
going into a room you know, where you're fa-
miliar with every stick of furniture, and it's 
your room, and it's just like it always has been, 
only somehow, in some way that only appears 
19 

as a tingling on the back of your neck, it's dif-
ferent. 
I shook it off. I had other things to focus on. 
Like whether Jake was ever going to even hold 
my hand. 
20 
D A Y 
S E V E N 
I woke up. 
Great. Another day. 
The couch I was sleeping on was saggy in the 
middle and smelled of cigarette smoke. But my 
uncle had gotten drunk and passed out on the 
floor in my room. So I took the couch. 
It was okay, at least that way I could watch TV 
till I fell asleep. 
I was wearing a T-shirt and shorts. I needed to 
find something to wear. My uncle doesn't do 
laundry, I do. So I knew exactly what I had avail-
able. A nice collection of stuff that could make 
me look like a complete dork or a complete 
lowlife, my choice. 
My uncle also doesn't buy a lot of stuff for 
21 

me. I'm what you'd have to call "low priority" in 
his life. Half the stuff I had was stuff he'd thrown 
away. Or else stuff I'd picked up from my aunt's 
attic whenever I was shuttled off to be with her 
for a few months. 
The food was better at my aunt's. She didn't 
pass out in my room. She had her own brand of 
fun. She'd work me like her own personal slave. 
That's how I knew what was in the attic: I 
cleaned it out. And she'd keep me out of school 
to run errands for her or just to "be there" in case 
she needed me. 
At least my uncle let me go to school. He'd 
have let me go to Australia and not cared. Not a 
nice feeling knowing that if you were ever kid-
napped or whatever, there was no one around to 
bother and call the cops. 
But, hey, that's life. It's worse for lots of kids. 
Marco's mom died. His dad is a wreck. Marco 
does everything. 
My mom probably died, too. And my dad. I 
don't know. Everyone just says my mom ran off. 
Everyone says my dad ran off before I was born. 
Or sometimes they make up stories, like they 
both died in an accident. Sometimes I make up 
stories. The truth, if there ever was any truth, was 
lost a long time ago. 
Doesn't matter. 
I put on the least pathetic clothes I could find 
22 
and headed for the bus stop. That part was okay. 
No major hassles at the bus stop, usually. It's not 
till I'm on the bus that it started. This kid named 
Andy and his creep sidekick who for some reason 
was called Tap-Tap, enjoyed kidney punching 
me. They'd wait till we were getting off the bus, 
find some way to get up behind me, and when I 
was all crammed in, they'd nail me once or twice 
in the back. 
I am what they call a bully magnet. I don't 
know why. I just am. 
Used to be these two other guys who had the 
job of torturing me. Their thing was swirlies. You 
know, they'd grab me by the ankles and knees 
and dip my head in the toilet while they flushed. 
Used to. This guy named Jake came into the 
boys' room while they were doing it. He told them 
to step off. That was it, but he had a way of say-
ing it, I guess. 
Those two haven't bugged me since. 
I don't think Jake has a big reputation as a 
tough guy or anything. He's kind of quiet, actu-
ally. Almost shy. But there's something about 
him that makes you take him seriously. 
I hung around with him for a while. Totally 
lame on my part. Jake has a best friend who 
doesn't like me, I don't think. After a while it was 
kind of obvious that I wasn't going to be part of 
that circle of friends. 
23 

That was okay. I was still grateful. I guess 
Jake is who I'd like to be if I could be someone 
else. But there was a long list of people I'd rather 
be than me. 
I managed to avoid Andy and Tap-Tap on the 
bus. Which just meant they'd lie in wait for me 
some other time. Probably it would have just 
been better to take my beating and move on, 
without all the suspense of wondering when they 
were going to get me. 
Yeah, right, Tobias. That's a good way to live. 
I had to wait all day. Sixth period. I headed for 
the boys' room. The boys' room is always danger-
ous for me, but I couldn't hold out all day. 
I went in, hoping against hope that a monitor 
would be in there. But it was me, and two guys I 
didn't know, and Andy and Tap-Tap. 
"Toby, Toby, Toby," Andy called out. "Hey, 
man, I missed you on the bus this morning. I 
thought we were friends." 
I felt the surge of fear. The ice in my stomach. 
The urgent desire to wet myself. Tap-Tap moved 
fast to get behind me, block my escape. 
Tap-Tap grabbed me by my shoulders from 
behind. Should I beg? Would begging do any 
good? 
"Why don't you guys find someone else to 
pick on," I said. Yeah, that'll work. Whining. 
Whining will work. 
24 
Andy laughed. "But you're so nice and easy," 
he said. "No one else is as big a wuss as you." 
Tap-Tap joined in the laughter. "You're the 
man, Toby." 
Tap-Tap shoved me suddenly forward. Off 
balance I slammed into Andy. 
"Hey! He attacked me, Tap-Tap!" 
"Sure did. Toby, man, what's up? Are you get-
ting all violent and stuff?" 
"He pushed me," Andy said in mock in-
credulity. 
Wham! 
The punch caught me low in my gut. 
Wham! Wham! 
I was down, twisting my legs around, pretzel-
ing to keep from peeing. 
Thunk! 
A kick that caught me in the ribs. I rolled 
over, rolled onto crushed paper towels, head 
against one of the stall uprights. 
Thunk! 
A second kick. The pain was shocking. I was 
scared. They'd really hurt me, this time. Oh, 
God, they'd really hurt me, who was going to take 
me to the hospital? 
I lay there groaning, back wet from splashed 
toilet water puddles. I lay there groaning and 
didn't even realize my tormentors were gone till I 
saw the faces of the other two guys, the two guys 
25 

who'd witnessed the whole scene, looking down 
at me. 
"You okay down there?" 
I couldn't talk. The pain. The rage. The hu-
miliation choking me. 
"Your life doesn't have to be like this," one of 
them said. "You don't have to be a victim all the 
time. There's a way out, man." 
The other one drew a small card from his 
back pocket and handed it down to me. "You 
don't have to be all alone, man. You don't have to 
be anyone's punching bag." 
They walked away. After a while I managed to 
stand up. 
I threw up in the toilet. 
I rinsed my face in the sink. I was late for 
class. Great. That meant a trip to Vice Principal 
Chapman. 
I cried. I was there alone, what did it matter? 
I cried. 
After a while I splashed more water on my 
face. And then, I looked at the card. 
It read THE SHARING. 
26 
I jerked awake. 
Eyes wide open. 
My covers were a mess. My sheet was twisted 
around my legs. My pillow was damp with sweat, 
but the room was cold. 
It had happened again. The call. Like a voice, 
but not a voice. Speaking without words. Images. 
Pictures, fuzzy, distorted, meaningless. 
A wide, grassy field. A glass dome. Trees with 
pink and blue leaves. And water. Everywhere, wa-
ter. 
It gave me the creeps. 
"You have a serious case of the willies," I 
whispered to myself. 
I got up, went to the bathroom, drank some 
27 

water, and spent five minutes rearranging my 
sheets and blankets. 
But I couldn't go back to bed. I was wide-
awake now. Adrenaline awake. 
I could work on some homework. Work on that 
paper. 
No. 
I pulled a pair of overalls on over my sleep 
shirt. Stuck my bare feet into a pair of muddy, 
unlaced boots. Then I took the boots back off. 
Boots were not going to make it easy to sneak 
past my parents' bedroom. 
I tiptoed down dark stairs to the living room. 
The blue display on the VCR was blinking 00:00 
again and again. There was a glass on the coffee 
table. My dad's. I picked it up and carried it to 
the kitchen and deposited it in the sink. 
"That's right, Mom and Dad, I couldn't sleep 
so I decided to get up at three A.M. and clean 
house." Yeah, that would work. That wouldn't 
seem too insane. 
Was that it? Was I going crazy? 
They say schizophrenia usually appears first 
during the teen years. I told my mom that once. 
She said, "Honey, how can anyone tell the differ-
ence between a crazy teenager and a regular 
teenager?" 
My dad had laughed, then caught himself. 
28 
"Not that we're saying we expect you to be wild 
or anything, let me make that perfectly clear. 
We're not saying it's okay." 
"Okay, Dad. I'll stop my wild and crazy ways." 
They laughed. I laughed. We all knew I was 
not exactly the definition of a wild and crazy girl. 
I told the story to Rachel. She said, "Wow, it 
must be cool to have your parents actually trust 
you. Man, that would be great if my mom trusted 
me like that." 
"Because then you could get away with any-
thing?" 
"Exactly." 
I smiled as I was remembering that. I opened 
the freezer. Hello Ben. Hello Jerry. 
No. What if Jake wasn't asking me out be-
cause of my thighs? 
I staggered, gripped the refrigerator door. It 
had hit in a wave. The voice. The soundless, 
wordless voice. Calling from the water. 
Oh, man, I really was going nuts. 
And it wasn't just the voice. There was this 
sense o f . . . of what? Strangeness? Of things be-
ing wrong in some way I couldn't figure out? 
Not funny. Not really. What if I was actually 
mentally ill? 
The animals. That was it, I'd go check on the 
barn. 
29 

I went out into the night, out through the 
kitchen door rather than the front door because 
my parents were less likely to hear me. 
Our barn is the Wildlife Rehabilitation Clinic. 
Both my folks are vets. My mom works with large 
animals at The Gardens. My dad handles the 
clinic, with some help from me. 
I guess to a lot of people the barn at night 
would have seemed eerie. Not to me. There were 
rows of cages, most full. We had muskrats and 
raccoons and geese and bats and foxes and deer 
and a forlorn eagle. All were injured or sick. 
Many wore bandages. Some were in one form of 
restraint or another, to keep them from chewing 
or pecking their own wounds. 
They smelled, I guess. Anyway, that's what 
Marco said when he came — 
No, no, he'd never been to the barn. Why 
would he have ever been to the barn? 
"Forget it, Cassie. It's late. It's dark. You're 
just confused." 
My hands shook a little as I tunneled a hand-
ful of grain into the goose's cage. She didn't 
need it, really. I just wanted to do something. 
Something normal. 
"How are you feeling? Huh? Yeah, I know, 
that wing still hurts, doesn't it?" 
I went down the row of cages. Tried not to 
think. Tried not to believe that I was hearing 
30 
things, imagining things, remembering things 
that had never happened. The familiarity of the 
barn soothed me. But within that very familiarity 
lay a new, unsettling sensation. I saw Jake, pac-
ing. I saw Rachel, restless. Marco lolling on a 
bale of hay. And up there, up in the rafters, a 
bird. 
A hawk. 
I could almost see him. Almost. 
Madness. I was losing my mind. 
I was losing my mind. 
31 

D A Y 
T E N 
Hi 
J. raced at full speed, all out, hooves flying, 
tail tucked down, upper body bowed, stalk eyes 
straight back to watch the ground that receded 
from me. 
I raced straight for the target, a bundle of 
sticks tied together to form an extremely crude 
representation of a Hork-Bajir-Controller. 
I ran. Waited. Reveal nothing. No subtle "tells," 
do not give anything away, he is ready to react to 
the slightest clue. Would I go left or right? Stop 
and strike or shoot past and tail whip him? 
Fwapp! 
I shot past, caught the "head" of the Hork-
32 
Bajir with my blade, and watched it topple onto 
the ground. 
I was panting. Gasping for air. It was my ninth 
attack. I was tired. 
Or maybe it was all in my head. Maybe it was 
the billions of pounds of pressure, the water that 
pressed down from all directions. 
There was very little hope left within me now. 
Too much time had passed. If anyone had sur-
vived, if my brother Elfangor had survived, he 
would have found me. 
The dome was still intact. It rested on the 
floor of one of Earth's oceans. It was at a slight 
angle. I noticed the incline whenever I raced 
across the vast, open field of grass. 
I was not sure how far down I was, how deep. 
All the instrumentation, the main computers and 
so on had been in the main section of the ship, 
spread out along the long corridors, the seem-
ingly endless stalk that connected the dome to 
the distant engines. 
Likewise all small craft. The fighters, the 
transports, the scout ships. Anything that would 
fly. All left behind when the dome separated and 
fell, atmosphere-shrieking and burning, down 
Earth's gravity well. 
Life support was intact. The low-power force 
field that kept the transparent dome from being 
33 

crushed by the ocean's pressure, all that was in-
tact. The energy plant would last for a hundred 
years. The grass would grow, the trees would 
bloom. The pond had spilled out during a tempo-
rary loss of artificial gravity, but it had mostly re-
filled. 
I could live out my life down here. Live out my 
life in this habitat meant to duplicate life at 
home. 
Except that I could not do that. 
Elfangor was probably dead. All the brave 
warriors with him. We had come out of Zero-
space, expecting at most to encounter a few 
scattered Yeerk ships. But they had been wait-
ing. A full Pool ship with its legion of Bug fight-
ers. And more dangerous still, the sleek black 
Blade ship of Visser Three. 
Our warriors had slaughtered the Yeerks. But 
we had lost some fighters. And then, the Blade 
ship had appeared. 
Maybe Elfangor had survived, somehow. But 
if he had, where was he? A fighter's sensors 
would have located me without great difficulty. 
And, unfortunately, the same would be true if 
the Yeerks were still present in orbit. Sooner or 
later they would find me. Some Taxxon watching 
a sensor display would catch the blip of trapped 
air beneath the waves. 
34 
Unacceptable. 
I was alone. Without a prince or a partner. A 
single Andalite aristh alone in the submerged 
dome of a once-great ship. How many light-years 
from home? What did it matter? I had no ship. 
I had called out in bursts of thought-speak. I 
had used all my energy, all my strength, to fire 
bursts of thought-speak, seeking Elfangor. 
There had been no answer. 
No answer for so long. 
I let my momentum carry me past the decap-
itated stick figure, on through the pink-leafed 
trees. To the dome wall. 
It rose up at an angle. I pressed my hand 
against the plex. Outside, out in the alien ocean, 
creatures swam by. The variety was startling. I 
had seen perhaps fifty different species in all, 
large and small, some apparently harmless and 
some seemingly dangerous. 
Earth. 
Elfangor had said little about the place. It 
was not a major planet. There had been some 
speculation that its dominant race was on the 
verge of achieving spaceflight, but aside from a 
few hundred primitive orbital satellites there had 
been no evidence. 
One thing was sure, the Yeerks in orbit had 
not been bothered by Earth-based craft. 
35 

A long, gray-blue creature swam close by. It 
scraped the dome, just a short distance from my 
splayed fingers. It had fins at its sides, a triangu-
lar fin that rose from its back, a raked, aerody-
namic tail, and eyes that were small, black, and 
empty. It also had something called a mouth. 
Many species on the home planet did as well. 
But this mouth seemed designed as a weapon. 
There were several rows of jagged triangular 
teeth. 
The fish swam away into the murk. Even when 
Earth's sun was high in the sky the light down 
here was dim, rippling, green-blue. During plan-
etary night the dome was so dark that I could 
stand and watch the faint phosphorescence of 
passing creatures, like slow comets crossing my 
personal sky. 
Aximili, you have to decide, I told myself. 
I could stay in the dome and wait, a week, a 
month, a year till the Earthers or the Yeerks spot-
ted me. 
Or I could venture out of the dome. I had the 
morphing power. If I could acquire one of these 
passing creatures I could leave, reach some 
shore, demorph, and look to make a life among 
the aliens. 
<You have to decide. Stay or go. Wait or 
leave.> 
I did not want to be afraid. But I was, I had to 
admit that. The morphing power is only good for 
two hours at a time. More than that and you are 
trapped. How far was the shore? How hostile 
were the inhabitants? Could I hope to survive? 
The Earthers might be savages. There might be 
diseases. Predators. 
And there was the very real possibility that 
the Yeerks were already there in force. 
You have to decide, I told myself again. But 
not yet. 
I headed back toward the target. I stopped 
still and stared. The head was back in place. 
Hadn't I . . . 
I had. I had seen the head fall. Impossible. 
Decide soon, I told myself. The isolation is 
having psychological effects. 
37 
36 

D A V 
T W E N T Y - O N E 
Line up on the cue ball, then draw the line 
back through your cue, and forward through the 
ball you're trying to hit, then on to the pocket, 
right?" 
He said "right?" a lot. 
"It's all about angles. Pool is geometry. A se-
ries of collisions, all at precise angles." 
His name was Bill. He was a high-school guy, 
older than me, obviously. He was my "guide." 
That's what they call it. When you attend your 
second meeting of The Sharing they assign you a 
guide. Someone to answer your questions, some-
one to hang with you, talk to you. 
At first I thought it was some kind of pity 
38 
thing. You know, that Tobias kid is such a loser 
we better put someone with him. 
But everyone gets a guide at their second 
meeting. A guide is a full member of The Shar-
ing. I'm still not sure what that means, a "full 
member." Bill is a little vague about it. 
What he's not vague about is pool. They have 
two tables in the back of the meeting hall. He 
has his favorite. 
I gripped the cue. Aimed. Tried to see the an-
gles. Tried to see the impacts: cue tip on cue ball, 
cue ball on seven ball, seven ball on bumper. 
"Okay, now relax into it," Bill said. "You want 
to aim like your life depended on it, then relax 
like it doesn't really matter, and let your shoulder 
and arm and hand and eye all work together." 
I tried to relax. 
Thock! 
The cue ball rolled, hit the seven ball that hit 
the bumper and then curved away from the 
pocket. 
"Sorry," I said. 
"What do you mean, sorry? You were off by 
two percent, maybe. You're getting better. You 
have an eye for this. You can think in three di-
mensions. That's good. You wait, when you be-
come a full member you'll be thinking in four 
dimensions. Five. N-dimensional space." 
39 

I had no idea what he was talking about, but 
I felt my face redden. Pleasure. His compliment 
may have been sincere or not. I wasn't sure, but 
I'd take it for what it was worth. There hadn't 
been all that many compliments in my life. 
"Take the next shot," he said. "I want to see 
how you handle it." 
The assumption that I would someday be-
come a full member of The Sharing, that was 
strange. I'd only attended two meetings. The first 
time I just kind of wandered around lost, feeling 
like a dork. I filled out some form with my name 
and address and social security number and all. 
The form asked me some personal questions, 
too. Nothing too personal, but enough to make 
me uneasy. 
But at the same time, even while I was feel-
ing lost, no one made me feel bad. They were 
kind of welcoming, like me showing up was a 
cool thing. They didn't press me, didn't try to sell 
me anything, just kind of let me hang out, watch 
some kids playing video games, watch other 
older guys playing basketball out back of the 
building on a half-court. 
When the first meeting was over this guy, this 
college guy or whatever, came up and shook my 
hand and asked me personally to come back. 
I was back. And now I had Bill teaching me to 
shoot pool. 
40 
I snapped the shot. Cue hit cue ball, hit ball, 
hit bumper. My ball rolled into the pocket. 
"Ah!" I yelled, way too excited. 
Bill clapped his hand on my back and gave 
my shoulder a squeeze. "Cool! Good job, Tobias. 
That was not an easy shot." 
We played pool some more till at last some 
other guys came up and jokingly demanded the 
table. 
"No problem," Bill said. "My boy Tobias here 
is getting too good for me already." 
It wasn't true. But I was better. 
"I never played pool before," I said. 
"Well, each of us has talents and abilities 
hidden within us," Bill said. "Who knows what 
you can do, Tobias? Have you ever had a chance 
to find out? That's what The Sharing is all about, 
man. The whole point is we all help each other to 
become the best people we can become." 
I wanted to ask, "Why?" Why would any bunch 
of people want to get together to help me play 
pool, or whatever? I mean, what did they get out of 
it? 
But that was just me being cynical. That was 
me thinking the whole world was like my uncle. 
It was possible that some people were just nice, 
right? 
There was a chime. A ringing bell, not too 
loud, but insistent. 
41 

Bill groaned. "Time for the 'sit down,'" he 
said. 
"What's a sit down?" 
"That's just what I call it. Every couple of 
meetings or so they have us all get together, talk 
to us about stuff." 
"Like what?" 
"You know, like the purpose of The Sharing, 
and our philosophy and all." He winced. "I 
shouldn't complain. I mean, The Sharing has to-
tally turned my life around." 
"Yeah?" 
"Yeah." 
"Like how?" 
He shrugged and started us toward the main 
meeting room. "I used to be messed up, man. My 
folks had a really bad divorce, you know? It was 
this total mess. Fighting and yelling and lawyers 
trying to drag me and my sister one way or the 
other. Sick." 
I nodded like I understood. 
"Anyway, I got kind of weird up behind all 
that. Depressed or whatever. Thinking maybe I 
didn't want to go on living. But The Sharing took 
me out of all that." 
"Yeah?" 
He spread his hands wide and smiled. "Not 
depressed anymore, right? I'm moving on. Deal-
42 
ing with it. Now I have my own plan for the fu-
ture, you know? Get past all the stuff, get on with 
my own life, right?" 
"Right." 
We sat down on folding chairs. There must 
have been about forty or fifty people there. Kids, 
older people, white and black and Asian. People 
in expensive clothes and people more like me. 
Cool kids, nerds, jocks. All sitting together, talk-
ing, like age or race or whatever didn't matter. 
I spotted someone I hadn't noticed before. 
Jake. He was sitting two aisles up, next to his 
brother Tom. 
I was surprised. "That guy up there," I 
pointed. "Is he a member?" 
"Who, Tom? Yeah, Tom is a very senior full 
member." 
I hadn't been talking about Tom, but the in-
formation surprised me. "You mean like a senior 
kid member?" 
Bill smiled. "There's no such thing as old or 
young, not in The Sharing. We don't draw lines 
like that." 
I watched the back of Jake's head as a 
speaker mounted two steps to a low stage. I 
watched him as the speaker talked to us about 
how the lonely individual in society had been 
overemphasized in our culture. There was no true 
43 

achievement unless you were part of something 
greater. You had to serve in order to achieve. You 
had to join with a larger reality. 
"That's why we are called The Sharing," the 
speaker said. "Together we achieve happiness, ful-
fillment, meaning. Together, holding each other 
up, supporting each other, working together to 
overcome individual weakness, individual failing 
and pain and hurt." 
It sounded good, I guess. I kept watching 
Jake. I don't know why. 
I don't think he knew I was there. 
I guess it was pathetic but I thought that if he 
was a member and I was a member, somehow, 
someway, stupid thought, lame idea, but some-
how I could become him. And not me. Have his 
life, and not mine. 
44 
£ 
L. TT TT"P T t . f\ 
t J 
D A Y 
T W E N T Y - F O U R 
You know, you should go out with me," I 
said. 
For a full five seconds Rachel didn't say any-
thing. She just sort of narrowed her eyes and 
stared straight ahead. 
I grinned. She was trapped. Couldn't get away. 
We were on a field trip to the natural history mu-
seum. We'd already looked at the big stuffed ele-
phant. We'd looked at the diorama showing early 
man cooking barbecue out with the lions. We'd 
gaped up at the suspended fiberglass whales. 
Now we were in the theater where they were 
about to show us an I MAX film entitled DNA: Mir-
acle Molecule. Or some such thing. It was nar-
rated by Paul Shaffer, from Letterman. Weird. 
45 

The screen was about the size of an old drive-in 
theater's screen, but it was so close I could prac-
tically reach out and touch it. 
So, anyway, we were in the seats next to each 
other, me and Rachel. Beside her was one of her 
friends, Melissa Chapman, daughter of the vice 
principal. The theater was totally full. Rachel 
was trapped. 
"I don't think so," she said at last. 
"Is it because I'm roughly three feet shorter 
than you?" 
No answer. Stoic stare. 
"Is it that you think I'm cuter than you?" 
"Yeah, that would be it." 
On-screen Paul Shaffer was saying, "DNA is a 
fabulous molecule." 
An electron microscope slide appeared, show-
ing a DNA molecule as long as a train. 
"You know, girls love a guy with a sense of hu-
mor." 
"Yeah. If he's Leonardo DiCaprio. Adam San-
dler, not so much." 
Despite myself, I laughed. She could throw it 
back at me. I liked that. 
"Still, we should go out. Do a movie. Eat some 
burgers. I could make you laugh." 
"Actually, I think the mere memory of that sug-
gestion will supply me with plenty of laughter." 
46 
She was fast. Sharper than I thought. I'd al-
ways assumed she was just this total babe. But 
she was cool. Funny. 
Wow. Fantastic looks and she was funny? How 
often does that happen? 
"You know, I could supply references, Rachel. 
Plenty of females have enjoyed the company of 
Marco the Magnificent." 
"Females? What species?" 
I barked out a laugh and got a loud "shush" 
from a row back. I guess someone back there 
really cared what was happening to the five-story 
green-and-red amoeba pulsating behind Paul's 
bald head. 
I shot a look at Rachel. Was that a faint 
shadow of a tiny, possibly imaginary smile I saw 
on her perfect lips? Or was it just a trick of the 
amoeba light? 
I fell silent. Wait. Wait. 
"Paul never gets credit for being as funny as 
he is," she said. 
Hah! She was enjoying talking to me. She 
started it up again. Hah! Well, well, well. 
What would Jake say if I started going out 
with his cousin? He was my best friend. Had 
been forever. He'd always been there for me. He 
was the one guy in the world I could absolutely 
count on. 
47 

So if he didn't approve of me and Rachel, 
hey, it would make me real sad to say "Bye-bye, 
Jake." 
Hah! She liked me. Or at least my sense of 
humor. No problem-o. 
Then . . . 
Paul Shaffer's head flickered and melted, 
erupting in brown goo that merged with what I 
believe was an invertebrate. 
"Awwww, man\" 
The film had caught and burned. The house-
lights came up. 
"Now we'll never know what happened," I 
complained. "Did Dave ever make a cameo ap-
pearance? Or at least Bif Henderson?" 
We all stood up. The kids all managed to con-
trol their disappointment. We filed outside, out 
into the brighter light of the museum proper. I 
had to struggle to stay up with Rachel. Somehow, 
and don't ask me to explain it, she had an abil-
ity to move easily and quickly through a crowd 
without ever touching anyone, or being touched 
in return. Like she was surrounded by a force 
field. 
But I stayed up with her. And by amazingly 
good luck Melissa made a girls' room run. By her-
self. Without Rachel. Which is not something you 
see very often, a pretty girl left vulnerable with-
48 
out some member of her girl gang around to fend 
off losers. 
"So. What do you think?" I asked Rachel. Up 
close it was hard to ignore the fact that I was 
looking almost directly up at her. While she was 
looking at the top of my head. 
"I think many things," she said cryptically. 
"I mean about. . . abou . . ." 
My mouth stopped moving. My throat seized 
up. I stared. Stared, heart pounding on no oxy-
gen, stared, pushed Rachel aside when she got 
in the way. 
"It's her," I said. I was aware that my voice 
had cracked. I knew I looked like an idiot. Didn't 
care. I was far away. I was in some frozen uni-
verse watching would could not possibly be. 
"Who?" Rachel snapped. 
"Mom," I whispered. 
"Your mom? So go say hi." 
I shook my head slowly, slowly coming out of 
my paralyzed trance. 
She had appeared. Simply appeared. Like 
materializing out of the air. Like she'd been 
transported down from the Star Trek universe. 
She was wearing a blond wig, but I wasn't wrong. 
It was her. 
She looked shocked, confused. Lost. Angry. 
Scared. 
49 

Then she was moving away, quickly. Heading 
for the escalator. Her back was to me. 
"My mom! My mom! I have to catch her!" 
"Your mom? Isn't she . . ." 
"Mom! Mom!" I yelled. I took off. Took off 
running like an idiot, yelling and running. 
50 
It took a great deal of patience. Days of pa-
tience. 
I waited hour after long hour, hope rising and 
falling, watching the air lock through the trans-
parent bulkhead. 
The big creatures would come toward the 
open air lock, nearer, nearer, but never all the 
way in. 
The air lock was big enough to accommodate 
four space-suited Andalites. That was its original 
function, to allow technicians to access the outer 
surface of the dome. 
The only creatures that came into the air lock 
were smaller finned creatures. These did not 
51 

seem to possess any natural weapons. Unless, 
somehow, their fins were far more formidable 
than they appeared. 
In my weeks under the alien ocean I had 
learned one thing: Earth creatures could be 
fiercely predatory. The large ate the small. 
In this environment there was not much point 
in being small and weak. I could afford to wait 
for a chance to acquire something strong. Strong 
and fast enough, I hoped, to make it safely to the 
nearest shore, wherever that might be. 
So I waited. Waited and invented names for 
the various creatures who ignored the open cave 
of the air lock. 
Big Mouth. Runny Eyes. Swimming Bird. 
And the creature I was after, Blue Blade. This 
creature seemed to be composed of triangles. 
Triangular tail, triangular fins, triangular teeth. 
Its entire body reminded me of a long, flattened 
triangle. It was blue, the blue-gray of wet steel, 
not so far different from my own color. 
Three days I had waited and waited to spring 
my trap. Not that I had anything better to do. I 
exercised. I conjured up absurd scenarios of how 
Elfangor was alive, had crash-landed among the 
aliens, and even now was forming an effective 
guerrilla organization to fight the Yeerks. If any-
one could do it, Elfangor could. 
But I knew he was dead. Knew it. 
52 
<Ah!> 
I slapped the panel. 
The door materialized. The creature was 
trapped! 
Now what? In order to acquire the creature's 
DNA I had to physically touch him. He did not 
look as if he would enjoy being touched. He had 
to be alive at the moment of acquisition. What if 
the removal of water killed him instantly? 
I instructed the air lock computer to draw off 
ninety percent of the water. This took a few min-
utes. When it was done the creature was still able 
to move, but only in two dimensions. His dorsal 
fin and part of his back were exposed to the air. 
His belly scraped the floor. 
He kept moving, restless. Afraid? Impossible 
to say. 
<Air lock computer, create a force field to 
contain the water and prevent its spilling into the 
outer chamber. Allow me to enter the air lock.> 
The computer erected a force field just three 
feet high, just enough to hold in the water and 
the creature. Above that three-foot wall of energy 
was open space. I could easily leap over. 
However, leaping back out would be harder. 
The water would be halfway up my side, sub-
merging my legs. 
I waited, watched, timed the creature's move-
ments . . . leaped! 
53 

I flew over the invisible wall, splashed into 
the water. My hooves slipped, I sagged down into 
the water, the creature whipped toward me, 
lightning quick. 
It surged at me. I stuck out my right hand and 
pressed its snout. Acquisition usually creates a 
trance in the acquired creature. Maybe it would 
work with this creature. 
Eventually. 
The monster jerked its head, broke contact, 
swam away, turned in a flash and arced toward 
me. 
Fwapp! 
I hit it, flat-bladed, on the snout. 
It turned away, but came right back. And now 
its mouth was open in a grin of triangular teeth. 
Fwapp! 
I hit it again. And jumped aside a split second 
before it could bite my front left leg. 
<Yah!> 
I leaped clear out of the pool and sprawled 
clumsily on the floor. Water drained off me. 
Blood, too. Mine. The creature had swiped my 
haunch with a fin I now realized was quite sharp. 
The creature was fast. Aggressive. Not easily 
discouraged. Perfect for my purpose. Assuming I 
lived long enough to worry about my purpose. 
<Computer, form a force field that will con-
54 
strict the creature into a narrow rectangular 
space.> 
The water receded from both side walls. The 
creature slammed into the force-field, retreated. 
Tried to turn and suddenly could not. 
The Blue Blade was now held within what 
amounted to a very narrow tank. There was dry 
floor on either side of him. 
<You might have thought of this earlier, Ax-
imili,> I chided myself. I had long since ac-
cepted the notion of solipsistic conversation. It 
was part of a general psychological decay. On at 
least three occasions I had seen things that were 
almost certainly not real. Either that or the struc-
ture of time itself was different on Earth. 
I jumped into the dry space. The creature lay 
sullen, the vertical gashes behind his mouth 
worked, open, close, open, close. The one eye on 
this side glared at me. 
I reached and touched the creature's skin. I 
pulled away surprised. It was rough-textured. I 
could have abraded the skin from my hand. 
I touched him again and focused as we are 
trained to do when acquiring DNA. 
Sharp teeth, sharp fins, speed, aggression, 
and armored skin — I didn't know how danger-
ous Earth's oceans might be, but I felt this crea-
ture would be safe in them. 
55 

IL don't know why I ran after Marco, but I 
did. 
He was chasing a woman who he couldn't 
possibly be chasing. Maybe I wanted to help him. 
But that's not what it felt like. It felt like . . . I 
don't know, like I liked chasing someone. 
That's dumb but it may be the truth. 
He raced down the escalator, trying to shove 
past people. I raced down the steps that paral-
leled the escalator. I hit the floor first. 
"There!" he pointed. 
I saw a blond woman fast-walking away 
through the crowd. A woman pushed a stroller 
into her path. Marco's ghost shoved the stroller 
aside and kept moving. 
56 
Marco and I pounded after her. No question 
now, she was running away from us. She was the 
antelope and we were the wolves. 
Of course maybe that's why she was running. 
Many people would find it disturbing to be 
chased by a couple of demented teenagers. 
In the main foyer she broke into a flat-out run 
hampered only by the fact that she was punching 
numbers into her cell phone. 
She had maybe a hundred-foot lead. No way 
some thirty-something mommy was going to out-
run me. She ran for the revolving door. 
"Hey!" 
A man slammed into the glass. She'd knocked 
him aside. 
She was slow getting through the revolving 
door. Stupid, I told myself. She shouldn't have 
taken the revolving door. Now we've got her. 
Marco and I reached the revolving door while 
she was still inside it, just exiting. Marco jumped 
into the next open section. That's when the 
woman yanked hard back on the door, spun it 
backward, caught Marco off balance and nailed 
him in the face with the brass push-bar. 
Marco sat down hard. He grabbed his face. 
Blood leaked through his interlocked fingers. 
"Hey! You okay?" I yelled to him. 
"After her! Stay on her!" he yelled and 
scrambled to his feet. 
57 

All right, I told myself. The boy can focus. 
I went through a side door. There were stone 
steps, about a dozen, two hundred feet wide, 
heading down to the busy street. 
Business people bustling on the sidewalk 
below. People coming up and down the steps. 
Groups. Individuals. 
No blond woman. 
She couldn't have gotten away. No way. Not 
enough time. She was here, here in view, one of 
the three or four dozen bodies in motion. 
Wig. It was a wig. The realization came to me 
in a flash. Marco raced up, stopped, panting be-
side me. 
"She has dark hair," he gasped. 
"I guessed that." 
He looked back and forth. "I don't see her." 
"Has to be here." 
"Look for whatever she wouldn't be doing," 
he said. "Should be alone, should be going down 
the steps, look for the opposite." 
I nodded. Yeah, he was right. He was upset, 
he was desperate, he thought he was chasing his 
dead mother, and he still figured that out. Maybe 
I would go out with him. The little guy had a 
brain in there. 
"There!" I yelled. 
She was brunette now, moving with a slow 
group of old people coming up the stairs. 
58 
For a split second I met her gaze. Rage. Fury. 
I hesitated a split second. But a split second 
later, my own anger answered hers. 
You don't scare me, lady. 
The wolves were on the scent again. The ante-
lope ran. Onto the sidewalk, shoving, slamming, 
barreling through businessmen and -women and 
UPS drivers and hot dog vendors and bike mes-
sengers. 
We raced along the facade of the museum. 
She turned a hard right, straight out into traffic. 
Give the lady points. She didn't scare easy. 
Yellow cabs screeched. Drivers cursed. Fin-
gers were thrust skyward. 
She ran, we chased, and we gained. 
She ducked into an alleyway. Now we had her. 
The crowds were her cover. She'd be alone. 
I turned the corner first, Marco inches behind 
me. Dumpsters and overflowing trash cans. A 
pile of empty bottles all in racks. 
She was not in sight. Only two places she 
could be. Behind the Dumpster. Or behind the 
stack of bottles. 
I looked at Marco. We reached unspoken 
agreement. He walked softly, sneakers squishing 
in filth, toward the Dumpster. 
"Lookout!" 
The tower of bottles tipped. 
CRASH! 
59 

Wham! 
Something hit the side of my face. Hard. My 
eyes rolled in different directions. Tears blurred 
my vision. A dark shape, moving fast right for 
me. A bottle in her hand. 
Swing! 
I ducked, kicked instinctively, and caught 
yielding flesh. My vision was clearing but I was 
still wobbly. 
She was down on her butt. 
She slammed the bottle down on the ground. 
It shattered, leaving her holding a broken bottle, 
all jagged, ripping edges. 
A deadly weapon. 
I backed up, heard Marco yell, "Get your 
hands off me!" 
Someone had him. A man. A large man. 
This was going very bad very quickly. 
I spun, a nice pirouette. Much easier on the 
ground than on the balance beam. 
I snatched up a bottle and nailed the elbow of 
the man holding Marco. 
"Ah!" 
Marco slipped free. 
"RUN!" I yelled and yanked him with me. 
We ran. Back toward the street. But suddenly 
two new figures loomed in our path. 
The cell phone. The woman had called 
fin 
for help. Even then some part of my scared, 
adrenaline-saturated brain wondered what kind 
of woman could make a call and have tough guys 
showing up within seconds. 
"Back!" 
We turned. Trapped. Two big guys behind us. 
One guy with a sore elbow and Marco's mother 
ahead of us. 
Think fast, Rachel. I slid the toe of my shoe 
under one of the bottles and flipped it up at the 
woman. She flinched and we shoved past her. 
Great. Now all four of them were behind us. 
And I didn't see any way out of the alley. 
Straight ahead a blank wall. The alley turned 
right. We turned right, scrabbling and panting 
and now very seriously scared. 
Dead end! 
Walls. Walls. Walls. 
I tried a door. Locked. Marco tried another. 
Locked. 
Overhead, a fire escape, the kind that lowers 
on springs when a person is descending. It was 
drawn up, hanging in midair. Seven feet up? 
The three men turned the corner. The woman 
was gone. I had a feeling it didn't matter. The 
men looked very serious. Determined. 
I stopped short of the tantalizing fire escape. 
"Marco! Stand right there!" I pointed at a spot 
e i 

on the ground, ten feet away from the fire es-
cape. 
I raced over to stand beneath the black-
painted wrought iron. Turned, cupped my hands 
together below my waist. 
"Are you crazy?" Marco demanded. 
"You have a better idea?" 
"Ahhhhhh!" Marco yelled and ran straight at 
me. Jumped, seated his foot in my cupped 
hands. I heaved up, timing the movement to use 
his momentum. 
Up he went. Not far. Just enough. He grabbed 
the bottom of the fire escape, drew it down with 
his weight. The thing screeched with the strain of 
rusted metal on rusted metal. 
I caught it before it hit the ground and we 
blew up the stairs, crowding each other, frantic. 
The springs lifted up.the stairs after us out of 
reach of our pursuers, but we weren't going to 
stop and toss off any clever comic book, "Take 
that, villain!" lines. 
We were going to climb till we ran out of 
stairs. 
Three stories. 
BLAM! BLAM! 
At first I couldn't figure it out. What was that 
incredibly loud noise? 
BLAM! BLAM! 
"They're shooting at us!" I yelled in outrage. 
62 
"Yeah. RUN!" 
We topped the fire escape and tumbled over 
the parapet onto the roof just as something really 
disturbing happened. 
The men stopped firing guns. 
They started firing lasers. 
63 

I stood in the empty air lock. The Blue 
Blade was long gone. It was time for me to be 
long gone, too. I considered waiting. But I was 
waiting for nothing, and I knew it. 
More waiting would just be cowardice. No one 
was coming to rescue me. 
I was frightened. There is nothing wrong with 
admitting that. A warrior who is not afraid when 
he goes toward danger is a fool. Fear is the reflex 
that keeps us alive. 
I focused on the image of the Blue Blade. 
Tried to see it in every detail. It was not difficult. 
I had spent quite a while observing it. 
I focused and I began to change. 
64 
My four legs dwindled swiftly. They melted up 
into my body. The floor rushed up toward me. 
Suddenly my stalk eyes went dark. I could 
only see directly ahead of me. 
<No!> 
I reversed morph. Demorphed. A momentary 
panic, that was all. I had felt suddenly blind. The 
three-dimensional world had gone flat. 
Stupid. I was annoyed with myself. Obviously 
the creature I was to morph had only two eyes. I 
should have been prepared. 
I took a last look around. Through the trans-
parent wall into the dome, at the familiar trees, 
at the grass that had nurtured me. I might never 
return. I might never again stand on any part of 
Andalite soil. 
No point in being sentimental, I told myself. 
You are a warrior now. 
Unprepared, yes. Without a prince or a mis-
sion. Too bad. That was how it was. I was alone 
on an alien world that might be infested with 
Yeerks. And would, most likely, offer me no vi-
able means of returning to my home world. 
A movement. Something out past the door, 
past the shell of the dome in the ocean itself. It 
was distorted by the lenses of water and plex. 
Distorted, warping in the filtered green sun-
light. 
65 

Bug fighter! 
The shock knocked the wind out of me. Bug 
fighter! Yeerks! They had found me. They were 
here. Coming. Yeerks! 
I fought the instinct to run back into the 
dome. NO. That is where they would kill me. 
Without shields up, with nothing but a weak force 
field it would be child's play to blow holes through 
the dome and drown the trees, the grass, and any-
thing else that required air. 
Morph. Morph. It was the only way. And 
quickly. 
My ears flattened against my skull and melted 
away. My arms slid down the length of my torso, 
hands flattening, stiffening, sharpening, till they 
formed matched fins. 
Following my orders the computer was filling 
the air lock with water. Cold. 
Hurry! 
I was almost on my belly. My four hooves 
remained, absurd remnants. Then, they, too, 
disappeared and I was a growing, elongating 
cylinder. 
My upper body tilted down, coming into line 
with the cylinder. My tail blade split in two, form-
ing an upper and lower triangle. 
My nostrils drifted across the fluid surface of 
my face, seemed to crawl across liquefied flesh 
to stop just behind my stalk eyes, which had, 
66 
themselves, slid down to opposite sides of my 
head. 
I heard the sickening slurp and slush of inter-
nal organs reforming, relocating, disappearing 
altogether, being replaced by more primitive 
structures. 
My fur that had been melting wax now hard-
ened and congealed, forming the stiff, abrasive 
skin of the Blue Blade. 
Faster! Hurry! It was taking too long. The 
Yeerks would see the air lock opening. They 
would see me emerge. 
I was almost complete. Only one change re-
mained, and it came last. 
My face split open horizontally. A gash. An 
open wound. Muscles attached themselves to 
jaw bones. And from those jaw bones grew teeth. 
How many? Too many to easily count. 
The mouth, my mouth opened, shut. Opened, 
shut again with sudden, savage force. 
And then, one last thing. One last change, 
one last gift from the Blue Blade. 
Instinct. The mind that went with the mouth. 
The hatch opened. I swam out into the un-
bounded ocean. 
My ocean. 
67 

J. kicked my tail and surged into the water. 
How to describe the feeling of the creature's 
mind beneath and within my own? I sensed no 
intelligence worth noting. This seemed to me a 
creature of pure instinct. 
The Blue Blade was a creature made up of ra-
zored triangles in mind as well as body. The in-
stincts were as clean and elegant as a crystal 
dagger. 
Move. Move. Move. 
Kill. Eat. 
Move. 
And to accomplish these utterly basic ends I 
discovered a whole array of weapons that had not 
been visible from the outside. 
68 
The Blue Blade had startlingly acute senses. 
Smell. Hearing. And some new sense, something 
that seemed to be a sort of electrical field aware-
ness. It was as if every living thing near me was 
pulsing with a distinct radio emission and I was 
a receiver. 
I heard the Bug fighter. Moved away from it. 
Fear? No. It was not prey. And there would be no 
prey near it. 
A school of smaller finned creatures passed 
by, off to my right, running from the Bug fighter. 
Too small for a meal. 
I swam, swam, moved, moved, this way and 
that, casting about for a scent that would jolt my 
brain. 
WHHUUUMMMPPPPFFF! 
A noise that filled the ocean. The part of me 
that was still Andalite understood. The Yeerks 
had imploded the dome. It was filling with water, 
I could hear the bubbles erupting, the tons of 
seawater rushing in. I could hear the trees snap-
ping like twigs. 
No going back. Only forward now. 
I swam. 
Sounds behind me. Pursuit. Meaningless. I 
was not pursued. Nothing pursued me. I pur-
sued. 
More sounds. The Bug fighter blew past me, 
rocking me with its wake. 
69 

Tseeeeeew! 
A blast of energy that set my electrical field 
senses on fire. 
I turned. 
Tseeeeeew! 
Heat! Irrelevant. Pain! Irrelevant. 
I turned and dived. 
Tseeeeew! 
This time the Dracon beam missed by a larger 
margin. 
They fired again. Sliced part of my tail off. 
But it was an uneven fight. In the water the Bug 
fighter was slow in the turns, sluggish. I turned in 
my own body length. 
The Bug fighter dove beneath me. I rose 
toward the surface. Shadows on the bright bar-
rier of the surface. Something flying low and 
slow. 
Pah-Loosh! Pah-Loosh! 
They fell from no great height into the water 
just fifty feet away. I, the Andalite me, recog-
nized them instantly, though I had never actually 
seen one except in holographic displays at the 
academy. 
Taxxons. 
The only species ever to agree en masse to be 
infested by the Yeerks. 
They were large worms. Worms that moved on 
dozens of sharp, pointed legs set in rows down 
70 
the lengths of their bloated, vile, pulsating bod-
ies. 
I could clearly see the hungry red mouths, the 
red jelly eyes. 
When they lectured us on Taxxons at the 
academy they emphasized two things: that any 
Andalite could slaughter an endless number of 
Taxxons in direct combat. The other thing they 
emphasized was that if we fell before the Taxxons 
our fate would be horrifying. 
The Taxxons do not accept surrender. They 
eat the wounded. Even their own. 
There were six of the big worms in the water 
ahead of me. Six arrayed in battle formation 
against one of me. 
I attacked. I raced for the nearest one. The 
Blue Blade sliced through the water, rolled onto 
its side, opened its mouth, and dug triangular 
teeth into too-yielding flesh. 
I ripped a two-foot hole in the worm. 
"Sreeeeeyah!" 
Taxxon blood and organs and bile billowed in 
the water. Air bubbles seeped from its mouth. 
A second Taxxon. Chomp! 
A third, a fourth, more, more, more! I was 
mad with killing rage, slashing, darting, flailing 
like an insane thing, hitting, biting, ripping, tear-
ing. 
Out of control! 
71 

The morph had taken over. The creature was 
directing the action. No, that made it sound as if 
it was thinking. It thought nothing. Even its low 
level of intelligence was wiped away, erased by a 
screaming, demanding urge to massacre any-
thing it could reach. 
Six Taxxons were in pieces, floating. 
More were dropping into the water, but these 
new arrivals saw what was happening and swam 
directly away from me. 
No more targets! Nothing left to kill. 
I flailed at nothing, bit and slashed the empty 
water. I would have bitten myself if I could. 
And then, suddenly, it was over. 
The madness gone, replaced by ice-cold in-
difference. 
I swam away. My Andalite mind regained con-
trol. For now. 
My first battle. Six Taxxons. And I had learned 
one thing: If the rest of Earth's species were any-
thing like this Blue Blade, the Yeerks had picked 
the wrong planet. 
72 
D A Y 
T H I R T Y - O N E 
Aren't you coming?" 
I shrugged. Tom was framed in my bedroom 
door. He looks a lot like me; at least that's what 
people say. They always say they can tell we're 
brothers. 
"I wasn't going to," I said. I pointed at the 
books on my desk. "Homework." 
He looked disappointed. "Oh, man, that's too 
bad, man. I figured you'd be there. There's some 
people I wanted you to meet. One of the high-up 
guys in The Sharing is coming." 
"Yeah?" I said, trying to sound interested. 
"Mr. Visser himself." 
I had a sudden mental image . . . a vision, al-
most. Strange. A picture that had popped into 
73 

my head. A head without a mouth. Eyes on some-
thing like snail stalks. 
Whoa. Then it was gone. "Weird name," I 
said. 
"Yeah, well, he's an unusual guy. But very 
smart. Very cool. Look, who's the homework for? 
Old Lady Hanna?" 
I smiled, despite myself. "Yeah. For Ms. 
Hanna." 
"Tell you what, you come to the meeting with 
me tonight, I'll guarantee Old Lady Hanna will 
give you an 'A.' " 
"Say what?" 
He shrugged. "She's a member, little brother." 
"That doesn't mean she'll let me blow off 
homework," I said. 
Tom considered for a moment. He blinked 
and kind of looked away, almost like he was em-
barrassed. "No. I don't want you thinking that," 
he admitted. "Tell you what, though, come to the 
meeting and I'll help you do the homework when 
we get home." 
Strange having Tom ask me for anything. It 
was like he was pressuring me. Maybe he was 
nervous himself and wanted me around as his se-
curity blanket. 
"Okay," I said. I shut my book. 
The phone rang. Tom stepped into the hall-
way to grab it. 
74 
"It's your honey pie," he said. 
I flushed. I couldn't control it. I shot him a 
dark look that just made him laugh. I grabbed 
the receiver from his hand. 
"Hi." 
"It's me, Cassie." 
"Yeah? Urn, hi. What's up?" 
"I . . . I, uh, I was wondering if, I don't 
know . . . " 
In the background I heard a voice I knew. 
Rachel. "Good grief, do I have to do it for you?" 
"Do you want to study together?" Cassie 
blurted out in a rush. 
"Is Rachel there?" I asked. 
"Yes, but she'll be leaving. Sooner than she 
thinks, if she doesn't watch out." 
I sighed. On the scale of things I wanted to 
do, study with Cassie was about a nine, going to 
The Sharing was about a one. A minus one. But 
I'd already told Tom I'd do it. 
"Cassie, I really would like to but —" 
"Oh! No problem!" she said, too quickly. "I 
was just, it was only that —" 
"Cassie, there is nothing I'd rather do than 
study with you. Really. Except maybe get some 
tips from Michael Jordan. But I promised Tom I'd 
go to this stu . . ." I stopped myself. Tom could 
be right out in the hall. "This meeting." 
"A meeting?" 
75 

"Yeah. It's this thing called The Sharing." 
Silence. 
"Are you there?" 
"Yeah." 
"Is something the matter?" 
"I . . ." 
"What is it?" 
"I don't know," she said. She sounded con-
fused. Worried. "I don't know. I really don't." 
I relaxed a little. Not much. "You know, 
maybe you're just upset over this thing with 
Rachel and Marco." 
"Over them going out?" 
"No, over the whole thing that happened with 
them. You know, Marco thinking he saw his mom 
and all. The guys with the guns." 
"The what?" 
I slapped my forehead. "Rachel didn't tell 
you?" 
"Tell me what?" Cassie demanded. Then, ob-
viously to Rachel, "Whatdidn't Rachel tell me?" 
"I thought you'd get all worried," Rachel said 
in the background. 
"Sorry," I said. "Marco hasn't shut up about 
it, and I just assumed Rachel told you." 
"Jake, I have to go and cause Rachel serious 
bodily pain." 
"I understand. Listen, Cassie, how about to-
morrow night? I mean, for studying together." 
76 
"That would be great." 
"Yeah." 
"Yeah." 
"Go kill Rachel now." 
I stepped back out into the hall and hung up 
the phone. Cool. Cassie, tomorrow night. My in-
sides were churning. Oh, man, what was I going 
to talk about with her? 
Maybe we could talk about why Rachel would 
keep something secret that Marco wouldn't stop 
bringing up. 
And maybe we could talk about why Cassie 
got weird when I said the words, "The Sharing." 
77 

i was used to the place now. I felt comfort-
able there. Weird feeling. Weird to be comfort-
able. 
I'd been to several meetings of The Sharing. 
Once some new kids started teasing me, but the 
real members shut them down fast. 
No one gave me any grief at The Sharing. 
They acted like I was an equal. Like I belonged. 
Or at least like I could belong. 
Tonight was the night. I had to decide. Join or 
not. Become a full member or stop coming. 
It wasn't that hard a decision for me. What 
else did I have going on? Where else was I going 
to go? 
And there was another factor. 
78 
Two days ago I'd run into Andy and Tap-Tap 
again. In the gym locker room. There were maybe 
two dozen other kids in there, so I'd figured I was 
safe even though this wasn't my regular class 
and I was only there because I'd missed gym two 
days in a row. I figured wrong. 
They started to stuff me into one of the taller 
lockers the football team uses. I was yelling, kids 
were laughing. Not just Andy and Tap-Tap. It was 
like every kid in there wanted to see me get hu-
miliated. 
Then these guys, these two ordinary kids I'd 
seen at The Sharing, came over. I didn't even 
know their names. I still don't. 
One guy said, "Hey, let him go." 
Andy stopped stuffing my face back with his 
hand. "Are you talking to me?" 
"Let him go." 
These two Sharing guys didn't have Jake's 
easy ability to convince people they were serious. 
But they were determined. The other guy walked 
over to a weight rack. He picked up about a 
twenty-pound weight and carried it back to Andy. 
"Let him go, or I'll bury this weight in your 
head." 
Andy blinked. Tap-Tap giggled. 
Class was changing. New kids were arriving. 
One of them was Sharing, too. He didn't even ask 
what was going on. He just moved in beside his 
79 

two friends. Now it was three of them against 
Andy and Tap-Tap. 
They let me go. 
My rescuers didn't even hang around long 
enough for me to say thanks. 
They'd made their point. That's what it meant 
to be Sharing, not throwing your weight around or 
anything like some gang or whatever, just the 
knowledge that there were people backing you 
up. Looking out for you. 
Bill was still my advisor. Only now I was beat-
ing him at pool. 
"I'm going to do it," I said to him. Then I 
nailed the four ball. 
"Do what? Kick my butt by running the table?" 
I laughed. "No. I want to join. I want to be a 
full member." 
He put down his cue, came over, and gave me 
a sort of arm's-length hug. He held me out to get 
a good look at me. 
"That's cool, Tobias." 
"Yeah," I said. I was feeling kind of embar-
rassed. 
"Now, you know this is a big step, right? I 
mean, we want you to join. We all want you to be 
a full member. But there are responsibilities that 
go along with it. It's not just games and fun all 
the time." 
80 
I nodded. "I know. Some Sharing guys saved 
my rear end the other day. I know what it's about." 
"The individual has to give up something to 
get something in return," he said. 
"Yeah. I know. I've been listening to the 
speeches and all." 
"You trade a little bit of freedom for a lot of 
belonging to something bigger than yourself." He 
moved closer and lowered his voice to a conspir-
atorial whisper. "Bigger than you can imagine." 
I felt wary. What was he talking about? 
"A full member of The Sharing is a special 
person," Bill said. "A rare and special person." 
He waved his arm around at the room full of kids 
and adults. "This is just the surface, Tobias. We 
are about bigger things. We are going to make 
this a better world." 
"Yeah?" 
"Yeah. Change is coming, Tobias. And you'll 
be part of it. You have no idea. You think you're 
just some kid, some kid going to school. You 
have no idea of the untapped potential deep in-
side yourself. You have no idea what you can be-
come. What you can accomplish." 
I nodded like I had some clue. I didn't. But it 
excited me. Scared me, too, a little. But there 
was something about The Sharing they don't tell 
you right at first: You have a few weeks, a month 
81 

even, but then you have to choose. You can stay 
and be a full member, or you have to leave. 
Leave The Sharing. And do what? Go back to 
my lovely life? 
I spotted Jake. He came in with Tom. Tom 
gets a lot of respect at the meetings. Even adults 
are respectful to him. 
I caught Jake's eye. He came over to see me. 
Cool. For once I wasn't running to him like a lit-
tle puppy dog. He was coming to see me. 
"What's up, Tobias?" 
I shrugged. "Nothing much. Except I guess 
tonight is the big night for me." 
"Yeah? Why's that?" 
"I'm going to become a full member." 
He looked at me kind of sideways. "Congratu-
lations, I guess, right?" 
"Sure. You should do it, too." 
"Uh-huh. That's what Tom keeps telling me." 
"So why don't you?" I asked. 
He looked uncomfortable. "I don't know. I 
guess it's just not my thing." 
"Oh, you're too cool?" 
He looked sharply at me. "I wasn't trying to 
offend you, man." 
"You didn't offend me," I said, sounding of-
fended. "Not at all. I'm just curious. Why don't 
you want to join? Tom's a member, so it's not like 
it's just for losers like me." 
82 
That came out much harsher and more pa-
thetic than I'd intended. 
"Tobias, you're not a loser," he said. 
Which just made it worse. It's bad enough be-
ing a loser. You don't want the winners like Jake 
feeling sorry for you. 
"Hey, join or not, no problem," I said. 
"It's j u s t . . . " He looked down at the floor, 
then over at Tom who was shaking hands and 
laughing with a group of guys and girls. "I don't 
know. People start talking about how the individ-
ual has to give way to the group, I just, I don't 
know. I get kind of. . . jumpy. Besides, how can 
I join any organization where Mr. Chapman is a 
member?" 
He meant that last part as a joke. But I didn't 
want to laugh. "Don't you want to be a part of 
something big and important?" 
He shook his head very slightly. "No. I don't 
want to be 'a part.' Maybe it's just me. Maybe it's 
just my own mental block. But anytime someone 
starts talking that stuff, I start looking for the exit 
door." 
"You're a part of lots of things, Jake," I said. 
"You're part of a team. You're part of your coun-
try." 
He nodded. "No, I didn't make the team," he 
said darkly. He forced a happy face. "Hey, I'm 
just down because of this conversation I had. 
83 

Cassie. Kind of bothered me somehow. Not your 
problem, though. So how about I say congratula-
tions, and wish you luck and all." 
"Okay. Cool." 
"Yeah." 
84 
There were four of us slated to become full 
members. There was a police officer named Ed-
ward. There was a newspaper reporter named 
Kiko. There was a guy who managed local bands. 
His name was Barry. 
And then, there was me. 
Why me? The question was impossible to 
avoid. How did I fit into this group? Was it really 
true that The Sharing didn't care if you were young 
or old, male, female, black, white, Asian, Chris-
tian, Jew, Muslim, Buddhist, atheist, straight, gay, 
rich, or poor? 
I mean, that's what they said. But lots of 
people say that. They don't always mean it. 
85 

Mostly people look for ways to treat other people 
like dirt. 
They put us in a small room, dimly lit. Like a 
dentist's waiting room only with mood lighting 
and no magazines. There was the door we came 
in. And a door that hadn't opened yet. 
I looked at the others. Edward and Kiko paid 
no attention to me. Barry nodded. They must have 
been wondering what some kid was doing there. 
Adults have an automatic prejudice against kids. 
They never take kids seriously, even when they 
pretend to. At least that's my experience. 
I said hi to Barry. 
"Hi, kid. What's your name?" 
"Tobias." 
"Good name. You like music?" 
"Sure." 
"Ever hear of Format Cee's Colon?" 
I shook my head. He looked disappointed. 
"Yeah, well, you will. Next big thing. You heard it 
here, first. They just need a break. We've got a 
video, but we can't get any play on MTV." 
I nodded like I cared. "I guess you need that, 
huh?" 
"Absolutely. They say they can help." 
"Who?" 
"The Sharing. Who else?" 
"Ah." 
86 
The door opened. The door that hadn't 
opened before. Mr. Chapman. Our vice principal 
at school. So far my meetings with Mr. Chapman 
had been in his office. Him asking me to tell him 
who had beat me up. Or who had pantsed me 
and shoved me into the girls' bathroom. And me 
refusing to tell. 
"Kiko?" Chapman said. 
She jerked to her feet. Straightened her trim 
skirt. Chapman gave me a friendly wink and led 
Kiko away. 
Barry fell silent. He was nervous. 
The policeman wasn't in uniform, but I knew 
he was a cop. My uncle has been arrested a cou-
ple of times in his life and cops are the one thing 
he really gets passionate about. He's always 
pointing them out. So I know a policeman when 
I see one. 
Basically, I figured if my uncle hated them, 
they were probably all right. It set my mind at 
ease a little seeing him there. I mean, if he was 
joining it had to be okay. Right? 
The door opened again and I jerked involun-
tarily. 
It was Bill. "Hey, switch to decaf, man," he 
joked. 
"Sorry." 
"Let's go." 
87 

I stood up. Barry gave me a nod of encour-
agement. The cop just stared blankly ahead of 
him. 
I walked through the door. 
Bill led me down a hallway. Suddenly, in the 
middle of the hallway he stopped and gave me a 
mysterious look. He pressed his hand against a 
small rectangular panel set about chest-high. 
Suddenly a door appeared. It opened on dark-
ness. 
We stepped through. Not completely dark. 
There was a red light. Metal stairs, leading down. 
I hesitated. Bill laughed. "Don't worry, it's 
just a bit of melodrama." 
Down. Not far. Three flights. To a landing, and 
another door, and another hallway. Another door. 
Open. Inside, a table. Six chairs. Chapman 
sat at the head of the table. Beside him, imperi-
ous, impatient, almost menacing, was the man 
who had spoken at the meeting earlier. Mr. 
Visser. 
Kiko sat to Chapman's right. She smiled at 
me. A weird smile. The side of her face spasmed 
suddenly, but then she was smiling again. 
In one corner was a sort of metal tub. Like 
the whirlpools the football team uses. Stainless 
steel, just big enough for one person. There was 
some sort of harness or whatever on the lip of the 
tub, and a steel chair. 
88 
"Tobias," Chapman said. 
"Yes, sir?" 
"Bill tells us that you are ready to become a 
full member of The Sharing." 
I nodded. 
"Why do you wish to join us?" 
I shrugged. "Because . . . I . . . because you 
know, what they're always talking about. What 
Mr. Visser was saying. Being part of something 
greater than myself. Part of something big." 
Chapman glanced at Mr. Visser. Nervously, I 
thought. 
Mr. Visser took a deep breath. "Is all this nec-
essary?" 
Chapman said, "Receptivity is helpful, Visser. 
There is less chance o f . . . of problems later." 
"Yes, yes, but get on with it." 
Chapman forced his features back into a pleas-
ant smile. "Are you ready, Tobias? Is this what you 
truly want?" 
What I wanted? I wanted to fly. To spread my 
wings, catch the breeze, feel my talons leave the 
branch, soar as the thermal raised me up to the 
clouds. 
What? 
Bill nudged me. "Yes," I said. 
"And you will surrender yourself to The Shar-
ing?" 
"Yes." The image had been so strong. So real. 
89 

Flying high, seeing through eyes that were like 
telescopes. 
Chapman nodded to Bill. Bill held my shoul-
ders from behind and guided me to the whirlpool 
thing. 
"Sit there," he said. 
I sat. The chair was cold. The surface of the 
liquid in the tub was still. Dark. Heavy-looking, 
as if it maybe wasn't water. 
No big deal, I told myself. Lots of organiza-
tions have weird initiations and stuff. No prob-
lem. But I felt off now. The vision, what was it? 
Some desperate fantasy? 
"Place your right hand here," Bill said. 
I placed my hand in what could only be a 
shackle. A handcuff. My insides were churning 
now. I was placing myself totally in their power. 
What was I doing? What was I doing? 
Bill fastened the cuff. 
"Now your left hand." 
No, no, this was insane. No, this was wrong. 
No. No. Handcuffs? I looked pleadingly at Mr. 
Chapman. He was the vice principal, he wouldn't 
be part of anything bad, would he? 
But Mr. Visser was in the way. It was his bored 
face I saw. 
I placed my left hand. Bill fastened the cuff. 
"Now lay your head down, sideways, in the 
harness," Bill instructed. 
90 
"What is this?" I asked. "What are you doing? 
I mean, what's going to happen?" 
"Your whole world is going to change, To-
bias," Bill said soothingly. "You will see and 
know and understand everything." 
"I don't think I . . ." I couldn't breathe. A 
voice in my head was screaming, Run! Run! My 
mind was reeling. "I think I changed my mind." 
Bill suppressed a smile. "You want to leave 
The Sharing? You want to leave all of us? All your 
friends? After all we've done for you? Okay, To-
bias. But what will you do, then? Where will you 
go? What's your future?" 
My heart was pounding. "I don't know," I said 
desperately. "I just. . . I . . ." 
"There is no 'I,' Tobias. What are you? One 
lonely, messed-up kid. No one loves you. No one 
cares. No one but us. Put your head in the har-
ness." 
I shook my head, wildly, firmly. "No. No. I 
don't want to do this." 
Bill smiled. He laughed. "Well, guess what? 
It's too late." 
He grabbed my head in his two hands and 
shoved it down. 
"No! Mr. Chapman! No!" 
Chapman got up and came over. He helped 
force me down. I was screaming, crying, yelling 
now. Helpless. My hands held firm. 
91 

"Let me go! Let me go! Let me go!" 
The harness was closed over my neck, around 
my head. I couldn't move it. I could barely move 
my mouth to beg for mercy. 
Bill and Chapman stepped back. There was a 
whirring motor somewhere close. The side of my 
head was forced down toward the surface of the 
liquid. 
"No! No! No!" 
"You see, in the end we have to use force," 
Mr. Visser said. 
"True, Visser, but we only have this problem 
in twenty-one percent of the cases of willing 
members. And there are sixty-four percent fewer 
incidents of contested control with voluntary 
hosts." 
"I know the statistics," Mr. Visser snapped. 
"Just do it. I have thirty minutes left before I 
have to demorph." 
I heard all this like it was coming from far 
away. I listened hoping to hear some note of 
mercy, some sense that maybe this was all a ter-
rible joke, a hazing, something. 
My ear touched the water. 
A moment later, something touched my ear. 
92 
l—ook, son, I just want to try and help you. 
But I can't help you if you don't talk to me." 
I had lived on the surface of planet Earth for 
several days. I had accomplished some things. I 
had observed that a species called humans were 
the dominant life-form. This had taken some 
time. 
For one thing, I wanted to guard against the 
problem of cultural prejudice. Coming from a rel-
atively large species myself, I tended naturally to 
look first to species that were of a similar size. 
I didn't want to be a victim of my own expec-
tations. So I deliberately investigated a number 
of other fairly ubiquitous species. But none of 
93 

those species possessed even rudimentary tech-
nology. 
I considered a species called cows. In places 
they were numerous. But despite their superficial 
similarity to my own species, I determined that 
they were not highly intelligent. 
"You're making this awfully hard on me. How 
can I prescribe for you if you won't even talk to 
me? I know you can communicate. You've com-
municated with other patients." 
"Yesssss," I said. "I can communicate. Cate-
uh. I can-nuh com-yew-yew-nicate. Is it not time 
for cookies?" 
In the end it became clear that my first in-
stinct was correct: Humans were the dominant 
species. 
I had acquired a human morph. And I had 
learned to pass as a human. In fact, I had been 
asked — forcefully — to adopt a particular loca-
tion as my primary residence. 
"You have to at least give me your name." 
"I am called Hey Moron. Hey! Moron-nuh!" 
The human before me closed his eyes and 
used his five-fingered hand to rub the flesh 
stretched across his forehead. Then he rubbed 
the back of his neck. Then he exhaled breath 
through his mouth. He was called Dr. Duber-
stein. Early in my stay at this location I had not 
fully understood his function. Now I did. 
94 
"That's not exactly a name. That's just some-
thing someone called you." 
"Ah. When will I receive ree-seeeve the 
cookies-zuh? They are delicious, mmm-mmm." 
"Well, to tell you the truth, the nurses don't 
want you around at cookie time. You made quite 
a scene yesterday." 
This was disturbing news. "No cookies?" 
He shook his head back and forth and looked 
at me with his two small eyes located on the front 
of his face. "No cookies." 
"Then I must go elsewhere in search of cook-
ies," I said. "The cookies formed by two thin, 
round, black discs with a layer of adhesive white 
substance between them are the finest accom-
plishment of your species!" 
"My species?" 
I had made a mistake. I had allowed my agi-
tation over the cookies to cause me to be care-
less. This was not the time to reveal myself. 
Humans use their mouths for eating — much 
as the Blue Blade — which I learned the humans 
call a shark. But humans possess an incredible 
sense that goes beyond anything the shark could 
boast: taste. 
Taste! And such tastes! Cigarette butts, 
baloney sandwiches, grape juice, Vaseline, and 
best of all, the indescribably vibrant, mind-
altering, overwhelming taste of cookies! 
95 

Especially the cookies formed by two thin, 
round, black discs with a layer of adhesive white 
substance between. Someday I hope my fellow 
Andalites will be able to visit Earth and morph to 
human simply for the intense pleasure to be had 
from eating cookies with a mouth. 
"I meant our species." 
"You said your species." 
"Evidently I am insane. May I go now?" 
The human raised his hands vertically and 
said, "Why me, Lord? Why?" 
I left the small room and went back out into 
the larger room where numerous humans wan-
dered back and forth holding discussions using 
mouth-sounds. At first I had assumed that these 
discussions were being transmitted by some sort 
of very small communications link since they 
were addressed to persons who were not in evi-
dence. 
Later I understood this, as well. 
The humans had various names. Two of them 
were named Elvis Presley. One was named John. 
He was the one who had first witnessed me de-
morphing. 
It was an accident. I'd hidden within a small 
enclosed area used for voiding biological wastes. 
But John had caught me. He had seen me in my 
natural state. 
96 
He had seemed unsurprised. 
John told one of the nurses that I was an alien. 
And for a moment I was quite concerned. But the 
nurse seemed bored by this fact. And it seems 
that many of the residents of this particular 
group habitation are aliens. 
It took me several days before it occurred to 
me that the humans in this group were not en-
tirely like the broader spectrum of humans. They 
suffered from mental illnesses. But, on balance 
they seemed less aggressive and hostile than the 
humans portrayed on the two-dimensional audio-
visual display screen called a TV. 
So I stayed with them. But now, if there were 
no more cookies, I would clearly have to leave. In 
any case, it was time for me to be about my pri-
mary mission. Whatever that was. 
I waited till darkness, when the orderlies turn 
out the lights and the first Elvis Presley sings an 
awful musical composition about a place called 
Heartbreak Hotel. 
I demorphed. I used my tail blade to slice 
open the steel wire mesh that covered the win-
dows. 
I was out in Earth's night, wiser about hu-
mans, and about cookies, but no closer to finding 
an answer to Elfangor's fate. Or a way home. 
Humans lacked the technology for Zero-space 
97 

travel. Their spacecraft was laughable explosive 
devices used to propel satellites into orbit. They 
were centuries away from Z-space travel. 
Which left me just two possibilities: One was 
to hope that some Andalites survived and were 
present on Earth. 
The other possibility was only very slightly 
more likely: the Yeerks. 
Were the Yeerks on Earth? I didn't know. I 
knew that they were in orbit. I knew that they had 
located the sunken Dome ship. But were they en-
gaged in a conquest of Earth? 
And if they were, what were the odds that I 
could steal a Bug fighter and escape? 
I needed a plan. I needed to learn whether 
the Yeerks were here. But how? 
How? TV. 
I had come to understand at least some as-
pects of human technology, in particular their 
communications technology. They have tele-
phones, which communicate only the spoken 
mouth-sounds of their primary communication. 
They have an inexplicable artifact of which they 
are absurdly proud called the Internet, which is 
evidently meant to be a sort of adjunct to other, 
more effective technologies. They have books, of 
course, models of efficiency. And they have TV. 
TV is immediate, pervasive, and transmits 
sound, images, and text. 
98 
In my time at the residence for insane hu-
mans I had learned to locate structures within 
the gridwork of streets. I knew the location of a 
television studio. And I knew at what time they 
would begin a "live" broadcast of news. 
My method of discovering whether the Yeerks 
had infiltrated the human species was quite sim-
ple: Show them an Andalite. 
99 

X felt it enter my ear. 
I've never felt anything like it. It wasn't that it 
was painful. It wasn't, not really. But something 
was crawling into my ear. Into my ear. 
"No! No! No! Help me, someone help me! Mr. 
Chapman, you have to . . . Bill, help me!" 
It wasn't stopping. It kept writhing, forcing it-
self into my head. I could feel it through a numb-
ness. I could feel it inside my ear, deeper, oh 
God, in my head! 
"Let me go. I'll do anything you want. Let me 
go! Please, please:" 
Deeper. 
Then . . . 
Then I felt the first tingling sensation of a new 
100 
presence. A mind. It was . . . I didn't hear it, 
didn't see it, but it was there, there and touching 
my own thoughts. 
Suddenly my hands, which had been clenched 
in rage, relaxed. The fingers hung limp. 
I felt a chill. Cold as death. 
No. It couldn't be. 
All at once memories were spilling out. Like I 
was thinking back over my life, only I wasn't. I 
wasn't, I didn't want to. I was sitting there, 
standing, hovering, I don't know where I was, but 
I was there watching as my memories were re-
played at hyper speed, tumbling, spilling out. 
My mouth said, "I have him." 
My mouth had moved! Lips, tongue, throat, 
all had worked to form words I didn't mean to 
say. 
"Let me up, this is rather uncomfortable," my 
mouth said. 
My voice! I heard my own voice with my own 
ears but I hadn't spoken. Had I? Was I losing my 
mind? 
"Report," Mr. Visser said. 
Only he wasn't Mr. Visser. He was Visser 
Three. Not a human at all. An alien. 
Okay, this was all a dream. This was all not 
happening. None of it. Aliens called Yeerks who 
infested other species? 
Insane! I was dreaming or something. 
101 

My mouth said, "Odret-One-Seven-Seven, of 
the Culat Hesh pool. Reporting for duty." 
A Yeerk. In my brain. In my brain, scan-
ning my memories, moving my mouth, rubbing 
my chafed wrists, stretching my fear-strained 
back. 
All of them, it's what they all were. Chapman, 
Bill, Tom, all the full members. Them, and thou-
sands more. Policemen, politicians, newspeople, 
businessmen, teachers, writers. And kids. 
Why kids? Because kids are never suspected. 
They can be used anywhere. 
I tried to look at Chapman. But I couldn't 
move my eyes! I wanted to scream. But my 
mouth, my vocal cords, it was like being para-
lyzed. Paralyzed and no one even to know that I 
was there, frozen, frozen inside my own body. 
Out of the corner of eyes I could no longer 
aim, I saw Bill smirk. He leaned close. "I know 
you can still hear me, Tobias. Now do you see 
what I meant? You have to give something up hu-
man, to be a part of something larger." 
He laughed. 
But Visser Three snapped, "Shut up, fool. Get 
out." 
Bill disappeared from the room. Fast. Very 
fast. 
"All right, Odret-One-Seven-Seven, you have 
your human host," Visser Three said. "Now, what 
102 
orders do you bring from the Council of Thir-
teen?" 
The Yeerk in my head, I could see his 
thoughts. Not all, but enough. I knew he was 
wary of Visser Three. But not frightened. This 
Yeerk was under the protection of another power. 
But not the Council of Thirteen! He had lied 
to Visser Three. Or at least twisted the truth. 
"The council congratulates you on taking 
command of the Earth invasion," my mouth said. 
"The council wishes you to know that your re-
quest to alter the tactics established by Visser 
One is denied. Earth will be taken by infiltration 
and subversion. It will not be openly attacked." 
Visser One. Yes, Odret was her ally. Visser One 
was Visser Three's enemy. She had been the first 
Yeerk on planet Earth. She had discovered the 
planet and launched the invasion. 
But Odret was leery even of Visser One. She 
told some story of being instantaneously trans-
ported from her ship to a museum on the planet. 
It made no sense to Odret. 
Visser Three had begun to demorph. He was 
becoming an Andalite. The Yeerk inside me, in 
my head, the slug creature who had wrapped 
himself around my brain and gained total control 
of me, knew about Andalites. 
They were the enemy. Duplicitous, hypocriti-
cal, sanctimonius, deadly, and dangerous. Visser 
103 

Three had the only Andalite host body in all 
the Yeerk Empire. The Andalite in question was 
morph-capable. 
It made Visser Three very dangerous. Odret 
was worried. And Odret was confused. He did 
not understand why Visser One opposed using 
greater force against the humans. 
That was not his concern, he told himself. His 
concern was to stay alive. To do so he — I — had 
to obey Visser Three while pretending to obey the 
Council of Thirteen and avoid so angering Visser 
Three that his life would end in hideous torture. 
My life, my very mind, everything that was 
me, had been stolen. Stolen by a creature who 
was almost certainly doomed. 
Bill came back into the room, rushing. 
"Visser! On the TV! Right now!" 
<What, you idiot?> 
"An Andalite." 
104 
"Look, Tom, it's just not me, okay?" 
"Yeah, whatever," Tom said. He was mad. He 
was hurt. He felt like I was rejecting him. "It's 
just that tonight was kind of special, with Mr. 
Visser being there and all. I mean, right now 
probably your friend Tobias is becoming a full 
member. He's probably already one of us." 
"That's good for him. And for you," I said. I 
was losing my patience. The whole thing was giv-
ing me the willies. "But you know what? The 
more you pressure me, the less I'm interested." 
We got home. Tom slammed in through the 
front door. I slammed through behind him. I 
didn't need this. Just because I didn't want to 
105 

join some stupid club. I had homework to do. I'd 
passed up a chance to be with Cassie. 
"Besides, he's not my friend," I said to Tom's 
retreating back. "He's just some guy from school." 
My mom was in the kitchen paying bills. She 
had the TV on as background noise. The local 
news. 
I entered in search of junk food. Tom started 
to take off upstairs, then I guess he reconsid-
ered. He flopped down in the family room and 
snapped on the TV. Some game was on. 
"Hey, Mom, what's up?" I said. 
"The electric bill," she muttered. "What 
the . . . What is going on, is that some kind of 
gag?" 
I followed the direction of her amazed stare. 
It was the familiar news set with the familiar 
newspeople. 
But standing in front of them was something 
decidedly unfamiliar. 
It was a centaur. No, not a centaur. Not like it 
was half-horse and half-human, more like it was 
half-muscular blue deer, half-human. Only with a 
face that was definitely not human. For a start, it 
had no mouth. But it had two additional eyes 
mounted on moveable stalks atop its head. 
And it had a tail like a python with a blade at 
the end. 
106 
"Special effects," I said. "It must be for some 
movie or whatever." 
"Tom!" my mom called. "Turn on channel 
seven." Then, to me, "I don't think the anchors 
expected this. They look scared to death." 
I shot a look toward Tom, illuminated by the 
glow of the TV in the family room. He was stand-
ing up. Rigid. Staring. But not amazed or amused 
or curious. 
His face was a mask of rage and hatred. 
The TV screen went blank. Up came a still 
shot saying Sorry, we are experiencing technical 
difficulties. 
"That was weird," my mom said. 
"Yeah," I agreed. But I was watching Tom. 
His fists were clenched. He bolted for the stairs 
and took them two steps at a time. 
"You want some chicken? There's some in the 
fridge." 
"No. Thanks," I said. I headed for the stairs. 
I didn't know why. I crept up them, moving as 
silently as I could. 
At the top of the stairs I paused, measuring 
my breath, quieting my heart. 
" . . . I saw," Tom said into the receiver. 
I waited. Hugged the wall. 
"It will take ten minutes —" 
I peeked around the corner. Tom yanked the 
107 

receiver from his ear. Someone was screaming 
abusively. I could hear the sound if not the 
words. 
"Immediately!" Tom said and dropped the 
phone. He ran into his room and came out a few 
seconds later. He was shoving something into his 
waistband up under his jean jacket. 
It was impossible to avoid thinking it was a 
gun. I walked past him, pretending not to notice. 
He grabbed me. Pushed me against the wall. 
"I have to go out. Cover for me. If Mom or Dad 
asks, I'm studying. Got it?" 
I nodded. It wasn't so different from any num-
ber of times Tom had playfully put on a similar 
act. We both knew not to take it seriously. Just 
one problem: This time Tom was deadly serious. 
108 
Wherever Tom was going he'd have to take 
my mom's car. He wasn't thinking clearly if he 
thought I could cover for that. My dad wasn't 
home yet and when he got home he'd see my 
mom's car was out. How was I supposed to ex-
plain that? 
Besides, this was bigger than some concern 
over getting grounded. Tom was into something 
dangerous. 
If he was going to avoid being seen by my 
mom he'd have to take the stairs down to the 
basement then go out that way. That gave me 
about five seconds' lead time. 
I slid my bedroom window up and shinnied 
out onto the pitched roof. Rolled down, checked 
109 

to make sure I was on the right side of the fence 
separating front and backyards, grabbed the gut-
ter, and prayed it would hold my weight. 
I dropped to the ground and ran to the back 
door of the garage. The automatic garage door 
around the front was just starting to rise. 
I popped the back door of the minivan, jumped 
in, cursed myself for making the springs bounce, 
pulled the door down, and went fetal behind the 
back row of seats. 
I heard the driver's-side door open and slam. 
The key, the engine. We squealed out of the drive-
way. Fishtailed onto the road and blew through 
the subdivision at three times the speed limit. 
I knew where we were heading. Knew it in my 
bones. We were heading for channel seven. Too 
much coincidence for anything else. 
And Tom was armed. 
What was I supposed to do? What could I do? 
Only one thing was sure-. I had to stop Tom before 
he got himself in some kind of serious trouble. 
He was my big brother and he was supposed to 
protect me. But that had to go both ways if he 
was the one who was in trouble. 
A gun? Did Tom really have a gun? The idea 
made me sick. Who owned handguns? Criminals. 
Pathetic people who thought it would make them 
important. Nuts. 
One thing was for sure. If my parents found 
110 
out they'd go nuclear. My parents didn't spank, 
and anyway Tom was way too old. But if they 
learned he had a gun, Tom was going to live out 
the rest of his years till his eighteenth birthday 
locked in his room having his food shoved in un-
der the door. 
What was he doing? 
A siren! The cops. Thank God. They'd pull 
him over. They'd slow him down at least, writing 
him a ticket. 
The siren was right behind us. I could see red 
flashing lights swirling against the seat back. I 
rose cautiously to peek out. Just as I did the po-
lice car turned off its siren and lights. 
The cops pulled around us, revving their big 
engine, and started the siren again. 
They were escorting us! We blew through red 
lights, through stop signs, jerked into oncoming 
traffic. 
Wait a minute, was Tom some kind of under-
cover cop or something? Insane. Stupid. He was 
in high school. 
Suddenly the cop car screeched to a halt. 
Crouched down I could see the big blue-and-
white channel seven logo. 
Slam! 
I opened the door, slid out cautiously. Tom 
was running up the front steps of the four-story 
station building. Two cops were right with him. 
111 

Both had guns drawn. And Tom . . . Tom was 
armed as well. Only it wasn't like any gun I'd ever 
seen. 
Absurd, I thought. Ridiculous. It was all part 
of some elaborate practical joke. Had to be. Be-
cause otherwise, the only other explanation was 
that my big brother was carrying some kind of ray 
gun. 
They shoved through the smoked-glass doors 
into a dimly lit lobby, already looking like a busi-
ness shut down for the night. I grabbed a side 
door, just off to the right. 
There was a uniformed security guard fretting 
nervously, obviously not sure what to do. 
"Hey, glad you're here," the guard said. 
"There's some kind of a, I don't even know what 
it is, but it's in the —" 
Tseeeew! 
I jerked in surprise. A bright red lance of light 
had shot from Tom's weapon. 
The guard fell back. There was smoke billow-
ing from his uniform. 
I yelled. Not a word, just a yell of surprise and 
shock and horror. 
Tom spun. He peered at me through the 
gloom. He fired. 
Tseeew! 
Miss! 
112 
No! He'd shot at me. He'd shot at me! Did he 
even know it was me? Had he recognized me? 
One of the cops aimed. 
BLAM! BLAM! BLAM! BLAM! 
The glass behind me shattered and fell in a 
hail of shards. The cop emptied his gun. But I 
was hugging the floor and crawling behind a dis-
play bearing artwork. Paintings. Photographs. 
The firing stopped. Holes had been blown 
through the pictures. 
By the time I worked up nerve to look again, 
they were all three gone. 
I couldn't breathe. My heart was hammering 
like it was trying to bang its way out of my chest. 
A ray gun. A laser or whatever. Just like Marco 
and Rachel. Marco would think I made it all up 
to top his story. 
If I lived long enough to tell him. 
I heard screams from some other part of the 
building. I heard the strange "tseeew" sound of 
the laser beam or whatever it was. 
What could I do? I wasn't armed. I wasn't 
some action hero. All I could do was hide. Hide 
right here, right where I was, till the cops showed 
up. Only the cops were already here. 
So I hid. For half an hour I just crouched, 
waiting for it all to end. 
But then . . . then something started to hap-
113 

pen to me. My hands were changing, flattening 
out. And orange-and-black fur was growing. And 
my fingernails were extending, curving, forming 
claws! 
What was happening to me? What was hap-
pening? 
Then, instantly, my hands were normal again. 
Stress. That was it. I was imagining things. Freak-
ing. 
Losing my mind. 
There came the sound of yelling, loud protests, 
cries of rage and fear. 
I peeked again from behind my flimsy protec-
tion. I looked through a bullet hole that had 
made an extra eye for a portrait of a woman. 
A dozen guys, all armed, some with guns, 
some with the laser gun things, were herding 
seven handcuffed people between them. The 
anchorpeople were among them, makeup turning 
their faces orange. 
Tom was there, calmly supervising. 
Through the smoked glass I could see a lim-
ousine pull up. My assistant principal, Mr. Chap-
man, stepped out and held the door for Mr. 
Visser, the guy from The Sharing. 
And then, last to step from the car, was To-
bias. 
114 
D A Y 
T H I R T Y - T H R E E 
Jake wouldn't talk in my house. He was too 
jumpy. So we went out to the barn. 
It was Saturday morning. No school. And my 
dad was at Home Depot buying materials for 
some improvements in the bam. He'd be gone for 
hours. 
Rachel showed up about ten minutes later 
with Marco. Jake had called them. 
Jake didn't waste time. "I was shot at," he 
said. 
Marco had just sat down on a hay bale. He 
jumped back up. "Okay, what is this? Are you 
goofing on Rachel and me?" 
"No." Jake had a look I'd never seen before. 
115 

There was not the slightest hint of lightheaded-
ness in his expression. He was serious. Grim, 
even. He seemed older. 
"I was shot at. With guns. And with some kind 
of laser. Just like you two." 
Weird. Once again, I had this weird feeling. 
Deja vu. The sense that we'd all been here, to-
gether. Not once, but many times. Only . . . only 
there was something missing. 
My eyes rose to the rafters. Something miss-
ing. 
"What is this?" Rachel exploded. "Someone 
has a grudge against us? What did we ever do?" 
She peered at Jake. "We're cousins, does this 
have something to do with that?" 
Marco flopped back on the hay bale. Like he 
did sometimes. Like he'd done so many times. 
And yet never done. He'd never been in our barn 
before. 
Jake shook his head. "I don't think it has to 
do with us directly. Marco says he saw his mom. 
Only she's dead." He saw Marco flinch. "Sorry, 
man." 
"Yeah. But it was her. Look, you know me, 
Jake, you've known me my entire life practically. 
Have I ever hallucinated? Have I ever seen some-
thing that wasn't there?" 
Jake shook his head. "No. You are probably 
116 
the last person on earth who'd imagine some-
thing like that." 
"She was there," Marco said. "I just don't 
know how. And I don't know why she wouldn't 
stop. I mean, any answer I come up with sounds 
like something you'd hear in a conspiracy chat 
room. I don't believe that stuff. I don't think the 
big corporations or the mafia or the CIA or little 
green men from Mars or whatever are secretly 
controlling our lives. That's crazy, wack-job stuff. 
But what am I supposed to think when I see my 
mom, and I chase after her, and these guys end 
up shooting at Rachel and me?" 
"With laser beams," Rachel added. She was 
pacing back and forth, an almost funny reflection 
of a recovering raccoon behind her that was pac-
ing its cage. 
Jake nodded. He seemed like he wanted to 
say something, but he was hesitating. 
"What is it?" I asked him. 
"Maybe I'm a crazy wack-job," he said. 
"I . . . I think maybe there is a conspiracy." 
Rachel stopped pacing. "Say what?" 
Jake sighed. "I was following Tom. This thing 
happened on TV, on the news. Suddenly there's 
this alien-looking thing. Very weird. Kind of cool. 
Anyway, I'm thinking it's some kind of publicity 
thing. But Tom is freaking out. Like eight seconds 
117 

later he's grabbed my mom's car and he's tearing 
out of there. I stash in the backseat. He goes 
straight for the TV studio. And he has a gun." 
"Whoa! Tom had a gun?" Rachel demanded. 
"Did you tell your parents?" 
"It's past that," Jake said. "At the TV station, 
he shot someone. Two cops were with him. They 
helped him. They shot at me, only they didn't 
know it was me. They grabbed everyone at the 
station and hustled them out of there, and Tom 
was in charge. And by the way? The gun he had?" 
"Don't even say ray gun," Rachel said. 
"What are you even talking about?" Marco 
said. "I thought my story was bizarre." 
"Tom and the cops dragged those people out 
of there in handcuffs. These famous newspeople 
and all. Then Chapman showed up." 
"Chapman? Chapman Chapman? Our Chap-
man?" 
"Yeah. And this guy named Mr. Visser. And 
Tobias. You know, the kid who was hanging with 
us for a while? They're all there, too." 
Marco said, "Why? Why them? Tom, Chap-
man, Tobias. Mr. Whatever? The cops?" 
Jake shook his head slowly. "I don't even 
want to say this, but Tom, Chapman, Mr. Visser, 
and Tobias are all members of The Sharing." 
"Aren't they just like some family thing or 
whatever?" Rachel asked. 
118 
Jake nodded. "So they claim. But it's kind of 
a big coincidence." 
"How about this alien thing you saw on TV?" 
Marco asked. 
"What about it?" 
He shrugged. "What'd it look like?" 
"I don't know, like a—" 
"Like a blue deer," I said. "Only it had a kind 
of human face. And a long tail." 
Jake looked at me in surprise. "You saw it on 
TV, too?" 
"No." I shook my head. "No. I've never seen 
it. But I know that it has two eyes on top of its 
head, on these little stalks." 
No one moved. The three of them just stared 
at me. 
"And I'll tell you something else. He should 
be here." I pointed to a spot off to one side. My 
arm was goose-bumped all the way up and down. 
"He should be standing right there." 
119 

There's something wrong," I said. 
"Do you think? There's plenty wrong," Rachel 
said. "Marco and I get shot at. Jake gets shot at. 
We got some kind of cult. My cousin has a ray 
gun and is shooting it while cops stand around 
and do nothing. Marco's mom is walking around 
alive, wearing a wig." 
Jake came over and took my hand and bent 
down to look into my eyes. It was so sweet. And I 
so needed it. 
"Cassie, what do you mean?" Jake asked. 
I felt wetness on my cheeks. Why was I cry-
ing? I was the only one who hadn't been shot at 
so far. 
"I thought I was going nuts," I said. "Ever 
120 
since, I don't know, for weeks I've had this feel-
ing deep down inside that things weren't right. 
There's supposed ..." I let go of Jake and threw 
up my hands. "I can't explain it. Just that every-
thing is wrong. This alien, I heard him talking, 
kind of, only he was out in the water somewhere. 
And I have these dreams, these amazing dreams 
where I'm not me, I'm an animal. A bug some-
times and I'm scared. Or a wolf. Or a bird." 
I spotted Marco rolling his eyes. I also spotted 
Rachel sending him a "keep your mouth shut" 
look. 
But Jake looked at his hands like he'd never 
seen them before. "Or a tiger," he whispered to 
himself. 
And once more I was drawn to look up. Up at 
a particular spot in the rafters. "Just now I had 
the feeling that someone was missing. Two some-
ones. The alien is one. He's supposed to be here. 
And . . . and I know this sounds crazy . . ." 
"Noooo, sounds perfectly sensible to me," 
Marco said not-quite-under-his-breath. 
". . . there's supposed to be a bird. A big one. 
Right up there. Anyway. Anyway, just now when 
you said Mr. Visser, I got this chill. He's . . . some-
how he's part of it, too." 
"Where are Mulder and Scully?" Marco won-
dered. 
Jake nodded, like he half-believed. But he 
121 

looked away, too, like you do when someone says 
something crazy. "You had a bad feeling from the 
start about The Sharing." 
Pity. Great. 
Rachel had this angry-concerned look, like 
she didn't know what to say or do to help me out, 
but she'd gladly yell at anyone who gave me any 
trouble. 
I'd just spilled my guts. And the result was that 
the three of them, including my best friend and 
the guy I liked more than ever, were all thinking I 
needed to see a shrink. 
"Oh, man," I said. "I am losing it, aren't I?" 
To my surprise it was Marco who came to my 
defense, in his own way. "Yeah, you are losing it. 
You're crazy. Insane. Nuts. The only thing crazier 
than what you said is some guy who thinks that 
his big brother, the assistant principal, and To-
bias the Mega Dweeb are shooting up a TV stu-
dio. And the only thing crazier than that is some 
kid who thinks his dead mom is running around 
town with laser-shooting bodyguards." 
"We have to do something," Rachel said de-
cisively. 
"Do what?" I asked her. 
"I don't know. Something. There really is 
some kind of conspiracy. I mean, what are we 
supposed to do, just do nothing?" 
122 
Marco said, "Rachel, what are the four of us 
going to do?" 
"I don't know!" she yelled in frustration. 
"Something! Jake? What do we do?" 
"Yeah. What do we do, Big Jake?" Marco 
asked, half-mocking. 
"What do you mean, what do we do?" Jake 
shot back. "Why are you asking me?" 
Marco shrugged. "You're the leader, man." 
"What are you talking about? The leader of 
what? And why am I the leader?" 
"Because you are," I said. The words were out 
of my mouth before I could think about them. I 
felt as i f . . . as if I was a judge and had just 
passed sentence on Jake. 
Marco jerked his thumb at me. "What the 
crazy chick said: Because you are." 
Jake looked at Rachel, dumbfounded. Rachel 
looked at me. An eerie look. Like she was listen-
ing to me talk, only I wasn't saying anything. 
Then Rachel said, "What do we do, Jake?" 
For a long minute it felt as if the entire barn 
was frozen. The three of us looked at Jake. He 
looked back at us, each in turn, this helpless, al-
most hopeless look on his face. 
And then he said, "We have to find out what's 
going on. We start with Tom. He's the obvious tar-
get." 
123 

Jake. Decisive, once the moment for decision 
arrived. 
"Let's grab him, tie him down, threaten to 
give him up to the FBI unless he tells us what's 
up," Rachel said. 
Rachel, bold, ready to act regardless of con-
sequences. 
"If he really shot someone, Tom's danger-
ous," Marco disagreed. "Which means whatever 
we do has to be subtle. If there's some kind of 
conspiracy involving The Sharing, we're not go-
ing to know if anyone we talk to is hooked up 
with them. We need proof before we make a 
move." 
Marco, cautious and clever. 
A chill crawled up my spine. I felt as if the 
universe had just shifted. Like . . . like for weeks 
I'd been riding a bike with the chain always slip-
ping. And like the chain had just caught again. 
Things weren't right. Not right. But more right 
than they'd been since we'd left the mall to-
gether. 
124 
D A Y 
T H I R T Y - F O U R 
I was helpless. Powerless. Unable to move 
an eye. Unable to lift a finger. Unable to speak. 
Unable to alter a facial expression. To smile. 
Frown. Give any sign that I was alive within my 
own body, a captive inside my own brain. 
I had watched, helpless to cry out, as the 
Yeerks had dragged the poor men and women 
from the channel seven studio into vans. Had 
driven them at breakneck speed toward a water 
tower that concealed a secret entrance to the 
vast underground complex of the Yeerk pool. 
I'd been unable to cry out in horror as one by 
one they were dragged, kicking and crying and 
begging, down the steel pier. The Hork-Bajir-
Controllers had held them tight and kicked them 
125 

to their knees, and shoved the heads down into 
that seething cesspool. 
Every one of them was infested. Every one 
would now agree on the same cover story to ex-
plain away the odd appearance of the blue-furred 
alien. No charges would be filed. The guard Tom 
had shot survived, but would never be free. He 
was infested in his hospital bed. I was there, ob-
serving. 
And now I was in my room. At home. Odret 
was still playing the role of Tobias. Still being 
me. 
Odret, the Yeerk, was growing ever more ner-
vous. I could sense his emotions at times. Some-
times he would sift through my memories, looking 
for a thrill, an escape. Like someone scanning the 
shelves at Blockbuster, looking for a movie to take 
his mind off his troubles. 
I had to laugh, down in my corner of power-
lessness. Odret had the wrong host if he wanted 
a lot of good times. 
He was nervous because of Visser Three. The 
visser was not behaving as he should, somehow. 
It wasn't anything obvious. More a question of 
something missing. 
For one thing, Visser Three had a reputation. 
He was notoriously volatile. He would blow up 
over very little. But he was treating Odret with 
elaborate courtesy. Allowing Odret access to any-
126 
thing and everything. Not even making an effort 
to conceal disasters like the sudden appearance 
of an Andalite. 
Why? 
<What a pathetic life you've led, Tobias,> 
Odret said to me. 
<l guess I have.> 
<l find nothing in your memories worth seeing 
again. Nothing was worth seeing a first time.> 
<Well, that's how it is, right? The Sharing is a 
magnet for losers. They go for the weak. So what 
did you expect?> 
To say that I hated myself would be an under-
statement. Odret had rifled through my memo-
ries, each more embarrassing than the one 
before. I'd had to relive too many things I had 
tried to forget. 
Most painful of all was the image of myself 
swallowing everything The Sharing told me. I had 
walked, willingly, to my own destruction. At the 
time I'd seen no alternative. Now I saw nothing 
but alternatives. 
Was my home a dreary, awful place? Yes. Was 
I somehow marked as a bully magnet? Yes. Was I 
different, strange, not-quite-normal? Yes. 
And to fight all of that I had destroyed myself. 
Brilliant, Tobias. Brilliant. All of life's pains com-
bined could not have equaled what I now en-
dured. 
127 

Even now no easy answers leaped to mind. I 
could not easily have stood the bullying. I could 
not easily have survived the loneliness. In my 
fantasies I could construct fantastic escapes, but 
in reality there was no easy way. My life was non-
fiction, not some story where the endings are al-
ways happy. I couldn't simply become a different 
person. I couldn't just have some great insight 
that would save me from myself. 
All I could have done, really, was wait. I could 
have endured. I saw that now. It wasn't a dra-
matic answer. Wasn't exactly inspiring. 
Endure. Outlast. Outwait. 
I might have been able to do that. I'm not a 
fool, I know that school was just a part of my life. 
You spend eighteen years as a kid, then maybe 
seventy years as an adult. And what you are as a 
kid isn't what you'll be as an adult, not always, 
anyway. 
Endure. I could have done that. 
Now, too late. My nose itched. I could not 
scratch it. 
Odret checked the clock. He got up, moved 
my legs and arms, aimed my eyes. I walked past 
my uncle. 
"Where do you think you're going?" 
"Out," my mouth said. 
"Not if I say you don't!" he yelled. 
I/we ignored him. Out the door. A car ap-
128 
peared. I waited for it, impatient. Odret was hun-
gry. He needed Kandrona rays. He needed to 
feed in the Yeerk pool. 
The car drove us to McDonald's. We went in, 
went up to the counter and gave the counter girl 
there a code word. Ten minutes later I stepped 
off the last stair and into the Yeerk pool complex. 
I walked self-importantly toward the first pier. 
Two Hork-Bajir were standing guard, checking 
people off on a sort of palm-top computer. 
"Odret-One-Seven-Seven," my mouth said. 
Suddenly I was aware that two more Hork-
Bajir were standing behind me. Not in line to 
feed. Standing poised. Ready. 
I felt the sudden spike of Odret's fear. 
"Come with us," one of the Hork-Bajir said. 
Odret hesitated. But only for a moment. He 
knew it was pointless. The Hork-Bajir were Con-
trollers. They were following orders. Nothing he 
could say would change their minds. 
They marched me into one of the shabby, 
temporary office buildings. It looked like an old 
barracks or something. 
Odret knew who was waiting for him. When 
the Hork-Bajir opened an office door he was not 
at all surprised to see Visser Three in his Andalite 
host body. 
<Ah, Odret-One-Seven-Seven,> he said. 
"Visser," Odret answered neutrally. 
129 

<You've come to feed?> 
"Yes. Obviously." 
<Then I'm sorry you've been at all delayed. 
Go. Enjoy.> 
Odret did not move a muscle. He knew. 
Visser Three laughed. <There is just one thing 
before you go, Odret. I'll need the truth.> 
"What truth is that, Visser?" 
The Andalite body moved with liquid ease. 
The mouthless Andalite face moved to within 
inches of my own. Both main eyes and one of the 
stalk eyes bored into me. <l know that you are 
faithful to Visser One, Odret. That much I know 
beyond all doubt.> 
Odret's fear was seeping into me. Releasing 
my own adrenaline. 
"I serve the Council of Thirteen, Visser Three, 
as you know. And if any harm should come to me 
they would investigate very thoroughly." 
The visser was unimpressed. <As I said, 
Odret, I know you are Visser One's minion. The 
question is about the order you transmitted to 
me. The order to avoid open war on the humans. 
I need to know whether that order came from the 
council, or whether Visser One is its source.> 
"I gave you the orders of the council," my 
mouth said. 
<Maybe. And if so, I shall have to obey them. 
130 
But if you speak only for Visser One . . . well, 
that's a very different matter.> 
"I've told you—" 
The Andalite tail flew so fast that human eyes 
could not track it. The blade stopped a millime-
ter from my jugular vein. 
<Yes. I know what you say now. The question 
is, what will you say in a day or so? What will you 
say when you are starving, Odret?> 
I felt the Yeerk's fear rise several more 
notches to an intolerable level. 
"You will pay for any harm that comes to me! 
You don't dare to defy the council this way!" 
<Very simple, Odret: Work for me, and feed. 
Work for Visser One, and starve. Take him away.> 
I saw in Odret's mind's eye the results. So did 
he. Kandrona starvation was a horror that could 
not be endured. 
I looked straight into Visser Three's Andalite 
eyes. "The council knows nothing. Visser One 
hopes to convince them to restrain you. She sent 
me to delay you till the council issues the order. 
But it will come." 
Visser Three nodded. <As I suspected. I will 
have to move quickly. Very quickly and present 
the council with a done deed. Then their order 
will be irrelevant.> 
"I work for you, then?" Odret asked pitifully. 
131 

Visser Three laughed. <You betrayed Visser 
One, Odret. Should I keep you around to betray 
me? Kill him.> 
A Hork-Bajir pressed a Dracon beam against 
my head. I felt it. Felt Odret's terror. Felt my own 
shock, fear. Regret. 
"No!" my mouth cried. "NO!" 
Felt slight pressure as the Hork-Bajir's finger 
tightened. 
Felt — 
132 
D A Y 
F O R T Y 
It was almost impossible following Tom. We 
tried, but he could drive, and none of us could. 
Marco and I searched his room when he was 
out. 
"Careful. Watch for any kind of little telltales 
he might leave," Marco said. 
"What are you talking about?" 
"He might place a hair in a certain way, say, 
wedged into a drawer to see if it's been opened." 
I stared at my friend. "What do you know 
about this?" 
He grinned. "I read, man. You know, books? 
John le Carre. Tradecraft, dude. It's all about 
tradecraft." 
I was going to ignore him. Then I saw the hair. 
133 

It was wedged into the closet door so that if the 
door was opened it would fall. 
Marco noticed and gave himself a little, "Am 
I smart, or what?" flourish. 
I took the hair. Opened the closet and searched 
it carefully. Nothing. I replaced the hair carefully 
and closed the door. 
"Nothing here, man," Marco said. "He's got 
these telltales around just to see if anyone's been 
here. He wants to know if he's suspected of any-
thing. But he's not dumb enough to leave his ray 
gun just lying around." 
I led Marco back out into the hallway, down to 
my room. My dog Homer was asleep on my bed, 
snoring. 
"Maybe we're just crazy," I said. 
The phone rang. I jumped about two feet. 
"That's good, Jake, very cool. Not at all like a 
guilty guy." 
I waited two rings to see if my folks were 
home and would pick up. Then I answered the 
call. It was Rachel. 
"Turn on the TV," she said. 
"Why?" 
"Just turn it on. Channel nine." 
I grabbed Marco and went to my parents' 
room, the nearest TV. Mine was being repaired. I 
flipped channels till I saw it. 
134 
"What's going on?" Marco wondered. 
The screen showed a definitely inhuman face. 
Two main eyes, two stalk eyes. No mouth. But it 
was speaking anyway. 
I scanned quickly. Channel nine, channel five, 
channel four, all the local channels were carrying 
the alien. All but channel seven. 
< . . . are a parasite species.> 
"Whatthe. . ." 
It was the alien. The blue deer. Making his 
second televised appearance. But this time he 
wasn't on the news set. This was a remote. Prob-
ably on tape. 
<ln their natural form they are similar to your 
Earth slugs. They enter the body through the ear 
canal, releasing numbing chemicals to dull the 
pain. They wrap themselves around the brain, 
and tie into all neural functions.> 
"He's not making any sounds — he doesn't 
even have a mouth — but I can hear him," Marco 
said. 
The phone on my parents' nightstand rang. I 
snatched it up. "Yeah, Cassie. I see it." 
<Humans who have been affected become 
Controllers. They will appear to be normal. But 
they have lost all control of their bodies. These 
Yeerks — > 
"Yeerks?" Marco echoed. 
135 

< — have already enslaved three sentient 
species, the Hork-Bajir, the Taxxons, and the 
Gedds.> 
"Hork Ba-what? This is some kind of goof?" I 
wondered. 
"On all local channels at the same time?" 
Marco said. "All but channel seven? This is like 
a tape loop or whatever. The stations aren't cut-
ting in, they aren't, like, putting any scroll or bug 
or even a logo under the picture." 
"What?" 
"Man, do you know anything?" Marco said. 
"All that stuff that's on the screen. You know, 
they'd put words under this, a title, like 'alien 
spokesman,' or whatever. No, man, this is boot-
leg. Someone is cutting this in." 
I nodded. "Only channel seven was prepared. 
They thought this might happen. They were 
ready." 
<l am an Andalite. My people resist the 
Yeerks throughout the galaxy. But we are not here 
in sufficient strength. So you humans must fight. 
You must —> 
The screen went blank. I hit the button on the 
remote. Channel five, blank. 
"They cut him off," I said. 
"That's what Tom is, Jake. A Yeerk. Or what 
did he say? A Controller. My mom, too. She's not 
dead, she's one of them." 
136 
I lifted the phone receiver. "You still there, 
Cassie?" 
"Yes." 
"What does this all mean?" 
"I watched it and . . . every word he said, I 
was like 'Yeah, yeah, that's it. That's the truth.' 
Jake?" 
"Uh-huh?" 
"We call him Ax." 
"What? The alien?" 
"I know this sounds crazy. But we're sup-
posed to know him. He's supposed to be our 
friend. We call him Ax. And sometimes he can 
become human. Crazy." 
"Cassie, nothing sounds crazy. Not anymore." 
"What do we do?" she asked me. 
I looked at Marco. He jerked his chin toward 
the screen. Two local newspeople were babbling 
and looking very lost. ". . . don't know how this 
person, or creature, or prankster managed to . . ." 
I flipped to another channel. ". . . some 
Howard Stern type of prank. Viewers should not be 
alarmed. We . . ." 
Another channel had gone back to Jenny 
Jones. 
"I have to pee," Marco said. He went into my 
folks' bathroom. 
"What do we do?" Cassie repeated. 
"I don't know, Cassie. But it's not a joke. It's 
137 

real. We have to find out who is taking this seri-
ously: cops, FBI, whoever. We have to let them 
know what we know. About The Sharing. About 
Chapman and that Mr. Visser and Tobias." 
"And Tom?" she asked softly. 
"Yeah," I said. "Yeah. Tom, too." I hung up 
the phone feeling like a hundred-pound weight 
was suddenly sitting on my shoulders. 
A noise. I spun. 
Tom. He was standing in the doorway. I didn't 
have to ask whether he'd heard. He had. The ray 
gun in his hand told me he'd heard. 
"I can kill you, or you can come along peace-
fully," Tom said calmly. "Your call." 
A flash of movement. Marco charging out of 
the bathroom, rushing Tom like a linebacker. 
Tom sidestepped, tripped Marco with a toe, 
and bashed the back of his head as he fell past. 
Marco lay sprawled, stunned, on the floor. 
"Let's go. You, too, Marco. And don't make 
me mad, I have a very busy day ahead of me with 
all this. If you slow me down . . ." 
He let the threat hang. 
Down the stairs. I couldn't believe it, couldn't 
imagine it. Couldn't think of what to say to him. 
He wasn't him. I had no trouble believing that, 
because there was no way Tom was doing this. 
No way. 
I wasn't even scared because I could not be-
138 
lieve any of it. Impossible. Tom? Not even with 
an alien in his head. No matter what, Tom wasn't 
going to hurt us. 
Marco and I walked down the stairs, through 
the empty family room, the front door. I opened 
the door. A car was just screeching to a halt, 
there to pick Tom up. 
The car door opened. A man's voice yelled, 
"Lookout!" 
Tom flinched. Too late! The baseball bat came 
down hard on his gun hand. 
"Ahhh!" he yelled. 
The ray gun clattered down the steps. 
The bat came up fast, caught Tom in the face. 
Then, one! Two! Three! 
Three stiff, hard blows and Tom was down, 
curled in a ball, groaning, eyes rolling, blood 
gushing from his nose and ear. 
I stared at my cousin. Rachel was breathing 
hard. But her outfit, hair, and makeup had re-
mained perfect. 
139 

Torn was down. Someone was running from 
the car. Someone big. 
Jake dove, landed hard, but snatched up the 
ray gun. He rolled, came up to his knees, and 
yelled, "Freeze!" 
It was so NYPD Blue. 
The running man slowed, raised a weapon . . . 
"Shoot!" Marco yelled. 
Tseeeew! 
Bright light stabbed from the weapon in 
Jake's hand. The man screamed. His left leg be-
low the knee no longer existed. 
He fell, and fired wildly. The ray sliced into 
the eaves of Jake's house. 
140 
"The car!" I cried. 
Jake took aim, fired. 
Tseeeew! 
A hole burned and sizzled in the car's engine 
compartment. 
Tom was getting up, staggering down the 
stairs, trying to catch us from behind. I swung low, 
caught him in one knee. Hard. He went down. He 
wasn't going to be walking anytime soon. 
The injured guy from the car was groaning, 
rolling onto his side, ready to shoot again. I was 
on him. 
Wham! 
People will drop a weapon really fast if you hit 
their arm with a baseball bat. I grabbed the ray 
gun. 
The driver of the car was out on the street, 
running, yelling into a cell phone. 
"Shoot him!" I yelled at Jake. 
"No, he's leaving." 
I raised my newfound ray gun and took aim at 
the fleeing man. Jake yanked my arm upward as 
I squeezed the trigger. I sliced a couple of 
branches off an elm tree. 
"We don't shoot people in the back," Jake 
snapped. "And we don't shoot people who are 
willing to leave us alone." 
I shoved his hand away. "Hey, who died and 
made you president? What are you, the boss?" 
141 

"Yes," he said. Then his expression softened. 
"And by the way, thanks." 
"No problem, cousin," I said. "What about 
Tom? What about that guy there?" 
"They'll have reinforcements here soon," 
Jake said. "We have to get out of here. Cassie. 
We have to get her before they do. Tom knows I 
was talking to her." 
"Yeah," I agreed, feeling a sudden pang of 
worry for my best friend. I'd come to Jake's house 
right away, as soon as the alien was off the air. 
We live just two blocks apart, less if you know the 
backyard routes. Cassie lived farther away. 
Tom had dragged himself painfully to the 
steps. He was sitting there holding his knee, not 
sure which part of him hurt worse. 
"You can run, but you can't hide," he said, 
spitting blood through his teeth. "We'll take you. 
We'll take you all!" 
"Where's that baseball bat?" I wondered. 
"The soft invasion is over," Tom jeered. "The 
real war is about to begin. We'll have you all! 
You're our meat! You're our meatl" 
"Come on," Jake said softly. "Quick, before 
another carload of —" 
"Forget carload," Marco said. 
He was looking up toward the sky. I followed 
the direction of his gaze. 
142 
It was not a plane. It was not a weather 
balloon, or swamp gas, or a trick of the light. It 
looked like a stylized metal cockroach, only 
where there might have been legs there were just 
two forward-aimed, serrated spears. 
It was, beyond any doubt, an alien ship. And 
it was slowing as it approached Jake's house. 
"Run!" Jake yelled. 
"Yes, run! Run! Run, ah-hah-hah-hah," Tom 
jeered giddily. "Run, humans, run!" 
TSEEEEEW! TSEEEEEW! 
Two huge beams of light chewed furrows in 
the lawn on either side of us. 
We ran. Across the lawn, the next lawn, the 
next lawn. 
TSEEEEEW! TSEEEEEW! 
A garage to our left blew apart, burning splin-
ters. 
Marco tripped. I grabbed him and hauled him 
to his feet. We turned a corner. Jake yelled, "This 
way!" 
We scrambled over a fence, raced through a 
backyard. I jumped a Big Wheel. Another fence, 
taller. No problem. Amazing what you can do 
when you're being fired on by a spaceship hover-
ing a few hundred feet up in the air. 
TSEEEEEW! TSEEEEEW! 
The pool in the next yard blew up in a gey-
143 

ser of steam. My face stung, eyes watered. We 
couldn't outrun this thing. There was no way: We 
were on foot, it flew. 
But I had underestimated Jake. He was head-
ing for a little patch of woods over behind the 
community playground. The trees. He was look-
ing for cover. Just one problem: that was three 
long blocks and we were already getting tired. 
People were coming out of their houses, star-
ing slack-jawed up at the spaceship. The aliens 
weren't even bothering to hide. Tom had told the 
truth: This was war. 
"Rachel! Here. Stand. Aim!" Jake ordered. 
I stopped. We were back against a tin tool-
shed. The ship would reappear just over our 
heads as it came around for another shot. We'd 
see it just as it saw us. 
Jake and I held our ray guns straight up. Marco 
panted, bent over with hands on knees. 
"Fire!" 
The steel bug slid into view. Our ray guns 
burned. The ship jerked. It didn't explode or any-
thing, but it jerked visibly, like someone who's 
been slapped. 
The ship hauled away. We ran. 
Two blocks before the ship found us again. 
TSEEEEEW! TSEEEEEW! 
Three cars and a parked RV blew apart. The 
concussion knocked me down. I felt grass in 
144 
my face. My ears were ringing like Quasimodo 
was in the belltower. My skin was singed. My 
mind wouldn't come together, little fragments of 
thoughts, little bits of me . . . 
I looked around. Jake was just getting up. He 
was slapping fire off his shirttail. Marco was on 
his back like he was enjoying a day at the beach. 
I climbed up, woozy, fading in and out, but 
more or less in one piece. 
"Marco! Let's go!" I yelled. 
I ran to him. Stopped. Looked down. Not 
comprehending. Not believing. 
Jake grabbed me from behind. "Run!" 
"But Marco!" 
"Run! Just run!" Jake sobbed. "Run!" 
145 

D A Y 
F O R T Y - O N E 
Videotapes of the Bug fighter were shown on 
TV. Endlessly. I watched in a portion of a large 
establishment called a Circuit City. Circuit City 
was devoted to archaic electronic devices: com-
puters, videodiscs, music players. 
Humans in the establishment stared in dis-
belief. They shook their heads. They discussed 
among themselves. Some were of the opinion 
that these invaders were simply misunderstood. 
Benign, but provoked by some obscure human 
behavior. 
"They're advanced, right? I mean, look at that 
thing! If they're way beyond us and all, they must 
believe in peace." 
"Yeah? They have a heck of a way of showing 
146 
it. Blowing up a man's garage? And how about 
that RV? You think insurance is going to cover 
that?" 
"Either way, I'm buying that Sony big screen. 
I don't want to miss any of this!" 
"Yes, sir. Can I interest you in our extended 
warranty program?" 
I had heard similar opinions from other hu-
mans. They assumed that technological superior-
ity must necessarily be linked to moral superiority. 
A natural impulse perhaps for an ignorant and 
primitive species. 
Suddenly all the many TV's went blank. The 
two humans used small handheld devices to 
change frequencies. But they, too, were nonfunc-
tional. 
The entire establishment had grown very 
quiet. None of the electronic equipment was 
functioning. 
"Power went out," one man said. 
"Uh-uh. The lights are still on. It's not the 
power." 
I used my human mouth to explain what 
should have been obvious. "Electromagnetic 
pulse," I said. "The Yeerks have simply fired a 
burst of powerful radiation that has rendered 
primitive electronic devices inoperative. Ray-
dee-ay-shun. It is a complex word. You will dis-
cover that any device containing a simple human 
147 

computer chip will have been overloaded. Chip is 
a very short word." 
The human looked at me in bewilderment. 
"No TV?" 
"No TV," I confirmed. 
"Why would they knock out the TV? Is it all 
the violent shows? Are they sending us a mes-
sage?" 
"Yes, they are sending you a message," I said 
impatiently. "The message is: We are coming to 
enslave and destroy you." 
I left the establishment. My duty was not 
clear: I could attempt to assist human efforts to 
resist the Yeerks. But how? These people were so 
primitive their vulnerable circuits were un-
shielded. How could they resist the Yeerks? 
Or, I could try at all costs to contact the home 
world. 
The Yeerks would move quickly to increase 
the pace of infestation now. And my own actions 
might have caused them to rush. 
How many Yeerks would they have in Earth 
space? It could easily be a hundred thousand. Or 
twice that number. Their goal would be to secure 
the planet for additional shipments of Yeerks. 
Newly arriving Yeerks would be a mixed bless-
ing for the enemy. The Yeerks suffered from a 
lack of sufficient host bodies. Andalite intelli-
gence had always estimated that fewer than one 
148 
in a hundred Yeerks had a host — mostly Hork-
Bajir, Taxxon, and Gedd. Gedds were severely 
limited as were the Taxxons. The Hork-Bajir were 
excellent host bodies, but Andalite actions had 
severely reduced the number of surviving Hork-
Bajir hosts. 
But here, on this planet, were nearly six 
billion potential hosts. More than enough to 
supply every living Yeerk with a human host. Hu-
mans were physically unimpressive, but they did 
have excellent hands and very good senses — all 
the Yeerks needed. 
Six billion hosts. A planet stocked with suffi-
cient raw materials for building ships. If the 
Yeerks took Earth and held it, they would be un-
stoppable. 
If only the Andalite fleet would arrive. It was 
a perfect opportunity! The Yeerks would rush 
transports full of Yeerks, as many as they could 
move. The ratio of unhosted Yeerks would rise in 
proportion to the number of hosted Yeerks. A fat 
target. A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. 
If Zero-space had not changed configuration, 
the fleet could arrive within weeks. If. Zero-space 
was inherently unpredictable, altering and shift-
ing randomly. A jump that might take a week one 
day could take a year the next. 
By now the high command realized that our 
task force was missing. But they might not know 
149 

why. And they would certainly not guess that the 
Yeerks had located an almost perfect target 
species for massive infestation. 
The larger war could be won. Right here. 
Or lost. Right here. 
But the fact, the terrible fact was, that the 
Yeerks would be more vulnerable once they be-
gan shipping large numbers of Yeerks to this 
planet. And that would not happen until human 
resistance was subdued. 
That is an unhappy thought, I told myself. 
These are simple, primitive creatures. But I 
would not want to see them slaughtered to afford 
us a tactical advantage. 
What was I to do? 
Do both. Contact the fleet. Then help the hu-
mans, and forget the fact that helping humans 
now might cause the Yeerks to be more cautious. 
Yes. That would be my plan. The policy of a 
half-trained aristh. How would I ever explain my-
self to my superiors? I could picture incredulous, 
outraged faces of great war princes staring at 
me and saying, <Your policy, aristh? Your policy? 
And when, exactly, did galactic policy fall into 
yourhands?> 
I had walked from the Circuit City, down a 
hill, closer to what humans called a "mall." 
I had a clear view of what happened next. Bug 
fighters began dropping from the clouds. They 
150 
landed, forming a loose perimeter around the 
mall parking area. Hork-Bajir jumped out, armed 
with Dracon weapons. 
An interesting move. Yes, the Yeerks would be 
able to take several hundred humans at once. It 
made sense. 
Several human cars attempted to exit. They 
were blown apart. 
I had a perfect view as well of the black, dan-
gerous shape that swooped confidently down 
from the blue sky and settled arrogantly atop the 
mall roof. 
A Blade ship. The Blade ship of Visser Three. 
151 

Marco was gone. He'd never even been a 
friend of mine. But now he was gone. 
Jake couldn't return home. Tom was there, 
and Jake had to worry now that his own parents 
were in the camp of the alien enemy. 
Rachel, too, was trapped. Where could she 
go? She had beaten Tom with a baseball bat. 
I called my parents and told them I couldn't 
come home, either. Tom knew me as well. 
My parents demanded that I come home im-
mediately. They told me that in all likelihood 
these aliens were friendly. This was all a wonder-
ful opportunity for the human race. 
Maybe they were naive. Or maybe they had 
been taken, too. 
152 
Jake, Rachel, and I had wandered here and 
there. We had no real plan. What could we do? 
What could we do, three kids against the mo-
mentous events that were unfolding around us? 
The TV showed commentators endlessly dis-
cussing what it all meant. Some people believed 
these Yeerks were the hope of humanity. Some 
believed the Andalite who had hijacked local sta-
tions to broadcast his warning. Some thought it 
was all a monstrous prank. 
President Clinton urged everyone to remain 
calm. He said that just in case, our military forces 
were being mobilized. 
There was a feeling of everything moving in 
slow motion. A feeling of a world hovering on 
the brink of something unprecedented. Waiting. 
Waiting. 
The three of us couldn't do much about 
any of that stuff. All we could do was keep mov-
ing and hope to keep living. We'd hidden in 
stores, in libraries, in the school, here and there. 
In plain sight during the day, undercover at 
night. 
"I'll grab us some munchies," Rachel said as 
Jake and I collapsed into the cheap plastic chairs 
at the mall food court. 
Jake looked unspeakably weary. There were 
dark bags under his eyes. The eyes themselves 
seemed to have caved in. He was scared. More, 
153 

he was devastated. Marco was his lifelong friend. 
Tom was his brother. 
"I hope the animals are okay," I said. 
Jake didn't answer. 
"I mean, my folks will take care of them," I 
said. "They don't really need me." 
I saw Jake's eyes flicker. He was looking past 
me. I turned around. A group of people were 
rushing toward the mall exit door, their voices ris-
ing excitedly. They were rushing to see/Some-
thing. 
"What is it?" I asked. 
"Don't know." He stared. He couldn't see any-
thing more than me, but he must have sensed. 
"Rachel!" he yelled. 
I spotted Rachel at the Taco Bell counter. She 
had caught the tone of Jake's cry. She snatched 
up the burritos she'd been paying for and came 
running. 
The crowd at the mall door came rushing 
back now, running away. 
Rachel met us as we started to run. 
"Rachel. You know this mall. Where can we 
hide?" Jake demanded. 
"Any of the stockrooms. Urn, no, too many 
people there." She looked around frantically. 
"Furniture department at the department store. 
Big armoires and stuff. We can get inside." 
154 
Scared as I was, I had to admire the girl. She 
knew the mall. 
We started running. Past Express. Past some 
shoe store. 
People were screaming. Ahead, people run-
ning out of The Gap. 
Then, it stepped into view. It had to be seven 
feet tall. It had a tail with spikes like a dinosaur's 
and big, taloned feet to match. There were 
blades on its arms, legs, head. 
It was a monster of destruction. A creature 
from a nightmare. 
And I said, "Hork-Bajir." 
No one asked how I knew. The Andalite had 
used the word on TV. And this, I knew, was a 
Hork-Bajir. More of the monsters poured from 
The Gap. 
I should morph . . . what? What was I think-
ing about? 
Behind us, Hork-Bajir coming up the aisles of 
the mall. Not after us. They were rounding 
everyone up, forming people into little groups 
and holding them under guard. 
"What do we do?" I cried. "We can't fight 
those things!" 
"I'm going to try," Rachel said through gritted 
teeth. She drew a weapon from her waistband. 
One of the ray guns she and Jake had taken. She 
155 

was grinning. She was vibrating with a dangerous 
energy. 
Back out into the mall. Hork-Bajir had cor-
nered a lot of the shoppers. But other people 
were running around in panic. One had a gun. He 
fired at a nearby Hork-Bajir. The Hork-Bajir fired 
back. The man sizzled and disappeared. 
Rachel fired. The Hork-Bajir emulated his 
own victim. 
"Up the escalator," Rachel said. 
We ran for the escalator. It was still operating. 
We ran, taking the moving steps two at a time. 
Then, at the lower landing, a Hork-Bajir ap-
peared. 
He leaped! Jake tried to fire, but the monster 
was on him. Jake and the Hork-Bajir slammed 
back into Rachel and me. We rolled, bunched 
and tangled, while the rising steps kept punch-
ing me in the back. 
Jake had lost his weapon! Rachel had not. 
But she couldn't get a clear shot. I dug in my 
heels, braced her, and yelled, "Do it!" 
She fired. 
Tseeeew! 
The Hork-Bajir sizzled. 
We were up and climbing the escalator to the 
next level. Two more Hork-Bajir! 
Tseeeew! 
Rachel fired. The Hork-Bajir fired. The esca-
156 
lator slammed us into one of the monsters as he 
was disintegrating. It was like grabbing an elec-
trical power line. I was knocked flat. Rachel fell 
on top of me. I watched helplessly as her weapon 
clattered away. 
The escalator deposited us in a heap on the 
landing. Jake jumped up. The remaining Hork-
Bajir loomed over him. Jake looked so small. So 
weak. There was nothing he could do. 
The monster was going to take us. Infest us. 
The Yeerk pool, that dark cavern, that hellish 
place. I saw it in my mind, but I had never seen 
it! 
"Why?" I asked the creature as he loomed over 
us. 
He did not answer. Instead, his head rolled 
off his shoulders, hit the escalator, and bounded 
heavily toward us. The forehead blades caught. It 
stopped, staring, expression unchanged. 
The body fell. But as it collapsed a thin arm 
and many-fingered hand snatched the ray gun 
from its lifeless hand. 
We reached the top. And there, holding the 
weapon, was the blue centaur. The Andalite. 
He ignored us and started away. But three 
more Hork-Bajir were on him now. 
He whipped his tail. The closest Hork-Bajir 
fell. But the other two were too close to avoid. 
Slash! 
157 

The Andalite's flank was deeply cut. The hand 
holding the weapon hung limp. 
Jake lunged. Slid on the polished marble 
floor, slid beneath the staggering Andalite, tried 
to grab the weapon. 
But he was nearly stomped by flashing An-
dalite hooves and the huge Tyrannosaurus feet of 
the Hork-Bajir. 
That's when Rachel stepped swiftly behind 
one of the Hork-Bajir. She was carrying the head. 
The bladed Hork-Bajir head. She lifted it high 
and slammed it down, blades out. She buried the 
Hork-Bajir's head blades in his comrade. 
"Aaahhh!" 
Jake yanked the weapon from the Andalite, 
spun, and fired. 
Tseeeew! 
A Hork-Bajir dropped, sizzling, seeming to fry 
as it disappeared. 
<Thank you,> the Andalite said calmly. 
I bent over and threw up. 
<Give me the weapon, please,> the alien de-
manded. 
"I don't think so," Jake snapped. 
<l am attempting to save your species,> the 
Andalite said. <And I observe that you have lost 
two weapons already.> 
Fwapp! 
His tail snapped like a bullwhip. It hit Jake's 
158 
hand and knocked the weapon away. The An-
dalite snatched it up with his good hand. 
<And now, a third. Again, thank you.> 
I said, "Ax! Ax . . . Axim. Ax . . ." The word 
was there, on the tip of my tongue, but I couldn't 
quite reach it. 
The creature's stalk eyes jerked toward me. 
<Do we know each other?> 
"Yes," I said. I wiped the puke from my mouth 
with the back of my sleeve. "Not here, not this 
way. I don't know how, but someway, somehow 
yes, we know each other." 
He scanned behind himself with one stalk 
eye, raised the weapon, and fired over his shoul-
der. A Hork-Bajir took a glancing blow that disin-
tegrated his right arm and shoulder. The creature 
toppled over the rail and fell. 
"Andalite!" it screamed. 
The effect of that one word was electric. The 
Hork-Bajir below us who had not seen the battle 
on the second floor immediately forgot about 
their human captives. 
<Are you able to run on those two legs?> the 
Andalite asked skeptically. 
"Dude," Jake said, "we can fly on these two 
legs." 
<You must lead me to the roof of this struc-
ture. There is a very slight chance that we can 
succeed.> 
159 

"Follow me," I said. I hauled toward the ser-
vice corridor that would lead to the roof. 
All the bad guys were coming upstairs now. 
Up the stairs, up the escalators, even trying to 
jump the fifteen feet or so straight up. And fail-
ing. 
It was insane! No way we'd make it. We were 
done for. We were dead. Like Marco. 
And yet, I was blazing! I was jazzed like noth-
ing I've ever known before. I had gone after a 
seven-foot-tall alien monster and taken him 
down! Me! 
Narrow stairs ahead, crammed with what 
Cassie had called Hork-Bajir. 
160 
The Andalite aimed and fired. Smart boy. He 
fired into the mass on the stairs, not the couple 
who'd already made it to the top. That would 
slow the ones coming up and make the couple al-
ready up here feel cut off. 
We raced past them. 
"There! That hallway! Right by Sam Goody!" 
Tseeeew! Tseeeew! 
The glass front of the CD store blew into 
shards. 
Down the hallway, panting, running, sneakers 
squeaking on tile. Down, past the bathrooms, 
turn left. 
Tseeew! Tseeew! 
I felt the heat of it. Hah-hah! Missed me! 
Ten feet to the door. I slammed hard against 
it. Backed off, scrabbled at the doorknob. "It's 
locked!" 
Fwapp! 
The Andalite's tail snapped. A gash appeared 
in the sheet metal of the door. I reared back and 
kicked it. It popped open. 
Inside a metal stairway. Ten steps and a land-
ing. Ten more and another landing. Ten more and 
we were at the door that led outside onto the 
roof. 
"Ax, or whatever your name is, shoot the 
stairs!" Jake yelled. 
161 

The Andalite hesitated. I don't think he ap-
preciated being told what to do. But Jake was 
right. 
The Andalite leaned slightly forward and fired 
at the stairs themselves. 
Tseeeeeeeeew! 
He held the trigger down till the metal twisted 
and bubbled and burned away. I had to pull back 
to avoid having my eyebrows scorched off. 
When I looked again two flights of stairs were 
gone. 
The Andalite said, <When we exit, we will 
need to move swiftly and decisively. There is a 
ship. We are going to take it.> 
"Say what?" I blurted. 
<Follow me.> 
We opened the door and stepped out onto the 
acres of gravel roof. 
And there, fifty yards away, approximately on 
top of Williams-Sonoma and Eddie Bauer, 
crouched a black ship that was all sharp edges 
and mean attitude. 
We started running, with the Andalite out 
front. 
There was a ramp leading up into the ship. 
Fifty yards. And not a Hork-Bajir in sight. Not a 
guard. Of course not, why bother? What kind of 
an idiot was going to try and run toward that 
ship? 
162 
Our kind of idiot. 
The Andalite kicked up the gravel. We raced 
along behind him. Something was coming down 
the ramp. 
Tseeeew! 
Now nothing was coming down the ramp. 
Under the shadow of the ship! We hit the 
ramp. Hork-Bajir above us. 
Tseeeew! 
More! Aiming at us. 
"Yaaahh!" I screamed and lunged. 
I felt the wind off the Hork-Bajir arm as it 
blew past me. I never felt the wrist blade. 
I hit the corrugated steel floor. Rolled onto my 
side. Saw bright lights and moving shapes. The 
movements grew slower. . . slower. . . 
Stop. 
163 

"Rachel!" I cried. 
Cassie was screaming. Screaming like she'd 
never stop. 
I grabbed Cassie. Pulled her to me. Dragged 
her with me. Couldn't look back. Couldn't see 
what had happened to my beautiful cousin. 
Tseeeew! 
The Andalite fired again and again. I saw a ray 
gun on the floor, clasped in a dead hand. I pried 
it free. 
I was holding Cassie by the hand. Pulling her 
along with me. 
Tseeeew! 
I felt the charge jolt my fingers. I let go of a 
hand that was no longer there. 
164 
Cassie sizzled and disappeared. Simply evap-
orated. 
I stared at the blank space where she had 
been. I stared at my hand. I was moaning. A 
weird sound. Moaning. Like a hurt animal. No 
sound that any human would make. 
<Come!> the Andalite snapped. 
I realized everything was quiet now. The Hork-
Bajir bodies were everywhere. The air reeked of 
charred flesh. 
I followed the Andalite, stumbling blindly. 
Down dim corridors. Past locked steel hatches. 
A hatch opened, a Hork-Bajir head appeared. 
It stared in shock. "Andalite!" 
Fwapp! 
The Andalite struck. I realized now that it had 
been hurt again. It was staggering. Bleeding. But 
determined. 
<The bridge. Have to reach the bridge.> 
We emerged from the hallway into a wider, 
more open space. There were display monitors 
that seemed to hang, formless, in midair. Three 
monstrously huge centipedes manned controls. 
And standing in the middle of it all was an-
other Andalite. Older-looking. Different. 
The Andalite called Ax stopped suddenly. He 
was weaving like a drunk. 
<Visser Three,> he said. 
<Yes. And you must be the Andalite who es-
165 

caped from the wreck of the Dome ship. How en-
terprising of you.> 
"He's one of your people," I muttered. 
<No,> the Andalite said. He sounded weary. 
<Looks can be deceiving.> 
The Andalite raised his weapon. 
Fwapp! 
The creature called Visser Three struck with 
his tail. The Andalite stared stupidly down with 
his main eyes at the stump of his arm. 
The Andalite was between me and Visser 
Three. 
I raised my own weapon . . . 
Visser Three lunged. 
. . . fired. 
Tseeew! 
Missed! 
Fwapp! 
I hit the ground. 
Then Cassie fired. 
Tseeeew! 
Cassie? 
Visser Three's upper body sizzled and disap-
peared. The deerlike lower half fell over, lifeless. 
"No, no, no!" It was a voice that dripped sar-
casm and contempt. But it was annoyed, too. 
"She's dead! The girl was dead! This is really too 
much!" 
166 
Cassie came rushing over to me. She knelt 
down and helped me to my feet. 
The Andalite stared weirdly at me. And more 
so at Cassie. 
"It's breaking up," Cassie said. 
"What is?" 
She shook her head. "I don't know. I . . . I 
don't know what to call it. But it's falling apart." 
The Andalite calmly shot the three big cen-
tipedes. Then he stepped to the controls and 
seconds later the bridge was sealed off. 
<They can break through, eventually. But 
Yeerks are rigidly structured. All commands must 
come from the bridge. They will not have an aux-
iliary controls 
I hugged Cassie close, disbelieving. I'd seen 
her die. Hadn't I? 
"What are we doing?" I asked the Andalite. 
<l am currently broadcasting a request for 
help to any and all Andalite fleet elements.> 
"Your guys can save us?" 
<No,> he said. <But they may be able to save 
your people. What we can do is make the arrival 
of the Andalite fleet less dangerous for them and 
more beneficial for your kind.> 
"How are we going to do that?" 
The Andalite didn't answer. Instead he or-
dered a transparent panel to appear. I was look-
167 

ing out at Earth. I could see the North American 
continent clearly. 
We had lifted off and flown into orbit without 
my noticing a thing. 
And then there was a gorilla. It was just there. 
Squatting in the corner. 
"Oh, this is wrong!" the angry, grating voice 
from nowhere cried again. "This isn't it at all!" 
"What's that voice?" I asked. "And what's a 
gorilla doing here?" 
<Gorilla? I'm a gorilla? Ahh! I'm a gorilla.> 
Marco? It was his voice. Coming directly from 
the gorilla. 
"It's coming apart quickly now," Cassie said, 
still staring weirdly around, like nothing she was 
seeing was real. 
"Ax! What is all this? You're the alien, man, 
what is going on?" 
The Andalite winced a little at the question. 
Then, obviously reluctant to admit ignorance, he 
said, <l do not know.> He looked at Cassie with 
both stalk eyes. <Perhaps she does.> 
"It's all a part of it," Cassie said in a sort of 
whisper. "It's coming apart." 
<There it is. The Yeerk pool ship,> the An-
dalite announced. 
"What now?" I demanded. 
<Now, I will aim every weapon this ship pos-
sesses — and it possesses a great many very 
168 
powerful weapons — and I will annihilate the 
Pool ship and every Yeerk on it.> 
<ln five seconds . . . > 
<Four. . . > 
<Three . . . > 
169 

c Iw 
< iwo . . . > 
"Oh, all right, all right!" the disembodied 
voice cried. "Stop it, stop it." 
A thing, an alien, I suppose, something, any-
way, that looked an awful lot like a small di-
nosaur with the skin of a prune, appeared. 
The Andalite stepped back from the controls, 
ready to shoot this latest enemy. 
He fired. The energy beam traveled half the 
distance to the alien, then froze. Simply stopped. 
"It was the girl, wasn't it?" the prune thing 
said, rolling its green-rimmed eyes upward. "She 
corrupted the time flow." 
Now a second figure appeared. He could have 
been a little old man. If you ignored the fact that 
170 
he was kind of bluish. And glowing. I had the 
sense that he was no such thing, but that was his 
appearance. 
This creature, this old man, laughed. "It's not 
so easy, is it, Drode?" 
"You cheated me, Ellimist," the Drode 
snapped. "We had a deal, a trade-off. You were 
allowed to meddle with the time line in the Falla 
Kadrat situation, and we, my master Crayak and 
I, were to be allowed to tempt this young jackal 
here." He stabbed a finger at me. 
"I kept my bargain," the Ellimist said. "I have 
done nothing to bring about this result. The girl 
is an anomaly. She is sub-temporally grounded. 
You were careless." 
"She's a freak of nature!" the Drode screamed. 
The Ellimist nodded. "Yes. She is." 
Marco said, "What is going on here?" He was 
no longer a gorilla. "I'm pretty sure I was dead, 
then I'm a gorilla." 
"Oh, I see it now, I see it now," the Drode 
said, ignoring Marco, ignoring all of us. "Subtle 
as always, Ellimist. Your meddling came before, 
didn't it? How could we not have seen it? Elfan-
gor's brother? His time-shifted son? This anom-
alous girl here? And the son of Visser One's 
host body? A group of six supposedly random hu-
mans that contains those four! You stacked the 
deck!" 
171 

"Did I?" The Ellimist laughed. "That would 
have been very clever of me." 
The Drode spat in disgust. "You knew the girl 
was an anomaly. You knew she was sub-tempo-
rally grounded. And you knew that whatever time 
line I built, her presence would eventually de-
stabilize it. She knew from the start that the 
time line had shifted. She felt it. I might as well 
have terminated this exercise then. I saw the sud-
den, inexplicable transportation of the mother, I 
thought, well, it's a glitch! The hands morphing 
to tiger. All the little breakdowns of logic and se-
quence. I still thought it might hold together." 
Cassie said, "Is anyone going to tell us what 
is going on here?" 
The Ellimist winked at her. And suddenly, 
alive, in the room with us, were Rachel and that 
kid Tobias. 
"Does this feel more right, Cassie?" the El-
limist asked. 
She nodded. "This is everyone. Only Tobias 
should be . . ." 
As I watched in amazement, Tobias seemed 
to melt, to shift, to dwindle. In seconds there was 
a hawk where he had been. 
"Most creatures live entirely within their time 
line," the Ellimist said. "Like a person trapped in 
a single room. They see only what is within those 
four walls. Others . . . like yourself, Cassie, can 
172 
see beyond those walls. Can see other rooms, as 
though the walls were translucent. You felt the 
change. You sensed that things were not right. 
You could see, only dimly, but still you could see 
beyond. You could see what should be, where 
you belonged, and without consciously knowing it 
you were working to repair what had been torn 
apart. To reconstitute time as it should have 
been. You were a virus in the software. You de-
graded the subtle workings of the Drode's artifi-
cial time shunt." 
"I have absolutely no idea what you're talking 
about," Cassie said. 
"You were in this time line, but of another. 
That is an anomaly. An impossibility. One of the 
two time lines was doomed to fail. You grounded 
the true time line. And thus, this time line began 
to fall to pieces." 
"Who are you two?" I demanded of the Ellim-
ist and the Drode. 
"He's an old cheat," the Drode snapped. 
"There are rules, Ellimist!" 
"Yes. And I obeyed them. I allowed you to 
create this alternate time line. And in this time 
line these humans and this Andalite came very 
close to annihilating the Yeerk presence. You sus-
pended the exercise. Not me. You can continue 
this time line, or allow these young ones to return 
to their own times." 
173 

The Drode's face was twisted with hatred. 
"Crayak will have him yet." 
He was talking about me. I knew it suddenly. 
I knew who I was. I knew it all. I was myself once 
more. Leader of the Animorphs. 
With that knowledge came a sledgehammer 
of guilt. 
It was all my fault! I had weakened. I'd said 
yes to the Drode. I'd given in. Marco, Rachel, 
Cassie, Tobias, all dead — at least in this real-
ity — because I had weakened and taken the 
Drode's offer. 
"Perhaps, Drode. Perhaps Crayak will have 
him," the Ellimist said. "But, then again, per-
haps he will have Crayak." 
The Drode disappeared. The six of us, the An-
imorphs, stood there on the wrecked bridge of 
the Blade ship with the nearly all-powerful crea-
ture called the Ellimist. 
"At least we'd have won in this time line," I 
said. 
He shook his head. "Yes. But you all would 
have died. And millions of humans, too, before 
the victory." 
"I gave in," I whispered. "I gave in." 
"You have been strong for a long time," he said. 
"He shouldn't have to be," Rachel erupted 
angrily. "None of us should have to. This is 
enough. This has gone on too long!" 
174 
Tobias said, <l wouldn't. I wouldn't have done 
it, would I? I couldn't have ever gone to The 
Sharing. That was wrong. No way.> 
"Of course you wouldn't," Rachel growled. 
I said, "Ellimist, is there anything better in 
our real time line? Will it happen any better, 
there? Will it, at least, ever end?" 
The Ellimist looked at me. Just at me. Sadly, 
I thought. Pitying. 
"It will end," he said. "It will end." 
I wanted to ask him more. But I knew that 
was all I'd get. 
"So, what happens now?" Cassie asked. 
The Ellimist took her hand and held it affec-
tionately. "What will happen now? Only you will 
ever recall so much as a dim memory of this time 
line." 
Cassie nodded, as though she'd half expected 
him to say that. "But I'll say nothing about it. 
Tobias can't know that he might have become a 
voluntary Controller. And Jake can't know that he 
ever weakened enough to take the Drode's deal." 
"You are wise," the Ellimist said. 
"Yeah, and I sure don't want to know that I 
ever dated Marco," Rachel added. 
"How do we get back?" I asked. "How do 
we—" 
175 

TTelp me. I'm cold." 
Another battle. Another horror. 
Couldn't anything make it end? Was there no 
way out? Was I trapped, fighting, fighting till one 
by one my friends died or went nuts? 
I lay on my bed. Stared up at the ceiling. 
"Help me. Please. I'm cold." 
Into the cave, Cassie. 
All for what? For nothing. To delay the Yeerks, 
but never to win. And someday, to lose. 
Was there no way out? 
"There's always a way out, Jake the Mighty," 
a voice said. "My lord Crayak holds out his om-
nipotent hand to you, Jake the Yeerk Killer. Jake 
the Ellimist's tool." 
176 
I sat up. I knew the voice. 
The Drode stood by my desk. It wasn't large. 
It perched forward like one of those small di-
nosaurs. It had mean, smart eyes in a humanoid 
head. It was wrinkled, dark green or purple 
maybe. So dark it was almost black. The mocking 
mouth was lined with green. 
The Drode was Crayak's creature, his emis-
sary, his tool. Crayak was . . . Crayak was evil. A 
power so vast, so complete that only the Ellimist 
could keep him in check. A balance of terror: evil 
and good checking each other, limiting each 
other, making deals that affected the survival of 
entire solar systems. 
"Go away," I said to the Drode. 
"But you called me." 
"Go back to Crayak. Leave me alone." 
The Drode smiled. He got up and moved 
closer. Closer till his face was only inches from 
my own. 
"There is a way out," the Drode whispered. 
"Say the word and it never was, Jake. Say the 
word, Jake, and you never walked through the 
construction site. Say the word and you know 
nothing. No weight on your shoulders. Say the 
word." 
"Go away," I said through gritted teeth. 
"How long till your cousin Rachel loses her 
grip? You know the darkness is growing inside 
177 
D A Y 
Z E R O 

her. How long till Tobias dies, a bird, a bird\ How 
can he ever be happy? How long till Marco is 
forced to destroy his own Controller mother? Will 
he survive that, do you think? How long, Jake, till 
you kill Tom? Then what dreams will come, Jake 
theYeerk Killer?" 
"Get out of here. Crawl back under your rock." 
"It will happen, Jake. You know that. The 
cave. The day will come. You know what the cave 
is, Jake. You know what it means, that dark cave. 
You know that death is within. When she dies, 
when Cassie dies, it will be at your word, Jake." 
I covered my face with my hands. 
"My master Crayak offers you an escape. In 
his compassion Great Crayak has struck a deal 
with that meddling nitwit Ellimist. Crayak would 
free you, Jake. Crayak would free you all. All will 
be as it would have been if you had simply taken 
a different path home." 
I saw that moment again. At the mall. Decid-
ing whether to take the safe, well-lit, sensible 
way home. Or the route that would take us 
through the construction site, and to a meeting 
that would change everything. 
Undo it. Undo it all. No more war. No more 
pain and fear and guilt? 
"Just one word, Jake," the Drode whispered. 
"No . . . no, two, I think, one must not sacrifice 
good manners. Two words and it never was. Two 
178 
words and you know nothing, have no power, no 
responsibility." 
"What words?" 
"One is Crayak. The other is please." 
I wanted to say no. 
I wanted to say no . . . 
I wanted . . . 
I opened my mouth to speak. 
"Oh, forget it. Never mind," the Drode said 
angrily. 
179 

