
C H A P T E R 1 
Whummph! 
BAAAM! 
I slammed the Hork-Bajir into the concrete. 
Pinned him against the subbasement wall with 
two massive tiger paws. 
His red eyes burned with hatred. His face was 
a twisted horror as he pushed back, desperate to 
free his tail blade from behind his body. 
I strained to reach the scarred, saddle-leather 
flesh of his neck. To rip out the throat. 
By the way, I'm Jake. 
Can't tell you much more than that. Like my 
last name or where I live. I can't even tell you 
where I go to school. Here's what I can tell you: 
Earth is being invaded by parasitic slugs called i 

Yeerks. Still with me? Pretty hard to believe, 
huh? See, humans seem to be their latest prefer-
ence in host bodies. They take thousands a day. 
Make them into slaves. They just squeeze into 
your ear canal. Wrap themselves around your 
brain. Tap into your memories and dreams. And 
then they tpke over. You can't even decide when 
to blink. No control at all. It's like your skull be-
comes a prison. And you're trapped in your own 
head. No way out. 
My friends Marco, Rachel, Cassie, Tobias, an 
alien kid we call Ax, and I are the only active resis-
tance. So now you're asking yourself, "How are 
six kids preventing the total takeover of Earth?" 
Well, we were given the power to turn into any ani-
mal we touch. To actually acquire the animal's 
DNA. To morph. The Andalite technology was a gift 
to us from Ax's older brother, Elfangor. After he 
crash-landed, and before he was murdered. 
So anyway, we're the only ones fighting back. 
We managed to slow the Yeerks down a little. But 
it was getting harder to keep up the fight. Harder 
to keep it together. 
"Hhhhhrrroooowwwwrrrr!" I roared. 
He faltered and I lunged forward. Missed! His 
tail broke free and he slashed! 
And carved a hole in my underbelly! 
I watched, stunned and helpless. Those were 
my guts, spilling from my body! I froze up for one 
2 
instant too long. He pushed me down onto pipes 
that. . . 
Tsssssssssss! 
<AHHHHHH!> 
My fur was smoking, my flesh scalded! 
Adrenaline cracked through my chest like a 
whip. I was up again, face-to-face with a Yeerk-
infested Hork-Bajir. 
I had one more chance with this guy. This 
was it. And suddenly the vividness of the scene 
seemed to recede. 
Don't get me wrong. My guts were still spilling 
out of my belly. Exhaustion still pressed on my 
shoulders like a granite slab. But I was in a new 
zone. It was him or me. 
Claws bared, teeth flashing, I leaped. 
WHAM! 
Heaved him into the wall. 
WHAM! 
Plowed him into the concrete. His skull hit 
hard. 
WHAM! 
His tail dropped. His eyes went lazy, then 
rolled up into his head. He groaned weakly and 
slid down the wall. 
We were three floors underground, in the 
dark, dank subbasement of a downtown high-
rise. Pipes and ducts ran close overhead. You 
could hear cries and growls from floor to ceiling 
3 

and wall to wall. I wheeled around. And only then 
did I see how insanely bad things were. 
We were completely outnumbered. 
Cassie was one against two. Marco one on 
four. 
I had to help them! 
But I'd drawn a living barrier. Five battle-
hardened Hork-Bajir, holding their blades like 
cocky gunslingers, were closing in on me like the 
walls of a collapsing room. 
Just beyond the Hork-Bajir was what looked 
like — what I hoped was an exit. A steel accor-
dion door thirty feet away, opposite the stairs. 
<Everybody out, now! Get to the door!> I 
yelled, but the other screams and cries and 
crashes drowned out my words. 
<More on the stairs! And Taxxons. I can smell 
them!> My best friend, Marco. Every quaking syl-
lable told me he was at the end of his strength. 
I caught a glimpse of Rachel, hobbling toward 
the sound of shock troops pouring down the 
stairs. <Come on!> Her voice cracked. Blood 
gushed from gashes around her eyes, blinding 
her. <Where are they?!> She slashed her grizzly 
bear paws wildly. 
<Rachel, no!> 
Three Hork-Bajir struck. Ran her across the 
room like a football-tackling dummy. 
"TSEEER!" 
4 
Tobias swooped and plunged, talons first. One 
Hork-Bajir fell off, clutching his eyes. Cassie 
clamped on to another's heel and yanked her 
steel-trap jaws from side to side. 
Rachel was still helpless. 
I backed up nervously. I was surrounded, 
closed off from the others by the approaching 
Hork-Bajir barricade. My butt hit the concrete 
wall. 
I reared up and roared. Seven hundred pounds 
of ripping claws and slicing teeth. Fluid strength. 
Mercurial speed. The male Siberian tiger. The 
biggest cat in the world. 
But my roar echoed back unmasked. I heard 
false confidence. I detected despair. 
"Ghafrash nyut!" said a voice like gravel. 
"Die!" 
The nearest Hork-Bajir lunged, blades flash-
ing. 
Mouth open, I leaped. My fangs sank in deep, 
past the armor of skin. Into the meat. 
He jerked back and fell under my weight. I 
rolled off and slammed to the floor. My right ear! 
Still stuck to his wrist blade! Sliced off! 
Two more were on me. I'd forgotten any 
thought of victory. Now it was simply a mindless 
struggle. A blade embedded in my left hind 
leg . . . Focus, Jake. Survive. 
FWAAP! 
5 

A tail blade cleaved the air above me. Blue 
fur. 
It was Ax. 
Fwaap, fwaap, fwaap! 
Two assailants slumped and crumpled to the 
floor. A third screamed and cradled his knees. 
<Prince Jake, if we do not leave now, we never 
will.> 
Movement. 
<Ax!> I cried. <Hit the floor!> 
Ax ducked. The bladed body of a Hork-Bajir 
whistled through the air. 
Then there was a fierce metallic crash and 
hiss. 
Psssssssssh h h h htttttt! 
A cracked steam pipe! An explosion of steam! 
Pressurized fog billowed across the floor. It en-
veloped the room, everyone and everything. Con-
fusion took over. 
Now or never. 
<Now!> I ordered. <Bail!> It was impossible 
to see more than an inch ahead. The scalding 
cloud burned my skin and eyes and throat. Chok-
ing on steam, bodychecking Hork-Bajir, I ran for 
the parking garage door and slammed my bloody 
mass on the weight-sensitive panel. The door be-
gan to creak open, inching up at first, then rising 
rapidly. Six inches, twelve inches, eighteen. 
6 
Cassie squeezed out through the opening. 
Then Ax. Tobias. 
<l'll kill them!> It was Rachel's voice. Raving 
like someone possessed. <Get your hands off 
me, Marco! I'll kill them! I'll kill them!> 
<Shut the door, Jake!> Marco roared. <There 
are more on the stairs!> 
<Marco, Rachel, get out of here now!> 
<We can't. Rachel's . . . can't leave her. You 
cut the Yeerks off or it'll be too late!> He was 
breathless, but insistent. <We'll find some other 
way out.> 
A Hork-Bajir emerged from the steam cloud, 
saw me, and broke into a run. Time was definitely 
not on my side today. 
Lose everyone, or lose two? 
I dropped and rolled under the door, sprang 
up and broke the glass box that housed the emer-
gency close switch. Engaged the switch. 
What alternative did I have? What choice? 
The door ground to a halt, hesitated, then 
changed directions, descending like a slow but 
certain guillotine. Cassie's wolf eyes fixed on me. 
<What are you doing? You can't trap them in 
there. You can't leave them!> 
7 

C H A P T E R 2 
The lone Hork-Bajir dove and skidded under 
the door. I grabbed him, mouth and claws. We 
tumbled. It was like being stuffed in the clothes 
dryer with ten razor-sharp kitchen knives. 
I used my weight, my fangs, the last of my 
strength. When his muscles finally slackened, I 
stumbled away. The accordion door was almost 
closed. 
I looked through the crack and there, like a 
mirage, was Marco's gorilla form emerging from 
the steam cloud. He was dragging a roaring, 
slashing Rachel. And not more than six feet be-
hind them, a dozen Hork-Bajir. 
Ax grabbed a length of pipe and wedged it be-
8 
tween the floor and door. The gears shrieked to a 
crawl. 
Then the pipe began to bend. 
Cassie screamed. 
The crunching metal door was just inches from 
the floor when thick, black fingers wrapped around 
the bottom. And with inconceivable strength, 
Marco heaved it up. Forced Rachel through. She 
was a bloody mess. 
Marco stooped, crawled under the door, and 
released the pipe. Four Hork-Bajir dove for the 
opening. Slid, clattered, reached the door just 
as . . . 
BOOM! 
It crashed shut. No Hork-Bajir made it through. 
In one piece, anyway. 
<Demorph!> I yelled. 
We raced up the empty, spiral parking ramp. 
I demorphed as I ran. Orange-, white-, black-, 
and red-striped fur thinned to a fuzz, then disap-
peared. My tail shrank into my coccyx. The guts 
that hung from my belly were drawn back in. 
Bones shifted, rearranged, and threw me onto 
my hind legs. I tripped and stumbled against the 
wall. My front legs were absorbed and then re-
issued as human arms. Back legs extended, paws 
minimized, claws grew into toes and fingers. 
"Let's get out of here!" 
9 

We plateaued onto level pavement, our trans-
formations complete. We sprinted, breathless, 
down a row of parked cars. Shot past a dumb-
founded attendant who saw a hawk and five kids 
in spandex tear into a downtown street. 
A busy downtown street. 
"Look out!" 
Honk! Honk! 
Drivers slammed on their horns. Cars screeched 
to a halt. 
I jumped back between parked cars on the 
side of the street. Rachel and Marco ran for the 
sidewalk. 
"Cassie!" 
She was in the middle of the street, frozen. 
I ran back into the lanes. A driver opened his 
car door. "Punks!" He shook his fist. "Bunch of 
no good . . . " 
I grabbed Cassie's arm. Yanked her out of 
traffic. Dodged into the alley where Marco and 
Rachel had turned in, following Ax. 
"Cassie!" I shook her roughly. She came to. 
"Four of them," she said anxiously. "I may 
have killed four back there, maybe five." She 
searched my eyes, her usual calm shattered. 
"Jake!" she whispered. "How do I deal with 
this?" 
I gently pushed her down along the alley, 
10 
shushing her, and looking back over my shoulder. 
The Yeerks could still be on the trail. 
"Every day we're more like them," she per-
sisted. "Aren't we?" Tears welled over her lower 
lids. "Jake?" 
I didn't have the energy for this. The doubt, 
the introspection, the analysis. I just didn't have 
the energy. 
"No," I said flatly. 
Why was she doing this? Why now? Yeah, we'd 
just had one of the closest calls I could remember. 
We'd had to scrap the mission and now the new 
Yeerk-pool entrance would open on schedule. But 
the brutality was nothing we hadn't done a hun-
dred times before. 
She began to cry almost noiselessly. I knew 
she needed to talk things over. She needed to 
work through the confusion we all feel after a 
battle and she wanted me to help. 
But I walked away. 
Marco and Rachel were up ahead, farther 
down the alley. 
"You're wrong!" Rachel cried, still pumped. 
"I could have brought them all down." Her fist 
slammed the Dumpster. Marco kicked it even 
more violently. 
"You had blood in your eyes! You couldn't 
even see the reinforcements swarming down the 
11 

stairs. You acted like an idiot. A selfish, crazy, 
whacked-out..." 
"Relax," I said, stepping between them like 
the leader I was supposed to be. Marco didn't lis-
ten. 
"You're about to blow, Rachel." His face was 
bright red, hot from exertion and frustration. 
"Haven't you learned anything? You put everyone 
at risk by hanging back when Jake said to bail. 
We can't always cater to your personal need to 
bash heads." 
"But as long as we follow Marco's righteous 
program, everything's fine?" She picked up an 
empty can and heaved it across the alley. 
"Mighty Marco can just. . ." 
"Forget about saving your life next time?" 
"I said relaxl" I shouted. 
There was a sudden rustling on the far side of 
the Dumpster. We tensed instantly. 
Around the corner peeked a boy, an oddly 
good-looking kid. 
Rachel gave a snort. 
It was Ax, in human morph. 
"I have not heard from Tobias," Ax said to 
me. 
"Try again. Ask him if we're clear." 
I looked up at the strip of late-evening sky vis-
ible from the alley. A raptor's form floated over 
then disappeared behind a glassy high-rise. 
12 
"Oh, that's really great! What a guy. So he's 
off the clock now?" Marco walked around behind 
the Dumpster and began to morph. "I'm going 
home." 
I kept watching the sky. Rachel, already 
morphed to bald eagle, powered her body up past 
the bricks. I knew she was going after Tobias. 
Ever since a Yeerk sub-visser held and tortured 
him, Tobias hadn't been the same. Even more 
time spent alone now than before. Withdrawn, 
despondent. 
Not good. 
"Prince Jake," Ax said. "Should we meet in 
the barn tonight and attempt the mission again 
tomorrow?" 
I sighed. Cassie's sobs were intermittent now. 
She rose from the pavement, from the shadow of 
a pile of cardboard boxes, and walked slowly 
toward the street. 
"I don't know, Ax," I said, watching Cassie. 
"Will you do me a favor, though? Will you make 
sure she gets home okay?" 
13 

: C H A P T E R 3 
I headed home alone. 
I demorphed in a tree in my front yard. I knew 
it was risky, being so close to the house and all, 
but I was drunk with exhaustion. When I dropped 
to the grass, my legs went limp under me. 
The gravel stabbed my bare feet as I stag-
gered up the path. The porch light was on. The 
other lights out. 
I paused with my hand on the doorknob and 
glanced down at my body. Spandex bike shorts 
and tight T-shirt. I looked like I should be giving 
a testimonial on a Tae Bo infomercial. I had regu-
lar clothes stashed in the garage. I needed to put 
them on. 
14 
The garage. It seemed so far away. I was so 
tired, my muscles ached . . . 
I pushed open the door. Forget about my nor-
mal clothes. My parents, if they were home, 
would probably just think this morphing outfit 
was some new fashion. You know — something 
Rachel thought up. Well, she says this is cutting 
edge or something. 
My brother Tom, my brother with a Yeerk in 
his head, would never buy that one. 
But Tom wasn't home. Friday night meant he 
was at The Sharing. The front organization for 
Controllers. 
I opened the fridge, grabbed a leftover slice 
of pizza, and started to stuff my face. I left the 
kitchen to climb the stairs to bed. One, two, 
three . . . I could feel it already, my head hitting 
the pillow, sleep descending. Dreams would 
come. No nightmares. Just dreams of. . . 
"Jake?" 
My head snapped up. A piece of pizza crust 
lodged in my throat. 
The voice was loud and mocking. "Bare feet? 
You been riding your bike barefoot? At night?" 
It was Tom. He stood at the top of the stairs. 
Tall and confident. Blocking my path. Guess it 
was a quick night at The Sharing. 
I coughed, hacking up the pizza crust. 
15 

"Hey," I said, forcing a half-smile. " I , uh . . . I 
was over at Marco's. Watching the game. It went 
into overtime and, well, Detroit scored and Marco 
jumped up and smacked a Pepsi all over my jeans 
and sneakers. I left them there to get washed." 
"Yeah?" Tom said, frown fading. "Well, you 
look pretty stupid. But that's really not unusual, 
is it?" He was smirking now. 
"Whatever," I ran up the rest of the stairs and 
jabbed him in the stomach, the way a little 
brother would. 
He fell to the floor, feigning injury, but hooked 
my foot and tripped me as I walked into my 
room. 
We laughed. 
"I'm gonna crash," I said, recovering my bal-
ance. "I'm beat." 
"Yeah. Fine." He headed for his room. Did he 
buy it? Did he believe the lies I'd grown so used 
to telling? The fake-nice routine I put on for a 
brother who's not a brother at all anymore, but 
the enemy? 
I dropped into bed. Pulled the blanket up to 
my neck. Began to shut my . . . 
A noise in the doorway. 
I shot up. Flicked on the lamp. 
"Hey, Midget?" Tom poked his head around 
my door frame. "Was that blood on your leg?" 
16 
My breathing stopped. 
Sometimes, when you demorph, the blood of 
battle stays behind. 
"Uh." My voice faltered. My brain slowed. 
"You know about my bike. It stinks. The stupid 
chain catches my skin. I should get Dad to buy 
me a new one." I dropped back onto my pillow. 
Switched off the light. 
Waited. 
Tom let it go. 
But when I glanced once more at my bedroom 
doorway, Tom's shadow was still there. Did he 
have something more to say? 
I was too tired to ask. Sleep was dragging 
down my eyelids. 
Whatever it was could wait till morning. 
Eyes closed, I saw Cassie. Watched her soli-
tary figure walking down the alley. Away from 
me. Toward a busy street where cars flashed 
past. 
I saw Tom's leery eyes. Always watching. Polic-
ing. Scheming. Eyes controlled by the very small, 
but very real parasitic slug in his brain. The Yeerk. 
The race of alien invaders, pressing ever forward in 
stealthy conquest of humanity. 
And suddenly, I stood before a giant wall, ris-
ing leagues above my head and running for miles 
in both directions. I had my hand crammed 
17 

against a small hole, from which water slowly 
seeped and bubbled. On the other side I heard 
the raging sea. Pummeling. Pounding. Weaken-
ing, with each lashing, every fiber of the wall. 
And I wondered: Just how long would it hold? 
18 
C H A P T E R 4 
• l 
IE-DEET! DE-DEET! 
The alarm was like a jackhammer to the head. 
I groaned. 
DE-DEET! 
Enough, already! I felt for the clock radio. The 
snooze button. Just five more minutes. 
My hand patted the air. No bedside table? I 
lifted my lids. Where was my . . . 
My heart stopped. 
I was staring into a triangular screen. A flat 
computer panel mounted flush in a peeling, 
white plaster wall across from the bed. Eerie cop-
per letters pulsed at the top of the glowing gray 
screen. 5:58:16 A.M. Below the time flashed the 
19 

words "TO DO" and a single entry: "Report to 
work." 
This was not my bedroom. Not even close. 
DE-DEET! DE-DEET! 
My body stiffened to defense mode and I 
bolted out of bed. 
The alarm stopped. 
My mind, forced into consciousness by the 
shock, hurled me orders. Get out! it warned. Get 
out, get out, get out! 
I raced to a tall black panel in the wall. A 
door. Had to be. 
Get out! 
I tried, but there was no handle. No release 
lever. Nothing. 
I struck it. 
"You are not prepared to leave for work!" said 
a shrill computer voice. 
I pounded even harder. Hammered the panel 
with a cienched fist. A fist that . . . 
I stopped suddenly as I studied my fist. 
It was big. 
I mean it was rough and callused and had 
veins that pumped across the hairy, muscular 
forearm like I belonged to Gold's Gym and actu-
ally used my membership. 
It was the hand and arm of a grown man. 
My heart started up again, pumping now at 
record speed. 
20 
I probed the polished steel door frame for my 
reflection, for the face I knew. 
And yes, there! I saw my eyes, dark as mid-
night. My strong, broad face. My . . . 
I swallowed hard. 
My short-cropped hair? My six-foot frame? 
My day-old beard?! 
I brought a hand to my face. My fingers 
scraped across my chin. Stubble like sixty-grit 
sandpaper. I needed a shave. 
My breath got choppy. My head felt about 
ready to explode. 
The Jake staring back at me was an adult! 
Not crazy old. But out of college a few years. At 
least ten years older than the kid I'd been the 
night before. 
What was going on? Where were the others? 
How did I get to this place? 
My heart was beating entirely too hard. 
I was gonna have a heart attack if I didn't 
calm down. I stumbled back to bed and sat down 
on the narrow strip no wider than a torso. A pad 
on a metal plate. 
"Okay," I said out loud. "Okay." Use your 
brain. Cover the possible explanations. 
An Ellimist trick? Yeah, it had to be. But why 
hadn't he spoken? 
A Yeerk experiment, maybe? Could I have 
been captured? 
21 

It's hard to think straight when you wake up 
like Tom Hanks in that movie Big. At least he 
woke up in his own room, in his own clothes. Sort 
of. I was wearing this weird, faded orange jump-
suit, the color of a sun-bleached Orioles cap. 
I fingered the suit, and then it hit me. 
Of course! 
I knew what was going on here. It had finally 
happened. 
I knew it was only a matter of time, what with 
the pressures of leadership, the violent battle, 
the endless fights against a strengthening en-
emy. 
I'd finally been driven to a complete psy-
chotic breakdown. 
I'd gone crazy. 
And this was my padded cell. 
22 
C H A P T E R 5 
It 
really was a cell. Maybe twelve by twelve. 
But it didn't look very institutional. What it looked 
like was the remodeling job from hell. A bizarre fu-
sion of decaying early-century architecture and 
modern metallic installations. 
Two walls of bubbling plaster rose twelve feet 
to a carved crown molding. An old porcelain sink 
basin stuck out in one corner. Hardwood flooring 
ran underfoot and spilled over into filthy yellow 
linoleum about halfway across. 
Applied over all this old stuff was a second 
phase of construction. Brightly colored metallic 
retrofits sprouted from two gray, synthetic walls. I 
stood up and walked toward a purple, kidney-
shaped pedestal. The top slid off to reveal a golden 
23 

cone. It was decorated — I guess — with a border 
of luminescent tubing. 
Flit, flit, flit. Sheets of soft paper shot at me 
from a slit in the wall and floated to the floor. 
Flit, flit, flit. More paper. 
Whoooosh! 
A violent suction nearly pulled my pant leg 
down the cone. The luminous tubing dimmed. 
The kidney lid slid shut. 
"Evacuation complete!" said the jarring com-
puter voice. I almost smiled. Whoever or what-
ever held me prisoner here was powerful, but 
they had a toilet that was out of order. 
I moved to a tray colored brilliant fuchsia. It sat 
beside an electric blue cylinder. Ghastly stalks re-
tracted the tubes into the wall as I walked closer. 
Whoop. Bam. 
I stared. 
Whoop. Bam. 
They reappeared, steaming with crisp bacon 
and scrambled eggs. Orange juice swirled in a 
blue beaker. 
I certainly wasn't hungry. 
I moved on to a long, narrow panel, solid but 
translucent. Faint natural light shone through it. 
My pulse quickened. A window? Maybe I could 
escape that way. 
Shleep! 
The wall absorbed the panel and revealed an 
24 
opening three inches wide. A sliver of window. 
Heavy, cool air tunneled in and caressed my 
face. I pressed my eyes closed, then opened 
them, and there . . . 
Structures, hundreds of them, rose beneath 
me, soared above me. Glass, steel, concrete, ma-
sonry. All jutting toward a simmering, red-cast 
sky. 
An urban jungle. 
But just like my cell, the city looked as though 
it had suffered modifications at the hands of a de-
ranged contractor. Chaotic clumps of black ma-
chinery clung, like unwelcome growths, to the 
skyscrapers' sides. Sickly deformations of a cen-
tury's architectural monuments. 
A few buildings were completely covered over 
by this industrial applique, like a ship's hull over-
run with barnacles. A tree trunk strung with para-
sitic . . . 
The word left me with a very uneasy feeling. 
Parasitic. . . 
Two fighters zoomed into my narrow field of 
vision. Their red lights blazed a streak across the 
cityscape. 
Oh. Crap. 
Yeerk fighters. 
They headed for a distant pack of skyscrap-
ers, an ominous elevation that studded the hori-
zon like giant chipped and broken teeth in the 
25 

mouth of some mythical hockey goalie. Two of 
the buildings looked familiar. Shimmering rec-
tangles. Twin towers. 
The World Trade Center! 
New York. This must be . . . except for. . . 
Yeerk fighters out 
in 
the 
open? 
That 
meant. . . that meant they'd launched an open 
attack. Visser Three. They'd gained enough 
forces to forget stealth and secrets, and wage a 
totally in-your-face war! 
DE-DEET! DE-DEET! 
The alarm sounded again. 
"Facility air quality jeopardized!" The com-
puter voice was more authoritative now. The win-
dow cover began to shut, closing off my sliver of 
city. 
Oh, no you don't! I reached up and grabbed 
the panel. Forced it back. 
One of those fighters wasn't Yeerk. 
Only one was a Bug fighter. Only one was a 
legless cockroach with two serrated spears. 
The other held its shredder raked high over 
the fuselage, pointing forward. Like an Andalite 
tail poised for combat. 
It was an Andalite craft. But grossly modified. 
Engines that should have glowed a cool blue in-
stead burned a fiery red. 
I fought the window cover. I had to see! 
The two fighters rocketed through the sky. 
26 
They buzzed through the sticky, filmy cloud that 
swelled above the city like fallout from a colossal 
explosion. 
"Continued idleness prohibited!" The sharp 
computer voice broke through the monotonous, 
mind-filling hum from outside. 
The fighters banked in tandem, slowed and 
hovered. Touched down on a platform connecting 
the World Trade towers. 
I let the window cover slam shut. 
There was no war being waged after all. 
The war, it seemed, was over. 
27 

C H A P T E R 6 
Tssssst. 
The cell door opened and ejected me with a 
burst of air into the dim hallway of an old apart-
ment house. I heard the hiss of other panel doors 
opening and closing at the same time. Tall, fit 
humans dressed in brightly colored jumpsuits 
swarmed into the corridor. 
I wanted to yell. I wanted to grab the nearest 
person and shake him and scream, "What is this 
crazy place?" 
But instinct told me to keep my mouth shut. 
Find the answers yourself, it said. Observe. Don't 
trust these strangers. Use them. 
I let the orange and green and yellow suits 
sweep me up in their mass exodus down the hall. 
28 
The wind grew stronger. The ghostly whir and 
hum I'd heard through the cell window churned 
louder and louder, until at last it vibrated every 
particle of air like a thousand-piece orchestra of 
different-sized fans. 
The building wall at the end of the hall had 
been knocked out. Everyone was stepping through 
the rough opening. And I followed — curious and 
terrified — out onto the crowded, open-air docking 
bay. 
"Step up!" An impersonal computer voice cut 
through the whoosh of engines and flooded my 
ears. I realized I was blocking traffic. 
I tripped forward toward a line of SUV-sized 
craft that hovered in the air at floor level, doors 
open, inhaling small groups of colored jumpsuits. 
And every few seconds . . . 
Woooooosh! 
One took off from the apartment building and 
fell away in a controlled tumble, careening toward 
the streets three hundred feet below. 
I stumbled past the blinking red lights that 
ran from nose to tail on every craft and bathed 
the docking bay and passengers in a sinister, 
pulsing glow. Stepped into what looked like a 
stripped-down Bug fighter. No weaponry or com-
bat stations. Just a pod with seats and windows. 
A floating, high-tech subway car. 
The instant I fell onto a seat, a belt shot 
29 

across my chest. Another drew tight over my legs. 
Before I could panic . . . 
Shoo-shoo-shoo. 
The unmanned hovercraft drew power. A deep 
computer voice boomed, "Midtown express." 
Doors clicked shut and . . . 
Sheeeeeeooo! 
Into an aerial roll! Hanging upside down! My 
stomach went goofy. Gray high-rises shot past. 
Other hovercraft streaked past the windows. 
"Hey." A human voice cut through the hum. 
We banked right. Flipped a sudden 180 de-
grees. And leveled off, upright, soaring parallel to 
the street grid below. 
"Hey, 
Essak-Twenty-Four-Twelve-Seven-Five!" 
The male voice was friendly. I felt a hand on my 
shoulder. I flinched, but turned. 
A guy in a green suit, strapped to the seat to 
my left, stared at me with icy blue eyes. Green 
Suit was talking to me! 
My heart hammered. My head began to pound. 
"When's the launch?" he said. 
I stared blankly back at him, unable to speak 
as we traced a slalom course between buildings. 
The launch? What launch? 
Air brakes rose to a frenzied roar. The hovercraft 
grazed a landing dock. The computer voice 
boomed, "Middle management!" Everyone suited 
in green rose and filed out. 
30 
Green Suit flashed a mischievous smile. "Mr. 
Hotshot Scientist forget to have his coffee?" 
He disappeared into the crowd. The doors 
clicked closed. 
That green suit. . . that green suit had called 
me by what I knew had to be a Yeerk name. 
31 

C H A P T E R 7 
We shot high. Skimmed the tops of tall tow-
ers. The Chrysler Building filled the windows. 
Streamlined and whimsical, just like in the photo 
my mom had in her office. All rounded edges and 
gleaming stainless steel and . . . 
Wait a minute. I looked closer and saw it was 
covered in some kind of sack. A silver sheath, 
draped like a giant deflated gift balloon. Busy 
workers moved about on platforms jutting from 
the skin at all levels. 
My mind was swimming . . . 
Even the Chrysler Building. Transformed. 
Swimming . . . 
That green suit had called me by a Yeerk 
name . . . 
32 
I wasn't Yeerk. How could I be? What was go-
ing on? 
When a Yeerk slug slithers through your ear 
canal, when it melds and flattens into every 
crevice of your brain, you know it's happening. 
Trust me, you know. Because you can't eat or talk 
or call up memories unless the Yeerk lets you. 
You're a helpless observer of an endless night-
mare. A prisoner in your own head. 
I was no prisoner. My eyes moved freely. My 
legs, when they weren't strapped to a hovercraft 
seat, walked where I told them to walk. Why 
wouldn't whoever was responsible for this just 
talk to me? 
Until today, I'd been the leader. . . 
No! I still was the leader of a small but powerful 
resistance to the Yeerk invasion. A group of six 
kids, five humans and an Andalite. We call our-
selves Animorphs because of our secret weapon, 
the power to morph into any animal we touch. We 
fight the Yeerk invaders, led by Visser Three. Those 
slimy parasitic aliens who've come to Earth to en-
slave our bodies because without host bodies, 
Yeerks aren't much more than the wriggling, help-
less worms you avoid on the sidewalk after it rains. 
There was no Yeerk in my brain. I was no hu-
man-Controller. 
Not Essak-Twenty-Four-whatever. 
No! It's . . . 
33 

"Jake! My name is Jake!" 
The words slipped out before I could stop 
them. Pierced the relative silence of the cabin. 
"What's the matter with you?" said a yellow-
suit with an accent. Eight pairs of eyes fixed on 
me. Eight faces I might have taken to be your av-
erage, ethnically diverse, cross section of New 
York commuters. 
Emphasis on "might have." 
Because there was one crucial giveaway. 
They'd reacted to me. 
See, I'd been to New York before. A class trip. 
I may not have noticed much of the cultural stuff 
I was supposed to have noticed, but I noticed 
one thing. You can shout Hamlet's soliloquy or 
scream Limp Bizkit lyrics, you can blare "The 
Star-Spangled Banner" or stomp an American 
flag, and no one—I mean no one — will give 
you the time of day. They'll look you over, but 
then they'll walk right on. 
All I'd said was, "My name is Jake." And 
these guys were on me like I'd driven a Kawasaki 
into their living rooms. 
I forced a smile. These weren't New Yorkers. 
These were human-Controllers. These were Yeerks. 
Watch your step, Jake. 
I cleared my throat. "My host," I said. "Some-
times I still . . . have trouble. You know, controlling 
him." 
34 
The craft stopped again. "Medicine," the com-
puter voice declared. 
"They have pills for that now," Yellow Suit an-
swered. "You should visit the clinic." 
He rose and shuffled out. Seven other yellow 
suits filed out after him. The doors closed. We 
twisted away from the landing dock. Just me and 
one other orange suit. 
A short ride. 
"Research and development. End of the line." 
The orange suit questioned me when I didn't rise. 
"Going to the clinic," I said smoothly. "Not 
well." I pointed at my head. She gave me a look 
of understanding. The doors closed behind her. 
I was alone. 
"My name is JAKE!" I yelled. And then I 
yelled it again. 
And for a second, I thought I would lose it. 
Really lose it. Start screaming stuff like, "I don't 
wear jumpsuits, I wear jeans! I'm not twenty-five, 
I'm a kid! I'm not a Controller, I'm free." 
But I didn't. Chances were that someone, 
somewhere, was watching. At least that's what 
my gut told me. I've learned to trust my gut. 
Down, down, down. The craft fell like a para-
chute, bobbing slightly with the buffets of wind, 
descending slowly toward street level. 
I looked out over a small park. A fraction the 
size of Central Park. Trampling the crusty, late-
35 

As long as I was free and in control of my 
mind, there was a chance — no — the certainty 
that I could find out what was going on. 
And then maybe, just maybe, somehow — 
even in this strange place — I could find the oth-
ers and together we could . . . 
The doors opened and I dropped to the con-
crete. My heart was back to its regular rhythm. My 
mind calmed and focused on a single thought. 
"Jake," I breathed quietly, "you didn't plan 
this one, but now it's time to deal." 
scious Andalite warrior would use his tail blade 
on himself before he'd let himself be captured. 
The craft buzzed just feet above the street, 
passing rows of blacked-out windows on run-
down facades. The ship entered a large, open 
space. A sort of parking lot. A paved triangle 
filled with other hovercraft. The engines were 
cut. The craft docked. 
I didn't know what world this was. I didn't 
know what time this was. A world before or after 
or parallel to mine? A bizarre reality that had 
somehow imposed itself on the one I was used to 
accepting? 
My own personal nightmare? 
I didn't know. But I knew the Yeerks were 
strong in this place. They owned this city. They 
owned the people in it. 
But they didn't own me. 
winter grass was a mass of bodies. Blue and tan 
fur. Hooves. Stalk eyes. The bodies were assem-
bled in orderly, disciplined rows. Maybe fifty 
across and a hundred lengthwise. 
A fog horn blared and they stopped and 
turned, changing directions. 
Captive Andalites. And they were feeding. 
My spine felt like a live lightning rod. A world 
with Andalite-Controllers is no world at all. 
In the world I know there is only one Andalite-
Controller. And he's a sad mistake. Any con-
36 
37 

C H A P T E R 8 
Ever 
imagine a scenario where world lead-
ers lose their minds, fire up those intercontinen-
tal ballistic missiles and nuke the whole planet? 
Ever think what it would be like to step out of the 
shelter, after the worst of the residue cleared, 
into some kind of postapocalyptic wasteland? 
Well, there I was, stepping out into the waste-
land of Times Square. The desolate ground zero of 
some neutron bomb. A stage set, minus the cast of 
characters. The whole place coated in menacing si-
lence. 
Sure, five hundred feet overhead roared a 
Yeerk metropolis. But down here, down at street 
level . . . no taxis clanking over manhole covers. 
No kamikaze bike messengers daring traffic. No 
38 
giddy groups of camera-toting tourists. No sharply 
dressed natives surging like lemmings in and out 
of high-rises. 
The only life was the buzz of giant, electrified 
billboards a hundred feet overhead. You know, 
those big, bold ads that make Times Square fa-
mous? I scanned. Not even close to the endorse-
ments for Coca-Cola or JVC or Calvin Klein I 
remembered. 
"You can go home again." The words flick-
ered like an electrical storm above the image of a 
darkened planet. What looked like thick, head-
less cattle roamed beneath the words against a 
puke-green sky. Sickly, low-lying trees grew hori-
zontally, like lengthy fingers of barbed wire. 
"Tired of the city?" another billboard read. 
"Make the Yeerk home world your home, too. 
Transports leaving noon and midnight, first of 
each cycle, Yeerk Empire State Building." 
And at the bottom, in smaller print, were the 
words "High Council Division for the Relocation 
of Unfit and Insurrectionist Hosts." These words 
were sprayed over by the graffiti tag "EF." 
I stopped in my tracks. The tagger's letters 
weren't some preconquest relic. They were new. 
They were fresh. They were angry. 
Unfit and Insurrectionist Hosts? 
A tinge of hope swelled against the well-
anchored caution and fear in my mind. Was there 
39 

a rebellion going on here? A resistance group 
somewhere? If I had allies in this town, I had to 
find them. 
But I needed to find the others first. They had 
to be here, too, right? Only where? In normal 
NYC, Marco could be in any video arcade in Man-
hattan, Rachel in any Express from Midtown to 
SoHo. I looked at the busted-up storefronts and 
littered streets. Were there parts of the ground-
city that still functioned normally? I wasn't ready 
to bet on it. 
All at once I realized Cassie would be easiest to 
find. A park. She'd be in a park and I'd seen one of 
those. She'd be feeding the pigeons and . . . 
BAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAM! 
I hit the ground. 
BAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAMBAM! 
Machine-gun fire. I rolled behind a kiosk and 
searched for the source. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
Dracon fire return, followed by a piercing hu-
man cry. A shoot-out at the other end of Times 
Square? The echo of weapon fire died away and 
was replaced by a clacking. A clicking. Clawed 
feet scratching over concrete. Weird, half-
whistled words . . . 
"Ssssssnit waaanaaa!" The loud, arrogant rasp-
ing drew snickering agreement from slobbering 
mouths. 
40 
I edged around the kiosk, and sure enough . . . 
Taxxons. 
A gang of them. Six or eight. Swaggering up 
from Forty-Second Street, straight toward me. Ban-
doliers of energy ammo and handheld Dracon-
beams crisscrossed their massive centipede bodies. 
Horrific scars striped their bloated chests. 
I fought the urge to sprint. I needed to play 
the part of a Controller, and a Controller wouldn't 
run. But I had to get away! I was out of place at 
ground level. As far as I could see, I was the only 
human on the street and it didn't take long to 
guess why that might be. No Taxxon encounter 
had ever ended well. Why expect something 
new? 
Where to go? 
The McDonald's on the corner was a burned-
out shell. The golden arches lay crushed and dim 
on the sidewalk. I'd be a sitting duck. 
The high-rise lobby was all glass. No cover. 
Suddenly. 
"TSSEEERRR!" 
A raptor's cry. A swishing of wings. Out of 
nowhere! A red-tailed hawk buzzed my head. He 
looked ancient. Thin, with feathers missing and 
skin taut around the eyes. He sailed into the 
steam cloud over a subway grate. 
I blinked . . . 
Gone. He was gone! 
41 

"Tobias?" 
No answer. A mirage? 
"Ssssreee sreeenaaaa!" 
I jerked back. I'd stepped out from behind 
the kiosk. The Taxxon gang leader had spotted 
me. Claw arms skittered. His speed increased to 
an all-out lumber. 
C H A P T E R 3 
Steam. The subway. Go! 
I ran for the subway entrance and took the 
steps three at a time. Wham! I burst through the 
rusted-out gate. 
"Ugh!" A horrible stench. A humid rot. The 
foul scent of. . . Taxxons. 
I gasped for breath in the hot stink of the cav-
ern. 
"Who are you?" 
"Yahh!" I almost had another heart attack. 
My head slammed the scissored turnstile in sur-
prise. 
A guy, a human, only three feet tall but an 
adult, looked up at me quizzically. He whipped the 
43 
| 
42 

stack of flyers he was carrying behind his back. I 
thought I saw the letters "EF," but I wasn't sure. 
"What'd you do to get sent down here?" The 
way he said it freaked me out. Like some jury had 
sentenced me to a horrible fate. 
I was still struggling for breath. 
The guy shrugged and continued. "You won't 
last long down here. No one does." 
I heard the gate bang open one flight up. The 
sound of skittering Taxxon feet. The little guy's 
eyes widened. He turned and ran. 
I followed. 
Down a white-tiled tunnel that narrowed and 
narrowed until my shoulders scraped the sides. 
Then into a still smaller channel that brought me 
to my knees. I crawled wildly through dampness. 
The Taxxon war cries grew fainter. Then, a new 
sound. Weak moans and muffled cries that filled 
the almost total darkness. 
We emerged into a wide, domed hall with a 
stagnant, toxic puddle at its center. Clustered 
around this shallow, filthy water — cramped and 
miserable — was a sampling of human and alien 
life. 
A horrific sampling. 
Clumsy Gedds loped along at a snail's pace. 
Battered Hork-Bajir, missing arms or legs or both, 
huddled around a glowing pit. Human children, 
44 
and maimed or disabled adults, lay on thin, soiled 
mats. Battle-scarred Andalites, some minus tail 
blades and others without stalk eyes, milled rest-
lessly. The stench was profound. The moans were 
heartrending. 
It was the eyes that told the story, though. De-
feated, dejected. Living death. 
At the sound of our abrupt entrance, most 
turned and tensed. Weak as they were, they were 
ready to run. Not fight. That was clear. 
"What is this?" I gasped. "Who are you?" The 
fumes made me light-headed. 
The little guy interrupted his whispers of re-
assurance to a group of human kids. "Depends 
who you ask," he said. "The Emperor calls us 
fugitives. The EF calls us refugees. I call us ca-
sualties. Casualties of the Fitness Policy. But it 
doesn't really matter, does it? We're all prey." He 
smiled. "Your body is strong. You must suffer 
mental illness?" 
I could hardly argue. "I must." 
"Ah." His tone turned gentler, more conde-
scending. "Take heart, friend. At least with your 
strong body you stand a chance against the 
Taxxon Special Force. With our help, you may 
last a month. Perhaps even two." 
My vision was wigging out. The little guy's 
face seemed to approach and recede. The stench 
45 

was eating away my brain. I moved back toward 
the tunnel and began to scrabble through. 
"No," he cried, alarmed. "You must stay with 
us. Alone you won't last two hours!" 
I had to get above ground. I was desperate for 
air. I was going to pass out. 
Back down the tunnel. Left turn, left again. 
Onto the platform of a subway station. The light 
was dim and reddish. 
Suddenly . . . 
Massive suction! 
I was being pulled toward the rails by an in-
tense, all-consuming suction! I had to fight against 
it! 
I ran for the exit, but I was barely moving for-
ward. Like that horrible nightmare where your 
legs feel like fifty-pound weights. Or you're run-
ning through water. 
I looked down at the rails ten feet below. They 
were covered in a dirt-packed ooze, seething and 
twisting with Taxxons! 
It was a living stream of Taxxons. Traveling, 
legs pulled in. Being sucked like lugers along an 
underground highway, red eyes jiggling as they 
flew past. 
This was Taxxon Mass Transit. 
And I was six feet from being sucked in with 
them! 
46 
"Ahh!" 
THWAP! thaap! 
THWAP! 
Two Taxxons rolled out of the suction stream. 
Lumbered onto the platform! Mouths full of ra-
zor-sharp teeth snapped for me. Hundreds of 
clawed feet powered toward me. 
Noooo! 
I grabbed for a bench and pulled myself 
closer to it, fighting the intense suction. Then 
past it. I grabbed for the trash can bolted to the 
floor, pulled myself past. Column! Bench! Sign! 
Trash can! 
I looked over my shoulder. The Taxxons were 
struggling against the suction, too, but they were 
bigger and they knew something I didn't. They 
had dropped to the floor and were slinking along. 
Racing like salamanders. 
Bench! Column! Column! Pull! 
They would overtake me. 
Gate! 
I flung it open. The exit stairs! I strained. I 
reached. 
"Ahhhhhhhhhh!" 
Something cut into my leg. I twisted. Jammed 
a fist into an airbag chest. Slammed the gate on 
gaping jaws and a probing tongue. 
Then I clambered toward daylight. Up, up, 
47 

up. Sweating. Gasping. Leg nearly crippled with 
pain. Head throbbing from running into the turn-
stile. 
The street! The pavement! 
Gasping breath after breath of fresh air, I col-
lapsed. 
Rolled onto my back. And froze. 
I wasn't alone. 
48 
C H A P T E R 10 
G ehhhtuupoorraanjjsoooot!" 
Words like a waterfall of syllables, strung tightly 
together. 
Totally incomprehensible. 
"Wutryoodooingindtheaghetoo?" 
Okay. This was a dream. That was the only 
possible explanation. But what felt like very real 
pain from the Taxxon bite shot up what felt like 
my very real leg. 
Right then I decided that this was a world I 
might never be able to figure out. And if I didn't 
stop trying to, I'd crack up. Effective immedi-
ately, my goal would be simpler: Just get out of 
this place alive, body and soul intact. 
I tried not to let the two forms in front of me, 
49 

roughly human in outline except for a third leg 
and a seriously long neck, freak me too much. 
But it was hard. 
See, each of them had only one eye, a big, in-
ternally lit thing that fixed on me like a follow 
spot. At the center of the eye was an iris, roughly 
like ours except for the faint amber and gray 
glow. 
But you know how our pupils are in the middle 
of our irises? Not the case here. I was looking at 
pupils that orbited the iris like slow, optical satel-
lites. These eyes studied me with all the suspi-
cion of secret service agents at a presidential 
appearance. They seemed to stare right through 
me. 
Though it's more accurate to say I stared 
through them. 
Because I was looking at blue lungs that filled 
and deflated with speech. And two bright green 
hearts pumping pale yellow blood through crystal 
clear veins. Miles of intestines coiled tightly near 
a swath of faintly reddish muscle. 
Their skin was as clear as glass or water. 
Clearer, since there was next to no distortion as I 
stared at the organs beneath. 
Specimens a biology teacher would die for. 
Although on whatever planet they were from, sur-
vival of the fittest was obviously not an issue. I 
50 
mean, I was staring right at a beating heart. A 
perfect target. 
Amber Eye stepped forward and yanked me to 
my feet. He repeated his question. All of a sud-
den, the rhythm in the speech, the slightly differ-
ent note that filled each word . . . The pattern. It 
all made sense. It clicked. 
"Get-up-Orange-Suit!" he said. "What-are-
you-doing-in-the-ghetto? Work-truancy-is-a-crime! 
Why-aren't-you-at-your-work-site?" A nearly invisi-
ble finger flicked something pinned to my chest. 
Then he looked up, way up, at the Chrysler Build-
ing with its Mylar sheath whipping with the wind. 
There was a badge on my jumpsuit that 
hadn't been there before. At least, I hadn't no-
ticed it. There was a hologram of me, and my 
Yeerk name written out. There were numbers cor-
responding to housing, work site, and work sec-
tor. Under the words "job title" was the term 
"Planetary Engineer." 
I gaped like an idiot. These guys were some 
street-level security force? I worked in the Chrysler 
Building? 
"Maybe this is the place for this mute," Silver 
Eye sneered. "Looks like he's had a breakdown. 
Can you tell us where you live, Orange Suit?" He 
growled patronizingly while fingering a pair of 
red-tinted handcuffs. "Or can't you remember?" 
51 

They could see where I lived. But I guess they 
just wanted me to say. I looked at my badge and 
tried to read the numbers upside down. " I , 
uh . . ." 
RrrrrrrrrBoomBoom . . . RrrrrrrrrBoooooom . . . 
The earth shook and a deafening boom thun-
dered through the street. Amber Eye spun around, 
then spun back and grabbed me. Dragged me with 
him as he moved with startling speed toward the 
sound of the explosion. Silver Eye followed. 
"Floor eighty-eight," I said, faking an answer. 
"I live in the, uh, the Empire Towers." I thought 
that sounded pretty good. 
"Don't be sarcastic, Orange Suit." He reached 
forward and slid the cuffs over my wrists. "You 
think I don't know that floors eighty-seven to 
ninety-two are a docking port? You're coming with 
us." 
"Under whose authority?" 
I struggled, but the cuffs were some living, or-
ganic material. The more I resisted, the tighter 
they squeezed. 
The creatures laughed heartily, a sound like a 
trilling trumpet. "We're the Orff, fool. Security 
agents to the High Council. We're our own au-
thority." 
R rrrrrrr Boooooooooom m m m m! 
Another massive boom and cloud of dust. 
The Orff turned away from me. 
52 
I made a break for it. 
"Hey!" 
Silver Eye grabbed for me. I wrestled free 
from him and shot around the corner, limping 
from my Taxxon bite, moving toward a billowing 
dust cloud. But the Orff followed me. His tripod 
legs moved like quicksilver. Then he was on me. 
We struggled as the chaos grew around us. 
I heard the distant sirens of approaching hover 
ships. The whistled lisps of Taxxon as they burst 
onto the street, spilling from three-hundred-foot 
earthen hives built up between buildings along the 
block, surging like beastly commandos. 
What was this? What was happening? 
Could I morph? I tried to focus. Tried to 
think. . . 
And then everything flashed a blinding yel-
low-white, like I was a bug inside some flash-
bulb. All was noiseless, but only for a second. 
Then — 
BOOM. 
BOOM. 
BOOM! 
The pavement heaved and thumped as deaf-
ening pressure waves threw everyone in the 
street to the ground. All down the block, entire 
building fronts were instantly reduced to lethal 
waterfalls of shattering glass and stone. 
I raised my head toward what appeared to be 
53 

the source of the explosion. A tremendous sky-
scraper, towering hundreds of feet, a fireball at 
its base, teetered hesitatingly, like a circus per-
former on a tightrope. 
My mouth opened in disbelief as the build-
ing's graceful, tentative sway gave way to deci-
sive instability. As the lowest ten or twenty 
stories disintegrated in a cloud of dust. 
Then the entire structure sailed toward Earth. 
Faster. . . faster. . . toppling in a single rigid 
section. Falling . . . falling . . . then — 
A thunderous concussion as the building rup-
tured and broke in two, missing the Chrysler 
Building by what seemed like a hair. 
Concussion after concussion battered the Man-
hattan bedrock. I should have taken the chance to 
disappear. 
But it was all I could do to crawl to a doorway 
and lie there, as a choking cloud of white dust 
engulfed me and a spattering of small debris 
rained down from the sky. 
Then heavier particles, chunks of steel and 
concrete, were pummeling the street. And then 
everything went black. 
54 
C H A P T E R 11 
Sirens blared. A splitting pain numbed my 
head. 
I opened my eyes to piles of rubble. Spewing 
geysers from burst watermains. Fires crackling, 
ripping through entire buildings. Hundreds of pa-
trol ships on the scene. Taxxons savagely herding 
the injured into transports, satisfying their raging 
hunger by disposing of the dead right there and 
then. 
The Orff were gone. The cuffs, somehow, van-
ished. Apparently, when you're in Yeerk Land and 
you hear sirens and they're coming to get you, 
you don't wait around. You move. 
I sprinted from the doorway. 
"Ahhrgh!" 
55 

And slammed smack into a purple suit. Be-
fore I could regain balance, I was looking down 
the barrel of a handheld Dracon. 
Yeerk Land definitely had it in for me. 
I looked past the barrel, past the arm. Into 
the eyes of a dark female figure covered head-
to-foot in dust. Blood dripped from even fea-
tures. As our eyes met, her expression changed. 
It flashed from ruthless hatred to a mysterious 
mix of confusion, disbelief, tenderness, and 
anger. 
My chest heaved involuntarily because this 
woman . . . 
This woman . . . my memory . . . 
"Ah!" 
Without warning she shoved me out of the 
way. 
TSEEEW! 
Whumph. 
Taxxon guts spilled onto the pavement as the 
bloated worm, teeth bared, skidded to a halt just 
shy of my legs. Three seconds more and my butt 
would have been nothing more than a pleasant 
Taxxon aftertaste. 
The woman darted ahead. I sprinted after her. 
She'd saved my life. 
But it was for more than that that I followed. 
With the agility of a triathlete, she scampered 
56 
down a narrow alley mounded with discarded rem-
nants of human society. A broken piano. Couch 
carcasses. Some rusting motorcycles. All of it cov-
ered over now in a fresh mountain of concrete, re-
bar, and fragments of still-steaming sheet metal. 
I called to her. "Hey, wait." She paused and 
turned back. 
I rushed eagerly forward and her face turned 
strange again like she was searching her mind, 
searching . . . 
TSEEEW! 
"Hey! What the. . ." 
She'd fired at me, igniting the air over my head. 
Then she disappeared through a large metal door 
opening off the alley, a side entrance to a tall brick 
building. 
Was that a warning shot? Or just bad aim? 
A gang of Taxxons flowed down the alley and 
followed her inside. I picked up a piece of metal 
and swung it like a thug, trying to show I was 
ready to fight. They snarled, but amazingly, they 
ran right by. 
One thing was clear. They were after the 
woman. 
I flung open the thick metal door and ran into 
the mottled darkness. Light filtered through a par-
tially blown off roof and illuminated velvety cur-
tains, a stage, an orchestra pit — a vast space 
57 

lined with rows of seats and tiers of balconies. I 
moved down the carpeted aisle, hoisted myself 
onto the stage littered with broken flats. 
TSEEEW! TSEEEW! 
Dracon fire lit the air. A 500-pound mass of 
Taxxon meat fell from the grid, whistling past a 
wall of ropes and rigging. 
WHUMP. 
It shook the floor. An exploded balloon. And 
boy, did it stink. 
The woman streaked behind a drop painted 
with a scenic country setting. There was a red 
barn and green pasture. Horses and farm animals 
grazed in the background. 
But no sooner had she disappeared than . . . 
TSEEEW! 
She burned a Dracon hole in the faded canvas 
landscape and vaulted through. Chasing after her 
were three of the fastest Taxxons I'd ever seen. She 
stumbled, running backward, firing her weapon 
again and again. But the discharges grew weaker 
and weaker, pathetic slaps in the face to the hulk-
ing Taxxons. 
And I was weaponless! 
I looked up at row upon row of heavy lights. I 
wondered . . . 
I ran into the wings, where the myriad ropes 
converge in neat rows anchored by stacks of steel 
weights. 
58 
I threw open the latch that fixed a rope to its 
stack of anchors. 
Whooooosh! 
An ethereal cloth backdrop came billowing 
down, deftly covering the predators and the prey 
below. 
Not happening. 
The Taxxons continued to surge forward until 
at last, the woman's faulty weapon wouldn't fire 
anymore. She hurled it at the closest Taxxon, but 
it was like a toy in his mouth. It was swallowed 
up without hesitation. 
I frantically disconnected rope after rope. The 
racing whine of pulleys filled my ears as a whole 
batten of heavy stage lights came crashing to the 
floor. And then another. And another. 
I let myself look. Three bloated Taxxons were 
pinned to the floor, writhing. Still caught under 
the delicate scrim net. 
I ran to the woman. Her arm was being crushed 
by a now-limp Taxxon. Her body was washed in a 
puddle of vile drool. She flinched as I neared her, 
still ready to fight. 
I bent low and freed her arm. She finally 
seemed to understand that I wasn't going to hurt 
her. 
Our eyes met. 
"Cassie." 
I wanted to hug her. Tell her everything was 
59 

okay. That she was brave. That we would make it 
out alive. 
But her eyes were like a wall or a mask. I 
searched them for the peace and sensitivity they 
used to hold. 
Neither was there. 
Her lips curled into a fake smile, a very un-
Cassie-like look. And she finally spoke. 
"So. You're not dead." 
60 
C H A P T E R 12 
I answered with a smile, the kind of look I'd 
have given her if we were back in the world I 
knew. 
"This city's been doing all it can to kill me. 
But no, I'm not dead. I've been alone. Where are 
the others? How . . . how did you get here?" 
She didn't answer, but swung her legs over the 
stage apron, heaved a sigh, and dropped into the 
orchestra pit. I followed her down, where she 
stooped in a corner and uncovered a stashed case. 
"Cassie, what's going on?" It wasn't like her 
to ignore me. She didn't even look up. "I got into 
bed, just last night, I think," I continued. "I was 
at home, living with my family. We'd just come 
back from our last messed-up mission. Remem-
61 

ber? I wake up this morning and I'm freakin' 
twenty-five years old. With a beard and no mem-
ory of the decade in between. Is this Crayak? The 
Ellimist?" 
"I haven't thought of those names in years," 
she said. Her tone was not nostalgic. She was 
rummaging through the case, I guessed for ban-
dages to fix a splint to her arm. The case was 
filled with first-aid supplies, five or six handheld 
Dracons, another purple suit, emergency food ra-
tions, and . . . 
She turned her head just in time to see my 
eyes widen. 
Spools of blast cord. Blocks of plastic explo-
sives. Detonators. Dynamite. A crazy mix of low-
and high-tech destructive potential. 
"I take it you're not with the EF?" she said. 
I shook my head. 
"The Evolutionist Front. The Yeerk rebel group? 
You know, the so-called Insurrectionists, dedicated 
to turning away from parasitism and toward the use 
of artificially created symbiotes?" 
She shoved a Dracon into my hand and took 
two for herself. And then I glimpsed an emer-
gency Kandrona particle emitter as she closed 
the case. 
"You're a Controller?" 
She laughed. "What else would I be? My Yeerk's 
name is Niss. We're in the EF together. We cooper-
62 
ate to fight the Council. I led the team responsible 
for the blast this morning. That's why the Taxxons 
like me so much. The damage will set them back, 
even though we didn't hit the . .." 
"What!" An uncontrollable wave of nausea 
knotted my chest. It was like hearing my dad 
confess to being a drug pusher or a murderer. It 
was an impossibility. "Cassie, what are you say-
ing? You engineered a blast that must have killed 
hundreds of refugees, the very people the EF is 
trying to help? That makes you a terrorist! How 
can you possibly justify that?" 
"In a war, Jake, anything is justified." She 
spoke with an unnerving confidence. "I'm not a 
kid anymore. I'm not concerned with the non-
sense I used to be." 
"Like life and peace? You think that's nonsense 
now! Don't you remember our last mission — the 
Ragsin Building battle? The comedown? You 
needed to talk when we got out and I turned you 
away. Just didn't want to deal with it. I was an idiot 
that night, Cassie. You were on target with your 
doubts, just like you always were. You have to real-
ize that." 
She laughed dismissively. "You're talking 
about a different lifetime, Jake. There were so 
many missions back then. All just a pitiful blur of 
youthful idealism. You don't get it, do you? I'm 
saying that I finally understand war." 
63 

The way she was speaking, the way she was 
sort of talking down to me, made me feel like I 
was about as important to her as a screw in the 
stage floor. 
Was there really no connection between us? 
Was my friend so changed? 
"The Taxxons own the subway," I said. "The 
Orff rule the streets. Cassie, if you look around, 
it's obvious that somehow we lost our chance to 
win this war." 
"The war is not lost!" she hissed. Her eyes 
were on fire. She looked ready to attack me. 
But then her eyes moved to the badge on my 
chest and all at once her anger vanished. Her 
face relaxed, then brightened. Her expression 
changed so quickly it was frightening. 
64 
C H A P T E R 13 
You're a planetary engineer? Working on the 
Chrysler Building project!" Suddenly, I was the 
most interesting thing in the theater. I didn't know 
what to say. She moved toward me. Her uninjured 
arm gripped my arm. Her voice was intense, almost 
obsessed. 
"Jake, the Yeerks want the moon. They want to 
make it a small, Kandrona-radiating sun. If they 
succeed, it means an Earth bathed in Kandrona 
rays for the rest of eternity! It'll be something the 
EF could never touch and never disable. No one 
could." 
I felt like a customer subjected to an intricate 
and manipulative sales pitch. The deal-maker was 
65 

just around the corner, I could feel it. And I knew it 
somehow involved me. 
"Your job brings you closer to the moon-ray 
technology than anyone in the EF. You know that 
shell over the Chrysler Building? The Yeerks have 
been working under there for months, fine-tuning 
the energy beam that will ignite the moon. The 
targeting has to be precise. Absolutely precise. 
The Yeerks need the beam to fire exactly the way 
you and your team have calculated, or else . . ." 
She was animated. Her eyes glistened as she 
stood before me. There was the spark I knew. 
Only it wasn't love of people or animals that put 
it there. It was thoughts of sabotage, terrorism, 
strategy. 
And now she was drawing me into it, too. 
I brought my fingers to the badge her eyes 
still fixed on. I yanked it off, breaking her trance. 
"Tell me right now! How did we get here? 
Where are the others? How were you captured? Is 
this even real?" 
Her enthusiasm settled. The fake smile re-
appeared. She didn't want to answer my ques-
tions, but if she wanted my help, she had to. 
"If you really don't remember, I'll tell you," she 
said. "You won't like the answer." She laughed 
again a little. Less ruthless, more rueful, she 
looked me in the eyes. "How was I captured? I was 
betrayed, Jake. By you." 
66 
My heart stopped. 
"Me!" 
"Well, you were a Controller by then, of course. 
You can thank Tom for that." 
"My brother?" 
She nodded. "The Yeerk in Tom's head finally 
put it all together. Clues, maybe. Carelessness. I 
don't know. But he suspected you of being an 
'Andalite bandit' and then one night, he was 
sure. He planned his attack so well that when it 
came, you didn't stand a chance." 
She continued. "You, Marco, and Ax were 
taken immediately, in my barn. Rachel was killed 
outright. They caught me the next day. Only To-
bias escaped." 
A tightness constricted my throat. Rachel 
dead?! There was a time when I'd encouraged 
her recklessness. I'd put her, more than any of 
the others, in dangerous spots. And Tobias? With 
a hawk's life span, he'd be dead by now. 
Cassie told me all of this matter-of-factly, like I 
should know the story. Like I should have known 
that this, all of it, was because of me . . . 
"Move!" 
TSEEEW! 
The black metal music stands in front of me 
vaporized. 
"Get down!" 
TSEEEW! 
67 

Cassie returned fire, striking the Taxxon. He 
keeled over, falling forward, falling right over the 
rail above the orchestra pit! Flailing fifteen feet 
to the floor. Crash! Writhing in agony at our feet. 
He was badly wounded, but he'd live. Maybe 
Cassie'd shot him in the hind quarters on pur-
pose, so he'd survive. All we had to do was run. 
I opened the access door to the crawlspace 
under the stage. 
"Cassie, come on!" She ducked in. I followed. 
But then she stopped. She turned. She aimed 
right past me, back through the door. 
TSEEEW! 
A second hole sizzled through the Taxxon's vi-
tal organs, coldly finishing him off. 
I looked at Cassie, searched her for an an-
swer, tried to understand eyes ablaze with ruth-
lessness. 
"They're just dogs," she said. "The Orffs' un-
official police squad let loose to catch us so-
called terrorists. The Orff don't mind too much if 
Taxxon hunger gets out of control and they eat us 
instead of bringing us to the station. An eye for 
an eye, I say." 
I wondered if maybe this was Niss talking. 
The Yeerk, and not Cassie. 
"Come on!" she yelled. 
I followed her. 
68 
C H A P T E R 14 
We burst into the street. Ran away from the 
sound of sirens and hover ships and a still-chaotic 
crime scene. 
Every hundred yards, Cassie turned back to re-
turn fire. The Taxxons finally fell off and we stopped 
at a smashed-up storefront. An old newsstand. 
Sweating and panting, I glanced at the racks. 
The sunburned, wind-tattered cover of an old 
Sports Illustrated caught my eye. I picked it up. 
"My dad . . . " I said with surprise. "He just 
got this issue in the mail!" Cassie looked at the 
date. 
"Yeah," she said flatly, "it's been about ten 
years. The Yeerk conquest concluded in a matter 
69 

of weeks after we were captured. Turns out we 
were more than a thorn in the side of the Empire. 
We'd actually started to shift the balance." 
And then I'd blown it. 
I'd gotten careless and cocky and ruthless 
myself. I'd been too ready to use the others, es-
pecially Rachel. 
"The others," I said. "Where are they now?" 
Cassie paused next to a ratty pile of romance 
novels. "Ax became a high-ranking Controller. 
From what I heard, he was the key player in the 
Yeerk attack on his home world. The Andalite 
planet was decimated. Millions died. Tens of thou-
sands of Andalites were taken. EF leadership 
thinks there are some still free in deep space, but I 
can't imagine . . . " 
I sank to the floor beside a stack of yellowed 
New York Times dated three weeks from the night 
I fell into bed in spandex bike shorts. 
"Tobias became a leader of sorts. Anti-Yeerk." 
"Does he — did he — know about Rachel?" 
"Yes. As for Marco." Her voice turned colder. 
"Marco's Visser Two now, in charge of Earth. He's 
done things . . . terrible things." 
This wasn't real. I couldn't be hearing this. I 
didn't believe it. 
"The Visser Three you remember was made 
head of the Council. The supreme Yeerk leader. 
Emperor." 
70 
No. Cassie's Yeerk was feeding me lies. She 
was wearing me down. She knew . . . she knew 
from Cassie's memory what would get to me, 
what could make me snap. 
But I wouldn't snap! I wasn't crazy. My friends 
weren't... No. My friends . . . No! 
Suddenly, I was running down an empty street. 
I didn't care that I had nowhere to go. I'd just keep 
running and running until I collapsed. "Free or 
die," I repeated to myself. "Free or die!" 
"Free or. . . " 
"Stop it!" 
Cassie cut in front of me and pushed me 
against the wall. Only then did I feel my face 
streaked with tears. My eyes blurred. My chest 
heaving. 
"It was good luck that I met you, Jake. The 
job you have as planetary engineer is an incredi-
ble chance for the EF." Cassie was intense and 
obsessed again. "The controlled burn of the 
moon the Empire is planning? We need to make 
it uncontrolled. The perfect targeting of the en-
ergy beam? We need it to be off. Exploding the 
moon will shower the earth with debris. It will 
knock out satellites, destroy spacecraft, disrupt 
the entire Yeerk social structure. It will create an 
opening for attack by the EF. Jake, do you hear 
me? It will be the opening the EF and free hu-
mans have been waiting for." 
71 

Two of her words struck my ears like bells. 
"Free humans?" 
"Yes. Small groups still survive in the coun-
tryside. Hunted groups of fugitives." 
"So, there's hope?" 
"I told you the war wasn't lost. But it will be. 
All hope will be erased if this energy beam fires 
as the Yeerks want it to. Go to work." She knew 
I'd help her. She knew she was my leader now. 
"Live the life your badge describes. Watch, lis-
ten, get information, scope things out. But don't 
act until I contact you. I'll send someone who 
works with me to give you instructions. We'll 
need a code word." 
Reluctantly, I clipped my badge back onto my 
jumpsuit. "How about 'peace'?" I said with a 
weak smile. 
Cassie looked at me like I was a naive two-
year-old. She reached out and touched my face 
tenderly. And for an instant, one sweet instant, 
the mask of hardness lifted. The girl I'd loved 
was looking back at me. 
But she was gone as quickly as she'd come. 
"It's too late for peace, Jake. All that's left 
now is to drive the invaders away by force. Make 
Earth too dangerous for them. How about a dif-
ferent code word? How about. . . 'Animorphs'?" 
I agreed and she was gone, leaving me with a 
72 
Dracon beam in my hand and emptiness in my 
heart. 
Was I on her side? I thought I wanted to be. 
She'd assumed I would be. 
But she was so changed. Driven. Obsessed. 
Ultrafocused. She'd become a cog in the war ma-
chine. But then, who here wasn't? 
Was I a pawn in her mind? A mere tool? 
I knew the answer. 
But I didn't care. 
It might help me save her. 
73 

C H A P T E R 15 
i. boarded a shuttle that dropped me on an 
empty docking pad, cantilevered off the face of 
the building two hundred feet above the street. 
The Chrysler Building's Mylar wrap gleamed 
reddish-brown in the city's frightening glow. 
A powerful gust slapped me off balance and 
ripped at my hair as I stepped toward a heavy 
steel panel. 
The panel began to rise. 
How would I save our moon from transfigura-
tion, from becoming a beacon of Yeerk strength, an 
irreversible enemy triumph? How could I obliterate 
the chance that Kandrona would forever taint 
Earth's surface with its malignant rays? 
If only I had clear-cut instructions, like: Infil-
74 
trate enemy science headquarters, corrupt the 
latest state-of-the-art Yeerk technology, blow up 
the moon. Hey, that even sounded vaguely famil-
iar. We'd done stuff like that before, right? No 
problem. 
But it wasn't that simple. She said I had to 
wait. 
Wait for orders from a Cassie I didn't even 
know! Why was I letting it happen? No Animorph 
would ever take orders from a Yeerk. Hadn't I 
made that a ground rule? 
I stepped across the threshold. Second-
guessing my decision to help Cassie. And third-
guessing it, and fourth-guessing it. 
The panel shut behind me, sealing out the 
immutable hum I'd come to know meant Yeerk 
business as usual. Small, triangular lights red-
dened the floor, pointing me toward a nearby 
gravity lift. With all the false confidence I could 
muster I entered the clear, semicircular enclo-
sure, hovering in the air just outside the Mylar 
sheath. There were a half-dozen other riders. Two 
humans, an Andalite, and some pinkish crea-
tures I'd never seen before. 
<Figured you had abandoned us for the home 
world,> the Andalite teased. 
"Had to visit the clinic. Problems with my 
host. He has a rebellious history." 
"I hear you, man," said a tall human male. 
75 

"My host used to work for the ACLU and he just 
won't shut up about how I'm infringing on his 
rights. I don't want to worry you, but the pills 
don't really work." 
The lift rushed upward with unsettling accel-
eration. I put a hand on the wall for balance and 
looked out over the corridor of death and wreck-
age carved by the explosion. The collapsed sky-
scraper still smoked and cindered. 
<They seem to grow stronger every day,> the 
Andalite commented. He didn't say who "they" 
were, but I knew he meant the EF. His voice was 
calm enough, the way you'd expect a member of 
the ruling class to sound when speaking of the 
oppressed. But his tone revealed more. Today's 
explosion marked a turning point. In the mind of 
this Andalite-Controller, the EF had just crossed 
the line from nuisance to threat. 
"You're just in time for this afternoon's group 
efficiency workshop," piped up another of the hu-
mans. "Peer Communication Skills — Conquest 
through Companionship." 
"Never miss one," I stated positively. 
The lift doors opened onto a vast room. A sea 
of short, shiny, stainless steel cubicles shone un-
der glaring lights. I followed the taller human 
into a large open area with metal stools, most al-
ready occupied. A holographic short film played 
at the front of the room. It depicted an Andalite-
76 
Controller passing the cubicle of a Hork-Bajir-
Controller. 
<May the Kandrona shine and strengthen 
you,> the Andalite said. The Hork-Bajir didn't re-
spond, just kept working. 
The holo paused at that frame and a female An-
dalite at the front of the room asked the assembled 
group, <What was missing from that interaction 
that could have facilitated team compatibility?> 
That's a tough one, lady, I thought. But I'll go 
out on a limb here and guess that it's free will. 
I turned on my heels and wound through the 
paths between cubicle walls. I had no idea where I 
was going, but I pretended I did. Almost everyone 
smiled as I passed. One guy even slapped my back 
and said, "Hey, Essak. Ready for the big night?" 
The big night. What was that about? The guy 
in the hovercraft had asked me about a launch. 
Were the Yeerks firing this moon ray tonight?! 
Find your desk, Jake. I looked at my badge. 
Sector 5-682. The cubicles had number plates: 
679,680,681. 
I stood over the computer monitor assigned to 
me. A model of the Chrysler Building spire ro-
tated and twisted its way across the screen. It 
was framed by strings of numbers that changed 
as the model turned. 
It was just like that dream where you show up 
for the final exam in some class, and it suddenly 
77 

hits you that you haven't studied at all. In fact, 
you haven't been to the class at all and now you 
have to pass the test. 
I looked around. Everyone else had silver 
probes hung on their ears. There was one on my 
desk. It looked like a tape dispenser, but I picked 
it off the console and fit it to my ear. Looked at 
the monitor. And suddenly . . . 
Whoa! The 3-D model flashed! The image was 
uncontrollable. Unstoppable! My brain was panick-
ing, racing. I tried to mask the monitor from view so 
that my cubicle neighbors wouldn't sound the im-
postor alarm. 
Then, I realized . . . 
I controlled the movement. The screen re-
flected whatever command my mind issued. Un-
der other circumstances, this would have been 
extremely cool. Slow, I ordered, easy. My mind 
relaxed and so did the images. I made the screen 
flip through pictures at a normal speed. 
I was just about to breathe a sigh of relief 
when I felt eyes staring at me. I looked up. 
There was a communal workstation directly in 
front of my cubicle. I'd passed through it on my 
way. Noticed focused, hardworking aliens of vari-
ous species, studying their own screens, consult-
ing other screens. 
Now, they'd stopped working. 
"Boss?" a Hork-Bajir huskily. "You okay, boss?" 
78 
Oh, my God. These guys were working for me 
and they'd seen my screen wig out! Did they 
know I was a phony, a fake, an infiltrator? Could 
they tell? 
I moved to shuffle papers on my desk, to look 
occupied and cover up my ignorance, but there 
weren't any papers to shuffle. "Yup," I said casu-
ally. I tinkered with my earpiece and frowned down 
at my screen, seriouslike. "I was just, you know, 
giving the old mind a rest." 
After a few seconds, I glanced back at the 
communal workstation, hoping my crew had re-
turned to business and forgotten everything 
they'd just seen me do. 
But when I looked at my crew, I saw . . . my 
crew . . . 
79 

C H A P T E R 16 
Seats just moments ago occupied by busy 
Controllers — healthy, 
breathing, 
living Con-
trollers — now held . . . 
I blinked just to make sure. 
Oh, yeah. 
The seats held the raw, bloody, dismembered 
bodies of enemies I had faced in battle. My past 
was staring back at me. 
You have to understand that I really didn't 
think what I was seeing was real. And yet, under 
the harsh fluorescent lights, there was no mistak-
ing that the corpses were there. 
A Hork-Bajir corpse rose out of a chair. His 
mauled body had been ripped apart by the claws of 
80 
my tiger morph. How could he stand?! He wasn't 
even breathing! His muscles were decomposing! 
And yet he staggered out from behind the console 
and started toward me. 
He stretched his arm forward, extended his 
wrist blade and reached . . . reached for me! A 
growling rumbled in a voice box that wasn't 
there. Tiger jaws had ripped it out. 
I turned to run. I was crazy. 1 was nuts! 
Total insanity was twisting my brain! 
But when I tried to move, my path was blocked 
by a Leeran's stocky form, its pebbly, slimy skin run 
dry. 
"Ahh!" Its webbed feet had been severed by a 
shark's teeth. My shark morph's teeth. Only thin, 
fibrous ligaments kept the feet moving with the 
body. The large, luminous, Leeran eyes were life-
less. 
And yet he shuffled toward me, and I felt him 
say my name. 
Jake, he chanted. Jake. Jake. Jake. Jake. 
Jake. 
I stiffened and backed into my cubicle. I could 
smell them now. Their decay and rot. Death, press-
ing nearer and nearer! 
Behind the Hork-Bajir, a Taxxon's jelly eyes 
gaped and a three-foot tongue dangled limp from 
its open mouth. A tiger slash had flayed it from 
81 

neck to belly. Its innards oozed. Flies swarmed at 
the opening. Maggots churned in the wound. Lob-
sterlike Taxxon claws clacked like castanets as it 
strained and reached for me. 
Jake. Jake. Jake. Jake. 
The chanting continued. The smells, the 
growling, the buzzing flies, the blood . . . 
"No," I breathed. It's a vision. This is your 
past. . . haunting you . . . This isn't real! 
Not real! 
I needed to climb over the cubicle wall. They 
were coming! 
Jake. Jake. Jake. Jake. 
I put a hand on the partition and tried to pull 
myself over it, but I had no strength. 
A rat appeared between the corpses' slow-
moving feet. Running blindly, frantically. Bump-
ing into dismembered alien parts. Recoiling, 
then starting out again. I knew it was David. The 
kid we turned into an Animorph. The kid who 
betrayed us. One bad decision after another. 
Trapped and helpless because of me . . . 
Corpses had crowded into my cubicle! The 
Leeran's tentacles brushed my arm! 
"No!" 
The Taxxon's claws closed over my fingers! 
A raw, blood-dipped Hork-Bajir claw pressed 
against my cheek. 
I closed my eyes. My heart pounded. 
82 
The rat scampered up my leg and sank its 
teeth into my skin. 
"Nooo!" 
The bodies of the enemies I'd destroyed . . . 
"No, No, NOOOOO!" 
"KEEEEEEEE-row!" 
I opened my eyes and the cubicle had disap-
peared. I was tumbling through the air, spinning, 
plummeting out of control! I was in wild free fall 
next to a Howler. 
"KEEEEEE-row!" 
Another mind-splitting cry! The planet floor 
was racing up! The Howler was clawing the air, 
screaming in rage. Screaming! Because I'd led 
him off the ledge. 
Rat teeth sliced my skin. Webbed fingers 
slapped at my face. A Taxxon tongue covered me 
with spit. Hork-Bajir blades began to slice . . . 
The ground, racing up! 
"KEEEEEEEE-row!" 
I couldn't take anymore. Too much! Too much! 
"AHH! 
AHH! 
AHH!" 
I 
screamed 
and 
screamed and screamed. 
Then, instantly, all went silent. 
I gasped and jumped up from where I lay, 
sweating and cowering against the cool cubicle 
wall. 
Confused, out of my mind, I stared ahead. 
"Boss?" 
83 

I jerked my head toward the communal work-
station. Normal Controllers sat behind the con-
sole, a Hork-Bajir and a Taxxon among them. 
They looked at me in alarmed disbelief. 
I felt like I always did when I woke from a 
nightmare. Startled, a little embarrassed, but 
mostly just grateful that even this reality was less 
than the terror of the dream. 
There was a bustling down the hall. 
Orff and Hork-Bajir steamed through the maze 
of cubicles. Security was heading straight for me. 
Leading them, storming fast and angrily, was 
a stone-faced human, tall and sturdily built. I felt 
I should know this person. 
There was something familiar. . . 
"Get him!" he roared. The guards moved as 
one. 
It couldn't be true. Yet it was true. This 
wasn't another nightmare vision. It was real! 
The man who was ordering a security force to 
apprehend me was the man who'd played catch 
with me as a child, who'd taught me how to 
swim. The man who had changed my diapers. 
My friend. My role model. 
My father. 
84 
C H A P T E R 17 
Magically clear, steel-strong Orff fingers 
clutched my arms as my father approached. He 
looked just as I remembered him. Salt-and-
pepper hair receding slightly. A vertical wrinkle 
forged above his nose. He hadn't aged a day. 
How was that possible? 
"Dad . . ." 
His face showed no response as his eyes 
tracked, sifting his memory. 
"That's right. Once upon a time, you were my 
host's son. This is quite a coincidence in a city so 
big." 
My thoughts exactly. 
It was a weird and unlikely coincidence. As 
an isolated event, maybe. I'm out of commission 
85 

for ten years and when I tune in again, my dad's 
there waiting to arrest me. Sure. 
But combined with bumping into Cassie? 
With sighting Tobias? With learning that it was 
my carelessness that led to Rachel's death? 
Too much convergence. Too many life lines 
intersecting. 
There had to be some other current at work 
here. 
"You were late for work," the Yeerk in my fa-
ther's head accused. "Late and in the vicinity of 
the explosion. You will be interrogated." 
The Orff squeezed my arms, nearly cutting off 
the blood flow. 
This is a dream, I thought again. Or maybe I 
have a fever. I'll wake up in a cold sweat, back in 
my room, back with a chance for victory. . . 
"Move him!" 
The guards pulled me forward. I leaned back. 
Wake up, I screamed silently. Wake up! 
I wanted it to be a dream. Willed it to be a 
fevered dream. 
The Orffs' blue lungs filled and collapsed, 
filled and collapsed. Their hearts contracted. 
Their blood coursed. 
I rammed an elbow into a lung. 
No response! 
A flash of insight. What if their organs, those 
blatant, exposed, vulnerable organs, were de-
86 
coys? By all biological laws, they should be. They 
could be drawing attention away from the body 
sections that mattered. 
With a sweep of my leg I knocked one to the 
floor. He released my arm and I packed the hard-
est punch I've ever thrown at the clearest part of 
the other Orff's chest. Just below the head, but 
above the heart. A section clear as air. 
The sea-green glow in his eye faltered and 
flickered out. He moaned and fell, an uncon-
scious heap. My father's face flashed alarm. 
"Take him!" 
Two Hork-Bajir lunged. I turned and ran for 
the gravity lift, but six more Hork-Bajir came run-
ning from that direction. Roping me in! Closing 
off escape! 
I was blocked. Surrounded. Helpless! 
Unless . . . 
I focused. 
And the impossible began to happen. 
Bands of color, stripes of orange and black 
inked my skin. Then fur erupted. Tiger muscles 
bulged, ripping my suit at its seams. My teeth en-
larged and sharpened, becoming rows of pointed 
spears. 
I was still able to morph. 
The Yeerk force stared in horror, incredulous. 
"He's not Andalite! It's impossible!" 
Not so, boys. 
87 

I fell forward onto all fours and lunged. 
Slashed a Hork-Bajir leg. Rip! Slash! Rip! 
Four were down. I turned on my father. He 
reached for the Dracon holstered on his hip. 
His hand was on it. His eyes were on me. 
One leap and I'd have him. One leap, and I 
could take him out. 
My dad. 
He lifted the beam from his belt. Started to 
bring it up. 
One leap . . . 
Take down my father? 
WHAM! 
From behind! A brutal blow. My head ex-
ploded. My legs, crumpling beneath me. And my 
vision . . . 
Red, then black. 
88 
C H A P T E R 18 
Slowly, 
very slowly, unconsciousness gave 
way to the numb daze of waking up. 
My limbs were heavy. Utter exhaustion made 
me happy to be lying down. Don't move. Don't 
even open your eyes. Back to sleep. Yeah . . . go 
back to sleep, Jake. 
Then suddenly, I remembered. 
Panic knotted my stomach. I was back in hu-
man form! 
How did I demorph? 
Hideous red light reflected off a cool, smooth 
floor. It burned my eyes. Bare, seamless walls. A 
large room. And I was sprawled near the exit. A 
door frame with no door. I could go . . . 
89 

I staggered to my feet, scanned the hall out-
side for guards. No one. This was it. My lucky 
break. I rushed forward. 
Kzzzzt! 
It was like being slapped down by a steel 
plate. My face, knees, and fists had struck an in-
visible, electrified force. I raised my head, not 
sure of what had happened, anticipating a sec-
ond strike. 
Nothing. Just the opening, still crackling from 
impact. 
I struggled to raise my limp body. 
"Still putting up the big fight?" It was a deep, 
chiding voice. "After all these years?" 
I looked up. A broad, dark man paused in the 
doorway, then strode through the energy barrier. 
He was flanked by six Hork-Bajir and four heavily 
armed Orff. The Hork-Bajir fell off and took up 
locations by the entrance. The Orff kept their po-
sitions on either side of this person, who was 
clearly in charge. 
He spoke. 
"When they told me it was you, I didn't believe 
it. I thought you'd been disposed of at the begin-
ning. My host's old comrade in arms. The former 
leader of that pathetic little gang, the Animorphs." 
The face was adult. Mid-twenties, like mine. 
Unmistakable anywhere, despite all that had 
90 
changed. Despite the deep, angular battle scars 
that scored it. 
I knew that face. 
That cocky confidence. That swagger. 
"Marco?" 
"Just the parts of his mind I find useful," 
came the reply. A voice at once familiar and 
alien. 
"Not you, too, man." 
"Your old friend Marco's serving the Empire 
now, if that's what you mean. He finally under-
stands how much better things can be when we 
all work together. One big happy family. Tell your 
old buddy, Marco." 
An odd expression contorted the man's face. 
A face so shocked to find it could speak, that the 
mouth could barely form words. 
There was stuttering. A long attempt to utter 
something. 
"N-n-n . . . o." 
And then the mouth stopped abruptly, turning 
once again cold and hard. The Yeerk cut in. The 
Yeerk who'd stolen my best friend's mind and 
made him a slave. 
"What he means is that no one could be hap-
pier." 
"Marco would die before he'd choose to help 
you." 
91 

"Evolutionist-Front nonsense. Everyone wants 
to help the Yeerks. It's the informed choice, the 
'in' thing to do. Life's cool when you share your 
head." 
This Yeerk was trying hard to tap Marco's hu-
mor, but it wasn't working. 
"You'll want to join us, too. We've already got 
a new Yeerk lined up for you. Someone more co-
operative with the Empire. He'll help you think 
things through, help that anarchic brain of yours 
find peace. But first we've got some business to 
take care of." 
A new Yeerk? So he, too, thought I was al-
ready a Controller? 
I knew I wasn't. I knew it! 
And yet when everybody thinks you're some-
thing you're not, when everyone tells you again 
and again who and what you are, it's hard not to 
wonder, way in the back of your mind, if they 
aren't somehow right. 
92 
C H A P T E R 19 
"You were spotted on the street near the 
scene of the explosion. You were off duty without 
authorization. Then I hear you're hanging with 
Gotham's most wanted. I have to say it was that 
particular piece of evidence that sealed your 
fate." A familiar smirk lit up the altered face. 
"Old Jake's a terrorist." 
"I don't know anything about the explosion. I 
was just on my way to work." 
"I anticipated you'd try to resist." 
Marco snapped his fingers and a Hork-Bajir 
swiftly disabled the energy barrier. Two Orff 
marched in, carrying Cassie. Her feet and hands 
were bound with living handcuffs. They handled 
her roughly, ignoring her broken arm. 
93 

Despite her injury, Cassie fought them like a 
madwoman. She spat in the big Cyclopean eye of 
an Orff. The orbiting pupil turned from bright 
yellow to beet-red. He threw her to the floor at 
Marco's feet. 
"Terrorist or not," Marco said to me, "when 
you see what I can do to Cassie, you'll do as I 
say." 
Cassie started to crawl away, but the Orff 
grabbed her again and dragged her to a corner of 
the room. They fastened her cuffs to brackets on 
the wall. 
"I want to meet those people clever enough to 
bring down a building in the center of town, right 
under our noses," Marco said, his calm unnerv-
ing. "I'd like you to introduce me to that group of 
individuals. If you're willing, Jake, I think we 
might be able to keep things friendly." 
No. I was going to free Cassie. She needed 
help. 
I was about to morph to tiger when she 
caught my eye. Her expression held me back. Its 
meaning was clear. Hold your ground, Jake, her 
eyes said. Tell him nothing. Keep your cool. If 
you try to free me, you'll tell him too much. 
So I didn't morph. Instead I turned to Marco 
and said, "I told you, I don't know anything 
about any group." 
Immediately, led in by two more Orff, came a 
94 
gigantic Taxxon on a leash. Each Orff carried a 
long pointed pole with which they jabbed at the 
Taxxon, keeping it at bay. 
Marco snickered. "This fellow's been brought 
straight over from the Taxxon home world where 
he made quite a name for himself. He ate his en-
tire hive. Mother? Uh-huh. Father? Yep. Siblings? 
Children? Cousins? Oh, yeah. We tried infesting 
him, but it became obvious that he's more effec-
tive at what he does when his natural inclinations 
are left unchecked." 
The Taxxon pulled violently, choking on his 
leash, oblivious to everything but the search for 
flesh. Hundreds of legs scrambled. The Orff could 
barely hold him back. 
Cassie squirmed, struggling to break free. I 
thought she would pull her arms out of their 
sockets. I couldn't watch. 
"Help us infiltrate the EF," Marco proposi-
tioned smoothly, "and her life will be spared. Tell 
me all you know and . . ." 
"Tell him nothing!" Cassie snarled. "I'd sooner 
die a thousand Taxxon-deaths than aid the Em-
pire." 
She meant it. No childish uncertainty lin-
gered in her voice. No naive hopes. She was pure 
warrior, calculating as any visser. 
But when I looked at her face, even though it 
was ten years older than in my memory, I saw 
95 

only the Cassie I once knew, the Cassie I once 
cared for. 
She saw my mind working. 
"No, Jake!" she yelled. 
"Decide now or it's over for the girl. You won't 
have a second chance." 
I looked from Cassie to Marco, and didn't 
even hesitate. 
"I'll tell you whatever you want." 
"No!" Cassie shrieked, bucking and kicking. 
Marco signaled. An Orff clamped see-through 
fingers over Cassie's mouth. 
"This makes a new record for breaking a ter-
rorist." Marco smiled and fell into a chair. "It's 
things like this that get you noticed by the Coun-
cil. They knew what they were doing when they 
made me Visser Three." 
Visser Three? 
"Cassie said you were Visser Two." 
"I am." 
"But you just said . . . you said three, not 
two." 
Marco's grin broadened. 
That was a slip. Proof that this couldn't be 
real! 
"It's all just a dream, isn't it?" I said excit-
edly. 
Marco laughed. "Dream? Reality? Can you tell 
96 
the difference? Are you so sure there even is a 
difference? Pain is pain. Fear is fear. If I order 
this Taxxon to eat you now you'll feel agony be-
yond imagining. Call it a dream if you want, but 
it'll be real enough." 
I looked at Cassie, still screaming muffled syl-
lables through the Orff's fingers. 
I looked at the Taxxon. He saw me and jerked 
his head. Drool flew from his mouth. Struck my 
hand. 
"You'll do just as I say. Exactly as I say, or this 
Taxxon scarfs Cassie down in a New York minute. 
Get it?" 
I got it. 
"Start talking." 
"Okay," I said nervously. "I'm waiting for fur-
ther contact from the EF. They're planning an-
other attack. Worse than the one today," I added, 
though I would not mention the moon-ray plan. 
"I don't have details yet. I get them from my next 
contact. I'll cooperate. I'll do whatever you want. 
Just don't hurt her." 
"Her?" Marco said, rising from his chair, mov-
ing toward Cassie. "Why would we have to harm 
her?" His voice was calm, confident. "She'll give 
us the names of the other EF terrorists. She'll give 
us their locations. She'll help us catch them, help 
us reinfest them. Relax, Jake. I'm sure . . ." 
97 

Cassie head-butted the Orff. His fingers fell 
away from her mouth. She coughed, back deep 
in her throat, and — 
Dead center. Marco's right eye. She lodged 
the perfect loogie. 
No one spoke. 
Marco reached out and gripped her hair. Bent 
her head back. Pulled so hard she squinted. 
Then he let go of her, rubbed the spit out of his 
eye, and turned to me. 
"Go back to work, Jake. Essak. Wait for the 
EF to contact you. Go with them. Do as they say. 
We'll be watching." 
The room began to spin. 
"No matter which way you turn, we'll know. 
We'll be there. Don't try to deceive us." 
I grabbed the table for support. But the room 
just kept spinning. And spinning . . . 
"We'll be watching." Marco's voice was faint 
now. "Every step you take, Jake. Buddy ..." 
98 
C H A P T E R 20 
Awake. 
Somehow, back at my work con-
sole. 
Controllers all over the office began quietly 
standing up, leaving their cubicles, systemati-
cally filing out of the big room toward the gravity-
lift doors. 
My computer was blank. No more rotating 
Chrysler Building model. Glowing numerals glared 
6:36. The workday was over. My crew was already 
gone, which was lucky, because I would have had a 
lot of explaining to do. 
Dreams within nightmares within hallucina-
tions within visions. It was debilitating! 
Play along. Get up and follow. 
99 

We'll be watching. . . 
Marco's voice still vibrated in my ears. 
I picked up the mug on my desk that had 
somehow appeared and took a swig of cold cof-
fee. I bit into a half-eaten jelly donut. It moved 
down my esophagus like a wad of wet paper 
towel. 
I stood up and followed the last Controller 
onto the gravity lift. It plummeted several floors 
and opened onto a long, yellow hallway. Pulsat-
ing triangles pointed the way to an enclosed 
bridge. A catwalk, running from skyscraper to 
skyscraper over dingy streets hundreds of feet 
below. 
I heard music. A thumping bass filled the air. I 
quickened my step. Inviting smells. Food smells. 
I followed the music and aromas to a huge 
carpeted room, like a banquet hall. Blue and red 
lights flashed and spun in the darkness. Long ta-
bles lined the walls and framed a dance floor. 
Orff lifted crystal mugs of green brew into the air, 
chanted something incomprehensible, downed 
the liquid, and slammed the mugs to the table. 
At the far end, a ring of Taxxons stuffed pot pie 
after pot pie into their mouths, cheered on by 
Hork-Bajir. 
But much of the crowd was human. Evidently 
the Yeerks understood the human need for leisure 
time. And for junk food. 
100 
Tacos, hamburgers, chicken strips, cheese 
sticks, buffalo wings. Bowls of chips piled three 
feet high. No broccoli in sight. My mother would 
not be happy. I was in heaven. Nightmare or not, 
it was real enough that I felt hunger. Hunger so 
strong I felt I'd been adrift for a month in the rag-
ing Pacific with nothing to sustain me but rain-
water. 
I heaped a plate with tacos and pizza and 
edged toward the drink bar. 
WHOOF! 
A Hork-Bajir slammed me against the wall, 
knocking my plate to the floor. 
I moved to strike. He blocked my arm. 
"Don't struggle," he said quietly. "I'm a 
friend." 
I looked him over. Savage blades. Bandana 
strips tied like tourniquets on all limbs. Didn't 
look like a friend to me. He reached for one of 
the cloth ties, pulled it down, and revealed a 
branding. A sort of poorly executed, self-inflicted 
tattoo. The letters "EF" etched in leathery skin. 
"My contact?" 
"No. A messenger," he said. "Make like you're 
going to the hovercraft dock, like you're going 
home for the night. Then double back and duck in 
the side door to the kitchen." His eyes trailed 
across the room to the door in question. My eyes 
followed. 
101 

He squeezed a hand against my neck to make 
it seem like he was an aggressor. Necessary for 
setting Marco's men off track, I assumed. Then 
he fell back into the rowdy, pulsing mass on the 
dance floor. 
I grabbed a taco off a table and crammed it 
into my mouth, then dance-walked over to the 
hovercraft dock. I strolled onto the platform, into 
the crazy hum. Hover ships crisscrossed the set-
ting sun, swarming in apparent disorder like bees 
in a garden. 
"Uptown?" a blue suit asked me. Her red hair 
glistened in the sun's dimming rays. 
"Yeah," I said. She smiled. The hovercraft 
pulled in. She stepped on. I stepped in after her. 
We brushed shoulders, then I remembered. 
"Wait! I'm, uh, still hungry." I smiled apolo-
getically. "One more taco should do the trick." I 
slipped off the ship. Its doors closed. Blue suit 
was whisked into the sky. 
Back into the canteen, slinking low, lost in 
the throbbing mass of dancers. Moving along the 
wall, past a row of diners. To the swinging door. 
Whoosh! 
I was inside a dimly lit kitchen. Empty, though 
the still-wet floor reeked of bleach. 
The door clapped shut, muting the after-work 
revelry of Yeerk happy hour. I moved through the 
102 
pantry. No one. Into the main kitchen. Prep 
counters. Ranges. Refrigerators. 
I froze. Labored breathing. 
A kind of struggle for air through lungs that 
were seriously not well. I swung around and 
there, next to the island chopping block, was a 
wheelchair. 
In the wheelchair, a woman. I'm not sure how 
I knew it was a woman. The face and body were 
grossly disfigured by injuries. She had no legs. 
Only one arm. A horrifying scar shut one eye. 
The other eye looked up at me. It gleamed a 
brilliant blue. 
I think I knew right then because the hair on 
the back of my neck stood on end. 
"Aahhh Nihhh Morfff," came a sound from 
lips that barely moved. A scraping voice, harsh as 
railroad brakes, weak as a whisper. Yet strangely 
animated. 
Animorph. The password! 
Relief washed over me. A sudden wave. I was 
in the presence of a friend. It was about time! 
This pitiable woman . . . just a clever disguise. 
"You don't even rec . . ." Thick wheezing cut 
off her words. She started up again. "You don't 
recognize me." 
The arduous puffs of speech . . . this was no 
disguise. 
103 

"Cause I'm not kicking . . . Yeerk butt, you 
don't. . . even recognize . . . your own cousin?" 
A sprig of dulled golden hair tucked behind a 
battered ear. 
Reckless vitality still shining in her one eye. 
"Cassie said you were dead!" I blurted. 
She jammed her hand on the wheelchair joy-
stick and lurched forward, stopping aggressively 
an inch from my boot. 
"Close," she whispered. "But not quite." 
104 
C H A P T E R 21 
Rachel! 
Not dead. Alive. 
I couldn't find words. There were plenty rac-
ing around in my head, but none made it out. I 
just dropped to my knees and looked into her 
face. She had been so badly hurt. I wanted to ask 
how — why didn't she morph to repair the dam-
age? But I was afraid of the answer. 
I knew it was my doing. I knew I'd finally 
wasted Rachel's life. 
"We don't do pity," she snapped, answering 
the expression on my face. "This is business. The 
serious stuff." 
I nodded. 
Why had Cassie lied to me? 
105 

"Eight blocks away is . . . the New York Public 
Library. A big abandoned building you . . . can't 
miss. Get there. Make the trip . . . from here to 
there the crookedest... line you can. We want 
them off... the scent." 
I nodded again. It was hard for me to listen to 
her wheezing, but it didn't seem to bother her 
much at all. 
"Go in . . . the side entrance," she contin-
ued. "Up two flights. Down . . . the hall and into 
the stacks. And wait." 
"For what?" 
"We don't do questions." 
Suddenly — 
Whoosh! 
An Orff flung open the swing door. Shone his 
amber eye-light on pots, pans, me, stacked dishes. 
Back to me. 
"Explain your position, Orange Suit." 
Rachel's chair was low enough to the ground 
that he couldn't see her behind the island chop-
ping block, but I was standing. 
"I wanted more salsa. The tacos are bland," I 
said. 
He thought a moment. I stared him down. 
But when he stepped through the door my 
heart pounded. Maybe he was a figment of my 
subconscious, but pain was pain. Fear was fear. 
Marco had a point. 
106 
"Get the sauce," he bellowed, "and bring it to 
my table. You're right, the tacos stink." 
He turned and walked out. 
"They'll trail you," Rachel said. "At least now 
you know . . . who you need to lose." 
"But do I meet someone? I want to do this 
right. Who do I look for? How will I know them?" 
"You'll know." An undercurrent of the old en-
thusiasm carried her voice, even through the la-
bored speech. "Believe me, you'll know." 
I moved to leave. Her hand grabbed my suit. 
"Don't let us down, Jake. It's not just... our 
freedom in the balance . .. this time. It's .. . life 
itself. There are many more . . . like me. Injured 
or weak or different. So let's do it. . . and do it 
right." 
She released me. I wish I could say it didn't 
bother me to look at the mess Rachel had be-
come, but it did. And in my mind, her wounds 
chronicled my failures as a leader. It was more 
than I could bear. 
Without a backward glance, I swung through 
the door and back into the rowdy canteen. I 
couldn't tell exactly who was watching, but I felt 
the threat. I felt the stare of Marco's men. 
A gravity lift dropped me at street level. Me 
and a group of blue suits looking to start a brawl 
with a Taxxon gang. I left them on the corner and 
started to move. 
107 

Down an alley. Back onto a main street. An-
other alley . . . 
I needed to morph. I focused on the image of 
a peregrine falcon. I waited for my bones to start 
shrinking, the ground to start racing up at me. 
Nothing happened. The changes didn't come! 
I heard footsteps behind me. I looked back, 
but saw no one. Could Marco's men have some 
antimorphing technology? 
I broke into a jog, dodging in and out of blown-
out storefronts, doubling back on my tracks. 
All the while I felt eyes on me. I saw no one. 
Just felt eyes. 
And heard footfalls. When I slowed, they 
slowed. When I sped up, they followed. 
I kept trying to morph, but the changes 
wouldn't come. Maybe it was me. Maybe my 
mind was too fragmented to focus. 
In the middle of Forty-second Street, in the 
center of the path the Yeerks had cut through de-
bris from the explosion, I stopped suddenly, waited 
two seconds, and spun around. 
My boot struck the pavement. It was the 
sound of triumph. Because I'd captured exactly 
what I wanted. 
I'd seen the Orff before they'd dimmed their 
eyes. 
There was one on a first-floor balcony a half-
block away, purple. And there was a group of 
108 
three, crouched next to a junked hovercraft, their 
eyes red. 
One of them was not even twelve feet away. A 
glowing orange follow spot. Invisible now, in the 
night, but that didn't matter. I'd charted it on my 
mental map. 
Five total. I would lose these guys. I'd lose 
them without morphing. For Rachel. 
Ready, set. . . 
Gone! I pumped my legs. Worked them like 
springs, jumping over the debris-laden street and 
across the pavement. A powerful body in top con-
dition. A host any Yeerk would give five ranks to 
get. 
I couldn't see the Orff, but I could hear them. 
A fluid swishing followed by a thump, as each leg 
struck the ground. Swish-thump. Swish-thump. 
Swish-thump. Blending together so fast it was 
one sound. One rhythm. The Orff's three legs. 
Like a well-oiled engine. 
I turned into another alley. Swish-thump. 
Only one Orff was near. But how close? I twisted 
and caught a glimpse. It was Orange-eye. Stick-
ing to me. He wouldn't let me pull away. 
I'd have to take this chase inside. 
109 

C H A P T E R 22 
1 dove through the storefront, its sheet glass 
already blown out. I landed on a bed of sports 
equipment. Hockey skates jabbed my ribs. Sneak-
ers broke my fall. 
I raced to the back of the store. Boxes of 
shoes and skates and hockey pads piled high, 
overturned, spilled randomly across the floor. I 
tripped through the obstacle course, heading for 
the backstairs when . . . 
Whoosh! 
The floor in front of me was opening up! I 
couldn't stop. Moving too fast. . . 
A black hole! 
"Ahh!" 
110 
I grabbed for a shoe rack. It tumbled. 
I was falling! 
Like Alice in Wonderland, I was shooting 
through blackness. Or down a water park slide. 
Only beneath me wasn't a stream of H20, but a 
current of air so strong it kept me buoyant. 
Air flew past so fast I could hardly breathe. I 
scratched the sides for a handhold, but they were 
smooth. 
A twisting turn! Then flatness. Then a thirty-
foot drop! 
"Oh-wah-oh-wa-weh-se-gunta-go . . ." 
<Oh-wah-oh-wa. . .> 
What the. . . ?! 
Kids. A mix of oral and thought-speak voices. 
Singing! 
It was the first joyful sound I'd heard since 
waking in my cell. 
I saw the end of the tunnel speeding toward 
me. No way to slow down! 
"Yahhh!" 
I was flying through night air, through a sky 
dotted by stars and warmed by the full moon. 
Whumph! 
An unexpectedly soft landing on a wide, 
grassy field. Next to me was a tree. But not just 
your average neighborhood maple or oak. This 
sucker was huge. A billowing, thriving tree whose 
111 

branches bowed to touch the ground, then 
headed back up toward the sky. Like the baobabs 
of Africa I've seen on the Discovery Channel. 
Every branch had a child on it. A smiling, play-
ful child, singing and swaying. Some of them were 
obviously skilled tree-climbers. Not all of them 
were human, although most were. There were 
young Andalites, too. Even a number of Orff. And a 
Leeran. 
"Oh-wah-oh-wa-weh-se-gunta-go!" 
The singing stopped. 
On the grass not far from me, beneath the 
tree, were some adults. A few were standing, oth-
ers sat cross-legged. They didn't wear the colored 
suits of the Yeerk metropolis. Instead they had 
on loose-fitting, linen-colored tunics. A bulge in 
a pouch on their sides revealed handheld Dra-
cons, but I got the feeling the weapons weren't 
used very often. 
Adult Andalites stood thoughtfully nearby. A 
single Orff, barely visible in the darkness, crouched 
on his third leg while he extended the other two 
legs comfortably out in front of him. 
A human female raised her hands with plea-
sure and smiled at the kids in the tree. "Very 
nice," she said. "We'll start the meeting now." 
All heads turned up to the starry sky. An adult 
Andalite stepped forward. 
112 
<With it we walk, think, and speak. For it we 
breathe, sleep, and work.> 
"Freedom guides us," everyone answered. 
<For it we live.> 
"Freedom is all." 
Heads dropped. A human male asked the kids 
if they wanted to share what they'd worked on 
during the week. The female who'd led the song 
walked over to me. 
"What is this place?" I asked. "Are you the 
group Cassie told me about? Are you free?" 
"Yes. So Cassie sent you?" 
"Well, no. I mean, I don't know. I just fell 
through a hole in the floor and . . ." 
"The floor doesn't open up for just anyone. 
Cassie must want you to learn. You see, all our 
young adults are in the EF. We're the ones 
they've saved so far. We elders, and the children 
that we raise and teach." She pointed back at 
the tree. It must have been art week because 
each child had a painting of his own creation in 
his hands. The canvases were small, but intri-
cate. One student at a time explained his work 
while the others listened. 
"These are the first healthy kids I've seen 
since I've been here." 
The woman nodded and squeezed my arm. 
"It's a sad story, to be sure. I'll tell you." She 
113 

jf 
lowered her voice a notch. "The Yeerks raise chil-
I 
dren in large warehouses back in the city. Con-
trollers like the ones you saw are picked at 
random to procreate. When children are born, 
they enter one of the wamps, or warehouses, 
where they are held from birth to age fifteen. 
Their lives are controlled though their brains are 
left uninfested. Children are seen as weak and 
unworthy host bodies. 
"During this captivity," she continued, 
; 
"they're pumped full of vitamin supplements so 
the host bodies will grow strong. They're run on 
treadmills so they'll be fit to fight and to produce. 
When instinct leads them to indulge in moments 
] 
of uncontrolled, regular childhood, they are pun-
ished. If they try to educate themselves, they are 
punished. Yeerks want minds as powerless as 
possible. So they raise children in a joyless, life-
less world where they wait for the day of infesta-
tion. The EF fights to free them. When they are 
freed, which is far more seldom than I can bear 
to think, they come here." 
1 
"These kids don't seem traumatized at all," I 
I 
said. "They seem completely normal." 
"We've been lucky that way. Very few have 
I 
been broken down beyond repair. This is a place 
I 
of joy. It helps that we don't talk about the 
wamps unless we must. We live simply. We teach 
I 
and cultivate. We hope." 
114 
She turned back to the class in progress, then 
back to me. 
"Would you like to see more?" 
I nodded. I felt it was important to see how 
things worked here. I felt that I was here because 
I was supposed to be. 
115 

C H A P T E R 23 
I walked over to the tree. 
"Are you from the EF?" A kid's voice. I looked 
down at one of the lower, swooping branches and 
saw a blond, rosy-cheeked boy. Maybe eight or 
nine. He spoke like he hoped I was with the EF 
because that would make me a quasi-celebrity 
and someone worth showing his artwork to. 
"Urn, I guess so," I said. "Yeah. I'm working 
with the EF. My name's Jake." 
"My name's Justice. The elders insist on giv-
ing us these funny 'concept' names. Like, that's 
Liberty over there." He pointed to a girl on a high 
branch. "And that's Storm." As he explained 
this, he rolled his eyes a little, indicating that to 
him, all adults seem a bit goofy. 
116 
I smiled and knelt down to get closer to his 
level. 
"You want to see my painting?" he said. "My 
friends think I'm better at art than they are. The 
elders say I have a gift." 
"Well, then, I'd better have a look." 
Justice handed his canvas to me. 
"What do you think?" 
The image was divided diagonally, from the 
lower left corner to upper right. Below that line was 
an expressionist nightmare. A dark, angular city. 
Jutting, steel-gray towers rising through a bloodred 
mist. A fog from which arms and screaming, ago-
nized faces reached in vain for a sky they couldn't 
see. 
Above the diagonal demarcation was a differ-
ent world. A cloudless, blue-skied landscape. In 
the sky hovered a hot-air balloon, stark-white, 
like a sun. Extending from the balloon's gondola, 
crossing over from the joyful sky to the dismal, 
urban abyss was a rope. 
A cord, thin as thread. 
On this rope were people, traveling upward, 
pinned to the thread like clothes on a laundry 
line. 
And as they crossed the border between dark-
ness and light, faces stiff with frustration and 
rage softened. There were no smiles, but there 
were expressions of hope. 
117 

"Do you like it, Jake?" 
"It's great," I said. He smiled. "You're really 
good at drawing. Is that how you got here? Did 
you escape up the rope?" 
"Not you too," he said with mild frustration. 
"The elders are always telling me I paint allegories, 
whatever they are! I'm working out my aggression 
and fears, they say. But I'm just painting what I 
want to." 
"Okay." 
"Do you get to fly Bug fighters?" 
"Nope." 
"But you get to plan attacks, right? And lead 
rebels? And free slaves?" 
"I guess so." 
"That's what I want to do. I'm gonna free all 
the friends I had to leave behind. They're prison-
ers and I'm gonna save them." 
I wondered how I should answer, how I could 
explain to him, without destroying his spirit. 
"War doesn't always let you save the people you 
know," I said. "You might end up being assigned 
to a mission that saves people far away from 
here. People you don't know. Other people's 
friends." 
He shook his head. 
"I'll save my friends first. Then I'll save other 
people's friends." He jumped suddenly and 
118 
grabbed hold of my arm, pulling me toward the 
trunk of the massive tree. 
"You're gonna be late," he said. "I want you 
to stay, but you're gonna be late." He pressed his 
small hand on a depression in the thick, corru-
gated bark and a door appeared. It opened for me 
and I let Justice push me through it, but then I 
turned back. 
When I did, there was just the trunk of an 
oak. 
No door, no free humans. 
I was back in the city. 
In Bryant Park, awash in shadows from a 
nearly full, rising moon. Gnarled branches on 
leafless trees spread like outstretched hands. 
Hands warning of danger. Pleading with me to be 
careful. 
Gravel crunched beneath my boots as I 
crossed to the New York Public Library. My mind 
hummed with confusion as I tried to make sense 
of the place I'd just been, the free humans I'd 
just met. 
I'd decided a while back to give up analyzing 
what was happening to me and why. I'd figured 
that sanity depended on accepting the reality I 
saw, this dream or nightmare or vision. But that 
didn't mean there weren't times when all I wanted 
were answers — definite, concrete answers. 
119 

I listened for the sound of Orff footfalls. For 
the feel of spying eyes tracking me. 
Nothing. I'd lost them. 
I'd done as Rachel had said. 
Up white marble steps. 
"TSSEEERRR." 
A raptor's cry cut the night. Then beating 
wings and the creaking of ancient bones. 
"Tobias!" 
Feathers brushed my face as a hawk shot 
past. So close this time! I blinked and . . . 
Gone! Absorbed by the night. 
"Tobias?" There was no answer. 
So I turned and opened the massive, brass-
handled door. I raced up moonlit stairs, boots 
pounding in the vast emptiness. 
A wood-paneled corridor led to the stacks, to 
endless rows of high, book-lined shelves. A gloomy, 
moody maze. A musty, unlived-in smell. Silent as a 
tomb. 
Reading obviously wasn't big with the Em-
pire. 
I walked along the main corridor, looking down 
each aisle. Rachel said I'd know. 
I was in the beginning of the "E" section 
when I passed an aisle that seemed to extend 
farther than the rest. I turned into the book-lined 
tunnel, heart thumping, and began to run. 
Suddenly, the bookshelves ended. I skidded 
120 
to a halt next to a row of dark-stained wooden ta-
bles. And then a hundred lights switched on and 
splashed light across the surfaces of a hundred 
desks, illuminating a huge reading room. 
A strapping Andalite, coarse blue fur drawn 
tight over battle-ready muscles, swiveled grace-
ful stalk eyes to rest on me. 
<Jake.> 
The thought-speak voice was mind-filling. 
Gentle and tough. Wise, inspiring, terrifying. 
Familiar. 
He looked just as he did the night his space-
craft crashed in the construction site. The night 
my life changed forever. 
By comparison, my voice sounded puny and 
forlorn, swallowed up by the vaulted chamber. 
"Elfangor." 
121 

C H A P T E R 24 
The Andalite shifted on his hooves and trot-
ted nearer, his stature breathtaking. He was pow-
erful and well-proportioned. 
<You have followed our instructions.> 
I'd seen Elfangor murdered with my own eyes, 
yet there he stood. Could he be leader of the EF? 
Mastermind of a terrorist campaign against Yeerk 
control? I was incredulous, but, at this point, 
anything seemed possible. 
"The EF is certainly a force to be reckoned 
with," I said. 
<lt sounds as though you question our tac-
tics.> 
"Action is the surest path to change. No 
question there." 
122 
<But you would fight them differently? Sabo-
tage and terrorist offensives make you morally 
uneasy. You want a better way.> 
"What I want is to go home." 
<Too much for you?> Elfangor was an awe-
some presence. I'd be lying to say he didn't in-
timidate me some. But I was a leader, too. I saw 
the fight for Earth as more mine now than his. I 
wanted to be respectful of him, but in my view 
he'd made a giant mistake with the terrorist cam-
paign. I had to call him on it. 
"No. I want to go home so I can keep all this 
from happening in the first place. If this is the 
future, I want to go back. I can stop the Yeerks 
without sacrificing my friends. Without botching 
the war, and bumbling into your brand of terror-
ism and half-freedoms. I can stop them before 
we sacrifice the very things we're fighting for!" 
Elfangor laughed in my mind. <Victory with-
out sacrifice? You know better than that.> 
"You don't have to give up your principles to 
win. Isn't there always an alternative to sacrifice 
if you just keep your mind clear, and step back, 
and see it and . . ." 
<You know better than that.> 
The repetition stung. How did he know I was 
just talking big? It was like he was inside my 
head, rifling through my personal file of fears and 
mistakes . . . 
123 

Now I was angry. 
"It's all your fault," I said suddenly, surpris-
ing myself. "I always thought of you as a hero, 
Elfangor. A leader. But the truth is you couldn't 
see another way out. You sentenced us to hard-
ship, pain, and suffering. We were kids. You 
made us question every value we ever learned. 
You had no right to heap that weight on us, huge 
and impossible. You used us!" 
<That's interesting, coming from you, Jake.> 
The voice changed as he said my name. Sud-
denly, he didn't sound like Elfangor anymore. 
The Andalite arrogance was gone, leaving only 
the voice of a man. A human. Familiar and unfa-
miliar. 
<Let me guess what comes next,> the new 
voice said. <You didn't ask for leadership, right? 
You didn't ask to make the tough calls. Plan the 
missions. Decide how to use your small but loyal 
force. How and when to put them in harm's way, 
risking their lives. You're blameless. The role was 
thrust upon you. Well, I don't buy it, Jake. Every 
choice is yours. Always has been. You were and 
are free.> 
"Tobias." 
<Yeah. You know I morphed Ax a long time 
ago. I decided to stay in this morph. Ax's body 
has aged ten years. It's a dead ringer for Elfan-
gor, isn't it? But Elfangor's dead, Jake.> 
124 
Of course. 
<And so are you.> 
My throat tightened. My skin tingled. What? 
My mind seized on his words, pulled and prod-
ded them. Turned and shook them. 
Dead? Then how could I be free?! 
<Ten years ago tonight, Tom put it all to-
gether. He came into your room and murdered 
the leader of the Animorphs. Rather than let 
Visser Three know that one of the notorious "An-
dalite bandits" had gone undetected for so long, 
right under his nose, Tom ended your life. Your 
own brother. . . > 
"But I'm here!" 
I looked down at my hand. Pink-tan flesh un-
der the light of the reading lamp. Knuckles, 
nails, veins, bones. Alive. Real. 
<Yes, you're here, but not alive.> 
What was this? 
<lt all converges tonight. Battles, struggle, 
strategy. Tonight is the decisive moment. The 
Chrysler Building moon ray is ready for use. 
They're powering it up as I speak. Running 
through the checklist. Applying your hundreds of 
hours of calculations.> 
"No! No, no, no! I'm not a scientist!" 
<You are. You were. Or rather, you will be. It 
all rests on you. You're the only one . . . only you 
can make the shot miss. Get there, Jake. Alter 
125 

the programming. Make it miss. Even a tenth of a 
percent will do the job. This is the decisive mo-
ment, do you understand? Use whatever means 
necessary.> 
"If I make the shot miss, the moon will ex-
plode and doom millions." 
<The greater good, Jake. The big picture. For 
God's sake, don't get stopped by details. Perma-
nent Kandrona. Failure means an Earth that is at 
last irrevocably Yeerk.> 
"But what about Cassie? Marco has her!" 
<There's no time. She's prepared to die with 
honor.> 
"Couldn't you send someone else to save her? 
One of your people?" I pleaded, indignant at his 
dismissal of her life. 
Tobias shrugged. 
<No one to spare.> 
"I won't let her die!" 
<Save one or save many? The choice wasn't 
so hard for you at the Ragsin Building, when you 
left Marco and Rachel to save themselves.> 
I couldn't answer that. 
<This is war, Jake. Sacrifices must be made.> 
He turned abruptly and walked across the 
room. 
<Alter the moon ray or save Cassie. One or the 
other. Or neither. Not both.> 
126 
C H A P T E R 25 
•1 couldn't accept it. 
I ran out the same way I came in, as fast as 
my legs could carry me. Past row upon row of 
books and cavernous marble library halls built for 
a different world. 
I burst out into a muggy cloud of night air, 
thick and hot. The leaves on the trees were full 
and lush. Leaves? Muggy air? Minutes ago I'd 
walked beneath barren branches, dormant as 
death. Now I raced past foliage rustling in the 
whirlwind currents from hovercraft overhead. 
Reality was all wrong. 
Cassie. 
No mission was worth sacrificing her life. 
127 

I ran from Tobias. From Elfangor and Ax, from 
friends who'd ceased to care. 
As leader of the Animorphs, I would put the 
mission first. The mission as a whole. But what 
was my mission? 
What made the world worth more? Sheer vol-
ume? The future? The common good? 
Detachment, you idiot. 
The last battle we'd fought together. . . Marco 
and Rachel, inside... lose everyone or just 
two . . . a door closing . . . Securing their des-
tiny .. . 
Guilt tore at me with scratching, ripping claws. 
I'd set the example. I was to blame for 
Cassie's hardness and Tobias's indifference. 
I ran still faster. Down a dark, narrow back-
street. The smell of Taxxon filth invaded every 
corner of the city. Sweat poured down my face, 
mixing with burning, unstoppable tears. 
"I'm sorry!" I shouted at the sky. 
No one to hear. 
Tobias was wrong about war. What good is it if 
people are forgotten along the way? If one girl in 
one million girls is scarred and hardened. 
Changed forever. What good? Only Yeerks freely 
give their own to see a job completed. I wasn't a 
Yeerk. 
I wasn't. 
TSEEEW! 
128 
A flash of heat. The scorch of Dracon fire on 
the bricks above my face. 
Marco's men! 
Get away! I had to get above this nightmare 
town! I tore at my synthetic orange skin and tried 
to morph. 
The physical changes began. I hadn't lost the 
morphing power! Long human legs collapsed up 
into my rear. Elbows fused to my chest. 
A downy undercoat sprouted across my skin. 
Stiff feathers shot outward from thinning arms. 
Hard cranial bones shifted, sculpting my heavy, 
round human head into the falcon's sleek form. 
I flapped as hard as I could. Struggling through 
wet air. 
Help Cassie, and I doom so many more. Kan-
drona for eternity. Help Cassie and mankind's 
fate is sealed. 
But I would have one more moment with 
Cassie by my side. We might make it. We could 
run. 
But where could we go? And with a Kandrona 
sun, I couldn't even starve the Yeerk out of her 
head . . . 
Every detail of the city surged into focus with 
raptor sight. And the mind. Simple, but keen. Fo-
cused on the task. No swells of emotion. No 
unanswered questions. 
The tears were gone. 
129 

Higher. Past walls of silver-green glass and 
rooftop landing pads. Glassed-in penthouses, 
beacons in the darkness, housed crowds of hu-
mans and Andalites gathered around sludgy 
pools. High-level Controllers cavorting and con-
spiring. The alien world's hot tub equivalent. The 
Yeerk pool. 
The air cooled and thinned as I rose higher 
still, until at last, the menacing Yeerk New York 
looked safe and small. Air began to slip past my 
tired wings. I was an insignificant dot in the sky. 
One free soul above a city of slaves. Millions that 
were mine to save. 
Cassie. 
Justice would save his friends first. 
But Justice was a kid. 
130 
C H A P T E R 26 
The lights of Yeerk and once-Andalite craft 
flitted over streets like crimson fireflies. Brook-
lyn. Queens. The Bronx. The suburbs. The string 
of distant cities beyond. All of it glowed a telling 
red. The East Coast megalopolis, to the horizon 
and beyond. 
Yeerk. All of it. Yeerk. 
My telescopic falcon eyes found the silhou-
ette of a man at a desk, high in a skyscraper. In 
the world I used to know, he could have been 
anyone. Working late. With a wife and a family. A 
dog. A home. 
Here he was a captive. One captive. 
One life. 
Two miles away was another building, not the 
131 

tallest, but one that stood out, with a pointed, 
shining peak. Brighter than all the structures 
around it, with starbursts stacked to form a tall, 
elegant tip. 
The Chrysler Building. Center of the invaders' 
command. Instrument of Yeerk domination. 
Cassie's prison. 
A stunning yellow light electrified the massive 
peak. The needle rod planted at the top began to 
pulse. 
Then suddenly, right before my eyes . . . the 
giant metallic gargoyle eagles that jutted from 
the corners of the spire's base seemed to ignite! 
The moon ray was energizing. 
An emerald-green glow was growing within 
the eagles, emanating, gaining intensity. 
Shafts of green sprang from the eagle heads, 
like controlled lightning. Rose up and up, con-
verging at the spire's needle tip! 
A pyramid of green with an axis of gold, all of 
it sizzling energy! 
I pulled in my two-foot wings and began the 
dive. Thirty, forty, fifty miles an hour. The Chrysler 
Building my prey. 
I plummeted through cold air, faster and 
faster. Eighty, ninety . . . a feathered bullet. A 
dark streak in the night. 
And then, a detail. 
A human form! A woman, perched on a nar-
132 
row ledge a thousand feet from the ground, one 
of the giant gargoyles anchored just beneath her 
feet! She was facing out, away from the building, 
her wrists strapped to the masonry wall, her face 
strained as she fought to break free. 
<CaaaaSieeeee!> 
She twisted. 
<The spire!> Her desperate plea filled my 
head. <Smash the spire!> 
How could she answer in thought-speak? How 
could she even see me? No time to wonder. 
The building was racing toward me. The green 
beams were growing wider and wider, expanding 
toward Cassie's perch. They'd fry her! In seconds, 
she'd be toast. 
<The smallest misalignment will disable it!> 
she screamed. <Smash into the spire! Do it 
now!> 
Razor talons could tear away Cassie's bonds. 
Free, she could take cover from the beams. She 
could survive. 
<The spire!> 
Indecision slowed my thoughts, and my de-
scent. 
The Chrysler Building glowed brighter and 
brighter. The air vibrated with turbulence. The 
ray seemed desperate to activate. An endless 
supply of Kandrona. An Earth forever Yeerk. 
One well-placed impact — a five-pound fal-
133 

con traveling at top speed — and the whole oper-
ation might fail. Two lives given to save millions 
more. To save Earth's future . . . 
Cassie yanked at the living bonds that held 
her wrists. She fought them, bit them, banged 
them against the wall. All she could do until sud-
denly . . . 
<Ahhhhh!> She was free! 
And then she leaped forward. Jumped from 
the brick ledge to the base of the gargoyle, per-
ilously close to the raging green shaft. Slammed 
her weight onto the eagle. It quaked minutely, 
but it was enough. The light dimmed! 
<You did it!> I cheered. The spire's color 
weakened from blinding white to dull yellow. 
<No! I only misaligned an auxiliary stabilizer. 
The system will be up and running again in min-
utes !> 
Before I could respond, a panel hissed open 
behind her. Strong, nearly invisible Orff arms en-
veloped her. 
<Jake! Disable the main computers!> 
She was dragged inside. And the panel shut. 
Except for a crack. 
134 
C H A P T E R 27 
A scarlet slit. The only entrance to the Yeerk 
fortress. 
I braked hard against the incredible force of a 
full dive. The narrow vertical opening approached 
too fast. I'd miscalculated. 
The only solution, maybe, was a fierce bank. 
One wing tip stretched at the ground, the other to 
the sky. I flattened my body. Braced for impact. 
Whhhhumppppppfffff. 
My hollow bird bones were crushed as momen-
tum forced the falcon's too-large body through the 
slit. 
Wham! 
I smacked a marble wall. Dropped to the cool 
stone floor. 
135 

Stay conscious, Jake. My body was shattered, 
unresponsive. Blackness closed in, blurring my 
vision. 
Feebly, I looked back at the narrow slit. Was I 
hallucinating? Perched atop the gargoyle-eagle, 
was a real bird. A red-tailed hawk. Eyes on me. 
<Demorph.> The strong voice pulled me back. 
My human form. Human . . . 
Miraculously, splintered bones began to fuse 
and grow. Fly, kill, eat, protect. The raptor's 
calming elemental instincts were forgotten by 
the confused human mind. 
<lt's not too late.> The same strong voice. 
I got up. I followed the sound of Cassie's 
kicks against the corridor. The building vibrated 
as the moon ray powered up again. 
So little time. 
I remorphed as I ran, bounding silently toward a 
red panel at the end of the hall on big Siberian 
paws. 
Ka-blam! 
I slammed the barrier and the half-inch-thick 
alloy easily folded. The door ripped from its track 
and revealed an immense chamber aglow with 
computer screens. 
Four armed Orff on high platforms. 
Two rows of Hork-Bajir. 
And a voice raging from above. 
"You again!" 
136 
It was Marco, glaring down from a pedestal 
hovering high in the center of the room, enclosed 
by a semicircular control panel fused to the base. 
A large holographic display at the front of the 
room showed an image of the moon. 
Displayed beside this moon view was a live 
image of the Chrysler Building. The spire glowed 
white-hot. Numbers beneath ticked away the 
seconds. 00:28. 00:27. 
"Don't even bother trying," Marco boasted. 
"Neither of you can do anything to stop this." He 
motioned to the wall of windows, where Cassie, 
bound and gagged, struggled in vain. 
"In minutes, the moon will shine and 
strengthen only Yeerks. We will be all-powerful. 
Earth will be ours forever." 
A panel behind Cassie flew open, revealing a 
red night. 
"And to celebrate, we've decided to throw a 
terrorist from the sky." 
I sprang. 
"Get him!" 
TSEEEWW! TSEEEWW! 
Dracon fire electrified the floor under my 
paws. Waves of Hork-Bajir moved in from every 
direction. I was hit! Hard, sharp blades sliced my 
back and neck. No pain. Not yet. I wouldn't let 
pain in. Not even as blood spewed from my cuts. 
Staining my fur. Coating my muzzle. 
137 

I fought back, wildly. Madly spilling purple-
blue Hork-Bajir blood. 
Five were down. A new wave rushed to catch 
me. No! 
Propelled by hind legs like rockets, I sailed 
over the approaching attackers. Landed hard. 
Tumbled into two Orff. 
"Get him, you morons!" 
I slashed frantically. Sent their handheld Dra-
cons flying like twigs in a hurricane. 
I moved in to finish the job. 
"Rrroooaaarrrr!" 
The Orffs' clear, soft neck tissue yielded to 
my fangs like soft butter to a knife. But the taste! 
I withdrew. Gagged and spat. 
The poisonous, toxic taste! 
Before I could recover one of the Orff closed his 
arms around my neck. Two legs clamped around 
my sides. The third kicked wildly at my gut. 
I bit into the other Orff's leg, crushing arter-
ies. Grinding leg bones in my jaw. Forcing myself 
to tolerate the taste. 
He fell. 
The one on my back increased his strangle-
hold. We were locked, Greco-Roman wrestlers 
who'd forgotten the rules. 
The numbers beneath the hologram. 00:14. 
00:13. 
No! 
138 
Marco towered above, triumphant. Eyes fixed 
on the holograms. Fists clenched. 
A scream! 
Cassie! Hurled through the opening, into the 
red night! 
BAAAM! 
Violently, I rammed the Orff on my back 
against the wall. 
BAAAM! 
He struggled, resisted. Tried to choke me. Cut 
off my air. 
BAAAM! 
I smashed him again. His kicking slowed. His 
grip loosened. 
He dropped to the floor, his green hearts 
spilling blood through severed vessels. 
I looked at the window. Cassie. 
And then, somehow, 
crazily... a 
hand 
reached up. Three fingers gripped the ledge. 
Cassie's hand. She wasn't gone! But in seconds 
she would tumble to her sixty-story death, a 
splattered heap for Taxxons to lick up. 
In seconds the moon ray would fire, shooting 
from the Chrysler Building cannon with perfect 
aim and precision. 
Cassie's hand. 
The large, red button standing out on Marco's 
control panel, shielded behind glass. The word 
ABORT etched on the cover. 
139 

Cassie . . . 
The world . . . 
I knew what I had to do. No time for indeci-
sion. I saw my goal. 
Save what should be valued above all else. 
I leaped. 
00:05. 00:04. 
140 
C H A P T E R 28 
I N T E R E S T I N G CHOICE. 
All was blackness when I heard the voice. 
A strange voice. Old and young. Male and fe-
male. Echoing in my mind like distant thought-
speak. 
It was not the Ellimist. No. It was a voice I'd 
never heard. 
THEY 
HAVE 
STRANGELY 
SEGMENTED 
MINDS: CONSCIOUS, UNCONSCIOUS, AND AN 
ABILITY TO RECONCILE BOTH. THEY WILL 
BEAR MORE STUDY, THESE HUMANS . . . 
A bird's song. 
Bright sun on my face. Warmth. 
I opened my eyes. 
A wooden desk with a computer on it. Star 
141 

Wars Episode I poster tacked to the wall. School-
books heaped on the floor. Dirty clothes falling 
from the closet. Worn gym shoes. Reading light. 
Cotton sheets. 
Downstairs, the smell of fresh waffles cooking. 
Dad. A woman talking about a doubles game. 
Mom. 
My room. My house. My . . . 
I leaped out of bed. 
The Schwarzenegger thing was history. My 
hand was my hand again. I brushed my chin. No 
sandpaper. Just smooth. 
I grabbed for the phone. I dialed the number. 
Pounded the keypads. My body ached in muscles 
I didn't know I had. 
Brrrrrrrr-ing. 
Come on. Pick up. 
Brrrrrrrr-ing. 
Answer! 
I wanted to hear a girl's voice. Deep and 
young. Cheerful and wise. 
My heart pounded. 
Bright sun washed my body. I moved a hand 
across my chest and felt. . . 
My badge! I yanked it off. 
I looked. 
My fingers clutched air. I opened my fist. Noth-
ing. 
Images still flashed through my head. 
142 
Dead Hork-Bajir towering above me. 
Orff manacling my wrists. 
David. 
A mind-blowing explosion. 
The Howler. 
The strangely beautiful singing of children. 
The stench of those condemned to death. 
A Mylar sheath beating with the wind. 
The scarred faces and mangled bodies of old 
friends. 
Elfangor. 
Lightning. Rain. Slipping . . . 
Brr. . . 
"Hello?" 
Time stopped. 
Everything got extremely quiet. Except for the 
pounding of my heart. 
I knew now. I'd made a choice. I knew what I 
was made of. My limitations and priorities. 
"It's Jake," I said. 
No response. 
"It's Jake," I said again, voice quaking like I'd 
never talked to her before. 
As if this were the first call I'd ever made. The 
only call that mattered. 
"Cassie, I just wanted to ask what I should 
have asked you yesterday. Are you okay?" 
143 

