

A N 
A P P L E 
PAPERBACK 
SCHOLASTIC INC. 
New York Toronto London Auckland Sydney 
Mexico City New Delhi Hong Kong 

For Scott Bremner 
And for Michael and Jake 

<They're going after the elementary school,> 
Tobias said. 
<They're going after everything,> I answered. 
<Why are they doing this? It makes no 
sense,> Tobias said. <It's not just brutal; it's stu-
pid. Pointless destruction.> 
The nearest Bug fighter swooped low and 
slow. It fired its Dracon beams and the two-story 
gym exploded into charred stucco and twisted 
steel beams. 
It drifted almost casually above the tired old 
low-slung classrooms and fired again, dragging 
the beam end-to-end along the buildings. 
<They're sending a message,> I said. <Mess 
with us and this is what we do.> 
1 

We had destroyed the Yeerk pool. The Yeerk 
pool was now the world's biggest sinkhole. It 
looked like a crater. It was a crater, with half the 
mall in ruins on one slope, jumbled bits of 
fast-food restaurants, streetlights, ripped up 
concrete, cars, skinny trees, all tumbled 
together at the bottom. The water of the Yeerk 
pool, looking like molten lead, soaked up 
through the dirt. An Exxon sign lay half-
submerged in it. A couple of dozen empty one-
liter soda bottles drifted around like someone's 
idea of toy boats. 
How many Yeerks had died? Certainly thou-
sands. Maybe tens of thousands. How many 
Hork-Bajir? How many Taxxons? 
Humans? 
We had tried to warn people, but the devasta-
tion had been too complete, had come too 
suddenly. 
<It's not a message, Big Jake,> Marco said. 
<The Yeerks know now that we'll do whatever we 
have to do, they know it's all-out war. We blew up 
their only on-planet food supply. We're way past 
sending messages. Look: They're drawing a circle. 
> 
Marco was a hundred feet higher up than me. 
He was in osprey morph, I was in falcon, Tobias 
was himself: a red-tailed hawk. 
<Marco's right,> Tobias said. <They're mak-
ing a big circle.> 
2 
More Bug fighters than I'd ever seen in one 
place. Maybe fifty of the things. They blasted 
schools; they blasted businesses; they blasted 
homes and churches. The shock waves would 
reach us, echoes of destruction. Pillars of smoke 
rose high in the air. Fires, some blazing and roar-
ing, others smoldering sullenly, created thermal 
updrafts that were bread and butter to three 
mismatched birds of prey. We soared easily, ef-
fortlessly. We had the best possible seats for the 
show. With raptor eyes we could see every 
sickening detail. We could not miss a shot, could 
not fail to see lovingly tended gardens, prized 
homes, businesses, cars, burn as quickly and 
brightly as match heads. 
The refugees 
people who had been our 
neighbors, friends, classmates the shocked, 
scared, lost refugees fled on foot, carrying what 
they could, running between stalled cars. Over-
passes were all down, traffic lights all off, bridges 
were collapsed: Nothing with four wheels was 
moving. 
A news helicopter was perhaps five miles off, 
no doubt filming and sending the pictures out 
live. The Yeerks could easily shoot down the 
copter. They were letting it film. Maybe even 
piloting the craft themselves. They wanted 
the world to see the violence. They wanted 
humans 
3 

to be afraid. The infiltration phase of the war was 
over, over. From now on the Yeerks would be as 
subtle as sledgehammers. 
I caught a rush of warm air, the thermal en-
ergy released by a burning supermarket, and I 
soared higher, up and up. I could see what Marco 
and Tobias had understood: The Yeerks were 
creating a circle of annihilation. The collapsed 
Yeerk pool was the center. They were burning, 
blackening everything in a radius of two miles. 
That would be virtually all of what had been 
our home town. 
And I had done it. I had given the order to de-
stroy the Yeerk pool. All of this was a result. 
But why? That was what bothered me. This 
wasn't the time for moaning over the destruction, 
or even for second-guessing myself. I was done 
with that. Why? Why were the Yeerks doing this? 
<Maybe they think we're down there,> Tobias 
suggested. 
I noticed something in the far distance, south 
of where we were. More smoke. And with my fal-
con's eyes I could just barely make out hints of 
still more Bug fighters. They looked like a cloud 
of gnats. 
Tobias yelled. <Hey! Jets!> 
I followed the direction of his gaze, and sure 
enough, there they were: a flight of four F-16's. 
They were racing straight toward us. Straight 
toward the Bug fighters. 
<It's suicide,> Marco said. 
We watched, helpless to do anything. We had 
spent the morning watching helplessly. 
The F-16's came straight in. Two of the Bug 
fighters broke off from torching civilian buildings 
and turned lazily to meet the attack. 
Missiles flew from the F-16's and the jets 
broke away. Two Dracon beams fired and the mis-
siles were destroyed in midflight. 
The Bug fighters accelerated, easily caught the 
jets, and fired again. Three of the four exploded. 
There were no parachutes. No possibility of para-
chutes. The fourth jet rocketed low, leveled off 
seeming inches from the scorched ground and 
hit afterburners. 
The Bug fighters let him go: They had nothing 
to fear. 
No, that wasn't quite true. The Yeerks were 
scared, just not of jets. This circle of destruction 
was evidence of fear. They were creating a barrier 
of sorts: not a wall, but a desert of ash and cinder 
so that an enemy wouldn't be able to get close, 
unseen. 
It gave me a grim satisfaction. The Yeerks 
were scared of us. But what were they protect-
ing? The ruins of the Yeerk pool? 
4 
5 

<The helicopter!> Marco yelled. 
The Yeerks had decided that show time was 
over. They torched the news copter. A twirling 
cinder fell to Earth. 
<Something's going to happen,> I said. 
<And there it is,> Tobias said, as always more 
observant in the air than any of us. 
It was as big as a sports arena. It moved 
slowly, cumbersome in atmosphere. It was 
designed for space, not, like the Bug fighters, to 
be comfortable in air. 
The Pool ship looked like a fat, swollen, three-
legged spider. I'd seen it before, up in orbit, 
high above planet Earth. 
The Pool ship: home of the Yeerk invasion 
force, base of the Bug fighters. It was a 
space-going 
Yeerk 
pool, 
well-defended, 
dangerous, but essentially a portable barracks, a 
giant mess hall that served up hearty doses of 
Kandrona rays, the sustenance that a Yeerk must 
have every three days or die. 
The Bug fighters rose to greet their mother, 
swarming around the Pool ship, bristling, daring 
anyone to attack. 
The Pool ship waddled down out of the sky, 
shouldering through the clouds. And gently, deli-
cately, ever-so-tentatively, it rested its bulk on 
terra firma. 
<The Pool ship,> Marco whispered reverently. 
<The mother of all targets. I would give both of 
my arms to see that thing burn.> Then he 
laughed harshly. <You know what this means, 
don't you?> 
<They're getting hungry,> I said. <They're 
getting very hungry.> 
7 

My name is Jake. 
My name is Jake Berenson. The days of se-
crecy, of lurking in the shadows are over. The 
Yeerks know my name. They know my height, 
weight, eye color, Social Security number, and 
favorite foods. At long last they know the word 
Animorph, Marco's word for us. 
My brother Tom is one of them, a human-
Controller. He has been for a long time. He's 
been elevated to security chief for all Yeerk 
forces on Earth. 
My parents, my mom and dad, are Controllers 
now, too. Host bodies for Yeerks. 
They know it all now, the Yeerks do. All our 
names. All our deeds. 
I've fought them for more than three years. I 
was just thirteen when I started. I'm sixteen now, 
though that fact, like so many facts, has been 
deliberately obscured in the secret accounts 
we've kept. 
I'm a sixteen-year-old kid named Jake Beren-
son, and I am the leader of the Animorphs. 
In the past it's been hard for me to say that, 
to take on the title of leader. In the past I've 
questioned myself. Wondered whether I was 
right, wondered whether what I did was good, 
wondered whether I had any right to make life-
and-death decisions. I've felt sorry for myself at 
times. Maybe anyone would, in my spot. 
But I had to put all that aside now. I had put 
it all aside. Not because I was suddenly con-
vinced that I deserved the power, was worthy of 
it. That wasn't it. I knew better than to get too 
caught up in the myth of Mighty Jake the Yeerk 
Killer. 
I had given up soul-searching because I real-
ized now that it was simply too late. Way past too 
late. The battle had become a war. And I was, for 
better or worse, the only leader we had. 
From here on out the second-guessing, the le-
gitimate doubts, and the self-indulgent whining, 
they were over. Save them for my old age in the 
unlikely event that I ever had an old age. 
We were all still alive, Cassie, Marco, Rachel, 
8 

Tobias, and me. We'd been formed into a group 
by accident. A chance encounter in an aban-
doned construction site with a dying Andalite 
prince named Elfangor. He had given the five of 
us the Andalite power to morph, to become any 
animal we could touch. Later Elfangor's brother 
Ax had joined us. 
We were just kids. But in some ways we were 
the ideal guerrilla fighters. The morphing power 
let us fly and dig and crawl, sense, hide, and 
fight with far more than human power. Our youth 
made us the least likely of suspects. 
The Yeerks had carried on a subversive war of 
infiltration for more than a decade. They had first 
discovered our planet back at the time of the 
Gulf War. For various reasons their then Visser 
One had fashioned a plan to slowly infiltrate hu-
man society, infest hundreds, then thousands, 
eventually millions of humans with the Yeerk par-
asite, and when it was too late to stop them, 
seize sudden control of the planet. Only then 
would the Yeerks finalize an almost bloodless 
conquest. 
But that visser moved on and was replaced in 
command of Earth by the evil creature we had 
long known as Visser Three. Visser Three was a 
less subtle enemy. Less adept at subversion. A 
brute. We had fought him, lost, won, but above 
all survived. And, in surviving, we had slowed his 
conquest, frustrated his plans, driven him to ever 
wilder schemes. We had forced his hand, in the 
end, I guess. 
Now the war of subversion was over. Visser 
Three was promoted to Visser One and all his 
most brutal instincts were unleashed. 
In this new, open war, we had scored some 
impressive victories. We had destroyed the Yeerk 
pool. And we helped to motivate at least partial 
and spotty efforts by the military to respond to 
the Yeerk threat. Marco's mom was free of her 
Yeerk slave master, free of the violent, dangerous 
creature who had been the very Yeerk who launched 
the invasion of Earth — Visser One. That Visser 
One was dead and his human host now worked 
with us. We had used the morphing cube to make 
new Animorphs, to increase our numbers. 
But we had taken hits, too: We had all been 
driven from our homes. We had lost all vestiges 
of a normal life. We now hid with the free Hork-
Bajir in a valley deep in the mountains. 
And we had lost the morphing cube. The 
Yeerks had it. My brother Tom had taken it, and, 
when I might have stopped him — Cassie had let 
him and it go. 
With that act, Cassie had surrendered our 
edge, our one great advantage: that we alone had 
the power to morph. 
The Andalite technology was now in Yeerk 
10 

hands, and we had already seen that Yeerks were 
using it just as we had used it: to capture all the 
amazing powers to be found in the animal 
kingdom. 
The six of us, Marco, Rachel, Tobias, Ax, 
Cassie, and I, had stayed together through im-
possibly bad times, through every defeat, every 
close call, every mind-twisting weirdness, every 
horror. None of us had ever turned against the 
others. There had never been a betrayal. 
Cassie let Tom take the morphing cube. Per-
haps she had done so because to her the alterna-
tive was worse: She feared for me, for my soul I 
guess, if I was forced to kill my own brother. 
Not good enough. Not for me. All that counted 
now was that we win, and Cassie, maybe for the 
most decent of motives, had hurt us badly. 
I loved Cassie. Always had. Still did. But 
there was this thing between us now. And I could 
never trust her again. She had put my personal 
well-being ahead of winning a war we absolutely 
could not lose. And, I knew, that her decision 
might have come in part from my own 
self-doubts, my own inability to throw off moral 
ambigu ity. 
If I had been stronger . . . if I had been as 
strong as I should be, maybe Cassie would not 
have made her fatal mistake. I saw that clearly 
now. Too late for either of us. 
And that was the other reason why I would al-
low myself no more second-guessing. A leader 
who shows weakness invites disaster. 
We flew back to the Hork-Bajir camp. And as 
we flew I thought. Not about how my orders to 
destroy the Yeerk pool had resulted in the literal 
obliteration of the city, but about how, how, how I 
could destroy the Pool ship. 
And about that distant pillar of smoke away to 
the south. 
There had to be a way to take out the Pool 
ship. Destroy that ship and the war might be 
won. It was the target I could not possibly resist. 
A fact that would be known by my brother 
Tom, and my parents, and by their ruler, Visser 
One. 
12 
13 

It's too dangerous." That was Eva, Marco's 
mom. The woman who had been host body to the 
first Visser One. "Visser One will know that you 
know. He'll know you're coming. He can't let you 
destroy a Pool ship — that's the only large-scale 
food supply the Yeerks have. The Blade ship can 
only service so many. Lose a Pool ship? The 
Council of Thirteen would have Visser One exe-
cuted." 
Marco shook his head. "He'll think we're 
cocky after taking out the Yeerk pool. Maybe he'll 
underestimate us." 
"No," Eva said flatly. "He'll never underesti-
mate you again. That's over." 
14 
We stood around a small fire. It was chilly. 
Fog had a tendency to form in this deep valley, 
sometimes so thick we could barely see our 
hands in front of our faces. It wasn't that bad 
now, but it was still cold. 
"It's too dangerous," Cassie's dad said. He 
was sipping a cup of what passed for coffee here 
in our rough-and-ready camp. 
"This is a job for the military now," Rachel's 
mom argued. "You kids have done enough. The 
secret is out: Leave it to the people who should 
be protecting this country. I mean, we paid 
enough in taxes to support the military; well, now 
let's see what we got for all that money." 
We were in a council of war. I was getting so I 
hated these meetings. Too many voices, too 
many opinions. So many opinions sometimes 
that it seemed the consensus would always come 
down on the side of doing nothing. 
But we were guests among the free Hork-Bajir. 
This was their valley, their trees, the only home 
they had. We'd come running to them with our 
families in tow when we needed a place to hide. 
So at the very least I had to listen to Toby, the 
young female Hork-Bajir seer. And only a fool 
would dismiss Eva's input: None of us knew the 
Yeerks half as well. And of course, there were my 
fellow Animorphs. 
15 

But added to all that we had Marco's dad; 
Rachel's mom; James, the representative of our 
new, adjunct Animorphs; Tobias's mom; both of 
Cassie's parents, who only cared about making 
sure no one got hurt . . . too many people with 
too many agendas. But I still didn't know how to 
tell adults, my friends' parents no less, to be 
quiet and let me do my job. 
I tried not to show my impatience, but these 
days I'm not so good at that. Cassie was watching 
me. We're not as close anymore, but she still 
knows me. 
She said, "Look folks, we're going to try. I 
don't think the question is really 'whether' but 
'how.'" 
"No one has decided any such thing," Rachel's 
mom said angrily. "My daughter is not going to 
be dragged into some suicidal undertaking like 
this." 
Rachel laughed. Rachel's not a person who'll 
be one way with her friends and another way with 
her family. There's only one version of Rachel. " 
Mom, if we go, I go. If we don't go, I still go. 
Visser One parks his Pool ship right out in the 
open and we're not going to ram it down his 
nonexistent throat? Hah! I'm with Marco: Blow it 
up. Blow it up real good." 
I hid a grin. Rachel is the original Nike girl: 
Just do it. Just do it, and if that doesn't work do 
it harder and meaner. 
"It seems a waste to simply blow it up," Toby 
said, speaking for the first time. The Hork-Bajir 
are a fearsome-looking, but basically peaceful 
race that, left alone, would live in the trees eat-
ing bark and caring for the forest. Toby is one of a 
rare Hork-Bajir mutation: a seer. A sort of 
HorkBajir intellectual and leader. She leads the 
free Hork-Bajir, a small but growing band of Hork-
Bajir who have been liberated from their parasitic 
masters. 
"What do you mean?" I asked Toby. 
"There are hundreds of captive Hork-Bajir 
aboard the Pool ship," Toby said. "If we could 
free at least a portion of them . . . and of course 
there are the ship's massive weapons systems. 
Imagine controlling aH that power." 
"Take it?" Marco yelped. "Steal the Pool 
ship!" 
Rachel jabbed a finger at Toby. "This is my 
girl," she said. 
Rachel's "girl" was nearly six and a half feet 
tall, and looked an awful lot like a kid's notion of 
a goblin. Not to mention the fact that she was 
armed with razor-sharp blades growing from 
wrists and elbows and forehead. 
<it is the approach Visser One would not ex-
pect,> Ax opined cautiously. <It is, of course, 
17 

possible. It is not like stealing a Bug fighter. 
Every system on board the Pool ship is en-
crypted, and the codes will probably change 
hourly. It might take me an hour to break any one 
sequence, and if I am a minute late it will roll 
over and I will be starting back at the beginning. 
An hour to get you into navigation, for example, if 
I am lucky. And another hour to gain access to 
weapons systems.> 
And then everyone started talking at once, ar-
guing, posturing, scoring debating points. 
"Okay," I said holding up my hands for calm. " 
That's enough, folks, thanks for coming." 
"You don't just dismiss us!" Rachel's mom 
yelled. 
"Sure he does, Mom," Rachel said cheerfully. " 
I need Rachel, Marco, Tobias, Ax, Toby, 
James, and Eva," I said. 
I hadn't meant to exclude Cassie. I really 
hadn't. But it was too late. She looked like I'd hit 
her. She blinked and turned quickly away, covering 
the moment with aimless chatter to her parents. 
Tobias gave me a dirty look. And if you think a 
red-tailed hawk's gaze is always a dirty look, 
you're close to being right. Still, I knew Tobias 
was mad at me. Everyone was. Everyone but 
James who was excited to be included, and Eva 
who hadn't really caught what was going on with 
me and Cassie. 
There was nothing to be done now. I couldn't 
go running after Cassie. The insult had been de-
livered. There was no taking it back now. 
I said, "As much as I hate to admit it, 
Rachel's mom is partly right: This isn't just our 
fight anymore. Three pilots died today. Probably 
Air National Guard. It shows that there are mili-
tary forces out there that could help." 
"All due respect," Marco said, "those pilots 
didn't do much good." 
"If we're going after the Pool ship we need a 
diversion," I said. "We'll need a great big diver-
sion. I want tanks and jets and soldiers. And I 
want us — some of us at least — to be right out 
there in front with them. I want Visser One to be 
dead sure we're trying to either blow up his pre-
cious ship or get inside it." 
"And we will be, right?" James asked. "I 
mean, one or the other, right?" 
I shook my head. "Visser One will consider 
the possibility that we're using the attack as a 
cover. He's slow but he's not a complete idiot. 
He'll figure one of three things: First, the attack 
is the real thing. Second, the attack is a cover for 
the next attack. Third, the attack is a cover for us 
to infiltrate the ship and destroy it from inside. 
Any of those three options he does the same 
'thing: lifts the ship off and amuses himself blast-
18 
19 

ing everything in sight with the Pool ship's big 
Dracon cannon." 
"Okay," Toby said. "I give up: How is he going 
to be wrong?" 
"When the diversion comes, we'll already be 
on board the Pool ship, working on breaking 
those access codes," I said. "The diversion won't 
be to cover us getting on. It'll be to cover the fact 
that we're already there." 
It sounded good. Sounded like I had a plan. I 
didn't. 
20 
I pulled Tobias and Marco aside after the 
council of war. 
"Tobias? Did you notice that pillar of smoke 
off to the south of where we were?" 
Tobias glared at me. <What you did to Cassie 
was beyond wrong.> 
I squirmed. "I don't have time for that, To-
bias." 
<Cassie is one of us,> he said. 
"Did you see the smoke or not?!" I de-
manded. 
<Yeah.> 
"Then I need you to go find out exactly where it' 
s coming from. Now. I mean, if you can spare the 
time from busting me." 
21 

Tobias didn't answer. He just spread his 
wings and flapped till he cleared the trees and 
then caught a tailwind out of sight. 
Marco gave me a fish-eyed look, but he didn't 
say anything. 
"Marco, we need to know who is currently in 
charge of military forces in this area." 
Marco thought that over. "It's not going to be 
just one guy. You'll have an air force general, a 
marine, an army guy." 
I nodded. "Yeah. But the Pentagon will have 
given someone the weight, you know? Someone 
is going to be in overall command. I mean, if they 
haven't done that at least . . . they can't be that 
sorry, can they? I want you to get me a name and 
a location. Grab Ax. Use him to creep Pentagon 
computers or whatever it takes. I need the person 
who can give orders and have them followed in 
this area." 
"How about the Chee? They'd be able to help 
us out." 
I shrugged. "Where are the Chee? That's the 
problem. Those Bug fighters smoked the King 
house. I don't think it would have damaged their 
underground complex, but with the house gone 
how do we make contact?" 
"Guess that's two problems for me and Ax," 
Marco said. 
"Yeah." I hung my head. "I didn't mean to do 
that with Cassie. It was . . . stuff happens some-
times." 
"Uh-huh. I better get going." 
In twenty-four hours I had two of the three an-
swers I was looking for. Marco did not find the 
Chee. He did find what he hoped and believed 
was the man in charge of military forces arrayed 
against the Yeerks. 
"He's an army general. Three star. His name 
is Sam Doubleday. He's fifty-four years old. His 
headquarters is fifty miles from here, though. In 
the hills, some kind of nuclear shelter in a 
hollowed out mountain." 
"Good. At least he's not dumb enough to be 
right here where the Yeerks can't help but kill 
him." 
The second piece of information was more in-
triguing. 
<They're building a new Yeerk pool,> Tobias 
reported. <Not so much a cave like the old one. 
More like they're digging a small lake and going 
to let it be open. Taxxons are all over the place, 
like maggots on a piece of roadki II.> 
I could see that Marco was preparing some 
witty remark on the fact that Tobias was 
unusually familiar with roadkill. I shot him a 
look and he sighed, letting it go. 
A second Yeerk pool being built at a frantic 
22 
23 

pace. That made sense. Once it was finished the 
Yeerks would remove the Pool ship back to safety 
in orbit. Taxxons were natural tunnelers, faster and 
more effective than anything Caterpillar made. It 
was like having a few hundred giant sentient 
earthworms at work. 
"Okay," I said. "Let's go see this general." 
<Who goes?> Tobias asked pointedly. 
"Animorphs," I said. But of course I knew 
what he was asking. "All of us. I'll have James's 
people come in to watch the camp here. The rest 
of us, the six of us, we go to see the general. 
Wait, ask James to come, too. He can use the ex-
perience." 
<Well, you'll need to go ask Cassie yourself,> 
Tobias said primly. 
"Marco: Let everyone know. Everyone." I 
avoided looking at Tobias. Not often do I feel like 
a coward, but I felt like one right then. 
They called it ATF-1. Alien Task Force One. 
Their headquarters was a concrete-and-steel 
pit carved into a mountain. It was a sort of minor-
league version of the big nuclear war fighting fa-
cility in Colorado. It had the look of a place that 
has just been brought out of mothballs. There 
were cobwebs hiding in the upper corners of the 
rooms. Dust was still being wiped from the sort of 
clunky computers and monochrome monitors 
you'd see in a video about the early days of the 
space race. 
Inside the mountain were hundreds of sol-
diers and airmen, but mostly armed, it seemed, 
with clipboards and Palm Pilots. They wore the 
exactly ironed uniforms of bureaucrat-soldiers. 
24 
25 

Outside the gaping mouth of The Hole, it was 
a different picture. Men were in firing positions on 
the tumbled, rocky slopes. Coming in as birds of 
prey again, we spotted machine-gun nests, tank 
emplacements, an artillery park well-camouflaged 
in the trees down the valley. Helicopters flew con-
stant patrols. 
Razor wire was going up everywhere. Soldiers 
were laying minefields on both sides of the only 
road. 
Security was very tight — it took us no time 
at all to penetrate it. The general's men were 
looking for giant bug-eyed monsters from outer 
space. Not dragonflies. 
We zoomed around the underground head-
quarters, locating storage vaults, some fairly im-
pressive underground barracks, food-and-water 
storage, electronics, so on. 
I located the general by watching the flow of 
uniforms. Lieutenants talked to captains, 
captains to majors, majors to colonels. My 
dragonfly eyes were good enough for me to spot 
colonels' bars. In time, the various colonels led 
me to the general. 
He was in a map-walled conference room. I'd 
have smiled if I had a mouth. It was like 
something right out of a war movie: maps and 
phones and guys chomping cigars. 
I landed on the conference table, right in the 
26 
middle of a large map of the city. The map 
showed a circle surrounding the former Yeerk 
pool. I guessed it was derived from satellite 
photos of what was left of my home town. 
I demorphed. 
"What the . ." 
"General!" someone yelped. 
"MP's! MP's, on the double." 
"Draw your weapons!" 
"Don't shoot!" 
There was a flurry of running men and cock-
ing weapons and lots of shouting. I'd had quite 
an impact. Not a surprise. I was changing from a 
two-inch-long insect to a nearly six-foot-tall teen-
ager. 
My compound eyes grew huge, larger by far 
than my dragonfly body, before they bubbled up 
like overcooked marshmallows, melted, shrank, 
and finally re-formed into my own human eyes. 
Of course they were human eyes staring out of 
a dragonfly's face. 
The morphing process has never been the 
kind of neat, smooth, fluid thing you see in a 
computer-animated special effect. It's messier 
and weirder. Things grow or shrink at different 
speeds. Parts of one form linger long after the 
others have morphed. Ax could explain it, if you 
had an hour to listen. 
What the general saw was a creature with hu-
27 

man eyes and a twitching insect proboscis and 
gossamer wings and a largely human body. 
I was probably lucky he didn't just order me 
to be shot. There were a dozen rifles and pistols 
aimed at me by the time I completed my 
de-morph. 
"General Doubleday," I said. "My name is 
Jake." 
"Get him!" 
Three big, burly MP's were on me before I 
could yell. They knocked me onto my back, 
twisted me over on my face, and slapped 
handcuffs on me. 
"General, this is a mistake," I yelled. " 
Mistake, is it? Sure as death you're one of them, 
" he said. 
"No, sir, I'm not," I grated with my cheek 
pressed hard onto a pencil and a crumpled map. 
"But chances are some of the people in this 
room are." 
"Let me shoot him," a major cried. Either a 
Controller or an idiot. 
"Shoot him? Have you lost your senses, Ma-
jor? This is a potentially valuable prisoner. 
Get my G-2 down here! Take him away, lock him 
up." 
I sighed. The MP's hustled me from the room, 
down a hallway to a bare, overlit room furnished 
with a chair and a sink and a cot and a steel door 
with a feeding slot in it. 
28 
They threw me in, not at all gently. 
I was a prisoner. 
Three minutes later, I demorphed in front of 
General Doubleday again. 
He had me tackled once more, handcuffed, 
shackled, my mouth duct-taped. I was carried, 
hog-tied, from the room and thrown back in the 
cell. In the cell I was chained to the cot. 
Three minutes later, I demorphed in front of 
General Doubleday. 
"General, why don't you stop being stupid 
and listen?" I said. 
He stopped being stupid. But not until the 
fourth time I demorphed in front of him. And 
then, at last, he narrowed his eyes and looked at 
me and said, "All right, Mr. Alien, what have you 
got to say to me?" 
"First: I'm not an alien. I'm a human with ac-
cess to alien morphing technology. Second: I 
know how to hurt the Yeerks in a way that they 
won't be able to brush off, but I'll need your help 
to provide a diversion." 
The general looked amused. "My help, huh? 
You need my help? See the stars on my shoulder 
there, son? I'm a major general, U.S. Army. 
You're a kid who can turn into a bug. I take my 
orders from the chain of command, and that ain't 
you." 
It was a nice try, but I've been intimidated by 
29 

the best. After you stand up to the likes of 
Andalites, Visser One, and Crayak, you don't 
quiver just because some guy has stars on 
his shoulders. 
"The chain of command is almost certainly 
infiltrated by Yeerks," I said. "So is this base. 
Probably even this room. You don't know if the 
orders you get are legitimate or not. You don't 
know if the orders you give out are going to be 
obeyed. Your power extends only as far as the 
first Controller in your staff." 
The general's face was growing redder the 
more I talked. But, like I say, you want scary? 
Visser One has a tendency to morph into huge, 
murdering alien beasts. Red face? Not even in 
the game. 
"Get out of my headquarters," Doubleday 
said. 
"He can't leave here alive," said a middle-
aged colonel who looked strangely like a Baldwin 
brother. 
The Baldwin colonel nodded to one of the 
MP's. The MP drew his sidearm and chambered 
a round. 
"Holster that weapon, soldier," the general 
snapped. 
The MP leveled the gun at me. 
"I said holster that weapon!" the general 
roared. 
30 
The MP ignored him and looked instead to 
the colonel. Two other officers drew weapons. 
One drew a bead on the general. The other stood 
ready, covering the rest of the room. 
"I'd rather take him alive — the visser would 
be sure to reward us," the colonel mused. "On the 
other hand, if we let him escape, we're dead." 
He gave me a hard look. "Better safe than dead 
of Kandrona starvation. Shoot him." 
"Now," I said. 
From beneath the conference table a great, 
shaggy, gray-coated wolf exploded out and 
upward. Cassie's jaw closed around the MP's 
throat and carried him down to the ground. 
A wolf's jaws are made for breaking the mar-
row out of bones. Those long, yellowed teeth dig-
ging into your throat, ready with a twitch to 
sever at least two major arteries, definitely get 
your attention. 
Then the entire table went flying. It was a big, 
thick, mahogany thing, must have weighed five 
hundred pounds. But a gorilla is a strong animal. 
Marco gave one of the Controllers a gorilla 
love tap that slammed him against the wall. 
But perhaps most surprising to everyone were 
two low-ranking soldiers who calmly drew 
concealed weapons and pointed them at the 
Controllers. Continuing to hold the weapons 
Rachel and Ax demorphed. 
31 

The three Controllers were handcuffed and 
led away. 
"You see my point, General," I said. 
He nodded. He smoothed his ruffled hair. He 
pulled a cigar out of his pocket. "All right, son. 
Let's talk." 
BOOM! 
The concussion shook the room and threw me 
into the wall. There was blood pouring from my 
nose and ears and mouth. 
BOOM! 
Marco grabbed me before I could fall over 
again. 
BOOM! BOOM! 
"Thanks, man." 
<It's just never easy, is it?> he said. 
Explosion followed explosion in rapid se-
quence. Every time I tried to get organized the 
concussion would knock me silly again. 
"Marco! Take care of the general!" I managed 
to yell. 
I started to morph. Tiger. "We're gonna be up 
to our butts in Hork-Bajir!" I warned everyone. 
They knew what to do. 
I heard gunfire. Lots of it. 
Should have seen this coming. Should have 
known the Yeerks would be wired into this head-
quarters. Someone, some Controller, had put in 
the call to Visser One: They're here. The Ani-
morphs are here. 
32 
33 

No, wait. Maybe not. Maybe they were just as-
saulting the base without knowing we were here. 
In which case it was just a typically crude Visser-
One move. 
Ax had demorphed. In his Andalite form he 
was a blue-furred centaur with a pair of extra 
eyes on movable stalks and a tail like a chef's 
knife tied to the end of a bullwhip. Rachel and 
Tobias were both well into morphing Hork-Bajir. 
When fighting Hork-Bajir-Controllers there is 
nothing quite as useful as having a few of our 
own to confuse things. 
"Let me up," General Doubleday raged at 
Marco. "I have to go to my men." 
<Let him up, Marco. General: Do you have 
any kind of surveillance cameras set up in this 
place?> 
"What? Is that you? Are you some kind of a 
tiger now?" 
<Yeah, some kind. General, if you have secu-
rity cameras, turn them on. We can use the tape 
later to spot the safe guys. Anyone who shoots a 
Controller is someone we can trust.> 
The general nodded. "The cameras are always 
on. Now get out of my way." 
He motioned a sergeant to open the door 
leading out into the main chamber of the under-
ground redoubt. The sergeant took up a firing po-
sition half in and half out of the doorway. A 
Dracon beam annihilated the half of him that was 
exposed. 
The general caught his gun as it dropped. 
"We have to get out of here. This room is a trap. 
" I agreed. <Rachel. Go.> 
Rachel leaned her bladed, goblin head gin-
gerly out of the doorway and yelled, <Stop shoot-
ing, you fools.> 
The firing continued, but it was no longer di-
rected at our doorway. Rachel and Tobias stalked 
angrily out and berated the lead elements of the 
Hork-Bajir assault force. 
"We have the gafrash human general, you 
loglafach. The visser wants him alive, and if you 
kill him it'll be you the visser eats for breakfast!" 
Even less firing now. 
Then a suspicious human voice, a human-
Controller, demanding, "Which unit are you two 
with?" 
<Ax then me then Marco and Cassie with the 
general,> I said tersely. 
Ax leaped through the doorway. I was a mil-
lisecond behind him. There were forty or so Hork-
Bajir and half a dozen obvious human-Controllers 
waiting for us. Some kept up fire down one 
hall-
way and upward at a catwalk lined with soldiers. 
There was a full second of stunned immobil-
34 

ity as they absorbed the sudden appearance of 
an Andalite. 
"Andalite!" someone yelled. 
<Surprise,> Ax said. He's almost developed a 
sense of humor. Almost. 
But by then Ax was in the midst of them, 
slashing with his deadly tail. I came in after him. 
The bigger the crowd, the better: hard to use Dra-
con beams when your own people are all around. 
Hork-Bajir slashed at me. I felt cuts on my 
flanks, my back. My tail was suddenly gone. My 
tiger's brain registered every wound but dismissed 
them, set aside the pain. This was a dominance 
fight. Tiger instinct and human will combined in 
me to press the attack forward. 
I roared back, launched into my nearest tor-
mentor, and smacked his horned head with a 
blow that could stun an elephant. I spun and gut-
slashed another. I closed my teeth on a flailing 
arm and worried it savagely like a mad dog with 
his last bone. 
I was in the tiger and the tiger was in me. No 
time to think, only act and react. Cat speed. Cat 
accuracy. But the sheer weight of the attackers 
would defeat Ax and me, and even in the battle 
frenzy, I knew it. 
Rachel and Tobias had joined the fight, but 
now, Hork-Bajir themselves, their abilities were 
no greater than those of their opponents. 
<The general's clear!> Marco yelled in thought-
speak. <We're coming.> 
<No! Stay with him!> I ordered. 
BamBamBam! 
The volume of firing increased suddenly. I 
caught a wild, distorted vision of troops lined up 
on the catwalk pouring automatic fire down on us. 
I heard Doubleday's foghorn voice bellowing, " 
Don't hit the tiger or the blue thing!" 
<Rachel! Tobias! Back off, get outta here and 
morph something else. You'll get shot> 
A Hork-Bajir nailed me with a sudden, unex-
pected blow. No pain, just a shocking numbness. 
My hind legs collapsed. He had severed my 
spine. The bottom half of the tiger's body might 
as well be gone. 
I would be dead in seconds. Had to demorph. 
No other choice. 
BamBamBamBamBamBam! 
Demorph, Jake, I told myself, already loopy, 
drifting. Demorph. 
A huge Hork-Bajir stood tall above me. The 
tiger's blood dripped from his wrist blade. He 
raised his T. Rex foot. He was going to gut me, 
make sure I was dead. Couldn't move my body. 
My front paws batted feebly at the air. Helpless. 
Half a dozen rounds caught him in the chest. 
He fell straight back. 
I lay there, twisted halfway around, a tiger 
36 
37 

pretzel. Ax was now astride me, whipping like a 
mad thing, a Cuisinart making Hork-Bajir puree. 
I heard a thud. Bullet in my hindquarters. I 
looked up, confused, unable to focus clearly. 
Then my vision cleared enough to see a soldier 
drawing careful, deliberate aim at me. A 
Controller. He looked just like his fellow 
soldiers, but he wasn't shooting at the Hork-
Bajir, he was going for a head shot on me, that's 
what he was going for. 
He fired. I saw the muzzle flash. 
I felt the bullet hit the right side of my head. 
But I wasn't dead. 
Something big and brown came barreling 
through, sweeping Hork-Bajir before it. Ax 
was no longer above me, but was shoulder-to-
shoulder with a grizzly bear. Cassie ran, bounded 
up, bounced off Rachel's massive shoulders and 
took a wild, flying leap straight into the Hork-Bajir. 
The Hork-Bajir were falling back. 
And still, I could see that single soldier biting 
his lip and taking aim at me again. This time he 
wouldn't miss. I was isolated, alone, 
defenseless. No one saw. No one could 
possibly see that he was aiming at me, not at the 
Hork-Bajir. 
I could see his finger tighten on the trigger. 
He was too focused to notice the gray-and-
white blur as the falcon raked his face, leaving 
great gashes across his nose and forehead. 
I was wrong: A falcon could see a man's eyes 
and know where they were aimed. 
<Thanks, James,> I said, loopy and fading 
fast. <That was very nice of you.> 
Marco was over me, shaking me with big go-
rilla hands and yelling, <Demorph! Demorph!> 
Demorph? 
Oh . . . okay. 
39 

Doubleday listened after that. He evacuated 
his headquarters at top speed. The Yeerks would 
be back, especially now that they knew we were 
there. Fortunately, like a good general, he had a 
fallback position. 
I explained about the three days, how no 
Yeerk can survive for more than three days with-
out consuming Kandrona rays in a Yeerk pool. 
"You need to lock down yourself and your offi-
cers and as many men as you can for three days. 
Whoever is left after that will be reliable." 
"I've got two regular army divisions and half a 
dozen guard units under my command. I can't 
lock down and watch anything like that number 
of men." 
"General, better a hundred men you can trust 
than ten thousand you can't." 
He agreed. Unfortunately, this meant a three-
day delay before he could provide the diversion 
we needed to take the Pool ship. In that time the 
Yeerks, with all their Taxxons, might well get the 
new Yeerk pool up and running. It wouldn't be 
finished, most likely, but if it was at all func-
tional, if it could be used to feed the Earth-based 
Yeerks, I was certain that Visser One would fly his 
precious Pool ship back up into the safety of orbit. 
So we had to make sure the new Yeerk pool 
wasn't ready. Which meant two impossible mis-
sions instead of just one. 
Better and better. 
"At least it'll be mostly Taxxons," Marco said 
when we were all back at camp and eating a meal 
of dry cold cereal. "They're easy to take down. 
Once they're injured at all, they're dead: Their 
brother Taxxons make sure of that." 
Taxxons are like big, nasty caterpillars or cen-
tipedes. As big around as an old oak tree. They 
walk on rows of needle legs, carrying the upper 
third of their bulk erect. They have a ring of red-
jelly eyes and a lamprey mouth. And they are 
hungry as shrews: always hungry. Always. It's a 
madness, a raging, insatiable need. 
The Yeerks had bought them off and made 
them allies by the simple expedient of promising 
40 

to feed them. Some Taxxons carried the Yeerk 
slug in their feverish brains, but many did not. 
The Yeerks hated them as host bodies, hated liv-
ing with the hunger that not even a Yeerk could 
control. 
And then, there was the danger that Marco 
had alluded to: Taxxons are cannibals. A wounded 
Taxxon is almost always set upon by his brothers, 
even in the middle of battle. It's like watching 
sharks react to blood in the water. 
"Yeah, they're easy to kill," I said, feeling the 
dark, bitter gloom that always came over me after 
a battle. "But they'll be protected by Hork-Bajir 
and by Bug fighters. And by human-Controllers, 
of course." 
"We blew up one Yeerk pool," Rachel said 
cockily. "So we blow up another. Badda-boom. 
Nothing to it." 
She knew better, of course. She was just play-
ing her part. Not for the first time I wondered 
what on Earth would happen to her if this war 
ever ended. Off to college to study prelaw or 
whatever? She was the goddess of war, my cousin 
was. Sixteen years old and a veteran of more bat-
tles than a World War II veteran. So was I, but 
Rachel loved it in a way I didn't. She needed it. 
"Anyone have any useful suggestions?" I 
asked. It was just us, just the Animorphs. I'd had 
42 
it with councils of war. "Tobias? You've seen the 
place," 
<It's a big hole in the ground. Looks like a 
strip mine or something. It's sort of terraced: a 
series of shelves stepping down to what will be 
the pool itself. The "shore," I guess you'd call it, 
is maybe a hundred feet wide. The pool is going 
to be three hundred feet across, give or take. Not 
deep: maybe eight feet, almost flat on the 
bottom, but graded so it can be drained for 
repair. The terraces higher up, two of them, as I 
recall, are more like twenty feet wide.> 
<Those will eventually be weapons emplace-
ments,> Ax suggested. <It was the central flaw of 
the old pool: They never had a serious set of in-
ternal defenses. They will ring the pool with 
Dracon cannons able to reach up, across, or 
down.> 
"Just for us," Rachel said with a laugh. "It's 
kind of flattering." 
"How do you hurt a hole in the ground?" 
Marco wondered. 
<Cave in the sides?> Tobias suggested dubi-
ously. 
"With what?" Marco said. 
Cassie started to say something, stopped her-
self. Then, gathering her courage, she blurted, 
"You can't worry about the hole, you have to de-
stroy the digging equipment." 

I raised an eyebrow. "The equipment is 
Taxxons." 
She looked away. 
Marco whistled softly. "Yep," he agreed, nod-
ding respectfully at Cassie. 
Was Cassie just stating the obvious, or was 
she trying to reestablish herself by being as ruth-
less as any of us? 
Either way, she was right: Forget the dirt, fo-
cus on the shovels. There was not an endless 
supply of Taxxons. I wished I knew how many 
there were, altogether. Once again I mourned the 
loss of access to the Chee, our most valuable 
sources of information. 
"Okay," I said. "So we go after the Taxxons. I 
better go see Toby. Cassie? Go see James and his 
people. We'll need everyone we can get. We go 
tonight." 
"Oh, man, I'm just getting over this morning's 
fun," Marco complained. 
"Eat your dry, stale granola," Rachel said 
with a laugh. "You need to keep up your 
strength." 
At the beginning of the American Civil War 
both sides thought the war was about taking or 
holding cities and ports and rivers and mountain 
passes. They thought it was a chess game. 
By the end of the war they'd figured out that 
they weren't playing chess. Cities didn't matter 
much. Ports and rivers and mountain passes, 
while useful, were secondary to the real game. 
The real game was destruction. 
Lincoln had figured it out earlier than most 
and his generals; Ulysses S. Grant, William Te-
cumseh Sherman, and Philip Sheridan made it 
happen. 
They burned enemy homes and farms. They 
burned crops in the field and slaughtered farm 
44 
45 

animals and wrapped railroad tracks around 
trees. They starved the enemy. 
They realized that warfare was no longer 
about chivalry and honor, but about killing 
the enemy. Find the enemy, kill the enemy. 
Kill so many of them that those who are left 
alive lose their will to fight on. Do whatever it 
takes. 
That's the way war has been ever since. 
For a long time we had fought the Yeerks re-
actively. We were always ten steps behind, trying 
to foil this plan or that plan. We'd tried to 
fight the war with at least some vestige of 
decency. And maybe that had been okay when 
we were fighting to stop an infiltration. Now things 
were different. We were down to the final 
stages. Either the Yeerks would prevail, or we 
would. 
So I gave simple orders to my people, the 
original Animorphs, and the auxiliary Animorphs, 
and Toby's free Hork-Bajir. Orders I had never 
given before: Kill the enemy. Kill the Taxxons. 
Dress it up however you want, that's what war 
is about. If there's glory in there somewhere, I 
must have missed it. 
We Animorphs went in first, the six of us, in 
bat morph. Tobias had reported that real bats 
were in the area during the evening hours, which 
would allow us to blend in naturally. 
Flying as a bat is very different from flying as 
a bird. You never feel that the air is your natural 
home. You always feel that you're airborne only 
by virtue of hard work, and if you let up for an in-
stant you'll drop like a rock. It's not actually 
quite that bad, but that's how it feels. 
Bats can see just fine, contrary to what some 
people think. They're not owls or hawks, but they 
see. But it's the echolocation that sets them 
apart. 
It's like a sort of Etch-A-Sketch picture of the 
world. You fire off a series of ultrasonic clicks. 
The sound waves bounce off objects, are picked 
up by your ears, and are translated in your bat 
brain into a sort of alternate reality picture of the 
world around you. 
You "see" things you don't see with your eyes. 
You see insects in flight as tiny pinpoint 
meteorites. And you overlook other things. But 
working together, regular sight and echolocation, 
once you relax into it and let the bat's brain 
work it out, you get a very complete picture. 
We had approached within a quarter mile of 
the site before morphing. Then we split up and 
moved in from different angles, flying wild and 
jerky, flapping our skin wings, blasting our 
unheard radar sounds all around. 
The Bug fighters swooped overhead, oblivious 
to us. Huge spotlights shone down from the lip of 
47 

the hole. Heavily armed men and Hork-Bajir pa-
trolled. They were very much on guard. No one 
was napping. 
And down inside, just like Tobias had said, 
like worms after a heavy rain, the Taxxons worked. 
There were pieces of heavy equipment down 
there as well: earthmovers, cranes, graders, and 
so on. But the Taxxons were digging up the dirt, 
squirming their way into walls of gravel and dirt 
and rock with amazing speed. 
As we watched a large section of slope col-
lapsed inward. The Taxxons had tunneled be-
neath it, loosened the structure and allowed it to 
fall in on them. They seemed to suffer no perma-
nent damage as they wormed free. Taxxons are 
easy to cut, not easy to squash, perfectly adapted 
to their own ecological niche. 
<There are more Taxxons than meet the eye,> I 
warned everyone. <No way to know how many are 
belowground in tunnels. Be on guard for that: They 
may come swarming up from underneath us.> 
<I'm more worried about those Bug fighters,> 
Marco said. <What if they decide the Taxxons are 
expendable? What if they decide to start shoot-
ing?> 
<Unlikely, but they may if they figure the 
Taxxons are toast anyway,> I agreed. <If they do, 
take cover in the Taxxon holes. Any other ques-
tions?> 
No one said anything. I was braced for some-
thing from Cassie. Surely she would raise some 
sort of moral objection to this straightforward 
slaughter. But she remained silent. Hard to know 
what she would object to. It was always a ques-
tion of balance for her, I guess. She was commit-
ted to winning, believed in our cause, understood 
that there would be terrible things to be done. 
But she found some things, and not other things, 
to be over the line. Me, I barely knew where the 
line was anymore. I'd come to depend on Cassie 
to keep me from going too far. 
Nothing from Cassie. 
<Okay. See that vertical rift over on the right 
there? Looks deep and dark enough for us. We go 
in. Then, battle morphs, and come out hot and 
mean. Soon as we're engaged I'll signal James. 
Then, Toby.> 
We swooped silently down, down through the 
hazy lights and into the deep cleft that, to our 
bat senses, was well defined and perfectly clear. 
<Ax first,> I ordered. Ax had only to demorph 
to be dangerous. The rest of us had to demorph, 
then morph again. 
With Ax ready I began to demorph. As my 
weight returned I had to grab exposed roots with 
unformed hands to keep from sliding down the 
cleft. Then, morphing to tiger, I lost my hold and 
slid, tumbling down, 
48 

I rolled to a stop by Ax who waited calmly just 
within the shadow. A pair of Taxxons toiled not 
ten feet away, out in the hazy light. They hadn't 
seen or smelled us. 
My acute tiger senses told me even without 
looking that the others were morphed behind me. 
<Three count,> I said more calmly than I felt. 
<Three, two, GO!> 
It must have been a terrifying sight for the 
Taxxons. An Andalite warrior and five wild beasts 
suddenly roaring out of a crack in the dirt wall. 
The nearest Taxxons had no chance to react. We 
hit them, slashed, cut, and moved on, knowing 
that a wounded Taxxon is a dead Taxxon. 
I moved at breakneck speed. Slashed the 
nearest Taxxon, leaped atop him, propelled my-
self away, digging my hind claws into him for 
good measure. 
I hit the ground, took two loping steps, and 
was ripping the next Taxxon before he could 
scream. 
But now the Taxxon voices were crying out in 
their shrill, sibilant language. 
"Sreeeeya! Ansacaleees!" 
I caught a glimpse of a wild African elephant 
burying ivory tusks in a Taxxon's raised chest. 
Rachel tossed her head and the tusks nearly re-
moved the top third of her victim. 
Marco in cheetah morph and Ax fought most 
50 
logically. They each understood that a mere 
wound was enough, as long as live Taxxons were 
left undamaged to take care of the finishing off. 
Marco would accelerate to forty mph, dig his less-
than-deadly claws into a victim, leave bloody 
scratches behind, and prance away far too 
quickly for a Taxxon to respond. 
Ax wielded his tail with the precision of a sur-
geon. Tobias wheeled and dove at the red jelly 
eyes. And Cassie was there, too, in wolf morph, 
tearing into sausage-casing flesh, ripping and 
jumping back. 
It was a sheer, one-sided massacre. 
Now the security forces, human-Controller 
and Hork-Bajir, were getting into the game. They 
came running around the lip of the crater to get 
close enough to fire down into us without hitting 
the Taxxons. 
<Here they come,> I warned. 
But we were faster than the Taxxons, and, 
with the exception of Rachel, smaller. Excited 
Hork-Bajir firing wildly were doing almost as 
much damage as we were. 
"Don't stand up here shooting, get down 
there!" a human voice bawled. "Get down there, 
you cowards!" 
<James!> I yelled. <Now!> 
Clear across the crater, James and seven of 
his people in morph erupted amid the Taxxons. 
51 

That would keep the security forces from concen-
trating. 
Taxxons were running away, turning and run-
ning, confused, terrified. Others lacked even that 
much self-control: They fell upon their wounded 
brothers and slammed their teeth-lined round 
mouths down again and again, reared up high, 
and with a "Sreee!" of delight tore chunks from 
their still-living fellow Taxxons. 
I saw two wounded Taxxons devouring each 
other. Both screamed in rage and hate; both 
must have known, somewhere, deep in their 
fevered minds, that this was madness, but nei-
ther could stop. 
<Ax! Hork-Bajir behind you!> I yelled. 
Unnecessary, of course: An Andalite sees in all 
directions at once. 
But now the easy part was definitely over: 
Hork-Bajir were piling into the melee. It was the 
difference between fighting big, nasty but vulner-
able worms and fighting walking razor blades. 
A Hork-Bajir leaped over a fallen Taxxon and 
landed right in front of me. Just that morning I'd 
let a Hork-Bajir cut me down. 
<Not this time,> I said, and launched myself 
straight at him, straight for his face. At arm's 
length a Hork-Bajir is almost the equal of a tiger. 
At close range the tiger is king. 
I broke free and yelled, <Okay, Toby, your 
turn! Now!> 
The battle had drawn every Yeerk eye down to 
the pit. The swift, running approach of sixty free 
Hork-Bajir warriors had gone unnoticed, even by 
the buzzing, frustrated Bug fighters overhead. 
The Yeerks were uncoordinated, thrown off by 
our successive waves. Our plan was working. But 
sooner or later someone was going to take charge 
of the shocked and off-balance Yeerks. 
Two minutes more, I told myself, and we bail. 
It was one minute too many. The Bug fighters 
opened fire without warning. They fired on Taxxon 
and human-Controller and Hork-Bajir alike. 
More Bug fighters were maneuvering to get into 
firing position. They were going to kill everyone, 
friend and foe alike. They were doing our work for 
us. But we would surely die as well. 
Hork-Bajir-Controllers were running for it, 
scrambling up out of the pit. 
<Toby! Mix your people in with them and run! 
James! Fall back. We'll distract them for another 
few seconds.> 
<We get all the fun jobs,> Marco muttered. 
And then, what I had warned against, had 
foreseen . . . and forgotten. The ground opened 
beneath me and I fell. 
52 
53 

<Aaahhh!> 
I fell a long way. My tiger speed and balance 
turned me around, aimed my feet down, tail 
twirling to maintain this attitude. 
I hit the dirt, took the shock in all four paws, 
rolled sideways, and came up snarling. Snarling 
at nothing. I was in an empty tunnel. Dark. Too 
dark for even my cat's eyes. But I smelled plenty, a 
smell I knew: Taxxon. 
I stayed on guard, not too worried, but defi-
nitely ready. I heard a sound . . . shuffling, grind-
ing . . . digging! 
The ground opened beneath me again and I 
fell in a cascade of dirt, down, and this time no 
hard landing on a flat surface. I was in a chute, 
rolling, trying to grab on with my spike claws. But 
the surface was smooth, almost like glass. And 
now I was getting worried. 
I fell for only thirty seconds or so, but that's a 
long way to go underground. Finally the chute 
ended and I was once more rolled across a dirt 
floor. 
<Marco! Rachel!> No answer. Was I that far 
underground? Out of thought-speak range? I took 
a chance. <Marco, get everyone home, that's an 
order. Don't argue.> 
There was light. Dim, but more than enough 
for me. 
And there were Taxxons: three of them. Each 
carried a Dracon beam in one set of upper legs. I 
could get one, maybe two of them. But three? 
Before they could shoot me? 
<Please do not attack, we mean you no 
harm.> 
It was thought-speak! Not the impossible-to-
decipher hissing and spitting of spoken Taxxon. 
Thought-speak, and impossible as it seemed, I 
had the strangest impression that it was an An-
dalite thought-speak "voice." 
I froze. 
<What do you want?> I demanded. 
<To speak to you, Jake.> 
He knew my name. Of course the Yeerks did 
know my name now, but still it was a shock. 
54 
55 

<Okay, so speak. You've got the Dracon 
beams, I guess I'll listen.> 
The Taxxon who was speaking opened his pin-
cers and let the Dracon weapon drop. The other 
two did the same. 
<Now we are at your mercy, Animorph. That 
morph is more than capable of killing the three 
of us.> 
I took a deep breath. <Okay, let's talk. You 
know me. Who are you?> 
<My name is Arbron. I am — was an An-
dalite aristh.> 
<You're a Taxxon.> 
<Your friend Tobias is a hawk,> he countered. 
<You're stuck in morph? You're a morphed 
Andalite stuck as a Taxxon? A nothlit?> I couldn't 
keep the horror out of my voice. One thing to be 
trapped as a hawk. But to be trapped as a 
Taxxon? 
<I am a Taxxon,> Arbron said almost proudly. 
<I have been for more years than I can easily 
count. I was on the Taxxon home world with two 
Andalites of your acquaintance. One was Alloran-
Semitur-Corrass.> 
<Visser One?> 
<Not then. But, yes, Alloran became the un-
willing host body for the Yeerk now ranked Visser 
One. He commanded our mission. Alloran was 
an Andalite prince with the smallest possible 
command: two lowly arisths. Me, and Elfangor-
Sirinial-Shamtul.> 
I stopped breathing. Could it be possible? 
Elfangor, Ax's brother? Elfangor, who gave us the 
morphing power to begin with? This . . . this 
whatever he was had been a friend of Elfangor's? 
<What do you want?> I asked him. 
He shuffled closer and I had to resist the nor-
mal reaction of disgust. 
<I want to be free, Jake the Animorph.> 
<You're a Controller?> 
<No. I have no Yeerk within me. We want to 
be free . . . we all want to be free . . . of the 
curse of being Taxxons.> 
<I don't understand,> I said, although I was 
beginning to guess. 
<The morphing power,> Arbron said, now 
sounding almost desperate. <The morphing power! 
Don't you see? If the Taxxons could morph, 
acquire some more benign shape and find a safe 
haven on your planet . . . become something 
other than what they are, escape the hunger. You 
cannot imagine the hunger . . . they've seen that 
there could be a better way. The virus of 
knowledge is in their bloodstreams now, they 
realize that they could change forever!> 
<You're telling me the Taxxons want to . . . to 
stop being Taxxons?> 
<Yes. Yes. My people have seen a better 
56 
57 

way . . . a way out of this life of eternal, 
excruciating pain and hunger, a hunger that 
has made us slaves of the Yeerks.> 
I didn't know what to say. Too much to ab-
sorb. An entire species wanting to morph? And 
surely Arbron knew that we no longer had the 
morphing cube, that Visser One had it. And in 
any event, Arbron must know that it wouldn't 
work on him. Not on a nothlit. 
As if he was reading my mind, Arbron said, 
<Listen to me, Jake the Animorph. I have been a 
leader of these, my new people, for many years. 
We have fought the hunger, resisted as well as 
we could the murderous cannibalistic urges. I've 
tried to show them a better way. But the need is 
too powerful. Resistance always breaks down, 
and we fall again under Yeerk sway. They feed us, 
you see. It's as simple as that. 
<I know that . . . I understand the morphing 
technology. I know it cannot save me, that I am 
forever trapped. But it can save my people. And 
if they are saved I can lay down my burden of 
leadership.> 
No choice but to be honest, I thought. I can't 
sustain a lie. I can't trick them. <I don't have the 
morphing cube,> I said. 
<We know. Visser One has it, and he will 
never free us, never. No Taxxon or even Taxxon-
Controller has been allowed to acquire the mor-
phing power. We can only have it, only be free, if 
you and not the Yeerks are victorious.> 
<And you would . .> I began, not daring 
even to complete the sentence, it was too 
amazing, the possibilities too incredible. 
<Yes. We would fight with you. There are one 
thousand seven hundred and nine non-Controller 
Taxxons on the surface of this planet and aboard 
the Pool ship. And we Taxxons would fight with 
you.> 
58 
59 

They had given me up for dead back at the 
valley of the free Hork-Bajir, so when I came fly-
ing in at first light there was a certain amount of 
amazement. 
Not that Marco was going to make a big thing 
of it. "Oh, there you are," he said. "So I guess I 
can't have your CD collection after all." 
I landed on the ground and demorphed as 
Cassie came running up, her tear-streaked face 
bright. She stopped herself from hugging me, 
and then turned away. 
"Cassie. Stay. Please," I said. "Marco: Did we 
lose anyone last night?" 
"Yeah. Three of Toby's people. One of James's 
people, the guy named Ray. And you, or so we 
thought." 
I had demorphed fully. I sat down hard. Ray 
was a kid born with severe birth defects. He'd ac-
quired a leopard as his main morph. He loved the 
physical grace of the animal, a grace he'd never 
experienced in his human body. 
"How are they taking it, James's people?" 
"About like we were taking your death, Jake: 
not well. At least it was quick: Dracon beam. He 
never knew what hit him." 
"We took out a lot of Taxxons," Rachel said, 
arriving on the scene impeccably dressed, look-
ing like she'd just stepped out of an exclusive 
day spa despite the fact that it was not yet six in 
the morning and she, like all of them, had spent 
the night in one of the hasty, shabby log shacks 
we'd built. 
"Was it worth it?" Cassie wondered, then 
looked as if she wished she'd kept her mouth shut. 
I got up and went to her. I took her hands and 
said, "This time, yes. I think it was. Rachel? 
Round everyone up: Toby, the parents, the whole 
war council." 
"Yeah?" she asked with an inquisitive look. 
"They've got fifteen minutes to dress, pee, 
and drink a cup of roots n' twigs coffee." I laughed. I 
was feeling incredible. Feeling, despite the lack 
60 

of sleep, despite the aftermath of two terrible 
battles in one day, wild and alive. 
It took them twenty minutes, but that was 
okay. Okay aside from the fact that Marco 
tortured me for the secret the whole time. 
At last the frowsy, discontented bunch was 
assembled. 
"You're alive," Rachel's mom said, not seem-
ing too happy about it. 
"He's hard to kill," Marco said, shaking his 
head as though commiserating with her. "I've 
been tempted repeatedly during the last twenty 
minutes or so." 
<I am very happy to see you alive, Prince 
Jake. But why have I been pulled away from fin-
ishing my morning rituals?> Ax said. He's cranky 
till he gets a few good hoofsfull of dewy grass. 
I didn't know where to begin. I thought about 
dragging it out and making a production out of it, 
but this was a dangerously tired, discontented 
crowd and I was too full of the news to keep it 
bottled up. 
"Well," I said, trying to sound laconic, "the 
Taxxons want to defect. They want to 
change sides." 
Everyone just stared. 
"Come again?" Cassie's dad said. 
"The Taxxons. They want to join us. They're 
ready to turn against the Yeerks." 
The parents for the most part didn't get it. 
Toby did. And Eva, the former Visser One. 
My fellow Animorphs just stared in dumb, 
openmouthed, it-can't-be, no-way shock. 
All but Cassie, who sighed as if she'd been 
holding her breath for weeks. 
I went to her and said, "You knew, didn't 
you?" 
She shook her head. "I hoped, that was all. I 
hoped." 
"Pretty good hope, Cassie," I whispered. 
"Oh my God," Marco said, getting it now. "It's 
the morphing. That's it, isn't it? The Yeerks got a 
taste of morphing. The Taxxons have figured out 
they could do it, too." 
I nodded. "Yeah. The Taxxons grabbed me to 
talk to me. They're led by an Andalite nothlit, 
trapped in Taxxon morph. He said his name is Ar-
bron. He said he was a former companion of 
Elfangor's." 
Ax jerked visibly. <Arbron? It is a name from a 
very long time ago. But yes, an aristh named Ar-
bron was a friend of my brother's.> 
I recounted the details of the meeting, play-
ing to a very, very attentive audience. 
<You believed him?> Tobias asked. 
I shrugged. "It doesn't make any sense as a 
trap. They had me dead. If they wanted to trap 
us, if it was all a setup, they'd have demanded I 
62 
63 

return with all of you. They didn't. They told me 
to come back alone. Arbron wants me to speak to 
his people. He wants me to tell them what I told 
him. He wants my personal promise." 
"Your promise of what?" Toby asked. 
I looked right at Ax. "They want to be made 
morph-capable. They have contact with Yeerks 
who've morphed, and they are bitterly ticked that 
Visser One has refused to enable any of his 
Taxxon so-called allies. They realize we don't 
have the morphing cube anymore. And Arbron is 
smart enough to know that even if we win we may 
not get the cube from Visser One. He could 
escape with it or even destroy it. But they've 
realized that the Yeerks will never, ever allow 
them to gain morphing capabilities because it 
would be the end of Taxxon dependence on the 
Yeerks." 
"So they want us to promise Andalite cooper-
ation?" Marco said thoughtfully. "They want us 
to guarantee that the Andalites will pay off on our 
debt?" 
I nodded. "Exactly. They want us to commit 
the Andalite high command to make every Taxxon 
morph-capable. In exchange, each Taxxon will 
choose a form and turn nothlit." 
<My people will never agree,> Ax said bluntly. 
<The morphing technology is the crown jewel of 
Andalite science. They are already furious that it 
has spread as far as the five of you and Visser 
64 
One. They do not know that Tobias's mother is 
morph-capable. They do not know about the aux-
iliary Animorphs. They do not know that the 
Yeerks have a cube. They will absolutely refuse.> 
"Even if it means stopping a war, saving a 
planet, and disarming their greatest enemy?" 
Cassie asked. "Are they that stubborn? That stu-
pid?" 
Ax's main eyes flashed. <What they will say is 
that it is a trick: that the Yeerks are using the 
Taxxons to acquire more morphing power and 
become even more formidable foes.> 
"They've said they'll go nothlit under our su-
pervision," I said. "Permanent morph." 
"The Andalite high command is not going to 
trust us that far," Marco said. 
"The Andalite high command can drop 
dead," Rachel said. "What good have they ever 
been to us? Where are they, huh? We've always 
been their last priority. They've done squat for 
us. They're sitting off at a safe distance waiting 
to see whether we win or lose. If we win they'll 
pat us on the head and say, 'Good inferior 
species, good girl, here's a doggie treat.' And 
if we lose what are they going to do?" 
No one had an answer to that. Then Cassie 
said, "Ax, you need to tell them." 
Ax looked startled. His stalk eyes jerked 
toward Cassie. 
65 

"It's time to choose, Ax," Cassie said very 
quietly. "Once and for all. We all know what Allo-
ran did to the Hork-Bajir world, trying to keep 
them from falling into Yeerk hands. The An-
dalites won't allow Earth to fall to the Yeerks, will 
they?" 
All attention was on Ax. 
It was a long time before he spoke. It's hard 
to read Andalite emotions — they lack mouths, 
and that makes them less expressive than hu-
mans. But it was easy enough to guess at the 
conflicts going on inside that wonderfully quick, 
agile brain. 
<I have at times contacted the Andalite fleet 
without telling anyone,> Ax said slowly. 
"I'll kill you myself!" Rachel erupted. 
"Rachel," I said as evenly as I could. 
<There is a possibility that the Andalite high 
command might resort to ... extreme mea-
sures.> 
67 

"Now can I kill him?" Rachel demanded. 
I wasn't far from letting her. I was furious. 
Betrayed! 
Ax 
had 
used 
our 
limited 
communicator to chat with his people? Behind 
our backs? 
Cassie said, "Ax has already defied 
them. They ordered him to stop our attack 
on the Yeerk pool. He disobeyed." 
<You spied on me?> Ax asked her. 
"I'm an Animorph, Ax," Cassie answered. " 
A flea on your back when you would sneak 
out of camp." 
"Why on God's green Earth would these 
Andalites order him to stop us from killing 
their enemies?" Rachel's mother asked, 
and for once it was a good question. 
Eva had the answer. "I can guess: They 
didn't want anything to stop the Yeerks 
from concentrating their forces here. They 
wanted the Yeerks to pour into Earth." She 
laughed mirthlessly. "The Yeerks are evil, 
destructive, dangerous creatures, I know 
that better than anyone. But the Andalites 
are no saints themselves. They want the 
Yeerks to concentrate here because the 
Andalites have written us off, decided we 
can't win, and they wanted to blast the 
entire planet out of existence and take out 
the bulk of the Yeerk race along with the 
human race." 
"Is that true, Ax?" 
Another long hesitation. Then, <Yes, 
Prince Jake. It is true.> 
In a few moment's time I'd gone from 
the heights of hope and optimism to the 
depths of rage and despair. The Andalite 
fleet wasn't coming to rescue us. They were 
coming to destroy us in order to destroy the 
Yeerks. 
In a heartbeat we'd lost one enemy, 
the Taxxons, and gained another, far more 
deadly: our erstwhile friends, our long-
awaited saviors, the Andalites. 
<How do we stop them, Ax-man?> 
Tobias asked. He and Ax are best friends. 
"You're asking him?" Rachel raged, 
stabbing an accusing finger at the Andalite. 
Ax held his head high and for a 
moment I thought he might refuse to 
answer Tobias's question. Then, <You 
must understand that the Andalite high 
command 
is 
not 
the 
entire 
Andalite 
electorate. This long war has made 
them a greater part of our civilization than 
they 
should 
rightly 
be. 
The 
Andalite 
electorate, the people, do not know what is 
planned.> 
"So, how do we tell them?" Marco said. " 
Any time we dial up that communicator my 
dad invented it just reaches the Andalite fleet." 
<We take the Yeerk Pool ship,> Ax said. 
<We use its power to contact the nonmilitary 
Andalite 

communications net. We tell the Andalite people 
what has happened, what we've done, and what 
we have promised the Taxxons.> 
<Will the Andalite people back us?> Tobias 
asked. 
Ax looked grim. <Will your people? Will they 
allow Taxxons to morph and live in peace on this 
planet? Will your people choose trust over hatred 
and revenge?> 
That put it back in my court. I didn't have an 
answer. 
"Arbron wants me to speak to the Taxxons 
tonight," I said. "He's suggested I appear in 
morph — to demonstrate the possibilities. He 
doesn't know much about Earth animals. But he 
thinks the Taxxons would prefer something not 
too different from their current forms. Something 
strong but something not afflicted by the Taxxon 
hunger. Cassie?" 
She looked blank. "Something similar to their 
present forms? Centipedes? Caterpillars? No, 
they'd want a longer lifespan at least. And you 
said strong . . . ah. I have an idea. I don't know. 
Maybe . . . I don't know. I'd be guessing." 
I said, "Cassie, you guessed that letting Tom 
take the morphing cube might weaken rather 
than strengthen the Yeerks. You guessed that Ax 
was . . ." I stifled the most bitter word that came 
to mind. ". . . conflicted. I'll back your guess 
any day of the week." 
"I think he means he's sorry he doubted you 
and treated you like crap," Rachel said archly. 
"Yeah. That's exactly what I mean. Come on, 
Cassie, show me where to go next." 
70 
71 

"Is it a python?" I guessed. 
"Anaconda," Cassie said. 
The Gardens had survived the destruction of 
the town since it was outside the radius of annihi-
lation. But it was closed. A handful of dedicated 
people worked to keep the animals from starving, 
but the place was a mess: The breeze blew trash 
around the usually pristine sidewalks; the whole 
place reeked of uncleaned cages and habitats; 
water pressure had been cut off so the picturesque 
moats and ponds were scummed over. 
The snake house looked about like it always 
did, though some of the display areas were dark. I 
guess snakes are low maintenance. 
The snake I was staring at looked about afoot 
72 
thick and so long I couldn't begin to guess at its 
total size. It had a clearly delineated head and a 
sort of rough-edged diamond pattern to its scales. 
It was either asleep or dead. Or very relaxed. 
"The anaconda is part of the python family," 
Cassie said. "One of if not the biggest snake 
species on Earth. It hunts live prey, but snakes 
are far from the kind of hunger a Taxxon knows. 
They have very slow metabolisms. They can go a 
long time between meals." 
I peered at the informational plaque. "Native to 
the Amazon jungle?" I laughed. "You're thinking 
ahead." 
Cassie looked embarrassed, like I'd caught 
her doing something dishonest. "If we agree to 
give the Taxxons a place to live in freedom here 
on Earth, why not the rain forest? The agreement 
would stop destruction of the rain forest dead in 
its tracks." 
I nodded. "Yes, it would. But is this . . ." I 
jerked my head toward the snake. "Is this the 
morph that would appeal to a Taxxon?" 
Cassie shrugged. "I guess I don't figure Taxxons 
are big on imagination. I think they'd want some-
thing fairly close, as you said, to what they are 
now. But not some helpless worm or bug: They're 
used to a certain relative size." 
"Uh-huh. You sure that snake isn't dead? I 
haven't seen it move yet." 

"Well, you see what I mean: It would be dif-
ferent from the relentless demands of life for a 
Taxxon. There's a lot of sitting in the sun in-
volved." 
"Florida retirement for Taxxons." 
"Yeah." 
"Well, let's get this over with," I said reluc-
tantly. 
"It's perfectly safe," Cassie said condescend-
ingly. 
"It's a snake. It's a snake the size of palm 
tree." 
"Come on." She put her arm through mine 
and drew me away toward the access corridor be-
hind the cages. 
We both went in and I knelt and touched the 
dry scales. Not slimy at all, but still creepy. I ac-
quired the snake. Its DNA joined the DNA of how 
many species floating around in my blood? I 
couldn't even remember them all. 
"When you do this morph your biggest prob-
lem will be staying awake," Cassie said. 
I stood up, and for a moment tried to figure 
out how to say what I wanted to say. 
"Cassie, you ever wonder what happens if we 
win? You ever think about that?" 
"All the time." 
"Nothing will ever be the same. People will 
know the galaxy is full of life, full of intelligent 
species. We'll have this huge rush of technologi-
cal change. There'll be nothing to stop us from 
being a space-traveling species. Humans on the 
moon, on Mars, maybe colonizing planets all 
around the galaxy. And there's the morphing 
technology. Can you imagine what that's going to 
mean?" 
Cassie nodded. "I guess I don't think about 
that stuff so much. I guess I think more about us. 
You and me. And all of us." 
I took her in my arms. The anaconda's habitat 
was probably not the most romantic place on 
Earth, but it felt safe. "You know I love you." 
"I love you, too, Jake," she said, and put her 
head on my shoulder. 
"I guess if we win, if we survive, maybe we 
should, you know, get married and all. I mean, 
eventually. I know we're young, but man, we've 
been through enough that it should count for a 
few extra years, shouldn't it?" 
I don't know what I expected her answer to 
be, but I didn't expect her to start crying. And 
not tears of joy, either. 
"I would like that ... eventually," she said. " 
But. But what?" 
She sighed. "But, Jake, what are you going to 
be? What are you going to do?" 
74 
75 

"Guess I thought I'd go to college," I said. 
"And study what, Jake? Me, I'll go to college, 
I'll become a doctor. never forget what's 
happened, I'll never even try, but I'll be able 
to slip back into a normal life. But you, Jake?" 
I shrugged and released her and stood away a 
bit. "I'm not Rachel, you know. I didn't fall in 
love with the fight. I don't need it like she does. I 
do it, I try and do it well, but it's just a job, a 
duty." I tried to make a joke of it. "I mean, what 
do you think? The Pentagon is going to call me 
up and make me Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff? I'm not even old enough to enlist as a pri-
vate." 
She didn't laugh. She just looked at me. 
"Look, Cassie, when this is over I'll be done 
with it forever. I'll go back to school, get an edu-
cation, go to basketball games, get a driver's li-
cense, go to college, figure out what it is I really 
want to do. And be with you. You and me." 
She forced a smile. "A year after it ends, if it 
ends, if we win, a year afterward if you want to be 
with me, we'll talk about that again, okay?" 
"I have to wait a year? Kind of harsh, isn't it?" 
"Hey, if we get married, Marco isn't going to 
live with us, is he?" Cassie said, trying her best 
to jolly us both out of our dark moods. 
It didn't work. 
For the first time I could taste the faint possi-
bility of actual victory, despite the probable 
Andalite betrayal. The Taxxons might be joining 
us! For so long I'd fought with no hope at all. 
I should be excited. 
I should be happy. 
77 

Arbron had given me the place: a spot more 
than a mile away from the site of the new Yeerk 
pool. He had not told me positively, absolutely, to 
come alone. So, I brought backup, though not in 
any visible form. 
I flew with fleas nestled deep in my feathers. 
Only Tobias remained in his true form, flying " 
cover." 
I found the spot easily enough: a used car lot 
just outside the blast area. It was abandoned, of 
course. About half the cars had been stolen by 
looters, and of those that remained maybe a third 
were damaged in some way. But there, just as Ar-
bron had told me, waited a yellow VW Beetle. 
I landed and demorphed. It was a chilly night, 
especially for someone in nothing but morphing 
clothes. I was glad to climb into the VW. I sat be-
hind the steering wheel and looked around, not 
knowing what to expect. The little bud vase was 
empty. 
<What are we doing?> Marco asked from his 
location somewhere on my body. 
"We're sitting here looking like a suspicious 
car thief," I answered. "Where are you guys, any-
way? Where on my body did you end up after I 
demorphed?" 
Rachel answered, <Gotta tell you, cousin, I 
don't know where we are exactly, and I don't 
really want to know.> 
"Mmmm. Good point." 
<Marco just bit you,> Ax reported. <If I un-
derstand the physiology of flea bites correctly, 
you will experience an itching sensation later, 
and then will know precisely where we were.> 
"There's a pleasant thought," I said. 
<Hey, there's a key in the ignition. See if the 
radio works,> Marco suggested. 
I punched the power switch. It was set to a 
news channel. The announcer sounded tired. " 
. . . are saying at this hour that the looting has 
diminished in intensity. Numerous fires are still 
burning, but fire departments from as far as a 
78 
79 

hundred miles away are sending trucks and 
crews to —" I pushed preset buttons and tried 
for some music. 
There was a rumbling. I turned off the radio. " 
Urn . . . you guys feel that?" 
<We're fleas, we feel everything,> Cassie said. 
Tobias called down from high above. <I guess 
you guys know the ground is opening up, right?> 
"Buckle your seat belts." 
The ground vibrated beneath the car and I fol-
lowed my own advice, drew the shoulder belt 
across, and clipped it just as the ground opened 
up and the car began to roll forward, down a 
sloping tunnel into the ground. 
It was elegantly done: The tunnel had an al-
most flat floor, the walls close enough to make 
steering unnecessary. The car rolled free, scuff-
ing the dirt walls from time to time. How far 
down, I couldn't be sure. Then I glanced in the 
rearview mirror: The tunnel was being collapsed 
behind me. 
If it was a trap after all, it was a very good 
trap. 
All at once 1 emerged into a huge open space. 
A cavern, tall and arched, and lit by dim artificial 
lights high overhead. 
The car rolled to a halt. I closed my eyes to 
adjust to the gloom. I opened them again and 
had an impression of restless movement all around. 
I closed my eyes and opened them once more and 
this time I saw the Taxxons, everywhere, all 
around the car, pressing close, red jelly eyes stari 
ng. 
"We're here," I muttered. 
<Good. I need to pee,> Marco said. 
"I'm going to get out," I whispered. 
I opened the door slowly. I stood up. 
They were everywhere, a wall of Taxxons. 
More Taxxons than I could have imagined in my 
worst nightmare. Not dozens, hundreds. 
Arbron — at least I hoped it was him — 
danced forward on his needle legs. He raised his 
upper third and loomed high above me. 
I knew, or at least hoped, it was a friendly 
gathering. But these were Taxxons, after all. 
Taxxons, not even Taxxon-Controllers. In their 
natural state they were insane with hunger, and I 
was food. 
<Please climb to the podium,> Arbron invited 
me and I noticed for the first time a sort of rock-
and-dirt mound maybe ten feet high. I scrambled 
up, trying not to look scared, and moving very, 
very carefully so as not to scrape a knee or cut a 
finger. 
Arbron rose part of the way behind me. Then 
he spread his upper rows of Taxxon arms wide 
and began addressing the crowd in the Taxxon 
speech. 
80 

I didn't understand a word of it, but the 
Taxxon multitude did. They hissed and slithered 
and made a trilling sound that could either be 
approval or rage. 
From atop the mound, and with my eyes ad-
justed to the near-darkness, I could see them all. 
A sea of Taxxons. A huge underground cavern 
reeking of ammonia and seething with oversized, 
murderous centipedes. 
Then Arbron began to speak to them in 
thought-speak, presumably for my benefit. 
<Taxxons! Here is the human who leads the 
fight against the Yeerks. He and his warriors have 
killed many of our people.> 
I must have gone several shades more pale at 
that. It seemed a strange way to introduce me. 
<He and his warriors have defied the power of 
Visser One, the former Visser Three, for years. It 
was he and his warriors who destroyed the Yeerk 
pool and killed many Yeerks.> 
The crowd liked that. They murmured in true 
Taxxon form, hissing and spitting and writhing. 
Impossible not to feel that I was sitting on some 
gigantic piece of rotting meat surrounded by 
huge maggots. Impossible to shake that image. 
<He and his warriors are friends to the An-
dalites who possess the transforming power. This 
human> — he pointed at me with three of his 
arms — <can morph!> 
Now the crowd grew quieter, more attentive, 
less excited, but very, very focused. 
<I have brought this human here to speak to 
you, my people.> 
I recognized my cue. I was about to start 
speaking, but it occurred to me that a visual aid 
would be helpful. So I spread my arms wide and 
reached deep inside myself for the DNA that 
would form the tiger. 
I morphed slowly, slowly so they could all see. 
They watched the claws grow from my fingers, 
saw the orange-and-black fur rush across my 
body, muttered as I dropped forward onto all 
fours. 
<You might want to warn us,> Rachel com-
plained. <It's like an earthquake down here.> 
Then, I began to demorph more quickly. And 
once I was human again I focused my thoughts 
on the dragonfly. I shrank, fell toward the ground 
like a man diving off a skyscraper. The dirt and 
rock rose to me, gravel becoming boulders. Gos-
samer wings sprouted from my back. Articulated 
insect legs erupted from my chest. Massive eyes 
swelled like balloons, popping out of my eye 
sockets, overwhelming my face. I could actually 
see the fleas clinging to my body. 
<Everyone hang on, we're going airborne,> I 
notified my friendly fleas. 
I fired my wings and zoomed just over the 
83 

heads of the Taxxons. Then back, to land atop my 
podium. I demorphed. And now, if Cassie was 
right, the piece de resistance. 
I formed a picture of the anaconda in my 
mind. The changes began. I saw my skin harden, 
dry out, crack into thousands of interlocked 
scales. 
My eyes moved around my head but remained 
forward-focused. My face bulged out, stretched, 
out and out. My arms were shriveling at a 
shocking pace. I was a weird creature, half 
snake, half human, standing erect but 
armless. Then my legs went weak and I 
dropped flat on my belly before I could fall. My 
legs melted into the tail that was stretching out 
and out and out from my elongating spine. 
I was ten feet long and still growing. Longer 
and longer, and without thinking I shortened the 
muscles on one side of my body and brought my 
length up to form a loose coil. 
The anaconda's senses replaced my own. Vi-
sion faded, color dimmed, but awareness of 
motion intensified. It was like when you set your 
computer cursor to show trails: everything, 
anything that moved was infinitely more 
interesting than color or shape. 
My tongue tasted the air and I received a 
download of data — temperature, humidity, the 
scent of Taxxon exhalations. 
I let the Taxxons take a good, long look. 
<This creature is called an anaconda,> I said. 
<It is the largest of snakes, powerful, dangerous 
when provoked. But as I feel its mind within my 
own, I know that it is calm, at peace, restful. It is 
unafraid. It longs for food, but it can resist, can 
control its hunger.> 
The chamber was silent. The Taxxons stared, 
stared holes in me with their red jelly 
eyes. <Very good,> Arbron said privately to 
me. 
84 
85 

Human once more, I addressed the Taxxon 
multitude. 
"My name is Jake. I am the leader of the Ani-
morphs. As Arbron told you, we have killed many 
Taxxons using the morphing power. But we are 
not the enemies of the Taxxons. We are the ene-
mies of the Yeerks. And we have killed many 
Yeerks." 
They liked that okay. 
"The Andalites are our friends." 
<Yeah, right,> Rachel said in private thought-
speak. 
"The Andalites are coming, and there may be 
a great battle. The Andalites may win. The Yeerks 
may win. If we and the Andalites win, you will be 
given the choice — to remain as you are, or to 
change, to find a new form, and live in peace and 
contentment here, in a special place. A home-
land for the Taxxons . . . for Taxxons who are no 
longer haunted by the desperate hunger, no longer 
prey to the Yeerks." 
I was lying. At least in part. Arbron was an An-
dalite, or had been: He had to know that the An-
dalites would resist ever turning the morphing 
power over to the hated Taxxons. 
I cringed a little as I spoke, waiting for him to 
interrupt, to call me a liar. But he let me go on. 
And I painted the picture for the Taxxons: life 
without hunger, a life of safety and security, 
where they would live in peace among them-
selves, no more cannibalism. 
And Arbron let me go on speaking. 
"The question is: Can we and our Andalite 
friends defeat the Yeerks and bring on this new 
day?" 
They waited for the answer. I gave it to them, 
feeling weirdly like a presidential candidate de-
livering a stump speech. 
"We can defeat the Yeerks . . . if you join us. 
Animorph, Andalite, and Taxxon together, we can 
win." 
The Taxxons didn't cheer, exactly, but they 
did send up a creepy whistling sound that rever-
berated around the chamber. 
86 
87 

Arbron slithered up beside me and, to my sur-
prise, dismissed them, told them all to get back 
to their work. Hundreds of Taxxons obediently 
turned away and began filing out of side tunnels 
like a football stadium crowd after the game. 
I probably looked puzzled as I turned to Ar-
bron. "Well?" 
<Well, they have agreed. For now. They will 
follow my direction. For now.> 
"Okay, then I guess we should get down to 
specifics," I said. "You know the Pool ship is 
here on Earth, on the surface. It's there to feed 
the Yeerks until they can finish —" 
<Why don't you ask your friends to demorph? I' 
m sure they would be more comfortable.> 
That stopped me. But there was no point in 
trying to lie. "Yeah, I guess they would." 
Fleas leaped away from me, unseen by either 
of us, and moments later my friends began to ap-
pear, growing out of swollen, vile, armor-plated 
flea bodies. 
<And now, my friend,> Arbron said. 
I heard footsteps and peered into the dark-
ness of an access tunnel. 
"Well, good evening, everyone. It's an awfully 
pretty night to spend it all in a filthy Taxxon tun-
nel." 
I knew the voice. I'd heard it every day of my 
life. My brother. Tom. 
My brother, the human-Controller, head of 
Yeerk security. 
"Oh, calm down, Rachel," Tom said genially, 
giving her a "chill-out" wave. She had begun to 
morph to grizzly. "No need to go all hostile." 
"Keep morphing, Rachel," I told her. "Ax?" 
Ax moved quickly to Tom's side. His tail blade 
was against Tom's throat. Tom stood still. He 
made a mocking face, exaggerated fear. 
"I'm alone, unarmed," Tom said, holding his 
arms up in surrender. "Hey, I'm morph-capable 
now, you know. If I wanted trouble I'd use this 
really cool jaguar morph I have." 
"Let him go, Ax," I said. 
Ax removed his tail but stayed within striking 
distance. A word from me and Tom's head would 
be rolling across the cave floor like a bowling 
ball. 
"So, this is the whole team, huh?" Tom nod-
ded. He shook his head ruefully. "Crazy cousin 
Rachel. I always knew you were too much for 
your own good." 
<Shut up, Yeerk,> she said. <You're not my 
cousin. You're a snail living inside my cousin's 
head.> 
"Snail? Oh, I'm wounded," the Yeerk inside 
Tom answered. "And there's Cassie. Marco. Your 
pet Andalite, of course. Hey, where's the bird?" 
"How about we cut the crap?" I said. 
88 
89 

"Absolutely, Killer." His eyes were cold, hos-
tile. He was making no effort to pretend to actu-
ally be Tom. He knew that I knew what he was. 
<Tom represents a faction of Yeerks who want 
some of what we want,> Arbron said. 
"Some?" 
"Yeah, some," Tom agreed. "Sorry, but we're 
not interested in hiding out in some out-of-the-
way forest, some game preserve. That may be fine 
for the Taxxons. Me, I want something a little bet-
ter than that. But then, I have even more to offer 
than Brother Arbron, here. You want the Pool 
ship? You want your mommy and daddy back, Big 
Jake the Yeerk Killer? You want this creature 
back?" He indicated his own body. "You want 
poor Tommy back? I can make all that happen." 
I had to rein in a powerful desire to go after 
him. It's hard to conceive of the impotent rage 
you feel watching someone you love be reduced 
to a mindless puppet. "In exchange for what?" 
"My people want it, too: the morphing power." 
"You said you're already morph-capable." 
"I am. And not just this body, by the way, but 
me. I've subjected my own true Yeerk self to the 
cube. You want to know what's funny? I can 
morph Tom. That's right, I can morph into my 
own host body. Cool, huh? But there are all these 
other Yeerks who are never going to get the 
chance to be free." 
Marco snorted derisively. "Free? You don't 
want to be free." 
Tom laughed. "Marco must be the one doing 
your thinking for you, Jake. You never were all 
that smart. You're right, Marco, I want something 
else. I want Visser One dead. I want the Council 
of Thirteen off my back. I want to lose the whole 
Empire. They're prisoners of their own tired old 
thinking. They can't see the future. We're a para-
sitic species, they can't see past that. We have 
the huge vulnerability of reliance on Kandrona 
rays. But morphed, permanently morphed, we 
won't need Kandrona rays, and we won't be para-
sites anymore. We can achieve a greater destiny." 
He moved closer now. His fists were clenched 
at his side, his jaw, seemed to tighten so that the 
words could barely force their way past bared 
teeth. I'd seen Tom this way once, just once, 
when he'd been wrongly accused of cheating on 
a test. It was as angry as Tom got, short of punch-
ing someone. 
"Visser One is only capable of piling brute 
force on top of brute force. He's insane, you 
know. You can't rely on him! You can't hope for 
career advancement, to rise as you should. I 
should be a sub-visser by now, and in the small 
numbers. What I've done on this planet? I've 
been carrying him for the last three years. But as 
long as . ." He stopped himself, forced a hard 
90 

smile. "Office politics. You don't want to hear 
about it." 
"What do you want?" Marco asked him. "Give 
it to us A,B,C. What do you want?" 
<Don't even listen to him,> Rachel growled. 
<We take him now, hold on to him for three days 
till the Yeerk starves to death. Then we have Tom 
back.> 
Tom's Yeerk dropped the wise-guy attitude. 
He ignored Rachel and Marco and even Ax who 
still hovered close, twitching with readiness. 
"You take the Pool ship, Jake. You can keep it. 
But I get the Blade ship, and a hundred of my 
people, all treated with the morphing cube. And 
we get a free pass out of this system." 
"And you take off to some far-off, unsuspect-
ing planet, make victims of some other species?" 
Cassie cried. 
"Hmm. Come to think of it, yes," Tom said. 
He waited. Grinned. "But . . ." 
"Yeah?" I asked. 
"But the Yeerk Empire will be gutted. Fin-
ished. I've told Visser One that I have informa-
tion that the Andalite fleet is massing close by, 
using Jupiter as a shield to hide behind. So he's 
ordered most of our own fleet to stay in Zero-
space, ready to emerge once the Andalites are 
committed. Not quite true. The Andalites are 
much closer than that." 
That interested me. Interested me greatly, but 
could I believe him? 
<Surely we cannot allow this creature to seize 
the Blade ship,> Ax said. <The Blade ship is a 
very powerful offensive weapon. As a warship it is 
even more dangerous than a Pool ship since it is 
as heavily armed and far faster and more maneu-
verable. We Andalites would have little to fear, 
but few other space-faring races could stand 
against such a ship.> 
Tom's face smirked. "Little brother, you've 
got to know by now: Wars aren't won with clean 
hands." 
"Don't listen to him," Cassie said, but it was 
almost a whisper. 
"What do you have to offer?" I asked Tom. 
"The keys to the kingdom, kid. I can give you 
the access codes for every system on the Pool 
ship. If you can take it, Brother Jake, you and 
your free Hork-Bajir and your new Taxxon allies, 
if you can take it, I can tell you how to fly it. Not 
only that, I have a plan to help you get aboard the 
Pool ship. And by the way, your old friend Visser 
One has temporarily transferred his headquarters 
to the Pool ship. The Pool ship and Visser One — 
that's game, set, and match." He grinned at me 
and said, "They'll carve your sanctimonious face 
up on Mount Rushmore, Jake-Boy. You'll be the 
savior of the human race." 
92 
93 

"Thanks for the offer," I said. "I don't think 
so. Ax, take him. Rachel? Help Ax. Carefully!" 
That rocked him for a second or two. Then he 
nodded. "I see: The Andalite's told you he can 
break security." He nodded. "He probably can, 
the Andalites are very good with computers. He'd 
have an hour before the codes shift. He would. 
Except that I've changed the code cycle to fifteen 
minutes." He glared at Ax. "Can you beat fifteen 
minutes, Andalite? Can you do that?" 
The keys were in my hands. 
I could win. We could win. 
If General Doubleday would provide the diver-
sion. If the Taxxons would rally to us. If Tom's 
Yeerk provided us with the access codes. If Tom 
really could get us aboard the Pool ship and we 
could overpower the Yeerks still aboard. And if Ax 
could (and would) find a way to convince his 
people to ratify the promises we'd made to the 
Taxxons and Tom's dissident Yeerk faction. 
Five "ifs." A lot. But at least now the number 
of "ifs" was a finite number. 
A sixth "if": If Tom's Yeerk was telling the 
truth. 
He had asked for no guarantees. Did he trust 
94 
95 

me to keep my word? Would he risk everything on 
my word? True, he knew me through my brother's 
memories. And yet ... and yet .. 
As we flew home, flew home impossibly free 
and alive after spending an hour with a few hun-
dred Taxxons plus one of the highest ranking 
Yeerks, my mind was full of the details. Cassie 
left me alone for a while, but I knew she'd have 
something to say. I knew it. And I knew I had ig-
nored her in the past at my own peril. I knew I 
should listen to her, trust her. 
But I also knew what she'd say, and I didn't 
want to hear it. Just the same, after a while, as 
we flew in the dead night air above the wrecked 
town below, the waiting got to me. 
<Cassie, just go ahead and say it,> I said finally. 
<Say it? You're expecting some moral lecture 
from me about turning Tom's Yeerk and a hun-
dred of his chosen people loose with a fantasti-
cally powerful warship to roam the galaxy? Never 
knowing what suffering he may inflict?> 
<Something like that, yeah.> 
<Because that's me, right? The voice of whin-
ing morality.> 
She sounded bitter. I wasn't surprised. I was 
surprised by what came next. 
<I gave the Yeerks the morphing cube,> she 
said. <Because of that the Taxxons may become 
a force for peace. And Tom, the real Tom, and 
your parents, may be restored to us. And because 
of that, Tom's Yeerk has seen a way to betray his 
own people and become some kind of warlord on 
his own.> 
I took a moment to digest that. She was actu-
ally blaming herself. <Cassie, these things hap-
pen. You can't always predict the results of the 
things you do. You try your best, take your best 
shot, and maybe it comes out right, and maybe it 
comes out . . . I don't know, confused.> 
<Brilliant, isn't it? So I make the decisions, I 
make the big call, sanctimonious little me, I 
make the moral, optimistic decision, and where 
are we?> 
<Better off than we were,> I said, but I was 
only half-listening now. An alarm bell was going 
off in my head. Why? What was the problem? 
What was it? 
<And some species we don't know about is 
maybe doomed when a Blade ship full of morph-
ing Yeerks descends on them.> 
<It's never completely clean, Cassie. Doesn't 
work that way. But you try your best to keep it 
clean. The fact that you know you'll be dragged 
in the gutter doesn't mean you don't try like hell 
to stay out of it. You don't get a lot of straight-up 
good or evil choices. You get shades of gray. I 
mean, we started this war thinking we'd hold on 
till the great and glorious Andalites came to res-
96 
97 

cue us. Now we're making deals with Taxxons 
and Yeerks to gain a victory fast enough to keep 
the great and glorious Andalites from making 
their own shades-of-gray decision.> 
<What are you going to do?> Cassie asked. 
<I'm going to win,> I said. But I didn't be-
lieve it. Why? It was all there. It was all possible 
at least. 
Of course Tom's Yeerk was lying in part. I was 
sure he was not interested in turning nothlit, that 
was a joke. The morphing cube was almost surely 
on board the Blade ship, and the Blade ship had 
its own small Yeerk pool facility. So of course he 
was lying about that. 
But just as surely, he was telling the truth 
about wanting to seize the Blade ship and go into 
business for himself. 
Tom. The Yeerk in his head. Had to believe 
him, after all, he'd known where we were, he ob-
viously knew about Arbron, he could very easily 
have called in every Hork-Bajir-Controller on the 
planet and taken us down. 
He'd had us right in the palm of his hand, 
and let us go. Had to trust that. Didn't I? 
Yeah. But why did he trust me? Why did he 
trust me? 
Trust breeds trust, right? Tom's Yeerk had 
shown he could be trusted, so he trusted us in re-
turn? Trusted me to get him all he wanted, all I'd 
agreed to? 
No. No, that wasn't it. Tom's Yeerk wanted us 
to believe we could trust him. He didn't ask for 
assurances or cross-examine me because he 
didn't want me doing the same to him. 
Then I saw it: Of course. I'd been looking at 
nothing but tactics; I'd overlooked emotion. The 
emotion of a vengeful Yeerk. He despised Visser 
One for being a failure, for being a brute, for re-
fusing to promote him. "As long as... ," Tom had 
started to say. 
Yes. Visser One was not the only person Tom's 
Yeerk hated. Someone else was to blame for forc-
ing this choice on an ambitious Yeerk. 
Me. My friends. We were responsible for forc-
ing this choice on Tom's Yeerk. In frustrating 
Visser One we had doomed Tom's Yeerk. 
That was why Tom's Yeerk didn't ask for reas-
surances from us. He expected us to be dead. He 
would kill Visser One and us and sail off across 
the galaxy in the Blade ship with the morphing 
cube in his hands. 
It came to me all at once that I could beat 
him. Use him and beat him. 
One of those rare, perfect moments when a 
dozen nagging questions, an infinity of details, 
simply fall perfectly into place and form a single 
clear picture. 
98 
99 

It took my breath away. The perfection of it. 
The pure, ruthless perfection of it. 
All I had to do was send my friends to die. 
Cassie was still talking to me, but I didn't 
hear her words. I had seen the vision. I could see 
the pure, straight line from point A to point Z. 
I said, <Marco? Find the Chee. Find them. 
Bring Erek to me.> 
<How am I going to do that?> Marco groused. 
<The Chee hideout is in the blast area. I tried, 
but it's nothing but destruction, you can't even 
tell where the streets used to be. And it's crawl-
ing with Yeerks shooting anything that moves. It 
would be very easy to get myself killed going 
back there.> 
<Yeah, I know. Do it anyway,> I said. <I need 
the Chee.> I felt sick inside. High and low at 
once. Exalted. Twisted. 
What chance was there that Marco would suc-
ceed? What chance that he would survive? 
And worse in store for Rachel. I needed Tobias, 
and could not risk losing Ax. Cassie? No. It had to 
be Rachel. Only she would do it, could do it. 
I had a few small changes to make to Tom's 
plan. The orders came easily, automatically as I 
dispatched my friends, one after the other. Only 
Rachel remained. 
<Rachel, I have a job for you.> 
I explained what I wanted her to do. 
<You're sure, Jake?> she asked solemnly 
when I had finished. <Because if you tell me " 
Go!" I'll follow your orders. You know what that 
means.> 
<Yeah, Rachel, I know what it means.> 
Still she hesitated. <It won't be the Yeerk, 
Jake. It'll be Tom. It'll be him.> 
<I know that,> I said. <And I ... if it hap-
pens, if it comes down that way, I don't have a 
plan for getting you out. You'd be on your own.> 
<That's how I like it.> 
<Okay, then. Get started. Make sure Cassie 
doesn't know.> 
<You still don't trust her?> Rachel said an-
grily. 
<She loves us both, Rachel,> I said. <I can't 
make her part of this. I can't let her know in ad-
vance, so, you know, if it happens, if it happens, I 
don't want her spending the rest of her life won-
dering if she could have stopped it somehow.> 
Rachel said, <Okay, Jake. You're right. And 
you're right to use me for this. Not exactly some-
thing I'm proud of, maybe, but later, you know, 
if — don't be blaming yourself, okay?> 
She angled her eagle's wings to take the 
wind, and flew away. 
The plan was a fragile thing in my mind, a 
100 
101 

construct of if-then possibilities, of hopes, opti-
mism, and cynicism in equal measure. 
I would use everyone, put everyone in harm's 
way. And I knew knew beyond any doubt— 
that someone, and maybe more than someone, I 
loved was going to die. 
102 
It took all day to get my chess pieces in 
place. The hardest one was Erek the Chee. 
Marco found him. He found him after twice 
being spotted and shot by Yeerk forces. But it's 
hard to kill an Animorph. A wounded morph has 
only to demorph to be reconstituted as a whole 
human. 
Of course a dead morph is a dead Animorph, 
and Marco came very close to not making it. 
He was not happy by the time he dragged into 
camp late in the day. I had almost given up hope. 
Erek is a Chee, one of a race of sentient ro-
bots created millennia ago by the Pemalites. The 
Pemalites were gentle, wise, intelligent creatures 
who were obliterated by the Howlers long, long 
103 

ago. The Pemalites believed in peace. And the 
Chee they created, despite being unimaginably 
powerful and equipped with formidable holo-
graphic technology, were incapable of violence. 
This was not to say that the Chee didn't have 
a side in the war. They were our allies. They were 
the ultimate spies, able to pass as humans, as 
they had since arriving on Earth as refugees back 
in the days of the pharaohs of Egypt. 
The Chee had spied for us, hoped we would 
win, but they would not help us kill. They 
couldn't help or cause anyone to kill or even to 
be hurt. I counted on that. 
Erek smiled at me with a human face that 
should belong to a guy my own age. Of course be-
neath the hologram was a machine that looked as 
though it was built of stainless steel and ivory, 
like a stylized dog walking erect. 
"Jake, I'm pleased to see you still alive," Erek 
said. "Pleased to see all of you." 
"And we're relieved to see you, Erek. How are 
the Chee doing?" 
He shrugged. "Well, our house is gone. But 
the underground facility is intact. All our people 
are safe. We've been through worse in five thou-
sand years among your lovely people. I mean, I 
survived the Huns and they were quite unpleas-
ant. The dogs are safe at least." 
The Chee carried on their master's love of ca-
nine forms. They took in stray or lost dogs when-
ever they could. 
"Erek, we need your help." 
"Always glad to help, within the limits of my 
programming," he answered cautiously. 
"We're taking the Pool ship," I said. 
He hesitated, thought that over. "I don't see 
how I'm going to be able to help you. We don't 
have a lot of data on the Pool ship. Nothing you 
don't already know." 
"It's not information we need," I said. "We 
need your skills. We need your active participa-
tion. We need you there." 
His eyes grew dark, a holographic but very 
real-seeming reaction. "I can't do that, Jake. We 
both know there'll be fighting. I can't be part of 
that." 
I took a deep breath, not wanting to say what 
was about to say. "Here's the thing, Erek, I 
know what you can and can't do. So I'm going to 
use that to force your hand. I'm sorry. But we're 
down to it, now. We're right down to it." 
"What are you planning?" He switched off the " 
Erek" holographic facade and revealed his true 
self. Maybe that was to intimidate me. Maybe it 
was just a way of conveying anger. 
"We know you can't fight us. So we're going 
to take you, carry you if we have to, put you in a 
position where you'll cooperate because refusing 
104 
105 

to cooperate will force us to take lives. Your refusal 
to cooperate would be the trigger for killing. 
"Ax? Bring your prisoner." 
I had dispatched Ax and Cassie to take a pris-
oner, a known Controller, a human-Controller. 
Chapman. 
And he was not happy. 
"Ax, if I tell you to kill this Controller, will you 
do it?" I asked him. 
<Yes,> Ax answered truthfully. <He is a rank-
ing Yeerk, an enemy who has done great damage 
to human freedom.> 
"This is low," Erek grated. "This is so far be-
neath you, Jake." 
Weird blackmailing a creature you know is 
physically capable of obliterating you down to 
your individual molecules. Weird trusting that he 
won't, can't, do any such thing. 
"Sorry," I said again. "But we'll keep you in a 
position where every time you refuse to help, we 
take a life. And I'll make you this promise: Your 
help will minimize the casualties." 
Erek said a long string of words I didn't un-
derstand. 
"What?" 
"I was offering you my opinion of your morals 
and your ethics and your sense of decency," Erek 
spat. "I was speaking an ancient Mesopotamian 
dialect known for its wide variety of curse words." 
I nodded. "Tell you the truth, Erek, your being 
mad at me is the least of my problems. Marco? 
Erek is your property. He tries to leave, stop him. 
If he succeeds in leaving, Ax, you'll execute this 
Controller." 
shot a challenging, defensive look at Cassie. " 
Any comment?" 
"No." 
I glared at my friends, all of whom were look-
ing somber. Erek had been with us, an ally, a 
friend, for a long time. "Does anyone have any 
thing to say?" 
No one did. 
"Good. Now, Ax? In addition to keeping an 
eye on our friend, here, it's time for you to phone 
the Andalite fleet. You tell them you succeeded 
in stopping our raid on the Yeerk pool. Tell them 
the Yeerks are all here on Earth like sitting 
ducks. But they can't strike yet because you, 
aristh Aximili, are going to deliver a major Yeerk 
warship right into their laps. You're going to hand 
them an entire, intact Pool ship." 
<You are asking me to lie to my people,> Ax 
said. <The Yeerks have stopped concentrating 
forces on Earth. They are awaiting the construc-
tion of a new Yeerk pool.> 
"I'm not asking you to lie to your people, Ax. 
I'm telling you to. We need them close enough to 
be of use, but we also need to give them a reason 
106 
107 

not to start blasting away at Earth. Call the An-
dalite fleet. Tell them what I've told you to tell 
them. I'm your prince, Ax: Do it." 
I didn't wait to hear his answer. I knew it. Or 
thought I did. 
James and his people came flying in, landed 
and demorphed. "You called?" 
It's always disturbing for me seeing the auxil-
iary Animorphs demorphed. When we still had 
the morphing cube we decided to add some 
members. But it's impossibly complicated and 
time-consuming to make sure each and every 
person is Yeerk-free. So we figured out who the 
Yeerks would have never infested, who they 
would have overlooked: the handicapped. Plenty 
of fully functional human hosts around, why has-
sle with all the drawbacks of dealing with a hand-
icap? 
We knew handicapped kids would be Yeerk-
free. We also knew they'd be even more willing 
than most people to accept a treatment that 
would allow them physical freedom in animal 
form. 
We'd used them. And now they lay there 
rather than standing because for the most part 
they couldn't stand. Or, if they could stand, they 
couldn't see. 
"Yeah, James. We need all your people. As 
you know, we're going after the Pool ship." 
108 
"Yes, I know." 
"It's going to be as dangerous as it gets, and I 
have a very tough assignment for you." 
"Okay, well, you know I'm in. But I'll need to 
talk to the others, see how they feel. I think some 
of them will want to sit this one out. I mean, after 
losing Ray . . . I mean, Jake, some of the young 
ones, you know, some of them are having —" 
"James, we didn't give them morphing power 
so they could have fun flying around. This is 
when we need them. All of them. You under-
stand? You've taken on the role as their leader, so 
lead: I want them all. Every last one." 
"Jake, some of these kids, I mean, they're all 
their families have, you know? They're still just 
starting to deal with Ray's death. It's not like we 
haven't fought. I can't . . ." 
"Look, if we lose this battle it's over, you un-
derstand me?!" I raised my voice to be heard by 
everyone. "If we lose it's over. This is the battle. 
This is the last stand. We lose and here's what 
happens: The Yeerk fleet fights the Andalite fleet. 
If the Yeerks win they'll be free to enslave every 
living human being and kill the ones they don't 
want. If the Andalites win there's a very good 
chance they'll sterilize Earth: kill everything in 
order to end the Yeerk menace once and for all. 
So, you don't like me telling you what to do, you 
don't like your job, you don't like me, period? I 
109 

don't really care. Before this night is over the ca-
sualties will be piled high and some of you stand-
ing here right now will be dead and I don't care 
because we are going to win. Is that clear? We're 
taking that Pool ship and before this night is over 
we'll have Visser One right here." I held up my 
tight-clenched fist. 
I was ranting. I was trembling. I'd never done 
this before. Never put myself forward as some 
kind of Napoleon wannabe. I felt like a jerk. Like 
some kind of nut. My friends must have thought I' 
d lost my mind. But no one said so. 
No one but Marco. "You know, you're turning 
into Rachel." He frowned. "Where is she, any-
way?" 
110 
I was in falcon morph, floating high, high in 
the air, rising on the updraft of warmth that still 
came from the smoldering ashes of the center of 
town. Usually night is a bad time for a peregrine. 
Night air is cold air and cold air is dead air. But 
flying above the black destruction I had all the 
lift I needed. 
I could see the Pool ship, still resting beside the 
crater that had once been the Yeerk pool. Could 
they see me, Visser One and his Yeerks? They could if 
they tried. I wasn't invisible. But they didn't attack, 
didn't send a Bug fighter up to Dracon me. 
Why not? Maybe Tom's Yeerk wasn't ready to 
kill me, yet. 
Or Maybe Visser One saw me, knew what I 
111 

was, and waited, like the spider in his web 
watching the fly. He wanted me to come to him. 
He wanted me as badly as I wanted him. 
Careful what you wish for, Visser. 
Careful what you wish for, Jake. 
I had visited General Doubleday. He was as 
shaken up as anyone I've ever seen, but deter-
mined. 
He'd followed our suggestion, reluctantly at 
first. He'd locked away as many of his men as he 
could. It was ten hours till the first Controller 
reached the point where he couldn't hold out any 
longer. He made a break for it. 
"What did you do?" I had asked him. 
"We warned him once. Gave him a direct or-
der. Then the MP shot him." 
"That must have been tough," I'd said. 
"The MP aimed for a leg shot, but the private 
slipped. Bullet caught him in the head." The 
general held out an empty bottle and showed it 
to me. "This thing crawled out of the man's 
head. Crawled out through the bullet hole." 
A Yeerk lay writhing in the bottle. 
"There's your enemy, General," I'd said. 
Some of the Controllers had tried to work to-
gether to rush the door. Others had waited as 
long as they could. Seventeen percent of the 
general's men had been infested. But now he 
had a strike force of almost a thousand men, 
Yeerk-free. Yeerk-free, and, having seen the en-
emy close-at-hand, they were motivated. 
I'd given him all the details I safely could. 
"They may come after you with Bug fighters — 
that would be the best we could hope for. The 
greater likelihood is that either the Pool ship or 
the Blade ship will attack you directly." 
"I've got what amounts to a scratch battalion, 
a few tanks, a few helicopter gunships. I've seen 
those Bug fighters in action. My men will fight, 
but they can't win." 
"That's right, General, they can't," I said. 
"But if they'll fight, keep up the diversion, we 
can win. I have about a dozen of my people com-
ing to join you. They'll be right out front." 
"With all due respect to your people, son, 
they may be great in hand-to-hand combat, but 
you're guerrilla fighters by nature. Your abilities 
are geared for that kind of warfare. You're asking 
me for a good, old-fashioned cavalry charge, 
here. You're asking me for the Charge of the 
Light Brigade." 
"We need the diversion," I said. "Visser One 
has to believe the Yeerk traitor is telling him the 
truth. So you have to attack, but once the Yeerks 
come after you all you can do is dig in and take 
cover. The Yeerks only have one way of fighting: 
112 
113 

Attack with everything they've got. They'll go 
right after you. Visser One doesn't know tactics; 
he fights with a sledgehammer." 
"If you've got a big enough sledgehammer 
that's all you need, son." 
I was hearing those weary, wry words as I flew 
above the Pool ship. It was a monstrous thing. 
Bigger than an aircraft carrier. More powerful than 
all the forces of humankind combined and multi-
plied a hundredfold. The Dracon cannon on the 
Pool ship could burn a hole through an asteroid. 
But it was a sledgehammer, a great, lumber-
ing beast designed for war in the weightlessness 
of space. And, anyway, if we succeeded it would 
be our sledgehammer. 
I saw movement below. Hork-Bajir patrols. A 
pair of Bug fighters flying a loose figure eight low 
above the desolation. 
Closer in to the Pool ship the Hork-Bajir pa-
trols increased till they formed a solid, shoulderto-
shoulder ring around the ship. Hork-Bajir and 
human-Controller snipers stood atop the engine 
pods. Visser One was taking no chances with his 
crown jewels. 
I wondered what time it was. No way to carry 
a watch, obviously, and I could no longer spot 
bank clocks. They'd all been destroyed. 
I floated and waited. Floated and waited and 
went over my plan again and again. I could see 
holes in it now. I could see nothing but holes. It 
would never work. It would never work. 
I saw movement down below. A pair of Humvees 
approaching an outer ring checkpoint, head-
lights playing on wrecked, charred brick walls 
and burned out cars. Hork-Bajir- and human-
Controller guards checked ID's and passed them 
through. 
Now I didn't need a clock. It was go time. 
I swooped down, diving faster and faster, 
matching speed with the Humvees. I dropped 
through the gaping window of a blackened home 
and out through the far side. That would throw 
off any sensors that might be tracking me. 
I used all my falcon speed and aimed for the 
bouncing rear window of the second Humvee. I 
swooped through, landed hard with a bounce 
against the seat back. 
A human-Controller I didn't know was driving. 
Tom was in the passenger seat. He turned to look 
at me. 
"Very unsettling when you do that," he said. 
<Good,> I answered. 
Cassie appeared to be lying on the backseat, 
handcuffed, ankles bound, a Hork-Bajir sitting be-
side her with a Dracon weapon leveled at her head. 
Her face was bruised. One eye swollen almost 
shut. There were bloody cuts on her arms. Her 
morphing suit was in shreds. 
114 
115 

"Gotta hand it to your girl back there," Tom 
said nonchalantly. "She takes a beating pretty 
well. Hope I didn't get carried away, Jake-boy, 
but it isn't every day I get a chance to pound on 
an Animorph. She didn't cry, didn't say a word. 
Almost took the fun out of it." 
<Shut up, you Yeerk scum,> I snapped. <I 
have to do business with you, but don't push your 
luck. Cassie. Cassie, are you okay?> 
No answer. I didn't expect one. 
"Bruised my fists," Tom's Yeerk said, display-
ing his hand. 
<I said, shut up.> 
"Whatever. Time to get small, Killer Jake. Se-
curity up ahead there." 
I demorphed, made a point of stroking the ap-
parent wounds, made another angry remark to 
Tom's Yeerk for verisimilitude, then went fly. 
Back in morph I used private thought-speak, au-
dible to only one person. <Rachel?> 
<I'm here, Jake.> 
I zoomed around and then headed for Cas-
sie's bruised, battered face. 
As I approached a landing, her swollen eye 
opened slightly. My compound eyes saw a hun-
dred fragmented images of an eye opening. 
And of the steel-and-ivory machine beneath 
the hologram. 
The Humvees approached the wall-to-wall 
line of Hork-Bajir around the Pool ship and came 
to a stop. 
A Hork-Bajir- and a human-Controller stepped 
over to the window like cops getting ready to 
hand out tickets. 
They spotted Tom, and I could hear the for-
mal stiffness in their voices. "Sir, you under-
stand we still need to conduct a thorough search 
and check your identity." 
"You'd better," Tom snarled. "Lax security 
makes me cranky." 
The human-Controller shined a powerful light 
around the inside of the vehicle. He introduced a 
sensor probe that to my fly senses registered as a 
116 
117 

fantastical wizard's wand. I could see energy ra-
diating in wild colors, invisible most likely to hu-
man eyes. 
"I only read two complex life-forms," the 
guard said. "I'm showing several insect readings, 
but only two complex life-forms: yours, sir, and 
the driver's. The prisoner is not registering as a 
Iife-form." 
It was already going bad. What was this new 
sensor? We'd never seen this instrument before. I 
tensed, ready to leap free and demorph. But in 
the enclosed space of the Humvee we were 
trapped, helpless. We wouldn't be able to bring 
our force to bear. 
Tom said, "Well, as much as I respect your 
new toy there, 1 count three: one, two, three." " 
Yes, sir." 
"You can count to three, right?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Do you know what that prisoner is? That's an 
Animorph. You think maybe Visser One would 
like to see her just as soon as possible?" 
"Yes, sir!" 
"As for the insect life-forms, they're endemic 
to this planet. But I'll be sure to use the Gleet 
BioFilter before I enter the ship." 
The guard must have been satisfied because 
moments later we were on the move. I rested 
calmly on a titanium rod that, to me, seemed as 
thick as an oak tree. 
No one said anything for a while, and I could 
see very little with my limited fly senses. 
Then, in a calm, low-pitched voice, Tom said, 
"How's it going, little brother? You still there?" 
<I'm still here,> I said. 
"Good, glad to hear it. And all your little 
friends are there with you?" 
<Shut up, Yeerk,> I snapped. <We work to-
gether because we have to. We don't make small 
talk.> 
Tom's Yeerk laughed. "Oh, you're a surly 
bunch, aren't you? No one talks to me. No one 
but Rachel, who told me to . . . well, you can 
guess what Rachel told me to do." 
<Whatever she said goes for all of us,> I an-
swered. 
"Surly and unpleasant. Oh, well. Time to go 
see the visser. My plan is working perfectly, don't 
you think?" 
Tom thought Cassie was real. And he thought 
all of us were hiding out somewhere on her body. 
His plan was working fine. Ours was working even 
better. 
Another delay. And then, at last, I heard that 
thought-speak voice. 
Visser One. 
118 
119 

<What have we here?> 
"One of the Animorphs, Visser. My people 
captured her and questioned her. Questioned 
her ... forcefully." 
<So I see. Congratulations.> He sounded al-
most annoyed, like he wasn't all that happy to 
see Tom succeed where he had failed. <Have you 
passed through the Gleet BioFilter? I don't want 
any surprises.> 
"Yes, Visser, of course," Tom's Yeerk lied. The 
Gleet BioFilter detects and eliminates nonpri-
mary life-forms — anything "riding" on a human 
or Hork-Bajir body. 
<One of the so-called Animorphs. This one 
would be . . . Cassie, yes?> 
Now I could see him, a mosaic of him, in my 
compound eyes. He loomed close, leering down 
with his mouthless Andalite face, stalk eyes 
widening out. 
Suddenly his tail whipped around and deliv-
ered a slapping blow. Fast. So fast that even 
my fly reflexes would not have saved me. But 
of course the blow never reached me. It was 
stopped by force fields that overlapped the holo-
gram. Just as Tom's torturing blows had been. 
<I would kill her myself,> Visser One grated. 
<The trouble these creatures have caused me.> 
"Perhaps not just yet, Visser," Tom demurred. " 
She may still be useful as bait. Why not hold 
her and hand her over to some worthy, loyal Yeerk 
as a host body?" 
<They are hard to hold on to,> Visser One 
said. <If you even appear to be thinking of morph-
ing you'll die, Animorph. Of course, you're likely 
to die either way.> 
"Cassie" said nothing. 
<But pleasure can wait,> Visser One said. 
<Report what you have learned.> 
Tom clasped his hands behind his back and 
assumed a respectful but casual stance. "The 
Animorphs' leader has made contact with human 
military forces. A combined force of human sol-
diers and Animorphs will attack very soon. The 
goal will be to use the attack as a diversion, to al-
low the Animorphs to infiltrate this ship." 
Visser One laughed. <They would try to take a 
Pool ship? Are they such fools?> 
"Don't forget, they have an Andalite among 
them. They would use his skills to break our se-
curity codes. And there is more, Visser." 
<More? What more?> 
"I .. I'm not certain, Visser, but I believe 
my people may have penetrated a second con-
spiracy, every bit as dangerous." 
<Tell me of —> 
"Visser!" A new voice. Human. I vaguely per-
ceived a human-Controller, a woman. 
<You interrupt me?> 
120 
121 

"With your permission, Visser, this may be the 
report I've been waiting for," Tom said smoothly. 
"Visser ... I apologize for interrupting," the 
woman said, "but a party of Hork-Bajir have ar-
rived at the perimeter with a Taxxon prisoner." 
<A Taxxon prisoner? If some Taxxon is giving 
trouble, kill it, don't waste my time with discipli-
nary matters like this.> 
Tom intervened again. "I believe this is a very 
special Taxxon, Visser. You may choose to hear 
what he has to say." 
Moments later the Taxxon, accompanied by 
Hork-Bajir guards, shuffled and writhed into the 
room. He was a hundred great worms in my com-
pound eyes. But the colors were different. I saw 
the red jelly eyes as an almost psychedelic violet. 
<Well?> Visser One demanded. <I'm not a pa-
tient Yeerk, explain the great mystery here.> 
Tom proceeded to explain his penetration of a 
Taxxon alliance with the Animorphs. The Taxxon, 
straining to form coherent speech with its inade-
quate mouthparts, confirmed the tale. 
"In a matter of moments now, Visser, this 
three-part attack will take place. Human soldiers 
will attack, the Taxxons will destroy the unfin-
ished Yeerk pool, and the Animorphs themselves 
will use the confusion to attempt to penetrate 
this ship." 
Visser One nodded. But was there hesitation 
in his bleary-looking Andalite eyes? No genius, 
maybe, Visser One, but he had an instinct for 
survival. He was moving back and forth, pacing, 
hooves clicking on the deck, stalk eyes wander-
ing randomly. 
Tom said, "If we move swiftly, we will destroy 
all our foes in one swoop. The Pool ship and its 
Bug fighters can quickly eliminate the human 
soldiers, and simply by lifting off we can doom 
the Animorph attempt at infiltration." 
<And what of these treasonous Taxxons?> 
"They must be stopped quickly but carefully: 
We don't want to damage the new Yeerk pool. I 
respectfully suggest, Visser, that I take temporary 
command of your Blade ship and deal with the 
Taxxons personally. Never fear: I will kill only as 
many as I need to, and drive the rest back to 
their labor." 
So, here it is, I thought. The moment of truth. 
The Visser would buy it or not. The silence 
stretched on. Too long. 
Visser One had smelled the rat. 
<I don't like so much good luck,> Visser One 
hissed. <I've fought to seize this planet for years. 
For years! And suddenly now everything falls into 
my hands? I don't trust good luck. For all I know, 
this Animorph, this Cassie creature, has man-
aged to carry her fellow bandits in with her.> 
"But, Visser, the Gleet BioFilter . ." 
122 
123 

<They've beaten the filter before,> Visser One 
shouted. <No! No! There's something wrong 
here, something very wrong. . . . Look how she 
stands there, beaten, whipped, cowed. No, it's 
too easy. And this Taxxon, how can I be sure he, 
too, isn't one of them? They can take any shape. 
How can I be sure?> 
"Very simply," Tom said calmly. "Order the 
Taxxon to eat the Animorph girl. If the Taxxon is 
an Animorph in morph, he will refuse. If not, 
then the girl — and any hidden morphs con-
cealed on her person — will be consumed. Thus, 
we will be sure of both." 
<Yes!> Visser One cried. <Guards, watch 
every corner of this room, shoot anything that 
moves, do you hear me? Anything! Don't wait for 
orders. If they're here they'll try to demorph and 
remorph. Shoot anything! And now, hungry 
brother Taxxon: If you are a true Taxxon, rid us of 
this girl.> 
The Taxxon did not hesitate. It reared up, 
opened its lamprey mouth, and slammed itself 
greedily down, teeth bared. 
"No! No!" Cassie cried. "NOOO!" 
The Taxxon's mouth ripped Cassie apart, 
chewed arms and legs, spilled organs out onto 
the deck of the Pool ship, and finally lifted off 
her head in one fatal bite. 
The voice — really very like Cassie's — 
screamed, cried, begged for mercy. 
Tom waved good-bye. "If you are there by 
some chance, little brother Jake, bye-bye!" 
I saw it all from inside the illusion, for illusion 
it was. "Cassie" was Erek, the Chee. 
Tom had betrayed us, as I knew he would. He 
believed we were all hiding on the true Cassie. 
He believed he had beaten the true Cassie, and 
124 
125 

that she had submitted in order to make her cap-
ture seem real. 
He believed he had now fed her, and me, and 
all of us, to the hunger-mad Taxxon. 
But the Taxxon was no more a Taxxon than " 
Cassie" was the real Cassie. 
Tobias in Taxxon morph gorged on an illusion. 
The Cassie hologram was a horror film directed 
by Erek. Bit by bit he replaced illusions of Cassie 
with illusions of empty space. Until, gory bit by 
gory bit, she was gone, consumed by the Taxxon 
who kept at it until not even a bloodstain was left 
on the ship's deck. 
It would never have fooled a true Taxxon — 
even Chee holograms and force fields cannot pro-
ject taste. But Tobias acted his part to perfection 
and the two Yeerks, Visser One and Tom, bought 
the performance entirely. 
Erek, now visibly nothing but deck, rolled 
away, out of range of any sudden movement by 
Visser One that would reveal his presence. 
<You did good, Erek,> I said. 
He didn't answer. He couldn't. And in any 
case, I knew what his answer would be. I had left 
him no choice. Any failure on Erek's part would 
have been the trigger for my ordering a slaughter. 
Chee programming chose the less violent path. 
<Very good,> Visser One said, laughing. <I've 
lived to see at least one of them die. That was 
126 
very satisfying. Now, go, my good and faithful 
servant: Take the Blade ship. Kill the Taxxon 
rebels for me! Hammer them into submission!> 
"Yes, Visser," Tom said, barely able to con-
ceal his glee. 
He thought he had it all in his grasp, right 
then. His voice gave nothing away, but I knew the 
Yeerk inside my brother's head was triumphant. 
Ecstatic! 
He had killed me. Killed all of us. And now, 
he would take possession of the Blade ship. 
Then, if my guess was right, he'd wait while Visser 
One annihilated General Doubleday's troops, and 
then, when Visser One was least expecting it, 
Tom's Yeerk would strike a surprise blow and de-
stroy the Pool ship itself. 
Tom's Yeerk would be left in command of the 
heavily armed and very fast Blade ship — almost 
surely the hiding place for the morphing cube. 
Tom's Yeerk would take his new command into 
Zero-space to reemerge far, far away with a hard 
core of loyal followers and the power to morph. 
He wouldn't have to stay behind to face the likely 
arrival of the Andalites. He would be safe and in 
control. 
It was a neat plan. And if I had trusted him 
I'd be dead, along with all my friends. 
<Tobias, you okay?> I said. 
<I think I chipped a couple of Taxxon teeth 
127 

munching on Erek's force fields, but yeah, I'm 
good.> 
<Marco? Cassie? Ax?> I called. 
<We're all okay, Jake,> Marco reported. <The 
good thing is that at least this flea morph I'm in 
has no interest in sucking Taxxon blood.> 
<Still no sign of Rachel,> Cassie said. <I 
thought you said she would join us.> 
<I'm sure she's okay,> I said. <Rachel takes 
care of herself. Now, you guys get to work. We 
need navigation control, and we need it as soon 
as possible.> 
Marco said, <Do you think we should even try 
the codes Tom gave us?> 
Ax answered for me. <Since he has, as pre-
dicted, betrayed us, it is likely the so-called 
codes he gave us are not only useless, but may 
well be self-destruct codes.> 
<Ax is right,> I said. <You guys have to do it 
the hard way. Get going.> 
Visser One helped us out inadvertently by or-
dering the Hork-Bajir guards to <Take that filthy 
Taxxon out and eliminate him. He'll give you no 
trouble now that he's been well fed!> 
The Hork-Bajir led the Taxxon away. But neither 
Tobias, nor my friends hiding on his morphed 
form, had any reason to fear. The Hork-Bajir 
guards were Toby and twelve of her people. 
My brother left the bridge of the Pool ship. He 
would be taken by Bug fighter up to the Blade 
ship in orbit. 
The Pool ship lifted off, a slight vibration be-
ing the only evidence. Off the earth to the safety 
of the skies, or so Visser One believed. 
Five Animorphs, twelve free Hork-Bajir, and 
one Chee were now aboard the Pool ship, unsus-
pected. The plan was on track. 
<Doing good, huh, Jake?> Rachel said, her 
thought-speak voice already fading with dis-
tance. 
I couldn't answer. 
128 
129 

The Pool ship rose from the earth, bigger 
than anything human eyes had beheld in the 
skies. Up and up, but not so high yet. 
I could see little of the room with my limited 
senses. Impossible to understand large spaces 
with fly eyes. So I searched out relative darkness. I 
searched out a space where the air motion was 
minimal. I had used the fly morph many times 
before and I was good at interpreting the frac-
tured data of its senses. 
I landed upside down on an almost horizontal 
surface and hung there for a moment, trying to 
assemble a picture of the Pool ship's battle 
bridge. 
It seemed to be an oval in shape, though I 
couldn't be sure. There were dozens of Con-
trollers, mostly Hork-Bajir, with a scattering of 
humans. They sat or stood before glowing display 
screens. Others stood at attention, awaiting the 
visser's orders. 
The visser paced back and forth, nervous or 
just feeling a rush of anticipation, I couldn't 
guess which. 
"There, Visser!" a human voice sang out. " 
Human military forces on the move." 
<On main screen,> Visser One ordered. 
<Magnify.> 
"We have a preliminary estimate. Seven hun-
dred and nine humans. Twelve of the tracked 
ground vehicles the humans call tanks, Visser. 
Nineteen rotary wing vehicles. Threat analysis: 
minimal." 
I could see the main view screen. It was up-
side down from my perspective, and a dizzying 
array of weirdly distorted colors, but I could 
make it out. I could see what Visser One could 
see: General Doubleday's forces, moving forward 
through the burned debris below, still moving 
forward, following orders, despite the fact that 
their target, their objective, the Pool ship now 
hovered a thousand feet over their heads. 
A Hork-Bajir voice jumped in. "They were de-
ployed to attack us on the ground, Visser. They 
seem at a loss." 
130 
131 

<Brilliant insight,> the visser said with acid 
sarcasm. 
"Now showing fixed wing aircraft on approach," 
another human voice said calmly. "Nine total." 
"Visser, I recommend allowing the Bug fight-
ers to take out the aircraft. We can use our Dra-
con cannon on widest possible dispersion and 
destroy all the ground forces with a single sus-
tained shot." 
<Yes,> Visser One said. Then, sounding al-
most regretful at being cheated of a real battle, 
he said, <Simple creatures. Did they really imag-
ine they would accomplish anything?> 
Where were Erek and Ax? Surely it had been 
long enough. Surely the Chee had penetrated 
Yeerk security by now. We should have control of 
navigation. I didn't want to bother them, they 
were surely doing their best. But neither could I 
watch wholesale slaughter of the troops on the 
ground and do nothing. 
"Dracon cannon configured, Visser. Permis-
sion to fire?" 
If they fired the main Dracon cannon on 
widest dispersion it would not kill the men on the 
ground quickly. It would kill them slowly. They 
would cook. They would grow warmer and warmer, 
as the diluted Dracon energy heated them up. 
Hotter. Hotter till some began to pass out. Others 
would go crazy as their brains fried. And then the 
men, those already dead and those who still 
clung to life, would burn. 
"Visser!" 
<Yes, what is it?> 
"Visser . . . the display ... I believe there are 
morphs down there with the attacking human 
troops." 
The viewscreen veered wildly, rushing in for a 
close-up like someone taking home video. 
I clearly saw a lioness loping along, a squad of 
soldiers hurrying beside it, weapons at the ready. I 
could see faces as they looked up fearfully at the 
Pool ship. Some stopped to fire up at us. 
Another morph, a rhino came lumbering into 
view. It was comical. Pitiful. Men with guns and 
a handful of fugitives from a zoo trying to attack 
a ship that could blow asteroids out of the sky. 
<The rest of the Animorphs!> the visser cried 
gleefully. <Hah hah hah! I guess they're having a 
hard time infiltrating my ship, eh?> 
Nervous, toadying laughter all around. Some-
one reported that Tom had reached the Blade 
ship. The Blade ship was reporting readiness to 
join the attack. 
<Yes, yes, tell him to go deal with the Taxxons. 
This, however, is all mine,> Visser One crowed. 
Then, in a much different tone, almost wistful, 
132 
133 

<How long I have waited for this moment. The 
bandits out in the open, targeted, on-screen, un-
able to escape . . .> 
"Permission to fire Dracon cannon?" 
<No, no, cancel wide dispersion,> the visser 
ordered. <I want to see them burn, one by one. 
Move us in. Use narrow beam. Forget the human 
soldiers, they're irrelevant. Rid me of these Ani-
morphs, one by one. Close-up! Maximum magni-
fication. Let me see them die!> 
I couldn't be patient any longer. <Ax? Marco? 
What is keeping you?> I cried. 
<Had a fight,> Marco answered. I could hear 
the pain in his thought-speak voice. 
At that same moment a new report reached 
the bridge. "Visser! Casualties in engineering!" a 
Hork-Bajir voice said. 
<What is it? Another plasma explosion?> 
Visser One asked. 
"No, Visser, all engines are nominal. All sys-
tems are nominal." 
<Well, find out what's happened down there 
then,> Visser One said, sounding petulant rather 
than concerned. <Now target the morphs. Begin 
firing.> 
"Firing," the neutral voice reported. 
The shot caught the hindquarters of the rhi-
noceros. For a horrifying moment the front legs 
kept running. The creature — a girl named Tri-
cia — toppled forward, dug its horn into the dirt, 
rolled over, and was dead. 
<Hah hah! Good shot! They burn well, these 
Animorphs!> 
I felt sick inside. I should do something. I 
should stop this. That was the auxiliary Ani-
morphs down there on the ground dying. Burning. 
<No, no, you have to lead them a bit. Look! 
You can get two at ... good shot!> 
<Marco,> I pleaded. <Marco, they're killing 
James's people.> 
<Erek's doing his best, so is Ax,> Marco an-
swered. 
<How long?> 
A moment's pause while Marco queried the 
Chee and the Andalite. 
<Three minutes,> he said at last. 
It was a death sentence. Three minutes. More 
than enough time for the sharpshooters on the 
bridge. Too much time. 
They fired. 
If I demorphed here I'd be seen. Nowhere to 
hide. I'd be shot. Killed. Accomplish nothing. 
Couldn't die. I was in charge. It was my plan. 
No time for gestures. Win, that was all I had to 
do: Win. 
Visser One said, <Look, it's trying to repair it-
self by demorphing. Get it now! No, fool! There. 
Yes!> 
134 
135 

"We're taking fire, Visser. The fixed wing air-
craft have launched missiles." 
<Destroy them,> Visser One said, too dis-
tracted by the murder of Animorphs to care 
overly much about minor matters. 
The Hork-Bajir voice spoke again. "Confirm 
casualties in engineering, Visser. One Hork-Bajir. 
He appears to have suffered some sort of animal 
attack." 
That news made the visser sit up and listen. 
He spun his stalk eyes around to the speaker. 
<What?> 
I used the moment to push off and swoop 
down. I landed between his stalk eyes. Ax had 
admitted it was one of the very few spots on an 
Andalite's body that he cannot easily see. I 
rested very still on Visser One's head. The stalks 
were like snakes to me, impossibly thick, but 
flexible, bending this way and that, high over my 
head. The eyes floated up there, glaring daggers 
at the Hork-Bajir crewman. 
<Animal attack?> Visser One grated. 
Then, another human-Controller reported in, " 
Visser, we've contacted engineering and they 
are responding that everything is normal. The 
wounded Hork-Bajir was a disciplinary matter." 
Of course: Someone down in engineering, one 
of my friends, had morphed and was now passing 
as a Yeerk crew member. 
<Don't bother me with any more disciplinary 
matters,> Visser One said. <There! Look! An-
other morph! Get it! Get it!> 
<Marco!> I yelled. <It's now or never!> 
<You missed! No, wait, there, he burns! He 
burns!> 
"Visser, that appears to be the last of the 
morphs." 
<Ah, well, all good things must end,> Visser 
One said. <But it was a good ending. Be sure to 
save the recorded data — I will wish to play that 
scene over and over again. Now, set Dracon can-
non for wide dispersal, let's end this game.> 
"Dracon cannon configured, Visser." 
<Fire.> 
"Firing." 
<Ah, the humans have begun to notice, eh? 
Ah hah hah! Look how they squirm!> 
"They will suffer one hundred percent casual-
ties in thirty seconds." 
<Marco!> I cried. 
<Got it!> he answered. 
<Then do it! Now!> 
<They burn, they burn!> the visser exulted. 
Finally, "Visser, the helm is not answering." 
<What do you mean the helm is not answer-
ing? We're drifting off-target! Get us back over 
the target!> 
"Helm is unresponsive, Visser!" 
136 

He bounded over to the helmsman's position 
and seized the controls himself. I had a perfect 
view. <Engineering! That fool in engineering 
must have . . .> 
I could practically see the wheels turning in 
his brain. I could almost see the thought process, 
as one by one the clues fell into place. 
<They are on board!> Visser One said, aghast. 
<They're here. They're on board! They sacrificed 
the girl and used her as a Trojan horse!> 
He still hadn't quite gotten it, but he was get-
ting there. He still had not figured out that Tom 
had betrayed him. 
"Visser, we appear to be heading toward a low 
orbit" 
<I can see that!> Visser One raged. <Do we 
still have communications?> 
"Yes." 
<Then raise the Blade ship. Order it to ap-
proach. If necessary it can fire to disable our en-
gines.> 
It was almost too perfect. Visser One was ac-
tually going to invite Tom to approach. He was all 
but sealing his own doom. 
<I want every Hork-Bajir who can stand to 
meet me outside engineering,> Visser One said. 
He was trembling, I could feel it so clearly. I 
savored his fear and rage. I had watched, help-
less, while he murdered James and his people. 
Watched while he gloated. 
Now I wanted him to feel afraid. 
<This ends now,> Visser One said harshly. 
And silently I replied, Yes, it does. 
138 
139 

I hunkered down and held on as Visser One 
raced through the Pool ship. Hork-Bajir flocked 
to him, fell into step behind him. Down gloomy 
hallways, across open, hangarlike spaces, and 
then cramming into seemingly endless stair-
wells. Descending, always descending. 
<Marco! Cassie! We're on our way down 
there. Visser One and a whole bunch of his 
people.> 
I was beginning to understand why it had 
taken Marco, Cassie, Tobias, Ax, and Erek so 
long. Engineering was quite a distance from the 
bridge. 
Three corridors converged together at a pair 
of wide blast doors. Hork-Bajir- and human-
Controllers pressed close together. 
<Dracon weapons on medium power,> Visser 
One ordered. <When the door opens begin firing. 
Fire until your power cells run dry, do you under-
stand me?> 
"Visser, there are surely some of our own 
people still alive in —" 
The visser spun, whipped his Andalite tail, 
and decapitated the Hork-Bajir who had inter-
rupted him. 
<Medium power won't damage the machinery 
but it will kill every living thing in there! You! All 
of you, form three rows right here. First row of 
Hork-Bajir kneels, second row of humans stands, 
third row of Hork-Bajir fires above the heads of 
row two. Am I clear?> 
He was clear. And if he wasn't, no one was go-
ing to say anything. 
I spotted Toby, recognizable only by virtue of 
the fact that she was a bit shorter than the aver-
age Hork-Bajir female. Presumably her compan-
ions were in the crowd as well. 
I called to my friends. <Hey, guys, they're go-
ing to fire blind. They'll saturate the room with 
Dracon beams on medium setting, kill every-
thing. Are you ready?> 
<Yep. We're good,> Marco reported. 
140 
141 

I launched, flew down and away, zipping 
through rapidly shuffling legs. The visser's troops 
were forming up, strangely reminiscent of the 
kind of array you'd have seen in the 
Revolutionary War. They might as well have 
been redcoats ready to fire volleys. 
<Open the doors,> Visser One ordered. 
The blast doors slid open on the main engi-
neering station, a semicircle not so different 
from the bridge itself. But the room was on a 
vastly larger scale, as much as ten stories tall, 
dominated by three huge pillars of something 
that looked like glowing red clay. 
The instant the doors opened the three close-
packed ranks of Hork-Bajir and humans began 
firing. They poured energy into that room. There 
were cries from Hork-Bajir, humans, and Taxxons 
within, quickly silenced. 
<Keep firing!> Visser One urged. <Assault 
teams ready. As soon as I order the firing to stop, 
rush the room!> 
I flew away from the scene, propelled by a tail 
wind of hot air coming from the oven that was en-
gineering. 
Down a corridor, left down a side hall. 
<In here,> Ax said. A small door slid open. 
I zoomed through and the door slid shut be-
hind me. I demorphed and stood facing Ax, 
Marco, Cassie, and Tobias. 
"Well, Jake," Marco said cheerily. "Imagine 
meeting you here." 
<There is a very convenient conduit pipe 
leading away from engineering,> Ax said. <We 
had no trouble getting away. Though a few more 
seconds' time would not have been resented.> 
"Yeah, you don't want to be in engineering 
right now," I said. I fought a desire to sit down. 
No time to rest. No time to show them how I felt. " 
Erek stayed in engineering?" 
<He'll be safe,> Tobias said. <It would take a 
full-power, sustained Dracon blast to hurt him.> 
"What happened on the ground?" Cassie asked. 
"I don't know if Tom went after the Taxxons or 
not," I said evasively. 
"No, I mean the men on the ground. The sol-
diers. James's people," Cassie clarified, knowing 
perfectly well that I'd deliberately misunderstood 
her question. 
"I think we were fast enough to save most of 
the soldiers," I said.. "James's people ... I don't 
think many of them made it." 
Cassie grabbed my arm. "Jake, was Rachel 
down there with them?" 
"No." 
"Then where is she? Why isn't she with us? 
Why won't you tell me?" 
I sighed. No way to avoid it any longer. "She's 
with Tom." I wanted to keep my eyes on the floor. 
142 
143 

Cassie was Rachel's best friend. Tobias, her 
boyfriend, if that term could apply to a hawk. I 
couldn't look at either of them. 
"Oh, Jake . . ." Cassie cried. 
<You son of a . . .> Tobias began. <You arro-
gant, ruthless . . . What have you done? What 
have you done?!> 
"I can't let him get away," I said dully. "Tom's 
Yeerk . . . A Blade ship, probably the morphing 
cube? You were right, Cassie, I can't let that hap-
pen." 
"Had to be," Marco said quietly. My friend 
Marco had seen the same necessity I had seen. 
He didn't like it any more than I did, but he saw 
the need, the inevitability. 
"There has to be some other way," Cassie 
whispered. 
<Erek will not help us gain access to the 
weapons systems,> Ax said. <He has degraded 
the helm controls so that this ship can be kept 
flying but cannot effectively be brought into any 
action. It is as if someone were trying to control 
the flight of the Pool ship with an oar. The Pool 
ship will enter orbit and not leave it until the 
Yeerks can perform a major system overhaul re-
quiring many hours. The Pool ship is useless as a 
weapons platform, except perhaps for one or two 
quick shots.> 
"Which we can't take because we can't ac-
cess weapons controls. Our blackmail only goes 
so far," Marco agreed. "Erek's down to core pro-
gramming, no discretion: He cannot enable a 
major weapons system. Flat cannot. We'll be sit-
ting ducks if Tom turns the Blade ship against 
us, and we all know that's his plan." 
I exploded. "It's not Tom! It's not Tom, don't 
call him that. It's the Yeerk in his head. It's the 
Yeerk, not my brother!" 
No one even looked shocked at my reaction. 
No one was in his right mind at that moment. To-
bias hated me, hated me, I could feel it, and I 
hated myself. 
Had to be another way. I couldn't kill Rachel. 
Not my cousin Rachel, not after all the times she 
had saved my life. 
"One chance and one chance only," I said. 
"You said it, Ax: one or two quick shots, if we had 
access to weapons. One or two shots, maybe we 
could disable the Blade ship." 
"We don't have access to weapons," Marco 
pointed out. 
I nodded. "Yeah. But Visser One does." 
"Use Visser One to disable the Blade ship?" 
Marco frowned. 
I took a couple of deep breaths. Tried to fo-
cus. There was a clock in my brain going tick 
tock, tick tock, time's up. Had to stick to the plan. 
"It's time," I said. "I have to call Toby." 
145 

I began to morph tiger. I needed the morph 
and more importantly, I needed the thought-
speak. 
<Don't let her die,> Tobias said quietly. <Find 
a way, Jake. Don't you let her die.> 
Once I was ready I called to Toby. <Toby, 
we're on track and on schedule. By now the bulk 
of available shock troops are in the engineering 
section, along with Visser One. Get into position: 
Close the engineering doors and shoot anything 
that tries to get out. And Toby, hold that position, 
no matter what. To the last person, Toby.> 
"Anyone who can morph can escape that 
room," Cassie pointed out. "And Visser One can 
morph. He can get past Toby's people and take 
them from behind." 
I nodded. <Yeah. But he won't go after Toby's 
people. He'll come after us because he'll know 
we're after his precious bridge.> 
"He doesn't even know we're here," she said. 
<Battle morphs, everyone. Let's inform Visser 
One of our presence.> 
e blew out of that room and tore down the 
corridor, heading directly away from engineering. 
Heading, in fact, for the pool itself. 
After all the pent-up watching and waiting it 
was good to have claws and teeth and enemies to 
face. 
From time to time as we went, lone Hork-Bajir-
or human-Controllers spotted us. Most ran and 
survived. Others did not run. A small patrol of 
what had to be some sort of Yeerk military police 
stood and did battle with us. They slowed us for 
only a few seconds. 
We were moving almost too easily, encounter-
ing almost too little resistance. Visser One had to 
146 
147 

learn of our presence. He had to rush from the 
battle in engineering to confront a greater threat. 
There were guards at the entrance to the pool 
itself, a pair of Hork-Bajir talking nervously about 
the distant firefight in engineering. 
I was on the first one before he could yell. I 
carried him down with the momentum of my leap 
and slapped him with the kind of blow that only a 
tiger can deliver. 
Ax took out the other guard and, all at once, we 
were in the holy of holys, the pool itself. It was 
perfectly round, dimly lit, under a low ceiling. It 
was a gray steel swimming pool lined with cages 
where uncooperative host bodies were kept while 
their Yeerks soaked up nutrients. The cages held 
maybe twenty or twenty-five humans and Hork-
Bajir, all temporarily Yeerk-free. 
I hadn't considered the possibility of freeing 
hosts. <Marco! The cages!> 
<On it, man,> he said happily. 
A Hork-Bajir voice cried, "Andal ite!" 
A gaggle of unprepared human-Controllers 
began to charge at us, drawing Dracon weapons 
but afraid of firing here in the sanctuary. 
We blew through them before they could 
make up their minds. A pair of Taxxons, evidently 
not members of Arbron's group, came slithering 
out to do battle. Cassie and Tobias tore one up 
badly enough that his brother would finish him 
off. 
More Hork-Bajir. A slashing, close-in battle, 
and we were away again. 
Now the word would reach Visser One. I 
hoped. Hoped. He had to come to the bridge. If 
he stayed in engineering he would turn the tide 
of battle against Toby's people. 
Ax said, <Prince Jake! Inside that booth, 
those must be controls for the pool.> 
<Yeah?> I didn't get it. 
<They must occasionally repair the pool it-
self,> Ax said. <That would mean draining it.> 
<Let's go!> 
A bonus. Another new element. Was that a 
good thing or a bad thing? 
Good. Good. Maybe. I knew the way the plan 
played out, knew what would happen. Rachel. 
Tom. Inevitable. 
Maybe new elements, maybe the freed pris-
oners, maybe this new opening, maybe the in-
evitable need not occur. 
Maybe we could save her. 
The booth Ax had spotted looked absurdly 
like a toll-collector's booth on the highway. It was 
clear plastic and perched just above the pool, 
jutting slightly out. There was a single Hork-Bajir 
inside. There were eight Hork-Bajir outside, un-
148 
149 

armed but ready for trouble, ready to stand and 
fight. 
No time to think, attack! 
Ax and I raced straight at them. I slashed and 
opened my nearest foe from belly to neck. Ax's 
tail whipped. Cassie came bounding up behind 
us and launched herself into the battle. 
But the area was too narrow, we were 
hemmed in. Like being shoved down inside a 
blender set on puree. The Hork-Bajir were all 
around us, beating us down, slashing, cutting, 
pounding, tearing at us with their clawed feet. 
No way to get free! I couldn't strike without 
hitting Ax who was shoved hard against me. 
And then, on my back, snarling but helpless, I 
saw a Hork-Bajir leap high over my head and 
land like a mosh-pit surfer on my tormentors. 
The prisoners! One of the Hork-Bajir prison-
ers Marco had released. 
Marco was there now, too, but most of all, it 
was the freed prisoners. They turned the tide, at-
tacking their tormentors with awesome rage. 
Ax was on his hooves again, bloody, hurt, but 
well enough to swing his tail and cut the lock to 
the control booth. 
A gorilla yanked the door open and said, <Hi, 
there! You want to live? Then lie down right 
now!> He grabbed the unresisting Hork-Bajir and 
threw him out into the fracas. 
Then Marco held the door open like a hotel 
doorman and grinned a rubbery gorilla grin. 
<Gentlemen?> 
Ax pushed past me, began punching at active 
screens and arrays of controls. 
<There is a flush sequence,> he said. <I have 
to override the safety protocols.> 
He turned his stalk eyes to me even as his 
main eyes guided swift, nimble fingers. 
<It can be done.> 
<Okay,> I said. 
<The pool is full to capacity. These are the 
Yeerks that were rescued from the earth-based 
Yeerk pool. Plus the bulk of the unhosted Yeerks 
recently transported here.> 
<Some reason you're telling me all this, Ax-
man?> 
<Jake, there are seventeen thousand, three 
hundred seventy-two Yeerks in this pool.> 
That rocked me. 
Visser One had to know we were here, on the 
loose. He had to run for the bridge and not stay 
to win the fight in engineering. 
Seventeen thousand. Living creatures. Think-
ing creatures. How could I give this order? Even 
for victory. Even to save Rachel. How could I give 
this kind of order? 
They could have stayed home, I thought. No 
150 
151 

one had asked them to come to Earth. Not my 
fault. Not my fault, theirs. 
No more than they deserved. 
Aliens. Parasites. Subhuman. 
<Flush them,> I said. 
The Pool ship's main pool went through its 
standard cleaning cycle, draining the gray, 
sludgy water out into the vacuum of space. 
The water, and the parasite creatures within 
it, froze instantly. The pool became an ice cloud 
falling away from the slow-moving Pool ship. 
How many had Ax said? Seventeen thousand 
and . . . how many? How many Yeerks had felt the 
sudden stab of terror as they realized what was 
happening? 
Frozen now. Crystals. An orbiting graveyard. 
<Let's go,> I said. 
We ran from that place, ran from thoughts of 
what we'd done. Ran for the bridge. His fault, it 
152 
153 

was Visser One's fault, all of it. Who had started 
this war? Not us. We hadn't asked for it. 
It was him. Him and his filthy, subhuman, 
parasitic race. 
His fault. Not mine. Not mine. 
He was on the bridge when we got there, our 
old enemy. Visser One and a handful of Con-
trollers, human and Hork-Bajir. But he seemed 
almost alone. 
The main view screen showed a cloud of 
sparkling ice shards. 
Visser One watched it, almost oblivious to us, 
though he surely knew we were there. Finally, he 
turned, and looked at me with all four of his An-
dalite eyes. 
<So,> he said almost softly, <still not dead.> 
<No, Visser. Not quite dead.> 
<You're the one called Jake, aren't you? The 
brother of my security chief's host body.> 
<That's me.> 
He nodded slightly. He motioned toward the 
view screen as the picture changed. <As you see, 
my Blade ship is approaching.> 
<I don't think they'll be much help to you, 
Visser.> 
<No. It took me a while to see what had hap-
pened. But I see it now. The Blade ship will at-
tack, and I am helpless, unable to control this 
ship.> He laughed mirthlessly. <Only a traitor 
could have beaten me. I was not beaten by you, 
human, or by your pet Andalite there. I was un-
done by my trusting nature.> 
Marco laughed then stopped himself. 
<Only another Yeerk could have beaten me, 
and then only by the lowest treason. I was not 
beaten by you. Never by you.> 
<Visser, you can still get off one or two shots 
at the Blade ship. Take out his engines.> 
<Yes, we will try that very thing,> he said 
dryly. <But you see, someone is bleeding power 
out of the Dracon beams. Power is being di-
verted. One of the traitors at work, I suppose. We 
will get off one or two shots, but at one-quarter 
strength. Will they be enough? Unlikely.> 
<Erek!> I raged in private thought-speak. 
<Stop draining power from the Dracon beams!> 
No answer of course. 
<Erek, I know you think you're doing the right 
thing, but you're making it worse!> 
Visser One sighed. <My one consolation is 
that when the traitor murders me with my own 
ship, it will at least finally be the end of you!> 
"Targeting the Blade ship's starboard engine. 
We are ready to fire," one of the humans re-
ported. 
Visser One waved a lazy hand. <Fire.> 
On the screen I saw the beam reach out 
through space. Once. Twice. Both missed. 
154 
155 

The Blade ship reacted swiftly to avoid the 
slow retargeting of the Pool ship's big Dracon 
cannon. 
The Blade ship fired. The explosion reverber-
ated through the ship. 
"Engine number one is destroyed, Visser." 
The Blade ship fired again. Again. 
Two more explosions. 
"We are without propulsion, Visser." 
<Yes. I noticed that,> Visser One said. <No 
engines. And all our brothers in the pool 
murdered by these humans.> 
"We are being hailed." 
<Of course,> Visser One muttered. <By all 
means. We must play it out.> 
It was Tom's face that appeared on the 
screen. And Tom's voice that spoke. But the 
smug, hard, derisive tone was that of a Yeerk. 
"You seem to be experiencing some engine 
trouble, Visser," Tom gloated. 
<The Empire will track you down and kill you, 
you do understand that, I hope?> 
"Oh, I doubt it. I think the Empire will have 
its hands full," Tom's Yeerk said cheerfully. "The 
Andalite fleet is rather close by. It's possible that 
I misled you on that point." 
Then he caught sight of me. 
His face paled. His eyes went wide. All at 
once, he knew. 
"You're not dead!" 
<I noticed the same thing,> Visser One said 
dryly. 
Tom snapped an order to his crew. "Bring us 
around to target the Pool ship's bridge. Do it! 
Now! Now! Bring us around!" 
<Jake,> Tobias said, pleading, knowing, but 
pleading anyway. 
<Rachel . .> I said. <Go.> 
156 
157 


