
Ax has a secret.... 
Clouds covered the moon. I took advantage of the almost total 
darkness and quickly morphed a raccoon. I was able to leave the 
camp without any Hork-Bajir or human spotting me. An adult 
female raccoon with a piece of alien technology wedged in her 
mouth. . . . 
As soon as I reached what I considered to be a safe distance, 
I removed the Z-space transponder from my mouth and activat-
ed it. . . . 
After a short delay, there was a response. . . . 
<Aximilli-Esgarrouth-lsthill?> 
<Yes.> I gave the password to clear the channel for communi-
cation. 
<Report,> came the curt command. 
<lt is just as you predicted,> I told Jaham-Estalan-Forlan, a war 
prince and chief of the Andalite military. <The human resistance is 
rapidly- losing its effectiveness. There is infighting. Tensions. 
Discipline is breaking down.> 
<They know nothing of our previous communications?> 
<They know nothing,> I confirmed. . . . 

<Heads up. Something's definitely going 
down.> Rachel, in bald eagle morph, braked and 
swooped and circled. 
James, in peregrine falcon morph, followed, 
circling almost in tandem with Rachel. 
That kind of close formation flying was a mis-
take. 
Different species of birds of prey do not typi-
cally fly together, especially in synchronized mo-
tion. 
I was in northern harrier morph, several feet 
above my companions and hanging back. Trying 
to keep a reasonable distance between us in case 
we were being observed from the ground. 
1 
OCR by Nihtelek 

I wondered if Rachel would rebuke James. He 
was new and sometimes made minor mistakes. 
But Rachel was too eager to pursue her inves-
tigation into what was taking place on the ground 
below to correct James. 
I, too, said nothing to James. Of all the Ani-
morphs, I had been most opposed to our recruit-
ing handicapped young humans to be warriors 
alongside us in our fight against the Yeerks. So 
far, the overall performance of James and the 
others had set my mind somewhat at ease. 
Still, I was uncomfortable treating James and 
his team as a true part of the resistance. 
And even after all this time on my adopted 
planet, Earth, I was acutely aware of being an 
outsider. The only Andalite, the only alien in our 
band of guerrillas. Though on several occasions I 
had spoken my mind, on many others I had hesi-
tated to do so. 
I had no real authority over James or Rachel. 
They were likely to reject any instructions or di-
rectives from me. 
Rachel, because she listened to no one but 
Jake, and then, often with barely concealed re-
sentment. And James, because he acted as 
leader and to some degree protector, of the seven-
teen new recruits. James was Jake's lieutenant. 
Jake is our leader. He had sent the three of us 
2 
on a reconnaissance mission. We were to make 
note of what was happening in the city and report 
back to our base of operations. The secret Hork-
Bajir camp. 
I doubt that Jake had anticipated anything as 
dramatic as what I saw below me. It appeared 
that the city was under military occupation. 
Police, uniformed military men and women, 
and official trucks and cars blocked off many 
streets. 
Drivers were being stopped and asked to exit 
their cars. Then they were taken to join the 
crowds of people being diverted into train sta-
tions at gunpoint. 
<What's going on?> James asked. <Are those 
people being protected, or persecuted? Evacu-
ated for their own protection? Or being taken 
prisoner?> 
<l can't tell,> Rachel answered. <That's the 
problem when the good guys and the bad guys all 
look alike. It's hard to know who's an uninfested 
human and who's a Controller. This war gets 
more complicated every day.> 
I agreed with Rachel's statement. 
My name is Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill. It is my 
real name. The others do not use their real names, 
though at this point, they could do so without in-
creasing the danger of discovery. 
3 

Our identities are known now to our enemies. 
We have been exposed. The danger could not get 
any nearer, clearer, or greater. 
Furthermore, our best weapon, the blue box, 
has fallen into the hands of the enemy. They now 
have the same Andalite morphing technology as 
we do. 
It has always been difficult to distinguish hu-
mans from human-Controllers. At least at a 
glance. Now it is also difficult to distinguish real 
animals from morphed human-Controllers. 
I don't think I'm doing a very good job of ex-
plaining our situation. 
Jake is very good at explaining. 
I will try again. 
A race of aliens that resemble large slugs has 
invaded Earth. The aliens are called Yeerks. 
Since the Yeerks have no useful bodies of 
their own — no means of movement, virtually no 
sensory abilities —they search out host bodies. 
They are parasites. 
The human and the Yeerk coexist. But the re-
lationship is far from symbiotic. The Yeerk is in 
total control. 
The Yeerks' plan is to use Earth as a hub 
planet. Here they can potentially acquire mil-
lions of host bodies. A massive force of human-
Controllers will enable them to effectively push 
out into other galaxies. 
4 
The Yeerks have already enslaved other 
species to use as hosts. For example, the Hork-
Bajirand the Taxxons. 
Hork-Bajir have excellent bodies for pur-
poses of combat. They are seven feet tall with 
blades on their elbows and knees, foreheads 
and wrists. They somewhat resemble the long 
extinct reptilian creatures humans call di-
nosaurs. 
Taxxon bodies are large and unwieldy, like a 
massive sack of guts. They possess hundreds of 
centipedelike arms and legs. Their mouths are 
rimmed with razor-sharp teeth. Their eyes are red 
and gelatinous. 
Because of their voracious hunger, Taxxons 
are excellent at instilling terror. Once they sense 
blood, they cannot be turned back, even if it 
means their own deaths. They are driven by a rav-
enous hunger that never, ever abates. 
It is difficult sometimes not to pity them. 
Of course, the bodies the Yeerks covet the 
most are bodies like mine. Andalite bodies. 
Andalites have four legs. This gives us the 
speed of horses. We have two pairs of eyes, one 
pair on stalks. This enables us to see in all direc-
tions at once. 
We have the ability to speak without using our 
mouths. This is very fortunate considering An-
dalites have no mouths. 
5 

r 
For purposes of combat, our tails are 
equipped with a deadly sharp blade. 
But it is our ability to morph, to transform 
into other creatures, that makes our species the 
envy of the galaxy. 
Only one Yeerk has ever succeeded in acquir-
ing an Andalite body. Visser One. The leader of 
the Yeerk invasion. 
For that desecration of my species, I hate 
him. 
And for killing my brother, Elfangor. 
6 
<Okay. No doubt about what's going on,> 
Rachel said angrily. <l see a pair of Hork-Bajir di-
recting people into a subway station. And the 
people don't want to go. This is a Yeerk opera-
tion.> 
<Oh, yeah. That roundup is definitely not for 
the citizens' protection.> James said. 
James was new. He was still learning. But he 
was smart and learning fast. 
<Human-Controllers, too,> Rachel noted. 
<Guns and Dracons.> 
James circled, maintaining his altitude. 
<Question is, why are the Yeerks herding people 
into a subway station?> 
7 

<Trains are a good way of transporting a lot of 
people at the same time. And fast,> Rachel 
replied grimly. 
<The Yeerk pool,> I said. <l would assume 
that is their destination.> 
<Where Yeerks live when they don't have a 
host body.> James. <Where they feed, too, right? 
If the Yeerks are taking humans to the pool in big 
groups, it means they're mass-producing new 
human-Controllers.> 
<A Controller factory. Assembly line and all. 
It's sick.> 
Rachel and James were discussing the Yeerk 
pools. It's a pretty basic concept. Yeerks must 
feed every three days. The majority of Con-
trollers, not important enough to be in posses-
sion of private, portable pools, must journey to a 
central place to absorb the life-sustaining Kan-
drona rays. 
If the Yeerk is deprived of Kandrona rays, a 
painful process of starvation ensues. 
<The Yeerk pool is only a train ride away,> 
James said wryly. <Very convenient. The Yeerks 
have solved the problem of commuting. Provide 
your employees with free transportation.> 
<Feeding a large number of Controllers is the 
one difficulty the Yeerks have not yet success-
fully mastered,> I said thoughtfully. <The Yeerk 
8 
pool has always been the one sure place we have 
been able to cause serious disruption.> 
We, the resistance, the Animorphs, have lo-
cated, damaged, or destroyed more than one 
Yeerk pool and Kandrona source. 
Animorphs. Marco coined the term back be-
fore I was rescued and joined the team. The orig-
inal members of the Animorphs are Jake, Rachel, 
Cassie, Tobias, Marco. And me. The only An-
dalite. 
None of us are adults. The others are now of 
the age to be attending what humans call "high 
school." 
We have no "high school" on the Andalite 
home planet. But we do have the Academy. I was 
an aristh in the Academy. What humans would 
call a "cadet." 
My brother, Elfangor, was a great Andalite 
military hero. He was killed here on Earth by 
Visser One, then known as Visser Three, leader of 
the Yeerk invasion. 
Before he died, Elfangor gave the morphing 
cube to this group of human young people. The 
ones who call themselves the Animorphs. 
For a long time, we were the only ones with 
the ability to morph. Us and, of course, Visser 
One, who only had the ability because his host 
body was an Andalite. 
9 

In our last major battle, the Yeerks were able 
to steal the blue morphing cube that transfers 
the morphing technology. Thus, we have lost our 
one true advantage. 
But while we still had the cube, Jake realized 
that in order to continue the fight against the 
Yeerks we needed to increase our ranks. As I 
mentioned, I was wary of the decision to enlist 
handicapped children, mostly due to their lack of 
combat experience. 
However, I could not deny that because the 
Yeerks would never consider handicapped hu-
man bodies suitable hosts, these children were 
likely to be uninfested. 
There are seventeen new recruits, including 
James, the boy called Tuan, and the girls called 
Kelly and Collette. 
On my planet we call such individuals vecols. 
Andalite custom ordains these disabled live in 
isolation. It is largely for their own sake, as they 
would feel great shame as part of society. So it is 
out of respect for vecols that they are kept from 
full participation in the world. 
My experiences on Earth, however, have led 
me to question the wisdom of the Andalite cus-
tom. Not that human custom regarding the dis-
abled or handicapped is not also flawed. 
As we suspected, a few of the new recruits 
were healed by the morphing process. Only 
10 
three, James and Craig and Erica. Their healthy 
DNA was restored although they have sworn to 
continue life as handicapped people. For secu-
rity reasons. At least until the war is over. 
James is a good soldier. They all are. But in-
experienced. 
I felt we should proceed no further on our 
own. <We should report this to Jake immedi-
ately,> I said. 
<No time,> Rachel replied tersely. <Ax, look 
at all those people being forced into the subway! 
In just a few hours, the Yeerks could produce an-
other thousand human-Controllers.> 
<So, what do we do?> James asked. 
I could hear the eagerness in his voice. The 
eagerness of a new soldier. One not yet ex-
hausted and sickened by war. 
<Let's see if we can either close that tunnel 
down or slow up production.> Rachel answered. 
It was a foolish course of action. There were 
only three of us. Yes, we had been clever and pro-
ductive in the past. But that was before the 
Yeerks had forced us to become refugees. 
<Ax?> Rachel prompted. <Are you in or are 
you out?> 
<l think we should talk to Jake,> I repeated. 
<Look, those are innocent people down 
there.> James's voice was getting angry. <Don't 
you care?> 
11 

Innocent people. 
Humans. 
Did James mean that he did not consider me 
part of their team because I am not human? 
I am not an adult, but I am not a child, either. 
My feelings are not easily hurt. 
But still, I could not help but think it odd that 
James would seem to feel the need to instruct 
me as to what emotions were appropriate in this 
situation. And to question my loyalty. 
I was still trying to decide what to say, when 
we heard the bloodcurdling cry. 
Something swooped past me, clipped my 
wings, and sent me spinning. 
I heard cries of surprise from James and 
Rachel, too. 
I righted myself in the air. Felt talons rake my 
back! I shot forward, out of my attacker's clutches. 
I poured on a burst of speed and wheeled to see 
what had attacked. 
A group of peregrine falcons, reforming to 
strike again. Yeerks in morph. 
I saw James bleeding and circling downward 
with a broken wing. 
Rachel flew, talons extended, beak open, 
rushing the falcons. 
The Yeerk-falcons scattered with cries of 
alarm and then divided into two groups of three. 
One group headed for me. 
12 
The other group headed for Rachel. 
It was interesting that none of them pursued 
James. They must have thought he was a real fal-
con. Or maybe they thought he was already dead. 
<Still want to report back?> Rachel asked. 
<l do not think it is an option now,> I replied. 
13 

Rachel 
and I streaked down toward the 
crowd of people being hustled into the subway 
station. 
Several of the uninfested humans saw us and 
screamed. Others ducked and covered their heads 
with their arms. 
We must have been an odd and frightening 
sight. A screeching eagle. A northern harrier. And 
six peregrine falcons giving chase. 
Tseew! Tseew! 
Dracon fire! But the beams went wide and hit 
the concrete overhang of the subway station. 
Shattered the tile sign that announced the sta-
tion's name. 
The Dracon fire created a panic. The crowd 
14 
surged back, away from the subway station en-
trance. Several people were being trampled. 
But the Hork-Bajir guards ignored the injured 
humans. They quickly formed a barricade behind 
the crowd and continued to herd their prisoners 
down the station's stairs. 
<Here we go!> 
Whoosh! 
Rachel tucked her massive wings back 
against her body and zoomed down into the sub-
way station. I followed into the relative dark. My 
feathers skimmed the heads of the taller hu-
mans. And every instinct of the bird and the An-
dalite recoiled at entering a confined and 
relatively airless space headfirst. 
Near the bottom of the stairs, first Rachel, 
then I thrust our feet and swept our wings for-
ward to help slow us down. When we reached the 
platform we righted ourselves, flapped hard to 
maintain stable, even flight. 
Rachel and I were inside the tunnel now. 
And we could hear the cries of the pursuing 
falcons. 
<Ax, Rachel? Can you guys hear me? If you 
can, I demorphed, remorphed, and followed you 
in. I'm on your tails, behind these Yeerk jerks. 
And they're even worse at flying in this place 
than I am.> 
The fact is that peregrine falcons are incredi-
15 

bly fast flyers. But the Yeerks' inexperience with 
their morphs and their own arrogant characters 
would work to our advantage now. At least I 
hoped so. 
Beneath us, humans continued to stream 
down onto the subway platform. 
A train sped by. The noise was disconcerting 
to both my Andalite brain and the harrier brain. 
Through the dirty windows of the train cars I saw 
far too many scared human faces. 
This train was obviously Yeerk-controlled. 
And there was no choice but to follow it into the 
ever-darkening tunnel. The falcons would be on 
us in moments. 
Through the tunnel we flew. We tried to fly 
above the rushing train, not directly behind it. 
<What a ride!> Rachel screamed. 
I agreed. Even flying above the train we were 
pulled along by its draft. Exciting, in one way. 
Terrifying in another. 
But it was no use. Even with this advantage, 
the six Yeerk-infested falcons were closing in. 
Their desire to reach us was clearly overriding 
their inexperience and the difficulties of under-
ground flight. 
<Land on the roof of the train!> I called. 
<We'll let the train lose them for us!> 
Imagine it. 
The train whizzed beneath us but always 
16 
pulling ahead. At my estimation it was traveling 
at approximately forty to forty-five miles per hour, 
creating the interesting optical illusion that there 
was no separation between cars. And that we 
were no longer moving at all. 
In short, the train was traveling far, far faster 
than any of us could fly. 
To land would be incredibly dangerous. But it 
was the only way we could possibly outfly the 
Yeerks. 
I kept my eyes focused for something, any-
thing, to grip and hold on to. After a moment or 
two my eyes adjusted to the darkness. I could 
make out individual components of what had 
been just a long, blurred strip of metal. Now I 
saw that along the right and left side of each 
car's roof was a raised'lip. <Rachel. There. On 
the left and right edge. A ridge.> 
<l see it,> Rachel responded. <James? You 
still with the Yeerks?> 
<Right behind you.> 
<Okay, Ax. Go!> 
17 

The train roared beneath me. I swept my 
wings forward to kill air speed. It didn't slow me 
down much. The drag was too great. 
I hit the top of the train hard. But my talons 
managed to catch the lip. Barely. I kept my wings 
forward and the rest of me strained back to slow 
my body's momentum. If I pitched forward and 
fell, I would have great difficulty righting myself 
without letting go of the lip. And without flying 
off the train and shooting headfirst into the wall 
of the tunnel. 
The effort was great but it was not the first 
time I had landed on a moving vehicle. I man-
aged to stay upright by hunkering down as close 
to the roof as I could. 
18 
A moment later, Rachel landed on the car be-
hind me. <l SO love doing that,> she laughed. 
<I'm on,> James called a moment after that. 
<And I do NOT love doing that.> 
Further along the dark tunnel we raced. Care-
fully, without letting go and using my wings for 
balance, I glanced behind me. 
We seemed to have lost our pursuers. It was 
time to abandon the train before it brought us 
into the Yeerk pool complex unprepared. 
It was definitely time to morph. 
One by one we opened our wings to catch the 
current and . . . 
WHOOOSH! 
Were torn off the roof of the train, tossed 
backward like tumbleweeds in a tornado, tum-
bling, whirling, spinning! 
<Woo hoo!> Rachel, of course. 
One by one we fought to get control of our 
bodies, land without serious injury on the tun-
nel's narrow walkway. 
<This falcon is nauseous,> James said. <ls that 
possible? Please tell me I'm not going to hurl.> 
<l personally have never known a falcon to 
throw up,> I said. <But you might want to de-
morph just in case.> 
<Yeah,> Rachel said. <And then morph 
something big and mean. Something that will 
help us fight our way out.> 
19 

As we've mentioned in the past, morphing 
isn't graceful or pretty. And it is quite unpre-
dictable. 
SPLOOOT. SPLOOOT. 
Fortunately, my legs were the first part of my 
Andalite body to emerge. I felt a strange tingling 
as my tail began to sprout from the harrier's tail 
feathers. 
<There they are!> The Yeerk-falcons were 
back. 
And none of us was entirely finished with our 
morphs. 
But my Andalite tail was now fully emerged. 
The blade was in place. Along with one stalk 
eye bursting from my still-feathered head. 
<Don't let them get away!!> The angry voice 
of a Yeerk-falcon. 
<l'll take the Andalite!> another shouted. 
I saw the falcon hurtle toward me in the dark. 
I lifted my tail, and WHAP! Sent him flying like a 
tennis ball. 
THUMP! 
Five Yeerk-falcons left. 
Peregrine falcons in a pack might be a danger 
to a lone northern harrier, but they are a minor nui-
sance to an Andalite. A second falcon screamed 
and zoomed in toward me. I lifted my tail and the 
bird was no longer a problem. 
20 
Hurriedly I completed the morph. Rachel was 
behind me. She had reversed her morph and was 
in her eagle morph again. But a bald eagle on the 
ground is not as deadly as one in the air. And it 
would be difficult for her to lift off in the stifling 
tunnel. 
James, the least experienced of us, had not 
begun his remorph. He crouched against the 
tunnel's grimy wall, reluctant to let the Yeerks 
identify a new human resistor. One who was sup-
posed to be paralyzed and in a wheelchair. 
It was up to me. Only four Yeerk-falcons re-
mained but they were angry. 
That's when I saw it. 
A low-hanging electrical conduit. Live. 
<Rachel, James,> I said in private thought-
speak. <l am going to cut the lights. Be prepared.> 
<Go for it, Ax-man.> 
I lifted my tail and aimed. Fortunately, the 
blade on my tail is not metal and my hooves 
would ground me. I felt nothing but a slight flut-
ter through my body as my tail blade sliced 
through the electrical conduit that powered the 
tunnel's lighting system. 
The dim lights in the tunnel went dark. 
I waited the few seconds it would take my 
eyes to adjust to the gloom. When they did, I still 
could see no more than dark and darker shapes. 
21 

<Whoa,> James whispered. <l'm almost all 
lion now. The lion's eyes are seeing more than 
the falcons' in this light.> 
The unexpected turn of events had momen-
tarily confused the Yeerk-falcons. I heard low 
muttering from them but no screams of attack. 
And Rachel had begun to morph again. 
22 
It took her only moments. And then she was 
a great horned owl. 
The four remaining falcons had re-formed 
and were coming at me. Even in the darkness 
they would provide relatively easy targets. 
I lifted my tail blade in preparation. 
When they were only two feet away . . . 
WHOOOOSH! 
I did not hear Rachel fly past me. I felt 
Rachel fly past me. 
Owl feathers are the softest feathers imagin-
able. The result is that owls can fly making no 
sound at all. 
The falcons never even heard her coming. 
Rachel took down the first falcon with her 
23 

talons neatly and dropping it to the tracks below. 
The remaining three falcons wheeled away. 
Rachel followed them. <lt's not so easy, is it, 
Yeerks?> she taunted. <You don't just turn into 
animals and everything is fine. It's harder than it 
looks, isn't it?> 
The falcons crowded at a turn in the tunnel. 
One of them collided into a wall. He let out a cry 
of alarm and fell to the ground. 
The Yeerk-falcons were disoriented. Confused 
and panicking. 
I watched as the fallen falcon demorphed and 
then began to morph to Hork-Bajir. 
Before he could complete the morph, there 
was a terrifying scream and a lion leaped out of 
the dark. James. 
I heard the Yeerk's last words. <No! No! Don't 
want to . . . die . . . please . . . aaagh . . .> 
I did not like it. I am a soldier. But there was 
something unseemly about dying in a dark and 
filthy tunnel in midmorph. 
I heard a sound that was even worse. Cries of 
victory and satisfaction from Rachel as she 
downed another of the falcons. 
The other Animorphs and I truly worry about 
Rachel. 
On the Andalite home planet, when a warrior 
becomes too fond of war he is shunned. A warrior 
should love only the cause not the killing. 
24 
If Rachel were an Andalite . . . 
But, she is not. And I am not a human. 
Only one Yeerk-falcon remained. Perhaps it 
had escaped Rachel. 
But we had bigger problems now. Out of the 
dark three Hork-Bajir came trotting toward us 
like commandos with a very serious purpose. 
The lights had been cut. Members of the 
resistance had been spotted entering the sub-
way station. They were coming to investigate. 
But in the near-total blackness the Hork-Bajir 
could not see me or James directly in their path. 
They could not hear Rachel coming up from be-
hind. 
We were ready. 
Rachel buzzed the guards. One of the Hork-
Bajir reeled back and fell onto the train tracks. 
On the way his elbow blades accidentally sliced 
into the stomach of the second Hork-Bajir. There 
was a horrible moaning as both were electro-
cuted by the live third rail. 
James took care of the third Hork-Bajir. 
And then with one stalk eye I spotted the re-
maining Yeerk-falcon streaking toward me. It was 
a bold and brave move but he was the enemy. 
I lifted my tail and struck with the flat of my 
blade. The blow brought him down but did not 
kill him. 
I bent quickly and picked him up. 
25 

<Let me go!> he begged. <Please let me go. I 
am so close. Only minutes away.> 
<Minutes away from what?> I asked. 
<lt only takes two hours. Right? I've been a 
falcon for one hour and fifty-five minutes. In five 
minutes I'll be free!> 
So. This creature wanted to be a nothlit. 
Wanted to be trapped in his morph. 
<You will not be free. You will still be a Yeerk 
inside,> I pointed out. 
<l will be free,> the falcon insisted. <l will fly. 
I will see. No more need for Kandrona. No more 
orders, no more of this horrible war. I'll just fly 
away.> 
I understood. This creature was like Tobias, 
my true shorm. What a human would call my 
"best friend." 
Tobias was once a human boy. A very unhappy 
human boy. He stayed in red-tailed hawk morph 
for longer than two hours. I suspect he did it on 
purpose. It was his way of escaping the complex-
ities of human life. Although he exchanged them 
for a new set of complexities. 
It was logical that among the Yeerks there 
might also be those who felt overwhelmed by the 
demands of war. I knew of the Yeerk resistance. 
With Cassie's encouragement we had allowed 
one of its freedom fighters to morph a humpback 
whale and escape life as a parasite. In exchange 
26 
for this gift, Aftran had promised never to reveal 
our identities to the Yeerks. 
I said nothing but I released him. Gently I 
tossed him into the air. 
<Thank you!> he cried gratefully. I watched 
as the falcon flew off down the tunnel and disap-
peared into the dark. 
I did not notice Rachel zooming after him. 
27 

<Aaaaaahhhh!> 
Suddenly, there was an eruption of screams 
and screeches from down the tunnel. A human 
voice. The cries of a peregrine falcon. 
Rachel. 
Had she caught the Yeerk-falcon? 
I did not know. 
I did not want to know. 
But our ill-conceived, spur-of-the-moment 
mission had not succeeded. Had any of us really 
thought we would be able to stop the train full of 
prisoners and thereby slow the Yeerk infestation 
of new hosts? 
Our next step was clear. 
We needed to get out. Quickly. 
28 
Rachel came flapping toward me out of the 
darkness. 
James appeared not far behind her, big paws 
stepping slowly and cautiously along the narrow 
walkway, shaggy lion's head watching. Observing. 
There was blood on his jowls and paws. 
<The Hork-Bajir took off down tunnel,> he 
said. <Limping, actually. I didn't stop him but I 
managed to slow him down.> 
Rachel landed on the ground with a flourish 
of her soft-feathered wings. <Good job, James. 
You, too, Ax.> 
<l think we have done what we came in to ac-
complish.> I said. 
<Are you kidding?> Rachel argued. <We've 
got the Yeerks on the run! We're right here in the 
tunnel! Let's do some serious damage!> 
I tried to keep my voice from showing my im-
patience. And I resolved to tell Jake that Rachel 
was unfit for missions without him. Her eager-
ness to fight was getting to be too much. 
<Rachel, there are only three of us,> I said 
reasonably. <And I think we would do better to 
learn more about this operation before we strike 
again with a larger and more prepared force.> 
Rachel's large owl eyes blinked. I could not 
tell if her response was hostile or thoughtful. 
<Okay,> she said after a long silence. <You're 
right. I'm going Hork-Bajir. Follow the group that 
29 

went down the tunnel and see what I can find 
out. I'll just see what I can see. I won't fight. Give 
me half an hour.> 
I said nothing. 
<That okay with you, Ax?> she asked. Now I 
heard definite antagonism in her voice. 
<l am not in charge,> I said shortly. <lf you 
choose to investigate further, that is your deci-
sion.> 
There was a long pause. 
James finally spoke. <Ax is right. We need to 
be careful. You go Hork-Bajir, Rachel. See what 
you can find out. But we'll wait here. Just in 
case.> 
<lf I don't come back, don't come after me,> 
Rachel said unnecessarily. 
We would not. 
The resistance could not afford to lose even 
one member now. And certainly not three. We 
shouldn't have been in the subway station in the 
first place. 
We had not even managed to stop one train-
load of prisoners. And undoubtedly there were 
many tunnels and many trains. 
We had done nothing but put the enemy on 
high alert. And endangered our own lives. 
I wished now not for Jake, but for an Andalite 
commander. An experienced soldier. Someone 
30
who better understood when to fight and when to 
watch. 
Someone who understood tactics. 
Someone who understood me. 
I watched silently as Rachel morphed. As she 
trotted awkwardly along the tunnel's narrow 
walkway into the darkness beyond. 
And I sincerely hoped for her safe return. 
31 

Three hours later we were back at camp. 
All of us. 
It was late afternoon and the sun was setting 
behind the canopy of trees that kept our camp 
from being seen from above. 
Camp consisted of a muddy, wooded, and 
heavily guarded compound built by a colony of 
free Hork-Bajir. Rebel Hork-Bajir who had es-
caped the tyranny of the Yeerks and had gone 
into hiding. 
Their leader was Toby. 
When the Yeerks discovered the true identity 
of the resistance we, the Animorphs, evacuated 
our homes immediately. 
32 
Now the muddy and primitive camp is full, 
crowded, and contentious. 
There are the free Hork-Bajir. 
But there are also humans. 
There is Marco, his father, and his mother, 
Eva, who was once host body of the former Visser 
One. That Yeerk is now dead and Eva is free. Re-
united with her husband and her son. 
Living with Marco's parents is a young girl 
named Elena who is blind when not in morph. 
Rachel gave her the morphing technology and al-
lowed Elena to acquire her. Our mission to re-
cruit several children from a school for the blind 
failed. Elena managed to escape the Yeerks in 
her Rachel morph. Now she lives as a refugee 
and cannot, for security reasons, return to the 
school or her parents. She is sad for her losses 
but slowly adjusting to her new life. 
Also in the camp are Cassie and her parents, 
Michelle and Walter, both veterinarians. Tobias 
and his mother, Loren, too. Loren has no memory 
of Tobias's father, Elfangor. My brother. 
And there is Rachel's mother, Naomi, and 
Rachel's two younger sisters, Sara and Jordan. 
Rachel's mother is quite quarrelsome. I am 
told that is because she is something called a 
"lawyer." A lawyer seems to be an odd type of 
human. Intelligent but in a way that is not terri-
33 

bly useful. At least to my Andalite sensibilities. 
All they seem to use their intellect for is argu-
ment. Not philosophical contemplation or artis-
tic pursuit. 
I am told that although people often find 
themselves in need of a lawyer, lawyers are not 
very popular. After the last few days, I under-
stand why. 
Lastly, there is Jake. 
Jake's family is not in our camp. Jake's 
brother, Tom, has been a Controller from the 
early days of the invasion. Recently, Jake's par-
ents were captured by the Yeerks — with Tom's 
help — and made into human-Controllers. 
This has made Jake very withdrawn. For a 
time he said he did not want to lead us anymore. 
Our morale suffered. 
Now, after our last confrontation with Tom, 
during which we lost the morphing cube to the 
Yeerks, Jake is beginning to take charge again. 
He is still somewhat depressed and often angry. 
But as he listened to Rachel's report his face 
showed interest. 
"The Yeerks used what they had. They ex-
tended the existing subway tunnels using Taxxon 
labor," Rachel was telling him. "We know what 
effective diggers Taxxons are. Now the trains run 
all the way to the main pool. My estimate is that 
there are at least six lines leading to it. And I 
34 
spotted some Taxxons at work on what looked 
like another new line." 
"When you think how fast the Yeerks can 
move hundreds, maybe thousands of people in 
and out of the central pool . . ." 
James did not need to finish his sentence. We 
all understood the implications of the Yeerks' 
newest scheme. 
With that kind of rapid expansion system in 
place in cities throughout the world, the Yeerks 
could rule Earth in what would seem like no time 
at all. 
"They're probably bringing in transports of 
unhosted Yeerks," Marco said grimly. "Why should 
the Yeerks stay on their own planet when they 
can take over this one, have an unlimited supply 
of hosts, and pretty much unimpeded access to a 
feeding pool?" 
<So, we're dead?> Tobias said. 
Toby, who was sitting in with us, shook her 
head. "Not necessarily. If the Yeerks are concen-
trating here, on this planet, around this pool, 
then . . ." 
Marco grinned. "Right. They can move Yeerks 
in in big numbers. But we can take them out in 
big numbers." 
"How?" Rachel asked eagerly. 
"A subway train loaded with explosives," 
Marco said. "A small nuke if we could get our 
35 

hands on one. Run that puppy at full speed, det-
onate it in the Yeerk pool, big BOOM! 'Bye-'bye 
Yeerks." 
Cassie took a deep breath before she spoke. 
"You can't be serious." 
"Why not?" Rachel. 
Cassie looked at Jake. Jake looked away. 
"Think! Those trains are full of people being 
taken to the Yeerk pool for infestation. We'd be 
killing thousands of Yeerks, yes. But we'd also be 
killing thousands of people who want nothing 
more than to go home and forget any of this ever 
happened." 
<We've been down this path before,> Tobias 
agreed. <Cassie's right. We're supposed to be 
saving humanity. Not slaughtering people who 
have the bad luck to get in the way.> He looked 
pointedly at Marco. <Think about it. Your mom 
could still be down there.> 
Marco lowered his eyes. But only for a mo-
ment. Then he lifted them and looked at Jake. 
We all looked at Jake. 
His brother. His mother. His father. Any of 
them. All of them. Tom could be stationed at that 
Yeerk pool. Jake's parents, low-level, unwilling 
Controllers, could be trapped down there in 
cages while their Yeerks fed on Kandrona. 
Jake's face turned pale. "I'm not making this 
decision. It has to be a vote." 
36 
Rachel stood and looked angrily around the 
circle of faces. "You're kidding, right? I mean, 
you think saving the earth really demands a 
vote?" 
"The ends simply don't justify the means," 
Cassie said softly. 
Rachel glared angrily at her. "You weren't 
there," she said. "You didn't see what we saw. It 
was like some old World War Two newsreel or 
something. People being rounded up and forced 
at gunpoint onto trains. Men, women, old people, 
and kids. It's like the Yeerks don't even care any-
more about finding the healthiest and strongest 
to infest. They're taking everyone. Quantity over 
quality." 
Cassie waved her hands in frustration. "Ex-
actly. And those are the people you would kill 
while you're trying to stop the Yeerks. Little kids. 
Retirees. Someone's grandparents." 
"You know, we won't actually be using a 
nuke," Marco said quietly. "Not that that changes 
things much," he admitted. 
There was a long, long silence. I could see 
each one of them grappling with his or her con-
science. 
Toby stared stolidly into space. Her home 
planet had been through a devastating war with 
the Yeerks. Most of her people had not survived. 
The majority of the ones who had were now Hork-
37 

Bajir-Controllers. A smaller number of survivors 
or children of survivors were here in the camp. 
Frankly, I did not know what her vote would 
be. I could not read her inscrutable expression. 
But I knew that, like me, Toby understood 
that she was an outsider here on Earth. That her 
ideas and experiences were her own. And that 
she often did not understand human thought 
processes or emotions. 
I was surprised when she spoke. "This is a 
war," she said quietly. "There is no question that 
people will die. The only question is, who?" 
There was another long pause. 
<Okay,> Tobias said finally. <l guess that sort 
of sums it up.> He was trying to sound uncon-
cerned but his voice quivered. 
Rachel's voice, on the other hand, was firm 
and unhesitating. "I don't know about you guys, 
but I'm thinking it's time to explode a big 'ole 
bomb." 
"And you couldn't be happier," Cassie said 
bitterly to Rachel. "Could you?" 
38 
Two hours later we were still strategizing. 
Marco was correct in stating that nuclear weap-
ons, fairly primitive explosives by Andalite stan-
dards, are very difficult for the average citizen to 
procure. 
This is a good thing. 
It wasn't that long ago when we had just 
barely succeeded in averting a Yeerk-instigated 
World War III. There was a fierce battle on board 
a United States Navy aircraft carrier. Many, many 
innocent American men and women were killed. 
And it was likely that the few survivors were trau-
matized by the brutal attack of Yeerk-infested 
humans and battalions of Hork-Bajir- and 
Taxxon-Controllers. 
39 

Near the end of that horrible battle I had not 
listened to Jake. I had even gone so far as to knock 
him unconscious so that I could carry out a des-
perate plan without interference. A plan that 
seemed to me the only way to a possible victory. 
My actions were in some ways traitorous. But 
in other ways, they were necessary. 
Against express orders I kidnapped Visser Two 
and commandeered an F-14D Tomcat. The Yeerks 
had fitted out the plane with a nuclear weapon. 
Once in the air with my captive I threatened to 
drop the nuclear weapon directly over the Yeerk 
pool. The result of such an action would have 
been not only the utter destruction of the pool 
complex itself, but also severe damage to my 
friends' community and the inevitable loss of 
thousands of human lives. 
It was a calculated risk, a terrible gamble. 
Threaten to kill thousands to save millions, 
maybe billions. Thankfully, my plan worked. Vis-
ser Two agreed to call off the planned nuclear 
strike against China if I would promise not to 
drop a bomb on the Yeerk pool. 
Would I have followed through on my threat if 
Visser Two had not complied? Could I have? 
To this day I have no answer to either of those 
questions. 
Now, here we were, not long after the very 
public incident on the USS George Washington, 
40 
just days from the governor's televised warning, 
once again discussing the total destruction of the 
Yeerks' main feeding operation. 
We sat by a low campfire, studying a map of 
the county spread out on an old picnic table. 
We were minus James, who had gone back to 
the hospital where he lived. It was essential for 
the new recruits to remain undercover for as long 
as possible. We were also minus Toby. She had 
been asked to help settle a dispute between one 
of the older Hork-Bajir and Rachel's mother. 
Marco pointed to a military base on the map. 
"This place might be storing nuclear weapons. 
But like I said before, even if we managed to get 
in past security and steal a nuke, we wouldn't be 
able to use it. It would take us too long to figure 
out its security codes. Way elaborate. By the time 
we knew what we were doing, the military would 
know what we were doing, too." 
"What if we had help from the Chee?" Jake 
asked. 
Tobias blinked fiercely. <The Chee won't help 
us. Not with something like this. Something 
overtly aggressive.> 
The Chee are a race of androids who live here 
on Earth. They are incredibly brilliant. And their 
technical capabilities are more advanced even 
than those of the Andalites. 
However, the Chee are hard-wired pacifists. 
41 

They will help us defend ourselves. But they 
would never help us with an assault. 
"Tobias is right. The Chee won't help us," 
Jake mused. "Everything about this idea is 
against who they are and what they're all about." 
"Back to the problem," Marco continued. "We 
don't really even need a nuke. We'll go with 
garden-variety explosives." 
Jake lifted an eyebrow. "Such as?" 
Marco shrugged. "Such as dynamite. Okay. 
Look." Marco pointed to a red circle on the map. 
"This is a National Guard installation. They do a 
lot of roadwork, forestry, and fire fighting in the 
national parks. Other public works. That means 
they've probably got some sort of armory, stores 
of dynamite, maybe other explosives." 
"I'm sure potentially dangerous materials like 
dynamite and bombs are under pretty heavy lock 
and key," Cassie pointed out. "We're still going 
to have to get past all sorts of security." 
Marco shrugged. "Hey. I never said it was go-
ing to be easy. All I'm saying is that if we can get 
hold of enough dynamite, we could pack a train 
with it and ram the pool. Put some major hurt on 
theYeerks." 
Jake nodded. "Yeah. The question is how." 
"We've got some friends in the National 
Guard, don't we?" Cassie asked. 
Marco frowned. <Do we? We don't know for 
42 
sure that Lieutenant Colonel Larsen is still with 
the governor. I mean, where is he while all of this 
Yeerk movement is going down? Where's the gov-
ernor? For that matter, where's our buddy Collins? 
Guy took a Dracon to the shoulder and still re-
fused to go off duty. I wouldn't mind him on our 
team right about now.> 
<Yeah.> Jake nodded. <Good guys. But I'm 
not sure we can count on our old allies anymore. 
Something tells me they've probably been taken. 
Let's face it. The governor seriously ticked off 
Visser One.> 
<So who can we count on? Okay, maybe we'll 
run into an uninfested National Guard comman-
der, but maybe not. Who do we have for sure?> 
Tobias mused. 
"Us. And I mean all of us," Rachel said excit-
edly. "The six of us. James and the new guys. 
Parents. Toby and what Hork-Bajir soldiers she 
can spare. It'll be the most major operation we've 
launched so far." 
"That's the entire resistance," Jake said. 
"Risking the whole team on one mission." 
Cassie. 
There was a long pause. 
<You know, maybe we should rethink this,> 
Tobias said. 
"Yeah, we should," Cassie agreed. "This mis-
sion is way too heavy with bad karma." 
43 

Jake turned on her angrily. "Look, Cassie, it 
would be nice if we had more choices. But now 
that the Yeerks have morphing technology, we've 
lost our major edge. Which means that now we 
have to take some major unpleasant risks." 
His voice was angry. Sarcastic. Accusatory. 
I had never heard Jake speak that way to any-
one. 
And since his friendship with Cassie is quite 
special, his tone was even more surprising. 
Cassie looked stricken. I wondered if she 
would answer him with equal passion. But she 
did not. Instead, she looked as if she might cry. 
The others looked at one another, bewildered. 
It was almost as if Jake were blaming Cassie for 
the Yeerk acquisition of morphing technology. 
I shifted my weight from one leg to the other 
and observed the humans around me. 
Relationships were changing. 
Loyalties were shifting. 
There were unspoken animosities and hidden 
agendas. 
The decisions were becoming more about 
emotions than tactics. The resistance was jeop-
ardizing its ability to be effective. 
I had been told this might happen. 
44 
Late that night I took the Z-space transpon-
der. 
It was necessary to avoid detection by any of 
the camp's inhabitants. 
It was also necessary to avoid detection by 
any Yeerk spies. 
Since the Yeerks had taken the morphing 
technology, any animal spotted in the camp or its 
environs was suspect. Every singing bird a poten-
tial enemy. Any scurrying vole a possible traitor 
to our cause. 
Therefore, each of us had acquired several 
additional morphs native to the camp's wooded 
mountain environment. We routinely used these 
common, largely innocuous morphs to get about 
45 

at night or when we had to leave the camp's 
perimeters. At night, a lone Animorph was more 
vulnerable to attack. But just as we could not at-
tack and kill every living creature that passed 
through the camp, neither could a Yeerk in 
morph attack and kill every waddling woodchuck 
or slithering snake. 
Clouds covered the moon. I took advantage of 
the almost total darkness and quickly morphed a 
raccoon. I was able to leave the camp without 
any Hork-Bajir or human lookout spotting me. An 
adult female raccoon with a piece of alien tech-
nology wedged in her mouth. 
I scurried off into the night. I would not have 
much time and I did not want to bring the Yeerks 
too close to the camp. 
As soon as I reached what I considered to be 
a safe distance, I removed the Z-space transpon-
der from my mouth and activated it. The raccoon's 
small and dexterous "hands" were strangely simi-
lar to those of an Andalite and were perfectly 
suited to the task. The morph had become a new 
favorite of mine. 
I listened as the waves warped and wove 
through galaxies, finding their way to the An-
dalite home planet. 
After a short delay, there was a response. 
Coded, yes. But a code that had been carefully 
worked out. Numeric but thoughtspoken. 
46 
<Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill?> 
<Yes.> I gave the password to clear the chan-
nel for communication. 
<Report,> came the curt command. 
<lt is just as you predicted,> I told Jaham-
Estalan-Forlan, a war prince and chief of the An-
dalite military. <The human resistance is rapidly 
losing its effectiveness. There is infighting. Ten-
sions. Discipline is breaking down.> 
<They know nothing of our previous commu-
nications?> 
<They know nothings I confirmed. 
<Good.> 
<The Yeerk concentration here is escalating. 
They are forcibly transporting thousands of hu-
mans to the central Yeerk pool via the subway 
system. In retaliation, the resistance is planning 
the destruction of that central pool.> 
Jaham-Estalan-Forlan made a sound of impa-
tience. <Do they truly believe they can defeat the 
Yeerks by destroying only one central pool?> 
I felt a need to defend my friends. <lt is 
all they can do — for now.> Then I realized my 
defense would only increase Jaham-Estalan-
Forlan's contempt for the human race. He would 
think that if the resistance could muster no bet-
ter defense than my excuse-making, they would 
not be worth saving. 
<The high command has met and made their 
47 

decision. If the Yeerks are indeed concentrating 
on the planet Earth, we must allow their plan to 
continue. Once the bulk of the Yeerk race has 
been transported, the planet can be quaran-
tined^ 
Quarantined. 
A polite word for consigning the human race 
to a life of slavery under the Yeerks. 
I thought about Jake. The others. Tobias. Af-
ter all our time together, I felt affection for them. 
<Aximili? Did you hear me?> 
Yes, I felt affection. But I was still an An-
dalite. I was still a soldier. And this was still a 
war. 
<l heard,> I responded. 
<Do nothing to hamper the Yeerk concentra-
tion on Earth. Stop the resistance's attack on the 
pool. We must let the Yeerks believe they have 
won. Do you uhderstand?> 
I did. 
Would Jake? 
Would the others? 
Never. 
<Once the planet is quarantined,> War Prince 
Jaham continued, <we will be in a position to ne-
gotiate. We will mediate a peaceful symbiosis be-
tween humans and Yeerks.> 
I wondered if this was an accurate description 
of the Andalite high command's intention. 
48 
The high command might disdain the hu-
mans, but they knew from my reports that hu-
mans were very ingenious. Very determined. Very 
tenacious. 
Millions of Yeerks with human hosts would 
constitute an intolerable threat. 
A quarantine would never hold. Not even if 
every ship in the Andalite fleet were assigned to 
police the perimeters of Earth's atmosphere. 
The Yeerk-human axis would push out. And it 
would conquer everything in its path. 
<Has there been any change in technology 
acquisition?> Jaham-Estalan-Forlan asked. 
I knew I should tell him that the Yeerks were 
now in posession of morphing technology. But I 
did not. <No,> I said. 
Perhaps I would tell the truth later. I wanted 
time to consider. To think how such a revelation 
would affect the Andalite high command's plans 
for the planet. 
It was an undisciplined decision, my decision 
to withhold the truth. It was not my place to 
second-guess the decisions of my superiors. Per-
haps I had been on Earth too long. 
Suddenly I could hear Bug fighters in the dis-
tance, drawn to the signals they had picked up 
from the Z-space transponder. 
Quickly I severed the connection and began 
to demorph and remorph to horned owl, an excel-
49 

lent form of night transport. The Zero-space 
transponder was small enough to carry in my 
talons. 
By the time the Bug fighters were hovering 
over my previous position, I was winging my way 
unseen back to camp. 
Quarantine. 
Quarantine. 
Quarantine. 
It was just a way of saying what could not be 
said over any channel of communication, no 
matter how secure. Because it was something 
that could not even be said in the chambers of 
the high command. 
The stated goal would be to quarantine. 
The orders would say to quarantine. 
But what everyone would understand is that a 
quarantine would be impossible to sustain. 
To enforce a quarantine, the Andalite fleet 
would be forced to engage. 
And once they engaged, they would annihi-
late the planet and every living thing on it. Yeerk 
and human. 
Quarantine was the first step toward geno-
cide. 
The high command had made its decision. 
The Yeerk conquest of the galaxy would stop here 
on Earth. 
The camp came into view. I wished I could 
50 
just keep going. Perhaps become a nothlit. Be 
free of the terrible burdens of secrecy and be-
trayal. 
I remembered the Yeerk falcon. Five minutes 
away from freedom. 
But the price of that freedom was high. 
Maybe too high. 
51 

The next morning, Jake gathered us together 
to finalize our plans. 
The Animorphs were there, Tobias in human 
form. Toby was there. James was there on behalf 
of the new recruits. And Marco's parents were 
present. 
"I've been on the computer all night," Marco 
said. "All of us. Me, Mom, and Dad. We hacked 
into nearly every file on the National Guard base. 
Bottom line? They've got a big warehouse full of 
thousand-pound bombs." 
"Yes!" Rachel grinned. "Major firepower." 
Marco's mother looked exhausted. "We could 
kill a lot of slugs with one thousand-pound 
bomb." 
52 
"We could kill them all with ten or twelve 
thousand-pound bombs," Marco's dad amended. 
"In an enclosed space an explosion of even one 
thousand-pound bomb would have incredible 
magnitude. The devastation would be close to 
that of an atomic explosion." 
Rachel nodded with satisfaction. "We'd be 
going seriously medieval on Yeerk butt." 
"The big question is: How?" Jake asked. "We 
talked about this before. We'd have to commit 
everything. Everybody. Animorphs, all of us. 
Hork-Bajir. Parents." 
"I'm out," Cassie said hotly. "I thought that 
maybe . . . But I can't. And I can tell you my par-
ents are out, too." 
Rachel glared at her. "Okay, Cassie," she said 
in a sarcastic-sweet tone. "So, what do you think 
we should do instead? Just sit here and wait for 
the Yeerks to find us? Or maybe we should make 
it real easy on them and all go hop on the train 
for a little swim in the pool." 
"Why do you have to be so horrible?" Cassie 
exploded. "You are, you know. And you get worse 
every day. Your own mother can't even stand 
you." 
Cassie turned to walk away, but Jake grabbed 
her sleeve. "Cassie! Come on." 
"Come on what!" Cassie spit. "You don't 
knowingly take innocent life. Not if you're a de-
53 

cent person. Not if you're not a murderer. The 
goal is irrelevant. I thought you knew that, Jake, 
but apparently . . ." 
"Apparently you decided to start making de-
cisions for me!" Jake shouted back. "Somewhere 
along the line you decided that you knew what 
was best. For me. For everybody. Well, guess 
what?" 
Cassie put her hands in front of her as if she 
were going to shove Jake away. "Don't. Stop! Just 
don't. Please." 
The rest of the assembled group was silent. I 
believe it is safe to say that none of us under-
stood what was causing Jake and Cassie to argue 
so furiously. 
Tears began to roll down Cassie's cheeks. 
"I'm sorry," she said. "I shouldn't have done it. I 
don't even really know why I did it. I . . . At that 
moment it seemed the right thing to do. The only 
thing. Now, I'm just sorry. I'm sorry." 
"What is she talking about?" Marco whis-
pered. 
"It was me!" Cassie shouted. "I gave the 
Yeerks the morphing cube. I let Tom run away 
with it. I stopped Jake from chasing him. From 
killing him. Me!" 
I felt my back legs weaken slightly. 
Cassie? A traitor? 
It did not seem possible. 
54 
"Oh, Cassie," Eva murmured. 
"You did what?!" Marco said, his voice hoarse. 
"Tom had it. He had the cube. The only way 
Jake was going to get it from him was to kill him. 
I couldn't let Jake do that. I couldn't. I was trying 
to protect him." 
"You were trying to protect Jake so you basi-
cally sold out the rest of the human race?" 
Rachel said. Her voice was tight. The voice of 
controlled ferocity. Violence just barely con-
tained. 
"I'm sure she didn't think of it in those 
terms," Tobias said softly. 
"I didn't think at all," Cassie said, her voice 
exhausted and full of grief. "It was more of an 
impulse. An instinct. Something inside just told 
me to let Tom take the cube. I knew . . . I knew I 
was making a sacrifice. That I was sacrificing so 
much . . . maybe now it seems stupid. But at 
that moment I thought I was doing the right 
thing. I really did." 
Rachel lifted her hand. Began to make a fist. 
Tobias grabbed her wrist. 
And surprisingly, Jake pulled Cassie to him 
and embraced her. 
Cassie leaned her head on his shoulder. 
Jake pressed his cheek against her hair. "It's 
okay, Cassie," he said, his voice ragged. "I'm 
sorry. It's okay." 
55 

Embarrassed, I averted my eyes. 
After several moments Cassie withdrew from 
Jake's arms and faced the rest of us. "I am so 
sorry. I made a mistake. A terrible mistake. I 
won't do it again. I won't try to decide what's 
right for everyone. It was arrogant and danger-
ous. I didn't mean it to be but it was." 
Jake ran his hands through his hair. "Look. 
This is hard stuff. But we've got to work as a 
team. We don't have room for individual agen-
das. We go or we don't go. But either way . . ." 
Jake's voice droned on. But I was no longer 
listening. 
I could not stop looking at Cassie. 
I was not exactly sure what I was feeling. 
But I was sure it was very close to hatred. 
56 
Toby spoke in her guttural voice. "My people 
are tired of hiding. We are a peaceful species. 
But we will fight. It is better than always living in 
fear." 
"I'm with Toby," Marco said. "Dad? Mom?" 
Marco's mother nodded grimly. "I've had the 
worst of the Yeerk high command living in my 
head. I know there's no appeasement. My advice 
is to fight. Go in. Clean house. Do as much dam-
age as we can. Visser One does not cope well 
with setbacks. If we do enough damage, we 
could possibly chase the Yeerks off Earth." 
"What do you mean?" Jake asked. 
"The former Visser One didn't advocate all-
out war because she knew Earth was too volatile. 
57 

The inhabitants too resistant. The Yeerks are 
used to tractable host bodies. Humans are a 
fighting race. They fight invaders. They fight each 
other. They don't give up easily. The current 
Visser One has never really understood that." 
"So?" Jake pressed. 
"So, knowing something about the Yeerk High 
Council, I'm thinking it's likely Visser One's been 
warned that one more major attack on a site of 
concentration, or one more major disaster like 
what happened on the aircraft carrier, or one 
more public announcement by the governor call-
ing for resistance, just might mean the end of his 
domination here. It might mean the Yeerks would 
decide to move their base of operations to some 
other planet. Let's face it. With the ability to 
morph, the Yeerks don't really need humans. 
They could make do with another species on an-
other planet, a species less aggressive than hu-
mans." 
There was a long silence. 
"I'm not sure that's good news for the rest of 
the world," Jake commented. 
"But it's good news for us. Earth is Visser 
One's personal fiefdom," Marco's father said. "If 
the Yeerks are forced to leave Earth, Visser One's 
back to being a subvisser somewhere." 
"We may not be able to defeat the Yeerks, but 
58 
we can at least move them off Earth," Marco 
said. 
"And inflict them on another species?" 
Cassie. 
Toby's eyes narrowed. "Perhaps not. With 
help from the Andalite fleet, perhaps we could 
keep the Yeerks from settling anywhere." 
"What do you mean?" Rachel asked. 
"We chase them into Zero-space and the An-
dalite fleet ambushes them there. Effectively 
wipes them out." 
Jake's eyes narrowed as he considered the 
possibility. "We don't know what we can count on 
from the Andalite fleet, as long as the Yeerks are 
Earth's problem. But maybe Toby's right. If we 
can chase the Yeerks off Earth and make them 
the Andalites' problem, the Andalites would be 
forced to act. Ax?" 
My hearts thundered. I felt ill with anger. And 
something close to guilt. <lt is hard to know what 
the Andalite high command would order,> I said, 
my voice cold. 
"Fair enough," Jake said. But he gave me an 
odd look. "In any event, step one is to blow the 
Yeerk pool." 
I said nothing. 
Should I have told the high command every-
thing? 
59 

Yes. I should have. Without doubt. 
They needed to know that the entire situation 
on Earth was changing. 
Because of one human. 
Because of Cassie. 
Of course, it has always been a possibility 
that the enemy might somehow acquire morph-
ing technology, either through conquest or guile. 
War is about losses as well as victories. 
But to surrender without struggle your most im-
portant piece of technology .. . strategy . . . de-
fense . . . It was simply incomprehensible to me. 
It was also incomprehensible to me that Cassie 
was allowed to participate in this discussion. 
On my own planet, she would have been tried 
for treason and executed immediately. 
And yet, the others continued to consult her. 
My hatred for Cassie began to extend to them 
all. They were fools. They would never prevail. 
They were too soft. Too sentimental. Too childish. 
Too stupid and ignorant. 
Stupidity and ignorance within one's own 
ranks are more dangerous opponents than an 
outside enemy could ever be. I had been taught 
that lesson in the military academy. Now I had 
been given an object lesson that proved the 
principle. 
As the humans continued to plan and plot, 
my mind raced. I did not know what to do. 
60 
Perhaps I should contact War Prince Jaham-
Estalan-Forlan and tell him I had been inter-
rupted by Bug fighters before making a full 
report. I could tell him that the Yeerks had ac-
quired Andalite morphing technology. 
And I could tell him that if the Andalite high 
command was going to quarantine the planet, 
they needed to do it quickly. 
"Let's go back to the attack," Marco said. 
"Cassie may have been a major idiot for about 
half a second, but she's right now. If there are in-
nocent people trapped down in the tunnel, how 
can we justify blowing it up?" 
"What if we gave them time to escape," To-
bias suggested. "I mean, what if somehow, just 
before the explosion, we told everyone on site 
that the pool was about to blow. The humans and 
the human-Controllers would probably run for 
their lives. The Yeerks in their heads will starve 
without the pool, but the humans would live. 
See? We save the humans, kill the Yeerks, and 
wipe out a major infestation center." 
Marco nodded. "That works for me. I mean, 
at least it gives people a chance. Some of them, 
anyway." 
One by one, each of the group nodded. Each 
signaled his or her approval of the plan. 
Each person but Cassie. She stared at the 
ground. Her cheeks were stained with tears. 
61 

No one seemed to know what to say to her. 
Finally, Jake spoke. "Cassie?" 
Cassie shook her head. "I'll do whatever you 
guys say." 
"That's not good enough, Cassie," Jake said. 
"You've always had definite ideas about what we 
should or shouldn't do. Don't weasel now." 
Cassie lifted her face. "Okay. Then it's wrong. 
But let's do it anyway. I'll learn to live with my 
conscience. We all will. I don't have a better 
plan. I guess this is as close as we'll get to de-
feating the Yeerks without being the Yeerks." 
Jake's face relaxed. I saw the faintest hint of 
a smile. Almost of relief. 
He addressed the group. "Look. Cassie did 
what she did. She had her reasons. I don't under-
stand them so I can't say if they were right or 
wrong. But her decision to let Tom get away with 
the morphing cube changed the equation. Still, I 
trust Cassie's instincts. Even more than my own. 
Especially my own these days. So let's just re-
adopt this phrase as our guideline. Defeat the 
Yeerks. Don't become them." 
He did not look directly at Rachel, but I knew 
he was telling her to restrain her violent im-
pulses. 
I remembered again the desperate falcon. 
The one who yearned for freedom. Had he found 
it in the sky, or in death? 
For a long time, I have regarded Rachel as 
representing one end of the continuum of human 
nature. What all humans would become if the 
war went on long enough. 
That perception has guided many of my deci-
sions. 
An entire human race of Rachels — angry, 
merciless, aggressive, and equipped with Yeerk 
and Andalite technology. It was a terrifying specter. 
But perhaps . ... perhaps I had been wrong. 
Perhaps the real menace lay at the other end 
of the continuum — represented by Cassie. Hu-
mans who were softer. Kinder. Well-meaning. 
And, ironically, infinitely more dangerous. 
63 
62

That night, I asked Cassie if I might speak 
with her privately. 
She was subdued. Still shaken after our meet-
ing. "Let's go sit somewhere quiet and dark," she 
said. 
We walked together to the far perimeter of the 
camp. A free Hork-Bajir sat high up in a tree 
branch keeping watch. But he paid little atten-
tion to us. 
Cassie folded her arms across her chest and 
sighed. 
<Tell me about the morphing cube,> I said. 
<Why did you keep Jake from chasing Tom?> 
"Look, Ax. I already feel like a criminal. Okay? 
64 
But I've already made my apologies. Why do I 
have to go through this again with you?" 
I was angry. So angry the blade on my tail was 
quivering. <Because my brother, Elfangor, gave 
the cube to you. To you and your friends. He 
compromised everything he stood for by giving it 
to you. He betrayed the laws of his own people. 
He placed his trust in five humans. I am trying to 
understand why you would betray him in return. 
Why you would betray your friends. And why you 
would betray your people.> 
They were harsh words. 
But I had a right to say those harsh words. 
Because it was my brother, my people, and my 
planet's technology that had been abused. 
According to Cassie, she had sacrificed them 
all on no more than an instinct. An impulse. 
I had to think there was a better reason. 
If not, then I could not help but believe that 
the high command had every right to annihilate 
this planet. And I would tell them so tonight. 
Humans were a retrograde species — de-
structive, violent, and at the mercy of their emo-
tions. Unable to make personal sacrifices or set 
aside personal agendas on behalf of a larger 
cause. 
Cassie's head dropped. She put her hands 
over her face. "Oh, Ax, you're right." Her voice 
65 

broke. "I did betray Elfangor. I never thought 
about how you would feel." 
<No,> I agreed coldly. <l am still trying to un-
derstand what it was you did think.> 
Cassie rubbed her temples, as if she were 
struggling with memories she would prefer to 
suppress. "I suppose . . . I suppose . . ." 
She stared at me, almost fearfully. "It wasn't 
just about Tom. It wasn't just about Jake." 
<Then what was it about? What did you think 
you were doing?> 
"Ax," she whispered, as one about to voice a 
terrible secret. "I just know there are so many 
Yeerks who would defect if they could. Aftran 
wasn't the only one, we know that. There's always 
been a group of Yeerks who can't stand the no-
tion of infestation. Who don't want to be para-
sites. Who don't want to be slavish followers of 
the vissers! Remember the first battle with the 
new recruits, when Visser One was in that horri-
ble morph and choking Jake to death? Remem-
ber how that Hork-Bajir cut off one of the visser's 
tentacles and freed Jake? Some of the Yeerks 
just want to be free! Now, with the ability to 
morph, maybe they can be. We can't fight on for-
ever. Not just us. And it's beginning to look as if 
we can't win by conquering. We may just have to 
learn to coexist. I don't know what was in my 
head at that moment, when I let Tom go. But 
66 
now, in retrospect, maybe letting the Yeerks have 
the morphing technology is the way to peace." 
My back legs felt as if they might collapse. 
For one person to make a decision so momentous 
and act on it without first talking to anyone . . . It 
was unthinkable. 
And yet my conscience nagged uncomfort-
ably. Hadn't I acted similarly? Hadn't I acted 
without the permission of my prince? Hadn't I as-
sumed the right to take an enormous risk with 
human lives when I commandeered the plane fit-
ted out with a nuclear weapon, kidnapped Visser 
Two, and threatened to explode the bomb di-
rectly over the Yeerk pool? Such an explosion 
would have destroyed most if not all of my 
friends' hometown and most if not all of its citi-
zens. 
The memory was too troubling. I chased it 
away and reached wildly for a way to continue to 
separate myself from Cassie. 
Perhaps Jake had known what Cassie was go-
ing to do. Suspicion grew in my hearts. <Does 
Jake agree with this assessment?> I asked coldly. 
Cassie shook her head. "No. No. I haven't 
told anyone any of this. I can't. Can you imagine 
what the others would say? Can't you just hear 
Rachel? 
"My god. She lives for the war. And Marco's 
mom? She hates the Yeerks so much that the 
67 

idea of sharing the planet with them makes her 
physically ill." 
<She knows the enemy,> I pointed out. <She 
knows them in a way we never will. If we con-
tinue to be lucky.> 
"Of course she feels that way," Cassie said 
impatiently. "Marco's mother was host to the for-
mer Visser One. It must have been horrible. But 
the former Visser One was one Yeerk. The current 
Visser One is one Yeerk." 
<He is the Yeerks' leader on this planet,> I 
replied. 
"It still doesn't mean he represents each and 
every Yeerk," Cassie insisted. "Humans have had 
some pretty evil leaders, too. Thousands, some-
times millions of people have followed those 
leaders, sometimes willingly, sometimes not. 
Sometimes because they were just too afraid to 
say no. What if some other species decided to 
wipe out the human race based on the existence 
of a few powerful people? What if that species 
decided all humans were cruel, based on the 
actions of a handful of sociopaths?" 
In spite of myself, I stumbled over my thoughts. 
Cassie gave me a sharp look. 
Was she expecting an answer? Or was it a 
rhetorical question? Either way, it had come too 
close for comfort. 
We stared at each other for a long moment. 
68 
<ln the tunnel, I caught a falcon,> I told her. 
<A Yeerk falcon. He begged to be let go. He 
wanted to stay in morph. To live to escape.> 
Cassie nodded slowly. "You see? I'm right." 
I shook my head. "No. You are wrong. Visser 
One will learn to control whoever acquires mor-
phing technology. He will give it only to the most 
loyal Yeerks." 
"But the falcon you caught..." 
"The falcon I caught might have been lying," 
I said simply. "Or he may truthfully have been 
seeking escape. Yes, one or two Yeerks may be 
seduced by the possibility of escape. But not 
enough." 
"Do you think you can forgive me for this?" 
she said quietly. 
<l do not know, Cassie.> 
"What are you going to do?" 
<l do not know,> I answered again. 
"I think this attack on the Yeerk pool will be 
our last stand. And if the Yeerks get any idea of 
our plan, any warning at all, chances are none of 
us will make it out alive," Cassie said. 
I shook my head. <l am an Andalite. I will 
never run away.> 
"You think I'm a traitor, don't you?" she 
asked. 
I nodded. <Yes.> 
"But did I do the wrong thing?" 
69 

<l do not know.> 
"How do you think Elfangor would answer 
that question?" 
<l do not know that, either. I wish I did.> 
I turned and walked away through the dark-
ness to an area thick with tree trunks and shrubs. 
I needed to be alone. 
No matter what happened, I knew I would 
never feel quite the same about Cassie. 
Or any other human. 
70 
I stared upward, trying to glimpse the stars 
through the thick canopy of trees. 
My birthplace was somewhere out there. I had 
come to believe I would never see it again. I 
closed my main eyes, trying to remember it in de-
tail. Trying to remember the faces of my family 
and friends. 
But their faces kept fading away and chang-
ing into other faces. 
Jake. Rachel. Tobias. Cassie. Marco. 
The humans amazed me with their resilience, 
their ingenuity, and their bravery. 
They delighted me with their humor, their 
passions, and their capacity for play. Their food. 
71 

But they truly sickened me with their self-
indulgence and their childishness. 
But then, I reminded myself, they are chil-
dren. And so am I. 
If I were at home, I would still be a cadet in 
the Andalite Military Academy. I would spend 
most of my time in my parents' scoop. 
But I had been thrust into the midst of this 
raging war on Earth. 
I had seen more battles, death, and destruc-
tion than many seasoned soldiers in our Andalite 
fleet. 
I felt my throat tighten and constrict. My 
hearts ached with a pain I could not describe. I 
wondered if I were dying. 
I felt not sadness. I felt pity. For myself. For 
us all. We were children no longer. And we never 
would be again. 
"What do you think Elfangor would say?" It 
was if Cassie had looked into my mind and read 
the question there. 
Elfangor! Why did you have to die and leave 
me here? I do not know what to do. 
Either path led me to betrayal. 
Elfangor was a great hero. A war prince. A 
member of the Andalite military. Brave. When 
necessary, ruthless. 
The Yeerks had to be stopped. The Andalite 
72 
high command knew that. Their plans might be 
unspoken. But they were clear. Annihilation of 
the planet. It would be clean. It would be final. It 
would be over. 
But... but Elfangor had broken the most 
fundamental law of our planet. He had broken 
the Law of Seerow's Kindness. He had given mor-
phing technology to another species. 
To humans. 
Why? 
To give them a chance? 
No. The Elfangor I knew was not sentimental. 
He would not compromise the safety of the home 
planet and the galaxy to save one species. 
Elfangor knew what every other Andalite 
knew. That the Yeerk menace had started with an 
old fool's sentimental impulse. His inability to 
understand that his enemy's goals and aspira-
tions were not his own. 
Seerow had let loose a plague of Yeerks upon 
the galaxy. The rest is history. A sad, violent, de-
structive history of conquest and war. 
Planets ravaged and ruined. 
One species after another enslaved. 
Countless dead. 
All triggered by an act of kindness. 
Yes. The Cassies of the world were infinitely 
more dangerous than the Rachels. 
73 

My brother had known this. So what had pos-
sessed him to give these human youths the 
power to change the future of the galaxy? 
What would he tell me to do now? 
I heard a flutter of wings. Then, the long quiet 
sound of studied stillness. 
Tobias. 
He had settled on a branch. He said nothing 
for a long time. Then, finally, <Well?> 
<Well, what?> I asked. 
<What did you decide?> 
I was startled. But I tried to pretend I was not. 
<About what?> 
Tobias ruffled his feathers placidly. <l fol-
lowed you last night. I don't know who you were 
talking to. Or what you were saying. But I'm 
guessing you were talking to the Andalite home 
planet. Am I right?> 
I could not lie to my true shorm. <Yes.> 
<They're going to fry us, aren't they?> 
74 
My eye stalks waved in spite of my determi-
nation to stay calm. <What makes you think 
that?> 
<lt's what makes sense for them to do now 
that the Yeerks are concentrated on Earth. I 
guess the question is, are you going to help them 
do it?> 
<l do not know. I do not know what is the 
right thing to do.> 
<There's a lot of that going around,> Tobias 
said. 
<Do you hate Cassie?> I asked suddenly. 
<l don't hate anybody,> Tobias said calmly. 
<lt's strange, but right now, I don't even hate the 
Yeerks. It's like, they're trying to survive. And 
75 

we're trying to survive. I'm not really sure why it 
has to be an either-or thing.> 
<You would consider a symbiotic truce?> 
<No. But we probably wouldn't have to do 
that. Don't you see? What do the Yeerks need? 
Bodies. If they can morph bodies from their slug 
state then . . . they don't have to keep taking 
other people's bodies as hosts. See? They'd have 
to deal with the two-hour time limit still. And 
they'd still have to feed on Kandrona. But. . .> 
So. Tobias and Cassie had been thinking sim-
ilar thoughts. 
<But the Yeerks would want to acquire hu-
mans. Other sentient creatures, as well. Not just 
cats and dogs.> 
<Yeah?> 
<But we have always said it is wrong. Espe-
cially without first receiving the person's permis-
sion. I cannot imagine a Yeerk asking permission 
to acquire a human's DNA. And I cannot imagine 
many humans who would freely give their DNA to 
a Yeerk.> 
Tobias adjusted his wings and appeared to 
tighten his talons on the branch. <Maybe you're 
right. I don't know. Look, Ax, it's a whole new 
world. We're having to make all this up as we go 
along. There aren't any rules falling out of the sky 
telling us what and what not to do.> 
<What exactly do you mean?> 
<Too hard to explain right now,> Tobias said. 
<l just mean that we don't really have any time-
tested rules for dealing with these issues. Like 
the morality of acquiring someone's DNA. So 
we have to see what works and what doesn't. We 
can't afford to get so locked into one idea that 
we defend it to the death, without really knowing 
if that idea works — in the real world.> 
Tobias was silent for a moment, then flapped 
away. 
My hearts raced. New possibilities were un-
folding. New solutions. 
Maybe Elfangor had seen something. A possi-
bility that had seemed impossible because we 
Andalites had been so indoctrinated by our own 
military thinking. Us versus the enemy. No com-
promise. 
We had decided long ago that morphing was 
proprietary. Too dangerous to share. But maybe 
Cassie had been right after all. Maybe the way 
to real peace was in giving choices to other 
species. 
On the other hand, maybe it depended on the 
species. 
Humans. 
Yeerks. 
If each were freed from the fight for survival, 
would they use the morphing technology for good 
or for evil? 
77 
76 

The high command had ordered me to stop 
the attack on the Yeerk pool. It would be simple 
to do. Just tip off the Yeerks and the mission 
would abort before it could begin. 
But if I assisted the mission, it would delay 
the ability of the high command to begin quaran-
tine measures. 
What would Elfangor do? 
I no longer needed to wonder. 
He had done it already. 
He had given the morphing cube to the hu-
mans. And then he had died. 
I, too, would place my faith in the humans. 
My faith, if not my trust. 
And if I died . . . 
Well, then, I hoped I would die as nobly as my 
brother. 
I knew that I should check in with high com-
mand. But now that my decision had been made, 
I did not. 
I was willing to disobey a direct order. And I 
was willing to die. 
But I was not willing to deceive the Andalites. 
To tell them I was going to do one thing, and then 
do another. 
I know it's a fine distinction, but I was learn-
ing to rationalize. To defend what was indefensi-
ble. 
It was a very human course of action. 
78
The following night, I led six human adults 
through the woods. Loren, Tobias's mother, had re-
ceived the ability to morph, but chose not to use 
it unless we expressly asked for her help in a bat-
tle situation. 
It was a wise decision. 
Tobias flew overhead thought-speaking direc-
tions to me. The adults made as little noise as 
possible considering they were carrying a collec-
tion of battered metal camping equipment. 
Jake, Rachel, Marco, and Cassie were in vari-
ous bird of prey morphs, flying overhead at differ-
ent levels. 
The auxiliary Animorphs were with us, too. 
James and his two lieutenants, Craig and Erica, 
79 

were in charge of leading the group of seventeen. 
I did not know who was on the ground and who 
was in the air. 
If the mission went wrong, their instructions 
were to melt away and save themselves. In this 
way at least some members of the resistance 
would live to fight another day. 
Toby and several free Hork-Bajir traveled 
silently and gracefully through the trees. 
We were a small, motley army stealing 
through the night on our way to a work site of Na-
tional Guardsmen. 
According to Tobias, four large covered trucks 
were parked along the highway where a group of 
what he estimated to be approximately ten Na-
tional Guardsmen were repairing a broken water 
line. They worked at night, of course, so as not to 
disrupt the heavier daytime traffic. 
We wanted the trucks. 
"How much further?" Rachel's mother de-
manded angrily. 
"Shhhh!" Eva cautioned. 
"I can't believe we're doing this," Naomi 
went on. She had been complaining incessantly 
since we left base camp. 
"We all agreed to be part of this mission," 
Loren pointed out reasonably. "Let's just keep 
going and hope for the best." 
Rachel's mother came to a stop. Reluctantly, 
80 
I ordered the others to stop as well. "Hope for the 
best?" she repeated. "That's all you have to of-
fer? Am I the only one of you people worried 
about our kids?" 
I could not help myself from retorting. <You 
do not need to be afraid on behalf of Rachel,> I 
told her. <Rachel is the one who frightens oth-
ers^ 
"And that's supposed to make me feel bet-
ter?" her mother demanded shrilly. "To know that 
my oldest, my first child, my little girl, has be-
come some kind of monster? Some kind of blood-
thirsty freak?" 
<Don't let her suck you into an argument, 
Ax,> Tobias said privately. <You'll never win. 
You're about one-fourth of a mile away from the 
work site. Keep heading east toward the road.> 
<l am afraid I must respectfully ask you to re-
main silent,> I said to Naomi. Her mouth 
dropped open in surprise but she spoke no more. 
<Please follow me.> I turned and pressed on, 
leading the small group of human adults east 
through the thick woods. 
Finally, we reached the road. 
Several yards away, we saw a work crew of Na-
tional Guardsmen. Flares and barricades lined 
the road for about a mile in either direction. And 
best of all, there were the four covered trucks. 
<Okay, Dad,> Marco said. <Show time.> 
81 

Marco's father stumbled forward onto the 
road. The others followed several feet behind, 
canteens clanking against flashlights and tin eat-
ing utensils. 
Startled, the National Guard commander 
looked up at the group of bedraggled adults. 
"Hello! Hello!" Peter called. "Thank god. We 
thought we'd never find anybody." 
The commander cautiously approached Mar-
co's father. Two other Guardsmen stopped their 
work and stood protectively at the ready. "Sir? Is 
there a problem?" 
Marco's father gestured toward the other 
adults. "We've been lost in the woods for two 
days. Night before last, a bear came into our 
campsite in the middle of the night. We grabbed 
what we could and ran. And, er, we got lost." 
Marco's father did indeed look as if he had 
been lost in the woods for several days. He was 
gaunt. His clothes were filthy and torn. His face 
was dirty and unshaven. 
Marco's mother looked even worse than her 
husband. She wore an old cap pulled low over 
her forehead. Her face and hands were smudged 
with the charcoal from a burnt stick. A human-
Controller would have had difficulty recognizing 
the host body of the former Visser One, but it 
was always possible that some of the National 
Guardsmen could be Yeerks. 
82 
Rachel's mother looked angry and tired. Very 
much like a woman who was unaccustomed to 
doing without a morning shower and other 
amenities of what Rachel called "the yuppie 
lifestyle." 
Cassie's parents were also dressed in appro-
priately worn clothing. Each wore a small back-
pack. 
And Tobias's mother hung in the rear, eyes 
lowered, trying to appear frail and timid. Loren 
was rather delicate in size and stature. But she 
had successfully survived far too many ordeals 
ever to be called timid. In my opinion, my brother 
Elfangor had married a very brave woman. 
I stayed back in the woods, watching, com-
municating with the other Animorphs. <The ap-
proach has been made,> I said. <l do not think 
these particular Guardsmen are Yeerks. They are 
surprised at the sudden appearance of a group of 
lost campers. But they do not seem afraid or sus-
picious.> 
The commander in charge signaled for some 
of his men to stop work and come forward. "Is 
anybody sick?" he asked Marco's father. "Any 
signs of dehydration? When was the last time any 
of you ate?" 
Marco's father put his hand to his chest. "I'm 
having some pains here." 
Immediately, Peter was escorted by three Na-
83 

tional Guardsmen to the truck at the front of the 
convoy. There they made him sit on the ground. 
One took his pulse. Another offered him water. 
Moments later, the third Guardsman had 
found places in the three trucks for the five other 
adults. The commander of the group got on the 
radio and reported back to the base that he and 
three of his crew would be bringing in six lost 
campers, one of whom was having chest pains. 
And while this was taking place, Hork-Bajir, 
under the supervision of Jolphimee-Celpik, were 
quietly dropping from the trees. When the convoy 
headed off for the base, the Hork-Bajir would 
silently disable the remaining seven National 
Guardsmen at work on the water main. Just in 
case one was a Yeerk determined to get word to 
his superiors about a suspicious group of lost 
campers. Jolphimee-Celpik would see that the 
Guardsmen came to no harm and were safely re-
leased when our mission was completed. 
Rachel, Jake, Cassie, and Marco landed un-
seen and quietly demorphed then remorphed. 
<lt is all going according to plan,> I told To-
bias and the others. 
"As soon as we get back to base, we'll get you 
to a doctor," the commander told Marco's father. 
"Let's move out!" 
Moments later, three trucks were rumbling 
back to the base. The commander and his three 
84 
Guardsmen had no idea that in addition to six 
human adults they were also transporting four 
other creatures. And being followed through the 
roadside treetops by seven-foot-tall aliens. 
I morphed to harrier and followed the convoy. 
<So far so good.> Tobias. <James, are you 
guys still with us?> 
<AII seventeen of us. I just took another 
count.> 
<Good,> I said. <l am in harrier morph about 
half a mile below you, Tobias. Rachel, Jake, and 
Cassie are traveling as fleas on Marco.> 
<Where is Marco, anyway?> 
I could see him, but just barely. 
He was the gorilla hitching a ride on the back 
of the last truck. 
85 

Just as we had hoped. The commander had 
called ahead to explain the emergency situation 
so the small convoy was not required to stop at 
the base entrance. 
The guards waved the trucks right through 
without a search. 
Now we had to hope the Hork-Bajir had been 
able to drop onto the base from the surrounding 
trees. We had to hope that James and his team 
were close by. 
The first truck, the one carrying Marco's fa-
ther, veered to the right toward the medical sta-
tion. 
The other two trucks pulled into a small yard 
86 
full of other military and civilian vehicles. The 
driver of the second truck got out and walked 
around to the back. 
I could not see his face, but I heard his muf-
fled gasp of surprise as a huge bladed creature 
grabbed him and pulled him away from the 
truck. Another muffled gasp, followed by a soft 
thud as the Guardsman was knocked out, low-
ered to the ground, and dragged off. 
The same scenario was played out behind the 
other truck. The Hork-Bajir had indeed arrived. 
The commander and one soldier were with 
Marco's father. The other two soldiers from the 
work site were safely out of the way. 
Then Naomi and Walter calmly walked around 
to the driver's side of each of the two trucks and 
got behind the wheel. 
<Okay,> I heard Marco say. <lt's a big base. If 
you were a thousand-pound bomb, where would 
you be?> 
<There are twelve warehouses along the 
southern perimeter of the base,> Tobias said. 
<Just like on the map Marco downloaded. And I 
see four more trucks in a motor pool along the 
western perimeter.> 
<We'll check out the motor pool.> James. 
<Disable any guards. And be ready for you guys 
to pick up more transports if you need them.> 
87 

<Be careful and try not to hurt anybody,> 
Jake said. <A lot of these Guardsmen are proba-
bly innocent.> 
<Got it,> James said. 
<Okay.> Marco. <l personally am ready to 
knock down a few doors.> 
The two trucks rumbled toward the ware-
houses. 
There was surprisingly little activity on the 
base. One man and two women coming out of 
what might have been the mess hall glanced cu-
riously at us but made no move to investigate. 
But then, it was late. Most of the Guardsmen, 
those who had not been part of the road crew, 
were probably in their barracks. 
<We're demorphing,> Rachel said. <l have to 
tell you, Marco. You stink. Even to the flea you're 
stinky.> 
<You know, Rachel,> he replied, <you —> 
<Come on, you two,> I heard Jake say. <Just 
remorph to firepower as fast as you can. You, too, 
Ax. I'm going tiger.> 
The two trucks pulled around behind the last 
warehouse. From my vantage point, it seemed 
the guards in front of Warehouse L took no par-
ticular notice. 
<Two guards in front of Warehouse A,> Tobias 
said. <Looks like two guards in front of each of 
the twelve warehouses.> 
88 
<We start the search at A, work our way to L,> 
Jake called. <But I want all guards incapacitated 
at the same time, before we start. Does every-
body hear me?> 
<FII send Tuan and a few others to help,> 
James replied. 
<Good. Ax, you, Rachel, and Marco take 
Warehouse A. Tuan, you back them up. As soon 
as you've knocked out the guards, every team do 
the same, knock out their guards.> 
Jake proceeded to assign teams to Ware-
houses C through L. 
<Let'sgo, Ax-man.> Rachel. 
I landed in the shadows and began to de-
morph. <l will make the approach. It will be a 
good way of finding out if the guards are unin-
fested humans or human-Controllers.> 
When I was fully Andalite, I walked from the 
narrow alley between Warehouse A and a smaller 
building. 
The two guards posted in front of the ware-
house did not look as if they were expecting trou-
ble. One was noisily chewing gum and cleaning 
his nails with a toothpick. The other was glancing 
through a newspaper. 
I walked forward. <Excuse me. Is this ware-
house locked?> 
89 

The two soldiers looked up. 
One of them gasped and gaped. The gum fell 
from his mouth. 
The second one stepped back. "What in 
the . . ." But as he studied me, his face lit up 
with delight. He held out his hand, palm up, as if 
I were a dog or horse. "I've never seen anything 
like this." His voice was low and coaxing. "Hey 
there, fella. Hey!" 
<Hay is for horses,> I retorted. <l am not a 
horse, though in some aspects I closely resemble 
one.> 
I heard Marco roar with laughter. I did not 
think the situation particularly humorous. 
The second guard dropped his gun and 
90 
backed up into the first guard. The first guard 
struggled to keep his balance and reached for his 
radio. 
Now I knew they were not Yeerks. 
By now, a Yeerk would have identified me as 
"Andalite scum" and tried to kill me. 
The soldier with the radio pressed a button. 
But before he could proceed any further, a hairy 
hand snatched the radio from him. The guard 
found himself face-to-face with a huge gorilla. 
He froze. 
The second guard dove for his gun. But a 
large owl swooped down, grabbed the gun in its 
talons, and flew off. 
<We mean you no harm. Now, would you open 
this warehouse, please?> I asked. 
The two guards glanced at each other. The 
next second they attempted to run. Marco 
grabbed the first guard and neatly brought him 
down. 
A bobcat jumped gracefully from the roof of 
the warehouse. It landed on the back of the sec-
ond guard. The guard fell forward onto his stom-
ach. Tuan stepped calmly from the guard's back. 
<Thanks, dude,> Marco said. 
<No problem.> 
Tuan si inked away. 
With my tail blade I severed the chain that 
locked the doors of Warehouse A. 
91 

Marco and I entered the warehouse. 
Marco snorted in disgust. 
The warehouse was filled with boxes stacked 
all the way to the ceiling. On the side of each box 
was written the word "SPAM" in large black let-
ters. 
<What is SPAM?> I asked. 
Marco shrugged. <That's what a lot of people 
would like to know. Come on. This place is just 
full of provisions. Let's move to the next ware-
houses 
We left Warehouse A and carefully ap-
proached Warehouse B, our next assignment. 
We did not have to speak to the guards. Toby 
and another Hork-Bajir had captured and re-
strained them along with the guards from several 
other warehouses. 
It was dark inside the warehouses. But we did 
not want to turn on the lights for fear of arousing 
even more suspicion among the conscious Guards-
men on the base. So the adults used flashlights, 
carefully avoiding shining them near the small 
windows. Rachel used the owl's night vision to 
assist the searches. Cassie relied upon the wolf's 
superior sense of smell to guide her steps. 
Our entire retinue was now spread out over 
the twelve warehouses, hurriedly searching for 
the munitions that Marco and his father had as-
sured us were stored on the base. 
92 
Suddenly I began to feel nervous. There were 
so many of us. So many different species. So 
many different levels of experience. 
The original Animorphs were used to a small 
team and tightly controlled missions. Unless the 
missions got out of control, which they had an 
unnerving tendency to do. 
Still, I was worried. So many things could go 
wrong. . . . 
<Here! Here they are! Warehouse J,> James 
shouted. 
Within moments those members of our larger 
team not on lookout duty had assembled at 
Warehouse J. 
The munitions were packed in approximately 
twenty-five, six-foot-long crates. On each crate 
were printed warnings and admonishments such 
as "Handle With Care" and "Do Not Open With-
out Authorization." 
<How many crates can we load in two or three 
trucks and still have room for us?> Cassie asked. 
Jake spoke. <l don't know. Probably ten, to-
tal? All the new Animorphs will have to travel as 
birds or fleas on birds. The core group needs to 
be with the trucks. And the Hork-Bajir will have 
to squeeze in somehow. It'll be tight. But we 
have to do this. Come on. Let's load.> 
Jake called to Tobias to have the two trucks 
brought around to Warehouse J. 
93 

When the trucks arrived, Toby signaled to two 
Hork-Bajir. They took up positions on each end of 
the first crate and grabbed the edges with their 
large, clawlike hands. 
Then they hoisted the crate off the floor. 
And a shrieking alarm pierced the night. 
94 
<Come on, come on, come on!> Jake called. 
<l'm demorphing in case I have to talk us out of 
trouble. Ax, go human. Marco, Rachel, and Cassie, 
stay in your morphs for now. But hang back. Don't 
get nasty unless you absolutely have to. James, 
you guys stay in morph and stay out of sight.> 
I began to morph. 
Toby's Hork-Bajir stepped up the pace of their 
loading. 
CLUMPclumpclumpclump. 
The steady thud of military boots somewhere 
on base. Twenty, thirty, maybe more National 
Guardsmen gathering for a showdown. 
Shouts. 
More alarms. 
95 

"The Guardsmen are heading for the gates, 
Prince Jake," I said. "They will attempt to stop 
and engage us there." 
"Hurry! Hurry!" Rachel's mother, from the 
driver's seat of one of the trucks. 
<Yeah, we get it, Mom!> Rachel snapped 
back. 
"Where are you going?" Jake yelled. Marco, 
still in gorilla morph, stopped and turned to face 
Jake. 
<Toget my dad!> 
"Stop right now or I'll get Toby to stop you!" 
Marco laughed disbelievingly. <You'll do 
what? > 
Jake stared stonily. "Get back here. Now!" he 
ordered. 
<l'm going to get my dad,> Marco repeated. 
Jake shook his head. "Nobody leaves this 
fight now. This is it! The real deal. Maybe the last 
one. We came in together. We're going out to-
gether. I'm not risking having to leave one of my 
team behind. Get it?" 
Marco stood, hesitant. Uncertain. 
I watched, holding my breath. Jake was 
Marco's best friend. But it was Marco's father 
who would be stranded on base, possibly at the 
mercy of the Yeerks. Would Marco acknowledge 
Jake's authority? Would this mission hold to-
gether? 
96 
"For god's sake, Marco," Rachel's mother 
shouted. "Let's get loaded and get out of here. 
Your dad will be fine. Come on!" 
For once, a bossy and impatient adult was ex-
actly what was needed. 
Marco loped back toward the trucks. 
At the gate to the base a battalion of soldiers 
and vehicles was continuing to gather. 
We would have to outrun them. And we would 
have to outrun them with trucks that were loaded 
with explosives. 
The last of the crates had been loaded. We 
were ready. 
"Rachel, Cassie, Marco, demorph!" Jake or-
dered now. "Get in the trucks. Tobias, stay in the 
air, okay?" 
<You got it, Jake.> 
"Good," Jake said. "Remember. We're not go-
ing to fight if we can at all help it. We're going to 
run our butts off." 
The Hork-Bajir jumped into the trucks on top 
of the crates. 
Rachel climbed in next to her mother. I 
squeezed in next to Rachel and slammed the 
door shut. In the cargo area, Loren and Eva 
perched precariously. 
Marco, Cassie, and Jake jammed themselves 
into the second truck with Michelle. Cassie's dad 
took the wheel. 
97 

"GO!" Jake shouted. 
The small convoy drove slowly but steadily 
toward the front gate. We did not want to have to 
knock through a fence. To do so might cause an 
explosion. 
And we had to hope we could get through the 
open gate without killing innocent National 
Guardsmen. 
But the soldiers were waiting. Of course. 
Three rows of soldiers. Armed. Rifles at the 
ready. 
Our truck was in the lead. When Rachel's 
mother saw the barricade of soldiers she auto-
matically slowed down. "What now?" she said. 
"What now!" 
"Ram them," Rachel instructed coldly. 
"No!" 
"Ram them!" Rachel placed her foot over her 
mother's on the gas pedal. The truck acceler-
ated. 
"Stop it! Rachel! Stop it!" Naomi screamed. 
"We'll kill them!" 
A soldier, obviously a captain, stepped out in 
front of the troops and held up his hand. 
It was a simple gesture. No gun. No threat. 
Just a request to stop. 
Rachel pressed her foot down even harder on 
her mother's. Naomi yelped. 
It was up to me to take control. 
98 
"Rachel!" I shouted. "I am ordering you to 
stop! You must obey my command!" 
"Shut up, Ax!" Rachel grabbed the steering 
wheel with her left hand. 
Naomi shoved Rachel toward me, grabbed 
her daughter's hand on the wheel, desperately 
tried to regain control of the truck. 
But Rachel was too strong. Too determined. 
We were going to crash right into the National 
Guard officer. We were going to kill him. 
So I used my strong human arms and grabbed 
Rachel's hands pulling them from the wheel. It 
certainly took her by surprise. Her hand slipped 
from the steering wheel. Her foot from the gas 
pedal. 
With a dreadful screech the truck came to a 
stop. Not ten feet from the captain. 
99 

Rachel 
turned on me furiously. "What do 
you think you're doing?" 
"Jake gave you an order," I lied. 
"What order?" she demanded. 
"An order to stop," Naomi said, glancing at 
me. "I heard it, too." 
For a split second Rachel looked stricken. 
Then the look of fury returned to her face and she 
slammed her palm on the dashboard. 
I turned and looked behind me. The other 
truck behind us had also been forced to stop. 
Jake climbed out of the second truck and 
walked past us, toward the captain. 
The captain, seeing only a boy, visibly re-
laxed. 
100 
This told me that the captain was not a Yeerk. 
He saw a young human. Not a threat. 
If he were a Yeerk he would have a detailed 
description of Jake and be on the lookout for 
him. 
Jake signaled to the humans to step out of 
the trucks. They did, and so did I. 
"Son! What is going on?" the captain de-
manded. 
"Sir, do you believe in sentient life on other 
planets?" Jake asked. "Aliens?" 
"Is this some kind of a joke?" the captain de-
manded. "You're in a lot of trouble, young man." 
"Sir. Please answer the question. I have two 
trucks loaded with bombs. It's important that you 
answer my question." 
The captain signaled to his men. They began 
to fan out and surrounded our convoy. Their 
weapons were held at the ready. 
"Son, I don't believe in flying saucers. I don't 
believe in little green men. And I don't know 
what this is all about. But I do know that kids 
and bombs are not a good combination. If this is 
a school prank, it's a doozy, but. . ." 
"Ax," Jake said. "Would you come here, 
please." 
I got out of the truck and walked forward to 
take my place at his side. 
"Sir, did you see the governor on television re-
101 

cently?" Jake asked the captain. "Did you hear 
her speech about the Yeerk invasion?" 
"Of course. But I received word from my ma-
jor that it was hoax. A very sophisticated hoax. 
The governor was sent away to a rehab center. 
Something about drugs or losing her mind. Lieu-
tenant Colonel Larsen is being court-martialed 
for his association with the governor. Several 
troops from area bases have been deployed into 
the city to prevent panic from breaking out." 
"Captain, I'm asking you to tell your people 
not to shoot. You're about to see something dis-
turbing but not dangerous." 
The captain considered for a moment before 
answering. "Okay, son," he said finally. "I'm not 
sure why I'm giving you my word but I am." The 
captain turned to his troops and gave the order to 
hold fire. 
"Ax?" Jake said. 
I began to demorph. 
As I have said, morphing is not pretty and it is 
not graceful. To the uninitiated it is undoubtedly 
frightening. 
SCHLUUP! 
I felt my human face began to tighten. My hu-
man lips turned inward and began to seal over. 
My human nose receded and was replaced by 
the distinctive slitted Andalite nose. 
CREEEEEEK! 
102 
Human shoulders, chest, and arms shrunk 
and remolded into the narrower, more delicate 
Andalite shoulders, chest, and arms. 
Strong Andalite hindquarters erupted in one 
smooth motion. My admirable Andalite tail and 
tail blade followed. 
With an audible tinkling sound, my skin was 
covered with attractive blue-and-tan fur. 
Though my eyes were neither fully human nor 
Andalite, I could see the expression on the cap-
tain's face. He looked appalled. I heard him call 
for a doctor. 
"No! No doctors. He's fine," Jake said. 
"He's dying," the captain cried hoarsely. 
"No, sir, he's not," Jake replied. "He's only 
demorphing." 
103 

I finished demorphing and saw myself sur-
rounded by faces that displayed a range of human 
emotion. Fascination. Horror. Exaltation. Terror. 
Even joy. 
"They're here!" one soldier cried. "They really 
are here!" 
"Martians?" another guy asked. 
"That stuff that's been on the Internet lately. 
Do you suppose it's true?" a woman whispered. 
At that point, Jake gave the signal and the 
Hork-Bajir came clumping out of the trucks. 
The soldiers fell back. I heard clicking and 
clattering as they shot the bolts of their guns and 
took aim. 
104 
"Remember, sir!" Jake said loudly. "You are 
not in any danger." 
"Hold your fire!" the captain shouted. But his 
voice shook. He turned to Jake. "I thought it had 
to be a hoax," he said. "I mean, in a million 
years . . . " 
"Captain, let me explain that just as not all 
humans are bad, not all aliens are bad, either. 
The Yeerks are the ones infesting Earth. The An-
dalites and the Hork-Bajir are our allies." 
Jake motioned toward me. 
"Captain, may I introduce Aximili-Esgarrouth-
Isthill. He's an Andalite. And he's been part of 
the Earth resistance since the start. His brother, 
War Prince Elfangor-Sirinial-Shamtul, died fight-
ing to protect Earth from the Yeerks." 
The captain nodded. When I held out my 
hand he hesitated. Then we each stepped for-
ward and shook. Briefly. His hand was much 
stronger than mine. I resisted the impulse to 
cringe. 
"Toby?" Jake called. With as much grace as a 
Hork-Bajir can muster, Toby stepped forward from 
the shadows. Involuntarily, the captain stepped 
back. 
"Toby is the leader of a group of free Hork-
Bajir, also valuable members of the resistance. 
Together we've been fighting the Yeerks. When 
105 

we're lucky, freeing more of Toby's people. And 
maybe someday her home planet." 
"It is a pleasure to make your acquaintance," 
Toby said. 
The captain nodded. Murmured something 
about aliens speaking more perfect English than 
most of his troops. 
"There's one more thing." Jake proceeded to 
tell the captain the Animorphs' story, beginning 
with Elfangor. "But now the Yeerks have gotten 
hold of the morphing techology," he finished. 
"We've lost our major advantage. It's a bad situa-
tion." 
The captain's face expressed several contra-
dictory emotions in rapid succession. Disbelief 
followed by belief. Horror followed by fascina-
tion. Finally, he spoke. 
"What's the current problem?" he asked. 
Jake allowed a small smile to flit across his 
face. The captain was at least willing to listen 
further. 
"There's a Yeerk pool complex under our 
town," he explained. "It extends for miles, into 
every surrounding neighborhood. It's where the 
Yeerks have to go every three days to feed. There 
are entrances in every place from fast food 
restaurants to the mail. It's the largest enemy 
concentration on the planet. Recently the Yeerks 
have gotten control of subway trains and six or 
106 
seven lines of tracks. We figure they did some 
simple construction that now leads the tracks 
right into the pool complex. We've seen them 
herding people at gunpoint down into various 
subway stations and onto trains. From there, the 
people are shipped off for infestation." Jake 
paused and looked intently at the captain. "We 
need your explosives to blow up the pool com-
plex." 
"But I have no orders," the captain protested. 
"I can't allow you to leave this base with those 
explosives." 
That's when Rachel's mother stepped for-
ward. "Captain Olston!" 
"Naomi. What in the world are you doing 
here?" the captain said. 
Rachel's mother and the captain shook 
hands. "How are you, sir?" 
The captain smiled weakly. "Under the cir-
cumstances, uh, fine. And still a soldier. Thanks 
to you." 
Rachel's mom turned to the rest of us. "I rep-
resented Captain Olston's oldest son when he 
was wrongfully accused of car theft." 
The captain smiled warmly. "You'll never 
know how grateful my family is. If Robert had 
been convicted, I probably would have resigned 
in order to keep pressing his case. You saved my 
son's future and my career." 
107 

He cleared his throat and frowned. "But 
what's your role in all of this? Why didn't you 
come forward before?" 
"I know it sounds insane, Captain Olston, but 
the Yeerk invasion is real. No matter what you've 
heard about the governor lying or being ill. She 
was telling the truth and now, obviously, she's 
being punished for it." 
"I'm glad to hear the governor's name 
cleared," the captain said. "She's the best per-
son this state's ever had in that office." 
"We're the resistance, Captain," Naomi went 
on. "And this . . . this kid," she said, gesturing 
toward Jake, "my nephew, Jake, is in charge. So 
the person to speak to is him. I just thought I'd 
back him up a little." 
The captain frowned and turned back to Jake. 
"Son, no offense, but you're younger than my 
own youngest boy. He's a fine young man, but I 
could never in good conscience send him off to 
the city with a couple of trucks full of bombs. 
You don't actually expect me to allow this, do 
you?" 
Jake spoke firmly but with respect. "We'll 
fight our way out of here if we have to, sir. And if 
we fight, we'll win. But we don't want to have to 
do that. What we really want is your help." 
Suddenly, there was a scuffle and a shout. A 
shot went wild and barely missed Jake's head. 
108 
Three soldiers wrestled a fourth soldier to the 
ground. 
"Sir," a soldier reported. "Private Grigsby took 
aim at the boy. He was about to kill him." 
Jake turned to the captain. "Grigsby's a human-
Controller. That means he's got a Yeerk in his 
head. There may be more of them in your ranks." 
Captain Olston shook his head. "I'm having a 
hard time taking this all in. As I said, I received 
orders the other day that the Yeerk invasion story 
was a huge and elaborate multimedia hoax. I was 
told that certain troops were needed in the city to 
prevent panic. The major said that under no cir-
cumstances was I to interfere." 
"Then your major is a Yeerk," Jake said. 
Captain Olston's face turned ashen. "That 
means . . ." 
"It means you have to act on your own author-
ity," Rachel's mother said. 
I watched Captain Olston's face and thought I 
understood his feelings. It is the willingness to 
take orders from your superiors and then to obey 
them that keeps an army from becoming a mob. 
"Sir," Jake urged. "We don't have a lot of 
time. There are Yeerks everywhere. We may have 
been spotted. There may be Yeerks among your 
own men who have already managed to get word 
to the city. We must move forward." 
Rachel's mother, long Jake's biggest critic, 
109 

put her hand on Jake's shoulder. "Listen to him, 
Captain Olston. He's probably the one who's go-
ing to wind up saving our lives. Maybe even the 
life of the planet." 
The captain stared at Jake, and then at me, 
for what seemed like a long time. Then he 
cleared his throat. 
"What do you need, son?" 
110 
Marco's father was summoned from the med-
ical unit to confer. Captain Olston offered men, 
material, and trucks. 
Marco's father first apologized to Captain Ol-
ston for having to resort to subterfuge. Then he 
explained what he considered to be the optimum 
freight per truck. 
"But won't that increase volatility?" Captain 
Olston asked. 
"Yes. But I don't think we have a choice. 
We're going to have one shot at this. So we want 
to pack as many explosives onto one train as we 
can. That means we're going to have to haul a lot 
of explosives." 
111 

"But why not take ten or twenty trucks? We've 
got them." 
"Too many trucks would attract too much at-
tention," Jake said. "Especially if your unit has 
orders to stay out of the city. But we'll take you 
up on a few more trucks, if you can spare them. A 
total of five. And you and some of your people." 
We were back at Warehouse J. 
The Hork-Bajir and the captain's men had un-
loaded the explosives and were reloading them 
so they were packed more stably. 
"What about the timers and fuses?" the cap-
tain asked. 
"I'll set the fuses and the timers," Marco's 
dad said. "I'm an engineer. Explosives weren't 
my specialty back before this war but you learn 
what you have to." 
"Please, let my sergeant help you," Captain 
Olston said. "Explosives are her specialty." He 
spoke to an assistant who ran off and returned a 
few minutes later with a small blonde woman. 
Sergeant Tara Weston. 
While she and Marco's father conferred, I 
hung back and thought. 
Though the explosives technology was primi-
tive by Andalite standards, I was fairly confident 
that it would do the job. If we could get the ex-
plosives down into one of the subway stations 
and onto an empty train. 
112 
That was a big "if." 
I looked over to where Rachel's mother leaned 
against the side of her truck, sipping water from 
a bottle. 
I found it interesting that Captain Olston had 
been grateful to Rachel's mother. Rachel had 
seemed so sure that her mother was of very little 
use at all. So had we. But clearly, the captain re-
garded Naomi the lawyer as very useful. 
Because of Rachel's mother, the captain had 
retained his post. And because he was a smart 
and honest leader, we were receiving the help we 
needed. 
I began to think Rachel had been unfairly 
contemptuous of her mother. I think Rachel 
might have been reaching the same conclusion. 
I watched her approach her mother. She did 
not swagger as she usually did. 
Although I do not approve of what humans 
call eavesdropping, I could not help but overhear 
some of their conversation. 
"Mom," Rachel said softly. "I . . . I'm sorry. 
I . . ." 
"Rachel, it's okay 
" 
The rest I could not hear. Suddenly, Rachel's 
shoulders began to shake. 
She was crying. It was an odd and disturbing 
thing to see. But still, I was glad to see her cry. 
Rachel is one human for whom I had never 
113 

felt pity. But now, I felt an odd sense of kinship. 
Perhaps Rachel, like me, suddenly realized that 
the gulf between the present and her childhood 
was an abyss of loss. 
The loading was finished. There were shouted 
orders as we prepared to depart the base. Na-
tional Guardsmen and Hork-Bajir scrambled to 
take their places on five trucks. We planned to 
morph birds and follow in the air. James and his 
group had been told to follow us closely. 
The parents were thanked and asked to return 
immediately to camp. There they would wait for 
news of the mission's success. Or failure. 
They did not argue. 
Rachel's mother kissed her daughter on the 
cheek and then stepped back into the shadows. 
Marco shook his father's hand and hugged his 
mother. Proud. But protective. 
Tobias had morphed to human to say good-
bye to his mother. He held her hand, reassuring 
her that all would be well. 
Cassie and her parents put their arms around 
each other and touched their foreheads together 
for a moment before parting. 
I knew what was happening. Everyone was 
saying whatever it is that one says to friends and 
family when they realize they might be parted 
forever. I had not had such a chance with either 
my parents or my brother, Elfangor. 
114 
Jake had not had such a chance with his fam-
ily, either. 
Jake, my prince, stood alone and apart. 
This might be our last night alive. 
I knew he felt keenly the absence of his own 
family. I could not be his family. He could not be 
mine. But I could be his friend. 
I walked over to him. "You are my prince," I 
said. "And whatever happens next, know that I 
am proud to have served you." 
Jake smiled wistfully and put his hand on my 
shoulder. "Ax, for the last time . . ." 
"Yes?" 
"Don't call me 'prince.'" 
115 

We reached the city. 
<Okay,> Tobias reported. <There's a subway 
station on Shawmut Street that's not being used 
to load people. Yet. But it is under guard.> 
<Probably our best bet,> Jake agreed. <Can 
you get us there?> 
Under Tobias's direction, our five-truck con-
voy rolled through the streets of the city. We Ani-
morphs followed, spread out in the air. 
It was early morning, before rush hour. There 
was little usual commuter traffic. But the side-
walks were packed with people being herded 
toward subway entrances. 
Some wore pajamas and nightgowns and 
bathrobes. 
116 
It was clear that the Yeerk roundup was no 
longer confined to passersby and motorists. The 
Yeerks were on the attack. Going from house to 
house. Rousting people out of their beds and 
forcing them at gunpoint to the subway stations 
and then onto the trains. 
Our convoy headed up to the Shawmut Street 
station and pulled to a stop. 
Captain Olston jumped out of the first truck 
and signaled his troops to follow. A small but 
dedicated and hand-selected group of men and 
women. 
The captain and his troops, guns at the ready, 
walked briskly toward the small detachment of 
National Guard soldiers guarding the entrance. 
The detachment, ten strong, wordlessly closed 
ranks and put their hands on their weapons. 
"Step aside, soldiers," Captain Olston com-
manded loudly. "We're unloading some equip-
ment." 
"Sir," one of the detachment answered. "We 
have no orders to receive equipment." 
"Where is your commanding officer?" the 
captain boomed. 
Immediately, there was the sound of ringing 
footsteps on metal plated stairs. 
The soldiers parted. 
A major emerged from the station below and 
smiled benignly. "Captain Olston! I am surprised 
117 

to see you. I believe you had orders to stay on 
your base." 
"I did," Captain Olston said icily. "But those 
orders have been rescinded." 
"On whose authority?" the major asked, his 
smile looking quite a bit tighter. 
"On his." Captain Olston nodded at some-
thing behind the major. The major turned and let 
out a shout of surprise. 
Marco, in gorilla morph, took him down. 
It all happened too fast for the Yeerk soldiers 
to react. 
A grizzly, a tiger, a wolf, and an Andalite ap-
peared as if from nowhere and quietly knocked 
the ten men unconscious. 
Toby and several Hork-Bajir swarmed from 
the trucks, gathered the Yeerk major and his sol-
diers, and hefted them down the subway stairs. 
In the station they locked the eleven in the toll 
booth. 
Tobias gave the all-clear and assured us he 
saw no other Yeerk force running to the scene of 
the ambush. We joined the Hork-Bajir on the 
subway platform. James and his original team 
completed our force. 
Just as a train came rumbling into the station. 
<Here's our train,> Jake said grimly. <Get 
ready. > 
118 
I watched as the first few cars passed before 
us. Each car was packed with terrified people. 
Some pressed their faces against the windows. 
Some pounded and screamed for help. Others 
just looked stunned and hopeless. 
We stood on the platform, waiting to be spot-
ted. And just as we had hoped, the Yeerks com-
manding the train pulled to an abrupt and 
screeching stop. 
The doors opened. People surged out and 
pelted for the subway stairs. Those from the 
first cars, already in the dark tunnel, tore back 
through the train toward the open platform. All 
were so terrified, all were so desperate for es-
cape, that they paid no attention to the strange 
group that stood lined up on the platform. 
A grizzly. Rachel. 
A gorilla. Marco. 
A tiger. Jake. 
A wolf. Cassie. 
A lion. James. 
A crocodile. Collette. 
A bobcat. Tuan. 
A bull. Kelly. 
And an Andalite. 
When the train had emptied of uninfested hu-
mans, a group of ten human-Controllers in various 
military uniforms stepped onto the platform. 
119 

One of the human-Controllers came for-
ward. "So," he said, laughing, "it looks like the 
circus is in town." He turned to his compan-
ions. "How about we join them in the center 
ring?" 
Immediately, the human-Controllers began to 
morph. 
<Jake!> Rachel's voice was shrill. <Let's get 
them before they're in battle morphs!> 
<No! We give them a fair fight. We fight the 
Yeerks. We don't become them.> 
The first human-Controller morphed to rhino. 
Another morphed to polar bear. Another to chee-
tah. 
The remaining seven morphed to wolf. 
Suddenly, the rhino lowered his head, 
snorted, and charged! 
<Go!> Jake commanded. 
Rachel rushed the rhino with the grizzly's sur-
prising speed. They collided! 
121 
120 

Rachel's amazing bulk absorbed the majority 
of the blow, but the rhino's horn caught her in 
the leg and opened a huge gash. 
It was the signal everyone was waiting for. 
Battle was joined. Every animal leaped into 
the fray. 
Tuan's bobcat rushed the cheetah. It flipped 
easily away . . . but Collette was waiting. 
SNAAAAAP! 
With a crack of the crocodile's deadly jaws, 
she caught the cheetah's back leg and dragged 
the cat to the ground. Brutally the crocodile 
shook the cat from side to side. The cheetah's 
head slammed against the side of the train. Col-
lette released the still body. 
<Marco, behind you!> I warned. 
<Got it.> 
With a nimble roll, Marco ducked out of the 
way of the rhino. And gave it a good punch on the 
head as it passed. 
One stalk eye swiveled . . . 
FWAP! 
One wolf down. But. . . 
"Grrrrrrrr, grrrrr, grrOWWWWRR!" 
Two other snarling, snapping, growling wolves 
leaped at me. Attempted to back me against the 
wall. 
FWAP! 
My tail blade nicked one across the ear. 
122 
The bleeding wolf yelped but did not back off. 
He bared his teeth and snarled more ferociously. 
The fur along his back bristled. Then, they both 
jumped at me. 
FWAP! 
FWAP! 
They fell heavily to the platform and lay bleed-
ing. I leaped over their prone bodies. But before I 
could seek out another opponent. . . 
WHUMPF! 
Something massive collapsed on top of me! 
Something huge and smothering. 
It was the polar bear. 
I struggled to whip my tail, but in vain. The 
massive weight of the polar bear prevented any 
part of me from moving at all. I could not 
breathe. I could not see. 
I was blacking out. 
Then, I heard rifle shots. 
The weight became even heavier. Then sud-
denly, several Guardsmen were pulling the dead 
bear off me. 
Captain Olston's men had joined us on the 
platform and opened fire on our attackers. I 
struggled to my feet. Saw a dead polar bear, a 
dead rhino, a dead cheetah. And many dead 
wolves. 
Many dead wolves! 
My hearts stopped. 
123 

I looked in every direction at once. 
Where was Cassie? 
All about me there was bustle and activity. 
Our team and Captain Olston's men hurried to 
unload the trucks waiting outside the station and 
then to pack the now empty train with bombs. 
I galloped from one wolf body to the next. 
Captain Olston's men would not be able to distin-
guish one wolf from another. 
In the heat of battle, neither would I, unless 
they were directly attacking me. 
Cassie! 
I had thought I hated Cassie. 
But I did not. I felt for her as I felt for the oth-
ers. And now she was dead. 
I regretted my harsh words. I regretted so 
much. 
"Ax! Come on! We have work to do." 
I turned, unable to believe my ears. The voice 
belonged to Cassie. 
She stood beside Jake at the foot of the sub-
way stairs. Both of them had demorphed. 
"Come on, Ax," Jake said. "I need you. We've 
got some decisions to make." 
I ran to join them. 
I looked at Cassie and she looked at me. 
I did not have to tell her that I did not really 
hate her. 
I think she already knew. 
124 
The train was packed with explosives set to 
blow five minutes after the detonator was keyed. 
That five minutes would give uninfested hu-
mans, human-Controllers, and Hork-Bajirtime to 
run for their lives. I must admit I don't think any 
of us cared much about the Taxxons' safety. 
More than five minutes might give the Yeerks 
time to figure out how to deactivate the bombs. 
"Okay," Jake said. "We're all set. We'll need 
three people to ride the train. I'll go. That means 
I need two volunteers to go with me." 
"Since this is basically all my fault," Cassie 
said, "I'm going. 
"Noway," Rachel argued. "I'm going." 
125 

Marco stepped forward. "Jake, I'm sorry, 
man, but you can't be one of the three." 
"Why not?" Jake shrugged. "I'm the only one 
with no family." 
"Maybe. For now," Marco said firmly. "But my 
point is that the rest of us do have families, right 
now. Families we care about. You're the one we 
trust the most. You're the one who's kept us to-
gether, kept us alive, and kept us sane. You're 
the one we trust most to get every one of us out 
of here and back to camp." 
Cassie and Rachel nodded. 
<You're the one irreplaceable person in this 
operations Tobias said. 
Jake took a deep breath. "Okay. Okay. I'm not 
saying you guys are right. But we don't have time 
to argue. You win. But who is going? Remember, 
whoever goes probably doesn't come back." 
I stepped forward. <l will go.> 
Jake looked at me for a long time. "Why?" 
<For reasons I cannot discuss,> I answered. I 
was now officially a traitor to my own planet and 
people. And if the other Animorphs knew that I 
had been privy to the high command plans of 
quarantine, they would regard me as a traitor to 
Earth, as well. 
If I did not come back from this mission, per-
haps it was best. All I wanted was a chance to die 
126 
as well as Elfangor. To strike a blow against the 
Yeerks. To do what I could to bring an end to this 
war. 
Jake asked me no further questions. And I 
wondered if he knew more than I realized. In a 
way I hoped so. 
Maybe one day, we would have a chance to 
talk. 
One day. 
"I'm going," Marco said. 
"I'm going," Cassie repeated. 
"No way," Rachel argued. "What about me!" 
"Cassie's going," Jake said. "If there are tough 
decisions to be made along the way, I want Cassie 
to make them. She's as close as I can get to go-
ing myself. And Marco's going because . . . I 
don't know. I guess because he'll enjoy the ride. 
Rachel, I need you here with me." 
Cassie smiled at Jake and he smiled back. 
Even Rachel looked somewhat appeased. 
In spite of the fact that we were all facing al-
most certain death, somehow it began to feel like 
old times. Before the war had gotten so terribly 
ugly. 
Somehow, the rifts were beginning to mend. 
The Animorphs were a team again. 
Down the line, we heard the scream of an en-
gine and a whistle. 
127 

"Go!" Jake said urgently. "Go. There's an-
other train coming in behind this one. If they see 
this one stopped, they'll get suspicious." 
No one embraced or said good-bye. There was 
no time. Marco, Cassie, and I ran onto the train 
and toward the engineer's booth. Marco pressed 
the lever that powered the train. 
The train jerked and began to move forward. 
"Come on," Cassie said to me. "Let's do an-
other check. Make sure everything's in place." 
The detonators had been set up in the car just 
behind the engineer's booth. Cassie and I double-
checked that everything Marco's father and 
Sergeant Weston had set in place was indeed in 
order. 
The train picked up speed. We raced deeper 
into the tunnel. Closer all the time to the Yeerk 
pool. 
The noise of the train's wheels on the tracks 
grew louder. We rounded a bend. 
WHUMPF! 
Cassie and I were thrown to the opposite side 
of the train car. 
"We're approaching a station," Marco yelled. 
"Get down. The Yeerks see an empty train go 
speeding by, they're going to shoot." 
The lights of the station were visible ahead. 
Cassie and I ducked. I allowed my stalk eyes 
128 
to remain erect so I could glimpse through the 
bottom sliver of window. 
Hork-Bajir and human-Controllers were guard-
ing a large group of people on the platform. They 
stepped forward, as if expecting the train to stop. 
But the train sped through the station. 
And the Yeerks began to fire. 
129 

Tseeew! Tseeew! 
Dracon fire shattered the windows of several 
cars. 
All along the train the lights flickered off, 
then on again. And I smelled smoke. 
Shouting! It was Marco. But I could not un-
derstand what he was saying. 
The acrid burning smell grew sharper. 
I heard the problem before I saw it. A crack-
ling, sizzling, snapping, live cable had detached 
from the ceiling. It flew madly around the inside 
of the car like an electrified whip. Blue-and-
white sparks shot in every direction. 
The cable swung toward us! 
130 
~
Cassie dove under a seat. The cable missed 
her by inches. "If that thing hits the fuse, it'll 
blow this train before we get to the pool!" she 
yelled. 
The cable whipped past my head! 
I ducked. 
"Can't you guys do something?" Marco 
yelled. 
"I'm on it." Cassie rolled out from under the 
seat, struggled to her feet, and grabbed the over-
head passenger bar that ran the length of the car. 
<Cassie! No!> 
The live cable hit the metal bar! Blue-and-
white sparks raced right for Cassie! 
Cassie released her grip on the passenger bar 
a nanosecond before the blue-and-white streak 
sizzled past her. 
The train hurled around a corner. Cassie was 
thrown roughly to the other side of the car. 
So was I. My hooves skidded out from be-
neath me and I fell heavily on my side. 
"Can't we slow down?" Cassie shouted. 
"No!" Marco yelled. "I haven't figured out 
how to work the brake." 
Just then, I heard the doors at the back of the 
car slide open. 
And looked up to see a squadron of three 
Blue Band Hork-Bajir clumping toward us. They 
131 

must have been hiding on the train all along. No 
other explanation. How could we have missed 
them? 
I scrambled to my feet. Tried desperately to 
keep my balance. 
Cassie was not in morph. Neither was Marco. 
It was up to me. 
I would have to keep the Hork-Bajir from 
killing us before the train reached its destina-
tion. 
I readied myself for battle. Curved my tail 
over my head. 
The live cable snapped and sizzled around me. 
The Hork-Bajir moved steadily forward, eyes 
on me, the blades on their knees and elbows 
whisking. 
Then . . . 
WHOOOSH! 
Something came whizzing through the car 
door the Hork-Bajir had left open. 
A red-tailed hawk! 
"Tseeer!" 
It buzzed the Blue Bands' heads, raked their 
heads with its ripping talons! 
The train rounded a corner at shocking speed. 
And in their startled surprise, the Hork-Bajir 
reached for the metal passenger bar to steady 
themselves. 
Just as the live cable whipped against it. 
132 
ZZZZZAAAAATTT!!!! 
The lights in the car flickered off and on. The 
metal bar turned blue and white. Sparks flew 
wildly through the air. 
I watched the three Blue Band Hork-Bajir 
turn momentarily translucent as volts of electric-
ity surged through them. 
Then, it was over. 
The electrical current, overloaded, went 
dead. And the Hork-Bajir fell to the floor. 
Cassie rolled out from beneath the seat. 
It was almost pitch-dark. The only light came 
from the dim lamps set in the tunnel walls. 
<Tobias!> I shouted. <Where are you?> 
Tobias didn't answer. But I saw the red-tailed 
hawk dart out a broken window and disappear. 
<l do not understands I said to Cassie. 
But Cassie had run to the window. "Thank 
you, James," she shouted. 
But her voice could barely be heard over the 
clattering of the racing train. 
133 

On and on through the dark tunnel we raced. 
The train was now traveling on newly laid track. 
At intervals we raced past teams of Taxxons and 
Hork-Bajir, digging at work sites by the light of 
burning flares. 
Some looked curiously at the dark, empty train 
hurtling past, but then continued with their work. 
Marco came out of the engineer's booth. 
"We're almost there, kids. We're about two min-
utes from impact. I suggest we start morphing 
now into survivable forms. Roach or flea. Either 
one can tolerate all sorts of abuse." 
"What about the detonator?" Cassie said. 
"I'm going to key it now," Marco said. 
"No!" she cried. "You can't key it now. That 
134 
only gives the people at the pool three minutes to 
escape. That's not enough time." 
"Cassie!" Marco sighed. "We increase the 
risk . . . " 
<Cassie is right,> I said abruptly. <We agreed 
to give a full five minutes to those who wish to 
escape. To give them less would be dishonorable 
and inhumane.> 
Cassie looked at me and smiled. 
"Okay. It's two against one. You guys win." 
Marco paused. "So, who's going to key the deto-
nator?" 
"Coin toss," Cassie said quickly. 
<What?> 
"It's the way we make most major decisions," 
Marco said dryly. "First, you choose heads or tails. 
Then you toss a coin. Whatever side is faceup 
when the coin lands is winner." 
The procedure was simple enough. But I 
could not help but think if this was the method-
ology by which humans made most of their major 
decisions . . . Well, it explained much. 
<l see. However, a coin has only two sides. 
And there are three of us.> 
"Oh." Cassie. "Right." 
"No offense, Cassie," Marco said. "But I 
think it should be me or Ax." 
"Why? You don't trust me to give the people 
only five minutes to escape?" 
135

"I don't trust you not to sacrifice yourself 
somehow in the process. No unnecessary hero-
ics. They give me gas." 
Cassie looked embarrassed but did not argue 
further with Marco. 
I entered into the decision-making process 
called the coin toss. I declared "heads" and I 
"won." 
"You know how to key the detonator?" Marco 
asked, beginning his morph to flea. 
<Of course.> 
Marco was morphing quickly. <Good luck, Ax-
man. See you later.> 
I watched as his head shrank to the size of a 
pin. His arms retracted and disappeared. His 
body shortened until it was almost flat. And then, 
zip! He was no larger than a grain of rice. 
Dark, scaly material began to cover Cassie's 
face. 
Her arms melted against her sides and wings 
flared from her shoulders. Her legs shriveled un-
til they appeared to be wires and she fell forward. 
In less than thirty seconds, she was a roach. I 
watched her scurry underneath a seat. 
The train zoomed on. We were deep, deep in-
side the tunnel. All around us was blackness. I 
poked my head out one of the broken windows 
and saw the end of the line. 
136 
A dim light. The station at the Yeerk pool 
complex. 
One minute had passed. 
The train hurtled closer to its destination. 
The final station. Where the train was sup-
posed to stop and unload its passengers. 
But this train was not going to stop. This train 
was not going to slow down. 
Hork-Bajir and human-Controllers lingered on 
the station platform. Several watched the speed-
ing train approach with alarm. 
The Hork-Bajir and human-Controllers sud-
denly scattered. 
They knew something was wrong. 
Thirty seconds. 
Twenty-nine seconds. 
The detonator. I pressed in the first three dig-
its of the four-digit code. Then I began my 
morph. 
Fortunately, the morph began in my hind end. 
With any luck, the last thing to go would be a fin-
ger. 
/ am the servant of the people . . . 
Fifteen seconds. 
/ am the servant of my prince . . . 
Fourteen seconds. 
I felt my tail curl. Experienced an odd, dry, 
shriveling sensation. My hooves felt papery and 
137 

crunchy. My chest cleaved, forming a thorax and 
belly. 
Nine seconds. 
Eight seconds. 
/ am the servant of honor . . . 
I could hear shouts and screams now above 
the clatter of the train. It was clear that a colli-
sion was imminent. 
Dark, crusty exoskeletal material crept over 
the backs of my hands. My fingers shortened. 
Three seconds. 
Two seconds. 
I pressed the fourth digit just as my finger 
disappeared. 
The train hit the end of the track and I felt it 
go airborne. 
It arced through the air. 
And jackknifed over the Yeerk pool. 
138 
The impact was incredible. Even the roach 
felt it. It was as if the Earth itself had exploded. 
I was thrown through the air and hit a surface 
which could have been anything — a wall, a 
floor, a ceiling. Thankfully, my lightweight roach 
body kept me from being injured. Though for a 
moment or two I felt quite disoriented. 
As soon as the motion stabilized, I realized I 
was floating. The train had landed in the Yeerk 
pool. The car was filling up with liquid. 
I began to demorph. I hoped that Cassie and 
Marco had also survived. 
Fortunately, the car was not completely filled 
with liquid by the time I had regained my An-
139 

dalite form. My head and shoulders were still 
above the sludgy water. 
Every one of the car's windows had been shat-
tered. Getting out of the wrecked train did not 
present a problem. 
When I emerged it was into a scene of dark 
and hideous tragedy. 
Humans, Hork-Bajir, and Taxxons swarmed 
toward the crash site. 
It occurred to me that the Yeerks had not yet 
realized that what they had just witnessed was 
not an accident, but rather, an attack. 
Dead slugs were everywhere. Floating on the 
surface of the pool. Pasted to the sides of the 
buckled and destroyed train. Scattered all over 
the docks. 
Humans and Hork-Bajir in cages screamed 
and struggled and begged to be released. 
I looked around and saw a familiar head pop 
up through the gray sludge. 
Cassie! 
She leaned her head to the side and pounded 
it with the heel of her hand. Her expression was 
one of utter disgust. Then I saw her pull a slug 
from her ear. 
She flung it at the side of the train. It made a 
heavy, wet sound on impact. 
"Hey! If you're finished your swim, don't you 
have an announcement to make?" 
140 
Marco! He stood atop the wreckage. He was 
already morphing. 
Cassie climbed up next to him. "Listen to me! 
Listen!" she cried. 
No one paid any attention to her. 
"Ax! They can't hear me! Too many of them 
can't hear me!" 
<Keep trying, Cassie!> 
She did. And finally people noticed the young 
girl standing on top of the wrecked train in the 
midst of the pool. Finally, hundreds of frightened 
and bewildered creatures listened. 
"There are ten one-thousand-pound bombs 
on this train," Cassie shouted. "They're going to 
go off in four minutes from now. You have four 
minutes to evacuate. Anyone still here in four 
minutes is dead." 
If there had been panic before, Cassie's an-
nouncement produced utter pandemonium. 
Now the Yeerks knew for sure the crash was 
no accident. 
Hork-Bajir stormed for the exits. Knocked 
over human-Controllers and even Taxxons in their 
efforts to escape. 
Those Controllers with morphing ability began 
to morph birds, cheetahs, rats. Anything fast. 
Anything that could fight its way free. 
Marco and I raced to the cages where humans 
and Hork-Bajir were held prior to infestation. 
141 

FWAP! 
FWAP! 
FWAP! 
I used my tail to sever bars, locks, chains, 
and head harnesses. Marco helped the freed 
people to stand, to take off. 
Cassie stood strong in the midst of the 
streaming mass of creatures. "Get out! Get out!" 
she yelled. "All of you!" 
Several human-Controllers did not run imme-
diately for the exits or the tunnels. Instead, they 
joined our efforts to free the imprisoned. Perhaps 
they were unwilling hosts whose Yeerks were cur-
rently feeding in the pool. Perhaps they were 
human-Controllers who worked with their Yeerks 
as members of the freedom movement. 
Quickly these helpers gathered tools and 
stray pieces of metal wreckage. And began to 
break open the locks of the cages. Cage by cage 
they worked to free the prisoners. 
I turned back toward the pool. And saw Marco 
as gorilla struggling with one of the cage. A fe-
male human-Controller ran over with a key. She 
turned it quickly and helped him release the 
trapped people. 
Just as something monstrous rose from the 
surface of the pool. 
142 
The people backed up, and began to run. 
I did not wonder at their actions. 
The head of the creature in the pool resem-
bled that of an octopus. Twenty bloodshot eyes 
dotted the bulbous face. Twenty tentacles grew 
out from the bottom of the head, as large around 
as eels. 
Visser One. Not his most horrifying morph, 
but certainly bad enough. 
<Andalite scum! Vile human resistors! I will 
tear the heads from your bodies before I let you 
escape again!> 
Marco stood his ground. <You want to fight? 
We can fight. But it'll be a short fight. About one 
143 

and a half minutes. Two minutes, tops. And no 
winners.> 
The visser's bloodshot eyes glared. Slowly he 
began to move through the thick, viscous layer of 
dead slugs toward the edge of the pool. Still, 
Marco stood unmoving. The visser lifted one ten-
tacle, as if to strike Marco. Then swiveled several 
of his eyes to look once again at the ruined and 
smoldering train. 
<That's right,> Marco said calmly. <Ten one-
thousand-pound bombs right behind you. No 
lie.> 
For a moment I thought Visser One would 
spontaneously combust. Rage emanated from 
his morphed body. Rage and frustration. He tried 
to speak but his voice came out as a choked gur-
gle. 
And then the octopuslike creature sank below 
the surface of the sludgy pool. 
No doubt the visser was already morphing to 
something that would allow him to escape. Visser 
One always looked after his own interests. 
By now the cages were empty of humans and 
Hork-Bajir alike. The pool complex was largely 
deserted. 
The pool itself remained, stocked with those 
Yeerks that had not died when the train crashed. 
"Time for us to get gone!" Marco ordered. 
Rapidly, we morphed to birds. Two ospreys 
144
and a northern harrier. And we took off after the 
escaping horde. 
Wings working madly we raced along one of 
the tunnels through which crowds of escaping 
Hork-Bajir, Taxxons, human-Controllers, and un-
infested humans were frantically scrambling 
their way to the surface. To freedom. 
Birds of every kind screeched and smashed 
into walls in their panic to get out. People were 
knocked on the floor, stepped on by humans too 
panicked to think. 
All around us was chaos and madness and 
fear. It was the saddest thing I had ever seen in 
this horrible war. Desperation brought on by the 
knowledge of imminent death. 
We had just cleared the first major loop up 
and away from the pool complex when the first 
bomb exploded. 
BA-BOOOOOM! 
There was a short delay and then it was as if a 
hurricane fueled by a blast furnace had come 
raging through the tunnel. 
Large areas of the roof fell in. The floor buck-
led and collapsed. My ears were bombarded by 
screams and cries and shrieks. 
I had lost track of Cassie and Marco. I did not 
know what to do except keep flying. The air was 
almost solid with dust and debris. The heat was 
overwhelming. But still I flew. 
145 

BABOOOOM!BABOOOOM!BABOOOOM! 
Explosions reverberated through one cav-
ernous tunnel after the other. 
Finally, miraculously, where the ceiling had 
caved in up ahead, I saw light. Just a pinpoint. 
But it was enough. 
I flew toward it, rising out of the hideous un-
derground into the open sky. 
146 
1 
Late that day, we perched on the roof of one 
of the few skyscrapers left in the area. 
The destruction was breathtaking. Below us, 
there was a sinkhole where much of downtown 
had been. 
Everything had just caved in. Half the mall, 
several office buildings, train stations, stores — 
all were gone. 
Most of downtown had simply collapsed, 
swallowed up by an explosion the size of a small 
nuclear blast. 
The buildings still standing were cracked. 
Some listed to the side. 
The entire area was ringed with fire engines, 
ambulances, military vehicles, and onlookers. 
147 

<Well,> Marco said thickly, <we did some se-
rious damage. Just like we hoped to do. I'll bet 
we killed a million Yeerks.> 
<Yeah,> Cassie agreed, no note of satisfac-
tion or joy in her voice. 
I felt no sense of satisfaction or joy, either. 
There were many bodies down there. Human 
bodies. Taxxon bodies. Hork-Bajir bodies. 
And perhaps three of the dead or mortally 
wounded were Jake's parents and brother. I knew 
we were all wondering if they had been at the 
pool when the explosion occurred. I also knew 
none of us would talk about it. Not to Jake and 
not to each other. 
What could we possibly say? 
Also, I could not forget that many human-
Controllers had lingered in order to save other 
humans who were not Controllers. 
I suppose I had always known that Cassie was 
right. Always known but had been reluctant to 
admit that Aftran had not been the sole member 
of a Yeerk resistance movement. That there were 
many Yeerks who, given a choice, would choose 
not to conquer. Would choose not to kill. If they 
ever were lucky enough to be given such a choice. 
Yes. Cassie was right. 
We heard the heavy flap of wings and Jake in 
peregrine falcon morph settled beside us. 
Everybody's back at camp and safe,> Jake 
148 
said. <Captain Olston and his troops got out of 
the area in time.> Jake paused. Then said, 
<Good job.> 
<l don't know,> Rachel said slowly. <There's 
no telling how many human-Controllers the 
Yeerks created down there in the past week. 
Thousands maybe. No telling how many es-
caped^ 
<Yes,> Jake agreed. <But without the pool, 
the Yeerks have no way to feed. It'll be a pretty 
horrible three days, but at the end, we're going to 
have a lot more dead Yeerks. And a lot of humans 
who have no illusions about what we're fighting 
against. Not to mention the Hork-Bajir who'll be 
freed, t o o 
<Well, that's something,> Marco pointed out. 
<But you know what the saddest thing about this 
whole situation is?> 
<l wouldn't even know where to begin,> 
Cassie answered. 
<The saddest thing is that this is our greatest 
victory. And I've never felt more depressed in my 
entire life.> 
<Well, just when you think you can't get any 
more depressed,> Tobias said, <look who's drop-
ping in.> 
A large gray shadow fell over the city. We 
looked up and saw Visser One's Blade ship hover-
ing, a swarm of Bug fighters surrounding it. 
149 

<l guess it was too much to hope that he 
wouldn't survive,> Marco said gloomily. 
<No telling what kind of morph got him 
through,> Tobias commented. <But we've hurt 
him. And he'll have some explaining to do to the 
Yeerk High Council.> 
<Come on,> Jake directed. <We're of no use 
here anymore. Let's get back to camp.> 
One by one we took off and winged our way 
back home. 
Visser One wasn't the only one who would 
have some explaining to do. 
I, too, would have to justify my actions to an 
angry Andalite high command. If I chose ever to 
speak to the Andalites again. 
They would never understand and I would 
never be able to explain. 
But for good or ill, I had thrown in my lot with 
the humans. 
Humans. 
Violent but peace-loving. 
Passionate but cerebral. 
Humane but cruel. 
Impulsive but calculating. 
Generous but selfish. 
Humans. Altogether a contradictory and 
deeply flawed species. 
And yet. . . And yet, somehow I knew that 
they represented the best hope of the galaxy. 
Perhaps the only hope. 
<Ax.> Jake, addressing me in private 
thought-speak. 
<Yes?> 
<Thankyou,> he said. 
<You are welcome,> I answered. Then to my-
self, I mentally added, <Prince Jake.> 
151 
150 

