
It's the beginning of the end. . . . 
Time stopped. 
He came to me. The Ellimist. 
The puppet master came to watch my final act. It figured. He 
was in his saintly old-man guise. As fake as everything else about 
him. The all-powerful weakling. The mighty manipulator. 
"You," I said accusingly. 
"Yes." 
"Who are you?" I demanded. "Who are you to play games with 
us? You appear, you disappear, you use us. Who are you? What 
are you?" 
And then, for what seemed a very long time, the Ellimist told 
me. I saw. I understood. 
But I also knew he would not save me. That he couldn't under 
the arcane rules of his millennia-long war with Crayak, 
The Ellimist was there to honor me, and I guess that was nice 
of him. Wasn't going to help me much. 
I wanted so much to live. I wanted so much to stay and not 
leave. In a moment no answer would matter to me, but just the 
same, I wanted to know what I guess any dying person wants to 
know. 
"Answer this, Ellimist: Did I . . . did I make a difference? My 
life, and my . . . my death . . . was I worth it? Did my life really 
matter?" 
"Yes," he said. "You were brave. You were strong. You were 
good. You mattered. . . . " 

CHAPTER 1 
My name is Rachel. 
I knew what was coming. I knew. 
I'd seen it in Jake's eyes. 
And you know what? I was scared. 
I never thought I would be. Cassie thinks I'm 
fearless. Marco thinks I'm reckless. Tobias . . . 
well, Tobias loves me. 
I guess they all do, in different ways. Jake, 
too. But Jake had to do the right thing. 
I felt sorry for him, you know? He's carried the 
weight so long. He's made hard decisions. None 
as hard as this maybe. I didn't blame him, not 
even for a minute. 
But I was scared. 
OCRed By Arpit Nathany 
1 

I guess no one wants to die. I guess everyone 
is scared when the time comes. 
We were so close. We were right there, right at 
the finish line, I'd already survived so many times 
when I shouldn't have. It seemed unfair. To come 
this far, get this close . . . 
Jake gave me the job because he knew that 
only I could do it. Would do it. Ax might have, sure, 
but he was needed for his skills. Me, I'm not the 
computer genius. I'm the one you send when you 
need someone to be crazy, to do the hard thing. 
I don't know whether I'm proud of that or not. 
I was Jake's insurance policy. He thought 
maybe he wouldn't have to use me. He hoped, 
anyway. But down deep he knew, and I knew, and 
we both hid the truth from the others because 
Cassie couldn't let Jake make that decision, and 
Tobias couldn't let me, and those two, by loving 
us, would have screwed everything up. 
It was a war, after all. A war we had to win. 
We hadn't asked the Yeerks to come to Earth. 
They made that call on their own. They're a para-
sitic species, not very big or impressive to look 
at, just these snail-like things that can enter your 
head through your ear. They have a capacity to 
anesthetize the inner ear enough to allow them to 
burrow through the soft tissue. It still hurts but 
not as much as it should. 
They dig their way straight to your brain and 
2 
then flatten themselves out, spread themselves 
down into the crevices, tie directly into your 
synapses. They take control. Absolute control. 
They read your thoughts, they sense your 
emotions. What your eyes see, they see. What 
your tongue tastes, they taste. If your hand moves, 
it's because they moved it. If you speak, it is the 
Yeerk who has spoken through you, made you 
into a ventriloquist's dummy. 
Over the course of years they spread like a 
virus. Invisible. Undetectable. 
They are your teacher, your pastor, your best 
friend. They are the police officer, the TV news-
man, the soldier. Anyone. 
Jake's parents had recently been taken; they 
were human-Controllers — people controlled by 
Yeerks. 
Jake's brother Tom, my cousin, had been a 
Controller for a long time. He was a powerful 
Yeerk. Jake still cared for him, still hoped some-
how he could be saved. 
Jake had sent me away with Tom. 
I understood. I approved. If Jake hadn't sent 
me I'd have gone anyway. 
Still, though, I was scared. 
I had power myself. We all did. The strange, 
unsettling power to absorb DNA from any living 
creature, to then alter our physical bodies to be-
come that creature. 
3 

I've been a whole zoo, you know. Everything 
from a fly to an elephant. Bat. Owl. I've flown, 
way up in the sky with eagle wings. I've flown up 
there with Tobias. Way up in the clouds. If there's 
something better than that, well, I never found it. 
It's not magic. Just technology. Of course tech-
nology always seems like magic at first. Haul a 
tenth-century knight into the modern age and 
show him your cell phone or your TV or your com-
puter or your car. Magic. 
This technology came from the Andalites. The 
Andalites are enemies of the Yeerks, and I guess 
allies of ours, though right at the moment they 
were more likely to annihilate Earth than the 
Yeerks were. You know the old saying, "With 
friends like these, who needs enemies?" 
Anyway, it began with a chance meeting. An 
Andalite prince named Elfangor crashed his 
shot-up fighter in our path. Coincidence? No, 
history. And a helping hand from the Ellimist 
who of course never lends a helping hand. 
Elfangor died, but not before he told us what 
was happening and gave us the morphing tech-
nology. 
I've been a rat. A dolphin . . . oh, man, do 
they have fun. That rush when you're zooming 
straight up through the water, when you see the 
ripply surface of the sea, when you blow through 
4 
that barrier and soar through the air. . . And 
then, splash! And do it all over again. 
So, anyway, we decided we had to try and 
stop the Yeerks. Jake and Tobias and Cassie and 
Marco and Ax, who is Elfangor's little brother, 
and me. We lived this secret life. We fought and 
mostly lost, but we survived. We frustrated the 
Yeerks. We ruined Visser Three's life, though he 
still managed to be promoted to Visser One. 
Maybe we did too good a job frustrating the 
visser. The Yeerks grew tired of infiltration. Visser 
One had been craving open war. And when we 
blew up their ground-based Yeerk pool, the source 
of their food, the center of their lives, it was 
gloves off. 
So much the better as far as I was concerned. 
The time had come to settle things. 
The Yeerks obliterated our town to create a 
dead zone around their construction of a new 
Yeerk pool. They were in a hurry. Without a func-
tioning pool they were getting hungry. 
But there was a worm gnawing at the Yeerk 
race. They had acquired morphing technology 
themselves — in part because of what Jake 
thought was Cassie's betrayal. 
Cassie sees further than I do. Further than 
any of us. She sees deep. The girl cannot dress or 
accessorize to save her life, she's a girl who 
5 

wears manure-stained Wal-Mart jeans for crying 
out loud, but Cassie sees connections and possi-
bilities that others don't. 
She let Tom take the morphing cube. And that 
changed everything. Some Yeerks began to see a 
way out of their parasitic lives. The hunger-crazed 
Taxxons — a race held captive by the Yeerks — 
began to dream of a life without their Yeerk over-
lords. A revolution was brewing. 
At the same time, the Andalite fleet was clos-
ing in, ready to obliterate Earth as the only way to 
stop the Yeerk infestation. They had watched the 
Yeerks concentrate their forces on Earth. They 
were ready to bring down the curtain: Obliterate 
Earth and the Yeerk Empire would be gutted. 
Too bad about those creatures who got in the 
way. What were they called? Oh yeah, humans. 
But Tom betrayed his visser, betrayed the 
Yeerk race. Not for the sake of poor old humanity, 
but for his own ambition. He would escape with 
the morphing cube and with a hard core of faith-
ful Yeerk supporters. He would abandon the Yeerk 
people to the Andalite vengeance, destroy the 
hated Animorphs, and if H. sapiens was annihi-
lated, too, well . . . 
That's where Jake saw his chance. Tom's 
Yeerk is smart. Jake is smarter. 
Now Jake and the others had control of the 
6 
Yeerk Pool ship. Tom had control of the visser's 
own personal Blade ship. 
Tom — the Yeerk in Tom's head — was clos-
ing in for his final act of betrayal: He would kill 
his master, Visser One, and doom his fellow 
Yeerks. He thought we were already dead. 
Surprise, Tom. 
My favorite morph was the grizzly bear. Seven 
feet tall standing erect. You cannot imagine the 
power, especially when united with human intel-
ligence and knowledge. Compared to my grizzly 
morph a human being is like something made 
out of glued-together Popsicle sticks. 
How many times have I felt that change as 
muscle piles on muscle, as the thick brown fur 
covers me, as the rail spike claws grow from my 
fingers? 
The grizzly bear and I had been through a lot 
together. 
I would go to grizzly to kill Tom. 
7 

CHAPTER 2 
I was a flea on Tom's head. A flea can't see 
much really, just an impression of light or dark. 
Not my favorite morph. But if you want to hide 
out, unnoticed, on a human body, you can't beat 
the flea. And with practice you can learn to un-
derstand speech from the distant, distorted vi-
brations that reach your quivering antennae. 
My time was coming, and I had to find a place 
to demorph and remorph. I fired the spring-loaded 
legs and catapulted into the air. 
It took forever for me to fall. The first time you 
do it it scares the pee out of you. Falling and 
falling like that. Like you jumped off the moon 
and were falling to Earth. 
8 
I hit the deck, a fall of thousands of times my 
own height. Flea didn't care. Not even a bruise. 
A strained voice said, "That's . . . that's not a 
waste dump. They aren't dumping waste! That's 
the pool. The main pool. It's been flushed." 
There was an audible gasp from several voices. 
The human-Controllers and Hork-Bajir-Controllers 
who were Tom's bridge crew. 
"Sensors showing . . . it's our people. Sixteen 
thousand . . . maybe seventeen thousand." 
Tom cut in harshly. "It saves us the trouble of 
killing them ourselves." Then, in an undertone, 
"But why? Why would the visser flush . . . what 
does this mean?" 
It means Jake's alive, Tommy boy. You'll fig-
ure it out in a minute, Yeerk. But I'm guessing it 
will be too late. 
Away from blood. That's where I had to go. 
The flea's senses were all attuned to the warm 
scent of blood. But that scent represented dan-
ger to me now, and I hopped away, each bound-
ing leap the equivalent of a human jumping over 
the Grand Canyon. Try getting a flea morph to 
move awayfrom blood. Amazing how much resis-
tance you can get from a brain that's about ten 
cells big. 
I felt shade. Absence of light. Distance from 
vibration. No scent of blood. 
9 

Was I in a safe place? Surely not, but maybe 
safe enough. 
I began a slow, cautious demorph. 
I heard a yell. 
"The Pool ship is preparing to fire!" 
"Hard left!" Tom yelled. 
A moment later, Tom laughed. "The visser's 
lost maneuvering ability. The Pool ship handles 
like a drunken Gedd at the best of times, and 
now look at it." 
Someone else reported, "His Dracon cannon 
is powering down. I show his reserves at less than 
ten percent." 
"Are they? Well, well," Tom said. "Hail the 
visser. On screen." 
I was halfway demorphed. I was a hideous crea-
ture made up of armored plates and prickly legs 
and human flesh spreading across me like a wave. 
The sickest imagination could not conjure up the 
true creepiness of a half-flea human. Human eyes, 
my own eyes, bulged from an insect face. 
I could see. Not well, confused, distorted, my 
visual cortex still more flea than human. I was 
still on the bridge of the Blade ship. I was actu-
ally crouched beneath an unoccupied control sta-
tion. It was like hiding under a desk. Fortunately 
it was designed for a Hork-Bajir body, so there 
was some room. 
10 
I saw the viewscreen light up. I saw Visser 
One's Andalite face. It was different. There was a 
dull look in his usually aggressive eyes, a slack-
ness in the normally tensed body. 
"You seem to be experiencing some engine 
trouble, Visser," Tom gloated. 
I was completely demorphed now. There would 
be no room for me to morph all the way to grizzly 
and stay concealed. Every eye on the bridge was 
watching the screen, but a seven-foot bear loom-
ing up will definitely attract attention. 
I started the morph. If it turned out I wasn't 
needed, well, then it would be fatally stupid of 
me. But I had no real doubt. 
Visser One said, <The Empire will track you 
down and kill you, you do understand that, I 
hope?> 
"Oh, I doubt it. I think the Empire will have 
its hands full," Tom said cheerfully. "The An-
dalite fleet is rather close by. It's possible that I 
misled you on that point." 
He was all but giggling. 
Then, the viewscreen widened out and he 
saw, and I saw, the lithe Bengal tiger standing 
near the visser. 
Tobias was there, too. 
Tom saw the tiger and knew it was Jake and 
knew in that split second that he had been out-
11 

maneuvered, outfought. He took a step back, 
like he'd been punched. "You're not dead!" he 
cried. 
<l noticed the same thing,> Visser One said 
dryly. 
Tom yelled, "Bring us around to target the 
Pool ship's bridge. Do it! Now! Now! Bring us 
around!" 
At that moment I could have morphed all the 
way to elephant without being noticed. Tom's 
panic was infectious. They all knew they'd been 
had. 
But they didn't know how. Tom's reaction was 
pure instinct: shoot. He'd forgotten that the Pool 
ship was helpless. The sight of Jake — who 
should be dead — standing there with the other 
Animorphs, standing there alive and apparently 
in control of the Pool ship . . . all Tom could 
think of was shooting. 
The danger was closer than that. 
Jake looked at me. Like he knew I was watch-
ing him. 
<Rachel,> he said. <Go.> 
<Rachel . . .> Tobias said. 
<l know, Tobias. I know.> I said. 
I was still not completely morphed when some-
one shrieked. "Animorph!" 
After all these years of the Yeerks thinking we 
were Andalites, always yelling "Andalite!" when-
12 
ever they saw a morph. It was strangely gratifying 
that at last they knew who we were. 
I said, <That's right, genius: Animorph.> 
I did what I do better than anyone. What Jake 
counted on me to do. 
I attacked. 
13 

I charged straight for Tom, on all fours, head 
down, an express train of muscle and fur, claws 
and teeth. 
I hit him with my lowered head and knocked 
him back into the viewscreen. Not enough to take 
Tom out, but I had to try and damage the ship. 
Tseeew! 
Someone fired a Dracon beam. I felt the sear-
ing pain in my right flank but it didn't matter. I 
was in berserk mode. Pain was something that 
could be stored up for later. Right now I was an en-
raged bear. I slammed a shoulder left, slammed a 
shoulder right and felt crumpling metal. 
Tom yelled, "No shooting! You'll destroy the 
bridge! Morph! Morph you idiots!" 
14 
I swung a paw at him, and it should have 
been all over right then, but I missed. He dropped 
and I missed. 
I reared up to my full height and Tom rolled 
into a ball. He was down under my legs. I swiped 
his back and laid his spine open. But I didn't 
stop him. 
He was through my legs and behind me and 
staggering toward the exit. 
I spun, dropped to all fours and bounded to 
cut him off. I reached the exit a split second be-
fore him and shouldered him aside in the 
process. He spun like a top and fell on his butt. 
I was in a clumsy stance so I just sort of 
dropped on him. It was like some WWF body 
slam, only I wasn't faking it. He grunted and I 
saw blood gush from his nose and mouth. 
Too easy. My final battle. It couldn't be this 
easy. 
I drew back, ready to go in and finish the job. 
But I had wasted too much time. There were oth-
ers on the bridge. And I had overlooked the fact 
that we were no longer the only ones who could 
morph. Every member of Tom's handpicked crew 
could morph, and I was surrounded now by a half 
dozen half-morphed beasts. 
Tom himself was starting to morph, but he 
wasn't my main problem now. 
<Rachel! Behind!> 
CHAPTER 3 
15 

It was Jake. He was watching the fight from 
the Pool ship. 
I spun, slashed horizontally and something 
that may have been a half-morphed leopard crum-
pled like a Dixie cup. 
The main weapons station was right there, a 
sort of waist-high, freestanding lectern. I threw 
myself back into it and heard a nice crunch as it 
toppled. 
But that was more seconds lost while the 
Yeerks were completing their morphs. All but Tom. 
His scarred back was crusting over with reptilian 
scales, but he was nothing recognizable yet. And 
in any case, I had plenty to keep me busy. 
I faced two lionesses, a cape buffalo, and a polar 
bear. It was a whole zoo full of dangerous animals. 
The polar bear was my equal all by himself. The 
cape buffalo maybe as well. I could take either li-
oness, but the combination was going to be rough. 
For a wondrous, frozen moment we all waited, 
stared, breathed, tensed, expectant. 
I felt. . . 
I felt exalted. 
It was my moment. This was my place and my 
time and my own perfection. 
I was no longer afraid. Weird. If I'd had a 
mouth I'd have smiled. 
<Well?> I said. 
16 
No one moved. 
<Scared?> I asked. 
No answer. 
<You should be,> I said, almost laughing. 
I lunged, straight for the polar bear. Go for the 
main opponent first. Go for the danger. I barreled 
straight into him. It was a train crash. I slammed 
him, my shoulder into the side of his head. 
He had a bear morph. I was my bear morph. 
Experience is very helpful. 
The polar bear staggered. I extended my claws 
and in a move no real bear had ever learned, I 
drove them straight into him, like four daggers, 
right beneath the front right shoulder: the heart. 
I hit him again before the cape buffalo slammed 
me and knocked me, windless, rolling into the 
bulkhead. 
The buffalo backed up and came at me again, 
the wide, thick horns like a battering ram. But 
the beast's hooves were designed for dirt and 
grass, not the slippery floor. He didn't fall but he 
lost a lot of speed and momentum. He hit me in 
my exposed belly. It would have killed me if he'd 
been up to speed. Even so it crushed the last 
ounce of air from my lungs. I felt like someone 
had dropped a house on me. 
A lioness was on my face, clawing madly, like 
a crazed alley cat. The other one was trying to 
17 

bite my neck — a waste of time. No one bites 
through a grizzly's fur. 
I was down, buried under mad fur. I was down, 
slashed at, punched, hammered, clawed. My 
legs were in the air, helpless! 
I drew my legs close and shifted my weight. 
Got my legs under me. I lifted myself and the two 
lions. I shook myself violently and threw off the 
lion who'd been on my face. I aimed a blow at 
her but she was too fast. 
Out of the corner of my eye I saw the polar 
bear demorphing. It's the only way when your 
morph body is dying: demorph and fast. Die in 
morph and you're dead. Period. 
But I was missing something. Something 
nagged at me. 
<Tom!> Jake yelled. <Tom!> 
The cape buffalo butted me in the hindquar-
ters and spun me around. The lion on my back 
was reaching around like it was trying to strangle 
me, digging busy claws into the folds of loose 
skin around my throat. 
The second lion charged gamely, leaped and 
sank its teeth into my left haunch. 
Had to take down the Yeerk with the polar 
bear morph. Had to stop him remorphing. I'd 
been lucky once, experience had told. But I 
couldn't count on a second easy win against a 
polar bear. 
18 
I tried to stagger forward, but the buffalo had 
done some damage now. My hindquarters were 
numb and weak. He was hitting me with short, 
sharp blows, like a boxer rabbit-punching. He'd 
figured out that he couldn't really wind up and 
deliver a killing blow. 
<Tom! Rachel, Tom! Look out for Tom!> 
Jake's voice was far away. Strange. 
The slick floor that handicapped the buffalo 
now worked against me, too. I couldn't get enough 
traction with my blood-slicked pads. 
Had to get the Yeerk with the polar bear 
morph. He was demorphed now. Ready to start 
morphing and come back rejuvenated. 
So heavy. Floor all covered in blood. Wow, 
they were really bleeding. 
My front right leg suddenly buckled. It was 
a pail of ice water in my face, a sudden realiza-
tion. 
My blood. That was my blood on the floor. 
White fur began to ripple across the morphing 
Yeerk. 
<He's a snake!> a voice cried. <Rachel!> 
No, he's a bear, I thought. 
A flash of movement, so fast it was a blur. 
Something in my eyes! Burning. I couldn't see. 
That's okay, okay, bears can't see alt that well 
anyway, I had . . . I had . . . 
A cobra, some distant, strange, analytical 
19 

part of my brain noted. Tom's morph: a cobra. 
The venom was in my eyes. 
I couldn't think. Couldn't see. 
Demorph. 
No. Bear. The lions on me. 
Weak. Strange to be the bear and be weak. 
Strange. 
I realized I was no longer standing. I was flat 
on the floor. I heard my own slow breathing. I 
should be panting. 
Something striking at my face again and again. 
The cobra. Couldn't even see him. 
I had failed. Tom. Alive. 
<Die, human,> he said. <Just die.> 
<Rachel!> Tobias cried. 
<Help me, Tobias,> I pleaded. 
<l can't. . . I . . .> 
He didn't understand. <Help me get him. 
Help me get him!> 
<Okay. Okay. He's . . . your left paw, toward 
your face. Get ready. Has to be fast.> 
<l'm ready.> 
<Now!> 
I jerked my paw, claws extended toward my 
face. 
Tom shrieked. I couldn't see him. But I felt 
something squirming. Like a worm on a fishhook. 
The snake was impaled on my claws. 
20 
<No!> Tom cried in outrage. 
I brought my paw to my mouth. 
<Sorry,> I said vaguely. 
<Jake, stop her!> the Yeerk screamed with 
Tom's mouth. 
I bit down on the snake. 
21 

CHAPTER 4 
I lay there in suspended animation. 
I felt myself floating. 
The bear was melting. Old grizzly bear, my 
friend. Good old bear. 
I demorphed. The snake was still in my mouth. 
Motionless. 
I demorphed. 
I was Rachel again, the human Rachel, alive, 
unhurt. I could have bounded up and gone off to 
the mall to shop. But I didn't kid myself. I didn't 
hope. 
I spit the snake out. 
I was surrounded on all sides. I was only a 
weak human girl now. The polar bear loomed over 
22 
me, his strength the equal of my own grizzly, but 
now I was just me, just Rachel. 
I could see the viewscreen. I could see my 
best friend Cassie. Jake. Marco, funny Marco. Ax. 
Tobias. 
He had morphed. He was his human self once 
more. He'd done that for me. And because he 
was crying. I understood. Humans cry, hawks 
don't. 
"I love you," I said to the screen. 
And oh, god, how could so much regret and 
so much sweetness and so much sadness all be 
present in that single moment. I was already 
dead and missing my unlived life. I was already 
dead and Tobias was mourning. 
I tried to smile. For him. 
The polar bear said, <You fight well, human.> 
Then he killed me with a single blow. 
Time stopped. 
He came to me. The Ellimist. 
The puppet master come to watch my final 
act. It figured. He was in his saintly old man 
guise. As fake as everything else about him. The 
all-powerful weakling. The mighty manipulator. 
"You," I said accusingly. 
"Yes." 
23 

"Who are you?" I demanded. "Who are you to 
play games with us? You appear, you disappear, 
you use us, who are you, what are you?" 
And then, for what seemed a very long time, 
the Ellimist told me. I saw. I understood. 
But I also knew he would not save me. That 
he couldn't under the arcane rules of his millen-
nia-long war with Crayak. 
The Ellimist was there to honor me, and I 
guess that was nice of him. Wasn't going to help 
me much. 
I wanted so much to live. I wanted so much to 
stay and not to leave. In a moment no answer 
would matter to me, but just the same, I wanted 
to know what I guess any dying person wants to 
know. 
"Answer this, Ellimist: Did I . . . did I make a 
difference? My life, and my . . . my death . . . 
was I worth it? Did my life really matter?" 
"Yes," he said. "You were brave. You were 
strong. You were good. You mattered." 
"Yeah. Okay, then. Okay, then." 
I wondered if — 
24 
No one moved. 
I don't think anyone even breathed. 
Toby, the leader of the free Hork-Bajir, burst 
onto the bridge. She was scarred and bloody. 
<Jake, they're surrendering. We had to promise 
them amnesty and a chance to acquire the morph-
ing power. > 
I heard her words. 
<What's the matter?> Toby asked. 
She noticed Tobias. She'd only seen him in 
human morph a few times. Toby is named for To-
bias. The free Hork-Bajir see Tobias as their lib-
erator. And Toby, the Hork-Bajir seer, was named 
in his honor. 
25 
Jake 
CHAPTER 5 

On the screen I saw the Blade ship slowly 
picking up speed and pulling away. They didn't 
fire at us. 
Tom was dead. 
And I wondered how I was ever going to ex-
plain it. I had ordered my cousin to execute my 
brother. How would I ever explain that? 
All these years I'd fought to keep us all alive, 
to stop the Yeerks, always with the hope that 
someday I would save my brother, that he would 
come back, that he'd be Tom again. That was 
why I'd enlisted in the war to begin with. I was 
going to save Tom. 
Tom was dead. The Yeerk in his head was 
dead. 
And Rachel. 
And how many others? 
General Doubleday's soldiers who had pro-
vided the suicidal diversionary attack on the 
ground. 
The auxiliary Animorphs who had gone with 
them to trick the enemy. 
How many of Toby's people? 
Seventeen thousand Yeerks, frozen. Flushed 
into space. 
Plus. 
Plus. 
All at my command. 
26 
<Jake, I need your okay,> Toby pressed. <The 
Yeerks want you. They want your assurances 
<A pack of traitors,> Visser One said, but the 
fight had gone out of him. 
Tom was dead. Rachel was dead. How would I 
explain this to my parents? 
Silly to think of that right then. Silly and stu-
pid. 
<Jake . . .> Toby urged. 
<Rachel,> Cassie said softly. <Toby, we lost 
Rachel. And Tom is dead.> 
Toby absorbed that, then said, <Jara Hamee, 
my father, died bravely in battle here today.> 
Still I couldn't say anything. How did I ex-
plain . . . 
Marco was still in gorilla morph. He said, <lt's 
okay, Toby. Tell the Yeerks that Jake will be along 
in a minute. Tell them Visser One is our captive. 
Tell them we approve the deal you made.> 
<My people may not agree,> Ax said. 
<Yeah?> Marco shot back. <Guess what? This 
is our planet. These are our prisoners. This is our 
victory. If the Andalite high command doesn't like 
it they can come and try to take a piece of us.> 
Cassie came to me and sort of leaned into 
me, as close to a hug as we could get right then. 
I was afraid she would say something sympa-
thetic, I was afraid she would comfort me, and if 
27 

she had I think that would have been it, I think 
my brain would have just shut down because all 
the pain would have suddenly been real and 
deep inside me. 
Cassie said, <We still need you. You're not 
done yet, Jake.> 
The right thing to say. Cassie was good at 
that. I noted the effect on me, observed my reac-
tion from a million miles away. 
I sighed. Okay. Yeah. I still had a job. Do the 
job. 
<Everything else can wait,> Cassie said. 
Yeah. It could all wait. 
I took a deep breath. 
<Okay, Toby. Okay, I'll be right there. Tell 
them what Marco said and I'll get there soon to 
back you up.> 
Toby left with a last, curious glance at Tobias. 
Me, I couldn't look at Tobias. I didn't care if he 
saw the way I avoided his eyes, I didn't care, I 
couldn't look at him. 
I wish to god Tobias had just come after me. 
Right then. I would have welcomed it. 
Instead I focused on Visser One. How had this 
happened? How had he survived and Tom died? 
How did he still live? How could that be the re-
sult? 
<l imagine it's time to kill me,> Visser One 
said. <You'll be doing me a favor. Whatever death 
28 
you have for me will be nothing compared to 
what the Council of Thirteen would sentence me 
to. They really don't approve of vissers who lose 
Pool ships.> 
<No. No more killing,> I said. 
"What do you mean, no more killing?" Tobias 
demanded, breaking his ringing silence at last. 
He stabbed a finger at the visser. "He's the one 
responsible for all this!" 
<He's a prisoner of war,> I said softly. <We 
don't kill prisoners.> 
<No, of course not,> Visser One mocked. 
<You merely destroy the ground-based Yeerk pool 
and kill thousands. And you add another seven-
teen thousand here on this ship. All defenseless, 
unhosted Yeerks. But you don't kill prisoners.> 
<Marco?> 
<Yeah, Jake.> 
<The visser is going to remove himself from 
this Andalite body he has stolen and inhabited 
for so long. Find a safe place for him. Watch over 
him.> 
<You got it.> 
<Cassie? Go get Erek. If he wants the Chee 
secret to be kept he needs to hide himself. We 
may have guests soon.> 
<Anything else?> Cassie asked. 
<Like what?> I snapped. <An apology? To 
that robot? "Sorry we blackmailed you into help-
29 

ing us?" No. He drained off the Dracon beams 
and because of that the Blade ship got away. Be-
cause of that Rachel died in vain. Because of 
him who knows what will happen?> 
Cassie hesitated, looked down, then turned 
to go. 
I began to demorph, then stopped myself. 
The visser was still a dangerous foe with a bot-
tomless grab bag of powerful morphs at his com-
mand. 
I spoke to Ax in private thought-speak. His 
tail blade flashed and caught the visser unpre-
pared, a flat-side smack against his temple. His 
host body, the long-enslaved Andalite war prince 
called Alloran, slumped unconscious. 
<l know you can still hear me in there, Visser. 
I'll make this simple: You exit that body. You do it 
right now because if you don't we're going to cut 
our way in and yank you out.> 
<Tobias? Marco? Find a box, a jar, something 
to hold this Yeerk in when he emerges. If he 
doesn't come out within two minutes, do it the 
hard way.> 
<That would be my pleasures Marco said. 
<Okay, Ax,> I said. <Dial up the Andalite high 
command. Tell them to stand by for a communi-
cation from me. And open a simultaneous chan-
nel directly to the Andalite home world.> 
30 
Ax hesitated. He turned his main eyes to me 
even as his stalk eyes remained focused on the 
visser. <Prince Jake, there is a specific regula-
tion forbidding me as an aristh from contacting 
the civilian media net. I am required to work 
through the chain of command, my prince.> 
He wasn't fighting me, just asking for dispen-
sation. The repetition of the word prince signaled 
his willingness. 
I began to demorph, moving from tiger to hu-
man, from thought-speak to spoken word. <Ax, 
as your prince I'm ordering you to ignore those 
regulations and do what I've told you to do.> 
<Then I must obey.> 
"Yeah. Now, I have to go see about Toby and 
then I'll be back. I want to see one slug in a jar 
and a ticked-off Andalite on screen when I get 
back." 
I left the bridge, trotted to catch up with Toby 
and followed her to engineering where the signs 
of a severe battle were evident. Hork-Bajir bodies 
were stacked in the corridor. Their blood was 
everywhere. Impossible to be sure which were 
free Hork-Bajir, our allies, and which had died 
still enslaved to the Yeerks. 
Toby's people controlled the doorway into en-
gineering where the dispirited Yeerks had taken 
refuge. 
31 

"Do they have a spokesman?" I asked. 
Toby yelled, "Sub-Visser Seventy-four, the 
Animorph leader Jake is here." 
A battered-looking Hork-Bajir female stepped 
into view. I looked her up and down, putting on 
my hard act. "We have the ship. We have Visser 
One. You're not in much of a position to make 
demands." 
The sub-visser showed nothing. "Human, you 
cannot frighten us. We have no hope left and that 
gives us strength. We will not die of Kandrona 
starvation — better to die here, now, in battle. 
We'll kill some more of your people before we do." 
I nodded. "Fair enough. You want amnesty, 
access to Kandrona rays, and morphing technol-
ogy? You'd accept permanent morphing and relo-
cation?" 
"As opposed to slow death by starvation or 
even a quick death now? Yes." 
"I don't have the morphing cube. But I pledge 
to use all my influence to gain agreement from 
the Andalites when they come." 
She stood there, straight, almost at attention 
for a while, then slumped. "It has come to this 
after all." 
I nodded. "Yeah. The onboard Yeerk pool 
needs to be refilled. Send some of your people 
under Toby's supervision to handle that. Then 
32 
you'll be escorted to the pool in groups of six. 
You'll exit your host bodies." 
"And be helpless again," the Yeerk said bit-
terly. 
"I keep my word," I said. 
I started to leave then stopped. "Toby? I'm 
sorry about Jara Hamee. He was . . ." 
"He was the first of the free Hork-Bajir," Toby 
said fiercely. "He was the father of his people. 
And he was my father." 
I started back for the bridge. 
33 

Rachel 
dead? How could that be? How 
could that be real? 
She'd been my best friend forever. Teased me 
about my clothes as I teased her about her ob-
sessive shopping. How long ago had that been? A 
hundred years? 
She'd wanted to be a gymnast but thought 
she was probably too tall ever to be really good. 
And of course all that was in the past, too. 
She had this way of seeming untouched by 
what went on around her. Unaffected. Above. 
She was a person who could walk through a car 
wash and come out dry. She could move through 
a mosh pit and never be jostled. She could wear 
34 
a white dress to dig in the mud and somehow 
never get a spot on her. 
But the war had touched her. She'd changed, 
and she'd known she was changing. The war had 
revealed a hidden part of her soul. She alone, of 
all of us, she alone liked it. Loved it, even. She 
had enjoyed the fight. 
Sometimes I imagined her as a Viking. Or as a 
knight on a quest. That's what she was: a joyful 
warrior. 
And she had died fighting against impossible 
odds. 
Like a hole inside me. Like someone had 
taken a knife and carved a hole in my chest. Like 
I might cave in, be swallowed up and disappear 
in that hole. 
Beautiful Rachel. 
Poor Tom. 
And now, all of us, the survivors. The victim-
perpetrators. 
I found Erek. I simply walked through the 
Yeerk ship calling out in thought-speak. A wolf 
prowling strangely empty, silent corridors. 
He appeared before me. He's an android, one 
of a long-lived species called the Chee. Their cre-
ators, the Pemalites, are extinct, but the pacific 
instincts of the Pemalites live on in these mag-
nificent thinking machines. 
CHAPTER 6 
Cassie 
35 

Erek is at least five thousand years old, and 
the person we knew by that name was really just 
a holographic projection that disguised the ma-
chine beneath the illusion. 
I demorphed. 
"Hi, Erek." 
"Hi, Cassie." He smiled sadly. "Jake sent 
you." 
I nodded. 
"I see. He feels guilty." 
"No. Not guilty." 
His eyes narrowed. "Then what? He used me, 
blackmailed me, manipulated my programming 
to get me to break through the security grid and 
take control of this ship." 
"You drained the Dracon beams." 
"What did Jake expect me to do? I had given 
him control when he needed it. I wasn't going to 
enable him to kill." 
"The Blade ship got away. Rachel . . . Jake had 
Rachel with Tom. Rachel and Tom are both . . . 
and the ship got away anyway. Thanks to you." 
The Erek hologram disappeared. He was an 
android now, a thing of steel and ivory vaguely in 
the shape of a dog walking erect. "And I'm sup-
posed to feel regret because Jake ordered his 
cousin to kill his brother and I didn't allow him to 
massacre everyone else on the Blade ship?" 
That made me mad and I guess I showed it. 
36 
"So, you, too, huh Cassie?" 
"Jake did what he had to do." 
"Did he? Someone flushed the Yeerk pool into 
space. Did he have to do that, too? They were un-
hosted Yeerks. They were harmless." 
"We needed a div —" I stopped myself. 
"A what? A what did you need? A diversion? 
You're going to tell me you needed a diversion so 
Jake massacred seventeen thousand sentient 
creatures? A diversion?" 
I took a deep breath. "Jake says maybe you 
should get off the ship, Erek. The Andalites will 
most likely be coming aboard soon. It's up to you 
whether you go on keeping your existence secret. 
We won't divulge it." 
"I see." 
"Bye Erek." 
He nodded. Then, as he was passing, he took 
my arm in his pseudo-hand. "Take care of Jake. 
He's going to need you." 
37 

Ax and I watched fascinated, repulsed, 
maybe a little triumphant, as the Yeerk crawled 
slowly from the Andalite ear. 
I had found a lockable briefcase, a very hu-
man artifact stuffed under a control panel. It was 
filled with chocolate chip cookies. Some Yeerk, 
probably a human-Controller, had developed a 
sweet tooth and it would be hard to get a good 
cookie on a Yeerk ship. 
I ate a cookie and held the case open for the 
slug-like creature that was the true Visser One. 
<l could easily cut him in half,> Ax said con-
versationally. 
<Yeah, well, better not, I guess.> 
Tobias had returned to what was his normal 
38 
form. The red-tailed hawk perched on a railing. 
The laser eyes drilled into the Yeerk. I was not at 
all sure that Tobias wouldn't swoop over and nail 
the visser. I wasn't at all sure I'd stop him. 
I'm probably the least emotional of the group. 
It's always been my virtue and my failing that I 
see the clear path from A to Z without the distrac-
tion of moral considerations. I don't want to say 
I'm ruthless, I'm not. But I have the ability. I can 
see the ruthless way clearly. I have to sort of add 
the morality back into the equation after the fact. 
I had no deep qualms about the seventeen 
thousand, any more than I had about our attack on 
the ground-based Yeerk pool. I knew why Jake had 
sent Rachel to Tom. I agreed with his thinking. 
But then, I wasn't in love with Rachel. I wasn't 
some lonely kid trapped in a hawk's body, half in 
one world, half in another with only Rachel's love 
tying me to my humanity. 
Maybe Tobias would eventually accept what 
Jake did. Maybe not. 
It was weird. I was watching our greatest foe 
place himself literally into our hands. We had 
beaten Visser One. 
Maybe later we'd celebrate. 
"Ax, pick him up." 
Ax picked up the Yeerk holding him between 
two fingers, gingerly, as though it was something 
dirty. 
Marco 
CHAPTER 7 
39 

He dropped it into the briefcase. I closed the 
lid and turned the combo lock. 
"I guess we won, Ax." 
<Yes.> 
"Shouldn't someone be singing 'God Bless 
America'?" 
Ax looked puzzled and decided to let it go. He 
said, <l must access the communications array 
and carry out Jake's orders.> 
The remaining Yeerks on the bridge were be-
ing very cooperative now. Seeing your great 
leader in a box will do that, I guess. Anyway, they 
followed Ax's instructions. 
It took a few minutes and then, on the screen 
there appeared a wary Andalite face. 
<What do you want, Yeerk?> 
Ax said, <We are not Yeerks. I am aristh Aximili-
Esgarrouth-lsthill, the brother of Prince Elfangor. 
You have correctly identified this signal as origi-
nating from a Yeerk pool ship, but this ship is 
now under the control of. . .> He frowned, un-
certain, and turned a quizzical stalk eye to me. 
I shrugged. "This ship is under the control of 
the Earth Liberation Army." I grinned. It was a 
wonderfully grandiose name for a handful of 
kids. 
Ax repeated it word for word to the skeptical 
Andalite. 
40 
<Do you seriously expect to me to believe that 
humans have seized control of a Yeerk Pool ship, 
aristh Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill? Clearly you are 
a Controller. Just as clearly this is a clumsy 
trap.> 
Cassie returned. She took in the scene and 
decided to stay quiet. 
"He's got us there," I admitted. "He has no 
way of knowing whether we're really us or Con-
trollers." 
Ax said, <There is a Yeerk Blade ship head-
ing . . .> He consulted a display panel and gave 
the coordinates. <You may be able to intercept 
them.> 
The Andalite officer said, <Anything else, 
Yeerk? Is there another part to this pitiful at-
tempt at a trap?> He was about to sign off. 
Jake arrived. "Where do we stand?" he asked 
me. 
I motioned at the screen. "This genius thinks 
we're Controllers trying to set him up." 
Jake nodded. "Perfect," he said dryly. "How 
do we get around this?" 
<Tell him you'll surrender the Pool ship to 
them.> 
It was Visser One! No. No, it was the Andalite 
Visser One had infested for so many, many years: 
Alloran-Semitur-Corrass. I'd forgotten all about 
41 

him. Ax had knocked him unconscious, now he 
was coming around. He climbed to his hooves, 
looking like a stunned blue deer. 
The Andalite officer said, <So the deception 
is over. I see the visser has revealed himself.> 
Alloran started to say something, then turned 
his face and main eyes to Jake. <With your per-
mission?> 
That was one weird moment. Alloran was an 
arrogant, determined, even criminally ruthless 
Andalite war prince. Or had been once, long ago. 
And then, for a long time, that face had been the 
face of our deadliest enemy, Visser Three/One. 
And now he was meekly waiting for Jake's okay. 
Jake nodded and in a very respectful tone 
said, "Please continue, War-Prince Alloran." 
Alloran's main eyes flickered, a slight display 
of emotion. <Who are you?> he demanded of the 
Andalite officer. 
<l am Offeran-Jibril-Castant. I am officer of 
the day aboard the Andalite Dome ship . . .> He 
hesitated and there was a slight, ironic smile. An 
Andalite smile, of course, which is all in the 
eyes. <The Dome ship Elfangor.> 
Ax swelled about a size. <A Dome ship named 
for Elfangor. There is no higher honor for a war-
riors 
<A well-named ship,> Alloran said. <Now, 
42 
officer-of-the-day Offeran, you're going to want to 
contact the captain because you have just cap-
tured a Yeerk Pool ship. We will advance at space 
normal speed to any point you name. All Bug 
fighters will be deployed around the ship, and as 
we reach the rendezvous point you will see all 
Bug fighters self-destruct. At that time we will 
detach the Pool ship's main engines. All weapons 
will be powered down. This ship will be perfectly 
helpless.> 
That got Offeran's attention. He turned a 
shade of lighter blue. It was kind of as if in the 
middle of World War II the Japanese Navy had 
called up the U.S. Navy and said, "Hey, we're go-
ing to turn over our biggest aircraft carrier to you. 
Come on over and pick up the keys." 
Suddenly the scene changed. The face on the 
screen was older. This Andalite had a burn scar 
on his scalp and was missing one stalk eye. 
<Captain-Prince Asculan-Semitur-l_angor,> Ax 
said in private thought-speak. 
"Big time?" I whispered under my breath. 
<Very big time.> 
The captain favored us with a long, hard, seri-
ous look. Then he said, <Visser, I refuse to —> 
I saw it coming. The old Andalite was going to 
chill us. It wasn't my place to butt in, maybe, but 
I couldn't let this old creep screw everything up 
43 

by committing himself. Once he said what he 
was getting ready to say it would be impossible 
for him to climb down. 
"Hey, Ax-man," I said brightly. "Is it true the 
Andalite home world is watching all this? Can I 
wave to them?" I waved like one of the idiots out-
side the 7bc/3yshow. "Hi, everyone! Howard Stern 
rules! Yaaaah!" 
Well, that stopped everyone and everything 
dead. You could practically see the wheels turn-
ing in old Asculan's nasty-looking head. Jake 
looked for a minute like he might slap me silly. 
And Ax basically turned to stone. 
But then Jake gave me a nod. He got it. 
So did Alloran. <l should have mentioned 
that under orders from his prince, aristh Aximili 
has patched this communication through to the 
civilian net.> 
Asculan had a mean look to him now. Furious. 
He was a person in a trap. A powerful person in a 
trap, not used to being trapped, not liking it. 
Jake stepped into Asculan's line of sight. 
"Captain Asculan, we know that the Andalite 
fleet is devoted to the destruction of the Yeerk 
threat. And we know that you must be personally 
committed to that goal." 
I translated in my head: We know you've 
come here to turn Earth into a great big charcoal 
44 
briquette because you think it's the only way to 
stop the Yeerks. 
"Because of your devotion to duty it may al-
most seem a disappointment to reach your goal 
at long last, only to discover that your foe has es-
sentially surrendered." 
Translation: It's over. 
"At this point we have to set aside the neces-
sary ruthlessness of war, the suspicion and hostil-
ity, and turn instead to the more satisfying duties 
of making peace." 
Translation: Your people back home are watch-
ing and if you come in guns blazing, annihilating 
a peaceful people, your own peaceful civilians 
will never stand for it. 
"Our victory could never have occurred with-
out the support of our Andalite friends." 
Translation: Look, we're willing to share the 
credit. You people did squat for us, but we're 
willing to spread the kudos around freely. 
"I look forward to our two peaceful peoples 
working closely together, to forming a deep and 
abiding friendship. We have so much to learn 
from our Andalite brothers, just as we have al-
ready learned so much from the great Elfangor 
and his no less courageous and resourceful 
brother, Aximili." 
Translation: The Dome ship Elfangor is going 
45 

to come in and annihilate all of the real Elfan-
gor's work? Kill his little brother who happens to 
be a ready-made Andalite hero? Guess again, you 
mean old fart. 
The captain listened to all this impassively. 
But I could see the steam sort of leaking out of 
him. By the end of Jake's little speech his eyes 
were glazed over. He knew he'd been trapped but 
good, and the truth was, he was probably re-
lieved. 
<Who exactly are you?> Asculan asked Jake. 
I jerked a thumb at my friend. "This is Jake. 
Jake Berenson. President of Earth." 
46 
We flew the Pool ship to a rendezvous point 
just beyond the moon's orbit. As we'd promised, 
we deployed the Bug fighters by remote control 
and blew them up. We detached the ship's en-
gines and waited. Waited for hours. 
Then, in a rush, perhaps two dozen of the 
slightly goofy-looking Andalite fighters came 
swooping around us. They surrounded us, shred-
der weapons aimed. It was a hair-raising mo-
ment. 
Then the Dome ship Elfangor and another 
Dome ship came in from different directions. 
Dome ships are very cool and typically Andalite. 
They're built a little like palm trees. There's a 
47 
J a k e 
CHAPTER 8 

long trunk with engines at one end and a bulge 
for weapons and living quarters in the middle. On 
top you have a big glass dome over grass and 
trees and even streams and little hills. The An-
dalites are a grazing species: They love an open 
meadow. 
Dome ships are also exceedingly well armed. I 
don't know who wins a straight-up fight between 
a Yeerk Pool ship and an Andalite Dome ship. 
But I know who wins when the Pool ship is dis-
armed and without engines. 
The Andalites ran sensor probes and satisfied 
themselves that we were powered down and that 
no other Yeerk ships were in the immediate vicin-
ity. 
Asculan arrived soon after by shuttle, along 
with a half dozen tough-looking Andalite marines 
and as many officers. I sent Ax to meet them at 
the space dock. I waited on the bridge. Marco 
had insisted, saying that I had to play the part of 
the big boss. 
"The boss doesn't go down to the airport, he 
sends a limo or whatever. The boss waits in head-
quarters." 
"Is that so?" I said. 
"Yeah. Look, Jake, you're a sixteen-year-old 
kid. But the Andalites don't know that, right? 
Play the part, fie the part." He laughed. 
48 
Tobias sent him a murderous look that stalled 
the laughter. 
Very quietly Cassie said, "Tobias, this is a big 
moment. Don't you think Rachel would want us 
to enjoy it as much as we can?" 
<l don't know,> he snapped. <lf she were 
alive I'd ask her.> 
The Andalite contingent swept onto the bridge. 
They were playing their own roles.- The warriors 
very intimidating, fanning out to keep everyone 
covered, the captain himself moving with self-
conscious dignity. 
The junior officers must have been mostly 
technical types because they looked around like 
starving men at the big brunch buffet. They 
couldn't stop themselves from touching the Yeerk 
display panels and controls with greedy fingers. 
They exchanged giddy looks that said, "Can you 
believe we're on a Yeerk Pool ship?" 
All of them, including the warriors, kept steal-
ing looks at Alloran. He had been infamous even 
before being made into the first and only Andalite-
Controller. 
I took a deep breath and said, "Captain, 
thanks for coming over. As soon as we can settle 
some details, I'll be glad to turn this ship over to 
you." 
<Details?> 
49 

"Yes. The Yeerk prisoners of war have been 
promised the opportunity to be subjected to the 
morphing technology. So have a number of 
Taxxons down on the surface." 
<Denied,> the captain said. 
It took me aback. I hadn't expected a flat de-
nial. 
"I promised them." 
<You had no right to promise what you do not 
own.> 
I didn't want to get mad. Fortunately I had 
Marco to do that for me. 
"Hey, we're handing you a Yeerk Pool ship. 
And by the way, there are another couple of dozen 
major Yeerk vessels back in orbit around Earth 
and you can snap them up easy. Thanks to us." 
<We're very grateful,> Asculan said blandly, 
speaking to me and refusing to directly acknowl-
edge Marco. <But Yeerk technology, while no 
doubt fascinating to my officers, is less sophisti-
cated than our own. It is of interest, but no more 
than that.> 
Marco erupted. "We won your lousy war for 
you, you pompous old —" 
"My promise to the Yeerks and the Taxxons 
will be honored," I said, trying my best to sound 
determined and confident and forceful. 
<The morphing technology is the property of 
50 
the Andalite people. I am aware that you are 
morph-capable yourself, as well as a number of 
your people. Despite the fact that this was ille-
gal, we don't intend to take any action against 
you for that. But the technology will not be made 
available any furthers 
Cassie said, "Sir, don't you understand? This 
is the way out. The Yeerks are parasites who re-
quire other bodies in order to see, to move about 
freely. As long as that's the case they'll be trou-
ble. Maybe not for us or for the Andalites any-
more, but for someone." 
<Now you're proposing the technology be 
made freely available to the entire Yeerk species?> 
Asculan laughed derisively. <You can't be seri-
ous. This will never happen. No Yeerk, no Taxxon 
will ever be given the morphing technology. Am I 
clear?> 
No one said anything. I was stunned. It was 
clear to me now: We had no way to convince the 
Andalite military. They had their "weapon," they 
were going to keep it. And if that meant the war 
continued, that was fine with them. 
And what did I have that could make them 
change their minds? Nothing. With the Pool ship 
and its information in their possession they'd be 
able to destroy the remainder of the Yeerk fleet. 
As for the Taxxons on Earth and the remaining 
51 

leaderless, cutoff, isolated Yeerks on Earth, that 
wasn't the Andalites' problem: They knew we'd 
deal with that. 
Checkmate. 
I was honestly tempted to surrender the point. 
We had won. Earth was saved. What did I care if 
the Taxxons on Earth were rounded up and 
killed? That's what would happen, there was no 
alternative, Taxxons could never be allowed to 
live on Earth. And what did I care for promises 
made to the Yeerks on board the Pool ship? I had 
tried to keep my promise. If I failed, so what? 
Marco must have read my mind. He drifted 
up beside me and whispered in my ear. "We give 
in now, they own us." 
As often was the case, Marco was seeing 
things I'd overlooked. He was right: The human 
race had just opened their first negotiation with 
an alien species with far superior technology. If 
this relationship started from an acceptance of 
Andalite superiority and human weakness it would 
always be that way. We'd end up being second-
class citizens on our own planet. 
But what was I supposed to do about that? 
I looked at Tobias. Nothing. He was gone into 
his own world. Cassie could only look troubled. 
And Ax, well, Ax had done what he could, he had 
defied his own leaders, but he was, after all, an 
Andalite. 
52 
But, then, Ax said, <Captain-Prince Asculan, 
I hereby declare a challenges 
A dozen Andalites stopped breathing. 
I looked at Marco. He shrugged. He had no 
clue either. 
Asculan laughed. <Aristh, you are not in a po-
sition to declare a challenge. You would have to 
be of princely rank or have the support of an An-
dalite of princely rank.> 
Silence. 
Then, <l hold that rank,> Alloran said. 
Avery long silence. 
In a low, dangerous tone, Asculan said, <Allo-
ran, you are under suspicion already for your ac-
tions on the Hork-Bajir world, I wouldn't —> 
<What I did on the Hork-Bajir world was pre-
cisely what you and the fleet were preparing to do 
to this world,> Alloran shot back. 
Asculan focused all his eyes forward, a sign of 
intense concentration for an Andalite. <l was un-
der orders. You acted alone.> 
<l still retain my rank,> Alloran grated. <l am 
a war prince. This aristh has declared a chal-
lenge and I support his challenge. The require-
ments of the law are satisfied.> 
At that moment I think if someone had so 
much as sneezed there would have been a fight. 
Asculan's tail blade was twitching. He was ready 
to throw down. 
53 

But not all the Andalites shared his feeling. 
Some of the officers and even some of the war-
riors looked troubled. Troubled by their boss. An-
dalites take their laws seriously. 
"Is someone going to maybe tell us what a 
challenge is?" Marco muttered. 
It was Ax who answered. <lt is the right and 
obligation of any Andalite warrior to challenge 
the order of a superior if he believes that superior 
is violating the fundamental rights of the elec-
torate — the people.> 
"You're kidding," Marco said. "How do you 
people ever fight wars if you can challenge any-
thing your superior officer tells you to do?" 
<lf my challenge fails I will be harshly disci-
plined^ Ax said. <l will be exiled. Permanently. 
And my tail blade . . . My tail blade will be cut 
off.> 
Alloran said, <Asculan, under the law you 
may declare an emergency and continue until we 
can arrange for the challenge to be judged at a 
later time. But I do not see how a court could 
agree that this negotiation over prisoners can 
possibly be called a legitimate emergency. In 
which case you would lose your rank and position 
and be exiled.> 
<l know the law,> Asculan snapped. 
I felt like a bystander at an event that would 
54 
determine the fate of the world. This was an all-
Andalite show. Their law, their sense of right and 
wrong. I resented it. But I couldn't do anything 
but hope it would work out. 
At last Asculan said, <l will confer with my of-
ficers^ 
He seemed to think we should all leave the 
bridge and let him hold his meeting. 
"I fought for this ship, Captain," I said. "You 
were invited aboard." 
Probably not a good idea to antagonize the 
old monster, but I wasn't going to start playing 
the wimp now. We had paid for this ship. It was 
ours. If we gave it up it would be to allies, not 
overlords. 
Asculan led his officers away. The rest of us 
let loose one very long sigh. 
"What now?" I asked Ax. 
He couldn't answer. He seemed to be shiver-
ing. 
Alloran answered instead. <Asculan will con-
tact the fleet high command. They will talk to 
their political advisors and try to decide whether 
they can win a challenge. It would be a sort of 
trial, with each side presenting evidence and wit-
nesses. The entire Andalite electorate would 
have a vote. It would consume perhaps half a 
day.> 
55 

Marco said, "So what are the odds?" 
Alloran shook his head. <l have been away 
from the home world a very long time. I do not 
know much about my people anymore. But the 
high command will make a cautious assessment. 
They are not bold or adventurous, they are more 
politicians than warriors. If Asculan comes back 
here prepared to go forward with the challenge, it 
will mean they are very, very confident of win-
nings 
"Okay. And by the way, Alloran, thanks for 
standing up for Ax. And all of us." 
Alloran turned his main eyes to me. He gave 
me a strange look. <l never hoped to be free 
again. You freed me. I have done what I have 
done in my life. I am what I am, though I may 
have gained at least some wisdom through the 
years of enslavement to Visser One. Just the 
same, I will always be Alloran, the Butcher of 
Hork-Bajir. Alloran, the only Andalite to be taken 
alive by the Yeerks. But, disgraced, even de-
spised, for whatever I am worth, I am yours to 
commands 
The speech was delivered in a low thought-
speak tone, all emotion severely controlled. But 
then Alloran whipped his tail blade over his 
head, so fast it cracked like a whip. He smiled 
the subtle Andalite smile and yelled, <Do you 
56 
know who did that? Do you know who moved my 
tail? I did. I did. I did it.> 
I smiled, but more for him than for me. If he 
would forever be the Butcher of Hork-Bajir, what 
would my name be? 
Alloran's exuberance seemed to shake Ax out 
of his funk and he raised his own tail to touch the 
blade to Alloran's. <Welcome back, War-Prince 
Alloran.> 
Asculan did not return to the bridge. He sent 
one of his junior officers, a calculated insult. But 
I guess no one really likes to admit face-to-face 
that they're beaten. 
<Captain Asculan issues the following orders: 
Four morphing cubes will be made available to 
aristh Aximili to use as he sees fit. Aristh Aximili 
is hereby elevated to the rank of prince. Prince 
Aximili is appointed liaison between the Andalite 
fleet and the people of Earth.> 
Asculan's officer waited, expecting a reply. 
Ax said, <Thank the captain for me. I will 
carry out my duties to the best of my ability. My 
challenge is hereby withdrawn.> 
And at that moment, with that polite ex-
change of messages, the war against the Yeerks 
was over. 
57 

Cassie 
Things happened quickly. 
With terms now approved, the Yeerks on the 
Pool ship formalized their surrender. 
The Pool ship joined the Andalite fleet in en-
tering close Earth orbit where we contacted the 
remaining Yeerk ships and gave them the stark 
choice: Resist and die, or surrender and be trans-
formed. 
Some Yeerk ships contacted the Yeerk home 
world and received instructions to fight. But the 
Andalites had all the technical data of the Pool 
ship — including disabling codes, combat tac-
tics, communications ciphers. The ships that re-
sisted were destroyed. The rest surrendered. 
58 
•The Yeerk crews were shuttled to the Pool 
ship where they left their host bodies to return to 
the now-refilled pool. Newly freed human and 
Hork-Bajir worked with Andalites to keep the 
ships flying. 
Jake had one more run-in with Asculan over 
possession of the great trophy prisoner, Visser 
One. But Jake won that confrontation, too. Visser 
One remained our prisoner. 
We Animorphs and the newly minted Prince 
Aximili, with our prisoner, landed Ax's official li-
aison ship, a sleek Fast-Courier, right in the mid-
dle of the Mall in Washington. Not a mall, the 
Mall, a sort of open green space with the Capitol 
Building at one end, the Smithsonian Institution 
and various government buildings on both sides, 
and the obelisk of the Washington Monument at 
the far end. 
We called ahead, not wanting to terrify any-
one. There were roughly a thousand cops and 
twice that many newspeople waiting for us. 
It was, as Marco said, a "shiver-my-spine mo-
ment." 
A sea of microphones and video cameras and 
flashbulbs. Ax and Jake, and to a lesser extent 
Marco and I, gave a sort of brief explanation of 
what had been happening, and where things 
stood now. 
CHAPTER 9 
59 

Needless to say, it was kind of a big news day. 
Tobias was silent throughout. If he even heard 
the questions he didn't show it. And then, as 
Marco was telling yet another amusing anecdote, 
Tobias spread his wings, caught an updraft, and 
flew away. 
The next day an Andalite scout ship reported 
finding a human body floating in space. Young, 
female. The Blade ship had jettisoned her body 
before going into Zero space. 
The Andalites brought her to California. Near 
the devastation that was all that was left of our 
homes. 
I was there when Rachel returned. Her mother 
was there, too. The Andalites treated her body 
with great respect. She had been wrapped in 
some sort of soft cloth. I guess it was the Andalite 
way. 
They uncovered her face and Rachel's mom 
and I identified her. 
Two days later, Rachel's body was cremated. 
It was inconceivable that she'd ever want to be 
buried in the ground. She ended up as a few 
handfuls of ashes in a pretty china urn. 
Everyone was at the memorial ceremony. By 
this point our story had swept the planet. Every-
one alive knew our names. 
The memorial had to be held outside. Fortu-
nately it was a nice day. You could see the Pacific 
60 
Ocean from the spot in the cemetery where 
Rachel's monument would be placed. There was 
an honor guard of free Hork-Bajir. Two dozen An-
dalite warriors stood at attention. Our friend and 
ally General Doubleday was there and quite a few 
men and women in uniform. 
Jake and Marco and me and Ax. We all gave 
little speeches. The President of the United States 
was there. He gave a speech, too. 
I guess Rachel would have liked it, in her 
own way. She would have laughed. She would 
have thought it was all way over the top, but at 
the same time, she would have liked the atten-
tion. 
Would have, but she was a few ounces of ash 
in a jar resting inside an open wooden box. 
The ceremony was almost over when I saw 
him. I'd been watching the sky. I knew if he was 
still alive, he would come. 
He wheeled high overhead, riding a thermal. 
His hawk eyes would see everything of course, 
even from half a mile up. 
But as the band played some horribly de-
pressing music, down he came. He swooped 
down and landed on the box, wings flaring. One 
of the ushers moved to chase him off. Jake took 
the man's arm. 
Tobias closed his talons around the urn's small 
handle. He glared fiercely at Rachel's mom. She 
61 

was crying, had been all along. She sobbed and 
nodded her head, giving her permission. 
Then Tobias looked at me. I said, "Yes, To-
bias. She would want it." 
I don't know where he found the strength to 
lift that urn, but he did. He flew away, low at first, 
then, catching a thermal, he bore the urn away 
into the sky. 
My career was going pretty well. I was past 
the point of being a fad, anyway. I'd done seven 
appearances total on Letterman and Leno, plus 
several times each on Jon Stewart and Conan. 
The Today Show, Good Morning America, Oprah? 
Been there. Bill O'Reilly called me a genuine 
American hero. I'd been on CNN so many times 
that Greta Van Susteren and I were practically 
roommates. Guest-VJ on MTV? Of course. 
And all of that is over and above the rounds of 
interviews that came in that first wild month after 
the defeat of the Yeerks. I mean, in that first 
month you couldn't keep track of how many 
shows I'd been on. Jake and Cassie and I were 
bigger than all of Hollywood, D.C., and Manhat-
62 
ONE YEAR LATER 
Marco 
CHAPTER 10 
63 

tan put together. We weren't just celebrities, we 
were the only celebrities. We had senators and 
big-league rap producers and hot starlets fetch-
ing us sodas and Kit Kat bars. 
So cool. 
That first month we owned the world. But that 
was the easy part: We had a story to tell and 
everyone wanted the details of how we and our 
weird alien friend and all our animal morphs had 
saved the world. The tough part was to keep it 
going after we stopped being The New Thing. 
I had become the unofficial spokesman for 
the Animorphs. Jake wasn't interested in doing 
it. Neither was Cassie. And as for Tobias, well, no 
one had seen him or heard from him since 
Rachel's funeral. 
It wasn't that Jake and Cassie never gave in-
terviews, but Jake was too serious and heavy for 
the media. Jake was on his way to becoming this 
icon, this national hero figure. He had that whole 
tragic-hero thing going on. People knew about 
him sending his cousin to take out his brother 
and they ate it up. I am not kidding when I say 
that some congressperson actually suggested 
carving his face onto Mount Rushmore. Nothing 
came of that, fortunately. 
So, anyway, everyone acted like they wanted 
Jake to do their show, but Jake wasn't really into 
64 
that game and the bookers for the shows knew it. 
Jake did not do good panel. He wouldn't sit there 
and trade jokes with Dave. There was too much 
he didn't want to talk about. Jake was still carry-
ing the world on his shoulders, and it showed. 
As for Cassie, well, she was worse, if that's 
possible. She had the tendency to wander 
around in all the moral subtext of everything. 
She'd take some story about a cool, rock 'em 
sock 'em battle we'd been in and turn it into this 
mope about the morality of self-defense. 
So basically, with neither of those two being, 
shall we say, Hollywood, that job fell to me. 
Bread and butter, baby. Could I do panel? 
Sure I could do panel. I was as much of a hero as 
any of the Animorphs and unlike Jake the Yeerk-
Killer and Saint Cassie, I was fun. 
I got a gig as "technical advisor" to a Spiel-
berg movie about us. Animorph. Come on, you 
gotta love that. I did all the shows to plug that 
deal. Sample dialog: "I loved working with Steven, 
he is absolutely devoted to accuracy, and I knew 
he was the man who could be trusted with our 
story." 
I wrote a book, with some help from a ghost-
writer. The title was The Gorilla Speaks. Number 
one on The New York Times best-seller list, num-
ber one on the PW list, number one on the Web. 
65 

Cassie wrote a book, too: Insights on the Ani-
mal Mind. I think it topped out around number 
seven. Not that I'm competitive. 
I had just been signed for a regular acting job. 
I was going to be Nick Lang, a wisecracking mu-
tant superhero sort of guy who can turn into ani-
mals. I wasn't the main star, I was the main 
supporting player, (and the main special effect), 
which is what I wanted: I needed time to "work 
on my craft" without the pressure of carrying the 
entire TV show. We were going to be on Fox in the 
old X-F/7estime slot, which was kind of cool. 
The acting job was especially great because it 
kept me alive as a product spokesman. I had a 
three-year deal with Pepsi, plus smaller deals 
with Alamo Rent A Car and Gap/Old Navy. You 
would not believe the money. 
So, a year after the end, I was seventeen and 
rich from book deals and product endorsements 
and acting contracts. I had a beach house in 
Santa Barbara (close to Hollywood, but with less 
traffic) and an apartment in New York. I owned a 
canary-yellow Viper, a red Maserati, and a desert-
camouflage Humvee. I dated girls who wouldn't 
have looked at me before. I ate in cool restaurants. 
. And maybe you're expecting me to say it was 
all an empty experience, that my life wasn't all 
that great, but you know what? I was happy. 
We all should have been happy. Cassie was 
66 
Undersecretary of the Interior for Resident Aliens. 
It paid less than I spend on corn chips, but hey, 
Cassie was seventeen, like me, and she was 
meeting with the President and spending most of 
her time with the free Hork-Bajir. They'd been 
given Yellowstone as a habitat. They lived on 
bark and cared for the trees and the tourists 
loved it. Yellowstone was so mobbed with tourists 
wanting to see Hork-Bajir swinging from the red-
woods or whatever that there was a year-and-a-
haIf waiting list to get in. 
Arbron's Taxxons — those that had survived 
the battle — had fulfilled another of Cassie's far-
seeing dreams: They had, as agreed, perma-
nently morphed to anaconda and various other 
way-too-big snakes. They'd been relocated to the 
Brazilian rain forest, which was now protected by 
Brazilian law and hefty U.N. payments. If you 
were a guinea pig walking around the rain forest 
now you were toast, but the former Taxxons left 
people alone. 
Arbron himself went down there with them. 
He could not morph again, of course. He was an 
Andalite nothlit. Many years ago, far away, he 
had stayed too long in Taxxon morph and had 
been unable to demorph. And now he was Taxxon 
for good. 
Arbron was shot and killed by poachers. It 
was a big incident for a while. They caught the 
67 

poachers and put them away. Everyone said how 
terrible it was. But you know, Arbron was proba-
bly grateful. He had saved his adopted people, 
but he had been a prisoner of that awful Taxxon 
hunger, and that's no way to live. 
The Andalite ambassador to the United Na-
tions took charge of the body — what was left of 
it. Arbron was flown back to the Andalite home 
world and given a quiet funeral. 
Anyway, Cassie was a government pooh-bah, 
always racing around here and there in govern-
ment jets and helicopters, making sure Toby and 
her people were good and just generally saving 
the world. Also taking college courses at night 
because she still wants to be a veterinarian like 
her mom and dad. That's Cassie for you: Save the 
rain forest, save some cow with a hernia — the 
girl just does not get the whole celebrity thing. I 
mean Wal-Mart practically begged her on hands 
and knees to take a million dollars to do ads for 
their jeans, and she said she didn't have time be-
cause there was some controversy over an access 
road into some forest somewhere. 
It boggles my mind. 
And Ax was doing great as well. He was an of-
ficial prince and this huge hero back on his home 
planet. He had stepped out of Elfangor's shadow 
at long last, and was not only a hero but the one 
and only expert on all things human. 
68 
Andalite tourism was the coming thing. The 
numbers were limited — interstellar travel isn't 
cheap, you know. But the big thing was for 
wealthy or influential Andalites to come to Earth 
and acquire human morphs. Then it was off to 
the mall food courts to raid the Cinnabon and 
Mrs. Fields. 
I am not kidding. An Andalite with a mouth is 
a dangerous thing when there are cinnamon buns 
around. Having no mouths or sense of smell 
themselves, they have no natural defenses against 
the appeal of flavor — as we had witnessed time 
and again with the Ax-man himself. You do not 
want to get between a newly morphed Andalite 
tourist and a chocolate chip cookie. 
Andalites and humans mostly got along well. 
Andalite civilians are about three degrees more 
humble and lovable than the Andalite warriors 
we'd always met. 
Some people had been afraid the news that 
aliens were real would freak the entire human 
race. They were wrong. Duh. Humans had been 
watching Star Trek and Star Wars and reading 
Heinlein and Simmons and Orson Scott Card for 
too many years. Humans weren't freaked by 
aliens — they'd been expecting them for years 
and were just relieved they weren't The Borg. 
Ax worked out technology-transfer deals with 
some of the big corporations. They have to keep 
69 

it slow because if you just dump a hundred years 
of technological advances overnight the stock 
market goes nuts. It worked out okay, though. 
The Andalites can definitely teach us a lot about 
computer architecture. But it was Microsoft and 
Sony and Adobe and Nintendo that came up with 
the killer apps. I mean, the new Palm Pilots will 
be actual pilots. 
The Andalites flatly refused to let us share 
their weapons technology. But NASA has had a 
definite revival: The first human Zero-space vehi-
cle will be built jointly by Boeing and Lockheed 
and be ready for launch in three years. H. sapi-
ens was going to the stars. Look out, universe, 
we're coming to build a Starbucks near you. 
As for Jake, well, my boy Jake has always had 
a serious side to him. I mean, I tried to talk to 
him about things. But some guys shake off a war 
and move on, and other guys don't. 
Jake carried Tom and Rachel and those sev-
enteen thousand Yeerks around his neck like the 
Ancient Mariner and his albatross. 
Being Jake he didn't lose it. He didn't go off 
and become some kind of drug addict or have 
some big breakdown or whatever. He was still 
Jake. But he was a different Jake. Smaller and 
bigger at the same time, if that makes any sense. 
He was closed off, inward. He would sound al-
most like the old Jake sometimes but you just got 
70 
this sense that he was out of phase with everyone 
else. Like he was a half step ahead or behind. 
Of course this just made him into the strong 
and silent type and he always was a big, good-
looking guy, so he got marriage proposals (and 
other proposals) from girls as young as twelve 
and women old enough to be his grandmother. 
No interest. 
He loved Cassie, of course, but I don't know 
what happened there. I know when I talk to 
Cassie I ask her if she's seen him and the answer 
is always no. The same when I talk to Jake, al-
though he always says he's just about to call her, 
just about to. 
Write a book? No thanks. 
Endorsements? No thanks. 
Every college on the planet tried to recruit 
him. No thanks. West Point offered him a gig as 
an instructor in the Tactical Application of Emerg-
ing Technologies and Xeno-Warfare. No thanks. If 
he'd been old enough he could have run for pres-
ident as the candidate of Democrats and Repub-
licans both. Jake was the biggest hero the world 
had ever seen because he was a hero for all hu-
mans, not one nation. He had saved the lives and 
freedom of the entire human race. I mean, he 
could have snapped his fingers and had anything 
he wanted. 
The problem was, he didn't want anything. 
71 

Except for Tobias to come back! For Rachel and 
Tom to be alive. For the chance to unlive one 
fateful moment when he gave the order that 
doomed seventeen thousand defenseless Yeerks. 
I worried about him. 
Okay, I worried about him while sitting by my 
pool or driving my Maserati or escorting some 
bubbly Hollywood honey past the rope line at the 
most exclusive clubs. I worried about him. 
I hadn't seen Jake or Cassie in a couple of 
months when my lawyer called to say the date 
had been set. 
And now, the three of us would be together 
again. In The Hague, Netherlands. 
We were to testify in the war crimes trial of 
the Yeerk prisoner, Visser One. 
72 
Cassie 
"Is Jake here yet?" I asked Marco. I figured 
I might as well find out right away. I wasn't eager 
to see Jake. I mean, yes, I was. But the Jake I 
was eager to see might not even exist anymore. 
The Jake I wanted to see was the one who had 
talked about us being together after the war was 
over. 
The war was over. We weren't together. Now, 
this reunion was just bound to be awkward if not 
painful. 
"I haven't seen him," Marco said. 
"When did you get here?" 
"Here?" Marco looked around, puzzled. We 
were in the modern lobby of one of The Hague's 
best hotels. "Oh, here at the hotel? I'm not stay-
CHAPTER 11 
73 

ing at the hotel. My business manager set me up 
in a rented villa. There's a fence, a gate, it's eas-
ier to keep the groupies away." 
I laughed and he grinned in response. "You're 
actually completely serious, aren't you?" I asked. 
"Cassie, how long have you known me? Am I 
ever completely serious?" 
I felt a wave of affection for Marco. We had 
never been the closest of the Animorphs — our 
connection went through Jake, it wasn't direct. 
But here we were, in some way the only two real 
survivors. We had even prospered. Each of us 
was far better off by most measures than we'd 
have been without the war. 
"Is Jake staying at this hotel?" I asked. 
Marco nodded. Then, with sudden fire, he 
said, "I wish he would see you, Cassie. You're 
what he needs. I mean, I try and talk to him but 
you know Jake, he can go totally opaque when he 
wants to. You ask him if he's okay, he says, 'Sure.' 
You ask him if he needs anything, it's 'No, I'm 
good.' But he never seems to do anything. Not 
that I know of anyway." 
"How often do you see him?" I asked. 
Marco started to answer, stopped, gave a 
guilty shrug. "Officially? As in, I see him and he 
sees me?" 
"Ah. You're spying on him?" 
"I'm still an Animorph. I still like to fly. 
74 
Maybe I'm in eagle morph and I happen to see 
him." 
"So how is he, really?" 
"I'm not exactly a psychiatrist, Cassie." 
I wasn't going to accept that. "Marco, you 
have a very subtle mind and you're a good ob-
server. And he's your best friend." 
The waitress brought us beverages and a plate 
of some kind of snack. She gave us the familiar 
"I know you!" smile and left only reluctantly. 
"She wants me," Marco said. Then, realizing 
that I wasn't going to be diverted, he sighed and 
said, "Like I say, I'm no psychiatrist. But he's de-
pressed. You know, like not just sad but some-
thing deeper? Like clinically depressed. Like a 
party balloon with half the helium gone. Like a 
flashlight with low batteries. He hangs around 
the house with his mom and dad. Sometimes 
he'll go for a drive — you know, at least he kept 
the free Jaguar. I mean, if he'd refused that I'd 
have had to kill him personally. And," Marco 
added with a significant look, "he goes to see 
her." 
I knew who Marco meant by "her." 
"He doesn't put flowers on the memorial or 
whatever, there are always lots of those. He goes 
when no one's around, late, after hours. The guys 
at the gate let him in. He parks and just kind of 
sits there like he's hanging out with her. I don't 
75 

think he talks to her. Sad as it is to say, I wish he 
did. Talking to a dead person is better than not 
talking at all. He sits there for an hour, some-
times two, stares out at the ocean. Watches the 
sun go down. Then he leaves. Sometimes I think 
he's waiting there hoping Tobias will show up." 
Tears were welling in my eyes. The image was 
too sad. I'd been to Rachel's memorial too. But 
not like that. "Rachel would be so mad at him." 
"Yeah," Marco agreed. "Get over it. Shake it 
off. That's what she'd say." 
"You think that's what he should do? Shake it 
off?" 
"Don't you?" 
I wasn't sure what I thought. "Sometimes I'm 
ashamed that I have moved on, you know? I guess 
I wonder if there's something wrong with me 
when I enjoy the day, or enjoy my job or my 
classes." 
"You still morph?" Marco asked. 
The question surprised me. "Yeah. Of course. 
I . . . I don't know, I guess I couldn't see why I 
shouldn't. It helps with my job. It's just easier 
getting around way back in the woods if I'm fly-
ing, or in wolf morph." 
"I can't be sure, but I have this feeling Jake 
hasn't morphed since . . . since." 
"It gives you a different perspective," I said. 
"I mean, I've often wondered if allowing some-
76 
one to morph to dolphin or falcon or whatever 
might not be a good way to let them put the little 
stuff in perspective." 
"Morph therapy? I think I feel another best-
selling book coming on. Oh, man, Oprah would 
eat that up. And you know the Andalites are say-
ing now they may make morphing technology 
more widely available on Earth." 
I frowned. "Really? Why?" 
"They want a Krispy Kreme franchise back on 
the home world. You have a fair number of An-
dalites who possess a human morph now, all 
back home after their tour on Earth. Still looking 
for a donut." 
The idea was so absurd I had to laugh. "We're 
going to trade donuts for morphing technology?" 
Marco and I sat there in silent enjoyment for 
a moment, sipping our Oranginas. 
"I think you're right," Marco said after a 
while. 
"About what?" 
"Morph therapy. I think it could be useful 
when someone is in a funk, let's say." 
I looked at him to see whether he was kid-
ding. He looked back. All of a sudden neither of 
us was kidding. 
77 

CHAPTER 12 
J a k e 
"...Did conspire to subjugate the people of 
Earth through subversion, terror, and violence. 
Four. That the defendant did conspire to over-
throw all legitimate forms of government through 
subversion, terror, and violence. Five. That the 
defendant did commit numerous acts of at-
tempted murder. Six. That the defendant com-
mitted murder in the specifics contained in 
appendix 2C. Seven. That the defendant com-
mitted or caused to be committed numerous acts 
of torture in the specifics contained in appendix 
2D. Eight. That the defendant did . . ." 
The reading of Visser One's indictment was 
going to take a while. The War-Crimes Tribunal 
didn't have a death penalty, just prison. The pros-
78 
ecutors said he was eligible for something like 
eight hundred years in prison. And since they 
had about a hundred witnesses drawn from for-
mer human-Controllers, Hork-Bajir, and we Ani-
morphs, there wasn't much question about the 
outcome. 
Alloran would not be allowed to testify. It 
came too close to being self-incrimination, the 
courts said. 
It had taken a year to organize the trial. The 
biggest problem was how to have the accused be 
present and involved in the proceedings. There 
was no way the visser could be allowed to take a 
host body. I mean, how does a court order one of 
the very things it considers a crime? 
Fortunately Ax's people were willing to help. 
Very willing. Andalite technicians created a Yeerk 
box. It was about the size of a hardcover book. It 
contained a miniaturized Kandrona source, a 
computer-interface, and a voice synthesizer. The 
visser could hear and "see" and speak. The box, 
painted lavender for some obscure Andalite reason, 
sat on a pedestal facing the curved judges' bench. 
There was a panel of five judges, American, 
Dutch, Chinese, Kenyan, and Chilean. 
The visser had half a dozen appointed lawyers. 
They looked very professional, very slick, and like 
they knew they had zero chance. 
There was a gallery down one side of the 
79 

courtroom for media. They had crammed what 
looked like a hundred cameras of every conceiv-
able type into a space smaller than a men's 
room. 
The whole world was watching. We were live 
on every station everywhere. 
The building was ringed with security. Proba-
bly half the people sitting in the audience were 
security or intelligence people. American, French, 
British, Russian, Chinese, Indian, Israeli . . . it 
was like a security convention. And that wasn't 
even counting the overt security inside the room, 
a dozen heavily armed Dutch Special Forces 
guys. 
People were very determined that the visser 
not escape. 
Marco leaned close and whispered, "If any-
one so much as farts there's going to be about 
ten thousand rounds fired off before you can say, 
'It wasn't me!'" 
I smiled. 
Marco was enjoying this. But then, he en-
joyed the attention. If he made it through his tes-
timony without making a dozen bad jokes I'd be 
amazed. 
Cassie was sitting just beyond him. We had 
exchanged smiles and awkward hugs. I had 
dreaded this for months. I didn't know what to 
say to her. I didn't seem to know what to say to 
80 
anyone lately. Maybe I was getting stupid in my 
old age. 
Part of me wanted what we'd had in the old 
days, Cassie and me. But that wasn't possible. I 
knew that. I had come to accept that all of that, 
all of what I'd had with Cassie, Tobias, Ax, even 
Marco, all of it was "in the war." And the things 
that were "in the war" didn't seem to translate 
into real life. Like they were written in incompat-
ible computer languages or something. 
I still cared for Cassie, for all of them. I al-
ways would. My life was divided into three parts: 
before, during, and after the war. And that mid-
dle section was so overwhelming, so big, so in-
tense, it made the other two portions seem dim 
and dark and dull. 
That's how I felt now, pretty much all the 
time. Dark. Dull. Slow and stupid. Distracted, 
but not by anything in particular. Just like there 
was something else I should be thinking about 
but I couldn't recall what it was. 
I understood Tobias. I didn't think he ran 
away out of rage or even out of grief. I mean, 
maybe at first, yeah, but I wondered if maybe, 
like me, he wasn't just looking for simplicity. 
Maybe. 
Why wasn't Marco like that? He thrived on it 
all. The attention, the fame, the excitement. Maybe 
he was just more resilient. 
81 

Ax was to my right. Not sitting, they had 
removed chairs so he and Alloran and an offi-
cial Andalite legal observer named Salawan 
could stand comfortably. 
" . . . mayhem. Sixteen. That the defendant 
did perform medical experiments upon human 
subjects without permission. Seventeen. That 
the defendant did drive more than a million 
people from their homes. Eighteen. That the de-
fendant did .. ." 
I wondered what the visser thought of all this. 
It was a very un-Yeerkish scene. The Yeerks re-
served trials only for the highest-ranking officers. 
And they would certainly never try a member of a 
different species. They had quicker, more direct 
ways of dealing with aliens. 
Suddenly the reading of the indictment was 
over. The prosecution was ready to call its first 
witness. 
"We call Jake Berenson." 
I stood up. My legs were stiff from sitting. 
I walked to the front and sat down in a chair 
placed in a little booth so that I faced the judges 
and the defendant. It seemed odd to see Alloran, 
the face I associated with Visser One, standing 
behind the prosecution desk, free, while my en-
emy was represented by a blank lavender box. 
"The defense objects to this witness." 
A murmur through the courtroom. Visser One's 
82 
head lawyer was on her feet looking nervous and 
smug at the same time. 
The president of the court, the Chilean judge, 
leaned forward. "What is the nature of your ob-
jection?" 
"Your honor, this witness should himself be 
under indictment as a war criminal. If the al-
leged war crimes of the Yeerk military officer, 
Visser One, are to be tried in this court, it must 
be in the pursuit of impartial justice. Truly impar-
tial justice cannot be applied only against one 
side in a conflict. If my client is to be tried for his 
actions in the human-Yeerk war, then so must 
the actions of this witness. With all due respect 
to this court, this witness is a mass murderer. A 
war criminal." 
The objection was denied. My testimony was 
to proceed. But I found I couldn't speak. I felt 
like I was choking, like the air wouldn't come. 
Billions of people were watching my reaction. 
Billions of people saw me freeze. Billions of 
people thought, This is the famous Jake the 
Yeerk-Killer? He doesn't look like much. 
"Apparently the witness is having some diffi-
culty," Visser One's lawyer said with only the 
slightest smirk. 
"The witness is disconcerted by this unjusti-
fied and vicious assault," the prosecutor said 
heatedly. 
83 

w 
The Chinese judge asked if I needed a mo-
ment to compose myself. 
"No," I said. "I'm ready." But I wasn't. I was 
fighting the urge to run from the room. 
"State your name and occupation, for the 
record." 
"Urn, Jake Berenson. My occupation? I guess 
I'm unemployed." 
"Are you a student?" the prosecutor sug-
gested helpfully. 
"No. Not really." 
"All right. Please tell the court how you first 
became aware of the presence on Earth of the 
Yeerk species." 
"All right," I said. But then memory crowded 
in and pushed the court into the shadows. I re-
membered being at the mall with Marco and To-
bias. We ran into Rachel and Cassie. We decided 
to walk home together. We decided to take a 
shortcut through the construction site. 
A light in the sky. 
The Andalite fighter. The wounded alien crea-
ture, the Andalite, staggering, falling. 
The attack of the Yeerks. Chapman. 
Seeing Tobias morph to a cat. 
My first morph. 
My first battle. The Yeerk pool. 
The realization that Tom was one of them. 
The decision, not my decision, that I was the 
84 
leader. Marco inventing the name: Animorphs. 
Leader of the Animorphs. 
The tiger. My battle morph so many times. So 
many battles. 
The prosecutor prodded me with questions. I 
answered them. But memories filled the court-
room. I couldn't get them out of my head. And 
each question triggered more. 
When they adjourned for the day I didn't no-
tice at first. I'd been on the stand for just an 
hour, I had barely begun my testimony. And then 
would come cross-examination. 
What was the matter with me? I knew I was 
screwed up. I knew I'd made a fool of myself. I'd 
let everyone down. 
I left the courtroom straightaway and found 
my way back to my hotel room. I sat on the bed 
and just held my head in my hands and stared. I 
don't know how long. 
I heard a noise. I looked up. 
A gorilla. 
Marco, of course. Cassie was demorphing, ris-
ing from the carpet in one corner. Out of the cor-
ner of my eye I saw Ax. 
<Hey, Jake,> Marco said. 
Then he swung his cinder block gorilla fist 
into the side of my head. 
85 

J a k e 
I woke up falling. 
"Aaaahhhh!" 
Not a long fall, but it was into water, into 
waves, into dark gray waves topped with foam. 
I hit facedown and sank maybe ten feet down. 
Salt water in my mouth, down my throat. It 
was freezing. Brutal cold, shocking cold. I wasn't 
groggy anymore, I was wide-awake, but disori-
ented. Which way was up? 
Sunlight. Cold and far, far away. I kicked 
madly, moved with painful slowness. Could I even 
reach the surface? I was a slug. My clothing bil-
lowed and knotted around me, twisted me, ham-
pered my movements. Shoes full of water, like 
lead weights. 
86 
I kicked hard and started to rise. I ripped 
off my shirt, buttons twirling away in the water. 
I took my shoes off. I was going to freeze to 
death. 
Then, air! 
I sucked in deep, spit water, breathed again. 
A wave crashed over me, buried me, turned 
me upside down. Then, air again. But air wasn't 
enough. I was freezing. I couldn't see anything 
down in the valley between waves. No boat, no 
shore, no plane. How had I ended up here? 
Already couldn't feel my fingers. Thought 
slowing. 
Dolphin. That was it, dolphin. I reached for 
the DNA that still flowed through my veins. 
I felt the changes begin. My skin was as gray 
as a corpse's. My hair was gone. My numb fingers 
were melting together, webbing, then stretching 
out to form fins. 
My legs twined together like two strands of 
overcooked spaghetti. The flesh melted, pain-
lessly. I heard the interior sounds of bones shift-
ing, the gloopy sound of organs disappearing or 
being replaced, relocated. 
My mouth and nose pushed out and out, 
ridiculously far. All at once a hole grew in the 
back of my neck. 
I was no longer cold. I was definitely mad. 
I kicked my tail hard, trying to lift my dolphin 
87 
CHAPTER 13 

body high enough to see over the wave tops. Not 
enough. I would have to jump. 
I sucked air through my blowhole and dove 
down deep. Ten feet; twenty feet, thirty. Down 
into darkness. I fired a series of clicks and the ul-
trasonic waves bounced back in patterns that re-
vealed a school of fish behind me at about my 
same depth. And a hint of something larger at a 
greater distance. 
At thirty feet or so I twisted and began power-
ing toward the surface. 
Up like a rocket. Speed was so easy. So easy 
to kick my tail and fly straight up through the wa-
ter. 
Faster and faster and the bright barrier be-
tween sea and sky was right there, shimmering 
above me, and I blew through it! 
I burst from the water and sailed high and for 
a perfect moment I held sea and sky within me, 
all encompassed within my brain. 
I flew, and I completely forgot to look around. 
I splashed down and reminded myself sternly 
that I had a job. I had to see where I was, figure it 
out, try and make sense of it all. 
Down and down, and up, up, up, into the sky! 
<Aaaahhh!> 
Again! 
Down and up, so fast, as fast as I could go. As 
high as I could fly. 
Again. Again. Again. 
The dolphin body was beginning to tire, but I 
didn't care. I wanted to be tired. I wanted to 
drain every last ounce of energy from the crea-
ture as I flew and splashed and flew again. 
Ultrasound now painted the picture of three 
other dolphins. They were clearly "visible," but 
they kept their distance. 
I swam hard till the dolphin body was worn 
out. Not easy to wear out a dolphin in the water. 
I was not far from the beach. I could see the 
buildings of The Hague, not at all far off. I 
headed for shore and beached. I demorphed in 
the freezing surf and staggered heavy-footed up 
the beach. 
My friends were right behind me. I waited for 
them. We were wearing our morphing outfits. 
Like the old days. No shoes, of course, we never 
had learned how to morph shoes. 
There weren't many people on the beach. Just 
an old couple taking a walk and a woman with 
her dog. 
"I guess you guys think you're clever," I said, 
squeegeeing water out of my hair. 
"More like desperate," Marco said. "You've 
had your head up your butt for a long time, Jake. 
Which is your business. Unless it's our business. 
Like when you screw up testifying against Visser 
One." 
88 
89 

I nodded. I couldn't argue. But if they thought 
the result was me all happy they were wrong. 
"She called me a war criminal," I said. 
"She's wrong," Cassie said. 
"Did what you had to do, man," Marco said. 
"We all did." 
<Jake, it was I who pointed out the possibili-
ties to you,> Ax said. <l pointed out that the 
Yeerk pool aboard the ship could be drained.> 
"Yeah, but I made the call. I pulled the plug. 
So why don't you tell me: How is that prosecutor 
wrong? How is Visser One evil and I'm not? I'd 
really like to know that." I had intended it to be a 
rhetorical question. I hadn't meant to sound so 
plaintive. 
Cassie took it seriously. "Jake, I've thought a 
lot about this." 
Marco rolled his eyes. "Yeah, we know." 
"I've had to think about it because I've done 
the same things you've done, Jake. You were the 
leader, but if you're a war criminal then so are we 
for following you." She shivered. It was cold and 
the breeze was gusting. "I've had to make my 
own peace with things I've done." 
Despite myself I was hanging on her words. 
And despite myself I was remembering kissing 
her. 
"Jake, you can't. . ." She took a deep breath. 
"You can't equate the victim and the perpetrator." 
90 
"So as long as you're playing defense it's not 
possible to commit a war crime?" I asked. "That's 
pretty close to just saying that the winner makes 
the rules because it's the winner who writes the 
history." 
She grabbed my arm and searched for my eyes, 
forcing me to look at her. "No, Jake, it isn't. 
There are a lot of close calls in history, lots of 
wars where the blame is evenly split between the 
sides. This isn't one of them. Before they came 
to Earth no human ever attacked a Yeerk. No hu-
man ever harmed a Yeerk. This one is clear: We 
are the victims. They made war on us." 
"That's good," I said softly. "All of that is 
good. We have justification. We're the good 
guys." 
Marco said, "That's right, Big Jake, we are." 
I nodded. "That's good for the big picture. 
See, my problem is a little more personal." 
<What do you mean?> Ax asked. 
"Well, Ax-man, you're right, you did call my 
attention to the possibilities on the Pool ship. 
And when you did that I guess I should have 
thought, Well, Jake, it's a harsh, terrible thing to 
do, but you're justified because, after all, you're 
the victim here. But that's not what I thought. 
You know what I thought?" 
Cassie released her grip on me. But Marco 
just took a step up close, right in my face. 
91 

"I know what you thought, Jake. You thought 
Die, you filthy worms. Feel the fear, Yeerks. Feel 
the pain. Feel the helplessness. You wanted 
them to suffer and the idea of them suffering and 
dying made you happy. You were thrilled. You 
were high." 
Cassie winced. She looked away. 
I said, "Yeah, Marco. That was about it: word 
for word." 
"Well, dude, you don't get to be a war crimi-
nal by thinking bad thoughts. It's what was done, 
not what was felt or thought. You have to judge 
the act. You were acting in self-defense. You 
were enjoying the fact that you were winning. 
Two different things." 
Cassie seemed less certain. Far less. She 
seemed ready to join in with Marco, but she 
couldn't bring herself to do it. She tried to hide 
it, but there was this look in her eyes, this side-
ways look at me. 
<Prince Jake,> Ax said, giving me back the ti-
tle he'd given me long ago, <l am not a human. 
But it seems to me that it is up to your own 
people to decide the morality of your actions. 
Their decision seems clear. My people agree with 
that assessment. We, the An'rmorphs under your 
leadership, stopped the Yeerk threat. We saved 
Earth. We may have saved my people as well, 
surely we saved many, many Andalite lives.> 
92 
I was suddenly exhausted. Worn out all the 
way, deep down. And everyone had run out of 
things to say. 
After a long, awkward silence I said, "Anyway. 
That..." I gestured out toward the water. I 
wanted to say that it was the first real joy I had 
felt since seeing Rachel kill Tom. But there was a 
wall between me and Cassie. And Marco, well, 
he's a guy and we guys don't do a lot of emo-
tional stuff with one another. "Anyway. I'll be 
good tomorrow, on the stand." 
CNN: Breaking News. 
"We have this just coming in. The five judge 
panel in The Hague has returned convictions on 
twenty-two of twenty-five counts of war crimes 
against the Yeerk, Visser One. 
"Visser One, of course, led the Yeerk invasion 
of Earth and was in command of all Yeerk and al-
lied forces at war's end. 
"The decision means that Visser One will al-
most certainly never be released from the specially 
constructed prison facility that has been built in 
Kansas. 
"The trial was televised live around the world 
for three weeks during which time seventy-three 
witnesses took the stand to substantiate the 
charges and allegations. Jake Berenson was the 
first witness, followed by the rest of the living 
93 

and available Animorphs, and many, many oth-
ers. 
"And now, we're going to go to our CNN legal 
analyst, Greta Van Susteren, for analysis of this 
truly unique moment in legal history." 
94 
95 
TWO YEARS LATER 
Aximili 
CHAPTER 
<Launch two fighters. They are to go in with 
sensors on full active, no stealth measures. If 
whoever is hiding behind that moon is peaceful 
we do not want to sneak up on them. If they are 
not so peaceful . . . well, let them think they are 
facing nothing but a pair of careless fighters.> 
<Yes, Prince Aximili.> 
Even after the last year aboard the Intrepid, I 
sensed that my first officer did not entirely approve 
of my habit of explaining my actions for the deck 
crew. It was not usual. Captains typically played 
the part of far-distant and all-knowing gods. I pre-
ferred to continuously train and retrain. The more 
the deck officers understood, the more they would 
learn and the more valuable they'd be in a crisis. 

Not that we'd encountered any crises. Rather 
we had chased interstellar ghosts and rumors 
ever since that first, faint intercept that may or 
may not have been from the Blade ship. 
Well, maybe the Blade ship was lurking be-
hind this cold, dark moon at the edge of nowhere, 
or maybe the Skrit Na freighter had just been 
confused about what they claimed to have seen. 
The Skrit Na did things for their own impene-
trable reasons: They had, after all, made a number 
of trips to Earth, long before the Yeerks had dis-
covered that planet. And what had they done 
with the people of Earth? Kidnapped them briefly 
for absurd medical tests, and on occasion killed 
some Earth creatures called cows. Had any of 
that had a purpose? Perhaps to the Skrit Na 
mind, but not to anyone else. 
<Fighters away,> my tactical officer reported. 
I saw the fighters come into view on the main 
screen. They lit up their sensors and fired their 
engines. In seconds they were just bright pin-
points against the moon's dark green backdrop. 
<Take us to stage-two alert, just in case,> I 
ordered. <lt never hurts to have everyone know 
their battle station. And go to silent runnings 
<Stage two alert. Silent runnings First Offi-
cer Menderash ordered. 
Now we were moderately ready in case a "bad 
96 
guy" was hiding out there, and we were sensors-
down so we didn't glow like a great big radiating 
beacon. 
A window appeared in the main screen. I saw 
the face of one of the fighter pilots. Fighter pilots 
have a certain look, easily identifiable, a mix of 
swagger and competence and pretended bore-
dom. As if playing the role of bait for a Blade 
ship was just another training run. 
<This is fighter one, Calarass reporting.> 
<Go ahead,> Menderash responded. 
<There's a ship back here, all right, but not 
the Blade ship. No evidence of the Blade ship or 
any active, hostile vessel on our sensors.> 
I nodded. <What do you have then, Calarass?> 
He shrugged. <Unknown, Captain. All I know 
is that it is very big, it is powered by old-fashioned 
ion engines, and it has been hit by some kind of 
energy weapon. Possibly a Dracon beam. I am 
showing no life signs.> 
I stilled the excitement in my hearts. Dracon 
weapons were widely available throughout the 
galaxy. The destruction of the Yeerk Empire had 
spawned a lot of illegal arms trading. And the 
Blade ship was not the only renegade Yeerk out-
fit. Still, if it had been a Dracon weapon that at 
least increased the chances we were on the trail 
of the Blade ship. 
97 

I took a moment to consider. Another lesson 
for the officers: Unless you're being fired on, 
think before you act. 
<Prepare a boarding party. I will command. 
F.O.? Full sensor sweep on the unknown vessel. 
Take us in.> 
This sort of mission wasn't supposed to be 
performed by me. The captain generally stays on 
the bridge. The T.O. normally led boarding par-
ties. But I was bored. And I knew the T.O. wouldn't 
argue: I wasn't just the captain or a prince, I was 
Aximili of Earth. The Aximili. A living legend. 
I couldn't complain about being bored, of 
course. The fleet command had given me what 
was easily the best assignment around. The bulk 
of the fleet was engaged either in flying blockade 
around the Yeerk home world, convoying traders 
back and forth to Earth, or escorting scientific 
missions. 
The Intrepid was just about the only ship out 
"looking for trouble," as Marco might have put it. 
Every officer in the fleet was jealous of us. Espe-
cially now with so many being eased out of ser-
vice. The fleet's size was being sharply reduced. 
War's end meant the end of glory and advance-
ment for warriors. 
They all had secondary occupations — that 
was part of our code, that "warrior" was a tempo-
rary occupation. You were supposed to want to 
98 
stop fighting and go home to your meadow and 
your scoop, back to your peacetime occupation, 
your family and friends. 
I guess some warriors did want all those 
things. At some level I did, too. But how do you 
weigh the sharp rush of battle against the slower, 
more contemplative joys of watching your trees 
flower? 
I left the bridge and went aboard the clumsy-
looking boarding craft. It was designed for 
docking — voluntary or forced — with any con-
ceivable craft. There were four grapples, basically 
legs of a sort, with the option to use magnetic, 
adhesive, or intrusive attachment. It was not a 
fast or well armed or attractive craft. And it had 
room for only two dozen Andalites, all of us 
jammed in hoof-to-tail. 
The pilot was at pains to handle the craft 
smoothly, what with me, the Living Legend, be-
ing aboard. I was worried he might overcorrect 
and humiliate himself. He did, and we nicked 
the side of the bay. 
I sighed. As captain I was expected to point 
out the error. But as the Great Aximili any harsh 
word from me carried ten times the usual weight. 
<Check that stick, Warlatan, the interface 
may be a bit balky.> 
<Yes, Captain.> 
I could see the alien vessel now. The two 
99 

scout fighters were on-station, one at the bow, 
one at the stern, armed and ready. Two additional 
escort fighters kept pace with us, deployed up-
and-down. 
It was not a type of craft I had ever seen be-
fore. It dwarfed even one of the old Dome ships, 
big as they were. It made my cruiser-class Intre-
pid look like a toy. 
It was built in a sort of star-burst pattern. 
Asymmetrical. As if someone had picked up a 
few dozen Earth-style habitations they call sky-
scrapers and welded the bottoms together. Each 
skyscraper was different in shape, size, and 
color, some quite fantastic. 
Still, it was easy to see the extrusion that had 
been blown apart by energy weapons. 
My hearts began to beat fast again. How many 
ships would dare to take on this behemoth? 
Surely the Blade ship had been here. 
F.O. Menderash reported in from the Intrepid, 
which was now in sight of the alien vessel as 
well. Sensors showed no life signs. However, sen-
sors did show what might be traces of DNA. 
I frowned. <DNA? Specifically? Earth origin?> 
<The readings are quite possibly inaccurate,> 
the tactical officer interjected. <The amount of 
material is very small and the ship, as you can 
see, Captain, is enormous.> 
<Yes, I had noticed that,> I said dryly. <l 
100 
want a sensor grid established. Link with all four 
fighters and the docker with main sensors. Let us 
see if we can pinpoint this alleged DNA. It would 
take a year to search that ship on hoof.> 
This took a few minutes during which time we 
drifted closer and closer to the silent behemoth. 
<We have a fix,> the T.O. reported. <Now a 
ninety percent probability that Earth-type DNA is 
present in one locations 
No one said anything but there was a sort of 
silent murmur of excitement. Warriors shifted 
their stance, surreptitiously glanced at the charge 
indicators on their Shredders, nudged each other. 
<Sensors continue to show no life signs,> the 
First Officer said. <However, Captain, since this 
is a very unusual situation, perhaps you may wish 
to reconsider whether the T.O. should be given 
command of the boarding party. Or myself.> 
<You sense danger, First Officer Menderash?> 
He hesitated. Then, <Yes.> 
<Despite the sensor readings showing this is 
a dead ship?> 
This time more forcefully. <Yes, Captain.> 
<So do I. Just the same, here I am, might as 
well go forward. Take us in for docking. Let us go 
see what this DNA is.> 
101 

CHAPTER 15 
Controlling the animal mind and instincts 
are hardest the first time. The instincts can carry 
you away, especially in prey animals where the 
fear reflex is overwhelming. After that first time it 
becomes easier. Which is why you never go into 
battle with an untested morph." 
"But, Professor, you did." 
"Yeah, well, I did lots of stupid things, Ser-
geant Santorelli. I was a kid when I started. I 
think your respective governments are kind of 
hoping that you professionals will learn the good 
habits from me, not the bad ones." 
I was instructing a class. My third in the last 
year. It was a special class of two dozen men and 
women, chosen from among elite antiterror forces 
102 
of democratic nations around the world. I had 
Americans, British, French, Japanese, German, 
and Norwegian soldiers in this particular class. 
Terrorism had grown as a problem. Many of 
the worst were religious cults convinced that the 
presence of alien species on Earth was delaying a 
hoped-for Armageddon. Some were antigovern-
ment paranoids who had convinced themselves 
that the Andalites were taking over Earth. Others 
were sort of latter-day racists who simply needed 
someone to hate and focused on the Hork-Bajir. 
Then there were the ecology extremists who just 
hated anything new and technological. 
Terrorists had begun to attack Andalite tourists 
and free Hork-Bajir. And the Andalites had agreed 
to make a single morphing cube available, on 
condition that it remain in Andalite custody and 
be used only for antiterror forces. 
We'd always known it was a bad idea to get 
between an Andalite tourist in human morph and 
a chocolate chip cookie, a cinnamon bun, or (to 
the great relief of the beleaguered tobacco indus-
try), old cigarette butts. 
On a more serious level, Andalite-Earth trade 
and tourism were becoming big business. The 
Andalites liked the status quo as much as hu-
mans did. 
I needed a job. I needed to do something use-
ful. And I was the reigning expert on using ani-
J a k e 
103 

mal morphs for infiltration, surveillance, and 
combat. 
They called me Professor. A joke, obviously, I 
still hadn't formally graduated from high school. 
But they had to call me something, these amaz-
ingly fit, smart, disciplined men and women, 
some of whom were twice my age. 
Classes were terribly Top Secret, naturally. 
The "school" was a squat cinder block building 
in a forgotten corner of the Twenty-nine Palms 
Marine Corps base. Way out in the California 
desert. Nothing around. 
I lived in Santa Barbara, now. After the trial of 
Visser One, and endless nagging from Marco 
(and his agent and manager and assorted Holly-
wood friends), I finally wrote a book. It was an 
autobiography, of course. I hated doing it. But it 
was a way for me to tell people more about 
Rachel and Tobias, the Forgotten Animorphs, as 
people called them. 
The book made way more money than I 
needed. I bought a house for my folks and finally 
moved out on my own. Tom was gone. My hang-
ing around my parents' house till I was thirty 
wasn't going to bring him back. 
Marco lived half a mile from me, in a house 
about seven times bigger than mine. We'd started 
hanging out again. And after awhile he'd given 
104 
up arranging dates for me with whatever starlet 
happened to be willing. 
The Defense Department was my official em-
ployer and they flew me in a private military jet 
from Santa Barbara to Twenty-nine every day of 
class. Flew me back in the evening. I would sit 
there pretending to work on lesson plans, stare 
out the window at the sun setting over the Pa-
cific, and watch the birds below. 
I had seen red-tailed hawks at times. But 
there was no way to know. 
I spoke to Cassie every couple of months. She 
was seeing some guy . . . actually, a good guy. I 
had met him at one of Marco's parties. I couldn't 
exactly remember his name. He worked for the 
governor of California on environmental concerns. 
He and Cassie spent a lot of time working to-
gether with the Hork-Bajir in Yellowstone. 
It was a Friday, the last day of class for the 
week and my students were glad to be done with 
me for a while, and I was glad to be heading 
home. 
My ride was waiting outside the building. 
They drove me back and forth in a Humvee with 
all kinds of security — a courtesy befitting my 
status as an official hero. 
I had been given the Presidential Medal of 
Freedom and a similarly exalted medal from pretty 
105 

much every nation on Earth. Some before the 
trial, some more afterward. If I'd suffered any-
thing tangible from having the title of "war crimi-
nal" applied to me, I never noticed it. And I'd 
gotten so I almost didn't notice the security that 
followed me everywhere since I'd become terror-
ist target number one. 
The Humvee pulled up alongside my parked 
jet and I waited, as I'd learned to do, for the ma-
rine driver to come running around and open my 
door. The delay gave time for the two security 
men to jump out and ostentatiously scan the 
area. 
"Kind of hot out today, Professor," the driver 
said as I climbed out. 
"Yeah, but it's a dry heat," I said. "See you 
Monday, Corporal." 
I pushed my sunglasses up on my nose and 
headed for the plane. Then I stopped. One of the 
security guys was pressing his earpiece in and 
listening intently. He raised his wrist and spoke 
to his walkie-talkie. "Roger that. I'll ask." 
"Ask what, Major?" I said. 
"Sir, an Andalite has landed, unannounced. 
He's here on base. Asking for you." 
"Prince Aximili?" 
"I don't think so, sir. They can bring him 
straight here if you okay it." 
I nodded. "Let's get into the shade, at least." 
106 
We waited and after a while a convoy of Hum-
vees appeared through the wavy heat lines of the 
tarmac. Two Andalites, not one, rode in the horse 
trailer towed behind a Humvee. These Andalites 
had never taken offense at this unusual mode of 
transport, and it worked better than trying to 
cram them into a car. 
The two Andalites descended the ramp. I 
went to greet them and led them under the 
plane's wings, out of the sun's direct rays. 
<l am Prince Caysath-Winwall-Esgarrouth. This 
is Menderash-Postill-Fastill. First Officer of the 
lntrepid.> 
<Ax's ship? I mean, excuse me, Prince Axim-
ili'sship?> 
<Yes,> Caysath confirmed. <Menderash is the 
only known survivor of the lntrepid.> 
I guess I looked pretty stupid for a minute as 
that news sank in. 
"Are you telling me Ax is dead?" 
Caysath slowly shook his head. It was a habit 
they learned as part of communicating with hu-
mans. <No. He is not confirmed dead. Only miss-
ing. In fact, we have reason to believe that he 
may still be alive, but a prisoners 
"Whose prisoner?" I snapped. 
It was Menderash who answered. <The Blade 
ship.> 
107 

We returned to base so that Menderash could 
explain. My heart was pounding. My pulse was rac-
ing. I was a little embarrassed by my response, 
but this was Ax, one of us. 
One of mine. 
Menderash was telling the story. 
<We approached the unknown alien vessel. 
Prince Aximili ordered the docking ship to board 
at a place near the suspected DNA reading.> 
"No life signs?" 
<None,> Menderash answered. He was visi-
bly shaken. I realized then that he was carrying 
the weight of this. I knew the signs. <We ran 
every sensor reading we know. You have to under-
108 
stand, it is a thousand times easier to detect life 
signs than to detect a tiny sample of DNA, we 
were sure the alien vessel was dead-in-space.> 
I nodded. "Go ahead." 
<The docking was uncomplicated. They grap-
pled and cut through the outer hull. Prince Axim-
ili and a dozen heavily armed warriors boarded. 
For a while they merely reported back on the in-
terior of the ship. It had clearly been inhabited at 
some time. But there was no sign of current ac-
tivity. None. If there had been, I never—> 
<Just proceed with the story,> Caysath said 
gently. 
<Of course.> Menderash stopped the agitated 
quiver of his stalk eyes and forced himself to 
stand still. <They used handheld sensors to pin-
point the DNA sample. Prince Aximili picked it 
up, held it. He said, <lt is a few hairs. White.> 
Then, he frowned and said, <No, not truly white. 
Colorless almost. Hollow.> 
I knew what was coming next. I knew the ani-
mal with hollow, colorless hairs that from a dis-
tance seemed white. Polar bear. 
It was a Yeerk with a polar bear morph that 
had killed Rachel. 
<Then the prince shouted for the warriors to 
draw weapons. He ordered me to raise defenses 
on the Intrepid and go to condition one. A split 
J a k e 
CHAPTER 16 
109 

second later the alien vessel fired at us. It was a 
very powerful weapon. They caught us only half 
ready. See, sensors are less effective when used 
while defensive force fields are raised. The at-
tack crippled the Intrepid. Half our people . . . 
there were many casualties. Chaos, as you can 
imagine. Blood. Computers down . . . Communi-
cations down . . . The T.O., he was, he was 
sucked out into space before the force fields 
could close the breach.> 
"The alien vessel, not the Blade ship, fired?" 
I asked. 
<Yes. It was fully operational. Alive. Very much 
alive. My duty was to the ship. Standing orders 
were to save the ship. I had no choice but to 
withdraw. All four fighters were lost. We pulled 
back. But just before I did, before I could, I 
heard him. Prince Aximili, the captain. Not by 
link, but through normal thought-speak. Very 
weak. Far away.> 
"Yes?" 
<The doctors believe I suffered a temporary 
stress reaction. An hallucination. That I was 
hearing things.> 
"What is it you heard, First Officer?" 
<Prince Aximili. He said your name. Just your 
name. Jake.> 
Both Andalites watched me, waiting to see 
my reaction. The marine guards in the room with 
110 
us watched, too. Their envy was obvious. Neither 
had seen combat. 
<And then, the engines went. We lost most 
life support. We called for help, but. . . Norshk 
pirates hit us and we couldn't even put up a 
fight. Help came, but too late. Air gone. Cold.> 
He lost the thread of his story, looked embar-
rassed, and fell silent. 
Caysath took up the narrative. <Menderash 
believes the thought-speak cry came from the 
Blade ship, which emerged from within the alien 
vessel and fled at top speed. The alien vessel fol-
lowed the Blade ship and fired repeatedly at the 
Intrepid, which followed for a while. But their en-
gines were damaged and they couldn't keep pace. 
The Blade ship and the alien vessel then entered 
Kelbrid space. > 
"What's that?" 
Caysath hesitated. Looked at me with his big, 
main eyes. Waited. 
"Please, wait outside," I told the marines. 
Once they were gone, Caysath said, <The Kel-
brid claim an empire that borders the far reaches 
of our own territory. They are dangerous. Warlike. 
Aggressive. But also very trustworthy. We have a 
treaty with one simple proviso: We do not enter 
Kelbrid space, they do not enter ours.> 
"Was this alien vessel a Kelbrid ship?" 
<We do not know. We have never seen a Kel-
111 

brid. They, likewise have no direct knowledge 
of us.> 
"Are they in league with the Blade ship?" 
<There is no way to know.> 
I was getting impatient. "These Kelbrid would 
have reason to want a live Andalite. First rule of 
intelligence: Know your enemy." 
<Yes.> 
"So what are you doing about it?" 
He looked very closely at me. <Nothing. We 
cannot enter Kelbrid space without starting a 
war. No Andalite ship, no Andalite warrior could 
enter Kelbrid space. The risk is far too great, 
even to attempt to rescue Prince Aximili.> 
"No/4nda//'teship." 
<Absolutely not.> 
He was definitely leading me somewhere. 
Where? Then it hit me. "There must be any num-
ber of surrendered Yeerk ships around." 
<l believe there are,> he said blandly. <l be-
lieve, to name just one example, that there is 
a Yeerk prototype ship in orbit above us at this 
very moment. Very fast. Heavily armed. A sort of 
smaller version of a Blade ship. We think it was 
a Yeerk attempt to design an lntrepid-o\ass ship. 
Yes, I believe such a ship, a definitely non-Andalite 
ship, is in orbit at this very moment, fully fueled, 
fully armed.> 
"And who is going to fly it?" 
112 
_,
In answer, Menderash began to morph. He 
was morphing to human. 
"He's still an Andalite," I said. 
<ln two hours, I will no longer be an An-
dalite,> Menderash said. 
113 

C-H • F T :f^ 1 7 
C a s s i e 
I was with Ronnie Chambers, my state of 
California counterpart of sorts. He was the gover-
nor's liaison to the Hork-Bajir. We had left our as-
sistants and even my omnipresent security detail 
behind. We were scouting out a new valley as a 
possible extension of the Hork-Bajir territory. The 
Hork-Bajir were a growing population. 
It was a hard climb, but we were high above 
the summer's heat and I had come to really love 
searching out the endless still-undiscovered se-
crets of Yellowstone. I was getting to be a hiking 
jock, even eschewing morphing except in cases 
of emergency or special need. 
I'd spent so much time in hiking boots and 
wool socks and L.L. Bean plaid shirts that Rachel's 
114 
entire ongoing satire of my wardrobe would have 
had to change. Not that I was exactly fashion-
able, but now, instead of being pestered by Wal-
Mart to do endorsements, I was being pestered 
by Patagonia. 
Ronnie was just slightly ahead of me, the 
slope was very steep and he was digging his feet 
in very carefully. 
I had resisted the whole dating thing for a 
longtime. And I resisted it with Ronnie in partic-
ular because we had to work together. Plus he 
was six years older than me. 
But, after The Hague, I knew I had to move 
on. I wasn't just Cassie the Animorph anymore. I 
had been moved out of the Interior Department 
when the new President was elected. She had 
appointed me instead to the new position of 
Special Assistant to the President for Resident 
Aliens. I was nineteen and I was in the President's 
sub-cabinet. 
Of course, yes, I would always be Cassie the 
Animorph. There was yet another movie coming 
out about us and my part was going to be played 
by an actress who was about a foot taller and 
twenty pounds lighter than me. So there'd be the 
inevitable "Where are they now?" stories about 
Jake and Marco and me. And of course the in-
evitable bogus Tobias sightings. 
I really wasn't trying to "Put all that behind 
115 

me." I was Cassie the Animorph, always would 
be. I was in history books, after all. But I had a 
different life to lead now. I was going forward. At 
the moment I was going forward uphill toward a 
pair of very muscular legs. 
And then I spotted the falcon. 
Don't ask me how I knew. There were occa-
sional peregrines up here, real ones. But I knew. 
"Ronnie?" I said. 
"Yeah?" He stopped and held on to a sapling. 
He smiled down at me. "What, you need a break? 
I told you not to eat those pancakes. I told you 
they'd slow you down." 
I generated a smile that he read as fake. 
"What's the matter, Cass?" 
"There's a friend of mine coming." 
He looked down the hill. Then up. I pointed 
straight up at the peregrine falcon inscribing cir-
cles above us. 
"One of them?" 
"Jake." 
"Oh." 
Ronnie knew about my relationship with Jake. 
I'd probably bored him half to death talking 
about my relationship with Jake. I felt sorry 
for him — Ronnie was a man's man, smart, 
confident, decent, funny. But in the public imag-
ination, Jake was still some melding of George 
116 
Washington and Patton and Batman. It was im-
possible not to be a little intimidated by all that. 
Ronnie made a thoughtful face and looked 
around. "You know what? I'll just head toward 
that outcropping up there. That should be a good 
observation post. Whenever you're done . . ." 
"Thanks, Ronnie." 
Jake came spiraling down, then straightened 
out to land on a fallen log. He hopped off the log 
and began to demorph as soon as his talons were 
on the ground. 
<Stand in front of me,> he said. <l'm going to 
roll right down the mountain if I demorph in the 
wrong order.> 
He demorphed without problems. And then, 
there he was: Jake. Not the old Jake, exactly, a 
little bigger, an inch or two taller. Jake as a 
grown-up, I thought. But then, no, that was wrong: 
Jake had been a grown-up for a long time. 
"Hi, Cassie." 
Jake always called me Cassie. Never Cass like 
Ronnie did. 
"Hi, Jake. Is something the matter?" 
He winced, a rueful acknowledgment that 
only some problem would have brought him to 
see me. 
"It's Ax. Some Andalite bigshot came to see 
me yesterday. Ax was on a deep-space mission 
117 

and his ship was attacked. He was taken pris-
oner." 
"Oh, my god," I said, and without thinking 
grabbed Jake's arm. 
"Yeah. It was the Blade ship. It disappeared 
into some place the Andalites can't follow. Not 
without triggering a major interstellar war. It's 
some treaty. No Andalite ships. No Andalites pe-
riod. Thing is, the Blade ship may have taken Ax 
across the barrier in order to use his presence 
there as a trigger, to cause a war between the An-
dalites and these Kelbrid." 
I had barely absorbed the information about 
Ax being in trouble. I was slow on picking up the 
thread of Jake's statement. Then it dawned. 
"They're asking you to go after Ax?" 
He made a wry smile. "Of course not. That 
would be a violation of the Andalite-Kelbrid 
treaty. They can't ask me to do any such thing. Of 
course, if I just happened to find a nice, new, 
gassed-up and ready-to-go captured Yeerk ship, 
and if I just happened to decide to go off on my 
own to rescue my friend. . . .well, you get the 
picture." 
"Jake, this sounds . . . I mean, one ship? You're 
supposed to go into some hostile space with one 
ship, and rescue Ax from the Blade ship and pos-
sibly a whole alien empire?" 
"Plus it seems there may be a third, unknown 
118 
alien species involved," Jake said. He smiled in a 
way that was so much like Rachel. That same 
self-mocking swagger. How had I never noticed 
that similarity before? 
"Marco will be going with me," he added. 
"He will? He agreed?" 
"No, not yet. I haven't asked him. But he 
will." 
I didn't want to say the words. I didn't want 
to. But Ax was more than a friend. How many 
times had he risked his life to save mine? I 
couldn't count the number of times I'd been 
down and only his flashing tail had brought me 
out alive. 
"I'll go, too," I said. "I just need a day to wrap 
things up and . . ." 
He was shaking his head. "No, Cassie." 
"Look, if it's because of us, because of, you 
know, you and me, hey, that's separate and apart 
from saving Ax. Ax is one of us." 
"That's not it, Cassie," he said, all the swagger 
gone now. He was the old, awkward Jake now, 
struggling to express feelings instead of making 
lightning decisions. "Look, Cassie, you're doing 
what you need to do and were born to do. Part of 
what we won was freedom for the Hork-Bajir 
people. And a place for them here on Earth. 
That's something we won. It's in the bank. It's 
real and it's good and your job is to protect it. 
119 

Me . . ." He shrugged. "Look, for better or worse, 
this is what I do. This is what I am, not what you 
are." 
"I'm still pretty good in a fight," I said. 
He laughed. "Pretty good? Cassie, you're a 
one-woman army. But you're the soldier who has 
fought her war and moved on. That's good. It's 
not me, though. Come on, Cassie, we both know 
this is a lifeline for me." 
I brushed away a tear. I didn't know how I 
felt. Relieved? Rejected? 
"So you just came to say 'good-bye'?" My 
voice quavered miserably. 
"No. I mean, yes, to say good-bye. For now. 
But also, I came for Tobias." 
I stared at him. 
"Don't bother to tell me you don't know where 
he is," Jake said. "I'm sure he's sworn you to se-
crecy. But you have to ask yourself what's best 
for Tobias now. Ax was his shorm. He has to go, 
you know that, even if he does hate me." 
"He doesn't hate you, Jake. He never did. His 
heart was broken, that's all. And you know, To-
bias never had anyone. No one before Rachel. No 
mother, really, no father he could ever know. 
Rachel was the first and only person who ever 
loved Tobias." 
Jake nodded. "Yeah. I know. But Ax was his 
120 
friend. So are all of us, even if he doesn't want it 
that way. So tell me how to find him." 
A few minutes later, after watching Jake morph 
and fly away, I climbed up to where Ronnie 
waited. 
I knew I had said good-bye to Jake forever. 
121 

The world's smartest mouse wiggled his nose 
at me. Oh, he knew I was watching, all right. He 
knew. 
He was brown, not especially plump or juicy-
looking. He had a tail that I had shortened by an 
inch on a previous encounter. But since that one 
close call he had outsmarted me every time I'd 
gone after him. 
It was a lesson in humility. I was a red-tailed 
hawk with the mental powers of a human. I was 
being out-thought by a mouse. The question was, 
should I even try? I had a nice perch, all I had to 
do was spread my wings and swoop right down on 
him. By all rights he was mine. But he'd been 
122 
"mine" before, and I'd ended up with talons full 
of dirt and grass. 
I could see him twitching his nose. No, he 
knew. He was just waiting to mess with me. 
<Okay, Old Man Mouse, you live for another 
day. I'm not falling for it today.> 
I shifted my gaze, slowly scanning my meadow. 
It was a nice meadow. Up-country where the air 
was clear and clean, and sunny days baked the 
wildflowers and gave me the updrafts I needed. 
The bouncing little stream drew plenty of small 
prey — except for the year before when the 
drought had just about starved me out. But now 
the high snowcaps were melting and the stream 
gurgled along, and the mice and rats and shrews 
and rabbits and skunks and moles — all the 
juicy prey animals — were present in abun-
dance. All mine during the daylight hours. 
At night the meadow belonged to the owl who 
lived in the lightning-struck aspen. But he kept 
his hours and I kept mine, and there was food 
enough for both of us. The only real competition 
came from the occasional wolf pack or a lone 
cougar, but I still had all my morphs available, 
and it's a rare alpha wolf who'll decide to keep 
his pack in bear country. 
Today, though, I had a different problem: 
campers. They had set up their tent the night be-
123 
Tobias 
CHAPTER 18 

fore, across the meadow, right beside the stream. 
They'd made a safe, careful fire of fallen branches, 
and they had at least had the decency to dig a 
slit trench a good distance away from my water 
supply, so they weren't complete idiots. But I 
didn't like having them there. 
Hikers seldom came to my meadow. It was far 
from the regular trails and far from the places 
where they could easily observe Hork-Bajir in the 
trees. These two were hardcore crunchies, I guess. 
They followed all the rules and customs, made 
sure they collected their trash and banked their 
fire and when the girl played her flute it was with 
professional skill. 
It had bothered me, the flute. It was a favorite 
instrument for hikers, and was usually played 
with the skill level you'd expect of a preschooler. 
But this was different. Last night I'd moved in 
closer to hear and to see. She had the moves of a 
professional, the ease, the focus, all that. 
The music had reached me and I guess so 
had she. She didn't look anything like Rachel. 
And the guy with her didn't look anything like 
me, obviously. But something about them, the 
two of them, the couple, they looked like what I 
thought we'd look like. They were in love, even 
a hawk could see that. And although a hawk's 
visual acuity is well-known, fewer people know 
124 
that we also have extraordinarily good hearing. I 
could hear the music. I could hear them talk. 
I had hoped they'd move on with first light. 
But they were dawdling, indecisive, as though 
not sure they wanted to leave my meadow. Well, I 
could change their minds for them in a hurry if I 
needed to. 
I didn't know what to do. If they stayed an-
other night she would play her flute again. Which 
shouldn't bother me. But if there's one great les-
son to surviving alone, it's this: Don't lie to your-
self. 
I was all I had, and I had to tell myself the truth, 
and the truth was that their presence bothered me. 
So, as I raised my predatory gaze from Old 
Man Mouse and saw that the girl was getting 
ready to drink from the stream, I thought I'd bet-
ter run them off. I didn't want to feel bad, I 
wanted to catch myself a nice, plump skunk pup. 
I didn't want to mope, tortured by miserable, 
pointless longing. 
Then, before I could act, the girl froze. She 
stared and called softly but urgently to her friend, 
and pointed. 
A Hork-Bajir was leaping from tree to tree. 
My mood picked up instantly. It was Toby. She 
had reached her full size now, a big, dangerous-
looking goblin. 
125 

I opened my wings, skimmed low over Old 
Man Mouse's burrow, just to keep him on his toes, 
flapped and skimmed the flower tops toward my 
Hork-Bajir namesake. 
<Hi, Toby. Longtime no . . .> 
Only then did I see the wolf who trotted along 
easily beneath the swinging Hork-Bajir. A wolf? 
Had to be Cassie. 
Toby dropped to the ground. 
"Hello, Tobias. I hope you are well." 
<Tolerable,> I answered guardedly. I landed 
on a low branch, just above Toby's eye level. The 
wolf wasn't saying anything yet, but there was no 
way it was a normal wolf. 
"Tobias, I have done something you may dis-
approve of," Toby said. She was always ridicu-
lously deferential when addressing me. It was a 
bit silly, what with her being not only the de facto 
head of the Hork-Bajir, but also, under U.S. law, 
officially the Governor of the Hork-Bajir Free 
Colony and a nonvoting observer-member in the 
House of Representatives. 
I could be mad at her or I could trust her. I 
decided to be both. <AII right, who is it?> I de-
manded sharply. 
<lt's me, Tobias,> Jake said. 
He began to demorph. Now the two campers 
were snapping pictures like mad and that didn't 
improve my mood. I yelled at them in thought-
126 
speak. <Hey, Ken and Barbie, knock it off. This 
is my meadow. You want to stay, sit down and 
stay quiet!> 
It was harsh of me, but I had to yell at some-
one. I was disturbed. Thrown off stride. I hadn't 
spoken to Jake in years. Not since Rachel . . . 
But I was so surprised, so taken aback that I 
had trouble summoning up the rage I thought I 
still felt toward him. 
He assumed his normal shape. Older than 
when I'd last seen him. The last of the boy gen-
eral had disappeared to be replaced by a young 
man with an old man's eyes. 
The campers were barely breathing now, a 
hundred feet away, staring like nitwits. Of course 
they'd recognize Jake. And unless they were 
dumber than I thought, they'd figure out who I 
was. Even in this very-much-altered world, there 
weren't a lot of birds who'd yell at you. 
<Well, Jake,> I said with what I hoped was a 
rock-steady thought-speak voice, <what's up 
with you?> 
"I'm doing good," he said. 
<You're older.> 
"So are you." 
<Well, it was fun catching up. Bye.> I spread 
my wings. 
"It's about Ax," Jake said. 
I should have flown away. I knew I should 
127 

have. But Ax had said I was his shorm. It's an An-
dalite word for someone who is closer than a 
friend. 
During the war we'd both been exiles in the 
woods, Ax and me. Neither of us had a real 
home. His family was a billion miles away, mine 
didn't really exist. Only later did we discover that 
Ax and I were, because of almost unbelievable 
circumstances, actually related. 
I could fly away. If I didn't, I was trapped. I 
would be trapped with Jake. Again. 
<What about Ax?> I asked. 
128 
Marco 
I had nine million four hundred and thirty-
two thousand dollars in my Merrill Lynch ac-
count. Mostly in stocks, some bonds. 
My TV show was doing fine, winning its time 
slot, although viewership in the critical demo-
graphic was falling off a little. 
I had a girlfriend. She was a model/actress. 
She was not, shall we say, a genius. But she 
was beautiful and sweet and about a foot taller 
than me. 
I had seven cars. A butler named Wetherbee. 
(Actually his name was McPherson, but I liked 
the sound of 'Wetherbee.') I had two maids. I had 
a time-share deal on a jet. I had the house in 
129 
CHAPTER 19 

Santa Barbara, the pied-a-terre in New York and 
was looking at a little place in Tuscany. 
So exactly why was I spending my time morph-
ing to lobster in order to crawl along the bottom 
of my swimming pool? 
I hadn't done the lobster morph in a long, 
long time. It seemed like a million years ago I'd 
used it to escape the Yeerks by hiding in a gro-
cery store's fresh fish tank. 
The days, man. Those were the days. 
I watched, fascinated, as my skin turned hard. 
It was cool. Like my fingernails were expanding 
to cover my entire body. Not red, by the way, no 
lobster wants to be red because you don't get red 
until you've been boiled. No, this was more of a 
mottled blue thing. 
My fingers melted together and covered over 
with blue fingernail and my whole hand began to 
swell up. Like I'd hit it with a hammer. Then this 
big mass split in two, separating into the halves 
of a pincer. 
Tiny, waving legs erupted from my diaphragm 
and that's when the doorbell rang. 
Wetherbee would get it and get rid of what-
ever fan was there for an autograph. 
I was just losing my legs and eyes when Jake 
walked in. 
"Well, if it isn't Lobster Boy." 
<Hey, Jake. Remember this morph?> 
130 
"Uh-huh. Some reason why you're morphing 
to lobster?" 
<Ummmm. . . I dropped my keys down in the 
pool? I was going to go get them?> 
"Well, then it's a good thing you have the 
ability to turn into a lobster, because otherwise, 
what would you do? I mean, normal people, they 
drop their keys in the pool, they're just totally 
helpless. Those keys stay down there. Forever." 
I stopped the morph before I lost my eyes and 
began to reverse it. As soon as I had a mouth I 
said, "You seem perky, today. You want some-
thing to drink?" 
"What are you going to do, morph to cow and 
squeeze me out a glass of two percent?" 
"I take that as a no? Wetherbee? Can you 
bring out a diet Coke?" I looked closely at Jake. 
"There's definitely something wrong with you, 
Jake. You're being way too clever. Way too quick. 
What's up? You finally go on Prozac?" 
He winced a little and I was sorry I'd opened 
my mouth. 
I flopped into a chaise longue and waited. He 
had something to tell me. Jake has no poker 
face. 
He sat down, too, but on the edge of his seat. 
He glanced up and smiled a little. I looked up 
and saw a hawk, circling high in the air, directly 
above us. 
131 

In a heartbeat it was as if everything around 
me turned translucent, like it was all fake, a set 
created with the help of trick lighting. Now, with 
the sudden change, it was like I could see right 
through the walls of my very nice house. Right 
past old Wetherbee and the silver tray with my 
Coke. The last three years were magically re-
duced to a daydream. An old reality emerged 
from beneath the illusion. 
I reached for my drink and my hand was trem-
bling. 
Jake waited, patient now that he knew that I 
knew. He was watching me, waiting for my reac-
tion. Waiting, but not like he had any doubt 
about me, the smug jerk. 
"You're about to ruin my life, aren't you?" I 
asked him. I sounded more self-pitying than I'd 
intended to. 
"That depends." 
"Yeah, right. So, what is it?" 
He told me, and every word was another nail 
in my coffin because, what was I going to do? 
Refuse to help save Ax? 
At last Tobias swooped down and landed on 
my patio table. 
"So where's the other Horsewoman of the 
Apocalypse?" I asked. 
"Cassie? She's not coming on this one," Jake 
said. 
132 
I nodded. "Good for you. At least you have 
that much sense." 
Jake shrugged. "She's doing what she needs 
to be doing." 
"And I'm not?" I demanded. 
He ignored that. Which made me mad, be-
cause it's not like what I do for a living is just 
negligible. Granted what Cassie does is more im-
pressive and admirable, if you care about that, 
but I had a TV show. I was a millionaire. 
"So now you're rounding up the old gang, 
huh? Like one of those over-the-hill-gunfighters 
movies? Like our parts should be played by Clint 
Eastwood and James Garner?" I glanced at To-
bias. "And Foghorn Leghorn?" 
<Marco, you're not even twenty,> Tobias said. 
<l'm old, for a red-tail. You, you're not even old 
enough to drink.> 
"Yeah? Well, I aged in gorilla years." I pouted 
for a moment, very annoyed that neither of them 
was buying my act at all. And, being annoyed, I 
lashed out a little. 
"You sure you're up for this, Jake? You haven't 
exactly been living the American Dream since 
your last war." 
That got him, and again I was mad at myself, 
which made me madder at him. 
Jake said, "Well, maybe we live and learn." 
"What have you learned?" I challenged. "You've 
133 

been all depressed, and now you see a way out of 
it because someone's giving you another chance 
to play war?" 
"Maybe," he admitted softly. 
I groaned. Being ticked off was stupid of me. 
And we had important stuff to discuss. 
"Okay, Jake-man. I'll cut the baloney if you 
will." I leaned toward him. "You're my friend. Ax 
is my friend. On a good day I can even stand the 
flea-bitten buzzard here. But you have to get real: 
You've been messed up behind some hard deci-
sions you made. And now you want to go make 
more hard decisions?" 
Jake glared fiercely. "I learned from my mis-
takes. This time, maybe I'll do it differently. 
Some things at least." 
Ah, so there it was-. Jake was going to give 
himself another chance. This time he would be 
the warrior who never sinned. He would be Sir 
Galahad. I felt sorry for him, and I knew I should 
probably just shut up. But I was his friend, and a 
friend tells you the stuff you don't want to hear. 
"Okay, Jake, I'm in. I'll go with you. You know 
that. But here's what you need to realize going 
in: If you're in charge yourre going to end up right 
back in the same swamp you didn't like the first 
time." 
"Marco, I —" 
"Shut up for a minute. Listen. If I'm putting 
134 
my life on the line with you again, the price you 
pay is to listen to me now." I took a deep breath. 
"Back in the day, Jake, you made more heavy de-
cisions than any ten men would have to in a hun-
dred lifetimes. You made life-and-death calls. 
You got us up to our butts in alligators, and you 
got us back out. And, sorry, but it's not what 
people think, that you were some kind of military 
genius. I'm better at tactics than you are." 
<And humble, too,> Tobias muttered. 
"It's true, and Jake knows it," I shot back. 
"Jake, you won because you didn't scare. You 
didn't panic, you didn't scare, and you didn't 
play a part or strike poses wondering what history 
would think. You made the right calls without re-
gard to all that. But then, when the shooting was 
all over, you started questioning everything you 
did. You armchair quarterbacked your entire life 
and decided you made mistakes. Well, no kid-
ding. Surprise: You're not a god." 
Jake nodded. "This time I won't make mis-
takes." 
"Don't tell me that," I said. "You want a zero-
screwup fight?" 
"I got Rachel killed. Wouldn't you like me to 
keep that from happening to you?" 
"Yeah, I really would. But you start thinking 
that way, and that's when you'll get me killed. 
You have to trust your instincts, not your doubts. 
135 

I'll trust my life to your instincts. If we're fighting 
again you have to be able to make the same kind 
of crazy, reckless, ruthless decisions you made 
before. We beat an empire, my friend, the six of 
us, and we did it in large part because you didn't 
know any better than to trust your own instincts." 
I stopped talking and Jake didn't say any-
thing. I could tell I'd had no effect on him. Or at 
least not the effect I'd hoped. All I'd managed to 
do was send him spiraling back to that awful day 
aboard the Pool ship. 
After a while, he shook himself, smiled and 
said, "So, you're in, right?" 
And of course, I was. 
136 
We drove through the desert night, silent most 
of the way. Me, Marco, and a human-morphed 
Tobias crammed in the front seat of a truck 
borrowed from the Twenty-nine Palms motor pool. 
A Humvee followed behind us with the now-
permanently human Menderash and two volun-
teers recruited from my counterterrorism class. 
I'd put it to the class that I needed volunteers 
for a mission that would very likely prove suici-
dal, that was illegal, that would involve their dis-
appearing without a trace, without the approval 
of their governments, without notice to their fam-
ilies. They wouldn't be paid, promoted, or well-
treated. I would be in charge and they would be 
low men or women on the totem pole. 
137 
J a k e 
CHAPTER 20 

All but three volunteered. It was a measure of 
my fame, I guess. It made me feel a little bad, 
like I was taking advantage of them. I decided to 
take two of them, Sergeant Santorelli, a U.S. 
Army Ranger who was five years older than me, 
and a French Deuxieme Bureau trainee named 
Jeanne Gerard. I chose them both on the strength 
of their lack of any close family. 
I could have had more, but I felt six people 
was the right number. It had worked before. 
Unfortunately, Jeanne was beautiful. A prob-
lem I should have foreseen. 
We hit a hard bump and Marco said, "See? 
You really should have put Jeanne up here with 
us. A bump like that might bruise her. I could 
have protected her." 
He made a point of carefully pronouncing her 
name Zhann. I sighed. "This is going to be a 
problem, isn't it?" 
"What? Me and Jeanne? No problem at all. Ob-
viously she wants me, and what woman doesn't? 
So I don't see any problem at all." 
I looked at him. "Marco." 
"Yes, Jake." 
"If you wanted to chase women you could 
have stayed home." 
"Believe me, I wish I had. I had a good life. I 
had it all. They're going to have to cancel my 
show, do you realize that? But, hey, without me 
138 
who would take care of you and the winged won-
der here?" 
"Marco, you were bored out of your mind." 
"Yes, I was." 
"If I hadn't asked you to come you'd have 
killed me." 
"Yes, Jake, I would." 
"But that's not going to change the fact that 
you'll be whining endlessly about the wonderful 
life you gave up, is it?" 
"I really doubt it." 
"Uh-huh. What's GPS say?" 
Marco peered at the dimly glowing display. 
"Better turn off your lights. We don't want to just 
drive up and look like complete amateurs." 
I killed the lights and slowed way down. The 
Humvee followed suit. We drove on till Marco 
said we were there. I stopped and turned off the 
engine. In the black desert night I could see a 
slight glow. It was impossible to tell the distance 
with no visual points of reference but the GPS 
said we had only three hundred yards to go. 
We climbed out and stretched our legs while 
the rest of our troop joined us. 
I said, "Okay, Santorelli? Jeanne? Call this 
your first nontraining mission. Our job is very sim-
ple but it can be easily screwed up, so pay atten-
tion. Ahead is an Andalite shuttle. There are two 
Andalite crew on board. They've been told to park 
139 

their craft there and wait for a terrorist turncoat 
who will bring them vital information. Nothing 
else. Everything is on strict need-to-know basis." 
"Hi, I'm Marco," Marco said to Jeanne. "I 
have my own TV show." 
"Here's the deal: We need to take down these 
two Andalites but not hurt them in any serious 
way. Is that crystal clear? A good pop alongside 
the head and they'll go down. But no cutting, 
slashing, or stabbing. These are our allies. We 
want this to look real, but we don't want anyone 
to go to the hospital." 
Everyone understood. Or so they said. 
It was all a setup. Caysath had made the 
arrangements. We needed a ship to reach orbit 
where we could "steal" the parked Yeerk craft. 
And the Andalites needed deniability. 
After we used the shuttle to reach the Yeerk 
ship we would crash the shuttle back into the 
desert. The official story would be that terrorists 
seized the Andalite shuttle but were unable to fly 
it and crashed. The two Andalite guards would 
testify that they were overpowered. The State De-
partment would yell at the Andalite government 
for being careless. Everyone would be happy. 
"Six against two," Jeanne said. "This is per-
haps overkill?" 
"Keel. Ovair-keel," Marco echoed. "I love your 
accent." 
140 
"They are Andalites," Menderash grated. "Six 
is hardly enough." 
I smiled. "It's all in which morph you choose. 
Okay, tell you what, we'll do it with just two of us. 
Tobias? Please demorph and then to Andalite." 
It was a test for both of us, Tobias and me. 
Would he follow my orders? If not, best to find 
out now. He said nothing. But he began to morph. 
A few minutes later the two Andalites on the 
shuttle thought they heard a thought-speak cry. 
They opened the hatch to investigate and out in 
the desert at the limits of their vision, they got the 
impression of a running Andalite. Maybe it was a 
wild mustang, but they couldn't be sure so they 
trained all their eyes forward. It was thanks to this 
that they didn't see the gorilla drop from the top 
of the shuttle and knock their heads together. 
It was a severely disgruntled Menderash who 
took the controls of the shuttle as we lifted off. 
"They were shamefully careless. Andalite war-
riors taken from behind? Shameful." 
"You know, I could be kind of a mentor to 
you," Marco said to Jeanne. "If we worked closely 
together I could teach you all I know." 
"But what could I possibly do to repay you?" 
Jeanne asked. 
"Well . . ." Marco leered, and was about to 
offer some specific ideas when Jeanne inter-
rupted him. 
141 

"I know! Perhaps someday I could introduce 
you to my cousin Michelle. She likes short men. 
Even as short as you." 
Marco winced. "Ah. Beautiful and mean. I 
like you." He caught my eye. "Jake, when you get 
a minute could you help me pull this knife out of 
my chest?" 
We reached orbit and I watched both Jeanne 
and Santorelli closely. It was their first time off-
planet. Santorelli tried hard to be cool about it 
but there was no hiding the slow smile of plea-
sure. 
"Cool, huh?" I said, nodding toward the day-
night line of Earth far below. 
"I've seen it on TV," he said. "This is better." 
"Objective locked in, Captain," Menderash 
reported. 
It took me a beat to realize he meant me. "All 
right. Take us in. Let's see what she looks like." 
The ship in orbit was unlike any Yeerk craft 
I'd seen before. It had the usual air of danger 
and hostility — the Yeerks favored the tapered, 
sharp-edged look generally. But in this case the 
aggressive, muscular silhouette achieved a cer-
tain beauty. 
It was a quarter the size of a Blade ship, 
maybe five or six times as big as a standard Bug 
fighter. The overall impression was of a sharp-
142 
ened boomerang, ends raked forward and ending 
in nasty-looking Dracon cannon. The core of the 
ship was a flattened and tapered cylinder placed 
above this seeming wing. 
"It looks tough enough," Marco said. 
Menderash said, "It is very fast and packs a 
very powerful weapons array, for its size. It car-
ries no Bug fighters but does carry two small 
shuttlecraft. The Yeerks intended these cruiser-
class ships to keep track of what they imagined 
would be a far-flung empire. As well as for escort 
duty." 
"Well, it's ours now," I said. "Okay, Mende-
rash. Let's go aboard." 
He hesitated. 
"What?" I asked. I had worried from the start 
that a former Andalite first officer would have a 
hard time taking orders from me. 
"It's nothing, Captain. Just a custom. An An-
dalite custom. We always name a ship before the 
first crewman boards — it's an old notion, a su-
perstition, really. The thinking is that the ship 
must know who it is before the crew can know it." 
I relaxed. "Fair enough, Menderash. Our own 
superstition is that a ship is never an 'it,' it's al-
ways a 'she.' Even if the ship is named after a 
male, it's a 'she.'" 
The six of us stood there contemplating our 
143 

dangerous-looking new home, set against the 
sunrise over Earth. 
"So what do we call her?" Marco wondered. 
<She's beautiful,> Tobias said. <She's beau-
tiful and dangerous and exciting.> 
I turned in surprise to look at Tobias. He stared 
back at me with his eternally fierce hawk's gaze. 
Marco laughed, realizing what we were think-
ing. "She would love it. A scary, deadly, cool-
looking Yeerk ship on a doomed, suicidal, crazy 
mission that no one can ever know about? She 
would love it." 
So it was that we went aboard the Rachel. 
144 
The Rachel was fast. 
We blew through normal space and into Zero-
space before either of the two Andalite ships in 
orbit could react. 
Later we picked up their Z-space communica-
tions. They made a lot of noise about the "theft" 
of the Yeerk prototype ship. It was almost too 
much. But I guess they wanted the news to get 
out: The Rachel was not Andalite, not associated 
with Andalites, not sanctioned byAndalites. Nope. 
Clean hands and innocent looks all around. 
The fact that this Yeerk ship was fully stocked 
with human food? That the quarters designed for 
Hork-Bajir had been converted to human propor-
145 
Marco 
CHAPTER 21 

tions? That certain controls designed to be ma-
nipulated by Taxxon pincers now perfectly fit hu-
man hands? Well, what would the Kelbrid ever 
know about that? 
Santorelli and I went to do an inventory of the 
supplies. We found water, vitamin pills, a good 
supply of various awful-looking freeze-dried foods 
and six dozen Cinnabons. 
"Do AndaNtes have a sense of humor?" San-
torelli wondered. 
"We've never been entirely sure," I said. 
The cinnamon buns didn't last long. We spent 
four days in Zero-space, which is like being 
buried in marshmallow sauce, and before we 
reemerged into the familiar universe of black 
space and white stars, all fresh food was long 
gone. 
Menderash was in charge of piloting and fly-
ing the Rachel, but Jake wanted as much cross-
training as possible, so we all took turns under 
the nothlit Andalite's tutelage. Menderash was a 
taciturn guy — as I guess you'd expect from an 
officer who'd lost his entire crew and chosen to 
permanently abandon his usual body. He was 
careful to be deferential to Jake, and I think he 
had real respect for our fearless leader. But when 
he taught navigation or piloting skills he was a 
whole different guy. He was like that psycho drill 
sergeant from Full Metal Jacket. 
146 
Four days of Menderash and I was a long way 
from being an Andalite-quality pilot, but I could 
take the ship from point A to point B. With lots of 
help from the computer. 
Menderash naturally plotted our course. Jake 
had talked it over with all of us, but it was 
Menderash who knew the last course taken by 
the Blade ship, so my opinion was not all that 
valuable. 
The theory was that we would simply draw a 
straight line. (Well, figuratively straight. Turns out 
space is curved. Who knew?) And try to jump 
past the place where the Blade ship would now 
be, assuming it had continued on its merry way 
for the last three weeks. 
A big assumption, but it was all we had. 
We emerged into real space with all guns 
loaded and the six of us ready for trouble. What 
we found was a whole lot of nothing. We were six 
light-years from the nearest planetary system. It 
was back the way we'd come. 
So it was back into Z-space, and throw the 
ship into reverse. (Menderash grits his teeth 
when I say things like that.) We popped back out 
of Z-space practically on top of the second 
biggest of four planets around a star that was 
ready to go nova at any minute. And of course, in 
celestial terms, "any minute" means maybe this 
millennium, maybe the next. 
147 

"This is Kelbrid space," Jake said, "so we 
have to assume that this planet may have Kelbrid 
remote sensors or even a Kelbrid outpost. Let's 
remember that we are a peaceful ship on a mis-
sion of exploration." 
We spent the next six weeks wandering around 
the system, seeing some cool things on strange 
worlds, but no evidence of Kelbrids. We were 
starting to wonder whether there was any such 
thing as a Kelbrid. And we definitely saw no sign 
of the Blade ship or the mysterious alien craft 
that had fired on Ax's Intrepid. We moved on to 
the next nearest system. And the next. 
Half a year went by, but it seemed longer. I 
had brought along some DVD's but there are only 
so many times you can watch Airplane!, espe-
cially when you have to explain every joke to a 
former Andalite. 
It became obvious that this was going to be a 
long trip. You can't just go toodling around a bil-
lion square light-years and find what you're look-
ing for. 
In the end, even after many months, we didn't 
find the Blade ship. They found us. 
I was manning the sensor station (and using 
the ship's computers to play Tomb Raider V), 
when I spotted the orange squiggle indicating an 
unknown ship within range. 
148 
"Hey, Menderash, I have a ship here. Urn . . . 
I think they're hailing us. That's the red num-
bers, right?" It was just the two of us on the 
bridge, everyone else was either sleeping or eat-
ing. 
He stalked over and stared at my screen for 
about a second. Then, "Captain, to the bridge!" 
"What is it?" I asked. 
But before the Andalite could answer, Jake 
was there, looking frowzy and flat-haired. He'd 
been sleeping, I guess. 
"What is it?" 
"That was my question," I muttered. 
"Ship approaching in normal space, Captain. 
They've hailed us. Standard inquiry: our point of 
origin and destination." 
"Okay. Answer them." 
We gave out our story, that we were the Enter-
prise, a peaceful, deep-space exploration ship 
from The United Federation of Planets. We fig-
ured no one in this far corner of the universe 
would have seen Star Trek reruns. It was our little 
joke. 
Here was the problem with that thinking: The 
Yeerks we were chasing had spent years on Earth, 
many with human hosts. 
"Receiving response," Menderash said. "And 
a request for visual, two-way communication." 
149 

<Uh-oh,> Tobias said. He had rushed to the 
bridge, along with Jeanne and Santorelli. 
"What do we show them?" Santorelli won-
dered. 
"Not me," Jake said. "If it's the Blade ship 
they may recognize me. Or Marco, or Tobias, for 
that matter." He looked quickly at the faces of 
his people. "Santorelli, you're the best B.S. artist 
aside from Marco. So you're the captain. Jeanne, 
you stand with him. Everyone else out of view. 
Narrow the audio channel to pick up Santorelli 
only. Okay, open communications." 
The image that appeared to us was of a hu-
man. A man, maybe forty years old. Laughing, 
with hands on hips. "So, you come from the 
Federation, do you? And where is Captain Pi-
card?" 
Santorelli shot a look at Jake. But this was 
more my specialty than his. 
"You've always thought of yourself as more of 
a Captain Kirk," I whispered. 
After that first panicked glance Santorelli be-
trayed no sign that he was listening to anyone. 
He assumed a wide, cocky stance and said, "I've 
always thought of myself as more of a Captain 
Kirk." 
"Sensor confirmation: It's the Blade ship," 
Menderash hissed. 
150 
That tightened a few sphincters. 
The Yeerk captain nodded in a genial sort of 
way in response to Santorelli. "That's quite a 
ship you have there . . . excuse me, I don't know 
your name." 
I made a slashing gesture with my hand, cut-
ting Santorelli off before he could say something 
wrong. "You're Rakich-Four-Six-Nine-One of the 
Flet Niaar Pool." 
Santorelli repeated it. 
The Yeerks seemed to buy that. "I am Eff I it-
One-Three-One-Eight of the Sulp Niar Pool," their 
captain replied. "Well met. And what exactly are 
you doing here, brother? And how do you come to 
be flying a new cruiser-class ship?" 
"I might ask the same of you," Santorelli shot 
back. "I find it hard to imagine what business a 
ship of the Yeerk Empire has in this far-flung 
quadrant." 
Menderash whispered, "He's powering up his 
weapons and maneuvering to bring them to bear." 
"He thinks we're from the Yeerk Empire. 
Maybe here to hunt him down as a traitor," Jake 
said quietly. 
Efflit 1318, his voice considerably more 
guarded now, said, "My mission here is classi-
fied." 
Santorelli nodded skeptically. "As is mine." 
151 

For a long moment the two ships were silent. 
Both had powered weapons. Both were maneu-
vering for an edge, should firing break out. But 
in a fight we were toast. We were tough, but 
we couldn't win against an alert and ready-to-
rumble Blade ship. And the real problem was 
that although we were fast enough to run away, 
we were aimed toward the Blade ship. We'd have 
to turn around if we were going to run away, and 
while we turned, they'd blow big holes in us. 
"We have to blink first," Jake said. He gave 
Santorelli instructions. 
Santorelli said, "It occurs to me, Efflit-One-
Three-One-Eight, that it would be a tragedy if any 
misunderstanding occurred here between us." 
"Indeed? And what misunderstanding could 
occur, Rakich-Four-Six-Nine-One?" 
Santorelli sighed. He acted the part of a de-
flated man. "There is no empire, Efflit-One-
Three-One-Eight. The empire is finished. I . . . 
my crew and I seized this ship and escaped as 
the Andalites closed in. We had heard that a 
Blade ship had escaped and survived. We have 
been looking for you ever since. For more than 
three years." 
Efflit nodded. But would he buy it? He and 
his people were all alone in the universe. We rep-
resented the only brother Yeerks he was ever 
likely to see. Was he lonely enough to be care-
152 
less? Would he trust us enough to let us destroy 
him? 
"You will place yourself under the command 
of The One?" 
Santorelli's eyebrows shot up. "The who?" he 
blurted. 
I looked at Jake. At Tobias. At Jeanne. There 
was a sort of collective shrug. 
"I command this ship," Efflit 1318 explained, 
"but I serve at the pleasure of The One Who Is 
Many. The One Who Is All. We are not alone, 
Rakich-Four-Six-Nine-One. We are not this ship 
alone. We are the seeds of a new empire that will 
far outshine the old, under the leadership of The 
One." Weird to see that wild, messianic glow in 
the eyes of a man you knew was really just a Yeerk 
slave. It was a disturbingly human expression. 
Santorelli said, "Urn, who is this . . . this 
One?" 
"I will invoke his presence," the Yeerk said. 
He closed his eyes and raised his face. 
"Okay, this is unexpected," I whispered. 
There was a long, silent pause during which 
time the two ships drew closer and closer. Too 
close now to do anything but play the game 
through. If this was a ruse, it was a convincing 
one. If it was a ruse, we were dead. 
I glanced at Jake and wished my heart wasn't 
jackhammering away. 
153 

Suddenly the screen image went blank. The 
human-Controller was gone. 
<What the —> Tobias demanded. 
But then the screen glowed to life. More than 
the screen. Trie whole front of the bridge was 
glowing, a light so bright it seemed to shine right 
through the bulkheads. 
Within the searing light, an image appeared. 
It was alien, not Yeerk. That was to be expected 
from the Yeerks, they were, after all, parasites, so 
you never saw the Yeerks themselves. 
But there was something very wrong with this 
particular alien. 
The face that filled the screen and more was a 
shifting image, a slow dissolve from what might 
be a robot's face, a machine with a rat-trap 
mouth and steel eyes, into a sweet, feminine, al-
most elfin visage, and last, and most enduring, 
into the face of Aximili-Esgarrouth-lsthill. 
<Ax?> Tobias whispered. 
The face that belonged to our friend Ax split 
wide open across the bottom and revealed a new-
formed mouth full of red-rimmed teeth. 
"Save your tricks for this Yeerk fool," The One 
said. "I see the truth. I see all. Step into view, 
Jake the Yeerk-Killer. I know you are there, I feel 
your mind." 
There was no doubting that voice. No way to 
154 
imagine that it was just bluffing. The sound of it 
reached deep down inside you, beyond speech, 
beyond thought-speak. 
Jake stepped out in front of Santorelli. 
"I'm here," Jake said calmly. 
"You have done well to come this far. You 
have come to find your friend. But the Andalite is 
part of me now. As you will soon be." 
Jake stared back at the foul thing on the 
screen. I saw what he saw, and I felt as if my 
brain was shutting down. In that shifting alien 
face was every corruption, every evil, and such 
power that it seemed impossible it could be pres-
ent in just the narrow confines of the onrushing 
Blade ship. 
"Can we shoot?" Jake asked Menderash, mak-
ing no attempt to conceal his words from the alien. 
"His Dracon cannon have longer range and 
greater power," Menderash reported grimly. "And 
his defensive fields have been enhanced. I doubt 
our cannon can penetrate them." 
"Thought so," Jake said, still weirdly calm. 
"But we're faster." 
"Yes." 
"Okay." Jake took a deep breath. He looked 
around the bridge at each of us. At Tobias. At 
me. "What was it, Marco? 'Crazy, reckless, ruth-
less decisions'?" 
155 

I nodded, wishing I had kept my mouth shut. 
There was a dangerous smile on Jake's face. 
Rachel's smile. 
"Full emergency power to the engines," Jake 
said. "Ram the Blade ship." 
156 
I know, I know, it's rotten of me to leave you 
hanging at the end like that. But I figured the An-
imorphs should go out the same way they came 
in: Fighting. 
Well, here it is at long last: the final chapter 
in the Animorphs story. It began in the summer 
of 1996. It ends in the summer of 2001. Five 
years, 54 regular titles, 4 Chronicles, 5 Meg-
amorphs and 2 Alternamorphs. An amazing num-
ber of you have read all those books. I am deeply 
grateful. 
I had a lot of fun writing these characters. I 
know it sounds pretentious to say that I'll miss 
them, but I will. It seems strange to think that I 
won't ever again write "My name is . . ." It 
157 

makes me a little sad to say good-bye to 
Andalites, Hork-Bajir, Chee, Taxxons, and even 
Yeerks. It was fun sitting down every day at my 
computer to invent that strange universe. 
There are a bunch of people to thank. (Hey, 
what is this, an Academy Awards speech?) First 
of all, Scholastic, in particular Jean Feiwel, Tonya 
Alicia Martin, and Craig Walker. Also the talented 
folks who created such great art for the series. 
And, of course, the people who never get men-
tioned but who are responsible for the crucial 
step from publisher to bookstore: the sales and 
marketing force. 
Mostly, I want to thank you guys, the readers. 
You praised, you complained, you extolled, you 
demanded, you asked questions that sometimes 
I couldn't answer. You told your friends, you 
started Web sites, you sent letters and e-mails, 
and wrote fan fiction. You pointed out every error 
I made. You were thoughtful and critical and 
imaginative. You were loyal. 
I want you all to know that it is my choice to 
end Animorphs. Much as I'll miss it, the time 
had come. Time to say good-bye, Jake. Good-bye, 
Cassie. You, too, Tobias and Marco and Ax. Good-
bye, Rachel. 
And now would be the time for me to say 
good-bye to you . . . but, I'm off to a new series 
called Remnants, and I'm hoping I'll see you 
158 
over there, in that new universe. If not, thanks 
from the bottom of my heart for everything. 
If you're coming along on the next trip, grab 
onto something because we're going to start off 
by blowing up the entire world. Then the real 
trouble will start. 
You may now demorph. 
— K.A. Applegate 
159 

Up close, so near Earth, the Rock looked very 
small. Seventy-six miles in diameter, it was nothing 
next to the planet measured in thousands of miles. 
But, up close, so close, Jobs could see the speed 
of it. Against the backdrop of space you couldn't 
sense the awesome speed. But now, as it angled into 
the atmosphere, in the brief second in which it could 
be seen outlined against blue ocean, it seemed im-
possibly fast. 
The Rock entered the atmosphere and for a flash 
became a spectacular special effect:The atmosphere 
burned, a red gash in its wake. 
It struck the western edge of Portugal. Portugal 
and Spain were hit by a bullet the size of Connecti-
cutThe Iberian peninsula was a trench, a ditch. 

The Mediterranean Sea, trillions of gallons of water, 
exploded into steam. Every living thing in the water, 
every living thing ashore, was parboiled in an instant 
Portugal, Spain, southern France, all of Italy, the 
Balkans, the coast of northern Africa, Greece, south-
ern Turkey, all the way to Israel was obliterated in 
less than five seconds. They were the cradles of 
Western civilization one second, a hell of super-
heated steam and flying rock the next. 
The destruction was too swift to believe. In the 
time Jobs could blink his eyes, Rome and Cairo, 
Athens and Barcelona, Istanbul and Jerusalem and 
Damascus were gone. Not reduced to rubble, not 
crushed, not devastated.This wasn't like war or any 
disaster humans understood. Rock became gravel, 
soil melted and fused, water was steam, living flesh 
was reduced to singed single cells. Nothing recogniz-
able remained. 
The impact explosion was a million nuclear 
bombs going off at once.The rock and soil and wa-
ters that had once defined a dozen nations formed a 
pillar of smoke and flying dirt and steam.The mush-
room cloud punched up through the atmosphere, 
flinging dust and smoke particles clear into space. 
Jobs could see a chunk of Earth, some fragment 
left half intact, maybe twenty miles across, spin slowly 
up in the maelstrom.There were houses. Buildings. A 
hint of tilled fields. Rising on the mushroom cloud, 
flying free, entering space itself. 
The entire planet shuddered. It was possible to 
see it from space:The ground rippled, as if rock and 
soil were liquid. The shock wave was an earthquake 
that toppled trees, collapsed every human-built 
structure around the planet, caused entire mountain 
chains to crumble. 
The oceans rippled in tidal waves a thousand feet 
high. The Atlantic Ocean rolled into New York and 
over it, rolled into Charleston and over it, rolled into 
Miami and washed across the entire state of Florida. 
The ocean waters lapped against the Appalachian 
Mountain chains, swamped everything in their way, 
smothered.all who had not been killed by the blast 
or the shock wave. 
People died having no idea why. People were 
thrown from their beds, dashed against walls that 
collapsed onto them. People who survived long 
enough to find themselves buried alive beneath 
green sea many miles deep. 
Jobs saw the planet's rotation slow. The day 
would stand still for the few who might still be alive. 
The impact worked its damage on the fissures 
and cracks in Earth's crust. Jobs watched the Atlantic 
Ocean split right down the middle, emptying millions 
of cubic miles of water as if it was of no more conse-
quence than pulling the plug on a bathroom sink. 
The planet was breaking up. Cracking apart. Im-
possibly deep fissures raced at supersonic speeds 
around the planet. They cut through the crust, 

through the mantle, deeper than a thousand Grand 
Canyons. 
Now the Pacific, too, drained away. It emptied 
into the molten core of Earth Itself. The explosion 
dwarfed everything that had gone before. As Jobs 
watched, motionless, crying but not aware of it, Earth 
broke apart. 
It was as if some invisible hand were ripping open 
an orange. A vast, irregular chunk of Earth separated 
slowly from the planet, spun sluggishly, slowly away. 
The sides of this moon-sized wedge scraped against 
the sides of the gash, gouged up countries, ground 
down mountains. 
And now this wedge of Earth itself broke in half. 
Jobs saw what might have been California, his home, 
turn slowly toward the sun. If anyone is left alive, he 
thought, if anyone is still alive, they'll see the sunrise 
this one last time. 
Earth lay still at last. Perhaps a quarter of the planet 
was bitten off, drifting away to form a second and a 
third Earth. The oceans were gone, boiled off into 
space.The sky was no longer blue but brown, as dirt 
and dust blotted out the sun. Here and there could still 
be seen patches of green. But it was impossible to be-
lieve, to hope, that any human being had survived. 
All of humanity that still lived was aboard the shut-
tle that now slid slowly toward the distant sun 

