
They keep going, and going, and going . . . 
I pushed off with my feet, flapped my wings, and sprung straight 
into the air. Through the trees. Above the waterfall. 
<Hey, this is cool,> I said. <No long, running takeoffs. No flapping 
along the ground. When the duck wants to be in the air, he's in the 
air\> 
Tobias and Ax followed, and we flew oven The Gardens. Three 
identical ducks, morphed from the same DNA. . . . 
We decided three ducks flying by themselves looked a little 
conspicuous, especially to Controllers who were probably looking 
for three ducks flying by themselves. So we hooked up with a flock 
of mallards heading in the direction of the capitol. 
We leeched on to the back of their V formation, and flapped off 
over the mountains. 
This wasn't sleek, soaring raptor flight. With our round heads, 
long necks, and plump bodies, we looked more like bowling pins with 
wings. 
I was the Energizer Bunny with feathers. The Energizer Birdie . . . 

The author wishes to thank Lisa Harkrader 
for her help in preparing this manuscript. 
Thank you to Art Alphin 
For Larry, Austin, and Ashley 
And for Michael and Jake 
Cover illustration by David B. Mattingly 
Art Direction/Design by Karen Hudson/Ursula Albano 
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this 
book is stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the 
publisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has received any pay-
ment for this "stripped book." 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in part, or stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permis-
sion of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write to 
Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 555 Broadway, 
New York, NY 10012. 
ISBN 0-439-11525-6 
Copyright © 2001 by Katherine Applegate. 
All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Inc. 
SCHOLASTIC, APPLE PAPERBACKS, ANIMORPHS, and associated logos 
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc. 
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
1 2 3 4 5 6/0 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
First Scholastic printing, March 2001 
CHAPTER 1 
I dove. Tucked my wings. Folded my tail. 
Hurtled toward earth! 
I was a bullet. A bullet with feathers. 
And feeling pretty righteous until Tobias rock-
eted past. He skimmed the top of the freight 
train and looped sideways in a corkscrew roll, 
wing over wing. His feathers grazed the big gun 
of one of the tanks. 
<Show-off,> I said. 
<Hey, I'm a hawk.> He pulled out of the roll. 
<l only get so many hobbies, and perfecting my 
Red-Tail Spiral of Death happens to be my fa-
vorites 
We pumped our wings and shot past the loco-
motive. Two guys wearing bib overalls and ball 
1 

caps sat inside. One, the engineer, I guessed, 
was driving while the other watched the track 
ahead. 
They weren't wielding Dracon beams. Or 
weapons of any kind. And they weren't paying 
any attention to the osprey and red-tailed hawk 
who'd dropped from the sky to spy on them. 
<They don't look like Controllers,> said To-
bias. <Like that means anything.> 
<Yeah. Everything looks normal,> I said. 
<Well, except for the tanks.> 
I wheeled. Scanned the line of flatcars. Noth-
ing unusual. Nothing that wasn't supposed to be 
there. 
Still, something prickled at the back of my 
brain. Something didn't seem right. 
Battling aliens every day of my life has fine-
tuned my already rampant paranoia. 
I powered my wings and caught up to Tobias 
and the locomotive. A beautiful thermal radiated 
up the side of the mountain. I fanned my wing 
and tail feathers and soared on the billowing jet 
of warm air. 
The freight train clattered below. One engine 
pulling a line of flatbed cars, loaded with military 
tanks. M-l Abrams. 
Yeah, M-l Abrams. I knew them as well as I 
knew my own PlayStation. All those hours play-
ing Tank Commando had finally paid off. 
2 
The M-ls belonged to the National Gu 
They were chained one to a flatcar, their big gu 
rotated toward the back. And they were heade 
toward the city. 
Truck and Humvee convoys had been snaking 
into town for days. Battalions of National Guard 
soldiers from all over the state were bunkered in 
Guard centers around the city. 
Now they were bringing in tanks. 
Ax had been monitoring all the local TV chan-
nels and the cable news networks, but nobody 
had mentioned a wide-scale urban training exer-
cise. I couldn't find anything on the Internet, and 
the Chee hadn't heard anything from their Yeerk 
sources, either. 
Tobias and I were here to do a little firsthand 
investigation. To find out if our state government 
had finally realized Earth was being invaded. To 
see if they were mounting a defense. 
Or to see if this was a carefully laid out Yeerk 
plan. Were all those National Guard troops Con-
trollers? Some of them, yeah. But all of them? 
We were talking thousands of soldiers. If they 
were all Controllers, we were in big trouble. We 
were talking serious doo-doo. 
But we were betting they weren't. Hoping 
they weren't. Careful prior planning wasn't Visser 
One's usual MO. He usually jumped in with both 
feet and a lot of noise. And if the details didn't 
3 

work themselves out, he just ripped a sub-
visser's head off and plowed ahead with his next 
maniacal plan. 
Besides, with a Blade ship and a fleet of Bug 
fighters at his disposal, the visser didn't need a 
bunch of clunky tanks. 
On the other hand, Visser One had been 
pushing for all-out war. To wage war, you need an 
army. And if you need an army in a hurry, why not 
hijack an existing one? If the highest-ranking Na-
tional Guard officers were Controllers, Visser One 
could easily round up the rest of the troops for a 
mass infestation of host bodies. And if he got the 
tanks out of the way, noninfested troops couldn't 
use them against him. 
Chuk-chuk-chuk-chuk. 
The freight train rolled along the tracks. It 
wasn't going all that fast for a train. About ten 
miles an hour. Maybe fifteen downhill. 
But it was plenty fast for sustained, level, rap-
tor flight. Tobias and I had started out over the 
engine, slippedt>ack to the first flatcar, then the 
second. Now we were somewhere near the mid-
dle and losing ground. My wing muscles ached, 
burned, and finally went numb. 
I wheeled again. Studied the train. Some-
thing still seemed odd. What was I missing? 
Nothing, Marco. There's nothing scary on this 
4 
train. If there were, your raptor eyes would've 
seen it a mile off. You're just a paranoid freaks 
A paranoid freak whose wings felt like they 
were going to snap off if I didn't stop flapping 
them. 
<This is stupid,> I said. <We want to know 
where the tanks are going, right? The train's not 
going that fast. Why don't we just land on one 
and find out?> 
I dove toward a flatcar in the middle of the 
train and swept over the top of the tank. My 
talons skidded across the big brass padlock on 
one of the top hatches. I locked them around a 
metal cargo cage, pulled my wings down, and 
hunkered against the bottom of the cage. Wind 
whipped the feathers on the top of my head. 
A shadow slid over me. Tobias latched onto 
the hull of the tank, behind a big metal ring. 
He hugged the metal. <Okay, this doesn't 
look too weird,> he said. 
The train groaned down a steep hill. I turned 
my head. The column of tanks stretched out 
behind me, chugging through pine trees that 
towered above us on either side of the track. 
Sunlight filtered through the pine needles and 
flickered over the camouflage green of the tanks. 
I saw no other movement. No life-forms, ex-
traterrestrial or domestic. 
5 

Normal. Everything looked — 
Wait. <No guards. If this is a National Guard 
operation gearing up to fight aliens, wouldn't 
they have soldiers posted on the train? And if it's 
Visser One, you know he'd have Controllers 
crawling all over. Thirty-four tanks, and nobody's 
watching them.> 
<Oh, I wouldn't say that,> said Tobias. 
I turned my head. 
Another red-tailed hawk swooped around a 
curve ahead. Behind it, in formation, flew a 
squadron of golden eagles and peregrine falcons. 
We were definitely not alone. 
6 
CHAPTER 2 
The red-tailed hawk shot toward the train. 
The eagles and falcons followed, banking and 
diving above the tracks. 
<They obviously don't have much flight 
experiences Tobias directed his private thought-
speak to me. <They're upwind. Flying in forma-
tion. A flock of eagles and the falcons acting like 
fighter pilots, taking orders from a hawk. These 
are not ordinary birds out for an afternoon of joy-
flyings 
The eagles and falcons swooped past the lo-
comotive and perched on the first tank. The red-
tailed hawk hung in the air and watched the train 
pass under it. They hadn't seen us. 
Yet. 
7 

Tobias slipped down the hull of the tank and 
crept underneath, into the dark cavern between 
the tank's tracks. Where he could see without be-
ing seen. 
But I was on top. On the turret. I couldn't 
move without catching the hawk's eye. I pressed 
myself against the floor of the cargo basket 
and watched. Waited. Hoped my gray-and-white 
feathers blended in with the camouflage paint of 
the tank. 
Right. We're talking about hawk vision here. 
No such thing as camouflage. 
The red-tailed hawk kited above the train. Ex-
amined each car, each tank, that passed below. 
<So, who are they?> I peered through the wire 
cage. Twelve of them. Two of us. <Or should we 
be overly optimistic and hope it's James and his 
gang?> 
James and his gang. A group of auxiliary Ani-
morphs we'd recently recruited to help us fight 
the Yeerks. Disabled kids by day. Superheroes by 
night. Or something like that. 
The Animorphs — originally just five human 
kids and one Andalite — are trying to stop the 
Yeerks. I'm one of the human kids. Marco. That's 
all I'm going to tell you about me. No last name. 
No address. 
Not that it probably makes any difference 
8 
anymore. The Yeerks know who I am. Or know 
who I was, anyway. 
Yeerks. I'm sure you know all about them by 
now. If not, here's the condensed version: slimy 
gray slugs that slither into your ear canal, flatten 
themselves out over the surface of your brain, 
and seize control of your body. Parasitic aliens 
who are conquering Earth, one human at a time. 
My mother was a Controller, controlled by one 
of the most powerful Yeerks in the Yeerk Empire, 
the former Visser One. We rescued her, killed the 
Yeerk who'd slithered into her head, staged a 
fake death for my dad and me, and evacuated to 
the mountain valley of the free Hork-Bajir. 
Which should've been great. And it was. For 
me personally. And for my family. Okay, so we 
were on a never-ending camping trip with seven-
foot-tall bladed aliens who rarely, if ever, bathed. 
And no, I hadn't seen an indoor toilet in weeks. 
But I wasn't complaining. I had my mom 
back. Had my family back. And, as an added 
bonus, algebra homework was now only a distant, 
quickly fading memory. 
But for the Animorphs, and for the war we 
were fighting, my mother's escape was the begin-
ning of a long, terrifying, downhill slide. And we 
were about to hit rock bottom. Hard. 
A big part of the reason we were struggling 
9 

was that the Yeerks had had better weapons than 
us. Plus, they outnumbered us about three gazil-
lion to six. But we had a couple of advantages 
that helped level the playing field. 
One: We could morph. We could touch an an-
imal, acquire its DNA, then become that animal. 
A dying Andalite war-prince gave us that ability, 
and with it we could infiltrate, spy, destroy, and 
kick Yeerk butt in ways no human ever could. 
Two: Since morphing is Andalite technology, the 
Yeerks believed we were all Andalites. The for-
mer Visser Three, commander of the Yeerk inva-
sion of Earth, had turned the planet upside down 
looking for a rogue band of blue aliens. 
But he didn't find us, because he never 
looked in places we might actually be. Cozy sub-
urban houses on tree-lined, Leave-lt-To-Beaver 
streets. Noisy school hallways between classes. 
The food court at the mall. Not your typical An-
dalite hangouts. Well, except maybe the food 
court. After this war is over, I fully expect Ax, our 
resident Andalite, to spend the rest of his life in 
human morph at Cinnabon. 
After we rescued my mother, though, it didn't 
take Visser Three long to figure out the "Andalite 
bandits" just might be human. He was promoted 
to Visser One, and he poured most of his re-
sources into finding us. 
The other Animorphs were forced to rescue 
10 
their families and flee to the Hork-Bajir valley. 
Rachel with her mom and two sisters. Cassie 
with her parents. Tobias with his mother. 
And Jake. Alone. 
We tried to get Jake's family out. Even Tom, 
his brother, who'd been a Controller since the be-
ginning of the invasion. But the Yeerks got there 
first. Turned his mom and dad into Controllers, 
too. 
Turned Jake into someone none of us knew 
anymore. 
Ax moved to the valley, too. It had become our 
new sort of base. 
Bottom line: We were human kids, and the 
Yeerks knew it. And we'd thought that was the 
worst thing that could happen to us. 
We were wrong. 
We needed more help. More firepower. More 
Animorphs. So we recruited humans we knew we 
could trust. Humans the Yeerks had written off. 
Humans they wouldn't infest. 
Disabled kids. 
The Yeerks caught on to what we were doing, 
and in the the last battle we lost the morphing 
cube. The blue box that gave anybody who 
touched it the power to morph. Our one weapon, 
the weapon Visser One had never been able to 
overcome, had fallen into Yeerk hands. Yeah, we 
could still morph. But now the Yeerks could, too. 
11 

Things were very, very bad. 
I looked into the sky. The red-tailed hawk cir-
cled. Examined the tanks below. Its eyes locked 
onto mine. 
Birds do not have lips. Birds cannot smile. 
But I swear this one did. 
12 
CHAPTER 3 
TSEEEEEEEER!" 
The red-tailed hawk rocketed from the sky, 
eyes gleaming in triumph. 
Chuk-chuk-chuk-chuk. 
The freight train was giving me a free ride 
right toward my enemy. 
I flapped to the top of the cargo bin and found 
a foothold. 
<Marco?> 
Tobias inched onto the bed of the flatcar. Four 
blocks of wood were wedged against the tank's 
tracks, two in front, two in back, keeping it from 
rolling. Tobias stood beside one of the front 
blocks, in its shadow, out of the hawk's line of vi-
sion. 
13 

<You do know a bird of prey is shooting from 
the sky, aiming for you, right?> he said. 
<Uh, yeah.> My thought-speak actually 
sounded confident, like I really knew what I was 
doing. <The hawk doesn't have much bird experi-
ence, remember?> 
I spread my wings. Flared my feathers. 
Fanned my tail. It's what raptors do when they're 
threatened. Make their bodies as large and men-
acing as possible. 
What raptors do not do is plan suicidal fake-
out maneuvers. No, that was purely a human 
move. My wings weren't spread high and wide 
just to make me look tough, though I'm sure I 
was one intense-looking bird. My wings were ac-
tually covering a thick steel tube that jutted up 
behind me through the cargo basket. 
A steel tube I was betting the hawk, in his 
rush to skewer my guts, hadn't noticed. 
I glared at him. Dared him to hit me. 
"TSEEEEEEEEEEER!" 
I stood my ground. Held my perch. My tail 
feathers flicked up and down like a lever, adjust-
ing my balance to the movement of the train. 
Tobias watched from the shadows, wings 
tense, ready to blindside the hawk if I failed. 
The hawk plummeted, his beak aimed at my 
exposed chest. 
Six feet above me. Four. Two. 
14 
Now! 
I dove. Sideways and down, toward the hull of 
the tank. 
Thungk-crack. 
The red-tail slammed into the steel pipe 
above me. 
Thump. 
And fell backward into the cargo basket. He 
lay on the bottom of the cage, unmoving, his 
neck twisted back and to the side. 
<That was a little on the crazy side, don't you 
think?> Tobias lifted his wings. <Now let's get 
away from here before his buddies notice he 
hasn't come up for air.> 
The train rattled around a curve. We swooped 
over the side. Stayed low. And came beak to beak 
with the pack of golden-eagle-Controllers. 
Did I mention that a golden eagle is almost 
three times as big as an osprey? That it's got 
about three times as much attitude and, in my 
opinion, is wound just a little too tight? 
And that's just your regular, run-of-the-sky 
golden eagle. Stir in a crazed Yeerk and a terri-
fied human host, and we're talking one seriously 
demented bird. 
I cut sharply to the right. Tobias was already 
ahead of me. We powered our wings and shot 
toward the front of the train, six golden eagles on 
our tails. 
15 

Chuk-chuk-chuk-chuk. 
The clatter of flatcars nearly drowned out the 
sound of beating wings. We whipped past one 
car. Another. We were gaining on the train. 
The eagles were bigger. Meaner. But not as 
quick. If we could outlast them, we could outdis-
tance them. I flapped my wings. We rounded the 
curve. 
<Uh-oh,>said Tobias. 
Five falcons circled above us. They weren't as 
big as the golden eagles. Not even as big as me 
or Tobias. But a whole lot faster. 
One of the falcons peeled off. Dove! 
<0h, man. Not this again. I am so tired of be-
ing dive-bombed by birds.> 
But this wasn't just any bird. This was a pere-
grine falcon. Not a bullet with feathers. A mis-
sile. A missile shooting toward me at two hundred 
miles an hour. 
Which gave me zero time to think up a suici-
dal fake-out maneuver. 
We were absolutely, positively toast. 
CHAPTER 4 
The falcon dropped from the sky. Another 
peregrine zeroed in on Tobias. 
I pumped my wings. Scanned the rail bed, 
searching for an opening. A hiding place. A 
shield. 
Nothing. 
A wall of trees on one side. A freight train on 
the other. A flock of psycho-eagles behind. 
<Under the train!> I yelled. 
I dove between two flatcars. Tobias followed. 
Chuk-chuk-chuk-chuk. 
Metal grated against metal. We dodged under 
axles. Between wheels. Around brake boxes. It 
was reckless and desperate and stupid. Thou-
sands of pounds of steel zinging along the tracks, 
17 
16 

a fraction of an inch from our wings, our legs, our 
heads. One wrong move, one slight miscalcula-
tion, and we'd be chicken nuggets. 
But it was our only chance. 
We shot between the rail bed and the floor of 
the flatcars above. Lost an eagle. And another. A 
bird with a seven-foot wing span has no business 
under a moving freight train. 
But the falcons kept coming. From the front. 
From behind. Raking. Slashing. Pummeling. 
<Did you ever see that old movie The Birdsl> 
I screamed. 
<Not funny, Marco!> Tobias screamed back. 
I jetted out from beneath a car, two falcons on 
my tail. I shot up. Around the tank. In. Out! Lost 
one of the falcons. Spun around the big gun. 
Lost the other. 
<AAAAAAAHHHHHH!> 
Talons the size of meat hooks clamped 
around my back, pierced feathers, then flesh, as 
a golden eagle plucked me from mid-flight. 
I thrashed. Tried to wrench free. My skin 
ripped beneath the eagle's viselike grip. Claw 
scraped bone. 
The eagle beat its wings and rose above the 
train. I dangled from its talons like a helpless 
field mouse, twisting and writhing. 
<Marco! Get your wings out of the way!> 
A flash of brown. 
18 
I tucked in my wings. 
Tobias swept under the eagle in a Red-Tail 
Spiral of Death. His talons slashed the eagle's 
feathered legs. 
"KYEEEEEEER!" 
The eagle screamed. Banked. Turned to face 
his attacker. 
But he wasn't as quick as Tobias, and he was 
weighted down by an uncooperative osprey. 
"TSEEEEEEEEEEEEER!" 
Tobias slammed into his throat. 
The eagle veered. Raked a talon at Tobias. My 
neck fell from its clutches. 
I spun, my butt clenched in one eagle claw, 
my head and shoulders flopping in midair, while 
Tobias and the eagle threw down above me. 
Tobias circled. In. Out. Over. Around. 
The eagle whirled and dodged. 
<ls there a barf bag on this flight?> I said stu-
pidly. 
Tobias ripped his talons across the eagle's 
back. 
The eagle lashed out, both feet open. 
I was free! 
I fell. Just plummeted toward the freight train 
below. Toward solid steel and jutting periscope 
housings. 
Fly. I had to fly! I focused. I pulled my wings 
up. Out. 
19 

Air filled my wings, like I'd opened a para-
chute. Somewhere above me an eagle screamed. 
I had to circle. Get back to Tobias and help him 
fight off the eagle. I swept over the train. Around 
a tank. 
<Marco, look out!> 
Smack. 
It hit me from below. A falcon that came out 
of nowhere. I lurched backward, end over end. 
Thunk. 
And landed on the bed of the flatcar. 
20 
CHAPTER 5 
I lay on my back, wings splayed across rough 
wooden planks, belly exposed. Wind whipped my 
feathers. The flatcar swayed beneath me. 
The falcon circled above. Flapped its wings 
and climbed. Gained altitude for another hit. 
I closed my eyes. Shut out the clacking of the 
train, the screams of hawk and eagle. Ignored the 
crippling pain shooting through my body. Forced 
one image into my head: Marco. Healthy human 
Marco. 
I felt my feathers liquefy. Felt them melt and 
dissolve into my skin. My legs thickened. Shot 
out to human length. The armored-plated scales 
covering them softened and smoothed into hu-
man skin. 
21 

But I was still bird from the legs up, and I still 
couldn't move. Pain burned through my wings. I 
refocused the image: arms. 
Currrrrrrunnnnnnch! 
My wings straightened, stretched. The pain 
stretched, too. Longer. Thinner. Faded to a tin-
gle, then disappeared as fingers popped from the 
ends of my arm-wings. 
I flexed them. Opened my eyes. 
I jerked to the side. Kicked at the falcon! 
Talons skidded across my thigh and locked 
onto my flesh. The falcon squeezed a mass of 
muscle between its dagger-sharp toes and kept 
flying. 
" AAAAAAAAAAAAAH H H H H H!" 
A golf ball-sized chunk of meat was ripped 
from my leg! 
In human form, I could fend off the falcons. 
In human form, I'd survive. Well, I'd survive 
longer than I would as an osprey. 
But why volunteer for that kind of carnage? 
I crawled to the tank. Sat with my back 
against the hull. Shoved the human image from 
my brain and thought of a different one: gorilla. 
Want to bulk up? Forget bench presses and 
power shakes. Morph a gorilla. 
I concentrated. 
My chest and shoulders bulged. Stomach rip-
pled. Biceps, deltoids, pecs. I was beefy. Buff. 
My hands grew to the size of catchers' mitts. My 
fingers swelled to sausages. 
Currrrreeeeeeeek! 
Human bones thickened. Arms shot out. My 
skull shifted. Back, then up. My face flattened. 
Jaw jutted forward. My skin darkened to a glis-
tening black, and waves of coarse dark hair 
swept down my body. 
I was Big Jim. 
I leaped to the hull of the tank. The falcon 
dove and raked my arm. Another swept over my 
head, talons bared. A golden eagle swiped at my 
face. 
But I was a gorilla. The eagle was merely an 
annoyance. A pest. As fierce as a mosquito but 
as easy to swat. I batted them away, like King 
Kong swatting airplanes from the top of the Em-
pire State Building. 
I turned and scanned the rail bed. The trees 
had thinned. The ground was leveling out. We 
were getting closer to the city. 
Closer to Yeerk reinforcements. 
Tobias shot around a tank three cars back, a 
golden eagle breathing down his neck. Two fal-
cons buzzed and jabbed around him, taking 
whatever shots they could get. 
<Tobias!> I yelled. <Time to bail.> 
<You think?> 
He flapped. Banked. Dove beneath the train. 
22 
23 

The rail bed had been cut into the side of the 
hill. On one side the ground lay even with the 
bed of the f latcar. 
Even with the tank's treads. 
Four chains, as big around as my arm, ran 
from huge steel loops welded to the tank to more 
huge loops welded to the flatcar, two in front, two 
in back. Each pair of chains criss-crossed and 
were locked down tight by giant steel buckles in 
the middle of each chain. 
Tools. I needed tools. Easy. I'd been to Level 
10 in Tank Commando. I knew where to get 
them. 
I leaped to the tank's hull. A big lockbox was 
built into the fender, the lid bolted shut with a 
brass padlock. 
Simply not a problem for a gorilla. I ripped 
the lock loose, the brass folding in my fist like 
Play-Doh. Banged open the lid. 
Yes! Ax. Shovel. Mondo-huge wrench. Pointy 
chisel-looking bar. 
Sledgehammer. 
I pulled the sledgehammer from the box. 
Leaped to the back of the tank. 
The wood blocks were still wedged against 
the tank's treads, anchored by steel spikes driven 
through the blocks into the bed of the flatcar. 
WHAM! 
One block was airborne. 
WHAM! 
The other flew into the trees. 
I grabbed one of the big metal buckles and 
gave it a twist. The chain loosened. I twisted 
both buckles till I had plenty of slack, then 
leaped onto the tank and unhooked the chains 
from the steel loops. 
CLANG! 
The chains slid to the floor of the flatcar. 
The big gun was locked down into a bracket 
on the rear of the tank's hull. Since I was back 
there anyway, I ripped it free and leaped to the 
front of the tank. 
WHAM! WHAM! 
Wood blocks flew. 
I twisted. Leaped. Unhooked. The front 
chains fell away. 
The tank was free. 
<Tobias! Let's go.> 
I leaped onto the turret. Knuckle-walked to 
one of the hatches leading inside. Twisted the 
padlock off and hurled it at the eagle on Tobias's 
tail. Ripped the hatch open. Tobias shot through, 
into the tank. 
I swatted the eagle away, then heaved the 
sledgehammer at the train's engine. It sailed end 
over end, over the flatcars. 
25 
24 

Slammed onto the roof of the locomotive and 
bounced. 
EEEEEEEEEE! 
Brakes squealed. The flatcar lurched. 
I barreled into the tank and slammed the lid. 
Bye-bye birdies. 
26 
<Okay. Good.> I squinted in the semidark-
ness. The train had stopped. <We're safe.> 
<Uh-huh.> Tobias flapped up onto a metal 
box. <Sealed inside a tin can, with Yeerk-infested 
birds nesting on top, waiting for reinforcements 
who will peel the lid off and kill us. We're not 
safe, Marco. We're dead.> 
<Dead? I think not. You underestimate the 
power of this particular tin can.> I patted the 
mesh wall behind me. 
The inside of the turret was a round metal 
basket. Everything in it — walls, floor, storage 
bins, equipment — had been painted white. 
Seats and storage bins filled the front and mid-
27 
CHAPTER 6 

die. My knees banged against a big metal box. 
An ammo rack jabbed my shoulder. 
The tank just wasn't built for a gorilla. 
I demorphed and climbed into one of the 
seats. I peered through the vision block mounted 
above me. It was the gunner's site. Computer-
ized. Equipped with night vision and infrared 
sensors. Just like the video game. 
I could see the eagles and falcons. They were 
perched on the hull of the tank, waiting. The rail-
road guys were hiking along the tracks, searching 
the cars, searching under the cars, searching the 
trees. One of them was carrying the sledgeham-
mer. Both of them looked really confused and a 
little ticked off. 
I climbed from my seat. Stood in the center of 
the basket and tried to figure out what to do first. 
"I assume we'll be taking this buggy for a joy-
ride." Tobias had morphed into his human self. 
"If we can figure out how to start it." 
"What do you mean, /Ywe can figure out how 
to start it? You happen to be sitting next to the 
Tank Commando master of the Hork-Bajir valley." 
"Right. Video-game expertise." He glanced 
around at the switches and levers. "So, what, we 
just rev it up and barrel off the side of the train?" 
"Yeah. The train's stopped. The ground's al-
most level with the flatcar. Should be easy. I saw 
a tank crew do it on the History Channel." 
28 
"Ah. Video games and cable. How reassur-
ing." He pulled a helmet from a hook on the side 
of the turret. "I should probably wear this." 
"Probably. That piece in front is a micro-
phone," I said. "And the ear thingies are speak-
ers. 
The mike was attached to a thick wire that 
curved down from the side of the helmet, like a 
telephone headset. Tobias adjusted it in front of 
his mouth. 
"I feel like Britney Spears," he said. 
"Unfortunately for me, you don't look like her. 
Sit here. Plug the cord in and push that little 
switch forward so you can talk to me." 
I climbed through the crawl space between 
the turret and the driver's area. Everything down 
there was painted white, too. I slid into the seat. 
It tipped back so far I was almost lying down. I 
slipped my helmet on. Plugged it in. 
And took a deep breath. 
I'll let you in on a little secret. Gunning down 
enemy troops in a video game does not actually 
prepare you to operate a real-life, sixty-ton tank. I 
mean, yeah, the controls looked familiar. I 
gripped the handlebar in front of me. And the 
equipment was all in basically the same spots as 
it was on my PlayStation screen. 
But this was the real deal. If I flipped the tank 
over, I couldn't hit ESCAPE and start again. 
29 

"How's it going down there?" Tobias's voice 
crackled into my helmet. 
"Cool." I studied the instrument panel. 
"Everything's cool. Got it all figured out." 
Which, I realized, was almost true. Because 
here's another little secret: Tank controls are 
amazingly well-marked. FUEL. START. MASTER 
SWITCH. It didn't take a genius to figure out how 
to get it rolling. 
Was the army aware of this? Did they realize 
that, with a little trial and error, a third grader 
with a limited vocabulary could probably steal an 
entire tank? 
I settled back into my seat. Pushed MASTER 
SWITCH. Heard a little hum as the instrument 
panel lit up. 
I peered through my vision block. It wasn't a 
whiz-bang computerized periscope like the gun-
ner's sight. It was more like a window. A slit of a 
window fitted with thick, bulletproof glass. The 
eagles and falcons were still perched on the 
tank. And they obviously knew something was 
up. They fluttered their feathers and stared at 
each other. 
I pushed START. 
RrrrrRRRRRRrrrrrrmmmmmm. 
The engine spun up and fired. Out on the 
hull, our friends the birds screeched and flapped 
their wings. 
30 
Okay. I could do this. I gripped the handlebar 
thing. Right grip, throttle. Left grip, transmis-
sion. Gear switch under my left thumb. 
I took a breath. In about a minute we'd either 
be off the flatcar, ripping over the hills, or we'd 
be flipped over on the rail bed, like a big old 
metal bug on its back. 
I kept the transmission in neutral and turned 
the handlebar a sharp left, it was sort of like rid-
ing my bike. Sort of. Revved the throttle. The 
tank rotated sideways on the bed of the flatcar. 
Its treads hung out over the edge, facing the 
cutout section of hill. 
I straightened the handlebar. Shifted to drive. 
Pulled back on the throttle. 
And we lunged forward into empty space. 
31 

CHAPTER 7 
The front of the treads rolled over the edge of 
the flatcar, supported by nothing. I could see 
level ground ahead. I held the throttle steady. 
The tank tipped, nose down. The falcons and 
eagles bailed. They obviously had no confidence 
in my tank-driving abilities. 
"Uh, Marco?" Neither, apparently, did Tobias. 
WHOOOOOOMPH! 
The tracks hit solid ground. 
The tank hung halfway on the flatcar, half on 
the cutout part of the hill. 
Then the treads grabbed onto the dirt and 
pulled us from the flatcar. We crawled across the 
cleared area next to the tracks. I found an open-
32 
mg in the line of trees, and we rattled off through 
the woods. 
"Cake," I said. 
I was very impressed with the tank. And, of 
course, myself. The M-l clipped right along. It 
was a tank, but it could move. Anywhere. Up 
hills, over boulders, across ditches. 
I bounced along in the driver's seat. Bushes 
crumbled and disappeared under my treads. 
Okay, and a couple of trees, too. And the corner 
of a railroad storage shed. It took me a while to 
get used to the steering. 
The bird-Controllers had settled back onto the 
tank, their talons locked around hinges and han-
dles, their wings bowed down against the hull. 
My helmet crackled. "Call me crazy," said To-
bias, "but when we abort a mission, I don't think 
we should bring the Yeerks home with us." 
I heard a rattle above and behind me. The 
tank's big gun whipped to the front of the tank. 
Knocked a golden eagle out cold. He fell from 
the tank. The gun swung to the rear and then 
around to the front again. The other birds took to 
the skies. 
"Tobias? That was you, wasn't it?" 
"Yeah. I found an operating manual back 
here. Pretty dry reading, but there's some stuff in 
it we can definitely use." 
33 

We thundered across a clearing. Slogged 
through a stream. Climbed the steep bank on the 
other side like it was downhill. Rattled through 
the underbrush and back into the trees. The bird-
Controllers swooped overhead. 
Tobias spun the gun again. The eagles and 
falcons screeched and flapped toward the sky. 
I thundered along, the turret basket whirling 
inches behind my head, trying not to get the gun 
tube stuck in the side of a hill or caught in a tree. 
Trying to keep my eyes focused through the 
vision block. The woods flashed by in a blur. 
THUNNNNNG. 
The tank tipped sideways. Kept rolling. 
Thumped back to level ground. 
"This is way cooler than a tank sim," said To-
bias. "Think Jake'd let us keep an M-l up in 
the . . . Marco! Watch out!!" 
"Watch what? I can't see very well." 
"I know. But I can. Stop. Stop!" 
I pushed down on the brake. The tank jerked 
to a stop. I bounced forward, then back. I peered 
through my vision block. 
And all I saw was sky. Acres and acres of 
empty air. We'd left the woods and were perched 
on the edge of a cliff overlooking the Interstate. 
The falcons and eagles had disappeared. 
Smart birds. 
34 
My helmet sputtered. "Uh, Marco? Does this 
thing have reverse?" 
I glanced at the gear switch. "Yeah." 
I pressed the switch with my thumb. Gave it 
gas. The tank started to roll. Forward. 
"AAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHH!" Tobias 
screamed in my ear. 
I slammed on the brake. The tank stopped. 
Chunks of earth crumbled beneath the treads 
and plummeted from the cliff. 
"Not reverse," I said. 
"No kidding." 
I pressed the gear switch again. Twisted the 
throttle toward me a fraction of a centimeter. 
The tank inched backward. 
I cranked the throttle. Backed to the edge of 
the woods. Sat in the shadow of the trees and let 
the tank idle. 
The "cliff" was a hill the highway department 
had blasted through when they built the Inter-
state. It sloped down on either side till it was 
level with the road. 
I cranked the handlebar. Turned the tank. We 
thundered down the hill. I turned again. Plowed 
through the ditch and up onto the highway. 
"Uh, Marco? You sure you know what you're 
doing?" Tobias said. 
"Sure. This puppy can do sixty-five, no sweat." 
35 

"Yeah, sixty-five in the wrong direction!" 
I stared out at the highway. It was divided, 
with a concrete barrier between the two sides. 
And our side was going the wrong way. 
Not much I could do about that but keep go-
ing. And hope the other vehicles were smart 
enough to get out of the way. 
They were. 
A brand-new Lexus shrieked off to the side of 
the road. A rusty old pickup filled with wood 
planks followed it. 
A minivan driven by a soccer-mom skidded 
after them. An SUV driven by a guy in a suit 
swerved right behind. 
So far, everyone was working with us. 
Except for the eighteen-wheeler. 
It kept on barreling toward us. I slowed down. 
Veered toward the shoulder. Plowed over a bank 
of road signs. Veered back onto the highway to 
avoid a stalled-out jeep. 
Still the truck bore down on us. We were close 
enough now so I could see the driver's face. He 
was smiling. No, he was laughing. 
"Is the guy a total idiot?" Tobias cried. "He's 
playing chicken with a tank. A tank!" 
"He is bigger." 
"Yeah? Well, we're better equipped." 
The big gun rattled. Swung to the right. 
"You can't shoot him, Tobias!" 
36 
"He doesn't know that." 
The cannon rattled again. Up, this time. 
Straight at the truck's window. 
The trucker's smile froze. He cranked his 
steering wheel and swerved into the next lane. 
"That'll learn him," I muttered. 
37 

Jake frowned. "So, where did you leave the 
tank?" 
Tobias and I looked at each other. 
We were back in the Hork-Bajir valley, seated 
around the campfire outside my parents' cabin. 
Crickets hummed. The setting sun bathed the 
valley in amber rays. Champ, Tobias's mom's 
dog, drowsed at our feet. It was peaceful. It was 
nice. 
It was a council of war. 
The Joint Chiefs of Staff were all present. Me, 
Tobias, Rachel, Cassie, Jake, and Ax. And, since 
we'd moved to the valley, we'd added two more 
members. 
Toby, the Hork-Bajir seer. Seer, meaning 
38 
smarter than the average Hork-Bajir. Meaning 
two-plus-two actually held some meaning for her. 
So did quantum physics. 
The second new member was my mom. 
"The tank." I took a breath. "Well, you know 
Chapman's house? Nice two-story?" 
Jake sighed. "How many stories is it now?" 
"Uh . . . " I glanced at Tobias. "Zero? But the 
back deck will give Chapman a nice supply of 
firewood this winter. It's already piled up for 
him." 
Tobias smiled. "Too bad he doesn't have a 
fireplace anymore." 
"Excuse me?" said Rachel. "You flattened 
Melissa's house?" 
She stared at me. She and Melissa Chapman 
used to be friends. Back before Melissa's dad be-
came a Controller and Rachel became an Ani-
morph. 
She turned on Tobias. "And you went along 
with it?" 
"Whoa. Down, girl," I said. "You're just mad 
because you didn't get to drive a tank. Nobody 
got hurt. Nobody was home. Not even Fluffer Mc-
Nutter or whatever that stupid cat's name is." 
"Fluffer McKitty," she said. 
"Oh. Excuse me. Fluffer McKitty. That's so 
much better. Anyway, they're all fine. Melissa, 
her parents, her cat." 
39 
CHAPTER 8 

Tobias nodded. "They're just, well, homeless." 
Rachel shook her head. Looked to Jake to 
back her up. 
Jake said . . . nothing. 
We waited for his reprimand. For his poorly 
concealed amusement. For his: "That's not ex-
actly what I meant by low profile, Marco." All the 
normal Jake stuff. 
The fire popped. Somebody's nylon jacket 
squeaked. Ax nailed a mosquito with the flat of 
his tailblade. 
Jake sighed again and poked the campfire 
with a stick. 
I frowned. Looked at Ax. He shrugged, one of 
the many human gestures he'd picked up. 
Since we'd moved to the valley, Jake had 
been on autopilot. I didn't know how to talk to 
him anymore. This was Jake. My best friend 
since second grade, and I couldn't even have a 
superficial, meaningless conversation with him. 
Let alone try to get into his head. 
Part of it was me. My guilt. Yeah, big news 
flash, call the Associated Press, Marco feels 
guilty. Well, wouldn't you? My family was safe, 
recovered, together, while Jake's had been torn 
away from him. There was only a very slim 
chance he'd ever get them back. 
But that wasn't exactly why I felt guilty. 
I felt guilty because I was so happy. Happy 
40 
my mom was back. Happy that she and my dad 
were still nauseatingly in love. My best friend 
had lost everything that had ever meant anything 
to him. Meanwhile, I practically had to tie myself 
to a tree to keep from running up and down the 
valley, arms spread wide, belting out show tunes. 
I glanced at Cassie. She sat on top of the old 
picnic table Ax and I had found and dragged to 
the camp. She sat away from the fire. Away from 
the whole group. 
I figured if anybody could get through to Jake, 
Cassie could. I mean, she's Cassie, for pete's 
sake. But since our last mission, since the Yeerks 
had stolen the morphing cube, Jake was more 
distant from her than from anybody. Distant? Ac-
tually where Cassie was concerned, Jake had 
completely closed down. Like an iron door had 
slammed shut. 
"But did you get any information?" Toby 
looked at Tobias, then me. She was crouched in 
the grass, the light from the smoldering logs in-
tensifying the fire in her Hork-Bajir eyes. "Did 
you discover anything useful?" 
Tobias scratched Champ's ears. "You mean 
before we stole government property, endangered 
innocent motorists, and leveled a moderately 
priced suburban home?" 
"Yes." She nodded. 
"Well, we did manage to get a good look at 
41 

the train," I said. "The National Guard wasn't 
moving those tanks. Not the regular, uninfested 
National Guard anyway." 
"The uninfested National Guard." Jake nod-
ded. Stirred the fire. "We've been assuming there 
still is such a thing." He turned to my mom. 
"Eva, is there any chance we're wrong?" 
"No." Mom shook her head. "If Visser Three 
had taken over the National Guard while I was 
Visser One's host body, I'd have known about it. 
What am I saying? Everybody would've known 
about it. Visser Three would've made sure." 
"What about since then?" said Jake. "Since 
he was promoted to Visser One?" 
"No." Mom shook her head again. "Not 
enough time. We're talking thousands of sol-
diers, spread out over the entire state. And 
they're not on active duty. They're weekend war-
riors, so most of the time they're not even with 
their units. This is a huge operation. It'd take 
months to plan, months more to execute." 
"Okay." Jake paced. Poked his stick at the 
fire. "With all the troop movement over the last 
few days, we can assume the planning stage is 
done. So I'm assuming the execution stage is be-
ginning. We can also assume at least some of the 
highest ranking officers are Controllers. Other-
wise, the visser wouldn't be able to get all those 
42 
soldiers into the city. They'll all be infested. 
Soon. We can't let that happen." 
<But how can we be sure we can stop it?> Ax 
asked. His blue fur gleamed in the firelight. 
<Even with James and the other new Animorphs, 
are we big enough?> 
"No. We're not. We need help." Pace. Pace. 
Poke. "So, we split up. One group is the in-your-
face group." Jake glanced at Rachel. "That 
group creates a diversion with the National 
Guard troops. Keeps them away from the Yeerk 
pool as long as possible. They're stationed all 
over the city, so we'll have to keep moving to hit 
all the bases. But it'll also split Visser One's re-
sources, trying to stop us. It'll keep him busy. 
Buy us some time." 
"We have been planning to liberate the group 
of Hork-Bajir that guard The Sharing headquar-
ters," said Toby. "We can be ready to go in the 
morning." 
"Good. That'll be one more fire Visser One 
has to put out. Group Two will be smaller, qui-
eter. They'll need to show a little more finesse." 
"Finesse?" Rachel shot me a sideways look. 
"Oh, yeah. Some of us are so good at that." 
"We'll have to be," said Jake. "Because only 
one person has enough authority to stop the 
movement of National Guard troops. The gover-
43 

nor. Group Two has to travel to the capitol. Get to 
the governor somehow. Convince him to work 
with us." 
"I'll go," Cassie said. 
"No," Jake replied, practically before the 
words were out of her mouth. 
Cassie froze. Stared at him. 
Jake didn't even look at her. 
Instead, he gave me a sarcastic half-smile. A 
glimpse of the old Jake. "If anybody can handle a 
politician, it's Marco. And Tobias can get to the 
capitol without getting lost. We also need to 
make sure the governor isn't a Controller, and Ax 
is the most qualified to judge. So that's the sec-
ond group. Marco, Ax, and Tobias." 
That's when he finally looked at Cassie. 
Locked his gaze on her. 
"I can trust them," he said. 
Silence. 
Jake turned back to us and continued, "I'll be 
with Group One. Rachel. Cassie. Toby and some 
of her people. James's group, too. We'll try to stir 
up some major chaos before midnight. Marco, 
you need to reach the governor some time tomor-
row. Doesn't matter exactly when, just get there." 
He stopped pacing. Stopped poking the fire. 
Looked at me. At Ax and Tobias. "I know this 
sounds melodramatic, but we can't fight this war 
alone anymore. We need the authorities on our 
44 
side. If the governor is free, you have to find a 
way to convince him. If he's a Controller, well, 
we'll have to figure out Plan B." 
"Oh. Well," I said. "As long as there's no 
pressure." 
"And try to keep things down. We don't need 
Visser One figuring out what we're up to." The 
half-smile again. "I'm counting on you guys to be 
cool. And to handle this the best way you know 
how." 
"Be cool? Handle this? Marco?" Rachel shook 
her head. "We are in serious trouble." 
45 

CHAPTER 9 
Weeds slapped at our faces. Mud sucked at 
our feet — well, two of us anyway. We waded into 
the swamp and crouched behind a stand of cat-
tails. Me, Ax, Tobias perched on Ax's shoulder. 
Group Two. The ones with "finesse." 
We were at The Gardens, in the wetlands sec-
tion that divided the zoo from the amusement 
park. The sun was rising behind the Ferris wheel. 
An early morning fog rose from the water. 
Birds filled the big, marshy pond. Ducks, 
geese, swans, pelicans, cranes. Flamingoes. 
<Hey,> said Tobias. <We can morph lawn or-
naments.> 
The capitol was over two hundred miles away. 
The fastest way to get there was by air, and our 
46 
normal bird-of-prey morphs wouldn't do the job. 
We needed distance flyers. Ducks. Our plan was 
to get in, acquire the necessary DNA, and get out 
before The Gardens opened for the day. 
And at the edge of the water, near our cattail 
hideout, swam a family of mallards. 
We hunkered down and waited for them to 
drift closer. 
"Anybody know the best way to catch a 
duck?" I whispered. 
Ax peered through the cattails. <l have been 
observing these animals very closely.> His main 
eyes studied a group of ducklings, while his stalk 
eyes followed a big male duck that bobbed near 
the cattails. <They are quick and agile, but they 
spend a great deal of time with their heads un-
derwaters 
<They're eating,> Tobias explained. 
<Ah.> Ax nodded. <You see how much safer 
and more efficient it would be for them if they 
fed through their feet? Capturing a member of 
this species while its front half is submerged 
should be relatively simple.> 
Simple. Right. When was the last time any-
thing in our lives was simple? 
The male paddled into the cattails. I could 
tell he was a male, a drake, by his shimmery 
green head, his cinnamon-brown chest, and the 
band of white that divided the two like a neck-
47 

lace. In the duck world, the boys get to be the 
pretty ones. All the girl ducks were a drab, 
splotchy brown. 
The drake swam closer. Dipped his beak into 
the water. 
I raised my arms. Slowly. I tensed, ready to 
grab him as soon as he dove for food. 
Sploot. 
Something heavy and wet landed on my head. 
Part of it slid down my face and latched on to my 
cheek. 
"Gree-deep," said the heavy, wet thing. 
Great. I lifted my hand. Started to shove it 
off. The drake drifted closer. I froze. 
<Marco, do you realize that there is a large 
amphibian on your head?> 
<lt's a bullfrog, Ax-man,> said Tobias. 
"Gree-deep," said the frog. 
The mallard turned. Watched me. Paddled 
away. 
I poked the bullfrog. 
"Oh, man." I groaned. "I think it just peed 
on me." 
I started to poke him again, then stood very 
still. One of the female mallards had paddled 
into the cattails. 
She nipped at something in the water. 
Floated. Nipped again. Plunged her head be-
neath the surface. Her bottom bobbed on top. 
48 
I lunged. Grapped the duck around the mid-
dle. Held her wings tight to her body and pulled 
her from the water. 
She thrashed and quacked. The other ducks 
squawked and flapped away. 
I turned toward shore. The frog slid down my 
face and over my eyes. 
I flung my head, tried to shake him loose. 
Kept my grip on the duck. Reeled blindly in the 
water. 
"QUAAAAAAAAAACK." 
The duck let out a cry and wrenched a wing 
from under my grip. Beat it against my arm, my 
face. Lashed out with her feet. 
You think just because they're webbed, duck 
feet don't have claws? They do. And they're 
sharp. Two kicks shredded my forearms. 
"AAAAAAAAHHHHHH!" 
I screamed. The pond erupted in quacks, 
honks, and screeches. Water sprayed over me. 
Cattails sliced at my face. 
The bullfrog stayed planted on my head. 
I stood totally still and concentrated on the 
duck in my hands. On the duck that was kicking, 
flapping, flailing. I had to focus. Had to acquire it 
before it got away. 
"QUAAAAAAAAAACK." 
Something small, hard, and sharp clamped 
down on my nose. 
49 

" AAAAAAAAAAAAH HHHHHHHHH!" 
I screamed. The duck had bit me! She gave 
one more major thrash and slipped from my 
hands. 
"QUAAAAAAAAAACK." 
Her wings beat against my face as she 
flapped away. 
"Gree-deep." 
The frog leaped into the cattails. 
"Oh, now you decide to leave," I said. I 
slogged toward the bank. 
<Stay still, Marco. I believe I have one.> Ax 
vaulted into the pond in a beautiful, perfect arc, 
his Andalite form clearly outlined in the morning 
sun. 
"Daddy, Daddy! Look! It's a unicorn." 
I whirled. 
A little girl was pulling her dad toward the 
duck pond. A group of grade-school kids on a 
field trip jostled along the sidewalk behind them. 
"The park's open," I yelled to Ax and Tobias. 
"Let's get what we came for and get out!" 
"A blue unicorn, Daddy. Look!" 
"There's no such thing as a unicorn, sweet-
heart. That's a, well, it's a . . . an antelope. Yes, 
an antelope. That's it. Probably from . . . Africa. 
An African antelope." 
Ax, 
the 
blue 
Andalite/African 
antelope, 
splashed through the water, chasing the mallard. 
50 
Ducks and geese quacked, honked, and thrashed 
over the pond. I sloshed after him, into the path 
of oncoming birds, trying to nab one as it flapped 
by. I could hear the field trip kids shouting be-
hind me. 
"Hey, what's that kid doing in the water?" 
"Looks like he's target practice for those 
birds." 
"Can we go swimming, too, Mrs. Duncan, 
please?" 
I dove. Ax lunged. Ducks skidded across the 
water. 
<l'll handle this,> Tobias said. 
He took to the sky and circled. Spilled air 
from his wings and dove. Swooped over the water 
and landed easily on a mallard's back. The duck 
squawked and splashed and tried to fly away. To-
bias sank his talons into its feathers. The duck 
relaxed. It had fallen into an acquiring trance. 
<Marco. Your turn,> said Tobias. 
I splashed out to the duck. Grabbed him 
around the middle. Pressed my hands against his 
feathers. Had to start acquiring him before he 
snapped out of it. 
I shut out the squawks and squeals around 
me, the shouts and laughs from the shore. Con-
centrated on the duck. 
"Ax. You ready?" I sloshed toward him, duck 
in hand. 
51 

Ax reached for it. 
"Andalite!" 
I spun. One of teachers pushed her way 
through the mob of field trip kids. She knocked a 
zoo guard onto the concrete and pulled a gun 
from his holster. 
52 
CHAPTER 10 
Ax! 
Get back!" 
Ax dove into the cattails. 
I dove after him, still carrying the droopy 
duck. 
Wooooooooosh. 
What I guess was a tranquilizer dart pierced 
the weeds. 
I handed the duck off to Ax in a weird DNA 
water relay. 
TSSSSSEEEEEEEEW-buh-loooooosh. 
A Dracon beam vaporized the water beside 
me. Human-Controllers leaped into the pond and 
splashed toward the cattails. 
Others, still on the bank, began changing. 
Shrinking, shifting . . . morphing. A leopard 
53 

emerged from a security guard, a golden eagle 
from an ice-cream vendor. 
<Man, I liked it better when only we could do 
that,> I said. 
<l've got the eagle,> Tobias called from over-
head. 
"TSEEEEEEEEEEEEEER!" 
He dove. Hit the eagle before it had finished 
the morph. Circled for another shot. 
" RoaaAAAAAAAAWWWWWWWWWR." 
The leopard leaped at Ax, teeth bared. 
Fwap! Fwap! 
Ax, still holding the duck, struck back with 
his bladed tail. 
TSSSSSEEEEEEEEW-buh-loooooosh. 
Human-Controllers 
charged 
through 
the 
pond, firing Dracons. 
I took a deep breath. Filled my lungs with air 
and dove into the shallow water. 
I focused. Tried not to move. Tried not to 
make waves or bubbles. 
And then it started. I felt my muscles bulge. 
Bones realign. Felt pin prickles as fur popped 
from my skin. 
But I was running out of air! My lungs burned. 
My eyes burned. Still, I concentrated. Felt my 
skull bulge. My jaw jut forward. 
Finally, I erupted from the water. Gulped in 
air. Tore through the cattails and leaped onto the 
54 
bank. I was Marco the gorilla. And I was looking 
to kick some Controller butt. 
TSSSSSSSEEEEEEEEW! 
A Dracon beam fried the cattails. I whirled. A 
human-Controller stood at the edge of the water. 
He raised his handheld Dracon and aimed it at 
my chest. 
I leaped. Knocked the Dracon into the water 
with one fist. Slammed the Controller uncon-
scious with the other. 
More human-Controllers charged me from be-
hind. Jumped onto my back. Beat me with sticks 
and rocks and cell phones. One of the Controllers 
jabbed at my eyes with her car keys. 
I whirled. Flung the Controllers away, one by 
one. One by one they sailed over the sidewalk 
and — 
CRASH! 
— flattened a slush stand. 
"HONNNK. HONNNK." 
A goose flapped up from the pond. It flew low, 
straight at me. 
Another Controller? I lifted an arm, ready to 
swing. Ready to fend off its claws and beak. 
But the goose just continued to beat its 
wings. It flew over my head toward the zoo. Not a 
Controller. Just a goose. 
This was insane. Birds were starting to make 
me jumpy. 
55 

The battle had spilled into the amusement 
park section of The Gardens. Tobias and the ea-
gle were locked in aerial combat above the roller 
coaster. 
Ax galloped toward the merry-go-round. The 
leopard lay beside it, trying to drag itself under-
neath on three legs. 
Ax stood above the leopard, tail blade poised. 
" RoaaAAAAAAAAWWWWWWWWWR." 
<Ax! Watch out!> 
A cougar vaulted from the top of the merry-
go-round. Sunk teeth and claws into Ax's back. 
Fwap! Fwap-fwap! 
Ax's tail blade lashed out. 
Wooooosh. 
Another tranquilizer dart shot past my head. 
Rippled the fur on my shoulder. I wheeled. Two 
human-Controllers stood at the edge of the log 
ride, on top of the waterfall. One held a gun. 
TSSSSSEEEEEEEEEWWW! 
The other wielded a Dracon. 
I knuckle-leaped toward the log ride. 
TSSSSSEEEEEEEEEWWW! 
The concrete beneath me exploded. 
I bounded over the wooden fence that sepa-
rated the log ride from the sidewalk. Climbed 
through the synthetic jungle up the man-made 
mountain. 
I was a gorilla. This was my territory. Okay, so 
56 
the jungle was fiberglass and plastic, whatever. I 
tore through it anyway. Reached the top of the 
waterfall in fifteen seconds flat. The Controllers 
stood on the edge of the man-made river, peering 
out over the park. I ripped through a tangle of 
fake vines and leaped onto the edge of the river-
way. 
"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH!" 
They screamed. I hammered. 
BAM!BAM! 
Spuh-LOOOOOOOSH! 
They plunged into the river. 
"AAAAAAAAAAAAAaaaaaaaahhhhhh . . ." 
And shot over the waterfall. 
"KYEEEEEER!" 
A golden eagle's scream. I was above the 
roller coaster, and I could see down over the 
track, where an eagle and Tobias were still at it. 
The eagle screamed again and pummeled To-
bias. 
Tobias fell, one wing flapping, the other hang-
ing limp at his side. 
Hespiraled. Down. Down. 
<Tobias!> 
Thump. 
And landed on the elevated track of the roller 
coaster, in a dip at the bottom of a steep hill. 
A roller-coaster car filled with passengers 
clanked up the other side of the hill. 
57 

<Get up! Tobias, get up!> 
I bounded along the edge of the fiberglass 
river. 
The eagle hurtled toward Tobias, ready to fin-
ish him off. 
The roller-coaster car reached the top of the 
hill and shot down the other side. It picked up 
speed as it traveled. Passengers squealed and 
flung their arms above their heads. 
Tobias fluttered his good wing. His body 
flopped pitifully against the steel track. 
He was too weak to get out of the way. It was 
too late! 
<Tobias! No!> 
58 
1 
CHAPTER 11 
KYEEEEEEEEER!" 
The eagle plummeted. 
The roller-coaster car shot down the tracks. 
Hurtled toward the badly injured body of my 
friend. 
<Tobias!> I skidded down the side of the wa-
terfall, from tree to vine to bush. 
The eagle was directly above him now. 
The roller-coaster car almost on top of him. 
Wuuuumpf. 
<What the . . . !> 
The roller-coaster car slammed into the eagle! 
Brown and golden feathers spewed over the pas-
sengers. 
"AAAAAAAAAAAAAHH H H H H H H!" 
59 

Women screamed. Kids cried. Men shouted. 
But I wasn't interested in the passengers. 
More brown feathers flashed below. Then, a 
red tail. A hawk had dropped through the bottom 
of the elevated tracks. 
<Tobias?> 
He flapped and swooped toward the sky, both 
wings strong and healthy. 
<What happened?!> I asked. 
<No big deal.> He climbed above the tracks. 
<l just stole your suicidal fake-out maneuver, 
that's all.> 
<That's all? Can a gorilla have a heart attack? 
Because I think I'm having a heart attack. I'm 
not breathing right. You know that was com-
pletely insane, don't you?> 
<lnsane, yes. But it worked.> He flapped over 
the waterfall. <Where's Ax?> 
BANG! CLANK! 
A tram car rocked and swayed overhead, on 
its way from the amusement park to the zoo. 
WHAM. 
The door banged open, and Ax leaped out, a 
cougar wrapped around its neck. 
They dropped, a ball of cat and alien, free-
falling to Earth. 
Ax began shrinking. His blue fur melted into a 
shimmering swirl of green and chestnut feathers. 
His stalk eyes shriveled. His front legs dissolved. 
60 
His back hooves flattened and webbed out as his 
arms broadened into wings. He slipped from the 
cougar's grasp and flapped toward the sky. 
<NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!> 
The cougar's thought-speak echoed through 
the park. He writhed, twisted, tried to get all four 
feet beneath him. He dropped through the trees 
into the Siberian tiger exhibit. 
"RrrrrrrrrrOOOOOOOOAAAAAAAAWWWWWW 
RRR!" 
Big kitty battle cries erupted from the pen. 
<That should keep him busy for a while,> 
said Tobias. 
He and Ax landed beside me in the man-
made jungle. Tobias went mallard. I demorphed 
then concentrated on the duck. 
I'd morphed birds before. A seagull. And an 
osprey, of course. The osprey and mallard were 
roughly the same size. But they were built a 
whole lot different. 
The ground shot up as my body shrank. I put 
out a hand to steady myself, but my fingers were 
already thinning, shifting. My first two fingers 
shot out. My pinkie and ring finger dissolved into 
nothing. 
Sploooooooooot. 
My bones snapped, realigned, and became 
hollow. Internal organs moved, re-formed. New 
ones sloshed into existence. My shoulders 
61 

shifted up. My hips shifted back. My whole body 
tipped forward till I was lying on my face. 
<Well, this is comfortable,> I said. 
My mouth and nose melded together and jut-
ted into the ground. My nostrils slid to the top, 
and my neck shot straight out, scraping my 
nose/mouth combo through the dirt. The combo 
flattened out. Hardened into a long, broad bill. 
Sccccuuuurreeeeech. 
Orange scales shot down my legs. Claws 
erupted from my toes, and the skin between 
them webbed together. 
I was a duck. Short, squat, steady. Alert. 
Tense. A little skittish, maybe, but ready to stand 
my ground, to defend my territory. In your face, if 
I had to. And — this part is gross — suddenly 
overcome by a craving for mosquito larva. 
<Ewwww.> 
I shuddered and tried out my new mallard 
voice: "Kwek." It didn't sound right. Too low. Too 
raspy. I tried again. "Kwek. Kwek-kwek-kwek-
kwek." 
<l think we acquired a defective duck,> I 
said. <My quack's not coming out right.> 
<l know a little something about birds,> said 
Tobias. <And when it comes to mallards quack-
ing, the females are better at it.> 
<Ah. So it's a trade-off. A pretty face.> I tilted 
62 
my shimmering green head. <Ora big, full-bodied 
quack.> 
<The quack's not the big problem,> said To-
bias. <What I'd really like to know is, who 
thought up this leg/tail arrangement?> He wad-
dled between two fiberglass trees. <Look at my 
butt.> 
<Uh, thanks, Tobias. I think I'll pass.> 
<Seriously,> he said. <Pm sure it's great for 
swimming, having the motor in the rear like 
that, but walking? My legs are so far apart my 
whole back end bobs up and down every time I 
take a step. Up and down. Side to side. Like 
a . . . like a . . .> 
<Like a duck?> 
<Yeah. It's humiliating.> He swept a wing 
over his flat duck bill. <And this is just wrong.> 
<Tobias, you've been a hawk way too long.> I 
lifted my wings. <Let's go find the governors 
63 

CHAPTER 15 
I pushed off with my feet, flapped my wings, 
and sprung straight into the air. Through the 
trees. Above the waterfall. 
<Hey, this is cool,> I said. <No long, running 
takeoffs. No flapping along the ground. When the 
duck wants to be in the air, he's in the air.> 
Tobias and Ax followed, and we flew over The 
Gardens. Three identical ducks, morphed from 
the same DNA. 
A flock of seagulls flitted about the food 
court. We watched them. Listened. Two of the 
birds suddenly took to the sky. 
Controllers? We beat our wings and veered 
away, looking for a place to land. A place to de-
64 
fend ourselves. The gulls dove for a Frito bag ly-
ing behind a trash can. Not Controllers. Just hun-
gry scavengers. We headed back on course. 
<l don't believe I'm saying this.> Tobias. 
<But I can almost sympathize with Visser One. 
Now we know what he's been going through all 
this time. Dodging every animal he sees, thinking 
the boogeyman in morph is lurking around every 
corner.> 
We decided three ducks flying by themselves 
looked a little conspicuous, especially to Con-
trollers who were probably looking for three 
ducks flying by themselves. So we hooked up 
with a flock of mallards heading in the direction 
of the capitol. 
We leeched onto the back of their V forma-
tion, and flapped off over the mountains. 
This wasn't sleek, soaring raptor flight. With 
our round heads, long necks, and plump bodies, 
we looked more like bowling pins with wings. 
I was the Energizer Bunny with feathers. The 
Energizer Birdie. I flapped and flapped and 
flapped. Fifty miles an hour on a straight, level 
flight. 
<Here's a questions I said. <Why haven't we 
morphed ducks before? All those times we had to 
fly long distances, like trying to keep up with the 
train yesterday, Tobias. Or that time Jake got his 
65 

guts squashed on the ceiling when we were stow-
ing away in fly morph on an airplane. Why didn't 
anybody say, "Long distance? Let's go duck"?> 
<Yes,> Ax agreed. <This is a useful morph. 
I'm not tired after quite a bit of time in the air.> 
<Exactly. Plus we're flying in formation, and it 
looks normal. None of that bird-of-prey stuff 
where we have to fly miles apart and pretend we 
don't know each other. No offense, Tobias. I like 
swooping and gliding and riding the thermals as 
much as the next raptor, but every bird can't be a 
fighter jet. Sometimes you need a steady, reliable 
747.> 
I scanned the rocks and treetops below. The 
duck had decent eyesight. It didn't have binocu-
lar vision like an osprey, so I couldn't judge dis-
tances very well. I couldn't scope out a fish from 
half a mile away and know exactly when to dive 
and at what speed and where to plunge my talons 
into the water to catch it. 
But hey, the mallard didn't need that kind of 
information. Mosquito larva and barley seed 
don't move very fast. 
We left the mountains behind and flew over 
fields and rivers, highways and small towns. We 
took a mid-morning pitstop on a marshy farm 
pond, then the flock headed back to the sky. We 
flew high to take advantage of a nice tailwind and 
66 
reached the outskirts of a city just before noon. A 
large white dome gleamed in the distance. 
<This is it,> I said. <l recognize the capitol 
from our third-grade field trip.> 
<A domed building?> Ax's thought-speak was 
filled with awe. He has a thing for domed roofs. 
<Excellent living quarters! Well-suited for an im-
portant government leader.> 
<That's not where he lives, Ax-man. It's just 
where he works.> 
<And it's Saturdays said Tobias. <So 
chances are, he's not there.> 
<So chances are, he'll be at home,> I said. 
<Which is . . . ?> 
I didn't say anything. 
Ax let out a raspy quack. <We traveled all this 
way, and we do not know where we are going?> 
<No big deal,> I said. <We've got finesse, re-
member? We'll ask directions.> 
We discreetly peeled off from the flock and 
landed in a big mud puddle behind a truck stop. 
Ax and Tobias dabbled in the water. I waddled 
across the gravel to the men's room, waited until 
it was empty, and demorphed. 
I circled to the front of the building and went 
inside. A skinny woman with teased orange hair 
sat behind the cash register, leafing through a 
magazine. 
67 

"Urn, hi," I said. "I'm from out of town, doing 
a little sight-seeing, and I'm wondering how to 
get to the governor's mansion." 
She didn't look up from the magazine. "Beats 
me. The governor's never invited me over." 
She flipped to a page of makeup tips. I wan-
dered through the side door to the truck stop's 
diner. 
None of the waitresses knew where the gover-
nor lived. They hollered back to the kitchen, but 
the cook and the dishwasher were clueless, too. 
"Thanks anyway," I said. 
I headed toward the door. 
"Need directions?" 
I turned. Two bikers were eating lunch at the 
counter. The big one was looking at me. He bit 
off a mouthful of burrito and watched me as he 
chewed. 
Did I say he was the big one? I take that back. 
He wasn't big. He was huge. His left bicep was 
bigger than my whole head. His body nearly swal-
lowed the stool he was sitting on. He wore a ban-
danna around his head and a leather jacket with 
the name "Chopper" embroidered across the 
back. 
Chopper picked something from his teeth. 
"Did a drywall job there once." 
"At the governor's mansion?" 
"Yep. The governor's a real nice person. That 
68 
job got me back on my feet." He pointed his bur-
rito at the front window. "This highway out front 
here? Take it east till you come to the cloverleaf." 
I nodded. Tobias would know where east was. 
"Then head north," he said. "About a mile, 
mile and a half. Governor's mansion sits on a 
bluff overlooking the river. You can't miss it. 
Freaky-looking place with towers and little bal-
conies. Like something straight out of The Ad-
dams Family." 
69 

We'd followed Chopper's directions. We found 
the governor's mansion and landed in the shrubs 
in the middle of the circular drive at the front of 
the house. We demorphed and were now staring at 
the front door, trying to figure out how to get in. 
I peered through a gap in the bushes. Thorn 
bushes. I hadn't noticed the thorns when I was 
standing underneath them as a duck. But now I 
was human, and I noticed. 
And Chopper was also right about the place 
being freaky-looking. Towers and turrets loomed 
above us. Vines crept up the dark stone walls and 
circled the stained-glass windows. Pointy black 
wrought-iron railings lined the balconies and the 
roof. 
70 
"Man. We should've brought our trick-or-treat 
bags," I said. 
<We need to find your governor quickly,> said 
Ax, <and convince him to speak to us alone. 
What does he look like?> 
"I'm not really sure," I said. "Tobias?" 
Tobias blinked his beady hawk eyes. 
Ax frowned. <But he is the most important 
government official in your state. Isn't his picture 
placed prominently in all your educational facili-
ties?> 
"Maybe." I shrugged. "I never really paid 
much attention." I looked at Tobias. 
<Don't ask me,> he said. <My education has 
taken place mostly outside the established facili-
ties^ 
Ax studied Tobias, then me. He shook his 
head, puzzled. <Perhaps it will not matter. Once 
we are inside, we will most likely hear someone 
call him by name.> He narrowed his stalk eyes. 
<You do know his name?> 
Tobias and I looked at each other. 
Okay, so I should've done an Internet search 
before we left the valley. Or picked up a state 
map at the truck stop. The governor's picture 
would've been right there on the inside flap, with 
his name printed underneath. 
Or I could've asked Chopper. He would have 
known. 
71 
CHAPTER 13 

<So I take it we're back to the finesse thing 
again?> said Tobias. 
I shrugged. "It's been working for us so far." 
Except here I couldn't just casually stroll 
through the door and ask directions. Too much 
security. 
I peeked through the thorns. A tall stone 
fence, topped with iron spikes and fitted with an 
alarm system, enclosed the house and grounds. 
The driveway twisted through a canopy of trees 
and ended at a gate in the fence. A state trooper 
manned the guardhouse beside the gate. Another 
trooper stood watch outside the front door to the 
mansion. More troopers were probably stationed 
inside. Not to mention all the maids, cooks, sec-
retaries, and personal assistants we'd have to get 
past. 
Maids, cooks, secretaries, and personal assis-
tants who could be Controllers. 
"We use our fly morphs," I said. "Buzz past the 
guard and into the house. Nobody'll notice us." 
<Perfect,> said Tobias, <if we were looking 
for garbage cans and bathrooms. It's just a 
guess, but I doubt he'll be spending large 
amounts of time in either of those places. We 
could fly around that mausoleum all day and 
never run into him.> 
Ax snorted. <Or recognize him if we did.> 
Okay. We deserved that shot. I let it go. 
72 
"Well, whatever we do, we have to stay small," 
I said. "We can't let anybody see us except the 
governor." 
We went over our list of possible morphs. 
Rat? 
Same problem as the fly, only worse. We'd be 
more likely to be seen. And exterminated. 
Flea? 
Blind and deaf. And not very mobile unless 
we caught a ride in somebody's hair. Plus who 
wants to put up with the overwhelming need to 
suck blood? 
"Wolf spiders?" I said. 
<People see spiders and go insane,> said To-
bias. <l don't want to end up on the bottom of 
somebody's shoe.> 
"So . . . what, then? Bat? Chimpanzee? In-
conspicuous, friendly looking Hork-Bajir? What 
else have we got?" 
<We have a very large black automobile,> 
said Ax. 
He pointed toward the guardhouse at the end 
of the drive. A stretch limo had stopped at the 
gate. The guard checked his clipboard and mo-
tioned the driver through. The limo crunched up 
the winding drive toward us and pulled into the 
circle in front of the door. The driver got out, said 
something to the guard at the front door, then 
stood by the limo, waiting. 
73 

"He's not here to pick up the butler," I said. 
"The governor must be going somewhere." 
<Somebody with finesse would probably go 
with him,> said Tobias. 
I nodded. "Yup." 
74 
CHAPTER 14 
RUN! 
It was the only thought in my little cockroach 
brain: RUN! OUT OF THE LIGHT! NOW! 
I skittered across the pavement toward the 
long, dark shadow beneath the limo. Every tiny 
black hair on my cockroach body trembled. Every 
nerve cell stood at attention. Two other cock-
roaches, Ax and Tobias, darted alongside me. 
The beauty of being a cockroach — well, rela-
tively speaking — is that suddenly you're Super-
man. You can be dropped, drowned, blown up. 
But do you die? No. You simply dust yourself off 
and scurry away. Get sprayed by a little insecti-
cide? Not a problem. Cockroaches adapt to bug 
75 

spray. If you are a cockroach, you are nearly inde-
structable. 
And indestructable was exactly what we 
needed at the moment. 
My six legs motored over chunks of gravel 
that, to my bug body, were the size of garbage 
trucks. Through cracks in the pavement that 
were like canyons. My complex eyes shattered 
the world around me into thousands of tiny im-
ages. But I couldn't stop to piece the picture to-
gether. The cockroach recognized light and dark. 
And it wanted dark. 
WOOOOMPH! WOOOOMPH! 
The ground quaked. 
Footsteps? The cockroach brain didn't have 
time to wonder. It just propelled my legs. Out of 
the light. Into the shadow. 
Darkness! Yes! 
I was under the limo. My nerve cells relaxed. 
The roach brain released its grip on the crunchy 
little roach body. But only for a second. 
WHAM! 
I didn't hear the noise as much as feel it. The 
roach's body reacted before my human brain had 
time to register what the sound meant. I shot 
toward the darkest corner of the shadow. 
Ax and Tobias darted behind me. We quivered 
in the dark. 
<Car door?> Tobias. 
76 
<That would be my guess,> I said. 
WHAM! WHAM! 
I jumped. Squeezed into a crack, a corner 
between the pavement and something big and 
dark rising up from it. Ax and Tobias huddled be-
side me. 
<lf those are car doors,> Ax said, <three of 
them have now closed. Which means — > 
The air exploded around us. Noise. Vibration. 
Heat. 
<lt means the driver started the car,> I said. 
<Let's go! Move, move!> 
I scuttled up the vibrating black hulk that 
towered above me. A rear tire. I climbed, the 
claws on my feet like spikes gripping into the 
rubber. 
Up. Over. My feet hit metal. And something 
else. Thick. Sticky. Axle grease. I slogged 
through it, six tiny feet dragged down with every 
step. I had to get across it. Had to get to some 
nonmoving part on the underside of the car. Had 
to find a safe place to — 
<AAAAAAAAAAH H HHHHHHHH!> 
The axle began to move. It was turning. Pick-
ing up speed. I clung to it, my feet mired in goo. 
The axle spun round and round. Faster and 
faster. Like a washing machine on spin dry. 
<AAAAAAAAAAH HHHHHHHHH!> 
Another scream. Not me this time. 
77 

<Tobias?> 
<l'm still on the tire. In a crack in the tread. I 
think I'm upside down now. No, right side up. 
No, upside down. Aaaaaaahhhhhhh. Do cock-
roaches hurrrrrlllll?> 
Now that was a good question. 
<ls Ax with you?> I said. 
<No, I am over here. I do not know where over 
here is exactly, but it is hot. Very hot. And it is 
getting hotter. Eeeeee-YOWWWWWWWWWW!> 
The limo hurtled down the drive. It probably 
wasn't going more than twenty miles an hour, but 
when you're half an inch long, twenty miles an 
hour might as well be the speed of light. Boul-
ders of gravel pummeled me. The axle spun. The 
limo jounced up and down over the bumps in the 
driveway. 
And every hair on my cockroach body 
screamed: GET OUT. TOO MUCH MOVEMENT. 
TOO MUCH DANGER. RUN! 
But my human brain told me to hang on. 
Hunker down in the grease and wait until it was 
safe to move. 
The spinning and bouncing slowed. The limo 
rolled to a stop. 
<We must be at the gate,> I said. <You've 
gotta get off the tire, Tobias.> 
<Uh, yeah. Tell the driver. He stopped with 
78 
me on the bottom. I'm wedged between rubber 
and pavement.> 
The limo edged forward. Stopped again. I 
heard a whirring noise. 
<He's waiting for the gate to open,> I said. 
<Can you move, Tobias?> 
<l already have.> He sidled up beside me in 
the grease. 
Another cockroach — Ax — crawled up be-
hind him. <The bottoms of my feet are numb. I 
may have fried them completely off.> 
<Let's go,> I said. <We don't have much 
time.> 
I scurried along the axle. Ax and Tobias fol-
lowed. My antennae hit a thick rubber-coated 
wire hanging down from the underside of the 
limo. I gripped it with my front claws and scram-
bled up. Ax followed. 
The limo started to roll. The wire swayed. To-
bias lunged for it. Caught Ax's back legs instead 
and hung on. 
The limo picked up speed. 
<l have a bad feeling about this,> said To-
bias. 
<We're cool,> I said. <We're cockroaches, re-
member? Indestructable. Our hearts can stop 
beating, and we won't die. Our heads can get 
chopped off, and we still won't die. Well, at least 
79 

not for a week or so, anyway, until we waste away 
from thirst and starvation because we don't have 
a mouths. But hey, that gives us plenty of time to 
demorph.> 
The car swerved. Thumped through a pothole. 
Our cockroach bodies banged against the under-
belly of the limo. Tobias was still hanging from 
Ax's back legs. 
<AAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHH!> 
We swung back. Banged again. I lost my grip. 
Twirled around the wire by one leg. 
<Forget our hearts and our heads,> Tobias 
croaked. <lf our guts get squashed all over the 
pavement, it's pretty much over.> 
80 
r 
CHAPTER 15 
I swung around. Snagged the wire with a 
second leg. And a third. Pulled my remaining 
legs in and around. 
Ax hung on below me. Tobias scrambled over 
Ax's back and grasped onto the wire between us. 
We clung to it as we shot down the highway at 
sixty-five miles an hour. Rocks pelted us. Mud 
puddles drenched us. 
Thud-thud-thud-thud. Thud-thud-thud-thud. 
The limo thundered through potholes and 
bumped over metal plates and asphalt patches. 
We swung from the rubber wire like suicidal 
trapeze artists. 
Thunk. 
81 

Banged against the limo above us. 
Crunch. 
And bounced against the axle below. 
<lf we get out of here alive,> I said, <l'm writ-
ing a letter to the highway department. These 
roads are terrible.> No one laughed. I guess it 
wasn't the time for a joke. 
The limo slowed again. Turned. Thudded over 
a speed bump and rolled to a stop. 
WHAM! 
<Car door,> I said. <We must be wherever 
we're going. Let's move.> 
I dropped to the asphalt. Motored to the edge 
of the shadow. 
<AAAAAAAAAAAAH H HHHHHHHH!> 
And was nearly speared by a lady's high heel. 
Another high heel extended from the limo and 
thumped to the pavement beside the first. The 
governor's wife? I darted toward the pair of heels 
before she could get away. Scrambled up. Clung 
to the soft leather as the high heels stepped away 
from the car. 
Suddenly, a man's leg shot from the limo. The 
governor? Two cockroaches scrambled across the 
asphalt, over the man's wing tip dress shoe, and 
up the ankle. Then dove into the cuff of the pant 
leg. 
The other leg emerged, and the Wing Tip es-
82 
corted the High Heel across the pavement and 
through a glistening glass door. 
They strode across a wide room. A hotel 
lobby? I hung on, my back end dipping down be-
tween thick rug fibers, then flying through the 
cool air every time High Heel took a step. 
<Wherever we are,> I said, <it's someplace 
nice. The carpet is cushy. And everything 
gleams. Brass, probably. Marble. Some kind of 
dark, polished wood.> 
A cockroach poked his head up from the cuff 
of Wing Tip's pant leg. Ax. <And everything 
smells lemony fresh.> 
Wing Tip and High Heel entered another 
room. Crowded. Noisy. Bright. I'd been in enough 
of them to guess it was a ballroom, the dance 
floor in the center, surrounded by tables. 
They wound their way through the crowd of 
people and stopped at a table at the front of the 
room. Wing Tip pulled out a chair for High Heel, 
then sat down next to her. A thick white table-
cloth draped itself around their legs. 
We sat there for a very long time. Human 
voices murmured and laughed. Dishes and silver-
ware clanked. High Heel crossed and uncrossed 
her legs several hundred times. Wing Tip 
dropped his spoon once. He leaned down to get 
it, and three cockroaches dove for cover. 
83 

<Ax, how long have we been in morph?> I 
said. 
Approximately ninety-seven minutes.> 
<Man. We're running out of time, and all 
these two want to do is eat dinner. Think we can 
demorph and remorph under the table without 
anybody noticing?> 
The clanks and murmurs quieted. A micro-
phone squealed, and a man's voice boomed 
through the room. I couldn't make out all the 
words. Something about being honored and wor-
thy cause and thank you all for coming. I heard 
clapping, then music erupted from the front of 
the room. 
High Heel pushed her chair back and strode 
past tables, chairs, waiters. Wing Tip followed. 
They left the cushy carpet and thumped across a 
wooden floor. 
High heel tapped her toe. Stepped forward. 
Back. Twirled. 
<WHOOOOOOOOOAAAAAA!> 
I twirled, too. By one leg. 
In. Out. Forward. Back. We spun round and 
round. I dug my claws into the leather and hung 
on. Other feet kicked and stomped around us, 
inches from my little cockroach head. I scram-
bled for shelter on the inside of the heel. 
The music ended. High Heel stopped spin-
ning. 
84 
<Finally,> I said. 
But High Heel stayed where she was. The or-
chestra began playing again. A slow song. She 
stepped closer to Wing Tip. Her feet swayed. 
Stayed closer to the ground. Other dancers' feet 
stayed closer to their own bodies. Away from me. 
Except Wing Tip's. His big, gunboats scuffed 
up against High Heel's gray pumps. Trounced on 
her toes. I hid on the inside of her heel, under 
her instep. About the fourth time he mashed her 
foot, she kicked his shin. I was starting to like 
this woman. 
Ax's head poked up from the tweed cuff. 
<One hundred and six minutes have passed.> 
<So, what, that gives us fourteen minutes?> I 
scanned the sea of legs around us. <We can't de-
morph on the dance floor.> 
Wing Tip trounced again. I dove for cover. 
High Heel gave him another swift kick, turned 
and strode away. She wove her way across the 
ballroom, through chairs and dessert carts. Wing 
Tip and two sets of men's plain black dress shoes 
followed. 
A door opened, and we entered another room. 
Smaller. Darker. Quieter. A conference room. The 
door closed, and both sets of black dress shoes 
positioned themselves in front of it. High Heel 
sat in the chair at the end of the long conference 
table. Wing Tip paced. 
85 

"I hate this," he said. "Smiling. Shaking 
hands. Begging for campaign contributions. 
Makes me feel like a dancing poodle." 
Campaign contributions? That's all I needed 
to hear. Wing Tip was definitely the governor. 
And it was show time. 
86 
CHAPTER 17 
Ax and Tobias stayed hidden in the tweed 
cuff. I crawled down the high heel and into the 
thick carpet under the conference table. 
I began todemorph. 
My roach body swelled. Up, then out. Like a 
crunchy brown beach ball. The shattered image 
of table legs and gray high heels smoothed into 
one unified picture as my compound roach eyes 
melded into two human eyes. 
<Governor.> My thought-speak rang out. 
<You might want to sit down. You're about to see 
something that will scare the pee out of you.> 
Silence. 
Then: "Who said that?" 
"I don't see anybody." 
87 

"Is there a microphone in here? Speakers?" 
A woman's voice. "I thought you said this 
room was secure, Frank." 
I dragged my bloated body across the carpet. 
Out from under the table, where I could see . . . 
and be seen. 
<Please be careful, M a r c o Ax's thought-
speak was no more than a whisper. 
As I grew, I kept a close eye on the people in 
the room. The dress shoes turned out to be two 
plainclothes security guys. Pistol handles bulged 
beneath their suit jackets. 
Wing Tip was tall. Distinguished. Like a TV 
news guy. Chiseled cheek bones. Aristocratic 
nose. Perfectly styled hair, fashionably gray at 
the temples. 
High Heel was just the opposite, short and 
plump. Everything about her was frumpy, lumpy, 
and gray. Her dress. Her shoes. Even her face. 
Everything but her eyes. Gray, yes. But a quick, 
intelligent gray. 
She turned those eyes on me. On the black 
lump of boy/insect growing from the carpet. 
And pulled back in horror. Maybe even revul-
sion. 
"Frank?" 
She spoke to Wing Tip, but kept her eyes on 
me. Watched four of my legs bulge into human 
88 
legs and arms, the other two shrivel away into 
nothing. 
Wing Tip followed her gaze. A strangled cry 
bubbled up from his throat. "Omigod." He 
grabbed one of the security guards by the arm 
and shoved him toward me. 
Both security guys stared. Reached for their 
guns. 
<Governor!> My sideways cockroach mouth 
melted into lips, teeth, and tongue. "Governor!" I 
was human now. I stepped toward Wing Tip, my 
hands in the air. "Tell them not to shoot. 
Please." 
"No. Don't shoot. Just watch him. Closely." 
It was an order. But it didn't come from Wing 
Tip. It came from High Heel. 
I turned. 
"I am the governor," she said. Her face was 
white, her body tense. But her eyes remained 
steady. "And who are you?" 
The governor? I stared at her. It didn't even 
occur to me that the governor could be a woman. 
<l won't tell Rachel if you won't,> said Tobias. 
"I — I'm an Animorph," I said. 
A sharp intake of breath. One of the security 
guards? I glanced toward the door, where the two 
of them stood in front of Wing Tip. Was one of 
them a Controller? Both of them? 
89 

The governor frowned. "Excuse me? An 
Ani—what?" 
"I'm one of the good guys." 
I still had my hands in the air. I lowered them. 
Slowly. Took a step toward her. Mustered up all 
my charm. My sincerity. My finesse. 
Click. Click. 
I heard the security guys release the safety 
catches on their pistols. I kept my eyes on the 
governor. 
"You have to believe me," I told her. "The en-
tire state — no, the entire planet — depends on 
it. And you're the only one who can help." 
The governor studied me. "Flattery, huh? 
Okay, I'm listening." 
I watched the security guards. The tall one 
stood open-mouthed. The pistol in his hand 
trembled. He clearly wanted to run screaming 
from the room. 
But the short one glared at me, his finger 
steady on the trigger of his gun. Hatred twisted 
his face. 
"That guard." I pointed at the short guy. 
"That guard is not going to follow your orders, 
Governor. He's going to shoot me. Then he'll 
probably shoot you, too. And your husband. And 
the other security guard." 
"Don't be ridiculous," said the governor. "His 
job is to protect me. He won't shoot you unless I 
90 
tell him to. Or unless you attack me. In fact, he'll 
take his itchy little finger off the trigger right 
now." She watched the short guard until he did 
as she said. "And Collins?" She looked at the 
other guard. "Make sure he keeps it off." 
Collins nodded. He backed up a step toward 
the door, obviously relieved to be watching an-
other security guard instead of the amazing 
Roach Boy. 
If he only knew the horror that was wrapped 
around Short Guy's brain. 
"Ax? Tobias?" I said. 
Two cockroaches crawled from Wing Tip's 
cuff, down his ankle, and over his shoe. One of 
the roaches began growing. The other turned 
blue, then it ballooned out, too. 
Quietly. Inconspicuously. Nobody noticed 
them at first, two enormous mutant insects half 
hidden behind Wing Tip's legs. Tobias's exoskele-
ton melted into his bulging body, and feathers 
popped out. Ax's claws turned into hands and 
Andalite hooves. 
Tobias spread his wings and flapped onto a 
lampshade in the corner of the room. 
"Oh!" Collins gawked. "But. . . where . . . ?" 
"A hawk?" The governor stared at him. Stared 
at me. Frowned. 
"Yes. A hawk!" Short Guy leveled his pistol at 
Tobias. 
91 

Then he saw Ax. Tall. Blue. Almost com-
pletely demorphed. 
"Andalite!" 
Short Guy whirled. Aimed. 
"NO!" 
I dove. Missed. Short Guy squeezed the trig-
ger. Collins knocked the pistol upward. 
BLAM! 
The paneling above Ax's head shattered. 
Fwap. 
Ax nailed Short Guy with his tail blade. Held 
him against the wall. 
Collins stared at Ax. "Who . . . wha . . . ?" 
<His firearm,> Ax ordered. 
Collins nodded. Pulled the pistol from Short 
Guy's hand. Backed away. 
Tromped on Wing Tip's foot. 
Wing Tip shoved him aside. "Idiot." He 
leaned down to rub the footprint from the top of 
his shoe. 
"Okay, now if everybody can stay calm, we've 
got a little story to tell." I looked at the governor. 
"It might take a while." 
The governor considered this for a moment. 
Studied me. Studied Ax. Studied Short Guy. 
She turned to Wing Tip. "Go back in to the 
ballroom. Make my apologies. Tell everyone I'm 
not feeling well. Assure them it's nothing serious. 
A cold or something." She glanced at me. Nar-
92 
rowed her eyes. "And Frank? Don't say anything 
else." 
Wing Tip nodded and slipped out the door. 
I watched him leave. He seemed so calm un-
der the circumstances. 
Yeah. Too calm. Any normal person would 
have been amazed, fascinated, creeped out. 
Wing Tip hadn't even been shocked by a full-
fledged Andalite. I glanced at Collins and the 
governor. They were still staring at Ax's stalk 
eyes, deadly tail and mouth less face. 
But Wing Tip had been more concerned with 
wiping Collins's footprint off his shoe. As if a 
four-legged alien were nothing unusual. Nothing 
new. 
Nothing he hadn't seen before. 
"Governor," \ said, "we have to move. Fast. 
Tobias? Firepower. Now." 
93 

CHAPTER 17 
Tobias swooped from the lampshade and 
landed on the carpet. Blades began to erupt from 
his feathers. 
I concentrated. Focused on the gorilla. 
Too late! 
The door burst open. Wing Tip barreled 
through, followed by four waiters wielding Dra-
con beams. 
"Hork-Bajir!" 
Wing Tip pointed at Tobias, now almost fully 
morphed. One of the Controllers leveled his Dra-
con at Tobias's leathery gut. Tobias dove. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
The conference table sizzled in two. Both 
halves dropped to the floor. 
94 
"Oh!" The governor stared at the smoldering 
wood. Then at her husband. "Frank! What are 
you — ?" 
A Controller grabbed her. 
Tobias vaulted over the pieces of the table. 
WHACK! 
Struck the Controller with his wrist blade. 
"AAAAAAAAAAH H H H H H H H!" 
The Controller screamed. Dropped the gover-
nor. Stared at his fingerless hand. 
The other Controllers charged. Tobias sliced. 
Ax's tail lashed out. 
FWAP! FWAP! 
I was fully morphed, fully gorilla now. I stormed 
through flying bullets, blades, and Dracon beams. 
Collins had crawled to the governor and was 
shielding her with his body. He held his pistol 
with both hands, aiming first at a Controller, then 
at Tobias, then at Ax, not sure what or who to 
shoot. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
"AAAAAAAAAHHHHHH!" 
Dracon fire seared Collins's shoulder. Blasted 
a hole in the wall behind him. 
<Go!> I told him. <NOW! There's nothing you 
can do here. Governor! Time to bail!> 
I wrapped one gorilla arm around her. 
Wing Tip reached for her. "Honey! Take my 
hand. I'll save you." 
95 

The governor grabbed a chair and swung it 
over her head. I thought she was aiming at me. I 
ducked. 
CRASH! 
Wing Tip crumpled to the floor. 
"Save me, huh?" she said with a frown. 
I leaped over Wing Tip's motionless body. 
<Let's go, let's go!> I yelled at Ax and Tobias. 
"Collins!" the governor cried. 
I turned. Collins lay on the carpet, stunned, 
his shoulder a lump of charred meat. 
I grabbed him in my free arm and leaped 
through the smoke and chaos. Charged through 
the door. Into the ballroom. Ax and Tobias 
bounded after me. 
"AAAAAAAA!" 
"Omigod!" 
Women screamed. Men screamed. Chairs, 
dishes, serving trays crashed to the floor as the 
well-dressed crowd scrambled for the doors. 
A waiter charged forward. Leveled a Dracon at 
the governor. 
"No!" Collins. 
He aimed his pistol. 
BLAM! 
"AAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHH!" 
The waiter fell, blood gushing from his thigh. 
Collins collapsed against me. I rolled him un-
96 
der a table. Pulled the heavy tablecloth down to 
hide him. 
<Stay here till the smoke clears,> I said. 
<Don't even try to be a h e r o 
"There! Get them!" 
Wing Tip's voice! I whirled. Controllers burst 
from the conference room. 
"Don't let them take the governor," yelled 
Wing Tip. "Kill her if you have to." 
The governor stared at him. "What is he say-
ing?" 
<Don't worry,> I said. <We'll get you out.> 
Wing Tip and his buddies charged from be-
hind. More Controllers streamed through the 
ballroom doors and beat their way through the 
fleeing crowd. 
<Service entranced Tobias directed. 
He bolted toward a tangle of waiters push-
ing through a small door at the front of the ball-
room. I knuckle-walked after him. Knocked over 
a huge coffee pot. Hurdled a dessert cart. Ax fol-
lowed. Across the dance floor. Around the or-
chestra pit. 
A Controller leaped from behind a bass drum. 
I grabbed a tuba. Shoved it over his head. 
Tobias reached the door, shoved the waiters 
aside and crashed through. I followed. Down a 
short hallway. Into the kitchen. 
97 

A state trooper and a guy in a chauffeur's uni-
form were sitting at a small table, munching 
party food and playing poker with the chef. 
Tobias vaulted over them. 
"Wha — ?" The trooper half rose from his 
chair. Fumbled with the holster of his pistol. 
I barreled past, the governor tucked under my 
arm. 
"Governor!" The chauffeur scrambled to his 
feet. "Where are you going, ma'am?" 
"I'm not sure," she called back. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
Dracon fire blasted through the kitchen. 
Fwap. Fwap-fwap. 
I heard Ax behind me, his hooves clicking on 
the tile floor, his tail striking again and again. 
We kept going. Around waiters, busboys, 
cooks. The pastry chef pulled a Dracon beam 
from his jacket and leveled it at the governor. 
She flattened him with a cutting board. 
We slammed through one set of doors. Then 
another. Finally, outside. Around a Dumpster. 
Across the loading dock. 
<Limo!> Tobias bounded toward the long 
black car parked by the dock, the same limo that 
had brought us here. <Doors unlocked. Keys in-
side! Oh come on. This is way too easy.> 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
98 
The concrete exploded beneath my feet. 
I swung over the side of the dock. Ripped 
open the back door of the limo. Dumped the gov-
ernor inside. 
<Sorry. I have better manners when Yeerks 
aren't shooting at me.> I jumped in after her. 
<Keep your head down.> 
Tobias squeezed into the driver's seat. 
Banged his wrist blade into the tinted window 
that divided-the front seat from the back. The 
glass shattered. 
<Ooops.> 
He folded his knees under the steering wheel, 
his arms around it. His neck was twisted over, 
the side of his leathery Hork-Bajir face crushed 
against the top of the limo. 
<Not comfy,> he said. 
But also not a problem for a guy with blades 
growing from his skull. 
Thump. Scuuuuurrrrr-UUUUNNNCH. 
He tore through the top of the limo like he 
was opening a tin can. <Sun roof.> 
He poked his head through the hole, cranked 
the key, and the limo revved to life. 
<Ax!> I yelled. <Let'sgo!> 
Ax downed two Controllers, clattered across 
the loading zone, and leaped into the backseat of 
the limo. I yanked the door shut. 
99 

<G0! GO! GO!> 
Tobias floored it. We screeched across the 
parking lot and into the street. 
We had now added yet another kidnapping to 
our crimes. 
100 
CHAPTER 18 
We squealed across four lanes of traffic. 
Thundered up over the curb on the other side. 
Dropped back down onto the pavement. Side-
swiped a delivery truck. In. Out. Around. Weaving 
through cars, trucks, SUVs. All I could see of To-
bias were his shoulders and elbows. His head jut-
ted up through the hole in the roof. 
I bounced along on the rear seat. Watched out 
the back and side windows, my gorilla skull 
thump-thump-thumping against the ceiling of 
the limo. The governor sat in the seat opposite, 
trying not to slide back and forth as the limo ca-
reened first left, then right. Her fingers dug into 
the leather armrest on the door beside her. 
Ax struggled to gain a foothold on the floor in 
101 

between the banks of seats. He gazed at the gov-
ernor. His Andalite eyes radiated warmth and . . . 
joy. 
Yes, joy. We were doing ninety in heavy traffic 
with clumsy Hork-Bajir hands at the wheel, and 
Ax looked like he'd just found the secret to inner 
peace. 
<Madam Governors He bowed low. Stretched 
his front leg out in front of him. His head nearly 
touched the floor. <l am Aximili-Esgarrouth-
Isthill, and I am honored to be in the presence of 
a great leader.> 
"A great leader?" The governor thumped 
against the side of the limo as Tobias screeched 
sideways into a bank parking lot. "Me?" 
Ax nodded. <l only regret that our meeting 
was not under less difficult circumstances.> 
Difficult. Yeah. Okay. Tobias plowed around 
the bank. Through the drive-up lane. 
Over a curb. For three full seconds, the limo 
was airborne — 
WOOOOMPH! 
— before slamming down onto a side street. 
Tobias screeched sideways and kept going. 
"Aaaahhhlllp!" The governor swallowed a 
scream. She managed to wrench her right hand 
free from the armrest and hold it out to Ax. 
He shook it, then bowed low again. <l will 
guard your life with my own.> 
102 
"Very reassuring," she said. 
The limo hurdled a median strip. 
The governor gripped the armrest. "I mean 
that sincerely, Aximili." 
<As do I, Governors 
<And Jake thought you were the one with 
charm, Marco,> Tobias said dryly. 
<Just keep your eyes on the road,> I said. 
<And I don't ever want to hear another word of 
criticism about my driving.> 
The limo skidded around a corner. Leveled a 
row of newspaper vending machines. 
A police siren! Red and blue lights flashed 
behind us. 
<Trouble,> I said. 
<You think?> Tobias. 
I turned. More sirens. More flashing red and 
blue lights ahead. Three, maybe four cars. 
Tobias jerked the wheel. We slid sideways into 
a pickup. Tobias gunned the engine, and we shot 
down an alley, the pickup's bumper trailing from 
ours. 
The limo thundered through potholes. Around 
Dumpsters. Shot across the next side street and 
into the alley in the next block. 
<Oh, man!> 
The brakes squealed. I plunged forward, then 
slammed back against the seat. Ax crashed into 
my lap. 
103 

"Ooomph." 
<Hey, watch the tail!> 
The limo had stopped nose to nose with a 
trash truck. The governor was sprawled on the 
floor. She struggled to pull herself back onto the 
seat. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
Dracon fire shattered the window next to 
where the she'd been sitting. Incinerated the 
headrest that had been behind her. 
<Stay down, Governor! On the floor!> 
She nodded. Stared up at the smoldering 
headrest. "No arguments here." 
She pulled her knees up to her chest, 
wrapped her skirt and her arms around them, 
and hunkered down between the seats. Her face 
had lost all color, but her eyes were still bright. 
Steady. 
Tobias threw the limo in reverse and started 
to back up. 
A police car turned into the alley behind us. 
BAM! BAM! 
Gunfire! 
Ax and I hit the deck again and crouched be-
side the governor. 
Tobias threw the limo in drive. We lurched 
forward. Squeezed past the trash truck. The right 
wheels thumped over the bottom two steps of a 
concrete stairway leading up to a loading dock. 
104 
SsscccuuurrrRRREEEEEEEEE. 
We scraped against the trash truck on one 
side, the loading dock on the other. 
And spit through into the alley beyond. A po-
lice car screamed into the narrow opening ahead. 
Came barreling toward us! 
Tobias gunned the engine. Sideswiped the 
police car and shot out into the street! 
Cranked the wheel. Dodged oncoming traffic. 
Sped the wrong way down the one-way street, 
warehouses towering above us on one side, the 
riverbank dropping away from us on the other, 
chased by an army of sirens and flashing lights. 
City police, county deputies, state troopers. 
Some of them were Controllers. Some proba-
bly weren't. But it didn't matter. As far as the 
non-Controllers were concerned, lunatic mon-
sters had kidnapped their governor. They were as 
determined as the Controllers to stop us. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
I looked up. A helicopter thundered overhead. 
I could see it through the sun roof. The real sun 
roof, not Tobias's emergency hatch. The pilot 
pitched the helicopter forward in a steep dive. 
Sunlight glinted off something in the passenger 
door. 
A Dracon beam. 
The governor saw it, too. 
"Time to ditch the limo," she said. "We're too 
105 

big. Too easy to spot. We'll have a better chance 
on foot." 
Good thinking. Behind those alert gray eyes 
lurked the brain of a combat general. 
<l know the perfect place,> said Tobias. <Get 
ready to bail.> 
An intersection loomed ahead. A main thor-
oughfare crossed our one-way street and led to a 
bridge. 
Tobias floored it and quickly turned the 
wheel. The limo skidded around the corner and 
hurtled onto the bridge. He slammed on the 
brakes and the limo screeched sideways. Plowed 
into a concrete pillar and lurched to a stop, 
blocking traffic from both directions. 
Cars honked. Skidded. Slammed into each 
other. 
Tobias dove from the driver's door. I threw the 
governor over Ax's back, flung the back door 
open, and we ran out into the chaos. 
106 
CHAPTER 19 
<Let's go, let's go!> 
Tobias bounded up over the hood of a sports 
car. I followed. Leaping from hood to roof to 
trunk. From car to truck to minivan. Over a jack-
knifed eighteen-wheeler. 
Ax stayed on the ground and galloped be-
tween the vehicles. The governor hugged his 
shoulders and squeezed her knees into his sides 
to keep from falling off. 
Police cars skidded onto the bridge behind 
us. Cops streamed from the cars and barricaded 
themselves behind the limo, weapons drawn. 
<Stay low!> I shouted. 
I leaped from the top of an SUV to the back of 
a jeep. 
107 

The jeep's driver climbed from the front. 
Stared at his crumpled bumper. Cursed, kicked 
his tire, and started punching numbers on his 
cell phone. 
I vaulted over him. 
He stared at me. "Oh my . . . oh my . . . 
AAAAAAAAAHHHH!" He tossed the phone to the 
road and sprinted toward the other end of the 
bridge. 
BAM!BAM! 
Bullets whizzed past. Bounced off steel and 
concrete. 
Drivers screamed and dove under their cars. 
I dropped and hugged the ground. Tobias 
crouched beside me. Ax skidded behind a UPS 
truck, the governor still on his back. 
A man's voice boomed out over bridge. "Hold 
your fire. HOLD. YOUR. FIRE. They've got the 
governor. And innocent motorists are trapped on 
that bridge." 
Thank God. The guy with the bullhorn was a 
legitimate, uninfested cop. With a brain. 
BAM! BAM BAM! 
But the Controllers obviously weren't taking 
orders from the sane guy. 
I walked between cars. Tobias followed and 
Ax, still carrying the governor, galloped behind. 
"They're getting away!" 
"After them!" 
108 
Cops swarmed over the limo. Raced across 
the bridge behind us. 
<Go go go!> I yelled. <We can make it. We're 
closer to the other end of the bridge than the 
cops are to us!> 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The helicopter was back. It hovered over the 
bridge, just above the tall suspension cables. 
More sirens! Flashing lights. Not from behind 
this time, but from in front. Police cars screamed 
onto the other end of the bridge. Cops leaped 
from the patrol cars. 
We dove for the pavement again. Crouched 
low between a Frito delivery truck and a TV repair 
van. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
The delivery truck exploded. Fritos rained 
down on us as we rolled under the van. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
A concrete pillar in front of the van shattered 
into dust. 
SSSCCCUUUURRRRENNNNCH. 
The steel beam it had been holding swayed. 
The suspension cable whipped through the air. 
" AAAAAAAAAH H H H H H H H!" 
The remaining motorists fled from their cars 
and ran screaming toward both ends of the 
bridge. 
I inched out from under the van. Raised my 
109 

head. Cops in front. Cops behind. Chopper over-
head. 
And below us, the river. 
A few barges in the distance. Some fishing 
boats. And a sailboat. Did I say sailboat? Make 
that a yacht, slowly cruising toward us. 
<You scared of heights, Governor?> I said. 
"As opposed to what? Bullets? Laser beams 
that vaporize solid concrete? A bridge that might 
collapse under me at any moment?" She shook 
her head. Took a deep breath. "Let's do it." 
"Let's do it?" A vision flashed into my head, 
the governor when she was a kid. She looked 
like . . . Rachel? 
I shook the image from my mind. <You heard 
the governor. Let's do it.> 
I pulled her from under the van and climbed 
onto the bridge rail. 
The yacht skimmed through the water. I could 
hear music and laughter. Could see people 
crowded on the deck. A party. 
The boat neared the bridge. Close. Closer. 
NOW! 
I wrapped one massive gorilla arm tight 
around the governor and leaped into space. 
110 
1 
CHAPTER 20 
We dropped. Straight down. 
The governor held on tight. She dug her fin-
gers into my fur and didn't even scream. Not 
even a whimper. 
I liked this lady. 
Down, down we fell. The yacht loomed larger 
and larger, I kept a tight grip on the governor with 
one arm. When we were close enough, I reached 
out with the other and grabbed the yacht's mast 
in my gorilla fist and hung on. 
The mast bowed, groaned, and bent almost 
double. The sail beat against me. My feet 
brushed the bow of the boat, then bounded into 
the air again as the mast sprang back and we 
swung over the cabin. 
111 

I spun around. Gripped the bottom of the 
mast with my fingerlike toes and held tight. 
The yacht slid under the bridge. The music 
and laughter continued. Party guests danced. 
Munched crackers. Refilled their drinks. They 
didn't even notice the gorilla hanging from the 
sail, clutching their governor in one arm like a 
rag doll. 
Didn't even notice the Hork-Bajir drop over 
the edge of the bridge above them. A strange, 
shrinking Hork-Bajir, sprouting feathers. Tobias. 
His blades shriveled. His serpent neck receded 
into his bird body. Just before he hit the water, 
his arms melted into wings. He flapped hard and 
just skimmed over the surface of the river. 
Ax dropped from the bridge behind him, his 
Andalite body sharply outlined against the set-
ting sun. He kicked. Flailed. 
Kuh-SPLAT! 
Belly-flopped into the river and sank. 
I waited. Saw nothing. No stalk eyes peaking 
above the surface. No tail blade slicing through 
the water. 
<Ax? Ax!> 
The governor scanned the river. "Can Aximili 
swim?" 
<Yeah.> 
We watched. Searched the waves. Still no Ax. 
"We have to do something," the governor 
112 
said. "The impact could have broken his legs. Or 
his ribs. Maybe knocked him unconscious!" 
<There!> Tobias tipped his wing. 
A dorsal fin broke the surface of the water and 
skimmed alongside the yacht. 
My heart started beating again. 
<Hey, Ax-man. Glad you could make it. He's 
fine,> I told the governor. I motioned toward the 
fin. <He morphed a shark.> 
"Morphed . . . a shark." The governor nod-
ded. "That's good. I think." 
The yacht had cleared the bridge and was 
sailing in open water. 
I slid down the mast, vaulted over the cabin 
and onto the top deck. 
"Wha — ?" The yacht's captain backed up. 
Stared at us. 
I leaped over the rail and onto the hors 
d'oeuvres table. Left a giant gorilla footprint in a 
bowl of bean dip. 
And landed in the middle of the party. 
" AAAAAAAAAH H H H H H H H!" 
The party guests screamed and scrambled to 
safety. A woman backed up against the railing 
and toppled, head over heels, into the river. 
"I can't swim! Somebody help. I can't swim!" 
Tobias swooped over the yacht, plucked a life 
jacket from the deck and tossed it out to her. She 
grabbed hold. 
113 

A dorsal fin broke the surface of the water be-
hind her as Ax nudged the woman to shore. 
All while cops raced from the bridge and 
along the banks. 
"There!" A Controller motioned to the heli-
copter. "On the boat!" 
The helicopter dove after us. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The downdraft from the rotors whipped the 
water into waves. The yacht pitched and rolled. 
The party-goers screamed even louder. 
Grabbed onto the railings and deck chairs to 
keep from being tossed overboard. 
The helicopter hovered now. A Controller 
leaned from the passenger door, weapon in hand. 
<Get down!> I screamed. <Everybody!> 
I dropped to the deck. Rolled the governor 
under a table. 
Tobias circled above. Zeroed in on the Con-
troller's outstretched arm and dove. 
The Controller spotted him. Beat him away 
with the Dracon beam. Then took quick aim. 
TSEEEEEWWW-ka-BLOOOOOOSH! 
"OH MY GOD! WHAT WAS THAT?" 
"ARE THEY CRAZY?" 
"HELP! SOMEBODY HELP US! PLEASE!" 
TSEEEEEWWW-ka-BLOOOOOOSH! 
Another shot! The water boiled. The yacht 
reeled. 
114 
The party-goers shrieked and scrambled to 
the back of the boat. Pushed each other aside 
and clambered over the railing and leaped into 
the water. Even the yacht's captain abandoned 
ship. He dove from the top deck into the river. 
It was madness. 
Police cars sped along the riverbanks, guns 
and Dracons blazing. 
Party-goers bobbed in the water, a sea of 
arms and legs, life jackets and fancy clothes, 
splashing and struggling toward shore. 
The captainless yacht spun wildly, forced 
downstream by the current. 
The governor crawled from under the wet bar. 
<No!> I said. <Stay down.> 
"Somebody has to pilot this boat. We'll cap-
size. Or run aground. We're too close to shore." 
<Oh. Okay.> 
The governor climbed up onto the second 
deck and grabbed the wheel. The boat stopped 
spinning. The bow straightened and turned. We 
headed toward open river. 
The helicopter banked and circled for another 
shot. 
On deck I grabbed pitchers and margarita 
glasses and hurled them at the helicopter. 
Specifically, at the Controller with the Dracon. 
Hey, you use what weapons you have. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
115 

A deck chair disintegrated. 
I flung a bottle. It clanked off the glass bub-
ble in front of the pilot. The chopper dipped and 
rocked. 
Then it straightened and pitched forward in a 
steep dive. 
THWOK! THWOK! THWOK! 
The helicopter hovered now only a few feet 
above my head. The noise was deafening. The 
downdraft churned the water and whipped chairs 
and life preservers around the deck. I held tight 
to the railing to steady myself as the boat pitched 
and rocked. 
The Controller leaned from the helicopter and 
steadied his Dracon against the hull. 
Tobias! I saw him flap to gain altitude. Turn. 
Dive! 
Too late! 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
Ka-BOOM! 
The bow of the yacht exploded. 
116 
Chunks of fiberglass pelted my hide. Smoke 
burned my nose and lungs. 
I coughed. Brushed debris from my face. 
<Governor?> 
No answer. The yacht tipped. The bow 
glugged then slipped beneath the waves. The 
stern shot from the water into the air. 
I wedged my feet against the wet bar to keep 
from sliding toward the bow. Pulled my face level 
with the top deck. The wheel was already sub-
merged, a gaping hole blown into the deck be-
neath it. Water lapped at the shattered wood and 
poured into the cabin below. 
<Governor!> 
<Marco! Watch out!> 
117 
CHAPTER 21 

I turned. Tobias hurtled toward the helicopter. 
The Controller leaned from the door, Dracon 
beam leveled at the sinking boat. At me. 
Tobias zeroed in. Raked his talons forward. 
Nailed him! 
The Dracon plummeted toward the river. 
Tobias dove. Nabbed the Dracon beam in 
midair and lobbed it to me. 
I gripped it in one gorilla hand. Raised my 
arm. Aimed. The pilot saw me and his face 
twisted in terror. The helicopter whipped up and 
around. 
And jetted away. 
I waited until he was down river, away from 
the yacht. Then I held my arm steady and 
squeezed the trigger. 
TSSSSEEEEEEEEWWWWWWW! 
Ka-BOOOOOOM! 
The helicopter burst into flames. Thick black 
smoke rolled over the river. 
I hurled the Dracon beam into the water. 
<Gotta bail, Marco.> Tobias swooped over-
head. <Let's go, let's go!> 
<You go,> I shouted. <You and Ax. I have to 
find the governor!> 
I climbed over the wet bar. Ripped the cabin 
door open and crawled inside. Waded into the 
murky water that filled the cabin. 
118 
The governor had fallen through from the 
deck above. She was slumped facedown across a 
table, submerged to her waist. Her gray dress 
floated around her. Her wet gray curls lay plas-
tered against her skull. I turned her over. Blood 
streamed from a gash on her forehead. 
<Governor.> I felt for a pulse. <Can you 
hear me?> 
Her eyelids flickered. She nodded weakly. 
"I'll be okay." 
I pulled her from the water, hoisted her onto 
my back, and climbed from the submerged 
cabin. 
The yacht listed sharply now, the stern stand-
ing nearly straight in the air. The wreck of the he-
licopter burned downriver. Black, choking smoke 
engulfed us. 
<Marco!> Ax circled the sinking yacht. <We 
are seriously running out of time.> 
<They're bringing in speedboats,> said To-
bias. <l can see them on the highway. Let's go!> 
I lay the governor over the wet bar. She gripped 
the rail behind her and struggled to sit up. 
I was already demorping. Gorilla hands 
shrank to human hands. Gorilla fur melted into 
human skin. 
The boat groaned. Water crept over my an-
kles. My knees. 
119 

My jaw pushed back and my nose pushed for-
ward. Arms shrank. Legs grew. I stood upright. I 
was human. 
But I wasn't finished. 
"Governor." My face shot out into a bot-
tlenose. "How do you feel about marine mam-
mals?" 
The governor stared at the fin growing from 
my back. "Well, I wouldn't marry one." She man-
aged a weak smile. 
My head and neck melted into one stream-
lined unit. Legs fused into a tail. Arms shrank to 
flippers. Two hundred extra teeth erupted from 
my jaws. 
The water edged over the cabin door and 
lapped at the wet bar. The governor climbed onto 
the back rail. 
Tobias swooped overhead. <Ticktock, Marco. 
Ticktock.> 
My skin thickened and faded to a light bluish 
gray. Finally, I flopped into the water. I was a dol-
phin. 
I floated above the sinking yacht. The gov-
ernor straddled my back and held tight to my 
dorsal fin. Together we slid through the water, 
through the smoke and confusion of the heli-
copter blast. 
And the yacht sank into the river. 
120 
CHAPTER 22 
The governor stared at me. "Parasitic aliens 
are invading Earth." She kept her voice even. 
"And my husband is controlled by one." 
I nodded. "Yeah. Basically, that's the story." 
"Thank God." She sank back into her leather 
chair and ran her hand through her damp gray 
curls. "I was beginning to think something 
much, much worse was happening. Aliens we 
can fight." 
She refilled her coffee mug from the pot on 
her desk. We were in her office on the top floor of 
the governor's mansion. We'd bolted the door 
and shoved a heavy bookcase in front of it. Ax 
stood guard, tail poised. Tobias was perched on a 
windowsill, watching the back of the mansion. 
121 

Posted at the other window, watching the front, 
was Collins. 
Yes, Collins. 
We'd found him in the bathroom off the 
governor's office. He was crouched in the tub 
waiting for the governor to return, his charred 
shoulder wrapped in the shower curtain. Ax and I 
helped him out into the office, and the governor 
cleaned and bandaged the wound as best she 
could. 
Now she sat at her desk, slugging down cup 
after cup of coffee. She'd changed into sweats 
and a snazzy pair of Nikes. Her gray fund-raising 
dress lay in a soggy mound on the bathroom floor, 
and she'd lost her high heels somewhere be-
tween the limo and the yacht. She paged through 
her day planner and scribbled names and phone 
numbers on a pad. 
I sat across from her, studying a roster of Na-
tional Guard officers. I slid it across the desk. 
"Call every officer on this list," I said. "Some 
of them will be Controllers. Some won't. But if 
you can get enough non-Controllers to listen to 
you, Visser One's operation will collapse." 
<For now, anyway,> said Tobias. 
The governor nodded, picked up the phone, 
and punched in the number of the first name on 
the roster. General Sherman, the commander of 
the Army National Guard. 
122 
"I want all units to stand down," she told 
him. "Take no action whatsoever. None. Yes, 
that's a direct order. From your commander in 
chief, that's who." 
She slammed the phone down. 
<He resisted orders from his commander?> 
Ax glanced at me. <He must be a Controllers 
"Maybe. Maybe not," said the governor. "He's 
a cantankerous old coot who can't stand taking 
orders from a woman. He doesn't need an alien 
wrapped around his brain to make him hard to 
get along with. Okay, who's next?" She ran her 
finger down the roster. "The commander of the 
Air National Guard." 
She punched in the number and gave the air 
commander the same orders she'd given General 
Sherman. Then she phoned the next officer, and 
the next, making her way down the roster. 
I paced from window to window to bathroom 
to desk. Even fixed myself a cup of coffee, heavy 
on the sugar and nondairy creamer. 
"Ugh." 
It tasted like motor oil. Creamy, sweet motor 
oil. I shuddered and set the cup on the win-
dowsill. 
The governor hung up the phone. Ran her fin-
ger down the list to the next officer. And froze. 
"Lieutenant Colonel Larsen." She stared at 
the name. "His battalion just rolled back into 
123 

town this morning. They've been on a military ex-
ercise in the desert." A slow smile spread over 
her face. "For the past two weeks." 
"Two weeks?" I blinked. "That means—" 
<lt means we've got an entire battalion of cer-
tified Yeerk-free soldiers,> said Tobias. 
The governor nodded. "Roughly six hundred 
troops." 
"This is . . . this is great." I pushed the 
phone toward her. "Call him. Tell him to keep his 
troops together. Have them bunker down some-
place where the Yeerks can't get to them." 
"I think I know just the place." 
She took the phone from me and punched in 
a number. 
"Colonel Larsen?" she said. "This is the gov-
ernor. And I've got a little emergency." 
The call took about a minute and a half. The 
governor told the lieutenant colonel what she 
needed, and the lieutenant colonel's voice boomed 
back through the receiver. "Yes, Ma'am." 
She hung up. "We're converting the grounds 
of the governor's mansion into temporary head-
quarters. Colonel Larsen's battalion can set up 
camp on the lawn." She shook her head. "My 
gardener's going to have a stroke." 
The governor ran her finger down the list and 
punched in the next number. She called every of-
ficer on the roster, then pushed the phone aside. 
124 
"Well. I guess that's it. We've done everything we 
can do." 
"Not quite," I said. "You're a target now. You 
need some personal security. Bodyguards." 
"I've got Collins," said the governor. 
"That's good, and no offense, Collins." I shot 
him an apologetic smile. "But —" 
"But one security guard with a bad shoulder 
isn't gonna do it," he said. "I'll do everything I 
can, Governor. You know that. But you need more 
people." 
I nodded. Looked at the governor. "Can you 
think of anybody else? Somebody you can count 
on? Somebody who can keep you safe? Is there 
anyone that you know for sure has been far away, 
maybe even out of the country, for more than 
three days?" 
The governor frowned. Rifled through her day 
planner. "Yes!" She tapped her finger on a page. 
"Major MacDonald. Deputy director of the state 
police. He just got back from a week-long Inter-
pol conference in Paris, and I think he took a 
couple of other officers with him." 
She picked up the phone, punched a number, 
and told MacDonald what she needed. 
"He's on his way," she said as she hung up. 
"He lives on this side of town, so it shouldn't 
take long." 
"I hope not," said Collins. 
125 

He pushed the heavy drapes aside so we 
could see. 
"We got company, Governor." 
Yes, we certainly did. 
A column of Humvees and military trucks 
were rolling up the highway. 
126 
CHAPTER 23 
The lead Humvee was about a mile away. The 
line of military vehicles behind it stretched over 
the next hill. 
"Any chance that's Colonel Larsen's battal-
ion?" I said. 
The governor shook her head. "He hasn't had 
time to muster his troops. They won't be here for 
hours." She peered through the window. "Be-
sides, this unit's too small. I count six Humvees 
and eight trucks. Maybe a couple more at the 
back that we can't see. It's not big enough for a 
battalion." She frowned. "But I didn't order any 
other units to report here." 
Ax watched the convoy. <lf those troops are 
127 

not following the governor's orders, they must be 
following someone else's.> He turned his stalk 
eyes toward me. 
"Yeah," I said. "Visser One. Governor, we 
have to get you out of here. Fast. We'll go out the 
back. Use the river again." 
<Don't think so.> 
Tobias motioned his head toward the back 
window. Police boats patroled the river beneath 
the mansion. 
"Great." I stared at the boats. Then at the 
convoy. "There's gotta be a way out." 
A siren wailed. I turned. A police car 
screamed down the highway from the opposite 
direction, lights flashing. 
"Geez, Governor." Collins's voice edged 
toward panic. "They're coming at us from all 
sides." 
"No." I watched the police car speed toward 
us. "Not this one. The Yeerks wouldn't send one 
car by itself." 
The governor nodded. "MacDonald. It has to 
be MacDonald." 
<Let's hope he gets here before the Humvees 
do,> said Tobias. 
The convoy rolled down the highway, half a 
mile from the mansion. The police car hurtled 
toward it, a streak of red and blue. 
128 
The governor picked up the phone. Made one 
more call. This time to the guardhouse. 
"Open the gate," she said. "A state police car 
will be approaching in a matter of seconds. Let it 
through. Don't stop it. I repeat. Do not stop it. 
I've given the police officer clearance." 
The turnoff to the the governor's mansion lay 
in a dip between two hills. A Humvee topped the 
hill on the convoy side. The police car flew over 
the hill opposite. It streaked over the last stretch 
of highway and squealed into the turnoff, spray-
ing dust and gravel over the Humvee. 
Then the car shot through the open gate, bar-
reled up the drive, and skidded to a stop at the 
front entrance to the mansion. The doors banged 
open. Three officers leaped out. 
"That's him. The tall one." The governor 
pointed. "MacDonald." 
The officers bolted inside. Seconds later, 
footsteps thundered down the hall. We shoved 
the bookcase aside and unlocked the door. Mac-
Donald burst into the office, followed by the 
other two police officers. I bolted the door behind 
them. 
"Ma'am." MacDonald nodded at the gover-
nor. His gaze swept over the other occupants of 
the room. Me, your average good-looking kid. 
Collins, one shoulder inexpertly bandaged. The 
129 

hawk on the windowsill. MacDonald frowned and 
shook his head. 
And Ax. 
"Ahhh!" 
MacDonald reached for his pistol. 
"No!" The governor grabbed his arm. "This is 
Axi m i I i-Esgarrouth-lsth i 11. He's an Andalite. A 
friend." 
Ax stepped forward and bowed his head. Kept 
his stalk eyes on MacDonald's pistol and his tail 
blade poised. 
MacDonald narrowed his eyes. Studied Ax. 
His hand hovered near his holster. 
"I'll explain everything when we have more 
time," the governor said. "Right now you need to 
know that those troops —" She pointed out the 
window. The convoy was winding its way up 
through the canopy of trees lining the drive. 
"Those troops have been taken over by enemy 
forces. Extraterrestrial enemy forces. We must do 
everything we can to stop them." 
"Extraterrestrial?" MacDonald gaped at her. 
"Aliens? You've gotta be joking!" 
<She is not joking,> Ax said, slightly of-
fended. <My presence should prove that.> 
MacDonald considered this. Rubbed a hand 
over his face. "Aliens. Okay. So what do we do?" 
"The governor is our main concern right now," 
I said. "If we can get the Controllers, the aliens, 
130 
out of here, can you keep her safe until Colonel 
Larsen's battalion arrives?" 
"Yeah," MacDonald said. "Not a problem." 
"Good." I turned to the governor. "I can't tell 
you where we're staying. You won't be able to 
contact us, but we'll contact you. Soon." 
"How?" she asked. 
"I'm not sure. But we'll find a way. We al-
ways do." 
<We haven't thought through this superhero 
business very well.> Tobias flapped down from 
the windowsill. 
MacDonald stared at him. "That bird did not 
talk," he muttered. "That bird did not talk." 
Ax took the governor's hand and bowed low. 
<lt has been an honor,> he said. 
"For me, too," she replied. 
I shook her hand next and held it for maybe a 
second too long. 
The governor's head bobbed. Her chin 
dropped to her chest. She almost seemed to doze 
off while leaning against her desk. I released her 
hand, and she blinked herself awake. 
"Oh!" She rubbed the circles under her eyes. 
"Guess the coffee's not working." 
"Don't worry about it," I said. "It's been a 
long day. Okay, I need to make a quick pit stop 
before we leave." 
I darted into the bathroom and gathered what 
131 

I needed. Then I strolled back into the office, my 
arms folded tightly across my chest. 
Armstrong unbolted the office door. "All 
clear," he said. 
Ax, Tobias, and I stepped into the hall. No-
body seemed to notice the soggy gray lump 
tucked under my shirt. 
132 
CHAPTER 24 
I pushed the front door open and strode out 
onto the porch. Alone. My damp dress clung to 
my legs. 
Hummers and National Guard trucks sur-
rounded the governor's mansion. Soldiers in 
camouflage fatigues hunkered down behind the 
governor's well-tended shrubs, weapons drawn. 
I peered out into an ocean of gun barrels. Pis-
tols, rifles, howitzers, Dracon beams. 
All pointing at me. 
I steeled myself. Flashed what I hoped was an 
elected-official smile. "It's lovely to see the 
young men and women of our armed forces gath-
ered here. However, I think—" 
I shivered. It was too weird. The governor's 
133 

voice coming from my body. Then I reminded 
myself. The body wasn't mine, either. 
It was the governor's. 
I'd acquired her DNA when I shook her hand, 
then morphed in the hall outside her office. Now 
I was standing barefoot on her front porch, wear-
ing her ragged fund-raising dress, trying to con-
vince lunatics with automatic weapons that I was 
the real thing. 
I cleared my throat. "As I was saying, I think 
we may have had a small miscommunication, be-
cause I don't have any National Guard events 
listed on my schedule. Could I speak to your 
commanding officer, please?" 
The door of one of the Hummers swung open. 
A man in crisply pressed fatigues climbed out. 
He was short and tan and built like a bulldog. He 
strode across the drive, sunlight glinting off his 
spit-polished boots. 
He stopped in front of me. His cold, hard eyes 
bored through my skull. "That's me," he said. 
"I'm in charge here." 
"Good." I nodded. Had to keep up the act. 
"Well, then, Col — Capt—" 
I frowned at the shiny gold eagles on his col-
lar. What rank did that make him? Colonel? Cap-
tain? Extreme Exhaulted Emperor? 
"Well, then . . . sir," I said. "I was not in-
134 
formed that a military exercise would be taking 
place on my front lawn today." 
His face twisted into a sneer. 
"This isn't an exercise," he said. "It's a well-
orchestrated operation, and it's proceeding bet-
ter than I could have dreamed. What is it the 
newspapers call you? Tough-minded? I thought 
our tough-minded governor would put up more of 
a fight. If I'd known it would be this easy, I 
wouldn't have brought so many friends." He 
swept one camouflaged arm toward the troops 
and trucks. "Seems like overkill, doesn't it?" 
His lips stretched across his teeth in a cold 
smile. 
And suddenly I knew. I was looking into the 
eyes of Visser One. He wasn't in the human 
morph he usually used, but it was him. 
I forced an indignant-governor frown onto my 
face. I couldn't let Visser One see that I recog-
nized him. That I knew what he was planning. 
That I was anything other than the governor of 
this state. 
"I have no idea what you're talking about," I 
said. 
"I'm sure you don't." He turned to the troops. 
"Corporal!" 
One of the soldiers scrambled forward. "Yes, 
sir." 
135 

"Would you escort our governor to her vehi-
cle?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"My vehicle?" I said. "But I'm not going any-
where." 
"Oh, but you are," said Visser One. He turned 
and strode toward the Humvee. "Someplace very 
special." 
The corporal grabbed me by the upper arm. 
"Watch it!" I started to jerk away. 
Keep up the act, Marco. Keep up the act. 
I took a breath. "Young man," I said, "you are 
hurting me." 
"Really? Good." The corporal hauled me 
across the driveway. 
The other troops began to pack up their 
weapons and load them into the trucks. They 
were getting ready to leave. 
I almost smiled. 
The corporal shoved me face first against a 
big canvas-covered transport truck. He twisted 
my arms behind my back and snapped handcuffs 
around my wrists. Two of his buddies dragged me 
to the back of the truck. 
Visser One's Humvee rumbled past. I watched 
it go. Scanned the drive. Were Ax and Tobias in 
place? I couldn't tell. 
The soldiers shoved me to the ground. The 
corporal pulled a rope from the back of the truck 
136 
and began winding it around my ankles. He 
wrenched each loop tight. The rope burned into 
my skin. 
These guys did not know how to treat a lady. 
"Owwww! What is your name, son? I demand 
to know your name, rank, and social security 
number. Uh, serial number. I'm suspending your 
pay as of this moment. You will be brought up on 
charges." I glared at the three soldiers. "All of 
you." 
"Oh, no." The corporal smirked. "Not 
charges!" 
"I'm trembling," said one of his buddies. 
"Look at me, I'm all a-flutter." 
Great. I got stuck with comedians. Lousy 
ones, too. 
The corporal finished tying my ankles to-
gether. His two buddies scrambled up into the 
back of the truck and held the canvas open. 
"I really don't understand you boys," I said. 
"I just don't understand what's going on here." 
"Don't worry. You will." The corporal lifted me 
over his shoulder. "You'll understand everything 
real soon." 
He heaved me headfirst into the back of the 
truck, climbed in after me, and snapped the can-
vas shut. 
We were on our way. 
137 

CHAPTER 25 
I lay on my stomach. I could see the floor, 
the toes of a Controller's boots, and a stack of 
ammunition crates in the corner. 
RRRRRRRrrrrrrmmmmmm. 
The truck roared to life. Shuddered as the 
driver shifted gears. 
RRRRRRRrrrrrrmmmmmm. 
The driver gave it gas. We lurched forward, 
stalled out, then lurched again. 
BAM! 
An ammo box banged to the floor. 
"Ooooooph." 
Somebody heavy landed on my back. 
The driver floored it, ground the gears, and we 
thundered down the drive. The truck bed rattled. 
138 
The canvas sides whipped in the wind. My face 
thumped against the cold metal floor. 
"Are these ropes and handcuffs really neces-
sary?" I said. 
I rolled to my side and swung my bound an-
kles around in front of me. My feet were purple 
and numb from lack of blood flow. 
"I'm not stupid," I said. "I won't try to es-
cape." 
I rocked, trying to get into a sitting position. 
Fell on my face and tried again. 
"I'm perfectly aware that a middle-aged, out-
of-shape woman is no match for three well-
trained — aah!" 
I sat up. 
And came face-to-face with the barrel of a ri-
fle. The corporal and his two buddies surrounded 
me, M-16s aimed at my head. 
"Oh, honestly," I said. "Aren't you boys going 
a bit overboard? As I said, I'm not in a position 
to —ulllmph." 
The corporal stuffed the corner of a filthy duf-
fle bag into my mouth. 
"Shut up already," he said. 
"Huuulph." I choked on loose threads, bits of 
grit, and something foul and sticky clinging to 
the fabric. An old Coke spill. 
I glared at my captors. They could've been 
clones. Same haircut. Same wardrobe, camou-
139 

flage fatigues and combat boots. Same sneer 
pasted across their faces. 
The only difference was the little collar pins 
that showed their rank. Like Visser One's gold ea-
gles, except these were dull black stripes. The 
corporal had two stripes. One of his buddies had 
one stripe. And the other didn't have any. 
Stripeless jabbed the barrel of his M-16 in my 
face. "What are you looking at?" 
"Ur-uuhl." I shrugged and shook my head. 
We rumbled down the drive. Sunlight filtered 
through the trees and flickered against the can-
vas roof. 
<They took the bait.> Tobias's thought-speak 
sounded strong. He was nearby. <They're all 
headed down the drive. Every last truck and 
Humvee.> 
I glanced up. A jagged shadow loomed above 
the canvas. 
Rrrrrrrrrriiiiiiip. 
The roof split open. 
Thummmp. 
And a Hork-Bajir dropped into the back of the 
truck. 
"Hey!" The corporal swung his rifle around. 
The Hork-Bajir — Tobias — lifted his knee 
blade. 
" AAAAAAAAAA AH H H H H H H H!" 
140 
The corporal's M-16 clattered to the bed of 
the truck. One Stripe dove for it. 
A second Hork-Bajir — Ax — dropped through 
the canvas. 
And pinned One Stripe's hands to the floor 
with his tyrannosaur feet. Ax doubled his leathery 
fist. 
WHAP! 
One Stripe was out cold. 
The corporal had dropped to his knees. Now 
he whirled. Lunged toward the fallen rifle. Tobias 
seized him in one clawed hand and jerked him 
into a stranglehold. Blood poured from the cor-
poral's arm. 
Stripeless had been slowly inching away from 
the fight. Now he jammed the muzzle of his rifle 
into my skull. "Let him go," he told Tobias, "or 
the governor here gets it." 
Ax and Tobias froze. 
The truck jolted as the driver shifted to a 
lower gear. We were approaching the end of the 
drive. 
"Are you deaf?" Stripeless screamed. "I said, 
LET HIM GO!" 
The truck shuddered to a crawl. 
I looked at Tobias. Caught his gaze and held 
it. Shook my head. Slowly, slightly, so Stripeless 
wouldn't see. 
141 

Tobias nodded. Tightened his death grip on 
the corporal. 
"You think I'm kidding? I'm not!" Stripeless 
jabbed my head for emphasis. "You either let 
him—" 
The truck lurched. 
"AAH!" 
Stripeless tumbled backward, slammed into 
an ammo box, and slumped to the bed of the 
truck, unconscious. 
<They could all use a little nap,> said Tobias. 
<They're a little cranky.> 
He doubled his fist. 
WHAP! 
The corporal dropped to the floor. 
Ax and Tobias rolled the Controllers together 
in a heap. Then they gathered the M-16s and be-
gan hacking the barrels off with their wrist 
blades. 
I thumped my feet on the floor. "Uh-ur-ulph." 
Tobias turned. <Did you say something, 
Marco?> 
"Uh-ur-ulph. UH. UR. ULPH!" 
Ax looked at me. Tilted his head. <l believe 
Marco is trying to tell us that while he is ex-
tremely happy to see us, he enjoys being trussed 
up, and could we please not remove the filthy 
satchel from his mouth, as he finds it quite 
tasty. > 
142 
Oh, good. Ax picks now to finally get human 
sarcasm. 
<Yeah.> Tobias nodded. <That's what I 
thought he said.> 
I banged my feet again. "Uh-uhl-ur-ULUPH!" 
<Okay, okay. Don't get your skirt in a wad.> 
Tobias pulled the duffle bag from my mouth. 
"Uuuuh." I wiggled my jaw. My mouth felt 
like sandpaper. "Thank you. Now, can you do 
something about the handcuffs?" 
Tobias turned me around. 
WHACK. 
One wrist fell free. 
WHACK. 
Then the other. The handcuffs clanked to the 
floor. 
I untied my feet and helped Ax and Tobias 
bind the Controllers together with the rope. 
I stood back. Pushed a wiry gray curl from my 
face and straightened my dress. 
We demorphed, then remorphed. Wings. To-
bias and I guarded the prisoners. Ax perched on 
an ammo box and played lookout. 
<We are approaching a tunnel,> he said. 
<Perfect.> I hopped up beside him. <Get 
ready. > 
The back of the truck grew dark. Three mal-
lards flew through the hole in the canvas and 
flapped toward home. 
143 

CHAPTER 26 
"Hey, look, Cassie!" I said. "You're a TV star." 
I pointed at the TV screen, where a wolf was 
leaping into a crowd of National Guard troops. 
The wolf growled, bared its teeth, and sank them 
into a burly soldier's butt. 
We were back home, in Ax's scoop in the 
Hork-Bajir valley. We were crowded around Ax's 
TV, watching news footage of last night's battle. 
Jake and the others — Group One — had dis-
covered the main Yeerk headquarters for troop 
infestation. When the Animorphs showed up, 
Controllers were herding hundreds of National 
Guard soldiers at gunpoint toward a temporary 
Yeerk pool. 
Jake, Rachel, Cassie, and James's group, 
144 
along with a few of Toby's finest fighters, at-
tacked. The battle quickly became bloody and 
desperate, and Group One realized they were los-
ing. Badly. But they knew they couldn't give up. 
They couldn't bail and let hundreds of soldiers 
become infested with Yeerks. 
Sometime after midnight, another National 
Guard unit made an appearance. The colonel in 
charge ordered the Yeerk commander to free the 
uninfested troops and surrender. When the Yeerk 
commander didn't, the colonel and his unit at-
tacked. Again the battle was bloody and desper-
ate, but the colonel had seen battle before, and 
he knew how to win. He hadn't stopped Visser 
One last night. But he had definitely slowed him 
down. 
Ax flipped from a local channel to CNN. 
"Hey, go back," said Jake. "I want to see 
that." 
Ax clicked back to the local channel. A blond 
reporter was interviewing a grim-looking military 
officer on the steps outside the governor's man-
sion. 
"That's him." Jake pointed at the screen. 
"The guy who kicked butt last night." 
Ax turned up the volume. The interview was 
almost over. 
". . . thank you for that detailed account, 
Colonel Larsen." 
145 

"Colonel Larsen? That's the governor's guy," I 
said. "The one who just got back from two weeks 
in the desert." 
The reporter turned to the camera. 
"That was Lieutenant Colonel Jacob P. 
Larsen, the newly appointed head of our state 
National Guard, giving us a chilling account of 
last night's violent clashes within National Guard 
ranks. Back to you, Dave." 
The camera switched to the news anchor. He 
flashed a TV-news-guy smile. 
"Thank you, Patricia. In a related story, the 
governor got a bit of a scare yesterday afternoon. 
During a fundraiser at the Ambassador Hotel, she 
was kidnapped by three suspects who, witnesses 
say, were wearing Halloween costumes. News 
Channel Five brings you exclusive footage of this 
bizarre incident." 
Dave's image was replaced by that of a limou-
sine screeching from a parking lot, a leathery ser-
pent head poking through the limo's roof. Then 
the camera switched to a scene of the governor 
galloping along a bridge on the back of a furry, 
blue, four-legged creature. A gorilla and another 
creature — the one with the serpent head — 
leaped over stalled cars and wrecked delivery 
trucks while police officers gave chase. 
The newscast ended with footage of a heli-
146 
copter explosion and a slow-mo shot of a yacht 
sinking into the river. 
"So." Jake looked at me. "You kept it all 
pretty quiet, huh?" 
"Hey, we were showing a little finesse there," 
I said. 
<Yeah,> said Tobias. 
"Hey, guys, quiet," said Cassie. "I want to 
hear this." 
She leaned forward and turned up the volume. 
An announcer's voice blared from the TV. "We in-
terrupt your regularly scheduled program to bring 
you late-breaking news from the capitol." 
The picture went fuzzy for a second, then fo-
cused on Patricia, the blond reporter, talking to a 
plump gray-haired woman. 
<lt is our governors said Ax. 
Rachel stared at the TV. "She's a woman." 
"Well, yeah, she's a woman, Rachel." I 
glanced at Tobias. "You didn't know that?" 
Rachel was too impressed with the governor 
to be annoyed with me. "This is so cool. The 
highest elected official in our state is a woman." 
She peered at the screen. 
The camera zoomed in on the governor. Her 
hair was a mess, her face pale. She was wearing 
the same sweats she'd had on yesterday, only 
now they were a lot more rumpled. 
147 

But when she looked into the camera, her 
steady gray eyes were still bright. Still focused. 
Patricia pushed a microphone into her face, 
and the governor began to speak. 
"I won't beat around the bush," she said. "I 
have declared a state of emergency. I repeat: a 
state of emergency. This is not martial law. Our 
police, and even our National Guard forces, can-
not be trusted." She glanced at the reporter. 
"The news media cannot be trusted. You may not 
even be able to trust your friends or your own 
family." 
She explained about Yeerks. About how, like 
an invisible disease, they have been infesting 
and slowly taking over the population. 
"I know this sounds fantastic," she said. 
"Like something out of Hollywood. But by now 
you've seen the news footage. You know what I'm 
telling you is true. Our state, our nation, our en-
tire world is under attack. But we are already 
fighting back. I have requested help from Wash-
ington, and the president has agreed to send 
U.S. troops." 
"U.S. troops," I said. "It's what we've wanted 
from the beginning. Why am I not ecstatic?" 
<How can you get ecstatic about all-out 
global war?> Tobias said. 
The governor shuffled her notes. Looked into 
the camera again. "This is not the time for 
148 
panic," she said. "It is the time for each of us to 
reach into our souls and pull out the courage we 
may not even know we possess. Our enemy is 
strong. But we are stronger, because we are fight-
ing for our lives and our freedom. For our very 
existence." 
"Thank you, Governor." The camera switched 
to Patricia. 
Ax clicked off the TV. We sat in silence, star-
ing at the blank screen. 
149 
OCRed By Arpit Nathany 

