
The author wishes to thank Ellen Geroux for her 
assistance in preparing this manuscript. 
For Michael and Jake 
Cover illustration by David B. Mattingly 
Art Direction/Design by Karen Hudson/Ursula Albano 
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this 
book is stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the 
publisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has received any pay-
ment for this "stripped book." 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in part, or stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permis-
sion of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write to 
Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 555 Broadway, 
New York, NY 10012. 
ISBN 0-439-11519-1 
Copyright © 2000 by Katherine Applegate. 
All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Inc. 
SCHOLASTIC, APPLE PAPERBACKS, ANIMORPHS and associated logos 
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc. 
1 2 1 1 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
0 1 2 3 4 
5/0 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
First Scholastic printing, September 2000 
m. 
ly name is Marco. 
And I am to cuisine what Sammy Sosa is to 
baseball. 
When it's my night to make dinner, I don't or-
der in. I don't crack open a can of Chef Boyardee 
and call that a meal. Please. 
I go the extra mile. 
I use the oven. 
I know. You're saying to yourself, "But, 
Marco, man, you're fighting a war against alien 
invaders. You and your friends, you guys battle 
Yeerks twenty-four seven. How do you find the 
time to cook?!" 
It isn't easy. But with a little help from the 
1 

freezer aisle and a guy I know called Red Baron, 
it's a lot simpler than it could be. 
Plus, this particular night, I was trying to 
make my stepmom feel, well, glad that she'd 
married my dad. Even if I wasn't one hundred 
percent behind the whole thing, she made my 
dad happy. That's worth something. 
A car pulled into the driveway, a car door 
closed, heels clipped up the sidewalk. Nora, my 
stepmother. 
I threw three paper plates on the table, 
spread out some silverware, grabbed cups and 
a block of napkins. Nora doesn't go for paper 
plates, but hey, it wasn't her night to do the 
dishes. 
The door opened. I heard a sigh, the sound of 
a heavy bag dropped to the foyer floor. 
"Hey," I called. 
"Hey," Nora called back. "That faculty meet-
ing lasted far longer than it . . ." The smell of 
Red Baron's home cooking met her nostrils, no 
doubt. "Marco!" she cried, entering the kitchen. 
"You're really making dinner!" She glanced at 
the paper plates and decided not to comment. 
"You're the stepson of my dreams." 
The woman was a math teacher. I would never 
really understand her. And now she was going 
goopy on me. 
2 
I forced a smile. "Crazy, isn't it?" 
Another car pulled into the drive. Whistling, 
then rapid steps up the walk. 
I grabbed a few sodas from the fridge. 
The front door opened. Dad was all spring-in-
his-step, a big smile plastered across his face. 
His cheeks were flushed. He looked like he'd just 
struck oil. 
"Hello, family!" 
Okay, that was more enthusiasm than I wanted 
to see. And the word family, when applied to any-
one but me, Dad, and my real mom, would al-
ways sound very weird. To worsen the nausea, 
Dad pulled a bouquet of flowers from behind his 
back. 
They were not for me. 
I think there was a kiss. Maybe some mushy 
whispers. I don't know. I looked away. I see 
enough of the "power of love" between Jake and 
Cassie, and Rachel and Tobias. 
"What's the occasion?" Nora giggled like a 
middle-schooler and sat at the table. 
"Oh, nothing," Dad said, beaming at her from 
the chair opposite. "You're just the most wonder-
ful woman in the world." 
"I know better than that." Her adult voice 
reemerged as she set the flowers aside. "What's 
gotten into you?" 
3 

"Let's just say things are getting pretty excit-
ing at work. Taking those stock options could be 
the best thing that ever happened to us." 
The buzzer rang. I pulled the pizza from the 
oven and cut it up on a pizza board. 
"What's the big deal, Dad? We gonna be 
rich?" 
I heaped a cheese-dripping slice in front of 
him. 
"Well . . ." he said slowly, "what my team is 
working on may just be one of the greatest ad-
vances in human history." 
"An HBO descrambler?" 
"Marco, I'm serious. Discoveries like the one 
we just made make me want to see you do well in 
math." He looked knowingly at Nora. "Or at least 
pass an exam." 
"He's right. Mathematics is the language of 
nature. It's the universal language. Everything 
around us can be represented and understood 
through numbers." Nora's face had taken on a 
weird glow. I wondered how numbers could make 
anyone feel like that. 
The nightmare of my last algebra test flashed 
before my eyes. 
"Dad. Just tell us what you're working on." 
"I really shouldn't," he said suddenly. "It's 
secret. Top secret." 
Nora gave him a look. It worked. 
4 
"Okay," Dad said slowly. "If you promise not 
to say a word . . . and I mean to anybody . . . I 
guess I can give you the basics." 
He swallowed a bite of pizza, then pushed his 
plate aside so he could lean forward, elbows on 
the table. 
"We've discovered what could be thought of 
as a whole new dimension, yet not a dimension 
at all. It's sort of like . . . Marco, you've studied 
conic sections, haven't you?" 
When would I learn not to ask Dad to elabo-
rate? Engineers, like math teachers, have a way 
of waxing prolific about theoretical situations 
that put my feeble mind to sleep almost in-
stantly. Even faster than my math book. 
"Forget math class," Dad said, realizing that 
he was losing me. "You know what a cone looks 
like, right? Well, the surface of a cone is the 
two-dimensional analogue to the five-dimensional 
space we inhabit." 
I sighed and got up to get another slice. Dad 
grabbed my arm and made me sit down. 
"But a cone is three-dimensional," Nora cor-
rected. 
"Exactly. While the surface of the cone is two-
dimensional, the surface exists in three dimen-
sions." 
"Hmm." Nora seemed perplexed. 
"Yeah," I said even louder. "Hmmm." 
5 

"Let's just say things are getting pretty excit-
ing at work. Taking those stock options could be 
the best thing that ever happened to us." 
The buzzer rang. I pulled the pizza from the 
oven and cut it up on a pizza board. 
"What's the big deal, Dad? We gonna be 
rich?" 
I heaped a cheese-dripping slice in front of 
him. 
"Well . . ." he said slowly, "what my team is 
working on may just be one of the greatest ad-
vances in human history." 
"An HBOdescrambler?" 
"Marco, I'm serious. Discoveries like the one 
we just made make me want to see you do well in 
math." He looked knowingly at Nora. "Or at least 
pass an exam." 
"He's right. Mathematics is the language of 
nature. It's the universal language. Everything 
around us can be represented and understood 
through numbers." Nora's face had taken on a 
weird glow. I wondered how numbers could make 
anyone feel like that. 
The nightmare of my last algebra test flashed 
before my eyes. 
"Dad. Just tell us what you're working on." 
"I really shouldn't," he said suddenly. "It's 
secret. Top secret." 
Nora gave him a look. It worked. 
4 
"Okay," Dad said slowly. "If you promise not 
to say a word . . . and I mean to anybody . . . I 
guess I can give you the basics." 
He swallowed a bite of pizza, then pushed his 
plate aside so he could lean forward, elbows on 
the table. 
"We've discovered what could be thought of 
as a whole new dimension, yet not a dimension 
at all. It's sort of like . . . Marco, you've studied 
conic sections, haven't you?" 
When would I learn not to ask Dad to elabo-
rate? Engineers, like math teachers, have a way 
of waxing prolific about theoretical situations 
that put my feeble mind to sleep almost in-
stantly. Even faster than my math book. 
"Forget math class," Dad said, realizing that 
he was losing me. "You know what a cone looks 
like, right? Well, the surface of a cone is the 
two-dimensional analogue to the five-dimensional 
space we inhabit." 
I sighed and got up to get another slice. Dad 
grabbed my arm and made me sit down. 
"But a cone is three-dimensional," Nora cor-
rected. 
"Exactly. While the surface of the cone is two-
dimensional, the surface exists in three dimen-
sions." 
"Hmm." Nora seemed perplexed. 
"Yeah," I said even louder. "Hmmm." 
5 

"The cone contains a singularity," Dad in-
sisted. 
"A what?" 
"The place where all lines intersect. The place 
where you can head out in any direction, or in all 
directions at once. Where you can move in any 
direction without moving anywhere at all." 
"What does this cone have to do with your 
work?" Nora's puzzled look revealed that Dad 
had just surpassed her in geekitude. Which, un-
fortunately, only made him more determined to 
explain. 
"We live our lives on just one line on the 
cone, in a mere four dimensions, including time." 
I felt my eyes rolling up into my head. 
"We've been stuck on the surface of the cone 
all this time. When we want to go anywhere, we 
have to travel on the line. But now, imagine 
someone notices the singularity. A point with no 
size, no breadth, no extent. The physical repre-
sentation of nothingness. By itself, it's nothing. 
Yet it's the starting and ending place of every-
thing! A multiplier of real space!" 
"Cool," I said. "Look, I've got homework. Lots 
of math." I dumped my paper plate in the trash 
and walked into the living room. Flopped on the 
couch and picked up the remote. I'm an advo-
cate of the quick, pre-homework channel surf. 
6 
"What are you calling your discovery?" I 
heard Nora ask. 
"I don't really know," Dad said tentatively. 
"What can you call something that is nothing at 
all?" 
There wasn't anything on TV. An old Star Trek. 
A new Star Trek. My life was plenty sci-fi. How 
about some Real World? 
"What could you call it?" Dad continued. 
"Zero, I suppose. Zero-space." 

I almost swallowed a lung. 
I sprang up, looked over the couch, stared 
into the kitchen. 
ZERO-SPACE?! 
Nora glanced at me with alarm. "Marco, you 
okay?" 
I shut my gaping mouth. Forced myself to 
blink. 
Normal. Be normal. Act normal. 
"Fine . . . uh, yeah, urn, fine." 
I sat back down. My hands were shaking. My 
head was a rush of adrenaline. How had I missed 
it! He'd been describing Zero-space. For the past 
five minutes! How? 
8 
How! 
I grabbed the cordless and dialed Jake. 
"Hello?" he answered. 
"We have . . . " I said in a whisper, coughing 
between words to muffle the sound, "a situa-
tion." 
There was a pause. I heard a voice in the 
background, then Jake faking a laugh at one of 
Tom's wisecracks. Tom, his brother, a Controller. 
I waited. 
Finally, Jake mumbled, "Twenty minutes?" 
"Fine," I said, and hung up. 
Dad was still talking to Nora. "We're working 
on a way to communicate through the singularity. 
Normal matter is dimensional and in theory 
couldn't , pass through." 
News flash, Dad: My matter passes through 
the singularity several times a week. Every time I 
morph, my excess mass gets sucked into noth-
ingness. A bubble in time. 
Dad continued with unchecked enthusiasm. 
"But we've determined that certain elementary 
particles could pass through . . ." 
I couldn't keep my mouth shut. 
I had to know. 
If Dad was a Yeerk . . . well, it was simple. I 
would not lose two parents to the enemy. 
I would not. 
9 

"So, Dad," I called, striding back into the 
kitchen. "You can, like, talk to people through 
this thing?" 
"Precisely," he said. 
"How's that any better than a radio?" 
I watched his face, his eyes, closer than I 
ever have. If he was a Controller, I would see it. 
The Yeerk residue. The arrogance, the conceit. I 
i 
would see it. You couldn't fight an enemy this 
long and be helpless to sense its presence, to tell 
if there's a Yeerk slug wrapped around your own 
father's brain. 
Could you? 
"Marco," he said. "Communication through 
this singularity, through this Zero-space, would 
be instantaneous. Unlike light, for example, the 
communication would actually travel zero dis-
tance." Dad's eyes were bursting with excitement 
and wonderment. No evil, no mystery. 
"Just think!" he said. "We could talk to the 
farthest star in an instant, send information faster 
than the speed of light. No travel distance at 
all!" 
He smiled, certain he'd floored me and Nora 
both. 
"That's fascinating, honey." Her interest, earn-
est at first, now seemed mostly just polite. She 
took her bouquet to the sink and began to put 
the purple buds in water. I sat down in her chair. 
10 
"Dad," I said. "When you say you could send 
communications through this Zero-space thing, 
what do you mean? I mean, who would you con-
tact? I know there are some fossilized life-forms 
on Mars, but I don't think they're big on answer-
ing the phone." 
Dad rocked back in his chair. "Marco, you're 
a prisoner of your education. They teach you 
about the solar system. They give you a glimpse 
of the Milky Way. But do they ever suggest how 
much is really out there? How many very real 
chances there are that somewhere beyond our 
ability to scope, in a place so distant our bodies 
couldn't hope to live long enough to journey 
here, life thrive?'" 
He sounded so innocent. A Yeerk wouldn't let 
a host go on like that. It just wouldn't. 
"What language would you use for the com-
munication?" I probed. "If there's life out there, 
don't tell me they speak English." 
"We could try music," Dad answered easily. 
"Or math, the universal language." His eyes met 
Nora's in a look of tender affection. 
So pure. So un-Yeerk. 
But I needed proof. Proof that he was still just 
Dad and no one else. Hunches weren't good 
enough. 
"I should get back to the office," he said sud-
denly, standing up. I stood up next to him. 
11 

"Higher-ups say that if by the end of the week 
our team perfects this small device that could, 
theoretically, send and receive communications 
through Zero-space, we get to present our find-
ings at next month's conference. You two know 
what that means 
Dad grabbed me and Nora around our waists 
and tried to lift us into the air. Maybe he was a 
Controller. He'd never done that before. 
"It means an all-expenses-paid, bring-your-
family-along vacation at an amazing mountain 
resort. HBO for the boy. Pool time for the wife. 
Raiding the mini-bar for everyone! We can stay 
through the weekend. Skip town for five whole 
days!" 
"Five days?" I said. 
"If you'd rather go to school . . . " 
"No," I said quickly. "It's not that. I just 
thought . . . " I watched Dad's eyes. "You know, 
the plants. Five days. That's a long time without 
Miracle-Gro." 
It was a test. Dumb but necessary. If there 
was a Yeerk in Dad's brain, it wouldn't allow a 
trip of more than three days. The Kandrona ray 
feeding cycle is three days. Yeerks aren't flexible 
on that one. 
Dad looked at me like I was an idiot. 
"Do you understand what I'm saying? I'm go-
ing to pull you out of school. No conic sections. 
12 
No biology. My boy, the plants will survive five 
days." He squeezed Nora's hand. "I've gotta go." 
He stopped at the front door. Turned back to 
us. 
"You know what?" he said. "This Zero-space 
discovery? It's big. Really big. I don't think our 
lives will ever be the same." 
13 

<Impossible!> Ax exclaimed a second time. 
<There is no way human science can have made 
such a leap. This is the Yeerks at work.> 
"Why would Yeerks use humans to develop a 
capacity they already have? That's just weird." 
Rachel looked up from her math book. My ruth-
less fellow warrior. Rachel isn't content with the 
whole beauty thing. No, she has to have brains, 
too. She actually planned to pass the test we had 
the next day. 
We were at Cassie's barn, aka the Wildlife Re-
habilitation Center. The place was packed. Ver-
min of every size and description sprawled out 
in cages, some scratching, some cawing. Some 
silent, yet watching. 
14 
Ax wasn't in morph. I felt we were vulnerable 
here, just after dinnertime. 
"Are you sure we're safe, Cassie?" I said. She 
looked up from her math book. I tell you, it was a 
conspiracy. 
"You kidding?" Cassie said. "A PBS docu-
mentary on lemurs? A Dome ship could land on 
the lawn and my parents wouldn't even notice." 
Cassie's parents are vets, the only people I 
know who like animals — and animal documen-
taries— more than Cassie does. "Plus," she 
continued, nodding toward the red-tailed hawk 
perched in the hayloft, "we've got Tobias." 
<This Z-Space thing has to be a trap,> Tobias 
said, <A very elaborate trap > 
"Too elaborate," I shot back. "Do you really 
think the Yeerks would go to the trouble of plant-
ing the seed of Z-space technology in some pid-
dling human engineering firm? Then wait for 
humans to pick upon it? And wait even longer for 
nows of the development to leak out and reach 
US? That's slow and uncertain. Not Yeerk." 
"It could be simpler than we think," Jake said 
calmly, lowering himself onto a bale of hay. This 
war had aged my best friend in ways you couldn't 
really see. But you could definitely tell that in his 
mind he was no longer just a kid. None of us 
were. "Maybe there's no Z-space device at all. 
The Yeerks could have put out a rumor, knowing 
15 

it would draw the Andalite bandits like bees to 
honey." 
"A rumor?" Cassie said doubtfully. 
<lt has to be,> Ax declared. <There is simply 
no way that humans are on the verge of Zero-
space communications^ 
<lf human engineers are part of the Yeerk 
plan,> Tobias reasoned, <that means Marco's 
dad . . .> 
"No." I stood up and began to pace. "The 
Yeerks don't have my father. They don't. Sure, it 
looks bad. But he's not a Controller. I tested him. 
I told you." 
"Maybe he fooled you with that five-day trip 
stuff," Rachel said. "If he knew you were testing 
him, he would have played along. Outsmarted 
you at your own game." 
"No!" I said firmly, stopping in my tracks. 
"Look, maybe he's a dupe. Maybe he's an inno-
cent member of the Yeerkish team at the office. 
But he's not one of them. At least, not yet." 
But it suddenly struck me as absurd. He had to 
be next on the list. Where was he right that 
minute? At the office, like he'd told us? Or at the 
Yeerk pool? And why . . . why had they let him stay 
free this long? Did the Yeerks need a buffer, a gen-
uinely ignorant human to keep their cover strong? 
Or had they just been waiting for the right op-
portunity to seize and infest him? Like tonight. 
16 
<You must admit,> Ax said solemnly, <it is 
unlikely the Yeerks would set a trap, yet leave 
our member of their team uncontrolled. It would 
be an enormous security breach.> 
I felt Jake's eyes on me, then his hand on my 
shoulder. 
"How do we handle this, Marco? Your dad, 
your call." 
Jake is a diplomatic leader. He makes it a pol-
icy to ask for input. But what I really wanted right 
then was dictatorship. I wanted him to order us 
to save my father. 
"I don't know," I said instead. "What about a 
Itakeoul at Dad's office? He's there now." 
Jake glanced at Cassie. "Okay," he said. "A 
stakeout, starting now. Ax and Tobias, stick with 
Marco's dad until he leaves the office and gets 
home 
THAT'S when I realized why Jake had looked at 
Cassie Jake had asked her if she thought I could 
be trusted. He said it all in one quick glance. 
And she'd said no. 
They thought I was too close to this. Poor 
Marco was about to lose a second parent to the 
enemy. Of course he'd snap. 
"Marco," Jake continued, "you keep watch 
on the homefront. I'll check with Erek to see 
what he knows. We'll compare notes in the morn-

Ax morphed to northern harrier and flapped 
up toward Tobias. 
"I want to go with them," I said. "It's more 
likely the Yeerks will try to infest Dad away from 
home." 
"They'll take care of it," Jake said. "They 
don't have a stepmother waiting for them to 
come home. Nothing's gonna happen without 
you." 
Did he mean it? Something in his tone made 
me wonder. 
"You can't be sure of that, Jake. What if 
something does happen? I want to be there." 
"You will be. Just go home for now. Every-
thing's gonna be cool." He smiled, but it didn't 
reach his eyes. 
I walked out of the barn and started down the 
road. I didn't morph to bird. I wanted to walk as a 
kid. I wanted to pretend for just a minute that a 
kid was all I was. 
But my mind knew better. 
Jake, my oldest friend, didn't trust me to do 
the right thing when family was involved. 
I would show him he was wrong. 
18 
Brrrrrrring! 
I jolted from sleep like ,i SAC pilot at the 
alarm Ready to run to my plane . . . start up, 
take off fight! 
Wait No, it was the phone. And I was Marco, 
Hie kid who'd fallen asleep over his math book. 
I here w,is drool on the page. Gross. 
Brrrrrrring! 
I reached for the phone on my desk. I lifted it 
up and was about to say . . . 
"Hello?" Dad said in a groggy voice. We'd 
picked up at the same time. Dad hadn't noticed. 
"It's Jack, from work." 
"Jack. Hey. What can I do for you?" 
19 

The call was for Dad, who was home, alive, 
and in bed. I could hang up. Should hang up. I 
looked at my watch. Eleven P.M. Why was some-
one from work calling so late? 
"It's Russ," said the flat male voice. "There's 
been a car accident. Russ is dead." 
"Oh, God!" 
"Russ's wife is . . . she's hysterical, she's . . . 
you know what it's like. You lost a spouse. We 
thought you'd be best at comforting her. Can you 
swing by her place?" 
"Sure," Dad said. 
I hung up the phone. Heard Dad head down-
stairs, still on the line, getting the widow's ad-
dress. 
I'd met Russ at a company picnic a few years 
ago. I'd met his wife, too. My mind flashed to the 
night Mom disappeared, to the terror that wound 
around my heart when I realized she was never 
coming home. 
"Hmph," I said aloud. "Sad." 
I looked back at my math. Problem 8. I 
squinted at it. Totally incomprehensible no mat-
ter how you looked at it. Problem 9 . . . 
It hit me. A flash, a surge of insight. Puzzle 
pieces dropping into place. Not problem 9, but 
the phone call. 
A guy from work had been killed, a guy work-
ing on the Z-space project. A call late at night. A 
20 
voice on the phone saying, "We thought you'd be 
best at comforting her." 
We? 
"Oh, God!" 
I jumped up, flung open the bedroom door. 
The electric garage door banged lightly closed. 
Dad's car pulling out! 
No. 
He was driving into a trap and I hadn't lis-
tened long enough to get the address. 
I sailed down the stairs three at a time. 
Checked the notepad by the cordless. Nothing. 
The notepad on Dad's desk. Nothing again. 
Where was Russ's house? 
Where would "they" be waiting? 
His computer screen was still up — no screen-
saver. At the bottom was a minimized "window," 
the words Yahoo! Maps written inside. I grabbed 
the mouse and clicked. 
Bingo— 1366 Fairmont and a road map in 
case I planned to drive. I didn't. 
I was going to fly. But I had to call in backup 
first. 
I dialed Jake, punching numbers frantically 
as I walked toward the back door. 
"Hello?" It wasn't Jake. The voice was gruff 
and hoarse. It was Tom. 
I hung up instantly. The phone rang in my 
h.ind and before I could think, I answered. 
21 

"Who is this? You just called and hung up on 
me. Who is this!" Tom had finally discovered 
*69. 
I was shaken up, embarrassed. I pictured the 
Yeerk on the other end of the line. "It's Marco," I 
muttered. "I wanted to talk to Jake. Sorry." 
Tom grunted into the phone and hung up. 
So much for Jake. Who else was there? Ax, 
Tobias. They were back in the woods. Cassie's 
parents would be in the way. Rachel. 
I dialed. She picked up. 
"Do you want to hang out?" I said. Always 
speak in code. Always be careful. 
"Where?" 
"Thirteen sixty-six Fairmont." 
"When?" 
"Five minutes ago." 
"What we talked about earlier?" 
"Uh-huh." 
I set the phone down and headed for the door. 
I was glad Rachel was the one. If you think a sit-
uation could get ugly, you want Rachel on your 
side. 
"Marco?" Nora, standing half-asleep on the 
stairs. "Where's your father?" 
"Dad? He just ran to the store. Probably had a 
craving for Chunky Monkey. He'll be back soon." 
Nora considered for a moment, seemed to 
buy it, and went back to bed. 
22 
I headed out the door. I morphed to osprey in 
the backyard. It was dangerous, but it was dark. I 
started flapping hard before my wings had fully 
formed. 
Up and up and up. The streetlights reduced 
the night city to a simple grid. The Yahoo! map. 
I swooped down, lower and lower, until I spot-
ted Dad's car. 
Already there! 
I dove like a stunt plane. Demorphed in the 
bushes. 
Lights were on in the house's lower level. 
Dense, red curtains shielded the windows. Shad-
ows played on the fabric. Strange silhouettes, 
sudden movements. A struggle. 
Where was Rachel?! I edged toward the house, 
crawl-walking to keep my head below the hedge. 
I stopped at a side window. Pressed my face to a 
place where the curtain didn't quite meet the 
window's edge. 
"Ahhh!" A distorted voice from somewhere in 
the room. 
Two Hork-Bajir stood rigid guard. Beyond 
them, two human-Controllers wrestling my father 
Into a chair. . . tying him down . . . securing him 
next to a portable Yeerk pool! 
One of the men was Russ. The "dead" guy 
was alive. 
I ,stood up. Forget about caution and stealth 

and security. Forget about everything except Dad, 
instinct said. 
Still, I stood, immobile. Watched as one of 
the men pushed my father's head down to the 
edge of the tank. Dad struggled, a desperate 
paroxysm of terror. The man slapped him across 
the face. 
Dad kicked the pool. Fluid spilled over the 
edge, onto the carpet. 
I watched, fascinated. Was this real? Was this 
now? 
Then anger and hate reared up like demons 
inside of me. 
"This can't happen," I said quietly. "Not Dad. 
Not again . . ." 
Instinct ordered me to end the nightmare, 
lunge through the glass, destroy the Controllers, 
free my father. 
But you're an Animorph, my rational mind ar-
gued. A soldier. You have to let it happen. You 
can't save him now. Even temporary freedom 
would mean the end. The Yeerks won't stop till 
they find him. Find you. Your friends. You have to 
let it happen. It's the smart thing to do. The only 
thing to do. 
I watched. Dad's head was forced into the 
sludge. One eye sunk beneath the surface. The 
other fixed in horror on the slug that was swim-
ming closer. Closer. Closer. . . 
24 
Noooooo!" 
I raised a huge, black fist to break the glass. I 
had morphed, without realizing or willing it. 
Gorilla: my outward expression of an inner 
rage too great to contain. 
That was it. This was the end of smart. And 
the beginning of right. 
Crash! 
I broke the glass and pulled myself through 
the shattered window. A million sparkling frag-
ments rained to the floor. Cool night air rushed in 
behind me. The red curtains flapped frantically. 
Everyone froze. All eyes. On me. 
I seized the nearest object, a huge oak chair, 
and flung it out of my path. Gorilla arms are like 
25 

heavy machinery. You think, /'// move that, and it 
just happens. No straining. No effort. 
The chair smashed and splintered into a mir-
ror on the wall. This breaking glass thing, it was 
becoming my calling card. 
<Step away from the pool and you might not 
get hurt,> I bellowed. 
"Andalite," the "dead" man spat. 
The two Hork-Bajir guards lunged. Rushed for 
me around either side of the dark leather couch, 
leg blades shredding upholstery as they passed. 
I grabbed the closest weapon, the glass globe 
from a floor lamp. <Heads up!> I sneered, and 
threw the globe like a fast ball. One of the Hork-
Bajir fumbled it like a hot potato. Fell backward 
and hit his head on a table. These goons were not 
pro-ball material. 
<You. At the table. Get your head up!> I 
yelled to Dad, faking a voice deeper than my 
own. <Get it above the surface. Now!> 
I saw him tilt his neck, strain against an angry 
human hand. 
The base of the lamp was still in my fist, a 
long wrought-iron pole. 
Whack! Whack! Whack! 
I quickly struck the second Hork-Bajir in the 
knees, in the stomach, in the head. He fell to the 
ground. A thud, then a clatter. 
26 
I heaved the couch aside. 
My father yelled again. I turned to see his 
head slip back into the pool! Sludgy slime lap 
. gainst his cheek! 
And a Yeerk slug began to slither into his ear! 
<NO!> 
It was maybe the weirdest moment I'll ever 
live. In an instant, everything changed. Live ac-
tion became slow motion. I saw Dad's future in 
my hands. 
My hands alone. 
I charged forward, arm extended, hand out-
stretched. Slow . . . too slow! 
"Ahhhh!" 
Yes! I caught the slug's slippery back half in 
my massive fingers and yanked it out of my fa-
ther's head. Slapped it to the floor. 
The human-Controller backed off. I grabbed 
the chair in which my father was tied and slid it 
across the floor, into the wall. He cursed and 
kicked, still tied down. But he was free. That was 
all that mattered. 
I wrapped my hands around the edge of the 
mini-pool and heaved. 
A hundred gallons of Kandronal fluid slopped 
onto the floor. One solitary gray Yeerk floated 
away in the torrent. It knocked against the leg of 
.1 side table and was swept toward the glass patio 
27 

doors. Just as it was about to smack into the 
track at the base of the doors, I slid them open. 
The fluid drained quickly onto the deck outside. 
There was a soft splat as the Yeerk dropped 
over the edge. 
<The opposition has been crushed,> I said to 
the people who remained standing. I took a step 
toward them and what was left of their confi-
dence. They'd seen me take two Hork-Bajir out of 
commission. They knew I could rip their arms 
from their sockets. 
I took another step — and their expressions 
changed. They smiled with identical half-grins. It 
didn't make sense. Not until I realized they 
weren't looking at me. 
SSSSEEEWW! SSSSEEEWW! 
Twin blades screamed toward my neck! Two 
new Hork-Bajir! 
I ducked but the sabers grazed my head. I hit 
the floor. Scampered under the diningroom table. 
Both Hork-Bajir were right behind me. I shoved a 
chair in their path. One of them kicked it away. 
I dove for an overstuffed armchair, gripped 
the legs, and threw it behind me to block them. 
They fought with the cotton batting and foam 
just long enough for me to leap over the de-
stroyed couch and hoist it into the air! Turn it on 
them like a battering ram! 
28 
<Ahhhh!> 
I grunted. Heaved. 
I hoped Russ had homeowner's insurance. 
Ka-plash! Bam! 
I missed both Hork-Bajir, but made a bull's-
eye with the entertainment center. 
One of the Hork-Bajir began to laugh. At least 
I think that's what he was doing. 
I backed up and hit the wall. They stomped 
toward me, blades flying, beak-mouths open. 
Whoa. Seriously hazardous breath. 
I looked up. Down. Left, right. There had to 
be an escape route. Some domestic weapon I 
hadn't used! 
A Hork Bajir claw squeezed my neck and 
pushed me back. 
I gasped for air and tried punching for his 
stomach. Couldn't reach. My face scrunched up 
with pain, head started to swirl . . . 
<lt's been fun, boys,> I panted. <But now I 
have to go home.> 
They had exactly one second to think I was 
crazy. 
"Roooooaaaaarrrr!" 
Gigantic paws, armed with claws that can gut 
a salmon before you can say "lox," knocked their 
heads together. 
I don't even want to describe what Rachel 
29 

did next. Let's just say those particular Yeerks 
wouldn't trouble anyone for a while. 
<Nice of you to show,> I huffed, falling back 
against the wall, blood smearing on the paint. 
<Looks like I'm a little late,> Rachel an-
swered, turning her weak grizzly eyes on Dad. 
30 
D a d had never looked as terrified as he did 
at that moment. He was really pale. Paper-white. 
He was trembling. 
Weeeeeeeooooo! Weeeeeeeeooooo! 
Sirens screamed in the distance. They were 
coming for us. I stepped forward. Dad cowered 
like he expected me to kill him. 
Marco, you idiot, you're a freakin' gorilla! 
Speak to him, say something. Get him to trust 
you. 
<We're here to help you,> I said trying to dis-
guise my voice. <lt's okay.> Dad's eyes darted 
from the ape to the bear, not nearly convinced. 
<Great,> Rachel said privately. <Now what? 
What are we supposed do with him?> 
31 

<He's seen way too much. Obviously, the 
Yeerks mean to make everyone involved in the Z-
space research a Controller. Now that Dad's been 
saved by an Andalite bandit, there's no way out 
for him.> 
I paused, looking at the totaled living room. 
What had I done? I was insane. This whole thing 
was insane. <l think, maybe, it's time . . .> 
I waited for Rachel to answer. She was silent. 
I took it as a sign that she agreed. 
<One thing's for sure,> she said suddenly. 
<You SO have to get out of here!> 
I lurched forward, untied Dad, and grabbed 
him around the waist. He tensed and fought, 
hollered desperately. 
<l_isten up!> I growled. <We're the good guys. 
We're all you've got.> 
He kicked one more time, then settled. I 
dragged him out through the patio door, through 
the ankle-deep Yeerk sludge. Rachel followed. 
We lumbered for Dad's parked car. I released him 
in front of the driver's door. 
<Get in!> 
I ran to the passenger's side and grabbed the 
door. Whoops! Too hard. It ripped almost com-
pletely off the hinges. 
<What are you doing?!> Rachel snorted. 
I shrugged, jammed my body into the cab, 
32 
and slid the seat back all the way, which made 
absolutely no difference. My head curled toward 
the dash. A leg and an arm hung out the broken-
door side of the car. 
Police car tires screeched around the corner at 
the intersection that had to be about five blocks 
back. Some of the police were free, but most were 
Controllers. Why bet on which kind was coming? 
Dad fumbled with the keys like an old man. 
His breath came fast and shallow. 
<Where are you going to go?> Rachel asked. 
<How are we going to find you?> 
<l'll let you know as soon as I can,> I said. 
The engine choked to life. Rachel backed into 
the bushes. 
Police streamed down the street. 
<DRIVE!> I bellowed. <MOVE!> Dad was too 
scared not to obey. We pulled out as the flashing 
lights and white sedans shrieked to a halt at 
1366. I looked back through the door hole. 
<Rachel?> I called into the darkness, not 
sure if she could hear me. <Thanks.> 
A van cruised past the squad cars and sped 
on toward us. 
<Come on! Let's move!> 
We crept along with a traumatized man at the 
wheel. Dad turned onto the street that would 
take us home. 
33 

<No!> I yelled. 
" B u t . . . my son," he gasped. "My wife." 
<South! Step on it!> I ordered. <You can't go 
home.> 
I couldn't let him. Impossible. Too dangerous. 
Nora was probably already in Yeerk hands . . . 
The van slammed us from behind. Whiplash 
threw our heads back. I looked over my shoulder. 
Two Hork-Bajir were in the cab. Another one 
hung out the sliding side door. Inside, I could 
only guess. Six or seven or more. 
<Crap!> 
Dad only gaped in terror. 
<We're being followed. Come on! Get to the 
highway!> But he was frozen up. I had to take 
control. 
I grabbed the wheel. Stretched and punched 
my massive foot onto the gas, right on top of 
Dad's shoe. 
Skreeeeeee! 
We took off like a Formula One. 
"Ahhhh!" Dad yelled. Either I'd smashed his 
foot or my driving was even worse than I thought. 
The Yeerks were stuck to our tail. I ran a red 
light, swerved onto an exit ramp, merged into 
highway traffic. 
Or tried to . . . 
Horns screamed obscenities. I did feel a little 
34 
bad about grazing the Jeep Cherokee. And that 
Dodge And the Honda. 
But we weren't losing the van! 
I moved left one lane. Two lanes. Three lanes. 
Four lanes. 
The van was still glued to our bumper! 
A sign. Exit 54 . . . 
Scrrrrrreeeeeeekkk! I braked, tires burning 
the pavement. 
Swerved across four lanes of traffic, from the 
far-left lane to the exit ramp. 
Screeeeeeek! The Yeerks followed. 
<Take the wheel!> I ordered. He did. 
I looked back. The Yeerks had turned too 
sharply. They were tipping . . . tipping . . . skid-
ding toward the concrete divider. . . 
Kaaachoomp! A terrific crash as we drove out 
of sight. 
There are bad drivers, and there are worse 
drivers. 
The residential neighborhood was quiet, asleep. 
It was after midnight and the sky was star-
less. Eventually, we turned onto a two-lane back 
road. 
"Who are you?" Dad said, pushing on the 
brakes and pulling onto the shoulder. "What are 
you?" 
<Remember those bladed guys who were try-
35 

ing to kill me? About two hundred of them are 
looking for us right now. If you don't keep driv-
ing . . .> 
The car stopped. Dad opened the door. Threw 
himself out and started to run. 
<No!> I yelled. 
He tumbled into the drainage ditch, got up, 
and took off across a field of tall grass. 
I yanked myself out of the car and loped after 
him. There was only one thing to do. But all I 
could think about was the last person who'd been 
in the know, the last person who'd discovered the 
Animorphs' secret. 
He'd ended up trapped as a rat. Forever. We'd 
done it to him. We'd had to. 
<Dad!> I called in thought-speak. In the 
voice that was my own. 
He froze. Turned. Looked back at me. 
In the glow of the car headlights, I began to 
demorph. To slowly transform from beast to boy 
right before my father's eyes. 
Dad stood still as a statue, eyes wide. As my 
body took shape, I saw tears start to well in his 
eyes. 
"It's me," I said as soon as my human mouth 
formed. 
Dad gasped huskily. Stepped toward me 
through the grass. "How? I don't understand." 
36 
He touched my hair, my face, my shoulders. 
Then he grabbed me. Hugged me. The tears on 
his cheek dripped onto my own. 
"How?" he said again. 
"It's a long story, Dad. A really long story." 

We ordered burgers from an all-night diner 
on the outskirts of town. The place was too much 
of a dump for the Yeerks to check out. I hoped. I 
made us eat in the car anyway, in a dark corner of 
the parking lot. 
I told Dad everything. Almost. 
My story seemed to wash over him somehow. 
He looked stunned, disbelieving. He shook his 
head as though everything I was telling him was, 
well, just too much for the man. 
When I stopped talking, the first thing he said 
was that he had to call Nora. 
I let him walk across the gravel parking lot to 
the pay phone. Let him dial the numbers. 
"Honey, it's me," he said. "Yeah, I'm okay." 
38 
I could hear Nora on the other end. Yelling, 
worried, scared. 
"I'm with Marco," Dad said. "Where? We're at 
the . . . " 
I cut the connection and grabbed the receiver 
from Dad's ear. Slammed it down angrily. 
He glared at me. "What was that?" he de-
manded. 
For the first time since the brutality at Russ's 
house, it felt like the father I knew was with me. 
Real Dad. Thinking Dad. Authority-figure Dad. 
For the first time since I'd demorphed, the look 
in his eye was anything but distant. 
"Why did you do that?" 
I started to walk back to the car. He followed. 
"I said, what was that about!" 
I sat down on the passenger car seat. Dad got 
in his side and slammed the door. He had a door 
to slam. 
"You know exactly what it was about," I said 
calmly. "If you've been listening to me at all, you 
know that by now the Yeerks have staked out 
our house, probably tapped our phone. I'd bet 
they're sitting on our couch right now, waiting for 
you to walk in the door so they can —" 
"Stop," Dad said angrily. "Stop it. I've lis-
tened to you. I've heard every word. But you 
have to understand . . . I have no proof, no . . . 
how can I believe all these things you say? You 
39 

changed from a gorilla into my son. But I only 
think I saw that. I was terrified. I was tortured, 
then kidnapped. Maybe my mind is making 
things up. Maybe this is a dream." 
Before he'd finished talking, I was on my way. 
My skin hardened, then blackened, then 
thinned like eggshell. Legs and arms shortened 
until there was nothing left to hold me up. I fell 
forward onto the seat, shrinking and shrinking 
until the crumbs from the burger bun looked like 
boulders, and then blindness cut my view. 
Shloooooop! 
My waist reduced to millimeters, splicing me 
almost in half. 
"Oh, God!" Dad cried. "Oh, no!" 
I was becoming an ant. But I wasn't going to 
wait for the ant's mind to surface. No. 
I began to demorph. 
I let Dad watch me and all the horror and 
weirdness of morphing. I let Dad sit there, alone 
and up close with his new reality, as I demorphed 
back to boy. And began to morph again. 
Feathers imprinted my skin in 2-D, then 3-D. 
They grew up and out as my body shrank and 
my head deformed. My nose grew hard and 
sharp and hooked. My fingers, though smaller, 
grew stronger, became flesh-piercing talons. Eyes 
sharpened to superhuman clarity. 
40 
Again, I started the return trip to boy. Back to 
the form Dad knew as his son. 
"I have about twenty other animals I could 
morph to," I said as the last feather disappeared. 
"Want to see my lobster?" 
A cold sweat coursed in tiny rivulets down the 
side of my father's head. He didn't need to see 
any more. 
I'd scared him, creeped him out. Made him 
nervous and worried and concerned. He was han-
dling it. For a guy whose reality had just been 
completely rocked, he was handling it pretty 
well. 
He looked out through the windshield and 
stared for a moment at a point far away. The sun 
was just beginning to think about rising. It gave 
our desolate patch of the world a preview. Dad 
looked back at me. 
"I get it," he said slowly. "I get it. You've been 
through hell." 
"Through hell and back." I smiled. "A few 
times." 
Dad smiled back. 
"I'm going to take you to some friends of 
mine, Dad," I said. "You can hang out with them 
until we decide . . ." 
"Whoa," Dad said quickly. "Are you nuts? I'm 
going to the police." 
41 

"Dad, the Yeerks are the police. I can't let you 
do that." 
He was shocked and confused again. "What 
do you mean you can't let me? I'm your father. I 
tell you what to do." 
Not in this reality, Dad. Not in this world. 
"Dad, of course you're my father," I said, 
fighting an onslaught of emotion. And it would be 
so nice to have someone make decisions for me 
again, I added silently. "I love you. I respect you. 
But I've been fighting this war for a long time. 
I've been on more missions, in more fights, and 
seen more terrible things than you can imagine. 
This is my fight. My war. Me and my friends, we 
know what's going on. You don't." 
Dad frowned at me, then looked back at the 
rising sun. 
"You've told me what's going on," he said 
quietly. 
"Not everything. I left something out." 
Dad chuckled sardonically. "Let me guess. 
Visser Three's your father, your mother's an An-
dalite, and I'm no relation at all." 
"No," I said. No way around it. My fingers 
gripped the vinyl of the seat. "Mom's not an An-
dalite. And she didn't drown. She's the host to 
Visser One. The Yeerk who started the invasion of 
Earth. Mom's been the visser's slave since before 
she disappeared." 
42 
Dad's face went white. "You mean Eva?" 
"I mean Mom." 
Dad bent forward. His head hit the steering 
wheel. His hands pressed into his face. 
"Oh, God," he said. 
"She's alive." 
"I didn't know . . ." 
He rocked back against the seat. His head hit 
the headrest. "If only I'd waited . . ." He covered 
his eyes, then uncovered them. Then he reached 
for the glove box, rifled through, and pulled out a 
pack of cigarettes and a lighter. He stuck one in 
his mouth and made it burn. 
"Dad, what are you doing?" I said nicely. "You 
stopped five years ago. Cut it out." 
Dad looked at me and threw the cigarette out 
the window. 
"I love Nora," he said. "I love her as much as 
I loved your mother." 
The words made my throat tighten. He didn't. 
Couldn't. Nora was nice, but . . . she was a math 
teacher. 
My mother was everything. 
But he loved Nora. Somehow, that was news 
to me. 
Fatigue and light-headedness struck me like 
a steel beam. My head was spinning. The rising 
sun seemed cruel and inappropriate. 
"I'm going to take you to some friends of 
43 

mine," I said quietly. "Drive us back toward the 
city." 
My mother was in the hands of the enemy. I 
felt like I was the only one who cared. 
Dad loved this other woman. 
I wished I'd kept my mouth shut. 
My universe, my dreams, were falling apart. 
44 
We got off the highway at an exit not far from 
our house. But we weren't going home. 
It was six A.M. Rush hour had already begun. 
Who knew people left their houses that early? 
Rolling out of bed in time for school is torture 
enough for me. 
Dad's stubble made him look rough, but he 
was holding on. Finding out about Mom had 
done something funny to his face. It was stiff and 
hard. Different. 
"Turn here," I said. "It's the third house on 
the right." 
The houses in the subdivision were all new 
and big and similar-looking, with two-car garages 
at the end of every driveway. 
45 

"The one with the black Lab taking a leak on 
the lawn?" 
"Uh-huh." 
We parked the car, walked up the path, and 
rang the bell. I eyed the street as we waited. The 
van of Hork-Bajir was a vivid memory. I watched 
as a car pulled out of a garage across the street 
and drove away. 
I heard Erek coming to the door. 
"Dad, it's about to get weird." 
"Please," Dad said calmly. "It can't get any 
weirder." 
"Dad, just a suggestion, but when you're deal-
ing with the Animorphs, never say it can't get any 
weirder. It always does." 
Erek King—Erek the Chee — opened the 
door. 
"Uh-oh," he said, looking from Dad to me. 
"Yeah, I know," I said. 
"Does he?" Erek asked with alarm. 
I nodded. Erek grabbed our arms and pulled 
us inside. The door slammed and bolted behind 
us. We stood in Mr. King's living room, the fa-
cade of normalcy that masked the expansive, 
rambling, underground Chee dog park. Just feet 
below where we stood. 
Dad's eyes trained to the couch. Then his 
mouth dropped open. He stumbled back against 
the wall. 
46 
Mr. King sat on the couch, watching the To-
day show. Normal enough. Only thing was he 
didn't have clothes on. No skin, either. He was 
relaxing au naturel, which for him meant loung-
ing as an android. No human hologram. 
When Mr. King realized Dad was about to lose 
it, his hologram shimmered instantly into place. 
"The Chee, remember?" I said. "An ancient 
android race created by the Pemalites and hard-
wired for peace. I told you all about them." 
"Right," Dad said weakly. "I just thought you 
were pulling my leg." 
"Erek," I said, "the Yeerks are after my dad. 
With a little Yeerk information, Dad here went 
and invented a Z-space transponder. Then he 
made them really mad when he broke away be-
fore they could get a slug in his ear. Can you hide 
him here without violating your programming? 
And can you disappear his car right away?" 
"No problem," Erek said. "Of course he can 
stay. Does he like dogs?" 
Dad glanced at me. We had roughly the same 
feelings for Nora's dog, Euclid. Annoyance and 
pity mixed with a very small, almost nonexistent, 
amount of affection. But then, Nora's dog was 
hardly what you'd call a real dog. 
"I love them," Dad said, faking a laugh. 
"Erek," I said, "there's one other thing. Dad's 
missing. And that means that every aspiring sub-
47 

visser in the metro area is looking for a lead. I'm 
a lead. If I turn up missing, too . . . if they think 
we've both disappeared . . ." 
"They'll go after your friends." 
"This do-do is pretty deep, isn't it?" 
"Yeah, but we'll handle it," Erek said. "Don't 
worry. We'll give the Yeerks just what they want to 
see: you and your dad, alive and well and seem-
ingly clueless." Before our eyes, Erek altered his 
programming to become an exact duplicate of 
Dad. 
"Did he, uh, morph me?" Dad said, stunned. 
"No. Remember, Erek's an android. And 
that's a hologram." 
"Oh," Dad said, suddenly getting it. "Oh, 
wow." The engineer in him had just kicked in. 
Technical curiosity brought him back to life. He 
reached out to touch Erek's hologram. His hand 
went right through the "skin." 
"Whoa!" he cried. "Unbelievable! Erek, you 
have to tell me about the rendering process. I 
want to know everything." He pulled his hand 
out, then stuck it inside again, this time at waist 
level. 
Erek frowned like Dad was infringing on his 
dignity, but he was polite about it. "We'll talk 
later," he said, gently removing Dad's hand from 
his hologram guts. 
48 
"Right," Dad said, embarrassed. "So, you're 
able to project holograms of me and Marco? 
What about Nora? Someone has to look out for 
her." 
Erek and I exchanged glances. He knew as 
well as I that we were probably too late. 
"We'll do everything in our power," Erek said. 
"But you have to realize the Yeerks move fast. 
You should prepare for the worst." 
I looked at my father's pained, exhausted face 
and my stomach sank. I risked my life almost 
every day on all sorts of crazy missions, and yet 
I'd chosen not to go back for Nora. Now she was 
probably beyond help and it was my fault. 
I decided Dad wasn't ready for the truth. 
"They won't touch her," I lied. "She's at 
school most of the day. Everything will be fine." 
Dad looked comforted. 
"Come with me," Erek said, replacing the 
hologram of Dad with the one I knew, a boy about 
Jake's size. We headed for the stairs. I pulled 
Erek aside. 
"You know the Yeerks may not waste time try-
ing for another infestation with Dad. They'll most 
likely just try to kill him. What if they shoot you?" 
"I can resist low-power attack by Dracon 
beams." 
"But what about full power?" 

Erek shrugged. "It'll depend on the angle, the 
duration, and blind luck. Marco, my program-
ming only forbids me to use violence, even in the 
best of causes. It doesn't forbid me to die." 
"Yeah, well, I do." 
We followed Dad down the narrow stairs to 
the basement. Then, just like I remembered, the 
floor began to drop like an elevator. Five floors 
down it stopped and the wall before us disap-
peared into a golden hallway of light. 
Then we were in the vast, glowing chamber. 
The grass underfoot extended for yards. Streams 
cut across the grass and wildflowers dotted the 
banks. Butterflies and bees inspected the flow-
ers, and squirrels scampered up and down the 
various kinds of trees. 
And throughout the entire park hundreds, 
maybe even thousands, of happy, healthy dogs 
ran and played, watched over by a handful of 
muzzle-mouthed Chee in android form. 
"These are the Chee," Erek explained to Dad. 
"They'll be good to you while you stay." 
Dad sank down on the grass, under a tree. 
Two or three tail-wagging doggies ran up to greet 
him. A mid-sized mutt started licking his face 
and kept licking until Dad agreed to pet her. 
"You'll take good care of him?" I said to Erek. 
I glanced back at Dad and saw that his eyes were 
50 
dosed. He was falling asleep with the mutt still 
licking his face. Two doglike Chee approached. 
One put a pillow under my father's head. The 
other covered him with a blanket. 
Erek smiled. "I think he'll be okay." 
51 

I was the last to arrive at the barn. Rachel 
quickly looked away when I met her glance. So, 
she'd already told the others. 
Tobias glared at me with his intense hawk 
eyes. The others weren't much more friendly. 
"Go ahead," I said, my voice not quite steady. 
"You can say it. I'm crazy. Stupid. IN-SANE!" 
Silence. What could I expect? I'd shown Jake 
that he was right not to trust me. I'd done just 
what he was afraid I would do. 
I hadn't done the right thing. 
I'd let emotions get in the way of reason. 
And I wasn't any happier about it than my 
friends were. 
"There's no excuse," I said now, "but here's 
52 
what happened. One second I vowed to let the 
Yeerks infest my father. The next second I was 
battling a dozen Hork-Bajir." 
<Rachel said there were four,> Ax said. 
"Whatever." 
"Do you have any idea what this means?" 
Jake asked calmly. 
"Of course." I looked at the others, then back 
at Jake. "It means no more math tests." No one 
smiled. I sat down on a block of hay and put my 
head in my hands, a head vibrating from fatigue. 
I just wanted to lie down. 
"I know," I said. "I'm sorry." 
"It's okay, Marco," Cassie said kindly. "No 
one ever said it was easy for you. I know I 
couldn't... I couldn't sit by and watch the Yeerks 
take my parents." 
"And you shouldn't," Rachel said fiercely. 
"Cassie's right. Marco acted like a human be-
ing." She paused. "There's a first time for every-
thing." 
<The action was imprudent,> Ax said, con-
cern in his alien face. <You acted alone and pub-
licly^ 
<The Yeerks will track down everyone con-
nected to your dad,> Tobias echoed. <Starting 
with you. Ending with the rest of us.> 
"I'm a step ahead of you, Bird-boy," I said 
wearily. "Erek and I have a plan for that." 
53 

"We can't go back in time. What's done is 
done," Jake said philosophically. "The point now 
is that we know the Z-space device exists." 
"And we have to get it!" Rachel. 
I shook my head. "Mission impossible. If the 
Yeerks have made Controllers of everyone at the 
lab, if they know we're going to try for the device, 
it's suicide. And for what?" 
"If we get our hands on that thing, we have a 
megaphone to the universe," Rachel replied. "An 
interplanetary cell phone." 
<l believe the device would require more than 
a single lithium-ion battery,> Ax said practically. 
"You know what I mean. I'm talking about 
communication with the forces that matter. Di-
rect communication with the Andalite fleet." 
<Not if we're dead,> Tobias muttered. 
Rachel heaved a sigh. Cassie looked at her. 
"From the last reports we got," Cassie said, 
"Earth is not an Andalite priority. What good will 
it do to contact a fleet that can't help us? Or 
doesn't want to?" 
"We're not sure how things stand," I coun-
tered. "None of our information is firsthand." 
Rachel stood up, aggravated by a lack of ini-
tiative. 
"What's the matter with you guys? Don't you 
realize that a Z-space transponder means access 
54 
to all Z-space transmissions? Isn't that right, 
Ax?" 
<Yes.> 
"So, it's not just a way to phone home," 
Rachel argued. "It's a chance to intercept Yeerk 
transmissions." 
I felt like an idiot for not having seen it be-
fore. 
How often do you get a chance at interplane-
tary surveillance? A chance to bug a Yeerk tele-
phone? 
< I . . . > Ax hesitated, began to pace, then 
spoke again. <This human-made device is, seem-
ingly at least, equal to or even superior. . .> I 
swear he was trying to stop himself from choking 
on the words. <. . .superior to Yeerk technology.> 
"Look," I said. "Whatever this device is, how-
ever complicated it is, it was built with man-
made components, right?" 
Ax looked increasingly annoyed. 
<lt took Andalites three millennia to breach 
the confines of the home world with a simple 
combustion rocket. Our race matured greatly 
before Z-space was discovered. We were ready 
for the challenges. We were prepared for zero-
dimensional travel and communications 
"I know, Ax," I said. "Humans are absurd and 
immature. But you're missing my point. If the 
55 

device was built with man-made components, 
my dad should be able to re-create it." 
This time, a definite choking sound. 
"I mean, you should be able to re-create it. 
Dad could help." The amended statement seemed 
acceptable to Ax. 
Jake nodded. 
"Ax?" 
<l will do it, Prince Jake.> 
"Well, then," Jake said, "let's go for it. This is 
too important not to try." 
56 
Ax 
and I fell into a gentle dive over the 
blocks of indistinguishable subdivision houses, 
until bamm! We were right over Erek's. 
A moment later we landed in the wildly thick 
grass between the pool house and a row of 
shrubs. For the first time it occurred to me that if 
the Chee can't wage war on individuals, maybe 
they're also prevented from harming the environ-
ment any more than is necessary to maintain 
their cover. Lawn fertilizer as environmental in-
sult. 
<This grass is delicious,> Ax said, demorph-
ing in the cover of trees and grinding a newly 
formed hoof into the weeds. <Fresh and tasty.> 
I might have made a witty comment, but my 
57 

mouth was exactly halfway between osprey beak 
and fleshy human lips. An impediment to fluid 
conversation. 
Ax morphed to human and together we 
trudged through the grass to the back door. 
"This is called a patio," Ax observed. "Paddy. 
Paddy-ohhhh." 
"Uh-huh. And this is the patio door. Come 
I 
on." 
The kitchen was clean and bright. I walked 
through to the living room. Absolutely normal-
looking with a couch, chairs, knickknacks. A TV 
playing on mute. A clip of the president talking 
to high school students. 
"That TV's been on for a year now," I said. 
I turned to head downstairs. Ax wasn't behind 
me. 
"Ax?" 
No answer. Just a crunching sound in the 
kitchen. 
I backtracked. The refrigerator door was open. 
I peered over the top. 
The Chee are very hospitable. Milk and cook-
ies were waiting for us in the fridge. Ax had de-
cided it was snack time. 
"Orr-ee-oohh!" he said, looking at me wide-
eyed. Brown crumbs and frosting covered his 
chin. 
58 
"Come on!" I ordered. 
"ORR-EE-OHH . . ." 
Sometimes it's easy to forget the boy is a 
warrior. 
Downstairs, we found Erek waiting for us near 
the entrance to Dog Park World. 
"Where's my dad?" I asked, looking around a 
little nervously. In the back of my mind was the 
fear that Dad would decide to leave and rescue 
Nora. The Chee would be powerless to stop him. 
But Erek pointed to a tree in a far corner of 
the brilliantly glowing park. 
"He's right over here . . ." 
Dad was reclining peacefully, several dogs 
curled up at his side. When he saw me, he 
mouthed "shhhh" and motioned to a sleeping 
puppy. 
He seemed relaxed. Almost too relaxed. 
Maybe he'd faced his new reality. Maybe he'd 
simply blocked it out. 
"Listen, Dad," I whispered over the puppy. 
"Me and my friends need your help. Your work on 
the Z-space transponder might be the most im-
portant thing that's ever happened to us. It could 
change everything." 
"I think I said those exact words yesterday," 
he said wistfully. 
"Could you build it again, Dad?" 
59 

The question seemed to shake him from his 
dream world. He sat up abruptly and the dogs 
scattered. 
"But I'd need to be back in the lab," Dad 
continued. "All my calculations . . . the equip-
ment and instruments, not to mention the com-
ponents. It would be impossible without going 
back there." 
"We cannot permit you to return to the lab," 
Ax stated flatly. "The Yeerks control it now. They 
will be waiting for you. I am well versed in Z-
space field theory. I can help . . . I can help you 
build the device." 
Dad looked at me quizzically, as if to say, 
"Who is this kid?" Ax looked like any ordinary, 
slightly awkward junior high schooler. Maybe a 
little better-looking than average. After all, he did 
carry my DNA. 
"It's okay, Dad. Remember? You met Ax once 
a while back and you thought he was weird then, 
too. That's just because he's really an Andalite. 
Elfangor's younger brother. Show him, Ax." 
Dad waved his hand. "No, no. It's all right. I 
remember now. I've heard all about you. . . ." 
But Ax was already morphing back to his true 
form. Stalk eyes sprang noisily from Ax's head. 
His mouth sealed into a smooth stretch of blue 
skin. A glistening tail blade grew up over his 
head. An extra set of legs shot out of his rear. 
60 
Dad gawked in amazement. 
"Catching flies?" I said. 
He closed his mouth and blinked a couple of 
times. "I just can't believe it." 
I think all science types secretly believe in 
aliens. First Erek, then Ax. Dad had to be pleased. 
<How far have you progressed toward Z-space 
penetration?> Ax asked. 
"Uh, well, we successfully detected the sub-
stellar background radiation with a working pro-
totype last month. The phase shift we measured 
was in precise conformation with our theories. 
We are, I mean were, about to attempt a pulsed-
clump transmission." 
That seemed to interest Ax. It seemed to give 
me a headache. 
<That's the very simplest form of subspace 
transmission, analogous to early human radio 
transmission using Morse code.> 
"Exactly." 
<lf the pulsed-clump transmission is suc-
cessful, full-spectrum communications will be a 
simple extension of the work.> 
"Learn how to crawl before you walk," I com-
mented to no one. 
"There's one very large obstacle," Dad said. 
"We'll never be able to acquire the necessary 
equipment and components. They're not the sort 
of things you can pick up at Radio Shack." 
61 

<l like Radio Shack.> 
"Sure," Dad said, "so do I. But they don't sell 
stellar coordinators. Maybe these Chee creatures 
could help us." 
<The Chee cannot participate or assist in the 
transfer of technology that could enable war and 
destructions Ax explained. <lt is written into 
their programming.> 
"Then there's no hope," Dad said, leaning 
back against the tree. 
"Dad, Dad, Dad. You underestimate your son. 
Burglary— in the name of justice and freedom, 
of course — is among the great variety of talents 
the Animorphs possess. You want it, we can get 
it." 
Dad looked disturbed. "Marco, you can't 
j u s t . . . " 
"Don't worry. We only take from Controller-run 
corporations and we'll find a way to make every-
thing okay when the war's over." 
"But that doesn't make it right." 
"Dad, nothing is right anymore." 
He was silent for a moment. Then he rose to 
his feet and looked at us. 
"Well, then, boys. Let's get busy." 
62 
I can't wait to get away from those luna-
tics at the office." Dad stuffed a handful of 
underwear and shorts into the open suitcase 
on the bed. "I'm glad I had those sick days 
stored up. People get all crazy over some stupid 
piece of electronics that probably won't work 
anyway." 
I was standing next to him, in his bedroom at 
home, helping him pack. Dad took his camera 
out of a drawer and tossed it in with the heap of 
clothes. 
"So, Dad? When we get to Acapulco, can I 
rent a Jet Ski?" 
"They pollute and make noise," he answered 
63 

as he folded a screaming Hawaiian shirt, "And 
they're dangerous. Do you want to be responsible 
for affecting your environment in a negative way?" 
"No, I just want to fly through the water at 
fifty miles per hour and jump a ten-foot wave." 
"We'll see," he said. 
"Why can't we wait until Nora can get some 
time off? Why do we have to go away now?" I 
pressed. 
"I told you already, Marco," he said, tossing a 
faded bathing suit into the bag. "Because I need 
to get away from work for a while. It's obvious 
that idiotic device I've been working on is impor-
tant to somebody. God knows why! But I'm in 
danger because of it. Kidnapped and held pris-
oner by some nutbags in costumes? I don't need 
that kind of stress. Let someone else finish the 
project." 
That was the last thing I heard my father say. 
There was a terrific bang. The bedroom door 
burst off its hinges and four human-Controllers 
dressed as cops rushed into the room. 
Dad froze and look puzzled. 
And then four separate Dracon beams con-
verged on the figure of one solitary human. For 
a fraction of a second I saw clothes, skin, hair, 
all of it vaporize, leaving a blackened carcass 
haloed in blinding light. 
64 
The body evaporated in a cloud of smoke. A 
charred scuff on the floor was all that marked the 
spot where Dad had stood. 
Then all four guns pointed at the boy. At me, 
Marco. I didn't even scream as my own body dis-
appeared in flames. 
Because it wasn't really me. It wasn't my 
dad, either, the guy the Yeerks now thought was 
dead. 
The Yeerks left and I began to demorph. I 
wanted to see the scene with my own eyes. 
Watching it all through the distorted prism 
of cockroach vision, sensing and feeling it all 
from under the molding by the closet, had not 
been enough. My human body emerged from the 
insect. 
"All clear," I said quickly. The curtains were 
still drawn closed. "Are you guys okay?" The holo-
gram of Erek shimmered and disappeared. He 
was lying on the floor by the bed. Scorched and 
smoking. 
But it was Mr. King I was really worried about, 
the Chee who had played the part of my dad. 
He'd been reduced to a clump of patchy holo-
graphic images. Beneath and between the weak 
projections of human body parts, I could see dam-
aged circuitry. The elaborate mechanical frame 
was now nearly skeletal. 

"His projection capacity has been severely 
damaged," Erek observed, coming closer. 
"Can you fix it?" I said anxiously. 
"I hope so. But I have to get him home first. 
His structural matrix is in obvious jeopardy." 
"What about yours?" 
"My systems are ninety-nine percent intact," 
he said easily. "Were the projections convincing? 
The program to simulate the destruction of you 
and your father?" 
"Awesome," I said. "The Yeerks won't be look-
ing for us anymore. I told Jake I'd do whatever it 
took to get them off our trail." 
Erek helped Mr. King to his feet. I peered out 
the window through the slit in the drapes. A po-
lice car was parked out front. The four Yeerk exe-
cutioners stood casually on the sidewalk, talking 
to Nora. 
They knew her. She knew them. 
A new aggressiveness controlled her move-
ments. 
It didn't take a math prodigy to figure out 
what that meant. 
Nora had been taken. 
The Controllers climbed back in the squad 
car and drove away with the lights flashing 
silently. 
I got a sick feeling in my stomach. Not the 
66 
kind you get when you smell rotten milk. The 
kind you get when you want to cry, but the tears 
just won't come. 
Nora had been a nice lady. Could I have saved 
her? Could anyone have saved her? 
The Yeerks must have taken her away in the 
night, as Dad was begging me to let him return 
home to get her. 
I'd known she was in danger and I'd done 
nothing. 
That was wrong. What was worse is that a part 
of me had wanted her out of our lives. 
My stomach squeezed tighter. 
No. I hadn't wanted it to happen. No. 
I thought about my father. Can a person take 
that kind of loss twice in a lifetime? The "death" 
of the person they love most? The one they eat 
breakfast with each day? The one they sleep next 
to each night? 
No. It would break him, the way losing Mom 
had. 
"Come on," Erek said. 
Nora pulled out of our driveway, following the 
Controller cops in her own car. 
Erek and a barely concealed Mr. King, his an-
droid form breaking out all over, hobbled out of 
the bedroom and down the stairs. 
"Can I help?" 
67 

Erek laughed. 
"Can you bench-press five hundred pounds? 
He's mostly dead weight." 
"Oh," I said dejectedly. "Okay. I'll get the 
door. How will you two make it home?" 
"I'll project a hologram around us, an image 
of something slow-moving. I do a pretty good 
garbage truck." 
The two Chee stumbled onto the back deck. I 
glanced back into the family room. 
My eye caught a photo tacked to the cork 
board over my father's worktable. It was a snap-
shot of me and Dad, taken by Mom on a sun-
drenched day several years ago. 
Suddenly, reality hit. 
I was dead. And this was the end . . . of 
school, of dates, of video games. Of everything 
normal. 
The kid in that photo had prepared his last 
frozen pizza dinner. Had gone to his last math 
class. Had seen his last movie at the Cineplex. 
That kid would never even hang out in his 
own backyard again. Because this wasn't his 
home anymore. He had no home. 
He'd made the necessary sacrifice. 
I could take the photo with me. It was small 
enough to fit in the beak of the osprey I would 
morph to fly away. 
68 
I took two steps toward the cork board, then 
stopped. 
No. 
I had my memories. 
They would have to be enough. 
69 
'IS 

Akka upe ozo oti. Scute! Muta pule." 
Ax looked at me hopefully. 
<ls the translator chip working yet?> 
"Uh, no. Not unless muta pule means some-
thing to you. Let's see . . . nope. Nothing." 
Ax's eyes drooped and he turned back to the 
contraption they had been working on for the 
past few days. 
Few long days, I would add. You should try 
spending your nights under a tree at Chee Park 
with a dog for a pillow. 
The Chee tell some great stories about the 
last ten centuries. Kings, conquerors, explorers, 
that kind of thing. Mr. King was the cook on Dar-
70 
win's ship and Henry Ford's production chief. I 
mean, that's very cool stuff. Fascinating stuff. 
But honestly, without HBO, life gets a little 
scary. 
"Kino ala ozo nev . . . nev . . . never catch 
them unless we know they're coming . . . nem 
zurka kakis loti." 
"Ax! Hey, for a second there, that was En-
glish. You did it." 
<No,> Ax said quickly. <l am unable to stabi-
lize the programming of the translator chip.> 
He glanced at my dad. 
"Could you couple it with this?" Dad lifted a 
blue wire, then pointed to a green, circular com-
ponent. 
<That would take time,> Ax said. <l should 
just interpret. Or attempt to summarize.> 
Ax had been sifting interplanetary chatter for 
hours. And for hours we'd been gathered with 
him, all of us, in Ax's scoop. We'd come for the 
unveiling of the Z-space transponder. Dad hadn't 
mentioned it was still under construction. 
"So, it doesn't even translate?" Rachel said 
impatiently. "What does it do?" 
Ax stopped working and looked at us with his 
main eyes. He put a delicate hand on either side 
of the device. It was fairly small. Mini-cooler 
size. 
71 

But it was clear from the way Ax held it that it 
meant more to him than an icebox. He cradled it 
like a newborn baby. Wires dangled like legs. In-
comprehensible cosmic chatter streamed softly 
from its earpiece. 
<The transmission capacity is not yet en-
abled. Neither is the translator. But this device 
can monitor unscrambled Yeerk communica-
tions, which I have been doing for some time 
now.> 
"Ax, you're amazing," Cassie said. 
Ax looked at Dad and flashed one of his eye-
smiles. 
<At times you humans truly scare me,> he 
muttered softly. <A mere four decades from first 
orbital spaceflight to the discovery of Zero-space 
communication?> He stamped the dirt with a 
hoof for emphasis. <We Andalites may wish we 
had left you to the Yeerks.> 
"So far you Andalites have left us to the 
Yeerks," Rachel pointed out dryly. 
Ax could have countered the insult. But I 
think he was still torn between the pride of 
creation and the humiliation of learning that hu-
mans— that my father — had, in one huge in-
tuitive leap, created a device that was in some 
ways superior to Andalite technology. 
"Ax, what've you heard?" Jake said. 
<lt is very difficult to piece together,> Ax said 
72 
tentatively. <My knowledge of Yeerk culture is 
not great. I do not fully understand the nuances 
of Yeerk communications 
<Don't worry, Ax-man.> Tobias, from a perch 
in a nearby tree. <What do you think they've 
been saying?> 
<But I would be speculating. Guessing,> Ax 
protested. 
"Go for it," Rachel ordered. "Live danger-
ously. If you don't, I'm leaving." 
<There is one thing,> Ax began. <One very 
disturbing conclusion that I can draw, though 
with limited certainty.> Ax looked at me. <Visser 
One has returned to Earth. But for a grim pur-
pose. She is being held at the Yeerk pool. She is 
to be executed as a traitor.> 
I felt my body stiffen, my heart stop. 
"Marco, Eva is Visser One," Dad said, his 
voice quaking. 
I nodded. 
<From what I understand^ Ax continued, 
<death as a traitor means death by Kandrona 
starvation. The event awaits only the necessary 
witness from the Council of Thirteen, who will ar-
rive in two days. Visser Three will then be ele-
vated to the post of Visser One. And,> Ax added, 
<there are rumors — nothing concrete, but sug-
gestions — that the execution of Visser One is 
part of an overall change affecting Earth.> 
73 

I knew what that meant. We all did. Visser 
One, originator of the Yeerk invasion of Earth, fa-
vored a slow infiltration of Earth, a quiet, stealthy 
assault. 
But Visser Three, a jumped-up egomaniac, 
has pushed for all-out conquest from the begin-
ning. His dearest dream is to annihilate human 
power centers in an Independence Day-style war. 
To drive large numbers of humans into infesta-
tion camps. To do it quickly and publicly. 
If he gets his way, the Animorphs won't mat-
ter. Everything will be lost. Millions will die. Hu-
man culture will be pulverized. 
<Of course, this is only speculation,> Ax reit-
erated. 
I laughed bitterly. "Ax, your speculations are 
like computer computations. This is more than a 
good guess." 
"It can't happen," Jake said, his voice hard. 
"We can't let Visser Three get promoted. If Yeerk 
forces change their tactics — if they decide to go 
public — it will be the end." 
What could I say? I'd just risked everything — 
every one of us — to pull my father out of trou-
ble. I couldn't argue now for a mission to save 
my mother. The situation was different, far more 
dangerous. 
It meant a trip to the Yeerk pool. 
And then Cassie's voice, sounding clear and 
74 
innocent. And persuasive. "If Ax can't be sure 
what the Yeerks are planning, there's only one 
person who would be." 
She was taking me off the hook. She was giv 
ing me the chance I couldn't ask for. 
Every muscle in my face tensed until it hurt. 
I would not cry. I just wouldn't again forget that, 
in some ways, Cassie is the bravest and the 
smartest of my friends. 
Still, I waited for someone else to speak. The 
image of my mother on death row, Yeerk prisoner, 
Yeerk victim, battered and beaten, bruised and 
broken, blazed in my mind's eye. 
"Visser One," Jake said. 
75 

i. had to say something. Had to let them 
know I hadn't lost sight of the realities of this 
war. 
"So what if Visser One is our best shot at find-
ing out what Visser Three has planned? We risk 
our butts for her?" 
Jake looked at me with eyes that said, "Give 
me a break. You know you want to save her." 
"Listen!" I continued, more forcefully. "If we 
can rescue her — and that's a big if — she'll still 
have the Yeerk in her head. Why would it cooper-
ate with us? Why would it tell us anything?" 
"It won't," Jake answered simply, sinking my 
counterargument. "But we can starve it out." 
76 
"Is that painful?" Dad said anxiously. "Would 
she survive?" 
"It's living hell," Jake answered. "But it 
would be more fun than anything she's been 
through so far." 
Rachel glanced at Dad, then at me. "Where 
will your mom and dad go?" she said. "They'll 
have to leave the country. Get as far from here as 
they can." 
"I can't do that," Dad protested. "I won't 
leave Nora." 
"You don't have a choice," Rachel said coldly. 
Another twinge of guilt struck me like a fa-
cial tic. Nora was probably the one Dad wanted 
to save. He could have left the country with her, 
his wife . . . been fugitives with the woman he 
loved . . . 
<l know a nice place,> Tobias said. <Good 
climate, no tourists, low prices. Friendly locals. 
They're a little on the slow side, but they can tell 
a great story. > 
"The free Hork-Bajir colony," Cassie cried. 
"We'll send them to the Hork-Bajir!" 
It was the perfect solution to the problem of 
safety for my parents. Dad aimed a look of re-
sentment at a far-off tree. An alien race of para-
sites had played god with his freedom. A bunch 
of kids had co-opted his free will. His life had 
77 

been totally taken over. He understood his new 
reality, but he didn't like it. 
Did I? My mind flooded with sun-washed 
scenes of peace and harmony. Mom climbing a 
tree next to Toby. Dad teaching English in a 
flower-filled meadow. They could act as advisors 
for the Hork-Bajir. They could be unofficial gov-
ernors of the valley. . . . 
What was I thinking? 
"Great idea," I said with mock enthusiasm. 
"Except it assumes that we make it out of the 
Yeerk pool death trap." I frowned. "Look, our 
odds for success might be pretty good in a world 
where Rachel is short, fat, and ugly, and Tobias is 
a stork. But in this world? We've used up most of 
our nine lives, kids. The Yeerks have got to have 
beefed-up security forces to prevent Visser One's 
escape. The odds are worse than slim." 
"They're dim," Dad echoed. "And grim." I 
glared at him. Okay, so maybe we try to rhyme 
with each other's last word. But we do that when 
we're alone. 
Dad smiled at the ground. A peace offering. I 
tried to finish my argument. 
"What I'm trying to say is that we don't have a 
plan. We don't even know how to get into the 
pool anymore. Not since they closed the car 
wash." 
<That's not true,> Ax said, glancing up with 
78 
his main eyes. He tuned a big knob on the Z-
space transponder, then another, littler one. He 
removed the earpiece from his ear. 
<l have heard enough Z-space communica-
tion to know that the Yeerks have recently added 
a major tunnel to the pool.> 
<Where?> Jake said. 
<Unclear. But it connects to a new under-
ground facility for docking and repairing Bug 
fighters. The tunnel also carries out a complex 
decontamination process equipped to kill any liv-
ing thing.> 
"Ax," I said. "Last time I checked, we can't 
morph inanimate objects like chairs and tables. 
And if we could, they wouldn't stand much of a 
chance against a pack of Hork-Bajir." 
"What about tiny animals?" Cassie sug-
gested. "Would a flea or a fly be less susceptible 
to decontamination?" 
<No,> Ax said with certainty. <Yeerk deconta-
mination is thorough and effectives 
"Then why are you telling us this?" Rachel ex-
ploded. 
<A Bug fighter's shield is sufficiently strong 
to block decontamination^ Ax suggested gently. 
Jake smiled, an engaged yet tentative grin. 
"I get it," he said. "All we have to do is steal a 
Bug fighter, find the new tunnel, fly through it, 
land in the docking facility, evade security, make 
79 

it to the main pool, kidnap Visser One, drag her 
back to the ship, and escape. It's all so simple." 
Rachel looked happier now that there was the 
promise of danger. 
Cassie raised an eyebrow thoughtfully. 
Tobias fluttered to ground level, giving me the 
impression that he supported this madness. 
"You'll have to lay a trap for the Yeerks," Dad 
said suddenly. "If I've followed this debate cor-
rectly, you need a reaction large enough to bring 
in a Bug fighter, but small enough to give you 
some control." 
I looked at him. My father never ceased to 
amaze me. Neither did the resilience of the hu-
man spirit. 
"Dad's catching on," I said approvingly. "We 
do need a trap and I've got me an idea." 
80 
c 
•an you hear me? Can you hear me? Is this 
the po-leese? I'm calling from the National For-
est. I've got the darndest dang thing you ever did 
see trapped up here. It's some kind of monster 
with blades all over it." 
Howls and groans echoed through the dark 
hills. 
My friends? 
Maybe. 
Or maybe not. 
The voice on the other end of the cell phone 
sounded like it was talking into a tin can. 
It asked for clarification. 
"Monster! Blades!" I cried. "I swear, I got me 
a real, live, outer-space alien!" 
81 
1S 

Instantly, I was headquarters' number-one pri-
ority. Where was I, they demanded? Who was I? 
I gave my location, then cut the connection. 
Spastic laughter gripped my chest. This plan 
was too insane! And I'd just set it in motion. 
<Keep it down!> Jake roared from a shadow 
somewhere near. 
I pulled a camouflaged hunting cap down 
over my head. This fashion statement was on 
loan from Jake's dad. It was supposed to shield 
my face so the Yeerks in the Bug fighter wouldn't 
recognize me as the boy gunned down the other 
day. The boy supposed to be dead. 
"Let's hope this works," I whispered, fastening 
the earflaps under my chin and looking toward 
the sky. 
A Bug fighter took exactly four minutes to 
swoop down from orbit. Its lights smeared a 
bloodred line across the sky. I crouched behind 
a massive pine tree. When the fighter passed 
low and slow overhead, I suddenly wished I'd 
snagged the hunting jacket, too. 
Not the orange one. 
The plan was for the Yeerks to see a cowering 
human — that would be me — attracted and re-
pulsed simultaneously by the sight of a strug-
gling Hork-Bajir, caught in some kind of leg trap. 
Who was I to mess with the plan? 
82 
I cowered. Expertly. 
I was glad Dad was safe at the Hork-Bajir 
colony. He had wanted a part in the mission. 
He'd been outvoted. 
<They're coming in,> Rachel said. <They're 
going to land. Get ready!> 
I fingered the coil of cable clutched to my 
chest. The fighter hovered lower and slower. 
Through the small, eyelike windows at the front, I 
saw a Taxxon at the controls. 
Pshhhhhhh-shhhhh-thooomp! 
The craft landed. A heartbeat later, a hatch 
slid open. Two Hork-Bajir jumped out, huge men-
acing shapes in the gloom of the forest. 
Then — a tiger streaked from the utter dark-
ness of the trees into the small clearing. 
"Rrrrrroaaaaahhhhhh!" 
WHAM! 
One Hork-Bajir, knocked off his feet. 
WHUMP! 
A grizzly reared up and sideswiped the sec-
ond warrior. 
Craack! 
That was his head, meeting the hull of the 
ship. 
"Gahh . . . " he said softly. "Lahh . . . " Victim 
two. Knocked silly. 
One more to go. 
83 

The Taxxon inside skittered hysterically from 
the controls to the hatch, and plunged onto the 
forest floor! 
"Sneeet! Sneeyanyanahhhh!" 
Look out! I screamed silently. Jake made me 
promise not to say a word. If the Yeerks thought a 
human was part of the attack, we'd be charred 
toast. All of us. 
Yes! A wolf sprinted from the trees on the 
right. An Andalite streaked in from the left, a 
lightning line of blue. 
Ploosh! Ploosh! 
Cassie plowed into the Taxxon's rear half. Ax 
took the front. 
The Taxxon was thrust into the night sky. A 
wormy constellation spinning clockwise at hyper-
speed. 
"Skreeeeeeeeyaaaaa!" 
Ka-blooooosh! 
He landed with a watery thud. 
I ran toward the fighter. Tobias was already 
demorphing, growing smaller and smaller in the 
mantrap that held his Hork-Bajir leg. Once bird, 
he could wriggle free. 
<Tie them up,> Jake ordered. <Just tight 
enough to keep them here till the free Hork-Bajir 
can pick them up.> 
"What about the Taxxon?" I said. 
84 
<He can fend for himself. Maybe he makes it. 
Maybe he doesn't.> 
"Right." 
I wrangled two bladed Hork-Bajir arms into 
position and bound them together with cord. One 
of them groaned faintly, face in the dirt. Rachel 
silenced him with a flick of a great grizzly paw. 
My heart was pounding wildly. But I managed 
to maneuver the legs and bind them. Then the 
hands and legs of the other one. 
<Come on,> Jake ordered, demorphing. 
Rachel climbed on board. Tobias flew in. 
I looked down at the Hork-Bajir I'd just tied 
up. To the touch, the skin was rough as bark. His 
back heaved and fell. A sharp snort accompanied 
every intake of air. 
I was going to the Yeerk pool. 
And this breathing sawmill was going to be 
my costume. 
85 

"How cool is this? This has got to be a 
limited edition sport model. I mean, wow. The 
Yeerks must only have made a few hundred of 
these." 
I walked to one of the tiny windows. Red spot-
lights still crisscrossed the ground below, pulsing 
in deliberately slow cadence. 
<Actually,> Ax corrected, <this is the stan-
dard model. Albeit the newest versions His 
multifingered hands worked frantically to keep 
pace with controls made for the five hundred or 
so little claws of a Taxxon. <This model has been 
produced by the thousands.> 
I watched Ax in profile as he worked furiously 
86 
to dim the searchlights. He was having some 
trouble. The cab lights went black, then red 
again. The outer lights brightened before they 
dimmed our RV-sized cockroach without legs. 
Cockroach. The kind of thing that makes your 
mom frantically beat the wall with the kitchen 
broom and not want to eat for a whole day after-
ward. 
A Bug fighter is not warm and fuzzy. It's not 
the kind of vehicle into which you want to crawl. 
The sudden sound of compressed air being 
released . . . 
"Ax?" 
Whoooossshhhhhh! 
"Aaaaaax!" 
My head was thrown back. My body slammed 
against four other bodies on the cabin's back 
wall. A hawk screeched nervously as momentum 
plastered his bony body to the ceiling. 
<l have control of the ship,> Ax said loudly. 
<Please remain calm. I think the cockpit was 
modified for a mutant Taxxon, a Taxxon with 
twice the normal number of appendages.> 
I took a deep breath. Nice luck. Hijack a ship 
built for a mutant. 
"Do you need help?" Jake asked. 
"This is so stupid," I cursed under my breath. 
From where I sat, helplessly pressed against 
87 

the bulkhead, Ax looked totally confused. His 
weak fingers ran over every button like a de-
ranged pilot with a phantom checklist. 
"Uh, Ax-man," I said, "do you have even, 
like, one little clue?" 
<l now have several. I will need several more 
before I can pilot the craft effectively.> 
Tobias fell to the floor with a thud. We'd 
stopped accelerating. Now we hovered indeci-
sively. 
Ax flipped two switches over his head, then 
pressed a red button. There was the sound of a 
fan. Warm air rushed out from under the seats 
that lined the sidewalls. Ax's stalk eyes swung 
around, puzzled. 
"Much better, Ax," Rachel said impatiently. 
"You have the makings of a great heating-and-
cooling engineer." 
"Maybe we should read the owner's manual?" 
Cassie. 
<No. No, that will not be necessary,> Ax de-
clared, newly confident. <l have an idea. Rather 
than search for the tunnel entrance based on 
clues from Z-space chatter, why not let the Bug 
fighter guide us? All low-level Yeerk combat ships 
are programmed to return to base automatically 
if flight begins to seem, urn, erratio 
"A safety precaution?" Cassie asked. 
88 
<No. A security measure. The Yeerks don't 
trust their own pilots.> 
"Yeah, well, good for them. We need autopilot 
bad." 
The ship jolted. It began to ascend rapidly, 
then pivot slowly. And suddenly, even though it 
was night outside, everything through the main 
windows appeared lit up bright as day. Yeerk 
night-vision technology. 
I moved to the front of the ship to get a better 
view. Silly of me. If I'd waited a half-second 
longer, I wouldn't have had to walk. 
The ship pitched forward and angled down 
toward the earth. Before we could yell, the six of 
us were trapped in a pile-on. 
<You should always wear the safety restraints,> 
Ax scolded, struggling futilely to get four humans 
and an angry bird off him. 
I pulled myself to my knees. Below us, through 
the night-vision windows, was the ocean, crash-
ing whitecaps and heaving swells. 
"Ax, are you sure everything's okay?" 
"We're pointed straight for the water!" 
<l . . . I . . .> 
" Yeeeeeooooooooowwwwwwwwww!" 
The scream was unanimous. 
"OhhhhhhhhMyyyyyyyyyGooooooodddd!!" 
I was down! We shot Earthward like a bullet. Ac-
89 

celeration crushed my chest. Rachel's leg wedged 
against my neck. 
I could feel the skin of my face pulled back by 
the force. 
"Yaaaaahhhh!" 
90 
Taaaaaaaaaah!" 
Seconds from plunging us into the watery 
depths, the Bug fighter got a different idea. 
It slowed, stopped, pivoted. And shot upward! 
"Ahhhh! What's going on?" 
Everyone but Ax and Tobias skittered and slid 
across the floor, back against the bulkhead. 
<Perhaps . . .> Ax said shakily. <Perhaps we 
did not register sufficient velocity. If the ship in-
tends to follow an underwater course, sufficient 
speed must be attained beforehand.> 
"Underwater!" 
<l believe so.> 
"Won't that kill us?" 
91 

<At these velocities, death is always a possi-
bility.> 
Great. Killed by autopilot. Totally humiliating 
death. 
Then — the image of my mother popped into 
my head, as I'd seen her in the Yeerk pool, at the 
trial. Bones broken and body bloody. She'd asked 
for more of the Yeerks' cruelty. Begged me to let 
Visser One continue to control her. Because she 
knew it might give Earth a better chance for sur-
vival. 
If she could take that kind of torture, I could 
deal with being at the mercy of autopilot. 
I glanced out one of the windows. Ocean and 
forest and city lights were dropping away, like a 
high-speed pan-out from a satellite camera. For 
just an instant, I could make out the dots of 
lights that were the city. The stadium, the busi-
ness district, the 'burbs, and the boonies. 
Whooosh! 
Then we pulled away so fast, all light con-
verged into one bright dot, one speck of city. 
More dots came into view, until I could see hun-
dreds of beacons of blazing white light. For a 
second, I thought they were stars. Then I realized 
that each one was a city. We were almost in outer 
space! 
Cassie gasped. It was unbelievable. 
<We should reach the apex of our trajectory at 
92 
any moment,> Ax said, inappropriately calm. <lt 
would be wise to fasten your safety restraints.> 
Again, the ship slowed. You couldn't feel 
g-fofces anymore, but the earth below stopped 
receding. It was like we'd reached the end of 
some massive, invisible rubber band. 
I'd shot off too many rubber bands during 
math class not to know what would come next. 
Was I distressed? 
Yes. Oh yes, I was. 
Fwooop! 
The ship tilted into a dive and without a sec-
ond's hesitation — 
"Aaaaaahhhh!" 
<Aaaaahhhh!> 
Raced toward Earth. Faster. Faster! 
We punched through the clouds, a millisec-
ond of fog. 
Then, the sparkle of the city. The curved 
coastline. 
And the ship diving straight at the water! 
A plain of blue and silver filled the cockpit 
windows. Growing clearer and sharper every sec-
ond! 
Shimmering waves . . . 
Someone screamed again. And at that mo-
ment I saw death. 
We've dived from planes, demorphed in mid-
air, dodged Dracon beams, done all these things 
93 

and more at lightning-fast speed. But nothing, 
nothing compared to this. 
Just a fraction of a second to know, not even 
to articulate, okay, you're about to die. 
Rushing toward a blue wall of death at a mil-
lion miles an hour! 
"Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!" 
<Ahhhhhh!> 
Six screaming voices. A weird whooshing in 
my head. 
And then I opened my eyes. 
Schools of fish streaked through the Bug 
fighter's red lights. 
I was alive. And we were under the water. The 
ship had become a submarine! Autopilot banked 
and steered some secret course known only to 
the enemy. 
I looked at the others. Rachel held Tobias's 
hawk body loosely but protectively. Ax stood on 
wobbly legs. Jake and Cassie were clutching 
hands. No one said a word. 
We dove deeper, into darker ocean depths. 
Leveled out along the ocean bottom, skimmed 
across a topography more bizarre than anything 
on the face of the planet. A cavern disappeared 
beneath us. A mountain jutted into blackness 
overhead. A bright yellow sea creature fled in our 
wake. 
And suddenly, our lights illuminated a mas-
94 
sive obstruction. Jagged, angular, covered over 
with sea life and yet, a familiar sight. 
<lt's a ship.> Tobias. 
Yeah, like what you see on a cable show. Lost 
Ships of the Sea: Terror, Treasure, and Discovery. 
"Go Hork-Bajir," Jake ordered. "Now. We may 
not have much time." 
We morphed. Six panting, muscular, seven-
foot-tall, blade-wielding bodies made the Bug 
fighter a tight fit. But it was the morph for the job 
and I knew what to expect. Good eyes. Slow 
mind, a little apprehensive. Powerful body. Just 
one of hundreds, maybe thousands of slaves to 
the Yeerks. 
No one would notice us. No one would know 
we were not Controllers. I hoped. 
The ship banked automatically, just missing 
the side of the seafaring relic. We began to circle 
slowly above it. 
The hull was gigantic, tipped on its side 
against the ocean floor. Large sections were bro-
ken off, plates of riveted steel scattered all 
around. A turret and three heavy guns protruded 
from the deck. 
<World War Two,> Jake murmured. <lt's a 
battleship.> 
The Bug fighter circled once more, then set a 
course for the center of the sunken ship. 
<Here we go again,> I yelled, throwing up my 
95 

bladed arms in disbelief. <Don't tell me we can 
fly through steel.> 
We shot toward the hull. I decided not to 
close my eyes this time. What would be the 
point? 
<The Z-space chatter,> Ax said suddenly. 
<There was the mention of a human ship. This is 
the entrance to the tunnel!> 
Just as we were about to crash, the ship frac-
tured. Just opened like a hinged box, revealing a 
long slit through the superstructure. 
Dead fish and other sea creatures poured out 
from the battleship opening, swarming our win-
dows. 
<lntense radiation screens,> Ax explained. 
<They are not uncommon as protective devices 
for Yeerk battle stations. Living things are de-
stroyed instantly.> 
I swallowed hard. 
We passed through the slit with inches to 
spare and were swallowed into featureless black-
ness. 
The ship dove swiftly under the seafloor, 
through an underwater tube to the center of the 
earth. 
Gradually, the walls of the tunnel changed 
from water to soil. From rock to concrete. 
And suddenly, our Bug fighter and its Hork-
Bajir crewmen pulled into an enormous, light-
96 
flooded cavern. Service hangars lined the walls 
of the dome-shaped space, as big as the main 
Yeerk pool. The floor was alive with Taxxon and 
Hork-Bajir crewmen streaming to and from docked 
fighters. Human-Controller maintenance workers 
buzzed from ship to ship in one-person pods. 
A Blade ship was being serviced in what 
looked like a private hangar. 
Our Bug fighter zoomed purposefully along a 
line of docked Bug fighters until it came to an 
empty stall. 
We descended slowly and landed with a slight 
jolt. 
<We have docked,> Ax said unnecessarily. 
Jake stood up. <Let's go, guys.> 
97 

Six Hork-Bajir backed down the debarkation 
ladder and stepped onto a hard concrete floor. 
I, for one, was doing my best to look ex-
tremely mean. 
<AII these fighters,> Cassie said in private 
thought-speak. <The Yeerks have an amazing 
force !> 
Yeah, the power assembled here was more 
than any of us had expected. Dozens of Bug 
fighters. A Blade ship. And these were just the 
ones in for servicing. 
If the all-out invasion came, it wasn't going to 
be pretty. 
<Stay calm, everybody,> Jake said. <Pretend 
you know where you're going. And look tough.> 
98 
Other Bug fighter crews marched across the 
mammoth room. We mimicked them by forming 
three rows of two and striding along until we 
neared a security checkpoint. 
Two Dracon-slinging Hork-Bajir heavies looked 
us over carelessly. The third one, a thinner, 
savvier-looking guy, raised a bladed arm for us to 
halt. 
If I'd been a normal kid, without the superhu-
man bravery of an Animorph, my heart probably 
would have stopped. It wasn't just the three se-
curity guards. I mean, the six of us could take 
them. It was the other hundred or so Hork-Bajir 
milling around. The complex was alive! 
The thin security guard slid off his stool, 
walked up to Ax, looked him up and down. Then 
he backed away and snorted to the others. 
"Grrraffshhh Grrrrufssshhhht!" 
Finally, he waved us on. 
<No, you have a nice day, sir,> I said softly. 
Nobody laughed. <Look, we might be in a Yeerk 
fortress, but life's about experience, right? This 
is experiences 
<Shut. Up,> Rachel said. 
<Okay.> 
We followed other crews to a long corridor at 
the edge of the cavern in which we'd parked the 
ship. There was a moving walkway, like the con-
veyer belts for people at the airport. In lanes on 
99 

either side of us, transport vehicles raced in both 
directions. 
<We're definitely headed for the pool,> Tobias 
observed. 
<We'll have to split up to find Visser One,> 
Jake said. <The place is huge and we probably 
don't have much time.> 
A few moments later we emerged from the 
connecting tunnel into the cavernous Yeerk pool 
complex we'd come to know and love. 
And there, in the center of the sloshing pool 
itself, tied to a stake in the middle of the infesta-
tion pier, was Visser One. 
My mother. 
<That was easy,> Cassie said. 
Visser One — my mother — was roped and 
chained. If there was a part of her body that 
wasn't bruised or bleeding, I couldn't see it. It 
hurt just to look at her. 
I wanted to run to her, cut her free. But 
didn't. It would have been suicide for all of us. 
Controllers jeered and yelled at her from the 
side of the pool. She was no longer their visser. 
She was a traitor, a loser. 
Torture, humiliation, death. The Yeerks had 
made the execution a public event. 
And obviously, the starvation was well under-
way. The visser thrashed madly and screamed in-
comprehensible words at the crowd. 
100 
The Yeerk in my mother's head was desper-
ate. Surrounded by Kandrona she couldn't have, 
starving in the midst of plenty. 
A sick, retching feeling twisted my stomach. 
<Mom!> I yelled in private thought-speak. 
Her jabbering stopped abruptly. She'd heard 
my thought-speak. My mother was still alive 
enough to know my voice! 
<Mom!> I yelled again. This time, she didn't 
respond. Or couldn't. Visser One reasserted con-
trol, roaring and wailing, spitting at her tormen-
tors. Pulling at wrists and ankles bound tight and 
black with bruising. I had to look away. 
A bladed claw pressed gently against my 
back. It was Jake. 
<l know this is tough,> he said. <But we have 
to do it right.> 
<Visser One knows who we are,> I said 
quickly. <ln the state she's in, starved out of her 
mind, she could say anything.> 
<Would anyone listen to her?> Cassie said. 
<Would anyone even understand?> 
<She will not talk,> Ax said. 
<What makes you so sure?> Tobias said. 
<She has nothing to gain by telling them. She 
will die anyway.> 
<True,> Tobias said thoughtfully. <But you 
could also argue that she has nothing to lose by 
telling them. I know what it's like. I know what it 
101 

does to you. If she thinks it might save her, she'll 
talk.> 
<How can we get her out of here?> Rachel 
said practically. <We can't just pick her up and 
carry her all the way back to the ship.> 
<Right,> I said, struggling to focus, to plan. 
<We wouldn't get two feet without being slaugh-
tered. We are seriously outnumbered.> 
<Okay, so the subtle rescue-and-escape plan 
is not happening,>Cassie said. <What . . . > 
<Back to the ship,> Ja ke commanded. <Now.> 
<And leave Visser One?> Cassie cried, indig-
nant. <We've made it this far. We can't give up.> 
<No one said anything about giving up,> Jake 
said. 
He turned his fierce Hork-Bajir eyes toward 
the entrance to the connecting walkway. Scruti-
nized the channel through which we'd arrived at 
the Yeerk pool. 
Ax was the first one to understand. 
<l am an excellent pilot,> Ax said. <But as 
you have witnessed, Yeerk ships are not as re-
sponsive as Andalite craft. I do not think such 
tight confines are maneuverable> 
<We're going to fly her out?> Rachel said. 
<Got a better plan?> Jake was already moving 
toward the walkway, back to the ship. We fol-
lowed, walking quickly. Stepped onto the con-
veyer belt with a group of Taxxon pilots. 
102 
And then, as we approached the maintenance 
dome, a security force assembled. 
<Please let them be there to question these 
Taxxons,> Tobias said. 
"Sttoooopflesshh!" the lead security agent 
commanded. 
Jake stopped. 
<Keep walkings he told us. <l'll handle this.> 
"Your fighter is overdue. Explain!" 
"Yes," Jake said, articulating human language 
sounds as clearly as a Hork-Bajir beak would al-
low. "We were cruishh . . . cruising over the for-
est when our right thruster stopped working. I 
had to land. My orders were to have the fighter 
maintenanced here." 
<Stay cool, everybody,> he added privately. 
"That's a lie," cried the thin Hork-Bajir from 
before, shoving Jake into his men. "There was a 
full system check. Nothing is wrong with your 
ship. Gufleccccssshhhh!" 
Hork-Bajir from neighboring hangars craned 
their necks to see if there would be a struggle. 
<0n second thought,> Jake directed, every-
body, run!> 
103 

J ake raised his bladed elbows and sliced 
into the wall of Hork-Bajir trying to restrain him. 
Note to self: Do not attempt to contradict 
Yeerk security forces. It only leads to mayhem. 
<Get to the fighter!> Jake screamed. 
He punched another Hork-Bajir out of his 
way and raced down the long row of ships. Sud-
denly — 
Tseeeeeew! Tseeeeeew! 
The air around him exploded in a flash of Dra-
con fire! 
<No!> 
Jake disappeared in a cloud of glowing 
smoke. 
<Jake!> Cassie screamed. 
104 
<Relax,> Jake called out to us, panting heav-
ily. <l'm okay. I'm crouched behind a service trol-
ley.> 
He was out of sight, but that didn't mean se-
curity believed he was dead. All attention, all 
guns, all Dracon beams swarmed toward the 
smoky cloud where Jake had last been seen. 
No one noticed the transformation that was 
taking place behind other conveniently placed 
pieces of equipment. A muscular blue Andalite 
and a red-tailed hawk, growing and morphing 
where two Hork-Bajir had stood seconds before. 
Tobias flapped up, high and silent, into the bowl 
of the dome. 
Thwack . . . Thwack-Thwack-Thwack! 
Ax! 
"Aaghshs . . . " Four Dracon beams clattered 
to the ground. Four warriors clutching fingerless 
stumps let loose with desperate, confused cries. 
Ax shot off like a bullet in Jake's direction. 
Cassie, Rachel, and I, still in our Hork-Bajir 
morphs, grabbed the Dracon weapons off the 
floor. 
<Fire at Ax!> I yelled. 
It was our best chance, our only option for 
cover. As long as we shot at the Andalite, the 
Hork-Bajir wouldn't shoot at us. We ran after Ax. 
Missing every shot. 
<Get to the ship!> 
105 

Bug ship crews were running for their fight-
ers. We had no time! 
Words to live by: When you're running from 
the enemy, don't look back. It never does any 
good. I turned around to see a stampede of angry, 
armed Hork-Bajir pouring through the connect-
ing tunnel. 
Did I need to see that? Was that good for 
morale? No. It was not. 
"Traitors!" I raged suddenly, waving my Dra-
con beam toward a disorganized group of security 
Hork-Bajir. "Over there. Over there! Get them!" 
"Guflesshhhkkl Defffantii!" cried the leader 
of the first wave. "Die, traitors!" Off they went. 
Security force against security force. 
Exactly what we needed. Civil war. Confusion. 
Yeerk against Yeerk. 
<Get your butts in the ship!> Jake roared. 
<l'm inside. I'm waiting!> 
Where were Rachel and Cassie? I'd lost them. 
I was alone. 
I ran. 
My long, hard claws scratched the cold, hard 
floor. The Hork-Bajir heart pounded like a bass 
drum in my chest. Lungs burned. Sweat dripped 
into my eyes. 
Our ship's bug-eye windows glowed red, pow-
ering up. 
106 
<AII systems are go,> Ax said from inside. 
<Autopilot is disabled. I have full controls 
<Let's ride, Ax,> Jake ordered. 
<Wait! For! Me!> I bounded up the narrow 
maintenance ladder and into our ride. 
Ax was at the controls. Tobias was perched 
like a figurehead inside. 
<Let's cruise for some chicks,> I breathed, al-
ready starting to demorph. <l lost the girls.> 
We lifted off. 
<Shields up,> Ax said. 
Ka-Bammm! Dracon fire grazed our force-
field bubble. 
Ax didn't wait for further orders. He knew 
what to do. 
We shot into the air. Dove down. Shot up 
again. I felt like I'd left my stomach in the main-
tenance hangar. 
I was human now, morph-capable. I'd had 
enough of the Hork-Bajir. I wanted something 
hairy and familiar. 
<There!> Tobias yelled. <l see them! Behind 
that maintenance pod.> 
We rose again. Then, dipped. Rose, dipped. 
Bug-fighter frenzy: The carnival ride from hell. 
Ax moved in and opened the hatch. 
<Shields down,> he said. 
Cassie was crouched low, shielding her head 
107 

from Dracon fire. I reached out with a still-forming 
gorilla hand. Grabbed hold. Pulled! 
<Ahhh!> 
Cassie was in. 
Rachel tumbled through the hole after her. 
<Shields up.> 
Tseeew! 
The maintenance vehicle exploded in a flash 
of heat that sent us rocking. 
<Ax,> Jake ordered, <get us out of here!> 
108 
I moved to a window. The red, bloodshot 
"eyes" of Bug fighters everywhere were coming 
to life. 
One rose from its hangar, still tethered to the 
maintenance tubes and tools that clung to its 
hull. 
It tried to accelerate. 
Blaamm! 
A white flash. An instant explosion. 
<Do not attempt to fly a ship undergoing main-
tenance,> Ax counseled. <Something is bound to 
go wrong.> 
<Yeah, well, we're not doing so hot our-
selves,> I said. 
Handheld Dracon fire battered our shields. Ax 
109 

pointed the ship at the connecting tunnel and 
slammed on the gas. 
Wee-oo-wee-oo! 
A deafening alarm! Flashing lights seized the 
controls. I looked at Ax. 
<We do not have clearance. Too narrow.> 
<Do something, Ax!> Jake cried. 
Ax did. He slowed the ship, turned our Dracon 
cannon on the rock of the connecting tunnel, and 
fired. Solid rock began to burn and melt and dis-
appear! 
Tobias was monitoring the shields. <Shield 
strength is fading, Ax! Twenty-eight percent. 
Twenty-six!> 
The stone blazed. Chunks of smoldering, 
flaming cliff crashed onto the conveyor belt we'd 
walked across minutes before. 
Ka-Bam! Bamm! Bam, bam, bam! 
Dracon fire continued to rock us from below. 
<Ax! Can you fly us through, yes or no?> 
<Yes.> 
<Whoa!> 
The ship banked forty-five degrees! And Ax 
took us into the flames. Scraping . . . bump-
ing .. . screeching through the exploding rock! 
We were like a bullet in a gun barrel. 
<Ax, you're craaaaazy!> Cassie screamed. 
Suddenly, light. Air. 
110 
The gigantic Yeerk pool complex opened up 
before us. 
<Nice work, Ax-man,> Jake said, breathing 
hard. <Now, let's take their minds off Visser 
One.> 
He aimed the Dracon cannon at a complex of 
outbuildings on the edge of the pool. Fired. 
Missed! 
<Let the master take over.> 
I took the controls. 
Tseeeew! 
An outbuilding disappeared. Another erupted 
in flames. 
Tseeeew! 
An unmanned earthmover vaporized. Control-
lers scattered in all directions. It was a Holly-
wood summer weekend movie. 
I ruled. 
I turned the cannon on the pool. 
My mother might have been delirious, but her 
eyes went wide at the sight of the training can-
non. 
<Careful,> Rachel said. 
I aimed at the edge. Not at the Yeerks, not at 
the Controllers. Just at the thick metal tank. The 
symbol of enslavement. 
Tseew! 
A low-power burst made the tank wall melt. 
111 

No major damage because I wasn't trying to de-
stroy it. I was just trying to get everyone to run. 
Hork-Bajir and humans fanned out in a des-
perate escape. 
<Take us in,> Jake said to Ax. <Rachel, 
Marco? You ready?> 
I snorted. <lf we can't do it, no one can.> 
<Let's do it!> 
Ax hovered the ship above the Kandrona slop. 
The under-hatch opened. 
<Shields down,> Ax said nervously. 
<Go!> Jake yelled. <Go!> 
We jumped out. Gorilla feet and Hork-Bajir 
talons slammed onto the metal peninsula where 
my mother was tied up. The infestation pier is as 
wide as a boardwalk, but it's as dangerous as a 
rope bridge strung across a canyon in the Andes. 
Rachel quickly sliced the cuffs that held my 
mother to the pole. Chest. . . wrists . . . ankles. 
My mother didn't seem to know we were there 
to help. The screaming Yeerk in her head was too 
far gone. 
<Grab her,> Rachel growled. <The ship's 
about to get hit!> 
Tseeeew! 
A Dracon bolt hit the ship over our heads! The 
force rattled the pier and burned a scar into the 
side of our fighter! 
112 
<Hang on!> Jake called from above. <We'll 
be back.> 
No choice. Ax had to pull away or be massa-
cred. The ship raised its shields and buzzed into 
the air. 
<We're stranded,> Rachel said. <This isn't 
how it was supposed to work out!> 
Another Bug ship zoomed through the con-
necting tunnel, swarmed the air over the pool. Ax 
shot straight up to the top of the dome, the at-
tacking ship right behind. 
Tseeew! 
Dracon fire missed Ax as he pulled steeply 
back. 
Tseeew! 
Jake shattered the shield of the enemy ship. 
I turned back to my mother, leaned low to 
protect her body from the fight. <Mom, it's me. 
It's Marco.> 
Carefully, I lifted her into my arms. She was 
silent for less than a second, then the screaming 
started again. 
Tseeew! Tseew! 
<Duck!> Rachel yelled. Stray fire Irom the 
aerial fight was dislodging piece, <>l ro< i< Irom 
the ceiling! Small boulders rained lo thi flooi 
like deadly hail. 
Ka-plash! Ka-plash-plash pl.ishl 

Chunks splashed into the pool, feet from us, 
covering us is a spray of goo. 
<We're in trouble now,> Rachel said solemnly, 
pointing to a fearsome-looking group of Hork-
Bajir marked with blue armbands on their bulg-
ing biceps. 
<Who are those guys? They're . . . huge. Crap. 
They're the most pumped Hork-Bajir I've ever 
seen!> 
I threw my kicking, fighting mother over my 
shoulder. 
<Let's get to the other pier!> I shouted. 
<Then what?> 
<Run like hell.> 
The gap between the piers was at least five 
feet. Maybe more. Rachel ran down our pier like 
it was an airstrip. She lifted up . . . rocketed 
through space . . . 
The perfect long jump. 
<Marco, come on!> 
No choice. I taxied like a DC-3. The jump was 
too long, too . . . 
<Ahhhhh!> 
We hurtled through the air above the churning 
Yeerks. 
And crashed onto the reinfestation pier. 
Suddenly, my mother went totally limp. 
Oh, God. Was she dead? Had I killed her? 
114 
No. Her eyes fluttered open and she looked at 
me pleadingly. 
"Kill it," she whispered. 
What? I looked down on the pier. 
Visser One! The overgrown leech had escaped 
from my mother's ear and was trying to bail! It 
must have tried to drop into the Kandrona that 
was food, that was life. . . . 
Trouble was, the timing of the jump had been 
off. Visser One had hit the pier as we landed. 
And now it was wriggling away. 
115 

" • a m ! 
A blue-banded Hork-Bajir slashed Rachel in 
the face! 
Bam! Bam, bam, bam! 
She struck back, a kickboxing, blade-slashing 
frenzy. The Hork-Bajir staggered, but stayed on 
his feet. 
"I am Grath," he growled, eyes yellow-orange 
infernos. "I am the leader of the elite Blue Band 
Squadron. You will surrender or you will die." 
<Surrender?> Rachel said to me, incredu-
lous. <He doesn't know me very well.> 
"A Hork-Bajir's gonna die on this pier, Mr. 
Grath," she snarled. "But it's not gonna be me." 
116 
Whooosh! 
"Kill it!" My mother's voice rose louder now, 
trembling with anger. Visser One was crawling, 
shriveling up to half its size, then stretching for-
ward. Shrivel, stretch. Shrivel, stretch. A slow, 
relentless rhythm toward the pier's edge. 
I reached to grab it . . . 
Bam! 
<Ahhh!> 
A claw-foot stabbed my leg! Another Hork-
Bajir had landed on the pier! 
I dropped my mother in a heap. 
"You will die, Andalite!" Another Blue Band 
jabbed my back! 
BAM! 
I whirled and punched him in the chest. <l 
don't think so, freak.> 
I glanced down to where my mother lay mo-
tionless, semiprotected between Rachel and me, 
oblivious to the battle. Bruised and broken, she 
was barely able to lift her head. 
But still, she raged. "You won't get away, 
filthy worm!" 
Tseew! Tseewtseew! 
<Ahhh!> Rachel cried. <l'm hit! Bad.> 
Had to help Rachel! 
"Kill it!" 
Had to help Mom! 
117 

I clenched my fist, a gorilla wrecking ball. I 
brought it up, ready to slam it down on the slug. 
Tseeew! 
"AAAAaaarghhhh!" 
Searing pain raced through my right leg! 
I dropped to the pier, clutching burns so 
painful I couldn't think. The smell of my own 
burning hair and flesh filled my nostrils, sweet 
and sickening. . . . 
<Marco!> Rachel. 
"Kill it!" My mother. 
Insane fighter combat in the air overhead! 
More rock raining down! 
Bam! 
The Blue Band slashed me on the face. 
Okay. That was unnecessary. 
Rage drove me to my feet. 
Ka-bam! 
"Galaaaah!" 
I punched Blue Band off the pier. 
Splash! 
He flailed, struggled in the muddy sea. . . . 
A Bug fighter buzzed my head. The wake of 
air pushed me down. The roar of engines filled 
my ears, a shrill, deafening whine. 
Then, without warning — 
TSEEEEW! 
A red flash over our heads. 
118 
Ka-BLAAMMM! 
The Bug fighter blew apart, showering us with 
fiery debris! 
Mounds of guts and severed limbs every-
where! 
<No!> 
Jake, Ax, Cassie, Tobias . . . gone! 
All gone. 
<N ooooooooooo !> 
Rachel! 
I spun around, jumped over Mom. Smashed 
into the two warriors that pinned Rachel to the 
pier. 
The anger was overwhelming. The pain nau-' 
seating. 
Whoomf! Bam! 
I slammed my pile-driver arms into the Hork-
Bajir chests. The bodies rolled, splashed . . . 
<Come on! Let's move!> I shrieked. 
My head was reeling. Rachel's left arm was a 
vein and a skin flap from falling off. My mother 
was helpless. Two more bladed Blue Bands were 
clanging down the infestation pier, gaining speed 
to make the jump . . . 
Suddenly, the dome went eerily quiet. 
The other Bug ship had disappeared. No roar 
of engines. No Dracon weapons firing. No battle. 
A new sound . . . 
119 

The sound of laughter, mind-filling, evil 
thought-speak laughter, flooding the pool com-
plex. 
The Blue Bands froze in their tracks. 
I looked across the pool. Visser Three stood 
on the shore, his stolen Andalite head tilted 
back. 
Then, he began to morph. 
The blue Andalite body turned black. Long, 
flat appendages sprouted from his neck and 
back, then opened outward in both directions, 
forming wings. Huge black wings! 
Growing fuller and wider till they joined in the 
center. A continuous delta wing. A living stealth 
bomber. 
A head grew in the middle. No, not a head . . . 
A mouth! Wide and long and lined with a dart-
ing silver tongue that licked rows of shimmering 
teeth. 
Then eyes . . . orange globes big as softballs, 
flanking the mouth like hardened gobs of tomato 
sauce. 
<Haa, haa, haa,> he squawked. <Poor little 
Andalites. Abandoned on the pier. Abandoned to 
die. . . .> 
The massive wings undulated only once, but 
it was enough to make the visser rise into the air. 
A second wing flap and he soared toward the top 
120 
of the dome, an enormous silhouette engulfing 
us in shadow. 
<Meet the Bievilerd!> the visser roared. <A 
little something I picked up on the planet Ondar. 
Its teeth will shred your flesh like paper.> 
Rachel and I were silent. What could we say 
to that? 
<You will die!> the visser cried. <And every-
one here will see me kill you!> 
<We have to move!> I yelled to Rachel. 
<l can't,> she said. 
<You have to!> 
But I knew it was impossible. A river of blood 
gushed from her severed arm. She was losing 
consciousness. 
Visser Three closed up his wings and dove for 
the pier, a missile with a mouth. 
There was no escape. No escape! 
I tried to lift both Rachel and my mother. 
They shuddered and gasped with pain. My at-
tempt was pathetic! My injuries made me too 
weak to do anything. . . . 
Suddenly — 
Zzeeeeoowwwwww! A Bug ship zoomed out 
from behind a storage building! 
Tseeew! 
A Dracon blast, right into the Bievilerds belly. 
"Rooooaaaaahhhhhhhhh!" 
121 

The visser shrieked. The fighter rocketed to-
ward us. 
<Marco!> It was Jake's voice . . . Jake's 
fighter! 
<But I saw you crash!> 
<No,> he said. <You saw the Yeerks crash. 
Where's your faith in the Ax-man? Hang on, we're 
coming in.> 
122 
Tseeew! 
A second hole sizzled the Bievilercfs folded 
wing. It crumpled, wilted, crashed . . . 
<Andalite filth!> the visser screamed. <You 
will pay. I will make you pay! Kill them!> 
Tseew! Tseew! 
Jake took out the two remaining Blue Bands 
just before we were sliced in their mobile 
Cuisinart-of-war. 
<l'm losing it, Jake,> Rachel mumbled, still 
fallen close by. <You have to get us out of here!> 
I tried to lift my mother again, but this 
time she resisted, summoning all her feeble 
strength. 
Dracon strafe sprayed the pier. . . . 
123 

"Die!" she wheezed, eyes fixed on a small 
gray spot an inch from the edge. 
Visser One! 
<Mom, stop!> 
She fell forward, arm extended, clutching . . . 
"Die!" 
The Bug ship flew in over the pool, block-
ing us from Dracon fire, hovering low just feet 
away. 
My mother's face was distorted. Real human 
tears ran from her cheeks. Rage, pain, joy . . . 
And then her hand squished the parasite. 
But the slug was still alive. . . . 
"No!" 
I slammed my foot on the still-wriggling 
worm. And it was clear. . . 
. . . it was clear that Visser One's journey had 
ended. 
My mother, Eva, looked into my gorilla eyes 
with an expression of sick satisfaction. In spite of 
everything, it scared me. 
"Now we can go," she whispered. 
Then she fainted in my arms. 
Ax lowered the shields. I jumped on board. 
Jake and Cassie leaped out, lifted Rachel, and 
set her inside. The operation took longer than it 
should have. . . . 
<The ship is hit!> Cassie yelled. 
124 
<lt can't be!> Tobias said. 
<Ax?> 
We dropped. The engines died like we'd 
pulled the plug. 
Ka-PLASSSSH! We smashed into some-
thing . . . soft. . . something fluid. 
Glug-glug-glug! 
Ax's nimble fingers worked frantically on the 
controls. I moved to a window. 
<We're in the POOL!> I cried. 
Cassie coaxed Rachel through her demorph to 
repair near-fatal injuries. I had to do the same. 
<Prince Jake, I cannot regain takeoff velocity. 
The pool is like a bog. The more we move, the 
more it sucks us under.> 
We were slowly sinking into the heart of en-
emy territory! 
I slammed a human fist against the cabin 
wall. 
Saw that my mother's eyes were open. Saw 
that she was trying to speak but could produce 
nothing but a scratchy, phlegmy sigh. 
"Mom, what is it?" 
She looked up at Ax. 
"Send the Dracon beam supply into over-
load," she muttered. 
"What?" I said. "Ax, did you hear that? She 
said to send the beam supply into overload." 
125 

Ax turned his stalk eyes. 
<That will explode the ship. It will destroy 
us.> 
"Ax, listen to her!" 
<Does your mother wish to see us die?> Ax 
said privately. 
"Ax, she's free now," I said. "She's free!" 
"It won't explode the ship," she went on, gag-
ging with the effort. "Not if you time it right. 
When the Dracon power supply reaches one hun-
dred fifty-five percent of maximum, shunt it to 
the engines, then fire the beams to bleed off any 
overcharge." 
I looked at Ax. Ax looked at Jake. Jake looked 
at Cassie, who was looking at a now-human 
Rachel. 
<lt makes sense — I guess,> Tobias said 
from his perch near the controls. 
<Then do it,> Jake said. 
<But . . .> 
<Do it.> 
The screaming sound of beam overload 
raged until even I thought the ship would ex-
plode. 
But my mother had been a Yeerk host for a 
long time. She'd learned a few things. She knew 
what she was doing. 
The screaming stopped. Ax fired the beams 
126 
directly into the pool. A cloud of smoke and 
steam billowed around us. 
<What's going on?> 
<Technically?> Ax answered. <Water mole-
cules are exploding. Simplistically? We are boil-
ing Yeerks.> 
Cassie turned away from the window. The 
ship began to rise. 
Ax punched the power. 
In the background, Visser Three continued to 
roar. <You will die, Andalites! I will kill you slowly 
and painfully! You are mine!> 
We zoomed through the burned-out connect-
ing walkway. Blew through the docking area, the 
repair facility, and into the tunnel. Yeerk fighters 
were on our tail. 
I knelt next to my mother. Took her into my 
arms as we erupted into the sea. Cradled her 
gently, securely. 
The Bug fighter punched through the ocean 
surface and into the night sky. Then up, up into 
the atmosphere. 
Ax's voice came as a distant alarm. 
<We are outnumbered, Prince Jake. Ships are 
dropping from orbit to attack.> 
<No choice,> Jake answered. <Ditch the ship.> 
Immediately, the ship turned, dove, plum-
meted toward the National Forest. 
127 

We crash-landed and bailed seconds before 
Bug fighters shot up the wreckage. 
Not far from the place in the woods where 
this adventure had begun. We were almost back 
at our starting point. 
Only this time, I had a prize. 
128 
Mom?" 
"Yes, sweetheart?" 
She put her hand on my shoulder and looked 
into my eyes. 
Her own eyes had healed up pretty well. The 
scars on her face and arms, the broken bones, the 
bruised tissue . . . Nature had done a good job. 
First aid from the Chee hadn't hurt, either. 
She looked just like she used to. Well, almost. 
The change was nothing obvious. It was a sort 
of tension, a vigilance in her face. It hadn't been 
there when I was younger. 
Because she hadn't been a slave before. 
A golden sun warmed the sky. Fluffy, non-
threatening clouds dotted the blue. 
129 

A perfect day. But if it was a perfect day, why 
didn't I feel perfect? If this was my dream come 
true, why did I feel so wrong? 
We were footsteps from the valley of the Hork-
Bajir, the Promised Land for refugees. So why 
did I feel uneasy? 
"Sweetheart, what is it?" Mom said again. 
"Nothing. Just that this valley is awesome. 
You're going to be safe. Free. And I'm glad, that's 
all." 
We crested the hill and the full effect of the 
valley spread out before us. 
Standing on the rim of the Grand Canyon? 
Same kind of feeling. 
Mom was visibly impressed. 
"The Yeerks have no idea. They think they de-
stroyed all this." She darkened suddenly. "And 
they will yet. Visser Three will have force enough 
to launch his attack in just a few months. He'll 
burn cities from orbit, Marco. He'll enslave the 
human race." 
She had been Visser One. Who was I to argue 
with her predictions? 
"Yeah, well, maybe not," I said bravely. Being 
brave is my job. 
A waving hand caught my eye. Down the 
slope, near a group of Hork-Bajir flashing blades 
in welcome, was one smiling human. 
130 
Dad. 
I didn't say anything. Neither did my mother. 
She just took off down the slope like a woman 
who hadn't seen her husband in months and 
months and months. . . . 
It was a movie cliche. It was lovers reunited. 
It was the dream I'd had ever since I knew my 
mother was alive. Dad opened his arms and she 
tumbled into them. 
They embraced. They held each other for a 
long, longtime. 
Everything I'd worked for was right before my 
eyes. 
So what was this heaviness pressing on my 
heart? 
The Hork-Bajir had prepared a feast. Bark 
Wellington. Bark Schnitzel. Bark chow mein. 
Bark fume a la creme. 
As I unpacked the supermarket cans I'd 
brought along, I assured the Hork-Bajir it's the 
thought that counts. 
I'd forgotten a can opener, but who needs one 
in the valley of the walking Swiss Army knives? 
The sun began to set as we finished our din-
ner. The Hork-Bajir lighted their campfires. Mom 
listened intently as Jara Hamee started one of his 
now-famous stories. 
Dad pulled me aside. 
131 

"Marco?" he said in a whisper. "Was there 
any way to save Nora? Is there any way to save 
her now?" 
His words made me feel a little sick. But by 
now, I knew that life, and love, were compli-
cated. 
"You know that I love her —" 
I nodded. Made the decision. 
"Dad, what if Nora was a Controller all along? 
What if the Yeerks put her in your path because 
they knew you were involved in secret work?" 
Pain knotted my father's face. 
My conscience was heavy. Permanent dam 
age had been done. My family was back together, 
but not really. 
Not honestly. 
It was a desperate speculation, one that, I 
hoped, would make it easier for my dad. 
It didn't make it any easier for me. 
"What are you saying?" 
"You were set up by the enemy," I said. "You 
can't blame yourself." 
132 
The waves lapped at the sandy shore. 
<Three miles,> Tobias called down. <The 
closest humans are three miles down the beach. 
But I don't think they're going anywhere. They're, 
urn, pretty focused on each other.> 
Not that I could see the waves. It was night, 
with an unhelpful crescent moon. 
"This thing is really ready?" Jake asked, look-
ing down at the infamous Z-space transponder. 
We'd let a little time pass. Not much. Just 
enough to let Ax finish the device. 
<Ready for transmission, Prince Jake. The 
translator chip has been installed and enabled.> 
Jake smiled. Gave me a not-so-inscrutable 
133 

look o f . . . a look that acknowledged our friend-
ship under fire. 
Dad and I had been reported gunned down by 
unidentified intruders. The local police had no 
leads. No clues. 
No surprise. 
The investigation was underway. A lie that 
made the neighbors feel better. 
Nora was a casualty, one more Controller in 
our midst. She still lived at the house, still 
taught at my old school. Tobias spotted her one 
night loitering around a known Yeerk pool en-
trance. 
Maybe . . . maybe someday I could save her. 
Chee Land wasn't so bad. That's where I 
stayed now, mostly. They had TV. They had Oreos. 
When I needed a cable fix, I spent the night 
at Ax's scoop. It was too risky for me to be at 
Cassie's or Rachel's or Jake's. 
And when we didn't have a mission, I went to 
the valley. 
Always to the valley. 
"Let me go over this one more time," I said. 
"Transmission may mean interception by the 
Yeerks, so we have to be careful what we say. And 
we can't hang around when we're done. Ax takes 
the machine with him so the Yeerks can't track 
us to this transmission site." 
134 
"Wait," Rachel interrupted. "Can't we encrypt 
the transmission? Like they do in the movies?" 
<lt will be encrypted, in four separate path-
ways,> Ax said with a hint of disdain. <But to 
Yeerk cryptographic equipment, the disguise is 
elementary.> 
"But there's a chance?" Cassie said hope-
fully. "A chance they'll think the signal is coming 
from one of their own ships?" 
<A small chance,> Ax answered. 
"Let's do this," Jake said, rubbing his hands 
together. 
"Let's hope the fleet is open twenty-four 
hours," I said. "Ax, you've got the Andalites on 
your speed dial, right?" 
I shifted my feet anxiously in the sand. 
Breathed deeply. 
Ax typed a line or two of code on the abbrevi-
ated keypad. His fingers trembled slightly. This 
was a long-distance call. 
I glanced at the sky, into the sea of stars and 
planets and alien worlds that lay beyond my view. 
"Look!" Cassie said, pointing to a small dome-
shaped light on the side of the machine that 
glowed a regal blue. 
<We have a connections Ax said. 
All four of his eyelids blinked rapidly. His pos-
ture straightened. 
135 

A voice . . . a scratchy, commanding voice . . . 
<Who is this?> demanded the Andalite officer 
on the other end. <Who is initiating this con-
tact?> 
It was surreal! This voice . . . these words . . 
Our link to another world! 
Jake signaled Ax to answer. 
But Ax shook his head. 
<No. I believe this is your moment.> 
Jake glanced at each of us, ran his hand 
through his hair. 
"This is . . ." He cleared his throat. He glanced 
back at Ax and smiled. Then he leaned in close 
to the device. 
"This is Earth," he said. 
We do know who they a r e . . . 
and we know you, t o o . . . 
136 
#46 The Deception 
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm 
Tobias kept careful watch from above. Marco 
hung over my shoulder. 
And with the aid of Cassie's cell phone and 
my new, lime green iMac, I proceeded to reroute 
the Yeerk Z-space transmissions through the 
NSA's central computer. 
"Federal prison," Marco said, "here we 
come." 
<What's happening, Ax?> 
I related the sequence of events as they oc-
curred. 
<The NSA is attempting to block out my 
transmission. Now they are receiving our offer-
ing. My code-cracking program.> 
A few keystrokes. A moment of tension. Wait-
ing. 
"Ax, what's going on!" 
<The NSA have halted their efforts to keep 
me out. Now, let's see what we find.> 
<One thing, Ax-man,> Tobias called. <Uh, are 

you sure the program you sent these guys can't 
be used to deciper your own stuff? Or the 
Yeerks'?> 
Slowly, I swung one eye stalk around and up 
to look at Tobias, perched on the branch of a 
tree. 
<Okay, okay, sorry I asked.> 
And then, suddenly, it happened. 
This bigger, faster, more powerful machine, 
combined with my superior Andalite technical 
knowledge and skills . . . 
". . . The newly appointed Visser One, re-
cently Visser Three, current leader of the Yeerk 
mission on planet Earth . . . has approved Oper-
ation 9466. Visser Two has undertaken a journey 
to Earth to assist in the execution of this long-
anticipated military action . . . " 
"Bingo," Marco whispered. 

