Springer Monographs in Mathematics

Akihiro Kanamori
The Higher Inﬁnite
Large Cardinals in Set Theory
from Their Beginnings
Second Edition
123

Akihiro Kanamori
Department of Mathematics
111 Cummington Street
Boston, MA 02215
USA
aki@math.bu.edu
The ﬁrst edition was published in 1994 by Springer-Verlag under the same title in the series
Perspectives in Mathematical Logic
First softcover printing 2009
ISBN 978-3-540-88866-6
e-ISBN 978-3-540-88867-3
DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-88867-3
Springer Monographs in Mathematics ISSN 1439-7382
Library of Congress Control Number: 2008940025
Mathematics Subject Classification (2000): 03E05, 03E15, 03E35, 03E55, 03E60
c⃝2009, 2003, 1994 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microfilm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9,
1965, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations
are liable to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply,
even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws
and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Coverdesign: WMXDesign GmbH, Heidelberg
Printed on acid-free paper
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
springer.com

Dedicated to my parents Kiyoo and Sakiko
and to Tamara, Danny, and Ari

Acknowledgements
My ﬁrst thanks goes to Gert M¨uller who initially suggested this project and
persisted in its encouragement. Thanks also to Thomas Orowan who went through
many iterations of the difﬁcult typing in the early stages. James Baumgartner,
Howard Becker, and Jose Ruiz read through large portions of the text and offered
extensive suggestions. The host of people who over the years provided suggestions,
information, or encouragement is too long to enumerate, but let me mention
Matthew Foreman, Thomas Jech, Alexander Kechris, Menachem Magidor, Tony
Martin, Marion Scheepers, Stevo Todorˇcevi´c, and Hugh Woodin. Of course, the
usual exculpatory remarks are very much in order. My ﬁnal thanks to Burton
Dreben and Gerald Sacks. Honi soit qui mal y pense.
Note to the Corrected First Edition
This printing mainly incorporates corrections of typographical and grammatical
errors, changes in four minor proofs, and updated publication details of cited
papers. It also introduces, on page 248, a new embedding concept ≺−subsequently
used in place of several unwarranted uses of ≺, elementary embedding. My thanks
to Kai Hauser for pointing out these unwarranted uses, as well as to Sakae Fuchino,
Richard Laver, Jose Ruiz, and several other people who have sent me corrections
and suggestions. Inevitably, several advances in a variety of directions have been
made since the ﬁrst printing, but no major attempt has been made to incorporate
these.
Brookline, Massachusetts
20 January 1997

VIII
Acknowledgements
Note to the Second Edition
This edition incorporates further corrections and improvements as well as updat-
ing remarks together with new bibliographical citations. The proofs of 23.6, 24.4,
28.12, and 32.7 have been signiﬁcantly changed. My particular thanks to Alessan-
dro Andretta and Benedikt L¨owe for providing corrections and suggestions, and
to the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology for providing
support and encouragement.
Since the previous printing of the book, Sakae Fuchino has provided a Japanese
translation incorporating most of the new corrections and published by Springer
Tokyo in 1998. I wish to express my particular gratitude to Fuchino-san for his
interest, industry, and efforts to publicize large cardinals in Japan.
The new remarks and citations have to do with advances directly pertinent to
the topics elaborated in the book. The projected volume II will provide expositions
of many other topics, particular in combinatorics and forcing, and the many new
advances made in these directions will be fully explored there.
Brookline, Massachusetts
2 January 2003
Note to the Corrected Second Edition
This printing incorporates corrections of typographical and grammatical errors
and cites a few advances. In the Chart of Cardinals there is now an arrow
from ‘strongly compact’ to ‘Woodin’ because of advances in core model theory
(cf. Schimmerling-Steel [96]). Also, p. 350 notes several advances, with 25.20
having become a theorem. My thanks to Masahiro Shioya and to Andrew Brooke-
Taylor for their corrections and suggestions.
Brookline, Massachusetts
13 December 2004

Table of Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
§0. Preliminaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Chapter 1. Beginnings
§1. Inaccessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
§2. Measurability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
§3. Constructibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
§4. Compactness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
§5. Elementary Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
§6. Indescribability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
§7. Partitions and Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
§8. Partitions and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
§9. Indiscernibles and 0#
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
§10. Development of Forcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
§11. Lebesgue Measurability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
§12. Descriptive Set Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
§13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
§14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
§15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
§16. Saturated Ideals I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
§17. Saturated Ideals II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
§18. Prikry Forcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
§19. Iterated Ultrapowers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244

X
Table of Contents
§20. Inner Models of Measurability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
§21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
§22. Supercompactness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 298
§23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
§24. The Strongest Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
§25. Combinatorics of Pκγ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
§26. Extenders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
Chapter 6. Determinacy
§27. Inﬁnite Games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
§28. AD and Combinatorics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
§29. Prewellorderings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403
§30. Scales and Projective Ordinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
§31. Det(α-Π1
1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 437
§32. Consistency of AD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 450
Chart of Cardinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 472
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 473
Indexed References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 483
Subject Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 531

Introduction
The higher inﬁnite refers to the lofty reaches of the inﬁnite cardinalities of set the-
ory as charted out by large cardinal hypotheses. These hypotheses posit cardinals
that prescribe their own transcendence over smaller cardinals and provide a super-
structure for the analysis of strong propositions. As such they are the rightful heirs
to the two main legacies of Georg Cantor, founder of set theory: the extension
of number into the inﬁnite and the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals. The
investigation of large cardinal hypotheses is indeed a mainstream of modern set
theory, and they have been found to play a crucial role in the study of deﬁnable
sets of reals, in particular their Lebesgue measurability. Although formulated at
various stages in the development of set theory and with different incentives, the
hypotheses were found to form a linear hierarchy reaching up to an inconsistent
extension of motivating concepts. All known set-theoretic propositions have been
gauged in this hierarchy in terms of consistency strength, and the emerging struc-
ture of implications provides a remarkably rich, detailed and coherent picture of
the strongest propositions of mathematics as embedded in set theory.
The ﬁrst of a projected multi-volume series, this text provides a compre-
hensive account of the theory of large cardinals from its beginnings through the
developments of the early 1970’s and several of the direct outgrowths leading to
the frontiers of current research. A further volume will round out the picture of
those frontiers with a wide range of forcing consistency results and aspects of
inner model theory. A genetic account through historical progression is adopted,
both because it provides the most coherent exposition of the mathematics and
because it holds the key to any epistemological concerns. With hindsight how-
ever the exposition is inevitably Whiggish, in that the consequential avenues are
pursued and the most elegant or accessible expositions given. Each section is a
modular unit, and later sections often describe how concepts discussed in earlier
sections inspired the next advance. With speculations and open questions pro-
vided throughout, the reader should not only come to appreciate the scope and
signiﬁcance of the overall enterprise but also become prepared to pursue research
in several speciﬁc areas.
In what follows a historical and conceptual overview is given, one that serves
to embed the sections of the text into a larger framework. In an appendix larger and

XII
Introduction
more discursive issues that may be raised by the investigation of large cardinals
are taken up. See Hallett [84], Lavine [94], Moore [82], and Fraenkel–Bar-Hillel–
Levy [73] for more on the development of set theory; several themes that are only
broached here are substantiated in at least one of these sources.
The Beginnings of Set Theory
Set theory had its beginnings in the great 19th Century transformation of math-
ematics that featured the arithmetization of analysis and a new engagement with
abstraction and generalization. Very much new mathematics growing out of old,
the subject did not spring Athena-like from the head of Cantor but in a gradual
process out of problems in mathematical analysis. In the wake of the founding of
the calculus by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz the function concept had been
steadily extended from analytic expressions toward arbitrary correspondences, in
the course of which the emphasis had shifted away from the continuum taken as a
whole to its construal as a collection of points, the real numbers. The ﬁrst major
expansion had been inspired by the explorations of Leonhard Euler and featured
the infusion of inﬁnite series methods and the analysis of physical phenomena,
particularly the vibrating string.
Working out of this tradition the young Cantor in the early 1870’s established
uniqueness theorems for trigonometric series in terms of their points of conver-
gence, theorems based on collections of reals deﬁned through a limit operation
iterable into the inﬁnite. In a crucial conceptual move Cantor began to investigate
such collections and inﬁnitary enumerations for their own sake, and this led ﬁrst
to basic concepts in the study of sets of reals and then to the formulation of the
transﬁnite numbers. Set theory was born on that December 1873 day when Cantor
established that the reals are uncountable, i.e. there is no one-to-one correspon-
dence between the reals and the natural numbers, and in the next decades was to
blossom through the prodigious progress made by him in the theory of ordinal
and cardinal numbers. But a synthesis of the reals as representing the continuum
and the new numbers as representing well-orderings eluded him: Cantor could not
establish the Continuum Hypothesis, that the cardinality 2ℵ0 of the set of reals is
the least uncountable cardinality ℵ1, part of his problem being that he could not
deﬁne a well-ordering of the reals.
Cantor came to view the ﬁnite and the transﬁnite as all of a piece, simi-
larly comprehendable within mathematics, and delimited by what he termed the
“Absolute” which he associated mathematically with the class of all ordinals and
metaphysically with God. As part of this realist picture Cantor viewed sets, at least
until the early 1890’s, as inherently structured with a well-ordering of their mem-
bers. Ordinal and cardinal numbers resulted from successive abstraction, from a
set x to its ordertype x and then to its cardinality x.
But such a structured view served to accentuate a growing stress among
mathematicians, who were already exercised by two related issues: whether in-
ﬁnite collections can be investigated within mathematics at all and how far the

Introduction
XIII
function concept is to be extended. The positive use of an arbitrary function having
been made explicit, there was open controversy after Ernst Zermelo [04] formu-
lated what he soon called the Axiom of Choice and established his Well-Ordering
Theorem, that the axiom implies every set can be well-ordered.
With axiomatization assuming a general methodological role in mathematics
Zermelo [08a] soon published the ﬁrst axiomatization of set theory. But as with
Cantor’s work the move was in response to mathematical pressure for a new
context: Beyond the stated purpose of securing set theory from paradox Zermelo’s
main motive was apparently to buttress his Well-Ordering Theorem by making
explicit its underlying set existence assumptions. In the process, he shifted the
focus away from the transﬁnite numbers to an abstract view of sets structured
solely by ∈and simple operations. Extracted from a speciﬁc proof (for the Well-
Ordering Theorem in his [08]) Zermelo’s axioms had the advantages of simplicity
and open-endedness. The generative set formation axioms, especially Power Set,
were to lead to Zermelo’s later adumbration [30] of the cumulative hierarchy view
of sets, and the vagueness of the deﬁnit property in the Separation Axiom was to
invite Thoralf Skolem’s [23] proposal to base it on ﬁrst-order logic.
Skolem’s move was in the wake of a mounting initiative, one that was to
expand set theory with new viewpoints and techniques as well as to invest it
with a larger foundational signiﬁcance. Gottlob Frege is regarded as the greatest
philosopher of logic since Aristotle for developing his 1879 Begriffsschrift (quan-
tiﬁcational logic), establishing a logical foundation for arithmetic, and generally
stimulating the analytic tradition in philosophy. The architect of that tradition
is Bertrand Russell who in his early years, inﬂuenced by Frege and Giuseppe
Peano, wanted to found all of mathematics on the certainty of logic. The vaulting
expression of that ambition was the 1910-3 three volume Principia Mathematica
by Alfred Whitehead and Russell. But Russell was exercised by his well-known
paradox, one which led to the tottering of Frege’s mature formal system. As a
result Principia was encased in a complex logical system of different types and
intensional predications ultimately breaking under his Axiom of Reducibility, a
fearful symmetry imposed by an artful dodger.
It remained for David Hilbert to shift the ground and establish mathematical
logic as a ﬁeld of mathematics. Russell’s philosophical disposition precluded his
axiomatizing logic, but Hilbert brought it under scrutiny as he did Euclidean geom-
etry by establishing an axiomatic context and raising the crucial questions of con-
sistency and later, completeness. This largely syntactic approach was soon given
a superstructure when in response to intuitionistic criticism by Luitzen Brouwer
and Hermann Weyl, Hilbert developed proof theory and proposed his program of
establishing the consistency of classical mathematics with his metamathematics.
These issues gained currency because of Hilbert’s preeminence, just as mathe-
matics in the large was expanded by his reliance on non-constructive proofs and
transcendental methods. Through this expansion the Axiom of Choice became a
mathematical necessity, particularly because of maximality arguments in algebra,
and arbitrary functions became implicitly accepted in the growing investigation of

XIV
Introduction
higher function spaces. With the increasing emphasis on frameworks and struc-
tures, the power set operation became incorporated into mathematics.
Throughout, Zermelian set theory grew as the mathematical repository of
foundational concerns and initiatives.
As the ﬁrst result of his axiomatic set
theory Zermelo [08a] himself put the Russell paradox argument to use to show
that for any set x there is a set y ⊆x such that y /∈x (so that there is no universal
set). Friedrich Hartogs [15] in effect converted the Burali-Forti paradox into the
existence for any set x of a well-orderable set y not injectible into x. Analyzing
the Zermelo [08] proof Kazimierz Kuratowski [21] provided that deﬁnition of
the ordered pair, antithetical to Russell’s type-ridden theory, which became the
standard way to reduce the theory of relations to sets. And then Skolem [23]
made his proposal of rendering Zermelo’s Separation Axiom in terms of properties
expressible in ﬁrst-order logic.
More than that, Skolem intended for set theory to be based on ﬁrst-order
logic with ∈construed syntactically and without a privileged interpretation. This
becomes clear in his application of the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem to get the
Skolem paradox: the existence of countable models of set theory although it entails
the existence of uncountable sets. Ironically, Skolem intended by this means to
deﬂate the possibility of set theory becoming a foundation for mathematics, but
following Kurt G¨odel’s work Skolem’s syntactical approach to set theory came
to be accepted. And again the ways of paradox were absorbed into set theory,
as the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem came to play an important internal role when
semantic methods were ushered in by Alfred Tarski.
Skolem [23] also and Abraham Fraenkel [21, 22] independently proposed the
addition of the Replacement Axiom to Zermelo’s list, and this axiom soon ﬁgured
in a counter-reformation of sorts. John von Neumann [23] introduced the ordinals
(transitive sets well-ordered by ∈) and showed that every well-ordering is iso-
morphic to an ordinal, thereby restoring Cantor’s transﬁnite numbers as sets. No
longer were the numbers abstractions, but in the new formulation became incor-
porated into the Zermelian framework of sets built up by ∈and simple operations.
Von Neumann’s particular approach to axiomatization fostered the liberal use of
proper classes in set theory and brought Replacement into prominence through its
role in deﬁnitions by transﬁnite recursion.
With these developments before him Zermelo [30] presented his ﬁnal ax-
iomatization of set theory, incorporating Replacement and also Foundation. This
axiomatization was in second-order terms, allowed urelements, and eschewed the
Axiom of Inﬁnity, but shorn of these features it became the standard Zermelo-
Fraenkel (ZFC) one when recast in the soon to emerge terms of ﬁrst-order logic.
The Foundation Axiom had been preﬁgured as a restricting possibility by Dmitry
Mirimanov [17], Skolem [23], and von Neumann [25]. Zermelo offered a syn-
thetic view of a succession of natural models for set theory, each a member of
a next, essentially realizing that Foundation ranks the sets in these models into a
cumulative hierarchy. In current terms the axiom stratiﬁes the formal universe V
of sets as 
α Vα, where V0 is ∅, Vα+1 is the power set of Vα, and Vδ for limit

Introduction
XV
ordinals δ is the union of the Vα’s for α < δ. In a notable inversion this iterative
conception came to be accepted after G¨odel’s later advocacy as a heuristic for
motivating the axioms of set theory generally, its open-endedness moreover pro-
moting a principle of tolerance for motivating new hypotheses mediating toward
Cantor’s Absolute. Foundation is the one axiom unnecessary for the recasting
of mathematics in set-theoretic terms, but it came to be the salient feature that
distinguishes structural investigations speciﬁc to set theory.
Indeed, it can be
fairly said that modern set theory is the study of well-foundedness, the Cantorian
well-ordering doctrines adapted to the Zermelian combinatorial conception of sets.
In the 1930’s G¨odel’s incisive analyses brought about a transformation of
mathematical logic based on new initiatives for mathematical elucidation. The
main source was of course his Incompleteness Theorem [31], which led to the
undecidability of validity for ﬁrst-order logic and the development of recursion
theory. But starting an undercurrent, the earlier Completeness Theorem [30] clar-
iﬁed the distinction between the semantics and syntax of ﬁrst-order logic and
secured its key instrumental property, compactness. Then Tarski [33, 35] set out
his schematic deﬁnition of truth in set-theoretic terms, exercising philosophers to a
surprising extent ever since. The groundwork had been laid for the development of
model theory, and set theory was to be considerably enriched since the 1950’s by
model-theoretic techniques. First-order logic came to be accepted as the canonical
language because of its mathematical possibilities, Skolem’s earlier suggestion for
set theory taken up generally, and higher-order logics became downgraded as the
workings of the power set operation in disguise.
So enriched and fortiﬁed by axioms, results, and techniques axiomatic set the-
ory was launched on its independent course by G¨odel’s construction of L [38, 39]
leading to the relative consistency of the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum
Hypothesis. Synthesizing what came before, G¨odel built on the von Neumann
ordinals as sustained by Replacement to formulate a relative Zermelian universe
of sets based on logical deﬁnability, a universe imbued with a Cantorian sense of
order.
Large Cardinals
If the foregoing in brief (and with interpretative twists) is the high tradition of set
theory from Cantor to G¨odel, large cardinals are the trustees of older traditions in
direct line from Cantor’s original investigations of deﬁnable sets of reals and of
the transﬁnite numbers. Before taking up the more continuous tradition having to
do directly with the transﬁnite the other tradition is described, one that was to be
revitalized in the 1960’s by major new initiatives.
Descriptive set theory is the deﬁnability theory of the continuum, the study of
the structural properties of deﬁnable sets of reals. In his most substantive approach
to the Continuum Hypothesis Cantor had structured the problem via perfect sets
and established that the closed sets have the perfect set property (11.3). Related
were his contributions to measure theory, a theory that led to the Borel sets and

XVI
Introduction
of course to Lebesgue measure. The major incentives of descriptive set theory
have been to approach sets of reals through deﬁnability as Cantor had done, and to
investigate the extent of the regularity properties, of which Lebesgue measurability
and Cantor’s perfect set property are two. In a seminal paper Henri Lebesgue [05]
provided the ﬁrst hierarchy for the Borel sets and applied Cantor’s diagonalization
argument to show that the hierarchy is both proper and does not exhaust the
deﬁnable sets of reals. The subject really began with Mikhail Suslin’s discovery
[17] of the analytic sets and fundamental results about this ﬁrst level of the later
projective hierarchy.
The subsequent development by Nikolai Luzin, Wacław
Sierpi´nski, and their collaborators featured tree representations of sets of reals,
and it was through this opening that well-founded relations entered mathematical
practice, the later tradition leading to Foundation and the iterative conception being
quite separate and motivated by heuristics. The transﬁnite numbers, at least the
countable ones, gained a further legitimacy through their necessary involvement in
this work, contributing to the mathematical pressure for their general acceptance.
Pressing upward in the projective hierarchy, by the early 1930’s the descriptive
set theorists had reached an impasse, one that was to be later explained by G¨odel’s
delimitative results with L. (These matters are taken up in §§12, 13.)
The other, more primal Cantorian initiative, the mathematical investigation of
the transﬁnite, was vigorously advanced into the higher inﬁnite by Felix Hausdorff
[08]. Dismissive of foundational issues, he pursued the structure of transﬁnite
ordertypes for its own sake and was ﬁrst to consider a large cardinal, a weakly
inaccessible cardinal, as a natural limit point. Paul Mahlo [11, 12, 13] then studied
stronger limit points, the Mahlo cardinals. Closure under the power set operation,
intrinsic to the Zermelian set concept, was later incorporated in the concept of
a (strongly) inaccessible cardinal by Sierpi´nski-Tarski [30] and Zermelo [30]. In
the early semantic investigations before the general acceptance of ﬁrst-order logic
these cardinals provided the natural models for set theory, i.e. the corresponding
initial segments of the cumulative hierarchy. (These topics are developed in §1.)
Measurability, the most prominent of all large cardinal hypotheses, embodied
the ﬁrst conﬂuence of the Cantorian initiatives. Isolated by Stanisław Ulam [30]
from measure-theoretic considerations related to Lebesgue measure, the concept
also entailed inaccessibility in the transﬁnite. Moreover, the initial airing generated
an open problem that was to keep the spark of large cardinals alight for the next
three decades: Can the least inaccessible cardinal be measurable? (Measurability
is discussed in §2.)
The further development of the higher inﬁnite was to depend on model-
theoretic techniques brought into set theory in the course of its larger develop-
ment. G¨odel’s L was the ﬁrst example of an inner model, a class (deﬁnable by a
formula of ﬁrst-order logic) including all the ordinals, which with ∈restricted to
it is a model of the axioms. G¨odel with L had in fact established the minimum
possibility for the set-theoretic universe, and large cardinals were to provide the
counterweight ﬁrst in reaction and then for generalization. G¨odel’s realist specula-

Introduction
XVII
tions, especially about Cantor’s Continuum Problem, contained the seeds of later
heuristic arguments for large cardinal hypotheses:
The set-theoretic universe V viewed as the cumulative hierarchy 
α Vα is
open-ended and under-determined by the set-theoretic axioms, and invites fur-
ther postulations based on reﬂection and generalization. In 1946 remarks G¨odel
[90: 151] suggested reﬂection in terms of a set-theoretic proposition being prov-
able in “the next higher system above set theory”, which proof being replaceable
by one from “an axiom of inﬁnity”. This ties in with V cast as Cantor’s Abso-
lute being mathematically incomprehendable, so that any property ascribable to it
must already hold in some sufﬁciently large Vα, some properties leading directly
to large cardinal hypotheses. In a 1966 footnote G¨odel [90: 260ff] acknowledged
“strong axioms of inﬁnity of an entirely new kind”, generalizations of properties
of ℵ0 “supported by strong arguments from analogy”. This ties in with Cantor’s
unitary view of the ﬁnite and transﬁnite, with properties like inaccessibility and
measurability technically satisﬁed by ℵ0 being too accidental were they not also
ascribable to higher cardinals. Both reﬂection and generalization are latent in the
eternal return of successive domains as envisioned by Zermelo [30]. Whatever
the heuristics, the theory of large cardinals like other mathematical investigations
was to be driven by open problems and growing structural elucidations. (These
matters are taken up in §3. Other heuristic arguments are described in Maddy
[88, 88a].)
The generalization of ﬁrst-order logic allowing inﬁnitary logical operations
was to lead to the solution of that problem of whether the least inaccessible cardinal
can be measurable. Tarski [62] deﬁned the strongly compact and weakly compact
cardinals by ascribing natural generalizations of the key compactness property of
ﬁrst-order logic to the corresponding inﬁnitary languages. A strongly compact
cardinal is measurable, and a measurable cardinal is weakly compact. Tarski’s
student William Hanf [64] then established (4.7) that there are many inaccessible
cardinals (and Mahlo cardinals) below a weakly compact cardinal. In particular,
the least inaccessible cardinal is not measurable. Hanf’s work radically altered
size intuitions about properties coming to be understood in terms of large cardinals.
(These topics are developed in §4.)
In the early 1960’s set theory was veritably transformed by structural initia-
tives based on new possibilities for constructing well-founded models and estab-
lishing relative consistency results. This was due largely to the creation of forcing
by Paul Cohen [63, 64], who happened upon a remarkably fertile technique for
producing extensions of models of set theory. In a different vein, a seminal result
of Dana Scott [61] stimulated the investigation of elementary embeddings of inner
models. The ultraproduct construction of model theory was just gaining currency
when Scott took an ultrapower of V itself to establish (5.5) that if there is a mea-
surable cardinal, then V ̸= L. Large cardinal hypotheses thus assumed a new
signiﬁcance as a means for maximizing possibilities away from G¨odel’s delimi-
tative construction. And Cantor’s Absolute notwithstanding, Scott’s construction
began the liberal use of manipulative inner model constructions in set theory. It

XVIII
Introduction
was in this richer setting that measurable cardinals came to play a central structural
role, being necessary for securing well-founded ultrapowers (see 5.6 and before):
There is an elementary embedding j: V →M for some inner model M iff there is
a measurable cardinal. (These matters are taken up in §5.)
With reﬂection arguments emerging in the model-theoretic approaches taken
in set theory, Azriel Levy [60a] established their broader signiﬁcance and the
close involvement of Mahlo cardinals. Then Hanf-Scott [61] formulated the inde-
scribable cardinals, directly positing reﬂection properties in terms of higher-order
languages, and showed that these cardinals provide a schematic approach to com-
paring large cardinals by size. Levy [71] then provided a systematic analysis,
features of which were to occur in later contexts. (Indescribability is described
in §6.)
Scott’s result that if there is a measurable cardinal then V ̸= L naturally led
to reﬁnements both weakening the hypothesis and strengthening the conclusion.
Notably, the ﬁrst moves were made in the context of the inﬁnitary combinatorics
then being developed by Paul Erd˝os and his collaborators, the study of partition
properties, which are transﬁnite generalizations of a result of Frank Ramsey [30].
Frederick Rowbottom [64, 71] then established a partition property for measurable
cardinals (7.17), and using model-theoretic methods showed that such properties
already imply that there are only countably many reals in L (8.3). This blending
of model theory and inﬁnitary combinatorics led to a spectrum of large cardinals
positing strong versions of the Low¨enheim-Skolem theorem, the Rowbottom and
J´onsson cardinals in particular generating intriguing questions. Weaving in the
crucial model-theoretic concept of a set of indiscernibles Jack Silver [66, 71] then
analyzed what came to be regarded as the essence of transcendence over L, encap-
sulated by him and Robert Solovay [67] as a set 0# of integers coding a collection
of sentences uniquely speciﬁed by indiscernibility conditions. Beyond a web of
implications encircling the merely negative conclusion V ̸= L, the existence of
0# is a strikingly informative assertion about just how starkly L is generated in a
transcendent V . Subsequent results have buttressed the existence of 0# as a piv-
otal hypothesis, and its isolation is the ﬁrst real triumph for large cardinals in the
elucidation of set-theoretic structure. (These matters are taken up in Chapter 2.)
Returning to the early 1960’s, if G¨odel’s construction of L had launched
axiomatic set theory as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics, then Cohen’s technique
of forcing began its transformation into a modern, sophisticated one. Starting with
his work on the Continuum Hypothesis many problems that had been left unre-
solved were shown to be independent, as set theorists were presented a remarkably
general and ﬂexible scheme with intuitive underpinnings for constructing models
of set theory. The thrust of research gradually deﬂated the Cantor-G¨odel real-
ist view with an onrush of new models, and shedding some of its foundational
burden set theory became an intriguing mathematical subject where formalized
versions of truth and consistency became matters for combinatorial manipulation
as in algebra. From Skolem relativism to Cohen relativism the role of set theory
for mathematics became even more evidently one of an open-ended framework

Introduction
XIX
rather than an elucidating foundation. From this point of view, that the ZFC ax-
ioms do not determine the cardinality 2ℵ0 of the set of reals seems an entirely
satisfactory state of affairs. With the richness of possibility for arbitrary reals
and mappings, no axioms that do not directly impose structure from above should
constrain a set as open-ended as the collection of reals or its various possibilities
for well-ordering.
Inaccessible cardinals ﬁgured from the beginning in this sea-change, ﬁrst
in the concept of the Levy collapse and then in its use in Solovay’s inspiring
result [65b, 70] that if there is an inaccessible cardinal, then in a submodel of a
forcing extension every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the perfect set
property. (The Axiom of Choice necessarily fails in this submodel.) As Cohen’s
independence of the Continuum Hypothesis did for the transﬁnite, this result on the
regularity of sets of reals not only resolved old axiomatic issues but reinvigorated
the Cantorian initiatives by suggesting new mathematical possibilities. Solovay
[69] soon applied the ideas of his proof to show that measurable cardinals directly
imply the regularity properties at the level of G¨odel’s delimitative results with L,
revitalizing the classical program of descriptive set theory. Then Donald Martin
and Solovay (cf. their [69]) applied large cardinal hypotheses at the level of 0#
to push forward the old tree representation ideas, with the hypotheses cast in the
new role of securing well-foundedness in this context. (These matters are taken
up in Chapter 3.)
The perfect set property led to the ﬁrst instance of a new phenomenon in
set theory: the derivation of equiconsistency results based on the complementary
methods of forcing and inner models. A large cardinal hypothesis is typically
transformed into a proposition about sets of reals by forcing that “collapses” the
cardinal to ℵ1 or “enlarges” the power of the continuum to the cardinal. Con-
versely, the proposition entails the same large cardinal hypothesis in the clarity of
an inner model. Solovay’s result provided the forcing direction from an inacces-
sible cardinal to the proposition that every set of reals has the perfect set property.
But Ernst Specker [57] had in effect established that if every set of reals has the
perfect set property (and ℵ1 is regular), then ℵ1 is inaccessible in L (11.6). Thus,
Solovay’s use of an inaccessible cardinal was necessary, and its collapse to ℵ1
complemented Specker’s observation. Years later, Saharon Shelah [84] was able
to establish the necessity of Solovay’s inaccessible also for the proposition that
every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
The emergence of such equiconsistency results is a subtle transformation of
earlier hopes of G¨odel: Propositions can indeed be resolved if there are enough
ordinals, how many being speciﬁed by positing a large cardinal. But the resolution
is in terms of the Hilbertian concept of consistency, the methods of forcing and
inner models being the operative modes of argument. In a new synthesis of the two
Cantorian initiatives, hypotheses of length concerning the extent of the transﬁnite
are correlated with hypotheses of width concerning sets of reals. There is a telling
antecedent in the result of Gerhard Gentzen [36, 43] that the consistency strength
of arithmetic can be exactly gauged by an ordinal ε0, i.e. transﬁnite induction up

XX
Introduction
to that ordinal in a formal system of notations. Although Hilbert’s program of
establishing consistency by ﬁnitary means cannot be realized, Gentzen provided
an exact analysis in terms of ordinal length. Proof theory blossomed in the 1960’s
with the analysis of other theories in terms of such lengths, the proof theoretic
ordinals.
In the late 1960’s a wide-ranging investigation of measurability was carried
out with forcing and inner models. These developments not only provided an illu-
minating structural analysis, but suggested new questions and provided paradigms
for the subsequent investigation of stronger hypotheses. Solovay [66, 71] brought
the concept of saturated ideal to the forefront, establishing an equiconsistency
result about real-valued measurability. Subsequent work showed that saturated
ideals are a ﬂexible generalization of measurability that can occur low in the cu-
mulative hierarchy. Exploiting the technique of iterated ultrapowers developed by
Haim Gaifman [64], Kenneth Kunen [70] established the main structure theorems
for inner models of measurability. Not only do these models have the minimal
structure of G¨odel’s L, but they turn out to be exactly the ultrapowers of each
other, and such coherence amounts to strong evidence for the consistency of the
concept of measurability. Kunen also established a characterization of the exis-
tence of 0# in terms of the non-rigidity of L: 0# exists iff there is an elementary
embedding j: L →L. Solovay isolated a set 0† that plays an analogous role
for inner models of measurability that 0# does for L, and its existence has a
similar characterization in terms of non-rigidity. (These topics are developed in
Chapter 4.)
Even as measurability was being methodically investigated, Solovay and
William Reinhardt were charting out stronger hypotheses.
Taking the concept
of elementary embedding as basic they independently formulated the concept of
supercompact cardinal as a generalization of both measurability and strong com-
pactness, and Reinhardt formulated the stronger concept of extendible cardinal
with motivating ideas based directly on reﬂection. Reinhardt brieﬂy considered
an ultimate reﬂection property along these lines, but in a dramatic turn of events
Kunen [71b] established that this prima facie extension is inconsistent: There is
no elementary embedding j: V →V . Kunen’s argument turned on what seemed
to be a combinatorial contingency, but his particular formulation has stood as the
upper bound for large cardinal hypotheses. The initial guiding ideas shaped and
delimited by a mathematical result, hypotheses just on the verge of this incon-
sistency were subsequently analyzed, as well as the weaker n-huge cardinals and
Vopˇenka’s Principle, to chart the terrain down to the extendible cardinals. The
supercompact cardinals in particular became prominent as a source of new com-
binatorics and relative consistency results. Also, when reﬁnements of elementary
embedding in the form of extenders were formulated, weakenings of supercom-
pactness in the form of strong, Woodin, and superstrong cardinals came to play
crucial roles in later developments. (These topics are developed in Chapter 5.)
With this charting out of the higher inﬁnite, the extensive research through
the 1970’s and 1980’s considerably strengthened the view that the emerging hi-

Introduction
XXI
erarchy of large cardinals provides the measuring rod of exhaustive principles
against which all possible consistency strengths can be gauged. First, the various
hypotheses though arising from diverse motivations and historical happenstance
nonetheless form a linear hierarchy, one neatly delimited by Kunen’s inconsistency
result. Typically for two large cardinal hypotheses, below a cardinal satisfying one
there are many cardinals satisfying the other, in a sense prescribed by the ﬁrst.
Moreover, the weaker hypotheses through strong forms of measurability have been
bolstered by a variety of equiconsistency results involving combinatorial proposi-
tions low in the cumulative hierarchy. In this respect, particularly intriguing is the
work on the Singular Cardinals Problem, which showed that something as basic
as rendering 2κ large for singular strong limit cardinals κ essentially requires large
cardinals. Finally, a variety of strong propositions have been informatively brack-
eted in consistency strength between two large cardinal hypotheses: The stronger
hypothesis implies that there is a forcing extension in which the proposition ob-
tains; and if the proposition obtains, there is an inner model satisfying the weaker
hypothesis. Supercompactness has often ﬁgured as the upper bound, but some-
times n-hugeness and even the hypotheses just short of Kunen’s inconsistency
have played this role. (This wide-ranging exploration is the subject of volume II.)
If set theory serves as an open-ended framework for mathematics, as an
autonomous ﬁeld of mathematics it has become a remarkably successful investi-
gation of well-foundedness, in large measure because large cardinals have been
found to provide an elegant and fully sufﬁcient superstructure for the study of
consistency strength.
Determinacy
One of the great successes for large cardinals has to do with perhaps the most
distinctive and intriguing development in modern set theory. Although the deter-
minacy of games has roots as far back as Zermelo [13], the concept for inﬁnite
games only began to be seriously explored in the 1960’s when it was realized
that it led to the regularity properties for sets of reals. Jan Mycielski and Hugo
Steinhaus in their [62] proposed the Axiom of Determinacy, at least for some inner
model since it contradicts the Axiom of Choice. Then in 1967 Solovay made
an initial connection with large cardinals and David Blackwell [67] with methods
of descriptive set theory. Investigating further consequences of determinacy, ﬁne
mathematicians like Solovay, Martin, Yiannis Moschovakis, Kunen, and Alexan-
der Kechris soon established an elaborate web of connections in the unabashed
pursuit of structure for its own sake. Determinacy hypotheses seemed to settle
many questions and provide new modes of argument, leading to an opaque real-
ization of the old Cantorian initiatives concerning sets of reals and the transﬁnite
with determinacy replacing well-ordering as the animating principle. By the late
1970’s a more or less complete theory for the projective sets was in place, and
with this completion of a main project of descriptive set theory attention began to
shift to questions of overall consistency.

XXII
Introduction
Martin [70] had early on shown that the existence of a measurable cardinal
implies the determinacy of games for analytic sets, and through the 1970’s he
established results equating many measurable cardinals with levels of a difference
hierarchy for analytic sets and then showed that a large cardinal hypothesis near
Kunen’s inconsistency implied determinacy at the next projective level. Then in
the mid-1980’s Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor, and Shelah made a major
breakthrough about strong large cardinal hypotheses, and although not directly
involving determinacy Martin, John Steel, and Hugh Woodin were able to build
on this to establish the consistency of the Axiom of Determinacy relative to large
cardinals. Woodin in fact established that the Axiom of Determinacy is equiconsis-
tent with the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals, pinpointing the axiom
in consistency strength above measurable cardinals but far below supercompact
cardinals. This unifying result was a resounding triumph for the modern methods
of set theory and an unexpected afﬁrmation of the relevance of large cardinals.
Woodin’s subsequent results about other determinacy hypotheses and inﬁnite com-
binatorics speak to the great progress that has been made and the promise of deeper
insights to come. (These matters are taken up in Chapter 6.)

0. Preliminaries
1
0. Preliminaries
This section sets out the necessary mathematical preliminaries for the text. Gen-
erally speaking, familiarity is assumed with the development of set theory through
the basics about the constructible hierarchy L and the method of forcing, and with
the basic concepts and constructions of model theory. Nevertheless, in taking a
historical approach well-known concepts are often formulated anew, their basic
facts reviewed, and references provided as part of the development. In particu-
lar, a discussion of the forcing formalism is deferred until results achieved by that
method are dealt with squarely. In what follows, some basic terminology and con-
cepts are afﬁrmed whose contextual review would break the pace of exposition,
and some standing conventions established.
Set-Theoretic Notation
For the set theory, the texts Jech [03], Kunen [80], Drake [74] and Levy [79] each
provide the basic development of the subject and more. The ﬁrst three contain the
necessary preliminaries about L, the ﬁrst two such preliminaries about forcing,
and the ﬁrst a good deal of information about large cardinals. L∈denotes the
language of set theory: ﬁrst-order predicate calculus with equality and the binary
predicate symbol ∈. In this language AC denotes the Axiom of Choice, CH the
Continuum Hypothesis, and GCH the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis.
ZF
denotes Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory in L∈, ZFC that theory with AC adjoined,
and ZF−and ZFC−these theories with the Power Set Axiom deleted.
The results in this book are theorems of ZFC ,
unless a different theory is speciﬁed either at the beginning of a section or statement
of a result. Thus, by “class” is meant deﬁnable class, and although ordered pairs
or even transﬁnite sequences of classes may be used, they will be deﬁnable as
single classes. The set-theoretic notation used in the text is generally standard,
with the possible deviations stipulated in the following pr´ecis:
Unless otherwise speciﬁed the ﬁrst lower case Greek letters α, β, γ, δ, . . .
denote ordinals, whereas the middle letters κ, λ, µ, ν, . . . are reserved for inﬁnite
cardinals. This convention is sometimes extended to allow these middle letters to
denote inﬁnite cardinals only in the sense of some model, and this should be clear
from the context. Concerning the αth uncountable cardinal, tradition dictates that
an intensional distinction be maintained by referring to its ordertype by ωα and
its cardinality by ℵα, although this distinction is not always sharp or illuminating.
cf(γ ) denotes the coﬁnality of γ , and γ + denotes the least cardinal greater than γ .
A cardinal κ is a strong limit iff for every λ < κ, 2λ < κ.
On denotes the class of ordinals, V the universe of sets, Vα the set of sets
of rank less than α, and Hκ the set of sets hereditarily of cardinality less than
κ. The cumulative hierarchy 
α Vα provides the basic stratiﬁcation of V through
the full exercise of the Power Set Axiom, but the Hκ’s are often more suitable

2
0. Preliminaries
as approximations. Not only is their use more parsimonious since Hκ is usually
much smaller than Vκ, but for regular κ, Hκ models Replacement.
For a set x, |x| denotes its cardinality, P(x) its power set, and Pκx =
{y ⊆x | |y| < κ}. αβ denotes cardinal exponentiation for cardinals α and β,
and αβ = |α||β| for arbitrary α and β unless it is contextually clear that ordinal
exponentiation is meant. Also, α<κ = {αβ | β < κ}, so that λ<κ is the cardinality
of Pκλ.
For a function f , dom( f ) denotes its domain, ran( f ) its range, f ‘‘x =
{ f (y) | y ∈x}, the image of x under f (after Whitehead and Russell), and
f |x = f ∩(x × V ), the restriction of f to x. More generally, for a binary relation
R, R‘‘x = {b | ∃a ∈x(⟨a, b⟩∈R)}.
yx denotes the collection of functions:
y →x, so that λκ is the cardinality of κλ, and <αx = 
β<α
βx. For 1 ≤n < ω,
an n-tuple is regarded alternately as a member of some n-fold Cartesian product
X1 × . . . × Xn (deﬁned recursively as (X1 × . . . × Xn−1) × Xn for n > 1), or as
a sequence, i.e. a function with domain n. For example, k X × Y for 0 < k < ω
is viewed as consisting of ⟨u0, . . . , uk−1, uk⟩such that ui ∈X for i < k and
uk ∈Y. Concatenation ⌢and initial segment have the expected meaning for n-
tuples. For ﬁnite sequences s, |s| is a convenient way of denoting its length. For
a function f and an n-tuple ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩in its domain, f (x1, . . . , xn) is written
for f (⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩).
x ⊆y denotes inclusion and x ⊂y proper inclusion, with ⊇and ⊃having
the derived meanings. x−y denotes set subtraction, x△y the symmetric difference
(x−y)∪(y−x), and tc(x) the transitive closure of x, the smallest transitive set ⊇x.
For x ⊆On, ot(x) denotes its ordertype; min(x) = ∩x when x ̸= ∅; sup(x) = ∪x;
max(x) = ∪x when ∪x ∈x; [x]α = {y ⊆x | ot(y) = α}; [x]<α = 
β<α[x]β
so that Pκλ = [λ]<κ; [x]≤α = 
β≤α[x]β; and an initial segment of x is a set of
form x ∩α for some α. Furthermore, if {α1, . . . , αn} is used to denote a member
of [x]<ω, it is with the understanding that α1 < . . . < αn, and for f a function
with domain ⊆[x]<ω, f (α1, . . . , αn) is written for f ({α1, . . . , αn}). In all of these
notations proper classes are allowed when the resulting expression is formalizable,
i.e. it again denotes a class.
Closed Unbounded and Stationary Sets
For X ⊆On, γ is a limit point of X iff (X ∩γ ) = γ > 0. C is closed unbounded
in δ iff C is an unbounded subset of δ containing all its limit points less than δ.
For regular ν < δ, C is ν-closed unbounded in δ iff C is an unbounded subset
of δ containing all its limit points less than δ of coﬁnality ν. For limit ordinals
δ, S is stationary in δ iff S ⊆δ and S ∩C ̸= ∅for any C closed unbounded in
δ. The “in δ” is deleted when clear from the context. If ⟨Xα | α < δ⟩∈δP(δ),
then its diagonal intersection is {ξ < δ | ξ ∈
α<ξ Xα}, denoted by △α<δ Xα. For
X ⊆On and f : X →On, f is regressive iff f (α) < α for every α ∈X −{0}.
The following is basic:

0. Preliminaries
3
0.1 Proposition. Suppose that λ > ω is regular.
(a) If γ < λ and ⟨Cα | α < γ ⟩is a sequence of sets closed unbounded in λ,
then 
α<γ Cα is closed unbounded in λ.
(b) If ⟨Cα | α < λ⟩is a sequence of sets closed unbounded in λ, then its
diagonal intersection △α<λCα is closed unbounded in λ.
(c) (Fodor [56]) If S is stationary in λ and f : S →λ is regressive, then there
is an α < λ such that f −1({α}) is stationary in λ.
(d) If ν < λ is regular, S ⊆{ξ < λ | cf(ξ) = ν} is stationary in λ, and C is
ν-closed unbounded in λ, then S ∩C ̸= ∅.
⊣
Filters and Ideals
For a non-empty set S, F ⊆P(S) is a ﬁlter (resp. ideal) over S iff F is a
proper, non-principal ﬁlter (resp. ideal) on the Boolean algebra P(S). The previous
sentence exempliﬁes the distinction intended between “over” and “on”. For E ⊆
P(S), the ﬁlter (resp. ideal) over S generated by E is {X ⊆S | ∃Y ∈E(Y ⊆X)}
(resp. {X ⊆S | ∃Y ∈E(X ⊆Y)}), provided that it is proper and non-principal. A
ﬁlter (resp. ideal) F over S is λ-complete iff for any γ < λ and {Xα | α < γ } ⊆F,

α<γ Xα ∈F (resp. 
α<γ Xα ∈F). U is an ultraﬁlter over S iff it is a maximal
ﬁlter over S, i.e. for any X ⊆S either X ∈U or else S −X ∈U. A ﬁlter F over
S is uniform iff |X| = |S| for any X ∈F.
As a convenient convention it is assumed that for a ﬁlter F over a cardinal λ
the ﬁnal segments λ−α = {ξ | α ≤ξ < λ} ∈F for every α < λ. Concomitantly it
is assumed that for an ideal I over a cardinal λ the initial segments α = {ξ | ξ <
α} ∈I for every α < λ. For a regular cardinal λ > ω, Cλ denotes the closed
unbounded ﬁlter over λ, the ﬁlter generated by the closed unbounded subsets of
λ, which is λ-complete by 0.1(a). Corresponding to it is NSλ, the non-stationary
ideal over λ, the λ-complete ideal of non-stationary subsets of λ.
Model-Theoretic Notation
For the model theory, familiarity is assumed with the basic notions of structures
and satisfaction, elementary equivalence, substructure and embeddability, com-
pactness, Skolem hull arguments, and the ultraproduct construction (although these
last two are reviewed below), as well as with the formalizability of the satisfaction
relation for set structures. The standard text for model theory is Chang-Keisler
[90], and the texts Devlin [84], Kunen [80], Moschovakis [80], and Drake [74]
work out set-theoretic formalizations.
For a formula ϕ of L∈, ϕM denotes the relativization of the quantiﬁers to
the class M, deﬁned by recursion on the complexity of ϕ. This then extends to
deﬁnable terms and classes t to yield t M. More generally, for M a structure and t
a deﬁnable term in the corresponding language, tM denotes the interpretation of t
in M. The notation t(v1, . . . , vn) for a term indicates that its variables are among
v1, . . . , vn, and ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) for a formula indicates that its free variables are
among v1, . . . , vn. For convenience, variables are usually indexed as here from

4
0. Preliminaries
1, but on occasion, from 0. In any case the particular indexing is not restrictive,
since just as ϕ should be regarded as a meta-variable for formulas, so too should
the vi’s be regarded as meta-variables for formal variables.
For t(v1, . . . , vn)
and ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) as above and for terms t1, . . . , tn, t(t1, . . . , tn) is the result of
replacing each occurrence of vi by ti, and ϕ(t1, . . . , tn) the result of replacing
each free occurrence of vi by ti, this allowed only when no variable in any ti
becomes bound by a quantiﬁer of ϕ. Finally, M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] indicates that
ϕ is satisﬁed in the structure M with the variable assignment taking vi to xi in
the domain of M, and tM(x1, . . . , xn) denotes the interpretation of t under this
assignment. |= is extended to collections of formulas as in M |= ZFC with the
expected meaning.
For a theory T , Con(T ) should be a formal assertion of its consistency in
terms of an arithmetization of its language. For theories T1 and T2, T2 is consis-
tent relative to T1 iff Con(T1) →Con(T2); and T1 and T2 are equiconsistent iff
Con(T1) ↔Con(T2). However, such assertions are better construed as part of the
mathematical English, the proofs in each case providing the sense.
Although these conventions are maintained when issues of satisfaction and
deﬁnability are discussed, speciﬁc formulas of L∈in our arguments are rendered as
usual in a mathematical English with the assignment of sets to variables indicated
by a direct substitution into the formula. Even when structures are being discussed
with some care, this conﬂating of syntax and semantics may occur to the right of
a |=; formulas are then set off from the rest of the text by the Quinean quotes
⌈⌉when confusion is possible. For a formula ϕ, ⌈ϕ⌉may also denote its code
according to some contextually established arithmetization.
We work most often with structures for L∈of form ⟨M, ∈∩(M × M)⟩,
consisting of a domain together with the real membership relation restricted to
it. For simplicity such a structure is usually denoted by ⟨M, ∈⟩, or just M when
contextually clear. For a theory T of L∈, M is an ∈-model of T iff ⟨M, ∈⟩is a
model of T . We also work with expanded structures of form ⟨M, ∈∩(M×M), R⟩
where R ⊆M, denoted by ⟨M, ∈, R⟩.
It is then to be understood that R is
interpreting a new unary predicate symbol, although in the set-theoretic context
x ∈R is often written instead of R(x). Similar remarks apply to further expanded
structures. When there is need to be explicit, LX
∈( ˙R1, . . . , ˙Rn) denotes the language
L∈of set theory expanded by constants ˙x for every x ∈X and predicate symbols
˙R1, . . . , ˙Rn of speciﬁed arity, with L∈( ˙R1, . . . , ˙Rn) being L∅
∈( ˙R1, . . . , ˙Rn).
We often consider structures with domains that are proper classes, like
V itself.
The previous conventions apply, but there is an important caveat:
By the G¨odel-Tarski undeﬁnability of truth argument (Jech [03: 162]) the sat-
isfaction relation ⟨⌈ϕ⌉, ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩⟩∈S iff V |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] is formally
undeﬁnable in ZF, and so also is the general satisfaction relation for proper
classes ⟨⌈ϕ⌉, ⟨z1, . . . , zk⟩, ⌈ψ⌉, ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩⟩∈S+ iff {y | ϕ[y, z1, . . . , zk]} |=
ψ[x1, . . . , xn]. This is the source of possible unformalizability in the text, and the
issue is discussed as it arises.

0. Preliminaries
5
Hierarchies of Formulas
Several hierarchies of formulas will ﬁgure in analyses of deﬁnability, particularly
in absoluteness and reﬂection arguments.
For any (ﬁrst-order) extension L of
L∈, the Levy hierarchy of formulas of L is formulated as follows: A formula is
Σ0 and Π0 if its only quantiﬁers are bounded, i.e. can be rendered as ∀v ∈w
or ∃v ∈w.
Recursively, a formula is Σn+1 if it is of the form ∃v1 . . . ∃vkϕ
where ϕ is Πn, and Πn+1 if it is of the form ∀v1 . . . ∀vkϕ where ϕ is Σn. For
convenience this terminology is extended by stipulating that every formula is Σω
and Πω. The classiﬁcation of deﬁnable concepts in this hierarchy depends on the
ambient theory. For a theory T of L, a formula ϕ is Σ T
n iff for some Σn formula
ϕ′, T ⊢ϕ ↔ϕ′; and similarly for Π T
n . A formula is ∆T
n iff it is both Σ T
n and
Π T
n . This terminology is extended to classes through the analysis of their deﬁning
formulas.
ΣZF
n
and ΠZF
n
formulas are equivalent to formulas with blocks of like quanti-
ﬁers contracted into one through applications of the Pairing Axiom. Also, bounded
quantiﬁcation does not add to complexity in ZF:
(i) If ϕ is ΣZF
n , so is ∃v ∈wϕ and ∀v ∈wϕ .
(ii) If ϕ is ΠZF
n , so is ∃v ∈wϕ and ∀v ∈wϕ .
To show this, assume inductively that (i) and (ii) hold with n replaced by any
k < n.
(ii) follows from (i) by taking negations, and the ﬁrst part of (i) is
immediate. For the second part of (i), ϕ can be taken to be of form ∃v0ψ where
ψ is Πn−1. Then by Replacement,
∀v ∈w∃v0ψ ↔∃v1∀v ∈w∃v0 ∈v1ψ ,
and the latter formula is ΣZF
n
by induction.
A typical analysis of transﬁnite recursion leads to a useful observation:
0.2 Lemma. ⌈rank(v0) = v1⌉is ∆ZF
1 , and ⌈Vv0 = v1⌉is ΠZF
1 .
Proof. Let ϕ( f ) be the formula
f is a function ∧∀x ∈dom( f )(x ⊆dom( f ) ∧f (x) = { f (y) + 1 | y ∈x}) .
This asserts that f must satisfy the usual recursive deﬁnition for the rank function
on a transitive domain. Hence,
rank(v0) = v1 iff ∃f (ϕ( f ) ∧⟨v0, v1⟩∈f )
iff ∀f (ϕ( f ) ∧v0 ∈dom( f ) →⟨v0, v1⟩∈f ) .
ϕ( f ) is ∆ZF
0 , and so the ﬁrst result follows. For the second, note that
Vv0 = v1 iff ∀v2(v2 ∈v1 ↔∃v3 ∈v0(rank(v2) = v3)) .
The latter is ΠZF
1
by previous remarks about absorbing bounded quantiﬁers.
⊣

6
0. Preliminaries
A well-known observation, established by induction on formula complexity,
is that Σ0 formulas are absolute for transitive structures, i.e. if ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) is
Σ0, M is transitive, and x1, . . . , xn ∈M, then
⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff ⟨V, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] .
Moreover, ∆ZF
1
formulas are absolute for transitive ∈-models of
ZF, i.e. if
ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) is ∆ZF
1 , M is such a model, and x1, . . . , xn ∈M, then
⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff ⟨V, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] .
This can be illustrated in terms of the proof of 0.2: If ⟨M, ∈⟩|= rank(x) = α,
then by the Σ1 formulation, in M there is an f satisfying ϕ such that f (x) = α,
and hence this holds in V ⊇M, so that rank(x) = α in V , i.e. there is upward
persistence. If rank(x) = α, then by the Π1 formulation, for any f satisfying ϕ
with x ∈dom( f ) we have f (x) = α, and hence this holds in M ⊆V so that
M |= rank(x) = α, i.e. there is downward persistence. We often use the basic
observation that if a ϕ is upward persistent, then so is ∃vϕ, and if ϕ is downward
persistent, then so is ∀vϕ.
For more information on the Levy hierarchy see Levy [65], Jech [03: 183ff],
Devlin [84: 27ff], or Drake [74: 75ff].
Concerning the satisfaction relation, the latter two texts provide (pp. 31ff and
pp. 89ff resp.) formalizations of the relation for set structures that are ∆ZF
1 , and
hence absolute for transitive ∈-models of ZF. We will use the following strategem:
If M is transitive, y ∈M is transitive, ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) is a formula of L∈, and
x1, . . . , xn ∈y, then
⟨y, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff ⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ(y)[x1, . . . , xn] .
Thus, although ⟨M, ∈⟩may not be a model of ZF, it can cast the satisﬁability of
ϕ in ⟨y, ∈⟩in the absolute terms of the Σ0 formula ϕ(y).
For proper classes, the unformalizability of the satisfaction relation was al-
ready mentioned. It will be useful to know that for any particular n and transitive
class M, the satisfaction relation |=n
M for M restricted to Σn formulas is formal-
izable in ZF: For n = 0, using the aforementioned absoluteness of Σ0 formulas
for transitive structures,
|=0
M ϕ[x1, . . . , xk] iff ϕ(v1, . . . , vk) is Σ0 and ∃y ∈M(y is transitive
∧x1, . . . , xk ∈y ∧⟨y, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . , xk]) ,
and recursively,
|=n+1
M
ϕ[x1, . . . , xk] iff ϕ(v1, . . . , vk) is Σn+1, say for simplicity
∃vk+1 . . . ∃vk+r¬ψ(v1, . . . , vk+r) where ψ is Σn,
and ∃y1 . . . ∃yr¬(|=n
M ψ[x1, . . . , xk, y1, . . . , yr]) .
General higher-order languages have typed variables of every ﬁnite type (or
order), quantiﬁcations of these, and beyond the atomic formulas speciﬁed by the

0. Preliminaries
7
language, X ∈Y and X = Y for any typed variables X and Y. In the intended
semantics, if D is the domain of a structure, type 1 variables play the usual role
of ﬁrst-order variables, type 2 variables range over P(D), and generally, type
i + 1 variables range over Pi(D) where Pi denotes i iterations of the power set
operation. A formula is Πm
n iff it starts with a block of universal quantiﬁers of
type m + 1 variables, followed by a block of existential quantiﬁers of type m + 1
variables, and so forth with at most n blocks in all, followed afterwards by a
formula containing variables of type at most m + 1 and quantiﬁed variables of
type at most m. A formula is Σm
n iff it starts instead with existential quantiﬁers.
Of course, formulas containing only type 1 variables can be construed as the usual
ﬁrst-order formulas. Note that this classiﬁcation of formulas is cumulative because
of the “at most”: any Πm
n or Σm
n formula is also Πr
s and Σr
s for any r > m, or
r = m and s > n. Over the structures that will be considered these formulas will
always be equivalent to like formulas where blocks of like quantiﬁers have been
contracted into one.
Well-Foundedness
For a binary irreﬂexive relation R with ﬁeld a set X,
R is well-founded iff any non-empty Y ⊆X has an R-minimal element .
It is not assumed that R is transitive. The following is basic:
0.3 Lemma. For a binary relation R with ﬁeld X, R is well-founded iff there is
a ρ: X →On which is order-preserving, i.e. if ⟨x, y⟩∈R, then ρ(x) < ρ(y). In
particular, ⌈R is well-founded⌉is ∆ZF
1
and hence absolute for transitive ∈-models
of ZF.
⊣
In the substantive direction, deﬁne a rank function ρ by recursion:
ρ(y) = sup({ρ(x) + 1 | ⟨x, y⟩∈R}) .
The deﬁnition of well-foundedness is ΠZF
1
and the rank function formulation, ΣZF
1 .
Also basic is the Collapsing Lemma:
0.4 Lemma (Mostowski [49], Shepherdson [51]). Suppose that ⟨M, E, . . .⟩is a
(possibly proper class) structure with E a binary relation on M satisfying:
(a) E is well-founded;
(b) ⟨M, E⟩is extensional, i.e. if a, b ∈M and x E a iff x E b for every
x ∈M, then a = b; and
(c) E is set-like, i.e. {x | x E a} is a set for every a ∈M.
Then there is a unique isomorphism π: ⟨M, E, . . .⟩→⟨M, ∈, . . .⟩where M is
transitive.
⊣
⟨M, ∈, . . .⟩is the transitive collapse of ⟨M, ∈, . . .⟩; π is deﬁned by recursion
on E by: π(x) = {π(y) | y E x} for x ∈M. The . . . accommodates further

8
0. Preliminaries
relations and functions. For example, for ⟨M, E, R⟩where R ⊆nM there is an
S ⊆nM such that π: ⟨M, E, R⟩→⟨M, ∈, S⟩satisﬁes x ∈R iff π(x) ∈S for
x ∈nM.
Conditions (b) and (c) are usually immediate for applications of the lemma in
this text, the former since the ⟨M, E, . . .⟩being considered is usually elementarily
equivalent to some ⟨X, ∈, . . .⟩where X is transitive. (a) is more consequential, but
the lemma will often be invoked when ⟨M, E, . . .⟩is an elementary substructure of
some ⟨X, ∈, . . .⟩when it too is immediate. As applications of the lemma become
routine, these conditions, and indeed the lemma, will be mentioned less and less.
Skolem Hull Arguments
To specify the approach and terminology, by a Skolem hull argument is meant an
argument based on some version of the following construction, detailed in Chang-
Keisler [90: §3.3]. Let M = ⟨M, . . .⟩be a structure for a language L. For a
formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vn) of L, f : nM →M is a Skolem function for ϕ iff for any
x1, . . . , xn ∈M,
M |= ∃v0ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] implies that M |= ϕ[ f (x1, . . . , xn), x1, . . . , xn] .
Such functions can be provided through a well-ordering of M by taking least
witnesses, and so if M has a deﬁnable well-ordering of M, there are deﬁnable
Skolem functions for every ϕ. A complete set of Skolem functions for M is the
closure under functional composition of some collection { fϕ | ϕ is a formula}
where fϕ is a Skolem function for ϕ. Such a collection has cardinality |L|, the
number of formulas of L.
Let M∗be the expansion ⟨M, fα⟩α<|L|, where fα: k(α)M →M and { fα | α <
|L|} is a complete set of Skolem functions for M. The function symbols corre-
sponding to the fα’s in the expanded language are the Skolem terms. For any
X ⊆M,
{ fα(x1, . . . , xk(α)) | α < |L| ∧x1, . . . , xk(α) ∈X}
is the domain of a substructure of M∗, and its reduct H(X) to the original language
is the Skolem hull of X in M with respect to { fα | α < |L|}.
By the usual
(Tarski) criterion, H(X) ≺M, i.e. H(X) is an elementary substructure of M.
This provides a useful version of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem:
0.5 Theorem (Tarski-Vaught [57: 92]). Suppose that M = ⟨M, . . .⟩is a structure
for a language L, and X ⊆M. Then there is an M0 = ⟨M0, . . .⟩≺M with
cardinality at most |X| + |L| such that X ⊆M0.
⊣
Beyond this result, a complete set of Skolem functions provides a uniform
way of generating many elementary substructures of a given structure.

0. Preliminaries
9
Ultraproducts
The basic ultraproduct construction is reviewed here partly in order to establish
the notation (see Chang-Keisler [90: §4.1] for details).
Let U be an ultraﬁlter
over a set S, and for each i ∈S let Mi = ⟨Mi, . . .⟩be a structure for some ﬁxed
language L. 
S Mi denotes the Cartesian product of the Mi’s, i.e. the collection of
all functions f with domain S satisfying f (i) ∈Mi for i ∈S. For f, g ∈
S Mi
deﬁne
f =U g iff {i ∈S | f (i) = g(i)} ∈U .
Then =U is an equivalence relation on 
S Mi, so let ( f )U denote the correspond-
ing equivalence class of f and set 
S Mi/U = {( f )U | f ∈
S Mi}. Finally,
deﬁne the ultraproduct of the Mi’s by U, a structure for L denoted by 
S Mi/U,
as follows: (i) its domain is 
S Mi/U, and (ii) for any n-ary predicate symbol in
L interpreted in Mi by the n-ary relation Ri ⊆nMi, the interpretation RU in the
ultraproduct is deﬁned by:
⟨( f1)U, . . . , ( fn)U⟩∈RU iff {i ∈S | ⟨f1(i), . . . , fn(i)⟩∈Ri} ∈U .
The interpretations of the function and constant symbols are deﬁned analogously.
Note that if each Ri is the real membership relation restricted to Mi, then the
corresponding interpretation EU in the ultraproduct is given by:
( f )U EU (g)U iff {i ∈S | f (i) ∈g(i)} ∈U .
The following is the basic Ło´s’s Theorem:
0.6 Theorem (Ło´s [55]). For a formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and f1, . . . , fn ∈
S Mi,

SMi/U |= ϕ[( f1)U, . . . , ( fn)U] iff
{i ∈S | Mi |= ϕ[ f1(i), . . . , fn(i)]} ∈U .
⊣
The proof is by induction on the complexity of ϕ; the Axiom of Choice is needed
at the existential quantiﬁer step.
When there is a ﬁxed M = ⟨M, . . .⟩such that each Mi is M, the ultraproduct
is the ultrapower of M by U, denoted SM/U. In this case there is by 0.6 an
elementary embedding j: M →SM/U given by: j(x) = ( fx)U for x ∈M,
where fx is the constant function: S →{x}. Ultrapowers of V itself are formulated
in §5, and variations considered in subsequent sections.
Direct Limits
The direct limit construction is formulated here for elementary embeddings of
structures; tailored versions with obvious modiﬁcations are used several times in
different contexts. A directed set is a partially ordered set ⟨S, ≤⟩such that for any
i, j ∈S there is a k ∈S such that i ≤k and j ≤k. A directed system is a pair
⟨⟨Mi | i ∈S⟩, ⟨fi j | i ≤j⟩⟩where ⟨S, ≤⟩is a directed set, each Mi is a structure

10
0. Preliminaries
for a ﬁxed language L, and each fi j: Mi ≺Mj is an elementary embedding such
that fik = fjk ◦fi j for i ≤j ≤k (so that each fii is the identity on Mi).
A direct limit of such a system is a structure M for L for which there are
elementary embeddings fi: Mi ≺M for i ∈S with fi = fj ◦fi j for i ≤j, such
that: for each x in the domain of M, x ∈ran( fi) for some i ∈S. The following
proposition gives the essence of this concept:
0.7 Proposition. Suppose that ⟨⟨Mi | i ∈S⟩, ⟨fi j | i ≤j⟩⟩is a directed system and
M is a direct limit with corresponding embeddings fi: Mi ≺M. Assume that N
is a structure such that there are elementary embeddings gi: Mi ≺N satisfying
gi = gj ◦fi j for i ≤j. Then there is an elementary embedding g: M ≺N such
that gi = g ◦fi.
⊣
To deﬁne g, for x in the domain of M, say x = fi(x) for some i ∈S and
x in the domain of Mi, set g(x) = gi(x). “Une chasse sur les diagrammes”
conﬁrms that the g is a well-deﬁned elementary embedding.
0.7 implies that any two direct limits of a directed system are isomorphic,
and so one can speak of the direct limit – once it is established that there is one
at all, which can be done as follows:
Suppose that ⟨⟨Mi | i ∈S⟩, ⟨fi j | i ≤j⟩⟩is a directed system with Mi the
domain of Mi for i ∈S. Set B = 
i∈S{i} × Mi, a union of disjoint copies of the
Mi’s. Deﬁne a binary relation ∼on B by:
⟨i, x⟩∼⟨j, y⟩iff ∃k ∈S(i ≤k ∧j ≤k ∧fik(x) = fjk(y)) .
It is simple to check that ∼is an equivalence relation, so letting [⟨i, x⟩] be the
corresponding equivalence class of ⟨i, x⟩, set
M = B/∼= {[⟨i, x⟩] | ⟨i, x⟩∈B} .
To expand M into a structure for L, suppose for instance that L has an n-ary
predicate symbol interpreted in Mi by Ri ⊆nMi for i ∈S.
Then deﬁne a
corresponding R ⊆nM as follows: Given [⟨i1, x1⟩], . . . , [⟨in, xn⟩] ∈M, ﬁrst ﬁnd
a k ∈S such that is ≤k for 1 ≤s ≤n. Then stipulate that
⟨[⟨i1, x1⟩], . . . , [⟨in, xn⟩]⟩∈R iff ⟨fi1k(x1), . . . , fink(xn)⟩∈Rk .
It is simple to check that R is well-deﬁned. Interpretations of function and con-
stant symbols are deﬁned analogously. Let M = ⟨M, R, . . .⟩be the resulting
structure for L. For each i ∈S deﬁne fi: Mi →M by: fi(x) = [⟨i, x⟩]. Then
straightforward arguments show that M is a direct limit with fi’s the verifying
embeddings.
Measure and Category
These preliminaries are concluded by reviewing some basic concepts used in the
study of the continuum. R denotes the set of reals, formalized as the Dedekind

0. Preliminaries
11
completion of the rationals. However, members of ωω or P(ω) are also called
“reals” following set-theoretic practice. For discussing the structural properties of
R in set theory it is convenient to work with ωω instead, topologized by taking as
the basic open sets
O(s) = { f ∈ωω | s ⊆f }
for s ∈<ωω. This is known as Baire space, again denoted by ωω. This space
is homeomorphic to the irrationals, and the essential features of the structural
properties that will be considered are preserved in this association with R (see e.g.
Levy [79: VII§3]). Once and for all,
we ﬁx an enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω such that |si| ≤i
and sequences appear after their proper initial segments, given in some effective
manner. Some simple observations are made about the topology:
0.8 Exercise (ZF). Suppose that s, t ∈<ωω. Then:
(a) O(s) ∩O(t) is either ∅, O(s), or O(t).
(b) O(s) −O(t) is a disjoint union of basic open sets.
(c) O(t) is clopen, i.e. closed as well as open.
(d) Every open set is a disjoint union of basic open sets.
Hint. For (b) note that
O(s) −O(t) = {O(s) ∩O(u) | |u| = |t| ∧u ̸= t}
and apply (a). For (c) take s = ∅in (b). Finally, for (d) suppose that O is an
open set, say O = 
j∈ω O(sij) in terms of our ﬁxed enumeration. Set X j =
O(sij) −
k< j O(sik).
Then O = 
j X j is a disjoint union, and by repeated
application of (b) each X j is in turn a disjoint union of basic open sets.
⊣
These properties are one of several advantages of working with ωω and imply
that, chameleon-like, ωω is “zero-dimensional”: For 0 < k < ω let k(ωω), the k-
fold Cartesian product of ωω, be topologized with the product topology, i.e. using
basic open sets of the form
O(si1) × · · · × O(sik) .
Then unlike for R, there is a homeomorphism: ωω →k(ωω). In fact, any bijection
of ω with ω · k induces such a homeomorphism.
In what follows, concepts
are described for ωω for notational simplicity, but their extensions to k(ωω) are
assumed through these homeomorphisms or directly in terms of the corresponding
product notions.
Turning ﬁrst to the concept of measure, we ﬁrst review the axiomatic approach
of Emile Borel: For any set S and F ⊆P(S),
F is a σ-algebra on S iff ∅∈F and F is closed under the taking
of complements and countable unions .

12
0. Preliminaries
For such F and any m: F →[0, 1], where [0, 1] ⊆R is the unit interval of reals,
m is a (probability) measure on F iff
(i) m(∅) = 0 and m(S) = 1 , and
(ii) if {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆F is a pairwise disjoint
collection, then m(
n Xn) = 
n m(Xn) .
With ωω in place of R,
the Borel sets are the members of the
σ-algebra B on ωω generated by the O(s)’s .
The Borel sets form a natural hierarchy (see §12), and focal are members of the
second level, the Fσ and Gδ sets in the classical but persistent terminology of
Hausdorff [14]:
A is Fσ
iff A is a union of countably many closed sets .
A is Gδ iff A is an intersection of countably many open sets .
To endow B with a measure, let mω be that measure on P(ω) satisfying mω({i}) =
2−(i+1), so that mω(a) = 
i∈a 2−(i+1) for any a ⊆ω.
Applying a standard
measure-theoretic construction (see e.g. Halmos [50: 157]), stipulate that
mB is the product measure on B induced by mω .
mB(O(s)) = 
i<|s| 2−(s(i)+1) for each s ∈<ωω −{∅}, and mB is the unique
measure on B with this property. With ωω in place of R, mB is Borel’s measure
from his [98: 46-47], and it was extended by Lebesgue’s measure from his [02],
now of course a basic feature of mathematical analysis. A simple way to formulate
his extension is to stipulate ﬁrst for N ⊆ωω that
N is null iff there is a Borel set X such that mB(X) = 0 and N ⊆X ,
and then for A ⊆ωω that
A is Lebesgue measurable iff A △B is null for some Borel set B .
in which case the Lebesgue measure of A is
mL(A) = mB(B) .
Clearly,
the Lebesgue measurable sets form a σ-algebra ML extending B ,
and
mL is a measure on ML extending mB on B .
See e.g. Halmos [50] for the further development of the theory. Two well-
known properties are stated here for later reference. The ﬁrst is immediate from the
standard characterization of mL in terms of the inner and outer measures derived
from mB.

0. Preliminaries
13
0.9 Lemma.
(a) For any Lebesgue measurable set A and ǫ ∈R with ǫ > 0, there is a
closed set C and an open set O such that C ⊆A ⊆O and mL(O −C) < ǫ.
(b) For any Lebesgue measurable set A, there is an Fσ set X and a Gδ set Y
such that X ⊆A ⊆Y and mL(X) = mL(A) = mL(Y).
⊣
(b) follows directly from (a) and highlights the signiﬁcance of Fσ and Gδ
sets.
The next theorem is the set-theoretic formulation of the familiar Fubini The-
orem in the case of null subsets of the plane. In the present context, Lebesgue
measure for k(ωω) is just the k-fold product measure of mL; for A ⊆2(ωω) and
y ∈ωω, temporarily set Ay = {x | ⟨x, y⟩∈A}.
0.10 Theorem. Suppose that A ⊆2(ωω) is Lebesgue measurable. Then A is a null
subset of 2(ωω) iff {y | Ay is not a null subset of ωω} is a null subset of ωω.
⊣
The Baire property evolved from the topological classiﬁcations of Ren´e Baire.
For A ⊆ωω,
int(A) = {O | O is open ∧O ⊆A} , and
cl(A) = {C | C is closed ∧C ⊇A} .
int(A) is the interior of A, the largest open set contained in A, and cl(A) is the
closure of A, the smallest closed set containing A.
A is nowhere dense iff int(cl(A)) = ∅.
A is meager (or ﬁrst category) iff A is a union of countably
many nowhere dense sets .
A has the Baire property iff A △O is meager for some open set O .
It is simple to see that if O is open, then the closed set cl(O) −O is nowhere
dense. Also, open and meager sets have the Baire property (the latter as ∅is
open). The Baire property arose from considerations related to the Baire Category
Theorem:
0.11 Theorem (Baire [99]). No nonempty open set is meager.
Proof. Assume to the contrary that O is a nonempty open set such that O =

j∈ω X j where each X j is nowhere dense. Deﬁne a sequence ⟨ij | j ∈ω⟩∈ωω
such that j < k implies that O ⊇O(sij) ⊇O(sik) and |sij| < |sik| as follows:
Let i0 be least such that O(si0) ⊆O. Given ij, there must be a t ⊇sij such
that O(t) ∩X j = ∅, else cl(X j) ⊇O(sij) and X j would not be nowhere dense.
Let ij+1 be the least i such that: O(si) ∩X j = ∅, si ⊇sij, and |si| > |sij|.
Clearly, if x = 
j sij, then x ∈O −
j X j, which is a contradiction.
⊣
This theorem can be seen as an extension of Cantor’s result that the reals are
uncountable, and the proof a generalization of his original 1873 proof. The Baire

14
0. Preliminaries
Property draws its life from the theorem: if it failed, then by a homeomorphism
argument ωω would be meager, and hence any A ⊆ωω would have the Baire
Property.
The next lemma gives some simple consequences of the deﬁnitions:
0.12 Lemma. Suppose that A ⊆ωω has the Baire property. Then:
(a) ωω −A has the Baire property.
(b) There is a Gδ set X and an Fσ set Y such that X ⊆A ⊆Y and Y −X
is meager.
Proof. Let O be open such that A △O is meager. For (a), note that
(ωω −A) △(ωω −O) = A △O ,
that cl(O) −O is nowhere dense, and hence that (ωω −A) △(ωω −cl(O)) is
meager.
For (b), ﬁrst note that since the closure of a nowhere dense set is also nowhere
dense, there is a meager Fσ set F such that A △O ⊆F. Then X = O −F is
Gδ, X ⊆A, and A −X is meager. By (a) there is similarly a Gδ set G such that
G ⊆(ωω −A) and (ωω −A) −G is meager. Taking Y = ωω −G, the proof is
complete.
⊣
Note that (b) is analogous to 0.9(b) but with the roles of the Fσ and Gδ sets
reversed. By (a) and simple consequences of the deﬁnitions,
the sets having the Baire property form a σ-algebra extending B .
Further important analogies as well as crucial differences exist between
Lebesgue measurability and the Baire property (see Oxtoby [71] and Kunen [84]).
The following theorem is the analogue of 0.10; like Lebesgue measure, the topo-
logical concepts extend naturally to k(ωω).
0.13 Theorem (Kuratowski-Ulam [32]). Suppose that A ⊆2(ωω) has the Baire
property. Then A is a meager subset of 2(ωω) iff {y | Ay is not a meager subset
of ωω} is a meager subset of ωω.
⊣

Chapter 1
Beginnings
The beginning threads of the subject are picked up in its early history. §1 discusses
weak inaccessibility and Mahloness, concepts that arose in the study of cardinal
limit processes, and their strong versions, which led to early speculations about
completeness and consistency. §2 describes Ulam’s formulation of measurability,
the most prominent of all large cardinal hypotheses, out of a measure problem for
sets of reals. In §3 G¨odel’s work on L, the beginning of axiomatic set theory as a
distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics, is reviewed since in both reaction and generaliza-
tion it shaped much of the subsequent work in large cardinals. §4 discusses weak
and strong compactness, concepts that emerged from Tarski’s study of inﬁnitary
languages, and establishes Hanf’s result, that in a strong sense there are many
inaccessibles below a measurable cardinal. The focus of §5 is on elementary em-
beddings and the ultrapower construction: Scott’s pivotal result that if there is a
measurable cardinal, then V ̸= L; the characterization of measurability in terms
of ultrapowers and elementary embeddings; and the related notion of normality.
And ﬁnally §6 discusses indescribability, a natural formalization of reﬂection phe-
nomena in terms of higher-order languages that provided a schematic approach to
comparing large cardinals by size.

16
Chapter 1. Beginnings
1. Inaccessibility
That volume of Mathematische Annalen containing Zermelo’s ﬁrst axiomatization
[08a] of set theory also contained Hausdorff’s wide-ranging paper [08] on trans-
ﬁnite ordertypes. While Cantor had concentrated his efforts on the rational and
real ordertypes, the second-number class, and of course, the Continuum Hypoth-
esis, Hausdorff extended mathematical investigations into the higher transﬁnite.
Deploring all the fuss made over foundations by his contemporaries (p. 436) he
ventured forth with vigor, pursuing structure for its own sake. His paper contains
the ﬁrst statement of the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis, the construction of
the ηα sets – prototypes for saturated model theory – and for the ﬁrst time, the
following concept (p. 443) formulated for κ > ω:
κ is weakly inaccessible iff κ is a regular limit cardinal .
(The term “inaccessible” is attributed to Kuratowski in Sierpi´nski-Tarski [30];
“weakly” is appended for a later distinction.)
Hausdorff observed that such a κ must satisfy ωκ = κ and is a natural closure
point for cardinal limit processes. In modern terms, a simple argument shows that
if C is closed unbounded in κ, then so is C′ = {α ∈C | |C ∩α| = α}; taking
C = κ we have C′ = {α < κ | |α| = α}, C
′′ = {α < κ | ωα = α}, and so
forth. However, Hausdorff was to write in his classic text [14: 131] that if weakly
inaccessible cardinals did exist, “the least among them has such an exorbitant
magnitude [exorbitanten Gr¨osse] that it will hardly ever come into consideration
for the usual [¨ublich] purposes of set theory”.
It is now well-known that the
existence of weakly inaccessible cardinals cannot be established in ZFC (since
Lκ |= ZFC for such κ – see §3).
Inspired by Hausdorff’s work Mahlo [11, 12, 13] ventured much further and
investigated hierarchies of regular cardinals formulated in terms of higher ﬁxed
point phenomena.
Given its early appearance this work is remarkable for its
boldness and sophistication. (Mahlo was a student of Felix Bernstein at Halle
and attended seminars of Cantor there, completing his dissertation (on geometry)
in 1908. He was ﬁrst to publish [13a] a construction under CH of what is now
known as a Luzin set, an uncountable set of reals that has countable intersection
with every meager set. Gottwald-Kreiser [84] discusses Mahlo’s life and work.)
Recasting Mahlo’s πα numbers,
κ is 0-weakly inaccessible iff κ is regular ;
κ is (α + 1)-weakly inaccessible iff κ is a regular limit of α-weakly
inaccessible cardinals ; and
κ is δ-weakly inaccessible iff κ is α-weakly inaccessible
for every α < δ
for limit ordinals δ > 0. This hierarchy can be extended through diagonalization,
considering next the regular limits of those ξ that are ξ-weakly inaccessible. By
a simple induction argument, if κ is β-weakly inaccessible and α < β, then κ is

1. Inaccessibility
17
α-weakly inaccessible. With Reg the class of regular cardinals and Λ the operation
deﬁned on X ⊆On by
Λ(X) = {α ∈X | |X ∩α| = α} ,
the α-weakly inaccessible cardinals are just the members Λα(Reg), where the
superscript indicates the number of iterative applications of Λ with intersections
taken at limit stages. The hierarchy of α-weakly inaccessible cardinals can thus be
seen as the consequence of imposing regularity on the process of taking cardinal
limits.
The Λ operation leads to larger and larger cardinals, but typically, a new
principle is needed to achieve a qualitative transcendence. Mahlo was able to
formulate such a principle, using for the ﬁrst time the concept of a stationary set.
(The term itself comes from Bloch [53].) His ρ0 numbers are now known through
the following deﬁnition for κ > ω:
κ is weakly Mahlo iff {ρ < κ | ρ is regular} is stationary in κ .
Such a κ is regular (if there were an unbounded X ⊆κ such that |X| < κ, then
the limit points of X −|X| other than κ would form a closed unbounded subset
not containing any regular cardinals), and so weakly Mahlo cardinals are weakly
inaccessible. The following illustrates what led Mahlo to these cardinals:
1.1 Proposition (Mahlo [11]). If κ is weakly Mahlo, then κ is κ-weakly inacces-
sible.
Proof. Setting R = {ρ < κ | ρ is regular}, deﬁne sets Cα closed unbounded in κ
for α < κ by recursion as follows: Set C0 = κ. Given Cα, let Cα+1 consist of the
limit points of Cα ∩R other than κ. As κ is weakly Mahlo, Cα ∩R is stationary,
and so Cα+1 is closed unbounded. Finally, for limit δ > 0 set Cδ = 
α<δ Cα.
It is readily seen by induction that for α < κ, Cα ∩R consists of the α-weakly
inaccessible cardinals below κ, and hence the proof is complete.
⊣
This result is not optimal since we could take the diagonal intersection C =
△α<κCα, infer that C ∩R = {ξ < κ | ξ is ξ-weakly inaccessible} is stationary
in κ, and continue. Interestingly enough, Gaifman [67] showed that in a concrete
sense a weakly Mahlo cardinal is the least upper bound of diagonalizing limit
processes from below. Such an upward approach is not possible for the larger
cardinals that will be encountered.
Mahlo formulated his ρα numbers by iterating the new process:
κ is 0-weakly Mahlo iff κ is regular ;
κ is (α + 1)-weakly Mahlo iff {ξ < κ | ξ is α-weakly Mahlo}
is stationary in κ ; and
κ is δ-weakly Mahlo iff κ is α-weakly Mahlo for every α < δ
for limit ordinals δ > 0. Again, the hierarchy can be extended through diago-
nalization, considering next those κ such that {ξ < κ | ξ is ξ-weakly Mahlo}

18
Chapter 1. Beginnings
is stationary in κ. By a simple induction argument, if κ is β-weakly Mahlo and
α < β, then κ is α-weakly Mahlo. The following operation deﬁned for X ⊆On
is now known as Mahlo’s operation:
M(X) = {α ∈X | X ∩α is stationary in α} .
As for Λ and the α-weakly inaccessible cardinals, the α-weakly Mahlo cardinals
are just the members of Mα(Reg); 1.1 illustrates the transcendence of M over Λ.
Despite its modest debut Mahlo’s operation is now a standard part of the modern
theory.
Almost two decades were to pass before the initial preoccupation with the
extent of the ordinals was enhanced by considerations involving the width of the
set-theoretic universe as advanced by the power set operation. Sierpi´nski-Tarski
[30] and Zermelo [30] formulated the following concept for κ > ω:
κ is (strongly) inaccessible iff κ is regular and a strong limit:
if λ < κ, then 2λ < κ .
The adverb “strongly” is suppressed for this preferred notion. Assuming GCH, κ
is inaccessible iff κ is weakly inaccessible.
The cumulative hierarchy view V = 
α Vα of the set-theoretic universe was
emerging at this time. In its terms, the following proposition implies that the
existence of inaccessible cardinals cannot be established in set theory:
1.2 Proposition. Suppose that κ is inaccessible. Then:
(a) If x ⊆Vκ, then x ∈Vκ iff |x| < κ.
(b) ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= ZFC.
Proof. (a) In the forward direction, it sufﬁces to show that |Vα| < κ for α < κ.
But this follows readily by induction on α. Conversely, suppose that x ⊆Vκ with
|x| < κ. By the regularity of κ, {rank(y) | y ∈x} ⊆α for some α < κ, and so
x ∈Vα+1 ⊆Vκ.
(b) All the axioms of ZFC except Replacement are readily seen to hold in Vα
for any limit ordinal α > ω. To verify Replacement for Vκ, suppose that x ∈Vκ
and F is any function: x →Vκ. Then |F“x| ≤|x| < κ and so by (a) F“x ∈Vκ.
⊣
Temporarily let IC be the hypothesis: There is an inaccessible cardinal. If IC
and κ is the least inaccessible cardinal, then it is readily seen that Vκ |= ZFC +
¬IC. Hence, IC is not provable in ZFC. This ﬁrst independence result over ZFC
was essentially observed in Zermelo [30] and was also asserted in Sierpi´nski-
Tarski [30]. (Kuratowski [24] reported that he had considered a theory of sets
– essentially ZFC sans Foundation – and remarked that even in the presence of
Replacement “one cannot establish [on ne saurait ´etablir]” the existence of weakly
inaccessible cardinals. However, despite the reading of Mostowski [49: 162] this
could not have been shown at the time without assuming some form of GCH.)

1. Inaccessibility
19
That the existential postulation IC immediately leads to its own independence is
analogous to the situation with the Axiom of Inﬁnity: Vω |= ⌈Every set is ﬁnite⌉.
Similarly, if κ is the least Mahlo, then Vκ |= ⌈There are no Mahlo cardinals⌉. This
is a typical feature of large cardinals.
The independence of IC can also be established by appealing to the Second
Incompleteness Theorem of G¨odel [31] since ZFC + IC ⊢Con(ZFC) by 1.2(b).
This further implies that Con(ZFC + IC) is not provable from Con(ZFC), again
by G¨odel’s theorem.
This ﬁner result points out a qualitative difference: the
very possibility of discussing formal consistency in G¨odel’s careful analysis far
transcends the simple proof of 1.2(b). Tarski soon became aware of this distinction
([38: 87]).
With ZFC having been cast as a ﬁrst-order theory 1.2(b) does not characterize
inaccessibility, by the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem (0.5). Signiﬁcantly, this fact
was observed only latterly (Mostowski [49], Montague-Vaught [59]) in the wake
of new model-theoretic initiatives. On the other hand, a characterization can be
achieved by venturing into higher-order logic. Let ZFC2 denote the second-order
version of ZFC where the schema of Replacement is replaced by a single axiom
with a second-order universal quantiﬁer. The following is established with the
intended interpretation of second-order variables as ranging over arbitrary subsets
of the domain.
1.3 Theorem (Zermelo [30], Shepherdson [52]). κ is inaccessible iff Vκ |= ZFC2.
Proof. The forward direction is as for 1.2(b).
For the converse, ﬁrst note that κ is regular: If not, there would be an α < κ
and a function G: α →κ with a range unbounded in κ. Then G ⊆Vκ, and
so by second-order Replacement G“α ∈Vκ.
Hence, sup(G“α) = κ ∈Vκ, a
contradiction.
It remains to establish that κ is a strong limit cardinal: If not, there would
be a λ < κ such that 2λ ≥κ. Then P(λ) ∈Vκ by the Power Set Axiom, yet there
would be a surjection H: P(λ) →κ. So again by second-order Replacement,
H“P(λ) = κ ∈Vκ, a contradiction.
⊣
Strictly speaking, the intrusion of the second-order satisfaction relation is
not essential here since ZFC2 can be cast as a single axiom: Vκ |= ZFC2 is
equivalent to the relativization ϕVκ+1 for some ﬁrst-order formula ϕ. John Shep-
herdson [52] was ﬁrst to give a formal proof of 1.3. However, it is a remarkable
historical happenstance that Zermelo [30] had already established an informal ver-
sion:
In [30] Zermelo presented his ﬁnal axiomatization of set theory, incorpo-
rating Replacement and Foundation, and moreover offered a striking, synthetic
vision of sets as partaking in a succession of natural models. From his [29] clar-
iﬁcation of the crucial notion of deﬁnit property used in his Separation Axiom
it is evident that Zermelo couched his approach in higher-order logic. Strictly
speaking, this would be the formal interpretation, and Shepherdson’s criticism

20
Chapter 1. Beginnings
([52: 227]) of Zermelo’s proof of 1.3 as “insufﬁciently rigorous” is justiﬁed from
this point of view. But Zermelo had adopted a deﬁnite anti-formalist viewpoint
by then, and downgraded the signiﬁcance of Skolem’s remarks [23] on the rel-
ativism of ﬁrst-order formalizations. For Zermelo concepts like power set and
cardinal number simply had deﬁnite extensions and assumed an absolute signiﬁ-
cance.
It was in Zermelo [30] that initial segments of the cumulative hierarchy

α Vα were ﬁrst proposed as models for the axioms of set theory. Although the
hierarchy was adumbrated by Mirimanov [17] and by von Neumann [25], Zermelo
was the ﬁrst to actually adopt the Foundation Axiom. Moreover, he started with
collections of urelements (his term) as bases for his hierarchical models. Although
this device has turned out to be unnecessary for the enrichment of set theory itself,
it is still important in restricted contexts (like admissible sets – see Barwise [75]).
Zermelo’s main achievement was to establish a second-order categoricity of
sorts for his axioms: he showed that his models are characterized up to isomor-
phism by two cardinals, the number of its urelements and the height of its ordinals.
Moreover, there is a unique end-extension relation between any two models, based
on these two invariants, so that one model is just a set in a higher domain. In
order to establish these results Zermelo used the cumulative hierarchy analysis
to correlate models rank by rank. Grappling with Replacement he characterized
these ordinal heights of models (“Grenzzahlen”) as regular ﬁxed points of the Beth
function, and hence arrived at inaccessible cardinals essentially through 1.3.
Zermelo went on to propound a dynamic view of sets that posits an endless
succession of models of set theory ([30: 47]):
The ‘ultraﬁnite antinomies of set theory’ that scientiﬁc reactionaries and anti-
mathematicians refer to so assiduously and lovingly in their campaign against set theory,
these seeming ‘contradictions’, are only due to a confusion of set theory itself, which is
non-categorically determined by its axioms, with particular representing models: What
appears in one model as an ‘ultraﬁnite non-or metaset’ is in the next higher one already a
fully valid ‘set’ with cardinal number and ordinal type, and is itself the foundation stone
for the construction of the new domain. The unlimited series of Cantor’s ordinal numbers
is matched by just as inﬁnite a double series of essentially different set-theoretic models,
the whole classical theory being manifested in each of them. The two diametrically oppo-
site tendencies of the thinking spirit, the idea of creative progress and of comprehensive
completion, which also lie at the root of the Kantian ‘antinomies’, ﬁnd their symbolic
representation and symbolic reconciliation in the transﬁnite series of numbers based on
the concept of well-ordering. This series in its boundless progression does not have a true
conclusion, only relative stopping points, namely those ‘limit numbers’ [i.e. inaccessible
cardinals] which separate the higher from the lower model types. And thus also, the set-
theoretic ‘antinomies’ lead, if properly understood, not to a restriction or mutilation but
rather to a presently unsurveyable unfolding and enrichment, of mathematical science.
These words run counter to Cantor’s (and later, G¨odel’s) view of a ﬁxed set-
theoretic universe, yet conform in a way to his realist conception of mathematics
as consisting of all consistently conceivable objects. In any event, it is notewor-
thy that inaccessible cardinals played such a prominent role in an early structural
analysis of the universe of sets. Tarski [38, 39a] later formalized the existence
of arbitrarily many inaccessible cardinals as an axiom, phrased in such a way

1. Inaccessibility
21
that most of the axioms of set theory including the Axiom of Choice are deriv-
able. Nevertheless, Zermelo’s inﬁnitistic conception was soon to be overtaken
by a growing preoccupation with the formalism of ﬁrst-order logic, following the
incisive analyses of Skolem and G¨odel.
In analogy with the weakly Mahlo cardinals,
κ is (strongly) Mahlo iff {α < κ | α is inaccessible} is stationary in κ .
As with inaccessibility the adverb “strongly” is suppressed for this preferred no-
tion. The hierarchies of the
α-inaccessible and α-Mahlo cardinals
are analogously deﬁned, and the analogue of 1.1 obtains.
Almost half a century after their introduction Levy revitalized the study of
Mahlo cardinals with his investigation of reﬂection phenomena, shifting the fo-
cus from the “weak” to the “strong” versions because of the interplay with the
cumulative hierarchy (§6).

22
Chapter 1. Beginnings
2. Measurability
This section picks up another thread, one that led to measurability, the most
prominent of all large cardinal hypotheses. This development occurred in Poland,
which featured a school of mathematics crucial to the foundations of mathemat-
ical logic, topology, and analysis. After the reuniﬁcation of the country in 1918
Zygmunt Janiszewski at the newly reopened University of Warsaw encouraged
the focusing of Polish mathematics on set theory and related areas to establish a
national tradition, and the publication of a new journal to promote international
research in these directions (see Kuratowski [80] and Kuzawa [68]). This was
the origin of Fundamenta Mathematicae (genitive singular), the ﬁrst specialized
journal devoted to foundational issues and the main conduit of scholarship in this
general area during the 1920’s and 1930’s (see Kuzawa [70]). The ﬁrst volume,
incidentally, contained the well-known problem of Suslin [20] that led to the in-
vestigation of Suslin trees in modern set theory. At Warsaw Sierpi´nski together
with Kuratowski and Tarski were soon making fundamental contributions to set
theory and the understanding of its role in mathematics. For present concerns
work of Stefan Banach and the young Stanisław Ulam at Lw´ow (now Lviv) on
an abstract measure problem turned out to be fundamental.
Modern measure theory dates back to Lebesgue’s thesis [02], where he posed
the Measure Problem.
For the real line this asks: Is there a function m that
associates to every bounded set of reals X a non-negative real number m(X) such
that:
(a) m is not identically zero .
(b) m is translation-invariant, i.e. m(X) = m(Y) whenever
there is a real r such that Y = {x + r | x ∈X} , and
(c) m is countably additive, i.e. if {Xn | n ∈ω} is a pairwise disjoint
collection whose union is a bounded set of reals, then
m(
n Xn) = 
n m(Xn) .
Lebesgue developed his measure towards a solution to this problem, and of course,
it is now integral to mathematical analysis. (For the historical development of
Lebesgue measure and integration, see Hawkins [75].) Part of the problem was
to decide what passed for a set of reals.
Giuseppe Vitali [05] constructed a
non-Lebesgue measurable set of reals from a well-ordering of the reals, thereby
showing that the Measure Problem has no solution under the Axiom of Choice.
This was the ﬁrst explicit use of AC to construct a speciﬁc set of reals after
Zermelo’s formulation of the axiom, a manipulative use of a well-ordering very
different from Cantor’s associations of sets with well-orderings. For Lebesgue
[07], Vitali’s construction raised doubts not so much about the possibilities for a
measure but about AC.
Vitali’s counterexample used all the conditions (a)–(c).
Banach proposed
a generalization of the Measure Problem where (b) is replaced by a minimal
necessary condition to avoid trivial solutions: m({x}) = 0 for every x.
With

2. Measurability
23
a proof that has a contemporary relevance Banach-Kuratowski [29] established
that under CH this version of the problem also has no solution. Note that by
(b) and (c) a solution m to the Measure Problem is determined by its values on
P([0, 1]), the subsets of the unit interval [0, 1]. Banach realized that his condition
removed geometric considerations from the problem, so that [0, 1] can be replaced
by an arbitrary set S. In this case, if m is not identically 0 on P(S), then surely
m(S) > 0, and so we can normalize and assume that m(S) = 1. Thus, the measure
problem of Banach [30] might as well be posed as follows: Is there a nonempty
set S and a function m: P(S) →[0, 1] such that:
(i) m(S) = 1 ,
(ii) m({x}) = 0 for every x ∈S , and
(iii) for pairwise disjoint {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆P(S),
m(
n Xn) = 
n m(Xn) .
Such a function will simply be called a measure over S (it is a measure on P(S)
in the sense of §0). The following exercise points to a salient feature of measures:
2.1 Exercise. If T ⊆{X ⊆S | m(X) > 0} is uncountable, then there are distinct
Y, Z ∈T such that m(Y ∩Z) > 0.
Hint. Note that for some n ∈ω, {X ∈T | m(X) > 1
n } is uncountable.
⊣
For a measure m over a set S,
m is λ-additive iff for any γ < λ and pairwise disjoint
{Xα | α < γ } ⊆P(S), m(
α Xα) = 
α m(Xα) .
(Here, a transﬁnite sum of reals is the supremum of the sums of ﬁnite subcollec-
tions.) Banach saw that only the cardinality of the set S matters in his problem,
and that in lieu of property (iii) one might as well require a stronger property.
2.2 Exercise. Suppose that κ is the least cardinal such that there is a measure over
κ. Then every measure over κ is κ-additive.
Hint. If not, let m be a measure over κ, γ < κ, and {Xα | α < γ } ⊆P(κ)
pairwise disjoint such that m(
α Xα) ̸= 
α m(Xα). Then γ > ω and there are
only countably many α’s with m(Xα) > 0 by 2.1. Removing these through the
additivity property (iii), assume without loss of generality that each m(Xα) = 0,
yet m(
α Xα) = r > 0. Now check that m: P(γ ) →[0, 1] deﬁned by
m(Y) = m(
α∈Y Xα)
r
is a measure over γ , contradicting the minimality of κ.
⊣

24
Chapter 1. Beginnings
For κ > ω,
κ is real-valued measurable iff
there is a κ-additive measure over κ.
If m is such a measure, then clearly m(X) = 0 whenever |X| < κ. Hence, it is
easy to see that a real-valued measurable cardinal is regular. Banach [30: 101]
established under GCH that every real-valued measurable cardinal is weakly in-
accessible.
As a student at Lw´ow Ulam [29] had already provided, in measure-theoretic
terms, the ﬁrst construction of an ultraﬁlter over ω using a well-ordering of P(ω).
(Tarski [29] announced the general result that any ﬁlter over a set can be extended
to an ultraﬁlter over that set.) In his doctoral dissertation Ulam then established
fundamental results concerning Banach’s measure problem; as we shall see, this
work involved a direct generalization of an ultraﬁlter over ω. Ulam ﬁrst removed
GCH from Banach’s result above; for this purpose, he devised a useful combina-
torial device now known as an Ulam matrix:
2.3 Proposition (Ulam [30]). For any λ, there is a collection of sets
{Aξ
α | α < λ+ ∧ξ < λ} ⊆P(λ+) satisfying
(a) Aξ
α ∩Aξ
β = ∅whenever α < β < λ+ and ξ < λ; and
(b) |λ+ −
ξ<λ Aξ
α| ≤λ for each α < λ+.
Proof. For each η < λ+ let fη: λ →η + 1 be surjective, and for α < λ+ and
ξ < λ set Aξ
α = {η < λ+ | fη(ξ) = α}. Then (a) is immediate and for (b) note
that (λ+ −
ξ<λ Aξ
α) ⊆α.
⊣
2.4 Corollary. If κ is real-valued measurable, then κ is weakly inaccessible.
Proof. Since κ must be regular, it remains to establish that κ is a limit cardinal.
Assume to the contrary that κ = λ+, and consider an Ulam matrix as in 2.3. Let
m be a κ-additive measure over κ. Then for each α < λ+, there is a ξα < λ such
that m(Aξα
α ) > 0 by 2.3(b). But then, there must be a ﬁxed ξ < λ such that ξα = ξ
for λ+ many α’s. By 2.3(a), this contradicts 2.1.
⊣
Ulam then pointed out a major dichotomy. For a measure m over κ,
A ⊆κ is an atom for m iff m(A) > 0 yet for any B ⊆A,
m(B) = m(A) or m(B) = 0 , and
m is atomless
iff there are no atoms for m .
Ulam drew important conclusions both from the existence of an atomless measure
and from the existence of a measure with an atom. (b) of the following does not
need much beyond Ulam’s proof of (a).
2.5 Theorem (Ulam [30]). Suppose that there is an atomless κ-additive measure
m over κ. Then:
(a) κ ≤2ℵ0.
(b) There is a measure over the reals extending Lebesgue measure.

2. Measurability
25
2.6 Lemma.
(i) For any ǫ ∈R with ǫ > 0 and X ⊆κ with m(X) > 0, there is a Y ⊆X
satisfying 0 < m(Y) < ǫ.
(ii) For any X ⊆κ there is a Y ⊆X satisfying m(Y) = 1
2 · m(X).
Proof. (i) It sufﬁces to recursively deﬁne a ⊆-descending sequence of sets Xi
satisfying 0 < m(Xi+1) ≤
1
2 · m(Xi) for each i ∈ω. But given Xi, since m
is atomless, there is a partition A ∪B = Xi such that 0 < m(A) ≤m(B); set
Xi+1 = A.
(ii) Recursively deﬁne a ⊆-descending sequence of sets Xα such that m(Xα) ≥
1
2 · m(X) for as long as possible, as follows: Set X0 = X. If Xα has been de-
ﬁned, deﬁne Xα+1 exactly when m(Xα) > 1
2 · m(X), in which case it is to satisfy
Xα+1 ⊆Xα and m(Xα) > m(Xα+1) ≥1
2 · m(X). This is possible by (i). Finally,
for δ a limit ordinal deﬁne Xδ = 
α<δ Xα exactly when Xα has been deﬁned for
each α < δ. There must now be an α < ω1 such that m(Xα) = 1
2 · m(X), else the
collection {Xα −Xα+1 | α < ω1} would contradict 2.1.
⊣
Proof of 2.5. For each s ∈<ωω deﬁne sets Xs ⊆κ as follows: Set X∅= κ. Given
Xs, apply 2.6(ii) recursively to get sets Xs⌢⟨i⟩for i ∈ω such that
Xs = 
i∈ω Xs⌢⟨i⟩is a disjoint union ,
and
m(Xs⌢⟨i⟩) = 2−(i+1) · m(Xs) .
For each f ∈ωω set Yf = 
n X f |n, so that m(Yf ) = 0. κ = {Yf | f ∈ωω},
and so m cannot be (2ℵ0)+-additive, and hence (a) follows.
For (b) deﬁne µ: P(ωω) →[0, 1] by
µ(A) = m({Yf | f ∈A}) .
It is simple to check that µ is a (in fact κ-additive) measure over ωω. It remains
to use properties of the Lebesgue measure mL as formulated in §0 to show that µ
extends mL: By the construction of Xs for s ∈<ωω,
µ(O(s)) = m(Xs) = 
i<|s|2−(s(i)+1) = mL(O(s)) .
Thus, by deﬁnition of mL, µ and mL agree on the Borel sets. But then, µ(N) = 0
for any null set N, and consequently µ and mL agree on the Lebesgue measurable
sets.
⊣
This result provided for the ﬁrst time a well-motivated example of a weakly
inaccessible cardinal ≤2ℵ0, and hence a plausible hypothesis implying a drastic
failure of Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis. Much stronger results are now known
along these lines, but almost forty years were to pass before the primary results
on real-valued measurability ≤2ℵ0 were established by Solovay (§§16, 17). For

26
Chapter 1. Beginnings
a portmanteau compendium of recent results on real-valued measurability, see
Fremlin [93].
The other road taken by Ulam was to be even more consequential. Suppose
that a κ-additive measure m over κ does have an atom A ⊆κ. If µ is deﬁned on
P(κ) by
µ(X) = m(X ∩A)
m(A)
,
then µ is a κ-additive measure over κ with range {0, 1}. This property can be
conveniently expressed in terms of ultraﬁlters: For such a two-valued measure µ,
set:
Uµ = {X ⊆κ | µ(X) = 1} .
Then Uµ is a (non-principal) ultraﬁlter over κ.
For instance, if X, Y ∈Uµ,
then X ∩Y ∈Uµ: otherwise X −Y ∈Uµ and Y −X ∈Uµ, leading to the
contradiction µ(X ∪Y) ≥2. Furthermore, the κ-additivity of µ translates to a
strong intersection property: Recall that a ﬁlter F is λ-complete iff for any γ < λ
and {Xα | α < γ } ⊆F, 
α<γ Xα ∈F. There is a simple dual characterization
for ultraﬁlters:
2.7 Exercise. An ultraﬁlter U is λ-complete iff for any γ < λ and
{Yα | α < γ } ∈U, there is an α < γ such that Yα ∈U.
⊣
Hence, our Uµ is κ-complete. This leads to the most important concept of
all large cardinal theory: For κ > ω,
κ is measurable iff there is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ .
Measurability is a direct generalization of the existence of ultraﬁlters over ω (which
of course are ω-complete). The ﬁnite intersection property is automatically pre-
served when taking the union of a chain of ﬁlters, so that just a maximal principle
is needed to get ultraﬁlters over ω. But κ-completeness for κ > ω is not similarly
preserved, so that the existence of a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ must be explic-
itly postulated. Tarski [39, 45] investigated the concept of measurability in the
context of Boolean algebras and κ-complete prime ideals – just the dual notion.
The following result stands in contrast to 2.5(a):
2.8 Theorem (Ulam; Tarski – Ulam [30: 146]).
If κ is measurable, then κ is
inaccessible.
Proof. What remains beyond 2.4 is to establish that κ is a strong limit. Suppose
that U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ, and assume to the contrary that λ < κ,
yet there is an injective function f : κ →λ2. For each α < λ, there is an iα < 2
such that Xα = {ξ < κ | f (ξ)(α) = iα} ∈U. Hence, X = 
α<λ Xα ∈U, and
for ξ ∈X, f (ξ)(α) = iα for every α < λ. But then, X can have at most one
member, which is a contradiction.
⊣

2. Measurability
27
Whether the least measurable cardinal is strictly larger than the least inac-
cessible cardinal became a focal question, and was settled only thirty years later.
For a result that by present-day standards is rather straightforward this may seem
like a remarkably long time – even taking into account the convulsive events that
took place in Europe. However, this is a typical case of a long-standing math-
ematical problem suddenly solved in the wake of new techniques – and perhaps
surprisingly, sufﬁciently strong methods were ﬁrst to emerge in the semantics of
inﬁnitary languages (§4).
Meanwhile, the center stage in set theory was taken by G¨odel’s formula-
tion of the constructible hierarchy and the consistency of the Axiom of Choice
and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (§3). Nonetheless, in the growing
abstraction of modern mathematics measurability occurred in various ﬁelds as a
limitative concept: Mackey [44], vector lattices; Hewitt [48], rings of continuous
functions; Ehrenfeucht-Ło´s [54], inﬁnite cyclic groups; and further references in
Keisler-Tarski [64: 272]. It remained for Scott to establish the modern and central
relevance of measurable cardinals in connection with the ultrapower construc-
tion (§5).

28
Chapter 1. Beginnings
3. Constructibility
This section does not discuss a new large cardinal concept, but rather the major
contribution to set theory of the foremost mathematical logician of our time and his
speculations about large cardinals. That contribution not only launched axiomatic
set theory as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics, but stimulated subsequent work in
large cardinals ﬁrst in complementary reaction and then in structural generalization.
In October of 1935 G¨odel informed von Neumann at the Institute for Ad-
vanced Study in Princeton that he had established the relative consistency of the
Axiom of Choice. This he did, of course, by devising his constructible hierarchy L
(for “law”) and verifying the axiom there. G¨odel conjectured that the Continuum
Hypothesis would also hold in L, but he soon fell ill and only gave a proof of this
and GCH two years later (the crucial idea apparently came to him during the night
of June 14-15, 1937 – G¨odel [86: 40]). In addition to these fundamental results
he observed that in L there are delimitative counterexamples for descriptive set
theory (§§12, 13).
G¨odel’s article [38] in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
U.S.A. was the ﬁrst announcement of these results, and the succeeding [39] pro-
vided more details in the context of ZF. To review, a set y is deﬁnable over
a structure M iff there is a ﬁrst-order formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vn) in the language
of M and parameters a1, . . . , an in the domain of M such that:
z ∈y iff
M |= ϕ[z, a1, . . . , an]. For any set x,
def(x) = {y ⊆x | y is deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈⟩} .
This is a set, being itself a subset of P(x) deﬁnable via the formalized satisfaction
relation for ⟨x, ∈⟩. Now deﬁne by transﬁnite recursion:
L0 = ∅; Lα+1 = def(Lα) ; Lδ = 
α<δLα for limit δ > 0 ;
and
L = 
αLα .
Thus, L is a (deﬁnable) class, the class of constructible sets, and the assertion
V = L, i.e. ∀x(x ∈L), is the Axiom of Constructibility. It is already apparent why
the Axiom of Choice would hold in L: By transﬁnite recursion within L one can
well-order L level-by-level, well ordering Lα+1 −Lα according to deﬁnitions and
the previous well-ordering of the parameters from Lα. The veriﬁcation of GCH
was less obvious, evidently inspired by the analysis of Skolem [23], the source
of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. Devlin [84], Kunen [80], Moschovakis [80]
and Drake [74] provide expositions of G¨odel’s results.
G¨odel believed that careful epistemological analysis can lead to signiﬁcant
mathematical advances, and his remarkable successes amply bear out this con-
tention. His results with L actually represent a steady intellectual development
from his celebrated Incompleteness Theorem [31] which was to extend later to

3. Constructibility
29
speculations on large cardinals. Already in footnote 48a to [31], made much of
by Kreisel [80], G¨odel wrote:
. . . the true reason for the incompleteness inherent in all formal systems of mathematics
is that the formation of ever higher types can be continued into the transﬁnite . . . while in
any formal system at most denumerably many of them are available. For it can be shown
that the undecidable propositions constructed here become decidable whenever appropriate
higher types are added (for example, the type ω to the system P [Peano Arithmetic]). An
analogous situation prevails for the axiom system of set theory.
G¨odel’s ﬁrst description of L in [38] shows how he had built on this insight:
This model, roughly speaking, consists of all “mathematically constructible” sets, where
the term “constructible” is to be understood in the semiintuitionistic sense which excludes
impredicative procedures. This means “constructible” sets are deﬁned to be those sets
which can be obtained by Russell’s ramiﬁed hierarchy of types, if extended to include the
transﬁnite orders. The extension to transﬁnite orders has the consequence that the model
satisﬁes the impredicative axioms of set theory, because an axiom of reducibility can be
proved for sufﬁciently high orders.
G¨odel thus regarded his hierarchy as a transﬁnite extension of Russell’s, which
can be construed as a formal theory of Lω+ω. Although this is a hierarchy of pred-
icative deﬁnitions (i.e. quantifying over domains of previously formed objects),
G¨odel’s realization was that extending the indexing of higher types through all the
ordinals would lead to a completion of the axioms of set theory, as adumbrated
in that footnote to [31]. G¨odel stressed the historical continuity: the allusion to
Russell’s ill-fated Axiom of Reducibility is a clear reference to the rectiﬁcation: if
x ∈Lλ and λ is a cardinal in L, then for any y ⊆x in L there is a γ < λ such that
y ∈Lγ . Thus, the impredicative power set operation is tamed in L, leading to the
consistency of GCH. In later commentary on Russell’s mathematical logic G¨odel
[44: 147] argued that with his “transﬁnite theorem of reducibility”, “all impred-
icativities are reduced to one special kind, namely the existence of certain large
ordinal numbers (or well-ordered sets) and the validity of recursive reasoning for
them.”
Interestingly enough, G¨odel viewed L as an outright construction using trans-
ﬁnite reasoning in metamathematics. See Wang [74: 8ff]; in a letter quoted there
G¨odel wrote about his CH result: “. . . there was a special obstacle which really
made it practically impossible for constructivists to discover my consistency proof.
It is the fact that the ramiﬁed hierarchy, which had been invented expressly for
constructive purposes, had to be used in an entirely nonconstructive way.” G¨odel
was aware of Zermelo’s [30], and there is an afﬁnity of sorts in the direct use of
inﬁnitary methods and the positing of successive domains. To be sure, Zermelo
did not formalize his logic, while G¨odel was led to transﬁnite types by his inves-
tigation of formal systems. In any formalization of L the extent of the ordinals
as sustained by Replacement has to be accommodated, and signiﬁcantly, the main
statement of formal consistency about ZF in G¨odel [39] appealed to what Zermelo
had called “Grenzzahlen”: If κ is inaccessible, then Lκ |= ZFC + GCH. κ need

30
Chapter 1. Beginnings
only be weakly inaccessible here because of the proof of GCH (Firestone-Rosser
[49]).
In his monograph [40], based on lectures given at the Institute for Advanced
Study during the winter of 1938-39, G¨odel gave another presentation of L. This
time he generated L set by set with a transﬁnite recursion in terms of eight
elementary set generators, a sort of G¨odel numbering into the transﬁnite. These
generators were based on a ﬁnite second-order axiomatization of the Separation
Schema by Paul Bernays [37], which in turn had an antecedent in a functional
formulation in von Neumann [25].
Providing a rigorous formalization of his
metamathematical construction G¨odel now emphasized how it yields an “inner
model” and ﬁnitary relative consistency proofs. In particular, an external appeal to
an inaccessible cardinal was no longer necessary. Moreover, the new presentation
highlighted the stark contrast between the elementary set formation processes and
the extent of the ordinals.
Ironically, the development of set theory in these formative years may have
been ill-served by [40]. Bearing the burden of authority it overshadowed [39] and
obscured its model-theoretic approach, especially in the Skolem hull argument
for the consistency of GCH. Only decades later was the sort of ﬁne analysis of
[40] to become an appropriate framework: G¨odel himself considered L only as
a contrivance for establishing consistency results, but in the mid-1960’s Ronald
Jensen [72] developed a “ﬁne structure” theory for L of intrinsic interest, and the
study of constructibility and its generalizations has become one of the mainstreams
of modern set theory.
Expanding on his vision of completability of formal systems using higher
types G¨odel speculated in the 1940’s about the possibility of deciding proposi-
tions with large cardinal hypotheses, particularly with respect to the Continuum
Problem. In a lecture at Princeton University in December of 1946, G¨odel re-
marked [90: 151]):
In set theory, e.g. the successive extensions can most conveniently be represented by
stronger and stronger axioms of inﬁnity. It is certainly impossible to give a combinatorial
and decidable characterization of what an axiom of inﬁnity is but there might exist, e.g. a
characterization of the following sort: An axiom of inﬁnity is a proposition which has
a certain (decidable) formal structure and which in addition is true. Such a concept of
demonstrability might have the required closure property, i.e. the following could be true:
Any proof for a set-theoretic theorem in the next higher system above set theory . . . is
replaceable by a proof from such an axiom of inﬁnity. It is not impossible that for such a
concept of demonstrability some completeness theorem would hold which would say that
every proposition expressible in set theory is decidable from the present axioms plus some
true assertion about the largeness of the universe of all sets.
This is a remarkably optimistic statement about the possibility of discovering
new “true” axioms that will decide every set-theoretic proposition. Note that the
following reﬂection argument for motivating large cardinals is almost explicit: (a)
any set-theoretic proposition can be established in the “next higher system above
set theory”, say if the satisfaction relation for V were available; and (b) this use of
the relation may in particular cases be replaceable by a strong axiom of inﬁnity,

3. Constructibility
31
say with a corresponding large cardinal playing the role of On. G¨odel went on
to apply his reﬂection argument to formulate the concept of ordinal deﬁnability
(see G¨odel [90: 146]). The Reﬂection Principle (see after 6.2) later schematized a
basic argument that can be carried out in ZF.
In an accentuated form reﬂection came to be the main heuristic advanced for
motivating various large cardinals: Largeness properties ascribable to On confront
the antithetical contention that it is essentially incomprehendable, recalling Can-
tor’s Absolute. This inability to characterize On in its open-endedness then fosters
the synthetic move to a large cardinal at which such properties obtain.
The Continuum Problem was the focus of an expository article [47] by G¨odel
that included rare statements concerning his realist conception of mathematics. He
assumed that the Continuum Hypothesis would be shown independent from ZF,
and argued moreover that it must be false according to certain a priori intuitions.
Regarding formal axioms that might resolve such questions he speculated about
large cardinals in more concrete terms than in his 1946 remarks. Citing Zermelo
[30] and echoing its theme G¨odel argued on the basis of the cumulative hierarchy
for new axioms “which assert the existence of still further iterations of the opera-
tion ‘set of’ ”, giving inaccessible and Mahlo cardinals as examples. However, he
mentioned that cardinals like these relativize to L (3.1) and hence cannot imply
the failure of CH.
G¨odel went on to speculate ([47: 521]):
. . . even disregarding the intrinsic necessity of some new axiom, and even in case it had
no intrinsic necessity at all, a decision about its truth is possible also in another way,
namely, inductively by studying its “success”, that is, its fruitfulness in consequences and
in particular in “veriﬁable” consequences, i.e. consequences demonstrable without the new
axiom, whose proofs by means of the new axiom, however, are considerably simpler and
easier to discover, and make it possible to condense into one proof many different proofs
. . . There might exist axioms so abundant in their veriﬁable consequences, shedding so
much light upon a whole discipline, and furnishing such powerful methods for solving
given problems (and even solving them, as far as that is possible, in a constructivistic
way) that quite irrespective of their intrinsic necessity they would have to be assumed at
least in the same sense as any well established physical theory.
This interestingly undercuts an avowedly realist position with a pragmatism that
dilutes the force of “truth”, but is resonant with subsequent investigations, par-
ticularly of the Axiom of Determinacy (Chapter 6).
See Wang [74: 200ff] for
more on G¨odel’s views on intrinsic necessity and pragmatic success for accepting
new axioms.
G¨odel concluded his article with some controversial remarks on
mathematical evidence against CH (cf. Martin-Solovay [70: 176], Martin [76]).
Whatever can be said about G¨odel’s proposals and despite latter-day refer-
ences to “G¨odel’s program”, it is unclear how much actual inﬂuence they had on
subsequent developments. True, Tarski who was to make an important contribu-
tion in 1960 (§4) heard G¨odel’s 1946 Princeton lecture, but a text did not become
generally accessible until 1965 in G¨odel [65]. The article [47] was widely read,
but it was addressed to non-specialists. And nowhere have G¨odel’s remarks been
acknowledged as having been an inspiration. In the 1960’s the theory of large

32
Chapter 1. Beginnings
cardinals quickly developed a self-fueling momentum, and blossomed into a so-
phisticated branch of set theory far overshadowing G¨odel’s epistemological con-
cerns.
In an unpublished footnote 20 toward a 1966 revision of his [47] G¨odel was
to acknowledge ([90: 260ff]) the new developments, matters taken up in §§4, 5:
In recent years great progress has been made in the area of axioms of inﬁnity. In
particular, some propositions have been formulated which, if consistent, are extremely
strong axioms of inﬁnity of an entirely new kind . . . Dana Scott . . . has proved that one
of them implies the existence of non-constructible sets. That these axioms are implied by
the general concept of set in the same sense as Mahlo’s has not been made clear yet . . .
However, they are supported by strong arguments from analogy, e.g., by the fact that they
follow from the existence of generalizations of Stone’s representation theorem to Boolean
algebras with operations on inﬁnitely many elements.
This last presumably refers to strong compactness (see 4.1).
The heuristic of
generalization from ℵ0, like reﬂection, also came to be used to motivate various
large cardinals. Recalling Cantor’s unitary view of the ﬁnite and the transﬁnite,
large cardinal properties satisﬁed by ℵ0 would be too accidental if they were not
also ascribable to higher cardinals in an eternal recurrence.
It is now known that in 1942 G¨odel had developed partial results toward the
independence of the Axiom of Choice, and that he soon abandoned this work (see
Moore [88: 149-151]). According to Kreisel [80: 201], “With present experience
it is not too difﬁcult to complete the proof. But something essential – in G¨odel’s
words (in conversation): a method – had been missing . . . ” According to John
Addison (Moore [88: 150]), G¨odel feared that his proof would lead set-theoretic
research in the wrong direction. Rather than developing relative consistency re-
sults, the concept of set should be analyzed more carefully and new axioms sought
that would simply settle issues like the Continuum Hypothesis. Nonetheless, in a
revised postscript toward a 1966 revision of his [47] G¨odel was to declare (G¨odel
[90: 270]) that Paul Cohen’s work on the independence of CH “. . . is the greatest
advance in the foundations of set theory since its axiomatization”, noting that it
showed in particular that large cardinals have no direct bearing on CH (10.12ff).
Whatever the subsequent developments, G¨odel’s construction of L had estab-
lished the minimum possibility for the set-theoretic universe, and large cardinals
were to provide the counterweight ﬁrst in reaction and then in generalization.
Scott’s result that measurable cardinals contradict V = L (§5) inspired research
that was to establish the intrinsic necessity of large cardinals for transcending such
hypotheses. The generalizations of constructibility accommodating measurability
(§§20, 21) led to a full-blown theory of minimal models for large cardinal hy-
potheses. And throughout, a crescendo of results was to amply demonstrate the
pragmatic success of large cardinals in settling a large variety of questions, many
about deﬁnable sets of reals. In these more subtle ways G¨odel’s hopes about large
cardinals have been vindicated.

3. Constructibility
33
Inner Models
The structural generalizations of G¨odel’s L began with abstractions, relativizations,
and some conditional independence results. With largely proof-theoretic aims in
mind Shepherdson [51, 52, 53] carefully formalized and studied a general notion
of “inner model”. The term will be reserved for a special case: For a proper
class M,
M is an inner model iff M is a transitive ∈-model of ZF with On ⊆M .
Such M modeling ZFC are speciﬁed by M is an inner model of ZFC, and so forth.
These notions can be formalized for arbitrary classes M in a theory like Morse-
Kelley where the class satisfaction relation is deﬁnable, but some clariﬁcation is
necessary for formalization in ZF:
(i) By “class” in the ZFC context is meant deﬁnable class, i.e. there is a
formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vn) and sets a1, . . . , an such that x ∈M is merely une fac¸on
de parler for ϕ[x, a1, . . . , an].
(ii) Let Inn(v) be the formula
v ⊆v ∧∀α(def(v ∩Vα) ⊆v) .
Inn(v) easily implies that On ⊆v by induction on ordinals and that {v ∩Vα |
α ∈On} ⊆v. Using this relativized rank hierarchy, it follows as for L that for
any axiom σ of ZF, with σ M the relativization of σ to M
(∗)
⊢ZF Inn(M) →σ M
(cf. Devlin [84: 60-63]).
Moreover, for any transitive class N with On ⊆N
satisfying ⊢ZF σ N for every axiom σ of ZF, it can be shown that ⊢ZF Inn(N).
Since all instances of ZF axiom schema are needed in the proofs of the
theorems (∗), (i) and (ii) constitute a formalization in a weak sense. Nonetheless,
Inn(M) will be what is meant by the assertion that M is an inner model, and
M |= ϕ will often be written for the more proper ϕM.
The archetypical inner model is L, and L ⊆M for any inner model M since
L M = L. Because of this Shepherdson [53] observed that the relative consistency
of theories like ZFC + ¬GCH cannot be established by relativization to an inner
model. Furthermore, as noted by G¨odel [38: 557] (and more clearly in [51: 69]),
some large cardinals relativize to inner models:
3.1 Exercise. If M is an inner model of ZFC and κ is an α-inaccessible cardinal,
then (κ is α-inaccessible)M. The analogous assertion holds for α-Mahlo cardinals.
Hint. Show that: (a) if κ is a strong limit, then κ is a strong limit in the sense of
M, and (b) if κ is regular, then κ is regular in the sense of M. Now use induction
on α.
⊣

34
Chapter 1. Beginnings
Despite these inherent limitations Andr´as Hajnal [56, 61] and Levy [57, 60]
in their doctoral dissertations in Hungary and Israel respectively developed basic
generalizations of L which will be central to our later concerns about the effect of
large cardinals on the inner structures of set theory. Moschovakis [80: 489ff, 531ff]
and Drake [74: 149ff] contain careful expositions on the following models, of
which only the salient features are noted:
Hajnal essentially provided for a given set A the constructible closure L(A),
i.e. the smallest inner model M such that A ∈M. If there is no concern about how
the elements of A are to be incorporated into L(A), the Zermelo [30] urelement
basis idea can be used with the transitive closure tc({A}) to ensure that the resulting
class is transitive:
L0(A) = tc({A}) ; Lα+1(A) = def(Lα(A)) ;
Lδ(A) = 
α<δLα(A) for limit δ > 0 ;
and
L(A) = 
αLα(A) .
Although L(A) is indeed an inner model, unless tc({A}) has a well-ordering in
L(A), L(A) does not satisfy the Axiom of Choice. |Lα(A)| = |tc({A})| · |α| for
α ≥ω, a result established by induction on α.
Levy on the other hand developed for a given set A the inner model L[A]
of sets constructible relative to A, i.e. the smallest inner model M such that for
every x ∈M, A ∩x ∈M. The idea is to deﬁne a relativized hierarchy where
assertions about membership in A can be made of sets deﬁned thus far. Let
defA(x) = {y ⊆x | y is deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈, A ∩x⟩} ,
making A ∩x available as a unary relation for deﬁnitions. In analogy with L,
L0[A] = ∅; Lα+1[A] = defA(Lα[A]) ; Lδ[A] = 
α<δLα[A] for limit δ > 0 ;
and
L[A] = 
αLα[A] .
Unlike for L(A) what remains of A is only A ∩L[A] ∈L[A], so that for example
L[R] = L for the reals R. However, L[A] is more constructive since knowledge
of A is incorporated through the hierarchy of deﬁnitions, and like L, L[A] satisﬁes
the Axiom of Choice. |Lα[A]| = |α| for α ≥ω, a result established by induction on
α. The theory of L[A] is best developed with structures ⟨Lα[A], ∈, A∩Lα[A]⟩for
L∈( ˙A), the language of set theory augmented by one unary predicate symbol ˙A.
As with L itself a prominent feature of the theory is the absoluteness
of the deﬁnitions involved, which leads to the following (see Moschovakis
[80: 515, 532]):

3. Constructibility
35
3.2 Proposition.
(a) If M is an inner model with A ∈M, then L(A)M = L(A).
(b) If M is an inner model with A ∩M ∈M, then L[A ∩M]M = L[A].
(c) If A ∩L[A] = B ∩L[A], then L[A] = L[B].
(d) L[A] = L[A ∩L[A]] = L(A ∩L[A]).
(e) If A ⊆L, then L[A] = L(A).
⊣
For future reference, some results about L and L[A] are stated that be-
gin the ﬁner analysis of constructibility (see Devlin [84: 71, 75] or Moschovakis
[80: 496, 516, 533]).
3.3 Theorem.
(a) There is a sentence σ0 of L∈such that for any transitive class N,
⟨N, ∈⟩|= σ0 iff
N = L ∨N = Lδ for some limit δ > ω .
Also, there is a formula ϕ0(v0, v1) of L∈that deﬁnes in L a well-ordering <L of
L such that for any limit δ > ω, any y ∈Lδ, and any x,
x <L y iff
x ∈Lδ ∧⟨Lδ, ∈⟩|= ϕ0[x, y] .
(b) There is a sentence σ1 of L∈( ˙A) where ˙A is unary such that for any A
and any transitive class N,
⟨N, ∈, A ∩N⟩|= σ1 iff
N = L[A] ∨N = Lδ[A] for some limit δ > ω .
Also, there is a formula ϕ1(v0, v1) of L∈( ˙A) that in any ⟨L[A], ∈, A∩L[A]⟩deﬁnes
a well-ordering <L[A] of L[A] such that for any limit δ > ω, any y ∈Lδ[A], and
any x,
x <L[A] y iff
x ∈Lδ[A] ∧⟨Lδ[A], ∈, A ∩Lδ[A]⟩|= ϕ1[x, y] .
⊣
The sentence σ0 leads directly to G¨odel’s Condensation Lemma, the crux of
his proof of GCH in L: If δ > ω is a limit ordinal and ⟨H, ∈⟩is an elementary
substructure of ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩, then ⟨H, ∈⟩has a transitive collapse (by 0.4) that must be
of form ⟨Lα, ∈⟩for some α (because of σ0).
Although differing in their formal presentations, both Hajnal and Levy used
a set of ordinals A so that L[A] = L(A) by 3.2(e), and the distinctions were to
surface only later. Hajnal and Levy (as well as Shoenﬁeld [59] who formulated a
special version of Levy’s construction) used these models to establish conditional
independence results of the sort: If ¬CH is consistent, then so is ¬CH together
with 2λ = λ+ for sufﬁciently large λ. Hajnal’s ﬁner analysis led to a useful fact:
If V = L[A] and A ⊆κ+, then 2κ = κ+. In particular, if ¬CH and A ⊆ω2 codes
ω2 distinct subsets of ω as well as injections: α →ω1 for every α < ω2, then
ωL[A]
2
= ω2 and so (2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1 = ω2)L[A]. More pointedly, if 2ℵ0 ̸= ω2 is provable
in ZFC, then so is CH. All this anticipated the expected independence of CH, and
providing at least a semblance of continuity Cohen duly established this with his
celebrated method of forcing.

36
Chapter 1. Beginnings
4. Compactness
For almost three decades after 1930 no signiﬁcant advance was made in the in-
vestigation of large cardinals, but Alfred Tarski maintained a steady interest in
the subject. He visited the United States from Poland in 1939, but the outbreak
of war precluded his return, and by 1942 he was established at the University
of California at Berkeley. Through his initiatives he was to play a pivotal role
in the ﬂowering of mathematical logic in California, and Berkeley became the
leading center for set theory in the 1960’s. In particular, he and his co-workers
were to make basic contributions to the theory of large cardinals through the infu-
sion of model-theoretic methods. This section describes the early stages of these
developments and brings into full play the model-theoretic preliminaries of §0.
Combinatorial elaborations had already been suggested in the early paper
Erd˝os-Tarski [43] which at the end described various properties of cardinals im-
plying inaccessibility (see §7). The details of implications asserted there were
presented in an inﬂuential seminar conducted by Tarski and Andrzej Mostowski
at Berkeley in 1958-9, and soon appeared in Erd˝os-Tarski [61]. It was against
this backdrop that Tarski’s initiatives in another direction were to lead to a real
breakthrough.
Tarski [58] considered the semantics of the inﬁnitary predicate languages Lλµ
and later raised the issue of their possible compactness. In brief, an Lλµ language
is formulated as follows: Proceeding as for the usual ﬁrst-order logic, ﬁrst specify
a supply of non-logical symbols: (ﬁnitary) predicate, function, and constant sym-
bols. These together with an allowed supply of max({λ, µ}) many variables lead
to the terms and atomic formulas. Then the usual formula generating rules are
expanded to allow conjunctions 
ξ<α and disjunctions 
ξ<α of α formulas for
any α < λ, and universal quantiﬁcations ∀ξ<β and existential quantiﬁcations ∃ξ<β
of β variables for any β < µ. Finally, a formula is an expression so generated
with less than µ free variables, this to allow the possibility of quantiﬁcational clo-
sure. Structures for interpreting the language are as for ﬁrst-order logic, and the
satisfaction relation is extended to incorporate the new inﬁnitary connectives and
quantiﬁers in the expected way. (For book studies of these languages see Karp
[64] for the formal syntax, Keisler [71] for the model theory of Lω1ω, and Dick-
mann [75] for the general model theory; Dickmann [85] provides an overview.)
In what follows, properties of Lλµ logic that are straightforward generalizations
of those for the usual ﬁrst-order, i.e. Lωω, logic are taken for granted. In subse-
quent sections the concepts introduced will be applied in terms of combinatorial
characterizations and the results established considerably improved.
Tarski [62] formulated two natural generalizations of the well-known com-
pactness property of Lωω: A collection of Lλµ sentences is satisﬁable iff it has a
model under the expected interpretation of inﬁnitary conjunction, disjunction and
quantiﬁcation; and is ν-satisﬁable iff every subcollection of cardinality less than
ν is satisﬁable. For κ > ω,

4. Compactness
37
κ is strongly compact iff any collection of Lκκ sentences,
if κ-satisﬁable, is satisﬁable .
κ is weakly compact iff any collection of Lκκ sentences using
at most κ non-logical symbols,
if κ-satisﬁable, is satisﬁable .
Tarski’s original formulation of weak compactness had the more stringent condi-
tion |Σ| = κ and does not imply the inaccessibility of κ (Boos [76]), while the
one that is adopted here does (4.4) which is the modern preference.
By the early 1960’s the development of the basic ultraproduct construction
led to a surge of new results in model theory and an enduring interest in ultra-
ﬁlters. The general construction was introduced by Jerzy Ło´s [55], where the
basic theorem 0.6 is implicit. Then Frayne-Morel-Scott [62] and also Kochen
[61] propagated the basic theory as developed by the authors and Tarski. The for-
mer paper provided an ultraproduct proof of the Compactness Theorem, a direct
generalization of which is used in the following characterization.
4.1 Proposition (Keisler-Tarski [64]). κ is strongly compact iff for any set S,
every κ-complete ﬁlter over S can be extended to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over S.
Proof.
Suppose ﬁrst that κ is strongly compact and F is a κ-complete ﬁlter
over a set S. Using constants ˙X for every X ⊆S, let Σ be the Lκκ theory of
⟨S ∪P(S), ∈, X⟩X⊆S together with the sentences c ∈˙X for every X ∈F, where
c is a new constant. Σ is κ-satisﬁable as F is κ-complete, so let M model Σ by
strong compactness. Now deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆S ∧M |= c ∈˙X .
It is simple to check that U is an ultraﬁlter over S extending F, and Σ has the
Lκκ sentences which ensure that U is κ-complete.
For the converse, note ﬁrst that κ must be regular: If to the contrary κ were
singular, then κ-completeness would readily imply κ+-completeness for ﬁlters.
But then, if U is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ+ extending the κ-complete
(even κ+-complete) ﬁlter {X ⊆κ+ | |κ+ −X| < κ+}, then U would also be
κ+-complete and so κ+ would be measurable, contradicting Ulam’s 2.4.
Suppose now that Σ = {σα | α < λ} is a κ-satisﬁable collection of Lκκ
sentences. Recall that Pκλ = {x ⊆λ | |x| < κ}. For any x ∈Pκλ, let Mx be a
structure for the language of Σ so that Mx |= 
α∈x σα. With the availability of
Mλ we can assume that λ ≥κ. As
{{x ∈Pκλ | y ⊆x} | y ∈Pκλ}
generates a κ-complete ﬁlter over Pκλ by the regularity of κ, let U be a κ-
complete ultraﬁlter over Pκλ extending this ﬁlter. Consider the ultraproduct M =

Pκλ Mx/U. It is straightforward to check that, essentially by the same proof
as for Lωω, Ło´s’s Theorem 0.6 holds for Lκκ and ultraproducts by κ-complete
ultraﬁlters. Since for any α < λ,

38
Chapter 1. Beginnings
{x ∈Pκλ | Mx |= σα} ⊇{x ∈Pκλ | α ∈x} ∈U ,
it follows that M |= σα.
⊣
An analogous characterization exists for weak compactness in terms of an
appropriately curtailed ﬁlter extension property (Keisler-Tarski [64: 288]).
The next two results were ﬁrst observed in equivalent formulations.
4.2 Corollary (Erd˝os-Tarski [43: 328]). If κ is strongly compact, then κ is mea-
surable.
Proof.
κ is regular by the proof of 4.1.
The ﬁlter {X ⊆κ | |κ −X| < κ}
is consequently κ-complete, and any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ extending it
veriﬁes the measurability of κ.
⊣
4.3 Proposition (Erd˝os-Tarski [43: 328]). If κ is measurable, then κ is weakly
compact.
Proof. Suppose that Σ be a κ-satisﬁable collection of Lκκ sentences using at most
κ non-logical symbols. Then it is simple to see that |Σ| ≤κ<κ. But measurable
cardinals are inaccessible, so |Σ| ≤κ. With ⟨σα | α < κ⟩enumerating Σ we can
now proceed as for 4.1:
For each β < κ let Mβ |= 
α<β σα. Let U be any κ-complete ultraﬁlter
over κ, and set M = 
κ Mβ/U. Then for any α < κ,
{β < κ | Mβ |= σα} ⊇{β < κ | β > α} ∈U ,
and so M |= σα.
⊣
Finally, weak compactness entails inaccessibility:
4.4 Proposition. If κ is weakly compact, then κ is inaccessible.
Proof. To show that κ is regular, assume to the contrary that X ⊆κ is unbounded
yet |X| < κ. Then for distinct constants c and cα for α < κ,
{c ̸= cα | α < κ} ∪{
β∈X

α<βc = cα}
is κ-satisﬁable yet not satisﬁable – a contradiction.
To establish that κ is a strong limit, assume to the contrary that there is a
λ < κ such that 2λ ≥κ. Then for distinct constants cα and di
α for α < λ and
i < 2,
{
α<λ[(cα = d0
α ∨cα = d1
α) ∧d0
α ̸= d1
α]} ∪{
α<λ(cα ̸= d f (α)
α
) | f ∈λ2} .
is not satisﬁable, else any interpretation of ⟨cα | α < λ⟩would correspond to a
function: λ →2 different from every member of λ2, yet by similar reasoning any
proper subset is satisﬁable – a contradiction.
⊣

4. Compactness
39
Presumably with the old question of whether the least measurable cardinal
is strictly larger than the least inaccessible cardinal in mind, Tarski suggested
to his student William Hanf at Berkeley that he investigate the possible weak
compactness of inaccessible cardinals. Using appropriate Lκκ sentences Hanf [64]
in 1960 was able to establish that there are in fact many inaccessible cardinals
below a weakly compact cardinal; notably, the early proofs were directly analogous
to Tarski’s construction of a consistent yet ω-inconsistent theory. Thus, the least
measurable cardinal is, a fortiori, strictly larger than the least inaccessible cardinal
(Tarski [62]).
This Hanf-Tarski breakthrough was the ﬁrst result about the size of measur-
able cardinals since Ulam’s original paper. It was greeted by Abraham Robinson
[62: 78] as “a spectacular success” for metamathematical methods. Tarski himself
opined ([62: 125]) that it was “contrary to expectations”; presumably, inaccessibil-
ity should have sufﬁced to generalize the compactness property of Lωω. Several
times in the development of set theory, such key results have reoriented the col-
lective set-theoretic intuition and spurred a spate of new research. Hanf’s work
radically altered size intuitions about problems that were coming to be understood
in terms of large cardinals.
Several methods are now known to establish Hanf’s result, two quickly dis-
covered in its wake: Keisler [62] via ultrapowers and Hanf-Scott [61] via inde-
scribability (§6). We shall proceed without much ado from an equivalent formu-
lation of weak compactness. Like the recursive functions weak compactness has
many diverse characterizations, which speaks to the naturalness and centrality of
the concept. More will be encountered in coming sections as different themes
are pursued. Most of the equivalences were established in the early 1960’s, and
later summarized in Silver [71: 62] and Devlin [75] – see also Comfort-Negrepontis
[74: 185] for topological equivalences and Dickmann [75: 184] for model-theoretic
equivalences.
H. Jerome Keisler established the following result, generalizing the use of the
Compactness Theorem to get proper extensions of models. A student of Tarski at
Berkeley and later a prominent model theorist, Keisler made important contribu-
tions at this formative stage by providing useful model-theoretic characterizations
as well as ultraproduct proofs (cf. 5.6).
4.5 Theorem (Keisler [62, 62a]). κ is weakly compact iff κ has the Extension
Property: for any R ⊆Vκ there is a transitive set X ̸= Vκ and an S ⊆X such that
⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩.
Remarks. ≺denotes the assumed concept of elementary substructure; it is re-
viewed in a larger setting at the beginning of §5. Note that since X ̸= Vκ is to be
transitive, κ ∈X.
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that κ is weakly compact and R ⊆Vκ. κ is inaccessible by
4.4, so that |Vκ| = κ. Using distinct constants c and ˙x for each x ∈Vκ, let Σ be
the Lκκ theory of

40
Chapter 1. Beginnings
⟨Vκ, ∈, R, x⟩x∈Vκ
together with the sentences ⌈c is an ordinal⌉and ⌈c ̸= ˙α⌉for each α < κ. Then Σ
is clearly κ-satisﬁable, and so by weak compactness it is satisﬁable. Of course,
the Axiom of Extensionality is in Σ. Also, well-foundedness is readily seen to be
expressible already in Lω1ω1, and so Σ has a member saying ∈is well-founded.
Hence, by the Collapsing Lemma 0.4 Σ has a transitive model
⟨X, ∈, S, x, γ ⟩x∈Vκ
where γ interprets c. For any x ∈Vκ, Σ contains the sentence
∀v(v ∈˙x ↔
y∈x v = ˙y) ,
so by induction on rank, x ∈Vκ implies that x = x. Clearly γ is an ordinal ≥κ
so X ̸= Vκ, and hence the reduct ⟨X, ∈, S⟩satisﬁes all the requirements.
For the converse, ﬁrst observe that the Extension Property for κ implies its
inaccessibility: Assume ﬁrst that there is a µ < κ, a coﬁnal map F: µ →κ, and a
proper extension ⟨Vκ, ∈, F⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩where X is transitive. Then ∃x(F“µ ⊆x)
fails in the ﬁrst structure yet ∃x(S“µ ⊆x) holds in the second, which is a
contradiction.
Assume next that there is a ν < κ such that κ ≤2ν.
Then
2ν ≤|Vν+1| and Vν+1 ∈Vκ, and so a surjection G: Vν+1 →κ can be used to
again derive a contradiction.
Next, note that for any inaccessible λ the following two L¨owenheim-Skolem
theorems for Lλλ are veriﬁable by essentially the same arguments as for Lωω (0.5):
(i) If σ is a satisﬁable Lλλ sentence, then it has a model of cardinality
less than λ .
(ii) If Σ is a satisﬁable collection of Lλλ sentences of cardinality at
most λ, then it has a model of cardinality at most λ .
Suppose now that Σ is a κ-satisﬁable collection of Lκκ sentences using at
most κ non-logical symbols. The corresponding Lκκ language has κ formulas by
the inaccessibility of κ, and so we can carry out an arithmetization of the language
that codes formulas with members of Vκ and formulate the satisfaction relation for
set structures in Vκ as a class of Vκ. Let R1 ⊆Vκ code this satisfaction relation,
and construing Σ to be a subset of Vκ through the arithmetization let R2: κ →Σ
be surjective. Then by (i) above
⟨Vκ, ∈, R1, R2⟩|= ∀α(R “
2 α has a model) .
By the Extension Property (with ⟨R1, R2⟩coded by a single subset of Vκ) let
⟨Vκ, ∈, R1, R2⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S1, S2⟩be a proper extension where X is transitive. By
elementarity S “
2 κ = R “
2 κ = Σ and ⟨X, ∈, S1, S2⟩|= Σ has a model. But by
the inaccessibility of κ, ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩and hence ⟨X, ∈⟩models ZFC, and since X is
transitive and κ ∈X, ⟨X, ∈⟩|= κ is inaccessible (cf. 3.1). It follows by (ii) above
that

4. Compactness
41
⟨X, ∈, S1, S2⟩|= Σ has a model M with domain ⊆κ .
Finally, it can be assumed that the Lκκ satisfaction relation S1 for M is upward
persistent (in fact absolute) between X and V as <κκ ⊆Vκ ⊆X: as in the Lωω
case the relation for M is Σ1 (and also Π1). Hence, M really models Σ in V .⊣
Although ⟨X, ∈⟩|= κ is inaccessible, it cannot in general be asserted that
⟨X, ∈⟩|= κ is weakly compact: X may not contain all the needed models of
κ-satisﬁable sets of sentences. Otherwise, ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= ∃α(α is weakly compact)
by elementarity, and hence by a simple argument there really would be a weakly
compact cardinal less than κ. This cannot happen, of course, if κ is the least
weakly compact cardinal. Large cardinal theory is replete with this sort of near
miss.
Toward Hanf’s result, a result about reﬂecting stationary sets is derived:
4.6 Proposition. Suppose that κ is weakly compact. Then:
(a) If A is stationary in κ, then there is an inaccessible λ < κ such that A ∩λ
is stationary in λ.
(b) If Aα is stationary in κ for each α < κ, then there is an inaccessible λ < κ
such that Aα ∩λ is stationary in λ for each α < λ.
Proof. (a) Assume to the contrary that for each ξ < κ, either ξ is not inaccessible
or else there is a Cξ closed unbounded in ξ such that Cξ ∩A = ∅. Let R: κ →Vκ
be deﬁned by: R(ξ) = Cξ if ξ is inaccessible and = ∅otherwise. By 4.5 (with
⟨A, R⟩coded by a single subset of Vκ) let ⟨Vκ, ∈, A, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, B, S⟩be a proper
extension with X transitive. Then
⟨X, ∈, B, S⟩|= κ is inaccessible ∧
S(κ) is closed unbounded in κ ∧S(κ) ∩B = ∅.
But then, S(κ) really is closed unbounded, and since B ∩κ = A, S(κ) ∩A = ∅
contradicting the assumption that A is stationary.
(b) The argument is similar, using the assumption Cξ ∩Aα = ∅for some
α < ξ and A = {⟨α, β⟩| β ∈Aα} instead.
⊣
4.7 Corollary (Hanf [64]). If κ is weakly compact, then κ is κ-Mahlo.
Proof. We show that κ is α-Mahlo for α ≤κ by induction on α. The basis and
limit cases are immediate, so it remains to argue from α to α + 1:
Suppose that κ is α-Mahlo. Then for β < α, Aβ = {ξ < κ | ξ is β-Mahlo}
is stationary in κ. Let C be closed unbounded in κ. Then by 4.6(b) there is
an inaccessible λ < κ such that C ∩λ and Aβ ∩λ for β < α are all stationary
in λ.
Hence, λ ∈C and λ is α-Mahlo.
Since this obtains for any such C,
{ξ < κ | ξ is α-Mahlo} is stationary in κ, i.e. κ is (α + 1)-Mahlo.
⊣
The full force of 4.6(b) leads to the conclusion that {ξ < κ | ξ is ξ-Mahlo}
is stationary in κ. Indeed, Hanf [64] extended the Mahlo hierarchy with a diago-
nalization operator related to 4.6(b) and established that weakly compact cardinals

42
Chapter 1. Beginnings
are high in this hierarchy. He wrote ([64: 313]): “However, it turns out that for
each class deﬁned in such a constructive way, it appears almost certain on the
basis of “na¨ıve” set theory (or what is sometimes called “Cantor’s absolute”) that
not all cardinals belong to the class.” That is, his arguments in no way disallow
weakly compact cardinals.
Tarski [62: 134] did make a clear distinction between inaccessible and weakly
compact (“not strongly incompact”) cardinals:
For one thing, the belief in the existence of inaccessible cardinals > ω (and even of
arbitrarily large cardinals of this kind) seems to be a natural consequence of basic intuitions
underlying the ‘naive’ set theory and referring to what can be called ‘Cantor’s absolute’.
On the contrary, we see at this moment no cogent intuitive reasons which could induce
us to believe in the existence of cardinals > ω that are not strongly incompact, or which
at least would make it very plausible that the hypothesis stating the existence of such
cardinals is consistent with familiar axiom systems of set theory.
However, in a contrasting passage he wrote later on the page:
We would of course fully dispose of all the problems involved if we decided to enrich the
axiom system of set theory by including (so to speak, on a permanent basis) a statement
which precludes the existence of ‘very large’ cardinals, e.g. by a statement to the effect
that every cardinal > ω is strongly incompact [not weakly compact]. Such a decision,
however, would be contrary to what is regarded by many as one of the main aims of
research in the foundations of set theory, namely the axiomatization of increasingly large
segments of ‘Cantor’s absolute’. Those who share this attitude are always ready to accept
new ‘construction principles’, new axioms securing the existence of new classes of ‘large’
cardinals (provided they appear to be consistent with old axioms), but are not prepared
to accept any axioms precluding the existence of such cardinals – unless this is done on
a strictly temporary basis, for the restricted purpose of facilitating the metamathematical
discussion of some axiom systems of set theory.
Although Tarski’s words are somewhat guarded, the inﬂuence of Cantor’s realist
conception, perhaps reﬁned by G¨odel’s remarks, is evident.
Keisler and Tarski detailed the results and interconnections of the theory to
date in their comprehensive paper [64]. Although they believed that the original
metamathematical methods “provide the intuitive and deductively simplest ap-
proach” to the results, they nevertheless labored with ultrapower proofs to provide
a “purely mathematical treatment”. They continued ([64: 226]):
We have been motivated by the realization of the practical fact that the knowledge of
metamathematics is not sufﬁciently widespread and may be defective among mathemati-
cians who would otherwise be intensely interested in the topic discussed, and to a certain
extent also by some (irrational) inclination toward puritanism in methods. As will be
seen from the remarks below, we do not feel that we have been entirely successful in our
undertaking.
Indeed, they ﬁrst established that measurable cardinals are high in the Mahlo
hierarchy using the ultrapower approach evolving from Keisler [62] (see 5.14),
but only sketched the sharper results for weakly compact cardinals because of the
expository difﬁculties involved. It is never simple to sublimate the satisfaction
relation!

4. Compactness
43
As large cardinal theory developed, metamathematical methods became basic
to the subject in the interplay of inner models, forcing, and elementary embed-
dings. Symptomatic of this is how the details of structures and satisfaction so
painstakingly set out in the early papers were soon replaced by casual expositions
in informal rigor. With this development the ﬁeld became an advanced and sophis-
ticated part of the mathematical enterprise with less direct concern for foundational
issues.
The discussion in Keisler-Tarski [64] is framed around the classes C0, C1 and
C2 of cardinals that are, respectively, not weakly compact, not measurable, and
not strongly compact. To the set theorist of today, ﬂipping through its pages is a
curious experience, as he repeatedly encounters theorems which he himself would
state in dual or contrapositive form. The several theorems with hypotheses of form
“if Ci contains all the cardinals”, while not necessarily espousing these hypotheses
according to the previous Tarski quotation, are at least suggestive of a uniform,
orderly cosmos delimited by pathologies beyond. In the next wave of research
by Gaifman, Rowbottom, Silver, Solovay, Kunen, and others, such universal con-
straints were replaced by existential postulations and positive implications about
the possible new richness of the set-theoretic universe. Perhaps it is a coincidence,
but it was by this time that the terminological move from the half-empty notion
of prime ideal to the half-full dual notion of ultraﬁlter was completed in model
theory.

44
Chapter 1. Beginnings
5. Elementary Embeddings
In the early 1960’s set theory was veritably transformed by structural initiatives
based on new possibilities for constructing well-founded models and establish-
ing relative consistency results. This of course was due largely to the creation
of forcing by Cohen, who came upon a remarkably fertile method for producing
extensions of models of set theory. Fine mathematicians like Solovay quickly
perceived the possibilities abounding, and within a few years the method of forc-
ing was systematized, and a cornucopia of relative consistency results was being
produced (§10).
A seminal result of Scott provided the impetus in another direction, the in-
vestigation of elementary embeddings. Scott had begun to work in the 1950’s,
initially with Tarski at Berkeley, on a variety of foundational issues. It is the
nuts and bolts of forcing to establish the relative consistency with ZF of V ̸= L,
but Scott [61] was the ﬁrst to realize the possibility by showing: If there is a
measurable cardinal, then V ̸= L. The difference is crucial: instead of a relative
consistency result he had established a direct implication from a prior principle. It
was in such ways that G¨odel’s hopes for large cardinals were to be vindicated; his
axiom V = L had imposed a consistent delimitation on ZFC, and developments
from Scott’s result were to establish the necessity of large cardinals for securing
a real transcendence over L (§9).
Scott’s work began the liberal use of manipulative proper class constructions
in set theory and led to a structural characterization of measurable cardinals via
ultrapowers and elementary embeddings. Setting the stage Keisler [62] (and in full
exposition Keisler-Tarski [64]) had used ultrapowers within set theory to provide
an alternate proof of Hanf’s result 4.6, and Scott then exploited the global approach
of taking an ultrapower of V itself. As with inner models the formalization of
such class concepts requires care:
We ﬁrst develop the model-theoretic concept of elementary embedding for
structures with possibly proper class domains, remembering that such structures
can be recast as single classes through deﬁnability.
To review, for structures
M0 = ⟨M0, . . .⟩and M1 = ⟨M1, . . .⟩for a language L an injective function
j: M0 →M1 is an elementary embedding of M0 into M1, denoted j: M0 ≺M1,
iff it satisﬁes the elementarity schema: for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) of L and
x1, . . . , xn ∈M0,
(∗)
M0 |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff
M1 |= ϕ[ j(x1), . . . , j(xn)] .
If j is also the identity map on M0, then M0 is an elementary substructure of
M1, denoted M0 ≺M1. Most structures to be considered will be for some
extension of L∈, the language of set theory.
A further specialization is to ∈-
models, structures of form M = ⟨M, ∈⟩, usually denoted by just M. If M0 and
M1 above are both of this form, (∗) can be expressed in terms of relativized
formulas of L∈:

5. Elementary Embeddings
45
(∗∗)
ϕM0[x1, . . . , xn] iff
ϕM1[ j(x1), . . . , j(xn)] .
Similarly, if t(v1, . . . , vn) is a deﬁnable term of L∈, x1, . . . , xn ∈M0, and
t M0[x1, . . . , xn] ∈M0, then
j(t M0[x1, . . . , xn]) = t M1[ j(x1), . . . , j(xn)] .
All this is formalizable for classes in terms of the satisfaction relation for classes,
deﬁnable in a theory like Morse-Kelley, but not in ZFC because of the G¨odel-
Tarski undeﬁnability of truth. However, we will be dealing primarily with set
structures for which the formalization can be carried out, or inner models, for
which a satisfactory approach to formalization is available:
Let j be as speciﬁed before (∗) with L an extension of L∈. Referring to the
Levy hierarchy of formulas (§0),
j is a Σn-elementary embedding, denoted j: M0 ≺n M1,
iff (∗) holds for the Σn formulas .
If j is also the identity map on M0, then M0 is a Σn-elementary substructure
of M1, denoted M0 ≺n M1.
In particular, for any class M, that M ≺n V
(understood as ⟨M, ∈⟩≺n ⟨V, ∈⟩) is just the assertion that the Σn formulas are
absolute for M. Note that j: M0 ≺n M1 implies that (∗) also holds for the
Πn formulas, and in fact for all Boolean combinations of Σn formulas. Also,
if M0 = ⟨M0, ∈⟩, M1 = ⟨M1, ∈⟩, M0 ⊆M1, and both are transitive, then
M0 ≺0 M1 since Σ0 formulas are absolute for transitive classes.
For any particular integer n, the satisfaction relation for Σn formulas for a
transitive proper class structure is formalizable in ZF (§0). Thus, the concept of
Σn-elementary embedding is formalizable in ZF even for such classes. Focusing
on inner models, some simple observations can be made using 0.2, according to
which ⌈rank(v0) = v1⌉is ∆ZF
1
and ⌈Vv0 = v1⌉is ΠZF
1 .
5.1 Proposition. Suppose that M0 and M1 are inner models and j: M0 ≺1 M1.
Then:
(a) For any ordinal α, j(α) is an ordinal ≥α.
(b) Suppose that j is not the identity, and either M1 ⊆M0 or M0 |= AC.
Then j(δ) > δ for some ordinal δ.
(c) For any particular integer n, j: M0 ≺n M1.
Proof. (a) Being an ordinal is ΣZF
0 : transitive and linearly ordered by ∈. That
j(α) ≥α follows by induction.
(b) Suppose ﬁrst that M1 ⊆M0. Let x be of least rank such that j(x) ̸= x,
and set δ =rank(x). Note that x ⊆j(x), since y ∈x implies that y = j(y) ∈j(x).
Hence, there must be a z ∈j(x)−x. If rank( j(x)) = δ, then since z ∈M1 ⊆M0,
j can be applied to get j(z) = z ∈j(x), leading to the contradictory z ∈x.
Hence, rank( j(x)) > δ, but also rank( j(x)) = j(δ) by 0.2.
Suppose next that M0 |= AC. Assume to the contrary that j(δ) = δ for every
ordinal δ. Note ﬁrst that for any set x ∈M0 of ordinals, j(x) is also a set of

46
Chapter 1. Beginnings
ordinals, and so the argument of the previous paragraph shows that j(x) = x.
How transitive ∈-models of ZFC are determined by their sets of ordinals is now
exploited:
Suppose that a ∈M0. Let b = tc({a}), the transitive closure of {a} (in V and
hence also in M0). Since M0 |= AC, there is a bijection e ∈M0 between some
ordinal γ and b. Let E ∈M0 be the binary relation on γ deﬁned by: ⟨α, β⟩∈E
iff e(α) ∈e(β). Identifying E with a set of ordinals through a pairing function, it
follows from the previous paragraph that j(E) = E. Now the function e veriﬁes
that E is a well-founded relation in V as well as in M0. Since every non-empty
subset of γ has an E-minimal element in V , this also holds in M1, i.e. E is
well-founded in M1 as well. The Collapsing Lemma 0.4 can now be applied in
M1 as ⟨γ, E⟩is also extensional there, and by uniqueness the transitive collapse
is ⟨b, ∈⟩∈M1. Since j is Σ1-elementary, j(E) = E, and ⟨b, ∈⟩is the unique
transitive collapse of ⟨γ, E⟩in both M0 and M1, it follows that j(b) = b. Using
0.2 it then follows that j(a) = a, since a is deﬁnable as that member of b of
largest rank. But a ∈M0 was arbitrary, and so j is the identity – a contradiction.
(c) The proof proceeds by informal induction up to any particular integer: As-
sume that j: M0 ≺n M1 with n ≥1, and suppose that ϕ is Σn+1, say ∃v0ψ(v0, v1)
where ψ is Πn for simplicity, and that x ∈M0. If M0 |= ϕ[x], then M0 |= ψ[y, x]
for some y ∈M0. Hence M1 |= ψ[ j(y), j(x)] and so M1 |= ϕ[ j(x)].
For the converse, suppose that M1 |= ϕ[ j(x)], say M1 |= ψ[z, j(x)]. By (a)
there must be an α such that z ∈V M1
j(α), and by 0.2, V M1
j(α) = j(V M0
α ). Hence,
M1 |= ∃v0 ∈v2ψ[ j(x), j(V M0
α )] .
(∃v0 ∈v2ψ is a formula in two free variables v1 and v2, interpreted respectively by
j(x) and j(V M0
α ).) But as observed in §0, ∃v0 ∈v2ψ is still ΠZF
n
by applications
of Replacement. Hence,
M0 |= ∃v0 ∈v2ψ[x, V M0
α ] ,
and so M0 |= ϕ[x].
⊣
(c) shows that for inner models Σ1-elementary embeddings provide an ade-
quate formalization in ZF of the informal concept of elementary embedding, since
in any particular argument only ﬁnitely many instances of the elementarity schema
are needed. The argument for (c) works under rather general conditions on ar-
bitrary models of ZF as long as j“OnM0 is coﬁnal in OnM1; see Gaifman [74],
which provides another approach to formalization in many cases.
Henceforth, with (c) in mind but anticipating more general situations,
by elementary embedding between transitive proper class
∈-structures is meant Σ1-elementary embedding .
Also, to avoid trivialities it will be implicit that
elementary embeddings are not the identity on their domains .

5. Elementary Embeddings
47
The least ordinal as in 5.1(b) will thus play a critical role: For any j: N →M,
δ = crit( j), the critical point of j, iff δ is the least ordinal moved by j .
Generally, elementary embeddings will be handled informally, with remarks
on formalizability in ZFC made only when it may be problematic. Such a circum-
stance involves quantiﬁcation over proper class elementary embeddings. However,
in each particular case the putative quantiﬁcation will be one that can be recast as
one over sets. Formalizability is usually a by-product of the developing theory,
and elementary embedding formulations, particularly of strong hypotheses, are
often more perspicuous.
Taking the ultrapower of the universe V by an ultraﬁlter U over a set S is
our next concern. The general ultraproduct construction was reviewed in §0 and
applied in §4. The ﬁrst obstacle in formally deﬁning an ultrapower of V is that
for any f : S →V , its U equivalence class
( f )U = {g | g: S →V ∧{i ∈S | f (i) = g(i)} ∈U}
is a proper class. However, using a device from Scott [55] let
( f )0
U = {g | g ∈( f )U ∧∀h(h ∈( f )U →rank(g) ≤rank(h))} ,
i.e. those members of ( f )U of minimal rank. Then ( f )0
U is a set, and so the
domain of the ultrapower can be formulated as the class
SV/U = {( f )0
U | f : S →V }
deﬁnable from U, with its membership relation EU deﬁned as expected:
( f )0
U EU (g)0
U iff
{i ∈S | f (i) ∈g(i)} ∈U .
The ultrapower can then be deﬁned by:
Ult(V, U) = ⟨SV/U, EU⟩.
More generally, if N is an inner model of ZFC and ⟨N, ∈, U⟩|= U is an ultraﬁlter
over a set S, an analogous procedure leads to the ultrapower of N by U using
functions in SN ∩N:
Ult(N, U) = ⟨SN/U, EU⟩.
It is not necessary to assume that U ∈N.
Continuing in terms of V , the needed version of Ło´s’s fundamental result
can be established by the usual induction on formula complexity:
5.2 Theorem.
For any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) of L∈and f1, . . . , fn functions:
S →V ,
Ult(V, U) |= ϕ[( f1)0
U, . . . , ( fn)0
U] iff
{i ∈S | ϕ[ f1(i), . . . , fn(i)]} ∈U .
⊣

48
Chapter 1. Beginnings
As this depends on the satisfaction relation for proper classes, it cannot be
formulated as a single theorem of ZFC but only as a schema of theorems, one for
each particular ϕ.
Finally, a strong hypothesis on U leads to inner models corresponding to
ultrapowers:
5.3 Proposition. U is ω1-complete iff EU is well-founded.
Proof. In the forward direction, if there were a sequence ⟨( fn)0
U | n ∈ω⟩such
that ( fn+1)0
U EU ( fn)0
U for each n ∈ω, then 
n{i ∈S | fn+1(i) ∈fn(i)} ̸= ∅
would lead to an inﬁnite descending ∈-sequence of sets.
Conversely, if there were sets {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆U yet 
n∈ω Xn ̸∈U, then
deﬁne gk: S →V for each k ∈ω by:
gk(i) =
 n −k
if i ∈(
m<n Xm) −Xn and n ≥k ,
0
otherwise .
Then {i ∈S | gk+1(i) ∈gk(i)} ⊇
m≤k Xm −
n∈ω Xn ∈U for k ∈ω, and so
⟨(gn)0
U | n ∈ω⟩conﬁrms that EU is ill-founded.
⊣
In connection with the Collapsing Lemma 0.4 note that EU is set-like: Sup-
pose that (g)0
U EU ( f )0
U, and let g0 ∈(g)0
U. Deﬁne g1: S →V by
g1(i) =
 g0(i)
if g0(i) ∈f (i) ,
0
otherwise .
Then g1 ∈(g)0
U and rank(g1) ≤rank( f ). Hence, rank((g)0
U) ≤rank( f ) + 1, and
so {(g)0
U | (g)0
U EU ( f )0
U} ⊆Vrank( f )+2 and is therefore a set.
If U is ω1-complete, it thus follows from 5.3 and 0.4 that there is a transitive
class MU and an isomorphism
πU: Ult(V, U) →⟨MU, ∈⟩.
It is immediate from Ło´s’s theorem 5.2 that MU is an inner model of ZFC. Hence-
forth to be used is the preferred notation
[ f ]U = πU(( f )0
U)
for f : S →V ,
emphasizing that f represents the set [ f ]U in the inner model MU. That f need
only be deﬁned on a set X ⊆S in U will often be used without further mention.
Finally, for any set x let fx be the constant function: S →{x}. Then setting
jU(x) = [ fx]U
for x ∈V ,
jU: V ≺MU by 5.2, the usual canonical embedding into the ultrapower modulated
by its transitive collapse. The situation will usually be summed up by
jU: V ≺MU ∼= Ult(V, U) .

5. Elementary Embeddings
49
More generally, if N is an inner model of ZFC, ⟨N, ∈, U⟩|= U is an ultraﬁlter
over a set S, and U is ω1-complete (in V ), then an analogous procedure using
functions in SN ∩N leads to
jU: N ≺MU ∼= Ult(N, U) .
Again, it is not necessary to assume that U ∈N.
Subscripts will usually be
suppressed when clear from the context.
With these preliminaries, we can turn at last to measurable cardinals:
5.4 Proposition. Suppose that U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over a measurable
cardinal κ with corresponding embedding j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Then crit( j) =
κ.
Proof. First observe that j(α) = α for every α < κ: If not, let α < κ be the
least such that j(α) > α. If [ f ] = α, then {ξ < κ | f (ξ) < α} ∈U, and so by
κ-completeness there is a β < α such that {ξ < κ | f (ξ) = β} ∈U. But then,
[ f ] = j(β) = β is a contradiction.
Next, since U is κ-complete, it contains no bounded subsets of κ. So, with
id: κ →κ the identity map on κ, for any α < κ, {ξ | α < ξ < κ} ∈U implies
that α = j(α) < [id] < j(κ). Hence, κ ≤[id] < j(κ), and κ = crit( j).
⊣
Here is Scott’s original argument, which builds on the Keisler [62] ultraprod-
uct proof of the Hanf-Tarski result.
5.5 Corollary (Scott [61]). If there is a measurable cardinal, then V ̸= L.
Proof. Building on 5.4 suppose that κ is the least measurable cardinal, and assume
to the contrary that V = L. Then M ⊆L, so M = L. But also by elementarity,
( j(κ) is the least measurable cardinal)M, contradicting j(κ) > κ.
⊣
The following result is a converse to 5.4, and was ﬁrst noticed in a local
form.
5.6 Theorem (Keisler [62a]). If there is an elementary embedding j: V ≺M for
some inner model M, then its critical point is a measurable cardinal.
Proof. Set δ = crit( j). Then δ > ω since every ordinal ≤ω is deﬁnable and j is
elementary. Now deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆δ ∧δ ∈j(X) .
The proof is completed by showing that U is a (non-principal) δ-complete ultraﬁlter
over δ. (This in particular implies that δ is regular and hence a cardinal.) Note
ﬁrst that δ ∈U, yet α < δ implies that {α} ̸∈U since j({α}) = {α}. To check that
U is an ultraﬁlter is straightforward. Finally, to verify δ-completeness, suppose

50
Chapter 1. Beginnings
that γ < δ and X ∈γU. Then δ ∈{ j(X(α)) | α < γ }. But since j(α) = α
for α ≤γ , j(X) is a function with domain γ such that j(X)(α) = j(X(α)) for
every α < γ . Hence,
j({X(α) | α < γ }) = { j(X)(α) | α < γ } = { j(X(α)) | α < γ } ,
and so {X(α) | α < γ } ∈U.
⊣
Since the quantiﬁer ∃j over classes j cannot be formalized in ZFC, 5.6 can
only be regarded as a schema of theorems, one for each j, or else be formalized
with V replaced by a Vα with α > crit( j) as indeed was Keisler’s approach. In
any case, measurable cardinals exist exactly when there are non-trivial elementary
embeddings of (initial segments of) the universe. Consequently, if the investigation
of well-founded models of set theory is to move beyond restrictions via inner
models and extensions via forcing and to comprehend elementary embeddings,
then measurable cardinals become intrinsically necessary.
The proof of 5.6 shows how critical points of elementary embeddings can be
used like principal generators for ultraﬁlters, which in turn lead to ultrapowers and
elementary embeddings. Not every elementary embedding is an ultrapower embed-
ding (as will become clear in subsequent sections), and the switch to ultrapowers
has deﬁnite advantages since the concrete structure yields more information:
5.7 Proposition.
Suppose that U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ > ω and
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U) the corresponding embedding. Then:
(a) j(x) = x for every x ∈Vκ, and so V M
κ
= Vκ; j(X) ∩Vκ = X for every
X ⊆Vκ, and so V M
κ+1 = Vκ+1; and κ+M = κ+.
(b) 2κ ≤(2κ)M < j(κ) < (2κ)+.
(c) If θ is a strong limit cardinal of coﬁnality ̸= κ, then j(θ) = θ.
(d) κ M ⊆M yet κ+ M ̸⊆M, i.e. M is closed under the taking of arbitrary
κ-sequences, but not of arbitrary κ+-sequences.
(e) U ̸∈M.
Proof. (a) The ﬁrst assertion follows from 5.4 and the rank argument for 5.1(b);
the rest follow in sequence, with κ+M = κ+ a consequence of M containing every
well-ordering of κ.
(b) 2κ ≤(2κ)M since P(κ)M = P(κ) by (a) and M ⊆V . (2κ)M < j(κ) since
j(κ) is inaccessible in M. Finally, j(κ) = {[ f ] | f ∈κκ} so that j(κ) < (2κ)+.
(c) It sufﬁces to take θ > κ, suppose that [ f ] < j(θ), and then show that
[ f ] < θ: We can assume that f (ξ) < θ for every ξ < κ, and so since cf(θ) ̸= κ,
there is an α < θ such that {ξ < κ | f (ξ) ≤α} ∈U. (If cf(θ) < κ, this follows
from κ-completeness, and if cf(θ) > κ, we could take α = sup(ran( f )).) Thus,
[ f ] ≤j(α) = {[g] | g ∈κα} < θ
as θ is a strong limit.

5. Elementary Embeddings
51
(d) Suppose that {[ fα] | α < κ} ⊆M; a g: κ →V must be found so that
[g] = ⟨[ fα] | α < κ⟩. Let h: κ →κ be so that [h] = κ. For each ξ < κ, let
g(ξ) be that function with domain h(ξ) satisfying (g(ξ))(α) = fα(ξ). By the
Ło´s theorem 5.2, [g] is a function with domain [h] = κ, and for each α < κ,
[g](α) = [ fα].
The second assertion will be established by showing that j“κ+ ̸∈M: j“κ+
is coﬁnal in j(κ+), for if [ f ] < j(κ+), we can assume that f (ξ) < κ+ for every
ξ < κ, take α = sup(ran( f )) < κ+, and see that [ f ] < j(α). But j“κ+ has
ordertype κ+, which by (b) is less than j(κ+), and so j“κ+ ∈M would contradict
M |= j(κ+) is regular.
(e) κκ = (κκ)M ∈M by (a). If U ∈M, then the map sending f ∈κκ
to [ f ] would also be in M. But then, j(κ) < (2κ)+M by the argument for (b),
contradicting the inaccessibility of j(κ) in M.
⊣
The point of (c) is that there is a deﬁnable, proper class of ordinals ﬁxed by
j. (b) or (e) imply that M ̸= V , so that there can be no ultrapower embedding:
V ≺V ; In fact, there can be no embedding: V ≺V of any sort (23.12), and this
was to be a watershed for the overall theory. That V M
κ+1 = Vκ+1 leads to a striking
observation about how the measurability of κ controls the size of 2κ:
5.8 Corollary (Scott). If κ is measurable and 2α = α+ for every α < κ, then
2κ = κ+.
Proof. With j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U) as before, κ < j(κ) and elementarity implies
that (2κ)M = κ+M. But then, 2κ ≤(2κ)M = κ+M = κ+.
⊣
Similarly, if κ is measurable and 2α ≤α++ for every α < κ, then 2κ ≤κ++,
and so forth. Actually getting a measurable cardinal κ satisfying 2κ > κ+ turned
out to require strong hypotheses, and the investigation of this possibility was to
lead to the development of important new forcing techniques (see volume II).
The Czech mathematician Petr Vopˇenka [62] independently derived Scott’s
result 5.5 from a difference in cardinal arithmetic between V and M as for 5.7(b),
since j(κ) is inaccessible in M. Vopˇenka and his student Karel Hrb´aˇcek then
established a global generalization of Scott’s result for the inner models L(A)
deﬁned in §3:
5.9 Theorem (Vopˇenka-Hrb´aˇcek [66]). If there is a strongly compact cardinal,
then V ̸= L(A) for any set A.
Proof. Suppose that κ is strongly compact, and assume to the contrary that V =
L(A) for some set A, which we can take to be transitive. Set λ = max({κ, |A|})+.
By 4.1, the κ-complete ﬁlter generated by {{ξ | α ≤ξ < λ} | α < λ} can be
extended to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter U over λ. Let
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U) with M = {[ f ] | f : λ →V }
as usual.

52
Chapter 1. Beginnings
Now let Ult−(V, U) be that substructure of Ult(V, U) with domain consist-
ing only of those equivalence classes containing functions f : λ →V such that
|ran( f )| < λ. Ło´s’s Theorem also holds for Ult−(V, U): For the induction step
to the existential quantiﬁer, note that if
{α < λ | ∃vn+1ϕ[ f1(α), . . . , fn(α)]} ∈U ,
where each |ran( fi)| < λ, then there are less than λ n-tuples ⟨f1(α), . . . , fn(α)⟩
involved, and so there is a g: λ →V with |ran(g)| < λ such that
{α < λ | ϕ[ f1(α), . . . , fn(α), g(α)]} ∈U .
Ult−(V, U) is well-founded, so let N be its transitive collapse and
k: V ≺N ∼= Ult−(V, U) .
For f : λ →V with |ran( f )| < λ let [ f ]−denote that element of N corresponding
to the equivalence class of f in Ult−(V, U). Next, let i: N →M be deﬁned by
i([ f ]−) = [ f ]; it is readily seen that this deﬁnition does not depend on the choice
of f representing [ f ]−. Then:
(i) i is elementary, and j = i ◦k .
(ii) i(α) = α for every α < k(λ), and i(k(A)) = k(A) .
(iii) k(λ) = sup({k(α) | α < λ}) ≤[id] < j(λ), where id: λ →λ is the
identity map on λ .
For (ii) it can in fact be proved by induction on ∈that [ f ]−= [ f ] for any f
such that the transitive closure of ran( f ) has cardinality less than λ. For (iii)
the equality follows from the observation that if {ξ < λ | g(ξ) < λ} ∈U and
|ran(g)| < λ, then {ξ < λ | g(ξ) < α} ∈U for some α < λ by the regularity of
λ; the rest follows as for 5.4.
A contradiction can now be derived as follows: Since V is the class L(A)
deﬁnable from A and k is elementary, N is the class L(k(A))N deﬁnable from
k(A). It follows from 3.2(a) that N = L(k(A))N = L(k(A)). Similarly, since i
is elementary and i(k(A)) = k(A), M = L(k(A)) = N. Now λ is a successor
cardinal, say of λ0. So in M, j(λ) is the successor of j(λ0) and in N, k(λ) is
the successor of k(λ0). But k(λ0) = i(k(λ0)) = j(λ0) by (ii), so M = N implies
that k(λ) = j(λ). This contradicts (iii).
⊣
Normality
Scott devised a further means of extracting information from the ultrapower con-
struction, particularly about reﬂection phenomena at measurable cardinals. The
key concept that he isolated has a combinatorial formulation in terms of ﬁlters.
For a ﬁlter F over λ,
F is normal iff for any ⟨Xα | α < λ⟩∈λF its diagonal intersection
△α<λXα = {ξ < λ | ξ ∈
α<ξ Xα} ∈F .

5. Elementary Embeddings
53
A ﬁlter over a cardinal λ contains the ﬁnal segments {ξ | α ≤ξ < λ} for
every α < λ by a §0 convention. By setting Xα = λ for α sufﬁciently large it
follows that normality subsumes λ-completeness. Also, the diagonal intersection
of ⟨{m ∈ω | n + 1 < m} | n ∈ω⟩is empty. Hence, if there is a normal ﬁlter
over λ, then λ is regular and uncountable. For such λ, the closed unbounded ﬁlter
Cλ is normal (0.1(b)). Oswald Veblen [08] ﬁrst took the diagonal intersection of
closed unbounded sets, although he did so only in the special case of ⟨Cα | α < λ⟩
where for each 0 < α < λ, ξ ∈Cα iff ξ is a limit point of Cβ for every β < α.
That Fodor’s regressive function lemma 0.1(c) is just a dual formulation was soon
realized as a general and useful fact about normal ﬁlters. For a ﬁlter F over a set
S and X ⊆S, X is F-stationary iff X ∩Z ̸= ∅for every Z ∈F.
5.10 Exercise. A ﬁlter F over λ is normal iff for any F-stationary X and regressive
f : X →λ there is an α < λ such that f −1({α}) is F-stationary in λ.
Hint. In the forward direction, if for every α < λ, f −1({α}) is not F-stationary
so that λ −f −1({α}) ∈F, then X ∩△α<λ(λ −f −1({α})) = ∅.
Conversely, if ⟨Xα | α < λ⟩∈λF yet △α<λXα ̸∈F, then λ −△α<λXα is
F-stationary. Deﬁne f on this set by: f (ξ) = least α such that ξ ̸∈Xα. Then f
is regressive, yet f −1({α}) ∩Xα = ∅for every α < λ.
⊣
It follows that any normal ﬁlter over λ extends Cλ: If C is closed unbounded
in λ, then f (ξ) = sup(C ∩ξ) < ξ whenever ξ ̸∈C ∪{0}, yet for each α <
λ, {ξ | f (ξ) = α} is a bounded subset of λ.
In the ﬁrst result 5.4 about measurable cardinals and ultrapowers the identity
map id: κ →κ had been used as a convenience. Scott saw that signiﬁcant results
can be derived by making it a focus of attention:
5.11 Exercise (Scott – Keisler-Tarski [64: 244]). For a κ-complete ultraﬁlter U
over κ > ω the following are equivalent:
(a) U is normal.
(b) Whenever f ∈κκ and {ξ < κ | f (ξ) < ξ} ∈U, there is an α < κ such
that {ξ < κ | f (ξ) = α} ∈U.
(c) [id]U = κ, where id: κ →κ is the identity map on κ.
Hint. The equivalence of (a) and (b) follows from 5.10.
⊣
5.12 Exercise (Scott – Keisler-Tarski [64: 241]). If κ is measurable, then there is
a normal ultraﬁlter over κ.
Hint. Suppose that U is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ, and f ∈κκ satisﬁes
[ f ]U = κ. Then
{X ⊆κ | f −1(X) ∈U}
is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ.
⊣

54
Chapter 1. Beginnings
Thus, any κ-complete ultraﬁlter can be “normalized” by a simple projection
process. The proof of 5.6 provided a canonical way of deﬁning an ultraﬁlter from
an elementary embedding; it is simple to check that the ultraﬁlter U deﬁned in the
proof of 5.6 is normal. Normality leads to simple but informative properties about
the corresponding ultrapower that foreshadow later work:
5.13 Proposition. Suppose that U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ. Then:
(a) MU = { jU( f )(κ) | f : κ →V }.
(b) If U had been deﬁned as for 5.6 from a j: V ≺M with critical point
κ, then there is an elementary embedding k: MU ≺M such that k ◦jU = j.
Moreover, if j = jN for some normal ultraﬁlter N over κ, then U = N and so k
is the identity.
Proof. (a) If x ∈MU, then x = [ f ]U for some f : κ →V . But then, by 5.11(c),
jU( f )(κ) = jU( f )([id]U) = [ f ]U, since the last equality is just a schizophrenic
translation of {ξ < κ | f (ξ) = f (ξ)} ∈U.
(b) Deﬁne k: MU →M by k([ f ]U) = j( f )(κ).
Then for any formula
ϕ(v1, . . . , vn),
MU |= ϕ[[ f1]U, . . . , [ fn]U] iff
{ξ < κ | ϕ[ f1(ξ), . . . , fn(ξ)]} ∈U
iff
M |= ϕ[ j( f1)(κ), . . . , j( fn)(κ)]
by the deﬁnition of U. Hence, k is elementary, and that k ◦jU = j is clear.
If j = jN where N is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, then for any X ⊆κ,
X ∈U iff
κ ∈jN(X) iff
{ξ < κ | ξ ∈X} = X ∈N
by the normality of N.
⊣
(a) asserts that MU
is a simple closure of the minimal information
{ jU( f ) | f : κ →V } ∪{κ}, and (b), that MU is minimal in a natural sense
among inner models provided by elementary embeddings.
From another van-
tage point, that [id]U
= κ leads to rather pathological consequences about
U that belie the term normal.
For example, since Vκ+1 ⊆MU by 5.7(a),
MU |= κ = [id]U is inaccessible. Hence, the sparse set {α < κ | α is inaccessible}
is in U even though ultraﬁlters intuitively consist of large sets.
Moreover,
as a model for arguments with weakly compact cardinals Keisler-Tarski [64]
showed that normal ultraﬁlters are closed under Mahlo’s operation M(X) = {α ∈
X | X ∩α is stationary in α}. A short model-theoretic proof is given here; the
original proof was later adapted to a more general setting by Solovay (16.8(c)).
5.14 Proposition (Keisler-Tarski [64: 248]). Suppose that U is a normal ultraﬁlter
over κ. If S ⊆κ is stationary in κ, then
{α < κ | S ∩α is stationary in α} ∈U .
Hence, if X ∈U, then M(X) ∈U.

5. Elementary Embeddings
55
Proof. By 5.7(a), jU(S) ∩κ = S and so jU(S) ∩κ is stationary in κ in MU. Since
[id]U = κ, it follows that {α < κ | S ∩α is stationary in α} ∈U. The second
assertion follows since normal ﬁlters contain every closed unbounded set, and so
any X ∈U is stationary.
⊣
More can be said outright using a further reﬂection argument:
5.15 Proposition. If U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, then
{α < κ | α is weakly compact} ∈U .
Proof. It sufﬁces to show that κ is weakly compact in MU. Since weak com-
pactness is characterized by the Extension Property of 4.5, κ has this property,
and it sufﬁces to check that κ has this property in MU. But if R ⊆Vκ, there
is a transitive X ̸= Vκ and an S ⊆X such that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩exactly
when there is such an X satisfying |X| = κ, by the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem
0.5. Hence, there is such a structure ⟨X, ∈, S⟩coded as a subset of Vκ. Also, the
appropriate satisfaction relation can be coded as a subset of Vκ. But Vκ+1 ⊆MU,
and so the proof is complete.
⊣
Hence, the weak compactness of a measurable cardinal κ reﬂects, and κ is
the κth weakly compact cardinal. This was ﬁrst established by Hanf and Scott
(6.5). As expected, there is a limit to this sort of reﬂection:
5.16 Proposition (Solovay). For any measurable cardinal κ, there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is not measurable} ∈U .
Proof. Proceeding by induction let κ be measurable, U a normal ultraﬁlter over
κ, and set A = {α < κ | α is measurable}.
If A /∈U, then we are done.
Otherwise, for each α ∈A inductively let Uα be a normal ultraﬁlter over α such
that A ∩α /∈Uα. Deﬁne W over κ by:
X ∈W iff
X ⊆κ ∧{α ∈A | X ∩α ∈Uα} ∈U .
It is simple to check that W is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ such that A /∈W.
⊣
Finally, Scott’s original proof of 5.8, implicit in Hanf-Scott [61], is given for
which a weaker hypothesis sufﬁces:
5.17 Proposition (Scott).
If there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | 2α = α+} ∈U, then 2κ = κ+.
Proof. Since [id]U = κ, (2κ)MU = κ+MU , and the argument can be completed as
for 5.8.
⊣

56
Chapter 1. Beginnings
This argument was ﬁrst published in Vopˇenka [65], which also noted that if
{α < κ | 2α ≤α++} ∈U, then 2κ ≤κ++, and so forth.
Combinatorial features of the use of normality eventually emerged in gener-
alizations, and besides having combinatorial ramiﬁcations normality was to play
a crucial role in the structural investigation of inner models of large cardinals
(§§19, 20). All in all, it is remarkable that a combinatorial contingency noticed by
Ulam in his salad days in Lw´ow should emerge so transﬁgured by the infusion of
ultrapowers and normality.

6. Indescribability
57
6. Indescribability
The formalization of reﬂection properties was one of the early developments in
the increasing reliance on model-theoretic approaches in set theory. After Richard
Montague [55, 61] studied reﬂection phenomena and showed that ZFC is not
ﬁnitely axiomatizable in a strong sense, Levy [60a] established their broader sig-
niﬁcance and the close involvement of the Mahlo hierarchy. Then Hanf-Scott [61]
postulated reﬂection properties directly for structures ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩where R ⊆Vκ
in terms of higher-order languages. They showed that this generalization in the
direction of higher types rather than inﬁnitely long formulas results in a schematic
approach to comparing large cardinals by size, and moreover provides a nice
characterization of weak compactness. The theory was further elaborated by Levy
[71], and led in the 1970’s to important analogues in the theory of admissible sets
and inductive deﬁnitions.
Levy’s initial observations lay the groundwork. The following lemma illus-
trates the contemporary importance of closed unbounded sets owing to the infusion
of model-theoretic techniques:
6.1 Lemma. Suppose that κ is inaccessible and R ⊆Vκ. Then
{α < κ | ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩}
is closed unbounded in κ.
Proof. That this set is closed is immediate. To show that it is unbounded, let α < κ
be arbitrary. Deﬁne αn < κ for n ∈ω by recursion as follows: Set α0 = α. Given
αn < κ deﬁne αn+1 to be the least β ≥αn such that whenever y1, . . . , yk ∈Vαn
and ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ∃v0ϕ[y1, . . . , yk] for some formula ϕ, there is an x ∈Vβ such
that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ[x, y1, . . . , yk]. Since κ is inaccessible, |Vαn| < κ and so
αn+1 < κ. Finally, set α = sup({αn | n ∈ω}). Then ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩
by the usual (Tarski) criterion for elementary substructure.
⊣
The ﬁrst part of the next proposition recalls 1.3, and is really a synoptic
version.
6.2 Proposition (Levy [60a]).
(a) κ is inaccessible iff for any R ⊆Vκ there is an α < κ such that
⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩.
(b) κ is Mahlo iff for any R ⊆Vκ there is an inaccessible cardinal α < κ
such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩.
Proof.
The forward directions are immediate by 6.1.
For the converses, it is
simple to see that κ > ω. Note that κ is regular: If not, there would be a β < κ
and a function F: β →κ with range unbounded in κ. Set R = {β} ∪F. By
hypothesis there is an α < κ such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩. Since β is

58
Chapter 1. Beginnings
the single ordinal in R, β ∈Vα by elementarity. But this is a contradiction since
the domain of F ∩Vα cannot be all of β.
Next, κ is a strong limit: If not, there would be a λ < κ such that 2λ ≥κ.
Let G: P(λ) →κ be surjective and set R = {λ + 1} ∪G. By hypothesis, there is
an α < κ such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩. λ + 1 ∈Vα and so P(λ) ∈Vα,
but this is a contradiction as before.
Finally, for (b) κ is Mahlo: If not, there would be a C closed unbounded
in κ containing no inaccessible cardinals. By the hypothesis from (b) there is an
inaccessible α < κ such that ⟨Vα, ∈, C ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, C⟩. By elementarity C ∩α
is unbounded in α. But then, α ∈C, which is a contradiction.
⊣
The Reﬂection Principle for ZF of Montague [61] and Levy [60a] asserts that
for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and any β, there is a limit ordinal α > β such that
for any x1, . . . , xn ∈Vα,
ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff
ϕVα[x1, . . . , xn] .
This principle is implicit in remarks of G¨odel made in 1946 (see G¨odel [90: 146]).
Classes R can be incorporated through their deﬁnitions to achieve a certain re-
semblance to the latter part of 6.2(a) with V replacing Vκ, but there are crucial
differences: Only one formula can be reﬂected, not all formulas as with elemen-
tary substructures; indeed, the arithmetization of syntax cannot be completed in
ZF to ﬁnd an α such that Vα ≺V because of the undeﬁnability of truth. Also,
arbitrary R ⊆Vκ are allowed in 6.2(a); this incorporates a bit of second-order
logic to attain the requisite strength (cf. 1.3 and the discussion before).
Levy [60a: 234] observed that the Reﬂection Principle is equivalent to the
Axiom of Inﬁnity and the Replacement Schema in the presence of the other ZF
axioms. Asserting this principle within some Vκ with arbitrary R ⊆Vκ necessitates
the inaccessibility of κ by the proof of 6.2(a). Next consider the reﬂection of V to
a Vα for α inaccessible; asserting this new principle within some Vκ with arbitrary
R ⊆Vκ necessitates the Mahloness of κ by the proof of 6.2(b), and so forth. This
is reﬂecting reﬂection: a reﬂection scheme is ﬁrst formulated and then is itself
reﬂected! In this way Levy developed a hierarchy of set theories that correspond
to the α-Mahlo cardinals and showed how the iterative formalization of reﬂection
illuminates Mahlo’s original scheme, formulated half a century before.
The formulations of Hanf and Scott using higher-order languages are the main
topics of this section. The Πm
n and Σm
n formulas for m, n ∈ω were described in
§0; for Q either Πm
n or Σm
n ,
κ is Q-indescribable iff for any R ⊆Vκ and Q sentence ϕ
such that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ, there is
an α < κ such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ .
Over structures of form ⟨Vα, ∈, R⟩with α a limit and R ⊆Vα, every higher-order
formula is equivalent by standard means to a Πm
n or Σm
n formula for some m and

6. Indescribability
59
n with blocks of like quantiﬁers contracted into one. Including arbitrary R ⊆Vκ
bolsters the theory with nice consequences, although the subject can be pursued
without the R’s (cf. 6.9). As Vκ is closed under pairing, the deﬁnition is equivalent
to one where R is replaced by any ﬁnite number of ﬁnitary relations; this will
often be invoked in what follows.
Extensions of the deﬁnition can be pursued using transﬁnite types, as was
done by Jensen (see Drake [74: 284ff]). Although there may be a traditional bias
for ﬁnite types in language, several indescribability results have sweeping proofs
that accommodate stronger modes of expressibility. However, as for the Mahlo
hierarchy transﬁnite types may lead to larger cardinals, but not to a qualitative
transcendence. So, the following weak overall notion is adopted, keeping in mind
that stronger indescribability properties are often derivable:
κ is totally indescribable iff κ is Πm
n -indescribable for every m, n ∈ω .
Following upon Levy [60a], Bernays [61] postulated the full second-order
reﬂection principle for the universe of sets, which amounts to ascribing Π1
n -
indescribability to On for every n ∈ω.
Pursuing his second-order approach
to set theory he showed that his principle implies the Global Axiom of Choice:
There is a class function F such that for any non-empty set x, F(x) ∈x. These
investigations have been continued by Rolando Chuaqui [78, 81].
Turning to the subject at hand, some observations are ﬁrst made for the case
m = 1:
6.3 Proposition.
(a) For any n, κ is Σ1
n+1-indescribable iff κ is Π1
n -indescribable.
(b) κ is Σ1
1-indescribable iff κ is inaccessible.
Proof. (a) In the substantive direction, suppose that R ⊆Vκ and ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|=
∃Xϕ(X) say, where X is type 2 and ϕ is Π1
n . So, there is an S ⊆Vκ such that
⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ[S]. But then, X can be replaced in ϕ by a new predicate symbol
and Π1
n -indescribability applied to ⟨Vκ, ∈, R, S⟩.
(b) This follows by reducing to ﬁrst-order formulas by (a) and using the
arguments for 6.2(a).
⊣
What about Π1
1 -indescribability? Hanf and Scott found that it provides a nice
characterization:
6.4 Theorem (Hanf-Scott [61]). κ is Π1
1 -indescribable iff κ is weakly compact.
Proof. We can argue in terms of the 4.5 characterization of weak compactness
in terms of the Extension Property.
For this purpose, suppose ﬁrst that κ is
inaccessible and R ⊆Vκ. If there is a transitive X ̸= Vκ and an S ⊆X such
that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩, then there is such an X satisfying |X| = |Vκ| by the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem 0.5. Using an injection of X into Vκ, this in turn
amounts to asserting that there is an A ⊆Vκ coding a structure ⟨Y, E, T ⟩with E

60
Chapter 1. Beginnings
a binary relation satisfying the hypotheses of the Collapsing Lemma 0.4, and a
proper elementary embedding J: ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩→⟨Y, E, T ⟩. That E is well-founded
is a ﬁrst-order assertion in ⟨Vκ, ∈, E⟩saying that there are no inﬁnite E-descending
sequences, since ωVκ ⊆Vκ by the inaccessibility of κ. That J is elementary is
expressible in terms of the satisfaction relation, formalizable as usual through the
existence of a satisfaction sequence K deﬁned by recursion on formula complexity.
Thus, when properly formalized the Extension Property holds for R ⊆Vκ exactly
when ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩satisﬁes a Σ1
1 sentence ∃A∃J∃Kρ where ρ is ﬁrst-order.
Suppose now that κ is Π1
1 -indescribable.
Then κ is inaccessible by 6.3.
Assume to the contrary that the Extension Property fails for some R ⊆Vκ. Then
⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= σ for a Π1
1 sentence σ equivalent to the negation of the Σ1
1 sentence
above. It is simple to devise a Π1
1 sentence τ such that ⟨Vδ, ∈⟩|= τ iff δ is
inaccessible. Finally, by 6.1,
C = {β < κ | ⟨Vβ, ∈, R ∩Vβ⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩}
is closed unbounded in κ, and so ⟨Vκ, ∈, R, C⟩|= ψ, where ψ is a ﬁrst-order
sentence asserting that C is closed unbounded.
By Π1
1 -indescribability there is an α < κ satisfying
⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα, C ∩Vα⟩|= σ ∧τ ∧ψ
so that in particular α is inaccessible and α ∈C. By an iterated Skolem hull
argument, there is an ⟨Xα, ∈, Sα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩such that: Xα is transitive, Vα is a
proper subset of Xα, and |Xα| = |Vα|. Having arranged α ∈C, ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺
⟨Xα, ∈, Sα⟩. But this contradicts ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= σ.
For the converse, suppose that κ is weakly compact and ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ
where ϕ is Π1
1 . By the Extension Property there is a transitive X ̸= Vκ and an
S ⊆X such that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩. In particular, ⟨X, ∈⟩is a transitive model
of ZFC with κ ∈X, and so V X
κ = Vκ ∈X. Since the only type 2 quantiﬁers of ϕ
are universal and persist downward when there are possibly fewer subsets of the
domain,
⟨X, ∈, S⟩|= ∃α(⟨Vα, ∈, S ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ) ,
since κ is such an α and S ∩Vκ = R. This sentence is ﬁrst-order, so also holds
in ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩by elementarity. Since κ is inaccessible, this means that there really
is an α < κ such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ, and the proof is complete.
⊣
This is a subtle phenomenon: the equivalence of an existential extension
property and a universal reﬂection property. Results like 4.7 on the size of weakly
compact cardinals in terms of the Mahlo hierarchy can also be derived via Π1
1-
indescribability.
Finally, Hanf and Scott made a general statement about reﬂection at a mea-
surable cardinal that subsumes 5.14 and 5.15:

6. Indescribability
61
6.5 Proposition (Hanf-Scott [61]). Measurable cardinals are Π2
1 -indescribable.
Moreover, if U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, R ⊆Vκ, and ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ where
ϕ is Π2
1 , then
{α < κ | ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ} ∈U .
Proof. Let j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Vκ+1 ⊆M by 5.7(a), so that second-order
sentences about ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩are absolute between V and M. But since the only type 3
quantiﬁers of ϕ are universal and persist downward when there are possibly fewer
subsets of Vκ+1, (⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ)M. The result now follows by normality since
j(R) ∩Vκ = R.
⊣
Kunen (see Solovay [71] or Fremlin [93]) established a kind of Π2
1 -indescrib-
ability for real-valued measurable cardinals, which for instance has the following
application: If κ ≤2ℵ0 is real-valued measurable, then there is a non-Lebesgue
measurable set of reals of cardinality less than κ. Also, Kunen [71] considered
a weak version of indescribability that does not entail inaccessibility, and ob-
tained results below 2ℵ0. (The formulation of Hanf-Scott [61] had actually been
in terms of the weak version, with the inaccessibility of κ an ambient hypothe-
sis.)
There is a Σ2
1 description over ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩of the measurability of κ, asserting
∃U ∈P2(κ) satisfying a second-order formula. 6.5 is hence the best possible in
the sense that the least measurable cardinal is not Σ2
1-indescribable. However:
6.6 Proposition (Vaught [63a]). If κ is measurable and U is a normal ultraﬁlter
over κ, then
{α < κ | α is totally indescribable} ∈U .
Proof. Let j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). By normality it sufﬁces to show that M |=
κ is totally indescribable. The following argument imposes little restriction on the
complexity of ϕ: Suppose that
M |= (R ⊆Vκ ∧⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ) .
Then
M |= ∃α < j(κ)(⟨Vα, ∈, j(R) ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ) ,
since κ is such an α and j(R) ∩Vκ = R. By elementarity,
∃α < κ(⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ) ,
and this then holds in M as well, since V M
κ
= Vκ.
⊣
Hence, there are many cardinals below the least measurable cardinal κ that
may have stronger reﬂection properties than κ itself. On the other hand, unlike
measurability Πm
n -indescribability is compatible with V = L.
The argument
appeals to speciﬁc properties of L, unlike the relativization of α-inaccessible and
α-Mahlo cardinals to inner models (3.1):

62
Chapter 1. Beginnings
6.7 Theorem. Suppose that Q is either Πm
n or Σm
n with either m > 1 or else
m = 1 and n > 0, and κ is Q-indescribable. Then (κ is Q-indescribable)L. In
particular, if κ is weakly compact, then (κ is weakly compact)L.
Proof.
For only this proof let δ+ denote the ﬁrst cardinal greater than δ and
δ+(i) the ith cardinal greater than δ in the sense of L. It is ﬁrst shown that for
0 < i < ω and inaccessible λ, to each Πr
s (resp. Σr
s ) formula ϕ(X1, . . . , Xt)
for s > 0 a Πr+i
s
(resp. Σr+i
s
) formula ˜ϕ(Y1, . . . , Yt) can be associated where
type(Yk) = type(Xk) + i for 1 ≤k ≤t, and to each A ∈P j(Lλ+(i)) for j ∈ω
(allowing P0(Lλ+(i)) = Lλ+(i)) a set ˜A ∈P j+i(Vλ) = Vλ+ j+i can be associated
so that
(∗)
Lλ+(i) |= ϕ[A1, . . . , At] iff
Vλ |= ˜ϕ[ ˜A1, . . . , ˜At] .
Although this will only be needed for r = 0 and ϕ a sentence, the complexity
must be maintained for the inductive argument.
For the case i = 1, let σ0 be the sentence of 3.3(a) so that for any transitive
set model N of σ0, N = Lα for some α. By the proof of GCH in L, if A ∈Lλ+,
A ∈Lγ for some γ < λ+. Since |Lγ | ≤λ, this amounts to the assertion: There is
a B ⊆Vλ and E a binary relation on B satisfying the hypotheses of the Collapsing
Lemma 0.4 such that ⟨B, E⟩|= σ0, and for that map H inductively deﬁned by
H(x) = {H(y) | y E x} as in that lemma’s proof there is a z ∈B such that
H(z) = A. Coding ⟨B, E, z⟩as a subset ˜A of Vλ, this assertion is formalizable as
a Σ1
1 formula ψ(Y) over Vλ with ˜A interpreting type 2 variable Y by the argument
of the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of 6.4.
Proceed now by recursion to deﬁne ˜ϕ for ﬁrst-order ϕ: For atomic formulas,
if A1, A2 ∈Lλ+, both A1 ∈A2 and A1 = A2 can be rendered as Σ1
1 assertions
over Vλ about ˜A1 and ˜A2 using the ψ above. If ϕ is ∃Xϕ0(X, X1, . . . , Xt) and
˜ϕ0(Y, Y1, . . . , Yt) corresponds to ϕ0, then
Lλ+ |= ϕ[A1, . . . , At] iff
Lλ+ |= ϕ0[A, A1, . . . , At] for some A ∈Lλ+
iff
Vλ |= ˜ϕ0[ ˜A, ˜A1, . . . , ˜At] by induction
iff
Vλ |= ∃Y(ψ ∧˜ϕ0)[ ˜A1, . . . , ˜At] .
Hence, ˜ϕ can be taken to be ∃Y(ψ ∧˜ϕ0), observing that if ϕ is Σ0
s , then ˜ϕ is
Σ1
s by induction. The sentential connectives are immediate, and so the argument
is complete for ﬁrst-order ϕ. For higher-order ϕ, corresponding sets ˜A can be
recursively associated with sets A in a straightforward manner. This completes
the case i = 1.
For i > 1, proceed by induction: Using the i = 1 argument with Lλ+(i+1)
replacing Lλ+ and Lλ+(i) replacing Vλ, ﬁrst translate down from Lλ+(i+1) to Lλ+(i);
then use the induction hypothesis to translate down to Vλ.
This is where the
general r is needed. The translation down from Lλ+(i+1) to Lλ+(i) involves one new
difﬁculty: For the Vλ case, the ﬁrst-order expressibility of the well-foundedness
of E depended on ωVλ ⊆Vλ as in the cited proof of 6.4. In the current situation,

6. Indescribability
63
only ωLλ+(i) ∩L ⊆Lλ+(i) is known from the proof of GCH in L.
However,
this sufﬁces by a basic fact about inner models and well-foundedness: First, for
A ∈Lλ+(i+1), A ∈Lγ for some γ satisfying |Lγ |L ≤λ+(i), so that we can assume
that the corresponding E ∈Lλ+(i). Now if E is well-founded in L, then E is
well-founded in V by absoluteness (0.3). Hence, it is enough to assert that there
are no inﬁnite E-descending sequences in L, and for this ωLλ+(i) ∩L ⊆Lλ+(i)
sufﬁces.
Proceeding toward the main argument for the theorem, note that if λ is inac-
cessible, then it is inaccessible in L and so (Vλ)L = Lλ by 1.2(a) and induction
on rank. For reﬂecting down to such a situation, note (as for 6.4) that there is a
Π1
1 sentence τ such that Vδ |= τ iff δ is inaccessible.
Finally, suppose that κ is Πm
n -indescribable with m, n as hypothesized. (The
Σm
n case is analogous, with the special Σ1
1 case following separately from 6.3(b).)
To verify Πm
n -indescribability in L, note ﬁrst that by the inaccessibility of κ,
(Vκ)L = Lκ. So assume that
R ∈P(Lκ) ∩L and (⟨Lκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ0)L
where ϕ0 is Πm
n . By the proof of GCH in L, P(Lκ) ∩L ⊆Lκ+ and inductively
Pi(Lκ) ∩L ⊆Lκ+(i) for each i ∈ω. Hence, our assertion can be rendered as
⟨Lκ+(m), ∈, R⟩|= ϕ1 ,
where ϕ1 is a Π0
n sentence corresponding to ϕ0. By previous remarks, this in turn
translates to
⟨Vκ, ∈, ˜R⟩|= ˜ϕ1
where ˜ϕ1 is Πm
n . The result now follows by reﬂecting ˜ϕ1 ∧τ down to an α < κ
and translating backwards to get
(⟨Lα, ∈, R ∩Lα⟩|= ϕ0)L .
⊣
The following result on universal formulas is a routine application of the
satisfaction relation. (See Levy [71: 208], Drake [74: 272], or Devlin [75: 96ff] for
details.)
6.8 Proposition. For any m, n > 0 there is a Πm
n formula ψmn(X, Y) with X type
2 and Y type 1 such that: for any Πm
n formula ϕ(X) there is a k ∈ω such that
for any limit ordinal α and R ⊆Vα,
⟨Vα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[R] iff
⟨Vα, ∈⟩|= ψmn[R, k] .
There is an Σm
n formula ψ′
mn(X, Y) with the analogous property for Σm
n formulas
ϕ(X).
⊣
A shift from a unary predicate to a type 2 variable was made to get the
following corollary:

64
Chapter 1. Beginnings
6.9 Corollary.
(a) For any n there is a Π1
n+1 sentence χ1n such that for any κ,
⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= χ1n iff
κ is Π1
n -indescribable .
(By 6.3 this subsumes the Σ1
n cases.)
(b) If m > 1, for any n > 0 there is a Πm
n sentence χmn such that for any κ,
⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= χmn iff
κ is Σm
n -indescribable .
There is a Σm
n sentence that similarly characterizes Πm
n -indescribability.
Proof. (a) For n = 0, let χ10 be any Π1
1 description of inaccessibility. For n > 0,
in terms of ψ1n from 6.8 let χ1n be
∀X∀Y(ψ1n(X, Y) →∃α > 0(α is a limit ∧⟨Vα, ∈⟩|= ψ1n(X ∩Vα, Y))) ,
appropriately formalized with the satisfaction relation for sets. Because of the ∀X
and the occurrence of ψ1n(X, Y) to the left of →this is Π1
n+1.
(b) This is like (a), except that for m > 1 the ∀X can be subsumed in the
prenexing procedure for classifying the resulting formula.
⊣
Set
πm
n = least Πm
n -indescribable cardinal , and
σ m
n = least Σm
n -indescribable cardinal ,
with the assumption implicit in the use of this notation that such cardinals exist.
The following is a consequence 6.3 and 6.9.
6.10 Proposition (Hanf-Scott [61]).
(a) σ 1
1 is the least inaccessible cardinal.
(b) π1
1 = σ 1
2 < π1
2 = σ 1
3 < . . .
(c) For m > 1 and n > 0, σ m
n ̸= πm
n , and πm
n < σ m
n+1, πm
n+1.
⊣
The order relationship between σ m
n and πm
n for m > 1 and n > 0 is discussed
at the end of the section.
Levy [71] carried out a systematic study of the sizes of indescribable cardi-
nals, extending aspects of Keisler-Tarski [64]. Most notably, he vitalized the idea
implicit in that paper of investigating deﬁnable ﬁlters, an idea to be used in later
contexts, and considerably extended 6.10. The starting point of his approach is
that various large cardinal properties are not only attributable to cardinals, but also
to their subsets. For X ⊆κ and Q either Πm
n or Σm
n ,
X is Q-indescribable in κ iff for any R ⊆Vκ and Q sentence ϕ
such that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ, there is
an α ∈X such that ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ .
This leads in turn to the consideration of the collections

6. Indescribability
65
I ={X ⊆κ | X is not Q-indescribable in κ} ,
{X ⊆κ | X is Q-indescribable in κ} , and
F ={X ⊆κ | κ −X is not Q-indescribable in κ}
of the negligible, non-negligible, and all but negligible subsets of κ with respect
to Q-indescribability. It is simple to check that κ is Q-indescribable iff F is a
(proper) ﬁlter, the Q-indescribable ﬁlter over κ. (F conforms to our §0 convention
about containing all the ﬁnal segments {ξ | α < ξ < κ}, since the assertion in
⟨Vκ, ∈, {α}⟩that {α} is not empty cannot be reﬂected down to any Vξ with ξ ≤α.
Levy styled the members of F weakly Q-enforceable at κ, and did not refer
explicitly to the ﬁlter.) I is then the ideal dual to F and the F-stationary sets
are just the Q-indescribable in κ sets. The Π1
1 -indescribable ﬁlter is also known
as the weakly compact ﬁlter because of 6.4. In the use of this terminology it is
assumed that the ﬁlters are indeed proper, i.e. that the ambient κ has the requisite
strength.
These deﬁnable ﬁlters have a crucial property:
6.11 Proposition (Levy [71]).
For m, n > 0 the Πm
n -indescribable and Σm
n -
indescribable ﬁlters over κ are normal.
Proof. Let F be the Πm
n -indescribable ﬁlter over κ (the Σm
n case is analogous).
Suppose that X ⊆κ and f : X →κ is regressive. Assuming that f −1({α}) is
not Πm
n -indescribable in κ for any α < κ, it sufﬁces to establish that X is not
Πm
n -indescribable in κ:
Invoking the universal formula of 6.8, it can be assumed that for each α < κ
there is an Rα ⊆Vκ and a kα ∈ω such that ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= ψmn[Rα, kα] yet
⟨Vξ, ∈⟩|= ¬ψmn[Rα ∩Vξ, kα] for any ξ ∈X with f (ξ) = α. Set
R = {⟨α, β⟩| α < κ ∧β ∈Rα} , and
T = {⟨α, kα⟩| α < κ} .
Let τ be any ﬁrst-order sentence such that if ⟨Vδ, ∈⟩|= τ, then δ is a non-zero
limit ordinal. Then
⟨Vκ, ∈, R, T ⟩|= τ ∧∀α∀U∀v(U = R“{α} ∧v = T (α) →ψmn(U, v)) .
Properly formalized this sentence is Πm
n , and because of τ any ξ that reﬂects it
satisﬁes
R ∩Vξ = {⟨α, β⟩| α < ξ ∧β ∈Rα ∩Vξ} , and
T ∩Vξ = T |ξ ,
and so ξ /∈X as f is regressive. Hence, X is not Πm
n -indescribable in κ.
⊣
Note that for any R ⊆Vκ and Πm
n sentence ϕ such that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩|= ϕ,
{α < κ | ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩|= ϕ}
is in the Πm
n -indescribable ﬁlter, and similarly for Σm
n . This leads to the following:

66
Chapter 1. Beginnings
6.12 Exercise (Levy [71]).
(a) For any n, {α < κ | α is Π1
n -indescribable in α} is in the Π1
n+1-
indescribable ﬁlter over κ.
(b) For m > 1 and n > 0, {α < κ | α is Σm
n -indescribable in α} is in the
Πm
n -indescribable ﬁlter over κ, and {α < κ | α is Πm
n -indescribable in α} is in the
Σm
n -indescribable ﬁlter over κ.
(c) If S is stationary in κ, then {α < κ | S ∩α is stationary in α} is in the
Π1
1 -indescribable ﬁlter over κ.
Hint. (a) and (b) follow from the sentences speciﬁed in 6.9, and (c) follows from
devising a Π1
1 sentence σ such that for any δ and A ⊆δ , ⟨Vδ, ∈, A⟩|= σ iff A
is stationary in δ.
⊣
Any normal ﬁlter extends the closed unbounded ﬁlter (5.10ff), so the sets
exhibited in (a) and (b) are stationary in κ. Moreover, (c) implies that the in-
describable ﬁlters are closed under Mahlo’s operation and strengthens 4.6. 6.12
typiﬁes how in hierarchies of large cardinals, a cardinal at one level deﬁnes for
itself its transcendent size relative to cardinals at lower levels.
A fruitful offshoot of the study of large cardinals has been the investigation
of their various analogues in restricted contexts.
After all, natural ideas ﬁrst
germinated in the maximal setting of set theory ought to thrive in more focused
situations. The ﬁrst substantive move in this direction was made in the early 1970’s
in the theory of inductive deﬁnitions allowing non-monotone operators. With the
admissible ordinals playing the role of regular cardinals, natural analogues of
Mahlo and indescribable cardinals were developed in this context. Wayne Richter
and Peter Aczel in their [74] and Aczel [77: 772ff] provide the details. A second
wave of activity began in 1980 with study of Σn admissibility in terms of reﬂection
and partition properties by Evangelos Kranakis [82, 82a, 83]. This was extended
by, e.g. Kranakis and Iain Phillips in their [84], and expanded to the study of
analogues of measurable cardinals by Matthew Kaufman and Kranakis in their
[84] and by Josephus Baeten [86].
Penetrating work by St˚al Aanderaa [74] in the earlier context of inductive
deﬁnitions motivated Yiannis Moschovakis to establish the following:
6.13 Theorem (Moschovakis [76]). If V = L, m > 1, and n > 0, then σ m
n < πm
n .
⊣
Devlin [75: 100] sketches a proof. This is a curious turn of events! The
use of effective analogues for large cardinals provided new characterizations and
insights, which in turn reverberated back to the original context.
Whether some restrictive hypothesis like V = L is necessary in 6.13 was left
unresolved for some time, until Kai Hauser established a contrasting result with
sophisticated forcing techniques:

6. Indescribability
67
6.14 Theorem (Hauser [91, 92]).
If m > 1, n > 0, and there is a Σm
n -
indescribable cardinal and a Πm
n -indescribable cardinal below it, then there is
a generic extension with such cardinals in which σ m
n > πm
n .
⊣
This was somewhat unexpected, since the straightforward deﬁnitions and the
m = 1 precedent suggested an absolute result in the Moschovakis direction. (The
ordering of the cardinals in the hypothesis of the theorem is necessary, since from
σ m
n > πm
n one can establish the consistency of: there are both Σm
n -indescribable
cardinals and Πm
n -indescribable cardinals.)
The study of indescribability set the stage for the general investigation of
large cardinals in terms of reﬂection phenomena, and also introduced an important
technique, the use of deﬁnable normal ﬁlters. 6.14 may have resolved what had
been the major open problem about indescribability, but in any case the concept
provides a useful framework for the analysis of the relative size of various large
cardinals.

Chapter 2
Partition Properties
This chapter describes the progression of ideas and results emerging from parti-
tion properties ﬁrst considered by Erd˝os and culminating in Silver’s results about
the existence of the set of integers 0#, a principle of transcendence over L. This
development incorporated both the reﬁned analysis of combinatorics as well as
the full play of model-theoretic techniques, and provided formulations that have
come to be regarded as basic. §7 explores partitions of n-tuples, developing the
related tree property and further characterizations of weak compactness, and in-
troduces partitions of all ﬁnite subsets. §8 gives Rowbottom’s model-theoretic
characterizations and results about L, and explores the related concepts of Row-
bottom and J´onsson cardinals. Finally, §9 presents Silver’s deﬁnitive work on sets
of indiscernibles and the implications for L of the existence of 0#.

70
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
7. Partitions and Trees
Although an itinerant mathematician for most of his life, Paul Erd˝os has been
the prominent ﬁgure of a strong Hungarian tradition in the concrete mathematics
of combinatorics, and through some initial results he introduced major initiatives
into the detailed combinatorial study of the transﬁnite. Erd˝os and his collaborators
simply viewed the transﬁnite numbers as a combinatorially rich source of intrinsi-
cally interesting problems. The lines of inquiry that they pursued soon developed
a momentum of their own, with the concrete questions about graphs and mappings
having a natural appeal through their immediacy. Some of the initial speculations
led to important correlations with weak compactness, and these ramiﬁcations are
discussed in this section. Enough was known by the late 1950’s so that the result
that the least inaccessible cardinal is not measurable could have been deduced
before the Hanf-Tarski work. That this combinatorial research should have some
bearing on large cardinals was not surprising, but that it was to play a central role
in their structural elaboration in the 1960’s (§§8, 9) was rather unexpected.
Despite later developments the story begins with a problem in formal logic.
A couple of years before G¨odel established the Incompleteness Theorem [31],
Ramsey [30] demonstrated the decidability of the class of ∃∀formulas with iden-
tity (see Dreben-Goldfarb [79] for a general framework). It was for this purpose
that he proved his well-known ﬁnite combinatorial theorem. Up at Cambridge
and brother to a later Archbishop of Canterbury, Ramsey through his association
with Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein is a pivotal ﬁgure in the philos-
ophy of mathematics. With the latter at his side, Ramsey died tragically at the
age of 26. Skolem [33] sharpened Ramsey’s work, but his theorem did not be-
come widely known until Erd˝os-Szekeres [35] rediscovered it and applied it to a
problem of combinatorial geometry. Today, Ramsey Theory is a thriving ﬁeld of
combinatorics (see Graham-Rothschild-Spencer [90]).
Ramsey also established an inﬁnite version of his combinatorial theorem
which is just as well-known, and it was the investigation of its analogues in the
transﬁnite that led to large cardinal properties. In the joint paper Erd˝os-Tarski [43]
weakly inaccessible cardinals were incorporated into a discussion about maximal
mutually disjoint families. But enticingly, that paper ended with an intriguing
list of six combinatorial problems (and announced some interconnections between
them in a footnote) whose positive solutions amounted to the existence of either a
strongly compact, measurable, or weakly compact cardinal. It is evident that here
the authors were motivated by strong properties of ω to formulate direct combina-
torial generalizations. They took a distinctly empirical approach to foundational
issues, considering their problems as lines of inquiry towards possible new axioms.
They speculated ([43: 328ff]):
The difﬁculties which we meet in attempting to solve the problems under consideration
do not seem to depend essentially on the nature of inaccessible numbers. In most cases
the difﬁculties seem to arise from lack of devices which enable us to construct maximal
sets which are closed under certain inﬁnite operations. It is quite possible that a complete
solution of these problems would require new axioms which would differ considerably in

7. Partitions and Trees
71
their character not only from the usual axioms of set theory, but also from those hypotheses
whose inclusion among the axioms has previously been discussed in the literature and
mentioned previously in this paper (e.g., the existential axioms which secure the existence
of inaccessible numbers, or from hypotheses like that of Cantor which establish arithmetical
relations between the cardinal numbers).
At ﬁrst, it might seem as if the possibility of such prior principles has not been
realized, since the positive solutions to their problems have simply been adopted
as large cardinal hypotheses. But, reﬂection principles studied in the 1960’s (§6)
have justiﬁed “maximal sets which are closed under certain inﬁnite operations”.
In particular, the characterization of weak compactness via Π1
1 -indescribability
has provided a local explanatory principle leading to the positive solutions of the
combinatorial problems, and the second-order indescribability principle of Bernays
[61], essentially the Π1
n -indescribability of On for every n ∈ω, a global one.
The program initiated by Erd˝os is now described, so that the related problems
of Erd˝os-Tarski [43] can be considered in context. Richard Rado was Erd˝os’ main
collaborator in this direction in the 1950’s, and Hajnal, since then. It is interesting
to note that like his earlier compatriot von Neumann, Hajnal’s initial work was in
the axiomatics of set theory (see before 3.2), but his concerns were quite different
afterwards. A general framework called a partition calculus was developed by
Erd˝os-Rado [56], and the starting point is a special case of their ordinary partition
symbol.
Recall that for x ⊆On, [x]γ = {y ⊆x | y has ordertype γ }.
The
ordinary partition relation
β −→(α)γ
δ
asserts that for any f : [β]γ →δ, there is an H ∈[β]α homogeneous for f :
| f “[H]γ | ≤1. In other words, for any partition of the ordertype γ subsets of β
into δ cells there is an H ⊆β of ordertype α all of whose ordertype γ subsets lie
in the same cell. The negation of this and like relations is indicated with a −→
/
replacing the −→. The idea behind this “arrow” notation is that the relation is
obviously preserved upon making the β on the left larger, or making any of the
α, γ, δ on the right smaller, as long as the order relationship between γ and α is
preserved, e.g. the trivially true case α ≤γ can become false when γ < α. Of
course, δ can be taken to be a cardinal, and if α is a cardinal, then the least β
satisfying the relation must also be a cardinal. Ramsey’s inﬁnitary theorem is the
assertion ω −→(ω)m
n for every m, n ∈ω and is established by 7.7.
An early comment was that γ must be ﬁnite in the presence of the Axiom of
Choice:
7.1 Proposition (Erd˝os-Rado [52: 434]). For any κ, κ−→
/ (ω)ω
2 .
Proof. Let ≺well-order [κ]ω, and deﬁne f : [κ]ω →2 by f (s) = 0 if every
t ∈[s]ω −{s} satisﬁes s ≺t, and f (s) = 1 otherwise. Then no x ∈[κ]ω can
be homogeneous for f : If y is the ≺-least member of [x]ω, then f (y) = 0.
But taking any inﬁnite increasing ⊂-chain x0 ⊂x1 ⊂x2 . . . ⊂x of inﬁnite sets,
f (xn) = 0 for every n would imply that . . . x2 ≺x1 ≺x0, contrary to ≺being a
well-ordering.
⊣

72
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
Erd˝os-Rado [56] provided some basic results for the general ordinary partition
relation. Working independently Djuro Kurepa [59] also obtained similar results.
Later, an almost complete theory for cardinals was given in Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado
[65] assuming GCH. Incorporating the further work of Shelah [75] the book Erd˝os-
Hajnal-M´at´e-Rado [84] then extended the discussion with Byzantine detail to the
general situation without GCH. What lies at the heart of these matters is a basic
argument for producing large homogeneous sets using trees.
A tree is a partially ordered set ⟨T, <T ⟩such that for any t ∈T the set
{u ∈T | u <T t} of <T -predecessors of t is well-ordered by <T . The αth level
of T consists of those t ∈T whose set of <T -predecessors has ordertype α under
<T . The height of T is the least α such that the αth level of T is empty. A chain
of T is a linearly ordered subset, and an antichain of T is a subset consisting of
pairwise <T -incomparable elements. For example, any level is an antichain. A
branch of T is a maximal chain of T , a coﬁnal branch of T is a branch with
members at every non-empty level of T , and an α-branch of T is a branch whose
ordertype under <T is α. A subtree of T is a subset T ⊆T together with the
induced ordering on T . Although not always done in set theory, it is assumed that
the 0th level of a tree consists of a single element, called the root.
Trees abound in contemporary set theory as basic combinatorial objects. The
ﬁrst systematic study of trees was carried out in Kurepa’s Paris thesis [35] with
Fr´echet, where several tree and linear order equivalences are derived, e.g. for
Suslin’s Problem [35: 127ff]. See Levy [79: IX§2] for the basic combinatorics,
Devlin [84] for trees in L, and Todorˇcevi´c [84] for a magisterial discussion. The
basic example is ⟨<γ x, ⊂⟩, the set <γ x = 
α<γ
αx ordered by proper inclusion,
which for x ̸= ∅is a tree of height γ with αth level αx.
The following lemma provides a basic analysis of partitions in terms of trees
and is known in general form as the Ramiﬁcation Lemma (cf. Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado
[65: §6]). It is used to establish a close relationship between large homogeneous
sets for partitions and long chains in trees, and as such provides the basis for the
quintessential tree argument in inﬁnitary combinatorics: Instead of building large
homogeneous sets directly by recursion, one argues that because a tree must have
long chains, some sufﬁciently large homogeneous set must exist. The ﬁrst argu-
ments of this sort were those appealing to the well-known tree lemma of D´enes
K¨onig [27], a generalization of which will be considered shortly. Recall our §0
convention that f (α1, . . . , αn) is written for f ({α1, . . . , αn}) with the understand-
ing that α1 < . . . < αn.
7.2 Lemma. Suppose that 2 ≤n < ω, σ is a cardinal, and f : [κ]n →σ. Then
there is a tree ⟨κ, <f ⟩such that:
(a) If ξ <f η, then ξ < η.
(b) If ξ1 <f . . . <f ξn−1 <f δ <f η, then
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, δ) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η) .

7. Partitions and Trees
73
(c) For each α < κ, the αth level of the tree has cardinality at most σ |ω+α|,
and is ﬁnite if both σ and α are ﬁnite.
Proof.
The tree is deﬁned by recursion, initially letting the ﬁrst n levels be
0 <f 1 <f . . . <f n −1. Suppose that n ≤η < κ, and every ξ < η has already
been put on the tree, i.e. <f |(η × η) has been deﬁned. Then choose a downward
closed chain b of the tree thus far constructed maximal with respect to having the
property:
for any ξ1 <f . . . <f ξn all in b, f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η) ,
and stipulate that ξ <f η for every ξ ∈b.
(Actually, this b is unique: If b1 ̸= b2 were chains that met the conditions for
b, let c = b1 ∩b2, γ1 the <f -least element of b1 −c, and γ2 the <f -least element
of b2 −c, say with γ1 < γ2. Then if ξ1 <f . . . <f ξn−1 are all in c,
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, γ1) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, γ2) .
But this is contradictory, since γ2 had been put atop c, yet c did not meet the
maximality condition at the time because of c ∪{γ1}.)
⟨κ, <f ⟩is a tree satisfying (a) and (b). To complete the proof, (c) is estab-
lished by induction: At limit ordinals α > 0, ﬁrst note that if b is a maximal chain
through that part of the tree below the αth level, then b has at most one successor
at the αth level: If η1 < η2 were two successors, for any ξ1 <f . . . <f ξn−1 all in
b, taking a ξ ∈b such that ξn−1 <f ξ as α is a limit,
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η1) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, ξ) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η2) .
But this is contradictory, since η2 had been put atop b, yet b was not maximal at
the time because of b ∪{η1}. Thus, the cardinality of the αth level is at most the
cardinality of the set of maximal chains through that part of the tree below the
αth level. By induction this is at most 
β<α σ |ω+β| = σ |α| as required.
For the argument at successor ordinals, ﬁrst note that if ξ is at the αth level,
then ξ has at most σ |α|n−2 immediate successors at the (α+1)st level: If η1 < η2 are
both immediate successors of ξ, then there must be some ξ1 <f . . . <f ξn−1 ≤f ξ
such that
(∗)
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η1) ̸= f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, η2)
else η2 would not have been an immediate successor, as before. In fact, ξn−1
must equal ξ, else (∗) would be an equality just as in the previous paragraph.
There are at most |α|n−2 (n −2)-tuples ⟨ξ1, . . . , ξn−2⟩as ξ is at the αth level,
and each immediate successor η of ξ determines for each such (n −2)-tuple a
value f (ξ1, . . . , ξn−2, ξ, η) < σ. Since these values must be different as in (∗) for
distinct immediate successors, there must be at most σ |α|n−2 immediate successors.
It is now simple to complete the argument: By induction, the αth level has
cardinality at most σ |ω+α| · σ |α|n−2 ≤σ |ω+α|. Also, if σ and α are both ﬁnite and

74
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
by induction the αth level is ﬁnite, then so is the (α + 1)st level since σ |α|n−2 is
ﬁnite.
⊣
To illustrate how this lemma is used, with it we establish what is called the
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem, which shows in particular that for any α, δ, and n ∈ω there
is a κ such that κ −→(α)n+1
δ
. The case n = 1 had occurred in Erd˝os [42]; the full
theorem was established independently by Kurepa [59]. For the statement of the
theorem, deﬁne the ﬁrst few Beth numbers based at a cardinal κ by: beth0(κ) = κ
and bethn+1(κ) = 2bethn(κ) for n ∈ω.
7.3 Theorem (Erd˝os-Rado [56]). For any κ and n ∈ω,
bethn(κ)+ −→(κ+)n+1
κ
.
Proof.
Proceed by induction on n.
The case n = 0 follows from the regu-
larity of κ+.
Assume now that the assertion is true for n, and suppose that
f : [bethn+1(κ)+]n+2 →κ.
Let <f be the corresponding tree ordering on
bethn+1(κ)+ as in the lemma. Then the bethn(κ)+th level of the tree is not empty:
Otherwise, (c) of the lemma would lead to the contradiction
bethn+1(κ)+ ≤{κ|α| | α < (bethn(κ))+} ≤2bethn(κ) = bethn+1(κ) .
Let η be at the bethn(κ)+th level and consider the chain C = {ξ | ξ <f η}.
By (a) and (b) of the lemma the function g: [C]n+1 →κ given by
g(ξ1, . . . , ξn+1) = f (ξ1, . . . , ξn+1, δ) for some (any) δ ∈C −(ξn+1 + 1)
is well-deﬁned. But then, the inductive hypothesis can be applied to g to extract
a subset of C of cardinality κ+, homogeneous for the original f .
⊣
7.3 is known to be best possible in the sense that bethn(κ)+ cannot be replaced
by bethn(κ) (Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [65]).
This follows from their “stepping-up”
lemma ([65: 118ff]), starting from two basic counterexamples for n = 1 that had
been noticed much earlier:
7.4 Exercise (G¨odel – Erd˝os-Kakutani [43: 459]). For any κ,
2κ−→
/ (3)2
κ .
Hint. With ⟨fα | α < 2κ⟩enumerating κ2 consider F: [2κ]2 →κ deﬁned by:
F(α, β) = least ξ such that fα(ξ) ̸= fβ(ξ).
⊣
7.5 Proposition (Sierpi´nski [33]; Kurepa [41: 487]). For any κ,
2κ−→
/ (κ+)2
2 .
Proof. Let < be the lexicographic ordering of κ2, i.e. for f ̸= g ∈κ2, f < g iff
f (α) < g(α) for the least α < κ such that f (α) ̸= g(α). With ⟨fα | α < 2κ⟩

7. Partitions and Trees
75
enumerating κ2 deﬁne F: [2κ]2 →2 by: F(α, β) = 0 if fα < fβ, and F(α, β) = 1
otherwise.
Assume to the contrary that there is an H ∈[2κ]κ+ homogeneous for F. Take
F“[H]2 = {0}; the other case is entirely analogous. For each α ∈H let d(α) be
the least ordinal ξ < κ such that for some γ ∈H, fα|ξ = fγ |ξ yet fα(ξ) < fγ (ξ).
For ξ < κ, set
Hξ = {α ∈H | d(α) = ξ} .
Note that for any ξ < κ, if α, β ∈Hξ, then fα|ξ = fβ|ξ. Thus, if α ∈Hξ and
γ ∈H is such that fα|ξ = fγ |ξ yet fα(ξ) < fγ (ξ), then any other member of Hξ
has this property with respect to the same γ . Hence, Hξ ⊆{α ∈H | fα < fγ },
and so |Hξ| ≤κ, since by homogeneity H is well-ordered by < in ordertype κ+.
However, this contradicts the regularity of κ+ since H = 
ξ<κ Hξ.
⊣
For any λ, using 7.3 there is a sequence ⟨λk | k ∈ω⟩such that λ0 = λ
and for k ∈ω, λk+1 −→(α)n
δ for any α, δ < λk and n ∈ω. It follows that if
κ = sup({λk | k ∈ω}), then κ > λ and κ −→(α)n
δ for any α, δ < κ and n ∈ω.
The following result is about the next interesting possibility, directly generalizing
Ramsey’s ω −→(ω)2
2:
7.6 Corollary (Erd˝os). If κ > ω and κ −→(κ)2
2, then κ is inaccessible.
Proof. First, κ must be regular: Otherwise, κ would be a disjoint union κ =

ξ<γ Xξ, where γ < κ and |Xξ| < κ for each ξ < γ .
Then the function
f : [κ]2 →2 deﬁned by f (α, β) = 0 if α and β are in the same Xξ, and f (α, β) =
1 otherwise, cannot have a homogeneous set of cardinality κ.
Next, κ must be a strong limit: Otherwise, there would be a λ < κ such that
κ ≤2λ. But then, κ −→(κ)2
2 would contradict 7.5 for λ.
⊣
The weaker conclusion that κ is weakly inaccessible is almost explicit in
Erd˝os [42] (cf. Erd˝os-Tarski [43: 328]).
The Tree Property
The proof of 7.3 shows how the existence of large homogeneous sets can be related
to the existence of long chains in trees. For κ −→(κ)2
2, the key feature is a strong
property considered by Kurepa [35] that replaces the cardinality argument of 7.3:
A κ-tree is a tree of height κ each of whose levels has cardinality less than κ.
κ has the tree property iff
every κ-tree has a coﬁnal branch .
This generalizes the well-known tree lemma of K¨onig [27], which is just the
assertion that ω has the tree property. The following result will shortly be seen to
provide another characterization of weak compactness.
7.7 Exercise (Ramsey [30] for κ = ω; Erd˝os-Tarski [43: 328] for n = λ = 2).
If κ = ω, or is inaccessible and has the tree property, then for any n ∈ω and
λ < κ, κ −→(κ)n
λ.

76
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
Hint. Use the inductive argument for 7.3; for the case κ = ω, apply the last clause
of 7.2(c).
⊣
Ramsey’s original proof was essentially this, although he did not formulate
K¨onig’s lemma explicitly.
As mentioned in §4 the details of implications announced at the end of Erd˝os-
Tarski [43] were provided in a seminar at Berkeley in 1958-9 by Mostowski and
Tarski, and appeared in Erd˝os-Tarski [61]. In addition to the crucial Hanf (§4)
and Scott (§5) results that followed, the tree and partition equivalences for weak
compactness were soon worked out:
7.8 Theorem (Erd˝os-Tarski [43, 61], Hanf [64a], and Monk-Scott [64]).
The
following are equivalent for κ > ω:
(a) κ is weakly compact.
(b) κ is inaccessible and has the tree property.
(c) κ −→(κ)n
λ for every n < ω and λ < κ.
(d) κ −→(κ)2
2.
Proof. (a) →(b). Inaccessibility is a consequence of weak compactness. To
establish the tree property a typical compactness argument can be used: Let
⟨T, <T ⟩be a κ-tree. To each t ∈T associate a propositional (0-ary predicate)
symbol Pt, and consider the collection of Lκω sentences consisting of: disjunc-
tions {Pt | t is at the αth level of T } for α < κ, and ¬(Pt ∧Pt′) for <T -
incomparable t, t′ ∈T . Since T has height κ, this collection of κ sentences is
κ-satisﬁable. Hence by weak compactness, it is satisﬁable, say by a model M.
{t ∈T | M |= Pt} is then a coﬁnal branch through T .
(b) →(c) follows from 7.7, and (c) →(d) is immediate. To complete the
proof, it will be convenient to establish (d) →(b) →(a).
(d) →(b). Inaccessibility follows from 7.6. To establish the tree property,
let ⟨T, <T ⟩be a κ-tree. Since |T | = κ, it can be assumed that T = κ. If ξ < κ is
at a level ≥α, let πα(ξ) be its predecessor at level α (allowing πα(ξ) = ξ if ξ is
at the αth level). <T can be extended to a linear ordering ≺of κ by specifying
how it orders two <T -incomparable elements ξ, η as follows: Let α be the least
such that πα(ξ) ̸= πα(η), and deﬁne ξ ≺η iff πα(ξ) < πα(η).
Now deﬁne f : [κ]2 →2 by f (ξ, η) = 0 if ξ ≺η, and f (ξ, η) = 1 otherwise.
By κ −→(κ)2
2 let H ∈[κ]κ be homogeneous for f . Since every level of the
tree has cardinality less than κ, there is a ρα < κ such that if ρα < ξ and ξ ∈H
then ξ is at a level ≥α. By deﬁnition of ≺if two ordinals γ ≺δ are both at
levels ≥α, then πα(γ ) ≺πα(δ) or πα(γ ) = πα(δ). Hence, if f “[H]2 = {0}, then
⟨πα(ξ) | ρα < ξ ∧ξ ∈H⟩is non-≺-decreasing in ξ, and if f “[H]2 = {1}, then it
is non-≺-increasing. In either case there is a σα < κ and a bα such that if σα < ξ
and ξ ∈H, then πα(ξ) = bα. Clearly, ⟨bα | α < κ⟩is a coﬁnal branch since any
two bα’s have a common <T -successor.
(b) →(a).
The Extension Property (4.5) for weak compactness will be
veriﬁed. So, suppose that R ⊆Vκ; a transitive set X ̸= Vκ and an S ⊆X must

7. Partitions and Trees
77
be found so that ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩≺⟨X, ∈, S⟩. By the inaccessibility of κ and 6.1,
{α < κ | ⟨Vα, ∈, R ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩}
is closed unbounded in κ; let ⟨αξ | ξ < κ⟩be its increasing enumeration.
A tree ⟨T, <T ⟩is now deﬁned. Fix a complete set of Skolem functions (§0)
for ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩, and deﬁne Skolem hulls for any X ⊆Vκ in what follows as being
with respect to this particular set. For αξ < β < κ let
H(ξ, β) = the Skolem hull of Vαξ ∪{β} in ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩
so that
⟨Vαξ , ∈, R ∩Vαξ ⟩≺H(ξ, β) .
Deﬁne
H(ξ, β) ≈H(ξ, β) iff ξ = ξ and there is an isomorphism between the
two structures ﬁxing Vαξ and sending β to β .
Clearly, ≈is an equivalence relation, and so let [H(ξ, β)] denote the equivalence
class of H(ξ, β). The elements of our tree T are to be the [H(ξ, β)]’s. Finally,
set
[H(ξ, β)] <T [H(ξ, β)] iff
ξ < ξ, β ≤β, and H(ξ, β) is isomorphic
to the Skolem hull of Vαξ ∪{β} in H(ξ, β) .
That ⟨T, <T ⟩is indeed a tree is not difﬁcult to see; note that the ξth level of T is
{[H(ξ, β)] | αξ < β < κ}. That ⟨T, <T ⟩is a κ-tree follows from the inaccessibility
of κ, there being at most 2|Vαξ | < κ Skolem hulls up to isomorphism generated by
Vαξ ∪{x} for sets x.
Hence, by the tree property there is a κ-branch ⟨[H(ξ, βξ)] | ξ < κ⟩through
T . By deﬁnition of <T , whenever ξ ≤η < κ there is an elementary embedding
iξη: H(ξ, βξ) ≺H(η, βη) that ﬁxes Vαξ so that iξη(βξ) = βη. From the construc-
tion it is seen that ξ ≤η ≤ρ < κ implies that iξρ = iηρ ◦iξη. Thus, the direct
limit (§0) can be formed, and it is well-founded as cf(κ) > ω. The transitive
collapse (0.4) is then an elementary extension ⟨X, ∈, S⟩of ⟨Vκ, ∈, R⟩. Since the
βξ’s get identiﬁed together to correspond to an ordinal β ∈X such that β ≥κ,
⟨X, ∈, S⟩is as required.
⊣
The proof of (a) →(b) shows that weak compactness is equivalent to its
deﬁning property restricted to propositional logic for Lκω.
Be that as it may,
nowadays the roots of the concept in inﬁnitary languages are usually passed over
in favor of its more immediate formulations, particularly (b).
Just as K¨onig’s
lemma is the mathematical essence of the compactness property of Lωω, so the
tree property provides the gist of the generalization. Further tree-related equiv-
alences for weak compactness have been provided by Baumgartner [75: 123],
Shelah [79], Erd˝os-Hajnal-M´at´e-Rado [84: §31] (also due to Baumgartner), and

78
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
Todorˇcevi´c [87]. Harkening back to the efforts of Keisler-Tarski [64] (§4), much
of the interest has been in devising avowedly combinatorial proofs of the results
on the size of weakly compact cardinals.
The tree property, decoupled from inaccessibility and hence from the partition
property κ −→(κ)2
2, has come to be regarded as intrinsically interesting in its
own right, especially after the advent of forcing which led to relative consistency
results about accessible cardinals. That ω1 does not have the tree property is a
1934 result of Nathan Aronszajn, presented in Kurepa [35: 96] and acknowledged
(inaccurately) in Erd˝os-Tarski [43: 328]. A fellow student with Kurepa in Paris
at the time, Aronszajn may seem a shadowy ﬁgure in the annals of logic, but he
became well-known as a functional analyst (e.g. [52]). With but one paper [52a]
in set theory and on a topic unrelated to trees, it is a happenstance of mathematics
that his name has become commonplace in inﬁnite combinatorics:
A κ-Aronszajn tree is a κ-tree with no coﬁnal branch .
Hence, a κ-Aronszajn tree is simply a counterexample to the tree property for κ.
Note that if κ is singular, then there is a κ-Aronszajn tree: Let κ −{0} = 
α<γ Xα
be a disjoint union with γ < κ and |Xα| < κ for each α < γ , and consider ⟨κ, <T ⟩
where ξ <T ζ iff ξ < ζ and ξ, ζ ∈{0} ∪Xα for some α < γ . For regular κ,
uniformly thin κ-trees do have coﬁnal branches:
7.9 Proposition (Kurepa [35: 80]). Suppose that κ is regular, λ < κ, and ⟨T, <T ⟩
is a κ-tree each of whose levels has cardinality less than λ. Then ⟨T, <T ⟩has a
coﬁnal branch.
Proof. It can be assumed, by trimming the tree if necessary, that distinct members
at a limit level have a distinct <T -predecessors at some earlier level. It can further
be assumed that T = κ. Let Tα denote the αth level of the tree, so that |Tα| < λ.
The result is ﬁrst established assuming that λ is regular:
For each α < κ with cf(α) = λ, choose a ξα ∈Tα. Then for such α there
is an f (α) < α such that for any ξ ∈Tα −{ξα}, ξ and ξα have no common
<T -predecessor in Tf (α). Since {α < κ | cf(α) = λ} is stationary in κ, it has
(0.1(c)) a subset X unbounded in κ on which f is constant, say with value γ . It
follows from |Tγ | < κ that there is a Y ⊆X unbounded in κ such that one ﬁxed
member of Tγ is a <T -predecessor to every member of {ξα | α ∈Y}. But then,
{ξα | α ∈Y} is readily seen to be a chain in ⟨κ, <T ⟩, and hence it determines a
coﬁnal branch.
For singular λ < κ, there is a regular ν < λ so that Y = {α < κ | |Tα| < ν}
is unbounded in κ. By the previous argument, the subtree determined by 
α∈Y Tα
has a coﬁnal branch. But any such branch determines a coﬁnal branch through
the original tree.
⊣
Specker generalized Aronszajn’s original result under a cardinality assump-
tion.
A proof based on the elegant “minimal walk” construction of Stevo
Todorˇcevi´c is provided:

7. Partitions and Trees
79
7.10 Theorem (Aronszajn for κ = ω – Kurepa [35: 96]; Specker [49]). If κ is
regular and 2<κ = κ, then there is a κ+-Aronszajn tree.
Proof (Todorˇcevi´c [87]). For each α < κ+ let Cα be closed unbounded in α
of ordertype ≤κ; successor ordinals can be accommodated by just requiring
ξ ∈Cξ+1. Deﬁne ρβ: β →<ω[P(β)] for each β < κ+ as follows: For any
α < β, let βα
0 = β and βα
i+1 = min(Cβα
i −α) < βα
i until βα
n = α; then set
ρβ(α) = ⟨Cβα
i ∩α | i < n⟩.
Several properties are noted:
(i) If ξ < α < β < κ+, then there is a unique j ∈ω such that βξ
i = βα
i
for i ≤j and ξ ≤βξ
j+1 < α .
(ii) If ξ < α < β < κ+ and ρβ(ξ) and ρβ(α) have the same length n,
then for some j < n, Cβξ
j ∩ξ is a proper initial segment of Cβα
j ∩α .
(iii) If α < β < γ and ρβ(α) = ργ (α), then ρβ|α = ργ |α .
For (ii), take j as in (i); then βξ
j = βα
j and Cβξ
j ∩ξ is a proper initial segment
of Cβα
j ∩α as βξ
j+1 belongs to the latter set. For (iii), suppose that ξ < α. Let j
be maximal such that βξ
j = βα
j and γ ξ
j = γ α
j . Then for i ≤j, the consequence
Cβα
i ∩α = Cγ α
i ∩α of ρβ(α) = ργ (α) implies that Cβξ
i ∩ξ = Cγ ξ
i ∩ξ. Moreover,
βξ
j+1 < α or γ ξ
j+1 < α by (i). In either case, the consequence Cβα
j ∩α = Cγ α
j ∩α
of ρβ(α) = ργ (α) implies that βξ
j+1 = γ ξ
j+1, and thus that βξ
i = γ ξ
i for i > j.
Hence, ρβ(ξ) = ργ (ξ).
Set
T = {ρβ|α | α ≤β < κ+} .
Then ⟨T, ⊂⟩is a tree of height κ+ which is κ+-Aronszajn: First, if b were a coﬁnal
branch through T , then f =  b would be a function with domain κ+. Since the
ordertypes of the Cα’s are at most κ, there would be an X ⊆κ+ with |X| = κ+
and ﬁxed n ∈ω and ordinals ζ0, . . . , ζn−1 such that for any α ∈X, f (α) has
length n and its ith element has ordertype ζi. But then b could not have been a
branch by (ii).
To complete the proof, note that for any α < κ+ the deﬁnition of the ρβ’s
and (iii) imply that the αth level of T has cardinality at most
|{Cβ ∩α | α ≤β < κ+}| ≤κ<κ = κ
since 2<κ = κ and κ is regular.
⊣
The original constructions of κ+-Aronszajn trees ensured a further property
that has become pivotal in subsequent developments:
A κ-tree is special iff it is the union of fewer than κ antichains .

80
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
Clearly, a special κ-tree is a κ-Aronszajn tree. The Todorˇcevi´c construction also
provides special κ+-trees:
7.11 Exercise. With the hypotheses of 7.10, there is a special κ+-tree.
Hint. Modify the previous construction by taking instead ρβ: β →<ωκ given by
ρβ(α) = ⟨ot(Cβα
i ∩α) | i < n⟩,
and setting
T = {ρβ|(α + 1) | α < β < κ+} .
By (ii) above each ρβ is an injective function, so that for s ∈<ωκ,
As = { f ∈T | ∃α(dom( f ) = α + 1 ∧f (α) = s)}
is an antichain of ⟨T , ⊂⟩, and T = {As | s ∈<ωκ}.
⊣
In contrast, the ﬁrst inkling that cardinals ≤2ℵ0 can have the tree property
was provided by the following result.
7.12 Proposition (Silver [66, 71]). If κ is real-valued measurable, then κ has the
tree property.
This is a simple consequence of 7.9, as is later pointed out in context (16.4(c)).
Few other direct implications in ZFC about the tree property were established until
the late 1980’s. On the other hand, consistency results in the early 1970’s involving
large cardinals have considerably clariﬁed the possibilities at accessible cardinals
like ω2 (see The Tree Property in volume II).
Partitions of All Finite Subsets
Erd˝os, Hajnal, and Rado formulated a further partition relation that was to invite
the infusion of model-theoretic techniques more directly into the study of large
cardinals. Recall that for x ⊆On, [x]<ω = 
n∈ω[x]n. The following partition
relation ﬁrst occurred in Erd˝os-Hajnal [58: 113]:
β −→(α)<ω
δ
asserts that for any f : [β]<ω →δ there is an H ∈[β]α homogeneous for f :
| f “[H]n| ≤1 for every n ∈ω. In other words, for every n, H is homogeneous
for f |[β]n in the former sense. For α ≥ω,
the Erd˝os cardinal κ(α) is the least λ such that λ −→(α)<ω
2
.
Implicit in the use of this notation will be the assumption that there is some λ
such that λ −→(α)<ω
2 ; unlike for the ordinary partition relation, this cannot be

7. Partitions and Trees
81
established in ZFC (7.15(b)). Next, the ﬁxed points of the sequence of Erd˝os
cardinals are speciﬁed:
κ is Ramsey iff κ −→(κ)<ω
2
.
Thus, Ramsey cardinals are weakly compact. Historically, the ﬁrst comment
on these partition relations was the following, which showed that the term “Ram-
sey” is not altogether appropriate.
7.13 Exercise (Erd˝os-Rado [52: 435]). ω is not Ramsey.
Hint. f : [ω]<ω →2 given by f (k1, . . . , kn) = 0 if k1 ≤n, and = 1 otherwise,
has no inﬁnite homogeneous set.
⊣
The following proofs are typical of the early combinatorics:
7.14 Proposition. Suppose that α ≥ω. Then:
(a) If α < β, then κ(α) < κ(β).
(b) κ(α) is regular.
(c) κ is Ramsey iff for any γ < κ, κ −→(κ)<ω
γ .
Proof. (a) For each γ < κ(α) let fγ : [γ ]<ω →2 have no homogeneous set of
ordertype α. Deﬁne g: [κ(α)]<ω →2 by g(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = fξn(ξ1, . . . , ξn−1) (and =
0 for n = 1). If H is homogeneous for g, then for γ < κ(α) with γ ∈H, H ∩γ
is homogeneous for fγ and so has ordertype < α. Hence, H has ordertype ≤α,
and so κ(α) < κ(β).
(b) Assume to the contrary that κ(α) is singular.
Then there is a non-
decreasing function h: κ(α) →δ where δ < κ(α) and |h−1({γ })| < κ(α) for
each γ < δ. Let f : [δ]<ω →2 and fγ : [h−1({γ })]<ω →2 for γ < δ each have
no homogeneous set of ordertype α. Deﬁne g: [κ(α)]<ω →2 by
g(ξ1, . . . , ξn) =



0
if n = 2 and h(ξ1) = h(ξ2) ,
1
if n = 2 and h(ξ1) < h(ξ2) ,
fγ (ξ3, . . . , ξn)
if n > 2 and h(ξ1) = . . . = h(ξn) = γ ,
f (h(ξ3), . . . , h(ξn))
if n > 2 and h(ξ1) < . . . < h(ξn) ,
0
otherwise .
Let H ∈[κ(α)]α be homogeneous for g, and ρ1 and ρ2 the ﬁrst two elements
of H. Since α ≥ω, H = H−{ρ1, ρ2} also has ordertype α. If g“[H]2 = {0}, then
h“H = {γ } for some γ < δ, and using ρ1 and ρ2 as ξ1 and ξ2 in the third clause
of g it follows that H is homogeneous for fγ , a contradiction. If g“[H]2 = {1},
then h“H has ordertype α, and using ρ1 and ρ2 as ξ1 and ξ2 in the fourth clause of
g, it follows that h“H is homogeneous for f , also a contradiction. κ(α) is hence
regular.

82
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
(c) Suppose that f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ.
Deﬁne g: [κ]<ω →2
by: g(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 0 if n = 2m and f (ξ1, . . . , ξm) = f (ξm+1, . . . , ξn), and
g(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 1 otherwise. Let H ∈[κ]κ be homogeneous for g, and n = 2m.
Since γ < κ, there must be s, t ∈[H]m with max(s) < min(t) such that
f (s) =
f (t).
Thus, g(s ∪t) = 0 and so by homogeneity g“[H]n = {0}.
For any u, v ∈[H]m, if w ∈[H]m with max(u), max(v) < min(w), then
f (u) = f (w) = f (v). Hence H is homogeneous for f as well.
⊣
For cardinals α Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [65: §17] labored with combinatorial
methods to show that κ(α) must be large, but far better results were soon to
be achieved using model-theoretic techniques. The following basic result general-
izing 7.14(c) was ﬁrst established by these means; the proof given here is simpler
and based on an idea from Baumgartner-Galvin [78]:
7.15 Proposition (Silver [66]). Suppose that α ≥ω is a limit ordinal. Then:
(a) For any γ < κ(α), κ(α) −→(α)<ω
γ .
(b) κ(α) is inaccessible.
Proof. (a) Set κ = κ(α), and note ﬁrst that by the proof of 7.14(c), κ −→(α)<ω
t
for any t ∈ω.
Suppose now that f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ, and let g: [γ ]<ω →2 have no
homogeneous set of ordertype α. Deﬁne h: [κ]<ω →4 by setting h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) =
0 unless n = 2i3 j for some i, j > 0, in which case:
h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) =



0
if f (ξ1, . . . , ξi) = f (ξi+1, . . . , ξ2i) ,
1
if f (ξ1, . . . , ξi) > f (ξi+1, . . . , ξ2i) ,
2
if ⟨f (ξik+1, . . . , ξi(k+1)) | k < j⟩,
is an increasing enumeration of
j ordinals homogeneous for g , and
3
otherwise .
By the initial remark, there is an H ∈[κ]α homogeneous for h. If h“[H]<ω = {0},
then H is homogeneous for f , by the argument for 7.14(c). So, assume to the
contrary that for some n = 2i3 j, h“[H]n ̸= {0} to derive a contradiction:
Note ﬁrst that h“[H]n ̸= {1} also, else there would be an inﬁnite descending
sequence of ordinals. If ⟨ζβ | β < α⟩is the increasing enumeration of H, set
ηβ = f (ζiβ+1, . . . , ζi(β+1)) for every β < α, possible since α is a limit ordinal.
⟨ηβ | β < α⟩must be a strictly increasing sequence, since h“[H]n ̸= {0}, {1}. In
particular, for any natural number of form n = 2i3 j for arbitrary j > 0, it must also
be the case that h“[H]n ̸= {0}, {1}. It will now be established that h“[H]n = {2}
for every such n. This would imply that {ηβ | β < α} is homogeneous for g, since
every ﬁnite subset of it is, contradicting the choice of g and thereby completing
the proof.

7. Partitions and Trees
83
To do this for a given n = 2i3 j with j > 0, apply Ramsey’s Theorem 7.7
j times to get an inﬁnite W ⊆{ηβ | β < ω} homogeneous for every g|[γ ]k with
k < j. Let ηβ1 < . . . < ηβj be the ﬁrst j elements of W. Then h on any n-tuple
starting with
ζiβ1+1, . . . , ζi(β1+1), ζiβ2+1, . . . , ζi(β2+1), . . . , ζiβj+1, . . . , ζi(βj+1)
has value 2. Hence, h“[H]n = {2} by homogeneity.
(b) Since κ(α) is regular by 7.14(b), it remains to show that it is a strong
limit.
But if λ < κ yet 2λ ≥κ, then 7.4 for λ would imply that κ−→
/ (3)2
λ,
contradicting (a).
⊣
In contrast to 7.15(b), κ(α + n + 1) for α ≥ω and n < ω is a cardinal
accessible from κ(α); in the notation of 7.3, κ(α + n + 1) = bethn(κ(α))+ (S.
Thompson – see Drake [74: 221]).
The ﬁrst inkling that inaccessibility was involved at all was a special case
of 7.15(b) attributed to G´eza Fodor in Erd˝os-Hajnal [58: 125]. Erd˝os and Ha-
jnal also established that measurable cardinals are Ramsey. In their [62], they
essentially observed the simple 7.14(a), and pointed out how the result that the
least inaccessible cardinal is not measurable could thus have been deduced by
these straightforward means, a couple of years before the Hanf-Tarski result. This
would have been a considerable coup for the Hungarians and their partition cal-
culus, and one is left to speculate on how it was missed. Erd˝os was surely aware
of the problem from Erd˝os-Tarski [43], but the thrust of Erd˝os-Hajnal [58] was in
a different direction, and the Fodor result may have been regarded as anomalous
and peripheral. To be sure, this combinatorial approach falls far short of the Hanf
breakthrough, and does not even sufﬁce to establish that measurable cardinals are
Mahlo.
Further showing the model-theoretic approach to advantage Reinhardt and
Silver observed that even κ(ω) is larger than the least weakly compact cardinal:
7.16 Proposition (Reinhardt-Silver [65]). There is a totally indescribable cardinal
below κ(ω).
A proof of this result is sketched in the appropriate setting (9.18). Erd˝os
cardinals have since been generalized and shown to be large in natural hierarchical
terms (see Subtle Properties in volume II).
Using normality the Ramsey property of measurable cardinals was established
in a strong sense by Rowbottom:
7.17 Theorem (Rowbottom [64, 71]). Suppose that κ is measurable and U is a
normal ultraﬁlter over κ. Then if f : [κ]<ω →γ where γ < κ, there is a set in U
homogeneous for f .
Proof. If for each n ∈ω there were sets Xn ∈U homogeneous for f |[κ]n, then

n∈ω Xn ∈U would be as required. Thus, it sufﬁces to establish the following for

84
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
every n ∈ω: for any g: [κ]n →γ with γ < κ, there is a set in U homogeneous
for g.
Proceeding by induction, the n = 1 case is clear from the κ-completeness of
U. So, assume that the assertion holds for n ≥1, and suppose that g: [κ]n+1 →γ
where γ < κ. For each s ∈[κ]n deﬁne gs: κ →γ by:
gs(β) =
	 g(s ∪{β})
if max(s) < β ,
0
otherwise .
By κ-completeness, for each s ∈[κ]n there is a δs < γ and a Ys ∈U such
that gs“Ys = {δs}. By induction hypothesis, there is a ﬁxed δ < γ and a Z ∈
U such that s ∈[Z]n implies that δs = δ. Finally, by κ-completeness Zα =
{Ys | max(s) ≤α} ∈U for each α < κ, so that by normality H = Z ∩△α<κ Zα ∈
U.
The proof is completed by checking that g“[H]n+1 = {δ}: Suppose that
t ∈[H]n+1, written t = s ∪{β} where max(s) < β. Then g(t) = gs(β) = δs = δ
since β ∈Zmax(s) ⊆Ys and s ∈[Z]n.
⊣
7.18 Corollary (Erd˝os-Hajnal [58: 125]). Measurable cardinals are Ramsey.
⊣
Rowbottom also observed that the least Ramsey cardinal is not measurable;
this follows quickly from a typical indescribability argument:
7.19 Exercise. If κ is measurable and U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, then
{α < κ | α is Ramsey} ∈U .
Hint. There is a Π1
2 sentence ϕ such that κ is Ramsey iff ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩|= ϕ, so the
result follows from 6.5.
⊣
In the next section partitions of all ﬁnite subsets are correlated with model-
theoretic transfer principles, and drastic consequences for L are deduced.

8. Partitions and Structures
85
8. Partitions and Structures
Frederick Rowbottom, a student of Keisler at the University of Wisconsin, in-
vestigated partition properties of measurable cardinals in his doctoral dissertation
[64]. An important result of his appeared at the end of the previous section, and
here we pursue his main line of argument, based on a basic characterization of
model-theoretic transfer principles. With this conceptual breakthrough he was able
to derive substantial statements about the distance between L and V .
A structure A = ⟨A, R, . . .⟩for a countable ﬁrst-order language with a dis-
tinguished unary predicate interpreted by R ⊆A is of type ⟨κ, λ⟩iff |A| = κ and
|R| = λ.
⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨µ, ν⟩
iff whenever A is of type ⟨κ, λ⟩,
there is a B ≺A of type ⟨µ, ν⟩.
⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨µ, <ν⟩iff whenever A is of type ⟨κ, λ⟩, there is
a B ≺A of type ⟨µ, ρ⟩for some ρ < ν .
These are evidently strong, two-cardinal versions of the L¨owenheim-Skolem The-
orem. The transfer principle ⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨µ, ν⟩is known as Chang’s Conjecture
for the pairs (κ, λ), (µ, ν), after the attribution to Chen-Chung Chang in Vaught
[63: 309]. A test case was soon singled out:
Chang’s Conjecture is ⟨ω2, ω1⟩→
→⟨ω1, ω⟩.
Of course, this is equivalent to ⟨ω2, ω1⟩→→⟨ω1, <ω1⟩since an inﬁnite unary
predicate cannot have a ﬁnite counterpart in any elementary substructure. Gener-
ally speaking, the less stringent ⟨µ, <ν⟩formulation is more immediate for large
cardinal postulations, but further analysis can produce a range of ⟨µ, ν⟩conclu-
sions (cf. 8.5(b)).
Rowbottom established an equivalence between the model-theoretic →→con-
cept and partition relations somewhat different from the types that have been dis-
cussed. In a nice reversal, this major application preceded the introduction of the
partition symbol:
First, the square brackets partition relation
β −→[α]γ
δ
of Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [65: 144] asserts that for any f : [β]γ →δ there is an
H ∈[β]α such that f “[H]γ ̸= δ. That is, f on [H]γ omits at least one value,
a far weaker conclusion than for the ordinary partition relation.
As with that
relation the focus is mostly on the case γ < ω, although Erd˝os-Hajnal [66] was
able to establish with a clever use of the Axiom of Choice that κ−→
/ [κ]ω
κ for
any κ (23.13), a result that was to impose an ultimate limitation on large cardinal
hypotheses. The main incentives in the study of square bracket relations lie in the
investigation of their possible negations as strong combinatorial propositions (see
Erd˝os-Hajnal-M´at´e-Rado [84] and Todorˇcevi´c [87]).

86
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
The version
β −→[α]γ
δ,<η
asserts that for any f : [β]γ →δ there is an H ∈[β]α such that | f “[H]γ | < η.
Finally, as with the ordinary partition relation Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [65: 156]
considered stronger forms:
β −→[α]<ω
δ
asserts that for any f : [β]<ω →δ there is an H ∈[β]α such that f “[H]<ω ̸= δ,
and
β −→[α]<ω
δ,<η
has the analogous meaning.
The basic Rowbottom discovery can now be stated:
8.1 Theorem (Rowbottom [64, 71]). Suppose that κ ≥λ and κ ≥µ ≥ν > ω.
Then the following are equivalent:
(a) ⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨µ, < ν⟩.
(b) κ →[µ]<ω
λ,<ν.
Proof. In the forward direction, suppose that f : [κ]<ω →λ. Consider the structure
A = ⟨κ, λ, ∈, f |[κ]n⟩n∈ω .
By hypothesis, there is an H ∈[κ]µ with |λ ∩H| < ν such that
⟨H, λ ∩H, ∈, f |[H]n⟩n∈ω ≺A .
Clearly, this H is as desired.
For the converse, we Skolemize of course. Suppose that A = ⟨A, R, . . .⟩is
a structure of type ⟨κ, λ⟩; it can be assumed by relabeling that A = κ and R = λ.
Let {hn | n ∈ω} be a complete set of Skolem functions for A (§0), say with hn
k(n)-ary where k(n) ≤n. Deﬁne f : [κ]<ω →λ by
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) =
 hn(ξ1, . . . , ξk(n))
if this is less than λ , and
0
otherwise .
By (b), let H ∈[κ]µ be such that | f “[H]<ω| < ν, and set B = 
n hn“[H]k(n).
Then |B| = µ and B is the domain of a structure ⟨B, λ ∩B, . . .⟩≺A. Also,
|λ ∩B| < ν as λ ∩B ⊆f “[H]<ω, and the proof is complete.
⊣
It is a measure of modern sophistication that this characterization is nowadays
regarded as entirely straightforward, with the two statements considered synoptic;
of course, we are standing on the shoulders of Skolem [23].
Some forms of these transfer principles have simpler combinatorial equiva-
lences. In fact, before Erd˝os, Hajnal, and Rado developed their notations, they had
pondered ([65: 154]) the relation ω2 −→[ω1]2
ω1,<ω1 in connection with a problem

8. Partitions and Structures
87
of Ulam, a relation that turns out to be equivalent to Chang’s Conjecture. As an
aside, a generalization of this is established:
8.2 Proposition (Erd˝os-Hajnal [74: 275] for n = 2). For 1 < n < ω,
ωn −→[ω1]<ω
ω1,<ω1 iff
ωn −→[ω1]n
ω1,<ω1 .
In particular, Chang’s Conjecture holds iff ω2 −→[ω1]2
ω1,<ω1.
Proof. The following will be established for n ∈ω by induction:
(∗) For any f : [ωn]<ω →ω1, there is a g: [ωn]n →ω1 such that: for any
s ∈[ωn]<ω with |s| ≥n, there is a t ∈[s]n satisfying max( f “[s]<ω) ≤
g(t).
The proof would then be complete, since given such f with corresponding g, if
H ⊆ωn and g“[H]n is countable, then sup( f “[H]<ω) ≤sup(g“[H]n) < ω1 and
so f “[H]<ω is also countable.
(∗) for n = 0 is immediate, as [ω0]0 = {0} and so g(0) = sup(ran( f )) works.
Suppose next that (∗) holds for n, and f : [ωn+1]<ω →ω1. For α < ωn+1 let
pα: α →ωn be injective, and deﬁne fα: [ωn]<ω →ω1 by
fα(x) = max( f “[p−1
α (x) ∪{α}]<ω) .
By the induction hypothesis, let gα: [ωn]n →ω1 verify (∗) for fα. Finally, deﬁne
g: [ωn+1]n+1 →ω1 by
g(t) = gα(pα“(t −{α})) where α = max(t) .
If |s| ≥n + 1 where α = max(s), then
max( f “[s]<ω) = fα(pα“(s −{α})) ≤gα(y) for some y ∈[pα“(s −{α})]n
= g(t) where t = p−1
α (y) ∪{α} ,
and so the proof is complete.
⊣
The exponent here is best possible in the sense that with GCH, ωn −→
(ω2)n−1
ω1
by the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem 7.3. Todorˇcevi´c [94] established in 1991
that Chang’s Conjecture is in fact equivalent to ω2 −→[ω1]3
ω1; the exponent
here is best possible in the sense that with CH, 7.3 implies that ω2 −→(ω1)2
ω,
and so ω2 −→[ω1]2
ω1. Silver established in 1967 that if there is a κ satisfying
κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 , then there is a forcing extension in which Chang’s Conjecture
holds (see Kurepa’s Hypothesis and Chang’s Conjecture in volume II).
Rowbottom Cardinals
The conspicuous feature of measurable cardinals that concerned Rowbottom is the
following. For ω < ν < κ,

88
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
κ is ν-Rowbottom iff κ −→[κ]<ω
λ,<ν for any λ < κ , and
κ is Rowbottom iff κ is ω1-Rowbottom .
By 7.14(c), a Ramsey cardinal is Rowbottom.
Gaifman (see 9.1) and Rowbottom independently and almost concurrently
established the ﬁrst informative structural results about the incompatibility of large
cardinals with V = L. Whereas both Scott (5.5) and Gaifman made global use of
ultrapowers, Rowbottom showed how strong local conclusions can be derived from
partition properties alone. The following theorem typiﬁes his results; although
they were soon subsumed by the deﬁnitive work of Silver (§9), Gaifman and
Rowbottom were ﬁrst to make such remarkable statements about L and the low
levels of the cumulative hierarchy. The proof is notably short, beneﬁting somewhat
from hindsight:
8.3 Theorem (Rowbottom [64, 71]).
Suppose that there are κ > λ > ω and
κ ≥µ > ω such that ⟨κ, λ⟩→→⟨µ, < ω1⟩. (For instance, suppose that there
is a Rowbottom cardinal, or there is a κ satisfying κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 , or Chang’s
Conjecture ⟨ω2, ω1⟩→→⟨ω1, ω⟩holds.) Then ω1 is inaccessible in L, and so in
particular P(ω)L is countable.
Proof. It sufﬁces to show for any α < ω1 that P(α)L is countable, for then ω1
being regular must be inaccessible in L.
Given such an α, let
A = ⟨Lκ, Lλ, ∈, β⟩β≤α ,
a structure in a countable language. By hypothesis, there is a
B = ⟨X, R, ∈, β⟩β≤α ≺A
with |X| = µ and |R| < ω1. By 0.4, B has a transitive collapse T , and by 3.3(a),
T is of form
T = ⟨Lγ , S, ∈, β⟩β≤α
for some γ ≥µ. Let i be the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism, so that
i: T ≺A with i(β) = β for β ≤α. If x ∈P(α) ∩Lγ , this implies that i(x) = x,
and since P(α)L ⊆Lω1 ⊆Lλ, it follows that x ∈S by the elementarity of i. But
also P(α) ∩Lγ = P(α)L since γ ≥µ > ω, and so P(α)L ⊆S and is therefore
countable.
⊣
Historically, Rowbottom’s ﬁrst insight was the conclusion that any ordinal
deﬁnable in L (like |P(ω)|L, |P(P(ω))|L, and so forth) is countable.
As one might have guessed, the restriction to countable languages in 8.1
and 8.3 is not essential. Rowbottom made a general statement along the lines of
8.1 about getting homogeneous sets simultaneously for collections of functions
corresponding to many Skolem functions, and then observed that Ramsey cardi-

8. Partitions and Structures
89
nals provide the requisite strength. The following are useful variants with single
functions:
8.4 Theorem (Rowbottom [64, 71]). Suppose that ⟨A, R, . . .⟩, where R ⊆A, is
a structure for a (ﬁrst-order) language with less than ν non-logical symbols, and
|A| ≥κ and |R| = λ < κ. Assume that either
(a) λ<ν < κ and κ is ν-Rowbottom, or
(b) λ = ν is regular and κ −→[κ]<ω
ν,<ν.
Then there is a ⟨B, R ∩B, . . .⟩≺⟨A, R, . . .⟩such that |B| = κ and |R ∩B| < ν.
Proof. Assuming that A ⊇κ and R = λ by relabeling and following the proof
of 8.1, let {hα | α < ρ} be a complete set of Skolem functions for the language,
where ρ < ν and hα is k(α)-ary.
First assume (a). Let f be the function on [κ]<ω deﬁned by
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = {hα(ξ1, . . . , ξn) | α < ρ ∧n = k(α) ∧hα(ξ1, . . . , ξn) ∈λ} .
Thus |ran( f )| ≤λρ, and so there is an H ∈[κ]κ such that | f “[H]<ω| < ν. Set
B = 
α<ρ hα“[H]k(α). Then ⟨B, λ ∩B, . . .⟩≺⟨A, λ, . . .⟩, and
|λ ∩B| ≤| f “[H]<ω| < ρ · | f “[H]<ω| < ν .
Assuming (b) instead, deﬁne f on [κ]<ω from the f above by
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = sup( f (ξ1, . . . , ξn)) .
Then ran( f ) ⊆ν by the regularity of λ = ν. The argument can now be completed
as before, invoking the regularity of ν again to insure for the corresponding B
that |λ ∩B| < ν.
⊣
8.5 Corollary. Suppose that κ is a Ramsey cardinal. Then:
(a) For any inﬁnite α < κ, |P(α)L| = |α|, and so every uncountable regular
λ < κ is inaccessible in L.
(b) For any ν ≤λ < κ, ⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨κ, ν⟩.
Proof. (a) This follows from the proof of 8.3 using uncountable languages.
(b) Given a structure ⟨A, R, . . .⟩of type ⟨κ, λ⟩(in a countable language), let
S ∈[R]ν and consider the expansion ⟨A, R, . . . , x⟩x∈S. Applying 8.4 with its ν
replaced by ν+, this expansion has an elementary substructure
⟨B, R ∩B, . . . , bx⟩x∈S
such that |B| = κ and |R ∩B| ≤ν. But then, |R ∩B| = ν because of the bx’s,
and the reduct ⟨B, R ∩B, . . . ⟩to the original language is of type ⟨κ, ν⟩.
⊣
The postulation of Rowbottom cardinals marked a historic reversal, in that
it was designed for strong implications like 8.3 but does not appear to have sub-
stantial size consequences. The only evident constraint is the following:

90
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
8.6 Exercise. For any λ,
(a) λ+−→
/ [λ + 1]2
λ,<λ.
(b) λ −→
/
[λ]1
cf(λ),<cf(λ).
Hence, a ν-Rowbottom cardinal κ is either weakly inaccessible or has coﬁnality
less than ν.
Hint. (a) For each β < λ+ let fβ: β →λ be injective, and consider g: [λ+]2 →λ
deﬁned by: g(α, β) = fβ(α).
(b) Let ⟨γα | α < cf(κ)⟩be coﬁnal in κ, and consider h: λ →cf(λ) deﬁned
by: h(ξ) = the least α such that ξ < γα.
⊣
Karel Prikry showed that singular cardinals can exhibit strong partition prop-
erties:
8.7 Theorem (Prikry [70]).
Suppose that κ is a singular limit of measurable
cardinals. Then κ is cf(κ)+-Rowbottom.
Proof. Set ν = cf(κ), and let ⟨κα | α < ν⟩be the increasing enumeration of a set
closed unbounded in κ with κ0 = ν and κα+1 measurable for each α < ν. Let
Uα+1 be a normal ultraﬁlter over κα+1 for α < ν, and deﬁne D by:
X ∈D iff
X ⊆κ ∧∃β < ν∀α(β ≤α < ν →X ∩κα+1 ∈Uα+1) ,
so that D is a uniform ﬁlter over κ. For s ∈[κ]<ω set
type(s) = {⟨α, k⟩∈ν × ω | |s ∩(κα+1 −κα)| = k > 0} .
The following will be established:
(∗)
For any f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ there is an H ∈D such that:
for any s0, s1 ∈[H]<ω with type(s0) = type(s1), f (s0) = f (s1) .
With at most ν possibilities for type(s) it will follow that | f “[H]<ω| ≤ν, and
hence that κ is ν+-Rowbottom.
Consider for n ∈ω the assertion:
(∗)n
For any f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ there is an H ⊆κ such that:
(i)
for every κα+1 > γ , H ∩κα+1 ∈Uα+1 , and
(ii) for any s0, s1 ∈[H]<ω with type(s0) = type(s1) and
|type(s0)| = n, f (s0) = f (s1) .
If f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ and for each n ∈ω there is an Hn satisfying (∗)n for
f , then by (i), 
n Hn ∈D, and by (ii), (∗) is satisﬁed with H = 
n Hn. Thus,
it sufﬁces to establish (∗)n for every n ∈ω by induction:
(∗)0 holds vacuously, so proceeding to the inductive step, suppose that (∗)n
holds, and let f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ.
For α < ν with κα+1 > γ and
t ∈[κα]<ω, deﬁne ft: [κα+1]<ω →γ by: ft(u) = f (t ∪u). By 7.17 there is an
Xα
t ∈Uα+1 homogeneous for ft. For α < ν with κα+1 > γ , set

8. Partitions and Structures
91
Xα = {Xα
t | t ∈[κα]<ω} −κα
so that Xα ∈Uα+1 by κα+1-completeness.
Next, for any ⟨α, k⟩∈ν × ω deﬁne fα,k: [κ]<ω →γ by
fα,k(t) =



f (t ∪u)
if t ∈[κα]<ω, where u is some
(any) member of [Xα]k , and
0
otherwise .
fα,k is well-deﬁned by deﬁnition of Xα. Let Hα,k ⊆κ be for fα,k as provided by
(∗)n.
Finally, set
H = {Xα | α < ν ∧γ < κα+1} ∩{Hα,k | ⟨α, k⟩∈ν × ω} .
Then for κα+1 > γ, H ∩κα+1 ∈Uα+1 by ν+-completeness. Suppose now that
s0, s1 ∈[H]<ω with type(s0) = type(s1) and |type(s0)| = n +1. Let α be maximal
such that ⟨α, k⟩∈type(s0) for some k, and set s0 = t0 ∪u0 and s1 = t1 ∪u1 where
type(t0) = type(t1) with |type(t0)| = n and type(u0) = type(u1) = {⟨α, k⟩}. Then
f (s0) = fα,k(t0) = fα,k(t1) = f (s1), conﬁrming (∗)n+1 for f .
⊣
Prikry also showed that a measurable cardinal can be maintained a Rowbot-
tom cardinal while changing its coﬁnality to ω by forcing (18.6). However, the
following is a major question that has remained impenetrable.
8.8 Question. Can ωω be Rowbottom?
For related results, see 8.16 and remarks surrounding.
Several observations about how ν-Rowbottom cardinals constrain power set
cardinalities, although not difﬁcult, were made considerably later.
8.9 Proposition (Prikry [75]).
Suppose that 2<ν = κ and κ is a regular ν-
Rowbottom cardinal. Then for ν ≤λ < κ, 2λ = κ.
Proof. As ν < κ = cf(κ), there is a µ < ν such that 2µ = κ. Proceeding by
induction, suppose then that λ < κ and for µ ≤λ′ < λ, 2λ′ = κ. If λ is singular,
a well-known argument establishes that 2λ = κ: Let ⟨γα | α < cf(λ)⟩be coﬁnal
in λ, and for X ⊆λ let fX on cf(λ) be deﬁned by: fX(α) = X ∩γα. Then X ̸= Y
implies that fX ̸= fY, and so 2λ ≤(2<λ)cf(λ) = 2<λ = κ.
Suppose next that λ is regular. Similarly considering fX on λ for X ⊆λ
deﬁned by fX(α) = X ∩α, 2<λ = κ implies that there is a family F of 2λ
functions: λ →κ that are almost disjoint, i.e. for f ̸= g both in F, f (α) ̸= g(α)
for sufﬁciently large α < λ.
Assume now to the contrary that 2λ > κ. Since κ is regular, for each f ∈F
there is a δf < κ such that ran( f ) ⊆δf . Consequently, there is a δ < κ and
a G ⊆F with |G| = κ such that f ∈G implies that δf = δ.
Enumerating

92
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
G as ⟨fξ | ξ < κ⟩, deﬁne F: [κ]2 →λ by: F(ξ, ζ) = the least β such that
fξ(α) ̸= fζ(α) for β ≤α < λ. Since κ is ν-Rowbottom, there is an H ∈[κ]κ
such that |F“[H]2| < ν. Now λ is regular, and the assumption 2λ > κ together
with the hypothesis 2<ν = κ implies that ν ≤λ, and so γ = sup(F“[H]2) < λ.
But then, { fξ(γ ) | ξ ∈H} consists of κ ordinals all less than λ, which is a
contradiction.
⊣
It follows that if 2ν is ν+-Rowbottom, then for ν ≤λ < 2ν, 2λ = 2ν. The
following result complements 8.9.
8.10 Proposition (Tryba [86]). Suppose that 2<ν < κ, and κ is ν-Rowbottom.
Then κ is a strong limit cardinal.
Proof. Assume to the contrary that λ < κ yet 2λ ≥κ. Arguing as for 8.1, let
⟨M, ∈⟩≺⟨Vκ+ω, ∈⟩be such that |M| = κ = |M ∩κ| and |M ∩λ| < ν. Let
N be the transitive collapse of M, and j: ⟨N, ∈⟩≺⟨Vκ+ω, ∈⟩the inverse of the
collapsing isomorphism, so that j(κ) = κ and j(δ) = λ for some δ < ν. By
assumption there is an injection: κ →P(λ) in Vκ+ω, and so there is an injection:
κ →P(δ) in N. But this contradicts the hypothesis 2<ν < κ.
⊣
In particular, if ωω is Rowbottom and 2ℵ0 < ωω, then ωω is a strong limit car-
dinal. Further results along these lines appear in Tryba [86]. A similar argument
establishes the following:
8.11 Exercise (Tryba [81]). If κ is ν-Rowbottom and there is a limit cardinal µ
such that ν ≤µ < κ, then κ is a limit of limit cardinals.
Hint. Assume to the contrary that λ is the largest limit cardinal less than κ. Let
j: ⟨N, ∈⟩≺⟨Vκ+ω, ∈⟩be as in the proof of 8.10 for this λ. Now note that µ is a
limit cardinal in M to derive a contradiction.
⊣
It follows that ωω+ω is not Rowbottom, and in fact the least Rowbottom car-
dinal > ωω is ≥ωω·ω. Hypothesizing that µ is an inaccessible cardinal, a Mahlo
cardinal, etc., lead to analogous results about the size of κ. Also, the same means
establish that if κ is ν-Rowbottom and ων < κ, then κ = ωκ.
Little else is known about ν-Rowbottom cardinals combinatorially or consist-
ency-wise which is not already a consequence of a related concept, to which we
now turn.
J´onsson Cardinals
An initiative from a different quarter completed the transition from the study
of ordinary partition relations to the consideration of an intrinsically interesting
algebraic problem. Bjarni J´onsson, a student of Tarski and a prime exponent of
transﬁnite universal algebra, posed in 1962 the following problem (see J´onsson
[72: 3.9] for the context): For a cardinal κ, does every algebra of cardinality κ

8. Partitions and Structures
93
have a proper subalgebra of the same cardinality? Here, an algebra is a structure
A = ⟨A, fn⟩n∈ω where for each n, fn: [A]k(n) →A for some k(n) ∈ω; and a
subalgebra of it is a structure of form A0 = ⟨A0, fn|[A0]k(n)⟩n∈ω where A0 ⊆
A and fn“[A0]k(n) ⊆A0. Thus, these are standard model-theoretic notions for
a countable language with only function symbols. J´onsson queried speciﬁcally
about algebras with only ﬁnitely many operations, but the difference is inessential
because of coding. A J´onsson algebra is an algebra without a proper subalgebra
of the same cardinality. A J´onsson cardinal is one that has no J´onsson algebras
of that cardinality, or stated afﬁrmatively,
κ is J´onsson iff every algebra of cardinality κ has a
proper subalgebra of the same cardinality .
J´onsson’s problem is thus: Are there any J´onsson cardinals?
As with Rowbottom cardinals, J´onsson cardinals were characterized combi-
natorially and model-theoretically:
8.12 Exercise (Erd˝os-Hajnal [66] for (b), Keisler-Rowbottom [65] for (c)). The
following are equivalent:
(a) κ is J´onsson.
(b) κ −→[κ]<ω
κ .
(c) Any structure for a countable ﬁrst-order language with domain of cardi-
nality κ has a proper elementary substructure with domain of the same cardinality.
Hint. For (a) →(b), if f : [κ]<ω →κ, consider the algebra A = ⟨κ, f |[κ]n⟩n∈ω.
(b) →(c) is as for 8.1.
⊣
Keisler and Rowbottom thus saw that if κ is ν-Rowbottom for some ν < κ,
then κ is J´onsson. By Skolemizing, they were able to incorporate predicates and
elementary substructures into J´onsson’s problem, and establish an extension of
Scott’s original result on L:
8.13 Proposition (Keisler-Rowbottom [65]). If there is a J´onsson cardinal, then
V ̸= L.
Proof. Let κ be J´onsson, and by 8.12(c) let ⟨B, ∈⟩≺⟨Lκ, ∈⟩with |B| = κ and
B ̸= Lκ. By 0.4, ⟨B, ∈⟩has a transitive collapse, and by 3.3(a), it must be ⟨Lκ, ∈⟩.
Let i: Lκ ≺Lκ then be the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism. Since B ̸= Lκ,
i cannot be the identity and so has a critical point δ by the argument for 5.1(b).
Now deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ∈P(δ)L ∧δ ∈i(X) .
Since P(δ)L ⊆Lδ+ ⊆Lκ, if V = L, then (cf. 5.6) U is a δ-complete ultraﬁlter
over δ and hence that δ is a measurable cardinal. But this contradicts Scott’s result
5.5.
⊣

94
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
The conclusion here is weaker than for 8.3, but in any case these results
were soon to be subsumed by the incisive work of Kunen (21.4) who showed that
the strongest conclusions in this direction can be derived from these hypotheses.
He also showed (20.23) that it is consistent with the existence of a measurable
cardinal that a cardinal is J´onsson iff it is Ramsey. However, even less is known
in ZFC about the size of J´onsson cardinals than of Rowbottom cardinals, and
this has become a major area of investigation; the initial observations were the
following:
8.14 Proposition.
(a) ω is not J´onsson.
(b) (Chang, Rowbottom, Erd˝os-Hajnal [66]) If κ is not J´onsson, neither is
κ+.
(c) (Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [65: 145]) If 2κ = κ+, then κ+ −→
/ [κ+]2
κ+ and hence
κ+ is not J´onsson.
(d) (Rowbottom – Devlin [73: 311]) The least J´onsson cardinal is either
weakly inaccessible or singular of coﬁnality ω.
Proof. (a) If f ∈ωω is deﬁned by f (0) = 0 and f (n) = n −1 otherwise, then
⟨ω, f ⟩is a J´onsson algebra.
(b) For κ ≤α < κ+, using a bijection let fα witness α−→
/ [κ]<ω
α . Deﬁne
g: [κ+]<ω →κ+ by: g(s) = fα(s −{α}) if α = max(s) ≥κ, and g(s) =
0 otherwise.
Then g witnesses κ+−→
/ [κ+]<ω
κ+ : If X ∈[κ+]κ+ and β < κ+
is arbitrary, let α ∈X such that β < α and |X ∩α| = κ.
Then for some
t ∈[X ∩α]<ω, β = fα(t) = g(t⌢{α}).
(c) Using 2κ = κ+ let {Xα | κ ≤α < κ+} = [κ+]κ with Xα ⊆α. Then there
is an f : [κ+]2 →κ+ so that for any κ ≤β < κ+,
(∗)
if κ ≤α < β and η < β, there is a ξ ∈Xα such that f (ξ, β) = η .
To show this, for such β let {⟨αi, ηi⟩| i < κ} = {⟨α, η⟩| κ ≤α < β ∧η < β},
recursively deﬁne {ξi | i < κ} so that ξi ∈Xαi −{ξj | j < i}, and then stipulate
that f satisfy f (ξi, β) = ηi for each i < κ.
To verify that f witnesses κ+−→
/ [κ+]2
κ+, let S ∈[κ+]κ+ and η < κ+ be
arbitrary. Take any α < κ+ so that Xα ⊆S, and let β ∈S −(max({η, α}) + 1).
Then (∗) implies that there is a ξ ∈Xα such that f (ξ, β) = η.
(d) Suppose that κ is the least J´onsson cardinal. Then κ is an uncountable
limit cardinal by (a) and (b), so assume to the contrary that ω < cf(κ) = λ < κ.
Let ⟨µα | α < λ⟩be an increasing sequence of cardinals closed and unbounded
in κ with λ < µ0. For each α < λ let fα witness µα−→
/ [µα]<ω
µα , and deﬁne
f : [κ]<ω →κ by:
f (s) =
 fα(s −{α})
if α = min(s) < λ and max(s) < µα , and
0
otherwise .

8. Partitions and Structures
95
Also, let g: [κ]<ω →κ be any extension of a function witnessing λ−→
/ [λ]<ω
λ ,
and let h: κ →λ be deﬁned by h(ξ) = that α such that µα ≤ξ < µα+1.
We shall show that
⟨κ, f |[κ]n, g|[κ]n, h⟩n∈ω
is a J´onsson algebra, arriving at a contradiction. So, suppose that X ∈[κ]κ is the
domain of a subalgebra. |X ∩λ| = λ because of h, and so X ∩λ = λ because
of g.
Assume now that ξ < κ is arbitrary.
Let α0 < λ such that ξ < µα0,
and by recursion choose αn ≤αn+1 < λ such that |X ∩µαn+1| ≥µαn.
Set
β = sup({αn | n ∈ω}) so that β < λ as λ = cf(κ) > ω. Then |X ∩µβ| = µβ
since the µα’s form a closed set of ordinals. Hence, fβ“[(X ∩µβ) −λ]<ω = µβ,
and so by deﬁnition of f and the fact that β ∈λ = X ∩λ, ξ ∈X. Hence X = κ,
and with this contradiction the proof is complete.
⊣
The proof of (b) was considerably elaborated by Shelah [80] to show that
there is a J´onsson algebra of cardinality ℵ1 which is a group, answering an old
question of Kurosh.
Eugene Kleinberg observed that J´onsson cardinals have Rowbottom-like prop-
erties:
8.15 Proposition (Kleinberg [73]).
(a) If κ is J´onsson, then there is an α < κ such that κ −→[κ]<ω
α . If δ is the
least such α, then δ is regular and κ −→[κ]<ω
δ,<δ.
(b) If κ −→[κ]<ω
λ
and λ is not J´onsson, then κ −→[κ]<ω
λ,<λ.
(c) The least J´onsson cardinal κ is ν-Rowbottom for some ν < κ; in fact, ν
can be taken to be the δ of (a) for the J´onsson cardinal.
Proof. (a) Assume that for each α < κ, there is an fα: [κ]<ω →α witnessing
κ−→
/ [κ]<ω
α . Then it is simple to check that f : [κ]<ω →κ deﬁned by f (s) =
fα(s −{α}) where α = min(s) (and f (∅) = 0) witnesses κ−→
/ [κ]<ω
κ , which is a
contradiction.
To verify the assertion about δ, it sufﬁces to show that κ −→[κ]<ω
cf(δ),<cf(δ).
So, assume to the contrary that this has a counterexample g.
Let e: cf(δ) →
δ be coﬁnal, and fα for α < δ as above.
Deﬁne h: [κ]<ω →δ by setting
h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 0 unless n = 2i3 j for some i, j > 0, in which case
h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = fe(g(ξ1,...,ξi))(ξi+1, . . . , ξi+ j) .
Then it is straightforward to check that h witnesses κ−→
/ [κ]<ω
δ , which is a con-
tradiction.
(b) We shall verify that ⟨κ, λ⟩→
→⟨κ, <λ⟩(cf. 8.1). So suppose that S =
⟨A, R, . . .⟩is a structure of type ⟨κ, λ⟩where it can be assumed that A = κ and
R = λ, and let g be any function: [κ]<ω →κ extending a function witnessing
λ−→
/ [λ]<ω
λ . Expand S to a structure A = ⟨κ, λ, . . . , g|[κ]n⟩n∈ω, and deﬁne a
function f : [κ]<ω →λ just as for 8.1 from a complete set of Skolem functions

96
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
{hn | n ∈ω} for A. By hypothesis there is an H ∈[κ]κ such that f “[H]<ω ̸= λ.
Set A0 = 
n hn“[H]k(n), so that
A0 = ⟨A0, λ ∩A0, . . . , g|[A0]n⟩n∈ω ≺A .
If |λ∩A0| = λ, then λ∩A0 = λ because of g, contradicting f “[H]<ω ̸= λ. Hence,
the reduct of A0 to the original language without g is an elementary substructure
of S of type ⟨κ, ρ⟩for some ρ < λ.
(c) This follows in a straightforward manner from (a) and (b).
⊣
By 8.14(a)(b), ωω is ostensibly the least possibility for a J´onsson cardinal.
Whether this can be realized is unresolved, and is essentially the same question
as 8.8 by 8.15(c) and the proof of the next result, which will be deferred until our
forcing context has been established (10.18).
8.16 Theorem (Kleinberg [72, 79]). The following theories are equiconsistent:
(a) ZFC + ∃κ(κ is Rowbottom).
(b) ZFC + ∃κ(κ is J´onsson).
Devlin [73] also observed with simple forcing arguments that: (i) Con (ZFC
+ ∃κ(κ is J´onsson)) implies Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is J´onsson ∧κ ≤2ℵ0)), and (ii)
Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is Ramsey)) implies Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is J´onsson) + ⌈the least
J´onsson cardinal is not Rowbottom⌉). Then Silver in 1974 established with an
elegant argument that if ωω is J´onsson and 2ℵ0 < ωω, then ωω is measurable in
an inner model (see Kanamori-Magidor [78: 129ff] for a proof).
After this work, save for a paper Shelah [78] there was a hiatus in the study
of J´onsson cardinals per se until a resurgence of interest in the 1980’s. Then
developments in inner model theory established that the existence of accessible
J´onsson cardinals has substantial large cardinal consequences. Extending results
of Donder-Koepke [83], Koepke [88] showed for example that if there is a J´onsson
cardinal κ such that κ = ωξ for some ξ < κ or κ is regular but not κ-Mahlo, then
for any λ there is an inner model with λ measurable cardinals. He also showed
that Prikry’s 8.7 is sharp in consistency strength for uncountable coﬁnalities: if
there is a J´onsson cardinal κ such that ω < cf(κ) < κ, then there is an inner model
with cf(κ) measurable cardinals. Then Koepke [89] established that the existence
of a successor J´onsson cardinal, the most acute possibility, has far stronger con-
sequences than having many measurable cardinals. This complemented important
developments concerning such J´onsson cardinals:
First came the following observation:
8.17 Proposition (Tryba [84], Woodin). Suppose that λ is regular and there is an
S stationary in λ such that S ∩α is not stationary in α for any limit ordinal α < λ.
Then λ is not J´onsson. In particular, if κ is regular, then κ+ is not J´onsson.
Proof. By a well-known result of Solovay that will be later established in context
(16.9) there is a partition S = 
η<λ Sη of S into disjoint stationary sets Sη.

8. Partitions and Structures
97
Let f : S →λ be deﬁned by:
f (ξ) = that η such that ξ ∈Sη.
Next, let
⟨A, ∈⟩≺⟨Vλ+ω, ∈⟩with λ ∪{S, f } ⊆A and |A| = λ, and g: λ →A a bijection.
Now consider the structure
A = ⟨A, ∈, {S}, f, g⟩.
Because of g, whenever B = ⟨B, ∈, {S}, f |B, g|B⟩≺A, |B| = λ iff |B ∩λ| = λ,
and B = A iff λ ⊆B. So, to establish that λ is not J´onsson it sufﬁces to show
by 8.12(c) that for such B, |B ∩λ| = λ implies that λ ⊆B:
Let C = {ξ < λ | sup(B ∩ξ) = ξ}, a set closed unbounded in λ since
|B ∩λ| = λ. Then C ∩S ⊆B: Assume to the contrary that ξ ∈(C ∩S) −B.
Let α be the least member of B ∩λ above ξ. Then α must be a limit ordinal
as ⟨B, ∈⟩≺⟨Vλ+ω, ∈⟩implies that B is closed under ordinal predecessors. So
S ∈B, ⟨B, ∈⟩≺⟨Vλ+ω, ∈⟩, and the hypothesis on S imply that there is a D ∈B
such that D is closed unbounded in α in the sense of B and D ∩S = ∅. But then,
ξ ∈C and sup(B ∩α) = ξ implies that D ∩B ∩ξ is unbounded in ξ, reaching
the contradiction ξ ∈D ∩S.
For any η < λ, it follows that C ∩Sη ⊆B, and since C ∩Sη ̸= ∅, there is a
ξ ∈Sη ∩B. But then, g(ξ) = η ∈B. Hence, λ ⊆B.
The last assertion follows by taking S = {α < κ+ | cf(α) = κ}: For any limit
β < κ+ there is a set closed unbounded in β consisting of ordinals of coﬁnality
less than κ, so that S ∩β is not stationary in β.
⊣
With some elegant combinatorics, Todorˇcevi´c improved this to the denial of
a partition relation for pairs:
8.18 Theorem (Todorˇcevi´c [87: 285]). Suppose that λ is regular and there is an S
stationary in λ such that S ∩α is not stationary in α for any limit ordinal α < λ.
Then λ−→
/ [λ]2
λ. In particular, if κ is regular, then κ+−→
/ [κ+]2
κ+.
Note that this considerably strengthens the implications 4.6(a) and 7.8(d) from
weak compactness. It also shows that the assumption 2κ = κ+ is unnecessary in
8.14(c) when κ is regular. Whether or not ω1−→
/ [ω1]2
ω1 had been a prominent
problem of inﬁnitary combinatorics for two decades (see Problem 15, Erd˝os-Hajnal
[71]).
The question of whether κ+ can be J´onsson when κ is singular (without
assuming 2κ = κ+) remained, and seemed quite difﬁcult. Although Shelah [78]
and Tryba [86, 87] imposed several constraints, the focal case κ = ωω seemed
destined to be resolved eventually by a positive consistency result relative to some
strong hypothesis. So, it was somewhat unexpected when Shelah established in
1988 that unless a singular cardinal κ satisﬁes some stringent conditions, κ+ is
not J´onsson. This was one of the many fruits of Shelah’s rich pcf theory for the
study of powers of singular cardinals; see Burke-Magidor [90] or Jech [92] for an
exposition. The following theorem is illustrative; the hypothesis can be weakened
further.

98
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
8.19 Theorem (Shelah). Suppose that a singular cardinal κ is not the limit of
regular J´onsson cardinals. Then κ+ is not J´onsson. In particular, ωω+1 is not
J´onsson.
Todorˇcevi´c also reﬁned this to the partition relation for pairs; see Burke-
Magidor [90: 224].
8.20 Theorem (Todorˇcevi´c). Suppose that a singular cardinal κ is not the limit
of regular cardinals λ satisfying λ −→[λ]2
λ. Then κ+−→
/ [κ+]2
κ+. In particular,
ωω+1−→
/ [ωω+1]2
ωω+1.
The overall question still remains open:
8.21 Question. If κ is singular, does κ+−→
/ [κ+]2
κ+?
As was elaborated in some detail, interest in combinatorial ramiﬁcations of
Rowbottom’s work has persisted to the present day, primarily because of the
enticing possibility that strong partition properties can obtain in the low levels
of the cumulative hierarchy.
We now return to the mid-1960’s, and Silver’s
dramatic ampliﬁcation concerning L based on a concept that was just coming into
prominence: set of indiscernibles for a structure.

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
99
9. Indiscernibles and 0#
Jack Silver was ﬁrst a student at Berkeley and then joined its faculty in the 1960’s,
a time of great activity there in set theory. His remarkable results on 0# (“zero
sharp”) appeared in his 1966 dissertation [66], rivaled only by Kunen’s (see §19)
of a couple of years later for its impact on the development of set theory. This
section is devoted to Silver’s results. §14 discusses the deﬁnability of 0# and
related issues about the forcing method, a line of inquiry concurrently initiated
by Solovay. He and Silver independently isolated 0# in the context of Silver’s
analysis of L.
Silver was motivated by and extended the groundbreaking work of Gaifman.
A student of Tarski, Gaifman wrote his 1962 Berkeley dissertation on Boolean
algebras. Soon afterwards, he had turned to an altogether different subject, and
established a strong extension of Scott’s result on the incompatibility of measurable
cardinals and V = L:
9.1 Theorem (Gaifman [64]). Suppose that there is a measurable cardinal. Then:
(a) There is a closed unbounded class C ⊆{α | Lα ≺L} such that for
any inﬁnite β, there is an α > β with |α| = |β| and α ∈C. This implies that
|P(x)L| = |x| for any inﬁnite x ∈L.
(b) There is an a ⊆ω such that in L[a], C is a deﬁnable class and (a) holds.
This implies that arbitrarily large cardinals in L are no longer cardinals in L[a].
⊣
Gaifman achieved these results using his method of iterated ultrapowers, a
method to be further exploited by Kunen (§19). With (a) Gaifman had indepen-
dently derived Rowbottom’s local conclusion 8.5(a), but moreover had shown for
the ﬁrst time that drastic global consequences hold for L in the presence of a
measurable cardinal. Gaifman was not far away from some of Silver’s results
on 0#: 0# is a subset of ω satisfying (b), and it uniquely determines a closed
unbounded class satisfying (a); beyond that, it incorporates a speciﬁc generating
scheme for L. The existence of 0# was a genuinely new structural principle, and
its isolation established the intrinsic necessity of large cardinals for transcendence
over L.
The story of 0# begins in model theory. Investigating the problem of getting
models of theories with a large number of automorphisms, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht
and Mostowski developed the concept of indiscernibility, and brought Ramsey’s
theorem 7.7 into model-theoretic prominence. For M a structure and X a subset
of the domain of M linearly ordered by < (not necessarily a relation of M),
⟨X, <⟩is a set of indiscernibles for M iff for every formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) in the
language of M and x1 < . . . < xn and y1 < . . . < yn all in X,
M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff
M |= ϕ[y1, . . . , yn] .
That is, for each n ∈ω all increasing n-tuples from X have the same ﬁrst-order
properties in M. Variants on this terminology, e.g. with ⟨X, <⟩replaced by X

100
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
when the < is clear, should be unambiguous.
The following became a basic
ingredient of several important results:
9.2 Theorem (Ehrenfeucht-Mostowski [56]).
Suppose that T is a theory with
inﬁnite models and ⟨X, <⟩is a linearly ordered set. Then there is a model M of
T such that X is included in its domain and is a set of indiscernibles for M.
Proof. Expand the language of T by introducing new constants cx for each x ∈X
and consider the theory T = T ∪{cx ̸= cy | x ̸= y both in X}∪{ϕ(cx1, . . . , cxn) ↔
ϕ(cy1, . . . , cyn) | ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) is a formula in the language of T and x1 < . . . < xn
and y1 < . . . < yn all in X}. It sufﬁces to show that T is consistent, which by
the Compactness Theorem amounts to showing that every ﬁnite subset of T is
satisﬁable.
Assume then that S ⊆T is ﬁnite. Let A be an inﬁnite model of T , and
{ai | i ∈ω} distinct members of the domain of A. Let m be the number of new
constants appearing among the members of S, and for k ≤m deﬁne fk on [ω]k
by:
fk(i1, . . . , ik) = {ϕ(v1, . . . , vk) |
ϕ(cx1, . . . , cxk) ↔ϕ(cy1, . . . , cyk) ∈S ∧A |= ϕ[ai1, . . . , aik]} .
Since S is ﬁnite, the range of fk is ﬁnite, so applying Ramsey’s Theorem 7.7 m
times there is an H ∈[ω]ω homogeneous for each fk. Hence, A satisﬁes S with
any m elements of {ai | i ∈H} assigned to the new constants appearing in S in
corresponding increasing order.
⊣
Actually, Ramsey’s original application [30] of the ﬁnite version of his theo-
rem was essentially to get indiscernibles in a ﬁnite model context. Michael Morley
[65, 65a] drew attention to 9.2 by applying it to derive important results in model
theory. Since its proof proceeds by a compactness argument, it gives little infor-
mation about the resulting model. Silver pointed out that strong partition relations
directly provide indiscernibles for structures:
9.3 Theorem (Silver [66, 71]). For inﬁnite limit ordinals α, κ −→(α)<ω
2
iff for
any structure M for a countable language with κ a subset of its domain, there is
a set of indiscernibles X ∈[κ]α for M.
Proof. Let {ϕn | n ∈ω} enumerate the formulas of the language so that ϕn has
at most the variables v1, . . . , vk(n) free where k(n) ≤n. Deﬁne f : [κ]<ω →2
by:
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 0 if M |= ϕn[ξ1, . . . , ξk(n)], and f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 1 other-
wise. Then any set homogeneous for f with ordertype a limit ordinal is a set of
indiscernibles for M.
Conversely, suppose that f : [κ]<ω →2 and X is a set of indiscernibles for
the structure ⟨κ, ∈, f |[κ]n⟩n∈ω. Then X is homogeneous for f .
⊣

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
101
Silver realized that because of the uniformity of the constructible hierarchy
L, if a sufﬁciently rich structure had enough ordinal indiscernibles, the theory of
the structure fueled by the class of ordinals in the role of indiscernibles can be
used to generate L. This harkens back to G¨odel’s original impredicative use of
the class of ordinals to construct L by extending type theory, but the indiscernible
generation shifts the weight of the construction squarely on the theory and leads
to striking consequences about the distance between V and L.
Silver’s work is now cast into a series of lemmata that highlight the conse-
quences of the various conditions leading to 0#. An observation of later signiﬁ-
cance is that these results do not depend on the Axiom of Choice, and how each
apparent use can be avoided is described at its juncture.
By 3.3(a) there is a formula ϕ0(v0, v1) that deﬁnes in L a well-ordering <L
of L such that: for any limit δ > ω and x, y ∈Lδ, x <L y iff Lδ |= ϕ0[x, y].
For each formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vm) of L∈, deﬁne the canonical Skolem term tϕ for ϕ
using ϕ0 as follows:
tϕ(v1, . . . , vm) = v0 iff
(∀vm+2¬ϕ(vm+2, v1, . . . , vm) ∧v0 = ∅) ∨
(ϕ(v0, v1, . . . , vm) ∧∀vm+1(ϕ0(vm+1, v0) →¬ϕ(vm+1, v1, . . . , vm))) .
For any M = ⟨M, E⟩satisfying the requisite well-ordering properties with ϕ0
(e.g. M is elementarily equivalent to some ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩with δ a limit ordinal > ω),
the corresponding expansion
⟨M, E, tM
ϕ ⟩ϕ
can be considered where the well-deﬁned interpretation tM
ϕ
is a Skolem function
for ϕ such that tM
ϕ (x1, . . . , xm) is the least y according to ϕ0 satisfying M |=
ϕ[y, x1, . . . , xm] when one exists. Note that {tM
ϕ
| ϕ is a formula of L∈} is already
closed under functional composition by deﬁnability, and hence is a complete set
of Skolem functions for M. Consequently, for X ⊆M the Skolem hull of X in
M can be taken to be well-deﬁned, with domain
{tM
ϕ (x1, . . . , xm) | ϕ is a formula of L∈and x1, . . . , xm ∈X} .
This set is canonical: It coincides with the collection of those x ∈M such that {x}
is deﬁnable over M using parameters from X, since that collection is included in
any elementary substructure of M that includes X.
By Skolem term is meant one of the tϕ’s in this section
although their speciﬁc form will not matter until they are taken up again in sub-
sequent sections.
Theories with indiscernibles are considered next. Let L∗
∈be L∈augmented
by constants {ck | k ∈ω}. By an EM blueprint (for Ehrenfeucht-Mostowski) is
meant the theory in L∗
∈of some structure
⟨Lδ, ∈, xk⟩k∈ω

102
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
where δ is a limit ordinal > ω and {xk | k ∈ω} is a set of ordinal indiscernibles
for ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩indexed in increasing order. A basic observation is that for any limit
ordinal δ > ω, any inﬁnite set of ordinal indiscernibles for ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩uniquely deter-
mines an EM blueprint: just take the theory of ⟨Lδ, ∈, xk⟩k∈ω for any increasing
subsequence ⟨xk | k ∈ω⟩of the indiscernibles.
For a theory T in L∗
∈, let T −denote its restriction to L∈, i.e. those sentences
of T with no occurrence of any ck.
9.4 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM blueprint. Then for any α there is a model
M = M(T, α) of T −unique up to isomorphism such that:
(a) There is a set X of ordinals in the sense of M of ordertype α (under
M’s ordinal ordering) that constitutes a set of indiscernibles for M. Moreover,
for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) of L∈an increasing n-tuple from X satisﬁes ϕ in
M exactly when ϕ(c0, . . . , cn−1) ∈T .
(b) The Skolem hull of X in M is again M.
Proof.
By deﬁnition of EM blueprint, T has at least one inﬁnite model.
So,
the proof of 9.2 shows that there is a model satisfying (a). Taking the Skolem
hull of the indiscernibles in this model results in a model M that also satisﬁes
(b). (Suppose that the usual Henkin construction for the Completeness Theorem
had been used for getting the model satisfying (a), using the language Lα
∈with a
constant for each member of α. Then the resulting “term” model already satisﬁes
(b), and no appeal to the Axiom of Choice is necessary as the terms of Lα
∈inherit
a well-ordering from α.)
Suppose next that there were two such models, M and M, with correspond-
ing sets of indiscernibles X and X. Since X and X have ordertype α, let h: X →X
be the order isomorphism. Then h extends to an isomorphism between M and
M: By (b), any element of M is of form tM(x1, . . . , xn) for some Skolem term
t and x1, . . . , xn in X, and similarly for M and X. Hence, it sufﬁces to show that
the map ˜h given by
˜h(tM(x1, . . . , xn)) = tM(h(x1), . . . , h(xn))
is an isomorphism: For any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and increasing n-tuple ⟨x1, . . . ,
xn⟩drawn from X,
M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff
ϕ(c0, . . . , cn−1) ∈T
iff
M |= ϕ[h(x1), . . . , h(xn)] .
Skolem terms are deﬁnable, so using particular formulas asserting the equality of
Skolem terms it can be checked that ˜h is well-deﬁned, i.e. does not depend on the
term descriptions, and that it is injective. Similarly, it preserves membership, and
clearly it is surjective.
⊣
Particularly portentous is when M(T, α) is well-founded; it then has a tran-
sitive collapse, which must be of the form ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩by 3.3(a). In that case,

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
103
M(T, α) is identiﬁed with ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩.
By a standing convention ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩is usually denoted by Lδ.
9.5 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM blueprint. Then M(T, α) is well-founded
for every α iff
(I)
M(T, α) is well-founded for every α < ω1 .
Proof. Assume that for some α, M(T, α) = ⟨M, E⟩is ill-founded. Let
⟨ai | i ∈ω⟩∈ωM with ai+1 E ai for every i ∈ω .
(This does not require the Axiom of Choice as ⟨M, E⟩inherits a well-ordering
from α, and so such a sequence is deﬁnable by recursion.) Each ai is of form
t⟨M,E⟩(x1, . . . , xj) for some Skolem term t and indiscernibles x1, . . . , xj, so let Y
be the countable set consisting of the indiscernibles involved in these terms. If N
is the Skolem hull of Y in M(T, α), then N is ill-founded, yet N ∼= M(T, β)
where β < ω1 is the ordertype of Y.
⊣
This result motivates the use of a strong partition property to produce EM
blueprints with arbitrarily large well-founded models:
9.6 Lemma. Suppose that there is a κ satisfying κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 . Then there is an
EM blueprint satisfying (I) of 9.5.
Proof. By 9.3, Lκ has an uncountable set of ordinal indiscernibles. Let T be
the corresponding EM blueprint. Then for any α < ω1, M(T, α) is well-founded
since it is isomorphic to the Skolem hull in Lκ of the ﬁrst α indiscernibles.
⊣
(I) already yields Rowbottom’s conclusion 8.3:
9.7 Lemma. If there is an EM blueprint satisfying (I), then P(ω)L is countable.
Proof. M(T, ω1) = Lδ for some δ ≥ω1, so that P(ω)L ⊆Lδ. In particular, if
a ∈P(ω)L, then a = t Lδ(x0, . . . , xn) for some Skolem term t and indiscernibles
x0 < . . . < xn. Let ⟨zi | i ∈ω⟩be the increasing enumeration of the ﬁrst ω
indiscernibles. Since each k ∈ω is deﬁnable,
k ∈t Lδ(x0, . . . , xn) iff
k ∈t Lδ(z0, . . . , zn)
and hence a = t Lδ(z0, . . . , zn). Since there are only countably many such forms,
P(ω)L is countable.
⊣
The hypothesis of 9.6 entails the existence of an EM blueprint satisfying two
further conditions, from which some remarkable conclusions can be drawn. On
the basis of its proof, specify that

104
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
(i) ρ is the least limit ordinal such that Lρ has a set of ordinal indis-
cernibles of ordertype ω1;
(ii) H is such a set of indiscernibles with the least possible ωth element;
and
(iii) T0 is the corresponding EM blueprint.
9.8 Lemma. The following condition holds for T = T0:
(II)
For any n-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cn−1) ∈On →t(c0, . . . , cn−1) < cn .
Proof. Assume to the contrary that
t(c0, . . . , cn−1) ∈On ∧cn ≤t(c0, . . . , cn−1)
is in T0 for some t. Let z0 < . . . < zn−1 be the ﬁrst n members of our ﬁxed set H of
indiscernibles for Lρ, and set H = H−{z0, . . . , zn−1} and δ = t Lρ(z0, . . . , zn−1) <
ρ. By our assumption and indiscernibility, H ⊆δ. Moreover, δ can be taken to
be a limit ordinal. (If δ = δ + k where k ∈ω, there are members of H below δ
and so cn ≤t(c0, . . . , cn−1) −k holds, and hence H ⊆δ.)
It will now be shown that H is a set of indiscernibles for Lδ, contradicting
the minimal choice of ρ: Suppose that x1 < . . . < xm and y1 < . . . < ym are all
in H. Then for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vm),
(∗)
Lδ |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xm]
is equivalent to Lρ |= ϕLδ[x1, . . . , xm], this relativization being possible as Lδ ⊆
Lρ are transitive. Noting that Lδ is deﬁnable in Lρ from δ (see Devlin [84: II§2])
and incorporating the deﬁnition of δ, (∗) is equivalent to
Lρ |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xm, z0, . . . , zn−1]
for some ϕ. Analogously,
Lδ |= ϕ[y1, . . . , ym] iff
Lρ |= ϕ[y1, . . . , ym, z0, . . . , zn−1] .
Hence, the indiscernibility of H for Lρ implies the indiscernibility of H for Lδ.
⊣
The following characterization is immediate:
9.9 Lemma. An EM blueprint T satisﬁes (II) of 9.8 iff for any inﬁnite limit ordinal
α, the set of indiscernibles corresponding to M(T, α) is coﬁnal in the ordinals of
the structure.
⊣
Rowbottom was involved in this work, particularly in connection with the
following further condition (Devlin [73: 195]; Silver [71: 77]):

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
105
9.10 Lemma. The following condition holds for T = T0:
(III)
For any (m + n + 1)-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cm+n) < cm →
t(c0, . . . , cm+n) = t(c0, . . . , cm−1, cm+n+1, . . . , cm+2n+1) .
Remark. This is known as the remarkable condition. By a simple indiscernibility
argument, the conclusion can be replaced by the self-reﬁnement
t(c0, . . . , cm+n) = t(c0, . . . , cm−1, ck1, . . . , ckn+1)
for any k1 < . . . < kn+1 with m ≤k1. Without further comment, this is how (III)
will be invoked.
Proof. It can be assumed that
t(c0, . . . , cm+n) < cm
is in T0.
Let H = {sξ | ξ < ω1} be a disjoint partition into sets consist-
ing of consecutive elements of H such that |s0| = m, and |sη| = n + 1 and
max(sξ) < min(sη) for 0 ≤ξ < η < ω1. Let t(s0, sξ) for 0 < ξ < ω1 denote
t Lρ(x0, . . . , xm−1, yξ
0, . . . , yξ
n), where s0 = {x0, . . . , xm−1} and sξ = {yξ
0, . . . , yξ
n}
in increasing order. It sufﬁces by indiscernibility to derive a contradiction from the
assumption that t(s0, sξ) ̸= t(s0, sη) for some (and hence any) 0 < ξ < η < ω1.
If t(s0, sξ) > t(s0, sη) for 0 < ξ < η < ω1, there would be an inﬁnite
descending sequence of ordinals. On the other hand, if t(s0, sξ) < t(s0, sη) for
0 < ξ < η < ω1 then it is simple to see that {t(s0, sξ) | 0 < ξ < ω1} would be a
set of indiscernibles for Lρ. However, the ﬁrst element yω
0 of sω is the ωth element
of H and t(s0, sω) < yω
0 by our initial assumption, contradicting the minimality
of the ωth element of H.
⊣
We now proceed to analyze those EM blueprints T that satisfy conditions
(I)–(III). For such a T and for any α, temporarily let
⟨ιT,α
ξ
| ξ < α⟩
denote the corresponding increasing sequence of indiscernibles for M(T, α). (III)
has the following primary consequence:
9.11 Lemma. If T is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III) and ω ≤α ≤β with α
a limit ordinal, then the Skolem hull of {ιT,β
ξ
| ξ < α} in M(T, β) is Lι, where
ι = ιT,β
α . Consequently,
M(T, α) = Lι and ιT,α
ξ
= ιT,β
ξ
for every ξ < α .
Proof. Let N be the stated Skolem hull. It sufﬁces to show that OnN = ιT,β
α , as
the second sentence follows from the deﬁnition and uniqueness of M(T, α). For

106
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
convenience, the superscripts T,β for the indiscernibles will be suppressed in what
follows.
If σ is an ordinal in N, then for some Skolem term t and ξ0 < . . . < ξn−1 < α,
σ = tM(T,β)(ιξ0, . . . , ιξn−1) < ιξn < ια
by (II) and as α is a limit. Conversely, if τ < ια, then
τ = uM(T,β)(ιζ0, . . . , ιζm−1, ιη0, . . . , ιηn) < ια
for some Skolem term u and indiscernibles in increasing order with ζm−1 < α ≤η0.
By (III),
τ = uM(T,β)(ιζ0, . . . , ιζm−1, ιζm−1+1, . . . , ιζm−1+n+1) ,
and this is in N as α is a limit ordinal.
⊣
Thus, for any EM blueprint T satisfying (I)–(III) and any ξ, unambiguously
set
ιT
ξ = ιT,α
ξ
for some (any) limit ordinal α > ξ , and
I T = {ιT
ξ | ξ ∈On} .
9.11 has a host of consequences:
9.12 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III). Then:
(a) LιT
ξ
≺LιT
ζ when ξ < ζ.
(b) |ιT
ξ | = |ξ| + ℵ0 for every ξ.
(c) I T is a closed unbounded class of ordinals.
(d) For any cardinal λ > ω, ιT
λ = λ ∈I T and so M(T, λ) = Lλ.
(e) T is the only EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III).
Proof. (a) for inﬁnite limit ordinals ξ < ζ follows directly from 9.11. Conse-
quently, it holds for arbitrary ξ < ζ by an indiscernibility argument within some
sufﬁciently large LιT
β .
If α is an inﬁnite limit ordinal, then LιT
α is the Skolem hull in itself of
{ιT
ξ | ξ < α} by 9.11. Hence, |ιT
α | = |α| and so (b) follows for every ξ. (c) also
follows, since {ιT
ξ | ξ < α} is coﬁnal in ιT
α by 9.9.
(d) is a consequence of (b) and (c).
Finally, for (e) note that T is the theory of ⟨Lωω, ∈, ωn+1⟩n∈ω by (d).
⊣
Assuming (a) and (d), L is the union of the elementary chain ⟨Lλ | λ > ω is
a cardinal⟩, so that the satisfaction relation for L can be deﬁned in ZFC by:
L |= ϕ[a1, . . . , an] iff Lλ |= ϕ[a1, . . . , an] for some (any)
λ > ω such that a1, . . . , an ∈Lλ .
In particular, a truth deﬁnition for L can be given by

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
107
L |= σ iff
Lω1 |= σ
for sentences σ.
Thus, the set of (G¨odel numbers of) sentences true in L is
constructible. It cannot be deﬁnable in L by the undeﬁnability of truth, but of
course (the real) ω1 being indiscernible is not deﬁnable in L. With the satisfaction
relation for L in hand, assertions like the following are directly formalizable in
ZFC.
9.13 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III). Then:
(a) LιT
ξ ≺L for every ξ.
(b) C is a closed unbounded class of ordinal indiscernibles for L such that
the Skolem hull of C in L is again L iff C = I T .
Proof. It is only necessary to verify the forward direction of (b): Note that C ∩I T
is inﬁnite, so that the EM blueprint corresponding to C is again T . Let h: C →I T
be the order-preserving bijection. It follows by the uniqueness argument for 9.4
that h extends to an isomorphism ˜h: L →L. But then, ˜h must be the identity
(else it would move some ordinal, removing it from the range). Hence, C = I T .
⊣
With 9.12(e) in hand, stipulate that
0# is that unique EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III)
if there is one, acceding to the accepted solecism
0# exists
for: There is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)–(III). Through a recursive arithmeti-
zation of L∗
∈, 0# is regarded as a subset of ω. While Silver had concentrated on
the theory, Solovay [67], the source of the # notation, emphasized its construal as
a subset of ω. The sense of “0# exists” will be clariﬁed by a later absoluteness
result (14.12) according to which the set 0# /∈L, yet remarkably there is a formula
that deﬁnes 0# in any model of ZF containing it. Dropping the superscript T in
9.12 and 9.13 by uniqueness, the following is a Hauptsatz summarizing Silver’s
results:
9.14 Theorem (Silver [66, 71]).
(a) 0# exists iff some Lδ has an uncountable set of indiscernibles. Hence, if
κ −→(ω1)<ω
2
for some κ (e.g. if κ is measurable), then 0# exists.
(b) 0# exists iff there is a class I of ordinals characterized by: I is a closed
unbounded class of indiscernibles for L such that the Skolem hull of I in L is
again L. Moreover, with ⟨ιξ | ξ ∈On⟩the increasing enumeration of I it has the
following properties: If ξ ≤ζ, then Lιξ ≺Lιζ ≺L and |ιξ| = |ξ| + ℵ0 so that I
contains every uncountable cardinal, and for any limit ordinal α ≥ω the Skolem
hull of {ιξ | ξ < α} in Lια is again Lια.
⊣

108
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
Thus, Gaifman’s 9.1 conclusions have been extended in an ultimate way:
the existence of 0# is an intrinsic principle that provides a complete scheme for
constructing L using one theory and a generating class of ordinal indiscernibles.
Silver also reduced Gaifman’s hypothesis to κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 . With the next result
he showed that this reduction is sharp in the hierarchy of Erd˝os cardinals:
9.15 Theorem (Silver [66, 70]). Suppose that M is an inner model of ZFC,
α < ωM
1 , and κ −→(α)<ω
δ . Then (κ −→(α)<ω
δ )M. Hence,
Con(ZFC + ∃κ∀α < ω1(κ −→(α)<ω
2 ))
implies
Con(ZFC + ∃κ∀α < ω1(κ −→(α)<ω
2 ) + 0# does not exist) .
Proof. Suppose that f : [κ]<ω →δ with f ∈M. A set in M of ordertype α must
be found homogeneous for f . Since α < ωM
1 , let g: ω →α be a bijection with
g ∈M. Set D = {d | d is an order-preserving injection: g“n →κ for some n,
whose range is homogeneous for f }, and deﬁne a partial ordering ≺on D by:
d ≺d iff d ⊃d.
Since g ∈M and (κ<ω)M = κ<ω, ⟨D, ≺⟩∈M.
It is
straightforward to see that the following is a theorem of ZFC:
≺is ill-founded iff there is a set of ordertype α homogeneous for f .
It thus follows that ≺is ill-founded in V . But then, ≺is ill-founded in M by
absoluteness (0.3), and hence the above theorem used in M yields the desired
result.
The last assertion follows from taking M = L; by 9.7 (there is no EM
blueprint satisfying (I))L.
⊣
Note that M need only model one theorem of ZFC of sufﬁcient strength to
carry out the foregoing argument, and that the superscript “<ω” can be replaced
by “n” for any particular n ∈ω.
There have been further developments in the study of combinatorial properties
that imply the existence of 0#. Kunen showed that if there is a J´onsson cardinal,
then 0# exists (21.4). Devlin-Paris [73] showed how to get 0# from a combinatorial
consequence of κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 . Baumgartner-Galvin [78] formulated a generalized
version of Erd˝os cardinals sensitive to the possible EM blueprints produced, and
provided sharp implications about 0# in their framework.
Finally, there is a straightforward way to get an equivalence, at the cost of
incorporating inner model hypotheses. For an inner model M,
η
M
−→(α)<ω
2
asserts that for every function f : [η]<ω →2 such that f ∈M, there is an X ∈[η]α
(not necessarily in M) homogeneous for f .

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
109
9.16 Exercise (Gloede [72: 153]). The following are equivalent:
(a) 0# exists.
(b) For every cardinal λ > ω, λ
L
−→(λ)<ω
2 .
(c) For some η, η
L
−→(ω1)<ω
2 .
⊣
If 0# does exist, it is not unexpected that there are consequences of large
cardinal character, especially about the indiscernibles {ιξ | ξ ∈On} themselves.
9.17 Theorem. Assume that 0# exists. Then:
(a) There is an elementary embedding: L ≺L.
(b) (ιξ is totally indescribable)L for every ξ.
(c) |P(x)L| = |x| for every inﬁnite x ∈L.
(d) (ιξ →(α)<ω
2 )L for every ξ and α < ωL
1 .
Proof. (a) Any order-preserving injection h from {ιξ| ξ ∈On} into itself extends
uniquely to an ˜h: L ≺L deﬁned by:
˜h(t L(ιξ1, . . . , ιξn)) = t L(h(ιξ1), . . . , h(ιξn))
(cf. the proof of 9.4).
Any such h which is not the identity thus induces an
elementary embedding that moves some ordinal.
(b) By indiscernibility, it sufﬁces to show that ι0 is totally indescribable in
L. Let h be any map as above such that h(ι0) > ι0. Then ι0 is the critical point
of ˜h: L ≺L: If δ = t L(ιξ1, . . . , ιξn) < ι0 with ξ1 < . . . < ξn, then
˜h(δ) = t L(h(ιξ1), . . . , h(ιξn)) = t L(ιξ1, . . . , ιξn) = δ
by (III). The argument for 6.6 now shows that ι0 must be totally indescribable in
L.
(c) By (b), the (real) cardinal |x|+ is inaccessible in L.
(d) It sufﬁces by indiscernibility to establish the property assuming that ιξ
is a cardinal λ > ω.
Suppose then that f : [λ]<ω →2 and f ∈L.
Then
f = t L(ιξ0, . . . , ιξm−1, ιζ0, . . . , ιζn) say, with the indiscernibles in increasing or-
der and ιξm−1 < λ = ιλ ≤ιζ0. By an indiscernibility argument it follows that
{ιξm−1+1+β | β ∈α} is homogeneous for f . Hence by 9.15, there is a homoge-
neous set in L of ordertype α.
⊣
Digressing brieﬂy, a proof of 7.16 is sketched as previously promised:
9.18 Exercise (Reinhardt-Silver [65]). There is a totally indescribable cardinal
below κ(ω).
Hint. Let κ = κ(ω), W a well-ordering of Vκ, and I0 a set of indiscernibles of
ordertype ω for ⟨Vκ, ∈, W⟩. Let H ≺Vκ be the Skolem hull of I0 in Vκ with
respect to Skolem functions deﬁned with W, H0 the transitive collapse of H, and e
the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism. Note that H0, H, and Vκ are all models

110
Chapter 2. Partition Properties
of ZFC since κ is inaccessible. As in the proof of 9.17(b), any order-preserving
injection h: I0 →I0 which is not the identity induces an elementary embedding
˜h: H0 ≺H0 whose critical point δ satisﬁes H0 |= δ is totally indescribable. But
then, e(δ) is totally indescribable, since it is so in H and hence in Vκ.
⊣
Sharps
The formulation of 0# for L can be relativized in a straightforward way to inner
models L[a] (§3) for sets a ⊆On to produce corresponding sets a# ⊆On. Hence,
# can be considered as an operation on sets of ordinals, with 0# for L = L[0].
Suppose that a is a set of ordinals, say with α = ∪a, which can be taken to be
inﬁnite to avoid trivialities. An EM blueprint for a is the theory of some structure
⟨Lδ[a], ∈, xk, a, ξ⟩k∈ω,ξ≤α
where δ > α is a limit ordinal and {xk | k ∈ω} is a set of ordinal indiscernibles
for ⟨Lδ[a], ∈, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α indexed in increasing order. To get an EM blueprint for
a satisfying (the analogues of) the conditions (I)–(III), uncountably many ordinal
indiscernibles are needed for a structure M for a language with |α| non-logical
symbols. For this purpose, instead of the special argument of 9.3, if {ϕζ | ζ < |α|}
enumerates the formulas of the language with ϕζ having at most the variables
v1, . . . , vk(ζ) free, the function
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn) = {ζ < |α| | k(ζ) ≤n ∧M |= ϕζ[ξ1, . . . , ξk(ζ)]}
can be used. Consequently, a cardinal κ satisfying the partition property
κ −→(ω1)<ω
2|α|
sufﬁces.
All further details go through with little change to procure a unique
EM blueprint a# satisfying (I)–(III) which through coding can be regarded as a
subset of |α|, and a corresponding closed unbounded class of ordinal indiscernibles
Ia for ⟨L[a], ∈, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α. a# for a ⊆ω hold the main interest because of the
intrinsic importance of the reals, construed here as subsets of ω. (From 14.16 on,
a shift is made to a# for reals a construed as members of ωω.) No excursion into
uncountable languages is then necessary:
9.19 Theorem. If κ −→(ω1)<ω
2
for some κ, then a# exists for every a ⊆ω.
⊣
The isolation of 0# was the culmination of a ﬂow of ideas from early efforts
in the partition calculus, through the infusion of model-theoretic techniques, to
the investigation of L. After Silver’s results on 0# together with Solovay’s on its
deﬁnability (§14) established its intrinsic importance, further results provided new
structural insights. Kunen soon showed (21.1) that the converse of 9.17(a) holds:
If there is an elementary embedding j: L ≺L, then 0# exists. This result provided

9. Indiscernibles and 0#
111
a simple paradigm for transcendence over inner models M, namely the existence
of an elementary embedding: M ≺M. Then in 1974, Jensen established his
celebrated Covering Theorem (see volume II), easily the most important result of
the 1970’s in set theory: 0# does not exist iff for any uncountable set X ⊆On,
there is a Y ∈L such that Y ⊇X and |Y| = |X|. Not only does this result
provide a surprisingly weak condition for the existence of 0#, but it implies in
the absence of 0# that some of the regular behavior of coﬁnalities in L lifts to
V . These results have buttressed the existence of 0# as the focal hypothesis of
transcendence over L.

Chapter 3
Forcing and Sets of Reals
This chapter describes the ﬁrst advances using Cohen’s method of forcing that
involved large cardinals and the ﬁrst applications of large cardinals in descriptive
set theory. Cohen’s creation transformed set theory, and large cardinal hypotheses
played an increasingly prominent role as a consequence. §10 discusses the devel-
opment of forcing, reviews the basic theory, and then focuses on mild extensions
and the Levy collapse. §11 is devoted to Solovay’s inspiring result that if there
is an inaccessible cardinal, then in an inner model of a forcing extension, every
set of reals is Lebesgue measurable. §12 reviews the historical development of
descriptive set theory and establish a working context, one in which the classical
results are established in §13 through to a delimitation established by G¨odel with
L. This sets the stage for the further results about large cardinals and projective
sets, a major direction of set-theoretic research from the mid-1960’s onwards.
§14 describes Solovay’s germinal work on Σ1
2 sets that grew out of his Lebesgue
measurability result, and his results and conjectures on the deﬁnability of sharps.
Then §15 describe how Martin used sharps to extend the methods of classical
descriptive set theory to the analysis of Σ1
3 sets.

114
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
10. Development of Forcing
In April of 1963 the analyst Paul Cohen of Stanford University circulated notes
sketching proofs of the independence of the Axiom of Choice from ZF and of
the Continuum Hypothesis from ZFC. These proofs, of course, were the inau-
gural examples of his technique of forcing for extending models of set theory.
Cohen lectured on his results on 3 May 1963 at the Institute for Advanced
Study, and then two articles [63, 64] on the CH result were quickly communi-
cated by G¨odel to the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A.,
where his own consistency results with L had appeared a quarter of a century
before.
Stirred by clear indications of a general procedure in Cohen’s breakthrough,
logicians close at hand soon developed the theory of forcing and began to es-
tablish further results with it. By mid-1963 Solomon Feferman at Stanford had
results in ﬁrst- and second-order arithmetic and on the Axiom of Choice, and ar-
riving there in the summer Levy quickly obtained further results elaborating AC.
Then two results displaying a notable sophistication were established at Princeton
University: William Easton’s [64, 70] in late 1963 on powers of regular cardi-
nals by class forcing, and Solovay’s [65b, 70] in mid-1964 that if there is an
inaccessible cardinal, then in an inner model of a forcing extension, every set of
reals is Lebesgue measurable. This preparatory section discusses the development
of the forcing method and sets the stage for its interplay with large cardinals,
especially toward Solovay’s result. See Moore [88] for more on the origins of
forcing.
Forcing provided a remarkably general and ﬂexible scheme with strong in-
tuitive underpinnings for establishing relative consistency and independence. Ac-
cording to Scott (Bell [85: ix]): “Set theory could never be the same after Cohen,
and there is simply no comparison whatsoever in the sophistication of our knowl-
edge about models of set theory today as contrasted to the pre-Cohen era.” In
retrospect one can point to precursors of forcing in the Beth semantics for intu-
itionistic logic (see Dummett [77: §5]); in the study of 2-valued homomorphisms
of Boolean-valued models (see Rasiowa-Sikorski [63: VIII]); in Stephen Kleene
and Emil Post’s argument for producing incomparable Turing degrees (see Ler-
man [83: II§2]); and especially in Clifford Spector’s two-quantiﬁer argument for
producing minimal Turing degrees (see Lerman [83: V§2]). However, Cohen was
unaware of these adumbrations and started with simple and basic intuitions. His
particular achievement lies in devising a concrete procedure for extending models
of set theory in a minimal fashion without altering the ordinals. Scott continued
(Bell [85: ix]):
I knew almost all the set-theoreticians of the day, and I think I can say that no one could
have guessed that the proof would have gone in just this way. Model-theoretic methods
had shown us how many non-standard models there were; but Cohen, starting from very
primitive ﬁrst principles, found the way to keep the models standard (that is, with a
well-ordered collection of ordinals).

10. Development of Forcing
115
Set theory had undergone a sea-change, and beyond how the subject was enriched,
it is difﬁcult to convey the strangeness of it.
Beyond his initial articles [63, 64] Cohen provided a further account [65] and
then a full exposition in the monograph [66] based on his lectures at Harvard
University in the spring of 1965. Later, he expressed his own philosophical views
on the foundations of set theory in a contribution [71] to the Axiomatic Set Theory
conference held during the summer of 1967 at the University of California at Los
Angeles (U.C.L.A.). By all accounts this was one of those rare, highly exhilarating
conferences that both summarized the progress and focused the energy of a new
ﬁeld opening up.
Cohen ﬁrst discussed and compared the realist and formalist positions in
mathematics. He considered ([71: 11ff]) that as regards the existence of a measur-
able cardinal “there seems absolutely no intuitively convincing evidence for either
rejection or acceptance.” Concerning CH he reckoned that it may well come to
be accepted as false ([71: 12]): “The justiﬁcation might be that the continuum,
which is given to us by the power set construction, is not accessible by any pro-
cess which attempts to build up cardinals from below by means of a construction
based on the Replacement Axiom. Thus C [i.e. 2ℵ0] would be considered greater
than ℵ1, ℵn, ℵω, etc.” Presumably then, 2ℵ0 would have to be weakly inaccessi-
ble. Cohen’s speculation here was from a realist perspective, one advocated more
directly in [66: 151].
Acknowledging the inﬂuence of Robinson [65], Cohen [71: 13] then came
down on the formalist side. He continued (p. 14):
Another example of how repeated exposure dulls the critical faculties is the Axiom of
Inaccessible Cardinals. The usual justiﬁcation given for assuming it is a negative one,
namely that it is unreasonable to think that every set is accessible. The analogy is drawn
with the passage from ﬁnite to inﬁnite sets. If one performs by induction a transﬁnite
sequence of suitable closure operations, it is argued, we can still go further and presumably
ﬁnd an inaccessible cardinal beyond. However, I feel that this is a specious argument,
since it tends rather to justify the existence of a standard model for set theory, which is an
incomparably weaker assertion. A more honest reason for accepting inaccessible cardinals
is that experience has shown that they do not lead to contradictions and we have developed
some kind of intuition that no such contradiction exists.
This point of view stands in distinct opposition to those of Zermelo [30](§1) and
G¨odel [47](§4).
Cohen’s concluding remarks notably anticipate later progress in large cardi-
nals, but are tempered by an undercurrent of doubt and uncertainty:
Yet mathematics may be likened to a Promethean labor, full of life, energy and great
wonder, yet containing the seed of an overwhelming self-doubt.
It is good that only
rarely do we pause to review the situation and to set down our thoughts on these deepest
questions. During the rest of our mathematical lives we watch and perhaps partake in
the glorious procession. Great questions of set theory that seemed untouchable eventually
yield. New axioms are investigated and larger and larger cardinals are somehow brought
closer to our intuition. Through all this, number theory stands as a shining beacon. If, as
I hope does not happen too often, our doubts begin to overpower us, we retreat back into
the safe conﬁnes of number theory until refreshed, we venture out again into the unsafe
ground of set theory. This is our fate, to live with doubts, to pursue a subject whose

116
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
absoluteness we are not certain of, in short to realize that the only “true” science is itself
of the same mortal, perhaps empirical, nature as all other human undertakings.
It is notable that in comments made two decades later, Cohen was to stress
the formal solution of the Continuum Problem, without further speculating on the
falsity of CH (Albers et al. [90: 54]):
Certainly G¨odel himself had the platonic view that the question demanded an absolute
answer and that, therefore, neither his proof of the consistency of the continuum hypothesis
with the axioms of set theory nor mine of its independence from them was the ﬁnal answer.
My personal view is that I regard the present solution of the problem as very satisfactory.
I think that it is the only possible solution. It gives one a feeling for what’s possible and
what’s impossible, and in that sense I feel that one should be very satisﬁed...There will be
philosophical papers, but I don’t think any mathematical paper will say that there is any
answer other than the answer that it’s undecidable.
Forcing was quickly forged into a general method, particularly by the efforts
of Solovay. He above all epitomized this period of great expansion in set the-
ory, with his mathematical sophistication and fundamental results with forcing,
in large cardinals, and in descriptive set theory. Following initial graduate study
in differential topology, Solovay focused his energies on set theory after attend-
ing Cohen’s 3 May 1963 lecture. He ﬁrst extended the independence of CH by
characterizing the possibilities for the size of the continuum ([63, 65]), and then
generalized forcing to arbitrary partial orders and dense sets. He next established
his Lebesgue measurability result during March-July 1964 ([70: 1]). Then with
Stanley Tennenbaum he worked out the iterated forcing proof of the consistency
of the classical Suslin Hypothesis in June 1965 (Solovay-Tennenbaum [71: 201]).
Complications in describing when a formula holds over a range of generic
extensions soon led Solovay to the idea of a Boolean value for the formula. It
turned out that Petr Vopˇenka had developed a similar concept in a reworking [64]
of the independence of CH. (Notably, this paper contains the remark that any
inaccessible κ can be made weakly but not strongly inaccessible by rendering
2ℵ0 ≥κ and preserving cardinals.) The conception was generalized and simpliﬁed
in a series of papers on the so-called ∇-models from the active Prague seminar
founded by Vopˇenka (see H´ajek [71: 78]), culminating in the exposition Vopˇenka
[67].
However, the earlier papers did not have much impact, partly because
of an involved formalism in which formulas were valued in a complete lattice
rather than Boolean algebra. Working independently, Scott and Solovay developed
the idea of recasting forcing entirely in terms of Boolean-valued models, and
came up with a formulation essentially equivalent to Vopˇenka’s. The method is
completely general, since any partial order can be “completed” in a natural way
to get a complete Boolean algebra. Scott popularized this approach in his own
reworking [67] of the independence of CH and in lecture notes distributed at the
1967 U.C.L.A. conference.
Boolean-valued models ﬁrst showed how to avoid Cohen’s ramiﬁed language
connection with the L hierarchy and his dependence on a countable ∈-model. With
their elegant algebraic trappings and seemingly more complete information, they

10. Development of Forcing
117
held the promise of being the right approach to independence results. J. Barkley
Rosser wrote a book on the subject entitled Simpliﬁed Independence Proofs [69],
and the initial iterated forcing paper Solovay-Tennenbaum [71] was written in
terms of Boolean-valued models.
But already at U.C.L.A., the lucid lectures
of Joseph Shoenﬁeld [71] had demonstrated that forcing with partial orders can
accommodate the gist of the Boolean approach in a straightforward manner. More-
over, Boolean-valued models were soon found to be too abstract and unintuitive
for establishing new consistency results, so that within a few years set theorists
were generally working with partially orders. It is a testament to Cohen’s concrete
approach that in this return from abstraction, even the use of ramiﬁed languages
has played an essential role in careful forcing arguments at the interface of recur-
sion theory and set theory.
During this period new set-theoretic results were being established at a bewil-
deringly fast pace, in the ﬁrst wave of applications of forcing and the coordinated
elaboration of large cardinals. A timely survey by Adrian Mathias, circulated in
typescript soon after the U.C.L.A. conference and eventually appearing as Mathias
[79], played an inﬂuential role in communicating and systematizing these devel-
opments. In particular, it was a vital source for graduate students at Berkeley who
were later to become prominent set theorists, like James Baumgartner, Richard
Laver, and William Mitchell.
Forcing Preliminaries
The basics about forcing through two-step iterations as presented in the texts Kunen
[80], Jech [78], or Bell [85] are assumed. By and large, the rather standard partial
order approach and terminology of the ﬁrst text is adopted; the Boolean-valued
approach is integrated into the second and prominent in the third. Anticipating the
wide-ranging use of forcing in volume II, the salient and sometimes distinctive
features are described in what follows:
For forcing purposes, a partial order (p.o.) is a partially ordered set ⟨P, ≤⟩
that has a maximum element denoted by 1l, and for p, q ∈P (the conditions)
p ≤q iff
p extends or reﬁnes q ,
i.e. less (in ≤) is more (informative). This conforms to the Boolean-valued ap-
proach and suggests that p allows fewer models than q. For simplicity ⟨P, ≤⟩is
usually denoted by P, but if there is a need to be speciﬁc, ≤P is written for ≤
and 1lP for 1l.
It is not necessary to assume that ≤is antisymmetric (see Kunen [80: 52ff])
and in iterated forcing arguments the naturally deﬁned orders are not. However,
for convenience in such situations
p and q are identiﬁed whenever p ≤q and q ≤p
(so that 1lP is the maximum element), effectively passing to a p.o. of equivalence
classes, but avoiding awkward notation.

118
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Set:
p ∥q iff p and q are compatible, i.e. ∃r(r ≤p ∧r ≤q) .
p ⊥q iff p and q are incompatible, i.e. ¬(p ∥q) .
For D ⊆P,
D is dense (in P) iff ∀p ∈P∃d ∈D(d ≤p) .
D is predense (in P) iff ∀p ∈P∃d ∈D(d ∥p) .
D is dense open (in P) iff D is dense ∧∀d ∈D∀p ∈P(p ≤d →p ∈D) .
D is an antichain (in P) iff ∀p, q ∈D(p ̸= q →p ⊥q) .
D is an antichain below p iff D is an antichain in {q | q ≤p} .
If D is either dense or a maximal antichain, then it is predense.
Suppose that M is a transitive ∈-model of ZFC. Then for any set x,
M[x] is the smallest transitive ∈-model of ZFC including M ∪{x},
assuming one exists. For a p.o. P ∈M and G ⊆P,
G is P-generic over M iff
(i) ∀p, q ∈G∃r ∈G(r ≤p ∧r ≤q) ,
(ii) ∀p ∈G∀q ∈P(p ≤q →q ∈G) , and
(iii) ∀D ⊆P (D dense in P ∧D ∈M →G ∩D ̸= ∅) .
Here, “dense” can be replaced by “predense”. For such G, it is simple to see that
for any maximal antichain A ⊆P with A ∈M, A ∩G has exactly one element;
more generally, if p ∈G and A is a maximal antichain below p with A ∈M,
then A∩G has exactly one element. In forcing arguments, M is the ground model
and M[G] the generic extension. Trivial p.o.’s leading to M = M[G] are allowed
to facilitate the statements and proofs of theorems.
No particular formalization of the forcing language is adopted, but the fol-
lowing are speciﬁed about the names (forcing terms): Names (or P-names if there
is a need to be speciﬁc) are denoted by dotted letters, like ˙t, and their interpreta-
tions in a generic extension M[G] by ˙tG or ˙t M[G]. This approach is taken with
terms deﬁnable in the language of set theory, e.g.
˙ω2 is a name for the second uncountable cardinal
in the generic extension. A basic observation is that a set x belongs to M[G]
iff x is deﬁnable in M[G] from G and ﬁnitely many elements of M, and hence
corresponds to a name. If x ∈M, then ˇx denotes the canonical name for x, so
that ˇxG = x for every P-generic G over M. As is customary, α is written instead
of ˇα for ordinals α ∈M, since ordinals are absolute for all generic extensions. ˙G
is the canonical name for the generic object, and ˇV the canonical name for the
ground model. By this means, the ground model can be considered a (deﬁnable)
class, and hence an inner model, in any generic extension.
The forcing relation for P is denoted by

10. Development of Forcing
119
p ∥-P ϕ ,
and
∥-P ϕ iff 1lP ∥-P ϕ , and
p ∥P ϕ iff p decides ϕ, i.e. p ∥-P ϕ or p ∥-P ¬ϕ .
The subscript P is suppressed when clear from the context, which should also
differentiate from ∥used for compatibility of conditions. Speciﬁc formulas ϕ are
rendered in mathematical English, only set apart by the Quinean quotes ⌈⌉when a
misreading is possible. ∥- is the standard, deductively closed relation, historically
called “weak forcing” and differing from Cohen’s original relation (see Kunen
[80: 235ff]). Among its well-known properties is the Maximal Principle:
If p ∥- ∃xϕ(x, ˙t1, . . . , ˙tn), then for some name ˙t, p ∥- ϕ(˙t, ˙t1, . . . , ˙tn) .
This requires the Axiom of Choice in the ground model and is crucial in several
arguments. Finally, the canonical names ˙G for the generic object and ˇV for the
ground model satisfy the following for any p, q ∈P and name ˙t, in conformance
with the recursive deﬁnition of the forcing relation for atomic formulas:
p ∥- ˇq ∈˙G iff
∀r ≤p∃s ≤r(s ≤q) .
p ∥- ˙t ∈ˇV
iff
∀r ≤p∃s ≤r∃x(s ∥- ˇx = ˙t) .
Forcing consistency results are usually stated syntactically, in terms of the
existence of a p.o. P so that for the desired assertion ϕ, ∥-P ϕ. This succinct
formulation makes the closest approach to the corresponding ﬁnitary relative con-
sistency result, as ∥-P σ for any ZFC axiom σ and ∥-P is deductively closed.
However, as is the usual practice proofs are often given semantically as foreshad-
owed by the discussion of transitive ∈-models, and corresponding to the syntactic
formulations V is regarded as the ground model and generic extensions V [G] are
“taken”. With this in mind,
P-generic means P-generic over V .
This of course runs counter to the Cantor-G¨odel view of the class V = {x | x = x}
as the universe of all sets, and the travesty is often compounded by talking of
extensions of V [G]. However, it is well-known that this semantic approach can
be regarded as merely une fac¸on de parler for formalizable arguments about forcing
relations, and it not only taps a vital source of intuitions about forcing but is often
the only way to render arguments intelligible.
An important feature of the theory is that generic extensions can be identiﬁed
through embeddings of the corresponding p.o.’s: For p.o.’s P and Q,
i: P →Q is a complete embedding iff
(i) ∀p, q ∈P(p ≤q →i(p) ≤i(q)) ,
(ii) ∀p, q ∈P(p ⊥q →i(p) ⊥i(q)) , and
(iii) if A is a maximal antichain in P ,
then i“A is a maximal antichain in Q .
i: P →Q is a dense embedding iff i satisﬁes (i) and (ii) above,
and i“P is dense in Q .

120
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
These deﬁnitions do not require i to be injective. A dense embedding is easily
seen to be complete.
P ∼= Q
asserts there is a a p.o. isomorphism: P →Q. Kunen [80: 218ff] has an equivalent
deﬁnition of “complete” and a proof of the following proposition. Toward its
statement, for X ⊆P set
i(X) = {q ∈Q | ∃p ∈X(i(p) ≤q)} .
10.1 Proposition. Suppose that i: P →Q is complete.
(a) If H is Q-generic, then i−1(H) is P-generic and so V [i−1(H)] ⊆V [H].
If i is dense, then i(i−1(H)) = H and so V [i−1(H)] = V [H].
(b) If i is dense and G is P-generic, then i(G) is Q-generic, i−1(i(G)) = G,
and so V [i(G)] = V [G].
⊣
The arguments are straightforward and the latter assertions follow from i ∈
V . Generic extensions are often identiﬁed using this result when P is actually
isomorphic to a dense subset of Q, but the basic process of passing to a separative
quotient (see Jech [03: 204ff]) uses the weaker hypotheses:
For a p.o. P,
P is separative iff
∀p, q ∈P(p ̸≤q →∃r ≤p(r ⊥q)) .
By and large, p.o.’s that occur in practice are separative, and the incentive behind
the concept is to insure a certain orderliness: separative p.o.’s are isomorphic to
a dense subset of their corresponding complete Boolean algebras, and are charac-
terized by a simple but useful observation:
10.2 Lemma. A p.o. P is separative iff ∀p, q ∈P(p ≤q ↔p ∥- ˇq ∈˙G).
⊣
For a p.o. P and p, q ∈P,
p ≈q iff
∀r ∈P(r ∥p ↔r ∥q) ,
and
[p] = {q | q ≈p} .
≈is an equivalence relation on P, and [p] the corresponding equivalence class
of p.
The separative quotient of P is P/≈= {[p] | p ∈P}
ordered by
[p] ≤[q] iff
∀r ∈P(r ≤p →r ∥q) .
By the following simple observation separative p.o.’s sufﬁce to get all generic
extensions:

10. Development of Forcing
121
10.3 Lemma. The map sending p to [p] is a dense embedding of P onto P/≈.
⊣
Familiarity is assumed with chain, closure, and density (distributivity) con-
ditions on p.o.’s and their salutary effects on generic extensions, but because of
some variance in usage deﬁnitions are given: For a p.o. P,
P has the κ-chain condition (κ-c.c.) iff
for any antichain A in P, |A| < κ .
P is κ-closed iff whenever γ < κ and {pα | α < γ } ⊆P
with pβ ≤pα for α < β < γ , there is a
p ∈P such that p ≤pα for every α < γ .
P is κ-Baire iff whenever γ < κ and Dα for each α < γ
is dense open, so is 
α<γ Dα .
These are all “less than κ” notions; κ+-Baire is also called κ-distributive because
of the connection with distributivity laws in Boolean algebras.
Familiarity is
assumed with how the κ-c.c is often deduced from a combinatorial fact known as
the ∆-system Lemma (see Kunen [80: 49ff]):
10.4 Proposition (ˇSanin [46] for λ = ω). Suppose that λ < κ, κ is regular, and
α < κ implies that α<λ < κ. If |A| = κ and x ∈A implies that |x| < λ, then
there is a B ⊆A with |B| = κ such that B forms a ∆-system, i.e.
there is an r such that for distinct x, y ∈B, x ∩y = r .
In particular, any uncountable set consisting of ﬁnite sets has an uncountable subset
that forms a ∆-system.
⊣
It is well known that chain conditions establish upper bounds on powers of
cardinals:
10.5 Proposition. Suppose that P is a p.o. with the κ-c.c., and for a given λ, set
θ = (|P|<κ)λ. Then
∥-P
⌈2λ ≤θ⌉.
⊣
To complete the review, what is assumed of iterated forcing, ﬁrst elaborated
by Solovay, is summarized starting with product forcing: Suppose that P and Q
are p.o.’s and consider the product p.o. P × Q ordered by
⟨p0, q0⟩≤⟨p1, q1⟩iff
p0 ≤P p1 ∧q0 ≤Q q1 .
Then forcing with P × Q is characterizable as an iteration (see Kunen [80: 252ff]
or Jech [03: 229ff]):
10.6 Proposition (Solovay [70]). G is P × Q-generic iff G = G0 × G1, where
G0 is P-generic, G1 is Q-generic over V [G0], and so V [G] = V [G0][G1].
⊣

122
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
More generally, products of many p.o.’s can be taken. Suppose that Pα is a
p.o. for every α < δ. For p ∈
α<δ Pα, deﬁne
supt(p) = {α < δ | p(α) ̸= 1lPα} ,
the support of p. Then the κ-product of ⟨Pα | α < δ⟩is
{p ∈
α<δ Pα | |supt(p)| < κ}
ordered by
p ≤q iff
∀α < δ(p(α) ≤Pα q(α)) .
For example, what is meant by “adding λ many Cohen reals” is forcing with the
ℵ0-product of λ copies of the p.o. for adding a Cohen real. The Easton product
of ⟨Pα | α < δ⟩is
{p ∈
α<δ Pα | ∀λ(λ regular →|supt(p) ∩λ| < λ)}
ordered coordinate-wise as before. This product was devised by Easton for the
ﬁrst forcing argument using a product of many p.o.’s, indeed a proper class of
them:
10.7 Theorem (Easton [64, 70]). Suppose that GCH holds and F is a class function
from the class of regular cardinals to the class of cardinals such that for regular
κ ≤λ: F(κ) ≤F(λ) and κ < cf(F(κ)). Then there is a generic extension
preserving cardinals and coﬁnalities in which 2κ = F(κ) for every regular κ.
⊣
The forcing was with the Easton product of ⟨Pα | α ∈On⟩with Pα the usual
notion for adjoining F(α) subsets of α if α is regular and trivial otherwise. The
following lemma played a crucial role in the product analysis.
10.8 Lemma. Suppose that P and Q are p.o.’s and λ is such that P has the
λ+-c.c. and Q is λ+-closed. If G is P × Q-generic over V with G = G0 × G1 as
in 10.6, then any f : λ →V in V [G] is in V [G0]. In particular, P(λ) ∩V [G] =
P(λ) ∩V [G0].
⊣
Of course, how to force with a proper class of conditions had to be worked
out as well. For details on this and product forcing in general, see Jech [03: §15].
10.7 completely solved the problem of determining the possible values of
F(κ) = 2κ for regular κ; the only restrictions are that F be non-decreasing and
consistent with the familiar K¨onig result: κ < cf(F(κ)). The Singular Cardi-
nals Problem is to determine the possible values of 2κ for singular κ, a much
more difﬁcult problem which is far from being solved. It is remarkable that large

10. Development of Forcing
123
cardinals are closely intertwined with this basic problem, and all the more remark-
able that their intervention turns out to be a necessary one (see volume II).
Suppose that one wants to force with a p.o. P to get V [G0] and then with a
p.o. ˙QG0, not necessarily in V , to get V [G0][G1]. Then one might as well assume
∥-P ˙Q is a p.o., and consider
P ∗˙Q = {⟨p, ˙q⟩| p ∈P ∧∥-P ˙q ∈˙Q}
ordered by
⟨p0, ˙q0⟩≤⟨p1, ˙q1⟩iff
p0 ≤P p1 ∧p0 ∥-P ˙q0 ≤˙Q ˙q1 .
As it stands, P ∗˙Q may be a proper class because of the possible ˙q’s, and ≤is
not antisymmetric, but according to previous remarks
⟨p0, ˙q0⟩and ⟨p1, ˙q1⟩are identiﬁed whenever ⟨p0, ˙q0⟩≤⟨p1, ˙q1⟩≤⟨p0, ˙q0⟩,
i.e. p0 = p1 ∧p0 ∥-P ˙q0 = ˙q1. In reasonable formalizations of names, there are
“set” many equivalence classes under this identiﬁcation, and natural representatives
can be chosen from each to comprise what should be meant by P ∗˙Q (Kunen
[80: 269]). Henceforth,
it is assumed that P ∗˙Q is a set
under such a contraction, but ⟨p, ˙q⟩will be used for its equivalence class to avoid
awkward notation. Under a natural identiﬁcation, every P-name is also considered
to be a P ∗˙Q-name. Moreover, after justifying p.o. isomorphisms like R ∼= P ∗˙Q,
such p.o.’s are often identiﬁed for notational convenience, even though they may
not be extensionally equal. Forcing with P ∗˙Q is characterizable as forcing ﬁrst
with P and then with ˙Q (see Kunen [80: 268ff] or Jech [03: 267ff]):
10.9 Proposition (Solovay-Tennenbaum [71]).
(a) Suppose that G0 is P-generic and G1 is ˙QG0-generic over V [G0]. Set
G0 ∗G1 = {⟨p, ˙q⟩∈P ∗˙Q | p ∈G0 ∧˙qG0 ∈G1} .
Then G0 ∗G1 is P ∗˙Q-generic and V [G0 ∗G1] = V [G0][G1].
(b) Conversely, suppose that G is P ∗˙Q-generic, and set
G0 = {p ∈P | ∃˙q(⟨p, ˙q⟩∈G)} , and
G1 = {˙qG0 | ∃p(⟨p, ˙q⟩∈G)} .
Then G0 is P-generic, G1 is ˙QG0-generic over V [G0], and G = G0 ∗G1.
⊣
10.6 is essentially the special case of this result where
˙Q is
ˇQ for some
Q ∈V , when P × Q is isomorphic to a dense subset of P ∗˙Q.
The following structure theorem applies 10.9(b) to show that every ZFC
model intermediate between the ground model and a generic extension is itself a

124
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
generic extension. This result about the generality of forcing has a natural proof in
terms of Boolean-valued models (see Jech [03: 247ff]) but may also be established
with partial orders.
10.10 Proposition. Suppose that R is a p.o., G is R-generic over V , and N is a
transitive ∈-model of ZFC such that V ⊆N ⊆V [G]. Then there is a p.o. P and
a P-name ˙Q such that ∥-P ˙Q is a p.o. with P ∗˙Q isomorphic to R so that, thus
identifying R with P ∗˙Q, if G0 is as in 10.9(b), V [G0] = N.
⊣
The initial observation here is that transitive ∈-models of ZFC are determined
by their sets of ordinals (see Jech [03: 196ff]) so that one can deduce that N = V [x]
for some x ⊆On. Serge Grigorieff [75] investigated the situation for ZF models
N.
10.9 was ﬁrst used in an argument that essentially established the consistency
of Martin’s Axiom together with ¬CH. This well-known axiom is brieﬂy reviewed:
For P a p.o., D a collection of dense subsets of P, and G ⊆P,
G is D-generic iff (i) ∀p, q ∈G∃r ∈G(r ≤p ∧r ≤q) ,
(ii) ∀p ∈G∀q ∈P(p ≤q →q ∈G) , and
(iii) ∀D ∈D(G ∩D ̸= ∅) .
For any κ, Martin’s Axiom for κ (MA(κ)) is:
If P is a p.o. satisfying the ω1-c.c. and D is a collection of at
most κ dense sets, then there is a G ⊆P which is D-generic.
Simply Martin’s Axiom (MA) is:
∀κ < 2ℵ0(MA(κ)) .
The clear motivation here is to justify internal generic objects when genericity is
restricted to small collections D ∈V of dense sets. It is well-known that MA(ω)
is a theorem of ZFC and that MA(2ℵ0) and MA with the ω1-c.c. restriction deleted
are both inconsistent.
10.11 Theorem (Solovay-Tennenbaum [71]). Suppose that κ is a cardinal sat-
isfying κ<κ = κ > ω. Then there is a ω1-c.c. p.o. P of cardinality κ such that
∥-P MA ∧2ℵ0 = κ.
⊣
In particular, starting with a model satisfying GCH, MA can be arranged
with 2ℵ0 any prescribed uncountable regular cardinal. For details on MA see Jech
[03: §16], or Kunen [80: II§2] where it is axiomatically presented before forcing
per se is discussed. Fremlin [84] is a portmanteau book on the consequences of
MA.

10. Development of Forcing
125
Mild Extensions
To test the waters, some straightforward observations about forcing and large
cardinals are discussed which, while not noticed at the outset, have a direct bearing
on G¨odel’s earlier speculations on the Continuum Problem (§3). Forcing provided
the means to show large cardinals do not decide the power of the continuum.
Cohen himself had noted ([64: 110]) that his argument for the independence of
CH preserves inaccessible and (“It seems probable”) Mahlo cardinals, and Levy
and Solovay showed that measurable cardinals are also preserved. In fact, their
argument is a generic one for showing that, by and large, large cardinals κ are
preserved in any mild extension, i.e. via a forcing with a p.o. of cardinality less
than κ. The following useful results pursue this theme through several cases:
10.12 Proposition.
Suppose that κ is inaccessible and P is a p.o. such that
|P| < κ. Then
∥-P κ is inaccessible .
Proof. This follows from the |P|+-c.c.: ∥- κ is regular, and 10.5 implies that ∥- κ
is a strong limit.
⊣
10.13 Proposition. Suppose that κ is Mahlo and P is a p.o. such that |P| < κ.
Then
∥-P κ is Mahlo .
The proof relies on a generally useful observation:
10.14 Lemma. Suppose that κ > ω is regular, P is a p.o. with the κ-c.c., p ∈P,
and p ∥- ˙C is closed unbounded in κ. Then there is a C0 closed unbounded in κ
such that p ∥- ˇC0 ⊆˙C.
Proof. For α < κ, set
Xα = {ξ < κ | ∃q ≤p(q ∥- ξ is the least member of ˙C −(α + 1))} .
By the κ-c.c., |Xα| < κ, so set f (α) = sup(Xα) < κ. Finally, let
C0 = {β < κ | ∀α < β( f (α) < β)} ,
a closed unbounded set.
To show that p ∥- ˇC0 ⊆˙C, assume to the contrary that there is a q ≤p and
a β ∈C0 such that q ∥- β /∈˙C. Then for some r ≤q and α < β, r ∥- α =
sup( ˙C ∩β). For some s ≤r and ξ ∈Xα, s ∥- ξ is the least member of ˙C −(α+1).
But ξ < β as β ∈C0, contradicting the choice of α.
⊣
Proof of 10.13. Suppose that p ∥- ˙C is closed unbounded in κ. By 10.12, if λ is
inaccessible and |P| < λ, then ∥- λ is inaccessible. Since κ is Mahlo, by 10.14
there are such λ < κ satisfying p ∥- λ ∈˙C.
⊣

126
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
10.15 Proposition (Levy [64], Solovay [65a], Levy-Solovay [67]). Suppose that
κ is measurable and P is a p.o. such that |P| < κ. Then
∥-P κ is measurable .
Proof. Let U be a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ, and
∥- ˙U = {Y ⊆κ | ∃X ∈ˇU(X ⊆Y)} ,
the ﬁlter generated by ˇU.
It will in fact be shown that ∥- ˙U is a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over κ. The following claim can serve a larger purpose:
(∗)
If p ∥- ˙τ: κ →ˇV , then there are q ≤p, Z ∈U,
and f : Z →V such that q ∥- ˙τ| ˇZ = ˇf .
To show this, for each r ≤p let Xr = {ξ ∈κ | ∃x(r ∥- ˙τ(ξ) = ˇx)}. Then

r≤p Xr = κ and |P| < κ, so by κ-completeness there is a q ≤p such that Xq ∈
U. But then, for f : Xq →V deﬁned by f (ξ) = that x such that q ∥- ˙τ(ξ) = ˇx
(unique as ˙τ is forced to be a function), it follows that q ∥- ˙τ| ˇXq = ˇf .
To complete the proof, note ﬁrst that ∥- ˙U is non-principal, so it remains to
verify that ∥- ˙U is ultra and κ-complete. For this it sufﬁces by simple arguments
(cf. 2.7) to show that if γ < κ and ∥- ˙τ: κ →γ , then there is an α such that
∥- ˙τ −1({α}) ∈˙U:
By the claim, there are Z ∈U and f : Z →γ such that ∥- ˙τ| ˇZ = ˇf . But
U is κ-complete, so there is an α < γ such that A = f −1({α}) ∈U. Hence,
∥- ˇA ∩ˇZ ⊆˙τ −1({α}) ∈˙U.
⊣
A further consequence of the claim (∗) is that if U is normal, then ∥- ˙U is
normal.
10.16 Exercise (Levy-Solovay [67]). 10.15 holds with “measurable” replaced by
“Ramsey” or by “weakly compact”.
Hint.
For Ramsey, if p ∥- ˙τ: [κ]<ω →2, deﬁne g: [κ]<ω →P(P × 2) by
g(s) = {⟨q, i⟩| q ≤p ∧q ∥- ˙τ(ˇs) = i}. Show that if H is homogeneous for g,
then p ∥- ˇH is homogeneous for ˙τ.
⊣
Similar arguments can be devised for a variety of large cardinals. The problem
of preserving large cardinals when forcing with p.o.’s of large cardinality was to
lead to important developments both in the theory of forcing as well as large
cardinals.
The Levy Collapse
The ﬁrst announcement after Cohen’s breakthrough of results using forcing was
made four months later, and notably one result involved an inaccessible cardinal.
Motivated by questions of deﬁnability Levy [63, 70] formulated a gentle collapse

10. Development of Forcing
127
of an inaccessible cardinal that has become basic to the theory, and experience has
shown that it often sufﬁces for relating large cardinals with combinatorial proper-
ties of ω1 and ω2 in equiconsistency results. For clarity and later convenience, a
general setting is ﬁrst pursued:
For S ⊆On and λ regular,
Col(λ, S) = {p | p is a function ∧|p| < λ ∧dom(p) ⊆S × λ
∧∀⟨α, ξ⟩∈dom(p)(p(α, ξ) = 0 ∨p(α, ξ) ∈α)}
ordered by p ≤q iff p ⊇q. Thus, Col(λ, S) is a p.o. for generically adjoining
surjections: λ →α for every α ∈S. Col(ω, {ω}) is essentially Cohen’s original
p.o. for adjoining a subset of ω, a Cohen real; Col(λ, {λ}) its generalization for
adjoining a Cohen subset of λ; and Col(λ, {κ}) for κ > λ the standard p.o. for
collapsing |κ| to λ. The following lemma lists some elementary properties:
10.17 Lemma.
(a) Col(λ, S) is λ-closed.
(b) Suppose that S = X ∪Y is a disjoint union, and set P0 = Col(λ, X) and
P1 = Col(λ, Y). Then G is Col(λ, S)-generic iff G = {p ∪q | p ∈G0 ∧q ∈G1},
where G0 is P0-generic, Col(λ, Y)V [G0] = P1, and G1 is P1-generic over V [G0].
(c) If κ is regular, κ > λ, and either κ is inaccessible or λ = ω, then
Col(λ, κ) has the κ-c.c.
(d) If Col(λ, κ) has the κ-c.c., then forcing with it preserves cardinals ≤λ
and ≥κ.
(e) Suppose that κ is regular, Col(λ, κ) has the κ-c.c., and G is Col(λ, κ)-
generic. Then for any x ∈V [G] with x: γ →On where γ < κ, there is a δ < κ
such that x ∈V [G ∩Col(λ, δ)].
Proof. (a) This is obvious.
(b) This follows from 10.6, since the association of p ∈Col(λ, S) with
⟨p|(X × λ), p|(Y × λ)⟩is an isomorphism between Col(λ, S) and the product
p.o. P0 × P1; that Col(λ, Y)V [G0] = P1 follows from (a) since forcing with P0
adds no new ordinal sequences of length less than λ.
(c) This follows by a typical application of the ∆-system lemma 10.4: Given
{pβ | β < κ} ⊆Col(λ, κ), the lemma together with the hypothesis imply that
there is an X ∈[κ]κ and an r ⊆κ × λ such that β ̸= γ both in X implies that
dom(pβ)∩dom(pγ ) = r. By deﬁnition of Col(λ, κ) and |r| < κ, there is a further
Y ∈[X]κ such that β ̸= γ both in Y implies that pβ |r = pγ |r. But for such β
and γ , pβ and pγ are compatible.
(d) This uses (a).
(e) Let ˙x be such that ˙xG = x, and for each α < γ let Aα ⊆Col(λ, κ) be a
maximal antichain such that for each p ∈Aα there is a ξ such that p ∥- ˙x(α) = ξ.
|Aα| < κ for each α < γ by the κ-c.c. so that | 
α<γ Aα| < κ, and hence
by the regularity of κ there is a δ < κ such that p ∈
α<γ Aα implies that

128
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
dom(p) ⊆δ × λ. Finally, x is deﬁnable from G ∩Col(λ, δ) by: x(α) = ξ
iff
p ∥- ˙x(α) = ξ for the unique p ∈G ∩Aα.
⊣
For κ > λ,
Col(λ, κ) is a Levy collapse ,
and when it has the κ-c.c.,
Col(λ, κ) collapses κ to λ+
because of 10.17(d). This is part of the parlance; forcing with Col(λ, κ) does
not collapse κ as a cardinal, but gently renders it the successor cardinal of λ
by collapsing all cardinals strictly between λ and κ. Levy’s original p.o. was
Col(ω, κ) with κ inaccessible, and usually 10.17(c) is invoked with inaccessible
κ.
Digressing brieﬂy, a proof is next provided of 8.16, the equiconsistency of
Rowbottom and J´onsson cardinals. One direction is immediate, as Rowbottom
cardinals are J´onsson, so the next proposition completes the proof. It is established
by a mild extension argument with two twists: 10.17(c) is invoked for λ = ω, and
the large cardinal property to be preserved does not entail (strong) inaccessibility.
10.18 Proposition (Kleinberg [72, 79]). If κ is the least J´onsson cardinal, then
there is a p.o. P such that
∥-P κ is Rowbottom .
Proof. By 8.15 there is a regular ν < κ such that
(∗)
κ is ν-Rowbottom and κ−→
/ [κ]<ω
α
for any α < ν .
By 10.17(c), P = Col(ω, ν) has the ν-c.c., and so renders ν = ω1 in any generic
extension. Hence, it sufﬁces to show that
∥-P κ is ν-Rowbottom .
To this end, suppose that p ∈P, γ < κ, and p ∥-
˙f : [κ]<ω →γ . For each
s ∈[κ]<ω let As ⊆P be a maximal antichain below p such that for each r ∈As
there is an αr < γ such that r ∥- ˙f (ˇs) = αr. |As| < ν by the ν-c.c., so by (∗)
there is a gs: [κ]<ω →As such that for any X ∈[κ]κ, gs“X<ω = As. Now deﬁne
h: [κ]<ω →γ by setting h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = 0 unless n = 2i3 j for some i, j > 0, in
which case:
h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = the α such that g{ξ1,...,ξi}(ξi+1, . . . , ξi+ j) ∥- ˙f (ξ1, . . . , ξi) = α .
By (∗) there is an H ∈[κ]κ such that setting E = h“[H]<ω, |E| < ν.
To
complete the proof, it sufﬁces to show that p ∥- ˙f “[ ˇH]<ω ⊆ˇE.
To do this, suppose that q ≤p, and for some s ∈[H]<ω and α < γ ,
q ∥- ˙f (s) = α. By deﬁnition of As, there is an r ∈As compatible with q, and since

10. Development of Forcing
129
p ∥- ˙f is a function, α = αr. By deﬁnition of gs, there is a t ∈[H−(max(s)+1)]<ω
such that gs(t) = r. Finally, if s = {ξ1, . . . , ξi} and t = {ξi+1, . . . , ξi+ j}, set
n = 2i3 j and choose ξi+ j+1 < . . . < ξn all from H −(max(t) + 1). Then it is
simple to check that h(ξ1, . . . , ξn) = α ∈E, and so the proof is complete.
⊣
Returning to the main development, Levy’s initial result with his collapse is
discussed in the context of Solovay’s result in §11, and both use a fundamental
property of Col(λ, S). For a p.o. P,
P is weakly homogeneous iff for any p, q ∈P there is an auto-
morphism e of P such that e(p) ∥q .
This property arose in the independence proofs for AC. The “weakly” acknowl-
edges that a Boolean algebra B is called homogeneous if for a, b ∈B with neither
a nor b equal to either the zero or the one of B, there is an automorphism e of B
such that e(a) = b. The ﬁrst part of the next proposition is the raison d’ˆetre for
weak homogeneity.
10.19 Proposition.
(a) If a p.o. P is weakly homogeneous, then for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn)
in the forcing language and x1, . . . , xn ∈V , either ∥-P ϕ(ˇx1, . . . , ˇxn) or else
∥-P ¬ϕ(ˇx1, . . . , ˇxn).
(b) Col(λ, S) is weakly homogeneous.
Proof. (a) Assume to the contrary that p ∥- ϕ(ˇx1, . . . , ˇxn) and q ∥- ¬ϕ(ˇx1, . . . , ˇxn)
for some p, q ∈P, and let e be an automorphism of P such that e(p) ∥q.
e induces a bijection: P-names →P-names that ﬁxes ˇx for every x ∈V and
preserves the forcing relation (see Kunen [80: 222]). Thus, e(p) ∥- ϕ(ˇx1, . . . , ˇxn),
but this contradicts e(p) ∥q.
(b) Given p, q ∈Col(λ, S) it is easy to ﬁnd a bijection f : λ →λ such that
for ⟨α, ξ⟩∈dom(p) and ⟨β, ζ⟩∈dom(q), f (ξ) ̸= ζ. f induces an automorphism
e of Col(λ, S) that to r ∈Col(λ, S) associates e(r) speciﬁed by
⟨α, f (ξ)⟩∈dom(e(r)) iff ⟨α, ξ⟩∈dom(r) ∧e(r)(α, f (ξ)) = r(α, ξ) .
Since dom(e(p)) ∩dom(q) = ∅, e(p) ∥q.
⊣
Finally, Solovay established a result speciﬁc to Col(ω, κ) for his Lebesgue
measurability result (§11). The natural proof uses what amounts to a characteri-
zation of Col(ω, {α}) of intrinsic interest:
10.20 Proposition. Suppose that P is a separative p.o. such that |P| ≤|α| and
∥-P ∃f ( f : ω →α is surjective ∧f /∈ˇV ) .
Then there is an injective, dense embedding of a dense subset of Col(ω, {α}) into
P.

130
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Remarks. The hypothesis is dichotomous in that f : ω →α being surjective is
only material when α is uncountable, and f ̸∈ˇV , when α is countable.
For
α = ω, the result densely associates any non-trivial countable p.o. with the Cohen
p.o. Col(ω, {ω}). Finally, by this result and 10.1, the generic extensions by such
P coincide with the generic extensions by Col(ω, {α}); the separativity of P is
extraneous in this regard since the separative quotient can ﬁrst be taken and 10.3
invoked.
Proof. Set ν = |α|. Note ﬁrst that the hypotheses imply that for any p ∈P there
is a maximal antichain below p of cardinality ν (so that in particular |P| = ν):
If ν = ω, this follows from ∥- f ̸∈ˇV since any condition must have incompatible
extensions. If ν > ω, this follows from the collapse of ν to ω and the consequent
failure of the ν-c.c.
The dense subset of Col(ω, {α}) in question is
Dα = {p | ∃n ∈ω(p: {α} × n →α)} ,
i.e. those members of Col(ω, {α}) which are not only ﬁnite but have domains of
form {α} × n for some n ∈ω. By the maximal principle, there is a term ˙g such
that ∥- ˙g: ω →˙G is surjective (where ˙G is the canonical name for the generic
object). Proceed now by recursion on |p| for p ∈Dα to deﬁne an injective, dense
embedding e: Dα →P:
Set e(∅) = 1lP. Having deﬁned e(p) for a p ∈Dα with dom(p) = {α} × n,
let ⟨a p
ξ | ξ < α⟩enumerate a maximal antichain below e(p) of cardinality ν. By
reﬁning if necessary it can be assumed that each a p
ξ ∥- ˙g(n) = ˇr for some r ∈P.
Set e(p ∪{⟨⟨α, n⟩, ξ⟩}) = a p
ξ for each ξ < α.
Clearly, this deﬁnition provides an isomorphism e: Dα →e“Dα. To show
that e“Dα is dense in P, let r ∈P be arbitrary. Since r ∥- ˇr ∈˙G by separativity,
there is an s ≤r and an n ∈ω such that s ∥- ˙g(n) = ˇr. By construction there is
a p ∈Dα with |p| = n + 1 such that e(p) ∥s, and since e(p) had also decided
˙g(n), e(p) ∥- ˙g(n) = ˇr. But then, e(p) ∥- ˇr ∈˙G, and so by separativity and 10.2,
e(p) ≤r.
⊣
10.21 Proposition (Solovay [70]).
Suppose that κ > ω is regular and G is
Col(ω, κ)-generic. Then for any x ∈V [G] with x: ω →On, there is an H which
is Col(ω, κ)-generic over V [x] such that V [G] = V [x][H].
Proof. By 10.17(e), there is a δ < κ such that x ∈V [G ∩Col(ω, δ)]. Set
G0 = G ∩Col(ω, δ) ,
G1 = G ∩Col(ω, {δ}) , and
G2 = G ∩Col(ω, κ −(δ + 1)) .
By 10.17(b), G0 is Col(ω, δ)-generic, and so by 10.3 and 10.10 there is a separative
p.o. P ∈V [x] and a P-generic H0 over V [x] such that V [x][H0] = V [G0]. Argue
in V [x]:

10. Development of Forcing
131
Set Q = P ×Col(ω, {δ}). By 10.6, V [x][H0][G1] is a generic extension over
V [x] using Q. Clearly, |Q| ≤|Col(ω, δ + 1)| = |δ|, and because of the second
component of Q, ∥-Q ∃f ( f : ω →δ is surjective ∧
f ̸∈ˇV ). Hence, by 10.20
there is an H1 Col(ω, {δ})-generic over V [x] such that V [x][H1] = V [x][H0][G1].
Also by 10.20 applied to the p.o. Col(ω, δ+1), there is an H2 Col(ω, δ+1)-generic
over V [x] such that V [x][H2] = V [x][H1].
Finally, by several applications of 10.17(b),
V [G] = V [G0][G1][G2] = V [x][H0][G1][G2] = V [x][H2][G2]
and H2 ∪G2 is Col(ω, κ)-generic over V [x].
⊣
That any countable sequence of ordinals can be “absorbed” into the ground
model in this way plays an important role in the next section.

132
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
11. Lebesgue Measurability
This section is devoted to the following result:
11.1 Theorem (Solovay [65b, 70]). Suppose that κ is an inaccessible cardinal and
G is Col(ω, κ)-generic. Then V [G] has an inner model satisfying:
(a) Every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
(b) Every set of reals has the Baire property.
(c) Every set of reals has the perfect set property.
(d) The Principle of Dependent Choices (DC).
Solovay established this result in the Spring of 1964, just a year after Cohen’s
creation of forcing. Cohen had in fact mentioned the possibility of (a) in a lec-
ture in July 1963 attended by Solovay. The result was remarkable for its early
sophistication and revealed what standard of argument was possible with forcing.
Like Cohen’s results, 11.1 resolved classical problems dating back to the turn
of the century and before. Lebesgue measurability and the Baire property were
formulated in §0. As discussed in §2 Lebesgue had intended his measure as a
solution to his Measure Problem, but Vitali in an early explicit use of the Axiom of
Choice constructed a non-Lebesgue measurable set of reals from a well-ordering
of the reals. In fact, it can be shown that Vitali’s set does not possess the Baire
property either. (Another counterexample is described after 11.4.) However, the
substance and import of 11.1 is ensured by its (d), the Principle of Dependent
Choices:
∀X∀R(X ̸= ∅∧R ⊆X × X ∧∀x ∈X∃y ∈X(⟨x, y⟩∈R
(DC)
→∃f ∈ωX∀n ∈ω(⟨f (n), f (n + 1)⟩∈R)) .
Formulated by Bernays [42: 86] (with a precedent in a short-lived journal, Oswald
Teichm¨uller [39: 568]) this choice principle readily implies, and in fact is equiva-
lent to having, the useful characterization of well-foundedness in terms of the lack
of inﬁnite descending chains. Moreover, it readily implies the Countable Axiom
of Choice,
(ACω)
Every countable set consisting of
non-empty sets has a choice function ,
and in turn the regularity of ω1. (Jensen [66] showed that ACω does not imply
DC.) Being handily sufﬁcient for the development of measure theory, DC bolsters
Solovay’s model as a bona ﬁde one for mathematical analysis. Lebesgue’s solution
was thus vindicated by 11.1 to the extent that it showed that some substantial use
of AC is necessary to produce a non-measurable set.
Lebesgue measurability and the Baire property are often linked together, and
the proofs of 11.1(a) and (b) have parallel arguments. On the other hand, the
following exercise highlights how being null and being meager are quite different

11. Lebesgue Measurability
133
indications of a set’s sparsity. In it and throughout this section, the terminology
developed in §0 for measure and category is put into service; in particular, by
“real” is usually meant member of ωω; mL denotes Lebesgue measure; and
⟨si | i ∈ω⟩is a ﬁxed enumeration of <ωω .
11.2 Exercise (ZF). There is a null set N of reals such that ωω −N is meager.
Hint. First, for j < ω ﬁnd a Dj ⊆ωω such that ωω −Dj is nowhere dense and
mL(Dj) <
1
j+1. For example, for any s ∈<ωω let s ∗n be s concatenated with n
zero’s, and set Dj = 
i∈ω O(si ∗fj(i)) for some fj ∈ωω sufﬁciently fast-growing
so that mL(Dj) <
1
j+1. Then set N = 
j<ω Dj.
⊣
The perfect set property dates back to Cantor’s original efforts to establish
his Continuum Hypothesis. For x ∈ωω and A ⊆ωω, x is a limit point of A iff
for any O(s) with x ∈O(s), (A ∩O(s))−{x} ̸= ∅. x is an isolated point of A iff
x ∈A and is not a limit point of A, i.e. there is an O(s) such that A ∩O(s) = {x}.
For A ⊆ωω,
A is perfect iff it is nonempty, closed, and has no isolated points .
Cantor formulated this concept in his topological investigations of R. Its relevance
to the Continuum Hypothesis can be seen from the following observations:
11.3 Proposition (ZF).
(a) (Cantor [83: 575][84: 471], Bendixson [83]) For any uncountable closed
set C of reals, there is a perfect set P ⊆C such that C −P is at most countable.
(b) (Cantor [84a]) Any perfect set of reals has cardinality 2ℵ0.
Proof. (a) For any A ⊆ωω, let A′ = the limit points of A (Cantor’s [72] concept
of the derived set of A). It is simple to check that A′ is always a closed set, and for
A closed, that A′ ⊆A. Starting with an uncountable closed set C of reals, deﬁne
⟨Cα | α < ω1⟩by: C0 = C, Cα+1 = C′
α, and for limit δ > 0, Cδ = 
α<δ Cα.
Then X = 
α<ω1(Cα −Cα+1) is at most countable: If x ∈X, noting that x is an
isolated point of exactly one Cα let χ(x) be the least i such that O(si)∩Cα = {x}.
It is simple to see that χ: X →ω is injective.
Since X is at most countable, there must be a γ < ω1 such that Cγ +1 =
Cγ ̸= ∅. Then P = Cγ is perfect, and C −P = X.
(b) Suppose that P ⊆ωω is perfect.
Then there are pt ∈P for every
t ∈<ω2 and a strictly increasing sequence ⟨ni | i ∈ω⟩of integers such that for
any t, u ∈<ω2,
(i) if t ⊆u, then pt|n|t| = pu|n|t| , and
(ii) if |t| = |u| yet t ̸= u, then pt|n|t| ̸= pu|n|t| .
This can be established by a straightforward recursion on |t|. For each x ∈ω2,
let px = limn{px|n | n ∈ω} in the natural sense based on (i). Then px ∈P since
P is closed, and x ̸= y implies that px ̸= py by (ii).
⊣

134
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Cantor thus veriﬁed the Continuum Hypothesis for closed sets: every closed
set is either countable or has cardinality 2ℵ0. Put another way, he had reduced
his efforts to ﬁnding a closed set of reals of cardinality ℵ1. Through Cohen’s
work it is now known that this is impossible in ZFC, but Cantor had initiated
a programmatic approach to the Continuum Problem based on the topological
complexity of sets which was to be vigorously pursued in descriptive set theory.
For any A ⊆ωω,
A has the perfect set property iff
A is countable or else has a perfect subset .
Like Lebesgue measurability and the Baire property, the perfect set property can
be regarded as a property indicative of well-behaved sets, and eventually all Borel
sets and more were shown to possess it. However, Bernstein, who was initially
a student of Cantor at Halle, showed that a modest form of the Axiom of Choice
already confronts this approach to the Continuum Problem. In 1897 when just
19, Bernstein had established, with a readily avoidable use of AC, what is usually
known as the Schr¨oder-Bernstein Theorem: if |A| ≤|B| and |B| ≤|A|, then there
is a bijection between A and B. The sense of this derives from ≤for “cardinals”
in the ZF setting denoting injective embeddability. In particular, ω1 ≤2ℵ0 means
there is an uncountable, well-orderable set of reals. Bernstein’s argument for the
perfect set property can be analyzed as follows:
11.4 Proposition (ZF)(Bernstein [08]).
(a) If the reals are well-orderable, then there is a set A of reals of cardinality
2ℵ0 such that P ∩A ̸= ∅and P −A ̸= ∅for any perfect set P of reals.
(b) If ω1 ≤2ℵ0, then there is a set of reals without the perfect set property.
Proof. (a) By a straightforward counting argument using the Schr¨oder-Bernstein
Theorem there are exactly 2ℵ0 perfect sets (the easier ≤2ℵ0 sufﬁces for the proof).
Using a ﬁxed well-ordering of ωω let ⟨Pα | α < 2ℵ0⟩be an enumeration of the
perfect sets and deﬁne aα ̸= bα for α < 2ℵ0 as follows: If aβ, bβ have been
deﬁned for β < α, let aα be the least a in the well-ordering such that
a ∈Pα −({aβ | β < α} ∪{bβ | β < α})
and then let bα be the least b in the well-ordering such that
b ∈Pα −({aβ | β ≤α} ∪{bβ | β < α}) .
This is possible by 11.3(b). The desired A can be taken to be {aα | α < 2ℵ0}.
(b) If 2ℵ0 ̸≤ω1, then by the hypothesis and 11.3(b) there is a well-orderable
set of reals without the perfect set property. If 2ℵ0 ≤ω1, then by hypothesis ωω
is bijective with ω1 by the Schr¨oder-Bernstein Theorem, and so the conclusion
follows from (a).
⊣
A remark of Bernstein’s (p. 330) is interpretable as asserting that the denial
of the perfect set property in the strong sense of (a) leads to a non-Lebesgue

11. Lebesgue Measurability
135
measurable set. This is simple to see, since if A were measurable, either mL(A) >
0 or mL(ωω −A) > 0, say the ﬁrst. By 0.9(a) there would be a closed set C ⊆A
such that mL(C) > 0, so by 11.3(a) a perfect set P ⊆C, which is a contradiction.
Moreover, the set A cannot have the Baire property either: Suppose other-
wise; by taking its complement if necessary it can assumed that A is not meager.
By 0.12(b) there is a Gδ set X ⊆A such that A−X is meager. But X is uncount-
able as A is not meager, yet any uncountable Borel set contains a perfect subset
(by 12.2(c)), which is a contradiction.
The perfect set property led to the ﬁrst instance of an important phenomenon
in set theory: the derivation of equiconsistency results based on the complementary
methods of forcing and inner models. A large cardinal hypothesis is typically
transformed into a proposition about sets of reals by forcing that collapses the
cardinal to ω1 or enlarges the power of the continuum to the cardinal. Conversely,
the proposition entails the same large cardinal hypothesis in the clarity of an inner
model. Thus, in a subtle synthesis, hypotheses of length concerning the extent
of transﬁnite are correlated with hypotheses of width concerning the fullness of
power sets. Solovay’s 11.1 provided the forcing direction from an inaccessible
cardinal to the proposition that every set of reals has the perfect set property.
Notably, Specker [57] had already made the conceptual move to inner models;
through a sequence of implications he had in effect established in ZF that if every
set of reals has the perfect set property and ω1 is regular, then ω1 is inaccessible in
L (cf. Mycielski [64: 213]). Thus, Solovay’s use of an inaccessible cardinal was
necessary for getting 11.1(c)(d), and its collapse to ω1 complemented Specker’s
observation.
Specker’s conclusion can be readily strengthened to ω1 is inaccessible from
reals:
∀a ∈ωω(ωL[a]
1
< ω1) .
This soon became a focal hypothesis, and the description is justiﬁed by a simple
self-reﬁnement:
11.5 Proposition (ZF). If ω1 is regular and ∀a ∈ωω(ωL[a]
1
< ω1), then
∀a ∈ωω(ω1 is inaccessible in L[a]) .
Proof.
Assume to the contrary that for some a ∈ωω, ω1 is not inaccessible
in L[a]. Since L[a] satisﬁes GCH by the same proof as for L, ω1 must be a
successor cardinal in L[a], say ω1 = ρ+L[a]. Since ρ is countable, let b ∈ωω
code a well-ordering of ω of ordertype ρ. But if c ∈ωω codes a and b, then
ωL[c]
1
= ω1, which is a contradiction.
⊣
Finally, Levy’s initial result with his collapse Col(ω, κ) can be brought into
the scheme of things; he essentially observed the equiconsistency of (a) and (c)
below:

136
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
11.6 Theorem (Solovay [65b, 70], Specker [57], Levy [63, 70]). The following
theories are equiconsistent:
(a) ZFC + ∃κ(κ is inaccessible).
(b) ZF + DC + ⌈every set of reals has the perfect set property⌉.
(c) ZF + ω1 is regular + ω1 ̸≤2ℵ0.
(d) ZF + ω1 is regular + ∀a ∈ωω(ωL[a]
1
< ω1).
Proof. Con(d) →Con(a) follows from 11.5 and Con(a) →Con(b) from 11.1
once it is established. (b) →(c) and (c) →(d) are direct, the ﬁrst from 11.4(b)
and the fact that DC implies that ω1 is regular, and the second as follows: For
any a ∈ωω, P(ω) ∩L[a] has a well-ordering in L[a] of ordertype ωL[a]
1
, so
ωL[a]
1
= ω1 would imply that ω1 ≤2ℵ0.
⊣
The question of whether an inaccessible cardinal is necessary in 11.1 for
Lebesgue measurability or the Baire property was left unresolved, and consid-
erable effort was eventually expended into trying to eliminate the large cardinal
hypothesis. In one of those twists that makes set theory so intriguing Shelah [84]
in 1979 put these issues to rest by establishing that indeed an inaccessible cardinal
is not necessary for the Baire property, but rather unexpectedly, it is necessary for
Lebesgue measurability (see volume II).
After this extended preamble, we ﬁnally begin the ascent to 11.1 with the
preliminaries toward the Lebesgue measurability result.
Random Reals
Solovay took the ﬁrst step beyond the p.o.’s like Col(λ, S) of §10 that arose
initially with the creation of forcing and investigated forcing with the familiar
σ-algebra of Borel sets. With the §0 terminology, consider
B∗= {X ∈B | X is not null} ,
ordered by
p ≤q iff
p ⊆q
as a p.o. for forcing. The following is simple:
11.7 Exercise.
(a) For p, q ∈B∗, p ⊥q iff p ∩q is null.
(b) B∗has the ω1-c.c.
Hint. (b) is like 2.1.
⊣
It is simple to see that B∗is not separative, and that its separative quotient
B∗/≈can be formulated with p ≈q iff p △q is null. Using this as a deﬁnition
≈can be extended to all of ML, the σ-algebra of Lebesgue measurable sets.
The quotient ML/≈, which coincides with B/≈, is a Boolean algebra under
the set-theoretic operations modulated by ≈called the Lebesgue measure algebra.

11. Lebesgue Measurability
137
Solovay worked in terms of this algebra, but carrying on with B∗avoids ≈-
equivalence classes and makes no difference by 10.3.
Toward Solovay’s characterizations of B∗-genericity, codes for the open,
closed, and Gδ sets are developed: For each c ∈ωω, set
Ac =



{O(si) | c(i + 1) = 1}
if c(0) = 0 ,
ωω −{O(si) | c(i + 1) = 1}
if c(0) = 1 , and

n({O(si) | c(2n3i+1) = 1})
if c(0) > 1 .
c is an open code if c(0) = 0, c is a closed code if c(0) = 1, and c a Gδ code
if c(0) > 1.
For every open, closed, or Gδ set X there is a respective code
c such that X = Ac. All the Borel sets can be coded as in Solovay [70], but
that complexity is not necessary because of the approximation result 0.9. While
the extensions of these sets may vary from model to model, their Boolean and
measure-theoretic essence can be described absolutely in terms of their codes.
11.8 Lemma. Suppose that M be a transitive ∈-model of ZF. Then:
(a) The following are absolute for M:
x ∈Ac ; Ac ̸= ∅; Ac ⊆Ad ; Ac ⊆(ωω −Ad) ; and Ac ∩Ad = Ae.
(That is, if x, c ∈M and c is a code, then x ∈AM
c iff x ∈Ac; and so forth.)
(b) If c ∈M is a code, then m M
L (AM
c ) = mL(Ac).
Proof. (a) This is straightforward since the codes determine the interplay of the
O(si)’s, which in turn only depends on the si’s.
(b) Suppose ﬁrst that c is an open code. A sequence ⟨ij | j ∈ω⟩can be
deﬁned from c such that Ac is a disjoint union of the O(sij)’s, as in the proof of
0.8(d). Thus, mL(Ac) is determined absolutely.
For a closed code c, let d be an open code such that Ad = ωω −Ac and use
(a).
Finally, suppose that c is a Gδ code.
A sequence ⟨cn | n ∈ω⟩of open
codes can be deﬁned from c such that Acm ⊇Acn if m < n and Ac = 
n Acn.
mL(Ac) = inf({mL(Acn) | n ∈ω}), and thus is determined absolutely.
⊣
Forcing with B∗can now be characterized in terms of adding a real:
11.9 Theorem (Solovay [65b, 70]). Suppose that G is B∗-generic. Then there is
a unique x ∈ωω such that for any closed code c ∈V ,
x ∈AV [G]
c
iff
AV
c ∈G ,
and V [x] = V [G].
Proof. The “C part” of 0.9(a) has the following consequences:

138
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
(i) For any n ∈ω,
{C ∈B∗| C is closed ∧∃k(C ⊆{ f ∈ωω | f (n) = k})}
is dense in B∗.
(ii) For any Lebesgue measurable A ⊆ωω with A ∈V ,
{C ∈B∗| C is closed ∧(C ⊆A ∨C ∩A = ∅)}
is dense in B∗.
For (ii), suppose that p ∈B∗is arbitrary. If mL(p ∩A) > 0, there is a closed
C ∈B∗such that C ⊆p ∩A. Otherwise mL(p −A) > 0 and there is a closed
C ∈B∗such that C ⊆p −A.
Arguing in V [G] there is a unique x ∈ωω speciﬁed by
{x} = {AV [G]
c
| c ∈V is a closed code ∧AV
c ∈G}
since this is an intersection of closed sets with the ﬁnite intersection property and
(i) holds.
Suppose now that c ∈V is an arbitrary closed code.
If AV
c ∈G, then
x ∈AV [G]
c
by deﬁnition. Conversely, suppose that x ∈AV [G]
c
. To show that
AV
c ∈G, it sufﬁces by (ii) to show that for any closed code d ∈V with AV
d ∈
G, AV
c ∩AV
d ̸= ∅. But this follows from x ∈AV [G]
c
∩AV [G]
d
and 11.8(a).
Finally, G is deﬁnable in V [x] by
G = {p ∈B∗| ∃c(c ∈V is a closed code ∧x ∈AV [x]
c
∧AV [x]
c
⊆p)} .
Hence, V [x] = V [G].
⊣
Solovay called such an x a random real; more precisely, for M a transitive
∈-model of ZFC and x ∈ωω,
x is random over M iff x is as in 11.9 for some (B∗)M-generic G over M .
The next result is an informative characterization of random reals in terms
of codes, and Solovay [70: 33] observed how it reﬂects the intuitive concept of
randomness. Ironically, as most of the generic reals were eventually named after
their discoverers, Solovay squandered an opportunity by his choice of le mot juste!
In what follows, being null is unambiguous by 11.8(b), and 11.8(a) is used without
further mention.
11.10 Theorem (Solovay [65b, 70]). Suppose that M is a transitive ∈-model of
ZFC. Then x ∈ωω is random over M iff x /∈Ac for any c ∈M which is a Gδ
code for a null set.
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that x is random over M with G the corresponding (B∗)M-
generic over M, and c ∈M is a Gδ code for a null set. Then
M |= ⌈D = {C ∈B∗| C is closed ∧C ⊆ωω −Ac} is dense in B∗⌉.

11. Lebesgue Measurability
139
Hence, there is a closed code d ∈M such that AM
d ∈G ∩D and so x ∈AM[G]
d
.
But then, x ∈Ad and so x /∈Ac.
Conversely, suppose that x /∈Ac whenever c ∈M is a Gδ code for a null set.
Considering how x can be used to deﬁne a corresponding G ⊆(B∗)M as in the
proof of 11.9, to show that x is random over M it sufﬁces to show that: whenever
D ∈M is dense in (B∗)M, there is a closed code c ∈M and a p ∈D such that
AM
c ⊆p and x ∈Ac.
To do this, let D ∈M be dense and ﬁrst argue in M: Let W be a maximal
antichain satisfying W ⊆{C | C is closed ∧∃p ∈D(C ⊆p)}. W is countable
by the ω1-c.c., so using closed codes let ⟨Acn | n ∈ω⟩enumerate it. Now let
c ∈ωω be any function satisfying c(0) > 1 and
c(2n3i+1) = 1 iff
O(si) ∩Acn = ∅.
Since each Acn is closed, c is a Gδ code for 
n(ωω −Acn), a null set by the
maximality of W.
Stepping out of M, by hypothesis x /∈Ac. Hence, x ∈Acn for some cn ∈M
to complete the proof.
⊣
Random reals enter the coming consistency results through this characteri-
zation. Beyond this initial use they have found a variety of applications in set
theory.
Proof of Solovay’s Theorem
The main theorem 11.1 is proved by ﬁrst establishing an auxiliary result about
the Levy collapse and then passing to an inner model. This result is itself quite
signiﬁcant in that it asserts in a ZFC context that a large collection of sets of reals
is well-behaved.
A set X is ωOn-deﬁnable iff for some a ∈ωOn and formula ϕ(v1, v2),
y ∈X iff
ϕ[a, y] .
Of course, using one parameter in ωOn is the same as using ﬁnitely many from
On ∪ωOn by coding. Like the well-known concept of ordinal deﬁnability (see
Kunen [80: V§2]) this concept is formally deﬁnable within set theory through the
Reﬂection Principle for ZF: X is ωOn-deﬁnable iff
∃α∃a∃ϕ(a ∈ωOn ∩Vα ∧∀y(y ∈X ↔y ∈Vα ∧Vα |= ϕ[a, y])) .
11.11 Theorem (Solovay [65b, 70]). Suppose that κ is an inaccessible cardinal
and G is Col(ω, κ)-generic. Then in V [G], every ωOn-deﬁnable set of reals is
Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property.
The proof hinges on a key lemma that uses previous facts developed about the
Levy collapse Col(ω, κ):

140
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
11.12 Lemma. For each formula ϕ(v1) there is a corresponding formula ˜ϕ(v1)
such that: for any x ∈ωOn ∩V [G],
V [G] |= ϕ[x] iff
V [x] |= ˜ϕ[x] .
Proof. Set P = Col(ω, κ). For any x ∈ωOn∩V [G], by 10.21 there is a P-generic
H over V [x] such that V [G] = V [x][H]. However, by the weak homogeneity of
P (10.19) it is not necessary to know H to decide whether or not ϕ[x] is satisﬁed:
V [x][H] |= ϕ[x] iff
V [x] |=
⌈∥-P ϕ(ˇx)⌉.
Hence, ˜ϕ can be taken to be a formula in one free variable corresponding to this
last forcing assertion about x and P.
⊣
Proof of 11.11. Argue in V [G]. Note ﬁrst that
for any a ∈ωOn, ωω ∩V [a] is countable
since κ is still inaccessible in V [a] by 10.12 and 10.17(e).
Suppose now that A ⊆ωω is ωOn-deﬁnable, so that for some a ∈ωOn and
ϕ(v1, v2),
x ∈A iff
ϕ[a, x] .
Using a two-variable version of 11.12 there is a formula ˜ϕ(v1, v2) such that
x ∈A iff
V [a][x] |= ˜ϕ[a, x] .
We ﬁrst verify A’s Lebesgue measurability: Note that
{x ∈ωω | x is not random over V [a]}
is null, being equal by 11.10 to
{Ac | c ∈V [a] is a Gδ code for a null set} ,
a countable union of null sets as ωω ∩V [a] is countable. Thus, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd
a Borel set X such that A △X consists of reals not random over V [a]:
For B∗forcing in the sense of V [a] with ˙r a canonical name for the random
real, let Y ∈V [a] be a maximal antichain consisting of closed sets each deciding
˜ϕ(ˇa, ˙r), all in the sense of V [a]. If x is random over V [a], by genericity
x ∈A iff
x ∈{Ac | AV [a]
c
∈Y ∧AV [a]
c
∥- ˜ϕ(ˇa, ˙r)} .
Since Y is countable by the ω1-c.c., the set on the right is a Borel (in fact an Fσ)
set, and hence can serve as our desired set X.
The veriﬁcation of the Baire property is only outlined since it parallels the
Lebesgue measurability argument. (As mentioned before, Shelah [84] has shown
that an inaccessible cardinal is not necessary to get the consistency of every set
of reals having the Baire property.) The idea is to force instead with

11. Lebesgue Measurability
141
B† = {X ∈B | X is not meager} ,
ordered by inclusion. The separative quotient this time has a countable dense
subset, namely the equivalence classes of the O(s)’s, and so by 10.20 forcing
with B† coincides with forcing with Col(ω, {ω}), i.e. adding a Cohen real. Using
0.12(b) and introducing codes for the Fσδ sets (countable intersections of Fσ sets),
analogues of the characterizations 11.9 and 11.10 for Cohen reals can be estab-
lished with Gδ replacing closed and Fσδ replacing Gδ. The rest of the argument
goes through, modulated only by these changes.
Finally, we verify the perfect set property for A. It can be assumed that A is
uncountable, so that because ωω∩V [a] is countable, there must be a y ∈A−V [a].
By 10.21 there is a Col(ω, κ)-generic H over V [a] such that V [a][H] = V [G]
and so by 10.17(e) there is a p.o. Q ∈V [a] satisfying Q ⊆Col(ω, κ) and |Q| < κ
such that y ∈V [a][H ∩Q]. Temporarily let ∥- denote the forcing relation for Q
in V [a]. There is a condition p and a name ˙y such that
p ∥- ˙y ∈ωω −Vˇ[a] ∧Vˇ[a][ ˙y] |= ˜ϕ(ˇa, ˙y) .
Also, PV [a](Q) is countable in V [G] as κ is inaccessible in V [a], so there is an
enumeration ⟨Dn | n ∈ω⟩of the dense subsets of Q in V [a]. To each t ∈<ω2
can now be associated a pt ∈Q and a ut ∈<ω2 as follows:
Let p∅≤p be such that p∅∈D0. Given pt ≤p with |t| = n, deﬁne
ut, pt⌢0, and pt⌢1 as follows: Because p ∥- ˙y /∈Vˇ[a] there must be a least k ∈ω
such that pt does not decide a value for ˙y(k). Let ut satisfy pt ∥- ˙y|k = ˇut, and
choose pt⌢0, pt⌢1 both in Dn+1 so that pt⌢0 and pt⌢1 decide different values for
˙y(k).
For each x ∈ω2, set
Gx = {q ∈Q | ∃t(pt ≤q ∧t ⊆x)} .
By the construction each Gx is Q-generic over V [a]. Next, let
C = { ˙yGx | x ∈ω2} .
Then C ⊆A since p ∈Gx for every x ∈ω2. Finally, C is perfect, since it
contains no isolated points and
C = 
n

t{O(ut) | |t| = n}
where each ﬁnite union is closed by 0.8(c) so that overall intersection is closed.
This completes the proof of 11.11.
⊣
Solovay established the main result 11.1 by passing in V [G] to the inner
model arising naturally from the previous proof, the class of hereditarily ωOn-
deﬁnable sets, i.e. those sets x such that every member of the transitive closure
tc({x}) is ωOn-deﬁnable. Here, we shall pass to the constructible closure (§3) of

142
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
the reals, L(R). This is the standard name for the model, and R was taken in §0
to be the Dedekind completion of the rationals, but in any case
L(R) = L(ωω) = L(P(ω))
by interdeﬁnability. Although L(R) is in general a smaller model than Solovay’s,
it can be shown that they are the same had L been the ground model for the initial
Levy collapse. Moreover, L(R) has ﬁgured prominently in the investigation of
strong hypotheses (§§27, 30). The veriﬁcation of DC is less immediate than for
Solovay’s original inner model, but is of intrinsic interest.
Proof of 11.1. Building on 11.11, continue to work in V [G]. ωω ∩L(R) = ωω, so
through codes every open, closed, Gδ and hence Fσ set is in L(R) and satisﬁes
these respective properties in L(R). (In fact, every Borel set is in L(R).)
Suppose now that A ⊆ωω with A ∈L(R). Then A is ωOn-deﬁnable, and
so by the proof of 11.11 there is an Fσ set X such that A △X is null. It follows
(by 0.9(a)) that for each n ∈ω there is an open set On ⊇A △X such that
mL(On) <
1
n+1. By the previous paragraph and absoluteness (11.8), all this holds
in L(R) as well, and so (A is Lebesgue measurable)L(R). The argument for the
Baire property is analogous.
For the perfect set property, it can be assumed in addition that A is uncount-
able in L(R). Then A is (really) uncountable, since every countable well-ordering
is coded by a real and hence in L(R). Thus, A has a perfect subset C by 11.11,
and it is simple to see that C is perfect in the sense of L(R).
The following proposition completes the proof of 11.1.
11.13 Proposition (ZF + DC). (DC)L(R).
Proof. First note that by straightforward means as for the deﬁnition of a well-
ordering of L, a surjection Φ: On × R →L(R) can be deﬁned by transﬁnite
recursion so that for any α, Φ|(α × R) ∈L(R).
Suppose now that X, R ∈L(R), X ̸= ∅, R ⊆X × X, and
∀x ∈X∃y ∈X(⟨x, y⟩∈R) .
Arguing in V , by DC there is an f ∈ωX such that ⟨f (n), f (n +1)⟩∈R for every
n ∈ω. Let δ be such that ran( f ) ⊆Φ“(δ × R), and using ACω, a consequence
of DC, let ⟨an | n ∈ω⟩be such that for every n ∈ω there is a ξ < δ such that
Φ(ξ, an) = f (n). Now deﬁne a relation ≺on δ × ω by:
⟨η, i⟩≺⟨ζ, j⟩iff
i = j + 1 ∧⟨Φ(ζ, aj), Φ(η, ai)⟩∈R .
Φ|(δ × R) ∈L(R), and the sequence of reals ⟨an | n ∈ω⟩∈L(R) since it
can be coded by one real. Hence, ≺∈L(R). Now ≺is ill-founded in L(R)
because of ran( f ) by absoluteness (0.3). Let E ⊆δ × ω with E ∈L(R) be
non-empty and without a ≺-minimal element. Then starting with any ⟨η, i0⟩∈

11. Lebesgue Measurability
143
E a sequence ⟨ηn | n ∈ω⟩can be deﬁned by recursion so that η0 = η and
⟨Φ(ηn, ai0+n), Φ(ηn+1, ai0+n+1)⟩∈R for every n ∈ω, specifying ηn+1 to be the
minimal possible given ηn. By deﬁnability ⟨Φ(ηn, ai0+n) | n ∈ω⟩∈L(R), and
the proof is complete.
⊣
Having ﬁnally completed the proof of 11.1, this section is concluded with a
compact discussion of one further problem resolved in Solovay’s model. An early
observation in the study of partition relations was that if there is a well-ordering
of the reals, then ω −→(ω)ω
2 fails (7.1). By devising a new generic real, Mathias
[68, 77] established that this partition property holds in Solovay’s model.
The Mathias forcing p.o. is
P = [ω]<ω × [ω]ω
ordered by:
⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩iff
t is an initial segment of s ∧A ∪(s −t) ⊆B .
The idea is that a condition ⟨s, A⟩determines an initial segment s of a new subset
of ω, whose further members are to be restricted to A. Such a forcing was ﬁrst
formulated by Prikry for measurable cardinals (§18). Note that if ⟨s, A⟩∥⟨t, B⟩,
then A ∩B is inﬁnite and s is an initial segment of t or vice versa. Thus, if G is
P-generic, then G determines a subset of ω,
xG = {s | ∃A(⟨s, A⟩∈G)} .
xG in turn determines G, since if
G′ = {⟨s, A⟩∈P | s is an initial segment of xG and xG −s ⊆A} ,
then G = G′: It is simple to check that G ⊆G′ and G′ is P-generic. But then
G = G′ on general grounds: For any ⟨s, A⟩∈P,
{⟨t, B⟩∈P | ⟨t, B⟩≤⟨s, A⟩∨⟨t, B⟩⊥⟨s, A⟩}
is dense in P, and so ⟨s, A⟩∈G′ readily implies that ⟨s, A⟩∈G.
Thus, V [xG] = V [G]. Such an xG is called a Mathias real; more precisely,
for M a transitive ∈-model of ZFC and x ⊆ω,
x is a Mathias real over M iff x = xG for some P M-generic G over M .
(Here, it is more convenient to consider reals as subsets of ω.) P does not have the
ω1-c.c., but it preserves ω1 and has other useful features that have led to several
applications. Mathias himself established some crucial properties:
11.14 Proposition (Mathias [77: 86]).
(a) For any ⟨s, A⟩∈P and formula ϕ in the forcing language, there is a
B ∈[A]ω such that ⟨s, B⟩∥ϕ.
(b) If x is a Mathias real over M, then any y ∈[x]ω is also a Mathias real
over M.
⊣

144
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
The point of (a) is that the s need not be extended to decide formulas; simpler
proofs for analogous results for measurable cardinals will be provided later (§18).
For discussing versions of ω −→(ω)ω
2 depending on the complexity of
partitions,
Y ⊆[ω]ω is Ramsey iff
∃x ∈[ω]ω([x]ω ⊆Y ∨[x]ω ∩Y = ∅) .
Thus, ω −→(ω)ω
2 iff every Y ⊆[ω]ω is Ramsey. See the end of §27 for more
about this property.
11.15 Exercise (Mathias [68, 77]). Suppose that there is an inaccessible cardinal
κ and G is Col(ω, κ)-generic. Then
(a) In V [G], every ωOn-deﬁnable subset of [ω]ω is Ramsey.
(b) In L(R)V [G], ω −→(ω)ω
2 holds.
Hint. For (a), let Y ⊆[ω]ω satisfy
x ∈Y
iff
V [a][x] |= ϕ[a, x]
with a ∈ωω. By 11.14(a), there is an ⟨∅, A⟩∈PV [a] such that ⟨∅, A⟩∥ϕ(ˇa, ˙r),
where ˙r is a canonical name for the Mathias real. Now note that there is a Mathias
real x over V [a] satisfying x ⊆A, and conclude by 11.14(b) that such an x veriﬁes
that Y is Ramsey.
⊣
Unlike the other properties considered, it is not known whether an inaccessible
cardinal is necessary for ω −→(ω)ω
2 :
11.16 Question. Does Con(ZFC) imply Con(ZF + DC + ω −→(ω)ω
2 )?
Solovay’s fruitful ideas, ﬁrst developed to establish the global result 11.1,
were to lead to important hierarchical extensions of classical results in descriptive
set theory (§14).

12. Descriptive Set Theory
145
12. Descriptive Set Theory
Descriptive set theory is the deﬁnability theory of the continuum, the study of the
structural properties of deﬁnable sets of reals. Motivated initially by constructivist
concerns, a major incentive for the subject has been to investigate the extent of
the regularity properties, properties indicative of well-behaved sets of reals of
which Lebesgue measurability, the Baire property, and the perfect set property
are the prominent examples. The subject developed progressively from Suslin’s
results on analytic sets in 1916, until G¨odel established delimitative results showing
under V = L that there are simply deﬁned sets of reals that do not have the
regularity properties.
In the ensuing years Kleene developed what turned out
to be the effective version of the theory as a generalization of his foundational
work in recursion theory, and considerably reﬁned the classical results. Then in
1965 Solovay reactivated the classical program by building on his 11.1 to provide
characterizations for the regularity properties at the level of G¨odel’s V = L
delimitation. While 11.1 had established the relative consistency of every set of
reals having the regularity properties, Solovay’s further results began the use of
large cardinal hypotheses to derive directly the regularity properties for sets of
reals, an approach that eventually met with remarkable success by the late 1980’s
as investigations with forcing and inner models established unexpectedly close
connections between large cardinal hypotheses and deﬁnable sets of reals.
This and the next section serve as a basis for succeeding sections by reviewing
the historical development and the basic theory, and §§14, 15 discuss work of
Solovay and then Martin incorporating large cardinal hypotheses. Moschovakis
[80] provides a comprehensive treatment of descriptive set theory in a general
context, Rogers [80] a compendium of recent results on analytic sets, Kechris [95]
an exposition of the classical theory in light of recent work, and Hinman [78] an
approach emphasizing hierarchies. Mansﬁeld-Weitkamp [85] and Jech [03: §25]
are shorter accounts that incorporate modern developments using forcing. This
section begins by recounting the early junctures of the subject, deferring proofs to
the next section.
Descriptive set theory has its origins in the work of the French analysts Borel,
Baire, and Lebesgue at the turn of the century. Following important contributions
to the theory of integration by Cantor as part of his study of sets (see Hawkins
[75: 3.3]), Borel [98: 46-47] isolated the Borel sets through an axiomatically pre-
sented measure. Taking a concrete approach to the general concept of function,
Baire in his thesis [99] distinguished and provided a hierarchical analysis of the
Baire functions, those functions in the smallest collection containing the continuous
functions of several real variables and closed under the taking of pointwise limits.
While Lebesgue’s thesis [02] is fundamental for measure theory as the source of his
concept of measurability, his ﬁrst major work in a distinctive direction was to be
the seminal paper of descriptive set theory: In the memoir [05] Lebesgue investi-
gated the Baire functions, stressing that they are exactly the functions deﬁnable via
analytic expressions (in a sense made precise). He correlated the Baire functions

146
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
with the Borel sets by showing that the latter are exactly the pre-images of open
sets by the former. With this he had introduced the ﬁrst hierarchy for the Borel
sets, differing in minor details from the now standard one from Hausdorff [14].
In §0 ωω served as the reals for formulations and the extension of concepts
to k(ωω) for k ∈ω was assumed through homeomorphisms. It is now incumbent
to state our further deﬁnitions explicitly for k(ωω), with k implicitly ranging over
ω. The classes Σ0
α and Π0
α for 0 < α < ω1 of the Borel hierarchy are deﬁned by
stipulating membership for each A ⊆k(ωω) as follows:
A ∈Σ0
1 iff A is open in k(ωω) , and
A ∈Π0
1 iff A is closed in k(ωω) ,
and recursively for α > 1,
A ∈Σ0
α iff A is the union of a countable subset of 
0<β<α Π0
β , and
A ∈Π0
α iff A is the intersection of a countable subset of 
0<β<α Σ0
β .
Each Σ0
α ∩P(k(ωω)) is closed under the taking of countable unions, and each
Π0
α∩P(k(ωω)), the taking of countable intersections. It is readily seen by induction
that Σ0
α and Π0
α are dual collections, i.e. A ∈Σ0
α iff k(ωω)−A ∈Π0
α for A ⊆k(ωω).
Moreover, Σ0
1 ⊆Σ0
2 by 0.8(c)(d), and so by induction 0 < β < α implies that
Σ0
β ∪Π0
β ⊆Σ0
α ∩Π0
α. By a coﬁnality argument the subsets of k(ωω) in

0<α<ω1 Σ0
α = 
0<α<ω1 Π0
α
comprise a σ-algebra, and hence are the Borel subsets of k(ωω).
In §§0, 11
Hausdorff’s terms Fσ and Gδ were used for the subsets of ωω in Σ0
2 and Π0
2
respectively; the now standard Σ0
α and Π0
α notation is from Addison [58].
The main results of Lebesgue [05] are that this is a proper hierarchy since
he showed in effect that Σ0
α ̸⊆Π0
α for any countable α > 0, and that there is a
Lebesgue measurable set which is not a Borel set. In fact, this paper is remarkable
for anticipating central concerns and techniques of mathematical logic: the sys-
tematic study of deﬁnable sets and the use of Cantor’s universal enumeration and
diagonalization argument to effect transcendence. Although Lebesgue’s reserva-
tions about arbitrary functions had turned to open skepticism with the appearance
of Zermelo’s Well-Ordering Theorem [04], it is ironic that his paper contained
tacit but essential uses of the Axiom of Choice (see Moore [82: 2.3]).
Descriptive set theory emerged as a distinct discipline through the initiatives
of the Russian mathematician Nikolai Luzin. Through a focal seminar that he
began in 1914 at the University of Moscow, he was to establish a prominent
school in the theory of functions of a real variable (see Phillips [78]; Keldysh
[74], Uspenskii [85], and Kanovei [85] survey the contributions to descriptive set
theory). Luzin had become acquainted with the work and views of the French
analysts while he was in Paris as a student, and from the beginning a major topic
of his seminar was the “descriptive theory of functions”. Signiﬁcantly, the young

12. Descriptive Set Theory
147
Sierpi´nski was an early participant; he had been interned in Moscow in 1915, and
Luzin and his teacher Dmitry Egorov interceded on his behalf to let him live freely
until his repatriation to Poland a year later. Not only did this lead to a decade-
long collaboration between Luzin and Sierpi´nski, but it undoubtedly encouraged
the latter in his founding of the Polish school (§2) and laid the basis for its interest
in descriptive set theory.
Luzin described the cardinality problem for Borel sets (operatively becoming
whether they have the perfect set property) to Pavel Aleksandrov, an early member
of the seminar and later a pioneer of modern topology. That the Borel sets are
Lebesgue measurable and have the Baire property are intrinsic to these concepts,
but little was known about the perfect set property beyond the Cantor-Bendixson
result 11.3(a). The property was implicit in a scheme of William Young [03]
clariﬁed by Hausdorff [14: 465ff], who used it to show that every Σ0
4 set is either
countable or has cardinality 2ℵ0. Hausdorff [16] then extended this conclusion to
all Borel sets. Aleksandrov [16] was able to establish that the Borel sets have the
perfect set property. The proof required a new way of comprehending the Borel
sets, as it turns out that a set having the perfect set property does not imply that
its complement does, and so an inductive proof through the Borel hierarchy is
not possible. The new, more direct analysis of Borel sets broke the ground for a
dramatic development:
Soon afterwards another student of Luzin’s, Mikhail Suslin (often rendered
“Souslin” in the French transliteration), began reading Lebesgue [05]. Memoirs
of Sierpi´nski [50: 28ff] recalled how Suslin then made a crucial discovery. For
any set B, the projection of B is
pB = {x | ∃y(⟨x, y⟩∈B)} .
In particular, for B ⊆k+1(ωω) = k(ωω) × ωω,
pB = {⟨x1, . . . , xk⟩| ∃y(⟨x1, . . . , xk, y⟩∈B)} .
Suslin noticed that at one point Lebesgue asserted ([05: 191-192]) that the pro-
jection of a Borel subset of the plane (2(ωω) in our formulation) is also a Borel
set. This was based on the mistaken claim that given a countable collection of
subsets of the plane the projection of their intersection is equal to the intersection
of their projections – in terms of quantiﬁers, an unjustiﬁable ∀∃to ∃∀switch.
Suslin soon found a counterexample to Lebesgue’s assertion, and this led to his
inspired investigation of the analytic sets. For A ⊆k(ωω),
A is analytic iff A = pB for some closed subset B of k+1(ωω) .
(To proceed classically with R instead of ωω, “closed” here must be replaced by
“Gδ”, i.e. countable intersections of open subsets of R.) Suslin [17] ﬁrst formulated
the analytic sets as the A-sets (les ensembles (A)), sets resulting from an explicit
operation, the Operation (A), and then characterized them as projections. He an-
nounced three main results, that every Borel set is analytic, that there is an analytic
set which is not Borel, and the following characterization (established by 13.5):

148
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
12.1 Theorem (Suslin [17]). For A ⊆k(ωω), A is Borel iff A and k(ωω) −A are
both analytic.
Thus, the Borel sets can be characterized in simple terms from above, as
well as analyzed through a hierarchy from below. Paradigmatic for later hierarchy
results, this theorem really began the subject of descriptive set theory. [17] was to
be Suslin’s sole publication, for he succumbed to typhus in a Moscow epidemic in
1919 at the age of 25. (The whole episode recalls a pivotal mistake by Augustin-
Louis Cauchy and the clariﬁcation due to the young Niels Abel that led to the
concept of uniform convergence, even to an unjustiﬁable ∀∃to ∃∀switch and
Abel’s untimely death.)
In an accompanying note, Luzin announced the regularity properties for an-
alytic sets ((a) and (b) are established by 14.4 and (c) by 14.8):
12.2 Theorem (Luzin [17]; (c) is attributed there to Suslin).
(a) Every analytic set is Lebesgue measurable.
(b) Every analytic set has the Baire property.
(c) Every analytic subset of ωω has the perfect set property.
(The attribution of (c) to Suslin is actually a faint echo of a question of
priority. According to memoirs of Aleksandrov [79: 284-286] it was he who had
deﬁned the A-sets, and Suslin proposed the name, as well as “Operation (A)”
for the corresponding operation, in Aleksandrov’s honor. This eponymy is not
mentioned in Suslin [17] but is supported by recollections of e.g. Keldysh [74: 180]
and Kuratowski [80: 69]. Aleksandrov recalled that he had shown that every Borel
set is an A-set and that every A-set has the perfect set property, although this is
not explicit in his [16]. He then tried hard in 1916 to show that every A-set is
Borel, only discontinuing when it became known that in the summer Suslin had
found a non-Borel A-set. According to Aleksandrov: “Many years later Luzin
started to call A-sets analytic sets and began, contrary to the facts, which he knew
well, to assert that the term ‘A-set’ is only an abbreviation for ‘analytic set’. But
by this time my personal relations with Luzin, at one time close and sincere, were
estranged.” Luzin [25, 27] did go to some pains to trace the term analytic back
to Lebesgue [05] and pointed out that the original example there of a non-Borel
Lebesgue measurable set is in fact the ﬁrst example of a non-Borel analytic set.
See also the text Luzin [30: 186ff], in which the Operation (A) is conspicuous by
its absence.)
The notes Suslin [17] and Luzin [17] were considerably elaborated in the
ensuing years, as the investigation of analytic sets was continued by Luzin and
his circle in Moscow and by Sierpi´nski in Warsaw. With the Borel sets having
been properly extended through the new operation of projection, Luzin [25a] and
Sierpi´nski [25] formulated the projective sets as those sets obtainable from the
Borel sets by the iterated application of projection and complementation. There
is the corresponding projective hierarchy, formulated in modern notation for ωω:
For A ⊆k(ωω),

12. Descriptive Set Theory
149
A ∈Σ1
0 iff
A ∈Σ0
1, i.e. A is open ,
and recursively for n ∈ω,
A ∈Π1
n iff
k(ωω) −A ∈Σ1
n , and
A ∈Σ1
n+1 iff A = pB for some Π1
n subset B of k+1(ωω) .
Thus, A ∈Σ1
1 iff A is analytic. Also deﬁne
∆1
n = Σ1
n ∩Π1
n .
These terms are also used as adjectives, as in “Σ1
n set” or “A is Π1
n”. Σ1
n and Π1
n
are dual collections, i.e. A ∈Σ1
n iff
k(ωω) −A ∈Π1
n for A ⊆k(ωω). Moreover,
Σ1
n ∪Π1
n ⊆∆1
n+1. This follows readily by induction from Π1
0 ⊆Π1
1, which itself
is seen as follows:
Suppose that A ∈Π1
0, i.e. A is closed, so that A = 
n∈ω Gn for open sets
Gn (by 0.8(c)(d)). Set G = 
n∈ω Gn × O(⟨n⟩) ⊆2(ωω). Then G is open, and
for any x ∈ωω,
x ∈A ↔∀n(x ∈Gn)
↔∀y(⟨x, y⟩∈G)
so that A ∈Π1
1.
Suslin’s result 12.1 is the assertion that ∆1
1 is exactly the collection of Borel
sets. Luzin [25c] and Sierpi´nski [25] observed that like the Borel hierarchy the
projective hierarchy is a proper hierarchy (12.8), and soon its basic properties were
established. For example, each Σ1
n ∩P(k(ωω))) and Π1
n ∩P(k(ωω)) is closed under
countable unions and intersections. (However, the projective subsets of P(k(ωω))
as a whole are not so closed; to obtain this closure, one can continue the projective
hierarchy into the transﬁnite incorporating countable unions at limit stages.)
On the other hand, the investigation of projective sets encountered basic
obstacles from the beginning. For one thing, unlike for Σ1
1 sets the cardinality
problem for Π1
1 sets (operatively, whether they have the perfect set property)
could not be resolved. Luzin [17: 94] had already noted this difﬁculty, and it was
emphasized as a major problem in Luzin [25a]. In a conﬁdent and remarkably
prophetic passage he declared that his efforts towards its resolution led him to
a conclusion “totally unexpected”, that “one does not know and one will never
know” of the family of projective sets, although it has cardinality 2ℵ0 and consists
of “effective sets”, whether every member has cardinality 2ℵ0 if uncountable, has
the Baire property, or is even Lebesgue measurable. Luzin [25b] pointed out the
speciﬁc problem of establishing the Lebesgue measurability of Σ1
2 sets. Both these
difﬁculties at Π1
1 and Σ1
2 were also observed by Sierpi´nski [25: 242], although he
was able to show that every Σ1
2 set is a union of ℵ1 Borel sets (13.7).
The ﬁrst wave of progress from Suslin’s results having worked itself out,
Luzin provided systematic accounts, especially in a classic text [30]. He aired
the constructivist views of his French predecessors, and not only did he contrive
somewhat self-effacingly to establish deﬁnite precedents for his own work in

150
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
theirs, but he also espoused their distrust of the unbridled Axiom of Choice and
advocated their views on deﬁnability. Lebesgue [05] had ended with the question,
“Can one name a non-measurable set?” Taking this as a starting point of his own
work, Luzin [30: 323] wrote: “. . . the author considers the question of whether
all projective sets are measurable or not to be unsolvable [insoluble], since in his
view the methods of deﬁning the projective sets and Lebesgue measure are not
comparable, and consequently, not logically related.”
If the projective sets proved intractable with respect to the regularity proper-
ties, signiﬁcant progress was nonetheless made in other directions. In Luzin [30a]
the investigation of uniformization was proposed. For A, B ⊆2(ωω),
A is uniformized by B iff
B ⊆A ∧∀x(∃y(⟨x, y⟩∈A) ↔∃!y(⟨x, y⟩∈B)) .
(As usual, ∃! abbreviates the formalizable “there exists exactly one”.) Since B is in
effect a choice function for an indexed family of sets, asserting the uniformizability
of arbitrary subsets of 2(ωω) is a version of the Axiom of Choice. Taking this
approach to the problem of deﬁnable choices, Luzin announced several results
about the uniformizability of Σ1
1 sets by like sets. One was afﬁrmed in a sharp
form by Petr Novikov [31], who showed that there is a closed set that cannot be
uniformized by any Σ1
1 set. It was eventually shown by Vladimir Yankov [41]
that any Σ1
1 set can be uniformized by a set that is a countable intersection of
countable unions of differences of Σ1
1 sets. Interestingly enough, von Neumann
[49: 448ff] also established a less structured uniformization result for Σ1
1 sets as
part of an extensive study of rings of operators.
Presumably because of the
difﬁculties encountered in the study of Π1
1 sets Luzin [30a: 351] claimed that there
are Π1
1 sets that cannot be uniformized by any “distinguishable” set and gave a
purported example. Notwithstanding, Sierpi´nski [30: 139] asked whether every
Π1
1 set can be uniformized by a Π1
2, or even any projective, set, and a result of
Novikov in Luzin-Novikov [35] did lead to the conclusion that every Π1
1 set can
be uniformized by a Σ1
2 set. Building on this, the Japanese mathematician Motokiti
Kondˆo established (see 13.17) the Π1
1 Uniformization Theorem:
12.3 Theorem (Kondˆo [37, 39]). Every Π1
1 subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized by
a Π1
1 set.
This was the culminating result of the early period. As Kondˆo noted, his
result implies through projections that every Σ1
2 set can be uniformized by a Σ1
2
set, but the question of whether every Π1
2 set can be uniformized by any projective
set was left open.
The total impasse in descriptive set theory with respect to the regularity
properties was to be explained by G¨odel’s work on the constructible hierarchy. In
his initial article [38] on L, he announced that if V = L, then there is a ∆1
2 set
of reals which is not Lebesgue measurable and a Π1
1 set of reals which does not
have the perfect set property. (See 13.10 and 13.12 for proofs.) Thus, the early

12. Descriptive Set Theory
151
descriptive set theorists were confronting an obstacle formalizable in ZFC. The
importance that G¨odel attached to these results can be evinced from his listing
of each of them on equal footing with his AC and GCH results. However, he
did not publish proofs, and more than a decade was to pass before proofs ﬁrst
appeared in Novikov [51]. In the meantime, G¨odel [51: 67] (see G¨odel [90: 33])
had sketched a more basic result that readily implies under V = L that there is
a non-measurable ∆1
2 set of reals: if V = L, then there is a Σ1
2 well-ordering of
the reals. (According to Kreisel [80: 197], “. . . according to G¨odel’s notes, not
he, but S. Ulam, steeped in the Polish tradition of descriptive set theory, noticed
that the deﬁnition of the well-ordering . . . of subsets of ω was so simple that it
supplied a non-measurable PCA [i.e. Σ1
2] set of real numbers . . . ”) Mostowski
had also established the result in a manuscript destroyed during the war, but it is
not apparent in Novikov [51]. Details were eventually provided by Addison [59]
who built on this work to settle the uniformization problem for projective sets and
related issues in L. Addison was a student of Kleene, who through initiatives from
mathematical logic had been developing what is now called effective descriptive
set theory.
After his fundamental work on recursive function theory in the 1930’s, Kleene
expanded his investigations of effectiveness and developed a general theory of de-
ﬁnability for relations on ω. In [43] he considered the arithmetical relations, those
relations obtainable from the recursive relations by applications of number quan-
tiﬁers. Developing canonical representations he classiﬁed these relations into a
hierarchy according to quantiﬁer complexity and showed that it is a proper hierar-
chy. In [55, 55a, 55b] he studied the analytical relations, those relations obtainable
from the arithmetical relations by applications of function quantiﬁers. Again he
worked out representation and hierarchy results, and moreover he established an
elegant theorem that turned out to be an effective version of Suslin’s characteri-
zation 12.1 of Borel sets.
Kleene was developing what amounted to the effective content of the classical
theory, unaware that his work had direct antecedents in the papers of Lebesgue,
Luzin, and Sierpi´nski.
Certainly, he had very different motivations: With the
arithmetical relations he wanted to extend the Incompleteness Theorem, and ana-
lytical relations grew out of his investigations of notations for recursive ordinals.
Moreover, his work featured reﬁnements made possible by his Recursion Theorem
and its sometimes miraculous applications in the method of effective transﬁnite
recursion. On the other hand, already in [43: 50] he did make elliptic remarks
about possible analogies with the classical theory. Pursuing one such analogy,
Mostowski [47] had also derived the results on arithmetical relations. But further
investigations exposed shortcomings with this analogy, and it was Addison who
established the proper correlation: it is the analytical relations that are analogous
to the projective sets, with the arithmetical relations being analogous to the sets
in 
0<n<ω Σ0
n, the ﬁnite levels of the Borel hierarchy. As he would put it,

152
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
analytical
projective =
arithmetical
ﬁnite level Borel .
The conceptual move in Kleene’s work from relations on ω to relations on ωω
revealed that this correlation was exact: as pointed out by Addison [58: 126] the
clopen subsets of ωω are exactly those sets recursive in some real (12.6(a)). Had
Kleene seen his work in this light from the beginning, it is doubtful that he would
have initially used “analytic” as he did for “analytical”; the latter term may have
evolved to draw a distinction from the classical analytic sets, but is still a source
of confusion.
The development of effective descriptive set theory considerably clariﬁed
the classical context, injected recursion-theoretic techniques into the subject, and
placed deﬁnability considerations squarely at its forefront. Not only were new
approaches to classical problems provided, but results and questions could now
be formulated in a reﬁned setting. That there is a basic connection between the
projective sets and logical deﬁnability had been observed in Kuratowski-Tarski
[31] and Kuratowski [31]; it is the careful attention to real parameters that distin-
guishes the modern approach. The effective context is forthwith established via
deﬁnability in what follows.
The development of descriptive set theory can be carried out in ZF + DC,
DC being the Principle of Dependent Choices from 11.1. The principle becomes
crucial for the later use of strong hypotheses (Chapter 6); it is then needed for the
characterization of well-foundedness in terms of the lack of inﬁnite descending
chains. Recalling that DC implies the countable choice principle ACω, consider
its further restriction to sets of reals:
(ACω(ωω))
Every countable set consisting of
non-empty sets of reals has a choice function .
This principle, applied to choose countably many reals coding well-orderings,
sufﬁces to show that ω1 is regular. An important observation for later is that:
The main development through this and
the next section can be carried out in ZF + ACω(ωω) .
Those few results and remarks involving more substantial uses of AC will
serve mainly to frame the discussion and will be noted explicitly.
The Deﬁnability Context
Second-order arithmetic is taken to be the two-sorted structure
A2 = ⟨ω, ωω, ap, +, ×, exp, <, 0, 1⟩,
where ω and ωω are two separate domains connected by the binary operation
ap: ωω × ω →ω of application,
ap(x, m) = x(m) ,

12. Descriptive Set Theory
153
and +, ×, exp, <, 0, 1 impose the usual arithmetical structure on ω, with exp
being exponentiation. (exp is traditionally not taken as a basic operation, but
its inclusion simpliﬁes our presentation without altering the signiﬁcant concepts
of descriptive set theory.) In addition to symbols for these features the underly-
ing language has two sorts of variables, those ranging over ω to be denoted by
v0
0, v0
1, v0
2, . . . and those ranging over ωω to be denoted by v1
0, v1
1, v1
2, . . .. Cor-
responding are the number quantiﬁers and function quantiﬁers, to be denoted
by ∃0, ∀0 and ∃1, ∀1 respectively.
Terms for numbers are deﬁned recursively
by closing off 0, 1, v0
0, v0
1, v0
2, . . . under +, ×, exp, and ap(v1
i , ·). For any such
term τ, (∃0v0
i < τ)ϕ is written for ∃0v0
i (v0
i < τ ∧ϕ) and (∀0v0
i < τ)ϕ for
∀0v0
i (v0
i < τ →ϕ) whenever possible; these are the bounded quantiﬁers. A2 is a
full second-order structure with ωω playing the role of P(ω).
Generally speaking, questions of deﬁnability in this structure can pertain to
any relations A ⊆rω × k(ωω) for some r, k ∈ω. The case A ⊆k(ωω) was the
preoccupation of classical descriptive set theory, but the general case is intrinsic
to the effective theory. Regarding the members of rω × k(ωω) as (r + k)-tuples,
to be written interchangeably are
A(m1, . . . , mr, x1, . . . , xk) iff
⟨m1, . . . , mr, x1, . . . , xk⟩∈A ,
with A regarded as a relation on the one hand and a set on the other. Notational
variations like
A(m, w)
when r > 0, m ∈ω, and w ∈r−1ω×k(ωω) have the expected meaning. Such an A
is deﬁnable in A2 by a formula ϕ(v0
1, . . . , v0
r , v1
1, . . . , v1
k) iff for any m1, . . . , mr ∈
ω and x1, . . . , xk ∈ωω,
A(m1, . . . , mr, x1, . . . , xk) iff
A2 |= ϕ[m1, . . . , mr, x1, . . . , xk] .
Henceforth, the syntax and semantics of A2 are informally conﬂated in such trav-
esties as ∀0m∃1x A(m, x) and ¬A(w), focusing primarily on relations rather than
their deﬁning formulas.
Classifying relations according to quantiﬁer complexity, stipulate for r, k ∈ω
and A ⊆rω × k(ωω) that:
A ∈∆0
0 iff A is deﬁnable in A2 by a formula
whose only quantiﬁers are bounded .
∆0
0 is also used as an adjective.
∆0
0 codings of sequences will often be used. For deﬁniteness, let pi denote
the (i + 1)st prime, and for m0, . . . , mr, m, i ∈ω set
⟨⟨m0, . . . , mr⟩⟩= pm0+1
0
· pm1+1
1
· · · pmr+1
r
, and
(m)i = min({e | pe+2
i
does not divide m}) .

154
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
These functions are ∆0
0 (and it is for this that exp was included in A2). Moreover,
(m)i is always deﬁned, and (⟨⟨m0, . . . , mr⟩⟩)i = mi for i ≤r. In §0 an enumeration
⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω had been ﬁxed; henceforth, the decoding of si from i will be
taken to be as ∆0
0, using
si =
 ⟨m0, . . . , mr⟩
if i = ⟨⟨m0, . . . , mr⟩⟩, and
∅
otherwise .
For x ∈ωω and m ∈ω set
x(m) = ⟨⟨x(0), . . . , x(m −1)⟩⟩∈ω
and deﬁne (x)i ∈ωω for i ∈ω by
(x)i(m) = x(⟨⟨i, m⟩⟩) .
The x notation is extended to w ∈
rω × k(ωω) by stipulating that for m ∈
ω, w(m) ∈r+kω is like w except that each occurrence of any x ∈ωω has been
replaced by x(m).
Continuing,
A is arithmetical iff A is deﬁnable in A2 by a formula
without function quantiﬁers .
Bounded quantiﬁers can be shifted to the right and like quantiﬁers contracted using
the following equivalences and their duals (obtained by negating both sides):
(∀0 p < q)∃0mR(p, q, m, w) ↔∃0m(∀0 p < q)R(p, q, (m)p, w)
∃0m∃0 pR(m, p, w) ↔∃0mR((m)0, (m)1, w) .
Hence, the arithmetical relations can be classiﬁed into a hierarchy, the arithmetical
hierarchy, by deﬁning the (lightface!) Σ0
n and Π0
n classes for n ∈ω as follows:
A ∈Σ0
n
iff
∀w(A(w) ↔∃0m1∀0m2 . . . Qmn R(m1, . . . , mn, w)) , and
A ∈Π0
n
iff
∀w(A(w) ↔∀0m1∃0m2 . . . Qmn R(m1, . . . , mn, w))
for some ∆0
0 R ⊆r+nω × k(ωω), where Q is ∃0 if n is odd and ∀0 if n is
even in the ﬁrst and vice versa in the second. (It is notationally incumbent that
Σ0
0 = Π0
0 = ∆0
0, but this will be irrelevant.) Σ0
n and Π0
n are dual collections,
i.e. A ∈Σ0
n iff rω × k(ωω) −A ∈Π0
n ; Σ0
n ∪Π0
n ⊆Σ0
n+1 ∩Π0
n+1; and these terms
are also used as adjectives.
A is recursive iff A ∈Σ0
1 ∩Π0
1 .
This conforms for A ⊆rω to the original 1930’s concept of recursive relation
(although this by no means is immediate from our formulation). Kleene extended
the theory in the 1950’s to include A ⊆rω × k(ωω). There are recursive relations
that are not ∆0
0, i.e. Σ0
1 ∩Π0
1 properly extends ∆0
0.

12. Descriptive Set Theory
155
Finally,
A is analytical iff A is deﬁnable in A2 .
Number quantiﬁers can be shifted to the right and like function quantiﬁers con-
tracted using the following equivalences and their duals:
(∗)
∀0m∃1x R(m, w, x) ↔∃1x∀0mR(m, w, (x)m)
∃0m∃1x R(m, w, x) ↔∃1x R((x)0(0), w, (x)1)
∃1x∃1yR(w, x, y) ↔∃1x R(w, (x)0, (x)1) .
(The ﬁrst makes use of ACω(ωω); (∗) will be seen to be necessary for the classiﬁ-
cation of relations, leading to the coming 12.7 and other basic results.) It follows
that the analytical relations can be classiﬁed into a hierarchy, the analytical hier-
archy, by deﬁning the (lightface!) Σ1
n and Π1
n classes for n ∈ω as follows: First,
for later inductive schemes set
Σ1
0 = Σ0
1
and Π1
0 = Π0
1 .
Then for n > 0, deﬁne
A ∈Σ1
n
iff
∀w(A(w) ↔∃1x1∀1x2 . . . Qxn R(w, x1, . . . , xn)) , and
A ∈Π1
n
iff
∀w(A(w) ↔∀1x1∃1x2 . . . Qxn R(w, x1, . . . , xn))
for some arithmetical R ⊆rω × k+n(ωω), where Q is ∃1 if n is odd and ∀1 if n is
even in the ﬁrst and vice versa in the second. Also deﬁne
∆1
n = Σ1
n ∩Π1
n .
As before, Σ1
n and Π1
n are dual collections, Σ1
n ∪Π1
n ⊆∆1
n+1, and these terms
are also used as adjectives. The terminology is consistent with the classiﬁcation
of formulas in §0, but the focus on relations and the use of ωω rather than P(ω)
makes the present context distinctive.
The quantiﬁer equivalences (∗) above show that the classiﬁcation of any
relation in the analytical hierarchy only depends on the function quantiﬁers and
their alternations; this is frequently relied upon without further mention. Although
the foregoing may be the natural formulation of the hierarchy, there is an important
self-reﬁnement that leads to simple normal forms (and vindicates our deﬁnitions
of Σ1
0 and Π1
0 ):
12.4 Exercise.
If n > 0 is even, there is a ∆0
0 ˆR ⊆r+k+n+1ω such that the
arithmetical R(w, x1, . . . , xn) above can be replaced by
∃0m ˆR(m, w(m), x1(m), . . . , xn(m)) .
An analogous assertion holds for n odd, with ∀0m replacing ∃0m.

156
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Hint. Take n > 0 even, so that the rightmost function quantiﬁer Q is ∀1; the
other case follows by taking negations. First change each number quantiﬁer ∀0 p
in a prenex arithmetical deﬁnition of R to a function quantiﬁer ∀1x by replacing
occurrences of p by x(0). Using the equivalences (∗), shift these new quantiﬁers
to the left and contract like quantiﬁers.
Hence, all the ∀0’s of R have been
absorbed into Q, and what remains is of form ∃0 pR0(p, w, x1, . . . , xn) where
R0 is ∆0
0.
Being deﬁnable in A2 with only bounded quantiﬁers, for each p,
R0(p, w, x1, . . . , xn) only depends on w(q), x1(q), . . . , xn(q) for some q ∈ω
sufﬁciently large. Thus,
∃0 pR0(p, w, x1, . . . , xn) ↔∃0 p∃0q R1(p, w(q), x1(q), . . . , xn(q))
for some ∆0
0 R1, and the quantiﬁers can be contracted to complete the argument.
⊣
Having deﬁned the effective (“lightface”) hierarchies the correlation with
the Borel and projective (“boldface”) hierarchies can be made through the simple
expedient of relativization to real parameters. For a ∈ωω, second-order arithmetic
in a is the expanded structure
A2(a) = ⟨ω, ωω, ap, +, ×, exp, <, 0, 1, a⟩
where a is regarded as a binary relation on ω. Replacing A2 by A2(a) in the
preceding there are the corresponding relativized notions:
∆0
0 in a
recursive in a
arithmetical in a
Σ0
n(a), Π0
n (a)
analytical in a
Σ1
n(a) , Π1
n (a) , ∆1
n(a) .
The following is a simple observation that will be used without further men-
tion:
12.5 Exercise. For a ∈ωω, R ⊆rω × k(ωω) is Σ0
1(a) iff there is aΣ0
1 S ⊆
rω × k+1(ωω) such that ∀w(R(w) ↔S(w, a)). Hence, analogous statements hold
for Σ0
n, Π0
n , Σ1
n, and Π1
n .
⊣
This provides a way of deﬁning the relativized hierarchies in A2, but one
has to be careful: although ∆1
n(a) = Σ1
n(a) ∩Π1
n (a), 12.5 does not hold with the
Σ0
1’s replaced by ∆1
n.
Here is the correlation with the classical hierarchies:
12.6 Proposition. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) and n > 0. Then:
(a) A ∈Σ0
n iff A ∈Σ0
n(a) for some a ∈ωω, and similarly for Π0
n.
(b) A ∈Σ1
n iff A ∈Σ1
n(a) for some a ∈ωω, and similarly for Π1
n.

12. Descriptive Set Theory
157
Proof. (a) For n = 1, suppose ﬁrst that A ∈Σ0
1. Using our ∆0
0 decoding of
si ∈<ωω from i and laying out the codes for the basic open sets that make up A
in blocks of length k, there is an a ∈ωω such that for any w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔∃0m(w ∈O(sa(mk)) × O(sa(mk+1)) × . . . × O(sa(mk+k−1))) .
Hence, it is readily seen that A ∈Σ0
1(a). Conversely, if A ∈Σ0
1(a) for some
a ∈ωω, then for any w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔∃0mR(m, w)
where R is recursive in a. For each m, R(m, w) only depends on w(q) for some
q. Consequently each Rm = {w | R(m, w)} is open, and so is A = 
m Rm.
The Π0
n case is an immediate consequence of the Σ0
n case, and the Σ0
n+1 case
follows from the Π0
n case by an argument similar to the base case.
(b) This is a direct consequence of the deﬁnitions, 12.4, and the n = 1 case
of (a).
⊣
Thus, via Σ0
1(a) ∩Π0
1 (a) being the collection of relations recursive in a we
have Addison’s dictum mentioned earlier that the clopen subsets of ωω are exactly
those sets recursive in some real. The uniform notation of Σ, Σ, and so forth that
has been used all along was advocated by Addison [58] to reﬂect the correlations.
Results will often be stated in terms of the Σ1
n(a)’s for the effective content; these
renderings imply of course the corresponding results about the classical Σ1
n’s.
There is also an effective analogue of the transﬁnite Borel levels Σ0
α, Π0
α
for α ≥ω (see Hinman [78: IV§4]). For relations ⊆rω, the original formula-
tion through integer notations for ordinals is Kleene’s hyperarithmetic hierarchy;
indeed, its study was the major motivation of his formulation of the analytical hi-
erarchy. In the classical context, extending the hierarchy 
0<n<ω Σ0
n of the ﬁnite
level Borel sets into the transﬁnite results in the Borel sets, which by Suslin’s fun-
damental result 12.1 coincides with the ∆1
1 sets. In the effective context, extending
the hierarchy 
n∈ω Σ0
n of arithmetical sets into the transﬁnite through analogous
but recursive procedures results in the hyperarithmetic sets, which by Kleene’s
analogue for 12.1 coincides with the ∆1
1 sets. (For more on hyperarithmetic the-
ory, see Sacks [90: A§II].)
Having established a working context for descriptive set theory, we now
pursue the development of the subject through its classical results. The emphasis
will be on the traditional relations ⊆k(ωω), although relations ⊆rω × k(ωω) can
be easily accommodated with only notational complications.
The ﬁrst important idea of descriptive set theory was the use of Cantor’s
universal enumeration and diagonalization argument to effect a hierarchical tran-
scendence. Borel [05: note III] had mentioned the idea, and Lebesgue [05] incor-
porated deﬁnability considerations to achieve his hierarchy results. An application
is given here in set form to show that the projective hierarchy is proper. For any
collection Γ of sets,

158
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
U is universal for Γ
iff (i) U ⊆2(ωω) and U ∈Γ , and
(ii) for any A ⊆ωω, A ∈Γ iff
A = {x | ⟨a, x⟩∈U} for some a ∈ωω .
For 0 < k ∈ω any homeomorphic identiﬁcation of k(ωω) with ωω yields subsets
of k+1(ωω) in Γ analogously universal for the subsets of k(ωω) in Γ , a concept
that occurs in the following proposition.
12.7 Proposition (Luzin [25c]; Sierpi´nski [25]). For each n > 0, there is a Σ1
n
set universal for Σ1
n (and so a Π1
n set universal for Π1
n).
Proof. First note that for 0 < k ∈ω there is a Σ0
1 set Wk ⊆k+1(ωω) universal for
Σ0
1 subsets of k(ωω), i.e. for any A ⊆k(ωω),
A ∈Σ0
1 iff
A = {w | Wk(a, w)} for some a ∈ωω .
Simply set
Wk(a, w) iff ∃0m(w ∈O(sa(mk)) × O(sa(mk+1)) × . . . × O(sa(mk+k−1)))
as in the proof of 12.6(a). It is now straightforward to check, recalling 12.4, that
if Un is deﬁned by
Un(a, x) iff ∃1x1∀1x2 . . . ∀1xnWn+1(a, x, x1, . . . , xn)
when n is even, and with ∀1xn replaced by ∃1xn and Wn+1 by its complement
when n is odd, then Un is universal for Σ1
n. The parenthetical remark about Π1
n
follows from taking the complement of Un.
⊣
12.8 Corollary. For each n > 0, Σ1
n ̸⊆∆1
n, Π1
n ̸⊆∆1
n, and ∆1
n+1 ̸⊆Σ1
n ∪Π1
n.
Proof. This uses Cantor’s diagonalization argument. With Un as in the previous
proof, set Dn(x) ↔Un(x, x) for any x ∈ωω. Then Dn ∈Σ1
n, and Dn ̸∈Π1
n:
Otherwise, ¬Dn = ωω −Dn ∈Σ1
n and there would be an a ∈ωω such that for any
x ∈ωω, ¬Dn(x) ↔Un(a, x). But then, there is the paradigmatic contradiction
¬Dn(a) ↔Un(a, a) ↔Dn(a) .
That Π1
n ̸⊆∆1
n follows by considering ¬Dn, and that ∆1
n+1 ̸⊆Σ1
n ∪Π1
n follows by
considering the recursive union
En = {(x)0 | x ∈Dn} ∪{(x)1 | x ̸∈Dn}
where for i < 2, (x)i ∈ωω is given by
(x)i(m) =
 i
if m = 0 , and
x(m −1)
if m > 0 .
En ∈∆1
n+1 since Dn ∈Σ1
n and ¬Dn ∈Π1
n , yet En ̸∈Σ1
n ∪Π1
n since both Dn and
¬Dn can be recovered from it.
⊣

12. Descriptive Set Theory
159
Note that the diagonalization argument shows that there can be no ∆1
n set
universal for ∆1
n. An analogous argument with number quantiﬁers shows that the
ﬁnite levels of the Borel hierarchy are proper. Lebesgue [05] similarly showed
that all levels of the hierarchy are proper (and bearing on his skepticism of the
Axiom of Choice, ACω(ωω) is nonetheless seen to be necessary here to choose
coﬁnal sequences for limit ordinals).
The next important idea of descriptive set theory was to analyze sets by asso-
ciating ordinals to their members. With roots in the Lebesgue paper and ﬁrst appli-
cations in Luzin-Sierpi´nski [18], the approach became basic in Luzin-Sierpi´nski
[23], a fundamental paper on analytic sets.
Establishing some terminology in
sufﬁcient generality for later use, stipulate for any k ∈ω and set Y that
T is a tree on kω × Y
iff (i) T ⊆
m∈ω
k(mω) × mY , and
(ii) if ⟨t0, . . . , tk⟩∈T , then
⟨t0|m, . . . , tk|m⟩∈T for any m ≤|t0| .
(When k = 0, T is a tree on Y iff T ⊆<ωY and is closed under the taking of
initial segments; analogous conventions apply when Y = ∅.) Thus, T consists of
(k + 1)-tuples of ﬁnite sequences of the same length and is a tree in the sense of
§7 under a natural initial segment ordering. [T ] denotes the collection of inﬁnite
branches of T :
⟨x0, . . . , xk−1, f ⟩∈[T ] iff
⟨x0, . . . , xk−1, f ⟩∈k(ωω) × ωY and
∀0m(⟨x0|m, . . . , xk−1|m, f |m⟩∈T ) .
Also, for w = ⟨x0, . . . , xl−1⟩∈l(ωω) with l ≤k, Tw is that tree on k−lω × Y
deﬁned by
⟨t0, . . . , tk−l⟩∈Tw iff
∃0m(⟨x0|m, . . . , xl−1|m, t0, . . . , tk−l⟩∈T ) .
Tx is written for T⟨x⟩.
Next deﬁne ⊆∗to be coordinate-wise inclusion for n-tuples, i.e.
⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩⊆∗⟨y1, . . . , yn⟩iff
xi ⊆yi for 1 ≤i ≤n ,
and let ⊂∗, ⊇∗, and ⊃∗have the derived meanings.
Also deﬁne ⌢∗to be
coordinate-wise concatenation for n-tuples of sequences, i.e.
⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩⌢∗⟨y1, . . . , yn⟩= ⟨x⌢
1 y1, . . . , x⌢
n yn⟩.
When k = 0 or Y = ∅in the deﬁnition of T , ⊃∗is regarded as reverting back to
⊃and so forth.
In these terms, some further terminology for a T as above is developed: First,
for any set t,
T/t = {s | t⌢∗s ∈T } .
Next,
T is well-founded iff [T ] = ∅,

160
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
i.e. reverse coordinate-wise inclusion ⊃∗is a well-founded relation on T . (In this
context, salient is the lack of inﬁnite descending chains. The equivalence of this
with the usual formulation of well-foundedness requires DC in general, but the
focus will be on well-orderable Y’s and hence well-orderable T ’s, for which DC
is not needed.) For such T , the rank function ρT : T →On is deﬁned in the usual
way (cf. 0.3) by:
ρT (t) = sup({ρT (s) + 1 | s ⊃∗t}) ,
noting that ρT (t) = sup(∅) = 0 iff t is maximal in ⊃∗. The height of T is then
deﬁned by
∥T ∥= ran(ρT ) .
Note that ∥T ∥is an ordinal, indeed ∥T ∥= ρT (⟨∅, . . . , ∅⟩), and generally ρT (t) =
∥T/t∥. ρT is a basic example of an order-preserving map ρ: ⟨T, ⊃∗⟩→⟨On, <⟩,
i.e. if s, t ∈T with s ⊃∗t, then ρ(s) < ρ(t). There is also the concept of an
order-preserving map ρ: T1 →T2 between two trees T1 and T2, i.e. if s, t ∈T1
with s ⊃∗t, then ρ(s) ⊃∗ρ(t). The following are simple but crucial observations;
no appeal will be made to (a) unless Y is well-orderable.
12.9 Exercise.
(a) For a tree T on kω × Y, T is well-founded iff there is an order-preserving
map ρ: T →On. If such a ρ exists, then ρT (t) ≤ρ(t) for every t ∈T , and
ρT : T →max({ω1, |Y|+}).
(b) For trees S and T , there is an order-preserving map: S →T iff either T
is ill-founded or else ∥S∥≤∥T ∥.
Hint. For (a), recall 0.3.
For (b), if f : S →T is order-preserving and T is well-founded, then
ρT ◦f : S →On is order-preserving, so by (a),
∥S∥= ρS(∅) ≤ρT ( f (∅)) ≤∥T ∥.
For the converse, if T is ill-founded, then ﬁxing an inﬁnite branch through
T , S can be mapped in an order-preserving manner into T by assigning all the
elements in a level to the single node on the branch at the corresponding level. If
T is well-founded and ∥S∥≤∥T ∥, then proceed by induction on ∥T ∥: For each
⟨i⟩∈S, ∥S/⟨i⟩∥< ∥T ∥, and so there is a ti ∈T such that ti ̸= ∅and ∥S/⟨i⟩∥≤
∥T/ti∥. Let fi: S/⟨i⟩→T/ti be order-preserving and deﬁne f : S →T by
f (s) =
 ∅
if s = ∅, and
ti ⌢fi(ˆs)
if s = ⟨i⟩⌢ˆs .
⊣
Trees provide a simple analysis of closed sets:
12.10 Proposition. For C ⊆k(ωω), C is closed iff there is a tree T on kω such
that C = [T ].

12. Descriptive Set Theory
161
Proof. Take k = 1 for notational simplicity. Given C, set
T = {x|m | x ∈C ∧m ∈ω}
so that C ⊆[T ]. If C is closed, then for any y ̸∈C there is an m ∈ω such that
O(y|m) ∩C = ∅, so y ̸∈[T ]. Hence, C = [T ].
Conversely, if T is a tree on ω and x ̸∈[T ], then for some m ∈ω, x|m ̸∈T
and consequently O(x|m) ∩[T ] = ∅. Thus, ωω −[T ] is open.
⊣
The next section begins with a tree representation of Π1
1 sets and proceeds
to the consequent classical results.

162
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
This section is devoted to the classical analysis of Π1
1 sets and Σ1
2 sets, building on
the groundwork laid in the previous section. As described there, the development
can be carried out in ZF + ACω(ωω).
Well-founded trees as articulated at the end of the previous section provide
a basic representation of Π1
1 sets, the classical result later given effective content:
13.1 Theorem (Luzin-Sierpi´nski [23], Kleene [55]). Suppose that a ∈ωω and
A ⊆k(ωω). Then A is Π1
1 (a) iff there is a tree T on kω × ω such that for any
w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔Tw is well-founded ,
and the relation {⟨i, w⟩| si ∈Tw} is recursive in a.
Proof. This can be seen as a corollary to 12.10, but is established anew. Given
such a representation, A(w) is clearly Π1
1 (a):
A(w) ↔∀1y∃0i∃0 p(si = y|p ∧si /∈Tw) .
For the converse, take k = 1 for notational simplicity. By 12.4, there is an
R ⊆3ω recursive in a such that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔∀1y∃0mR(m, x(m), y(m)) .
Let T be that tree on ω × ω consisting of the “unsecured” sequences:
T = {⟨s, t⟩| ∀0 p < |s| + 1(¬R(p, ⟨⟨s(0), . . . , s(p −1)⟩⟩, ⟨⟨t(0), . . . , t(p −1)⟩⟩))} .
Then A(x) iff Tx is well-founded, and {⟨i, x⟩| si ∈Tx} is a relation recursive
in a.
⊣
By this means, for any Π1
1 set A with corresponding tree T an ordinal ∥Tw∥
can be associated to each w ∈A. Actually, Luzin-Sierpi´nski [23] focused on
well-orderings, and Kleene [55] on integer notations for ordinals. Both in effect
linearized trees using an ordering that ﬁrst appeared in the earlier paper, although
it is now known as the Kleene-Brouwer ordering: For s, t ∈<ωOn,
s <KB t iff either s ⊃t or else for the least i
such that s(i) ̸= t(i), s(i) < t(i) .
<KB is a strict linear ordering of <ωOn. Note that it is s ⊃t in the deﬁnition
rather than s ⊂t.
As a simple way to remember the ordering, s <KB t iff
s⌢⟨∞, ∞, ∞, . . .⟩is lexicographically less than t⌢⟨∞, ∞, ∞, . . .⟩where ∞is
formally greater than all the ordinals.
13.2 Exercise (Luzin-Sierpi´nski [23]). If T is a tree on γ , then T is well-founded
iff T is well-ordered by <KB. Hence, “well-founded”can be replaced in 13.1 by
“well-ordered by <KB”.
⊣

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
163
Hint. Suppose that ⟨ti | i ∈ω⟩is an inﬁnite <KB descending chain in T . The
ti’s for i > 0 cannot be the empty sequence, and since ⟨ti(0) | 0 < i < ω⟩is a
non-increasing sequence of ordinals, there is a k0 ∈ω such that ti(0) has a ﬁxed
value y(0) for i ≥k0. The ti’s for i > k0 cannot have length 1, and so there is a
k1 ∈ω with k0 < k1 such that ti(1) has a ﬁxed value y(1) for i ≥k1. Continuing,
the resulting y ∈ωω veriﬁes that T is ill-founded.
⊣
The development is carried out in the more immediate terms of well-founded
relations. Not only have they become as basic in set theory as well-orderings,
but later generalizations were to establish direct connections with well-founded
models.
The representation 13.1 provides a basic stratiﬁcation:
13.3 Proposition (Luzin-Sierpi´nski [18, 23]). Every Π1
1 (and hence Σ1
1) set is both
a union and an intersection of ℵ1 Borel sets.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Π1
1, and T is a tree on kω × ω as given by 13.1
so that for any w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔Tw is well-founded .
For s ∈<ωω and α < ω1, set
Bs
α = {w ∈k(ωω) | Tw/s is well-founded with ∥Tw/s∥≤α} .
Then it follows by induction on α that these sets are Borel:
Bs
0 = 
i∈ω{w ∈k(ωω) | s⌢⟨i⟩/∈Tw} ,
and since s⌢⟨i⟩/∈Tw depends only on the initial segment w(|s| + 1), Bs
0 is Borel,
in fact Π0
2. For α > 0, note that a tree U on ω is well-founded with ∥U∥≤α
exactly when for any i ∈ω there is a β < α such that U/⟨i⟩is well-founded with
∥U/⟨i⟩∥≤β. Hence,
Bs
α = 
i∈ω

β<α Bs⌢⟨i⟩
β
is Borel by induction. A is consequently a union of ℵ1 Borel sets:
A = 
α<ω1 B∅
α .
To show that A is also an intersection of ℵ1 Borel sets, for α < ω1 set
Cα = {w ∈k(ωω) | (Tw is well-founded with ∥Tw∥≤α) ∨
∃s ∈<ωω(Tw/s is well-founded with ∥Tw/s∥= α)} .
That the Bs
α’s are Borel implies in a straightforward manner that the Cα’s are
Borel. We shall verify that
A = 
α<ω1Cα .

164
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
If w ∈A, then Tw is well-founded, so that for any α < ω1 either ∥Tw∥≤α
or else there is an s ∈<ωω such that ∥Tw/s∥= α, i.e. w ∈Cα. On the other
hand, if w /∈A, then Tw is ill-founded, and also for any s ∈<ωω there is at most
one β < ω1 such that Tw/s is well-founded with ∥Tw/s∥= β. But since <ωω is
countable, there must be some α < ω1 such that w /∈Cα.
⊣
The Borel sets B∅
α ﬁgure in a general bounding principle for analytic sets:
13.4 Proposition (Luzin-Sierpi´nski [18, 23]). Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Π1
1 with
a corresponding tree T on kω × ω as given by 13.1, and B ⊆A is Σ1
1. Then there
is an α < ω1 such that
B ⊆{w ∈k(ωω) | Tw is well-founded with ∥Tw∥≤α} .
Proof. Taking k = 1 for simplicity, by 12.4 let U be a tree on ω × ω so that
B = p[U], i.e. for any w ∈ωω,
w ∈B ↔∃1y(⟨w, y⟩∈[U]) .
For n ∈ω and s, t, u ∈nω, set
Bs,t,u = {w ∈B | ⟨s, t⟩∈T ∧s ⊆w ∧∃1y(⟨w, y⟩∈[U] ∧u ⊆y)} .
Assume now to the contrary that sup({∥Tw∥| w ∈B}) = ω1.
Deﬁne
sn, tn, un ∈nω for every n ∈ω such that sn ⊆sn+1, tn ⊆tn+1, un ⊆un+1,
and
(∗)
sup({∥Tw/tn∥| w ∈Bsn,tn,un}) = ω1
by recursion on n as follows: Set s0 = t0 = u0 = ∅, so that Bs0,t0,u0 = B and
(∗) holds for n = 0 by assumption. Given sn, tn, un satisfying (∗), since there
are only countably many one-step extensions of sn, tn, un, and since ∥Tw/tn∥=
sup({∥Tw/t⌢
n ⟨i⟩∥+ 1 | i ∈ω}), recursively deﬁne sn+1 ⊇sn, un+1 ⊇un, and
tn+1 ⊇tn so that (∗) is satisﬁed with n replaced by n + 1.
Set w = 
n sn, x = 
n tn, and y = 
n un. Then it is easy to see that
⟨w, y⟩∈[U], i.e. w ∈B, yet Tw is ill-founded since x ∈[Tw]. Contradiction! ⊣
The foregoing proof was drawn from the original publications. Curiously,
recent texts give the following less direct proof:
Second proof of 13.4. Assume to the contrary that for any α < ω1 there is a w ∈B
with ∥Tw∥> α. It will be shown that any Π1
1 set of reals is also Σ1
1, contradicting
the hierarchy result 12.7. So, suppose that C ⊆ωω is Π1
1 with a corresponding
tree U on ω × ω as given by 13.1 so that for any x ∈ωω,
C(x) ↔Ux is well-founded .
By 12.9(b) and the assumption on B, it follows that

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
165
C(x) ↔∃w(B(w) ∧∃f ( f : Ux →Tw is an order-preserving map)) .
But the ∃f . . . can be rendered in Σ1
1 form as
∃1y∀0i∀0 j(si ∈Ux ∧sj ∈Ux ∧si ⊃sj →
sy(i) ∈Tw ∧sy( j) ∈Tw ∧sy(i) ⊃sy( j)) .
Hence, C is Σ1
1.
⊣
A direct consequence of 13.4 is the Borel separability of analytic sets (Luzin
[27: 50ff]): If X, Y ⊆k(ωω) are disjoint Σ1
1 sets, there is a Borel set Z ⊆k(ωω)
such that X ⊆Z and Y ∩Z = ∅. This in turn leads directly to the fundamental
result that began descriptive set theory:
13.5 Exercise (Suslin [17]). A set is Borel iff it is ∆1
1.
Hint. For the forward direction, show that the ∆1
1 subsets of k(ωω) form a σ-
algebra; closure under countable unions follows from the quantiﬁer equivalences
(∗) before 12.4.
⊣
This is essentially the ﬁrst published proof of Suslin’s result, which appeared
in Luzin-Sierpi´nski [18]. Luzin-Sierpi´nski [23] started with a formulation of ana-
lytic sets differing from Suslin’s, one that essentially regarded reals as codes for
relations. In our context, any x ∈ωω encodes a binary relation Ex on ω given by
⟨m, n⟩∈Ex iff
x(⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩) = 0 .
If Ex is well-founded, it has a rank function ρx deﬁned recursively on ω by:
ρx(n) = sup({ρx(m) + 1 | ⟨m, n⟩∈Ex}) ,
so that ρx(n) = sup(∅) = 0 iff n is minimal in Ex or else n is not in its ﬁeld.
(The latter is allowed for the convenience of having dom(ρx) = ω.) Deﬁne
∥x∥= sup({ρx(n) | n ∈ω}) .
Now set
WF = {x ∈ωω | Ex is well-founded} , and
WFα = {x ∈WF | ∥x∥≤α}
for α < ω1. WF is Π1
1 , since for any x ∈ωω,
x ∈WF ↔∀1y∃0m(x(⟨⟨y(m + 1), y(m)⟩⟩) ̸= 0) .
In terms of 13.1, this is already in normal form, with the corresponding tree on
ω × ω of “unsecured” sequences being
T WF = {⟨s, t⟩∈
m(mω × mω) |
∀0i < |s| −1(⟨⟨t(i + 1), t(i)⟩⟩< |s| →s(⟨⟨t(i + 1), t(i)⟩⟩) = 0)} .

166
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
For x ∈WF, ∥x∥= ∥T WF
x
∥and so
WFα = {x ∈ωω | T WF
x
is well-founded and ∥T WF
x
∥≤α} .
The following is now a simple consequence of the argument for 13.3 and of 13.4:
13.6 Exercise (Luzin-Sierpi´nski [23]).
(a) For any α < ω1, WFα is Borel.
(b) If B ⊆WF is Σ1
1, then there is an α < ω1 such that B ⊆WFα.
(c) WF ∈Π1
1 −Σ1
1.
⊣
Spector [55] established an effective version of (b) in terms of well-orderings
for (lightface) Σ1
1 sets and with ω1 replaced by
ωCK
1
= sup{∥x∥| x ∈WF ∧(the graph of) x is recursive} .
This Σ1
1 boundedness theorem is a cornerstone of hyperarithmetic theory (see
Sacks [90: A§II]).
(c) provides a natural example of a member of Π1
1 −Σ1
1. Note that with
the ﬁrst proof of 13.4, this approach to Π1
1 −Σ1
1 ̸= ∅does not depend on the
diagonalization argument for 12.8. By 13.1, for any Π1
1 (a) set A ⊆k(ωω) there is a
function f : k(ωω) →ωω (whose graph is) recursive in a such that A = f −1(WF).
Hence, WF is “complete” for this sort of reducibility for the Π1
1 sets. Versions
of WF and (a) had already occurred in Lebesgue [05], but he could not get to (c)
because of a crucial mistake, discussed earlier, that spurred Suslin’s discovery of
the analytic sets.
Mazurkiewicz [36] provided a more mathematical example of a member of
Π1
1 −Σ1
1. Since a continuous function: R →R is determined by its values on the
rationals, for present purposes such functions can be identiﬁed with members of
ωω in a systematic way much as codes for open sets were developed (see before
11.8). Mazurkiewicz showed that
{ f : R →R | f is differentiable} ∈Π1
1 −Σ1
1 .
See Becker [92] for an account of recent work along these lines.
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant result about the second level of the projective hierarchy
was the following extension of part of 13.3:
13.7 Proposition (Sierpi´nski [25]). Every Σ1
2 set is a union of ℵ1 Borel sets.
Two proofs are provided; the ﬁrst is the original one and uses AC, and the
second (see after 13.14) does not.
First proof of 13.7. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Σ1
2, with Π1
1 B ⊆k+1(ωω) such
that for any w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔∃1yB(w, y) .
By 13.3, B = 
α<ω1 Cα where each Cα is Borel, and so

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
167
A(w) ↔∃1y∃α < ω1Cα(w, y)
↔∃α < ω1∃1yCα(w, y) .
For each α < ω1, Dα = {w ∈k(ωω) | ∃1yCα(w, y)} is Σ1
1, and so again by 13.3
Dα = 
ξ<ω1 Eα
ξ where each Eα
ξ is Borel. (The choice for each α < ω1 of a
family {Eα
ξ | ξ < ω1} uses AC.) Hence,
A = 
α<ω1

ξ<ω1 Eα
ξ .
⊣
With the perfect set property for Borel sets (see 12.2(c)) Sierpi´nski was able
to conclude that every Σ1
2 set has cardinality at most ℵ1 or a perfect subset and
hence cardinality 2ℵ0. (This result is improved by 14.9 in a modern setting.)
The main classical results about Π1
1 and Σ1
2 were established using these
ideas (without the effective content, of course), and Kondˆo’s Π1
1 Uniformization
theorem (see 13.17), considered difﬁcult for some time, was a culminating result
of the ordinal analysis of Π1
1 sets. 13.7 was to become paradigmatic for reducing
the analysis of projective sets to unions of Borel sets; digressing somewhat, we
brieﬂy take a look at work in this vein in the post-Cohen era:
The converse to 13.7,
any union of ℵ1 Borel sets is Σ1
2 ,
fails in ZFC + CH, since any set of reals of cardinality ℵ1 is a union of ℵ1 Borel
sets, namely the singletons of its members. Notwithstanding, Luzin [35] consid-
ered the possibility of that proposition holding, and it is actually a consequence
of ZFC + MA + ¬CH + ∃a ∈ωω(ωL[a]
1
= ω1) (Martin-Solovay [70: §3]). This
incidentally showed that one cannot prove in ZFC that every Π1
2 set is a union of
ℵ1 Borel sets. Solovay showed that it is consistent to have 2ℵ0 large and a Π1
2 set
that is not the union of fewer than 2ℵ0 Borel sets.
Considering arbitrary sets of reals, Levy-Solovay [72] ﬁrst observed that ZFC
+ ¬CH implies that there is a set of reals which is not the union of any ℵ1 Borel
sets, and went on to show that some substantial use of AC is necessary: They
established using Solovay’s Lebesgue measure arguments that Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ
is inaccessible)) implies Con(ZFC + ¬CH + ⌈every ωOn-deﬁnable set of reals is
a union of ℵ1 Borel sets⌉) (cf. 11.11), and passing to an inner model, Con(DC +
ω1 ̸≤2ℵ0 + ⌈every set of reals is a union of ℵ1 Borel sets⌉) (cf. 11.1). Finally, in
the rather different setting of ZF + AD, the Axiom of Determinacy, the converse
to 13.7 does hold, and moreover, elegant generalizations through the projective
hierarchy have been obtained (30.20).
Regularity Properties in L
We next discuss G¨odel’s delimitative results with V = L. A conspicuous feature
of the modern theory is the study of reals as codes for countable models. Any
x ∈ωω encodes the binary relation Ex = {⟨m, n⟩| x(⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩) = 0} as speciﬁed
before, and consequently a structure

168
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Mx = ⟨ω, Ex⟩
for the language L∈of set theory. If Mx is well-founded and extensional, then
by the Collapsing Lemma 0.4 it has a unique transitive collapse tr(Mx) and an
isomorphism
πx: Mx →tr(Mx) .
For ϕ a formula and s ∈<ωω,
Mx |= ϕ[s]
is written with the understanding that ϕ has at most the variables v0, . . . , v|s|−1
free and is satisﬁed in Mx with the variable assignment of s(i) to vi. Temporarily
specify that ⌈ϕ⌉∈ω is the G¨odel number of formula ϕ in some ﬁxed recursive
arithmetization of L∈, and for any collection Φ of formulas, deﬁne ⌈Φ⌉: ω →2
by ⌈Φ⌉(m) = 1 iff m = ⌈ϕ⌉for some ϕ ∈Φ.
13.8 Proposition.
(a) For any n ∈ω,
{⟨m, i, x⟩∈
2ω × ωω | m = ⌈ϕ⌉∧ϕ is Σn ∧Mx |= ϕ[si]}
is arithmetical, in fact Σ0
n when n > 0.
(b) For any collection Φ of L∈sentences, {x ∈ωω | Mx models Φ} is ∆1
1(⌈Φ⌉).
(c) If a ∈ωω and Ma is well-founded and extensional, then
{⟨m, x⟩∈ω × ωω | πa(m) = x}
is arithmetical in a.
Proof. (a) and (b) follow from the arithmetization of the satisfaction relation. The
ﬁrst can be established inductively following the deﬁnition of |=n
M given in §0.
The second recasts the ∆ZF
1 deﬁnability of the satisfaction relation for set structures
(see e.g. Devlin [84: 41] or Drake [74: 92]).
(c) Using (a) and the deﬁnition of each member of ω in set theory, it is simple
to see that
{⟨i, p⟩∈2ω | πa(i) = p}
is arithmetical in a. Consequently, if φ is the formula ⟨v0, v1⟩∈v2, then for any
m ∈ω and x ∈ωω,
πa(m) = x ↔
∀0 p∀0q(x(p) = q ↔∃0i∃0 j(πa(i) = p ∧πa( j) = q ∧Ma |= φ[i, j, m])) ,
which shows that the relation is arithmetical in a.
⊣
It can be checked that the relation in (c) is Π0
2 (a).
By 3.3(a), there is a sentence σ0 such that for any transitive set model N of
σ0, N = Lδ for some limit δ > ω, and a formula ϕ0(v1, v2) that deﬁnes in L a

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
169
well-ordering <L of L such that for any limit δ > ω and x, y ∈Lδ, x <L y iff
Lδ |= ϕ0[x, y]. By the proof of CH in L the well-ordering
2(ωω) ∩<L = {⟨x, y⟩| x, y ∈ωω ∩L ∧x <L y}
has ordertype ωL
1 .
13.9 Theorem (G¨odel [51: 67]). ωω ∩L and 2(ωω) ∩<L are Σ1
2.
Proof. Proceeding directly to the well-ordering, for any x, y ∈ωω ∩L,
x <L y ↔∃1z∃0 p∃0q(Mz is well-founded and extensional
∧πz(p) = x ∧πz(q) = y ∧Mz |= σ0 ∧ϕ0[p, q]) .
By 13.8 this is Σ1
2.
⊣
13.10 Corollary. If ωω ⊆L, then 2(ωω) ∩<L is a ∆1
2 set which is not Lebesgue
measurable and does not have the Baire property.
Proof. With ωω ⊆L, 2(ωω) ∩<L is a well-ordering of all the reals, and so it
must also be ∆1
2, since for any x, y ∈ωω,
x <L y ↔x ̸= y ∧¬(y <L x) .
Assume now that 2(ωω) ∩<L is Lebesgue measurable. For any y ∈ωω ∩L,
{x ∈ωω ∩L | x <L y} is countable and hence null, and so 2(ωω) ∩<L is null
by Fubini’s Theorem 0.10. However, the same argument could be applied to its
complement {⟨x, y⟩∈2(ωω) ∩L | y <L x ∨x = y} to show that it too must
be null, reaching a contradiction. An analogous argument using the Kuratowski-
Ulam Theorem 0.13 shows that 2(ωω) ∩<L does not have the Baire property.
⊣
G¨odel [38] announced the Lebesgue measure result; the Baire property result
seems to be ﬁrst explicit in Mycielski [64: 216]. The following reﬁnement of 13.9,
establishing in the parlance that in L, 2(ωω) ∩<L is a Σ1
2-good well-ordering,
led to the further results of descriptive set theory in L.
13.11 Exercise (Addison [59]). The relation ISL ⊆2(ωω) given by
ISL(x, y) ↔{(x)i | i ∈ω} = {z ∈ωω | z <L y}
is Σ1
2.
Hint. This is similar to 13.9.
⊣
The delimitative result for the perfect set property is more involved. G¨odel
never published a proof, and those published have relied on Π1
1 Uniformization.
He once described to Levy the following incisive argument, one that has a wider

170
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
applicability (20.21); Solovay also came to essentially the same argument (cf. Sil-
ver [71b: 440]). It can be rendered with just the 3.3(a) properties of σ0 and ϕ0
reviewed before 13.8.
13.12 Theorem. Suppose that ωL
1 = ω1. Then there is a Π1
1 set of reals without
the perfect set property.
Proof. The idea is to get a Π1
1 set of unique codes for ordinals less than ωL
1 . For
such an ordinal α, there is an x0 ∈ωω ∩L such that Mx0 is a well-ordered set
with ordertype α. To specify the <L-least such x0 is not Π1
1 , but it is Π1
1 to say
of some x1 ∈ωω ∩L: Mx1 ∼= ⟨Lδ, ∈⟩for the least limit ordinal δ > ω such that
some x0 ∈Lδ is the <L|(Lδ × Lδ)-least possible as above. Again, to specify the
<L-least such x1 is not Π1
1 , but it can be similarly speciﬁed in terms of some Mx2,
and so forth. The resulting ⟨xi | i ∈ω⟩can then serve as a unique code for α.
For k ∈ω and x ∈ωω, let Mx|k be the initial segment of Mx determined by
k, i.e. set
Dx,k = {n | x(⟨⟨n, k⟩⟩) = 0} , and
Mx|k = ⟨Dx,k, Ex|(Dx,k × Dx,k)⟩.
Recall that each x ∈ωω encodes a countable sequence ⟨(x)i | i ∈ω⟩with each
(x)i ∈ωω. The description above then leads to the following relation on ωω:
A(x) ↔M(x)0 is well-ordered ∧∀0i[M(x)i+1 is well-founded
and extensional ∧M(x)i+1 |= σ0 ∧(x)i ∈tr(M(x)i+1)
∧∀0k(M(x)i+1|k |= σ0 →(x)i /∈tr(M(x)i+1|k))
∧∀1y∀0 p∀0q[π(x)i+1(p) = y ∧π(x)i+1(q) = (x)i
∧M(x)i+1 |= ϕ0[p, q] →My ̸∼= M(x)i]] .
That My ̸∼= M(x)i can be cast as a Π1
1 assertion ∀1 f ( f does not code an iso-
morphism: My ∼= M(x)i) (cf. the second proof of 13.4), and so applications of
13.8(a)(c) and a quantiﬁer analysis show that A is Π1
1 .
If A(x), there is a corresponding sequence ⟨αx
i | i ∈ω⟩of ordinals less than
ωL
1 such that, using the 3.3(a) properties of σ0 and ϕ0,
(a) M(x)0 has ordertype αx
0, and for each i ∈ω, M(x)i+1 ∼= ⟨Lαx
i+1, ∈⟩
and αx
i+1 is the least limit ordinal > ω such that (x)i ∈Lαx
i+1 .
(b) For each i ∈ω, if y <L (x)i (in Lαx
i+1 and hence in L), then My ̸∼= M(x)i .
Moreover, it is simple to see that for any α < ωL
1 there is a unique x ∈ωω
such that A(x) and αx
0 = α. Hence, A is a Π1
1 set of cardinality |ωL
1 |.
A cannot have a perfect subset; in fact, any Σ1
1 subset B of A is countable:
B′ = {(x)0 | x ∈B} is also Σ1
1, and in terms of 13.6, B′ ⊆WF so that B′ ⊆WFβ
for some β < ω1. This means that ∥(x)0∥= αx
0 ≤β for x ∈B, and so by the
uniqueness of the coding, |B| ≤|β|.
Finally, the assumption ωL
1 = ω1 implies that A is uncountable, and so the
proof is complete.
⊣

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
171
Guaspari [73], Kechris [75], and Sacks [76] independently showed that
C1 = {x ∈ωω | x ∈Lωx
1} ,
where ωx
1 is the least ordinal not recursive in x (i.e. not the ordertype of any
well-ordering ⊆2(ωω) recursive in x), is also a Π1
1 set of cardinality |ωL
1 | without
a perfect subset. Moreover, they showed that any Π1
1 set without a perfect subset
is a subset of C1, and provided detailed analyses which are generalized through
the projective hierarchy by Kechris [75] under strong hypotheses.
For any a ∈ωω, L[a] has a canonical well-ordering <L[a] with properties
analogous to <L. Hence 13.8-13.12 all relativize to produce corresponding results
about L[a] and Π1
1 (a), ∆1
2(a), and Σ1
2(a) sets. Moreover, this relativization is
uniform, so that for example {⟨x, a⟩∈2(ωω) | x ∈L[a]} is Σ1
2.
Analysis of Σ1
2 Sets
A basic tree representation of Σ1
2 sets implicit in Shoenﬁeld [61] provided the
backdrop for the analysis of their regularity properties.
As this foreshadowed
the development of similar representations of all projective sets under strong hy-
potheses, a general setting is developed. Recall that the projection of a set B is
pB = {x | ∃y(⟨x, y⟩∈B)}. For A ⊆k(ωω) and set Y,
A is Y-Suslin iff there is a tree T on kω × Y such that A = p[T ] .
This last can be further expressed in our tree terminology by: For w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔[Tw] ̸= ∅
↔Tw is ill-founded .
In terms of a natural topology imposed on k(ωω) × ωY, a subset C is closed iff
there is a tree on kω×Y such that C = [T ] (cf. the proof of 12.10). Thus, being Y-
Suslin is a generalization of being analytic. While it may be necessary to replace
ω by other Y, such representations turn out to have signiﬁcant consequences (see
e.g. §30), and so in anticipation,
A is Suslin iff A is Y-Suslin for some set Y .
The following serves to frame the discussion, with all but (c) and (d) making
substantial uses of AC.
13.13 Proposition. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω). Then:
(a) A is Y-Suslin iff A is |Y|-Suslin.
(b) A is 2ℵ0-Suslin.
(c) A is ω-Suslin iff A is Σ1
1.
(d) If k > 1 and A is κ-Suslin, then pA is also κ-Suslin. Consequently, if
n ∈ω and every Π1
n set is κ-Suslin, then so is every Σ1
n+1 set.
(e) If Aξ is a κ-Suslin subset of k(ωω) for each ξ < κ, then so is 
ξ<κ Aξ.
(f) (Martin) For any n > 0, A is ωn-Suslin iff A is a union of ℵn Borel sets.

172
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
(g) Suppose that B ⊆l(ωω) is Y-Suslin, f : k(ωω) →l(ωω) is continuous, and
A = f −1(B). Then A is Y-Suslin.
Proof. (a) Only the cardinality of Y matters; a bijection: Y →|Y| induces an
isomorphism between the corresponding trees.
(b) Assuming that A ̸= ∅, let A = {aξ | ξ < 2ℵ0}. Then if
T = {⟨aξ|m, m × {ξ}⟩| m ∈ω} ,
it follows that A = p[T ].
(c) This follows from 12.10 and the deﬁnition of analytic sets; cf. 13.1.
(d) If a tree T on kω × κ is such that A = p[T ], then that tree recast as T ′
on k−1ω × (ω × κ) is such that pA = p[T ′]. The result now follows as for (a) by
applying a bijection: ω × κ →κ.
(e) Suppose that for each ξ < κ there is a tree T ξ on kω × κ such that
Aξ = p[T ξ]. For z ∈ωκ deﬁne z+ ∈ωκ by: z+(i) = z(i + 1). Let T be that tree
on kω × κ such that
[T ] = {⟨w, y⟩| ⟨w, y+⟩∈T y(0)} .
Then
w ∈
ξ<κ Aξ ↔∃ξ < κ∃y(⟨w, y⟩∈[T ξ])
↔∃z(⟨w, z+⟩∈[T z(0)])
↔∃z(⟨w, z⟩∈[T ]) .
(f) For one direction, (c) and (e) imply that a union of κ Borel sets is κ-Suslin.
For the converse, proceed by induction on n: Suppose that T is a tree on kω × ωn
with n > 0 and A = p[T ]. For each γ < ωn, let T γ = T ∩(k(<ωω)× <ωγ ). Then
A = 
γ <ωn p[T γ ] since cf(ωn) > ω. But by (a), each p[T γ ] is ωn−1-Suslin.
Consequently, if n = 1 then by (c) and 13.3, p[T γ ] is a union of ℵ1 Borel sets,
and if n > 1, then p[T γ ] is a union of ℵn−1 Borel sets by induction. In either
case, it follows that A is a union of ℵn Borel sets.
(g) Take k = l = 1 for notational simplicity. By the continuity of f , for any
t ∈<ωω there is an s ∈<ωω such that O(s) ⊆f −1(O(t)). A sort of converse is
needed, so ﬁrst note that for any s ∈<ωω,
Ws = {t ∈<ωω | O(s) ⊆f −1(O(t))}
is nonempty as it contains ∅, and for t, t ∈Ws, either t ⊆t or t ⊆t. So, let θ(s)
be the largest t ∈Ws satisfying |t| ≤|s|.
For any x ∈ωω,
f (x) = 
m∈ωθ(x|m) .
The ⊇direction follows directly from the deﬁnition of θ. For the ⊆direction,
suppose that n ∈ω. Since f is continuous and x ∈f −1(O( f (x)|n)), there must
be an m ∈ω such that O(x|m) ⊆f −1(O( f (x)|n)). Taking such an m ≥n, it
follows that f (x)|n ⊆θ(x|m).

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
173
Suppose now that B = p[T ] with T a tree on ω × Y, and let S be a tree on
ω × Y deﬁned by:
S = {⟨s, u⟩| |s| = |u| ∧⟨θ(s), u||θ(s)|⟩∈T } .
Then for any x ∈ωω,
x ∈p[S] ↔∃g ∈ωY(⟨x, g⟩∈[S])
↔∃g ∈ωY∀0m(⟨θ(x|m), g||θ(x|m)|⟩∈T )
↔∃g ∈ωY(⟨f (x), g⟩∈[T ])
↔
f (x) ∈p[T ]
↔x ∈A .
⊣
With ZF the ambient theory the uses of AC can be made explicit by adding
hypotheses, e.g. that Y is well-orderable in (a) and that the choice of trees
⟨T ξ | ξ < κ⟩is given beforehand in (e).
(f) is a ZFC construction principle
which will be applied later (15.13). (b) is merely a foil; the main interest is in
Suslin representations established in ZF with trees having deﬁnability and homo-
geneity properties (as will become clearer in §15). With (c) as the starting point
Shoenﬁeld provided such a representation for Σ1
2 sets:
13.14 Theorem (Shoenﬁeld [61]). Every Σ1
2 set is ω1-Suslin. In fact, if a ∈ωω
and A ⊆k(ωω) is Σ1
2(a), there is a tree U ∈L[a] on kω×ω1 such that A = p[U].
Proof. The result is ﬁrst established assuming that A is Π1
1 (a). Taking k = 1 for
notational simplicity, by 13.1 there is a tree T ∈L[a] on ω × ω such that for any
x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔Tx is well-founded .
Consequently,
A(x) ↔∃g(g: Tx →ω1 is an order-preserving map)
by 12.9(a).
This can be recast in terms of getting an inﬁnite branch through a tree.
Remembering that there is a ﬁxed recursive enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω with
|si| ≤i, deﬁne a tree ˆT on ω × ω1 by
ˆT = {⟨s, u⟩| ∀i, j < |s|(si ⊃sj ∧⟨s||si|, si⟩∈T →u(i) < u( j))} .
It is straightforward to see that ˆT ∈L[a], being deﬁnable from T and ω1, and
that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔∃g ∈ωω1(⟨x, g⟩∈[ ˆT ])
↔x ∈p[ ˆT ] .

174
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
The full result for Σ1
2(a) sets now follows by the argument for 13.13(d),
using a bijection: ω × ω1 ↔ω1 in L[a] at one point.
⊣
The ω1 of this result is emphatically in the sense of V and could well differ
from ωL[a]
1
. Note that in the full AC context the converse,
any ω1-Suslin set is Σ1
2 ,
is independent by the discussion (after 13.7) of the proposition “any union of ℵ1
Borel sets is Σ1
2” and the connecting 13.13(f).
The 13.14 representation leads to a proof of the classical 13.7 avoiding AC:
Second Proof of 13.7. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Σ1
2, and let U be a tree on
kω × ω1 such that A = p[U]. For each γ < ω1 let U γ = U ∩(k(<ωω) × <ωγ ),
so that A = 
γ <ω1 p[U γ ] as cf(ω1) > ω. This follows the proof of 13.13(f); by
other parts of 13.13 not dependent on AC, each p[U γ ] is ω-Suslin and hence Σ1
1.
In any case, we can now proceed as in the proof of 13.3 to show, uniformly in γ ,
that for any α < ω1,
Cγ
α = {w ∈k(ωω) | (U γ
w is well-founded and ∥U γ
w∥≤α) ∨
∃s ∈<ωω1(U γ
w/s is well-founded and ∥U γ
w/s∥= α)}
is Borel, and arguing as in that proof but in terms of complements, p[U γ ] =

α<ω1(k(ωω) −Cγ
α ). Consequently,
A = 
γ <ω1

α<ω1(k(ωω) −Cγ
α ) .
⊣
Shoenﬁeld established an important absoluteness result with this analysis of
Σ1
2 sets. To discuss the absoluteness of analytical relations, ﬁrst associate to each
analytical A a deﬁnite normal form as given by 12.4. For instance, if A ⊆ωω is
Σ1
2, then ﬁx a recursive R ⊆4ω such that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔∃1y∀1z∃0mR(m, x(m), y(m), z(m)) .
Let M be a transitive class such that for any r ∈ω and recursive S ⊆rω, S ∈M;
this certainly holds if M is an ∈-model of ZF. Then AM denotes the relativization
of (the normal form of) A to M. For the Σ1
2 A above and x ∈ωω ∩M,
AM(x) ↔(∃y ∈ωω ∩M)(∀z ∈ωω ∩M)∃0mR(m, x(m), y(m), z(m)) .
Finally,
A is absolute for M iff for any u ∈M, A(u) ↔AM(u) .
For any a ∈ωω, these concepts relativize directly to relations analytical in a and M
such that a ∈M. Here is Shoenﬁeld’s Σ1
2 Absoluteness Theorem, parsimoniously
stated; as before, ω1 is in the sense of V .

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
175
13.15 Theorem (Shoenﬁeld [61]). There is a theorem ˆσ of ZF such that for any
a ∈ωω and M a transitive ∈-model of ˆσ with ω1 ∪{a} ⊆M, every Σ1
2(a) (and
hence Π1
2 (a)) relation is absolute for M.
Proof.
The proof is carried out assuming that M is an inner model of ZFC
with a ∈M, the necessary reﬁnements articulated later. For notational simplicity
consider a Σ1
2(a) relation A ⊆ωω.
First, let T be a tree on 2ω × ω such that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔∃1y(T⟨x,y⟩is well-founded) ,
where by 13.1 it can be assumed that T M = T . Now if x ∈M and AM(x), there
is a y ∈M such that T⟨x,y⟩is well-founded in the sense of M. It follows by
12.9(a) that in M there is an order-preserving map: T⟨x,y⟩→On. Of course, the
map also exists in V , so A(x) holds.
The converse uses the 13.14 representation of Σ1
2(a) sets. Let U ∈L[a] ⊆M
be a tree on ω × ω1 such that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔Ux is ill-founded .
Now if x ∈M and A(x), the ill-foundedness of Ux in V implies by 12.9(a) that
there is no order-preserving map: Ux →ω1, and so no such map can exist in M
either. Thus, Ux is ill-founded in the sense of M, and using 13.14 there AM(x)
holds.
To complete the proof, note ﬁrst that M need only model a sufﬁciently strong
theorem ˆσ of ZF. Neither the uses of 12.9(a) nor of 13.14 require DC, as it is
not needed in the equivalence between well-foundedness and the lack of inﬁnite
descending chains for well-orderable trees. Also, it can be checked that U need
only be a deﬁnable class in M, for which ω1 ⊆M sufﬁces.
⊣
The mathematical signiﬁcance of this result lies in the fact that many propo-
sitions of classical analysis are Σ1
2, and so if they can be established assuming for
example V = L (and hence CH), then they can be established in ZF alone!
The result is the best possible in the projective hierarchy, since ∃1x(x /∈L)
is Σ1
3 and cannot be absolute for M = L. Inner models involving large cardinals
were to be devised that possess stronger absoluteness properties (see volume II).
13.16 Corollary. If r ∈ω and A ⊆rω is Σ1
2(a), then A ∈L[a].
Proof. Although we have been working with tree representations of subsets of
k(ωω), the preceding argument works with only notational changes for A ⊆rω.
Consequently, AL[a] = A ∩L[a] = A, so A ∈L[a].
⊣
The idea behind 13.14 also provides a straightforward approach to the proof
of Kondˆo’s Π1
1 Uniformization Theorem 12.3, which as Addison observed can be
effectivized.

176
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
13.17 Theorem (Kondˆo [37, 39]; Addison). For a ∈ωω, any Π1
1 (a) subset of
2(ωω) can be uniformized by a Π1
1 (a) set.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆2(ωω) is Π1
1 (a). The task is to ﬁnd a Π1
1 (a) set A0 ⊆A
such that for any x ∈ωω, if there is a y such that A(x, y), then there is exactly
one y such that A0(x, y). Let T be a tree over 2ω × ω as in 13.1 such that
A(x, y) ↔Tx,y is well-founded ,
where Tx,y is written for T⟨x,y⟩from now on for the sake of convenience. The
argument for 13.14 provides a corresponding tree ˆT on 2ω × ω1 such that
A(x, y) ↔∃g ∈ωω1(⟨x, y, g⟩∈[ ˆT ]) ,
where g provides an order-preserving map:
Tx,y →ω1 verifying the well-
foundedness of Tx,y.
For any x, y ∈ωω, if there is a g such that ⟨x, y, g⟩∈[ ˆT ] at all, then as for
any ill-founded tree, there is a lexicographically least (“leftmost”) one, i.e. a g0
such that for any other g, if i is least such that g0(i) ̸= g(i), then g0(i) < g(i).
However, for ˆT there is an “honest leftmost” one, i.e. a gx,y such that for any
other g, gx,y(i) ≤g(i) for every i ∈ω: By 12.9(a) and the deﬁnition of ˆT , we
can take
gx,y(i) =
 ρTx,y(si)
if si ∈Tx,y , and
0
otherwise .
Next, for any x ∈ωω, suppose that there is a y such that A(x, y), i.e. a pair
⟨y, g⟩such that ⟨x, y, g⟩∈[ ˆT ]. Then there is a lexicographically least (“leftmost”)
one, i.e. a pair ⟨yx, gx⟩such that for any other pair ⟨y, g⟩, if i is least such that
⟨yx(i), gx(i)⟩̸= ⟨y(i), g(i)⟩, then either yx(i) < y(i) or else yx(i) = y(i) and
gx(i) < g(i). The uniformization is carried out by choosing yx. That this can
be done in a Π1
1 (a) fashion relies on the observation that gx must be the honest
leftmost gx,yx.
Turning to formalities, because of how honest leftmost branches can be de-
ﬁned let R≤and R< be relations on ω × 3(ωω) given by
R≤(i, x, y, z) ↔Tx,z/si is ill-founded ∨ρTx,y(si) ≤ρTx,z(si) , and
R<(i, x, y, z) ↔Tx,z/si is ill-founded ∨ρTx,y(si) < ρTx,z(si) .
Remembering that ρT (t) = ∥T/t∥for well-founded trees T and t ∈T , by 12.9,
R≤(i, x, y, z) ↔∃f ( f : Tx,y/si →Tx,z/si is order-preserving) , and
R<(i, x, y, z) ↔∃f ∃0k( f : Tx,y/si →Tx,z/s⌢
i ⟨k⟩is order-preserving) .
Since by 13.1, {⟨i, x, y⟩| si ∈Tx,y} is recursive in a, R≤and R< are thus seen
to be Σ1
1(a) (cf. the second proof of 13.4).

13. Π1
1 Sets and Σ1
2 Sets
177
Now deﬁne A0 ⊆2(ωω) by
A0(x, y)
↔A(x, y) ∧∀1z∀0m[(y(m) = z(m)
∧∀0i < m(R≤(i, x, y, z) ∧R≤(i, x, z, y))
→(y(m) < z(m) ∨(y(m) = z(m) ∧¬R<(m, x, z, y)))] .
This is essentially of form Π1
1 (a) ∧∀1[Σ1
1(a) →¬Σ1
1(a)], and hence Π1
1 (a). To
decipher it, note that R≤(i, x, y, z) ∧R≤(i, x, z, y) is equivalent to
(Tx,y/si and Tx,z/si are both ill-founded ∨ρTx,y(si) = ρTx,z(si)) .
¬R<(m, x, z, y) is equivalent to
(Tx,y is well-founded ∧ρTx,z(sm) ̸< ρTx,y(sm)) ,
which in turn is equivalent to
(Tx,y is well-founded ∧ρTx,y(sm) ≤ρTx,z(sm)) .
Hence, for any x ∈ωω, through honest leftmost branches A0(x, y) does indeed
pick out that y of the leftmost pair ⟨y, g⟩such that ⟨x, y, g⟩∈[ ˆT ] if there is one,
and so the proof is complete.
⊣
Elements of this proof, particularly the simple deﬁnability of the honest left-
most branch, were later abstracted in the concept of a scale (cf. 29.2). Adjoining
an ∃1 to the result is straightforward:
13.18 Exercise (Kondˆo [39]). For a ∈ωω, any Σ1
2(a) subset of
2(ωω) can be
uniformized by a Σ1
2(a) set.
⊣
This is the limit of directly derivable results about uniformization. Addison
settled the issue in L:
13.19 Exercise (Addison [59]). If ωω ⊆L, then for any a ∈ωω and 2 ≤n ∈ω,
every Σ1
n(a) subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized by a Σ1
n(a) set.
Hint. Note that if A ⊆2(ωω) is Π1
n−1(a), then in terms of 13.11,
A0(x, y) ↔A(x, y) ∧∃1u(ISL(u, y) ∧∀0i¬A(x, (u)i))
is Σ1
n(a), and ∃y A(x, y) ↔∃!y A0(x, y).
⊣
However, Levy [65a] observed that if one adjoins a Cohen real to L then in the
resulting extension there is a Π1
2 set that cannot be uniformized by any analytical
set (see also Levy [70]). Moreover, if one adjoins uncountably many Cohen reals
to L, then in the resulting extension there is a Π1
2 set (namely {⟨x, y⟩| y /∈L[x]})
that cannot be uniformized by any projective set. Strong hypotheses were later to
settle these issues in different ways (15.14, 29.9); in fact, they breathed new life
into the study of structural properties of classical vintage (§§28, 29).

178
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
In 1965 Solovay reactivated the classical program of investigating the extent of
the regularity properties by providing characterizations for the Σ1
2 sets, the level of
G¨odel’s delimitative results. He also investigated the deﬁnability of the transcen-
dent 0# and made several related conjectures bearing on the scope of the forcing
method that inspired new avenues of research. This section features these devel-
opments, which served to establish the relevance of large cardinal hypotheses to
the study of the projective hierarchy.
Building on his Lebesgue result 11.1, Solovay used forcing to establish char-
acterizations for the measurability of the Σ1
2 sets. Through this and other results,
forcing soon became established as a basic construction technique within set the-
ory.
14.1 Theorem (Solovay). The following are equivalent for a ∈ωω:
(a) Every Σ1
2(a) set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
(b) {Ac | c ∈L[a] is a Gδ code for a null set} is null.
(c) {x | x is not random over L[a]} is null.
(d) Every set of form {x ∈ωω | L[a][x] |= ϕ[p, x]} for some formula ϕ and
p ∈L[a] is Lebesgue measurable.
Proof. By 11.10, (b) and (c) are synoptic and imply (d) by the argument for 11.11
with V replaced by L. (d) →(a) follows from Σ1
2 absoluteness 13.15.
Finally, for (a) →(b), let B be the set described in (b). If C ⊆2(ωω) is
given by
C(x, c) ↔c is a Gδ code for a null set ∧x ∈Ac ,
then it is straightforward to check that C is arithmetical. Since
x ∈B ↔∃1c(c ∈L[a] ∧C(x, c)) ,
B is Σ1
2(a) by 13.9 relativized. B is therefore measurable by assumption, and
it remains to verify that it is null. For this purpose, an elaboration of the well-
ordering argument for 13.10 is used:
First deﬁne D ⊆2(ωω) by
D(x, c) ↔c ∈L[a] ∧C(x, c) ∧∀1d(d <L[a] c →¬C(x, d)) .
Then deﬁne R ⊆2(ωω) by
R(x, y) ↔∃1c∃1d(D(x, c) ∧D(y, d) ∧(c <L[a] d ∨c = d)) .
Thus, R orders the x’s in B according to the <L[a]-least Gδ code c for a null set
such that x ∈Ac. R is a prewellordering, i.e. a well-ordering except that there
may be distinct x and y such that R(x, y) and R(y, x).
By 13.11 relativized D is Σ1
2(a), and so also is R. Hence, R is measur-
able by assumption. Since 2(ωω) ∩<L[a] has ordertype ωL[a]
1
≤ω1, for any y,

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
179
Ry = {x | R(x, y)} is null, being a countable union of null sets. Thus, by Fubini’s
Theorem 0.10, R is null. However, the same argument can be applied to the
complement {⟨x, y⟩∈B × B | ¬R(x, y)}, a measurable set since B is, to show
that it too must be null. But then, B × B is null, and so also must be B.
⊣
An analogous argument based on remarks in the proof of 11.11 about the
Baire property establishes the following:
14.2 Theorem (Solovay). The following are equivalent for a ∈ωω:
(a) Every Σ1
2(a) set of reals has the Baire property.
(b) {Ac | c ∈L[a] is an Fσδ code for a meager set} is meager.
(c) {x | x not a Cohen real over L[a]} is meager.
(d) Every set of form {x ∈ωω | L[a][x] |= ϕ[p, x]} for some formula ϕ and
p ∈L[a] has the Baire property.
⊣
14.3 Corollary. If ωL[a]
1
< ω1, then every Σ1
2(a) set of reals is Lebesgue measur-
able and has the Baire property. In particular, if there is a measurable cardinal,
then every Σ1
2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the Baire property.
Proof. If ωω∩L[a] is countable, then the (b)’s of the theorems obtain. The second
assertion follows from the ﬁrst, since by 9.19, ω1 is inaccessible in L[a] for every
a ∈ωω.
⊣
Solovay’s ideas were recast by Moschovakis [80: 8G] to provide a forcing-
free proof of this corollary. While the statement about measurable cardinals is
not very sharp, it is a direct implication between classical concepts that provided
a counterweight to G¨odel’s V = L delimitations for deﬁnable sets of reals. In
this way, Solovay established that although measurable cardinals do not decide the
Continuum Hypothesis, they do have a direct mathematical effect on the reals. On
the other hand, Silver was to show that even measurable cardinals do not entail the
Lebesgue measurability of ∆1
3 sets (20.19). One of the prominent themes of the
pursuit of stronger hypotheses is the measurability of more and more projective
sets.
The consistency of ZFC plus the proposition that every Σ1
2 set is Lebesgue
measurable and has the Baire property does not require large cardinal hypotheses.
Martin-Solovay [70: §4] showed that it follows from Martin’s Axiom (MA) +
¬CH, and moreover, by an ω1-length iteration of the forcing described there, it
can be made consistent with CH. On the other hand, Shelah [84] was to show that
the Lebesgue measurability of every Σ1
3 set does require the consistency strength
of an inaccessible cardinal (see volume II), complementing Solovay’s result 11.1.
Solovay also established outright the Lebesgue measurability of sets in a
substantial subclass of ∆1
2. To describe this class, we have to look more carefully
at the deﬁning formulas for relations.
For a ∈ωω and A ⊆ωω, A is provably ∆1
2(a) iff there are A2 formulas
ψ(v1
1, v1
2, v1
3, v1
4) and ϕ(v1
1, v1
2, v1
3, v1
4) without function quantiﬁers such that for

180
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
any x ∈ωω, A(x) iff A2 |= ∃1v1
3∀1v1
4ψ[x, a] iff A2 |= ∀1v1
3∃1v1
4ϕ[x, a], and
moreover, provable in ZFC is:
A2 |= ∀1v1
1∀1v1
2(∃1v1
3∀1v1
4ψ ↔∀1v1
3∃1v1
4ϕ) .
(The deﬁnition extends analogously to A ⊆rω×k(ωω) and also to the correspond-
ing concepts provably ∆1
2 and provably ∆1
2.) Thus, A is ∆1
2(a) in the strong sense
that there are Σ1
2(a) and Π1
2 (a) formulations whose equivalence is a theorem of
ZFC. For example, V = L implies that 2(ωω) ∩<L is ∆1
2, but it is not provably
∆1
2. By introducing vacuous quantiﬁers, every Σ1
1(a) relation is provably ∆1
2(a).
Andrei Kolmogorov [28] introduced the R-sets by generalizing the Operation (A)
of Suslin [17] into a transﬁnite hierarchy, and showed that they are Lebesgue mea-
surable. Recently John Burgess [82, 83] and Rana Barua [84] have redeveloped
and extended the theory of these sets. It can be shown that the R-sets are provably
∆1
2. Thus, the following subsumes 12.2(a)(b) and more:
14.4 Exercise (Solovay – cf. Fenstad-Normann [74]). Every provably ∆1
2 set of
reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the Baire property.
Hint. Suppose that A is provably ∆1
2(a) for some a ∈ωω, and let τ be a theorem of
ZFC establishing the equivalence between a Σ1
2 formulation and a Π1
2 formulation
of A. If ˆσ is the theorem of ZF of 13.15, then any transitive ∈-model M of ˆσ ∧τ
with a ∈M and containing the recursive relations is absolute for A. (The point
is that ω1 ⊆M as in 13.15 is no longer required, as the Π1
2 formulation can be
used contrapositively in place of the argument with the tree over ω × ω1.) Now
work with a countable such M satisfying ﬁnitely more axioms of ZFC so that the
arguments for (b) →(a) of 14.1 and 14.2 can be used with M in place of L[a].⊣
Finally, recent characterizations are provided that further attest to the intrinsic
importance of random and Cohen reals in descriptive set theory: They complement
14.1 and 14.2, inform on G¨odel’s 13.10, and could well have been noticed much
earlier. First, a preparatory exercise:
14.5 Exercise. Suppose that M is an inner model of ZFC. Then:
(a) If there is a real random over M, then such reals are dense: For any
closed code c ∈M for a non-null set there is a real in Ac random over M.
(b) If there is a Cohen real over M, then such reals are dense: For any
s ∈<ωω there is a Cohen real ⊇s over M.
Hint. (b) is much easier than (a), and both can be deduced from the fact that the
notions of forcing are weakly homogeneous (cf. 10.19). However, this fact for
random real forcing depends on involved results about Lebesgue measure, so a
direct approach is outlined for (a):
Let x be random over M. The idea is to develop a permutation p: ω →ω so
that the induced homeomorphism p: ωω →ωω (deﬁned by p( f )(n) = f (p(n))

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
181
for n ∈ω) satisﬁes p(x) ∈Ac. Such induced homeomorphisms preserve measure,
so p(x) will also be random over M. To begin with, it can be assumed that
Ac = ωω −{O(sij) | j ∈ω}
where the O(sij)’s are pairwise disjoint. p will be comprised of transpositions
p(am) = bm and p(bm) = am for am’s and bm’s all distinct and exhausting ω,
deﬁned in pairs ⟨am, bm⟩by recursion as follows:
Suppose that the am’s and bm’s for m < n have been deﬁned, recursively
satisfying
mL({O(sij) | sij ⊇{⟨a0, x(b0)⟩, . . . , ⟨an−1, x(bn−1)⟩}}) < 
m<n2−(x(bm)+1) .
(The basis n = 0 is included vacuously here with the value on the right being 1,
a consequence of the assumption that Ac is not null.) Let an be the least member
of ω different from all the am’s and bm’s for m < n. (So a0 = 0.) There must be
a k ∈ω such that
mL({O(sij) | sij ⊇{⟨a0, x(b0)⟩, . . . , ⟨an−1, x(bn−1)⟩, ⟨an, k⟩}})
< 2−(k+1) · 
m<n2−(x(bm)+1) .
Since x is random, choose bn ̸= an and different from all the am’s and bm’s for
m < n such that x(bn) = k. Thus, the recursion assumption is perpetuated. It can
be checked that this construction insures that p(x) ∈Ac.
⊣
14.6 Theorem (Ihoda-Shelah [89]). Suppose that a ∈ωω. Then:
(a) Every ∆1
2(a) set of reals is Lebesgue measurable iff there is a real random
over L[a].
(b) Every ∆1
2(a) set of reals has the Baire property iff there is a Cohen real
over L[a].
Proof. As usual, only the measure result is established. The forward direction
follows the proof of (a) →(b) of 14.1, noting that the R in that proof would
actually be ∆1
2(a) if there were no reals random over L[a] (cf. 13.10).
The converse is a variation of the argument for 14.4. Suppose that there is a
real random over L[a] and that A ⊆k(ωω) is ∆1
2(a). Taking k = 1 for simplicity,
there are consequently Σ1
2(a) relations R0, R1 ⊆ωω such that for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔R0(x) ↔¬R1(x) .
As usual, if M is a transitive class containing all recursive relations, then RM
i
denotes the relativization of (the normal form of) Ri to M. Let P = (B∗)L[a], the
random real forcing in the sense of L[a], and ˙r a P-name for the random real.
Then
D = {p ∈P | p ∥- RL[a][˙r]
i
(˙r) for exactly one i < 2} ∈L[a]
is dense in P by the following argument in V : Starting with an arbitrary member
of P, which for demonstrating density can be taken to be of form AL[a]
c
for some

182
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
closed code c ∈L[a], there is an x ∈Ac random over L[a] by 14.5(a). There is
exactly one i < 2 such that Ri(x), whereupon Σ1
2 Absoluteness 13.15 implies that
RL[a][x]
i
(x). Hence, there is a p ≤AL[a]
c
such that p ∈D.
Since D is dense open in P, there is in L[a] a maximal antichain E ⊆D
consisting of closed sets, which by the ω1-c.c. is countable. For i < 2, set
Yi = {c ∈ωω | c ∈L[a] is a closed code ∧
AL[a]
c
∈E ∧AL[a]
c
∥- RL[a][˙r]
i
(˙r)} , and
Zi = {Ac | c ∈Yi} .
It now sufﬁces to verify that Zi −Ri is null for i < 2. Granted this and invoking
the absoluteness 11.8 of codes, that
(i) Z0 ∩Z1 is null since Y0 ∩Y1 = ∅, and
(ii) mL(Z0) + mL(Z1) = 1 by the maximality of E
will together imply that Z0 △R0 is null. Hence, it can be concluded that R0 = A
is measurable.
To verify that Zi −Ri is null for i < 2, let M ∈L[a] be a countable transitive
∈-model of enough of ZFC with Y0, Y1 ∈M. (It will sufﬁce to take M ≺Lλ[a]
for some sufﬁciently large regular λ, and such M model ZFC except possibly for
the Power Set Axiom. In what follows, pretend that M |= ZFC for the use of
established terminology.) Since M is countable, the set of reals not random over
M is null (cf. 11.10). If on the other hand x ∈ωω is random over M and x ∈Zi,
then x ∈Ac for some c ∈Yi and so x ∈AM[x]
c
. Hence, RM[x]
i
(x) by genericity,
and so by the upward direction of Σ1
2 Absoluteness 13.15 (which does not require
ω1 ⊆M) it follows that Ri(x). This conﬁrms what was to be veriﬁed, and so the
proof is complete.
⊣
As observed by Solovay, if ℵ1 many random reals are generically added to
L[a], then the Σ1
2(a) set ωω ∩L[a] is not Lebesgue measurable in the extension
(see Jech [03: 535ff]). Thus, the measurability of every ∆1
2(a) set does not imply
the measurability of every Σ1
2(a) set.
Analogous remarks hold for the Baire
property. As to the difference in the proofs of 14.4 and 14.6, the countable M of
the former is absolute for A by provability, while it was necessary to incorporate a
maximal antichain into the M of the latter, which in turn depended on the property
that R0(x) ↔¬R1(x) holds for all x random over L[a].
Solovay also characterized the perfect set property for Σ1
2 sets by a forcing
argument as in 11.11. Then an elegant result of Richard Mansﬁeld revealed the
structural essence. It too was proved initially by forcing, but Solovay provided
a proof that can be seen as an elaboration of the Cantor-Bendixson argument
(11.3(a)):
14.7 Theorem (Mansﬁeld [70]). Suppose that for some inﬁnite Y, T is a tree on
ω × Y such that T ∈L[T ], A ⊆ωω, and A = p[T ], i.e. for any x ∈ωω,

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
183
A(x) ↔∃f ∈ωY(⟨x, f ⟩∈[T ]) .
Then either A ⊆L[T ] and |A| ≤|T |, or else A has a perfect subset.
Proof. For any tree U on ω × Y, let U ′ consist of those members of U having
extensions in U with incompatible ﬁrst coordinates, i.e.
U ′ = {⟨s, h⟩∈U | ∃⟨s0, h0⟩, ⟨s1, h1⟩∈U(⟨s0, h0⟩⊇∗⟨s, h⟩
∧⟨s1, h1⟩⊇∗⟨s, h⟩∧|s0| = |s1| ∧s0 ̸= s1)} .
Now set T0 = T, Tα+1 = T ′
α, and for limit ordinals δ > 0, Tδ = 
α<δ Tα. It is
clear that each Tα ∈L[T ]. There is a β < |Y|+ such that Tβ+1 = Tβ; set T ∗= Tβ
for the least such β.
If T ∗= ∅, then A ⊆L[T ] and |A| ≤|T |: Suppose that x ∈ωω satisﬁes
A(x), so that there is some f ∈ωY with ⟨x, f ⟩∈[T ].
Clearly there is an
α < β such that ⟨x, f ⟩∈[Tα] −[Tα+1]. But then, there is an m ∈ω such that
⟨x|m, f |m⟩∈Tα −Tα+1, so that any ⟨s, h⟩∈Tα with s ⊇x|m and h ⊇f |m
satisﬁes s ⊆x. Hence,
x = {s | ∃h(s ⊇x|m ∧h ⊇f |m ∧⟨s, h⟩∈Tα)} ,
and so x ∈L[T ].
Thus, A ⊆L[T ].
This analysis shows that any x ∈ωω
satisfying A(x) is determined by an α < β and a pair ⟨x|m, f |m⟩∈Tα. Hence
also |A| ≤|β|·|T | = |T |.
The proof is completed by showing that if T ∗̸= ∅, then A has a perfect
subset: Starting with a member of T ∗and using T ∗′ = T ∗, recursively deﬁne
st ∈<ωω for each t ∈<ω2 such that for any t, u ∈<ω2,
(i) ∃h(⟨st, h⟩∈T ∗) ,
(ii) if t ⊂u, then st ⊂su , and
(iii) if |t| = |u| yet t ̸= u, then st(i) ̸= su(i)
for some i ∈dom(st) ∩dom(su) .
Then S = {s ∈<ωω | ∃t ∈<ω2(s ⊆st)} is a tree on ω, [S] ⊆A, and building on
12.10, [S] is perfect.
⊣
The following corollaries are immediate from the tree representations of Σ1
1
sets (13.13(c)) and Σ1
2 sets (13.14).
14.8 Corollary (Suslin – Luzin [17]). Every Σ1
1 set of reals has the perfect set
property.
⊣
14.9 Corollary (Solovay [69]). If a ∈ωω and A is a Σ1
2(a) set of reals, then
either A ⊆L[a] or A has a perfect subset.
⊣
Recalling the set C1 deﬁned after 13.12, 14.9 implies that if ωL[a]
1
< ω1, then
the countable set

184
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
Ca
2 = ωω ∩L[a]
is a Σ1
2(a) set such that any Σ1
2(a) set without a perfect subset is a subset of Ca
2.
Thus:
14.10 Theorem (Solovay [69]). The following are equivalent for any a ∈ωω:
(a) Every Σ1
2(a) set of reals has the perfect set property.
(b) Every Π1
1 (a) set of reals has the perfect set property.
(c) ωL[a]
1
< ω1.
Proof. (a) →(b) is immediate, (b) →(c) is 13.12 relativized, and (c) →(a)
follows from the above remarks.
⊣
This result reﬁnes 11.6 and shows that the perfect set property for all Π1
1
sets requires the consistency strength of an inaccessible cardinal. As observed
by Lyubeckij [70], 14.3 and 14.10 have the curious consequence that if every
Σ1
2 set has the perfect set property, then every Σ1
2 set is Lebesgue measurable –
with the implication between these classical properties proceeding through ∀a ∈
ωω(ωL[a]
1
< ω1). Lyubeckij [71] rederived several of Solovay’s results about Σ1
2
sets.
Deﬁnability of Sharps
The main motivation for Solovay’s study of 0# was to analyze its deﬁnability.
By 13.16 every Σ1
2 subset of ω is constructible. Using methods of Gaifman and
Rowbottom, Solovay showed in the autumn of 1965 that if there is a measurable
cardinal, then there is a non-constructible ∆1
3 subset of ω. Then in the context
of Silver’s work on indiscernibles, Solovay and Silver independently saw that 0#
has stronger properties. For present purposes, temporarily specify that if ϕ is a
formula in the language L∗
∈of §9, then ⌈ϕ⌉∈ω is its G¨odel number in some
recursive arithmetization of L∗
∈. Recall that by this means, 0# is regarded as a
subset of ω.
14.11 Theorem (ZF)(Solovay [67], Silver [71]). The relation R ⊆ωω deﬁned by
R(x) ↔0# exists ∧x ∈ω2 ∧{m | x(m) = 1} = 0#
is Π1
2 .
Proof.
We analyze the deﬁnition from §9 that 0# is the unique EM blueprint
satisfying conditions (I)-(III); this uniqueness is a consequence of ZF, since as
observed in §9 the 0# theory does not require AC. For any x ∈ωω, let Thx =
{ϕ | x(⌈ϕ⌉) = 1}. Now deﬁne S ⊆ωω by: S(x) iff x ∈ω2; for any m ∈ω,
x(m) = 1 implies that m = ⌈ϕ⌉for some sentence ϕ of L∗
∈; and Thx is a complete
and consistent theory of L∗
∈containing
(i) the sentence σ0 of 3.3(a) ,

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
185
(ii) the sentences asserting that the ci’s are indiscernibles , and
(iii) the sentences for satisfying conditions (II) and (III) .
Then it is straightforward to check that S is arithmetical; to assert that Thx is
consistent, it is enough to say that there is no integer coding a proof from it of
v0 ̸= v0. Note that if S(x), then by the Completeness Theorem Thx has a countable
model. But technically speaking, (i) and (ii) do not sufﬁce to show that Thx is an
EM blueprint, for only if the model is well-founded can its transitive collapse be
taken and 3.3(a) invoked. However, this will be taken care of when condition (I)
is incorporated.
For this purpose, recall the terminology of 13.8; in particular, every countable
well-ordering is an Ey for some y ∈ωω. The R ⊆ωω of the theorem is then seen
to be equivalent to:
S(x) ∧∀1y∀1z[(Ey is a well-ordering ∧Mz satisﬁes 9.4 with Thx
the theory and indiscernibles of ordertype Ey) →Mz is well-founded] .
That Mz satisﬁes 9.4 etc. is Σ1
1: Beyond what Mz is to model, one must assert
that there is an order-preserving injection of Ey into OnMz such that its image is a
set of indiscernibles for Mz, and every element of Mz results from a Skolem term
applied to these indiscernibles. Thus, R has form ∀1y∀1z[Π1
1 ∧Σ1
1 →Π1
1 ] and
so is Π1
2 .
⊣
14.12 Corollary.
(a) 0# is absolute for transitive ∈-models M of ZF such that ω1 ⊆M in the
following sense:
M |= ⌈There is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)⌉iff
0# ∈M ,
in which case M |= ⌈0# is the unique EM blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)⌉.
(b) 0# is a non-constructible ∆1
3 subset of ω.
(c) Assume 0# exists. Then every x ∈P(ω) ∩L is one-one reducible to 0#,
i.e. there is an injective, total recursive function f : ω →ω such that x = f −1(0#),
and so in particular, x is ∆1
3.
Proof.
(a) This follows from Σ1
2 Absoluteness 13.15.
With R as in 14.11, if
M |= There is an EM blueprint satisfying (I)-(III), then there is an x ∈M such
that (R(x))M. Hence R(x), and so {m | x(m) = 1} = 0# ∈M.
(b) By (a), 0# /∈L. Also, for any m ∈ω,
m ∈0# ↔∃x(R(x) ∧x(m) = 1)
↔∀x(R(x) →x(m) = 1) .
The ﬁrst expression shows that 0# is Σ1
3, and the second, that it is Π1
3 .
(c) x = t L(ιξ1, . . . , ιξn) for some term t and indiscernibles ιξ1, . . . , ιξn. As a
recursive arithmetization had been assumed, the function f ∈ωω deﬁned by
f (m) = ⌈m ∈t(c1, . . . , cn)⌉

186
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
is an injective total recursive function.
But clearly, x = f −1(0#).
The last
assertion of (c) follows, as 0# is ∆1
3.
⊣
(c) implies by remarks after 9.12 that if 0# exists, then the set of (G¨odel
numbers of) sentences true in L is one-one reducible to 0#.
These properties of 0# relativize directly for any a ⊆ω to a# (as deﬁned at
the end of §9) over L[a]. Consequently, the assumption that a# exists for every
a ⊆ω provides a rich landscape for the study of relative constructibility, akin to
the study of Turing reducibility in recursion theory. For any sets a and b,
a ≤c b iff
a ∈L[b] ,
and let <c and ≡c have the derived meanings.
Restricting the discussion to
P(ω), the equivalence classes under ≡c are called the constructibility degrees of
reals, and the orderings <c and ≤c carry over to these degrees. P(ω) ∩L is the
minimum degree and the degrees form an upper semi-lattice under <c. Because of
the transcendence properties of a <c a#, # can be regarded as the analogue of the
jump operation on Turing degrees. Jeffrey Paris [74] established a signiﬁcant result
on patterns of indiscernibles which implies that if a ≤c b <c a#, then a# ≡c b#;
the analogous assertion about Turing degrees with jump is well-known to be false.
Paris’s result was a basic ingredient for further results: Leo Harrington and Kechris
in their [77] established partial results toward a conjecture of Solovay (see below).
Also, Farrington [82] showed that the ﬁrst-order theory of the upper semi-lattice
of constructibility degrees with # has the same sort of recursive isomorphism to
the truth set of second-order arithmetic as was established by Simpson [77] for
the Turing degrees. In evident analogy with the Turing degrees, much more can
still be done in this investigation of #.
The remarkable properties of 0# prompted Solovay to make sweeping con-
jectures in the late 1960’s that raised broad issues about the scope of the forcing
method. The ﬁrst was the Genericity Conjecture:
If a ⊆On and 0# /∈L[a], then a is generic over L .
This conjecture turns on what is meant by genericity over L, and a ∈L are
allowed to be generic over L in a trivial sense. If M is an inner model, a set
a ⊆On is set-generic over M iff there is a p.o. P ∈M and a G P-generic
over M such that M[a] = M[G]. Since forcing with any (set) p.o. P preserves
cardinals ≥|P|+, 0# is not set-generic over L by 9.17(c) and 14.12(a). Conﬁdent
in the apparent generality of forcing, Solovay originally meant his conjecture to
be an assertion of minimal transcendence for 0# from the set forcing point of
view. However, in 1975-6 Jensen refuted this version of the conjecture using his
impressive “coding the universe in a real” technique, with which he established
the following result.
14.13 Theorem (Jensen – Beller-Jensen-Welch [82]). Assuming GCH, there is a
proper class notion of forcing P such that if G is P-generic, then V and V [G]

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
187
have the same cardinals and coﬁnalities, and for some a ∈P(ω) ∩V [G],
V [G] |= V = L[a] .
⊣
Forcing with P moreover preserves various large cardinal properties con-
sistent with V = L like weak compactness.
In the mid-1980’s Sy Friedman
[94] reﬁned and simpliﬁed Jensen’s proof toward the development of the much
stronger “strong coding” technique of S. Friedman [87, 87a]. In 1989 Shelah and
Lee Stanley (see their [90, 95, 95a]) found a short proof of Jensen’s original cod-
ing result assuming that 0# does not exist, and subsequently so did S. Friedman
[97].
Jensen also showed that it is consistent relative to ZFC that there is a real a
as in 14.13 so that 0# /∈L[a] yet a is not set-generic over L, and that such an a
can be constructed outright from 0#:
14.14 Theorem (Jensen – Beller-Jensen-Welch [82]). Assume that 0# exists. Then
there is an a ⊆ω such that a <c 0# yet a is not set-generic over L.
⊣
The more liberal interpretations of genericity over L involve proper class
notions of forcing; see Beller-Jensen-Welch [82: 155] for several formulations.
Suppose that M is an inner model. For P ⊆M, ⟨M, P⟩is amenable iff P∩x ∈M
for every x ∈M. This is a weaker condition than requiring that P be a (deﬁnable)
class in the sense of M. a ⊆On is amenable-generic over M iff there is a class
p.o. P such that ⟨M, P⟩is amenable and the forcing relation ∥-P restricted to
formulas of any bounded complexity is deﬁnable in ⟨M, P⟩, and there is a G P-
generic over M (i.e. G meets every dense subclass of P deﬁnable in M in addition
to the usual genericity requirements) such that a ∈M[G]. 0# is not amenable-
generic over L.
S. Friedman developed a notion of forcing with hyperclasses
(classes of classes) to show that if 0# exists, then there is an a ⊆ω such that
a <c 0# yet a is not amenable-generic over L. Mack Stanley [94] established
the consistency of the existence of a real not amenable-generic over any inner
model to which it does not belong. (However, the existence of Stanley’s real is
incompatible with that of 0#.)
A second conjecture of Solovay’s had to do more directly with the deﬁnability
of 0#. For x ∈ωω, or x ⊆ω regarded as a member of ω2 through its characteristic
function,
x is a Π1
n singleton iff {x} is a Π1
n subset of ωω .
By Σ1
2 Absoluteness 13.15, a Π1
2 singleton is deﬁnable by a formula that deﬁnes it
in every inner model that contains it, and by 14.11, 0# is such a singleton. Because
this absolute deﬁnability seemed a structurally stringent constraint, Solovay made
the Π1
2 Singleton Conjecture:
There are no Π1
2 singletons a such that a /∈L yet a <c 0#.

188
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
That is, 0# is a minimal, non-constructible Π1
2 singleton with respect to relative
constructibility. The ﬁrst related work was the discovery of several forcing notions
for adjoining a Π1
2 singleton to a model of ZFC without large cardinal hypothe-
ses: Jensen-Solovay [70], Jensen [70], and Jensen-Johnsbr˚aten [74]. These are
particularly elegant constructions, but they do not yield Π1
2 singletons if 0# ex-
ists. The Jensen-Johnsbr˚aten real was the most absolute: if ωL
1 = ω1, then it
is a Π1
2 singleton. Building on Jensen’s coding techniques, several people then
established results more directly toward the conjecture. For instance, Ren´e David
[82] showed that there is a non-constructible real a satisfying a <c 0# such that
for any set-generic b ⊆On over L[a], a is a Π1
2 singleton in L[a][b] (through
the same Π1
2 formula for all such b). See David [84, 89] for various properties of
0# simulated by reals in generic extensions. Then in culminating work, Friedman
ﬁnally refuted the conjecture outright:
14.15 Theorem (S. Friedman [90]). Assume that 0# exists. Then there is a Π1
2
singleton a such that a /∈L yet a <c 0#.
⊣
Solovay apparently conjectured the negation of his original conjecture soon
after learning of Jensen’s 14.14, and this is the orientation of S. Friedman [90].
Solovay had made a third conjecture asserting in part that all constructibility
degrees containing Π1
2 singletons are produced by the iterative application of #.
Before this was refuted by Friedman’s work, Harrington-Kechris [77], building
on Paris [74], had made observations that tended to support the conjecture. They
showed that if x ⊆ω is a Π1
2 singleton, then either 0# ≤c x or x# ≡c 0#. Rela-
tivizing this, they observed that the constructibility degrees of 0#, 0##, 0###, . . .
are the ﬁrst ω degrees of sharps of Π1
2 singletons.
Uniform Indiscernibles
Solovay’s conjectures generated results that have led to a considerable under-
standing of sharps, forcing, and deﬁnability at the second level of the projective
hierarchy. Another important chapter was begun in the late 1960’s when, as dis-
cussed in the next section, sharps were used to analyze the sets in the third level
of the projective hierarchy. In preparation, some results are established here about
the interplay of the sharps, building on the §9 theory in relativized form.
Up to the discussion above of Π1
n singletons it was convenient to regard reals
for the theory of sharps as subsets of ω, since the classes L[A] had only been
deﬁned for A ⊆On; henceforth, it is incumbent to consider reals as members of
ωω. For a ∈ωω, set
a# = {⟨⟨n, a(n)⟩⟩| n ∈ω}# ,
i.e. the sharp of the graph of a coded as a subset of ω, and stipulate that
L[a] = L[{⟨⟨n, a(n)⟩⟩| n ∈ω}] , and
Ia is the corresponding class of indiscernibles for L[a] .

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
189
Moreover, for either a ⊆ω or a ∈ωω, construe a# ⊆ω also as
a# ∈ω2 via the characteristic function
as beﬁts the context.
The uniformity of the relativization of 14.11 is ﬁrst recorded:
14.16 Exercise (ZF). The relation S ⊆2(ωω) deﬁned by
S(a, x) ↔a# exists ∧x = a#
is Π1
2 .
⊣
For a ∈ωω, the relativization of 14.12(a) leading to the absoluteness of a#
is direct. Taken for granted in what follows is the straightforward consequence
that the deﬁnition from a# of the class Ia of indiscernibles for ⟨L[a], ∈, a⟩, in
terms of Skolem hulls and so forth as in §9, is absolute for any inner model M
containing a#. Properties of Ia that follow from the relativization of 9.14 will
also be assumed, e.g. Ia is a closed unbounded class containing every uncountable
cardinal, and if δ ∈Ia, then ⟨Lδ[a], ∈, a⟩≺⟨L[a], ∈, a⟩.
When assuming ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists), set
I ∗= 
a∈ωωIa ,
the class of uniform indiscernibles.
14.17 Exercise (ZF).
(a) Suppose that a, b ∈ωω with a ∈L[b], and b# exists. Then a# exists and
Ib ⊆Ia.
(b) Assume ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists). Then I ∗is a closed unbounded class of
ordinals containing every uncountable cardinal, and for any a ∈ωω and u ∈I ∗,
Ia ∩u has ordertype u.
Hint. (a) For the existence of a#, note that for any λ > ω, (Ib ∩λ) −η is a
set of indiscernibles for Lλ[a] ∈L[b] for some η < λ (thrown in to get above
indiscernibles ﬁguring in some deﬁnition of a).
Assuming next that γ /∈Ia, we show that γ /∈Ib: First,
γ = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn)
for some Skolem term t (of L∈(˙a)) and x1 < . . . < xm < y1 < . . . < yn all in Ia
with xm < γ < y1. By the remarkable condition (III) of §9 relativized, it can be
assumed that the yi’s are in the closed unbounded class Ia ∩Ib. Also, by further
applications of (III) each xi is deﬁnable in L[b] in terms of members of Ib −{γ }
and a is deﬁnable in L[b] in terms of members of Ib −(γ + 1). Consequently, γ
is deﬁnable in L[b] in terms of members of Ib −{γ }, and hence γ /∈Ib.
(b) For the last assertion, suppose that a ∈ωω, u ∈I ∗, and ξ < u. By
the remarkable condition (III) and the simple observation that u must be a limit

190
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
member of Ib for every b ∈ωω, ξ is deﬁnable in ⟨L[a#], ∈, a#⟩in terms of
members of Ia# ∩u. By absoluteness of a# it follows that the ξth member of Ia
is deﬁnable in L[a#] in terms of members of Ia# ∩u, and so that member is less
than u (by condition (II) of §9). But this holds for any ξ < u, so it follows that
the ordertype of Ia ∩u is u.
⊣
Assuming ∀a ∈ωω(a#exists), set
I ∗= {uξ | 0 < ξ ∈On}
with the indexing in increasing order; then
u1 = ω1 and ∀ξ > 0(uξ ≤ωξ) ,
the ﬁrst as every countable ordinal is coded by a real, and the second as I ∗contains
every uncountable cardinal.
14.18 Proposition (ZF)(Solovay). Assume ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists) and ξ > 0. Then:
(a) cf(uξ+1) = cf(u2) ≤ω2.
(b) For any γ < uξ, there is an a ∈ωω, a Skolem term t, and
0 < ξ1 < . . . < ξn < ξ such that
γ = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(uξ1, . . . , uξn) .
Proof. Deﬁne n: On × ωω →On by
n(α, a) = least member of Ia −(α + 1) .
Then for any ξ > 0,
(∗)
sup({n(uξ, a) | a ∈ωω}) = uξ+1 .
To show this, note that we have ≤, and so it sufﬁces to show that the supremum
is in I ∗. But for any b ∈ωω,
sup({n(uξ, a) | a ∈ωω}) = sup({n(uξ, a) | a ∈ωω ∧b ∈L[a]})
by 14.17(a) since for any a ∈ωω there is an a ∈ωω such that {a, b} ⊆L[a], and
the latter supremum is in Ib as it is closed.
To establish (a), note that
(∗∗)
If n(u1, a) = n(u1, b), then n(uξ, a) = n(uξ, b) .
To see this, let c ∈ωω code a and b, e.g. (c)0 = a and (c)1 = b.
Then it
is straightforward to see by 14.17(a) and absoluteness of sharps that there is a
formula ψ(v0) such that for any x ∈Ic#,
n(x, a) = n(x, b) iff
⟨L[c#], ∈, c#⟩|= ψ[x] .
Hence, (∗∗) follows by indiscernibility.

14. Σ1
2 Sets and Sharps
191
By (∗), {n(u1, a) | a ∈ωω} is coﬁnal in u2, and by (∗∗) the map sending
n(u1, a) to n(uξ, a) is well-deﬁned. Hence (a) follows.
To establish (b), proceed by induction on ξ and then on γ . So, it can be
assumed that ξ = ζ + 1 for some ζ > 0 and uζ < γ < uζ+1. Since γ /∈I ∗, there
is an a ∈ωω such that
γ = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
0
(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn)
for some Skolem term t0 and x1 < . . . < xm < y1 < . . . < yn all in Ia with
xm < γ < y1. The xi’s can be replaced by members of I ∗: Inductively, each xi is
deﬁnable in ⟨L[ai], ∈, ai⟩for some ai ∈ωω in terms of members of I ∗less than
uζ+1, and hence so deﬁnable in ⟨Lδ[ai], ∈, ai⟩≺⟨L[ai], ∈, ai⟩for some (any) δ
in I ∗−uζ+1. So, if necessary, a can be replaced by a real coding a, a1, . . . , an
and each xi by its deﬁnition, subsuming the δ into the yi’s by 14.17(a). Thus,
(∗∗∗)
γ = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
1
(uξ1, . . . , uξr , y1, . . . , yn)
for some new Skolem term t1, with ξ1 < . . . < ξr ≤ζ.
Next, by our initial observation (∗), γ < uζ+1 implies that there is a b ∈ωω
such that γ < n(uζ, b).
As before, replacing a by a real coding a and b if
necessary, it can be assumed by 14.17(a) that b = a.
Finally, by the absoluteness of sharps, (∗∗∗) also holds in the sense of L[a#].
Arguing there with the remarkable condition (III) applied to γ < n(uζ, a) and the
fact that Ia contains every uncountable cardinal, the yi’s can be replaced by the
ﬁrst n cardinals in the sense of L[a#] greater than uζ. But these cardinals are
deﬁnable in L[a#] from uζ, and hence
γ = t⟨L[a#],∈,a#⟩
2
(uξ1, . . . , uξs, uζ)
for some Skolem term t2 and ξ1 < . . . < ξs < ζ to complete the proof.
⊣
That 14.18 is provable in ZF was noted for a later purpose. With the Axiom
of Choice ω3 is of course regular, and that ω3 ∈I ∗has the following consequence
in ZFC:
14.19 Corollary. un < ω3 for every n ≤ω.
⊣
These results will be applied in the forthcoming section.

192
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
Martin and Solovay in their [69] established results about Σ1
3 sets under the ex-
istence of sharps that began the use of large cardinal hypotheses to extend the
methods of classical descriptive set theory. Martin went on to provide a sharp tree
representation of Σ1
3 sets, and these ﬁrst explorations broke the ground for major
developments over a decade later: the analysis of the projective sets under the
Axiom of Determinacy (§§29, 30), and the consistency of that hypothesis relative
to large cardinals (§32). Against this larger backdrop the results for Σ1
3 have a
transitional ﬂavor, but they were to form the bases of the grander ediﬁces to follow
and, being close enough to the bedrock of Σ1
2, to ﬁgure in important absoluteness
arguments.
Unlike previous sections this one is largely devoted to a single technical
development – one that serves to motivate later generalizations and substantiate
how large cardinals provide contextually optimal analyses of the projective sets.
A tree representation for Σ1
3 sets implicit in Martin-Solovay [69] was brought to
light by Mansﬁeld [71] using a measurable cardinal; this approach is ﬁrst taken
because of its own signiﬁcance and simpler context, and then the context reﬁned
to follow from the existence of sharps, as was done by Martin. Kechris [81] is a
good reference.
The idea is to develop a tree representation for Σ1
3 sets based on one for Σ1
2
sets, emulating how a tree representation for Σ1
2 sets was developed based on one
for Σ1
1 sets. Recapitulating from 13.13 and 13.14, every Σ1
1 set is ω-Suslin, and
to show that every Σ1
2 set is ω1-Suslin it sufﬁced to show that every Π1
1 set is
ω1-Suslin. But if A ⊆k(ωω) is Π1
1, then there is a tree T on kω × ω such that for
any w ∈k(ωω),
A(w) ↔w /∈p[T ]
↔Tw is well-founded
↔∃g(g: Tw →ω1 is an order-preserving map)
↔w ∈p[ ˆT ] ,
where ˆT is a tree deﬁned on kω×ω1 from T as in the proof of 13.14. Thus, a tree
representation for Σ1
1 sets was converted into one for Π1
1 sets by appealing to the
equivalence between the ΠZF
1
property of well-foundedness and the ΣZF
1
property
of having an order-preserving map and formulating a new tree of approximations
to such a map.
The tree representation for Σ1
2 sets is to be similarly “dualized” to get one for
Π1
2 sets and hence for Σ1
3 sets. For this purpose, a more speciﬁc representation
for Σ1
2 sets is ﬁrst derived:
Suppose that B ⊆k(ωω) is Σ1
2. Taking k = 1 for simplicity, let T be a tree
on 2ω × ω such that for any x ∈ωω,
B(x) ↔∃1y(T⟨x,y⟩is well-founded) .

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
193
T can be deﬁned from a relation recursive in a real (13.1), and by slightly altering
that relation if necessary it can be assumed that ⟨∅, ∅, ∅⟩∈T .
In terms of the ﬁxed recursive enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω such that
|si| ≤i, for any x, y ∈ωω let <x,y be that strict linear ordering of ω deﬁned by:
i <x,y j ↔si /∈T⟨x,y⟩∧sj /∈T⟨x,y⟩∧i < j ; else
si /∈T⟨x,y⟩∧sj ∈T⟨x,y⟩; else
si ∈T⟨x,y⟩∧sj ∈T⟨x,y⟩∧si <KB sj
where <KB is the Kleene-Brouwer ordering, deﬁned before 13.2. Thus, those i’s
so that si is not in T⟨x,y⟩appear ﬁrst in their indexing ordering, followed by those
i’s so that si is in T⟨x,y⟩ordered according to <KB. Note that since ⟨∅, ∅, ∅⟩∈T
and s0 = ∅(as |si| ≤i), 0 is the maximum of <x,y by the deﬁnition of <KB. The
following is a consequence of 13.2.
15.1 Lemma. For any x ∈ωω, B(x) ↔∃1y(<x,y is a well-ordering).
⊣
For s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|, temporarily setting
T⟨s,t⟩= {w | ∃m < |s|(⟨s|m, t|m, w⟩∈T )}
let
<s,t = that strict linear ordering of |s| = {i | i < |s|}
deﬁned like <x,y but with T⟨x,y⟩replaced by T⟨s,t⟩.
For |s| > 0, note that 0 is again the maximum of <s,t. If s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with
|s| = |t| and for some m ≤|s|, s = s|m and t = t|m, then si ∈T⟨s,t⟩iff si ∈T⟨s,t⟩
for i < m since |si| ≤i. Consequently, <s,t ⊆<s,t as relations. Similarly, for
x, y ∈ωω
i <x,y j iff
i <x|m,y|m j
for any m ∈ω such that i, j < m, and so
(∗)
<x,y = 
m∈ω <x|m,y|m .
In terms of a regular κ > ω to be further speciﬁed later, a tree T ∗on 2ω × κ
is now deﬁned by
T ∗= {⟨s, t, u⟩∈
m∈ω(mω × mω × mκ) | ∀i, j < |s|(u(i) < u( j) ↔i <s,t j)} .
T ∗is like the ˆT deﬁned in the proof of 13.14 with κ = ω1, except that the linearity
of <s,t affords the possibility of iff. The following is a consequence of 15.1 and
(∗).
15.2 Lemma. For any x ∈ωω, B(x) ↔∃1y∃g ∈ωκ(⟨x, y, g⟩∈[T ∗]).
⊣
Toward a tree representation for Π1
2 sets, suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is such a
set. Again taking k = 1, A can be considered to be the complement of B above
so that for any x ∈ωω,

194
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
A(x) ↔∀1y∀g ∈ωκ∃0m(⟨x|m, y|m, g|m⟩/∈T ∗)
↔T ∗
x is well-founded .
To convert as in the Π1
1 case, note that this in turn is equivalent (in ZF) to the
existence of an order-preserving map: T ∗
x →κ+ by 12.9(a), as T ∗
x is injectible
into κ. A nicety for now but of consequence later, the κ+ here can in effect be
replaced by κ:
First, in the deﬁnition of B the maximum of <s,t is ∅by arrangement so
that if ⟨s, t, u⟩∈T ∗with |s| > 0 then u(0) = max(ran(u)). Next, deﬁne a strict
ordering <KB2 on T ∗
x (= {⟨t, u⟩| ∃0m(⟨x|m, t, u⟩∈T ∗)}) as follows:
⟨t, u⟩<KB2 ⟨t, u⟩iff
t = u = ∅∧|t| = |u| > 0 ; else
t ⊃t ∧u ⊃u ; else
∃m < |t|(t|m = t|m ∧u|m = u|m ∧
(u(m) < u(m) ∨(u(m) = u(m) ∧t(m) < t(m)))) .
Thus, ⟨∅, ∅⟩is the minimum, and the other ⟨t, u⟩are ordered according to an
antilexicographical version of <KB. If ⟨t, u⟩<KB2 ⟨t, u⟩then either u = ∅or else
u(0) ≤u(0), and since u(0) = max(ran(u)) as noted above, it follows that the set
of predecessors of ⟨t, u⟩has cardinality |<ωω × <ω(u(0) + 1)| < κ. On the other
hand, {⟨⟨0⟩, ⟨ξ⟩⟩| ξ < κ} is a subset of T ∗
x of ordertype κ under <KB2. Hence,
by arguments as for <KB,
T ∗
x is well-founded iff T ∗
x is well-ordered by <KB2 in ordertype κ .
⟨∅, ∅⟩was made the minimum of <KB2 to render the ordertype κ (rather than κ+1),
whereas the well-foundedness of T ∗
x is with respect to ⊃∗(as described before
12.9) for which ⟨∅, ∅⟩is the maximum. Accepting this, we have the following:
15.3 Lemma. For any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔∃f ( f : T ∗
x −{⟨∅, ∅⟩} →κ is an order-preserving map) .
⊣
This is recast (cf. 13.14) in terms of getting an inﬁnite branch through a tree:
For s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|, set
T ∗
s,t = {u | ⟨s, t, u⟩∈T ∗} .
Then stipulate for s ∈<ωω that
⟨hi | i < |s|⟩is orderly for s iff for i, j < |s| ,
(a) hi: T ∗
s||si|,si →κ , and
(b) if si ⊃sj ̸= ∅and u ∈T ∗
s||si|,si, then hi(u) < hj(u||sj|) .
((b) imposes no conditions on h0: {∅} →κ, which corresponds to ⟨∅, ∅⟩∈T ∗
x ; it
is only maintained for notational convenience.) Now let

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
195
T + = {⟨s, ⟨hi | i < |s|⟩⟩| s ∈<ωω ∧⟨hi | i < |s|⟩is orderly for s} .
The following is then straightforward.
15.4 Lemma. For any x ∈ωω, A(x) ↔∃h∀0m(⟨x|m, h|m⟩∈T +).
⊣
This is a sort of Suslin property, but one with ordinal-valued functions hi
composing the tree rather than ordinals. The ﬁnal step involves ranking the hi’s
in a coherent way, and the crucial idea is to assign to the hi’s ordinals that they
represent in well-founded ultrapowers.
Note ﬁrst that the tree T ∗has the following homogeneity property: For s, t ∈
<ωω with |s| = |t|, <s,t is a strict linear ordering, and so for any u ∈T ∗
s,t,
ran(u) ∈[κ]|s|. Moreover, for any w ∈[κ]|s| there is a unique u ∈T ∗
s,t with
ran(u) = w, the one that orders the members of w to satisfy the deﬁnition of T ∗.
Hence, the range function ran: T ∗
s,t →[κ]|s| is a bijection.
κ is now speciﬁed to be a measurable cardinal, and the homogeneity of T ∗is
used to deﬁne ultraﬁlters over T ∗
s,t as follows: Let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over
κ. For s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|, deﬁne Us,t by:
X ∈Us,t iff
X ⊆T ∗
s,t ∧∃H ∈U([H]|s| ⊆ran“X) .
By Rowbottom’s result 7.17, for any n ∈ω and Y ⊆[κ]n there is an H ∈U such
that either [H]n ⊆Y or else [H]n ∩Y = ∅. It follows that Us,t is a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over T ∗
s,t. (Here, the principal ultraﬁlter U∅,∅= {{∅}} is being allowed
for notational convenience, contravening a convention.) Let
js,t: V ≺Ms,t ∼= Ult(V, Us,t)
(so that j∅,∅is the identity and M∅,∅= V ). For each ⟨s, ⟨hi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈T +, hi
is to be replaced by the ordinal [hi] that it represents in the ultrapower Ms||si|,si.
Since [hi] < js||si|,si(κ) by condition (a) of orderliness, the result will be a tree on
ω × γU, where
γU = sup({ js,t(κ) | s, t ∈<ωω ∧|s| = |t|}) .
(γU has a simple description in terms of U, but this will not be needed.)
Toward expressing the condition (b) of orderliness in terms of ordinals, note
the following coherence property: If s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| = n say and
s = s|m and t = t|m for some m ≤n, then for X ⊆T ∗
s,t,
X ∈Us,t iff
{u ∈T ∗
s,t | u|m ∈X} ∈Us,t
since for H ∈U, [H]m ⊆ran“X iff [H]n ⊆{w ∈[κ]n | [w]m ⊆ran“X}. As is
readily checked, there is a corresponding elementary embedding
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩: Ms,t ≺Ms,t
deﬁned by

196
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩([ f ]Us,t) = [⟨f (u|m) | u ∈T ∗
s,t⟩]Us,t
satisfying j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩◦js,t = js,t. Condition (b) of orderliness can now be suitably
rendered, recasting T + as the following tree on ω × γU:
˜T = {⟨s, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈
m∈ω(mω × mγU) |
∀i, j < |s|(si ⊃sj ̸= ∅→δi < j⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si,si⟩(δj))} .
The coherence property of the Us,t’s provides a real Suslin property:
15.5 Proposition. A = p[ ˜T ].
Proof. The characterization 15.4 of A in terms of branches through T + and how
˜T was deﬁned from T + readily implies that A ⊆p[ ˜T ].
Conversely, suppose that x ∈p[ ˜T ], say with ⟨x, g⟩∈[ ˜T ]. For i ∈ω let
hi: T ∗
x||si|,si →On be such that g(i) = [hi] in Mx||si|,si. Then by the deﬁnition of
˜T , for si ⊃sj ̸= ∅,
{u ∈T ∗
x||si|,si | hi(u) < hj(u||sj|)} ∈Ux||si|,si ,
and so there is an Xi j ∈U such that
(†)
ran(u) ∈[Xi j]|si| →hi(u) < hj(u||sj|) .
Set Y = {Xi j | i, j ∈ω ∧si ⊃sj ̸= ∅} ∈U.
Assume now to the contrary that ¬A(x). Then going back to the earlier
juncture 15.1 in terms of B, there is a y ∈ωω such that <x,y is a well-ordering.
As Y is uncountable, there is a function d: ω →Y such that for i, j ∈ω,
d(i) < d( j) iff
i <x,y j .
This implies that for every m ∈ω, d|m ∈T ∗
x|m,y|m, and hence by (†) that whenever
y ⊃si ⊃sj ̸= ∅, hi(d||si|) < hj(d||sj|). This leads to an inﬁnite descending
sequence of ordinals and thus a contradiction.
⊣
The foregoing analysis will soon be adapted to a hypothesis weaker than
measurability, but we draw on its strength to derive an interesting and useful
conclusion based on the deﬁnability of ˜T . This result extends Σ1
2 Absoluteness
13.15, and applicable is the discussion before it of the relativization of analytical
relations in terms of their normal forms and the corresponding formulation of
absoluteness.
15.6 Theorem (Martin-Solovay [69: 152]). Suppose that A is the Π1
2 set as above
with associated tree ˜T deﬁned from the normal ultraﬁlter U over κ, and P is a
p.o. satisfying |P| < κ. Then
∃1x A(x) iff
∥-P ∃1x A(x) .

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
197
Hence, if there is a measurable cardinal, Σ1
3 relations are absolute for V in any
generic extension via a p.o. P of cardinality less than that cardinal.
Proof. By the argument for the Levy-Solovay result 10.15,
∥- ˙U = {Y ⊆κ | ∃X ∈ˇU(X ⊆Y)}
is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ.
Moreover, as for (∗) in that argument,
but incorporating Rowbottom’s 7.17, we have the following:
If n ∈ω and
p ∥- ˙τ: [κ]n →ˇV , then there is a q ≤p, a Z ∈U, and an f : [Z]n →V
such that q ∥- ˙τ|[ ˇZ] = ˇf .
Suppose now that G is P-generic. Then it is straightforward to check with
the property just established that for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|, if j G
s,t is deﬁned in
V [G] from ˙U G just as js,t had been deﬁned in V from U, then j G
s,t and js,t agree
on the ordinals. Consequently, if ˜T G is deﬁned in V [G] as ˜T had been deﬁned
in V , then ˜T G = ˜T .
With this absoluteness property the argument can now be concluded as for
13.15: If in V there is an x ∈ωω such that A(x), then x ∈p[ ˜T ] ⊆(p[ ˜T ])V [G] and
so AV [G](x). Conversely, if in V there is no x ∈ωω such that A(x), then [ ˜T ] = ∅,
i.e. ˜T is well-founded and so there is an order-preserving map: ˜T →On. Such
a map also exists in V [G], and so [ ˜T ]V [G] = ∅, i.e. in V [G] there is no x ∈ωω
such that AV [G](x).
⊣
Hence, if there is a proper class of measurable cardinals, then Σ1
3 relations
are absolute for V in any generic extension. Generic absoluteness would become
an important consideration in the study of strong hypotheses.
Another analysis of Σ1
2 sets is provided next, one not needed for present
purposes but through which 15.5 could have been established. This approach was
to be the basis of a generalization through the projective hierarchy using strong
hypotheses (see 32.6 about weakly homogeneous trees).
For x, y ∈ωω it is simple to check that
⟨⟨Mx|m,y|m | m ∈ω⟩, ⟨j⟨x|m,y|m⟩,⟨x|n,y|n⟩| m ≤n⟩⟩
is a directed system (§0), so stipulate that
⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩is the direct limit, and
kx|m,y|m: ⟨Mx|m,y|m, ∈⟩≺⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩
the corresponding embeddings so that for m ≤n,
kx|n,y|n ◦j⟨x|m,y|m⟩,⟨x|n,y|n⟩= kx|m,y|m .
In what follows, B is the representative Σ1
2 set of which we have been viewing A
as the complement.

198
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
15.7 Exercise.
(a) For any x, y ∈ωω, ⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩is well-founded iff
(∗)
whenever Xm ∈Ux|m,y|m for m ∈ω there is a
d ∈ωκ such that d|m ∈Xm for every m ∈ω.
(b) For any x ∈ωω,
B(x) ↔∃1y(⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩is well-founded) .
Hint. (a) Suppose that (∗) holds, and assume to the contrary that ⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩is
ill-founded, i.e. there are {zi | i ∈ω} ⊆Mx,y such that zi+1 Ex,y zi for every i ∈ω.
For each such i, let mi ∈ω and hi: T ∗
x|mi,y|mi →V be such that kx|mi,y|mi([hi]) =
zi, with mi ≤mi+1. It follows that
[hi+1] ∈j⟨x|mi,y|mi⟩,⟨x|mi+1,y|mi+1⟩[hi] for every i ∈ω .
This is similar to a situation in the argument for 15.5, so invoking (∗) get an
appropriate d ∈ωκ as there to get a contradiction.
Suppose next that (∗) fails, i.e. there are Xm ∈Ux|m,y|m for m ∈ω with no
d ∈ωκ such that d|m ∈Xm for every such m. Set
W = {w ∈<ωκ | ∀m ≤|w|(w|m ∈Xm)} .
Then ⟨W, ⊃⟩is a well-founded tree on κ and so has a rank function ρW (see
before 12.9). By the coherence property of the Us,t’s, W ∩Xm ∈Ux|m,y|m for
every m ∈ω. Now show that for such m,
kx|m+1,y|m+1([ρW|(W ∩Xm+1)]) Ex,y kx|m,y|m([ρW|(W ∩Xm)])
to conﬁrm that Mx,y is ill-founded.
(b) If there is a y ∈ωω such that ⟨Mx,y, Ex,y⟩is well-founded, then by (∗)
there is a d ∈ωκ such that ⟨x, y, d⟩∈[T ∗], so that B(x). For the converse, argue
as for 15.5 to establish (∗) for a y ∈ωω such that <x,y is a well-ordering by
ﬁnding a d: ω →Y for an appropriate Y ∈U.
⊣
The Analysis with Sharps
Having developed a tree representation for Π1
2 (and hence Σ1
3) sets with the broad
strokes afforded by a measurable cardinal, the analysis is now reﬁned to establish
results in ZF assuming only
∀a ∈ωω(a# exists) .
This hypothesis was discussed at the end of §14, and the results established there
will soon be applied. In effect, the approach of Mansﬁeld [71] is incorporated
into the original Martin-Solovay [69] context, as was done by Martin.
Following the previous theory for our representative Π1
2 set A up to the
formulation of T +, the ﬁrst task is to replace the normal ultraﬁlter U by an
adequate analogue. For this purpose we simply take
κ = ω1

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
199
and the closed unbounded ﬁlter Cω1 over ω1 restricted to a suitable class. Recalling
that for a ∈ωω, L[a] = L[{⟨⟨n, a(n)⟩⟩| n ∈ω}] as stipulated in §14, set
˜L = 
a∈ωωL[a] ,
the class of sets constructible from some real.
˜L ⊆L(R) = L(ωω), and the
equality ˜L = L(R) holds iff R ∈L[a] for some a ∈ωω iff ˜L is an inner model.
˜L serves as a convenient class, rich enough for the full play of the reals, but
restricted enough to be constrained by the sharps.
15.8 Lemma.
For any n ∈ω and Y ∈P([ω1]n) ∩˜L, there is an H closed
unbounded in ω1 such that either [H]n ⊆Y or else [H]n ∩Y = ∅.
Proof. Suppose that Y ∈P([ω1]n) ∩L[a] where a ∈ωω. Then
Y = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yp)
for some Skolem term t and x1 < . . . < xm < y1 < . . . < yp all in Ia, the class
of a# indiscernibles, with xm < ω1 ≤y1. If H = Ia ∩(ω1 −(xm + 1)), then
H is closed unbounded in ω1, and either [H]n ⊆Y or else [H]n ∩Y = ∅by
indiscernibility.
⊣
With this, Cω1 ∩˜L can be used in place of U to deﬁne analogues U s,t to Us,t
for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| by
X ∈U s,t iff
X ∈P(T ∗
s,t) ∩˜L ∧(∃H ∈Cω1 ∩˜L)([H]|s| ⊆ran“X) .
(U ∅,∅= {{∅}} is allowed as before.) Note that T ∗
s,t ∈˜L, since it is simple to
check that T ∗∈L[b] ⊆˜L for any b ∈ωω such that A is Π1
2 (b) (cf. 13.14; as
there, ω1 may differ from ωL[b]
1
). It follows by 15.8 that U s,t is an ω1-complete
ultraﬁlter on P(T ∗
s,t) ∩˜L. (In our approach through a motivating analogy, some
use of AC is needed to choose countably many H’s in Cω1 ∩˜L here, and to get
an order-preserving map into On from well-foundedness below. DC sufﬁces, but
as we note before the summarizing result 15.12, all uses of choice principles can
be eliminated from its proof.)
As before there is a coherence property: if s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| and
s = s|m and t = t|m for some m ≤|s|, then for X ∈P(T ∗
s,t) ∩˜L,
X ∈U s,t iff
{u ∈T ∗
s,t | u|m ∈X} ∈U s,t .
What about the analogues for the maps j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩? Note that only their restric-
tions to On, indeed to γU, had been needed. So, ﬁrst consider for s, t ∈<ωω with
|s| = |t| the ultrapower of ⟨On, <⟩by U s,t using only functions: T ∗
s,t →On that
are members of ˜L:

200
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
For such a function f , set
( f )U s,t = {g ∈˜L | g: T ∗
s,t →On ∧{u ∈T ∗
s,t | f (u) = g(u)} ∈U s,t} .
(Note that if f ∈L[a0] and g ∈L[a1] for some a0, a1 ∈ωω, then { f, g} ⊆L[a]
for any a ∈ωω coding a0 and a1, so that {u ∈T ∗
s,t | f (u) = g(u)} ∈L[a] ⊆˜L.)
Now deﬁne ( f )0
U s,t as in §5 to consist of those members of ( f )U s,t of minimal
rank, so that ( f )0
U s,t is a set. The domain of the ultrapower can then be formulated
as
T ∗
s,tOn/U s,t = {( f )0
U s,t | f : T ∗
s,t →On ∧f ∈˜L}
with its ordering <U s,t deﬁned by
( f )0
U s,t <U s,t (g)0
U s,t
iff
{u ∈T ∗
s,t | f (u) < g(u)} ∈U s,t .
(Note that {u ∈T ∗
s,t | f (u) < g(u)} ∈˜L as before.) Since U s,t is ω1-complete,
this ultrapower is well-ordered (cf. 5.3), and hence there is a unique isomorphism
πU s,t: ⟨T ∗
s,tOn/U s,t, <U s,t⟩→⟨On, <⟩.
As in §5, set
[ f ]U s,t = πU s,t(( f )0
U s,t) .
There is a corresponding ultrapower embedding js,t: On →On given by js,t(α) =
[ fα]U s,t, where fα is the constant function: T ∗
s,t →{α}.
For s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| and s = s|m and t = t|m for some m ≤|s|,
deﬁne analogues
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩: On →On
to j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩by:
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩([ f ]U s,t) = [⟨f (u|m) | u ∈T ∗
s,t⟩]U s,t .
The coherence property for the ultraﬁlters insures that these maps are order-
preserving.
From the tree T +, a new tree analogous to the former ˜T is now deﬁned.
This time, for ⟨s, ⟨hi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈T +, hi is to be replaced by the ordinal [hi]
that it represents in the ultrapower of On by U s||si|,si. Since [hi] < js||si|,si(ω1) by
condition (a) of orderliness, the result will be a tree on ω × γ , where
γ = sup({ js,t(ω1) | s, t ∈<ωω ∧|s| = |t|}) .
Important conclusions will soon be drawn from a detailed analysis of γ , but for
now the condition (b) of orderliness is cast in the formulation of the new tree,
which again will be called ˜T :

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
201
˜T = {⟨s, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈
m∈ω(mω × mγ ) |
∀i, j < |s|(si ⊃sj ̸= ∅→δi < j⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si,si⟩(δj))}
The analogue of 15.5 holds:
15.9 Exercise. A = p[ ˜T ] (with the current deﬁnition of ˜T ).
Hint. To show that A ⊆p[ ˜T ], suppose that x ∈ωω and A(x), i.e. T ∗
x is well-
founded. T ∗∈L[b] for b ∈ωω such that A is Π1
2 (b), so if c ∈ωω codes b
and x, then T ∗
x ∈L[c]. Arguing as for Σ1
2 Absoluteness 13.15, T ∗
x is also well-
founded in L[c], and so applying 15.3 in L[c] there is an order-preserving map
f : T ∗
x −{⟨∅, ∅⟩} →ω1 with f ∈L[c]. Such a map can be elaborated as a set
{hi | i ∈ω} ⊆L[c] ⊆˜L such that ⟨x|m, ⟨h0, . . . , hm−1⟩⟩is orderly for x|m (as
in the deﬁnition of T +) for every m ∈ω. Consequently, if g: ω →γ is deﬁned
by g(i) = [hi], the equivalence class in the sense of U x||si|,si, then ⟨x, g⟩∈[ ˜T ] to
conﬁrm that x ∈p[ ˜T ].
The converse is just as for 15.5.
⊣
Whenever there are Suslin representations for the Π1
2 sets, there are corre-
sponding representations for the Σ1
3 sets, and some observations can be made about
their absoluteness and regularity properties. Suppose that for x ∈ωω,
C(x) ↔∃1yD(x, y)
where D ⊆2(ωω) is Π1
2 (a) for some a ∈ω, and there is a tree T D on 2ω × κ for
some κ such that D = p[T D]. Then
C(x) ↔T D
x
is ill-founded .
Recall the discussion before 13.15 about the relativization of analytical relations
in terms of their normal forms and the corresponding formulation of absoluteness.
15.10 Exercise (Mansﬁeld [71]). Suppose that M is an inner model with {a, T D} ⊆
M. Then:
(a) C is absolute for M.
(b) If ωω ∩M is countable, then C is Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire
Property, and has the perfect set property.
Hint. (a) For any x ∈ωω ∩M,
C(x) ↔T D
x
is ill-founded
↔(T D
x
is ill-founded)M
↔(∃y ∈ωω ∩M)(T D
⟨x,y⟩is ill-founded)M
↔(∃y ∈ωω ∩M)(T D
⟨x,y⟩is ill-founded)
↔(∃y ∈ωω ∩M)D(x, y)
↔(∃y ∈ωω ∩M)DM(x, y) (by Σ1
2 Absoluteness)
↔C M(x) .

202
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
(b) For the ﬁrst two properties, note that by (a),
C = {x ∈ωω | M[x] |= ϕ[x]}
for some formula ϕ, and use Solovay’s arguments for 14.1 and 14.2. For the third
property, apply 14.7.
⊣
The signiﬁcance of the tree ˜T on ω × γ lies not only in such properties,
but also in the possibility afforded by the sharps of establishing a contextually
optimal Suslin property low in the cumulative hierarchy. This is a consequence of
a calculation of γ in terms of the class {uξ | 0 < ξ ∈On} of uniform indiscernibles
discussed at the end of §14. The results established there lead to the following
connection between the indiscernibles and the ultrapower embeddings that ﬁgured
in the formulation of ˜T :
15.11 Lemma. Suppose that s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|. Then
js,t(ω1) = u|s|+1 .
Proof. Since js,t(ω1) is
{[h]U s,t | h: T ∗
s,t →ω1 ∧h ∈˜L} ,
we must show that the uniform indiscernible u|s|+1 coincides with this set of
ordinals.
Suppose that h: T ∗
s,t →ω1 with h ∈˜L. Then for some a ∈ωω, h ∈L[a],
and moreover by the proof of GCH in L[a], h is the γ th element in the canonical
well-ordering of L[a] (3.3(b)) for some γ < u2 (as ω1 = u1 < u2). Using 14.18(b)
for this γ and coding more into a if necessary (or proceeding directly as in its
proof), it follows that
h = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
1
(ω1)
for some Skolem term t1.
It can henceforth be assumed that |s| > 0, as j∅,∅(ω1) = ω1 = u1.
By
deﬁnition of T ∗there is a unique permutation π: |s| →|s| such that for any
ξ0 < . . . < ξ|s|−1 < ω1, ⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩∈T ∗
s,t. A small adjustment of t1 leads
to a new Skolem term t such that for any ξ0 < . . . < ξ|s|−1 < ω1,
h(⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩) = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(ξ0, . . . , ξ|s|−1, ω1) < ω1 .
Cast this way, h can be naturally extended. In particular, consider
η(h, a, t) = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , u|s|, u|s|+1) < u|s|+1 .
(By an argument used in the proof of 14.18(b), η(h, a, t) = t⟨L[a#],∈,a#⟩(u1, . . . , u|s|)
for some Skolem term t, i.e. the dependence on u|s|+1 can be eliminated at the

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
203
cost of replacing a by a#. However, while resonating with a surjectivity argument
at the end of this proof, this further transformation is not needed here.)
First observe that if h ∈[h]U s,t and η(h, a, t) is derived from some a and
t for h, then η(h, a, t) = η(h, a, t): By deﬁnition of U s,t, there is a C closed
unbounded in ω1 such that for ξ0 < . . . < ξ|s|−1 all in C, h(⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩) =
h(⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩). Since Ia ∩Ia ∩ω1 is also closed unbounded in ω1, there
are such ξ0 < . . . < ξ|s|−1 all in Ia ∩Ia, and so
t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(ξ0, . . . , ξ|s|−1) = h(⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩, ω1)
= h(⟨ξπ(0), . . . , ξπ(|s|−1)⟩)
= t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(ξ0, . . . , ξ|s|−1, ω1) .
Hence, if c ∈ωω codes a and a, then by deﬁnability and indiscernibility applied
in L[c],
η(h, a, t) = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , u|s|, u|s|+1)
= t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , u|s|, u|s|+1)
= η(h, a, t) .
It now follows that
e: {[h]U s,t | h: T ∗
s,t →ω1 ∧h ∈˜L} →u|s|+1
is well-deﬁned by: e([h]U s,t) = η(h, a, t) for some a and t for h. An analogous
argument shows that e is order-preserving. Finally, any γ < u|s|+1 is of form
t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , u|s|) for some a ∈ωω by 14.18(b), so it follows that e is surjec-
tive. Hence, e is a bijection (and consequently the identity map), and the proof is
complete.
⊣
That the map e is the identity implies that ˜T could have been formulated
in terms of a well-ordering of Skolem terms involving the un’s without reference
to the ultraﬁlters U s,t. Consequently, the foregoing analysis can be carried out
in ZF without relying on a choice principle (DC) to ensure well-foundedness
of ultrapowers (cf. Moschovakis [80: 596ff]). On the other hand, the ultraﬁlter
formulation motivates ˜T by embedding it into a larger context.
It follows from 15.11 that
γ = sup({ js,t(ω1) | s, t ∈<ωω ∧|s| = |t|})
= sup({un | 0 < n ∈ω})
= uω ,
and this leads to the following result, incorporating the previous remark about
provability in ZF.
15.12 Theorem (ZF)(Martin). Assume that ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists). Then every Σ1
3 set
is uω-Suslin.
⊣

204
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
The Axiom of Determinacy actually implies that un = ωn for every n ≤ω
(28.9). In the ZFC context we have the following remarkable structure result for
Σ1
3 sets:
15.13 Corollary (Martin). Assume that ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists). Then every Σ1
3 set is
ω2-Suslin, and hence a union of ℵ2 Borel sets.
Proof. By 14.19, uω < ω3. The latter assertion follows from 13.13(f).
⊣
This is analogous to the classical result 13.7, and implies under the existence
of sharps that every Σ1
3 set has cardinality at most ℵ2 or a perfect subset and hence
cardinality 2ℵ0.
The deﬁnability properties of ˜T also lead to a uniformization result for Π1
2
sets. As discussed at the end of §13, every Σ1
2 set can be uniformized by a Σ1
2
set, and but it is consistent that there is a Π1
2 set that cannot be uniformized by
any projective set. The tree analysis of Mansﬁeld [71] together with the sharps
analysis of Martin-Solovay [69] leads to the following:
15.14 Theorem (Mansﬁeld [71], Martin-Solovay [69]).
Assume that ∀a ∈
ωω(a# exists). Then for any b ∈ωω, every Π1
2 (b) set can be uniformized by a
Π1
3 (b) set.
Proof. The structure of the proof is as for the Π1
1 Uniformization 13.17, which
established: If A ⊆2(ωω) is Π1
1 (a), then there is a Π1
1 (a) set A0 ⊆A such that for
any x ∈ωω, if there is a y such that A(x, y) then there is exactly one y such that
A0(x, y). Availing ourselves of our representative Π1
2 set A ⊆ωω and the theory
developed for it through 15.9, we shall establish the following “basis” theorem:
For b ∈ωω such that A is Π1
2 (b), there is a Π1
3 (b) set A0 ⊆A such that if there
is a y such that A(y), then there is exactly one y such that A0(y). With only
notational changes A and A0 can be recast as subsets of 2(ωω) and a parametrized
version of the proof can be given to establish the usual uniformization assertion.
Let T ∗on 2ω × ω1 and ˜T on ω × γ be as before so that for any y ∈ωω,
A(y) ↔T ∗
y
is well-founded
↔∃g ∈ωγ (⟨y, g⟩∈[ ˜T ]) .
First observe that for any y ∈ωω if there is a g such that ⟨y, g⟩∈[ ˜T ]
at all, then there is an honest leftmost one, i.e. a gy such that for any other
g, gy(i) ≤g(i) for every i ∈ω:
Suppose that A(y), so that T ∗
y is well-founded.
By 12.9(a) and 15.3 the
restriction of its rank function ρT ∗
y to T ∗
y −{⟨∅, ∅⟩} is an order-preserving map into
ω1. Moreover, by the relativization argument for 15.9, for any c ∈ωω that codes b
and y, ρT ∗
y ∈L[c] ⊆˜L. Consequently, ρT ∗
y can be elaborated as {hy
i | i ∈ω} ⊆˜L
where hy
i : T ∗
y||si|,si →ω1 is speciﬁed by hy
i (u) = ρT ∗
y (⟨si, u⟩) for i ̸= 0 and

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
205
hy
0(∅) = 0. Then if gy ∈ωγ is deﬁned by gy(i) = [hy
i ], the equivalence class in
the sense of U y||si|,si, it follows that ⟨y, gy⟩∈[ ˜T ].
Suppose now that ⟨y, g⟩∈[ ˜T ] with g arbitrary. For i ∈ω let hi: T ∗
y||si|,si →
On be such that g(i) = [hi], the equivalence class in the sense of U y||si|,si. Then
for si ⊃sj ̸= ∅,
{u ∈T ∗
y||si|,si | hi(u) < hj(u||sj|)} ∈U y||si|,si ,
and so there is a Ci j closed unbounded in ω1 such that
(†)
ran(u) ∈[Ci j]|si| →hi(u) < hj(u||sj|) .
Set C = {Ci j | i, j ∈ω ∧si ⊃sj ̸= ∅}, a set closed unbounded in ω1.
Next, let e: C →ω1 be the order-preserving bijection. Then e induces an
isomorphism between T ∗
y and a tree T C on ω × C deﬁned by
⟨t, u⟩∈T C iff
⟨t, e ◦u⟩∈T ∗
y
since the order relationships for the second coordinates are preserved. As A(y),
both T ∗
y and T C are well-founded, and their rank functions are related by
ρT C(⟨t, u⟩) = ρT ∗
y (⟨t, e ◦u⟩) .
Hence, by 12.9(a) and how the hi’s make up an order-preserving map: T C →On
by (†),
ρT ∗
y (⟨si, e ◦u⟩) ≤hi(u) for 0 < i ∈ω and u ∈|si|C .
Finally, it is simple to see that there is a D ⊆C closed unbounded in ω1 on
which e is the identity, so that
ρT ∗
y (⟨si, u⟩) ≤hi(u) for 0 < i ∈ω and u ∈|si|D .
But how the hy
i ’s were deﬁned from ρT ∗
y implies that
gy(i) = [hy
i ] ≤[hi] = g(i) for every i ∈ω .
Proceeding now as in the argument for Π1
1 Uniformization, the idea is to
uniformize by choosing that y of the leftmost ⟨y, g⟩in [ ˜T ] if there is one. With
A being Π1
2 (b), that this can be done in a Π1
3 (b) fashion relies on the observation
that g would have to be the honest leftmost gy as described above.
Let R≤and R< be relations on ω × 2(ωω) given by
R≤(i, y, z) ↔¬A(y) ∨¬A(z) ∨gy(i) ≤gz(i) , and
R<(i, y, z) ↔¬A(y) ∨¬A(z) ∨gy(i) < gz(i) .
It sufﬁces to show that these are Σ1
3(b). If A0 ⊆A were then deﬁned following
the proof for 13.17, it would uniformize as desired and be essentially of form
Π1
2 (b) ∧∀1[Σ1
3(b) →¬Σ1
3(b)] and hence Π1
3 (b) to complete the proof.

206
Chapter 3. Forcing and Sets of Reals
To show that R≤is Σ1
3(b), the argument for R< being analogous, note ﬁrst
that ¬A is Σ1
2(b), so it remains to show assuming A(y) and A(z) that gy(i) ≤gz(i)
is Σ1
3(b):
For this purpose, recall that any x ∈ωω codes ⟨(x)k | k ∈ω⟩∈ω(ωω)
by (x)k(m) = x(⟨⟨k, m⟩⟩), and let a(y, z) ∈
ωω be such that (a(y, z))0 = b,
(a(y, z))1 = y, (a(y, z))2 = z, and (a(y, z))n = the constant function: ω →{∅}
for n > 2. Now by the characterization of the honest leftmost gy, for i ∈ω,
gy(i) = [hy
i ], the equivalence class in the sense of U y||si|,si, where in turn
hy
i : T ∗
y||si|,si →ω1 is given by hy
i (u) = ρT ∗
y (⟨si, u⟩).
Applying a previous re-
mark, ρT ∗
y ∈L[a(y, z)] as a(y, z) codes b and y, and in fact a closer look shows
that ρT ∗
y is deﬁnable in ⟨L[a(y, z)], ∈, a(y, z)⟩, via the same formula for all y and
z, in terms of the one parameter needed to deﬁne T ∗
y there, namely (the real) ω1.
We next incorporate aspects of the proof of 15.11. For 0 < i ∈ω, there is
a unique permutation πi,y: |si| →|si| such that for any ξ0 < . . . < ξ|si|−1 < ω1,
⟨ξπi,y(0), . . . , ξπi,y(|si|−1)⟩∈T ∗
y||si|,si. It follows from the aforementioned deﬁnability
of ρT ∗
y in terms of ω1 that for 0 < i ∈ω Skolem terms ti can be deﬁned uniformly,
not depending on y or z, such that
hy
i (⟨ξπi,y(0), . . . , ξπi,y(|si|−1)⟩) = ρT ∗
y (⟨si, ⟨ξπi,y(0), . . . , ξπi,y(|si|−1)⟩⟩)
= t⟨L[a(y,z)],∈,a(y,z)⟩
i
(ξ0, . . . , ξ|si|−1, ω1) .
The proof of 15.11 now shows (through its mapping e being the identity) that
[hy
i ] = t⟨L[a(y,z)],∈,a(y,z)⟩
i
(u1, . . . , u|si|, u|si|+1) .
All of the foregoing applies, of course, to get an analogous expression for
[hz
i ] in terms of some ti. Consequently, for each i ∈ω there is a formula ϕi such
that
gy(i) ≤gz(i) ↔[hy
i ] ≤[hz
i ]
↔⟨L[a(y, z)], ∈, a(y, z)⟩|= ϕi[u1, . . . , u|si|+1]
↔
⌈ϕi(c0, . . . , c|si|)⌉∈a(x, y)#
where the ci’s are constants for indiscernibles in the §9 language L∗
∈for the
theory of sharps.
By the uniformity of the deﬁnitions it is straightforward to
see that the function taking i to ⌈ϕi(c0, . . . , c|si|)⌉can be taken to be recursive.
Hence, with b coded in a(x, y), 14.16 and the argument for 14.12(c) implies that
the gy(i) ≤gz(i) is Σ1
3(b) (in fact, ∆1
3(b)) to complete the proof.
⊣
Adjoining an ∃to the result is straightforward (cf. 13.18).
15.15 Exercise. Assume that ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists). Then for any b ∈ωω, every
Σ1
3(b) set can be uniformized by a Σ1
4(b) set.
⊣
Thus, the methods and results of classical descriptive set theory were extended
to the third level of the projective hierarchy. What about the fourth level?

15. Sharps and Σ1
3 Sets
207
Having developed a tree representation for Π1
2 sets and hence for Σ1
3 sets,
the next step would be to convert the latter to a tree representation for Π1
3 sets by
again appealing to the basic equivalence between well-foundedness and having an
order-preserving map into the ordinals. Suppose that E ⊆ωω is Π1
3, say
E(x) ↔¬∃y A(x, y)
where A ⊆2(ωω) is Π1
2. This A can be regarded as a binary version of our
previous, representative A; recalling that γ = uω (as noted before 15.12), the new
A is p[ ˜T ] for a corresponding ˜T on 2ω × uω. Consequently,
E(x) ↔¬∃y∃g ∈ωuω(⟨x, y, g⟩∈[ ˜T ])
↔
˜Tx is well-founded
↔∃f ( f : ˜Tx →u+
ω is an order-preserving map) .
A tree analogous to T ∗could now be developed of ﬁnite approximations to
order-preserving maps. This done, certain ordinal-valued functions would have
to be ranked, requiring ω1-complete ultraﬁlters Us,t on P(Xs,t) for some sub-
sets Xs,t of |s|uω. These ultraﬁlters would again have to satisfy coherence and
well-foundedness properties, and these would be derived most directly from ho-
mogeneity properties of ˜T . How can such properties be established?
Looking further into the construction of ˜T , if ⟨s, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈˜T , there is
a sequence ⟨hi | i < |s|⟩orderly for s such that δi = [hi]. Such a sequence in turn
corresponds to a function on Zs = {⟨si, u⟩| ∃i < |s|(⟨s||si|, si, u⟩) ∈T ∗} given by
h(⟨si, u⟩) = hi(u). Moreover, for s ̸= ∅, Zs is seen to be well-ordered by <KB2 in
ordertype ω1 by remarks before 15.3. Thus, Zs can be identiﬁed with a member
of [ω1]ω1, which would now play the role of [ω1]n. But now, we would need a
partition property for [ω1]ω1 analogous to 15.8, i.e. some substantive version of
the full ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
ω . Such properties contradict AC, but actually follow from
the Axiom of Determinacy (cf. 28.13), and moreover the ZFC context could be
maintained by only assuming that axiom in the inner model L(R), which could
play the role of ˜L.
In 1971 Kunen thus proceeded to derive a tree representation for Π1
3 sets, and
forging ahead, similarly comprehended the Π1
4 sets. This work was to stand as
the high point of the contextually optimal analysis of the projective sets for well
over a decade, further progress being stymied by the inability to gain sufﬁcient
information about an ordinal known as δ1
5.
How this work was resoundingly
completed in the mid-1980’s is discussed in §30.

Chapter 4
Aspects of Measurability
This chapter describes the wide-ranging investigation of measurability carried out
in the late 1960’s with the complementary methods of forcing and inner models.
These developments not only provided a coherent and illuminating structural anal-
ysis, but suggested new questions and provided paradigms for the investigation
of stronger hypotheses. §16 and §17 discuss saturated ideals, a subject brought
to the forefront by work of Solovay. The ﬁrst section presents his combinatorial
analysis, and the second, his consistency result on real-valued measurability and
then the cycle of Kunen-Paris consistency results based on the extendibility of
elementary embeddings. §18 describes Prikry forcing, a notion that provided yet
another understanding of measurability, and a generalization, one of several that
were to become crucial to the careful study of consistency strength. The rest of the
chapter is based on Kunen’s work on iterated ultrapowers, inner models of mea-
surability, and elementary embeddings: With the general concept of M-ultraﬁlter,
his iterated ultrapower theory is developed in §19. §20 applies it to derive the
structure theorems of Kunen and Silver on inner models of measurability. Finally,
§21 gives Kunen’s result that the existence of 0# is equivalent to the existence of
a j: L ≺L, and a detailed analysis of Solovay’s 0†, the existence of which is a
principle of transcendence over inner models of measurability.

210
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
16. Saturated Ideals I
Addressing another aspect of Lebesgue measure, Solovay derived the principal
results on its extendibility, in the presence of AC, to a measure on all sets of
reals. This is real-valued measurability ≤2ℵ0, the other branch of the bifurcation
found by Ulam in his fundamental paper [30] on Banach’s measure problem (§2).
16.1 Theorem (Solovay [66, 71]).
(a) If κ is a measurable cardinal, then there is a p.o. P such that
∥-P κ = 2ℵ0 ∧κ is real-valued measurable .
(b) If κ is a real-valued measurable cardinal, then there is an inner model of
ZFC in which κ is measurable.
(a) is established in the next section (17.5); the original proof of (b) is sketched
in the setting of inner models of measurability (20.4); and a sharp version of (b) is
established much later (see Precipitous Ideals in volume II). Solovay’s paper [71]
was particularly inﬂuential, for in establishing 16.1 not only did it broaden the
study of large cardinal properties from ultraﬁlters to ideals, but it also described
how forcing and ultrapowers can be combined in a useful technique now known
as generic ultrapowers. Owing to various developments in the 1970’s generic
ultrapowers was to emerge as a standard technique of wide applicability, and it is
taken up against a broader backdrop in volume II.
What played a key role in this area and soon became a staple feature of large
cardinal theory is the concept of saturated ideal, formulated and studied by Tarski
[45]. Building on the §0 preliminaries about ideals, for I an ideal over a set S,
set
I ∗= {X ⊆S | S −X ∈I} , and
I + = P(S) −I .
I ∗is the dual ﬁlter of I, and I + the collection of I ∗-stationary sets, i.e. those sets
X ⊆S such that X ∩Z ̸= ∅for any Z ∈I ∗. A ∈I + iff
I|A = {X ⊆S | X ∩A ∈I}
is a (proper) ideal, the restriction of I to A or the ideal generated by I ∪{S −A}.
Intuitively, I, I +, and I ∗are the collections of negligible, non-negligible, and all
but negligible subsets of S with respect to I. For S a regular cardinal κ > ω,
the main example is I = NSκ, the ideal of non-stationary subsets, when I + is the
collection of stationary subsets and I ∗the closed unbounded ﬁlter Cκ. Of course,
the theory of ideals can be recast entirely in terms of ﬁlters, an approach consistent
with the modern preference for ultraﬁlters over maximal ideals. However, like the
choice of p ≤q in forcing for p is stronger than q, the ideal formulation is more
natural because of the interplay with Boolean algebras.

16. Saturated Ideals I
211
Turning to Tarski’s concept, for an ideal I,
I is λ-saturated iff for any {Xα | α < λ} ⊆I + there are
β < γ < λ such that Xβ ∩Xγ ∈I + ,
and
sat(I) = the least λ such that I is λ-saturated .
sat(I) is a measure of how close I is to being a maximal ideal, with sat(I) = 2
iff I is maximal. Erd˝os-Tarski [43] established that sat(I), if inﬁnite, is always a
regular uncountable cardinal.
Only ideals I over cardinals κ will be considered in this section, for which
by a §0 convention α = {ξ | ξ < α} ∈I for every α < κ. Furthermore, for
the study of large cardinal properties analogous to measurability only ideals of
requisite completeness will be considered:
By ideal over κ is meant κ-complete ideal over κ .
It is simply to see that for such ideals to exist κ must be regular.
Saturation of ideals is a rather general concept; for example, the ideal [κ]<κ
over κ is not λ-saturated iff there is a family F of λ almost disjoint subsets of κ:
F ⊆[κ]κ with |F| = λ such that X ̸= Y both in F implies that |X ∩Y| < κ. An
early result of combinatorial set theory is that such a family exists for λ = κ+ by
a simple recursive construction (Sierpi´nski [28]), so that [κ]<κ is not κ+-saturated.
The connection with real-valued measurability is provided by 2.1:
16.2 Exercise. If m is a κ-additive measure over κ, then {X ⊆κ | m(X) = 0} is
an ω1-saturated ideal over κ.
⊣
Solovay showed that only this property is all that is needed to establish the
large cardinal consequences of real-valued measurability. Beyond this, the study
of saturated ideals led to a basic result about stationary sets and soon developed
into an important area of research in its own right. This section establishes the
basic combinatorial results about saturated ideals and the next, the ﬁrst relative
consistency results.
Initial observations about the saturation of ideals were based on Ulam’s fun-
damental work on measurability.
16.3 Exercise (Ulam [30]). For any λ, there is no λ+-saturated ideal over λ+.
Hint. Check that the proof of 2.4 with Ulam matrices works.
⊣
The following proposition is established using transﬁnite versions of Ulam’s
tree argument for 2.5(a); its (c) afﬁrms 7.12 by 16.2.
16.4 Proposition. Suppose that I is an ideal over κ.
(a) (Tarski [45: 53]) If I is λ-saturated where 2<λ < κ, then κ is measurable.

212
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
(b) (Levy, Silver) If I is κ-saturated and κ is weakly compact, then κ is
measurable.
(c) If I is λ-saturated for some λ < κ, then κ has the tree property.
Proof. For (a) or (b), suppose ﬁrst that I has an atom, i.e. a set A ∈I + such
that whenever A = B ∪C is a disjoint union, either B ∈I or C ∈I. Then
{X ⊆κ | X ∩A ∈I +} is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter, and hence κ is a measurable
cardinal. So, we can assume to the contrary that I has no atoms, and derive a
contradiction.
For this purpose, build a tree T ordered by ⊃and consisting of sets indexed
by some of the members of <κ2 as follows: Set X∅= κ. If Xs has been deﬁned
for some s ∈<κ2, then deﬁne Xs⌢⟨0⟩and Xs⌢⟨1⟩exactly when Xs ∈I +, in which
case they are to satisfy
Xs⌢⟨0⟩, Xs⌢⟨1⟩∈I + , Xs = Xs⌢⟨0⟩∪Xs⌢⟨1⟩, and Xs⌢⟨0⟩∩Xs⌢⟨1⟩= ∅.
That I has no atoms makes this possible. Finally, if δ < κ is a limit and s ∈δ2,
deﬁne Xs = 
α<δ Xs|α exactly when Xs|α has been deﬁned for each α < δ. The
tree T thus built has the following property:
(∗)
If γ ≤κ and s ∈γ 2, then the collection of “offshoots”
{Xs|α⌢⟨i⟩| α < γ ∧Xs|α+1 is deﬁned ∧s(α) ̸= i} is pairwise disjoint .
For (a), (∗) and λ-saturation imply that T has height at most λ. But then, κ
is a union of 2<λ < κ sets in I, namely those Xs’s without tree successors. This
contradicts the κ-completeness of I.
For (b), note that if T had height less than κ, then by the inaccessibility of κ
and the above argument, the κ-completeness of I would again be violated. Thus,
it can be assumed that T is a κ-tree, and so by weak compactness it has a coﬁnal
branch. But by (∗) this contradicts the κ-saturation of I.
To establish (c), suppose that ⟨T, <T ⟩is a κ-tree; it can be assumed that
T = κ. For ξ < κ set Sξ = {ζ < κ | ξ <T ζ}, and let U = {ξ < κ | Sξ ∈I +}.
Then ξ ∈U and ξ ′ <T ξ implies that ξ ′ ∈U. It is simple to see that the subtree
determined by U has height κ because of the κ-completeness of I, and that each
of its levels has cardinality less than λ by λ-saturation. 7.9 then implies that this
subtree has a coﬁnal branch, which is also a coﬁnal branch through ⟨κ, <T ⟩.
⊣
The hypothesis of (c) cannot be weakened to I is κ-saturated (Kunen [78]).
It follows from (a) that the theory of λ-saturation over κ essentially reduces to
that of measurability unless λ > ω and 2<λ ≥κ. Having saturated ideals over κ
does not require the strong inaccessibility of κ as evidenced by 16.2, and subject
to some restrictions like 16.3 there could be saturated ideals low in the cumulative
hierarchy.
Since an ideal I over κ is trivially (2κ)+-saturated, the substantive cases for
λ-saturation are for λ in the range ω < λ ≤2κ. In fact, the theory quickly de-
volved into three cases: κ+, κ, and <κ saturation. In what follows, Solovay’s

16. Saturated Ideals I
213
results are analyzed by progressively considering these cases in turn, deriving con-
sequences of measurability which are really consequences of these restricted hy-
potheses. Although restricted as combinatorial properties, it should be mentioned
at the outset that even κ+-saturation has the consistency strength of measurability
(see remarks at the beginning of §17). λ-saturation for κ+ < λ ≤2κ has been
studied in Baumgartner [76: §5] and more extensively in Baumgartner-Taylor [82];
interesting questions remain, but large cardinals are generally not involved.
While κ-saturation amounts to the assertion that no subset of κ can be par-
titioned into κ disjoint I + sets, κ+-saturation has no such intuitive feel. What is
signiﬁcant is the completeness of the quotient Boolean algebra P(κ)/I. This is
the Boolean algebra consisting of equivalence classes [X]I for X ⊆κ, where
[X]I = [Y]I
iff
X △Y ∈I .
As usual, the subscripts are suppressed when clear from the context. The Boolean
operations are the set-theoretic ones modulated by ideal properties:
[X] + [Y] = [X ∪Y] , [X] · [Y] = [X ∩Y] , and −[X] = [κ −X] .
Consequently,
[X] ≤[Y] iff
X −Y ∈I ,
and
0 = [∅] = I and 1 = [κ] = I ∗
are the zero and one elements of the Boolean algebra. ⟨I +, ⊆⟩is later considered
as a notion of forcing (see Precipitous Ideals in volume II). Since then p ⊥q iff
p ∩q ∈I, the separative quotient I +/≈is just P(κ)/I −{0}. In this guise the
λ-saturation of I is equivalent to the λ-c.c. of the forcing notion.
The following was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant result about κ+-saturation. Recall that
a Boolean algebra B is complete iff for any S ⊆B, the least upper bound  S
exists in the sense of B.
16.5 Proposition (Smith-Tarski [57: 254]). If I is a κ+-saturated ideal over κ,
then P(κ)/I is a complete Boolean algebra.
Proof. Set B = P(κ)/I and let S ⊆B be arbitrary. The proof that  S exists
proceeds progressively through three cases depending on |S|:
Case (i): |S| < κ. With S = {[Xα] | α < γ } where γ < κ it follows that
 S = [
α<γ Xα]: If [Y] ≥[Xα] for every α < γ , then (
α<γ Xα) −Y =

α<γ (Xα −Y) ∈I by κ-completeness, and so [Y] ≥[
α<γ Xα].
Case (ii): |S| = κ. Let S = {bα | α < κ}, and using (i) set aα = bα−
ξ<α bξ
for α < κ. Then straightforward arguments show that:
(a) if α < β < κ, then aα · aβ = 0 ;
(b) if α < κ, then 
ξ<α aξ = 
ξ<α bξ ; and hence
(c) if 
α<κ aα exists, then so does 
α<κ bα and 
α<κ aα = 
α<κ bα .

214
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
We can now work with the aα’s instead, which can be assumed to be nonzero.
Extend {aα | α < κ} to a maximal family A ⊆B such that x ̸= y both in A implies
that x ̸= 0 yet x · y = 0. By κ+-saturation |A| ≤κ, so let A = {[Yδ] | δ < κ}. The
Yδ’s can be taken to be pairwise disjoint. (Replace each Yδ by Yδ −
ξ<δ Yξ =
Yδ −
ξ<δ(Yξ ∩Yδ), noting that the subtracted set is in I by κ-completeness.)
Finally, set D = {Yδ | [Yδ] = aα for some α < κ}; then [D] = 
α<κ aα:
Suppose that [E] ≥aα for every α < κ.
To show that [E] ≥[D], set
b = [D] −[E]. Certainly b · aα = 0 for every α < κ by hypothesis on [E].
Also, for [Yδ] not an aα, Yδ ∩D = ∅, and so b · [Yδ] = 0. Hence, b = 0 by the
maximality of A.
Case (iii): |S| > κ.
It can be assumed inductively that if T ⊆S with
|T | < |S|, then  T exists. Let S = {bα | α < λ}, and using the inductive
hypothesis, set aα = bα −
ξ<α bξ for α < λ. Then (a)–(c) of (ii) hold with κ
replaced by λ. But by κ+-saturation at most κ of the aα’s are non-zero, and so
by (ii) 
α<λ aα = 
α<λ bα exists.
⊣
This result has a partial converse:
16.6 Exercise (Solovay [71: 427]). Suppose that I is an ideal over κ such that
P(κ)/I is complete. Then for any λ such that I is not λ-saturated, 2λ ≤2κ. In
particular:
(a) I is 2κ-saturated.
(b) If 2κ < 2κ+, then I is κ+-saturated.
Hint. Suppose that {bα | α < λ} ⊆P(κ)/I is a counterexample to λ-saturation.
For X ⊆λ set aX = 
α∈X bα, and note that if X ̸= Y, then aX ̸= aY. But
|P(κ)/I| ≤2κ.
⊣
The completeness of P(κ)/I
is itself a substantial hypothesis;
see
Kanamori-Shelah [95].
Solovay used 16.5 to show that κ+-saturation is enough to “normalize” ideals
in analogy to 5.11 for measurability. To establish some further terminology, for
I an ideal over κ, X ⊆κ, and f : X →κ,
f is I-small on X iff {ξ ∈X | f (ξ) = α} ∈I for every α < κ ,
f is I-incompressible on X iff
f is I-small on X yet for any Y ⊆X
with Y ∈I + and g: Y →κ with g(ξ) < f (ξ)
for ξ ∈Y, g is not I-small on Y , and
I is normal iff I ∗is a normal ﬁlter ,
i.e. for any X ∈I + and f regressive on X, there is a Y ⊆X with Y ∈I + such
that f is constant on Y.
16.7 Proposition (Solovay [71]). Suppose that I is a κ+-saturated ideal over κ.
Then:

16. Saturated Ideals I
215
(a) For any X ∈I + there is an I-incompressible function on some Y ⊆X
with Y ∈I +.
(b) There is an I-incompressible function on κ.
(c) If f is an I-incompressible function on κ, then
f∗(I) = {X ⊆κ | f −1(X) ∈I}
is a normal κ+-saturated ideal over κ.
Proof. (a) Assume to the contrary that this fails for some X ∈I +. The following
is ﬁrst established:
(∗)
For any f I-small on X, there is an f I-small on X
such that [{ξ ∈X | f (ξ) < f (ξ)}] = [X] .
Given such an f , note that by assumption whenever Y ⊆X with Y ∈I +, there
is a Z ⊆Y with Z ∈I + and a g I-small on Z such that g(ξ) < f (ξ) for ξ ∈Z.
Hence, by taking an appropriately maximal family ⊆P(X) ∩I + and invoking
κ+-saturation, there is a collection {⟨Zα, gα⟩| α < κ} satisfying:
(i) α < β < κ implies that Zα ⊆X with Zα ∈I + yet Zα ∩Zβ ∈I ;
(ii) gα is I-small on Zα and gα(ξ) < f (ξ) for ξ ∈Zα ; and
(iii) 
α<κ[Zα] = [X] .
As for 16.5, the Zα’s can be taken to be pairwise disjoint (by replacing Zα with
Zα −
ξ<α Zξ). Now let f be any extension of 
α<κ gα to all of X. Then it
is simple to see that f satisﬁes the conclusion of (∗). For example, f must be
I-small on X, else if {ξ ∈X | f (ξ) = γ } ∈I + for some γ < κ, then by (iii)
{ξ ∈Zα | gα(ξ) = f (ξ) = γ } ∈I + for some α < κ, contradicting (ii).
With (∗) we can readily derive a contradiction as follows: Let f0 be the
identity map on X, and for n ∈ω inductively set fn+1 = f n as provided by (∗).
Setting
Xn = {ξ ∈X | fn+1(ξ) < fn(ξ)} ,
[Xn] = [X] implies that X −Xn ∈I and hence X −
n Xn ∈I, so that 
n Xn ∈
I +. But any ξ in this set corresponds to a descending sequence of ordinals
f0(ξ) > f1(ξ) > f2(ξ) > · · · .
(b) By taking an appropriately maximal family and invoking κ+-saturation,
it follows from (a) that there is a collection {⟨Yα, fα⟩| α < κ} satisfying
(i) α < β < κ implies that Yα ∈I + yet Yα ∩Yβ ∈I ,
(ii) fα is I-incompressible on Yα , and
(iii) 
α<κ[Yα] = 1 .
Again the Yα’s can be taken to be pairwise disjoint.
Then any extension of

α<κ fα to all of κ is an I-incompressible function on κ.
(c) This is straightforward.
⊣

216
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
The strengthening to κ-saturation opens the door to results about the large
size of κ analogous to those for measurability. The proof of (c) below was based
on the original Keisler-Tarski one of 5.14. Recall that
M(X) = {α ∈X | X ∩α is stationary in α} ,
Mahlo’s operation.
(e) was also obtained by Jensen and in part by Fremlin
(cf. Solovay [71: 397]).
16.8 Proposition (Solovay [71]). Suppose that I is a normal κ-saturated ideal
over κ. Then:
(a) If X ∈I + and f is regressive on X, then there is a Y ⊆X with [Y] = [X]
and a γ < κ such that f “Y ⊆γ .
(b) {α < κ | α is regular} ∈I ∗.
(c) If S ⊆κ is stationary, then {α < κ | S ∩α is stationary in α} ∈I ∗.
(d) For any X ⊆κ, [M(X)] = [X].
(e) κ is κ-weakly Mahlo.
Proof. (a) Set Xα = {ξ ∈X | f (ξ) = α} for α < κ, and E = {α < κ | Xα ∈
I +}. By κ-saturation |E| < κ, and so γ = sup(E) < κ. Hence, we can take
Y = 
α∈E Xα since X −Y ∈I by a simple application of normality.
(b) Assume to the contrary that {α < κ | cf(α) < α} ∈I +, so that by
normality A = {α < κ | cf(α) = δ} ∈I + for some δ < κ. For each α ∈A, let
⟨ηα
ξ | ξ < δ⟩be coﬁnal in α, and then for each ξ < δ deﬁne regressive functions
gξ on A by: gξ(α) = ηα
ξ . By (a), for each ξ < δ there is an Aξ ⊆A with
[Aξ] = [A] and a γξ < κ such that gξ“Aξ ⊆γξ. Set γ = sup({γξ | ξ < δ}) < κ.
By κ-completeness 
ξ<δ Aξ ∈I + as in previous arguments yet 
ξ<δ Aξ ⊆γ ,
which is a contradiction.
(c) Assume to the contrary that W = {α < κ | S ∩α is not stationary in
α} ∈I +. Then for each α ∈W there is a Cα closed unbounded in α such that
Cα ∩S = ∅. Deﬁne fξ: W →κ for ξ < κ by:
fξ(α) =
 ξth element of Cα
if there is one , and
0
otherwise .
Then fξ is regressive on W, so by (a) there is a Wξ ⊆W with [Wξ] = [W] and
a γξ < κ such that fξ“Wξ ⊆γξ.
Let D be the diagonal intersection of the Wξ’s, i.e.
D = {α ∈W | α ∈
ξ<αWξ} .
Then [D] = [W]: If not, {α ∈W | ∃h(α) < α(α /∈Wh(α))} ∈I +, and so
by normality {α ∈W | α /∈Wξ} ∈I + for some ξ < κ; but this contradicts
[Wξ] = [W]. Next set C = {α < κ | α is a limit ∧∀ξ < α(γξ < α)}, a closed
unbounded set.

16. Saturated Ideals I
217
To conclude the argument, since S is stationary, let η ∈S ∩C, and ζ ∈D
with ζ > η. By (b) we can assume that ζ is regular, so that fη(ζ) is the ηth
element of Cζ. In fact, fη(ζ) = η since
η ≤fη(ζ) = sup({ fξ(ζ) | ξ < η}) ≤sup({γξ | ξ < η}) ≤η .
The equality holds since η is a limit ordinal, the next inequality since ζ ∈D, and
the last since η ∈C. Thus, η = fη(ζ) ∈Cζ yet η ∈S, which is a contradiction.
(d) We can assume that X ∈I +; X is then stationary since I ∗is normal and
thus contains every closed unbounded subset. As
M(X) = X ∩{α < κ | X ∩α is stationary in α} ,
the result now follows from (c).
(e) This follows by induction from (b),(d), and κ-completeness.
⊣
As with weakly compact cardinals (e) can be extended using diagonal inter-
sections: {α < κ | α is α-weakly Mahlo} ∈I ∗and so forth.
Solovay used 16.8(d) to establish a basic result about stationary sets that does
not involve large cardinal hypotheses:
16.9 Theorem (Solovay [71]). Suppose that κ > ω is regular and X ⊆κ is
stationary. Then X can be partitioned into κ disjoint stationary sets, i.e. there are
pairwise disjoint stationary sets Xξ for ξ < κ such that X = 
ξ<κ Xξ.
Proof. The crux of the matter is:
(∗) If S ⊆κ is stationary and κ −S is unbounded in κ, then S −M(S) =
{α ∈S | S ∩α is not stationary in α} is stationary in κ .
To show this, suppose that C closed unbounded in κ. Let D be the set of
limit points of C less than κ, and E the set of limit points of κ −S less than
κ. Then D and E are both closed unbounded in κ, so S ∩D ∩E ̸= ∅. Let α
be the least member of S ∩D ∩E. If cf(α) = ω, then since α ∈E, there is an
unbounded subset of α of ordertype ω disjoint from S ∩α. If cf(α) > ω, then it
is simple to see that D ∩E ∩α is a closed unbounded subset of α disjoint from
S ∩α. In either case, α ∈(S −M(S)) ∩C.
To establish the theorem, assume by taking a subset of X if necessary that
κ −X is unbounded in κ. If X cannot be partitioned into κ disjoint stationary
subsets, then it is simple to check that NSκ|X, the ideal of non-stationary subsets
of κ restricted to X, would be a normal κ-saturated ideal. But then, (∗) for S = X
would contradict 16.8(d).
⊣
This result has become a standard tool of combinatorial set theory, and proofs
have been devised that avoid 16.8(d) (see e.g. Jech [03: 95]). Nonetheless, it is
a prominent example of a basic result of set theory ﬁrst found in the context of
large cardinals. Another is Silver’s 1974 result on the Singular Cardinals Problem

218
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
(see volume II). These results further attest to the “pragmatic success” of large
cardinals; techniques developed in their study have led to crucial results in set
theory not involving large cardinal hypotheses.
A basic combinatorial question about the ideal NSκ of non-stationary subsets
of κ sets was soon raised:
Can NSκ, or even NSκ|S for some stationary
S ⊆κ, ever be κ+-saturated for some regular κ > ω?
16.9 had denied κ-saturation, but the question of κ+-saturation, particularly for
the focal case κ = ω1, could not be readily resolved. Results soon showed that
having any κ+-saturated ideal over a successor cardinal κ was a very substantial
hypothesis, and the possibility at ω1 was particularly enticing. Progressive research
steadily clariﬁed the relationship between ideals and large cardinal hypotheses, and
eventually led in the mid-1980’s to a positive answer to the question (see §32 and
volume II).
What about partition properties? Using <κ saturation, Solovay established
a generalization of Rowbottom’s result 7.17 on normal ultraﬁlters. For a ﬁlter F
over a cardinal κ and ω < ν < κ,
F is ν-Rowbottom iff for any f : [κ]<ω →γ with γ < κ there
is an X ∈F such that | f “[X]<ω| < ν .
F is Rowbottom iff F is ω1-Rowbottom .
This ﬁlter ampliﬁcation of ν-Rowbottom cardinals is analogous to the relationship
of normal ultraﬁlters to Ramsey cardinals. A simple observation is made before
turning to the theorem:
16.10 Exercise. Suppose that I is a ν-saturated ideal over κ where ν < κ. If
f : κ →γ where γ < κ and E = {ξ < γ | f −1({ξ}) ∈I +}, then E ̸= ∅, |E| < ν,
and 
ξ∈E f −1({ξ}) ∈I ∗.
⊣
16.11 Theorem (Solovay [71]). Suppose that I is a normal ν-saturated ideal over
κ where ν is regular and ω < ν < κ. Then I ∗is a ν-Rowbottom ﬁlter.
Proof. It sufﬁces to establish the following for every n ∈ω: for any f : [κ]n →γ
with γ < κ there is an X ∈I ∗such that | f “[X]n| < ν.
Proceeding by induction, the case n = 1 follows from 16.10. So, assume that
the statement holds for n, and suppose that f : [κ]n+1 →γ with γ < κ. Deﬁne
fα: [κ]n →γ for each α < κ as follows:
fα(s) =
 f ({α} ∪s)
if α < min(s) , and
0
otherwise .
By the inductive hypothesis, for each α < κ let Hα ∈I ∗be such that fα“[Hα]n =
Sα with |Sα| < ν.
We now whittle down further. First, let g: κ →ν be given by g(α) = |Sα|.
By 16.10, let W ∈I ∗such that |g“W| < ν. If δ = sup(g“W), then δ < ν by the

16. Saturated Ideals I
219
regularity of ν. For each α ∈W, let hα: δ →Sα be a surjection. Then deﬁne
gξ: W →γ for each ξ < δ by: gξ(α) = hα(ξ). Again, for each ξ < δ there
is a Wξ ⊆W with Wξ ∈I ∗such that |gξ“Wξ| < ν. By the regularity of ν, if
E = 
ξ<δ gξ“Wξ, then |E| < ν.
Finally, set X = 
ξ<δ Wξ ∩△α<κ Hα. X ∈I ∗by normality, so to complete
the proof it sufﬁces to show that f “[X]n+1 ⊆E. Suppose then that t ∈[X]n+1,
written t = {α} ∪s where α < min(s). Then f (t) = fα(s) ∈Sα as s ∈[Hα]n,
and as α ∈
ξ<δ Wξ it follows that Sα ⊆E.
⊣
16.12 Corollary (Prikry [75]).
(a) Suppose that there is a ν-saturated ideal over κ, where ω < ν < κ and
2<ν = κ. Then for ν ≤λ < κ, 2λ = κ.
(b) If 2ℵ0 is real-valued measurable, then 2λ = 2ℵ0 for every λ < 2ℵ0.
Proof. (a) If ν is regular, the result follows from 16.11 and 8.9. If ν is singular,
then 2ν = κ (see the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of 8.9); but ν < κ implies ν+ < κ
by 16.3, and so just ν+-saturation implies the result by 16.11 and 8.9. (There is
another argument appealing to the Erd˝os-Tarski [43] result that the least λ such
that some ideal is λ-saturated is always regular.)
(b) This follows from (a).
⊣
(b) was Prikry’s main objective; his argument was factored through 8.9. The
conclusion of (b) is also a consequence of Martin’s Axiom, a hypothesis known
to be inconsistent with the real-valued measurability of 2ℵ0.
The analogy with measurable cardinals was further extended by Kunen (see
Solovay [71]), who established that a cardinal κ carrying a ν-saturated ideal for
some ν < κ has a kind of Π2
1 -indescribability property.

220
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
17. Saturated Ideals II
This section is devoted to the ﬁrst relative consistency results about saturated ideals
obtained by forcing. Solovay was led to 16.11 so that he could establish 16.1(b)
by adapting an argument of Silver’s from measurability – see 20.3 and 20.4.
Soon afterwards Kunen [70] using iterated ultrapowers showed that κ+-saturation
sufﬁced for a comprehensive result: If I is a normal κ+-saturated ideal over
κ, then κ is measurable in L[I], the class of sets relatively constructible from I.
Moreover, in L[I] the dual ﬁlter to I ∩L[I] is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ. A
reﬁned version of this result will be established later (see Precipitous Ideals in
volume II). What is pertinent for us now is that the forcing arguments below all
assume the existence of a measurable cardinal in the ground model, an assumption
both necessary as well as sufﬁcient.
An early forcing result of Prikry spurred the initial work in this area. He
showed that merely chain conditions sufﬁce to preserve saturation, and thus satu-
rated ideals are resilient under a variety of generic extensions. The following is
an extension of his result.
17.1 Theorem (Prikry [66,70] for λ < κ, Solovay [71: 411] for λ = κ, and Kakuda
[72] for λ = κ+). Suppose that I is a λ-saturated ideal over κ where λ ≤κ+ is
regular, and P is a p.o. with the ν-c.c. where ν < κ and ν ≤λ. Then
∥-P ˇI generates a λ-saturated ideal over κ .
Proof. Let ∥- ˙I = {X ⊆κ | ∃Y ∈ˇI(X ⊆Y)}, the ideal generated by I. Only
ν ≤κ is needed to show that ∥- ˙I is κ-complete: It sufﬁces to show that if ρ < κ
and p ∥- { ˙Xα | α < ρ} ⊆ˇI, then there is an A ∈I such that p ∥- 
α<ρ ˙Xα ⊆ˇA.
To do this, for each α < ρ let Qα be a maximal antichain below p such that for
each q ∈Qα there is an Aq
α ∈I such that q ∥- ˙Xα = ˇAq
α. Since |Qα| < ν ≤κ by
the ν-c.c., Aα = {Aq
α | q ∈Qα} ∈I. Thus also A = 
α<ρ Aα ∈I, and it is
simple to see that p ∥- 
α<ρ ˙Xα ⊆ˇA.
Turning to λ-saturation, suppose that p ∥- { ˙Yα | α < λ} ⊆˙I +. The proof is
completed by ﬁnding a q ≤p and α < β < λ so that q ∥- ˙Yα ∩˙Yβ ∈˙I +:
For each α < λ let
Aα = {ξ < κ | ∃q ≤p(q ∥- ξ ∈˙Yα)} .
Then Aα ∈I + since p ∥- ˙Yα ⊆ˇAα. Hence, there must be an A ∈I + satisfying:
(∗)
∀W(W ⊆A ∧W ∈I + →|{α < λ | W ∩Aα ∈I +}| = λ) .
This follows directly from λ-saturation and the regularity of λ: Let {Wγ | γ <
ρ} ⊆I + be maximal such that γ < δ < ρ implies that Wγ ∩Wδ ∈I and
|{α < λ | Wγ ∩Aα ∈I +}| < λ. Then ρ < λ, and so it is readily seen that A = Aβ
must satisfy (∗) for any sufﬁciently large β < λ.

17. Saturated Ideals II
221
With (∗), sets {Sη | η < ν} ⊆[λ]<λ and {Bα | α ∈Sη} can be deﬁned
recursively so that for η < ζ < ν,
(i) Sη ∩Sζ = ∅,
(ii) if {α, β} ∈[Sη]2, then Bα ⊆Aα ∩A and Bα ∈I +
yet Bα ∩Bβ = ∅, and
(iii) [A] = 
α∈Sη[Bα] .
At stage η < ν of the recursion, | 
ξ<η Sξ| < λ since ν ≤λ and λ is regular, and
so with (∗) ﬁnd Sη ⊆λ −
ξ<η Sξ and {Bα | α ∈Sη} satisfying (iii) such that
for {α, β} ∈[Sη]2, Bα ⊆Aα ∩A and Bα ∈I + yet Bα ∩Bβ ∈I. |Sη| < λ by
λ-saturation, and so the Bα’s can be taken to be pairwise disjoint by replacing Bα
with Bα −{Bβ | β < α ∧β ∈Sη} as usual.
Let A′ = 
η<ν

α∈Sη Bα, so that by (iii) and κ-completeness, [A′] = [A]
and thus A′ ∈I +. By (ii), for each ξ ∈A′ and η < ν there is exactly one α ∈Sη
such that ξ ∈Bα ⊆Aα. By deﬁnition of Aα let qη
ξ ≤p such that qη
ξ ∥- ξ ∈˙Yα.
Note that by the ν-c.c., for each ξ ∈A′ there must be ηξ < ζξ < ν and an rξ ∈P
such that rξ ≤q
ηξ
ξ , q
ζξ
ξ . (Note that if λ ≤κ, we could have taken the ˙Yα’s to be
forced disjoint and ﬁnish the argument here with a contradiction, since rξ forces
ξ to be in two different ˙Yα’s.) By κ-completeness and ν < κ, there must be ﬁxed
η < ζ < ν and a B ⊆A′ with B ∈I + such that for ξ ∈B, ⟨ηξ, ζξ⟩= ⟨η, ζ⟩.
Finally, by (i), (iii), and the completeness of P(κ)/I there are α < β such that
α ∈Sη and β ∈Sζ and Z = Bα ∩Bβ ∩B ∈I +.
All of the foregoing was to establish that there are Z ∈I + and α < β < λ
satisfying:
for each ξ ∈Z, there is an rξ ≤p such that rξ ∥- ξ ∈˙Yα ∩˙Yβ .
The rest is simple. Let Q ⊆P be a maximal antichain below p such that for
each q ∈Q there is an Zq ∈I such that q ∥- ˙Yα ∩˙Yβ ⊆ˇZq. Since |Q| < ν ≤κ,
Z −
q∈Q Zq ∈I +. For any ξ in this set, note that rξ must be incompatible with
every member of Q. Thus, rξ ∥- ˙Yα ∩˙Yβ ∈˙I + to complete the proof.
⊣
This result does not extend to the κ-c.c. since the Levy collapse Col(ω, κ) of
an uncountable regular cardinal κ to ω1 has the κ-c.c. yet there are no ω1-saturated
ideals over ω1 by 16.3.
For κ+-saturated ideals over κ, Laver [82] and later
Baumgartner-Taylor [82a] characterized those κ-c.c. P for which the conclusion
holds. 17.1 is subsumed by, and its proof derived from, this characterization. The
case λ < κ led to the ﬁrst consistency result on saturated ideals:
17.2 Corollary (Prikry [66, 70]). Suppose that κ is a measurable cardinal. Then
there is an ω1-c.c. p.o. P such that
∥-P 2ℵ0 = κ ∧∃I (I is an ω1-saturated ideal over κ) .

222
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Proof. Let P be the p.o. for adding κ Cohen reals, i.e.
P = {p | p is a ﬁnite function ∧dom(p) ⊆κ × ω ∧ran(p) ⊆2} .
It is well-known that P has the ω1-c.c. (by the ∆-system Lemma 10.4) and that
∥-P 2ℵ0 = κ (using 10.5 in one direction). By 17.1 any ideal dual to a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over κ generates an ω1-saturated ideal over κ in the generic extension.
⊣
Prikry [70] veriﬁed that in this generic extension, κ is not real-valued mea-
surable. Solovay had originally been inspired by Prikry’s work to show that after
“adding κ random reals” instead, κ does remain real-valued measurable. This is
the result established next, after a discussion of the forcing.
Product Measure Forcing
For any inﬁnite cardinal κ, we consider a product measure for κ2 that recalls
Lebesgue measure as formulated in §0. For each function s with dom(s) ∈[κ]<ω
and ran(s) ⊆2, set
O(s) = { f ∈κ2 | f ⊇s} .
κ2 is topologized by taking these O(s)’s as the basic open sets. Specify that
Bκ is the σ-algebra on κ2 generated by the O(s)’s.
To endow Bκ with a measure, let m2 be the measure on P(2) speciﬁed by: m2(∅) =
0, m2({0}) = m2({1}) = 1
2, and m2({0, 1}) = 1. Then stipulate that
mκ is the product measure on Bκ induced by m2.
mκ(O(s)) = 2−|s| for every s, and mκ is the unique measure on Bκ with this
property.
Consider
B∗
κ = {X ∈Bκ | mκ(X) > 0}
ordered by
p ≤q iff
p ⊆q
as a p.o. for forcing. The following recalls 11.7.
17.3 Exercise.
(a) If p, q ∈B∗
κ, then p ⊥q iff mκ(p ∩q) = 0.
(b) B∗
κ has the ω1-c.c.
⊣
B∗
κ is not separative, and its separative quotient B∗
κ/≈is formulated with
p ≈q iff mκ(p △q) = 0. Using this as a deﬁnition to extend ≈to all of Bκ,
Bκ/≈is a Boolean algebra with the Boolean operations being the set-theoretic
ones modulated by ≈. This algebra is analogous to P(κ)/I discussed previously,

17. Saturated Ideals II
223
with the corresponding ideal being {X ∈Bκ | mκ(X) = 0}. By a simple version
of the proof of 16.5, the ω1-c.c. implies that Bκ/≈is a complete Boolean algebra.
Proceeding as in §11, we can develop codes for appropriate B∗
κ sets, show
that forcing with B∗
κ amounts to adding a new function: κ →2 analogous to a
random real, and provide characterizations like 11.9 and 11.10. See Kunen [84]
for details. The next proposition shows how forcing with B∗
κ affects the size of
the continuum.
17.4 Proposition. ∥-B∗
κ
⌈2ℵ0 ≥κ⌉, and if κℵ0 = κ, then ∥-B∗
κ
⌈2ℵ0 = κ⌉.
Proof. For each limit ordinal γ < κ let ˙fγ be a name satisfying ∥- ˙fγ : ω →2
such that for any n ∈ω and i < 2,
∥- ˙fγ (n) = i ↔
ˇO({⟨γ + n, i⟩}) ∈˙G
(where ˙G is the canonical name for the generic object). To show that ∥- 2ℵ0 ≥κ,
it sufﬁces to show that ∥- ˙fγ ̸= ˙fδ for limit ordinals γ < δ < κ:
Let p ∈B∗
κ be arbitrary. Choose k ∈ω so large that 2−k < mκ(p). For each
t ∈k2, let
t: {γ, γ + 1, . . . , γ + k −1, δ, δ + 1, . . . , δ + k −1} →2
satisfy t(γ + i) = t(δ + i) = t(i) for each i < k. If q = 
t∈k2 O(t), then
mκ(q) = 2k(2−2k) = 2−k. Thus, mκ(p −q) > 0, and a standard forcing argument
shows that p −q ∥- ˙fγ |k ̸= ˙fδ|k.
If κℵ0 = κ, note that an analysis of Bκ in a hierarchy of length ω1 as for the
Borel hierarchy for ωω shows that |Bκ| = ℵ1 · κℵ0 = κ. Hence by the ω1-c.c. and
10.5, ∥- 2ℵ0 ≤κ.
⊣
For any γ < κ, the map eγ : ω →κ given by eγ (n) = γ + n induces an
injective, complete embedding: B∗
ω →B∗
κ. Hence by 10.1(a), if G is B∗
κ-generic,
then e−1
γ (G) is B∗
ω-generic. Moreover, for limit γ these generics are determined by
the ˙fγ of the previous proof, which can thus be considered random reals. (In §11,
random reals were deﬁned via B∗⊆P(ωω) whereas B∗
ω ⊆P(ω2). However, there
is a natural homeomorphism between ωω and ω2, if countably many points are
ignored, that preserves measure (see e.g. Levy [79: VII§3]) and hence randomness.)
It is in this sense that forcing with B∗
κ is often referred to as “adding κ random
reals”, although it is not the same as adding κ random reals “side-by-side” with
product forcing because of the measure-theoretic overlay.
Solovay established his result 16.1(a) with B∗
κ using Boolean-valued models.
Towards a proof of his result, some of that approach is adopted in the assignment
of Boolean values in a weak sense to formulas of the forcing language for B∗
κ:
For any formula ϕ, choose a maximal antichain A ⊆{p ∈B∗
κ | p ∥ϕ}. A is
countable by the ω1-c.c., so set
[[ϕ]] = {p ∈A | p ∥- ϕ} ∈Bκ .

224
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
[[ϕ]] has two crucial properties: if [[ϕ]] ̸= ∅, then [[ϕ]] ∥- ϕ; and for any q ∈B∗
κ, if
q ∥- ϕ, then mκ(q −[[ϕ]]) = 0. Although [[ϕ]] depends on the choice of A, only
mκ([[ϕ]]) and mκ([[ϕ]] ∩p) for p ∈B∗
κ will be used, and it is simple to check that
these values do not depend on A.
The following result establishes 16.1(a):
17.5 Theorem (Solovay [66, 71]). Suppose that κ is measurable. Then
∥-B∗
κ 2ℵ0 = κ ∧κ is real-valued measurable .
Proof. By 17.4 it sufﬁces to establish real-valued measurability. Let U be a κ-
complete ultraﬁlter over κ. First deﬁne for each p ∈B∗
κ a “measure” µp on names
˙X such that p ∥- ˙X ⊆κ by:
µp( ˙X) = r iff
{ξ < κ | mκ([[ξ ∈˙X]] ∩p)
mκ(p)
= r} ∈U .
This is well-deﬁned, since 2ℵ0 < κ and U is κ-complete. It is straightforward to
check that
(i) If X ∈U, then µp( ˇX) = 1; if X ̸∈U, then µp( ˇX) = 0 .
(ii) If p ∥- ˙X ⊆˙Y ⊆κ, then µp( ˙X) ≤µp( ˙Y) .
(iii) If γ < κ and p ∥- ⌈˙X = { ˙Xα | α < γ } ⊆κ is a
pairwise disjoint union⌉, then µp( ˙X) = 
α<γ µp( ˙Xα) .
For the last, note that for any ξ < κ,
mκ([[ξ ∈˙X]] ∩p) = mκ(
α<γ [[ξ ∈˙Xα]] ∩p) = 
α<γ mκ([[ξ ∈˙Xα]] ∩p)
since the union is really a countable union of B∗
κ sets by the ω1-c.c..
A crucial observation is that for any p ∈B∗
κ, name ˙X such that p ∥- ˙X ⊆κ,
and r ∈R with 0 ≤r ≤1,
(∗)
if ∀q ≤p∃s ≤q(µs( ˙X) ≤r), then µp( ˙X) ≤r
(and an analogous assertion holds with the last two ≤’s replaced by ≥’s). To show
this, let A = {pn | n ∈ω} be a maximal antichain below p so that µpn( ˙X) ≤r for
n ∈ω. By the ω1-completeness of U, there is an E ∈U such that for each ξ ∈E,
mκ([[ξ ∈˙X]] ∩pn) ≤r · mκ(pn) for every n ∈ω. For such ξ, the maximality of
the antichain implies that
mκ([[ξ ∈˙X]] ∩p) = 
nmκ([[ξ ∈˙X]] ∩pn) ≤r · 
nmκ(pn) = r · mκ(p) ,
and hence µp( ˙X) ≤r.
The theorem is established by showing that for any B∗
κ-generic G,
µ: P(κ) →[0, 1] given by
µ(X) = lim({µp( ˙X) | p ∈G})

17. Saturated Ideals II
225
where ˙X is any name for X, is a κ-additive measure over κ in V [G]. To verify that
the limit exists, does not depend on the name ˙X, and has the requisite properties,
Solovay used the Radon-Nikodym Theorem of measure theory; proceeding more
gingerly, a lim inf is taken instead, following Jech [03: 416ff]:
First deﬁne for each p ∈B∗
κ a µ∗
p on names ˙X such that p ∥- ˙X ⊆κ by
µ∗
p( ˙X) = inf({µq( ˙X) | q ≤p}) .
Then let ˙µ be a name such that ∥- ˙µ: P(κ) →[0, 1] and satisfying
∥- ˙X ⊆κ →˙µ( ˙X) = sup({ ˇµ∗
p( ˙X) | p ∈˙G})
(where ˙G is the canonical name for the generic object). There is a basic connection
between µ∗
p and ˙µ: For any p ∈B∗
κ, name ˙X such that p ∥- ˙X ⊆κ, and r ∈[0, 1],
(∗∗)
µ∗
p( ˙X) ≥r iff
p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥ˇr .
The forward direction is clear. For the converse, suppose that p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥ˇr, and
let r0 ∈R satisfy 0 ≤r0 < r. It sufﬁces to show that µ∗
p( ˙X) ≥r0: By deﬁnition
of ˙µ, p ∥- ∃s ∈˙G( ˇµ∗
s( ˙X) ≥r0). This means that any q ≤p is compatible with
some s such that µ∗
s( ˙X) ≥r0, and since generally speaking p1 ≤p2 implies that
µ∗
p1( ˙X) ≥µ∗
p2( ˙X), it follows that
∀q ≤p∃s ≤q(µ∗
s( ˙X) ≥r0) .
With any p0 ≤p playing the role of p here, it follows from the ≥-variant of (∗)
that µp0( ˙X) ≥r0. Hence, µ∗
p( ˙X) ≥r0.
The proof is completed by establishing that ∥- ˙µ is a well-deﬁned κ-additive
measure.
By (i) above, if X ∈U, then ∥- ˙µ( ˇX) = 1; and if X ̸∈U, then
∥- ˙µ( ˇX) = 0. Also, if p ∥- ˙X ⊆˙Y ⊆κ, then for any q ≤p, µ∗
q( ˙X) ≤µ∗
q( ˙Y)
by (ii) above, and hence p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≤˙µ( ˙Y).
(Otherwise, there would be a
q ≤p and a rational r such that q ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥ˇr > ˙µ( ˙Y), which by (∗∗) leads
to the contradictory µ∗
q( ˙X) ≥r > µ∗
q( ˙Y).) In particular, if p ∥- ˙X = ˙Y, then
p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) = ˙µ( ˙Y), and so for any B∗
κ-generic G, ˙µG is well-deﬁned on elements
in V [G]. The rest of the proof is devoted to showing that ∥- ˙µ is κ-additive:
We ﬁrst verify that ∥- ˙µ is ﬁnitely additive, for which it sufﬁces to show that
if ∥- ˙X, ˙Y ⊆κ are disjoint, then ∥- ˙µ( ˙X ∪˙Y) = ˙µ( ˙X) + ˙µ( ˙Y): Suppose that r1
and r2 are rationals and p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥ˇr1 ∧˙µ( ˙Y) ≥ˇr2. Then
µ∗
p( ˙X ∪˙Y) ≥µ∗
p( ˙X) + µ∗
p( ˙Y) ≥r1 + r2 .
Here, the ﬁrst inequality follows from (iii) above and the deﬁnition of µ∗
p, and the
second, from (∗∗). So again by (∗∗), p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X ∪˙Y) ≥ˇr1 + ˇr2. Since p,r1, and
r2 were arbitrary, it follows that ∥- ˙µ( ˙X ∪˙Y) ≥˙µ( ˙X) + ˙µ( ˙Y).
In the other direction, assume to the contrary that ∥- ˙µ( ˙X∪˙Y) > ˙µ( ˙X)+ ˙µ( ˙Y).
Then it is simple to see that for some p and rationals r3,r4,r5, and r6,

226
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) < ˇr3 < ˇr4 ∧˙µ( ˙Y) < ˇr5 < ˇr6 ∧˙µ( ˙X ∪˙Y) ≥ˇr4 + ˇr6 .
For any q ≤p, µ∗
q( ˙X) < r3 by (∗∗), and so there is an s ≤q such that µs( ˙X) < r3.
By (∗), it follows that µp( ˙X) ≤r3. Similarly, µp( ˙Y) ≤r5, and consequently
µ∗
p( ˙X ∪˙Y) ≤µp( ˙X ∪˙Y) = µp( ˙X) + µp( ˙Y) ≤r3 + r5 < r4 + r6 ,
which by (∗∗) contradicts p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ∪( ˙Y) ≥r4 + r6.
To verify κ-additivity, suppose that γ < κ and ∥- ⌈˙X = { ˙Xα | α < γ } ⊆κ
is a pairwise disjoint union⌉. By ﬁnite additivity, ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥
α ˙µ( ˙Xα). In the
other direction, assume to the contrary that for some p and rationals r1,r2,
p ∥- 
α ˙µ( ˙Xα) < ˇr1 < ˇr2 ≤˙µ( ˙X) .
For any t ∈[γ ]<ω, let ∥- ˙Xt = 
α∈t ˙Xα. Then p ∥- ˙µ( ˙Xt) < ˇr1 by ﬁnite additivity,
and so an application of (∗) as in the previous paragraph shows that µp( ˙Xt) ≤r1.
Since t was arbitrary, µp( ˙X) ≤r1 by (iii) above. Hence, µ∗
p( ˙X) < r2, which by
(∗∗) contradicts p ∥- ˙µ( ˙X) ≥ˇr2. This completes the proof.
⊣
Kunen-Paris Forcing
Kunen and Paris in their [71] provided the ﬁrst widely applicable method for
preserving properties of measurable cardinals κ in forcing extensions by p.o.’s
P such that |P| ≥κ, and used it to establish consistency results about saturated
ideals I over κ such that sat(I) ≥κ. Their basic scheme is presented in a form
that anticipates later developments; the rest of the section is then devoted to its
applications.
Suppose that κ is a measurable cardinal, U a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, and
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Some general conditions are imposed on a p.o. so that j
can be extended, in a weak sense, in an intermediate generic extension. Assume
that P is a p.o. so that, regarding j(P) as a p.o. in V ,
(i)
j(P) ∼= P ∗˙Q under an identiﬁcation through which
(ii)
j(p) = ⟨p, ˙1lQ⟩for every p ∈P.
These conditions are met by a variety of p.o.’s that can be analyzed as iterations.
Let G be j(P)-generic over V . Then by (i) and 10.9 there are corresponding
G0 and G1 such that G = G0 ∗G1, G0 is P-generic over V , G1 is ˙QG0-generic
over V [G0], and V [G] = V [G0][G1]. Moreover by (ii),
(∗)
if p ∈G0, then j(p) ∈G .
Since M ⊆V , G is also j(P)-generic over M, and we can consider the generic
extension M[G] of M. The key observation is that with (∗) the embedding j can
be extended to an elementary embedding
j: V [G0] ≺M[G]
deﬁnable in V [G]. The idea is to apply j to forcing names:

17. Saturated Ideals II
227
Suppose that x ∈V [G0] and ˙x is any P-name such that ˙xG0 = x. Then j(˙x)
is a j(P)-name, so we can set
j(x) = j(˙x)M[G] .
This is well-deﬁned, i.e. does not depend on the choice of name for x: Suppose
that ˙y is another name and p ∈G0 is such that
p ∥-P ˙x = ˙y .
Then j(p) ∈G by (∗), and in M,
j(p) ∥-j(P) j(˙x) = j( ˙y) .
Hence, j(˙x)M[G] = j( ˙y)M[G]. The veriﬁcation that j is elementary is analogous,
with the atomic formula ˙x = ˙y replaced by a general formula. Finally, j extends
j, since if x ∈V , then x = ˇxG0, j(ˇx) = jˇ(x) (under any reasonable formalization
of the forcing language), and so j(x) = j(x).
The embedding j generates an ultraﬁlter. For N an inner model,
W is an N-normal ultraﬁlter over κ iff
(i) W is an ultraﬁlter on P(κ) ∩N, and
(ii) For any f ∈κκ ∩N with {ξ < κ | f (ξ) < ξ} ∈W
there is an α < κ such that {ξ < κ | f (ξ) = α} ∈W.
Note that (ii) subsumes what would be called N-κ-completeness. Of course, the
point is that W ∈N is not required. The following recalls 5.6:
17.6 Exercise. In V [G] with j as above, deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ∈P(κ) ∩V [G0] ∧κ ∈j(X) .
Then U is a V [G0]-normal ultraﬁlter over κ such that U ⊇U.
⊣
This in sum is the basic Kunen-Paris scheme; its applications are based on
those P such that the ˙Q part of j(P) ∼= P ∗˙Q is tame. For example, if forcing
with ˙Q adds no new subsets of κ, then the U of 17.6 veriﬁes the measurability of
κ in V [G]. Also, the following lemma may be applicable in V [G] to the dual of
U to yield saturated ideals in intermediate models N, V [G0] ⊆N ⊆V [G]. For
N an inner model,
J is a N-λ-saturated ideal over κ iff
(i) J is an ideal on P(κ) ∩N such that if
γ < κ and f ∈γ J ∩N, then 
α<γ f (α) ∈J , and
(ii) For any g ∈λJ + ∩N there are
α < β < λ such that g(α) ∩g(β) ∈J + .

228
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
17.7 Lemma. Suppose that κ and λ are regular and P is a p.o. with the λ-c.c.. If
∥-P ˙J is a ˇV -λ-saturated ideal over κ ,
then
I = {X ⊆κ | ∥-P ˇX ∈˙J}
is a λ-saturated ideal over κ.
Proof. Suppose that {Xα | α < λ} ⊆I +. Then
(∗)
∥- |{α < λ | ˇXα ∈˙J +}| = λ .
If not, by the regularity of λ and the λ-c.c. of P, there would be a γ < λ such
that
∥- {α < λ | ˇXα ∈˙J +} ⊆γ .
But then, Xγ ∈I, which is a contradiction. With (∗), the ˇV -λ-saturation of ˙J
implies that there is a p ∈P and α < β < λ such that p ∥- ˇXα ∩ˇXβ ∈˙J +,
i.e. Xα ∩Xβ ∈I +.
⊣
Kunen and Paris showed in applications of their scheme that straightforward
Easton products (as described before 10.7) preserve large cardinal properties. The
ﬁrst application preserved measurability, and showed that while normal ultraﬁlters
may be special, it is consistent to have the maximum possible number of them.
17.8 Theorem (Kunen-Paris [71]). Suppose that κ is measurable. Then there is a
κ-c.c. p.o. E such that
∥-E There are 22κ normal ultraﬁlters over κ .
Proof. Let P be the Easton product of the p.o.’s for adding a generic subset to
each successor cardinal less than κ.
P can be regarded as consisting of those
functions p with dom(p) ⊆κ × κ and ran(p) ⊆2 such that
(i) for any ⟨ξ, ζ⟩∈dom(p), ξ is a successor cardinal less than κ and
ζ < ξ , and
(ii) for any regular ν, |{⟨ξ, ζ⟩∈dom(p) | ξ ≤ν}| < ν .
Here, the ξ ≤ν comprises the case ξ < ν for the Easton product, and the case
ξ = ν (only for successor cardinals ν) for adding a subset at ν. Note that |p| < κ
for every p ∈P by taking ν = κ. P is ordered by: p ≤P q iff p ⊇q.
Some observations generally applicable to Easton products are now made,
partly to establish a context for later proofs. First, there is a standard product
analysis: For any γ , set
(P)γ = {p ∈P | p ⊆γ × κ × 2} , and
(P)γ = {p ∈P | p ∩(γ × κ × 2) = ∅} .

17. Saturated Ideals II
229
Then P ∼= (P)γ × (P)γ under the natural identiﬁcation of p ∈P with
⟨p∩γ ×κ ×2, p−γ ×κ ×2⟩. (P)γ is γ +-closed, and if γ <γ = γ , then (P)γ has
the γ +-c.c. by a typical application of the ∆-system Lemma 10.4. Hence by 10.8,
forcing with (P)γ after (P)γ adds no further subsets of γ and preserves γ + as a
cardinal. Since there are arbitrarily large such γ < κ, it follows that κ remains
inaccessible after forcing with P. We next observe that because κ is Mahlo, P
has the κ-c.c.:
Suppose that A ⊆P is a maximal antichain.
By 6.2(b), let δ < κ be
inaccessible such that
⟨Vδ, ∈, P ∩Vδ, A ∩Vδ⟩≺⟨Vκ, ∈, P, A⟩.
For any p ∈P, p ∩Vδ ∈Vδ by (ii), so by the maximality of A ∩Vδ in Vδ, p ∩Vδ
is compatible with some element of A ∩Vδ. But then, it is readily seen that p
itself is compatible with that element. Hence, A ∩Vδ is a maximal antichain of
P, so that A = A ∩Vδ and |A| < κ.
Suppose now that U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, and j: V ≺M ∼=
Ult(V, U). Then
j(P) ∼= P × Q , where Q = ( j(P))κ ,
since ( j(P))κ = P.
Here, for any p ∈P, j(p) is identiﬁed with ⟨p, ∅⟩=
⟨p, 1lQ⟩, since |p| < κ and so j(p) = p. Hence, the Kunen-Paris conditions are
satisﬁed.
Generally speaking, the U of 17.6 is seen by the deﬁnition of j to correspond
to a P × Q-name ˙U such that for any P-name ˙X for a subset of κ and ⟨p, q⟩∈
P × Q,
⟨p, q⟩∥- ˙X ∈˙U ↔κ ∈j( ˙X) .
In the present case, because P × Q is identiﬁed with j(P) by taking ⟨p, q⟩to
p ∪q, if q = [ fq]U where fq: κ →P, it follows that
(∗)
⟨p, q⟩∥- ˙X ∈˙U iff
{ξ < κ | p ∪fq(ξ) ∥- ξ ∈˙X} ∈U .
Furthermore, Q is κ+-closed (since κ is not a successor cardinal). Because P
has the κ+-c.c., it follows from 10.8 that forcing with Q after P adds no further
subsets of κ. Hence,
∥-P×Q ˙U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ .
To get 22κ normal ultraﬁlters, proceed as follows: In V , set λ = 22κ and let R be
the κ+-product of λ copies of Q, i.e. the p.o. consisting of functions r ∈λQ such
that |{α < λ | r(α) ̸= ∅}| ≤κ, ordered by: r ≤R s iff ∀α < λ(r(α) ≤Q s(α)).
Then force with P × R instead. It is readily seen that P × R is also κ+-closed,
so for each α < λ there is a P × R-name ˙Uα corresponding to ˙U satisfying
∥-P×R ˙Uα is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ ,

230
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
such that for any ⟨p,r⟩∈P × R and P-name ˙X,
(∗∗)
⟨p,r⟩∥-P×R ˙X ∈˙Uα iff
⟨p,r(α)⟩∥-P×Q ˙X ∈˙U .
A genericity argument shows that for α < β < λ, ∥-P×R ˙Uα ̸= ˙Uβ:
Given any ⟨p,r⟩∈P × R, let ⟨p,r⟩≤⟨p,r⟩be such that r(α) ⊥r(β) in
Q. If [g]U = r(α) and [h]U = r(β), it follows that
Y = {ξ < κ | g(ξ) ⊥h(ξ) in P} ∈U .
Let ˙X be a P-name for a subset satisfying
∥-P ∀ξ(ξ ∈˙X ↔ξ ∈ˇY ∧g(ˇξ) ∈˙G)
(where ˙G is the canonical name for the generic object), i.e. for any z ∈P,
z ∥- ξ ∈˙X iff ξ ∈Y ∧z ≤P g(ξ). Then using (∗) and (∗∗) it is straightforward
to verify that
⟨p,r⟩∥- ˙X ∈˙Uα −˙Uβ .
Finally, λ = 22κ in the sense of the generic extension: Since there are λ
distinct ultraﬁlters over κ, it remains to verify that 22κ ≤λ: Clearly P × R has
cardinality λ, and a use of the ∆-system lemma 10.4 shows that it has the (2κ)+-
c.c.. Hence, the computation of 10.5 yields the desired result. (Actually, it is seen
that 22κ can be made arbitrarily large in the generic extension.)
⊣
The next two theorems establish consistency results about ideals I over κ
such that sat(I) = κ and sat(I) = κ+.
17.9 Theorem (Kunen-Paris [71]). Suppose that κ is measurable. Then there is a
p.o. E such that ∥-E (a) + (b) + (c), where:
(a) 2ℵ0 = κ.
(b) There is a κ-saturated ideal over κ.
(c) For no λ < κ is there a λ-saturated ideal over κ.
Proof. Let P be the Easton product of the p.o.’s for adding κ subsets of ω and
of each successor cardinal less than κ. P can be regarded as consisting of those
functions p with dom(p) ⊆κ × κ × κ and ran(p) ⊆2 such that
(i) for any ⟨ξ, ζ, η⟩∈dom(p), ξ is ω or a successor cardinal less than
κ, and ζ < ξ , and
(ii) for any regular ν, |{⟨ξ, ζ, η⟩∈dom(p) | ξ ∈ν}| < ν ,
intending p(⟨ξ, ζ, η⟩) = 1 iff “the ηth new subset of ξ contains ζ”. Note that
|p| < κ for every p ∈P by taking ν = κ. P is ordered by: p ≤P q iff p ⊇q.
As for 17.8, P has the κ-c.c..
Suppose now that U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ and j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U).
Let

17. Saturated Ideals II
231
P1 = {p ∈j(P) | p ⊆( j(κ) −κ) × j(κ) × j(κ) × 2} , and
P2 = {p ∈j(P) | p ⊆κ × κ × ( j(κ) −κ) × 2} .
Then
j(P) ∼= P × P1 × P2
through a natural identiﬁcation. Here, for any p ∈P, j(p) is identiﬁed with
⟨p, ∅, ∅⟩= ⟨p, 1lP1, 1lP2⟩since |p| < κ and so j(p) = p. Hence, the Kunen-
Paris conditions are satisﬁed.
We now proceed to show that P × P1 is the desired p.o.. Let G0 be P-generic
over V and G1 P1-generic over V [G0]. To invoke the Kunen-Paris scheme let G2
be P2-generic over V [G0][G1], and set G = G0 ×G1 ×G2. Since P1 is κ+-closed
(as κ is not a successor cardinal), it follows from 10.8 that forcing with P1 after
P adds no further subsets of κ. Hence,
(∗)
the U of 17.6 is a V [G0][G1]-normal ultraﬁlter over κ .
Observe next that ∥-P×P1 ˇP2 has the κ-c.c.: Given {pα | α < κ} ⊆P2, let
X = {η | ∃α∃ξ∃ζ(⟨ξ, ζ, η⟩∈dom(pα))} ⊆j(κ) −κ .
Then |X| ≤κ, and so an injection: X →κ can be used to associate to each pα a
qα ∈P so that: pα ⊥pβ iff qα ⊥qβ. Thus, the κ-c.c. of P implies the κ-c.c. of
P2. By a standard antichain argument, another appeal to the κ-c.c. of P further
shows that ∥-P
ˇP2 has the κ-c.c.. Finally, P1 is κ+-closed, so 10.8 ensures that
∥-P×P1 ˇP2 has the κ-c.c..
Using this and (∗), 17.7 can be applied to the dual of U to conclude that in
V [G0][G1] there is a κ-saturated ideal over κ. That 2ℵ0 = κ also holds follows
from standard arguments (using 10.5 and the κ-c.c. in one direction). To complete
the proof, it is veriﬁed that in V [G0][G1] there are no λ-saturated ideals over κ
for any λ < κ:
Assume to the contrary that there is such an ideal for some λ < κ, which
can be taken to satisfy λ<λ = λ. Then by a product analysis as in 17.8, P ∼=
(P)λ × (P)λ where (P)λ has the λ+-c.c. and (P)λ is λ+-closed. G0 can thus
be considered as H0 × H1 where H0 ⊆(P)λ and H1 ⊆(P)λ. If V [G0][G1] is
regarded as a generic extension of V [H1][G1] using (P)λ, then by 17.7 there is a
λ+-saturated ideal in V [H1][G1]. Now 2λ < κ holds in this model as (P)λ × P1
is seen to be λ+-closed, so it follows from 16.4(a) that κ is measurable there.
However, 2λ+ = κ also holds in the model because of (P)λ. This is a contradiction.
⊣
17.10 Theorem (Kunen-Paris [71]). Suppose that κ is measurable. Then there is
a p.o. E such that ∥-E (a) + (b) + (c), where:
(a) κ is weakly compact.
(b) There is a κ+-saturated ideal over κ.
(c) There is no κ-saturated ideal over κ.

232
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Proof. Let P be the Easton product of the p.o.’s for adding a generic subset to
each regular cardinal less than κ, i.e. P is as in the proof of 17.8 except that
“successor” is replaced by “regular” in its (i). Again, P has the κ-c.c..
Suppose that U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ and j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U).
Let
P1 = {p ∈j(P) | p ⊆( j(κ) −κ + 1) × j(κ) × 2} , and
P2 = {p ∈j(P) | p ⊆{κ} × κ × 2} .
Then P1 is κ+-closed, P2 is κ-closed and has the κ+-c.c., and since
j(P) ∼= P × P1 × P2
through a natural identiﬁcation which for any p ∈P identiﬁes j(p) with
⟨p, 1lP1, 1lP2⟩, the Kunen-Paris conditions are again satisﬁed.
We now proceed to show that P × P1 is the desired p.o.. Let G0 be P-generic
over V and G1 P1-generic over V [G0]. To invoke the Kunen-Paris scheme, let
G2 be P2-generic over V [G0][G1], and set G = G0 ×G1 ×G2. As in the previous
proof, the κ+-closure of P1 implies that in V [G], there is a V [G0][G1]-normal
ultraﬁlter over κ. Since P2 has the κ+-c.c., it follows from 17.7 that there is a
κ+-saturated ideal over κ in V [G0][G1].
We next verify that κ is weakly compact in V [G0][G1]: By 7.8, κ is weakly
compact iff κ is inaccessible and has the tree property, and by 10.8 it sufﬁces to
establish these properties in V [G0]. First, κ is inaccessible in V [G0] by remarks
at the beginning of the proof of 17.8. Next, Suppose that ⟨T, <T ⟩is a κ-tree
in V [G0] with T ⊆κ. Applying the Kunen-Paris j: V [G0] ≺M[G] extending
j, ⟨j(T ), j(<T )⟩is a j(κ)-tree in M[G]. Hence, any γ at its κth level determines
a κ-branch through T since j(T ) ∩κ = T . It remains to show that such a branch
already exists in V [G0]. This is not immediate since P(κ)∩V [G0] = P(κ)∩V [G]
fails; we work in V [G0] and rely on the fact that V [G] is a generic extension by
P1 × P2, a κ-closed notion of forcing:
By the above remarks, there is a P1 × P2-name τ such that
∥-P1×P2 τ is a κ-branch through ˇT .
Using κ-closure, deﬁne conditions pα ∈P1 × P2 and sets bα for α < κ by
recursion such that for α < β < κ: (i) pα ∥- τ ∩α = ˇbα, and (ii) pβ ≤pα. But
then, b = 
α<κ bα is a κ-branch. (Note that we did not need any p such that
p ∥- τ = ˇb.)
To complete the proof, it remains only to verify that there are no κ-saturated
ideals over κ in V [G0][G1].
To do this, it sufﬁces by 16.4(b) to argue in
V [G0][G1] that κ cannot be measurable there: For any regular α < κ, P had
added a generic set g(α) ⊆α such that g(α) ∩ξ ∈V for any ξ < α. If κ
were measurable and W a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, let x = [g]W. As usual,
x = jW(x) ∩κ, i.e. {α | g(α) = x ∩α} ∈W. However, for any α < β both in
this set g(α) = g(β) ∩α ∈V , which is a contradiction.
⊣

17. Saturated Ideals II
233
17.11 Exercise. 17.10 holds with “κ is weakly compact” replaced by “κ is weakly
inaccessible and 2ℵ0 = κ”.
Hint. One approach is to force ﬁrst with the p.o. E of 17.10, and then do the
ω1-c.c. forcing for adding κ Cohen reals. 17.1 veriﬁes (b), and 17.7, (c).
⊣
Some further consistency results are cited as the possibilities for non-
measurable κ and sat(I) ≤κ+ for some ideal I over κ: If κ is weakly compact,
the only possibility by 16.4(b) is sat(I) = κ+, shown consistent by 17.10. If κ is
strongly inaccessible but not weakly compact, the only possibilities are sat(I) = κ,
shown consistent by Kunen [78], and sat(I) = κ+, shown consistent by Boos [74].
If κ is weakly but not strongly inaccessible, then ω < sat(I) < κ is consistent by
17.1, sat(I) = κ by 17.9, and sat(I) = κ+ by 17.11. Finally, if κ is a successor
cardinal, the only possibility by 16.3 is sat(I) = κ+, shown consistent by Kunen
[78] in 1972.
This last result generated considerable interest. The others had all assumed
the consistency strength of measurability, the exact strength required. However,
Kunen [70] had previously shown through inner models that the consistency
strength of having a κ+-saturated ideal over a successor cardinal κ was strictly
stronger than that of measurability. He then proceeded to establish that, assuming
a strong hypothesis, the existence of a huge cardinal (§24), there is a generic ex-
tension in which there is an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1. Furthermore, he suggested
prima facie evidence for the necessity of some such hypothesis. This is an early
instance of an emerging approach to the analysis of combinatorial propositions
about the low orders of the cumulative hierarchy: By using the methods of forc-
ing and inner models, their consistency strength is located between two hypotheses
in the hierarchy of large cardinals. Short of achieving an equiconsistency result,
their strength can then be compared to others, and suggested possibilities pursued
to reﬁne the large cardinal correlations. As for getting ω2-saturated ideals over ω1,
far less than huge cardinals are now known to sufﬁce (see §32, especially 32.10).

234
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
18. Prikry Forcing
This section describes a simple but elegant notion of forcing for measurable car-
dinals devised by Karel Prikry, as well as a useful generalization. These together
with his forcing results discussed in §17 appeared in his 1968 Berkeley dissertation
with Silver. Prikry and also Thomas Jech were originally members of Vopˇenka’s
productive seminar, and their emigration was a Prague spring of sorts for set the-
ory in the United States. Although Prikry’s forcing may have seemed a bit of
a curiosity at ﬁrst, it soon became an integral part of the theory of measurable
cardinals. Not only did it add to the growing store of intuitions about them, but
it provided a basic paradigm for later generalizations.
Maintaining some generality, let F be a ﬁlter over a cardinal κ. Then Prikry’s
forcing p.o. for F is
PF = [κ]<ω × F
ordered by
⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩iff
t is an initial segment of s and A ∪(s −t) ⊆B .
The idea is that a condition ⟨s, A⟩determines a ﬁnite initial segment s of a new
subset of κ whose further members are to be restricted to a set A, kept large in the
sense of being in F. Note that PF is not separative, since for any ⟨s, A⟩, ⟨t, B⟩∈
PF, ⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩exactly when ⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B −(max(t) + 1)⟩. It could be
required of conditions ⟨s, A⟩that A ∩(max(s) + 1) = ∅with only notational
complications.
18.1 Lemma.
(a) If ⟨s, A⟩∥⟨t, B⟩, then s is an initial segment of t or vice versa.
(b) PF has the κ+-c.c..
(c) If G is PF-generic and
x = {s | ∃A(⟨s, A⟩∈G)} ,
then x is a unbounded subset of κ of ordertype ω, and V [x] = V [G].
Proof. (a) is clear, and (b) follows from the observation that any two conditions
with the same ﬁrst component are compatible.
For (c), that x is unbounded in κ with ordertype ≥ω follows from a density
argument (by a §0 convention, {ξ | α ≤ξ < κ} ∈F for every α < κ). On the
other hand, for any ⟨s, A⟩∈G, s must be an initial segment of x by (a), and so
x must have ordertype ≤ω. Finally, G can be recovered from x since if
Gx = {⟨s, A⟩∈PF | s is an initial segment of x and x −s ⊆A} ,
then G = Gx (cf. before 11.14).
⊣
Because of this last point, for M a transitive ∈-model of ZFC such that
M |= ⌈F is a ﬁlter over a cardinal κ⌉and x ∈[κ]ω,

18. Prikry Forcing
235
x is PF-generic over M iff Gx is PF-generic over M ,
and identifying x with its increasing enumeration, that
x is a Prikry sequence over M iff x is PF-generic over M for some such F .
Since the coﬁnality of κ is ω in any forcing extension by PF, κ may be
collapsed. The following key lemma is how large cardinal ideas enter the picture
in the case by which Prikry forcing is primarily known.
18.2 Lemma (Prikry [70]).
Suppose that κ is measurable and U is a normal
ultraﬁlter over κ. Then for any ⟨s, A⟩∈PU and formula ϕ in the forcing language,
there is a B ⊆A with B ∈U such that ⟨s, B⟩∥ϕ.
Proof. Deﬁne a function f : [A −(max(s) + 1)]<ω →2 by
f (t) =
 0
if ∃X(⟨s ∪t, X⟩∥- ϕ) , and
1
otherwise .
By Rowbottom’s 7.17, there is a B ⊆A−(max(s)+1) with B ∈U homogeneous
for f . It follows that ⟨s, B⟩∥ϕ: Otherwise, there would be a ⟨s ∪t0, B0⟩≤⟨s, B⟩
and a ⟨s ∪t1, B1⟩≤⟨s, B⟩such that ⟨s ∪t0, B0⟩∥- ϕ and ⟨s ∪t1, B1⟩∥- ¬ϕ. By
extending one condition if necessary, we can assume that |t0| = |t1|. But then
f (t0) = 0 and f (t1) = 1, contradicting the homogeneity of B.
⊣
For any ⟨s, A⟩∈PU and formula ϕ, there is always a ⟨t, B⟩≤⟨s, A⟩that
decides ϕ; the point of the lemma is that we can take t = s. This leads to a strong
conclusion usually drawn from the κ-closure of a p.o.:
18.3 Lemma. With the hypotheses of 18.2, for any PU-name ˙τ and set y with
|y| < κ, there is a z ⊆y such that ∥- ˙τ ⊆ˇy →˙τ = ˇz.
Proof. By a standard forcing argument (as for the maximal principle), it sufﬁces
to assume that ⟨s, A⟩∥- ˙τ ⊆ˇy and ﬁnd a ⟨t, B⟩≤⟨s, A⟩and a z ∈V such that
⟨t, B⟩∥- ˙τ = ˇz. For each a ∈y, by 18.2 let ⟨s, Ba⟩∥ˇa ∈˙τ. Since |y| < κ,
B = 
a∈y Ba ∈U. If z is then deﬁned by a ∈z iff ⟨s, B⟩∥- ˇa ∈˙τ, it follows
that ⟨s, B⟩∥- ˙τ = ˇz.
⊣
The following summarizes the situation:
18.4 Theorem (Prikry [70]). Suppose that κ is measurable and U is a normal
ultraﬁlter over κ. If G is PU-generic, then (Vκ)V = (Vκ)V [G] and the cardinals of
V and V [G] coincide, yet cfV [G](κ) = ω.
Proof. That (Vκ)V = (Vκ)V [G] can be established by a straightforward induction
on rank using 18.3, so that the cardinals below κ are preserved. κ too remains a
cardinal since it is a limit cardinal, and the cardinals above κ are preserved by the
κ+-c.c..
⊣

236
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
So, without disturbing the universe below κ, PU introduces an ω-sequence
overlay on κ and the crux of the matter is Prikry’s lemma 18.2. 18.4 ﬁrst solved
the problem of getting an extension of a model of ZFC with the same ordinals and
cardinals but a different coﬁnality. Remarkably, later developments in inner model
theory would demonstrate that the consistency strength of a measurable cardinal
is necessary for this purpose (see volume II). In any case, just for the preservation
of cardinals alone, a Rowbottom ﬁlter (as deﬁned before 16.10) sufﬁces:
18.5 Exercise (Prikry [70]). Suppose that F is a Rowbottom ﬁlter over κ. Then
forcing with PF preserves all cardinals.
Hint. It sufﬁces to show that no successor cardinal λ+ < κ in V is collapsed
by PF. So, set µ = λ+ and suppose that ⟨s, A⟩∥- ˙τ: λ →µ. For each t ∈
[A −(max(s) + 1)]<ω let
Et = {η | ∃ξ∃X(⟨s ∪t, X⟩∥- ˙τ(ξ) = η)} .
|Et| ≤λ as ˙τ is forced to be a function, so set f (t) = sup(Et) < µ.
Let
B ⊆A −(max(s) + 1) with B ∈F be such that | f “[B]<ω| ≤ω, so that δ =
sup( f “[B]<ω) < µ. Finally, show that ⟨s, B⟩∥- ˙τ“λ ⊆δ.
⊣
Devlin [74] characterized those F over κ such that PF preserves cardinals
by a property slightly weaker than being Rowbottom which is implicit in the
preceding proof. On the other hand, he and Paris (Devlin [74: 30]) established the
full converse for PF rendering (Vκ)V = (Vκ)V [G] for any PF-generic G: F must
be a κ-complete ultraﬁlter satisfying the Rowbottom partition property 7.17 – all
that 18.2 required of normality.
It is not surprising that PF should preserve large cardinal properties; the
following result provided an example of a Rowbottom cardinal of coﬁnality ω.
18.6 Exercise (Prikry [70]). Suppose that F is a Rowbottom ﬁlter over κ. Then
in any generic extension by PF, F generates a Rowbottom ﬁlter over κ.
Hint. If λ < κ and ⟨s, A⟩∥- ˙τ: [κ]<ω →λ, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a B ⊆A with B ∈F
such that ⟨s, B⟩∥- |˙τ“[ ˇB]<ω| ≤ω. To do this, for each t ∈[A −(max(s) + 1)]<ω
let
f (t) = {η | ∃u,v∃X(t = u ∪v ∧⟨s ∪u, X⟩∥- ˙τ(v) = η)} .
f (t) ∈[λ]<ω since ˙τ is forced to be a function. Let B ⊆A −(max(s) + 1) with
B ∈F such that | f “[B]<ω| ≤ω, and set W =  f “[B]<ω. Finally, show that
⟨s, B⟩∥-
˙τ“[ ˇB]<ω ⊆ˇW.
⊣
A revealing characterization of PU-genericity for normal ultraﬁlters U is
established next. If F is any ultraﬁlter over κ (in V ) and x ∈[κ]ω is PF-generic
over V , then since x manages to burrow its way into every X ∈F by genericity,
it is simple to see that x generates F in the following sense:

18. Prikry Forcing
237
∀X ∈V ∩P(κ)(X ∈F ↔x −X is ﬁnite) .
Mathias provided a basic structural rationale for Prikry forcing by establishing the
converse for normal ultraﬁlters. Generalizing a familiar concept, for ⟨As | s ∈
[κ]<ω⟩with each As ⊆κ, its diagonal intersection is
△s As = {ξ < κ | ξ ∈{As | max(s) < ξ}} .
If U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ and each As ∈U, then it is simple to see that
△s As ∈U.
18.7 Theorem (Mathias [73]). Suppose that M is a transitive ∈-model of ZFC in
which κ is a measurable cardinal and U a normal ultraﬁlter over κ. Then for any
x ∈[κ]ω,
x is PU-generic over M iff
∀X ∈U(x −X is ﬁnite) .
18.8 Corollary. With M as above, if x is PU-generic over M and y ∈[x]ω, then
y is also PU-generic over M.
⊣
Proof of 18.7. In the substantive direction, suppose that x ∈[κ]ω and x −X is
ﬁnite for every X ∈U. We must show that
Gx = {⟨s, A⟩∈PU | s is an initial segment of x and x −s ⊆A}
is PU-generic over M, which reduces to showing that if D ∈M is dense open in
PU, then Gx ∩D ̸= ∅:
For each s ∈[κ]<ω, deﬁne fs: [κ −(max(s) + 1)]<ω →2 by
fs(t) =
 0
if ∃X(⟨s ∪t, X⟩∈D) , and
1
otherwise .
By 7.17, there is an As ⊆κ −(max(s) + 1) with As ∈U homogeneous for fs.
Set A = △s As ∈U.
Next, for each s ∈[κ]<ω, if there is an X such that ⟨s, X⟩∈D, let Bs be
such an X; otherwise, let Bs = κ. Set B = A ∩△s Bs ∈U. Then
(∗)
∀s ∈[κ]<ω(∃X(⟨s, X⟩∈D →⟨s, B −(max(s) + 1)⟩∈D)) ,
noting that D is dense open.
By hypothesis, there is an initial segment s0 of x such that x −s0 ⊆B. Now
by density there is a t ∈[B −(max(s0)+1)]<ω such that ⟨s0 ∪t, X⟩∈D for some
X. Consequently, if t0 consists of the ﬁrst |t| members of x −s0 ⊆B, then the
homogeneity of B −(max(s0) + 1) ⊆As0 for fs0 implies that ⟨s0 ∪t0, X⟩∈D for
some X. But then by (∗), ⟨s0 ∪t0, B −(max(t0) + 1)⟩∈D. This condition is also
a member of Gx, and so the proof is complete.
⊣

238
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
18.8 is analogous to 11.14(b) for Mathias reals, and indeed the two were
proved together by Mathias. The analogies extend to the circumstance that Mathias
forcing is equivalent to ﬁrst adjoining an ultraﬁlter U over ω with strong properties
by an ω1-closed forcing, and then forcing with PU (Mathias [77: §4]). An external
ω sequence generating an internal normal ultraﬁlter also occurs in the theory of
iterated ultrapowers as described in the next section. To conclude it, we establish
a connection with Prikry forcing extensively studied by Patrick Dehornoy. Claude
Sureson [89] has studied the interplay of various Prikry extensions in terms of
degrees of constructibility.
As inner model theory developed through the 1970’s, intriguing results were
to provide intimate connections among the forcing and inner model phenomena
and the concept of generating indiscernibles. With this synthesis, Prikry forcing
has become a integral part of the study of measurability.
A Generalization
Prikry [70: 17, 18, 38] also considered a generalization of his forcing for which a
version of his crucial lemma 18.2 can be established without assuming the partition
property 7.17. The generalization being a natural and useful one for a variety of
purposes, it has since been rediscovered by Dehornoy [78], who established the
analogue of 18.7 for it, and variants by Moti Gitik [80, 86], Andreas Blass [88],
and James Henle [90] (see also the work of Arthur Apter and Henle in their
[91, 92]). A general formulation is provided, the main properties established, and
then several examples given.
Let ⟨I, <I⟩be a non-empty directed set (§0) with no maximal elements, and
with <I understood let <ωI+ denote that subset of <ωI consisting of increasing
functions, i.e.
<ωI+ = {s | ∃n ∈ω(s: n →I ∧∀i∀j(i < j < n →s(i) <I s( j)))} .
Next, let F be a function on <ωI+ such that for s ∈<ωI+,
(i) F(s) is an ultraﬁlter over I , and
(ii) for any i ∈I, { j | i <I j} ∈F(s) .
For such F,
F = {A | A is a function ∧dom(A) = <ωI+ ∧∀s ∈<ωI+(A(s) ∈F(s))} .
For A, B ∈ F set
A ⊆∗B iff
∀s ∈<ωI+(A(s) ⊆B(s)) .
Finally, deﬁne a notion of forcing with
PF = <ωI+ × F
ordered by

18. Prikry Forcing
239
⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩iff (i) t ⊆s ,
(ii) A ⊆∗B , and
(iii) for |t| ≤i < |s|, s(i) ∈B(s|i) .
(t ⊆s is equivalent of course to s||t| = t, i.e. t is an initial segment of s.)
When I = κ, <I is the membership relation on κ, and F is the constant
function with range {U} where U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, then PF and PU as
deﬁned earlier are equivalent forcing notions: Temporarily ignoring the difference
between members of <ω[κ]+ and their ranges in [κ]<ω, deﬁne i0: PU →PF
by setting i0(⟨s, A⟩) = ⟨s, A⟩where A is the constant function: [κ]<ω →{A},
and i1: PF →PU by setting i1(⟨t, B⟩) = ⟨t, B⟩where B = △sB(s), so that
B −(max(s) + 1) ⊆B(s) for each s. Noting that for any ⟨s, A⟩, ⟨t, B⟩∈PF,
⟨s, A⟩≤i0(i1(⟨t, B⟩)) implies that ⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩, it is straightforward to check
that i0 and i1 are dense embeddings (cf. 10.1).
The idea of the generalization is that for a ﬁnite s, instead of considering
extensions drawn from a single large set, we consider those that are chains in a
tree, the possible one-point extensions at each node being large in a sense speciﬁc
to that node.
The following is the analogue of 18.1:
18.9 Exercise.
(a) If ⟨s, A⟩∥⟨t, B⟩, then s ⊆t or vice versa.
(b) PF has the |I|+-c.c..
(c) If G is PF-generic and
x = {s | ∃A(⟨s, A⟩∈G)} ,
then x: ω →I and is unbounded in ⟨I, <I⟩, i.e. for any i ∈I there is an n ∈ω
such that i <I x(n), and V [x] = V [G].
⊣
The last assertion of (c) is established by showing that if
Gx = {⟨s, A⟩∈PF | s ⊆x ∧∀i(|s| ≤i < ω →s(i) ∈A(s|i))} ,
then G = Gx. Because of this, for M a transitive ∈-model of ZFC in which I
and F are as above and x: ω →I,
x is (PF)M-generic over M iff Gx ∩M is (PF)M-generic over M .
The following is the analogue to 18.2, and it is crucial for this context just
as 18.2 was for its.
18.10 Lemma.
Suppose that ⟨s, A⟩∈PF and ϕ is a formula of the forcing
language. Then there is a B ∈ F with B ⊆∗A such that ⟨s, B⟩∥ϕ.

240
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Proof. The following is ﬁrst established:
(∗)
For any t ∈<ωI+, there is a X ∈ F such that ⟨t, X⟩∥- ϕ
iff {i ∈I | ∃Y(⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∈PF ∧⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∥- ϕ)} ∈F(t) .
The forward direction is clear, since for any i ∈X(t) with t(|t| −1) <I
i, ⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, X⟩≤⟨t, X⟩. For the converse, let W be the hypothesized member of
F(t), and for each i ∈W with t(|t| −1) <I i let Yi be such that ⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Yi⟩∥- ϕ.
Deﬁne X ∈ F by:
X(u) =



Yi(u)
if i ∈W and t⌢⟨i⟩⊆u ,
W
if u = t , and
I
otherwise .
Then it is simple to check that ⟨t, X⟩∥- ϕ.
To establish the lemma assume to the contrary that for no B ⊆∗A does
⟨s, B⟩∥ϕ. For t ∈<ωI+ with s ⊆t, set
A′(t) = {i ∈A(t) | ¬∃Y(⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∈PF ∧⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∥ϕ)} .
For such t satisfying ∀i(|s| ≤i < |t| →t(i) ∈A′(t|i)), it is straightforward to
check that A′(t) ∈F(t) by induction on |t|, repeatedly applying (∗) for ϕ and
¬ϕ “relativized” to A. Hence, if we further set A′(t) = A(t) for those t such
that s ̸⊆t, then A′ ∈ F with A′ ⊆∗A. But then, no ⟨t, X⟩≤⟨s, A′⟩can ever
decide ϕ, which is a contradiction.
⊣
The following is the analogue of 18.3:
18.11 Exercise.
Suppose that λ is regular and F(s) is λ-complete for every
s ∈<ωI+. Then for any PF-name ˙τ and set y with |y| < λ, there is a z ⊆y such
that ∥- ˙τ ⊆ˇy →˙τ = ˇz.
⊣
All this was known to Prikry [70]; Dehornoy [78] went on to establish the
following analogue of the characterization 18.7 in his context. For the general
result, the partition property argument for 18.7 is replaced by a well-foundedness
argument.
18.12 Theorem. Suppose that M is a transitive ∈-model of ZFC in which I and
F are as above. Then for any <I-increasing x: ω →I,
x is (PF)M-generic over M iff
∀A ∈(F)M∃n ∈ω∀i(n ≤i < ω →x(i) ∈A(x|i)) .
Proof.
The forward direction is clear since for any A ∈( F)M, {⟨t, B⟩∈
(PF)M | B ⊆∗A} is dense.
For the converse direction, we must show that
Gx = {⟨s, A⟩∈(PF)M | s ⊆x ∧∀i(|s| ≤i < ω →s(i) ∈A(s|i))}

18. Prikry Forcing
241
is (PF)M-generic over M, which soon reduces to showing that it meets every
dense open set in M.
To this end, argue in M: Assume that D is dense open. For ⟨s, A⟩∈PF set
τ(s, A) = {t | s ⊆t ∧∀i(|s| ≤i < |t| →t(i) ∈A(t|i))
∧∃B ∈ F(⟨t, B⟩/∈D)} ,
i.e. the set of possible ﬁrst coordinates t of extensions of ⟨s, A⟩“unsecured” in
the sense that there is still a B such that ⟨t, B⟩/∈D. As D is open, if t0 ⊆t1 and
t1 ∈τ(s, A), then t0 ∈τ(s, A). Deﬁne
⟨s, A⟩snares D iff there is no y: ω →I such that
for every n ∈ω, y|n ∈τ(s, A)
(i.e. ⟨τ(s, A), ⊃⟩is well-founded). Then for any s ∈<ωI+, there is an A ∈ F
such that ⟨s, A⟩snares D:
Arguing as for 18.10, the following can be established:
For any t ∈<ωI+ there is a X ∈ F such that ⟨t, X⟩snares D
iff {i ∈I | ∃Y(⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∈PF ∧⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩snares D)} ∈F(t) .
Using this, assume to the contrary that there is no A ∈ F such that ⟨s, A⟩
snares D and get an A′ ∈ F such that for any t ∈<ωI+ with s ⊆t,
A′(t) = {i ∈I | ¬∃Y(⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩∈PF ∧⟨t⌢⟨i⟩, Y⟩snares D)} .
However, any ⟨t, X⟩≤⟨s, A′⟩with ⟨t, X⟩∈D certainly snares D, which is a
contradiction.
To complete the proof of the theorem, for each s ∈<ωI+ let As ∈ F be
such that ⟨s, As⟩snares D. Deﬁne a “diagonal intersection” of the As’s by setting
B(t) = 
s⊆tAs(t) for t ∈<ωI+ .
B ∈ F, and it is simple to check that for any s ∈<ωI+, τ(s, B) ⊆τ(s, As), so
that ⟨s, B⟩snares D.
By hypothesis, there is an n ∈ω such that for n ≤i < ω, x(i) ∈B(x|i).
Now ⟨x|n, B⟩snares D, i.e. ⟨τ(x|n, B), ⊃⟩is well-founded, so there is (0.3) an
order-preserving function ρ: τ(x|n, B) →On. Finally stepping out of M, such a
ρ also veriﬁes that τ(x|n, B)M is well-founded in V , and consequently there must
be an m ≥n such that ⟨x|m, B⟩∈D. But ⟨x|m, B⟩∈Gx, and so the proof is
complete.
⊣
18.13 Corollary. With M as in 18.12, if x is (PF)M-generic over M and y: ω →
I is <I-increasing with ran(y) ⊆ran(x), then y is also (PF)M-generic over M.⊣
Having duly established that the main features of Prikry forcing carry over
to the general setting, this section is concluded with several examples:

242
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
1. (Prikry [70: 38]) I is κ+, <I the membership relation on κ+ and F a
constant function with range {U} where U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ+. Then
forcing with PF adds no new bounded subsets of κ and preserves all cardinals
except κ+, whose coﬁnality is changed to ω.
2. (Prikry [70: 38]) I is κ+, <I the membership relation on κ+, and there
is an increasing sequence ⟨κn | n ∈ω⟩of cardinals coﬁnal in κ such that Un
is a κn-complete ultraﬁlter over κ+ for n ∈ω and F(s) = U|s| for s ∈<ωI+.
Then again forcing with PF adds no new bounded subsets of κ and preserves all
cardinals except κ+, whose coﬁnality is changed to ω. (But here, we must ﬁrst
note that the B of 18.10 can also be required to satisfy B(t) = A(t) for s ̸⊆t
by suitably adjusting the proof, and using this, that for 18.11 F(s) need only be
λ-complete for |s| sufﬁciently large.)
3. (Dehornoy [78]) I is κ > ω, <I the membership relation on κ, and F a
constant function with range {U} where U is a (not necessarily normal) κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over κ. In this case, forcing with PF has an equivalent formulation which
is more like Prikry forcing:
Let f ∈κκ be such that [ f ]U = κ, i.e. for any α < κ, {ξ < κ | α < f (ξ)} ∈
U, yet for any g ∈κκ such that {ξ < κ | g(ξ) < f (ξ)} ∈U there is an α < κ
satisfying {ξ < κ | g(ξ) = α} ∈U. For ⟨As | s ∈[κ]<ω⟩with each As ⊆κ, its
f-diagonal intersection is
△f
s As = {ξ < κ | ξ ∈{As | max(s) < f (ξ)}} .
As for the case when f is the identity map: κ →κ, i.e. U is normal, it is simple
to check that if each As ∈U, then △f
s As ∈U.
Setting
<ω[κ]f = {s ∈<ω[κ] | ∀i < |s| −1(s(i) < f (s(i + 1)))} ,
let
P f
U = <ω[κ]f × U
ordered by
⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B⟩iff
t is an initial segment of s and A ∩(ran(s) −ran(t)) ⊆B .
It can be assumed that f (ξ) ≤ξ for each ξ < κ, and so this is a stringent version
of Prikry forcing where beyond s(i) < s(i + 1) we require s(i) < f (s(i + 1)) ≤
s(i + 1).
Echoing remarks before 18.9 and again temporarily ignoring the difference
between members of <ω[κ]+ and their ranges in [κ]<ω, deﬁne i0: P f
U →PF by
setting i0(⟨s, A⟩) = ⟨s, A⟩where A is the constant function [κ]<ω →{A}, and
i1: PF →P f
U by setting i1(⟨t, B⟩) = ⟨t, B⟩where B = △f
s B(s). Note that for
any ⟨t, B⟩∈PF, if B′: [κ]<ω →U is deﬁned by
B′(s) = B(s) ∩{ξ < κ | max(s) < f (ξ)} ∈U ,

18. Prikry Forcing
243
then for any ⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B′⟩and i + 1 ∈dom(s)−dom(t), s(i) < f (s(i + 1)).
Consequently, ⟨s, A⟩≤i0(i1(⟨t, B′⟩)) implies that ⟨s, A⟩≤⟨t, B′⟩.
It is now
straightforward to check that i0 and i1 are dense embeddings.
Gitik-Magidor [92] used this forcing in the PU version.
4. With κ ≤γ , I is Pκγ = {x ⊆γ | |x| < κ}, <I the proper inclusion
relation on Pκγ , and F a constant function with range {U} where U is a κ-
complete ultraﬁlter over Pκγ such that {x ∈Pκγ | α ∈x} ∈U for every α < γ .
Then forcing with PF adds no new bounded subsets of κ, and for every regular
δ with κ ≤δ ≤γ renders its coﬁnality ω: if x: ω →Pκγ is PF-generic, then

n∈ω x(n) ∩δ = δ. Since the cardinal successor of κ in the generic extension
must be regular there as well as in V , it follows that no δ with κ < δ ≤γ remains
a cardinal.
5. (Gitik) The same as 4., except that <I is the relation < deﬁned on Pκγ
by:
x < y iff
x ⊆y and |x| < |y ∩κ| .
(See the end of §25 for more on this relation.) Then forcing with PF has the
properties described in 4. and moreover has an alternate formulation as in 3. See
Gitik [80, 86] and Apter-Henle [91, 92] for applications.
6. I is ω and <I the membership relation on ω. Blass [88] considered various
possibilities for F and extended results of Mathias [77] established using Mathias
forcing (see the end of §11). Woodin and also Judah-Shelah [91] showed assuming
CH how to get an F so that PF (and hence an ω1-c.c. notion of forcing) adjoins
a real of minimal constructibility degree.
As a large part of the increasing use of strong hypotheses to establish relative
consistency results, Prikry forcing was to be generalized in various directions for
a variety of purposes. The possibility of adjoining a new unbounded subset of
some large κ with minimal disturbance to the universe, as in the basic paradigm,
came to be considered a prominent feature of large cardinals. In the decades to
follow, generalizations for changing coﬁnality were to become central to the study
of the possible values of 2λ for singular strong limit λ, and equiconsistency results
were to be established using an elegant and technically sharp generalization for
adjoining closed unbounded subsets of some κ while preserving its large cardinal
properties, Radin forcing (see volume II).

244
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
19. Iterated Ultrapowers
Kenneth Kunen was a student with Scott at Stanford University and went on to
become a prominent set theorist and topologist at the University of Wisconsin.
Results of his have already been discussed in §17 and elsewhere.
His 1968
dissertation [68] is rivaled only by Silver’s of a couple of years earlier for its impact
on the development of set theory.
Sophisticated and wide-ranging, it featured
elegant results about inner models and elementary embeddings that considerably
clariﬁed the structure theory of measurable cardinals and 0#. This section develops
the techniques that led to these results, which are then established in the two
subsequent sections.
Like Silver, Kunen was inspired by Gaifman’s seminal work. Gaifman had
systematized the process of iterating the ultrapower construction into the transﬁnite
and revealed its potentialities by establishing 9.1. Kunen realized that ultrapowers
of inner models can be taken by an ultraﬁlter not necessarily a member of the
model, and the process iterated if an “amenability” condition is satisﬁed.
His
approach is formulated in a way that anticipates later developments, turning ﬁrst
to a generalization of the ultrapower construction of §5.
Suppose that M is a transitive ∈-model of ZFC−; i.e. ZFC with the Power
Set Axiom deleted. Suppose also that κ is an inﬁnite cardinal in the sense of M;
κ need not be a cardinal in V . (To the end of this chapter especially germane
is the liberal convention that κ, λ, . . . may denote cardinals only in the sense of
some transitive ∈-model.) Then
U is an M-ultraﬁlter over κ iff
(i) ⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ ; and
(ii) ⟨M, U⟩is weakly amenable: for any
F ∈κ M ∩M, {ξ < κ | F(ξ) ∈U} ∈M .
An equivalent formulation of (i) was used for a deﬁnition before 17.6, and as
noted there, normality subsumes κ-completeness in the sense of M, and U ∈M is
not required. The present formulation in terms of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩anticipates the use
of such structures below, so it should be pointed out that when M is a proper
class, the usual caveats about the formalizability of satisfaction apply (§0). The
new condition (ii) is a weak form of Jensen’s concept of amenability: For R ⊆A,
⟨A, R⟩is amenable iff for any x ∈A, R ∩x ∈A. (ii) imposes this condition
on ⟨M, U⟩only for those x ∈M of cardinality at most κ in the sense of M. It
should thus be clear that in considering ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, U is not to play a role in the
Replacement Schema for M |= ZFC−.
The current deﬁnition of M-ultraﬁlter over κ differs from the original one in
Kunen [70] in two respects: First, transitive ∈-models M not only of ZFC but of
ZFC−are allowed; examples are Lλ and Hλ for regular λ > ω and their elementary
substructures, and so such models abound. (On the other hand, such an M, if it
contains all the ordinals, must be an inner model of ZFC (cf. before 3.1).) Second,
for the sake of simplicity normality is imposed on U at the outset, whereas Kunen

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
245
had began only with κ-completeness in the sense of M. Kunen [70: 188] observed
that for countable M |= ZFC, having an M-ultraﬁlter over κ in his weaker sense
is equivalent to κ being weakly compact in M. With normality Kleinberg [78]
established an analogous equivalence with a stronger large cardinal property (see
Subtle Properties in volume II). This property is also compatible with V = L, but
in any case external measurability with the weak amenability condition (b) does
lead to strength within M, at least if M |= ZFC.
With U an M-ultraﬁlter over κ, an ultrapower of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩can be formed:
For any f ∈κ M ∩M, set
( f )U = {g | g ∈κ M ∩M ∧{ξ < κ | f (ξ) = g(ξ)} ∈U} .
Thus, only functions in M are considered and equivalence classes of these taken.
To accommodate proper classes M set
( f )0
U = {g | g ∈( f )U ∧∀h(h ∈( f )U →rank(g) ≤rank(h))}
as in §5 so that the ( f )0
U’s are sets. The domain of the ultrapower can then be
formulated as
κ M/U = {( f )0
U | f ∈κ M ∩M}
with its membership relation EU deﬁned by
( f )0
U EU (g)0
U iff
{ξ < κ | f (ξ) ∈g(ξ)} ∈U .
Furthermore, taking L∈( ˙A) to be the ambient language of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, the new
interpretation ˙AU of the unary predicate symbol ˙A can be deﬁned appropriately:
( f )0
U EU ˙AU iff
{ξ < κ | f (ξ) ∈U} ∈U .
This motivates weak amenability: that {ξ < κ | f (ξ) ∈U} ∈M makes this
deﬁnition possible.
Proceeding as in §5, a crucial use of M |= ZFC−is to check that Ło´s’s
Theorem holds for ⟨κ M/U, EU⟩; the Separation Axiom is needed for its very
statement, and the Axiom of Choice for the existential quantiﬁer step. However,
EU may not be well-founded, as U is κ-complete only for sequences in M. If it
is well-founded, by the Collapsing Lemma 0.4 there is a transitive N, a W ⊆N,
and an isomorphism
π: ⟨κ M/U, EU, ˙AU⟩→⟨N, ∈, W⟩.
We can then set
[ f ]U = π(( f )0
U) for f ∈κ M ∩M
and
j(x) = [ fx]U for x ∈M
where fx is the constant function: κ →{x}. Because of Ło´s’s Theorem,

246
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
j: ⟨M, ∈⟩≺⟨N, ∈⟩
and so N |= ZFC−and On ∩M ⊆On ∩N, and
crit( j) = κ and [id]U = κ
by normality, where id: κ →κ is the identity function. When M is an inner
model of ZFC and U ∈M, the foregoing is just the §5 ultrapower construction
carried out in M, so that W ∈N ⊆M and N is a deﬁnable class in the sense
of M. However, it can well be that On ∩M < On ∩N: Suppose that κ is a
measurable cardinal and U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, and consider M = Hκ+.
Then ⟨κ M/U, EU⟩is well-founded, and there is an N and j as above. Since this
j is the restriction to M of the usual embedding deﬁned on all of V ,
On ∩M = κ+ ≤2κ < j(κ) < On ∩N .
By taking a countable elementary substructure of an amalgamation of M, U, and
N and forming its transitive collapse, we can get countable M0, U0, and N0 such
that On ∩M0 < On ∩N0.
Parts of the next lemma recall 5.7; as usual, the subscript U is suppressed.
19.1 Lemma.
(a) j is coﬁnal: for any y ∈N there is an x ∈M such that y ∈j(x).
Moreover, if y is an ordinal, then x can be taken to be an ordinal as well.
(b) If M is a set, then |M| = |N|.
(c) j(x) = x for every x ∈Vκ ∩M, Vκ ∩M = Vκ ∩N, P(κ)∩M = P(κ)∩N,
and κ+M = κ+N.
(d) U /∈N.
(e) W is an N-ultraﬁlter over j(κ).
Proof. (a) If y = [ f ] say, take x = ran( f ). If also y ∈On, then we can assume
that ran( f ) ⊆On and take x = sup(ran( f )) + 1.
(b) |N| ≤|κ M ∩M| ≤|M|, but also |M| ≤|N| because of j.
(c) The rank function can be deﬁned in ZFC−by the usual recursion (0.2).
Using this, we shall show that for each α ≤κ,
(∗)
j(x) = x for every x ∈Vα ∩M, and Vα ∩M = Vα ∩N .
This proceeds by induction on α, the limit stage being immediate. For the suc-
cessor stage, suppose that (∗) holds, and let x ∈M with rank(x) = α. Then
rank( j(x)) = j(α) = α by deﬁnability of rank, so by induction
j(x) = {y ∈Vα ∩N | y ∈j(x)}
= {y ∈Vα ∩M | y ∈j(x)}
= {y ∈Vα ∩M | j(y) ∈j(x)}
= {y | y ∈x}
= x .

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
247
This also implies that Vα+1∩M ⊆Vα+1∩N, so it remains to establish the converse
to complete the inductive proof of (∗):
Suppose that x ∈N with rank(x) = α, say x = [ f ]. Since j(α) = α, it
can be assumed that rank( f (ξ)) = α for every ξ < κ. Set u =  ran( f ) ∈M.
Assume to the contrary that |u| ≥κ in M, so that there is a surjection s: u →κ
with s ∈M. Let g: κ →u with g ∈M such that s(g(ξ)) = ξ for every ξ < κ.
Since rank(g(ξ)) < α for every ξ < κ, [g] ∈Vα ∩N = Vα ∩M, say [g] = z ∈M,
so that j(z) = z = [g]. But this is a contradiction, since g through its deﬁnition
must be injective.
It follows that |u| ≤κ in M. But then,
x = {y ∈u | {ξ < κ | y ∈f (ξ)} ∈U} ∈M .
The equality holds since for any y ∈x, y ∈Vα ∩N = Vα ∩M and j(y) = y by
induction, and membership in M follows from the weak amenability of ⟨M, U⟩.
For the ﬁnal parts of (c), note ﬁrst that if X ∈P(κ) ∩M, then j(X) ∩κ =
X ∈N. Conversely, if Y ∈P(κ) ∩N, say Y = [ f ], then
Y = {α ∈κ | {ξ < κ | α ∈f (ξ)} ∈U} ,
which is in M by the weak amenability of ⟨M, U⟩. That κ+M = κ+N follows, as
M and N contain the same well-orderings of κ.
(d) Assume to the contrary that U ∈N. Then
P(κ) ∩M = U ∪{κ −X | X ∈U} ∈N .
Since P(κ)N = P(κ) ∩N = P(κ) ∩M by (c) and j(κ) = {[ f ] | f ∈κκ ∩M}, it
is not difﬁcult to see that
N |= ∃α < j(κ)∃y∃g(y = P(α) ∧g: y →j(κ) is surjective)
since we can take α = κ and deﬁne an appropriate g from U ∈N using Replace-
ment. But then,
M |= ∃α < κ∃y∃g(y = P(α) ∧g: y →κ is surjective) ,
and this is enough to derive a contradiction by the argument of 2.8. (Alternately,
let h: κ →y with h ∈M satisfy g(h(ξ)) = ξ for every ξ < κ. Then [h] ∈
Vα+1 ∩N = Vα+1 ∩M by (c), and as in its proof, the injectivity of h leads to a
contradiction.)
(e) To verify the weak amenability of ⟨N, W⟩, suppose that F ∈j(κ)N ∩N,
say F = [ f ]. For each ξ < κ it can be assumed that f (ξ) ∈κ M, and so a
function f : κ × κ →M can be deﬁned by:
f (ξ, η) = f (ξ)(η).
Since f ∈
M, X = {⟨ξ, η⟩| f (ξ, η) ∈U} ∈M by the weak amenability of ⟨M, U⟩. Now
deﬁne g ∈κ M by: g(ξ) = {η | ⟨ξ, η⟩∈X}. Then g ∈M, and for any h ∈κ M∩M,

248
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
[h] ∈[g] iff {ξ < κ | h(ξ) ∈g(ξ)} ∈U
iff {ξ < κ | f (ξ)(h(ξ)) ∈U} ∈U
iff F([h]) ∈W ,
i.e. [g] = {α < j(κ) | F(α) ∈W}.
It is similarly straightforward to show that ⟨N, ∈, W⟩|= W is a normal
ultraﬁlter.
⊣
The import of (d) is that whether or not U ∈M, it is deﬁnitely the case that
U /∈N. Assertions like (a) become pertinent since it is not necessarily the case
that On ∩M = On ∩N.
Recalling 5.6, elementary embeddings also give rise to ultraﬁlters in the
present context:
19.2 Exercise. Suppose that M and N are transitive ∈-models of ZFC−, k: M ≺N
with crit(k) = κ, and P(κ) ∩M = P(κ) ∩N. Then
{X ∈P(κ) ∩M | κ ∈k(X)}
is an M-ultraﬁlter over κ.
⊣
The process of iterating the ultrapower construction is now described. Starting
with an M-ultraﬁlter over κ, if the ultrapower of M by U is well-founded, we can
deﬁne N, W, and j as above and by 19.1(e) repeat the process with N and W,
continuing through successor stages as long as ultrapowers are well-founded. At
limit stages we will have engendered a directed system of models and embeddings
as reviewed in §0, and so we can take a direct limit. The following observation
shows that the process can be continued if the result is a well-founded structure.
For convenience, let
e: ⟨X, ∈, R⟩≺−⟨Y, E, S⟩
indicate that (i) e: ⟨X, ∈⟩≺⟨Y, E⟩, i.e. e is elementary for L∈formulas; and (ii)
e also preserves the predicate, i.e. e is an embedding of ⟨X, ∈, R⟩into ⟨Y, E, S⟩.
With regard to (i), recall our convention emanating from 5.1(c) that for transitive
proper class ∈-structures, elementary is Σ1-elementary. For (ii), note that if R is
deﬁnable in ⟨X, ∈⟩using parameters, then ≺−is equivalent to ≺, full elementary
embedding.
19.3 Exercise. Suppose that for each α < δ, Wα is an Nα-ultraﬁlter over λα and
that
⟨⟨⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩| α < δ⟩, ⟨jαβ | α ≤β⟩⟩
is a directed system of ≺−embeddings which has a well-founded limit. Then it has
a transitive collapse ⟨N, ∈, W⟩, and if for α < δ, jαδ: ⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩≺−⟨N, ∈, W⟩
is the direct limit embedding modulated by the transitive collapse, then W is an
N-ultraﬁlter over λ = jαδ(λα) for some (and so any) α < δ.

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
249
Hint. Toward showing that the Collapsing Lemma 0.4 is applicable to the di-
rect limit, note that it is set-like:
Let ⟨D, E, A⟩denote the direct limit and
iα: ⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩→⟨D, E, A⟩the corresponding embeddings for α < δ. Sup-
pose that a ∈D, so that for some α < δ there is a b ∈Nα such that iα(b) = a.
Then for any x ∈D,
x E a iff
∃β∃y(α ≤β < δ ∧iβ(y) = x ∧y ∈jαβ(b)) ,
and so {x ∈D | x E a} is a set by Replacement.
For the latter assertion, the veriﬁcation of weak amenability is typical: Sup-
pose that F ∈λN ∩N, so that F = jαδ(F) for some α < δ and F ∈λα Nα ∩Nα.
By the weak amenability of ⟨Nα, Wα⟩,
X = {ξ < λα | F(ξ) ∈Wα} ∈Nα ,
and hence
jαδ(X) = {ξ < λ | F(ξ) ∈W} ∈N .
⊣
For any M-ultraﬁlter U over κ, we can thus proceed recursively to deﬁne
L∈( ˙A) structures ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩for α < τ where Uα is an Mα-ultraﬁlter over κα,
and embeddings iαβ: ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩≺−⟨Mβ, ∈, Uβ⟩for α ≤β < τ as follows:
Set M0 = M, U0 = U, κ0 = κ, and i00 the identity on M. Having deﬁned
Mα, Uα, κα, and iαβ for α < β < δ, there are two cases:
(i) δ is a successor ordinal, say δ = γ + 1. If the ultrapower of Mγ by Uγ is
well-founded, let Mδ be its transitive collapse and Uδ ⊆Mδ such that
j: ⟨Mγ , ∈, Uγ ⟩≺−⟨Mδ, ∈, Uδ⟩
is the corresponding embedding. Set κδ = j(κγ ), iγ δ = j, iαδ = j ◦iαγ for α < γ ,
and iδδ the identity on Mδ. If on the other hand the ultrapower is ill-founded, set
δ = τ.
(ii) δ is a limit ordinal. If the direct limit of
⟨⟨⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩| α < δ⟩, ⟨iαβ | α ≤β⟩⟩
is well-founded, let Mδ be its transitive collapse and Uδ ⊆Mδ such that for each
α < δ there is a direct limit embedding:
⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩≺−⟨Mδ, ∈, Uδ⟩
modulated by the transitive collapse.
Call this embedding iαδ for α < δ, set
κδ = iαδ(κα) for some (and hence, any) α < δ and iδδ the identity on Mδ. If on
the other hand the direct limit is ill-founded, set δ = τ.
If this deﬁnition proceeds through all the ordinals, set τ = On. Otherwise,
τ ∈On denotes the least stage at which the iteration process encounters ill-
foundedness. We could have trudged on through ill-founded structures with only
notational complications, but such toil would be gratuitous for present purposes.

250
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
To summarize the notation,
⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈τ is the iteration of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩;
τ is the length of the iteration; and for α ∈τ, ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩is an iterate, speciﬁcally
the αth iterate, of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩. Also,
⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable (and U is an iterable M-ultraﬁlter) iff τ = On .
Concerning formalizability, note that even if M were a proper class, the iteration of
⟨M, ∈, U⟩can be regarded as a single class deﬁnable from M and U. In particular,
if M is an inner model of ZFC and U ∈M, then the iteration is deﬁnable entirely
in M.
Iterability is a substantial hypothesis, one that will soon be considered in
detail. But for now, we ﬁx ⟨M, ∈, U⟩and its iteration as given above, and proceed
through several lemmata to establish some basic properties.
19.4 Lemma. Suppose that α < β ∈τ.
(a) crit(iαβ) = κα and iαβ(κα) = κβ.
(b) iαβ(x) = x for every x ∈Vκα ∩Mα, Vκα ∩Mα = Vκα ∩Mβ, and P(κα) ∩
Mα = P(κα) ∩Mβ.
(c) If β is a limit ordinal, then κβ = sup({κγ | γ < β}).
(d) If M is a set, |Mα| = |M| · |α|.
Proof. (a) follows directly from the construction, and (b) is a consequence of
19.1(c). For (c), if ξ < κβ, then by deﬁnition of direct limit ξ = iγβ(ξ) for some
γ < β and ξ < κγ . Hence, ξ = ξ < κγ .
For (d), |Mα| ≤|M| · |α| follows by induction on α, using 19.1(b) and
bounding direct limits. Conversely, M is injectible into Mα and
{κγ | γ < α} ⊆Mα, and so |M| · |α| ≤|Mα|.
⊣
For any α + 1 ∈τ and X ∈P(κα) ∩Mα,
X ∈Uα iff
{ξ | ξ ∈X} ∈Uα iff
κα ∈iα,α+1(X)
by normality. This leads to a further characterization at limit ordinals crucial to
later deﬁnability results – another testimonial to the efﬁcacy of the concept of
normality.
19.5 Lemma (Kunen [68, 70]). Suppose that β is a limit ordinal less than τ. Then
for any X ∈P(κβ) ∩Mβ,
X ∈Uβ iff
∃α < β({κγ | α ≤γ < β} ⊆X) .
Proof. Suppose that γ < β and X = iγβ(X) for some X ∈P(κγ ) ∩Mγ . Then
X ∈Uβ iff
X ∈Uγ
iff
κγ ∈iγ,γ +1(X)
iff
κγ ∈iγβ(X) = X ,

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
251
since iγ +1,β(κγ ) = κγ . Thus, for any γ < β, if X ∈ran(iγβ), then X ∈Uβ
iff
κγ ∈X. This sufﬁces, by the deﬁnition of direct limit.
⊣
Thus, Uβ is generated by the closed unbounded set {κγ | γ < β} ⊆κβ, and
so in particular, this set cannot belong to Mβ. The following result provides a
representation of iterated ultrapowers that generalizes 5.13(a) and plays a basic
role in the structure theory.
19.6 Lemma. For any α ∈τ and x ∈Mα, there are n ∈ω, f ∈[κ]nM ∩M, and
γ1 < . . . < γn < α such that x = i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn).
Proof. Proceed by induction on α. Suppose that the proposition holds for α,
α+1 ∈τ, and x ∈Mα+1. By 5.13(a), x = iα,α+1(g)(κα) for some g ∈κα Mα ∩Mα,
so we are done if α = 0. Otherwise, by induction g = i0α(h)(κγ1, . . . , κγn) for
some n ∈ω, h ∈[κ]nM ∩M, and γ1 < . . . < γn < α, where it can be assumed that
ran(h) consists of functions. Deﬁne f ∈[κ]n+1M ∩M by: f (ξ1, . . . , ξn, ξn+1) =
h(ξ1, . . . , ξn)(ξn+1). Then:
i0,α+1( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn, κα) = i0,α+1(h)(κγ1, . . . , κγn)(κα)
= iα,α+1(i0α(h)(κγ1, . . . , κγn))(κα)
= iα,α+1(g)(κα)
= x .
If δ < τ is a limit ordinal and x ∈Mδ, then x = iαδ(x) for some α < δ and
x ∈Mα. By induction x = i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) for some n ∈ω, f ∈[κ]nM ∩M,
and γ1 < . . . γn < α. Hence, x = i0δ( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) since iαδ(κγi) = κγi for
1 ≤i ≤n.
⊣
Mα is thus generated in a concrete fashion from ran(i0α) and {κγ | γ < α}.
This leads the following corollary on the action of the i0α’s on ordinals; the
cardinals are in the sense of V as usual.
19.7 Corollary.
(a) If ξ ∈On ∩M and α ∈τ, then
i0α(ξ) < (|κξ ∩M| · |α|)+ .
(b) If ν is a cardinal such that |κκ ∩M| < ν ∈τ, then
κν = i0ν(κ0) = ν .
(c) If θ is a cardinal, M |= ⌈ZFC ∧θ is a strong limit of coﬁnality > κ⌉,
and α < min(θ, τ), then
i0α(θ) = θ .

252
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Proof. (a) This follows from cardinality considerations, since 19.6 implies that
η < i0α(ξ) iff η = i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) for some n ∈ω, f ∈[κ]nξ ∩M, and
γ1 < . . . < γn < α.
(b) We have
ν ≤κν = sup({κα | α < ν}) ≤sup({(|κκ ∩M| · |α|)+ | α < ν}) ≤ν .
The equality follows from 19.4(c), and the middle inequality from (a) above.
(c) It sufﬁces to show assuming η < i0α(θ) that η < θ.
By 19.6, η =
i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) for some n ∈ω, f ∈[κ]nθ ∩M, and γ1 < . . . < γn < α. Since
cf(θ) > κ in M, there is a ξ < θ such that f ∈[κ]nξ. Hence,
η < i0α(ξ) < (|κξ ∩M| · |α|)+ ≤θ .
The second inequality is from (a), and the third follows from the hypotheses on
θ.
⊣
19.6 veers toward Kunen’s original formulation of iterated ultrapowers; the
beginnings of that formulation are broached as part of this development: For
n ∈ω, set
U n = {X ∈P([κ]n) ∩M | ∃H ∈U([H]n ⊆X)} .
Thus, U n is a (deﬁnable) class in the sense of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩. The normality of U
together with weak amenability shows that this provides the appropriate notion of
n-fold product:
19.8 Exercise.
(a) For n ∈ω and X ∈P([κ]n+1) ∩M,
X ∈U n+1 iff
{s ∈[κ]n | {ξ < κ | s ∪{ξ} ∈X} ∈U} ∈U n .
(b) For 0 < n ∈ω,
⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= U n is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over [κ]n .
Hint. Verify (a) along the way to (b); Rowbottom’s 7.17 holds for U and those
f : [κ]n →2 such that f ∈M since U is an M-ultraﬁlter.
⊣
Temporarily liberalizing conventions, for 0 < n ∈ω we can proceed to form
the ultrapower
[κ]nM/U n = {( f )0
U n | f ∈[κ]nM ∩M}
and a corresponding embedding
kn: ⟨M, ∈, U⟩≺−⟨[κ]nM/U n, EU n, ˙AU n⟩
given by
kn(x) = ( fx)0
U n for x ∈M
where fx is the constant function: [κ]n →{x}.

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
253
The next result, together with the representation 19.6, provides a reduction of
the satisfaction relation for an iterate to that of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, and shows in particular
that the ultrapowers just deﬁned are isomorphic to the ﬁnite iterates of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩.
Note that U 0 = {0} by deﬁnition.
For proper classes M, (a) below and the
coming corollary should be taken to be schemas of theorems, one for each class
and formula.
19.9 Lemma.
(a) For any formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vn) of L∈, x ∈M, and γ1 < . . . < γn < α ∈τ,
⟨Mα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0α(x), κγ1, . . . , κγn]
iff
⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= {{ξ1, . . . , ξn} ∈[κ]n | ϕ[x, ξ1, . . . , ξn]} ∈U n .
(b) For n ∈ω with 0 < n ∈τ, πn: ⟨[κ]nM/U n, EU n, ˙AU n⟩→⟨Mn, ∈, Un⟩given by
πn(( f )0
U n) = i0n( f )(κ0, . . . , κn−1)
is a well-deﬁned isomorphism. Hence, it is the collapsing isomorphism onto the
transitive collapse. Moreover, i0n = πn ◦kn.
Proof. (a) Proceed by induction on n; the case n = 0 is immediate. Generally,
⟨Mα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0α(x), κγ1, . . . , κγn]
iff ⟨Mγn+1, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0,γn+1(x), κγ1, . . . , κγn]
iff ⟨Mγn, ∈, Uγn⟩|= {ξ <  Uγn | ϕ[i0γn(x), κγ1, . . . , κγn−1, ξ]} ∈Uγn
iff ⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= {{ξ1, . . . , ξn−1} ∈[κ]n−1 |
{ξ <  U | ϕ[x, ξ1, . . . , ξn−1, ξ]} ∈U} ∈U n−1
iff ⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= {{ξ1, . . . , ξn} ∈[κ]n | ϕ[x, ξ1, . . . , ξn]} ∈U n .
(Of course,  Uγn is κγn and  U is κ.)
(b) This is an application of (a) and 19.6 with α = n.
⊣
19.8(a) suggests the general notion of product ultraﬁlter. In general model-
theoretic terms, that ﬁnite iterations of ultraproducts can be rendered as a single
ultraproduct by a product ultraﬁlter had been observed by Frayne-Morel-Scott [62].
For technical reasons obviated by the representation 19.6 for normal ultraﬁlters,
Kunen carried through a similar analysis into the transﬁnite, representing all iter-
ates as single ultrapowers of sorts. Independently, Keisler also developed such a
representation (Chang-Keisler [90: 6.5]).
The following immediate corollary of 19.9(a) shows how iterated ultrapowers
lead to indiscernibles. This insight of Kunen’s led to a new structural understand-
ing of 0# (21.1).
19.10 Corollary (Kunen [68, 70]). For any ϕ(v0, . . . , vn) of L∈,
x ∈M, γ1 < . . . < γn < α ∈τ, and δ1 < . . . < δn < β ∈τ,

254
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
⟨Mα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0α(x), κγ1, . . . , κγn] iff ⟨Mβ, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0β(x), κδ1, . . . , κδn] .
In particular, {κγ | γ < α} is a set of indiscernibles for ⟨Mα, ∈, i0α(x)⟩x∈M.
⊣
Iterability
Continuing in terms of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩and its iteration ⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈τ, several
characterizations of iterability are established next. For convenience, On is treated
as an ordinal when discussing lengths of iterations.
For example, τ ≥ω1 is
understood to include the possibility τ = On. Indeed, the historically ﬁrst result
about iterability, due to Gaifman, was the assertion that τ = On
iff
τ ≥ω1.
This is established as part of a larger framework, one that incorporates a sufﬁcient
condition due to Kunen:
U is countably complete iff for any {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆U, 
n Xn ̸= ∅.
This sufﬁces for the forward direction of 5.3; {Xn | n ∈ω} may not be a member of
M, and for that reason requiring 
n Xn ∈U as in ω1-completeness would be too
stringent. Kunen showed that this external completeness implies iterability. For
later characterizations, the implication is factored through a property attributable
to Jensen and implicit in Dodd [82: 65]:
⟨M, ∈, U⟩is countably iterable iff for any N-ultraﬁlter W with
⟨N, ∈, W⟩countable and ≺−embeddable into
⟨M, ∈, U⟩, the length of the iteration of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩is ≥ω1 .
19.11 Lemma (Jensen). If U is countably complete, then ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is countably
iterable.
Proof. Suppose that W is an N-ultraﬁlter, ⟨N, ∈, W⟩is countable, and
e: ⟨N, ∈, W⟩≺−⟨M, ∈, U⟩.
Letting ⟨Nα, Wα, λα, jαβ⟩α≤β∈σ be the iteration of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩it must be veriﬁed
that σ ≥ω1. To do this, proceed by induction on α < ω1 to establish that:
(i) ⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩is deﬁned, and for inductive purposes ,
(ii) there is an eα: ⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩≺−⟨M, ∈, U⟩such that
eγ = eα ◦jγ α for γ < α .
Initially set e0 = e. For the induction argument at α + 1, suppose that (i)
and (ii) have been satisﬁed through stages ≤α. In particular, for any X ∈Wα,
eα(X) ∈U. Also, since N is countable and α < ω1, Nα is countable by 19.4(d).
Hence, there is an η ∈{eα(X) | X ∈Wα} by the countable completeness
of U.
Now η deﬁnes an embedding of the ultrapower ⟨λα Nα/Wα, EWα, ˙AWα⟩
of ⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩into ⟨M, ∈, U⟩by:
j(( f )0
Wα) = eα( f )(η). Moreover, j is L∈
elementary: Using a one-variable formula ϕ(v0) for simplicity,

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
255
⟨λα Nα/Wα, EWα⟩|= ϕ[( f )0
Wα]
iff
{ξ < λα | ⟨Nα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[ f (ξ)]} ∈Wα
iff
η ∈{ξ < κ | ⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ[eα( f )(ξ)]}
iff
⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ[eα( f )(η)] .
But, ⟨λα Nα/Wα, EWα, ˙AWα⟩is well-founded, being embeddable into a transitive
structure, and so ⟨Nα+1, ∈, Wα+1⟩is duly deﬁned as its transitive collapse. Con-
sequently, j modulated by the collapsing map yields an embedding
eα+1: ⟨Nα+1, ∈, Wα+1⟩≺−⟨M, ∈, U⟩.
Furthermore, it is simple to check that eα = eα+1 ◦jα,α+1, and hence that for any
γ < α, eγ = eα ◦jγ α = eα+1 ◦jγ,α+1.
Suppose now that δ < ω1 is a limit ordinal and (i) and (ii) have been satisﬁed
through stages < δ. In particular, the direct limit of
⟨⟨⟨Nα, ∈, Wα⟩| α < δ⟩, ⟨jαβ | α ≤β⟩⟩
is ≺−embeddable into ⟨M, ∈, U⟩by 0.7 because of the eα’s. Hence, this direct
limit is well-founded, and so ⟨Nδ, ∈, Wδ⟩is duly deﬁned as its transitive collapse.
Moreover, that embedding of the direct limit into ⟨M, ∈, U⟩modulated by the
collapsing map yields an embedding
eδ: ⟨Nδ, ∈, Wδ⟩≺−⟨M, ∈, W⟩
such that eγ = eδ ◦jγ δ for γ < δ.
⊣
19.12 Lemma. If ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is countably iterable, then it is iterable.
Proof.
Assume to the contrary that τ ∈On.
If τ is a successor, say τ =
γ + 1, then temporarily let ⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩be the ultrapower ⟨κγ Mγ /Uγ , EUγ , ˙AUγ ⟩
of ⟨Mγ , ∈, Uγ ⟩, and
iτ: ⟨M, ∈, U⟩≺−⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩
the composition of i0γ followed by the natural embedding into that ultrapower.
If τ is a limit ordinal, let ⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩be the direct limit of the iteration of
⟨M, ∈, U⟩, and
iτ: ⟨M, ∈, U⟩≺−⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩
the corresponding embedding. In either case ⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩is ill-founded by as-
sumption. Nonetheless, a look at the inductive proofs of 19.6 and 19.9(a) shows
that they also hold “at τ”, i.e. with α = τ, ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩replaced by ⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩,
and i0α replaced by iτ – if in the case τ = γ + 1, κγ is replaced by [id]Uγ where
id: κγ →κγ is the identity. This is how 19.6 and 19.9(a) are applied “at τ” in
what follows.

256
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Let {xk | k ∈ω} ⊆Mτ such that xk+1 Eτ xk for each k ∈ω. By 19.6 “at τ”,
xk = iτ( fk)(κγ k
1 , . . . , κγ k
n(k)) for some n(k) ∈ω ,
fk ∈[κ]n(k)M ∩M , and γ k
1 < . . . < γ k
n(k) < τ .
Take a Skolem hull of { fk | k ∈ω} in ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, and then its transitive collapse.
This produces a countable ⟨N, ∈, W⟩where W is an N-ultraﬁlter, and the inverse
of the collapsing map is an embedding
e: ⟨N, ∈W⟩≺−⟨M, ∈, U⟩.
Let f k satisfy e( f k) =
fk for each k ∈ω.
By hypothesis, the iteration
⟨Nα, Wα, λα, jαβ⟩α≤β∈σ of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩satisﬁes σ ≥ω1.
Let ζ < ω1 be the ordertype of the set Z = {γ k
m | k ∈ω ∧1 ≤m ≤n(k)}
and h: Z →ζ the unique order-preserving function. For each k ∈ω, set
δk
m = h(γ k
m) for 1 ≤m ≤n(k) , and
xk = j0ζ( f k)(λδk
1, . . . , λδk
n(k)) .
Furthermore, let ϕk(v0, v1, . . .) be a formula such that ϕk[iτ( fk), iτ( fk+1), . . .]
asserts that xk+1 Eτ xk in ⟨Mτ, Eτ, Uτ⟩, where . . . denotes the listing of the set
{κγ k
1 , . . . , κγ k
n(k), κγ k+1
1
, . . . , κγ k+1
n(k+1)} in increasing order. Finally, let ϕ∗
k (v0, v1) be the
formula to the right of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= in the application of 19.9(a) “at τ” to ϕk.
Then for each k ∈ω,
xk+1 Eτ xk iff
⟨M, ∈, U⟩|= ϕ∗
k [ fk, fk+1]
iff
⟨N, ∈, W⟩|= ϕ∗
k [ f k, f k+1]
iff
xk+1 ∈xk ,
by using ϕk appropriately in ⟨Nζ, ∈, Wζ⟩. This of course is a contradiction, and
so the proof is complete.
⊣
19.13 Corollary (Kunen [68, 70]). If U is countably complete, then ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is
iterable.
⊣
The converse is false, since there are iterable ⟨N, ∈, W⟩that are countable
(19.15(e)) in which case W cannot be countably complete. However, we do have
the following:
19.14 Lemma. If ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable, then it has an iterate ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩such
that Uα is countably complete.
Proof. This is afﬁrmed with α = ω1: Suppose that {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆Uω1. By 19.5,
for each n ∈ω there is an αn < ω1 such that {κγ | αn ≤γ < ω1} ⊆Xn. Let
β = sup({αn | n ∈ω}). Then κβ ∈
n Xn.
⊣

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
257
The arguments for these lemmata can now be used to concoct a daisy chain
of implications that provides several characterizations of iterability:
19.15 Theorem (Gaifman for (b), Jensen, Dodd [82]). The following are equiva-
lent:
(a) ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable, i.e. τ = On.
(b) τ ≥ω1.
(c) There is an iterate ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩such that Uα is countably complete.
(d) ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is countably iterable.
(e) Any ⟨N, ∈, W⟩≺−embeddable into ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable.
Proof. (a) →(b) is immediate. For (b) →(c), note ﬁrst that τ ≥ω1 implies that
τ > ω1, i.e. there is an ω1-iterate, since the corresponding direct limit is readily
seen to be well-founded. Hence, (c) follows by the argument for 19.14. For (c)
→(d), note that ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩is countably iterable by 19.11, and so ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is
countably iterable since it is embeddable into ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩. For (d) →(e), note
that ⟨N, ∈, W⟩is countably iterable, and use 19.12. (e) →(a) is immediate.
⊣
The following absoluteness result is a consequence:
19.16 Proposition. Suppose that S is a transitive ∈-model of ZFC, ω1 ⊆S, and
M, U ⊆S are classes in the sense of S such that S |= U is an M-ultraﬁlter. Then
⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable iff
S |= ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable .
In particular, if U is an M-ultraﬁlter, M |= ZFC, and ω1 ∪{U} ⊆M, then
⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable.
Proof. Clearly U really is an M-ultraﬁlter, and in particular M really models
ZFC−– assertions implicit in the conclusion. The hypotheses further imply by
absoluteness of satisfaction that for any α < ω1, (⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩)S = ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩
when both are deﬁned. Moreover, for class structures in the sense of S, well-
foundedness is absolute (0.3). Hence, if S |= ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable, then the (real)
iteration of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩has length ≥ω1, and so by 19.15 it is iterable. The converse
is clear.
The last assertion follows from taking S = M and noting that M |= U is
countably complete.
⊣
A Lemma on Measurable Cardinals
Tucked in next is a striking result of Kunen’s, a dividend of his work on iterated
ultrapowers.
Chang [71] formulated for cardinals κ the class Cκ of sets con-
structible using the inﬁnitary language Lκκ (described in §4) and observed various
generalizations of properties of L = Cω. For example, Cκ is the least inner model
M closed under the taking of arbitrary <κ-sequences, i.e. <κ M ⊆M.
Also,
Scott’s result 5.5 can be extended to show that if there is a measurable cardinal κ,

258
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
then V ̸= Cκ+. Sureson [86] studied transcendence over these models in terms of
indiscernibles, and showed in particular that transcendence over Cω1 is equicon-
sistent with the existence of a measurable cardinal. Using iterated ultrapowers
Kunen [73] showed that unlike L these models do not generally have intrinsic
well-orderings: if κ is regular and there are κ+ measurable cardinals then the
Axiom of Choice fails in Cκ+. Toward this result he established a striking lemma
that revealed an unexpected global constraint on measurable cardinals imposed by
ZFC. Here, a proof due to William Fleissner is provided that does not use iterated
ultrapowers. As usual, if κ is measurable and U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over
κ, then jU: V ≺MU ∼= Ult(V, U) and [ f ]U ∈MU corresponds to f : κ →V .
19.17 Theorem (Kunen [73]). For any ξ, the following set is ﬁnite:
{κ > ω | there is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter U over κ such that ξ < jU(ξ)} .
Proof (Fleissner [75]). First, stipulate for U a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ > ω
that a half-open interval of ordinals [α, β) = {ξ | α ≤ξ < β} is a moving interval
for U iff jU ﬁxes coﬁnally many ordinals less than α as well as β, yet it moves
every ordinal in [α, β). Note that if these conditions are satisﬁed, then
(i) cf(α) = κ , and
(ii) β = sup({ jn
U(ξ) | n ∈ω}) for any ξ ∈[α, β) ,
where jn
U indicates n iterative applications of jU. (For (i), sup({ jU(η) | η < α}) =
α since coﬁnally many ordinals less than α are ﬁxed by jU, so a standard argument
shows that jU(α) > α necessitates cf(α) = κ.)
Next, observe that if U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ > ω and W is
a λ-complete ultraﬁlter over λ > κ, then jU and jW commute: For any set x,
jU(x) = {[ f ]U | f ∈κx} and since jW ﬁxes κ and U,
jW( jU(x)) = {[ f ]U | f ∈κ jW(x)} = jU( jW(x)) .
It follows that with U and W as above if, [α, β) is a moving interval for U and
[α, β) is a moving interval for W, then either they are disjoint or strictly nested,
i.e.
if α < α < β, then β < β.
To show this, ﬁrst choose an η such that
α ≤η < α and jW(η) = η; this is possible by hypothesis on α. By (ii) above,
there is an n ∈ω such that α < jn
U(η) < β. Since jU and jW commute,
jW( jn
U(η)) = jn
U( jW(η)) = jn
U(η) .
Hence, β ≤jn
U(η) since [α, β) is a moving interval for W, and so β < β.
The proof can now be completed: Assume to the contrary that for some ξ
there is an increasing sequence ⟨κi | i ∈ω⟩of measurable cardinals such that
for each i ∈ω there is a κi-complete ultraﬁlter Ui over κi with ξ < jUi(ξ). It
follows that for each i ∈ω, ξ is in a moving interval [αi, βi) for Ui. By (i) above,
i ̸= j implies that αi ̸= αj, so that we can assume by taking a subsequence that
i < j implies that αi < αj. But then, as the [αi, βi)’s all contain ξ, they are

19. Iterated Ultrapowers
259
nested intervals, and so β0 > β1 > β2 . . . is a descending sequence of ordinals.
Contradiction!
⊣
Friedrich Wehrung [89] gave another proof of Kunen’s result and established
related results.
A Connection with Prikry Forcing
This section is concluded by establishing an interesting connection between iterated
ultrapowers and Prikry forcing. Suppose that M is an inner model of ZFC, U ∈M,
and M |= U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ. Then ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is iterable by 19.16, so
let ⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On be its iteration. Then for any γ , i0γ (U) = Uγ ∈Mγ ,
and by absoluteness of satisfaction ⟨⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩| γ ≤α ∈On⟩is deﬁnable in
⟨Mγ , ∈, Uγ ⟩as its sequence of iterated ultrapowers. In particular, α ≤β implies
that Mβ ⊆Mα.
For limit ordinals δ > 0, set
M+
δ = 
α<δMα .
Then Mδ ⊆M+
δ , and M+
δ is an inner model: in terms of our formulation before
3.1,
M+
δ ⊆M+
δ
and ∀ξ(def(M+
δ ∩Vξ) ⊆M+
δ ) .
For the latter, if x ∈def(M+
δ ∩Vξ) for some ξ, then for any α < δ, by deﬁnability
and absoluteness of M+
δ
and rank in Mα we have x ∈Mα, and hence x ∈

α<δ Mα = M+
δ .
Focusing on δ = ω, note that {κn | n ∈ω} ∈M+
ω −Mω: For each i ∈ω,
{κn | i ≤n ∈ω} ∈Mi because of the deﬁnability of the iteration process from
Mi on within Mi, and so {κn | n ∈ω} ∈Mi as it is only a ﬁnite modiﬁcation.
However, {κn | n ∈ω} /∈Mω since κω = sup({κn | n ∈ω}) is measurable in Mω.
Solovay noted that {κn | n ∈ω} is in fact Prikry PUω-generic over Mω; Bukovsk´y
[73] observed on general grounds that M+
ω is a generic extension of Mω; and then
Dehornoy and Bukovsk´y made the exact connection:
19.18 Theorem.
(a) (Solovay) {κn | n ∈ω} is Prikry PUω-generic over Mω.
(b) (Dehornoy [75, 78]; Bukovsk´y) Mω[{κn | n ∈ω}] = M+
ω .
Proof. (a) This is a direct consequence of 18.7 and 19.5.
(b) Set g = {κn | n ∈ω}; it remains to establish that M+
ω ⊆Mω[g]. First,
(∗)
if x ∈Mω, then for sufﬁciently large n ∈ω, inω(x) = iω,ω2(x) .
This is a consequence of the following for sufﬁciently large n ∈ω: There is a
xn ∈Mn such that inω(xn) = x, i.e. ⟨Mn, ∈, Un⟩|= ⌈the image of xn under the
embedding into the ωth iterate is x⌉. Applying inω, ⟨Mω, ∈, Uω⟩|= ⌈the image of
inω(xn) under the embedding into the ωth iterate is inω(x)⌉. But as the embedding
in question is iω,ω2, inω(x) = iω,ω2(inω(xn)) = iω,ω2(x).

260
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Next, every set of ordinals in M+
ω is also in Mω[g]: Suppose that x ∈
P(γ ) ∩M+
ω . By 19.6 and deﬁnability there is a sequence ⟨fn | n ∈ω⟩∈M
such that for each n ∈ω, fn: [κ]n →M and x = i0n( fn)(κ0, . . . , κn−1), so that
inω(x) = i0ω( fn)(κ0, . . . , κn−1) as inω(κi) = κi for i < n. Since
⟨i0ω( fn) | n ∈ω⟩= i0ω(⟨fn | n ∈ω⟩) ∈Mω ,
it follows by deﬁnability from g that ⟨inω(x) | n ∈ω⟩∈Mω[g]. Now for any
ξ < γ, ξ ∈x iff for sufﬁciently large n ∈ω, inω(ξ) ∈inω(x) iff for sufﬁciently
large n ∈ω, iω,ω2(ξ) ∈inω(x) by (∗) above. Hence, by the deﬁnability of iω,ω2
in Mω it follows that x ∈Mω[g].
Finally, M+
ω ⊆Mω[g] can be established by induction on rank: Suppose that
x ∈M+
ω and inductively, x ⊆Mω[g]. Then x ⊆(Vrank(x))Mω[g], and since Mω[g]
satisﬁes AC (being a generic extension by (a) of a model of AC), let f ∈Mω[g]
be an injection: (Vrank(x))Mω[g] →On. Then f ∈M+
ω ⊇Mω[g], and f “x is a
set of ordinals in M+
ω . Hence, f “x ∈Mω[g] by the previous paragraph, and so
x = f −1( f “x) ∈Mω[g].
⊣
This last is part of the argument for showing that if two transitive ∈-models
N0 and N1 of ZF have the same sets of ordinals and at least one satisﬁes AC, then
N0 = N1 (see Jech [03: 196ff]).
Dehornoy [76, 78] completely described the inner models M+
δ in terms of the
Mα’s by cases as follows: (i) δ = α + ω for some α < δ. Then as for 19.18,
{κα+n | n ∈ω} is Prikry PUδ-generic over Mδ and M+
δ = Mδ[{κα+n | n ∈ω}].
(ii) For some α < δ, ⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩|= cf(δ) > ω. Then M+
δ = Mδ. For instance,
⟨Mω, ∈, Uω⟩|= κω is regular, so M+
κω = Mκω. (iii) Neither (i) nor (ii) obtain for δ.
Then M+
δ = Mδ[Gδ], where Gδ is a speciﬁed set of Prikry generic sequences not
well-orderable in M+
δ . In particular, AC fails in M+
δ . Dehornoy [83] extended
the scheme to inner models of stronger hypotheses and forcing for changing to an
uncountable coﬁnality.
The basic theory of this section is extended in the next to derive the main
structure theorems for inner models of measurability.

20. Inner Models of Measurability
261
20. Inner Models of Measurability
One of the emerging themes of the theory of large cardinals in the late 1960’s
was the investigation of the smallest inner models in which they maintain their
deﬁning property. Like L for the theory ZFC these canonical inner models were
found to crystallize the necessary consequences of the corresponding theories as
well as to establish the relative consistency of minimal principles like GCH. Sil-
ver and Kunen initiated this direction of research with their structure theorems on
inner models of measurability, which are established in this section. As attention
shifted to strong hypotheses, the development of inner model theory was to be-
come a full-ﬂedged program. Guiding structural initiatives were thus introduced
beyond the combinatorial theory of large cardinals, and this was to lead to remark-
able equiconsistency results by the complementary methods of forcing and inner
models.
Inner model theory began, of course, with G¨odel’s fundamental work on L.
For modest large cardinals like inaccessible, Mahlo, and weakly compact cardinals,
the corresponding inner model is L itself (3.1, 6.7). Jensen’s systematic investi-
gations beginning in the late 1960’s revealed a ﬁne structure for L which is thus
compatible with these cardinals, and led moreover to informative characterizations
in this sharpened context. He also isolated combinatorial principles obtaining in
L whose negations turned out to entail these cardinals in L (see volume II). Thus,
the careful investigation of L resulted in a new structural understanding of modest
large cardinals.
Before these developments, the relativity introduced by Scott’s result that
measurable cardinals contradict V = L had set the stage for the development
of inner models for measurability, ﬁrst considered by Solovay. Let U be a κ-
complete ultraﬁlter over κ > ω. Since the measurability of κ amounts to the
existential postulation of such a set U, Solovay looked at L[U], Levy’s inner
model of sets constructible relative to U (§3). U = U ∩L[U] ∈L[U] and so
L[U] = L[U], and the following is simple to check:
20.1 Exercise.
L[U] |= U is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ ,
and if U is normal, then
L[U] |= U is normal .
⊣
Thus, κ is measurable in L[U], and like L with respect to ZF, it is consistent
with κ being measurable that V = L[U], so that U could have been U all along.
Focusing on these inner models of measurability,
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is a κ-model iff ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩|= U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ.

262
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Thus, U ∈L[U] is incorporated from the beginning as a unary relation. That
U ∈L[U] implies that L[U]L[U] = L[U] by 3.2(b), and hence that L[U] |= ⌈V =
L[U]⌉. It is not assumed that κ is a cardinal in V . (This section continues the
extensive use of κ, λ, . . . to denote cardinals only in the sense of some transitive
∈-model.) Initial observations were promising:
20.2 Lemma (Solovay). Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is a κ-model. Then the fol-
lowing hold in L[U]:
(a) ∀λ ≥κ(2λ = λ+).
(b) κ is the only measurable cardinal.
Proof. (a) G¨odel’s argument for GCH in L works in any L[A] for sufﬁciently
large cardinals; in the present case, that U ⊆P(κ) allows it to work for any
λ ≥κ: For such λ we shall verify that P(λ) ∩L[U] ⊆Lλ+[U], drawing the
conclusion from |Lλ+[U]| = λ+. Since L[U] |= V = L[U], the argument carried
out inside L[U] then gives the desired result.
Suppose then that x ∈P(λ) ∩L[U]. Let γ > λ be a limit ordinal such that
x, U ∈Lγ [U], and ⟨H, ∈, U ∩H⟩≺⟨Lγ [U], ∈, U⟩such that λ ∪{x, U} ⊆H
and |H| = λ. Let ⟨N, ∈, W⟩be the transitive collapse of ⟨H, ∈, U ∩H⟩and π
the collapsing isomorphism. Since λ ⊆H, π(y) = y for every y ∈P(λ) ∩H.
Consequently, π(x) = x and W = π“(U ∩H) = U ∩N.
By elementarity
⟨N, ∈, U ∩N⟩satisﬁes the sentence σ1 of 3.3(b), so that N = Lδ[U] for some δ.
Finally, |N| = λ so that δ < λ+, and the result follows since x ∈Lδ[U] ⊆Lλ+[U].
(b) Assuming throughout that V = L[U], suppose to the contrary that there
is a measurable cardinal λ ̸= κ. Let W be a λ-complete ultraﬁlter over λ and
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, W) .
Since V is the class L[U] deﬁnable from U, by elementarity and 3.2(b), M =
L[ j(U)]M = L[ j(U)]. It will in fact be established that M = L[U], and this
sufﬁces for a contradiction since by 5.7(e), W /∈M.
If λ > κ, then j(U) = U, and so we are done. Suppose then that λ < κ. As
U is normal,
E = {α < κ | α > λ ∧α is inaccessible} ∈U ,
and by 5.7(c), j(α) = α for every α ∈E. It follows from this that j(U) =
U ∩M: First, suppose that X ∈j(U), say X = [ f ]W with f ∈λU.
Then
Y = 
ξ<λ f (ξ) ∈U by κ-completeness, and clearly j(Y) ⊆X. But j(Y) ⊇
j“(Y ∩E) = Y ∩E ∈U since j is the identity on E, and so X ∈U ∩M. With
j(U) ⊆U ∩M veriﬁed, it follows that j(U) = U ∩M since j(U) is an ultraﬁlter
in M. 3.2(b) now implies that
M = L[ j(U)] = L[U ∩M] = L[U] .
⊣
Extending 20.2(a), Silver obtained the ﬁrst substantial result about κ-models,
that full GCH holds:

20. Inner Models of Measurability
263
20.3 Theorem (Silver [66a, 71a]). Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is a κ-model. Then
L[U] |= GCH.
Proof. Keeping in mind that L[U] |= V = L[U], we argue in L[U] to verify
GCH below κ there: Suppose that λ < κ. Recall the well-ordering <L[U] of L[U]
given by the formula ϕ1(v0, v1) of 3.3(b). Although there may be new subsets of
λ appearing late in the L[U] = 
α Lα[U] hierarchy, we shall establish a property
that clearly sufﬁces, that <L[U] |(P(λ) × P(λ)) has ordertype ≤λ+. In other
words, for any y ∈P(λ) ∩L[U],
|{x ∈P(λ) ∩L[U] | x <L[U] y}| ≤λ .
Assume to the contrary that this fails. Then there is a y ∈P(λ) ∩L[U] such
that with
R = {x ∈P(λ) ∩L[U] | x <L[U] y} ,
|R| = λ+.
Let γ be a limit ordinal > κ with y, U ∈Lγ [U], and consider the structure
A = ⟨Lγ [U], ∈, U, R, {y}⟩.
Since U is λ+-Rowbottom (as deﬁned before 16.10), by the argument for 8.4(b)
using a language with constants for each ordinal less than λ, there is a
B = ⟨B, ∈, U ∩B, R ∩B, {y}⟩≺A
such that |R ∩B| ≤λ, λ ⊆B, and B ∩κ ∈U. Let ⟨N, ∈, W⟩be the transitive
collapse of ⟨B, ∈, U ∩B⟩, and π the collapsing isomorphism.
Since λ ⊆B,
π(x) = x for any x ∈P(λ) ∩B. In particular, y ∈N and R ∩N = R ∩B.
We shall verify that W = U ∩N. By elementarity and 3.3(b) this would imply
that N = Lρ[U] for some limit ρ, and R ⊆N since y ∈N, leading to the
contradiction |N| = |R ∩N| = |R ∩B| ≤λ.
To verify that W = U ∩N, note that: B ∩κ ∈U, π(ξ) ≤ξ for any ξ ∈B,
and π is injective. It follows from the normality of U that
E = {ξ ∈B ∩κ | π(ξ) = ξ} ∈U .
For any S ∈N, say S = π(S) with S ∈B, it follows that: S ∈W iff ∃D ∈
U(D ∩E ⊆S) (taking D = S in one direction since W = π“(U ∩B)) iff
∃D ∈U(D ∩E ⊆S))(since π is the identity on D ∩E) iff S ∈U. Hence,
W = U ∩N and the proof is complete.
⊣
Instead of going into inner models Jensen [74] established the relative consis-
tency of GCH with a measurable cardinal by forcing. Relying on a combinatorial
contingency, he showed that a measurable cardinal in the ground model remains
measurable upon forcing with an Easton product of collapsing p.o.’s. This method
ﬁrst established the relative consistency of GCH with Ramsey cardinals, for which
an inner model theory became available only later.

264
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Digressing somewhat, the following sketches Solovay’s original proof of
16.1(b), that real-valued measurable cardinals are measurable in an inner model.
20.4 Exercise (Solovay [71]). Suppose that I is a normal λ-saturated ideal over
κ where λ < κ. Then
L[I] |= κ is measurable .
Hint. Check that if I = I ∩L[I], then L[I] |= I is a normal λ-saturated ideal
over κ. Now work in L[I]: λ+ < κ by 16.3, and I
∗is λ+-Rowbottom by 16.11,
so check that the argument for 20.3 works to show that 2λ = λ+. Now apply
16.4(a).
⊣
The foregoing results about L[U] depended on U being preserved as a pred-
icate in transitive substructures, i.e. if N is the domain, what corresponds to U
is just U ∩N. The further results required a more sophisticated analysis of rela-
tive constructibility. Although just the Rowbottom property of normal ultraﬁlters
sufﬁces for the GCH result 20.3, Silver saw that the Ramsey property leading
to substructures generated by indiscernibles provides a ∆1
3 well-ordering of the
reals in L[U], sharpening the analogy with L. Kunen established that a κ-model
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩only depends on κ, and in fact, if W is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter
over κ then L[U] = L[W]. Moreover, he showed that all the κ-models for differ-
ent κ’s are generated by taking iterated ultrapowers! In particular, all these inner
models of measurability have the same theory.
With the preparations of §19, these and further structure theorems will be
established in a terminology and approach that anticipates later developments.
In particular, iterated ultrapower proofs will be provided for Silver’s results on
GCH and the ∆1
3 well-ordering of the reals.
The clear internal structure and
striking global coherence of inner models of measurability revealed by these results
provide a forceful argument for the consistency of the theory: ZFC plus there is
a measurable cardinal.
We begin by considering structures that approximate κ-models and sharpen
the §19 context:
⟨M, ∈, U⟩is a ZFC−premouse (at κ) iff
U is an M-ultraﬁlter over κ and
M = Lζ[U] for some ζ (allowing M = L[U]) .
The terminology is a capitulation to historical development, and anticipates a
rodent infestation in a ﬁner context (the Core Model – see volume II). The ZFC−
refers to the implicit assumption in the term M-ultraﬁlter that M |= ZFC−, but
for the sake of brevity
by premouse is meant ZFC−premouse in this section
with the caveat that the term will have a different meaning in volume II. Some
simple observations:

20. Inner Models of Measurability
265
(i) The weak amenability condition for M-ultraﬁlters U is redundant
for M = Lζ[U].
(ii) Any iterate of a premouse is also a premouse by 3.3(b) and
and elementarity.
(iii) A κ-model ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is a premouse such that U ∈L[U].
To allow this inner model case implicitly, we stipulate that in this context that
Lζ[U] includes the possibility “ζ = On”, i.e. Lζ[U] = L[U] .
Iterability in such cases is an immediate consequence of 19.16:
20.5 Lemma. Suppose that ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩is a premouse, Lζ[U] |= ZFC, and
ω1 ∪{U} ⊆Lζ[U]. Then ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩is iterable.
⊣
In particular, any κ-model is iterable (and its iterates are deﬁnable in it).
The following is a crucial observation about the deﬁnability of certain iterates
of a premouse.
Recall that if ν > ω is regular, then Cν denotes the closed
unbounded ﬁlter over ν.
20.6 Lemma.
Suppose that ⟨M, ∈, U⟩is a premouse at κ with iteration
⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈τ, and ν ∈τ is a regular cardinal > |κκ ∩M|. Then for
some ζ,
Mν = Lζ[Cν] and Uν = Cν ∩Lζ[Cν] .
Proof. κν = ν by 19.7(b), and Uν ⊆Cν ∩Mν by 19.5. Hence, Uν = Cν ∩Mν since
Uν is an ultraﬁlter on P(ν) ∩Mν. Since ⟨Mν, ∈, Cν ∩Mν⟩satisﬁes the sentence
σ1 of 3.3(b), the result follows.
⊣
20.7 Corollary (Kunen [68, 70]).
Suppose that there is a κ-model, and ν is a
regular cardinal greater than κ+. Set Cν = Cν ∩L[Cν]. Then L[Cν] is a ν-model,
i.e.
⟨L[Cν], ∈, Cν⟩|= Cν is a normal ultraﬁlter over ν .
Proof. Let ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩be a κ-model. By 20.5, ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is iterable and by
20.2(a), κ+ ≥|κκ ∩L[U]|. Hence, the result follows from 20.6, since L[Cν] =
L[Cν] is the νth iterate of L[U].
⊣
Thus, constructing relative to ﬁlters deﬁnable in ZFC can result in internal
measurability! This compelling insight of Kunen’s became a recurring theme in
inner model theory, bringing Ulam’s concept of measurability further into the fold
of set theory.
The next result is the main technical lemma from which the structure theorems
ﬂow.
⟨M, ∈, U⟩and ⟨N, ∈, W⟩are comparable iff
either U = W ∩M or W = U ∩N .

266
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
In other words, there is an F such that U = F ∩M and W = F ∩N with
M = Lζ[F] and N = Lη[F] for some ζ and η, so that M and N are initial
segments of the same relative constructible hierarchy. Of course, if M and N
are inner models, then M = N. The following direct consequence of 20.6 is the
Comparison Lemma for ZFC−Premice.
20.8 Lemma. Suppose that ⟨M, ∈, U⟩and ⟨N, ∈, W⟩are iterable premice. Then
there is an iterate of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩and an iterate of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩that are comparable.
⊣
We need one further preliminary result on deﬁnability. The 3.3(b) formula
ϕ1(v0, v1) of L∈( ˙A) deﬁnes in any ⟨L[A], ∈, A ∩L[A]⟩a well-ordering <L[A] of
L[A] such that: for any limit δ > ω and x, y ∈Lδ[A],
x <L[A] y iff
⟨Lδ[A], ∈, A ∩Lδ[A]⟩|= ϕ1[x, y] .
Following a discussion after 9.3, for any formula ϕ(v0, . . . , vm) of L∈( ˙A) the
canonical Skolem term tϕ for ϕ can be deﬁned that chooses the least witness to
v0 according to ϕ1 whenever possible. Consequently, for any limit ordinal δ > ω
and X ⊆Lδ[A], the Skolem hull of X in ⟨Lδ[A], ∈, A ∩Lδ[A]⟩can be taken to
be well-deﬁned, with domain
{t⟨Lδ[A],∈,A∩Lδ[A]⟩
ϕ
(x1, . . . , xn) | ϕ is a formula of L∈( ˙A) ∧x1, . . . , xn ∈X} .
This coincides with the collection of those x ∈Lδ[A] such that {x} is deﬁnable
over ⟨Lδ[A], ∈, A ∩Lδ[A]⟩using parameters from X.
By Skolem term is meant one of these tϕ’s in this section .
20.9 Lemma. Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is a κ-model, B ⊆On with |B| ≥κ+,
and δ is a limit ordinal such that B ⊆Lδ[U]. Then P(κ) ∩L[U] is a subset of the
Skolem hull of κ ∪B in ⟨Lδ[U], ∈, U⟩, so that for any X ∈P(κ) ∩L[U],
X = t⟨Lδ[U],∈,U⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, η1, . . . , ηn)
for some Skolem term t, ξ1, . . . , ξm ∈κ, and η1, . . . , ηn ∈B.
Proof.
Let ⟨H, ∈, U ∩H⟩be the stated Skolem hull, ⟨N, ∈, W⟩its transitive
collapse, and π the collapsing isomorphism. Then π(α) = α for every α < κ, so
π(X) = X for every X ∈P(κ) ∩H. Consequently, W = U ∩N, so that using
the sentence σ1 of 3.3(b), N = Lζ[U] for some ζ. ζ ≥κ+ since |B| ≥κ+, so by
the proof of 20.2(a), P(κ) ∩L[U] ⊆N. Hence, P(κ) ∩L[U] ⊆H as π is the
identity on subsets of κ.
⊣
The Main Results
We are now in a position to prove the main structure theorems on κ-models.

20. Inner Models of Measurability
267
20.10 Theorem (Kunen [68, 70]). Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩and ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩
are both κ-models. Then U = W and so L[U] = L[W].
Proof. By 20.5 ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩and ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩are iterable, so by 20.8 they have
comparable iterates and hence a common iterate ⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩since L[U] and
L[W] are inner models. Let
i: ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩≺⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩and
j: ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩≺⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩
be the corresponding embeddings. By 19.7(c),
{θ > κ | θ = |θ| = i(θ) = j(θ)}
is a proper class, so let B ∪{δ} consist of members of this class so that |B| = κ+
and δ > sup(B).
For any X ∈U, by 20.9
X = t⟨Lδ[U],∈,U⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, η1, . . . , ηn)
for some Skolem term t, ξ1, . . . , ξm ∈κ, and η1, . . . , ηn ∈B. Set
Y = t⟨Lδ[W],∈,W⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, η1, . . . , ηn) .
Since Skolem terms are deﬁnable,
i(X) = t⟨Lδ[F],∈,F⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, η1, . . . , ηn) = j(Y)
noting that all the parameters are ﬁxed by i and j. X ∈U, so i(X) = j(Y) ∈F,
and hence Y ∈W. But also
X = i(X) ∩κ = i(Y) ∩κ = Y .
This argument establishes that U ⊆W, and the converse follows mutatis mutandis.
⊣
20.11 Corollary.
If ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model, then U is the only normal
ultraﬁlter over κ in L[U].
Proof.
Suppose that W is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ in L[U].
Setting W =
W ∩L[W], L[W] is a κ-model. Hence W = U, and since W is an ultraﬁlter in
L[U], W = U.
⊣
Thus, if there is a κ-model ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩, then it is unique, κ is the only
measurable cardinal in L[U] (20.2(b)), and U is the only normal ultraﬁlter over
κ in L[U].
This last contrasts with the consistency of having the maximum
possible number 22κ of normal ultraﬁlters (17.8). (The possible number of normal
ultraﬁlters is further discussed before 22.13.)

268
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
The next theorem shows that all the κ-models for various κ are produced
by iterating the κ-model where κ is least possible; consequently, all κ-models for
various κ are deﬁnable subclasses of this κ-model and are elementarily equivalent
to each other.
20.12 Theorem (Kunen [70]).
Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model and
⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩is the λ-model with κ < λ. Then ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩is an iterate of
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩.
In particular, L[W] ⊆L[U] and ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩is deﬁnable in
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩from λ.
Proof. Let ⟨L[Uα], Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On be the iteration of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩, so that in
particular each ⟨L[Uα], ∈, Uα⟩is deﬁnable in ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩. Since the κα’s form a
closed unbounded class of ordinals, there is a unique β such that κβ ≤λ < κβ+1.
If κβ = λ, we are done by 20.10. So, assume toward a contradiction that κβ <
λ < κβ+1:
Let ⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩be a common iterate of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩and ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩,
with
i: ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩≺⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩and
j: ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩≺⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩
the corresponding embeddings. Hence, i = i0γ for some γ > β. Arguing as for
20.10, let B ∪{δ} consist of cardinals greater than λ ﬁxed by both iβγ and j, with
|B| = κ+
β and δ > sup(B).
By 5.13(a) there is an f ∈κβκβ ∩L[Uβ] such that λ = iβ,β+1( f )(κβ). By
20.9,
f = t⟨Lδ[Uβ],∈,Uβ⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, η1, . . . , ηn)
for some Skolem term t, ξ1, . . . , ξm ∈κβ, and η1, . . . , ηn ∈B. Hence,
λ = iβ,β+1( f )(κβ) = u⟨Lδ[Uβ+1],∈,Uβ+1⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, κβ, η1, . . . , ηn)
for some Skolem term u. By deﬁnability of Skolem terms,
λ = u⟨Lδ[F],∈,F⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, κβ, η1, . . . , ηn)
since λ < κβ+1 and so every parameter as well as λ is ﬁxed by iβ+1,γ . But since
κβ < λ, the expression on the right also equals
j(u⟨Lδ[W],∈,W⟩(ξ1, . . . , ξm, κβ, η1, . . . , ηn))
for similar reasons. Thus λ ∈ran( j), contradicting λ = crit( j).
⊣
These results have emphasized normal ultraﬁlters. Kunen also showed that
constructing relative to an arbitrary κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ again yields the
κ-model, and analyzed the structure of the κ-complete ultraﬁlters over κ in the
κ-model. The following technical result is the basis:

20. Inner Models of Measurability
269
20.13 Exercise (Kunen [70]). Suppose that W is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over
κ > ω, and j: V ≺MW ∼= Ult(V, W). Let ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩be the κ-model with
iteration ⟨L[Uα], Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On. Then for some β, j and i0β agree on P(κ) ∩
L[U].
Hint. L[ j(U)]MW = L[ j(U)] is the j(κ)-model, so by 20.12 there is a β such
that κβ = j(κ) and Uβ = j(U). Show that this β is as desired with an appropriate
use of 20.9.
⊣
20.14 Corollary. Under the above hypotheses, L[W] = L[U].
Proof. Since κ is measurable in L[W], there is a κ-model which is a subclass of
L[W]. Hence, by 20.10, L[U] ⊆L[W]. For the converse, it sufﬁces to show that
W ∩L[U] ∈L[U], for then L[U] ⊇L[W ∩L[U]] = L[W]. For this purpose, let
ρ = [id]W, where id: κ →κ is the identity, so that for any X ⊆κ, X ∈W iff
ρ ∈j(X). Then using 20.13,
W ∩L[U] = {X ∈P(κ) ∩L[U] | ρ ∈j(X)}
= {X ∈P(κ) ∩L[U] | ρ ∈i0β(X)} ∈L[U]
since i0β is deﬁnable in ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩.
⊣
Proceeding toward a description of the κ-complete ultraﬁlters over κ in the
κ-model, the rudiments of a structure theory for ultraﬁlters are discussed next, a
subject which is pursued further in volume II:
Suppose that S and T are sets, f : S →T , and D is an ultraﬁlter over S.
Then
f∗(D) = {Y ⊆T | f −1(Y) ∈D} .
If principal ultraﬁlters were allowed, it can be checked that f∗(D) is always an
ultraﬁlter over T , the natural projection of D via f . Note that if X ∈D, then
f “X ∈f∗(D). If moreover E is an ultraﬁlter over T ,
D and E are equivalent iff there is a bijection f : S →T such that E = f∗(D).
Thus, equivalent ultraﬁlters are the same up to a relabeling of their underlying
sets. The following is well-known.
20.15 Proposition. Suppose that D is an ultraﬁlter over S and f : S →T .
(a) If g: S →T and {i ∈S | f (i) = g(i)} ∈D, then g∗(D) = f∗(D).
(b) If h: S →S and h∗(D) = D, then {i ∈S | h(i) = i} ∈D.
(c) If E is an ultraﬁlter over T, |T | = |S|, f∗(D) = E, and g: T →S is
such that g∗(E) = D, then D and E are equivalent.
Proof. (a) This is clear.
(b) Assume to the contrary that {i ∈S | h(i) > i} ∈D; the < case is
analogous. By (a), it can be assumed that h(i) > i for every i ∈S. Let h0(i) =
i, hn+1(i) = h(hn(i)) for n ∈ω, and deﬁne a relation ∼on S by:

270
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
i ∼j iff
∃m∃n(hm(i) = hn( j)) .
It can be checked that ∼is an equivalence relation, so ﬁx a representative for each
equivalence class. Let S0 ⊆S consist of those i such that if r is the representative
of the equivalence class of i and hm(i) = hn(r), then |m −n| is an even number.
(Note that this is independent of m and n as h is increasing on S.) Set S1 = S−S0.
Then for some e < 2, Se ∈D, and so h“Se ∈h∗(D) = D. But it is simple to see
that h“Se ⊆S1−e, leading to the contradictory Se ∩h“Se = ∅∈D.
(c) (g ◦f )∗(D) = D, so that {i ∈S | g( f (i)) = i} ∈D by (b), and f is
injective on this set. Since |S| = |T |, there is a bijection f : S →T such that
{i ∈S | f (i) = f (i)} ∈D, and so the proof is complete by (a).
⊣
In L[U], where ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model, U is the only normal ultraﬁlter
over κ, and from U the product ultraﬁlters U n over [κ]n for n ∈ω can be deﬁned
(as after 19.7). (b) below asserts that every κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ in L[U]
is essentially one of these.
20.16 Theorem (Kunen [70]; Paris [69] also for (a)). Suppose that V = L[U]
where ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model with iteration ⟨L[Uα], Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On. Let
W be any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ. Then:
(a) W = {X ⊆κ | ρ ∈i0ω(X)} for some ρ < κω.
(b) W is equivalent to U n for some n with 0 < n ∈ω.
Proof. Letting j: V ≺MW ∼= Ult(V, W), ﬁrst observe that V = L[U] implies that
the β of 20.13 must be ﬁnite: By 20.14, V = L[W] and MW = L[ j(W)] = L[Uβ]
by the uniqueness of j(κ)-models. If to the contrary β ≥ω, then κω is inaccessible
in L[Uβ] since it is measurable in L[Uω] and P(κω) ∩L[Uω] = P(κω) ∩L[Uβ].
However, since MW contains every countable sequence of ordinals by 5.7(d), κω
has coﬁnality ω there, which is a contradiction. Hence, β = n for some n with
0 < n ∈ω.
(a) now follows from the proof of 20.14, since inω(ρ) = ρ for any ρ <
j(κ) = i0n(κ).
For (b), if
en: V ≺MU n ∼= [κ]nV/U n ,
then MU n = L[Un] and en = i0n by the analysis of 19.9(b). Let id: κ →κ and
id: [κ]n →[κ]n be the identity maps on their respective domains, and f : κ →[κ]n
and g: [κ]n →κ such that [ f ]W = [id]U n and [g]U n = [id]W. Because j and en
agree on P(κ) and hence on P([κ]n), for any X ⊆[κ]n,
X ∈U n iff
[id]U n ∈en(X)
iff
[ f ]W ∈j(X)
iff
f −1(X) ∈W.
Hence, f∗(W) = U n. Similarly, g∗(U n) = W, and so the proof is complete by
20.15(c).
⊣

20. Inner Models of Measurability
271
The next goal is to establish Silver’s result that there is a ∆1
3 well-ordering
of the reals in L[U]. The argument is in terms of premice, and to motivate it,
another proof of Silver’s GCH result 20.3 is ﬁrst given, one that has the advantage
of having generalizations to inner models of stronger hypotheses.
Second Proof of 20.3.
As before, it sufﬁces to show for λ < κ that for any
y ∈P(λ) ∩L[U],
|{x ∈P(λ) ∩L[U] | x <L[U] y}| ≤λ .
Suppose then that y ∈P(λ) ∩L[U], and let x ∈P(λ) ∩L[U] with x <L[U] y,
i.e. ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩|= ϕ1[x, y] for ϕ1(v0, v1) of 3.3(b). Then:
(∗)
If ⟨N, ∈, W⟩is an iterate premouse at
some ν > λ and y ∈N, then x ∈N.
To show this, by 20.8 let ⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩and ⟨Lζ[F], ∈, F ∩Lζ[F]⟩be compara-
ble iterates of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩and ⟨N, ∈, W⟩respectively. Then y ∈Vν ∩N =
Vν ∩Lζ[F] by 19.4(b).
Remembering that λ < κ, ⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩|= ϕ1[x, y]
by elementarity, and so by 3.3(b), y ∈Lζ[F] implies that x ∈Lζ[F]. Hence,
x ∈Vν ∩Lζ[F] = Vν ∩N. (Note for the next theorem that ⟨N, ∈, W⟩|= ϕ1[x, y],
again by elementarity.)
With (∗), the proof devolves to ﬁnding an iterable premouse ⟨N, ∈, W⟩at
some ν > λ with |N| ≤λ. But this is simple: Let θ be a sufﬁciently large
regular cardinal such that y, U ∈Lθ[U]. Then by the absoluteness 19.16 applied
with S = L[U], ⟨Lθ[U], ∈, U⟩is an iterable premouse. Take the Skolem hull of
λ∪{y} in ⟨Lθ[U], ∈, U⟩; then its transitive collapse is a premouse as desired, with
iterability a consequence of 19.15(e).
⊣
The next results are about the set of reals in the κ-model. An early intimation
of the Core Model (see volume II) is that this set is independent even of κ; this
follows by a simpler version of the previous argument depending only on 20.12:
20.17 Exercise. Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model and ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩is
the λ-model for some κ and λ. Then
ωω ∩L[U] = ωω ∩L[W] and
2(ωω) ∩<L[U]= 2(ωω) ∩<L[W] .
⊣
In referring to these sets in what follows, L[U] is used generically since the
sets do not depend on any particular choice. Recall from before 13.8 that any
z ∈ωω encodes a binary relation Ez = {⟨m, n⟩| z(⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩) = 0} and consequently
a structure Mz = ⟨ω, Ez⟩for the language L∈of set theory.
Deﬁning Az =
{n | z(n) = 1}, z also encodes a structure
Nz = ⟨ω, Ez, Az⟩

272
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
for the augmented language L∈( ˙A). As before, if Nz is well-founded and ex-
tensional, then it has a transitive collapse tr(Nz) and an isomorphism πz: Nz →
tr(Nz).
The following is the analogue of G¨odel’s result 13.9 for L:
20.18 Theorem (Silver [71b]). ωω ∩L[U] and 2(ωω) ∩<L[U] are Σ1
3.
Proof. Proceeding directly to the well-ordering, for any x, y ∈ωω ∩L[U],
(∗∗)
x <L[U] y iff there is a countable, iterable premouse ⟨N, ∈, W⟩
with x, y ∈N and ⟨N, ∈, W⟩|= ϕ1[x, y] .
This follows from the argument for (∗) in the proof of 20.16 together with the
Skolem hull argument at its end. It remains to verify that this gives a Σ1
3 descrip-
tion:
Building on 3.3(b) and 13.8(a)(c),
Z = {z ∈ωω | Nz is well-founded and extensional ∧tr(Nz) is a premouse}
is Π1
1 . It now sufﬁces to show that (z ∈Z ∧tr(Nz) is iterable) is Π1
2 , for then
(∗∗) can be rendered as ∃z(Π1
2 ).
By 19.15(b) a premouse is iterable iff its iteration has length ≥ω1. Recalling
the analysis 14.11 of 0#, this can be asserted through codes for countable well-
orderings. First, with ≺−as before 19.3 let R ⊆3(ωω) be given by R(a, b, z)
iff
(i) Ea = {⟨m, n⟩| a(⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩) = 0} is a well-ordering with ﬁeld ω.
(ii) b codes a set {zb
n | n ∈ω} ⊆Z together with codes for embeddings
imn: tr(Nzb
m) ≺−tr(Nzb
n) for ⟨m, n⟩∈Ea such that:
(iii) if n is the minimum in terms of Ea, then zb
n = z;
(iv) if n is the immediate successor of m in terms of Ea, then tr(Nzb
n)
is the ultrapower of tr(Nzb
m) and imn the corresponding embedding;
and
(v) if n is a limit point of Ea, then tr(Nzb
n) is the direct limit of the
corresponding structures and embeddings, and imn for ⟨m, n⟩∈Ea
the corresponding embedding into the direct limit.
It is tedious but straightforward to check that R is Π1
1 since Z is Π1
1 and satisfaction
for Nzn is ∆1
1 (cf. 13.8(b)(c)).
Next, let S ⊆2(ωω) be given by S(a, b) iff
(i), (ii), (iv), and (v) above.
(vi) if Ea has a maximum element n, then the ultrapower of tr(Nzn) is
well-founded.
(vii) if Ea has no maximum element, then the direct limit of the struc-
tures and embeddings coded by b is well-founded.
S is also Π1
1 .

20. Inner Models of Measurability
273
Finally,
(z ∈Z ∧tr(Nz) is iterable) iff
z ∈Z ∧∀1a∀1b(R(a, b, z) →S(a, b)) ,
which is of form Π1
1 ∧∀1a∀1b(Π1
1 →Π1
1 ), and hence Π1
2 .
⊣
20.19 Corollary. If
ωω ⊆L[U], then 2(ωω) ∩<L[U] is a ∆1
3 set which is not
Lebesgue measurable and does not have the Baire property.
Proof.
As for 13.10.
⊣
As for L (cf. 13.11) there is a reﬁnement of 20.19, establishing in the parlance
that in L[U], 2(ωω) ∩<L[U] is a Σ1
3-good well-ordering:
20.20 Exercise (Silver [71b: 440]). The relation ISL[U] ⊆2(ωω) given by
ISL[U](x, y) ↔{(x)i | i ∈ω} = {z ∈ωω | z <L[U] y}
is Σ1
3.
⊣
For the perfect set property, the argument for L (13.12) can be adapted. For
this purpose, ﬁrst observe that there is a natural ordering of iterable premice:
⟨M, ∈, U⟩<ip ⟨N, ∈, W⟩iff there is an F such that ⟨Lζ[F], ∈, F ∩Lζ[F]⟩is
an iterate of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, ⟨Lη[F], ∈, F ∩Lη[F]⟩is
an iterate of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩, and ζ < η .
It is straightforward to check using the Comparison Lemma 20.8 that <ip is a well-
deﬁned well-ordering of iterable set premice. Next observe that countable such
⟨M, ∈, U⟩and ⟨N, ∈, W⟩have countable iterates that are comparable: Suppose
that
⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On is the iteration of ⟨M, ∈, U⟩, and
⟨Nα, Wα, λα, jαβ⟩α≤β∈On is the iteration of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩.
Noting that κω1 = ω1 = λω1 by 19.7(c) so that {κα | α < ω1} and {λα | α < ω1}
are both closed unbounded in ω1, let ⟨γn | n ∈ω⟩be an increasing sequence
of ordinals drawn from their intersection and set γ = sup({γn | n ∈ω}). Then
γ = κα = λβ for some α, β < ω1, and with F the ﬁlter generated by ⟨γn | n ∈ω⟩
(i.e. X ∈F iff ∃m ∈ω({γn | m ≤n ∈ω} ⊆X ⊆γ )),
⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩= ⟨Lζ[F], ∈, F ∩Lζ[F]⟩, and
⟨Nβ, ∈, Wβ⟩= ⟨Lη[F], ∈, F ∩Lη[F]⟩
for some ζ and η.
20.21 Theorem (Silver [71b: 440]; Solovay). If ωL[U]
1
= ω1, then there is a Π1
2
set without the perfect set property.

274
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Proof. Adapting the argument for 13.12, the idea is to get a Π1
2 set of unique codes
for ordinals less than ωL[U]
1
. For such an ordinal α, there is an x0 ∈ωω∩L[U] such
that Mx0 = ⟨ω, Ex0⟩is a well-ordered set with ordertype α. To specify the <L[U]-
least such x0 is not Π1
2 , but it turns out to be Π1
2 to say of some x1 ∈ωω ∩L[U]:
Nx1 ∼= ⟨N, ∈, W⟩where the latter is the <ip-least countable iterable premouse
such that some x0 ∈N is the <L[U] |(N × N)-least possible as above. Again, to
specify the <L[U]-least such x1 is not Π1
2 , but it can be similarly speciﬁed it in
terms of some Nx2, and so forth. The resulting ⟨xi | i ∈ω⟩can then serve as a
unique code for α.
For any x, y ∈ωω, that tr(Ny), if deﬁned, is the <ip-least possible countable
iterable premouse containing x is equivalent by the remark preceding the theorem
to: ∀1z(tr(Nz) is deﬁned and is a premouse with a countable iterate isomorphic
to a proper initial segment of a countable iterate of tr(Ny) →x /∈tr(Nz)), noting
that the antecedent to this implication implies that tr(Nz) is iterable.
Recalling the relation A of the proof of 13.12 and availing ourselves of the
Π1
1 Z and R of the proof of 20.18, we are led to the following relation on ωω:
A(x)
↔M(x)0 is well-ordered ∧∀0i[(x)i+1 ∈Z
∧tr(N(x)i+1) is iterable ∧(x)i ∈tr(N(x)i+1)
∧∀1z∀1a∀1b∀1c∀1d[z ∈Z ∧R(a, b, z) ∧R(c, d, (x)i+1)
∧m is the maximum element of Ea
∧n is the maximum element of Ec
∧∃1 f ( f codes an isomorphism of Nzb
m into a
proper initial segment of Nzd
n) →(x)i /∈tr(Nzd
n)]
∧∀1y∀0 p∀0q[π(x)i+1(p) = y ∧π(x)i+1(q) = (x)i
∧(N(x)i+1 |= ϕ1[p, q] →(i = 0 →My ̸∼= M(x)0)
∧(i > 0 →Ny ̸∼= N(x)i))]]
where ϕ1(v0, v1) is the well-ordering formula of 3.3(b). Now getting on track and
following the 13.12 argument, it is straightforward to check that A is a Π1
2 set
of cardinality |ωL[U]
1
|, and that A does not have a perfect (even uncountable Σ1
1)
subset.
⊣
These results are the best possible in the projective hierarchy since Solovay
had shown that if there is a measurable cardinal, then every Σ1
2 set is Lebesgue
measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property (14.3, 14.10).
Silver had been motivated in part by this, and his results established a new de-
limitation at ∆1
3. This in turn led to an investigation of stronger large cardinal
principles that might similarly correlate with regularity properties higher in the
projective hierarchy. Unlike G¨odel’s hopes for the Continuum Problem (§3), the
relative concreteness of the projective hierarchy afforded the possibility of a sys-

20. Inner Models of Measurability
275
tematic study, one that was to meet with remarkable success by the late 1980’s
(§32).
The concluding results of this section concerns other large cardinals and inner
models of measurability. Of course, in the presence of a measurable cardinal more
modest large cardinals exist in great profusion by previous reﬂection results. The
J´onsson and Rowbottom cardinals (§8) are somewhat anomalous in that although
they have substantial consistency strength (21.4) they themselves may not be very
large. Kunen on the other hand established that in the κ-model these cardinals
coincide with the ostensibly stronger Ramsey cardinals. Thus, one cannot establish
in the theory ZFC plus there is a measurable cardinal that there are, e.g. singular
J´onsson cardinals. An outright limitation reminiscent of 8.13 is ﬁrst noted:
20.22 Exercise. Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model and there is a J´onsson
cardinal λ > κ. Then V ̸= L[U].
Hint. Working in L[U], argue by contradiction and take λ to be the least J´onsson
cardinal > κ. By 8.14(c) and 8.15(a)(b) there is a regular ν satisfying κ < ν < λ,
such that λ →[λ]<ω
ν,<ν. By 8.4(b) let
⟨H, ∈, U ∩H, ν ∩H⟩≺⟨Lλ[U], ∈, U, ν⟩
be such that |H| = λ, κ + 1 ⊆H, and |ν ∩H| < ν. The transitive collapse of
⟨H, ∈, U ∩H⟩is again ⟨Lλ[U], ∈, U⟩, so if i: ⟨Lλ[U], ∈, U⟩≺⟨Lλ[U], ∈, U⟩is
the inverse of the collapsing map, crit(i) is a measurable cardinal greater than κ
in L[U], which is a contradiction.
⊣
This result is extended by 21.23.
20.23 Theorem (Kunen [70]). Suppose that ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model for some
κ. Then
L[U] |= ∀λ(λ is J´onsson ↔λ is Ramsey) .
Proof. Working in L[U], suppose that λ is J´onsson, and f : [λ]<ω →2. We
must ﬁnd a member of [λ]λ homogeneous for f , and this is ﬁrst done under an
additional assumption:
(∗)
There is a δ < λ and an x ⊆δ such that f <L[U] x .
This uses arguments employed in the proof of GCH: Noting that λ < κ by 20.22,
there is an iterable premouse ⟨N, ∈, W⟩at some ρ > δ with x ∈N and |N| = |δ|.
If ⟨Nλ, ∈, Wλ⟩is then the λth iterate of ⟨N, ∈, W⟩with j0λ the corresponding
embedding, j0λ(ρ) = λ and x ∈Nλ.
By Comparison, let ⟨L[F], ∈, F⟩and
⟨Lζ[F], ∈, F ∩Lζ[F]⟩be comparable iterates of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩and ⟨Nλ, ∈, Wλ⟩
respectively. Since f <L[U] x, by elementarity, f <L[F] x. Also P(λ) ∩Nλ =
P(λ) ∩Lζ[F], so that x ∈Nλ implies that f ∈Nλ. But λ is measurable in Nλ,
so f has a homogeneous set as required.

276
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
The general case yields to similar arguments. First, there is an iterable pre-
mouse ⟨M, ∈, Y⟩at some σ > λ with f ∈M and |M| = λ. Let g: λ →M be a
bijection. Since λ is J´onsson, there is a proper substructure
⟨H, ∈, Y ∩H, g|H, { f }⟩≺⟨M, ∈, Y, g, { f }⟩
with |H| = λ. Let ⟨T, ∈, Z, g, { f }⟩be the transitive collapse and
j: ⟨T, ∈, Z, g, { f }⟩≺⟨M, ∈, Y, g, { f }⟩
the inverse of the collapsing map. Using g, |H ∩λ| = λ yet H ∩λ ̸= λ, so that
j(λ) = λ yet j has a critical point δ < λ. The usual
{X ∈P(δ) ∩T | δ ∈j(X)}
cannot witness the measurability of δ in L[U], so there must be an x ∈P(δ) −T .
It is clear that ⟨T, ∈, Z⟩is an iterable premouse at λ and f ∈T , so an
application of Comparison as before shows that f <L[U] x.
Finally, by the
argument from (∗) there is an S ∈[λ]λ homogeneous for f . But then, j“S ∈[λ]λ
is homogeneous for f , and the proof is complete.
⊣
Kunen [68] generalized his structure results to models M = L[⟨Uα | α < γ ⟩]
where in M, Uα is a normal ultraﬁlter over some λα, α < β < γ implies that
λα < λβ, and the sequence is short: γ < λ0. For example, he showed that in M
the Uα’s are the only normal ultraﬁlters (over any cardinal). Silver [71b] showed
that M satisﬁes GCH, and there is a ∆1
3 well-ordering of its reals. Far beyond
this ﬁrst generalization, inner model theory was to develop into a sophisticated
area of set theory in the hands of Mitchell, Jensen, Dodd, Steel, and others,
encompassing stronger and stronger hypotheses and providing forceful arguments
for their consistency.

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
277
21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
Iterated ultrapowers is not only the appropriate technique for investigating in-
ner models, but also their embeddings. Using it Kunen established an elegant
characterization of 0#: it exists exactly when there is an elementary embedding:
L ≺L. Reminiscent of the elementary embedding characterization of measurable
cardinals, the initial isolation of 0# was bolstered by Kunen’s result. Moreover,
it provided a simple paradigm for transcendence over inner models M in gen-
eral in terms of their non-rigidity, i.e. the existence of an elementary embedding:
M ≺M. For inner models of measurability Solovay had already isolated a real
0† analogous to 0# for L. The existence of 0† is a canonical principle for tran-
scendence over all inner models of measurability and also has characterizations in
terms of their non-rigidity. This section explores embeddings of L and develops
the theory of 0† in considerable detail.
The following theorem analyzes Kunen’s result about the non-rigidity of L
through several equivalences. Strictly speaking, the quantiﬁcation ∃j( j: L ≺L)
cannot be formalized, and (b) articulates what is needed.
21.1 Theorem (Kunen). The following are equivalent:
(a) There is an elementary embedding: L ≺L.
(b) For some α and β there is an elementary embedding: Lα ≺Lβ with a
critical point less than |α|.
(c) There is an L-ultraﬁlter U such that the ultrapower of L by U is well-
founded.
(d) There is an iterable L-ultraﬁlter.
(e) 0# exists.
Proof. (d) →(e) The domain of each iterate is again L by elementarity, so 19.10
can be applied to get an uncountable set of indiscernibles for some Lα.
(e) →(a) This is 9.17(a).
(a) →(b) Suppose that k: L ≺L with critical point κ. For any α with
κ < |α|, the satisfaction relation for Lα can be used to show that k|Lα satisﬁes
(b).
(b) →(c) Let j be an elementary embedding as hypothesized, say with
critical point κ, and consider the usual
U = {X ∈P(κ) ∩Lα | κ ∈j(X)} .
P(κ) ∩L ⊆Lα since α ≥κ+L, so U is an L-ultraﬁlter (cf. 19.2). It remains to
verify that the ultrapower of L by U is well-founded:
Assume to the contrary that for each n ∈ω there is a function fn ∈L with
domain κ such that
Xn = {ξ < κ | fn+1(ξ) ∈fn(ξ)} ∈U .

278
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Let γ > κ be a limit ordinal such that { fn | n ∈ω} ⊆Lγ , H ≺Lγ a Skolem hull
of κ ∪{ fn | n ∈ω}, and N its transitive collapse with π: H →N the collapsing
isomorphism. Then N = Lδ for some δ < α (this is where α ≥κ+ is needed,
not just α ≥κ+L). Letting π( fn) = f n for n ∈ω and noting that π(ξ) = ξ for
ξ < κ, for such n
Xn = {ξ < κ | f n+1(ξ) ∈f n(ξ)} ∈U .
Since { f n | n ∈ω} ⊆Lα, it follows from the deﬁnition of U that
j( f n+1)(κ) ∈j( f n)(κ)
for every n ∈ω, which is a contradiction.
(c) →(d) Suppose that U is an L-ultraﬁlter with corresponding iteration
⟨Mα, Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈τ
where τ > 1; note that each Mα = L. It will be established that in fact τ = On.
This is the heart of the matter, and uses the canonicity of L to derive full iterability
from just the well-foundedness of the ﬁrst ultrapower. The following two lemmata,
showing successively that τ is neither a successor ordinal nor a limit ordinal,
complete the proof of the theorem.
21.2 Lemma. τ is not a successor ordinal.
Proof. Assuming that α < τ we must show that α + 1 < τ, i.e. the ultrapower of
Mα by Uα is well-founded. By 19.6,
Mα = L = {i0α(g)(κγ1, . . . , κγn) |
(∗)
g ∈[κ]n L ∩L for some n ∈ω and γ1 < . . . < γn < α} .
Since τ > 1, M1 ∼= κ L/U is again L, so a g as in (∗) is of form g = [ f ]U, where
it can be assumed that for every ξ < κ, f (ξ) is a function with domain [ξ]n. For
such f , deﬁne f : [κ]n →κ L by:
f (ξ1, . . . , ξn)(ξ) =
 f (ξ)(ξ1, . . . , ξn)
if ξ1 < . . . < ξn < ξ , and
0
otherwise .
Incorporating this into the representation (∗) of L, we show that the map
e: ⟨L, ∈⟩→⟨κα Mα/Uα, EUα⟩given by:
e(i0α([ f ]U)(κγ1, . . . , κγn)) = (i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn))0
Uα
is a well-deﬁned isomorphism, thereby conﬁrming that the latter structure is well-
founded:
Taking for simplicity a one-variable formula ϕ(v0) of L∈, note that as a
schema,

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
279
⟨L, ∈⟩|= ϕ[i0α([ f ]U)(κγ1, . . . , κγn)]
iff
⟨L, ∈, U⟩|= {{ξ1, . . . , ξn} ∈[κ]n | ϕ[[ f ]U(ξ1, . . . , ξn)]} ∈U n (by 19.9(a))
iff
⟨L, ∈, U⟩|= {{ξ1, . . . , ξn} ∈[κ]n | {ξ < κ | ϕ[ f (ξ1, . . . , ξn)(ξ)]} ∈U} ∈U n
iff
⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩|= {ξ < κα | ϕ[i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn)(ξ)]} ∈U α (by 19.9(a))
iff
⟨Mα
κα/Uα, EUα⟩|= ϕ[(i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn))0
Uα] .
Using atomic formulas ϕ, it is simple to check that e is well-deﬁned (i.e. e(x) for
x ∈L does not depend on the representation of x), that it is injective, and that
it preserves membership. Also, e is surjective: every member of Mακα/Uα is of
form (i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn))0
Uα for some appropriate f and γ1 < . . . < γn < α.
Hence, e is an isomorphism as desired.
⊣
21.3 Lemma. τ is not a limit ordinal.
Proof. Assuming that δ ≤τ is a limit ordinal we must show that δ < τ, i.e. that
the direct limit of
⟨⟨⟨Mα, ∈, Uα⟩| α < δ⟩, ⟨iαβ | α ≤β < δ⟩⟩
is well-founded.
This is done by developing a different representation of the
iteration based on Skolem hulls constructed uniformly in L. In order to formalize
the procedure in ZFC generated Σ1-elementary substructures are used, in keeping
with the convention based on 5.1(c) that elementary embeddings between proper
classes are formalized as Σ1-elementary embeddings.
Recall the canonical Skolem terms tϕ for ϕ a formula of L∈as deﬁned after
9.3. Let T consist of the terms in the closure under term composition of the tϕ’s for
ϕ a Σ1 formula. Since the satisfaction relation |=1
L for L restricted to Σ1 formulas
is deﬁnable in ZFC (§0), the collection of L interpretations {t L | t ∈T }, properly
coded, is deﬁnable in ZFC. Consequently, we can uniformly deﬁne for any X ⊆L
the Σ1 Skolem hull of X in L, denoted H L
1 (X), to be that ∈-substructure of L with
domain
{t L(x1, . . . , xm) | t ∈T is m-ary and x1, . . . , xm ∈X} .
H L
1 (X) is extensional, since if a, b ∈H L
1 (X) and ∃x(x ∈a △b), then ∃x ∈
H L
1 (X)(x ∈a△b). It follows (0.4) that H L
1 (X) has a transitive collapse N(X), and
by deﬁnition of T the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism is a map eX: N(X) ≺1
L, which by 5.1(c) also satisﬁes eX: N(X) ≺n L for each particular n. As N(X)
satisﬁes the sentence σ0 of 3.3(a), it follows that N(X) = L for proper classes X.
Proceeding with the proof, set
H = {x ∈L | ∀α < δ(i0α(x) = x)} .
Then κ ⊆H and H is a proper class. Stipulate for α ≤δ that
Hα = H L
1 (H ∪{κγ | γ < α}) ,
Nα is its transitive collapse , and

280
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
eα: Nα ≺L the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism .
Then it is simple to see that H0 = H, and by previous remarks, that each Nα = L.
For α ≤β < δ, keeping in mind that Hα ⊆Hβ, set
eαβ = e−1
β ◦eα: L ≺1 L .
Then the system of embeddings ⟨eαβ | α ≤β < δ⟩forms a directed system.
Moreover, for any limit ordinal γ with 0 < γ ≤δ, Hγ = 
α<γ Hα and so
Nγ = L is the direct limit of ⟨eαβ | α ≤β < γ ⟩. Since this holds for γ = δ itself,
it sufﬁces to show that iαβ = eαβ for α ≤β < δ to complete the proof.
We ﬁrst establish the following for α ≤β < δ:
(i) κα ⊆Hα .
(ii) For any X ∈P(κα) ∩L, iαβ(X) = eαβ(X) ∩κβ .
(iii) crit(eαβ) = κα and eαβ(κα) = κβ .
For (i), let ξ < κα be arbitrary. Then by 19.6, ξ = i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn)
for some
f : [κ]n
→κ with
f
∈
L and γ1 < . . . < γn
< α.
But
f = e0( f )|[κ]n since κ ⊆H, and so i0α( f ) = e0( f )|[κ]n since e0( f ) ∈H.
Hence, ξ = e0( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) ∈Hα.
For (ii), note ﬁrst that X = eα(X) ∩κα since eα ﬁxes every member of κα by
(i). Hence,
iαβ(X) = iαβ(eα(X) ∩κα) = eα(X) ∩κβ = eαβ(X) ∩κβ .
The second equality follows from the fact that iαβ ﬁxes every member of H ∪
{κη | η < α} and hence of Hα, and the third equality, that eβ ﬁxes every member
of κβ by (i) for β.
(iii) follows from (i) and by taking X = κα in (ii).
We can now proceed to establish iαβ = eαβ for α ≤β < δ by induction on
β: The limit case is immediate since direct limits are taken. If β = α + 1, only
iα,α+1 = eα,α+1 need be veriﬁed. For this purpose, note that
Mα+1 = L = {iα,α+1( f )(κα) | f ∈κα L ∩L}
by the usual representation of ultrapowers. We shall show that the map k: Mα+1 →
Nα+1 given by
k(iα,α+1( f )(κα)) = eα,α+1( f )(κα)
is an isomorphism between Mα+1 = L and Nα+1 = L. This more than sufﬁces,
for then k must be the identity, and so for any x ∈L,
iα,α+1(x) = iα,α+1( fx)(κα) = eα,α+1( fx)(κα) = eα,α+1(x)
where fx is the constant function: κα →{x}.

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
281
An appeal to (ii) shows that k is a well-deﬁned injection:
iα,α+1( f )(κα) = iα,α+1(g)(κα) iff κα ∈iα,α+1({ξ < κα | f (ξ) = g(ξ)})
iff κα ∈eα,α+1({ξ < κα | f (ξ) = g(ξ)})
iff eα,α+1( f )(κα) = eα,α+1(g)(κα) .
Clearly, = can be replaced by ∈throughout.
Finally, it remains to show that k is surjective. Suppose that y ∈Nα+1. Then
eα+1(y) ∈Hα+1, and so
eα+1(y) = t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, κα)
for some t ∈T (as deﬁned at the beginning of the proof), x1, . . . , xm ∈H, and
γ1 < . . . < γn < α. Let f ∈κα L ∩L be deﬁned by:
f (ξ) = t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, ξ) .
Then
eα,α+1( f )(κα) = e−1
α+1(eα( f )(κα))
= e−1
α+1(t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, κα))
= y .
We should justify the middle equality because of the formalization through Σ1-
elementary embeddings:
Suppose that the well-ordering formula ϕ0(v0, v1) of 3.3(a) is Σk where
k > 0.
(Actually, ϕ0 can be required to be Σ1; see Devlin [84: 75].)
Then
for any t(v1, . . . , vm) ∈T , v0 = t(v1, . . . , vm) is deﬁnable by a Σk+1 for-
mula: Proceeding by induction on complexity of term composition, if t is a
canonical Skolem term tϕ where ϕ is Σ1, then the deﬁnition after 9.3 is a
Boolean combination (Σ1 ∧Πk) ∧Π1, and hence is Σk+1. Suppose now that
t ∈T is of form tϕ(t1(v1, . . . , vm), . . . , tr(v1, . . . , vm)) where ϕ is Σ1 and induc-
tively each v0 = ti(v1, . . . , vm) has a Σk+1 deﬁnition ϕi(v0, v1, . . . , vm). Then
v0 = t(v1, . . . , vm) iff
∃w1 . . . ∃wr(ϕ1(w1, v1, . . . , vm) ∧. . .
∧ϕr(wr, v1, . . . , vm) ∧v0 = tϕ(w1, . . . , wr)) .
The last conjunct having a Σk+1 deﬁnition by the previous argument, the whole
formula can be recast as a Σk+1 formula by “pushing” existential quantiﬁers to
the left.
Finally, eα,α+1 is Σk+2-elementary for our particular k by 5.1(c), so applying
it to
∀ξ < κα( f (ξ) = t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, ξ))
results in
∀ξ < κα+1(eα,α+1( f )(ξ) = t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, ξ))

282
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
since eα,α+1(κα) = κα+1 by (iii) and x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn are all ﬁxed by eα,α+1.
In particular, we have the desired justiﬁcation
eα,α+1( f )(κα) = t L(x1, . . . , xm, κγ1, . . . , κγn, κα) .
This completes the proof of 21.3, and with it, the theorem.
⊣
Proofs of 21.1 have been devised by Silver (see Devlin [84: V§4]) and Paris
(see Kanamori-Magidor [78: §10]) that generate indiscernibles directly without
relying on iterated ultrapowers. Parsimony may be appropriate were the theorem
an end in itself, but in volume II generalizations will be considered for which the
richer context of iterated ultrapowers provides the natural setting.
As foreshadowed, we can now draw a stronger conclusion from model-
theoretic hypotheses discussed in §8:
21.4 Corollary (Kunen). If Chang’s Conjecture holds or there is a J´onsson cardi-
nal, then 0# exists.
Proof. These hypotheses imply 21.1(b) by the proofs of 8.3 and 8.13 respectively.
⊣
There is another consequence, about the closed unbounded ﬁlter being an
ultraﬁlter in a restricted sense:
21.5 Exercise. The following are equivalent for regular κ > ω:
(a) 0# exists.
(b) Every X ∈P(κ)∩L either contains or is disjoint from a closed unbounded
subset of κ.
Hint. For (a) →(b), suppose that X = t L(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn) for a Skolem
term t and x1 < . . . < xm < y1 < . . . < yn all in I, the class of 0# indiscernibles,
with xm < κ ≤y1. Show that X either contains or is disjoint from I∩(κ−(xm+1)).
For (b) →(a), produce a k: L ≺L.
⊣
Finally, as noted in the proof of 9.17(a) any order-preserving injection from
the class of indiscernibles given by 0# into itself induces an elementary embedding:
L ≺L via Skolem terms. This is how all elementary embeddings: L ≺L are
generated:
21.6 Proposition. Suppose that 0# exists, j: L ≺L, and I is the class of indis-
cernibles given by 0#. Then crit( j) ∈I. Also, j|I: I →I, and hence j|I induces
j via Skolem terms.
Proof. First observe that for any k: L ≺L, crit(k) ∈I: Let δ = crit(k), and
assume to the contrary that δ /∈I. Then
δ = t L(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn)

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
283
for some Skolem term t and 0# indiscernibles x1 < . . . < xm < y1 . . . < yn with
xm < δ < y1. It can be assumed that there is a proper class of cardinals ﬁxed by
k. (If not, switch from k to jU: L ≺L ∼= δL/U where U is the L-ultraﬁlter over
δ deﬁned by: X ∈U iff X ∈P(δ) ∩L ∧δ ∈k(X) as in the proof of 21.1, as jU
also has critical point δ.) But then, by the 0# condition (III) it can be assumed that
y1, . . . , yn are all ﬁxed by k. Hence, being deﬁnable in terms of ﬁxed parameters
we have k(δ) = δ, which is a contradiction.
It remains to show for the given j that if ι ∈I, then j(ι) ∈I. For this
purpose, it sufﬁces by the above observation to show that j(ι) is the critical
point of some k: L ≺L. Let H be a Skolem hull of j(ι) ∪j“(I −(ι + 1)).
(This is directly formalizable, since the satisfaction relation for L is deﬁnable in
the presence of 0#.) The transitive collapse of H is L, and the inverse of the
collapsing isomorphism is an elementary embedding k: L ≺L. It will be shown
that crit(k) = j(ι); since j(ι) ⊆H, this reduces to checking that j(ι) /∈H:
Assume to the contrary that there are η1 < . . . < ηm < j(ι) such that
j(ι) = t L(η1, . . . , ηm, j(y1), . . . , j(yn))
for some Skolem term t and ι < y1 < . . . < yn all in I. Then by the elementarity
of j, there are ξ1 < . . . < ξm < ι such that
ι = t L(ξ1, . . . ξm, y1, . . . , yn) .
However, by simple applications of the 0# condition (III) each ξi is deﬁnable in
terms of members of I −{ι}, and hence ι itself is deﬁnable in terms of other
indiscernibles. This is a contradiction.
⊣
The Set 0†
Having developed a detailed analysis of transcendence over L, we next consider
a canonical formulation of transcendence over inner models of measurability. If
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model for some ordinal κ, by the remarks at the end of
§9 (slightly amended to allow U ⊆P(κ)) there exists under sufﬁcient assump-
tions a set U # ⊆κ analogous to 0# that generates a closed unbounded class of
indiscernibles for ⟨L[U], ∈, U, ξ⟩ξ≤κ. However, because the κ-models for various
κ are merely iterates of each other, one might expect a unifying transcendence
principle. In fact, soon after the isolation of 0# Solovay formulated such a prin-
ciple: the existence of the set of integers 0† (“zero dagger”). The theory of 0† is
developed in considerable detail as in Kanamori-Awerbuch-Friedlander [90], ﬁrst
following the analysis leading to 0# in §9 and then providing non-rigidity and
other characterizations.
The idea behind 0† is to develop a canonical theory for structures of form
⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩|= U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ
with two sets of indiscernibles, one below κ and one above, that together generate
the structure. For M a structure and X and Y subsets of the domain of M so that

284
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
X ∪Y is linearly ordered by a relation <, ⟨X, Y, <⟩(or in context, just ⟨X, Y⟩) is
a double set of indiscernibles for M iff for every formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn+s) in the
language of M; x1 < . . . < xn and x1 < . . . < xn all in X; and y1 < . . . < ys
and y1 < . . . < ys all in Y,
M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ys] iff
M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ys] .
Let L∈( ˙A)∗∗be L∈( ˙A) augmented by constants {ck | k ∈ω} ∪{dk | k ∈ω}.
An EM2 blueprint is the theory in L∈( ˙A)∗∗of some structure
⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U, xk, yk⟩k∈ω
where ζ is a limit ordinal greater than ω; for some ordinal κ, ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩|= U
is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ; and ⟨{xk | k ∈ω}, {yk | k ∈ω}⟩is a double set of
ordinal indiscernibles for ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩such that for every k ∈ω,
xk < xk+1 < κ < yk < yk+1 .
The canonical Skolem terms tϕ for ϕ a formula of L∈( ˙A) and corresponding
Skolem hulls were formulated before 20.9.
By Skolem term is meant one of these tϕ’s for the rest of this section .
We can suppose that if a structure ⟨M, E, R⟩is elementarily equivalent to one of
form ⟨Lδ[A], ∈, A⟩for some limit ordinal δ > ω, then for any X ⊆M the Skolem
hull of X in ⟨M, E, R⟩is well-deﬁned and given by these Skolem terms.
The following is the analogue of 9.4. For a theory T in L∈( ˙A)∗∗, temporar-
ily let T −denote its restriction to L∈( ˙A). Note for here and later that if ˙A is
interpreted by a normal ultraﬁlter in a structure, then  ˙A is a way of denoting
the corresponding measurable cardinal in the structure.
21.7 Exercise. Suppose that T is an EM2 blueprint. Then for any α and γ , there
is a model M = M(T, α, γ ) of T −unique up to isomorphism such that:
(a) There is a double set ⟨X, Y⟩of indiscernibles for M with X ∪Y ⊆OnM,
X of ordertype α and Y of ordertype γ under <M, and x <M  ˙AM <M y for
every x ∈X and y ∈Y. Moreover, for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn+s) of L∈( ˙A),
x1 <M . . . <M xn all in X, and y1 <M . . . <M ys all in Y,
M |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ys] iff
ϕ(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) ∈T .
(b) The Skolem hull of X ∪Y in M is again M.
⊣
If M(T, α, γ ) is well-founded, then its transitive collapse is of form
⟨Lδ[U], ∈, U⟩for some limit ordinal δ > ω. In this case,
M(T, α, γ ) is identiﬁed with ⟨Lδ[U], ∈, U⟩.
The following is the analogue of 9.5.

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
285
21.8 Exercise. Suppose that T is an EM2 blueprint. Then M(T, α, γ ) is well-
founded for every α, γ iff
(I)
M(T, α, γ ) is well-founded for every α, γ < ω1 .
⊣
A sufﬁcient hypothesis leads quickly to EM2 blueprints with potent properties;
the following is an analogue of 9.6.
21.9 Lemma. Suppose that there is a κ-model for some κ and a Ramsey cardinal
greater than κ. Then there is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I) of 21.8.
Proof. Let ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩be the κ-model, ⟨L[Uα], Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On its iteration,
and ν a Ramsey cardinal greater than κ. By the argument for 9.3, there is a set of
indiscernibles H ∈[ν −κ]ω1 for the structure ⟨Lν[U], ∈, U⟩. Set X = {κα | α <
ω1} and Y = i0ω1“H. Then straightforward uses of 19.9(a) with i0ω1(ν) = ν as a
parameter show that ⟨X, Y⟩is a double set of indiscernibles for ⟨Lν[Uω1], ∈, Uω1⟩.
Hence, ⟨X, Y⟩determines an EM2 blueprint, and since X and Y are uncountable,
this EM2 blueprint satisﬁes (I) by the argument for 9.6.
⊣
By 20.22, the hypothesis of 21.9 already implies that V is not the κ-model
L[U]. Assuming that hypothesis, we can deduce the existence of an EM2 blueprint
fully analogous to 0#. Evidently, a weaker partition property than Ramsey sufﬁces
for the proof of 21.9; in any case, on the basis of that proof, stipulate that
(i) ρ < ζ are limit ordinals and ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U⟩|= U is a normal
ultraﬁlter over ρ;
(ii) ⟨X, Y⟩is a double set of indiscernibles with X and Y both of
ordertype ω1 and sup(X) = ρ;
(iii) ζ is the least possible satisfying (i) and (ii);
(iv) X and Y have the least possible ωth elements; and
(v) T0 is the corresponding EM2 blueprint.
21.10 Exercise. The following conditions hold for T = T0:
(IIa) For any (n + s)-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) ∈ ˙A →t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) < cn .
(IIb) For any (n + s)-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) ∈On →t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) < ds .
(IIIa) For any (m + n + s + 1)-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cm+n, d0, . . . , ds−1) < cm →t(c0, . . . , cm+n, d0, . . . , ds−1) =
t(c0, . . . , cm−1, cm+n+1, . . . , cm+2n+1, d0, . . . , ds−1) .
(IIIb) For any (n + r + s + 1)-ary Skolem term t, T contains the sentence:
t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , dr+s) < dr →t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , dr+s) =
t(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , dr−1, dr+s+1, . . . , dr+2s+1) .

286
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
Hint. A simple argument by contradiction establishes (IIa) from sup(X) = ρ and
the argument for 9.8 establishes (IIb) by the minimality of ζ. The argument for
9.10 establishes (IIIa) and (IIIb) from the minimality of the ωth elements of X
and Y respectively.
⊣
For an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I) and for any α, γ , temporarily let
⟨⟨χ T,α,γ
η
| η < α⟩, ⟨ιT,α,γ
ξ
| ξ < γ ⟩⟩and χ T,α,γ
α
denote the double set of indiscernibles and the measurable cardinal of
M(T, α, γ ) respectively. The χ notation anticipates the following:
21.11 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III). Then for
any β, δ:
(a) {χ T,β,δ
η
| η < β} is a closed set of ordinals, unbounded in χ T,β,δ
β
if β is
an inﬁnite limit ordinal.
(b) If ω ≤α ≤β and ω ≤γ ≤δ with α and γ limit ordinals, then for every
η ≤α,
χ T,α,γ
η
= χ T,β,δ
η
.
Proof. (a) (IIa) implies that the set is unbounded in χ T,β,δ
β
if β is a limit ordinal.
(IIIa) implies that the set is closed (by the argument for 9.11, also used below).
(b) Let H be the Skolem hull of
{χ T,β,δ
η
| η < α} ∪{ιT,β,δ
ξ
| ξ < γ }
in M(T, β, δ). Its transitive collapse is M(T, α, γ ) by uniqueness. We shall
show that χ T,β,δ
α
is a subset of the domain of H. This sufﬁces, since the collapsing
isomorphism consequently ﬁxes every member of {χ T,β,δ
η
| η < α} making this
set the lower set of the double set of indiscernibles for M(T, α, γ ) (and thus also
χ T,α,γ
α
= χ T,β,δ
α
by (a) for α as well as for β).
To show that χ T,β,δ
α
is a subset of the domain of H, let σ < χ T,β,δ
α
be arbitrary.
Suppressing the superscript T,β,δ from the indiscernibles for convenience,
σ = tM(T,β,δ)(χη0, . . . , χηm−1, χζ0, . . . , χζn, ιξ0, . . . , ιξs−1)
for some Skolem term t and the indiscernibles listed in increasing order with
ηm−1 < α ≤ζ0. Applying (IIIb) with r = 0, ξi can be replaced by i for i < s,
and then applying (IIIa), ζi can be replaced by ηm−1 + i for i < n + 1. Since α
and γ are limit ordinals, the resulting expression shows that σ is in the domain
of H.
⊣
21.12 Lemma. Suppose that T is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III), ω ≤γ ≤δ,
and γ and α are limit ordinals (allowing α = 0).
Then with M(T, α, δ) =
⟨Lζ[D], ∈, D⟩say, the transitive collapse of the Skolem hull of
{χ T,α,δ
η
| η < α} ∪{ιT,α,δ
ξ
| ξ < γ }

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
287
in M(T, α, δ) is ⟨Lι[D], ∈, D ∩Lι[D]⟩, where ι = ιT,α,δ
γ
. Consequently,
M(T, α, γ ) = ⟨Lι[D], ∈, D ∩Lι[D]⟩and ιT,α,γ
ξ
= ιT,α,δ
ξ
for every ξ ≤γ .
Proof. Let H be the stated Skolem hull. Then its transitive collapse is M(T, α, γ )
by uniqueness. By the argument for 21.11(b) with α = β (and a simple version
for α = 0), χ T,α,δ
α
is a subset of the domain of H, so that M(T, α, γ ) must be of
form ⟨Lι[D], ∈, D ∩Lι[D]⟩for some ι. Checking that ι = ιT,α,δ
γ
by the argument
for 9.11, the proof is complete.
⊣
By 21.11 and 21.12, if T is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III), then for any
η, ξ, and α with α a limit ordinal (possibly 0), we can unambiguously set
χ T
η = χ T,β,γ
η
for any limit ordinals β and γ with β > η ,
ιT,α
ξ
= ιT,α,γ
ξ
for any limit ordinal γ > ξ , and
Y T,α = {ιT,α
ξ
| ξ ∈On} .
Finally, stipulate that if α is a limit ordinal,
DT
α is the normal ultraﬁlter over χ T
α in the sense of M(T, α, ω) .
The following is the analogue of 9.12.
21.13 Exercise. Suppose that T is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III) and α is
a limit ordinal. Then:
(a) ⟨L[DT
α ], ∈, DT
α ⟩is the χ T
α -model, and for ξ ≤ζ,
⟨LιT,α
ξ [DT
α ], ∈, DT
α ⟩≺⟨LιT,α
ζ [DT
α ], ∈, DT
α ⟩.
(b) |χ T
η | = |η| + ℵ0 for every η, and |ιT,α
ξ
| = |ξ| + |α| for every ξ.
(c) {χ T
η | η ∈On} and Y T,α are closed unbounded classes of ordinals.
(d) For any cardinal λ > ω, χ T
λ
= λ and if λ > α, ιT,α
λ
= λ and so
M(T, α, λ) = ⟨Lλ[DT
α ], ∈, DT
α ⟩.
(e) T is the only EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)–(III).
Hint. For (a), note that 21.12 implies that there is a D such that
M(T, α, γ ) = ⟨LιT,α
γ [D], ∈, D ∩LιT,α
γ [D]⟩
for any limit ordinal γ ≥ω. Hence, ⟨L[D], ∈, D⟩is the χ T
α -model. By indis-
cernibility, (χ T
α )+L[D] < ιT,α
ξ
for any ξ. In particular, D ⊆LιT,α
ω [D] by 20.2(a),
and so D = DT
α . The rest of (a) and the exercise is just like 9.12.
⊣
We shall soon derive more information about the χ T
η ’s and ιT,α
ξ
’s, incorpo-
rating successor α’s into the scheme using iterated ultrapowers. As with 0#, the

288
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
hypothesis of 21.13 implies through its (a) and (d) that for any inﬁnite limit ordinal
α,
the satisfaction relation for ⟨L[DT
α ], ∈, DT
α ⟩is deﬁnable in ZFC .
Because of this, various upcoming assertions like the following about inner models
are directly formalizable.
21.14 Lemma. For any limit ordinal α, ⟨{χ T
η | η < α}, Y T,α⟩is a double class of
indiscernibles for the χ T
α -model and the Skolem hull of {χ T
η | η < α} ∪Y T,α in the
model is again the model.
⊣
With 21.13(e) in hand, stipulate that
0† is the unique EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)
if there is one, and use the accepted solecism
0† exists
for ⌈there is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)⌉. Through a recursive arithmeti-
zation of L∈( ˙A)∗∗, 0† is regarded as a subset of ω. The following summarizing
theorem gives the main features (with one direction of its (a) given by the proof
of 21.9):
21.15 Theorem (Solovay).
(a) 0† exists iff there is a κ-model for some ordinal κ that has an uncountable
set of indiscernibles whose minimum element is greater than κ. Hence, if there is
a κ-model for some κ and a Ramsey cardinal greater than κ (e.g. if there are two
measurable cardinals), then 0† exists.
(b) 0† exists iff for every uncountable cardinal λ there is a λ-model and a
double class ⟨X, Y⟩of indiscernibles for it such that: X ⊆λ is closed unbounded,
Y ⊆On −(λ + 1) is a closed unbounded class, X ∪{λ} ∪Y contains every
uncountable cardinal and the Skolem hull of X ∪Y in the λ-model is again the
model.
⊣
In this last situation, since there are regular cardinals and there are strong limit
cardinals, every member of Y is inaccessible in the λ-model by indiscernibility.
Hence, as Solovay noted early on, the existence of 0† implies the existence of set,
transitive ∈-models of measurability. To be sure, much more can be said about
the size of the indiscernibles, along the lines of 9.17.
Solovay also established the direct analogue of 14.11 on the deﬁnability of
0†:
21.16 Theorem (ZF)(Solovay). The relation R ⊆ωω deﬁned by
R(x) ↔0† exists ∧x ∈ω2 ∧{m | x(m) = 1} = 0†
is Π1
2 .
⊣

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
289
21.17 Corollary.
(a) 0† is absolute for transitive ∈-models of ZF such that ω1 ⊆M as follows:
M |= ⌈There is an EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)⌉iff
0† ∈M ,
in which case M |= ⌈0† is the unique EM2 blueprint satisfying (I)-(III)⌉.
(b) 0† is a ∆1
3 subset of ω which is not a member of the κ-model for any κ.
Proof. For (b), if to the contrary 0† were a member of the κ-model for some κ,
then by iterating ultrapowers it can be assumed that κ is a cardinal. But this is a
contradiction by (a) and 21.15(b).
⊣
Having developed the analogue of the 0# theory in §9, we now proceed to
derive more information with iterated ultrapowers that sharpens the focus. But
ﬁrst, a respite from the rigors: Instead of yet another recipe, we offer the following
chess problem (M. Henneberger, ﬁrst and second prize, “Revista de Sah” 1928):
White. King on b1, Rooks on b7 and c7, and Bishop on b5.
Black. King on a8, Rook on a3, and Pawn on f2.
White to play and win.
Send complete solutions to the author for a small prize.
For the rest of this section, stipulate that
⟨L[Uα], Uα, κα, iαβ⟩α≤β∈On is the iteration of the least κ-model ,
i.e. with κ the least possible. All the κ-models for various κ appear in this iteration
(20.12). The results quickly follow from the basic uniqueness property of 21.7
tailored for 0† and κ-models and stated here for emphasis.
21.18 Lemma.
For any α, there is at most one double class ⟨X, Y⟩of indis-
cernibles for the κα-model with X ⊆κα of ordertype α and Y ⊆On −(κα + 1)
such that:
(a) For any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn+s) of L∈( ˙A), x1 < . . . < xn all in X, and
y1 < . . . < ys all in Y,
the κα-model satisﬁes ϕ[x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ys] iff
ϕ(c0, . . . , cn−1, d0, . . . , ds−1) ∈0† .
(b) The Skolem hull of X ∪Y in the κα-model is again the model.
Proof.
If ⟨X, Y⟩and ⟨X, Y⟩were two such classes, then the order-preserving
injection: X ∪Y →X ∪Y extends to an isomorphism of the κα-model into itself
and hence must be the identity.
⊣
Dropping the superscript T by uniqueness, in the presence of 0† there are
corresponding classes

290
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
{χη | η ∈On} and Y α = {ια
ξ | ξ ∈On}
for every limit α as deﬁned before 21.13 and with the properties ascribed by it.
By 21.14, for every limit ordinal α, ⟨{χη | η < α}, Y α⟩satisﬁes 21.18(a)(b) for the
χα-model. In particular, the ⟨X, Y⟩of 21.18 need not determine an EM2 blueprint:
X could be ﬁnite, with ⟨∅, Y 0⟩for the χ0-model being an example. In fact, Y 0 is
the basis of the next lemma, one that is not surprising in view of the uniqueness
properties of 0†.
21.19 Lemma.
(a) For every α, ⟨X, Y⟩= ⟨{κη | η < α}, i0α“Y 0⟩satisﬁes 21.18(a)(b) for the
κα-model.
(b) χη = κη for every η, and i0α“Y 0 = Y α for every limit ordinal α.
Proof. We ﬁrst argue that χ0 = κ0. Clearly, κ0 ≤χ0 by deﬁnition of κ0. For the
converse, we work in some generality for a later inference: Let λ be a regular
cardinal such that κλ = λ = χλ; there are arbitrarily large such λ by 19.7(b)
and 21.13(d). Note for what follows that by 21.14, ⟨{χη | η < λ}, Y λ⟩satisﬁes
21.18(a)(b) for the λ-model. By 19.10, if E is the proper class of cardinals greater
than λ ﬁxed by i0λ, then ⟨{κη | η < λ}, E⟩is a double class of indiscernibles for
the λ-model.
Note that this pair satisﬁes 21.18(a) for this model: There are
inﬁnitely many χη’s in the set {κη | η < λ}, and E ⊆Y λ as Y λ contains every
cardinal greater than λ. Let N be the transitive collapse of the Skolem hull of
{κη | η < λ} ∪E in the λ-model, and π the collapsing isomorphism. Then N is
again the λ-model since π(λ) = λ. Hence, π(κη) = χη for every η < λ by 21.18.
Consequently, χη ≤κη for every η < λ since π is collapsing.
Having deduced that κ0 = χ0, argue as follows for any α: Remembering
that ⟨L[Uα], ∈, Uα⟩is the κα-model, by 19.6 any x ∈L[Uα] is of form x =
i0α( f )(κγ1, . . . , κγn) for some function f ∈L[U0] and γ1 < . . . < γn < α. Since
κ0 = χ0, f is deﬁnable in the κ0-model from elements in Y 0, and so i0α( f ) is
deﬁnable in the κα-model from elements in i0α“Y 0. Hence, ⟨{κη | η < α}, i0α“Y 0⟩
satisﬁes 21.18(b) for the κα-model.
Next, take any regular cardinal λ ≥α such that κλ = λ = χλ. It follows from
a previous remark that ⟨{κη | η < λ}, i0λ“Y 0⟩satisﬁes 21.18(a) for the λ-model.
Hence, the elementarity of iαλ shows that ⟨{κη | η < α}, i0α“Y 0⟩satisﬁes 21.18(a)
for the κα-model.
(b) of the lemma is now a direct consequence of 21.14 and 21.18.
⊣
We can now deﬁne Y α for successor ordinals α by:
Y α = i0α“Y 0 .
These Y α’s are also closed unbounded classes by the usual argument from (IIb)
and (IIIb) of 0†. Save for a small initial shift, the Y α’s coincide:

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
291
21.20 Exercise. For any α ≤β:
(a) Y β = iαβ“(Y α ∩(β + 1)) ∪(Y α −(β + 1)), a disjoint union.
(b) If β < min(Y α), then Y β = Y α.
Hint. Any ι ∈Y α is inaccessible in the κα-model. Since the iteration of inner
models of measurability beyond the κα-model can be deﬁned in the model using
Uα, 19.7(c) applied there implies that iαβ(ι) = ι for any β < ι.
⊣
The following overall theorem describes the global coherence of κα-models
and their indiscernibles.
21.21 Theorem. Assume that 0† exists. Then for every α there is a class Y α of
ordinals characterized by:
(a) Y α is closed unbounded and ⟨{κη | η < α}, Y α⟩is a double class of
indiscernibles for the κα-model.
(b) The Skolem hull of {κη | η < α} ∪Y α in the κα-model is again the model.
Moreover, for any α ≤β, iαβ“Y α = Y β, and if πβ
α is a collapsing isomorphism
from the Skolem hull of {κη | η < α} ∪Y β in the κβ-model into its transitive
collapse, then: πβ
α (κη) = κη for η < α, πβ
α (κβ) = κα, and πβ
α “Y β = Y α.
Proof. The characterization of Y α follows from 21.18 and the fact that two closed
unbounded classes have many common members.
For the assertion about πβ
α , the transitive collapse must be the κ-model for
some κ with ⟨{πβ
α (κη) | η < α}, πβ
α “Y β⟩satisfying 21.18(a)(b) for that κ-model.
Because of the ordertype α of the lower set of this pair, the only possibility by
uniqueness is κ = κα, and the conclusions follow, also by uniqueness.
⊣
Thus, the existence of 0† leads to remarkable conclusions about the simple
generation of inner models of measurability and their relation to each other. Taking
into account the absoluteness result 21.17(a), for every α the κα-model is a subclass
of L[0†], and is moreover deﬁnable in L[0†] as 
γ M(0†, α, γ ), i.e. by taking
the lower set of indiscernibles of ordertype α and “stretching” the upper set. The
resulting systems of indiscernibles are closely interrelated by iterated ultrapowers
and Skolem hulls as described by 21.21.
As expected, there is a non-rigidity characterization:
21.22 Exercise. The following are equivalent:
(a) 0† exists.
(b) There is a κ-model for some κ and an elementary embedding of that model
into itself with critical point greater than κ.
Hint. In the forward direction, for any α let Y α be the closed unbounded class
for the κα-model as given by 0† and h any order-preserving injection of {κη | η <
α} ∪Y α into itself such that h(κη) = κη for every η < α and h(ι) > ι for some
ι ∈Y α. Then h induces an elementary embedding of the κα-model into itself as
desired.

292
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
The converse can be established by following the arguments for 21.1:
Suppose that for some α, k is an elementary embedding of the κα-model
⟨L[Uα], ∈, Uα⟩into itself with crit(k) = ρ > κα. k determines an L[Uα]-ultraﬁlter
W = {X ∈P(ρ) ∩L[Uα] | ρ ∈k(X)}
over ρ. It now sufﬁces to show:
(∗)
W is an iterable L[Uα]-ultraﬁlter .
The argument could then be completed by iterating with W to get uncountably
many indiscernibles for L[Uα] by 19.10, and then proceeding to get 0† by the
argument for 21.9 and the ensuing analysis.
To establish (∗), note that the ultrapower of L[Uα] by W is well-founded
and check that the arguments for 21.2 and 21.3 can be generalized from L using
the following basic observation deriving from 3.3(b): If M and N are transitive,
j: M ≺N, and j(ξ) = ξ for ξ ≤κα, then M = L[Uα] iff N = L[Uα]. The
forward direction is for ultrapower arguments, and the latter, for Skolem hull
arguments.
⊣
There are further equivalences as for 21.1; one of them ﬁgures in the following
analogue of 21.4, which has a simple argument if we avail ourselves of the result
that if µ is regular, then µ+ is not J´onsson (8.17).
21.23 Exercise. Suppose that there is a κ-model for some κ, and a J´onsson cardinal
λ > κ. Suppose also that if |κ| is singular, then λ > κ+. Then 0† exists.
Hint. Building on the outline for 20.22, note that the current hypotheses together
with the result that successors of regular cardinals are not J´onsson are enough
to show without assuming V = L[U] that there is a regular ν, κ < ν < λ,
such that λ −→[λ]<ω
ν,<ν.
Hence, the embedding i can be deﬁned as before,
and then a corresponding L[U]-ultraﬁlter W over crit(i) > κ such that the ul-
trapower of L[U] by W is well-founded by the argument for 21.1(b) →(c).
⊣
With more sophisticated techniques, the conditions on singular |κ| can be
eliminated (Donder-Koepke [83: 248]). The J´onsson cardinal can also be replaced
by a suitable analogue of Chang’s Conjecture for uncountable languages to extend
the analogy to 21.4.
Also, 21.5 has a direct analogue in the present context.
Finally, the argument for 21.6 can be adapted to show that every elementary
embedding as for 21.22 is induced by an h as described in its proof.
The existence of 0† does not imply the existence of measurable cardinals,
only inner models of measurability. The following is a slight reformulation of an
observation of Kunen in the presence of a measurable cardinal.
21.24 Proposition (Kunen [70]). Suppose that κ is a measurable cardinal and
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩the κ-model. Then the following are equivalent:

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
293
(a) 0† exists.
(b) κ++L[U] ≤2κ.
Proof. The forward direction is clear; every (real) cardinal greater than κ is in
the class Y κ of indiscernibles for the κ-model given by 0†, and hence large in the
model by simple indiscernibility arguments.
For the converse, ﬁrst note that in the continuing terminology, κ = κα and
U = Uα for some α. Since the iteration of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩can be deﬁned in L[U]
using U, 19.7(a) applied there implies that κα+ω < κ++L[U]. Also, if F is the
ﬁlter over κα+ω generated by {κα+n | n ∈ω}, i.e.
X ∈F iff
∃m ∈ω{κα+n | m ≤n ∈ω} ⊆X ,
then by 19.5 L[F] is the κα+ω-model.
Suppose now that W is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ and jW: V ≺MW ∼=
Ult(V, W). Then by assumption
κα+ω < κ++L[U] ≤2κ < jW(κ) .
Also {κα+n | n ∈ω} ∈MW since ωMW ⊆MW, and hence F ∩MW ∈MW so that
L[F] = L[F ∩MW] is deﬁnable in MW. Consequently,
MW |= There is a ρ-model for some ρ < jW(κ) ,
so that by elementarity there is a ρ-model for some ρ < κ. By 21.9 this entails
the existence of 0†.
⊣
As Kunen observed, it follows that if there is a measurable cardinal κ such
that κ+ < 2κ, then 0† exists. This was the ﬁrst inkling of a genuine impediment
to forcing at measurable cardinals: Beyond the restriction from below of 5.17,
the measurability of κ imposes sufﬁcient constraints on P(κ) so that achieving
κ+ < 2κ requires stronger hypotheses and presumably a new forcing approach.
Such an approach was to be discovered by Silver (see volume II).
Kunen soon elaborated his argument to draw a stronger conclusion from
several hypotheses:
21.25 Theorem (Kunen [71a]). Suppose that for some κ at least one of the fol-
lowing holds:
(a) κ is measurable and κ+ < 2κ.
(b) Every κ-complete ﬁlter over κ can be extended to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter
over κ (e.g. κ is strongly compact).
(c) There is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter D over κ+ which is uniform, i.e. |X| = κ+
whenever X ∈D.
Then for any λ there is an inner model of ZFC with λ measurable cardinals.

294
Chapter 4. Aspects of Measurability
The building store of intuitions indicated that once a conclusion like this about
a large cardinal concept can be deduced, presumably a genuine transcendence over
that concept can be achieved. This was indeed conﬁrmed by later developments in
inner model theory, with an actual equiconsistency result established for 21.25(a)
(see volume II).
Daggers
As for 0#, the formulation of 0† can be relativized in a straightforward way.
Suppose that a is a set of ordinals with α = ∪a. An EM2 blueprint for a is the
theory of some structure
⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U, xk, yk, a, ξ⟩k∈ω,ξ≤α
where ζ is a limit ordinal; for some ordinal κ > α, ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α |= U
is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ; and ⟨{xk | k ∈ω}, {yk | k ∈ω}⟩is a double set of
ordinal indiscernibles for ⟨Lζ[U], ∈, U, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α such that for every k ∈ω,
xk < xk+1 < κ < yk < yk+1 .
Let L[A, B] be the expected inner model constructible relative to A and B (the
least inner model M such that for x ∈M, A ∩x ∈M and B ∩x ∈M) deﬁned
through a hierarchy as for L[A] (§3). The theory of inner models of measurabil-
ity developed in §19 can be adapted in a straightforward way to iterate models
⟨L[U, a], ∈, U, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α that satisfy ⌈U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ⌉with κ > α.
Again, such a model only depends on κ (and not on U) and all such models are
iterates of each other. The theory for 0† carries over with minor changes, so
that from sufﬁcient hypotheses we get a unique EM2 blueprint a† for a satisfying
(the analogues of) the conditions (I)-(III). a† through coding can be regarded as a
subset of |α|. The following analogue of 21.15(a) is typical:
21.26 Theorem. Suppose that a is a set of ordinals with α = ∪a. Then a† exists
iff there is an inner model M with a ∈M such that for some U ∈M, M |= U is
a normal ultraﬁlter over κ > α, and ⟨M, ∈, U, a, ξ⟩ξ≤α has an uncountable set of
indiscernibles whose minimum element is greater than κ.
As with sharps, the main interest is in reals a; with our development having
shifted from a ⊆ω to a ∈ωω, the foregoing is readily adapted to such a.
The results of this section attest to the breadth and fecundity of Kunen’s iter-
ated ultrapowers. Whether they can be proved in other terms, iterated ultrapowers
looms large as the framework in which they were ﬁrst conceived. The uncovered
uniformity of inner models and their embeddings offer compelling evidence for
the coherence and efﬁcacy of the concepts of measurability, 0#, and 0†.
Broadly speaking, this chapter described the ﬁrst wave of methodical research
on Ulam’s original concept of measurability using the techniques that became

21. Embeddings, 0#, and 0†
295
available in the expansive period of the 1960’s. Cohen’s creation of forcing led to
the relative consistency analysis in terms of saturated ideals, real-valued measur-
ability, and Prikry forcing, and Scott’s result 5.5 spurred interest in ultrapowers
and their iterations, leading to the analysis of deﬁnability in the enriched contexts
involving elementary embeddings: inner models of measurability, 0#, and 0†. This
latter direction of research was to be vigorously pursued by Jensen and Dodd in
their investigation of covering properties and the Core Model in the mid-1970’s
(see volume II). Before then, the forcing analysis of large cardinals was to be
advanced by crucial consistency results of Silver and Magidor involving strong
hypotheses (see volume II also). In the next venture forth beyond the extended
elaboration of measurability, these hypotheses were just beginning to be explored,
the most prominent among them being supercompactness.

Chapter 5
Strong Hypotheses
This chapter provides the basic theory for the strong hypotheses that generalize
measurability. §22 discusses Solovay and Reinhardt’s concept of supercompact-
ness, a global reﬂection property, and the relation of supercompactness to strong
compactness. §23 describes the stronger hypotheses that evolved from Reinhardt’s
proposals: extendibility and a prima facie extension shown inconsistent by Kunen.
§24 then considers hypotheses on the verge of that inconsistency, and then span-
ning the expanse, n-hugeness and Vopˇenka’s Principle. Pursuing offshoots of the
theory of supercompactness, §25 describes the combinatorial study of Pκγ , and
§26 provides the fundamentals of extenders and related large cardinals, reﬁned
concepts that were to lead to major advances in inner model theory.

298
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
22. Supercompactness
In the late 1960’s, even as measurability was being methodically investigated
Solovay and William Reinhardt, as a graduate student at Berkeley, were charting
out stronger hypotheses using straightforward guiding ideas. Taking the concept
of elementary embedding as basic they considered various generalizations of the
elementary embedding characterization of measurability. These new hypotheses
had succinct formulations and clear motivations, and were soon found to have a
simple but elegant basic theory. Prominent features were that the hypotheses form
a linear hierarchy in terms of consistency strength, and that an outright inconsis-
tency result of Kunen provided a delimiting upper bound. The basic framework
generated several avenues of research inspired by intriguing questions and natural
possibilities for structural elaboration, and relative consistency results in terms of
the new hypotheses soon began to be established for propositions low in the cumu-
lative hierarchy. With mounting extrinsic evidence in the next two decades, these
strong hypotheses together with the hierarchy up through measurability became
widely accepted as the measuring rod of exhaustive principles against which all
possible consistency strengths can be gauged. This section discusses Solovay and
Reinhardt’s concept of supercompactness, and §§23, 24, the stronger hypotheses
arising from Reinhardt’s main proposals. The basic theory appeared belatedly in
Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78], which serves as a general reference for these
sections; Di Prisco-Marek [85a] is also a useful source.
Strong compactness (§4) was the one concept stronger than measurability that
had been considered up to this time, and Solovay and Reinhardt independently
devised supercompactness as a further strengthening – hence the term. Recall that
if κ is measurable, U a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ, and j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U),
then κ M ⊆M. This, especially spiced with normality for U, leads to reﬂection
phenomena at κ (6.5). Generalizing, for κ ≤γ ,
κ is γ -supercompact iff there is a j: V ≺M such that
(a) crit( j) = κ and γ < j(κ) , and
(b) γ M ⊆M .
κ is supercompact iff κ is γ -supercompact for every γ ≥κ .
Thus, if κ ≤γ ≤δ and κ is δ-supercompact, then κ is γ -supercompact, and κ is
κ-supercompact iff κ is measurable. Although j: V ≺M is formalized through
our convention from 5.1(c) that ≺between inner models is ≺1, these formulations
are not directly formalizable because of the ∃j ranging over classes. The de-
veloping theory provides a characterization in terms of ultrapowers that provides
an a posteriori formalization, but nonetheless the intelligibility of the concepts
comes from their elementary embedding formulations. (b) is the crucial closure
assumption, asserting that arbitrary γ -sequences of members of M are again mem-
bers of M and implying in particular that Hγ + ⊆M. Only cardinals γ need be
considered, but maintaining the general deﬁnition has various procedural advan-
tages. In (a) the condition γ < j(κ) is carried over from how supercompactness

22. Supercompactness
299
evolved from strong compactness. Its inclusion in the deﬁnition is convenient
for the development, but it turns out to be superﬂuous: For any j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = κ and γ M ⊆M, some nth iterate jn has these same properties and
satisﬁes γ < jn(κ) (23.15 (a)). The relationship between supercompactness and
strong compactness is later discussed at some length, but ﬁrst we develop the basic
theory of supercompactness.
Straightforward observations illustrate how closure conditions lead to reﬂec-
tion properties:
22.1 Proposition. Suppose that κ is 2κ-supercompact. Then there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U .
In particular, κ is the κth measurable cardinal.
Proof. Let j: V ≺M witness the 2κ-supercompactness of κ. If U is deﬁned from
j by
X ∈U iff
X ⊆κ ∧κ ∈j(X) ,
then U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ. But since 2κ M ⊆M, it is simple to see that
every ultraﬁlter over κ is a member of M. Hence, κ is measurable in M, so that
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U by its deﬁnition.
⊣
22.2 Proposition.
Suppose that κ is γ -supercompact and 2α = α+ for every
α < κ. Then 2β = β+ for every β ≤γ .
Proof. Let j: V ≺M witness the γ -supercompactness of κ. Arguing as for 5.8,
β ≤γ < j(κ) and elementarity implies that (2β)M = β+M. But γ M ⊆M implies
that P(β)M = P(β), so that 2β ≤(2β)M and β+M = β+.
⊣
That supercompactness is a global reﬂection property can be expressed in
terms of the notion A ≺n V , that Σn formulas are absolute for A. A well-known
result of Levy [65] is that for any κ > ω, Hκ ≺1 V .
22.3 Proposition. If κ is supercompact, then Vκ ≺2 V .
Proof. Suppose that ϕ is Σ2, say ∃v0ψ(v0, v1) where ψ is Π1 for simplicity, and
x ∈Vκ. If Vκ |= ϕ[x], then for some y ∈Vκ, Vκ |= ψ[y, x]. But κ is inaccessible
so that Vκ = Hκ, and the aforementioned result of Levy’s implies that ψ[y, x].
Conversely, suppose that ϕ[x].
Let z be such that ψ[z, x].
Taking α >
rank(z), the |Vα|-supercompactness of κ implies that there is a j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = κ and z ∈(Vj(κ))M. Note that j(x) = x ∈Vκ = (Vκ)M. Since ψ is
Π1, it is readily seen that (Vj(κ) |= ϕ[x])M. It now follows by elementarity that
Vκ |= ϕ[x] as desired.
⊣
The preceding three propositions already follow from a substantially weaker
hypothesis on κ; see 26.6.

300
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Generalizing the situation with measurability, γ -supercompactness is next
characterized in terms of ultraﬁlters and ultrapowers. This will provide an ade-
quate formalization of the concept, and hence of supercompactness. A general
proposition about closure properties of ultrapowers related to 5.7 (noting that
j“κ = κ there) suggests and frames the later work.
22.4 Proposition. Suppose that U is an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over a set S, and
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Then:
(a) If j“X ∈M for some set X and Y ⊆M is such that |Y| ≤|X|, then
Y ∈M.
(b) For any γ, j“γ ∈M iff
γ M ⊆M.
(c) j“(|S|+) /∈M.
(d) U /∈M.
Proof. (a) Argue as for 5.7(d): Construe Y as {[ fx] | x ∈X}. Let h: S →P(X)
be so that [h] = j“X. Deﬁne g: S →V by stipulating that g(i) is that function
with domain h(i) satisfying g(i)(x) = fx(i). Then [g]( j(x)) = [ fx] for every
x ∈X, and so ran([g]) = Y.
(b) This follows from (a).
(c) Let [ f ] ∈M be arbitrary. If A = {i ∈S | | f (i)| ≤|S|} ∈U, then
there is an α ∈|S|+ −{ f (i) | i ∈A}, so that j(α) /∈[ f ]. Otherwise, B =
{i ∈S | | f (i)| > |S|} ∈U, in which case there is an injective function h on B
satisfying h(i) ∈f (i) for every i ∈B, so that [h] ∈[ f ] −j“V . In either case,
[ f ] ̸= j“(|S|+).
(d) Assume to the contrary that U ∈M.
Then S =  U ∈M, and so
P(S) = U ∪{S −X | X ∈U} ∈M, and so also P(S × S) ∈M. This last
set contains every well-ordering of S, and so it is straightforward to see that
S(|S|+) ∈M. But for any α < |S|+, j(α) is the ordertype of {[ f ] | f ∈Sα}, and
the set of such ordertypes is deﬁnable from U and S(|S|+), i.e. j“(|S|+) ∈M.
This contradicts (c).
⊣
(b) provides a simple way of gauging the closure of ultrapowers, with (c)
establishing an upper bound in this direction and (d) in another.
Suppose now that j: V ≺M witnesses the γ -supercompactness of κ. Then
j“γ ∈M, and (b) above suggests (recalling 5.6 for measurability) that we try to
deﬁne an ultraﬁlter Uj by:
X ∈Uj iff
j“γ ∈j(X) .
Recall that PνS = {x ⊆S | |x| < ν}. Properties of j and M imply that | j“γ | <
j(κ) in M, so that j“γ ∈(Pj(κ) j(γ ))M. Hence, Pκγ ∈Uj, and this can be taken
to be the underlying index set for Uj. The following properties obtain:
(i) Uj is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter .
(ii) For any α ∈γ, {x ∈Pκγ | α ∈x} ∈Uj .
(iii) For any ⟨Xα | α < γ ⟩∈γUj, {x ∈Pκγ | x ∈
α∈x Xα} ∈Uj .

22. Supercompactness
301
By (i) and (ii), for any y ∈Pκγ, {x ∈Pκγ | y ⊆x} ∈Uj. For (iii), note that if
j(⟨Xα | α < γ ⟩) = ⟨Yβ | β < j(γ )⟩, then j“γ ∈
α<γ j(Xα) = 
β∈j“γ Yβ.
These properties motivate the following deﬁnitions, stated for later purposes
for an arbitrary κ, set S, and ﬁlter F over Pκ S. If ⟨Xi | i ∈S⟩∈SP(P(S)), then
its diagonal intersection is {x ∈P(S) | x ∈
i∈x Xi}, denoted by △i∈S Xi.
F is ﬁne iff F is κ-complete, and for any
i ∈S, {x ∈Pκ S | i ∈x} ∈F .
F is normal iff F is ﬁne, and for any
⟨Xi | i ∈S⟩∈S F, △i∈S Xi ∈F .
Anticipating a possible confusion, note that members of such F consist of certain
subsets of a set S, not its elements. Also, we usually deal with sets S of ordinals,
in which case Pκ S = [S]<κ; the former notation has nonetheless become standard
in the subject. Finally, for S an inﬁnite ordinal γ there are no normal ﬁlters over
Pωγ since △α∈γ {x ∈Pωγ | α + 1 ∈x} is empty.
With ﬁneness providing the requisite breadth, this new concept of normality
is a generalization of the old one:
22.5 Exercise.
(a) If F is a normal ﬁlter over κ, then {X ⊆Pκκ | X ∩κ ∈F} is a normal
ﬁlter over Pκκ.
(b) If F is a normal ﬁlter over Pκκ, then F ∩P(κ) is a normal ﬁlter over
κ.
Hint. For (b) note that if Xα = {x ∈Pκκ | α ⊆x} for α < κ, then △α<κ Xα =
κ ∈F.
⊣
Recall that for a ﬁlter F over a set I and X ⊆I, X is F-stationary iff
X ∩Z ̸= ∅for every Z ∈F.
22.6 Exercise. A ﬁne ﬁlter F over Pκ S is normal iff whenever X is F-stationary
and f is a choice function on X (i.e. f (x) ∈x for x ∈X −{∅}), there is an s ∈S
such that f −1({s}) is F-stationary.
Hint. Argue as for 5.10.
⊣
Having produced an ultraﬁlter from an embedding, the process can be re-
versed by taking an ultrapower.
Suppose that κ ≤γ and U is a normal ul-
traﬁlter over Pκγ .
Since this entails κ > ω so that U is ω1-complete, let
jU: V ≺MU ∼= Ult(V, U). Let id: Pκγ →Pκγ be the identity map. Then:
(i) [id]U = jU“γ and γ MU ⊆MU .
(ii) crit( jU) = κ and γ < jU(κ) .
For (i), jU“γ ⊆[id]U by ﬁneness, and 22.6 implies that equality holds. That
γ MU ⊆MU then follows by 22.4(b). For (ii), crit( jU) ≥κ by κ-completeness.

302
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
But also, ot([id]U) < jU(κ) in MU since {x ⊆γ | ot(x) < κ} ∈U, and γ =
ot( jU“γ ) = ot([id]U).
The following characterization has been established:
22.7 Theorem (Solovay, Reinhardt). If κ ≤γ , κ is γ -supercompact iff there is a
normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ .
⊣
One observation that can now be made is that supercompactness does not
entail the existence of greater large cardinals:
22.8 Exercise.
(a) If κ is supercompact and λ > κ is inaccessible, then Vλ |= κ is super-
compact.
(b) If Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is supercompact)), then
Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is supercompact ∧¬∃λ(λ > κ ∧λ is inaccessible))).
⊣
It can also be deduced from 22.7 that ⌈κ is γ -supercompact⌉is ∆ZF
2 : To show
that it is ΣZF
2 , note that it can be rendered as ∃x(x = Vγ +5 ∧ϕ(κ, γ, x)) where
ϕ asserts that there is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ . ⌈y = Vα⌉is ΠZF
1
(0.2), and
ϕ can be taken to be Σ0 with all quantiﬁers bounded to x = Vγ +5. To show that
it is ΠZF
2 , note that it can also be rendered as ∀x(x = Vγ +5 →ϕ(κ, γ, x)) with ϕ
as before.
This has a useful consequence about the persistence of γ -supercompactness:
22.9 Exercise. Suppose that κ ≤λ, κ is γ -supercompact for every γ with κ ≤
γ < λ, and λ is supercompact. Then κ is supercompact.
Hint. Apply 22.3, noting that Vλ |= κ is supercompact.
Alternately, for δ ≥λ glue together a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκδ as follows:
Let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pλδ, and for each x ∈Pλδ with |x| ≥κ let Dx
be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκx. Deﬁne W by:
X ∈W iff
X ⊆Pκδ ∧{x ∈Pλδ | |x| ≥κ ∧X ∩Pκx ∈Dx} ∈U .
Then W is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκδ.
⊣
This shows that 22.3 is optimal in the sense that the ΣZF
3
sentence ⌈there is a
supercompact cardinal⌉does not hold in Vκ if κ is the least supercompact cardinal.
Supercompactness is characterizable directly as a reﬂection property:
22.10 Theorem (Magidor [71a]). κ is supercompact iff for every η > κ there is
an α < κ and an e: Vα ≺Vη with a critical point δ so that e(δ) = κ.
Proof. For the forward direction, suppose that η > κ. Let j: V ≺M witness
the |Vη|-supercompactness of κ. Set j = j|Vη; it is simple to see that j: Vη ≺
(Vj(η))M. By the closure of M under |Vη|-sequences, Vζ = (Vζ)M ∈M for ζ ≤η

22. Supercompactness
303
by induction, and so also j ∈M and M |= ⌈j: Vη ≺Vj(η)⌉. Hence, M |= ⌈there
is an α < j(κ) and an e: Vα ≺Vj(η) with a critical point δ so that e(δ) = j(κ)⌉.
The desired result now follows from the elementarity of j.
For the converse, suppose that γ ≥κ. Let α < κ and e: Vα ≺Vγ +ω with
a critical point δ so that e(δ) = κ. It follows that α = β + ω for a β satisfying
e(β) = γ . Noting that P(Pδβ) ⊆Vα and e“β ∈Pκγ , deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆Pδβ ∧e“β ∈e(X) .
Then U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pδβ. But U ∈Vα, and so e(U) is a normal
ultraﬁlter over Pe(δ)e(β) = Pκγ .
⊣
Carrying this further Magidor [71a] characterized the least supercompact car-
dinal in terms of a second-order L¨owenheim-Skolem property. See also Kunen
[03], especially its 2.9.
Normal Ultraﬁlters
Having characterized γ -supercompactness in terms of the existence of normal
ultraﬁlters over Pκγ and derived some initial consequences of this, the basic
theory of these ultraﬁlters is now developed as in Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori
[78].
The ﬁrst proposition provides more information about ultrapowers.
22.11 Proposition.
Suppose that κ ≤γ , U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ ,
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U), and |γ | = λ. Then:
(a) For α ≤γ , j“α = [⟨x ∩α | x ∈Pκγ ⟩]U and
α = [⟨ot(x ∩α) | x ∈Pκγ ⟩]U.
(b) λ<κ M ⊆M.
(c) 2λ<κ ≤(2λ<κ)M < j(κ) < (2λ<κ)+.
Proof. (a) By normality j“γ = [id]U where id: Pκγ →Pκγ is the identity map.
Now note that for α ≤γ , j“α = j“γ ∩j(α) and α = ot( j“α).
(b) By 22.4(a), it sufﬁces to show that j“Pκγ ∈M. But
j“Pκγ = Pκ j“γ = (Pκ j“γ )M ∈M ;
the ﬁrst equality holds as j(x) = j“x for any x ∈Pκγ by κ-completeness, and
the second, as j“γ ∈M and γ M ⊆M.
(c) 2λ<κ ≤(2λ<κ)M since (P(Pκλ))M = P(Pκλ) by (b) and M ⊆V .
(2λ<κ)M < j(κ) since j(κ) is inaccessible in M. Finally j(κ) = {[ f ]U | f : Pκγ →
κ} so that j(κ) < (2λ<κ)+.
⊣
(b) asserts that in certain situations there is more closure, for example when
cf(λ) < κ.
We next take a closer look, when a normal ultraﬁlter U is deﬁned from an
embedding, at the relationship between that embedding and jU: Suppose that

304
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
j: V ≺M witnesses the γ -supercompactness of κ, and U is the normal ultraﬁlter
over Pκγ deﬁned from j with corresponding jU: V ≺MU ∼= Ult(V, U). Deﬁne
k: MU →M by:
k([ f ]U) = j( f )( j“γ ) .
22.12 Lemma. Set |γ | = λ. Then:
(a) k is elementary, and j = k ◦jU.
(b) k(α) = α for every α < (2λ<κ)+MU , and k(z) = z for every
z ∈P(P(Pκγ )) ∩MU.
(c) If (2λ<κ)+ = (2λ<κ)+M, then crit(k) = (2λ<κ)+MU .
Proof. (a) This is straightforward (5.13(b)).
(b) For α ≤γ , by 22.11(a)
k(α) = k([⟨ot(x ∩α) | x ∈Pκγ ⟩]U) = ot( j“γ ∩j(α)) = α .
Noting that P(γ ) ⊆MU, this implies that k(x) = x for every x ∈P(γ ). (In
one direction, if α ∈k(x), then k(x) ⊆k(γ ) = γ implies that k(α) = α, so
that k(α) ∈k(x) and consequently α ∈x.)
Noting that P(Pκγ ) ⊆MU by
22.11(b) this in turn implies that k(y) = y for every y ∈P(Pκγ ).
(In one
direction, if x ∈k(y), then k(y) ∈P(Pk(κ)k(γ ))M = P(Pκγ ) ⊆MU implies that
k(x) = x by the previous assertion, so that k(x) ∈k(y) and consequently x ∈y.)
The argument can be repeated one more time to show that k(z) = z for every
z ∈P(P(Pκλ)) ∩MU.
That k(α) = α for α < (2λ<κ)+MU also follows, by induction on α: Assume
that k(α) = α for α < β and β < (2λ<κ)+MU . Then there is an z ∈P(P(Pκλ)) ∩
MU and a bijection f : z →β such that f ∈MU.
By elementarity, M |=
k( f ): k(z) →k(β) is a bijection. By the previous paragraph, k(z) = z. Moreover,
for any y ∈z,
k( f )(y) = k( f )(k(y)) = k( f (y)) = f (y) ;
the ﬁrst equality holds by the previous paragraph, the second by elementarity, and
the third by induction. Hence, k( f ) = f , and so k(β) = β.
(c) In view of (b), it remains to observe that
(2λ<κ)+MU < (2λ<κ)+ = (2λ<κ)+M = k((2λ<κ)+MU ) .
The inequality follows from 22.11(c), and the last equality, from elementarity.
⊣
Suppose now that j is itself a j ˜U: V ≺M ˜U ∼= Ult(V, ˜U) where ˜U is a normal
ultraﬁlter over Pκδ with δ ≥γ . Then
X ∈˜U iff
X ⊆Pκδ ∧j ˜U“δ ∈j ˜U(X) ,
and
Y ∈U iff
Y ⊆Pκγ ∧j ˜U“γ ∈j ˜U(Y) .

22. Supercompactness
305
Setting
˜U|γ = {{x ∩γ | x ∈X} | X ∈˜U} ,
it readily follows that
U = ˜U|γ .
˜U|γ = f∗( ˜U) in a former terminology, where f∗(U) = {Y | f −1(Y) ∈U} and
f : Pκδ →Pκγ is given by f (x) = x ∩γ . The corresponding k: MU ≺M ˜U can
be explicated by
k([⟨f (x) | x ∈Pκγ ⟩]U) = [⟨f (x ∩γ ) | x ∈Pκδ⟩] ˜U .
Note that for δ ≥2λ<κ, δM ˜U ⊆M ˜U implies by 22.12(c) that crit(k) = (2λ<κ)+MU .
We next consider the question of the number of normal ultraﬁlters, ﬁrst raised
for measurable cardinals.
If κ is measurable, then by 20.11 there is an inner
model in which there is only one normal ultraﬁlter over κ, and by 17.8 there is
a forcing extension in which there is the maximal possible number 22κ of normal
ultraﬁlters over κ. If κ is 2κ-supercompact, then by 5.16 and 22.1 there are at
least two normal ultraﬁlters over κ, one containing {α < κ | α is measurable}
and the other not. In 1967 Solovay and also Kanji Namba showed that there
are (2κ)+ normal ultraﬁlters.
A few years later, Solovay showed that in fact
there are 22κ normal ultraﬁlters over κ. The question of whether the number of
normal ultraﬁlters over some κ can be intermediate between 1 and 22κ was settled
by Mitchell [74]. In the ﬁrst development in inner model theory for hypotheses
stronger than measurability, he showed that assuming sufﬁcient hypotheses about
κ (2κ-supercompactness sufﬁces), if τ ≤κ or is one of the terms κ+ or κ++,
there is an inner model in which there are exactly τ normal ultraﬁlters over κ.
In the model with exactly two normal ultraﬁlters over a κ, one contained the set
{α < κ | α is measurable} and the other did not. Stewart Baldwin [85] built on
Mitchell’s work to show that assuming similarly strong hypotheses about κ, if
τ < κ, there is an inner model in which there are exactly τ normal ultraﬁlters
over κ and κ is the only measurable cardinal. It is not known how to get such
relative consistency results assuming only that κ is measurable at the outset.
Solovay’s result mentioned above is now established in a general form; it is
a consequence of a structural result that has an argument having aspects of self-
reference as well as reﬂection. Again, for an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter W, jW: V ≺
MW ∼= Ult(V, W).
22.13 Theorem (Solovay). If κ ≤γ and κ is 2|γ |<κ-supercompact, then for any
A ∈P(P(Pκγ )) there is a normal ultraﬁlter W over Pκγ such that A ∈MW.
Proof. Let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκ(2|γ |<κ) and j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U).
Let ϕ(v0, v1, v2) be a formula such that ϕ[A, κ, γ ] iff A ∈P(P(Pκγ )) but for
any normal ultraﬁlter W over Pκγ , A /∈MW. ϕ can be assumed to have the
property that ∃v0ϕ[κ, γ ] exactly when M |= ∃v0ϕ[κ, γ ]: Since P(P(Pκγ )) ⊆M,
for any normal ultraﬁlter W over Pκγ , W ∈M. Moreover, P(P(Pκγ )) ∩MW is
deﬁnable in M since every function: Pκγ →Vκ is in M, and

306
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
P(P(Pκγ )) ∩MW ⊆(Vγ +4)MW ⊆(VjW (κ))MW = jW(Vκ) .
Assume now to the contrary that ∃v0ϕ[κ, γ ]. Then M |= ∃v0ϕ[κ, γ ]. Mindful
of 22.12 and the discussion following it, let U|γ be the normal ultraﬁlter over
Pκγ corresponding to U with j0: V ≺M0 ∼= Ult(V, U|γ ) and k: M0 ≺M such
that j = k ◦j0. Since k(κ) = κ and k(γ ) = γ , by elementarity of k there is
an A0 ∈M0 such that M0 |= ϕ[A0, κ, γ ]. Since k(A0) = A0, it follows that
M |= ϕ[A0, κ, γ ], and hence ϕ[A0, κ, γ ]. But A0 ∈M0 = MU|γ . Contradiction!
⊣
22.14 Corollary. If κ ≤γ and κ is 2|γ |<κ-supercompact, then there are 22|γ |<κ
normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ . Hence, if κ is 2κ-supercompact, then there are 22κ
normal ultraﬁlters over κ.
Proof. Set |γ | = λ. Note ﬁrst that if W is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , then
|P(P(Pκλ)) ∩MW| ≤(22λ<κ
)MW < jW(κ) < (2λ<κ)+
by the argument for 22.11(c). By 22.13,
P(P(Pκγ )) = {P(P(Pκγ )) ∩MW | W is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ } .
Hence, it follows that there must be |P(P(Pκγ ))| = 22λ<κ normal ultraﬁlters over
Pκγ .
The second assertion follows from 22.5(b), noting that κ<κ = κ.
⊣
Historically, Magidor [71] had ﬁrst shown that if κ is supercompact, then
there are (2|γ |<κ)+ normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ .
A further corollary provides
another measure of the wealth of normal ultraﬁlters:
22.15 Exercise. If κ ≤γ and κ is 2|γ |<κ-supercompact, then
(2|γ |<κ)+ = sup({ jW(κ) | W is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ }) .
Hint. One direction follows from 22.11(c). For the converse, suppose that ξ <
(2|γ |<κ)+. Let A ∈P(P(Pκγ )) be such that ξ < (2|γ |<κ)+L[A], and by 22.13, W a
normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ such that A ∈MW. Show that ξ < jW(κ).
⊣
The proof of 22.14 shows that if κ is 2κ-supercompact, then there are 22κ
normal ultraﬁlters over κ containing the set {α < κ | α is measurable}.
But
paradoxically, the following question remains open:
22.16 Question. If κ is 2κ-supercompact, does it follow that there is more than
one normal ultraﬁlter over κ containing the set {α < κ | α is not measurable}?
The theory of ﬁne and normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ has been pursued along
these lines by Julius Barbanel [82, 82a, 85] and Yoshihiro Abe [84]. The main
avenues of related research concern combinatorial aspects of Pκγ (§25).

22. Supercompactness
307
On Strong Compactness
Having developed the basic theory of supercompactness, one based on simple
reﬂection arguments, we now turn to a contextual characterization of strong com-
pactness and discuss its relationship to supercompactness, continuing to follow
Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78].
In the study of strong compactness ﬁne ultraﬁlters over Pκγ come naturally
into play as in the proof of 4.1. Deﬁne for ω < κ ≤γ :
κ is γ -compact iff there is a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pκγ .
Hence, if κ is γ -supercompact, then κ is γ -compact; and κ is κ-compact iff κ is
measurable. Also, if κ ≤γ ≤δ and κ is δ-compact with U a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over
Pκδ, then U|γ is a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , and thus κ is γ -compact. Fineness
without normality has the following characterizations. Recall that for a set S and
E ⊆P(S), the ﬁlter over S generated by E is {X ⊆S | ∃Y ∈E(Y ⊆X)}
provided that it is proper and non-principal.
22.17 Theorem. If κ ≤γ , the following are equivalent:
(a) κ is γ -compact.
(b) There is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ such that: for any X ⊆M with
|X| ≤γ , there is a Y ∈M such that Y ⊇X and M |= |Y| < j(κ).
(c) For any set S, every κ-complete ﬁlter over S generated by at most |γ |
sets can be extended to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over S.
Proof. (a) →(b) Let U be a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pκγ and j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U).
Suppose that X ⊆M with |X| ≤γ , say X = {[ fα]U | α < γ }. Deﬁne F: Pκγ →
V by F(x) = { fα(x) | α ∈x}, and set Y = [F]U. Then Y ⊇X by ﬁneness, and
M |= |Y| < j(κ). Finally, note that κ-completeness and the preceeding argument
with X = κ shows that crit( j) = κ.
(b) →(c) Suppose that F is a κ-complete ﬁlter over a set S generated by a
E ⊆P(S) with |E| ≤γ . By (b) let Y ⊇j“E with Y ∈M and M |= |Y| < j(κ).
In M, j(F) is j(κ)-complete and j(F) ∩Y is a subset of cardinality less than
j(κ). Hence, there is a c ∈M so that c ∈( j(F) ∩Y). c generates an ultraﬁlter
U by: X ∈U iff X ⊆S ∧c ∈j(X). It is simple to check that U is a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over S extending F.
(c) →(a) Extend the κ-complete ﬁlter over Pκγ generated by the family
{{x ∈Pκγ | α ∈x} | α < γ } to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over Pκγ .
⊣
22.18 Corollary. κ is strongly compact iff κ is γ -compact for every γ ≥κ.
Proof. By 4.1.
⊣
We now see how the concept that came after is the mightier: Solovay and
Reinhardt independently devised supercompactness to ensure Y = X in 22.17(b)
through the normality condition. This led to the simple transcendence as given
by 22.1, and provided a provisional answer to a question of Tarski: Is the least

308
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
strongly compact cardinal necessarily greater than the least measurable cardinal?
The Vopˇenka-Hrb´aˇcek result 5.8 together with the existence of inner models for
measurability had shown that measurable cardinals need not be strongly compact
and Kunen’s result 21.25, that strong compactness is strictly stronger than measur-
ability in consistency strength. Yet, Tarski’s question had remained unanswered.
Having made the conceptual move to supercompactness, the problem was
shifted. While the process of producing a normal ultraﬁlter over a measurable
cardinal κ was a simple one, trying to produce a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ from
a ﬁne one met with unexpected difﬁculties. Still, with so little experience strong
compactness and supercompactness had the same feel, and Solovay conjectured
that they are equivalent. This conjecture was to be refuted, but it inspired much
of the early work in this area. In a few years, with mounting extrinsic evidence
provided by relative consistency results supercompactness came to be accepted
as the proper generalization of measurability in the emerging hierarchy of large
cardinals.
Strong compactness was nonetheless to remain a signiﬁcant hypothesis, par-
ticularly because of its combinatorial consequences. Jussi Ketonen [72] clariﬁed
the concept with another characterization: If κ ≤λ are both regular, then κ is λ-
compact iff for every regular µ such that κ ≤µ ≤λ there is a uniform κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over µ. This conﬁrmed a conjecture of Kunen, and reduced strong com-
pactness to having uniform κ-complete ultraﬁlters over arbitrarily large cardinals.
Before this, Solovay had made an initial connection between supercompactness
and the Singular Cardinals Problem, and using an idea in Ketonen’s proof, he was
able to reﬁne that connection to the following solution from strong compactness
(see volume II): If κ is λ+-compact and λ is a singular strong limit cardinal > κ,
then 2λ = λ+.
Solovay’s conjecture that strong compactness and supercompactness are
equivalent was refuted by his student Telis Menas in late 1972.
22.19 Theorem (Menas [74]).
(a) If κ is measurable and a limit of strongly compact cardinals, then κ is
strongly compact.
(b) If κ is the least cardinal as in (a), then {α < κ | α is measurable} is not
a stationary subset of κ. In particular, κ is not 2κ-supercompact.
Proof. (a) Let U be a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ with
A = {α < κ | α is strongly compact} ∈U .
(Such a U is simple to produce: If W is any κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ and
f : κ →A is injective, take U = {X ⊆κ | f −1(X) ∈W}.) Suppose now that
γ ≥κ. For each α ∈A let Uα be a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pαγ , and deﬁne D by:
X ∈D iff
X ⊆Pκγ ∧{α ∈A | X ∩Pαγ ∈Uα} ∈U .
Then it is simple to check that D is a ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pκγ .

22. Supercompactness
309
(b) Set A = {α < κ | α is measurable}. Deﬁne f ∈κκ by:
f (α) = sup({β < α | β is strongly compact}) .
Then by hypothesis on κ, f is regressive on A, yet f cannot be constant on any
unbounded subset of κ. Hence, A is not stationary. It follows that A is not in any
normal ultraﬁlter over κ, and hence by 22.1 that κ is not 2κ-supercompact.
⊣
The D in the proof of (a) illustrates how ﬁne ultraﬁlters can be composed with
relative ease, and (b), how normality with the consequent reﬂection properties is
another kettle of ﬁsh. Abe [85] observed that D is not normal. 23.8 will provide
measurable limits of strongly compact cardinals.
Menas’s 1973 Berkeley thesis substantiated the gap between ﬁne and normal
ultraﬁlters in various ways, and made contributions to the emerging study of Pκγ
combinatorics ([74, 76] – see §25). Much of the work was devoted to forcing; he
developed methods for preserving supercompactness [76a], and having broached
the possibility with 22.19, established the relative consistency of there being ex-
actly one strongly compact cardinal and it failing to be supercompact ([74]).
Menachem Magidor, following upon his 1972 Hebrew University thesis on
supercompactness from which [71, 71a] have already been cited, established the
principal results on the varying nature of strong compactness. A driving force
in large cardinal theory, Magidor quickly became a major set theorist. His early
and unabashed use of supercompactness in several relative consistency results
conﬁrmed their signiﬁcance and efﬁcacy and steered set theoretic research upward
to the investigation of consistency-wise strong propositions. By mid-1972, he [76]
had established:
If κ is supercompact, then there is a forcing extension in which κ remains
supercompact and is also the least strongly compact cardinal .
Then at the beginning of 1973, motivated by Menas’s 22.19 and relative consis-
tency result, Magidor [76] established:
If κ is strongly compact, then there is a forcing extension in which κ
remains strongly compact and is also the least measurable cardinal .
This result separated strong compactness from supercompactness in the strongest
possible way, and rather unexpectedly answered the aforementioned question of
Tarski in the negative. See volume II for proofs of Magidor’s results.
Several basic questions about strong compactness have remain unanswered.
The following was not resolved by Magidor’s consistency results:
22.20 Question. Are the following theories equiconsistent?
(a) ZFC + ∃κ(κ is supercompact).
(b) ZFC + ∃κ(κ is strongly compact).

310
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
That there are many normal ultraﬁlters over κ was established by a reﬂection
argument whose inﬂexibility led to the question 22.16; are there other means
available?
22.21 Question. If κ is strongly compact, does it follow that there is more than
one normal ultraﬁlter over κ?
Finally, the following question is related to 22.2 and concerns the possibilities
with forcing:
22.22 Question (Woodin). If κ is strongly compact and 2ν = ν+ for every ν < κ,
then does GCH hold?
§§25, 26 describe developments in different directions related to the analysis
of supercompactness. The ﬁrst pursues the combinatorial study of ⟨Pκγ, ⊂⟩based
on analogies with ⟨κ, <⟩initially seen in connection with normal ultraﬁlters. The
second develops a basic analysis of elementary embeddings and corresponding
weak versions of γ -supercompactness. Unlike for measurability a canonical inner
model theory for γ -supercompactness is not available, with na¨ıve attempts failing,
e.g. if κ < λ and U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκλ, then L[U] = L (25.8).
The approach of §26 does lead to a successful inner model theory for reasonably
substantial hypotheses.
As set theory advanced in the 1970’s to the study of consistency-wise strong
combinatorial propositions, various forcing results soon established supercompact-
ness as a hypothesis of sufﬁcient strength for relative consistency. However, in
addition to lacking an inner model theory for the sharper study of consistency
strength, supercompactness did not seem to have substantial direct consequences
for deﬁnable sets of reals beyond those of measurability. An early, optimistic
conjecture of Solovay [69: 60] was: if there is a supercompact cardinal, then ev-
ery set of reals in L(R) has the perfect set property. In remarkable developments
in the mid-1980’s, this and much more (ADL(R) – see §32) were conﬁrmed and
from the weaker hypotheses of §26. However, it was in the expansive setting pro-
vided by supercompactness that the crucial techniques were ﬁrst developed, with
the weaker hypotheses only emerging in the effort to sharpen implications. With
equiconsistency results established for these hypotheses and continuing progress
in their inner model theory, there is no doubt left as to the intrinsic necessity of
strong hypotheses based on elementary embeddings with closure conditions.

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
311
23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
The large cardinal hypotheses stronger than supercompactness evolved from the
proposals of William Reinhardt. A recurring theme of his work was to investigate
the concept of set together with broad notions of class or property. He considered
various extensions of ZFC based on such notions, and just as an inaccessible
cardinal provides a natural model of ZFC, strong large cardinal hypotheses were
motivated as providing natural models for the emerging theories.
In his 1967 Berkeley thesis Reinhardt (see [70]) established results about
Ackermann’s set theory A. With motivations quite different from those for ZFC,
A provides for a universe with extensionally determined entities, classes in a
broad sense, together with a predicate for sethood. With that predicate rendered
as x ∈V , the main schema of A is: If X ⊆V is deﬁnable using only parameters
from V (and without the predicate V ), then X ∈V . Let A* be A augmented by
the Axiom of Foundation for members of V . Levy and Vaught had observed that
much as for ZF, A* is consistent relative to A, but also that in A* one can prove
the existence of classes like {V }, P(V ), and P(P(V )). On the other hand, Levy
had shown that if the relativization to V of a sentence σ of L∈is provable in
A*, then σ is provable in ZF. Reinhardt then established the converse, so that in
particular A* and ZF are equiconsistent. He also showed that if 0 < η < α < β
and
(∗)
⟨Vα+η, ∈, x⟩x∈Vα ≡⟨Vβ+η, ∈, x⟩x∈Vα
(where ≡denotes elementary equivalence), then ⟨Vβ+η, ∈, Vα⟩is a model of A*,
with Vα interpreting the predicate V for sethood. Levy had established this result
for η = 1; Reinhardt observed that the existence of 0 < η < α < β satisfying (∗)
follows from a sufﬁcient indescribability assumption on β of the sort discussed in
§6 for the motivating case η ∈ω.
At the end of his thesis Reinhardt considered an axiom that was soon proved
inconsistent by Kunen, a dramatic turn of events that will be discussed later in
this section. That axiom was a prima facie extension of a proposal for extending
Ackermann’s set theory, a proposal which can be cast within set theory as follows:
Extend (∗) above in the motivating case η = 1 by incorporating for each “class”
X ⊆Vα a corresponding interpretation j(X) ⊆Vβ to get
⟨Vα+1, ∈, x, X⟩x∈Vα,X⊆Vα ≡⟨Vβ+1, ∈, x, j(X)⟩x∈Vα,X⊆Vα .
It is simple to see that this amounts to asserting that j: Vα+1 ≺Vβ+1 with crit( j) =
α. This is how Silver formulated Reinhardt’s idea, and then Reinhardt considered
arbitrary η > 0:
κ is η-extendible iff there is a ζ and a j: Vκ+η ≺Vζ
with crit( j) = κ and η < j(κ) .
κ is extendible iff κ is η-extendible for every η > 0 .

312
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Thus, embeddings are postulated that are sets, but whose domains and target
structures have the ultimate closure property: they are initial segments of the
universe. Since η ≥κ · ω implies that κ + η = η, the speciﬁc form of the ﬁrst
deﬁnition is pertinent only for small η. For η < κ it is clear that ζ = j(κ)+η, so
that, generalizing the sense from η < ω, η-extendibility asserts that (η+1)st-order
properties are preserved between Vκ and Vj(κ) in a strong way. The condition
η < j(κ) evolved from the η = 1 case; it is convenient to include it in the
deﬁnition, but it is superﬂuous for full extendibility (23.15(b)).
Silver’s 1-extendibility is already quite strong:
23.1 Proposition. If κ is 1-extendible, then κ is measurable, and there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U .
Proof. Let j: Vκ+1 ≺Vj(κ)+1 with crit( j) = κ. Since P(κ) ⊆Vκ+1, a normal
ultraﬁlter can be deﬁned from j as usual by
X ∈U iff
X ⊆κ ∧κ ∈j(X) .
But U
∈
Vj(κ)+1 so that Vj(κ)+1
|=
κ is measurable, and consequently
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U by its deﬁnition.
⊣
We shall soon establish that extendibility implies supercompactness, but also
that these concepts are closely intertwined. However, while supercompactness
was arrived at rather pragmatically as a strengthening of strong compactness,
Reinhardt’s motivations for extendibility were based on his analyses of the concept
of set. We continue to chart his work in order to describe these motivations in
context.
In [74] Reinhardt formulated a set theory S based on a set-existence principle
of Shoenﬁeld. S also provided for a universe of extensionally determined entities
and had a predicate V , and in effect extended Ackermann’s A. For S however,
Reinhardt now viewed V as the collection of “existing” sets and the universe as
consisting of “imaginable” sets – things and imaginings. Shoenﬁeld’s principle
was rendered as: If X ⊆Y for some (imaginable) Y and X is deﬁnable using
only parameters in V , then X ∈V . With S* bearing the analogous relation to S
that A* does to A, Reinhardt observed that the relativization to V of a sentence
σ of L∈is provable in S* exactly when σ is provable in ZF.
Reinhardt then extended S* to a further theory S+ by enriching the notion of
property. He ﬁrst introduced a predicate U for the imaginable sets and a further
predicate P for “existing properties of sets”.
The main new principle that he
now proposed was that each imaginable set consisting of existing sets corresponds
to an existing property of sets, i.e. for any w ⊆V , there is a Q ∈P such
that w = V ∩Q. Reinhardt gave contextual and other arguments for this broad
interpretation of property. He then showed that a structure of form ⟨Vβ, D, ∈, Vα⟩,

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
313
where Vβ interprets U, D ⊆Vβ+1 interprets P, and Vα interprets V , is a model
of S+ iff
(a) If Q′ is deﬁnable in ⟨Vβ, ∈, Q⟩Q∈D, then Q′ ∈D ,
(b) D ∩Vβ = Vα , and
(c) Vα+1 = {Q ∩Vα | Q ∈D} .
(a) provides for the requisite store of properties, (b) expresses Shoenﬁeld’s prin-
ciple in the presence of (a), and (c) expresses Reinhardt’s new principle.
He
showed that these conditions imply that α is measurable with a normal ultraﬁl-
ter containing the set {ξ < α | ξ is measurable}, and as is simple to check, if
j: Vκ+1 ≺Vj(κ)+1 witnesses the 1-extendibility of κ, then ⟨Vj(κ), j“Vκ+1, ∈, Vκ⟩
satisﬁes the conditions.
[74a] was Reinhardt’s most extensive and explicit statement about motivations
for large cardinal axioms based on the concept of set. Proceeding informally this
time from the vantage point of ZFC, he advanced ideas of the sort that he had
pursued in terms of more elaborate formalizations. After considering the role of
the class On in reﬂection arguments for motivating the inaccessible, Mahlo and
indescribable cardinals, Reinhardt introduced V and On as constants in the spirit
of an imagined projection of ideas over new possibilities like VOn+1 and VOn+On.
He argued that since Cantor through his doctrine of the Absolute had intended the
universe of sets to comprehend all possibilities, the theory of the new, formally
projected universe of imaginary sets, even allowing parameters from V , ought to
be the same:
∀x ∈V (ϕV [x] ↔ϕ[x]) .
Reinhardt next extended these considerations into class-set theory with arbi-
trary classes X ⊆V . He argued that a proper class X is essentially different from
a set x in that if there were more ordinals, then x would have exactly the same
members, whereas X would necessarily have new members. Writing j(X) for the
extension of X in the formally projected universe, he came to the schema:
(†)
∀x ∈V ∀X ⊆V (ϕP(V )[x, X] ↔ϕ[x, j(X)]) .
This is the exact counterpart to the aforementioned extension of Ackerman’s A in
Reinhardt’s thesis that led to Silver’s formulation of 1-extendibility. It is consistent
with the persistent theme that sets are sharply delimited and determined by their
extensions, whereas classes in the sense of properties have an essential intensional
quality.
Towards full extendibility, Reinhardt not only considered the cumulative hi-
erarchy as proceeding beyond V = VOn in the formally projected universe, but
projected versions of these further levels. While the introduction of new objects
beyond Cantor’s intentions may violate the universality of the concept of set, Rein-
hardt proposed ([74a: 198]) “to mitigate this sorrow by seeing the universality not
in the extension of the concept of set but in the applicability of the theory of sets.”
This recalls his observation in [74: 13] that the axioms of ZF follow outright, not

314
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
just relativized to V , from his S*. Let λ be a formal ordinal greater than On, with
corresponding Vλ. Reinhardt argued for a projected realm VOn′ corresponding to
V = VOn, a Vλ′ corresponding to Vλ, and a correspondence j: Vλ →Vλ′ so that
j(x) = x for x ∈V , j(On) = On′, and the theory is preserved:
There is a j: Vλ ≺Vλ′ with crit( j) = On and j(On) = On′ ,
and in analogy with (†) for λ = On+1, λ < j(On). This of course is the assertion
of λ-extendibility of On (at least when λ ≥On · ω).
The theory of properties with necessity operator in [80] is the most mature and
sophisticated formalization of Reinhardt’s ideas. Here, properties are elevated to
the status of rich, intensional entities, and modal operators are used to mediate with
extensional entities. A professed feature is expressive power adequate to formulate
extendibility, although he only indicated the treatment of a simple version.
Extendibility is now brought into the fold by describing its relationships to the
other hypotheses, especially supercompactness. As for §22, Solovay-Reinhardt-
Kanamori [78] continues to serve as a general reference.
A simple lemma leads to the initial observation.
23.2 Lemma. There is a formula ϕ(v0, v1) of L∈such that for any α < β,
Vβ |= ϕ[α, x] iff
x = Vα .
Proof. Consider the formulas
ψ1: f is a function ∧dom( f ) ∈On ∧
∀γ ∈dom( f )( f (γ ) = {P( f (ξ)) | ξ < γ }) .
ψ2: v0 = dom( f ) ∧v1 = {P( f (γ )) | γ ∈dom( f )} .
ψ3: v0 = dom( f ) + 1 ∧v1 = P({P( f (γ )) | γ ∈dom( f )}) .
ψ4: v0 = dom( f ) + 2 ∧v1 = P(P({P( f (γ )) | γ ∈dom( f )})) .
ψ1 asserts that f must satisfy the usual recursive deﬁnition of the rank hi-
erarchy, so that f (γ ) = Vγ for γ ∈dom( f ). (The proof could alternately have
been cast in terms of the rank function (cf. 0.2).)
Let ϕ(v0, v1) be ∃f (ψ1 ∧(ψ2 ∨ψ3 ∨ψ4)). To show that this works, suppose
that α < β. It is simple to see that if Vβ |= ϕ[α, x], then x = Vα. For the
converse, assume that x = Vα. It is straightforward to check that if f satisﬁes
ψ1, then f ∈Vdom( f )+3, and if dom( f ) is a limit ordinal, f ∈Vdom( f )+1. Hence,
if α + 2 < β or α is a limit ordinal, then Vβ |= ∃f (ψ1 ∧ψ2)[α, x].
In the
remaining cases argue as follows: If α is a successor ordinal and either α +2 = β
or else α + 1 = β and α −1 is a limit ordinal, then there is an f ∈Vβ with
dom( f ) = α −1 satisfying ψ1, and so Vβ |= ∃f (ψ1 ∧ψ3)[α, x]. Finally, if α is
a successor ordinal, α + 1 = β, and α −1 is a successor ordinal, then there is an
f ∈Vβ with dom( f ) = α −2 satisfying ψ1, and so Vβ |= ∃f (ψ1 ∧ψ4)[α, x]. ⊣

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
315
23.3 Proposition. If κ is η-extendible and 0 < δ < η, then κ is δ-extendible.
Proof. Let j: Vκ+η ≺Vζ witness the η-extendibility of κ. It follows from the
lemma that j(Vκ+δ) = Vj(κ+δ). Hence, formulas can be relativized to show that
j|Vκ+δ: Vκ+δ ≺Vj(κ+δ), conﬁrming δ-extendibility: For any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn)
and sets x1, . . . , xn in Vκ+δ,
Vκ+δ |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iff
Vκ+η |= ϕVκ+δ[x1, . . . , xn]
iff
Vζ |= ϕVj(κ+δ)[ j(x1), . . . , j(xn)]
iff
Vj(κ+δ) |= ϕ[ j(x1), . . . , j(xn)] .
⊣
While it is consistent with the supercompactness of κ that there is no inac-
cessible cardinal above κ (22.8), the extendibility of κ implies the existence of
many large cardinal above κ: If j: Vκ+1 ≺Vj(κ)+1 witnesses the 1-extendibility
of κ, then κ is measurable so that j(κ) is inaccessible in Vj(κ)+1 by elementar-
ity and hence inaccessible in V as P( j(κ)) ⊆Vj(κ)+1. Moreover, by 23.1 and
elementarity {α < j(κ) | α is measurable} is unbounded in j(κ).
In turn, if
j: Vκ+2 ≺Vj(κ)+2 witnesses the 2-extendibility of κ, then j(κ) is itself measur-
able in V as P(P( j(κ))) ⊆Vj(κ)+2. In these ways, extendibility projects stronger
and strong hypotheses upward. These considerations illustrate how strongly the
existence of an extendible cardinal affects the higher levels of the cumulative hier-
archy, and why η-extendibility cannot be formulated, as γ -supercompactness can,
in terms of the existence of ultraﬁlters.
Extendibility is next characterized in terms of the higher-order analogue of
the original formulation of strong compactness. This result of Magidor reinforces
extendibility by explicating it as a direct generalization of a prior concept. The
Lλµ languages were deﬁned in §4; for 1 ≤n ∈ω, an Ln
λµ language is an extension
of an Lλµ language allowing higher-order variables of type at most n. With the
intended interpretation of type i + 1 variables as ranging over Pi(D) where D is
the domain, there are the corresponding notions of satisﬁability and ν-satisﬁability
as for L1
λµ = Lλµ.
κ is Ln
λµ-compact iff any collection of Ln
λµ sentences,
if κ-satisﬁable, is satisﬁable .
Thus, κ > ω and κ is L1
κκ-compact iff κ is strongly compact.
23.4 Theorem (Magidor [71a]). The following are equivalent for κ > ω:
(a) κ is extendible.
(b) κ is Ln
κκ-compact for every 1 ≤n ∈ω.
(c) κ is L2
κω-compact.
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that κ is extendible, 1 ≤n ∈ω, and Σ is a κ-satisﬁable
collection of Ln
κκ sentences. It can be assumed that Σ is coded as a set via an
arithmetization of the language where the logical symbols are coded by members
of Vκ. Let η ≥κ · ω be a limit ordinal sufﬁciently large so that |Σ| ≤η and
Vη |= Σ is κ-satisﬁable. By η-extendibility, let j: Vη ≺Vζ with crit( j) = κ and

316
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
η < j(κ). Then Vζ |= j(Σ) is j(κ)-satisﬁable. Note that j“Σ ⊆j(Σ) and so
j“Σ ∈Vζ, and that | j“Σ| ≤η < j(κ) and so this holds in Vζ as ζ must be a limit
ordinal. Hence, Vζ |= j“Σ has a model A, in which case A really is a model of
j“Σ. But then, A is a model of Σ, since the formulas in j“Σ are like those of Σ
with at most the non-logical symbols renamed. It follows that κ is Ln
κκ-compact.
To complete the proof, it remains to show that if κ is L2
κω-compact, then κ
is extendible. Suppose then that η ≥κ · ω; we seek a ζ and a j: Vη ≺Vζ with
crit( j) = κ and η < j(κ). In terms of distinct constants ˙x for x ∈Vη and cα
where α ≤η, let Σ be the L2
κω theory of
⟨Vη, ∈, x⟩x∈Vη
together with the sentences ⌈cα ∈˙κ ∧cα ∈cβ⌉for α < β ≤η. Then Σ is
κ-satisﬁable, so by hypothesis it is satisﬁable. Now Σ contains a Π1 sentence σ
so that for any transitive set X, X |= σ iff X = Vα for some α (cf. 0.2), and a Π1
sentence τ asserting that ∈is well-founded. Hence, taking a transitive collapse Σ
has a model of form
⟨Vζ, ∈, x, γα⟩x∈Vη,α≤η ,
where γα interprets cα. Clearly, the map j: Vη →Vζ deﬁned by j(x) = x is
elementary. Also, for any α < κ, Σ contains the Lκω sentence
∀v(v ∈˙α ↔
ξ<α v = ˙ξ) ,
so that by induction j is the identity on κ. Finally, η < j(κ) since {γα | α ≤η}
is a subset of j(κ) of ordertype η + 1 > η.
⊣
Although extendibility reﬂects more ethereal ambitions than supercompact-
ness, the next two results show how their local versions are closely intertwined.
23.5 Exercise. If κ is |Vκ+η|-supercompact and η < κ, then there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is η-extendible} ∈U .
Hint. Argue as for the forward direction of 22.10.
⊣
23.6 Proposition.
If κ is η-extendible and δ + 2 ≤η, then κ is |Vκ+δ|-
supercompact. Hence, if κ is extendible, then κ is supercompact.
Proof.
Let j: Vκ+η
≺Vζ witness the η-extendibility of κ.
Noting that
P(PκVκ+δ) ⊆Vκ+δ+2 ⊆Vη, deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆PκVκ+δ ∧j“Vκ+δ ∈j(X) .
Then it is straightforward to check that this is a normal ultraﬁlter over PκVκ+δ,
provided that enough apparatus can be coded into the domain of j. This however
is routine to check:

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
317
To verify, for example, the choice function condition (cf. 22.6), suppose that
f is a choice function on PκVκ+δ. For each y ∈Vκ+δ, set
y+ = (y ∩(Vκ+δ −ω)) ∪{n + 1 | n ∈y ∩ω}
so that ∅̸∈y. Then for each x ∈PκVκ+δ, set
xf = {y+ | y ∈x} ∪{{∅} ∪f (x)+}
so that ∅tags f (x). Clearly xf ∈Vκ+δ+1. Finally, set
X f = {xf | x ∈PκVκ+δ}
so that X f ∈Vκ+δ+2. Hence, X f ∈Vη and faithfully codes f , and can be used in
conjunction with the elementarity of j to verify the choice function condition for
f .
⊣
That an extendible cardinal is supercompact can also be derived along the
lines of 22.10.
The conjunction of even 1-extendibility and supercompactness transcends
supercompactness:
23.7 Proposition. If κ is supercompact and 1-extendible, then there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is supercompact} ∈U .
In particular, the least supercompact cardinal is not 1-extendible.
Proof. Let j: Vκ+1 ≺Vj(κ)+1 witness the 1-extendibility of κ, and U the usual
normal ultraﬁlter over κ deﬁned from j. Since j(κ) is inaccessible, Vj(κ)+1 |= κ
is γ -supercompact for κ ≤γ < j(κ). Hence,
A = {α < κ | α is γ -supercompact for α ≤γ < κ} ∈U .
But κ is supercompact, so by 22.9 every α ∈A is supercompact.
⊣
This readily leads to a rich supply of cardinals for Menas’s result 22.19:
23.8 Exercise. The conclusion of 23.7 can be strengthened to:
{α < κ | α is supercompact and a limit of supercompact cardinals} ∈U .
⊣
On the other hand, supercompactness reins back its stronger cousin in the
following sense:
23.9 Exercise.
(a) If κ < λ, κ is extendible, and λ is supercompact, then Vλ |= κ is ex-
tendible.

318
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
(b) If Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is extendible)), then Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is extendible
∧¬∃λ(λ > κ ∧λ is supercompact))).
Hint. For (a), remembering that ⌈x = Vα⌉is ΠZF
1
check that ⌈κ is extendible⌉is
ΠZF
3
and apply 22.3. For (b), use (a) and 22.9.
⊣
Hence, while extendibility may imply the existence of proper classes of var-
ious large cardinals, this does not encompass supercompact cardinals.
Finally, the next result is analogous to 22.3:
23.10 Proposition. If κ is extendible, then Vκ ≺3 V .
Proof. Suppose that ϕ is Σ3, say ∃v0ψ(v0, v1) where ψ is Π2 for simplicity, and
x ∈Vκ. It follows from 22.3 that if Vκ |= ϕ[x], then ϕ[x]. For the converse,
we only need the simple corollary of extendibility that there are arbitrarily large
inaccessible λ > κ such that Vκ ≺Vλ:
Assume that ϕ[x], and let y be such that ψ[y, x]. Let λ > κ be inaccessible
such that Vκ ≺Vλ and y ∈Vλ. Since ψ is Π2 and Vλ = Hλ, by the downward
direction of Levy’s result mentioned before 22.3, Vλ |= ψ[y, x]. But then Vλ |=
ϕ[x], and hence Vκ |= ϕ[x].
⊣
23.11 Exercise. If κ < λ, Vλ |= κ is extendible, and λ is extendible, then κ is
extendible.
Hint. Argue as for 22.9, using ⌈κ is extendible⌉is ΠZF
3 .
⊣
This shows that 23.10 is optimal in the sense that the ΣZF
4
sentence ⌈there is
an extendible cardinal⌉does not hold in Vκ if κ is the least extendible cardinal.
These various results, drawn mainly from Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78],
show how extendibility extends supercompactness, but also how the two concepts
are closely related. Of the two, supercompactness has become a focal hypothesis
in set theory, serving as the beginning hypothesis in several relative consistency
results, whereas extendibility has receded from view. The simple 23.5, showing
how local extendibility is a consequence of local supercompactness, may provide
the underlying reason.
Proofs of a Theorem of Kunen
At the end of his thesis Reinhardt brieﬂy considered the following axiom as
a strong expression of ideas for extending Ackermann’s set theory: There is
a j: V ≺V .
As noted in his [74a: 200], this is also suggested as an ex-
tension of extendibility:
For such a j with crit( j) = κ and any ordinal η,
j|Vκ+η: Vκ+η ≺Vj(κ+η), and so save for a small quibble about η < j(κ), it
is as if one j works for all η. Although not the original motivation, j: V ≺V is
most immediately suggested as the ultimate possibility in terms of closure condi-
tions on target inner models, proceeding progressively from measurability through
degrees of supercompactness.

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
319
Reinhardt’s proposal led to a dramatic turn of events. After initial results
aroused some suspicion, Kunen established that in ZFC there can be no
j: V ≺V :
23.12 Theorem (Kunen [71b]). Suppose that j: V ≺M. Then M ̸= V .
As the quantiﬁcation ∀j over classes j cannot be formalized in ZFC, this
result can only be regarded as a schema of theorems, one for each j. Kunen’s
argument does lead to a simple assertion about sets (23.14(a)).
23.12 has delimited the whole large cardinal enterprise. It could have been
that j: V ≺V would serve as the culmination of the guiding idea of closure
conditions on range models of elementary embeddings; a new guiding idea in
some orthogonal direction would have been exploited to formulate still stronger
hypotheses; and so on. Rather, in quickly resolving the situation with an appro-
priately simple statement, Kunen’s result sharply deﬁned the context and showed
that a completion of ZFC in a speciﬁc sense exists. The particular form of the
result was intriguing and unexpected, and although the original proof has an ad
hoc ﬂavor, what it established has not since been superceded by any stronger
inconsistency result.
Several proofs of 23.12 are given. The ﬁrst is that original proof, which
applied a combinatorial result of Erd˝os-Hajnal [66]. The result is of independent
interest in connection with J´onsson cardinals (§8) since it shows that if inﬁnitary
operations are allowed, then there are J´onsson algebras of every inﬁnite cardinality.
For any set x of ordinals and function f ,
f is ω-J´onsson for x iff
f : [x]ω →x and for any y ⊆x
with |y| = |x|, f “[y]ω = x .
There is a function ω-J´onsson for x iff there is a function ω-J´onsson for |x|, and
for cardinals κ, there is a function ω-J´onsson for κ iff κ−→
/ [κ]ω
κ in the notation of
§8. The following proof is drawn from Galvin-Prikry [76] and has an antecedent
in Galvin [65].
23.13 Theorem (Erd˝os-Hajnal [66]). For any λ, there is a function ω-J´onsson for
λ.
Proof.
For x, y ∈[λ]ω set x ∼y iff they have equal “tails”, i.e. for some
α < ∪x, x −α = y −α. Then ∼is an equivalence relation on [λ]ω, so for each
equivalence class E choose a representative xE ∈E. (This is the use of AC in
this proof.) Now for any x ∈[λ]ω, with E the equivalence class of x and α ∈xE
minimal such that xE −(α + 1) = x −(α + 1), set g(x) = α.
To complete the proof, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd an A ∈[λ]λ such that for any B ∈
[A]λ, g“[B]ω ⊇A, since for such an A a function ω-J´onsson for A can be readily
derived from g. So, assume to the contrary that no such A exists. Then for n ∈ω
there are An ∈[λ]λ and an ∈λ with An ⊇An+1 and an+1 ∈An −(an +1) such that

320
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
an+1 /∈g“[An+1]ω. Set y = {an | n ∈ω} ∈[λ]ω. With E the equivalence class of
y let m ∈ω be such that for some α < ∪xE, {an | m ≤n < ω} = xE −α. But
then, g({an | m < n < ω}) = am so that am ∈g“[Am]ω, which is a contradiction.
⊣
First Proof of 23.12 (Kunen [71b]).
Let κ = crit( j), and jn denote the nth
iteration of j, i.e. for any x ∈V , j0(x) = x and jn+1(x) = j( jn(x)) for n ∈ω.
Set λ = sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}) so that λ is the least ordinal δ above κ such that
j(δ) = δ. To conclude that M ̸= V , it is established that j“λ ̸∈M:
Assume to the contrary that j“λ ∈M, and let f be ω-J´onsson for λ. In M,
j( f ) is ω-J´onsson for j(λ) = λ, and j“λ ∈[λ]λ ∩M. However, we shall check
that j( f )“[ j“λ]ω ⊆j“λ, which is a contradiction since j“λ ̸= λ (for example,
κ ∈λ −j“λ).
Suppose then that s ∈[ j“λ]ω. Clearly there is a t ∈[λ]ω such that j(t) =
j“t = s. But then, j( f )(s) = j( f ) j(t) = j( f (t)) ∈j“λ.
⊣
As Kunen observed, since λ is a strong limit cardinal of coﬁnality ω, 2λ = λℵ0,
and to establish 23.13 for such λ there is a simple recursive construction available
(albeit one that uses a bit more of AC): Let {⟨xα, γα⟩| α < 2λ} enumerate [λ]λ×λ.
For α < 2λ recursively choose sα ∈[xα]ω so that sα ̸= sβ for β < α; this is
possible since 2λ = λℵ0. Then any function f : [λ]ω →λ such that f (sα) = γα is
ω-J´onsson for λ.
Other proofs of 23.12 appeared in the late 1980’s.
One, due to Woodin,
depends only on partitioning stationary sets into disjoint stationary subsets:
Second Proof of 23.12 (Woodin). Let κ = crit( j) and λ = sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω})
as before. By Solovay’s 16.9, there is an S: κ →P(λ+) such that ran(S) is a
partition of {ξ < λ+ | cf(ξ) = ω} into sets stationary in λ+. (In fact, because
of the nature of the set to be partitioned, a recursive deﬁnition of such an S is
possible.) Since j(λ) = λ, λ+ ≤j(λ+) = λ+M ≤λ+ so that equality pervades.
Hence, by elementarity j(S): j(κ) →P(λ+) and
( j(S)(κ) ⊆{ξ < λ+ | cf(ξ) = ω} is stationary in λ+)M .
Assume to the contrary that j(S)(κ) is really stationary in λ+, a consequence of
M = V . Then by λ+-completeness j(S)(κ) ∩S(α0) is stationary in λ+ for some
α0 < κ. Also,
C = {ξ < λ+ | j(ξ) = ξ ∧cf(ξ) = ω}
is readily seen to be ω-closed unbounded in λ+. It follows (0.1(d)) that there is a
ξ0 ∈( j(S)(κ) ∩S(α0)) ∩C. But then, ξ0 = j(ξ0) ∈j(S(α0)) = j(S)(α0) so that
ξ0 ∈j(S)(κ) ∩j(S)(α0), which is a contradiction since by elementarity the range
of j(S) must consist of pairwise disjoint sets.
⊣
Todorˇcevi´c observed that the consideration of C is unnecessary: Assume
as above that j(S)(κ) is really stationary in λ+. Since j“λ+ is unbounded in
j(λ+) = λ+,

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
321
C = {ξ < λ+ | ∃s(s ∈[ j“λ+]ω ∧ξ = sup(s))}
is ω-closed unbounded, so let ξ0 ∈j(S)(κ) ∩C with s ∈[ j“λ+]ω such that
ξ0 = sup(s). There is a t ∈[λ+]ω such that j(t) = s, and sup(t) ∈S(α0) for some
α0 < κ. But j(sup(t)) = ξ0 ∈j(S)(κ), and so j(α0) = κ by elementarity, which
is a contradiction.
In fact, for regular µ > ω, with S: µ →P(µ) such that ran(S) is a partition
of {ξ < µ | cf(ξ) = ω} into sets stationary in µ, f : [µ]ω →µ deﬁned by f (s) =
that unique α such that sup(s) ∈S(α) is a simple example due to Solovay (see
Galvin-Prikry [76: 370]) of a function ω-J´onsson for µ. Consequently, we have a
reversion to Kunen’s argument through an explicit function of ω-J´onsson sort for
λ+ = j(λ+).
The following is a simpler version of a proof of 23.12 due to Mikio Harada;
rather than depending on combinatorial contingencies it reveals a more structural
constraint.
Third Proof of 23.12 (Harada). Letting λ be as before, assume again to the contrary
that j“λ ∈M.
Note ﬁrst that for any bijection g: 2λ →P(λ), j“λ ∈P(λ)M = ran( j(g)).
So, let σ be the least ordinal such that for some injective function F: σ →P(λ),
j“λ ∈ran( j(F)). Fix such an F, and set S = ran(F). Now deﬁne U by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆S ∧j“λ ∈j(X) .
Then U is an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over S, so let
i: V ≺N ∼= Ult(V, U) .
Recalling the theory of normal ultraﬁlters from §22, if id: S →S is the
identity map, the deﬁnition of U implies successively that:
(i) i“λ = [id]U and so i“λ ∈ran(i(F)) ,
(ii) α = [⟨ot(x ∩α) | x ∈S⟩]U for α ≤λ , and
(iii) i|(λ + 1) = j|(λ + 1) .
(iii) follows by arguments for 22.12, since k: N →M deﬁned by k([ f ]U) =
j( f )( j“λ) is elementary; j = k ◦i; and k(α) = α for α ≤λ by (ii).
The switch to ultrapowers secures more structure: By 22.4(b), i“λ ∈N
implies that P(λ)N = P(λ) and also that i|Vλ ∈N by a simple argument as λ
is a strong limit cardinal. Now for any X ∈P(λ), i(X) = 
α<λ i(X ∩α) since
i(λ) = λ, so that in turn i“P(λ) = {
α<λ i(X ∩α) | X ∈P(λ)} ∈N. Again by
22.4(b) it follows that N has all the enumerations of P(λ)N = P(λ), and hence
(∗)
2λ = (2λ)N = i((2λ)) .
The properties of σ are now used to derive a contradiction.
Clearly the
deﬁnitions imply that σ is a cardinal and |S| = σ ≤2λ. 22.4(c) implies that

322
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
i“σ + /∈N; but since i“P(λ) ∈N as noted above, it follows from 22.4(a)(b)
that 2λ < σ +.
Hence, it must be that σ
= 2λ.
But then, i(σ) = σ
from (∗), so that i(σ) = sup(i“σ).
Since i“λ ∈ran(i(F)) by (i), it fol-
lows that i“λ ∈ran(i(F)|i(α)) = ran(i(F|α)) for some α < σ.
But then,
j“λ ∈ran( j(F|α)) by deﬁnition of U and i, contradicting the minimality of σ.
⊣
These proofs of 23.12 lead to the following reﬁnements:
23.14 Corollary.
(a) For any δ, there is no j: Vδ+2 ≺Vδ+2.
(b) If j: V ≺M and δ is the least ordinal above crit( j) such that j(δ) = δ,
then j“δ /∈M.
Proof. (a) Assume to the contrary that there is such a j. Clearly j(δ) = δ, and
crit( j) < δ. (Elementary embeddings are not the identity on their domains by
convention, and the argument for 5.1(b) implies that j must move some ordinal.)
As before, let κ = crit( j), and noting that each iterate jn(κ) is deﬁned and less
than δ, set λ = sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}) ≤δ. Kunen’s contradiction can now be
derived since the function ω-J´onsson for λ is in Vλ+2, and hence in the domain
of j.
For Woodin’s proof, note that subsets of λ+ can be faithfully coded by
members of Vλ+2.
For example, for each well-ordering R ⊆λ × λ of λ, let
αR < λ+ be its ordertype, and eR: ⟨αR, <⟩→⟨λ, R⟩the order-isomorphism. Let
p: (λ × λ) × λ →λ be a bijection, noting that p ⊆Vλ. Then for any X ⊆λ+,
{p“(R × eR“(X ∩αR)) | R is a well-ordering of λ} ∈Vλ+2
can serve as a code for X. Short sequences of subsets of λ+ can be similarly coded,
and it is straightforward to see that the relevant assertions like the stationariness
of a subset of λ+ can be expressed in Vλ+2 in terms of codes. Hence, Woodin’s
contradiction can be derived via codes with j|Vλ+2.
Harada’s proof can also be carried out with j|Vλ+2, since every well-ordering
of a subset of P(λ) can be coded by a member of Vλ+2, and so the σ and
corresponding F and U ⊆Vλ+2 can be deﬁned via such codes.
(b) Note that if λ is again deﬁned as before from crit( j), then δ = λ. Kunen’s
and Harada’s proofs thus show that j“δ /∈M. To push through Woodin’s ar-
gument, ﬁrst switch from j to an ultrapower embedding as in Harada’s proof:
Assuming that j“λ ∈M, deﬁne U over P(λ) by
X ∈U iff
X ⊆P(λ) ∧j“λ ∈j(X) ,
and let i: V ≺N ∼= Ult(V, U). Then as seen before, crit(i) =crit( j), i(λ) =
λ, i“λ ∈N, and i“P(λ) ∈N. Hence 2λN ⊆N, and Woodin’s proof can be
carried out via codes as for (a).
⊣

23. Extendibility to Inconsistency
323
The following makes good on a small debt concerning the deﬁnitions of
γ -supercompactness and extendibility.
23.15 Proposition.
(a) κ is γ -supercompact iff there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ and γ M ⊆
M.
(b) κ is extendible iff for any η > κ there is a j: Vη ≺Vζ with crit( j) = κ.
Proof. (a) Suppose that j is as stated; only the condition γ < j(κ) is missing.
But by 23.14(b), γ < sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}), and hence γ < jn(κ) for some n ∈ω.
Hence, it sufﬁces to establish
(∗)
For every n ∈ω with n > 0 there is an inner model
Mn of ZFC such that jn: V ≺Mn and γ Mn ⊆Mn .
To this end ﬁrst extend j to classes R by stipulating that
j+(R) = 
α j(R ∩Vα) .
Note that for classes R1, . . . , Rm,
j: ⟨V, ∈, R1, . . . , Rm⟩≺⟨M, ∈, j+(R1), . . . , j+(Rm)⟩
(where extending a standing convention, ≺is ≺1 for formalizability) via the Re-
ﬂection Principle for ZF.
(∗) can now be established by induction on n.
For n = 1 it holds with
M1 = M. Assume now that it holds for n, and set Mn+1 = j+(Mn). Since
j: ⟨V, ∈, jn, Mn⟩≺⟨M, ∈, j+( jn), Mn+1⟩,
Mn+1 is transitive, and j+( jn): M ≺Mn+1 so that j+( jn) ◦j: V ≺Mn+1. But
j+( jn) ⊇{⟨j(x), jn+1(x)⟩| x ∈V ⟩}, and so j+( jn) ◦j = jn+1. Finally, since
⟨V, ∈, Mn⟩≺⟨M, ∈, Mn+1⟩and γ Mn ⊆Mn, j(γ )Mn+1 ∩M ⊆Mn+1, and so
γ Mn+1 = γ Mn+1 ∩M ⊆Mn+1 .
(b) It sufﬁces to show from the latter assertion that, taking η ≥κ · ω, κ is
η-extendible – only the condition η < j(κ) is missing. For this purpose, let γ > η
be such that
(i) whenever β < γ and for some ζ there is a k: Vη ≺Vζ with
crit(k) = κ and k(κ) = β, there is such a k with a ζ < γ .
(ii) cf(γ ) = ω1 .
Such a γ exists by a simple closure argument iterated ω1 times. By hypothesis,
let j: Vγ ≺Vρ with crit( j) = κ. If jn(κ) were deﬁned for every n ∈ω, then
sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}) < γ as cf(γ ) = ω1, and we would be able to derive Kunen’s
contradiction. Hence, it follows that there is an m ∈ω such that jm(κ) < γ ≤
jm+1(κ).

324
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Let P(i) be the assertion:
There is an e: Vη ≺Vζ for some ζ with crit(e) = κ and e(κ) = ji+1(κ) .
It sufﬁces to establish P(m), for then η-extendibility would follow from η < γ ≤
jm+1(κ). To this end, P(i) is established for every i ≤m by induction on i:
Set j = j|Vη. Then as for 23.3, j: Vη ≺Vj(η) with crit( j) = κ and j(κ) =
j(κ), and P(0) holds. Now assume P(i) where i < m. Then because ji+1(κ) < γ
it follows from (i) that for some ζ < γ there is an k: Vη ≺Vζ with crit(k) = κ
and k(κ) = ji+1(κ).
j can therefore by applied to k to conclude by 23.2 and
elementarity that in Vρ, and hence in V , there is an k: Vj(η) ≺Vj(ζ) with crit(k) =
j(κ) and k( j(κ)) = ji+2(κ). But then, with j as above, k ◦j: Vη ≺Vj(ζ) with
crit(k ◦j) = κ and k ◦j(κ) = ji+2(κ). Hence, P(i + 1) obtains, and the proof is
complete.
⊣
Because of its obvious import, Kunen’s result quickly came under close
scrutiny. A prominent feature of the proofs is the appeal to the Axiom of Choice
at the level of a well-ordering of P(λ). This is a crucial factor in getting an ω-
J´onsson function for λ in the ﬁrst proof (actually, a well-ordering of [λ]ω sufﬁces
for the given proof of 23.13), in splitting {ξ < λ+ | cf(ξ) = ω} into κ stationary
subsets of λ+ (through their codes in P(λ)), and in arguing for the existence of
σ in the third. The following unresolved question is therefore of foundational
interest:
23.16 Question. Is it provable in ZF that there is no j: V ≺V ?
Pending an answer, Kunen’s result can best be viewed as an ultimate lim-
itation imposed by the Axiom of Choice on the extent of reﬂection possible in
the universe. ZFC rallies at last to force a veritable G¨otterd¨ammerung for large
cardinals!

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
325
24. The Strongest Hypotheses
This section describes the strongest large cardinal hypotheses not known to be in-
consistent, starting with those on the verge of Kunen’s result and then n-hugeness
and Vopˇenka’s Principle. Like the development of set theory after the discovery of
the antinomies, there was a stepping back from the precipice of Kunen’s inconsis-
tency, a charting out of possibilities that remained, and with the passage of time,
a growing conﬁdence in the delimited ediﬁce. However, unlike the emergence of
the cumulative hierarchy and other guiding ideas that provided intuitive underpin-
nings for ZFC, it is doubtful that even heuristic arguments can be put forward for
the optimality of Kunen’s result, because of its basis in a speciﬁc mathematical
contingency. The strongest hypotheses thus stand on much shakier ground, but
their study has a natural appeal owing to the power and simplicity of the concepts
involved as well as the possibility of some new apocalyptic inconsistency.
The following propositions just weaker than those denied by 23.14 were
considered in Gaifman [74] and Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78]:
I1. For some δ, there is a j: Vδ+1 ≺Vδ+1 .
I2. There is a j: V ≺M such that Vδ ⊆M
for some δ > crit( j) satisfying j(δ) = δ .
I3. For some δ, there is a j: Vδ ≺Vδ .
The class assertion I2 is formalizable through a coming set characterization.
A proposition yet stronger than all of these, I0, will be mentioned shortly.
These propositions have thus far deﬁed all attempts at refutation in ZFC.
It is clear from the proof of 23.14 that if in each case κ = crit( j) and λ =
sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}) as before, then necessarily δ is λ, except that for I3 δ could
also be λ + 1 to yield the stronger I1. One attempt to refute I1 would be to get a
function in Vλ+1 that would play the role of the function ω-J´onsson for λ. Since
λ is a limit of measurable cardinals, namely the jn(κ)’s, λ is J´onsson (8.7) so that
[λ]ω cannot be replaced by [λ]<ω in f : [λ]ω →λ. However, a positive answer to
the following would refute I1.
24.1 Question (Magidor). For strong limit λ is there an f : 
ν<λ[ν]ω →λ such
that whenever y ∈[λ]λ, f “(
ν<λ[ν ∩y]ω) = λ?
That is, is there an analogue of the function ω-J´onsson for λ with domain
consisting of the subsets of λ of ordertype ω that are bounded below λ?
Of
course, such an analogue would be in Vλ+1. Masahiro Shioya [93] has shown that
a positive answer to 24.1 would also refute I2.
Some results about I1-I3 are now established, and later some recent work
described in light of which these propositions might be approached with some
conﬁdence. Recalling the proof of 23.15(a), for j: Vδ ≺Vδ with δ a limit ordinal
deﬁne an extension j+: Vδ+1 →Vδ+1 by stipulating for R ⊆Vδ that
j+(R) = 
α<δ j(R ∩Vα) .

326
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Since Vδ × Vδ ⊆Vδ, j+(R) is thus deﬁned for relations R on Vδ, functions
R: Vδ →Vδ, and the like. j+ is not generally elementary, but signiﬁcantly, it is
the only possibility for an elementary extension of j to domain Vδ+1.
The following characterization of I2, evident from Gaifman [74: 89] or Powell
[74: 129], clariﬁes its relationship to I1 and I3:
24.2 Proposition. The following are equivalent for any κ and δ:
(a) There is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ < δ = j(δ) and Vδ ⊆M.
(b) There is a j: Vδ ≺Vδ with crit( j) = κ such that whenever R is a well-
founded relation on Vδ, so is j+(R).
Proof. For the forward direction, set j = j|Vδ. Then j: Vδ ≺Vδ, and for any
R ⊆Vδ, j
+(R) = j(R). If moreover R is a well-founded relation, then M |= j(R)
is well-founded. But then, by absoluteness (0.3) j(R) is well-founded in V .
For the converse direction, the idea is that although no ultrapower embed-
ding can have the requisite properties, we can take a direct limit of ultrapower
embeddings: For n ∈ω, set κn = jn(κ) and deﬁne Un by:
X ∈Un iff
X ⊆P(κn) ∧j“κn ∈j(X) .
Noting that j“κn ∈P(κn+1) and X ⊆P(κn) implies that j(X) ⊆P(κn+1), it is
simple to check that Un is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over P(κn). Set
in: V ≺Mn ∼= Ult(V, Un) .
Recalling the theory of normal ultraﬁlters in §22, with idn: P(κn) →P(κn) the
identity map,
(i) in“κn = [idn]Un , and so
(ii) α = [⟨ot(x ∩α) | x ∈P(κn)⟩]Un for α ≤κn ,
(iii) crit(in) = κ , and
(iv) Vκn ⊆Mn .
For (iii), note that by the representation of κ given by (ii) and the deﬁnition of
Un, κ < in(κ) iff ot( j“κn ∩j(κ)) < j(κ), and the latter holds since the ordertype
is κ.
(iv) follows from (i) and 22.4(a) by an inductive argument, since κn is
inaccessible.
Next, for n ≤m < ω deﬁne knm: Mn →Mm by:
knm([ f ]Un) = [⟨f (x ∩κn) | x ∈P(κm)⟩]Um .
Then recalling 22.12 and subsequent remarks,
(v) knm: Mn ≺Mm , and
(vi) knm(x) = x for every x ∈Vκn .
For (vi), knm(α) = α for every α ≤κn by (ii), and so with (iv) the rank argument
for 5.1(b) can be used.
Finally, as ⟨⟨⟨Mn, ∈⟩| n ∈ω⟩, ⟨knm | n ≤m⟩⟩is seen to be a directed system,
let ⟨M, ∈M⟩be its direct limit. For n ∈ω let

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
327
kn: ⟨Mn, ∈⟩≺⟨M, ∈M⟩
be the corresponding embedding so that km ◦knm = kn for n ≤m, and let
i: ⟨V, ∈⟩≺⟨M, ∈M⟩
so that kn ◦in = i. ⟨M, ∈M⟩is well-founded:
Assume to the contrary that there are zr ∈M such that zr+1 ∈M zr ∈M OnM
for every r ∈ω. For such r, let κnr be such that κnr ≤κnr+1, and gr: P(κnr ) →On
such that knr ([gr]) = zr. Since | 
r∈ω ran(gr)| ≤δ, there is a well-ordering R
of δ and an order-preserving injection p: ⟨
r∈ω ran(gr), <⟩→⟨δ, R⟩. It is now
straightforward to check from the deﬁnitions of the Un’s and knm’s that for every
n ∈ω,
⟨j(p ◦gr+1)( j“κnr+1), j(p ◦gr)( j“κnr )⟩∈j+(R) .
But then, j+(R) is ill-founded, contradicting a key hypothesis on j.
M can now be identiﬁed with its transitive collapse, and ∈M with ∈. The
proof is complete, since crit(i) = κ by (iii) and Vδ ⊆M by (iv) and (vi).
⊣
This characterization leads to the following transcendence results of I1 over
I2 and I2 over I3. For convenience, temporarily let I1(κ, δ) be the proposition
that there is a j: Vδ+1 ≺Vδ+1 with crit( j) = κ, and analogously deﬁne I2(κ, δ)
(in terms of the above characterization for formalizability) and I3(κ, δ).
24.3 Proposition. Suppose that I1(κ, δ). Then:
(a) (Gaifman [74: 89]) I2(κ, δ).
(b) There is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | I2(α, δ)} ∈U .
Proof. Suppose that j: Vδ+1 ≺Vδ+1 with crit( j) = κ. For (a), set j = j|Vδ.
Then j: Vδ ≺Vδ by the argument for 23.3, and for any R ⊆Vδ, j
+(R) = j(R).
Moreover, R is a well-founded relation exactly when it is so in the sense of Vδ+1,
since Vδ+1 contains all functions: ω →Vδ. Hence, the well-foundedness of R
implies the well-foundedness of j(R) by elementarity.
For (b), note that the above argument shows that Vδ+1 |= I2(κ, δ) since there
is an S ∈Vδ+1 coding the satisfaction relation for Vδ. Hence, the result follows
by the usual reﬂection argument using the normal ultraﬁlter over κ deﬁned from
j.
⊣
24.4 Proposition. Suppose that I2(κ, δ). Then:
(a) I3(κ, δ).
(b) There is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | I3(α, δ)} ∈U .
Proof.
(a) is immediate in terms of 24.2.
For (b), ﬁrst let j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = κ < δ = j(δ) and Vδ ⊆M as in that characterization. It sufﬁces, by

328
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
the usual reﬂection argument using the normal ultraﬁlter over κ deﬁned from j,
to show that
M |= ∃i(i: Vδ ≺Vδ ∧crit(i) = κ) .
It cannot be asserted that j|Vδ ∈M, but a well-foundedness argument sufﬁces:
Set
I = {i | i: Vα ≺Vβ for some α < β < δ and crit(i) = κ} .
Noting that by elementarity the coﬁnality of δ in M is also ω, ﬁx a sequence
⟨γn | n ∈ω⟩∈M coﬁnal in δ. Now deﬁne < on I as follows: For i, i′ ∈I, say
with i: Vα ≺Vβ and i′: Vα′ ≺Vβ′,
i < i′ iff
i ⊇i′ ∧∃n ∈ω(γn ∈dom(i) −dom(i′)) .
Then let ≤∗be the reﬂexive, transitive closure of <, i.e. that partial order in which
i′ is an immediate successor of i exactly when i < i′.
Since Vδ ⊆M and ⟨γn | n ∈ω⟩∈M, I M = I and ≤∗M
= ≤∗. If ≤∗is
ill-founded in M, then the union of any inﬁnite ≤∗-descending sequence would be
an i: Vδ ≺Vδ as desired. So, assume to the contrary that ≤∗is well-founded in M.
But then, by absoluteness (0.3) ≤∗is well-founded in V . This is a contradiction,
since some subsequence of ⟨j|Vjn+1(κ)| n ∈ω⟩is an inﬁnite ≤∗-descending chain.
⊣
24.3(b) and 24.4(b) are simple reﬂection observations focusing on the critical
point κ. For reﬂection on the δ, Solovay (see Gaifman [74: 92]) observed that if
I2(κ, δ), then for some κ′ < δ′ < κ, I3(κ′, δ′). As part of a latter-day, detailed
analysis of I1–I3 through deﬁnability, Laver [97] established that if I1(κ, δ), then
for some κ′ < δ′ < κ, I2(κ′, δ′).
The following is an observation concerning I3. For j: Vδ ≺Vδ with δ a limit
ordinal, j had been extended to a j+: Vδ+1 →Vδ+1 by stipulating for R ⊆Vδ that
j+(R) = 
α<δ j(R ∩Vα). What about taking R itself to be a map k: Vδ ≺Vδ?
24.5 Exercise. Suppose that j: Vδ ≺Vδ and k: Vδ ≺Vδ. Then j+(k): Vδ ≺Vδ,
and crit( j+(k)) = j(crit(k)).
Hint.
One way to show that j+(k) is elementary is to replace quantiﬁers by
Skolem functions and to use a reﬂection argument.
⊣
Hence, while the extendibility of κ may imply the existence of various large
cardinals above κ, I3 is a large cardinal property of κ = crit( j) that implies the
very same large cardinal property for a cardinal above κ.
Attitudes about and expectations concerning I1-I3 have evolved since their
formulation, from skepticism toward conﬁdence and acceptance.
In Solovay-
Reinhardt-Kanamori [78: 109] we had written: “It seems likely that I1, I2, and
I3 are all inconsistent since they appear to differ from the proposition proved
inconsistent by Kunen only in an inessential technical way.” However, this may
not be the case. As mentioned earlier, the Axiom of Choice ﬁgures prominently

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
329
in the proof of Kunen’s result by providing a well-ordering of P(λ), and such
well-orderings ﬁrst appear, in coded form, in Vλ+2 −Vλ+1. Hence, any refutations
of I1-I3 would have to have a different basis. Also, recent work has provided
some extrinsic evidence for their coherence and consistency:
Determinacy hypotheses are discussed in Chapter 6. In 1978 Martin [80]
showed (see 31.8 and after) that the hypothesis Det(Π1
2) follows from a proposition
intermediate between I2 and I3, and in 1984 Woodin showed (see 31.9) that ADL(R)
follows from a proposition stronger than I1 and straining the limits of consistency:
I0. For some δ, there is a j: L(Vδ+1) ≺L(Vδ+1) with crit( j) < δ .
(This last condition ensures that j|Vδ+1 witnesses I1.) The proofs of 23.12 preclude
the possibility here of L(Vδ+1) |= AC. These Martin and Woodin results, discussed
in context in §31, provided the ﬁrst indications that large cardinal hypotheses
sufﬁce to establish strong determinacy hypotheses, and further progress was to
lead to remarkable equiconsistency results. That propositions at the level of I0–I3
could serve as appropriate hypotheses for the initial implementation of the proof
ideas is some extrinsic evidence in their favor. Moreover, Woodin’s investigations
of I0 was to produce a detailed and coherent structural theory for L(Vδ+1). Laver
[01, 02] summarizes and develops this theory further.
Work concerning I3 has led to characterizations of corresponding algebras
of elementary embeddings. Martin had used the proliferation of elementary em-
beddings given by 24.5 and composition to establish his determinacy result, and
questions soon arose about the supporting algebraic structure. After exploratory
work by Laver [86], Dehornoy [88, 89, 89a, 89b], and Randall Dougherty, Laver
[92] in 1988 established the freeness of the algebras subject only to the obvious
identities.
Set Eδ = { j | j: Vδ ≺Vδ}. In view of 24.5, deﬁne a binary operation on
Eδ by: j · k = j+(k). Another operation on Eδ is composition; if j, k ∈Eδ, then
j ◦k ∈Eδ. The following equalities are simple to check; such rules were ﬁrst
applied by Martin [80].
24.6 Exercise. Suppose that i, j, k ∈Eδ. Then:
(a) i ◦( j ◦k) = (i ◦j) ◦k, (i ◦j) · k = i · ( j · k), i · ( j ◦k) = (i · j) ◦(i · k),
and i ◦j = (i · j) ◦i.
(b) i · ( j · k) = (i · j) · (i · k).
Hint. (b) also follows from (a).
⊣
Let Σ denote the set of laws in (a); (b) is the left distributive law for ·. Laver
established that these are the only laws:
24.7 Theorem (Laver [92]). Suppose that j ∈Eδ. Then:
(a) The closure of { j} in ⟨Eδ, · ⟩is the free algebra with one generator satis-
fying the left distributive law.

330
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
(b) The closure of { j} in ⟨Eδ, · , ◦⟩is the free algebra with one generator
satisfying Σ.
⊣
Freeness here has the standard meaning. For (b), let W be the set of terms in
one constant a in the language of · and ◦. Deﬁne an equivalence relation ≡on
W by stipulating that u ≡v iff there is a sequence u = u0, u1, . . . , un = v with
each ui+1 obtained from ui by replacing a subterm of ui by a term equivalent to it
according to one of the laws of Σ. Then · and ◦are well-deﬁned for equivalence
classes, and (b) asserts that the resulting structure on W/≡and the closure of { j}
in ⟨Eδ, · , ◦⟩are isomorphic via the map induced by sending the equivalence class
of a to j.
For u, v ∈W, deﬁne u <L v iff for some w1, . . . , wn+1 ∈W,
v ≡((. . . (u · w1) · w2) . . . · wn) · wn+1 , or
v ≡((. . . (u · w1) · w2) . . . · wn) ◦wn+1 .
Laver [92] showed that if Eδ ̸= ∅for some δ, then <L is irreﬂexive, and used
this result to obtain a normal form theorem for W/≡showing that <L actually
linearly orders W/ ≡, from which 24.7 as well as the solvability of the word
problem for W/≡follows (this is the problem of effectively deciding whether
u ≡v or not for arbitrary u, v ∈W). Considerable interest was generated by a
hypothesis bordering on the limits of consistency entailing solvability in ﬁnitary
mathematics, particularly because of the peculiar and enticing possibility that some
strong hypothesis may be necessary. Dehornoy [92] provided another approach
to the freeness and solvability conclusions from the irreﬂexivity of <L. A few
years later in late 1991, he [92a, 94] settled matters by establishing that irreﬂexivity
outright in ZFC with an elegant argument based on an embedding into an extension
of the inﬁnite braid group. Consequently, all the various structure results obtained
about W/≡, including the normal form results of Laver [92, 94], are now theorems
of ZFC. This is yet another testament to the fecundity of large cardinals: It
suggested a simple algebraic structure and inspired its further study in connection
with elementary embeddings and critical points. Much of the structure understood,
the focus became the question of the irreﬂexivity of a certain order, and the large
cardinals were gracefully retired from the ﬁeld. See the monograph Dehornoy
[00] for developments in braid groups and distributivity.
The study of ⟨Eδ, · ⟩has raised other interesting ﬁnitary issues. For j ∈Eδ,
let κ = crit( j) and let Aj be the closure of { j} in ⟨Eδ, · ⟩. Deﬁne a corresponding
function f on ω by:
f (n) = |{crit(k) | k ∈Aj ∧jn(κ) < crit(k) < jn+1(κ)}| .
Laver had noted that f (0) = 0, f (1) = 0, and f (2) = 1, but that f (3) is large.
Dougherty [93, 96] established a large lower bound for f (3) and showed moreover
that f eventually dominates the Ackermann function, and hence cannot be primi-
tive recursive. It was not even clear that each f (n) is ﬁnite, but using a result of
Steel, Laver [95] duly established this, so that the ordertype of {crit(k) | k ∈Aj} is

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
331
ω. The argument involved a tower of ﬁnite algebras which may be deﬁned without
reference to large cardinals. Laver showed that a simple ﬁnitistic proposition Φ
about the tower is a consequence of I3, and at present it is not known whether
Φ is provable in ZFC. Using Dougherty [93], Dougherty and Jech in their [97]
showed that Φ cannot be established in Primitive Recursive Arithmetic.
Of course, the extent of structure at the level of I0–I3 may be due to their
inconsistency! However, just as in the case of Silver’s 0# investigations for which
one motivation was surely the prospect of a possible refutation of measurability,
the further elaboration of coherent structure at the level of I0–I3, despite the
stalking of possible new inconsistencies, may reinforce conﬁdence in these strong
hypotheses.
n-Hugeness
The remainder of this section is devoted to the main hypotheses between ex-
tendibility and I0–I3, as charted out in Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78].
By
Kunen’s result, if j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ, then M is not closed under se-
quences of length λ = sup({ jn(κ) | n ∈ω}). It is natural to step back and consider
weaker closure conditions. For n ∈ω,
κ is n-huge iff there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ
and jn(κ)M ⊆M .
κ is huge iff κ is 1-huge .
κ is almost huge iff there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ
and γ M ⊆M for every γ < j(κ) .
Note that κ is 0-huge iff κ is measurable; that if j: V ≺M witnesses the n-
hugeness of κ, then jn(κ) is measurable (in M and hence in V as P( jn(κ))M =
P( jn(κ))); and similarly, if j: V ≺M witnesses the almost hugeness of κ, then
j(κ) is inaccessible in V .
We shall see that the existence of an almost huge
cardinal is consistency-wise much stronger than the existence of an extendible
cardinal. n-huge cardinals are reminiscent of γ -supercompact cardinals and will
have a similar characterization in terms of ultrapowers that provides a formalization
in ZFC. However, there is a crucial difference: γ -supercompactness is formulated
in terms of an a priori γ as the degree of closure of M (and requires γ < j(κ)),
but n-hugeness posits closure only a posteriori in that M is to be closed under
jn(κ) sequences, however large jn(κ) may be. Even then, an attempt has been
made to motivate n-hugeness as a reﬂection property by Victoria Marshall [89].
Hugeness was formulated by Kunen in 1972 in order to have a sufﬁcient
hypothesis for a relative consistency result. As mentioned at the end of §17, Kunen
[78] established that if there is a huge cardinal, then there is a forcing extension
in which there is an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1. The conclusion was known to
have consistency strength stronger than the existence of a measurable cardinal,
and this was the ﬁrst time that a hypothesis stronger than measurability was used
in a relative consistency result about the low orders of the cumulative hierarchy.

332
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Since then, supercompactness and, to some extent, hugeness have played the major
such roles. Most arguments have depended on the reﬂection phenomena provided
by supercompactness, but on occasion the relative consistency of two-cardinal
propositions has made use of the interplay among κ, j(κ) and j(κ)M ⊆M.
Reﬁnements have followed once upper bounds on consistency strength have
been established. For example, almost hugeness became more focal when it was
realized that it could replace hugeness in Kunen’s argument. Then, as part of an
important development, Foreman-Magidor-Shelah [88] further reduced the hypoth-
esis in Kunen’s result to supercompactness, and then Shelah reduced the hypothesis
to an essentially equiconsistent one (see 32.10 and before). Almost hugeness is
still needed, however, to get an ω3-saturated ideal over ω2. While it is unlikely
that equiconsistency results for supercompactness and hugeness lie in this direc-
tion of combinatorial propositions, these hypotheses have considerably clariﬁed
their consistency strength.
The following characterization is implicit in the proof of 24.2. Adapting a
previous deﬁnition, for a ﬁlter F over some P(λ) (i.e. F ⊆P(P(λ)),
F is normal iff (i) for any α < λ, {x ∈P(λ) | α ∈x} ∈F , and
(ii) for any ⟨Xα | α < λ⟩∈λF, △α<λXα ∈F .
24.8 Theorem. κ is n-huge iff κ > ω and there is a κ-complete normal ultraﬁlter
U over some P(λ) and cardinals κ = λ0 < λ1 < . . . < λn = λ so that for each
i < n,
{x ∈P(λ) | ot(x ∩λi+1) = λi} ∈U .
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that j: V ≺M witnesses the n-hugeness of κ. Set λi = ji(κ)
for i ≤n, and deﬁne U over P(λn) by:
X ∈U iff
X ⊆P(λn) ∧j“λn ∈j(X) .
Then it is simple to check that U is a κ-complete normal ultraﬁlter. Now note
that for i < n, ot( j“λn ∩j(λi+1)) = j(λi).
For the converse, take j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Then [id]U = j“λ where
id: P(λ) →P(λ) is the identity map, and so λM ⊆M. Also, for i < n
λi+1 = ot( j“λ ∩j(λi+1))
= [⟨ot(x ∩λi+1) | x ∈P(λ)⟩]U
= [⟨λi | x ∈P(λ)⟩]U
= j(λi) .
Finally, the case i = 0 and κ-completeness implies that crit( j) = κ.
⊣
This leads to the expected transcendence results by the usual reﬂection argu-
ment:
24.9 Exercise.
(a) If there is a j: Vδ ≺Vδ as in I3 with crit( j) = κ, then there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
333
{α < κ | α is n-huge for every n} ∈U .
(b) If κ is (n +1)-huge, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is n-huge} ∈U .
⊣
24.8 also shows that ⌈κ is n-huge⌉is ΣZF
2
by an argument (before 22.9) for
γ -supercompactness. This leads to the following observation.
24.10 Exercise (Morgenstern [79]). If κ is supercompact and there is an n-huge
cardinal above κ, then there are κ n-huge cardinals below κ. In particular, if there
are supercompact and n-huge cardinals, then the least n-huge cardinal is less than
the least supercompact cardinal.
Hint. For any α < κ, consider the ΣZF
2
proposition ⌈there is an n-huge cardinal
above α⌉and apply 22.3.
⊣
It will soon be shown that the existence of a huge cardinal implies the con-
sistency of the existence of supercompact cardinals in a strong sense. 24.10 is a
consequence of supercompactness as a global reﬂection property and is unrelated
to the consistency strength of hugeness.
Almost hugeness has a characterization in terms of sequences of ultraﬁlters.
Suppose that κ ≤λ, and for κ ≤γ < λ, Uγ is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ .
Then ⟨Uγ | κ ≤γ < λ⟩is a coherent sequence iff whenever κ ≤γ ≤δ < λ,
Uδ|γ = Uγ . This refers to the projection process described after 22.12; setting
jγ : V ≺Mγ ∼= Ult(V, Uγ ) there are corresponding embeddings kγ δ: Mγ ≺Mδ
such that jδ = kγ δ ◦jγ , given by
kγ δ([⟨f (x) | x ∈Pκγ ⟩]Uγ ) = [⟨f (x ∩γ ) | x ∈Pκδ⟩]Uδ .
24.11 Theorem. κ is almost huge iff there are an inaccessible λ > κ and normal
ultraﬁlters Uγ over Pκγ for κ ≤γ < λ such that ⟨Uγ | κ ≤γ < λ⟩is coherent,
and the corresponding jγ ’s and kγ δ’s satisfy: if κ ≤γ < λ and γ ≤α < jγ (κ),
then there is a δ such that γ ≤δ < λ and kγ δ(α) = δ.
Proof. For the forward direction, let j: V ≺M witness the almost hugeness of κ.
Set λ = j(κ), so that λ is inaccessible. For κ ≤γ < λ, deﬁne Uγ by:
X ∈Uγ
iff
X ⊆Pκγ ∧j“γ ∈j(X) .
As readily seen, each Uγ is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ and ⟨Uγ | κ ≤γ < λ⟩
is a coherent sequence.
Suppose next that κ ≤γ < λ and f : Pκγ →κ is such that γ ≤[ f ]Uγ <
jγ (κ). Noting that γ = ot([id]Uγ ) where id: Pκγ →Pκγ is the identity, the
deﬁnition of Uγ implies that γ = ot( j“γ ) ≤j( f )( j“γ ) < j(κ) = λ.
Set
δ = j( f )( j“γ ). Then ot( j“δ) = δ = j( f )( j“δ ∩j(γ )), and so
{x ∈Pκδ | ot(x) = f (x ∩γ )} ∈Uδ .
Hence, kγ δ([ f ]Uγ ) = δ by the deﬁnition of kγ δ.

334
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
For the converse, note that
⟨⟨Mγ | κ ≤γ < λ⟩, ⟨kγ δ | κ ≤γ ≤δ < λ⟩⟩
is a directed system, so let M be its direct limit. M is well-founded since λ is
inaccessible, so it can be assumed that M is an inner model. There are corre-
sponding j: V ≺M and kγ : Mγ ≺M for κ ≤γ < λ such that j = kγ ◦jγ . Note
for what follows that if α ≤γ ≤δ < λ, then kγ δ(α) = α (22.12(b)), and thus
kγ (α) = α.
To complete the proof, we show that β M ⊆M for every β < λ and that
j(κ) = λ. If β < λ and s = ⟨xα | α < β⟩∈β M, then by the regularity of λ there
are γ with β ≤γ < λ and {yα | α < β} ⊆Mγ such that kγ (yα) = xα for α < β.
t = ⟨yα | α < β⟩∈Mγ since γ Mγ ⊆Mγ , and noting that kγ (β) = β, it follows
that kγ (t) = s ∈M.
To show that j(κ) = λ, note ﬁrst that if γ < λ, then since γ < jγ (κ),
γ ≤kγ (γ ) < kγ ( jγ (κ)) = j(κ) .
Hence, j(κ) ≥λ. For the other direction, suppose that β < j(κ). There is a γ
and an α < jγ (κ) such that kγ (α) = β. If α ≤γ , then β = kγ (α) = α < jγ (κ).
If α > γ , then by hypothesis there is a δ such that γ ≤δ < λ and kγ δ(α) = δ;
but kδ(δ) = δ, and so it follows that β = kδ(δ) = δ < jδ(κ). In either case, there
is some ζ < λ such that β < jζ(κ), and so by 22.11(c)
β < jζ(κ) < (2|ζ|<κ)+ < λ
as λ is inaccessible. Hence, j(κ) = λ.
⊣
24.12 Exercise. If κ is huge, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is almost huge} ∈U .
⊣
Beyond these results from Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78], the theory of
huge cardinals has been pursued in several papers.
Robert Mignone [84] and
Carlos Di Prisco and Wiktor Marek in their [84, 85] analyze the ultraﬁlter char-
acterization, and It Beng Tan [81], Barbanel-Di Prisco-Tan [84], Di Prisco-Henle
[85], Abe [86], Di Prisco-Marek [88], and Barbanel [89, 91, 91a] consider vari-
ous generalizations and elaborations. The following is a global generalization of
hugeness in the spirit of supercompactness and extendibility:
κ is superhuge iff for any γ there is a j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = κ,
j(κ)M ⊆M, and γ < j(κ) .
The following shows how this concept ﬁts into the overall scheme:
24.13 Theorem (Barbanel-Di Prisco-Tan [84]).
(a) If κ is superhuge, then κ is extendible and there is a normal ultraﬁlter U
over κ such that
{α < κ | α is extendible} ∈U .

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
335
(b) If κ is 2-huge, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | Vκ |= α is superhuge} ∈U .
Proof. (a) First, it is simple to produce normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ for every
γ ≥κ to show that κ is supercompact. With η arbitrary, we next show that κ
is η-extendible: Let j: V ≺M witness the hugeness of κ with η < j(κ). Set
e = j|Vκ+η; since j(κ) is inaccessible, e ∈M and so M |= κ is η-extendible. But
by elementarity M |= j(κ) is supercompact, and so by the argument for 23.9(a),
M |= (Vj(κ) |= κ is η-extendible).
Finally, V M
j(κ) = Vj(κ), and so κ really is
η-extendible.
To complete the proof of (a), note that the above argument shows that
if j: V
≺M is any witness to the hugeness of κ, then M |= (Vj(κ) |=
κ is extendible). Hence, if U is the normal ultraﬁlter over κ deﬁned from j,
then A = {α < κ | Vκ |= α is extendible} ∈U. But κ is extendible, so by 23.11
every α ∈A is extendible.
(b) Temporarily denote by α →(β) the following: there is a j: V ≺M
witnessing the hugeness of α with j(α) = β. By 24.8, this amounts to asserting
the existence of a certain ultraﬁlter over P(β). Let j: V ≺M witness the 2-
hugeness of κ. Then M |= κ →( j(κ)) since j2(κ)M ⊆M, and so if U is the
normal ultraﬁlter over κ deﬁned from j, then A = {α < κ | α →(κ)} ∈U.
For any α ∈A, M |= α →(κ), and so {ξ < κ | α →(ξ)} ∈U and hence is
unbounded in κ. Consequently, A = {α < κ | Vκ |= α is superhuge}.
⊣
Vopˇenka’s Principle
Finally, a circle is completed by going back to a model-theoretic hypothesis that
was ﬁrst considered about the time that extendible cardinals were formulated. This
is Vopˇenka’s Principle:
For any proper class of structures for the same language,
there is one that is elementarily embeddable into another .
This hypothesis has an immediate appeal owing to its unencumbered statement and
its readily discernible motivation in the set vs. class distinction. Given a proper
class {Mα | α ∈On} of structures for the same language, there must be two, in
fact a proper subclass, that have the same theory. Vopˇenka’s Principle can be mo-
tivated in terms of a further resemblance based on the elements of the structures:
Considerations of the richness of proper classes and the uniformity enforced by the
class deﬁnition suggest that in cases like Mα = ⟨Vα, ∈⟩one structure ought to be
an elementary substructure of another. On the other hand, if Mα = ⟨Vγα, ∈, {α}⟩
where γα > α, Mα ≺Mβ fails for α < β because of the singleton predicates.
However, this can be rectiﬁed by positing an association up to a renaming of the
elements, i.e. an elementary embedding j: Mα ≺Mβ, which must necessarily
satisfy j(α) = β. This step from elementary substructure to elementary embed-
dability, necessary to state a general resemblance principle involving elements, is

336
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
a dramatic strengthening. Several people quickly saw what was suggested, that
Vopˇenka’s Principle implies the existence of extendible cardinals.
Vopˇenka’s Principle cannot be formulated in ZFC. Its consequences were
pursued in class theory in Solovay-Reinhardt-Kanamori [78], but this work will
be cast here in terms of inaccessible κ so that Vκ |= Vopˇenka’s Principle with
arbitrary rather than deﬁnable “classes” X ⊆Vκ, as in Kanamori [78]. To focus
the discussion, a sequence of structures ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩is natural iff each Mα
has form ⟨Vf (α), ∈, {α}, Rα⟩where Rα ⊆Vf (α) and α < β < κ implies that
α < f (α) ≤f (β) < κ.
Through coding we can construe as natural those
sequences where Rα is replaced by a ﬁnite number of relations. The speciﬁcation
of {α} in Mα ensures that whenever α < β and j: Mα ≺Mβ, j must move
some ordinal since j(α) = β.
In the spirit of the study of indescribability in terms of corresponding ﬁlters
(§6), deﬁne for inaccessible κ the contextual notion of non-negligible subset of κ:
For X ⊆κ,
X is Vopˇenka in κ iff for any natural sequence ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩
there is a j: Mα ≺Mβ for some
α < β < κ with critical point in X ,
and
κ is Vopˇenka iff κ is Vopˇenka in κ .
This leads to the consideration of the collection of the all but negligible subsets,
F = {X ⊆κ | κ −X is not Vopˇenka in κ} .
Note that X ∈F iff there is a natural sequence ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩such that for any
α < β < κ and j: Mα ≺Mβ, its critical point is in X. Also, if X, Y ∈F, then
X ∩Y ∈F by pointwise amalgamating the two corresponding natural sequences
into one. Finally, if ⟨Aα | α < κ⟩∈κVκ is any sequence of structures for the same
language, then each Aα can be encoded into an Mα so that ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩a natural
sequence, and so if X is Vopˇenka in κ, there are α < β < κ and j: Aα ≺Aβ
such that if it has a critical point, then it belongs to X. These remarks show that
F is a (proper) ﬁlter iff Vκ |= Vopˇenka’s Principle iff κ is Vopˇenka .
F is the Vopˇenka ﬁlter over κ, and that it is indeed a (proper) ﬁlter will be implicit
in the use of this terminology. Although in terms of §6, κ being Vopˇenka is a Π1
1
property of Vκ and hence does not even imply the weak compactness of κ, the
following propositions provide structural information which shows that it implies
the existence of extendible cardinals in Vκ in a strong sense.
24.14 Proposition. The Vopˇenka ﬁlter over κ is normal.
Proof. Suppose that X is Vopˇenka in κ and f : X →κ is regressive. Assume to
the contrary that for each γ < κ, f −1({γ }) is not Vopˇenka in κ, i.e. there is a
natural sequence ⟨Mγ
α | α < κ⟩such that for any elementary embedding of one

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
337
structure into another with critical point ρ, f (ρ) ̸= γ . Deﬁne a natural sequence
⟨Nα | α < κ⟩by setting
Nα = ⟨Vg(α)+ω, ∈, {α}, ⟨Mγ
α | γ < α⟩, f |α⟩
where Vg(α) is the union of the domains of Mγ
α for γ < α. Since X is Vopˇenka,
there is a j: Nα ≺Nβ with a critical point η ∈X. But then f (η) < η implies that
j( f (η)) = f (η) so that j|M f (η)
α
: M f (η)
α
≺M f (η)
β
with critical point η, which is
a contradiction.
⊣
This result is the n = 1 case of a larger scheme in Kanamori [78], which
analyzes hypotheses cascading up alongside the n-huge cardinals.
24.15 Proposition. {ξ < κ | Vκ |= ξ is extendible} is in the Vopˇenka ﬁlter over κ.
Proof. Deﬁne g ∈κκ by:
g(ξ) =



ξ
if Vκ |= ξ is extendible , else
ξ + η
where η is the least ordinal such
that Vκ |= ξ is not η-extendible .
Set C = {ρ < κ | g|ρ: ρ →ρ}. Then C is closed unbounded, so that C is in the
Vopˇenka ﬁlter over κ by 24.14. So, let ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩be a natural sequence such
that for any elementary embedding of one structure into another with a critical
point ρ, ρ ∈C. Now deﬁne a natural sequence ⟨Nα | α < κ⟩by setting
Nα = ⟨Vγα, ∈, {α}, Mα, C ∩γα⟩
where γα is the least limit point of C greater than every ordinal in the domain of
Mα. To complete the proof, it sufﬁces to show that if j: Nα ≺Nβ with a critical
point ξ, then ξ is extendible:
Assume to the contrary that this fails, so that g(ξ) > ξ. Since ξ < γα and
γα ∈C, g(ξ) < γα. It follows that j|Vg(ξ): Vg(ξ) ≺Vj(g(ξ)) with critical point ξ.
Also, note that ξ ∈C as Mα is encoded in Nα. Hence, j(ξ) ∈C as C ∩γα is
encoded in Nα. It then follows from ξ < j(ξ) that g(ξ) < j(ξ). But then, if
g(ξ) = ξ + η, these properties show that Vκ |= ξ is η-extendible, contradicting
the deﬁnition of g(ξ).
⊣
The following proposition shows that the Vopˇenka ﬁlter is closed under a
strong analogue of Mahlo’s operation.
24.16 Proposition. If X is in the Vopˇenka ﬁlter over κ, then so also is the set
{ξ < κ | ξ is measurable and there is a normal ultraﬁlter over ξ containing
X ∩ξ} .
Proof. Deﬁne a natural sequence ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩by setting
Mα = ⟨Vα+ω, ∈, {α}, {X ∩α}⟩.

338
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
It sufﬁces to show that if j: Mα ≺Mβ with a critical point ξ ∈X, then there is a
normal ultraﬁlter over ξ containing X ∩ξ. But if U is the usual normal ultraﬁlter
over ξ deﬁned from j, then
j(X ∩ξ) = j(X ∩α ∩ξ) = j(X ∩α) ∩j(ξ) = (X ∩β) ∩j(ξ) = X ∩j(ξ)
and ξ ∈X ∩j(ξ) so that X ∩ξ ∈U.
⊣
24.17 Corollary. If κ is Vopˇenka, then κ is κ-Mahlo and the set
{ξ < κ | Vκ |= ξ is extendible and there is a normal
ultraﬁlter over ξ containing {ζ < ξ | Vκ |= ζ is extendible}}
is stationary in κ.
Proof. By 24.14, 24.15, and 24.16.
⊣
William Powell [72] and others situated Vopˇenka’s Principle into the large
cardinal hierarchy below almost hugeness. Typically, one can establish much more
than is needed:
24.18 Theorem. Suppose that κ is almost huge. Then there is a normal ultraﬁlter
U over κ such that:
(a) For any natural sequence ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩there is a Y ∈U such that α < β
both in Y implies that there is an elementary embedding: Mα ≺Mβ with critical
point α.
(b) {α < κ | α is Vopˇenka} ∈U.
Proof. Let j: V ≺M witness the almost hugeness of κ and U the normal ultraﬁlter
deﬁned from j. To establish (a), let ⟨Mα | α < κ⟩be a natural sequence. Setting
Xα = {ξ < κ | there is an elementary embedding: Mα ≺Mξ with critical point
α} for α < κ and T = {α < κ | Xα ∈U}, we shall show that T ∈U. Granted
this, the normality of U would imply that
Y = {α ∈T | α ∈
β∈α∩T Xβ} ∈U ,
and clearly this Y would be as desired.
To show that T ∈U, set
j(⟨Mα | α < κ⟩) = ⟨M∗
α | α < j(κ)⟩,
j(⟨M∗
α | α < j(κ)⟩) = ⟨M∗∗
α | α < j2(κ)⟩, and
j(⟨Xα | α < κ⟩) = ⟨X∗
α | α < j(κ)⟩.
For any α < κ, noting that M∗
α = Mα we have: Xα ∈U iff κ ∈j(Xα) iff there
is an elementary embedding: Mα ≺M∗
κ with critical point α. So if α < j(κ), by
elementarity we have: X∗
α ∈j(U) iff in M, there is an elementary embedding:
M∗
α ≺M∗∗
j(κ) with critical point α. Hence, T ∈U iff κ ∈j(T ) iff X∗
κ ∈j(U) iff

24. The Strongest Hypotheses
339
in M, there is an elementary embedding: M∗
κ ≺M∗∗
j(κ) with critical point κ. But
setting j = j|M∗
κ, j: M∗
κ ≺M∗∗
j(κ). Also, j is a subset of M with cardinality
that of the domain of M∗
κ, which in turn is less than j(κ). Hence, j ∈M, and so
T ∈U.
For (b), just note that by (a), M |= κ is Vopˇenka.
⊣
Finally, characterizations of Vopˇenka’s Principle are drawn from Solovay-
Reinhardt-Kanamori [78] in terms of “boldface” versions of extendibility and
supercompactness. Characterizations in terms of model-theoretic logics were pro-
vided by Edward Fisher [77] and Johann Makowsky [85]. The following deﬁni-
tions serve present purposes: For any set A and κ ≤η,
κ is η-extendible for A iff there is a ζ and a
j: ⟨Vη, ∈, A ∩Vη⟩≺⟨Vζ, ∈, A ∩Vζ⟩
with crit( j) = κ and η < j(κ) ,
κ is η-supercompact for A iff there is an α < κ and an
e: ⟨Vα, ∈, A ∩Vα⟩≺⟨Vη, ∈, A ∩Vη⟩
with e(δ) = κ, where δ = crit(e) .
The second deﬁnition is based on the characterization 22.10. Injecting A’s into
previous arguments lead to characterizations:
24.19 Exercise. The following are equivalent for inaccessible κ:
(a) κ is Vopˇenka.
(b) For any A ⊆Vκ there is an α < κ η-extendible for A for every η < κ.
(c) For any A ⊆Vκ there is an α < κ η-supercompact for A for every η < κ.
Hint. The argument for 24.15 adapts to establish (a) →(b).
For (b) →(c), show that for any A ⊆Vκ, if α is η-extendible for A for every
η < κ, then α is η-supercompact for A for every η < κ: For such an α let
j: ⟨Vη+ω, ∈, A ∩Vη+ω⟩≺⟨Vζ, ∈, A ∩Vζ⟩
with crit( j) = α and η < j(α). Set j = j|Vη. Then j ∈Vζ, and noting that
A ∩Vη = (A ∩Vj(η)) ∩Vη = j(A ∩Vη) ∩Vη,
j: ⟨Vη, ∈, j(A ∩Vη) ∩Vη⟩≺⟨Vj(η), ∈, j(A ∩Vη)⟩.
Now apply the elementarity of j (cf. 22.10).
Arguing with natural sequences as A’s establishes (c) →(a).
⊣
The strong hypotheses from Reinhardt’s extendibility to Kunen’s inconsis-
tency were formulated and systematized into a linear hierarchy in a relatively
short time. Since then, this ediﬁce has proved resilient, reinforced by relative
consistency results from hugeness and even I0–I3, and the further elucidation of
structure at these hypotheses. Of course, a new inconsistency result would be an
exciting development, but as time goes by, the further analysis and application of
these hypotheses suggest that they may be approached with increasing conﬁdence
if not acceptance.

340
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
The emergence of Pκγ in the study of supercompactness led to several combina-
torial problems about this set that stimulated considerable research; this section is
devoted to the work through the 1980’s in this offshoot direction. For convenience,
κ denotes a regular uncountable cardinal and κ ≤γ in this section .
The seminal paper in this area was Jech [73], which in the spirit of the
generalization from measurability to γ -supercompactness advanced the idea of
generalizing combinatorial properties of and problems about ⟨κ, <⟩to ⟨Pκγ, ⊂⟩.
Basic to the subsequent work was the Jech [71] generalization of the concepts of
closed unbounded set and stationary set: For X ⊆Pκγ ,
X is unbounded in Pκγ iff
for any y ∈Pκγ there is
an x ⊇y such that x ∈X .
X is closed in Pκγ iff
for any {xξ | ξ < β} ⊆X
with β < κ and xξ ⊆xζ for
ξ ≤ζ < β, 
ξ<β xξ ∈X .
X is closed unbounded in Pκγ iff
X is closed in Pκγ
and unbounded in Pκγ .
X is stationary in Pκγ iff
X ∩C ̸= ∅for any C
closed unbounded in Pκγ .
The “in Pκγ ” is deleted when clear from the context. Note that for any s ∈Pκγ ,
{x ∈Pκγ | s ⊆x} is closed unbounded, and so if X ⊆Pκγ is stationary, then it
is unbounded. David Kueker [72] also formulated these concepts for κ = ω1 for
use in model theory, and his [77] provides a full account of his work along these
lines.
Jech’s original formulation of closed in Pκγ was different and Solovay ob-
served that the current one is equivalent.
Because of its usefulness, that ﬁrst
formulation is recovered through the following lemma. A set D is ⊆-directed iff
for any x, y ∈D there is a z ∈D such that x ∪y ⊆z. Solovay’s observation
turns out to be the Pκγ case of a result about transﬁnite directed sets:
25.1 Lemma (Cohn [65: 33]; Isbell [66]). X is closed in Pκγ iff for any ⊆-directed
D ⊆X with |D| < κ,  D ∈X.
Proof. The substantive direction is established by induction on |D|. The result
is immediate if |D| is ﬁnite. Suppose now that |D| < κ is inﬁnite and for each
⊆-directed E ⊆X with |E| < |D|,  E ∈X. Enumerate D as {xα | α < |D|}.
Recursively deﬁne Dα for α < |D| to be a ⊆-directed subset of D of minimal
cardinality including {xα}∪
β<α Dβ. By a simple closure argument, if α is ﬁnite,
then Dα is ﬁnite, and otherwise |Dα| = | 
β<α Dβ| = |α|. Set yα =  Dα for
α < |D|. Then by induction each yα ∈X, and since yα ⊆yα for α ≤α < |D|,

α<|D| yα =  D ∈X.
⊣

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
341
The following provides analogues to most of 0.1 and is established in like
manner.
25.2 Exercise (Jech [71]).
(a) If η < κ and ⟨Cα | α < η⟩is a sequence of sets closed unbounded in
Pκγ , then 
α<η Cα is closed unbounded in Pκγ .
(b) If ⟨Cα | α < γ ⟩is a sequence of sets closed unbounded in Pκγ , then its
diagonal intersection △α<γ Cα = {x ∈Pκγ | x ∈
α∈x Cα} is closed unbounded
in Pκγ .
(c) If S is stationary in Pκγ and f is a choice function of S (i.e. f (x) ∈x
for every x ∈S −{∅}), then there is a T ⊆S stationary in Pκγ such that f is
constant on T .
⊣
Let Cκ,γ denote the ﬁlter generated by the closed unbounded subsets of Pκγ :
Cκ,γ = {X ⊆Pκγ | ∃C(C is closed unbounded in Pκγ ∧C ⊆X)} .
Then by 25.2, Cκ,γ is a normal ﬁlter over Pκγ , called the closed unbounded ﬁlter
over Pκγ .
Menas established a useful basis theorem for Cκ,γ . For n ∈ω and f : [γ ]n →
Pκγ , deﬁne
C( f ) = {x ∈Pκγ | x is inﬁnite ∧∀s ∈[x]n( f (s) ⊆x)} .
Analogously deﬁne C( f ) for f : [γ ]<ω →Pκγ . It is simple to see that these
C( f )’s are closed unbounded.
25.3 Proposition (Menas [74]).
For any X ⊆Pκγ , X ∈Cκ,γ iff there is an
f : [γ ]2 →Pκγ such that C( f ) ⊆X.
Proof.
In the substantive direction, suppose that C is closed unbounded; an
f : [γ ]2 →Pκγ must be found so that C( f ) ⊆C. To this end, a g: [γ ]<ω →Pκγ
is ﬁrst found so that C(g) ⊆C and then reﬁned later:
Deﬁne g(s) for s ∈[γ ]<ω by recursion on |s| as follows: Let g(∅) be any
inﬁnite member of C, and if |s| = n+1, let g(s) satisfy s∪{g(t) | t ∈[s]n} ⊆g(s)
and g(s) ∈C. Then C(g) ⊆C: If x ∈C(g), then x is inﬁnite and {g(s) | s ∈
[x]<ω} ⊆x, and so equality holds since s ⊆g(s). But clearly, {g(s) | s ∈[x]<ω}
is ⊆-directed, and so by 25.1, x ∈C.
The following will be established next:
(∗)
Whenever 1 < n < ω and h: γ n →Pκγ ,
there is an h: [γ ]2 →Pκγ such that C(h) ⊆C(h) .
Once done, the proof can be completed as follows: For each n ∈ω let gn: [γ ]2 →
Pκγ be such that C(gn) ⊆C(g|[γ ]n).
Deﬁne f : [γ ]2 →Pκγ by:
f (s) =

n gn(s). Then C( f ) ⊆
n C(gn) ⊆C(g) ⊆X.

342
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
To establish (∗), it will be convenient to show that whenever n > 1 and
h: [γ ]n+1 →Pκγ , there is an h: [γ ]n →Pκγ such that C(h) ⊆C(h). This
sufﬁces by ﬁnite descent. To this end, let p: [γ ]2 →γ be a bijection such that
max(α, β) ≤p(α, β), and π0, π1: γ →γ be such that p(π0(α), π1(α)) = α for
every α < γ .
Deﬁne h: [γ ]n →Pκγ so that for any α1 < . . . < αn < γ ,
h(α1, . . . , αn) ∈C(h) and
h(α1, . . . , αn) ⊇{p(αn−1, αn)} ∪h(α1, . . . , αn−1, π0(αn), π1(αn)) .
Then C(h) ⊆C(h): If x ∈C(h) and α1 < . . . < αn+1 are all in x, then
p(αn, αn+1) ∈h(α1, . . . , αn−2, αn, αn+1) ⊆x, and so
h(α1, . . . , αn+1) ⊆h(α1, . . . , αn−1, p(αn, αn+1)) ⊆x .
⊣
This result shows in particular that for any C closed unbounded in Pκγ there
is a C ⊆C closed unbounded in Pκγ such that for any x, y ∈C, x ∩y ∈C. If
C is closed unbounded in Pκγ so that for any x, y ∈C, x ∪y ∈C, then there is
an f : [γ ]1 →Pκγ such that C( f ) ⊆C: For α < λ, just let f ({α}) ∈C satisfy
α ∈f ({α}). However, Menas observed that for γ ≥κ+, the [γ ]2 in 25.3 cannot
be replaced by [γ ]1. In particular, for such γ there are C closed unbounded in
Pκγ such that for any C ⊆C closed unbounded in Pκγ , there are x, y ∈C such
that x ∪y /∈C. Donna Carr [82] investigated closed unbounded sets closed under
unions; she also observed the following, almost explicit in Menas [74: 332], which
is the analogue of the fact that the closed unbounded ﬁlter Cκ is included in every
normal ﬁlter over κ.
25.4 Proposition (Carr [82], Menas [74]). If F is a normal ﬁlter over Pκγ , then
Cκ,γ ⊆F.
Proof.
Assume that this fails; then by the previous proposition there is an
f : [γ ]2 →Pκγ such that X = Pκγ −C( f ) is F-stationary. For each x ∈X,
there are αx < βx both in x so that f (αx, βx) ̸⊆x. By applying normality (22.6)
twice, there are F-stationary Y ⊆X and α < β such that for every x ∈Y, αx = α
and βx = β. But this is a contradiction, since Y is unbounded and so there must
be a y ∈Y such that f (α, β) ⊆y.
⊣
Jech [73] had previously observed that if U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ ,
then Cκ,γ ⊆U.
Pursuing analogies, the next problem that naturally arises is to generalize
Solovay’s result 16.9 that every set stationary in κ can be partitioned into κ
disjoint stationary sets. Menas [74: 337] conjectured for λ > κ:
Every stationary subset of Pκλ can be
partitioned into λ<κ disjoint stationary sets .
Most of the results have been about this assertion with λ<κ replaced by λ. The
ﬁrst observations can be deduced from consideration of one particular stationary
set.

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
343
25.5 Proposition. Suppose that κ ≤λ and S = {x ∈Pκλ | |x ∩κ| = |x|}. Then:
(a) S is stationary in Pκλ.
(b) If κ is a successor cardinal, then S ∈Cκ,λ.
(c) If κ < λ and κ is λ-supercompact, then S /∈Cκ,λ.
(d) (Baumgartner) If X ⊆S is stationary, then X can be partitioned into λ
disjoint stationary subsets.
Proof. (a) Suppose that C is closed unbounded in Pκλ. Then it is easy to ﬁnd
xn ∈Pκλ such that xn ⊆xn+1 for n ∈ω with x2m ∈S and x2m+1 ∈C for m ∈ω.
It follows that 
n∈ω xn ∈S ∩C.
(b) If κ = ν+, then {x ∈Pκλ | |x ∩κ| = ν} is closed unbounded in Pκλ, and
this set is included in S.
(c) If U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκλ, then κ < λ implies by 22.11(a) that
{x ∈Pκλ | |x ∩κ| < |x|} ∈U. But Cκ,λ ⊆U by the previous proposition, and so
S /∈Cκ,λ.
(d) For each x ∈X, let fx: x →x ∩κ be injective. For α < λ, deﬁne gα on
the stationary set {x ∈X | α ∈x} by: gα(x) = fx(α). Then by 25.2(c) there is a
stationary Xα ⊆X such that gα is constant on Xα, say with value ηα < κ.
Now for any ν ≤λ such that cf(ν) > κ, there is an η < κ such that
|{α < ν | ηα = η}| = ν, and so it is simple to see that {Xα | α < ν ∧ηα = η} is a
family of ν disjoint stationary subsets of X. Hence, if cf(λ) > κ, the result follows.
If on the other hand cf(λ) ≤κ, it can be assumed that κ < λ, else the result follows
from Solovay’s 16.9 and 22.5(b).
So, let ⟨µα | α < cf(λ)⟩be an increasing
sequence of regular cardinals coﬁnal in λ with κ < µ0. By taking ν = κ+ ≤λ in
the above, ﬁrst ﬁnd a partition X = 
α<κ+ Yα into disjoint stationary sets. Then
for each α < cf(λ) ≤κ the argument with X replaced by Yα can be applied to
get a partition of Yα into µα disjoint stationary sets. Finally, the conglomeration
of these partitions is a partition of X into λ disjoint stationary sets as desired.
⊣
25.6 Corollary. Suppose that κ ≤λ. Then:
(a) Pκλ can be partitioned into λ disjoint stationary sets.
(b) (Jech [73] for regular λ; Matsubara [87]) If κ is a successor cardinal,
then every stationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into λ disjoint stationary
sets.
Di Prisco (see Di Prisco-Marek [82]) showed that for regular λ ≥κ, every
closed unbounded subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into λ disjoint stationary sets.
For κ weakly inaccessible, he formulated a concept, superstationary, intermediate
between stationary and closed unbounded, and showed that for regular λ ≥κ every
superstationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into λ disjoint superstationary
sets. When S /∈Cκ,λ as in 25.5(c), then S is an example of a stationary but not
superstationary subset of Pκλ.
In 1981, Baumgartner made the following observation about the set S that
reestablished direct connections with large cardinals:

344
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
25.7 Theorem (Baumgartner). Assume the hypothesis of 25.5. If 0# does not exist,
then S ∈Cκ,λ, and so every stationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into λ
disjoint stationary sets.
Proof. Assume to the contrary that S /∈Cκ,λ. Then κ < λ. Let f : λ →Lλ be a
bijection which is the identity on κ + 1. Then
C = {x ∈Pκλ | x ∩κ ∈κ ∧κ ∈x ∧f “x ≺Lλ}
is readily seen to be closed unbounded. By assumption Pκλ −S is stationary, so
there is a y ∈C such that |y ∩κ| < |y|. Let Lα be the transitive collapse of
f “y and j the inverse of the collapsing isomorphism, so that j: Lα ≺Lλ. Setting
δ = y ∩κ, since f is the identity on κ + 1 and κ ∈y, j(δ) = κ and crit( j) = δ.
But δ < |y| = |α|, and so by 21.1, 0# exists.
⊣
Hence, the refutation of Menas’s conjecture with λ<κ replaced by λ neces-
sitates the existence of 0#! The following observation made in passing precludes
the possibility of developing an inner model theory for γ -supercompactness in a
na¨ıve manner:
25.8 Exercise. Suppose that κ < λ and U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκλ. Then:
(a) Pκλ ∩L /∈U.
(b) L[U] = L.
Hint. For (a), assume to the contrary that Pκλ∩L ∈U, and noting that Pκλ−S ∈
U as for the proof of 25.5(c), use the proof of 25.7 to ﬁnd a y as there satisfying
y ∈L to derive contradiction. (b) follows from (a).
⊣
A contradiction from Pκλ∩L ∈U can also be derived by considering the 0#
Skolem term generation of members of Pκλ ∩L and stabilizing components with
normality.
With a surprising result that raised the level of sophistication in this area,
Gitik in 1982 showed relative to supercompactness that Menas’s conjecture can
fail in a strong sense:
25.9 Theorem (Gitik [85]). Suppose that κ is supercompact and λ > κ. Then
there is a p.o. P that preserves cardinals ≥κ such that ∥-P κ is inaccessible ∧∃S(S
is stationary in Pκλ ∧S cannot be partitioned into κ+ disjoint stationary sets).
Gitik observed that this is optimal in the sense that for any λ ≥κ every
stationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into κ disjoint stationary sets, using a
version of Solovay’s argument for 16.9. He also noted that κ can also be made
the least inaccessible cardinal, using a construction due to Woodin. The exact
consistency strength of the proposition that there is a stationary subset of Pκκ+
that cannot be partitioned into κ+ disjoint stationary sets is unknown; Gitik’s proof
established as an upper bound the existence of a κ that is κ+++-supercompact.
Recently, Shioya [03] improved the upper bound to the existence of a κ that is
κ+-supercompact and moreover provided a much simpler proof of 25.9.

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
345
The focal set S of 25.5 occurred at one point in Gitik’s argument. Moreover,
Baldwin [83] was led to S in the course of generalizing the Mahlo hierarchy for
applications to the developing inner model theory; the result of Jech [86] is based
on S; and S serves to distinguish between versions of the closed unbounded ﬁlter
formulated in Matsubara [88a]. Consider the possibility S /∈Cκ,λ:
For some λ, {x ∈Pκλ | |x ∩κ| < |x|} is stationary in Pκλ .
As a nice example of how questions are resolved in terms of large cardinals,
the exact consistency strength of this proposition was determined in the linear
hierarchy. By 25.5(c) and 25.7 the consistency strength lies between the existence
of 0# and the existence of a κ that is κ+-supercompact. Baldwin [84] localized
it to the lower end by showing that it sufﬁces to take λ satisfying a partition
property weaker than Ramsey with respect to a weakly inaccessible κ < λ. Then
Donder-Koepke-Levinski [88] pinned down the exact partition property needed
and conﬁrmed its necessity using the newly available inner model theory to good
effect.
As was already evident from Levinski [84: 229] however, for κ ≥ω3
the proposition with the additional requirement that λ = κ+ implies at least the
existence of 0†, and the exact consistency strength is unknown.
Menas’s original conjecture, partitioning into λ<κ sets, was refuted in ZFC
with κ = ω1:
25.10 Theorem (Baumgartner-Taylor [82]). Assume GCH and ν = λℵ0. Then for
any ω1-c.c. p.o. P, ∥-P ∃S(S is stationary in Pω1λ ∧S cannot be partitioned into
ν++ disjoint stationary sets). In particular, Con(ZFC) implies Con(ZFC + 2ℵ0 is
large + ∃S(S is stationary in Pω1ω2 ∧S cannot be partitioned into ω4 disjoint
stationary sets)).
On the other hand, Matsubara established the consistency of Menas’s conjec-
ture as a corollary to the following case:
25.11 Proposition (Matsubara [90]). Suppose that κ<κ < λ<κ = 2λ. Then every
stationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned into λ<κ disjoint stationary sets.
Proof. Note ﬁrst that if Y is unbounded in Pκλ, then Pκλ ⊆
y∈Y P(y) so that
λ<κ ≤κ<κ · |Y|, and κ<κ < λ<κ thus implies that |Y| = 2λ. Next, as λ<κ = 2λ,
let ⟨fα | α < 2λ⟩enumerate the collection of functions: [λ]2 →Pκλ so that
each function appears coﬁnally often.
In terms of 25.3, each C( fα) is closed
unbounded, and for any Z ∈Cκ,λ and ξ < 2λ, there is an α such that ξ < α < 2λ
and C( fα) ⊆Z.
Suppose now that X is stationary in Pκλ. For each α < 2λ choose a sequence
⟨ηα
ξ | ξ < α⟩of distinct members of X by recursion on α as follows: Having
chosen such sequences for β < α, ﬁrst note that X ∩C( fα) is stationary, hence
unbounded, and therefore has cardinality 2λ as noted above. Let ⟨ηα
ξ | ξ < α⟩be
a sequence of distinct members drawn from (X ∩C( fα)) −{ηβ
ξ | β < α ∧ξ < β}.

346
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
For ξ < 2λ, set Xξ = {ηα
ξ | ξ < α < 2λ}. Then {Xξ | ξ < 2λ} is a collection
of pairwise disjoint subsets of X. The proof is completed by showing that each
Xξ is stationary: If C is closed unbounded, then as noted before there is an α
such that ξ < α < 2λ and C( fα) ⊆C. But then, ηα
ξ ∈Xξ ∩C( fα) ⊆Xξ ∩C. ⊣
25.12 Corollary. Assume GCH and κ ≤λ. Then:
(a) If 0# does not exist, then every stationary subset of Pκλ can be partitioned
into λ<κ disjoint stationary sets.
(b) Pκλ can be partitioned into λ<κ disjoint stationary sets.
Proof. If λ<κ = λ, the results follow from 25.6(a) and 25.7, and if λ<κ > λ, from
25.11.
⊣
(b) also follows from the work on combinatorial principles in Donder-Matet
[93], which showed that if 2<κ < λ, then Pκλ can be partitioned into λ<κ stationary
sets, improving a result of Matsubara [88]. Both papers include results showing
that some such hypothesis is necessary.
A major development from Jech [73] was the investigation of partition prop-
erties for Pκγ . Note that for |γ | > κ every unbounded subset of Pκγ has members
x1 ⊂y1 and x2 ̸⊂y2. Hence, for n ∈ω it is natural to consider partitions of
[Pκγ ]n
⊂= {{x1, . . . , xn} | x1 ⊂. . . ⊂xn ∈Pκγ } .
For functions f on such sets, f (x1, . . . , xn) is written for f ({x1, . . . , xn}) with
the understanding that x1 ⊂. . . ⊂xn. For such an f ,
H ⊆Pκγ is homogeneous for f iff there is an i such that x1 ⊂. . . ⊂xn
all in H implies that f (x1, . . . , xn) = i .
The following are generalizations (from n = 2) of propositions formulated by
Jech.
Part(κ, γ )n iff for any f : [Pκγ ]n
⊂→2 there is an
unbounded H ⊆Pκγ homogeneous for f .
Part∗(κ, γ )n iff for any f : [Pκγ ]n
⊂→2 there is a
stationary H ⊆Pκγ homogeneous for f .
Jech observed that Part(κ, γ )2 implies that κ is weakly compact, and raised several
questions.
The early work along these lines was done around 1971 by Solovay and
Menas, who considered the generalization of Rowbottom’s 7.17 to normal ultra-
ﬁlters over Pκγ . For U such an ultraﬁlter,
U has the partition property iff for any f : [Pκγ ]2
⊂→2 there is
a set in U homogeneous for f .
This property implies Part∗(κ, γ )2 by 25.4. Except for the case γ = κ handled by
7.17 and 22.5(b), that every normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ has the partition property
was not evident. Menas found a simple characterization:

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
347
25.13 Theorem (Menas [76]). For U a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , U has the
partition property iff there is an A ∈U such that x ⊂y both in A implies that
|x| < |y ∩κ|.
Proof.
In the forward direction, deﬁne f : [Pκγ ]2
⊂→2 by:
f (x, y) = 0 iff
|x| < |y ∩κ|. Let H ∈U be homogeneous for f ; since there are x0, y0 ∈H such
that |x0| < |y0 ∩κ|, the desired result follows.
The converse is established by adapting the argument for Rowbottom’s 7.17:
Let A be as hypothesized, and suppose that f : [Pκγ ]2
⊂→2. For each x ∈Pκγ
deﬁne fx: {y ∈Pκγ | x ⊂y} →2 by fx(y) = f (x, y). Then for each x ∈Pκγ
there is an Hx ∈U and an ix < 2 such that fx“Hx = {ix}. It follows that there
is a B ⊆A with B ∈U and an i < 2 such that for any x ∈B, ix = i. Set
H = {x ∈B | x ∈{Hy | y ⊂x ∧y ∈B}}. Then y ⊂x both in H implies
that f (x, y) = i, so it sufﬁces to show that H ∈U:
Assume that this fails, so that B −H ∈U. Then for any x in this set, there is
an h(x) ∈B so that h(x) ⊂x and x /∈Hh(x). Let j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Then
[h]U ⊂j“λ, and as B ⊆A so that |h(x)| < |x ∩κ| for x ∈B −H, |[h]U| < κ by
22.11(a). Hence, a simple argument using κ-completeness shows that there is an
s ∈Pκγ such that [h]U = j(s). But for any x ∈B −H satisfying h(x) = s we
have x /∈Hs, and this contradicts Hs ∈U.
⊣
Proceeding inductively as for 7.17, this argument shows that U has the par-
tition property iff for any n ≥2, whenever f : [Pκγ ]n
⊂→2, there is a set in U
homogeneous for f .
Menas moreover found a useful property that implies the partition property.
For U a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ ,
χ(U) iff
for some f ∈κκ, {x ∈Pκγ | f (|x ∩κ|) = |x|} ∈U .
With jU: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U), χ(U) translates by 22.11(a) into the assertion that
for some f ∈κκ, jU( f )(κ) = |γ |. That χ(U) implies that U has the partition
property depends on the following lemma, a derivative of Kunen’s proof of his
23.12:
25.14 Lemma (Solovay [74: 371]). For U a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , there is
an E ∈U such that x ⊂y both in E implies that |x| < |y|.
Proof. Let f be ω-J´onsson for γ , and set
E = {x ∈Pκγ | f |[x]ω is ω-J´onsson for x} .
Then for x ⊆y both in E, |x| = |y| implies that x = f “[x]ω = y. Hence, it
sufﬁces to show that E ∈U:
Let j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Then by Ło´s’s Theorem, it sufﬁces to show
that j( f )|[ j“γ ]ω is ω-J´onsson for j“γ , noting that we do not need to distinguish
between V and M as γ M ⊆M. We indeed have j( f )“[ j“γ ]ω ⊆j“γ (as in

348
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Kunen’s original proof of his 23.12). Suppose now that y ⊆j“γ with |y| =
| j“γ | = |γ |. Setting z = j−1(y), f “[z]ω = γ since f is ω-J´onsson for γ . It
follows that for any α < γ , there is an s ∈[z]ω satisfying α = f (s), so that
j(α) = j( f (s)) = j( f )( j(s)) where j(s) ∈[y]ω. Hence j( f )“[y]ω = j“γ .
⊣
25.15 Proposition (Menas [76]).
For U a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , χ(U)
implies that U has the partition property.
Proof. Let f ∈κκ be such that X = {x ∈Pκγ | f (|x ∩κ|) = |x|} ∈U. With
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U), clearly j( f )“κ = f “κ ⊆κ as crit( j) = κ. It follows
by 22.11(a) that Y = {x ∈Pκγ | f “|x ∩κ| ⊆|x ∩κ|} ∈U. Finally, by 25.14
let E ∈U be such that x ⊂y both in E implies that |x| < |y|. Now for x ⊂y
both in X ∩Y ∩E ∈U, since |x| < |y|, |x ∩κ| < |y ∩κ| by deﬁnition of X, and
moreover f (|x ∩κ|) = |x| < |y ∩κ| by deﬁnition of Y. Consequently, U has the
partition property by 25.13.
⊣
It follows that for γ easily deﬁnable from κ, like γ = κ+ or γ = 2κ, every
normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ has the partition property. The initial observations
about the partition property were along these lines, made by Solovay assuming
GCH. If γ = κ+ for example, then the function f ∈κκ given by f (α) = α+
veriﬁes χ(U) for any normal ultraﬁlter over Pκκ+. Donald Pelletier (see Kunen-
Pelletier [83]) later established that χ(U) is strictly stronger than the partition
property for U.
Menas used the property χ to show that if κ is supercompact, then for every
γ ≥κ there is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ , in fact the maximal possible number
of such ultraﬁlters, with the partition property. The argument is as for 22.14, with
a further twist loaded into Solovay’s for 22.13:
25.16 Exercise (Menas [76]). Suppose that κ is 2|γ |<κ-supercompact. Then for any
A ∈P(P(Pκγ )) there is a normal ultraﬁlter W over Pκγ with χ(W) such that
A ∈MW. Hence, there are 22|γ |<κ normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ with the partition
property.
Hint. Assume that this fails for some γ ≥κ, and let γ0 be the least such. Following
the proof of 22.13, let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκ(2|γ0|<κ) with corresponding
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U), and let ϕ(v0, v1, v2) be such that ϕ[A, κ, γ ] iff A ∈
P(P(Pκγ )) and for any normal ultraﬁlter W over Pκγ with χ(W), A /∈MW.
It follows as before that if j0: V ≺M0 ∼= Ult(V, U|γ0), then by the choice of
γ0, M0 |= γ0 is the least ordinal such that ∃v0ϕ[κ, γ0]. A contradiction results,
once it is veriﬁed that χ(U|γ0). But if f ∈κκ is deﬁned by f (α) = |β| for the least
β such that ∃v0ϕ[α, β] if one exists, and = 0 otherwise, then jU|γ0( f )(κ) = |γ0|.
⊣
What then heightened interest in the partition property was Solovay’s discov-
ery that it does not always hold:

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
349
25.17 Proposition (Solovay – Menas [76]). Suppose that κ < λ ≤δ and both
κ and λ are δ-supercompact. Then there is a normal ultraﬁlter Pκδ without the
partition property.
Proof. Let D be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκδ, and for each x ∈Pλδ with x ⊇κ
set
D|x = {{s ∩x | s ∈Z} | Z ∈D} .
Then D|x is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκx (cf. after 22.12). Now let U be a normal
ultraﬁlter over Pλδ, and deﬁne W by:
X ∈W iff
X ⊆Pκδ ∧{x ∈Pλδ | x ⊇κ ∧X ∩Pκx ∈D|x} ∈U .
Then W is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκδ (cf. the hint for 22.9), one that glues
together approximations to D using U.
D may or may not have the partition
property, but W does not:
To show this, it sufﬁces by 25.13 to take an arbitrary X ∈W and ﬁnd x ⊂y
both in X such that |x| ≥|y ∩κ|. For such an X, set
Y = {x ∈Pκδ | x ⊇κ ∧X ∩Pκx ∈D|x} ,
and for each x ∈Y set
Zx = {s ∈Pκδ | s ∩x ∈X} .
Then by deﬁnition of W, Y ∈U and Zx ∈D for every x ∈Y. Now let x ⊂y be
both in Y, and by unboundedness let s ∈Zx ∩Z y be such that s ∩(y −x) ̸= ∅.
Set x = x ∩s and y = y ∩s. Then x ⊂y and both are in X, yet as x ∩y ⊇κ
|x| = |x ∩s| ≥|κ ∩s| = |y ∩κ ∩s| = |y ∩κ| .
⊣
Taking δ = λ, if κ < λ, κ is λ-supercompact, and λ is measurable, then there
is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκλ without the partition property. Just after Solovay
established this result, Kunen (see Kunen-Pelletier [83]) improved it by showing
that if κ < λ, κ is λ-supercompact, and λ is ineffable (a property consistent with
V = L discussed in volume II), then there is a γ < λ and a normal ultraﬁlter over
Pκγ without the partition property. Moreover, he showed that if κ is supercompact
and there is a γ > κ so that some normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ does not have the
partition property, then γ is Π2
1 -indescribable. Hence, it is consistent that there is
no such γ .
Further results about the partition property for normal ultraﬁlters were es-
tablished in Menas [76], Di Prisco [77], Pelletier [81], Kunen-Pelletier [83], and
Barbanel [86, 92, 93, 93a].
Turning to the more general propositions Part(κ, γ )n and Part∗(κ, γ )n, by
Menas’s 25.16, if κ is 2|γ |<κ-supercompact, then Part∗(κ, γ )2 (and in fact
Part∗(κ, γ )n for every n ∈ω by the comment after 25.13). Citing this for one
direction, Magidor established the following combinatorial characterization of su-
percompactness:

350
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
25.18 Theorem (Magidor [74]). κ supercompact iff Part∗(κ, γ )2 for every γ ≥κ.
It was recently observed that the forward direction has a sharp local form,
improving what can be deducted from 25.16. Shizuo Kamo [97, 02] established: If
κ is γ -supercompact, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ with the partition
property (and hence Part∗(κ, γ )2 holds). See Shioya [∞] for a short proof. There
is a quick argument for showing that if κ is γ -supercompact, then Part∗(κ, γ )2
holds:
Assume to the contrary that the proposition fails for some γ ≥κ, and let
γ0 be the least such. Let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over Pkγ0 with corresponding
j: V ≺M ∼= Ult(V, U). Deﬁne f : κ →κ by: f (ξ) = 0 unless ξ is a regular
uncountable cardinal and Part∗(ξ, γ ) fails for some γ ≥ξ, in which case f (ξ) =
the least such γ . Since M is closed under |γ0|<κ-sequences (22.11(b)), it follows
that j( f )(κ) = γ0. But then, χ(U), so that by 25.15, Part∗(κ, γ ), which is a
contradiction.
Magidor also established an intermediate characterization of supercompact-
ness in terms of a concept formulated in Jech [73], γ -ineffability. Di Prisco and
William Zwicker in their [80] reﬁned this result, and moreover provided an anal-
ogous characterization of strong compactness. Through such means Baumgartner,
Carr [87], and Di Prisco independently showed that if Part(κ, γ )3 holds for every
γ ≥κ, then κ is strongly compact. The exponent here was recently lowered to 2,
but it remains unknown whether strong compactness yields even exponent 2:
25.19 Question. If κ is strongly compact, does Part(κ, γ )3 hold for every γ ≥κ?
25.20 Theorem (Matet). If Part(κ, γ )2 holds for every γ ≥κ, then κ is strongly
compact.
The property Part(κ, γ )2 generalizes the characterization κ −→(κ)2
2 of the
weak compactness of κ. Carr [85] considered generalizations of other character-
izations, and in [86, 87, 87a] pursued their study in considerable detail. (See also
Johnson [88, 88a].)
Recent work has been directed toward shortcomings in the analogical treat-
ment of ⟨Pκγ, ⊂⟩in terms of ⟨κ, <⟩. Zwicker [84] deﬁned a stationary coding
set for Pκγ to be a set A stationary in Pκγ together with an injective function
c: A →γ such that x ⊂y both in A implies that c(x) ∈y. He showed that
restricting the study of ⟨Pκγ, ⊂⟩to such a set A results in more features anal-
ogous to ⟨κ, <⟩. Shelah [86: §§7, 9] then established the existence of stationary
coding sets in a variety of situations, e.g. when κ > ω2 is a successor cardinal
and γ = κ+. Zwicker [86] contained related work, and his [89] subsequently
used stationary coding sets to begin a study of structural properties of ideals over
Pκγ in the spirit of the extensive treatment in Baumgartner-Taylor-Wagon [82]
for ideals over κ.
Carr-Pelletier [89] also began such a study, but by proceeding analogously
with ⟨Pκγ, <⟩where < on Pκγ is deﬁned by:

25. Combinatorics of Pκγ
351
x < y iff
x ⊂y ∧|x| < |y ∩κ| .
This new order is suggested by 25.13, and was ﬁrst used systematically in Carr
[87]. The following exercise provides versions of previous results in terms of <.
If ⟨Xa | a ∈Pκγ ⟩∈Pκγ P(Pκγ ), then its <-diagonal intersection is {x ∈Pκγ |
x ∈
a<x Xa}. For a ﬁlter F over Pκγ ,
F is strongly normal iff F is ﬁne, and for any ⟨Xa | a ∈Pκγ ⟩∈Pκγ F,
its <-diagonal intersection is in F.
For X ⊆Pκγ , a function f : X →Pκγ is <-regressive on X iff
f (x) < x for
every x ∈X. For n ∈ω, set
[Pκγ ]n
< = {{x1, . . . , xn} | x1 < . . . < xn all in Pκγ } .
For functions on this set, that a subset is homogeneous has the expected meaning
from the [Pκγ ]n
⊂context.
25.21 Exercise (Carr-Pelletier [89]).
(a) A strongly normal ﬁlter over Pκγ is normal.
(b) A ﬁne ﬁlter F over Pκγ is strongly normal iff whenever X is F-stationary
and f is <-regressive on X, there is an F-stationary Y ⊆X such that f is
constant on Y.
(c) A normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ is strongly normal.
(d) If U is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pκγ and f : [Pκγ ]n
< →2 for some n ∈ω,
then there is a set in U homogeneous for f .
Hint. For (c) and (d) recall the argument for 25.13.
⊣
Thus, the partition property for [Pκγ ]2
<, unlike for [Pκγ ]2
⊂, holds for all
normal ultraﬁlters. On the other hand, the approach with < is less general, for
Carr-Levinski-Pelletier [90] showed that for some (every) γ ≥κ there is a strongly
normal ﬁlter over Pκγ iff κ is Mahlo or κ = ν+ where ν<ν = ν.
The investigation of Pκγ is far from exhausted, and both the stationary cod-
ing set and < ordering approaches to structural analysis hold promise. Roughly
speaking, the ﬁrst approach seems more appropriate when either γ is small with
respect to κ or the property being investigated is invariant under isomorphisms
induced by mappings: Pκγ →Pκγ , and the second, when κ is large, and either γ
is large with respect to κ or the property being investigated is not invariant under
isomorphisms. For ideals over Pκγ a full structure theory has yet to be worked
out.

352
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
26. Extenders
As a nod to modernity, this section reaches ahead to provide a basic analysis
of elementary embeddings and related hypotheses that was to become crucial
to both the development of inner model theory and the consistency analysis of
strong propositions from the late 1970’s onwards. (Volume II proceeds with the
orderly elaboration of strong hypotheses, especially with regard to combinatorics
and relative consistency, carried out systematically through the 1970’s and after.)
As described in §20, if U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ, then L[U] is an inner
model of ZFC in which κ is measurable. Moreover, these models have strong
canonicity properties and establish the relative consistency of minimal principles
like GCH, and their structural coherence provide a persuasive argument for the
consistency of measurability.
A ﬁrst attempt at relativizing strong hypotheses
to develop a comparable inner model theory would be to analogously take a
normal ultraﬁlter U over Pκγ and consider L[U]. In the case of measurability,
the absoluteness κ ∩L = κ of the underlying set for measurability is implicitly
exploited in the results on canonicity.
However, in the presence of a normal
ultraﬁlter U over Pκγ with |γ | > κ, Pκγ ∩L = Pκγ fails, and indeed Pκγ ∩L /∈U
so that L[U] = L (25.8).
The absoluteness problem can be dealt with, at the cost of weakening the
hypotheses to be relativized, by considering extenders, sequences of ultraﬁlters
over absolute sets whose corresponding ultrapowers form a directed system. Ex-
tenders had occurred in a general context in Powell [74].
However, they did
not enter large cardinal theory until after Mitchell [79] discovered a way to de-
velop a canonical inner model theory for weak versions of γ -supercompactness.
Dodd and Jensen (see Dodd [82]) then arrived at the extender concept as an
improvement over Mitchell’s formulations, and ﬁrst used the term.
The basic
theory of extenders and related hypotheses is developed here, these scant remarks
alone suggesting their crucial role in the emerging inner model theory. Unlike
for γ -supercompactness, it is the method of analysis rather than those hypotheses
characterizable by it that is described ﬁrst, as it provides the main motivation.
The basic discovery is that any elementary embedding between inner mod-
els can be approximated arbitrarily closely as direct limits of ultrapowers with
constructive features reminiscent of iterated ultrapowers. Proceeding in a general
setting that anticipates wide applicability, suppose that
N and M are inner models of ZFC and j: N ≺M .
There is no presumption here that j is a (deﬁnable) class of N or that M ⊆N.
By 5.1(b), j has a critical point.
Let β > κ = crit( j), and ζ ≥κ the least ordinal satisfying β ≤j(ζ) .
The basic case is ζ = κ, i.e. β ≤j(κ); the general context is for the study of
very strong hypotheses. For each a ∈[β]<ω, deﬁne Ea by:
X ∈Ea iff
X ∈P([ζ]|a|) ∩N ∧a ∈j(X) .

26. Extenders
353
This is yet another version of the now familiar idea of generating ultraﬁlters from
embeddings. If X ∈P([ζ]|a|)∩N, then j(X) ∈P([ j(ζ)]|a|)∩M, so that querying
a ∈j(X) is apropos. Although Ea may not be in N, ⟨N, ∈, Ea⟩|= Ea is a κ-
complete ultraﬁlter over [ζ]|a|. Strictly speaking, Ea is a principal ultraﬁlter for
a ∈[κ]<ω, but for notational simplicity conventions and concepts are hereby
liberalized to allow such Ea throughout this section. Stipulate that
E = ⟨Ea | a ∈[β]<ω⟩is the (κ, β)-extender derived from j .
For a ∈[β]<ω let
ja: N ≺Ult(N, Ea)
be the usual ultrapower embedding. It is simple to check that ka: Ult(N, Ea) →M
deﬁned by
ka(( f )0
Ea) = j( f )(a)
(where ( f )0
Ea ∈Ult(N, Ea) is the equivalence class of f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N) is elemen-
tary, and that ka ◦ja = j. In particular, Ult(N, Ea) is well-founded and so has a
transitive collapse Ma.
Ult(N, Ea) is identiﬁed with Ma .
Next, for a ⊆b both in [β]<ω, say b = {α1, . . . , αn} with the usual under-
standing that α1 < . . . < αn and a = {αi1, . . . , αim} where 1 ≤i1 < . . . < im ≤n,
deﬁne πba: [ζ]n →[ζ]m by:
πba({ξ1, . . . , ξn}) = {ξi1, . . . , ξim} .
Then it is simple to check that iab: Ma →Mb deﬁned by
iab([ f ]Ea) = [ f ◦πba]Eb
is elementary, and that
iab ◦ja = jb and kb ◦iab = ka .
Finally, ⟨⟨Ma | a ∈[β]<ω⟩, ⟨iab | a ⊆b⟩⟩is seen to be a directed system, so
stipulate that
⟨ME, ∈E⟩is the direct limit ,
and
jE: ⟨N, ∈⟩≺⟨ME, ∈E⟩,
kaE: ⟨Ma, ∈⟩≺⟨ME, ∈E⟩, and
kE: ⟨ME, ∈E⟩≺⟨M, ∈⟩
the corresponding embeddings, so that for a ∈[β]<ω,
kE ◦jE = j , kaE ◦ja = jE , and kE ◦kaE = ka .
In particular, ⟨ME, ∈E⟩is well-founded, and so assume that
ME is transitive and ∈E= ∈∩(ME × ME) .

354
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
The crucial features of the extender analysis of elementary embeddings are
given by the following lemma. Its (a) provides a useful representation of ME
(cf. 19.6), and its (b) and (c) describe to what extent ME approximates M. Al-
though there are at most 22|ζ| distinct Ma’s, it is how they are interwoven by the
iab’s that leads to these considerable properties.
26.1 Lemma.
(a) ME = { jE( f )(a) | a ∈[β]<ω ∧f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N}.
(b) For any γ satisfying |Vγ |M ≤β: V M
γ
⊆ran(kE), V ME
γ
= V M
γ , and
kE(x) = x for x ∈V ME
γ
.
(c) crit(kE) ≥β, and so crit( jE) = κ and β ≤jE(ζ). If β = j(ζ), then
crit(kE) > β, and so β = jE(ζ).
Proof. (a) If x ∈ME, there is an a ∈[β]<ω and an f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N such that
x = kaE([ f ]Ea), and so
kE(x) = kE(kaE([ f ]Ea)) = ka([ f ]Ea) = j( f )(a) .
Consequently,
ran(kE) = { j( f )(a) | a ∈[β]<ω ∧f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N} .
The result now follows since kE ◦jE = j.
(b) Let g ∈[ζ]1N ∩N be such that whenever |Vα|N ≤ζ, g|[|Vα|N]1 is a
bijection between [|Vα|N]1 and V N
α . Then for any γ satisfying |Vγ |M ≤β and
any x ∈V M
γ , there is a ξ < β such that j(g)({ξ}) = x. It follows from the
characterization of ran(kE) above that V M
γ
⊆ran(kE), and the rest follows since
the inverse of kE is just the collapsing isomorphism: ran(kE) →ME.
(c) This is similar, since it is readily seen that β ⊆ran(kE). Note that if
β = j(ζ) = kE( jE(ζ)), then in fact β + 1 ⊆ran(kE).
⊣
Having formulated extenders in terms of an ambient elementary embedding,
the essential features are abstracted in a deﬁnition. For N an inner model of ZFC,
κ a cardinal in the sense of N, β > κ, and E = ⟨Ea | a ∈[β]<ω⟩, E is an
N-(κ, β)-extender (and simply a (κ, β)-extender if N = V ) iff for some ζ ≥κ:
(i) For each a ∈[β]<ω, ⟨N, ∈, Ea⟩|= Ea is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter
over [ζ]|a|, and:
(1) For at least one such a, ⟨N, ∈, Ea⟩|= Ea is not κ+-complete.
(2) For each ξ ∈ζ, there is such an a so that
{s ∈[ζ]|a| | ξ ∈s} ∈Ea.
(ii) (Coherence) Suppose that a ⊆b are both in [β]<ω and
πba: [ζ]|b| →[ζ]|a| is deﬁned as before, i.e. if b = {α1, . . . , αn} and
a = {αi1, . . . , αim}, then πba({ξ1, . . . , ξn}) = {ξi1, . . . , ξim}. Then
X ∈Ea iff
{s | πba(s) ∈X} ∈Eb .

26. Extenders
355
(iii) (Well-foundedness) Whenever am ∈[β]<ω and Xm ∈Eam for m ∈
ω, there is an d: 
m am →ζ such that d“am ∈Xm for every such
m.
(iv) (Normality) Whenever a ∈[β]<ω, f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N, and
{s ∈[ζ]|a| | f (s) ∈max(s)} ∈Ea ,
there is a b ∈[β]<ω with a ⊆b such that, with πba as in (ii),
{s ∈[ζ]|b| | f (πba(s)) ∈s} ∈Eb .
Again, ζ = κ is the basic case, and the general context is for the study of very
strong hypotheses. For (i), the Ea’s are allowed to be principal. (i)(1) establishes
the role of κ, and as will become clear, (i)(2) speciﬁes the ζ. It is simple to check
that for any α < β, if the a’s from [α]<ω satisfy (i)(1) and (i)(2), then E|[α]<ω is
an N-(κ, α)-extender.
We now proceed to use these clauses to construct an ME and a jE: N ≺ME
as before; throughout, πba is as in (ii). First, for each a ∈[β]<ω we can by (i) form
the ultrapower Ult(N, Ea). By (iii) applied with each am = a, Ea is countably
complete (as deﬁned before 19.11, i.e. for any {Xn | n ∈ω} ⊆Ea, 
n Xn ̸= ∅).
It follows that Ult(N, Ea) is well-founded and so has a transitive collapse Ma.
Let
ja: N ≺Ma ∼= Ult(N, Ea) .
Next, for a ⊆b both in [β]<ω, with (ii), iab: Ma ≺Mb can be deﬁned as
before by
iab([ f ]Ea) = [ f ◦πba]Eb ,
so that
iab ◦ja = jb .
Again, ⟨⟨Ma | a ∈[β]<ω⟩, ⟨iab | a ⊆b⟩⟩is a directed system, so stipulate that
⟨ME, ∈E⟩is the direct limit,
and
jE: ⟨N, ∈⟩≺⟨ME, ∈E⟩and
ka: ⟨Ma, ∈⟩≺⟨ME, ∈E⟩
the corresponding embeddings so that for a ⊆b both in [β]<ω,
ka ◦ja = jE and kb ◦iab = ka .
It is straightforward to see that (iii) implies that ⟨ME, ∈E⟩is well-founded.
(By the argument for 15.7(a), (iii) in fact characterizes well-foundedness.) More-
over, an argument as for 19.3 shows that ∈E is set-like. Hence, we can assume
(0.4) that

356
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
ME is transitive and ∈E = ∈∩(ME × ME).
Extending a previous notation, the situation is summed up by
jE: N ≺ME ∼= Ult(N, E) ,
although a single ultrapower is not being taken.
As usual, subscripts will be
suppressed when clear from the context.
(a) of the following lemma is based on (iv) and shows why it was called
normality, and (b) is based on the subsidiary conditions of (i).
For n ∈ω,
let idn: [ζ]n →[ζ]n be the identity map. Note that for a ⊆b both in [β]<ω,
iab([id|a|]Ea) = [πba]Eb.
26.2 Lemma.
(a) For any a ∈[β]<ω, ka([id|a|]Ea) = a.
(b) crit( jE) = κ and ζ is the least ordinal satisfying β ≤jE(ζ).
(c) ME = { jE( f )(a) | a ∈[β]<ω ∧f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N}.
Proof. (a) This is ﬁrst established for a ∈[β]1 by showing that k{α}([id1]E{α}) = {α}
for α < β by induction on α. So, assume that this holds for α < γ where γ < β.
k{γ }([id1]E{γ }) = {δ} for some δ, and it must shown that δ = γ .
Consider ﬁrst an α < γ , and set a = {α, γ }. For each s ∈[ζ]2, πa{α}(s) =
{ξ s
0} and πa{γ }(s) = {ξ s
1} where s = {ξ s
0, ξ s
1} with ξ s
0 < ξ s
1. It follows from the
deﬁnitions that the unique member of k{α}([id1]E{α}), which inductively is α, is less
than the unique member of k{γ }([id1]E{γ }), which is δ. Hence, γ ≤δ.
For the converse, suppose that ρ < δ, say ρ = ka([ f ]Ea) where a ∈[β]<ω
with γ ∈a and f ∈[ζ]|a|N ∩N. By the deﬁnition of δ,
(∗)
{s ∈[ζ]|a| | f (s) is less than the unique member of πa{γ }(s)} ∈Ea .
By condition (iv) there is a b ∈[β]<ω with a ⊆b such that
{s ∈[ζ]|b| | f (πba(s)) ∈s} ∈Eb .
It follows that for some i,
{s ∈[ζ]|b| | f (πba(s)) = (s)i} ∈Eb
where (s)i temporarily denotes the ith member in increasing order of a set s of
ordinals. If (b)i = α, then
{s ∈[ζ]|b| | { f (πba(s))} = πb{α}(s)} ∈Eb .
But then, condition (ii) applied to (∗) implies that πb{α}(s) < πa{α}(πba(s)) for s
in a set in Eb, so that α < γ . It follows from the deﬁnitions and induction that
{ρ} = {ka([ f ]Ea)} = k{α}([id1]E{α}) = {α} .
Hence δ ≤γ , and so δ = γ .

26. Extenders
357
The result for general a ∈[β]<ω now follows easily: Suppose that ρ =
kb([ f ]Eb), taking a ⊆b. Then as in the above arguments,
ρ ∈ka([id|a|]Ea) iff
[ f ]Eb ∈[πba]Eb
iff
{[ f ]Eb} = [πb{α}]Eb for some α ∈a
iff
{ρ} = ka([id1]E{α}) = {α} for some α ∈a .
(b) To check that crit( jE) = κ, that jE(α) = α for α < κ follows by a simple
inductive argument based on the “N-κ-completeness” of the Ea’s, and then (i)(1)
implies that for some a, crit( jE) = crit( ja) = κ.
That β ≤jE(ζ) follows from (a): For any α < β, [id1]E{α} ∈[ j{α}(ζ)]1 so
that k{α}([id1]E{α}) ∈[ jE(ζ)]1, and k{α}([id1]E{α}) = {α} by (a).
Finally, if ξ < ζ, then (i)(2) implies that for some a, ja(ξ) ∈[id|a|]Ea so that
jE(ξ) ∈a ⊆β by (a), and so indeed ζ is the least ordinal satisfying β ≤jE(ζ).
(c) This is like 26.1(a): If x ∈ME, there is an a ∈[β]<ω and an f ∈[ζ]|a|N∩N
such that x = ka([ f ]Ea). But [ f ]Ea = ja( f )([id|a|]Ea), and so
x = ka([ f ]Ea) = ka(( ja( f ))(ka([id|a|]Ea)) = jE( f )(a) ,
the last equality being a consequence of (a).
⊣
The correlation of the two kinds of extenders is now at hand:
26.3 Exercise. Let N be an inner model of ZFC.
(a) Suppose that j: N ≺M with crit( j) = κ, and E is the (κ, β)-extender
derived from j. Then E is an N-(κ, β)-extender.
(b) Suppose that E = ⟨Ea | a ∈[β]<ω⟩is an N-(κ, β)-extender. Then the
(κ, β)-extender derived from jE: N ≺ME ∼= Ult(N, E) is again E.
Hint. (b) applies 26.2.
⊣
The following observations are as for ordinary ultrapowers (cf. 5.7). Re-
call from §19 that for N a transitive ∈-model of ZFC−and U and S such that
⟨N, ∈, U⟩|= U is an ultraﬁlter over S, ⟨N, U⟩is weakly amenable iff whenever
F ∈SN ∩N, {i ∈S | F(i) ∈U} ∈N.
26.4 Exercise. Suppose that N is an inner model of ZFC, E = ⟨Ea | a ∈[β]<ω⟩
is an N-(κ, β)-extender with each Ea over [ζ]|a|, and j: N ≺M ∼= Ult(N, E).
Then:
(a) j(x) = x for every x ∈Vκ ∩N. If ⟨N, Ea⟩is weakly amenable for each
a ∈[β]<ω, then Vκ ∩N = Vκ ∩M, P(κ) ∩N = P(κ) ∩M, and κ+N = κ+M.
(b) For any ξ, j(ξ) < (|ζξ ∩N| · |β|)+.
(c) If θ > β is a cardinal and N |= ⌈θ is a strong limit of coﬁnality greater
than ζ ⌉, then j(θ) = θ.
(d) For any set X such that |X| > ζ, j“X /∈M.
(e) E /∈M.

358
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
Hint. (a) is like 19.1(c), (b) like 19.7(a) because of 26.2(c), (c) like 19.7(c), (d)
like 22.4(c), and (e) like 22.4(d).
⊣
The following simple observation precludes the possibility of target models
for extender embeddings having global closure properties in general.
26.5 Exercise. Suppose that κ < λ, λ is a strong limit cardinal of coﬁnality ω, and
there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ and Vλ ⊆M. Let E be the (κ, λ)-extender
derived from j and jE: V ≺ME ∼= Ult(V, E). Then ωME ̸⊆ME.
Hint. Vλ ⊆ME by 26.1(b), and so if κ ≤β < λ, the (κ, β)-extender E|[β]<ω ∈
ME. But E /∈ME by 26.4(e).
⊣
Strong, Woodin, and Superstrong Cardinals
While extenders may not generate inner models closed under the taking of arbitrary
ω-sequences, they suggest appropriately tailored hypotheses:
κ is γ -strong iff there is a j: V ≺M such that
(a) crit( j) = κ and γ < j(κ) , and
(b) Vκ+γ ⊆M .
κ is strong iff κ is γ -strong for every γ .
κ is superstrong iff there is a j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = κ and Vj(κ) ⊆M .
Thus, if γ ≤δ and κ is δ-strong, then κ is γ -strong; and κ is measurable iff κ
is 0-strong iff κ is 1-strong. These new hypotheses are clearly weak analogues
of previous ones: if κ is supercompact, then κ is strong; and if κ is huge, then
κ is superstrong.
And as before, although the ∃j ranging over classes is not
directly formalizable, there will be characterizations that provide a posteriori for-
malizations. By these means the superstrongness of κ will actually be seen to
be consistency-wise weaker than its 2κ-supercompactness (26.11(b)).
Gaifman
[74: 85ff] had considered strong and superstrong cardinals, but they did not be-
come a focus of attention until Mitchell [79] and Dodd and Jensen (see Dodd [82])
showed that strong cardinals have a canonical inner model theory. Concerning
our deﬁnition of γ -strong, the speciﬁc form of (b) is pertinent only for small γ ,
since γ ≥κ · ω implies that κ + γ = γ , and has some nominal advantages. Also
the condition γ < j(κ) is included for convenience as for γ -supercompactness; it
is superﬂuous when γ is a successor and hence for full strongness. (See 26.7(b),
which gives Gaifman’s original formulation; if j(κ) ≤γ , then κ is superstrong,
a consistency-wise stronger assertion than being strong (26.12, 26.13).) Note that
γ < j(κ) implies that |Vκ+γ | < j(κ): since Vκ+γ = V M
κ+γ and j(κ) is inaccessible
in M, |Vκ+γ | ≤|Vκ+γ |M < j(κ).
Strongness sufﬁces for drawing former conclusions deducible with reﬂection
arguments depending only on having sufﬁciently large Vα included in the target
model:

26. Extenders
359
26.6 Exercise.
(a) If there is a strong cardinal, then V ̸= L(A) for any set A.
(b) If κ is 2-strong, there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U .
(c) If κ is γ -strong and 2α = α+ for every α < κ, then 2β = β+ for every
β < κ + γ .
(d) If κ is strong, then Vκ ≺2 V .
Hint. For (a), assume to the contrary that V = L(A) for set A. Let j: V ≺M
with crit( j) = κ and A ∈M. Then M = L(A) since M is an inner model of
L(A) with A ∈M. But then j: V ≺V , contradicting Kunen’s 23.12.
(b) follows from the argument for 22.1, (c) from that for 22.2, and (d) from
that for 22.3.
⊣
(a) recalls 5.9, but the relationship between strong compactness and strong-
ness is unclear.
These observations may fuel the speculation that strongness can supplant
supercompactness, but there are important relative consistency results based on
the latter for which the former does not seem to sufﬁce.
The following characterizations are in the spirit of the ultraﬁlter characteri-
zation of γ -supercompactness:
26.7 Exercise.
(a) κ is γ -strong iff there is a (κ, |Vκ+γ |+)-extender E such that Vκ+γ ⊆ME
and γ < jE(κ).
(b) κ is (γ + 1)-strong iff there is a (κ, β)-extender E for some β > κ such
that Vκ+γ +1 ⊆ME. Consequently, κ is strong iff for any set x there is a j: V ≺M
with crit( j) = κ and x ⊆M.
(c) κ is superstrong iff there is a (κ, β)-extender E for some β > κ such that
VjE(κ) ⊆ME.
Hint. Apply 26.3(b) and 26.1(b)(c). For (a), note that if j: V ≺M witnesses
the γ -strongness of κ, then |Vκ+γ | ≤|Vκ+γ |M < |Vκ+γ |+. For (b), argue as for
23.15(a) that the condition γ < jE(κ) can be adjoined.
⊣
((b) can be slightly strengthened with occurrences of γ + 1 replaced by γ ,
by further developing the theory of iterated embeddings broached in the proof of
23.15(a) to get a jω+1: V ≺Mω+1 with γ < jω+1(κ).)
These characterizations lead to formalizations in ZFC, since clauses of the
sort Vα ⊆ME can be rendered in terms of the “extender ultrapower” of a suf-
ﬁciently large Vρ.
Such clauses can be further embedded by formulating the
concept of a (κ, Y)-extender for arbitrary transitive sets Y: Simply replace the β
in the deﬁnition of (κ, β)-extender by Y, replacing ζ by Vζ and making notational
changes to accommodate Y not necessarily having a natural well-ordering. The

360
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
argument for 26.2(a) then shows that Y is included in the target model ME of the
resulting extender embedding, so that Vα ⊆ME becomes automatic if Vα ⊆Y.
Such extenders were used in Martin-Steel [89]. However, the simpler Y = β
extenders are appropriate for the inner model theory because of the absoluteness
of the corresponding ζ, and hence of the underlying [ζ]|a|’s for the Ea’s.
The following analogue of 22.8(b) is a consequence of 26.7(a):
26.8 Exercise. If Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is strong)), then Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is strong
∧¬∃λ(λ > κ ∧λ is inaccessible))).
⊣
In contrast, the argument from 1-extendibility given after 23.3 shows that
there are many measurable cardinals above a superstrong cardinal.
We can deduce as for γ -supercompactness that ⌈κ is γ -strong⌉is ∆ZF
2 (cf. be-
fore 22.9), and as for hugeness that ⌈κ is superstrong⌉is ΣZF
2 . This leads to a
direct analogue of 24.10:
26.9 Exercise. If κ is strong and there is a superstrong cardinal above it, then
there are κ superstrong cardinals below κ. In particular, if there are strong and
superstrong cardinals, then the least superstrong cardinal is less than the least
strong cardinal.
⊣
This has no bearing on the consistency strength of superstrongness, which is
stronger than that of strongness. Before establishing this, a further hypothesis is
tucked in:
κ is Woodin iff for any f ∈κκ, there is an α < κ
with f “α ⊆α and a j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = α and Vj( f )(α) ⊆M .
This concept was isolated in 1984, and through a series of remarkable advances
came to play a central role in consistency analysis (§32). A more technical hy-
pothesis, its full signiﬁcance can only be appreciated after an extended exegesis.
Note that as for 26.7, being Woodin is characterizable in terms of the existence of
extenders; a reﬁned form of this will be established below (26.14).
26.10 Exercise. Suppose that κ is Woodin. Then κ is regular and {α < κ | α is
measurable} is stationary in κ, and so κ is κ-Mahlo.
Hint. For the regularity of κ, note that if κ were singular and f ∈κκ were such
that ⟨f (ξ) | ξ < cf(κ)⟩is increasing and coﬁnal in κ with f (0) > cf(κ), there
would be no α < κ such that f “α ⊆α.
⊣
This section is brought to a close by establishing the hierarchical relationships
among the new hypotheses and providing useful characterizations of being Woodin
in the process.

26. Extenders
361
26.11 Proposition.
(a) If κ is 1-extendible, then κ is superstrong, and there is a normal ultraﬁlter
U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is superstrong} ∈U .
(b) If κ is 2κ-supercompact, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ such that
{α < κ | α is superstrong} ∈U .
Proof.
(a) Suppose that j: Vκ+1 ≺Vj(κ)+1 witnesses the 1-extendibility of κ.
Let E be “the (κ, j(κ))-extender derived from j”; we had only deﬁned extenders
derived from embeddings when they are between inner models, but in this case
we can still deﬁne the Ea’s, as P([κ]|a|) ⊆Vκ+1. It is simple to check that E is
indeed a (κ, j(κ))-extender, and so has a corresponding jE: V ≺ME ∼= Ult(V, E).
If g ∈Vκ+1 is a bijection: [κ]1 →Vκ, then j(g) ∈Vj(κ)+1 is a bijection:
[ j(κ)]1 →Vj(κ), so that the argument for 26.1(b) shows that Vj(κ) ⊆M. Also,
the argument for 26.1(c) shows that jE(κ) = j(κ). Hence, κ is superstrong by
the characterization 26.7(c).
Finally, E ∈Vj(κ)+1, and so if U is the normal
ultraﬁlter deﬁned from j as usual, then again by 26.7(c), mindful of how the
condition VjE(κ) ⊆ME can be expressed in terms of the “extender ultrapower” of
Vκ, {α < κ | α is superstrong} ∈U.
(b) This follows from (a) and 23.5 for η = 1.
⊣
(b) is rather striking, in that a j: V ≺M with the closure condition 2crit( j)M ⊆
M implies the consistency of the existence of a j′: V ≺M′ with the closure
condition Vj′(crit( j′)) ⊆M′; j′(crit( j′)) is only determined a posteriori by j′ and is
much larger than crit( j′), so that a large initial segment of the universe is absolute
for M′. This serves to mitigate against a heuristic argument given for the strength
of n-hugeness just after that concept was deﬁned, for the case n = 1.
In contrast, a real strengthening is to go to an (n + 1)-huge analogue of
superstrongness: There is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κ and Vjn+1(κ) ⊆M. This
proposition implies the n-hugeness of κ by the argument for 24.8.
26.12 Proposition. If κ is superstrong, then κ is Woodin and there is a normal
ultraﬁlter U over κ such that
{α < κ | α is Woodin} ∈U .
Proof. Suppose that j: V ≺M witnesses the superstrongness of κ. Towards
verifying that κ is Woodin, let f ∈κκ. Then j( f ) ∈j(κ) j(κ), and j( f )“κ =
f “κ ⊆κ. Let E be the (κ, |Vj( f )(κ)|M)-extender derived from j. Since j(κ) is
inaccessible in M and j( f )(κ) < j(κ), it follows that |Vj( f )(κ)|M < j(κ), and so
it is simple to see that E ∈Vj(κ) ⊆M. Moreover, by 26.1(b), Vj( f )(κ) ⊆ME and
j( f ) = kE( jE( f )) = jE( f ), so that VjE( f )(κ) ⊆ME. It follows by elementarity
that there is an α < κ with f “α ⊆α and an (α, β)-extender E′ ∈Vκ for some β
such that VjE′( f )(α) ⊆ME′. Hence, κ is Woodin.

362
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
The rest of the proposition now follows by the usual reﬂection argument,
since the existence of the requisite extenders in Vκ ⊆M shows that M |= κ is
Woodin.
⊣
26.13 Proposition. If κ is Woodin, then
{α < κ | α is γ -strong for every γ < κ}
is stationary in κ.
Proof. Suppose that κ is Woodin, and C closed unbounded in κ. A member of C
must be found γ -strong for every γ < κ.
Remembering that κ is inaccessible by 26.10, deﬁne g ∈κκ by:
g(ξ) =



0
if ξ is γ -strong for every γ < κ , else
γ
where γ is the least strong limit cardinal
less than κ such that ξ is not γ -strong .
Then deﬁne f ∈κκ by:
f (ξ) = max({g(ξ) + 5, min(C −ξ)}) .
By hypothesis, there is an α < κ with f “α ⊆α and a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = α
and Vj( f )(α) ⊆M. Now j(C) is closed unbounded in j(κ); j(C)∩α = C ∩α; and
f “α ⊆α implies that C ∩α is closed unbounded in α. Consequently, α ∈j(C).
To complete the proof, it sufﬁces by elementarity to show that M |= α is γ -strong
for every γ < j(κ):
Let
E = ⟨Ea | a ∈[ j(g)(α) + 1]<ω⟩
be the (α, j(g)(α) + 1)-extender derived from j. By elementarity,
j(g)(α) < j( f )(α) < j(α) ,
the latter inequality by f “α ⊆α and α < j(α). Consequently, each Ea is over
[α]|a|, and j(g)(α) < jE(α) by 26.1(c) (in its terms, crit(kE) ≥j(g)(α)+1). Also,
j(g)(α) is a strong limit in M and Vj( f )(α) ⊆M, so that by 26.1(b),Vj(g)(α) ⊆ME.
Finally, rank(E) ≤j(g)(α)+5, so that E ∈Vj( f )(α) ⊆M. Moreover, the foregoing
properties of E also hold in the sense of M:
E is an extender in M (note that the functions needed for the well-foundedness
condition are in Vj( f )(α) ⊆M), and j M
E : M ≺M M
E ∼= Ult(M, E) is a class of M
deﬁnable from E. jE(α) is the ordertype of
{ka([ f ]Ea) | a ∈[ j(g)(α) + 1]<ω ∧f : [α]|a| →α}
and V M
α+1 = Vα+1, and so it is straightforward to check that the computation
of jE(α) is absolute for M, i.e. j M
E (α) = jE(α), and consequently j(g)(α) <
j M
E (α). Finally, a similar argument about the “extender ultrapower” of Vα shows

26. Extenders
363
that j M
E (Vα) = jE(Vα), and so the consequence Vj(g)(α) ⊆V M
jE(α) = jE(Vα) of
j(g)(α) < jE(α) implies that V M
j(g)(α) = Vj(g)(α) ⊆M M
E .
All this conﬁrms that M |= α is j(g)(α)-strong, and so by the deﬁnition of
g, M |= α is γ -strong for every γ < j(κ).
⊣
When κ is inaccessible and ξ < κ, then through the use of extenders as in
the above proof, ξ is γ -strong for every γ < κ iff Vκ |= ξ is strong. Hence,
26.13 establishes transcendence of Woodin cardinals over strong cardinals. An
extension of its argument leads to a useful characterization of Woodinness in
terms of a “boldface” version of strongness. For any set A,
κ is γ -strong for A iff there is a j: V ≺M such that
(a) crit( j) = κ and γ < j(κ) ,
(b) Vκ+γ ⊆M , and
(c) A ∩Vκ+γ = j(A) ∩Vκ+γ .
There is an obvious analogue of 26.7(a) characterizing γ -strongness for A in terms
of the existence of extenders.
26.14 Theorem (Woodin). The following are equivalent:
(a) κ is Woodin.
(b) For any A ⊆Vκ,
{α < κ | α is γ -strong for A for every γ < κ}
is stationary in κ.
(c) For any A ⊆Vκ, there is an α < κ γ -strong for A for every γ < κ.
(d) For any f ∈κκ there is an α < κ with f “α ⊆α and an extender E ∈Vκ
with crit( jE) = α, jE( f )(α) = f (α), and VjE( f )(α) ⊆ME.
Proof. (a) →(b) κ is inaccessible by 26.10. Following the proof of 26.13, suppose
now that κ is Woodin, A ⊆Vκ, and C is closed unbounded in κ. Deﬁne g ∈κκ
by:
g(ξ) =



0
if ξ is γ -strong for A for every γ < κ , else
γ
where γ is the least strong limit cardinal
less than κ such that ξ is not γ -strong for A .
Then deﬁne f ∈κκ by
f (ξ) = max({g(ξ) + 5, min(C −ξ)}) .
By hypothesis, there is an α < κ with f “α ⊆α and a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = α
and Vj( f )(α) ⊆M. As before, α ∈j(C), and it sufﬁces to show that M |= α is
γ -strong for j(A) for every γ < j(κ):
Again let E be the (α, j(g)(α) + 1)-extender derived from j.
Then the
previous results about E and j M
E : M ≺M M
E ∼= Ult(M, E) will complete the proof,
once we establish the further property

364
Chapter 5. Strong Hypotheses
j(A) ∩V M
j(g)(α) = j M
E ( j(A)) ∩V M
j(g)(α) .
To do this, it sufﬁces to show that
j(A) ∩V M
j(α) = j M
E ( j(A)) ∩j M
E (Vα)
since as observed before, j(g)(α) < j(α), j(g)(α) < j M
E (α), and V M
j(g)(α) =
Vj(g)(α) ⊆M M
E . But note that
j(A) ∩V M
j(α) = j(A ∩Vα) = jE(A ∩Vα) = j M
E (A ∩Vα) ,
the second equality from 26.1(b) and the third, by an absoluteness argument as
before since V M
α+1 = Vα+1. Furthermore, A ∩Vα = j(A) ∩Vα as crit( j) = α, and
so the chain of equalities can be continued with
j M
E (A ∩Vα) = j M
E ( j(A) ∩Vα) = j M
E ( j(A)) ∩j M
E (Vα)
completing the proof.
(b) →(c) This is immediate.
(c) →(d) Suppose ﬁrst that g ∈κκ. Then by hypothesis there is an α ∈κ γ -
strong for g ⊆Vκ for every γ < κ. This implies that g“α ⊆α:
For ξ ∈κ, set mg(ξ) = max({ξ, g(ξ)}) + 3. Suppose now that ξ < α. Let
j: V ≺M with crit( j) = α, g(ξ) < j(α), and g ∩Vmg(ξ) = j(g) ∩Vmg(ξ). Since
⟨ξ, g(ξ)⟩∈g ∩Vmg(ξ), it follows that j(g)(ξ) = g(ξ) < j(α), and hence that
g(ξ) < α.
The argument for 26.10 using various g’s now shows that κ must be inac-
cessible.
To complete the proof, suppose that f ∈κκ. As before, let α < κ be γ -
strong for f ⊆Vκ for every γ < κ, so that in particular f “α ⊆α. As we now
know that κ is inaccessible, by characterizability through extenders (cf. 26.7(a))
there is an extender E ∈Vκ such that crit( jE) = α, Vf (α) ⊆ME, and f ∩Vm f (α) =
jE( f )∩Vm f (α) (where m f (α) is deﬁned as in the second paragraph). But as before,
jE( f )(α) = f (α), and so the result follows.
(d) →(a) This is immediate.
⊣
Woodin cardinals are best viewed in terms of (c), which captures their essence
as a kind of reﬂection property. (d) shows that κ being Woodin is a Π1
1 property
of ⟨Vκ, ∈⟩, and so the least Woodin cardinal is not weakly compact.
26.14(c) is similar to the characterizations 24.19 of Vopˇenka’s Principle,
and this promotes the analogy that Woodin cardinals are to strong cardinals as
Vopˇenka’s Principle is to supercompact cardinals. As with that principle, Woodin
cardinals can be further analyzed in terms of corresponding ﬁlters: For X ⊆κ,
X is Woodin in κ iff for any f ∈κκ, there is an α ∈X
with f “α ⊆α and a j: V ≺M with
crit( j) = α and Vj( f )(α) ⊆M .

26. Extenders
365
It is simple to check that κ is Woodin iff
{X ⊆κ | κ −X is not Woodin in κ}
is a (proper) ﬁlter, the Woodin ﬁlter over κ.
The following propositions are analogous to those for Vopˇenka’s Principle,
but the proofs are less straightforward at some points.
26.15 Exercise. Suppose that κ is Woodin, and F is the Woodin ﬁlter over κ.
(a) F is normal.
(b) For any A ⊆Vκ, {α < κ | α is γ -strong for A for every γ < κ} ∈F.
(c) If X ∈F, {α < κ | α is measurable and there is a normal ultraﬁlter over
α containing X ∩α} ∈F.
Hint. (a) recalls 24.14. For (b), argue as for 26.14(a) →(b), but with a j that
also satisﬁes g(α) = j(g)(α); this is possible by the argument for 26.14(c) →
(d). (c) recalls 24.16 and uses 26.14(c).
⊣
In the context of inner model theory Schimmerling [02] provided a further
characterization of Woodin cardinals and went on to formulate the hyperWoodin
cardinals and the weakly hyperWoodin cardinals.
These cardinals ﬁt into the
large cardinal hierarchy in the following increasing order of strength: measurable
Woodin, weakly hyperWoodin, hyperWoodin, and superstrong. A cardinal κ is
hyperWoodin iff it is Woodin and there is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ extending
the Woodin ﬁlter.
With this look at extenders and related hypotheses we have peered ahead
at trappings of major advances of the 1980’s. These were made over a broad
front: dramatic progress in inner model theory in conjunction with crowning
achievements in the concerted investigation of a hypothesis that arose in the 1960’s
from an entirely different quarter, the Axiom of Determinacy.

Chapter 6
Determinacy
The investigation of the determinacy of games is perhaps the most distinctive
and intriguing development of modern set theory, and the correlations eventually
established with large cardinals the most remarkable and synthetic.
Although
focused on sets of reals, the subject was to expand across the breadth of set theory
from combinatorics and forcing to large cardinals and inner model theory. As a
topical and anticipatory conclusion to the present volume this chapter describes
this development. §27 discusses the historical beginnings of the study of inﬁnite
games and the early work that led to the formulation of determinacy hypotheses.
§28 starts with Solovay’s seminal result on the connection with large cardinals and
proceeds to develop the combinatorial theory in that direction. §29 and §30 explore
the structural consequences of determinacy in descriptive set theory, a direction of
investigation ﬁrst pursued by Moschovakis and Martin. §31 starts the discussion
the consistency of determinacy hypotheses, with Martin’s groundbreaking work.
Finally, §32 gives a panoramic survey of recent relative consistency results of
Martin, Steel, and especially Woodin.

368
Chapter 6. Determinacy
27. Inﬁnite Games
With roots in the analysis of actual games, the concepts of inﬁnite game, winning
strategy, and determinacy (i.e. having a winning strategy) have become a rich
paradigm for the articulation of dichotomies across the breadth of set theory. In
light of the ﬁrst results along these lines, Polish mathematicians in 1962 introduced
the Axiom of Determinacy (AD), postulating for every set of reals the determinacy
of a corresponding game, largely because it established the regularity properties
(§12) for all sets of reals. With the conclusion contradicting the Axiom of Choice,
AD was initially cast adrift in the sea-change of set theory brought on by the
development of forcing and the gathering results about large cardinal hypotheses.
On the other hand, after Solovay established in 1965 that the regularity properties
for the Σ1
2 sets follow from the existence of a measurable cardinal (§14), there was
a predisposition to consider the liberal use of strong hypotheses to settle questions
of descriptive set theory.
Two events in 1967 stimulated the further research that soon transformed
the investigation of determinacy into a mainstream of set theory. The ﬁrst was
Solovay’s demonstration that AD implies the measurability of ω1, which anchored
unexpected consequences for the transﬁnite in the emerging theory of large cardi-
nals. The second was the appearance of a new and elegant game proof by David
Blackwell [67] of a result of classical descriptive set theory, which secured a
mooring for a systematic approach to extending the methods and results of that
theory based on determinacy.
Acknowledging an apparently strong hypothesis based on a new paradigm
and attracted by the possibility of developing more consequent structure about
the transﬁnite cardinals and deﬁnable sets of reals, a host of ﬁne mathematicians
soon came on board and carried out a concerted effort: Solovay, Martin, and
Moschovakis, joined by Kunen and Kechris by the early 1970’s. A wide array
of techniques ranging from the Recursion Theorem to ultrapowers was brought
to bear to systematically substantiate an often strange and striking but internally
coherent web of connections imposed by AD and other determinacy hypotheses.
That these hypotheses had no particular justiﬁcation was widely acknowledged, but
their consequences as well as the modes of argument, particularly in descriptive
set theory, were thought to be considerable motivation for their further study.
By the later 1970’s a more or less complete theory for the projective sets was
in place, a resilient ediﬁce founded on determinacy with both strong buttresses
and ﬁne details. (There was one notable lacuna, the determination of the so-called
projective ordinals. This was to be carried out in a culminating feat of technical
virtuosity by Steve Jackson.) With the study per se thus vindicated the researchers
started the Cabal Seminar in the Los Angeles area, and particularly with two ﬁne
younger mathematicians, Steel and Woodin, joining the ranks of that seminar,
attention began to shift to sets of reals beyond the projective sets, to inner models,
and to questions of overall consistency.

27. Inﬁnite Games
369
From the beginning, the investigation of determinacy not only involved its
consequences, but how much determinacy is derivable.
Early on Martin had
established another synthetic connection between determinacy and large cardinals
by showing that the existence of a measurable cardinal implies a signiﬁcant amount
of determinacy. In 1974, complementing early work of Harvey Friedman, Martin
essentially established just how much determinacy is derivable in ZFC, and several
years later, building on work of Solovay and Harrington he established an exact
correlation between amounts of determinacy and the existence of many measurable
cardinals.
With its seemingly boundless strength, does determinacy subsume the large
cardinal hierarchy? Or are all the determinacy hypotheses derivable, after all, from
large cardinals? Are the two somehow orthogonal in the higher reaches? How
this central problem was eventually resolved in the later 1980’s has elements of
an exciting mystery novel: the spurts and lulls, the red herrings and sudden leads,
the long-distance phone calls, and once the parts of the puzzle began to ﬁt into
place, the orderly denouement. Large cardinals, and relatively modest ones at that,
do provide the requisite strength as shown by Martin and Steel, and ultimately by
Woodin, in remarkable equiconsistency results. This was a resounding triumph for
the modern methods of set theory and an unforseen afﬁrmation of the relevance
of large cardinals.
This overview has gone far beyond our historical frame, and to provide an
adequate account of the foregoing would go far beyond the scope of the present
volume. The approach that will be taken is as follows: This section describes
the historical beginnings of determinacy and the early work that led to the for-
mulation of determinacy hypotheses. The next pursues the more combinatorial
consequences of determinacy, particularly those of large cardinal character. §29
and §30 explore the structural consequences of determinacy hypotheses in descrip-
tive set theory. §31 discusses the early work on the consistency of determinacy
hypotheses, and ﬁnally §32 surveys the crowning achievements of the 1980’s in
this direction. By then, most proofs will have been dispensed with in favor of a
coherent account of the overall context and the historical progression of ideas. The
text Moschovakis [80] serves as the reference for the decriptive set theory part, and
§§28, 31, 32 play roles complementary to it, the ﬁrst in emphasizing combinatorics
and large cardinals and the latter in focusing on relative consistency.
As much of the work in determinacy must proceed without AC,
ZF serves as the ambient theory for this section ,
and uses of AC will be explicitly noted, reversing the usual procedure.
To establish the basic context, let X be a non-empty set. For A ⊆ωX, G X(A)
denotes the following “inﬁnite two-person game with perfect information”: There
are two players, I and I I. I initially chooses an x(0) ∈X; then I I chooses an
x(1) ∈X; then I chooses an x(2) ∈X; then I I chooses an x(3) ∈X; and so
forth:

370
Chapter 6. Determinacy
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
Each choice is a move of the game, and each player before making each of his
moves is privy to all the previous moves (“perfect information”). The resulting
x ∈ωX is a play of the game, an initial segment of x a partial play, and I wins
if x ∈A, and otherwise I I wins. A is the payoff for the game G X(A).
A strategy for I is a function σ: 
n∈ω
2n X →X that tells him what move
to make given the previous moves, so that a (partial) play according to σ is a
(partial) play of form
I :
σ(∅)
σ(⟨σ(∅), y(0)⟩)
σ(⟨σ(∅), y(0), σ(⟨σ(∅), y(0)⟩), y(1)⟩)
I I :
y(0)
y(1)
. . .
With I I’s moves thus enumerated by y ∈ωX, this play is denoted
σ ∗y .
σ is a winning strategy for I iff {σ ∗y | y ∈ωX} ⊆A, i.e. no matter what moves
I I makes, plays according to σ always result in a member of A. Analogously, a
strategy for I I is a function τ: 
n∈ω
2n+1X →X; and a (partial) play according
to τ is a (partial) play of form
I
:
z(0)
z(1)
. . .
I I :
τ(⟨z(0)⟩)
τ(⟨z(0), τ(⟨z(0)⟩), z(1)⟩)
for some z ∈ωX, denoted
z ∗τ .
τ is a winning strategy for I I iff {z ∗τ | z ∈ωX} ∩A = ∅. Note that for any
strategy σ for I, the function assigning y ∈ωX to σ ∗y ∈ωX is injective, so that
if |A| < |X|ω, then I cannot have a winning strategy; analogous remarks apply to
I I and |ωX −A|. Finally,
G X(A) is determined iff a player has a winning strategy .
Note that the players cannot both have winning strategies. For brevity in the main
case of X = ω and A ⊆ωω,
A is determined iff Gω(A) is determined .
The following notation is helpful in this setting: For x ∈ωX, deﬁne xI, xI I ∈
ωX by
xI(i) = x(2i) , and
xI I(i) = x(2i + 1) .
If σ is a strategy for I as above and y ∈ωX, then (σ ∗y)I I = y, and if τ is a
strategy for I I and z ∈ωX, then (z ∗τ)I = z.
The games G X(A) are taken to be paradigmatic, but various games will
also be considered with more involved rules. The foregoing terminology adapts

27. Inﬁnite Games
371
naturally, and will be applied without further explanation. Sometimes a “payoff
scheme” is described without making explicit a corresponding set A, but this will
be simple to do in each case.
The determinacy of games having emerged in modern set theory as a major
area of investigation, it is notable that important ﬁgures in foundational studies ﬁrst
entertained the possibility of an analysis of extant games and game-like contexts.
In an early adumbration focusing on chess Zermelo [13: 502-503] argued that if
from a position q a player can force a win at all, then there is a t(q) ∈ω such that
he can win in at most t(q) moves no matter how his opponent plays. This was
later taken up by Hungarian mathematicians: In the paper that introduced his well-
known tree lemma K¨onig [27] ﬁlled a gap in Zermelo’s argument using that lemma,
following a suggestion of von Neumann. At the end K¨onig [27: 130] gave a simple
argument communicated to him by Zermelo that also ﬁlled gap; Zermelo was
arguing in effect that ﬁnite versions of the games G X(A) are determined. K¨onig
considered an inﬁnite chessboard, and L´aszl´o Kalm´ar [28] pursued a transﬁnite
generalization.
Before this, Borel [21] had described a wide range of ﬁnitary game-theoretic
problems, introduced a general concept of strategy, and formulated the now fa-
miliar minimax strategy. Then von Neumann [28] proved the crucial minimax
theorem, the result that really began the mathematical theory of games. A simple
consequence of that theorem is again that ﬁnite versions of the games G X(A) are
determined. Focusing on chess Max Euwe [29] had also described the minimax
strategy; he was, incidentally, the world champion of chess, 1935-1937.
Speculating about possible consequences for sets of reals Polish mathemati-
cians ﬁrst contemplated inﬁnite games involving reals. Following another antic-
ipation of the theory of games by Hugo Steinhaus [25], Banach and Stanisław
Mazur in 1925 (according to Steinhaus [65: 464]) found a non-determined game
of the sort G X(A) (using AC; cf. 27.2). In the Scottish book of problems (see
Mauldin [81: 113ff]) Mazur described an inﬁnite game and conjectured its con-
nection to Baire category, a conjecture conﬁrmed by Banach in 1935. Modifying
the problem Ulam essentially asked: For which A ⊆ωω does I (or respectively
I I) have a winning strategy in Gω(A)? It was to take set theorists half a century
to provide a fair answer to a related question: For which A ⊆ωω does either I
or I I have a winning strategy in Gω(A), i.e. is Gω(A) determined?
By the mid-1940’s von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern in their [44] had
codiﬁed the theory of games and its approach to the analysis of economic behavior,
stimulating research in this direction for decades to come. It was against this back-
drop that a more systematic investigation of the determinacy of inﬁnite games
began.
David Gale and Frank Stewart initiated the study of the games G X(A). For
non-empty X and s ∈<ωX let O(s) = {x ∈ωX | s ⊆x}. A ⊆ωX is open iff it is a
union of such O(s)’s, and is closed iff ωX −A is open. With the discrete topology
on X, these are just the concepts of open and closed in the product topology,
consistent with the case X = ω. The following result is simple yet fundamental

372
Chapter 6. Determinacy
for the whole subject; the argument is as for related ﬁnite games (essentially given
by Zermelo and von Neumann as described above) as membership in open sets is
secured at a ﬁnite stage.
27.1 Proposition (AC)(Gale-Stewart [53]). If A ⊆ωX is either open or closed,
then G X(A) is determined.
Proof. For any B ⊆ωX and s ∈<ωX, let
B/s = {x ∈ωX | s⌢x ∈B} .
If I has no winning strategy in G X(B/s), then for any i ∈X there is a j ∈X
such that I has no winning strategy in G X(B/s⌢⟨i, j⟩): Otherwise, let i ∈X be
such that for every j ∈X, I has a winning strategy σj in G X(B/s⌢⟨i, j⟩). Then
I would have a winning strategy in G X(B/s) after all: Initially make the move
i, and after any reply j by I I, play according to σj.
Suppose now that A ⊆ωX is open, and assume that I has no winning
strategy in G X(A). Then by the above remark, a strategy τ for I I can be deﬁned
recursively so that for any partial play s ∈
n∈ω
2n X according to τ, I has no
winning strategy in G X(A/s). Now if x were a play according to τ yet x ∈A,
then by openness there would be a 2n ∈ω such that O(x|2n) ⊆A. But then, any
strategy for I in G X(A/x|2n) would be a winning one, reaching a contradiction.
Hence, τ is a winning strategy for I I in G X(A).
The argument for closed A is analogous, with the roles of I and I I inter-
changed.
⊣
As in this proof, an informal description of a strategy will be typically given
without bothering to write out a formal deﬁnition. Although the main case is
X = ω, proofs of determinacy often turn on the determinacy of auxiliary games
corresponding to open A ⊆ωX for some X, the crux of the matter being that
membership in A is secured at a ﬁnite stage.
The full exercise of AC delimits the possibilities:
27.2 Proposition (AC)(Gale-Stewart [53]). There is a set of reals which is not
determined.
Proof. As there are 2ℵ0 strategies for games of form Gω(A), let ⟨σα | α < 2ℵ0⟩
enumerate the strategies for I and ⟨τα | α < 2ℵ0⟩those for I I. Recursively choose
aα, bα ∈ωω for α < 2ℵ0 as follows: Having chosen aβ and bβ for β < α, choose
bα so that bα = σα ∗y for some y yet bα /∈{aβ | β < α}. This is possible since
|{σα ∗y | y ∈ωω}| = 2ℵ0, the function taking y ∈ωω to σα ∗y being injective.
Similarly, choose aα so that aα = z ∗τα for some z yet aα /∈{bβ | β < α}. It is
simple to check that the resulting sets A = {aα | α < 2ℵ0} and B = {bα | α < 2ℵ0}
are disjoint, and that neither I nor I I has a winning strategy for Gω(A).
⊣
Gale-Stewart [53] also asked the basic question whether every Borel set of
reals determined. By 27.1 open sets are determined; Philip Wolfe [55] proved that

27. Inﬁnite Games
373
Σ0
2 sets are determined; and almost a decade later, Morton Davis [64] proved that
Σ0
3 sets are determined. The emerging difﬁculties were to be explained, and further
progress to be stimulated, by metamathematical arguments (see after 31.2). Prior
developments are discussed next that motivated the formulation of new hypotheses
in set theory.
Games and Regularity Properties
Putting the regularity properties for sets of reals in a new light, successively
considered are three games closely related to the Baire property, the perfect set
property, and Lebesgue measurability.
For A ⊆ωω Mazur’s Scottish book game mentioned earlier is essentially the
game G∗∗
ω (A) formulated as follows: There are two players I and I I, but instead
of choosing members of ω they choose members of <ωω −{∅}:
I
:
s0
s2
. . .
I I :
s1
s3
. . .
The previous terminology adapts, and with x the concatenation s0⌢s1⌢s2⌢. . . of
the resulting play, I wins if x ∈A, and otherwise I I wins. For the following,
Mazur initially noted the forward directions, Banach provided the converse, and
John Oxtoby, a generalization to arbitrary topological spaces.
27.3 Proposition (Mazur, Banach – Mauldin [81: 113ff]; Oxtoby [57]). For A ⊆
ωω,
(a) A is meager iff I I has a winning strategy in G∗∗
ω (A).
(b) O(s) −A is meager for some s ∈<ωω iff I has a winning strategy in
G∗∗
ω (A).
Proof. (a) Suppose ﬁrst that A is meager, so that A ⊆
n∈ω Cn where each Cn is
closed and nowhere dense. Then a strategy τ for I I can be deﬁned so that τ(⟨s0⟩)
is some t such that O(s0⌢t) ∩C0 = ∅, and generally τ(⟨s0, s1, . . . , s2n⟩) is some
t such that O(s0⌢s1⌢. . . ⌢s2n⌢t) ∩Cn = ∅. Such a τ is winning for I I.
Suppose now that I I has a winning strategy τ. For each partial play according
to τ of form p = ⟨s0, . . . , s2n⟩, let p∗= s0⌢. . . ⌢s2n and set
Dp = {x ∈ωω | p∗⊆x →∃t ∈<ωω −{∅}(p∗
⌢t⌢τ(p⌢⟨t⟩) ⊆x)} .
Then each Dp is open (noting in part that O(p∗) is clopen) and dense (for if
u ∈<ωω, either u ̸⊇p∗so that O(u) ⊆Dp, or else there is a t ∈<ωω −{∅}
such that p∗⌢t = u and so any x ∈ωω with x ⊇p∗⌢t⌢τ(p⌢⟨t⟩) satisﬁes
x ∈O(u) ∩Dp). Moreover, for any x ∈
p Dp we can recursively deﬁne a
play ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩according to τ such that x = s0⌢s1⌢s2⌢. . ., and so x /∈A.
Consequently, A ⊆
p(ωω −Dp), a countable union of nowhere dense sets.
(b) Suppose ﬁrst that O(s) −A is meager for some s ∈<ωω, which can be
taken to be non-empty. Then I has a winning strategy beginning with initial move
s and then playing to avoid O(s) −A as in the forward direction of (a).

374
Chapter 6. Determinacy
For the converse, if I has a winning strategy σ, say with σ(∅) = s, then it is
simple to see that I I has a winning strategy in G∗∗
ω (O(s) −A) derived from σ,
and so O(s) −A is meager by (a).
⊣
27.4 Corollary. For A ⊆ωω, setting
OA = {O(s) | s ∈<ωω ∧O(s) −A is meager} ,
if G∗∗
ω (A −OA) is determined, then A has the Baire property.
Proof. If I had a winning strategy in G∗∗
ω (A −OA), then for some t ∈<ωω,
O(t)−(A−OA) would be meager. But then, O(t)−A would also be meager and
so that O(t) ⊆OA and O(t) −(A −OA) = O(t), which is a contradiction (0.11).
Hence, I I has a winning strategy in G∗∗
ω (A −OA), and so A −OA is meager. But
OA −A is also meager by deﬁnition of OA, and so A has the Baire property. ⊣
The game for the perfect set property is based on X = 2. For A ⊆ω2, G∗
2(A)
is the game formulated as follows: I chooses members of <ω2 and I I, members
of 2:
I :
s0
s2
. . .
I I :
k1
k3
. . .
The previous terminology adapts, and with x being the concatenation
s0⌢⟨k1⟩⌢s2⌢⟨k3⟩⌢. . . of the resulting play, I wins if x ∈A, and otherwise I I
wins. With ω2 topologized with basic open sets O(s) = {x ∈ω2 | s ⊆x} for
s ∈<ω2, a perfect set is as before: non-empty, closed and containing no isolated
points.
27.5 Proposition (Davis [64]). For A ⊆ω2,
(a) A is countable iff I I has a winning strategy in G∗
2(A).
(b) A has a perfect subset iff I has a winning strategy in G∗
2(A).
Proof. (a) Suppose ﬁrst that there is an enumeration ⟨ai | i ∈ω⟩of A. Then I I has
a simple winning strategy: He plays his ith move to ensure that the concatenation
of the resulting play differs from ai.
Suppose now that I I has a winning strategy τ. Proceeding as in the proof
of 27.3(a), for a partial play according to τ of form p = ⟨s0, k1, . . . , s2n, k2n+1⟩
let p∗= s0⌢⟨k1⟩⌢. . . ⌢s2n⌢⟨k2n+1⟩and set
Dp = {x ∈ω2 | p∗⊆x →∃t ∈<ω2(p∗
⌢t⌢τ(p⌢⟨t⟩) ⊆x)} .
Then as before, A ⊆
p(ω2 −Dp).
Now for each p, x ∈ω2 −Dp exactly when p∗⊆x and
∀t ∈<ω2(p∗⌢t⌢τ(p⌢⟨t⟩) ̸⊆x). But then, ω2 −Dp has a unique member xp:
With |p∗| = m, xp|m = p∗; necessarily xp(m) = 1 −τ(p⌢⟨∅⟩); and recursively
xp(e) = 1 −τ(p⌢⟨xp(m), . . . , xp(e −1)⟩)

27. Inﬁnite Games
375
for e > m. (This argument is possible because of the switch from ωω to ω2.)
Hence, A is countable.
(b) Suppose ﬁrst that A has a perfect subset P. Setting
T = {x|n | x ∈P ∧n ∈ω} ,
a strategy for I can be described as follows: Let the initial move be an s ∈T
such that both s⌢⟨0⟩and s⌢⟨1⟩are in T ; such an s exists as P has no isolated
points. Generally, in response to a partial play p with concatenation p∗∈T , let
the move be an s such that both p∗⌢s⌢⟨0⟩and p∗⌢s⌢⟨1⟩are in T ; again such
an s exists as P has no isolated points. This is a winning strategy for I as P is
closed.
For the converse, note that if σ is a winning strategy for I, {σ ∗y | y ∈ω2}
is a perfect subset of A.
⊣
It is simple to make the transfer from ω2 to ωω. This can be done on general
grounds, or by applying a speciﬁc map:
For n, k ∈ω deﬁne bk
n: n + 1 →2 as follows: If k is even, set bk
n(i) = 1 for
i < n and bk
n(n) = 0; if k is odd, set bk
n(i) = 0 for i < n and bk
n(n) = 1. Then
deﬁne Ψ : ωω →ω2 by:
Ψ (x) = b0
x(0)
⌢b1
x(1)
⌢b2
x(2)
⌢. . .
It is straightforward to check that the range consists of all but the countably many
members of ω2 that are eventually constant, and that Ψ is actually a homeomor-
phism onto its range considered as a subspace of ω2. Also, for B ⊆ω2, B is
perfect iff Ψ −1(B) is perfect, and B is countable iff Ψ −1(B) is countable. This
leads to the following:
27.6 Corollary. For A ⊆ωω, G∗
2(Ψ “A) is determined iff A has the perfect set
property.
⊣
For Lebesgue measurability, Mycielski-Swierczkowski [64] provided the ﬁrst
game argument. Harrington then found a simpler approach with his covering game.
This is best cast as a game for ω2, but the ωω context is maintained through
contrivance: For A ⊆ωω and ǫ ∈R with ǫ > 0, the covering game G(A, ǫ) is
played with integer moves:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
However, the payoff scheme is somewhat involved. Let Ψ : ωω →ω2 be as above,
and on its range, let Ψ −1 be its inverse function. I must always play 0’s or 1’s so
that the resulting xI is not eventually constant. Each of I I’s moves is regarded
as coding a ﬁnite union of basic open sets; for deﬁniteness, in terms of the ﬁxed
recursive enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω set:

376
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Ni = O(ssi(0)) ∪. . . ∪O(ssi(|si|−1)) .
I I’s move x(2n + 1) must then satisfy
mL(Nx(2n+1)) < ǫ/22(n+1) .
Now if either I or I I fails to meet these conditions, the ﬁrst to do so loses.
Assuming that this does not happen, the idea is that I I tries to cover A with

n∈ω Nx(2n+1). Accordingly, I wins if Ψ −1(xI) ∈A −
n∈ω Nx(2n+1), and other-
wise I I wins.
27.7 Lemma. In G(A, ǫ):
(a) If I has a winning strategy, there is a Lebesgue measurable B ⊆A such
that mL(B) > 0.
(b) If I I has a winning strategy, there is an open set O ⊇A such that
mL(O) < ǫ.
Proof. (a) Suppose that σ is a winning strategy for I. Then the set of I’s outputs
according to σ,
B = {Ψ −1((σ ∗y)I) | y ∈ωω} ,
is seen to be a Σ1
1 set (in a parameter coding σ) and so is Lebesgue measurable.
The rules of the game imply that mL(B) > 0: Otherwise, it is simple (using 0.8(d)
and 0.9(a)) to ﬁnd ⟨x(2n + 1) | n ∈ω⟩so that I I wins a play even according to
σ.
(b) Suppose that τ is a winning strategy for I I. For any s ∈<ω2 −{∅}, say
with |s| = n+1, let d(s) be I I’s response (the (2n+1)st move of the game) of the
play according to τ where I’s moves are successively s(0), . . . , s(n). Then as τ is
winning for I I, for any x ∈A there must be an n ∈ω such that x ∈Nd(Ψ (x)|(n+1)).
Consequently, if
O = {Nd(s) | s ∈<ω2 −{∅}} ,
then A ⊆O. Moreover, according to the rules of the game mL(Nd(s)) < ǫ/22(n+1)
where |s| = n + 1, and there are 2n+1 such s’s. Hence,
mL(O) < 
n∈ω(ǫ/22(n+1)) · 2(n+1) = 
n∈ωǫ/2(n+1) = ǫ .
⊣
For A ⊆ωω, B ⊆ωω a minimal cover for A iff A ⊆B, B is Lebesgue
measurable, and if Z ⊆B −A is Lebesgue measurable, then mL(Z) = 0. Any
A ⊆ωω has a minimal cover: take any Lebesgue measurable B ⊇A with mL(B)
minimal. In fact, B can be taken to be Gδ by 0.9(b). Noting that 27.7 can be
established in our ambient theory ZF, the argument for 14.4 showing in ZF that
every Σ1
1 set is Lebesgue measurable, there is the following corollary:
27.8 Corollary. Suppose that A ⊆ωω, B ⊆ωω is a minimal cover for A, and
for any ǫ ∈R with ǫ > 0, G(B −A, ǫ) is determined. Then A is Lebesgue
measurable.

27. Inﬁnite Games
377
Proof. By choice of B, I I must have a winning strategy in each of the games
G(B −A, ǫ). Hence, B −A ⊆G where G is a Π0
2 set with mL(G) = 0.
⊣
Determinacy Hypotheses
In Poland, with renewed interest in inﬁnite games (Mycielski-Zieba [55], Myciel-
ski-Swierczkowski-Zieba [56]) Mycielski and Steinhaus in their [62] proposed the
following axiom, now known as the Axiom of Determinacy:
(AD)
Every set of reals is determined .
(Steinhaus [65: 465]) recalled how the axiom came to be formulated. He there
used the term “determinacy”, but the early papers on the subject used the term
“determinateness”.
By the 1970’s “determinacy” came to prevail.)
The basic
theory of AD was soon set out in Mycielski [64, 66] and Mycielski-Swierczkowski
[64].
Mycielski [66] considered a further hypothesis:
(ADR)
Gωω(A) is determined for every A ⊆ω(ωω) .
ADR readily implies AD. AD was to be the main preoccupation, but ADR was to
ﬁgure as a suitably strong hypothesis in later developments.
Concerning the regularity properties, the games above can all be recast as
games of form Gω(B). For G∗∗
ω (A) for example, in terms of the ﬁxed recursive
enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω with s0 = ∅, deﬁne B ⊆ω(ω −{0}) by
x ∈B iff
sx(0)
⌢sx(1)
⌢sx(2)
⌢. . . ∈A .
Then I has a winning strategy in G∗∗
ω (A) exactly when I has a winning strategy
in Gω(B), and similarly for I I. This leads to the following summarizing result:
27.9 Theorem (Mycielski-Swierczkowski [64]; Mazur, Banach; Davis [64]). As-
sume AD. Then every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire property,
and has the perfect set property.
⊣
This was the main incentive behind the formulation of AD. AD thus contra-
dicts AC by actually banishing those “pathological” non-measurable sets and the
like given by unfettered applications of AC. Nonetheless, accepting AC Mycielski
and Steinhaus wrote [62: 2] of their axiom that it could be considered as leading
to a nice submodel:
It is not the purpose of this paper to depreciate the classical mathematics with its
fundamental ‘absolute’ intuitions on the universum of sets (to which belongs the axiom
of choice), but only to propose another theory which seems very interesting although its
consistency is problematic. Our axiom can be considered as a restriction of the classical
notion of a set leading to a smaller universum, say of determined sets, which reﬂect
some physical intuitions which are not fulﬁlled by the classical sets (e.g. paradoxical
decompositions of the sphere are eliminated by [AD]). Our axiom could be considered
as an axiom added to the classical set theory claiming the existence of a class of sets
satisfying [AD] and the classical axioms without the axiom of choice.

378
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Mycielski [64: 205] hoped for an inner model: “a subclass of the class of all sets
with the same membership relation. It would be still more pleasant if such a
submodel contains all the real numbers.” As Solovay and Gaisi Takeuti pointed
out, the natural possibility is L(R), the smallest inner model containing every
real. If AD holds, then so does ADL(R): Every strategy is coded by a real and so
belongs to L(R), and the property of being a winning strategy for a game Gω(A)
with A ∈L(R) is absolute for L(R).
In the late 1960’s Solovay made the prescient conjecture that ADL(R) holds
relative to some large cardinal hypothesis. (In print Solovay [69: 60] conjectured
that if there is a supercompact cardinal, then in L(R) every set of reals has the
perfect set property.) ZF + AD was never widely entertained as a serious alterna-
tive to ZFC, and increasingly from the early 1970’s onward consequences of ZF
+ AD were regarded as what holds in L(R) assuming ADL(R). This compromise,
if you will, reafﬁrmed ZFC as the ambient theory while at the same time vastly
increasing the sets of reals possessing the regularity properties through a maximal
principle.
AD itself provides a countable choice principle, ACω(ωω) of §§12, 13:
27.10 Proposition (Swierczkowski, Mycielski [64], Scott).
Assume AD. Then
ACω(ωω), i.e. every countable set consisting of non-empty sets of reals has a choice
function. Consequently, ω1 is regular.
Proof. Suppose that {Zn | n ∈ω} ⊆P(ωω) −{∅}. Deﬁne A ⊆ωω by: x ∈A iff
xI I /∈Zx(0). Clearly I cannot have a winning strategy in Gω(A). But then, with
τ a winning strategy for I I, f : ω →ωω deﬁned by f (n) = (⟨n, 0, 0, . . .⟩∗τ)I I
is a choice function as desired.
⊣
As noted in §§12, 13 ACω(ωω) sufﬁces for the results in those sections, and so
they can be brought into play when establishing results in ZF + AD. Nonetheless,
it soon became de rigueur to assume the stronger DC in much of the investigation
of AD. DC is needed for those consequences of AD in descriptive set theory
depending on the characterization of well-foundedness in terms of the lack of
inﬁnite descending chains. Moreover, DC relativizes to L(R) (11.13), the natural
inner model for AD.
As described in §11 Cantor initiated a programmatic approach to the Con-
tinuum Hypothesis via the perfect set property. Since AD implies the perfect set
property for every set of reals, AD realizes that program in the sense that for no set
X does ℵ0 < |X| < 2ℵ0 (where < between “cardinals” in the ZF setting is deﬁned
via injective embeddability). However, it should be stressed that Cantor wanted
to establish the stronger 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, i.e. that there is some well-ordering of the
continuum in ordertype ω1. Observations that were applied in §11, incorporating
a deduction by Specker [57], were ﬁrst made for AD:

27. Inﬁnite Games
379
27.11 Proposition (Mycielski [64]).
(a) Assume AD. Then ω1 ̸≤2ℵ0, i.e. there is no uncountable well-orderable
set of reals.
(b) Con(ZF + AD) implies Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is inaccessible)).
Proof. (a) follows from 11.4(b), and (b), from (a), the regularity of ω1 (27.10),
and (c) →(a) of 11.6.
⊣
(b) was the ﬁrst connection made with large cardinals. It follows from (a)
that an extension of AD in a different direction from ADR is already inconsistent
with ZF:
27.12 Exercise (Mycielski [64]). There is an A ⊆ωω1 such that Gω1(A) is not
determined.
Hint.
Let A ⊆ωω1 be deﬁned by: x ∈A iff x(0) ≥ω and xI I is not an
injective enumeration of x(0) = {ξ | ξ < x(0)}. If Gω1(A) is determined, it
must be I I who has a winning strategy, say τ. For any z ∈ωω1 with z(0) ≥ω,
{⟨m, n⟩| z ∗τ(2m + 1) < z ∗τ(2n + 1)} is then a well-ordering of ordertype z(0).
It follows that there is an injection: ω1 →ωω deﬁnable from τ, so that AD fails
by 27.11(a).
⊣
This argument does not provide an A ⊆ωω1 such that Gω1(A) is not de-
termined, and curiously it may not be possible to do so (see Harrington-Kechris
[81: 133-134]).
With full AD confronting AC and raising problematic issues, a natural ap-
proach in the ZFC context is simply to consider determinacy as yet another regu-
larity property of sets of reals, one that subsumes the others by local versions of
27.9, and to investigate its possible extent. Consider
(Det(Λ))
Every set of reals in Λ is determined .
Thus, AD is Det(P(ωω)), and ADL(R) is Det(L(R)) by absoluteness. Det(Π1
n)
is known as Π1
n Determinacy, and so forth.
Focal became the hypothesis of
Projective Determinacy:
(PD)
Det(
n∈ωΠ1
n) .
The consequences of PD will be analyzed at length in §29, and Borel Determinacy
discussed after 31.2. Π1
1 Determinacy was soon seen to transcend ZF, by the ﬁrst
extension of 27.11(b):
27.13 Exercise (ACω(ωω)). Det(Π1
1) implies ∀a ∈ωω(ω1 is inaccessible in L[a]).
Hint. By 11.5 it sufﬁces to show that ωL[a]
1
< ω1 for every a ∈ωω. But if
ωL[a]
1
= ω1, then by 13.12 relativized there would a be Π1
1 (a) set A without

380
Chapter 6. Determinacy
the perfect set property. Now apply 27.6, after checking that G∗
2(Ψ “A) can be
construed as Gω(B) for some Π1
1 (a) set B of reals.
⊣
The concept of determinacy having emerged and its basic consequences and
connections worked out, two seminal results appeared in 1967 as was mentioned
at the outset. With the result of Blackwell [67] to serve as the starting point of
§29, the development from the other result is explored in the upcoming section.
But before concluding this one, some related results of later vintage are tucked in
that will serve subsequent commentary as counterpoint.
A local version of 27.9 is: If Det(Π1
n), then every Π1
n set of reals is Lebesgue
measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property. As antici-
pated, this merely requires checking for n > 0 that for any Π1
n set A of reals, the
games corresponding to the regularity properties for A can each be recast in form
Gω(B) for some Π1
n set B of reals.
It was noticed in the early 1970’s that a simple way of modifying games due
to Solovay called “unfolding” leads to stronger conclusions:
27.14 Exercise (ACω(ωω))(Kechris, Martin). Assume Det(Π1
n). Then every Σ1
n+1
set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set
property.
Hint. Suppose that A ⊆ωω is Σ1
n+1. To establish the Baire property for A, apply
Solovay’s unfolding idea as follows:
Let OA be the open set as in the statement of 27.4, and set B = A −OA, a
Σ1
n+1 set. Let C ⊆2(ωω) be a Π1
n set such that B = pC. The unfolded version
of the game G∗∗
ω (B) is played as follows:
I
:
⟨y(0), s0⟩
⟨y(1), s2⟩
. . .
I I :
s1
s3
. . .
As for G∗∗
ω (B), I and I I choose members si of <ωω −{∅}, but in addition I
chooses y(i) ∈ω. With x the concatenation s0⌢s1⌢s2⌢. . . and y ∈ωω the result
of I’s integer choices, I wins if ⟨x, y⟩∈C, and otherwise I I wins. As C is Π1
n,
this unfolded game can be cast as one of form Gω(D) for some Π1
n set D of reals,
and so the game is determined by hypothesis.
Suppose ﬁrst that I I has a winning strategy τ.
Then argue much as for
27.3(a) that B must be meager: Disregarding I’s integer moves deﬁne the open
dense sets Dp as before, and then show that if x ∈
p Dp, then x /∈B. (If to
the contrary x ∈B, then there would be a y ∈ωω such that ⟨x, y⟩∈C. But
then, a play according to τ can be recursively deﬁned with y(i)’s as I’s integer
moves and x as the concatenation of the ﬁnite sequences, contradicting τ being a
winning strategy.)
Suppose next that I has a winning strategy σ. Then I has a winning strategy
in the original game G∗∗
ω (B): He simply keeps the y(i)’s to himself and plays
only the s(2i)’s. Hence, by 27.3(b), O(s) −B is meager for some s ∈<ωω.
Now conclude by the argument for 27.4 that A has the Baire property.

27. Inﬁnite Games
381
For the perfect set property, argue similarly with an unfolded version of
the game G∗
2(Ψ “A) where I makes extra choices y(i) (cf. 27.5 and 27.6). The
resulting “witness” y can be taken to be in ω2 or just in ωω, depending on whether
the homeomorphism Ψ : ωω →ω2 is to be applied ﬁrst or not.
Finally, establish Lebesgue measurability for the complement ˜A = ωω −A
as follows: As described before 27.8 let B be a Gδ minimal cover for ˜A, and for
rational ǫ ∈R with ǫ > 0 argue with unfolded versions of G(B −˜A, ǫ) where
I makes extra choices y(i) (cf. 27.7 and 27.8). Dealing with the complement ˜A
instead of A, these games can be recast in form Gω(D) for some Π1
n set D of
reals. Again, the resulting “witness” y can be taken to be in ω2 or just in ωω. ⊣
As a nice complement, note that the n = 0 case provides a new proof, based
on the determinacy of closed games, of the classical result that the analytic sets
have the regularity properties.
The next observations concern ADR, that mightier hypothesis lurking large
and inchoate behind AD. In analogy to 27.10, ADR implies that every ωω-indexed
family of nonempty sets of reals has a choice function:
27.15 Exercise. Assume ADR. Then every subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized.
Hint. Suppose that A ⊆2(ωω) and consider the two-move game where I chooses
a real x and I I wins iff he responds with a real y such that ⟨x, y⟩∈A. ADR
implies that I I must have a winning strategy, and such a strategy provides a
uniformization.
⊣
In contrast, the following delimitation was seen through a diagonalization
argument showing that unlike AD, ADR does not relativize to L(R) as a natural
inner model.
27.16 Proposition (Solovay [78a: 176]). Assume V = L(R) and there is no well-
ordering of the reals. Then there is a subset of 2(ωω) that cannot be uniformized.
Proof.
For any x ∈ωω, let OD(x) denote the class of sets deﬁnable using
parameters from On ∪{x}. As for the well-known class OD of ordinal deﬁnable
sets, OD(x) has a deﬁnable well-ordering, and the 2-ary ⌈y ∈OD(x)⌉is deﬁnable
via the Reﬂection Principle for ZF. Let A ⊆2(ωω) be such that
⟨x, y⟩∈A ↔y /∈OD(x) .
Since by hypothesis there is no well-ordering of the reals, ∀x∃y(⟨x, y⟩∈A).
Assume now to the contrary that there is a B ⊆A uniformizing A. Since
by hypothesis V = L(R) and there is a deﬁnable surjection: On × ωω →L(R)
(cf. the proof of 11.13), B ∈OD(x0) for some x0 ∈ωω. But then, that unique y0
such that B(x0, y0) would be in OD(x0). Contradiction!
⊣

382
Chapter 6. Determinacy
For any S ⊆ωω, by considering an analogous concept OD({S, x}) for x ∈ωω
and noting that {y ∈ωω | y ∈OD({S, x})} is still well-orderable, 27.16 can be
extended to L(R ∪{S}). This leads to the following:
27.17 Proposition (Solovay [78a: 177]). Assume ADR. Then for any S ⊆ωω,
V ̸= L(R ∪{S}).
⊣
Solovay [78a] went on to formulate sharps for sets of reals and show that
ADR implies their existence for every such set. In contrast to the situation for
AD, for quite some time it was unclear whether there is a natural inner model of
ADR containing every real. This issue was resolved in the 1980’s as broached in
the last section (cf. 32.19).
The ﬁnal remarks concern the Ramsey property discussed at the end of §11;
for present purposes the P(ω) context there is shifted to ωω. Being Ramsey is
also regarded as a regularity property for sets of reals. Like the others, every set
of reals is Ramsey in Solovay’s model (11.15), and there was progress through
the ﬁrst levels of the projective hierarchy: Galvin-Prikry [73] showed that every
Borel set of reals is Ramsey, and Silver [70a] that every analytic set is Ramsey,
and if there is measurable cardinal, that every Σ1
2 set is Ramsey. Erik Ellentuck
[74] devised proofs of these results using a topology based on the Mathias forcing
conditions and observing that a set of reals is Ramsey exactly when it (through an
identiﬁcation) has the Baire property in that topology. Making the ﬁrst connection
with determinacy, Prikry [76] then appealed to the determinacy of the correspond-
ing **-game with real moves (cf. 27.3) to show that ADR implies that every set
of reals is Ramsey. (Ilias Kastanas [83] established related results.) Consequences
of later developments are that PD implies that every projective set of reals is Ram-
sey (Harrington-Kechris [81]), and that AD and V = L(R) implies that every set
of reals is Ramsey (Martin-Steel [83]). However, with the corresponding games
naturally based on real moves, the following question remains open:
27.18 Question. Does AD imply that every set of reals is Ramsey?

28. AD and Combinatorics
383
28. AD and Combinatorics
Solovay established in 1967 that AD implies that ω1 is measurable, injecting
emerging large cardinal intuitions, techniques, and results into a novel setting
without AC. Unexpected was how strong an effect AD has on the transﬁnite, and
intriguing were the possibilities for further large cardinal consequences. Others
soon joined in, with Martin making particularly incisive contributions, in a ﬁrst
wave of what was to become a broad combinatorial investigation. This section
pursues this development, emphasizing the richness of the game paradigm with a
variety of games. As for §27,
ZF serves as the ambient theory for this section .
Although the preoccupation is with direct consequences of AD, it is noted again
that they were increasingly regarded in ZFC as what holds in L(R) assuming
ADL(R).
The following was an early observation about ultraﬁlters.
28.1 Proposition. Assume AD. Then there are no (non-principal) ultraﬁlters over
ω. Hence, every ultraﬁlter is ω1-complete.
Proof. Assume to the contrary that there is an ultraﬁlter U over ω. Consider a
game where the players choose members of [ω]<ω:
I
:
s0
s2
. . .
I I :
s1
s3
. . .
If a move sn is not disjoint from 
i<n si, then the player to make the ﬁrst such
move loses. Assuming that this does not happen, I wins if 
i∈ω s2i ∈U, and
otherwise I I wins. A contradiction is derived by showing that a winning strategy
for either player can be converted to one for the other:
Suppose ﬁrst that σ is a winning strategy for I. Deﬁne a strategy τσ for I I
by:
τσ(⟨s0⟩) = σ(∅), and for 0 < i ∈ω, τσ(⟨s0, . . . , s2i⟩) = σ(⟨s1, . . . , s2i⟩) −s0 ,
i.e. ignore the ﬁrst move s0 and play according to σ, subtracting s0 to maintain
disjointness of moves. For any play ⟨s0, s1, s2, . . .⟩according to τσ consisting of
disjoint moves, s0 ∪
i∈ω s2i+1 ∈U as σ is winning for I, and so 
i∈ω s2i+1 ∈U
as U is presumed non-principal. Hence, τσ is winning for I I since U is ultra – a
contradiction in this case.
Suppose next that τ is a winning strategy for I I. First modify τ to a strategy
τ for I I deﬁned by:
τ(⟨s0, . . . , s2i⟩) =

τ(⟨s0, . . . , s2i⟩) ∪{i}
if i /∈
j≤2i sj , and
τ(⟨s0, . . . , s2i⟩)
otherwise .
Then τ is also winning for I I, and moreover for any play ⟨s0, s1, s2 . . .⟩according
to τ consisting of disjoint moves, 
i∈ω s2i+1 ∈U as 
i∈ω si = ω and U is ultra.

384
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Now deﬁne a strategy στ for I by
στ(⟨s0, . . . , s2i−1⟩) = τ(⟨∅, s0, . . . , s2i−1⟩) ,
i.e. assume there is a ﬁrst move ∅and play according to τ. Then as in the previous
argument, στ is winning for I – a contradiction in this case also.
For the second assertion, if W were an ultraﬁlter over a set S which is not
ω1-complete, there would be a function f : S →ω such that
f∗(W) = {X ⊆ω | f −1(X) ∈W}
is a (non-principal) ultraﬁlter over ω.
⊣
This result can also be seen, albeit less directly, via 27.9 and the result
of Sierpi´nski [38] that an ultraﬁlter over ω construed as a set of reals is not
Lebesgue measurable. Of course, ω1-completeness is only of consequence if there
are ultraﬁlters at all under AD, and this was established by Solovay:
28.2 Theorem (Solovay). Assume AD. Then ω1 is measurable.
Measurable cardinals are regular in ZF because of the completeness of their
witnessing ultraﬁlters. It is AC that renders them weakly inaccessible (and much
more) through the enumerability of power sets. However, the absence of AC does
not affect consistency strength.
⌈ZF + ω1 is measurable⌉is equiconsistent with
⌈ZFC + ∃κ(κ is measurable)⌉: Jech [68], Levy, and Takeuti [70] each observed
that in ZFC if a measurable cardinal is Levy collapsed to ω1, then in an inner
model of the resulting extension ω1 is measurable. Conversely, if in ZF, U is a
κ-complete ultraﬁlter over some κ > ω, then L[U] |= ZFC + κ is measurable.
Moreover, for any a ∈ωω, L[U, a] |= ZFC + κ is measurable, where L[U, a],
deﬁned using predicate symbols for U and a, is the smallest inner model such that
U ∩M ∈M and a ∈M. Thus, although AC is not actually needed in §9, a ZFC
context is in any case available to develop the theory of a#, and its absoluteness
properties (cf. 14.12(a)) ensure its substance.
The following was an early extension of 27.11(b) about the consistency
strength of AD.
28.3 Corollary.
(a) Con(ZF + AD) implies Con(ZFC + ∃κ(κ is measurable)).
(b) Assume AD. Then ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists).
⊣
The measurability of ω1 also has direct consequences in ZF, e.g. there are no
ω1-Aronszajn trees (cf. 7.8, 7.10).
Starting with his original argument two proofs of Solovay’s theorem are
given, both of which became paradigmatic for further work.

28. AD and Combinatorics
385
First Proof of 28.2. Solovay devised a game where the players are required to
play codes for well-orderings and used a bounding argument with Σ1
1 sets to show
that under AD, the closed unbounded ﬁlter Cω1 over ω1 is an ultraﬁlter. By 28.1
the measurability of ω1 follows.
To motivate Solovay’s argument consider for Y ⊆ω1 a game where the
players choose countable ordinals:
I
:
ξ0
ξ2
. . .
I I :
ξ1
ξ3
. . .
I wins if (sup{ξi | i ∈ω}) ∈Y, and otherwise I I wins. It is argued that if I has
a winning strategy σ, then Y ∈Cω1 (and the argument will show that if I I has a
winning strategy, then ω1 −Y ∈Cω1):
As ω1 is regular (27.10), for each η < ω1 let w(η) < ω1 be least so that
σ|<ωη ⊆w(η), i.e. for any ﬁnite partial play all of whose moves (or equivalently,
just I I’s moves) are less than η, the strategic response according to σ is less than
w(η). Then
C = {ρ < ω1 | ρ is an inﬁnite limit ∧∀η < ρ(w(η) < ρ)}
is closed unbounded in ω1, and C ⊆Y: Suppose that ρ ∈C, and let {ηi | i ∈
ω} ⊆ρ be unbounded in ρ. Then in the play σ ∗⟨ηi | i ∈ω⟩each move is less
than ρ, and since σ is winning, ρ ∈Y.
Solovay’s idea was to simulate this game by one to which AD is applicable.
Consider for Y ⊆ω1 a game where the players choose integers:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
Recall from §13 that each y ∈ωω encodes a sequence ⟨(y)i | i ∈ω⟩∈ω(ωω) and
each z ∈ωω encodes a relation Ez ⊆ω×ω with ∥z∥denoting its ordertype when it
is a well-ordering. I is regarded as playing a sequence of relations ⟨E(xI )i | i ∈ω⟩
and I I, ⟨E(xI I )i | i ∈ω⟩. Suppose ﬁrst that for some i ∈ω, either E(xI )i or
E(xI I )i is not a well-ordering; then for the least such i, I I wins if E(xI )i is not a
well-ordering, and otherwise I wins. Assuming that this did not happen, I wins
if
sup({∥(xI)i∥| i ∈ω} ∪{∥(xI I)i∥| i ∈ω}) ∈Y ,
and otherwise I I wins.
This game can be construed as a game Gω(A) for some A ⊆ωω, and so is
determined. We argue that, as before, if I has a winning strategy σ, then Y ∈Cω1
(and the argument will show that if I I has a winning strategy, then ω1 −Y ∈Cω1)
thus completing the proof by conﬁrming that Cω1 is an ultraﬁlter.
Considering the previous argument, it will sufﬁce to get bounds in the fol-
lowing sense: For each η < ω1, there is a β < ω1 such that: for any n ∈ω and
y ∈ωω, if for each i < n, E(y)i(= E((σ∗y)I I )i) is a well-ordering with ∥(y)i∥< η,
then E((σ∗y)I )n is a well-ordering with ∥((σ ∗y)I)n∥< β. So, suppose that η ∈ω1.
Set

386
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Aη = {((σ ∗y)I)n | n ∈ω ∧y ∈ωω ∧
∀i < n(E(y)i is a well-ordering with ∥(y)i∥< η)} .
Then Aη is Σ1
1 in a real coding the ordertype η, since it can be deﬁned in terms
of embeddability into that ordertype (cf. the second proof of 13.4). Moreover, in
terms of 13.6, Aη ⊆WF as σ is winning, and so Aη ⊆WFβ for some β < ω1.
Hence, a β as desired has indeed been found. Taking w(η) to be the least such
β, the proof can now be completed with the deﬁned function w: ω1 →ω1 as
anticipated.
⊣
For the foregoing and the forthcoming, note again for provability in ZF that
AD implies ACω(ωω) (27.10), which sufﬁces for the results of §13. That Cω1 itself
witnesses the measurability of ω1 turned out to be a substantial hypothesis. In
the mid-1970’s Martin and Mitchell (see their [79]) applied Kunen’s methods for
21.25 to conclude from the hypothesis that for every λ there is an inner model of
ZFC with λ measurable cardinals. By the early 1980’s the hypothesis was gauged
as considerably stronger (see Radin Forcing in volume II).
Martin provided a proof of Solovay’s theorem via a nice observation of
independent signiﬁcance. Like Solovay, Martin made crucial contributions in this
area as well as in descriptive set theory (§§29, 30), and moreover was to forge the
initiative for establishing the consistency of determinacy hypotheses (§31). Some
well-known concepts and notation are ﬁrst afﬁrmed: For a, b ∈ωω,
a ≤T b iff
a is recursive in b ,
a ≡T b iff
a ≤T b ∧b ≤T a , and
[a]T = {c ∈ωω | c ≡T a} .
≤T is the well-known relation of Turing reducibility, and ≡T that of Turing equiv-
alence, with the corresponding equivalence classes [a]T being the Turing degrees.
Every a ∈ωω has countably many ≤T-predecessors; in terms of §12 there are
countably many formulas to consider. Letting DT be the set of such degrees,
DT = {[a]T | a ∈ωω} ,
≤T lifts to an ordering on DT well-deﬁned by:
d0 ≤d1 iff
∃a∃b(d0 = [a]T ∧d1 = [b]T ∧a ≤T b) .
Martin considered the ﬁlter MT over DT generated by the “cones” of degrees:
X ∈MT iff
∃d0 ∈DT({d ∈DT | d0 ≤d} ⊆X) .
That it is indeed a ﬁlter is simple to see, since for any a, b ∈ωω there is always
a c ∈ωω such that a ≤T c and b ≤T c. Generalizing this, ACω implies that MT is
ω1-complete. On the other hand, AC implies that MT is not an ultraﬁlter (cf. the
proof of 11.4(a), noting that every Turing degree is a countable set).

28. AD and Combinatorics
387
28.4 Proposition (Martin [68]). Assume AD. Then MT is an ultraﬁlter.
Proof. Suppose that X ⊆DT, and consider the game Gω(∪X). Assume ﬁrst
that I has a winning strategy σ in this game. Considering σ as a member of ωω
(through a recursive coding of <ωω) set d0 = [σ]T. Then for any d ∈DT with
d0 ≤d and y ∈d, clearly σ ∗y ∈d and hence d ∈X. A similar argument
shows that if I I has a winning strategy τ, then {d ∈DT | [τ]T ≤d} ⊆DT −X.
⊣
With AD, that MT is an ultraﬁlter already implies that it is ω1-complete by
28.1.
Second Proof of 28.2. For a, b ∈ωω with a ≡T b, ωL[a]
1
= ωL[b]
1
, and this is a
countable ordinal (27.13). Thus, f : DT →ω1 given by:
f ([a]T) = ωL[a]
1
is well-deﬁned. With 28.4,
f∗(MT) = {X ⊆ω1 | f −1(X) ∈MT}
is then an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over ω1. (To check that it is non-principal, note
that for any α < ω1 and a ∈ωω there is a b ∈ωω with a ≤T b such that α < ωL[b]
1
,
so that f −1({α}) /∈MT.)
⊣
There is such an f so that f∗(MT) = Cω1; the proof of 28.20 provides a
general result along these lines.
Solovay in the meanwhile had established a structure result important for
later work, playing the ﬁrst of what came to be known as a Solovay game, a game
where the players must again play codes for countable ordinals, but where the
rules preclude I from having a winning strategy.
28.5 Theorem (Solovay). Assume AD. Suppose that Y ⊆ω1. Then there is an
a ∈ωω such that Y ∈L[a].
Proof. Consider a game where the players choose integers:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
The rules this time are that I I wins if either ExI is not a well-ordering, or else
E(xI I )i is a well-ordering for every i ∈ωω and {∥(xI I)i∥| i ∈ω} = Y ∩β for
some β > ∥xI∥. Otherwise, I wins.
Using a bounding argument as in Solovay’s previous proof, it is ﬁrst estab-
lished that I cannot have a winning strategy: Assuming that σ is such a strategy,
{(σ ∗y)I | y ∈ωω} is a Σ1
1 subset of WF. Hence, there is a β < ω1 such that
for any y ∈ωω, ∥(σ ∗y)I∥< β. Consequently, for any y ∈ωω with E(y)i a

388
Chapter 6. Determinacy
well-ordering for every i ∈ω and {∥(y)i∥| i ∈ω} = Y ∩β, σ ∗y is a play that
I I wins – a contradiction.
It follows that I I must have a winning strategy, say τ. The proof is completed
by showing that Y ∈L[τ] (regarding τ as a real): Note ﬁrst that there is a simple
formula ϕ(v0, v1) such that for any z ∈ωω with Ez a well-ordering,
∥z∥∈Y
iff
ϕ[z, τ] .
As τ is winning, ϕ can assert that there is an i ∈ω and a real coding an isomor-
phism between ⟨ω, Ez⟩and ⟨ω, E((z∗τ)I I )i⟩. Now if ω1L[τ] = ω1, then deﬁnability
via such a ϕ and absoluteness would imply that Y ∈L[τ].
However, ω1 is
inaccessible in L[τ] by 27.13, but a forcing argument can be applied:
For each ξ < ω1, let Pξ be the p.o. for adjoining a surjection from ω onto
ξ via ﬁnite conditions, and let ˙zξ be a Pξ-name, deﬁned uniformly in ξ, for a
z ∈ωω such that Ez has ordertype ξ in any generic extension via Pξ. Then for ϕ
as above,
ξ ∈Y
iff
L[τ] |= (∥-Pξ ϕ(˙zξ, ˇτ)) .
For the right-to-left direction note that P(Pξ) ∩L[τ] is countable by the inacces-
sibility of ω1 in L[τ], and so there are Pξ-generics over L[τ]. It follows by this
deﬁnability (and an application of the ZF Reﬂection Principle) that Y ∈L[τ]. ⊣
Kechris [88b] has recent results on subsets of ω1 so constructible from a real.
Upon seeing Martin’s result 28.4 Solovay raised the ante in 1968 with the
following result:
28.6 Theorem (Solovay). Assume AD. Then ω2 is measurable.
Proof.
The argument starts out as for the second proof of 28.2 and then has
features of the proof of 28.5. For a, b ∈ωω with a ≡T b, (ω1)+L[a] = (ω1)+L[b],
i.e. the respective successors in L[a] and in L[b] of (the real) ω1 are equal, and this
ordinal is less than (the real) ω2 by the existence of sharps. Thus, f : DT →ω2
given by
f ([a]T) = (ω1)+L[a]
is well-deﬁned. Using 28.4,
f∗(MT) = {X ⊆ω2 | f −1(X) ∈MT}
is then an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over ω2. (To check that it is non-principal, note
that for any α < ω2 and a ∈ωω, if p: α →ω1 is an injection, then by 28.5 there is
a b ∈ωω such that p ∈L[b], and taking a ≤T b implies that f −1({a}) /∈f∗(MT).)
To complete the proof, it sufﬁces to verify ω2-completeness:
Suppose then that {Xξ | ξ < ω1} ⊆f∗(MT) where it can assumed that
Xη ⊆Xξ for ξ < η < ω1 by ω1-completeness. It must be shown that 
ξ<ω1 Xξ ∈
f∗(MT). To this end, consider the following Solovay game:

28. AD and Combinatorics
389
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I I wins if either ExI is not a well-ordering, or else {d ∈DT | [xI I]T ≤d} ⊆
f −1(X∥xI ∥).
A bounding argument as for 28.5 shows that I cannot have a winning strategy:
Assuming that σ is such a strategy, {(σ ∗y)I | y ∈ωω} is a Σ1
1 subset of WF,
and so there is a β < ω1 such that ∥(σ ∗y)I∥< β for every y ∈ωω. Since
Xβ ∈f∗(MT), there is a b ∈ωω such that {d ∈DT | [b]T ≤d} ⊆f −1(Xβ). But
then, as ξ < β implies that f −1(Xβ) ⊆f −1(Xξ), it follows that σ ∗b is a play
that I loses – a contradiction.
It follows that I I must have a winning strategy, say τ. Regarding τ as a real,
the proof is completed by showing that {d ∈DT | [τ]T ≤d} ⊆f −1(
ξ<ω1 Xξ):
Suppose that ξ < ω1 and x ∈ωω with τ ≤T x; it must be shown that
f ([x]T) ∈Xξ. As in the proof of 28.5 let Pξ be the p.o. for adjoining a surjection
from ω onto ξ via ﬁnite conditions.
Since P(Pξ) ∩L[x] is countable by the
inaccessibility of ω1 in L[x], there is a g Pξ-generic over L[x]. g can be regarded
as a real such that ∥g∥= ξ.
Let y ∈ωω be such that x ≤T y, g ≤T y,
and L[x][g] = L[y]. Since forcing with Pξ preserves all cardinals greater than
ξ, f ([x]T) = f ([y]T).
Now τ is winning for I I, so if h = (g ∗τ)I I, then
{d ∈DT | [h]T ≤d} ⊆f −1(Xξ). But it follows from τ ≤T x and the choice of y
that h ≤T y. Hence, f ([x]T) = f ([y]T) ∈Xξ.
⊣
With an apparent trend set, quite unexpected was the next advance: Martin
in 1970 established that under AD the ωn’s for 3 ≤n < ω are singular with
coﬁnality ω2. It is a brave new world that has such properties! Martin’s result
was a corollary to his incisive analysis of Σ1
3 sets under AD. Setting the stage,
recall from §14 that under the assumption ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists), uξ denotes the ξth
uniform indiscernible, so that u1 = ω1 and uξ ≤ωξ for ξ > 0.
AD implies u2 = ω2 .
This follows from the argument for 28.6, which can be viewed as showing that u2
is a measurable cardinal; put another way, ω2 = sup(ran( f )) ≤u2, the equality
by the ω2-completeness of f∗(MT) and the inequality by the deﬁnition of f .
The following is established, working with Σ1
3 sets and assuming a coding
lemma, as 30.18:
28.7 Theorem (Martin). Assume AD. Then uω = ωω.
With the regularity of ω2 from 28.6 and the above observation that u2 = ω2,
Martin’s corollary follows:
28.8 Corollary. Assume AD. Then cf(ωn) = ω2 for every 2 ≤n < ω.
Proof. For 2 ≤n < ω, ωn = uk for some k, which by the theorem satisﬁes
1 < k < ω. But then by Solovay’s 14.18(a), cf(ωn) = cf(u2) = ω2.
⊣

390
Chapter 6. Determinacy
28.7 in fact implies that the ﬁrst ω inﬁnite cardinals are exactly the ﬁrst ω
uniform indiscernibles:
28.9 Theorem (DC)(Kunen; Solovay). Assume AD. Then for 1 ≤n ≤ω, un = ωn.
Proof. Ultrapowers of sets (regarded as structures for L∈) via ω1-complete ultra-
ﬁlters lack inﬁnite descending chains, and so DC ensures that such ultrapowers are
well-founded. In particular, such ultrapowers of ordinals are well-ordered under
the induced ordering. The following will be established:
(∗)
For 1 ≤n < ω, ω1un/Cω1 has ordertype un+1 .
Granted this, if for some such n, |un| = |un+1|, then
|un+2| = |ω1un+1/Cω1| = |ω1un/Cω1| = |un+1|
and recursively |un+i| = |un| for every i ∈ω, so that |uω| = |un| ≤ωn, contra-
dicting 28.7. It follows that |un| < |un+1| for 1 ≤n < ω, and this together with
un ≤ωn for 1 ≤n < ω imply the desired conclusion.
Toward establishing (∗), it is ﬁrst observed that for ξ < uω, ω1ξ ⊆˜L where
˜L = 
a∈ωω L[a] (as deﬁned before 15.8). For ξ < ω2 this follows from 28.5. For
ω2 ≤ξ < uω, proceeding by induction on ξ, assume ﬁrst that for some a ∈ωω, ξ
is not a cardinal in L[a], so that there is a bijection g: ξ →ζ for some ζ < ξ with
g ∈L[a]. Then for any f ∈ω1ξ, g ◦f ∈L[b] for some b ∈ωω by induction, and
hence f ∈L[c] for any c ∈ωω coding a and b. Now assume that ξ is a cardinal
in L[a] for every a ∈ωω. Then ξ is a uniform indiscernible: If for some b ∈ωω,
ξ were strictly between two consecutive members of the corresponding class of
indiscernibles Ib, then in L[b#] these indiscernibles are of the same cardinality,
and hence ξ would not be a cardinal there. With ω2 ≤ξ < uω, ξ = un with
2 ≤n < ω , and so it follows by 14.18(a) that cf(ξ) = cf(u2) = ω2. But then,
ω1ξ = 
ζ<ξ
ω1ζ, and so the result follows by induction.
Finally, to establish (∗) the argument for 15.11 is used. Suppose ﬁrst that
h ∈ω1un. Then h ∈˜L by our observation. It follows from 14.18(b) that there is
an a ∈ωω and a Skolem term t1 such that
h = t1
⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , un) .
A small adjustment leads to a Skolem term t such that for any ξ < ω1 (= u1),
h(ξ) = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(ξ, u1, . . . , un) .
Now consider
η(h, a, t) = t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , un+1) < un+1
following the 15.11 proof; as there, if h ∈ω1un with {ξ < ω1 | h(ξ) = h(ξ)} ∈Cω1
and η(h, a, t) is derived from some a and t for h, then
η(h, a, t) = η(h, a, t) .

28. AD and Combinatorics
391
Hence, the map
e: ω1un/Cω1 →un+1
given by e([h]) = η(h, a, t) for some a and t for h is an order-preserving bijection.
This completes the proof.
⊣
This synthetic result provided a structural description of the ﬁrst ω uncount-
able cardinals under AD through the theory of sharps, and accounted for the
apparent pathology of cf(ωn) = ω2 for n ≥3 through Solovay’s 14.18(a).
The investigations of the combinatorial and descriptive set theory conse-
quences of AD were both to provide a context for and be advanced by an initia-
tive from a different quarter, the study of strong partition relations in inﬁnitary
combinatorics.
Inﬁnite Exponent Partition Relations
Eugene Kleinberg, a student of Martin, pursued the consequences of inﬁnite ex-
ponent partition relations. The Ramsey property for sets of reals, discussed at
the ends of §§11, 27, evolved from the possibility ω −→(ω)ω
2 . Although such
relations contradict AC (7.1), early on in 1968 Kleinberg argued for their intrinsic
interest at uncountable cardinals and showed that versions imply measurability in
a strong sense through canonical ultraﬁlters.
For λ < κ both regular let Cλ
κ denote the ﬁlter over κ generated by the sets
λ-closed unbounded in κ. If D is such a set, then letting C consist of the limit
points of D other than κ, C ∩{ξ < κ | cf(ξ) = λ} ⊆D. Thus,
Cλ
κ = {X ⊆κ | ∃C ∈Cκ(C ∩{ξ < κ | cf(ξ) = λ} ⊆X)} .
With AC, through arguments that choose for each X ∈Cλ
κ a corresponding C ∈Cκ
satisfying C ∩{ξ < κ | cf(ξ) = λ} ⊆X, it can be shown that Cλ
κ is a κ-complete, in
fact normal, ﬁlter over κ; on the other hand, {ξ < κ | cf(ξ) = λ} can be partitioned
into disjoint stationary sets by 16.9, and so Cλ
κ is not an ultraﬁlter. Inﬁnite exponent
partition relations contradict AC, but establish that the Cλ
κ witness the measurability
of κ:
28.10 Theorem (Kleinberg [70]). Suppose that λ < κ, λ is regular, and κ −→
(κ)λ+λ
2
. Then κ is measurable, and Cλ
κ is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ.
Proof. First observe that κ −→(κ)2
2 already implies the regularity of κ (by the
proof of 7.6). Next note that κ −→(κ)λ
γ for every γ < κ by the argument for
7.14(c):
Suppose that f : [κ]λ →γ where γ < κ. Deﬁne g: [κ]λ+λ →2 by: g(s) = 0
iff f (s0) = f (s1), where s0, s1 ∈[s]λ, s0 ∪s1 = s, and ∪s0 ≤∩s1. Let H ∈[κ]κ
be homogeneous for g. Since λ · κ = κ > γ , there must be t0, t1 ∈[H]λ such
that ∪t0 ≤∩t1 and f (t0) = f (t1). Thus, g(t0 ∪t1) = 0, and so by homogeneity
g“[H]λ+λ = {0}.
Now for any u, v ∈[H]λ there is by the regularity of κ a

392
Chapter 6. Determinacy
w ∈[H]λ satisfying ∪u, ∪v ≤∩w, so that f (u) = f (w) = f (v). Hence, H is
homogeneous for f as well.
We next show that Cλ
κ is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter. For this purpose, it sufﬁces
to assume that F: κ →γ where γ < κ, and ﬁnd a β < γ such that F−1({β}) ∈Cλ
κ.
To do this, deﬁne G: [κ]λ →γ by: G(s) = α iff F(∪s) = α. By κ −→(κ)λ
γ ,
let H ∈[κ]κ be homogeneous for G. Set
C = {ξ < κ | (H ∩ξ) = ξ ∧cf(ξ) = λ} .
Then C is λ-closed unbounded in κ, and if G“[H]λ = {β}, then C ⊆F−1({β})
so that F−1({β}) ∈Cλ
κ.
We ﬁnally show that Cλ
κ is normal. Noting that the regressive function char-
acterization 5.10 holds in ZF, it sufﬁces to assume that f ∈κκ is regressive and
by κ-completeness, to ﬁnd an X ∈Cλ
κ and a δ ∈κ such that f “X ⊆δ. To do this,
deﬁne g: [κ]λ →2 by: g(s) = 0 iff f (∪s) < ∩s. By κ −→(κ)λ
2, let H ∈[κ]κ
be homogeneous for g. Taking any s ∈[H]λ, let s = s −( f (∪s) + 1). Then
s ∈[H]λ as f (∪s) < ∪s, and f (∪s) = f (∪s) < ∩s. Thus, g(s) = 0, and so by
homogeneity g“[H]λ = {0}. But then, if δ is the least member of H and
C = {ξ < κ | (H ∩ξ) = ξ ∧cf(ξ) = λ}
as before, then C is λ-closed unbounded in κ, and it is simple to check that
f “C ⊆δ.
⊣
The Cλ
κ’s become focal when κ is not too inaccessible:
28.11 Exercise (Kleinberg [70]). Suppose that κ is not weakly Mahlo and the Cλ
κ’s
for regular λ < κ are normal ultraﬁlters. Then they are the only normal ultraﬁlters
over κ.
Hint. Normal ultraﬁlters over κ include Cκ, and by hypothesis {ξ < κ | cf(ξ) <
ξ} ∈Cκ.
⊣
These results would have remained curiosities had it not been for a succession
of partition theorems that was to span the accessible transﬁnite. It was established
in the early 1970’s that under AD + DC both ω1 and ω2 satisfy substantial inﬁnite
exponent partition relations, and later, that many cardinals satisfy such relations.
The ﬁrst inkling for ω1 was Martin’s groundbreaking result in late 1968 that
under AD, ω1 −→(ω1)ω
2 . Kunen then extended the conclusion to ω1 −→(ω1)α
2
for every α < ω1. Then in 1971, building on Solovay’s structure result 28.5,
Martin established the following assertion of strong dichotomy about ω1:
28.12 Theorem (Martin). Assume AD. Then ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
2 .
Proof. For H ∈[ω1]ω1, with h: ω1 →H enumerating it in increasing order set
ωH = {sup({h(ω·ξ + i) | i ∈ω}) | ξ < ω1} ∈[ω1]ω1 ,

28. AD and Combinatorics
393
i.e. ωH consists of the suprema of ω consecutive members of H.
Suppose now that f : [ω1]ω1 →2. A C closed unbounded in ω1 will be
found so that ωC is homogeneous for f . C will consist of the closure ordinals
provided by a Σ1
1 bounding argument applied to a winning strategy for a certain
game associated with f . By 28.5 every Y ∈[ωC]ω1 is in some L[a] with a ∈ωω
and so can be anticipated using sharps and Skolem terms.
Toward deﬁning the game, we ﬁrst review and tailor the §§9, 14 sharp theory
relativized to reals. An EM blueprint for a ∈ωω is the theory of some structure
⟨Lδ[a], ∈, a, ζk⟩k∈ω where δ is a limit ordinal > ω and {ζk | k ∈ω} is a set of
ordinal indiscernibles for ⟨Lδ[a], ∈, a⟩indexed in increasing order. Here, such a
theory is identiﬁed with some z ∈ωω through some arithmetization (so that a can
be recovered from z), and M(z, α) denotes the model unique up to isomorphism
generated by indiscernibles in ordertype α (cf. 9.4). For z ∈ωω,
∃a ∈ωω(z = a#) ↔S(z) ∧W(z)
where S is arithmetical, asserting that z codes an EM blueprint for some a contain-
ing sentences for satisfying the §9 conditions (I) and (III), and W is Π1
2 , asserting
that M(z, α) is well-founded for every α < ω1 (cf. 14.11).
When S(z), whether M(z, α) is well-founded or not, it has a largest initial
segment of its “ordinals” which is actually well-ordered. Identifying members of
this initial segment with corresponding bona ﬁde ordinals, temporarily write
η <is M(z, α)
to indicate that η is a member of the initial segment.
Let ⟨tn | n ∈ω⟩enumerate the Skolem terms (like those described after 9.3,
but) for L∈( ˙A) and in one free variable. For z ∈ωω, let z+ ∈ωω be deﬁned by
z+(i) = z(i + 1), so that z = ⟨z(0)⟩⌢z+. Now deﬁne for α < ω1:
Aα = {z ∈ωω | S(z+) ∧α <is M(z+, α + ω) ∧
∃η ≥α(tM(z+,α+ω)
z(0)
(α) = η <is M(z+, α + ω))} .
The signiﬁcance of these sets becomes clear through their role in the following
game associated with f : [ω1]ω1 →2:
The players choose integers as usual:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
Here, I is regarded as playing an integer x(0) and a real (xI)+, and I I as playing
an integer x(1) and a real (xI I)+. There are two cases in the payoff scheme:
(i) There is an α such that either xI /∈Aα or xI I /∈Aα. Then for the
least such α, I I wins if xI /∈Aα, and otherwise I wins.

394
Chapter 6. Determinacy
This case leads to the crucial bounding argument. Loosely speaking, a player
wins if his real satisﬁes S and generates structures with well-founded parts “more
closed” under his Skolem term.
Suppose that z ∈Aα for every α < ω1. Then since α <is M(z+, α + ω) for
such α, all the M(z+, β)’s are well-founded as they are embeddable into each
other, and so there is an a such that z+ = a#. Moreover, as M(z+, α + ω) ≺
⟨L[a], ∈, a⟩, α ≤t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
z(0)
(α) < ω1 for every α < ω1. These remarks lead to the
other case:
(ii) (xI)+ = a# and (xI I)+ = b# for some a, b ∈ωω. Then deﬁning
px: ω1 →ω1 by
px(ξ) = sup({t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
x(0)
(ω·ξ + i) | i ∈ω} ∪{t⟨L[b],∈,b⟩
x(1)
(ω·ξ + i) | i ∈ω}) ,
I wins if f (ran(px)) = 0 and I I wins if f (ran(px)) = 1.
It will be argued that a winning strategy for I provides a requisite homogeneous
set with f value 0 (and the argument will show that a winning strategy for I I
provides a requisite homogeneous set with f value 1).
Suppose then that σ is a winning strategy for I. As anticipated, a Σ1
1 bounding
argument is ﬁrst applied to deﬁne a closed unbounded subset of ω1 (using the
notations Er, ∥r∥, and WF as e.g. in the ﬁrst proof of 28.2). Deﬁne for η < ω1:
Bη = {r ∈ωω | ∃z ∈ωω∃α ≤η(S(z+) ∧α <is M(z+, α + ω)
∧tM(z+,α+ω)
z(0)
(α) = η <is M(z+, α + ω)
∧Er has ordertype tM(((σ∗z)I )+,α+ω)
σ(∅)
(α)} .
Then Bη is Σ1
1 in a real coding the ordertype η: The various assertions about
ordinals can be cast in terms of reals coding them and embeddings (cf. the second
proof of 13.4). Note that since σ is winning for I and the conditions on z ensure
that z ∈Aα, tM(((σ∗z)I )+,α+ω)
σ(∅)
(α) is a bona ﬁde ordinal by clause (i). This implies
that Bη ⊆WF, so that as in previous arguments a function w: ω1 →ω1 can be
deﬁned such that if r ∈Bη, then ∥r∥< w(η). Set
C = {γ < ω1 | ∀η < γ (w(η) < γ )} .
Then C is closed unbounded in ω1, and the proof is completed by showing that
ωC is a homogeneous set for f with value 0.
Suppose that p: ω1 →ωC is increasing; it must be shown that f (ran(p)) = 0.
By deﬁnition of ωC there is an increasing function q: ω1 →C such that for any
ξ < ω1,
p(ξ) = sup({q(ω·ξ + i) | i ∈ω}) .
q ∈L[b] for some b ∈ωω by 28.5, and in fact the last paragraph of its proof
provides a speciﬁc deﬁnition via forcing so that for some k ∈ω,
∀α < ω1(t⟨L[b],∈,b⟩
k
(α) = q(α)) .

28. AD and Combinatorics
395
Set z = ⟨k⟩⌢b#. Then since σ is winning for I, (σ ∗z)I = ⟨σ(∅)⟩⌢a# for some
a ∈ωω. For pσ∗z as in the statement of (ii) it now sufﬁces to show that p = pσ∗z,
for then f (ran(p)) = f (ran(pσ∗z)) = 0 as σ is winning for I.
Suppose then that ξ < ω1. For each i ∈ω,
ω·ξ + i ≤t⟨L[b],∈,b⟩
k
(ω·ξ + i) = tM(b#,ω·(ξ+1))
k
(ω·ξ + i) , and
t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
σ(∅)
(ω·ξ + i) = tM(a#,ω·(ξ+1))
σ(∅)
(ω·ξ + i)
as M(b#, ω·(ξ + 1)) ≺⟨L[b], ∈, b⟩, and similarly for a. Hence,
t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
σ(∅)
(ω·ξ + i) < w(q(ω·ξ + i)) < p(ξ) ,
the ﬁrst inequality by the choice of k and the deﬁnitions of Bq(ω·ξ+i) and w,
and the second, as q(ω·ξ + i) < p(ξ) and p(ξ) ∈C.
Thus p(ξ), being the
supremum of the t⟨L[b],∈,b⟩
k
(ω·ξ + i)’s, equals pσ∗z(ξ), which is the supremum of
the t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩
σ(∅)
(ω·ξ + i)’s and t⟨L[b],∈,b⟩
k
(ω·ξ + i)’s. This completes the proof of the
theorem.
⊣
This proof was to be generalized to higher cardinals using analogues of the
Σ1
1 bounding argument and the coding of functions: ω1 →ω1 by reals (30.26).
The proof admits a stronger conclusion:
28.13 Exercise. Assume AD. Then ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
2ℵ0 , and so ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
α for
every α < ω1.
Hint. Suppose that f : [ω1]ω1 →ω2. For each n ∈ω let fn: [ω1]ω1 →2 be deﬁned
by fn(s) = f (s)(n), and by the proof of 28.12 let Cn be closed unbounded in ω1
so that ωCn is homogeneous for fn. Then ω(
n Cn) is homogeneous for f .
For the latter assertion, note that any countable ordinal is injectible into ωω.
⊣
The function f : [ω1]ω1 →ω1 deﬁned by f (s) = ∩s is a counterexample to
ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
ω1, but recall that ω1 ̸≤2ℵ0 under AD.
Martin had also shown by then, using the emerging structure theory for sets
of reals (§§29, 30), that under AD + DC there are many cardinals κ satisfying
∀α < ω1(κ −→(κ)α
2).
In the next advance, Martin and Paris built on 28.12 by taking an ultrapower
by Cω1 to establish that under AD + DC, ∀α < ω2(ω2 −→(ω2)α
2). As 28.12
did for ω1, this result considerably strengthened the result that ω2 is measurable,
and implied through 28.10 and 28.11 that there are exactly two normal ultraﬁlters
over ω2, Cω
ω2 and Cω1
ω2 . On the other hand, Kunen showed that ω2−→
/ (ω2)ω2
2 . (See
Kechris [78] for these various results.)
Kleinberg showed in 1975 that many of these results under AD are actually
consequences solely of Martin’s ω1 −→(ω1)ω1
2 . He emphasized the generality,
and the J´onsson and Rowbottom partition properties:

396
Chapter 6. Determinacy
28.14 Theorem (DC)(Kleinberg [77, 77a]). Suppose that κ > ω and κ −→(κ)κ
2.
Then there are cardinals κ = κ1 < κ2 < κ3 < . . . such that:
(a) κ2 as well as κ1 are measurable, and moreover κ2 −→(κ2)α
2 for every
α < ω1.
(b) κn for n
≥3 are singular J´onsson cardinals of coﬁnality κ2 and
sup({κn | n ∈ω}) is a Rowbottom cardinal.
Moreover, if there is a normal ultraﬁlter U over κ such that κκ/U has ordertype
κ+, then:
(c) κn+1 = κ+
n for n ≥1.
(d) κ2 −→(κ2)α
2 for every α < κ2.
(e) Every normal ultraﬁlter over κ1 or κ2 is of form Cλ
µ.
For κ = ω1 under AD, (c) - (e) apply since ω1ω1/Cω1 has ordertype u2 = ω2
by (∗) in the proof of 28.9.
Some surface remarks are made about the web
of connections described by 28.14: (b) and (c) provide a purely combinatorial
explication of cf(ωn) = ω2 for n ≥2 (28.8). The arguments for (a) and (b) are
implicit in the Martin-Paris result of the special case ω2 −→(ω2)α
2 for every α <
ω2. Generalizing ω2−→
/ (ω2)ω2
2 , Henle [79] showed that κ2−→
/ (κ2)κ2
2 delimiting
(d). As described in Kleinberg [77a] the proof of (b) was simpliﬁed by another
result of Henle, one that generalizes 28.13: If κ −→(κ)κ
2, then κ −→(κ)κ
2ℵ0 .
Also, Everett Bull [78: 171] showed that the existence of a U as described implies
that κ is a successor cardinal, so that (e) follows from 28.11.
The combinatorial consequences of κ −→(κ)κ
2 and its variants were further
studied by Henle [77, 79, 84], Kleinberg [81, 82], and Henle-Kleinberg-Watro [84].
As for consequences of AD along these lines, it was known by 1977 that AD
implies that there are many cardinals κ such that κ −→(κ)κ
2. (However, not until
the work of Jackson [88] did it become known that there are such cardinals greater
than ω1 that satisfy the “Moreover, . . . ” clause of 28.14.) Such results about AD
and inﬁnite exponent partition relations are discussed toward the end of §30.
On Θ
With AD seen to cast a long shadow over the transﬁnite, we next turn to the early
analysis of its extent. In gauging the continuum with respect to the ordinals the
consequence ω1 ̸≤2ℵ0 of AD implies that the continuum is small with respect
to possibilities for injections: ξ →ωω. On the other hand, there is always a
surjection: ωω →ω1 (sending reals coding well-ordered sets into their ordertypes),
and the length of the continuum can be considered in terms of the possibilities for
surjections: ωω →ξ. Moschovakis [70] drew attention to the following ordinal:
Θ = sup({ξ | there is a surjection: ωω →ξ}) .
A surjection: ωω →ξ amounts to a stratiﬁcation of ωω into well-ordered layers,
and so corresponds to a well-ordering of some subset of P(ωω). It follows by

28. AD and Combinatorics
397
Replacement that in ZF, Θ is indeed an ordinal. Moreover, it is readily seen that
in ZF, Θ is a cardinal ≥ω2, and that in ZFC, Θ = (2ℵ0)+. The determination
of Θ in the sequence of alephs can be regarded as a version of the Continuum
Problem in settings without AC.
Θ came to be seen in various ways as the upper bound on the effect of AD
on the transﬁnite, and Θ under AD also turns out to be very large. The ﬁrst results
along these lines were established independently by H. Friedman and Moschovakis
in 1968. The latter soon isolated his fundamental Coding Lemma, which ﬁgures
crucially in many results concerning Θ and its deﬁnability analogues (see before
30.16). The proof of the lemma used what came to be known as a Friedman
game, a game where the players must play codes for countable ordinals but unlike
in a Solovay game, either player can have a winning strategy. Such a game was
ﬁrst used in the following striking result, and its anticipations by H. Friedman:
28.15 Theorem (Moschovakis [70]). Assume AD. If there is a surjection: ωω →α,
then there is a surjection: ωω →P(α).
Proof. Let f : ωω →α be a surjection. A sequence ⟨gξ | ξ ≤α⟩will be recursively
deﬁned so that each gξ is a surjection: ωω →P(ξ). Let g0: ωω →P(0) be the
only possible map. At successor stages, deﬁne gξ+1 directly if ξ is ﬁnite, and in
terms of gξ via a bijection: ξ →ξ + 1 deﬁned uniformly in ξ. It remains to
deﬁne gδ for limit δ with 0 < δ ≤α:
First, for ξ < δ and y ⊆ξ, temporarily stipulate that z ∈ωω codes y iff
f ((z)0) = ξ and gξ((z)1) = y. Now for X ⊆δ consider a game G X where the
players choose integers:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I loses unless xI codes X ∩ξ for some ξ < δ, in which case I I loses unless xI I
codes X ∩η for some η with ξ < η < δ.
Suppose ﬁrst that I has a winning strategy σ. Then
∀y ∈ωω((σ ∗y)I codes X ∩ξ for some ξ < δ) ,
and X is the unique subset of δ with this property: If Y ⊆δ with Y ̸= X, let
ζ ∈Y△X and y ∈ωω code X ∩(ζ + 1). Then (σ ∗y)I must code X ∩ξ for some
ξ ≥ζ, and X ∩ξ ̸= Y ∩ξ.
Suppose next that I I has a winning strategy τ. Then
∀z ∈ωω(z codes X ∩ξ for some ξ < δ →
(z ∗τ)I I codes X ∩η for some η with ξ < η < δ)
and X is the unique subset of δ with this property: If Y ⊆δ with Y ̸= X, let ξ
be the least member of Y△X and z ∈ωω code Y ∩ξ(= X ∩ξ). Then (z ∗τ)I I
must code X ∩η for some η > ξ, and X ∩η ̸= Y ∩η.

398
Chapter 6. Determinacy
It follows that for any strategy for either player, if it is winning in some
G X, then that X is unique as it can be reconstructed from the strategy. Thus, the
function g: {ρ | ρ is a strategy for either I or I I} →P(δ) given by:
g(ρ) =



X
if ρ is a winning strategy
for either I or I I in G X , and
∅
otherwise .
is well-deﬁned and by AD, surjective. The domain of g can be reconstituted to
get a surjective gδ: ωω →P(δ), completing the recursive construction.
⊣
There is a simple corollary:
28.16 Exercise (H. Friedman). Assume AD. Then Θ is a limit cardinal.
Hint. Suppose that λ < Θ, and show that λ+ < Θ: By the theorem there is a
surjection:
ωω →P(λ). First compose it with a bijection: P(λ) →P(λ × λ)
induced say by the G¨odel pairing bijection: λ →λ × λ. Then compose with that
function mapping R ∈P(λ × λ) to its ordertype if R is a well-ordering, and to 0
otherwise.
⊣
The arguments for 28.15 and 28.16 actually show that from a surjection:
ωω →λ a surjection:
ωω →λ+ can be deﬁned. A more substantial corollary
follows from this observation:
28.17 Exercise (Solovay). Assume AD. Then Θ = ωΘ.
Hint. Suppose that α < Θ, and show that ωα < Θ: Using a surjection: ωω →α,
recursively deﬁne a sequence ⟨gξ | ξ ≤α⟩such that each gξ is a surjection:
ωω →ωξ.
⊣
Applying his Coding Lemma Moschovakis [70] extended further results of
Solovay by showing that under AD there are cardinals κ that are κ-weakly Mahlo
below Θ. However, it turned out that the coﬁnality of Θ may be small without
further hypotheses. The following uses the expected argument, depending only on
ACω:
28.18 Exercise (DC). cf(Θ) > ω.
⊣
We had mentioned L(R) as the natural inner model for AD in the ZFC
context.
28.19 Exercise (Solovay). Assume V = L(R). Then Θ is regular.
Hint. It sufﬁces to show (sans AC!) that there is a sequence ⟨hξ | 0 < ξ < Θ⟩
such that each hξ is a surjection: ωω →ξ, for then the regularity of Θ can be

28. AD and Combinatorics
399
established in the expected way. To get such a sequence let Φ: On × ωω →V
be a deﬁnable surjection (cf. the proof of 11.13). Deﬁne t: Θ −{0} →On by:
t(ξ) is the least ordinal such that for some y ∈ωω, Φ(t(ξ), y) is a surjection:
ωω →ξ. Then deﬁne hξ: ωω →ξ for 0 < ξ < Θ by:
hξ(x) =
 Φ(t(ξ), (x)0)((x)1)
if Φ(t(ξ), (x)0) is a map into ξ , and
0
otherwise .
⊣
Thus, although Θ L(R) ≤Θ may be a small ordinal, it follows from ADL(R)
that Θ L(R) is a weakly inaccessible cardinal in L(R). The possibilities for Θ in
L(R) were later to be considerably clariﬁed (30.32).
Introducing sharps for sets of reals Solovay [78a] showed that
ZF + ADR + cf(Θ) > ω ⊢Con(ZF + ADR) ,
and so by G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem,
Con(ZF + ADR) implies Con(ZF + ADR + cf(Θ) = ω) .
By 28.18, Con(ZF + ADR) thus implies Con(AD + ¬DC), the independence of
DC from AD. Steel and Robert Van Wesep in their [82] established related results.
Strong and Supercompactness under AD
This section is concluded with combinatorial versions of strong and supercompact-
ness derivable from AD. The equivalences in terms of elementary embeddings of V
are no longer available, the proof of the basic Ło´s’s Theorem 5.2 depending on AC.
Thus bereft, the strength of these combinatorial versions is unclear. The results of
the late 1980’s about the relative consistency of AD (§32) were to indicate that, at
least for supercompactness, there is not much consistency strength. Nonetheless,
it is interesting that AD has these other ways of affecting the transﬁnite.
In terms of an early characterization (4.1) of strong compactness, Kunen
observed in 1970 that under AD, ω1 is strongly compact up to the natural bound
Θ. The proof uses Martin’s ultraﬁlter over Turing degrees to project down as
before, and has a further consequence.
28.20 Theorem (Kunen). Assume AD. Then for any λ < Θ, any ω1-complete
ﬁlter over λ can be extended to an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over λ.
Proof. By 28.15 let g: ωω →P(λ) be surjective. Suppose now that F is an
ω1-complete ﬁlter over λ. Recalling Martin’s 28.4 and its terminology, deﬁne
f : DT →λ by:
f (d) = least ordinal in {g(a) ∈F | a ∈ωω ∧[a]T ≤d} .
(Since there are countably many a ∈ωω such that [a]T ≤d, this intersection is
not empty by ω1-completeness.) Then for any X ∈F, with a ∈ωω such that
g(a) = X, f “{d ∈DT | [a]T ≤d} ⊆X. With this it is simple to check that

400
Chapter 6. Determinacy
f∗(MT) = {X ⊆λ | f −1(X) ∈MT}
is an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over λ extending F.
⊣
28.21 Corollary (DC)(Kunen). Assume AD. Then for any λ < Θ,
β(λ) = {U | U is an ultraﬁlter over λ}
is well-orderable.
Proof. By the proof of the theorem, any ultraﬁlter over λ, being ω1-complete
(28.1), is of form f∗(MT) for some f : DT →λ.
It is simple to see that for
any two functions f and g with domain DT if {d ∈DT | f (d) = g(d)} ∈MT,
then f∗(MT) = g∗(MT). Hence, the map with domain the ultrapower DTλ/MT
sending [ f ]MT to f∗(MT) is a well-deﬁned surjection onto β(λ). But DC ensures
that ultrapowers of ordinals via ω1-complete ultraﬁlters are well-ordered under the
induced ordering. Hence, the surjective image β(λ) is also well-orderable.
⊣
Thus, under AD, if λ < Θ, then P(λ) is not well-orderable, but β(λ) is.
Under AC, for any κ, that |β(κ)| = 22κ is a classical result of Posp´ıˇsil [37]
and Tarski [39]. Under AD it may happen that |β(κ)| = κ. The β function on
cardinals less than Θ has been latterly regarded as a power set operation (see
Kechris [85]).
Assuming DC and a hypothesis intermediate between AD and
ADR, Kechris [88a] established the following result analogous to 28.15: If there
is a surjection: ωω →λ, then there is a surjection: ωω →β(λ).
Turning to supercompactness, the existence under AD of normal ultraﬁlters
over various Pκγ was established in the latter 1970’s. Solovay had proved the
following in one of the early uses of the stronger ADR.
28.22 Theorem (Solovay [78a: §3]). Assume ADR. Then for any γ < Θ there is
a normal ultraﬁlter over Pω1γ.
Proof. Solovay actually showed that there is an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter U over
Pω1
ωω that has the following ﬁneness and normality properties:
(i) ∀a ∈ωω({X ∈Pω1
ωω | a ∈X} ∈U) .
(ii) If ⟨Aa | a ∈ωω⟩∈
ωωU, then {X ∈Pω1
ωω | X ∈
a∈X Aa} ∈U .
Such a U plays a role similar to Martin’s MT in Kunen’s 28.20: For γ < Θ, let
f : ωω →γ be surjective; then it is straightforward to show that
{Y ⊆Pω1γ | {x ∈Pω1
ωω | f “x ∈Y} ∈U}
is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pω1γ .
Toward the formulation of U, for A ⊆Pω1
ωω consider a game G(A) where
the players choose ﬁnite, possibly empty, subsets of ωω:

28. AD and Combinatorics
401
I
:
s0
s2
. . .
I I :
s1
s3
. . .
I I wins if 
i∈ω si ∈A, and otherwise I wins. Coding ﬁnite subsets of reals by
reals, ADR implies that G(A) is determined. Now deﬁne U ⊆P(Pω1
ωω) by:
A ∈U iff
I I has a winning strategy in G(A) .
Clearly property (i) obtains, and if A ∈U and A ⊆B ⊆Pω1
ωω, then B ∈U.
Moreover, if A ⊆Pω1
ωω and A /∈U, then Pω1
ωω −A ∈U, for if σ is a
winning strategy for I in G(A), then the following is a winning strategy for I I
in G(Pω1
ωω −A): After I’s initial move s0, I I moves σ(∅), and after I’s next
move s2, I I moves σ(⟨σ(∅), s0 ∪s2⟩), and thereafter according to σ.
We next show that U is an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter by verifying ω1-complete-
ness, the argument soon to be extended to establish (ii): Suppose that ⟨Am | m ∈
ω⟩∈ωU. Consider a game where I’s initial move must be an integer, say m,
I I must respond with ∅, and then the players’ moves and result are as in G(Am).
It is simple to see that it is I I who must have a winning strategy in this new
game, and that from it a sequence ⟨τm | m ∈ω⟩can be read off where each τm
is a winning strategy for I I in G(Am). (This strategem avoids ACω.) A winning
strategy for I I in G(
m Am) can now be formulated:
Recall our recursive coding of ω × ω with ⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩∈ω coding the ordered
pair of m and n; it can be assumed that ⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩< ⟨⟨m, n + 1⟩⟩for every m, n ∈ω.
For I I’s ith move (the (2i + 1)st move of the game), if i = ⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩, I I makes the
strategic response according to τm to the partial play up until then, but with all the
reals played by either player after I I’s ⟨⟨m, n −1⟩⟩th move (or 0th move, if n = 0)
taken together as a single move by I. Thus, I I’s ⟨⟨m, 0⟩⟩th, ⟨⟨m, 1⟩⟩th, ⟨⟨m, 2⟩⟩th, . . .
moves ensure that the resulting set belongs to Am.
(ii) is established by building on this argument: Suppose that ⟨Aa | a ∈
ωω⟩∈
ωωU. Playing an auxiliary game as before but with I’s initial move a real
a, we get a sequence ⟨τa | a ∈ωω⟩such that each τa is a winning strategy for
I I in G(Aa). A winning strategy for I I in G({X ∈Pω1
ωω | X ∈
a∈X Aa})
can now be formulated as follows: With the countable set of Aa’s into which the
union of the resulting play must get only determined by the progress of the game,
I I applies a dovetailing procedure to ensure that whenever a real a occurs in a
move of either player, I I eventually applies τa inﬁnitely many times. As before,
each application of τa is based on regarding all the reals played after the previous
application taken together as a single move of I.
⊣
Whether the conclusion already follows from AD is unknown. Martin ob-
served in 1975 that in ZF, if κ and κ+ are both measurable, then there is a normal
ultraﬁlter over Pκκ+. A normal ultraﬁlter over κ+ can be used to “glue together”
normal ultraﬁlters over Pκγ for κ ≤γ < κ+ canonically deﬁned from a normal
ultraﬁlter over κ (see Di Prisco-Henle [78]). It thus follows from AD that ω1 is
“ω2-supercompact”, but also it was not difﬁcult to simulate the game of 28.22
for small γ to draw its conclusion for such γ . In a signiﬁcant advance for the

402
Chapter 6. Determinacy
general theory Harrington-Kechris [81] showed that certain games played with
reals coding ordinals uniformly bounded below Θ can be simulated with games
played with integers, and so are determined under AD. Through this means they
simulated Solovay’s game to show that under AD there is a normal ultraﬁlter over
Pω1δ where δ < Θ is a deﬁnability analogue of Θ, weakly Mahlo but not the
least such. Becker [81] applied Martin’s ultraﬁlter MT instead of Solovay’s game
to get the same result, and showed in [81a] that this approach shows that under
AD there is a normal ultraﬁlter over Pω2δ. Becker [81] also showed that under
AD, for several γ there is exactly one normal ultraﬁlter over Pω1γ , and Woodin
[83] extended this result to all γ covered by the Solovay result under ADR and
by the Harrington-Kechris result under AD.
These various results as well as 28.7, from which we have drawn conclusions,
are very much part of the study of deﬁnability under AD, the subject of the
succeeding section.

29. Prewellorderings
403
29. Prewellorderings
This and the next sections explore the structural consequences of determinacy hy-
potheses in descriptive set theory, a direction of investigation inspired by Blackwell
[67] and ﬁrst pursued by Moschovakis and Martin. A theme broached in §27 is
broadly developed, that of regarding determinacy itself as a regularity property
and investigating the consequences of Det(Λ) for various Λ, particularly those
in the projective hierarchy.
The Moschovakis text [80] provides an extensive
account, and most of the work before the crowning achievements of the later
1980’s appears in the proceedings of the Cabal Seminar: Kechris-Moschovakis
[78], Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [81, 83], and Kechris-Martin-Steel [88].
The conventions of §§12, 13 are maintained, and as there
ZF + ACω(ωω) serves as the ambient theory for this section .
AD implies ACω(ωω) (27.10), and versions of this observation for deﬁnable sets
of reals give the ﬁrst equivalence of (∗) before 12.4 for deﬁnable relations. It will
follow that several of the forthcoming results featuring determinacy hypotheses
can be established in just ZF, but this is not traced. Uses of DC are explicitly
noted however.
The focus will be on the projective sets, and PD, Projective Determinacy,
will sufﬁce for the main development of this section.
In any case results are
stated parsimoniously with determinacy hypotheses only as needed. To cast the
discussion in some generality, a projective class is some Σ1
n or Π1
n for 1 ≤n ∈ω,
or for the effective content, Σ1
n(a) or Π1
n (a) for some a ∈ωω restricted to the
traditional relations ⊆k(ωω), which are again referred to as Σ1
n(a) or Π1
n (a)
respectively. For Γ such a class, ¬Γ denotes its dual class, i.e.
¬Γ = {A | ∃k ∈ω(A ⊆k(ωω) ∧k(ωω) −A ∈Γ )} ,
and ∃1Γ and ∀1Γ those classes corresponding to the adjunction of the correspond-
ing quantiﬁer, i.e.
∃1Γ = {A | ∃B ∈Γ (A = pB)} , and
∀1Γ = ¬∃1¬Γ .
For example, ∃1Π1
3 is Σ1
4, and ∀1Π1
3 (a) is again Π1
3 (a). It will be convenient to
have some standing meta-variables for this section; as above,
Γ denotes a projective class ,
and
∆Γ denotes Γ ∩¬Γ .
For example, ∆Σ1
3 is ∆1
3.
The Moschovakis text [80] formulates results more
abstractly in terms of general classes satisfying closure and other properties, and
these generalizations are suggested by the formulations here.

404
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Determinacy hypotheses for projective classes and their duals do not have to
be considered separately by a simple observation:
29.1 Lemma. Det(Γ ) iff Det(¬Γ ).
Proof. For any A ⊆ωω, set
A−= {⟨i⟩⌢x | i ∈ω ∧x ∈A} .
Then it is readily seen that a winning strategy for I in Gω(A−) converts to a
winning strategy for I I in Gω(ωω −A), and that a winning strategy for I I in
Gω(A−) converts to a winning strategy for I in Gω(ωω −A). But A−∈Γ iff
A ∈Γ .
⊣
Toward giving the seminal Blackwell argument and beginning the appropriate
structural approach, two simple properties are discussed that were widely studied
in classical descriptive set theory: For any A and B, ⟨A∗, B∗⟩reduces ⟨A, B⟩iff
A∗⊆A, B∗⊆B, A∗∪B∗= A ∪B, and A ∩B = ∅.
Γ has the reduction property iff
for any A, B in Γ there are A∗, B∗in Γ
so that ⟨A∗, B∗⟩reduces ⟨A, B⟩.
Γ has the separation property iff
for any disjoint A, B ⊆k(ωω)
with A, B in Γ there is a C in ∆Γ
so that A ⊆C and B ∩C = ∅.
Simple diagrams illustrate these properties, and the following is an exercise in
propositional logic.
29.2 Exercise.
If Γ has the reduction property, then ¬Γ has the separation
property.
⊣
An early argument using universal sets was recast for the following:
29.3 Proposition (Novikov [35: 465], Addison [58]).
If Γ has the reduction
property, then Γ does not have the separation property.
Proof. Let U ⊆2(ωω) be universal for Γ (12.7), and set
A = {⟨x, y⟩| ⟨(x)0, y⟩∈U} and B = {⟨x, y⟩| ⟨(x)1, y⟩∈U} .
A and B are in Γ , so let A∗and B∗in Γ be such that ⟨A∗, B∗⟩reduces ⟨A, B⟩.
Assume to the contrary that there is a C in ∆Γ so that A∗⊆C and B∗∩C = ∅.
Then C ⊆2(ωω) is universal for ∆Γ :
For any D ⊆ωω with D in ∆Γ , let a ∈ωω be such that for any y ∈ωω,
y ∈D ↔⟨(a)0, y⟩∈U ,
and y /∈D ↔⟨(a)1, y⟩∈U .

29. Prewellorderings
405
Then for such a, ⟨a, y⟩∈A iff ⟨a, y⟩/∈B, so that ⟨a, y⟩∈A∗iff ⟨a, y⟩/∈B∗,
and consequently y ∈D ↔⟨a, y⟩∈C.
However, there can be no set universal for ∆Γ by Cantor’s diagonal argument
(as noted after 12.8).
⊣
29.4 Corollary.
If Γ has the reduction property, then ¬Γ does not have the
reduction property.
Proof. By 29.2 and 29.3.
⊣
Luzin [27: 50ff] formulated and established the separation property for Σ1
1
(cf. before 13.5). Kuratowski formulated the reduction property and established
the following, which subsumes Luzin’s result by 29.2. Addison, as with 29.3, later
noted the effectivization. In a move that brought on a conceptual shift, Blackwell
provided a proof based on the determinacy of open games:
29.5 Theorem (Kuratowski [36], Addison [58]). For any a ∈ωω, Π1
1 (a) has the
reduction property.
Proof (Blackwell [67]). Suppose that A and B are Π1
1 (a), taking A, B ⊆ωω
for simplicity. Let T and U be trees on ω × ω as provided by the basic 13.1
representation of Π1
1 sets so that for any z ∈ωω,
A(z) ↔Tz is well-founded , and
B(z) ↔Uz is well-founded .
For z ∈ωω, consider a game Gz played with integers:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I wins exactly when there is an i ∈ω such that xI|i ∈Uz and xI I|i /∈Tz, i.e. I
manages to stay on the tree Uz until I I falls off of Tz and conﬁrms membership
for z in A.
Set
A∗= {z ∈A | I I has no winning strategy in Gz} , and
B∗= {z ∈B | I has no winning strategy in Gz} .
If z ∈A −B, then z ∈A∗: Letting y ∈[Uz], no play where I’s moves are
x(2i) = y(i) for i ∈ω can be a win for I I. Analogously, if z ∈B −A, then
z ∈B∗. Finally, if z ∈A ∩B, then z ∈A∗∪B∗as I and I I cannot both have
winning strategies in Gz. This case-by-case analysis shows that A∪B = A∗∪B∗.
Next, since in each Gz any win for I is secured at a ﬁnite stage, by 27.1
(cf. the remarks afterward) Gz is determined. Hence, A∗∩B∗= ∅.
Finally, the 13.1 representation implies that for any z ∈ωω,
A∗(z) ↔A(z) ∧∀τ(τ is a strategy for I I →. . .)

406
Chapter 6. Determinacy
where . . . is arithmetical, so that A∗is Π1
1 (a). B∗is similarly Π1
1 (a), and so the
proof is complete.
⊣
This is a singular example of a new proof of an old result that stimulates a re-
generation of the ambient theory. Addison and Martin quickly and independently
came to the idea of assuming Projective Determinacy (PD) to derive structural
conclusions. With Σ1
2 having the reduction property also a classical result (see af-
ter 29.9) they each saw how to generalize Blackwell’s proof to show that Det(∆1
2)
implies that Π1
3 has the reduction property. Then Martin and Moschovakis inde-
pendently propagated the reduction property through the projective classes under
PD. With ZFC securing the reduction property only for Π1
1 and Σ1
2 as it turns out,
and delimiting it to at most one of Γ or ¬Γ (29.4), PD is a regularity hypothesis
that provided the deductive power to establish reduction for at least one of Γ or
¬Γ for every Γ by a natural inductive process.
The Prewellordering Property
Although the Blackwell proof can be generalized to propagate reduction through
the projective hierarchy under PD, attention soon shifted to a stronger property
that could be similarly propagated. That property had already been abstracted
by Moschovakis in 1964 from the classical ordinal analysis of Π1
1 and Σ1
2 sets,
and being intrinsic to sets rather than relating two sets it soon assumed a greater
prominence. The formulation proceeds through several deﬁnitions:
A relation ⪯on some A is a prewellordering (of A) iff ⪯is reﬂexive on A,
transitive, connected on A (i.e. ∀x, y ∈A(x ⪯y ∨y ⪯x)), and well-founded.
Thus, such a ⪯satisﬁes all the conditions for a well-ordering of A except possibly
anti-symmetry: there may be distinct x, y ∈A such that x ⪯y and y ⪯x. With a
⪯contextually clear, ≺, ⪰, and ≻have the expected derived meanings. A norm
on A is a function ρ: A →On. Such a ρ induces a prewellordering ⪯ρ of A
deﬁned by:
x ⪯ρ y iff
ρ(x) ≤ρ(y) .
Conversely, for any prewellordering ⪯of A there is a norm ρ: A →On such that
⪯ρ = ⪯. A canonical such norm is the rank function of ⪯(cf. 0.3); it is the one
norm whose range is an ordinal.
To illustrate, let U be an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter over a set S, and for
f, g: S →On deﬁne
f ⪯U g iff
{i ∈S | f (i) ≤g(i)} ∈U .
Assuming DC, the lack of inﬁnite descending chains implies well-foundedness,
so ⪯U is a prewellordering. The corresponding rank function is just that function
taking f to its equivalence class [ f ]U in the (transitive collapse of the) ultrapower.
Deﬁnability is incorporated next. For A ⊆k(ωω), ρ: A →On is a Γ -norm
iff there are R+ in Γ and R−in ¬Γ with R+, R−⊆2k(ωω) such that for any
y ∈A,

29. Prewellorderings
407
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y)
↔
R+(x, y)
↔
R−(x, y) ,
i.e. {x ∈A | ρ(x) ≤ρ(y)} is in ∆Γ “uniformly in y”.
For A in Γ , this is
stronger than requiring that the induced prewellordering ⪯ρ be in Γ , but weaker
than requiring that ⪯ρ be in ∆Γ . Finally,
Γ has the prewellordering property iff every A in Γ has a Γ -norm .
This deﬁnition serves for classes more general than the projective classes. For
the latter only a representative set need be considered: Γ has the prewellordering
property iff a set A ⊆2(ωω) universal for Γ has a Γ -norm. (For 1 ≤k ∈ω any
subset of k(ωω) can be homeomorphically identiﬁed with a subset of ωω, which
can then be endowed with a Γ -norm derived from one for the universal set.)
A useful, if less motivated, characterization of Γ -norm casts a different light
on Moschovakis’s property:
29.6 Exercise. Suppose that A is in Γ and ρ: A →On. Then ρ is a Γ -norm iff
the following relations are in Γ :
x ≤∗
ρ y
↔
x ∈A ∧(y ∈A →ρ(x) ≤ρ(y)) .
x <∗
ρ y
↔
x ∈A ∧(y ∈A →ρ(x) < ρ(y)) .
Hint. Note ﬁrst that if R+ and R−are as in the deﬁnition of Γ -norm, then
x ≤∗
ρ y
↔
x ∈A ∧(R+(x, y) ∨¬R−(y, x)) , and
x <∗
ρ y
↔
x ∈A ∧¬R−(y, x) .
For the converse, set
R+(x, y) ↔x ≤∗
ρ y , and
R−(x, y) ↔¬(y <∗
ρ x) .
⊣
For Γ -norms ρ, ≤∗
ρ and <∗
ρ are taken as basic. They are just what is needed
for a simple reduction process:
29.7 Proposition (Kuratowski [36], Addison [58]). If Γ has the prewellordering
property, then Γ has the reduction property.
Proof. Suppose that A, B ⊆k(ωω) are both in Γ . With the constant functions
ˆ0: ω →{0} and ˆ1: ω →{1}, set
R = (A × {ˆ0}) ∪(B × {ˆ1}) .
R is in Γ , so let ρ: R →On be a Γ -norm. The idea is to see to which set A or
B membership is ﬁrst secured according to the norm. Deﬁne A∗, B∗⊆k(ωω) by

408
Chapter 6. Determinacy
x ∈A∗
↔
⟨x, ˆ0⟩≤∗
ρ ⟨x, ˆ1⟩, and
x ∈B∗
↔
⟨x, ˆ1⟩<∗
ρ ⟨x, ˆ0⟩.
By the exercise ⟨A∗, B∗⟩reduces ⟨A, B⟩and A∗and B∗are in Γ .
⊣
The following is a simple consequence of the basic 13.1 representation of
Π1
1 sets, and indeed harkens back to the original ordinal analysis of Π1
1 sets in
Luzin-Sierpi´nski [18].
29.8 Exercise. For any a ∈ωω, Π1
1 (a) has the prewellordering property.
Hint. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Π1
1 (a), with T a tree on kω × ω such that
A(w)
↔
Tw is well-founded .
Deﬁne ρ: A →On by
ρ(w) = ∥Tw∥,
the height of the well-founded tree Tw. That this is a Π1
1 (a)-norm follows from
the arguments for the relations R≤and R< in the proof of 13.17: Fixing the
parameter x there, take y ≤∗
ρ z to correspond to R≤(0, x, y, z) and y <∗
ρ z to
¬R<(0, x, z, y).
⊣
29.7 now implies 29.5, and this is essentially the classical proof of that result.
The early descriptive set theorists did not get to a useful representation of Σ1
2
sets (cf. 13.14), but Novikov [35] did get results about them using an ordinal anal-
ysis lifted from the Π1
1 sets. Moschovakis formulated that lifting schematically:
29.9 Proposition (Novikov [35], Moschovakis).
Suppose that ∀1Γ ⊆Γ and
Γ has the prewellordering property. Then so does ∃1Γ . Consequently, for any
a ∈ωω, Σ1
2(a) has the prewellordering property.
Proof. Suppose that
A(x) ↔∃1wB(x, w)
where B is in Γ . Let ν be a Γ -norm on B, and deﬁne ρ: A →On by:
ρ(x) = min({ν(x, w) | B(x, w)}) .
Then in terms of 29.6,
x ≤∗
ρ y
↔
∃1w∀1z(⟨x, w⟩≤∗
ν ⟨y, z⟩) , and
x <∗
ρ y
↔
∃1w∀1z(⟨x, w⟩<∗
ν ⟨y, z⟩) ,
and since ∀1Γ ⊆Γ , these relations are in ∃1Γ .
⊣
This implies the result of Kuratowski [36] that Σ1
2 has the reduction property,
and so the results of Novikov [35] that Π1
2 has the separation property but Σ1
2

29. Prewellorderings
409
does not. Note the importance of the well-foundedness of the prewellordering in
the proof; well-foundedness was not needed in 29.7, but is a crucial feature in the
inductive propagation of the prewellordering property.
What happens at the higher levels? L not only delimited the classical efforts
but also provided the ﬁrst analysis consistent with ZFC. We again start with an
abstract deﬁnition for a general statement:
Assuming that ≺is a (strict) well-ordering of ωω in ordertype ω1, let IS≺⊆
2(ωω) be given by
IS≺(x, y)
↔
{(x)i | i ∈ω} = {z ∈ωω | z ≺y} .
Note that if ≺is in Γ , then it is also in ¬Γ as x ≺y ↔x ̸= y ∧¬(y ≺x),
and so
IS≺(x, y)
↔
∀0i((x)i ≺y) ∧∀1z(z ≺y →∃0i(z = (x)i))
shows that IS≺is in ∀1Γ ∩∀1¬Γ . The following imposes a stronger restriction
on IS≺:
≺is Γ -good iff
IS≺is in ∆Γ .
It is simple to see that if ≺is Γ -good, then it is in Γ , and that ≺is Γ -good iff
≺is ¬Γ -good.
29.10 Proposition.
Suppose that ¬Γ ⊆∃1Γ and there is a ∃1Γ -good well-
ordering of ωω. Then ∃1Γ has the prewellordering property.
Proof. Suppose that A is ∃1Γ , where for simplicity A ⊆ωω, say
A(x) ↔∃1wB(x, w)
where B is in Γ .
Let ≺be a Γ -good well-ordering of ωω, ≺2 the induced
lexicographic well-ordering of 2(ωω), and ν: 2(ωω) →On the corresponding rank
function. For each x ∈A, let wx by the ≺-least w so that B(x, w), and deﬁne
ρ: A →On by
ρ(x) = ν(wx, x) .
(ρ(x) could have been taken to be just the ≺-rank of wx, but for a later purpose
an injective norm is produced.) Then
x <∗
ρ y
↔∃1w(B(x, w) ∧∃1u(IS≺(u, w) ∧∀0i¬B(y, (u)i))) ∨
∃1w[B(x, w) ∧B(y, w) ∧
∃1u(IS≺(u, w) ∧∀0i(¬B(x, (u)i) ∧¬B(y, (u)i)) ∧x ≺y] ,
and similarly for ≤∗
ρ. Since ¬Γ ⊆∃1Γ , these relations are thus seen to be in
∃1Γ , and so the result follows.
⊣

410
Chapter 6. Determinacy
29.11 Corollary. If ωω ⊆L, then for any a ∈ωω and 2 ≤n ∈ω, Σ1
n(a) has the
prewellordering property.
Proof. By 13.11, 2(ωω) ∩<L is a Σ1
2-good well-ordering of ωω.
⊣
It was to become clear from Silver [71b: 440] that the same conclusion can
be drawn if the reals are included in an inner model L[U] of measurability; by
20.17 the reals in these models coincide.
29.12 Corollary. If ωω ⊆L[U], then for any a ∈ωω and 2 ≤n ∈ω, Σ1
n(a) has
the prewellordering property.
Proof. The result holds in any case for n = 2 by 29.9, and for n > 2 there is by
20.20 a Σ1
3-good well-ordering of ωω.
⊣
Thus, if V = L or even V = L[U], then the reduction property holds for
Π1
1 and then for Σ1
n for every n ≥2. This was ﬁrst seen for L by Addison [59];
Novikov [51] had announced the ﬁrst result of this kind, that if V = L, then for
sufﬁciently large n the separation property holds for Π1
n.
This persistence of reduction on the Σ side depended on the external circum-
stance of having a well-ordering of ωω with nice deﬁnability properties. Addi-
son [74: 9-10] speculated in 1967 on other possibilities, and his remarks “turned
out to be prophetic”, for soon afterwards a more natural pattern for reduction
through the projective hierarchy was established under PD, and even more to the
point, the argument featured a natural inductive propagation. It was for this pur-
pose that Martin introduced his ﬁlter over Turing degrees. In another approach
Moschovakis explicitly propagated the prewellordering property using strategies
for speciﬁc games, establishing what he later called the First Periodicity Theorem:
29.13 Theorem (DC)(Martin [68]; Moschovakis – Addison-Moschovakis [68]).
Assume Det(∆Γ ). Suppose that ∃1Γ ⊆Γ and Γ has the prewellordering property.
Then so does ∀1Γ .
Both the Martin and Moschovakis arguments will be given, but ﬁrst the con-
sequence of this result and 29.9 that PD inductively propagates the prewellordering
property in a “zig-zag” pattern:
29.14 Corollary (DC). Assume PD. Then for any a ∈ωω, the following classes
have the prewellordering (and hence the reduction) property:
Σ1
2(a)
Σ1
4(a)
. . .
Π1
1 (a)
Π1
3 (a)
. . .
⊣
In contrast to the stark situation in L and in L[U], this perpetuation of the
alternation beyond the classical “zig” from Π1
1 to Σ1
2 of the reduction property

29. Prewellorderings
411
suggested that PD may be a hypothesis with the deductive power to settle major
questions about the projective sets in ways that naturally extend the classical
theory.
The following is Martin’s argument with Turing degrees, cast in terms of
prewellorderings. The idea of ranking functions via ultrapowers, so crucial in
later arguments in descriptive set theory, ﬁrst appeared here (cf. after 15.4).
First Proof of 29.13. Suppose for simplicity that A ⊆ωω and
A(x) ↔∀1wB(x, w)
where B is in Γ . Let ν be a Γ -norm on B. Recalling the terminology toward
28.4, for x ∈A deﬁne sx: DT →On by:
sx(d) = sup({ν(x, w) + 1 | [w]T ≤d}) ,
and for y ∈A also, set
Zxy = {d ∈DT | sx(d) ≤sy(d)} .
Note ﬁrst that for a, x, y ∈ωω,
sx([a]T) ≤sy([a]T) ↔∀w ≤T a∃z ≤T a(ν(x, w) ≤ν(y, z)) .
It is well-known that the displayed quantiﬁers are arithmetical, about number codes
for “reduction procedures” (with the codes being for formulas and ﬁnite sequences
if we proceed in terms of 12.4). Consequently, it follows from ν being a Γ -norm
and the deﬁnitions that
{a ∈ωω | [a]T ∈Zxy}
is in ∆Γ . Hence, with Det(∆Γ ) Martin’s argument for 28.4 implies that for any
x, y ∈A,
either Zxy ∈MT or else DT −Zxy ∈MT .
Deﬁne an ordering ⪯of A by:
x ⪯y iff
Zxy ∈MT .
⪯is a prewellordering, DC and the ω1-completeness of MT ensuring well-
foundedness, so let ρ: A →On be the corresponding rank function. (ρ ranks
the members x of A as per the corresponding sx’s in an ultrapower of On by MT.)
To complete the proof, we show that ρ is a ∀1Γ -norm:
First, for y ∈A,
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y)
↔∃1a∀1b(a ≤T b →
∀w ≤T b∃z ≤T b[B(x, w) ∧ν(x, w) ≤ν(y, z)]) .
(Note that for any w, a ∈ωω there is always a b ∈ωω such that w ≤T b and
a ≤T b, and so x ∈A is indeed a consequence of the right side.) The quantiﬁers

412
Chapter 6. Determinacy
involving ≤T are arithmetical as observed before, and the relation [. . .] is in ¬Γ
as ν is a Γ -norm. Consequently, the overall relation is in ∃1∀1¬Γ , or equivalently
in ¬∀1∃1Γ , and hence in ¬∀1Γ as ∃1Γ ⊆Γ .
We also have for y ∈A
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y) ↔x ∈A ∧{d ∈DT | sy(d) < sx(d)} /∈MT
↔x ∈A ∧∀1a∃1b(a ≤T b ∧
∃w ≤T b∀z ≤T b[ν(y, z) ≤ν(x, w)]) .
Since for y ∈A the relation [. . .] is in Γ as ν is a Γ -norm, the overall relation
is in ∀1∃1Γ and hence in ∀1Γ as ∃1Γ ⊆Γ . The deﬁnition of ∀1Γ -norm thus
satisﬁed, the proof is complete.
⊣
Just as the classical argument for 29.9 lifts the prewellordering property from
Π1
n to Σ1
n+1 by the simple expedient of taking minima to deﬁne a new norm,
Martin had found a way to “integrate” over suprema to lift the prewellordering
property from Σ1
n to Π1
n+1. Moschovakis was able to take suprema more concretely
with speciﬁc strategies, with an argument that was to have an important extension
(30.8):
Second Proof of 29.13. Suppose again that A ⊆ωω and
A(x) ↔∀1wB(x, w)
where B is in Γ .
For x, y ∈ωω consider the game G(x, y) played with integers:
I
:
t(0)
t(2)
. . .
I I :
t(1)
t(3)
. . .
I I wins if either: (a) ¬B(y, tI I), or else (b) B(x, tI) and ν(x, tI) ≤ν(y, tI I).
This game is determined: If y /∈A, then I I can always win by ensuring (a). If
y ∈A, then (a) never occurs, and the deﬁnition of Γ -norm ensures that the payoff
set according to (b) is in ∆Γ , and Det(∆Γ ) is being assumed.
Deﬁne ⪯on A by:
x ⪯y ↔I I has a winning strategy in G(x, y) .
Thus, x ⪯y exactly when sup({ν(x, w) | w ∈ωω}) ≤sup({ν(y, z) | z ∈ωω})
uniformly, in the sense that there is a winning strategy τ for I I so that for any
w ∈ωω, ν(x, w) ≤ν(y, (w ∗τ)I I).
That ⪯is a prewellordering of A is checked clause by clause:
⪯is reﬂexive: For x ∈A, I I has a simple winning strategy in G(x, x); just
copy I’s moves.
⪯is transitive: Suppose that x, y, z ∈A, x ⪯y, and y ⪯z. Letting τ1 be a
winning strategy for I I in G(x, y) and τ2 winning for I I in G(y, z), if a strategy
τ for I I could be devised so that for any w ∈ωω,

29. Prewellorderings
413
(w ∗τ)I I = ((w ∗τ1)I I ∗τ2)I I
with the consequent
ν(x, w) ≤ν(y, (w ∗τ1)I I) ≤ν(z, (w ∗τ)I I) ,
then τ would be winning for I I in G(x, z) and x ⪯z. But this is simple to do:
For the initial response set τ(⟨i⟩) = τ2(⟨τ1(⟨i⟩)⟩). Generally, I I keeps partial
plays of G(x, y) and G(y, z) going, with each of I’s moves in G(x, z) viewed as
a move in G(x, y), considering the response according to τ1 as I’s next move in
G(y, z), and then responding to it according to τ2.
⪯is connected: Suppose that x, y ∈Z and ¬(x ⪯y). By determinacy, I then
has a winning strategy σ in G(x, y), and since x, y ∈A, ν(x, (σ ∗w)I) > ν(y, w)
for any w ∈ωω. If a strategy τ for I I could be devised in G(y, x) so that for
any w ∈ωω,
(σ ∗w)I = (w ∗τ)I I
with the consequent
ν(y, w) < ν(x, (σ ∗w)I) = ν(x, (w ∗τ)I I) ,
then τ would be winning for I I in G(y, x) and y ⪯x. But this is simple to do:
Set τ(⟨i⟩) = σ(∅), and generally
τ(⟨s(0), . . . , s(2n + 2)⟩) = σ(⟨s(1), s(0), s(3), s(2), . . . , s(2n + 1), s(2n)⟩) .
At each turn I I temporarily ignores I’s previous move s(2n + 2), transposing
the consecutive odd and even values of the partial play until then, and responds
according to σ.
⪯is well-founded: With DC in hand, assume to the contrary that x0 ≻x1 ≻
x2 . . . are all in A, where with connectedness x ≻y iff ¬(x ⪯y). For each
i ∈ω, let σi be a winning strategy for I in G(xi, xi+1), so that for any w ∈ωω,
ν(xi, (σi ∗w)I) > ν(xi+1, w). Simultaneously produce plays ti for G(xi, xi+1) for
every i ∈ω,where I follows σi in G(xi, xi+1), and I I’s nth move in G(xi, xi+1)
(the (2n + 1)st move of the game) is I’s nth move in G(xi+1, xi+2) (the 2nth
move of that game). We then have (ti)I I = (ti+1)I for every i ∈ω, arriving at
the contradiction
ν(x0, (t0)I) > ν(x1, (t0)I I) = ν(x1, (t1)I) > ν(x2, (t1)I I) = ν(x2, (t2)I) > . . . .
It remains to verify that the norm ρ corresponding to ⪯is a ∀1Γ -norm.
Suppose that y ∈A. Then if I I has a winning strategy in G(x, y), it follows that
x ∈A. (Otherwise, for any w such that ¬B(x, w), w ∗τ would be a play that
loses for I I according to the rules.) Hence,
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y) ↔I I has a winning strategy in G(x, y)
↔∃τ∀1w(τ is a strategy for I I ∧
[B(x, w) ∧ν(x, w) ≤ν(y, (w ∗τ)I I)]) .

414
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Strategies are coded by reals and the relation [. . . ] is in ¬Γ as ν is a Γ -norm.
Consequently, the overall relation is in ∃1∀1¬Γ , or equivalently in ¬∀1∃1Γ , and
hence in ¬∀1Γ as ∃1Γ ⊆Γ .
Also,
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y) ↔I has no winning strategy in G(x, y)
↔∀σ∃1z(σ is a strategy for I →
[B(x, (σ ∗z)I) ∧ν(x, (σ ∗z)I) ≤ν(y, z)]) .
Since the relation [. . . ] is in Γ as ν is a Γ -norm, the relation is in ∀1∃1Γ and
hence in ∀1Γ as ∃1Γ ⊆Γ . The deﬁnition of ∀1Γ -norm thus satisﬁed, the proof
is complete.
⊣
This section is brought to a close with a discussion of the structural properties
thus far considered for more general classes under full AD. These results are part
of a general theory, one underpinned by a basic lemma established by William
Wadge in 1968 toward his Berkeley dissertation [83]. For A, B ⊆ωω deﬁne
A ≤W B iff
A = f −1(B) for some continuous f : ωω →ωω ,
i.e. A is a continuous pre-image of B. The following is Wadge’s Lemma:
29.15 Lemma (Wadge [72]). Assume AD. Suppose that A, B ⊆ωω. Then either
A ≤W B or else B ≤W ωω −A.
Proof. Consider the Wadge game WG(A, B) played with integer moves:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I I wins exactly when xI ∈A iff xI I ∈B. If τ is a winning strategy for I I, then
z ∈A iff (z ∗τ)I I ∈B for any z ∈ωω, and as the map sending z to (z ∗τ)I I is
clearly continuous, A ≤W B. On the other hand, if σ is a winning strategy for I,
then (σ ∗y)I /∈A iff y ∈B for any y ∈ωω, and so similarly B ≤W ωω −A.
⊣
This simple but revelatory lemma established a basic connectedness under
AD between arbitrary subsets of ωω. For boldface Γ and just with a local Γ
version of the lemma, note that any B ⊆ωω in Γ −¬Γ is complete in the sense
that for any A ⊆ωω in Γ , A ≤W B. (The alternative B ≤W ωω −A would imply
by the simple deﬁnability of continuous functions that B is in ¬Γ .)
For any Λ ⊆
k∈ω P(k(ωω)),
Λ is continuously closed iff Λ is closed under continuous pre-images
i.e. if B ∈Λ and A ≤W B, then A ∈Λ. Extending the terminology for projective
classes to arbitrary Λ ⊆
k∈ω P(k(ωω)) to get e.g. ¬Λ with the expected meaning,
Λ is nonselfdual iff ¬Λ ̸= Λ .

29. Prewellorderings
415
Next, for A, B ⊆ωω set
A ≡W B iff
A ≤W B ∧B ≤W A , and
[A]W = {C ⊆ωω | C ≡W A} .
The equivalence classes [A]W are known as the Wadge degrees. Wadge in his
dissertation [83] latterly appearing carried out a detailed study of Wadge degrees of
Borel sets assuming the corresponding determinacy, one that revealed in particular
that ≤W on these sets is well-founded. Leonard Monk found a short argument
directly relating winning strategies, and applying this with AD Martin established
a basic structure result in 1973:
29.16 Theorem (DC)(Martin and Monk). Assume AD. Then ≤W is a well-founded
relation.
Van Wesep [78a] exposed the basic role of Wadge degrees and provided a
proof of this result. It follows from the hypotheses and Wadge’s Lemma that
if each Wadge degree is coalesced with its dual class, then ≤W well-orders the
resulting classes: Each rank of ≤W is exactly one Wadge degree, or else the union
of a Wadge degree and its dual class when they are nonselfdual. Since each of the
classes Σ0
ξ, Π0
ξ, Σ1
n, and Σ1
n is readily seen by induction to be continuously closed,
their restrictions to P(ωω) are initial segments of ≤W. Determinacy provides an
ultimately ﬁne stratiﬁcation of P(ωω) via continuous reducibility.
Against this backdrop the following results established under AD articulate
the pervasiveness of the separation and reduction properties under that hypothesis:
Van Wesep [78] initially observed that if Λ is continuously closed and nonselfdual,
then at most one of Λ and ¬Λ can have the separation property. Steel [81] then
showed that for such Λ at least one of Λ and ¬Λ does have the separation property.
The arguments for 29.2 and 29.3 relate the reduction and separation properties, so
that if there is a set universal for Λ, then at most one of Λ and ¬Λ can have the
reduction property. If Λ is continuously closed and nonselfdual, then it turns out
that there is a set universal for Λ; however, Van Wesep [78a: 163] observed that
there are such Λ so that neither Λ nor ¬Λ has the reduction property. Improving a
previous result Steel [81] then showed that if Λ is continuously closed, nonselfdual
and closed under the taking of ﬁnite unions, then at least one of Λ and ¬Λ does
have the reduction property.
Further results about general classes were soon established in ZF + DC + AD:
Kechris-Solovay-Steel [81] explored the extent of the prewellordering property
and showed for example that if Λ ⊆L(R) is nonselfdual and closed under real
quantiﬁcation, then either Λ or ¬Λ has the prewellordering property. Steel [81a]
established closure properties of nonselfdual Λ based on those for ∆Λ. Becker [88]
established closure properties of various Λ under category and measure quantiﬁers.
As for ﬁner work in the ZF + DC context, Borel Wadge Determinacy is
the proposition that for every pair of Borel sets A, B ⊆ωω the Wadge game
WG(A, B) (as in the proof of Wadge’s Lemma) is determined. Assuming only

416
Chapter 6. Determinacy
this Alain Louveau [83] described the Wadge ordering of Borel sets, recasting
work from Wadge’s dissertation [83]. Then Louveau and Jean Saint-Raymond
(see their [87, 88]) showed rather unexpectedly that Borel Wadge Determinacy is
already provable in second-order arithmetic.

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
417
30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
This section continues the exploration began in §29 of the structural consequences
of determinacy hypotheses in descriptive set theory. The references and conven-
tions are as for §29, and as there,
ZF + ACω(ωω) serves as the ambient theory for this section .
But what serves to distinguish is the increased complexity, and the dispensing of
several proofs in favor of a brisk account of the main developments. At the end
is a survey of recent results, notably those about the structure of L(R).
A question left unanswered by the prewellordering theory of the previous
section is: What about uniformization? Continuing in our general setting,
Γ has the uniformization property iff
every subset of 2(ωω) in Γ can be uniformized by a set in Γ .
Thus, Π1
1 has the uniformization property. Using a coded union as in the argument
for 29.7, it is simple to see that if Γ has the uniformization property, then Γ has
the reduction property.
Martin [68: 689] conjectured that under PD the uniformization property would
hold with the same zig-zag pattern as for the reduction property.
Analyzing
the uniformization arguments of Kondˆo (13.17) and Martin-Solovay (15.14),
Moschovakis in 1971 isolated a strengthening of the prewellordering property
appropriate for propagating uniformization. Although somewhat technical, this
new property soon assumed a central role, for it abstracted a substantial aspect of
determinacy for various classes of sets of reals. The formulation proceeds through
several deﬁnitions:
For A ⊆k(ωω) and ordinal γ , a scale is a sequence ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩of norms:
A →γ satisfying the following property: Suppose that
{xi | i ∈ω} ⊆A with limi→ωxi = x ,
and there is a g: ω →γ such that
for every n ∈ω and sufﬁciently large i ∈ω, ρn(xi) = g(n) .
Then
x ∈A, and for every n ∈ω, ρn(x) ≤g(n) .
Here, limi→ω is in the usual sense of convergence with respect to the topology of
k(ωω), so that topological convergence through A together with a norm conver-
gence is to imply membership in A as well as a lower semicontinuity with respect
to the norms. Phrases like scale on A into γ will make explicit the parameters
involved.
Deﬁnability is incorporated as for the prewellordering property: First, for
n ∈ω let ˆn be the constant function: ω →{n}. Then a scale ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩on A

418
Chapter 6. Determinacy
is a Γ -scale iff there are R+ in Γ and R−in ¬Γ with R+, R−⊆2k+1(ωω) so
that for any y ∈A and n ∈ω,
x ∈A ∧ρn(x) ≤ρn(y) ↔R+(ˆn, x, y) ↔R−(ˆn, x, y) .
It is simple to check that the analogue of 29.6 holds:
30.1 Exercise. Suppose that A is in Γ and ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩is a scale on A. Then it
is a Γ -scale iff the following relations are in Γ :
S≤(ˆn, x, y)
↔
x ≤∗
ρn y
S<(ˆn, x, y)
↔
x <∗
ρn y
⊣
Finally,
Γ has the scale property iff
every set in Γ has a Γ -scale .
The following useful characterization serves to motivate the concept of scale.
In the terminology of §13, for a tree T on γ an honest leftmost branch is an f ∈[T ]
such that for any g ∈[T ], f (i) ≤g(i) for every i ∈ω. Such branches occurred in
the proof of Π1
1 Uniformization 13.17 and were emphasized in Kechris [81]; trees
T with [T ] ̸= ∅always have lexicographically least, or leftmost, branches, but
not necessarily honest leftmost branches. For a tree T on kω × γ , T has honest
leftmost branches iff for any x ∈p[T ], Tx has an honest leftmost branch.
30.2 Proposition. For any A ⊆k(ωω), there is a scale on A into γ iff there is a
tree T on kω × γ having honest leftmost branches such that A = p[T ].
Proof. Taking k = 1 for simplicity, suppose ﬁrst that ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩is a scale on A
into γ . Set
T = {⟨x|i, ⟨ρ0(x), . . . , ρi−1(x)⟩⟩| x ∈A} .
Then T is a tree on kω × γ , and A ⊆p[T ].
In fact, A = p[T ]:
Sup-
pose that for some x ∈ωω, g ∈[Tx], so that for some {xi | i ∈ω} ⊆A,
⟨xi|i, ⟨ρ0(xi), . . . , ρi−1(xi)⟩⟩= ⟨x|i, g|i⟩for every i ∈ω. Since limi→ω xi = x
and ρn(xi) = g(n) for n < i ∈ω, x ∈A by the deﬁnition of scale. It also follows
that ρn(x) ≤g(n) for every n ∈ω, and hence ⟨ρn(x) | n ∈ω⟩is an honest
leftmost branch of [Tx].
For the converse, suppose that A = p[T ] for a tree T on ω × γ such that for
each x ∈A, fx is an honest leftmost branch of Tx. For each n ∈ω deﬁne a norm
ρn: A →γ by:
ρn(x) = fx(n) .
Suppose now that {xi | i ∈ω} ⊆A with limi→ω xi = x and g: ω →γ is such
that for every n and sufﬁciently large i, ρn(xi) = g(n). Then it is simple to see
that ⟨x, g⟩∈[T ]. Hence, x ∈A and for every n, ρn(x) = fx(n) ≤g(n).
⊣

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
419
Thus, a Γ -scale on A provides a representation of A as p[T ] for some T
having honest leftmost branches and satisfying a Γ deﬁnability condition. How
that condition is related to uniformization is clariﬁed by the next two results,
implicit in the proof of Π1
1 Uniformization.
30.3 Exercise. For any a ∈ωω, Π1
1 (a) has the scale property.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is Π1
1 (a), with T a tree on kω × ω such that
A(w) ↔Tw is well-founded .
The argument for 13.14 provides a corresponding tree ˆT on kω × ω1 such that
A(w) ↔∃g ∈ωω1(w, g) ∈[ ˆT ])
where g provides an order-preserving map:
Tw →ω1 verifying the well-
foundedness of Tw. As described in the proof of 13.17, ˆT has honest leftmost
branches deﬁned when A(w) given by:
gw(n) =
 ρTw(sn)
if sn ∈Tw , and
0
otherwise .
It follows from the proof of 30.2 that ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩deﬁned by ρn(w) = gw(n) is
a scale on A. Finally, that it is a Π1
1 (a)-scale follows from the arguments for the
relations R≤and R< in the proof of 13.17: In terms of 30.1, take S≤(ˆi, y, z) to
correspond to R≤(i, x, y, z) and S<(ˆi, y, z) to R<(i, x, y, z).
⊣
30.4 Proposition (Moschovakis [71]). If ∀1Γ ⊆Γ and Γ has the scale property,
then Γ has the uniformization property.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆2(ωω) is in Γ , with ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩a Γ -scale on A into
γ say, and corresponding relations R+ ∈Γ and R−∈¬Γ . The argument for
30.2 shows how the scale leads directly to a tree T on 2ω × γ having honest
leftmost branches such that A = p[T ]. Imposing the deﬁnability condition the
uniformization can be carried out as in the proof of 13.17:
Deﬁne A0 ⊆2(ωω) by:
A0(x, y)
↔A(x, y) ∧∀1z∀0m[(y(m) = z(m)
∧∀0n < m(R−(ˆn, x, y, x, z) ∧R−(ˆn, x, z, x, y))
→(y(m) < z(m) ∨(y(m) = z(m) ∧R+( ˆm, x, y, x, z)))] .
This is in Γ by the deﬁnability of R+ and R−. Moreover, if A(x, y) and A(x, z),
then R−(ˆn, x, y, x, z) ∧R−(ˆn, x, z, x, y)) is equivalent to ρn(x, y) = ρn(x, z),
and R+( ˆm, x, y, x, z) to ρm(x, y) ≤ρm(x, z). By how the tree T was deﬁned,
it follows that for any x ∈ωω, through honest leftmost branches A0(x, y) does
indeed pick out that y of the leftmost pair ⟨y, g⟩such that ⟨x, y, g⟩∈T if there
is one, and so the proof is complete.
⊣

420
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Previous arguments lead to the existence of scales in other situations:
30.5 Exercise. Suppose that ¬Γ ⊆∃1Γ and there is a ∃1Γ -good well-ordering
of
ωω. Then ∃1Γ has the scale property. In particular, if
ωω ⊆L, or even
ωω ⊆L[U] for an inner model L[U] of measurability, then for any a ∈ωω and
2 ≤n ∈ω, Σ1
n(a) has the scale property.
Hint. Consider the proof of 29.10. The norm ρ provided is injective, and so it is
simple to see that ⟨ρ | n ∈ω⟩is a scale. Furthermore, it is a Γ -scale by 30.1.
The second assertion of the exercise follows as for 29.11 and 29.12.
⊣
Note that 13.19 establishes the uniformization properties in L more directly
than through 30.4 and 30.5.
For the next result our deﬁnitions are temporarily liberalized to allow “∆1
n(a)-
scales” with the expected meaning.
30.6 Exercise (Mansﬁeld [71], Martin-Solovay [69]). Assume that ∀a ∈ωω(a#
exists). Then for any b ∈ωω, every Π1
2 (b) set has a ∆1
3(b)-scale into uω.
Hint. Argue as for 30.3, but using 15.14, particularly the parenthetical comment
at the end of its proof.
⊣
The scale property propagates in a manner similar to the prewellordering
property, and this reinforced the zig-zag pattern under determinacy. The following
is analogous to 29.9:
30.7 Exercise (Moschovakis [71]). Suppose that ∀1Γ ⊆Γ and Γ has the scale
property. Then so does ∃1Γ . Hence, for any a ∈ωω, Σ1
2(a) has the scale property.
Hint. Suppose for simplicity that A ⊆ωω and
A(x) ↔∃1wB(x, w)
where B is in Γ , and let ⟨νn | n ∈ω⟩be a Γ -scale on B. Deﬁne new norms
through a minimization process:
For convenience, assume by 30.4 that whenever A(x), there is a unique wx
such that B(x, wx). For each n ∈ω, deﬁne ⪯n on ωω by
x ⪯n y iff
⟨ν0(x, wx), wx(0), ν1(x, wx), wx(1), . . . , νn(x, wx), wx(n)⟩
≤lex ⟨ν0(y, wy), wy(0), ν1(y, wy), wy(1), . . . , νn(y, wy), wy(n)⟩
where ≤lex is the lexicographic ordering, and let ρn be the corresponding rank
function. Then ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩is a scale on A:
Suppose that {xi | i ∈ω} ⊆A with limi→ω xi = x, and there is a g: ω →
On such that for every n and sufﬁciently large i, ρn(xi) = g(n).
Then it is
straightforward to see that limi→ω wxi = w for some w and that for some h: ω →
On read off from g, νn(xi, wxi) = h(n) for every n and sufﬁciently large i.

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
421
Consequently, B(x, w) (and so w = wx), and νn(x, w) ≤h(n) for every n. But
then, A(x) and for every n, ρn(x) ≤g(n) by deﬁnition of the ⪯n’s.
That ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩is a ∃1Γ -scale follows from 30.1 and the argument for
30.4.
⊣
Just as the First Periodicity Theorem 29.13 had complemented the process of
taking minima for the prewellordering property, Moschovakis again took suprema
to establish the Second Periodicity Theorem:
30.8 Theorem (DC)(Moschovakis [71]). Assume Det(∆Γ ). Suppose that ∃1Γ ⊆
Γ and Γ has the scale property. Then so does ∀1Γ .
⊣
The proof proceeds by elaborating Moschovakis’s argument for 29.13, in-
terlacing countably many of the games G(x, y) used there; see Moschovakis
[80: 311ff] for details.
30.9 Corollary (DC). Assume PD. Then for any a ∈ωω, the following classes
have the scale (and hence the uniformization) property:
Σ1
2(a)
Σ1
4(a)
. . .
Π1
1 (a)
Π1
3 (a)
. . .
⊣
Moschovakis [73] provided a third periodicity theorem.
Proceeding more
generally, Moschovakis [80: 325ff] gave a new explanation for the periodicity of
the prewellordering property, one that encompassed both 29.9 and First Periodicity
in a single norm propagation theorem: For a class Λ satisfying some weak closure
conditions, if Det(Λ), then the class of those A ⊆k(ωω) deﬁned by
A(w) ↔{∀0n0∃0n1∀0n2∃0n3 . . .}B(w, ⟨n0, n1, n2, n3, . . .⟩) ,
where {∀0n0∃0n1∀0n2∃n3 . . .} is the game quantiﬁer and B ⊆k+1(ωω) ∈Λ, has
the prewellordering property. The game quantiﬁer has the expected interpretation,
asserting in this instance that {x | ¬B(w, x)} is determined with a winning strategy
for I I.
Moschovakis [80: 335ff] then applied the ideas to scales to derive in ZF + DC
the Third Periodicity Theorem, which showed that when winning strategies exist,
they can be simply deﬁned. Moschovakis [73] had stated the main consequence
for the projective classes: If n ∈ω, Det(Σ1
2n), A ⊆ωω is Σ1
2n(a), and I has a
winning strategy in Gω(A), then I has a winning strategy which (construed as a
real) is ∆1
2n+1(a).
From these periodicity theorems ﬂowed results that generalized most of the
structure theory for Π1
1 and Σ1
2 to all levels of the projective hierarchy, often with
proofs applicable to the ﬁrst levels and arguably simpler than the original ones

422
Chapter 6. Determinacy
there. The elegant Spector-Gandy Theorem was so generalized by Moschovakis
[73] (indeed, Martin had conjectured the consequence of Third Periodicity stated
above for this purpose); measure and category extensively analyzed by Kechris
[73]; and the theory of largest countable sets developed by Kechris-Moschovakis
[72] and Kechris [75].
Expanding on this last, there is a Π1
1 set C1 without a perfect subset such
that any Π1
1 set without a perfect subset is a subset of C1 (see after 13.12), and a
Σ1
2 set C2 with analogous properties (see after 14.9; in fact C2 = C∅
2 = ωω ∩L).
Under local versions of 27.9, to be bereft of perfect subsets is equivalent to being
countable, and one can inquire after the existence of a largest countable Γ set, i.e.
one that contains every other countable Γ set. Results in the cited papers show
that under PD those Γ so that there is a largest countable Γ set have the same
zig-zag pattern as for the prewellordering and scale properties. The structure of
these largest countable sets is analyzed in Kechris [75], Guaspari-Harrington [76],
and Martin [83].
Moschovakis and Kechris also used scales in the early 1970’s to develop a
theory of “partially playful universes”. Moschovakis (see Kechris-Moschovakis
[78a: §5]) showed initially that for 2 ≤n ∈ω, Det(∆1
k) where k is the greatest
even integer less than n implies in ZF + DC that there is a smallest inner model
Mn of ZFC absolute for Σ1
n relations (as described before 13.15). He veriﬁed
that Mn satisﬁes GCH, has a Σ1
n+1-good well-ordering of its reals, and because of
the absoluteness, satisﬁes Det(∆1
n−1) if V does. This in particular established the
relative consistency of having ﬁnitely many zig-zag’s for the scale property and
then the property settling on the Σ side thereafter. Moschovakis and Kechris then
considered for 1 ≤n ∈ω the models L[C2n] where C2n is the largest countable
Σ1
2n set as described in the previous paragraph. These models are “higher analogs”
of L since C2 = ωω ∩L so that L[C2] = L. Moschovakis observed that L[C2n] is
also absolute for Σ1
2n relations and so satisﬁes Det(∆1
2n−1) if V does, and Kechris
showed that in fact it has a Σ1
2n-good well-ordering, and so does not satisfy
Det(Σ1
2n−1) (by 27.14 and the argument for 13.10). Martin then established in
1973 a somewhat unexpected result that complemented this:
30.10 Theorem (DC)(Martin). For n ∈ω, Det(∆1
2n) implies Det(Σ1
2n).
Kechris-Solovay [85: 196ff] provided a simple proof of this, and Kechris-
Woodin [83: 1784] drew a stronger, contextually optimal determinacy conclusion.
Becker [78] and Moschovakis [80: 8G] provide detailed accounts of the theory
of partially playful universes, with both considering models L[T2n+1] naturally
deﬁned from a scale and the latter also introducing similarly deﬁned models H2n+1.
Discussed is an informative result from Harrington-Kechris [81] on simulating
ordinal games that showed, generalizing previous work of Kechris-Martin [78],
that Det(∆1
2n+2) implies that ωω ∩L[T2n+1] = C2n+2, the largest countable Σ1
2n+2
set. Moschovakis [81] provided an analogous characterization of P(λ)∩H2n+1 for
many λ’s; for such λ Becker [80] established an analogue of the perfect set property

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
423
for X ⊆P(λ) (proved independently by Ramez Sami), veriﬁed (2λ = λ+)H2n+1
in some cases, and extended the work of Kechris [75]; and Becker-Moschovakis
[81] studied the measurable cardinals in these models.
The T2n+1 above is in fact the tree corresponding to a Π1
2n+1-scale (cf. 30.2)
on a “complete” Π1
2n+1 set. Answering a long-standing question of Moschovakis,
Becker-Kechris [84] showed that L[T2n+1] is independent of the choice of the
complete set and the scale on that set, and moreover that L[T2n+1] = H2n+1. This
is a central result that uniﬁed the theory of partially playful universes and revealed
a strong canonicity for the concept of scale.
Recent results about the extent of scales are surveyed toward the end of this
section. Before then a theory of lengths of prewellorderings is developed, one that
was buttressed by the results on scales through their tree characterization 30.2.
Projective Ordinals
Moschovakis’s groundbreaking work was also to lead to elegant structural analyses
of the projective sets, generalizing Suslin’s fundamental theorem 12.1 that a set
is ∆1
1 iff it is Borel, and Sierpi´nski’s result 13.7 that every Σ1
2 set is a union of
ℵ1 Borel sets. ℵ1 is an important parameter in these results, and for the higher
projective classes new ordinals were to play analogous roles.
In his study of
prewellorderings Moschovakis [70] had introduced the following; the length of a
well-founded relation is that ordinal which is the range of the corresponding rank
function.
δΓ = sup({ξ | ξ is the length of a prewellordering ⊆2(ωω) in ∆Γ }) .
In particular, for 1 ≤n ∈ω the projective ordinals are deﬁned by
δ1
n = δΣ1
n = δΠ1
n .
These ordinals are evidently deﬁnability analogues of Θ discussed at the end of
§28. It is consistent with ZFC that they are at most ω2, as Θ could be ω2, but
under AD things turn out to be dramatically different.
Some simple observations set the stage:
30.11 Exercise.
(a) Suppose that A is in Γ and there is a Γ -norm ρ: A →On whose range
is an ordinal. Then ρ: A →δΓ , and A = {Aξ | ξ < δΓ } for some sets Aξ all in
∆Γ .
(b) cf(δΓ ) > ω, and δ1
1 = ω1.
Hint. For (b), note that the union of countably may sets in Γ is again in Γ . It
remains to verify that δ1
1 ≤ω1:
Suppose that ⪯⊆2(ωω) is a Σ1
1 prewellordering. Set
X = {x ∈ωω | ∃1y∀0m∀0n(x(⟨⟨m, n⟩⟩) = 0 ↔(y)m ⪯(y)n)} .

424
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Then X is Σ1
1 and X ⊆WF in the terminology of 13.6, so that by it X ⊆WFα
for some α < ω1. This implies that the length of ⪯is less than ω1.
⊣
Simple conclusions can now be drawn from Second Periodicity 30.8 for the
concept of γ -Suslin from 13.13:
30.12 Exercise (DC)(Moschovakis, Kechris). Assume n ∈ω and Det(∆1
2n). Then:
(a) Every Σ1
2n+2 set is δ1
2n+1-Suslin.
(b) Every Σ1
2n+1 set is γ -Suslin for some γ < δ1
2n+1.
Hint. For (a), it sufﬁces by 13.13(d) to show that every Π1
2n+1 set is δ1
2n+1-Suslin,
but this follows from 30.9, 30.2, and 30.11(a).
For (b), it sufﬁces to show that every Π1
2n set is γ -Suslin for some γ < δ1
2n.
For such a set A, there is by 30.9 a Π1
2n+1-scale on A into δ1
2n+1. Since A is in
∆1
2n+1, each of the prewellorderings corresponding to norms in the scale is actually
in ∆1
2n+1, and so by 30.11(b) there must be a γ < δ1
2n+1 bounding all their lengths.
⊣
To generalize the classical Suslin and Sierpi´nski results, call by η-union the
process of taking the union {Aξ | ξ < η} of a (well-ordered) sequence of sets
⟨Aξ | ξ < η⟩, and say that A ⊆k(ωω) is γ -Borel iff A is in the smallest collection
of sets containing the open subsets of k(ωω) and closed under complementation
and the taking of η-unions for every η < γ . Thus, A is ω1-Borel iff A is Borel.
Moreover, for any γ not a cardinal, A is γ -Borel iff A is γ +-Borel.
The following is based on classical arguments going back to Luzin-Sierpi´nski
[18, 23]; Martin saw, particularly through (b), how to make incisive use of the
generalizations.
30.13 Exercise. Suppose that A ⊆k(ωω) is γ -Suslin. Then:
(a) A is a γ +-union of (γ + 1)-Borel sets, and so is (γ + + 1)-Borel.
(b) If cf(γ ) > ω, then A is γ +-Borel.
(c) If B ⊆k(ωω) is also γ -Suslin and A∩B = ∅, then there is a (γ +1)-Borel
set C that separates A and B, i.e. B ⊆C and A ∩C = ∅.
Hint. For (a), suppose that A = p[T ] where T is a tree on kω × γ . Proceed
as in the proof of 13.3, ﬁrst deﬁning Bs
α analogously for s ∈<ωγ and α < γ +
and showing by induction on α that they are (γ + 1)-Borel.
Then deﬁne Cα
analogously for α < γ +, and show that they too are (γ + 1)-Borel. Finally, argue
as in 13.3 but in terms of complements to show that
A = 
α<γ +(k(ωω) −Cα) .
For (b), amend the previous argument as in the second proof of 13.7 (given
after 13.14), deﬁning T ξ = T ∩(k(<ωω) × <ωξ) for ξ < γ and observing that
A = 
ξ<γ p[T ξ] as cf(γ ) > ω.

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
425
For (c), suppose that A = p[T ] and B = p[U] where T and U are trees on
kω × γ . Argue as for 13.4 with k(ωω) −A in the role of the A there, to get an
α < γ + such that
B ⊆{w ∈k(ωω) | Tw is well-founded with ∥Tw∥≤α} .
This set, B∅
α in a previous notation, is (γ + 1)-Borel and is disjoint from A.
⊣
The following is a consequence of (c) and 30.12(b).
30.14 Exercise (DC)(Moschovakis [71]).
Assume n ∈ω and Det(∆1
2n). Then
every ∆1
2n+1 set is δ1
2n+1-Borel.
Martin used his analysis of Σ1
3 sets, discussed in §15, to draw an unexpected
conclusion from AD. The following goes much of the way to that result.
30.15 Proposition (Martin). Assume ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists). If cf(|uω|) > ω, then
every Σ1
3 set is δ1
3-Borel.
Proof. Every Σ1
3 set is uω-Suslin (15.12), and so is uω+-Borel (30.13(b)). But
every cardinal ≤uω must have coﬁnality cf(u2) by 14.18(a), and so it is readily
seen that every Σ1
3 set is in fact (u2 + 1)-Borel. To complete the proof, it sufﬁces
to observe that for 1 ≤n ≤ω, un < δ1
3 (and consequently uω < δ1
3 by 30.11(b)).
To this end, note that each un is the length of a prewellordering in ∆1
3:
By 14.18(b) any γ < un is of form t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , un−1) for some Skolem
term t and a ∈ωω. Coding pairs ⟨t, a⟩by reals, the prewellordering ⪯given by
⟨t, a⟩⪯⟨t, a⟩iff
t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , un−1) ≤t⟨L[a],∈,a⟩(u1, . . . , un−1)
is then ∆1
3 by 14.12(b) relativized, being equivalent to c(a, b)# containing (a
code for) a sentence σ(c1, . . . , cn−1) depending recursively on t and t, where
c(a, b) ∈ωω recursively codes a and b.
⊣
We have now arrived at a notable juncture. Further progress cannot be made
without the Coding Lemma of Moschovakis [70], a technical assertion for appli-
cations that necessarily does not admit a simple statement. Devised in the study
of Θ before the concept of scale was isolated, the lemma incorporates deﬁnability
into antecedents of H. Friedman and Solovay and asserts loosely speaking that
bounded subsets of Θ and functions on ordinals less than Θ are deﬁnable. The
proof requires the full exercise of AD in that winning strategies are needed for
games of arbitrary complexity, and for the incorporation of deﬁnability, Kleene’s
Recursion Theorem. This intriguing convergence of recursion theory and a strong
hypothesis in set theory was perhaps novel at ﬁrst, but the lemma steadily gained
in importance through various applications so that it came to be recognized as a
cornerstone of the theory of determinacy. Moschovakis’s ﬁrst application of his
lemma was to establish the following result:

426
Chapter 6. Determinacy
30.16 Theorem (Moschovakis [70: 41]). Assume AD. Then for 1 ≤m ∈ω and
η < δ1
m, any η-union of Σ1
m subsets of k(ωω) is also a Σ1
m set.
See Moschovakis [80: 434ff] for a proof. Incidentally, in ZFC Martin’s Ax-
iom MA + ¬CH + ∃a ∈ωω(ωL[a]
1
= ω1) also implies the conclusion for m = 2
(Martin-Solovay [70: §3]). Before the emergence of scales Martin had applied
30.16 to establish the converse to 30.14 from AD; the proof is given assuming
30.16, partly to highlight an early use of Wadge’s Lemma 29.15:
30.17 Theorem (DC)(Martin). Assume n ∈ω and AD. Then every δ1
2n+1-Borel
set is ∆1
2n+1.
Proof. By the deﬁnition of δ1
2n+1-Borel set, if the class of ∆1
2n+1 subsets of k(ωω)
is closed under the taking of η-unions for every η < δ1
2n+1, then every δ1
2n+1-Borel
set is ∆1
2n+1. It thus sufﬁces to assume that the class is not so closed and derive
a contradiction.
Suppose then that η < δ1
2n+1 is least such that there is an η-union of ∆1
2n+1
subsets of k(ωω) which is not ∆1
2n+1, and let A = 
ξ<η Aξ be such an η-union.
By 30.16, A is Σ1
2n+1. We ﬁrst show that A has a Σ1
2n+1-norm:
As η < δ1
2n+1, it is simple to see that there is a ∆1
2n+1 prewellordering of ωω
with length η, say with rank function ρ. For each ξ < η, Rξ ⊆2(ωω) deﬁned by
Rξ(x, z) ↔x ∈Aρ(z) ∧ρ(z) = ξ
is seen to be ∆1
2n+1, so again by 30.16, R ⊆2(ωω) deﬁned by
R(x, z) ↔x ∈Aρ(z)
is Σ1
2n+1, being the η-union of the Rξ’s.
By the minimality of η, for any ξ < η the sets 
ζ<ξ Aζ and 
ζ≤ξ Aζ are
∆1
2n+1, and so by a similar argument S, T ⊆2(ωω) deﬁned by
S(x, z)
↔
x /∈
ζ<ρ(z)Aζ , and
T (x, z)
↔
x /∈
ζ≤ρ(z)Aζ .
are both Σ1
2n+1.
Finally, let ν be that norm on A deﬁned by:
ν(x) = least ξ such that x ∈Aξ .
Then
x ≤∗
ν y
↔
∃1z(R(x, z) ∧S(x, z))
x <∗
ν y
↔
∃1z(R(x, z) ∧T (x, z))
both are evidently Σ1
2n+1, and so ν is a Σ1
2n+1-norm.

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
427
The proof is completed with Wadge’s Lemma 29.15. For any Σ1
2n+1 set B of
reals, either A ≤W ωω −B or B ≤W A. But the ﬁrst alternative readily implies
that A is Π1
2n+1 contrary to assumption. On the other hand, the second alternative
readily implies that B has a Σ1
2n+1 norm induced by ν. Applying homeomorphisms
to encompass subsets of k(ωω), it thus follows that Σ1
2n+1 has the prewellordering
property, contradicting 29.14.
⊣
This leads to that unexpected result heralded by 30.15:
30.18 Theorem (Martin). Assume AD. Then uω = ωω.
Proof. First observe that for 1 ≤n ∈ω, ACω(ωω) together with the existence of
a surjection: ωω →P(ωn) (28.15, 28.16) readily imply that cf(ωn) > ω. Hence,
the least uncountable cardinal of coﬁnality ω is ωω.
If DC were assumed, we could now argue as follows: Since sharps exist under
AD and there are Σ1
3 sets that are not ∆1
3, 30.15 and 30.17 imply that cf(|uω|) = ω.
But then, the previous observation together with ω1 = u1 < uω ≤ωω imply that
uω = ωω.
Finally, the use of DC can be eliminated by analyzing the appeal to 29.14 in
the argument for 30.17: First, the prewellordering property for Σ1
2n+1 is derived.
Since the prewellordering property implies the reduction property and the latter
cannot hold for both Σ1
2n+1 and Π1
2n+1, a contradiction results from Π1
2n+1 having
the prewellordering property. It is only this last appeal to 29.14 that depends
on DC. However, in the 29.13 derivation of the prewellordering property for Π1
3
from Det(∆1
2), DC is only used to get the well-foundedness of the prewellordering
relation, the classical prewellordering property for Σ1
2 not being dependent on DC.
The other properties short of well-foundedness sufﬁce for the 29.7 derivation of
the reduction property for Π1
3 from the prewellordering property, and hence the
contradiction.
⊣
This is the result from which was derived the remarkable consequence of AD
that cf(ωn) = ω2 for 2 ≤n ∈ω (28.8), and indeed that un = ωn for 1 ≤n ∈ω
(28.9).
The following are two characterizations depending on 30.16 that generalize
classical results. 30.14 and 30.17 provide a generalization of Suslin’s result 12.1
to the odd levels of the projective hierarchy:
30.19 Theorem (DC)(Martin, Moschovakis). Assume AD. Then for n ∈ω and
A ⊆k(ωω),
A is ∆1
2n+1 iff A is δ1
2n+1-Borel .
Moschovakis established the following extension of Sierpi´nski’s 13.7 in the
wake of scales:
30.20 Theorem (DC)(Moschovakis [71]).
Assume AD. Then for n ∈ω and
A ⊆k(ωω),

428
Chapter 6. Determinacy
A is Σ1
2n+2 iff A is a δ1
2n+1-union of ∆1
2n+1 subsets of k(ωω) .
In particular,
A is Σ1
2 iff A is a union of ℵ1 Borel subsets of k(ωω) .
⊣
See Moschovakis [80: 435] for a proof. As for the extent of closure of Σ1
2n+2
instead of an analysis in terms of simpler sets, Kechris [78a] used this theory to
observe in ZF + DC + AD that for arbitrary η any η-union of Σ1
2n+2 subsets of
k(ωω) is Σ1
2n+2. However, this may be vacuous for large η, with the following
question unresolved:
30.21 Question (DC). Assume AD. Is there a sequence of distinct Σ1
2n+2 sets of
reals of length (δ1
2n+1)+? In particular, is there a sequence of Σ1
2 sets of reals of
length ω2?
This is a major open question in the area; partial results appear in Jackson-
Martin [83] and Jackson [90], e.g. there no such sequences that are increasing
under ⊆.
With the elegant structure results 30.19 and 30.20 recasting the projective
sets in terms of well-ordered unions of Borel sets, it remained to get an extrinsic
understanding of the possible lengths of these unions, i.e. the projective ordinals.
Recalling that
δ1
1 = ω1
is essentially a classical result (30.11(b)), the following summarizes the ﬁrst results
that situated the further projective ordinals in the transﬁnite under AD:
Moschovakis [70] had used his Coding Lemma to show under AD that the
projective ordinals are cardinals, and that for n ∈ω, δ1
2n+1 is regular and less than
δ1
2n+2. Martin showed (without AD) that δ1
2 ≤ω2 and so concluded with AD that
δ1
2 = ω2 .
Using his analysis of Σ1
3 sets, Martin showed (from just the existence of
sharps) that δ1
3 ≤ωω+1, and so concluded with AD that
δ1
3 = ωω+1 ,
the third regular uncountable cardinal under AD. Martin’s results followed from a
basic result on the lengths of well-founded relations established by him and Kunen
independently:
30.22 Theorem (DC)(Kunen; Martin). Suppose that ⪯⊆2(ωω) is a well-founded
relation which is κ-Suslin. Then the length of ⪯is less than κ+.
The following is then a simple consequence of 30.12(a):

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
429
30.23 Corollary (DC). Assume n ∈ω and Det(∆1
2n). Then δ1
2n+2 ≤(δ1
2n+1)+.
It follows under AD that
δ1
4 = ωω+2 .
Some results generalizing properties of these ﬁrst projective ordinals were
soon established.
Kechris [74] showed that for n ∈ω, δ1
2n+1 is the cardinal
successor of a cardinal of coﬁnality ω and that δ1
2n+2 < δ1
2n+3.
Generalizing
Solovay’s early measurability results, Martin showed that for each n ∈ω, δ1
2n+1 is
measurable, and then Kunen showed that δ1
2n+2 is also measurable. The following
summarizes what was known by the early 1970’s; for proofs see Kechris [78].
30.24 Theorem (DC). Assume AD. Then ⟨δ1
n | 1 ≤n ∈ω⟩is a strictly increasing
sequence of measurable cardinals such that for odd n, δ1
n is the successor of a
cardinal of coﬁnality ω and δ1
n+1 = (δ1
n)+. Moreover, δ1
1 = ω1, δ1
2 = ω2, δ1
3 =
ωω+1, and δ1
4 = ωω+2 are the ﬁrst four regular uncountable cardinals.
But which cardinal is δ1
5 under AD? This became the focal question, one that
was to remain unanswered for well over a decade. It was felt that once δ1
5 was
determined, the techniques developed might sufﬁce to determine all the projective
ordinals. Moreover, the question was related to a reﬁned, structural approach to
the Continuum Problem: Stepping back into ZFC, we have the classical δ1
1 = ω1,
and Martin’s δ1
2 ≤ω2. Under the existence of sharps, Martin’s AC result 15.13
together with 30.22 imply that
δ1
3 ≤ω3 .
(Some assumption is necessary here, for Harrington [77] established the consis-
tency of δ1
3 being arbitrarily large in ZFC.) Mindful of how the consequences
of AD were increasingly viewed as consequences of ADL(R) in L(R), one more
deduction can be made: Note ﬁrst that the notions having to do with projective
sets like the δ1
n’s are readily seen to be absolute for L(R). Assuming ADL(R) and
comparing the fourth regular uncountable cardinals in L(R) and in V ,
δ1
4 = ωL(R)
ω+2 ≤ω4 .
Here was the new approach to the Continuum Problem. With the projective
ordinals being deﬁnability analogues of Θ construed as the length of the contin-
uum, it may be that ADL(R) imposes similar upper bounds on all the projective
ordinals. A version of a 1970 conjecture of Martin’s is that the hypothesis implies
that for every 1 ≤n ∈ω, δ1
n ≤ωn. But even δ1
n < ωω could not be established.
How these issues came to be resolved in the 1980’s is discussed at the end
of this section. Although the ground was to lie fallow after 1971 for well over a
decade, the remarkable progress made by Kunen in that year should be mentioned.
Beyond what was chronicled above, he proceeded to “dualize” the tree represen-
tation of Σ1
3 sets to get one for the Π1
3 sets (as suggested at the end of §15), and
forging ahead, similarly comprehended the Π1
4 sets (see Kechris [81] and Solovay

430
Chapter 6. Determinacy
[78]). This work stood as the high point of the contextually optimal analysis of
projective sets until further progress could be made by the determination of δ1
5.
The Extent of Scales
Having developed the theory of scales and projective ordinals available in the
early 1970’s this section is brought to a close with a survey of the further work,
starting with the investigation of the extent of scales beyond the projective classes.
As Steel [83: 107] put it,
Scales are important in Descriptive Set Theory because they provide the only known
general method which will take arbitrary deﬁnitions in a given logical form of sets of
reals, and produce deﬁnitions of members of those sets.
Using a process known as inductive deﬁnability Moschovakis [78] formulated
the class IND of inductive sets as a natural extension of the projective sets. For
a succinct characterization, A ⊆k(ωω) is inductive iff there is an open set B ⊆
k+1(ωω) such that
A(w) ↔{∀1x0∃1x1∀1x2∃1x3 . . .}B(w, ⟨x0, x1, x2, x3, . . .⟩) ,
where the real game quantiﬁer {∀1x0∃1x1∀1x2∃1x3 . . .} has the expected interpre-
tation and ⟨x0, x1, x2, x3, . . .⟩is that real x such that (x)i = xi for every i ∈ω.
Applying (a general form of) his Second Periodicity Theorem 30.8 Moschovakis
showed under Det(∆IND) that the inductive sets, both in boldface and lightface
forms, have the scale property. (See Moschovakis [80: 7C].) After a lull of sev-
eral years, the extent of deﬁnable scales was considerably clariﬁed as outlined in
Martin-Moschovakis-Steel [82]:
Moschovakis [83] realized that with sufﬁcient determinacy members of the
dual class of coinductive sets have scales deﬁnable not much beyond inductivity
in complexity.
Martin [83] noted however that this complexity cannot be re-
duced in general. Building on Moschovakis’s construction Martin-Steel [83] then
demarcated the extent of scales in L(R):
With third-order arithmetic A3 the expected expansion of A2 incorporating
P(ωω) with new quantiﬁers ∀2 and ∃2 ranging over that domain, A ⊆k(ωω) is
Σ2
1 iff
A(w) ↔A3 |= ∃2Xϕ[w] ,
where ϕ is a formula with only real and number quantiﬁers. The dual class Π2
1
is deﬁned analogously with ∀2 in place of ∃2, and the incorporation of parameters
a ∈ωω leads to the boldface versions Σ2
1 and Π2
1. Correlating with the inductive
sets Martin-Steel [83] ﬁrst showed that A is (Σ2
1)L(R) (i.e. ∃2 is restricted to P(ωω)∩
L(R)) iff there is an Π1
1 set B ⊆k+1(ωω) such that
A(w) ↔{∀1x0∃1x1∀1x2∃1x3 . . .}B(w, ⟨x0, x1, x2, x3, . . .⟩) .

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
431
They then established: Assume AD and V = L(R). Then Σ2
1 has the scale prop-
erty. This is indeed a demarcation, by a 1976 observation of Kechris and Solovay
based on an early counterexample:
30.25 Exercise (Kechris and Solovay). Suppose that V = L(R), and there is
no well-ordering of the reals. Then there is a Π2
1 subset of 2(ωω) that cannot be
uniformized.
Hint. Verify that the set A of 27.16 is a counterexample by checking that ⌈y ∈
OD(x)⌉is Σ2
1: First use a L¨owenheim-Skolem argument to show that deﬁnability
using parameters from On∪{x} in L(R) is equivalent to such deﬁnability in Lγ (R)
for some γ < Θ. (This recalls the proof of the Reﬂection Principle for ZF in
its role for formalizing the concept of ordinal deﬁnability.
Remembering that
cf(Θ) > ω in L(R), an argument in ω stages minimizing according to a deﬁnable
surjection: On× ωω →L(R) is helpful to get γ < Θ.) Then note that any Lγ (R)
for γ < Θ can be coded by a set of reals.
⊣
In further work Martin [83a] showed that assuming corresponding versions
of ADR, if a reasonably closed class Λ has the scale property, then so does the
class consisting of sets deﬁned via the real game quantiﬁer preceding Λ relations,
and moreover via analogous quantiﬁers corresponding to games of any countable
length. A high plateau was reached by Steel [83] who developed a “ﬁne structure”
theory for L(R) and considerably reﬁned the previous results.
Analyzing the
minimal complexity of scales in L(R), Steel essentially extended the structure
theory for the projective sets provided by determinacy to all sets of reals in L(R).
In the next advance upward, Woodin proved in the mid-1980’s that ADR
implies that every set of reals has a scale. This implies by the previous work of
Martin that there are nonselfdual classes arbitrarily high in the Wadge ordering ≤W
with the scale property and reasonable closure properties. Woodin also established,
relative to large cardinals, the consistency of the existence of an inner model
containing every real and satisfying ADR – but here we are treading into matters
taken up in §32.
The Structure of L(R)
With L(R) seen from the beginning as the natural inner model for determinacy,
not only were the consequences of AD increasingly regarded as what holds in
L(R) assuming ADL(R), but the structure of the inner model came to be studied
for its own sake and as an avenue to relative consistency results. In contrast to the
investigation of L which can be regarded as the extended analysis of a minimal
principle, this study of L(R) sought clariﬁcation of a maximal principle in sharp
focus. The sophisticated Steel [83] analysis of scales in L(R) was the high point
of the internal analysis, and was to serve as a basis for the wide-ranging assertions
about AD in L(R) that resolved various issues raised in the 1970’s. Kechris [85]
provides a summarizing account. As already with the extent of scales, the short

432
Chapter 6. Determinacy
discussion which follows can convey little of the depth and complexity of the
results being surveyed.
As described in §28 determinacy has a strong effect on the structure of the
transﬁnite cardinals up to the natural bound Θ. Taking up again the discussion of
the inﬁnite exponent partition relations,
κ has the strong partition property iff ∀α < κ(κ −→(κ)κ
α) .
By Martin’s 28.13, AD implies that ω1 has the strong partition property. For some
time there was no other example known, the focal question of whether δ1
3 has the
strong partition property remaining open. Then in late 1977 Kechris bypassed the
projective ordinals, and taking features of Martin’s proof and using properties of
the class IND of inductive sets, established that under AD + DC there is a cardinal
κ with the strong partition property such that {λ < κ | λ has the strong partition
property } is stationary in κ. The argument was soon extended to establish the
following:
30.26 Theorem (DC)(Kechris-Kleinberg-Moschovakis-Woodin [81]).
Assume
AD. Then Θ is a limit of cardinals having the strong partition property.
These cardinals with the strong partition property are analogous to ω1 in its
role as δ1
1 in the proof of Martin’s 28.12, and a uniform version of the Moschovakis
Coding Lemma was used to code functions: κ →κ by reals, replacing Martin’s
coding via sharps. The possibility of a converse in L(R) was raised, and this was
established by Kechris and Woodin in 1982:
30.27 Theorem (DC)(Kechris-Woodin [83]). Assume V = L(R). Then the fol-
lowing are equivalent:
(a) AD.
(b) Θ is a limit of cardinals having the strong partition property.
This illuminating characterization reduced AD to a purely combinatorial as-
sertion about the transﬁnite cardinals, and vindicated the early interest in inﬁnite
exponent partition properties. Kechris-Kleinberg-Moschovakis-Woodin [81] had
already shown that if a set A of reals is λ-Suslin (i.e. A = p[T ] for some tree T on
ω×λ) and there is a κ > λ with the strong partition property, then A is determined.
Loosely speaking, the tree representation was used as in the §15 analysis of Σ1
3
sets, and the strong partition property applied to get an invariance for ordering
functions (cf. the end of §15). With this, they had achieved a weak version of
30.27. What Kechris-Woodin [83] established is that in L(R), if every set of reals
λ-Suslin for some λ is determined, then AD. Proceeding level by level through
the ﬁne structure hierarchy of L(R), the argument used the Steel [83] analysis of
scales, in their role of witnessing the Suslin property, and applied a technique of
Martin [83] for handling quantiﬁer alternations over R using his ﬁlter over Turing
degrees. Woodin later conﬁrmed that (b) cannot imply (a) in ZF + DC alone, by
showing that (b) is consistent with the existence of an ultraﬁlter over ω.

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
433
Another characterization established around the same time addressed the in-
volvement of Turing degrees in determinacy. Consider Turing Determinacy,
Det({X | X ⊆DT}) ,
i.e. the hypothesis that every set of reals closed under Turing equivalence ≡T is
determined. Turing Determinacy can replace full AD in Martin’s result 28.4 that
his ﬁlter over Turing degrees is ultra and at various junctures (cf. the proofs of
First Periodicity 29.13), and the question of its strength was raised early on. In the
early 1980’s Woodin pushed the techniques that had become available to establish
the following:
30.28 Theorem (DC)(Woodin).
Assume V = L(R).
Then the following are
equivalent:
(a) AD.
(b) Turing Determinacy.
A decade later Woodin was to establish an equivalence in L(R) for AD
merely in terms of some of its structural consequences for sets of reals (32.22).
A more basic issue had to do with DC. With much of the consequences of
AD appealing to DC, how substantive a role does DC play was a question often
raised during the 1970’s. Does Con(ZF + AD) imply Con(ZF + AD + DC)? As
mentioned after 28.19, Solovay [78a] established that Con(ZF + ADR) implies
Con(ZF + ADR + ¬DC), and hence the independence of DC from AD relative to
ADR. It was Kechris who eventually settled the consistency question:
30.29 Theorem (Kechris [84]). Assume AD and V = L(R). Then DC.
Thus the role of L(R) as an inner model for ZF + AD became more fully
analogous to the role of L for ZF. Just as ZF + V = L procures AC, ZF + AD
+ V = L(R) procures DC, and so indeed Con(ZF + AD) implies Con(ZF + AD
+ DC) by absoluteness. The proof also used the Steel [83] analysis of scales, in
their role of securing uniformization as a means to establish DC.
Woodin was able to replace ADR by AD in Solovay’s DC independence
result:
30.30 Theorem (Woodin – Kechris [84: §3]). Assume AD and V = L(R). Then
in a forcing extension there is an inner model satisfying AD + ¬ACω.
Thus, Con(ZF + AD) implies Con(ZF + AD + ¬DC) and the independence
of DC relative to AD.
Woodin’s counterexample to ACω occurs high in the cumulative hierarchy
however, and toward the formulation of a reﬁned question consider DC restricted
to relations on reals:

434
Chapter 6. Determinacy
∀R(R ⊆2(ωω)
∧
∀1x∃1y(⟨x, y⟩∈R)
(DC(ωω))
→∃f ∈ω(ωω)∀0n(⟨f (n), f (n + 1)⟩∈R)) .
30.31 Question (Woodin). Does AD imply DC(ωω)?
An independence result here would seem to require inner models of AD
qualitatively different from the onces concocted thus far.
Yet another issue clariﬁed by L(R) is the size of Θ. Recall from §28 that
under AD, there are cardinals κ that are κ-weakly Mahlo below Θ, and under AD
+ V = L(R), Θ itself is weakly inaccessible (28.18 and before, and 28.19).
30.32 Theorem (DC)(Kechris and Woodin – Kechris [85]).
Assume AD and
V = L(R). Then:
(a) Θ is Θ-weakly Mahlo.
(b) Θ is not weakly compact, i.e. there is a Θ-tree without a Θ-branch.
(c) Θ is the supremum of the measurable cardinals.
(a) established that Θ is hierarchically large in L(R), but (b) imposed a
limitation. (c) provided a purely combinatorial description of Θ, and was a con-
sequence of the arguments toward (a); a question related to it is stated at the end
of the section.
The Determination of the Projective Ordinals
The structural analysis under AD of the projective sets was essentially completed
in the mid-1980’s with the calibration of the projective ordinals in the sequences
of cardinals. This was a veritable tour de force of technical virtuosity by Steve
Jackson, a student of Martin. More in the fullness of time rather than by the weight
of new techniques, Jackson determined δ1
5 in his 1983 U.C.L.A. dissertation. The
starting point was some observations of Martin on normal ultraﬁlters over δ1
3
leading to a putative lower bound for δ1
5. By 1985 Jackson had carried out the
determination of all the projective ordinals with the large part of the upper bound
calculations provided in his formidable [88]. 30.24 summarizes what had been
known before with δ1
2n+2 = (δ1
2n+1)+ reducing the analysis to the δ1
m’s for odd
m; deﬁne ordinals E(n) for n ∈ω by recursion as follows: E(0) = 1, and
E(n + 1) = ωE(n) via ordinal exponentiation.
30.33 Theorem (DC)(Jackson [88]). Assume AD. Then for n ∈ω,
δ1
2n+3 = ωE(2n+1)+1
and δ1
2n+3 has the strong partition property.
The δ1
m’s for odd m are thus the successors of cardinals indexed by a cor-
responding tower of ω’s, starting with Martin’s δ1
3 = ωω+1 (cf. before 30.22).

30. Scales, Projective Ordinals, and L(R)
435
That they have the strong partition property is both an outgrowth and a crucial
component of the proof, which proceeds by induction. Beyond the Martin result
28.13 that δ1
1 has the strong partition property, even that δ1
3 has the strong parti-
tion property had not been known. The inductive scheme can be elaborated at the
basis:
As motivated through methodological considerations at the end of §15, Kunen
had applied Martin’s strong partition property for δ1
1 to get ultraﬁlters over ωω (=
uω) that provide the necessary homogeneity properties for the contextually optimal
tree representation of Π1
3 sets. Forging ahead, Kunen carried out a detailed analysis
of these ultraﬁlters and their ultrapowers (see Solovay [78]).
This led to the
property δ1
3 −→(δ1
3)α
2 for every α < δ1
3, which in turn provided the ultraﬁlters
over δ1
3 (cf. 28.10) necessary for the optimal tree representation of Π1
4 sets.
δ1
5 is characterizable in terms of a certain supremum of ultrapowers via those
ultraﬁlters over δ1
3 (see Kechris [81: 62]), and Martin had noted that only certain
canonical functions need be considered in the calculation of this supremum. Ap-
plying this Jackson was able to complete the calculation by an intricate analysis
that further reduced the supremum to one of ultrapowers via certain canonical ul-
traﬁlters. In the process, he was able to lift the Kunen situation to the next level:
the strong partition property for δ1
3 (not just the “weak” one mentioned above) and
a detailed analysis of the ultraﬁlters over δ1
3 and their ultrapowers that leads to the
optimal tree representation of Π1
5 sets. With sufﬁcient inductive hypotheses thus
in place Jackson completed the calculation of all the projective ordinals, getting
the optimal tree representations for all the projective sets.
The Jackson analysis conﬁrmed that under AD the regular cardinals strictly
between δ1
2n+1 and δ1
2n+3 are exactly the ultrapowers of δ1
2n+1 via the normal ul-
traﬁlters over δ1
2n+1 derived from its strong partition property. Moreover, these
ultrapowers are distinct, and by 28.11 there are just as many as there are regular
inﬁnite cardinals below δ1
2n+1. With this in mind, deﬁne F: ω →ω by: F(0) = 1
and F(n +1) = 2F(n)+1. Then under AD there are exactly F(n) regular inﬁnite
cardinals below δ1
2n+1 for every n ∈ω:
This is clear for n = 0, and for n = 1, with the F(1) = 3 cardinals below
δ1
3 = ωω+1 being ω, ω1, and ω2 . Assuming inductively that there are F(n) regular
inﬁnite cardinals below δ1
2n+1, it follows that there are F(n) regular cardinals
strictly between δ1
2n+1 and δ1
2n+3, and so counting the regular inﬁnite cardinals
below δ1
2n+1 and δ1
2n+1 itself, there are exactly 2F(n) + 1 = F(n + 1) regular
cardinals below δ1
2n+3.
The Jackson analysis thus established in ZFC that under ADL(R) the projective
ordinals are all less than ωω. In fact, noting once again that the δ1
m’s are absolute
for L(R) and comparing regular cardinals there and in V , the list of inequalities
after 30.24 can be continued assuming ADL(R) with the following for every n ∈ω:
δ1
2n+1 ≤ωF(n) and δ1
2n+2 ≤ωF(n)+1 .
In particular, the projective sets are comprehended in ZFC + ADL(R) through the
characterizations 30.19 and 30.20 as unions of λ Borel sets with the λ’s concretely

436
Chapter 6. Determinacy
inset among the ωn’s. This is a remarkable advance, mediated by determinacy,
beyond the early results of Suslin and Sierpi´nski.
Taking stock however, the following version of an early conjecture of Martin
remains unresolved:
30.34 Question (ZFC). Does ADL(R) imply that δ1
n ≤ωn for every 1 ≤n ∈ω?
Jackson’s analysis raised the possibility of a similarly detailed analysis of
L(R) right up to Θ, with the ﬁrst excursions made by him in [91, 92]. A question
thought to be along these lines was answered in 1993 by Steel and Woodin, in the
wake of important advances made by Steel in inner model theory. Moschovakis
and Kechris had shown that under ZF + ADL(R), every regular (in V ) uncount-
able cardinal below Θ L(R) is measurable in L(R). Jackson’s work afﬁrmed that
under AD + DC, every regular uncountable cardinal below sup ({δ1
n | n ∈ω}) is
measurable.
30.35 Theorem (ZFC) (Steel and Woodin). Assume AD + V = L(R). Then every
regular uncountable cardinal below Θ is measurable.
Taken together, the various results through the early 1980’s on internal ques-
tions about determinacy and the structure of L(R) provide a cumulative impression
of systematic progress using more and more sophisticated methods of descriptive
set theory. The consistency of AD from the vantage point of ZFC seemed ever
remote however, but surprisingly a denouement in this direction was to soon take
place, and this notably through new initiatives involving supercompact cardinals
as described in §32.

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
437
31. Det(α-Π1
1)
The consequences of determinacy having been explored in the previous sections,
this one begins the ﬁnal ascent to the consistency of determinacy hypotheses.
Martin forged the initiative in this direction, and starting afresh with his ground-
breaking work in 1967 his results through the 1970’s are described. They provided
the ﬁrst solid evidence towards Solovay’s general conjecture that large cardinals
would provide the consistency strength to establish determinacy. The next section
describes the deﬁnitive work of Martin, Steel, and Woodin in this direction.
Returning to safe haven,
ZFC serves as the ambient theory for this and the next sections .
Proofs are increasingly dispensed with, as in any case they are precluded by their
range and sophistication, in favor of providing a driving account of the progression
of ideas.
In 1967, Martin struck on the fertile idea of using ω1-complete ultraﬁlters,
viewed as two-valued measures, to “integrate” over possibilities to get structural
results about the projective sets. For this purpose he had introduced his ﬁlter
over Turing degrees (cf. the ﬁrst proof of 29.13), and this had led to his proof
of Solovay’s result from AD that ω1 is measurable (cf. 28.4). The integration
idea, mediated by the sharps, ﬁltered into the Martin-Solovay [69] work on Σ1
3
sets (§15), and was to plainly appear in the next result. That Det(Π1
1) cannot
be established in ZFC was clear (27.13); Martin established that it does follow
from the existence of a measurable cardinal. Obliquely complementing Solovay’s
deduction of measurability from AD Martin’s result opened the door to the pos-
sibility of getting amounts of determinacy from large cardinals, a possibility that
was to be pursued with remarkable and unexpected consequences in the years to
come.
31.1 Theorem (Martin [70]). Suppose that there is a measurable cardinal. Then
Det(Π1
1) holds.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆ωω is Π1
1, so that there is a tree T on ω × ω such that
for any x ∈ωω,
A(x) ↔Tx is well-founded .
That A is determined will be argued in terms of well-orderings, and to this end,
the development toward the beginning of §15 is adapted.
First, it can be assumed that ⟨∅, ∅⟩∈T . With the ﬁxed recursive enumeration
⟨si | i ∈ω⟩of <ωω such that |si| ≤i, for any x ∈ωω let <x be that strict linear
ordering of ω deﬁned by:
i <x j ↔si /∈Tx ∧sj /∈Tx ∧i < j ; else
si /∈Tx ∧sj ∈Tx ; else
si ∈Tx ∧sj ∈Tx ∧si <KB sj

438
Chapter 6. Determinacy
where <KB is the Kleene-Brouwer ordering. Then for any x ∈ωω,
A(x)
↔<x is a well-ordering .
Next, for s ∈<ωω, setting
T⟨s⟩= {w | ∃m < |s|(⟨s|m, w⟩∈T )}
let
<s = that strict linear ordering of |s| = {i | i < |s|}
deﬁned like <x but with Tx replaced by T⟨s⟩.
|si| ≤i implies that for s ⊆t both in <ωω, <s ⊆<t as relations, and for x ∈ωω,
<x = 
m∈ω <x|m .
Finally, suppose that κ is a measurable cardinal, and deﬁne a tree T ∗on
ω × κ by
T ∗= {⟨s, u⟩| ∀i, j < |s|(u(i) < u( j) ↔i <s j)} .
Then for any x ∈ωω, since <x is a well-ordering exactly when there is an order-
preserving injection of ⟨ω, <x⟩into ⟨κ, <⟩,
A(x)
↔
∃g ∈ωκ(⟨x, g⟩∈[T ∗]) .
Proceeding to the main argument, to establish that Gω(A) is determined
consider an auxiliary game G∗:
I
:
⟨x(0), g(0)⟩
⟨x(2), g(1)⟩
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I and I I both play integers x(i) to form a real x, but in addition, I plays ordinals
g(i) < κ to form a function g: ω →κ. I wins if ⟨x, g⟩∈[T ∗], so that g is an
order-preserving injection of ⟨ω, <x⟩into ⟨κ, <⟩and x ∈A, and otherwise I I
wins.
If I loses in G∗, then he has lost irrevocably at a ﬁnite stage: He will have
made a move ⟨x(2i), g(i)⟩for some i > 0 such that the choice g(i) does not
preserve the order of <x, and this can already be seen in terms of the initial
segment <x|2i (as |si| ≤i < 2i). Hence, by 27.1 (cf. the comments following)
G∗is determined. If it is I who has a winning strategy in this game, then he has
a winning strategy in Gω(A): he simply keeps the g(i)’s of his moves to himself
and plays only the x(2i)’s. If it is I I who has a winning strategy in G∗, it remains
to invoke the measurability of κ to show that he has a winning strategy in Gω(A):
We ﬁrst adapt the development after 15.4: Note that T ∗has the following
homogeneity property: For any s ∈<ωω, set T ∗
s = {u | ⟨s, u⟩∈T ∗}. Then since
<s is a strict linear ordering, ran(u) ∈[κ]|s| for any u such that u ∈T ∗
s . Moreover,
for any w ∈[κ]|s| there is a unique u ∈T ∗
s such that ran(u) = w.
With this in mind, let U be a normal ultraﬁlter over κ and for s ∈<ωω deﬁne
Us by:
X ∈Us iff
X ⊆T ∗
s
∧∃H ∈U(|H||s| ⊆ran“X) .

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
439
Then for s ̸= ∅, by the above described homogeneity and Rowbottom’s 7.17, Us
is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over T ∗
s .
Suppose now that τ is a winning strategy for I I in G∗. For n ∈ω, t ∈2n+1ω,
and u ∈n+1κ, let τ(t, u) denote the strategic response according to τ to
⟨⟨t(0), u(0)⟩, t(1), . . . , ⟨t(2n), u(n)⟩⟩.
Then for such t and k ∈ω, set
Zt,k = {u ∈Tt|(n+1) | τ(t, u) = k} .
Next, deﬁne a strategy τ0: 
n∈ω
2n+1ω →ω by:
τ0(t) = k iff
Zt,k ∈Ut|(n+1) .
This is well-deﬁned by the ω1-completeness of the Us’s. The proof is completed
by showing that τ0 is a winning strategy for I I in Gω(A):
Assume to the contrary that x is a play according to τ0, yet x ∈A. By the
ω1-completeness of U there is an H0 ∈U such that for every n ∈ω,
[H0]n+1 ⊆Zx|(2n+1),τ0(s|(2n+1)) .
Since H0 is uncountable, there is an order-preserving injection g: ⟨ω, <x⟩→
⟨H0, <⟩. But then, ⟨x, g⟩is in T ∗and corresponds to a play of G∗in which I I
plays according to τ and still loses. Contradiction!
⊣
As in the analysis of Σ1
3 sets (§15) the hypothesis can be weakened to the existence
of sharps:
31.2 Theorem (Martin). Suppose that a ∈ωω and a# exists. Then Det(Π1
1(a)).
Proof. The previous argument is reﬁned. Construing the A as Π1
1 (a), it can be
assumed that the corresponding tree T is in L[a] by 13.1. Now deﬁne the tree
T ∗from T as before but with (the real) ω1 in place of the measurable κ. T ∗and
so (the payoff set of) the corresponding game G∗are both in L[a], and arguing
as before, the game is determined in L[a].
Suppose ﬁrst that in L[a], I has a winning strategy σ in G∗. Then in V , σ is
also a winning strategy for I, since if he moves according to σ and still loses, this
would have happened at a ﬁnite stage, and so also in L[a]. It follows as before
that I has winning strategy in Gω(A).
Suppose on the other hand that in L[a], I I has a winning strategy τ in G∗.
Let Pτ consist of those ﬁnite partial plays according to τ that are not yet secured
for I I, i.e. those that are extendible to a play that is a win for I. As I loses at a
ﬁnite stage when he loses at all, it follows that in L[a], ⟨Pτ, ⊃⟩is well-founded.
But then, by absoluteness of well-foundedness (0.3), ⟨Pτ, ⊃⟩is well-founded in
V . τ is consequently a winning strategy for I I in the sense of V . It remains to
derive a winning strategy for I I in Gω(A):

440
Chapter 6. Determinacy
With Ia the closed unbounded class of ordinal indiscernibles for L[a] given
by a#, let γ < ω1 be sufﬁciently large so that in some Skolem term rendering
of τ, no indiscernible in C = Ia ∩(ω1 −γ ) appears.
Now deﬁne a strategy
τ0: 
n∈ω
2n+1ω →ω by:
τ0(t) = k iff
∃u ∈n+1C(⟨t|(n + 1), u⟩∈T ∗∧τ(t, u) = k) ,
where τ(t, u) is deﬁned as before; τ0 is well-deﬁned by indiscernibility. Again,
τ0 is a winning strategy for I I in Gω(A):
Assume to the contrary that x is a play according to τ0 yet x ∈A. Since C
is uncountable, there is an order-preserving injection g: ⟨ω, <x⟩→⟨C, <⟩. But
then, by indiscernibility ⟨x, g⟩corresponds to a play of G∗in which I I played
according to τ yet lost. Contradiction!
⊣
Note that this result together with 27.14 provides a new proof of the version
of Solovay’s result 14.3 that if ∀a ∈ωω(a# exists), then the Σ1
2 sets have the
regularity properties.
Martin viewed his result as a plausibility argument in two complementary
directions. Looking upward he wrote prophetically ([70: 287]): “We believe that
larger cardinals will yield a generalization of our proof to all projective sets.” This
accorded with Solovay’s hopes for the relative consistency of ADL(R), and was to
be borne out by developments in the 1980’s. In the other direction, he saw telling
evidence for a theorem of ZFC:
Martin [70] actually drew his conclusion from the existence of a cardinal κ
satisfying κ −→(ω1)<ω
2 . Owing to the boundedness of order-preserving maps
(cf. 13.4), he observed that if there is a cardinal κ satisfying ∀α < ω1(κ −→
(α)<ω
2 ) then Borel Determinacy holds. He then noted that the partition property
relativizes to L (9.15), and although Det(Π1
1) fails in L, Borel Determinacy also
relativizes: The assertion that Gω(A) is determined,
∃σ∀y(σ ∗y ∈A) ∨∃τ∀z(z ∗τ /∈A) ,
is Σ1
2(a) when A is ∆1
1(a), and hence absolute for L when a ∈L. Note that Borel
Determinacy is itself a Π1
3 assertion, as “∀Borel A” can be rendered through real
codes for Borel sets (cf. before 11.8) as a real quantiﬁer ∀1.
The best outright determinacy result at the time was the Davis [64] result
Det(Σ0
3), and its proof could be readily carried out in second-order arithmetic.
The apparent impasse in stalking of Borel Determinacy with elementary methods
was soon to be explicated by a remarkable metamathematical analysis: Harvey
Friedman was an early popularizer of the investigation of determinacy hypotheses
(cf. 28.16). Formulating games where the players must code models of fragments
of set theory, H. Friedman [71] showed in 1968 that establishing Borel Determi-
nacy would require the existence of the cumulative hierarchy through Vω1, and so
in particular cannot be carried out in Zermelo set theory, i.e. ZF −Replacement.
This revealed a remarkable state of affairs, since Borel Determinacy is a Π1
3 as-

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
441
sertion about sets of reals yet would have to be proved using uncountably many
iterations of the power set operation. Friedman’s arguments lead to a level-by-
level analysis showing that determinacy at each new level of the Borel hierarchy
would require one more iteration of the power set operation. He himself pointed
out that Det(Σ0
5) cannot be established in second-order arithmetic.
The stakes having been raised, the progress was initially guided by Martin’s
Det(Π1
1) proof cast in terms of indiscernibles. Davis [64] had shown that deter-
minacy is preserved by the taking of countable unions if the sets involved had
sufﬁciently simple representations, and mixing this with Martin’s proof, Baum-
gartner had found an alternate proof of Det(Σ0
3). Martin then saw that if there is
a weakly compact cardinal, then there is such a simple representation of Π0
3 sets
in terms of certain indiscernibles provided, and so derived Det(Σ0
4). Soon after-
wards in 1971 Paris [72] procured the requisite indiscernibles in ZFC, establishing
Det(Σ0
4) outright.
There matters stood for several years, and in retrospect the initiative based
on indiscernibles impeded progress toward Borel Determinacy. Although the ap-
proach of Martin [70] was to be seminal for the investigation of higher determinacy
hypotheses, the large cardinals idea had to be cast aside for another. Blass [75]
and independently Mycielski established the interesting result that ADR is equiv-
alent to the determinacy of all games of length ω2 with integer moves, speciﬁed
in terms of payoff sets included in ω2ω. The proof featured moves of an auxil-
iary game conveying information corresponding to strategies for the given game.
Fashioning and elaborating this idea for the Borel sets Martin in 1974 established
Borel Determinacy:
Theorem 31.3 (Martin [75]). Det(∆1
1).
Loosely speaking, the proof proceeded by associating to each Borel set A
corresponding sets X and A∗⊆ωX such that A∗is open and a player has a
winning strategy in Gω(A) exactly when he has one in G X(A∗).
Consistent
with the Friedman anticipation, if A is Σ0
α, then X has roughly the cardinality
of Vω+α.
Of later emendations, the proof was reorganized in Martin [85] to
subordinate various features to a more directly inductive argument, and extended
in Martin [90] to games of form G X(A) for uncountable X and sets A “∆1
1”
in this context. The argument was further streamlined in the book Martin [∞],
which moreover exposed Martin’s analysis of optimal hypotheses: He established
in ZFC −Power Set that if α < ω1 and Vω+α exists, then Det(∆0
1+α+3), and
reﬁning Friedman’s arguments, that the hypotheses do not sufﬁce to establish
Det(Σ0
1+α+3).
The establishment of Borel Determinacy was a signiﬁcant advance for set
theory in that it both resolved an open problem whose stakes had been raised by
metamathematical anticipations, and secured the Borel world for the consequences
of determinacy. Among a variety of applications, it now followed from the argu-
ment for Martin’s 28.4 that any Borel subset B of ωω either includes or is disjoint

442
Chapter 6. Determinacy
from a Turing cone, i.e. there is a ∈ωω such that {b ∈ωω | a ≤T b} ⊆B or
else {b ∈ωω | a ≤T b} ∩B = ∅. One interesting turn of events is that while
Wadge in his studies of Wadge degrees of Borel sets (recast in Louveau [83]) had
assumed Borel Determinacy in the late 1960’s in order to avail himself of Borel
Wadge Determinacy – the proposition that for every pair of Borel sets A, B ⊆ωω
the Wadge game WG(A, B) (from the proof of Wadge’s Lemma 29.15) is deter-
mined – Louveau-Saint-Raymond [87, 88] later established that this proposition is
already provable in second-order arithmetic. In another reverberating development
H. Friedman [81] considerably expanded his metamathematical work of [71], for-
mulating in particular a simple “Borel diagonalization” proposition [81: 235] which
follows from Borel Determinacy and also requires uncountably many iterations of
the power set operation but is moreover Π1
2 .
It is the direction upward from Martin [70] to stronger hypotheses and con-
clusions that holds the sustained interest. The early efforts at getting more de-
terminacy were informed by results showing that determinacy hypotheses beyond
Det(Π1
1) require the consistency of measurability and more:
The ﬁrst break was made, once again, by Solovay. Soon after he showed that
full AD implies the measurability of ω1 and ω2, he established that Det(Π1
3) implies
the existence of a transitive ∈-model of ZFC with a measurable cardinal. After
further results along these lines by H. Friedman [71a: §3] and Martin, Solovay
then established that Det(∆1
2) implies the existence of transitive ∈-models of ZFC
with many measurable cardinals. Subsequently stronger conclusions were derived
by Martin and others. These results were based on a way that Solovay had found
for exploiting local versions of Martin’s result 28.4 about Turing degrees.
Returning the compliment Martin in the meanwhile had gone back to Solo-
vay’s original method for establishing the measurability of ω1 from AD. By that
means, he was eventually to derive a series of results that exactly correlated the
existence of many measurable cardinals with amounts of determinacy, based on
the difference hierarchy:
For working with classes closed under the taking of countable intersections, if
Λ is such a class and α < ω1, the class α-Λ is deﬁned by stipulating membership
for A ⊆k(ωω) as follows: A is in α-Λ iff there is a sequence ⟨Aξ | ξ < α⟩of
subsets of k(ωω) in Λ such that Aζ ⊇Aξ for ζ ≤ξ < α and:
w ∈A iff the least ξ such that either w /∈Aξ or ξ = α is odd .
(As usual, an ordinal is odd iff it is of the form δ +2n +1 for some limit ordinal δ
and n ∈ω.) A can be viewed as a union of alternate concentric rings of a ⊇-chain
of sets in Λ: A is in 1-Λ iff it is in Λ; A is in 2-Λ iff A = A0 −A1 for some
sets Ai in Λ; A is in 3-Λ iff A = (A0 −A1) ∪A2 for some sets Ai in Λ; A is
in 4-Λ iff A = (A0 −A1) ∪(A2 −A3) for some sets Ai in Λ; and so forth. If
α ≤β < ω1, then α-Λ ⊆β-Λ. Set
Diff(Λ) = 
α<ω1α-Λ .
This cumulative hierarchy is the difference hierarchy for Λ.

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
443
Hausdorff [14: 460ff] formulated the difference hierarchy for closed sets and
showed that
Diff(Π0
1) = ∆0
2 ,
using this “resolvability” to establish properties of this class.
Kuratowski
[58: §37III] generalized this work through the Borel hierarchy, showing that for
each ξ < ω1,
Diff(Π0
ξ) = ∆0
ξ+1 .
(The work of Louveau-Saint Raymond [87, 88] on Borel Wadge Determinacy is
couched in these terms. An analogous characterization of ∆0
δ for limit δ is avail-
able.) Martin’s analysis was based on the α-Π1
1 sets; through its discussion it
should be kept in mind that in contrast to the Kuratowski result Diff(Π1
1) falls far
short of ∆1
2.
The sensible formulation of lightface versions is not direct, as the ⊇-sequence
should be appropriately deﬁnable. For (lightface) α-Π1
1, ﬁrst assume that α is
recursive, i.e. there is a recursive well-ordering E ⊆2(ωω) with ordertype α,
and temporarily let ∥m∥for m ∈ω denote the ordertype of the predecessors of
m according to E.
Then for A ⊆k(ωω), A is α-Π1
1 iff there is a sequence
⟨Aξ | ξ < α⟩of subsets of k(ωω) such that {⟨m, w⟩| w ∈A∥m∥} is Π1
1 ; Aζ ⊇Aξ
for ζ ≤ξ < α; and
w ∈A iff the least ξ such that either w /∈Aξ or ξ = α is odd .
For a ∈ωω, analogously deﬁne the class
α-Π1
1 (a) for α recursive in a .
Then for any A ⊆k(ωω) and α < ω1, A is α-Π1
1 iff there is an a ∈ωω such that
α is recursive in a and A is α-Π1
1 (a).
In all these various cases, there are universal sets at each level, and so the
hierarchies are proper (cf. 12.8).
Martin’s results on many measurable cardinals went hand-in-hand with a new
elucidation of 0#. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant result about sets in Diff(Π1
1) was established
by Friedman [71a], who extended 31.2 by showing that if 0# exists, then Det(3-
Π1
1 ). He also found a way to show that Det(Π1
1 ) fails in every generic extension
of L. Martin then established both the intrinsic necessity of 0# and the relevance
of the difference hierarchy by establishing the following characterization:
31.4 Theorem (Martin). 0# exists iff Det(
β<ω2 β-Π1
1 ).
(See Martin [∞] or Dubose [90] for a proof.)
In the wake of ideas from Jensen’s Covering Theorem (see volume II), Martin
in 1975 applied 31.4 to establish the converse of H. Friedman’s result: if Det(3-
Π1
1 ), then 0# exists.
The gap from 3-Π1
1 to Π1
1 loomed larger than the rest,
but Harrington closed it shortly afterwards by using ideas of Sami and Steel to
establish the converse of Martin’s 31.2:

444
Chapter 6. Determinacy
31.5 Theorem (Harrington [78]). Suppose that a ∈ωω and Det(Π1
1 (a)). Then a#
exists.
For the generality, this (and 31.2) were stated in a form relativized to a ∈ωω.
The Martin and Harrington results together provide an elegant characterization for
any a ∈ωω:
a# exists iff
Det(Π1
1 (a)) .
This is a remarkable equivalence between the existence of the metamathematical
sharps and the determinacy of the analytic sets, an unexpected conﬂuence that
bolstered both the large cardinal and the determinacy theory and intimated further
riches to be unearthed about an underlying unity.
That unity was considerably reinforced by Martin’s companion results on
many measurable cardinals. He saw that starting with α + 1 measurable cardinals
he could get Det((ω2·α + 1)-Π1
1), and in fact determinacy a bit further along the
difference hierarchy. Continuing the pattern of 31.1 and 31.2, he then saw that
just having an inner model with α measurable cardinals and indiscernibles for that
structure sufﬁces, and moreover, a converse can be achieved!
Suppose that M an inner model of ZFC. Just to clarify, say that M has α
measurable cardinals iff there is a sequence ⟨ρξ | ξ < α⟩of ordinals such that for
each ξ < α, M |= ρξ is measurable. Suppose next that M |= δ is the supremum of
the measurable cardinals. Eschewing details, say that M has indiscernibles iff it
has an uncountable set of ordinal indiscernibles whose minimum element is greater
than δ. In light of §21, having such indiscernibles is a notion of transcendence over
the model, and an 0†-type theory can be developed. By 21.26 and the comment
after, for any a ∈ωω, a† exists iff there is an inner model containing a that has a
measurable cardinal and has indiscernibles.
The following generalizes 31.4 and 31.5, which together can be regarded as
the α = 0 case:
31.6 Theorem (Martin). For any a ∈ωω and α recursive in a, the following are
equivalent:
(a) Det(
β<ω2(ω2·α + β)-Π1
1 (a)).
(b) Det((ω2·α + 1)-Π1
1 (a)).
(c) There is an inner model of ZFC that contains a and has α measurable
cardinals and has indiscernibles.
In particular, for any a ∈ωω,
a† exists iff
Det((ω2 + 1)-Π1
1 (a)) .
John Simms [79], a student of Martin, provided an analogous characteriza-
tion of the existence of a transitive ∈-model of ZFC satisfying “there are arbitrar-
ily large measurable cardinals” which has indiscernibles in an appropriate sense:
This is equivalent to the determinacy of Σ0
1(Π1
1 ), the class of countable unions of

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
445
Boolean combinations of Π1
1 sets. (See Martin [∞: §5.5].) Simms in fact estab-
lished equivalences analogous to 31.6 through the difference hierarchy for Σ0
1(Π1
1 )
in terms of hierarchically high measurable cardinals. Loosely speaking, each new
level corresponds to a measurable limit of cardinals corresponding to the previous
level.
These various determinacy hypotheses fall far short of Det(∆1
2) (which by
30.10 is equivalent to Det(Π1
2)).
An impressive result at the time was due to
John Green [78], a student of Harrington, who was able to get more than mea-
surable limits of measurable cardinals: If Det(∆1
2), then there is an inner model
of ZFC that has a measurable cardinal κ with a normal ultraﬁlter U such that
{α < κ | α is measurable} ∈U. Such a κ is high in the “measurable limits of
measurables” hierarchy; through the study of inner models Steel [82] was able to
determine just how much determinacy is derivable from having such a κ.
There were later emendations having to do with reﬁned issues. 31.6 provides
no equivalence for Det(ω2-Π1
1 (a)) (taking α = 1 as a typical case). Martin showed
in the late 1970’s that the existence of an inner model of ZFC that contains a and
has a measurable cardinal sufﬁces, and eventually improved it in [90] to show that
if there is an inner model of ZFC that contains a and has a measurable cardinal,
then every set of reals such that both it and its complement are in (ω2 + 1)-Π1
1(a)
is determined. This is optimal in the sense that by 31.6 indiscernibles for the
inner model are needed to get Det((ω2 + 1)-Π1
1 (a)).
Martin also established
technical equivalences for Det(ω2-Π1
1 (a)) in terms of inner models that have a
measurable cardinal and closed unbounded sets having special properties for such
models. Recently, Philip Welch found an equivalence for Det(ω2-Π1
1) (boldface
only) more analogous to 31.6, but for a weaker set theory.
Derrick Dubose, a student of Martin, has explored in detail how sharps corre-
late with determinacy hypotheses between Det(
β<ω2 β-Π1
1 ) and Det(ω2-Π1
1 ). In
terms of such hypotheses formulated via hierarchies of sets, he [90] found char-
acterizations for the existence of the iterated sharps 0#, 0##, 0###, and so forth. He
[91, 92] also characterized the existence of the sharp function, that function # on
the reals given by #(a) = a#, and extended versions of this function. Moreover,
he [95] characterized the existence of sharp functions on objects of higher type,
sets of reals, sets of sets of reals, and so forth.
Having extensively set out the results on the determinacy of sets in the dif-
ference hierarchy for Π1
1, how Martin got measurable cardinals out of such hy-
potheses is illustrated with his earliest result along these lines established in the
early 1970’s.
31.7 Theorem (Martin). Assume Det((ω2 + 1)-Π1
1 ). Then there is an inner model
with a measurable cardinal.
Proof. The proof uses a game which is a sort of ω-ary iteration of the one used
by Solovay in his original proof of the measurability of ω1. The players choose
integers as usual:

446
Chapter 6. Determinacy
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
Using a recursive coding scheme, xI is regarded as encoding a sequence
⟨(xI)ξ | ξ ≤ω2⟩∈ω2+1(ωω), and xI I, a sequence ⟨(xI I)ξ | ξ < ω2⟩∈ω2(ωω).
Recall again (§13) that each z ∈ωω encodes a relation Ez ⊆ω × ω with ∥z∥
denoting its ordertype when it is a well-ordering.
Suppose ﬁrst that for some ξ < ω2, either E(xI )ξ or E(xI I )ξ is not a well-
ordering. Then for minimal such ξ, if E(xI )ξ is not a well-ordering, then I I wins.
Otherwise, I wins.
Suppose now that for each ξ < ω2 both E(xI )ξ and E(xI I )ξ are well-orderings.
For such ξ and n ∈ω, set
βx
ξ = ∥(xI)ξ∥,
γ x
ξ = ∥(xI I)ξ∥,
ρx
n = sup({βx
ω·n+i | i ∈ω} ∪{γ x
ω·n+i | i ∈ω}) , and
δx = sup({ρx
n | n ∈ω}) .
Let F x be the ﬁlter over δx generated by {ρx
n | n ∈ω}, i.e.
X ∈F x iff
X ⊆δx ∧∃m ∈ω({ρx
n | m ≤n ∈ω} ⊆X) .
The intention when the ρn’s are increasing is that L[F x] |= F x ∩L[F x] is a normal
ultraﬁlter over δx, and through the following rules the burden falls on I to try to
defeat this. For their formulation, recall (as before 20.18) that each z ∈ωω encodes
a structure Nz = ⟨ω, Ez, Az⟩, and when it is well-founded and extensional, tr(Nz)
denotes its transitive collapse and πz: Nz →tr(Nz) the collapsing isomorphism.
Stipulate that I I wins unless N(xI )ω2 is well-founded and extensional, and for
some limit ordinal θ x > ω,
tr(N(xI )ω2) = ⟨Lθ x[F x], ∈, F x ∩Lθ x[F x]⟩.
Assuming that I has managed to arrange this, I I wins unless there is a counterex-
ample to normality: an f : δx →δx such that f ∈Lθ x[F x] and {ρ < δx | ρ ≤
f (ρ)} /∈F x yet f is not constant on any set in F x. If there is such an f , taking
f x to be the least such in the canonical well-ordering of L[F x], I I wins unless
either
x(0) = 0 ∧f x(ρx
0 ) ≥f x(ρx
1 ) , or
x(0) = 1 ∧f x(ρx
0 ) < f x(ρx
1 ) ,
in which case I wins.
To analyze the payoff set of this game, consider for ξ < ω2 the sets
Y2ξ = {x ∈ωω | E(xI )ξ is a well-ordering} , and
Y2ξ+1 = {x ∈ωω | E(xI I )ξ is a well-ordering} .

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
447
There is also a set corresponding to the various conditions for I winning the game
as described in the previous paragraph:
Yω2 = {x ∈
ξ<ω2Yξ | E(xI )ω2 is well-founded ∧N(xI )ω2 |= σ1 ∧ψ
∧π(xI )ω2“A(xI )ω2 = F x ∩π(xI )ω2“ω} ,
where σ1 is the sentence of 3.2(b), and ψ is a sentence asserting that ω exists and
that there is no largest ordinal, and sets out the various conditions for I winning
the game with a counterexample to normality. It is straightforward to check that
with an appropriate ψ,
I wins a play x iff the least ξ such that x /∈Yξ or ξ = ω2 + 1 is odd .
With the deﬁning clauses for Yω2 other than well-foundedness being arithmetical
as for 13.8(a)(c) it is straightforward to see that the payoff set is (ω2 + 1)-Π1
1 and
so the game is determined by hypothesis. As in other Solovay games, I cannot
have a winning strategy:
Assume to the contrary that σ is a winning strategy for I. A Σ1
1 bounding
argument is ﬁrst applied as in the ﬁrst proof of 28.2 to get a closed unbounded
subset of ω1: For η < ω1 set
Bη = {((σ ∗y)I)ξ | ξ < ω2 ∧y ∈ωω ∧
∀ζ < ξ(E(y)ζ is a well-ordering with ∥(y)ζ∥< η)} .
Bη is Σ1
1 in a real coding the ordertype η. Moreover, in terms of 13.6, Bη ⊆WF
as σ is winning, and so Bη ⊆WFβ for some β < ω1. Taking w(η) to be the least
such β, the resulting function w: ω1 →ω1 leads to a set
C = {ρ < ω1 | ρ is an inﬁnite limit ∧∀η < ρ(w(η) < ρ)}
closed unbounded in ω1.
C has a crucial property which will be used several times in what follows:
If ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩∈ωC, then there is a play x ∈
ξ<ω2 Yξ of the game according to
σ such that ρx
n = ρn for every n ∈ω. To show this, let ⟨ηξ | ξ < ω2⟩be such that
for each n ∈ω, {ηω·n+i | i ∈ω} ⊆ρn and is coﬁnal in ρn. Then let y ∈ωω be
such that for each ξ < ω2, ∥E(y)ξ ∥= ηξ. Then σ ∗y ∈
ξ<ω2 Yξ, and it follows
from the deﬁnition of w and C that ρσ∗y
n
= ρn for every n ∈ω.
A contradiction is now derived from the existence of σ: Fix an increasing
sequence ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩of limit points of C such that C ∩ρn has ordertype ρn for
each n ∈ω. Let x ∈Yω2 be a play according to σ such that ρx
n = ρn for every
n ∈ω. There is a corresponding F x and a counterexample f x to normality, and
x(0) must be either 0 or 1.
Suppose ﬁrst that x(0) = 0. Fixing k ∈ω for the moment, let z ∈Yω2 be a
play according to σ such that ρz
n = ρn+k for n ∈ω, with corresponding Fz and
f z. Evidently Fz = F x, and so also f z = f x. But z(0) = x(0) = 0, as x(0) is,
after all, the ﬁrst move of the game played according to σ. Hence,

448
Chapter 6. Determinacy
f x(ρk) = f z(ρz
0) ≥f z(ρz
1) = f x(ρk+1) ,
the inequality as σ is winning. Now this holds for every k ∈ω, and so f x(ρk)
must become constant for sufﬁciently large k ∈ω. But this is a contradiction, as
f x cannot be constant on any set in F x.
Suppose next that x(0) = 1. Fixing k ∈ω and ρ ∈C with ρ < ρk for the
moment, let y be a play according to σ such that ρy
0 = ρ and ρy
n+1 = ρn+k for
n ∈ω. Then F y = F x, f y = f x, and y(0) = x(0) = 1, and so
f x(ρ) = f y(ρy
0 ) < f y(ρy
1 ) = f x(ρk) .
Fixing a further ζ ∈C with ρ < ζ < ρk, a similar argument with a play z
according to σ such that ρz
1 = ζ and ρz
n = ρy
n for every n ̸= 1 shows that
f x(ρ) < f x(ζ) .
Varying ρ and ζ, it follows that f x|(C ∩ρk) is an increasing function into f x(ρk).
But since C ∩ρk has ordertype ρk,
ρk ≤f x(ρk) .
Finally, varying k leads to {ρ < δx | ρ ≤f x(ρ)} ∈F x, which is a contradiction
of the choice of f x.
Having established that I cannot have a winning strategy, it follows that I I
must have one. Let τ be such a strategy. Following the argument leading from σ
to the set C, τ leads to a set D closed unbounded in ω1 that satisﬁes the following:
If ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩∈ωD, θ > ω is a countable limit ordinal, and i < 2, then there
is a play x ∈
ξ<ω2 Yξ of the game according to τ such that ρx
n = ρn for every
n ∈ω; θ x (is deﬁned and) equals θ; and x(0) = i.
Fixing an increasing sequence ⟨ρn | n ∈ω⟩∈ωD, set δ = sup({ρn | n ∈ω})
and let F be the ﬁlter over δ generated by {ρn | n ∈ω}. The proof is completed
by showing that L[F] |= F ∩L[F] is a normal ultraﬁlter. This follows from the
following property: If f ∈δδ ∩L[F] with {ρ < δ | ρ ≤f (ρ)} /∈F, then f is
constant on a set in F. Granted this it is simple to show ﬁrst that F ∩L[F] is an
ultraﬁlter in L[F] using functions in δ2 ∩L[F], and then to derive normality.
To verify the property, assume to the contrary that there is a counterexample
which is not constant on any set in F, and let f ∗be the least such in the canonical
well-ordering of L[F].
By the argument for 20.2(a) there is a countable θ∗,
which can be taken to be a limit ordinal, such that f ∗∈Lθ∗[F]. Let i∗= 0 if
f ∗(ρ0) ≥f ∗(ρ1), and i∗= 1 if f ∗(ρ0) < f ∗(ρ1). Then by the condition on D
there is a play x according to τ such that ρx
n = ρn for every n ∈ω; θ x = θ∗; and
x(0) = i∗. But this is a contradiction, since τ is a winning strategy. The proof is
complete.
⊣
The special properties exhibited by the closed unbounded set C in this proof
lend plausibility to the optimal conclusion from Det((ω2+1)-Π1
1 ), the existence of

31. Det(α-Π1
1)
449
0†. Little more complexity beyond this proof is needed to show that if Det((ω2·α+
1)-Π1
1 ), then there is an inner model that has α measurable cardinals.
Through such results a pattern of correlations with large cardinals emerged
during the mid-1970’s, one agreeably reinforced by the amounts of the rank hi-
erarchy necessary to establish fragments of Borel Determinacy as the beginning
cases. The determinacy hypotheses involved, however, fell far short of Det(Π1
2)
which seemed to loom ever stronger in consistency strength. Through the 1970’s
a variety of substantial propositions were shown to be consistent relative to a su-
percompact cardinal. But despite various attempts Det(Π1
2) was not among them.
Then reaching higher to the hypotheses I0-I3 at the limits of consistency (§24)
Martin was able to establish a synthetic connection in 1978:
31.8 Theorem (Martin [80]). Assume I2. Then Det(Π1
2).
In fact, sufﬁcient is the existence of a j: Vδ ≺Vδ satisfying an iterability
condition, a hypothesis strictly intermediate between I2 and I3. Martin applied
the basic idea of his Det(Π1
1) proof, using the representation of Π1
2 sets cast in
terms of an embedding j as above in order to apply its 24.6 properties.
This afﬁrmation of large cardinals raised hopes, but also concerns. Could
there be some sort of converse? Any such result would likely have to secure an
inner model of some large cardinal hypothesis (cf. 31.7), but into the early 1980’s
the development of inner model theory had not progressed beyond the models
of Mitchell [79]. These were for the “hypermeasurable” cardinals, essentially γ -
strong cardinals for small γ (§26), and the amount of determinacy in them was
analyzed by Steel [82]. In any case, the models all have ∆1
3 well-orderings of the
reals of ordertype ω1, and so cannot satisfy Det(Π1
2) (by 27.14 and the argument
for 13.10).
This apparent obstruction to getting inner models for large cardinals implying
Det(Π1
2) was a major reason advanced for its considerable strength, and Martin’s
result ruled out inner models of the sort then known for hypotheses at the level
of I0-I3.
The other question was where the higher determinacy hypotheses would ﬁt in
if at all; perhaps they veer off in some orthogonal direction from large cardinals?
With attention shifted upward to the strongest large cardinal hypotheses, Woodin
boldly formulated I0 just at the edge of the Kunen inconsistency and ampliﬁed
Martin’s embeddings proof to establish the following in early 1984:
31.9 Theorem (Woodin). Assume I0. Then ADL(R).
So determinacy is subsumed by the large cardinal hierarchy, but only just!
However, the hypotheses I0-I3 were little understood and might totter as Kunen’s
proposition did. And there seemed little hope that the inner model theory could
be developed enough to achieve equiconsistencies. But at least a mooring was
secured, and there was new anticipation of a grand uniﬁcation of large cardinals
and determinacy. How that came about is the subject of the next section.

450
Chapter 6. Determinacy
32. Consistency of AD
As a ﬁtting conclusion to both this chapter and volume, this section provides a
panoramic survey of the crowning achievements concerning the relative consis-
tency of determinacy hypotheses. After setting out the basics of what came to
serve as a general framework, proofs are dispensed with, as in any case they
are precluded by the range and sophistication of the results discussed. Rather, a
scaffolding is provided based on the historical progression of ideas, one that may
serve as a guide to expositions to come (Martin [∞] and Woodin-Mathias-Hauser
[∞]).
The culminating equiconsistency results are due to Hugh Woodin, whose re-
sults have ﬁgured in previous sections. Already as an undergraduate Woodin in
1976 had reduced a proposition in the theory of Banach algebras to a set-theoretic
one whose consistency was then established by Solovay. Then, as his student
at Berkeley, Woodin found a more systematic route to that consistency incorpo-
rating Martin’s Axiom (see Dales-Woodin [87]), and soon established important
consistency results using Radin Forcing and about ideals over ω1 (see volume II).
With strong hypotheses and structural issues in set theory becoming the driving
imperatives in his work, Woodin joined the Cabal Seminar in the early 1980’s and
became deeply involved in the investigation of determinacy. By the mid-1980’s
his many splendid results had earned him a reputation comparable only to that
of Shelah, who has been in the limelight since the 1970’s. But unlike the lat-
ter Woodin is not one to rush to the presses, and the bulk of his work remains
unpublished.
Stepping back, it was Martin and Steel who made a major breakthrough
toward the relative consistency of determinacy from large cardinals, and for Martin
this was the capstone of nearly twenty years of sustained effort. In retrospect the
quest for this synthesis was based on a remarkable insight that principles in ZFC
based on elementary embeddings could somehow provide combinatorial principles
for sets of reals entailing their regularity properties.
Afﬁrming Martin’s early
successes using tree representations to establish determinacy a general approach
to such representations is ﬁrst provided; it is an elegant abstraction of the essentials
of previous constructions involving large cardinals.
Homogeneous Trees
Homogeneous trees are implicit in the work of Martin-Solovay [69] (described in
§15) and in early work on determinacy: Martin’s Det(Π1
1) result 31.1 and Kunen’s
1971 analysis of δ1
3 and δ1
5. The concept itself was isolated much later by Kechris
[81: 63] and Martin, and came to be the means by which determinacy was derived
from large cardinals. In the paradigmatic case, for any κ > ω, Π1
1 sets of reals are
κ-Suslin (13.14), i.e. projections of trees on ω × κ. But the inﬁnite paths through
such a tree form a closed subset of ωω × ωκ in the expected sense (cf. 12.10), and
so are determined (27.1). Martin derived Det(Π1
1) by taking κ to be measurable

32. Consistency of AD
451
and using a normal ultraﬁlter over κ to “integrate” over winning strategies for
closed subsets of ωω × ωκ to get such strategies for their projections, the Π1
1
subsets of ωω. Recalling the §15 analysis homogeneous trees are just those trees
that carry the requisite ultraﬁlter structure to push through Martin’s argument.
Some terminology is ﬁrst developed toward the deﬁnition:
For a tree T on some kω ×Y (as deﬁned after 12.8) and for s ∈
m∈ω
k(mω),
Ts = {u | ⟨s, u⟩∈T } .
In this section by tree is meant some such tree, usually taking k = 1 for notational
simplicity, such that Ts ̸= ∅for every such s.
Also, principal ultraﬁlters are
allowed, contravening a convention.
Suppose that for some set Y and m ≤n ∈ω, U is an ultraﬁlter over some
I ⊆mY and W is an ultraﬁlter over some J ⊆nY. Then U is a projection of W
iff for any X ⊆I,
X ∈U iff
{u ∈J | u|m ∈X} ∈W .
If moreover U and W are ω1-complete, then with
jU: V ≺MU ∼= Ult(V, U) and
jW: V ≺MW ∼= Ult(V, W) ,
the map k: MU →MW given by
k([ f ]U) = [⟨f (u|m) | u ∈J⟩]W
is elementary, and k ◦jU = jW.
A sequence ⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩of ω1-complete ultraﬁlters is a tower iff for some
set Y, Um ⊆P(mY) for m ∈ω, and Um is a projection of Un for m ≤n ∈ω. For
such a tower, let
jm: V ≺Mm ∼= Ult(V, Um) ,
and
jmn: Mm →Mn
be the embeddings corresponding to Um being a projection of Un, so that jmn◦jm =
jn. Then
⟨⟨Mm | m ∈ω⟩, ⟨jmn | m ≤n⟩⟩
is a directed system.
⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩is countably complete iff whenever Xm ∈Um for m ∈ω,
there is a d ∈ωY such that d|m ∈Xm for each such m. By the argument for
15.7, a tower is countably complete iff the corresponding directed system has a
well-founded direct limit.
To proceed to the main deﬁnitions, for a tree T on some kω × Y and κ > ω,
taking k = 1 for notational simplicity, T is κ-homogeneous iff for s ∈<ωω there

452
Chapter 6. Determinacy
are κ-complete ultraﬁlters Us over Ts such that Us is a projection of Us whenever
s ⊆s, and: For any x ∈ωω,
if x ∈p[T ], then ⟨Ux|m | m ∈ω⟩is a countably complete tower .
The converse is immediate, since if Xm = Tx|m for m ∈ω, a corresponding d ∈ωY
such that d|m ∈Xm for such m veriﬁes that x ∈p[T ].
For A ⊆k(ωω), A is κ-homogeneously Suslin iff A = p[T ] for some κ-
homogeneous tree T . A is homogeneously Suslin iff A is κ-homogeneously Suslin
for some κ > ω. Note that for such sets to exist in any substantive sense, there
must be a measurable cardinal: Otherwise the Us’s would have to be principal
(2.2), and so being homogeneously Suslin would be equivalent to being closed
(cf. 12.10). Also, note that by the argument for 2.8, it can be assumed that κ > 2ℵ0
and much more.
As anticipated, the following two exercises factor Martin’s Det(Π1
1) result
31.1 through the concept of homogeneous tree.
32.1 Exercise. Suppose that there is a measurable cardinal κ. Then every Π1
1 set
is κ-homogeneously Suslin.
Hint. Show, following the proof of 31.1, that the Us’s deﬁned there are as required.
⊣
32.2 Exercise. Suppose that a set of reals is homogeneously Suslin. Then it is
determined.
Hint. Suppose that A = p[T ] say, where T is a κ-homogeneous tree on ω×Y with
corresponding κ-complete ultraﬁlters Us for s ∈<ωω. To establish that Gω(A) is
determined, consider the auxiliary game G∗as in the proof of 31.1:
I
:
⟨x(0), g(0)⟩
⟨x(2), g(1)⟩
. . .
I I :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
I and I I both play integers x(i) to form a real x, but in addition, I plays g(i) ∈Y
to form a function g: ω →Y. I wins if ⟨x, g⟩∈[T ], and otherwise I I wins.
As before, G∗is determined, and if I has a winning strategy in this game,
he has one in Gω(A). It remains show that if I I has a winning strategy τ in G∗,
then he has one strategy in Gω(A):
Proceeding as for 31.l, for n ∈ω, t ∈2n+1ω, and u ∈n+1Y let τ(t, u) denote
the strategic response according to τ to
⟨⟨t(0), u(0)⟩, t(1), . . . , ⟨t(2n), u(n)⟩⟩.
Then for such t and k ∈ω, set
Zt,k = {u ∈Tt|(n+1) | τ(t, u) = k} .
Next, deﬁne a strategy τ0: 
n∈ω
2n+1ω →ω by:

32. Consistency of AD
453
τ0(t) = k iff
Zt,k ∈Ut|(n+1) .
This is well-deﬁned by the ω1-completeness of the Us’s. Finally, argue that τ0 is
a winning strategy for I I in Gω(A):
Assume to the contrary that x is a play according to τ0, yet x ∈A. By the
homogeneity of T there is a d ∈ωY such that for every n ∈ω, d|(n + 1) ∈
Zx|(2n+1),τ0(x|(2n+1)). But then, ⟨x, d⟩is in [T ] and corresponds to a play of G∗in
which I I plays according to τ and still loses. Contradiction!
⊣
Weakly Homogeneous Trees
Weak homogeneity for trees is a technical weakening of homogeneity also consid-
ered by Kechris [81: 66] and Martin, which through the work of Woodin became
pivotal as the ﬁrst structural property related to determinacy to be obtained from
large cardinals. For a tree T on some kω × Y and κ > ω, again taking k = 1 for
simplicity, T is κ-weakly homogeneous iff for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| there are
κ-complete ultraﬁlters Us,t over Ts such that Us,t is a projection of Us,t whenever
s|m = s and t|m = t for some m ∈ω, and: For any x ∈ωω,
if x ∈p[T ], then there is a y ∈ωω such that
⟨Ux|m,y|m | m ∈ω⟩is a countably complete tower .
As with homogeneous trees, the converse is immediate. Clearly, a κ-homogeneous
tree is κ-weakly homogeneous.
For A ⊆k(ωω), A is κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin iff A = p[T ] for some
κ-weakly homogeneous tree T , and A is weakly homogeneously Suslin iff A is
κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin for some κ > ω. As with homogeneity it can be
assumed that κ > 2ℵ0 and much more.
The following two exercises cast weak homogeneity in different lights.
32.3 Exercise.
A ⊆k(ωω) is κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin iff A = pB for
some κ-homogeneously Suslin B ⊆k+1(ωω).
Hint. Taking k = 1, suppose in the forward direction that A = p[T ] where T is a
κ-weakly homogeneous tree on ω × Y with corresponding κ-complete ultraﬁlters
Us,t for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|. For any x, y ∈ωω, if ⟨Ux|m,y|m | m ∈ω⟩is not
countably complete, let X x,y
m
∈Ux|m,y|m for m ∈ω be such that no d ∈ωY satisﬁes
d|m ∈X x,y
m
for every such m; otherwise, set X x,y
m
= Tx|m for every m ∈ω. Next,
for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t| set
Zs,t = {X x,y
|s| | x, y ∈ωω ∧x||s| = s ∧y||t| = t} .
Then Zs,t ∈Us,t since Us,t is (2ℵ0)+-complete (by the argument for 2.8, as noted
before). Finally, deﬁne a tree T + on 2ω × Y by
T + = {⟨s, t, u⟩| u ∈Zs,t} ,

454
Chapter 6. Determinacy
and set U s,t = Us,t ∩P(Zs,t) for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|. Now verify that T +
with the U s,t’s is κ-homogeneous, and that with B = p[T +], A = pB.
The converse is straightforward.
⊣
If homogeneously Suslin sets are to be viewed as generalizations of closed
sets, the verifying ultraﬁlters ensuring determinacy, then weakly homogeneously
Suslin sets can be regarded through 32.3 as generalizations of analytic sets. It
now follows from 32.1 that if there is a measurable cardinal κ, then every Σ1
2 set
is κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin.
32.4 Exercise.
Suppose that T is a tree on some kω × Y and κ > ω. Then
T is κ-weakly homogeneous iff there is a countable collection D of κ-complete
ultraﬁlters such that for any x ∈k(ωω): If x ∈p[T ], then there is a countably
complete tower ⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩∈ωD such that Tx|m ∈Um for every m ∈ω.
Hint. Taking k = 1, for the direction starting from D it can be assumed that D is
closed under projections: If W ∈D and W ⊆P(nY) for some n ∈ω and set Y,
then for each m ≤n
{{u|m | u ∈Z} | Z ∈W} ∈D .
Proceed now by induction on |s| to deﬁne Us,t so that for any i ∈ω, allowing
principal ultraﬁlters if necessary,
{Us⌢⟨i⟩,t⌢⟨e⟩| e ∈ω} ⊇
{W ∩P(Ts⌢⟨i⟩) | W ∈D ∧Ts⌢⟨i⟩∈W ∧Us,t is a projection of W} .
⊣
32.3 shows how weak homogeneity is closely tied to homogeneity, but 32.4
suggests that the former may be considerably easier to obtain. One consequence
is that being weakly homogeneously Suslin is preserved under Wadge reducibility,
i.e. the taking of continuous pre-images:
32.5 Exercise.
Suppose that B ⊆
l(ωω) is κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin,
f : k(ωω) →l(ωω) is continuous, and A = f −1(B). Then A is κ-weakly ho-
mogeneously Suslin.
Hint. Taking k = l = 1, suppose that B = p[T ] where T is a tree on ω × Y, and
let A = p[S] where S is the tree on ω × Y deﬁned as in the proof of 13.13(g)
from T and a function θ. Show that if D veriﬁes the weak homogeneity of T as
in 32.4, then it also does so for S:
Suppose that x ∈p[S]. Then f (x) ∈p[T ], so that there is a countably
complete tower ⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩∈ωD such that Tf (x)|n ∈Un for every n ∈ω. To
complete the proof, check that Sx|m ∈Um for every m ∈ω:

32. Consistency of AD
455
Sx|m = {u ∈mY | ⟨x|m, u⟩∈S}
= {u ∈mY | ⟨θ(x|m), u||θ(x|m)|⟩∈T }
= {u ∈mY | u|n ∈Tf (x)|n}
where n = |θ(x|m)|, so that θ(x|m) = f (x)|n. But since Tf (x)|n ∈Un and Um
projects to Un, it follows that Sx|m ∈Um.
⊣
A crucial feature of weakly homogeneously Suslin sets is that their com-
plements are also Suslin by a canonical “dualization” process. This was already
developed in §15, and with the motivation given there we can proceed forthwith
to the formulation:
Suppose that T is a κ-weakly homogeneous tree on ω×Y with corresponding
κ-complete ultraﬁlters Us,t for s, t ∈<ωω with |s| = |t|. For s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with
s = s|m and t = t|m for some m ∈ω, let
js,t: V ≺Ms,t ∼= Ult(V, Us,t)
and
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩: Ms,t ≺Ms,t
be the embeddings corresponding to Us,t being a projection of Us,t, so that
j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩◦js,t = js,t. In terms of the ﬁxed recursive enumeration ⟨si | i ∈ω⟩
of <ωω, deﬁne a tree on ω × (2|Y|)+ by:
˜T = {⟨s, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈
m∈ω(mω × m((2|Y|)+) |
∀i, j < |s|(si ⊃sj →δi < j⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si|,si⟩(δj))} .
The ﬁrst part of the following is a representation that recasts 15.5 and 15.7
in terms of countably complete towers; the second shows that that representation
is quite robust.
32.6 Proposition.
(a) p[ ˜T ] = ωω −p[T ].
(b) For any p.o. P with |P| < κ, ∥-P p[ ˇ˜T ] = ωω −p[ ˇT ].
Proof. (a) Suppose ﬁrst that x ∈p[ ˜T ], say with ⟨x, g⟩∈[ ˜T ]. For i ∈ω, let
hi: Tx||si| →On be such that g(i) = [hi] in Mx||si|,si. Then for si ⊃sj,
Zi j = {u ∈Tx||si| | hi(u) < hj(u||sj|)} ∈Ux||si|,si .
Assume now to the contrary that x ∈p[T ].
Then there would be a y ∈ωω
such that ⟨Ux|m,y|m | m ∈ω⟩is countably complete, and so a d ∈ωY such
that for any si ⊂y, d||si| ∈{Zi j | si ⊃sj}.
Hence, when y ⊃si ⊃sj,
hi(d||si|) < hj(d||sj|). This leads to an inﬁnite descending sequence of ordinals
and thus a contradiction.
For the converse, suppose that x ∈ωω −p[T ]. Since Tx is well-founded, let
ρ: Tx →∥Tx∥be its rank function. For i ∈ω set:

456
Chapter 6. Determinacy
δi = [ρ|Tx||si|]Ux||si |,si .
Then for si ⊃sj,
{u ∈Tx||si| | ρ(u) < ρ(u||sj|)} ∈Ux||si|,si
so that δi < j⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si|,si⟩(δj). To ﬁnish off an inconsequential case, if Y is
ﬁnite, then the Us,t’s are all principal, and so p[T ] = ωω. If Y is inﬁnite, then
note that for i ∈ω,
|δi| ≤|{ f | f : Tx||si| →∥Tx∥}| ≤2|Y| .
Hence, all the conditions being satisﬁed, x ∈p[ ˜T ].
(b) Suppose that P is a p.o. with |P| < κ and G is P-generic. It must
be shown that in V [G], p[ ˜T ] = ωω −p[T ]. By the proof of 10.15, each Us,t
generates a κ-complete ultraﬁlter U +
s,t over Ts in V [G]. For s, t, s, t ∈<ωω with
s = s|m and t = t|m for some m ∈ω, let
j+
s,t: V [G] ≺M+
s,t ∼= Ult(V [G], U +
s,t) ,
and as U +
s,t is readily seen to be a projection of U +
s,t, let
j+
⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩: M+
s,t ≺M+
s,t
be the corresponding embedding, so that j+
⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩◦j+
s,t = j+
s,t. Then:
(i) If f : Ts →V is in V [G], there is a g: Ts →V in V such that
[ f ]U +
s,t = [g]U +
s,t .
(ii) For any f : Ts →V in V , [ f ]U +
s,t = [ f ]Us,t .
(iii) j+
⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩|On = j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩|On .
(i) follows from the claim (∗) of the proof of 10.15. (ii) follows from (i) by
induction on rank. Finally, for (iii), note ﬁrst that for any ordinal ξ, ξ = [g]U +
s,t
for some g: Ts →V in V by (i). But then,
j+
⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩([g]U +
s,t) = [⟨g(u|m) | u ∈Ts⟩]U +
s,t
= [⟨g(u|m) | u ∈Ts⟩]Us,t
(by (ii))
= j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩([g]Us,t)
= j⟨s,t⟩,⟨s,t⟩([g]U +
s,t) (again by (ii))
conﬁrming (iii).
Proceeding to the argument that p[ ˜T ] = ωω −p[T ] in V [G], note ﬁrst that
p[T ] ∩p[ ˜T ] = ∅there: Deﬁne a tree S merging T and ˜T by
S = {⟨s, u, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩| ⟨s, u⟩∈T ∧⟨s, ⟨δi | i < |s|⟩⟩∈˜T } .

32. Consistency of AD
457
Then in V as well as in V [G], p[S] = p[T ] ∩p[ ˜T ] so that p[T ] ∩p[ ˜T ] = ∅iff
S is well-founded. But then, S is well-founded in V , and hence by absoluteness
(0.3) in V [G] as well, and the result follows.
It remains to show that in V [G] if x ∈ωω−p[T ], then x ∈p[ ˜T ]: Arguing in
V [G] as for (a), since Tx is well-founded, let ρ: Tx →∥Tx∥be its rank function,
and for i ∈ω set
δi = [ρ|Tx||si|]U +
x||si |,si .
For si ⊃sj, δi < j+
⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si|,si⟩(δj) as before, so that by (iii),
δi < j⟨s||sj|,sj⟩,⟨s||si|,si⟩(δj). Hence, ⟨x, ⟨δi | i ∈ω⟩⟩∈[ ˜T ], and so x ∈p[ ˜T ].
⊣
Soon after their formulation, it was seen that weakly homogeneously Suslin
sets possess the regularity properties. The ﬁrst arguments grew out of the gener-
ative game context, and Woodin found new forcing proofs indicative of the new
abstract approach. Versions of both are given in the following proof.
32.7 Theorem. Suppose that a set of reals is weakly homogeneously Suslin. Then
it is Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property.
Proof. Suppose that A ⊆ωω is κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin. The perfect set
property for A is ﬁrst established in terms of games:
Consider the game G∗
2(Ψ “A) from 27.6 for the perfect set property.
By
having I not play ﬁnite sequences but rather integers coding them the game can
be recast as one of form Gω(B). Some straightforward checking shows that B can
be taken to be a continuous pre-image of A, and thus is κ-weakly homogeneously
Suslin by 32.5.
By 32.3 there is a C ⊆2(ωω) κ-homogeneously Suslin with B = pC. As
in the proof of 27.14, consider the unfolded version of the game Gω(B) where
I makes extra choices y(i) leading to a real y, and I wins if ⟨x, y⟩∈C, and
otherwise I I wins.
By a simple modiﬁcation of the argument for 32.2, this
unfolded game is determined. But Gω(B) is essentially G∗
2(Ψ “A), and so by the
argument for 27.14 A has the perfect set property.
Lebesgue measurability and having the Baire property can be established
similarly, although more checking has to done to be able to apply 32.5. Instead,
Woodin’s forcing argument is given, which builds on Solovay’s for 11.11:
Let T be a κ-weakly homogeneous tree such that A = p[T ], and ˜T the
canonical tree for the complement so that 32.6 is satisﬁed. To show that A is
Lebesgue measurable proceed as for 11.11 in terms of random reals, the corre-
sponding p.o. B∗, and closed and Gδ codes:
With ∥- temporarily denoting a set restriction of the forcing relation for B∗
sufﬁcient for the coming argument, let µ be a regular cardinal so that Hµ contains
T, ˜T , B∗, and ∥- , and let N ≺Hµ be countable and containing these sets. In
what follows, assume the straightforward liberalization of the necessary forcing
concepts to such models of just ZFC−. Note that

458
Chapter 6. Determinacy
{x ∈ωω | x is not random over N}
is null, being equal by 11.10 to
{Ac | c ∈N is a Gδ code for a null set} ,
a countable union of null sets since N is countable. Hence, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a
Borel set X such that A △X consists of reals not random over N:
For B∗forcing in the sense of N with ˙r a canonical name for the random
real, let Q ∈N be a maximal antichain consisting of closed sets each deciding
˙r ∈p[ ˇT ], all in the sense of N. Set
X = {Ac | AN
c ∈Q ∧AN
c ∥- ˙r ∈p[ ˇT ]} .
Since Q is countable by the ω1-c.c., X is Borel (in fact Fσ). To complete the
proof it sufﬁces to show that for x random over N,
x ∈A iff x ∈X .
First, if x is random over N and x ∈X, then N[x] |= x ∈p[T ] by the deﬁnition
of X, and hence x ∈p[T ] = A. For the converse, the crucial property 32.6(b)
is used: Since B∗has a dense subset of cardinality 2ℵ0 (the closed non-null sets)
and κ > 2ℵ0 can always be assumed,
∥-B∗p[ ˇ˜T ] = ωω −p[ ˇT ] .
It follows from this and the deﬁnition of X that if x is random over N and x /∈X,
then N[x] |= x ∈p[ ˜T ], and hence x ∈p[ ˜T ] = ωω −A.
The argument for the Baire property is analogous, using Cohen reals.
⊣
The Ramsey property was discussed at the ends of §§11, 27. An analogous
forcing argument using Mathias reals shows that being Ramsey can be added to the
conclusions of 32.7. And as for Lebesgue measure and Baire category there is a
more involved game argument. This depends on Ramseyness being equivalent to
having the Baire property in a topology (as mentioned in §27), and the determinacy
of the unfolded version of the corresponding ∗∗-game as in the proof of 27.14 (see
Kechris [95: 19D, 21D]).
The forcing approach depended on the 32.6 property of both a set of reals and
its complement being Suslin with representations that are robust through forcing
extensions.
In Feng-Magidor-Woodin [92], this property is called “universally
Baire” and studied for its own sake as well as in connection with determinacy.
Having set the stage with the basic theory of homogeneous and weakly ho-
mogeneous trees, we begin the historical ascent. Martin made the ﬁrst connection
between determinacy and weak homogeneity by showing in ZF that ADR implies
that every tree is ω1-weakly homogeneous. Inspired by this, Woodin by 1982 had
established the ﬁrst result in the general framework of the subsequent results:

32. Consistency of AD
459
32.8 Theorem (Woodin [86]). Suppose that κ is a supercompact cardinal and G
is Col(ω, κ)-generic. Then L(R)V [G] |= Every tree is κ-weakly homogeneous.
The appeal to L(R)V [G] is as for Solovay’s 11.1. Woodin used ultraﬁlters
given by supercompactness to verify weak homogeneity, but in any case 32.8 is
a relative consistency result. To describe the progress toward actual implications
from large cardinals, the situation is ﬁrst summarized in the investigation of strong
hypotheses in the early 1980’s, a subject that is taken up at length in volume II.
The Role of Supercompact Cardinals
After the introduction of the strong large cardinal hypotheses (as described in
Chapter 5) the work through the 1970’s led to a growing conviction that these hy-
potheses provide an ultimate scale against which all possible consistency strengths
can be gauged. The stronger propositions were usually found to be consistent rel-
ative to supercompact cardinals, and also to imply the consistency of having many
measurable cardinals in a strong sense. There was one early and notable excep-
tion, however, the proposition that there is an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1. Kunen
[78] in 1972 had established the consistency of this proposition relative to a huge
cardinal, and even gave a heuristic argument for why something like it may be
necessary.
Kunen collapsed a huge cardinal to ω1 in such a way that a residue of a huge
embedding is retained as an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1. Not only are such ideals
of general interest as a combinatorial feature low in the cumulative hierarchy but
Solovay [71] had shown that they have a intriguing technical property: Starting
with such an ideal I there is a forcing extension V [G] (in fact via the p.o. P(ω1)−
I) in which there is a generic elementary embedding, a j: V ≺M with critical
point ω1. Kunen observed that < j(ω1)M ⊆M, so that j is like an embedding
witnessing the almost hugeness of ω1. But the embedding has domain just the
ground model V , and only exists in the generic extension V [G]. Still, this was a
heuristic argument taken to suggest that saturated ideals might have consistency
strength on the order of hugeness, that the generic embedding might foreshadow
a full-ﬂedged embedding.
Kunen’s work emboldened set theorists to use strong large cardinal hypothe-
ses as in the formative work of Foreman [82, 83], and generated a continuing
interest in ideals with strong properties low in the cumulative hierarchy. In fact,
this interest was not only to trigger the major advances toward the consistency of
determinacy, but to continue to interweave ideals into the unifying theory as one
of a triad: large cardinals, determinacy, and ideals.
Two synthetic results in the late 1970’s injected a sense of anticipation as
well as mystery into the growing mosaic. One was the Martin result 31.8 that
I2 implies Det(Π1
2), and the other was the result of Steel-Van Wesep [82] that in
ZF if ADR and Θ is regular, then in a forcing extension there is an inner model
of ZFC in which NSω1 is ω2-saturated. The previous work of Martin and others
had suggested that Det(Π1
2) is an apparently very strong hypothesis, but the upper

460
Chapter 6. Determinacy
bound established by Martin raised the specter of having to reach up to the top of
the large cardinal hierarchy to pull in determinacy. The Steel-Van Wesep result
established the consistency of a basic proposition about stationary subsets of ω1
that had not been derived from large cardinals; recalling the ideal terminology
from §16, Kunen’s ideal was not even of form NSω1|S for any stationary S ⊆ω1.
This raised the prospect of having to enlist determinacy hypotheses in order to
secure the consistency of strong combinatorial propositions in ZFC.
Both the Martin and Steel-Van Wesep results were improved by Woodin.
Around 1981 he reduced the hypothesis of the latter result to just AD (see his
[83a]), and in early 1984 he improved the conclusion of Martin’s result to ADL(R),
albeit starting from the stronger I0 (31.9). This was an important advance in that
it did subsume AD into the large cardinal hierarchy, but any possibility of an
equiconsistency result remained remote. It turned out that, as sometimes happens
in mathematics, a fresh infusion of ideas from a different quarter was to lead to a
major reorientation and generate new results.
The break came in the work of three ﬁne mathematicians at the forefront in
the investigation of large cardinals, Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah. In a major
collaboration in early 1984 in Jerusalem they [88, 88a] implemented a project
of larger signiﬁcance for set theory which led to a new understanding of strong
propositions and the possibilities with forcing. Applying the powerful semi-proper
forcing techniques of Shelah [82], they [88] collapsed a supercompact cardinal κ to
ω2 via a κ-c.c. forcing so that in the extension a provably maximal form of Martin’s
Axiom, Martin’s Maximum, holds. They then established the relative consistency
of several propositions by deriving them directly from this new axiom. One such
proposition was that NSω1 is ω2-saturated. Hence, not only was the upper bound
for the consistency strength of having an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1 considerably
reduced from Kunen’s huge cardinal, but for the ﬁrst time the consistency of
NSω1 itself being ω2-saturated was established relative to large cardinals rather
than determinacy.
With their work Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah had overturned a long-held
view about the scaling down of large cardinal properties. In the ﬁrst ﬂush of
new hypotheses and propositions, Kunen had naturally enough collapsed a large
cardinal to ω1 in order to transmute strong properties of the cardinal into an ω2-
saturated ideal over ω1, and this sort of direct connection had become the rule.
The new discovery was that a careful collapse of a large cardinal to ω2 instead
can provide enough structure to secure such an ideal. In particular, the generic
elementary embedding given by the further forcing with the saturated ideal does
not extend any previous embedding associated with the original large cardinal.
And now for a crucial connection that was made with Lebesgue measurability.
As described in Foreman-Magidor-Shelah [88: §3], results of Shelah and Woodin
when put together led to a direct implication about L(R) from supercompactness:
Martin’s Maximum implies that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Shelah realized that the tech-
nique of S-closed forcing from his [82] can be incorporated into the argument
for Martin’s Maximum to get a version of that axiom consistent with CH: The

32. Consistency of AD
461
supercompact cardinal κ is collapsed by an amended κ-c.c. forcing which more-
over is ω1-Baire and so does not add any new reals. Starting in the ground model
V with an S ⊆ω1 so that both S and ω1 −S are stationary, this S-closed forcing
arranges in any generic extension V [G] that NSω1|(ω1 −S) is ω2-saturated.
In long-distance telephone conversation with Foreman in April 1984, Woodin
outlined a proof that with the reals unchanging in such a collapse, the existence of
a generic elementary embedding of the type given by an ω2-saturated ideal over
ω1 in a further extension of V [G] implies that in the ground model V every set of
reals in L(R) is Lebesgue measurable. This depended on the Solovay result 11.1
and the known fact that for large cardinals κ, the reals in any generic collapse of
κ to ω1 via a κ-c.c. forcing coincide with the reals of a Col(ω, κ) Levy collapse.
(Notably, arguments using a generic elementary embedding to secure Lebesgue
measurability in the ground model had occurred in previous work of Magidor
[80] and Foreman [86].)
The Shelah realization and the Woodin observation
established: If there is a supercompact cardinal, then every set of reals in L(R) is
Lebesgue measurable.
Such an implication from a large cardinal hypothesis precludes the possibility
of any inner model of it with a reasonable well-ordering of the reals (cf. the
remarks after 31.8).
With the familiar supercompact cardinals exhibiting such
“wildness” the quest was on to reduce the large cardinal hypothesis sufﬁcient for
the implication. This was later described in Shelah-Woodin [90], the concepts
involved having been explored in §26: Woodin ﬁrst noticed that a superstrong
cardinal sufﬁces.
While Woodin was visiting Jerusalem in June 1984, Shelah
isolated a weaker concept incorporating functional conditions, later called a Shelah
cardinal, and implemented his crucial idea of investing one such cardinal to get
Lebesgue measurability for each level of the projective hierarchy. But such a
cardinal still reﬂected the requisite technical properties downward, and so less
would do.
Soon afterward Woodin formulated the crucial concept of Woodin
cardinal by inverting quantiﬁers in Shelah’s deﬁnition, and showed that it sufﬁces
for Shelah’s scheme:
32.9 Theorem (Shelah-Woodin [90]).
(a) If n ∈ω and there are n Woodin cardinals with a measurable cardinal
above them, then every Σ1
n+2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
(b) If there are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals with a measurable cardinal
above them, then every set of reals in L(R) is Lebesgue measurable.
The n = 0 case of (a) is Solovay’s 14.3. Woodin cardinals seemed to encap-
sulate just what is needed to carry out the collapsing argument that led to saturated
ideals, and moreover the proofs suggested optimality – recall that Woodin cardinals
are not necessarily weakly compact so do not directly reﬂect substantial proper-
ties. The measurable cardinal hovering above was to be a recurring theme, the
purpose being loosely speaking to maintain a stable environment with the exis-
tence of sharps. Since Woodinness in consistency strength is much stronger than

462
Chapter 6. Determinacy
measurability, it is a mild if annoying peculiarity of the theory. Finally, 32.9 was
the ﬁrst instance of a circumstance remarkable granting the optimality the hypothe-
ses: (a) leads from inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals to the Lebesgue measurability
of every projective set of reals, yet the marginally stronger hypothesis of (b) sud-
denly opens the ﬂoodgates to the measurability of every set of reals in L(R).
As part of this development Shelah in early 1985 reduced the consistency
strength for saturated ideals to a Woodin cardinal:
32.10 Theorem (Shelah).
Suppose that κ is Woodin. Then there is a forcing
extension in which κ = ω2 and NSω1 is ω2-saturated.
As with versions of Martin’s Maximum consistent with CH, Shelah was also able
to get CH to hold in the extension at the cost of the ideal being of the less canonical
form NSω1|S. See Shelah [87] for related results.
Woodin made an important conceptual move in the Autumn of 1984 that
streamlined much of the previous work. That work had turned on the process of
collapsing a large cardinal to get a saturated ideal and then a generic elementary
embedding. As in any case there is a forcing that does all this, Woodin stalked for
the essence and formulated his stationary tower forcing. This notion of forcing,
given sufﬁcient hypotheses, directly provides a generic elementary embedding
j: V ≺M with crit( j) = ω1 and ωM ⊆M among a multitude of possibilities. It
looks strange at ﬁrst, but can be seen as an outgrowth of the work of Foreman-
Magidor-Shelah [88], both in the adoption its generalization of stationariness and
the use of a key “semi-properness” property needed to “capture” dense open sets.
With stationary tower forcing, Woodin eliminated saturated ideal arguments from
the derivation of the regularity properties for sets of reals.
In early 1985 Woodin [88] applied his stationary tower forcing both to im-
prove his earlier 32.8 to a direct implication and to replace Lebesgue measurability
by a prior representability for sets of reals: If there is a supercompact cardinal,
then every set of reals in L(R) is weakly homogeneously Suslin. With Woodin
cardinals soon seen to provide just the right technical strength to implement sta-
tionary tower forcing Woodin then weakened the hypothesis to an accumulation
of many Woodin cardinals. He did not get to the optimal result, however, before
a major advance was made from a different quarter.
Woodin Cardinals and Determinacy
With the hypotheses dramatically reduced for getting the Lebesgue measurability
of the projective sets, the growing web of connections set the stage for Martin
and Steel’s breakthrough in September 1985. The new Woodin cardinals held out
the hope for getting results along the lines of Martin’s correlations of Det(α-Π1
1)
with inner models having many measurable cardinals. Alive to the possibility
Martin and Steel were able to derive determinacy by converting an obstacle in
the developing inner model theory into an asset. They wrote in their systematic
exposition [89: 74]:

32. Consistency of AD
463
. . . the authors owe a great debt to the work of Foreman, Magidor, Shelah, and Woodin.
Nevertheless, the technical ideas in our proof have no relation to that work. We arrived
at our proof by asking what it is about Woodin cardinals that makes their inner models
so complicated. In earlier work on inner model theory, there had arisen the worry that
superstrong cardinals might generate complicated “iteration” trees . . .. It turns out that
Woodin cardinals generate such trees, and, while this is a problem for inner model theory,
it can be used to prove determinacy.
Iteration trees was the means through which Martin and Steel established their re-
sults, and Woodin cardinals, complementing their role in stationary tower forcing,
provided just the right technical strength to construct such trees. Woodin cardinals
thus became ﬁrmly established as the central large cardinal concept in the study
of the consistency of determinacy.
Martin and Steel’s main result was a “transfer” theorem that can be moti-
vated as a means of propagating determinacy through the projective hierarchy via
homogeneous trees, just as reduction was propagated via prewellorderings and
uniformization via scales. If there is a measurable cardinal κ, then the Π1
1 sets
are κ-homogeneously Suslin and so are determined (32.1, 32.2), and Σ1
2 sets are
κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin (32.3). A means must now be devised, as for the
other regularity properties, to continue to the next level. To a weakly homoge-
neous tree T corresponds a tree ˜T so that p[ ˜T ] = ωω −p[T ] (32.6). The transfer
theorem used a Woodin cardinal and the aforementioned iteration trees to derive
homogeneity for ˜T , and thus determinacy for p[ ˜T ], from the weak homogeneity
of T :
32.11 Theorem (Martin-Steel [88, 89]). Suppose that λ is a Woodin cardinal and
T is a λ+-weakly homogeneous tree. Then for any γ < λ, ˜T is γ -homogeneous.
Hence, continuing from Σ1
2 being κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin, if there
is a Woodin cardinal λ0 < κ, then the Π1
2 sets are µ-homogeneously Suslin for
any µ < λ0 and Σ1
3 sets are µ-weakly homogeneously Suslin for such µ. And if
there is a Woodin cardinal λ1 < λ0, the propagation can continue:
32.12 Corollary. If n ∈ω and there are n Woodin cardinals with a measurable
cardinal above them, then Det(Π1
n+1).
The form of this result had been suggested by the reduction 32.9(a), remembering
that Det(Π1
n+1) implies that every Σ1
n+2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable (27.14).
By July 1986, Martin and Steel (see their [94]) had advanced the inner model
theory enough to get such a model with n Woodin cardinals and a Σ1
n+2-good
well-ordering of the reals.
Such a well-ordering is not Lebesgue measurable
(cf. 13.10), and so in 32.12 (and 32.9(a)) the measurable cardinal hovering above
cannot be eliminated.
Within weeks after the Martin-Steel result 32.12 was achieved, Woodin in the
autumn of 1985 had established the optimal result for getting weakly homogeneous
representations in L(R):

464
Chapter 6. Determinacy
32.13 Theorem (Woodin). Suppose that there are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals
with a measurable cardinal above them. Then for any λ less than the supremum
of those Woodin cardinals, every set of reals in L(R) is λ-weakly homogeneously
Suslin.
The following is an immediate consequence of 32.11 and 32.13, and as with
the latter it is surprising in light of the optimality of 32.12 that just having one
measurable cardinal above should encompass all sets of reals in L(R).
32.14 Corollary. If there are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals with a measurable
cardinal above them, then ADL(R).
Although the pace of narrative is slowed, a component of 32.13 is estab-
lished to convey something of how large cardinals provide weakly homogeneous
representations for sets of reals:
32.15 Proposition (Woodin). Suppose that κ is inaccessible and there is a generic
extension V [G] in which: κ = ω1 and there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = ω1
and ωM ⊆M. Suppose also that A ⊆ωω and there are trees T and T ′ such that
A = p[T ] and p[T ′] = ωω −p[T ], and this also holds in V [G]. Suppose ﬁnally
that λ < κ is T -strong. Then A is λ-weakly homogeneously Suslin.
Remarks. The existence of such a generic extension follows via stationary tower
forcing when κ is Woodin.
The existence of such tree representations for an
arbitrary set A of reals and its complement, robust through generic extensions,
follows from the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals with a measurable
cardinal above them. Finally, after a contextual argument showing that for present
purposes T ⊆Vκ can be assumed, the existence of arbitrarily large λ < κ such
that λ is T -strong follows from 26.14 when κ is Woodin. In particular, this result
is a weak converse to 32.6 in the presence of a Woodin cardinal.
Proof. It is ﬁrst deduced that because λ is T -strong, A = p[T ] = p[T ∩Vλ],
and the expected argument is used to generate ultraﬁlters that motivate the main
construction:
Suppose that x ∈A, say with ⟨x, f ⟩∈[T ]. Let γ = rank( f ) and e: V ≺N
be such that crit(e) = λ, γ < e(λ), Vγ +1 ⊆N, and T ∩Vγ +1 = e(T ) ∩Vγ +1. It
follows readily that ⟨x, f ⟩∈[e(T )], and so by elementarity there is some g ∈Vλ
such that ⟨x, g⟩∈[T ]. But then, x ∈p[T ∩Vλ].
Continuing with the ⟨x, f ⟩∈[T ] and e as above, for m ∈ω deﬁne Um by:
X ∈Um iff
X ⊆Vλ ∧f |m ∈e(X) .
Then Um is a λ-complete (possibly principal) ultraﬁlter over Vλ. The deﬁnition
recalls the formulation of extenders from elementary embeddings (§26), except
that the function f |m is used rather than the set ran( f |m).
As for extenders,

32. Consistency of AD
465
⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩is a countably complete tower: That it is a tower follows from the
deﬁnition of the Um’s. That it is countably complete can be veriﬁed directly from
elementarity, since if Xm ∈Um for m ∈ω, then as f |m ∈e(Xm) for such m and
f ∈N, there must be some d ∈V such that d|m ∈Xm for such m. Finally, note
that for m ∈ω,
(T ∩Vλ)x|m ∈Um iff f |m ∈e(Tx|m) iff f |m ∈e(T )x|m iff ⟨x|m, f |m⟩∈e(T ) ,
but this last holds, as noted before.
Setting
E = {U | U is a λ-complete ultraﬁlter over Vλ} ,
the above argument shows that E veriﬁes the λ-weak homogeneity of T ∩Vλ in the
sense of the characterization 32.4, except that E is not countable. It is to remedy
this defect that the other hypotheses are used in a further reﬂection argument.
Note ﬁrst the E is countable in V [G] since κ is inaccessible in V and κ = ω1 in
V [G]. Since ωM ⊆M, it readily follows that j“E ∈M and is countable there.
Building on this it will be argued that there is enough cohesion between V and
M to establish the claim, with that 32.4 sense of “veriﬁes”, that
M |= j“E veriﬁes the j(λ)-weak homogeneity of j(T ∩Vλ) .
Once this is established the proof would be complete, since by elementarity there
would be some witness to the λ-weak homogeneity of T ∩Vλ, and A = p[T ∩Vλ].
To establish the claim, suppose that M |= x ∈p[ j(T ∩Vλ)]. It must be
shown that in M there is a countably complete tower ⟨Wm | m ∈ω⟩∈ω j“E such
that j(T ∩Vλ)x|m ∈Wm for every m ∈ω. First note that since p[T ′] = ωω−p[T ]
in V , M |= x /∈p[ j(T ′)] by elementarity. It follows from this that x ∈p[T ] in
V [G]:
Arguing in V [G], assume to the contrary that x
/∈p[T ].
Then since
p[T ′] = ωω−p[T ] persists there by hypothesis, x ∈p[T ′], say with ⟨x, g⟩∈[T ′].
It follows readily that ⟨x, j“g⟩∈[ j(T ′)] where j“g is of course the func-
tion {⟨n, j(g(n))⟩| n ∈ω}, and moreover j“g ∈M as ωM ⊆M. But then,
M |= x ∈p[ j(T ′)], which is a contradiction.
With x ∈p[T ] in V [G] conﬁrmed, let f ∈V [G] be such that ⟨x, f ⟩∈[T ]
and set rank( f ) = γ . In V , let e: V ≺N be as at the beginning of this proof,
with crit(e) = λ, γ < e(λ), Vγ +1 ⊆N, and T ∩Vγ +1 = e(T ) ∩Vγ +1. Although
f is not necessarily in V , for each m ∈ω the ﬁnite set f |m can be used in V as
before to deﬁne an ultraﬁlter Um ∈E.
In V [G],
f is available and so also is the sequence ⟨Um | m ∈ω⟩,
and as argued previously this sequence is a countably complete tower such
that (T ∩Vλ)x|m ∈Um for each m ∈ω.
It follows from ωM ⊆M that
j“ f = {⟨n, j( f (n))⟩| n ∈ω} ∈M and ⟨j(Um) | m ∈ω⟩∈M, and from elemen-
tarity that this sequence is a tower drawn from j“E such that j(T ∩Vλ)x|m ∈j(Um)
for each m ∈ω. To complete the proof, it is checked that this tower is countably
complete in M:

466
Chapter 6. Determinacy
In V set e = e|Vλ+1; then in the deﬁnition of the Um’s, e can be replaced by e.
In its terms the previous argument for the Um’s can be transferred from V : Suppose
that in M, Xm ∈j(Um) for m ∈ω, so that by elementarity j( f |m) ∈j(e)(Xm) for
such m. Since j“ f ∈M, and by elementarity rank( j“ f ) ≤j(γ ) and V M
j(γ )+1 ⊆
ran( j(e)), it follows that j“ f ∈ran( j(e)), and of course ( j“ f )|m = j( f |m) for
m ∈ω. But then, the elementarity of j(e) implies that there must be some d ∈M
such that d|m ∈Xm for every m ∈ω. This completes the proof of the claim about
j“E in M, and with it, the theorem.
⊣
This argument highlights the crucial roles played in the theory of the property
ωM ⊆M and of p[T ′] = ωω −p[T ] holding in V [G] as well as in V .
With the consistency strength of AD gauged by 32.14, Woodin soon estab-
lished the crowning equiconsistency result:
32.16 Theorem (Woodin). The following are equiconsistent:
(a) ZFC + There are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals.
(b) ZF + AD.
Whether or not this had to be the theorem, the scant remarks made here can
convey little of the depth and sophistication of the proof (for which and others see
Woodin-Mathias-Hauser [∞]). In the forward direction, inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals are all made countable and a sequence ⟨Gn | n ∈ω⟩of generics for
their stationary tower forcings is developed that cohere: In each V [Gn] there is
a generic elementary embedding jn: V ≺Mn, and for n ≤n there are maps
jn,n: Mn ≺Mn that commute with the jn’s. Taking Rn to be the reals of Mn, the
desired model of AD is L(
n Rn). The ﬁnal argument is one by contradiction
based on a constructively least counterexample. For that allegedly undetermined
set A of reals a robust tree representation for it and its complement is found, and
from the consequent weak homogeneity a contradiction is reached by applying the
Martin-Steel result 32.11 to derive the determinacy of A.
For the converse direction, it is ﬁrst established that if AD and V = L(R),
then Θ is Woodin in HOD: HOD is of course the class of hereditarily ordinal deﬁn-
able sets. AD is applied most directly in an argument, recalling Solovay’s original
proof of the measurability of ω1, to get certain ultraﬁlters. A crucial normality
property is then derived for these ultraﬁlters through the deﬁnability properties
available in HOD. Finally, a uniform version of the Moschovakis Coding Lemma
is applied to show that these ultraﬁlters provide embeddings of HOD that witness
the strongness properties below Θ needed to afﬁrm its Woodinness.
To get an inner model with inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals, an inﬁnite ⊇-
decreasing chain ⟨Mi | i ∈ω⟩of inner models is ﬁrst constructed based on the
above HOD result. Starting with M0 = HODL(R), M1 is (the transitive collapse
of) the ultrapower of M0 constructed in L(R) using an analogue of the Martin
ultraﬁlter over the Turing degrees. The ultrapower indirectly generates a new set
of reals R1 such that R1 ⊇R, and an embedding: L(R) ≺L(R1). By elementarity

32. Consistency of AD
467
AD holds in L(R1) and M1 = HODL(R1), and the construction is iterated to get all
the Mi’s. Recasting the HODL(R) |= ⌈Θ is Woodin⌉result, an increasing sequence
⟨θi | i ∈ω⟩of ordinals is then found with accompanying “witnesses” Wi ⊆θi
deﬁned uniformly so that θi is Woodin in Mi[Wi].
With W = ⟨Wi | i ∈ω⟩
and M = 
i Mi the argument is concluded by showing that in M[W] each θi is
Woodin.
As described in §31, Det(Π1
2) had been a focal hypothesis for the consistency
study of determinacy through the 1970’s. In 1989 Woodin settled matters with
the following elegant characterizations:
32.17 Theorem (Woodin). The following are equiconsistent:
(a) ZFC + Det(Π1
2 ).
(b) ZFC + There is a Woodin cardinal.
32.18 Theorem (Woodin). The following are equivalent:
(a) Det(Π1
2).
(b) For any a ∈ωω there is a countable ordinal δ such that δ is Woodin in
an inner model of ZFC containing a.
The (a) to (b) direction ﬁgured in the proof of 32.16, and begins from a
surprising result of Kechris-Solovay [85] in ZF + DC, that for any a ∈ω, L[a] |=
Det(∆1
2) implies Det(OD). That is, in such models determinacy for lightface ∆1
2
sets already implies determinacy for the largest class of lightface “deﬁnable”sets,
the ordinal deﬁnable sets.
It is known that there is no direct analogue of 32.17 for Det(Π1
n ) when n > 2
in terms of merely having a number of Woodin cardinals. Woodin has explored
this terrain, and has tentative large cardinal formulations for equiconsistencies.
What about ADR? By our surface remarks at the end of §27 no inner model
of ADR can be of form L(R ∪{S}) for any S ⊆R. Woodin was able to show that
if there is an inner model of ADR containing every real, then there is a smallest
such model (see Steel [88: §3]). Moreover, he was able to get one from a moderate
augmentation of having inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals:
32.19 Theorem (Woodin). Suppose that there is a δ such that cf(δ) = ω, δ is
a limit of Woodin cardinals, and δ is also a limit of cardinals γ -strong for every
γ < δ. Then there is a forcing extension in which there is an inner model containing
every real and satisfying ADR.
The proof is along the lines of that for the forward direction of 32.16, and
recent results suggest that the hypothesis may be the exact consistency strength
for ADR. As mentioned earlier, ZF + ADR + ⌈Θ is regular⌉is a strong hypothesis
that implies the consistency of ZF + ADR (Solovay [78a]), and served as the ﬁrst
sufﬁcient hypothesis for getting the relative consistency of NSω1 is ω2-saturated
(Steel-Van Wesep [82]). There were various indications that ADR + ⌈Θ is regular⌉
has stronger consistency strength than any accumulation of Woodin cardinals, but

468
Chapter 6. Determinacy
in 1992 Woodin was able to tame even this hypothesis.
Recall from §24 the
hypothesis I1 that for some δ, there is a j: Vδ+1 ≺Vδ+1, and that a marginally
stronger hypothesis just short of Kunen’s inconsistency ﬁgured in the ﬁrst proof
of the relative consistency of AD (31.9).
32.20 Theorem (Woodin). Suppose that there is a j: Vδ+1 ≺Vδ+1 for some δ, say
with crit( j) = κ. Then the following holds in any generic extension via Col(ω, κ):
There is an inner model containing every real and satisfying ADR + ⌈Θ is regular⌉.
Large cardinals have reasserted themselves once again, but surely the hypoth-
esis here is not optimal.
Among a growing number of synthetic results that have built a large web of
connections around determinacy, the more accessible are cursorily described to
bring this overview to a close.
Determinacy in Terms of Regularity Properties
In his early investigations toward equivalences for determinacy (cf. 30.28) Woodin
considered the possibility that determinacy hypotheses might be equivalent to some
of their structural consequences for sets of reals. He posed the following question
for the projective sets, since answered in the negative as dicussed below.
32.21 Question (ZF + DC)(Woodin [82]). Are the following equivalent:
(a) PD.
(b) Every projective set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the Baire
property, and every projective subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized by a projective
set.
Lebesgue measurability and having the Baire property, being antithetical to
choice principles, are complemented by uniformizability as just such a principle,
and these consequences of PD are together to provide the strength to recover PD.
If so, a hypothesis with ad hoc features would gain considerably in justiﬁcation
and explication through being equated with consequences of structural immediacy.
Although Woodin [82] did not answer his question, he was able to derive from
(b) that ∀a ∈ωω(a† exists) (a† was deﬁned at the end of §21).
With the resolution of 32.21 the ultimate goal, Hauser [95] in the wake of
considerable advances in inner model theory established that projective absolute-
ness, the proposition that projective relations are absolute for V in any generic
extension (cf. 15.6), is equiconsistent with the existence of inﬁnitely many strong
cardinals.
Then somewhat unexpectedly, Steel in the Fall of 1997 answered 32.21 in
the negative. With the relevance of strong cardinals seen and building on work of
Woodin, Steel established that the consistency of 32.21(b) already follows from
the consistency of the rather weak proposition (∗): There is an increasing sequence

32. Consistency of AD
469
⟨κn | n ∈ω⟩of cardinals with λ their supremum such that: For any n ∈ω and
x ∈Vλ+1 there is a j: V ≺M with crit( j) = κn and x ∈M.
Hauser-Schindler [00] then established a relative consistency result that was
just short of being the converse to Steel’s, using inner model apparatus that neces-
sitated the existence of a measurable cardinal above. Finally, resolving the issue
with an exact large cardinal analysis Schindler [02] established the equiconsistency
of 32.21(b) with (∗).
In the early 1990’s Woodin was able to answer the question analogous to
32.21 for full AD in L(R); recall the 30.25 delimitation at Π2
1 for uniformization
there.
32.22 Theorem (ZF + DC)(Woodin). Assume V = L(R). Then the following are
equivalent:
(a) AD.
(b) Every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the Baire property, and
every Σ2
1 subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized.
The new (b) to (a) direction provided by Woodin used recent results of Steel
in inner model theory. The import of 32.21 for PD carries over to 32.22 for AD,
and this result, characterizing the regularity properties for the large class of sets
in L(R), can be viewed as a culmination of the efforts of the classical descriptive
set theorists.
What about ADR in terms of regularity properties? Formulations along these
lines stirred interest as a possible approach to comprehending this strong hypothe-
sis. ADR implies that every subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized (27.15). Consider
the following hypothesis intermediate between AD and ADR:
(AD1/2
R )
Every game where one player plays reals
and the other plays integers is determined .
Clearly this hypothesis sufﬁces for the proof of 27.15 (since player I can choose
a real x, and forgetting about the rest of his moves player I I can be required
to choose integers forming a real y such that ⟨x, y⟩∈A). In the early 1980’s
Kechris [88] established the converse in ZF + DC: AD1/2
R
iff AD + ⌈Every subset
of 2(ωω) can be uniformized⌉. With uniformizability seemingly a weak choice
principle, this result suggested that AD1/2
R
is a weak augmentation of AD.
On the other hand, Woodin showed that in ZF + DC, AD + ⌈Every set of
reals has a scale⌉implies ADR. Scales provide tree representations (30.2), and
these in turn lead to representations as γ -Borel sets (30.13(a)) and analogues of
the projective ordinals (cf. 30.12). AD + ⌈Every set of reals has a scale⌉thus
has consequences beyond what was known to follow from ADR: (i) Every set of
reals is ∞-Borel, i.e. in the smallest collection of sets of reals containing the open
sets and closed under complementation and the taking of well-ordered unions (of
arbitrary length). (ii) There are arbitrarily large regular successor cardinals below
Θ (those analogues of the projective ordinals).

470
Chapter 6. Determinacy
Having scales seemed to strengthen AD considerably whereas uniformizabil-
ity seemed a weak augmentation. However, using results of Becker [85], Woodin
in the early 1980’s established an equiconsistency: Con(ZF + DC + AD + Ev-
ery subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized) iff Con(ZF + DC + AD + Every set
of reals has a scale). This foreshadowed equivalence, and in the wake of the
developments of the late 1980’s Woodin duly established this, bringing together
the various hypotheses:
32.23 Theorem (ZF + DC)(Woodin). The following are equivalent:
(a) ADR.
(b) AD + Every set of reals has a scale.
(c) AD + Every subset of 2(ωω) can be uniformized.
It is striking that ADR could be equivalent to such an ostensibly weak form
as (c).
Determinacy in Terms of Ideals
With the investigation of ideals having led to the major break for determinacy,
subsequent developments were eventually to reverberate back to inform on ideals.
Mitchell and Steel has pursued the development of inner models for Woodin
cardinals, and the latter was able to establish that Shelah’s 32.10 is essentially
optimal:
32.24 Theorem (Steel). Suppose that there is an ω2-saturated ideal over ω1 and
there is a measurable cardinal. Then there is an inner model of ZFC in which
there is a Woodin cardinal.
Again there is the minor annoyance of the measurable cardinal, but an
equiconsistency result can at least be stated for saturated ideals and Woodin car-
dinals by incorporating a measurable cardinal hovering over each.
The inner model theory has been further advanced with persistence and en-
ergy. In 1992 Steel used an inner model with inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals
to answer a question of Woodin [88: 6591] with the following result: If every set
of reals in L(R) is weakly homogeneously Suslin, then ADL(R).
Sprinting to the ﬁnish, a pivotal ideal concept is quickly introduced. Building
on our terminology from §16, an ideal I over a cardinal κ is λ-dense iff there is
a family D ⊆P(κ) −I with |D| = λ such that for any X ∈P(κ) −I, there is
a Y ∈D with Y −X ∈I. This is a natural notion of density for the Boolean
algebra P(κ)/I. Clearly, if I is λ-dense and λ < µ, then I is µ-saturated. As
part of his sustained interest in ideals, Woodin in the early 1980’s had improved
the Steel-Van Wesep [82] result mentioned earlier by showing in ZF that if ADR
and Θ is regular, then in a forcing extension there is an inner model of ZFC
in which NSω1|S is ω1-dense for some stationary S ⊆ω1.
He later drew the
same conclusion from the existence of an almost huge cardinal. Shelah [86: 247ff]

32. Consistency of AD
471
showed that ZFC imposes an intriguing limitation: If 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1, then NSω1 is not
ω1-dense. In particular, CH implies the conclusion. With the continuum being ω2
in 32.10, an important open question is whether CH is consistent with NSω1 being
ω2-saturated.
Pushing the connections between ideals and determinacy, Woodin established
the following, which like 32.22 used Steel’s recent work in inner model theory.
32.25 Theorem (Woodin). Suppose that there is an ω1-dense ideal over ω1. Then
ADL(R).
Woodin [99] would go on to develop a vast and brillant body of work on
canonical models based on forcing and large cardinals for the failure of the Con-
tinuum Hypothesis, confronting the fundamental problem from the beginnings of
set theory. Pivoting toward this new context Woodin in late 1992 established the
following converse to 32.25 for consistency strength:
32.26 Theorem (Woodin [99: 366]).
Assume ADL(R). Then there is a generic
extension of L(R) satisfying ZFC + ⌈NSω1 is ω1-dense⌉.
Putting in the AD result and stepping back we conclude this book with a
breath-taking synthesis of large cardinals, determinacy, and inﬁnite combinatorics,
one that speaks to the great achievements that have been made, but is only a
prologue to Woodin [99].
32.27 Theorem (Woodin). The following are equiconsistent:
(a) ZF + AD.
(b) ZFC + There are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals.
(c) ZFC + The non-stationary ideal over ω1 is ω1-dense.

Chart of Cardinals
The arrows indicates direct implications or relative consistency implications, often
both.
0 = 1
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
I0-I3
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
n-huge
↓
superhuge
huge
←−−−−−−−−−−−−
↓
almost huge
Vopˇenka’s Principle
←−−−−−−
↓
extendible
−−−−−−−−−→
supercompact
−−−−−−→
strongly compact
superstrong
←−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−→
Woodin
←−−−−−−−−
↓
strong
↓
0† exists
↓
measurable
↓
Ramsey
−−−−−−−−−→
Rowbottom
J´onsson
←−−−−−−−−−
κ −→(ω1)<ω
2
←−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−→
↓
∀a ∈ωω(a# exists)
↓
0# exists
−−−−−−−−−→
κ −→(ω)<ω
2
↓
indescribable
weakly compact
←−−−−−−
α-Mahlo
←−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−→
Mahlo
−−−−−−−−−−→
α-inaccessible
inaccessible
←−−−−−−−−
↓
weakly inaccessible

Appendix
(With apologies to Burton Dreben)
This appendix addresses several larger and more discursive issues that may be
raised by set theory and made more acute by the theory of large cardinals. An
attempt is made to deﬂate their signiﬁcance, and thereby to forestall moves that
end up in metaphysics. The history and practice of mathematics in general and
set theory in particular afﬁrms that they have achieved an evident autonomy, one
that should resist external explanations, extrapolations, or prescriptions.
Although there have been strong metaphysical motivations for doing mathe-
matics, it has steadily emerged through a thinning process to achieve a degree of
invariance that distinguishes it from other human endeavors. As Laplace replied
to Napoleon when asked why God did not appear in his work, “I have no need
of that hypothesis!” This invariance is evident in the universality of mathematical
language and acceptance of a body of results and procedures, and is arguably part
of the sense of being mathematical. Moreover, it is this invariance that has led to
the cumulative progress of mathematics, one more sustained than in science and
very different from the dialectical to and fro of philosophy.
On the other hand, the broader history of mathematics undercuts any sug-
gestion of orderly progress and moreover features sudden spurts, the major ones
brought about by successively new contexts – complexes of terms, approaches,
and procedures. These contexts provided new senses that transformed or reﬁned
older concepts and resolved previous questions thus recast, eventually stabilizing
at new levels of invariance. To frame a discussion of set theory, we shall review
(with interpretive twists) the salient features in the evolution of the continuum to
the real numbers, i.e. the so-called “arithmetization of the continuum”.
The most momentous mathematical discovery made by the classical Greeks
was that the side and the diagonal of a square are incommensurable, in our terms
that
√
2 is irrational. Filtering through the mysteries of the Pythagorean school in
the 5th Century B.C., this ﬁrst impossibility result, reputedly due to one Hippa-
sus of Metapontum, overturned their belief that geometry can be investigated in
terms of ratios of (the natural) numbers. With the situation further accentuated by
Zeno’s paradoxes, collectively an attack on the intelligibility of inﬁnitary dynamic
processes, the response was one of the great achievements of Greek mathematics:
Eudoxus’s theory of geometrical proportions as described in Book V of Euclid’s
Elements. This context provided for the ordering of possibly incommensurable
magnitudes, and was thus the ﬁrst mathematization of the continuum. But ge-
ometry was dominant to the extent that numbers had the sense of geometrical
magnitudes, the product of two numbers qua lengths being an area and so forth,
and multiplication in practice was not iterated more than a few times.
Almost two millenia later, the emergence of mercantile arithmetic and quan-
titative scientiﬁc investigation proceeded hand in hand with the introduction of
basic arithmetical notation. By the early 17th Century +, ×, =, < were in

474
Appendix
common usage, and also
√
and variables x, y. This amounted to a new con-
text in which long calculations became surveyable, particular irrational numbers
gained an operative legitimacy, and algebra could develop systematically. Even
before this standardization, the study of equations in streamlined notations had
suggested new combinations like √−1 that outstripped sense but pointed to new
possibilities.
In the mid-17th Century the great philosopher Ren´e Descartes set the stage
for the subsequent expansionary period in mathematics with his advocacy of a
new framework, analytic geometry, for the study of the continuum. Establishing
the primacy of algebra over geometry, not only did Descartes make the conceptual
move to the familiar coordinate system, but he loosened the connection of multi-
plication to dimension so that polynomials could be investigated without e.g. x2
being regarded as an area, and he shifted attention from closed curves to those
given by functional variation.
Surely the greatest advance in mathematics since antiquity was the indepen-
dent creation of the calculus by Newton and Leibniz in the late 17th Century.
Newton viewed curves as representing physical motion and made liberal use of
inﬁnite series. Leibniz articulated curves with inﬁnitesimals and emphasized the
larger possibilities for symbolic manipulation. Both arrived at the fundamental
connection between tangents to curves and areas underneath, Newton from the
former and Leibniz from the latter. But even in this very multiplicity genius is
contextual, not ineffable, and there is something to Newton’s remark that he saw
farther because he had “stood on the shoulders of giants”. What Newton and Leib-
niz had done was to forge a general approach that subsumed previous piecemeal
results, an approach that not only resolved, in the new terms, a host of problems
inherited from the Greeks, but suggested new problems and possibilities for the
emerging ﬁeld of mathematical analysis.
With the legacies of Newtonian mechanics and Leibnizian generative sym-
bolism, mathematics expanded tremendously in the 18th Century, especially into
the new domains of functions, inﬁnite series, and differential equations. The latter
provided a language to describe physical phenomena, and there was overwhelm-
ing empirical reinforcement, particularly in celestial mechanics. The century was
epitomized by Euler, whose staggering output featured great strides in inductive
mathematics bolstered by appeals to empirical evidence, as in physics today, and
remarkable computational powers, foreshadowing recent trends in mathematics.
In the 19th Century mathematics not only continued to expand at a tremen-
dous rate, but it also underwent a transformation based on new structural initia-
tives, a transformation beginning in analysis. In the previous century the vibrating
string had been much discussed; the physics suggested the superposition of many
frequencies, leading symbolically to inﬁnite trigonometric series, as well as the
possibility of an arbitrary initial conﬁguration, which in turn led to the extension
of the concept of function beyond those given by analytic expressions. The ten-
sion thus created by this juxtaposition of “inﬁnite series” and “function” in new

Appendix
475
expanded senses was to lead to the arithmetization of analysis initiated by Cauchy
and eventually to the creation of set theory by Cantor.
In order to pursue his study of series of functions, Cauchy in the 1820’s
articulated the concept of limit, and in its terms, convergence of series and con-
tinuity of functions. This amounted to a reorientation of mathematical analysis
in that divergent series were excised and the ground laid for the deniability of a
property of functions that had been implicit in their geometric sense. Indeed, a
discontinuous counterexample to one of Cauchy’s own assertions, that the sum of
a convergent series of continuous functions is continuous, spurred a more careful
analysis.
Karl Weierstrass in the 1850’s introduced the familiar ∀ǫ-∃δ style of formu-
lating limits, and eliminated once and for all the justiﬁcatory procedures in terms
of inﬁnitesimals. With mathematicians in the process of making their subject free
from appeals to physical or geometric intuition, this new language was quickly ac-
cepted because of its ability to draw ﬁner distinctions. By this means Weierstrass
was able to rectify Cauchy’s assertion by incorporating the concept of uniform
continuity, and moreover to formulate a continuous yet nowhere differentiable
function, driving a wedge between continuity and differentiability.
With inﬁnitesimals replaced by the concept of limit and that cast in the ǫ-δ
language, a level of deductive rigor was incorporated into mathematics that had
been absent for two millenia. This may be surprising, but the concept of proof
as ﬁrst advanced by the Greeks had not remained crucial to mathematics. With
the creation of the calculus, the available calculational procedures and the steady
reinforcement of empirical evidence had been sufﬁcient to propel mathematics
inductively forward. But with the function concept steadily outgrowing the New-
tonian basis in physical motion, a new calculus became imperative. Sense for the
new functions given in terms of inﬁnite series could only be developed through
carefully speciﬁed deductive procedures, and these amounted to a new calcula-
tional technique. Just as proof for the Greeks had implicitly been the vehicle
for demonstrating geometric constructibility, proof reemerged as an extension of
algebraic calculation and soon became intrinsic as the basis for mathematics in
general.
With the new articulations to be secured by proof and proof in turn to be
based on prior principles, the regress lead in the early 1870’s to the appearance
of several independent formulations of the real numbers, of which Cantor’s and
Richard Dedekind’s are the best known. It is at ﬁrst quite striking that the real
numbers as a class came to be developed so late, but this can be viewed against
the background of the foregoing account as part of a larger conceptual shift from
intensional to extensional mathematics, that is from rules to objects:
The geometric investigation of the continuum as transformed by the calculus
had made functional variation central to mathematics. But functions were ini-
tially identiﬁed with analytic expressions, so that they were viewed intensionally
as rules, whether generating geometric ﬁgures or representing physical motion.
Although inﬁnitesimal change served to motivate differentiation and integration

476
Appendix
as transformations of these rules, there was no mathematical need to analyze the
continuum itself. Mathematics has consistently maintained invariance with such
minimal commitments, but the 19th Century articulation of limits and continuity
to be demonstrated by proof brought to bear new pressures toward an extensional
view of functions as acting on points. With geometric assumptions made more
explicit and inﬁnite series outstripping sense, it became necessary to adopt an
arithmetical view of the continuum given extensionally as a collection of points.
Cantor’s formulation of the real numbers appeared in his seminal paper [72]
on Fourier series; proceeding in terms of fundamental sequences, he laid the basis
for his theorems on sequential convergence. Dedekind [72] formulated the real
numbers in terms of his cuts to express the completeness of the continuum; deriv-
ing the least upper bound principle as a simple consequence, he thereby secured
the basic properties of continuous functions. In the use of arbitrary sequences
and inﬁnite collections, both Cantor’s and Dedekind’s objectiﬁcations of the con-
tinuum helped set the stage for the subsequent development of that extensional
mathematics par excellence, set theory. Cantor was led to his formulation rather
pragmatically to secure speciﬁc results, but they were also the results that sug-
gested the enumerations leading to the investigation of the transﬁnite. Dedekind
[72] describes how he came to his formulation much earlier, but also acknowledges
Cantor’s work.
Neither Cantor nor Dedekind regarded their respective formulations and its
correlation with an antecedent continuum as automatic. Cantor [72: 97] wrote:
In order to complete the connection . . . with the geometry of the straight line, one
must only add an axiom which simply says that conversely every numerical quantity also
has a determined point on the straight line, whose coordinate is equal to that quantity . . . I
call this proposition an axiom because by its nature it cannot be universally proved. A
certain objectivity is then subsequently gained thereby for the quantities although they are
quite independent of this.
Dedekind [72] (see [63: 11ff]) wrote:
If all points on the straight line fall into two classes such that every point of the ﬁrst class
lies to the left of every point of the second class, then there exists one and only one point
that produces this division . . .
. . . I am glad if everyone ﬁnds the above principle so obvious and so in harmony
with his own ideas of a line; for I am utterly unable to adduce any proof of its correctness,
nor has anyone the power. The assumption of this property of the line is nothing else than
an axiom by which we attribute to the line its continuity, by which we ﬁnd continuity in
the line.
Dedekind was not above “proving” basic principles (cf. his (in)famous proof of
Theorem 66 in his [88], that there is an inﬁnite set), but here he advocates an
axiomatic correlation as does Cantor.
Dedekind’s circumlocutions in terms of
“creation” via cuts led to Russell’s [03: 279ff] criticism. However, Russell’s ex-
tensional solution of simply deﬁning the real numbers as the cuts, while consistent
with his reductionism, obscures an antecedent sense of the continuum that both
Cantor and Dedekind were trying to accommodate. Neither theft nor honest toil

Appendix
477
sufﬁced; both Cantor and Dedekind recognized the need for a sort of Church’s
Thesis, a thesis of adequacy for the new construal of the continuum as a collection
of points.
Set theory emerged out of this setting, with the larger backdrop of mathemat-
ics also featuring new extensional initiatives in the development of algebraic and
geometric structures. The birth of set theory was attended by the metaphysics of
Cantor’s Absolute; it was raised on the more subtle metaphysical initiatives from
logic; and throughout, the mathematization of the inﬁnite confronted concerns
about its very possibility.
The numerical inﬁnite of indeﬁnite progression had long been held to be inco-
herent as a completed totality. With Aristotle’s potential inﬁnite vs. actual inﬁnite
a traditional demarcation, the occasional excursions into the latter had only been
morality tales clinched by apparently paradoxical one-to-one correspondences. In
particular, the only possibility for an answer to the question “how many points
are there on a line?” had been “potentially inﬁnite”, with “inﬁnite” in the decid-
edly negative, etymological sense of “not ﬁnite”. It was Cantor’s incisive work
that made of the inﬁnite a positive concept and provided a structured sense to
the question with the answer, 2ℵ0. Cantor charted out the transﬁnite with simple
generative and arithmetical rules, and thereby provided a mathematical context
for the investigation of inﬁnite collections. The inﬁnite, thus cast, was after all
mathematically coherent.
As before in mathematics the new language suggested a host of new possi-
bilities, most notably 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, but the whole transﬁnite landscape was slow in
gaining acceptance. Philosophical skepticism about the actual inﬁnite may have
played an inhibitory role, just as Kant’s dogma of the a priori of Euclidean ge-
ometry may have done for non-Euclidean geometry, but the main factor may have
simply been the mathematical reluctance to contemplate a proliferation of new
entities. Whereas the natural numbers were as old as time and at the heart of the
intuitive underpinnings of mathematics, the transﬁnite numbers seemed at ﬁrst to
be contrived and of little mathematical use. While Cauchy’s formulation of conti-
nuity had been quickly accepted as the articulation of geometric assumptions, there
was no comparable backing to the transﬁnite numbers. That reinforcement was to
be secured by the steadily increasing use of the transﬁnite leading eventually to
the full-blown theory of large cardinals, and the explicit extensional casting of set
theory through axiomatization.
As described in the introduction, Zermelo axiomatized set theory in order to
make explicit some underlying set existence assumptions and thereby advanced
a combinatorial view of sets structured solely by ∈and simple operations. The
vagueness of the deﬁnit property in the Separation Axiom invited Skolem’s pro-
posal to base it on ﬁrst-order logic, and the addition of the Replacement Axiom
ﬁgured in von Neumann’s reformulation of the transﬁnite numbers as the ordinals,
transitive sets well-ordered by ∈.
Beginning as a mathematical theory of extensions, axiomatic set theory has
carried the weight of a larger signiﬁcance having to do generally with the existence

478
Appendix
of mathematical objects. However, just as Euclid’s axioms for geometry had set
out the permissible geometric constructions, the axioms of set theory set out the
speciﬁc conditions for set generation, and this in a new calculus based on ﬁrst-
order logic. Unlike the emergence of mathematics from marketplace arithmetic
and Greek geometry, sets and transﬁnite numbers were neither laden nor buttressed
with substantial antecedence. Like strangers in a strange land, stalwarts developed
a familiarity with them guided hand in hand by their axiomatic scaffolding, which
served as new rules of procedure. In particular, existential propositions of set
theory are closely tied, even in practice, to the ∃of ﬁrst-order logic whose sense
is determined by its logical rules, and do not call for correlation with “existence”
in some larger sense.
As for the contextualized existence of inﬁnite sets, the Axiom of Inﬁnity in
its usual formulation is just the extensional counterpart to the principle of math-
ematical induction as a rule for deriving the universal ∀nϕ(n). In so far as the
natural numbers do have an antecedent sense, ∀nϕ(n) should be correlated with
the informal counterparts to ϕ(0), ϕ(1), ϕ(2), . . .. However, the correlation here
is less direct than that for the continuum with formulations of the real numbers,
since number-theoretic assertions are being made. Contra Poincar´e, Hilbert distin-
guished between contentual (inhaltlich) induction proceeding recursively from one
number to the next and formal induction by which ∀nϕ(n) follows immediately
from the ϕ(0)∧∀n(ϕ(n) →ϕ(n +1)) and “through which alone the mathematical
variable can begin to play its role in the formal system” (Hilbert [28]; see van
Heijenoort [67: 473]). With Cantorian metaphysics thinned out by axiomatization,
there is no larger sense of existence beyond the use of formal induction in which
the inﬁnite has been domesticated; a telling observation is that if there is some
doubt about some ∀nϕ(n) purportedly established by the rule, no search is under-
taken for a particular natural number a so that ϕ[a] fails, but rather the putative
proof is carefully scrutinized much as an arithmetical calculation is checked. There
is no larger sense to the Axiom of Inﬁnity other than providing the extension of
formal induction; one consequence is that the Cantorian move against the natural
numbers as having no end in the traditional “after” sense is neatly rendered by
extensionalizing induction itself with the ordinal ω, with “after” recast as “∈”.
The transﬁnite is similarly contextualized by Replacement and the principle
of transﬁnite induction.
Recalling Cantor’s unitary view of the ﬁnite and the
transﬁnite, the principle is a simple extension of induction through limit points,
and the seeming exacerbation of the breach into the actual inﬁnite amounts to
just contextual deductions from this new rule. From this viewpoint, the Axiom
of Choice can be regarded as a similarly necessary principle for infusing the
contextualized transﬁnite with the order already inherent in the ﬁnite.
As described in the introduction, the Foundation Axiom and the iterative
conception of set converted set theory into a study of well-foundedness. After
the infusion of model-theoretic techniques, the development of forcing and inner
model theory established set theory as a sophisticated and distinctive ﬁeld of
mathematics. And to repeat, formalized versions of truth and consistency became

Appendix
479
matters for combinatorial manipulation as in algebra, with large cardinals providing
an elegant and fully sufﬁcient superstructure for the study of consistency strength.
Large cardinal hypotheses as existential propositions have a distinctive status
in so far as relative consistency results have made of them a gauge, the interplay
between forcing and inner models becoming part of their collective sense in set
theory. Just as large ﬁnite numbers became surveyable through arithmetical nota-
tion, so also did large cardinals through their set-theoretic formulations as part of
the calculus of Zermelian set theory. And just as large ﬁnite numbers seem hope-
lessly inaccessible in terms of counting one by one, so also do large cardinals in
terms of hierarchically simpler processes. But just as we can work with 101,000,000
in the proper context, so we can work with a measurable cardinal.
What about the role of set theory as a foundation for mathematics? As a
mathematical theory of extension, a small part of Zermelian set theory can serve
as an ambient framework for most of ongoing mathematics. Recapitulating the
history above, rules can be extensionalized and then further recast in terms of
sets, ∈, and =. Be this as it may, this reduction does not necessarily clarify, for
generally speaking, mathematics operates at various levels of organization and
articulation: Number theory thrives ﬁrst at the level of arithmetical rules and
then at the level of analytic superstructures, far above Frege and even Peano.
Mathematical analysis thrives ﬁrst at the level of Weierstrass and then at the level
of functional superstructures, with only a faint nod to Cantor and Dedekind. Like
the relation of organic chemistry to particle physics, reducibility is acknowledged,
but the emphasis is rather on the possibilities afforded by speciﬁc conceptual
schemes at different levels of organization.
On the other hand, as a study of well-foundedness ZFC together with the
spectrum of large cardinals serves as a court of adjudication, in terms of relative
consistency, for mathematical propositions that can be informatively contextual-
ized in set theory by letting their variables range over the set theoretic universe.
Thus, set theory is more of an open-ended framework for mathematics rather than
an elucidating foundation. It is as a ﬁeld of mathematics that both proceeds with
its own internal questions and is capable of contextualizing over a broad range
which makes of set theory an intriguing and highly distinctive subject.
What then is left for philosophy? Existence, truth, and knowledge, when
taken in the large, are ultimately contentious subjects for debate rather than con-
cepts for explication. The subjects of much philosophizing, these as well as the
whole package of dichotomies like objective/subjective, realist/anti-realist, and
contingent/necessary are of unlimited ﬂuidity and variability. For example, a ta-
ble, the moon, and unicorns exist in such plainly different ways that existence per
se cannot have sense as a prior category. It is only through communication and
learning that we become familiar with the various uses of the term as part of our
language. This being the case, such general terms cannot serve, unreﬂectively or
with short “deﬁnitions”, as the beginning of some analysis, but must themselves
be subject to contextualized description. Mathematics has long been held up as a
paragon of clarity and knowledge, but even then, assertions like “mathematics is

480
Appendix
true” or “numbers exist” are without antecedent sense and must be developed and
argued for in toto, each like a new sentence formed from familiar words.
But where to begin, and how far to go? Considerations of assertions like
“a sea-battle will take place in the Aegean tomorrow”, “the evening star is the
morning star”, or even “7 + 5 = 12” should begin with their evidently invariant
feature, the words themselves. And such considerations can arguably proceed at
most to a description of their interplay as part of how we use language, if they are
not to overleap the bounds of invariance and become enmeshed in metaphysics.
According to Wittgenstein in Philosophical Investigations (§109):
. . . We must do away with all explanation, and description alone must take its place. And
this description gets its light, that is to say its purpose, from the philosophical problems.
These are, of course, not empirical problems; they are solved, rather, by looking into the
workings of our language, and that in such a way as to make us recognize those workings;
in despite of an urge to misunderstand them. The problems are solved, not by giving
new information, but by arranging what we have always known. Philosophy is a battle
against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language.
A historical account was given above “arranging what we have always
known” to describe existence as contextualized in set theory. As for truth, the
attitude is similar. To be bold, mathematical truth is what we have come to make
of it. As for knowledge, description ultimately provides no insights beyond de-
scription. To be bolder still, it may be that we cannot say anything other than
that the acquisition of mathematical knowledge may be just what happens. Like
morning lilies opening at dawn or squirrels saving up nuts in trees, we just do it.
To pursue an analogy, the world of mathematics is like a great cathedral. The
thick stone walls along the stately aisles still show the lines of the ancient church
that predated the grand ediﬁce. The central dome is supported by high arches of
vaulting stone, resilient reminders of the anonymous master masons. Whatever
their design, the arches have easily supported the elegant latter-day spires reaching
high into the sky. The ﬁrst adornments can still be seen in the oldest chapels;
there in continuing communion with the past steady additions are made, each
new age imparting its own distinctive style. In recent memory large new side
chapels have been constructed, and new ﬂying buttresses for extra support. Every
day the curious enter through the great door of polished wood with the attractive
inset ﬁgures. Several venture down the long nave seeking instruction, and a few
even initiation, quite taken by the the order and beauty of the altar. And the
work continues: The architects attempt to chart out large parts of the cathedral,
some even proposing vast renovations. The craftsman continue the steady work
on the new wood paneling, the restoration of the sculpture, and the mortaring of
the cracks that appear with age. And supported by high scaffolding, the artisans
continue to work on the ﬁne stained glass.
They try to coordinate with their
colleagues in the adjoining frames, but sometimes the heady heights inspire them
to produce new gems. Those who step back see a larger scheme, but they cannot
see across the whole breadth. And they are so high up that they can no longer

Appendix
481
see their supports. Nevertheless, they are sustained as a community, as part of the
ongoing human adventure.
To append an apocryphal tale: A host of industrious spiders started to build
an elaborate network of webs in newly excavated vaults beneath the cathedral.
It quickly grew so thick and complex that no one could venture across without
getting enmeshed. One day, a fearful wind came howling in and blew a gaping
hole through the network, and in desperate response the spiders worked frantically
to reestablish the connections. For you see, the spiders had become convinced that
their carefully constructed webbing was the foundation without which the entire
cathedral would totter. Of course, the craftsmen above hardly raised an eyebrow.
There are some remaining possibilities for metaphysical appropriation that
should be forestalled. Mathematicians themselves have often described a feeling
of dealing with autonomous objects, some professing an avowedly realist view
of mathematics. The reply is that this objectiﬁcation is part of the practice of
mathematics, the sense of existence here to be described as in any other concerted
human activity. Among many examples of the sort, one should remember how
roundly Edward Gibbon was criticized by the faithful for having presented the
emergence of Christianity as part of history. And there is the analogy with the
blindfold chess player who can play out entire games; he may visualize the pieces
on a particular chessboard, but in the end what remains is the structure of the game
as communicated by him through the notation. Finally, G¨odel’s realist arguments
in [47] have been much discussed, no doubt in part because of the signiﬁcance of
his mathematical results. But again, it is the invariance of those results that lies at
the heart of the matter. G¨odel himself much admired the work of Robinson and
wanted him as his (G¨odel’s) successor at the Institute for Advanced Study; that
Robinson [65] was a committed formalist was never of mathematical consequence.
But even with the metaphysics thinned out, there is still the recurrent feeling,
familiar to the working mathematician, of questions being induced by a context,
and once resolved, a gripping sense of inevitability about their solutions. This
suggests the possibility of a new metaphysical appropriation, as the mathemati-
cian seems to be impelled to extend the boundaries of order against a chaos of
possibilities. But this feeling is also familiar to the artist, who can proceed straight-
forwardly at various junctures once the context has largely precipitated; as James
Joyce in Ulysses (17: 1012-15) describes Dedalus,
He afﬁrmed his signiﬁcance as a conscious animal proceeding syllogistically from the
known to the unknown and a conscious rational reagent between a micro and a macrocosm
ineluctably constructed upon the incertitude of the void.
Even with this said, there may still be lurking some inchoate feeling that the
fact of mathematics still calls for some kind of explanation. Beyond any concerns
about its unreasonable effectiveness in the natural sciences, there may remain a
larger feeling of mystery about how the world of mathematics has come about
and ﬁts together into a coherent whole. But this ﬁnal possibility for metaphysical
appropriation, along with the more traditional musings about the starry heaven

482
Appendix
above or the moral law within, are not in the world but of the mystical, part of
the feeling for the unity of experience in the large. According to Wittgenstein in
the Tractatus (6.41):
The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world everything is as it
is and happens as it does happen. In it there is no value – and if there were, it would be
of no value.
If there is a value which is of value, it must lie outside all happening and being-so.
For all happening and being-so is accidental.
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in in the world, for otherwise this would
again be accidental.
It must lie outside the world.
Again from the Tractatus (6.44):
Not how the world is, is the mystical, but that it is.
And this in Wittgenstein’s dialectical distinction can at most be shown, not said,
leading in one direction to his admonition to silence at the end of the Tractatus.
Neither metaphysics nor solipsism, it is that part of human experience beyond
human discourse. The Tao Te Ching of Lao-Tzu begins:
The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.
The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

Indexed References
The following abbreviations are used for long titled or frequently cited journals:
AAMS Abstracts of papers presented to the American Mathematical Society
ALS
Acta Litterarum ac Scientiarum Regiae Universitatis Hungaricae Fran-
cisco-Josephinae, Sectio Scientiarum Mathematicarum (from 1946: Acta
Scientiarum Mathematicarum, Szeged).
AdM
Advances in Mathematics
AM
Annals of Mathematics
AMAH Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae
AMM
American Mathematical Monthly
AML
Annals of Mathematical Logic (continued from 1983 by Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic)
APAL
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic (continues Annals of Mathematical
Logic from 1983)
BAMS Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
BAPS
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´e-
matiques, Astronomiques et Physiques (continued from 1983 by Bulletin
of the Polish Academy of Sciences. Mathematics.)
BKSG
Berichte ¨uber die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematisch-Physikalische Klasse
BLMS Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society
CMUC Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae
CRP
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sci-
ences, Paris.
FM
Fundamenta Mathematicae
IJM
Israel Journal of Mathematics
JAMS
Journal of the American Mathematical Society
JSL
The Journal of Symbolic Logic
MA
Mathematische Annalen
NAMS Notices of the American Mathematical Society
PAMS
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society
PJM
Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics
PLMS
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society
PNAS
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A.
RMS
Russian Mathematical Surveys
TAMS
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society
ZML
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik

484
Indexed References
The italicized numbers after a publication refer to those pages in the text where
it is cited. The italicized numbers directly after a person refer to those pages in
the text where he or she is cited, but not only in connection with a publication or
speciﬁc result.
Aanderaa, St˚al O.
74
Inductive deﬁnitions and their closure ordinals. In: Fenstad-Hinman [74],
207–220. 66
Abe, Yoshihiro
84
Strongly compact cardinals, elementary embeddings and ﬁxed points. JSL
49 (1984), 808–812. 306
85
Some results concerning strongly compact cardinals. JSL 50 (1985), 874–
880. 309
86
Notes on Pκλ and [λ]κ.
Tsukuba Journal of Mathematics 10 (1986),
155–163. 334
Abel, Niels H.
148
Aczel, Peter
77
An introduction to inductive deﬁnitions. In: Barwise [77], 739–782. 66
See also Richter, Wayne H., and Peter Aczel.
Addison Jr., John W.
32, 151, 157, 176, 406
58
Separation principles in the hierarchies of classical and effective descrip-
tive set theory. FM 46 (1958), 123–135. 146, 152, 157, 404, 405, 407
59
Some consequences of the axiom of constructibility. FM 46 (1959), 337–
357. 151, 169, 177, 410
74
Current problems in descriptive set theory. In: Jech [74], 1–10. 410
Addison Jr., John W., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis
68
Some consequences of the axiom of deﬁnable determinateness. PNAS 59
(1968), 708–712. 410
Addison Jr., John W., Leon Henkin, and Alfred Tarski
65
The Theory of Models. Proceedings of the 1963 International Symposium
at Berkeley. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1965.
Albers, Donald J., Gerald L. Alexanderson, and Constance Reid
90
(eds.) More Mathematical People. Boston, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
1990. 116
Aleksandrov, Pavel S.
16
Sur la puissance des ensembles mesurables B. CRP 162 (1916), 323–325.
147, 148
79
Pages from an autobiography. RMS 34(6) (1979), 267–302. 148
Alexanderson, Gerald L.
See Albers, Donald J., Gerald L. Alexanderson, and Constance Reid.
Apter, Arthur W., and James M. Henle
91
Relative consistency results via strong compactness.
FM 139 (1991),
133–149. 238, 243

Indexed References
485
92
On box, weak box, and strong compactness. BLMS 24 (1992), 513–518.
238, 243
Aristotle
XIII, 477
Aronszajn, Nathan (Nachman)
78, 79
52
Applied functional analysis. In: Proceedings of the International Congress
of Mathematicians, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1950, vol. 2. Providence,
American Mathematical Society 1952, 123–127. 78
52a
Characterization of types of order satisfying α0 + α1 = α1 + α0. FM 39
(1952), 65–96. 78
Awerbuch-Friedlander, Tamara E.
See Kanamori, Akihiro, and Tamara E. Awerbuch Friedlander.
Baire, Ren´e
145
99
Sur les fonctions de variables r´eelles.
Annali di Matematica Pura ed
Applicata (3)3 (1899), 1–123. 13, 145
Baeten, Josephus C.M.
86
Filters and Ultraﬁlters over Deﬁnable Subsets of Admissible Ordinals.
CWI Tract #24.
Amsterdam, Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica
1986. 66
Baldwin, Stewart
83
Generalizing the Mahlo hierarchy, with applications to the Mitchell mod-
els. APAL 25 (1983), 103–127. 345
84
The consistency strength of certain stationary subsets Pκλ.
PAMS 92
(1984), 90–92. 345
85
The ⊳-ordering on normal ultraﬁlters. JSL 51 (1985), 936–952. 305
Banach, Stefan
22, 371, 373, 377
30
¨Uber additive Massfunktionen in abstrakten Mengen. FM 15 (1930), 97–
101. Reprinted in [67] below, 200–203. 23, 24
67
Hartman, Stanisław, and Edward Marczewski (eds.) Oeuvres. Vol. 1.
Warsaw, Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1967.
Banach, Stefan, and Kazimierz Kuratowski
29
Sur une g´en´eralisation du probl`eme de la mesure. FM 14 (1929), 127–131.
Reprinted in Banach [67], 182–186, and in Kuratowski [88], 327–331. 23
Barbanel, Julius B.
82
Supercompact cardinals, elementary embeddings, and ﬁxed points. JSL
47 (1982), 84–88. 306
82a
Supercompact cardinals and trees of normal ultraﬁlters. JSL 47 (1982),
89–109. 306
85
An ordering of normal ultraﬁlters. FM 125 (1985), 155–165. 306
86
Supercompact cardinals, trees of normal ultraﬁlters, and the partition prop-
erty. JSL 51 (1986), 701–708. 349
89
Flipping properties and huge cardinals. FM 132 (1989), 171–188. 334

486
Indexed References
91
Almost hugeness and a related notion. The Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic 32 (1991), 255–265. 334
91a
Making the hugeness of κ resurrectable after κ-directed closed forcing.
FM 137 (1991), 9–24. 334
92
A note on a result of Kunen and Pelletier. JSL 57 (1992), 461–465. 349
93
On the relationship between the partition property and the weak partition
property for normal ultraﬁlters on Pκλ. JSL 58 (1993), 119–127. 349
93a
Some variations on the partition property for normal ultraﬁlters on Pκλ.
FM 142 (1993), 163–171. 349
Barbanel, Julius B., Carlos A. Di Prisco, and It Beng Tan
84
Many times huge and superhuge cardinals. JSL 49 (1984), 112–122. 334
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua
65
(ed.)
Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science.
Proceedings of
the 1964 International Congress, Jerusalem. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1965.
70
(ed.) Mathematical Logic and Foundations of Set Theory. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1970.
See also Fraenkel, Abraham A., Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and Azriel Levy.
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua, E.I.J. Poznanski, Michael O. Rabin, and Abraham Robinson
61
(eds.) Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics. Jerusalem, Magnes
Press 1961.
Barua, Rana
84
R-sets and category. TAMS 286 (1984), 125–158. 180
Barwise, K. Jon
75
Admissible Sets and Structures.
Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1975. 20
77
(ed.)
Handbook of Mathematical Logic.
Amsterdam, North-Holland
1977.
Baumgartner, James E.
117, 343, 344, 350, 441
75
Ineffability properties of cardinals I. In: Hajnal-Rado-S´os [75] vol. 1,
109–130. 77
76
Almost-disjoint sets, the dense set problem and the partition calculus.
AML 9 (1976), 401–439. 213
83
Iterated forcing. In: Mathias [83], 1–59.
Baumgartner, James E., and Fred Galvin
78
Generalized Erd˝os cardinals and 0#. AML 15 (1978), 289–313. 82, 108
Baumgartner, James E., Donald A. Martin, and Saharon Shelah
84
(eds.) Axiomatic Set Theory. Contemporary Mathematics vol. 31. Provi-
dence, American Mathematical Society 1984.
Baumgartner, James E., and Alan D. Taylor
82
Saturation properties of ideals in generic extensions. I. TAMS 270 (1982),
557–574. 213, 345

Indexed References
487
82a
Saturation properties of ideals in generic extensions. II. TAMS 271 (1982),
587–609. 221
Baumgartner, James E., Alan D. Taylor, and Stanley Wagon
82
Structural properties of ideals. Dissertationes Mathematicae (Rozprawy
Matematyczne) 197 (1982), 1–95. 350
Becker, Howard S.
78
Partially playful universes. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 55–90. 422
80
Thin collections of sets of projective ordinals and analogs of L. AML 19
(1980), 205–241. 422
81
AD and the supercompactness of ℵ1. JSL 46 (1981), 822–842. 402
81a
Determinacy implies that ℵ2 is supercompact. IJM 40 (1981), 229–234.
402
85
A property equivalent to the existence of scales.
TAMS 287 (1985),
591–612. 470
88
More closure properties of pointclasses. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88],
31–36. 415
92
Descriptive set theoretic phenomena in analysis and topology. In: Judah-
Just-Woodin [92], 1–25. 166
Becker, Howard S., and Alexander S. Kechris
84
Sets of ordinals constructible from trees and the Third Victoria Delﬁno
Problem. In: Baumgartner-Martin-Shelah [84], 13–29. 423
Becker, Howard S., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis
81
Measurable cardinals in playful models. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis
[81], 203–214. 423
Bell, John L.
85
Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory. Second
edition.
Oxford Logic Guides #12.
Oxford, Oxford University Press
1985. 114, 117
Beller, Aaron, Ronald B. Jensen, and Philip Welch
82
Coding the Universe. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series
#47. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 1982. 186, 187
Bendixson, Ivar
83
Quelques th´eor`emes de la th´eorie des ensembles de points. Acta Mathe-
matica 2 (1883), 415–429. 133
Bernays, Paul
37
A system of axiomatic set theory. Part I. JSL 2 (1937), 65–77. 30
42
A system of axiomatic set theory. Part III. JSL 7 (1942), 65–89. 132
61
Zur Frage der Unendlichkeitsschemata in der axiomatischen Mengenlehre.
In: Bar-Hillel-Poznanski-Rabin-Robinson [61], 3–49. See also [76] be-
low. 59, 71
76
On the problem of schema of inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory. In: M¨uller
[76], 121–172. English translation of a revised version of Bernays [61].

488
Indexed References
Bernstein, Felix
16, 134
08
Zur Theorie der trigonometrischen Reihen. BKSG 60 (1908), 325–338.
134
Blackwell, David
404, 406
67
Inﬁnite games and analytic sets. PNAS 58 (1967), 1836–1837. XXI, 368,
380, 403, 405
Blass, Andreas R.
75
Equivalence of two strong forms of determinacy. PAMS 52 (1975), 373–
376. 441
88
Selective ultraﬁlters and homogeneity. APAL 38 (1988), 215–255. 238,
243
Bloch, G´erard
53
Sur les ensembles stationnaires de nombres ordinaux et les suites dis-
tingu´ees de fonctions r´egressives. CRP 236 (1953), 265–268. 17
Boos, William
74
Boolean extensions which efface the Mahlo property.
JSL 39 (1974),
254–268. 233
76
Inﬁnitary compactness without strong inaccessibility. JSL 41 (1976), 33–
38. 37
Borel, Emile F.
11,145
98
Lec¸ons sur la Th´eorie des Fonctions. Paris, Gauthier-Villars 1898. 12,
145
05
Lec¸ons sur les fonctions de variables r´eelles et les d´eveloppements en
series de polynomes. Paris, Gauthier-Villars 1905. 157
21
La th´eorie du jeu et les ´equations int´egrales ´a noyau sym´etrique. CRP
173 (1921), 1304–1308. Reprinted in [72] below, 901–904. Translated
in Econometrica 21 (1953), 97–100. 371
72
Oeuvres de Emile Borel. Paris, Editions de C.N.R.S. 1972.
Brouwer, Luitzen E.J.
XIII
Bukovsk´y, Lev
73
Changing coﬁnality of a measurable cardinal. CMUC 14 (1973), 689–
697. 259
Bull Jr., Everett L.
78
Successive large cardinals. AML 15 (1978), 161–191. 396
Bulloff, Jack J., Thomas C. Holyoke, and Samuel W. Hahn
69
(eds.) Foundations of Mathematics. Symposium papers commemorating
the sixtieth birthday of Kurt G¨odel. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1969.
Burgess, John P.
82
What are R-sets? In: Metakides [82], 307–324. 180
83
Classical hierarchies from a modern standpoint. II. R-sets.
FM 115
(1983), 97–105. 180

Indexed References
489
Burke, Maxim, and Menachem Magidor
90
Shelah’s pcf theory and its applications. APAL 50 (1990), 207–254. 97,
98
Cantor, Georg
XI, XII, XIV–XVIII, XXI, 13, 16, 20, 32, 42, 119, 133, 134, 145,
146, 313, 378, 474–479
72
¨Uber die Ausdehnung eines Satzes aus der Theorie der trignometrischen
Reihen, MA 5 (1872), 123–132. Reprinted in [80] below, 92–102. 476
83
¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannichfaltigkeiten. V. MA 21 (1883),
545–591. Reprinted in [80] below, 165–209. 133
84
¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannichfaltigkeiten. VI. MA 23 (1884),
453–488. Reprinted in [80] below, 210–246. 133
84a
De la puissance des ensembles parfaits de points. Acta Mathematica 4
(1884), 381–392. Reprinted in [80] below, 252–260. 133
80
Zermelo, Ernst (ed.)
Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und
philosophischen Inhalts. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1980. Reprint of the
original 1932 edition, Berlin, Verlag von Julius Springer.
Carr, Donna M.
82
The minimal normal ﬁlter on Pκλ. PAMS 86 (1982), 316–320. 342
85
Pκλ generalizations of weak compactness.
ZML 31 (1985), 393–401.
350
86
The structure of ineffability properties of Pκλ. AMAH 47 (1986), 325–
332. 350
87
Pκλ partition relations. FM 128 (1987), 181–195. 350
87a
A note on the λ-Shelah property. FM 128 (1987), 197–198. 350
Carr, Donna M., Jean-Pierre Levinski, and Donald H. Pelletier
90
On the existence of strongly normal ideals over Pκλ. Archive for Math-
ematical Logic 30 (1990), 59–72. 351
Carr, Donna M., and Donald H. Pelletier
89
Towards a structure theory for ideals on Pκλ. In: Stepr¯ans-Watson [89],
41–54. 350, 351
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis
148, 474, 476
Chang, Chen-Chung
85, 94
71
Sets constructible using Lκκ. In: Scott [71], 1–8. 257
Chang, Chen-Chung, and H. Jerome Keisler
90
Model Theory. Third edition. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1990. 3, 8, 9,
253
Chuaqui, Rolando
78
Bernays’ class theory. In: Arruda, Ayda I., Newton C.A. da Costa, and
Rolando Chuaqui (eds.) Mathematical Logic. Proceedings of the First
Brazilian Conference. New York, Marcel Dekker 1978, 31–55. 59
81
Axiomatic Set Theory. Impredicative Theories of Classes. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1981. 59

490
Indexed References
Cohen, Paul J.
XVIII, XIX, 32, 35, 44, 113–117, 119, 126, 132, 134, 295
63
The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis. I. PNAS 50 (1963),
1143–1148. XVII, 114, 115
64
The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis. II. PNAS 51 (1964),
105–110. XVII, 114, 115, 125
65
Independence results in set theory. In: Addison-Henkin-Tarski [65], 39–
54. 115
66
Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis. New York, Benjamin 1966.
115
71
Comments on the foundations of set theory. In: Scott [71], 9–15. 115
Cohn, Paul M.
65
Universal Algebra. New York, Harper & Row 1965. 340
Comfort, W. Wistar, and Stylianos Negrepontis
74
The Theory of Ultraﬁlters. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1974. 39
Dales, H. Garth, and W. Hugh Woodin
87
An Introduction to Independence for Analysts. London Mathematical So-
ciety Lecture Note Series #115. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
1987. 450
David, Ren´e
82
A very absolute Π1
2 real singleton. AML 23 (1982), 101–120. 188
84
Generic reals close to 0#. In: Baumgartner-Martin-Shelah [84], 63–70.
188
89
A functorial Π1
2 singleton. AdM 74 (1989), 258–268. 188
Davis, Morton
64
Inﬁnite games of perfect information.
In:
Dresher, Melvin, Lloyd
S. Shapley, and Alan W. Tucker (eds.) Advances in Game Theory. An-
nals of Mathematical Studies #52. Princeton, Princeton University Press
1964, 85–101. 373, 374, 377, 440, 441
Dedekind, Richard
475, 476, 479
72
Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. Braunschweig, F. Vieweg 1872. Trans-
lated in [63] below, 1–27. 476
88
Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Braunschweig, F. Vieweg 1888.
Translated in [63] below, 29–115. 476
63
Essays on the Theory of Numbers. Translations by Wooster W. Beman.
New York, Dover 1963. Reprint of original edition, Chicago, Open Court
1901. 476
Dehornoy, Patrick
238
75
Solution d’une conjecture de Bukovsk´y. CRP 281 (1975), 821–824. 259
76
Intersections d’ultrapuissances iter´ees de mod`eles de la th´eorie des en-
sembles. CRP 282 (1976), 935–938. 260
78
Iterated ultrapowers and Prikry forcing. AML 15 (1978), 109–160. 238,
240, 242, 259, 260

Indexed References
491
83
An application of ultrapowers to changing coﬁnality.
JSL 48 (1983),
225–235. 260
88
Π1
1 -complete families of elementary sequences. APAL 38 (1988), 257–
287. 329
89
Free distributive groupoids.
Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 61
(1989), 123–146. 329
89a
Sur la structure des gerbes libres. CRP 309 (1989), 143–148. 329
89b
Algebraic properties of the shift mapping. PAMS 106 (1989), 617–623.
329
92
An alternative proof of Laver’s results on the algebra generated by an
elementary embedding. In: Judah-Just-Woodin [92], 27–33. 330
92a
Preuve de la conjecture d’irreﬂexivit´e pour les structures distributives
libres. CRP 314 (1992), 333–336. 330
94
Braid groups and left distributive operations. TAMS 345 (1994), 115–
151. 330
00
Braid groups and self-distributivity. Progress in Mathematics #192. Basel,
Birkh¨auser Verlag 2000. 330
Descartes, Ren´e
474
Devlin, Keith J.
73
Some weak versions of large cardinal axioms. AML 5 (1973), 291–325.
94, 96, 104
74
Some remarks on changing coﬁnalities. JSL 39 (1974), 27–30. 236
75
Indescribability properties and small large cardinals. In: M¨uller-Ober-
schelp-Potthoff [75], 89–114. 39, 63, 66
84
Constructibility. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Berlin, Springer-
Verlag 1984. 3, 6, 28, 33, 35, 72, 104, 168, 281, 282
Devlin, Keith J., and Jeffrey B. Paris
73
More on the free subset problem. AML 5 (1973), 327–336. 108
Dickmann, M´aximo A.
75
Large Inﬁnitary Languages. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1975. 36, 39
85
Larger inﬁnitary languages. In: Barwise, K. Jon, and Solomon Feferman
(eds.) Model-Theoretic Logics. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1985, 317–363.
36
Di Prisco, Carlos A.
77
Supercompact cardinals and a partition property. AdM 25 (1977), 46–55.
349
See also Barbanel, Julius B., Carlos A. Di Prisco, and It Beng Tan.
Di Prisco, Carlos A., and James M. Henle
78
On the compactness of ℵ1 and ℵ2. JSL 43 (1978), 394–401. 401
85
Sorts of huge cardinals. In: Caicedo, Xavier, Newton C.A. da Costa,
and Rolando Chuaqui (eds.)
Proceedings of the Fifth Latin American
Symposium on Mathematical Logic. Revista Colombiana de Matem´aticas
19 (1985), 69–75. 334

492
Indexed References
Di Prisco, Carlos A., and Wiktor Marek
82
Some properties of stationary sets. Dissertationes Mathematicae (Rozpra-
wy Matematyczne) 198 (1982). 343
84
A ﬁlter on [λ]κ. PAMS 90 (1984), 591–598. 334
85
On the space (λ)κ. In: Di Prisco, Carlos A. (ed.) Methods in Mathemati-
cal Logic. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #1130. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
1985, 151–156. 334
85a
Some aspects of the theory of large cardinals. In: Luiz Paulo de Alcantara
(ed.) Mathematical Logic and Formal Systems. Lecture Notes in Pure and
Applied Mathematics #94. New York, Marcel Dekker 1985, 87–139. 298
88
Reﬂection properties induced by some large cardinal axioms. In: Carnielli,
Walter A., and Luiz Paulo de Alcantara (eds.) Methods and Applications
of Mathematical Logic. Contemporary Mathematics vol. 69. Providence,
American Mathematical Society 1988, 19–25. 334
Di Prisco, Carlos A., and William S. Zwicker
80
Flipping properties and supercompact cardinals. FM 109 (1980), 31–36.
350
Dodd, Anthony J.
276, 295
82
The Core Model. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series #61.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 1982. 254, 257, 352, 358
Donder, Hans-Dieter, and Peter G. Koepke
83
On the consistency strength of ‘accessible’ Jonsson cardinals and of the
weak Chang conjecture. APAL 25 (1983), 233–261. 96, 292
Donder, Hans-Dieter, Peter G. Koepke, and Jean-Pierre Levinski
88
Some stationary subsets of P(λ). PAMS 102 (1988), 1000–1004. 345
Donder, Hans-Dieter, and Pierre Matet
93
Two cardinal versions of Diamond. IJM 83 (1993), 1–43. 346
Dougherty, Randall
329
93
Critical points in an algebra of elementary embeddings. APAL 65 (1993),
211–241. 330, 331
96
Critical points in an algebra of elementary embeddings II. In: Wilfrid
Hodges (ed.)
Logic: From Foundations to Applications, Staffordshire
1993. New York, Oxford University Press 1996, 103–136. 330
Dougherty, Randall, and Thomas J. Jech
97
Finite left-distributive algebras and embedding algebras.
AdM 130
(1997), 201–241. 331
Drake, Frank R.
74
Set Theory. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1974. 1, 3, 6, 28, 34, 59, 63, 83,
168
Dreben, Burton, and Warren D. Goldfarb
79
The Decision Problem: Solvable Classes of Quantiﬁcational Formulas.
Reading, Addison-Wesley 1979. 70

Indexed References
493
Dubose, Derrick A.
90
The equivalence of determinacy and iterated sharps. JSL 55 (1990), 502–
525. 443, 445
91
Determinacy and the sharp function on the reals. APAL 54 (1991), 59–85.
Corrected version 55 (1992), 237–263. 445
92
Determinacy and extended sharp functions on the reals, Part II: Obtaining
sharps from determinacy. APAL 58 (1992), 1–28. 445
95
Determinacy and the sharp function on objects of type k. JSL 60 (1995),
1025–1053. 445
Dummett, Michael
77
Elements of Intuitionism. Oxford Logic Guides #2. Oxford, Oxford Uni-
versity Press 1977. 114
Easton, William B.
64
Powers of regular cardinals.
Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University 1964.
Abstracted as: Proper classes of generic sets. NAMS 11 (1964), 205.
Published in abridged form as [70] below. 114, 122
70
Powers of regular cardinals. AML 1 (1970), 139–178. 114, 122
Egorov, Dmitry
147
Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej, and Jerzy Ło´s
54
Sur les produits cart´esiens des groupes cyclique inﬁnis. BAPS 2 (1954),
261–263. 27
Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej, and Andrzej M. Mostowski
56
Models of axiomatic theories admitting automorphisms. FM 43 (1956),
50–68. Reprinted in Mostowski [79], 494–512. 100
Ellentuck, Erik
74
A new proof that analytic sets are Ramsey. JSL 39 (1974), 163–165. 382
Erd˝os, Paul
XVIII, 69, 70, 75
42
Some set-theoretical properties of graphs. Revista, Universidad Nacional
de Tucum´an, Serie A, Matem´aticas y F´ısica Te´orica 3 (1942), 363–367.
74, 75
73
Spencer, Joel H. (ed.) Paul Erd˝os: The Art of Counting. Selected Writ-
ings. Cambridge, The MIT Press 1973.
Erd˝os, Paul, and Andr´as Hajnal
58
On the structure of set mappings. AMAH 9 (1958), 111–131. 80, 83, 84
62
Some remarks concerning our paper “On the structure of set mappings”.
AMAH 13 (1962), 223–226. 83
66
On a problem of B. J´onsson. BAPS 14 (1966), 19–23. 85, 93, 94, 319
71
Unsolved problems in set theory. In: Scott [71], 17–48. 97
74
Unsolved and solved problems in set theory.
In: Henkin et al. [74],
269–287. 87

494
Indexed References
Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, Attila M´at´e, and Richard Rado
84
Combinatorial Set Theory: Partition Relations for Cardinals. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1984. 72, 77, 85
Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, and Richard Rado
65
Partition relations for cardinal numbers. AMAH 16 (1965), 93–196. 72,
74, 82, 85, 86, 94
Erd˝os, Paul, and Shizuo Kakutani
43
On non-denumerable graphs. BAMS 49 (1943), 457–461. 74
Erd˝os, Paul, and Richard Rado
52
Combinatorial theorems on classiﬁcations of subsets of a given set. PLMS
(3)2 (1952), 417–439. Reprinted in Erd˝os [73], 383–405. 71, 81
56
A partition calculus in set theory. BAMS 62 (1956), 427–489. Reprinted
in Gessel-Rota [87], 179–241. 71, 72, 74
Erd˝os, Paul, and Gy¨orgy Szekeres
35
A combinatorial problem in geometry. Compositio Mathematica 2 (1935),
463–470. Reprinted in Erd˝os [73], 5–12, and in Gessel-Rota [87], 49–56.
70
Erd˝os, Paul, and Alfred Tarski
43
On families of mutually exclusive sets.
AM 44 (1943), 315–329.
Reprinted in Tarski [86] vol. 2, 591–605.
36, 38, 70, 71, 75, 76, 78,
83, 211, 219
61
On some problems involving inaccessible cardinals. In: Bar-Hillel-Poz-
nanski-Rabin-Robinson [61], 50–82.
Reprinted in Tarski [86] vol. 4,
79–111. 36, 76
Euclid
473, 477
Eudoxus
473
Euler, Leonhard
XII, 474
Euwe, Max
29
Mengentheoretische Betrachtungen ¨uber das Schachspiel.
Koninklijke
Akademi van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Natuurkundige 32 (1929), 633–
642. 371
Farrington, C. Patrick
82
The ﬁrst-order theory of the c-degrees with the # operation. ZML 28
(1982), 487–493. 186
Feferman, Solomon
114
Feng, Qi, Menachem Magidor, and W. Hugh Woodin
92
Universally Baire sets of reals. In: Judah-Just-Woodin [92], 203–242.
458
Fenstad, Jens E., and Peter G. Hinman
74
(eds.) Generalized Recursion Theory. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1974.

Indexed References
495
Fenstad, Jens E., and Dag Normann
74
On absolutely measurable sets. FM 81 (1974), 91–98. 180
Firestone, C.D., and J. Barkley Rosser
49
The consistency of the hypothesis of accessibility (abstract).
JSL 14
(1949), 79. 30
Fisher, Edward R.
77
Vopˇenka’s Principle, category theory and universal algebra (abstract).
NAMS 24 (1977), A-44. 339
Fleissner, William G.
75
Lemma on measurable cardinals. PAMS 49 (1975), 517–518. 258
Fodor, G´eza
83
56
Eine Bemerking zur Theorie der regressiven Funktionen.
Acta Scien-
tiarum Mathematicarum, Szeged 17 (1956), 139–142. 3
Foreman, Matthew
XXII, 461, 463
82
Large cardinals and strong model-theoretic transfer properties.
TAMS
272 (1982), 427–463. 459
83
More saturated ideals. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [83], 1–27. 459
86
Potent axioms. TAMS 294 (1986), 1–28. 461
Foreman, Matthew, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah
88
Martin’s Maximum, saturated ideals and non-regular ultraﬁlters. Part I.
AM 127 (1988), 1–47. 332, 460, 462
88a
Martin’s Maximum, saturated ideals and non-regular ultraﬁlters. Part II.
AM 127 (1988), 521–545. 460
Fraenkel, Abraham A.
21
¨Uber die Zermelosche Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre. Jahresbericht der
Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 30II (1921), 97–98. XIV
22
Zu den Grundlagen der Cantor-Zermeloschen Mengenlehre.
MA 86
(1922), 230–237. XIV
Fraenkel, Abraham A., Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and Azriel Levy
73
Foundations of Set Theory. Second edition. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1973. XII
Frayne, Thomas E., Ann C. Morel, and Dana S. Scott
62
Reduced direct products. FM 51 (1962), 195–228. Abstracted in NAMS
5 (1958), 673–675. 37, 253
Frege, Gottlob
XIII, 477
Fremlin, David H.
216
84
Consequences of Martin’s Axiom. Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics #84.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 1984. 124
93
Real-valued-measurable cardinals. In: Judah, Haim (ed.) Set Theory of
the Reals. Israel Mathematical Conference Proceedings vol. 6. Provi-
dence, American Mathematical Society 1993, 151–304. 26, 61

496
Indexed References
Friedman, Harvey M.
369, 397, 398, 425, 440, 441
71
Higher set theory and mathematical practice. AML 2 (1971), 325–357.
440, 442
71a
Determinacy in the low projective hierarchy. FM 72 (1971), 79–84. 442,
443
81
On the necessary use of abstract set theory. AdM 41 (1981), 209–280.
442
Friedman, Sy D.
87
Strong coding. APAL 35 (1987), 1–98. 187
87a
A guide to “Strong coding”. APAL 35 (1987), 99–122. 187
90
The Π1
2 -Singleton Conjecture. JAMS 3 (1990), 771–791. 188
94
A simpler proof of the Coding Theorem. APAL 70 (1994), 1–16. 187
97
Coding without ﬁne structure. JSL 62 (1997), 808–815. 187
Gaifman, Haim
43, 88, 99, 108, 184, 244, 254, 257
64
Measurable cardinals and constructible sets (abstract). NAMS 11 (1964),
771. XX, 99
67
A generalization of Mahlo’s method for obtaining large cardinal numbers.
IJM 5 (1967), 188–200. 17
74
Elementary embeddings of models of set theory and certain subtheories.
In: Jech [74], 33–101. 46, 325–327, 358
Gale, David, and Frank M. Stewart
53
Inﬁnite games with perfect information. In: Kuhn, Harold W., and Alan
W. Tucker (eds.) Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. 2. Annals of
Mathematical Studies #28. Princeton, Princeton University Press 1953,
245–266. 371, 372
Galvin, Fred
65
Problem 5348. AMM 72 (1965), 1136. 319
See also Baumgartner, James E., and Fred Galvin.
Galvin, Fred, and Karel L. Prikry
73
Borel sets and Ramsey’s Theorem. JSL 38 (1973), 193–198. 382
76
Inﬁnitary Jonsson algebras and partition relations. Algebra Universalis 6
(1976), 367–376. 319, 321
Gandy, Robin O., and Charles E.M. Yates
71
(eds.) Logic Colloquium ’69. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1971.
Gentzen, Gerhard
XX
36
Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. MA 112 (1936), 493–
565. Translated in [69] below, 132–213. XIX
43
Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit van Anfangsf¨allen der transﬁniten
Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie. MA 119 (1943), 140–161. Trans-
lated in [69] below, 287–308. XIX
69
Szabo, M.E. (ed.) The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1969.

Indexed References
497
Gessel, Ira, and Gian-Carlo Rota
87
(eds.) Classic Papers in Combinatorics. Boston, Birkh¨auser 1987.
Gibbon, Edward
481
Gitik, Moti
243, 345
80
All uncountable cardinals can be singular. IJM 35 (1980), 61–88. 238,
243
85
Nonsplitting subset of Pκ(κ+). JSL 50 (1985), 881–894. 344
86
Changing coﬁnalities and the non-stationary ideal. IJM 56 (1986), 280–
314. 238, 243
Gitik, Moti, and Menachem Magidor
92
The Singular Cardinals Hypothesis revisited. In: Judah-Just-Woodin [92],
243–279. 243
Gloede, Klaus
72
Ordinals with partition properties and the constructible hierarchy. ZML
18 (1972), 135–164. 109
G¨odel, Kurt F.
XIV–XX, 15, 20, 21, 27–32, 35, 44, 70, 74, 101, 113, 119, 125,
145, 167, 169, 178, 179, 261, 274
30
Die Vollst¨andigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalk¨uls. Monats-
hefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 37 (1930), 349–360.
Reprinted and
translated in [86] below, 102–123. XV
31
¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und ver-
wandter Systeme I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 38 (1931),
173–198. Reprinted and translated with minor emendations by the author
in [86] below, 144–195. XV, 19, 28, 29
38
The consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continu-
um-Hypothesis. PNAS 24 (1938), 556–557. Reprinted in [90] below,
26–27. XV, 28, 29, 33, 150, 169
39
Consistency-proof for the Generalized Continuum-Hypothesis. PNAS 25
(1939), 220–224. Reprinted in [90] below, 28–32. XV, 28–30
40
The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continuum
Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Annals of Mathematics Studies
#3. Princeton, Princeton University Press 1940. Reprinted in [90] below,
33–101. See also [51] below. 30
44
Russell’s mathematical logic. In: Schilpp, Paul A. (ed.) The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell. Library of Living Philosophers vol. 5. Evanston,
Northwestern University 1944, 123–153. Third edition, New York, Tudor
1951. Reprinted in [90] below, 119–141. 29
47
What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem? AMM 54 (1947), 515–525. Errata
55 (1948), 151. Reprinted in [90] below, 176–187. Revised and expanded
version in: Benacerraf, Paul, and Hilary Putnam (eds.) Philosophy of
Mathematics. Selected Readings. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall
1964, 258–273. This version reprinted with minor emendations by the
author in [90] below, 254–270. 31, 32, 115, 481

498
Indexed References
51
Second printing (1951) of [40]. 33, 151, 169
65
Remarks before the Princeton Bicentennial Conference on problems in
mathematics. In: Davis, Martin (ed.) The Undecidable. Basic Papers on
Undecidable Propositions, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Func-
tions. Hewlett, N.Y., Raven Press 1965, 84–88. Reprinted in [90] below,
150–153. 31
86
Feferman, Solomon, et al. (eds.) Collected Works, vol. 1. New York,
Oxford University Press 1986. 28
90
Feferman, Solomon, et al. (eds.) Collected Works, vol. 2. New York,
Oxford University Press 1990. XVII, 30–32, 58, 151
Goldfarb, Warren D.
See Dreben, Burton, and Warren D. Goldfarb.
Gottwald, Siegfried, and Lothar Kreiser
84
Paul Mahlo – Leben und Werk. NTM. Schriftenreihe f¨ur Geschichte der
Naturwissenschaften, Technik, und Medizin 21 (1984), 1–22. 16
Graham, Ronald L., Bruce L. Rothschild, and Joel H. Spencer
90
Ramsey Theory. Second edition. New York, Wiley & Sons 1990. 70
Green, John
78
Determinacy and the existence of large measurable cardinals. Ph.D. thesis,
University of California at Berkeley 1978. 445
Grigorieff, Serge
75
Intermediate submodels and generic extensions in set theory. AM 101
(1975), 447–490. 124
Guaspari, David
73
Thin and well ordered analytical sets. Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge University
1973. 171
Guaspari, David, and Leo A. Harrington
76
Characterizing C3 (the largest countable Π1
3 set). PAMS 57 (1976), 127–
129. 422
H´ajek, Petr
71
Sets, semisets, models. In: Scott [71], 67–81. 116
Hajnal, Andr´as
35, 71
56
On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum prob-
lem. ZML 2 (1956), 131–136. 34
61
On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum prob-
lem. AMAH 12 (1961), 321–376. 34
See also Erd˝os, Paul, and Andr´as Hajnal.
See also Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, Attila M´at´e, and Richard Rado.
Hajnal, Andr´as, Richard Rado, and Vera T. S´os
75
(eds.) Inﬁnite and Finite Sets. Colloquia Mathematica Societatis Janos
Bolyai vol. 10. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1975.

Indexed References
499
Hallett, Michael
84
Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size. Oxford Logic Guides #10.
Oxford, Clarendon Press 1984. XII
Halmos, Paul R.
50
Measure Theory. Princeton, Van Nostrand 1950. 12
Hanf, William P.
15, 58, 60, 70, 83
64
Incompactness in languages with inﬁnitely long expressions.
FM 53
(1964), 309–324. XVII, 39, 41, 42
64a
On a problem of Erd˝os and Tarski. FM 53 (1964), 325–334. Abstracted
in NAMS 9 (1962), 229. 76
Hanf, William P., and Dana S. Scott
61
Classifying inaccessible cardinals (abstract). NAMS 8 (1961), 445. XVIII,
39, 55, 57, 59, 61, 64
Harada, Mikio
321, 322
Harrington, Leo A.
369, 375, 443
77
Long projective wellorderings. AML 12 (1977), 1–24. 429
78
Analytic determinacy and 0#. JSL 43 (1978), 685–693. 444
See also Guaspari, David, and Leo A. Harrington.
Harrington, Leo A., and Alexander S. Kechris
77
Π1
2 singletons and 0#. FM 95 (1977), 167–171. 186, 188
81
On the determinacy of games on ordinals. AML 20 (1981), 109–154.
379, 382, 402, 422
Hartogs, Friedrich
15
¨Uber das Problem der Wohlordnung. MA 76 (1915), 436–443. XIV
Hausdorff, Felix
08
Grundz¨uge einer Theorie der geordneten Mengen. MA 65 (1908), 435–
505. XVI, 16
14
Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre. Leipzig, de Gruyter 1914. Reprinted in
New York, Chelsea 1965. 12, 16, 146, 147, 443
16
Die M¨achtigkeit der Borelschen Mengen. MA 77 (1916), 430–437. 147
Hauser, Kai
91
Indescribable cardinals and elementary embeddings. JSL 56 (1991), 439–
457. 67
92
The indescribability of the order of the indescribable cardinals. APAL 57
(1992), 45–91. 67
95
The consistency strength of projective absoluteness. APAL 74 (1995),
245–295. 468
See also Woodin, W. Hugh, Adrian R.D. Mathias, and Kai Hauser.
Hauser, Kai, and Ralf-Dieter Schindler
00
Projective uniformization revisited. APAL 103 (2000), 109–153. 469

500
Indexed References
Hawkins, Thomas W.
75
Lebesgue’s Theory of Integration. Its Origins and Development. Second
edition. New York, Chelsea 1975. 22, 145
Henkin, Leon, et al.
74
(eds.) Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium. Proceedings of Symposia in
Pure Mathematics vol. 25. Providence, American Mathematical Society,
1974.
Henle, James M.
77
Some consequences of an inﬁnite exponent partition relation.
JSL 42
(1977), 523–526. 396
79
Researches into the world of κ −→(κ)κ. AML 17 (1979), 151–169. 396
84
Weak strong partition relations. JSL 49 (1984), 555–557. 396
90
Partition properties and Prikry Forcing on simple spaces. JSL 55 (1990),
938–947. 238
See also Apter, Arthur W., and James M. Henle.
See also Di Prisco, Carlos A., and James M. Henle.
Henle, James M., Eugene M. Kleinberg, and Ronald J. Watro
84
On the ultraﬁlters and ultrapowers of strong partition cardinals. JSL 49
(1984), 1268–1272. 396
Hewitt, Edwin
48
Rings of real-valued continuous functions. TAMS 64 (1948), 45–99. 27
Hilbert, David
XIII, XX
28
Die Grundlagen der Mathematik. Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen
Seminar der Hamburgischen Universit¨at 6 (1928), 65–92. Translated in
van Heijenoort [67], 464-479. 478
Hinman, Peter G.
78
Recursion-Theoretic Hierarchies.
Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1978. 145, 157
Hippasus of Metapontum
473
Hrb´aˇcek, Karel
51
See Vopˇenka, Petr, and Karel Hrb´aˇcek.
Ihoda, Jaime (Haim Judah), and Saharon Shelah
89
∆1
2-sets of reals. APAL 42 (1989), 207–223. 181
See also Judah, Haim (Jaime Ihoda), and Saharon Shelah.
Isbell, John R.
66
Directed unions and chains. PAMS 17 (1966), 1467–1468. 340
Jackson, Steve
368, 434–436
88
AD and the projective ordinals. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88], 117–220.
396, 434
90
Partition properties and well-ordered unions. APAL 48 (1990), 81–101.
428

Indexed References
501
91
Admissible Suslin cardinals in L(R). JSL 56 (1991), 260–275. 436
92
Admissibility and Mahloness in L(R). In: Judah-Just-Woodin [92], 63–
74. 436
Jackson, Steve and Donald A. Martin
83
Pointclasses and well-ordered unions. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis
[83], 56–66. 428
Janiszewski, Zygmunt
22
Jech, Thomas J.
234
68
ω1 can be measurable. IJM 6 (1968), 363–367. 384
71
The closed unbounded ﬁlter over Pκ(λ). NAMS 18 (1971), 663. 340,
341
73
Some combinatorial problems concerning uncountable cardinals. AML 5
(1973), 165–198. 340, 342, 343, 346, 350
74
(ed.) Axiomatic Set Theory. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathemat-
ics vol. 13, part 2. Providence, American Mathematical Society 1974.
86
A theorem on Pκ(λ). Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan 38
(1986), 421–425. 345
92
Singular Cardinal Problem: Shelah’s theorem on 2ℵω. BLMS 24 (1992),
127–139. 97
03
Set Theory. Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag 2003. Third millenium edition.
1, 4, 6, 117, 120–124, 145, 182, 217, 225, 260
See also Dougherty, Randall, and Thomas J. Jech.
Jensen, Ronald B.
59, 111, 186–188, 216, 254, 256, 261, 276, 295, 352, 358,
443
66
Independence of the axiom of dependent choices from the countable ax-
iom of choice (abstract). JSL 31 (1966), 294. 132
70
Deﬁnable sets of minimal degree. In: Bar-Hillel [70], 122–128. 188
72
The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. AML 4 (1972), 229–308.
30
74
Measurable cardinals and the GCH. In: Jech [74], 175–178. 263
See also Beller, Aaron, Ronald B. Jensen, and Philip Welch.
Jensen, Ronald B. and H˚avard Johnsbr˚aten
74
A new construction of a non-constructible ∆1
3 subset of ω. FM 81 (1974),
279–290. 188
Jensen, Ronald B., and Robert M. Solovay
70
Some applications of almost disjoint sets. In: Bar-Hillel [70], 84–104.
188
Johnsbr˚aten, H˚avard
See Jensen, Ronald B. and H˚avard Johnsbr˚aten.
Johnson, Chris A.
88
Seminormal λ-generated ideals on Pκλ. JSL 53 (1988), 92–102. 350
88a
On saturated ideals and Pκλ. FM 29 (1988), 215–221. 350

502
Indexed References
J´onsson, Bjarni
72
Topics in Universal Algebra. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #250. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag 1972. 92
Joyce, James
481
Judah, Haim (Jaime Ihoda), Winfried Just, and W. Hugh Woodin
92
(eds.)
Set Theory of the Continuum.
Mathematical Sciences Research
Institute publication #26. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1992.
Judah, Haim (Jaime Ihoda), and Saharon Shelah
91
Forcing minimal degree of constructibility. JSL 56 (1991), 769–782. 243
See also Ihoda, Jaime (Haim Judah), and Saharon Shelah.
Just, Winfried
See Judah, Haim (Jaime Ihoda), Winfried Just, and W. Hugh Woodin.
Kakuda, Yuzuru
72
Saturated ideals in Boolean extensions. Nagoya Mathematical Journal 48
(1972), 159–168. 220
Kakutani, Shizuo
See Erd˝os, Paul, and Shizuo Kakutani.
Kalm´ar, L´aszl´o
28
Zur Theorie der abstrakten Spiele. ALS 4 (1928), 65–85. 371
Kamo, Shizuo
97
Ineffability and partition property on Pκλ. Journal of the Mathematical
Society of Japan 49 (1997), 125–143. 350
02
Partition properties for Pκλ. Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan
54 (2002), 123–133. 350
Kanamori, Akihiro
78
On Vopˇenka’s and related principles. In: Macintyre, Angus, Leszek Pa-
cholski, and Jeffrey B. Paris (eds.) Logic Colloquium ’77. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1978, 145–153. 336, 337
See also Solovay, Robert M., William N. Reinhardt, and Akihiro Kanamori.
Kanamori, Akihiro, and Tamara E. Awerbuch-Friedlander
90
The compleat 0†. ZML 36 (1990), 133–141. 283
Kanamori, Akihiro, and Menachem Magidor
78
The evolution of large cardinal axioms in set theory. In: M¨uller, Gert H.,
and Dana S. Scott (eds.) Higher Set Theory. Lecture Notes in Mathemat-
ics #669. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1978, 99–275. 96, 282
Kanamori, Akihiro, and Saharon Shelah
95
Complete quotient Boolean algebras. TAMS 347 (1995), 1963–1979. 214
Kanovei, Vladimir G.
85
The development of the descriptive theory of sets under the inﬂuence of
the work of Luzin. RMS 40(3) (1985), 135–180. 146

Indexed References
503
Kant, Immanuel
477
Karp, Carol R.
64
Languages with Expressions of Inﬁnite Length.
Amsterdam, North-
Holland 1964. 36
Kastanas, Ilias G.
83
On the Ramsey property for sets of reals. JSL 48 (1983), 1035–1045.
382
Kaufman, Matthew J., and Evangelos Kranakis
84
Deﬁnable ultrapowers and ultraﬁlters over admissible ordinals. ZML 30
(1984), 97–118. 66
Kechris, Alexander S.
XXI, 368, 380, 422, 424, 431, 432, 436
73
Measure and category in effective descriptive set theory. AML 5 (1973),
337–384. 422
74
On projective ordinals. JSL 39 (1974), 269–282. 429
75
The theory of countable analytical sets.
TAMS 202 (1975), 259–297.
171, 422
78
AD and projective ordinals. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 91–132. 395,
429
78a
On transﬁnite sequences of projective sets with an application to Σ1
2
equivalence relations. In: Macintyre, Angus, Leszek Pacholski, and Jef-
frey B. Paris (eds.) Logic Colloquium ’77. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1978, 155–160. 428
81
Homogeneous trees and projective scales. In: Kechris-Martin-Moscho-
vakis [81], 33–73. 192, 418, 429, 435, 450, 453
84
The Axiom of Determinacy implies dependent choices in L(R). JSL 49
(1984), 161–173. 433
85
Determinacy and the structure of L(R). In: Nerode-Shore [85], 271–283.
400, 431, 434
88
“AD + UNIFORMIZATION” is equivalent to “HALF ADR”. In: Kechris-
Martin-Steel [88], 98–102. 469
88a
A coding theorem for measures. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88], 103–109.
400
88b
Subsets of ℵ1 constructible from a real. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88],
110–116. 388
95
Classical Descriptive Set Theory. New York, Springer-Verlag 1995. 145,
458
See also Becker, Howard S., and Alexander S. Kechris.
Kechris, Alexander S., Eugene M. Kleinberg, Yiannis N. Moschovakis and
W. Hugh Woodin
81
The Axiom of Determinacy, strong partition properties and nonsingular
measures. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [81], 77–99. 432
Kechris, Alexander S., and Donald A. Martin
78
On the theory of Π1
3 sets of reals. BAMS 84 (1978), 149–151. 422

504
Indexed References
Kechris, Alexander S., Donald A. Martin, and Yiannis N. Moschovakis
81
(eds.) Cabal Seminar 77–79. Proceedings, Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1977–79. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #839. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
1981. 403
83
(eds.) Cabal Seminar 79–81. Proceedings, Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1979–81. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #1019. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
1983. 403
Kechris, Alexander S., Donald A. Martin, and John R. Steel
88
(eds.) Cabal Seminar 81–85. Proceedings, Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1981–85. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #1333. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
1988. 403
Kechris, Alexander S., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis
72
Two theorems about projective sets. IJM 72 (1972), 391–399. 422
78
(eds.) Cabal Seminar 76–77. Proceedings, Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1976–77. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #689. Berlin, Springer-Verlag
1978. 403
78a
Notes on the theory of scales. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 1–53. 422
Kechris, Alexander S., and Robert M. Solovay
85
On the relative consistency strength of determinacy hypotheses. TAMS
290 (1985), 179–211. 422, 467
Kechris, Alexander S., Robert M. Solovay, and John R. Steel
81
The Axiom of Determinacy and the prewellordering property. In: Kechris-
Martin-Moschovakis [81], 101–125. 415
Kechris, Alexander S., and W. Hugh Woodin
83
Equivalence of partition properties and determinacy. PNAS 80 (1983),
1783–1786. 422, 432
Keisler, H. Jerome
50, 85
62
Some applications of the theory of models to set theory.
In: Nagel-
Suppes-Tarski [62], 80–86. 39, 42, 44, 49
62a
The equivalence of certain problems in set theory with problems in the
theory of models (abstract). NAMS 9 (1962), 339. 39, 49
71
Model Theory for Inﬁnitary Logic. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1971. 36
See also Chang, Chen-Chung, and H. Jerome Keisler.
Keisler, H. Jerome, and Frederick Rowbottom
65
Constructible sets and weakly compact cardinals (abstract). NAMS 12
(1965), 373–4. 93
Keisler, H. Jerome, and Alfred Tarski
64
From accessible to inaccessible cardinals. FM 53 (1964), 225–308. Cor-
rections 57 (1965), 119. Reprinted in Tarski [86] vol. 4, 129–213. 27,
37, 38, 42–44, 53, 54, 64, 78

Indexed References
505
Keldysh, Ljudmila V.
74
The ideas of N.N. Luzin in descriptive set theory. RMS 29(5) (1974),
179–193. 146, 148
Ketonen, Jussi A.
72
Strong compactness and other cardinal sins. AML 5 (1972), 47–76. 308
Kleene, Stephen C.
114, 145, 151, 152, 154, 157
43
Recursive predicates and quantiﬁers. TAMS 53 (1943), 41–73. 151
55
On the forms of predicates in the theory of constructive ordinals (second
paper). American Journal of Mathematics 77 (1955), 405–428. 151, 162
55a
Arithmetical predicates and function quantiﬁers. TAMS 79 (1955), 312–
340. 151
55b
Hierarchies of number-theoretic predicates. BAMS 61 (1955), 193–213.
151
Kleinberg, Eugene M.
391, 395
70
Strong partition properties for inﬁnite cardinals. JSL 35 (1970), 410–428.
391, 392
72
The equiconsistency of two large cardinal axioms (abstract). NAMS 16
(1972), 329. 96, 128
73
Rowbottom cardinals and Jonsson cardinals are almost the same. JSL 38
(1973), 423–427. 95
77
AD ⊢“The ℵn are Jonsson cardinals and ℵω is a Rowbottom cardinal”.
AML 12 (1977), 229–248. 396
77a
Inﬁnitary Combinatorics and the Axiom of Determinateness.
Lecture
Notes in Mathematics #612. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1977. 396
78
A combinatorial characterization of normal M-ultraﬁlters.
AdM 30
(1978), 77–84. 245
79
The equiconsistency of two large cardinal axioms. FM 102 (1979), 81–85.
96, 128
81
Producing measurable cardinals beyond κ. JSL 46 (1981), 643–648. 396
82
A measure representation theorem for strong partition cardinals. JSL 47
(1982), 161–168. 396
See also Henle, James M., Eugene M. Kleinberg, and Ronald J. Watro.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Eugene M. Kleinberg, Yiannis N. Moschovakis,
and W. Hugh Woodin.
Kochen, Simon
61
Ultraproducts in the theory of models. AM 74 (1961), 221–261. 37
Koepke, Peter G.
88
Some applications of short core models. APAL 37 (1988), 179–204. 96
89
An introduction to extenders and core models for extender sequences. In:
Ebbinghaus, Hans-Dieter, et al. (eds.) Logic Colloquium ’87. Amster-
dam, North-Holland 1989, 137–182. 96
See also Donder, Hans-Dieter, and Peter G. Koepke.
See also Donder, Hans-Dieter, Peter G. Koepke, and Jean-Pierre Levinski.

506
Indexed References
Kolmogorov, Andrei N.
28
Operations on sets (in Russian).
Matematicheskij Sbornik 35 (1928),
414–422. 180
Kondˆo, Motokiti
167
37
L’uniformisation des compl´ementaires analytiques. Proceedings of the
Imperial Academy of Japan 13 (1937), 287–291. 150, 176
39
Sur l’uniformisation des compl´ementaires analytiques et les ensembles
projectifs de la seconde classe.
Japanese Journal of Mathematics 15
(1939), 197–230. 150, 176, 177
K¨onig, D´enes
27
¨Uber eine Schlussweise aus dem Endlichen ins Unendliche: Punktmen-
gen. Kartenf¨arben. Verwandtschaftsbeziehungen. Schachspiel. ALS 3
(1927), 121–130. 72, 75, 371
Kranakis, Evangelos
82
Reﬂection and partition properties of admissible ordinals.
AML 22
(1982), 213–242. 66
82a
Invisible ordinals and inductive deﬁnitions. ZML 28 (1982), 137–148.
66
83
Deﬁnable Ramsey and deﬁnable Erd˝os ordinals. Archiv f¨ur Mathemati-
sche Logik und Grundlagenforschung 23 (1983), 115–128. 66
See also Kaufman, Matthew J., and Evangelos Kranakis.
Kranakis, Evangelos, and Iain Phillips
84
Partitions and homogeneous sets for admissible ordinals. In: M¨uller, Gert
H., and Michael M. Richter (eds.) Models and Sets. Lecture Notes in
Mathematics #1103. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1984, 235–260. 66
Kreisel, Georg
80
Kurt G¨odel, 28 April 1906 – 14 January 1978. Biographical Memoirs
of the Fellows of the Royal Society 26 (1980), 149–224. Corrections 27
(1981), 697 and 28 (1982), 718. 29, 32, 151
Kreiser, Lothar
See Gottwald, Siegfried, and Lothar Kreiser.
Kueker, David
72
L¨owenheim-Skolem and interpolation theorems in inﬁnitary languages.
BAMS 78 (1972), 211–215. 340
77
Countable approximations and L¨owenheim-Skolem theorems. AML 11
(1977), 57–103. 340
Kunen, Kenneth
XXI, XXII, 43, 61, 94, 99, 108, 110, 207, 209, 219, 244, 252,
254, 257, 259, 261, 264, 275, 277, 282, 294, 297, 298, 311, 319–322, 324, 325,
328, 339, 349, 368, 386, 390, 392, 395, 399, 400, 428, 429, 435, 449, 450, 459–461
68
Inaccessibility properties of cardinals. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University
1968. Published in part in [70] below. 244, 250, 253, 256, 265, 267, 276

Indexed References
507
70
Some applications of iterated ultrapowers in set theory. AML 1 (1970),
179–227. XX, 220, 233, 244, 245, 250, 253, 256, 265, 267–270, 275, 292
71
Indescribability and the continuum. In: Scott [71], 199–203. 61
71a
On the GCH at measurable cardinals. In: Gandy-Yates [71], 107–110.
293
71b
Elementary embeddings and inﬁnitary combinatorics.
JSL 36 (1971),
407–413. XX, 319, 320
73
A model for the negation of the Axiom of Choice. In: Mathias-Rogers
[73], 489–494. 258
78
Saturated ideals. JSL 43 (1978), 65–76. 212, 233, 331, 459
80
Set Theory. An Introduction to Independence Proofs. Amsterdam, North-
Holland 1980. 1, 3, 28, 80, 117, 119–121, 123, 124, 139
84
Random and Cohen reals. In: Kunen-Vaughan [84], 887–911. 14, 223
03
Compact spaces, compact cardinals, and elementary submodels. Topology
and its Applications 130 (2003), 99–109. 303
Kunen, Kenneth, and Jeffrey B. Paris
71
Boolean extensions and measurable cardinals. AML 2 (1971), 359–377.
226, 228, 230, 231
Kunen, Kenneth, and Donald H. Pelletier
83
On a combinatorial property of Menas related to the partition property for
measures on supercompact cardinals. JSL 48 (1983), 475–481. 348, 349
Kunen, Kenneth, and Jerry E. Vaughan
84
(eds.) Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1984.
Kuratowski, Kazimierz
16, 22
21
Sur la notion de l’ordre dans la th´eorie des ensembles. FM 2 (1921),
161–171. Reprinted in [88] below, 1–11. XIV
24
Sur l’´etat actuel de l’axiomatique de la th´eorie des ensembles. Annales
de la Soci´et´e Polonaise de Math´ematique 3 (1924), 146–147. Reprinted
in [88] below, 179. 18
31
Evaluation de la classe Bor´elienne ou projective d’un ensemble de points
`a l’aide des symboles logiques. FM 17 (1931), 249–272. Reprinted in
[88] below, 376–399. 152
36
Sur les th´eor`emes de s´eparation dans la th´eorie des ensembles. FM 26
(1936), 183–191. Reprinted in [88] below, 461–469. 405, 407, 408
58
Topologie. Vol. 1. Warsaw, Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1958.
English translation, 1966. 443
80
A Half Century of Polish Mathematics. Remembrances and Reﬂections.
Oxford, Pergamon Press 1980. 22, 148
88
Borsuk, Karol, et al. (eds.)
Selected Papers.
Warsaw, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1988.
See also Banach, Stefan, and Kazimierz Kuratowski.

508
Indexed References
Kuratowski, Kazimierz, and Alfred Tarski
31
Les op´erations logiques et les ensembles projectifs. FM 17 (1931), 240–
248. Reprinted in Tarski [86] vol. 1, 551–559, and in Kuratowski [88],
367–375. Translated in Tarski [83], 143–151. 152
Kuratowski, Kazimierz, and Stanisław M. Ulam
32
Quelques propri´et´es topologiques du produit combinatoire. FM 19 (1932),
247–251. Reprinted in Ulam [74], 32–36. 14
Kurepa, Djuro R.
35
Ensembles ordonn´es et ramiﬁ´es. Th`ese, Paris. Published as: Publications
math´ematiques de l’Universit´e de Belgrade 4 (1935), 1–138. 72, 75, 78,
79
41
Transformations monotones des ensembles partiellement ordonn´es (con-
tinuation). Revista de Ciencias de la Universidad Mayor de San Marcos
(Lima) 43(437) (1941), 483–500. 74
59
On the cardinal number of ordered sets and of symmetrical structures in
dependence on the cardinal numbers of its chains and antichains. Glasnik
Matematiˇcko-ﬁziˇcki i astronomski, Periodicum mathematico-physicum et
astronomicum 14 (1959), 183–203. 72, 74
Kuzawa, Mary Grace
68
Modern Mathematics. The Genesis of a School in Poland. New Haven,
College & University Press 1968. 22
70
Fundamenta Mathematicae: an examination of its founding and signiﬁ-
cance. AMM 77 (1970), 485–492. 22
Lao-Tzu
482
Laplace, Pierre Simon
473
Laver, Richard
117
82
Saturated ideals and non-regular ultraﬁlters. In: Metakides [82], 297–305.
221
86
Elementary embeddings of a rank into itself. AAMS 7 (1986), 6. 329
92
The left distributive law and the freeness of an algebra of elementary
embeddings. AdM 91 (1992), 209–231. 329, 330
94
A division algorithm for the free left distributive algebra. In: Juha Oikko-
nen and Jouko A. V¨a¨an¨anen (eds.) Logic Colloquium ’90. Lecture Notes
in Logic #2. New York, Springer-Verlag 1994, 155–162. 330
95
On the algebra of elementary embeddings of a rank into itself. AdM 110
(1995), 334–346. 330
97
Implications between strong large cardinal axioms.
APAL 90 (1997),
79–90. 328
01
Reﬂection of elementary embedding axioms on the L[Vλ+1] hierarchy.
APAL 107 (2001), 227–238. 329
02
On very large cardinals. In: G´abor Hal´asz, L´aszl´o L´ovasz, Mikl´os Si-
monovits, and Vera T. S´os (eds.) Paul Erd˝os and his Mathematics II,

Indexed References
509
Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies 11. Berlin, Springer-Verlag (2002),
453–469. 329
Lavine, Shaughan M.
94
Understanding the Inﬁnite. Cambridge, Harvard University Press 1994.
XII
Lebesgue, Henri
132, 145, 146, 151
02
Int´egrale, longueur, aire. Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata (3)7
(1902), 231–359. Reprinted in [72] below, vol. 1, 203–331. 12, 22, 145
05
Sur les fonctions repr´esentables analytiquement. Journal de Math´ema-
tiques Pures et Appliqu´ees (6)1 (1905), 139–216. Reprinted in [72] below,
vol. 3, 103–180. XVI, 145–147, 148, 150, 157, 159, 166
07
Contributions `a l’etude des correspondances de M. Zermelo. Bulletin de
la Soci´et´e Math´ematique de France 35 (1907), 202–212. Reprinted in
[72] below, vol. 3, 227–237. 22
72
Oeuvres Scientiﬁques. Geneva, Kundig 1972.
Leibniz, Gottfried W.
XII, 474
Lerman, Manuel
83
Degrees of Unsolvability. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag 1983. 114
Levinski, Jean-Pierre
84
Instances of the conjecture of Chang. IJM 48 (1984), 225–243. 345
See also Carr, Donna M., Jean-Pierre Levinski, and Donald H. Pelletier.
See also Donder, Hans-Dieter, Peter G. Koepke, and Jean-Pierre Levinski.
Levy, Azriel
21, 35, 114, 125, 128, 129, 135, 169, 212, 311, 384
57
Ind´ependance conditionelle de V = L et d’axiomes qui se rattachent au
syst`eme de M. G¨odel. CRP 245 (1957), 1582–1583. 34
60
A generalization of G¨odel’s notion of constructibility. JSL 25 (1960),
147–155. 34
60a
Axiom schemata of strong inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory. PJM 10 (1960),
223–238. XVIII, 57–59
63
Independence results in set theory by Cohen’s method IV (abstract).
NAMS 10 (1963), 593. 126, 136
64
Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis (abstract). NAMS 11
(1964), 769–770. 126
65
A hierarchy of formulas in set theory. Memoirs of the American Mathe-
matical Society 57 (1965). 6, 299
65a
Deﬁnability in axiomatic set theory I. In: Bar-Hillel [65], 127–151. 177
70
Deﬁnability in axiomatic set theory II. In: Bar-Hillel [70], 129–145. 126,
136, 177
71
The sizes of the indescribable cardinals. In: Scott [71], 205–218. XVIII,
57, 63–66
79
Basic Set Theory. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Berlin, Springer-
Verlag 1979. 1, 11, 72, 223
See also Fraenkel, Abraham A., Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and Azriel Levy.

510
Indexed References
Levy, Azriel, and Robert M. Solovay
67
Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis. IJM 5 (1967), 234–
248. 126
72
On the decomposition of sets of reals to Borel sets. AML 5 (1972), 1–19.
167
Ło´s, Jerzy
55
Quelques remarques, th´eor`emes et probl`emes sur les classes d´eﬁnissables
d’alg`ebres. In: Skolem, Thoralf, et al. (eds.) Mathematical Interpretation
of Formal Systems. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1955, 98–113. 9, 37
See also Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej, and Jerzy Ło´s.
Louveau, Alain
83
Some results in the Wadge hierarchy of Borel sets. In: Kechris-Martin-
Moschovakis [83], 28–55. 416, 442
Louveau, Alain, and Jean Saint-Raymond
87
Borel classes and closed games: Wadge-type and Hurewicz-type results.
TAMS 304 (1987), 431–467. 416, 442, 443
88
The strength of Borel Wadge Determinacy. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88],
1–30. 416, 442, 443
Luzin, Nikolai N.
XVI, 146, 147, 151
17
Sur la classiﬁcation de M. Baire. CRP 164 (1917), 91–94. 148, 149, 183
25
Sur un probl`eme de M. Emile Borel et les ensembles projectifs de
M. Henri Lebesgue; les ensembles analytiques. CRP 180 (1925), 1318–
1320. 148
25a
Sur les ensembles projectifs de M. Henri Lebesgue. CRP 180 (1925),
1572–1574. 148, 149
25b
Les propri´et´es des ensembles projectifs. CRP 180 (1925), 1817–1819.
149
25c
Sur les ensembles non mesurables B et l’emploi de la diagonale Cantor.
CRP 181 (1925), 95–96. 149, 158
27
Sur les ensembles analytiques. FM 10 (1927), 1–95. 148, 165, 405
30
Lec¸ons sur Les Ensembles Analytiques et Leurs Applications.
Paris,
Gauthier-Villars 1930. Reprinted with corrections in New York, Chelsea
1972. 148–150
30a
Sur le probl`eme de M.J. Hadamard d’uniformisation des ensembles. CRP
190 (1930), 349–351. 150
35
Sur les ensembles analytiques nuls. FM 25 (1935), 109–131. 167
Luzin, Nikolai N., and Petr S. Novikov
35
Choix ´effectif d’un point dans un compl´ementaire analytique arbitraire,
donn´e par un crible. FM 25 (1935), 559–560. 150
Luzin, Nikolai N., and Wacław Sierpi´nski
18
Sur quelques propri´et´es des ensembles (A). Bulletin de l’Acad´emie des
Sciences Cracovie, Classe des Sciences Math´ematiques et Naturelles,

Indexed References
511
S´erie A (1918), 35–48.
Reprinted in Sierpi´nski [75], 192–204.
159,
163–165, 408, 424
23
Sur un ensemble non mesurable B. Journal de Math´ematiques Pures et
Appliqu´ees (9)2 (1923), 53–72. Reprinted in Sierpi´nski [75], 504–519.
159, 162–166, 424
Lyubeckij, V.A.
70
The existence of a nonmeasurable set of type A2 implies the existence of
an uncountable set of type C A which does not contain a perfect subset.
Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR 195 (1971), 548–550. Translated in Soviet
Mathematics, Doklady 11 (1970), 1513–1515. 184
71
Independence of certain propositions of set theory from Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory.
Vestnik Moskovskogo Universiteta Seriia I, Matematika
Mehanika 26(2) (1971), 78–82. Translated in Moscow University Math-
ematics Bulletin 26(2) (1971), 116–119. 184
Mackey, George W.
44
Equivalence of a problem in measure theory to a problem in the theory
of vector lattices. BAMS 50 (1944), 719–722. 27
Maddy, Penelope
88
Believing the Axioms. I. JSL 53 (1988), 481–511. XVII
88a
Believing the Axioms. II. JSL 53 (1988), 736–764. XVII
Magidor, Menachem
XXII, 295, 309, 325, 463
71
There are many normal ultraﬁlters corresponding to a supercompact car-
dinal. IJM 9 (1971), 186–192. 306, 309
71a
On the role of supercompact and extendible cardinals in logic. IJM 10
(1971), 147–157. 302, 303, 309, 315
74
Combinatorial characterization of supercompact cardinals.
PAMS 42
(1974), 279–285. 350
76
How large is the ﬁrst strongly compact cardinal? or: A study on identity
crises. AML 10 (1976), 33–57. 309
80
Precipitous ideals and Σ1
4 sets. IJM 35 (1980), 109–134. 461
See also Burke, Maxim, and Menachem Magidor.
See also Feng, Qi, Menachem Magidor, and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Foreman, Matthew, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
See also Gitik, Moti, and Menachem Magidor.
See also Kanamori, Akihiro, and Menachem Magidor.
Mahlo, Paul
58
11
¨Uber lineare transﬁnite Mengen. BKSG 63 (1911), 187–225. XVI, 16, 17
12
Zur Theorie und Anwendung der ρ0-Zahlen. BKSG 64 (1912), 108–112.
XVI, 16
13
Zur Theorie und Anwendung der ρ0-Zahlen II. BKSG 65 (1913), 268–
282. XVI, 16
13a
¨Uber Teilmengen des Kontinuums von dessen M¨achtigkeit. BKSG 65
(1913), 283–315. 16

512
Indexed References
Makowsky, Johann A.
85
Vopˇenka’s Principle and compact logics. JSL 50 (1985), 42–48. 339
Mansﬁeld, Richard B.
70
Perfect subsets of deﬁnable sets of real numbers. PJM 35 (1970), 451–
457. 182
71
A Souslin operation for Π1
2 . IJM 9 (1971), 367–379. 192, 198, 201, 204,
420
Mansﬁeld, Richard B., and Galen Weitkamp
85
Recursive Aspects of Descriptive Set Theory. Oxford Logic Guides #11.
New York, Oxford University Press 1985. 145
Marek, Wiktor
See Di Prisco, Carlos A., and Wiktor Marek.
Marshall, M. Victoria
89
Higher order reﬂection principles. JSL 54 (1989), 474–489. 331
Martin, Donald A.
XXI, 113, 145, 171, 192, 193, 203, 204, 367–369, 380, 383,
386, 389, 391, 392, 395, 401, 403, 406, 411, 412, 415, 417, 422, 424–429, 431–
436, 439–445, 450, 453, 458–460, 462, 463
68
The axiom of determinateness and reduction principles in the analytical
hierarchy. BAMS 74 (1968), 687–689. 387, 410
70
Measurable cardinals and analytic games. FM 66 (1970), 287–291. XXII,
437, 440–442
75
Borel determinacy. AM 102 (1975), 363–371. 441
76
Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem: The Continuum Hypothesis. In: Browder, Felix
(ed.) Mathematical Developments Arising from Hilbert’s Problems. Pro-
ceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics vol. 28. Providence, American
Mathematical Society 1976, 81–92. 31
80
Inﬁnite games. In: Lehto, Olli (ed.) Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians, Helsinki 1978, vol. 1. Helsinki, Academia
Scientiarum Fennica 1980, 269–273. 329, 449
83
The largest countable this, that, and the other.
In:
Kechris-Martin-
Moschovakis [83], 97–106. 422, 430, 432
83a
The real game quantiﬁer propagates scales. In: Kechris-Martin-Moscho-
vakis [83], 157–171. 431
85
A purely inductive proof of Borel determinacy. In: Nerode-Shore [85],
303–308. 441
90
An extension of Borel determinacy. APAL 49 (1990), 279–293. 441, 445
∞
Forthcoming book on determinacy. 441, 443, 445, 450
See also Baumgartner, James E., Donald A. Martin, and Saharon Shelah.
See also Jackson, Steve, and Donald A. Martin.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., and Donald A. Martin.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Donald A. Martin, and Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Donald A. Martin, and John R. Steel.

Indexed References
513
Martin, Donald A., and William J. Mitchell
79
On the ultraﬁlter of closed, unbounded sets. JSL 44 (1979), 503–506.
386
Martin, Donald A., Yiannis N. Moschovakis, and John R. Steel.
82
The extent of deﬁnable scales. BAMS (New Series) 6 (1982), 435–440.
430
Martin, Donald A., and Robert M. Solovay
69
A basis theorem for Σ1
3 sets of reals. AM 89 (1969), 138–159. XIX, 192,
196, 198, 204, 420, 437, 450
70
Internal Cohen extensions. AML 2 (1970), 143–178. 31, 167, 179, 426
Martin, Donald A., and John R. Steel
83
The extent of scales in L(R).
In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [83],
86–96. 382, 430
88
Projective determinacy. PNAS 85 (1988), 6582–6586. 463
89
A proof of Projective Determinacy. JAMS 2 (1989), 71–125. 360, 462,
463
94
Iteration trees. JAMS 7 (1994), 1–73. 463
M´at´e, Attila
See Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, Attila M´at´e, and Richard Rado.
Mathias, Adrian R.D.
238
68
On a generalization of Ramsey’s theorem (abstract). NAMS 15 (1968),
931. 143, 144
73
On sequences generic in the sense of Prikry. Journal of the Australian
Mathematical Society 15 (1973), 409–414. 237
77
Happy families. AML 12 (1977), 59–111. 143, 144, 238, 243
79
Surrealist landscape with ﬁgures (a survey of recent results in set theory).
Periodica Mathematica Hungarica 10 (1979), 109–175. 117
83
(ed.) Surveys in Set Theory. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note
Series #87. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
See also Woodin, W. Hugh, Robert M. Solovay, and Adrian R.D. Mathias.
Mathias, Adrian R.D., and Hartley Rogers Jr.
73
(eds.) Cambridge Summer School in Mathematical Logic. Lecture Notes
in Mathematics #337. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1973.
Matsubara, Yo
87
Menas’ conjecture and generic ultrapowers. APAL 36 (1987), 225–234.
343
88
Splitting Pκλ into stationary subsets. JSL 53 (1988), 385–389. 346
88a
Variations of cub ﬁlter on Pκλ. PAMS 102 (1988), 1009–1017. 345
90
Consistency of Menas’ conjecture. Journal of the Mathematical Society
of Japan 42 (1990), 259–263. 345
Mauldin, R. Daniel
81
(ed.) The Scottish Book. Boston, Birkh¨auser 1981. 371, 373

514
Indexed References
Mazur, Stanisław
371, 373, 377
Mazurkiewicz, Stefan
36
¨Uber die Menge der differenzierbaren Funktionen. FM 27 (1936), 244–
249. 166
Menas, Telis K.
344–346
74
On strong compactness and supercompactness. AML 7 (1974), 327–359.
308, 309, 341, 342
76
A combinatorial property of pκλ. JSL 41 (1976), 225–234. 309, 347–349
76a
Consistency results concerning supercompactness.
TAMS 223 (1976),
61–91. 309
Metakides, George
82
(ed.) Patras Logic Symposion. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1982.
Mignone, Robert J.
84
The ultraﬁlter characterization of huge cardinals. PAMS 90 (1984), 585–
590. 334
Mirimanov, Dmitry
17
Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probl`eme fondamental
de la th´eorie des ensembles. L’Enseignment Mathematique 19 (1917),
37–52. XIV, 20
Mitchell, William J.
117, 276, 470
74
Sets constructible from sequences of ultraﬁlters. JSL 39 (1974), 57–66.
305
79
Hypermeasurable cardinals.
In: Boffa, Maurice, Dirk van Dalen, and
Kenneth McAloon (eds.)
Logic Colloquium ’78.
Amsterdam, North-
Holland 1979, 303–316. 352, 358, 449
See also Martin, Donald A., and William J. Mitchell.
Monk, J. Donald, and Dana S. Scott
64
Additions to some results of Erd˝os and Tarski. FM 53 (1964), 335–343.
76
Monk, Leonard
415
Montague, Richard M.
55
Non-ﬁnitizable and essentially non-ﬁnitizable theories (abstract). BAMS
61 (1955), 172–173. 57
61
Fraenkel’s addition to the axioms of Zermelo. In: Bar-Hillel-Poznanski-
Rabin-Robinson [61], 91–114. 57, 58
Montague, Richard M., and Robert L. Vaught
59
Natural models of set theories. FM 47 (1959), 219–242. 19
Moore, Gregory H.
82
Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. Its Origins, Development and Inﬂuence. New
York, Springer-Verlag 1982. XII, 146

Indexed References
515
88
The origins of forcing. In: Drake, Frank R., and John K. Truss (eds.)
Logic Colloquium ’86. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1988, 143–173. 32,
114
Morel, Ann C.
See Frayne, Thomas E., Ann C. Morel, and Dana S. Scott.
Morgenstern, Carl F.
79
On the ordering of certain large cardinals. JSL 44 (1979), 563–565. 333
Morgenstern, Oskar
See von Neumann, John, and Oskar Morgenstern.
Morley, Michael D.
65
Categoricity in power. TAMS 114 (1965), 514–538. 100
65a
Omitting classes of elements. In: Addison-Henkin-Tarski [65], 265–273.
100
Moschovakis, Yiannis N.
XXI, 367, 368, 397, 403, 406, 408, 410, 412, 417,
422–424, 427, 436
70
Determinacy and prewellorderings of the continuum. In: Bar-Hillel [70],
24–62. 396–398, 423, 425, 426, 428
71
Uniformization in a playful universe. BAMS 77 (1971), 731–736. 419–
421, 425, 427
73
Analytical deﬁnability in a playful universe. In: Suppes, Patrick, et al.
(eds.) Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV. Proceedings of
the 1971 International Congress, Bucharest. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1973, 77–83. 421, 422
76
Indescribable cardinals in L (abstract). JSL 41 (1976), 554–555. 66
78
Inductive scales on inductive sets. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 185–
192. 430
80
Descriptive Set Theory. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1980. 3, 28, 34, 35,
145, 179, 203, 369, 403, 421, 422, 426, 428, 430
81
Ordinal games and playful models.
In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis
[81], 169–201. 422
83
Scales on coinductive sets. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [83], 77–85.
430
See also Addison Jr., John W., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
See also Becker, Howard S., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Eugene M. Kleinberg, Yiannis N. Moschovakis,
and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Donald A. Martin, and Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., and Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
See also Martin, Donald A., Yiannis N. Moschovakis, and John R. Steel.
Mostowski, Andrzej M.
36, 76, 99, 151
47
On deﬁnable sets of positive integers. FM 34 (1947), 81–112. Reprinted
in [79] below, vol. 1, 339–370. 151

516
Indexed References
49
An undecidable arithmetical statement. FM 36 (1949), 143–164. Re-
printed in [79] below, vol. 1, 531–552. 7, 18, 19
79
Kuratowski, Kazimierz, et al.
(eds.)
Foundational Studies.
Selected
Works. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1979.
See also Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej, and Andrzej M. Mostowski.
M¨uller, Gert H.
76
(ed.) Sets and Classes. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1976.
M¨uller, Gert H., Arnold Oberschelp, and Klaus Potthoff
75
(eds.) Logic Conference, Kiel 1974. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #499.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1975.
Mycielski, Jan
441
64
On the axiom of determinateness. FM 53 (1964), 205–224. 135, 169,
377–379
66
On the axiom of determinateness II. FM 59 (1966), 203–212. 377
Mycielski, Jan, and Hugo Steinhaus
62
A mathematical axiom contradicting the axiom of choice.
BAPS 10
(1962), 1–3. Reprinted in Steinhaus [85], 778–781. XXI, 377
Mycielski, Jan, and Stanisław Swierczkowski
64
On the Lebesgue measurability and the axiom of determinateness. FM
54 (1964), 67–71. 375, 377
Mycielski, Jan, Stanisław Swierczkowski, and A. Zieba
56
On inﬁnite positional games. BAPS 4 (1956), 485–488. 377
Mycielski, Jan, and A. Zieba
55
On inﬁnite games. BAPS 3 (1955), 133–136. 377
Nagel, Ernest, Patrick Suppes, and Alfred Tarski
62
(eds.) Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of
the 1960 International Congress, Stanford. Stanford, Stanford University
Press 1962.
Namba, Kanji
305
Napoleon Bonaparte
473
Negrepontis, Stylianos
See Comfort, W. Wistar, and Stylianos Negrepontis.
Nerode, Anil, and Richard A. Shore
85
(eds.) Recursion Theory. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics
vol. 42. Providence, American Mathematical Society 1985.
Newton, Isaac
XII, 474
Normann, Dag
See Fenstad, Jens E., and Dag Normann.
Novikov, Petr S.
31
Sur les fonctions implicites mesurables B. FM 17 (1931), 8–25. 150

Indexed References
517
35
Sur la s´eparabilit´e des ensembles projectifs de seconde class.
FM 25
(1935), 459–466. 404, 408
51
On the consistency of some propositions of the descriptive theory of sets
(in Russian). Trudy Matematiˇceskogo Instituat imeni V.A. Steklova 38
(1951), 279–316. Translated in American Mathematical Society Transla-
tions 29 (1963), 51–89. 151, 410
See also Luzin, Nikolai N., and Petr S. Novikov.
Oxtoby, John C.
57
The Banach-Mazur game and Banach Category Theorem. In: Dresher,
Melvin, Alan W. Tucker, and Philip Wolfe (eds.) Contributions to the
Theory of Games. Vol. 3. Annals of Mathematics Studies #39. Princeton,
Princeton University Press 1957, 159–163. 373
71
Measure and Category. A Survey of the Analogies between Topological
and Measure Spaces. New York, Springer-Verlag 1971. 14
Paris, Jeffrey B.
236, 282, 395
69
Boolean extensions and large cardinals. Ph.D. thesis, Manchester Uni-
versity 1969. 270
72
ZF ⊢Σ0
4 determinateness. JSL 37 (1972), 661–667. 441
74
Patterns of indiscernibles. BLMS 6 (1974), 183–188. 186, 188
See also Devlin, Keith J., and Jeffrey B. Paris.
See also Kunen, Kenneth, and Jeffrey B. Paris.
Peano, Giuseppe
XIII, 479
Pelletier, Donald H.
81
The partition property for certain extendible measures on supercompact
cardinals. PAMS 81 (1981), 607–612. 349
See also Carr, Donna M., Jean-Pierre Levinski, and Donald H. Pelletier.
See also Carr, Donna M., and Donald H. Pelletier.
See also Kunen, Kenneth, and Donald H. Pelletier.
Phillips, Esther R.
78
Nicolai Nicolaevich Luzin and the Moscow school of the theory of func-
tions. Historia Mathematica 5 (1978), 275–305. 146
Phillips, Iain
See Kranakis, Evangelos, and Iain Phillips.
Poincar´e, Henri
478
Posp´ıˇsil, Bedˇrich
37
Remark on bicompact spaces. AM 38 (1937), 845–846. 400
Post, Emil L.
114
Powell, William C.
72
Almost huge cardinals and Vopˇenka’s principle (abstract).
NAMS 19
(1972), A-616. 338
74
Variations of Keisler’s theorem for complete embeddings. FM 81 (1974),
121–132. 326, 352

518
Indexed References
Prikry, Karel L.
91, 143, 234
66
Measurable cardinals and saturated ideals (abstract). NAMS 13 (1966),
720–721. 220, 221
70
Changing measurable into accessible cardinals. Dissertationes Mathemat-
icae (Rozprawy Matematyczne) 68 (1970), 5–52. 90, 220–222, 235, 236,
238, 240, 242
75
Ideals and powers of cardinals. BAMS 81 (1975), 907–909. 91, 219
76
Determinateness and partitions. PAMS 54 (1976), 303–306. 382
See also Galvin, Fred, and Karel L. Prikry.
Rado, Richard
71
See Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, Attila M´at´e, and Richard Rado.
See also Erd˝os, Paul, Andr´as Hajnal, and Richard Rado.
See also Erd˝os, Paul, and Richard Rado.
See also Hajnal, Andr´as, Richard Rado, and Vera T. S´os.
Ramsey, Frank P.
30
On a problem of formal logic. PLMS (2)30 (1930), 264–286. Reprinted
in Gessel-Rota [87], 2–24. XVIII, 70, 75, 100
Rasiowa, Helena, and Roman Sikorski
63
The Mathematics of Metamathematics. Monograﬁe Matematyczne #41.
Warsaw, Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1963. 114
Reid, Constance
See Albers, Donald J., Gerald L. Alexanderson, and Constance Reid.
Reinhardt, William N.
XX, 297, 298, 302, 307, 311–314, 339
70
Ackermann’s set theory equals ZF. AML 2 (1970), 189–249. 311
74
Set existence principles of Shoenﬁeld, Ackermann, and Powell. FM 84
(1974), 5–34. 312, 313
74a
Remarks on reﬂection principles, large cardinals, and elementary embed-
dings. In: Jech [74], 189–205. 313, 318
80
Satisfaction deﬁnitions and axioms of inﬁnity in a theory of properties
with necessity operator.
In: Arruda, Ayda I., Rolando Chuaqui, and
Newton C.A. da Costa (eds.) Mathematical Logic in Latin America. Am-
sterdam, North-Holland 1980, 267–303. 314
See also Solovay, Robert M., William N. Reinhardt, and Akihiro Kanamori.
Reinhardt, William N., and Jack H. Silver
65
On some problems of Erd˝os-Hajnal (abstract). NAMS 12 (1965), 723–
724. 83, 109
Richter, Wayne H., and Peter Aczel
74
Inductive deﬁnitions and reﬂecting properties of admissible ordinals. In:
Fenstad-Hinman [74], 301–381. 66
Robinson, Abraham
62
Recent developments in model theory.
In: Nagel-Suppes-Tarski [62],
60–79. Reprinted in [79] below, vol. 1, 12–31. 39

Indexed References
519
65
Formalism 64. In: Bar-Hillel [65], 228–246. Reprinted in [79] below,
vol. 2, 505–523. 115, 481
79
Keisler, H. Jerome et al. (eds.) Selected Papers of Abraham Robinson.
New Haven, Yale University Press 1979.
Rogers, Claude A., et al.
80
(eds.) Analytic Sets. London, Academic Press 1980. 145
Rosser, J. Barkley
69
Simpliﬁed Independence Proofs. New York, Academic Press 1969. 117
See also Firestone, C.D., and J. Barkley Rosser.
Rothschild, Bruce L.
See Graham, Ronald L., Bruce L. Rothschild, and Joel H. Spencer.
Rowbottom, Frederick
43, 69, 87, 88, 94, 98, 99, 184
64
Large cardinals and small constructible sets. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Wisconsin at Madison 1964. Published as [71] below. XVIII, 83, 85, 86,
88, 89
71
Some strong axioms of inﬁnity incompatible with the axiom of con-
structibility. AML 3 (1971), 1–44. XVIII, 83, 86, 88, 89
See also Keisler, H. Jerome, and Frederick Rowbottom.
Russell, Bertrand
XIII, XIV, 2, 29, 70
03
The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
1903. 477
Sacks, Gerald E.
76
Countable admissible ordinals and hyperdegrees. AdM 19 (1976), 213–
262. 171
90
Higher Recursion Theory. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag 1990. 157, 166
Saint-Raymond, Jean
See Louveau, Alain, and Jean Saint-Raymond.
Sami, Ramez
423, 443
ˇSanin, Nikolai A.
46
A theorem from the general theory of sets (in Russian).
Doklady
Academii Nauk S.S.S.R. 53 (1946), 399–400. 121
Schimmerling, Ernest
02
Woodin cardinals, Shelah cardinals, and the Mitchell-Steel Core Model.
PAMS 130 (2002), 3385–3391. 365
Schimmerling, Ernest, and John R. Steel
96
Fine structure for tame inner models. JSL 61 (1996), 621–639. 472
Schindler, Ralf-Dieter
02
The core model for almost linear iterations. APAL 116 (2002), 205–272.
469
See also Hauser, Kai, and Ralf-Dieter Schindler.

520
Indexed References
Scott, Dana S.
XVIII, 15, 27, 32, 44, 51–53, 55, 58, 60, 88, 114, 116, 244, 257,
261, 295, 378
55
Deﬁnitions by abstraction in axiomatic set theory. BAMS 61 (1955), 442.
47
61
Measurable cardinals and constructible sets. BAPS 9 (1961), 521–524.
XVII, 44, 49
67
A proof of the independence of the Continuum Hypothesis. Mathematical
Systems Theory 1 (1967), 89–111. 116
71
(ed.) Axiomatic Set Theory. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathemat-
ics vol. 13, part 1. Providence, American Mathematical Society 1971.
See also Frayne, Thomas E., Ann C. Morel, and Dana S. Scott.
See also Hanf, William P., and Dana S. Scott.
See also Monk, J. Donald, and Dana S. Scott.
Shelah, Saharon
XXII, 97, 98, 179, 331, 450, 460–463
75
Notes on partition calculus. In: Hajnal-Rado-S´os [75] vol. 3, 1257–1276.
72
78
Jonsson algebras in successor cardinals. IJM 30 (1978), 57–64. 96, 97
79
Weakly compact cardinals: a combinatorial proof. JSL 44 (1979), 559–
562. 77
80
A problem of Kurosh, J´onsson groups and applications. In: Adian, Sergei
I., William W. Boone, and Graham Higman (eds.) Word Problems II.
Amsterdam, North-Holland 1980, 373–394. 95
82
Proper Forcing. Lecture Notes in Mathematics #940. Berlin, Springer-
Verlag, 1982. 460
84
Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? IJM 48 (1984), 1–47. XIX,
136, 140, 179
86
Around Classiﬁcation Theory of Models. Lecture Notes in Mathematics
#1182. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1986. 350, 470
87
Iterated forcing and normal ideals on ω1. IJM 60 (1987), 345–380. 462
See also Kanamori, Akihiro, and Saharon Shelah.
See also Baumgartner, James E., Donald A. Martin, and Saharon Shelah.
See also Foreman, Matthew, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
Shelah, Saharon, and Lee J. Stanley
90
Coding and reshaping when there are no sharps. In: Judah-Just-Woodin
[92], 407–416. 187
95
A combinatorial forcing for coding the universe by a real when there are
no sharps. JSL 60 (1995), 1–35. 187
95a
The combinatorics of combinatorial coding by a real. JSL 60 (1995),
36–57. 187
Shelah, Saharon, and W. Hugh Woodin
90
Large cardinals imply that every reasonably deﬁnable set of reals is
Lebesgue measurable. IJM 70 (1990), 381–394. 461

Indexed References
521
Shepherdson, John C.
51
Inner models for set theory – Part I. JSL 16 (1951), 161–190. 7, 33
52
Inner models for set theory – Part II. JSL 17 (1952), 225–237. 20, 33
53
Inner models for set theory – Part III. JSL 18 (1953), 145–167. 33
Shioya, Masahiro
93
Inﬁnitary J´onsson functions and elementary embeddings.
Archive for
Mathematical Logic 33 (1994), 81–86. 325
03
A saturated stationary subset of Pκκ+. Mathematical Research Letters 10
(2003), 493–500. 344
∞
An ultraﬁlter with property σ. PAMS. 350
Shoenﬁeld, Joseph R.
174, 312, 313
59
On the independence of the axiom of constructibility. American Journal
of Mathematics 81 (1959), 537–540. 35
61
The problem of predicativity. In: Bar-Hillel-Poznanski-Rabin-Robinson
[61], 132–139. 171, 173, 175
71
Unramiﬁed forcing. In: Scott [71], 357–381. 117
Sierpi´nski, Wacław
XVI, 22, 147, 148, 151, 167
25
Sur une classe d’ensembles. FM 7 (1925), 237–243. Reprinted in [75]
below, 571–576. 148, 149, 158, 166
28
Sur une d´ecomposition d’ensembles. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und
Physik 35 (1928), 239–242. Reprinted in [75] below, 719–722. 211
30
Sur l’uniformisation des ensembles mesurables (B). FM 16 (1930), 136–
139. Reprinted in [76] below, 44–46. 150
33
Sur un probl`eme de la th´eorie des relations. Annali della Scuola Normale
Superiore de Pisa (2)2 (1933), 285–287. Reprinted in [76] below, 120–
122. 74
38
Fonctions additives non compl`etement additives et fonctions non mesura-
bles. FM 30 (1938), 96–99. Reprinted in [76] below, 380–382. 384
50
Les ensembles projectifs et analytiques. M´emorial des Sciences Math´ema-
tiques #112. Paris, Gauthier-Villars 1950. 147
75
Hartman, Stanisław, et al. (eds.)
Oeuvres Choisies, vol. 2.
Warsaw,
Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1975.
76
Hartman, Stanisław, et al. (eds.)
Ouevres Choisies, vol. 3.
Warsaw,
Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1976.
See also Luzin, Nikolai N., and Wacław Sierpi´nski.
Sierpi´nski, Wacław, and Alfred Tarski
30
Sur une propri´et´e caract´eristique des nombres inaccessibles.
FM 15
(1930), 292–300.
Reprinted in Sierpi´nski [76], 29–35, and in Tarski
[86] vol. 1, 289–297. XVI, 16, 18
Sikorski, Roman
See Rasiowa, Helena, and Roman Sikorski.

522
Indexed References
Silver, Jack H.
43, 69, 87, 88, 96, 98, 99, 101, 107, 110, 184, 209, 212, 217,
234, 244, 261, 264, 274, 293, 295, 311–313, 330
66
Some applications of model theory in set theory. Ph.D. thesis, University
of California at Berkeley 1966. Published in abridged form as [71] below.
XVIII, 80, 82, 99, 100, 107, 108
66a
The consistency of the generalized continuum hypothesis with the exis-
tence of a measurable cardinal (abstract). NAMS 13 (1966), 721. 263
70
A large cardinal in the constructible universe. FM 69 (1970), 93–100.
108
70a
Every analytic set is Ramsey. JSL 35 (1970), 60–64. 382
71
Some applications of model theory in set theory. AML 3 (1971), 45–110.
XVIII, 39, 80, 100, 104, 107, 184
71a
The consistency of the GCH with the existence of a measurable cardinal.
In: Scott [71], 391–395. 263
71b
Measurable cardinals and ∆1
3 well-orderings. AM 94 (1971), 414–446.
170, 272, 273, 276, 410
See also Reinhardt, William N., and Jack H. Silver.
Simms, John C.
445
79
Semihypermeasurables and Π0
1 (Π1
1 ) games.
Ph.D. thesis, Rockefeller
University 1979. 444
Simpson, Stephen G.
77
First-order theory of the degrees of unsolvability. AM 105 (1977), 121–
139. 186
Skolem, Thoralf
XV, XVIII, 21, 477
23
Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre.
In: Matematikerkongressen i Helsingfors den 4–7 Juli 1922, Den femte
skandinaviska matematikerkongressen, Redog¨orelse. Helsinki, Akademi-
ska-Bokhandeln 1923, 217–232.
Reprinted in [70] below, 137–152.
Translated in van Heijenoort [67], 290–301. XIII, XIV, 20, 28, 86
33
Ein kombinatorischer Satz mit Anwendung auf ein logisches Entschei-
dungsproblem. FM 20 (1933), 254–261. Reprinted in [70] below, 337–
344. 70
70
Fenstad, Jens E. (ed.) Selected Works in Logic. Oslo, Univesitetsforlaget
1970.
Smith Jr., Edgar C., and Alfred Tarski
57
Higher degrees of distributivity and completeness in Boolean algebras.
TAMS 84 (1957), 230–257. Reprinted in Tarski [86] vol. 3, 623–650.
213
Solovay, Robert M.
XX, XXI, 25, 43, 44, 54, 55, 99, 110, 113, 116, 125, 129,
132, 135–139, 141–145, 167, 170, 178–180, 182, 184, 186–188, 190, 192, 209,
212, 220, 222, 223, 259, 261, 262, 273, 274, 277, 283, 288, 297, 298, 302, 305,
307, 308, 321, 327, 340, 346, 348, 349, 367–369, 378, 383–388, 390, 398, 425,
431, 437, 442, 445, 450, 466

Indexed References
523
63
Independence results in the theory of cardinals. I, II (abstracts). NAMS
10 (1963), 595. 116
65
2ℵ0 can be anything it ought to be. In: Addison-Henkin-Tarski [65], 435.
116
65a
Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis (abstract). NAMS 12
(1965), 132. 126
65b
The measure problem (abstract). NAMS 12 (1965), 217. XIX, 114, 132,
136–139
66
Real-valued measurable cardinals (abstract). NAMS 13 (1966), 721. XX,
210, 224
67
A nonconstructible ∆1
3 set of integers. TAMS 127 (1967), 50–75. XVIII,
107, 184
69
The cardinality of Σ1
2 sets of reals. In: Bulloff-Holyoke-Hahn [69], 58–
73. XIX, 183, 184, 310, 378
70
A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
AM 92 (1970), 1–56. XIX, 114, 116, 121, 130, 132, 136–139
71
Real-valued measurable cardinals. In: Scott [71], 397–428. XX, 61, 210,
214, 216–220, 224, 264, 459
74
Strongly compact cardinals and the GCH. In: Henkin et al. [74], 365–372.
347
78
A ∆1
3 coding of the subsets of ωω. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 133–
150. 430, 435
78a
The independence of DC from AD. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78], 171–
184. 381, 382, 399, 400, 433, 467
See also Jensen, Ronald B., and Robert M. Solovay.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., and Robert M. Solovay.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Robert M. Solovay, and John R. Steel.
See also Levy, Azriel, and Robert M. Solovay.
See also Martin, Donald A., and Robert M. Solovay.
Solovay, Robert M., William N. Reinhardt, and Akihiro Kanamori
78
Strong axioms of inﬁnity and elementary embeddings. AML 13 (1978),
73–116. 298, 303, 307, 314, 318, 325, 328, 331, 334, 336, 339
Solovay, Robert M., and Stanley Tennenbaum
71
Iterated Cohen extensions and Souslin’s problem. AM 94 (1971), 201–
245. 116, 117, 123, 124
S´os, Vera T.
See Hajnal, Andr´as, Richard Rado, and Vera T. S´os.
Specker, Ernst
49
Sur un probl`eme de Sikorski. Colloquium Mathematicum 2 (1949), 9–12.
79
57
Zur Axiomatik der Mengenlehre (Fundierungs- und Auswahlaxiome).
ZML 3 (1957), 173–210. XIX, 135, 136, 378

524
Indexed References
Spector, Clifford
114
55
Recursive well-orderings. JSL 20 (1955), 151–163. 166
Spencer, Joel H.
See Graham, Ronald L., Bruce L. Rothschild, and Joel H. Spencer.
Stanley, Lee J.
See Shelah, Saharon, and Lee J. Stanley.
Stanley, Mack C.
94
A Π1
2 singleton incompatible with 0#. APAL 66 (1994), 27–88. 187
Steel, John R.
XXII, 276, 330, 367–369, 415, 437, 443, 450, 462, 463, 468, 470
81
Determinateness and the separation property. JSL 46 (1981), 41–44. 415
81a
Closure properties of pointclasses. In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [81],
147–163.
82
Determinacy in the Mitchell models. AML 22 (1982), 109–125. 445,
449
83
Scales in L(R). In: Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [83], 107–156. 430–
433, 436
88
Long games. In: Kechris-Martin-Steel [88], 56–97. 467
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Robert M. Solovay, and John R. Steel.
See also Martin, Donald A., Yiannis N. Moschovakis, and John R. Steel.
See also Martin, Donald A., and John R. Steel.
Steel, John R., and Robert A. Van Wesep
82
Two consequences of determinacy consistent with choice. TAMS 272
(1982), 67–85. 399, 459, 467, 470
Steinhaus, Hugo
25
Deﬁnicje potrzebne do teorji gry i po´scigu. My´sl Akademicka (Lw´ow) 1
(1925), 13–14. Translated as: Deﬁnitions for a theory of games and pur-
suit. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 7 (1960), 105–108. Translation
reprinted in [85] below, 332–336. 371
65
Games, an informal talk. AMM 72 (1965), 457–468. Reprinted in [85]
below, 805–817. 371, 377
85
Edward Marczewski et al. (eds.) Selected Papers. Warsaw, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1985.
See also Mycielski, Jan, and Hugo Steinhaus.
Stepr¯ans, Juris, and Stephen Watson
89
(eds.) Set Theory and its Applications. Lecture Notes in Mathematics
#1401. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1989.
Stewart, Frank M.
See Gale, David, and Frank M. Stewart.
Sureson, Claude
86
ω1-constructible universe and measurable cardinals.
APAL 30 (1986),
293–320. 258
89
About Prikry generic extensions. APAL 51 (1989), 247–278. 238

Indexed References
525
Suslin, Mikhail Ya.
145–149, 151, 166, 183
17
Sur une d´eﬁnition des ensembles mesurables B sans nombres transﬁnis.
CRP 164 (1917), 88–91. XVI, 147, 148, 165, 180
20
Probl`eme 3. FM 1 (1920), 223. 22
Swierczkowski, Stanisław
378
See Mycielski, Jan, and Stanisław Swierczkowski.
See also Mycielski, Jan, Stanisław Swierczkowski, and A. Zieba.
Szekeres, Gy¨orgy
See Erd˝os, Paul, and Gy¨orgy Szekeres.
Takeuti, Gaisi
378
70
A relativization of axioms of strong inﬁnity to ω1. Annals of the Japan
Association for the Philosophy of Science 3 (1970), 191–204. 384
Tan, It Beng
81
Sequentially large cardinals. In: Chong, Chi Tat, and Malcolm J. Wicks
(eds.) Southeast Asian Conference on Logic. Amsterdam, North-Holland
1981, 197–210. 334
See also Barbanel, Julius B., Carlos A. Di Prisco, and It Beng Tan.
Tarski, Alfred
XIV, 15, 22, 31, 36, 37, 39, 44, 70, 83, 92, 99, 307, 308
29
Sur les fonctions additives dans les classes abstraites et leur application
au probl`eme de la mesure. Comptes Rendus des S´eances de la Soci´et´e
des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 22 (1929), 114–117.
Reprinted in [86] below, vol. 1, 243–248. 24
33
Poje¸cie prawdy w je¸zykach nauk dedukcyjnych. (The concept of truth
in the languages of deductive sciences.) Prace Towarzystwa Naukowego
Warszawskiego, Wydział III (Travaux de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des
Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III) #34 (1933). See also [35] below. XV
35
Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen. (German transla-
tion of [33] with an appendix) Studia Philosophica 1 (1935), 261–405.
Reprinted in [86] below, vol. 2, 51–198. Translated in [83] below, 152–
278. XV
38
¨Uber unerreichbare Kardinalzahlen. FM 30 (1938), 68–89. Reprinted in
[86] below, vol. 2, 359–380. 19, 20
39
Ideale in vollst¨andigen Mengenk¨orpern. I. FM 32 (1939), 45–63. Re-
printed in [86] below, vol. 2, 509–527. 26, 400
39a
On well-ordered subsets of any set. FM 32 (1939), 176–183. Reprinted
in [86] below, vol. 2, 551–558. 20
45
Ideale in vollst¨andigen Mengenk¨orpern. II. FM 33 (1945), 51–65. Reprint-
ed in [86] below, vol. 3, 3–17. 26, 210, 211
58
Remarks on predicate logic with inﬁnitely long expressions. Colloquium
Mathematicum 6 (1958), 171–176. Reprinted in [86] below, vol. 4, 11–
16. 36

526
Indexed References
62
Some problems and results relevant to the foundations of set theory. In:
Nagel-Suppes-Tarski [62], 125–135.
Reprinted in [86] below, vol. 4,
115–125. XVII, 36, 39, 42
83
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938. Transla-
tions by J.H. Woodger. Second edition. Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing
Company 1983.
86
Givant, Steven R., and Ralph N. McKenzie (eds.)
Collected Papers.
Basel, Birkh¨auser 1986.
See also Addison Jr., John W., Leon Henkin, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Erd˝os, Paul, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Keisler, H. Jerome, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Kuratowski, Kazimierz, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Nagel, Ernest, Patrick Suppes, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Sierpi´nski, Wacław, and Alfred Tarski.
See also Smith Jr., Edgar C., and Alfred Tarski.
Tarski, Alfred, and Robert L. Vaught
57
Arithmetical extensions of relational systems. Compositio Mathematica
13 (1957), 81–102. Reprinted in Tarski [86], 653–674. 8
Taylor, Alan D.
See Baumgartner, James E., and Alan D. Taylor.
See also Baumgartner, James E., Alan D. Taylor, and Stanley Wagon.
Teichm¨uller, Oswald
39
Braucht der Algebraiker das Auswahlaxiom?
Deutsche Mathematik 4
(1939), 567–577. Reprinted in [82] below, 323–333. 132
82
Ahlfors, Lars V., and Frederick W. Gehring (eds.) Gesammelte Abhand-
lungen. Collected Papers. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1982.
Tennenbaum, Stanley
116
See Solovay, Robert M., and Stanley Tennenbaum.
Thompson, S.
83
Todorˇcevi´c, Stevo B.
80, 87, 98, 320
84
Trees and linearly ordered sets. In: Kunen-Vaughan [84], 235–293. 72
87
Partitioning pairs of countable ordinals. Acta Mathematica 159 (1987),
261–294. 78, 79, 85, 97
94
Some partitions of three-dimensional combinatorial cubes.
Journal of
Combinatorial Theory, Series A 68 (1994), 410–437. 87
Tryba, Jan
81
A few remarks on Rowbottom cardinals. IJM 40 (1981), 193–196. 92
84
On J´onsson cardinals with uncountable coﬁnality. IJM 49 (1984), 315–
324. 96
86
Rowbottom-type properties and a cardinal arithmetic. PAMS 96 (1986),
661–667. 92, 97
87
No J´onsson ﬁlters over ℵω. JSL 52 (1987), 51–53. 97

Indexed References
527
Ulam, Stanisław M.
15, 22, 39, 56, 87, 151, 294, 371
29
Concerning functions on sets. FM 14 (1929), 231–233. Reprinted in [74]
below, 6–8. 24
30
Zur Masstheorie in der allgemeinen Mengenlehre. FM 16 (1930), 140–
150. Reprinted in [74] below, 9–19. XVI, 24, 26, 210, 211
74
Beyer, W.A., Jan Mycielski, and Gian-Carlo Rota (eds.) Sets, Numbers,
and Universes. Selected Works. Cambridge, The MIT Press 1974.
See also Kuratowski, Kazimierz, and Stanisław M. Ulam.
Uspenskii, Vladimir A.
85
Luzin’s contribution to the descriptive theory of sets and functions: con-
cepts, problems, predictions. RMS 40(3) (1985), 97–134. 146
van Heijenoort, Jean
67
(ed.) From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–
1931. Cambridge, Harvard University Press 1967. 478
Van Wesep, Robert A.
78
Separation principles and the axiom of determinateness. JSL 43 (1978),
77–81. 415
78a
Wadge degrees and descriptive set theory. In: Kechris-Moschovakis [78],
151–170. 415
See also Steel, John R., and Robert A. Van Wesep.
Vaughan, Jerry E.
See Kunen, Kenneth, and Jerry E. Vaughan.
Vaught, Robert L.
311
63
Models of complete theories. BAMS 69 (1963), 299–313. 85
63a
Indescribable cardinals (abstract). NAMS 10 (1963), 126. 61
See also Montague, Richard M., and Robert L. Vaught.
See also Tarski, Alfred, and Robert L. Vaught.
Veblen, Oswald
08
Continuous increasing functions of ﬁnite and transﬁnite ordinals. TAMS
9 (1908), 280–292. 53
Vitali, Giuseppe
132
05
Sul problema della misura dei gruppi di punti di una retta.
Bologna,
Tip. Gamberini e Parmeggiani 1905. 22
von Neumann, John
28, 71, 371, 372, 477
23
Zur Einf¨uhrung der transﬁniten Zahlen. ALS 1 (1923), 199–208. Reprint-
ed in [61] below, vol. 1, 24–33. Translated in van Heijenoort [67], 346–
354. XIV
25
Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Journal f¨ur die reine und ange-
wandte Mathematik 154 (1925), 219–240. Reprinted in [61] below, vol. 1,
34–56. Translated in van Heijenoort [67], 393–413. XIV, 20, 30
28
Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele. MA 100 (1928), 295–320. Reprinted
in [61] below, vol. 6, 1–26. 371

528
Indexed References
49
On rings of operators.
Reduction theory.
AM 50 (1949), 401–485.
Reprinted in [61] below, vol. 3, 400–484. 150
61
Taub, Abraham H. (ed.) John von Neumann. Collected Works. New York,
Pergamon Press 1961.
von Neumann, John, and Oskar Morgenstern
44
Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton, Princeton Univer-
sity Press 1944. Second edition, 1947. Third edition, 1953. 371
Vopˇenka, Petr
116, 234
62
Construction of models of set theory by the method of ultraproducts (in
Russian). ZML 8 (1962), 293–304. 51
64
The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis (in Russian). CMUC 5
Supplement I (1964), 1–48. Translated in American Mathematical Society
Translations 57 (1966), 85–112. 116
65
The ﬁrst measurable cardinal and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis.
CMUC 6 (1965), 367–370. 56
67
The general theory of ∇-models. CMUC 8 (1967), 145–170. 116
Vopˇenka, Petr, and Karel Hrb´aˇcek
66
On strongly measurable cardinals. BAPS 14 (1966), 587–591. 51
Wadge, William W.
442
72
Degrees of complexity of subsets of the Baire space. NAMS 19 (1972),
A-714. 414
83
Reducibility and determinateness on the Baire space. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley 1983. 414–416
Wagon, Stanley
See Baumgartner, James E., Alan D. Taylor, and Stanley Wagon.
Wang, Hao
74
From Mathematics to Philosophy. New York, Humanities Press 1974. 29,
31
Watro, Ronald J.
See Henle, James M., Eugene M. Kleinberg, and Ronald J. Watro.
Wehrung, Friedrich
89
Nonabsoluteness of elementary embeddings. JSL 54 (1989), 774–778.
259
Weierstrass, Karl
475, 479
Weitkamp, Galen
See Mansﬁeld, Richard B., and Galen Weitkamp.
Welch, Philip
445
See Beller, Aaron, Ronald B. Jensen, and Philip Welch.
Weyl, Hermann
XIII
Whitehead, Alfred N.
XIII, 2
Wittgenstein, Ludwig
70, 480, 482

Indexed References
529
Wolfe, Philip
55
The strict determinateness of certain inﬁnite games. PJM 5 (1955), 841–
847. 372
Woodin, W. Hugh
XXII, 96, 243, 310, 320, 322, 329, 344, 363, 367–369, 431–
434, 437, 449, 450, 453, 457–464, 466–471
82
On the consistency strength of projective uniformization.
In: Jacques
Stern (ed.) Proceedings of Herbrand Symposium. Logic Colloquium ’81.
Amsterdam, North-Holland 1982, 365–384. 468
83
AD and the uniqueness of the supercompact measures on Pω1(λ).
In:
Kechris-Martin-Moschovakis [83], 67–72. 402
83a
Some consistency results in ZFC using AD. In: Kechris-Martin-Moscho-
vakis [83], 172–198. 460
86
Aspects of determinacy. In: Marcus, Ruth B., Georg J. Dorn, and Paul
Weingartner (eds.) Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science VII.
Proceedings of the 1983 International Congress, Salzburg. Amsterdam,
North-Holland 1986, 171–181. 459
88
Supercompact cardinals, sets of reals, and weakly homogeneous trees.
PNAS 85 (1988), 6587–6591. 462, 470
99
The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonstationary Ideal.
De Gruyter Series in Logic and Applications 1. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter
1999. 471
See also Dales, H. Garth, and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Feng, Qi, Menachem Magidor, and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Judah, Haim (Jaime Ihoda), Winfried Just, and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., Eugene M. Kleinberg, Yiannis N. Moschovakis,
and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Kechris, Alexander S., and W. Hugh Woodin.
See also Shelah, Saharon, and W. Hugh Woodin.
Woodin, W. Hugh, Adrian R.D. Mathias, and Kai Hauser
∞
The Axiom of Determinacy. To appear. 450, 466
Yankov, Vladimir
41
Sur l’uniformisation des ensembles A. Doklady Akademiia Nauk SSSR
30 (1941), 597–598. 150
Young, William H.
03
Zur Lehre der nicht abgeschlossenen Punktmengen. BKSG 55 (1903),
287–293. 147
Zeno
473
Zermelo, Ernst
XIV, 21, 371, 372
04
Beweis, dass jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann (Aus einem an Herrn
Hilbert gerichteten Briefe). MA 59 (1904), 514–516. Translated in van
Heijenoort [67], 139–141. XIII, 146
08
Neuer Beweis f¨ur die M¨oglichkeit einer Wohlordnung. MA 65 (1908),
107–128. Translated in van Heijenoort [67], 183–198. XIII, XIV

530
Indexed References
08a
Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I. MA 65 (1908),
261–281. Translated in van Heijenoort [67], 199–215. XIII, XIV, 16
13
¨Uber eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie des Schachspiels.
In: Hobson, E.W., and A.E.H. Love (eds.) Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Congress of Mathematicians, Cambridge 1912, vol. 2. Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press 1913, 501–504. XXI, 371
29
¨Uber den Begriff der Deﬁnitheit in der Axiomatik. FM 14 (1929), 339–
344. 19
30
¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche: Neue Untersuchungen ¨uber die
Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. FM 16 (1930), 29–47. XIII, XIV, XVI,
XVII, 18–20, 29, 31, 34, 115
Zieba, A.
See Mycielski, Jan, Stanisław Swierczkowski, and A. Zieba.
See also Mycielski, Jan, and A. Zieba.
Zwicker, William S.
84
Pκλ combinatorics I: Stationary coding sets rationalize the club ﬁlter. In:
Baumgartner-Martin-Shelah [84], 243–259. 350
86
Pκλ combinatorics II: The RK ordering beneath a supercompact measure.
JSL 51 (1986), 604–616. 350
89
A beginning for structural properties of ideals on Pκλ.
In: Stepr¯ans-
Watson [89], 201–217. 350
See also Di Prisco, Carlos A., and William S. Zwicker.

Subject Index
This index concentrates on deﬁnitions (occurring on the italicized pages), basic
properties, and those signiﬁcant but singular occurrences of larger subjects that
might otherwise be difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Greek letters and other symbols are alphabet-
ized according to their English transliterations.
Absolute, Cantor’s
XII, XV, XVII, 31, 42, 313,
477
Absolute relation
174
AC (see Axiom of Choice)
ACω; ACω(ωω) (see Countable Axiom of
Choice)
Ackermann’s set theory (A)
311–313, 318
AD (see Axiom of Determinacy)
ADIR
329, 377, 399–402, 441, 458, 467–471
AD1/2
IR
469
Algebra
93
Almost huge cardinal
331, 333, 334, 338
α-branch (of a tree)
72
α-inaccessible cardinal
21, 33
α-Mahlo cardinal
21, 33, 41, 58
α-Π1
1 (a) set
443–449
αth iterate (of a structure)
250
αth level (of a tree)
72
α-weakly inaccessible cardinal
16, 17
α-weakly Mahlo cardinal
17, 216, 217
Amenable pair
187, 244
Amenable-generic set
187
Analytic set
147, 148
Analytical hierarchy
155
Analytical relation
151, 155
– in a
156
Antichain
– of a tree
72
– of conditions
118
– of conditions below p
118
Application (ap)
152
A-set
147, 148
a† (see also Daggers)
294
a# (see also Sharps)
110
Arithmetical hierarchy
154
Arithmetical relation
151, 154
– in a
156
Aronszajn tree (see κ-Aronszajn tree)
Atom (for a measure)
24
Atomless measure
24
Axiom of Choice (AC)
XIII, XV, 1, 21, 22, 28,
32, 34, 71, 101, 114, 132, 167, 257, 324, 329,
372, 377, 478
Axiom of Constructibility (V = L) (see also L)
28, 44, 66
Axiom of Determinacy (AD)
31, 167, 192,
204, 377–379, 382, §28, 414, 415, 425–436,
449, §32
Axiom of Inﬁnity
XIV, 58, 478
Axiom of Reducibility
XIII, 29
Baire Category Theorem
13
Baire function
145
Baire property
13, 14, 136
– for all sets from inaccessibility
132, 136
– for all sets under AD
377, 468
– for ∆1
2
∆1
2 sets
181
– for provably ∆1
2
∆1
2 sets
180
– for Σ1
1
Σ1
1 (analytic) sets
148
– for Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
179
– for Σ1
n+1
Σ1
n+1 sets under Det(Π1
n
Π1
n )
380
– for weakly homogeneously Suslin sets
457
– in L
169
– in L[U]
273
– via games
374
Baire space
11
Banach algebra
450
Begriffsschrift
XIII
Berkeley (see University of California at
Berkeley)
Boolean algebra
26, 116, 120, 129, 213, 214,
223
Boolean-valued model
114, 116, 117, 223
Borel Determinacy
372, 373, 379, 440–442
Borel hierarchy
146, 149, 151, 152
Borel measure (mB)
12
Borel set (see also γ -Borel set, ∞-Borel set,
Borel Determinacy)
12, 145–149, 165
Borel Wadge Determinacy
415, 416, 442
Bounded quantiﬁer
5, 153
Branch (of a tree)
72
Burali-Forti Paradox
XIV
Cabal Seminar
368, 403, 450
CH (see Continuum Hypothesis)
Chain (of a tree)
72
Chang’s Conjecture
85, 87, 88, 282, 292
Closed code
137
Closed set
– in Pκγ
340, 341
– of ω X
371, 372
Closed unbounded ﬁlter
– over λ (Cλ)
3
– over Pκγ (Cκ,γ )
341, 342
Closed unbounded set (see also ν-closed
unbounded set)
– in λ
2, 3
– in Pκγ
340
Coding Lemma
397, 398, 425, 428
Coﬁnal branch (of a tree)
72

532
Subject Index
Cohen real
127, 130, 177, 179–181
Coinductive set
430
Collapsing Lemma
7, 48, 62
Compactness Theorem
XV, 36, 39
Comparable structures
265
Comparison Lemma (for ZFC−premice)
266
Compatible conditions (p ∥q)
118
Complete Boolean algebra
116, 120, 213, 214,
223
Complete embedding
119, 120
Complete set (of Skolem functions)
8
Completeness Theorem
XV, 102, 185
Condition
117
Constructibility degree
186
Constructible closure (see L(A))
Constructible hierarchy (see L)
Constructible set (see also L)
28, 29
Continuously closed class
414, 415
Continuum Hypothesis (CH)
XII, 1, 28–32,
114–116, 133, 134, 378
Countable Axiom of Choice (ACω)
132, 433
– restricted to sets of reals (ACω(ωω))
152,
159, 162, 378, 403, 417
Countably complete tower
451
Countably complete ultraﬁlter
254, 256
Countably iterable structure
254, 255
Covering Theorem
111, 443
Critical point (crit( j))
47
Cumulative hierarchy
XIII, XIV, XVI, XVII, 1,
20
Daggers
294, 444, 445, 468
DC (see Principle of Dependent Choices)
DC(ωω)
434
deﬁnit property
XIII, 19
∆1
2
∆1
2 sets
– Baire property
169, 181
– Determinacy
467
– Lebesgue measurability
150, 169, 181
∆-system
121
∆-system Lemma
121
Dense embedding
119, 120
Dense open set (of conditions)
118
Dense set (of conditions)
118
Derived set (A′)
133
Det(Λ)
379
Determinacy
– of Borel sets (see Borel Determinacy)
– of Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
437–440
– of Π1
2 sets
467
– of Π1
2
Π1
2 sets
329, 449, 467
– of projective sets (see Projective Determinacy)
Determined game
370
Determined set
370
Diagonal intersection
– of sets indexed by λ
2
– of sets indexed by [κ]<ω
237, 242
– of subsets of P(S)
301
Difference hierarchy (Diff(Λ)) (see also α-Π1
1 (a)
set)
442
Direct limit
9, 10
Directed set
9
Directed system
9, 10
Dual ﬁlter (of an ideal)
210
Easton product
122, 228, 230, 232
Elementary embedding (see also Σn-elementary
embedding)
44, 46
Elementary substructure (see also Σn-elementary
substructure)
39, 44
EM blueprint
101–107
– for a
110
EM2 blueprint
284–288
– for a
294
∈-model
4
Equiconsistency result
XIX, 4, 135
Equivalent ultraﬁlters
269
Erd˝os cardinal (κ(α))
80–84
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem
74
η-extendible cardinal
311–318
η-extendible for A cardinal
339
η-supercompact for A cardinal
339
Extender
353–355, §26
Extendible cardinal
311–312, 315–318, 322
Extension property
39, 76
Extensional relation
7
Filter
3
Fine ﬁlter
301
Fine structure theory
30, 431
First Periodicity Theorem
410
Foundation Axiom
XIV, 20, 478
Friedman game
397
Fσ set
12
F-stationary set
53
Function quantiﬁer
153
Fundamenta Mathematicae
22
Game
369, 370
Game quantiﬁer
421
Γ -good well-ordering
169, 273, 409, 422, 463
Γ -norm
406, 407
Γ -scale
418
γ -Borel set
424–427, 469
γ -compact cardinal
307
γ -strong cardinal
358, 359
γ -strong for A cardinal
363
γ -supercompact cardinal (see also η-
supercompact for A cardinal)
298,
§22, 316, 317, 348, 349, 358
GCH (see Generalized Continuum Hypothesis)
Gδ code
137
Gδ set
12
Generalization (argument)
XVII, 32
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH)
1,
16, 28, 263
Generic elementary embedding
459, 460

Subject Index
533
Generic extension
118
Generic ultrapower
210
Genericity Conjecture
186
Global Axiom of Choice
59
Good well-ordering (see Γ -good well-ordering)
Ground model
118
Harvard University
115
Hebrew University
309
Height (of a tree)
72
Hereditarily ωOn-deﬁnable set
141
Hereditarily ordinal deﬁnable set
466
HOD
466
Homogeneous Boolean algebra
129
Homogeneous set (for a function)
– on an ordinal
71
– on [Pκγ ]n
⊂
346
Homogeneous tree
195, 451, 452
Homogeneously Suslin set
452
Honest leftmost branch
176, 204, 418
Huge cardinal
233, 331, 334, 358, 449
Hyperarithmetic hierarchy
157
Hyperarithmetic set
157, 166
HyperWoodin cardinal
365
I0
325, 329, 449
I1
325–329, 468
I2
325–329, 449
I3
325–329
Ideal
3
Ideal over κ
211
Inaccessible cardinal (see also α-inaccessible
cardinal, α-weakly inaccessible cardinal,
Weakly inaccessible cardinal)
18, 26, 38,
57, 83, 115, 125, 127, 132, 136, 144
– ω1 inaccessible from reals
135, 379
Incompatible conditions (p ⊥q)
118
Incompleteness Theorem
XV, 28, 70, 151
– Second
19, 399
Indescribable cardinal
58, §6
Indescribable ﬁlter
65, 66
Indescribable in κ set
64
Indiscernibles, set of
99, 253
– double
284
Inductive deﬁnability
430
Inductive set (of reals)
430
∞-Borel set
469
Inner model
33
– of measurability
§20
Institute of Advanced Study
28, 30, 114
Isolated point (of a set of reals)
133
Iterable M-ultraﬁlter
250
Iterable structure
250, 255–257
Iterate (of a structure)
250
Iterated forcing
121, 123, 124
Iterated ultrapower
§19
Iteration (of a structure)
250
Iteration tree
463
Iterative conception (of set) (see also Cumulative
hierarchy)
XV
J´onsson algebra
93
J´onsson cardinal
93–98, 128, 275, 282, 292,
396
κ-Aronszajn tree
78–80, 384
κ-Baire partial order
121
κ-chain condition (for a partial order)
121
κ-closed partial order
121
κ-homogeneous tree
451, 452
κ-homogeneously Suslin set
452
κ-model (see also L[U])
261
κ-product (of partial orders)
122
κ-tree
75
κ-weakly homogeneous tree
453–459, 463
κ-weakly homogeneously Suslin set
453–459,
464
Kleene-Brouwer ordering (≤KB)
162, 193, 194
– ≤KB2 version
194
Kunen-Paris forcing
226, 227
L
28, §3, 44, 49, 62, 66, 88, 89, 93, §9, 150,
151, 167–170, 277–283
˜L
199
L[A] (see also L[U])
34
L(A) (see also L(IR))
34, 51, 359
L(IR)
142, 378, 381, 398, 431–434, 461, 464,
466, 467
L[U]
261, §20, 283–295
L∈
1
L∗
∈
101, 102
L∈( ˙A)
245
L∈( ˙A)∗∗
284
Lλ,µ
36, 257
Ln
λ,µ
315
Ln
λ,µ-compact cardinal
315
λ-additive measure
23
λ-complete ﬁlter
3
λ-complete ideal
3
λ-dense ideal
470, 471
λ-saturated ideal
211, §16, §17
Lebesgue measurability
12, 13, 61, 133
– from Woodin cardinals
461
– in L
169
– in L[U]
273
– of all sets from inaccessibility
132, 136, 179
– of all sets under AD
377, 468
– of ∆1
2
∆1
2 sets
181
– of provably ∆1
2
∆1
2 sets
180
– of Σ1
1
Σ1
1 (analytic) sets
148
– of Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
149, 178
– of Σ1
n+1
Σ1
n+1 sets under Det(Π1
n
Π1
n )
380
– of weakly homogeneously Suslin sets
457
– via games
376
Lebesgue measure (mL)
12, 22, 24
– algebra
136

534
Subject Index
Left distributive law
329
Length (of an iteration)
250
Levy Collapse (Col(λ, κ))
128, 135, 139, 221
Levy hierarchy
5
Limit point
– of a set of ordinals
2
– of a set of reals
133
Ło´s’s Theorem
9, 47, 52, 245
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem
XIV, 8, 19
– for Lλµ
40
Mahlo cardinal (see also α-Mahlo cardinal,
α-weakly Mahlo cardinal, Weakly Mahlo
cardinal)
21, 57, 58, 125
Mahlo’s Operation
18, 54, 66, 216
Martin’s Axiom (MA)
124, 167, 179, 219, 426,
450, 460
– for κ (MA(κ))
124
Martin’s Maximum
460
Mathematische Annalen
16
Mathias real
143, 144, 238
Maximal Principle
119
meager set
13, 373
Measurable cardinal
26, 27, 38, 39, 44, 49–56,
61, 83, 90, 126, 179, 195, 210–212, 221,
224, 226–237, §20, 283–295, 299, 312, 359,
384–389, 434, 444, 445
measure
– on a σ-algebra
12
– over S
23
Measure Problem
22, 23, 132
Mild extension
125, 126
Minimal cover (of a set of reals)
376
Move (of a game)
370
M-ultraﬁlter
244–257
Name
118
Natural sequence (of structures)
336–339
n-huge cardinal
331–333
N-λ-saturated ideal
227
N-normal ultraﬁlter
227
Non-rigidity (of an inner model)
277
Nonselfdual class
414, 415
Non-stationary ideal over λ (NSλ)
3
Norm
406
Normal ﬁlter (see also Strongly normal ﬁlter)
– over λ
52–56
– over Pκ S
301
– over P(λ)
332
Normal ideal over κ
214
Nowhere dense set
13
ν-closed unbounded set
2, 3, 391
ν-Rowbottom cardinal
88–92
ν-Rowbottom ﬁlter
218
ν-satisﬁable set
– of Lλµ sentences
36
– of Ln
λµ sentences
315
Null set (of reals)
12
Number quantiﬁer
153
ω-J´onsson function
319–321, 325, 347
ωOn-deﬁnable set
139
ω1-dense ideal
470, 471
Operation (A)
147, 148
Open code
137
Open set (of ω X)
371, 372
Order-preserving map (for trees)
160
Ordinal deﬁnable set
139, 381, 466
Partial order (p.o.)
117
Partial play (of a game)
370
– according to σ (resp. τ)
370
Partition property (for ultraﬁlters)
346–349
Partition relation
– inﬁnite exponent
71, 391–396
– of all ﬁnite subsets
80–84
– ordinary
71–77
– square brackets
85, §8
Payoff (of a game)
370, 371
pcf theory
97
Perfect set
133
Perfect set property
133, 134, 310
– for all sets from inaccessibility
132, 136
– for all sets under AD
377
– for Borel sets
147
– for Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
149, 170, 184
– for Σ1
1
Σ1
1 (analytic) sets
148, 183
– for Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
184
– for Σ1
n+1
Σ1
n+1 sets under Det(Π1
n
Π1
n )
380
– for weakly homogeneously Suslin sets
457
– in L
150, 169, 170
– in L[U]
273
– via games
375
P-generic
119
– over M
118
Philosophical Investigations
480
Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
– Determinacy
437–440
– Perfect set property
149, 150, 170, 184
– Tree representation
162
– Uniformization
150, 175–177
– Union of ℵ1 Borel sets
163
Π1
2
Π1
2 sets
– Determinacy
329, 449, 467
– Perfect set property
273
– Tree representation
192, 196, 201
– Uniformization
150, 177, 204
Π1
2 Singleton Conjecture
187
Π1
n singleton
187
Play (of a game)
370
– according to σ (resp. τ)
370
P-name
118
p.o.
117
Predense set (of conditions)
118
Premouse, ZFC−
264–266
Prewellordering
178, 406
Prewellordering property
407
– for Π1
1 (a) sets
408

Subject Index
535
– for Σ1
2 (a) sets
408
– in L
410
– in L[U]
410
– under PD
410
Prikry forcing
234, §18, 259–260
Prikry sequence
235
Princeton University
30, 31, 114
Principia Mathematica
XIII
Principle of Dependent Choices (DC)
132,
142, 152, 378, 433
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
U.S.A.
28
Product forcing
121–123
Product measure (on κ2 (mκ))
222
Product measure forcing
222, 223
Projection (of a set (pB))
147
Projective class
403
Projective Determinacy (PD)
379, 406, 410,
421–425, 468
Projective hierarchy
148, 149
Projective ordinal
423, 428, 429, 434–436, 469
Projective set
148
Provably ∆1
2
∆1
2 set
179, 180
Quotient Boolean algebra
213
Radon-Nikodym Theorem
225
Ramiﬁcation Lemma
72
Ramsey cardinal
81, 84, 89, 126, 263, 275
Ramsey property
144, 382, 458
Ramsey’s Theorem
– ﬁnite version
70, 100
– inﬁnite version
70, 75, 76
Random real
138, 178, 180, 181, 223
Rank function
7
– on a tree
160
Real game quantiﬁer
430
Real-valued measurable cardinal
24, 80, 210,
219, 224
Recursion Theorem
151, 368, 425
Recursive relation
154
– in a
156
Reduction property
404, 405–407, 415
– for Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
405
– for Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
406
– under PD
410
Reﬂection (argument)
XVII–XVIII, 30, 31
Reﬂection Principle
31, 58
Regressive function
2
Relative constructibility (see L[A])
Replacement Axiom (Schema)
XIV, XV, 2, 58,
115, 440, 477, 478
Root (of a tree)
72
Rowbottom cardinal
88, 91, 92, 96, 128, 396
Rowbottom ﬁlter
218, 236
R-set
180
Russell’s Paradox
XIII, XIV
Satisﬁable set
– of Lλµ sentences
36
– of Ln
λµ sentences
315
Saturated ideal
211, §16, §17
Scale
177, 417, 418, 430, 431
Scale property
418, 419
– for inductive sets
430
– for Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
419
– for Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
420
– for Σ2
1
Σ2
1 sets
431
– under PD
421
Schr¨oder-Bernstein Theorem
134
S-closed forcing
460
Second-order arithmetic
152, 416
– in a
156
Second Periodicity Theorem
421
Semi-proper forcing
460
Separation Axiom (Schema)
XIV, 19, 30, 245,
477
Separation property
404, 415
Separative partial order
120, 129, 130
Separative quotient (of a partial order)
120,
121
Set-generic set
186
Sharps
110, 188–191, 198–207, 420, 425, 439,
444, 445
Shelah cardinal
461
σ-algebra
11
Σn-elementary embedding
45, 46, 281
Σn-elementary substructure
45
Σ1 Skolem hull
279
Σ1
1
Σ1
1 (analytic) sets
– Bounding principle
164
– Lebesgue measurability
148
– Perfect set property
148, 183
– Union of ℵ1 Borel sets
163
Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
– Absoluteness
174, 175
– Baire property
179
– Lebesgue measurability
178, 179
– Perfect set property
183, 184
– Tree representation
173, 174
– Uniformization
177
– Union of ℵ1 Borel sets
149, 166, 167, 174
Σ1
3
Σ1
3 sets
– Absoluteness
197
– Tree representation
192, 201, 204
– Uniformization
206
– Union of ℵ2 Borel sets
204
Singular Cardinals Problem
122, 217, 308
Skolem function
8
Skolem hull (and argument) (see also Σ1 Skolem
hull)
8, 101, 266, 284
Skolem paradox
XIV
Skolem term
8
– for 0#
101
– for L[U]
266
– for 0†
284
Special κ-tree
79, 80
Solovay game
387

536
Subject Index
Spector-Gandy Theorem
422
Stanford University
114, 244
Stationary coding set
350
Stationary set
– in λ
2, 3, 17, 217
– in Pκγ
340, 341
Stationary tower forcing
462, 464, 466
Strategy
370
Strong cardinal (see also γ -strong cardinal,
γ -strong for A cardinal)
358–360, 468
Strong limit cardinal
1, 18
Strong partition property
432, 434, 435
Strongly compact cardinal (see also γ -compact
cardinal)
37, 38, 51, 298, 307–310, 350, 399
Strongly inaccessible cardinal (see Inaccessible
cardinal)
Strongly normal ﬁlter
350, 351
Subalgebra
93
Subtree
72
Supercompact cardinal (see also γ -supercompact
cardinal, η-supercompact for A cardinal)
298, §22, 316, 317, 322, 344, 350, 358,
400–402, 459–462
Superhuge cardinal
334
Superstrong cardinal
358–361
Support (of a condition (supt(p))
122
Suslin set
171, 424, 428
Suslin tree (and problem)
22, 72, 116
Tao Te Ching
482
Θ
396–400, 432, 434, 467, 468
Third-order arithmetic
430
Third Periodicity Theorem
421, 422
Totally indescribable cardinal
59, 61, 83, 109
Tower (of ultraﬁlters)
451
Tractatus (Logico-Philosophicus)
482
Transitive collapse
7
Tree
72
– on κω × Y
159–161
– on Y
159
Tree property
75, 76, 78, 212
Tree representation
– for Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
162
– for Π1
2
Π1
2 sets
192, 196, 201
– for Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
173, 174, 192
– for Σ1
3
Σ1
3 sets
192, 201
– for Σ1
4
Σ1
4 sets
207
Turing degree ([a]T)
114, 186, 386
Turing Determinacy
433
Turing reducibility (≤T and ≡T)
386
Ulam matrix
24
Ultraﬁlter
3
– over ω
24, 26, 383, 384
Ultrapower
9
Ultraproduct
9, 37
Ulysses
481
Unbounded set (in Pκγ )
340
Uniform ﬁlter
3
Uniform indiscernible
188, 189–191, 202–204,
389, 427
Uniformization
150, 151, 468
– of Π1
1
Π1
1 sets
150, 175–177
– of Π1
2
Π1
2 sets
204
– of Σ1
2
Σ1
2 sets
177
– of Σ1
3
Σ1
3 sets
206
– in L
177
– under ADIR
381, 469
Uniformization property
417, 419, 421
Universal set
158, 159, 404
University of California at Berkeley
36, 39,
76, 99, 311, 450
University of California at Los Angeles
(U.C.L.A)
115–117, 434
University of Moscow
146
University of Warsaw
22
University of Wisconsin
85, 244
Urelement
XIV, 20, 34
Vopˇenka cardinal
336, 338, 339
Vopˇenka ﬁlter
336–338
Vopˇenka in κ set
336
Vopˇenka’s Principle
335
Wadge degree ([A]W)
415
Wadge game
414, 415, 442
Wadge reducibility (≤W and ≡W)
414, 415,
431, 454
Wadge’s Lemma
414, 415
Weakly amenable pair
244
Weakly compact cardinal
37–43, 59, 62, 76,
126, 364
Weakly compact ﬁlter
65
Weakly homogeneous partial order
129
Weakly homogeneous tree
453–459, 464
Weakly homogeneously Suslin set
453–459,
464
Weakly inaccessible cardinal
16
Weakly Mahlo cardinal
17, 392, 402
Well-founded relation
7
Well-founded tree (on kω × Y)
159
Well-Ordering Theorem
XIII, 146
Winning strategy
370
Woodin cardinal
360–365, 461–468, 470, 471
Woodin ﬁlter
364, 365
Woodin in κ set
364
Y-Suslin set
171, 424, 428
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory (ZF)
1, 369, 383
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with Choice (ZFC)
XIV, 1, 437
0†
283, 288–295
0#
99, 107–111, 184–188, 277, 282, 344, 346
Zig-zag pattern
410, 420–422

Springer Monographs in Mathematics
This series publishes advanced monographs giving well-written presentations of the “state-of-the-art”
in ﬁelds of mathematical research that have acquired the maturity needed for such a treatment. They
are sufﬁciently self-contained to be accessible to more than just the intimate specialists of the subject,
and sufﬁciently comprehensive to remain valuable references for many years. Besides the current state
of knowledge in its ﬁeld, an SMM volume should also describe its relevance to and interaction with
neighbouring ﬁelds of mathematics, and give pointers to future directions of research.
Abhyankar, S.S. Resolution of Singularities of Embedded Algebraic Surfaces 2nd enlarged ed. 1998
Alexandrov, A.D. Convex Polyhedra 2005
Andrievskii, V.V.; Blatt, H.-P. Discrepancy of Signed Measures and Polynomial Approximation 2002
Angell, T.S.; Kirsch, A. Optimization Methods in Electromagnetic Radiation 2004
Ara, P.; Mathieu, M. Local Multipliers of C∗-Algebras 2003
Armitage, D.H.; Gardiner, S.J. Classical Potential Theory 2001
Arnold, L. Random Dynamical Systems corr. 2nd printing 2003 (1st ed. 1998)
Arveson, W. Noncommutative Dynamics and E-Semigroups 2003
Aubin, T. Some Nonlinear Problems in Riemannian Geometry 1998
Auslender, A.; Teboulle, M. Asymptotic Cones and Functions in Optimization and Variational
Inequalities 2003
Banagl, M. Topological Invariants of Stratiﬁed Spaces 2006
Banasiak, J.; Arlotti, L. Perturbations of Positive Semigroups with Applications 2006
Bang-Jensen, J.; Gutin, G. Digraphs 2001
Baues, H.-J. Combinatorial Foundation of Homology and Homotopy 1999
Bonﬁglioli, A.; Lanconelli, E.; Uguzzoni, F. Stratiﬁed Lie Groups and Potential Theory for Their
Sub-Laplacians 2007
Böttcher, A.; Silbermann, B. Analysis of Toeplitz Operators 2006
Brown, K.S. Buildings 3rd printing 2000 (1st ed. 1998)
Chang, K.-C. Methods in Nonlinear Analysis 2005
Cherry, W.; Ye, Z. Nevanlinna’s Theory of Value Distribution 2001
Ching, W.K. Iterative Methods for Queuing and Manufacturing Systems 2001
Chudinovich, I. Variational and Potential Methods for a Class of Linear Hyperbolic Evolutionary Pro-
cesses 2005
Coates, J.; Sujatha, R. Cyclotomic Fields and Zeta Values 2006
Crabb, M.C.; James, I.M. Fibrewise Homotopy Theory 1998
Dineen, S. Complex Analysis on Inﬁnite Dimensional Spaces 1999
Dugundji, J.; Granas, A. Fixed Point Theory 2003
Ebbinghaus, H.-D.; Flum, J. Finite Model Theory 2006
Edmunds, D.E.; Evans, W.D. Hardy Operators, Function Spaces and Embeddings 2004
Elstrodt, J.; Grunewald, F.; Mennicke, J. Groups Acting on Hyperbolic Space 1998
Engler, A.J.; Prestel, A. Valued Fields 2005
Fadell, E.R.; Husseini, S.Y. Geometry and Topology of Conﬁguration Spaces 2001
Fedorov, Yu. N.; Kozlov, V.V. A Memoir on Integrable Systems 2001
Flenner, H.; O’Carroll, L.; Vogel, W. Joins and Intersections 1999
Gelfand, S.I.; Manin, Y.I. Methods of Homological Algebra 2nd ed. 2003 (1st ed. 1996)
Griess, R.L. Jr. Twelve Sporadic Groups 1998
Gras, G. Class Field Theory corr. 2nd printing 2005
Greuel, G.-M.; Lossen, C.; Shustin, E. Introduction to Singularities and Deformations 2007
Hida, H. p-Adic Automorphic Forms on Shimura Varieties 2004
Ischebeck, E; Rao, R.A. Ideals and Reality 2005
Ivrii, V. Microlocal Analysis and Precise Spectral Asymptotics 1998
Jakimovski, A.; Sharma, A.; Szabados, J. Walsh Equiconvergence of Complex Interpolating
Polynomials 2006
Jech, T. Set Theory (3rd revised edition 2002)
Jorgenson, J.; Lang, S. Spherical Inversion on SLn (R) 2001
Kanamori, A. The Higher Inﬁnite corr. 2nd printing 2005 (2nd ed. 2003)
Kanovei, V. Nonstandard Analysis, Axiomatically 2005

Khoshnevisan, D. Multiparameter Processes 2002
Koch, H. Galois Theory of p-Extensions 2002
Komornik, V. Fourier Series in Control Theory 2005
Kozlov, V.; Maz’ya, V. Differential Equations with Operator Coefﬁcients 1999
Lam, T.Y. Serre’s Problem on Projective Modules 2006
Landsman, N.P. Mathematical Topics between Classical & Quantum Mechanics 1998
Lau, D. Function Algebras on Finite Sets: Basic Course on Many-Valued Logic and Clone Theory 2006
Leach, J.A.; Needham, D.J. Matched Asymptotic Expansions in Reaction-Diffusion Theory 2004
Lebedev, L.P.; Vorovich, I.I. Functional Analysis in Mechanics 2002
Lemmermeyer, F. Reciprocity Laws: From Euler to Eisenstein 2000
Levine, M.; Morel, F. Algebraic Cobordism 2007
Malle, G.; Matzat, B.H. Inverse Galois Theory 1999
Mardesic, S. Strong Shape and Homology 2000
Margulis, G.A. On Some Aspects of the Theory of Anosov Systems 2004
Miyake, T. Modular Forms 2006
Murdock, J. Normal Forms and Unfoldings for Local Dynamical Systems 2002
Narkiewicz, W. Elementary and Analytic Theory of Algebraic Numbers 3rd ed. 2004
Narkiewicz, W. The Development of Prime Number Theory 2000
Neittaanmaki, P.; Sprekels, J.; Tiba, D. Optimization of Elliptic Systems. Theory and Applications 2006
Onishchik, A.L. Projective and Cayley–Klein Geometries 2006
Parker, C.; Rowley, P. Symplectic Amalgams 2002
Peller, V. (Ed.) Hankel Operators and Their Applications 2003
Prestel, A.; Delzell, C.N. Positive Polynomials 2001
Puig, L. Blocks of Finite Groups 2002
Ranicki, A. High-dimensional Knot Theory 1998
Ribenboim, P. The Theory of Classical Valuations 1999
Rowe, E.G.P. Geometrical Physics in Minkowski Spacetime 2001
Rudyak, Y.B. On Thorn Spectra, Orientability and Cobordism 1998
Ryan, R.A. Introduction to Tensor Products of Banach Spaces 2002
Saranen, J.; Vainikko, G. Periodic Integral and Pseudodifferential Equations with Numerical
Approximation 2002
Schneider, P. Nonarchimedean Functional Analysis 2002
Serre, J-P. Complex Semisimple Lie Algebras 2001 (reprint of ﬁrst ed. 1987)
Serre, J-P. Galois Cohomology corr. 2nd printing 2002 (1st ed. 1997)
Serre, J-P. Local Algebra 2000
Serre, J-P. Trees corr. 2nd printing 2003 (1st ed. 1980)
Smirnov, E. Hausdorff Spectra in Functional Analysis 2002
Springer, T.A.; Veldkamp, F.D. Octonions, Jordan Algebras, and Exceptional Groups 2000
Székelyhidi, L. Discrete Spectral Synthesis and Its Applications 2006
Sznitman, A.-S. Brownian Motion, Obstacles and Random Media 1998
Taira, K. Semigroups, Boundary Value Problems and Markov Processes 2003
Talagrand, M. The Generic Chaining 2005
Tauvel, P.; Yu, R.W.T. Lie Algebras and Algebraic Groups 2005
Tits, J.; Weiss, R.M. Moufang Polygons 2002
Uchiyama, A. Hardy Spaces on the Euclidean Space 2001
Üstünel, A.-S.; Zakai, M. Transformation of Measure on Wiener Space 2000
Vasconcelos, W. Integral Closure. Rees Algebras, Multiplicities, Algorithms 2005
Yang, Y. Solitons in Field Theory and Nonlinear Analysis 2001
Zieschang, P.-H. Theory of Association Schemes 2005

