KATE ELLIOT
CROWN OF STARS 02
PRINCE OF DOGS
 
PROLOGUE 
1
All spring they managed to stay alive by hiding in the abandoned tannery quarter, coming
out only at night to scrounge for food. After a few nights, running from the dogs, hiding in the
pits, they became accustomed to the stink. Better to stink like the tanners, Matthias pointed
out to his sister, than be torn to pieces by dogs. 
Anna reflected silently on this. It gave her some small satisfaction to know that if they were
caught by the Eika savages, if they were run down by the dogs and rent arm from shoulder,
leg from hip, at least they would smell so badly of chicken dung that surely not even those
hideous dogs would eat them. Or if the dogs did eat them, then maybe their flesh, immersed
so many times in oak bark tannin that their skin had begun to take on a leathery cast, would
poison the creatures; then, from the Chamber of Light where her spirit would reside after
death in blessed peace, she could watch their writhing, agonized deaths. 
All spring there was food to be scrounged, for those who had escaped the city had fled
without having time to fetch anything and those who had not escaped were dead. Or so at
least observation told them. Half-eaten corpses lay strewn in the streets and alleys, and
many houses stank of rotted flesh. But they found stores of vegetables in root cellars and
barrels of ale in the common houses. Once, they foolishly ventured to the kitchens of the
mayorÕs palace where they found sweet meats that made Anna, who stuffed herself with
them,violently ill. Matthias forced her to run, gagging, with a hand clapped over her mouth to
keep it in and in such pain she thought her stomach was going to burst, all the way back to
the tanneries so she could throw it up into the puering pits, a stew of chicken dung mixed
with water that would, he prayed, hide the smell of fresh human vomit. 
No dogs came Ôround the tanneries for a long while after that. Perhaps the Eika had
given up hunting their human prey or deemed there were none left worth hunting in the empty
city. Perhaps theyÕd sailed down the river to hunt in greener pastures. But neither child
dared climb the city walls to the parapet to see how many Eika ships lay beached along the
riverÕs edge. Now and again they saw Eika walking those parapets, staring north toward
the sea. Now and again they heard the keening and howling of the dogs and, once, the
screams of a human, whether man or woman they could not tell. They kept to familiar haunts
and stayed mostly in the little shed where Matthias had slept after he had been apprenticed
to a currier the winter before the Eika attack. Left behind, forgotten, in the confusion of the
attack and the hopeless street-by-street defense of the city, he had had the wits to take
refuge with his younger sister in the foul tannery pits when he saw the dogs hunting through
the city. That was why they had survived when so many others had died. 
But come summer, they used up their last stores and had to dig in untended gardens for
those half-grown vegetables that had fought past the weeds. They learned to hunt rats, for
there were rats aplenty in the empty buildings, fat ones well fed on dessicated corpses.
Anna found herself with a talent for stone throwing, too, and brought down seagulls and
complacent pigeons and once a feral cat. 
Come summer, more Eika came, and these Eika brought human slaves with them,
gleaned from a distant harvest. 
When one fine summerÕs morning the Eika returned to the tanning quarter with slaves
brought to work in the tannery, the two children fled to a loft and cowered behind tanned

hides which had been hung to dry from the crossbeams. When they heard voices, the creak
and scrape of a body climbing the ladder, Matthias boosted Anna up to one of the great
beams. Her terror added strength to her tugs, and with him scrambling on the uneven plank
wall and her pulling, they got him up beside her. There they huddled, clinging to the beam
and shaking with fear. The stink of the tannery protected them no longer. The trapdoor
opened at the far end of the loft. 
Anna sucked down a sob when they heard the first whispery soft wordsÑan Eika
speaking a language they could not understand. A dog yipped and growled outside. As if in
reply a human voiceÑbelow, from over by the puering pitsÑyelped in pain, then began
screaming and pleading pointlessly and unintelligibly, screaming again until at last,
mercifully, the screams cut off with a gurgle. Matthias bit his lip to keep from crying out.
AnnaÕs eyes filled with tears that slipped down her cheeks; she grasped the wooden Circle
of Unity that hung on a leather cord at her thin chestÑher motherÕs dying gift to herÑand
traced her finger around its smooth circle in silent prayer as she had seen her mother do
many times, though this wordless prayer had not availed her mother against her final illness. 
Footsteps shuddered on the rungs. A body scraped, half metal, half cloth, heaving itself
up and over onto the loft floor. A man grunted, a human sound, curt and yet familiar in its
humanity. 
The Eika spoke again, this time in recognizable if broken Wendish. ÒHow soon these is
ready?Ó 
ÒI will have to look them over.Ó The man enunciated each word carefully. ÒMost likely all
are ready if theyÕve been here sinceÑÓ He broke off, then took a shuddering breath. Had
he witnessed that killing just now, or only listened to it, as they had? ÒSince spring.Ó 
ÒI count, these,Ó said the Eika. ÒBefore you come, I count these skins. Less than I count
come to me when they ready, I kill one slave for each skin less than I count. I start with you.Ó 
ÒI understand,Ó said the man, but the children could not see him, couldÕonly hear, and
what emotion they heard in his voice they could not interpret. 
ÒYou bring to me when ready,Ó said the Eika. The ladder creaked, and this time they
recognized the slight chime of mail as the Eika left the loft and climbed back down, away, to
wherever Eika went when they were not hunting and killing. Still the children clung there,
praying the man would go away. But instead he moved slowly through the loft, jostling the
hides, rubbing them, testing them. Counting them. A loose plank creaked under his foot. The
quiet rustle of a hide sliding against another marked his progress, and the huff and stir of
leather-sodden air in the dim room, spreading outward from his movements, shifted and
swirled about them like the exhalation of approaching death, for discovery would indeed
mean death. 
Finally it was too much for Anna, who was three winters younger than Matthias. The sound
got out of her throat, like a puppyÕs whimper, before she could gulp it back. The manÕs
slow quiet movement ceased, but they still heard his breathing, ragged in the gloom. 
ÒWhoÕs there?Ó the man whispered, then muttered a LadyÕs Blessing. 
Anna set her lips together, squeezed her eyes shut, and wept silently, free hand clutching
the Circle. Matthias groped for the knife at his belt, but he was afraid to pull it out of its
sheath, for even that slight noise would surely give them away. 
ÒWhoÕs there?Ó the man said again, and his voice shook as if he, too, were afraid. 
Neither child dared answer. Finally, thank the Lady, he went away. 
They waited a while and climbed down from the beam. ÒI have to pee,Ó whimpered
Anna as she wiped her nose. But they dared not leave the loft and yet, sooner or later, they
would have to leave the loft or starve. She peed in the farthest darkest corner and hoped it
would dry before anyone came back up. There were other chores for the new slaves in the
tanneryÑhides to be washed and hair and flesh scraped from them, new pits to be filled for
puering or drenching, hides to be layered in with oak bark, saturated in the tannic acid, or,
tanning completed, rinsed off and smoothed before drying. There were other lofts where
hides waited, drying, in silent darkness, until they were ready for the currier. No reason

anyone should come up here again this day. 
But that evening they heard steps on the ladder. No time, this time, to scramble up on the
beam. They huddled behind the far wall, wrapping themselves in a cow hide. 
They heard, instead of words, the soft tap of something set down on wood. Then the trap
closed and footsteps thumped down the ladder. After a bit Matthias ventured out. 
ÒAnna! Quietly!Ó he whispered. 
She crept out and found him weighing a hunk of goatÕs cheese in one hand and a dark,
small, misshapen loaf of bread in the other. A rough-hewn wooden bowl sat empty beside
the trap. She stared at these treasures fearfully. ÒIf we eat it, then heÕll know weÕre here.Ó 
Matthias broke off a piece of cheese, sniffed it, and popped it in his mouth. ÒWeÕll eat a
bit now,Ó he said. ÒWhat difference does it make? If we donÕt get out of here tonight, then
theyÕll discover us sooner or later. WeÕll save the rest for after weÕve escaped.Ó 
She nodded. She knew when to argue, now, and when to remain silent because
argument was pointless. He gave her a corner of cheese; it tasted salty and pungent. The
bread was dry as plain oats, and its coarse texture made her thirsty. He divided the rest of
the food into two portions and gave half to her. Both carried leather pouches, tied to their
belts, for such gleanings as this. Such necessities the ruined city provided in plenty, taken
from empty houses and shops orÑif valuable enoughÑpried from the dead. Water, clothing,
knives or spoons or even an entire timbered house furnished with fine painted furniture and
good linen, none of this they lacked; only food and safety. 
They waited until no crack of light gleamed through the plank walls onto the warped
floorboards, until gray shadow became indistinguishable from black. Then Matthias eased
open the trap and slid over the edge as quietly as he could. 
ÒLady!Ó 
A man, not Matthias, spoke. Anna froze. Matthias grunted and dropped to the ground. 
ÒThere now,Ó said the man, ÒdonÕt pull your knife on me. I wonÕt hurt you. Lady Above,
I didnÕt think any soul had survived in this charnel house. YouÕre just a child.Ó 
ÒOld enough to be apprenticed,Ó muttered Matthias, stung, as he always was, because
this manÕs voice was like their uncleÕs and his taunt the same one. Only perhaps, Anna
thought, this man had spoken with awed pity, not with contempt, when he called Matthias a
child. She had a sudden rash intuition that this man could be trusted, unlike their uncle, and
anyway, if Matthias was now caught, it was better to die with him than to struggle on in a fight
she could never win alone. She swung her legs out and climbed quickly and quietly down the
ladder. 
Matthias swore at her under his breath. The man gasped aloud, then clapped a hand over
his mouth and stared furtively around, but they remained alone. No one moved through the
tanning grounds this late. The quarter moon lit them, and thin ghostly shadows cut the pits
with strange patterns. Anna grabbed her brotherÕs hand and held on tightly. 
ÒAi, Lady, and a younger one still,Ó the man said at last. ÒI thought you was a cat. Are
there more of you?Ó 
ÒOnly us two,Ó said Matthias. 
ÒLord in Heaven. How did you survive?Ó 
Matthias gestured toward the pits, then realized the man might not be able to see his
movement. ÒThere was food enough to be scrounged, until now. We hid here because the
dogs couldnÕt smell us.Ó 
The man squinted at Anna in the dim light, stepped forward abruptly, and took her chin in
his hand. Matthias started forward, raising his belt knife, but Anna said, ÒNo,Ó and he
stopped and waited. 
After a moment the man let go and stepped back, brushing his eyes with a finger. ÒA girl.
YouÕre a girl, and no older than my little Mariya. The Lady is merciful, to have saved one.Ó 
ÒWhere is your daughter?Ó asked Anna, bold now. This man did not scare her. 
ÒDead,Ó he said curtly. ÒIn the Eika raid that took my village not a month ago. They
killed everyone.Ó 

ÒThey didnÕt kill you,Ó said Anna reasonably, seeing that he looked alive and not
anything like the shade of a dead manÑnot that she had ever seen such a thing, but certainly
she had heard stories of them such as come back to haunt the living world on Hallowing
Eve. 
ÒAi, they killed me, child,Ó he said bitterly. ÒKilled all but this husk. Now I am merely a
soulless body, their slave, to do with as they will until they tire of me and feed me to the
dogs.Ó Though he spoke as though living exhausted him, still he shuddered when he spoke
of the dogs. 
Anna sorted through this explanation and thought she understood most of it. ÒWhat will
you do with us?Ó she asked. ÒWonÕt the Eika kill us if they find us?Ó 
ÒThey will,Ó said the man. ÒThey never leave children alive. They only want grown slaves
strong enough to do their work. But I heard tell from one of the other slaves that there are no
children in Gent, no bodies of children, simply no children at all. ItÕs a tale they whisper at
night, in the darkness, that the saint who guards the city led the children away to safety or up
to the Chamber of Light, I donÕt know which.Ó 
ÒItÕs true,Ó muttered Matthias. ÒAll the children are gone, but I donÕt know where they
went.Ó 
ÒWhere are your parents, then?Ó asked the man. ÒWhy were you not taken to safety, if
the others were?Ó 
Anna shrugged, but she saw her brother hunch down as he always did, because the
misery still sank its claws in him although she did not recall their parents well enough to
mourn them. 
ÒTheyÕre dead four summers ago,Ó said Matthias. ÒOur da drowned when he was out
fishing, and our ma died a few months later of a fever. They were good people. Then we
went to our uncle. He ran, when the Eika came. He never thought of us. I ran back to the
house and got Anna, but by then there was fighting everywhere. You couldnÕt even get to
the cathedral where most folk fled, so we hid in here. And here we stayed.Ó 
ÒItÕs a miracle,Ó murmured the man. Out of the nightÕs silence came sudden noise:
dogs barking and a single harsh call, a word neither child understood. The man started
noticeably. ÒThey come Ôround in the middle night to count us,Ó he said. ÒI must go back. I
wonÕt betray you, I swear it on Our LadyÕs Hearth. May Our Lord strike me down with His
heavenly Sword if I do any such thing. IÕll bring more food tomorrow, if I can.Ó 
Then he was gone, retreating into the night. 
They relieved themselves quickly in one of the stinking pits filled with dung and water, and
paused after to look up at the strangely clear sky, so hard a darkness above them that the
stars were almost painful to look upon. They heard the dogs again and Matthias shoved
Anna onto the ladder. She scrambled back up, and he came up behind her and closed the
trap. After a hesitation, but without speaking, they devoured the rest of the cheese and
breadÑand waited for tomorrow. 
2
 The next night, long after sunset, the man came again and tapped on the door softly and
said, ÒI am your friend.Ó 
Cautiously, Matthias opened the trap and peered down. After a moment he climbed
down. Anna followed him. The man gave them bread and watched silently as they ate. She
could see him a bit more clearly tonightÑthe moon was waxing, and its quarter face slowly
swelled, bubbling toward the full. Not particularly tall, he had the broad shoulders of a farmer
and a moon-shaped face. 
ÒWhat are you called?Ó he asked finally, hesitantly. 
ÒI am called Matthias, and this is Anna, which is short for Johanna. Our ma named us
after the disciplas of the blessed Daisan.Ó 
The man nodded, as if he had known this all along or perhaps only to show he

understood. ÒI am called Otto. I am sorry the bread was all I could bring. We are not fed
well, and I dare not ask the others for a share of their portion. I donÕt know if I can trust them,
for theyÕre no kin of mine. Any one of them might tell the Eika in return for some reward,
more bread perhaps.Ó 
ÒIt is very kind of you to help us,Ó said Anna brightly, for she remembered that their ma
had always told her to be polite and to be thankful for the gifts she received. 
The man caught in a sob, then hesitantly touched her hair. As abruptly, he backed away
from her. ÒOr perhaps like me, the others would gladly help, if only it meant finding a way to
see two more brought free of the savages. It isnÕt as if the Eika play favorites. IÕve never
seen them seek to turn their slaves against each other by handing out special treatment.
They despise us all. All are treated the same. Work or die.Ó 
ÒIs it only here,Ó asked Matthias, Òin the tanneries, that theyÕve brought slaves?Ó 
ÒTheyÕve opened up the smithies, too, though theyÕve no one trained here in
blacksmithÕs work. But weÕre slaves and expendable.Ó His voice was hard. ÒItÕs
fortuneÕs chance I was sent here to the tanneries, though it stinks like nothing IÕve smelled
before. ItÕs whispered that at the forge men are burned every day and the Eika as likely to
slit a burned manÕs throat as to let that man heal if he canÕt get up and keep working. I saw
those Eika. I saw one pushed into a fire. It didnÕt burn. The heat left no scar on its body.
They donÕt have skin, not like us. ItÕs some kind of hide, like a snakeÕs scales but harder
and thicker. DragonÕs get.Ó He hawked and spat, as if to get the taste of the word out of
his mouth. ÒThe spawn of dragons and human women, thatÕs what they say, but I donÕt
see how such an unnatural congress could take place. But we should not speak of this in
front of the child.Ó 
ÒIÕve seen nothing she hasnÕt seen also,Ó said Matthias softly, but Anna felt at once
that the manÕs simple statement, protecting her, confiding in the boy, had won over her
brotherÕs trust. 
She finished her bread and wished there were more, but she knew better than to ask.
Perhaps he had given them his entire ration. It would be rude to demand more. 
ÒFortuneÕs chance,Ó the man whispered bitterly. ÒFortune had smiled more sweetly on
me had she let me die with my children. But no.Ó He shook his head, shifting, casting a
glance back over his shoulder nervously, for surely he had reason to be nervous, as did they
all. ÒFor everyi thing, a reason. I was spared so that I might find you.Ó He took a step
forward, clasped Matthias by the hand and with his other hand touched AnnaÕs hair gently.
ÒI will find a way for you to escape here, I swear it. Now I must go. I tell them I use the privies
each night at this hour, so I must get back. The Eika are strange creatures. Savages they
are, surely, but they are fastidious; but perhaps that only goes to show that Ôthe path of the
Enemy is paved neatly with well-washed stones, for the waters cleansing them are the tears
of the wicked.Õ We may make soil only in one place, no pissing even except where they tell
us to or on the new skins. That is why we may come out for a few momentsÕ freedom in this
way, even at night, for they cannot bear the stink of our human bodies near their own. But I
dare not stay longer.Ó 
He came again the next night, and the next, and the next after that, bringing them
pittances of food but enough to stave off starvation. Ale he brought also and once wine in a
flagon, for there was little water to be found in and about the tanning pits and all of it
foul-tasting. 
He quickly discovered that Matthias had more knowledge of the tannery and its workings
than any of the slaves set to work here; in three monthsÕ apprenticeship, Matthias had
learned the rudiments of currying and tanning, enough to know what went on at each station
and with each tool. The boy he treated politely, even kindly, but it was Anna he truly doted on.
She sat on his lap and he stroked her haii and once or twice forgot himself and called her
ÒMariya.Ó 
No one disturbed the hides in their loft. Otto explained that he was in charge of
overseeing them, and no slave had time to look into anotherÕs business. After several more

nights passed, he began bringing more food. 
ÒThe Eika have increased our rations. They brought in more slaves to work the bakeries,
but also, my boy, what you have told me and I have told the others is helping us work. They
are pleased with us, so they feed us better.Ó The moon was full, now, and Anna could see
his expression, which was, as always, grim. ÒNo good fortune for those taken to the
smithies, or so I hear. As many are dragged out dead as walk in alive. Beasts!Ó He hid his
eyes behind a hand, but she could see the anguished line of his mouth. ÒSoon the hides will
be dry and they will be cartet off, and then there will be no place for you to hide.Ó 
ÒTheyÕll hang up more hides, wonÕt they?Ó asked Anna.
ÒAh, child.Ó He pulled her tight against his chest. ÒThat they will, but I canÕt hide you
here forever. IÕve asked her and there, but I donÕt know how to get you out of the city
exceptÑÓ 
ÒExcept what?Ó demanded Matthias, for he, too, Ann knew, had been talking to her
about any possible way fo them to escape from the city. Perhaps they could have don it
during the spring, had they not been so frightened, bu they had been frightened, and the
dogs had roamed the city every night. Now, with slaves in the city and all the gates
watchedÑor so he assumedÑit would be even hard to escape. 
ÒI donÕt know. ItÕs just a story, and I donÕt know whether to believe it.Ó But he clutched
Anna, his lips touching he hair, a fatherÕs kiss. ÒIÕve heard some say thereÕs a creature,
a daimone, held prisoner in the cathedral. They say the Eika enchanter lured it from the
heavens above where such creatures live and imprisoned it in a solid body like to our own.
He keeps it chained to his throne.Ó 
Anna shuddered, but she felt safe on OttoÕs lap; he was holding her so securely. 
ÒI am thinking,Ó continued the man slowly, Òthat the magi say daimones know secrets
hidden from human ken. If it is true the saint beloved of this city saved the children, if it is true
she led them by hidden ways out from the cathedral to safety, then might not this daimone
know of that hidden way? For can daimones not see into both the past and the future, farther
than mortal eyes can see? If you offer the creature some gift, and if it hates the Eika as
much as we do, might it not tell you of this secret way? It is a small chance, surely, but I can
think of no other. The gates are guarded day and night and the dogs roam the streets.Ó He
shuddered, as they all shuddered, at the thought of the dogs. ÒYou are children. The saint
will smile on you as she did on the others.Ó 
ÒYou will come, too, wonÕt you, Papa Otto?Ó Anna rested her head on his chest. 
He wept, but silently, tears streaming down his face. ÒI dare not,Ó he said. ÒI dare not
attempt it.Ó 
ÒYou could escape with us,Ó said Matthias. ÒGod will show you mercy for your kindness
to us, who are no kin of yours.Ó 
ÒGod might, but the Eika will not. You donÕt know them. TheyÕre savages, but theyÕre
as cunning as weasels. They mark each slave, and if one slave goes missing, then others
get staked out in front of the dogs and the dogs let loose on them. That way if any slave tries
to escape, he knows what will happen to those left behind. I will not cause the death of those
I work beside. I could do nothing to save my family. I will not save myself and by so doing kill
these others who are as innocent as my dear children. But you two might escape, if you can
find and speak to this daimone.Ó 
ÒBut what could we bring it?Ó Matthias asked. ÒWe have nothingÑÓ Then he halted and
Anna saw by his crafty look hat he had thought of something. He reached into his boot and
drew out the prize of their extensive collection of knives, secreted here and there about their
bodies. This one, looted from the corpse of a stout man richly dressed in the kind of clothes
only a wealthy merchant or a noble could afford, had a good blade and a finely wrought hilt
molded in the shape of a dragonÕs head, studded with emeralds for eyes. By this measure
Anna saw Matthias trusted Otto fully; the knife was too valuable to show to anyone who might
covet it and easily take it by force from a lad and his young sister. 
OttoÕs eyes widened, for even by the moonlight the knifeÕs quality was evident. ÒThat is

a handsome piece,Ó he said. ÒAnd a worthy gift, if you can get so far.Ó 
ÒBut how will we get into the cathedral?Ó asked Matthias. ÒThe Eika chieftain lives
there, doesnÕt he? Does he ever come out?Ó 
The slow quiet brush of summerÕs wind, the night breeze off the river, stirred OttoÕs hair
as he considered. Anna smelted on its wings the distant tang of iron and the forge, a bare
taste under the stench of the tanning pits so near at hand. The man sighed at last, coming to
some conclusion. ÒIt is time to trust others. This information I cannot gain on my own. Let us
pray, children, to Our Lady and Lord. Let us pray that we weak mortal folk can join together
against our heathen enemies, for now we must trust to others who are no kin of ours except
that we are humankind standing together against the savages.Ó With this he left them. 
The next night he brought a woman, stooped, scarred, and weary. She stared for a long
time at the children and said at last, ÒIt is a miracle they could have survived the slaughter. It
is a sign from St. Kristine.Ó She went away again, and he gave them their nightly ration of
food. 
The next night he brought a young man who had broad shoulders but such a weight on
them that he looked as bent with age as a man twice his years. But seeing the children, he
lifted up and became a man proud of his youth and strength again. ÒWeÕll show those
damned savages,Ó he said in a low voice. ÒWeÕll never let them have these. WeÕll beat
them in this. That will lend us strength in the days ahead.Ó The next night Otto brought a
robust woman who still wore her deaconÕs robes though they were now stained, torn, and
dirty. But she nodded, seeing the childrenÑnot surprised, for surely she had by now heard
tell of them. She bent her head over clasped hands. ÒLet us pray,Ó she murmured. 
It had been a long time since Anna had prayed. She had forgotten the responses, but she
traced around the smooth wood of her Circle of Unity carefully with a finger as the deacon
murmured the holy words of God, for that was the prayer she knew best. Otto watched her,
as he always watched her: with tears in his eyes. 
ÒThis is a sign from God,Ó the deacon said after her prayer. ÒSo will They judge our
worthiness to escape this blight, if we can save these children who are no kin of ours and yet
are indeed our children, given into our hands, just as all who live within the Circle of Unity are
the children of Our Lady and Lord.Ó Otto nodded solemnly. 
The deacon rested a hand on MatthiasÕ shoulder, as if giving a blessing. ÒThose who
get water from the river and bring it here have spoken now with those who get water for the
smithies, and of those in the smithies some carry weapons to the cathedral, where the
chieftain sits in his chair and oversees all. Other slaves who sweep and clean the cathedral
meet at times with those who carry weapons from the smithies, and this information they
have given us.Ó She paused at a noise, but it was only the wind banging a loose shutter.
ÒThe chieftain leaves the cathedral four times each day to take his dogs to the
necessariumÑÓ
ÒThe necessarium?Ó asked Anna. 
This question stirred the first faint smile Anna had seen on any of the slavesÕ faces, even
on OttoÕs. ÒPits. Holes dug in the ground where such creatures relieve themselves, for
even such as they are slaves to their bodies. As are all of us bound to mortal matter. Now
hush, child. Though it was a fair question, you must listen carefully to my words. Once each
day all Eika leave the cathedral, with their dogs and the few slaves who attend them there.
They go to the river to perform their nightly ablutionsÑÓ She raised a hand to forestall
AnnaÕs question. ÒTheir bath. At this time, which is the time Vespers would be sung each
evening, the cathedral is empty.Ó
ÒExcept for the daimone,Ó said Otto. 
ÒIf such a creature truly exists. So say the slaves who clean there, but it may be that their
minds are disordered by their proximity to the savages, for none has been allowed close to
this creature, which is said to be chained with iron to the holy altar. By their description it
seems to be more of a dog than a man. One man said it has human speech, but another
said it can only yip and howl and bark. To this plan, if the saint grants us a miracle, we must

trust. Now do you understand?Ó She asked this of Matthias and studied him carefully in the
moonÕs waning light as he nodded, once, to show he understood. Anna nodded also and
took MatthiasÕ hand because she was so frightened. 
ÒTonight,Ó said the deacon. She looked at Otto and he nodded, though his hands
clenched. 
ÒTonight?Ó asked Anna in a whisper. ÒSo soonÑ?Ó Impulsively she darted forward and
clasped her arms round OttoÕs body. His clothes hung on him, a once stout man made thin
by privation and grief, yet still he felt sturdy to her. He held her tightly against him, and she
felt his tears on her cheeks. 
ÒWe must move immediately,Ó said the deacon. ÒYou might be discovered any day. It
is indeed a miracle you have not been found before this.Ó She frowned, and the moonlight
painted her face in stark, suffering lines. ÒWe know not if some fool will betray us all,
thinking to gain favor in the eyes of the Eika. But there is no favor to be gained with the
savages. They are no kin to us. They have no mercy for their own kind, and less than that for
us, and so shall we have no mercy for them. Now. Make your farewells, children. You will not
see Otto again.Ó 
Anna wept. It was too hard to leave him behind, the only person besides Matthias who
had shown her kindness since her parents died. 
ÒTake news,Ó said Otto. He still held Anna, but she knew he spoke to Matthias. ÒTake
news to others that some are yet alive in this city, that we are made slaves. Tell them the
Eika are massing and building their strength, that they are using us to forge weapons and
craft armor for them.Ó 
ÒWeÕll come back for you,Ó said Matthias, his own voice choked with tears. Anna could
not speak, could only cling. Otto stank of the puering pits, but they all of them stank of the
tannery; it was a good scent to her now, a familiar one that promised safety. Out beyond the
tanning pits lay the great wide world which she no longer knew or trusted. ÒAi, Lady,Ó
whispered Otto. He kissed AnnaÕs hair a final time. ÒPerhaps it is worse this way: that you
have given me hope. I will wait for you, as well as I can. If you live, if I survive, if we are
reunited, then I will be as your father.Ó 
ÒCome, children,Ó said the deacon, taking their hands after gently prying Anna free from
OttoÕs grasp. 
Anna cried as she was led away. She looked back to see Otto staring after them, hands
working at his sides, opening and closing, and then his face was lost to her, hidden by night
and distance. 
The deacon took them to the edge of the fetid trench where the slaves relieved
themselves. ÒWait here,Ó she said. ÒA man will come for you.Ó 
She left and returned to the building where the slaves slept. Somewhat later, the young
man they had met before arrived. 
ÒCome,Ó he said, hoisting Anna onto his back. ÒWe must run all the way to the forge.Ó
So they ran, hiding once for the man to catch his breath and a second time when they heard
the howling of the dogs nearby, but they saw nothing. Only ghosts walked the city at night. It
had been so long since Anna had ventured out into the ruined streets that the open spaces
and angular shadows, the simple emptiness, made chills crawl like spiders up and down her
skin. 
The young man left them, quite unceremoniously, by another trench, this one equally filled
with the stink of piss and diarrhea. But it was yet a good, decent, human smell, not like the
dry metallic odor of the savages. 
A woman found them there. She stared at first, then handled them, touching their lips,
their hair, their ears. 
ÒYou are real,Ó she said. ÒReal children. They murdered mine. Come. There is no
time.Ó She led them at a loping run farther into the labyrinth of the city, on to another trench,
another group of slaves. By this way, from trench to trench, they passed through the city. 
ÒThat is our only freedom,Ó said the man who took them at last within sight of the

cathedral even as they saw the first stain of light in the eastern sky. ÒThey are savages, the
Eika, but they cannot stand the least stink of human piss or shit near them. IÕve seen a man
killed for loosing his bowels where he was not meant to, though he could not help himself.
So we may come out to relieve ourselves, one by one, and if we say we are having the
cramping, then we are allowed a little more time. Now. This is as far as I or any of us can
take you. Hide here, under these rags next to the trench, for the Eika never come near these
trenches. Do not move, do not stir, even if you hear the dogs. Perhaps they will discover you
and kill you. We all will pray that they do not. Be patient. Wait out the day. You will know by
the light and by the horn they blow and by the great size of the procession when they go
down to the river. Be careful, though, for they do not all go; some remain behind to guard the
slaves who sleep in that building across the way, which they call the mint. For all I know,
some may remain behind here in the cathedral as well. What is inside the cathedral I do not
know. That you must discover for yourselves. May God go with you.Ó 
He clasped their hands in his, first Anna and then Matthias, as the sign of their kinship.
Then he directed them to lie flat and covered them with the stinking, filthy rags. Anna heard
his footsteps recede. Something crawled over her hand. She choked off a gasp. She dared
not move, hardly dared breathe. But for the first time in so many days and weeks she held
an odd, light feeling in her heart. It took a long time to decide what it was, and finally she
recalled OttoÕs last words to them: 
¡°You have given me hope.Ó 
Amazingly, even almost smothered as she was by the foul-smelling heap of rags, she
slept. 
3
Howls woke her. She jerked up and at once Matthias shoved her down to keep her still.
She made no sound. 
Rags slipped, giving her a view of the steps of the cathedral and avenue. Not five paces
from her, a man stopped, turning his back to the pile of rags, and pissed into the trench.
Then, straightening his clothes, he edged closer and crouched down. Of all the slaves she
had seen he looked best kept; his tunic was not encrusted with dirt, though it was not
precisely clean either. He toyed with the rope belt hung low on his thin hips and glanced
back once over his shoulder, toward the cathedral steps. Through the gap in the rags Anna
could see on those steps another slave. This personÑshe could not tell if it was a man or a
womanÑwashed the gleaming white stone steps with rags and a bucket of water. 
The man cleared his throat and spoke in a rush. ÒAs soon as all have gone down the
road, run inside into the nave. Stay in the shadows if you can and go to the end, where you
will find the altar. There you will find the daimone. Approach it softly. It can be violent, or so
we have seen. None of us speaks to it. That is forbidden.Ó 
He stood and walked away, and that was the last they saw of him, for first he vanished
from their restricted view and then, coming back into sight on the steps, he was suddenly
engulfed by dogs. 
A horn blasted, a sharp, painful sound. A swarm of dogs surged down the stairs, growling
and barking and yipping and howling like mad things. Anna whimpered and then stuck a
hand in her mouth, biting down hard, to stop herself from crying out loud. They were
monsters, huge hulking things as tall at the shoulder as she was, with long lean haunches
and massive shoulders and yellow eyes that sparked with demonÕs fire. Their mouths hung
open perpetually to display their great teeth and red, lolling tongues. 
They bowled over the two slaves, overwhelmed them until all she could see was a frenzy
of dogs, roiling and leaping and biting each other and only God knew what else. She shut
her eyes and groped for her Circle. Matthias choked down a sob; his grip on her tightened.
She dared not look. She did not want to see. 
A voice roared, a great bellowing powerful shout. She squinched her eyes shut as hard

as she could, but Matthias tugged on her and her eyes opened. Eika strode down the steps
now, sickly things with their scaled hides. Yet each one, though a savage with nothing of
humankind in it, had a brutish strength and the gleam of animal cunning in its bearing and in
its sharp ugly face. They grabbed the frenzied dogs by their back legs and yanked them
away, struck them hard blows with their clawed hands or the hafts of their spears. The Eika
yipped and howled at the dogs as if they were kin and could understand each other in their
beastÕs language. 
Behind them came the oddest looking pair of Eika she had yet seen. The first was a huge
brawny creature dressed in gold-and-silver chains studded with bright gems, and its
companion was an Eika as scrawny as the human slaves and itself clothed only in a single
rag tied about its hips. A leather pouch hung from the belt around its waist; it carried a small
wooden chest braced against one scrawny hip. The huge Eika waded into the seething
mass of dogs and proceeded to strike about himself, roaring and laughing as he tossed
dogs aside and beat them away from their prey. 
One dog at last broke away and bounded down the steps. Many of the Eika warriors
followed after it. As if this defection signaled their defeat, the rest of the dogs retreated from
the Eika chieftainÕs wrathÑor his humor, for why else would he station slaves on the steps
right then, knowing what the dogs would likely do to them?Ñand loped away down the steps,
turning to follow the others down toward the river. As they cleared the steps, their passing
revealed two ravaged, red heaps ofÑ
This time she clamped her eyes shut and did not look, willed herself not to look, and
heard only Matthias gulping under his breath, trying to keep silent because any noise would
doom them. 
Finally he whispered, ÒTheyÕve gone. TheyÕve carried the twoÑthemÑaway. Come
now, Anna. DonÕt lose heart now when weÕre so close.Ó 
He scrabbled at the rags, dug himself free, and jumped to his feet, then yanked her up.
He ran and she ran behind, stumbling, gasping for breath because she was so scared and
because she had almost forgotten how to run and because her legs were stiff from so many
days lying still. They came under the shadow of the cathedral wall and ran up the steps.
Blood still stained the stone next to an overturned bucket of water, and runnels of pink water
seeped down the steps toward the avenue below. Rags were strewn everywhere, stained
with blood. 
The great doors stood open, but because the sun set behind the cathedral, little light
penetrated the interior by this, the eastern entrance. They ducked inside, and at once
Matthias threw himself against a wall and tugged Anna down beside him. He put a finger to
his lips. They stood there in shadow and listened. 
And heard . . . the music of chains, shifting, whispering, as some creature tested its
bonds and found them as unyielding as ever. 
Matthias crept forward to hide behind one of the great pillars of stone that supported the
great roof. Here, in the side aisle, they remained in shadow. The nave itself, the vast central
aisle of the cathedral, was brighter, lit by windows built high into the towering walls that faced
north and south. Brightest of all was the altar, lying in a wash of light from seven tall windows
set in a semicircle at the far end of the church, encircling the Hearth. A heap of refuse lay
next to the altar. Matthias slipped forward to the next pillar, using it as cover to get close to
the altar. Anna followed him. She wanted to grab hold of his belt, to cling, but she did not.
This she had learned: They must both be free to move quickly. 
It was silent. The stone muffled sound, and the outside world seemed far away in this
placeÑonce a haven but now the camp of savages. She felt their musty scent against her the
way dry things dragged against the skin cause a tingling in fingertips and neck; she smelled
it the way a storm announces itself by a certain feeling in the air long before the first rolling
peal of thunder is heard and the first slash of lightning seen in the dark sky. They ruled this
space now, which had once been sacred to God. 
She caught up to Matthias and leaned on the cool, stippled stone. He touched her briefly,

then darted forward to the next pillar. The refuse heap by the altar stirred and came to life. 
Not rags but dogs, starting out of sleep, scrambling up, alerted. 
ÒRun,Ó moaned Matthias. He shoved her back, toward the door, but it was too late, the
door was too far away. They could never run as fast as the dogs, only hide from them. And
there was no place to hide here. 
The dogs bolted toward them. Anna ran, stumbled, jerked herself up. 
ÒNo!Ó she screamed, for Matthias had run out into the nave, out into the path of the dogs
to try to distract them so that she could run free. 
ÒGo! Go!Ó he shouted. 
But she ran to him. It was better to die with him, torn to pieces by the dogs, than live if he
were dead. Ai, Lady. What did it matter? There was no way to live in this city except as a
slave of the Eika, if that could be called life. 
She reached him just before the dogs did, the hideous dogs. She flung her arms around
her brother and braced herself for the impact, for death. Please, Lady, let it be quick. 
A hoarse cryÑnot human words, not any words she recognizedÑcame from the direction
of the altar, punctuated by noises that sounded like growls and yips. The dogs clattered to a
halt, nails slipping and sliding on the stone paving, and they stopped a bodyÕs length from
the children, growling, glaring with sparking yellow eyes. Then, when more of those hoarse
words came, they slunk away, tails down, still growling but now submissive to the creature
that rose out of the heap of rags by the altar, a heap which was not rags after all but the
daimone itself. 
Not human, certainly not that. This much Anna saw easily in the fading light that
penetrated the cathedral nave. It was tall and human-shaped, but the Eika were
human-shaped and they were no kin to humans. It had covered itself modestly with clothing,
though cloth and tunic were shredded by teeth marks and as ragged as if strips had been
torn off at random. Gold cloth bound its forearms, this also torn and ripped in many places
as though the dogs had gnawed and worried at it, seeking flesh underneath. It wore an iron
collar around its neck; to the collar was fastened a thick iron chain, and that chain was
fastened to the heavy block of stone that was the altarstone, the Hearth of Our Lady. 
It stared at them with eyes as inhumanly green as the emeralds that studded MatthiasÕ
fancy dagger, and as if that stare reminded him of the chosen gift, Matthias slipped the
dagger out from his boot and held it forward, hilt first, in offering. 
ÒCome,Ó said the daimone in its hoarse voice. 
They dared not disobey, for it spoke in the tone of a creature used to obedience and, in
any case, it controlled the dogs by some daimonic magic. And why not? It was not human, it
was an aetherical creature, something that flew bodiless through the vast impenetrable
heavens far above the mortal earth, far above the changing moon; it would not fear human
children nor hesitate to command them. 
They crept closer, and this time Anna held tight to MatthiasÕ belt with one hand and her
Circle with the other, chewing at her lower lip. She sniffed back tears, but she did not flinch
as the dogs circled them, smelling their feet and nipping forward only to be brought to heel
by the harsh words of the daimone. 
Closer yet, then close enough that Matthias could reach out and hand the knife to the
daimone. It took it and with sudden furtive haste glanced around the shadowed nave,
peering into the colqnnades, then tucked the precious weapon in among the filthy rags it
wore to cover itself. It stood there silent, listening, and they grew silent as well, but Anna
heard nothing and Matthias made no sound. 
Anna stared. She thought that, perhaps, when the enchanter had called the daimone
down from the heavens and when the magic had imprisoned it in a body made of earth, the
daimone had triedÑgiven now no choiceÑto form itself into a human body. For it was very
like a human: human eyes though they were of a stark green color and somewhat pulled at
the corners, as if distorted; human skin though it had the tint of bronze as if the metals
hidden in earth had leached out to the surface; a human face though with broad, prominent

cheekbones; and no trace of beard though it was clearly male. But had not God made
humans both male and female? Why should They not make daimones likewise? 
And it spoke human speech, though slowly, as if not much practiced at it. To the dogs, in
that other language of beasts, it spoke more fluidly. 
ÒWhy have you given me this knife?Ó it asked. Its voice likewise, she thought: a human
voice but with that hoarse edge to it, not quite formed. 
Matthias dipped his chin for courage and faced the creature squarely. ÒIn trade for the
secret of St. Kristine, who led the other children to safety.Ó
ÒWho led them to safety,Ó it echoed. It stared at them for what seemed forever until
Anna thought it had not understood what Matthias said, only mimicked the sounds. The dogs
sniffed at her feet, and a hundred prickles ran like poisonous creatures up and down her
back. The Eika procession would return at any moment. The creature flung up its head as a
dog does at a sudden sound. ÒQuickly,Ó it said. ÒBeyond the tower stair lies a door to the
crypt. In the crypt lies the path you seek. Go free.Ó That fast, it changed before their eyes to
a mad thing. It grabbed the heavy chain that bound it and yanked violently. It threw back its
head and howled, and the dogs set up such a yammering and howling and barking that
Anna was deafened. 
Matthias grabbed her hand. Together they ran into the shadow of the colonnade and all
the way back along the nave while the daimone hammered the chain against the stone
paving like a wild beast and the dogs leaped and barked around it, some nipping in at its
body to be met by elbow or fist. 
ÒGod help the poor creature,Ó muttered Matthias. They came to the end of the
colonnade and into the long en-tryway which ran perpendicular to the nave, itself now draped
in shadows as the sun set outside and the interior darkened and the poor mad daimone
finally ceased its frantic and useless efforts to free itself. Magic it might have, to control the
dogs, but not magic enough to free itself from the Eika enchanter. 
 The door that opened onto the stairwell which led to the crypt stood before them, dark,
somber wood scored with deep scratches as if someone had clawed at it, trying to get in.
Matthias set a hand on the latch, jiggling it tentatively to make sure it wasnÕt stuck or
squeaky. 
In the new silence Anna heard the noise first, the scuff of a foot on stone. She whirled and
then, because she could not help herself, let out a low moan of fear. Matthias looked back
over his shoulder. She felt him stiffen and grope for the knife he always tucked in at his belt. 
Too late. 
An Eika stood in the shadows not ten strides from them, next to the great doors. It
stepped out from its hiding place and stared at them. It was tall, as most of the savages
were, but more slender than bulky; its body winked and dazzled in the last glint of sun
through the high windows because it wore a girdle of surpassing beauty, gold-and-silver
chains linked together and bound in with jewels like a hundred eyes all staring at them, who
were at last caught. 
She was too terrified even to whimper. She loosened her hand from her Circle and traced
it, a finger all the way around the smooth wood grain, the Circle of GodÕs Mercy, as her
mother had taught her many years ago: the only prayer she knew. 
The creature moved no farther, not to retreat, not to charge. 
But Anna saw the strangest thing she had yet seen in her entire life, stranger than
slaughter and death and the horrible dogs and rats feeding on a bloated corpse. The
creature wore a necklace, a plain leather thong knotted in several places as if it had broken
more than once and been tied back together, and on that leather thong, resting against its
gleaming copper-scaled chest, hung a wooden Circle of Unity, the sign of the church. Just
like hers. 
Still it did not move, nor did it raise its head and howl an alarm. But, just like her, it lifted a
single finger and traced the round shape of the Circle, as she had done. 
Matthias shook himself as if coming out of a dream. He lifted the latch, grasped Anna by

the arm. ÒDonÕt look,Ó he said. ÒDonÕt look back. Just follow me.Ó 
He dragged her inside, shutting the door after them though there was no light to see by.
Together they stumbled down the stairs into the black crypt. 
No oneÑno thing, no creature, no sound of pursuitÑcame after them. 
ÒItÕs a miracle,Ó she whispered, and then stumbled as she took a step down only to find
there were no more steps; the impact jarred her entire body. She lost hold of Matthias and
groped frantically, found him again, and clutched his hand so tight he grunted in pain, but
she would not lessen her grip on him. She could see nothing, not even her hand in front of
her face. 
ÒLook,Ó whispered Matthias, and his whisper faded into the blackness, and she heard it
filter away into some vast empty unknowable expanse. 
She saw it first as luminescence, a faint glowing light. Then, as her eyes adjusted, she
gasped and gagged, for the crypt before them was filled with skeletal corpses and all of
them in the same stage of decay although they no longer stank of rotting flesh. 
ÒLook there,Ó whispered Matthias. He pointed, and she could see his arm lifted in the
gloom and see beyond it a throbbing light as faint as the soulÕs breath might appear if it
were visible to the human eye. ÒCome!Ó he said urgently, and they began the gruesome
task of picking their way through the litter of corpses. 
ÒFighting men, these were,Ó he said. ÒLook. Some are still wearing surcoats, what you
can see of them.Ó 
Some indeed wore gold surcoats bearing the sigil of a black dragon. Anna did not know
what this meant, only that the one time she had seen a procession go by, bearing a banner
to mark the passage of a noble lord or lady, it had not been this one but some other
creature, a hound perhaps or a horse. This mysteryÑwho were these soldiers? Had they
died in the last battle, when the city was overwhelmed? How had they come to be dumped in
this holy crypt like so much refuse?Ñshe could not answer. 
Gaping skulls grinned up at them, but Anna no longer feared them. They were dead; they
had fought to save their kin, their human brothers and sisters, and so they would not disturb
her and Matthias now. In this way she was able to find a path through their bodies, to nudge
them gently aside when necessary. Once, when she saw a knife protruding from a rib cage,
she carefully pried it out and took it for herself, thanking the poor dead soul who had in this
way saved it for her. You never knew when you might need another knife. 
Beyond the dead soldiers they followed the light farther into the crypt, past the
gravestones of the holy dead, those who were once biscops and deacons and good men
and women who labored for the church, until they came to a secret corner and found there
what the daimone had promised them: a staircase leading down into the earth, illuminated
by the whisper of light that had led them there. 
Anna felt hope swell in her heart, of itself a light against the darkness of despair and
dread. 
Matthias hesitated and then, not looking back, started down the stairs, testing each one
carefully before he set his full weight on it. Because he still held her hand, because she
feared more than anything else in the world losing him, she had to follow. Yet she looked
back over her shoulderÑthough she could see nothing but darkness behind themÑand
spoke a solemn vow: 
ÒWeÕll come back for you, Papa Otto, for you and all the others but especially for you.Ó 
The stairs led down a long way and all of it in darkness. They felt their way along, groping
along the wall with the flats of their hands, and when at last the stairs ended and the wall
curved and then straightened, a breeze caught her lips and she tasted something strange on
it, something she had not tasted for many months: fresh air untainted by a cityÕs death, and
green things growing in plain good earth, not in the crevices between fallen stones. 
They walked for a long while, resting a few times although never for long. 
When they emerged from the tunnel, it was dawn. 
They came out of a caveÕs mouth to see a field of oats run wild and a few buildings that

looked abandoned. Behind the narrow cave mouth rose a ridge of rock and up this Matthias
scrambled, Anna right behind him. From the ridge they looked back over the empty
countryside to the city below, resting like a jewel on an island in the middle of the broad
river. From this distance one would never guess what lay inside. It looked like a perfect toy
model of a city, untouched, gently gleaming in the early morning sunlight. 
ÒI should have killed it,Ó said Matthias. 
ÒKilled what?Ó she asked. ÒThe Eika?Ó Without thinking, she clasped her Circle of
Unity. She could not stop thinking about the Circle of Unity that had hung at its chest. 
ÒThe daimone,Ó he said. ÒI should have killed it with the knife. Then it would have been
free of the mortal body and able to go home to the heavens. WouldnÕt that have been a
better trade?Ó 
Anna shook her head. ÒI donÕt think any human can kill a daimone. They arenÕt like us,
they donÕt have our blood, and maybe they donÕt have blood at all the way we do. You
would just have made it mad.Ó 
He sighed. ÒMaybe so. But I pity that poor soul. If it has a soul.Ó 
She hesitated, but then she asked, ÒDo Eika have souls?Ó 
ÒOf course not!Ó 
ÒBut that oneÑit saw us, and it let us go. It wore a Circle, Matthias. If it wore a Circle,
isnÕt it kin of ours because it also believes in God?Ó 
ÒIt just stole it from a body and wears it as a trophy. I donÕt know why it let us go. Maybe
St. Kristine watched over us and blinded its eyes.Ó He turned his back on the city and
began to climb back down the hill. ÒCome, Anna. I donÕt know how far weÕll have to walk
before we find people.Ó 
But St. Kristine, while surely saving them, had not blinded the EikaÕs eyes. Anna knew
that. It had seen her touch her Circle, and it had copied her movement. It had let them go,
knowingly, deliberately. Just as every human slave in the city had conspired to set them free,
which was only what they would have done for their own kin. 
It was a beautiful summerÕs day and they walked free through bright woods and drank
from free-flowing streams and ate, carefully, a few moist berries. At dusk Matthias saw a
campfire. The astonished woodsmenÑset here in the forest to hunt and to keep an eye out
for Eika incursionsÑgladly traded them food for one of the extra knives, and let them sleep
huddled by the coals. In the morning one woodsman escorted the children to the nearest
village. 
ÒLet me give you some advice,Ó said the woodsman, who was small and wiry and
cheerful, and who had lost one finger on his left hand. ÒThereÕs little room in Steleshame
these days, with all the refugees. But youÕve value in the news you bring, so donÕt sell it
cheap, and you might get to stay there. Ask for an apprenticeship, lad, and something to
keep your sister busy with and cared for until sheÕs old enough to marry. LadyÕs Blood! It
is a miracle. We never thought to see any other folk walk alive out of the city. How did you
survive? How did you get free?Ó 
Matthias told a brief version of the story, but when he got to the end, he didnÕt mention
the Eika. For the Eika was not part of MatthiasÕ story. And yet the Eika puzzled Anna most.
But she kept silent. All humans hated the Eika. They had every reason to, for the Eika were
savages and their dogs the most hideous creatures living. 
ÒYour brother will no doubt find work with a tanner, child,Ó the woodsman said to Anna.
ÒHave you any skills?Ó 
She did not mean to say it. It popped out unbidden. ÒWhen IÕm old enough, IÕll travel
like the fraters do. IÕll bring the Holy Word and the Circle of Unity to the Eika. They canÕt be
meant to be savages.Ó 
He laughed, but not unkindly, only shaking his head as adults did when children said
something they considered silly. Matthias shushed her and made a face. 
But the day was very beautiful, and they were free, and perhaps if they brought news that
slaves still lived in the city, someoneÑsome noble lady or lordÑmight lead an expedition to

free the others. If only Papa Otto and the rest could hold on for that long. 
She thought for a long while as she walked through the woodland. She and Matthias had
lost both father and mother and been given into the callous care of their uncle. Yet it was not
their uncleÑtheir only remaining kinsmanÑwho had saved them. He had tried only to save
himself and she supposed she would never know if he still walked among the living or rotted
among the forgotten dead. It was Papa OttoÑno blood father of theirsÑand the other slaves
who had saved them. If they, who were not her true kin, could act as kin, then was it not
possible that even an Eika could become kin? This thought she held like a gift in her heart.
Matthias had given the daimone the knife, which it could use to defend itself or free itself if
such were possible, and in exchange it had given them freedom. 
But in the end, after all that had happened, it was the solitary Eika who had stayed its
hand and let them go. 
PART ONE: DIVINATION BY THUNDER
I THE MUSIC OF WAR
1
He smelled the storm coming before the first rumble of thunder sounded far in the
distance. The dogs stirred restlessly and nipped at him, but he slapped them aside until they
whined and hunkered down at his feet. 
Bloodheart appeared not to have heard the distant thunder. The Eika chieftain sat on his
throne, just out of reach of his captiveÕs chains, and measured leg and arm bones that had
been scraped clean of flesh. Tossing aside those he did not want, he sawed off the knobby
joint ends of the bones until he had half a dozen smooth white lengths of various sizes
collected in his lap. With a sharp stick he hollowed out the bones, cleaning out the marrow.
Then, using a stone burin mounted on a stick, he drilled holes down the length of the hollow
bones. All this he worked in silence, except for the hasp of the obsaw, the rasp of wood
scraping, and his muted grunting breaths as he twirled stick between palms to drive the drill
through. 
Beyond, other sounds made a counterpoint to BloodheartÕs task: The old priest
crouched on the marble floor as he tossed out finger bones into a random pattern read and
swept aside; outside, Eika soldiers played a game on the cathedral steps which involved a
head in a sack; thunder muttered far away, and the Veser River, a low roar too faint here for
human ears to hear, sang its constant familiar chant. 
The dogs, slinking away, gnawed at the discarded bones, cracking them open for the
marrow inside. The most faithful brought a few bones back to drop at his feet, his portion as
their lord. God knew he was hungry all the time now, but never let it be said he had stooped
to this: eating human remains. 
He fought back the shattering despair. It came on him in waves as out of nowhere, out of
the shadows or out of BloodheartÕs enchantment that shackled him here, bound by more
than iron. Caught in a sudden fit of uncontrollable snaking, he clutched chains in his hands
and scraped them violently against the marble floor until his skin was rubbed raw and the
chains polished to a shining gleam but with no least weakening of their heavy links. 
Only then, when the dogs began to growl around him sensing his weakness, when his
blood dripped on the pale marble to form little rosettes of agony against cold stone, did he
remember himself, cuff them into submission, and look up. 
Teeth bared, Bloodheart grinned down from his chair. ÒNow,Ó he said, his voice as
whispery as the flutter of birds in the eaves. ÒShall I make a flute out of your bones when you
are dead?Ó 
ÒYou will never kill me,Ó he replied in his hoarse voice. Some days, these were the only

words he remembered how to say. 
But Bloodheart was not even listening. Instead, the Eika chieftain lifted the smooth white
tubes one by one to his lips, testing their tone. Some breathed high, some low, and on them,
switching from one to the next, he played a rag eed melody while at last lightning flashed,
seen through the great cathedral windows, and thunder broke overhead, and the Eika
soldiers outside laughed uproariously in the sudden drenching rain and continued their
game. 
2
¡°Two months!Ó King Henry paced under the awning while rain drizzled beyond the
overhang, dripping down the sides of his tent, curling down tent poles in slow streams. ÒI
have wasted two months on these damned stubborn Varren lords when we could have been
marching on Gent!Ó 
Liath had taken shelter under a wagon; with night watch ahead, she had been permitted
an afternoonÕs nap. Thank the Lady the rain had not drenched the ground. She was still dry,
and now she listened as HenryÕs advisers rallied around him, soothing his temper. 
ÒYou could not have left Varre behind that quickly,Ó said his favored cleric, Sister
Rosvita, in her usual calm voice. ÒYou have done the right thing, Your Majesty, the only thing
you could do. Your anger toward the Eika is justified, and when the time is right, they will
suffer your wrath.Ó 
ÒThe time will never be right!Ó Henry was in one of his rare sour moods. Liath could see
only legs and torsos from this angle, and while any soul would have known Henry by the belt
he wore embossed and painted with the badges of each of the six duchies whose princes
owed allegiance to him as king regnant, on this day he was also recognizable by the sheer
irritable energy he projected as he paced from one corner of the carpet to the other. ÒFive
sieges we have laid in, in the last two months.Ó 
ÒNone of them lasted more than five days,Ó said Margrave Judith with disdain. ÒNone
of these Varren nobles had any stomach for a fight, knowing Lady Sabella was defeated.Ó 
ÒYour Majesty.Ó Now Helmut Villam weighed in, and the others paused to listen
respectfully to the words of a man whose age and experience of hard campaigns eclipsed
even that of the king. ÒOnce Lady Svanhilde surrenders to your authority, we can turn east.
You have sent what Eagles you can to the Wendish dukes and nobles, to raise the alarm.
But do not forget that after the battle we fought near Kassel, your forces are too weak in any
case to attack the Eika at Gent. It will take time to assemble a new army.Ó
ÒDamn Sabella,Ó said Henry. ÒI was too lenient with her.Ó 
ÒShe is our sister, Henry,Ó said Biscop Constance. Though the rebuke was mild, only
one of HenryÕs powerful younger sisters would have dared utter it. 
ÒHalf sister,Ó muttered the king, but he had stopped pacing. 
ÒShe is safely confined under my authority in Autun, where I will soon return,Ó added
Constance, who despite her youth had the grave authority of a much older woman. He
grunted, acknowledging this truth. 
They began to talk about the disposition of this latest siege, invested yesterday
afternoon, and what route they would take when they at last marched east through northern
Arconia back into Wendar. 
The rain slackened and stopped. Liath wormed out from under the wagon, strapped on
sword and quiver and draped her saddle-bags over her shoulder, then went hunting for food.
Rations had been scarce the past several weeks. Hard as it was to feed the kingÕs
progress, it was more difficult still in these days of summer before the harvest came in. That
they marched through lands hostile toward the king did not help matters any. Although the
former kingdom of Varre was by right of succession under HenryÕs rule, the number of
recalcitrant nobles and reluctant church leaders in Varre amazed even Liath, who had long
ago gotten used to being an outsider. 

Yet despite the hardships, she was as content as she could be. She had food, most of
the time, and such shelter as a wagon or tent awning afforded. She was free. For now, it
was enough. 
The camp sprawled in a ragged half circle around a wooden palisade, the outer ring of
Lady SvanhildeÕs fortress. The two siege engines and three ballistas sat just out of range of
an arrowÕs shot from the wall; hastily dug ditches protected their flanks, and a wall of
mantelets shielded the men who guarded and worked the machines. On either side of the
mantelets a picket of stakes stood, protecting the camp from a charge of cavalry. The first
line of mud-streaked tents, some listing under the weight of rain puddles caught in canvas,
stood somewhat back from these stakes, and the tents of nobles and king yet farther back,
almost intone trees. The patchwork of tents and wagons left many gaps and wide stretches
of open ground, but Henry had been careful to avoid trampling the ripening fields. He
needed grain to feed his retinue. 
Certain of the camp followers had set up stalls or brought wares from nearby villages to
sell. Indeed, the armyÕs camp resembled a large disorganized autumn market more than it
did any other army Liath had ever seen. 
In Arethousa, a precise order of march prevailed and every tent had its specific site rated
in order of proximity to the emperor. 
In Andalla, the Kalif had his own compound made of manteletlike frames draped with
bright fabric. Only the favored few were allowed inside this compound, and the Kalif himself
from his place of seclusion ordered the generals who led his troops into battle. 
In that almost fatal passage across the deserts west of Kartiako, so many years ago now,
she remembered a silent and deadly army whose robes were the color of sand and who
seemed to move as with the windÕs speed and sudden gusting shifts of direction. She and
Da and a dozen others were all that had survived of the one hundred souls who had started
the trek in a vast caravan. She had been so hungry, and too young truly to understand why
there had been no food toward the end of that terrible journey. 
Now she stared, caught by the enticing smell of a rack of pig meat roasting over a fire.
The robust woman tending it looked her over. 
ÒAny coin?Ó she demanded. Her accent had the broad Varren lilt. ÒWhat do you have to
trade?Ó 
Liath shrugged and made to move on. She had nothing, only her status as a KingÕs
Eagle. 
ÒHere, friend.Ó A Lion halted beside her. Ragged around the edges of his well-worn
tunic, still, he had a friendly smile. ÒDonÕt just walk away. We serve the king, and such as
her must feed the kingÕs servants.Ó 
The woman spit on the ground. ÒIf I feed the kingÕs servants all that I have, for no return,
then IÕll have nothing to feed my own kin.Ó 
ÒYou came to take coin off of us, good woman,Ó said the Lion with a laugh, Òso donÕt
complain if you must feed those of us who have no coin. We only came heje because your
Varren lords rebelled against the kingÕsÓ authority. Otherwise weÕd not have been graced
with the vision of your beautiful face.Ó 
This was too much. She smiled at his smooth flattery, then recalled her irritation. ÒIt isnÕt 
my fault the nobles quarrel. And it wasnÕt Lady Svanhilde that followed the kingÕs sister, it
was her reckless eldest son, Lord Charles. Poor woman. She had only boy children and
loved them too well.Ó 
ÒMy mother had only boys,Ó retorted the Lion, Òbut we none of us gave her reason to be
ashamed. Come now, give this loyal Eagle something to eat.Ó 
Grudgingly, the woman did so, a fresh piece of pork spitted on a twig. The Lion handed
her a round of flat bread, coarse flour mixed with a paste of dried berries, their usual rations
when all else was gone. It was still warm from baking. 
ÒThank you,Ó she said, not quite knowing how to respond to his kindness except to
identify herself. ÒIÕm called Liath.Ó 

ÒIÕm known as Thiadbold. YouÕre the Eagle who rode in from Gent,Ó he added. ÒWe
remember you. Those of us who serve the king, and who donÕt have noble kinÑÓ Here he
grinned. He had a shock of red hair and part of one ear missing, the lobe sliced cleanly off
and healed now into a white dimple. ÒÑmust watch out for each other as we may. Will you
drink with us?Ó 
The camp of Lions, sited near the kingÕs tent, was much reduced. The first King Henry
had commissioned ten centuries of Lions. In these days, at least five of those centuries
served in the eastern marchlands, protecting market cities and key forts from the incursions
of the barbarians. Two Lion banners flew at this camp, marking the two centuries who
marched with the king. But even considering those men who stood watch at this hour, Liath
could not imagine that more than sixty men out of two hundred had survived the final battle
with Lady Sabella. 
ÒI canÕt,Ó she said with some regret. She was not used to sitting and chatting in the
company of soldiersÑor anyone else, for that matter. Even some of the other Eagles thought
her aloof and had told her so, being by nature an independent group of souls who had no
reluctance to speak their minds when in the company of their own kind. ÒI stand watch
tonight.Ó 
He nodded and let her go. 
In the woods beyond she heard the bleating and lowing of livestock, kept well away from
the tempting fields. Some soldiers, too, had been commandeered from those recalcitrant
Varren lords who had fled home after SabellaÕs defeat and hoped to avoid the kingÕs
notice. These sat sullen in their own camps, watched by the kingÕs men. A few brace of
young noble lordlings and a handful of their rashest sisters had come along as well, some as
hostages, some for the hope of war and booty at Gent or farther east in the marchlands. At
least some of these had gear and horses but, all in all, HenryÕs army had lost much of its
strength. 
By the time she got back to the kingÕs tent, she had licked every last spot of grease off
her fingers. The king had gone to his bed and his noble companions had retired to their own
tents. 
Hathui handed her a skin filled with ale. ÒYouÕll want this,Ó she said. ÒIf we donÕt take
this damned city by tomorrow, weÕll be forced to drink water. Now IÕm to bed.Ó As the
kingÕs favored Eagle, she slept just inside the entrance to his tent, along with his other
personal servants. 
Liath got the night watch because she could see so well in the dark, but she also liked it
because it left her alone with her thoughts. Some nights, though, her thoughts were no fit
companion. 
Gent. 
She could not bear to think of Gent and what had happened there. Sometimes, at night,
she still dreamed of the Eika dogs. It was better to remain awake at night, if she could. 
With the sky overcast, she could not observe the heavens. Instead, she walked through
her city of memory. Only standing alone through the night, freed from Hugh and no longer
under the eye of Wolfhere, dared she risk the intense concentration it took to order her city
and remember. 
 The city stands on a hill that is also an island. Seven walls ring the city, each one
pierced by a gate. At the height, on a plateau, stands the tower. 
But on this journey into the city, she crosses under the threshold of the third gate, which
is surmounted by the Cup of Boundless Waters. She enters the fourth house to the left,
passing under an archway of horn. 
Here resides her recollection of ArtemisiaÕs Dreams, and here she walks into the first
hall and enters the second chamber, first book, second chapter. Why do these dreams of
the Eika dogs torment her? Do they mean something she ought to interpret, or are they
just the memory of that awful last day in Gent? 
But Artemisia gives her no respite, once she has read the various symbols installed in

the little chamber, each one a trigger for some portion of the words written in the book. 
Ò ¡®Let me tell you that if you want to make sense of your dream, it must be
remembered from beginning to end, or you cannot interpret it. Only if you remember it
completely, can you explore the point to which the vision leads.Ó 
But she never recalled beginning or end to the dreams, only the sudden madness of the
dogs feeding among the pale tombs of the dead, in the darkness of the crypt at the
cathedral in Gent. 
Wind soughed through the trees. She shook herself and shifted. Her knees ached from
standing so stiffly. Down by the siege engines several campfires burned. Figures shifted, a
change of guard. She watched as a manÕs figure stooped, adding wood, then straightened
and moved out of her sight into darkness. Drizzle started up, pattered for a little while, and
gave way to a weighty nightÕs stillness, more sticky than hot. One of the servants emerged
from the tent, staggering with sleep, relieved himself, and went in again. 
Slowly the clouds began to break up. Stars shone here and there through the rents,
ragged patterns formed and concealed as quickly as she could recognize them. The waning
crescent moon appeared in a gap, then vanished. Above, the wheel of the heavens turned
and winterÕs sky roseÑthe sky seen in the late autumn and early winter evenings, here
marking the advent of late summerÕs dawn. The first hint of light colored the tents and
palisade wall a murky gray, gaining tone as, above, the faintest stars faded from view. 
A manÕs figure moved down by the siege engines, scurrying along the wall of mantelets.
One of the campfires was doused. She started forward in surprise, then saw half a dozen
shadowy figures heave themselves over the mantelets and drop to the ground behind. 
Raiders from the fortress. 
ÒHathui!Ó she cried, then drew her sword and dashed down the slope, shouting the
alarm as she ran. 
A horn sounded, and men began to yell. ÒTo arms! To arms!Ó 
As she ran through the foremost tents, soldiers fell in beside her or hurried before, all
running to protect the front line. Below, a man screamed in pain. Swords rang, the clash of
arms and the pound of blade against shield. A sudden fire bloomed at the base of the
leftmost siege engine and by its unruly light she saw the skirmish unfold and spread as men
leaped forward to beat down the flames while others took up blazing brands to look for their
enemyÑor start new fires. 
Dawn grayed the horizon. As if in answer to the call to arms now ringing through camp,
the gates of the fortress swung open. More than a score of mounted riders, pennants held
high upon their up-raised spears, galloped through the yawning gate and drove down toward
the engines. 
Liath saw them coming, heard voices beyond her shout warnings, heard the shrill of horns
from King HenryÕs camp as they blared a warning, but she had more pressing matters
before her. 
The raiders had put one ballista to the torch with a flaming pitch that refused to yield to
water or blanket. A solitary LionÑone she didnÕt recognize except by his tabardÑdefended
another ballista from three of the raiders. With torch and sword he held them at bay. Another
raider lay dead, nearly decapitated, at his feet. They had not yet trapped the Lion against
the ballista, but they would in a moment. 
¡°Eagles donÕt fight, they witness.Ó So Hathui always said. But he would die without her
help. 
She plunged in, parrying blows, and took up a position to his left. He greeted her with a
slurred Ògud mornÕn.Ó Despite the odds, she sensed he was smiling. The raiders
hesitated, faced with two where there had been one. She shifted, feinting to attack, when the
Lion changed position beside her and his face fell within her view. His cheek had been split
by a slash; a permanent toothy grin showed through the rivulets of blood. For an instant too
long the ghastly grin caught her eye. One of the raiders rushed her from the left. She turned,
catching his blow on her quillons, but the weight of his charge drove her to her knees. She

strained up, locked in a test of strength as the man tried to force her down. The injured Lion
thrust his lit torch into a second raiderÕs face, stunning him, and then two more Lions ran
up. 
One was Thiadbold. She recognized him by his red hair; he had not had time to put on a
helmet. That fast, he drove his sword to its hilt through the abdomen of the raider who
grappled with her. They stood embraced above her, the impaled man flushing and twitching,
his sword arm pinned to his side by the body of the man who killed him. Thiadbold had
wrapped his free arm tight around his prey, holding him as he would a shield, until he was
sure that all of the fight had drained from the body. The raiderÕs sword fell from his limp
hand. Thiadbold stepped back to let the corpse fall, twisting his own sword free. 
Liath rolled out of the way of the body, then jumped to her feet as the two remaining
raiders gave groundÑbut not fast enough. Cut down, they dropped, screaming, and lay still. 
The injured Lion turned to beat again at the fire that scorched the ballista. Blood dripped
down his tabard. 
ÒFall back!Ó cried Thiadbold, his words underscored by a heavy drumming throb, the
pound of hooves and the ominous call of a low-pitched horn. ÒTo the camp! To the king!Ó 
She saw at once what the ruse had been. The raid on the siege engines had diverted
their attention from the picket of stakes that protected the flanks of the camp. The horsemen
from the fortress pressed forward at full charge and with spears lowered. With the stakes
now uprooted or cut down, they had a clear sweep into camp. 
ÒWe have too few to repel the charge!Ó cried Thiadbold ÒEagle! Fall back!Ó 
She obeyed, and they made room for her behind them, for of all the men hacking around
at the remains of the raiding force, falling back to set a position against the charge of heavy
horse, she was the only one without some kind of armor. 
The injured Lion had salvaged bolts from the ballista and these he handed to his fellows.
ÒBrace with these,Ó he shouted, his voice heavily slurred. ÒItÕs our only chance to stop the
charge. Eagle!Ó He nodded toward her, his sliced cheek still seeping blood. ÒShoot into
the faces of the horses. That might hurt their charge.Ó 
Men stumbled forward through the dawning light, forming a line where once the pickets
had stood. New raiders, emboldened by the defensive posture of the kingÕs troops, set to
work on the now undefended engines. 
ÒThe king!Ó voices shouted far behind her. ÒThe king rides forth!Ó 
She hunched down behind the line of Lions and men-at-arms, a few of whom held the
long ballista bolts inclined forward like spears. While the others braced themselves, spear
butts dug into the ground, she sheathed her sword and readied her bow. Her mind had gone
still and quiet; empty. She nocked, drew, and shot, but lost sight of the arrow in the gloom.
The pounding of hooves drowned her; she could not even hear the Lions next to her
speaking. Beyond, the fortress lay still. No footmen or archers had followed the lordÕs
charge out the gates. She nocked another arrow, drewÑ
The horsemen were upon them. She had only an instant to register their tabards, sewn
with the device of a swan. The lead horseman, made bright by his shining mail and
gleaming helm and the white coat of his horse, cleared them with a great leap. His fellows
broke through, some of the horses jumping, some simply shattering the line with their weight.
Only one horse faltered, screaming in pain as a spear caught it in the chest, and went down.
A Lion dragged the rider from his horse. 
She followed the charging horsemen with her nocked arrow but could not release it for
fear of hitting the kingÕs people. By now, all was chaos in the camp. The lord leading the
charge had little interest in the infantry who hurried forward. His milites behind him, he
headed for the tent that flew the kingÕs banner: a huge red silk pennant marked with an
eagle, a dragon, and a lion stitched in gold. His charge carried him through camp, scattering
the disorganized troops who lay in his path. 
King Henry had not waited for his lords. With a quilted jacket and steel cap he had
mounted, taken up St. PerpetuaÕs holy lance, and now, with no more than a dozen mounted

riders at his back, he raced toward the fray. The king broke from a cluster of tents into the
small parade that separated the high nobility from the rest of the camp. Henry drove his
horse into a charge, lance lowered, and galloped forward in a headlong fury. Others,
shouting, tried to divert his charge, but the kingÕs horse was evidently possessed by the
same fury that, smoldering for so long, had finally burst into full flame. These riders would
feel the wrath that Sabella, as his kinswoman, had been spared. 
From the opposite end of the parade, the lord and his retinue approached, also at full
gallop. As they passed the last tent of the lower camp, the right leg of the lordÕs mount
caught the guy rope, toppling the tent and throwing lord and horse to the ground with terrific
force. 
ÒUp, you!Ó cried Thiadbold, jerking Liath to her feet. A few men lay moaning or quiet on
the ground around her. The rider, pulled from his horse, was dead. 
She ran up the hill with the others. 
Henry barely had time to pull up his charge as the lordÕs companions scattered in
confusion. The king laid his lance against the manÕs chest. The lordÕs face was hidden by
mail that draped down from the nasal of his gold-trimmed helmet. 
ÒYield!Ó cried the king in a voice that carried across the camp and caused a sudden
stilling hand to press down on the battle. The man did not stir but, one by one, his
companions were slain, disarmed, or forced to surrender. 
ÒLiath! To me!Ó Liath ran over to Hathui and stood panting beside her. ÒEagles donÕt
fight,Ó added Hathui in an undertone. ÒThey witness. But you did well, comrade.Ó 
Henry did not move, simply sat his patient horse with the lance point pressed up under
the mail, hard into the lordÕs vulnerable throat. 
In this way he waited as his Wendish lords hurried to form up around him, the crippled
Villam chief among them. Margrave Judith directed the mopup: prisoners herded into a
group, horses tied up, the fires put outÑalthough two of the ballistae had already collapsed
into ashy heaps. 
As the sun rose, the gates of the fortress yawned open again. A great lady, mounted on a
brown mare whose trappings had as much gold and silver woven into them as a biscopÕs
stole, rode between two deacons dressed in simple white and two holy fraters in drab
brown. Her retinue, all unarmed, crowded behind her. Already a wailing had risen from the
back of their ranks, keening and mourning. 
Henry gestured with his free hand and his men parted to let Lady Svanhilde through his
lines. She approached, was helped to dismount by one of her stewards, and knelt before the
king. 
ÒI beg you, Your Majesty,Ó she said, her voice shaken with grief. ÒLet me see if my son
yet lives. I beg you, grant us your mercy. This was no plan of mine. He is a rash youth, and
has listened too long to the poets singing the music of war.Ó 
ÒYou would have been better served to come before me yesterday, when first we
arrived,Ó said the king, but he withdrew his lance from the body. 
Lady Svanhilde unbuckled the helm and drew it back. Her sudden gasp made clear what
was not yet apparent to all. The young man was dead although no mark of war stained his
body. He had died in the fall from his horse. His mother began to weep, but in a dignified
way. 
ÒThis gives me no pleasure,Ó said the king suddenly in a voice made hoarse by
remembered grief. ÒI, too, have lost a beloved son.Ó 
She pressed a hand to her heart and stared down for a long time on the slack face of the
young man. She was an old woman, frail, with thin bones. When she stood, she needed help
to rise. But pride shone in her face as she regarded the king who sat above her, still
mounted, his holy lance given into the care of Helmut Villam. ÒHe followed Lady Sabella,
although I counseled against it.Ó 
ÒAnd your loyalties?Ó demanded Biscop Constance, who had come forward now that
the fighting was over. 

ÒYour Grace.Ó Lady Svanhilde inclined her head, show ing more respect to the biscop
than she had to the king. ÒWe bow to the regnant.Ó 
Margrave Judith snorted. ÒNow that you are compelled to!Ó 
ÒNecessity breeds hard choices,Ó said the lady without flinching. ÒI will do what I am
commanded, because I must.Ó 
ÒLet her be,Ó said Henry suddenly. ÒFeed us this night, Lady Svanhilde, give us the tithe
I ask for, and we will be on our way in the morning.Ó 
ÒWhat tithe is that?Ó Several Wendish lords gasped to hear a defeated noble question
terms. 
ÒI need men, horses, and armor to retake the city of Gent, which has fallen to the Eika.
This is the tax I set upon you and all the other Varren nobles who followed Sabella. Her fight
cost me much of my strength, which you and your countryfolk will return to me.Ó 
Lady Svanhilde poured the kingÕs wine and served him with her own hands at the feast.
Her children served his children, the two margraves, the biscop, and certain other high
nobles whose rank demanded they be served with equal honor to the rest. Liath, standing
with Hathui behind the kingÕs chair, tried not to listen to the rumbling of her own stomach.
As one of the lucky ones, she would get leftovers from the feast fed to the nobles. 
As usual, Lady Tallia had pride of place beside her uncle, King Henry, but the young
princess merely picked at her food, contenting herself with so little that Liath wondered how
she could keep up her strength. 
ÒAs you see,Ó said Henry to Lady Svanhilde, indicating Tallia, ÒSabellaÕs only child
rides with me.Ó He looked carefully at the three children serving at the feast. One, a girl of
about twelve years of age, had a face pale from crying; as her auntÕs heir, she served the
kingÕs children, Theophanu and Ekkehard. SvanhildeÕs two sons served the other high
nobles. One was a boy of no more than eight, so nervous that a steward hovered at his
elbow, helping him to set platters down without breaking them and to pour without spilling.
The other was a boy somewhat older than Ekkehard, not yet at his majority. His manners
were perfect and his expression grimly serious. 
ÒThese are your remaining children?Ó asked Henry. 
Svanhilde gestured to a steward to bring more wine. ÒI have a son in the monastery my
grandmother founded. This boy, ConstantineÑÓ She indicated the elder of the two boys.
ÒÑis to join the schola at Mainni next spring, when he turns fifteen.Ó 
ÒLet him join my schola instead,Ó said the king. ÒSister Rosvita supervises the young
clerics and the business of the court. She would be glad to attend to his education.Ó 
ÒThat would be a great honor,Ó said the lady without emotion, glancing toward Lady
Tallia. She, like everyone else there, understood that her son was now a hostage for her
good behavior and continued support. 
Hathui cleared her throat, shifting to stretch her back. ÒIndeed,Ó she murmured so that
only Liath could hear, Òthe kingÕs schola has increased vastly in numbers in these last two
months, so many young lords and ladies from Varre have come to join us. They almost
make up for the lack of Princess Sapientia.Ó 
These sudden and occasional outbursts of sarcasm from Hathui never failed to surprise
Liath. But since Hathui always grinned after speaking them, Liath could not be sure whether
she disliked the nobles or merely found them amusing. 
Liath followed the movements of young Constantine as he was brought before the king to
kneel and be presented to Henry. He was even allowed to kiss the kingÕs hand. Would she
have wished for such a life? To be given into the kingÕs schola, where she might study,
write, and read all she wishedÑand be praised for it? If Da hadnÕt diedÑ
But Da had died. Da had been murdered. 
She touched her left shoulder, where, when she wasnÕt riding, she usually draped her
saddlebag. She felt light, almost naked, without it, but she had to leave her gear wrapped in
her cloak in the fortress stables. She hated to leave the bag anywhere, for fear someone
would steal both it and, more importantly, the precious book hidden inside, but sheÕd had

no choice. At least this time one of the Eagles had been left behind to guard all their various
possessions while the others came to stand attendance on the king and remind these
Varren lords of the kingÕs magnificence and his far-reaching strength. 
 Lions stood here, too, ranged along the walls. She caught sight of Thiadbold, by the door
that led out of the great hall to the courtyard and kitchens. He was chatting with one of his
comrades. 
Above the buzz of conversation she heard Margrave Judith address the king. The
imposing margrave terrified Liath even though Liath was certain that Judith could not know
who Liath was and had no reason to connect an anonymous Eagle with her own son. Hugh
was abbot of Firsebarg now, which lay west of here in northern Varingia. He had no reason
to attend the kingÕs progress. At first, she had been afraid that HenryÕs progress through
Varre might take them that far, but it had not because on this journey, Henry did not need to
visit a place loyal to him. 
ÒI will take my party and ride east to my marchlands,Ó Judith was saying. ÒI will raise
what levies I can, Your Majesty, but with the harvest coming, with winter after and then the
spring sowing, it will be next summer before I can march on Gent.Ó 
ÒWhat of this marriage IÕve heard you speak of?Ó asked the king. ÒWill that delay
you?Ó 
She raised her eyebrows. A powerful woman of about the same age as Henry, she had
borne five children, of whom three still lived, and had outlived two husbands. Unlike Lady
Svanhilde, these travails had not weakened her, and she could still ride to battle, although
she had sons and sons-in-law to do that for her now. Despite herself, Liath had to admire
JudithÕs strengthÑand be grateful that strength wasnÕt turned against her. 
ÒA young husband is always eager to prove himself on the field,Ó she said. This
statement produced guffaws and hearty good wishes, to which she replied, in a stately
manner, ÒI see no reason he canÕt fight at Gent, once we reach there. But I must return to
Austra to marry, and I promised I would collect my bridegroom this past spring.Ó Her lips
quirked up, and she looked rather more satisfied at the prospect than Liath thought seemly.
ÒThe delay brought on by SabellaÕs rebellion was unexpected. I hope his kin have not
given up on me.Ó
ÒItÕs hot in here,Ó muttered Liath.
ÒAnd not just because of the conversation,Ó retorted Hawith a grin. ÒGo outside for a
bit. You wonÕt be needed.Ó 
Liath nodded and sidled away from the high table. Pressing back along the wall, she got
caught in an eddy of servants bringing the next course, roasted pheasants arranged on
platters with their feathers opened like a fan behind them. From this vantage she could hear
the conversation at the nearest table, where Sister Rosvita sat with her clerics. ÒI hope
heÕs as handsome as they all say her first husband was,Ó one woman was saying. 
ÒHer first husband wasnÕt handsome, dear Sister Amabi-lia,Ó said the plump young
man sitting beside her. ÒHe was heir to considerable lands and wealth because his mother
outlived her sisters and gave birth to no daughters. It was the margraveÕs famous Alban
concubine who was so handsome. IsnÕt that right, Sister Rosvita? You were with the court
then, werenÕt you?Ó 
ÒLet us keep our minds on Godly subjects, Brother Fortunatus.Ó But after uttering this
pious sentiment, Sister Rosvita smiled. She was famous at court for her great learning and
wise counsel, and for never losing her temper. After two months with the kingÕs progress,
Liath could not help but admire her from afarÑespecially having heard Ivar sing her praises
so often in HeartÕs Rest. ÒI canÕt recall his name now, but in truth, he was memorably
beautiful, the kind of face one never forgets.Ó 
ÒHigh praise from you, Sister Rosvita,Ó said the one called Amabilia. ÒEven if you do
remember everything.Ó 
The stream of platters and pheasants passed. Liath hurried on and made it to the door. 
ÒThiadbold.Ó She stopped beside the red-haired Lion. ÒWhat of the man this morning,

whose cheek was cut so horribly? Will he live?Ó 
ÒHeÕll live, though he wonÕt be charming any of the women with his handsome face,
alas for him.Ó 
ÒWill he still be able to serve as a Lion? What will happen to him if he canÕt?Ó She
knew all too well what it meant to have neither kin nor home. 
ÒA Lion who is unfit to serve because of a wound in battle can expect a handsome
reward from the king, a plot of land in the marchcountry or fenland.Ó 
ÒArenÕt those dangerous and difficult places to farm?Ó 
 ÒIn some ways, but youÕre free of service to the lordlings who demand tithes and labor.
The king only demands service from you to man the marchcountry watchforts. Even a man
as scarred as poor Johannes will be can find a wife if he has a plot of land to pass on to
their daughters. ThereÕs always a strong woman to be found, a younger sister, perhaps,
whoÕd like to forge out on her own and will overlook an unsightly scar.Ó He hesitated, then
touched her, briefly, on the elbow. ÒBut mind, Eagle, we Lions will remember that you came
to his aid.Ó 
Behind them, at the table, the king rose and lifted his cup, commanding silence. ÒIn the
morning we march east, toward Wendar,Ó the king announced. Several of the younger lords
cheered, happy at the prospect of marching nearer to those lands where fighting might be
expected. ÒBut let us not rejoice in a hall of mourning. Let us remember the lesson of St.
Katina.Ó 
Since St. Katina had been tormented by visions of great troubles lying in wait for her
village in the same way a beast of the forest lies in wait for an innocent fawn, Liath
wondered that King Henry would want to remind his retinue of her story. But this was her
feast day, and her visions had proved truthful. 
Ò ÔDo not let fear draw a veil across your sight,Õ Ò said Biscop Constance. 
Ò ÔDo not forget that which troubles you.ÕÒ The king stared past his cup toward a vision
only he could see. ÒIt has been sixty-seven days since I learned of the death ofÑÓ Here he
faltered. Never could he bring himself to say the name out loud. Better that he never do so,
thought Liath bitterly, so as not to bring pain blooming fresh out of her own heart. ÒSince the
Dragons fell at Gent.Ó 
Certain of the young lords in the back of the hall called out a toast to the bravery of the
fabled Dragons. Some of them, no doubt, had hopes that Henry would name a new captain
and form a new troop of Dragons, but he had not once spoken of such a thing in LiathÕs
hearing. They drank, toasting the dead Dragons, but Henry only sipped at his wine. 
Villam changed the subject at once, discussing the road back. They would ride southeast
until they linked up with Hellweg, the Clear Way, that began in easternmost Ar, then cut
through northwestern Fesse and from there into the heartland of Saony. 
ÒIt is too late to hope to reach Quedlinhame for Matthiasmass,Ó the king said, Òfor the
harvest will be over. But we may reach there in time to celebrate the Feast of St. Valentinus
with my mother and sister.Ó 
Quedlinhame. WasnÕt that where Ivar had been sent? Liath glanced toward Sister
Rosvita, who was smiling at some comment made by Sister Amabilia. Thinking of Ivar made
her think of Hanna. Where was Hanna now? How did her journey prosper, she and
Wolfhere? Once Hanna had spoken of Darre as if it were a city built from a poetÕs song, all
breath and no substance. Now Hanna would see it herself. 
ÒThen,Ó the king was saying, Òwe will swing south, to hunt.Ó 
ÒWhat are we hunting?Ó asked Villam. 
ÒTroops and supplies,Ó said King Henry grimly. ÒIf not for this year, then for the next.Ó
The thought of Gent was never far from his mind. 
3
Anna had to walk farther into the forest than she ever had before in order to find anything

to harvest. The woods nearest to Steleshame had been picked clean by the refugees from
Gent. Matthias didnÕt like her to go out into the woods alone, especially as the border of the
forest itself steadily shrank back as refugees culled what they could in berries and roots, let
their livestock graze away the undergrowth, and then cut down the trees themselves for
shelter and fuel. 
She and Matthias had survived in Gent for a long time, all alone. Surely she could survive
a few expeditions into the forest, where the worst predators were wolves and bearsÑif any
still roamed here now that the forest had been hunted clean by the foresters who guarded
the pathways against Eika scouts and who supplied Mistress Gisela and the refugees in
Steleshame with fresh meat. 
But there was not enough for everyone. There was never enough for everyone. 
She used a stick to beat a pathway through the leaves and undergrowth. Burrs stuck to
her skirts. Sharp thistles pricked her feet. She had a welt on one cheek and a tear in her
shawl where it had gotten caught on a dead branch. Fearful of losing her direction, she
scored a line in the trees she passed so she could follow this trail back; she and Matthias
had plenty of knives, four of which they had so far traded for canvas and a steady supply of
eggs. But stopping to score every third or fourth tree made slow goingÑand her feet hurt
from stones and stickers. 
Ahead, a dense thicket glistened with berries, bright red balls no bigger around than the
tip of her little finger. She bit into one carefully; its sour bite made her wince, and a sharp
tang burned her tongue. But she picked every last one nevertheless, dropping them into the
pouch she had brought along. Maybe they were poison, but certain wise-women in the camp
knew which could be eaten raw, which eaten if cooked, which could be used for dye, and
which were simply useless. Scrambling through the thicket looking for more of the berries,
she found the real treasure. A tree had fallen and left space and enough sun for a garden of
wild onions. 
She got down on hands and knees to dig them up. Matthias would be so proud of her. 
When the twig snapped, old reflexes kept her still. She dared not even raise her head.
Only that stillness saved her. They walked past on the other side of the thicket, and when
they whispered, one to the other, she knew by the whispery flute of their voices and the harsh
unintelligible words that Eika stalked these woods. Ai, Lady. Were they hunting for
Steleshame? Would they never let the refugees rest? Would they find her? She knew what
they did to children. But she kept her hands buried in the dirt, the smell of onions sharp in her
nostrils, and prayed to the Lord and Lady, lips forming unspoken words. If she could only
stay still, and hidden, they would pass by without seeing her. 
Then she could run back and warn MatthiasÑand all the others. 
She heard the snick, like a nail flicking against a kettle, heard a hiss of air and then a
sudden grunt. A howl of rage pierced the air not ten paces from her, at her back. She dared
not move. She stifled a sob, grasping onions and dirt in her hands as, behind her, foresters
converged on the Eika and a bitter fight ensued. 
¡°DonÕt runÓ Matthias had always counseled her. ¡°If you run, theyÕll see you.Ó And
anyway, if she ran, sheÕd probably never find this trove of onions again. 
A man shrieked. Branches snapped and splintered in a wave of sound, and a heavy
weight hit the ground so hard and close behind her that she felt the shudder through her
knees. An arrow thunked into wood. Metal rang, meeting another blade. A man shouted a
warning. Many feet crashed through the undergrowth and someone cursed. 
Then came many voices raised at once, running feet, undergrowth torn and broken, and a
drumming like many blows thrown down upon the earthÑor on some object. Silence. 
She dared not raise her head. A thin liquid puddled by her left hand, lapping over and
wetting her little finger. It stung like the kiss of a bee. Moving her head a bare fraction, she
risked a glance back over her shoulder. 
An outflung hand reached for her. Eyes stared at her, and lips pulled back from sharp
teeth, a mouth opened wide in a last grimace. Every part of her that was not her actual

physical body bolted up and fled, screaming in terrorÑbut her training held. She did not
move, and after an instant of such terror that her stomach burned, she realized the Eika had
fallen, dead, almost into her hiding place. Farther away, she heard foresters talking. ÒI only
saw two.Ó
ÒThey scout in pairs.Ó
ÒWhereÕs their dogs?Ó 
ÒAi, Lord, have you ever seen their dogs, lad? Scout with them dogs and you tell
everyone where youÕre passing. They never scout with their dogs, and itÕs just as well for
us. I swear the dogs are harder to kill than the damned savages.Ó 
ÒWhat do we do with these two, now?Ó
ÒLeave them be and let the maggots and flies have them, if such creatures can even eat
Eika.Ó 
Shuddering, she picked herself up, wiping her fingers clean of the greenish liquid that had
oozed from the wound where an arrow had embedded itself in the EikaÕs throat. She had
harvesting to do. The onions came up easily, but she trembled as she worked, even
knowing the Eika couldnÕt hurt her now. ÒHey there! WhatÕs this?Ó
Men thrashed through the undergrowth and she glanced up to see two of them hacking at
the thicket, then peering over the broken and crushed leaves, at her. 
ÒAi, I know you,Ó said one of the foresters. ÒYouÕre the child what came out of Gent
early summer.Ó He didnÕt ask what she was doing; he didnÕt need to. ÒGodÕs blood, but
you came close to having your throat slit, lass. YouÕd better get back to town.Ó He waved
his companion away. ÒWhat have you found there, child?Ó 
ÒOnions,Ó she said, suddenly afraid he would take them away from her. 
But he merely nodded, pulled a colored stick from his belt, and stuck it beside the tree to
mark the find. ÒDonÕt take them all, now. ThatÕs the problem with you folk, you take
everything and donÕt leave anything to go to seed for next year. You must husband what you
find, just as a farmer saves seed to sow and doesnÕt use it all for bread.Ó 
She stared at him, waiting for him to move off, and he sighed and stepped back. ÒNay,
child, IÕll take nothing from you. WeÕre better off who live out here than you poor orphans
nearby the town. That Gisela, sheÕs a cunning householder and would indenture you all if
she had room for it. Go on, then.Ó 
She jumped up and scuttled away, clutching the precious onions against her. After she
could no longer see the foresters, she stopped to make a fold in her skirt, laying the onions
in the fold and tucking the fabric up under her belt, a makeshift pouch for her new treasure.
She peered up through leaves at the sky. It was hot, if not unpleasant, but well past
noontideÑtime to be heading back so that she would not be caught out after dark. She
arranged her shawl on her back to drape over one shoulder and around the opposite hip.
With a practiced backward motion she filled this sling with firewood: anything loose, dry, and
not too heavy for her to carry. 
Thus laden, she arrived back at camp in the late afternoon. She drew her sling of
firewood over the lump in her skirt, hiding her trove of onions as she cut across the camp on
her way to the tannery. Once this stretch of ground had also been woodland, harvested
under the supervision of Gisela, mistress of the holding of Steleshame which sat on the rise
above. Now Anna saw only stumps where there had once been scrub forest. Goats had
eaten the last of the greenery except in the carefully fenced and hoarded vegetable patches.
All the scattered seeds had long since been eaten by chickens and geese, and any least
stick or twig had gone to cookfires. When the rains fell, mud washed every pathway into a
river of filth that wound through the maze of shelters and huts. 
Here, at Steleshame, many of the refugees from Gent had encamped last spring, washed
up like sticks and leaves after a flood. News of so many children had excited the concern or
greed of folk living west of the holding, and about a third of the orphans had been taken
away to towns and villages, some to good situations, some, no doubt, to bad. 
But hundreds remained behind. Most had nowhere else to go. Some refused to leave the

vicinity of Gent, while others were simply too weak to attempt to walk to more distant
settlements. Not even Mistress GiselaÕs displeasure could force them to move on. 
Into this camp Anna and Matthias had wandered just after midsummer. Matthias had
been lucky to trade intelligence about Gent for employment at the tanning works, which lay
outside the Steleshame palisade next to the sprawling refugee encampment. 
Now as late summer heat became stifling, a sickness afflicted the weakest in camp.
Certain wisewomen called it a flux, a curse brought on by the enemyÕs swarm of malevolent
helpers. Others called it a spell called down on them by the Eika enchanter, while yet others
blamed the presence of maleficiÑevil sorcerersÑhidden in their own camp. Every day a few
parties of desperate souls trickled away, seeking their fortune elsewhere. Yet for every
person who left, another would likely wander into the camp a day or week later telling tales of
Eika atrocities in some other village within reach of the Veser River. 
At the tannery, where Anna and Matthias slept in a crude shelter strung up behind the
drying sheds, the sickness had not yet taken its toll. But they had cider and bread as well as
eggs to eat every day, and Anna supposed the stink of the tannery drove away evil spirits. 
As she scurried through camp, she prayed the pungent smell of earth and onions would
not give away her secret good fortune. She was not big enough to fight off any but a smaller
child, if it came to that. 
ÒSettle down, now, children. Sit down. Sit down. My voice isnÕt what it used to be, alas,
but if you will all be quiet, I will tell you the tale of Helen.Ó 
Anna paused despite knowing she ought to hurry right back to Matthias. With the aid of a
stout walking stick, an old man shuffled forward and laboriously seated himself on a stool set
down behind him by a girl. Many young children crowded Ôround with gaunt faces upturned.
She recognized him, just as she recognized the children: They, too, were refugees from
Gent, the only ones who had escaped the Eika attack. No older children sat here; like
Matthias, they had taken on the responsibilities of adults or been adopted by farmers to the
west. They worked the tanneries and the armories, assisted the blacksmiths, chopped and
hauled wood, built huts, broke virgin forestland to the plow, sowed and tended fields, and
hauled water from the stream. It was children AnnaÕs age or younger who were set to watch
over the very smallest ones, even those toddling babies whose nursing mothers had to
spend all of their day working to make food and shelter. 
The old man had been an honored guest at the mayorÕs palace in Gent; he was a poet,
so he said, accustomed to sing before nobles, Yet if this were true, why hadnÕt the mayor of
Gent taken him along when he had traded some part of the wealth he had salvaged from
Gent to Mistress Gisela in exchange for her allowing him to set up housekeeping within the
palisade wall of Steleshame? The old man had been left behind to fend for himself. Too
crippled to work, he told tales in the hope of gaining a pittance of bread or the dregs from a
cup of cider. 
He cleared his throat to begin. His voice was far more robust than his elderly frame. 
Ò ÔThis is a tale of war and a woman. Fated to be an exile not once but twice, first from
her beloved Lassadaemon and then from her second home, red-gated Ilios, she suffered
the wrath of cruel Mok, the majestic Queen of Heaven, and labored hard under the yoke of
that great QueenÕs fury. High Heaven willed that she walk the long path of adventure. But in
the end she succeeded in founding her city, and thus in time out of these tribulations grew
the high walls and noble empire of Dariya.Õ Ò 
The poet hesitated, seeing his audience grow restless, then began againÑthis time
without the stiff cadence that made the opening hard to follow. ÒHelen was heir to the throne
of Lassadaemon. She had just come into her inheritance when usurpers arrived. Ai, ruthless
Mernon and his brother Menlos marched with their terrible armies into the peaceful land and
forced poor Helen to marry that foul chieftain, Menlos.Ó 
ÒWere they like the Eika?Ó demanded a child. 
ÒOh, worse! Far worse! They came out of the tribe of Dorias, whose women consorted
with the vile Bwrmen.Ó 

 He coughed and surveyed the crowd, seeing that he had their attention. Anna liked the
story much better told this way. ÒThey made Helen a prisoner in her own palace while
Mernon went off to conquerÑwell, never mind that. So Helen escaped and with her faithful
servants fled to the sea, where they took ship. They set sail for Ilios, where her motherÕs
motherÕs kin had settled many years before and built a fine, grand city with red gates and
golden towers under the protection of bright Somorhas. But Mernon and Menlos prayed to
cruel Mok, the pitiless Queen of Heaven, and since she was jealous of beautiful Somorhas,
she cajoled her brother Sujandan, the God of the Sea, into sending storms to sink HelenÕs
ship. ÔHow quickly night came, covering the sun! How the winds howled around them! How
the waves rose and fell, first smothering the bow of the ship, then sinking so low that the very
bottom of the sea was exposed!Õ Ò
Beyond the old manÕs shoulder Anna could see the palisade and heavy gates of
Steleshame proper. The gates were always shut, even during the day. Some in the camp
grumbled that it was more to keep out the refugees than to guard against an Eika attack, for
everyone in camp knew that within Steleshame they ate beans and bread every day, even
the servants. Now, one of the gates to this haven of plenty opened, and five riders appeared.
They rode out on the southeast track, along which part of the refugeeÕs settlement had
sprawled. 
The poetÕs storyÑeven as the storm-tossed ship ran aground on an island filled with
monstersÑcould not compete with such an unusual event. Anna followed the others as they
ran to line the road, hoping for news. 
ÒWhere are you going?Ó children shouted to the riders as they passed through the
camp. ÒAre you leaving?Ó 
ÒNay,Ó shouted back a young woman outfitted in a boiled leather coat for armor, with a
short spear braced against her stirrup and two long knives stuck in her belt. ÒWeÕre riding
to the stronghold of Duchess Rotrudis, down to Osterburg where itÕs said she holds court at
Matthiasmass.Ó 
ÒWill she come to rescue us?Ó demanded several children at once. 
The other riders had gone on, but the young woman lingered, eyeing the crowd of children
with a frown, shaking her head all the while. ÒI donÕt know what sheÕll do. But we must ask
for help. More Eika scouts are sighted every day. More villages are burned. Their circle is
growing wider. Soon they will engulf all of us. There are too many people here already.
Mistress Gisela canÕt support them all.Ó 
Her comrades called to her and she urged her horse forward, leaving the camp behind. 
Most of the children wandered back to the old poet and told him what the rider had said. 
He snorted. ÒAs if Mistress Gisela supports any but her own kin and servants, and those
with coin to pay for food and protection. Alas that there is no biscop here to feed the poor.Ó
Anna noticed all at once how thin he was. A film of white half-covered his left eye, and his
hands had a constant small tremor. 
ÒWho is Duchess Rotrudis?Ó she asked. 
Trained as both listener and singer, he found her in the crowd and nodded toward her,
acknowledging her question. ÒRotrudis is duchess of Saony. She is the younger sister of
King Henry. Alas that the Dragons fell. That was a terrible day.Ó 
ÒWhy hasnÕt the king come to rescue us?Ó asked a boy. 
ÒNay, lad, you must recall that the world is a wide place and filled with danger. I have
traveled over its many roads and paths. It takes months to get news from one place to
another.Ó Seeing their expressions shift from hope to fear, he hurried on. ÒBut I have no
doubt King Henry knows of the fall of Gent and mourns it.Ó 
ÒThen why doesnÕt he come?Ó 
He only shrugged. ÒThe king may be anywhere. He may be marching on his way here
now. How can we know?Ó 
ÒHave you ever seen the king?Ó Anna asked. 
He was surprised and perhaps taken aback by her question. ÒI have not,Ó he answered,

voice shaking and cheeks flushed. ÒBut I have sung before his son, the one who was
captain of the Dragons.Ó 
ÒTell us more of the story,Ó said a child. 
ÒTell us something that happened to you, friend,Ó said Anna suddenly, knowing she
ought to return to the tannery but not quite able to tear herself away. 
ÒSomething that happened to me,Ó he murmured. 
ÒYes! Yes!Ó cried the other children. 
ÒYou donÕt want to hear more of the lay of Helen?Ó 
ÒDid it happen to you?Ó asked Anna. ÒWere you on the ship?Ó 
ÒWhy, no, child,Ó he said, half chuckling. ÒIt happened so long ago thatÑÓ 
ÒYou were a child then?Ó 
ÒNay, child. It happened long before Daisan received the Holy Word of God and
preached the truth of the Unities, bringing Light to the Darkness. It happened long, long ago,
before even the old stone walls you see in Steleshame were built.Ó 
ÒIÕve never been inside Steleshame,Ó Anna pointed out. ÒAnd if it happened so long
ago, how do you know itÕs true?Ó 
ÒBecause it has been passed down from poet to poet, line for line, even written down by
the ancient scribes so it would be remembered.Ó Then he smiled softly. Amazingly, he still
had most of his teeth, but perhaps a poet took better care of his mouth, knowing that his
fortune rested there and in what he could recall from his mind. ÒBut IÕll tell you a story that
happened to me when I was a young man. Ai, Lady! Have you ever heard of the Alfar
Mountains? Can you imagine, you children, mountains that are so high that they caress the
heavens? That snow lies thick upon them even on the hottest summerÕs day? These
mountains you must cross if you wish to travel south from the kingdom of Wendar into the
kingdom of Aosta. In Aosta you will find the holy city of Darre. That is where the skopos
resides, she who is Mother over the Holy Church.Ó 
ÒIf the mountains are so high,Ó asked Anna, Òthen how can you get over them?Ó 
ÒHush, now,Ó he said querulously. ÒLet us proceed with no more questions. There are
only a few paths over the mountains. So high do these tracks rise along the rugged ground
that a man can reach up and touch the stars themselves at nightfall. But every step is
dangerous. No matter how clear at dawn, each day may turn into one of blinding
stormÑeven at midsummer, for summer is the only season when one may cross the
mountains. 
ÒYet some few attempt the crossing late in the season. Some few, as I did, try it even as
late as the month of Octumbre. My need was greatÑÓ He raised a hand, forestalling a
question. ÒIt had to do with a woman. You need ask no more than that! I was warned
against attempting the crossing, but I was a rash youth. I thought I could do anything. And
indeed, as I climbed, the weather held fair and I had no trouble...Ó 
He leaned forward, his voice dropping to a whisper that still carried easily over the crowd.
Every child hushed and leaned forward, mirroring him. ÒThe blizzard hit without warning. It
was the very middle of day, a fine day, a warm day, and between one footstep and the next I
was engulfed in storm. I saw nothing but howling white wind before my eyes. The cold
pierced me like a sword, and I staggered and fell to my knees. 
ÒBut I would not give up! Nay, not when she awaited me in distant Darre. I staggered
forward, crawled when I could no longer walk, and yet the storm still raged about me. The
cold blinded me, and I could not feel my feet. I stumbled, fell, and tumbled down a slope to
my death.Ó 
Here he paused again. Anna edged forward, hand tight over the bulge of onions. No one
spoke. 
ÒBut alas, the fall hadnÕt killed me. I tried to open my swollen eyes. As I groped forward,
I felt grass under my hands. A stream ran not a manÕs length from my body, and there I
crawled and drank my fill of its clear water. I splashed it on my face and slowly I could see
again. Above me, beyond the steep slope down which I had fallen, the storm still raged. A

few flakes of snow drifted down on the breeze to wet my face. But in the vale it was as warm
as springtime, with violets, and trees in bloom.Ó 
ÒWhere were you?Ó Anna demanded, unable to keep still. 
But now memory made him look down. His old shoulders hunched, and he sighed heavily,
as if sorry to have remembered this tale. ÒI never knew. Truly, it was a miracle I did not die
that day. There was a ring of trees, mostly birch, and a little grassy meadow, but beyond that
I never managed to go. A hut stood at the edge of the meadow. There I slept and recovered
my strength. Every morning I would find food and drink outside the door, sweet bread, strong
cider, a stew of beans, tart apples. But no matter how I tried to stay awake, I never could. I
never saw what creature brought me the food. When I was strong enough, I knew it was time
to leave, so I went.Ó 
ÒDidnÕt you ever find it again?Ó asked Anna. Other children nodded their heads,
marveling at the thought of an enchanted place where food appeared miraculously each
morning. 
ÒNay, though I traveled three times more over that pass. I searched, but the way was
closed to me. Now I wonder sometimes if it was only a dream.Ó 
ÒCould we take him in?Ó she demanded at dusk as she and Matthias feasted privately
on onion stew and roasted eggs. ÒHeÕs just a frail old man. He canÕt eat much, and he
hasnÕt anyone else to take care of him. ThereÕs room for him to sleep here.Ó With the flap
pulled down snug to protect them from wind and rain, their little lean-to did indeed have
room for one more to sleepÑjust barely. 
ÒBut what good would he be to us, Anna?Ó Matthias had gulped down his portion more
like a dog than a boy, eating the egg first and the stew after. Now he wiped the sides of the
blackened pot clean with a dry hunk of bread heÕd saved from his midday meal. 
ÒWe werenÕt any good to Papa Otto!Ó she retorted. ÒOh, Matthias, he knows the most
wonderful stories.Ó 
ÒBut theyÕre not true.Ó Matthias licked the last crumbs off his lips and eyed the old pot
with longing, wishing for more. Then he took Anna by the wrist and shook her. ÒTheyÕre just
tales he made up. He as good as admitted it was a dreamÑif the whole thing even
happened at all! ThatÕs how storytellers make their stories sound true, by pretending it
happened to them.Ó He shook his head, grimacing, and let her go. ÒBut you may as well
bring the old man here to us, if heÕs no other place to sleep. ItÕs true enough that Papa
Otto and the other slaves in Gent helped us for no return. We should help others as we can.
And anyway, if you have him to care for, maybe you wonÕt go wandering out into the woods
and get yourself slaughtered by Eika!Ó 
She frowned. ÒHow do you know his stories arenÕt true? You never saw such things or
traveled so far.Ó 
ÒMountains high enough that their peaks touch the sky! Snow all the year round! Do you
believe that?Ó 
ÒWhy shouldnÕt I believe? All weÕve ever seen is GentÑand now Steleshame and a bit
of forest.Ó She licked the last spot of egg from her lips. ÒI bet thereÕs all kinds of strange
places just as fantastic as the stories the poet tells. YouÕll see. IÕll bring him here tomorrow.
I bet heÕs been to places no one here has ever heard of. Poets have to do that, donÕt they?
Maybe he knows what the Eika lands look like. Maybe heÕs seen the sea that Helen sailed
across. Maybe heÕs really traveled across the great mountains!Ó 
Matthias only snorted and, as the last daylight faded, rolled up in his blanket. Exhausted
by his dayÕs labor hauling ashes and water and lime, he quickly fell asleep. 
Anna snuggled up against him, but she could not go to sleep as easily. Instead, she
closed her eyes and dreamed of the wide world, of a place far from the filth of the camp and
the lurking shadows of the Eika. 
 

II IN THE SHADOW OF THE MOUNTAINS 
1
The hawk spiraled far above, a speck against the three mountain peaks that dominated
the view. It sank, then caught an updraft and rose, wings outstretched, into the depthless
blue of the sky. Here, where human paths arched closest to the vast and impenetrable
mystery of the heavens, Hanna could believe that anything was possible. She could believe
that the distant bird, hovering high overhead, was no hawk at all but a man or woman
wearing a birdÕs shapeÑor else that it was a spirit, an angel disguised in plain feathers,
surveying earth from the heights. Or perhaps it was only a hawk, hunting for its supper. 
A thin crest of breeze touched her ears, and she thought she heard the birdÕs harsh call;
its slow spiral did not alter. As she waited, the heavens shaded from the vivid blue of
afternoon into the intense blue-gray of impending twilight. Shadow crept up the stark white
peaks as the sun sank in the western sky. 
Where had Wolfhere gone, and why was he taking so long to return? 
The path wound farther up into heather and gorse, sidetracked by heaps of sharp
boulders and the high shoulder of a cliff face. Beyond, the dirt track lost itself in a narrow
defile. Wolfhere had bade her wait here while he walked on ahead, disappearing through
the narrow gate of stone and crumbling cliff into the vale that lay beyond. Through the gap
Hanna saw the rippling tops of trees, suggesting a cleft of land that ran lush with spring-fed
plants. She had seen other such valleys in these mountains, sudden gorges and startlingly
green vales half hidden by the jagged landscape. Beneath the scent of gorse she smelled
cookfires and a distant whiff of the forge. 
Why had Wolfhere wanted her to accompany him this far, and no farther? 
¡°Stay here and watch,Ó he had said. ÒBut on no account follow me and let no other
follow me.Ó 
What was he hiding? What other did he expect to follow them up here, on this goat track
he called a path? She turned to look back the way they had come. At first she thought they 
had been following a goat track along the heights towering above the ancient paved road
that marked St. Barnaria Pass. But no goatÕs track sported a thin trail of wagon wheels,
although how a wagon could possibly be dragged up here was more than she could
imagine. 
It was very strange. 
A few steps back, an outcropping gave her a good view down onto the pass below. The
road had been built during the old Dariyan Empire by their astoundingly clever engineers. In
the hundreds of years since then, not even winter storms had washed it away, although many
of its stones were cracked or upturned by the weight of snow, the thawing power of ice, or
the simple strength of obstinate grass. Its resilience astonished her. 
The hawk wafted lazily above. She blinked back tears as her gaze caught the edge of the
sinking sun. Specks swam before her eyes; then she realized that two more birds had
joined the first. 
Her neck hurt from staring upward for so long, but in her seventeen or so years of life she
had never imagined there might be a place like this. She knew the sea and the marsh, rivers
and hills and the dark mat of forest. She had now seen the kingÕs court and the glittering
parade of nobles on his progress. She had seen the Eika raiders and their fearsome dogs
so close she could have spit on them. But to see such mountains as these! The peaks were
themselves presences, towering creatures hunched in sleep, their shoulders and bowed
heads covered by drifts of snow deeper than anything Hanna had ever seen. Last winter she
would have laughed at any poor soul foolish enough to suggest that she, Hanna, daughter of
the innkeepers Birta and Hansal, would herself journey across those mountains wearing the
badge of an Eagle. Last winter her mother and father had arranged for her betrothal to
young Johan, freeholder and farmer, a man of simple tastes and no curiosity, his gaze fixed

on the earth. 
Now, as summer flowers bloomed alongside the high mountain pass, sheÑmercifully
unbetrothedÑwas on her way south across the Alfar Mountains, an agent of the king on an
important errand to the skopos herself. Truly, her life had taken a sudden and surprising turn.
How distant HeartÕs Rest seemed now! 
From the outcropping she could see down to the road and, farther back, partially hidden
by the thrusting shoulder of a ridge, the hostel where their party had halted for the night. The
stone buildings nestled into the ridgeÕs spine. Under the protection of the skopos, the
hostel was run by monks from the Order of St. Servitius. According to Wolfhere, those
monks stayed up in these inhospitable heights through the winter. A merchant in their party
had been snowed in one terrible winter, or so he claimed, and he had regaled the party with
a horrific story of fire salamanders, cannibalism, and avenging spirits. The story sounded so
true when he told it, but Wolfhere had stood in the shadows of the campfire that night,
shaking his head and frowning. She had seen heaps of snow in shadowed verges beside
the road and huge fields of ice and snow on the slopes above, giving credence to the tale,
but she had also seen flowers aplenty, pale blue, butter yellow, scarlet and orange, scattered
across tough grass and ground-clinging shrubs. She had seen sky so deep a blue that it
shaded into violet as if brushed with a stain of beet juice. She laughed at herself. Their party
included a bard journeying to Darre to make his fortune, and he never used such prosaic
images as beet juice to describe the sky. 
No one traveled the mountains alone, not even KingÕs Eagles. They had found a party
assembling in the city of Genevie and joined it. Now they counted among their companions
the bard, seven fraters, a high and mighty presbyter returning to the skopos with an
important cartulary and his train of clerics and servants, and a motley assortment of
merchants, wagons, and slavesÑand the two prisoners she and Wolfhere and ten of King
HenryÕs Lions escorted to the palace of the skopos in Darre. 
A breeze skirled down from the heights, and the sun slid behind a low-lying ridge. The
moonÕs pale disk gleamed softly against the darkening sky. Dusk. She shuddered. 
Where was Wolfhere? How was she to make her way back down that path in darkness?
What if he had fallen and hurt himself? 
A bird called. She had a sudden, awful feeling of being watched. 
She spun and there, perched on a stub of rock jutting out from the cliffside that demarked
one side of the narrow defile, sat a hawk. She let out a nervous chuckle and fanned herself,
abruptly flushed though the day was cooling fast. The hawk did not stir. Uncanny, with eyes
as dark as amber, it stared unblinking at her until she felt chills run up her back. 
And there was something else...a suggestion of something hovering just where the path
dipped out of sight. Something there and yet not there, a figure glimpsed out of the corner of
her eye, a pale woman creature whose skin had the color and texture of water. But when she
looked directly, she saw nothing, only shadows sliding along the rock like the ripple of water
over pebbles in a stream. 
The hawk launched itself up in a flurry of wings. She ducked instinctively and heard a
gasp. Was it her own or someone elseÕs, someone hidden? 
The hawk was gone. A light bobbed into view. Wolfhere, whistling, came up the path
around the shoulder of the cliff face. 
ÒLady Above!Ó she swore. ÒI thought you werenÕt coming back.Ó 
He stopped and looked around, then cocked an eyebrow and resumed walking past her
and down the path toward the hostel. To keep in the light she had to hurry after; the moon
was not yet half full and did not give enough illumination for her to negotiate the hillside
track. 
ÒWhere did you get that lantern?Ó she demanded, angry that she had waited for so long
but would evidently get no explanation. 
ÒAh,Ó he said, hoisting the lantern a little higher. 
He did not intend to answer her. Fuming, she followed him down the path, stumbling now

and again over a rock or a thick tuft of grass grown untimely in the middle of the track. By
now the hostel appeared below them only as a dark encrustation against the blacker ridge;
a single lantern burned at the enclosureÕs gateway. So did a light burn all night, every night,
a beacon for any lost traveler caught out and struggling toward safe haven just as after the
bodyÕs death the soul struggles upward to the Chamber of LightÑor so the bard had said,
thinking it a poetical conceit. 
ÒWhere did you go?Ó Hanna asked, not expecting an answer. Wolfhere gave her none.
She watched his back, his confident walk, the gray-silver gleam of his hair in the twilight, his
ancient, seamed hand steady on the lanternÕs handle. 
Hanna did not distrust Wolfhere, but neither did she precisely trust him. He kept his
secrets close by him, for secrets he clearly had. Starting with the one he had never
answered: How had he come so fortuitously this past spring to the inn at HeartÕs Rest just
in time to save her dear friend Liath from slavery? He had freed Liath and taken her away
from the village, made her a KingÕs Eagle like himself. Like a leaf drawn in the wake of a
boat, Hanna had been dragged along also. She, too, had been made a KingÕs Eagle, had
left the village of her birth to begin these great adventures. Wolfhere was not a man of whom
one asked questions lightly, but Hanna was determined to see Liath remain safe. So she
had asked questions, which was more than Liath was willing to do. How had he known Liath
was in HeartÕs Rest and in danger? From what was he protecting her? Wolfhere had never
taken offense at those questions; of course, he had never answered them either. 
They left the narrow defile and mysterious valley behind and, soon enough, the hillside
path deposited them on the smooth stone of the old Dariyan road a few hundred paces from
the enclosureÕs gateway. Stars bloomed above, a sudden harvest of bright flowers; ahead,
a lantern flared as it swung back and forth in the breeze. 
On a bench beside the gateway sat a monk, brown-robed, hooded, and silent. The
lantern hung from a post, illuminating him in a pool of soft light. He lifted a
weather-roughened hand at their approach and without speaking opened the gate to let
them in. Because she was a woman and thus could not be admitted to the innermost
cloister, she had seen few of the monks. Of those, only the genial cellarerÑthe monk in
charge of provisionsÑand the guest-master seemed willing, or permitted, to speak to
visitors. Many monks and nuns took a vow of silence, of course. The brothers at SheepÕs
Head were rumored never to speak at all once they had passed out of the novitiate,
communicating only with hand signs. 
Wolfhere opened his lantern and blew out its flame. Together, they trudged in pale
moonlight past the ripe-smelling dung heap. A fence scraped her thigh and she smelled the
rich tang of plants as they walked alongside the garden. Beyond this enclosure stood half a
dozen squat beehives. Finally, they came in among the outbuildings: stables, kitchen,
bakery, kiln, and forgeÑdark and empty at this hour except for a single form sitting beside
the dull red coals, tending the fire. The hostel of the monks of St. Servitius was famous,
Wolfhere had told her, not just because some of them lived here the winter through, despite
snow and ice and bitter cold, but also because they kept a blacksmith. 
As they came up to the guest house, a young monk, unhooded, hurried out the door and
away to the right, toward the infirmary. His reddish-pale hair and coltish gait reminded
Hanna abruptly and painfully of her milk brother Ivar. 
Was he well? Had he forgiven her for choosing to stay with Liath rather than go with him? 
Wolfhere sighed suddenly and squared his shoulders. Shaken out of her thoughts, Hanna
heard shrill voices from the entryway. They mounted the wood steps into the entry chamber,
now lit by four candles, and right into the middle of an argument. 
2
¡°This guest house is reserved,Ó said a sallow man Hanna immediately identified as the
insufferable manservant to the presbyter, Òfor those who arrive on horseback. It is quite

impossible that these common soldiers be stationed here.Ó 
ÒBut the prisonersÑÓ This objection, raised by the inoffensive guest-master, was quelled
at once by the presbyter himself, who now stepped out of the shadows. 
ÒI will not let my rest be disturbed by their shuffling and muttering,Ó said the presbyter,
his Wendish marred by a thick accent. He had a thin, aristocratic voice, fully as imperious as
that of the nobles she had observed during her weeks attending King HenryÕs progress.
But of course he, too, was a man of noble birth; with a perpetually curled-down lip, soft, white
hands, and the imposingly portly demeanor of a man who feasts more days than not, one
could never have mistaken him for a farmer or a hard-working craftsman. ÒThe two guards
who are standing watch over the prisoners must be moved. If that means the prisoners must
be moved, so be it.Ó 
Wolfhere responded blandly. ÒAre you suggesting Biscop Antonia and Brother Heribert
be quartered in the stables with the servants?Ó 
The presbyterÕs eyes flared, and he looked mightily irritated, as if he suspected
Wolfhere of baiting him. ÒI am suggesting, Eagle, that you and those you are responsible
for do not disturb my rest.Ó 
ÒYour rest is of supreme importance to me, Your Honor,Ó said Wolfhere with no
apparent irony, Òbut I swore to King Henry of Wendar and Varre that I would deliver Biscop
Antonia and her cleric to the palace of the skopos, Her Holiness dementia. This buildingÑÓ
he gestured to stone walls and tight shuttersÑÓgrants me a measure of security. You know,
of course, that Biscop Antonia is accused of sorcery and might be capable of any foul act.Ó 
 The presbyter grunted. ÒAll the more reason to remove her from this guest house.Ó He
signed to his manservant, turned with a swirl of rich fabric, and climbed the steps into the
gloom above where another servant waited to light him to his chamber. 
Wolfhere turned to the guest-master. ÒMy apologies for inconveniencing you again, good
brother. Have you any other chamber that might serve our purpose?Ó 
The guest-master glanced at the presbyterÕs manservant, who sniffed audibly, steepled
his fingers, and tapped his thumbs together impatiently. ÒAt times it happens that a brother
or traveler is disturbed by evil spirits who have insinuated themselves into his mind, and at
those times we must isolate him in a locked chamber in the infirmary until an effusion of
herbs or a healing can extricate the creature from his body. It is not what I would choose for
a biscop, even one accused of such, urn, undertakings, butÑÓ He hesitated, perhaps
fearing that WolfhereÕs reaction would be as explosive as that of the presbyter, but in the
end he glanced again toward the manservant. Worse to insult a presbyter than one of King
HenryÕs Eagles, especially consideringÑHanna reminded herselfÑthat they were not in
HenryÕs kingdom now. 
ÒThat will do very well,Ó said Wolfhere easily. ÒBut will it inconvenience the Brother
Infirmarian?Ó 
ÒI think not. At this time we have only one aged brother resting there who is too feeble for
our daily rounds.Ó 
ÒHanna.Ó Wolfhere nodded at her. ÒGo fetch the other Lions. Once the Brother
Infirmarian has made all ready, we will transfer the prisoners to their new cell.Ó 
Satisfied, the manservant hurried up the stairs to deliver this news to his master. The
guest-master grimaced, then quickly smoothed the expression over as he retreated out the
door. Hanna moved to follow him, but Wolfhere said her name softly. She turned to see him
open the lanternÕs glass shutter and reach inside. He murmured a word under his breath,
and the touch of his fingers to the dark wick ignited a flame. She started back, surprised, but
he merely handed the lit lantern to her and waved her away. Outside, Hanna hoisted the
lantern to light her way to the stables. 
The guardsmen had already bedded down for the night on the straw in the loft, wrapped
in their cloaks. They rousted easily enough. KingÕs Lions all, they were used to night alarms
and swift risings for an early march, and they followed her back to the guest house without
grumbling. They served the king and did not complain at the tasks given them. Such was the

strength of the oaths they had sworn to Henry. 
At HannaÕs entrance, the guest-master nervously shook his ring of keys and led the way
into the back passage where two Lions stood guard at a locked door. Inside the chamber,
Biscop Antonia sat, wide awake, in the roomÕs only chair while Brother Heribert sat on the
edge of one of the two beds, fingering the silver Circle of Unity that hung on a chain at his
chest. A carpet, thrown down as a courtesy, covered the plank floor; the windows were
closed and shuttered, barred from the outside. 
ÒYour Grace,Ó said Wolfhere. ÒI beg pardon for disturbing you, but it has become
necessary to move you to different quarters.Ó 
A stout woman of respectable age, Biscop Antonia wore her episcopal dignity with gentle
authority and a benign expression. ÒNo unbearable hardship afflicts the faithful,Ó she said
mildly, Òfor is it not said in the Holy Verses that Ôthy daughters and sons did not succumb to
the fangs of snakes?Ó 
Wolfhere did not reply but merely signed for her and the cleric to precede him out the
door. Heribert rose and went out first. A quiet, attractive, neat young man, he had the soft,
delicate white hands of an aristocrat born, one who had never put those hands to labor more
taxing than prayer, the folding of vestments, and the occasional writing of a deed or royal
capitulary. All the monks here in the hostel of St. Servitius had, like Hanna, work-roughened
hands, but Heribert was a cleric whose duties were to pray, read, and act as scribe in the
episcopal chancellery or the kingÕs chapel. With her hands folded quietly in front of her,
Antonia followed after him, smiling and nodding first at Wolfhere and then at Hanna. 
The single mild glance she gave Hanna made the young Eagle horribly uncomfortable.
Biscop Antonia appeared as kindly and wise as an old grandmother who had lived her life in
perfect harmony with the God of the Unities and been blessed with a prosperous family and
many surviving grandchildren. But she was accused of base sorcery, such as even the
church could not countenance, and Hanna herself had heard the biscop speak words of
such searing contempt at the parley before the battle between King Henry and his sister
Sabella that she knew AntoniaÕs kindly mien disguised something dark and unpleasant
beneath. 
Better not to be noticed by such folk. Or, as the saying went in HeartÕs Rest, ÒLet well
enough alone and turn over no rock unless you care to be knowing whatÕs underneath it.Ó 
But after one glance, Antonia no longer appeared to notice Hanna. As the guards
escorted them out of the building and down the stony path to the infirmary, she kept up a
one-sided conversation with Wolfhere. ÒI have been reflecting on the words of St. Thecla, in
her Letter to the Dariyans, when she speaks of the law of sin. Is not GodÕs law higher than
the law of sin?Ó 
Wolfhere grunted. His lips twitched as if he were restraining words. He turned so that the
lantern light hid his expression in shadow. 
ÒAnd yet do we not, in our ignorance, in our flesh, remain slaves to the law of sin?Ó she
continued. ÒBy what means do they judge who have not wholly united themselves to the
life-giving law of the God of the Unities and the Holy Word?Ó 
Wolfhere made no answer. They came to the infirmary steps. Here the Brother Infirmarian
met them, lantern in hand, and showed them to a small cell where he had hastily erected a
cot next to the single pallet. He bowed several times, bobbing up and down so that the
lantern light rose and dipped nauseatingly; he was clearly distraught at the idea of closing a
holy biscop into such mean quarters, but he obeyed the commands of his superiorsÑand
Wolfhere carried letters from both King Henry and Biscop Constance as proof of his
authority to carry out his mission. 
Antonia and Heribert walked into the cell. The Brother Infirmarian shut and locked the
door behind them and hung the key on a ring at his belt. Two Lions stationed themselves on
either side of the door. Wolfhere directed two more Lion? to sleep outside on the ground
beneath the shuttered and barred window that let air into the cell. 
ÒOn no account,Ó Wolfhere finished, looking sternly at the Infirmarian, Òis any person to

enter into that cell without me beside him.Ó 
Then he and Hanna and the other six Lions returned to the stables. In the loft, Hanna
kicked hay into a pile, threw her cloak over the prickly mound, and pulled off her boots
before lying down and shaking her blanket open on top of herself. Wolfhere bedded down in
the hay beside her. Already she heard the snores of the soldiers from the other end of the
loft. 
She waited for a long while but was not sleepy. The loft door stood open to let in air.
Through it she saw the black hulk of mountain, a blot against the night, and a single patch of
sky brilliant with stars. 
ÒYou donÕt like her,Ó she whispered finally, thinking that Wolfhere, too, did not sleep. 
There was a long pause and she began to think the old man was in fact asleep, that she
had mistaken his breathing. 
ÒI do not.Ó 
ÒBut if I didnÕt know what she had been accused of, if I hadnÕt heard her speak that one
time, at the parley with Lord Villam, then I would never suspect she wasÑÓ She hesitated.
Wolfhere made no comment, so she went on. ÒItÕs just hard to imagine she could do such
terrible thingsÑmurder a lackwit in cold blood so she could raise creatures to control Count
LavastineÕs will, cast a spell on the guivre to put it under her power, and send her servants
to catch living men for it to feed on. ItÕs just that she seems . . . such a good and generous
soul, so mild and compassionate. And she is a biscop besides. How can the Lady and Lord
allow a person with such an evil heart to be elevated in Their church?Ó 
ÒThat is indeed a mystery.Ó 
This answer did not satisfy Hanna, who frowned and shifted on her makeshift pallet.
Under the cloak, hay poked through the cloth against her back, tiny blunt pinpricks. She
wiped the dust of old hay and last summerÕs straw from her dry lips. ÒBut you must have 
some idea!Ó 
ÒShe is related on her motherÕs side to the reigning Queen of Karonne, and her kin on
her fatherÕs side had land near the city of Mainni, where she was some years ago elevated
to the episcopal chair. Do you suppose the skopos nominates only the most worthy?Ó 
 ÒI thought women and men who entered the church entered to serve God, not their own
desires and ambitions. Deacon Fortensia cares faithfully for our small village though she
herself resides a half dayÕs walk farther north, at the church of St. Sirri. The monks at the
monastery at SheepÕs Head areÑ-wereÑÓ For had not Eika killed them all? ÒÑfamed for
their devotion to Our Lady and Lord.Ó 
ÒSome do enter the church to serve God, and do so faithfully throughout their lives. Some
see in the church an opportunity for advancement. Others are put in the church against their
will.Ó 
As Ivar had been. 
ÒAre all who serve in the church faithful to God alone?Ó Wolfhere continued. ÒWhat of
Frater Hugh? You were acquainted with him, I believe.Ó 
Hanna shut her eyes and turned her face away, ashamed to remember so clearly and
with still a betraying warmth in her throat. Only WolfhereÕs unheralded arrival had saved
Liath from a lifetime of servitude to Hugh. Beautiful Hugh. 
Wolfhere grunted, but he might simply have been settling himself more comfortably on the
hay. He said nothing more and for once she did not want to ask any more questions. He had
an odd, perhaps a deliberate, way of turning questions back on the one who asked them.
She set her cheek against the folds of her cloak and shut her eyes. The light snores of the
men-at-arms, the rustling of mice scurrying on their nightly rounds, and the quiet noises of
the horses stabled below lulled her to sleep. 
3
The rats came out at night to gnaw on the bones. The whispering scrape of their claws on

stone alerted him, brought him instantly out of his doze. Most of the dogs slept; one whined
in a dream and thumped his whipcord tail against the cathedral floor. The Eika slept,
sprawled across the stone as if it were the softest of featherbeds to them. They loved the
stone the way a nursing child loves its motherÕs breast, and nuzzled near it whenever they
could. 
Only he did not sleep. He never slept, only napped, caught moments of dream and then
bolted awake as a muzzle nudged him, testing, or as Eika laughed and poked him with their
spears, or if he heard a human voice cry out in agony and hopeless pleading. That was the
worst, the slavesÑfor he knew the Eika had brought human slaves into the city when summer
came and that he could do nothing to help those poor souls. 
Gent had fallen, and he would have died protecting her, only he could not die. That was
the curse his mother had put on him at his birth: ¡°No disease known to you will touch him,
nor will any wound inflicted by any creature male or female cause his death.Ó 
He could not sleep, and when he was lucid, he wondered if the periods of madness, the
shaking, the fits of insensibility when he would come to suddenly and realize it was night
when last it had been dawn, were a mercy set on him by the Hand of Our Lady. An educated
man might have known disciplines of the mind with which to combat this prison that was as
much of spirit as of chains. But he had only been trained for war. That was his lot, the
bastard son of the king, the child whose birth gave Henry the right to be named Heir to the
throne of Wendar and Varre: to become a fighter and defend his fatherÕs realm. 
He had always been an obedient son. 
Would his father send soldiers to rescue him? Yet surely Henry thought him dead. It was 
Gent they must rescue. No king could leave such an important city in barbarian hands. 
 And even if he were rescued, what if his father no longer wished to acknowledge him,
seeing what manner of creature he had become? 
He vaguely recalled a dream in which two children had visited himÑexcept there were no
children in Gent, not any more. She had led them to safety, long ago. 
Once children had flocked to him, but these two children had been afraid of him. They had
seen not a prince but an animal; he had seen their reaction in their eyes. Were they only
mirrors created in his mind? A vision through which he could see himself and what he had
become? Or had they really been here? 
As rats scurried through the refuse, he searched under the rags that were all that was left
of his clothingÑand found knife and badge. Their knife. Her badge, the badge of the Eagles.
Only it was not her badge, it was another badge, that of a man who had fallen and whose
name he could not recall. But it represented her, it held her warmth, for she had been like a
warm thing, like a star fallen to earth and trapped in a human body as he was trapped in
these chains. 
The rats scrabbled among the bones. Slowly, he eased the knife out from under his torn
and ragged tunic. This knife had been a gift, of sorts, an exchangeÑthough he would have
told the children the secret of the saintÕs tunnel without any gift. He would have told them
because it was his duty to aid them, to aid all of the kingÕs subjects. He was captain of the
KingÕs Dragons and obliged by his oath to the king, his father, to protect and defend the
kingÕs possessions and everything and everyone that the king ruled. 
Rats were not subject to the king. 
The bones lay within reach of his chains, and he was quick and silent but for the scrape of
chains as he moved, sticking one on the point, grabbing another by the tail. It squeaked
wildly and scrabbled helplessly at his fingers. He killed them. The dogs stirred, waking. The
Eika slept on. 
He growled the dogs down, and they subsided. They fed better than he did, because they
did not scorn human flesh. He skinned the rats and, because he had no fire, ate them raw. 
No better than the Eika, less than a man, more than a dog, he would have wept at his own
savagery, but he had no tears. He never got enough to drink. Sometimes the priest
remembered to set out water for him. Once a slave had done so, and been killed for her

pains. 
The Eika slept on. He sawed at the chains with the knife, but the work only dulled the
blade. At last, he tucked it away again and curled up among his chains. The iron collar at his
neck chafed his skin, and he shifted to ease the raw ache. The EagleÕs badge lay cool
against his skin, next to his heart. 
Ai, Lady, if only he could sleep for one night, soundlessly and without dreaming, without
interruption. If only he could rest. But the dogs panted, wakeful now, smelling death. 
 
4
 
Awake.
Something was wrong. Hanna knew it instantly, but it took her three breaths to identify
what it was. A cold hard wind blew into the loft, scattering hay and chilling her limbs, and a
soft cold thing settled on her lips. Without thinking, she licked it. Snow. 
More snow settled on her face, blown in from outside as the wind rose and moaned in the
beams. The unlatched loft door banged incessantly. A dog barked. Distantly she heard
voices shouting an alarm, and then the wind gusted so hard it shook the very timbers of the
stables and jarred the Lions awake. 
She rolled up onto her hands and knees, groping in the blackness for her boots. She
found WolfhereÕs blanket with her hand. 
He was gone. 
A bell began to toll, a dull reverberating sound that shook through her. It seemed to call in
a thick oppressive voice: Fire! Storm! Attack! Awake! Awake! 
She got hold of her boots and tugged them on, then crawled, found the trapdoor and the
ladder by touch, and eased herself over and climbed down. Above, one of the soldiers
called to her, but the wind howled and screamed at such a pitch outside that she couldnÕt
make out his words. She found the floor and stood, clutching the ladder, trying to get her
bearings. The horses had gone wild with fear; the voice of the monk in charge of the stables
was a murmur running beneath the roar of the storm as he attempted, in vain, to calm them.
The bell tolled on and on as if for a hundred newly dead souls being rung up through the
seven spheres of Heaven to the Chamber of Light above. 
ÒHanna.Ó 
She jerked around but could not see Wolfhere, for it was utterly black inside. 
ÒIÕm at the door,Ó he said. 
Gingerly, she crossed to him. Bitter cold air streamed in through the cracks in the plank
door. With each gust the door shuddered and shook and even, once, bent inward as if the
wind were trying to break it down. Wolfhere had to lean hard against the door to keep it
closed. Upstairs the loft door stopped banging abruptly. 
A heavy object slammed against the stable door. Wood ripped and splintered, but the
door did not give way, though she felt Wolfhere press farther into the door to hold it shut.
Then, like the whisper of mice in the walls, she heard a voice from outside. 
ÒPlease. I beg you, if any are inside, let me enter.Ó It was the guest-master. 
At once Wolfhere unlatched the door. Wind blew the door open. It smashed into Hanna, a
haze of pain all along her right side, and as she stumbled back, it slammed all the way open
and hit the inner wall so hard the top hinge tore free. A hooded figure staggered in,
propelled by the tearing wind. 
No wind, this. No storm either, not as she knew storms. Half stunned, Hanna stared in
disbelief. Outside she could not even see the shadows of the other outbuildings or the
cloister. She could see neither sky nor moon. The world was a ghastly gray-white. They
stood isolated in the middle of a howling blizzard. She could no longer hear the bell. Snow
spun into the stables, blasting her face. Within, in the darkness of the stables, a horse broke
free. She heard the swearing of the stablekeeper as he fought the animal back to its stall. 
ÒHanna!Ó Wolfhere had to shout to be heard above the gale. ÒHelp me!Ó They grasped

the shattered door and together yanked it back to the broken hinge to shove it closed
against the cold hand of the wind. Despite the cold, she was sweating with fear and
exertion. Her hand slipped on the weathered wood, and a splinter jabbed in just as
Wolf-here grunted and put the pin through the latch. 
ÒI canÕt risk light,Ó he said, turning. ÒA broken lantern in this storm would burn this
place down around us.Ó 
The guest-master had crumpled to the floor, and now Hanna could faintly discern his
shape, made manifest more by the thin coating of snow on his robe and hood than by his
own substance. He was muttering a prayer in Dariyan, the language of the church. She could
not follow the words. He sounded half delirious, like a man raving with fever. 
A man cursed above; one of the soldiers, a bulky shadow in armor, came down the
ladder, swearing with such a foul string of curses that it took her a few shocked moments
before she realized he was not angry but terrified. 
ÒDid you see them?Ó he demanded as he thudded into the ground. Outside wind
screamed, and hail peppered the walls like pebbles flung in volleys; the stables, the very
wood structure of them, groaned under the onslaught. 
¡°Things,Ó said the guest-master in a terrified voice as the wind battered at the stables
and hail pounded on the roof and walls. ÒAi, Merciful Lady protect us from such visions.
Protect us from such creatures. Such creatures as must be conceived in feculence and
expelled from their damÕs soiled flesh in base darkness. So came they down from the
mountainside. So fell they down upon the wind. And such a stink they had to them that the
hair on the back of my neck stood on end and my body shook with terror and the guests
came rushing out of their chambers all crying and sobbing and one indeed could only
babble like a child and he glowed as if he had been lit afire.Ó 
ÒBrother, take hold of yourself,Ó said Wolfhere sternly. ÒTell me what you saw.Ó 
ÒI have told you! They were living beings and yet like no creature I have ever seen. They
had no limbs but only a thick dark body like an incorporeal staff as thick around as my own
poor flesh. They sang in dire voices but in a language most foul-sounding if it was language
at all. The wind bore them down from the mountain and the storm came with them as if they
had raised it out of the air or from corrupt magics, for it is like no storm I have ever seen and
I have lived here at this hostel for almost twenty years and served God in Unity faithfully, so
help me. Ai, Lord in Heaven. That this terrible sight had never been given me for I have not
the strength...Ó 
ÒHush,Ó said Wolfhere. He shifted. ÒLion. Watch over this good brother. Hanna. Dare
you walk outside with me?Ó Her shoulder and hip throbbed from the pain of being struck by
the windblown door. Shifting to her right leg brought stabs of pain bad enough to make her
wince. 
ÒHanna?Ó 
ÒI can go,Ó she said. 
First Wolfhere found rope hanging on the wall, which he tied round his waist and then, by
touch, round hers. The Lion braced himself against the door as Wolfhere unlatched it, but
even so, the wind flung the soldier backward, and he skidded back, dragging his heels
against the dirt floor. Wolfhere tugged Hanna after him. Together they forged out into the
blizzard. 
They staggered under the press of wind. Not six steps out Wolfhere began shouting at
her, though she could scarcely hear him over the roar of the wind. She looked behind. She
could not see the stables; night and storm buried them in darkness. Panic gripped her. She
could not breathe. Her hands curled tight, so cold so fast she could no longer feel them. 
Wind struck. She had to lean, hunched over, in order not to be thrown down by the force
of wind and snow andÑmore than thatÑa peppering against her skin, stinging and harsh, as
if the gale were stripping the mountains themselves of all their earth, scraping soil and rock
off them to reveal the bones beneath. 
Something brushed her. She screamed. She could not help herself. Some thing, some

creature, but like no creature she ever seen or dreamed of. Then it was gone, vanished into
the night, but there was another, and a third, streaming past her, borne on the gale. Towers
of darkness, they were blacker even than the night itself, like a glimpse of the Abyss, the pit
of the Enemy in which the wicked fall endlessly, never reaching bottom. With them, of them,
around them swirled the stench of burning iron. Hanna heard their voices like the muttering
of bells beneath the tearing wind, wordless and yet sentient. 
From out of the blackness she heard a low rumbling roar that surged and swelled to a
terrible crashing booming shuddering thunder that went on and on. 
The rope at her waist pulled taut as Wolfhere reeled her in and shoved her back toward
the stables. ÒGo!Ó he cried. ÒWe dare notÑÓ 
She stumbled back. Groping, she found the door; shak ing, she fumbled with the latch,
and at last they got it open and fell inside. The soldier slammed the door shut and latched it
behind them. The roar deafened her; it filled the air as if it were itself part of the air. Then,
slowly, it subsided, faded, until once more the wind was all the sound they heard, the
endless tearing wind and the hail of rain and snow and pebbles against the wood walls. 
Inside, it was warm and dark. The nervous horses stamped; the stablekeeper spoke in a
soothing voice. Hanna heard, also, others of the Lions moving Ôround the stable, calming
the animals. The guest-master sobbed softly. 
ÒWhat was that noise?Ó she asked as the building creaked and groaned and the wind
shook the rafters and the low throb of bells numbed her down to her boots. Her hip and
shoulder ached. She rubbed her hands to warm them. 
ÒAvalanche,Ó said the guest-master through his tears. ÒAi, Lady, I know that sound well,
for I have lived in these mountains twenty years. And close by, it was. I fear me that the
cloisterÑÓ No farther could he go. He began to weep again. 
ÒWhat were those creatures?Ó she asked. 
Wolfhere untied her. ¡°Galla,Ó he said. The word had a hard, foreign, ugly sound, the
ÒgÓ more of a guttural Ògh.Ó 
ÒWhat are galla?Ó she asked. 
ÒSomething we should not speak of now, with them walking abroad, for they might hear
their name spoken a third time and seek us out who know of them,Ó he said in such a tone
she knew he meant to say no more. ÒWe must wait out the storm.Ó 
It was a long night. She could not sleep, nor did Wolf-here, though perhaps some of the
Lions did. That the guest-master did sleep, fitfully, she knew because his weeping
slackened at last. 
Just as the gale slackened at last. Come dawn, Wolfhere ventured out with Hanna right
behind him. It was a cloudless morning, the sky a delicate, washed-out blue. The mountains
stood in all their glory, white peaks gleaming in the pale new sun. There was not a breath of
wind. But for the debris scattered everywhere, the gate and much of the fence enclosure
knocked down, the woodpile torn apart and scattered, shutters torn from hinges, and goats
milling in confusion in the middle of the garden, she would never have guessed there had
been a storm at all. Oddly, the beehives stood unscathed. 
But the infirmary was gone. 
There monks and merchants scurried, a swarm of them buzzing round the huge pile of
boulders and earth that covered what had once been the infirmary. Built of stone and timber,
it was obliterated now, melded with the great bank of mountain that had slid down on top of
it. 
They hurried over. The monks had managed to pull from the rubble the bodies of their
ancient brother and of two Lions. Of the other two soldiersÑHanna recognized these as the
two who had been posted outside, along the wall behind the cell that had imprisoned
Antonia and HeribertÑone had a broken leg and the other lay on the ground, moaning, his
skin unbroken but something broken inside him. The Brother Infirmarian knelt beside him,
probing his abdomen gently. Tears wet the monkÕs face. 
ÒIt happened so fast,Ó the monk said, looking up when Wolfhere knelt beside him. ÒI ran

outside, hearing the noise, and then sawÑnay, I did not see it but felt it, felt its power. Then
the avalanche came. Lady forgive me, but I ran. Only when I saw it was too late, only when I
saw the infirmary would be overwhelmed, did I recall poor Brother Fusulus, who was too
weak to save himself.Ó 
ÒYou were spared,Ó said Wolfhere, Òbecause you have yet work to do in this world.
What of this man, here?Ó 
The Infirmarian shook his head. ÒGod will decide if he is to live.Ó 
Wolfhere rose and paced over the edge of the avalanche. Hanna followed him but kept
back, not wanting to venture too close. She could see the bones of the infirmary underneath
rock and rubble, mortared stones torn up by their roots, planks strewn like so much offal, a
bed overturned but its rope base untouched, a three-legged stool with one leg broken, dried
herbs once tied in bundles now scattered every which way on the torn grass. 
ÒWhat of the prisoners?Ó asked Wolfhere when he turned back to the others. 
The abbot himself came forward. He had been soothing the presbyter, who had already
sent his servants to the stables to make ready to leave. ÒWe cannot find their bodies,Ó he
said. ÒThis is most distressing. The rocks have buried them utterly. We will try to dig them
out, butÑÒ
¡°No matter.Ó Wolfhere surveyed the huge scar, the trail of the avalanche, that now
scored the side of the ridge. Something shifted in the rubble and a few pebbles bounced
down to land at his feet. He backed away nervously. ÒSearch only if it is safe. The prisoners
are lost to us now.Ó 
ÒWhat will you do?Ó asked the abbot. ÒWhat of the two injured men? Brother Infirmarian
says this poor man must not be moved any distance, and the other will not be able to walk
for many weeks.Ó 
ÒCan they remain here until they are healed?Ó 
ÒOf course.Ó The abbot directed his monks to move the injured men away. 
ÒCome, Hanna,Ó said Wolfhere. He walked back toward the stables, leaving the Lions
to help. 
ÒWhy did you say it in that way? That the prisoners are Ôlost to us.Õ Not that theyÕre
dead.Ó 
He looked at her curiously. ÒDo you think they are dead? Do you believe she lies there
under the rocks? That someday, if the monks can dig the building out, they will find their two
crushed bodies or their shattered bones?Ó 
ÒOf course they must be dead. They were locked in the cell. How could they have
escapedÑÓ Seeing his expression, she broke off. ÒYou donÕt think theyÕre dead.Ó 
ÒI do not. That was no natural storm.Ó 
No natural storm. A blizzard blown up in the midst of mild summer weather. Strange
unnatural creatures he had named galla walking abroad, stinking of the forge. 
ÒWhere will she go, Hanna? That is the question we must ask ourselves now. Where will
she go? Who will shelter such as her?Ó
ÒI donÕt know.Ó 
ÒSabella might, if she could reach Sabella. But Sabella is herself in prison, so Wendar
and Varre are closed to Antonia, for now.Ó He sighed sharply and stopped at the stable
door, turning back to look up at the mountains, so calm, so clear, above them. ÒI should
have known. I should have prepared for this. But I underestimated her power.Ó
ÒWhere will we go?Ó 
He considered. ÒAlas, I fear we must split up. One of us must continue on to Darre to lay
the charges against Biscop Antonia before the skopos. That way we remain prepared,
whatever Antonia means to do. One of us must return to Henry and warn him, and hope he
believes us.Ó He smiled suddenly then, with a wry expression that made Hanna remember
how much she liked him. ÒBetter that one be you, Hanna. You will take four of the Lions, I the
other twoÑwhen I journey back this way, I will pick up the two who remain here, if they
survive.Ó 

She had grown used to Wolfhere and now, abruptly, was afraid to travel without him.
ÒHow long will it take you? How soon will you return to Wendar?Ó 
He shrugged. ÒI cannot say. I may be able to get back across the pass this autumn, but
most likely I wonÕt be able to return until next summer. You must convince Henry, child.Ó He
touched her, briefly, on her EagleÕs badge, newly made and still as bright as if the memory
of ManfredÕs death lit it. ÒYou have earned this, Hanna. Do not think you are unequal to the
task.Ó He went inside the stables. 
Hanna lingered outside, staring up at the three great peaks so beautiful, so silent, so at
peace in their vast strength, their sheer living force, that it seemed impossible to believe at
this instant that threeÑbriefÑhuman lives had been extinguished in the shadow at their feet.
What was it the bard had called them? Youngwife. MonkÕs Ridge. Terror. She shaded her
eyes against the rising sun and looked for the hawk, but no birds flew in the sky this fair
morning. 
She would return to Wendar, to the kingÕs progress, without seeing the city of Darre and
the palace of the holy skopos. Without seeing, perhaps, a few elves or other strange
creatures not of humankind. And yet, this also meant she would return to Liath sooner. 
Thinking of Liath made her think of Hugh, though she did not want to think of Hugh.
Beautiful Hugh. And thinking of Hugh made her remember what he had done, and so she
thought of Ivar. Ai, Lady, where was Ivar now? Had he reached Quedlinhame safely? Did he
like it there? Was he resigned to his fate? Or did he still fight against it? 
III The Cloister
1
Ivar hated Quedlinhame. He hated the monastery, he hated the daily round of
monotonous prayer, and most of all he hated the novicesÕ dormitory, which was a narrow
barracks of a building where he spent all of his nights and much of his day in miserable
silence along with the other novices. Worst, because of the careful reckoning of days at
Mass and in prayerbooks, he knew exactly how many days he had been imprisoned here. 
One hundred and seventy-seven days ago, on St. BonfiliaÕs Day, he had knelt before the
postern gate in a cold rain and after a night of utter wretchedness had been admitted onto
the grounds of Quedlinhame. They did not even give him a tour of the famous church.
Instead, his new keepers immediately led him to the novitiary and locked him in with the rest
of the poor souls consigned to this purgatory. 
The poor male souls, of course. Quedlinhame was a double monastery; the abbess,
Mother Scholastica, ruled over both monks and nuns who lived apart but prayed together.
The novicesÕ dormitory let out onto a small cloister, a courtyard marked off by trim columns.
A high wood fence ran down the center of this cloister, dividing it into two smaller courtyards,
one for the male novices and one for the female novices whose dormitory lay on the
opposite side. 
Ivar prayed briefly at that fence every day unless the weather was awful, once in the
morning just after the service of Terce and once in the afternoon before Vespers. Or at least,
he appeared to be praying. In fact, in these, his only unsupervised moments of the day, he
studied the wood planks. In the last five months, he and the other three first-year novices had
examined that fence fingerÕs breadth by fingerÕs breadth, each upright plank, each
horizontal beam, each crack and warp and weathered knot. But he could not find any chink
through which to see onto the other side. 
Were the female novices young? Almost certainly. Like him, most of them would have
been put into the churchÑmost willingly, some notÑby their families when they reached
adolescence. 
Were they pretty? Perhaps. This goal he had set himself soon after he arrived: to identify
each female novice by name and face. It kept him from going crazy, even though he knew it

was wrong and against the rules. Or perhaps because it was against the rules. 
Right now, his fellow first-year novice, Baldwin, had finished digging dirt out from under
his nails with his shaving knife and now he stuck that knife into the minute gap between two
warping planks. He wiggled the blade back and forth in what Ivar supposed would be a vain
attempt to try to widen the gap enough to peer through. Baldwin, however, would not give up.
In all things, fair-haired Baldwin knew that eventually he would get his way. 
Ermanrich lumbered up and plopped down beside Ivar. He shivered in the cool autumn
wind, which Ivar found pleasant after a hot summer confined within walls, but Ermanrich,
though stoutest in body of their band of four, was also most susceptible to fevers and runny
noses. He coughed now and wiped running eyes and squinted at BaldwinÕs handiwork. 
ÒThere must be a weak spot,Ó Ermanrich muttered. He picked at his nails, which were
dirty from turning over soil in the garden now that all the vegetables were harvested.
ÒHathumod says the first years all think Baldwin is very handsome.Ó Hathumod was
ErmanrichÕs cousin and in her second year as a novice. She and Ermanrich had
mysterious ways of communicating which Ivar had not yet divined the nature of. 
ÒWhat does Hathumod think of our Baldwin?Ó Ivar asked.
ÒShe wonÕt say.Ó 
Baldwin glanced at them and grinned, then went back to his work. 
He had every reason to be vain of his looks, but of course, according to his own account,
it was those looks that had landed him in the monastery. He was, indeed, the handsomest
fellow Ivar had ever laid eyes on...with the exception of Prater Hugh. 
Ai, Lady! Even thinking of that bastard Hugh made Ivar angry all over again, trapped by
helpless fury. He had tried to free Liath but had been made to look a fool and then gotten
condemned to this life in the bargain. All of it HughÕs fault, that damned arrogant handsome
bastard. What had happened to Liath? Was she still HughÕs concubine? At least, if reports
were true, Hanna was with her. 
Ivar could not begrudge Hanna her choiceÑservice with Liath rather than with him. Liath
needed Hanna more than he did, and anyway here at Quedlinhame he was not allowed to
converse with any woman except Mother Scholastica. He had brought two male servants
with him, and they tended to his clothing and his bed and with the other servants tidied the
dormitory and in general did whatever manual labor he himself did not have time for, since
as a novice his main duties were to pray and to study. Had he brought Hanna, she would
have been sent to work as a laundress or cook, and he would never have seen her. Better
that she stayed with Liath. He sighed heavily. 
Ermanrich touched a hand to his elbow, though novices were not supposed to touch, to
form bonds of affection and sympathy. They were meant to devote themselves only to God.
ÒYouÕre thinking of her again,Ó said the stout boy. ÒWas she really as pretty as
Baldwin?Ó 
ÒUtterly unlike,Ó said Ivar, but then he smiled, because Ermanrich always made him
smile. ÒShe was darkÑÓ 
ÒDark like Duke Conrad the Black?Ó asked Baldwin without looking up from his
scraping at the fence. ÒI met him once.Ó 
¡°Met him?Ó demanded Ermanrich. 
ÒOh, well, not met. I saw him once.Ó 
ÒI donÕt know if they look anything alike,Ó said Ivar. ÒI never saw Duke Conrad. How
did he get to be so dark?Ó 
ÒHis mother came from the east. She was a princess from Jinna country.Ó Baldwin had
a treasure trove of gossip about the noble families of Wendar and Varre. ÒShe was a
present to one of the Arnulfs, I forget which, from one of the sultans of the east. Conrad the
Elder, who was then Duke of Wayland, took a fancy to her and because King Arnulf owed
him a favor, he asked for the girl. She was just a child then, but very pretty, everyone said.
Conrad had her raised as a good Daisanite, for she came of heathen fire-worshipers. When
she was old enough, he took her as a concubine, but of all his wives and concubines only 

she conceived by him, so perhaps she knew some eastern witchery, for the rumor went
round that Conrad was infertile because of a curse set on him by one of the Lost Ones he
raped when he was a young man.Ó 
Ermanrich coughed again and cocked one eyebrow up. 
ÒYou donÕt believe me?Ó demanded Baldwin, cheek ticking as he tried to suppress a
grin. 
ÒWhich part do you wish to know that I believe?Ó asked Ermanrich. 
ÒAnd then what happened?Ó asked Ivar, trying to imagine this Jinna girl but only able to
see Liath in his mindÕs eye. The thought of her made his heart ache. 
ÒShe gave birth to a baby boy, the second Conrad, whom we now know as Conrad the
Black. He succeeded to the duchy when his father died. She still lives, you know, the Jinna
woman. I donÕt know what her old name was, her heathen name, but she was baptized with
a good Daisanite name, Mariya or Miryam. Something like that.Ó 
ÒThey let a bastard inherit?Ó asked Ermanrich, looking skeptical. 
 ÒNo, no. At the end of his life, when it came time to name his heir, Conrad the Elder
claimed he had been married to her all along. The first tame deacon he got to say she was
present at the ceremony then turned out to have been only ten years old when the marriage
was supposed to have been solemnized. So Conrad finally made a huge bequest of land to
the local biscop and she agreed that God had sanctified the union before the childÕs birth.
Look! IÕve made a crack!Ó He leaned down and stuck his perfectly-proportioned nose up
against the wood, closed one eye, and peered through the tiny gap with the other. Then he
withdrew, shaking his head. ÒAll I can see is warts. I knew they would have warts.Ó 
ÒDearest Baldwin, doomed by warts to a life in the monastery,Ó said Ermanrich in a
sententious voice. ÒNow move and let me try.Ó They changed places. 
ÒHush,Ó said Ivar. ÒHere comes Lord Reginar and his dogs.Ó 
Lord Reginar had a pack of five ÒdogsÓÑthe other second-year novicesÑand a thin face
made ill-featured mostly because of its habitual sour expression. 
ÒWhatÕs this?Ó he said, pausing beside the three first-year boys. He touched a scrap of
very fine white linen to his lips as if the stench of the first years offended him. ÒAre you at
your daily prayers?Ó That he meant to insinuate something was clear, though what exactly
he meant was not. 
Ivar stifled a giggle. He found ReginarÕs conceit so pathetic, especially compared to that
of Hugh, that he always wanted to laugh. But a countÕs son never ever laughed at the son of
a duchess and one who, in addition, wore the gold torque around his neck that symbolized
he came of the blood of the royal family and had a claimÑhowever distantÑto the throne. 
Ermanrich clasped his hands tight and leaned against the fence, covering the telltale
signs of cutting. He began to murmur a psalm in the singsong voice he used at his prayers. 
Baldwin smiled brightly up at the young lord. ÒHow kind of you to deign to notice us this
day, Lord Reginar,Ó he said without any obvious sign of sarcasm. 
Ermanrich made a choking sound. 
Reginar touched his lips again with the linen, but even heÑyoungest son of Duchess
Rotrudis and nephew of both Mother Scholastica and King HenryÑwas not immune to
BaldwinÕs charms. ÒIt is true,Ó he said, Òthat two marchlanders and a minor countÕs son
are unlikely to receive attentions from such as myself every day, but then you are entitled to
sleep near me, as are all these others.Ó He gestured toward his sycophants, an
indistinguishable collection of boys of good family who had had the misfortune to be
dedicated to the monastery last year, together with Reginar, and had by necessityÑor by
forceÑfallen into orbit around him. 
ÒPray you,Ó said Baldwin sweetly, Òdo not forget our good comrade Sigfrid, Mother
ScholasticaÕs favorite. I am sure he, too, is not insensible to the favor you show us.Ó 
Ermanrich fell into a fit of frantic coughing. One of the boys hovering at ReginarÕs back
tittered, and the young lord turned right around and slapped him hard. Then he spun and
stalked away, his ÒdogsÓ scurrying after him. 

Fittingly, at that moment Sigfrid came running out of the dormitory, his sharp face alight,
his noviceÕs robes all askew. He did not notice Reginar. He never did. And that was the
worst insult of all, although Reginar never understood that Sigfrid noticed nothing except his
studies, his prayers, andÑnowÑhis three friends. 
ÒI heard the most amazing news,Ó Sigfrid said as he halted beside them. He knelt with
the practiced ease of a person who has spent years moving into or out of a kneeling
position, as indeed Sigfrid himself cheerfully admitted he had, having come at age five to
his vocation: monk-in-training. 
ÒThat was cruel,Ó said Ermanrich. 
ÒWhat was?Ó asked Sigfrid. 
Baldwin smiled. ÒPoor Reginar. He canÕt abide that his own dear aunt, Mother
Scholastica, favors a mere stewardÕs son and lavishes her favorÑand her private
tutorialsÑon that lowborn creature instead of on her nephew.Ó 
ÒOh, dear,Ó said Sigfrid. He looked concerned all at once. ÒI do not mean to make
anyone envious of me. I have not striven for Mother ScholasticaÕs attention, and yetÑÓ His
face took on an expression of rapt contemplation. ÒÑto be privileged to study with her and
with Brother MethodiusÑÓ 
ÒYou know what they say.Ó Baldwin cut in before Sigfrid could launch into a long
recitationÑby heart, of courseÑof whatever horrific matristic text written centuries ago he
had studied today in Mother ScholasticaÕs study. ÒWhy, no,Ó said Ermanrich. ÒWhat do
they say?Ó
ÒThat Lord Reginar was put into the monastery only because his mother detests him.
Had she allowed him to become ordained as a frater and then be elevated to the rank of
presbyter, he would have had to visit her every three years as is traditional, as long as she
lives, and she decided it was better to put him in the monastery where sheÕd never have to
see him again if she didnÕt wish it.Ó 
Ermanrich snorted, gulped, and began to laugh helplessly. 
Sigfrid gazed sorrowfully at Baldwin and only shook his head, as if to remind the other
boy that the Lord and Lady looked ill on those who spoke spitefully of others.
ÒI believe it,Ó muttered Ivar. 
ÒIÕm sorry, Ivar,Ó said Baldwin quickly. ÒI didnÕt mean to remind you of your own
situation.Ó 
ÒNever mind,Ó said Ivar. ÒWhatÕs done is done. What was your news, Sigfrid?Ó 
ÒKing HenryÕs progress is coming here, to Quedlinhame, for the Feast of St. Valentinus.
They expect the king today or tomorrow!Ó 
ÒHow do you know this?Ó Ermanrich demanded. ÒNot even Hathumod knows, for if she
did, sheÕd have told me.Ó
Sigfrid blushed. He had a sensitive face, his expressions made interesting by the conflict
between his studious nature and solitary soul on the one hand and the very real and
passionate liking he had taken to his year-mates on the other. ÒAlas, I fear I overheard
them. It was ill-done of me, I knowÑbut I couldnÕt wait to tell you, for I knew you would want to
hear! Imagine! The king!Ó 
Baldwin yawned. ÒAh, yes. IÕve met the king.Ó 
ÒHave you really met him?Ó demanded Ermanrich, laughing. 
The schoolmaster appeared under the colonnade and they all leaped guiltily to their feet
and with contrite faces made their way to the line. As first years, they took their place at the
end, matched up in pairs. Before them walked Reginar and his sycophants, and in front of
ReginarÑalthough Reginar hated anyone to walk in front of himÑstood the humble third
years. 
As they marched out of the dormitory and made their way along the path that led to the
church, Ivar craned his neck when the brown-robed female novices came into view. For his
pains he got a sharp whack on his shoulders from the schoolmasterÕs willow switch. It
stung, but in a way the pain helped him. The pain helped him remember that he was Ivar,

son of Count Harl and Lady Herlinda. He was not truly a monk, not by vocation as Sigfrid
was, nor was he resigned to his fate as was Ermanrich, sixth of seven sons of a marchland
countess who, to her horror, had never given birth to a girl and had perforce made her eldest
son her heir and after that hastily dedicated the superfluous boys to the church so they would
not contest their brotherÕs elevation to the rank of count after her death. Unlike Baldwin, he
had not escaped an unwanted marriage by begging to be put in the church. 
No. He had been forced to take the noviceÕs hood. Forced because he loved Liath and
she loved him and he would have taken her away from Hugh, and this had been HughÕs
way of revenging himself on Ivar. 
No. He never minded the pain or the austerities of a noviceÕs life. The pain, even of the
willow switch, reminded Ivar daily that he would, somehow, avenge himself on Hugh and
save Liath from HughÕs clutches. No matter that HughÑbastard though he wasÑranked far
above a minor countÕs youngest son. No matter that HughÕs mother, a powerful margrave,
was an acknowledged favorite of King Henry. 
By hating Quedlinhame, Ivar kept himself strong enough to hate Hugh. Somehow, some
way, Ivar would have his revenge. 
2
 Bloodheart had sons. As time passed, Sanglant learned how to recognize them: by their
ornamentation. Only the sons of Bloodheart could stud their teeth with gems; the mail skirts
they wore, as intricate as lace, were gilded with gold and silver and woven with bright stones
and flashing jewels; a stylized red-ocher arrowhead, symbol of their fatherÕs hegemony,
figured prominently in the pattern of colorful painting with which they decorated their torsos. 
As summer passed into autumn and the vast nave of air in the cathedral grew steadily
colder, sons came and went .from their favored place in front of BloodheartÕs heavy chair.
They left for expeditions whose fruit brought gold, cattle, slaves, and a harvest of endlessly
fascinating small items: an eagle-feather quill, a length of sky-blue silk, a sword with an
ornamented gold hilt, vases carved out of horn or marble, an arrow fletched with the
iron-gray feathers of a griffin, a turquoise pendant engraved with six-pointed stars inlaid with
gold, a silver paten, a bloodstone cameo ring, a linen tablecloth embroidered with silk,
slivers of ossified dragonÕs fire sharpened into thin blades, a hoard of green beads,
translucent angelÕs tears polished and strung together as a necklace, silk bed-curtains, and
silk-covered pillows. Bloodheart tossed one of the pillows to Sanglant, but the dogs ripped it
to pieces and bits of its feather stuffing floated, spinning in the still air, for the rest of the day. 
One son haunted the cathedral more than the others, favored or in disgrace, Sanglant
could not tell. He was easily distinguished from the others: He wore at his chest a wooden
Circle of Unity, no doubt a trophy ripped off a corpse, and he had taken upon himself the
odd habit of, once a day, overseeing the slave who brought bucket and rags to clean up the
spot where, at the limit of his chains, Sanglant relieved himself. This humiliation Sanglant
endured in silence. It was, in its own way, a mercy not to be left to fester in worse filth than
what he already had to suffer. 
But Bloodheart was fickle, or perhaps it served his purposes to act so. 
Day by day more Eika trickled in until their numbers swamped the cathedral. They were
like a swarm of locusts, all of them pestering him with pricks of their spears, with spit, with
dogs sent to fight him until the tunic he had wrapped his forearms in lay in shreds on the floor
and his skin was a mass of bleeding scrapes and bites. But it would heal. It always did,
cleanly and without infection. Some of the dogs died, to be eaten by his pack and, finally, by
him as well; this food he could not scorn, because he had so little. The dogs that fled him
were quickly killed by their pack brothers. 
The Eika cheered on these battles, ringing him and shouting and calling out
encouragement. Since he understood so little of their language, he could not tell whether
they hoped he died, or whether his living was entertainment enough. They sang until all hours

of the night and seemed to have no need of sleep, nor could he sleep in any case, with the
dogs testing him and the curious coming to stare and point and howl with laughter at the
sight of a half-human prince among the dogs. 
Bloodheart sat and surveyed all from his throne, and his priest crouched at his side,
scratching the scars on his scrawny chest now and again, rolling bones to read the future,
caressing the little wooden chest which he kept always beside him. 
But at last, on a day made warm by the press of bodies and cold by the gloomy light that
filtered in through the windows, Bloodheart rose and howled them to attention. 
ÒWhich of you has brought me the greatest treasure?Ó he cried, or so Sanglant
assumed, because at once the sons came forward with magnificent treasures, some of
which Sanglant had seen before, some of which were new: gold chalices; a necklace of
emeralds; a sword of such terrible beauty and slender killing sleekness that it must have
come from the forges of the east; a womanÕs veil woven so cunningly that it could have
been a spiderweb unfastened from branches and gilded with silver and pearls; rings made
gaudy with precious stones; a reliquary of ivory and gold and pearls; a Quman bowcaseÑ
Sanglant shut his eyes. He had to lean forward onto his hands, swept by such a powerful
memory of Liath walking ahead of him through the stables, her body ornamented by a
bowcase incised with a griffin devouring a deer, that he trembled. His dogs growled, always
alert to weakness. Bloodheart barked out words, and Sanglant jerked up, ready to fight.
Never let it be said that he did not fight until his last breath. 
But BloodheartÕs attention was on another. He called one of his sons before him, the
one who wore the Circle. This one, young and straight, had less of the bulky mass of his
brothers, but there was yet something about him that was different, something Sanglant
recognized but could put no name to, unless it was intelligence. 
Bloodheart gestured to the treasures scattered like leaves at his feet. He spoke,
indicating this last of his sons. What had he brought? 
The other Eika howled and dogs began barking and howling in response. Never allowed
to leave the city, this Eika son could hardly have been expected to find and bring home
treasure. But perhaps he was in disgrace, and this, finally, was the moment Bloodheart had
chosen to make the point. 
The young Eika stood calmly under the storm of their howling and derision. At last, seeing
they had not made him cower, they quieted. He did not speak immediately. He waited, and
when he did speak, he spoke only to his father and, amazingly, in good Wendish. 
ÒI bring you the most precious treasure,Ó he said, his voice as smooth as the tone of the
bone flutes Bloodheart played each day. ÒWisdom.Ó 
ÒWisdom!Ó Bloodheart grinned, flashing gems. ÒWhat might that be?Ó 
ÒWhich of your other sons can speak the tongue of the human kind?Ó 
ÒWhy should they? What use are the humans to us? They are weak, and being weak, will
die. We will take what we want from them and go on our way.Ó 
ÒThey have not died yet.Ó He did not look toward Sangiant. ÒThe humankind are as
numerous as flies on a corpse. Though we are stronger, we are fewer.Ó 
Murmuring, the others grew restless at an exchange few of them could understand. 
ÒWhat matters it if we are fewer,Ó said Bloodheart, Òif they are weaker?Ó But he still
spoke Wendish, to SanglantÕs surprise. ÒWhat matters it as long as we kill twenty for every
one of our brothers who dies?Ó 
ÒWhy must we kill so many if we could gain more with less killing?Ó 
BloodheartÕs laughter sounded long and ominously in the echoing nave. Abruptly, he
spat at the young EikaÕs feet. ÒGo back to Rifcin fjord. You are too young to bide here any
longer. Your captivity weakened you, and you are not strong enough to fight this war. Go
home and rest with the Mothers. Prove yourself there in the fjordlands, bring the other tribes
under my heel, and perhaps I will let you return. But while you are under my displeasure, let
none among my sons speak to you in the language of true people, but only in the language
of the Soft Ones. I have spoken.Ó He turned, spat toward Sanglant, and seated himself on

his throne. The priest translated his words in a quavering voice, and then the hubbub began,
so loud with howling and laughter and harsh words, with the scraping and banging of spear
hafts on stone, and with the stamping of heels to the ground that Sanglant was deafened. 
The Eika princeling stood his ground, oblivious to the taunts and the abuse. When at last
Bloodheart began to distribute gifts to his favored soldiers, he alone left quietly, without
looking backÑout to the lit world beyond this stone and timber prison. A breath of wind
touched SangiantÕs lips. He licked it, moisture from rain almost painful on his dry tongue.
Free to go, even in disgrace. 
The madness came as a cloud covers the sun. But he fought it this time, fought
succumbing to it. He did not want to fall into madness in front of so many, an animal in truth.
But the dogs circled in, and the black cloud descended, and he forgot everything except his
fear that he would be chained here forever. 
3
 A rich autumn light streamed in through the schola windows, bathing Ivar in such a
soporific warmth that he nodded, then jerked himself back to attention as the schoolmaster
paused beside him. 
ÒMundus, munde, mundi, mundo, mundum, mundo, Ivar. Certainly if you would bestir
yourself, you could master Dariyan easily. Ermanrich, pay attention. Ah, yes, Baldwin, of
course you are doing well; it just needs more practice. See, it is mundi here, not mundo, in
the vocative.Ó 
The schoolmaster moved forward to the second-year novices, whose study of Dariyan,
the language of the old Empire and now of the Daisanite Church, was more advanced than
that of the first yearsÑall but Sigfrid, who spoke and read Dariyan fluently. 
Ivar yawned and painstakingly impressed the word into the wax tablet. He was a slow
writer and reader, having only learned the alphabet upon leaving the world and entering the
monastery. Mundus, the world. Ivar very much wanted to be out in the world right now. He
shifted, trying to get comfortable on the hard wooden bench, but of course it was impossible
to get comfortable. One was not meant to be comfortable in the monastery but rather and
always discomforted by oneÕs own unworthiness in the face of GodÕs majesty. 
However, if he slid forward just so, he could lean a little farther into the sunlight that spilled
over the table. The heat of the sun melted through the coarse fabric of his robe. The warmth
was too powerful a spell. Ivar dozed off over his tablet while the schoolmaster, lecturing to
the row of third-year novices, droned on about the elegant style on display in St.
AugustinaÕs City of God. 
Something nudged IvarÕs foot, and he snorted and started awake, losing his grip on his
stylus. It fell to the stone floor, and the sound of its impact in the silent chamber resounded in
his ears at least as loudly as if one of the huge stone pillars in the church had just crashed
down. 
But Fortune was with him this day, as She had not been yesterday when he had been
caught trying to look at the female novices. ErmanrichÑfor he was the culprit who had
nudged him awakeÑmade a quick sign with his free hand: Look. 
The schoolmaster had walked to the door and was now speaking in a low voice with
Brother Methodius, prior of the monastic half of Quedlinhame as well as Mother
ScholasticaÕs deputy. Finally he turned back to survey his pupils and signed: Stand. 
Dutifully, they stood. Ivar stooped to grab the stylus off the floor and set it next to the tablet,
for once free of the punishment that would normally attend his carelessness. 
ÒCome.Ó Brother Methodius stepped forward. ÒYou are to be granted the honor of
attending the adventus of King Henry. Keep silence, I pray you, and keep your heads bowed
humbly.Ó His eyes glinted, and Ivar thought the good brother suppressed a smile. ÒNo
doubt Our Lord and Lady will forgive you a single glance at the magnificence of the kingÕs
progress as it passes by, if you are not yet strong enough to resist such temptation.Ó 

He signed in the hand language learned by all the monks. Come. The novices formed
rows quickly, for they had by now much practice in obedience. But even SigfridÕs eyes
were wide with awe at the thought of seeing the king. 
Ivar had never seen the king, of course. HeartÕs Rest and the North March of Wendar
was too far north, too remote, and too poor to be of much interest to the king; the counts of
the North March were left to rule as they wished, unless that rule came into direct conflict with
the kingÕs authority. During IvarÕs lifetime such an incident had never happened, but his
father, Count Harl, could dimly recall an expedition by the KingÕs DragonsÑhis elite
cavalryÑto put down a northern rebellion in the time of the younger Arnulf many years ago. 
Here at Quedlinhame, of course, they could expect to see the king frequently. King Henry
preferred to spend Holy Week at the foundation ruled over by his sister, Mother Scholastica,
and inhabited by his widowed mother, Queen Mathilda, now a nun. In autumn, as it was now,
the king and his court often rested here on their way to the royal hunting lodges in the Thurin
Forest. 
 The king! Even Ivar, who tried very hard to dislike everything at Quedlinhame excluding
his new friends, could not help but be excited. As they walked down the steps from the
schoolroom and out of the dormitory, he noticed as if for the first time what a veritable hive of
activity the great monastery had become. Servants swept pavement or whitewashed
exterior walls. Women aired out blankets and featherbeds at the guest houses. By the
kitchens, wagons waited in neat rows, their beds heaped with vegetables, casks of ale,
baskets of ground wheat and rye, and crocks of honey. Cages of chickens stood stacked by
the slaughter pit and a half dozen servants worked feverishly, chopping off heads, while
others carried the dead chickens to huge vats of boiling water and threw them in to scald off
the feathers. Butchered pigs and cattle hung, draining, from the beams of the
slaughterhouse shed. The bakery fires roared, and the smell of cooking permeated the air. 
The line of novices joined that of the assembled monks and they walked out together
under the great archway that spanned the gate. Up until the time of the first Henry,
Quedlinhame had been a fortress, part of the vast inheritance his wife, Lucienna of Attomar,
had brought to their marriage. Together they had dedicated both the fortress and their only
daughter Kunigunde to the church, and at age sixteen she had become first abbessÑfirst
ÒMotherÓÑof Quedlinhame Convent. During her long rule the foundation had expanded to
include monksÑwhich unfortunate ambition had transpired in the end to bring Ivar here to
this prestigious foundation against his wishes. 
Not even these troubling thoughts could dampen IvarÕs excitement as the entire
community left the enclosure in dutiful silence and walked down the hill on the stone-paved
avenue that led through town. They walked out beyond the town walls and along the road for
at least a mile. They passed townsfolk, standing at the side of the road, who had left their
tasks and brought themselves and their children to witness the arrival of the king. Out here,
newly sown fields of winter wheat wore brown earth laced with shoots of tender green as
their autumn garb. The view behind was dominated by the great hill on which stood the
ancient fortress that was now the monastery; the towers of the church pierced the deep blue
of the heavens, reaching toward God. They halted on either side of the road, two lines of
simply-clad brothers and sisters of the church and the many layservants who served them
and God bothÑperhaps two hundred souls in total. 
Ivar heard the kingÕs progress before he saw it. He heard a muttering as of many feet
and hooves and rolling wheels, felt the subtle vibration as a tremor rising up through the
soles of his feet. He heard them singing, many voices raised in a joyful psalm. The strength
of their combined voices, the sheer power of it, made him shiver with joy; not even a full
prayer service and the chanting and singing of the monks and nuns in unison at
Quedlinhame made him feel this sudden pull to be torn away from his own person and
become some other one, one who could join in the con-cordia, the power that attended
upon the kingÕs presence. 
I sing of loyalty and justice. 

I will raise this psalm to Thee, Our Lord and Lady Who are God in Unity. 
I will follow a wise and blameless course whatever may befall me. I will go about my
house in purity of heart. I will set before myself no sordid aim. I will hate disloyalty. will
silence those who spread tales behind menÕs backs. I will not sit at table with those who
are proud and pompous. I will choose the most loyal for my companions; my servants
shall be folk whose lives are blameless. Morning after morning I will put all wicked men to
silence and I will rejoice in all on GodÕs earth which is good. 
The schoolmaster always enjoined his pupils to keep their heads bowed and their eyes
toward the ground, for in this way they made themselves smaller and indicated their
insignificance. But as the cavalcade drew near enough that he could hear the small noises
of a hundred or more souls in movement, Ivar could not help himself. He had to look. 
Ermanrich stirred beside him, and Baldwin drew in a sharp, surprised breath. Only Sigfrid
kept his head dutifully bowed. 
A KingÕs Eagle rode in front, as herald. She wore the scarlet-trimmed cape and the
brass badge of an Eagle, and she stared straight ahead at the road before her; she had a
hard, interesting face, broad shoulders, and the look of a person sure of her position and
name in the world. In her right hand she held a staff, its haft wedged against her boot. The
kingÕs banner draped from the staff, curling down to hide the hand itself, for there was no
wind to lift the banner. 
Behind her rode six young nobles honored this day with a position at the head of the
procession. They, too, carried pennants, one for each of the duchies under HenryÕs rule:
Saony, Fesse, Avaria, Varingia, Arconia, and Wayland. Ivar guessed the four boys and two
girls to be about the same age as himself; the girl holding the standard of Arconia had hair
as pale as wheat and fingers so delicate that he wondered how she had the strength to grip
the banner pole. He wondered whose child she was. If only he had been sent to court,
instead of to Quedlinhame, then he might have ridden proudly at the front of such an
adventusÑan arrivalÑas this! His gaze skipped back to the riders who followed directly
behind the pennants. 
In this group of nobles, each one attired magnificently in fine embroidered and trimmed
linen tunics, in fine leather riding boots, with handsome fur-trimmed capes or richly colored
wool cloaks thrown over all, the eye still leaped immediately to King Henry. Ivar had never
seen him before, yet he knew instantly that the middle-aged man riding in the center was the
king though he wore no crown. He needed no crown. The weight of his authority was like a
mantle cast over his shoulders. He wore clothing no plainer and no richer than the others,
one prince among many, but the leather belt that girdled his waist, embossed with the
symbols of each of the six duchies that made up the kingdom of Wendar and Varre, and the
many small and subtle gestures of the others as they deferred to him, proclaimed him prima
inter pares, first among equals. From the back of a handsome bay mare, he surveyed the
hooded monks and nuns, most of whom still stared fixedly at the ground, with stern approval
for their humility. 
Just as he passed the ranks of the novices, his eye caught IvarÕs gaze. One royal
eyebrow arched, intrigued or censorious. Ivar blushed and dropped his gaze. 
He saw booted feet march by, heard the renewed voices of many men lifted in song: The
KingÕs Lions had been granted the honor of marching directly behind the king. They halted
suddenly and their song cut off, to be replaced by the stillness of a fine autumn day, the
creak of leather, the restlessness of horses farther down the line, the barking of a dog. 
Ermanrich shifted next to Ivar and whispered to Baldwin. ÒIf only I were closer.Ó 
Startled, Ivar glanced up at the same time as did Sigfrid. Their view was partly blocked by
the ranks of Lions, sturdy men clothed in fighting gear and gold tabards marked by a black
lion, but beyond the militesÑthe fighting menÑand the nobles, the king had ridden forward
with only the Eagle in attendance to greet Mother Scholastica. 
She was also mounted, as befit a woman of royal birth come to greet her brother; she
rode on a mule whose coat was so polished a gray as to be almost white. In her dark blue

robes, adorned only with the gold Circle of Unity hanging at her chest, with her hair drawn
back under a white scarf and her face guileless and calm, she appeared every bit as regal
as her elder brother. Of course it was not fitting that a woman of her ecclesiastic rank
dismount to greet anyone except the skopos, but neither could the king dismount to greet
her. So the king had ridden forward on his mare to meet her, and now, with the two animals
side by side, the royal siblings leaned across the gap and gave each other the kiss of
family, once to each cheek, as greeting. 
ÒAnd if,Ó continued Ermanrich in that whisper, Òyou took Master Pursed-LipsÕ willow
switchÑÓ Baldwin started to snicker. 
ÒÑand gave a quick twitch of it to the mareÕs hindquarters, what do you think would
happen?Ó 
Sigfrid snorted and clapped a hand over his mouth. Ivar was so aghast at ErmanrichÕs
imagining either Mother Scholastica or the king made ridiculous by a bolting horse that he
started to giggle. 
That same willow switch lashed hard against his rump and he yelped. Then Ermanrich
gulped down a yelp as he, too, was disciplined. 
ÒKeep silence,Ó hissed the schoolmaster, stationing himself behind the four boys. He
did not, of course, switch either Baldwin or Sigfrid, and poor Sigfrid looked horrifically guilty,
for had he not responded by laughing at ErmanrichÕs jest? Ivar bit his lip as he blinked back
tears; his buttocks stung. Ermanrich had his usual sly grin on his face. He had unknowable
reserves and rarely showed any visible sign of feeling pain. The schoolmaster cleared his
throat and Ivar hastily looked down just as the king and his sister parted, her mule being
brought around by a servant so abbess and king could lead the procession up to the
monastery together. 
On past IvarÕs station marched the Lions, then the rest of the train, a stamp of feet and
hooves and rumble of wagons. Beyond, toward town, people shouted and cried out praise
to the king. 
IvarÕs rump still smarted. He could practically feel the schoolmasterÕs breath on his
neck, but the schoolmaster had moved on. A sudden feeling like the whisper of elfshot made
his neck prickle. He glanced up, or he would have missed her. 
ÒLiath!Ó He almost fell forward. The three other boys jerked their heads up and stared.
Baldwin whistled under his breath. 
Liath! He could never mistake her for someone else: dark hair, golden-brown skin, her
height and slender frame. She wore the cape and badge of a KingÕs Eagle. She wore the
badge of a KingÕs Eagle! Somehow she had gotten free of Hugh. 
Envy pierced him, as ugly an emotion as he had ever felt. Who had helped her? He did
not want to share that victory, share her gratitude, with anyone. Had she freed herself?
Surely not. Hugh would never let her go. Perhaps Hugh was dead; yet not even that thought
satisfied Ivar. He, Ivar, son of Harl and Herlinda, must be the one to kill HughÑor, preferably,
to humiliate him. 
As wagons rumbled by, he could only stare at her receding back, at the braid that hung in
a thick line to her waist. She looked closely at the ranks of hooded monks, their heads
bowed modestly so none might see their faces. She knew he was here, didnÕt she? Surely
she remembered he had been sent to Quedlinhame, only because he had tried to help her. 
As he watched her ride away, he almost wept, yet was so filled with joy that he thought he
must shine with it. Now, as she passed the last line of layservants, she stopped looking. She
stared straight ahead instead, gaze fixed on some unseeable point, perhaps on the church
towers whose gilded roofs glinted in the noonday sun. She was lost to him as the kingÕs
progress rode into Quedlinhame and the trainÑwagons, produce, servants, spare horses,
tents, furnishings, the entire ponderous cavalcade that attended the kingÑtrundled past,
kicking dust up into his teeth. 
Still he stared after her, keeping his head lifted defiantly as the long train passed, the last
of the courtiers and their attendant servants at the end. He searched them all, looking for

Hanna. Hanna had sworn to stay by Liath. But of Hanna he saw no sign. 
The willow switch surprised him. This time it landed on his shoulders and he actually
grunted out loud, it hurt so badly. 
ÒIt is unseemly to stare,Ó said the schoolmaster coldly. ÒYou bring notice on yourself.Ó 
Ivar clamped his lips shut over a retort. Now he could not get angry. Now he must plan.
Liath had come to Quedlinhame and though the novices rarely stirred outside their dormitory
and courtyard, though they were always heavily supervised, he would find a way to let Liath
know he was here. He would find a way to see her, talk to her. To touch her. 
Even thinking such a thing was a sin. 
But he didnÕt care. 
The last of the train rolled by. The monks and nuns fell into place behind the kingÕs
progress. Bells rang in Quedlinhame. Someone at the head of their procession began to
sing and the others joined in as they walked back toward town, following the king. 
O God, endow the king with Thine own justice, and give Thy righteousness to the
kingÕs heir so this one may judge Thy people rightly and deal out justice to the poor and
suffering. 
By this time the road was a swirling, choking mass of dust made no better by the
hysterical townsfolk who swarmed in behind the line of monks and nuns. Their excitement
was itself a creature, huge and perilous and joyful. Was this not the king? There would be a
ceremony later, after the king had washed himself and greeted his sainted mother in quieter
rooms. Queen Mathilda was not strong enough for a public greeting. Then Mass would be
sung in the townÕs church, and as many townsfolk as could manage would crowd into the
church to see the king robed and crowned in royal splendor, his sacred presence a
reminder of GodÕs heavenly grace and HenryÕs earthly power. After the Feast of St.
Valentinus tomorrow, townsfolk could bring their grievances to the kingÕs personal
attention, for he would rest in town for Hallowing Eve and the holy days of All Souls and All
Saints which followed. Only then would he and his retinue ride on to Thurin Forest, where
they would hunt. Ivar envied them the freedom to hunt. 
But he had his own hunting to do. Somehow, at some time in the excitement during the
next three days, Master Pursed-Lips would stray from his attentiveness. He would forget to
watch quite as closely. Somehow Ivar would find a way to contact Liath. 
4
Liath had searched the line of monks along the roadside, but their heads had remained
bowed, their faces hidden. So she rode on into Quedlinhame, through the town, and up a
winding road that led to the top of the hill where thick walls protected monks and nuns from
the temptations of the world; so Da had said to her. Had he been a brother here once? 
Beyond the monastery gate, layservants took the horses and led them away to the
stables. She started after them, swinging her saddlebag off the horse and draping its weight
over her shoulderÑthen heard her name above the clamor of horses and wagons. 
ÒLiath!Ó Hathui hailed her. 
Liath threaded her way through the mob, avoiding a whippet hound snapping at the end
of a leash, stepping over a fresh pile of horse manure, waiting as a noble lady still mounted
on a fine gray gelding crossed in front of her. 
ÒCome. We are to attend the king.Ó Hathui smoothed down her tunic and straightened
the brass badge that pinned her cloak. Then she frowned at Liath. ÒYou should have left
your gear with the horse. ItÕll be safe in a convent, I should think!Ó 
Liath attempted a smile. ÒI didnÕt think. I just grabbed it.Ó 
Hathui crooked an eyebrow. She was not a woman easily fooled nor one to succumb to
nonsense. ÒWhatÕs in there so precious that youÕll never let that bag leave your side?Ó 
ÒNothing!Ó It was said too quickly, of course. Liath shifted the saddlebag on her
shoulders, shrugging the back pouch aside where it had gotten tangled with her bow quiver.

ÒNothing special except to me. Something Da left to me. The only thing I have left of him.Ó 
ÒYes, so youÕve said before,Ó replied Hathui in the tone of someone who doesnÕt
believe what she is hearing. ÒBut if Wolfhere minds not, than neither shall I. He may settle
this with you when he returns.Ó 
 Which, Lady grant, might be many months from now. Though she missed Hanna bitterly,
Liath did not regret that she would not see Wolfhere until next year, when he and Hanna
could cross back over the mountains from Darre and return to the kingÕs progress. She 
liked Wolfhere, but she could not trust him. 
Monks walked through the gate. She looked for IvarÕs pale, familiar face. 
ÒCome, come, Liath. We wait upon the king. He does not wait upon us. Why are you
staring so?Ó 
Liath shook off the older womanÕs hand and followed beside her as they crossed the
field. Ahead, the king and a few of his most trusted retainers gathered by the stairs that led
up to the churchÕs portico. ÒI know someone who is a novice hereÑÓ 
ÒIvar, son of Count Harl and Lady Herlinda.Ó 
Liath glanced sharply at her. ÒHow did you know?Ó
ÒHanna told me. She told me all about Ivar, her milk brother.Ó 
It stung, the dart of jealousy, that Hanna had formed such a friendship with this tough
marchlander woman. Liath liked Hathui but could never be comfortable with her. She dared
not trust anyone she had met after DaÕs death. Trusted no one now, except Hanna. Except
possibly Ivar, if she could find him. No one else, except SanglantÑand he was dead. ÒNever
meant for me even if he had lived,Ó she muttered. 
ÒWhat?Ó asked Hathui. Liath shook her head, not answering. ÒHanna said Ivar loved
you,Ó Hathui added in an altered tone of voice. ÒDo you feel guilt for it still, that Prater Hugh
condemned him to a life as a monk though it was no wish of the boyÕs? Only because he
interfered with what Hugh wanted?Ó 
ÒHanna told you a great deal,Ó said Liath, voice choked.
ÒWe are friends. As you and I might be, but you are such a strange, distant creature,
more like a fey spirit than a womanÑÓ Hathui broke off, not because she wished to avoid
offending LiathÑHathui said what she meant and intended no offense by itÑbut because
they had reached the king. King Henry caught sight of Hathui and indicated with a gesture
that she should walk behind him as they proceeded into the church. Liath stumbled over her
own feet and hurried to catch up, not knowing where else to walk except behind Hathui. In
the midst of so many fine nobles she could nurse her pain in private because, to the noble
lords and ladies, she was merely an appendage of the king, like his crown or scepter or
throne, not a real living person they had to take any notice of. She was simply an Eagle, a
messenger to be dispatched at the kingÕs whim. 
Hanna had every right to tell Hathui whatever she wished, had every right to count Hathui
as a friend. Wolfhere and Hathui and poor dead ManfredÑthe three Eagles who had
rescued her from HughÑsurely knew or guessed the truth of her relationship to Hugh, knew
that he had kept her warm in his bed though he was a holy frater and dedicated to the
church, that he had gotten her with child and then beaten her nearly to death for defying him,
after which beating she had miscarried. In the end, worn down by exhaustion and fear, she
had given him The Book of Secrets and all it represented: her submission to him. 
Only the arrival of Wolfhere and his two companion Eagles had saved her. They had
rescued her from Hugh; she had not truly escaped him. Liath glanced up at HathuiÕs sturdy
back, she who walked directly behind the king. Hathui had not once treated Liath with
disrespect or scorned her, even knowing she had been a churchmanÕs slave and
concubine. Hathui might be only a freeholderÕs daughter, but the freeholders of the
marchlands were notoriously proud. The king himself had seen fit to bestow on Hathui his
favor. In the four months Liath had ridden with the kingÕs progress, she had seen how
Hathui was called frequently to the kingÕs side, how he now and again asked her advice on
some matter. This was indeed a signal honor for a woman born of common farmers. 

Yes, Hanna had every right to count Hathui as a friend. But that endless niggling fear
pricked at Liath: What if Hanna came to prefer Hathui? What if she loved Liath the less for
liking Hathui more? It was a weak, unkind thought, both toward Hanna and toward Hathui.
Liath could even now hear what Da would say were he alive to hear her confess such a
thing: ¡°A rosebush can give more than one bloom each season.Ó 
But Da was dead. Murdered. And Hanna was all she had left. She wanted so desperately
not to lose her. ÔWo use fretting about the donkey,Ó Da would say, ¡°when heÕs safe
inside the shed and youÕve loose chickens to save from the fox.Ó 
At that moment Hathui glanced back at her and gave her a reassuring smile. They
entered the church. It was surprisingly light inside the nave, a long lofty space with a wooden
ceiling made of a checkerboard of crossbeams. A double row of arched windows set high
in the wall, well above the decorative columns that lined the nave, admitted this light. The
party walked forward solemnly so that Henry and his sister could kneel before the Hearth.
Liath admired the parallel rows of columns, two round columns alternating with every square
one to form the central nave. Eagles and dragons and lions adorned the capitals, carved
cunningly into stone; these symbols of power served to remind visitors and postulants alike
whose authority reigned here, second only to God in Unity. The floor was paved in pale
yellow-and-dun granite. She tried, superstitiously, not to step on any of the cracks seaming
the blocks into a larger whole. 
The king mounted the steps at the far end of the nave and knelt before the Hearth. Liath
knelt with the others, many of whom perforce had to get down on their knees on the stairs in
all manner of awkward positions. Her knee captured the trailing end of HathuiÕs cloak so
that the poor woman could not kneel forward comfortably, but it had become so very quiet in
the church that Liath dared not shift even enough to loosen the cloak from her weight. 
Mother Scholastica said a prayer over the Hearth to which the assembled nobles
murmured rote responses. Liath could not keep her eyes from the Hearth, where a sparkling
reliquary cut entirely from rock crystal and formed into the shape of a falcon rested next to
Mother SeholasticaÕs hand. Beside the reliquary stood a book so studded in gems and
coated with gold leaf that it seemed of itself to emanate light. 
Blessed and sanctified, King Henry rose, shook off his cloak into the hands of a waiting
servant, and beckoned to Hathui and his two most trusted advisers: the crippled margrave,
Helmut Villam, and the cleric, Rosvita of Korvei. Hathui beckoned to Liath, and the two
Eagles hastened to follow these notables as they descended the stairs and exited the
church by a smaller door that led into quarters reserved for the mother abbess and her
servants. 
In an insignificant room just off the abbessÕ private cloister, King Henry knelt beside the
low bed on which his mother lay. He kissed her hands in greeting, as any son gives his
mother the honor due her. ÒMother.Ó 
She touched his eyes gently. ÒYou have been weeping, my child. What is this grief for?
Do you still mourn the boy?Ó 
He hid his face even from her, but not for long. A motherÕs demands must be
acknowledged. At last he set his face against the coarse wool blanketÑfit for a common nun
but surely not for a queenÑand wept his sorrow freely while the others turned their gazes
away. 
They had all knelt in emulation of the king. Liath, at the back, studied their faces. Hathui
stared steadily at the rough flagstone floor of the cell, her expression one of mingled pity and
respect. The old margrave, Helmut Villam, wiped a tear from his own cheek with his
remaining hand. Mother Scholastica frowned at the displayÑnot at the sight of a grown man
crying, for of course the ability to express grief easily and compassionately was a kingly
virtue, but at the excessive grief Henry still carried with him at the death of a son who was,
after all, only a bastard. The cleric had no expression Liath could read on her intelligent face,
but she glanced LiathÕs way, as if she had felt her gaze upon her, and Liath looked down at
once. ÒDonÕt let them notice you,Ó Da had always said. ÒSafety lies in staying hidden.Ó

 ÒNow, child,Ó the old queen was saying to Henry. Though her body was weak and her
voice tremulous, her spirit clearly had not quailed under the burden of her illness. ÒYou will
dry these tears. It has been half a year since the boy diedÑand an honorable death he had,
did he not? It is time to let him go. Is this not the eve of hallowing? Let him go so that his
spirit may ascend, as it must, through the seven spheres to come to rest at last in the
blessed Chamber of Light. You bind his soul to this world with your grief.Ó 
ÒThese are heathen words,Ó said Mother Scholastica abruptly.
ÒIt is a heathen holy day, is it not, though we have given it a Daisanite name?Ó retorted
the queen. Married young, she had borne at least two of her ten children before she was
LiathÕs age, or so Liath calculated. She was at most fourteen years older than Henry, who
was her eldest child. Her hair, uncoifed in the privacy of her cell, had a few brown strands
still woven in among the white. Whatever sickness ravaged her came not only from the
assault of time but also from a more physical malady. ÒWe speak of Hallowing Eve still and
pray to all the saints on these days when the great tides of the heavens bring the living and
the dead close togetherÑbring them so close that we might even touch, if our eyes were
open.Ó 
Liath caught in a sob. As she listened to the old queen speak, she recalled Da so vividly
that it was almost as if she could see him standing beside her, glimpsed out of the corner of
her eye. 
ÒIt is a form of respect,Ó continued the old woman, Òthat I think God will not begrudge
us.Ó 
Mother Scholastica bowed her head obediently, for although she was mistress of
Quedlinhame and Mother over all the nuns, including Mathilda, she was at the same time
this womanÕs daughter. Mathilda had been queen once and was a powerful woman still,
queen by title though she no longer sat upon a throne. 
ÒHenry, you must let him go, or he will wander here forever, trapped by your grief.Ó 
ÒWhat if he canÕt die as we do?Ó asked Henry in a rasping voice. ÒWhat if his
motherÕs blood forbids him entrance to the Chamber of Light? Is he then doomed to
wander as a shade on this earth forever? Are we never to be reunited in the blessed peace
of the Light?Ó 
ÒThat is for Our Lord and Lady to judge,Ó said Mother Scholastica sternly, Ònot for us to
trouble ourselves over. Many books were written by the ancients on this questionÑwhether
the Lost Ones had soulsÑbut this is not the time or place to debate that issue. Come, Henry.
You are tiring our mother.Ó 
ÒNo,Ó said the old queen. ÒI am not tired. If you speak to me of your grief, Henry,
perhaps that will ease it.Ó She looked up, her gaze sharper than Liath had expected from a
bedridden woman. ÒVillam is here.Ó 
It struck Liath suddenly that Helmut Villam was as old as Queen Mathilda. Despite his
crippling injury, he had far more vigor, the energy of a much younger person. The margrave
came forward, kissed her hand, then retired to the door. The queen acknowledged Rosvita
next, clasped the clericÕs hands in her own in the sign of fealty. ÒMy History?Ó she asked
with a gentle smile. ÒHow does it progress?Ó 
The clericÕs smile in answer was brief but sweet. ÒI hope to complete the First Book this
year, Your Majesty, so that you may have it read to you and learn of the illustrious deeds of
the first Henry and his son, the elder Arnulf.Ó 
ÒDo not tarry too long, my sister, for your words interest me greatly, and I fear I have not
too many more days upon this earth.Ó 
Rosvita bowed her head, touching her forehead to the old queenÕs wrinkled hands. Then
she stood and retreated. 
ÒWho are these?Ó the old woman asked, looking at the two Eagles. 
Henry glanced back. At first he appeared surprised. Then he registered Hathui. ÒMy
faithful Eagle,Ó he said wryly. He looked beyond HathuiÑLiath flinched when his powerful
gaze focused on her. For an instant it was like HughÕs gaze, penetrating, absolute; like the

strike of lightning, it could obliterate her. But Henry only marked her and looked away without
further interest. ÒThis other Eagle was at Gent. Together with Wolfhere she witnessed the
destruction of the Dragons and the death ofÑÓ His voice broke, unable to speak the name
of his dead son. 
ÒTogether with Wolfhere,Ó said the queen thoughtfully, as if the name meant something
to her. Liath stared at the gray stone, at its uneven surface and rough grade. No polished
marble or fine granite blocks graced this common nunÕs cell. ÒCome forward, child.Ó 
One did not disobey a queen, even one who now professed to be a nun, not when she
used that tone of voice. Liath hooked a foot under her body, stood, took seven small steps
forward, and knelt again. Only then did she look up. 
Gray eyes as cool as winter storm clouds and yet with a deep calm beneath them met
LiathÕs gaze. ÒYou are some relation to Conrad the Black, perhaps?Ó Queen Mathilda
asked. ÒI have seen such coloring nowhere else, except perhaps inÑÓ She made a tiny
gesture with one hand, a scissoring of fingers quickly made and quickly vanished. Mother
Scholastica rose and left the cell. Henry still gripped his motherÕs other hand, the one that
lay so still upon the rough wool blanket. Mathilda had the most delicate wrists Liath had ever
seen on an adult. Her small hands were weathered with work, for Queen Mathilda was
famous for serving in common with the other nuns, such was her humility. ÒYou are no
relation?Ó 
Liath shook her head, not trusting herself to speak. 
ÒYou were in Gent?Ó 
Liath nodded. Lady Above, please let her be satisfied with this knowledge; please let her
not demand that Liath tell the entire awful heart-wrenching tale again, so that she had to live
through it again: that last vision seen through fire, Sanglant struck down by an Eika ax and
Bloodheart gloating above his fallen body, holding aloft in his bare bloody hand the golden
neck torque that signified the princeÕs royal kinship. 
At that moment Liath realized Queen Mathilda did not wear the golden torque, though her
son and daughter did. But she was not born of the royal lineages of Wendar and Varre. She
had only married into the family. At this moment, under that calm gray but utterly penetrating
gaze, Liath could not remember where Mathilda came from, of what kin, of what
countryÑonly that she had ruled as queen beside Arnulf the Younger, his second wife, and
that she now examined Liath with keen interest and not a little understanding. 
ÒYou knew Sanglant,Ó she said. 
Liath nodded, dared say nothing in answer. I loved Sanglant. But the prince was not for
her; even Wolfhere had warned him away from her. ¡°Down that road I dare not walk,Ó
Sanglant had said to her, for was he not an obedient son? ¡°Be bound, as I am, by the fate
others have determined for you. That way you will remain safe.Ó 
But the fate that had bound Sanglant, captain of the KingÕs Dragons and bastard son of
a king, was nothing like the fate she struggled against, whose bonds she could not even
recognize. Just as well, she thought bitterly, that he was killed. It was only safe to love
someone who was already dead. 
Her expression betrayed her. 
ÒThe last,Ó said the queen, comprehending the whole, Òif not the first. Pretty enough that
any might understand why he was tempted. That is enough, child. You may go.Ó 
Liath was mortified. To be discovered, to be seen through so easily, and by a woman
who did not even know her! Henry was staring morosely at the far wall, idly twisting the
signet ring on his right hand, not paying attention. Villam had gone outside to the sun. Only
Hathui and Ros-vita witnessed. Perhaps the queen had spoken too softly for them to hear.
Liath dipped her head obediently and retreated, still on her knees, back to the safety of the
door and HathuiÕs shadow. 
But a queenÑa girl brought from foreign lands to marry an older and possibly indifferent
manÑsurely must learn to study faces and puzzle out intrigue from every line and utterance.
After all, she had gotten her son onto the throne of Wendar and Varre despite the claim of

the elder half sisterÑArnulf s only living child from his first and some said more legitimate
marriage. It would not do to underestimate a woman like Mathilda, no matter how weak she
looked now. 
Liath was allowed to leave, although Hathui remained with the king and the king
appeared determined to remain for some while with his mother. Outside, no one asked her
to run errands or carry a trifling message. She couldnÕt enter the innermost cloisters, of
course, but when the kingÕs progress had come to Quedlinhame it was impossible to stop
visitors from wandering the grounds and gardens of the monastery. She climbed the outer
wall and found a vantage point from which to look down over the foundation. 
All monasteriesÑwhether housing monks or nunsÑwere built on the same general plan,
one laid out three centuries ago by St. Benedicta, founder of The Rule. Liath had seen plans
of various monasteries, and once she had seen a thing and committed it to memory, it was
the work of a moment to dredge it up again. Mathilda. She searched in the city of memory.
Past the gate surmounted by the Throne of Virtue stood the halls of the kingdoms. She found
the one inscribed with the Dragon, Lion, and Eagle of Wendar and went inside. On the dais
Henry sat alone now that his queen, Sophia, had died. Behind him, through a curtain, lay the
chamber of Arnulf the Younger, flanked on the right by his first wife, Berengaria of Varre, and
on the left by Mathilda. This seated statue of Mathilda held in its right hand a scroll bearing
the names of her nine children and in its left, signifying her descent, a small banner
embroidered with the sigil of the kingdom of Karrone. 
Liath backtracked to the hall of Karrone. There among the gathered dead and living
nobles of the royal house, all cast in stone, she found Mathilda. Granddaughter of Berta,
princess and later Queen of Karrone, the first Karronese prince to defy her Salian overlords
and style herself regnant. Daughter of BertaÕs only son, prince and later King Rodulf, the
last of BertaÕs five children, all of whom had held the throne, each in succession. Having
seen the chronicle of the monks of St. Galle, Liath could even recall the dates of their reigns
and their deaths. Rodulf had reigned from until . His death had brought forth two claimants to
KarroneÕs throne: his niece Marozia and his grandson, Henry. Marozia had seized the
throne by right of proximity, and Henry, newly crowned king of Wendar and Varre, was too
young in power to contest her. Instead he had married his younger brother Benedict to her
daughter, also called Marozia; these two now reigned in the mountainous kingdom of
Karrone as Queen Regnant and King Consort. 
All of this Liath remembered, and much more besides. It was only in the central tower, the
highest point in the city itself, that a door stood which she could not unlockÑbehind it rested 
DaÕs secrets, all he had kept hidden from her. She shook her head impatiently and
scanned the monastery, searching for a small building with its own cloister, set apart from
the others: the novitiary. 
Eventually the novices would have to emerge from the novitiary, to pray, to attend to their
bodily needs, to perform manual labor. The Rule enjoined that all nuns and monks spend
some part of each day in labor, Òfor then are they truly laborers for God when they live by the
labor of their hands.Ó 
She hunkered down to wait, finding a patch of warm autumn sun and tugging her cloak
tight around her. The sudden cold autumn wind on her neck made her shudder, and she was
abruptly seized with an unreasoning panic, heart pounding, breath caught in her throat and
her hands trembling as if with a palsy. But Hugh wasnÕt here. He wasnÕt here. She still had
the book, and other weapons besides. To calm herself, she touched them one by one, like
talismans: Her short sword rested easily on her left hip; her eating knife nestled in a sheath;
the weight of her bow, quiver and arrows made a comforting presence on her back. Ai,
Lady! Surely she was safe from Hugh now. The door to the novitiary opened and a double
line of brown-robed novices, heads bowed humbly, emerged from the novitiary and walked
in strict columns by paved paths, then dirt ones, out to the gardens. Liath jumped up to follow
them. Certain of the noble lords and ladies lounged at their leisure on the withering autumn
grass or admired the late flowers in the herb garden; unlike Liath, they ignored the

novicesÑall, that is, except the wheat-haired girl Liath recognized as Lady Tallia. 
As the column of novices passed Tallia, she knelt on ragged grass and bowed her head
in prayer. Liath found the girlÕs piety grating and excessive, but others praised her for it.
Liath had been on the road for too long to find it admirable that Tallia ruined her gowns by
using them to wash the Hearths of churches, scraping her pale fine hands raw in the
process. That was all very well for a noblewoman who could replace such fine stuffs, but
something else again for those who had little to spare. Tallia might fast at every opportunity
and turn away fine meats and soft breads and rich savories, but at least she had such food
to turn away. Liath had traveled the roads with Da for eight years. She had seen faces gaunt
with starvation because the last harvest had run scant; she had seen children scrabbling in
the dirt for precious grains of wheat and rye and oats. 
Some among the novices did not ignore the nobles. Some looked up, curiousÑas she
would have been curious, in their place. The watching schoolmaster scurried down the line
and applied his willow switch to shoulders. They plodded out to the gardens where a ridge
of soil lay dry and crumbling on one side from a summer under the sun and fresh and moist
on the other where the novices had turned it up the previous day. With hoes, pointed sticks,
and shovels, they commenced digging the unturned earth. Liath picked her way down the
steep stone stairs and took a circuitous route across the grounds. Lady Tallia had ventured
to the edge of the garden and Liath saw her pleading with the schoolmistressÑfor both male
and female novices worked in the gardens this day, though at separate ends as was proper.
After a bit, the schoolmistress relented and handed the girl a stick. With this in hand, she
promptly climbed over the little stone fence that served to keep vermin out of the vegetables
and with more enthusiasm than skill commenced digging beside the other female novices,
oblivious to the stains that now accumulated on the hem and knees of her gold linen gown. 
Liath circled in and took up a stance east of the novices, where she pretended to study
the towers of the church. She busied herself with her cloak, flashing its scarlet trim. 
Of a sudden she saw him, caught with his astonished gaze on her and his hoe frozen in
the dirt. He nudged the boy next to him. Ai, Lady! Even from this distance Liath could see
that his friend was remarkably handsome. The handsome boy elbowed another and that one
the next until four faces stared at her while she stared back. 
Ivar! He gaped at her for long stunned moments, then straightened, yanked his hoe out of
the earth as if he meant to run over and greet herÑand suddenly hunched over again to
strike his hoe back into the dirt. All of them did, dutiful novices attending to their labor just in
time for the schoolmaster to pass them by, willow switch in hand, and glower first at them
and then, briefly, at the Eagle who was making a spectacle of herself so close by sheltered
novices. 
It would be impossible to speak to Ivar. 
Impossible. 
At that moment she noted the long narrow shed with many plank doors which sat out
away from the cloister: the necessarium. Even holy church folk must attend to the needs of
the earthly body. She looked back toward Ivar. He was chopping the hoe onto the dirt with
one hand, pointlessly but enough to make it look as though he were working, and with his
other hand making signs. Though Da had taught her the silent hand language used by nuns,
and monks, she stood too far from Ivar to read what he said, and she dared not move closer
since the schoolmaster had already marked her. Instead, knowing Ivar watched her, she
ostentatiously stretched one arm up over her head and slowly lowered it until her hand
pointed toward the neces-sarium. She turned her back on the gardens and walked over to
the long shed. 
Picking a door at randomÑnot at the very end, not in the middleÑshe pulled it open,
paused so that Ivar had time to mark her, then stepped up onto a rough raised plank floor
and closed herself into the gloom. 
Lady Above! It stank of piss and excrement. But there was room to turn around and also,
because this was a royal monastery, a sanded wood bench with a hole cut in the middle on

which to sit. She sat on the edge of the bench, extremely careful to make sure no trailing end
of cloak snaked down the hole to the pit below, and covered her nose and mouth with an
edge of that cloak. In this way, shielded somewhat from the ripe smell of human waste by the
honest scent of good plain wool, she waited. 
She waited for a long time, so long, in fact, that the smell began not to bother her as
much, and the occasional sounds as doors banged open or shut and folkÑmonks, nuns, and
courtfolk alikeÑwent about their business in the long shed began to have a kind of
monotonous lulling pattern to them. Suddenly, a hand scraped at the rope handle. She
shrank back into the corner as the door opened. 
As quickly, a brown-robed figure slipped inside and closed the door behind him. She
stood up, and because the space between bench and door was so narrow and because her
left foot had gone numb, she staggered. He embraced her, steadying her, and clasped her
hard against him. His hood fell back. She stood there, stiff and dumb, and he began
muttering her name over and over as if he knew no other word and kissed first her neck and,
as he got his bearings, her ear, her cheek and finally her mouth. 
ÒIvar.Ó She slid a hand between them. He was taller than she remembered, filled out,
broader in the shoulder. His embraceÑso unfamiliar and yet utterly familiarÑreminded her of
long-ago nights in HeartÕs Rest when she and he and Hanna would run laughing out of a
rainstorm and huddle together in the shelter of the inn stables. But they had so little time.
ÒIvar!Ó she said urgently, pulling away. 
ÒSay you will marry me,Ó he said softly, lips moist against her skin. ÒSay you will marry
me, Liath, and we will escape from here somehow and make our way in the world. Noth ing
will stop us.Ó He took in a sharp breath to speak more passionate words yet, then grunted.
ÒAi, Lord! What a muffled her giggles in the coarse fabric of his robe; he buried his face in
her hair. In moments she was crying softly and he was, too. She closed her arms about his
torso and hugged him tightly. Kinless, she had no one left her but Ivar and Hanna. ÒAi,
Liath,Ó he whispered. ÒWhat will we do? Whatever will we do?Ó
5
Night came as it always did, whether this dayÕs night or the next one he did not know. He
no longer had any conception of time, only of the stone beneath him, the rainÑor lack of
itÑon the roof, the dogs growling around him, the slaves scurrying about their tasks, bent
and frightened, and the Eika on their way in and out of the cathedral, always moving.
Sometimes they left him alone through days and nights he could no longer keep track of, for
there was still a world outside although he had long since forgotten what it looked like. Most
of the dogs went with them, then, although some few always stayed beside him. He was
never truly alone. Perhaps it was better that he was never truly alone. Without the dogs, he
would have forgotten that he existed. 
Sometimes when they left him, he could only stare at nothing, or else at the stippling in the
marble stone with its veins running away into nothing, or else at the scars on his arms and
legs which were in all stages of healing, some still oozing blood, some pink, some scabbed,
some the white of a cleanly healed wound. 
Sometimes he was seized with such a restless surge of energy that he paced in the
semicircle that was the limit of his chains, or lunged, or ran in place, or sparred with
imaginary sword or spear against an imaginary opponent, the old drill he had learned so
well that his body knew it by heart though he could not now put words to its movements. Only
the chains hindered him. Always the chains hindered him, the iron collar, the heavy
manacles chafing his wrists and his ankles. 
ÒWhy arenÕt you dead yet?Ó Bloodheart would ask with irritation when he returned, or in
the mornings when light flooded in through open doors and the painted windows shone with
stories from the Holy Verses: the blessed Daisan and the seven miracles; the Witnessing of
St. Thecla; the Vision of the Abyss of St. Matthias; the Revelation of St. Johanna: ÔOutside

are dogs and murderers, fornicators and sorcerers, and all who love deceit; only those
whose robes are clean will have the right to enter the gates of the blessed city.Õ 
Dog he was now. Murderer he had once been named by the mother of a young nobleman
who had rebelled against the kingÕs authority and paid for that rebellion with his life and the
lives of his followers; no doubt the families of the barbarians who had invaded WendarÕs
borders and been killed by his Dragons in fair combat felt the same, but they never came to
court to face him or his king. FornicatorÑwell, he could not regret a single one of the women
he had slept with, and he had never heard that they regretted the act either. 
He would have used sorcery to escape this torment had he known how. But that gift, said
to be the lifeÕs blood of his motherÕs kin, he knew nothing of. She had abandoned him,
and he had taken up instead the birthright of his fatherÕs people. Trained to fight and to die
bravely, he knew nothing else. He had nothing else. 
The brass badge pressed painfully against the joint where arm met shoulder as he
shifted, trying to find a comfortable position so that the chains did not rub him raw. 
The EagleÕs badge. Her image came to his mindÕs eye as sharply as if he had seen
her yesterday. Her name he remembered, when he had forgotten so much else: Liath. 
¡°My heart rests not within me but with another, and she is far away from here.Ó Was it
true? Or had he only spoken those words as defiance, as a shield against BloodheartÕs
enchantment? What if it were true? What if it could be true? 
There was a world beyond this prison, if he could only imagine it. But when he imagined
life, he imagined war, battle, his brave Dragons dying around him. That imagining always
led him here, chained to the altar stone in this cathedral. What was the name of the city? 
She would know. 
Gent. It was in Gent he waited, imprisoned, scraping sometimes at his chains, sawing at
them with the knife when the Eika were absent, but he could not get free. 
Yet as the holy man is freed from the world by contemplating God, surely he could free at
least his mind from this prison by contemplating the world outside. He was not a holy man, to
meditate on Our Lord and Lady, although surely he ought to. He was too restless for that holy
peace, and uneducated in the disciplines of the mind. 
The world outside waned from autumn to winter. It was cold. The dying sun would be
reborn, as they sang in the Old Faith, and then spring would return. And he would still be
chained. 
She had led others to freedom. If he only imagined himself walking beside her through a
field of oats, then Bloodheart could touch him no longer. 
6
 Young Tallia, her wheat-colored hair and wheat-colored gown rendering her almost
colorless, knelt on the hard stone floor before Mother ScholasticaÕs chair. The girl carefully
avoided the carpet laid on the floor, as if she dared not succumb to the luxury of padding
beneath her much-abused knees. 
ÒI beg you!Ó she cried. ÒI want nothing more than to dedicate my life to the church in
memory of the woman I was named after, Biscop Tallia of Pairri, she who was daughter of
the great Emperor Taillefer. If you would let me pledge myself as a novice here at
Quedlinhame, I would serve faithfully. I would humble myself as befits a good nun. I would
serve the poor with my own hands and wash the feet of lepers.Ó 
The king, pacing, turned at this. ÒI have had several marriage offers for you, none of
which I am tempted to act on at this timeÑÓ 
ÒI beg you, Uncle!Ó Tallia had the dubious ability to make tears spring out at any
utterance. But Rosvita did not think this entirely contrived: The girl had a kind of tortured
piety about her, no doubt from living with her mother Sa-bella and her poor idiot of a father,
Duke Berengar. ÒLet me be wed to Our Lord, not to the flesh.Ó 
Henry lifted his eyes to heaven as if imploring God to grant him patience. Rosvita had

heard this argument played out a dozen times in the last six monthsÑindeed, Tallia seemed
to have memorized the speechÑand the cleric knew Henry wearied of it and of the girlÕs
dramatic piety. 
ÒI am not opposed to your vocation,Ó said the king, turning back finally and speaking
with some semblance of patience, Òbut you are an heiress, Tallia, and therefore not so
easily removed from the world.Ó 
The girl cast one beseeching glance toward Queen Mathilda, who reclined on a couch,
then clasped her hands at her breast, shut her eyes, and began to pray. 
ÒHowever,Ó said Mother Scholastica before the girl could get well-launched into a
psalm, Òwe have agreed, King Henry and I, that for the time being you will reside with the
novices here at Quedlinhame. But only until a decision has been made over what will
become of you.Ó 
By this means, of course, Henry and Scholastica placed Tallia as a virtual hostage in the
middle of HenryÕs strongest duchy. But Tallia wept tears of gratitude and was finallyÑthank
the LadyÑled away by the schoolmistress. 
Queen Mathilda said, into the silence, ÒShe seems fierce in her vocation.Ó 
ÒIndeed,Ó said Henry in the tone of a man who has been pressed too far. ÒHer
privations are legendary.Ó 
Mother Scholastica raised one eyebrow. She studied the owl featherÑher quill penÑthat
lay by her right hand; touching its feathers briefly, stroking them with the tip of a finger, she
looked at her mother. ÒExcessive piety can itself be a form of pride,Ó she said dryly. 
ÒSo did I observe in you,Ó said the old queen with the barest of smiles, Òwhen you were
young.Ó 
ÒSo did I come to observe in myself,Ó said Mother Scholastica without smiling. Here, in
her private study with only family and clerics in attendance, she had let slip her white scarf to
reveal hair, rather lighter than HenryÕs, liberally sprinkled with gray. Only three years
younger than Henry, she looked perhaps ten years younger. This contradiction was much
debated in the matristic writings. Women, blessed with the ability to bleed and to give birth,
suffered from that birthing if they took advantage of the blessing, while those who pledged
themselves and their fertility to the church, living their lives as holy virgins, often lived much
longer lives. Mathilda, who had given birth to ten children and been widowed at the age of
thirty-eight, looked as ancient and frail as Mother Otta, the abbess of Korvei Convent, but
Mother Otta was ninety and the queen only fifty-six. 
Now, later that same day, these thoughts came back to Rosvita as she knelt with the
congregation in the Quedlinhame town church. Thunder rumbled in the distance as Mother
Scholastica intoned the final words of her homily. 
ÒThe Lady does not give out her blessing freely. This is GodÕs way of teaching a lesson
to humankind. Although the gift of bearing children is certainly a blessing, the means by
which we mortals can in some measure know immortality, all earthly beings are tainted with
the infinitesimal grains of the primordial darkness that mixed by chance with the pure
elements of light, wind, fire, and water. That intermingling brought about the creation of the
world. And those of us who live in the world are thereby stained with darkness. Only through
the blessed DaisanÕs teaching, only through the blinding glory of the Chamber of Light, can
we cleanse ourselves and attain a place at Our LordÕs and LadyÕs side. So ends the
teaching.Ó 
The brethrenÑmonks and nuns from QuedlinhameÑsang the Te Deam, the hymn to
GodÕs glory. Their voices blended with the fine precision of a choir used to singing in
concord. With this music as accompaniment, King Henry entered the church in formal
procession. 
Rosvita stifled a yawn. It was so very muggy for this late in the year, and she was not as
young as she once had been. It was no longer easy to standÑor kneelÑthrough an entire
service. For how many years had she traveled with the kingÕs progress? How often had she
seen the banners representing the six duchies carried in and displayed, symbol of the

kingÕs earthly power? How many times had she watched the ceremonial anointing, robing,
and crowning of the king on feast days? Yet even now as King Henry ascended the steps
that led to the altar stone and Hearth, the familiar quaver of awe caught in her throat. 
Bareheaded but clad in a robe woven of cloth-of-gold, his shoes detailed in gold braid,
King Henry knelt before his sister, Mother Scholastica, offering himself before the LadyÕs
Hearth. Every soul knelt with the king. The abbess combed his newly cut hair with an ivory
comb encrusted with gold and tiny gems. She anointed him with oil, on the right ear, from the
forehead to the left ear, and on the crown of his head. 
ÒMay Our Lord and Lady crown you with the crown of glory, may They anoint you with the
oil of Their favor,Ó she said. 
Assisted by certain local nobles singled out for this honor, she placed the robe of state
over his shoulders; trimmed with ermine, woven of the finest white wool, the cloak bore the
emblems of each duchy embroidered across its expanse: a dragon for Saony, an eagle for
Fesse, a lion for Avaria, a stallion for Wayland, a hawk for VaringiaÑand a guivre for
Arconia. 
ÒThe borders of this cloak trailing on the ground,Ó the abbess continued, Òshall remind
you that you are to be zealous in the faith and to keep peace.Ó 
Rosvita shuddered, thinking of the guivreÑthe terrible basilisk-like creatureÑwhose
presence had almost won the Battle of Kassel for Sabella. 
But Sabella had not won. A monk and a boy had killed the guivre, surely a sign of GodÕs
displeasure at SabellaÕs attempt to usurp her half brotherÕs power. HenryÕs luckÑthe luck
of the rightful kingÑhad held true. 
Now Mother Scholastica handed Henry the royal scepter, a tall staff carved out of ebony
wood and studded with jewels, its head carved into the shape of a dragonÕs head with ruby
eyes gleaming. 
ÒReceive this staff of virtue. May you rule wisely and well.Ó 
On this staff the king leaned as Mother Scholastica crowned him in the sight of all the folk
who were present. 
ÒCrown him, God, with justice, glory, honor, and strong deeds.Ó 
A great sigh swept through the crowd, mingled awe and pleasure at the rare sight of their
king crowned and robed in the sight of God and his countryfolk. 
From the gathered host a single voice cried out: ÒMay the King live forever!Ó Other
voices from the crowd answered the first with the same words until the acclamation was a
roar of approval. 
From her station on the steps below the Hearth, Rosvita surveyed the assembled
courtfolk, brethren, and local nobles come from their estates to watch the ceremony and to
feast after with the king and his retinue. She sought in their faces some clue to their state of
mind. Few of the nobles here would harbor any sympathy for the recently imprisoned
Sabella. But in other duchies the kingÕs position was not so strong. That was why he had to
travel constantly across his kingdom: so that his people could see him; so that his nobles
would be reminded in ceremonies like this one that he was king and therefore had authority
to rule; and so that Henry, appearing before them, could demand troops and supplies for his
warsÑin this case, for an assault on Gent. 
 The boom of thunder rolled, shaking glass windows and causing one child in the back of
the nave to start crying. 
What did the thunder portend? Those called fulgutari claimed they could divine the future
by observing the sound and appearance of storms and the direction of thunder and lightning.
This display now, with great booms of thunder rattling the church and lightning scoring bright
flashes against the lowering sky of late afternoon, seemed to underscore HenryÕs power,
as if God in Their Unity reminded the assembled people that he had received GodÕs
grace. 
But perhaps it portended other things. Divination by thunder was condemned by the
church as were all forms of divination, for women and men must trust to God and not seek

knowledge of what is to come. It was sacriligious even to think of heathen practices. | 
Rain lashed the windows. The side doors were opened to allow the poor to process
through in an orderly line. None complained that, waiting outside, they had gotten soaked
through. They waited gratefully for this chance to be blessed and touched by King Henry
himself, for was it not true that the anointed kingÕs touch might bring healing? 
Rosvita yawned again. She ought to be watching the holy blessings, but she had seen
this same scene, albeit rarely with the dramatic background of thunder and lightning, so
many times before on the endless itinerant progress of the king. Could the heathens foretell
the future from the sounds and directions of thunder? Surely not. Only angels and the
daimones of the upper air could see into the future, and back into the past, for they did not
live in Time in the same way humans did. But, alas, she could never help thinking of such
things, sacrilegious though they might be. She would be damned by her curiosity; Mother
Otta of Korvei Convent had told her that so many times, although not without a smile. 
Thunder rumbled off into the northwest, and the rain slackened as the last of the poor and
sick shuffled past King Henry for the ritual blessing. The nobles shifted restlesslyÑas
restless as the weather or as their fears that Henry would demand large levies from them in
the coming season of war. 
At last the final hymn was sung. A happy babble of voices filled the church as the king led
the procession out of the church. In the royal hall, the Feast of All Saints would be
celebrated. Rosvita followed the king together with the rest of his retinue, nobles and
townsfolk crowded behind, all eager to partake in some way of the meal, even if it was
simply bread handed out from the doors. Her stomach, like a distant failing echo of the
thunder, rumbled softly, and she chuckled. 
In the morning, still driven by nagging thoughts of thunder and portents, she availed
herself of QuedlinhameÕs excellent library. She ought to be working on her History of the
Wendish People, but she knew from long experience that until this nibbling curiosity was
satisfied, she would be able to think of nothing else. 
Rosvita turned first to Isidora of SeviyaÕs great encyclopedia, the Etymologies, which
contained descriptions of various forms of sorcery and magic. But IsidoraÕs book had only
a passing reference to the fulgutari. 
Dissatisfied, Rosvita replaced the volume in its cabinet and latched the door. The library
had long since outgrown its original chamber and now several smaller rooms contained the
overflow books. She stood in one of these chambers now; the Etymologies had been
consigned here not because the work was unimportantÑfar from itÑbut because, Rosvita
thought uncharitably, QuedlinhameÕs librarian was incompetent and disorganized. There
was no logical order to the placement of the books, and in order to find which cabinet any
book might reside in, one had to consult the catalogÑwhich sat on a lectern in the central
library hall. Rosvita sighed. In wrath, remember mercy. No doubt her own faults were
greater than those of the librarian. 
As she crossed back through the warren of dark rooms, she saw a cloaked figure
standing in the pale light afforded by a slit of a window high in one stone wall: one of the
KingÕs Eagles. 
She paused in shadow and staredÑnot at the young woman, for this Eagle was instantly
recognizable for her height and coloring, but at what she was doing. Clerics took little notice
of Eagles, who were recruited from the children of stewards, freeholders, artisans, or
merchants. Clerics wrote the letters and capitularies and cartularies which were handed
over, sealed, to the kingÕs messengers. Eagles carried those messages; they did not read
them. 
 A very few, like the infamous Wolfhere, had been educatedÑas had, evidently, this
strange young person as well. 
The young Eagle stood and, in light surely too dim for any human eyes to see finely
written calligraphy, read a book. Her finger traced the lines of text and her lips moved, her
profile framed by dust motes floating downward on the thin gleam of light. So intent was she

on her reading that she remained oblivious to RosvitaÕs presence. 
In the silence of Korvei Convent, where nuns communicated by hand signs, Rosvita had
learned the trick of reading lips. She had even used this skill to learn things forbidden to
novices. Now, curiosity piqued, she tried to puzzle out syllables and sound from the
movements of the young womanÕs lipsÑ
Ñand was baffled. The Eagle read not in Wendish or in Dariyan, but in another language,
one Rosvita could not ÒhearÓ through seeing. Where had such a young person learned to
read? What on earth was she reading? 
Rosvita glided softly out of the room, passed through an arch, and emerged into the
library hall, blinking at the sudden shift in light. Here, at individual carrels, several nuns read.
Cabinets stood along the walls, shut and latched. The catalog rested on a lecturn carved
with owls peeking out from oak trees. It lay open. Rosvita skimmed the titles listed on the
page: St. Peter of AronÕs The Eternal Geometry, OrigenÕs De Principiis, PtolomaiaÕs
Tetrabiblos, Abu MaÕsharÕs Zjal-hazarat. 
Rosvita blinked back amazement. Could it be this book that the girl read? She
recognized the language, here transposed into Dariyan script, though she could not read
Jinna herself. Did the girl claim Jinna ancestry, revealed in her complexion? Had she been
trained to read the Jinna language? This was a mystery indeed. The young Eagle would
bear watching. 
Given the company it kept, the book appeared to be about matters astronomical. Surely
even the librarian here, for all her faults, would catalog books about the weatherÑwhich took
place in the skyÑnear to those about the heavens. Rosvita flipped idly through the pages,
searching for what she was not sure, but could find nothing that seemed to be what she
wanted. 
Distracted, she shrugged and stretched and examined the room. From here she could
see into the scriptorium, where nuns and monks worked in silence writing correspondence
and making copies of missals and old texts. The monastery had recently received from a
sister institution six ancient papyrus scrolls written in Dariyan and Arethousan. These were
being recopied onto parchment and bound into books. 
Drawn by the light pouring in through the windows and the quiet murmur emanating from
the scriptorium, Rosvita wandered past the cabinets and out under a wall set with arches
into the scriptorium. Here some of the novices had assembled to observe the scribes at
workÑwork they would themselves be engaged in once they became monks. One restless
boy, his hood slipped back to reveal curly red-gold hair and a pale freckled face, sidled up
to the schoolmaster and made a hand sign: Necessarium. With obvious disgust, the
schoolmaster signed assent. No doubt the poor boy had been consigned to the monastery
against his will and now chafed at the discipline: Rosvita had seen such novices in her time
at Korvei. 
With a sudden and violent start she recognized the boy. Ivar had not yet been born when
she entered Korvei Convent, and she had actually only met him on two occasions. Perhaps
she was mistaken; perhaps this was not Ivar at all but merely a northcountry boy who
resembled him in coloring. But their father, Count Harl, had written to her not six months ago
telling her that Ivar was to be pledged as a novice at Quedlinhame. It had to be him. 
Ivar hurried out of the scriptorium, not noticing Rosvita. But he went on into the library
rather than going outside. And meanwhile, three other novices distracted the schoolmaster,
asking him about a parchment laid on one of the desks. Clearly they meant him not to notice
where Ivar had gone. 
So Rosvita followed him. 
He hurried through the library hall and vanished into the warren of dim rooms beyond. She
entered cautiously and was quickly rewarded by the sound of voices, so soft that had she
not been listening for them she might have thought it the sough of the wind heard through the
windows. By listening for direction and sound, as the fulgutari were said to observe the
movement of storms, she managed to creep close enough to overhear without being seen. 

 ÒBut your vowsÑÒ
¡°I care nothing for my pledge! You know that. My father forced me to become a novice
here, just because ofÑHere he bit off a word. ÒIÕm not like Sigfrid, I have no vocation. And I
wonÕt be like Ermanrich who resigned himself long agoÑÓ 
ÒBut is it so easy to be released from that pledge? Ai, Lady. Ivar, IÕm flatteredÑÓ 
ÒYou donÕt want to marry me!Ó 
Rosvita almost stumbled and gave herself away, but she had just enough presence of
mind to lay a palm against the carven door of one of the cabinets: the same one, she noted
with a dry smile, in which resided IsidoraÕs Etymologies. She recognized the image carved
into the oak door. It was St. Donna of Pens, the famed librarian of the first convent founded
by St. Benedicta, holding scroll and quill pen. If only QuedlinhameÕs librarian had followed
the good saintÕs example, this fine collection of books would not be arranged in such
disorder. 
Lady and Lord! Her little brother, now a novice, wanted to marry some unknown and
unnamed woman! Their father would be furious. 
ÒIvar,Ó said the unknown and unnamed woman in a calm voice. Her accent was slight
but peculiar. ÒIvar, listen to me. You know I have nothing, no kinÑÒ
This was all it took, that he would become infatuated with a kinless woman! No wonder
Count Harl had sent him to the monastery: to get him out of trouble. 
ÒÑor none who know me. I have safety in the Eagles.Ó-The Eagles!ÑÓSurely you
understand that I canÕt marry you unless you offer me that kind of safety.Ó 
The Eagle Rosvita had seen loitering in this chamber earlier had waited here for this very
assignation! At that moment, groping as for a stone, Rosvita could not recall the young
womanÕs name. Instead, the cleric leaned against the carved cabinet doors and settled
herself for a long wait while she listened to her brother launch into an impassioned, if
whispered, plea for love, marriage, indeed every part of the world which six months ago on
entering Quedlinhame he had sworn to renounce forever. 
7
 IÕll leave the monastery,Ó Ivar concluded. ÒWeÕll travel east and find service in the
marchlands. ThereÕs always need for soldiers in the eastÑÓ 
ÒBut donÕt you understand?Ó she said with fine disregard for his sincerity. Did she not
think he could do what he pledged? Did she not understand that he would do anything for
her? ÒUntil you had such a place, until I was assured of such a place, I canÕt leave the
Eagles. How can you ask me to?Ó 
ÒBecause I love you!Ó 
She sighed, brushing a hand across her lips, breathing through her fingers. He wanted to
kiss those fingers but dared not. After their first embraceÑin the priviesÑshe had become,
not cooler but more distant. 
ÒI love you as well, but as a brother. I canÕt love youÑÓ Here the hesitation. ÒÑin that
way.Ó Her second hesitation was longer and more profound. ÒI love another man.Ó 
ÒYou love another!Ó Angry, he said the first name that came to his lips. ÒHugh!Ó 
She went still and cold and deathly rigid. 
ÒAi, Lord, forgive me, Liath. I didnÕt mean to say it. I knowÑÓ 
ÒIt doesnÕt matter.Ó She shook herself free. Dim light sifted in through the stout cabinets
of books, books upon books upon books, so many that their weight alone felt like a pile of
stones crushing him. Just as LiathÕs words crushed him. ÒThis manÕs dead. I trust you,
Ivar, but if it ever came to pass that all obstacles were put aside and we married, you must
understand I could never love you in the way I loved him.Ó 
ÒIfÓ sounded to Ivar like a very good word. 
ÒLady!Ó She rested a handÑtoo brieflyÑon his shoulder. The warmth of her flesh burned
him through his coarse robes. ÒI sound so selfish. But IÕm alone in the world. I have to

protect myself.Ó 
 ÒNo, I am here.Ó He gripped her hand in his, the clasp of kinship. ÒI am always here.
And Hanna is with you, surely.Ó In the privies, he had not had time to ask about Hanna, only
time to arrange this meetingÑonly time to kiss her. He had dreamed of Liath last night and
embarrassed himself in his sleep, but the others, Baldwin, Ermanrich, and Sigfrid, had
helped him hide the traces. 
ÒHanna was sent south with Wolfhere, to escort Biscop AntoniaÑÓ She shook her head,
impatient with herself. ÒYou wouldnÕt know about that. I beg you, Ivar, understand thatÑitÕs
not just Hugh I need to be safe against. ItÕs . . . itÕs other things, things that chased Da and
me for years until they finally caught up and killed him, and I donÕt know what they are. Ai,
Lady.Ó She leaned forward, against himÑbut not to embrace him as he wished, only to
whisper as if she feared the walls themselves, the books in their silent waiting, might hear.
ÒDo you understand?Ó 
A year ago, Ivar would have dismissed all these concerns with a wave of the hand and
with grandiose plans that came to nothing. But he was older now, and he had, amazingly,
learned something. 
ÒAll right, then,Ó he said, as calmly as he could, for she was still leaning against him.
ÒYou will marry no man but me.Ó 
She gave a caught-in laugh, more a sob perhaps. ÒI could never have married him. If not
him, then you, because I can trust you.Ó But she said it wistfully, as if she still mourned that
other man whose name she dared not utter out loud. 
Ivar felt he might float, he was so happy. She trusted him. 
In time, he thought, she would forget the other man. In tune she would love Ivar alone and
only remember as a kind of hazy dream that she had spoken so about another man, a dead
man. A dead man was no rival to a living one. And, because he had learned, for the first
time he thought rather than acted impulsively. She was kinless, so needed kin, clan, family.
There was Hugh to deal with; but Ivar wanted his revenge on Hugh, and he understood Hugh
well enough to know that if Ivar had Liath, then, sooner or later, Hugh would appear. There
remained only how to get out of the monastery. He must find a way to escape. But this would
take planning. 
ÒIt will take time,Ó he said at last and with reluctance. ÒWill you wait for me?Ó 
She smiled sadly. ÒI will stay an Eagle. That much I can promise you. They are my kin
now.Ó 
ÒHush,Ó he said suddenly, pressing her away from him. A rustling more like mice than
wind sounded from the hidden corner of the room. ÒWhoÕs there?Ó Ivar demanded. 
She came out quietly from behind a row of cabinets. It took Ivar a few moments to
recognize her in the dim room, and then his mouth dropped open in astonishment. 
ÒAre you my sister Rosvita?Ó he demanded. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó swore Liath. She jerked away from him. 
ÒYes, Ivar.Ó As soon as the cleric spoke, he knew it for truth. ÒMy brother,Ó she
continued, expression bland and eyes bright withÑlaughter? anger? He did not know her to
be able to judge. ÒMy brother novice,Ó she went on, gesturing toward his coarse brown
robe, Òthis is most irregular. I will have to report you to Mother Scholastica.Ó 
But at those words, Ivar exulted. ÒVery well,Ó he said, drawing himself up. ÒI will go
willingly.Ó Brought to Mother ScholasticaÕs notice for the sin of consorting with a woman,
surelyÑsurelyÑthe mother abbess would throw him out of Quedlinhame once and for all
time. 
It was a serious enough offense that Ivar had only to wait through Sext, the midday
prayers, kneeling like a penitent on the flagstone floor in front of Mother ScholasticaÕs
empty and thereby imposing chair, before the door opened behind him and the abbess
entered her study. Rosvita walked with her. Ivar could not read his sisterÕs expression. He
wished he knew her, so that he might guess what she had told the abbess, might guess
whether Rosvita was sympathetic or hostile to his cause. But he did not know and dared not

guess. 
ÒI gave you no leave to look up, Brother Ivar,Ó said Mother Scholastica. 
He flinched and dropped his gaze, watched feet shift, a dance whose measure and steps
he could not follow. To his horror, Rosvita retreated from the room to leave him alone with
the formidable abbess. He clenched his hands together, wrapping the fingers tightly around
each other, and bit down on his lower lip for courage. His knees hurt. There was a carpet,
but he had been strictly enjoined not to kneel upon anything that would soften his penance. 
Mother Scholastica sat down in her chair. For a long while, though he dared not look up,
he knew she studied him. A knob, an uneven hump in the stone, dug into his right knee. It
was so painful he thought he would cry, but he was afraid to utter any complaint. 
She rules with a rein of iron, so they all said. She was the kingÕs younger sister. Why
had he ever ever thought, in that wild liberating moment in the library, that he could face her
down? 
She cleared her throat as a prelude to speaking. ÒIn our experience,Ó she said, Òwhen
the king visits Quedlinhame with his court, there runs in his wake like the wash of a boat on
the waters a shiver of restlessness through those of the novices and some few of the
brothers and sisters who are not at that moment content in their vows. Always a few,
seduced by the bright colors and the panoply and the excitement, mourn their loss of the
world and seek to follow the king. It is our duty to rescue these fragile souls from their folly,
for it is a fleeting temptation, dangerous but not, I think, unforeseeable.Ó
ÒBut I never wantedÑ: Ò
ÒI did not yet give you leave to speak, Brother Ivar.Ó He hunched down, nails biting into
knuckles. She did not have to raise her voice to make him feel humiliated and terrified. 
ÒBut I do mean to give you leave to speak. We are not barbarians, like the Eika or the
Quman riders, to enslave you for no cause but our own earthly enrichment. It is your soul we
care for, Ivar. Your soul we have been given charge of. That is a heavy burden and a heavy
responsibility.Ó She paused. ¡°Now you may speak, Brother.Ó 
Given leave to speak, he also took the chance to shift his right knee off the digging knob
of rock. Then he took a breath. Once begun, he could not hide his passion. ÒI donÕt want to
be here! Let me go with the king. Let me be a DragonÑÓ 
ÒThe Dragons are destroyed.Ó 
ÒDestroyed?Ó The news shook him out of his single-minded fury. 
ÒThey were overwhelmed by a force of Eika, at Gent.Ó 
Destroyed. Trying to make sense of this, he looked up at her. He had never actually seen
Mother Scholastica from this close before; only the rare novice, like Sigfrid, came into
contact with the abbess. She had a handsome face, her hair tucked away inside a plain
linen scarf draped and folded over her head and twisting in neat lines down over her
shoulders. She wore dark blue robes to distinguish her from the other nuns, a gold Circle of
Unity studded with gems on a gold chain that hung halfway down her chest, and the golden
torque that signified her royal kinship around her neck. Her gaze remained cool; she was not
one bit flustered by this meeting or by the circumstances which had brought him here. He
had a sudden, awful notion that she had judged many a boy or girl whose complaint was
similar to his. 
He would not let himself be overawed by her consequence! He was also the son of noble
parents, if not of a king. ÒThenÑthen theyÕll need more Dragons,Ó he blurted out. ÒLet me
go, please. Let me serve the king.Ó
ÒIt is not my decision to make.Ó 
ÒHow can you stop me if I refuse to take vows as a monk when my novitiate is ended?Ó
he demanded. 
She raised an eyebrow. ÒYou have already pledged yourself to enter the church, an oath
spoken outside these gates.Ó 
ÒI had no choice!Ó 
ÒYou spoke the words. I did not speak them for you.Ó

ÒIs a vow sworn under compulsion valid?Ó
ÒDid I or any other hold a sword to your throat? You swore the vow.Ó
ÒButÑÓ 
ÒAnd,Ó she said, lifting a hand for silenceÑa hand that bore two handsome rings, one
plain burnished gold braid, the other a fine opal in a gold setting, Òyour father has pledged a
handsome dowry to accompany you. We do not betroth ourselves lightly, neither to a partner
in marriageÑÓ He winced as she paused. Her gaze was keen and unrelenting. ÒÑnor to the
church. If a vow can be as easily broken as a feather can be snapped in twoÑÓ She lifted a
quill made from an owl feather from her table, displaying it to him. ÒÑthen how can we any of
us trust the other?Ó She set down the feather. ÒOur oaths are what make us honor able
people. What man or woman who has forsworn his noble lord or lady can ever be trusted
again? You swore your promise to Our Lady and Lord. Do you mean to forswear that oath
and live outside the church for the rest of your days?Ó 
Said thus, it all sounded so much more serious. No man or woman who made a vow and
then broke it was worthy of honor. His knees ached; his back hurt. His hood had slipped
back, and the hem of his robe had doubled up under his left calf to press annoyingly into the
flesh. 
ÒNo. IÑÓ He faltered. Had he actually imagined scant hours ago that he could get the
better in a debate with Mother Scholastica? 
ÒWhy now, Ivar?Ó She, too, shifted in her chair, as if her back hurt her, and for one
uncharitable moment he hoped it did. ÒYou are a good boy and never rebellious, never like
this. Was it the kingÕs arrival?Ó 
He flushed. Of course she must already know. 
ÒYou are tempted by the presence of so many women who are not bound by vows,Ó she
went on, as if toying with him, though her voice remained level and her expression clear and
calm. ÒDo not be ashamed to admit such to me, Ivar. I understand that we who pledge
ourselves to the church have to battle the temptations of the flesh in order to make ourselves
worthy. Those who remain in the world do their part as well, but theirs is a different path. We
in the church strive to set the darkness behind us, to make of ourselves an immaculate
chamber, to set aside the taint of darkness that lies within each of us, that is part of each of
us. For did the blessed Daisan not preach that although we are bound by our nature, GodÕs
goodness to humankind was in giving us liberty?Ó 
Ò ÔKeep clear of all that is evil,Õ Ò responded Ivar dutifully, for these sayings had been
drilled into the novices, Ò Ôwhich we would not wish to befall ourselves.ÓÔ 
ÒGood is natural to us, Ivar. We are glad when we act rightly. As the blessed Daisan
said, ÔEvil is the work of the Enemy, and therefore we do those evil things when we are not
masters of ourselves.Õ Ò 
ÒButÑbut I donÕt want this path. Not this one. I wantÑÓ 
ÒCan you be sure?Ó 
ÒIt isnÕt womenÑit isnÕt just anyÑÓ 
¡°One woman?Ó 
He betrayed himself, but surely that did not matter. She already knew. He caught in his
breath abruptly, a stab of pain in his lungs. What had happened to Liath? What if she was
thrown out of the Eagles? 
ÒA woman who traveled with the kingÕs progress,Ó continued Mother Scholastica in that
same emotionless voice. Not emotionless, noÑshe spoke without being torn by emotion,
without the violent feelings that ripped him apart from within. 
Ai, Lord. The memory of embracing LiathÑeven in the stink of the privies . . . 
ÒThis, too, will pass, Ivar. I have seen it happen so many times.Ó 
ÒNever!Ó He leaped to his feet. ÒI will always love her! Always! I loved her before I came
here, and I will never stop loving her. I promised I would marry herÑÓ 
ÒIvar. I beg you, take hold of yourself and remember dignity.Ó 
Panting with anger and frustration, he knelt again. 

ÒAs the blessed Daisan said, ÔFor desire is a different thing from love, and friendship
something else than joining together with evil intent. We ought to realize without difficulty that
false love is called lust and that even if it gives temporary peace, there is a world of
difference between that and true love, whose peace lasts till the end of days, suffering
neither trouble nor loss.Õ Ò 
He could not speak. He stared fixedly at one of the paned windows which let light into the
study. A branch scraped the glass as it swayed in a rising wind, and the last remaining leaf
dangled precariously, ready to fall. 
ÒYou must have your fatherÕs permission to marry. Do you?Ó 
There was no need to answer. He wanted to cry with shame. None of this had gone as he
had planned. 
ÒDo not think I take this lightly, child,Ó she said. He risked a glance up, for a certain note
of compassion had surfaced in her tone. She did indeed have an expression on her face
that he could almost call sympathetic. ÒI can see you are firm in your resolve and
passionate in your attachment. But I am not free to let you go. You were given into my care
by your father and your kin, you spoke your vowsÑwillingly, I thoughtÑand were taken into
this monastery. It would be unwise of me to let every young person walk free at each least
impulse toward the world.Ó 
ÒThis isnÕt an impulse!Ó 
She lifted her ringed hand for silence. ÒPerhaps not. If it is not an impulse, as you claim,
then time will not dull it. I will send a message to your father, and you will wait for his reply.
What you propose is not an undertaking to be entered into lightly, just as we should not any
of us enter into the church lightly.Ó By this mild rebuke she scolded him. ÒThere remains
also the young woman to be considered. Who is she? She has a name, I have
discoveredÑan unusual name, Arethousan. Who are her kin?Ó 
ÒI donÕt know anything about her,Ó he admitted finally. ÒNot really. No one in HeartÕs
Rest did.Ó 
ÒIs she of noble birth?Ó 
He blinked. Perhaps silence was the better choice. Liath and her father had been close
with their secrets. And her father had diedÑalthough only Liath had claimed it was murder;
Marshal Liudolf had decreed the death came of natural causes. 
ÒAnswer me, child.Ó 
He did not like the stern look Mother Scholastica fixed on him. ÒIÑI think so. Her father
was educated.Ó 
ÒHer mother?Ó 
He shrugged. ÒShe never had a mother. I meanÑwe never knew of her mother.Ó 
ÒHer father was educatedÑ? Was he a fallen monastic, perhaps? Ah, yes, I see it in your
face.Ó 
ÒI donÕt know that he was. But we all thought he must have been a monk once, or
perhaps a fraterÑÓ 
ÒIf he left the church, he would scarcely speak of such an act out loud. Educated in and
then fled from the church. You are sure she was his child?Ó 
ÒYes!Ó he exclaimed, indignant on LiathÕs behalf. 
ÒNot his concubine or servant?Ó 
ÒNo! Of course they were father and child.Ó 
ÒIt might explain all,Ó said Mother Scholastica, musing now; she appeared to have
forgotten IvarÕs existence, and certainly cared nothing for his indignation. ÒWhy she could
read Jinna.Ó 
Read Jinna? What else was hidden in Liath that she had L never shared with him? He
had a sudden sick intuition that Prater Hugh might not have been interested in Liath only for
her beauty and youth. 
ÒDark of feature. A fallen churchman. Perhaps my mother was right. A frater may travel
as a missionary to the four quarters of the world, even unto the Jinna heathens who worship

the fire god Astereos. Such a man might have been seduced by the potions and perfumes
of the east, such a man might have forsworn his oath to the church and gotten a child on an
eastern woman and then, as an honorable Daisanite, refused to leave the child behind to be
raised as a heathen. That would explain her complexion and her ability to read. Well, Ivar.Ó
The abrupt change of subject startled him, her sudden cooling of interest in him. ÒIt is good
you confessed this to me. Return to the novitiary. You will study. You will obey. In time, if you
do your duty and remain meek and humble, I will call you here again and let you know what
answer your father has given.Ó The interview was over. She signed with her hand the
gesture for departure, and he knew there was no point in protesting. But he could not leave
one question unasked, even if he was punished for asking it. 
ÒWhat will happen to Liath? Because of what I did, I mean.Ó 
She favored him with a sudden smile, and its powerÑits approvalÑstruck him as if he had
been granted a glimpse of the Chamber of Light in all its brilliance through a crack in the
gates. ÒThat is the first time in this interview you have spoken of her need and not your own.
She serves as a KingÕs Eagle, and I have heard no complaint of her service there. It will
continue. Now.Ó He bowed his head over clasped hands, was allowed to kiss her opal ring,
and backed out of the room, stumbling down backward over the doorstep. 
Master Pursed-Lips waited outside, as glowering as any looming storm cloud. Mercifully,
he withheld the willow switch. 
ÒYou may be certain,Ó said the schoolmaster in his disagreeable voice, Òthat you and
your fellows, whose connivance in this matter has been duly noted, will be confined in the
novitiary for the remainder of the kingÕs visit, and closely guarded thereafter. Take no
notion in your mind to escape and run after them. We have dealt with these kinds of things
before.Ó 
Spoken ominously, the schoolmasterÕs threats proved true. The kingÕs progress left the
next day and although the other novices got to leave the barracks and line the road to lend
pomp and dignity to the departure of king and court, Ivar, Baldwin, Ermanrich, and Sigfrid
were left behind. They waited out the dreary interlude in the courtyard, taking turns with their
knives at the fence. 
¡°SheÕs really in love with you?Ó demanded Baldwin. 
ÒWhy should that surprise you? Am I that ugly?Ó Ivar wanted to slug his friend. 
Baldwin looked him over consideringly, then shrugged. 
ÒNo.Ó 
ÒBut if sheÕs an Eagle,Ó pointed out Ermanrich, Òthen she canÕt be of noble birth. Why
would your father ever allow you to marry a common-born woman?Ó 
ÒBut her father was in the church, and educated,Ó Ivar protested. ÒHe must have come
out of a noble lineage!Ó Thinking about it only made it worse, but he couldnÕt help thinking.
Mother Scholastica had promised to send a message to his father. He would have to be
patientÑand Liath had promised to wait. 
Sigfrid had been given his turn with BaldwinÕs knife and he was trying to wiggle the little
gap into a wider gap, something they could actually see through. Now he glanced over his
shoulder toward the empty courtyard, then leaned forward to the others. ÒWhile I was
waiting for my lesson,Ó he said in a low voice, ÒI heard that Lady SabellaÕs daughter is
going to be held here until King Henry decides to marry her off or let her become a novice.Ó 
ÒAh,Ó said Baldwin. ÒThe young Lady Tallia. I met her once.Ó 
Ermanrich snorted. 
ÒOh!Ó said Sigfrid in the tone of man who has opened the door only to find a snake in
his room. ÒI didnÕt think it would work.Ó 
ÒHush,Ó said Baldwin. ÒMove this way, Ermanrich. Ivar, get on your knees as if youÕre
praying. Move over here.Ó Sigfrid had accomplished the deed. Pressure had forced one
thin plank to slide behind another, and now they had a gap through which they could see a
thin strip of the other side of the courtyard. 
Baldwin hunkered down and flattened his face against the fence. He gasped and jerked

back. ÒThereÕs someone there!Ó he hissed. ÒA novice!Ó
ÒDoes she have warts?Ó asked Ermanrich.
ÒBe serious!Ó Baldwin stuck his right eye against the gap again, closing his left and
squinching up his face to see better. After a pause, he backed away and spoke in a
whisper. ÒSheÕs kneeling just opposite us. I think itÕs Lady Tallia!Ó 
Ermanrich whistled under his breath. Even Ivar was impressed. ÒLet me look,Ó he
demanded. Baldwin scooted back and Ivar pressed his face up against the fence. The
wood scraped his skin. ErmanrichÕs breath blew against his neck as if, with enough force
of will, the other boy could see through IvarÕs eyes. 
She had thrown back her hood and he recognized her at once: the wheat-haired girl who
had carried the banner of ArconiaÑher fatherÕs duchyÑat the forefront of the procession the
day King Henry had arrived at Quedlinhame. Only three days ago! How much had happened
since then. She prayed, thin hands clasped before her breast, pale lips touching her
knuckles. Then, abruptly, her eyes opened and she looked straight at him. She had the
palest blue eyes, like a many-times-washed indigo tunic bled so fine that only the memory of
blue remained in the threads. ÒWho are you?Ó she whispered. Ivar jerked back from the
fence. 
ÒShe said something!Ó exclaimed Ermanrich. He stuck his face up against the fence.
ÒAre you Lady Tallia?Ó he whispered. 
Baldwin pulled Ermanrich back from the wall and wedged himself in as Ermanrich made
a grunt of protest. ÒYou must not look upon me,Ó she said in that same quiet voice, as soft
as the wind brushing IvarÕs hair. His hood had fallen back, and he hastily jerked it up over
his head, looking guiltily back toward the barracks. The layser-vant left to watch over them
was not in sight. ÒIt is not seemly for you to stare so,Ó she continued. In the silence of the
courtyard they could hear her words clearly. She hesitated, then went on. ÒBut that we have
stumbled upon this opportunity to converseÑthat, surely, is GodÕs doing, is it not?Ó 
ÒOh, certainly,Ó said Baldwin blithely, although, obedient to her wish, he had now drawn
back from the gap in the fence. ÒAre you to be a nun?Ó 
Sigfrid made a choked noise in his throat and immediately assumed a position of prayer.
The layservant had walked back into view, a surly, stout man no doubt angered at having to
watch over four disobedient novices rather than the colorful departure of king and court. All
four boys hunkered down in attitudes of contrite prayer. 
From the shelter of the colonnade, the layservant could not hear TalliaÕs faint voice, but
the four boys could. ÒIt is my most devout wish to become a nun. Unless I can be a deacon,
but they will not let me out into the world except to marry me to some grasping nobleman.Ó 
ÒWhy would you want to be a deacon?Ó asked Sigfrid. ÒIn the cloister, we can devote
all our hours to study and contemplation.Ó 
ÒBut a deacon who lives in the world can bring the true Word of God to those who live in
darkness. If I were ordained as a deacon, I could preach the Holy Word of the Redeemer as
it was taught me by Prater Agius, he who was granted GodÕs favor and a holy
martyrdom.Ó 
A low rumble of thunder sounded in the distance, like drums beating for the departure of
the king. Ivar smelled rain on the wind. Dark clouds scudded overhead. 
ÒWho is the Redeemer?Ó asked Ermanrich, his bland, friendly face bearing now a
confused expression. 
ÒThatÕs a heresy,Ó whispered Sigfrid, but he did not move. 
Baldwin did not move. 
Ivar did not move. He wanted to hear her speak again. She had a kind of monotonously
fascinating voice, pure and quietly zealous. And she was female, and young. 
ÒFor the blessed Daisan was born not of earthly mortals but out of Our Lady, who is God.
He alone was born without any taint of darkness. So did he suffer. By the order of the
Empress Thaisannia, she of the mask, he was flayed alive because of his preaching, as
was their custom with criminals and those who spoke treason against the Dariyan Empire

and its ruler. His heart was cut out of him, and where his heartÕs blood fell and touched the
soil, there bloomed roses.Ó 
Sigfrid made the sign of the Circle against what is forbiddenÑagainst this most
erroneous and dangerous heresy. But he did not move away. None of them moved. They
were caught there, spellbound, as the thunder rambled closer and the first drops of rain
darkened the dirt around them. 
ÒBut by his suffering, by his sacrifice, he redeemed us from our sins. Our salvation
comes through that redemption. For though he died, he lived again. So did God in Her
wisdom redeem him, for was he not Her only Son?Ó 
She would have gone on, perhaps she did go on, but the wind picked up and lightning
flashed bright against lowering clouds and thunder pealed overhead. The stinging bite of
rain drove them to the shelter of the colonnade. Whether she ran in as well Ivar could not
know, but he imagined her, kneeling still, soaked and pounded by rain as she prayed her
heretical prayers. That image disturbed him greatly for many nights to come. 
IV  ON THE WINGS OF THE STORM 
1
The king and his entourage rode south from Quedlinhame. Liath rode northeast through
scattered woodland amid rolling hills with a message for Duchess Rotrudis, the kingÕs
sister. She followed the Osterwaldweg, a grassy track that ran north from Quedlinhame and
slanted east-northeast at the confluence of the Ailer and Urness Rivers, themselves
tributaries of the Veser. In the morning the track, crisp with frost, glittered in the cold sun as
though an angel had blown its sweet breath over the rutted road. By evening, wagon traffic,
sun, and the usual passage of a swift autumn storm overhead had turned the path to a
sludge that would re-freeze over the long night. 
It was always windy and sometimes quite chill, but in the late afternoon the sun would
often shine brightly. During those times Liath would find a patch of sunlight while her horse
foraged along the verge of the track. Sometimes, if the way lay empty, she would open The
Book of Secrets and read words she had long since memorized or puzzle over the brief
Arethousan glosses in the inner book, the most secret ancient text. Alas, without time to
study or preceptor to continue her teaching, she had already forgotten much of what little
Arethousan she had learned from Hugh. But perhaps if she forgot everything he had taught
her, she would truly be free from him. 
Other times, frustrated by her ignorance, she would simply close her eyes and imagine
Da beside her on the quiet road. The sunÕs warmth was like his presence, soothing and
secure; oddly, she could never imagine him by her on cloudy days. Perhaps his spirit,
looking down on her from the Chamber of Light where he now resided at peace, could only
see her when his view down through the seven spheres was unobstructed. 
¡°Do you suppose,Ó she imagined him asking now, ¡°that souls have sight? Or is that
sense reserved for those who wear an earthly body?Ó 
¡°YouÕre trying to trick me, Da,Ó she would answer. ¡°Angels and daimones donÕt
wear earthly bodies. They wear bodies made up of the pure elements, fire and light and
wind and air, and yet they can see with a sight that is keener than that of humankind. They
can see both past and future. They can see the souls of the stars.Ó 
¡°Some have argued they are the souls of the fixed stars.¡± Thus would the argument be
joined, over free will and Fate and natural law. And if not that argument, then a different one,
for Da had a fine treasure-house of his own, knowledge earned over many years of study,
and though his Òcity of memoryÓ was not as finely honed as LiathÕsÑfor he had taught her
skills of memory which he had only mastered late in lifeÑit was yet impressive. He knew so
much, and all of it he meant to teach to his daughter, especially the secrets of the

mathematici, the knowledge of the stars and of the movements of the planets through the
heavens. 
A sudden gust of wind fluttered the pages of the open book, set on her knee. Snow
swirled past, but there were no clouds in the sky now. The cold wind brought memory. 
 Wings, settling on the eaves. A sudden gust of white snow through the smoke hole,
although it was not winter. 
Asleep and aware, bound to silence. Awake but unable to move, and therefore still
asleep. The darkness held her down as if it were a weight draped over her. 
A voice of bells, heard as if on the wind. Two sharp thunks sounded, arrows striking
wood. 
¡°Your weak arrows avail you nothing,Ó said the voice of bells. ÒWhere is she?Ó 
¡°Nowhere you can find her,Ó said Da. 
¡°Liath,Ó said a voice of bells, coming from everywhere and nowhere at once. 
Heart beating wildly, she dared not move, but she had to look. Snow spun past like the
trailing edge of a storm, flakes dissolving in the sun. A feathery gleam lit the track where it
bent away northward, a roiling in the air like the fluttering of translucent wings as pale as the
air itself. 
Something came toward her down the road. 
The fear bit so deep, like a griffinÕs beak closing on her throat, that she could not draw
breath. Certainly she could not run. DaÕs voice rang in her ears: ¡°Safety lies in staying
hidden.Ó 
She did not move. 
¡°Liathano.Ó 
She heard it then, clearly, the voice made of the echoes of bells ringing away long into an
unbroken night. She saw it though it was not any earthly being. It did not walk the track but
rather floated above it, as if unable to set its aetherical being fully in contact with the dense
soil of the mortal world. It came down the track from the north, faceless, with only humanlike
limbs and the form of a human body and the wings of an angel to give it shape. 
It called her, alluring, not unmusical, with that awful throbbing bass vibrato in its tone. It
wanted her to answer. It compelled her to answer. 
But Da had protected her against magic. Silent, as still as stone, she did not move. She
held her breath. A leaf blown free by the wind fluttered over her arms and came to rest on the
open book, and then a second, as if the earth itself collaborated in hiding her. 
The creature stalked past her, still calling, and went on up the road to the south and, at
last, out of her sight. A single white feather swirled in the eddy left by its passing and drifted
down to the ground. It was so pale that it shone like purest glass. Where she had tied it to a
leather cord to hang around her neck, the gold feather left to her by the Aoi sorcerer burned
against her skin as if in warning. Still she did not move. She was too stunned to move. She
sat so still that eventually a trio of half-wild pigs, all tusks and bristles and sleek haunches,
ventured out onto the path to investigate this bright interloper. But as soon as the lead pig
nudged the white feather with its snout, the feather spit sparks, flashed and, with a whirlpool
of smoke, dissipated into the air. The pigs squealed and scattered. 
Liath laughed almost hysterically, but as soon as the fit passed, she was swept by such
anger that she could barely get the book back into the saddlebag because her hands shook
so. Was it such a creature that had murdered Da? Even that very one? Anger and terror
warred within her, but anger won out. It hadnÕt seen her. DaÕs magic still protected her;
whatever spell he had laid on her long ago had not died with him. 
With anger came revelation: All those years she had thought him a failed sorcerer when
instead he had poured that power into keeping her hidden. 
ÒI swear to you, Da,Ó she whispered, standing beside her horse with her eyes turned to
the heavens where, perhaps, his soul looked down upon her, trapped on the mortal earth,
Òthat IÕll find out what it was that killed you.Ó 
¡°Nay, Liath, you must be careful,Ó she imagined him saying to her. He was always so

afraid. 
And for good reason. Was it the aetherical daimone itself that stalked them, or a human
sorcerer, a maleficus, who had drawn it from its sphere above the moon and coerced it to
do his bidding? 
ÒIÕll be like a mouse,Ó she murmured. ÒTheyÕll never see me. I promise you, Da. IÕll
never let them catch me.Ó With that, in her imagination, he seemed to be content. 
A distant flock of sheep crested a rise and disappeared out of her view, an amorphous
body herded by unseen dogs and a single shepherd. She did not want to stay here, where
the creature had come so close. Apprehensive now and still unnerved by that unearthly sight
and by the horrible, sick fear that had come over her when its inhuman voice spoke her
name, she mounted and rode on. On this, her third day out of Quedlinhame, she could
expect to come by nightfall to the palace at Goslar, so Hathui had told her. Please the Lady
that she did; she did not want to sleep alone this night. And from Goslar, if the weather held,
another four days of steady riding would bring her to Osterburg, the city and fortress favored
by Duchess Rotrudis. 
But when she rode into Goslar that evening, it was to find a large retinue already
inhabiting it. A groom took her horse and she was brought at once into the great hall. There,
seated on a chair carved with dragons and draped with gold pillows embroidered with black
dragons whose curling shape and fierce demeanor echoed those of the KingÕs Dragons,
waited Duchess Rotrudis herself. 
ÒWhat message does Henry send to me?Ó she asked without preamble as soon as
Liath knelt before her. She did not resemble those of her siblings Liath had seen: Henry,
Mother Scholastica, and Biscop Constance; she was not handsome nor had she any
elegance of form. Short, stout, and with hands as broad and red as a farmerÕs, she had a
nose that looked as if it had been broken one too many times, and old pockmarks scarred
her cheeks. Even so, no one would have mistaken her for anything but one of the great
princes of the land. 
ÒKing Henry speaks these words, my lady,Ó began Liath dutifully. Ò ÔFrom Henry, King
over Wendar and Varre, to Rotrudis, Duchess of Saony and Attomar and beloved
kinswoman, this entreaty. Now that winter is upon us, it is time to think of next summerÕs
campaign. We must drive the Eika out of Gent, but for this endeavor we will need a great
army. Fully half of my forces died at Kassel. I have taken what I can out of Varre, and asked
for more, but you, as well, must bear this burden with the others. Send messengers to your
noble ladies and lords that they will increase their levies and send troops to Steleshame
after the Feast of St. Sormas. From this staging place we will attack Gent. Let it be done.
These words, spoken in the presence of our blessed mother, represent my wishes in the
matter.Õ Ò 
Rotrudis snorted, took a draught of wine, and called for more wood on the hearth. ÒFine
words,Ó she said indignantly, Òwhen it is my duchy that the Eika ravage now. They are not
content with Gent. My own city of Osterburg has been attacked!Ó 
ÒAttacked!Ó The memory of GentÕs fall hit Liath as hard as a swordÕs blow, and she
swayed back, horrified. 
ÒWe drove them off,Ó said the duchess bluntly. ÒIt was only ten ships of the damned
savages.Ó She handed the gold cup to her cupbearer, a pretty young woman dressed in a
plain gown of white linen. With a grunt, she heaved herself up and walked over to look down
on Liath. Pressing the tip of her walking stick under LiathÕs chin, she lifted the EagleÕs
head up so she could examine her face. ÒAre you some relation to Conrad the Black?Ó
she demanded. ÒHis by-blow, perhaps?Ó 
ÒNo, my lady. I am no relation to Duke Conrad.Ó 
ÒWell-spoken, I see,Ó said the duchess. ÒToo old to be his get, in any case.Ó She had
a limp and one swollen foot, and when she sat heavily down in her chair, the pillows sighed
beneath her. A servant hurried forward to prop the foot up on a padded stool. All along the
walls rich tapestries hung, a sequence depicting a band of young ladies on the hunt, first

after a stag, then a panther, and last a griffin. ÒYou tell this, then, to my dear brother Henry.
Good God, where is he now, dare I ask?Ó 
ÒHe and the court have ridden southÑÓ 
ÒTo hunt in Thurin Forest, no doubt!Ó 
ÒYes, my lady.Ó 
ÒWhile my villages burn under the raids of the Eika! Ah, well, no doubt heÕll claim he
must meet and trouble every southern lord in order to get them to pledge troops for next
summerÕs war. A war every summer, that is Henry for you.Ó She put out her hand and her
cupbearer placed the gold cup in her hand. The duchess examined its contents, then
frowned. ÒHere, child, my cup is empty.Ó A boy dressed in a neat white linen tunic rushed
over, took the cup away, and returned with a full one. A cleric leaned over and whispered
into the duchessÕ ear. 
Liath wished the noble lords would think of placing carpets or pillows down in front of their
chairs so that her knees might have some respite. 
ÒTrue enough,Ó commented Rotrudis to the cleric before returning her attention to Liath.
ÒTell Henry that I expect more help from him. These Eika are like flies swarming around
fresh meat. What if I canÕt wait for next summer?Ó 
ÒI have no further message from the king, my lady. ButÑÓ She hesitated. 
ÒBut? But! Go on. IÕm no fool to think Eagles donÕt notice that which others might
miss.Ó 
ÒItÕs true, my lady, that HenryÕs forces were badly hurt at Kassel. His complement of
Lions went from perhaps two hundred men to a bare sixty, and though he has sent for more
centuries from the marchlands, there is no guarantee those men can march so far so fast or
that the marchlords will be able to let them go.Ó 
ÒHuh. The Quman havenÕt raided for years. I think thereÕs no threat there. But go on.
What of the Varren lords?Ó 
ÒThey, too, suffered at Kassel, though under SabellaÕs banner. But the king has
collected levies from them and expects more to be sent in the spring.Ó 
ÒThat isnÕt good enough! IÕve had to send my own son Wichman and his band of
reckless young gadflies to Steleshame to restore order. What has Henry risked?Ó 
This was too much. Furious, Liath lifted her gaze to stare straight at the duchess. ÒKing
Henry lost his son at Gent!Ó 
Courtiers murmured, shocked at her tone, but the duchess only laughed. ÒHereÕs fire for
you! Well then, itÕs true enough that Prince Sanglant died at Gent together with the
Dragons, but thatÕs what the poor boy was bred for, wasnÕt it?Ó 
¡°Bred for?Ó said Liath, appalled. 
ÒQuiet! You have spoken enough. Now you will listen to my words and carry them
faithfully back to my dear brother. I need more help, and I need it soon. According to my
reports, thereÕs not a village left standing within a dayÕs ride of Gent, and half the livestock
stolen from the villages within three daysÕ walk likewise and my people slaughtered,
frightened, and running with a scant harvest to feed them this winter and no chance to sow in
the spring, if the Eika arenÕt driven out. These Eika raid up the Veser as they wish, although
winterÕs ice may dull their oars in the water, and none of the waterways are safeÑnor will
they be after the thaw come spring. Tell Henry this: I know where our royal sister Sabella is. If
he cannot help me, then she willÑand bring me those lords who pledged loyalty to her, if
Henry canÕt.Ó 
She paused, sipped wine, winced as she shifted her foot on the stool. ÒNow then, have
you understood it all?Ó 
Liath could barely speak, she was so astounded at the reference to Sabella. ÒThatÕs the
message you wish me to take back to King Henry?Ó 
ÒWould I have spoken it if it were not what I wished delivered to him? Your duty is not to
question, Eagle. Yours is to ride. Go on, then. I am done with you.Ó 
Liath rose, backed away, and retreated to the farthest corner of the hall. Was she meant

to ride out immediately into the twilight? Where anything might await her? But a steward led
her to a table placed in the back of the hall while the nobles began their eveningÕs feast.
Here, with some of the other servants, she was fed royally, a fine meal of goose, partridge,
fish braised in a tart sauce, mince pie, and as much bread as she could eat together with a
sharp cider. The noblesÕ feast went on forever, what with singing and dancing and tales,
and even when the last platter of food was taken away, they still drank so heavily that Liath
was surprised they hadnÕt emptied the cellars. 
She crept away from the table at last and curled up in the corner, and yet woke
intermittently throughout the long night, roused by their laughter, each time seeing through
the haze of smoke and torchlight the nobles still drinking, singing, wrestling among the young
men, and boasting while they paced the floor and drank again. Only at dawn, when she
struggled to her feet and made ready to ride, had they at last given up the nightÕs carousing
and themselves gone to their beds. 
2
 King Henry and his court were out hunting when she rode into the broad enclosure that
formed the northernmost of the royal hunting lodges in the Thurin Forest. It had taken her
seven days to ride here, pushing her pace and changing horses at Quedlinhame. This time,
at the monastery, she had been restricted to the stables; sheÕd had no chance to contact
Ivar again. On the road, sheÕd seen no trace of the mysterious creature who had passed so
close by her before. 
Great hall and barracks, kitchens, smithy, storerooms, stables, and a few guest houses
made up the hunting lodge. A large grassy field surrounded these buildings, bounded by a
steep-bedded, narrow river on one side and the palisade wall on the others. Servants
scurried here and there about the lodge. Liath heard the squeal of pigs being driven to
slaughter for the nightÕs feast. A veritable army of servants swarmed around the
cookhouseÑset well away from the great hall in case of fireÑand farther, down a grassy
slope to the river, servants aired linen and featherbeds and washed clothes. 
Once she crossed under the palisade gate, a groom took her horse and informed her that
the king was gone for the day. Liath was glad to miss the hunt. She could take no pleasure
in hunting some poor, terrified creatureÑit reminded her too much of her own life. 
She settled her saddle and harness in the same empty stall where she found HathuiÕs
familiar gear, saddlebags and rolled-up wool blanket. Hathui had gone out with the king.
She crouched to open the bag, set her hand on the book withinÑand hesitated. Had the
daimone appearedÑtracked her downÑbecause she had opened the book out on the road?
Or because she had, in her thoughts, recalled DaÕs death? Or had it only been coincidence
that the creature had appeared then? She closed the flap and tied the pouch shut, shoved
the saddlebag under her saddle, then went outside. 
It was a fine blustery autumn day with clouds aplenty and the scent of cooking fires heavy
on the wind. Brittle leaves of faded yellow and orange rolled across LiathÕs boots, blown by
the wind. Goats grazed on the verge of the forest on the other side of the river, attended by a
solitary shepherd. No one marked her. They were all too busy. 
The morningÕs sun which had shone on her earlier had now vanished, shrouded by the
wings of a coming storm. This was the season of storms, blown in one after the next. She
shivered, thinking of the Eika, themselves a storm blown in from the north; it was still painful
to remember the fall of Gent. 
Yet the world beyond seemed far away, here deep in the heart of the forest. No one lived
here, no freeholders or peasants working a noble ladyÕs estate or church lands fanned the
steep hills and densely wooded valleys. The Thurin remained a forest wilderness, and here
the king hunted most autumns. 
The cool bluster of the day drove her to seek shelter in the great hall. But to her surprise
and dismay, clerics tenanted the great hall, half a dozen garbed in neat robes. She had

thought they, too, would be out hunting. 
Instead, they sat quietly at the long tables where, in the evenings, the king and his court
feasted. They went about the kingÕs business while the king went about his pleasure.
Goose quills bobbed evenly, dabbed in ink, letters curving across parchment or vellum. 
Liath took a step back, but it was too late. At the chair nearest the door sat IvarÕs sister,
Rosvita. She looked up, caught sight of Liath, and beckoned to her. A bound book,
parchment pages folded into a quire, some of them not yet cut, lay open on the table before
her. Her fingers were stained with ink. 
Cautiously, Liath ventured closer. 
ÒYou are back, Eagle,Ó said the cleric. 
ÒI am, Sister. I bring a message from Duchess Rotrudis for the king.Ó 
ÒYou left Quedlinhame swiftly,Ó observed Rosvita, Òand must not have tarried there long
on your way back.Ó 
Ai, Lady! In all that had happened since, Liath had scarcely thought about poor Ivar. What
was it Da had always said? ¡°When the wolf has your arm in its jaws, then use the other to
tickle its belly.Ó 
ÒWhat are you writing?Ó Liath asked, but the words written in fresh ink caught her in their
spell and she read out loud: 
¡°Then Henry, born to Kunigunde, Duchess of Saony, and her husband, Arnulf of
Avaria, became duke by reason of his motherÕs death and his elder sisters having died
before him. But Queen Conradina, who had often tested the valor of the new duke, was
afraid to entrust to him all his motherÕs power. By this attitude the queen incurred the
indignation of the entire Wendish army. She then spoke many words in praise of the new
and most noble duke, promising to bestow on Henry great responsibilities and to glorify
him with honor. But the Wendish soldiers were not deceived. The queen, seeing that they
were more unfriendly than usual, and realizing that she could not destroy the new duke
openly, tried to find a way to have him slain by treachery. 
¡°She sent her brother with an army into Wendar to lay it waste. But when he came to
the city which is called Gent, it is related that he boastfully stated that the greatest trouble
he anticipated was that the Wendish would not dare show themselves before the walls so
that he could fight them. With this boast still on his lips, the Wendish came rushing upon
him and once the battle was joined they cut down his army of Arconians and Salians and
Varingians with such slaughter that, as the bards tell us, the Abyss must indeed be a large
place if it can contain so great a multitude of the slain. 
¡°Eberhard, the queenÕs brother, was freed from his fear that the Wendish would not
put in an appearance, for he saw them actually before him, and he fled from them.Ó 
ÒA history!Ó Liath exclaimed. She turned her gaze to Rosvita only to see the older
woman staring at her with an ominous smile touching her lips. All the other clerics had
ceased their writing to stare at this oddity, a KingÕs Eagle who could read the language of
educated church people, Dariyan. 
Ai, Lady. She had betrayed herself again, and this time in front of the kingÕs schola, his
retinue of educated clerics. 
ÒI am working on a history of the Wendish people,Ó agreed Rosvita without any sign of
astonishment, unlike the others. ÒI am relating here the story of how the first Henry, Duke of
Saony, became King of Wendar upon the death of Queen Conradina.Ó 
ÒWhat will you write next?Ó Liath asked, hoping to distract her. 
Rosvita coughed politely, and the other clerics hastily and obviously went back to their
work. She set down her quillÑa magnificent eagleÕs feather, surely the mark of great favor
from the king or his motherÑbeside the book. ÒQueen Conradina was herself wounded in
battle, and thus finding herself burdened with disease as well as the loss of her earlier good
fortune, she called her brother Eberhard to her side and reminded him that their family had
every resource that the dignity of the rulership demandedÑevery resource except good luck.

She gave to Eberhard the insignia of their royal ancestorsÑsacred lance, scepter, golden
torque, and crownÑand told him to take the insignia and give them to Duke Henry along with
his allegiance. Soon after this she died, a brave and valiant woman, outstanding both at
home and in the field, well known for her liberalityÑÓ 
ÒBoth in and out of bed,Ó said one of the clerics, and others laughed and then quieted
when Rosvita signed for Silence. 
ÒEberhard offered both himself and the treasures to Henry, made a peace treaty with
him, and established friendship. That friendship he kept faithfully to the end. Then, at the city
known as Kassel, in the presence of all the great princes of the realm, he made Henry
king.Ó 
ÒOf course,Ó said Liath. ÒAnd now the first HenryÕs great-grandson, our Henry, is King
of Wendar and Varre.Ó She bowed slightly, backing up. ÒI beg pardon for disturbing you,
Sister. I will leave you and these others to your work.Ó 
She turned and hurried out the door, then leaned against the wall and thanked Lady and
Lord that she had escaped their scrutiny. The faint lime scent of freshly washed plaster
burned in her nostrils and with it burned a wash of envy. Had events transpired differently
that dimly recalled day nine years ago, she might have taken orders herself and become a
cleric. She could have sat together in the company of others like herself, and written, and
read, and talked. How strange that Ivar chafed where she might have found happiness. But it
was not to be. 
Still, seeing the clerics made her wistfulÑand bold. She walked back to the stables,
feeling a sudden urge to touch the book again, even if the act itself of touching the book
brought her into danger. 
The dim light in the stables draped like a cloak of secrecy thrown over her shoulders,
giving her courage. She pulled The Book of Secrets out of the saddlebag and opened it
delicately. She waited a moment, but no cold wind disturbed the stillness of the stables.
Even for her salamander eyes, it was too dark in the stables to read. Instead, she simply sat
touching the book, the binding, the grain of the leather, the parchment leaves and the fragile
touch of the innermost book, ink on papyrus. 
She laid her check against it, breathing in its dry perfume. DaÕs book. All she had left of
him and everything he had given to her. Ai, Lady. He had given her all that he had, literally; all
the power that was in him. She had only doubted him because she hadnÕt understood. 
It was never safe, not for her. She no longer wondered at DaÕs exaggerated vigilance,
his fastidious wariness, his attention to each least detail at every monastery guest house, at
every isolated inn or farmerÕs shed they had bedded down in. Not any more. 
Hugh had understood DaÕs power better than she had, it seemed. Wind rattled the
stable doors and she started around, but it was natural wind. She could smell rain, though
none yet fell, could hear the clatter of bare branches outside as the stormÕs breath, running
before it, stirred the trees in anticipation of its coming. Hugh. 
That suddenly, as if the name itself had magic, she shuddered, trembling violently, and
caught the book against her chest as she fought back tears. She must not, could not, give in
to the old fear. She had escaped him. 
ÒEagle. Liath.Ó 
She jerked, startled, and spun around, but it was too late. She had been run to ground,
cornered, and cut off. 
Rosvita had come after her. 
3
Rosvita knew she would be damned for her curiosity, so she had given up trying to stop
herself from succumbing to its lure. 
She had blotted the fresh ink carefully and left the book open to dry, pushed back her
chair, and risen to follow the young Eagle. Since the incident in the library at Quedlinhame,

she had not been able to stop thinking about the young Eagle. 
Once out in the courtyard she saw the young woman vanish into the stables, so she
followed, tracking her to an empty stall where she sat alone in the gloom. 
ÒEagle. Liath.Ó 
As soon as she spoke the words, she saw the object the girl clutched to her chest like a
frightened child. It was a book. Surprised and puzzled, Rosvita acted before thinking. She
stepped forward and plucked the book from the EagleÕs grasp. The girl gasped out loud
and jumped up, but Rosvita had already retreated to the door and thus the Eagle had
perforce to follow her outside as a starving dog slinks at the heels of a woman gnawing on a
succulent rib of pork. 
ÒI beg youÑÓ stuttered the girl, face washed gray with fear. She was of good height but
so slender that she appeared frail. 
At once, faced with such an expression of abject misery and terror, Rosvita relented. She
handed back the book and yet, as the young woman locked the book under her left arm,
immediately regretted her own act of generosity. The title was lost in the folds of the
EagleÕs cloak. What on GodÕs earth did an Eagle mean by carrying a book? And what
kind of book was it? But Rosvita was too wise to attempt a direct assault. 
ÒI canÕt help but wonder where a woman such as yourself learned to read Dariyan so
fluently,Ó she said. ÒAre you church educated?Ó 
 The girl hesitated, her fine mouth turning down stubbornly. Then, with an effort, she
smoothed her expression. Rosvita had studied faces for too many years not to recognize a
person who wanted to remain unnoticed and unremarkedÑalthough how, with such a striking
face, this young person thought she could remain unnoticed, Rosvita could not fathom. 
ÒMy da educated me,Ó she said at last. 
ÒYou mentioned him to Queen Mathilda, did you not? He was in the church?Ó 
She shrugged, not wanting to answer. 
ÒPerhaps he left the church after you were born,Ó suggested Rovita, trying to sound
sympathetic, trying to worm her way past the wall the girl had thrown up. ÒDoes he have
kin? Do you know who your people are?Ó 
ÒI have been told he has cousins at Bodfeld. But they disclaimed the kinship afterÑÓ
She broke off. 
That, Rosvita saw, was the girlÕs weakness. Once begun, she would forget to stop.
ÒAfter he acknowledged you as his child? Or had he already left the church?Ó 
ÒI donÕt know,Ó said the girl, a little rudely. 
ÒI beg your pardon. But then, I was often told by my mother abbess that my curiosity is
unpardonable.Ó Rosvita offered a smile. The girl almost smiled back, but did not. The fierce
blue of her eyes, as brilliant as sapphires or the blue depths of fire, shone bright against her
dusky skin. ÒYour mother?Ó 
ÒIs dead. These many years.Ó 
ÒAnd now Wolfhere has taken you on as his discipla. Perhaps you knew him before?Ó 
ÒNo, I didnÕtÑÓ She shook her head impatiently. ÒHe took me into the Eagles. He
saved me fromÑÓ She winched her right arm more tightly against her side, concealing the
book. 
Lady Above! Had she stolen it from the library at Quedlinhame? 
It was time for the direct approach. ÒWhat book is that?Ó 
Rosvita had never seen anyone look quite so fragile and terrified. Had the girl stolen it?
Ought she to seek justice in this case, and force her to tell the truthÑor was it better to be
merciful and let her confess in due time? 
ÒItÑMy da gave it to me,Ó the girl said at last, in a rush. ÒItÕs the only thing I have left of
him.Ó 
A rumble of thunder sounded closer now. Rain brushed the clericÕs cheeks and struck
her hands like thoughts falling from the heavens to disturb what little peace of mind she had
ever managed to secure. So many thoughts distracted her, like the drops of rain increasing

in frequency now: old Brother Fidelis and his legacy, the Vita of St. Radegundis, which he
had given to her; his last whispered mention of Seven Sleepers, daimones or humans or
some other creatures whose power he feared; the terrible and mysterious disappearance of
VillamÕs son, Berthold, and his six companions, in the stone circle in the hills above
Hers-ford; her History, which she really must continue working on so that it might be finished
before the old queen died; the book that this vulnerable girl clutched to herself so tightly. 
The book. Rosvita knew at that instant, as if the sound of thunder divined it, that she
would somehow, in some way, get a look inside that book. 
Suddenly, as lightning flashed and a fresh peal of thunder cracked and roared in
response, the girl spoke. ÒDo you know how to read Arethousan?Ó 
Rosvita arched one eyebrow. ÒYes, I do. I learned from Queen Sophia herself.Ó The girl
remained silent, quite unlike the unrolling turmoil in the sky. Seeing an opening, Rosvita
continued. ÒWould you like to learn Arethousan? You read Dariyan very well.Ó 
She bit her lip. She was tempted. 
Tempted. This Rosvita understood. This fault she knew how to nurture, although surely it
was a sin to do so. ÒI can teach you Arethousan. I saw you reading in the library, a Jinna
work, I believe, one of the astronomers. That was just before IvarÑÓ 
ÒIvar,Ó whispered the girl, looking embarrassed. 
ÒMy brother Ivar,Ó agreed Rosvita, and saw at once the wedge through which she could
penetrate this girlÕs defenses. ÒDid he ever speak of me? You knew him in HeartÕs Rest, I
believe, before he entered the church.Ó 
ÒHe always spoke of you with respect,Ó she admitted, Òthough he never wanted to
emulate your vocation!Ó 
ÒSo he gave me reason to understand.Ó 
 The Eagle flushed and looked away, embarrassed either to replay that scene in the
library in her own mind or to remember that another had witnessed the whole. ÒHe trusts
you.Ó 
Rosvita took in a careful breath, measuring her words. This moment was the crucial one.
Here might all be won, or lost. 
ÒSister!Ó 
She almost cursed out loud, managed not to. She glanced toward the sound of the voice
and grimaced. A middle-aged man with dark hair and undistinguished featuresÑa KingÕs
EagleÑled his horse through the gate into the courtyard. 
ÒI beg you, Sister, I bring an important message.Ó He led the horse forwardÑit was
limpingÑand halted before her. ÒSister,Ó he repeated respectfully. 
LadyÕs Blood! Granted this distraction, the girl escaped, slinking away like a hunted
creature escaping the hounds. It was too late to call her back, and in any case, Rosvita knew
her duty: The man looked worn, weary, and as if his feet hurt him. 
ÒWhere have you come from?Ó she asked politely. It was not, after all, his fault, not
precisely, anyway. By such means did God remind her of her duty. 
ÒI am the herald for Princess Sapientia.Ó 
ÒSapientialÓ 
ÒI was meant to ride in half a day before her, to make sure her lodgings were properly
prepared, but my horse came up lame, so I amÑÓ He halted, silenced by the ring of harness
and by the laughter and animated cheer of voices carried on the wind in a sudden lull.
Lightning brightened the darkening sky; thunder, almost on top of them, cracked and rolled,
shaking the shutters. It began to rain. 
The riders appeared in the gate, laughing, untroubled by storm and rain. It was a small
retinue, not above twenty riders together with several wagons and a number of servants
walking beside, but clearly a noblewomanÕs party. A banner sodden with rain fluttered
limply in the wind. The horses wore rich caparisons, and the soldiers were outfitted in good
armor. 
The princess rode at the front. Rosvita judged she could scarcely be more than four

months gone, given that she had only ridden out on her heirÕs progress some six months
ago, but the princess was of such a slight build that even through her heavy wool traveling
tunic Rosvita could see the telltale swelling of her belly. 
But the clericÕs gaze skipped almost immediately away from the princess to the man
riding with easy grace beside her. 
RosvitaÕs mouth dropped open. Without any words being spoken, she knew this man
was the father of SapientiaÕs as yet unborn child. Knew it, as she was meant to know, as all
were meant to know, by the little gestures of intimacy he and the princess exchanged. Truth
to tell, she was scandalized, although after so many years in the kingÕs progress she had
thought herself inured to scandal. 
The Eagle, still beside her, grunted, acknowledging her surprise. ÒNot quite what anyone
expected.Ó 
And yet, after a momentÕs consideration, Rosvita realized she was not at all surprised.
HenryÕs grief had rendered him incapable of sending his eldest legitimate child on her way
for her heirÕs progress, as was traditional. He had left that duty to another, to Judith,
margrave of Olsatia and Austra. 
This, of course, was the inevitable result. 
4
 She jammed the book into the saddlebag, cursing herself under her breath. Why must
she continually betray herself? WouldnÕt it be better to stop pretending to be what she was
notÑa simple, uneducated Eagle? Why not confide in the woman? She looked trustworthy
enough, and she was IvarÕs sister. 
Yet Rosvita had lived for many years in the circle of the kingÕs progress. She could not
be a simple woman, uncomplicated in the way Ivar was; she might involve herself in many
intrigues unknown to Liath, dangerous to Liath. As a good church woman, surely she would
not be sympathetic to tales of daimones and the forbidden knowledge of the mathematici. 
I would never know. I can never know whom to trust. That is why Da told me to ¡°Trust no
one.Ó 
Thunder boomed. The entire stables shook under that great crack and rumbling roar. She
jumped, startled, hating herself for being scared all the time. If only Hanna would return, but
she could not expect Hanna for months. And with Hanna would come Wolfhere and his
damnable questions and his watching eyes. 
And yet, was not Rosvita more likely to be trustworthy than Wolfhere? Liath liked
WolfhereÑthat was the worst of itÑbut she could never trust him. He had known both her
mother and father. He knew what she was, and he wanted something from her, just as Hugh
had wantedÑ
But she was not going to think about Hugh. She could not. Hugh looked like someone
who could be trusted. Beautiful Hugh. She touched a hand to her cheek, remembering the
pain when he hit her. 
ÒYou are free of Hugh,Ó she whispered, if only to stop this pointless endless fruitless
speculation. 
Thunder cracked and rumbled on and on and on, directly overhead. She shuddered,
seized by a sudden intense wave of fear, as if fear were a living being, a daimone that had
set its claws into her and tightened them, drawing blood and entrails and sucking all the
spirit out of her. Rain drummed on the roof. 
Abruptly the doors to the stables opened and servants and horses flooded in. They talked
all at once, chattering, excited, exuberant. She shrank back into the stable where her and
HathuiÕs gear lay together. Hiding in shadow, she listened: Sapientia, sent off on her
heirÕs progress after the battle at Kassel, had returned to the kingÕs progress triumphantly
pregnant with the child who, if born alive and healthy, would guarantee her claim to become
ruler after her father. 

On the heels of their arrival the hunters returned, escaping the full force of the storm.
Every stall was needed to stable horses. Liath gathered up her and HathuiÕs meager
bundles and hauled them up to the loft where she arranged them in a safe corner. It took
time. It kept her out of the way. It made her just another anonymous servant, someone who
would be overlooked. But not, alas, forever. 
Hathui, wet through, came up the ladder and onto the plank floor. She wrung water out of
her cloak. Her hair lay matted to her head and in streaks down her neck. ÒYouÕre back!Ó
she said with surprise. ÒI am.Ó 
ÒYou should have been waiting for the king,Ó scolded Hathui. Then, distracted by the
stamp and bustle of folk below, she added, ÒI hear Princess Sapientia has returned, though
I havenÕt seen her.Ó 
ÒI havenÕt seen her either,Ó said Liath. ÒShe and her party must have been riding just
behind me.Ó 
ÒThey came in by the western road.Ó Hathui gathered her saddlebags and bedroll.
ÒIÕm off to Quedlinhame to announce the news to Queen Mathilda and Mother Scholastica.
You must go now and attend the king. At once.Ó 
Liath nodded dutifully. She nudged her saddlebags into the corner and threw her bedroll
over them to conceal them. Hathui hoisted her bedroll over her shoulders and, with a brisk
nod at Liath, climbed back down the ladder. Liath followed. 
Rain pounded outside. She paused as Hathui got a new horse, freshly saddled. Ducking
out by a side door, she hesitated under the eaves as water coursed down from the thatch
roof and puddled at her feet, as rain pummeled the dry-packed earth of the courtyard into a
shallow sea of mud. Hathui, coming outside by the main stable doors, swung onto her horse
and forged out through the open gate into the teeth of the storm. Liath gazed across the
courtyard at the whitewashed wall of one long side of the great hall, where all the living and
feasting and sleeping went on. It looked no different than it had an hour ago, when she had
entered hoping to find solitude there. But now, as if brought by the storm, she felt that wave
of fear again, such a hideous swell of dread that her knees almost gave out under her. 
She must not give in to the old fear. She touched the hilt of her sword, her Ògood friend,Ó
and shifted her shoulders to feel the comfortable weight of her bow, Seeker of Hearts, and
her quiver full of arrows. 
She braced herself against the wall, then thrust forward into the storm, dashing as fast as
she could across the sloppy ground. She reached the other side without being too
thoroughly drenched, and a Lion standing guard under the protection of the eaves gave her
a smile for her trouble and opened the door. Warmth and smoke roiled out. She stepped up
to enter the hall. 
It was much changed now. The industrious clerics had been overwhelmed by loud, wet,
laughing, bragging courtiers, noble folk newly ridden in from the hunt. Though a large
chamber, the hall seemed cramped, reeking with the smell of wet wool and sweaty, jovial
men and women. Liath weaved her way through them toward the hearth at the other end of
the hall, where the kingÕs chair stood. With each step, dread clawed in her, a
sharp-fingered hand digging through her soul, groping up the paved streets of her city of
memory on the track of her sealed tower. She had to force each foot forward, one step after
the next. 
What was wrong with her? Why had this fear come on her? 
How much easier it would be to turn and flee. But that was what Da had done, and in the
end it hadnÕt saved him. In order to live, she was going to have to do better than Da. 
They parted before her, making way for the KingÕs Eagle. Henry sat in his chair, looking
tired. With one hand he toyed with a houndÕs leash, knotted and tangled. His other hand
rested on a thigh; he opened and closed it over and over. He looked distracted, staring
without seeing toward his two younger children who sat on stools beside the fire. Sapientia
stood beside him, shifting restlessly from one foot to the other, glancing again and again
toward a knot of people kneeling to her left. These, her courtiers, stooped over a finely

carved chest in which she probably had stored her fine clothing as well as mementos of her
sacred progress, whose successful outcome would mark her as fit to rule as Queen
Regnant after HenryÕs death. 
Thunder boomed, rattling the timbers and shaking the barred shutters, and hard on top of
that came a second crash, resounding through the hall, stilling their chatter. The princessÕ
courtiers rose and transformed themselves into a newÕpattern, one made bright and
focused by the man who stood at their heart, the man at whom Sapientia stared, her gaze
fixed avidly and jealously on his face. 
His beautiful face. 
As the thunder faded, Liath heard the gentle snap and rustle of the hearthÕs fire. 
Hugh. 
PART TWO: CAPUT DRACONIS
V THE HAND OF THE LADY
1
Wind scours his skin but he minds it not. Mere cold, mere sting of blown snow, cannot
drive him from the stem of the ship. He sails on the wings of the storm, driving down on
the northcountry to tear out the throats of those warlead-ers who have refused to bare their
throats to his father, Bloodheart. This was the duty given him. 
His nestbrothers laughed and howled their derision, for they see this as his
punishment. Did he not prove himself weak when he got captured by the Soft Ones? Does
he not further display his weakness because he wears the circle at his chest, the circle that
is the mark of the God of the Soft Ones? 
He knows that Bloodheart meant the duty as punishment. 
 Sent back to the northcountry, land of OldMother and the WiseMothers, he will not gain
booty and glory by raiding all winter into the lands that lie near the city the Soft Ones call
Gent but which Bloodheart has renamed Hundse, Òto treat like a dog.Ó 
But his nestbrothers cannot think more than two steps before their eyes. They do not
understand, and he does not tell them, that he wears the circle not because he believes in
the God of the Soft Ones but rather as a mark of his link to Alain Henrisson, the human
who freed him. They do not understand that their brother, who returns in disgrace to the
northcountry, will be the one who holds his claws to the throats of the rebellious
warleaders. 
Someday, somehow, Bloodheart will die. It is the way of males to die. It is the way of the
OldMother to stiffen and grow old and climb at last to the fjall of the WiseMothers. There,
with her mothers and grandmothers and great-grandmothers unto uncounted generations,
she will dream of the past and of the future and of the stars that lie like thoughts strewn
across the fjall of the heavens far above, too steep a climb for mortal legs. 
And when Bloodheart dies, who will the warleaders of the northcountry remember? The
ones who raid and burn in the southlands, far away from the homelands? Or the one who
drove into their halls and plundered their gold and stole and slaughtered their slaves?
The one before whom they bared their throats? 
The mewling and sobbing of a slave disturbs him. The dogs are restless, but he no
longer lets them feed on obedient slaves. This lesson he learned from Alain: Impulse
must not govern action. The other RockChildren, rowing, glance his way with their bitter
eyes; they want to challenge him but dare not. They did not fight their way to a manÕs
form out of the nestlings sired by Bloodheart. They come from other nests, other valleys,
other dams. They serve Bloodheart and his litters. They do not contest him. 

But they still watch. He dares show no sign of weakness in front of them, or else they will
not fight for him when it comes time to bring the rebellious warleaders to heel, the
independent ones who raid as all the RockChildren did before BloodheartÕs hegemony:
as they wish, with no coordination, with no greater vision leading them. They are no better
than dogs! How they matured into men puzzles him sometimes, but he does not worry
himself about it. That is a question only OldMother and the WiseMothers can answer. 
He steps down from the stem and makes his way across the rocking ship. The beat and
rise and fall of the waves is like a second breath to him; he does not falter although the
swells are steep here where the seas sing with the joy of coming storm. 
He stops at the stern where the slaves huddle. Miserable creatures. OneÑbearded as
all the older males areÑstares defiantly at him for a moment; then, remembering, the
male drops his gaze swiftly and hunches his shoulders, waiting for the death blow. Another
would kill the male simply for that glance. But he knows better. 
Nurture the strong ones. In time they can become useful tools. 
He leans down and presses the tip of a claw gently but firmly into the edge of one soft
eye of the defiant male, as if to say. ÒI have noticed you.Ó 
Then he shoves aside the others to find the one who moans and mewls and groans.
This one has the stink of blood and feces about her. She is a female of middle years,
haggard of face, thin, her skirts stained with blood and diarrhea, the sign of an illness he
has learned to recognize. Every Soft One he has ever seen excrete such a foul
combination of blood and pus and stink dies after a day or three of agonizing pain. Some
of his nestbrothers in Gent would wager over how many days one stricken by the disease
could live. But he has also noticed that this disease can pass itself on to others if not
eradicated quickly. What good does it do the miserable creature to lie there in pain and
her own fetid mess? 
He does not, of course, want to stain his claws with her tainted fluids. He fetches a
spear, its iron point honed into a fine instrument of death. He places the tip of the spear
against the femaleÕs breast. She whimpers and sobs, still clutching her belly, and the
others draw away, but no one tries to stop him. They fear him. Surely they know she is
doomed. Not even the prayers they mouth to their god can save her. 
This is the other lesson he learned from Alain: to be merciful. With a single thrust, he
pierces her chest. 
Alain started up, gasping, hands clutched to his chest. The pain that stabbed into him
faded as Rage and Sorrow stirred, woke, and licked his hands until he calmed. The dream
had been so real. But all the dreams of Fifth Son seemed this real. Somehow the blood they
had exchanged so many months ago linked them now irrevocably. He saw with Fifth SonÕs
eyes and knew his thoughts. He lived, in those sleeping hours, in Fifth SonÕs metal-hard
skin. 
Shuddering, he let the two black hounds nuzzle him until the wave of revulsion passed.
The revulsion brought in its wake shame. What right had he to judge another creature, even
an Eika? 
A flame lit suddenly, seen through the gauzy veil that separated his side of the tent from
his fatherÕs. My father. 
The veil was pushed aside. Count Lavastine looked in, candle and holder gripped in one
hand and the other still caught in the thin fabric of tent wall. ÒAlain? I heard you cry out.Ó 
Alain swung his legs off the cot and looked up at his father. If he stood, he would top
Lavastine by half a head; at this vulnerable time of night, with the count dressed in shirt and
linen drawers, he remained seated. Lavastine let the fabric wall fall behind him and crossed
to Alain. 
ÒAre you well?Ó He placed the back of his hand against the boyÕs cheek. It was not
precisely a tender gestureÑLavastine did not have tender impulsesÑbut the simple display
of concern moved Alain deeply. ÒI am well. I had a bad dream.Ó 

Terror padded in from the other room and nipped at Rage. Lavastine cuffed them gently,
almost absently, and they both settled down comfortably together, a quivering mass of black
hounds. ÒYou are concerned about the battle.Ó Ai, Lady, the dream had been so vivid that
Alain had forgotten about the work they meant to do at dawn. 
ÒNo,Ó he said truthfully. ÒI am troubled by dreams of the Eika prince.Ó 
Lavastine began to pace. Terror yawned, stretched, made as if to rise and pad after his
master, and then bared teeth, nipped sleepily at Rage again, and settled back to sleep. 
ÒDo not fear my anger, Alain. You were honest with me, and I have forgiven you for
freeing the savage. Is it the Eika you fear? Perhaps youÕre afraid the prince you let go will
be among them and you donÕt know if you can kill him, if it comes to that?Ó 
ÒHe isnÕt among them. HeÕs sailing north. He was sent back to his own country by his
father to bring to heel all the warleaders who havenÕt yet accepted Bloodheart as chief over
all the Eika. King, I suppose we might say.Ó 
As soon as he spoke, Alain realized how strange this statement must sound. Lavastine
turned and, in the warm light of the candle, he gave that grimace which was his smile, not an
expression of warmth, precisely, nor yet of amusement. ÒSon.Ó Always, these past months,
he savored the word, son. ¡°If it is true you have dreams that are also true visions, I wish you
never to speak of them to anyone but me. Never to a deacon or any person in the church.Ó 
ÒWhy not?Ó 
ÒThey might claim you have been touched by God and try to take you away from me. I will
not let you go, not as long as I am alive.Ó 
Alain shivered. ÒDonÕt say that,Ó he whispered. ÒDonÕt speak of death.Ó 
Lavastine reached, hesitated, then touched the boy on his dark head, laying his hand
there almost tenderly, certainly possessively. ÒI will not let go of you, ever, Alain,Ó he
repeated. With a shake of his head as a dog shakes off water, he pulled away and crossed
to the other side of the tent, hooking the fabric wall up over a post. ÒI smell morning,Ó he
said. ÒCome, son. It is time to arm for battle.Ó 
The hounds roused and with their waking roused the servants, who hurried to bring lit
lanterns and clothing. They dressed the count and his heir in padded jackets to cushion their
bodies from the weight of their armor. Alain had spent the summer training in armor,
becoming accustomed to its weight and feel along his body: heavy mail hauberk, soft
leather hood over which a servant slipped and tightened a mail coif and, on top of that, a
conical helmet trimmed with bronze. Another servant bound his calves with leather strips
wound from ankle to knee. This was far better armor than anything he could have hoped to
wear as a man-at-arms. 
 He did not think about battleÑif it came to thatÑas the servant hung belt and short sword
at his hips. Outside, he took a spear from the rack set up beside the tent. The long haft of
oak was strengthened by a twining ribbon of blue leather that wound from butt to lugs, the
ÒwingsÓ projecting out on either side just below the blade. Grooms brought their horses.
Without too much trepidation, Alain swung up on his. He was a natural riderÑLavastine had
stated more than once, in his emphatic way, that this was clearly a sign of AlainÕs noble
blood. He might well have been born to the saddle, but he had truly only learned to ride after
that day in the month of Sormas when Lavastine had acknowledged him as son and heir. He
was untried and inexperienced, especially when it came time to ride into a skirmish where
he might see actual fighting. But a countÕs son did not walk into battle. So he would ride. 
Lavastine mounted his fine gray gelding, Graymane, and nodded at Alain as if to say: ¡°
Are you ready?Ó 
Alain nodded in turn. He would not disappoint his father. 
WasnÕt riding to war what he had dreamed of all his life? His foster father, Henri the
merchant, and his Aunt Bel had pledged him to the church, to live out his life as a monk at
the DragonÕs Tail Monastery. But the Lady of Battles had appeared that stormy spring day
when Eika had burned the monastery and slaughtered all the monks. She had given him a
rose that never wilted and could never be crushed, a rose he kept wrapped in a little cloth

bag and wore on a leather thong around his neck. She had taken a pledge from him. ¡°
Serve me.Ó He had sworn to serve her in order to save Osna village from the Eika attack
but also because what she promised him was his heartÕs desire. For that, knowing that the
man who raised him had promised him in good faith to the church, he still felt guilty. 
Birds chirped, and the gray light that heralds dawn rose around them, etching the skeletal
lines of trees against the seamless expanse of sky. Above the trees stars shone. Trained by
a navigator, Alain could not help but note stars and constellations and wonder at their
omens. The wandering stars moved on the backdrop of the sphere of the fixed stars, the
highest of the seven spheres beyond which lay the Chamber of Light. Their threads wove
power that guided Fate and could be wielded by hands trained in that craft. Or so it was
claimed, though such teaching was condemned by the church. 
The pale rose beacon of Aturna, the Magus, shone near the zenith in the constellation
known as The Sisters, and Mok, planet of wisdom and bounty, made her stately way through
The Lion. Beyond Aturna to the west, the jewel of seven stars clustered closely together and
known as Òthe CrownÓ glittered so brightly he thought he could see the mysterious seventh
sister among her six bolder siblings. Bow and Arrow, the arrow tipped with the bright blue
brilliance of the star Seirios, pointed toward the Hunter with his belt of gems and his left
shoulder tipped with redÑthe star called Vulneris. But as Alain stared, recalling the
knowledge taught him by his foster father, the stars faded with dawn. Soon the light of the
rising sun would obliterate this sight, as Lavastine meant to obliterate the Eika camp. 
Lavastine lifted a hand for silence. His men-at-arms quieted to gather around him. These
were the cavalry, some twenty experienced men, the best of his fighters. The infantry was
already in place. The scouts, by now, would be creeping down to the shoreline to do their
duty. 
Lavastine left nothing to chance, not when he could help it. 
They started out slowly, each armed servant holding on to a horseÕs bridle and leading
them across the rough ground. It grew lighter as they crossed down through forest, picked
their way across a blackened field that had once been ripe oats, and came out on a sandy
hill that overlooked sea and shore. There, on a rocky rise just above a riverÕs mouth, Eika
had built a winter camp. 
The sea shone and glimmered in the east where the first line of light touched it, spreading
over the waves. From the beach down by the river, as if it were an echo of the sunÕs light,
fire sprang up among the ships ÒForward,Ó said Lavastine calmly. He was always calm. 
Alain was sweating with excitement. Someday, perhaps, the bards would sing of this
battle. He followed his father down, the other mounted soldiers ranged around them,
protecting them. No nobleman sent his soldiers into battle alone; that would be dishonorable
as well as disloyal. So must his sonÑhis bastard son, only recently proclaimed as his
legitimate heirÑbe seen capable of riding to war and fighting in battle. 
Lavastine glanced, just once, toward Alain, as if to say: ¡°DonÕt fail me.Ó 
An alarm shriekedÑthe howling of dogs and the blast of a hornÑfrom the Eika camp. Like
hornets, Eika rushed from their shelters and out of their palisade to save their ships. 
Archers hidden in the brush on the steep slopes of the ridge lit arrows from coals
concealed in hollow tubes they had carried with them and began to shoot into the enclosure.
The infantrymen, who had waded out along the shore, closed in on the surprised Eika from
the riverÕs mouth. And from behind, the claw that closed the pincerÕs mouth, rode
Lavastine with his cavalry. 
It took every ounce of skill Alain had to keep his horse running with the rest, to keep his
balance, to simply stay with them and keep hold of his spearÑnot be jounced off or have his
attention wrenched away by a hundred distractions. The cloth shelters in the enclosure
burned with a spitting, furious flame. The ships did not burn as brightly, but shapes swarmed
over them, dousing the flames and howling their rage while the lightly armed scouts scuttled
away to safety. 
Then the cavalry hit the first rank of the Eika, those who had seen them coming and

turned to fight. Alain rode right over one. He did not even tuck and thrust with his spear, did
not even parry, just rode, hoping the horse knew what it was doing. He did not. He was dimly
aware that beside him Lavastine thrust and stuck with his spear, striking home into an Eika
chest, tugged, then gave up the spear and rode on. Soldiers pounded after them, leaving
behind a mass of trampled Eika. Beyond, a larger clot of Eika struggled with the infantry. On
foot the Eika had the advantage over the smaller, weaker men. With axes hacking and
shields used like weapons, striking and punching, Eika clawed and fought their way through
the foot soldiers. But even in the fury of battle some turned, alerted by the cries of their
brothers and the pounding of hooves. 
He was upon them. Skin of copper, of bronze, of gold or silver or iron, they resembled
creatures poured out of metal into a human mold, and yet they were not human at all. One
cut at him, its teeth gleaming sharply white, its hair the dead color of bleached bone. He
parried with his spear, felt the ax blade cut and hang up in the leather-bound haft. He tugged,
suddenly frantic, and the Eika dropped its shield and drew its knife. Horrified, Alain released
his hold on the spear and, as the creature staggered back with its lips frozen in a ghastly
grimace, he jerked his sword from its sheath, lifted it highÑ
Ñand in that moment, with the Eika off-balance before him, with the skirmish swirling
forward as other horsemen pressed Eika back and Lavastine shouted to urge them on, in
that instant before his father looked around, before his father would see him frozen, a
coward, he knew he could not do it. 
He could not kill. 
The Eika cast away ax and spear and leaped forward with its knife, a wicked obsidian
blade. Alain tried to lift his short sword to parry, but he was paralyzed with that revelation. 
He could not kill. 
He was not worthy. He would never be a soldier. He had failed his father. 
He was going to die. 
The sun flashed fire in his eyes, blinding him. Or was it death that he did not yet feel, a
knife buried in his eye or throat, that blinded him? He dropped his reins and instinctively held
up a hand to shield his eyes from the sun. A shadow swooped down over him. An iron-gray
broadsword cut down across his sight. The Eika fell, cut down in mid-leap, and collapsed to
the earth. 
Alain gasped and groped for his reins before the horse could feel he had lost control; but
this was a trained war-horse. It moved forward with the others. Who had come forward?
Who had saved him? Who had witnessed his cowardice? 
He turned. Her gaze was at once distant and utterly piercing. The rose burned at his
chest like a hot coal pressed against his skin. 
She spurred her horse forward, his horse responding not to his limp control but somehow
to hers, though she did not touch it, though she did not hold its reins. 
ÒStay beside me,Ó she said, whether words spoken through her lips or ringing in his
mind he could not tell. I am the Lady of Battles. She had a terrible beauty, seared by
hardship and agony and the wild madness of battle. She drove her white horse, and with him
beside her, surged forward through the Eika, striking to each side, so smooth in her
movements that he knew she had ridden to war for so many years that she no longer had to
think in order to kill. 
Beyond her rode Lavastine, face grim and focused on his task. He took no pleasure in
battle; this was duty. He parried a blow and cut in his turn, striking down a silver-scaled Eika;
in that instant, as the Eika fell before him, Lavastine looked right past the woman and with
that glance marked Alain and went back to the fight. 
Now the cavalry drove the Eika back into the waiting line of infantry. Crushed between foe
and foe, the Eika fought with hopeless fury or struggled to run free. But Alain, with the Lady
of Battles at his side, remained untouched. She struck down any of the savages who lunged
at him or hacked at him with ax or spear. He managed to stay seated on his horse. On her
other side, Lavastine fought with the same steady imperturbable calm. 

Alain jerked his horse left to avoid trampling an infantrymen. The two lines had met at last.
Lavastine peeled aside and with a shouted command led Alain and a dozen others down
toward the shore. Some Eika ran flat out for the ships; others fought as the horsemen came
up behind them. But the savages were broken now. Each one fought only for its own life, or
for death. Down at the beach one ship was halfway into the water; Eika jostled each other
for a place in its belly, grappling for oars, shoving it out into the current. The other two ships
burned with an oily smoke that stung AlainÕs nostrils, bringing tears to his eyes and a
cloudy haze over his vision. 
ÒRein in!Ó cried Lavastine. 
Alain blinked back tears and passed a hand over his eyes. 
ÒWell done,Ó said the count. 
Alain wiped tears from his checks and looked at his father with surprise. Well done? To
whom was he speaking? 
Soldiers circled them, weapons held at the ready. They waited on that verge where sandy
soil turns into grassy beach and watched a single ship as it hove to into the cur rent,
watched as oars beat the water and the ship was swept out to sea. A few arrows, shot
harmlessly from the rocking belly of the boat, splashed in the shallows or skittered away into
the reeds. 
The Lady of Battles was gone. At his chest he felt only the cool, soft lump that was the
little leather pouch. 
The soldiers ranged Ôround as they shook themselves free of the last eddies of
skirmishing. A few Eika had plunged into the river to swim after the receding ship. Most lay
dying on the ground. A few men were wounded, one or two with mortal wounds, but
LavastineÕs tactics had worked with that same blunt effectiveness with which Lavastine
himself approached life. 
ÒWell done, my son,Ó repeated Lavastine. He lifted his sword; a viscous fluid the
greenish-blue color of corroded copper stained the blade. With it held high, he addressed
his soldiers, ÒMy trusted companions, now you have seen this boy prove himself in battle.Ó 
One of the cavalrymen spoke. ÒI saw him strike down four with his own hand, my lord. He
had the battle fury on him. He shone with it. I will follow Lord Alain gladly.Ó To AlainÕs
horror, he saw respect in the soldierÕs eyes. 
As soon as this was spoken, others began to talk. Others, too, had seen a kind of
unearthly glow around the lad. 
ÒBut I did nothing,Ó he protested. ÒI was afraid. It was the hand of the Lady of Battles
which protected me, which struck down those Eika.Ó 
As soon as the words passed his lips, he wished he had not spoken. They
misunderstood him utterly. They none of them had seen her. They took his words as
modesty, and as piety. They believed he had accomplished those deeds when in fact he
had proved himself unworthy and only been saved by her intervention. 
Some of the men drew the Circle at their breasts. Some murmured with awe and
amazement. Others bowed their heads. Lavastine stared at him hard, and then, as if he
could not help himself, he gave that grimace which to him was a smile. 
ÒGod in Unity have set Their Hand on you, my son,Ó he said with pride. ÒYou are meant
to be a warrior.Ó 
2
Lavastine and his retinue celebrated the Feast of St. Valentinus at the holding of Lord
GeoffreyÕs wife, Lady Aldegund. All summer Lavastine had drilled Alain in the art of war
and the rules of proper conduct, both of which were necessaryÑmore than necessary, given
the particulars of AlainÕs birthÑfor Alain to impress those noble families and other stewards
and servants who gave allegiance to the counts of Lavas. Wealth Alain would inherit from his
father, but there were many other virtues he must display in abundance in order to rule as

count after him. All of these virtues Lavastine had and to spare: shrewdness, military
prowess, boldness, liberality, and a stubborn and dogged determination to defend his
possessions and prerogatives. 
ÒThey are treating you well?Ó Lavastine asked that evening as they made ready for the
feast, which would be held in the great hall. 
ÒYes, Father.Ó Alain stood very still, admiring the fine brocade that trimmed
LavastineÕs indigo tunic while a servingman wrapped strips of linen around AlainÕs calves,
binding his loose hosen tightly against his lower legs. A buckle worked of tiny panels of
cloissonne interspersed with garnets mounted in gold cells clasped the narrow leather belt
he wore to hike his tunic up around his knees; its richness still stunned him. The tunic itself,
woven of wool, was dyed with woad to a rich afternoon blue. He recognized the color from
cloth dyed and woven in Osna village by his Aunt Bel and old Mistress Garia, both of whom
had daughters and distant kin and servantwomen trained in weaving. 
But sheÕs not my Aunt Bel, not any more. SheÕs only the common woman who raised
me. 
So had Lavastine decreed. Alain had heard nothing from his old family since the count
had sent a reward of sceattas to Bel and Henri, payment for the years they had fostered
Alain. Had they forgotten him so quickly, not even to send word of how they and Stancy and
Julien and little Agnes and the others fared? 
This thought, and the traitorous wrench of sorrow it produced in his heart, he kept to
himself. 
All was ready at last; in the company of kin they need wear no weapons. The hounds had
been penned outside, since it was not safeÑto the othersÑto bring them indoors in an
unfamiliar hall. Alain followed Lavastine down the stairs from the loft where they, as honored
guests, would sleep with their servants this night. Together, he and his father came into the
long hall. Every tapestry in the holding had been aired and now hung to decorate the walls.
Fire burned in the central hearth where six months ago Lavas-tineÑunder Biscop AntoniaÕs
spellÑhad set his hounds on his own kinsman, Geoffrey, and on GeoffreyÕs young wife. 
Now, Alain felt that every eye there turned to measure him. Lavastine they had forgiven
for the madness set on him by another, but Alain did not think Lord Geoffrey and the others
quite believed that Lavastine truly intended to make this unknown and illegitimate boy his
heir. 
They were all terribly polite as he took his place on his fatherÕs right side. That place, the
one of greatest honor, had once been given to Lord Geoffrey; of all LavastineÕs kin,
Geoffrey was his nearest blood relationÑor had been, until Alain. 
Lady Aldegund, as hostess, sat on LavastineÕs left. After a prayer, she directed her
servants to pour wine at the upper table and cider to those at the lower tables. She handed
Lavastine the cup that she, as hostess, and he, as honored guest, were to share; he bowed
his head and offered it back to her, so she might have the first taste. 
ÒLet us give this toast,Ó said Lord Geoffrey with that same polite smile fixed on his face,
Òto the newly discovered son and heir of my cousin, Lavastine.Ó He drank and handed his
cup to Alain. 
LavastineÕs men-at-arms toasted heartily, with cheers. From Aldegund and GeoffreyÕs
people the salute was subdued, even perfunctory. Lavastine studied the assembled
crowdÑquite fifty peopleÑwith narrowed eyes and his habitual half-frown, but he made no
comment. He was no fool. He must know that many folk would not gladly accept the
illegitimate son over the legitimate third cousin. Servants brought in the first course, a variety
of fowl, chickens, geese, moorhens, and quail, all steeped so heavily in spices that Alain
feared he would get sick to his stomach. 
ÒYou found no more winter camps?Ó asked Lord Geoffrey, leaning past Alain to
address Lavastine. 
Lavastine lifted his cup to lips and made a small gesture with his free hand. 
Alain started. ÒWhy, no, Lord Geoffrey,Ó he said dutifully, seeing that his father meant for

him to answer, Òwe found no more. It is not usual for the Eika to winter in these lands.Ó 
GeoffreyÕs mouth twisted into a smile. ÒIndeed not, Lord Alain. This is the first time we
have seen any Eika on our shores after Matthiasmass, and yet my own men burned a winter
camp a month ago. Now you bring news that not one week ago you destroyed another. I
wonder if the Eika mean to begin a new campaign. What if they want our land as well as our
gold?Ó 
ÒDo they farm?Ó asked Alain. 
Geoffrey blinked. Aldegund took the cup from Lavastine and answered for her husband.
She was a year or two younger than Alain, and her first child lay asleep in a cradle upstairs.
ÒI would suppose that savages know nothing of farming. My kin have held estates in these
lands since the time of the Emperor Taillefer. All the Eika ever want is gold and whatever
other wealthÑslaves, iron, coins, jewelryÑthey can carry away.Ó 
ÒBut why would they want land, if not to farm it?Ó asked Alain. ÒOr to pasture sheep and
cattle?Ó He saw at once he had asked the wrong question. He had asked the sort of
question Aunt Bel would ask. The other noble folk ranged along the table turned to listenÑto
see him make a fool of himself. 
He refused to oblige them. And he refused to be ashamed of the common sense Aunt
Bel had taught him. ÒIf the Eika are now making winter camps, then we must ask ourselves
why they do this now, this year, when they did not before. IsnÕt it true that there is one who
stands as king among them, this Bloodheart? They have always been raiders before. Each
ship is ruled over by a separate war-leader. Now one Eika unites many tribes, and he has
taken Gent, the very city where King Arnulf the Elder crowned his children and laid his claim
for them to be rulers over Wendar and Varre together.Ó 
The nobles grumbled, forgetting their distrust of Alain when reminded of their grievance at
old King Arnulf, grandfather of the current king, Henry. Once, as princes and counts and
noble ladies and lords of Varre, they had crowned their own sovereign ruler and fought their
own private battles for influence in the Varren court. Now, outsiders in a court dominated by
nobles of Wendish blood, they waited, discontent. Some of these men had ridden with
Sabella in her rebellion against Henry. Some of these women had sent supplies and gold to
enrich SabellaÕs war chests and maintain her army. Now Sabella was a prisoner and her
rebellion ended; Lavastine had pledged himself loyal to King Henry, and in return Henry had
acknowledged LavastineÕs bastard son as the countÕs heir. 
The bastard son who had to prove himself worthy, in their eyes. ÒNow some of the Eika
acknowledge a king,Ó he continued, Òwhile others build winter camps in Varren lands.
What does this mean?Ó 
ÒIndeed,Ó said Lavastine. ÒWhat does it mean, Lord Geoffrey? Have you thought on
this puzzle, cousin?Ó 
By his expression, Geoffrey clearly had not. He took a gulp of wine to cover his
discomfiture and set the cup down hard on the table. A few soldiers, at a lower table,
laughed; LavastineÕs men, they had seen Alain in battle and now seemed as willing to
follow where he led as were Rage and Sorrow and the other black hounds. 
I am not worthy. 
And yet, if the Lady of Battles had appeared to him and not to the others, was that not a
sign of his worthiness? Did he not carry the rose, the mark of her favor? 
A servingwoman refilled Lord GeoffreyÕs cup and lingered just long enough to look over
Alain impertinently but with obvious interest; he flushed, suddenly warm. And why shouldnÕt
he be? The hall was certainly warm enough to suit the coldest heart. 
ÒHave you formed some opinion yourself as to the EikaÕs reasons, Lord Alain?Ó asked
Aldegund with a sharp tinge to her voice, like malice. A sweet-faced woman, scarcely more
than a girl, Aldegund had not accepted Alain and, except for her marriage to Geoffrey,
Lavastine had no claim over her. Her kin had their own lands and estates, their own
connection to Varren nobility and to the Wendish kings. She made a gesture and the
servingwoman moved away to tend to other cups. 

ÒI have.Ó His flush deepened as he heard his own words. It sounded so veryÑproud. But
a countÕs son was allowed some arrogance; indeed, it was expected of him. 
ÒGo on.Ó Lavastine gestured with his cup. 
Alain allowed himself a drink of wine for courageÑsuch very fine wine, carted in from
Salia, and so much of itÑbefore he continued. ÒI think Bloodheart means to make of
himself a king to rival King Henry, or King Lothair of Salia. But when a king or queen is
made, there are always princes who chafe under this rule. Some of these warleaders might
not like being under the hand of another Eika, even one said to be a powerful enchanter. Yet
if their own people wish to gain BloodheartÕs favor, those warleaders and the men loyal to
them might be driven out of their own lands because they are rebels. Perhaps that is why
they winter here. They may have nothing to go back to.Ó 
ÒIt is possible,Ó said Geoffrey grudgingly, finishing their shared cup. His wife sent a
servant at once to refill it. 
ÒIs it not just as likely,Ó asked an older man whom Alain identified as Meginher, one of
AldegundÕs many maternal uncles, a fighting man who had a considerable reputation, Òthat
these winter camps have been built at the order of this Bloodheart?Ó 
ÒWhy do we suppose,Ó asked Aldegund sharply, Òthat these Eika behave in any
manner like ourselves? They are savages, are they not? Why should they act as we do?
What do we truly know of them?Ó 
I know what I see in my dreams. But he could not speak of those dreams out loud. His
father had forbidden it. He bowed his head before her superior wisdom, for though she was
young, she was a woman, lady of this estate and fashioned in the likeness of Our Lady, who
orders the Hearth of Life. Men were fashioned for rougher work, and though certainly they
were usually skilled beyond women in combat and hard labor, everyone knew, and the
church mothers had often written on, the greater potential of women for the labors of the
mind and the arts. These blessings, like that of childbirth, were granted to them by the grace
of Our Lady, Mother of Life. 
ÒWe know little of the Eika,Ó said Lavastine curtly. ÒWhile we still have good weather,
however, myself, my son, and these of our men-at-arms who accompany us will patrol the
coasts for as long as we can. We will march west to Osna Sound next. The last and worst
incursion of the Eika came there two springs ago, as you know.Ó 
ÒAh.Ó Lord Geoffrey leaned forward with new interest. ÒThere is a village at Osna
Sound. IsnÕt that where you were fostered, Lord Alain? I remember when you came to
Lavas town along with the other laborers who owed their yearÕs service.Ó 
ÒYou do?Ó asked Alain, surprised that as important a man as Geoffrey had noticed an
insignificant common boy like himself. 
But Geoffrey looked down swiftly, and Alain glanced at his father to see that Lavastine
had fixed an expressionlessÑyet for that very reason intimidatingÑstare on the other man. 
Meginher snorted and turned to his cup, taking a swig of wine. Servants staggered in
under the weight of a roasted boar and several haunches of venison decorated with
pimentos. Alain could not help but think of Lackling, who had eaten gruel all his life with a
few beans or turnips if there were extra. Poor bastard . . . just like Alain, only how different
LacklingÕs fate had turned out to be. He had never been given leave to eat food this rich,
except the last scraps taken from the table if he could grab them before they were thrown to
the pigs. 
ÒOf course,Ó said Lavastine, relinquishing the cup to his hostess, who had it filled once
again with wine, Òany person would have noticed your quality at once, Alain, for it was
preordained that you take your place among the magnates and potentes, was it not? Twice
now you have distinguished yourself in battle.Ó He said this firmly and clearly so that every
person in the hall heard him. He gestured toward the captain of his cavalry. ÒIs it not true,
Captain?Ó 
The soldier stood. He, like the others, had bent his knee before Alain four days ago after
the battleÑand not just because Lavastine wished them to do so. ÒI have fought for the

counts of Lavas since I was a lad, and I have never seen anything like this. I remember when
the boy killed the guivre at the battle outside Kassel. Even so, to see him ride through his
first battle as a true soldier, to see him strike to either side with no sign of fear, with such
strength, with such fury that it shone from him as if he had been touched by the saints and
God Themselves, to see him slay Eika on his right hand and on his left, I could see he had
been born to the life of a warrior.Ó The other menÑthose of LavastineÕs soldiers who had
survived the battle-pounded cups and knife hilts and empty platters on the table as they
roared their approval. 
Alain leaped up. ÒIt was the hand of the Lady of Battles, not my own,Ó he insisted,
Òwhich killed those Eika.Ó 
ÒSit,Ó said Lavastine softly and, as obedient as the hounds, Alain sat. 
The others murmured, but Lord Geoffrey made no more comments about AlainÕs service
as a laborer at Lavas Holding, and Lady Aldegund turned the talk to more innocent subjects:
the yearÕs harvest, the new wheeled plow, and how the mild summer and autumn presaged
a good growing season which would, in turn, presage a rich harvest of taxes. A third course
was brought in, veal and lamb spiced with cumin and pepper and other exotic flavors and
condiments. A poet, trained in the court chapel of the Salian king and now singing for his
supper at the lesser courts of nobles, sang from an old and lengthy panegyric in praise of
the Salian Emperor Taillefer as Alain picked at his food. 
¡°As did the mariners of old, I set sail to test my weary limbs against the storms of the
sea, to try my ship against the ocean waves. I set my gaze to that beacon which gleams
from afar. That light is the name of Taillefer. Look! The sun shines no more brightly than
the emperor, who illuminates the earth with his boundless love and great wisdom.Ó 
The poet went on in this manner, extolling the virtues of the long-dead emperor while
Alain wondered how the noble lords and ladies could possibly eat as much food as they
were stuffing into their bellies at this feast. He had gone hungry from time to timeÑeveryone
didÑbut he had never suffered; Aunt Bel was prosperous enough to be able to set aside
some portion every year against a catastrophi-cally bad harvest. But he had seen the poor
who lived from hand to mouth, their children in perpetual want, begging at the church with
legs and arms as thin as sticks and faces bleak with hopelessness. In good years, of
course, such people found day labor and managed, but in bad years even the prosperous
stared into the gaunt face of hunger. 
¡°For although the sun knows twelve hours of darkness, Taillefer, like a star, shines
eternally. He enters first among the company, and he clears the way so that all may follow.
With heavy chains he binds the unjust and with a stiff yoke he constrains the proud. With a
stern hand he teaches the impious to love God.Ó 
The servants brought in a fourth course of clear soup together with a bread so white and
fine it seemed to dissolve on AlainÕs tongue. 
¡°Taillefer is the fount of all grace and honor. His achievements have made him
famous throughout the four quarters of the earth. He is generous, prudent, just, pious,
affable, handsome, outstanding at arms, wise in conciliation, compassionate to the poor,
and gentle with the weak. Never before did there speak such an eloquent lecturer; the
sweetness of his words surpasses those of Marcia Tullia, the orator of ancient Dariya. He
alone has penetrated the hidden paths of knowledge and understood all its mysteries, for
to him God revealed the secrets of the universe. He has discovered every secret of the
mathematici and the secret hidden words and the ways of the stars in their courses and
the means by which their powers may be drawn down into the hands of humankind. No
navigator has studied the heavens with greater keenness.Ó 
After the soup came apple tarts, pears steeped in honey, and a custard. The creamy
mixture of milk, honey, and eggs melted on AlainÕs lips like nectar, and he thought that
perhaps he could endure another entire poem cataloging the dead emperorÕs virtues if only
he could make room in his belly for several more helpings of custard. Mostly, however, he

wanted to go to sleep. It was well into night now; candles and torches burned, illuminating
the feast and the faces of women and men eating and drinking their fill, passing cups from
mouth to mouth, sharing bites of apple tart, getting up to stretch their limbs. A constant
stream of people went to and from the forecourt, so sodden with wine that they had to relieve
themselves. Some of the soldiers, made restless by the long court poem, called for a stanza
from the Gold of the Hevelli. Instead, the learned poet launched into a long
digressionÑevidently part of the poemÑin which Taillefer oversaw the construction of a new
palace at the city of Autun, where he had most often lingered with his court. His workers
labored eagerly, raising straight columns and a high citadel, digging into the earth to find hot
springs for the baths the emperor loved; the most favored workers built a church fit for a
hallowed king. ÒThey labor as do the bees in summerÓÑat which point the poet went into a
second long digression, this one on the nature of bees. 
It was time to go outside. Alain excused himself and left the hall. As he came out into the
cold autumn night, he sucked in a deep breath of clean air. Inside, smoke from hearth and
torches had wreathed the air with a heavy perfume; he was dizzy from it and from the wine.
Aunt Bel had never served such wine at her table! Or such a plethora of dishes, each one as
exotic as if it had been itself carted to this land from the fabled East. But he was becoming
accustomed to feasts. 
Feeling suddenly guilty for his good fortune, he walked farther out into the night and
relieved himself against a tree. The chill air had the effect of sharpening his senses, and he
heard the crack of a branch under a foot and the long scrape of cloth pulled across twigs
before he saw the shadow slip toward him. He hastily tied his hosen and stepped back, then
let out a breath; it was only one of the servingwomen who had lost her way or also come out
to relieve herself. 
ÒMy lord Alain,Ó she said. She stumbled and gave a little cry. He started forward and put
out an arm to catch her. She pressed herself against him. She had firm breasts and a
provocative swell of belly and hip beneath her long gown. ÒItÕs a cold night. The hayloft is
much warmer than it is out here.Ó 
He was suddenly much warmer than he had any right to be on such a cold night.
Somehow, her moist lips nuzzled his neck; her breath smelled of sweet custard. Somehow,
her hand slipped around the curve of his buttocks. 
ÒMyÑmy father expects me inside.Ó 
ÒInside you shall be, my lord, if you wish it.Ó 
The sudden heat that transfixed his body scared him, and yet, the more she stroked his
body, the more he felt it. He fumbled at her shoulders as she maneuvered him back, pinning
him up against the tree. 
ÒYouÕre very handsome,Ó she murmured. 
ÒAm I?Ó he asked, surprised. No woman except the bored Withi had ever shown
interest in him before he became LavastineÕs heir. But the thought vanished as does mist
under the sun when she kissed him, moving her body against his and taking hold of his
hands, guiding them. 
If this was the fire of lust, then it was no wonder people succumbed to it. But, kissing her,
he made the servingwoman in his mind into an image of Tallia, and the thought of kissing 
her, of being free to do so, of meeting her in the marriage bed . . . 
ÒAh!Ó sighed the woman. ÒThatÕs better. Not as inexperienced as you look, my lord.Ó
She deftly slid her hands along his belt and unfastened the buckle. ÒIÕve a brother who will
be ready for service next spring. HeÕs a good strong boy.Ó The belt, and extra length of
tunic held up by it, slipped down to around his knees. ÒHeÕd make a fine man-at-arms.Ó 
At this moment, she could have asked for anything and he would have given it to her. She
took his hands and helped them slide her own tunic up, to her knees, to her thighs, baring
pale legs, to her hips . . . 
From the kennels erupted a sudden uproar of barking and maddened howls and menÕs
shouts, punctuated by a scream. Alain knew those howls: LavastineÕs hounds. His hounds. 

ÒI beg you,Ó he said, so out of breath he might as well have been running. He tried to
slide out away from her, caught his back on a branch that stabbed in just below his shoulder
blade. He stumbled, took a step, tripped over his not-quite-fastened belt, and fell hard to his
knees. The jolt brought tears to his eyes. His skin was on fire. 
ÒMy lord Alain!Ó She came to his rescue, helping him up, fumbling with the belt. ÒI
donÕt meanÑIÕm sorryÑbut the houndsÑHer face was a flash of pale skin and dark eyes in
the light of a thin crescent moon. ÒOf course you must go.Ó She had remembered the
hounds, and what he was. Now she was frightened of him, she who had held all the power
moments before. 
He hastily tucked his tunic in over his belt so he wouldnÕt trip on its length, then ran for the
kennels, which lay out behind the great hall in the lee of the stables. 
The hounds had gone mad, ravaging a man who lay like a rag doll in their midst. Alain
waded in and dragged them off the poor man, who by now bled from a score of bites and
ragged tears. 
ÒBack! Back!Ó Made strong by anger and fear and the still coursing memory of the
servingwomanÕs caresses, Alain hoisted the man up and hauled him out of the kennel,
kicked Terror back, scolded Rage and Sorrow, who slunk together to a corner and hunkered
down as if ashamed of themselves. As they should be! One of the handlers slammed the
gate shut behind him. He let the man down onto the ground and examined his legs and
arms, which had taken the worst of it from the hounds. The man writhed on the ground,
moaning and crying and begging for mercy. It was one of Lord GeoffreyÕs men. ÒHow did
this happen?Ó he demanded, looking up at the others, a ring of LavastineÕs soldiers who
were obviously drunk. 
ÒHe said such things, my lord,Ó said one, young enough and drunk enough to be brash.
ÒHe said things about you, my lord, but he never saw you in the battle against the Eika. He
never saw you kill the guivre and save Count LavastineÕs life. He had no right to say such
things and he wouldnÕt believe us, what we said, so it came toÑÒ
Those werenÕt shadows on the soldiersÕ faces, but bruises. ÒIt came to a fight?Ó 
ÒYes, my lord.Ó 
ÒHow did he get into the kennel? Ai, by our Lord! You.Ó He gestured to one of the
handlers. ÒRun and get the herb-woman who lives here. There is such a one, surely? Ask at
the stable.Ó The handler obeyed, dashing off. 
 The soldiers did not answer at once. But he could guess how it had all happened. While
he allowed himself to be seduced, this other game had unfolded here. Even now, watching
the man weeping with pain before him, watching as blood pooled on the ground, running his
hands over the manÕs skin to find the gaping wounds, he knew this man could die. If he did
not succumb to loss of blood or the simple trauma, he might well die later of infection. 
ÒAi, Lady!Ó He hated himself at that moment. Slowly the encounter by the tree
unwrapped itself from the heat of lust and he saw it more clearly. Perhaps the woman really
had thought him handsome. Certainly, he had found her desirable. But she would never have
thrown herself against him if he hadnÕt been LavastineÕs heir. She had wanted something
from himÑa position for her brother in his retinue. This coin she had to offer in trade. Had he
been simple Alain, foster son of Henri the merchant, he would have had nothing to give her
in return. She would not have looked twice at him, just as the girls at Lavas Holding had
never looked twice at him before this summer except that one time, on a dare. And this
summer, under stern orders given by the count himself to Cook who had delivered those
orders to all the servingwomen in Lavas Holding, none had dared approach him for fear of
the countÕs wrath. The man who had made a bastard intended that illegitimate son to make
none of his own. 
ÒMy lord, I beg you, forgive us.Ó The three soldiers knelt before him. The stench of mead
on their breath was almost enough to stagger Alain where he crouched beside the ravaged
man. ÒBut he made such claims! He said any boy could claim to be a bastard, that any
noble lord might tumble a woman or two and think nothing of itÑÓ As he had been about to

do, without thinking at all! ÒÑand so we said weÕd see how well he did, claiming to be
LavastineÕs heir.Ó 
Alain let out a breath. ÒSo you threw him into the kennel.Ó 
They didnÕt answer, nor did they need to. Men from the stables came running up, and
there was shoving and angry words. The man on the ground ceased his muttering and
lapsed into quiet. ÒYouÕve killed him!Ó 
ÒBastard lovers! Our lord Geoffrey is a true nobleman!Ó ÒYou wouldnÕt know a noble
lord if he bit you in theÑÒQuiet!Ó cried Alain, standing. He set a hand on the gate and
shook it, and that shut every one of them up and brought Rage and Sorrow to the gate,
panting to be let out. He opened it, chased the others back, and let Rage emerge. Sorrow
whined at being left behind and thumped his tail against wood, barking once. 
ÒTake this man and give him care. All who witnessed, come with me. This will be
settled.Ó 
They followed like sheep, the handlersÑsome LavastineÕs, some GeoffreyÕsÑthe three
soldiers, and a pair of GeoffreyÕs men-at-arms who had been comrades to the injured man
and who now admitted to having goaded him on. Except for the handlers, they were all
drunk. Rage herded them to the doors which led into the hall. Alain stepped across the
threshold and was assaulted at once with a haze of smoke. The annoying buzz of whispering
voices made an undertone beneath the ringing tenor of the poet. Lady and Lord Above! The
poet was still going on. It was no wonder the Salian king had thrown him out to make his
fortune elsewhere. 
¡°In the woods every manner of wild beast makes its lair. Through these glades the
admirable hero, Taillefer, would often go hunting and give chase with hounds and spears
and arrows. At the very dawn of day, when the sun first rises to spread its light upon the
fields and the great city, a band of nobles waits at the threshold of the emperorÕs
bedchamber, and with them wait the emperorÕs noble daughters. A clamor arises in the
city, a roar lifts into the air, horse neighs to horse, and hound strains at its leash. At length
all set out. The young men carry the thick hunting spears with sharp iron points, and the
women carry linen nets fastened with square mesh. A throng encircles the emperor, and
he and his daughters lead their black hounds with leashes round their necks, and in their
excitement the hounds snap at any person who comes near them except for their master
and his children, for even the dogs in their dumb loyalty bow before such bright nobility...
¡± 
 The poet was last to see and lastÑfinallyÑto stop talking. 
Lavastine rose from behind the long table at the far end of the hall. ÒWhat does this
mean, Alain?Ó 
Alain walked forward with Rage padding obediently at his side. Every soul in the hall
shrank back from the hound who panted with mouth open, revealing her teeth. ÒThere has
been a fight outside. One of Lord GeoffreyÕs men-at-arms was thrown into the kennel and
badly torn. He may yet die.Ó 
Geoffrey leaped to his feet. A moment later, Lady Aldegund rose together with her uncle.
At a sign from her, Geoffrey sat down; the uncle did not. The girl set a hand briefly on his
hand as if to remind herself that she had the weight of his arm to back her up. 
ÒHow did this happen?Ó she asked. 
ÒI believe,Ó replied Alain calmly, Òthat they had all drunk too much.Ó 
ÒIt is my man who may die!Ó exploded Lord Geoffrey, jumping again to his feet. 
ÒSit down, cousin,Ó said Lavastine in a cool voice. Geoffrey sat. Aldegund and her uncle
did not. 
ÒIf he dies,Ó said Aldegund, Òthere will be a price to pay.Ó 
ÒAnd so shall those men responsible pay it,Ó said Alain, halting just before the table like
a supplicant. Except that, with Rage at his side and, indeed, a growing anger in his heart, he
did not feel one bit as if he had to beg anyoneÕs pardon. ÒThey will pay the proper fine to
the man himself if he is crippled or to the manÕs kin if he dies. But the man, or his kin, must

also pay a fine.Ó 
Geoffrey gasped. ÒWhy is that?Ó demanded Aldegund. 
This, here and now, was the test of willsÑand of whether the illegitimate son deserved
what he had been given. 
ÒAll of these men took part in the fight or witnessed the fight, and they will swear before
your deacon and Count LavastineÕs clerics that the man involved spoke words disloyal to
Count Lavastine, lord of his lord.Ó 
At that even Lady Aldegund blushed, for every person there knew what sort of things a
tongue loosened by too much mead might have said: not against the count himÑno one
disputed LavastineÕs deeds or prerogatives or virtuesÑbut against the countÕs judgment. 
There was a long silence. 
At last Lady Aldegund inclined her head, acquiescing to AlainÕs judgment in the matter.
Her uncle sat down and, after a moment, she did as well. Lavastine sat, too, and took the
cup she offered him. 
Alain bowed his head. Rage snuffled into his palm, smelling something of interest
thereÑperhaps the lingering scent of the servingwoman. Ai, Lady; as if the thought made her
appear, there she stood beside Lavastine, filling the countÕs cup. She glanced up, briefly,
at Alain, and then away. She did not look at him again. The feast proceeded without
incident, and the poetÑwhose diction and voice were decent enoughÑwas encouraged to
sing something more popular. 
Only in the morning when they had ridden away from the holding and lost sight of it past
hills and forest did Lavastine comment on the incident. 
ÒI am pleased with your cleverness.Ó 
ÒButÑ¡± 
Lavastine lifted a hand, which meant he had not finished and did not yet wish for Alain to
reply. Dutifully, Alain waited. ÒBut you must not be unwilling to boast of your
accomplishments, Alain. To display prowess in battle is a fine thing for a man in your
position. You must not boast immoderately, beyond what you deserve, but it is just as bad to
claim false humility. Modesty is a virtue for churchmen, not for the son and heir of a count,
one who will lead these same men and their younger brothers and cousins and their sons
into battle. They must believe in you, and they must believe that your good fortune will lift
them as well and keep them alive and prosperous. That the Lady of Battles, a saint, has
given you her favorÑthat will weigh heavily with them. But you must not mire yourself in
humility. You are not a monk, Alain.Ó 
ÒI was meant to be one,Ó he murmured.Ó 
ÒNot any more! We will no longer speak of this, Alain. A good man remembers and
honors his oaths. In time, when you are an old man and have an heir who is ready to take
your place, then perhaps you can retire to a monas tery and live out the rest of your years in
peace. But that oath was made for you by others, before it was known who you were and
what role you have to play. You never stood before the monastery gate and pledged yourself
to the church. That you think of this obligation at all is to your credit. But it is not to be spoken
of again. Do you understand?Ó 
Alain understood. ÒYes, Father,Ó he replied. The hounds, on their leashes, padded
obediently alongside. 
Lavastine took in a deep breath of the autumn air. ÒNo need to hasten to Osna Sound.Ó
He turned to survey his retinue. ÒWeÕve heard no reports of Eika wintering there. I think we
may take a few days to go hunting.Ó 
 
VI THE CHILDREN OF GENT 
 
1

Spades stabbed into loose dirt. From where she stood, Anna caught flecks of soil on her
cheek, spray thrown out as the gravediggers filled in the latest grave. They had buried twelve
refugees in a mass grave this bitter cold morning, including a young mother and her
newborn babe. 
Anna had been on her way to the stream, but it was hard not to stop and stare. A few
ragged onlookers huddled in the wind. Rain so cold it felt like droplets of ice spattered
down, and she tugged her tattered cloak tighter about her shoulders. Here in the camp,
corpses went naked into the grave since the living had need of the clothes off their backs. 
A child no more than two or three winters old bawled at the lip of the pit. It had straggly
hair that might have been blond once, a face matted with filth, a dirty tunic, and nothing
covering its feet. It also looked about to fall into the pit with the dead folk. She set down her
buckets and hurried forward just as the child slipped and fell to its rump on the crumbling
slope. 
ÒHere, now,Ó she said, grabbing it by the arm and pulling it back. ÒDonÕt fall in, child.Ó
Looking around, she hailed one of the diggers. ÒWhereÕs the childÕs kin?Ó 
He pointed into the grave, where woman and infant lay bound together by shreds of old
cloth, all that the folk in the camp could spare to make sure they werenÕt separated in
death. With a stab and a heave, he tossed another spadeful of earth onto the grave. A
shower of dirt scattered across the waxy faces of mother and child. 
ÒIsnÕt there anyone here to look after it?Ó 
ÒIt was crying when we came to carry away the corpse,Ó he said, Òand itÕs crying still.
Ach, child,Ó he added, Òperhaps it was a blessing that the children of Gent escaped the
city, but most of them are orphans now, as is this poor babe. WhoÕs to care for them when
we canÕt even care for our own?Ó 
The child, safe away from the rim, had now fastened onto her thigh and it snuffled there,
smearing her tunic with snot as it whimpered and coughed. 
ÒWho, indeed?Ó asked Anna softly. With a finger she touched the Circle of Unity that
hung at her chest. ÒCome, little one. WhatÕs your name?Ó 
The child didnÕt seem to know its name, nor could it talk. She pried its arms off her leg
and finally, with some coaxing, got the child to drag one of the empty buckets. In this way,
with the baby toddling along beside her, they made it to the stream, where they waited in line
to dip their wooden buckets into the water. 
ÒWhoÕs this?Ó asked one of the older girls, indicating the child who stood fast at
AnnaÕs heels like a starving dog. ÒI didnÕt know you had a little brother.Ó 
ÒI found him by the new grave.Ó 
ÒAch, indeed,Ó said an older boy. ÒThat would be Widow ArtildeÕs older child.Ó 
ÒWidow?Ó asked Anna. ÒBut she was so young.Ó Then she realized how stupid the
comment sounded as the older children snickered. 
ÒHer husband was a militia man in the city. I suppose he died when the Eika came.Ó 
ÒThen you know her?Ó Anna tried to draw the child out from behind her, but the child
began to bawl again. 
ÒSheÕs dead,Ó said the boy. ÒHad the baby, and they both of them caught sick and
died.Ó 
ÒDoesnÕt anyone want this child?Ó 
But having filled their buckets, the others were already walking away, hauling the precious
water back to camp or to Steleshame. So she let the child follow her back to the shelter she
and Matthias called home. Indeed, the child seemed unlikely to let her out of its sight. 
ÒGod forfend!Ó exclaimed Helvidius when she ushered the child into the shelter of the
canvas awning. A fire burned brightly in a crude hearth built of stones, and the old poet sat
on his stool watching over the pot in which they kept a constant hot stew made of anything
edible they could scavenge. Today it smelled of mushroom and onion, flavored with the
picked-over bones of a goose. The remains of yesterdayÕs acorn gruel sat in their one bowl

next to the fire. Anna handed spoon and bowl to the child. The spoon dropped unregarded
from its hand and it used its dirty fingers to shovel down the lukewarm gruel. 
ÒWhatÕs this creature?Ó demanded Helvidius. 
ÒOne more helpless than you!Ó Anna had taken the buckets of water around to the
tanners in exchange for scraps of leather. ÒCan you help me make it something to wear on
its feet?Ó 
ÒYouÕre not taking this brat in, are you? ThereÕs scarcely room for the three of us.Ó 
But Anna only laughed. The old poet was always grumpy, but she didnÕt fear him. ÒIÕll
let him sleep curled at your feet. ItÕll be like having a dog.Ó 
He grunted. The child had licked the bowl clean and now began to snivel again. ÒDogs
donÕt whine so,Ó he said. ÒDoes it have a name?Ó 
ÒIts motherÕs dead, and no one else claimed it. You watch over it while I go haul more
water.Ó 
She made four more trips down to the stream. At this time of year, with the winter
slaughter underway, the tanwas busy with many new hides, so Matthias had seen to it that
she could take his place hauling water and ash for the tanning pits or collecting bark from
the forest. He had taken on more skilled work scraping or finishing skins which had cured
over summer and autumn. She didnÕt mind the work. The activity kept her warm and gave
them a certain security that many of the other refugees, dependent on what they could
scavenge from the forest or on Mistress GiselaÕs charity, did not have. 
Yet although the winter slaughter went on, and meat was salted or smoked against the
season to come, little of that meat reached the refugees. Once a day a deacon distributed a
coarse oat bread at the gate, but there was never enough to go around. 
Now, when Anna returned to their shelter from her last trip to the stream, it was to find the
child wailing, old Helvidius vainly singing some nonsense tune with all the enthusiasm of a
woman proposing marriage to a dowerless man, and Matthias glowering over the stewpot. 
ÒWhatÕs this?Ó Matthias demanded as she shoved the canvas awning aside. The
canvas didnÕt really keep out the cold as much as it kept in some of the heat in the fire and
their massed bodies. It did keep off rain tolerably well. Still, her toes and fingers ached from
the chill and her nose was running. ÒWhere did this come from?Ó 
ÒItÕs a child, Matthias,Ó she said. 
ÒI can see itÕs a child!Ó 
ÒIt had nowhere else to go. I couldnÕt just leave it to die! Not after St. Kristine saved it
from death at the hands of the Eika.Ó The child sniffed and babbled something unintelligible
but did not let go of the old manÕs knee. 
ÒAnd it stinks!Ó added Matthias. 
It certainly did. ÒMaster HelvidiusÑÕ 
ÒI didnÕt know it couldnÕt take care of such things itself!Ó the old man wailed. ÒIÕm a
poet, not a nursemaid.Ó 
ÒWell, you must learn how to watch over the child, since it will be under your care all
day,Ó she said tartly. 
ÒUnder my care all day!Ó he cried. 
ÒYou mean to keep it?Ó Matthias looked appalled. 
There was a sudden silence. 
ÒWe must keep it,Ó said Anna. ÒYou know we must, Matthias.Ó 
He sighed, but when he did not reply, she knew she had won. 
ÒWell, then,Ó said Helvidius grudgingly, Òif we keep it, we must name it. We could call it
Achilleus or Alexandras, after the great princes of ancient Arethousa. Or Cornelius, the
Dariyan general who destroyed proud Kartiako, or Teutus of Kallindoia, famous son of the
warrior-queen Teuta.Ó 
She had coaxed the child over to her and, by the door flap, was now peeling off the soiled
cloth that swaddled its bottom. She laughed suddenly. ÒYouÕd best find a girlÕs name,
Master Helvidius. WeÕll call her Helen, for didnÕt Helen survive through many trials?Ó 

ÒHelen,Ó said the old poet, his tone softening as he regarded the child. ÒFair-haired
Helen, true of heart and steadfast in adversity.Ó 
Matthias snorted, disgusted, but he was careful as always to share out the stew equally
between them as they each took turns spooning stew out of their shared bowl. 
It was dusk outside, almost dark, when they heard shouts from the roadway. Anna thrust
little Helen into HelvidiusÕ arms and ran outside with Matthias. They heard a great
commotion and hurried to where the southeast road ran alongside the tanning works in time
to see an astonishing procession ride pastÑnoble lords on horseback and more
men-at-arms, marching behind them, than she could count. 
Even in the twilight their arms and clothing had such a rich gleam that she could only gape
at their finery. They laughed, proud, strong young lords, a handful of women riding in their
ranks, and appeared not to notice the ragged line of people who had gathered to watch
them arrive. 
The gates of Steleshame had already opened and there, lit by torchlight, Anna saw the
mistress of Steleshame and the mayor of Gent waiting to welcome their guests. 
ÒWhere are you from?Ó Matthias shouted, and a man-at-arms called back, ÒWeÕve
come from Osterburg, from Duchess Rotrudis.Ó 
When they returned to the shelter and gave their news, Helvidius was beside himself.
ÒThat would be one of the duchessÕ kinsmen,Ó he said. ÒTheyÕll want a poet at their
feasting, and where there is feasting there are leftovers to be had!Ó 
In the morning she rose with Matthias at the first light of dawn and in the cold dawn began
her daily haul of water. The stream ran with a bitter ice flood over her bare fingers, but its
chill was nothing to the cold fury that seized her upon returning to their little shelter. 
Helvidius and Helen were gone and with them the old poetÕs stick and stool and her
precious leather bag of dried herbs, onions, four shriveled turnips, and the last of the acorns.
No sooner had she stuck her head under the canvas, searching to see what else the old
man had taken, than a spear butt prodded her in the back and a harsh voice ordered her to
come out. 
ÒI thought weÕd cleared this place,Ó said a soldier to his companion, eyeing Anna with
disgust. ÒThese children are as filthy as rats, each and every one.Ó She gaped at the two
soldiersÑwell fed, well brushed, and warmly dressedÑwho confronted her. ÒGo on, then,
girlÑor are you a boy?Ó
ÒGo where?Ó 
ÒWeÕre clearing out the camp,Ó he said. ÒYouÕll be marching east, where we can find
homes for you orphans. Now go on, get your things or leave them behind.Ó
ÒBut my brotherÑÓ 
This time when he jabbed her with the butt of his spear, his touch wasnÕt as gentle.
ÒTake what you need, but only what you can carry. ItÕs going to be a long march.Ó
ÒWhereÑ?Ó 
ÒMove!Ó His companion walked on, poking a spear through hovels and the other
pathetic shelters the refugees from Gent had put up beyond the tannery, but they were
already empty. Indeed, the camp itself was far more quiet than usual, but now that she
listened, she heard the nervous buzz of voices from down by the southeast road. 
Though she had five knives tucked here and there inside her clothes, she knew it was
pointless to resist. She scrambled back inside the canvas shelter, grabbed the pot and
bowl, nesting the one inside the other, rolled up their blankets and tied them with a leather
cord, and bound up her shawl to make a carry pack. She began to take down the canvas
shelter. 
ÒHere, now, leave that!Ó 
ÒHow can I leave that?Ó she demanded, turning on him. ÒWhat if it rains? WeÕll need to
shelter under something!Ó 
He considered this, hesitating. ÒWeÕre to shelter at church estates, but there are so
many of you . . . perhaps itÕs wisest to have some shelter of your own. If the weather turns

colder, or thereÕs snow . . .Ó He shrugged. 
ÒIs everyone leaving?Ó 
But he wouldnÕt answer more of her questions, and she sensed that time was short. The
rolled-up canvas was an unwieldy burden, and together with buckets, blankets, and pot she
could barely stagger along under the weight. 
The sight of the refugees made her sick with terror. Herded into a ragged line along the
road, she realized suddenly how very young they all were. For every twenty children there
was, perhaps, a single adultÑeven counting the soldiers, all of them grim as they held
spears to prevent any child from slipping out of line. The sheer amount of bawling and
wailing was like an assault, a wave of fear spilling out from the children who had escaped
Gent and now were being driven away even from the meager shelter they had made here at
Steleshame. 
Anna spotted Helvidius. He leaned heavily on his stick and little Helen, beside him, sat on
the stool with the precious bag of food draped over her lap. She cried without sound, and
yellow-green snot ran from her nose. The old poetÕs face brightened when he saw Anna. 
ÒWhereÕs Matthias?Ó she asked as she came up beside him. 
ÒI donÕt know,Ó said the old man. ÒI tried to tell them IÕm a great poet, that the young
lord will be angry at them for sending me away, but they drove me out and didnÕt listen! I
think they mean to march these four hundred children to the marchlands. I suppose thereÕs
always a need for a pair of growing hands in the wilderness.Ó 
ÒBut this isnÕt everyone.Ó 
ÒNay, just those deemed useless and a burden. When we first got here from Gent last
spring, some third of the children were taken away by farming folk who live west of here, for
a strong child is always welcome as a help to work the land. And those who work now for
Mistress Gisela, like the blacksmithsÑtheyÕll stay. And a few families who hope to go back
to Gent in time, but only those which have an adult to care for the children. Nay, child, all the
rest of us will be marched east to Osterburg and farther yet, past the Oder River and into the
marchlandsÑÓ 
ÒBut how far is it?Ó Helen began to cry out loud, and Anna set down the pot and hoisted
the little girl up onto her hip. 
ÒA month or more, two months, three more like. Lady Above, how do they expect these
children to walk so far, and how do they intend to feed them along the way?Ó 
Three months. Anna could not really conceive of three monthsÕ time, especially not with
winter coming on. ÒBut I donÕt want to go,Ó she said, beginning to cry, beginning to panic.
ÒItÕs better to stay here, isnÕt it?Ó 
Someone had managed to get a flock of goats together, and in truth the goats milled no
more aimlessly than did the frightened children. Pinch-faced toddlers whined and wriggled
in the arms of children no older than eight or twelve. An adolescent girl with a swelling belly
and her worldly goods tied to her back held tightly onto two young siblings who could not
have been more than five or six; they, too, carried bedrolls tied to their thin shoulders. Two
boys of about AnnaÕs age clung together. A girl tied cloth around the feet of a small child to
protect it against frost and mud. A little red-haired boy sat alone on the cold ground and
sobbed. 
ÒSaved by a miracle,Ó murmured Master Helvidius. ÒAnd now what will become of
us?Ó 
The young lord and his retinue waited beside the gate to Steleshame. They only watched,
mounted on their fine horses, but the sick feeling in her chest curdled and turned sour. They
only watched, but they would enforce this order. Any child who ran into the forest would be
hunted down and brought back. Mistress Gisela stood beside them. Anna imagined she
surveyed the chaos with satisfaction. Soon she would be rid of most of the refugees who
had been such a burden on her, and if Helvidius was right, she would keep exactly those
people who would do her the most good. Ai, Lady. Where was Matthias? 
ÒI have to go find Matthias!Ó she said to Helvidius. ÒKeep watch overÑÓ She set Helen

down and the little girl set up a howling. 
ÒDonÕt leave me!Ó he gasped, suddenly white and leaning on his stick as if he might fall
the next instant. ÒIf they goÑI donÕt believe I can walk so far alone, me and the childÑÓ 
ÒI wonÕt leave you!Ó she promised. 
ÒAnna!Ó 
Matthias came running with one of the men from the tannery. They conferred hastily with a
sergeant, who stepped back from the pungent smell that clung to their clothes. Quickly
enough, Anna, Helvidius, and little Helen were called out of the line. 
ÒYes,Ó said Matthias, Òthis is my grandfather and my two sisters.Ó 
ÒYouÕre to stay here, then,Ó said the sergeant, and dismissed them by turning away to
order his soldiers into formation, a group in the van and one at the end and some to march
single file on either side of the refugees. Anna could not tell whether this was meant to
protect the refugees or to keep them from escaping the line. 
ÒCome on, then, lad,Ó said the tanner with a frown, glancing toward the mob of children
and away as quickly, as if he didnÕt like what he saw. ÒLetÕs get back to work.Ó He
walked away. 
Anna started after him. She had no desire to stay and watch. 
ÒAnna!Ó Matthias called her back. ÒWeÕre to get a hut. Give the canvas over to those
poor souls, and the pot, too. And you may as well give over the food as well, what poor
scraps there are. ThereÕs so few of us left here that we wonÕt want for so much, not until
late in the winter, anyway, and those scraps will help them better than us.Ó 
She stared as the soldiers at the van started forward. Slowly, like a lurching cart, the line
of children moved forward, and the wailing and crying reached a sudden overwhelming
pitch. ÒI canÕt do it,Ó she said, sobbing. ÒHow can you choose? You do it.Ó She blindly
thrust canvas, pot, and food pouch into MatthiasÕ arms and then grabbed Helen up and ran
as well as she could back toward the tannery precincts. She could not bear to watch the
others march away into what danger and what uncertainty she could not imagine, only
dreaded to think of walking there herself. Ai, Lady, what would they eat? Where would they
shelter? What if the cold autumn winds turned to the cruel storms of winter? How many would
even reach the distant east, and what would become of them, saved from Gent and yet
driven away from this haven, such as it was, by the greed of householder and duchess
working in concert? 
And yet perhaps it was too hard to shelter so many here with no rescue for Gent in
sightÑfor surely no one expected the young lord and his retinue to drive the Eika away on
their own. 
Helen had stopped bawling and now clung to her in silence. She paused on the rise and
stared back as the mob of children, hundreds of them, started walking reluctantly,
resignedly, toddlers stumbling along in the wake of elder children, thin legs bare to the cold,
their pathetic belongings strapped to backs already bowed under the weight. They had so
far to go. 
Tears blinded her briefly as a glint of sun struck out from a rent in the clouds and shone
into the midst of the line of children. She blinked back a blurring vision of a bright figure
walking among them, a woman robed in a white tunic with blood dripping down her hands,
and then the vision vanished. Anna turned away to look toward the young lord who surveyed
this exodus with dispassion. 
Master Helvidius hobbled up beside her, so exhausted from the morningÕs excitement,
his legs buckling under him, that she and Matthias had to half carry him back to the tannery.
Little Helen walked beside them singing a tuneless melody, and by the time Master
Helvidius and Helen were settled in the shelter of a lean-to set up against the tannery fence,
and Matthias sent back to work, and Anna gone out again to the stream to haul water, the
line of refugees had vanished from sight. 
Only the deserted camp remained. 

2
Anna had never seen a noble lord so close before. Nor had she ever imagined that a
table could groan under the weight of so much food. She had never seen people eat and
drink as much as these did: Lord Wichman, eldest son and second child of Duchess
Rotrudis, his cousin Lord HenryÑnamed after the kingÑand their retinue of young nobles and
stalwart men-at-arms. The young nobles boasted about the battles they would fight with the
Eika in the days to come. The men-at-arms, who drank as lustily as their noble masters,
were wont to get into fistfights when their interest in Master HelvidiusÕ lengthy and
complicated court poems waned. 
It had not taken long after the departure of the refugees for the mayor of GentÑdesperate
to find amusement for Mistress GiselaÕs noble guestsÑto remember that he had left a court
poet out among the refugees and to wonder if the old man had remained behind. 
ÒYouÕll go to his summons?Ó demanded Matthias that next afternoon, amazed and
appalled, Òafter he deserted you here when he took the rest of his servants inside the
palisade?Ó 
ÒPride hath no place among the starving,Ó said Master Helvidius. So each evening he
took Anna with him to carry his stool and help support him on the long walk up the rise that
led to the inner court, and of course Helen had to tag along as well, for there was no one
else to watch over her with Matthias working until last light each day. The tanners and smiths
and foresters worked long hours and harder even than they had before, for they now had
over seventy men and thirty horses to care for, feed, and keep in armor and weapons
besides those they had brought with them. 
Over the next many days Lord WichmanÕs force marched out every day, searching for
Eika, fighting a skirmish here, burning a ship there, each feat of arms retold in great detail at
the nightÕs feast. Helvidius quickly became adept at turn ing the details of these
expeditions into flattering paeans to Lord WichmanÕs courage and prowess, which the
young Lord never grew tired of hearing. 
Anna grew equally adept at grabbing half-eaten bones off the floor before the lordÕs
dogs could get them, or at begging crusts of bread from drunken soldiers. Master Helvidius,
fed at the high table, slipped her food from the common platter, delicacies she had never
before tasted: baked grouse, black pudding, pork pie, and other savories. Helen was
content to sit sucking her thumb in a corner, by the hearth, eating what was offered her; the
rest Anna saved in her pouch and took back to Matthias in the morningsÑshe, Helen, and
the poet had to sleep in the hall because once night fell, the gates to Steleshame remained
shut. 
Sleeping on the floor of the newly built longhall in Steleshame was a more luxurious bed
than any she had slept on before. It was never bitter cold inside even as autumn eased into
winter and the days grew short and gray. Little Helen got roundness back in her cheeks, and
Master HelvidiusÕ legs got stronger, although he still needed his staff to walk. 
ÒTheyÕve turned all the lands round Gent into pasture, I swear,Ó said Lord Henry,
WichmanÕs fatherÕs sisterÕs son. He was a young man, not much older than a boy, with
dark hair, a fresh scar on his cheek which he wore as proudly as his sword, and a boastful
tongue. ÒThereÕs enough cattle out there trampling good fields to feed an army a thousand
strong!Ó 
ÒWhy have none wandered back to us?Ó demanded Gisela. 
ÒTheyÕre tended by slaves and guarded by Eika.Ó 
ÒDo the Eika have so many soldiers still wintering there?Ó asked the mayor nervously. 
ÒWe havenÕt ridden close enough to the town to count them,Ó said Lord Henry, glancing
reproachfully toward his elder cousin. ÒBut we might still do so, if we dared more.Ó 
Young Wichman merely belched in reply to this appeal and called for Mistress GiselaÕs
pretty young niece to fetch him another cup of wine. He had, as Master Helvidius said, Òan
itch between his legs,Ó though she didnÕt quite understand what that meant except that he

pestered the young woman in a way the niece didnÕt like, yet no one else seemed inclined
to prevent. 
Helen had already fallen asleep. Anna curled up beside her, smoke and warmth a haze
around them, and closed her eyes while Master Helvidius droned on, his slightly nasal voice
intoning the lay of Helen. Neither he nor the young lord ever seemed to tire of the long
poemÑand what the young lord wanted the young lord got. 
Ò...Now the servants removed the tables, and while the second course was brought, as
much talk sprang up among the banqueters as echoed in the hall like the din of battle. But
King Sykaeus raised his cup and called silence to the hall. Huge bowls were brought and
filled to the brim with wine, and out of these the king himself filled the first cup and this he
passed among the company. 
ÒThus he entreated Helen for the story of Ilios. ÔFair and noble guest, tell us your tale
from the beginning . . 
A dog nosed Anna awake, sniffing her face and licking the dried juice of meat off her
fingers. She could tell by the somber gray of light within the hall that dawn was close at hand.
Helen lay fast asleep on a heap of dirty rushes, her breath a liquid snore. Helvidius had
fallen asleep still sitting, head draped over the table; he would regret that later, when his
muscles stiffened. 
She had to pee. 
She got up and picked her way over the sleeping servants, tiptoed around the
men-at-arms who reeked of ale and piss and sweat. Outside, in the open dirt yard, she crept
around to where a line of privies had been dug up against one palisade wall, well away from
hall and longhouse. The sky grayed toward twilight and the last stars shone faintly, fading
into the growing light of dawn. 
The stone keep stood like a stolid, faithful servant, its shadow blunt against the lightening
sky. Outbuildings were scattered about; she saw a flash of coals, bright red, from one of the
open huts. Smiths and tanners worked outside the palisade wall now, so their stink
wouldnÕt disturb the sleep of the householder, her kin, the mayor of Gent and his retinue,
and their noble guest. 
Here, by the privies, the noble guest was clearly disturbing Mistress GiselaÕs niece. 
 ÒI beg you, Lord Wichman,Ó said the young woman, twisting away as she tried to hurry
back to the safety of the hall, ÒI have much work to do.Ó 
ÒWhat better work than what I can give you, eh?Ó 
ÒMy lord.Ó She tugged out of his grasp and slipped sideways, trying to escape into the
gloom. ÒForgive me, but I canÕt stay.Ó 
Angry, he grabbed at her cloak, jerking her up short. ÒI hear it said you thought yourself
good enough for my bastard cousin Sanglant. Surely youÕre good enough for me!Ó 
At first, Anna thought the slow hiss came from the niece, preface to an angry outburst.
Then she saw a pale stream of light trailing above the distant treetops, undulating in languid
curves. A great golden beast rose into the sky, and as the sunÕs rim pierced the bowl of the
horizon, its roar shuddered the air. 
The niece screamed and bolted. Young Lord Wichman, still groggy from a night of
drinking, gaped at the sky, groping at his belt to draw his sword. He staggered back and
Anna shrieked as the dragon, its golden scales more blinding than the sun, flew directly over
the holding. Gouts of flame boiled upward into the clouds, the hiss of fire meeting ice. Anna
had never seen anything so beautiful or so terrifying. 
ÒDragons!Ó shouted guards from the wallwalk. 
Lord Wichman sheathed his sword and cursed. His bland face suddenly creased with
delight, and he spun and ran toward the stables, shouting. ÒTo arms! To arms!Ó 
The alarm sounded, horn blasts piercing the quiet of dawn. 
ÒDragons! Dragons!Ó The cry lifted again as men-at-arms scrambled out of the hall and
servants brought horses from the stables. 
She had to get back to Master Helvidius and Helen. Ai, Lady, she had to get back to

Matthias who, with the other tanners and laborers, slept outside the main palisade in little
enclosures sheltered with mere fences, more to keep livestock out than to protect against
fearsome beasts. But could anything protect against a dragon? 
The huge creature rose sluggishly, each flap of its wings like a sheet of gold thrumming
and throbbing in the air. Slowly it banked and turned for a second pass. Before she knew
what she meant to do, she ran for a ladder and climbed up to the wallwalk to get a better
look. It was madness; ai, Lady, indeed, she was crazy and Matthias would say as much, but
even Matthias must be astonished by the sight. This seemed more uncanny, more
miraculous, than the daimone chained in the cathedral. She had to get a better look. And
perhaps from this angle she could see the tannery. 
She had to hop and scramble up, hooking her arms over the top of the palisade and
brace herself on the logs, in order to see over. What she saw caught her breath in her
throat. 
The guards at the gate yelled again: ÒDragons!Ó 
But they were not pointing at the sky. 
Through the deserted camp, strewn now with the remains of hovels and shelters, littered
with garbage and beaten to dirt churned muddy by yesterdayÕs rain and frozen by the last
nightÕs frost, rode a hundred horsemen. Their helmets gleamed, fitted with polished brass.
Their gold tabards shone as brightly as the dragonÕs scales, each one marked with a
menacing black dragon, miniature hatchlings that rippled and moved as the Dragons
approached. 
As from far away she heard a man shout in a thin, hysterical voice: ÒDonÕt open the
gates! DonÕt open the gates!Ó 
Fire sparked from the hooves of the DragonsÕ horses as they pounded through the
empty camp. There, by the stream, fire leaped into the scatter of buildings that marked the
tanning works. Anna screamed, pointing, but it was useless. No one could hear her. No one
would hear her. 
They werenÕt Dragons at all. She saw now the gaping holes in the tabards, the gleam of
bone where ragged mail parted to reveal a skeletal jaw or flesh scored deep from a
putrefying wound. Empty eyes stared from beneath nasals. Skin peeled away from bone
where the morning wind whipped them clean. They made no sound. 
Yet they came on. 
Months ago she had seen them lying dead in the cathedral crypt at Gent. They were not
Dragons at all, only the remains of them, only the memory of that force that had fought
against the Eika. What terrible magic had raised them from the dead? 
The gates yawned open, and out from Steleshame rode young Lord Wichman and his
retinue. They shone as bright as their enemy, and they charged with abandon. 
ÒAnna!Ó 
She fell, caught herself on the lip of the walk, and half slid down the ladder. 
ÒAnna!Ó Fright made Master Helvidius able to walk without his staff. ÒChild! Child!
Come in! The Eika are attacking! Come to shelter!Ó 
ÒWhereÕs Helen?Ó 
ÒIn the hall. Still asleep.Ó The old poet wept with fear. ÒGo get her and then come to the
keep, but make haste, Anna! Hurry! ThereÕs not enough roomÑÓ 
ÒMatthiasÑ!Ó 
ÒThereÕs nothing we can do for him! Go!Ó 
She ran across the yard. A spinning ball of flame hurtled past and smacked into the dirt: a
torch cast from outside. It guttered and failed, but she heard more torches thunk onto the
roofs. Most slid down the slope of roofs, plummeted to earth, and were stamped out, but a
few caught and began to burn. 
As she came to the great doors that opened into the long hall, she saw Mistress
GiselaÕs niece slap a ladder against the side of the house. Climbing to the top, with
another woman halfway up behind her, she took buckets of water drawn from the well and

threw water onto the roof, wetting it down. To the left, half hidden by the bulk of the hall, Anna
saw other people struggling to save the old longhouse whose thatch roof had caught fire. 
She had to shove and elbow to get inside, for people ran every which way, some in,
some out, some no place at all but frozen in terror or dithering in circles. A table had been
knocked over; dogs gulped down the remains of food, lapped at puddles of ale. 
Helen had retreated to a corner beyond the great hearth and there she sat, utterly silent,
thumb stuck in her mouth. Anna hoisted her up to her hips. She was such a tiny thing that she
was no burden. 
But it was harder to get out than in. The mayor and certain of his servants crowded the
door, seeking shelter, and Anna could not fight past them. Their press against her caused
her to stumble and fall to one knee, and for a horrible instant she thought she and Helen
would be trampled. 
Smoke stung her nostrils, and suddenly the cry arose: ÒFire! Fire!Ó 
She found a wedge through which to shove herself, got herself to the wall, and hurried
down the hallÕs length past the open hearth to the far wall where stood the single window,
now shut against winter. She set Helen down, dragged a chest over and, getting up on it,
pounded the shutters open. Tugging the little girl up behind her, she swung a leg over the sill,
and dangled there. Together they dropped, hitting the ground hard just as a shower of
embers floated down from above. The little girl began to cry. Anna scuttled backward,
jumped up, and lifted Helen to her back. 
In this way, with Helen fairly choking her with thin arms vised round her neck, Anna
threaded her way through the chaos of the yard up the rise to the stone keep. Inside, the
storerooms were pungent with barrels of salted meat, with ale and wine, with baskets of
apples and unground oats and moldering rye. Master Helvidius cowered behind a chest,
weeping softly. Anna thrust Helen onto his lap and climbed the ladder to the second level.
There she found six grim-faced men laying arrows, point down, against the wall on either
side of the six arrow slits. 
ÒHere, child,Ó said one, beckoning to her. ÒStack these neatly.Ó He left without ado,
and she hurried to carefully place the arrows in a line, pausing once to lean into the slit and
peer out. 
Her view gave her a vantage of the ground just beyond the gates. There, in a melee more
like the frenzy of market square on the busiest autumn day in Gent, Lord Wichman, Lord
Henry, and their riders battled Eika, cutting about themselves, parrying ax blows. A line of
men-at-arms struggled forward, shields held high against the press. Eika swarmed
everywhere. The huge Eika dogs darted through the swirling fight, ripping and rending. Of
the horrible Dragons there was no sign, nor any remains. 
An ax hooked over Lord WichmanÕs shield, dragged, tugged, and there was a sudden
titanic struggle as the young lord grappled with an Eika soldier braced at his horseÕs
shoulder. ThenÑsliding, gripped, tuggedÑhe fell from his horse and vanished under a hail of
flailing arms. 
Anna gasped out loud and jerked back, bumping into the careful rack of arrows. With a
clatter, they fell, but the sound was drowned out by a howl sent up from outsideÑthe young
lordÕs riders had gone mad with fury. 
Anna began to cry. 
A man shoved her away roughly and began to set up arrows again. A woman called up
from below. 
ÒThe longhouse is burning! WeÕre getting a flood of people in here. What shall I do?Ó 
ÒSqueeze in as many of the young and weak as you can!Ó shouted the man next to
Anna. ÒBut any who are able-bodied must take to the walls. ItÕll be slaughter if the Eika get
through those gates. Anything they can fling downÑanyone who can lift a hoe or spade or
shoot a bow or stab with a spearÑÓ He spun round. ÒGirl! DonÕt be ham-handed again.
Now set these arrows upright for those who will need them later!Ó 
He climbed down the ladder. 

She did as she was told. Such a din of wailing and shouting had arisen from within the
holdingÑthe squawking of chickens, the barking of dogs, the screams of horses and
menÑthat she could only stay moving by pretending nothing was happening, by hearing
nothing at all. She concentrated on each arrow as she leaned it with fletching upright against
the stone wall. 
Smoke billowed in from outside, but she could not, dared not, look again out through the
arrow slit. A hugely pregnant woman came up the ladder, blood streaming from a gash on
her forehead. With a grunt, she heaved her ungainly bulk up over the lip, got to hands and
knees, then with a shove from foot and hand got herself up. She stationed herself with a bow
by one of the slits. The man whose place she took scrambled down, disappearing below. 
Soon, other women and one adolescent boy had stationed themselves by the arrow slits,
each with a bow. The boy played nervously with an arrow, rolling it through his fingers. More
people clambered up the ladder and cowered, some weeping, some stunned, against the
walls and then along the floor until there was scarcely room for anyone to move. And yet
more tried to come up, and more yet. Such a noise swelled up from this mass of
terror-stricken people and from the battle raging outside that Anna could only hunker down,
clap hands over ears, and pray. The sting of burning timber and thatch made her eyes burn,
and the fear made her heart thud hard in her chest. Her breath came in gasps. 
ÒCome, child,Ó said a womanÕs brusque voice. Anna looked up into the heat-seared
face, blackened with soot, of Mistress GiselaÕs niece. Dozens of tiny burns and charred
holes from flying embers pitted her clothing. ÒHand me arrows as I shoot.Ó 
ÒWho are you shooting at?Ó she breathed. Horror rose in her throat until it choked the
breath out of her and she thought she would fall and faint. 
But the woman only took careful aim and loosed the arrow and, without thinking, Anna
handed her another. She nocked and aimed and shot while screams pierced above the
clamor of battle and fire roared and dogs howled and a horn blared long and high and
distantly a manÕs voice shouted: ÒForm up to my left! Form up to my left!Ó 
One by one Anna handed her the arrows, and as each one was nocked and loosed, the
young womanÕs expression wavered not at all from blank concentration. Only once did she
grunt with satisfaction, and once she whimpered, suddenly made afraid by some sight in the
yard beyond. But she gulped down her fear as everyone had to, or die through being
helpless. That was the way of war. 
One by one, Anna handed up the arrows until they were all gone. 
3
In the end the Eika retreated, but by that time Steleshame lay in shambles, a quarter of
the palisade wall burning or battered down, the longhouse in flames and the outbuildings in
ruins. Only the newly built hall still stood, though it was scorched. Some of the roof tiles had
fallen in where the smoke hole opened and both doors had been wrenched off their hinges. 
It was a miracle anything at all had survived. Of the Dragons there remained no sign, but
everyone agreed they, like the flying dragon, had arisen from the Eika enchanterÕs magic, a
false vision used to strike fear into their hearts and render them incapable of fighting. 
It had not worked, not this time. 
ÒThat is the weakness of illusion,Ó Master Helvidius said when the people hiding in the
stone keep ventured out to the horrible scene opening before them in the yard. ÒOnce you
know it is illusion, it is easier to combat.Ó 
Anna held little Helen tightly on her hip as she picked her way through the rubble to the
gate. She kept her eyes fixed on her feet, so she wouldnÕt have to see the dead bodies.
There were a lot of dead, human and Eika alike. If she didnÕt look, then maybe it would be
as if they werenÕt there. 
Soldiers staggered through the gates, leading wounded horses, carrying their dead or
injured comrades. Some of their number wandered the killing field, sticking Eika through the

throat to make sure they would not rise again. A sudden shout rose from their midst as a
figure armed in mail, his tabard rent and bloody, shoved himself up from the ground where
he had been pinned down by a dead Eika. 
It was Lord Wichman himself, by a miracle unharmed except for the battering his mail and
helmet had taken. But he had not gotten far before he dropped to his knees and wept over
the body of his young cousin, Henry, who had fallen by the gates. Mistress Gisela appeared
beside him. Roused by her appearance, the lord rose and began directing the soldiers as
they methodically looted the Eika corpses of weapons, shields, and whatever fine mail
armor the creatures wore round their hips, mostly silver and gold wrought into delicate
patterns. 
Anna spied a knife lying in a pool of muck and blood. She knelt quickly, grabbed it, and
tucked it into her leggings. Its blade pinched her calf, but she went on. 
Beyond, both smithy and tannery burned. A few men had begun to cast dirt onto the fires. 
ÒHere, now, child,Ó said a soldier, coming up beside her. ÒGet back inside. You donÕt
know how far the Eika have run. They might come back any moment.Ó 
ÒWere those truly Dragons? All dead and rotting?Ó 
ÒNay. They were Eika. They only looked like Dragons until they got close. Then we saw
through the enchantment.Ó 
ÒDid we win?Ó 
He snorted, waving a hand to indicate the destruction. ÒIf this can be called winning. Ai,
Lord, I donÕt know that we beat them. Rather, they got what they wanted and left.Ó 
ÒBut what did they want?Ó she demanded. ÒMy brotherÑÓ She faltered when she saw
the flames that raged round the row of small huts abutting the tannery fence. She began to
snivel and Helen, catching her fear, started to cry. 
ÒThey drove off the livestock.Ó The soldier grimaced as he raised his left arm, and she
saw a gash running up the boiled leather coat he wore, a slash running from waist to armpit.
Underneath a thin stream of blood seeped through his quilted shirt, but he seemed
otherwise unharmed except for a cut on his lip and a purpling bruise along his jaw. ÒI saw
them myself. IÕd guess they were raiding for cattle and slaves more than to kill my good
Lord Henry, namesake of the king, bless them both.Ó He drew the Circle of Unity at his
breast and sighed deeply. ÒCome, child, go on in.Ó 
ÒBut my brother worked at the tanneryÑ
He clucked softly and shook his head, then surveyed the scene. The old camp looked as
if it had been flattened by a whirlwind. A single chicken scratched diligently beside a hovel.
Two dogs cowered under the shelter of a single straggly bush. ÒThank God the refugees
had already left. Come, then, weÕll go down and see, but mind you, child, youÕll go up
again when I tell you.Ó 
By the time they got down to the stream the tannery fire was under control, though still
burning. She saw a body, charred and blackened, over by the puering pit, but it was too
large to be Matthias. This body alone remained; of the other inhabitants of the tannery, none
could be found. 
ÒThereÕs nothing here, child,Ó said the soldier. ÒGo on back where itÕs safe. IÕll ask
about. You say his name is Matthias?Ó 
She nodded, unable to speak. Helen sucked her thumb vigorously. 
With this weight on her, the walk back up the rise to the wrecked palisade seemed
forbidding and it exhausted her. Helvidius found her sobbing just inside the gate, and he
took her into the hall just as a cold drizzle began to fall. 
He brought her heavily watered cider and made her drink, then fussed over Helen,
complaining all the while. ÒThe livestock stolen! Food stores trampled or spoiled or burned!
What will we do? How will we get through the winter without even enough shelter for those
left? What will we do? Without fodder, the young lord will ride back to his home, and then
who will protect us? We should have gone with the others.Ó 
But by the hearth Mistress Gisela had called a council. A stout woman, she gripped an ax

in one hand as if she had forgotten she held it. Blood stained her left shoulder, though it did
not appear to be her own. Beyond, in the farthest corner of the hall, the pregnant woman who
had been shooting from the keep leaned against the wall, panting, then got down on her
hands and knees as several elderly women clustered around her. A boy carried in a pot of
steaming water, and GiselaÕs niece hurried forward with a length of miraculously clean
cloth. 
ÒLord Wichman! I beg you,Ó Gisela was saying, Òif there is not enough fodder for those
of your horses which remain...Ó 
But the young lord had a wild light in his eyes. With his helmet off and tucked under one
arm, he warmed his free hand over the fire while a man-at-arms wiped the blood from his
sword. He had a fine down of beard along his chin, as fair as his pale hair. ÒDid you see the
dragon?Ó he demanded. ÒWas it a real thing, or another enchantment?Ó 
Master Helvidius hobbled forward, Helen dragging on his robes. ÒMy lord, if I may
speakÑÒ
But the young lord went on, heedless. ÒNay, Mistress, I wonÕt let the Eika drive me
away! Are there no old wise-folk here, who can braid a few spells of protection into being?
Give us those, Mistress, and weÕll raid as the Eika do, like a pack of dogs harrying their
heels!Ó 
ÒBut weÕve lost full half our livestock, or more! And I hear now from those who escaped
into the trees that a good half of my laborers were herded away to be slaves!Ó 
ÒOr eaten by the dogs!Ó said a sergeant. 
Mistress Gisela set down the ax and looked about for support. ÒIs Mayor Werner not
here? He will advise as I do. How can I support my own people and yours as well, Lord
Wichman?Ó 
ÒThe mayor is dead, Mistress,Ó said Wichman. ÒOr had you not heard that news yet?
How can you not support me? I am all that stands between you and another Eika raid. And
let that be an end to it!Ó He handed his helmet to the sergeant, stomped his boots hard to
shake dirt off them, and sat on a bench, beckoning to GiselaÕs niece to serve him drink. 
Anna began to shake. All of a sudden the cold struck her, and she could not stop
trembling. Helvidius limped over and threw a bloodied cape, trimmed with fabulous gold
braid embroidery, over her shoulders. ÒHere,Ó he said. ÒHim as owned this before wonÕt
be wanting it now.Ó 
She began to cry. Matthias was gone. 
In the far corner, the pregnant womanÕs grunting breaths, coming in bursts, transmuted
into a sudden hiss of relief. The thin wail of a newborn baby pierced the noise and chaos of
the hall. 
ÒItÕs a boy!Ó someone shouted, and at once Lord Wichman was applied to for his
permission that the woman might name her son Henry in honor of his dead cousin. 
Ai, Lady. Matthias was gone. 
He did not appear that day or the next among the dead pulled from fallen buildings nor
among the living who crept out one by one from their hiding places. Amid such disaster, one
boyÕs loss made little difference. 
VII BELOW THE MOON
1
Biscop Antonia had a high regard for her own importance. Granddaughter of Queen
Theodora (now deceased) of Karrone, youngest child of Duchess Ermoldia (now deceased)
of Aquilegia, daughter of two fathers, Prince Pepin (now deceased) of Karrone who had
sired her and Lord Gunther (now deceased) of Brixia who had raised her, most favored
cleric of King Arnulf (now deceased), she had been ordained twenty years ago as biscop of
Mainni when the previous biscop had suddenly died. Antonia did not like to be kept waiting. 

She was being kept waiting now, and in the most unsightly hovel, a small shepherdÕs
cottage with a bare plank floor, unwashed walls, no carpet, and one narrow bench. On that
bench she sat while Heribert stood by the single window and peered out between the cracks
in the barred shutters. There was not even a fire in the hearth, and it was bitterly cold.
Heribert shivered, thin shoulders shaking under an ermine-lined cloak and two thick wool
tunics. 
ÒCome away from the window,Ó she said. 
He hesitated, and she frowned. ÒItÕs growing late,Ó he said. ÒRain has started falling
again. It looks as if itÕs more ice than rain. If someone means to come, then they must do
so soon or we will be left here in this Lady-forsaken place to face nightfall.Ó 
ÒHeribert!Ó 
ÒYes, Your Grace.Ó Nervously, he touched the holy relics hanging in a pouch at his neck
and backed away from the shutters. 
The roof was, thank the Lord, sound enough. No rain leaked through to drip on the uneven
plank floor. A single lantern that hung from a hook by the hearth gave light to the single room.
Antonia had not failed to notice that it had burned for hours now with no change in the level
of oil. So, she supposed, their mysterious confederate meant to put them on notice that
sheÑor heÑhad arts of magic at her disposal. Someone not to be trifled with. 
As they are trifling with me! 
Antonia did not like to be trifled with. Only disobedience in those sworn to obey her
annoyed her more. She glanced at Heribert, watched him pace back and forth before the
cold hearth, now rubbing his arms. He sneezed and wiped his nose, and she hoped he was
not getting sick. This frustration also nagged at her: Some of the magi knew arts by which a
sorcerer could bring heat or cold. These were not arts she had mastered or even
discovered the secrets of. The irritating thing about hidden words was that they were hidden,
and difficult to dig out of whatever cave or ciphered manuscript or reluctant, stubborn mind
she found them in. 
Wind shook the cottage and rain lashed the walls and roof. Surely no one would venture
out to this isolated hillside in such weather. Why had she responded to the summons? For
weeks now they had been led through the hinterlands of Karrone and northernmost Aosta
like idiot sheep. Lured by signs as elusive as sparrows, she found at each turn that these
mysterious messages fluttered away just when she thought she might grab hold of them. But
she had nowhere else to go. She could not return to Mainni, not yet, not now. The courts of
King Henry of Wendar and Varre and Queen Marozia (her aunt) of Karrone were closed to
her; they would only detain her again and send her south to Darre to await trial before the
skopos. Many lesser nobles might take her in for a month or two, not yet knowing of the
accusations made against her, but she hated living on the sufferance of others. 
If she could not clear herself, if the false and misguided testimony of others was to be
used against her, then she would simply have to bide her time until she could rid herself of
her enemies. Until that time, she followed such will-oÕ-the-wisps as had led her here, to this
Lady-forsaken cottage on a windswept barren hillside on the southern slopes of the Alfar
Mountains. They had only reached the spot with difficulty; poor Heribert had had to walk
alongside her mule up the rugged path that led here. Technically, she supposed, this cottage
rested in the queendom of Karrone or perhaps on the northern boundaries of one of the
Aostan principalities. But it was so isolated that in truth no princely jurisdiction reigned here,
only that of wind and rain and the distant mercy of God in Unity. 
The latch snicked open. A gust of wind slammed the old door so hard against the wall
that one of the door planks splintered. Heribert yelped out loud. He lifted a hand to point. 
She rose slowly. Biscop Antonia, granddaughter and niece of queens, did not show fear.
Even if she were afraid. A thing loomed outside the door, not one of the dark spirits such as
she had learned to compel but something other, something made of wind and light,
shuddering as rain rippled its outlines and wind shredded its edges into tatters. It wore the
form of an angel, of which humankind is but a pale wingless copy, and yet there was no holy

Light in its eyes. By this means Antonia knew the creature was a daimone coerced down
from a higher sphere to inhabit the mortal world for a brief measure of time. 
If a human hand could control such as this, then certainly she could learn to compel such
creatures. She gestured Heribert to silence, for he was mumbling frantic prayers under his
breath as he clutched his holy amulet. 
ÒWhat is it you want?Ó she demanded. ÒWhom do you serve?Ó The thing stretched as
if against a hidden mesh of fine netting. I serve none, but I am bound here until this deed is
accomplished. 
It had no true mouth but only the simulacrum of a mouth, a seeming, as its corporeal body
was obviously more seeming than physical matter. The rain, now waning, fell through it as
through a sieve. Beyond it, through it, she saw the stunted trees and wild gorse as through
thick glass, distorted by the curves and waves of its form. It was as restless as the wind,
chafing in a confined space. Antonia was entranced. Into how small a space could such a
creature be bound until it screamed with agony? Would fire cause it to burn? Would iron and
the metals of earth dispel it or obliterate it entirely? Would water wash it away or only, like
the rain, pour through it as a river pours through a fishermanÕs net? 
ÒDo you not serve that person who has bound you?Ó she demanded. 
I am not meant to be trapped here below the moon, it answered, but not with anger or
frustration such as she understood. Such as humankind felt. It had no emotion in its voice
she could comprehend. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó murmured Heribert behind her, his voice made delicate by terror. 
ÒHush,Ó she said without turning to look at him. His sensitivity irritated her at times; this
was one of them. Sometimes boys took too much of their nature from their fatherÕs
transitory and fragile seed and not enough from their motherÕs generative blood. ÒIt cannot
hurt us. It does not belong to this sphere, as any idiot can see. Now come forward and stand
beside me.Ó 
He obeyed. It had been a long time since he had failed to obey her. But he shook. Those
pale, soft, perfectly manicured hands clutched at her cloak and then, sensing her
displeasure, he merely sniveled and twisted the rings on his fingers as though the fine gems
encrusted in goldÑgems dug from the heavy earthÑcould protect him from this aery being. 
ÒWhat is it you wish, daimone?Ó she asked the creature, and it swayed at the utterance
of the word, Òdaimone,Ó for any being, mortal or otherwise, is constrained by anotherÕs
knowledge of its name and thus its essence. 
I wish to be free of this place. It stretched again. The rain had passed and the wind lulled,
but still its shape was blown and whipped by unseen and unfelt winds, perhaps not earthly
winds at all but a memory of its home in the upper air, above the sphere of the moon. Come.
I will lead you to the one who awaits you. 
ÒDare we go with it?Ó whispered Heribert, nearly on his knees with fright. 
ÒOf course we dare!Ó 
In this way she had been punished for the one sin, the one occasion of weakness. She
had been younger and notÑthenÑimmune to the desires of the flesh, though she had rid
herself of such desires since that time some twenty-six years ago. And to have succumbed
to his blandishments, of all people! His concupiscence was legendary. He simply could not
keep his hands off women, of any station. Someday that desire would be his downfall, she
sincerely hoped. 
The child gotten of the union she loved immoderatelyÑshe recognized thatÑbut she also
despised him, because he was weak. Yet he was hers, and she would take care of him. She
had in the past, and she would in the future. 
ÒCome, son,Ó she said sternly. Without more than a squeak, Heribert followed her over
the threshold. The sky was clearing rapidly. The glowering front receded to the east, tearing
itself to shreds against the imposing heights of the mountains. Behind it, ragged bands of
high white clouds striped the sky. 
Like the storm, the daimone receded before her. It did not walk; neither did it fly. Like the

wind, it simply moved across the land. Its humanlike shape bulged and shrank in conformity
to its own nature or to the weather in some far-off clime. It moved up the hill on a muddy
footpath, though it left no imprint of its passage except the disturbance in the air that was its
presence. She followed, wondering what had become of the mule and the old laborer who
had led her and Heribert up to this abandoned cottage. It was very very cold, far too cold to
stay in the heights overnight. The laborer, cowed by her importance, had asked no
questions and had himself no answers to give her, though she had compelled answers from
him; he was as stupid as the beasts he shepherded. 
They walked until Heribert coughed as he labored upward and even Antonia felt winded.
The daimone, of course, showed no sign of strain; it could easily have outpaced them, but
did not. Antonia wondered if such creatures felt impatience. Was it without sin, as all
humanfolk were not? Or was it beyond salvation, soulless, as some in the church claimed? 
They crossed a field of rubble. 
ÒItÕs an old fort,Ó said Heribert, his words more breath than voice; he coughed more
frequently as they climbed higher. But she heard spirit in his voice. Old buildings were his
passion; had she not forbidden it, he would have left her to train as an architect and builder
in the school at Darre or traveled even as far as Kellai in Arethousa to become an
apprentice in the schools there. But if he went so far away from her, then she could not watch
over him. Now, of course, he never questioned her at all. 
He paused, leaning on dressed stone tumbled to the ground, and surveyed the ruins. ÒIt
is an old Dariyan fort. I recognize the pattern.Ó 
ÒCome,Ó she said. The daimone had not waited; it coursed ahead like a hound that has
scented its prey. ÒCome, Heribert.Ó With a wrench, he pulled himself away from this
strange ruin, an old fort lostÑor abandonedÑin such desolate country. 
They climbed and, in the odd way of slopes in such country, ground that seemed level
ahead proved to be the crest of a hill. Coming over it, they saw in the vale below a ring of
standing stones. 
ÒA crown!Ó breathed Heribert. He stared. 
Antonia gazed with astonishment. Broken circles she had seen aplenty; they were well
known in the border duchy of Arconia at whose westernmost border stood the city of
MainniÑacross the river to the west of the cathedral lay the kingdom of Salia. But this circle
stood upright, as if it had been built yesterday. It did indeed have a superficial resemblance
to a giantÕs crown half buried in the earth, but that was peasant superstition, and Antonia
despised the credulity of the common folk. 
The daimone surged down through bracken; bare twigs whipped at its passing as if a
gale had torn through them. She sent Heribert to find a trail, and on this paltry trackÑthe poor
lad had to beat back as much undergrowth as if there had been no path at allÑthey
descended into the vale. Down in the bowl the wind slackened to silence, and the
undergrowth gave way to a lawn of fine grass clipped as short as if sheep had grazed here
recently. 
The daimone circled the standing stones and paused before a narrow gateway made of
two upright stones with a lintel placed over them. Air boiled where the creature stood, like a
cloud of translucent insects swarming. Antonia halted just far enough away from it and
looked in through the flat gateway toward the center of the stone circle. She felt, in her bones
and as a throbbing in the soles of her feet, the power that hummed from the circle. The
ground here was impossibly flat, as if it had been leveled by human laborÑor some other
force. 
Heribert gazed at the sky, then at the circle, and whispered, ÒItÕs the eastern-facing
doorway. Does that mean something?Ó 
ÒOf course it means something,Ó she said. ÒIt means this doorway looks toward the
rising sun, perhaps at midwinter or midsummer.Ó 
He shuddered. As the sun set behind the hills opposite them, west across the eerie
architecture of stones, it threw long shadows out from the stones that made weird patterns,

almost like writing, on the short grass. The rising moon, its pale face lifting above the distant
mountains, heralded night. 
Enter by this gate, said the daimone. 
ÒCertainly,Ó said Antonia graciously. ÒI will follow you.Ó 
I go no further. I cannot enter the halls of iron. My task is done once I have guided you
here. 
ÒIf we choose not to go?Ó 
It vanished. One moment its disturbance roiled the air, the next the sun slipped down
below the hills and the moon breathed paler light across a landscape empty of wind or the
pulsation of air that had marked the daimoneÕs presence. 
ÒWhat do we do?Ó whimpered Heribert, shivering harder. ÒWe donÕt know whatÕs in
there. How could anyone drag such huge stones up these foothills?Ó 
ÒWe enter,Ó said Antonia calmly. ÒWe have no fire, no food, no shelter. WeÕll freeze
out here. We have chosen to put ourselves at the mercy of our mysterious correspondent.
We must go forward.Ó And take our revenge for this insulting treatment later, she finished
in her own thoughts. Such sentiments she could not share with poor, weak Heribert. 
She did not wait for him to go first. They would be here all night while he gathered up his
courage. ÒTake hold of my cloak,Ó she said, Òso that we can by no means become
separated.Ó 
ÒBut itÕs only a stone circle. WeÕll freezeÑ!Ó 
2
There are spirits burning in the air with wings of flame and eyes as brilliant as knives.
They move on the winds that blow above the sphere of the moon, and now and again their
gaze falls like the strike of lightning to the earth below, where it sears anything it touches.
Their voices have the snap of fire and their bodies are the conjoining of fire and wind, the
breath of the sun coalesced into mind and will. 
All this she sees inside the vision made by fire. Here she runs as would a mouse, silent
and watchful, staying in the shadows. She braves the unknown passageways and the vast
hidden halls where other creatures lurk. This skill aloneÑthat of seeing through fireÑDa
did not strip from her, or perhaps the skill manifested only because Da died. It may be all
that saves her, if she can learn to use it to spy on those who seek her out, to hide herself
from whateverÑwhomeverÑmurdered Da. 
It may even be that someone who also can see within the vision made by fire can help
her. Can save her. 
Ai, Lady, no one can save her. Hugh has returned, as he promised he would. How
foolish she was to think she had escaped him. All this time she thought she had at last
won free of him, but she cannot now and never will be free of him on the realm of earth
where his power is vast and hers insignificant, only here, in the vision made by fire, where
he cannot follow her. And in the vision made by fire, other things stalk her. 
She needs help so desperately and she does not know where to turn. 
Through the endless twisting halls she seeks the gateway that will lead her to the old
Aoi sorcerer. 
There! Seen in shadow, in a dark dry corridor walled in stone, she sees two people
walking, searching as she is. 
There! A boy sleeps with six companions, heads pillowed on stone, feet and knezs
covered by heaps of treasure, armbands of beaten gold, rings, gems, vessels poured out
of the silver of moonlight, and smooth scarlet beads that are dragonÕs blood turned to
stone with exposure to the air. 
There! Creatures move and crawl among the tunnels, misshapen knuckles tamping
down soil clawed from the dank walls. Like the Eika, they seem fashioned more of metal

and soil than of the higher elements, trapped forever by the weight of earth that courses
through their blood and hardens their bones. 
When she at last finds the burning stone that marks the gateway to the old sorcerer, he
no longer sits beside it rolling strands of flax into rope against his thigh. He has left that
place, and she does not know where to find him. But she has to keep looking. Because he
is one of the Lost Ones, he is not human and surely therefore not bound to human
concerns, to human intrigues and jealousies, to human lusts for power and possession.
He might know the answer. He might know the pattern of the paths she must unravel. 
Perhaps Da left her a message here, secreted in the labyrinth in such a way that she
alone can find it. He must have prepared for this, knowing he might be gone and that she
yet lived. Behind the locked door in her tower in her City of Memory there burns a fiery
light; is it DaÕs magic, hidden away? Is it the living manifestation of the spell he cast over
her? If she had the key, could she open the door? Did Da hide the key here, somewhere
in these halls whose pathways she cannot trace unless she explores them? 
And yet, what will happen if she does unlock the door? 
A whisper of breath touches the back of her neck. She shudders. Her back stings as if,
simply by closing in on her, the creature blisters her with its poisonous intent. Is this what
Da felt? Some thing always getting closer, always coming up behind him? Did he know it
would kill him in the end? 
She begins to run through the halls seen in the vision made by fire, although on the
realm of earth her body sits silent and still in front of a roaring camp fire. But the creature
is stronger than she is, here, in this place. It knows these paths, and it is looking for her. 
¡°Liath.Ó 
It knows her name. She flees, but there is nowhere to go. Da used his magic to conceal
her from their eyes on the realm of earth, but here she is vulnerable to their sightÑ
and there, where she is hidden from them, she is vulnerable to Hugh. 
Fear leaps and burns in her heart like wildfire. She is lost. Gasping, weeping, she
forces herself to stop. She turns to face what stalks her, but she sees no thing, no shadow,
no creature or human form; yet she knows it has marked her and that it closes in. It wants
her. The air itself carries the sound of her breathing, the simple heat of her being, to the
ears of that which listens for her. 
ThisÑone creature or many working in concertÑkilled Da. 
She feels their breath like air stirred by an arrow, an arrow whose sharp point seeks her
heart. In this place, she has no weapons. 
Nay, she has one weapon here: the gift given to her by the old Aoi sorcerer. 
¡°Ai, Lady,Ó she breathes, a prayer for strength. Closing her hand around the gold
feather, she escapes the maze. 
3
Side paths fainter than the breath of a dying baby teased AntoniaÕs vision, but she could
catch only glimpses of what lay down their paths: halls piled with treasure; a sleeping boy; a
young woman running in fear; the fading image of an old, old monk with one hand laid
tenderly upon a book while the other lifts to ward off the clutching fingers of daimones whose
insubstantial hands reach right inside his body for whatever secret he has hidden within his
heart. A hound barked. An owl hooted and struck in the depths of night. A manÑno man, but
an elven prince armed in the style of the ancient DariyansÑfought to save a burning fort from
the assault of the savage Bwrmen and their human allies. A dragon slept in enchanted sleep
beneath a ridge of stone. A young man sat in sunlight and surveyed the quiet sea. Did she
recognize him? The vision was too brief for her to look more closely. 
Were these glimpses of the past or the future or the present? 

She could not know. She was entirely lost; she knew that she existed only because her
son dragged at her cloak. At least his terror was so great that he was mercifully silent rather
than gibbering prayers and psalms. 
God would see them to safety, or God would see them dead. 
If the first, then certainly she would discover the secrets of this place and bind to herself
the knowledge of how to coerce daimones down from the upper air and lead unsuspecting
souls into a prison as torturous as this. She fully expected the Abyss to open at her feet at
any moment and give her a gratifying vision of the punishment of the damned. 
If the second, then she was content to know that her soulÑand that of her son, of
courseÑwould ascend as did the souls of all the righteous to the Chamber of Light beyond
the seven spheres. 
 Stairs opened before them. Wind brushed her face. The pale round moon wavered
before her eyes, high above, and she realized with a start that she was looking up the stairs
to the world above, to an actual night sky now shot through with stars. Behind her, Heribert
moaned slightly as she had heard laboring women do when the child was, at long last, finally
and safely birthed. 
She shook him off brusquely and climbed the stairs. He came up so close behind that his
boots clipped her heels but, this once, she did not berate him for his carelessness. She
sensed that at long last they had come to the place where she would learn what she wanted
to know. 
The stairs brought them up out of the earth into the center of a small stone circle, seven
stones placed equidistant from each other on a grassy sward. Beyond, like hulking beasts
against the heavens, three mountains loomed. They had not returned to the first stone circle,
that was obvious, but Antonia guessed they still walked among the Alfar Mountains. 
Her second thought, unbidden and unwelcome, was that it was surely no longer late
autumn. The air was clement, the night mellow and almost warm. But the moon remained full,
much farther gone in the sky than it had been when they entered the first stone circle. They
had walked beneath the earth, guided by the moonÕs distant light, for many hoursÑand it
was nearing dawn. 
The stone circle stood on a low hill. Beyond, down the slope and half hidden by trees,
stood several buildings. The sinking moon still gave enough light that she could make out
the rest of the little valley: a copse of lush trees, a few neat strips of cultivated field, a
vineyard, squat boxes for bees, a chicken shed, and the leaning wall of a stable set into the
steep side of a mountain. A single lantern burned by the gate that led into the enclosure. A
stream whispered, murmuring, in the distance. High cliff walls enclosed them, shutting out
half the night sky in which stars dazzled, uncloaked by any sign of cloud. 
A hand brushed her cheek and she started. ÒHeribert.Ó 
He stood three steps behind her, too far away to have touched her. He seemed to have
been struck dumb. 
ÒBiscop Antonia.Ó The speaker stepped out from behind one of the stones and made
the gesture that in the sign language of the convent signified Welcome. She gave no
obeisance. ÒI am glad you chose to follow my messenger.Ó 
ÒWho are you?Ó demanded Antonia, annoyed by her lack of deference. ÒAre you the
one who has led us this far?Ó She had many more questions, but she knew better than to
ask them all at once. 
ÒI am the one who has brought you here, for I have seen your promise.Ó 
Promise! Antonia snorted, but held her tongue. 
ÒYou may call me Caput Draconis.Ó 
ÒThe head of the dragon? A strange name, or title, to give oneself.Ó 
ÒA strange road has brought us all here, and we must tread stranger and more
dangerous paths yet if we are to succeed. You are not trained as a mathematicus?Ó The
question was, in fact, a statement, waiting on AntoniaÕs acknowledgment. 
ÒI know that the constellation known as the Dragon is the sixth House in the great circle

of the zodiac, itself called the world dragon that binds the heavens.Ó Antonia did not like to
be toyed with in this manner. She did not like to be reminded that others might know things
she did not. 
ÒSo it is. And it wields its own power. But the stars do not in their movements gather as
much power as do the seven erratica, which we know as the planets: Moon, Efekes,
Somorhas, Sun, Jedu, Mok, and Aturna. I speak of the ascending and descending nodes of
the moon, where that vessel crosses the plane of the ecliptic. The ecliptic is the path on
which the planets move, which we also call the world dragon that binds the heavens. South
to north the moon ascends across the ecliptic, and that is the caput dra-conis, the head of
the dragon. North to south she descends, and that is the cauda draconis, the tail. Every
twenty-seven days, in the sphere above us, the moon moves from caput to cauda and back
again. In every movement we observe in the heavens, there is power to be taken and
used.Ó 
ÒAnd these are the secrets hoarded by the mathematici? By such as you?Ó 
The woman lifted her hands, palms up and open, empty, to reveal that she needed no
weapon cast of brute metal or grown out of earth in order to triumph over her adversaries. 
 ÒThe teachings of the mathematici are forbidden by the church,Ó Antonia added. 
ÒAnd you were being sent to Darre to stand trial before the skopos on the charge of
maleficent sorceries whose use is forbidden by the church. I know of you, Antonia. I know
your skills. I need them.Ó 
ÒI tire of this portentousness,Ó said Antonia bluntly. ÒDid you compel the daimone? Can
you teach me such power?Ó 
ÒIndeed I can, and more besides. Your great talent is for coercion. I need that talent, for I
only possess it in small measure.Ó 
ÒYou have drawn down and trapped a daimone! Is that, to you, possessing only a Ôsmall
measureÕ of talent?Ó 
ÒFor compulsion, yes. With the others I can draw down such creatures, but our ability to
coerce them is sorely limited. The one you met we could only command to a single taskÑto
find you and guide you to the circle by whose path you then came here. But I cannot, as you
evidently can, command spirits and beasts to killÑunless it is already their own desire to do
so.Ó 
ÒIs that what you want? To kill someone?Ó 
The other woman smiled slightly. 
ÒAt what do you wish to succeed, Caput Draconis?Ó Antonia said, curious now. She
hated being curious. It put her at a disadvantage. 
ÒI want only that we might all become closer to God,Ó murmured the woman. 
ÒA worthy goal,Ó agreed Antonia. The moon set, and with its passing came the first
glimmers of dawn. A bird sang. Stars had faded. Clouds massed now at the second of the
three snow-covered peaks that guarded one side of the little valley. Thin streamers of mist
rose from the ground and seemed to coalesce into shapes with human limbs and human
hands and half-formed human faces. But that surely was only a trick of the light. 
ÒBut I must know if you have the strength and the will to aid us,Ó continued the woman,
looking past Antonia to what stood behind her. ÒSome offering. Some sacrifice . . .Ó 
Antonia knew at once, and a small fire of anger bloomed inside her. Such presumption!
ÒNot that,Ó she said. ÒNot him.Ó She refused to show weakness by turning to make sure
Heribert was still in one piece. 
Now there was enough light for Antonia to see the other womanÕs face: pale of
complexion, it had a certain distant familiarity about itÑbut, as with the sparrows, she could
not grasp how she knew it. She could have been as old as Antonia or as young as Heribert;
no obvious sign of age, or of youth, marked her. Her hair remained tucked away in a scarf of
gold linen. She wore a fine silk tunic dyed a rich indigo and leather shoes trimmed with gold
braid. At her throat she wore the golden torque that signified royal kinship in the realms of
Wendar and Varre and Salia. Though the granddaughter and niece of queens, Antonia had

no right to such a symbol of her royal kinship. Karrone had been a principality allied to Salia
not three generations ago, in the time of Queen Berta the Cunning. Berta had been the first
of its rulers to style herself ÒQueen.Ó Neither did the petty princes of the many warring
states of Aosta wear the torque. They, too, could not trace their royal blood back to the
forebears of the legendary Emperor Taillefer. 
ÒVery well,Ó said the woman. ÒNot him. But let that, then, be your first lesson. That is
why you are neither caput nor cauda draconis but rather seventh and least of our order. You
can only take as much power as you are willing to give of yourself.Ó 
Antonia did not agree, but she was too wise to say so out loud. She gestured to Heribert,
and he crept up beside her. She noted with some approval that, though he was silent and
certainly quite frightened, he held himself straight and with the pride of a man who will not
bow before fear. Or perhaps he had been stricken dumb by a spell thrown on him by this
woman. He was not, as was his habit when nervous, murmuring a prayer. 
ÒWhat do you want from me, then?Ó asked Antonia. 
ÒI need a seventh. I need a person who has strong natural powers of compulsion, as you
do. I am trying to find a certain person and bring that person here, to me.Ó 
Antonia thought about power. Imagine how much good she could do with greater powers,
with the ability to compel others to act as she knew they truly wanted to. She could return
order to the kingdom, return herself to her rightful place as biscop and Sabella to the throne
that was lawfully hers. She could go farther even than that: She could become skopos and
restore the rule of God as it ought to be observed. ÒLet us imagine that I agree to join you.
What happens then?Ó 
ÒTo come into our Order you must give something.Ó 
ÒWhat is that?Ó 
ÒYou would not give me the young man. So give me your name, the secret, true name
your father whispered in your ear as is every fatherÕs right when a child is born of his
begetting.Ó 
Antonia flushed, truly angry now. This was impertinence, even from a woman who wore
the golden torque. Although by what right she wore that torque Antonia, who knew the royal
lineages of five kingdoms as if they were her own names, could not guess. ÒMy father is
dead,Ó said Antonia icily. ÒBoth of my fathers. He who sired me died before I could walk or
speak.Ó 
ÒBut you know.Ó 
She knew. 
And she wanted the power. She wanted the knowledge. She could do so much with it. So
much that needed to be done. 
She spoke it, finally. After all, Prince Pepin had not lived long afterward. His spite could
not haunt her, for it had fallen with him into the pit. 
ÒVenenia.Ó Poison. 
The woman inclined her head respectfully. ÒSo shall you be called Venia, kindness, in
memory of that naming and to honor a new beginning. Come, Sister Venia.Ó She stepped
outside the circle of stones. They followed her out onto grass moist with dew. Heribert
gaped and knelt to touch, wonderingly, a violet. 
ÒCome,Ó repeated the woman as she set off along a well-worn path that wound down
the gentle slope toward the buildings below. A man dressed simply in a tunic and drawers
came out to the gate and snuffed the lantern. Goats left the shed and moved in a
massÑherded by what manner of creature Antonia could not tellÑup into the gorse and
heather. 
ÒItÕs so beautiful,Ó breathed Heribert. 
It was beautiful as the sun rose and light washed over the little valley, all greens and rich
browns, with a rushing stream bubbling and boiling through pastureland. The woman smiled
at the young cleric, then continued down. Heribert hurried after her. Antonia lingered, staring
at the peaks as the sun, rising in the east, set their proud heads glaring, ice glinting fire. She

recognized them now, those three high peaks: Young Wife, MonkÕs Ridge, and Terror. Just
over the steep, impassable ridge on which the goats grazed so peacefully rested the hostel
run by the monks of St. Servitius, hospitable souls making shelter for those travelers who
braved St. Barnaria Pass. 
VllI THE HARVEST
1
Alain sat on Dragonback Ridge, halfway down the spine of the DragonÕs Tail, and
watched the surge and fall of waves on the shore. Rage and Sorrow sat beside him,
tongues out to catch the wind off the bay. Two men-at-arms loitered at a discreet distance. A
seagull circled in the wind over the water; a tern took careful steps through the surf on the
gravelly beach below. To the left, along the curve of the beach where it grew sandier, ships
lay at their winterÕs rest, set up on logs. Out in the surge, dark heads bobbed in the swells:
seals...or mermaids. 
He scanned the distant islands, studded like jewels along the horizon, where fishermen
and merchants might take refuge in times of storm if they were out on the open sea. He had
survived a storm, caught out on these heights. That storm had changed his life. 
After hunting, Lavastine and his retinue had ridden to the ruins of DragonÕs Tail
Monastery. Alain could not imagine what his father expected to find there. Surely the
villagers had gleaned from the wreckage every last un-scorched bench and table and scrap
of cloth, beehives, paving stones, spoons, knives, bowls, lanterns, candle wax and candles,
salt basins, pickaxes, spades, hatchets, sickles, pothooks, baskets, shingles, all the fine
small tools of the scribeÕs trade, parchment leaves scattered from books whose jeweled
covers had been ripped off and carried away by the Eika raiders. Anything that could be
hauled would have been taken away and put to use, or shipped to MedeÕmelacha for
trade. 
But the sight of the destroyed monastery had upset Alain so much that Lavastine had
allowed him to go on ahead. Alain could have walked the long path along the rocky ridge all
the way to Osna village but now, as he stared at the sleeping ships below, he knew he was
afraid to meet the man he had called ÒFatherÓ for most of his life. 
He shut his eyes. The wash of late autumn sun was not warm enough to heat his fingers.
The hounds whined; Sorrow stuck her moist nose into AlainÕs palm. He set that palm down
on gritty rock. In the old story, a Dariyan emperor versed in magic had come to this land and
turned a dragon into stone, into this very ridge that swelled from the head up across a great
back and down to the tip of the tailÑwhere lay the now-burned monastery. Was there a
dragon lying in enchanted sleep beneath this rock? If he stayed still enough, could he feel
the pulse of the dragonÕs heartÑor only the fine grains of rock ground by wind, rain, and
time into granules that crunched under a manÕs boot? 
As a boy, he had climbed this ridge many times, seeking a sign of the dragonÕs
presence. He had never found any, and Aunt Bel had told him more times than he could
count that he dreamed so much he was as likely to stumble off the edge of the path and into
the waters below as make his way safely through the world. ¡°The world is here, AlainÓ she
would say, knocking on the tabletop with her knuckles, then doing the same, sharply, to
his head, Ònot here, though I think sometimes this table and your head are made of the
same thing.Ó But she would smile to take the sting out of the words. 
But if he only had the hearing of Fifth Brother, the keen hound sense of Rage and Sorrow,
could he not hear the dragonÕs breath under the weight of earth? Sense the contour of its
spine under rock, the texture of its scales under dirt? Touch its dreaming mind, so like to his
own? 
The earth shuddered and moved beneath him. 

He jumped to his feet, shaken and frightened. Rage barked and Sorrow howled, as if
baying at the absent moon. The two men-at-arms hurried forward. 
ÒMy lord Alain, are you well? What is it?Ó They kept well clear of the hounds, who
snuffled at rock and dirt, ignoring the soldiers. 
ÒDid you feel it?Ó 
ÒAh, yes.Ó The men turned as the faint jingle of harness, the clop of hooves, and a
murmur of jovial voices drifted up to them. ÒYouÕve good hearing, my lord, as good as
those hounds, IÕd wager. There come my lord count and the others.Ó 
Count Lavastine and his company emerged from the winter forest and made their way up
the path to the high ridge. Even after two months on the road fighting Eika and mopping up
ragtag packs of bandits, and after a week of hunting in the dense forest a dayÕs ride east of
here, the count and his retinue still looked impressive with banners flying and dressed in
tabards dyed bright blue and embroidered with two black houndsÑthe mark of the Lavas
counts. Count Lavastine let none of his personal guard go into battle unarmed, and each
man had at least a helmet decorated with blue ribands, a spear and a knife, and a padded
coat under the tabard. Some, if they could afford it or had been lucky enough to glean such
winnings from the field, had more armor: a boiled leather coat or a scale hauberk, a leather
aventail, even leather bindings on their arms and legs. Like any good lord, Lavastine was
generous with his winnings and always gave his men-at-arms their fair share of the spoils. 
Alain mounted his horse and rode dutifully alongside his father. They crested the
dragonÕs back and started down the slope of shoulders and neck. A jutting boulder at the
base of the ridge, lifting the height of three men, was commonly called the dragonÕs head; it
was crowned with a scraggly yew tree and the stubble of old climbing roses, planted years
ago. 
By this boulder the people of Osna village waited to greet Count Lavastine. Osna village
was an emporiumÑa trading portÑand as such it needed protection. Count Lavastine
provided that protection...at a price levied in goods and services. And in any case, as Aunt
Bel used to say, ÒItÕs wisest to greet politely those as have better weapons than you do.Ó
 
Everyone stared at him. Embarrassed, he fixed his gaze on the reins twisted across his
palm, but he still heard whispers, his name a mutter in the background. 
They rode through the palisade gate and past the fields, halting in front of the church
made proud and handsome by the contributions of OsnaÕs wealthiest families. But their
wealth was nothing compared to the wealth he had seen at Biscop ConstanceÕs palace
and at the kingÕs court, or to that he enjoyed every day as heir to a count. 
The rough-hewn longhouses, built of undressed logs patched with mud and sticks, looked
shabby compared to the palaces of the nobly born. Yet werenÕt they good houses built of
good timber by the willing hands of good people? He had always thought himself well off
when he lived hereÑthough he had forgotten how strongly the village smelled of fish. 
Was it pride that made him see modest Osna village differently now? Or only the
experience of the wider world? Deacon Miria declaimed a formal welcome. Count
Lavastine dismounted, and Alain hurried to do the same, handing his reins to a groom but
keeping a firm hold on the leashes of the hounds. He looked about him, then, and saw many
familiar faces, people he had grown up with, people he knew well... 
But he saw not a single member of his family. Not my family any longer. Not one of them
stood among the crowd. ÒCome, my lord,Ó said Deacon Miria. ÒI trust you will find the
lodgings here in Osna village not beneath your notice.Ó She led them away...to Mistress
GariaÕs long-house. The men-at-arms remained behind to be dispersed into other
households. 
Why were they not honoring Aunt Bel with their presence? Their path gave him a view of
the entrance to Aunt BelÕs longhouse. A woman stood in the threshold, a ladle in one hand
and the other holding a toddler on one hip. It was not Aunt Bel. 
Why was old Mistress GariaÕs daughter standing in the entrance of Aunt BelÕs house as

if she lived there? 
Afternoon eased into dusk. Garia and her daughters laid out a feast at which her own
sons and grandsons served the count, his heir, and his most honored retainers. 
Though a feast by Osna standards, it was poorer fare by far than the feast celebrated at
Lady AldegundÕs manor. The bread was dark, not white; besides the ubiquitous fish, there
were only two kinds of meat, pig and veal, and they were spiced only with pepper and such
herbs as could be found locally; there were apples baked in honey but no sweet custard to
melt on his lips. He blushed, thinking of the servingwoman and what she had wanted. 
At a remove between courses, Mistress Garia came forward to offer Count Lavastine her
eldest grandson as a retainer, to serve the count as a permanent member of his guard. ÒIt
is hard, indeed, my lord, to find places for all my grandsons. Our Lady has blessed my line
with many healthy children, but the girls will inherit the workshop, and we do not yet have the
means, as some doÑÓ For the first time, her gaze darted to touch on AlainÕs face, then
away. ÒÑto build another ship. Meanwhile, the boy is almost sixteen. I hope you will honor us
with your notice.Ó 
Your notice. 
At those innocuous words, every person present turned to stare at Alain. ÒIÑÓ he started
to say. 
Lavastine raised a hand. Alain fell silent. ÒIn the spring, I will know my requirements. I will
send word with my chatelaine, Mistress Dhuoda, when she comes around on her usual
progress.Ó 
Terror stood, baring his teeth, and Mistress Garia drew back, frightened. Alain quieted
the hound and got him to lie down. Sorrow nudged up against him, sticking his head under
AlainÕs hand for a caress. The company returned their attention, firmly, to the table. 
After the main courses, instead of entertainment, Count Lavastine questioned the
townsfolk of Osna about the Eika. 
Two Eika ships had been sighted the summer after the monastery had been sacked,
another three this past summer, but they had all sailed by Osna Sound, keeping out beyond
the islands. No reports had come of villages nearby being burned; no one had heard any
rumors of winter encampments. A foresterÑone of GariaÕs cousinÕs sons who ranged
wide looking for game and exceptional stands of timberÑhad seen nothing along the coast
for two daysÕ walk in either direction, nor had he heard tales from those he met on his
travels. 
Lavastine questioned the merchants in greater detail, and from them he heard more
varied stories. None had himself run afoul of Eika, but merchants traded not just goods but
gossip. Four Eika ships poised along the coast just north of the rich emporium of
Medemelacha had suddenly turned north and sailed away. A nobleÕs castle in Salia had
been the scene of a vicious attack; one city had held out two months against a siege;
refugees from a monastery burned on the island kingdom of Alba had arrived in a skin boat
in Medemelacha late in the summer with an awful tale of slaughter and looting. 
Alain sat dutifully and listened, but what he most wanted to ask he dared not ask: Where
was Henri? Why did he not sit among the Osna merchants? What had happened to his
family? 
Not my family any longer. 
Mistress GariaÕs bed, the best in the house, was given to the count and his heir for the
night. Their servants commandeered pallets or slept on the floor around them, and, in the
warmth of the longhouse with a hearth burning throughout the cold late autumnÕs night, all
were comfortable. The smell of old timber, the wreath of smoke curling along the roof
beams, the smell of babies and sour milk nearby and of livestock crowded into the other end
of the hall comforted Alain; they reminded him of his childhood. He had slept in such a house
for many years, and his dreams had been good ones. 
In the morning he drew Deacon Miria aside as the grooms saddled the horses and the
soldiers made ready to leave. ÒWhere are Bella and Henri? What has become of them and

the family?Ó 
 ÒAlain!Ó Lavastine had already mounted and now gestured impatiently for Alain to join
him. 
ÒYouÕre a good boy, Alain, to ask after them,Ó she replied with a look compounded of
sympathy, distaste, and amusement. Then she recalled to whom she was now speaking.
ÒMy lord.Ó 
ÒBut where are they?Ó 
ÒAt the old stewardÕs house. They come to Mass each week faithfully, but many of the
others canÕt forgive them their good fortune.Ó 
ÒAlain!Ó 
ÒThank you!Ó He would have kissed the old deacon on the cheek but he was not sure,
with so many folk standing about and staring, if the gesture was one he was now allowed to
make. She inclined her head with formal dignity. 
He mounted. As the count and his retinue rode out of the village, children trotted at a safe
distance behind them, giggling and pointing and shouting. 
ÒWhat did you ask?Ó demanded Lavastine. 
They rode past the stink of pig sties and the winter shelters for the sheep and cows. They
crossed through the southern palisade gate and skirted the stream which was bounded on
its eastern shore by a small tannery and the village slaughterhouseÑstill busy with the
butchering of the animals who couldnÕt be wintered over. Alain held a hand over his nose
and mouth until they got downwind. If the stench bothered Lavastine, he did not show it; his
attention remained focused on Alain. 
ÒI asked about my foster family,Ó said Alain at last, lowering his hand. ÒI found out
where theyÕve gone to.Ó 
ÒTheyÕve gone somewhere?Ó Lavastine said without much curiosity, although for an
established family to pick up and move was unheard of. 
ÒTheyÕve taken the stewardÕs house...Ó He hurried on since Lavastine clearly did not
know what he meant. ÒItÕs a small manor house. It was built in Emperor TailleferÕs reign
for the steward who oversaw these lands then. That was before the port was established. An
old man lived there. He was the grandson of the last steward, but heÕd little to keep and no
servants . . . the fields went fallow. And heÕd no ship to send out, though thereÕs a decent
landing spot below the house.Ó 
ÒMake your point, son, if there is one you intend.Ó But the road made AlainÕs point for
him: The packed-dirt way forked ahead. The wider left fork continued south, where it would
eventually veer east to join the road that took the traveler to Lavas Holding. 
ÒThe path to the right leads to the stewardÕs house, which lies down in a sheltered vale
by the bay.Ó
ÒAnd?Ó 
But Alain knew he would never forgive himself if he did not see them. ÒI beg you, Father,
may we go see them?Ó Lavastine blinked. He looked, for an instant, the way a man might
who has just been told that his wife has given birth not to a child but to a puppy. But he pulled
up his horse just before the fork in the road, and his soldiers, obedient, halted behind him. 
AlainÕs breath ran shallow as he tried desperately to hold back further words, but could
not. ÒI beg you,Ó he burst out. ÒJust this one time.Ó 
Alain knew of no window into LavastineÕs soul and thoughts. His curt speech, his
brusque gestures, his impatience and his efficiency, all melded into a whole so seamless
that Alain could only suppose, as the church taught, that the outer man mirrors the inner. Only
Prater Agius had taught differently: that an outer seeming might mask the inner heartÑjust as
pious Agius had, until the end, concealed his belief in the heretical doctrine of the flaying
knife and the death and redemption of the blessed Daisan. ÒVery well,Ó said Lavastine
crisply. Whether he approved this course or disliked it Alain could not have said, nor did he
really wish to know. He had to see Aunt Bel and Stancy and Julien and little Agnes and the
baby, if it still lived. He had to speak with Henri, to be sure that he didnÕtÑDidnÕt what? 

DidnÕt condemn him as an oath breaker for not entering the church? 
He took in a breath and started forward. His mare, a meek creature at the best of times,
picked her way through the litter of leaves shrouding the trail. Lavastine let him lead their
little cavalcade down the narrow path that wound through oak and silvery birch, maple and
beech. He saw the outline of buildings past bare branches, a small estate with a house,
stables, cookhouse, and outbuildings set around an open court that could also serve as
corral. They passed out of the forest and into the scrub surrounding the estate, stumps not
yet burned and dug out, brushy undergrowth and new seedlings struggling up toward the
light, strips of field cut out of the brush, wisps of winter wheat growing in neat green rows
along soil ridges. 
It took him a moment to recognize the young man standing in unmown grass at one end
of a long log set up on sawbucks. Stripped of bark and being planed down to an even
curved round, the log had the lean supple strength necessary for a mast. At the far end of the
log, scraping, stood Henri, his back to the road; Alain knew him instantly. The young man at
the near end had the broad shoulders of a soldier, but when he turned to stare, Alain
realized this was his cousin Julien, filled out to a manÕs stature now and half a head taller
than he had been two winters ago. 
Julien saw the cavalcade and cried out so loudly that first two children and then Aunt Bel
came to the door of the house; several laborers Alain did not recognize emerged from the
workshop. Henri looked up once and with a deliberate shrug went back to his work. But the
others flooded out, all of them, Aunt Bel and Stancy, and little Agnes looking more like a
woman than the girl Alain remembered. Even the baby toddled out, curly fair hair wound
down around thin shoulders. Stancy had a new baby in a sling at her hips. A woman in the
robes of a cleric hurried forward to stand next to Aunt Bel. A small child Alain did not
recognize stood, mouth open and stick upraised, forgetting the geese she had been set to
watch over. The birds strayed into the woods, but only Alain noticed because everyone else
was staring at him. 
Aunt Bel walked forward to place herself between her family and the countÕs entourage.
She folded her hands respectfully before her and inclined her head in the same manner, not
quite as an equal but neither as a servant. ÒMy lord count, I give you and your company
greetings to this house.Ó 
ÒMistress Bella,Ó said Lavastine in acknowledgment, a fine mark of notice since Alain
hadnÕt imagined the count remembered her name. 
The cleric murmured a blessing upon them all. 
The geese were wandering unnoticed back in among the trees while the child gawped at
the soldiers in their blue tabards and at the banners that fluttered in the breeze. 
ÒThe geese!Ó Alain blurted as the first one vanished from his sight. There was a sudden
flurry in the crowd. The goosegirl began to sob, frozen in place. Julien ran toward the wood,
but that only startled the geese and sent some flapping every which way while the others
hissed and snapped; one bit a laborer hard on the fingers. 
Alain dismounted and flung his reins to a groom. ÒMove back,Ó he said to the laborer
and the few children who had pressed forward. ÒDown,Ó he called to the hounds, who had
started to bark and strain against their leashes. They stilled obediently. ÒJulien!Ó he
scolded, coming up beside his cousin, Òyou know thatÕs no way to bring in geese.Ó
ÒYes, my lord,Ó mumbled Julien, red in the face.
Alain blushed. Had he sounded so proud? But the geese were scattering and the
goosegirl had now hunkered down on her haunches and started bawling outright. He
squatted beside her. ÒHush, child.Ó He reached out to touch her dirty chin. ÒThis will not
bring them back. Now you go stand there, by the gate to the pen, and you shut it tight once
theyÕve all gone in.Ó 
His fine clothing and his clean face and hands overawed her; he saw that by her
expression and the way her gaze darted from hands to face to tunic and back again. Her
bawling ceased and, though tears still ran down her cheeks, she obeyed him. He went a few

steps into the forest and began the onerous job of coaxing the flustered and annoyed geese
back out of the trees and into the pen. But he spoke softly and moved slowly, and in time
they came, suspicious and ill-tempered but not, at this moment, intent on inflicting bodily
harm. Long necks arching, still hissing at the audience of family and soldiers, they followed
Alain to the pen and went inside as meekly as geese were able. At the gate, one gander
hissed and retreated. Alain circled him carefully, crouched, and snaked out a hand to grab
the feet from behind, sweeping the bird up while he took a firm grip on its neck with his other
hand. He deposited the squawking, furious bird in the pen, jumped back, and let the
goosegirl slam the gate shut. The geese subsided with a hissing and flapping of wings. 
 He looked back in time to see Aunt Bel trying not to laugh, the soldiers and laborers
staring in outright astonishment, and his father watching with his thinnest smileÑthe one
always linked with his disapproval. 
ÒI see you havenÕt forgotten everything you learned here,Ó said a voice at his side.
Alain turned to confront his fatherÑnot his father, but his foster father. Henri. 
Aunt Bel raised her voice. ÒMy lord count, I hope you and yours will take a meal with us.
My own daughters will prepare it.Ó 
Lavastine nodded curtly. He could scarcely refuse. It was practically a sin to scorn
hospitality. But after he dismounted, he gestured to Alain to attend him. 
ÒIf you will allow me, my lord,Ó Aunt Bel continued while Stancy and Agnes and the other
women hurried inside and the laborers retreated to stand at a respectful distance. Julien
followed Henri back to their work on the mast. ÒRather than wait inside, perhaps I may show
you around the manor. It was your largesse that made it possible for us to improve upon our
circumstances and settle here.Ó 
ÒIndeed.Ó 
Aunt Bel kept a careful distance from the hounds, who growled at her while a padded
handler staked them out away from the house. While the soldiers took the horses to graze
and water, she conducted Lavastine and Alain on a tour; the cleric attended Aunt Bel much
as if Bel were herself a noble lady. It was a fine grand house, although not of course nearly
as grand as LavastineÕs fortress, and included a good stretch of ground with fields, two
workshops, pastureland and woodland, and a broad path leading down to a sheltered
beach where the familyÕs ship had been drawn up onto logs and covered with a thatch roof
for the winter. 
ÒMy brother Henri is a merchant, my lord, and we have for some years shipped both
cloth and quernstones south to Medemalacha. There is a quarry near here in the hills where
we get our stone. With the generous payment we received from you, my lord, we have been
able to expand our business in addition to moving to this manor. I have hired laborers to
carve soapstone into vessels for cooking and storage. We will ship them to Medemalacha
also. In time Henri hopes to sail north as far as Gent, although there is more risk of Eika
attacks in that direction, and next year he intends to attempt his first trip northwest to Alba, to
the port of Hefenfelthe on the Temes River.Ó 
Lavastine began to look interested. A good husbandman, he was wealthy in large part
because of his careful stewardship of his lands and possessions. ÒOne ship cannot sail to
three places.Ó 
Aunt Bel smiled. ÒWe are building a second ship this winter. My third son Bruno we have
apprenticed to Gilles Fisher, a local man who builds most of the ships hereabouts. In return
the shipbuilder will aid my brother with those parts of the ship Henri does not know the
secrets of.Ó Lavastine surveyed the work that continued on the mast. Henri, sweating even
in the chill, seemed oblivious to the visit of the great lord. ÒBut is it not also true, as my
clerics have read to me from the commentaries on the Holy Verses, that Ôthe farmer must
save some of the grain when he makes bread, else there will be nothing for sowingÕ?Ó 
Ò ÔAnd in the days to come not pride nor greed will fill his stomach,Õ Ò finished the
cleric. She was a young woman, not much older than Alain himself, with crooked teeth, a
pockmarked face, and a cheerful expression. ÒYour attention to the words of Our Lady and

Lord marks you with favor, my lord.Ó 
ÒIndeed,Ó said Lavastine. ÒSo have They shown me Their favor.Ó He glanced at Alain.
Bel, miraculously, appeared not to notice the aside. She moved away toward the other
workshop, which was attached by a covered causeway to the main house. 
ÒThree ships we may hope for in time, my lord,Ó she said, Òbut for now the seaways
north are closed to us by the Eika. As you say, we must move slowly as we expand lest we
overreach. In this room my daughters and I weave. In time weÕll expand to four looms. In
time we hope also to hire more laborers and expand the farm as well. We have betrothed
my daughter Agnes to a merchantÕs son in Medemelacha. HeÕs an experienced sailor. In
time heÕll take over the third boat, should Our Lord and Lady shower their favor upon our
enterprise.Ó 
ÒBut Agnes is too young to be married!Ó said Alain, shocked. 
 Lavastine swatted away a fly and stepped back from the door into the weaving shop,
held open by the cleric so that he could look inside. ÒHow old is this daughter?Ó 
ÒShe is twelve, my lord. Her betrothed will come to live with us next year, but they wonÕt
wed until she is fifteen or sixteen. If you will come this way.Ó It began to irritate Alain that she
addressed all her conversation to Count Lavastine and none to him, as if he were a
stranger. Yet certain small expressions familiar to him came and went on her face like so
many private signals to him alone of her thoughts and of unspoken comments too personal
to share with someone who did not know her intimately, the arched eyebrow that betrayed
amusement, the dimple that hid annoyance, the pursed lips with which she swallowed any
sign of satisfaction she considered unseemly. ÒWe have bought more cows and will export
cheese as well. We hope, in time, to bring a blacksmith here. As you can see, we have hired
the Osna smith to come in twice a week and do work for us.Ó They crossed into the house
itself, the long hall busy with women and girls setting out cups and bringing in platters of food
from the cookhouse. Beside the threshold Alain saw an unpainted wooden shield, a helmet,
and a spear. ÒWe are are sending my eldest son Julien to the new duchess of Varingia as
a man-at-arms, because we can afford to outfit him now.Ó 
They had promised him to the church when he had wanted nothing more than to be a
soldier! Stung with jealousy, he flushed in shameÑbut no one remarked on it. No one even
paid attention to him. Of course it would be different for Julien. Julien was Aunt BelÕs
legitimate child, her eldest son, and of course she would want to give him such an
opportunity now that they had the means. They had done their best by him; it wasnÕt their
fault they hadnÕt known who he really was . . . was it? 
Aunt Bel went on, discussing various potential marriage alliances for her children and
relations. To AlainÕs consternation and utter confoundment, Count Lavastine appeared to
relish these discussions; he asked questions and gave advice. Indeed, he treated Aunt Bel
with the same distant familiarity as he did his own chatelaine, Dhuoda, a woman whose
ability to run his household he respected enough to leave her alone to do her job. 
 ÒÑand now that we have more business, we have brought in Sister Corinthia of Salia to
write and read letters and do our accounts. We also hope to put JulienÕs daughter,
Blanche, into the church with a dowry. Sister Corinthia will teach her so that she isnÕt
unlettered when she goes.Ó 
JulienÕs daughter, the baby, was illegitimate, although Julien and his sweetheart had
proclaimed publicly their intent to marry before the young womanÕs death in childbed. 
ÒYou have done well,Ó said Count Lavastine. He wasÑperhapsÑimpressed. Alain was
vastly irritated. He felt used, as if his family had only wanted him for what they could get from
him, the countÕs generous reward for his fosterage. 
Aunt Bel glanced at Alain, then away. Her features were stern now. ÒIt is nothing we
looked for or expected, my lord,Ó she said as if she had heard AlainÕs thoughts spoken out
loud. Perhaps she had, seeing his expression. She knew him that well. He was ashamed.
ÒBut is it not said in the Holy Verses that Ôyou shall eat the fruit of your own laborsÕ?Ó 
Ò ÔYou shall be happy and you shall prosper,Õ Ò quoted the young cleric, evidently

eager to show off her knowledge of the Holy Verses, Ò Ôand your daughters shall be like
the fruitful vines and your sons like the rich stands of wheat. For the hearth-holder who lights
each day a candle from the hearth in memory of the Chamber of Light, this shall be the
blessing in store for her: She may share the prosperity of SaiÕs all the days of her life and
live to see her childrenÕs children!Õ Ò 
ÒPlease, my lord count.Ó Aunt Bel gestured to the single chair at the table. Everyone
else would sit on benches. ÒIf you will be seated.Ó Now she turned to Alain as well and
made the same respectful gesture. ÒAnd you, my lord.Ó 
ÒAunt Bel,Ó he began, hating this formality. 
ÒNo, my lord.Ó He knew better than to argue with her. ¡°YouÕre a countÕs son now and
must be treated as one. ÔGod maketh poor and maketh rich; They bringeth low and lifteth
up.Õ Ó 
ÒSo said the prophet Hannah,Ó added the cleric. 
Aunt Bel turned back to Lavastine. ÒI will send one of my children to bring your company
in to table, my lord.Ó 
ÒIÕll go,Ó said Alain, though it was not his place. He should not offer, not without asking
his fatherÕs permission. But he knew, suddenly, that he would have no opportunity to speak
to Henri, that Henri would not eat with them. None of the family would eat with them; they
would serve their guests. That was all. 
The soldiers began to stamp in, a flurry of activity by the door. 
Lavastine said, ÒAlain!Ó 
Alain made his escape. 
Outside, Julien and Henri were still working on the mast. When Henri saw Alain coming,
he straightened and waved Julien away. Then he bent back to his task. 
Alain halted beside the older man. Out here, outside the confines of Osna village, it
smelled different. There the ever-present smell of drying fish and salted fish and smoked fish
pervaded streets and common and even the Ladysday service. In the longhouse, fish and
smoke and sweat and the dust of stones and wet wool and drying herbs and sour milk and
rancid oil and candlewax all blended into a rich, familiar aroma. At the manor house there
was no such ripe blend, for here there was room to store foodstuffs in the shed beside the
cookhouse, to grind stone in a separate workshop, to weave in a room set aside for that
purpose. Although perhaps thirty people lived on this farm, they were not crowded together
except on winter nights when they would all sleep in the main hall. 
He smelled the sea foam and heard the cries of gulls. The animal sheds stank, of course,
but the smell of earth and wind and the late chill of autumn dying into winter overrode
anything else, made all else into a fragrant herbal, the scent of life. The smell of land and
opportunity, even though it was only an old stewardÕs house from the time of the Emperor
Taillefer. 
ÒYouÕve done well with the payment Count Lavastine gave you,Ó said Alain, not
meaning to say anything of the kind. 
Henri smoothed the sides of the log into an even curve. ÒAs have you,Ó he said without
looking up from the steady rhythm of his work. The words, spoken so bluntly, cut into AlainÕs
heart. 
ÒI didnÕt ask for this!Ó 
ÒHow then did it come about?Ó 
ÒYou donÕt think IÑ!Ó His voice gave out as he struggled with indignation. 
ÒWhat am I to think? I promised the deacon at Lavas Holding to put you in the monastery
when you came to your majority at sixteen, and she did not say me Ônay.Õ Had she known
who you were, do you think she would have offered you up so easily?Ó 
ÒShe didnÕt know Count Lavastine wouldnÕt marry again! She couldnÕt have known
that seventeen years ago. You think I somehow cozened him, cheated him, made up a
storyÑ! Just to get out of the church!Ó 
ÒWhat am I to think?Ó asked Henri. He had not once raised his voice. ÒYou made it

clear enough you didnÕt want to enter the church, though the promise was made at the
same time you were given into the Circle as a newborn babe.Ó 
ÒMade by others,Ó retorted Alain furiously. ÒI couldnÕt even speak. I was a baby.Ó 
ÒAnd then,Ó Henri went on as quietly, Òafter the monastery burned, you went to serve a
year at Lavas Holding and we hear nothing more of you until this payment comes, and you
are suddenly named heir to the count. I counseled Bel to send it back.Ó 
ÒTo send the payment back!Ó Henri might as well slap him in the face as say such
words. ÒYou would have sent it back?Ó His voice broke like a striplingÕs. 
Ò ÔAccursed thirst for gold, to what fell crimes dost thou not force menÕs hearts?Õ The
cleric, a fine educated woman I can tell you and a very Godly one as well, has been reciting
to us the lay of Helen, which they call the Heleniad. Those words I took to my heart and I said
them to Bel.Ó 
ÒYou donÕt think Aunt Bel is greedy!Ó 
ÒNay,Ó admitted Henri. ÒNor has she acted in any way except for the family. Indeed, we
will be the better for her stewardship. But we should never have accepted that which came
to us through false pretenses. The Lord and Lady do not smile on those who lie to advance
themselves.Ó 
Now he had said it baldly. Alain was stunned. When he spoke, all his hard loud words had
vanished and he could only whisper. ÒYou donÕt think IÕm LavastineÕs son.Ó 
ÒNay,Ó said Henri as calmly as if he had been asked to predict the next dayÕs weather.
But for the first time he stopped from his work and straightened, scraper dangling from one
hand, to inspect Alain. His quiet gaze was devastating. ÒAnd why should I?Ó 
Rage and Sorrow barked and whined where they stood tugging at their leashes, which
were staked to the ground. Furious, Alain spun and ran, too angry to think, too angry to do
anything but jerk the stake out of the ground and pull the leashes free. 
ÒGo!Ó he shouted, and they leaped forward, growling, toward the man who had made
their master so angry. 
Lavastine appeared, crossing the threshold of the house. ÒAlain!Ó he shouted. 
Rage and Sorrow ran flat out and bounded over grass and shavings while Henri stood
and stared them down, although Alain saw him shaking, scraper raised as if to protect
himself. Nothing would protect him from the hounds. Nothing except the voice of an heir of
Lavas. 
ÒHalt!Ó Alain cried, and the hounds, an armÕs length from Henri, stopped dead.
ÒHeel.Ó He whistled. They growled once, longingly, at the other man, then, obedient, they
slewed their great heads round and trotted back to Alain. Shaking, his hands trembling so
hard he could scarcely hold the leashes, he staked them back down. 
By that time Lavastine had reached him. ÒWhat means this?Ó The count glanced toward
Henri, who had not gone back to his work but stood slackly by the mast and who, as a tree
leans under the wind, moved now to rest a hand and then his weight on the log, bent over
like an old, old man. 
ÒN-nothing,Ó whispered Alain. He wanted to weep. He dared not. 
ÒIndeed,Ó said Lavastine. ÒIf it is nothing, you must come inside. You should not have
run out in that way. It is a great honor to this family that we eat at their table and allow them to
serve us.Ó He signed to one of his servingmen. ÒGet my cup.Ó 
Alain followed him inside. He could not look to his right or left. He could not look at all, not
to meet anyoneÕs eyes. Lavastine took from the hand of his servingman his fine walnut cup
which he used when he traveled. Four golden rivers had been carved into the wood, and the
fine grain was polished until it gleamed. This cup he graciously gave to Aunt Bel, who had
Stancy fill it with wine and returned it to him to drink first. Only after the count had drunk from
it did she agree to sit at his right and take food herself, though the rest of her family served. 
ÒThis cup I hope you will accept,Ó said Lavastine, Òin memory of your hospitality toward
myself and my son this day.Ó 
ÒYou do us honor, my lord,Ó said Aunt Bel, and she drank. 

The meal was not as fancy as that served by Mistress Garia, who had, after all, had
several dayÕs notice of Lavas-tineÕs arrival. But there was veal and good bread and wine
and apples, and several chickens had been freshly killed and cooked, spiced with coriander
and mustard. Most importantly, the meal was served with dignity and pride, and there was
more than enough for all. 
Henri did not come inside. 
To Alain, silent in the midst of his old familyÕs newfound plenty, it all tasted like ashes
and dust. 
2
They sail at dawn into the fjord. Cliffs surround them, glittering with ice and snow and
cold gray-black stone, the stone of the Mothers. Waves beat on the prow, spraying the
rowers with bitter cold water, so cold that a human drenched in it will die. Not his kind, of
course. His kind are RockChil-dren, the children of earth and fire, and the only thing they
fear is the venom of the ice-wyrms. All other fates lead merely to death, and against death
they are strongest of all. Iron can kill them, if wielded with sufficient strength. They can
drown. But heat and cold alike melt off their beautiful skin, for are they not marked with the
rich colors of the hidden earth, melded as if in the forge from the very metals with which
they adorn themselves? 
He hefts his spear in his right hand as the ship slides in past islands of ice and
prepares to jump as it grinds up onto the rocky beach. This valley, this tribe, is
unprepared for his coming. They will rue that. But they will bare their throats before him. 
The hull scrapes on stone. He leaps out of the ship, hitting ground hard, then splashes
forward through the surf while his dogs jump out after him, followed by his war band. His
feet grip ice, slick on pebbles, while the dogs flounder behind him and regain their footing.
He races up the shore and runs on snow. Behind, he hears the ragged panting of the dogs
and the intent breathing of his warband. They believe in him, now. This is their fourth tribe
this season. Winter is a good time for killing. 
Too late the Watchers at waterÕs edge raise the alarm. Too late the smoke fire rises to
alert those living farther up along the paths which lead to the high slopes and the fjall. He
hears the sudden bleat of the OldMother waking from her trance to danger. The
SwiftDaughters run from the long hall carrying baskets, the nests of unhatched eggs. He
sets the dogs on them. SwiftDaughters are not sacred, although the OldMother is. The
dogs scatter them and baskets drop and eggs fall to the cold earth, to be lost in snow or
splintered by ice, claw, tooth, or wind. Those that are strongest will survive. The others
deserve to perish. 
Now the warriors of Hakonin fjord gather their weapons and rush like a herd of furious
goats down into the fray. He is proud of his people. He has never seen one of them turn
and run. And on this day they have his cunning as well as courage to aid them. His
second and third boats have beached farther down the strand and his soldiers have raced
up from behind, so that the Hakonin RockChildren are already encircled. Death already
sweeps down on them, as dragons and eagles take their prey from the skies. Only they do
not know it yet. But as the battle is joined and they realize their plight, they fight the harder.
They are strong and fearless, and because of that he calls his soldiers off sooner than he
would have otherwise, leaving perhaps half of the Hakonin warriors still in the fjall of the
living rather than sending them to the cold stone pathways of the dead. 
He gives them a choice. 
Proud warriors, each one that is left, and properly raised. They do not throw down their
weapons but neither do they fight on when all is hopeless. They do not surrender. They
pledge their death, or their life, to the will of their OldMother and her knife of decision. 

Now, and at last, when all is lost, she emerges from the long hall. She is stout and as
gray and strong as rock, which she much resembles. Her movements are as stiff as those
of trees unbent in storm. It is the peculiar beauty of the OldMothers that, like the
mountains and the cliffs and the jutting ridges of stone that scar the fields and pastures,
they are glimpses of the bones of earth that lace all land together and give strength and
solidity to the world. The SwiftDaughters left to her hoist baskets and gather up those
eggs, fallen among the detritus of their sisters, which remain unbroken. These they collect
together to form new nests, but there are few, many fewer than a tribe needs to survive. 
In the pens behind the long hall the human slaves wail and moan; their noise is
appalling and irritating, but he restrains himself from killing them outright just to silence
that awful mewling. He gestures. His own soldiers part, forming a path down which his
human slaves can come forward. These slaves he has gathered to himself as the
SwiftDaughters gather the unbroken eggs. At Valdarnin fjord he set these slaves to watch
over warriors and dogs alike as humiliation, for the Valdarnin warriors fought weakly and
some even surrendered before they knew their OldMotherÕs will. But he will not humiliate
the Hakonin; instead, he lets his human soldiers, such as they are and armed only with
weapons of wood, stand watch over the penned slaves. They have served him well this
season of fighting. He is pleased to have thought of using them, the strong ones, the ones
that arenÕt afraid to look him in the eye, to wish to defy him, and who are yet intelligent
enough to know that defiance is useless. 
¡°Who are you?Ó asks Hakonin OldMother. She waits at the threshold. It is gesture
enough that she has emerged into the ragged winter sunlight, torn by clouds and a few
drifting curls of snow. 
¡°I am of Rikin fjord, fifth son of the fifth Utter of Rikin OldMother. I am son of
Bloodheart, and it is to his teeth you will now bare your throats.Ó 
¡°To what purpose?Ó she asks, her voice like the grinding of pebbles on the shore
beneath the hull of his ship. 
None of the other OldMothers have asked this question, only his own, RikinÕs Mother,
before he set off for the winterÕs hunt. 
¡°The many can accomplish what the few cannot,Ó he replies. 
¡°You serve Bloodheart,Ó she says. 
¡°I do,Ó he replies. 
¡°Someday, as does all that is mixed with air and water, he will die,Ó she says. 
¡°He will,Ó he replies, Òfor only the Mothers who are unmixed with any element save
that of fire and earth may remain untouched by time for as long as the embers burn and
Smolder beneath their skin.Ó 
¡°You are the Soft Ones.Ó She does not look toward the human slaves. They are
beneath her notice, and like the icy waters her touch is dangerous to them. 
¡°I use what weapons I can gather,Ó he replies. 
¡°You wear their sigil at your heart,Ó she says, and now her sons and brothers murmur,
seeing that it is true, noting the wooden circle that hangs by a new-forged iron chain
around his neck. 
 ¡°It signifies my understanding of their ways,Ó he replies. ÒI can walk through their
dreams.Ó 
¡°You are one who has spoken with the WiseMothers,Ó she says. ÒI hear it in your
voice and I see with their vision for they have shared this vision all along the fjalls. They
have shared this vision with the bones of the earth. That you have the patience to find
wisdom, and that you think strong thoughts. But you have no name. Bloodheart is a
powerful enchanter. He has taken a name, as only enchanters may.Ó 
He bows his head respectfully. He knows better than to contest the old laws that govern
RockChildren. He is nameless, as is fitting, and yet did Alain Henrisson not give him a

name? Did the human not call him ÒFifth Son,Ó thinking this was a name? He will
remain patient. Patience is the strength of the WiseMothers, as it is the strength of the
earth. 
From the pouch of skin at her thigh, Hakonin OldMother draws the knife of decision. ÒIf
my sons and brothers fight with you,Ó she says, Òif we let our dogs run with your army and
our slaves labor for BloodheartÕs purposes, what will you give me in return?Ó 
¡°I have defeated you,Ó he replies. 
¡°With this knife I crack the eggs.Ó OldMother lifts the knife so that sun glints off its
black blade, a sliver of obsidian so smooth it is depthless and so sharp it can cut both
bone and the stone-sheathing of eggs. ÒWith this knife I winnow the weak from the strong,
as do all my sisters to the north and to the south. This knife is the choosing of death or
life, and you cannot defeat death, for you are mortal. What will you give me in return?Ó 
¡°What do you want?Ó he asks, curious now. 
¡°I have birthed my daughters,Ó she says, Òand one begins to harden now. Her ribs
are stiffening and soon her time will come. These nests that are my laying you have
scattered, and she will have few brothers to tend her fields and her pastures and to fight for
Hakonin hall. I will lay no more eggs, but she has not yet begun. Promise me that when
she has birthed her daughters and it comes time for her to breed her nests, of which she
must have many in order to harvest a strong clan, I can send for you and you will perform
the ritual with her. The Hakonin nests will be of your making.Ó 
¡°Only a male who is named may perform the ritual with a YoungMother,Ó he replies
carefully. But he feels the course of excitement in his blood. These words, this pledge,
once spoken, cannot be taken away. It is dangerous to take for himself what is the
prerogative of Bloodheart and the other, the very few, named males. But this OldMother
knows as he knows that he intends to be one of them, in time. He must only be patient and
ruthless. 
¡°Many seasons will pass,Ó says Hakonin WiseMother, Òbefore I must begin my walk
to the fjall and before she will take the knife from me and seat herself in my chair. Promise
me this, and we will seal our bargain: your breeding for our nests, our sons and brothers
for your army.Ó 
¡°I make this promise,Ó he replies. ÒI seal it with the blood of my brother.Ó He whistles
one of the dogs to him, curses it as it snaps at his arm, and grabs its collar to wrestle it
close. Its breath, weeping with the broken eggs it has feasted on, hits his face like the
breath of fetid summer wind. He cuts its throat and its blood pours out onto the earth in
offering. When it sags, dead, he drops it to the ground, into its own blood, some of which
has spattered him, mottling his chest and the delicate faience and gold and silver links of
his long metal girdle, a thousand tiny linked rings flowing like water around his hips and
thighs. 
The OldMother bids one of her SwiftDaughters kneel before her. Then she takes in her
hand the wealth of the daughterÕs deep gold hair and cuts it off with a single efficient
motion. ÒWith this token I seal our bargain. Spin this and smith this and wear it when I
summon you.Ó 
He nods, accepting her bargain. Her sons and brothers lift their throats and the chill
winter sun glints on smooth metal skin, copper, bronze, gold, and silver, and iron-gray. In
response, he grins, baring his teeth and the jewels studded there. Tonight he will add
another. For as it is said among his people, jewels are like boasts, hard to keep once they
are displayed. 
The SwiftDaughter carries her shorn hair across the forecourt to him, stepping carefully
over her dead sisters and the broken shells of eggs, her never-to-be-born brothers. She
lays the hair in his waiting arms, and he is careful not to stagger under its weight. No gold
as pure exists anywhere, not even in the mines dug deep into the earth by the goblin-kin.

With this gold, spun and beaten, he will fashion a new girdle, one of his own making, not
one granted him by his fatherÕs strength. 
ÒAlain!Ó his father said, and he woke from the web of dream and struggled to free
himself of its coils. 
He sat up to see light pouring in through the open shutters of the sleeping chamber he
shared with his father and the hounds. Another lord might sleep with many servants in his
chamber; the counts of Lavas could not. 
ÒYou were dreaming,Ó said Lavastine, standing now and crossing back to close the
shutters. It was bitter cold outside; three braziers, a sinful luxury, burned in the room. As soon
as the shutters closed, darkening the chamber, Alain rubbed his arms and shook off sleep.
He rose and began to dress. Rage scratched at the door, whining. 
ÒYou were dreaming,Ó repeated Lavastine. 
ÒI was.Ó Alain bound his calves with linen bands and then pulled on an undertunic of
wool over his shirt, and his thick winter tunic, lined with marten fur, over all. 
ÒThe Eika again.Ó Lavastine always wanted news of the Eika. 
Alain laughed suddenly, a short, sharp laugh, much like his fatherÕs. Much like
LavastineÕs. 
The memory of his last glimpse of Henri still hurt, but not as much, not after two months.
He was too busy here at Lavas Holding. Life went on at the fortress at a more sluggish pace
in wintertime, but it went on nonetheless. He trained at arms, though he knew himself a
coward. Next time it will be different. Next time I wonÕt fail in battle. He sat with his father
as Lavastine spoke with his chatelaine, with his stewards, with his clerics, and with those
few winter travelers who lingered a day or two in the warm hall of Lavas fortress before
continuing their journey. Alain learned what it meant to be a great lord, what gestures to
make, what polite phrases to utter, how to judge a visitor and greet him according to his
station. 
ÒThe Eika,Ó said Alain. ÒFifth Son. I think heÕs going to get married. But not in any way
we understand.Ó 
Lavastine regarded him without answering until Alain grew uncomfortable, as if he had
said something wrong or made a comment more fitting to a farmer than a countÕs heir. 
 ÒFather?Ó he asked, not liking the countÕs silence. Henri had been silent in that way. 
But Lavastine quirked his lips finally, upward, signifying approval. ÒIt is a portent. We
have spoken of this before, but it has come time to act on it. We will send my cousin
Geoffrey to the court of King Henry.Ó 
Speaking of Geoffrey, whose open dislike of Alain still crawled fresh along his skin, made
the young man nervous. ÒCome,Ó he said to the hounds. He tied leashes around the necks
of Rage and Sorrow and old Terror and Bliss, the four favored to sleep at night in the tower
chamber with their masters. He tied the ends of the leashes to a hook set into the wall and
then rapped on the door with a staff. It opened at once, servants enteringÑnot without their
usual nervous glance toward the houndsÑwith two pitchers of steaming water scented with
mint, basins and cloth for bathing his face, and a clean covered chamberpot. ÒIt is time for
you to be betrothed, Alain.Ó
ÒBetrothed!Ó He let the servants wipe his face. The water heated his face, a touch of
summer, and every least curve of skin on his hands was washed until his hands smelled of
the herb garden. The scent of warmth and summer made him think of Tallia, and he bent
over the table to shield himself, lest he betray his feeling to anyone, even to Lavastine. 
ÒWhen Geoffrey asks King Henry for a marriage alliance between you and Lady Tallia, it
will remind Geoffrey of the order of things in Lavas now. As he needs reminding.Ó Any
discomforting memories of the visit to AldegundÕs manor vanished with the mention of
TalliaÕs name.
ÒTallia,Ó Alain breathed. ÒButÑsheÕs the daughter of a duke and of HenryÕs own
sister.Ó 
ÒHalf sister. Alain, my son, you must understand this about marriage. Henry must marry

the girl to some lordling or else put her in the convent. As long as she is in the convent, there
is always the chance some lord will abduct her and marry her against HenryÕs will. The king
does not want to marry her to a lord whose power is already too great, or to a lord or ladyÕs
son he does not trust. He needs me, and you, because the counts of Lavas bow to no duke
or margrave, and yet we are not as powerful as some of the great families of Wendar and
Varre. Nor as weak as others. He would be wise to grant us this alliance. Especially since
we saved his army, his kingdom, and his life at Kassel. Lady Tallia is a small price to pay, I
think.Ó 
ÒJust as the gold and silver you gave to my foster family was a small price for you to
pay,Ó said Alain, suddenly bitter again. 
ÒFor their fostering of you? A small price, indeed, Alain. Never begrudge the seed you
sow in good soil, for it is the harvest that comes from that sowing that will determine whether
you live or die the next spring. Think not only for this day, but for the one that is to come. In
this way, Lavas has prospered and it will continue to do so under your stewardship.Ó 
ÒYes,Ó whispered Alain, promising it, determined to make it true. He did not want to fail
Lavastine, now or ever. How keenly he felt, suddenly, that need to have Tallia beside him. It
was more than liking, more than advantage. It was simpler than that. Perhaps it was not
altogether pure. ÒTallia,Ó he said, trying her name out on his tongue. Wondering how he
would speak to her once they were married, once they were alone in the intimacy of the
bridal chamber. He flushed and looked up in time to see Lavastine smile, so quick he might
not have glimpsed it. 
ÒAnd sooner,Ó said Lavastine casually, Òrather than later.Ó AlainÕs face burned. Was
the sin of lust emblazoned on his face? ÒIt is vital you secure the succession as soon as
possible.Ó The count turned to the servants and signed to them to open the door. Sorrow
barked. Bliss whined, tail whipping against tapestried wall, as the door was opened and the
servants braced themselves well back from the path that would be taken by the hounds. 
Alain let the servants help him with his boots, and then he unhooked the hounds and led
them down the curving staircase to the outside where they could runÑunder his supervision,
of course. 
He sat on a bench. The snow of last week had melted, though it was still cold. The cloudy
sky had the look of porridge. He chafed his hands to warm them. A servant, seeing him, ran
into the hall and emerged soon after with gloves. Soft rabbit fur caressed his hands as he
slipped them on. 
He had, in these moments when the hounds ran, a brief time to himself. Everyone kept
well away and Lavastine was already about his business, business Alain would join as soon
as he put the hounds into the kennel. He closed his eyes and drew a picture of Tallia in his
mindÕs eye, all wheat, like the harvest, frail, bending under the weight of the wind, of her
motherÕs ambition and her fatherÕs ancestry, and yet always whipping back. She seemed
so...unreachable. So clean. So pure and holy, she who scarcely ate a crust of dry bread
when riches sat on her plate. 
That night when he lay down on the bed beside his father, he closed his eyes and thought
of her again. She had never been far from his thoughts all day. The idea that he might
actually marry her was so incredible that he might as well dream of being a fatherless
bastard child raised by commoners suddenly elevated to the rank of heir to a powerful
count. 
God bringeth low and lifteth up. 
With this comforting thought and the vision of Tallia as close as his own cloudy breath in
the chill air, he slept. 
Rain edged with slivers of ice batters the canvas tents of their camp. His warriors do not
need the tents to sit out the storm, though it makes the wait more comfortable. But the
human slaves do. Another war-leader would let the slaves sit in the freezing rain and half
of them would die. So are the weak winnowed from the strong. But he is not like the others. 
He touches the Circle at his breast, circles his finger around its smooth grain in

memory of the gesture made by the childÑseen but not forgottenÑat the door of the crypt
in the cathedral at Gent. That child he had let go free, because she had reminded him of
Alain. 
The slaves sit in the warm billow of smoke and heat from the fire he has allowed them
to start, up against a rock face beneath the canvas tent. One man stares at him, then
looks quickly away when he realizes he has attracted his masterÕs attention. 
¡°Why do you stare?Ó he asks. In his dreams he has learned the language of the Soft
Ones. 
The slave does not reply. The other slaves look away quickly, hunching their
shoulders, their way of trying to avoid notice, of pretending to be invisible as the spirits of
air and wind and fire are invisible to all but enchanters. 
¡°Tell me,Ó he commands. Wind stings his neck and tines of ice shatter on his back
where he crouches at the open end of the shelter. 
¡°I beg your pardon, master,Ó says the slave without looking up again, but even so he
cannot keep the hate out of his voice. 
¡°You saw something.Ó The long winterÕs night shrouds them, blanketed by the ice
storm and serenaded by the howling wind. By the red sullen light of fire he watches the
slaves stare at their knees and their hands, even this one, the one who spoke. The one
whom he caught looking. ÒI will know.Ó 
¡°You wear the Circle of Unity, master,Ó says the slave at last, knowing that to disobey
is to die. ÒBut you do not worship God.Ó 
He touches the Circle, drawing his finger round its curve with that same remembered
gesture. ÒI do not hide the Circle.Ó 
¡°It is the way you touch it, master.Ó The manÕs voice gains strength, of a kind. ÒIt
reminded me of. . . someone I once knew.Ó 
Someone this man does not wish to speak of. Bored by the storm, irritated by the delay,
since no ship can brave the seas in such conditions, he forces the slave to go on. ÒDo
you have a family as, I think, is common among your kind?Ó 
¡°No, master.Ó Here, finally, the slave lost his fear and let his hate take wing. ÒYour
people murdered them, all of my kin: my wife, my sisters, even my poor innocent
children.Ó 
¡°Yet you serve me.Ó This human interests him. He has fire, perhaps even some
stubborn strength of earth in him. The penned slaves who have lived among the
RockChildren for many generations are more like dogs than people, but these new slaves
to whom he has given sticks for weapons, better food, and decent clothing all come from
the southern lands, and they think before they bark. That is why he believes they will be
useful. 
¡°I have no choice but to serve you,Ó replies the slave. 
¡°You have the choice to die.Ó 
The slave shakes his head. ÒYou wear the Circle, but you do not know God. The Lady
weaves and the Lord cuts the thread when our time has come. It is not for us to choose to
die. Death comes to us by Their will.Ó 
He examines the other slaves, who hunker down. One, at the limit of the canvas,
shaking in the raw wind, turns and turns about until another slave, closer in, sees her
plight and changes places with her, there at the edge of the shelter where the fireÕs
warmth scarcely reaches and the windÕs breath bites with killing cold. After a bit, yet a
third slave takes the worst place. They help each other live. Is this the mercy that Alain
Henrisson spoke of? 
¡°Do you have a name?Ó he asks. 
The slave hesitates. He does not want to offer his name. The other slaves stare,
watching, surprised out of their pretense of mute stupidity. None of these, to whom he has

given favor, are mute or stupid; he has studied his slaves carefully, just as he studies his
livestock. 
Still the slave does not speak. 
He lifts a hand and unsheathes his claws. 
¡°My name is Otto,Ó the slave says at last and reluctantly. 
The others whisper and then silence themselves. He can smell their nervousness
beneath the hot pitch smoke of the fire and the cold blast of the storm. 
¡°Do you all have names?Ó he asks. 
To his surprise, they do all have names. They speak them, one by one, a sound drawn
out of each one as an arrow is pulled from a wound, carefully, with respect. 
Are they all enchanters, then? No, he reminds himself, they are merely different. They
are not RockChildren. They are weak, and yet, in their weakness, they survive by helping
each other. 
He sheathes his claws and shifts backward far enough that he can stand outside the
shelter of the canvas awning roped down and angled to give them shelter at the cliff face.
The canvas flaps and moans in the tearing wind. 
He steps out from its sheltering angle into the full fury of the storm. The icy wind drives
into his face, its touch like that of thousands upon thousands of knives flung from the
windÕs hand into the wild air. 
He listens as the wind pounds him and the ice stings his face. Dimly he can see the
ships drawn up on a rocky beach, five ships now, since two new ships came with him out of
HakoninÕs fleet. He sees his soldiers hunkered down, waiting out the storm with the
patience of stone, and the dogs lying in jumbled heaps like fallen boulders. 
He listens. It is said among his people that on this far western shore in the wintertide,
when storm wracks sea and land, one can hear the keening of dragonsÑthe FirstMothersÑ
who in ancient days bred with the living spirits of earth and gave birth to his kind. 
But all he hears is the wind. 
PART THREE 
THE ORNAMENT OF WISDOM 
PART THREE: THE ORNAMENT OF WISDOM
IX THE WINTER SKY
1
On bitterly clear nights he saw stars through certain sections of unpainted glass window
whose patterns themselves formed the shapes of stars, some with five and some with six
points. On this night he watched the moonÕs light ease across the gulf of darkness that was
night in the cathedral, its glow a wavering dim light as illusive as a will-oÕ-the-wisp. 
There came to him in an instant the searing memory of Count Hildegard and her retinue
fleeing to the gates. It had all been a trick, an illusion. He had seen what he wanted to see,
what Bloodheart wanted them all to see, the count and her ragged army in flight, when in fact
Bloodheart had cast a glamour over his own Eika troops to make them appear human. In
that way the Eika had gained entry into the city, and stalemate had turned to slaughter. 
Only Liath had been clear-sighted enough to see through the illusion. If only he had such
sight as that, he could make out a way to escape his captivity. But his gifts from his mother
did not include sight beyond that common to humankind. And in any case the chains, and
the dogs, were no illusion. 

Here in the bitter cold of the winter cathedral, tears stung at his eyes, but he blinked them
back, fighting them. Only men were allowed to weep, but never dogs. Men might weep
honorably in grief, in anger, or in joy. He no longer deserved such distinction. 
With the tears came the cloud, a gray haze covering his vision, a roaring in his ears as
clamorous as a thousand Eika howling, as maddening as a swarm of bees, as seductive as
the din of battle to one confined. But that cloud was madness. He must fight the madness. 
Slowly, struggling with each breath, he formed an image in his mind like to the images he
saw on the windows, painted scenes from the Life of the blessed Daisan to uplift and
illuminate the worshipers. He formed no holy image but rather a common one, a scene he
had been struggling to build for days now, or weeks, or months; he didnÕt know how long it
had been, only that it was winter and once, long ago, when he was a free man and captain of
the KingÕs Dragons, it had been spring. 
He built in his mindÕs eye a manor house such as his Dragons often lodged at as they
rode here and there in the kingdom, defending King Henry and his sovereignty. In this
season, in winter, fields would be stripped clean of their harvest, some few budding with
winter wheat. The vines and orchards would be bare; barrels of apples would line the cellars;
cider would be brewed. The extra animals would have already been killed and their meat
smoked or salted away against winterÕs barrenness and the quiet hunger of spring. 
This manor house he built was no lodging place. He constructed it, in his mind, as his
own, his refugeÑhis land, not anotherÕs. He had nothing of his own save his status as the
kingÕs son, his sword and spear, his shield and armor, his clothing and tent and, over the
course of years, a number of horses. All else he received because of obligations owed to
the king or, now and again, certain gifts from certain women. But he was careful in his affairs
as in all else, obedient to his fatherÕs wish that he choose wisely and discreetly and never
ever indulge himself where his interest might cause trouble farther down the road. 
None of this he had now, of course, not even the gold torque he had once worn around his
neck, symbol of his royal lineage. That torque now adorned BloodheartÕs arm, symbol of
his victory, and Sanglant wore an iron collar such as all of BloodheartÕs dogs wore. 
He must not think of his humiliation. He must think of other things or else he would fall into
madness. He walked, in his mind, across fields and forest and pastureland. His lands.
Through these lands he would walk, no longer outfitted for war, no longer dressed in a
DragonÕs tabard and armor, no longer wearing the Dragon helm that marked him as
captain. 
No longer a Dragon. 
In this place, he was outfitted like any other noble lord, with a retinue, with servants and
field hands. The outbuildings would include a stable, of course, for his horses, a byre,
beehives, a forge, a weaving house. 
Like any other noble lord, he would be married. This was more difficult to imagine. All his
life he had been told, repeatedly, that the kingÕs bastard son could not marry. Only
legitimate children married. For an illegitimate one to do so might set in motion endless
intrigues whose fruit would be as sour as discord. Indeed, no one had expected him to live
long enough to chafe against the prohibition; he had already served as captain of the
KingÕs Dragons longer than any other man before him except wily old Conrad the Dragon. 
But the lord of a manor must wed, and must beget children to inherit from him and his
lady. He had always been an obedient son. Now, among the dogs, wreathed by iron and no
longer by gold, he need not be. 
What woman in HenryÕs progress, what daughter of a noble lady, might be suitable?
Whom would he choose? Who would choose him? 
But when he skirted the kitchens where servants prepared the eveningÕs feast, when he
passed through the broad-beamed hall, striped with afternoonÕs light through the narrow
windows, when he crossed under the threshold and out into the garden where a lord might
find his ladypicking herbs for healing simples or dictating a letter to her dene, he saw no
noblewoman from the kingÕs pro? ress waiting for him. No countÕs or duchessÕ daughter

smiled up at him, greeting him with affection When he opened the door that led into the
bedchamber the woman who waited inside half-suprised but obviously pleased by his
appearance, was the young Eagle. Liath. 
2
 It was bitter cold, and out here by the dying fire the wind cut and burned Liath until she
shuddered under its bite. But she dared not go inside where the nobles sat at table,
carousing long into the night in observance of the Feast of Saint Edana of the Bonfires,
whose saintÕs day was celebrated with much drink and good cheer. Hathui had returned
from Quedlinhame, and she could attend the king. Better for Liath to remain outside, as far
away as possible, even shivering in the breath of coming winter. 
Out here the stars shone with brilliant clarity. The waning crescent moon had not yet risen.
This sky was perhaps her favorite, winterÕs sky. The Child and the Sisters, second and third
Houses of the zodiac, rode high in the heavens; the Crown of Stars, just outside the grasp of
the Child, stood almost at zenith. Below, the Hunter guarded them from the Guivre, whose
yellowish eye gleamed directly overhead. But it was not the Hunter who was fated to
vanquish the dreadful Guivre but rather his unseen companion, the Huntress, valiant Arteme.
In Andalla one could just see her where she rested among the southern stars, and Liath had
even once glimpsed her golden boot, known to the Jinna as the star Suhel, the handsome
one. Here in the north only her Bow and its fire-tipped Arrow star, blue-white Seirios, could
be seen above the horizon. 
She searched for the planets and found three. Wise Aturna, eldest and slowest of the
wandering stars, moved through the Sisters, the third House, and stately Mok through the
Lion. Red Jedu, the Angel of War, shone in sullen grandeur in the Penitent. A baleful
influence, according to the astrologi. But Da scorned the astrologi. He called them street
merchants and ignorant tinkerers and claimed they knew nothing of the true knowledge of
the heavens. That knowledge hadnÕt saved him. 
She shivered again in the windÕs chill and put more sticks on the fire, building it until
flame licked and popped up a lattice of branches. Smoke stung her nose and eyes. She
chafed her hands to warm them and tugged her cloak more tightly about herself, prepared to
wait out the night. The stables were close by, but even there among the horses and servants
she could not feel safe. In any enclosed place he might corner her. Only out here, under the
winter sky, did she have room to run. 
The debate entertained Rosvita and to some extent surprised her. The subject was well
worn, of course: is it better to be useful or to be good? From his earliest days as sovereign,
King Henry had encouraged such debates; his younger sister Constance, now Biscop of
Autun, had excelled at them during her time at court. 
No, indeed, this time it was the participants who surprised her. For once, Princess
Sapientia showed wisdom and kept her mouth shut, letting others argue while she sat in the
chair of honor at her fatherÕs right side and basked in the attention of the courtiers. Her
younger sister Theo-phanu sat beside Rosvita in silence, her expression as smooth as
cream; she, too, kept quiet, although she never spoke recklessly under any circumstances.
HenryÕs youngest child, Ekkehard, actually listened to the debate, mouth half open. Like his
elder sister Sapientia, he stared wide-eyed and worshipfully at the younger of the two
debaters. Ekkehard had been seized with one of his admirations and this time Rosvita
could not deplore his choice. 
Three years ago she would have, had Ekkehard stared in this way at this particular man.
But Hugh, abbot of Firsebarg and the bastard son of Margrave Judith, had altered so greatly
in the five years he had been absent from the kingÕs progress that it was only by his
lineaments, his actual face and hair, that she knew him. 
ÒThe Rule of Saint Benedicta commands abbot and abbess to do good rather than to
govern,Ó said Hugh in response to Cleric MonicaÑshe had for many years now taught all

the young folk in the kingÕs schola, where he had once been a pupil. 
ÒBut if our stewardship is given us for the profit of many, then must we not learn to govern
in order to benefit our subjects most usefully?Ó A vigorous elderly woman who had disliked
Hugh when he was her student, Monica was softening as the debate wore on. Rosvita
recognized the gleam in her eye and the quirk of her lips with which she favored only her
most exemplary students. Hugh had been brilliant, but he had also known he was brilliant
and wished others to acknowledge it, and that sort of arrogance had never been tolerated
by a teacher such as Monica. 
Now, however, Hugh smiled gently. ÒBut of course,Ó he said mildly, ÒI must bow before
the wisdom of my preceptor. Is it not true that the teacher is an artist who molds her students
as clay is fashioned into vessels of glory? A good student will imitate his teacherÕs
example and strive to become her image in excellent and sublime qualities. We learn to
govern, and the first person we learn to govern is ourselves. Then virtue without creates
virtue within, and thus we become both good and useful.Ó 
How had Hugh, as brilliant and handsome and arrogant as he had once been, become
so gracious, witty, and charming, if no less beautiful in form? His voice was moderate, his
gestures composed, his manners amiable and elegant. Only this morning, when the kingÕs
progress had left the manor house at which the king had rested overnight, Hugh had
distributed bread with his own hands to a family of beggars standing alongside the road. By
no sign did he betray that he had any interest in Princess Sapientia except that of a
well-mannered courtier privileged to ride with the kingÕs progress. 
Ò ÔVirtues alone make one blessed.Õ Ò Monica smiled sweetly on him and began to
quote at length from the Commentary on the Dream of Cornelia by Eustacia. 
ÒGood and useful, indeed,Ó whispered Theophanu suddenly to Rosvita. ÒI observe that
my sister is now pregnant by him, so we must presume he has learned both lessons well
enough.Ó 
ÒTheophanu!Ó breathed Rosvita, shocked. Belatedly, she added, ÒYour Highness.Ó 
Theophanu said nothing else. 
Monica declaimed at length on the virtues as written in the Commentary. ¡° ÔThus do the
virtues come in tour types, and these types are distinguished each from the other in regard
to the passions. For the passions are these, Fears and Desires, Griefs and Joys, Anger,
and Envy. The political virtues of prudence, temperance, courage, and justice mitigate the
passions. The cleansing virtues put the passions aside. The purified and serene mind has
forgotten the passions, and to the divine Mind whose virtues are exemplary, the passions
are anathema.ÕÒ 
Torches and candles flickered; the hearth fire burned steadily, stoked by servants. King
Henry smiled softly on the two debaters, although these past months at odd moments he
could be found staring off into nothing, attention lost to the matters at hand. Now he yawned,
finally, and signed to his servants that his bed should be made ready. Rosvita, finishing her
wine, toyed withÕ the cup. The others made ready for sleep; Theophanu did not move. 
ÒYou do not like him,Ó said Rosvita at last. 
ÒYou did not, before he left.Ó 
ÒI did not,Ó agreed Rosvita. ÒBut he is much changed.Ó She watched as Father Hugh
retired discreetly to the back of the hall while Sapientia waited for her camp bed to be set up
behind a screen next to her father. HughÕs move-irients were decorous and graceful, and if
it were true that virtue radiated more brightly in beauty of form, then he was virtuous, indeed.
ÒAi, Lady,Ó she murmured to herself, catching herself looking at him. She had thought
herself long past such half-formed yearnings, but perhaps her mind was not as serene as
she hoped. 
ÒHeÕs very handsome,Ó said Theophanu suddenly, standing. ÒDoes the Psalm not say,
ÔThe Lady desireth your beautyÕ?Ó Then she walked away to her own camp bed, modestly
placed behind a curtain away from her sister. 
ÒThis bodes ill, I fear,Ó said Rosvita to herself as she set down her winecup. She rose.

Did clever Theophanu dislike Father Hugh, or was she envious at her sisterÕs good fortune
in finding such a courtier? In finding, to be blunt, such a lover? Indeed, how could Sapientia
have resisted him, even though she knew he was a churchman and that it was wrong of her
to desire him and wrong of him to accede to such a seduction? She was a royal princess,
after all, and it was necessary for her to get with child in order to prove she was worthy of the
throne. One might say, as had Theophanu, that he was only doing his duty and being useful. 
 One by one, torches were extinguished as nobles and servants found sleeping space in
the hall of the hunting lodge where they had arrived this afternoon. 
Tomorrow, the king would ride out after deer. 
Tonight, some slept more restfully than others. 
Liath pulled off her gloves and, her fingers clumsy with cold, found the gold feather in her
pouch. Instinct had warned her not to pick up the white feather she had found beside DaÕs
body the night he was murdered. Now she had seen what manner of creature shed such
feathers. But this gold feather, plucked from the ashes of a dying fire through which she had
seen a vision of the old Aoi sorcerer, had a different texture, one of promise, not pain or
fear. 
Drawing the feather gently through her fingers, she stared into the fire, thinking of Hanna,
forming HannaÕs face and expression in her mindÕs eye, the curve of her shoulders, the
twist of her braided hair, the seal ring of the Eagles on her right middle finger. On one other
occasion this past summer she had formed Hanna so in her mind, and within the gateway
made by fire she had seen shadows of a narrow pass winding through mountains whipped
by storm, of a landslide that had obliterated a road. Was it only her fear, imagining such a
scene, or had she truly visioned Hanna in the mountains, threatened by an unseasonable
storm? 
Where was Hanna now? As she concentrated, spinning the feather through her fingers,
she saw movement within the flames, images seen through a veil of fire. 
A standing stone in the midst of a clearing burns with a fire born of no natural kindling,
for it burns without fuel and gives off no heat. No one sits on the flat rock where once the
old Aoi sorcerer sat and spoke to her. Sinewy plant stalks lie in a heap at the foot of the
rock, awaiting his return. A rope the length of her arm lies draped over the rock. Where did
he go? When will he return? 
But the burning stone is itself a window, shutters opening through which she can look
onto another place. 
Hanna rides with three ragged Lions at her side across a plain populated more by
grass than by trees. The rising sun glints off her brass EagleÕs badge. They are leaving a
village, a cluster of sod huts thatched with grass; some of the roofs are scorched. The
wooden palisade is also scored with fire and the scars of battle. Fresh graves lie outside
the palisade and beyond them stretch empty fields dusted with fresh snow. 
Ice rimes HannaÕs eyebrows. In her gloved left hand she holds a broken arrow tipped
with an iron point and fletched with iron-gray feathers that resemble those of no bird Liath
has seen or heard tell of. The Lions, grim of face, sing as they walk; Liath cannot hear the
words, but it is not a happy song. Villagers cluster at the palisade gate to call out farewells.
One lad breaks away, bundle thrown across his back, and hurries after them. His mother
weeps, but she lets him go. The Lions make room for him among their number. Hanna
stares straight ahead, eyes to the west, where their path leads. 
Why is Wolfhere not with Hanna? The feather brushes LiathÕs palm, and fire snaps
and wavers. Now she sees a lofty hall illuminated by the winter sky seen through huge
glass windows and by what seem a thousand candles burning in imitation of the stars. A
man steps humbly forward in the way of a person brought before a regnant, and as he
bows before an unseen figure, Liath recognizes him: It is Wolfhere. On the walls behind
him she sees bold frescoes depicting the martyrdoms of the seven disciplas: Thecla,
Peter, Matthias, Mark, Johanna, Lucia, and Marian. Is this the audience chamber of the

skopos in Darre? 
He straightens up, and his eyes lift to take in a dimly-seen person sitting in great state
on a gilded chair. His nostrils flare in surprise. He murmurs a name under his breath. 
ÒLiath.Ó 
Liath started back, remembering all at once that there was also danger within the vision
made by fire. They were looking for her, and they could see her when she wandered in the
flames. 
But it was too late. 
Their touch came, fingers laid lightly on her shoulders. 
Ai, Lady. Not their fingers. 
His. 
ÒLiath, my beauty.Ó His hand closed over her shoulder and with that grip he forced her to
rise and turn away from the fire to face him. The wind was not more cold than his
expression. ÒSo at last I find you alone.Ó He smiled. 
She jerked away, but he held on to her, not letting go. She caught back a whimper. Ai,
Lady, she dared not let him know how scared she was. Clutching the feather behind her
back, she stared at the fine brocade on his tunic and willed herself to become as hard as
stone. 
ÒYou look well, my beauty. And perhaps it is best I have looked but little upon you these
past six days since I came to the kingÕs progress, or I should have been dreadfully
tempted.Ó 
She said nothing, but she knew he was still smiling. She felt, though his left hand did not
touch her, that hand close and then open, flexing. His right hand burned her shoulder as if ice
pressed against her skin. 
ÒDo you have nothing to say to me, Liath?Ó 
She said nothing. She moved not at all. She was stone, heavy, insensible. 
ÒI am not happy that you left me,Ó he said in his most gentle voice. ÒIndeed, I am
disappointed. But I forgive you. You didnÕt know what you were doing. And it matters not.
What happened that day means nothing to us. You are still my precious slave.Ó 
ÒNo!Ó She wrenched away from him, almost falling into the fire as her heel scattered
coals and burning brands. Heedless, she stooped to grab the end of a burning stick and
held it out like a sword. ÒI am free of you. Wolfhere set me free!Ó 
He laughed, delighted. ÒThis is the Liath I remember and the one that the court will see
beside me, in the fullness of time, when I can display you as you are meant to be displayed.
But no one can see us now.Ó He touched a finger to his lips to enjoin her to silence. His
handsome face looked no less beautiful in the firelight, adorned by shifting light and shadow.
ÒLook you, Liath.Ó He lifted his left hand, two fingers raised, and murmured a word. The
burning stick extinguished as if a sudden gust of wind had blown it out. 
Her voice caught in her, and all that came out was a fragile whisper of sound, more
breath than word. 
ÒA childÕs trick,Ó he said modestly, Òbut we must all begin somewhere.Ó He carefully
drew the stick out of her hand and tossed it away. ÒWolfhere did not set you free. He stole
you from me. I have not yet laid my grievance against Wolfhere before King Henry, who will
pass judgment. Be assured I willÑalthough, alas, I must wait until Sapientia has the child and
it lives and is healthy. After that blessed event my position at court will be unassailable. But
until then, Liath, do not think you have escaped me. We will ride together and speak
together, sing together and feast together, and you shall be near me every hour of every
day.Ó 
ÒI am not your slave,Ó she repeated stubbornly, hand smarting from the sting of the
brand. ÒWolfhere freed me.Ó He shook his head as a wise father considers his childÕs
foolishness. ÒWolfhere? Wolfhere wants you for his own reasons. DonÕt think Wolfhere
took you except to use you himself.Ó 
ÒNot in that way.Ó Then, horrified she had spoken of such a thing when they were alone,

she tried again to bolt. He was too fast for her, and his grip was strong as he took hold of
her arms and pulled her against him. ÒIn what way, Liath? No, not in that way. He and his
kind have other plans for you, no doubt.Ó 
ÒWhat do you know of Wolfhere and his kind?Ó Ai, Lady, what if Hugh truly knew
something and could tell her? How much would she be willing to give him in return? But he
only sighed deeply and kissed her on the forehead. She shuddered, paralyzed by the sick,
helpless fear in her belly. He did not let go of her. ÒI will be honest with you, Liath, as I have
always been honest with you. I only suspect Wolfhere works in league with other unknown
people. He was thrown out of court for something, some act, some opinion, and it is well
known he has mastered the art of seeing through fire and stone. Surely he must have other
skills, or be in league with those who do. I know your father was murdered, and I know he
was trying to hide you, his most precious treasure. Therefore, someone else must be
looking for you. Does that not follow? If they are willing to murder your father, how can you
expect kindness from them? You will wish most devoutly, my beauty, that you were back in
my bed if they get hold of you, as they will, if you donÕt come back to me. I can protect you.Ó
ÒI donÕt want your protection.Ó Twisting, she tried to spin out of his grasp, but he was too
strong. And she was too weak. 
ÒYou are bound to me,Ó he whispered. ÒYou will always be bound to me. No matter
where you run, I will always find you. You will always come back to me.Ó 
She glimpsed a figure in the gloom, a servingman out in the night, perhaps walking to the
privies. ÒI beg you, friend!Ó she called out to him, her voice ragged with fear. 
Hugh wrenched her arm tightly up against her back, trapping her. The servingman turned,
his face indistinguishable in the darknessÑbut her position was silhouetted plainly by the
fire. 
ÒHow fare you, friend?Ó the man asked. ÒNeed you help?Ó 
ÒPleaseÑÓ Liath began, but Hugh pressed his free hand to her throat and suddenly she 
could not speak. 
ÒNay, brother,Ó answered Hugh sternly. ÒWe need no help here. You may move on.Ó 
Whether because he recognized the voice of a nobleman, the robes of a churchman, or
was simply obedient to a tone in HughÕs voice which he could not resist, the man turned
away and vanished on his errand, abandoning her. 
ÒNo,Ó she whispered, finding her voice again when Hugh lowered his hand. 
ÒYes.Ó Hugh smiled. ÒYou are mine, Liath. You will love me in the end.Ó 
ÒI love someone else,Ó she said hoarsely. The feather, still hidden, burned like a hot coal
against her free hand. ÒI love another man.Ó 
She only knew how gentle he had been before because he now went white with rage and
shook her viciously. ÒWho? Who is it?Ó 
Unable to help herself, she began to weep. ÒAi, Lady, heÕs dead.Ó 
ÒAny man you love will die, for I proclaim it so. I will make it so. Love no one, love only
me, and you will be safe.Ó 
ÒI will never love you. I hate you.Ó 
ÒHate is only the other face of love, my beauty. You cannot hate what you cannot also
love. My beautiful Liath. How I love the sound of your name on my lips.Ó 
She believed him. That was the worst of it. He spoke so persuasively, and his voice was
so softÑexcept she knew what he was, she had seen that glimpse of it when she made him
angry. 
ÒI will always treat you well,Ó he said as if he had heard her thoughts, Òas long as you
obey me.Ó 
She began again to cry. Seeing her reduced to weeping in front of him, her fear and
weakness revealed utterly, he let go of her. Like a rabbit miraculously released from the
clutches of a hawk, she ran. 
ÒWhere will you go?Ó he called after her, mocking her as she ran. ÒYou will never
escape me, Liath. Never.Ó 

She ran to the stables where so many animals and sta-blehands crammed in together
that breath and sweat made the air almost warm. But she would never be warm again. 
3
Anna shivered as wind wailed through the trees. Snowflakes spun down; a thin dusting
made the ground bright, and the wind shuddered branches of trees and shook snow from
them in sudden waterfalls of white. 
It was so cold. 
Here in the shelter of a fir tree, she had at least some respite from the constant cut of
wind. But there was never any respite from fear or from the pit of hunger that yawned in her
belly like the dreaded Abyss. Two horses also sheltered under the cave made by the firÕs
branches; with reins wrapped loosely around a crook in one thick branch, they snuffled at the
forest litter, trying to graze. ¡°Watch the horses,Ó two of Lord WichmanÕs soldiers had
ordered her after finding her foraging in the woods. ÒPull the reins free and flee if the Eika
approach.Ó 
She hadnÕt known she was so close to Eika. She stayed within the cover of trees on her
daily foraging expeditions into the forest, but every day she had to search farther away from
the battered holding of Steleshame to find any pittance to add to the shared pot. In this way,
with the young lord growing bored of Master HelvidiusÕ poetry and Mistress Gisela eager to
exclude anyone who didnÕt Òearn their keep,Ó Anna staved off the cold knife of starvation.
It would not have been like this if Matthias hadnÕt died. 
She shuddered. She could not bear to think about Matthias. Maybe it would have been
better to have died with him, it hurt so much to be without him. But the old poet and the child
relied on her as well; she had to go on. 
She rubbed her hands and listened. She had been told to stay on the lee of the hill, to
save the horses should things go awry. Yet, there was grass atop the hill, yellowed and dry
under the winter sky and high enough to hide her. If she could watch the raid, wouldnÕt she
be better able to protect herself and the horses she had been put in charge of? What if the
soldiersÕ blades couldnÕt penetrate Eika hides? What if Lord Wichman and his men were
all killed and the Eika came searching for her and she didnÕt know they were coming?
What if she were unable to flee, or the reins wouldnÕt unwrap from the tree limb? What if
she fell from the horse? She didnÕt know how to ride. 
Maybe it would be better to wait here by the horses, to wait for the soldiers to return,
driving captured cattle before them, but she couldnÕt bear to wait as if she were blind and
crippled. 
And anyway, there was nothing she could see on this day that would be worse than what
she had already seen in this past year. 
She crept up the slope on hands and knees. Grass rustled under her weight and she
froze, then slowly crawled to the crest, checking always to assure herself that the foxtails
waved above her head. At the top of the hill lay a large gray rock with dry orange lichen
clinging to it as if to a scaly hide. From behind this screen she dared to peer down into the
vale. 
A single ragged byre stood at the far end of the vale. Cattle grazed in their dull fashion,
watched over by three slaves dressed in far less than what Anna wore. They leaned heavily
on staves. Occasionally a cow lifted its head from the grass to low nervously. Goats strayed
over one rise beyond which Anna could see copses of trees and the suggestion of
floodplain; if she moved just enough she might be able to see the towers of Gent in the
distance. A woman so weak that she frequently stumbled hurried after the straying goats
and herded them back. Anna could not count very high, but there were plenty of cattle and
goats just in this one sheltered vale where grass still covered the hillside. No doubt these
livestock had been stolen from Steleshame or some other unfortunate village. According to
the reports brought in by the mounted soldiers, many such herds grazed the lands around

Gent now, good cropland which had gone to seed under the stewardship of the Eika. 
Lord Wichman and his soldiers werenÕt raiding, not really; they were just getting back
what the Eika had stolen. 
A few trees stood in this pasture, which by the patchwork of grass, some long and dying,
some short and new, had perhaps once been a series of long, narrow fields. But cattle,
grass, and slaves did not hold her attention for long. Other objects stood in the vale, and
these she could not help but stare at with a grim, hungry fear pulling at her gut. 
Rising above the grass, occasionally under a tree yet most often atop a gentle rise, stood
a number of standing stones the same hue as the stone she lay beside but tall and
monolithic rather than low and rugged. No Eika with gleaming skin and ice-white hair, with
jewel-studded teeth and fierce spear point, stood guard over the slaves and the precious
livestock. Nothing stood here except those dozen stones, yet the slaves did not run in the
face of such freedom. 
Of Lord Wichman and his soldiers she saw no sign. 
She knew these stones, they were somehow familiar to her, each alike, each...a threat. 
The stone nearest to her stood at the base of the slope at whose height she knelt. Its
pitted surface lay a bit more than a long bow-shot away. HadnÕt it been farther away when
she first peeked out? Why would stones stand out here in the middle of this vale, in no
discernible pattern? Why did they look different from the boulder she hid behind? Why did
no lichen grow on them? 
She stared at the stone, frightened. Something was not right here. What was it Master
Helvidius had said about illusion? 
But it was only a stone. 
Her pouch dug into her thigh, the scant reward for her hours of foraging. She had found a
few handfuls of acorns which could be leached and ground up into gruel, withered nettle and
parsley to flavor soup, and a dead squirrel. 
Her thoughts wandered to those happy days when Matthias had labored in the tannery
and Helvidius had sung for the lordling every night, when she had begged scraps of food
from the soldiers and they had eaten every day. Now they were always so terribly hungry,
and little Helen had barely strength to cry. Maybe it would have been more merciful to have
left her to die with her mother and infant sibling. 
Slowly, while she stared without truly seeing, the stone took shape as illusion toys with the
form of things: a spear point, a head, eyes peering up at her, seeing her...it was not a
standing stone at all but an Eika soldier creeping one cautious step at a time toward her,
easing up the low rise. 
 Terror seized her heart. Goose prickles rose on her arms and neck. She wanted to
scream, yet no sound rose out of her throat. 
¡°They find you if you scream,Ó Matthias had said when they lay in the stinking tanning
pit while Eika and their dogs prowled the deserted tanning grounds. ÒLie still without a
noise.Ó 
Yet would a scream turn it back into stone? Would a scream wake her up and free her
from this nightmare? Would the two soldiers come running to save her? They were still out
there somewhere, hiding, searching for the Eika guards... 
Or had the Eika already slain them? 
Did the soldiers see only stones and fail to strike? Had they been cut down unaware that
they already faced their foe in the guise of unmoving rock? 
Movement stirred in the dark entrance to the byre, a figure ducking out from under the low
roof. Smaller than the others, this one had a bad limp and a familiar tilt to his head. 
At last the scream rose out of her throat, loud and piercing. 
ÒMatthias!Ó She could not help herself. She leaped to her feet. ÒMatthias!Ó 
His name carried upon the breeze and across the vale. Most of the cattle lifted their
heads, dull wits responding at last to this unknown sound. 
The Eika stalking her froze in its tracks, as if trying to turn itself again to stone, but it was

too late. The waning rays of the sun silhouetted every detail of formÑno dream at all, but
illusion shrouding it: the obsidian leaf-shaped spear; the jut of its lips and the gleam of teeth
beneath; the smooth sheen of gold-tinted scales that were its skin. All showed plainly now,
illusion banished. A dozen Eika stood frozen in the vale, like statues, and not until the first of
the soldiers sprang from his hiding place in the grass and struck a fierce blow did the Eika
realize their illusion was shattered. 
They moved, dashing to fight, but the trick had worked against them. As a half dozen
soldiers rushed in and the pound of hooves alerted Anna to the arrival of Lord Wich, the
Eika ran here and there, almost at random as if, separated, they were confused. 
The Eika below her took two great strides up the hill, then, hesitating, turned back toward
the vale. From the far slope ten horsemen crested the hill, Lord Wichman at their head, and
raced down the gentle slope at a full gallop. Swords held high, they bore down in pairs upon
their scattered foes. Another six soldiers appeared from the grass with spears. 
An Eika with a large stone ax rushed a spearman. The huge form of the Eika eclipsed the
warrior so Anna could see only the Eika as the two met. The point of the spear pushed
through the EikaÕs back; the two fighters twisted around, both now visible. As he was
forced to the ground, the spearmanÕs spear shaft bowed as the man attempted to shift the
Eika aside to avoid a blow from the creatureÕs ax. The haft snapped and the ax fell hard
upon the warriorÕs leg. A sound reached Anna; she did not know whether it was that of the
broken spear or of splintering bone. Still from the ground, first with the splintered shaft of
wood and then with a dagger the man rained thrusts and blows upon the face and neck of
the Eika until it at last lay still. All over the field Eika fell, most in silence, some in flight. 
Matthias dashed back into the shelter of the byre. Of the other slaves, one followed him
into the ragged shelter while the other two ran for freedom. 
ÒMatthias!Ó she shrieked. He had to run now. What if the others retreated and some of
the Eika were left alive? 
The Eika at the base of her hill turned at the sound of her voice and raced up the
hillÑwhether to flee the fight or to catch her she did not know. But it made no difference. A
knife in the hand of a starving girl was no match for a spear wielded by an Eika warrior. 
Anna bolted. She scrambled, half sliding, half leaping, down the slope, back to the safety
of the tree where she should have remained all along. Distantly, she heard the shouts of
Lord Wichman and his men. 
If she could only reach the horses, she would have the safety promised her by his
soldiers. 
But the Eika was far swifter, and quickly he closed to within a few paces. She heard his
breath behind her, felt his presence; his long shadow reached out to encompass, to blot out,
her slight shadow that danced across the ground as she ran. But though it was useless, she
could not stop running. 
Another sound drowned out the heavy stamp of the Eika feetÑthe pound of hooves. A
taller shadow, a man upon a horse, overtook them both and a trilling war cry shattered the
air. She dove and rolled. The long thin line of a sword leaped ahead of the mesh of shadows
upon the grass and then it cut down into the darkness. There was a thud behind her. The
horseman passed her, slowing and then bringing his mount around. She stuck out her hands
and knees and stopped herself, rose up, hands and face scratched and just beginning to
bleed softly. Her breath came in such gulping gasps that she thought she couldnÕt get any
air in. She twisted around. 
The Eika lay behind her sprawled on its belly, cleaved from shoulder to spine. Its ugly
head was twisted up to the left, almost all of the way around. Life drained rapidly from its
eyes. It wore no wooden Circle on a thong around its neck. It had sworn no allegiance to the
kin of humankind. Ai, Lady, itÑand its brothersÑhad killed so many of her people and
probably Papa Otto, too. It would have killed Matthias, given the chance. 
She stood, bent, and spit in its face, but it was already dead. 
ÒAi, there, child!Ó The horseman reined up beside her. He unhooked his helm and

pulled it off. She stared up, astonished, at Lord Wichman himself. He had a crazed look in
his eyes and a wild grin on his lips. ÒYouÕre the one my men found foraging in the woods.
Why didnÕt you go with the refugees we sent off months ago, to the marchlands? YouÕre a
cursed nuisance, almost ruining our raid like that.Ó 
He had the full cheeks of a man who doesnÕt want for food, even in hard times. Terrified,
she did not know how to address him. No lord had ever even noticed her before. 
At last, stammering, she found her voice. ÒMaster Helvidius is my grandfather, my lord.Ó
The lie came conveniently to her lips. ÒI had to stay with him, and he was too ill to walk so
far when the others left.Ó 
He grunted, sheathing his sword. ÒHeÕll have a victorious tale to sing tonight. A good
sixty cattle and as many goats weÕve claimed back today.Ó His grin was fierce and sure,
and he looked ready to ride out this minute on another raid. ÒGo on, then.Ó He gestured to
the west. Snow blew and skittered round him, white flakes spinning in the wind. ÒItÕs a long
walk back to Steleshame.Ó 
Then he turned and rode away to meet a half dozen of his mounted soldiers. They
headed east. Anna ran for the top of the hill and thereÑ
All the breath slammed out of her as if she had been struck in the stomach. There! At last
she found breath to shout. 
ÒMatthias!Ó 
With the other slaves, rescued now, he had formed up to help the remaining soldiers herd
cattle and goats back to Steleshame. Hearing her voice, he started away, cast about, then
saw her and limped up the slope. 
She burst into tears and ran down to meet him. Ai, Lady, he was all bone with only a layer
of skin holding him together. 
ÒYouÕre so thin,Ó he said, hugging her tightly. ÒOh, Anna! I thought IÕd never see you
again.Ó 
She couldnÕt speak she was sobbing so hard. 
ÒHush, now,Ó he said. ÒItÕs over and done with.Ó 
ÒItÕs not done with! ItÕs never done with! TheyÕll never go away. TheyÕll always be
here, hunting us, wonÕt they?Ó 
ÒHush, Anna,Ó he said more sternly. Because she had learned to obey him, she choked
down her sobs and quieted. ÒI just thought of Papa Otto,Ó he continued. ÒI thought if Papa
Otto could survive even after he lost everyone in his family, then I could, too, knowing you still
lived.Ó 
ÒBut you didnÕt know I still livedÑyou saw them attackÑÓ 
ÒI had to believe it!Ó 
That silenced her. 
ÒCome now.Ó He took her hand. The herd had begun to creep sluggishly westward.
ÒOther Eika will come when this group donÕt report back to the main camp. WeÕve got to
be long gone. Lord Above, Anna, why were you with them? Are there so few of you left at
Steleshame that theyÕre taking children out to fight?Ó 
Like the Eika made by illusion into stone, he appeared to her different than what she had
known before. Still familiar, he was no longer the same Matthias. He was not a boy any
longer. 
ÒThere arenÕt any dogs here,Ó she said softly, to say something, finally beginning to
tremble with reaction. Her feet hurt, and her nose was cold. 
They fell in line with the others. Matthias used his stave to nudge back a straying goat.
ÒThe dogs kill the cows, and the Eika would have to spend more time guarding the cows
against the dogs than the cows againstÑwellÑa raid like this. Out here with the livestock we
donÕt see many dogs.Ó 
ÒWhatÕs wrong with your leg?Ó she asked. 
But he only shook his head and would not answer. 
It took them the rest of the day to walk back to Steleshame. MatthiasÕ limp got

progressively worse, and finally one of the soldiers took pity on him and let him ride behind
him. 
Mistress Gisela fell into ecstasies, seeing what a great number of livestock had been
rescued from the Eika. At once, she ordered her servants to prepare a thanksgiving feast. 
Anna led Matthias out to a hovel in the courtyard where she, Helvidius, and Helen made
their home, such as it was. Stuck cheek by jowl with a number of other hovels constructed
after the attack, the tiny hut had at least the benefit of lying within the newly reconstructed
palisade wall. No one slept outside the palisade now; of course, Steleshame was no longer
as crowded as it had once been. 
Master Helvidius sent Anna to sit with Helen while he tended to MatthiasÕ leg, grumbling
all the while about Mistress Gisela and her airs of nobility: ÒFeasting when there isnÕt
enough to feed the weakest! The biscop of Gent would have fed the poor, bless her
memory!Ó 
Matthias was feverish, too restless to sleep, too nauseated to eat much more than a sip
of ale and a crust of bread, but at last he fell asleep on their single pallet, little Helen curled
up at his chest. Anna heaped all three blankets over him and resigned herself to shivering
out the night. 
ÒNay,Ó said Helvidius. ÒYouÕll come with me into the hall. No use your getting sick
when you have both of them to tend for. And thereÕll be roasted cow, IÕll wager. You can
grab a bone before the dogs get to it.Ó Thus coaxed, Anna reluctantly left Matthias and the
little girl. 
 But later that night as Anna sat half-dozing by the hearth, after Lord Wichman had
returned from his scouting expedition, after he and his men had feasted and the fortunate
servants been allowed to wolf down their scraps, after Helvidius had serenaded the young
lord endlessly with his exploits, a sudden cold undercurrent chilled the girl like a wordless cry
for help. 
Quite drunk now, soldiers sang a bawdy tune as Mistress Gisela retired to the shadowy
end of the hall. Anna heard angry words hushed as though under a blanket. But at last the
householder returned bearing the prize which Lord Wichman had so far not obtained. 
GiselaÕs niece, as pretty a woman as Anna had ever seen, was led forward, decked out
in whatever fine garb had survived unscathed from the autumn attack on the holding. The
young womanÕs expression wore no emotion at all; she seemed, like the Eika, more statue
than living being. But Lord Wichman smiled broadly and toasted her beauty with one more
cup of wine. Then he took her hand and she went, unresisting, to his curtained bed while his
soldiers cheered and laughed. 
A servant went outside with a bucket of slops for the pigs. As the door opened, the
nightÕs wind cast a sudden cold glamour over the hall like the breath of the winter sky,
turning the ground to frost. 
Then the door shut and, as with a collective breath, the soldiers began to drink and sing
again. 
Much later, when even the most stalwart fellow snored and Helvidius slept with his head
pillowed on his arm, she heard the sound of a woman weeping softly.
4
 
It was a symptom of the remarkable persistence of lust-fulness in humankind that no
matter how cold and dreary the weather outside and how cramped the conditions inside,
folk did find ways to carry on moreÑor lessÑdiscreet affairs. Certain of RosvitaÕs younger
clerics had the habit, both annoying and amusing, of keeping track of who was sleeping with
whom. 
ÒÑand Villam has a new concubine, which I grant you is nothing unusual, but I swear to
you I saw her sharing her favors, such as they are, with Lord Amalfred.Ó Brother Fortunatus
was one of the many sons of the robust and prolific Countess of Hesbaye as well as by far

the worst gossip among the clerics. 
ÒPerhaps when Lord Amalfred returns to Salia, he will take the concubine with him and
spare poor Villam the pain of her duplicity,Ó said Sister Amabilia. 
ÒAh, well, Villam no doubt has his eye on more succulent prey. I swear I saw him eyeing
the young Eagle.Ó 
ÒOur friend the hawk?Ó asked quiet Sister Odila, astonished. 
ÒOf course not! The dark one. But you know how Eagles are and the code they swear to.
Eagles donÕt indulge themselves in such a way, except among their own number. But I have
observed some new developments in other placesÑhands meeting and petting in the bowl
at table, if you take my meaning. 
Sister Amabilia sighed profoundly, and Brother Fortunatus looked downcast that his hint
provoked no greater reaction than this. ÒEven so,Ó Amabilia said in a weary voice, Òit
isnÕt half as interesting now as when Prince Sanglant was alive.Ó 
ÒI beg you,Ó said Rosvita sternly. ÒDo not speak disrespectfully of the dead.Ó 
Brother Constantine looked up from his muller where he ground vermilion to form the
base of red ink. ÒI never saw Prince Sanglant. He was gone before I arrived here.Ó 
 ÒAi, well,Ó said Sister Amabilia. ÒCourt was much livelier when Prince Sanglant graced
it.Ó 
ÒI will thank you,Ó said Rosvita, setting down her quill pen, Ònot to mention his name
within the kingÕs hearing.Ó She tested the point of the pen on her finger, sighed, and
picked up her penknife to recut the tip of the quill. 
ÒBut he was only a fighter,Ó said Brother Constantine. ÒSurely he could not have cut
such a fine figure, so elegant and charming in manners, so affable and benevolent, so
even-tempered, so learned, as Father Hugh.Ó 
Amabilia sniffed. ÒFather Hugh ought to be tending to his monastery rather than playing
the courtier. But I have been with the kingÕs progress for eight years, ConstantineÑÓ 
ÒAs you are ever reminding me,Ó muttered the young cleric. 
ÒÑand I recall Frater Hugh when he was at the schola here. A birdÕs feathers may
change in color, but itÕs the same duck inside!Ó 
ÒAnd you will be at your task another eight years, Sister,Ó Rosvita said gently, Òif you do
not set yourself to work.Ó 
For all of AmabiliaÕs tart character, she had a remarkably sweet smile, which she used
now to good effect. She had also the finest hand Rosvita had ever seen, master of the 
Litteras Gallica and Tulay-tilah as well as knowing the antique Scripta Actuaria. For this
reason, though she was not of the highest nobility, she had become a fixture in the kingÕs
chapel; she also taught writing to the most promising students in the kingÕs schola. ÒI beg
your pardon, Sister Rosvita. You are right to reproach me for my unseemly attachment to the
amusements the world affords.Ó 
ÒTo the amusements people afford,Ó said Constantine reprovingly. He really was too
serious given how very young he was, not above fifteen. 
ÒGod gave us eyes so that we could observe and a tongue with which to speak our
minds!Ó 
ÒAnd humility teaches us to cast our eyes to the ground and to keep silence!Ó 
ÒMy children,Ó said Rosvita without raising her voice. ÒAttend to your tasks.Ó 
Constantine flushed and bent back to the muller, now mixing white of egg and a bit of
gum arabic into the vermilion powder. Amabilia did not look chastened; for all that she had a
wicked eye for human foibles, she was at peace with herself. She sharpened her quill and
returned to her work: making a copy of the precious Vita of Saint Rade-gundis for the library
at Quedlinhame. The other clerics, some listening, some not, worked on in pleasant silence.
Rosvita bent back to her History. 
She read over what she had most recently accomplished: the crowning of the first Henry,
Duke of Saony, as King of Wendar and of his wife, Lucienna, Count of Attomar, as queen;
his speech before the nobles and their acclamation of his rule; certain small rebellions and

battles as well as armed struggle with the Varren queen, Gisela. With red ink she wrote in
the initial line to a new chapter, then changed to black. 
¡°To Henry and his most renowned wife Lucienna were born these children, the first
called Arnulf, beloved by all the world, the second, brave and industrious, called Otto,
while the third, Kunigunde, Mother of Quedlinhame Convent, was a woman of singular
wisdom and authority. Henry had also another daughter, named Haduidis, who married
Immed, Margrave of EastIall. Lucienna had another child, a son named Reginbern. This
son rode as captain of the Dragons. He fought against the Eika who were at the time
laying waste to Saony, and so ruthlessly waged war against them that they were driven
away and feared even to sail within sight of the Wendish coast for many years. 
¡°When all these wars ceased, there came into the east country of Saony an army of
Quman horsemen, burning cities and towns and monasteries. They worked such
slaughter that it is better to pass over this destruction in silence rather than set it all down
again in words. However, it happened that one of the Quman princes was captured.
Margrave Immed brought him to the king, but he was so esteemed by his kin that the
Quman offered to King Henry as much gold and silver as ten wagons could carry for the
princeÕs ransom. But the king despised their gold and demanded peace, which they
gave him in return for the prisoner and certain other gifts.Ó 
 From outside she heard the return of the hunters and the clamor of horses, hounds, and
voices in the forecourt. She rose, needing an excuse to stretch her back, and crossed to the
door. In the yard beyond, King Henry laughed at a comment by his trusted companion,
Margrave Helmut Villam, while Father Hugh dismounted and turned to help Princess
Sapientia dismount. Behind, courtiers crowded around; farther back, servants carried in a
number of deer, several brace of partridge, an auroch, and a boar. 
Sapientia hurried away toward the necessarium and, as smoothly as a silk robe slips
down over a body, Hugh turned to assist Princess Theophanu in dismountingÑthough, as
good a horseman as she was and with a servant already prepared to take her foot in his
hands, she scarcely needed such aid. But Hugh offered kindnesses to every person,
regardless of rank. Did TheophanuÕs hand linger longer in his than was necessary? Was
that blush in her cheeks from the wind, or his touch? Turning away from the door, moving
back to make room for the kingÕs entrance, Rosvita wondered what Brother Fortunatus
might say had he witnessed that little scene and was then irritated with herself for even
thinking such a thing. 
The courtfolk flooded into the hall, brash with their success at the hunt. Ekkehard followed
at HughÕs heels like a love-smitten puppy. King Henry seated himself in his chair. Servants
brought water and linen and wiped his hands clean of dirt and blood. Luckily, this hallÑthe
third at which they had stoppedÑwas the largest of the royal hunting lodges in Thurin Forest;
though the crowd of people entering was large, it did not overwhelm the gabled hall.
Sapientia entered and shed her cloak, then seated herself in the place of honor beside her
father. Now poor folk who had walked a half day from the forestÕs edge were let in to
receive alms from the king. As they left through a side door, Hugh assisted Ekkehard in
dispensing bread to them while Sapientia, from across the hall, watched with greedy eyes. 
Theophanu came, as she always did, to sit beside Rosvita. Her cheeks were still flushed. 
ÒI hope you have not taken a fever,Ó said Rosvita, setting aside her work. 
Theophanu flashed her a startled glance, then, as quickly, composed herself. ÒI trust I
have caught no fever from which I cannot recover.Ó She played with the fabric of her riding
tunic, rolling the cloth up between thumb and forefinger. 
Amabilia looked up from her copying on the other side of the long table but, mercifully, did
not speak. 
ÒWhere is my most valued cleric?Ó asked the king after all the alms seekers had been
led back outside. ÒRosvita.Ó She rose obediently. ÒRead to us, I pray you. Something
eloquent and pleasant to the ear that may yet educate us.Ó 
Rosvita signed to Amabilia and the younger woman set aside her pen so that Rosvita

could take up the Vita. ¡°Shall I continue to read from the Life of Saint Radegundis, Your
Majesty?Ó she asked. 
He nodded. 
Ekkehard, settling himself at his fatherÕs feet, piped up. ÒLet Father Hugh read. He has
such a fine voice. I am sure I learn more than I might otherwise just from listening to his
cadences as he reads.Ó 
TheophanuÕs cheeks burned. The king looked startled. Sapientia gloated. 
Hugh stood over by the door next to the young Eagle, Liath; he was wiping crumbs from
his hands but he looked up and smiled gently, giving the cloth into the care of a servant
before walking forward. ÒYour notice would natter any man, Your Highness,Ó he said to
Ekkehard, Òbut I am unworthy of such praise. Our esteemed Sister Rosvita has by so far
outshone me in every branch of knowledge and in good manners that I know only too well
how poorly I compare to her. ÔTo one desiring to know by what path blessedness is
reached, the reply is, ÒKnow thyself.Ó Ô Ò He bowed respectfully toward Cleric Monica,
who was seated on a bench near a shuttered window, close by the hearth and yet out of the
worst of the smoke. But Rosvita thought for one instant that his gaze skipped to and halted
on the figure of the young Eagle, Liath, hovering by the door as if she wanted to escape
outside. 
Interestingly, the EagleÕs expression seemed composed of equal parts loathing, fear,
and humiliation, though she struggled to maintain a blank facade. No one else was looking
at her, and by now HughÕs gaze had traveled on. Only Rosvita kept half an eye on her, still
curious about that bookÑHad she stolen it?Ñand her ability to read. 
 ÒYour humility is a good example for the others, Father Hugh,Ó said Cleric Monica. 
ÒDo please read to us,Ó said Ekkehard. 
Rosvita was too wise to protest. She presented the book to Hugh. ÒI, too, hope that you
will read to us, Father Hugh.Ó 
ÒYou are too generous,Ó he said, but he took the book. 
ÒIndeed,Ó muttered Sister Amabilia. 
Rosvita sat down again. Theophanu, restless, was still playing with her gown, her gaze
fixed on her elder sisterÕs face. 
Henry gestured to the seat beside him, opposite Sapientia. If he was taken aback at this
change, he showed no sign on his face; he seemed as pleased by HughÕs presence as he
would have been at RosvitaÕsÑwhich unpleasant thought she berated herself for
immediately. 
Hugh opened the book, cleared his throat softly, and began to read. 
¡°Here begins the Life. The most blessed Radegundis was bom into a family of the
highest earthly rank. She came of the royal bloodline in the barbarian nation of the
Athamanni, youngest daughter of King Bassir and niece of Queen Hermingard, for it was
the custom of that country to set brother and sister to rule together. But the Enemy works
as cunningly as any burglar who wishes to divine the treasures most worth stealing out of
a house, yet work in utter darkness. This the burglar accomplishes by tossing a fine sand
into each corner of the room so that she may deduce the value of the object by the sound
the sand makes when it strikes that object. So, too, do the creatures of the Enemy toss a
fine sand of evil suggestion among the treasures of the human heart and by this means
divine what they may steal. 
¡°In this way Queen Hermingard suddenly lost her natural feeling of kinship for her
brother. Inviting him and his guests to a banquet, she had them all murdered. It happened
that among his guests were several Salian lords, and when news of this treachery got back
to Salia, their kin were so outraged that they gathered together a host and descended
upon the Athamanni and wiped them out. Only some few of the children survived, among
them the saintly Radegundis. It was her lot to be quarreled over by certain lords as part of
the plunder, each of them desiring her to come into his grasp. When news of her terrible

plight reached the great emperor Taillefer, he had her removed from their keeping and
placed under the care of guardians at his royal villa in Baralcha. 
¡°Here she was taught her letters and became familiar with the treatises on agriculture
by Palladius and Columel-lina, and learned to maintain inventories, and other things
suitable to a lady who will manage an estate. She would often converse with other children
being raised at the villa about her desire to become a martyr. She herself brought the
scraps left from table to the poor assembled outside, and with her own hands she washed
the head and hands of each poor beggar child. Often she would polish the pavement by
the Hearth with her own dress, and the dust that drifts around the altar she would collect in
a napkin and place reverently outside the door rather than sweep it away.Ó 
Abruptly Sapientia choked down a giggle, then blurted out, ÒGod help us. She sounds
much like Lady Tallia. Do you suppose Radegundis is TalliaÕs great-great-grandmother?Ó 
Henry, frowning, turned to his daughter. ÒDo not speak so lightly of a blessed saint,
Sapientia. No child came of the marriage between her and the emperor, and after his death
she cloistered herself in the convent for full fifty years. It is unseemly to suggest she might
have lapsed from her vows.Ó 
There was a sudden profound silence while everyone in the hall attempted not to look at
Father Hugh, whose lapse so prominently showed in the swell of SapientiaÕs belly. Brother
Fortunatus squeaked and snorted, stifling a laugh. 
Theophanu stood up and went forward. ÒI will read now, if you will,Ó she said, and for this
rescue was rewarded with a charming smile from Hugh. 
ÒShowing off your accomplishments?Ó said Sapientia. 
The book had not yet touched TheophanuÕs hand, but her cheeks flushed as if her sister
had slapped her. ÒAt least I have some!Ó 
ÒChildren,Ó said Henry sharply. He took the book from Hugh, closed it with gentle care
for the binding, and beckoned to Rosvita. ÒIf you will, Sister, read to us.Ó 
ÒI donÕt want to hear any more of that story.Ó Sapientia smoothed a hand over her
abdomen, then rose restlessly and wandered over to the fire. Lords and ladies parted to let
her through; a few of the wiser souls had slipped out the door, escaping the heat, but most
remained. A public quarrel between the royal sisters would enliven any long winterÕs
evening. 
A plague on all of them, thought Rosvita grimly as she went forward to take the book,
and then berated herself for her ill temper. But as winter chilled the air outside, so did it chill
the mind and heart, and quarrels always surfaced under the winter sky that had been lulled to
sleep by summerÕs warmth and cheer. Yet, in almost nineteen years Rosvita had never
seen Theophanu lose her temper, not even as a small child. What had caused her to do so
now, and at such small provocation? 
ÒI have nothing to do here,Ó said Sapientia, striding back to her fatherÕs chair. ÒIf you
made me Margrave of Eastfall, as you promised, then I would have lands of my own to
administer untilÑÓ She broke off, had the grace to flush. 
ÒSit,Ó said Henry. He did not glance at his courtiers, but he knew they were all listening.
ÒI do not wish you to leave my side until you are safely brought to childbed.Ó 
Sapientia fidgeted, glanced toward the other end of the hall where servants prepared
tables for the nightÕs feast, and set her mouth in a sulky frown. 
ÒI will ask our clerics,Ó said Henry, setting a hand on her arm placatingly, Òwhat copies
we have of these agricultural treatises, perhaps even the ones mentioned in the Life of Saint
Radegundis. You may have them read to you.Ó 
Sapientia considered this. She sighed. ÒItÕs a fair idea, Father. But I want an Eagle or
two for myself as well, so that I may have people to send at my own beck and call. It is only
what is due my new consequence, isnÕt it?Ó 
ÒIt would be fitting,Ó he agreed, aware, as he always was, that every soul in the hall
waited on his judgment. He glanced toward Hathui, newly returned from her errand to
Quedlinhame, then around the room. Four Eagles were in attendance on him right now,

many more out on some errand or another, such as Wolfhere and his young compan ion
who had journeyed south to Aosta with the renegade biscop, Antonia. 
Theophanu had retreated in silence and during the exchange had gotten all the way to the
door unremarked. Now, looking about, Henry saw her just as she stepped outside into a soft
rain. Liath still stood, obedient, beside the door. 
ÒThere is one I would be willing to part with,Ó said Henry. Hathui looked up sharply. Hugh
did not look at all. ÒShe is young and strong, and she has proved herself at Gent. I have also
heard it said that she is very accomplished for a common Eagle. My clerics say she can
read.Ó 
Sapientia grimaced. ÒI donÕt want one who can read so that everyone will remember
that I canÕt and Theophanu can. And anyway, sheÕs too pretty. I donÕt like her. What about
this one, Father?Ó She gestured toward Hathui. 
Reading the simple upward quirk of an eyebrow, Rosvita deduced that Henry had had
enoughÑeither of Sapientia betraying her lack of wisdom and patience before the
assembled court or of himself for allowing it to go on. ÒYou may take the one offered you,
daughterÑor none at all.Ó 
ÒPrincess Sapientia,Ó interposed Hugh gently, Òis it not true that one Eagle is as like to
another as are the field mice to our eyes?Ó 
ÒBut sheÕs educated. They all say so. It was all the clerics were talking about when we
arrived. DonÕt you remember?Ó 
ÒDo they really speak so much about a common Eagle?Ó he asked, and his tone was
the very model of a reproof disguised as quiet amazement. 
She shrugged, recalling her dignity and position. 
ÒLet me discover if it is true that she is educated,Ó said Hugh. ÒI will question her.Ó He
inclined his head toward the king. ÒWith your permission, Your Majesty.Ó 
Henry signed, and the young Eagle came and knelt before him. She looked to Rosvita
rather like a field mouse forced into the clutches of an owl. The prospect of such
entertainment excited the interest of the court almost as much as did the quarrelÑnow
denied themÑbetween the royal sisters. Those who had slipped away to warm themselves
by the other hearth or to try to claim beds for the night in one of the sidechambers now
returned. 
ÒLet me see.Ó Hugh tapped fingers together as he consid. Liath kept her gaze fixed on
the kingÕs boots. ÒYou can read Dariyan, can you not, child?Ó he asked kindly. 
ÒYÑyes,Ó she murmured, keeping her eyes lowered. 
ÒYes?Ó 
ÒYes, Father Hugh.Ó 
ÒDo you consider yourself well educated?Ó 
Now she hesitated. 
ÒCome now,Ó said the king. ÒYou need not fear any word you speak plainly and
honestly in front of me.Ó 
ÒSo my da told me,Ó she said finally, still staring at the kingÕs boots. 
ÒIs that a yes?Ó asked Hugh, evidently puzzled by this answerÑor wanting her to state it
plainly. 
ÒYes.Ó And though she said it softly, Rosvita detectedÑperhapsÑno small amount of
pride. 
ÒAh. Well. To what work of the ancients might I be referring? ÔAs had been noted, there
are roots and shrubs that have many powers affecting not only living bodies but also bodies
without life.Õ Ó 
Again she hesitated. Courtiers leaned forward. Was there something of reluctance in her
expression? Was she afraid to reveal her knowledge? Where had she gotten that book, and
what did it contain? 
ÒYou would not wish to lie before the king, I hope,Ó said Hugh mildly. 
ÒIt is from the Inquiry Into Plants by Theophrastus,Ó she replied finally, her voice

scarcely audible. 
A murmur rose from the crowd, and there passed among them a certain amount of
nudging and winking and a few sly glances toward Helmut Villam. Rosvita wondered if it was
true that Villam had propositioned the handsome young Eagle. Indeed, the old margrave
was gazing with rapt attention at the young woman. 
ÒFrom whence does this come? ÔTo one desiring to know by what path blessedness is
reached the reply is, ÒKnow thyself.Ó Ô?Ó 
Startled, she looked up. ÒI donÕt know,Ó she admitted. 
He nodded, expecting this answer. ÒSo writes Eustacia, repeating the words of the
oracle at Talfi: ÔGnosi seaton.Õ But of course you do not know Arethousan, do you?Ó 
ÒThe one who taught me knows how much Arethousan I know,Ó she said with such an
odd inflection that Rosvita wondered who had taught her ArethousanÑand why. 
Hugh lifted a hand in a graceful gesture that suggested there was more like this to come.
ÒYou have some knowledge of Dariyan. Does the word ÔCiconiaÕ mean anything to
you?Ó 
ÒIt means Ôstork,Õ Ò she said instantly as if, bested once, she meant to defeat him
now. 
ÒNay, child, I refer to Tullia Marcia Ciconia, the great orator of ancient Dariya. Which
works of hers have you read?Ó 
ÒWhich works of hers?Ó 
¡°De officiis? De amlcltia? Can you speak to me some of the wisdom contained in her
words?Ó 
ÒIÑI donÕt know those works. I mean to say, IÕve heard of them, butÑÓ She faltered. 
He nodded gently and glanced toward Sapientia as if to say, ÔShall we stop this now?Õ
but he went on. ÒSurely you have instructed yourself in the writings of the church mothers?Ó 
ÒI know the Acts of Saint Thecla,Ó she said defiantly. 
ÒThat is proper. Your Highness,Ó he nodded toward Sapientia, Òyou are familiar with
the Acts as well, are you not?Ó 
ÒIsnÕt every child?Ó demanded Sapientia, looking affronted. 
ÒThe Acts, like The Shepherd of Hermas, is a work both noble and common folk may
hear for their edification. But what of the writings with which the educated cleric instructs
herself? Macrina of NyssaÕs The Catechetical Orations and her Life of Gregory? These
fine works you have read, of course?Ó 
She shook her head. A few of the courtfolk whispered among themselves. Some
snickered. 
¡°The City of God by Saint Augustina? Or her De Doc-trina Daisanitia? JeromeÕs Life
of Saint Paulina the Hermit? Justin MartyrÕs Dialogue with Zurhai the Jinna?Ó 
Numbly, she shook her head and, just as King Henry raised a hand, growing bored with
this display of ignorance, Hugh stood up. His audience quieted expectantly. The poor Eagle
ducked her head, as any shamed creature would, to stare at the floor. 
ÒIs it not said,Ó Hugh asked of Sapientia and the assembled clerics and layfolk together,
as a teacher addresses his students, Òthat the emperor of all Jinna keeps a bird which he
has taught to speak human words? Have you ever seen entertainers make dogs to walk
upon two legs? Such learning makes neither bird nor dog educated, however. A child
trained early enough can learn the meanings of words written upon a page, and speak them
out loud, but that does not mean her understanding is equally trained. I believe we have
before us a curiosity.Ó He smiled wryly but with a touch of gentle amusement such as an
adult shows before an incredulous childÕs outrageous claims. ¡°Not a prodigy. Is it not so,
Your Highness? How do you judge this case?Ó 
Thus appealed to, Sapientia nodded sternly. ÒOf course what you say must be true,
Father Hugh. It might be a mercy, then, to take this poor creature under my wing.Ó 
Henry rose, and quickly any seated man or woman rose as well, young Brother
Constantine almost spilling his red ink in his haste not to show discourtesy toward the king.

ÒLet that be a lesson, daughter, that we are well served by wise counselors.Ó 
ÒAnd some more than others,Ó murmured Villam so softly that only Rosvita and the king
could hear. 
HenryÕs lips quirked, and he signed to his servants. There was a sudden flurry of activity
at the other end of the hall. Two servants picked up his chair and carried it over to the central
place. ÒI think we may now sit down to table,Ó Henry observed. He led the way. 
Rosvita lingered, bitten by curiosity. The young Eagle remained kneeling. A few tears
streaked her cheeks, but she made no sound, moved not at all even to wipe them away. She
simply stared fixedly at the cold stone floor. 
ÒEagle!Ó called Sapientia from her seat at the central table. ÒAttend me!Ó 
She rose and, silent, attended her new mistress. 
X  A DEER IN THE Forest
1
 I still donÕt like her,Ó said Sapientia to her companion, Lady Brigida, whose status as
SapientiaÕs current favorite gave her the privilege of combing the princessÕ hair in the
evening before bed. ÒThat skin of hers. ItÕs so...so...Ó 
ÒDirty? She might wash more.Ó 
ÒIt isnÕt dirt. It doesnÕt come off. I rubbed at it yesterday.Ó The princess giggled.
ÒPerhaps sheÕs the lost sister of Conrad the Black, or his by-blow.Ó 
ÒHmm. SheÕs too old to be his by-blow . . . but perhaps not, if he bedded some girl
when he was young Brother ConstantineÕs age. Perhaps sheÕs a Jinna slave girl who
escaped her master.Ó 
ÒThen how would she know how to speak our language?Ó demanded Sapientia. 
ÒDuke ConradÕs mother didnÕt enter the convent after the elder Conrad died, did she?
Perhaps this is her second child by another man.Ó Lady Brigida had the unfortunate habit
of snorting when she giggled, and she giggled a great deal, possessing ample inheritance
in lands but little in wit or sense. ÒYou wouldnÕt think she would have had to hide the child
unless there was something wrong with the lover she had taken.Ó 
ÒI believe she lives quite retired. Still, thereÕs something in what you say, Brigida, that
she must have Jinna blood in her, for theyÕre all brown like that. But I still say she must have
some Wendish blood in her, or sheÕd not be able to speak our language.Ó 
ÒDidnÕt Father Hugh say any bird can be taught human speech?Ó 
Liath endured this without flinching. Their idiocy and arrogance bothered her not one whit.
At this moment, Hugh was not in the room, and after three days as SapientiaÕs Eagle that
was the only mercy she lived for. 
ÒKeep brushing,Ó said Sapientia. ÒWhom should I marry, Brigida?Ó 
ÒLord Amalfred,Ó said Brigida instantly. ÒHeÕs very handsome and he killed a bear last
week with his own hand, as you saw, as well as a dozen deer or more. I should like a
husband like that. When I inherit from my mother, IÕll expand her lands eastward, and IÕll
need a strong fighting man at my side.Ó 
ÒHeÕs only the son of a Salian duchess. I must marry a man with royal connections.Ó 
ÒIsnÕt King Henry going to send for an Arethousan prince for you to marry, since your
mother was an eastern princess?Ó 
Sapientia sighed sharply and tossed her head, disturbing the smooth flow of black hair
that Lady Brigida had been stroking with the comb. ÒEven my Eagle knows better than that,
Brigida. IsnÕt that so, Eagle? Why can I not marry an Arethousan prince?Ó 
In three days Liath had learned that Sapientia liked her to be stupid. ÒI donÕt know, Your
Highness.Ó 

Although, in this case, she did know. But the humiliation at HughÕs hands still stung
bitterly, not least because he had been right as well as wrong. It was true she read well and
that Da had taught her a great dealÑbut when Hugh had paraded her ignorance publicly, to
torture her, she had suddenly realized that Da had taught her narrowly. She knew far more
than Hugh and probably any person at court of the knowledge hoarded by the mathematici,
and yet how could she judge how much Da had truly known? 
She was young, and she had been educated on the run and in the way of arrowshots
toward a hidden foeÑscattered far and wide and toward no set target. There was so much
she did not know that any person educated in the kingÕs schola or a cathedral school, in the
convents and monasteries, would know and would be expected to know in order to be
considered educated. Yet, if truth be told, she had no interest in MacrinaÕs The
Catechetical Orations or in the Lives of the early saints. The wisdom of the ancients drew
herÑas long as it concerned the heavens, sorcery, or natural history and the workings of the
physical world. That Da had taught her to construct her city of memory, and thus she had
many facts available to her stored away in that cityÑsuch as Arethousan inheritance
practicesÑdid not mean she was educated as anyone else understood the term. 
ÒPoor thing,Ó said the princess. ÒThe Arethousan princes are never allowed to leave
the palace, you see, my dear Brigida, because they are such barbarians that only a male
can become emperor among them, and only one among the sons and nephews and cousins
of the reigning emperor can become emperor after him. So if any of them get away, then
they might have a claim to the throne and come back to the palace with their own army and
cause a civil war. That is why there are never any civil wars in Arethousa, because once the
new emperor is chosen, all of the royal princes of his generation are poisoned by his
mother.Ó 
The temptation washed over Liath to correct Princess Sapientia, for if partly correct her
account was so jumbled as to be absurd: The Arethousans did indeed only allow a male to
be titled ÒEmperor,Ó but it was the infidel Jinna khshayathiya who had his mother poison
all those relatives who might contest his claim to the throne. 
ÒIs that what you mean to do to Theophanu?Ó asked Brigida lightly. 
The chill hit LiathÕs throat and spine at the same instant, and her hands tightened on her
belt. She could not help but look toward the door, which stood half open; smoke leaked in
from torches stuck in sconces in the corridor beyond. He came with his attendants. The
torchlight made a halo around him, gilding his fine golden hair. He wore long hose, an azure
tunic embroidered with sunbursts, and a cloak thrown back over one shoulder, clasped by a
handsome gold-and-jeweled brooch in the shape of a panther. He looked like a noble lord
just in from the hunt; only by his shaven chin could one tell he was a churchman. 
Both noblewomen and all the other attendants in the chamber looked up at the same
instant. Sapientia glowed. Brigida simpered. 
ÒI beg your pardon,Ó said Hugh smoothly. ÒI did not mean to interrupt you.Ó Sapientia
gestured at once and a chair was unfolded for him so he could sit beside her. Servants
brought linen and water for him to refresh himself. He did not look at Liath. He didnÕt need
to. 
ÒWe were speaking of nothing important,Ó said Sapientia too quickly. 
ÒNo, indeed, Father Hugh,Ó said Lady Brigida. ÒI heard that next we go to my uncle
Duke BurchardÕs palace in Augensburg, and then to the royal palace at Echstatt. ThereÕs
lots of good hunting.Ó 
ÒAnd a host of soldiers,Ó added Sapientia, who always grew excited speaking of battle,
Òto be gathered for the attack on Gent.Ó 
ÒI am glad to hear it,Ó said Hugh. 
In this way they readied themselves for bed. In this guest room there were four actual
beds and four additional camp beds. In every room at this time, Liath knew, an elaborate
dance went on, just as it did when it came time to seat for dinner, testing rank against rank,
establishing the order for who would sleep where and next to what person, so that all might

know who was most privileged and who less so. Sapientia took the bed that held pride of
place, centered in the room, and Hugh the one next to her. His proximity to her caused no
commentÑnot any more. Brigida slept on the other side of Sapientia, lesser ladies by
degrees farther away on the other beds and the favored and most noble of the clerics on the
remaining camp beds. Liath retreated to the door, hoping for the chance to escape out to
sleep in the stables or at least, as she had the last two nights, in the corridor. 
ÒIt is a bitter chill night,Ó said Hugh, Òand some few of my attendants have gone out to
help warm the stables. All of your people may sleep herein with us, Your Highness, so that
none must suffer the cold.Ó 
ÒOf course!Ó said Sapientia, always wishing to appear magnanimous, and disposition
was made. 
ÒHere, Eagle,Ó he continued casually, Òthere is a place here.Ó Hugh indicated an open
space on the floor beside his bed. 
She dared not object. She wrapped herself tightly in her cloak and lay down. Soon the
torches were extinguished and in blackness she lay, catching now and again the wink of a
gold buckle where belts or ornaments had been hung from the bed frames to wait until
morning. She could not sleep, not even after the restless settling down of the twelve or
fourteen people in the room had ceased and most every breath gentled into soft snoring or
the long cadences of sleep. His presence and the faint murmur of his voice in a prayerlike
monotone wore on her as painfully as if she lay on a thousand prickling needles. Her chest
felt tight, but she could not resist peeking up at him. The shadow that was his form sat
upright in bed, curved over his handsÑand threads gleamed between his fingers. He
seemed to be weaving. 
As if he sensed her scrutiny, he moved, hiding his hands. ÒYour Highness,Ó he
whispered. ÒYou are not yet asleep.Ó 
Sapientia yawned. ÒThere are so many things that trouble my mind, my love. Whom shall
I marry? Why can it not be you?Ó 
ÒYou know that is impossible, though it is my fondest wish. Were I not illegitimateÑÓ 
ÒNot in my heart!Ó 
ÒHush. Do not wake the others.Ó 
ÒWhat do I care if they hear me? They know my heart as well as you do, and so shall all
the court, even my husband, whatever poor sorry fool he may be. I love you more than
anyoneÑÓ 
ÒYour Highness.Ó He broke in gently. ÒIt is your fate as Heir to marry, and mine as
bastard and churchman to remain unwed. What God has granted us, we must endure gladly.
You shall find affection and good will toward your husband in timeÑÓ 
ÒNever!Ó 
ÒÑfor it is the will of Our Lady and Lord that woman cleave to man, and man to woman,
all but those who cleave instead to God and turn away from the vanities and temptations and
empty pleasures of the world.Ó 
ÒIs that all I am to youÑ!Ó 
ÒYour Highness. I pray you, speak no harsh word to me, for I could not bear it. Now, what
else troubles you?Ó 
Liath dared not move, though a stone pinched her thigh. All the others breathed the even
breaths of sweet dreaming. 
ÒTheophanu.Ó 
ÒYou need not fear Theophanu.Ó 
ÒThat is all very well for you to say, but-Ñ
¡°Your Highness. You need not fear Theophanu.Ó 
Something in his tone made Liath shiver, and as if the slight shift of her wool cloak on the
hard stone floor alerted the princess, her voice changed. 
ÒAre you sure all of them sleep?Ó she hissed. 
ÒNo one can hear us whom you need fear, Your Highness.Ó He shifted on the bed, and

Liath heard the muffled sighing sound of two people kissing passionately. 
ÒAh,Ó gasped Sapientia at last, Òhow I long for the day when I am rid of this burdenÑlive
and healthy, God grantÑso that we may againÑÓ 
ÒHush.Ó He moved away from her and again, hidden from all but Liath, began to wind
the gleaming threads, as faint as spiderÕs silk, between his fingers. ÒSleep now, Your
Highness.Ó 
Her breathing gentled and slowed, and she slept. Liath lay as still as stone, but he shifted
on the bed, rolling back until he lay above her as a boulder poised on the edge of a cliff
shades the delicate plants beneath in its shadow. She held her breath. 
ÒI know you are not asleep, Liath. Have you forgotten that I had many nights to study you,
where you lay beside me, to study your face in repose, or when you were only pretending to
sleep? I know when you sleep, and when you do not. And you are not sleeping now, my
beauty. All the others sleep, but not you. And not me.Ó 
He could only speak in this way if he was sure everyone else slept, and how could he
know that? Or perhaps he did not care. Why should he? He was the abbot of a large
institution, the son of a powerful margrave, an educated churchman out of the kingÕs schola.
She was nothing compared to that, a KingÕs Eagle, a kinless fugitive whose parents had
both been murdered. 
ÒTell me, Liath,Ó he continued in that same soft, persuasive, beautiful voice, Òwhy do
you torment me so? It is wrong of you to do so. I cannot understand what power lies in you
that eats at me so constantly. You must be doing it on purpose, you must have some
scheme, some end, in mind. What is it? Is it this?Ó 
He shifted. She would have screamed, but she could not, she could only lie in mute
dread, and then his fingers brushed her cheek, probing for her lips, explored them softly
before tracing down over her chin to her vulnerable throat. Bile rose, burning her tongue. 
ÒCome up here,Ó he whispered, fingers drawing a pattern on her throat. 
If she went to him now, perhaps he would stop tormenting her. If she only made him
happy, if she obeyed him, he would be kind to her. 
As quickly, the thought washed off her as water slides down a roof. She rolled away from
him, bumping up against a sleeping servant. Sapientia murmured, half waking, and a man
laughed in the corridor outside. 
ÒDamn,Ó muttered Hugh. She cringed, waiting for the blow, but he only shifted away
from her and at last she heard his breathing slow and deepen. All the others slept on, so
gently, so peacefully. Only she did not sleep. 
2
 Morning came none too soon, and she crept out as soon as there was any least graying
of darkness toward light through the cracks in the shutters. A few torches burned by the
entrance to the kitchens as servants began to prepare for the afternoonÕs feast. Mist
wreathed the palisade and twined around corners, covering the courtyard in a dense blanket
of cold. Drops of icy rain stung her cheeks. 
The gates were already propped open, but no one had yet ventured out to the privies
beyond. Most servants were not yet up, and any of the noble folk would use their
chamberpots rather than venture out so early. But Liath could see perfectly well in the
morning gloom, and she wanted a moment of freedom. She relieved herself and started
back, but when the gates loomed before her out of the trailing mist, she was seized with
such horror that she could not move except to sink down to her knees. The ground was bitter
cold; wet soaked up through the fabric of her leggings. 
They did not see her, but she saw them: concealed from the sight of any in the courtyard
within, Hugh paused in the lee of the gate to meet Princess Theophanu. The princess was
hesitant, drawn but reluctant, as a half wild but starving creature shies forward, then away,
then forward again to sniff at food laid out by alien hands, suspicious of a trap but desperate

to slake its hunger. 
He touched her hand in an intimate manner, twining fingers through hers but in no other
way touching her. He spoke. She replied. Then he slipped something into her hands. It
winked as sun cut through a gap in the trees, dispelling an arm of mist that shadowed the
gate: his panther brooch. 
Furtively, Theophanu hurried back inside. He lingered, looking about, looking for her, but
she was still hidden by mist and the flash of the rising sun. He turned and walked out toward
the privies. 
Liath jumped up and bolted inside the gatesÑand ran into Helmut Villam. He caught her in
a strong grasp as she jerked back and stumbled. The sleeve hung empty below the elbow of
his other arm, the wound he had received at the Battle of Kassel when he had defended
King Henry against the false claims of HenryÕs half sister, Sabella. 
ÒI beg your pardon, Lord Villam,Ó Liath gasped. 
ÒYou are well, I trust, or in a hurry about the princessÕ business?Ó 
ÒI was only outÑI beg your pardon, my lord.Ó 
ÒNo need to beg anything of me,Ó he said without releasing her, a certain spark in his
eyes as he looked her over. He was at least fifteen years older than King Henry but still
robust in every way, as everyone on the progress continually joked. ÒIt is I who should beg
comfort of you, for it is cold these nights and I have been, alas, abandoned to shiver
alone.Ó 
At any moment Hugh would come back through the gates and find her. ÒI beg you, my
lord, you are too kind, but I wear the badge of an Eagle.Ó 
He sighed. ÒAn Eagle. It is true, is it not?Ó He released her and clapped his hand to his
chest. ÒMy heart is broken. If ever you choose to heal it . . .Ó 
ÒI am sensible to the honor you do me, my lord,Ó she said quickly, retreating, Òbut I am
sworn.Ó 
ÒAnd I am sorry!Ó He laughed. ÒYou are well spoken as well as beautiful. You are
wasted as an Eagle, I swear to you!Ó But he let her go. 
She could not bring herself to return to the confinement of SapientiaÕs supervision. And
she had one other thing to check on. She went in search of her comrade. 
She found Hathui sitting on a log bench outside the stables, polishing harness for the
dayÕs hunt. Her gear lay at her feet, and she looked up, smiled wryly at Liath, and beckoned
for her to sit down beside her. ÒThere is plenty for you to do.Ó She gestured toward a pile
of mud-splattered harness. The light had changed, spare and silver now although the sun
had not yet cleared the surrounding trees. HathuiÕs hands, gloveless, were chapped red
with cold. 
ÒI must return,Ó said Liath. ÒHer Highness will be looking for me when she wakes. I just
wanted toÑÒ
 ÒI know.Ó Hathui glanced to her right where saddlebags lay heaped. ÒStill in my
possession.Ó 
ÒYou are a good comrade,Ó said Liath. 
ÒI am your comrade in the Eagles!Ó Hathui snorted. ÒAnd I will expect no less of you,
Liath, when I must ask for your aid. Here, now. Will you trim my hair again?Ó Her hair, shorn
short, had gotten ragged at the ends. 
Liath took out her knife, tested it on a strand of hair, and then began carefully to trim the
ends. ÒYour hair is so fine, Hathui,Ó she said. ÒNot coarse, like mine. ItÕs so soft, like the
touch of a beautiful cloth.Ó 
ÒSo my mother always said.Ó Hathui spit into a cloth and used it to rub a shine into her
bridle. ÒThat is one reason I dedicated my hair to St. Perpetua when I swore myself to her
blessed service.Ó 
ÒShould I cut my hair?Ó Liath asked suddenly, remembering Villam. 
ÒWhat does that mean?Ó 
ÒI only . . . itÕs just...oh, Hathui, on my way back from the privies the margrave asked me

if...if, you knowÑÓ 
ÒDid he tell you the sad story of how his paramour has gone over to Lord Amalfred and
he is most cold at night?Ó 
Liath snorted and then, unable to stop herself, laughed. ÒDid he proposition you, too,
Hathui?Ó 
ÒNo, indeed, for I wear my hair shorn, as you say. But he did once, some years ago when
I first came to the Eagles and spent time at court. Wolfhere told me that Villam is one of
those men afflicted with lust or perhaps certain tiny fire daimones have taken up residence
in his loins and dance there night and day. He is notorious for having a taste for very young
women and a new one frequently. It is no surprise to me that he has gone through four wives,
or is he on his fifth now?Ó 
ÒBut if he has so many concubines and loversÑ?Ó 
ÒI donÕt mean he wears his wives out with his physical attentions, but with grief, for heÕs
always straying, and though he is a good man, a cunning general, and a wise counselor in
other matters, King Henry at least knows better than to emulate him in this.Ó 
ÒHow can I avoid him?Ó 
ÒIt is impossible to avoid anyone on the kingÕs progress. But Villam is a good man,
more so than most, and if you are modest and respectful when you are around him, so that
he knows you mean to keep to your EagleÕs vows, he wonÕt bother you again. What do
you have in the bag, Liath?Ó 
She almost nicked the other EagleÕs neck. ÒNothing. Something. ItÕs a book.Ó 
ÒI know itÕs a book. We saw it at HeartÕs Rest. What sort of book is it that you hide as if
youÕd stolen some of the kingÕs treasure and mean to keep it hidden for fear of losing your
life if you were found out?Ó 
ÒItÕs mine! It was DaÕs. I canÕt tell you, Hathui, you or anyone. Some words arenÕt
meant to be spoken out loud or they attractÑsome words must be kept in silence.Ó 
ÒSorcery,Ó said Hathui, and then, Òouch!Ó 
ÒI beg your pardon.Ó Liath staunched the wound with the end of her tunic. ÒIt isnÕt
bleeding much.Ó 
ÒWas that to punish me for my curiosity?Ó But Hathui sounded more like she was about
to laugh than to get angry. 
ÒYou just startled me.Ó 
ÒLiath.Ó Hathui sighed, set down her bridle, and turned Ôround. Over her shoulder Liath
could see the walls of the hunting lodge still wreathed in mist. Servants led horses out from
the stable doors. Men and woman came and went from the privies. Smoke boiled up from
the kitchens as the roasting for the afternoonÕs feast was begun, and servants grimy with
smoke and soot hauled buckets and kettles up from the river beyond the palisade gates.
ÒEvery village in the marchlands has its wisewoman or conjureman. We listen to what they
say, because itÕs always wise to hear the words of the elder folk, what few of them there
are. Some of them only tell stories from the old days, before the Circle of Unity came to the
outlanders and the Wendish tribes. Aye, those tales are so dreadful and exciting that I fear
for my soul when I hear them. Sometimes I still dream of those tales, though their heroes and
fighting women are all heathens. Ha!Ó She clapped her hands to chase off a thin little dog
that had sidled over to sniff at her gear. ÒAnyway, certain of the old ones have powers no
one speaks of out loud. But anyone who lives on the edge of the wilderness knows that if you
call out the true name of the creatures that live beyond the walls and fields, you might attract
their notice and then they would come. Where I come from, we call that sorcery.Ó 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó said Liath, not needing to turn round to know who was approaching her. 
ÒAi, Lady, indeed.Ó HathuiÕs eyes narrowed as she looked past Liath. She rose,
inclining her head. ÒFather Hugh.Ó 
ÒPrincess Sapientia requires the services of her Eagle,Ó he said crisply. He said
nothing else but did not move until Liath put away her knife and turned to follow him. 
ÒDoes she have the book?Ó he asked in a low voice as they crossed the courtyard.

ÒEagles are notoriously faithful each to the other. One would scarcely think common folk
capable of such loyalty. But how can you trust her, a mere freewoman, and not trust me,
Liath?Ó 
She did not need to answer because Sapientia was already waiting, impatient to be out
on the hunt. She busied herself with duties beneath an Eagle, for Sapientia had servants
aplenty, but keeping busy kept her away from Hugh. At last they rode out, a great cavalcade
of noble riders, their servants on foot, the hounds and their handlers, and the kingÕs
foresters who lived year round in the tiny village beside the royal lodge. Amid the noise and
shouting and hubbub, Liath noticed a sudden and disturbing detail: Theophanu had clasped
her hip-length riding cloak with a gold panther brooch. No one else appeared to notice, not
even Sapientia. 
3
At first, the forest around the lodge lay fairly open. Trees grew back at shoulder height
where they had been cut for firewood for the kingÕs hearth; half-wild pigs raced away into
the shelter of brush and young trees. But soon the foresters led them into the older, deeper,
uncut woods. The hounds were released, and the hunt was on. 
Their course led them down a ravine and up a steep slope where half the riders had to
dismount and lead their horses. Burrs caught on their cloaks. A gap formed between a
forward group of the hardiestÑand most recklessÑriders, and a more cautious group. The
unmounted servants lagged behind. Liath could barely keep up with Sapientia, who even
halfway through her pregnancy was determined to ride at the head of the host. 
Oak and beech had lost most of their leaves, though a scattering of pale gold and dull red
leaves still clung to the branches of the trees. Here and there evergreens stood in clumps,
shafts of dense green. Ghosts of morning mist wove around the boles of trees and settled in
hollows or near pools of standing water. A light rain fell intermittently. 
The progress of the hunters sounded a steady din through the litter and deadwood on the
forest floor. Breaking through a dense growth of bracken, they flushed a covey of partridges.
The kingÕs huntsmen laid about themselves and clubbed some down, dragging the dogs
still with the company out of reach of the birds. Ahead, braches belled. 
ÒDeer!Ó cried a forester. The chase was on. 
Now the forward group itself split into two groups, King Henry and the older nobles falling
behind to leave pride of chase to the younger adults. Sapientia rode to the fore, Liath
laboring after her on a gelding more hardy than agile. Lord Amalfred, Lady Brigida, young
lords and ladies shouting and whooping in their excitement, all pressed forward. Theophanu
came up beside Liath, face intent. The panther clasp sparked in a flash of sunlight through
the branches. She glanced back over her shoulder and, reflexively, Liath did as well. Hugh
was behind them, but his presence was curiously lost to Liath as if for once he was not
aware of her at all. His head was bent over his saddle and his lips moved soundlessly. With
his left hand he clasped a tiny gold reliquary hung on a golden chain around his neck. 
Sapientia disappeared into bracken. Lord AmalfredÕs horse shied back, refusing to
cross through the heavy growth of fern, and he kicked it forward, angry. 
ÒYour Highness!Ó A forester called out to Theophanu. ÒA path! This way!Ó 
Faced with a wall of bracken or a clear, if narrow, path, Liath chose to ride after
Theophanu, but the princessÕ horse was superior to hers in these woods, fearless and
surefooted. Theophanu forged ahead as if she meant to catch up and pass her royal sister.
As if she meant to have for herself what her sister wanted to possess. 
ÒOut of the way! Out of the way!Ó cried a man behind her, and Liath just got her gelding
aside before a group of some dozen young nobles including Lord Amalfred pounded past
on the track. ÒI see the deer!Ó 
ÒA deer! A deer!Ó The others took up the cry. 
Liath saw it, too, a handsome doe springing away before them, bolting through the trees.

Amalfred and the others pulled up, taking aim. 
Except it wasnÕt a deer. It was Theophanu, riding farther ahead of them into trees still
wreathed with morning mist. It was an illusion. The memory of Gent hit her so like a blow that
her hands went lax on the reins and she gasped aloud. An illusion that only she could see
through. Even Sanglant, who wanted to believe, had not dared to. 
She screamed. ÒHalt! DonÕt shoot!Ó She yelled as loudly as she was able. ÒYour
Highness! Say something! Pull up your horse!Ó 
Did her warning reach that far? 
Theophanu slowed her horse and began to turn, as if she had heard... 
ÒAi, Lady!Ó cried one of the noblemen. ÒItÕs slowed. NowÕs your chance!Ó He turned
to wave a new rider forward. ÒPrincess Sapientia. Come forward.Ó 
But Lord Amalfred had already drawn down. ÒThis one is mine!Ó 
ÒStop!Ó cried Liath, but Hugh rode up beside her and set his hand on her arm. Her voice
vanished. 
Theophanu was still turned, raising a hand in acknowledgment; there was an instant when
her face registered the tableau behind her. Her expression froze in horror. 
Amalfred shot. Another lord shot. The arrows sped toward their target. 
She would not be powerless this time! She wrenched her arm out of HughÕs grasp.
Please God let her bring fire through her eyes alone. Let the fire in the vision of the burning
stone pass through her as through a doorway, as though a daimone of the fiery sphere
above had reached down below the moon and pressed its blazing touch onto the speeding
wood of the arrows. 
Both arrows ignited in midair. Theophanu threw herself off her horse. The wailing and
shouting that deafened Liath now was its own conflagration. 
ÒMy God, the princess!Ó 
ÒA miracle! A miracle!Ó 
ÒLord Amalfred, what meant you by this?Ó 
ÒBut I saw a deer. These othersÑ!Ó 
As all protested that they, too, had seen a deer, Sapientia began to sob noisily. Liath
threw her reins over the horseÕs head, dismounted, and ran forward; she stubbed her toes
on a log, jumped over another only to have her boots sink into the dense litter of fallen and
rotting leaves in her haste to reach Theophanu. 
The princessÕ hair lay in disarray, braids fallen loose, her riding tunic twisted at her hips,
her gold-braided leggings ripped at the knees, her face scraped and stained with dirt. She
shoved herself up and reached for her knife as Liath dropped down beside her. ÒHave you
come to finish the job at her bidding?Ó 
Liath threw up her hands to show she was empty-handed. ÒYour Highness! Are you
hurt?Ó 
ÒYour voice.Ó TheophanuÕs eyes flared with astonishment. ÒYour voice is the one I
heard warning me. What treachery is this?Ó 
ÒThey saw a deer where you rode, Your Highness.Ó 
 ÒI am no deer to be hunted and slain. Was this an accident, Eagle?Ó 
But now a forester had come up, and the crowd like a mindless writhing creature moved
across the wood to engulf them. Back on the path, Hugh comforted a weeping Sapientia. 
By now the king had come up to the others, and in their babble of voices Liath heard
repeated over and over that all dozen or so there and even in addition the foresters had
seen not Theophanu but a deer. 
ÒWitchcraft,Ó someone said. 
ÒA miracle,Ó said another. 
ÒToo many damn fool young hotheads hunting for prizes and seeing visions in the mist,Ó
said Villam with disgust. 
ÒThis dayÕs hunt ends now,Ó said King Henry. A groom helped him dismount. He came
up to his daughter and extended a hand. She took it, and he raised her up off the ground.

ÒYou are unhurt?Ó he asked. Villam by now had forced order into the milling mob behind
them, pressing them back from the frightened horse. Far away, hounds bayed wildly. Henry
released TheophanuÕs hand and beckoned a huntsman forward. ÒFollow the hounds,Ó he
said, Òand bring back to the lodge whatever meat you take.Ó 
The man nodded. Soon, foresters and huntsmen went on alone, though some of the
young nobles clearly wished to go with them. 
ÒMay I have a moment alone to collect my wits, Father,Ó Theophanu. asked, Òbefore I
ride again?Ó 
He gestured to his attendants to back off and himself moved away. Liath began to retreat,
but Theophanu signed to her, and Liath hesitated, afraid to be seen with her, afraid not to
obey. 
ÒWas it an accident?Ó the princess repeated, her gaze hard, her mouth a thin line. ÒDid
my sister devise this treachery?Ó 
The thought of Sapientia concocting any kind of intrigue made LiathÕs mouth drop open
in amazed disbelief. ÒYour sister? No! But it was not an accidentÑÓ Then she broke off.
She had revealed too much. 
Theophanu said nothing for a long while. Slowly, one scratched and bleeding hand came
up to touch the panther brooch that held her cloak closed. ÒWas it sorcery? And from whose
hand?Ó 
ÒI can prove nothing, Your Highness. I know only what I saw.Ó 
ÒOr did not see.Ó She looked up at a sight behind LiathÕs back, and away quickly, as if
she was ashamed. ÒAm I any better than those who saw a deer in the forest, which is only
what they wished to see?Ó With a jerk and a sudden grimace, she ripped the panther
brooch off her cloak and flung it behind her into the leaves. ÒI am in your debt, Eagle. What
reward can I give you?Ó 
She blurted it out, not meaning to say it, but it was more impassioned for its rash honesty.
ÒGet me away from him, I beg you.Ó 
Ò ÔThe meekness of the dove with the cunning of the serpent,Õ Ò Theophanu muttered.
ÒBut I need proof.Ó Still pale, she groped through the leaves until she found the brooch
again. Gingerly, as though it were poison, she tucked it in between belt and tunic. ÒI will do
what I can. Go now. It is not wise that you be seen with me, if what I suspect is true. Say
nothing to anyone until I give you leave.Ó 
4
Henry was furious. The hunt came clattering back early in an uproar to upset the quiet
tenor of a day that Rosvita had hoped would be a productive one for her clerics. But the
stories she heard, from so many different sources, were alarming enough that she was
relieved when Princess Theophanu rode in unharmed. Strangely, for all that her dress was in
disarray, her hair disordered, and her skin scratched and stained with loam and dirt, the
princess was herself perfectly composed. 
ÒSo eastern,Ó muttered Brother Fortunatus. ÒYou know these Arethousans are
inscrutable.Ó 
ÒSpare us these false wisdoms,Ó said Sister Amabilia. ÒPoor Theophanu! To be
mistaken for a deer!Ó 
The king was not to be mollified by the testimony of all who had been present. Everyone,
even the foresters and huntsmen who had raced ahead with SapientiaÕs party, had seen a
deer in place of a princess. 
ÒThe rain confused our eyes.Ó ÒThe mist confused our eyes.Ó ÒIt was the shape of the
branches above her head.Ó On they went, all of them grievously shocked at the accident. 
ÒOr there was a deer behind her in the woods and in your rashness you shot without
looking closely! Lord Amalfred. Lord Grimoald. You are no longer welcome at this court. You
will be gone by nightfall. We will all of us leave this ill-omened place tomorrow. One of my

children I have already lost. I do not intend to lose any more.Ó 
No protest, even by Sapientia, could mitigate the kingÕs judgment. The two young lords
left the hall in disgrace. Henry spent the rest of the day at Mass led by Father Hugh. In
particular, the king prayed and gave thanksgiving to St. Valeria, whose day this was and
whose miraculous intervention had spared his daughter worse harm than the fall she had
taken. Before the feast he handed out bread with his own hands to the usual supplicants
who had gathered outside the palisade. Hearing of the kingÕs arrival at this southernmost of
his royal hunting lodges, they had come from villages at the forestÕs edge. Some of them
had walked several days on rag-clad feet hoping for food or a blessing. 
At the feast, Theophanu begged a boon of her father. ÒI pray you, Your Majesty, let me
undertake a pilgrimage to the Convent of St. Valeria to offer a proper thanksgiving for my
deliverance from harm. Surely her hand lay over me this day.Ó 
He was reluctant to let her leave after such an incident, but the miracle had been attested
by a dozen or more persons. 
ÒI will take an Eagle,Ó she said, Òand thus any message can be sent quickly from my
hand to yours.Ó 
ÒAs a sign of my favor,Ó he said, Òyou may take my faithful Hathui, daughter of Elseva,
as long as you and she return in one piece to my progress by the end of the year. It should
take you no more than two or three months to complete the journey.Ó 
ÒI would not take such a loyal servant from you, Your Majesty,Ó she replied, as calm as if
no arrows had sped toward her head and breast that morning. ÒBut if I could take another
EagleÑÓ Here her gaze came to rest on the young Eagle who stood several paces behind
SapientiaÕs chair. 
Sapientia leaped to her feet, the gesture of anger made ungainly because of her
increasing girth. ÒYou just want what is mine!Ó 
ÒSit down,Ó said the king. 
Sapientia sat. 
ÒIt is true,Ó said Henry, Òthat Sapientia has an Eagle, one whose service I gave into her
hands, which I will not now take from her. But it is only right, Theophanu, that you be given an
Eagle as well. Since you are going on a journey, two would be better. Hathui will choose
among those who attend me now, at your pleasure.Ó 
The feast went on. But the damage had been done to RosvitaÕs peace of mind, for she
suddenly recalled that Sapientia enjoyed the novelty of having an Eagle in constant
attendance. Liath had been on that hunt and, surely, had seen the whole; someone had
mentioned seeing her go to the princess after the fall. But no one had called her to testify
when even the kingÕs foresters and huntsmen had given testimony after the noblefolk had
finished speaking. How could such a lapse be possible? Why did the young Eagle not come
forward on her own? 
Why should Theophanu, inscrutable Theophanu, notice her now and, even, attempt to
take her into her own retinue? Only to provoke her sister? 
For that matter, why should Theophanu undertake a pilgrimage across the winter
landscape when she could as easily send servants with gifts of gold and silver and an altar
cloth to grace the conventÕs church and treasury? 
Two arrows bursting into flame in midair. Any soul would agree that it was a miracle
wrought by the hand of a saint. But Rosvita did not believe in coincidence. 
¡°In the guise of scholars and magi,Ó Brother Fidelis had said to her last spring, ¡°
tempting me with knowledge.Ó Why did his words come back to her now? 
Theophanu knew as well as any why the Convent of St. Valeria was renowned: Its Mother
Abbesses were known for their study of the forbidden art of sorcery. 
5
It was raining, again. Rain made Sapientia irritable; she was only happy when she was

active ÒFetch me wine, Eagle,Ó she said, although she had servants to fetch her wine.
ÒAnd milk. I want milk.Ó Leaving the Thurin Forest had made Sapientia irritable. Riding
south into the duchy of Avaria had made Sapientia irritable. Being pregnant made Sapientia
irritable. ÒRead to me, Hugh. I am so bored. It isnÕt right IÕm not allowed to ride out to the
hunt just because I have a little fever.Ó She yawned. ÒI am so tired always.Ó 
Hugh turned away from the great hearth of the kingÕs hall in the palace of Augensburg.
More restless than usual, for he was usually as smooth as cream resting in an untouched
bowl, he had been shredding leaves and tossing them into the blazing fire. He did not look
toward Liath nor even appear to notice her. He did not need to. 
ÒI rather like Lord Geoffrey,Ó Sapientia continued, rattling on despite her protestations of
being tired. ÒHeÕs a good hunter and he has very good manners. Father likes him so much
he asked him to ride beside him on todayÕs hunt. Poor Brigida. I suppose you wish he
wasnÕt already married!Ó 
ÒHeÕs from Varre,Ó retorted Brigida. ÒI donÕt know if my uncle Burchard would want
me to marry a Vanish lord, not after what happened to my cousin Agius. And I donÕt know
what kind of inheritance Geoffrey would bring as his dowry.Ó 
ÒPoor man. He lost his inheritance to a bastard!Ó The princess giggled. 
Hugh looked up abruptly. ÒIsnÕt Lord Geoffrey heir to the Lavas count?Ó 
ÒIndeed not!Ó Sapientia smiled with the satisfaction of a slow child who has, at long last,
won a footrace against its rivals. ÒBut you werenÕt at court then. Father pardoned Count
Lavastine for his treachery and allowed him to name his illegitimate son as his heir.Ó 
ÒHis heir,Ó murmured Hugh with such an odd inflection that Liath actually paused to
stare at him. 
He knelt beside a clay bowl filled with dried herbs. A strip of linen marked with a writing
she could not read lay over his thighs, and as Liath watched, his hands tied the linen strip
into a complex knot. 
Binding. 
The word leaped unbidden into her thoughts. A fragment of The Book of SecretsÑwhich
she had herself copied out of a penitential from a monastic library in SaliaÑrose up from the
city of memory and stirred on her tongue. She murmured it under her breath. 
Ò ÔHast thou observed the traditions of the mathematici, that thou shouldst have power
through the binding and loosing made by that woven fabric formed out of the courses of the
moon and the sun and the erratica and the stars, each in relationship to the others? These
are the arts known to the daimones of the upper air, and it is written, ÒWhatsoever ye do in
word or in work, do all in the name of Our Lord and Lady.Ó If thou hast done this, thou shall
be judged before the skopos herself.ÓÔ 
But Ihere had been more, which she had not written down because it did not concern the
astronomical arts. ¡°Hast thou made knots, and incantations . . .Ó 
Hugh looked up at her as if he could sense her thoughts, and she flushed, afraid, when a
smile touched his lips. He had not addressed a single word to her since the incident in Ihe
forest, and that was worse than anything that had come before . . . because she knew, and
he knew, that he was only biding his time. 
ÒThat Ungrian ambassador is so uncouth.Ó The princess continued on obliviously, just
as all the others seemed oblivious to HughÕs actions by the fireÑas if he had shielded
himself from their curiosity. ÒThe way he picks at his food as if it isnÕt fit for him to eat! You
donÕt suppose Father means to marry the son of the Ungrian king to me, do you?Ó 
ÒI think not, Your Highness.Ó Hugh dumped the last of the herbs into the fire and stepped
away, dusting white ash from his otherwise spotless tunic. The linen strip had vanished.
ÒThe LTngrian king is newly converted to the Faith of the Unities, praise God, and I believe
he wishes L for a woman of Wendish kin to settle there so that she may bring her knowledge
of the Circle of Unity and the example of her faith to his people.Ó 
ÒThat might be a useful occupation for Theophanu when she returns from her pilgrimage.
Where is my milk?Ó 

A steward fetched wine and milk. Hugh left the hall for the guest rooms beyond. With the
shutters closed, it was dim and smoky within the hall. The tapestries carried on the progress
by King Henry had been hung over the frescoed walls for warmth, creating an odd mosaic of
images, painted and woven, all jumbled up together. Freshly cut rushes smothered the floor.
Three hearthfires burned, and lamps glowed on the far table where a dozen clerics worked.
The rest, even Sister Rosvita, had gone out on the hunt. 
Candles sat in clay bowls on all the mantelpieces; lit this morning, they would burn all day
and through the night. It was the first day of the month of Decial, called Candlemass: the
shortest day of the year, the winter solstice. The heathens called it Dhearc, the dark of the
sun, and on this day it was traditional to go hunting no matter what the weather was like,
because on this day the sun and light, in the person of the regnant, at last defeated darkness
and disorder, in the body of the wild game which would be killed and feasted upon. St. Peter
the Discipla, whose feast day this was, had been martyred by being burned alive by
unbelievers. 
In The Book of Secrets, Da had written: ¡°When the sun stands still, certain pathways
otherwise hidden become clear and certain weavings otherwise too tangled to unravel
become straight. Thereby with what power you can bind a small spell into life on other
days, you can bind your wish into life in an altogether greater manner at the hinges of the
year. Therefore, be cautious.Ó 
Bind your wish. Therefore, be cautious. She crouched by the fire. Two stone posts
framed the hearth, carved with the forelegs and heads of griffins, and she touched the one
nearest her, tracing its lionÕs claws. Tiny singed fragments of flowers lay scattered at the
base and on the bricks; she rolled them between thumb and finger and sniffed. Lavender. A
single apple seed lay on the flagstones. The scent from the fire was heady and thick, and
she had to step back to let her head clear. 
 Was Hugh working magic? Ai, Lady, she could not regret saving TheophanuÕs life, but
what if Hugh suspectedÑwhat if the others discoveredÑthat she had made those arrows
catch fire? Would she be taken before the skopos to stand trial? And yet the thought
gnawed at her, like a nagging pain: II you can bring flame and see visions through fire,
then why not other magics? Why did Da lie? 
She was not deaf to magic. She was protected against it: against the magic of others
and, perhaps, against her own. But she had no way to discover the truth, she had no one to
confide in, no one to teach her. Suddenly WolfhereÕs hints and gentle suggestions, his
attempts to convince her to trust him, seemed both more sinister and more welcome. If only
he were here now. 
Hugh returned, carrying a book. She recognized Poly-xeneÕs History of Dariya at once.
The binding was almost as familiar to her as her own skin. He had stolen it from her as he
had stolen so much else. He seated himself beside Princess Sapientia, and two servants
stood over him with lamps. The dozen clerics at the other end of the hall set down their pens,
turning as flowers toward the sun, eager to hear him read. 
ÒI shall read today from Polyxene,Ó he began. 
ÒWhat should I care about such an old history, and written about heathens, at that?Ó
asked Sapientia. 
He raised one eyebrow. ÒYour Highness. Surely you are aware that the Dariyans, who
were said to be half of humankind and half of elvish kin, conquered and ruled the largest
empire the world has ever known. Only in the myths and tales of the ancient Arethousans do
we hear of older and greater empires, that of SaiÕs which was swallowed by the waves, or
of the wise and ancient Gyptos peoples across the middle sea. After the destruction of the
Dariyan Empire the many lands they had once held together in greatness became the
haunts of savages, and uncivilized heathens fought over the spoils. It was only a hundred
years ago that the great Salian Emperor Taillefer restored the empire, by the grace of Our
Lord and Lady, God of Unities. He had himself crowned Holy Dariyan Emperor, but at his
death his empire was lost to the feuding of his successors.Ó 

SapientiaÕs expression cleared, and she looked oddly thoughtful. ÒFather believes that
it is the destiny of our family to restore the Holy Empire of Dariya.Ó 
ÒAnd so your family shall,Ó murmured Hugh, Òand be crowned in Darre before the
skopos, as was Taillefer.Ó 
Liath shivered. Was this why Hugh had tried to murder Theophanu? So Sapientia would
have no rival for the imperial throne, not just for the throne of the kingdom of Wendar and
Varre? 
He cleared his throat, took a sip of wine, and began to read out loud in his beautiful,
almost hypnotic voice. Ò ÔThe fact is that we can obtain only an impression of a whole from
a part, and certainly neither a thorough knowledge or an accurate understanding. It is only by
combining and comparing certain parts of the whole with one another and taking note of
their resemblances and their differences that we shall arrive at a comprehensive view.Ó 
Was that what Da was doing all along in the first part of The Book of Secrets? In that first
part he had written down so many snippets from so many different sources, compiling them
so that he could better understand the knowledge hidden in the heavens. She yawned,
feeling a sudden sense of numbing lassitude, then shook herself back awake. 
Ò ÔBy what means and in what time the people we know now as the Dariyans first came
to Aosta rests outside my consideration. Instead, I shall take as my starting point the first
occasion on which the Dariyans left Aosta, crossing the sea to the island of Nakria.Õ>: 
Sapientia snored softly. She had fallen asleep, as had two of her servingwomen; her
other servants, seated around her, also nodded off. Liath had a sudden desperate fear that
if she did not get up and get outside this instant, she, too, would fall asleep. 
The youngest cleric spoke up from the other end of the room. ÒI beg you, Father Hugh,
read to us of the seige of Kartiako.Ó 
The distraction gave her cover. She crept out the door but took a wrong turn and at once
was confused. The Augensburg palace boasted two reception halls, a solarium, courtyards,
barracks, guest rooms, chambers for the regnant and for the duke of Avaria, a safe room for
the kingÕs treasury, and a dozen cottages for envoys and servants. All this was built out of
timber felled from the surrounding forest Only the bathing complex and the chapel were built
of stone. 
Liath had left her saddlebags in the barracks, but Sapientia held her on such a tight leash
that sheÕd had no time to commit the palace layout to memory. She retraced her steps. In
the hall, everyone was asleepÑand Hugh was nowhere to be seen. Backing out of the room,
she tried again to find the barracks by cutting through a side corridor, but it only let her out
through a tiny fountain courtyard where an old gardener sat dozing in the cold air on the lip of
a frost-encrusted fountain. No water ran. 
The reception room opened before her. Frescoes gleamed on the walls, splashes of
color in the dim chamber. Great wooden beams spanned the ceiling. A languor hung over
the hall. Two servants, brooms in hand, snored on the steps that led up to the dais and the
regnantÕs throne, itself carved cunningly with lions as the four legs, the back as the wings of
an eagle, and the arms as the sinuous necks and heads of dragons. A woman had fallen
asleep by the hearth fire while mending a seat cover; she had pricked herself with her
needle, and a tiny drop of blood welled on her skin. 
Suddenly uneasy, Liath climbed spiraling wooden stairs to a long corridor. Built above
the north block of buildings, the corridor was reserved for the king, his family, and his
messengers; it provided a way for him to proceed from one quarter of the complex to
another without walking through the common rooms below or setting foot in the muddy
alleyways. She hurried down the narrow corridor, not wider than the width of her arms
outstretched. Now she remembered; the barracks lay in the northeast corner of the palace
complex. 
She became consumed with the fear that something was following her. She felt breathing
on her neck, spun around. The far end of the corridor, down which she had just come, lay
blanketed in darkness except where spines of light shone through cracks in the wooden

shutters. A footstep scraped on the stair. 
ÒLiath,Ó he said, his voice muted by the distance and the narrow walls. ÒWhy are you
still awake?Ó 
She bolted. 
She ran down the length of the corridor, scrambled, half falling, down the other stairs,
banging her knee, wrenching a finger as she gripped a smooth square railing and shoved
herself forward. It was dark in the palace, all the shutters closed against winterÕs chill. Most
of the nobles were out on the hunt. In every room she came to, every corridor she escaped
down, those who had stayed behind slept. 
Even in the barracks the soldiers rested, snoring, on straw mattresses on the floor. Her
friend Thiadbold and a comrade slumped in chairs over a dice game and cooling mugs of
cider. Beyond them, a ladder led up to the attic loft where she and the other Eagles slept.
But as cold seeped in through the timber walls and the single hearth fire burned low and
flickered out, she could not bring herself to go up the ladder. Once she climbed that ladder,
she would be trapped. 
She ran to Thiadbold. His LionÕs tunic folded at odd angles, creased by the twist of his
body in the chair and the way his right arm was flung back over the chair back. His head
lolled to one side, mouth open. She shook him. 
ÒPlease, I beg you, comrade. Thiadbold! Wake up!Ó 
ÒNothing you do will wake them, Liath,Ó he said behind her. He stood in the doorway,
perhaps twenty paces away. He held a lamp in one hand. Its soft light gilded him, as gold
does a painting or the favor of the king does a virtuous man. 
ÒIÕm very angry with you, Liath,Ó he added kindly, without raising his voice. ÒYou lied to
me.Ó Indeed, he sounded more hurt than angry. ÒYou said you knew nothing about sorcery,
and yet...Ó He lifted his free hand in a gesture of puzzlement. Ò. . . what am I to think now?
Arrows bursting into flame in mid-flight. You are not asleep with the others.Ó 
ÒWhy do you want to kill Theophanu?Ó she demanded. 
ÒI donÕt want to kill Theophanu,Ó he said, as if disappointed she would think he did. He
took a step forward. 
There was another door at the far end of the barracks. But if she ran out now, he would
get the book. Surely the book was what he had wanted all along. 
ÒLiath! Stop!Ó 
She did not stop, but when she reached the ladder, she scrambled up it, panting, heart so
frozen with fear that her chest felt as if it were in the grip of some great beast. 
 Heaving herself up over the top, she turned on her knees, grabbed the legs of the ladder,
and yanked up. 
And was jerked forward almost falling back down through the opening as Hugh caught the
ladder from below and dragged it back down. 
ÒDonÕt fight me, Liath. You know it makes me angry.Ó 
She fought him anyway, but though she was physically strong, he had the advantage,
braced on the floor. It was a losing battle. It had always been a losing battle. And once he
fought the legs back into their braces and settled his full weight on the bottom rung, it made
no difference. The opening was too small for her to cast the ladder off and drop it away. 
She scrambled back, scraping palms against the rough-hewn plank floors, rising and
bumping her head against the low pitch of the ceiling. Her feet got tangled in gear, but she
knew her own gear, knew it as well as the feel of DaÕs hand holding hers when she woke at
night from a bad dream. She grabbed the leather saddlebags, draped them over a
shoulder. Her quiver caught on a beam above, and she stumbled. 
ÒLiath.Ó He had no lamp, but she needed no lamp to see his shadow emerge into the
loft and swing onto the floor. 
Bent over, breathing in gasps more like whimpers, she drew her short sword. 
ÒNow we shall have this out. And you will put away your sword, my beauty.Ó He walked
forward two steps, one hand held out. ÒI have no doubt you can thrust that blade through me,

but what will you tell them when they find me dead? You will be condemned for murder, and
executed. Is that what you want? Give me the sword, Liath.Ó 
ÒIÕll tell them you used sorcery to spell everyone to sleep and then tried to rape me.Ó 
He laughed. ÒWhy would anyone believe you? Can you imagine such a story coming to
my motherÕs ears and what she would say about it? A mere Eagle accusing a margraveÕs
son?Ó 
Theophanu would believe her, but Theophanu had charged her to keep silence on the
matter of sorcery. Theophanu had her own plans and, to a royal princess, an Eagle was
simply another servant. 
ÒI am right, as you know,Ó he added, his tone coaxing. ÒPut down the sword.Ó 
ÒGet away from me,Ó she whispered. ÒWhy canÕt you leave me alone?Ó 
ÒThat is the choice given you after your da died. Be mine, or be dead. Which will it be?Ó
He stopped, shifted, then fumbled with something unseen. A moment later he unlatched the
shutter and opened it. The dull light of winterÕs sky flooded into the loft, searing her eyes.
And when she had done blinking and had finally, truly, to look upon him, he smiled. Cold air
boiled in past him, a wind of ice drawn in to this, her prison, for her prison was any place
where she was confined with him. The cold was itself the shackles, binding her as it curled
around her, freezing her heart. 
ÒHush, my beauty,Ó he murmured softly. ÒDo not be scared of me. I wonÕt hurt you. I
found a book at the monastery at Firsebarg, locked away in a chest which only the father
abbot is allowed to open. I learned much from that book, as you see. ÔLavender, for
sleep.Õ How did you make those arrows burst into flame? Do you even know? I can teach
you what it means to have power, to know what is within yourself that you can use. I want only
what is best for you. For you and for myself.Ó 
The hilt of her sword felt like ice in her hand. He crossed the low attic to her, ducking his
head, and took the sword out of her lax hand. His touch was warm, but his eyes were cold. 
At last, she recognized that peculiar deep tone in his voice; she had learned well what it
presaged, in the depths of winter in HeartÕs Rest. 
ÒI canÕt wait any longer, Liath. And there is no one here to witness.Ó 
ÒIÕll give you the book,Ó she whispered, voice half caught in her throat. Ai, Lady, she
was begging. She was offering the only and most precious thing she had left to her, but
losing that would be better than this again. 
He shook his head impatiently. ÒYou already gave me the book, and your submission,
last spring, before Wolfhere stole them from me. I have been waiting a long time to get them
back.Ó 
She was too numb to resist when he gently stripped her of bow and quiver and
saddlebag, when he lay her down on the hard plank floor. But when he kissed her, when his
hand sought and found her belt, loosening it, she remembered finally through terror and
numbing weakness one thing. Wood burns. 
6
The road back to the kingÕs progress had proved so miserable and so full of hardships,
appalling detours, and frustrations that Hanna had begun to wonder if Wolfhere might have
gotten back with the news about Biscop An-tonia before her. She had never seen the
palace-at Augens-burg, of course, but two of her three remaining Lions had slept in the
barracks there only two years ago while attending the king. 
Now, with clouds sweeping in low over hills glazed with a thin crust of snow and with the
last forest crossing behind them, they could see in the distance the market village and
sprawling palace complex of Augensburg. 
ÒThat,Ó said Ingo, the most senior of the Lions, Òis a lot of smoke. Even for
Candlemass.Ó 
ÒLadyÕs Blood!Ó swore Leo. ÒFire!Ó 

Hanna had been walking in order to spare her horse. Now she mounted and left the Lions
behind. Soon she came upon traffic that slowed her down as people rushed out away from
Augensburg and othersÑfarmers and forestersÑrushed in, coming to aid the king against an
implacable foe. They made way for her as best they could in the crush, but despite this she
was forced to pull up just inside the low outer wall. Here she stared past river and market
village, which lay to her left, and up at the palace, which lay on a low rise protected by its
own inner palisade and the steep bluff on its other side. Her horse laid its ears back, trying
to back up. The stench of burning was caustic as she breathed in. 
Hanna had seen fire before, but never anything like this. 
The fire roared. The hot wind streaking off the flames baked her where she stood, though
the day was cold and beyond town a thin blanket of snow covered field and forest. Half the
palace was on fire, sheets of flame rising into the heavens, a second wall that mirrored the
wooden wall of the palisade. In the town, ash rained down on women loading their valuables
into carts, on children carrying infants out of houses, on men and women hauling buckets of
water up the rise toward the burning palace. Gaping, she sucked in ash; the sharp bite in her
throat made her hack. 
ÒToo little water!Ó shouted Folquin, the fastest runner among the Lions. Panting hard, he
came up beside her and leaned, coughing, on his spear. ÒTheyÕll never put that out! Pray
to the Lady it doesnÕt catch the roofs in town.Ó 
Hanna dismounted and thrust reins into the LionÕs hands. ÒLet young Stephen take the
horse and hold it for us,Ó she said. ÒThen you and Ingo and Leo follow me up. We must aid
those we can.Ó 
ÒI pray the king is not insideÑÓ he said, but she gave him a look, and he drew the Circle
of Unity at his breast and shut up. 
She ran up the hill, easily outpacing people burdened with buckets. A ragged procession
filed past her down the hill, some with empty buckets, some with handcarts heaped with
furniture and books and chests and every kind of item salvaged from the fire. A cleric
clutched an ancient parchment codex to her chest; her face was streaked with ash and she
had a weeping red welt on her right arm where her clericÕs robe was ripped open. Other
clerics followed behind her, each holding something precious. One man had pressed
unbound parchment sheets against him, hands struggling to keep them all together. A
woman held her robe out as a basket, full of quills and inkpots, stands and styluses and
tablets all jumbled together, ink leaking through the fine gold fabric of her rich vestment. The
youngest of them stumbled behind, looking stunned, carrying a magnificent eagleÕs feather
quill and a little pot of red ink that, tipping, had stained his fingers. A child cried. Servants
staggered under loads of bedding salvaged from the blaze. 
ÒMake way!Ó cried a man in LionÕs tabard. ÒMake way for the princess!Ó 
Hanna stepped aside as Princess Sapientia was carried past reclining on a camp bed.
She looked only half conscious, but both of her hands clasped her swollen abdomen and
she moaned as she passed Hanna. Behind her, sobbing or gabbling like panicked geese,
more servants hauled chests, tapestries that kept coming unrolled, even the splendid chair
carved with lions and dragons and an eagleÕs wings that Hanna recognized as belonging
to King Henry. 
At the palace gate, grim-faced guards forced back the curious and only admitted those
persons carrying water-as though such a trifle could stem the inferno. The wind off the fire
singed her skin, and her eyes stung with heat and burning ash. 
ÒMake way!Ó she cried, pushing forward to the guards. ÒWhere is the king?Ó 
ÒOut on the hunt, thank God!Ó shouted the one nearest her. He had no helmet; part of
one ear was missingÑbut it was an old scar. His red hair was stained with ash. ÒThere
were few enough therein, by Our LordÕs Mercy, but surely some have perished.Ó 
ÒIs there anything I can do?Ó she yelled. She had to yell to be heard above the roar of
flames. Already her voice was hoarse from heat and ash. 
ÒNay, friend. This is one foe we canÕt fight. Ah!Ó he exclaimed, a gasp of relief.

ÒThereÕs one of your comrades whoÕs run mad. Can you calm her?Ó 
Shifting to look past him, she saw a crowd of some twenty people, a handful of men in
Lion tabards, servants, and one man in noble garb who directed the others. He had golden
hair, and as she watched he reached to help two figures struggling out of the smoke: a
dark-haired young woman in an EagleÕs scarlet-trimmed cloak who half-dragged and
half-led a man in a singed and dirty LionÕs tabard. 
ÒLiath!Ó Hanna bolted toward the fire. 
A sudden pop sounded, followed by a low thundering gasp of air, a thousand breaths
drawn in. People stumbled back from the courtyard, crying out, as the roof of the back
portion of the palace collapsed in a huge unfolding bloom of flame and smoke and stinging
red hot ash. Four men grabbed the harness shaft of a wagon loaded to bursting with
iron-bound chests: the kingÕs treasure. 
ÒLiath!Ó shouted the golden-haired nobleman as Liath turned and vanished back into
the boiling smoke, back into the burning palace. He started after her. Three soldiers broke
forward, grabbed him, and dragged him away from the raging fire. 
ÒLiath!Ó Hanna cried, running forward. She hopped awk wardly sideways to avoid being
run over by the wagon, which had now gathered speed as the men at the shaft got
momentum. One small chest jolted, bounced, and fell out, splitting open at HannaÕs feet to
spill delicate cloissone clasps and buckles onto the cracking mud. 
ÒMy lord! There is nothing you can do! You must come away, my lord!Ó So the Lions
shouted at the nobleman, and he cursed them once, without feeling, and then began to
weep. 
Ai, Lady. Surprise brought her to a jarring halt while fire blistered the timber walls of the
palace and parched her lips. It was Hugh. He dropped to his knees as if he meant to pray,
and only when the Lions hoisted him up bodily could he be persuaded to move back to
safety as the fire scorched the peaked roof, spit, leaped the chasm of an alley between
buildings, and kindled a new fire on the roof of the fourth quarter of the palaceÑthe only
quarter as yet untouched. Everything would go. Everything. 
ÒLady forgive me,Ó said Hugh as he stared into the blaze. ÒForgive me my presumption
in believing I had mastered the arts you gave into my hands. Forgive me for those innocent
souls who have died needlessly.Ó He looked up, saw Hanna, and blinked, for an instant
examining her as if he recognized her. 
She almost staggered under the weight of his stare. She had actually forgotten how
glorious he was. 
Then he shook his head to dismiss her and spoke to himselfÑas if to convince himself.
ÒHad I only known more, it would not have happened this way. But I cannot let her go...Ó 
ÒCome, my lord,Ó said a servant, but Hugh shook him off. 
ÒFather Hugh!Ó A new man had come running up; he was clearly terrified to stand so
close to the blaze. ÒPrincess Sapientia calls for you, my lord.Ó 
Torn, he wavered. Rising, he could not bring himself to follow the servant. 
ÒShe is having painsÑÓ 
Clenching a hand, he glared at the raging fire, cursed under his breath and then, with a
lastÑbeseeching?Ñglance at Hanna, spun and followed the servant. 
Liath had gone back inside the inferno. 
 ÒKeep your wits, Hanna,Ó she muttered to herself, recalling the first LionÕs words: ¡°
Your comrade has run mad.Ó Pulling her cloak tight over her mouth and nose, she pressed
forward into the blaze. 
ÒCome back!Ó they shouted, those Lions who remained. ÒEagle!Ó 
Her skin was aflame, but no flame touched her. She crossed into a great hall ragged with
smoke and blowing ash. Heat boiled out. She saw nothing, no one, no figure struggling
through the smoke. The thick beams supporting the ceiling above smoldered, not yet in
open flame. A far wall cracked, splintering, burst by heat. 
She heard the scream. It was Liath. 

ÒHelp me! God save us, wake up, man!Ó 
Hanna could not take a deep breath, for courage or for air. But she ran forward anyway
into the fire. Ash rained on her head. The boom and surge of fire raged around her as
harshly as the tempest of battle. Smoke burned her eyes and the air tasted acrid. 
She found Liath in the corridor behind, dragging a man so big and so burdened with
armor that it was a miracle Liath had managed to get him this far. 
ÒHanna!Ó That she had breath to talk was astounding. ÒOh, God, Hanna, help me get
him free. ThereÕs two more, but the beams have fallenÑÓ She was weeping, although how
could she weep when the heat should have wicked all moisture away? 
Hanna did not think, she merely grabbed the LionÕs legs and together they tugged him
out of the corridor while the fire blazed closer. They had dragged him halfway across the hall
when beams began to fall and the far walls to crack and disintegrate. 
Just out the door her three faithful Lions were waiting, together with the red-haired Lion;
Ingo and Leo grabbed their limp comrade and yanked him free as Liath turned and started
inside again. 
ÒStop her!Ó screamed Hanna. Folquin wrapped his arms around the young Eagle and
lifted her as she kicked and pleaded and wept, trying to get freeÑbut he was a brawny,
farm-bred lad and as strong as an ox. 
ÒLiath!Ó Hanna shouted. 
But there was no time to reason with her. They retreated in awkward haste as the great
roof beams collapsed in the hall. The gates remained open but stood now deserted, and
they paused outside the gates to look behind. Everyone had fled to safer ground. Townsfolk
carried their buckets of water to the houses closest to the palace wall, dousing their roofs
with water to stop the flaming ash from setting a new blaze. The market village was all there
was left to save. 
On the wind, a faint counterpoint to the blaze, she heard a hunting horn. 
ÒLet me go back! Let me go back! There are two moreÑat least two moreÑÓ Liath
struggled and fought and even tried to bite poor Folquin, whose leather armor had protected
him from worse attacks. 
ÒHush, friend,Ó said the red-haired Lion sternly. ÒThis one is dead, though you tried
valiantly to save him. I doubt not the others have already died. No use risking yourself to
drag out their bodies. May God have mercy on their souls, and may they come in peace to
the Chamber of Light.Ó He bowed his head. 
Gingerly, Folquin set Liath down, glanced at Hanna and, with a nod from her, let Liath go.
Liath collapsed to her knees but simply sat trembling as the palace burned and ash drifted
down like a light rain of snow upon them. Despite her forays into the raging fire, she had
nary a mark or burn on her. 
ÒWe are still too close,Ó said Ingo. 
There was a commotion on the road below. Hanna turned to see Hugh striding up toward
them. Seeing Liath, he stopped dead. Such an expression transformed his face that it
chilled her to her bones and yet made her want to weep in compassion for his pain. But he
said nothing. He only looked. Perhaps that was worse. Then, wincing at a pain in his
shoulder, he turned to limp away along the path. Servants and townsfolk and clerics
swarmed him. Someone brought a chair on which to carry him, but he waved it away. Closer
now, the hunting horn sounded again, high and imperative. 
Liath broke into gulping sobs, so racked by them she could hardly breathe. Hanna
gestured to her Lions to step back, and they ranged out, helping other Lions and guards
pick up any detritus that could be saved without venturing too close: items lost from wagons
or thrown down from the wallwalk; swords, shields, spears; clothing, saddlebags, scattered
jewelry; a browned and blistered book, two carved stools, a sandal, a trail of ivory chess
pieces. The fire burned on, but already the flames seemed less furiousÑor perhaps she had
become accustomed to the heat searing her face. Her hands were red with it, her lips so dry
that licking them made them bleed. 

ÒLiath.Ó She crouched down beside her friend. ÒLiath, itÕs me. ItÕs Hanna. You must
stop this. Liath! There was nothing you could do to save them. You triedÑ
¡°Ai, Lady. Hanna! Hanna! Why werenÕt you here before? Why didnÕt you come? Oh,
God. Oh, God. I lost everything. Where is he? Please, Hanna, please get me away from him.
You donÕt understand. I did it. I caused it. Why did Da lie to me?Ó On she went, more
sobbing than words and all of them incoherent. 
The horn blasted close at hand, and Hanna looked over her shoulder to see the
magnificent train of the king and his hunting party emerge from the forest west of the blaze
with the setting sun at their backs. 
On Dhearc, the shortest day of the year, light triumphed at last over the advance of night.
Candles were lit to aid in that battle. Some fallen candle, surely, had kindled this fire; the
bitter irony did not escape her. But Hanna could only sniff back tears, feeling the heat of fire
blazing on her cheek as she held Liath and tried to get her to stop shaking and babbling and
crying, but Liath could only go on and on about fire and rape and ice and power and sleep
as if she had truly lost her mind. 
ÒLiath,Ó said Hanna sharply, Òyou must stop this! The king has arrived.Ó 
ÒThe king,Ó whispered Liath. She sucked air in between clenched teeth. She struggled
more fiercely than she had against FolquinÕs hold, but in the end she fought herself out of
hysteria and into something resembling control. ÒStay by me, Hanna. DonÕt leave me.Ó 
ÒI wonÕt.Ó Hanna looked up as she tasted a new scent on the wind. ÒIs it raining?Ó But
there were only a few clouds. ÒLook at the fire. ItÕs as if all the timberÕs gone.Ó Indeed,
the fire was ebbing, although it was as yet far too hot to venture close. 
 ÒDonÕt leave me, Hanna,Ó Liath repeated. ÒDonÕt ever leave me alone with him, I beg
you.Ó 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó murmured Hanna, suddenly afraid. ÒHe didnÕtÑÓ 
ÒNo.Ó Her voice dropped to a whisper, barely audible. Her hands gripped HannaÕs so
tightly it hurt. ÒNo, he didnÕt have time toÑÓ Her hands convulsed, her whole body jerking
at some horrible memory. ÒI called, I reached for fireÑÔ Shaking again, she could not go
on. The wind had come up, fanning the flames. Beyond, king and retinue approached.
Already a small entourage had gone out to meet him and give him the terrible news,
although surely he could divine the worst from any distance. The air stank of burning. 
ÒHanna, donÕt desert me,Ó Liath breathed. ÒI need you.Ó She rested her head on
HannaÕs arms. Her hair was caked with soot, as were her arms and hands, every part of
her. She was so grimy that anything she touched came away streaky with soot. ÒI didnÕt
knowÑI didnÕt know what Da was protecting me from.Ó 
ÒWhat was he protecting you from?Ó Hanna asked, mystified. 
Liath looked up at her, and her bleak expression cut Hanna to the core. ÒFrom myself.Ó 
7
Sister Amabilia had saved the Vita of St. Radegundis. 
This single thought kept leaping back so insistently into RosvitaÕs mind that it became
hard for her to attend to the council at hand. Brother Fortunatus sat at her feet, hands still
gripping the loose pages of her History, which he had grabbed instead of the cartulary he
had been working on. She had thanked him profusely, as he deserved, poor child. But
though it would have been a blow to lose the History, she could write it again from memory. 
Sister Amabilia had saved the Vita. Had it burned, it could never have been restored.
Brother Fidelis was dead. Only this copy remained, except for the partial, also saved by
Amabilia, which the young woman had herself been copying from the original. 
Rosvita felt sick to her stomach just thinking about it. What if the Vita had been lost?
Gone up in smoke to join its creator, Fidelis, where he rested in blessed peace in the
Chamber of Light? 
ÒBut it did not,Ó she murmured. 

Her clerics glanced at her, surprised to hear her comment while the king was speaking.
She smiled wryly at them and made the gesture for Silence just as Amabilia opened her
mouth to reply. 
Ò...to the efforts of my faithful clerics who rescued my treasury and much of the business
of the court, and mostly to Father Hugh. He stayed to the end until all who could be brought
out of the fire were saved. He risked his own life with no thought for himself. Where is Father
Hugh?Ó 
ÒHe is still with Princess Sapientia, Your Majesty,Ó said Helmut Villam. 
They stood or sat, all in disorder, in the hall of a well-to-do merchant. Even so, most of the
court could not crowd in. They had slept out in the fields and forest last night, in barns and
hayricks and under such shelter as could be found, safely away from the fire. Rosvita had
been glad of straw for bedding; most of the court and the townsfolk rousted from their homes
had been glad simply to have a roof of some kind over their heads. It had rained half the
night. Now, in the morning, with the palace smoldering and a light rain still falling, Henry had
felt it safe enough to venture back into town and take shelter there while he held council. 
Burchard, Duke of Avaria, and his duchess, Ida of Rovencia, sat beside the king.
Burchard had the look of a man who has touched Death but not yet realized it; Ida looked
stern, tired, and very old, as befit a woman who has seen her two eldest sons die untimely. 
The king himself looked tired. Though his tent had been salvaged from the fire, he had not
passed a restful night. Last to sleep, sitting by his pregnant daughterÕs bed, he had been
first to wake and with a number of attendants had walked to the palace to investigate the
remains. 
It was still too hot to enter. A few pillars stood, the remaining roof sloped precariously,
about to cave in, and the stone chapel was scorched but otherwise intact. All the chapel
valuablesÑa reliquary containing the dust of the thighbone of St. Paulina, the gold vessels
for holy water, and the embroidered altar clothÑhad been saved. 
ÒWhat of the cause?Ó asked the king now. 
A palace steward came forward. He had obviously slept in his clothing and himself risked
his life in the fire, for his sleeves were ripped and stained with soot and the hood of his cape
was singed and blackened. ÒNo one knows, Your Majesty. All the Candlemass candles
were carefully watched. We always set them in clay bowls so if they spill there wonÕt be
danger of fire. Alas, the Lions have testified that some among their number fell asleep while
gaming in the barracks. Perhaps they knocked over a lamp.Ó 
Henry sighed. ÒI see no point in casting blame, not when a dozen souls lost their lives,
may God grant them peace. Let us consider this as a sign that we take our leisure at our
peril, as long as Gent remains in the hands of the Eika. Thus does our sport blind us to our
duty. Let greater care be taken in the future.Ó 
Sister Amabilia bad saved the Vita of St. Radegundis from the fire. 
The book lay on RosvitaÕs lap, swaddled in a lambÕs wool blanket, the softest cradle
Rosvita had found for it. She had slept with it clasped to her breast last night, though its
presence had triggered strange dreams, and she would not let it out of her grasp today. 
Was this obsession unseemly? Perhaps it would be best to give the original to the
monastery at Quedlinhame and keep only AmabiliaÕs copy for herself, to keep herself free
of the sin of esurienceÑthat greedy hunger she had for the knowledge that had died with
Brother Fidelis: his knowledge, some of which was retained in the Life he had written. 
Henry sat forward suddenly, his expression lightening. ÒHere is Father Hugh. What
news?Ó 
Hugh knelt before the king. He looked ragged and unkempt. Possibly he had not slept at
all. Yet his lack of concern for his appearance, under these circumstances, could only reflect
well on him. He alone of all the nobles had remained behind beside the conflagration; he
had directed the rescue efforts; he had made sure all who could be brought safely out of the
palace were gotten free. 
Perhaps it had been a wise choice when Margrave Judith had sent Princess Sapientia

on her way, directing her to visit first with the young abbot of Firsebarg, JudithÕs bastard
son. Poor Sapientia, whose name meant wisdom, had never shown much of that quality;
perhaps, with such a name, she had been bound to become sensitive to comparisons to her
clever younger sister. But she had chosen wisely when it came to Hugh. 
Truly it could be said, as the court wits said now, that he was the ornament of Òwisdom.Ó
Even in such a state as this. 
ÒPrincess Sapientia sleeps, Your Majesty,Ó he said, his voice as calm and
well-modulated as ever. ÒHer pains have gone away, but she still feels poorly. With your
permission, I will send a message to my mother. Her physicianÑ
¡°Yes, I am acquainted with Margrave JudithÕs physician.Ó The king gestured toward
Villam. ÒThe man saved my good companion VillamÕs life, if not his arm. Very well, send
for herÑor for the Arethousan, if her business keeps her in the marchlands.Ó 
ÒWhat business?Ó whispered Sister Odila. 
 ÒOh, come,Ó muttered Brother Fortunatus, ÒdonÕt you recall? Judith had to return to
Olsatia because she is to marry again.Ó 
ÒAgain?Ó squeaked young Brother Constantine. 
ÒHush,Ó hissed Sister Amabilia, but a moment later she, too, could not contain herself.
ÒI thought she meant to celebrate the marriage here on the kingÕs progress.Ó 
ÒIndeed,Ó said Fortunatus smugly, certain of his sources of information and pleased to
have knowledge Amabilia lacked. ÒBut the young bridegroom never showed up. His family
made peculiar excuses, so the margrave journeyed back to find out for herself.Ó 
ÒHush, children,Ó said Rosvita. 
Ò...Sapientia has become fond of her Eagle,Ó Hugh was saying, Òand I fear it would
upset her at this delicate time to send the young woman away. If another Eagle could be
found to ride...Ó He smiled gently. 
The kingÕs Eagle, Hathui, now leaned forward. ÒYour Majesty. You have not gotten a
report from the Eagle who rode in yesterday.Ó 
The king nodded. Hathui gestured and a young woman walked forward from the back of
the hall to kneel before the king. 
ÒGive your report,Ó said Hathui to her. 
The young Eagle bowed her head respectfully. ÒYour Majesty, I am Hanna, daughter of
Birta and Hansal, out of HeartÕs Rest.Ó 
HeartÕs Rest! Rosvita stared at the young woman but could see no resemblance to any
person she recalled from her childhood; it had been so many years since she had visited
her home and her fatherÕs hall. Perhaps her brother Ivar knew the familyÑbut it was unlikely
unless Count Harl had himself brought the young woman to the notice of the Eagles. 
ÒYou sent me south with Wolfhere, escorting Biscop Antonia, late last spring after the
battle of Kassel.Ó 
ÒI remember.Ó 
ÒI bring grave news, Your Majesty. While in the Alfar Mountains, a storm hit St. ServitiusÕ
Monastery, where we took shelter for the night.Ó She described a rockfall and the
destruction of the monastery infirmary. ÒWolfhere beit was no natural storm. He believes
Antonia and her cleric escaped.Ó 
ÒHe found no bodies?Ó 
ÒNone could be found, Your Majesty. The rocks were too unstable to move.Ó 
ÒWhere is Wolfhere now?Ó 
ÒHe went on to Darre to bring the charges against Biscop Antonia before the skopos.
He does not believe she is dead, Your Majesty.Ó 
ÒSo you have said.Ó 
At this, she looked up directly at him. ÒAnd so I will say again, Your Majesty, and again,
until you believe me.Ó 
He smiled suddenly, the first smile Rosvita had seen since their return from the hunt
yesterday into the chaos attendant on the disastrous fire. ÒYou believe Wolfhere is

correct?Ó 
She hesitated, bit her lip, then went on. ÒI myself witnessed such sights that night...I saw 
things, Your Majesty, creatures in the storm such as I have never seen before and hope
never to see again! They were not any creatures that walk on earth unless called fromÑother
places, dark places.Ó 
Now he leaned forward. She had caught his interest. ÒSorcery?Ó 
ÒWhat else could it be? We saw the guivre, such as only a magi could capture and
control. But these were not even creatures of flesh and blood. Wolfhere called them galla.Ó 
Every person in the hall shuddered reflexively when the word came out of her mouth.
Rosvita had never heard of such a thing, and yet some tone, some intonation, made her
flinch instinctively. But as she glanced round the room she saw Father Hugh look up sharply,
eyes wideningÑwith interest? Or with distaste? 
ÒI have no reason,Ó said the king wryly, Òto distrust Wolfhere in such matters. Well, then,
Eagle, if this happened while crossing the Alfar Mountains in the summer, why has it taken
you until winter to reach me?Ó 
She lifted a hand. ÒIf I may, Your Majesty?Ó Curious, he assented. 
She gestured behind, and three Lions walked forward and knelt beside her, heads
bowed. They, too, looked travel-worn, tabards and armor much mended; one had a newly
healed cut on his left cheek. ÒThese Lions were my escort, and they will witness that all that I
say is true. When we turned back from the monastery, we found the pass was closed,
blocked by another avalanche. Therefore we had to keep going south into the borderlands
of Karrone until we could link up with the road that led back north through the Julier Pass. But
here, too, we could not get through.Ó 
ÒAnother storm?Ó demanded Villam, and Father Hugh leaned forward as if he feared
the EagleÕs answer would be too faint for him to hear. 
ÒNo, my lord. Duke Conrad closed the pass.Ó 
Henry stood up, and immediately any persons in the hall who were sitting scrambled to
their feet as well, including poor Brother Fortunatus, who had sprained his knee in the
conflagration yesterday. ÒDuke Conrad has closed the pass? On whose authority?Ó 
ÒI do not know the particulars, Your Majesty, only what I could learn from the border
guards. It seems there is a dispute about borders between Queen Marozia and Duke
Conrad, and neither will back down. So to spite her, Duke Conrad refused to let any traffic
through the pass.Ó 
ÒTo spite himself,Ó muttered Villam. ÒThat pass links the duchy of Wayland to Karrone 
and to Aosta.Ó He shook his head, looking disgusted. 
ÒNevertheless,Ó she replied, still sounding offended at the memory of the incident, Òwe
were not let through although I carry an EagleÕs ring and badge, the seals of your
authority.Ó 
There was a silence while Henry considered this news. A few whispers hissed through
the hall, then hushed. Abruptly, he sat down. Rosvita could not read his expression. ÒWhat
then?Ó he asked, his voice level. 
ÒWe had to ride farther east until we came to the Brinne Pass, and farther east still, once
we had crossed over the mountains. We came into the marchlands of Westfall where
Margrave Werinhar fed us most handsomely and gave me a new horse and all of us
generous supplies. But so many of the paths and roads had been washed out by heavy
rains that we had to go even farther east into the marchland of Eastfall before we could find
a good road leading west.Ó Again she hesitated and looked toward Hathui, as for courage.
The older Eagle merely nodded crisply, and the younger went on. ÒEvery person there sent
word by me, Your Majesty. They beg you to set a margrave over them for protection. The
Quman raids have been more fierce this year than in any year since your great-grandfather
the first Henry fought and defeated the Quman princes at the River Eldar.Ó She turned and
signed to the Lion, eldest of her companionsÑthe one with the scarred cheek. He presented
a broken arrow to the king. Fletched with iron-gray feathers, the arrow had an iron point; it

looked innocuous enough for a tool meant for killing, and yet a kind of miasma hung about it
as if it had a rank smell or some kind of repelling spell laid on it. Those feathers resembled
none of any bird she had ever seen. 
But in the eastern wilderness, griffins hunted. Or so books said and report gave out. But
Rosvita rarely trusted the reports of credulous folk who might see one thing and believe it
was anotherÑas had the lords and ladies out hunting, seeing a deer instead of Theophanu. It
was stuffy in the small hall with so many people crammed in, even with the high windows
thrown open. A restlessness plagued them all at the sight of the arrow. A few slipped out the
door, but even as they left, others shouldered in to take their place. 
Henry took the arrow from the LionÕs hand and at once cut a finger on the hard edge of
the fletching. He grunted in pain and stuck his finger in his mouth, sucking on it. Immediately,
the Lion took the arrow out of HenryÕs hand. ÒLet me hold this for you, Your Majesty,Ó said
the man. ÒI beg you.Ó 
ÒWhere did you get this arrow?Ó asked the king as he pressed on the finger with his
thumb to stop the bleeding. ÒAt a village called Felsig,Ó continued the Eagle. ÒWe arrived
hours after dawn, when they had repulsed an attack of Quman raiders. We helped fight off
the last of them, some of their foot soldiers who I swear to you are so unsightly that they
could be born of no human mother, though they are nothing like the Eika. Our comrade Artur
died of wounds taken there. We brought with us a lad, named Stephen, who fought bravely
in that skirmish. He wishes to swear himself to the service of the Lions.Ó 
ÒAnd I, as senior among us, deemed him fit to serve,Ó added Ingo. 
ÒDo as you see fit,Ó said Henry. ÒSuch a brave fighter is welcome in my Lions.Ó 
ÒWhom will you nominate as margrave of Eastfall?Ó asked Lady Brigida from the crowd.
As niece of Duke Burchard and Duchess Ida, she might expect to be named. 
Several voices spoke. ÒPrincess Theophanu. Prince Ekkehard.Ó 
Henry raised a hand for silence. ÒI will think on it. It is not a decision to be made rashly.
Duke Burchard.Ó He turned to the old duke. ÒCan you send a force into the marchlands
from Avaria?Ó 
The duke coughed before he spoke, and his voice was weak. ÒI have no sons of an age
to lead such an expedition,Ó he said slowly and pointedlyÑthus reminding all listeners that
his second son Frederic had died fighting in the marchlands and his eldest son, Agius, just
last spring, had sacrificed himself to save the king from the dreadful guivre. ÒIt is my
experience that the Quman riders must be met by cavalry. Foot soldiers cannot defeat them.
You must reform the Dragons, Your Majesty.Ó 
ÒI have no sons of such an age either,Ó said Henry harshly, not even looking toward poor
Ekkehard who sat unnoticed in the corner behind Helmut Villam. ÒNot any more. Nor any
soldiers as brave as those who died at Gent.Ó 
No one spoke or ventured an opinion, for Duke Burchard had thrown the meat among the
dogs and everyone waited to see how ugly the fight would be for the spoils. But no one
dared contradict the king, not even Burchard. ÒWhat other news do you bring for me,
Eagle?Ó Henry demanded, turning his attention back to the young woman kneeling before
him. ÒThere has been enough of bad news. Pray you, tell me nothing more that I do not want
to hear.Ó She had been pale before. Now she blanched. ÒThere is another piece of news,Ó
she began, almost stuttering. ÒI heard it when we halted at the Thurin Forest, where we had
come searching for you. They had it there from Qued-linhame.Ó Then she broke off. ÒGo
on!Ó said the king impatiently. ÒN-news from Gent.Ó 
 ÒGent!Ó The king stood again. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó muttered Brother Fortunatus, wincing as he got up. 
¡°What news?Ó 
ÒOnly this: that two children escaped from the city. The children said that a daimone
imprisoned by Bloodheart showed them the way out through the crypt, but there was no
trace of such a tunnel when the foresters thereabouts went later to look.Ó 
ÒSuch a tunnel,Ó said Villam, Òas the other refugees from Gent claimed to have used to

flee to safety?Ó 
ÒI donÕt know,Ó said Hanna, Òbut LiathÑÓ 
ÒLiath?Ó asked the king. 
ÒMy comrade in the Eagles. She would know. She was there.Ó 
ÒOf course,Ó said the king. ÒI will question her later. Go on.Ó His interest was keen and
his attention, on the young Eagle, utterly focused. 
ÒThere is little else to report. The Eika still infest the city. They have brought in slaves
who work the smithies and armories and in the tanneries, so the children reported. They
sawÑÓ She made a kind of hiccuping sound, then got the words out. ÒAccording to the
report I heard, they saw the bodies of fighting men in the crypt below the cathedral. Tabards
sewn with the sigil of a dragon.Ó 
ÒThat is enough.Ó The king signed her to silence. She looked relieved to be free of his
notice. ÒI am weary. Today my stewards will organize the train. Tomorrow we ride toward
Echstatt. Duke Burchard, you will give me fifty soldiers to send to Eastfall. Young Rodulf of
Varingia and ten companions attend me. He can prove himself loyal to me and cleanse his
family honor of the stain laid there by his father the late duke by fighting well and bravely in
the east. Let them be called Dragons.Ó The words came hard, but he spoke them. ÒIn time,
others will be added to their number.Ó 
He shut his eyes a moment, seemed to be praying silently; then he shook himself free of
memory and went un. ÒGod guide us in this hour of loss.Ó He touched a hand to his chest
where, Rosvita knew, he kept an old bloodstained ragÑthe birthcloth of his bastard son
SanglantÑnestled against his skin. ÒNow we must consider Gent. We have recovered from
our losses at Kassel. There has been time to get the harvest in, and by the mercy and grace
of Our Lord and Lady, the crop has been good. Sabella remains safely in the custody of
Biscop Constance. I need only an army sufficient to attack Gent.Ó 
Many people in the hall, mostly young and male, clamored at once. ÒI will go! Let me ride,
Your Majesty! The honor of my kinÑ!Ó 
The newest arrival at court, pleasant and able Lord Geoffrey, shouldered his way to the
front. ÒGrant me this honor, Your Majesty,Ó he said, kneeling. 
Henry raised a hand to cut short the outcry. ÒWinter is a poor season for Eagles to ride,
but ride they must for my purposes. Hathui. Send one hardy soul to Margrave Judith, to
inquire if she will lend her physician for the care of my daughter until she gives birth to the
child. Send one with the expedition to Eastfall. Send another to Duke Conrad in Wayland
with these words: ÔAttend me on my progress to explain your conduct toward my Eagle at
Julier Pass.Õ And choose a fourth carefully, to send to Count Lavastine, in Varre.Ó 
Lord Geoffrey glanced up, surprised. 
ÒYou, my young friend,Ó said Henry to him, ÒI will keep by my side for a few more hunts
at least. Let the Eagle ride now to your kinsman. You can return there later.Ó 
ÒWhy to Count Lavastine?Ó asked Burchard querulously. 
Villam, who had been listening carefully to the king, smiled softly as at a joke only he
understood. 
ÒHe has gained a son. I have lost one. Let Lavastine prove his loyalty to me by meeting
me with an army at Gent. If God grant us victory over the Eika and restore the city to our
hands, then I will grant him the reward he seeks.Ó 
8
 ln the end it had mattered not. And she had, besides, brought death to a dozen or more
people. Could God ever forgive her? Could she forgive herself? 
ÒPlease, Da,Ó she prayed, hands clasped tight before her lips, Òplease tell me what to
do. Why didnÕt you teach me, Da?Ó 
ÒI will teach you, Liath.Ó 
She jerked away just before he could set his clean, white hand on her shoulder. Stumbling

up to her feet, she jumped out of his reach. Mist curled around them, a low-lying fog that
shrouded trees and the market village, just out of sight of the kingÕs encampment. Hugh
had worked some terrible magic on SapientiaÕs mind, such that the princess would not let
Liath out of her sight, as if she were a talisman for the safety of the unborn child. So Liath
had risen early and come outside to relieve herself, and afterward lingered in the bitter cold
of a fog-bound winter dawn, hoping to have one moment of solitude, of respite. 
But Hugh could not let her be. He would never let her be. He had known long before she
had what Da was protecting. And he wanted it for himself. 
ÒHave you learned your lesson, Liath?Ó Hugh continued. ÒSo many dead.Ó He shook
his head, clicking his tongue with disapproval. ÒSo many dead.Ó 
ÒIf you hadnÕt spelled them to sleepÑÓ she cried. 
ÒItÕs true,Ó he said, amazing her. She broke off. ÒI thought too well of what little I had
learned. I will pray to God for wisdom.Ó His lips curled up. He seemed, for an instant, to be
laughing at himself; then the moment passed and, as quick as an owl strikes, he grabbed
LiathÕs wrist. ÒDonÕt be a fool. The longer you ignore it, the less able you will be to control
it. Is that what you want?Ó He gestured toward the rise where the blackened hulk of the
palace scarred its height. ÒLiath, whom else can you trust?Ó 
ÒIÕll tell the king I set the fireHe laughed curtly. ÒImagine what the king and his
counselors will say when they discover they have harbored a maleficus in their midst. Only
the skopos can judge such as youÑa monster!Ó 
ÒIÕll go to WolfhereÑÓ 
ÒWolfhere! We have had this discussion before. Trust Wolfhere, if you will. But I have 
The Book of Secrets now. I have seen what you can do, and I do not hate you for it. I love
you for it, Liath. Who else will love or trust you once they know what you are? I have the trust
of the king, and Wolfhere does not. I can protect you from the kingÕs wrath, and the
churchÕs suspicion. And when Sapientia gives birth to our child, I will be guaranteed the
place of her closest adviser for as long as she reigns.Ó 
ÒNot if she miscarriesÑÓ 
He hit her, hard, on the cheek with an open hand. 
ÒI carried your child,Ó she gasped, jerking away, but she could not get free. ÒAi, Lady, I
am glad you beat it out of me.Ó 
He hit her again, and then again, harder, and the fourth time she staggered and fell to her
kneesÑbut this time she drew her knife. 
ÒIÕll kill you,Ó she whispered hoarsely. Tears stung her eyes and blood dripped from her
nose. 
He laughed, as if her resistance delighted him. 
ÒMy lord Father!Ó A servingman ran out of the mist, leaping between her knife and
HughÕs body. He jumped in to grapple with her, but she flung the knife away before he could
touch her. What use was a knife against HughÕs magicÑif it even were magic? Hugh
wielded his earthly power as effectively as any magic. 
ÒMy lord Father, are you unhurt?Ó Numb, she listened as the servingman fawned over
Hugh. ÒGod Above! That an Eagle should threaten you so! IÕll take her into custody until the
kingÑÓ 
ÒNay, brother.Ó Hugh broke in with a gentle smile. ÒHer mind is disordered by the
minions of the Enemy. I thank you for your watchfulness, but God are with me and I need not
fear her, for I intend to heal her instead. You may go on, but be sure I shall remember you in
my prayers.Ó He nodded toward Liath. ÒAs you must pray for her soul.Ó 
The servingman bowed. ÒAs you wish, my lord.Ó He shook his head. ÒYou are all that is
generous.Ó Clucking softly under his breath as if with veiled disapproval, he walked away. 
HughÕs gentle demeanor vanished as soon as the man was out of earshot. ÒDonÕt
provoke me, Liath, and donÕt mock God.Ó His tone was as hard as the rocks digging into
her knees. He picked up the knife and used the point to lift her chin so that she had to look at
him. ÒNow go in. The princess wants to see you.Ó Then, in an action meant to flaunt his

power and her weakness, he flipped over the knife and handed it to her, hilt first. 
Still numb, she sheathed it. Her nose still bled. She pressed one nostril with a hand, to
stem the blood, and walked stiffly back to the princessÕ tent; Hugh walked right behind her.
Her eyes stung and her head pounded, but her heart was frozen. Nothing she could do
mattered. She had no recourse. Perhaps it was true that she could stop him physically
should he try again to rape her...but he was still her jailer, and she was in every other way his
prisoner. 
Sapientia did not even notice Liath; she was gossiping with Lady Brigida about who
might be named as the next Margrave of Eastfall. But Sister Rosvita was there, attending
the princess. 
ÒGood child,Ó she exclaimed as she noticed Liath. ÒWhat happened to your face?Ó 
ÒI tripped on a stump. I beg your pardon, Sister.Ó 
ÒNo need to beg my pardon, Eagle. Your Highness, your father has sent me to get news
of your health.Ó 
ÒIÕm feeling better,Ó said Sapientia. ÒI can ride today.Ó 
ÒPerhaps not today,Ó said Rosvita gently, glancing curiously over at Liath again. ÒYour
father wishes you to remain here resting another week before you attempt the journey to
Echstatt.Ó 
ÒI donÕt wantÑ!Ó 
ÒYour Highness,Ó said Hugh softly. 
Sapientia stopped dead, looked up at Hugh with a most disgustingly exultant expression,
and smiled. ÒWhat do you advise, Father Hugh?Ó 
ÒHeed the kingÕs advice, Your Highness. You must conserve all your energy to bring this
child safely to term.Ó 
ÒYes.Ó She nodded soberly. ÒYes, I must.Ó She turned back to the cleric. ÒTell my
father I will abide by his wishes.Ó 
ÒI will. There is one other thing. King Henry wishes to interview your Eagle about Gent.Ó 
Liath waited stupidly, stripped of purpose, until Sapientia gave permission for her to go.
Hugh begged leave to attend the king. Together, Liath, Rosvita, and Hugh left and crossed
to the kingÕs tent. Not even in such a small way would Hugh leave her alone. Henry was
awake, seated in his chair while his servants packed what remained of his possessions into
chests for the journey. 
ÒThere is the Eagle,Ó said the king as he looked up from a consultation with a steward
about the outfitting of the new Dragons. He indicated Hathui, who stood over to one side of
the tent with Hanna and a redheaded Eagle named, of course, Rufus. ÒYou will give your
report to your comrades. One of them will be riding to Count Lavastine. Father Hugh! How
may I aid you?Ó 
Hailed by the king, Hugh could hardly follow her over to the others. 
ÒWhat happened to your face!Ó exclaimed Hanna. 
ÒI beg you, Hathui,Ó pleaded Liath in a whisper, grasping HathuiÕs hands. ÒI beg you, if
you have any influence with the king, let me ride with Hanna, get me out of here.Ó 
ÒIÕm sorry, Liath. ItÕs already been decided.Ó 
ÒBut if you all go today, if you leave me aloneÑÓ She was suddenly so nauseated, head
pounding, eyesight blurring, that she knew she was going to be sick. 
ÒThis way,Ó said Hathui briskly, and hustled her outside. 
She retched, heaving up mostly spume for she had taken nothing to eat or drink since last
nightÕs sparse dinner, and hacked and shuddered until she thought she might as well die
now and be rid of this misery. 
ÒChild!Ó Rosvita appeared out of the mist and touched her gently on the shoulder.
ÒWhat ails you?Ó 
Hysterical with fear, she no longer cared what she said or did. She could not endure this
any longer. She flung herself down and clasped RosvitaÕs knees like a supplicant. ÒI pray
you, Sister. You have influence with the king! I beg you, ask him to send me away, anywhere,

to take any message, anywhere, only away from here. I beg you, Sister.Ó 
ÒYou are from HeartÕs Rest,Ó said Rosvita suddenly, in a tone of surprise. Liath looked
up, but the cleric was examining Hanna, not her. 
ÒI am.Ó 
ÒAnd this one, too,Ó said Rosvita slowly, looking from Hanna to Liath and then back to
Hanna. ÒIs it possible, Eagle, that you also know my brother Ivar?Ó 
Hanna blinked, then dropped like a stone to kneel before the cleric. ÒMy lady! I beg your
pardon for not knowingÑ
¡°Never mind it,Ó said Rosvita. ÒAnswer my question.Ó 
ÒIvar is my milk brother. He and I nursed from the same breastÑmy motherÕs. My lady, I
beg you.Ó Coming from HannaÕs lips, the pleading sounded freakish. Hanna never
begged. Hanna could always handle any emergency that came her way. Hanna was so
calm. ÒIt is presumptuous of me to claim kinship with you, my lady, but I beg you by that
bond of kinship I hold with your brother, that if you can help her, please do.Ó 
Liath gulped down a sob, she was so desperate, so hopeful, so stripped of hope. 
ÒBut why are you so eager to leave the king?Ó Clearly Rosvita was groping for answers
and having trouble finding any. ÒYou were with Wolfhere in Gent. Has he poisoned your
mind somehow against Henry? Any dispute Wolfhere had with Henry was not of HenryÕs
making.Ó 
ÒNo,Ó gasped Liath, Òit was nothing Wolfhere said. He never said anything against
King Henry.Ó 
ÒTrue-spoken words,Ó muttered Hathui. 
ÒIt isnÕt the king at all.Ó Ai, Lady, how much could she say? How much dared she say? 
ÒCome, now, daughter, take hold of yourself.Ó Rosvita set a hand, like a benediction, on
LiathÕs forehead. ÒIf it is the service of Princess Sapientia you chafe underÑ
¡°Yes!Ó Liath leaped at this. ÒYes. I donÕtÑI canÕtÑWe donÕt suit, IÑÓ 
ÒAn Eagle serves where the king commands,Ó said Rosvita sternly. 
Having freed himself from the king, Hugh came out of the tent. Liath began to sob. She
had lost. 
But Rosvita took her by the hand and lifted her up. ÒCome, daughter, dry your eyes and
sit yourself down here, where there is shelter. It has begun to rain.Ó 
Indeed, it had begun to rain. Liath only noticed it because the sleeting rain slid under the
neck of her cloak and straight down her spine. 
ÒI will take her back to Princess SapientiaÕs tent,Ó said Hugh softly. ÒI fear the fall she
took earlier has disordered her mind.Ó 
ÒLet her rest here a moment,Ó said Rosvita. For a miracle, Hugh did not press the issue
while Rosvita left LiathÕs side and went into the kingÕs tent. Hathui followed the cleric in,
leaving Hanna and a confounded Rufus to stand beside her. She swallowed tears and,
through the fabric of the tent, heard Rosvita speaking to the king. 
ÒWould it not be wisest, Your Majesty,Ó she asked, Òto send the Eagle who has come
from Gent to Count Lavastine, so that he may question her directly?Ó 
ÒThere is wisdom in your words, Sister,Ó said the king. ÒBut my daughter is fond of the
Eagle, and I wish to keep her spirits up.Ó 
ÒI trust Father Hugh and her other companions can keep her spirits up, Your Majesty. But
Count Lavastine will need the best intelligence if he is to have any hope of retaking Gent,
surely, and you cannot afford to leave Gent in the hands of the Eika. Not when it comes time
for them to raid again, and they have control of the river.Ó 
ÒIt is true,Ó spoke up Hathui, Òthat Liath led the refugees through the hidden tunnel so
many have spoken of. If any can find it again, she can.Ó 
Liath heard no reply from the king. Beside her, Hugh cursed softly under his breath.
ÒEagles,Ó he said curtly. ÒWithdraw.Ó Rufus did at once, but Hanna hesitated. ÒGo!Ó
She backed away. ÒLook at me.Ó She kept her head down. ÒLiath!Ó he hissed, but she
would not look. Let him strike her where everyone could see, even his noble peers. Let her

at least have that satisfaction, even if it would make no difference in the end. 
From inside the tent the king spoke. ÒIt is good advice, Sister. Hathui, see that the young
Eagle who came from Gent rides with the message to Lavastine. You may dispose of the
others as you see fit.Ó 
ÒDo not think you have escaped me,Ó said Hugh in a reasonable tone. ÒI will go in now
and tell the king which Eagle Sapientia wishes to replace you. You know which Eagle I will
choose...Ó 
She could not look up. He had won again. 
He smiled. ÒYour friend will be my hostage until you return. She, and the book.
Remember that, Liath. You are still mine.Ó He turned and walked into the tent. So, with his
honey-sweet words, did he convince the king. 
ÒLiath.Ó Hanna laid a hand on her arm. ÒStand up.Ó 
ÒIÕve betrayed you.Ó 
ÒYouÕve betrayed no one. I am an Eagle. That means something. He canÕt harm
meÑÓ 
ÒBut Theophanu in the forestÑ
¡°What are you talking about? Liath, stop it! He doesnÕt care about me, he only cares
about you. As long as I behave myself, he wonÕt notice me. Lady and Lord, Liath, I have
survived Antonia, an avalanche, creatures made of no flesh or blood, two mountain
crossings, a Quman attack, flooded rivers, and your bawling. I think I can survive this!Ó 
ÒPromise me you will!Ó 
Hanna rolled her eyes. ÒSpare us this!Ó she said with disgust. ÒNow go collect your
things.Ó 
Liath winced, remembering. ÒBurned,Ó she whispered. ÒEverything burned in the
attic.Ó 
ÒThen tell Hathui and sheÕll see new gear is issued to you. Oh, LiathÑdid youÑdid you
lose the book, after everything?Ó 
ÒNo.Ó She shut her eyes, heard the soft flow of words from inside the tent, heard Hugh
laugh at a jest made by the king, heard Rosvita answer with a witty reply. ÒHugh got the
book.Ó 
ÒWell, then,Ó said Hanna sharply, ÒitÕs just as well I stay behind to keep an eye on it,
isnÕt it? WasnÕt it I who got it away from him at HeartÕs Rest?Ó 
Liath wiped her nose with the back of a hand and sniffed, hard. ÒOh, Hanna, you must be
sick of me. IÕm sick of myself.Ó 
ÒYouÕll have no time to get sick of yourself when youÕre traveling all day and just trying
to keep alive! ThatÕs what you need! Now go on. The king wants his Eagles sent out as
soon as they can get horses saddled.Ó 
Liath hugged her and went to find Hathui. 
But in the end, when she left the kingÕs encampment, the road swung back by the market
village and, curious, she took a quick detour up to the rise to see the burned palace. Hathui
had found no bow to replace the one lost, and there were no swords to spare with so many
having been lost in the burned barracks. She had a spear, a spare woolen tunic, a water
pouch and hardtack for the road, and a flint to make fire. She had not told Hathui she
needed no tools to make fire. 
She could not help herself. She dismounted at the charred gates and led her horse into
the ruined complex. Already human scavengers tested the blackened timbers nearest the
edge of the fire, those that had cooled; they searched for anything that could be salvaged.
Liath threw the reins over the horseÕs head and left it to stand. She trudged through
wreckage, boots collecting soot, her nose stinging from the stink. A sticky trail of blood from
her nose tickled her lip, and she licked it away and sniffed hard, hoping the bleeding would
finally stop. 
She knew where the barracks stood. Though confused about the palaceÕs layout in her
first days at Augensburg, she now knew the route well because of the fire, when she had

plunged in more times than she could count in her vain attempt to drag all the sleeping Lions
to safety. 
There, at that spot, in that courtyard, she and Hugh had jumped to safety. He had had the
presence of mind to grab her saddlebags before he jumped. That he still limped from a
twisted ankle gave her some pleasure, but not enough. 
She had been too horrified to think. The flames had come so fast, so fierce, and she had
not meant them to come into being at all. They had come to her as fire leaps to any dry thing
within its reach. She had scrambled to safety after him, and only then had she remembered
all the people lying asleep in the palace. 
I will not blame myself. He sent them to sleep. He drove me to the act, whose
consequences I could not imagine. 
But that was no excuse. 
Da had been right to protect her. But he should have taught her, too. She had to find
some way to teach herself. She had to find a way to keep Hugh away from her. 
Light winked, a jewel flash among ash and fallen timbers. She stepped forward over the
crumbled threshold into the main portion of what had once been the barracks. Everything
had caved in and she could not tell which planks came from the walls, which from the attic
floor, and which from the roof. Her boot broke through a plank and she fell, foot hitting the
ground a handÕs breadth beneath. She tugged her boot out of the hole and gingerly
stepped over two fallen beams, skirted a litter of swords and spear points and shield
bosses, all chary and still glowing, and stopped where three planks composed more of
charcoal than of wood lay in perfect alignment, one, two, three in a row like the lid to a chest.
She nudged one aside with her boot. 
There, lying amidst cinders and ash and blackened wood, rested her bow in its case,
untouched, unharmed except for a thin layer of soot streaking it. Amazed, she lifted it off the
ground to find her good friend, LucianÕs sword, beneath it, still sound, as if together they
had weathered the firestorm. 
¡°Liath.Ó 
She started back, grabbing bowcase and sword to her, and spun, stumbling over a fallen
beam and the detritus of the blaze. 
But there was no one there. 
XI THE SOULS OF THE DEAD
1
Antonia had become heartily sick of staring into fire. The smoke stung her eyes and
chapped her cheeks. But she knew better than to complain. At this moment, as the heat
chafed her skin, she watched with her five companions. She had not yet mastered the art of
opening such a window, a vision drawn through fire, but she could see with the others. In her
first days in the valley she could not even do that, and Heribert, who had tried many times,
still could not see through fire or stone. 
She saw shapes as insubstantial as flames, but the others had assured her that these
shapes were the shadows of real forms, real people, real buildings; they had assured her
that every incident they saw through the window made by fire occurred somewhere in the
world beyond their little valley. By this means, through their power, they could see what
transpired in the world beyondÑalthough there were limits to their ability to see. 
Right now, in a distant place whose outlines were limned by the hearth fire, a young
noblewoman and her retinue arrived at the gates of a convent and requested admittance to
pray and offer gifts. 
ÒThat is Princess Theophanu,Ó said Antonia, amazed. 
ÒHush, Sister Venia,Ó said she who sat first among them, caput draconis. ÒLet us listen
to their words as she speaks to the gatekeeper.Ó 

Antonia did not want to admit she heard nothing. She never heard anything through the
flames, only saw shapes and people as they moved and spoke in a kind of dumb show. The
conversation within the fire went on and on as the elderly gatekeeper questioned the
princess at length. 
Antonia examined her companions. 
She disliked their habit of addressing each other in the clerical way: Sister and Brother. It
suggested they were equals. And yet, in truth, she had to admit that Brother Severus was an
educated man of obvious noble blood and proud bearing; his name reflected his severe
manner and ascetic ways. Sister Zoe spoke with the accent of the educated clergy of the
kingdom of Salia, precise and clean. A lush beauty with evident charms that had, alas,
attracted HeribertÕs notice, she looked more like a courtesan than a cleric. Brother Marcus
was older than Zoe but younger than Severus; small, tidy, and arrogant, he had unfortunately
encouraged Heribert in his obsession with building and had soon involved Heribert in a
complicated scheme to rebuild the admittedly dilapidated cluster of buildings that housed
their little community. Sister Meriam looked more like a Jinna heathen than a good
Daisanite woman; old and tiny, with slender bones that looked as fragile as dry sticks, she
nevertheless carried herself with a fierce dignity that even Antonia respected. 
None of these names were true names, of course. Like Antonia, they had all taken other
names when they came to the valley. She did not know what they had once been called or
who their kin were, although any fool could see that Sister Meriam came from the infidel
east. They did not volunteer such information, nor did they ask her about herself. That was
not their purpose here. 
The vision in fire faded to the orange-blue blur of flames crackling and the snap of wood.
Antonia blinked smoke out of her eyes, and sneezed. 
ÒBless you, Sister,Ó said Brother Marcus. He turned to the others. ÒCan this be true,
that Princess Theophanu was mistaken for a deer? Does the princess suspect a sorcerer
walks unseen in the kingÕs court? Could it be she suspects our brother who walks in the
world?Ó 
She who named herself Caput Draconis answered. ÒShe came to St. Valeria Convent
because she suspects sorcery. But that she suspects our brotherÑI doubt it, just as I doubt
Mother Rothgard suspects that her faithful gatekeeper is in fact our ally. We are not known,
Brother Marcus. Do not trouble yourself on that score.Ó 
He bent his head in submission to her words. ÒAs you say, Caput Draconis. What of this
suspected sorcerer, then, whom Princess Theophanu wishes to make known to Mother
Rothgard?Ó 
ÒShe is precipitate, this princess,Ó said the caput draconis. ÒHow can we be sure that
the young folk in question did not simply see what they wished in their eagerness and
mistake branches for antlers and mist for the flash of a deerÕs body? That is what the king
suggested, is it not?Ó 
ÒWhat of the burning arrows?Ó asked Sister Zoe. ÒTaken separately, I would put little
credence in either incident. Taken together, I become suspicious.Ó 
It was dusk, but not chill, for it was never chilly here in this valley. The gold torque worn by
the caput draconis winked and dazzled in the firelight. The womanÕs face remained calm;
she alone Antonia could not put an age to. This difficulty puzzled her and made her fret at
odd moments, waking at night, wondering, as she did about so many other things. 
Above, the sun sank behind the mountains and the night stars emerged, brilliant fires
burning beyond the seventh sphere, lamps lighting the way to the Chamber of Light. The
stars and constellations had names and attributes. Like any educated cleric, she knew a bit
of the astrologusÕ knowledge, but if she had learned one thing in the last six months, it was
this: She knew nothing about the knowledge of the stars compared to her new companions.
She and Heribert had come to rest in a nest of mathematici, the most dangerous of
sorcerers. Antonia had learned more about the stars and the heavens in the last six months
than she had ever before imagined existed. 

She had thought to teach them, for had not the caput draconis admitted that
sheÑAntoniaÑhad a natural gift for compulsion? But her early demonstrations had not
impressed her audience. Hers had been a study of magics used to bring people into her
power, magics born from the earth, from ancient and fell creatures that waited, hidden, in the
earth or in the deep crevices of the soul or of the land itself. Such creatures and spirits were
eager to serve, if commanded boldly and given the right payment, usually in blood. 
ÒAnyone can spill blood,Ó Brother Severus had said contemptuously, Òor read bones,
like a savage.Ó After that she had confined her study of such magics to times when she was
alone. 
Though she resented him for speaking such words out loud, even she had to
admitÑgrudginglyÑthat he was right. Another power arched above all this, and her
companions had studied long and fruitfully to master a sorcery which she had only now taken
the first and tiniest steps toward understanding. 
Why was it that spring lay always in the air here in this valley while winterÕs sky wheeled
above them? How old, truly, was the caput draconis, who carried herself with the gravity of a
woman of great wisdom and age and yet to judge by her face and hair might be any age
between twenty and forty? 
ÒThe burning arrows,Ó mused the caput draconis. ÒOur Brother Lupus brought the one
we seek closer to us but not into our hands, as we had hoped. We have been patient so far,
but this news of burning arrows makes me wonder if it is time to act.Ó 
ÒAct in what way, Sister?Ó Brother Severus raised an eyebrow in muted surprise. Even
at night, he wore only the one thin robe, and he never wore shoes. His bare feet reminded
Antonia at times of poor Brother Agius, whose heretical notions had led him in the end to the
unfortunate death that had proved most inconvenient for her. But God, no doubt, would
forgive him his error. God were merciful to the weak. 
ÒIt is time to investigate,Ó said their leader. ÒThere are gentler ways of persuasion, now
that no obstacle but distance lies between us and that which we seek. Brother Marcus, you
will journey to Darre to be our eyes and ears in the presbytersÕ palace once our brother
must leave to return north. Meanwhile, I, too, must venture out into the world to see what I can
learn there.Ó 
ÒIs that safe?Ó demanded Antonia. 
ÒWhy should it not be safe, Sister Venia?Ó asked Sister Meriam, speaking at last. 
A good question, it was one Antonia could not answer. 
ÒI do not suggest you go, Sister,Ó continued the caput draconis. ÒYou must not leave
here yet. But I am under no such constraints. I can walk in anonymity, as I have pledged to
do.Ó 
ÒA prince is no prince without a retinue,Ó said Antonia snappishly, indicating the gold
torque the other woman wore. 
But the other woman only smiled, her expression almost like pity. ÒI have a retinue.Ó
Lifting a hand, she indicated the darkened valley beyond them where uncanny lights winked
into existence, burning without flame, and stray breezes wove their unsteady way through
trees and flowers blooming in unseasonable splendor. ÒAnd my retinue is more powerful
than any that exists in this world. Let us go, Sisters and Brothers. Let us bend our backs to
this task.Ó 
They rose together, clasped hands in a brief prayer, and left the hearth. 
Irritated, Antonia had to acknowledge the truth of what their caput draconis had said. No
human servants lived in this valley, only beasts, goats and cows for milk, sheep for wool,
chickens and geese for eggs and quills. No, indeed, their little community was not attended
by human servants. 
She left the small chapel behind Brother Marcus and crossed to the site of the new long
hall. Though it was growing dark quickly, Heribert was still out measuring and hammering,
aided by certain of the more robust of the servants. Strangely, he had gotten used to the
servants more quickly than she had, perhaps because he worked beside them every day as

he designed and constructed his projects. 
She still was not used to them. At times, she could barely bring herself to look at them. 
It was one thing to use the abominations nurtured in the bosom of the Enemy to punish
the wicked. It was one thing to harness the power of ancient creatures which had crawled
out of the pit in the days before the advent of the blessed Daisan to frighten the weak into
obedience. 
It was quite another to treat them as honorable servants, to use them as allies, no matter
how fair some of them appeared. 
At her appearance beside the construction site, they fluttered away, or sank like tar into
the ground, or folded in that odd way some had into themselves, vanishing from her sight.
One, the most loyal of HeribertÕs helpers, simply wound itself into the planks which were set
tongue to groove along the north wall of the long hall. It now appeared as a knotlike growth
along the wood. 
ÒHeribert,Ó she said disapprovingly. ÒYour work finishes with sunset,Ó 
ÒYes, yes,Ó he said impatiently, but he was not paying attention. He was setting a
tongued plank into a grooved plank, clucking with displeasure at the poor fit, and planing the
narrow edge carefully down. 
ÒHeribert! How many times have I told you that it is not right that you dirty your hands in
this way. That is the laborerÕs job, not that of an educated and noble cleric.Ó 
He set down board and plane, looked up at her, but said nothing. No longer as thin and
delicate as he had once beenÑan ornament to wisdom, as the saying went, rather than to
gross bodily vigorÑhe had grown thicker through the shoulders in the past months. His
hands were work-roughened, callused, and scarred with small cuts and healed blisters. He
got splinters aplenty now, every day, and could pull them out himself without whimpering. 
She did not like the way he was looking at her. In a young child, she would have called it
defiance, ÒYou will come in now and eat,Ó she added. ÒWhen I am finished, Mother,Ó he
said, and then he smiled, because he knew it irritated her when he called her by that title. As
a good churchwoman, she should not have succumbed to the baser temptations, and in time
she would have her revenge on the man who had tempted her. 
 ÒYou would never have spoken to me so disrespectfully before we came here!Ó 
A whispering came on the breeze, and he cocked his head, listening. Was he hearing
something? Did the abominations speak to him? And if so, why could she not hear or
understand their speech? 
He bowed his head. ÒI beg your pardon, Your Grace.Ó But she no longer trusted his
docility. 
Had the caput draconis lied to her? Misled her? Did they mean to take Heribert from
herÑnot by any rough and violent means but simply by allowing certain dishonorable
thoughts to fester in his mind, such as the idea that he could turn his back on his duty to his
elders, his kin, his own mother who had borne him in much pain and blood and who had
bent her considerable power to protecting him against anything that might harm him? Would
he disobey her wishes simply to indulge himself in the selfish and earthly desire to partake
of such menial tasks as building and architecture? Was this the price she would have to pay:
the loss of her son? Not his physical loss, but the loss of his obedience to her wishes?
Would she have to stand by and watch his transformation into a mere artisanÑa builder, for
GodÕs sake! She would not stand by idly while they worked their magics on him, even if
they were the trivial magics of flattery and false interest in his unworthy obsessions. They
were using him for their own gain, of course, since certainly the buildings they lived in were
not fit for persons of their consequence. It was infuriating to watch as those who were
supposed to be her companions in work and learning encouraged the young man in these
inappropriate labors as if he were a mere artisanÕs child. 
But she was wise, and patient. She bided her time. Her companions were also powerful,
and it would not do to offend them as long as they knew more than she did about sorcery. 
She bided her time, and watched, and listened, and learned. 

Heribert stored his tools in a chest, ran a hand lovingly down the partially finished north
wall, and with no further insolence walked away to the old stone tower where they now took
their common meal. 
Antonia waited until the door opened onto light and closed behind him. She lingered in
the pleasant evening breeze, staring up at the sky. This knowledge did not come easily but,
like all things in life, one had only to grasp and squeeze firmly enough to choke obedience
out of thatÑhuman or otherwiseÑwhich was recalcitrant. 
On this night high in the mountains whose breeze was that of spring, certain
constellations shone high in the sky, betraying the proper season: winter. 
ÒName them for me, Sister Venia,Ó said Brother Severus, coming suddenly out of the
gloom to stand beside her. 
ÒVery well,Ó she said. She would not be intimidated by his solemn tone and dour
expression. ÒAt this season, the Penitent, twelfth House in the zodiac, rides high in the
skyÑÓ She pointed overhead. ÒÑwhile the tenth House, the Unicorn, sets with the sun and
the Sisters, the third House, rise at nightfall. The Guivre stalks the heavens and the Eagle
swoops down upon its back. The Hunter begins his climb from the east as the Queen sets in
the west and her Sword, her Crown, and her Staff ride low on the horizon, symbol of her
waning power.Ó 
ÒThat is good,Ó said Severus, Òbut you have listened in your youth to too many
astrologi. The Hunter, the Queen, the Eagle: These are only names we give to the stars,
drawing familiar pictures on the face of the heavens. In heaven itself, they have their own
designations whose names are a mystery to those of us who live here beneath the sphere of
the ever-dying moon. But by naming them, even in such a primitive way, seeing our own
wishes and fears among them as the young hunters saw Princess Theophanu as a running
deer, we gain knowledge enough to see the lines of power that bind them together. With
knowledge, we can harness the power that courses between them through that geometry
which exists between all the stars. Each alignment offers new opportunities or new
obstacles, each unique.Ó 
He raised a hand, pointing. ÒSee there, Sister. How many of the planets do you see, and
where are they?Ó 
Her eyesight was not what it had been in her youth, but she squinted up. ÒI see
Somorhas, of course, the Evening Star, lying in the Penitent. Jedu, Angel of War, entered
the Falcon ten days ago. And Mok, mistress of wisdom and plenty, must still be in the Lion,
although we canÕt see her now.Ó 
Whatever pride she felt in this observation he punctured with his next words. ÒThere also
find Aturna, who moves in retrograde through the Child, his lines of influence opposite the
others. ThereÑsee you?Ñalmost invisible unless you know where to look, lies fleet Erekes,
just entering the Penitent. The Moon is not yet risen this night. The Sun, of course, has set.
Yet within twenty days Mok and Jedu will also move into retrograde, so that only Somorhas
and Erekes move forward. Thus the planets on this night as on every night form a new
alignment in relationship to the great stars of the heavens. There you see the GuivreÕs Eye,
and there Vulneris and Rijil, the HunterÕs shoulder and foot. There are the three jewels,
sapphire, diamond, and citrine, which are the chief stars in the Cup, the Sword, and the
Staff. The ChildÕs Torque rises toward the zenith, as does the Crown of Stars. Tomorrow
we will send our companion on her way, aiding her swift travel through the halls of iron by
such power as we can draw down to us through these alignments. Only with knowledge can
we use the power of the heavens. Do not think it is fit knowledge for any common mortal soul
who walks the earth. Only a few can truly comprehend it and act rightly.Ó 
ÒThat is why God through the hand of Their skopos ordained biscops and presbyters,
Brother, is it not? To guide and to shepherd?Ó 
He considered this comment in silence while he studied the stars above, looking for
something, some sign, some portent, perhaps. As she waited, she became lost in
contemplation of the River of Heaven, the track of sparkling dust like a great serpent circling

the sky, each faint light a soul streaming toward the Chamber of Light. 
At last Severus spoke, slowly now and as if to himself as much as to her. ÒYou are
accustomed to power, Sister Venia. But you must forget all you have learned in the world.
You must leave it behind, cut yourself off from it, as we did. That is the only way to learn what
we have to teach you.Ó 
ÒHow can we let go of the world when God have given us as our task the means to guide
the mistaken back to the righteous way, to chastise the weak, and to punish the wicked?Ó 
ÒIs that what God have asked us to do?Ó 
ÒIs it not?Ó 
ÒWe are all tainted with the darkness which is the touch of the Enemy, Sister Venia. It is
arrogance to believe we can see through the darkness that veils us and understand GodÕs
will better than any other mortal soul. Only thereÑÓ He gestured toward the River of Heaven,
streaming above them. ÒÑwill we be cleansed of that darkness and shine only as light.Ó He
lowered his hand. ÒShall we go in to dinner?Ó 
2
 The River of Heaven,Ó Da always said, ¡°was called the Great Serpent by the heathen
tribes who lived here before the Holy Word came to these lands.Ó 
¡°Why is the zodiac called the world dragon, Da?Ó she would ask, ¡°when itÕs actually
twelve constellations and not one creature at all? And if thatÕs a dragon, then why is the
River of Heaven called a serpent?Ó 
¡°We have many names for things,Ó he would answer. ¡°It is the habit of humankind to
name things so that we may then have power over them. The Jinna call the River of
Heaven by another name: the Fire GodÕs Breath. In the annals of the Babaharshan
magicians it was called the Ever-Bright Bridge Which Spans the Chasm. The ancient
Dariyan sages called it the Road of Lady Fortune, for where She sets her foot, gems
bloom.Ó 
¡°What do you think it is, Da?Ó 
¡°It is the souls of the dead, Liath, you know that. That is the path by which they stream
onward into the Chamber of Light.Ó 
¡°But then why donÕt we see it movingÑI mean really moving, flowing, not just moving
as the stars all do, rising in the east and setting in the west? Rivers flow. Water is always
moving.Ó 
¡°That is not water, daughter, but the light of divine souls. And in any case, the aether
does not follow the same laws as the elements bound to this earth, nor should it.Ó 
¡°Then is there fire in our souls, that they should light up like that once they reach the
heavens?Ó 
But at the mention of fire, he would get upset and change the subject. 
Now she wondered. ¡°Hindsight is a marvelous thing,Ó Da would always say. ¡°Every
person sees perfectly with hindsight.Ó She had done brushing down her horse and lingered
outside the door, staring up at a winter sky unblemished with clouds. It was bitter cold, this
night; snow had fallen yesterday, delicate flakes like the shedding of down from angelÕs
wings, but there had not been enough to make more than a thin crust on the road today. 
¡°Then is there fire in our souls?Ó 
She built the City of Memory in her mind as she stood, arms crossed and gloved hands
tucked under armpits for warmth, staring up at the sky. The city lies on an island, and the
island is itself a small mountain. Seven walls ring the mountain, each one higher up on the
slope, each one named by a different gate: Rose, Sword, Cup, Ring, Throne, Scepter, and
Crown. Beyond the Crown gate, at the flat crown of the hill, stands a plaza, and on this plaza
stand five buildings. Of the five buildings, one stands at each of the cardinal directions:
north, south, east, and west. The fifth building, a tower, stands in the very center, the navel of

the universe, as Da sometimes said jokingly. 
But perhaps he had not meant it as a joke. Inside the topmost chamber of the tower stand
four doors, one opening to each of the cardinal directions. But in the center of that chamber
stands a fifth door, which neither opens nor closes because it is locked; because, standing
impossibly in the center of the room, it leads to nothing. 
Except there was something beyond it. If she, in her mindÕs eye, knelt and peered
through the keyhole, she saw fire. 
Da had locked the door and not given her the key. He had meant to teach herÑshe was
sure of thatÑbut poor Da, always running, always suspicious, always afraid of what might be
walking up from behind, could never decide quite when the time was right. So the time had
never come. 
Some things cannot be locked away. 
ÒI miss you, Da,Ó she whispered to the night air, her breath a cloud of steam. Glancing
up, her attention was caught by the River of Heaven, and she suddenly wondered if it, too,
was a cloud of steam, warm breath on the cold celestial sphere of the fixed stars far above
her. Like the zodiac, it was a circle banding the heavens, but it crossed the zodiac obliquely,
cutting across at the foot of the Sisters and again, one hundred and eighty degrees round
the circle, at the bow carried by the Archer. 
Suddenly, with this vision of the sky bright above her, she realized that she had known all
along which Eustacia Hugh had quoted from when he humilated her in front of the court. Of
course she knew the Commentary on the Dream of Cornelia. But she had always skimmed
over the bits about philosophy and virtue and the proper government for humankind. Those
chapters didnÕt interest her. She had memorized the chapters in which Eustacia
commented upon the nature of the stars. 
Where was it stored? She searched, in her mindÕs eye, in the city, found the level, the
building, the chamber, where EustaciaÕs chapters resided, those she had copied out years
ago at the biscopÕs library in Autun. 
¡°Concerning the River of Heaven, many writers have offered explanations for its
existence, but we shall discuss only those that seem essential to its nature. Theophrastus
called it the Via Lactea, the Milky Way, and said it was a seam where the two hemispheres
of the celestial sphere were joined together. Democrita explained that countless small
stars had been compressed by their narrow confines into a mass and that by being thus
close-set, they scatter light in all directions and so give the appearance of a continuous
beam of light. But PosidonosÕ definition is most widely accepted: Because the sun never
passes beyond the boundaries of the zodiac, the remaining portion of the heavens gets
no share in its heat; therefore the purpose of the River of Heaven, lying obliquely to the
zodiac as it does, is to bring a stream of stellar heat to temper the rest of the universe with
its warmth.Ó 
ÒEagle! No need to stand outside. ThereÕs a fire and supper within!Ó 
She shook herself free of musing and went back inside. A long-house with stables at one
end and living quarters at the other, it was as warm and welcoming as its mistress. 
ÒI admit to you, Mistress Godesti, that I have not always met with as warm a hospitality
as you grant me, now that I ride on King HenryÕs business here in Varre.Ó Her family had
been at their meal at dusk when Liath had ridden in to this hamlet, but they had saved a
generous portion for her. 
The woman grunted and gestured to the children of her household to go back to their
beds. A single lantern and the hearth lit them, all they could spare on a winterÕs night. 
 Her elder daughter hovered by the fire, pushing sparks and coals back within the brick
circle; another girl ladled out stew. ÒMany resent the rule of King Henry, here in Varre,Ó she
replied in a low voice. 
ÒYou do not?Ó 
A son set down the bowl of stew and mug of warm cider before Liath as his mother
spoke. ÒI fear war if the great lords fight among themselves. So do we all. But I fear a bad

harvest more. And I fear the invisible arrows of the shades of the Lost Ones, those who
lingered behind when their living cousins left this world. They plague us with illness and
festering.Ó 
ÒThe shades of the Lost Ones?Ó Liath asked. This hamlet lay on the edge of forest, and
everyone knew that many strange and ancient creatures preferred the shelter of trees. 
ÒGo on, eat now. I would be a poor host if I were to make you talk instead of fill yourself
up. We have nothing to complain of. This has been a good year for us, ever since our new
master took control of these lands.Ó 
ÒWho is your master?Ó 
ÒWe tithe to the abbey of Firsebarg.Ó 
Liath choked on her cider, coughed, and set down the cup hastily. ÒI beg your pardon. It
was hotter than I expected.Ó 
ÒNay, I beg your pardon, Eagle. Careful of the stew.Ó 
Liath recovered her breathing and, now, blew on the stew, anything to distract herself.
Would she never be free of reminders of Hugh? ÒFirsebarg is many daysÕ journey north of
here, isnÕt it?Ó 
ÒIt is, indeed. It happened in my grandmotherÕs time that these lands were given into the
care of the monks by a grieving lady, in memory of her only daughter. For the same reason
my brother gives an extra tithe in memory of his dead wife so that the monks will pray for her
during Holy Week. As for the rest of us, we pay what is due twice a year, without fail, and the
abbot has always been merciful when crops were bad.Ó 
ÒAnd this year?Ó 
ÒNay, this year was no trouble at all with our new lord abbot. They say heÕs a good
Father, for all that heÕs Wendish. HeÕs generous to the poor, feeds seven families every
Ladys-day in honor of the disciplas of the blessed Daisan, and lay hands on any who are
sick. His rule is strict, but kind, they say. The harvest was very good this year, for the weather
was perfectÑthe proper portion of sun and rain, and no bad storms though we heard
hailstorms wiped out the barley crop west of here. It must be GodÕs favor, donÕt you
think?Ó 
Or weather magic. But Liath didnÕt say that aloud. Instead, she changed the subject. Just
as Da always did, she thought wryly and with no little disgust. How many such little habits
had she learned from Da, both for good and for ill? ÒIs there any resentment here, Mistress,
that King Henry defeated Lady Sabella?Ó 
ÒDefeated her? We heard no such tidings. When did he fight her?Ó 
ÒShe led a rebellion . . .Ó They listened with rapt attention as she told them the tale. 
ÒWhat does the king look like?Ó asked the daughter from her station by the hearth. With
her hair bound back and a shawl over her head, she looked modest and quiet, but her voice
was bold. ÒIs he very grand and terrifying?Ó 
ÒHe is a man of good height, noble in bearing. He is merciful in his judgments, but his
anger is as fierce as that fire you tend.Ó Then, because she saw many pairs of eyes glinting
from the alcoves, child and adult alike, she went on to tell of the kingÕs progress and the
noble lords and ladies who rode with him. She told them of the places she had passed
through on her way here, places they would never see and had never heard of: Augensburg;
the elaborate palace at Echstatt; Wendish villages much like this one; the Sachsen Forest;
Doardas Abbey; Korvei Convent; the market towns of Gerenrode and Grona; the city of
Kassel, where Duchess Liutgard herself had interviewed her about the proposed expedition
to Gent to drive out the Eika. 
ÒIÕve heard of demons called Eika.Ó GodestiÕs brother had just come from checking
on the animals. He hunkered down by the fire to listen. A small child crept from her bed and
slunk into the shelter of his arms. ÒBut I thought they was just stories.Ó 
ÒNay,Ó she said, ÒIÕve seen them with my own eyes. I sawÑÓ Here she faltered. 
ÒWhat did you see?Ó demanded the son, creeping up beside her, face alight with
interest. 

So she told them about the fall of Gent, and somehow, telling it to these simple farming
folk whose farthest journey was to the market town two daysÕ walk from here, it became
more like a tale of ancient and noble deeds told a hundred times on a winterÕs night.
Somehow, telling the tale drew the pain out of it. 
ÒAi, the prince sounds so brave and handsome,Ó breathed the sister by the hearth. 
Her young brother snorted. ÒThat would be a cold lover for you, Mistress Snotty Nose,
too good for your suitors.Ó 
ÒNow, you!Ó said Mistress Godesti sharply, chucking the boy under the chin. ÒHush.
DonÕt speak ill of the dead. His shade might hear you.Ó 
ÒBut all souls ascend to the Chamber of Light,Ó began Liath, then stopped, hearing a
whispering from the alcove and seeing a certain furtive look pass among them all. 
Mistress Godesti drew the Circle at her breast. ÒSo they do, Eagle. Will you have more
cider to sooth your throat? This food is scarcely fit payment for such tales as you have told
us this night.Ó 
Liath accepted the cider and drank it down, its bite a fire in her chest. After eating a
second helping of stew, she rolled herself up in her cloak near the fire on a heap of straw
filthy with fleas. The house cat, as dainty a creature as ever prowled a longhouse for mice,
curled up against her stomach, liking the warmth of her body. Waking on and off, restless,
she saw one or another person kneeling beside the hearth, a chargirl, an old man, a woman
dressed even more poorly than the others, each taking a turn tending the fire through the
long winterÕs night. 
In the morning, in a light fall of snow so insubstantial that little seemed to touch ground,
she rode on. Mistress GodestiÕs brother walked with her a good hour or more beyond the
hamlet into the forest, though she tried to dissuade him because he had no boots, only
sandals with cloth tucked in to warm his feet. But when they reached the spot where the
autumn rains had washed out the path as it twisted down a thickly wooded slope, she was
grateful for his guidance. He showed her where the new cut lay, a detour that switchbacked
down a ridge and back to the old road. This far out, there was deadwood aplenty and no
felled trees marking where folk from the village came out to get firewood. He made polite
farewells. 
ÒNot all in Varre have been so friendly,Ó she said, thanking him. 
ÒAid the traveler as you would wish to be aided were you in their place, thatÕs what our
grandmother taught us.Ó He hesitated, looking troubled. ÒI hope you know my sister meant
nothing by her mention of the dark shades walking abroad.Ó 
ÒI carry messages for the king, friend. I do not report to the biscops.Ó 
He flushed. ÒYou know how women are. If the old ways were good enough for our
grandmother, thenÑÓ He restlessly hoisted his threadbare tunic up higher through his rope
belt. 
ÒYou live close by the forest. Why shouldnÕt you see the old gods of your people still at
work here?Ó 
This startled him. ÒBelieve you in the Tree and the Hanged God?Ó 
ÒNo,Ó she admitted. ÒBut I traveled to many strange places with my da andÑÓ She
broke off. 
ÒAnd?Ó Did he look curious or merely tired and worn out? By the age of his children she
guessed he was only about ten years older than herself, yet he looked as old as Da had at
the end, aged by constant work and worry and by grief at the death of his wife. ÒGodesti
says that if my dear Adela had given gifts to the Green Lady at the old stone altar, then she
wouldnÕt have died, for the Green Lady helps women through their labor. Is it because she
did as the deacon from Sorres village commanded and turned her heart away from the old
ways? She prayed to St. Helena when her birth pains came on her, but maybe the Green
Lady was angry for not receiving any gifts. Is that why she died?Ó 
ÒI donÕt know your Green Lady. But I lived in Andalla once, with my da. The Jinna
women there didnÕt pray to Our Lord and Lady, they prayed to the Fire God Astereos, yet

they survived and bore healthy childrenÑmany of them, at any rate. IÕm sorry about your
wife. IÕll pray for her soul. Maybe it had nothing to do with GodÑexcept that God watch over
us all,Ó she added quickly. ÒMaybe the child didnÕt move right within her. Maybe it was
breech and couldnÕt come out. Maybe some sickness got into her blood and made her
weak. It might be any of those things, or something else, and nothing to do with God at all,
just asÓÑshe gestured at the path behind themÑÓthis track was washed away by a
combination of rain and rockslides, not because the creatures of the Enemy made mischief
here to bedevil youÑÓ 
ÒI pray you!Ó He drew the Circle at his breast hastily, and then another sign, something
she didnÕt recognize but which was clearly pagan. ÒThe shades might be listening.Ó 
ÒThe shades?Ó 
ÒThe souls of dead people too restless to board the ship of night and sail to the
underworld. Or worse . . .Ó He hefted his walking staff, twirled it once, dropping his voice to
a whisper. Ò. . . the shadows of dead elves. Their souls are confined in a dark fog. They
have no body, but they werenÕt released from the earth either. They arenÕt allowed into the
Chamber of Light, but they have nowhere else to go if they were killed on this earth. They
haunt the deep forest. Surely you know that, you who have traveled so much.Ó 
ÒThe shades of dead elves . . .Ó She stared at the forest around her: leafless winter
trees stood dark against the gray-white sky with undergrowth of all shades of brown and dull
green and the pale yellow of decay interwoven beneath; evergreens skirted the edge of
open areas. All of it was dense with growth and fallen limbs and the tangle j of a wild land
untouched by human hands. Had that been SanglantÕs fate? To wander the earth as a
shade, because he could not ascend through the seven spheres to the River of Heaven and
thence stream with the other souls into the Chamber of Light? Was he near her now? 
Then she shook herself roughly, and her horse stamped j and shook its head as if in
sympathy. ÒNay, friend,Ó she continued. ÒThe blessed Daisan taught that the Aoi were
made of the same substance as humankind. Some of the ancient Dariyan lords converted to
the faith of the Unities. So why should the blessed Daisan turn elvish kin away from heaven if
they served God faithfully? And even if they do live here, why should they concern
themselves with us?Ó Suddenly, Liath realized she didnÕt believe the souls of dead people
lurked in the forest. And she wasnÕt afraid of the shades of dead elves. Of course, many
other things might lurk in the forest, wolves and bears least among them. ÒTo be fearless is
to be foolhardy and likely dead,Ó 
Da always said. But away from Hugh, fear did not ride constantly on her shoulder. 
ÒWho knows what lingers in this forest.Ó The man looked around nervously, afraid even
in a morning light that painted the gray-limbed trees and stubborn clouds of morning with the
burnished light of pearls. ÒNear the ford there may be bandits. But by dusk tomorrow youÕll
come to a big town called Laar.Ó 
They parted. He seemed relieved, but whether to be returning to the safety of his village
or to be rid of her and her uncomfortable views Liath could not be sure. She did not mean
disrespect to the old gods or the saints. But it was not God or the shades of dead elves or
the half-formed creatures who served the Enemy who had caused her to miscarry last
winter. No, indeed. It was the very abbot whom these villagers praised. 
Snow drifted down between the bare branches of trees. She walked most of the day to
keep warm and to spare her horse. The road was good, considering what little use it must
get. Two wagon ruts wide, it remained clear of undergrowth, and puddles hidden beneath a
film of ice were the worst of its treacheries. 
Was there really any point to being in a hurry? It had taken Hanna months to reach the
king. No one would know why she had herself been delayed, and in any case, Count
Lavastine would be unlikely to muster an army before summer. Spring, with sowing and
swollen rivers and muddy roads, was not the time for an army to march. The Eika surely
could make no attack down the Veser River in the full flood of springtide. 
Yet she owed it to the people of Gent to make sure the message arrived as soon as it

could. She owed it to SangiantÕs memory, so that his death could be avenged. 
Late in the day, snow turned to sleeting rain and she escaped the downpour by sheltering
under a huge fir tree; its limbs made a kind of cave where they arched to the ground. She
tied up her gelding and piled twigs and sticks on the cold ground, surrounding them with a
firewall of stones. Then, biting her lip, she reached through the window of fire that she could
see in her mindÕs eye and called flame. 
Flames shot up from the little heap of twigs, stinging the branches above. She jumped
back. The horse snorted, kicked, snapped a rein, and bolted out of their shelter. 
ÒDamn!Ó she swore. She ran after the horse. Luckily, it calmed quickly and waited for
her. Wet and shivering, she led it back to the overhang. The fire had settled down, and now,
half ashamed, she fed it in the normal manner. The horse ate such leavings as she could
glean from the nearby undergrowth and she chewed on a hard end of bread and a sour
handful of cheese. 
It was cold, that night, but the fire burned steadily. Fir needles rained down on her at
erratic intervals. Though she slept fitfully, this rough shelter with fir needles sticking through
her cloak and the breath of winter wind chafing her neck and chilling her fingers was far
better than any fine, warm, elegant chamber shared with Hugh. If winter harmed her, it would
not be because it wished to but because of its indifference to her fate. Somehow, that vast
and incomprehensible indifference comforted her. The stars wheeled on their round whether
she died or lived, suffered or laughed. Against the eternity of the celestial sphere and the
great harmony sung in the heavens, she was the merest flash, so brief in its passing that
perhaps the daimones coursing in the aether above could no more comprehend her
existence than she could comprehend theirs. After all those years running with Da, after what
she had endured with Hugh, it was a great relief to be unworthy of notice. 
Yet she was still not free. She so desperately needed a preceptorÑa teacher. 
Could Wolfhere see her through the fire? Was Hanna well? Coals glowed, and it was the
work of a moment to feed sticks to the fire. Flames leaped up, bright yellow, and she pulled
out the gold feather. 
ÒHanna,Ó she whispered as she spun the featherÕs tip between thumb and forefinger,
spinning the faint breath of air stirred by that turning into the licking flames of fire and twisting
out of those flames a gateway through which she could see... 
Sapientia sits restless in a chair, obviously unwell. Of all her attendants the only one
whom she tolerates for more than a moment is Hanna, who speaks soothingly to her and
gets her to drink from a silver cup. Of Hugh there is no sign. 
The feather brushes LiathÕs palm, and fire snaps and wavers. Now she sees a dim loft
carpeted with straw. A man stirs, and in his unquiet sleep she recognizes him. It is
Wolfhere. He murmurs a name in his dream and, that suddenly, as if a voice called to
him, he wakes, opening his eyes. 
¡°Your Highness.Ó 
LiathÕs sight blurs and sharpens, and she sees a pallet on which a woman lies in a
desperate fever, clothes soaked in sweat. She is no longer in the loft. Here a trio of women
stand over the patient, tending her. By their clothing Liath recognizes them as a
servingwoman, an elderly nun, and the Mother Abbess of a convent. 
¡°Your Highness? It is I, Mother Rothgard. Can you hear me?Ó 
Mother Rothgard wrings out a cloth and turns the sufferer over to press the damp cloth
to her forehead. As the lax face rolls into view, Liath recognizes Princess Theophanu, but
so changed, all vitality burned out of her, leached away by fever. Mother Rothgard frowns
and speaks to the servingwoman, who hurries out. She unfastens the princessÕ tunic and
eases it open to examine the young womanÕs chest: Beads of sweat pearl on her nipples;
moisture runs down the slope of her shoulder to vanish into her armpits. The thunder of
TheophanuÕs heartbeat, frantic, irregular, seems to resound in the small chamber. She
wears two necklaces; one is a gold Circle of Unity, and the otherÑa panther brooch hung

from a silver chain. 
This brooch Mother Rothgard lays in her palm and examines. Turning it over with a
finger, she traces writing too faint for Liath to see. The abbess has a clever face made
stern by perpetual frowning. 
¡°Sorcery,Ó she says to her attendant. ÒSister Anne, fetch me the altar copy of the
Holy Verses, and the basket of herbs sanctified under the Hearth. Speak of this to no one.
If this ligatura comes from the courtÑeven if Princess Theophanu survivesÑwe cannot
know who are our allies and who our enemies. This bespeaks an educated hand.Ó 
Mother Rothgard speaks a blessing and Theophanu grunts, and the vision smears into
the dull glow of fading coals. 
The rain had slowed to a shushing patter, and as Liath replaced the gold feather against
her chest and clasped her knees for warmth, the twilight faded into the chill expectation of
dawn. 
Sorcery. How powerful had Hugh become? Was she herself no longer immune to his
magic? Had she ever been? 
With this disquieting thought like a burden weighing on her, she saddled her horse and
made ready to leave. As she took its reins to lead it out from under the shelter of the
overhang, a stabbing pain burned at her breast. She pressed a hand to the pain . . . where
the gold Aoi feather lay between tunic and skin. 
In that pause, standing motionless and still half-hidden by the hanging evergreen
branches, she heard a twig snap. Mounting, she drew her bow and an arrow out of its quiver.
She laid the bow across her thighs and started west on the forest road, one hand on the
bow, one on the reins. 
A covey of partridges took wing, a sudden flurry, startled out of their hiding place. She
stared into the undergrowth but saw nothing. But the crawling sensation grew: SomeoneÑor
somethingÑwatched her from the shelter of the trees. 
She urged her horse forward as fast as she dared. With the next town so far ahead, she
couldnÕt risk exhausting her horse, and anyway the road was cut here and there with
gashes, holes of a size to trap a horseÕs hoof. Nothing appeared on the forest road behind
her, nothing ahead. In the forest, all she saw was a tangle of trees and little sprays of snow
where wind rattled branches. 
Abruptly, dim figures appeared in the shadows of the forest, darting around the trees like
wolves following a scent. 
A whoosh like the hiss of angry breath brushed her ear, and she jerked to one side. Her
horse faltered. An arrow buried itself into the trunk of a nearby tree. As delicate as a needle,
it had no fletching. Pale winter light glinted off its silver shaft. Then, in the space of time it
takes to blink, it dissolved into mist and vanished. 
The scream came out of nowhere and seemingly from all directions: a ululating tremor,
more war cry than cry for help. It shuddered through the trees like the coursing of a wild
wind. 
Maybe sometimes it was better to run than to stand and fight. 
Galloping down the forest road, she hit the opening in the trees before she was aware
that trees had been hacked back from either side of a wide stream. At the ford, a
dilapidated bridge crossed the sluggish waters. 
A party of men blocked the bridge and its approach. They raised their weapons when
they saw her. She pulled up her horse and while it minced nervously under her, she glanced
behind, then ahead, not sure what threatened her most. The men looked ill kempt, as
desperate as banditsÑwhich they surely were. Most of them wore only rags wrapped around
their feet. A few wore scraps of armor, padded coats sewn with squares of leather. Only the
leader had a helmet, a boiled and molded leather cap tied under his scraggly beard. But
they stood in front of her, surly and looking prepared to run; they were tangible, real. She had
no idea what had let loose with that scream. 
ÒI am a KingÕs Eagle! I ride on the kingÕs business. Let me pass.Ó 

By now they had guessed that she rode alone. 
ÒWendarÕs king,Ó said the foremost, spitting on the ground. ÒYouÕre in Varre now.
HeÕs no king of ours.Ó 
ÒHenry is king over Varre.Ó 
ÒHenry is the usurper. WeÕre loyal to Duchess Sabella.Ó 
ÒSabella is no longer a duchess. She no longer rules over Arconia.Ó 
The man spit again, hefting his spear with more confidence. He cast a glance at his
comrades, who were armed with clubs fashioned from stout sticks. Two came off the bridge
and began to circle around on either side to flank her. ÒWhat the false king says of Duchess
Sabella donÕt mean anything here. ItÕs his mistake to send his people here and think his
word protects them. WeÕll treat you better, woman, if you give up without a fight.Ó 
ÒIÕve nothing worth anything to you,Ó she said as she raised her bow, but they only
laughed. 
ÒGood boots, warm cloak, and a pretty face,Ó said their leader. ÒNot to mention the
horse and the weapons. ThatÕs all worth something to us.Ó 
Nocking the arrow, she drew down on the leader. ÒTell your men to pull back. Or IÕll kill
you.Ó 
ÒFirst rights,Ó said the leader, Òto the man who drags the rider off the horse.Ó 
The two men charged. The one to her right made the mistake of reaching her first. She
kicked him, hard under the chin, and as he reeled back she turned just as the other man
reached her. Her string drawn back, she held her arrowhead almost against his face as he
grabbed for her boot. And loosed the string. 
The arrow drove through his mouth. He staggered and dropped. 
No time to think. They had no bows. She could outrun them. 
As she pulled her mount around, she saw shadows in the forest. They moved like hunters
and yet at once she knew they werenÕt men, no kin of these bandits come to aid them. They
carried bows as slender and light as if they had been woven from spiderÕs silk twisted and
folded together a thousandfold to make them as strong as wood. 
Caught between the one and the other. She had no reason to trust either side. 
The man she had kicked struggled back, grunting, and jumped for her. 
Living wood in damp winter cold burns poorly . . . she reached for fire and called it down
on the old bridge. 
The logs and planks caught fire with a burst, a snap and whuff of flame. The men on the
bridge screamed, jumping to safety into the riverÕs cold waters, floundering there or leaping
for the shore. Her horse screamed and bolted. A thin silver arrow gashed its flank and fell to
the ground. The man coming after her yelled in terror, then crumpled as he groped at a silver
needle embedded in his own throat. 
She rode for the river. Men scrambled away, fleeing from herÑor from what pursued her,
half hidden in the forest behind. The cold water came as a shock, coursing past her thighs
as she urged her horse across the stream. The animal needed no pressing; it, too, was
smart enough to run. The water flooded its rump and washed away the thin stream of blood
that ran from the cut made by the arrow. For a moment, Liath felt the horse lose its footing;
then they were struggling up the far bank, breaking through the film of ice that rimed the
shoreline. 
From behind she heard screaming; she did not pause to look. In the center of the road,
stunned into immobility, stood one of the bandits. He stared in horror at the burning bridge
and at his comrades falling on the other side or thrashing their way down the cold stream. 
ÒDo you think King Henry leaves his Eagles unprotected?Ó she cried. He bolted into the
woods, running from herÑor from what lay behind her. She turned. 
The burning bridge flared like a beacon. No shadows emerged from the forest, and the
bandits had scattered. The bridge would be ruined. As she stared, she realized she could
not put the fire outÑshe did not know how. She tried reaching, imagined a fire dying to
embers and embers dying to dead coals, but the bridge burned on with the glee of a raging

fire. It terrified her. She had no way to control it. 
Then they came out of the forest. They had bodies formed in human shape, even the
suggestion of ancient armor, hammered breastplates decorated with vulture-headed women
and spotted lions without manes. But she could see the trees through them. They were more
like a dense smoky fog forced into an alien shape, humanlike and yet not human at allÑand
they were coming after her. One raised its bow and shot at her, but the silver arrow, a wink
against the sun, vanished in the flames. They came to the streamÕs bank, well away from
the scorching flames that devoured the old bridge, but they did not attempt to cross the
water. 
She turned her horse and fled. 
She rode, walked beside her horse, rode again, then trotted again alongside her tired
mount. But though a winterÕs day was short, this one seemed to drag on and on. The forest
would never end. 
At dusk, at last and amazingly, it gave into scrub and overcut woods. Pigs scattered away
from her. Fields which cut into stands of trees like gaping scars lightened her way. She was
still shaking with reaction when she reached the town of Laar as the waxing gibbous moon
rose behind her. 
At the closed gates she called out. ÒI beg you. I am a KingÕs Eagle riding on the kingÕs
business. Give me shelter!Ó 
The gate creaked open, and they let her in. Good Varren villagers, they were not
sympathetic to Henry, but she was a lass riding alone and, when it came down to it, they
were eager to hear what news she had. 
The village deacon led the horse away at once and applied a salve of holy water, dock,
and stitchwort to the elfshot gash while singing psalms over the wounded beast. ÒIt is clear
you have been at your prayers, daughter,Ó said the deacon, Òfor surely the intervention of
St. HerodiaÑwhose feast day this isÑsaved you from harm this day.Ó 
Liath left the horse in the deaconÕs care and let herself be escorted to a longhouse
where the whole village gathered to watch her eat a cold supper. The villagers knew of the
bandits and were glad to be rid of them, and it was clear that LaarÕs townsfolk had long
ago resigned themselves to the depredations of the nameless creatures who lurked in the
forest. 
ÒDo you know what they are?Ó Liath demanded. 
ÒThe shades of dead elves,Ó said the householder who had taken her in. 
ÒThey are doomed to wander the earth,Ó said a village elder, Òbecause they cannot
ascend to the Chamber of Light.Ó 
ÒMy wise aunt told me the Lost Ones ruled here once,Ó added the householder. ÒTheir
shades canÕt bear to leave the scene of their great glory. So they haunt us and try to drive
us away so that their kin can come back and rule again.Ó 
One tale led to another, and of course they wanted to know what message she took to
Count Lavastine, whom they had heard tell of; his southernmost holdings lay not ten daysÕ
ride from here. A few of the villagers had even seen the count and his army when they had
returned this way last summer after the battle at Kassel. 
ÒHe had his heir with him,Ó said the householder. ÒA good-looking boy, tall and noble.
What does the king want with Count Lavastine? Him being Varrish, and all, and the king
Wendish. Maybe the king donÕt like Varrish counts.Ó 
So she told them about Gent. 
ÒAi, the Dragons!Ó said one old woman. ÒI saw the Dragons years ago! Very glorious,
they was.Ó 
That night, lying rolled in her cloak before the hearth fire, she dreamed of the Eika dogs. 
Xll READING THE BONES

1
As winter dragged on and the Eika left in Gent grew bored, Sanglant began to lose his
dogs. Like his Dragons, they fought for him when he was attacked. Like his Dragons, they
died. He did what he could to save them, but it was never enough. 
Eika needed to fight and the combats they arranged against slaves were terrible to
watch. The few combats they arranged against him, they lost. It was beneath their dignity to
fight him many against one or with a weapon while he stood unarmed, and he had honed his
skills so well over the months that none of them, however stout or bold, could best him. 
That some Eika still raided he knew when one of the restless princeling sons brought in a
few pathetic slaves or a handful of baubles to parade in front of Bloodheart, but the pickings
in the region around Gent were pitifully thin by now after three seasons of raiding. Others
hosted gatherings during which one or another of the savages would tell a tale of butchery in
their harsh language that sometimes included horrible reenactments with living slaves, poor
doomed souls. 
Such shows impressed Bloodheart not at all. He, too, was restless. He played his bone
flutes. He played with his powers, such as they wereÑSanglant had little experience with
sorcery and did not know how to measure what he saw: webs of light caging the cathedral
with brightness; keening dragons that filled the vast nave with slashing tails and searing fire
before they dissolved into mist; glowing swarms of mitelike bees that tormented Sanglant,
stinging him until his hands and face swelledÑonly, all at once, to vanish together with the
swelling when Bloodheart grew tired of the game and put down his flutes. 
When the madness threatened to descend, he took refuge in his manor house, built as
painstakingly over the winter as if he had sawed the logs arid raised the roof with his own
hands. The vision of the manor house saved him from the black cloud more times than he
could count. 
But it was never enough. 
He smelled smoke on the wind, fires burning in the city, and then the acrid stench of
charred wood. He heard the Eika play their game, day in and day out, in the square that
fronted the cathedral. Always the winning team howled and laughed as they threw their
trophy, the sack containing its gruesome burden, down in front of Bloodheart. Perhaps they
moved more sluggishly in the cold, but neither heat nor cold, not the bitter hard wind or the
silence of a dense snow, not the lash of freezing rain or the dull ache of a cold that chills
down to the bones affected them adversely, no more than it did a rock. 
As winter eked its way toward spring and the days grew longer, he noticed a change in
their appearance. More of them now wore leather armor cut from the tanneries of Gent or
carried spears and axes and iron-pointed arrows forged in GentÕs smithies. The cries of
the slaves came to his ears day and night, but there was nothing he could do to help them. 
There was nothing he could do but watch, and think. Spring was coming. The river would
soon flow at floodtide. Few ships would sail upstream until late spring. But Bloodheart was
mustering an army. Any fool, even a mad fool, could see that. Daily, Eika came and went.
SomeÑfor Sanglant could now tell certain ones apart from the restÑdid not return, as if they
had died on their errand or, perhaps, gone a much longer way away. Surely not even Eika
dared to cross the northern seas in winter, but who could know? They were savages, and
savages might try anything. 
Chained here as he was, he could only watch. If he could keep the madness at bay, like
the dogs, he could think. He could try to plan. 
Bloodheart must not muster an army out of Gent. The Veser River ran deep into Wendish
lands and with enough ships and a clear road past Gent, Bloodheart and his Eika army
could wreak havoc on HenryÕs lands. 
Even Bloodheart must have a weakness. He needed only to be clear-sighted, like Liath,
to find it out. 
Certain things he observed. 

A small galleryÑthe choirÑran above the nave along one side of the cathedral, but no
Eika ever walked here or crowded above to stare down at their brothers. 
The dogs never had puppies, nor did they ever seem to mate. 
Just as he was tethered to the altar stone by his chains, so the Eika priest seemed
tethered to Bloodheart. If Bloodheart sat on his throne, the priest did not venture out of
doors. If Bloodheart left the cathedral as he did four times a day, then the priest left as well,
dogging the chieftainÕs heels. 
The Eika showed no sexual interest in their slaves, none that he had ever seen; perhaps
their contempt for their human enemies ran too deep for such intercourse. 
Wooden chest and leather pouch never left the priestÕs care. From the pouch he drew
the bones which he read to prophesy the future. The chest he never opened. 
However many Eika crowded the nave, they never stank. Humans stank; Sanglant knew
that well enough because he had lived so long among them. The kingÕs progress reeked
with the smell of many humans jostled together. Villages and estates had each their own
aroma of sweat and mold and damp wool, cesspits and rotting meat, womenÕs holy blood,
manure, all the lingering smells of human activity in the smithies and tanneries, the
butcheries and the bakeries rolled into a fetid whole. He suspected the Eika thought he
stank, even though he was only half of human kin. But it had been months since he had
washed; even the dogs were cleaner than he was. 
Ai, Lady, he was no better than a wild animal rolling in the forest loam, matted with
filthÑthough he took what care he could of himself. But it was never enough. 
When would King Henry come? Sanglant understood now that he could not die here
among the dogs. His motherÕs geas was also a curse, for death would have been a
blessing; it had been one for his faithful Dragons whose bones rotted in the crypt or,
smoothed and bored, made music for BloodheartÕs pleasure. That some other event had
prevented Henry from marching last autumn on Gent Sanglant believed. Not for SanglantÕs
sake: Revenge was a luxury. But Henry had to retake Gent. 
And someone had to stop Bloodheart. 
If one only looked clearly at what lay in plain sight, the answer was obvious. He was
amazed that it had taken him this long to realize it. He knew how to kill Bloodheart, if only he
could get close enough. 
2
Ivar was of such little importance to Mother Scholastica that she allowed Master
Pursed-Lips to deliver the message, which might as well have been a death blow. 
ÒIÕll hear no more complaining from you, feckless creature!Ó scolded the schoolmaster.
He did not exactly smile, but he clearly felt an unpleasant glee in the words which followed.
ÒYour lord father has replied at last to your unseemly request to be released from your
vows. Of course you are to stay in the monastery. You will offer up your prayers in the service
of your kinÑthose living and those now dead. Now.Ó He rapped Ivar hard on the knuckles
with his switch. ÒGet back to your labors!Ó 
What choice did he have? The daily round at Quedlin-hame was, in its own monotonous
way, soothing to his bruised heart. Trapped forever. Even Liath had rejected him, and that
after everything he had promised to do for her. 
Only once a day did this monotony lift, did he feel one iota stirred from the numbness that
afflicted his heart and soul. And even this event was attended by obstacles. 
ÒThe problem,Ó said Baldwin, Òis that we canÕt get close enough to her. ItÕs all very
well to listen to what she preaches, but there is a fence between us.Ó 
ÒWhat matters a mere fence?Ó demanded Ermanrich. ÒHow can you even doubt her,
Baldwin? CanÕt you hear the truth in each word she utters?Ó 
ÒHow can we truly see how sincere she is if we canÕt see her face except through a
knothole? What if she has been set here as a test for us?Ó 

ÒA test, indeed,Ó murmured Sigfrid, voice muffled by his clenched hands pressed
against his lips. Head bent, he had his eyes shut tight and seemed to be grimacing. 
Ever since Tallia had come to Quedlinhame, ever since she began speaking in her
monotonously fervid voice about the Redemptio of the blessed Daisan, of his death and
rebirth, poor Sigfrid seemed engaged in an inner struggle which caused him much pain. 
The four boys were not her only audience. Each afternoon just after the office of Vespers
she walked barefoot out from under the colonnade to the fence that separated the girlsÕ
side of the novitiary from the boysÕ half. Each day for the last three months, no matter how
awful the weather, she knelt, covered only by her noviceÕs drab brown robe, and prayed.
Only a few prayed with her every day. One of these was Ermanrich, who knelt on the
opposite side of the fence, shivering in snow, in sleet, in gusty winds, in the heavy chill of
winterÕs hard breath, to hear her speak. Some of the female novices did as well, among
them ErmanrichÕs cousin, Hathumod. 
Baldwin and Ivar came to listen on those days when it wasnÕt too much of a hardship.
Many of the female novices collected on those pleasanter days as well, or so the boys
assumed by the weighty sense of many breaths drawn and released in time to Lady
TalliaÕs testimony, by the rustling and murmuring of coarse robes, by the whispers of light
voices and, now and again, a giggle. But the giggling was never directed toward TalliaÕs
words. No one ever laughed at Lady Tallia or her heretical preaching. 
Lady Tallia never raised her voice. She never traded on her high position, unlike Duchess
RotrudisÕ son Reginar, nor did she expect to be deferred to or made much of. Quite the
contrary. 
Her privations had become legendary among the novices. She never wore shoes, not
even in the winter. Her diet consisted wholly of barley bread and beans. She never drank
wine, not even on feast days. She never allowed a stovepot by her bed, no matter how cold
it became, and she allowed no servant to wait upon her, as the other noble girls did, but
rather insistedÑwhen her aunt Scholastica allowed itÑon serving the servants as if she were
the commoner born and they the noble. 
There even circulated a rumor that she had worn a hair-shirt under her robe until Mother
Scholastica forbade her to indulge herself in such a prideful display of humility. 
ÒHsst!Ó said Baldwin. On his knees, face pressed up against the knothole, he peered
through onto that which was forbidden them. ÒHere she comes.Ó 
 Ivar sank to his knees. The cold ground burned a chill into his skin through the fabric of
his robe, and he wondered if he should go back inside. But inside sat Master Pursed-Lips,
snoring by the stovepot, or Lord Reginar and his dogs, hoping to make life miserable for
anyone who disturbed them while they diced. The second-year novices, led by Reginar,
always diced just before Vespers, the only time during the day when novices were allowed a
short period without occupation. 
Only at this time did Tallia have opportunityÑand privacyÑto speak. 
ÒThen why is it,Ó whispered Baldwin, turning away from the fence to let Ermanrich press
nose and eye up against the knothole, ÒÑif she speaks the truthÑthat she doesnÕt testify in
front of Mother Scholastica?Ó Like most handsome and favored children, Baldwin nurtured
a blithe assurance that the adults in charge would bow before any reasonable, or
passionately felt, request. 
ÒWhy didnÕt you just tell your parents you had no liking for the noblewoman who wanted
to marry you instead of claiming you had a vocation to the church?Ó said Ivar. 
BaldwinÕs beautiful eyes flared. ÒThat wouldnÕt have mattered! You know as well as I
that liking matters not when it comes time for one family to ally itself with another. Especially
for the family which seeks advantage in the match.Ó 
ÒYouÕre too skeptical, Baldwin,Ó said Ermanrich. 
ÒAbout marriage or Lady Tallia?Ó Baldwin retorted. 
Sigfrid took his turn. As the female novices on the other side settled down with a rustling
of cloth and several coughs and sniffles, he leaned back to speak. ÒOf course she would be

condemned by Mother Scholastica and the other authorities if they heard her speaking such
heresy!Ó 
ÒHush,Ó said Ermanrich. ÒI canÕt hear her.Ó 
Sigfrid moved aside and let Ivar take his turn at the knothole. Ivar squinted, seeing first a
wash of faces and fabric blended together as his sight adjusted. Like the twelve virtues,
virgins all, in The Shepherd of Hermas, the female novices and even the meek
schoolmistress had gathered around Tallia to listen. Ivar matched faces with virtues. Tallia
for Faith, of course; Hathumod for Simplicity; the elderly and mild schoolmistress for
Concordia. The restÑunremarkable girls with their hair covered by shawls and with noses
red, or white, from cold and their pale hands clasped devoutly before themÑwould do for
Abstinence, Patience, Magnanimity, Innocence, Charity, Discipline, Truth, and Prudence. Of
them all, only Tallia had a truly interesting face, drawn to a fine pallor by her austerities. But
perhaps it was only her tinge of fanaticism that lent attraction to her. She had nothing of
LiathÕs warm beauty, but she was the only truly enticing object Ivar had seen at
Quedlinhame since Liath had departed with the kingÕs progress. 
ÒDeath is the cause of life,Ó she was saying now. ÒBy sacrificing the blessed Daisan in
that ritual by which the Dariyans flayed the skin from the body of a living man, the empress
relieved Him of His earthly clothing. So was He freed forever from His body, which He would
not need in the Chamber of Light.Ó 
ÒBut why did he have to be killed like that?Ó demanded one of the girls. ÒDidnÕt he
suffer?Ó 
ÒHe already suffered by the measure of our sins.Ó Tallia lifted her hands and turned
them palms up to display to her audience. ÒThis is mere skin, molded from clay, nothing
more than that. Like all else outside the Chamber of Light, it is tainted with darkness. We do
not return to God in the flesh but rather in the spirit. It is our soul that ascends through the
spheres to the Chamber of Light.Ó 
ÒBut then how could the blessed Daisan have come back to the earth and walked
among his disciplas again, as you say, if he didnÕt have a body?Ó 
ÒIs there any power God does not have? She gave us birth. She gave birth to the
universeÑAh!Ó Tallia gasped, swaying, and Hathumod, as stout a young woman as her
cousin was a young man, held her up so she did not fall. ÒLady bless!Ó said Tallia in an
altered voice, high and breathless and yet somehow piercing. ÒI see a light like the blinding
glance of angels. It penetrates the haze of mist that envelops the dull earth.Ó Head lolling
back, Tallia appeared to faint. 
Ivar jerked back from the fence to find Baldwin, Ermanrich, and Sigfrid clustered at his
shoulder, pressing him back into the rough wood. 
ÒWhat happened?Ó demanded Ermanrich. 
 The bells rang for Vespers and the four young men scrambled up guiltily to take their
place in line. 
Ivar braved Master Pursed-LipÕs willow switch to get a good look at the line of female
novices as they proceeded into the church, but he did not see Lady Tallia among their
number . . . and she never, ever, missed a chance to pray. 
Nor did she appear before Vespers at her usual place the next day. 
It took two days for Ermanrich to arrange a private rendezvous with his cousin, and then
the news he had to report hit all four boys with horror. 
ÒHathumod says Tallia has been stricken with a paralysis.Ó 
ÒDevils have inhabited her because of her heretical words!Ó said Sigfrid, biting at his
nails. ÒSheÕs been possessed by the Enemy!Ó 
ÒDonÕt say such a thing!Ó ErmanrichÕs ability to defer to the wishes of anotherÑin this
case his lady motherÑwithout resentment had allowed him to enter Quedlinhame with a
resigned heart and a peaceful spirit. He looked anything but peaceful now. ÒShe lies as if
dead, Hathumod says, with only the faintest blush of red in her cheeks to show she still lives.
It is God who afflicts her, to test her faith with infirmity!Ó 

ÒIf itÕs true she eats so little, she probably fainted from hunger,Ó observed Baldwin,
whose appetite was as certain as the promise of the sunÕs rising each morning. ÒMy aunt
said thatÕs a sure sign of starvation, when farmers are too weak to sow. The biscop enjoins
us to sow charity and distribute grain in lean times for the good of our souls, but my aunt
says weÕd best do it for the good of our holdings.Ó 
ÒBaldwin!Ó Poor Sigfrid looked deeply affronted. ÒHow can you say such a thing, and in
GodÕs house, may They forgive you for your disrespect.Ó 
ÒItÕs no disrespect to speak the truth!Ó 
ÒQuiet!Ó said Ivar. ÒIt wonÕt help us if we quarrel like princes.Ó But a sudden fear
gnawed at him, and he did not know why. 
He did not know why, but he and the others knelt every day at the usual time beside the
fence, hoping for news. 
And news came in the most startling fashion four days later when Tallia herself, leaning
on Hathumod, made her slow way out to her accustomed place. There she knelt on fresh
snow as though it were spring flowers, brought her hands together at her chest, and prayed. 
She had no color in her lips. Her hands were curled up like claws, nails tucked into her
palms. Although she was frail in body, her voice was strong. 
ÒGod be praised! By the blessing given by the Holy Mother and Her blessed Son we
have all been granted eternal life if only we shall testify to the Holy Word of the sacrifice and
redemption. I was overcome by light, and while my body was laid low by GodÕs hand, a
vision enveloped me.Ó 
Her face had so fine and delicate a pallor that she appeared almost aethereal, as if her
body had leached away and all that held her together in this world was the strength of her
immortal soul. The very fragility revealed in her flesh, woven with the fierce glamour of her
gaze, gave her a beauty she had not possessed beforeÑor so Ivar thought, staring raptly
until Ermanrich poked him hard between the shoulder blades and demanded his chance to
look. 
Though they shouldnÕt have been looking. 
ÒMy soul was led by a spirit of fire to the resting place of the angels. There I was granted
a vision of the rewards God prepares for those who love Her, in which infidels and those
who heed the False Word of the Unities put no faith.Ó She lifted her fists. With great effort,
face straining against obvious pain, she uncurled her swollen fingers. 
Ivar gasped out loud, as did every female novice clustered on the other side of the fence. 
Her palms bled, each one marked by a single shallow scarlet line down the centerÑjust
as if a knife had begun the first cuts to flay her skin from her body. Blood dripped from her
palms to color the snow crimson. 
Ivar staggered back, clapping his hands over his eyes. 
Ermanrich pressed his face against the fence. ÒA miracle!Ó he breathed. 
Sigfrid, after peering through the knothole, was too overcome to speak. 
Baldwin only grunted. 
But not a month later, when the snow had finally melted and the first violets bloomed, a
climbing rose grew from the very spot where TalliaÕs blood had stained the earth. On the
Feast Day of St. Johanna, the Messenger, a single bud unfolded into a crimson flower. 
ÒItÕs a sign,Ó murmured Sigfrid, and this time Baldwin made no objection. 
It had been almost a year since Ivar had knelt outside the gates and pledged himself as a
novice. For the first time since that day, he walked into the great church at Quedlinhame with
no thought for his own grievances. His heart was too full with mystery and awe. 
3
Alain saw her from a distance. He stopped, calling the hounds to heel, and made them sit
in a semicircle around him. 
ÒGo,Ó he said while his escort, his usual retinue of padded dog handlers, a half dozen

men-at-arms, and a cleric who had been brought into the household to read aloud to Alain
various practical treatises on husbandry and agriculture, stared down the long open slope at
the unusual sight of an Eagle walking instead of riding. ÒUlric and Robert, go down and
escort her to me.Ó 
It was always safer to escort a new person to him; if he approached them with the
hounds, anything might happen. 
The thin sheen of snow turned the winter landscape a glittering white, muddied by the
dark line of the southern roadway and the skeletal orchard that stretched along it on either
side. From this vantage he could see the tower of Lavas keep behind him but nothing of the
town except trails of smoke rising into the clear sky. On this, St. OyaÕs Day and the first day
of Fevrua (so the cleric had informed him this morning), the weather remained mild and
bright. It was a good omen for those girls who had come to their first bleeding in the past
year; they would now sit on the womenÕs benches at church and those whose families were
well-to-do enough might think of betrothing them to a suitable man. In thirty days would come
the first day of the month of Yanu, the new year and the first day of spring. 
In that new year, if God willed, he would be betrothed. 
ÒLady Above!Ó swore the cleric, and the remaining men in his retinue murmured,
likewise, in amazement. Alain, too, stared, as the Eagle met the two guards and walked with
them up the slope. He had never seen an Eagle arrive except on horsebackÑfor of course
Eagles must move swiftly and how better to do that than by riding? But that was not the only
strange thing about her. 
Young, she had the most astonishing complexion, as brown as if she had just stepped
through into winterÕs pale daylight from a land where summerÕs sun burned night and day
in all seasons. She wore quiver and bow on her back, had a sword strapped to her side and
leather bag of provisions slung from one shoulder, and strode along as easily as any foot
soldier. But there was yet another quality, something he could not name. She had a certain
brightness about her, a warmth...it made no sense and yet struck him as one sees the
shadow of the mother in her childÕs face. 
ÒAutun!Ó he said suddenly, out loud. ÒShe was one of the Eagles who came to Autun
after the battle at Kassel. She brought the news of GentÕs fall.Ó 
The hounds began to whine. 
They cowered, heads down, whimpering away from her as she approached. First Good
Cheer, then Fear, then the others tried to slink away, as meek as puppies frightened by
thunder; only Sorrow and Rage remained, though they, too, stirred restlessly. ÒSit!Ó he
commanded and, reluctantly, the other hounds sat. But as the Eagle walked up to him, old
Terror flopped down, rolled over, and exposed his throat. 
ÒWhat a sweet old dog,Ó the Eagle exclaimed. ÒI love dogs.Ó She reached down to pet
him. 
Terror snapped at her hand, terrified, rolled and scrambled back to his feet, and at once
all the hounds were up and barking wildly at her. She leaped back. His retinue did the same
reflexively. 
ÒSit!Ó commanded Alain. ÒSit, you!Ó He tugged down Sorrow and Rage. ÒTerror!Ó He
jerked the old hound down by his collar, calmed the others. But even so, when they had
subsided, they whined and growled and kept Alain between her and them. 
ÒMy lord!Ó She stared at the hounds, aghast. Alain had never seen eyes as blue as
hers, as bright as fiery Seirios, the flaming point of the HuntressÕ bow in the night sky. ÒI
beg your pardonÑÓ 
ÒNay, think nothing of it.Ó But he was puzzled by the houndsÕ reaction. ÒYou have a
message for my father?Ó 
ÒFor Count Lavastine, yes.Ó 
ÒI am his son.Ó 
She was surprised. ÒI do not mean to interrupt your walk, my lord. If one of your men will
show me to the countÑÓ 

ÒI will do so myself.Ó 
ÒBut, my lordÑÒ
He waved aside the clericÕs objections. They had as their object this morning the little
abbey of Soisins, founded by his great-grandfather after the death of his first wife in
childbirth and added onto by his great-grandfatherÕs second wife after his own death in
battle. ÒThis is more important.Ó No one argued with him. ÒCome.Ó He said it more to the
hounds than to the others: where he and the hounds went, the rest followed. ÒWalk beside
me,Ó he said to the Eagle. 
She glanced toward the hounds. ÒIÕm sorry to have startled them. They donÕt seem very
. . . welcoming.Ó 
Alain heard the men-at-arms muttering behind him, and he could just imagine what they
were saying. ÒSometimes they surprise even me, but they wonÕt harm anyone as long as
IÕm with them.Ó With only a slight hesitation she moved up beside him. At once, still
growling low in their throats, the hounds flowed to his opposite side, a mass of black coats
and legs scrunched together. So intent were they on avoiding her that they scarcely noticed
the handlers and men-at-arms hurriedly sidestepping to make room for them. 
ÒWhat happened to your horse?Ó he asked. 
ÒAi, Lady!Ó She glanced behind herself as if wondering if someone followed besides
his guards. ÒElfshot, my lord.Ó 
ÒElfshot!Ó 
ÒFifteen days south of here. IÕve almost lost track of the days.Ó She told a jumbled story
of bandits and shadowy figures in the deep forest. ÒOne of their arrows struck my horseÕs
flank, just a scratch, but even though the deacon at Laar blessed it, the poor creature
sickened and died.Ó 
ÒBut youÕre a KingÕs Eagle! Surely you could have commandeered another horse.Ó 
ÒSo I could have, had I been in Wendar. But no one here would give me a fresh mount in
exchange for a sick one.Ó 
ÒAnd this in my fatherÕs lands?Ó He was appalled. ÒThat isnÕt how we serve the
kingÕs messengers! I will see the deacons hereabouts are reminded of our duty.Ó 
ÒDo you support King Henry, my lord?Ó she asked, clearly surprised. 
He could only imagine the reception a Wendish riderÑthough she scarcely appeared
Wendish, with that complexionÑhad received in this part of Varre. ÒI do what is right,Ó he
said firmly, Òand I hope my auntÑI hope my elders will never be disappointed in me by
hearing I have stinted in hospitality to a stranger.Ó 
She smiled, a brief flash on her face that he wished, at once, to see again. ÒYou are
kind, my lord.Ó 
ÒDidnÕt the blessed Daisan say, ÔIf you love only those who love you, what reward can
you expect?Ó 
That did make her smile again. ÒIn truth, my lord, many of the folk who offered me shelter
and food these last fifteen days had no horse to give in exchange. It was the ones who did
who were least hospitable.Ó 
ÒThat will change,Ó he promised her. ÒWhat is your name, Eagle?Ó 
Startled, she took a stutter step, stumbling to catch up as he paused to look at her. ÒI beg
your pardon, my lord. ItÕs just notÑfew noble folk askÑ
Of course. Eagles hatched from common stock. No nobly born lord or lady would ever
think of asking oneÕs name. He had betrayed his upbringing, and yet, why should he be
ashamed of simple courtesy? ÒI am called Alain,Ó he said, to reassure her. ÒI meant
nothing by it. ItÕs just hard to address you as ÔEagleÕ all the time.Ó 
She ducked her head as she thought over this answer. She had a fine profile, limned now
by the morning sun to the east. But for all her obvious physical vitality, she wore under that
vigor a mantle of fragility, as if she might break apart at any moment. She is afraid. The
revelation came to him with such force that he knew it to be true, yet he could hardly say so
aloud. She lives in fear. 

ÒI am called Liath,Ó she whispered, and sounded amazed to hear her own voice. 
ÒLiath!Ó This name had meaning for him. He remembered it. ÒLiathano,Ó he said in a
low voice as he took a step forward. 
The weight of memory drowned him. 
He stands in the old ruins, midsummerÕs stars rising above him as bright as jewels
thrown into the heavens. The SerpentÕs red eye glares above. A shade detaches itself
from the far wall, entering the avenue of stone. Fitted in a cuirass, armed with a lance, he
carries a white cloak draped over one arm. Behind him, flames roar as the outpost bums
under the assault of barbarians. He is looking for someone, but he sees Alain instead. 
¡°Where has Liathano gone?Ó the shade asks. 
Liathano. Surprised, Alain speaks. ÒI donÕt know,Ó he says, but in answer he only
hears the pound of horses galloping past, a haze of distant shouting, a faint horn caught
on the wind. 
His foot came down. 
ÒWhat did you say?Ó asked the Eagle. 
He shook himself, and Sorrow and Rage, trotting alongside, slewed their great heads
round to look at him. Rage yipped once. Sorrow butted him on the thigh with his shoulder,
and he staggered and laughed and rubbed Sorrow affectionately on the head with his
knuckles. 
ÒI donÕt know,Ó he said, blinking into sunlight that seemed abruptly twice as bright.
ÒJust that IÕve heard that name before.Ó 
For an instant, he thought she would bolt and run. Instead she stopped dead, stared at
him as he, too, halted, the hounds sitting obediently beyond. Bliss whimpered softly. His
retinue eddied to a halt around him, keeping well away from both Eagle and hounds. 
ÒNo,Ó she said at last, more to herself than to him, her voice so soft only he and the
hounds heard her. She seemed more perplexed than anything. ÒI canÕt make myself feel
afraid of you.Ó 
Poor creature. Did she think she had to be afraid of everyone? ÒCome,Ó he said gently,
showing her the way. ÒYou must be hungry and tired. You will find a place to rest in my
fatherÕs hall. Nothing will hurt you there.Ó 
And with that, she burst into tears. 
Nothing will hurt you there. 
The young lord made sure she had something to eat and wine to drink before he took her
upstairs to his father. She was too bewildered, too confused, and too embarrassed by her
sudden storm of weeping on the road beyond Lavas stronghold to know what to say to him,
so she kept quiet. 
With the count, she felt on surer ground. 
ÒWhat brings you to my lands, Eagle?Ó he asked. He did not, of course, ask her to sit
down, nor did he ask her name. 
ÒThis message I bring to you from King Henry. ÔThe city of Gent still lies under the hand
of the Eika. Its defenders lie dead. The count of that region and her nearest kin are dead as
well and her army scattered. The lands all round the city lie as wasteland. It is time to take it
back before the Eika can do worse damage. You were rewarded with a son for your honesty
before me in Autun, after the Battle of Kassel. But I could not then ride to GentÕs aid
because of SabellaÕs treachery, which you once supported. Prove your loyalty to me by
taking on this task. Meet me at Gent with an army before Luciasmass at midsummer. If you
restore Gent to my sovereignty, with or without my aid, you will receive a just reward as well
as my favor.ÓÔ 
Lavastine smiled slightly. His smile had no warmth in it; neither, like HughÕs, was it cold,
merely practical, as at the sight of a good harvest. ÒGent,Ó he mused. ÒCome, come,
Alain. Sit down. DonÕt stand there like a servant.Ó 
Mercifully, the hounds had been kenneled, all but two. These padded obediently after the
young lord, who sat himself in a fine carved chair to the right of his father. One of the hounds

draped itself over the boots of the count. The other yawned mightily and flopped down near
one of the three braziers that heated the room. After two months of traveling through the
winter countryside, Liath appreciated how very warm it was in this room, as long as you kept
out of the drafts. Tapestries smothered the walls. Rugs lay three deep on the floor. She was
so warm she wanted to take off her cloak and outer tunic but feared it would look
disrespectful. 
ÒGent,Ó repeated Lavastine. ÒA long march from these lands. Yet the reward may be a
rich one.Ó He glanced up at his captain, who stood with his other intimate servants here and
there about the chamber. Liath recognized a soldier when she saw one; like the count, this
man had a brisk competency about him and a squared strength to his shoulders that
reminded herÑbriefly and painfullyÑof Sanglant. ÒHow many men-at-arms can we muster
after the sowing?Ó 
ÒI beg your pardon, my lord count,Ó said Liath. Surprised, he looked at her, raised a
hand to show she might continue. ÒKing Henry also sends this message. ÔFrom my kin you
may ask for aid. Constance, Biscop of Autun and Duchess of Arconia, will provide troops.
Rotrudis, Duchess of Saony and Attomar, will provide troops. Liutgard, Duchess of Fesse,
will provide troops. I ride the southlands now to gather an army for the coming battle and I
will meet you at Gent unless events in the south or east prevent me. Only a strong army can
defeat the Eika.Ó 
ÒAh,Ó said Lavastine. ÒCaptain, what do you say to this?Ó 
ÒIt is a long march to Gent,Ó said the captain. ÒI donÕt rightly know how far, but it lies a
good way into Wendish lands, up along the north coast. We heard many stories, at Autun,
that the Eika chieftain was an enchanter, that he had brought a hundred ships to Gent
together with a thousand Eika savages.Ó 
ÒYou were at Gent,Ó said the young lord suddenly. Alain. That was his name. He had
offered her his name in the way of equals. She could not stop sneaking looks at him. Tall,
broad-shouldered but slender, with dark hair and the thinnest down of pale beard on his face
so that it almost appeared as if he had not yet grown a beard, he looked nothing like his
father. Ai, Lady. He had spoken so gently to her, in the same way one coaxed a wounded
animal into shelter. 
ÒYou were at Gent?Ó demanded Lavastine, suddenly interested in her. Before, she had
only been, like a parchment letter, a medium through which words reached him. 
ÒI was there at the end.Ó 
So again she had to tell the whole awful story of the fall of Gent. And yet, telling it at
almost every hamlet she had slept at these past two months had softened the pain. Told
again and again, it could hardly be otherwise. ¡°If you pound your head against the wall
enough times,Ó Da would say with a bitter smile when she was furious with herself for
making a mistake, ¡°it will finally stop hurting.Ó 
Lavastine questioned her closely about the lay of the city, the land thereabouts, the
approaches from the west, from the north and south, which she knew little about, and from
the east, which she had never seen. He asked her about the river, how close the city lay to
the riverÕs mouth, how the island on which the city lay was situated, how the bridges
gapped the water and in what manner the gates and walls stood in reference to roadway
and shoreline. 
ÒThis tunnel,Ó he said. ÒThe farmer claimed the cave ended in a wall.Ó 
ÒSo he did, my lord count. I have no reason to disbelieve him. It was a miracle that
anyone survived or that the tunnel appeared.Ó 
ÒBut a tunnel did appear,Ó said Lavastine. 
ÒAnd you survived,Ó said the young lord, and blushed. 
His father glanced sharply at him, frowned, and then played absently with the ears of the
hound that lounged at his feet. ÒDhuoda,Ó he said to the woman seated to his left, the only
other person so honored in the chamber. ÒCan you be without so many men for another
summerÕs season? If we leave after sowing, I donÕt know if we can return by harvest.Ó 

ÒMuch depends on the weather,Ó she said. ÒBut despite everything, last yearÕs harvest
was decent and this winter has been mild. It could be done if you muster after the Feast of
St. Sormas . . . if you think it worthwhile.Ó 
ÒThe kingÕs favor and a just reward.Ó Both he and the noblewoman looked at the young
man. ÒEagle, where is Lord Geoffrey?Ó 
ÒLord Geoffrey remained behind to hunt with the king. He will follow later and will meet
you here by the time you muster your troops.Ó 
ÒWas the king so certain I would agree?Ó 
ÒHe said, my lord count, that he would grant you the reward you asked for.Ó 
The young Lord had the propensity to blush a fierce red. He did so now. Liath could not
imagine why. But at this moment she did not much care about the embarrassments of the
nobly born. She only wanted to stand in this room, to shelter in this safe hall, for the rest of
her life. 
ÒTallia!Ó said Lavastine in the tone of a man who has scented victory. ÒHe will give us
Tallia.Ó He stood. ÒLet it be done. Eagle, you will return to the king to let him know that I
hereby pledge to free Gent from the Eika.Ó 
4
He climbs upward on the old path through a forest of spruce, pine, and birch. Soon the
forest fades to birch only and at last even these stunted trees fall away as he emerges
onto the fjall, the high plateau, home of the WiseMothers. The wind blows fiercely at this
height, whipping his ice-white hair. A rime of frost covers the ground. 
The OldMother, who is both his mother and his aunt, sent him here. ÒSpeak to them,
restless one,Ó she said. ÒTheir words are wiser than mine.Ó 
He finds the youngest of the WiseMothers still on the trail, her great bulk easing upward
toward her place with the others. He sees them now in the distance like stout pillars
surrounding a hollow burnished to a bright glare by the glittering threads that mark the
spawning net of ice-wyrms. But he does not mean to brave the ice-wyrmsÕ venomous
sting this day. 
Instead he stops beside the youngest of them, who has not yet reached their council
ground. Although she passed the knife of decision to his OldMother before his hatching, it
has taken her these many years to get as far as a morningÕs hard walk for him. But she,
like her mothers and mothersÕ mothers before her, grew from that same substance that
carves the bones of the earth. She has no reason to move swiftly in the world: She will see
many more seasons than he can ever hope to, and long after her bones have hardened
completely, her thoughts will still walk the paths of earth until, at last, she departs utterly to
the fjall of the heavens. 
He kneels before her, brings her in offering nothing durable or hard, only those things
made precious by their fragility and transience: a tiny flower once sheltered in the lee of a
rock; a lock of downy hair from one of the Soft OnesÕ infants which just died last night; the
remains of an eggshell from Hakonin fjord; the delicate bone of a small bird such as a
priest would carve marks into and with its fellows scatter onto stone to read the footprints of
the future. 
¡°WiseMother,Ó he says. ÒHear my words. Give me an answer to my question.Ó
Having spoken, he waits. One must have patience to converse with the WiseMothers and
not just because of the ice-wyrms, Her progress up the path is so slow he cannot actually
see her forward movement, but were he to come in another week, the lichen-striped
boulder that lies beside the tread of her great hooves would be a fingerÕs span behind. In
that same way they hear and they speak to a measure of years far longer than his own.
Perhaps, indeed, once they are no longer bound to the world of the tribe by the knife, it is
actually hard for them to understand the words of their grandsons who speak and move so

swiftly and live so short a time, not more than forty circuits of the sun. 
Her voice rumbles so low, like the lowest pitch in the distant fall of an avalanche, that
he must strain to hear her. ÒSpeak. Child.Ó 
¡°OldMother heard from the southlands. Bloodheart calls an army together, all the
RockChildren who will come to him, to campaign against the Soft Ones. If I take such
ships as I have gathered and sail south when the wind turns, will I still be in disgrace? Is it
better to remain here, risking little, or sail there, risking much?Ó 
The wind blusters along the rocky plateau. Rocks adorn the land, the only ornament
needed to make of it a fitting chamber for the wisdom of the eldest MothersÑall but the
FirstMothers, who vanished long ago. Below, trees shush and murmur, a host of voices in
the constant wind. It begins, gently, to snow. With the thaw will come spring rains, and then
the way will lie open to sail south. 
Her voice resonates even through the earth beneath his knees, though it is faint to his
ears. ÒLet. Be. Your. Guide. That. Which. Appears. First. To. Your. Eyes.Ó 
His copper-skinned hand still lies over her rough one. He feels a sharp tingling, like
lightning striking nearby, and withdraws his hand at once. The offerings he has laid upon
her upturned hand melt and soak into her skin as honey seeps into sodden earth, slowly
but inexorably. The audience is over. 
He rises obediently. She has answered, so there is no need to walk the rest of the way
up the fjall, into the teeth of the wind, to kneel before the others by the hollow where all
come to rest in the fullness of time. 
He turns his back on the wind and walks down through the sullen green and white of the
winter forest. Below the trees he walks through pastureland, the steadings of his brothers
and oldest uncles, the pens of their slaves. All this is familiar to his eyes; he has seen it
many times before: the sheep and goats huddling in the winter cold, scraping beneath the
snow to find fodder; cows crowded into the byres, fenced away from the dogs; the pigs
scurrying away to the shelter of trees; the slaves in their miserable pens. 
But as he comes up behind his own steading, newly built from sod and timber, he sees
a strange procession wind away into the trees. Silent, he follows. It is a small group of
slaves, six of them; one carries a tiny bundle wrapped in precious cloth. They are hard to
tell apart, but two he can recognize even from a distance: the male named Otto and the
female-priest named Ursuline. These two have become like chieftain and OldMother to
the other Soft Ones he keeps as slaves; over the winter he has observed their actions
among the others, forming them into a tribe, and it interests him. As this interests him. 
A clearing lies in the trees. Certain markers of stone, crudely carved, are set upright
into the soil. It is a slave place, and he leaves it alone as do all the RockChildren. Slaves
have their customs, however useless they may be. Now, he sees what they are about.
They have dug a hole in the ground and into the earth they place the body of the infant
that died in the night. The female-priest sings in her thin voice while the others weep. He
has tasted the tears of the Soft Ones: They are salt, like the ocean waters. Is it possible
that their Circle god has taught them something of the true life of the universe? Why else
would they cover their dead ones in earth even as they leak water onto the dirt? Is this
what they give in offering? He does not know. 
But he watches. Is this event the one he must use as his guide? What does the funeral
presage? His own death if he returns to his fatherÕs army? Or the death of the Soft Ones
whom Bloodheart will attack? 
Risk much or risk little. 
In the end, staring through the branches at the small mourning party, he knows he
always knew the answer to his question. He is too restless to stay. Death is only a change
in existence; it is neither ending nor beginning, no matter what these Soft Ones may think.
He will return to Hundse, to Gent. 

The mourners file past him on the narrow track. One of them, a young female with
hollow eyes and a body frailer than most, still cries her salt tears though the others
attempt to soothe her. Did the infant come from her body? And if so, how was it planted
there? Are they the same as the beasts, who also plant their young in and feed them out
of the motherÕs body? But though the Soft Ones resemble brute animals, he thinks it
cannot be completely true. They speak, as people do. They gaze above themselves into
the fjall of the heavens and wonder what has brought them to walk on the earth. This, also,
true people do. And they do something he has seen no other creature, not RockChildren,
not animal, not the small cousins of the earth nor the fell beasts of the ocean water, do. 
They weep. 
Alain woke to the profound silence of Lavas stronghold asleep in the dark and cold of a
late winterÕs night. But a tickle nagged at him, like a hound scratching at the door. Rage
slumbered on. As he rose, Sorrow whuffed softly and clattered to his feet, following him. The
other hounds lay curled here and there on the carpet or near the bed. Terror lay atop
LavastineÕs feet, the two of them snoring softly together, in concert. Alain slipped on a tunic.
He had heard something, or perhaps it was only the residue of his dream. 
He latched the door carefully behind him and placed a hand on SorrowÕs muzzle. It was
cold in the hall and cold on the stairs. A draft leaked up the stone stairwell, a breath of
warmth from the hall. He followed its scent and at last, beneath the breathing silence of hall
and stone, heard what he was listening for: the sound of weeping. 
It was so soft that he only found its source when he was halfway into the hall, attracted by
the red glow of hearth fire. In the alcoves, servants and men-at-arms slept; others would
have returned to their own huts outside the palisade or down in the village. But a single
heaped shape more like a forgotten bundle of laundry lay by the fire, shuddering. 
The Eagle wept alone on her rough pallet by the fire. 
Sorrow whined nervously. 
ÒSit!Ó Alain whispered, leaving the hound sitting in the Doos middle of the floor with his
tail thumping in the rushes. He approached the Eagle. 
She did not notice him until he was almost upon her. Then, gasping aloud, she choked on
a sob, started up, and reached for a stick in the fire. 
ÒHush,Ó he said. ÒDonÕt be scared. ItÕs only me. Alain. DonÕt burn yourself.Ó 
ÒOh, God,Ó she murmured, but she drew her hand away from the fire and used it to wipe
her nose instead. He could not make out much of her face, but he could smell the salt of her
tears in the smoky air. 
ÒWhy are you crying?Ó he asked. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó she whispered. ÒIt wasnÕt so bad, riding away. But now I must go back.Ó 
ÒGo back where?Ó 
She shook her head, trying now to dry her tears, but they still came despite her wish. ÒIt
doesnÕt matter.Ó 
ÒOf course it matters!Ó 
She was silent for so long that he began to think he would have to speak, or that he had
somehow offended her. 
ÒWhy should it matter to you?Ó she asked at last, haltingly. 
ÒIt should matter to every one of us when we see one of our kinsfolk lost in sorrow.Ó 
ÒWe are not kin, you and I.Ó The words came choked from her mouth. ÒI have no kin.Ó 
ÒWe are all the sons and daughters of God. IsnÕt that kinship enough?Ó 
ÒIÑI donÕt know.Ó She stirred restlessly and held out her hands toward the coals to
warm them. Reflexively, he fetched some sticks from the woodpile just inside the door and
fed the fire. She watched him, still silent. 
ÒYou donÕt want to go back,Ó he said, settling beside her and pulling his knees up to
his chest. Sorrow whined softly but kept his distance. ÒI saw you,Ó he added, Òwhen you
rode in from Gent, when the king was in Autun. You and the other Eagle. I donÕt know his
name.Ó 

ÒWolfhere.Ó 
ÒArenÕt Eagles your kin?Ó 
ÒIn a way.Ó 
ÒYouÕve really no one at all?Ó 
ÒMy mother died about ten years ago. And Da is dead.Ó How bitter this admission
came he could hear in the tight rein she held on her voice. ÒAi, Lady, almost two years ago
now. He was all I had.Ó 
ÒAnd I was granted a wealth of fathers,Ó he said, suddenly struck by how great his good
fortune had been. 
ÒHow can you have a wealth of fathers? How can you have more than one?Ó 
He hung his head, shamed to think with what anger he had left Merchant Henri at their last
meeting, how badly he had behaved. Would Henri ever forgive him for that pride and anger?
ÒI was fostered to one, a good man, and grew up calling him ÔFather.Õ I came lately to the
second.Ó 
ÒOh, yes.Ó She turned toward him, expression almost visible in the darkness. ÒKing
Henry granted Count Lavastine the right to name you as his heir. IsnÕt that right?Ó 
ÒAnd I only a bastard before,Ó he said lightly, but even so, and even though LavastineÕs
soldiers and servants had now accepted him, the memory of their visit to the manor of Lady
Aldegund and Lord Geoffrey still stung. 
ÒWho was your mother?Ó she asked, then said, embarrassed, ÒI beg your pardon, my
lord. IÕve no right to ask such a thing.Ó 
ÒNo, no, I asked you questions. You may ask me questions in my turn. She was a
servingwoman here, gotten with child by my father and put aside when he married.Ó 
ÒThat story has been told before,Ó she said sharply. ÒNoble lords never ask if their
attentions are welcome. That is the last thing they think of.Ó Then, while he was still so
astonished by this accusation that he could only blink, eyes tearing from the smoke, she
huddled away from him, cowering as if she expected to be hit. ÒI beg your pardon. I meant
no such thing. Forgive me.Ó 
But he could only gape, struck so hard by this new and unwelcome notion that it was only
when a flea crawled up his ankle from the rushes matting the floor that he came to himself,
scratching it off. ÒIt never occurred to me,Ó he said, ashamed now. ÒPerhaps she loved
him, tooÑitÕs possibleÑor wanted something from him. But maybe she never cared for him
at all and had no choiceÑÓ Hard on this thought, another flashed before him in all its
brilliance. ÒIs there a noble lord on the progress who torments you in this way? IsnÕt there
anything the king or the other Eagles can do to stop it?Ó 
 ÒAi, Lady,Ó she whispered, and because she began to cry again, he knew his guess
was right. ÒThereÕs nothing Eagles can do. And nothing the king will do, for heÕs cleverer
than the king and all the lords and ladies at court. They canÕt see him but only what he lays
before them to see. There is no one to aid me in any case. He is the son of a margrave. I
have no one to protect me!Ó 
ÒI will protect you,Ó said Alain. ÒI am heir to the county of Lavas, after all. That counts for
something.Ó 
Suddenly she clutched his hands. Though the air was cold, her skin was hot. ÒI pray you,
my lord, if you can do anything, if you can make it possible for me to stay hereÑto send
someone else in my place back to the kingÕs progress...Ó 
ÒThen what?Ó asked Alain, amazed by the intensity in her voice. ÒIs this noble lord so
loathsome to you?Ó 
She let go of him at once. ÒYou donÕt understand,Ó she said fiercely. ÒI have no kin,
only the Eagles. Even if I had any fondness for this manÑwhich I do not!Ñif I became his
concubine I would be cast out of the Eagles. Then where would I be if he tired of me? I
wouldnÕt even have the protection of the Eagles. God help me, it doesnÕt matter. HeÕll
never tire of me. HeÕll never let me alone.Ó 
He was afraid she was going to start weeping again. The confident Eagle he had seen

on the road this morning seemed a distant memory now. She was all tears and fear. ÒWhat
youÕre saying doesnÕt make sense! First you say you fear he will cast you off, and then you
say you fear heÕll never do so. It must be one or the other, surely, and in truth, my friend, I
think you are right to fear the first more. If he favors you for a few years until he finds another
younger, prettier woman, then you are kinless and without support when he puts you aside. If
he never puts you aside, then surely you will live in good circumstances for the rest of your
life, and any children you have by him will be well provided for.Ó 
At that, she began half to cry and half to snort with laughter. Had she gone mad? ÒYou
sound like Mistress Birta. Always calculating what is most practical.Ó 
ÒThatÕs what my Aunt BelÑthe woman who raised meÑtaught me. No use worrying
about the fox stealing the chickens when the henhouse is safely locked and itÕs your house
thatÕs burning down.Ó 
Her sobs and laughter subsided into hiccuping chuckles. ÒThat sounds like something
Da would say. But you donÕt understand. You canÕt understand. IÕm sorry. IÕm sorry to
have disturbed your rest this night.Ó 
ÒI want to understand!Ó he said, angry that she would think he didnÕt care. He sought
and found her hands where she had wrapped them in an end of her cloak. ÒThere is so
much fear in you, Liath. What are you running from?Ó He leaned forward without thinking
and kissed her on the forehead. A few stray ends of her hair tickled his nose. Her entire
body stiffened and at once he dropped her hands and leaned back. Sorrow, behind them,
growled softly and scrabbled forward, but not too much, not too close. 
ÒI beg your pardon!Ó said Alain. What had come over him? Yet what he felt now was
nothing like the sinful, intense yearning that engulfed him when he thought of Tallia. He
simply knew he must find some way to shelter Liath, just as he had known he had to save the
Eika prince that awful night when Lackling was sacrificed in place of the Eika. 
By now his eyes had adjusted well enough to the gloom that he could see her fairly well,
sitting stiff and straight, her cloak draped in folds down to the floor, her single braid tucked
away inside the hood. When she turned her head to stare at the fire, her eyes glinted with a
spark of blue. 
She only needed encouragement. 
Haltingly, hoping to encourage her by his own open-heartedness, he told his story. It
came out all in a jumble as he skipped from one thing to the next, watching her face by
firelight to see how she responded. He told her of Fifth Son and the hounds, of LacklingÕs
murder by Biscop Antonia, of the guivre and AgiusÕ death. Of the vision he had seen in the
old Dariyan ruins, the shade who spoke the name ÒLiathanoÓ and then vanished in a
maelstrom of fire and smoke and battle. Of the dreams he still had, his link to the Eika
prince. 
When he stumbled to a close, she held a hand out to warm it over the coals. ÒArtemisia
describes five types of dreams: the enigmatic dream, the prophetic vision, the oracular
dream, the nightmare, and the apparition. ItÕs hard to judge what you experienced.
ÔEnigmaticÕ because the meaning of your dreams is concealed with strange shapes and
veilsÑÓ 
ÒBut they donÕt seem like dreams at all. ItÕs as if I see through his eyes, as if I am
him.Ó 
ÒThe Eika are not like us,Ó she said softly. ÒThey wield magics we have no knowledge
of.Ó 
The comment surprised him into blurting out a careless thought. ÒDo you have
knowledge of magic?Ó 
Their silence drew out until it became like a living thing which, hiding in the shadows,
does not know whether to bolt into the nether darkness or advance into the clear, clean light.
Abruptly, in a low, almost monotone voice and in short bursts punctuated by silences, she
began to talk. 
She told him of a childhood faintly remembered, of the sudden flight she and her da had

made from that pleasant home after the death of her mother. She told him of many years
wandering in distant lands, and though she spoke as one who has lived every day in fear, he
ached to hear her speak so matter-of-factly about all the far and curious places he had ever
dreamed of visiting. It seemed, strangely, that inside her words he heard her wish for a safe
haven, like the walls of a monastery, to which she could retire, while she had lived the very
adventure he had always hoped for and known would be denied him. She had seen Darre
and the wild coast of eastern Aosta. She had sailed to Nakria and roamed the ruins of dead
Kartiako. She had explored the fabulous palace of the ruler of Qurtubah in the Jinna
kingdom of Andalla and wandered the market stalls of busy Medemelacha in Salia. She had
seen with her own eyes creatures and wonders he had never heard tell of, not even from the
merchants of Osna village, the most Ôtraveled people he knew. 
But for this she had paid a price. She had lost her father, murdered at night by sorcery
with no mark left on his body. Even now, fell creatures stalked herÑsome of them inhuman
and one all too human. Seeking sorcerous knowledge from The Book of Secrets as well as
what secrets he vas sure she held hidden inside her, a holy man of the church had made her
his slaveÑand worse. 
After such misery as made Alain wince to hear it, she had been rescued by Eagles. Yet
she could not trust even them, certainly not Wolfhere. She couldnÕt trust anyone except an
Eagle named Hanna who was now, somehow, Father HughÕs prisoner. Except Prince
Sanglant, whom she had met in GentÑand he was dead. Except perhaps an Aoi sorcerer
seen through fire, and she had no idea where he was. In the end, tormented again by Father
Hugh, she had discovered the most terrifying knowledge of all: She held locked inside her a
sorcerous power trapped in her bones or in her blood over which she had no control. 
ÒI donÕt know what to do with it. I donÕt know what it means or what it is, how much Da
locked away and how much he never knew of. I only know he was trying to protect me. What
if I go back to the kingÕs progress? Hugh is holding Hanna as a hostage to make me come
back. And if I donÕt go back, then what becomes of her? Ai, Lady, I donÕt know what to do!
I donÕt know whatÕs going to become of Hanna. But if I go back to the kingÕs progress,
Hugh will imprison me again. ThereÕs nowhere to run any more. IÕm so afraid.Ó 
ÒThen maybe you have to stop running,Ó he said reasonably. 
Her laughter was sharp in reply. ÒAnd let them find me? Let Hugh trap me?Ó 
ÒFind yourself.Ó The answer didnÕt come cleanly; answers rarely did. But he sensed
that they groped closer to the question now, and only when they could discover the question
could they search out the path that would lead her to the answer she sought. 
¡°Gnosi seaton,Ó she murmured. Ò ÔKnow thyself.Õ ThatÕs what the prophetesses of
the ancient gods said at the temple of Talfi.Ó 
His hand. The memory from his dream engulfed him so abruptly that he had to cover his
eyes. Ò ÔLet be your guide that which first appears to your eyes.Õ It wasnÕt the funeral at
all. It was his own hand. ThatÕs what she meant.Ó 
ÒWhat funeral?Ó 
He shook himself free of the windings of forgotten sleep. ÒMy dream of Fifth Son, the one
I had this night.Ó 
ÒI only have nightmares,Ó said Liath, her voice so quiet that even the snap of twigs and
roll of burning logs drowned it. ÒIÕve never had a true vision, except through fireÑand that
isnÕt truly a vision but a gateway.Ó 
Before he knew what he was about, he had pulled the leather thong up from around his
neck and opened the little cloth pouch. He laid the delicate red rose on his palm for her to
see. It gleamed uncannily in the firelight. 
She stared. ÒThe Rose of Healing,Ó she whispered. Her voice caught, broke, and she
sniffed back tears. She did not attempt to touch it. 
The petals burned on his palm. Quickly he replaced it in the pouch. Then, trembling
slightly, he took another log and set it on the hot coals. It smoldered, caught, and blazed,
flames dancing along its length. 

She wiped her nose again with the back of a hand and looked up at him. She reached,
hesitated, then laid a hand on his arm. The touch was so light it might not have been there at
all, and yet in that simple act Alain understood that, as with the hounds, he had won her trust
forever. 
5
 He crept back upstairs when the first stirrings of dawn reached him. She had fallen
asleep hours ago. Yet he could not bear to leave and instead had sat watch over her and the
fire for the rest of the night. 
Upstairs, his father was awake and waiting for him. 
ÒAlain.Ó He nudged Terror out of his way and swung his legs out of bed, rose, stretched,
and then turned to examine his son with a frown. ÒOpen the shutters.Ó 
Alain obeyed. The sting of cold air chased along his skin like so many gnats. 
ÒClose it again,Ó said Lavastine after examining him. ÒHave we not spoken of this? You
of all people must be more careful than most.Ó 
ÒCareful of what?Ó 
ÒI hope you are not about to say you went out to the pits to relieve yourself when we have
a perfectly good chamber pot here, and a servant to carry it away in the morning?Ó Alain
flushed, having finally realized where his father thought he had been for most of the night.
ÒWhere have you been?Ó 
ÒDown in the hall, talking withÑÓ 
¡°Talking with?Ó 
ÒThatÕs all!Ó 
ÒPerhaps it isnÕt fair to expect so much from you. ItÕs a rare man who in his youth can
resist a fair morsel set before him. Had God wanted us to remain as pure as the angels,
They could have molded us differently, I suppose.Ó 
ÒBut I didnÕtÑ
¡°Is it the Eagle? You know they swear oaths. They arenÕt allowed congress of that
nature with any but their own kind, on pain of being thrown out of their Order. But youÕre a
good-looking boy, and fair spoken, and sheÕs a long way from the king. We each of us
have our weaknesses.Ó 
ÒBut we didnÕtÑ!Ó 
ÒSo it was the Eagle.Ó 
ÒI talked to her. You know IÕve always told the truth, Father! I heard her crying and I went
to seeÑI comforted her, thatÕs all. CanÕt you send another messenger in her place?Ó 
ÒWhy shouldnÕt she return to court? That is her duty.Ó 
ÒShe has an enemy at court.Ó 
ÒAn Eagle has an enemy at court? Why should anyone at court even notice such an
Eagle, unless she has brought the kingÕs displeasure down on herself?Ó 
ÒIt isnÕt that at all. ThereÕs a nobleman at court, an abbot, who wants to force her to
become his concubine.Ó 
ÒIndeed.Ó Lavastine walked over to the shutters and opened them again, framing
himself in the full blast of cold air. He stared outside, examining some sight in the courtyard
below. No one could ever doubt Lavastine ruled here. He did not have the height or bulk of
King Henry or of his own cousin Geoffrey, but even standing in his bare feet, dressed only in
a linen undershift as a robe against the chill, he had authority, that absolute assurance that
all he surveyed lay under his command. Some gray colored his sand-pale hair; no longer a
young man, neither was he old in the way of men entering their decline. Alain wished he
could feel so sure of himself, could in the simple act of opening a shutter proclaim his fitness
to stand in his ordained place in the world. Aunt Bel had that assurance; so had his foster
father, Henri. ÒPerhaps itÕs even understandable, if the nobleman is insistent enough. If
she becomes his concubine, sheÕll lose her position as an Eagle. Then, should he tire of

her, she would have no recourse except to return to her kinÑif they would take her in.Ó 
ÒShe has no kin.Ó 
ÒThen it is doubly wise of her to resist such an arrangement. I admire her pragmatism.
She is better off in the Eagles.Ó He shut and latched one shutter, leaving a draft of cold air
to spill into the room while he called over Terror, Ardent, Fear, and Bliss and leashed them
to a ring set into the wall. ÒBut I remain puzzled. Why did she confide in you?Ó 
Alain hesitated. For an instant, he wanted to say, ÒBecause sheÕs a wild creature, like
the hounds, and she trusts me,Ó but the notion was so outrageous that he knew he could
speak no such thing aloud. ÒI donÕt know.Ó 
Lavastine had marked the hesitation. ÒIf you have conceived some fondness for the
Eagle . . . you understand why nothing must happen, Alain. You of all people must be more
carefulÑÓ 
As he hadnÕt been when the servingwoman at Lady AldegundÕs manor had accosted
him. Only the savagery of the hounds had saved him from giving in to base desire! HadnÕt
he learned anything from that? ÒI wouldnÕtÑif IÕm to marry Lady TalliaÑÓ But this was too
much. He sat down heavily on the bench and buried his face in SorrowÕs flank. The thick
smell of dog drove all impure thoughts out of his mindÑor most of them, anyway, though he
could not banish the image of Tallia. And why should such thoughts be impure? WasnÕt it
true that desire came from the Lady and Lord, that They had granted it to humankind so that
woman and man could create children between them? 
ÒWhat wouldnÕt you do since youÕre to marry Tallia?Ó asked Lavastine, sounding more
curious than anything. 
ÒSheÕs so holy, so pure. It wouldnÕt be right if I didnÕt come to her as...pure as she will
come to me.Ó 
ÒA Godly sentiment, Alain, and I am proud of you for it. It is just as well that the Eagle
leaves today. If you have conceived a fondness for her, it might prove hard to keep your
pledge to your future bride.Ó 
It took Alain a moment to sort through this. Then he jerked his head up. The untied hounds
swarmed over to him, licking his hands. ÒGo away!Ó he said, irritated at their attention.
ÒBut I wouldnÕtÑI wouldnÕt think ofÑÓ He stammered to a halt. With the window open, he
could see his fatherÕs expression clearly and read what it meant: Not that Alain was
tempted by the young Eagle, but that Lavastine was. 
Was this how Alain had been conceived? By a young man who, seeing a young woman,
determined to have her in his bed no matter what she wanted? ÒIsnÕt it written down by the
church mothers that we must all come cleanly to the marriage bed?Ó he demanded,
horrified to see Lavastine in this unflattering light. No word of scandal had ever touched
Henri the Merchant. 
Lavastine bowed his head and looked away. ÒSo I am justly reminded of my own
faults.Ó 
ÒI beg your pardon, Father.Ó How had he come to blurt out such an appalling
statementÑeven if it was true? 
But Lavastine only smiled wryly and crossed the chamber to touch AlainÕs hair as a
praying man might touch a reliquary. ÒNever beg pardon for telling what is only the truth. Be
assured I have learned my lesson in such matters. I have learned to confine myself to whores
and married women, such as may be approached discreetly.Ó 
ÒFather! But the church mothers enjoin us toÑ
The count laughed sharply and called Steadfast over to him. She had become more
restless of late; most likely she was going into heat. Already the males had begun to grow
more irritable than usual. ÒI am not that strong, son. We must all learn the measure of our
strength. Otherwise we exhaust ourselves striving for that which we can never gain.Ó He tied
Steadfast up away from the others and frowned at her, then whistled for Sorrow and Rage.
Good Cheer was, as usual, hiding under the bed. ÒLet the servants in, Alain,Ó he added
curtly, motioning toward the door. 

ÒBut, Father, what about the Eagle?Ó 
Lavastine was down on his knees now. Grabbing Good Cheer by the forelegs, he
dragged her bodily out from her hiding place while she whined and attempted to lick him into
leniency. He grunted, heaved her up, and wrestled her over to the wall while she leaned
heavily against him, anything to impede his progress. ÒCursed stubborn hound.Ó He patted
her affectionately on the shoulder. Then he turned round. 
ÒWell, then, boy, we shall keep the Eagle here with us, which is the only practical choice,
is it not? She knows the lay of the land by Gent. She has walked in the city and remembers
its streets and walls. She traversed this hidden tunnel. What use to us is her knowledge of
Gent if she is with King Henry when we attack?Ó He lifted a hand, forefinger raised as the
deacon did when she meant to scold her congregation. ÒBut there will be noÑÓ 
ÒI never even thought of it!Ó 
Lavastine smiled thinly. ÒPerhaps you did not. Not yet, at any rate.Ó 
ÒThen you must make the same promise!Ó Alain retorted, still waiting at the door. 
Steadfast barked, and all at once all the hounds began yipping and barking. ÒHush! Stop
that noise, you miserable creatures!Ó snapped the count, but he was not truly angry with
them. He could not be. Just as, Alain saw suddenly, he was not angry at what Alain had said.
Having been granted the heir he so long desired and despaired of ever having, he could not
bring himself to chastise him. Nor, perhaps, did he even want to, though the demand had
been impertinent. 
ÒVery well. She will stay with us...untouched. We march to Gent after the Feast of St.
Sormas. Once we have retaken the city, we will collect Tallia and return home.Ó 
Collect Tallia. It made her sound like a chest of gold or a jeweled cup, a valuable
treasure held by the king to be given out as a prize. WasnÕt that what she was, now that her
parents had been disgraced and shorn of their position? But their disgrace did not strip
from her the inheritance she received through her mother nor the royal bloodlines that tied
her to both the ruling house of Wendar and the princely house that had once ruled Varre. 
A servant scratched lightly on the door. 
ÒWhat if we fail to take Gent?Ó asked Alain. 
Lavastine simply looked at him as if he had uttered words in a language the count did not
know. ÒThey are savages, Alain! We are civilized people. The city of Gent fell because it
was unprepared and overwhelmed. The same will not happen to us. Come now. We have
spent far too long talking about a common Eagle who is no doubt more useful to us when
she flies as is her nature than when she is left bound to a post for us to admire her beauty.
Let us get on with our day.Ó 
6
He had not spoken words in a long time except to respond to taunts or to call down the
dogs. Indeed, it took him a long timeÑhours, perhaps daysÑto find the words that would say
what he meant them to. 
But he struggled, piecing them together. Never let it be said he did not fight until his last
breath. He would not let Bloodheart and the dogs defeat him. 
ÒBloodheart.Ó 
Was that his voice? Rasping and hoarse, he sounded brutish compared to the light, fluid
tones of the Eika, who for all their ugly metal-hard bodies had voices as soft as the flutes
Bloodheart played. 
Bloodheart stirred on his throne, coming to life. ÒIs this my who addresses me? I thought
you had forgotten how to speak! What boon do you ask?Ó 
ÒYou wonÕt kill me, Bloodheart. Nor will your dogs.Ó 
Bloodheart didnÕt reply, only fingered the ax laid across his thighs and the smooth bone
flutes tucked into his girdle of glistening silver-and-gold chain links. Perhaps he looked
irritated. 

ÒTeach me your language. Let your priest teach me to read the bones, as he does.Ó 
ÒWhy?Ó demanded Bloodheart, but he might have been amused. He might have been
angry. ÒWhy should I? You are only a dog. Why should you want to?Ó 
ÒEven dogs bark, and gnaw at bones for sport,Ó said Sanglant. 
At that, Bloodheart laughed uproariously. He did not answer. Indeed, he left soon after to
tour the armories and tanneries of Gent, to take his daily excursion down to the river. 
But the next day the priest settled down just outside the limit of SanglantÕs chains and
began to teach him the language of the Eika, to teach him how to roll and interpret the finely
carved bones he carried in his pouch. And every day, lulled by SanglantÕs muted voice and
intent interestÑfor what else did the prince have to be interested in?Ñthe priest edged a little
closer. Even a dog could be patient. 
PART FOUR: SEEKER OF HEARTS
XIll A GLIMPSE BEYOND THE VEIL
1
Because of the rugged terrain and the lay of the mountains, no roads fit for the kingÕs
progress led between the duchy of Avaria and that of Wayland. An Eagle had ridden straight
west from the palace at Echstatt along tracks impassable for the heavy wagons that made
up the train of the kingÕs entourage. So after several weeks at Echstatt, the court itself
moved north along the Old Avarian Road toward the city and biscophric at Wertburg.
Although not as well traveled a road as the HellwegÑthe Clear WayÑthat ran through the
heartland of Saony and Fesse, the road accommodated king and retinue without too much
hardship for the royal party, though they moved slowly. Old fortresses, royal manors, and
estates under the rule of convents or monasteries provided lodging and food. Common folk
lined the way to watch the king and his entourage ride by. According to Ingo, the king had
not ridden this way for some five years, accounting for their enthusiastic welcome. To
Hanna, their welcome resembled all the others she had witnessed, just as this land looked
much like any other land with hills, vast forest, and the friendly sight of fields and villages,
churches and estates. But the hills were steep and high while in HeartÕs Rest the
wilderness gave way to heath; beech and fir dominated in open fields where she was used
to a dense canopy of oak and elm and lime; and the village folk spoke in a dialect that was
hard for her to understand. 
Each day on the kingÕs progress brought new fascinations for Hanna. Heralds rode
ahead to shout the news of the kingÕs adventusÑhis arrival at the next stopping place. A
levy of soldiers and servants forged ahead of the main party to clear the road of snow and
debris. At the forefront of the main procession rode the king and his noble companions in full
glory. After them came the swelling ranks of an army, growing with each day as nobles
joined Henry or sent soldiers in their place. The horde of servants followed them, and farther
back, wagons rolled, lumbering and jolting over the rutted road, skidding on ice, getting
stuck in drifts. A century of Lions marched at the rear. 
But of course there were always stragglers, beggars trailing behind, women and men
hoping to hire themselves out as laborers. Peddlers, prostitutes, homeless servants,
persons with grievances to bring before the king, and anonymous young men hoping to find
employment or loot in the aftermath of battle, all of these followed in the track of the kingÕs
progress, some joining as others dropped out. 
ÒIs it always like this?Ó Hanna asked Hathui. Fifteen days ago they had left Echstatt.
Now she and the other Eagle pulled up their horses on a rise that looked down to the north
over the episcopal city of Wertburg and down to the south over the road that wound away
through the stubble of fields and lines of hedges before it lost itself in forest. Riding at the

front, they had a good view of the kingÕs train, a long and colorful procession strung across
the landscape below. The line of stragglers still emerged from forest. Below them, the king
ascended the hill. The hugely pregnant Sapientia rode beside him, mounted on a gentle
mare, with Helmut Villam, Sister Rosvita, and Father Hugh in close attendance. At the
Wertburg city gates, a large party led by the biscop and the local count had already begun
its own procession out to meet the king. 
ÒWeÕll be in Mainni by the thaw,Ó said Hathui. ÒThere are several royal palaces where
we will sit out the floods. ItÕs hard work traveling in the spring. How do you fare, Hanna?Ó 
Hanna considered the question seriously; she knew very well what Hathui was asking. ÒI
fare well enough. ThereÕs nothing wrong with Princess Sapientia that wise companions and
fields of her own to plow wonÕt cure, as my mother used to say.Ó 
ÒAre you her champion now?Ó 
ÒItÕs true sheÕs rash and proud and thoughtless, but from what I hear she lived for a
long time in the shadow of her brother, Prince SanglantÑÓ 
ÒTrue enough,Ó observed Hathui. 
ÒÑand if she has many companions now, I fear itÕs mostly because they expect King
Henry to name her as HeirÑnot for herself. So itÕs no wonder sheÕsÑwell, as my mother
would say, if you bring up a child on table scraps, then it will surely gorge to sickness when
you finally sit it down to a feast.Ó 
ÒA wise woman, your mother,Ó said Hathui with a grim smile. ÒBut I didnÕt mean to
inquire about the princess. What of Father Hugh?Ó 
ÒI am of no concern to him,Ó Hanna said at last, but she knew she was blushing. ÒHe
pays no attention to me.Ó Why, then, knowing what she did about him, did she sometimes
still wish he did? 
ÒIf I did not have LiathÕs testimony, it would be hard for me to believe the things she has
accused him of.Ó 
ÒPerhaps heÕs changed.Ó 
Hathui shot her a sharp glance. ÒDo you think so?Ó 
ÒHeÕs so...kind and gentle, so soft-spoken. So clever and industrious. YouÕve seen him
yourself, laying hands on the sick, giving out alms to the poor. He attends Princess
Sapientia faithfully and advises her with care.Ó 
ÒAs well he might!Ó 
Hanna had to grin. ÒIf itÕs a child of his own begetting, then itÕs no wonder he attends
her so closely. But he doesnÕt seem . . . the same person as he was in HeartÕs Rest.Ó 
ÒHeÕs with his own people now.Ó 
ÒThatÕs true enough. We were only common folk in HeartÕs Rest, far beneath his
notice.Ó 
ÒExcept for Liath.Ó 
ÒExcept for Liath,Ó Hanna echoed. 
ÒDid you ever think she might be lying?Ó asked Hathui casually. Ahead, the biscopÕs
procession had unfurled banners and the bright standards representing the city and the local
count. Behind, riders in the kingÕs procession began to sing. 
Clouds covered the heavens this day, and it was cold, yet surely no soul could be gloomy
observing such pageantry. Hanna turned her face into the breeze and stared, the lick of the
wind on her lips. Even in gloves her hands were cold, but she would have been no other
place in the world than this one as the king and his party ascended the hill, reaching the
crest behind them. Their song carried fitfully on the breeze. 
ÒSheÕs not lying, Hathui. I saw her carried in that day, when she miscarried. I know what
he did to her. And he stole her book.Ó 
ÒSome would say the book became his when he bought off her fatherÕs debts. She was
his slave.Ó 
ÒAnd manyÕs the man or woman who uses a slave as they see fit, and no one would
ever fault them for it. It still doesnÕt seem right to me. She never welcomed his attentions. Is

it right that she be forced, to accept him just because heÕs a margraveÕs son and she has
no kin to protect her?Ó Her tone came out more bitter than she intended. 
ÒSome would say it is,Ó remarked Hathui. ÒYou and I would not. But you and I do not
rule this kingdom.Ó 
There was more Hanna wanted to say, but she was ashamed to say it out loud: Hugh was
a selfish, arrogant lord with the faultless manners of a cleric and a voice like that of an
angelÑbut sometimes beautiful flowers are the most poisonous. ÒYet we canÕt help
admiring them,Ó she murmured. 
ÒWhat?Ó Hathui looked at her side wise, then mercifully turned her horse aside. ÒCome,
here is the king.Ó 
They made way, letting the kingÕs standard bearers and then the king himself pass
before them, and fell in behind, singing. 
King and court celebrated the Feast of St. Herodia at Wertburg, with the biscop of
Wertburg presiding. After a week eating from the biscopÕs table, they continued north for
three days to Hammelberg, on the Malnin River, where they sheltered at a monastic estate.
From here they cut across overland by the Helfenstene Way, a journey of four days, until they
rejoined the Malnin Road at Aschfenstene. Turning northwest, they followed the river for five
days until they reached the city of Mainni, where the Brixian tongue of the kingdom of Salia
bordered the duchy of Arconia and lapped up against the duchy of Fesse. Once Biscop
Antonia had presided over Mainni. Now, upon arriving, King Henry installed Sister Odila, a
relative of the local count, as biscop. 
Their arrival in the city coincided with the feast day celebrating the conversion of St.
Thais. She had been a prostitute before embracing the God of Unities and walling herself up
in a cellÑfrom which she did not emerge for ten years, and then only to die. Hanna heard
more than one cleric comment that Henry had offered the biscophric first to Sister Rosvita,
but that the cleric had remarked that she was not yet ready to wall herself up when there
were many more places she needed to visit for her History. She had suggested Sister Odila
as a suitable candidate, and Henry had taken her advice in this as in so many other things.
The appointment, of course, was contingent on the approval of the skopos, though as yet
they had no news from Darre about the case brought against Antonia. 
ÒI wonder how Wolfhere fares,Ó Hanna asked Hathui many nights later after the feast
celebrating the miracle of St. Rose aÕlee; the saint, a limner in a humble village outside the
city of Darre, had painted a set of murals depicting the life of the blessed Daisan that had so
pleased the Lord and Lady that a holy light had shone on the images ever after. 
ÒWolfhere fares well enough, I have found.Ó Hathui heaped the dwindling winter fodder
in the biscopÕs stables into a plush heap, over which she threw her cloak, bundling herself
up in her blanket. With so many animals stabled below, the loft was a warm, if pungent,
resting place. ÒI wonder how Liath fares. ItÕs almost the end of the year and weÕve had no
word from Count Lavastine.Ó 
ÒYou donÕt think the count will refuse to march on Gent?Ó 
ÒI think it unlikely. The question is whether the king will be able to meet him there.Ó
Hathui settled herself comfortably in the straw. ÒFrom Mainni, we can follow the road north
to GentÑor the road south to Wayland.Ó 
ÒWhy would the king want to go to Wayland?Ó 
ÒAnswer that yourself, Hanna!Ó 
ÒDuke ConradÕs soldiers turned me back from the Julier Pass. Is that a grave enough
offense that the king would march against the duke?Ó 
ÒPicking a fightÑwithout the kingÕs permissionÑwith the Queen and King of Karrone?
Remember, the King of Karrone is HenryÕs younger brother. And Duke Conrad also wears
the golden torque that marks him as born of the royal line. His great-grandfather was the
younger brother of the first Henry.Ó 
ÒDo you think he means to rebel, as Sabella did? Surely any claim he might have to the
throne isnÕt nearly as strong as hers.Ó 

ÒI donÕt know what the noble folk intend. Their concerns are different from those I grew
up with. I hope,Ó she added, Òthat King Henry finds a good margrave for Eastfall, a woman
or man who can stop the Quman raids and protect the freeholders. A person who is not
concerned with the intrigues of the court.Ó 
ÒArenÕt all the nobles concerned with the intrigues of the court?Ó 
Hathui only grinned. ÒI havenÕt asked them all. Nor would they answer me if I did. Hush
now, chatterer. I want to sleep.Ó 
In the morning a messenger arrived from Count Lavas-tineÑa messenger who was not
Liath. Sapientia reclined on a couch while her attendants fluttered around her and her new
physicianÑon loan from Margrave Judith and newly arrivedÑtested her pulse by means of
pressing two fingers to her skin just under her jawline. Hanna had observed that the princess
liked commotion, as if the amount of talking and movement eddying around her reflected her
importance. Behind the couch Hugh paced, more like a caged animal than an amiable and
wise courtier. He held LiathÕs book tucked under his arm. In the two and a half months
since the disaster at Augensburg, Hanna had rarely seen him without the book in his hands;
if not there, then he stowed it in a small locked chest which a servant carried. 
ÒWhy did she not return?Ó he demanded of no one in particular. Looking up, he saw
Hanna. 
Hanna froze. She could not bring herself to move, not knowing whether to bask in his
notice or fear it. 
Sapientia yawned as she rubbed a hand reflexively over her huge abdomen. ÒReally,
Father Hugh, I prefer my Hanna. Her voice is so very calming. The other one was too
skittish. She serves Gent better riding with Count Lavastine than with us.Ó 
Hugh frowned at Hanna a moment longer. Then, with a palpable effort, he turned his
attention to the princess. ÒWise advice to your own counselor, Your Highness,Ó he said in
an altered tone. 
Sapientia smiled, looking pleased. ÒMore fruitful to wonder if we will ride south to
Wayland and Duke Conrad, or north to meet Lavastine at Gent. And what is keeping my
dear Theophanu? Perhaps she has turned nun at St. Valeria Convent.Ó Her favorites,
surrounding her, giggled. Hugh did not laugh, but when the gossip turned to the latest
newsÑwhich was noneÑabout Duke Conrad, he joined in with his usual elegance of manner,
gently chiding those who were mean-spirited and encouraging those who supposed King
Henry would find a peaceful solution to any misunderstanding which might arise. 
ÒIt is true,Ó he remarked, Òthat force is sometimes necessary to win what is rightfully
yours, but God also gave us equal parts of eloquence and cunning which we rightly point to
as the mark of the wise counselor. We are better off hoarding our substance in order to fight
off the incursions of the Quman and the Eika than wasting it among ourselves.Ó 
With this judgment King Henry evidently agreed. The court did not move south toward
Wayland. But as the early spring rains began and the rivers swelled with the thaw, his
advisers deemed the journey north toward Gent as yet too difficult to attempt. While they
waited for the roads to open, they visited the small royal estates that lay in a wide ringÑeach
about three daysÕ ride from the lastÑaround Mainni. The court celebrated Mariansmass
and the new year at Salfurt, fasted for Holy Week at Alsheim, and moved north to celebrate
the feasts of St. Eirik and St. Barbara at Ebshausen. On the road from Ebshausen to the
palace at Thersa, Sapientia felt her first birth pangs. 
ÒBut Thersa is so comfortable,Ó she complained, looking both disgruntled and
frightened when the king declared that they would go instead to the nearby convent of St.
Hippolyte for the lying-in. ÒI want to go to Thersa!Ó 
ÒNo,Ó said Henry with that look that any observant soul would know at once meant he
could not be swayed. ÒThe prayers of the holy sisters will aid you.Ó 
ÒBut they can pray for me wherever I am!Ó 
Hugh took SapientiaÕs hand in his and faced the king. ÒYour Majesty, it is true that the
palace at Thersa is a grander place by far, more fitting for a royal lying-inÑÒ

¡°No! The matter is settled!Ó 
Sapientia began to snivel, gripping her bellyÑand the king seemed ready to lose his
temper. Hanna moved forward and leaned to whisper in SapientiaÕs ear. ÒYour Highness.
What matters it what bed you lie in as long as God favor you? The prayers of the holy nuns
will strengthen you, and your obedience now will give you favor in your fatherÕs eyes.Ó 
SapientiaÕs sniveling ceased and, once a birth pang had passed, she grasped the
kingÕs hands in her own. ÒOf course you are right, Father. We will go to St. Hippolyte. With
a patron saint like Hippolyte, the child is sure to grow strong and large and of stout courage,
suitable for a soldier.Ó 
Henry brightened noticeably and, for the rest of the damp ride to the convent, fussed over
his daughter, who put up a brave face as her pains worsened. 
Sapientia was taken inside the walls of the convent with only two attendants and Sister
Rosvita to act as witnesses, as well as the physician who, being a eunuch, was considered
as good as a woman. Everyone else waited in the hall, what remained of an old palace from
the time of Taillefer, now under the management of the convent sisters. Henry paced. Hugh
sat in a corner and idly leafed through the book. 
ÒSheÕs small in the hips,Ó said Hanna nervously, remembering births attended by her
mother. Not all had happy outcomes. 
ÒLook here.Ó Hathui examined the carvings that ran along the beams in the hall.
Blackened with layers of soot, cracked from the weight of years of damp and dryness, they
depicted the trials of St. Hippolyte whose strength and martial courage had brought the Holy
Word of God to the heathen tribes who had lived in these woodlands a hundred years
before. ÒA good omen indeed for the child who will prove SapientiaÕs fitness to rule and
also ride as captain of the Dragons when he grows up.Ó 
Hanna surveyed the old hall. Servants swept moldering rushes out the door. Ash heaped
the two hearths and had to be carried away by the bucket load before a fresh fire could be
started. Even with all the people packing into the hall, the cold numbed her. At a time like
this, the stables provided better shelter. She could still hear, like an echo, the soft cries of
the sister cellarer of the convent bemoaning the loss of so many scant provisionsÑit took a
vast amount of food and drink to satisfy the king and his company. 
ÒWhy didnÕt the king want Princess Sapientia brought to bed at Thersa? Everyone is
saying that Thersa is a grander place by far, and the steward there more able to supply the
court.Ó 
ÒLook here.Ó Hathui took a few steps away from the younger clerics who, clustered
nearby, were muttering among themselves. She wet her fingers and reached up to brush
away grime and dust from one carving. Deep in the wood a scene unfolded down the length
of the old beam. A figure draped in robes advanced, spear in one hand, the other raised,
palm out, to confront the tribespeople retreating before her: a stylized flame burned just
beyond her hand. Behind her walked many grotesque creatures, obviously not of human kin,
but it wasnÕt clear whether they stalked the saint or trod in her holy footsteps, seeking her
blessing. 
As the clerics moved away, Hathui dropped her voice. ÒItÕs better not to speak out loud
of these matters. HenryÕs bastard son Sanglant was born at Thersa. So Wolfhere told me.
The elvish woman who was the princeÕs mother was so sick after the birth that some feared
she would die. The court couldnÕt move for two months, but when she did rise at last from
her bed, she walked away never to be seen again. They say she vanished from this earth
completely.Ó 
ÒBut where could she have gone?Ó demanded Hanna. ÒWhere else is there to go, for a
creature such as that? To the island of Alba?Ó 
ÒItÕs only what I heard. That doesnÕt mean itÕs true.Ó 
ÒThat doesnÕt mean itÕs not true,Ó replied Hanna thoughtfully, examining the next
carving. The same figureÑshe recognized the robes and the mark of fire before the saintÕs
handÑapproached an archway out of which emerged a man-sized creature with a circle of

stylized feathers behind it that appeared to be wings; it also wore a belt of skulls. Following
to the next scene, Hanna saw the same archway, made small now, standing among a circle
of standing stones which were, apparently, in the act of falling to the ground, their power
banished by the saintÕs holy courage. 
ÒHow was St. Hippolyte martyred?Ó Hanna asked. 
Hathui smiled grimly. ÒCrushed by rock, as you see here.Ó She indicated the last
carving. They stood now at the far end of the hall. At the other end, fire flared, and Villam at
last entreated Henry to sit down and take some wine. 
The princess labored long into the night. At dawn on the next day, the Feast of St.
Sormas, thirteenth day of the month of Avril, she bore a healthy girl child. 
And there was great rejoicing. 
Henry called Hugh before him. ÒYou have proved yourself a good adviser to my
daughter,Ó he said, presenting him with a fine gold cup out of his treasury. ÒI have hopes
now for her ability to reign after me.Ó
ÓGod has blessed your house and bloodline, Your Majesty,Ó replied Hugh, and though
the compliments came many over the rest of the day, by no act or word did he display any
unseemly pride in an event he had helped bring about. Nor did he appear conscious of the
new status this safe birth brought him. 
That evening, at the urging of Sister Rosvita, he read aloud from the Vita of St.
Radegundis, the happy taleÑsomewhat startling to find in a saintÕs lifeÑof how the saintly
young woman, so determined in her vow to remain chaste and thus closer to heavenly purity,
was overcome by the great nobility of Emperor Taillefer. Wooing her, he overcame her
reluctance. Her love for his great virtues and imperial honor melted her heart, and they were
married as soon as she came of age. 
ÒIt is time to think of marriage for Sapientia,Ó said Henry when the reading was finished.
ÒThe king of Salia has many sons.Ó 
ÒIt might be well,Ó suggested Villam, Òto send Princess Sapientia to Eastfall once she
has regained her strength. Then she would gain some experience in ruling.Ó 
ÒIt is better to keep her beside me as we travel,Ó said Henry in the tone which meant he
intended no argument to sway him. ÒBut Eastfall needs a margrave. Perhaps I should send
Theophanu to Eastfall...Ó With the king musing in this way, the happy feast passed swiftly.
For the first time in months, for the first time, really, since he had heard the terrible news of
SanglantÕs death, Henry looked cheerful. 
The court feasted for three days, for it took a feast of such magnificence to properly thank
God for Their blessings upon the royal house. Sapientia was as yet too weak to appear, and
in any case it was traditional for a woman to lie abed for a week in seclusion before
receiving visitors. That way she might not be contaminated by any taint brought from the
outside or any unholy thoughts at this blessed time. 
Hanna was astounded yet again at the sheer amount of food and drink the court
consumed. She could only imagine what her mother would say, but then, her mother might
well say that as the king prospers, so does the kingdom. 
Ai, Lady, at this time last year she and Liath had just left HeartÕs Rest behind, riding out
with Wolfhere, Hathui, and poor brave Manfred. She touched her EagleÕs badge. Where
was Liath now? 
 
2
Liath hunkered down, arms hooked around her knees. The ground was too wet to sit on,
and everything was damp. Mud layered wagon wheels and dropped in clumps from the
undersides when they jolted over the roads. Every branch scattered moisture on any fool
sorry enough to touch it. The grass wept water, and the trees dripped all day even when it
wasnÕt raining. 
Though they had waited until the first day of the month of Sormas to leave, it was still a

wet time to be marching to war. But that deterred no oneÑnot with such a prize within reach. 
ÒCan you do it?Ó whispered Alain. He kept a cautious three steps back from her.
Sorrow and Rage sat panting a stoneÕs throw away. 
She did not reply. That the hounds would still not come near her only made her wonder if
they sensed the awful power trapped inside her. Wood burns. She shuddered. Would she
ever learn to control it? She had to try. 
ÒWe donÕt have much time,Ó he said. ÒTheyÕll come looking for me soon.Ó 
ÒHush.Ó She lifted a hand, and he shuffled another step back. Behind, the hounds
whined. In wood lies the propensity to burn, the memory of flame. Perhaps, as Democrita
said, tiny indivisible building blocks, hooked and barbed so that they could fasten together,
made up all things in the universe; in wood some of these must be formed of the element of
fire. If she could only reach through the window of fire and call fire to them, they would
remember flameÑ
And burn. 
Wood ignited with a roar. Fire shot upward to lick the branches of the nearest tree. Liath
stumbled away from the searing heat. The hounds yelped and slunk backward, growling. 
ÒLord Above!Ó swore Alain. He took another step away from her and drew the sign of
the Circle at his breastÑas if for protection. 
Falling to one knee, Liath stared at the fire. Gouts of flame boiled up into the sky.
Branches hissed. Grass within the ring of penetrating heat sizzled and blackened. Only
when it was this wet dared she attempt to call fire; only when it was this wet was it safe to
attempt an act whose consequences she could not control. 
A light rain began to fall. Alain pulled his hood up over his head and took a hesitant step
toward her. Liath stared into fire and in her mind twisted the leaping flames into an archway
that would let her see into another part of the world. 
ÒHanna,Ó she whispered. There. The sight was more of a whisper than a scene
unfolding before her. Hanna stands beside Hathui; all else is shadow. But Liath could see
by the set of HannaÕs shoulders, the sudden grin she flashed at a comment made by the
older Eagle, that she was well. Hugh hadnÕt harmed her. 
Reaching inside her cloak, she drew out the gold feather. It glinted fire, bright sparks, a
reflection of the blaze. Alain murmured an oath. The hounds growled. 
ÒLike to like,Ó she murmured. ÒLet this be a link between us, old one.Ó 
As a curtain draws aside, revealing the chamber behind, so the fireÕs roar without
abating shifted and changed in pitch. A low rumble like distant thunder shivered around her.
The veil parted and within it, beyond it, she saw the Aoi sorcerer. 
Startled, he looks up. Flax half twisted into rope dangles from his hand. ÒWhat is
this?Ó he asks. ÒYou are the one I have seen before.Ó 
She sees through the fire burning before her, which is fed by wood, but sees also
through fire burning an upright pillar of stone. This mystery attracts her notice. She must
speak, even if it might attract those who are looking for her. But her first words are not
those she had intended. ÒHow do you make the stone burn?Ó she demands. 
¡°Rashly spoken,Ó he replies. With that, he begins to roll flax into rope against his
thigh. But he appears to be thinking. He regards her unsmiling through the veil of fire, but
he is not unfriendly. ÒYou are of the human kin,Ó he says. ÒHow have you come here?
Yet I see my gift reached you.Ó 
 She grasps the gold feather tightly, mirror to those trimming his leather gauntlets.
ÒYou have touched that which I have touched. I do not know how to read these omens.Ó 
¡°I beg you,Ó she says. ÒI need help. I made fireÑÓ 
¡°Made it?Ó His smile is brief and sharp. ÒFire exists in most things. It is not made.Ó 
¡°No, no.Ó She speaks quickly because she does not know how long she has before
she and Alain are interrupted, and this manÑno manÑthis Aoi sorcerer is the only
creature she can ask. ÒI called it. ItÕs as if the element of fire lies quiescent within the

wood, and remembers its power suddenly and comes to life.Ó 
¡°Fire is never quiescent. Fire rests within most objects, in some more deeply than in
others.Ó 
¡°Then in stone it rests more deeply than I can touch. Why can that stone burn?Ó 
He pauses, flax rope draped over his thigh. ÒWhy do you ask questions, child?Ó 
¡°Because I need answers, old one. I need a teacher.Ó 
He lifts the rope and twirls it through his fingers. The white shells on his waist-length
cloak clack together as softly as the whisper of leaves on the forest floor. He turns,
glancing once behind him, then back at her. ÒAre you asking me to teach you?Ó 
¡°Who else will teach me? Will you?Ó The fire does not burn more fiercely than the
hope which leaps up in her heart. 
He considers. Shells, stones, and beads wink and dazzle in the firelight. He wears a
round jade spool in each ear. His hair, bound simply into a topknot, is as black as the veil
of night, and he has no beard. His dark eyes regard her, unblinking. ÒFind me, and I
will.Ó 
At first she cannot find her voice, as if it has been torn from her. Then, struggling,
panicking, she gasps out words. ÒHow do I find you?Ó 
He lifts a hand, displaying the rope, gesturing toward the burning stone. ÒStep through.
The gateway already exists.Ó 
She rises, takes a step forward, but the heat is too strong. She canÕt move any closer. 
¡°I canÕt,Ó she says, half weeping. ÒI canÕt. How do I get there?Ó 
¡°One strand of flax has no strength.Ó He twines a single unwound thread of flax around
a finger. Straining, he snaps it through. Then he wraps the finished rope around a hand.
ÒTwined together, they make a strong rope. But it takes time to make rope, just as it takes
time to twine strands of knowledge together to make wisdom.Ó 
Abruptly he stands, glancing around as if he has heard something. ÒThey are
coming.Ó 
In that instant she sees beyond him down a path which snakes oddly through the trees.
A short procession winds its way along the path, rather like King HenryÕs progress but in
smaller numbers. Bright colors so overwhelm her sight that she can make no sense of
what walks there. One thing she sees: a round standard carried on a pole, a circular sheet
of gold trimmed with iridescent green plumes as broad across as a manÕs arms
outstretched. It spins, like a turning wheel. Its brilliance staggers her. 
¡°You must go,Ó says the sorcerer firmly. He licks a finger and reaches forward with it
into fire as though to douse a wick. Moisture sizzles and snaps, popping into her face. She
jerks back, blinks, then with a gasp leans forward again. But the veil has closed. 
She saw nothing but raging fire and the mist of water rising as steam into the cool spring
air. 
ÒLiath!Ó A hand closed on her elbow, but it was only Alain, kneeling beside her. ÒI
thought you were going to walk right into the fire.Ó 
She licked her finger, reached out toward the fire as if to extinguish itÑbut nothing
happened. ÒIf only I could have.Ó 
ÒNow, there,Ó he began, meaning to soothe her while behind him the hounds growled at
the flames. 
She shook out of his grasp and stepped back. The skin on her face felt baked; when she
touched it, it smarted. ÒI saw the Aoi sorcerer. He said heÕd teach me, if I could find a way
to get to where he is.Ó 
He glanced at the fire suspiciously. ÒCan you trust a Lost One? They donÕt even believe
in the God of Unities!Ó 
ÒMaybe thatÕs why,Ó she said slowly, trying to understand it herself. ÒIÕm a curiosity to
him, thatÕs all. He doesnÕt want anything from meÑunlike the others.Ó 

ÒBut why can you see him through fire?Ó 
ÒI donÕt know.Ó 
 ÒIt is a mystery, like my dreams,Ó he agreed, mercifully letting the unanswerable
question drop. He raised a hand in front of his face, absorbing some of the heat. ÒHow it
burns!Ó he exclaimed, and she hung her head, ashamed, thinking he would realize what a
monstrous thing she had done and be repelled by her now that he knew what she was:
sorcererÕs child, untrained, ignorant, and uncontrollable. ÒOnly think of what you could do
with such fire!Ó 
ÒHavenÕt I already done enough?Ó she asked bitterly, thinking of the Lions she had
killed. 
ÒWe are none of us without sin,Ó he pointed out. ÒBut if you could learn to do something
useful with it . . .Ó 
ÒCall it down on the Eika,Ó she replied caustically. ÒBurn Gent and all the poor dead
bodies rotting there!Ó 
ÒNay, donÕt say that! If you could only scare them with it, enough to make them runÑÓ 
ÒAi, Alain! YouÕve fought the Eika. Fire wonÕt scare them.Ó 
ÒAnd there are slaves in the city, or so it has been reported. If the city burned, they would
burn, too.Ó He frowned, then looked at her. ÒWe must tell my father.Ó 
ÒNo!Ó This she had no doubts about. ÒIf the king knew I had burned down the palace at
Augensburg, if the biscops knew, what do you think theyÕd do with me?Ó 
Troubled, he busied himself with flicking ashy flakes of wood off his cloak. ÒTheyÕd
condemn you as a maleficus and send you to stand trial before the skopos,Ó he said
reluctantly. ÒBut I would speak up for you! I trust you.Ó 
ÒTheyÕd only accuse me of binding you with charms. Nay, theyÕd never trust a
maleficus who can call fire. And why should they believe I canÕt control it? Only that I donÕt
want toÑor that IÕm more dangerous for being flawed.Ó 
ÒYou canÕt control it?Ó He glanced nervously toward the raging fire. 
ÒI canÕt even put it out,Ó she said with disgust. ÒI can only make it light.Ó 
ÒBut I must tell my father, Liath. He wonÕt condemn you. He has too much on his own
conscience to cast stones at others.Ó 
ÒBut he might order me to call fire onto Gent, wouldnÕt he? If he did, and if I could do it,
how many innocent slaves will die in the conflagration?Ó 
He hesitated. By his expression he clearly feared she was right, that Count Lavastine
would sacrifice a few slaves, even if they had once been honest freeholders, for the sake of
taking Gent. For the sake of getting a noble bride for his heir. 
Out of mist and rain and steam, they heard a shout. ÒTheyÕve discovered IÕm gone,Ó
Alain said. ÒYou cut around the back. Then they wonÕt know youÕve been gone. If they find
this fire, they wonÕt associate it with you.Ó 
ÒYes, my lord.Ó She was not sure whether to be grateful or amused by his
high-handedness. He had nothing of the noblemanÕs arrogance but, like Da, he had an
inexplicable dignity about him that made it impossible to do anything but respect him. 
Darting forward, he grabbed a brand in each hand out of the fire and jumped back. ÒNo
use letting the poor soldiers shiver in this rain. We can start other fires with this. Go on!Ó 
ÒHow will you explain that?Ó she demanded, but he only smiled, mocking himself more
than her. 
ÒI am the countÕs heir. No one will question me except my father, and thereÕs no reason
he need ever hear about it. Now go on. I will say nothing of what IÕve seen today.Ó He
dashed off into the woods in the direction of the shouting. The hounds loped behind him. 
She lingered by the fire, but she knew that if she looked within it now, no veil would part,
no gateway would open. With a sigh, she started by a roundabout way back to camp. Ai,
Lady. Her knee was sopping wet; the baggy cloth of her leggings alternately stuck to her
skin and, as she walked, peeled off only to slap back again, cold and slimy. 
But such discomfort mattered little against the offer the Aoi sorcerer had made to her: ¡°

Find me.Ó 
3
 Rosvita thought she recognized the book Father Hugh now carried with him. But he had
such an elegant way of keeping it close against him or tucked away in the carved chest that
one of his servants carried along behind him, of closing it softly, as if without thinking, or
laying his hand over the binding to half conceal it, that she could never get a good look. She
wasnÕt quite sure that it was, in fact, the same book she had seen Liath carrying last
autumn on the very day Princess Sapientia had returned to the kingÕs progress. 
Rosvita hated being curious, but she had come to accept the fault and, perhaps,
embrace it a little too heartily. 
After seven days, the infant girl was anointed with holy water and perfume and given the
name suggested by her father: Hippolyte, after the blessed saint. A robust child, she wailed
heartily, indignant at the cold touch of water on her skin, and flushed a bright red from head
to toe. Sapientia left seclusion and pleaded with Henry to let the court travel the four days to
Thersa, whose accommodations were far more pleasant than these. 
King HenryÕs good humor could hardly be improved upon. But Rosvita had observed
that a man or woman who held their own childÕs child felt a certain triumph, as at a victory
over the fragility of life on this mortal earth. Without argument, he relented. The entire court
bundled itself and its possessions up yet again and headed off. God were gracious: The
weather for the short journey was mild and sunny. At Thersa they settled in for a three-week
stay so that the new mother and child could gain strength before continuing north to Gent. 
ÒPerhaps it is time to lay his memory to rest,Ó said Henry in a low voice one evening,
and Rosvita merely murmured encouragement. 
So it was arranged. A small party rode out the next morning, consisting of King Henry,
Helmut Villam, Rosvita and three clerics, Father Hugh, and a company of Lions with an
Eagle in attendance. A track led through greening fields to a village whose residents hurried
to greet them. Father Hugh passed out sceattas to the householders; King Henry blessed
the little children, held up for him by their mothers and fathers so he could set a hand on
each dirty head. A little-used path led to a streamÕs edge. Here, clumps of grass waved in
the rush of high water. The steep banks had overflowed slightly, but only the Lions got wet;
the ford proved passable for the riders. 
The ruins lay in a jumbled heap along the slope of land before them, crowned by a ring of
standing stones. Once, buildings had stood here. Had they been built by the same people
who raised the circle of stones, or was this a later fortress, built here to guardÑor guard
againstÑthe influence of the crown of stones? With the nearby stream and cultivatable land,
it made a good homestead, as the persistence of the villagers showed: Few people would
willingly live within sight of a ring of stones unless they had a compelling reason to remain
there. 
Henry dismounted and, with Villam beside him, made his way up through the ruins alone. 
ÒNow thereÕs two men still mourning the loss of sons,Ó said Brother Fortunatus, looking
around the scene with interest. ÒIs this where the Aoi woman vanished?Ó 
ÒUp in the ring of stones, I should think,Ó said Sister Amabilia. ÒAnd poor Villam lost his
son in a ring of stones.Ó 
ÒHe did?Ó demanded Brother Constantine. ÒI never heard that story.Ó 
ÒThat was before you came to us,Ó said Amabilia sweetly, never loath to remind the
solemn young man that he was not only young but the son of a Varren lady sympathetic to
Sabella. ÒYoung Berthold was a fine young man, a true scholar, I think, though itÕs a shame
he was being kept out of the church so that he could be married.Ó 
ÒBut what happened to him?Ó 
Brother Fortunatus wheeled around, excited by the prospect of gossip. ÒHe took a group
of his retainers up to explore the ring of stones above the monastery of Hersfeld . . .Ó He

paused, relishing ConstantineÕs wide-eyed stare, and dropped his voice to a dramatic
whisper. Ò. . . and they were never seen again.Ó 
ÒHush!Ó said Rosvita, surprised at her own snappishness. ÒBerthold was a good boy. It
isnÕt right to make a game of his loss and his fatherÕs grief. Come now.Ó She saw Hugh
seat himself on an old wall somewhat away from everyone else and open his book. ÒYou
may look around, as you wish. Brother Constantine, you may wish to discover if there are
any Dariyan inscriptions on the stones and whether you can read them. Do not approach the
king unless he requests your company.Ó Together with Villam, the king had vanished into
the circle of stones, a half dozen Lions and his favorite Eagle hard on his heels. ÒGo on.Ó
They scattered like bees out to search for honey. Rosvita composed herself, then strolled
casually across the ruins, picking her way over fallen stone and mounds of earth, until she
reached Hugh. 
ÒFather Hugh.Ó She greeted him as she seated herself on a smooth stretch of wall.
ÒYou must be pleased at your motherÕs loyalty, sending her physician so far away from her
lands in order to attend Princess Sapientia.Ó 
As he turned to smile at her, he gently closed the book; she gained only a glimpse of a
bold hand scrawled in uneven columns down the page. ÒIndeed, Sister. But I believe my
mother intends to return to the kingÕs progress as soon as she has completed her business
in Austra.Ó 
ÒAh, yes, her marriage. Have you had any recent news?Ó Since any recent news would
have spread to her clerics the instant it came in, this was pure gambit, and she knew it.
Perhaps he.did as well, but he was hard for her to read, never being anything less than
polite and well-mannered. 
ÒNone, alas. But perhaps,Ó and now he smiled with a sudden and winning shrewdness,
ÒBrother Fortunatus has heard that which we are not yet privy to.Ó 
That made her laugh. Hugh had much the look of his father about him. The Alban slave
Margrave Judith kept as concubine had still been a fixture at court when Rosvita arrived in
the last years of King Arnulf. No young woman, even one pledged to the church, could have
failed to notice him, although upon closer examination he had proved to be stupid and vain.
But in the end he had died in a hunting accident and the boy child who had come some
years previously of this begetting had been given to the church. Hugh did not have the sheer
breathtaking beauty of his father, but he was handsome enough that it was no wonder
Sapientia had seduced him. If, indeed, the seduction had been one-sided, which Rosvita
doubted. For all his arrogance, Hugh had always been noted as a dutiful son to his mother;
by becoming SapientiaÕs favorite and adviser, he enhanced his motherÕs strength among
the great princes of the realm. 
ÒIt is a fine day, is it not, Father Hugh?Ó She lifted her face to the sun. 
ÒI am only sorry the king should find sadness on such a favored day.Ó He indicated the
ring of stones above. Henry and Villam could be seen moving slowly among the stones.
Henry had an old rag pressed to his face, dabbing now and again at his eyes. 
ÒHe must lay the prince to rest in his own heart,Ó she said, forgetting her own purpose
for a moment, Òbefore the prince can go to his rest above.Ó She gestured toward the sky. 
ÒCan he?Ó asked Hugh suddenly. ÒHe is half of elvish kin, and it is said they wander as
dark shades on this earth after they die.Ó 
ÒOnly God can answer that question. You and Sanglant were of an age, werenÕt you?Ó 
ÒOh, yes,Ó he said, the words clipped short. 
ÒBut you attended the kingÕs schola, and he did not.Ó 
Hugh looked away, up toward the stones. He was tall, though not as tall as Sanglant had
been, and fair-haired where Sanglant had been dark. As a churchman he went beardless,
and in this way he might be said to resemble the dead prince; in all other ways they were
utterly unlike. Indeed, Rosvita knew very well that Sanglant had been a favorite at court in his
youth; Hugh, while tolerated, envied, and sometimes grudgingly admired, had never inspired
likingÑnot until now. ÒThere is no virtue in speaking unkindly of the dead,Ó he said at last.

His hand shifted on the book he held, bringing it back to her notice. 
ÒTrue words, Father Hugh,Ó she said, seeing her opening. ÒWhat book is that you
carry?Ó 
He blinked. Then he glanced at the book, tucked his fingers more tightly around its
cracked leather binding, and returned his gaze to her. ÒIt is a book I have been studying for
some time.Ó 
ÒHow curious. I could swear that I saw that book before Princess Sapientia returned to
the kingÕs progress. Before you came back to us with her. Yes.Ó She pretended to
consider, then carefully looked away, surveying the ruins and the fine view of trees and
stream and distant village as if the book was of only passing interest. After a while of
basking in pleasant silence in the spring sun, as if she had just that instant recalled their
conversation, she turned back to him. ÒI must be mistaken. I saw a book like to this in the
possession of one of the Eagles. What was her name? These Eagles all run one into the
next.Ó 
He raised his eyes to look at her but said nothing. She found a cluster of white flowers
growing out from a crevice within the stones that was filled in with dirt. Plucking them, she
pressed the rustic bouquet to her nose. 
ÒLiath,Ó he said finally, so baldly that she was startled, and showed it. 
ÒAh, yes, Liath,Ó she managed, lowering the flowers. ÒA curious name, Arethousan in
origin, I believe.Ó He did not reply. ÒDidnÕt you serve as frater in the north, Father Hugh?Ó 
ÒI did indeed, in that region called HeartÕs Rest, just south of the emporia of Freelas.Ó 
ÒNow there is a strange coincidence. The Eagle, Liath, and her comrade, HannaÑwho is
now SapientiaÕs EagleÑboth came from HeartÕs Rest.Ó 
ÒThat is where you come from as well, is it not, Sister?Ó 
ÒSo it is.Ó 
ÒYou are the second child of Count Harl, I believe.Ó 
ÒOf course you would be acquainted with my father and family, if you resided there.Ó 
ÒI have met them,Ó he said with a hint of condescensionÑsomething he normally never
showed toward her, the favored cleric among HenryÕs intimate advisers, his elder in the
church, and a woman. 
ÒDid you bring the two young women to the notice of the KingÕs Eagles, then? It was a
generous act.Ó 
His pleasant expression did not waverÑ-by muchÑbut a certain hard glint came into his
eyes. ÒI did not. I had nothing to do with that.Ó 
Had lightning struck, she could not have been more surprised by revelation. The memory
of their visit to Quedlinhame last autumn jolted her so hard she lost her grip on the flowers,
and they fell to scatter over her robe, the stones, and the soil. 
Ivar, talking to Liath in the dark sanctuary of a back room in the convent library. Liath
had said, ÒI love another man.Ó And that had made Ivar angry. Whose name had he
spoken? 
¡°Hugh.Ó 
Liath had not denied it, only said that he was dead. Now, with Hugh regarding her as
innocently as a dove, she was angry with herself for not questioning Ivar closely about the
incident. 
ÒI am confused, then, and I beg your pardon, Father Hugh,Ó she said at last. ÒI had
thought you must have known the young women, as well as my brother, Ivar, when you were
in HeartÕs Rest. Thus my curiosity about the book, which resembles one I saw Liath
carrying.Ó 
He toyed with the book, tucked it more firmly against his thigh, and sighed deeply as at
an unpalatable decision. ÒShe stole it from me. But now, as you see, I have gotten it
back.Ó 
¡°Stole it from you!Ó That she had suspected as muchÑthat Liath had stolen the book
from somewhereÑdid not make the fact any more pleasant to hear. ÒHow did she steal it?

Why?Ó 
He closed his eyes a moment. It was difficult for Rosvita to imagine what thoughts might
be going through his mind. Like the book, like a veil drawn to hide the chamber behind, he
was closed against her. He had completely given up abbotÕs robes and now dressed like
any fine lord in embroidered tunic, a short cloak with a gold brooch, silver-banded leggings,
and a sword; one knew he was a churchman only by his lack of beard and his eloquent
speech. 
ÒI do not speak easily of this,Ó he said finally. ÒIt pains me deeply. The young womanÕs
father died in severe debt. I paid it off because it was the charitable thing to do, as you can
imagine, being a Godly churchwoman yourself, Sister. By that price, she became my slave.
She had no kin and thus, really, no prospects, so I kept her by me to protect her.Ó 
ÒIndeed,Ó murmured Rosvita, thinking of IvarÕs protestations of love. Of course a
countÕs son could never marry a kinless girl who was also another manÕs slave! He should
never even have considered it. ÒShe is a beautiful girl, many have noticed that, and has an
awkward smattering of education. Enough to attract the wrong kind of notice.Ó 
ÒIndeed. That she repaid me in this manner . . .Ó Here he broke off. 
ÒHow then did she come into the Eagles?Ó 
He hesitated, clearly reluctant to go on. 
ÒWolfhere,Ó she said, and knew she had made a hit when his lips tightened perceptibly. 
ÒWolfhere,Ó he agreed. ÒHe took what was not his to have.Ó 
ÒBut only free women and men may enter into the Eagles.Ó 
Elegant, confident Hugh looked, for an instant, like a man stricken with a debilitating
sorrow. ÒMy hand was forced.Ó 
ÒWhy do you not tell the king? Surely he will listen to your grievance?Ó 
ÒI will not accuse a man if he is not beside me to answer in his turn,Ó said Hugh
reasonably. ÒThen I would be taking the same advantage of Wolfhere that he took of me, in
a sense, when he claimed the young woman in question for the kingÕs service without
letting the king judge the matter for himself. Nor do I wish to be seen as one who takes
unseemly advantage of myÑÓ He smiled with that same shrewd glint. ÒLet us be blunt,
Sister Rosvita. Of my intimate association with Princess Sapientia.Ó 
ÒNo one would fault you if you brought the matter before the king now. It is generally
agreed that your wise counsel has improved her disposition.Ó 
But he merely bowed his head modestly. ÒI would fault myself.Ó 
4
They gathered an army and, helpless, he watched them do so. By the angle of light that
shone through the cathedral windows and the sullen warmth that crept in through the vast
stone walls during the day when the doors were thrown open to admit sunlight, he guessed
that spring had come at last. With the spring thaw running low, the winds would give the Eika
good sailing out of the north. 
From the north they came, droves of them, collecting at the foot of BloodheartÕs throne
like so much flotsam cast up by the tide. 
That day, when the rebellious son returned, he knew he had to act. When even rebellious
sons return to the fold, it means great movements are afoot, even so great as to attract back
those who once were condemned to leave. Even the priest, crouching just out of range of
SanglantÕs chains while he taught him to read the bones, turned to stare at the unexpected
sight of the young Eika princeling who wore a wooden Circle around his neck. 
ÒWhy have you come back?Ó roared Bloodheart in the human tongue, confronting the
slender Eika who stood, proud and unflinching, before him. 
ÒI bring eight ships,Ó said the son, gesturing to certain Eika who stood behind him,
representative, perhaps, of soldiers who remained outside. There were by now in Gent too
many Eika to all crowd into the cathedral. He could smell them; their metallic scent

permeated the air. ÒThese two, from Hakonin, these two, from Skanin, and this one, from
Valdarnin. Three more sailed with me from Rikin. These will swell the number of your
army.Ó 
ÒWhy should I take you in, when it was my voice and my command which sent you home
without honor?Ó 
Sanglant measured the distance between himself and the priest, then patted the rags
draped over him that had once been clothing. He slid a hand under cloth and pulled out the
brass EagleÕs badge. With a flick of the wrist, he tossed it at one of his dogs, to his left.
The sudden growling movement of two dogs leaping to growl over the badge startled the
priest enough that he jumped sideways. 
With that jump, the priest came for an instant within reach of Sanglant. 
He sprang. As his hand closed on the Eika priestÕs bony arm, he jerked the knife out
from under his tunic. Yanking the priest around hard, he dropped his grip on the creatureÕs
arm and snatched the little wooden chest out of the crook of its elbow. 
Then he leaped back into the protection of his dogsÑbarking and raging wildly nowÑas a
roar of fury broke from BloodheartÕs throat and all the Eika in the hall began shrieking and
howling at once, their dogs echoing them until Sanglant was deafened. He had only
moments to act before he would be overwhelmed. 
There was no time for finesse, but then, there rarely was in a pitched fight. 
He hacked violently at the hasp of the chest. The knife, little used, still bore a good edge.
The hasp snapped and wood splintered as he struck down and again, with all his strength,
then wrenched the lid open and dumped the contents out on the floor. 
He didnÕt know what an Eika heart would look like. But where else would Bloodheart
keep his heart if not close by him? Why else would the priest carry a chest night and day,
never letting it leave his side? 
But all that spilled onto the floor was a bundle of down feathers and a white hairless
creature smaller than his hand. With rudimentary ears and eyes, a nub of a tail, and four
limbs, it looked like the premature spawn of an unholy mother, a ghastly colorless thing
without defined features and with no recognizable parentage. It fell with a sickening plop
onto the flagstone floor and lay there, limp, unmoving. 
Dead. 
Never trust the appearance of death. 
He raised his knife. 
A spear haft hit him broadside and then, as he spun, he felt a second spear pierce him in
the back, just below the ribs. He jerked forward, brought the knife down as his dogs
swarmed forward to attack his attackers. But his vision had gone awry; the world spun and
staggered before him. 
 A shift of sunlight spilled over the stone floor, its golden touch illuminating the tiny corpse.
With a shudder, the embryonic creature stirred, curled. 
Came alive. 
It darted away just as the point of his knife stabbed and skidded on the stone floor where
it had lain. 
Bloodheart screamed in rage. 
The spear point was yanked out of his flesh and he staggered forward to keep himself
upright; his neck snapped back when, at the limit of his chains, the iron slave collar brought
him up short. The priest yipped wildly, scurrying after the slender dead-white creature now
scrambling away between the feet of the Eika soldiers who had dashed forward to mob
him. 
Bloodheart, still roaring, his own dogs at his heels, slapped his howling soldiers aside as
he shoved his way through. Blood streamed down SanglantÕs back, coursing over his
buttocks and down his thighs. He faltered and fell to his knees, knife raised before him. 
ÒDog! Son of dogs! The heart you seek with that blow lies far away from here, hidden
among the stones of Rikin fjall. For this sacrilege you will pay the price in blood.Ó 

Bloodheart struck, but Sanglant was faster. He jumped up and sank the knife into the
Eika chieftainÕs shoulder and hung there as two packs of dogs swarmed forward. At once
he and Bloodheart were surrounded by a maelstrom, all teeth and tails and claws. 
In this whirlpool Bloodheart grabbed Sanglant by the iron collar at his neck and hoisted
him into the air. With his other hand, he took SanglantÕs wrist, where he still held the knife,
and twisted it hard. 
The snap of bone and the wash of hot pain almost made him pass out. But he did not let
go of the knife, not until Bloodheart ripped it out of his own shoulder and shook it free of
SanglantÕs grip. He tossed Sanglant back, flipped the knife to hold it, jeweled hilt in his
huge scaled hand, and struck furiously to either side at the ravening dogs, then leaped in
among them. 
Sanglant groped, found the brass EagleÕs badge, and hauled himself to his feet. This
tiny shield he held before him, like a talisman, but it was useless. BloodheartÕs fury had
passed the point of thought. The Eika stabbed the knife again and again into SanglantÕs
chest. 
Sometimes the remains of his chain mail turned the point, but at the ragged ends it could
not protect him. The knife pierced him repeatedly, tearing him inside, shattering him, until his
dogs leaped howling and biting and Bloodheart was forced to defend himself against them.
He let go of Sanglant, who could not stand, could not even kneel, could only fall to the floor
as his dogs drove back the mob that had come howling to watch him die. He could only
watch as spears and axes fell on his dogs and the other dogs indiscriminately, splitting them
open, spattering viscera and green-tinted blood and the wet matter of brain over him, over
the floor, over everything. He could only feel the press of bodies and the sting of their
whipcord tails as the last of his dogs pressed in around him, defending him even until the
bitter endÑas had his Dragons. 
He would have wept at their loyalty, but he had no tears. 
Bloodheart was still howling in rage, shouting at his priest, calling the Eika to silence, to
stillness, so that they could hunt for the hideous creature that had escaped from the
shattered chest. The mob stilled, broke, and parted. 
In this way, abandoned for more important prey, Sanglant was left alone. Pain washed
like water over him, the flood tide swelling to its height as black hazed his vision and he
struggled to remain conscious, then ebbing to reveal every point of scalding pain in his
body. 
He heard the breath of the dogs, those panting out their last breaths and those few which
still remained upright. The last six stood around him in a protective circle to face their
common enemy. Surrounded by this fortification of dogs, he lay there breathing shallowly
and waited for the blinding pain to end. 
5
He could not quite manage to open his eyes. But he knew he was surrounded by bodies
strewn about him like so much refuse. Some few of the dogs were still alive, and they
growled when any movement sifted near him. It was so hard to wake up and perhaps better
not to. Perhaps it was better to slide unresisting into oblivion. 
Ai, Lady. Would he be admitted to the Chamber of Light? Or was he, because of his
motherÕs blood, condemned to wander the world forever as a bodiless shade? 
In the distance or in a dream, he heard the flutelike voices of the Eika speaking in
Wendish, two voices accompanied by the mocking, harsh counterpoint of Eika calling and
crying out in their own rough tongue. Some few of the words he now knew. In his dream he
recognized more than he ever had before, but that was the nature of dreams, was it not? 
ÒI have seen this army in my dreams.Ó This in fluent Wendish. 
ÒNo better than dog, why dare you speak so before the great one?Ó This in the Eika
speech. 

ÒMy dreams are more honest than your boasting, brother! Do not toss aside the gifts the
WiseMothers give you just because they are not made of iron or gold.Ó 
ÒHow can I believe your dreams are true dreams, weak one?Ó This from Bloodheart. 
ÒI am stronger than I look, and my dreams are not just true dreams, they are the waking
life of one of the humankind. He marches with this army, and as he marches, I march with
him, seeing through his eyes.Ó 
One of the dogs nudged him, testing for life, and he gasped so loud the echo of it split his
skull with pain, but no sound came out of his mouth. Blackness fell. For an endless time he
drowned in a black haze of unrelenting pain that spun and sparkled like the knife which had
been driven countless times into his body. Finally the darkness lightened to an early morning
gray. Glints of light burst here and there in the limitless mist. 
The veil parted. 
The woman appears young and is certainly beautiful. She wears a fringed skirt sewn of
leather so thin and supple that it moves around her with her movements like a second
skin. A double stripe of red paint runs from the back of her left hand up around the curve
of her elbow, all the way to her shoulder. Her hair has a pale cast, though her complexion
is as bronze-dark as his own; drawn back from her face, it is bound behind her head with
painted leather strips nested with beads, trailing a long elegant green plume. A wreath of
gold and turquoise and jade bead necklaces drapes down her chest almost to her waist.
She wears no shirt or cloak, only the necklaces, concealing and revealing her breasts as
she shifts. 
But for all her beauty and fine grace, she works patiently toward a brutal goal: with a
curved bone tool, she is shaving stout lengths of wood into spear hafts. Obsidian points lie
on a reed mat nearby with rope heaped beside them. 
Does he make a noise? She looks up as if she has heard him and in that instant as a
sudden lance of sun cuts down through trees to pierce across her shoulders, flashing on
her necklaces, she sees him. 
¡°Sharatanga protect me!Ó she exclaims. ÒThe child!Ó She flinches away from the
sight, drops wood haft and bone tool, and gropes for the stone points lying on the mat. 
¡°It is not yet time for him to die,Ó she mutters to herself, although he can hear every
word clearly in a language he ought not to know yet understands perfectly. Grabbing one
of the thin blades, she lifts it and raises it high above her and cries in a clear, strong voice.
ÒTake this offering, She-Who-Will-Not-Have-A-Husband. Give life back into his limbs.Ó 
She drags the blade across her palm. Blood wells, dripping down the length of the cut
to spill into the air and she shakes the hand out, blood spitting toward him. Behind her, a
voice calls a sudden frantic question. A touch of moisture spatters his lips, dissolving
there, and as the harsh taste spreads to the back of his throat, the veil closes in a swirling
pattern of grays and sparkling stars. 
¡°I know you,Ó he whispers. 
But his voice was lost in the snuffling of dogs, and the touch of familiarity drifted away on
the last tendril of mist. 
Stillness hung like the weight of stone in the vast nave of the cathedral. 
Terror hit with sudden force. Had he died? Had he seen, beyond the veil of the living, one
of his own kinfolk or only a soulless shade caught forever in the memory of life? 
He had always thought his motherÕs curse protected him from death. Ai, Lord, it wasnÕt
true. It had never been true. He had only been lucky. 
If this could be called luck. 
He strained, listening, but heard nothing except the dogs. Had everyone gone away? Had
they deserted the city, leaving to raid downriver into the heart of Wendar? How long had he
lain here, dying and living again? 
The footsteps that neared him came as soft as a breeze sliding through dead leaves
scattered on the forest floor. 

Never let it be said that he did not fight until his last breath. 
He twitched but could not move his hands. His dogs growled, menacing their visitor. The
smell of rancid meat hit him hard, gagging him, and he swallowed convulsively. He heard the
damp slap of meat thrown to the floor and suddenly all the dogs skittered off, nails scraping
the floor, and they fought over the remains. The footsteps eased closer. He lay there,
paralyzed and unprotected, working his throat as if the movement would spread to his numb
hands and allow him to defend himself. 
He managed to open his eyes just as the slender Eika princeling who wore the wooden
Circle crouched beside him. The EikaÕs movements had the easy arrogance of a creature
who has the confidence of perfect health. 
ÒAre you going to kill me now?Ó asked Sanglant. He was surprised to hear his voice,
faint and hoarse. He struggled to lift a hand, to shift his shoulders beneath him, and felt the
merest tick in his neck. One hand flicked up, the one with the unbroken wrist. 
But the Eika princeling only blinked. His copper-melded face wore no human expression.
He had eyes as sharp as obsidian blades, thin nostrils, and a narrow chin. His ice-white hair
was itself as bright as the sun that glanced in through the cathedral windows. His thin lips
remained set, considering. ÒNo. You are my fatherÕs challenge, not mine. I only want to
know why you are still alive. You are not like the other Soft Ones. They would be dead by
now of such wounds. Why arenÕt you dead?Ó 
Sanglant grunted. The pain was bitter and would remain with him for some time, but he
was used to pain. He got an elbow to move and, with a second grunt, heaved himself up
onto the elbow. He stared down the Eika, who merely appeared . . . curious? Sanglant was
himself curious. 
ÒWhat was it?Ó he whispered. ÒThe thing in the chest.Ó 
The Eika glanced toward the dogs, but they still munched on the bones. One raised its
head to growl at him, but as no violence seemed imminent, it turned its attention back to
scrounging for the last scraps of meat. ÒDonÕt all the leaders of your people carry the
trophy of their first kill with them?Ó He lifted a copper-scaled hand, turning it slowly to display
the tufts of bone claw, filed and sharpened to points, that sprouted from his knuckles. ÒThat
is the mark of the strength of their hands.Ó 
¡°That was his first kill?Ó Disgust swamped him, and he briefly forgot the pain under a
spasm of nausea. 
ÒSo it is with all of us. Those destined to mature into men must prove their manhood by
killing one of their nest-brothers. DonÕt you do the same?Ó 
ÒIt wasnÕt dead. It ran.Ó 
The Eika flashed a sudden and startling grin, white sharp teeth glinting with bright jewels.
ÒWhat is dead may be animated by sorcery. So Bloodheart protects himself against his
sons and any others who might attempt to kill him.Ó 
Sensation had returned to his legs and he got one heel to move, sliding under him. His
broken wrist was stiff but whole. ÒProtects himself? How?Ó 
ÒIt is the curse we all fear, even the greatest chieftain.Ó 
ÒA curse on you all,Ó muttered Sanglant under his breath. He jerked over, fist swinging. 
But the Eika laughed and nimbly leaped out of the way as the dogs, alerted, bolted away
from their food and rushed the princeling. 
ÒStop,Ó said Sanglant and the dogs sat, yipped irritably, and returned to the scraps.
ÒDid you come to strip me of what little I have left?Ó He could move enough now to indicate
his tattered clothing. 
The Eika recoiled. ÒNo Eika would want such things so foul. Here.Ó He kicked at
something on the floor and the brass EagleÕs badge skidded across the stone and lodged
against SanglantÕs thigh. Dried blood caked his skinÑor at least, the dirt that grimed his
skin. He was all dirt and stink except where the dogs had tried to lick him clean. The tatters
of his undertunic were translucent, almost crystalline, because they were soaked with
months of sweat. What remained of his tabard had so much dried blood and fluid on it that

flakes fell off with each least movement and the cloth itself was stiff with grime. 
The Eika princeling stared, then shook his head as he stepped away. ÒYou were the
pride of the human kingÕs army?Ó he demanded. ÒIf you are their greatest soldier, then no
army they bring can be strong enough to defeat us.Ó 
ÒNo army,Ó murmured Sanglant, the words bitter to his ears. 
ÒEven the one that has now camped in the hills toward the sunset horizon cannot
possibly be strong enough to defeat us.Ó 
ÒIs it true? Has King Henry come to Gent with an army?Ó 
¡°Henri,Ó mused the Eika, naming the king in the Salian way. Without answering, he
walked away. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó murmured Sanglant, crawling to his hands and knees. ÒHow long has it
been? Lord, have mercy upon me. I am not an animal to roll in my own filth. Spare me this
humiliation. I have always been Your faithful servant.Ó He tried to get to his feet but did not
have the strength. One of the dogs wandered back and, seeing his weakness, nipped at
him. He barely had strength to slap it back, and it whined and slunk away, snapping at the
other dogs who came to trouble it for its own sign of weakness. 
What had he done wrong? He had been so sure that Bloodheart kept his heart in the
wooden chest; it was the obvious place. It was the only place. But Bloodheart had said: ¡°
The heart you seek lies hidden among the stones of Rikin fjall.Ó 
Ai, Lady, he was only grateful that the cathedral was empty, that the Eika had left. That
way they could not see him humbled. That way they could not see him weep with pain as he
struggled to stand upright like a man. 
XIV A SWIRL OF DANGEROUS CURRENTS
1
Lord WichmanÕs deacon sang Mass every morning, and that morning she closed with
her usual prayer: ÒFrom the fury of the Eika, God deliver us.Ó 
That morning after Mass, Anna paused beside the tannery to catch a glimpse of Matthias,
as she did every morning to remind herself he really was still alive. 
Not well, perhaps, but alive. He spoke no word of complaint; he never once said that his
leg ached him although he could scarcely put weight on it. How he had broken the calf bone
she never knew. He wouldnÕt speak of his captivity among the Eika. He had suffered
terribly from fever and swelling after his rescue, but in the end he had recovered although the
leg had healed crookedly, with an unnatural skew to it, ugly and discolored. Now he limped
like an old man, leaning heavily on a stout stick, and had to brace himself on his good leg
and prop his weight on a stool while he scraped hair and the residue of flesh from skins
draped over a beam of wood. He had a delicate hand at this labor and could do it quickly,
and for that reason had been allowed back at the rebuilt tannery despite his crippling injury.
For his work he was fed twice a day. 
Anna slipped away before he saw her; he didnÕt like her to forage in the forest, but with
her gleanings and the scraps given Master Helvidius for his songs and poetry, they had
survived through winter and early spring. Now, as spring ripened into summer, the first
berries could be harvested, mushrooms gleaned from damp hollows, and all kinds of plants
collected in glades and meadows and in the shade of trees. Certain bugs were edible,
tooÑand, Anna had discovered, if you were hungry enough, they could be quite tasty. 
Little Helen had grown but never uttered an intelligible word. Master Helvidius complafned
incessantly but, with a steady if sparse diet and a rough bed to sleep in every night, he had
grown stronger and had less need of a stick in order to walk than did Matthias. 
It was Matthias who worried Anna the most. ÒThat I survived is a blessing from God.Ó
That was all he would say on the matter. 
Outside the palisade she hurried down paths that led west through fields where men and

women labored in the hot sun. Many of themÑmale and female alikeÑhad stripped down to
breechclouts for comfortÕs sake; there was little place for Godly modesty under the
sweltering sun. Anna would gladly have shucked her tunic, but in the forest she needed its
protection against burrs and bugs. The heat and recent rains, though, meant that natureÕs
bounty prospered, and indeed Lady Fortune smiled on her this day. She found sweet
berries and a trove of mushrooms. She collected fennel, parsley, and onion grass as well as
moss for bedding. By midday her wandering brought her to the westward road. 
The wide track lay quiet at this hour, pleasant and bright. 
Little traffic moved in and out of Steleshame these days although Mistress Gisela often
talked of the great days of Steleshame, before the Eika had come to Gent, and how nobles
had sheltered in her longhouse and merchants haggled over the fine cloth woven by her
women. No one, seeing Steleshame now, would be reminded of these past glories. Anna
herself was not sure if Mistress Gisela was telling the truth or only a story, as Master
Helvidius told stories. But Master HelvidiusÕ stories were all true, or so he claimed; it was
only that they had happened so very long ago. 
Anna stood in the sunlight. Such moments of peace came rarely and were to be savored
as long as the threat of the Eika hung like a sword over them all. Anna supposed that
eventually the Eika would mass an army and wipe out Steleshame completely, for the Eika
were as numberless as flies supping on carrion. Lord Wichman rode out each day to harry
the Eika, but he had lost perhaps a third of the men he had come with, and while young men
from distant villages had joined him in the hope of sharing in the spoils, he could not hope to
hold off the Eika foreverÑnot when he was a mortal man and his foe not only a savage but
an enchanter into the bargain. 
But what point in dwelling on such horror? She sighed and opened her eyes to survey the
roadside with pleasure. 
No one had gleaned here along the verge of track and wood. She found tansy growing in
abundance, and this she pulled and bundled, for it could be mixed with the rushes strewn on
the hall floor to drive away fleas. She found nettles densely packed along a ditch, their feet
sodden in standing water. Swathing a hand in cloth, she plucked as many leaves as she
could stuff into her bursting shawl. Then she bundled up her skirt, tucking it under her belt,
and picked dandelion leaves and bistort. These, and delicate clover, she heaped into the
folds made of her skirt. 
Humming tunelessly, she did not at first hear what she ought to have listened for. She felt
it first through the soles of her feet where they pressed against the pleasantly coarse dirt: the
thrum of an army, marching. Too late she heard them, the creak of armor, the hum of voices,
horses blowing and the sudden warning bark of dogs. The Eika had circled all the way
around Steleshame and now approached from the unprotected west. 
Clutching her treasures to her, she bolted for the shelter of the trees. 
ÒHai! There! Child!Ó 
The voice called, a human voice, and she hesitated, glancing back over her shoulder. 
¡°Never hesitate,Ó Matthias always said. 
But for once, Matthias was wrong. 
She lurched to a stop, spilling a few stalks of tansy, and stared. 
ÒHow far to Steleshame, girl?Ó asked the voice, but it was no phantom but a real
flesh-and-blood man outfitted in a leather vest and a thick leather cap. He carried shield and
spear. There were many more with him. She was too astonished to reply. 
Soldiers. Led by a noble lord who was mounted on a fine gray horse, they advanced
without fear and only the lead file even noticed her as they marched past where she stood,
balanced on the lip of the ditch of nettles. Three banners flew before them: two black hounds
on a silver field; a red eagle; a gray tower surmounted by a black raven. 
An army had come at last. 
That night neither she, Matthias, nor Helen could get into the hall to observe the great
nobles, for such a press of folk stood there, some of them soldiers newly marched in, others

residents of Steleshame who wanted to catch a glimpse of the noble lord and his son, that
they had to go stand by the corner of the great hall and listen through the gaps in the wall to
the gathering within. 
Amid the buzz of a feast, Anna could hear Helvidius intoning the now-familiar phrases
from the Heleniad. 
ÒNow the guests of King Sykaeus fell silent, and each one turned to face Helen. In this
way they waited intently for her to speak, to tell the tale of her sufferings and of the fall of
Ilios.Ó 
ÒLook,Ó whispered Matthias. 
A young woman emerged from the hall. In the darkness her complexion had a strange
shade, as if she had rubbed her skin with soot. She wore a gray cloak trimmed with scarlet
and clasped with a badge marked with the likeness of an eagle. 
ÒA KingÕs Eagle!Ó murmured Matthias, his tone breathless with admiration. ÒSheÕs a
messenger for the king himself! So would I become, given the chance.Ó His tone turned
sour. ÒIf I wasnÕt crippled now.Ó 
Escaping from the crush, the Eagle pushed her way past the crowd and came to rest in
the open a few steps from Mistress GiselaÕs niece, who had also come outside. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó swore the Eagle. ÒHeÕs mangling Virgilia again!Ó 
ÒWho is that you speak of?Ó asked the niece, wiping a speck of dirt from her eye and
turning to regard the other woman. 
ÒThe old poet. But I oughtnÕt to complain of him, I suppose. ItÕs a miracle and a mercy
he survived Gent.Ó 
The niece eyed the young Eagle with regret and hesitation before, at last, she spoke.
ÒYou were there at the end.Ó 
The Eagle got a still, sudden look on her face, like the Eika statues, like the niece when
she had been handed to Wichman as his prize. ÒSo I was, alas. The prince died bravely.Ó 
ÒOf course,Ó replied the niece. She bit at her lip, then reached out to touch the delicate
embroidery that trimmed the cloak. 
ÒItÕs excellent work,Ó said the Eagle. ÒThings have changed, here at Steleshame.Ó 
ÒSo they have.Ó The niece looked first one way, then the other and, seeing only the three
children within earshot, leaned forward. ÒAi, Lady. If you know of a way that I can attach
myself to the army and march with them, out of hereÑÓ She broke off, leaving the rest of the
question unasked. 
The Eagle raised an eyebrow, astonished at this request. ÒCount Lavastine has allowed
no camp followers, no stragglers, nothing that could impede the progress of the march or
that might make him vulnerable when we come to meet the Eika on the field.Ó 
ÒI can shoot a bow, wash clothes, cook for twenty men, repair torn clothÑ
¡°What is it?Ó 
The blunt question shocked the niece into silence. Then tears flooded her eyes and
coursed down her cheeks. ÒMy aunt has given me to Lord Wichman, to do with as he
wills,Ó she said on a hoarse whisper. ÒEagle, I beg you, free me from this if you can!Ó 
The Eagle stood as if she had been struck dumb, but in a moment she shook herself free
of her paralysis. 
ÒI will see you free of him before we leave on the morrow.Ó 
The niece sagged forward, resting a hand on her abdomen. ÒAi, Lord, I carry his child.
What will become of it?Ó 
ÒFear not,Ó said the Eagle sternly. She set a hand over the other womanÕs, her fingers
clasped over the nieceÕs faded skirts. ÒI will speak with Lord Alain. If you wish, the child will
be promised to the church. I am sure Lord WichmanÕs mother will give a dowry for it,
knowing it is of her sonÕs begetting.Ó 
ÒIt would be a great honor,Ó murmured the niece, but her shoulders remained bowed
although she untangled her hand from that of the Eagle. ÒAnd a better future for the child
than what I can give it or can expect for myself. Ai, Lady. WhatÕs to become of me?Ó 

ÒHe made no gift to you?Ó 
ÒA morning gift, do you mean. If we are not to be wed, then why would he gift me with
anything?Ó 
ÒA noble lord or lady might well gift a concubine with some mark of their favor, isnÕt that
so?Ó 
ÒTheir attentions are not mark enough?Ó The niece laughed harshly, bending as at a
sudden pain in her side. ÒNay, friend Eagle, I was the giftÑto him. A nobleman of his kind
would only gift his bride in that way, celebrating the consummation of the marriage. Not even
the prince made such a gift to meÑÓ Here she faltered and could not for a moment go on. 
The Eagle shut her eyes. 
ÒBut kindness and a sweet temper are their own gifts,Ó finished the niece softly. Then
Mistress GiselaÕs voice could be heard, shouting her nieceÕs name from the crowded hall.
ÒI thank you,Ó she added, her voice heavy with tears. She hastened back into the hall. 
The Eagle leaned back against the wall, eyes still shut. Dusk had fallen and, seeing her
half caught in that attitude, a shape pressed against the wall that was more shadow than
woman, Anna could imagine the Eagle as much a part of the wall as the wood itself. Then,
suddenly, the young woman stirred, came to life, and pushed away. She squared her
shoulders under the cloak, took in a breath, and pressed back into the crowd, who parted to
let her through into the packed hall. 
At first she thought they were alone in the pavilion, and in that instant a sudden wave
compounded more of adrenaline than fear washed through her. What did he want of her? It
was very late. The feast had just ended. 
The hounds ranged around his chair growled and slunk back to keep their distance from
her, and she saw how he raised his eyebrows, surprised at their behavior. Then his captain
stepped out from the shadows to attend his lord. 
ÒMy lord count,Ó she said. ÒI have come, as your steward directed me.Ó Still rumpled
from being woken out of sleep! She did not add that thought, knowing he would judge it as
impertinence. He did not tolerate impertinence. 
ÒSit, Terror,Ó he said. The old hound, a handsome creature despite its fearsome size
and disposition, sat obediently. He called the others to order as well, firmly but without
cruelty or roughness. From his tone she could tell he regarded them not with the loving care
one bestows on a beloved child but with the absolute unthinking consideration one has for
oneÕs own limbs. 
Two lanterns illuminated the tent, just enough for her to-see a wide pallet in one corner of
the tent, draped with a gauzy veil, a camp table with pitcher and basin atop it, and his mail
shirt glittering faintly where it draped from a wooden post and cross post in another corner.
A servant hustled in through the entryway, bearing a candle that flashed and flamed in her
eyes. The count lifted a hand and at once the servant licked two fingers and pressed them to
the wick, dousing the flame. The servant took up the pitcher and retreated outside. 
The count looked up at her then. His expression disconcerted her. She had come to
recognize that look in a manÕs eyes, the one that betrayed his interest in her as a woman,
but it flashed and faded as quickly as the candle had been extinguished. This was not a man
who acted upon impulse, or who let his desires or obsessions get the better of him. She had
never met anyone quite like him. Had Da had such qualities, perhaps they could have
stayed in Qurtubah instead of being forced to flee because of his folly; perhaps his temper
would not have gotten them into so much trouble in Autun that they had been driven out;
perhaps he could have covered his tracks better, seen the assassin coming, and saved
himselfÑand herÑin HeartÕs Rest. 
At once she felt miserable for thinking such traitorous thoughts toward Da. Da was who
he was. He had done the best he could. He had protected her for as long as he was able. 
And if all had not happened as Lord Fate and Lady Fortune and God Themselves willed,
then she would never have met Prince SanglantÑhowever brief that time had been. 
ÒEagle.Ó The count beckoned her to step closer. ÒWhat do you want from my son?Ó 

Too startled to take a step forward, she gaped at him. ÒI want nothing from your son, my
Lord.Ó 
ÒBut it is clear to me that he has put you under his protection.Ó Now the count leaned
forward, gaze hard. ÒI do not want his situation complicated by a bastard of his making!Ó 
A fish might have bubbled so, mouth popped open. 
One of the hounds yipped. ÒHush, Ardent,Ó he commanded. He turned his gaze back on
her. ÒMy servants report that he gave you coin earlier.Ó 
ÒIt isnÕt for me!Ó 
He lifted a hand, as if to say: ¡°Then for whom?Ó 
She flushed. ÒIt is for Mistress GiselaÕs niece.Ó 
ÒShe is Lord WichmanÕs lover, is she not?Ó 
ÒNot by her own choice!Ó 
Terror growled, and the count set a stilling hand on the houndÕs white mantle. ÒAh,Ó
said the count, enlightenment dawning. ÒIt reminded you of your own situation at the kingÕs
court.Ó 
Shame made her angry, and reckless. ÒYour son is as honest a person as I have ever
met. You shouldnÕt suspect him of concealing from you what you have already forbid den
him. You have nothing to fear from me in that regard. I have long since pledged my heart to a
man who is now dead. And I have sworn the oaths of an Eagle.Ó 
ÒThat will do,Ó he said with an edge on his voice so quiet that she almost didnÕt hear it.
But she understood its intent and inclined her head to show she meant to speak no
furtherÑon that subject, at least. 
ÒWe havenÕt much time.Ó He looked toward his captain. ÒAlain will return soon, and we
must finish before he comes back. This tunnel, into GentÑÓ He beckoned the captain
forward. The soldier had certain small blocks of wood in his hands. He knelt before his lord
and arranged them: here two towers to represent a city; a strip of leather cord stood in for
the river. 
ÒNow, Eagle, come forward and place the tunnel where it would lie in relation to the city,
as far as you remember. Lord Wichman says there is a line of bluffs hereÑÒ The captain set
down sticks in a ragged line to demark the bluffs. ÒAnd the riverÕs mouth, so, with two
channels but only one of them navigable and perhaps vulnerable . . .Ó 
She must have made a noise in her throat, or a soft grunt. 
He looked up with an impatient grimace. ÒDo you have a question? Speak it!Ó 
ÒI beg your pardon, my lord.Ó She glanced around the pavilion, but she, the count, his
hounds, and his captain were the only occupants. ÒOughtnÕt we to wait for Lord Alain to
return before we speak of such plans?Ó 
Irritation flared in his expression, but instead of speaking, he took wood chips from the
captainÕs hand and placed them, ÒbelowÓ the bluffs and within sight of the city, in the
shape of an oval rampart, like unto a fort. After all, he did not have to explain his actions to
her. With a momentÕs thought she knew the answer anyway. Alain shared dreams with an
Eika prince. If the one could dream the otherÕs life, why shouldnÕt the opposite be true?
Lavastine could not risk betraying his thoughts to Bloodheart, even if it meant deceiving his
son in such a way as this. ÒEagle!Ó He handed her a stiff length of thread. ÒCan you see
this in your mind and make a picture of it?Ó 
She took the thread and squatted to consider the landscape before her. ÒIÕve seen
maps at the kalifÕs palace in Qurtubah. I know how to read them.Ó 
ÒQurtubah!Ó But the countÕs exclamation was voiced so softly that she deemed it better
not to respond. She was not sure how much Alain had told his father, and she did not want to
risk betraying to the count that, in one matter at least, Alain had concealed her secrets from
his father. 
After a long pause, she set one end of the thread between the two block towers
representing Gent and lay it down stretching westward, its other end coming to rest beyond
the sticks that marked the uplands above the river plain. Then she frowned and moved the

line of sticks back a bit. ÒThe river plain is broader here. Lord Wichman must know the lay
of the ground better than I, since heÕs been raiding through this area for months.Ó 
ÒLord Wichman is brave but foolish. I will use him as I judge fit.Ó The count examined the
little map, then moved the placement of the fort so that it rested on the plain but up against
the uplands, near the place where the tunnel supposedly had its end. ÒRiverÕs mouth,Ó he
said, touching that place and having evidently forgottenÑor dismissedÑyoung Lord
Wichman. ÒGent. A fortified camp. A secret tunnel. The Eika have ships, foot soldiers, and
herds. WichmanÕs last scout brought in news that there are forty-seven ships beached near
Gent. I know from my own experience that each ship can carry about thirty Eika. With Lord
Wichman joining me I have about seven hundred soldiers, a third of whom are cavalry.Ó 
ÒBut that means they have twice as many soldiers as we do! ShouldnÕt we wait here at
Steleshame for King Henry?Ó 
ÒWho knows when King Henry will arrive?Ó asked the captain. ÒOr if some other conflict
distracts him? Nay, lass, we canÕt wait on an army that may never come. And certainly not
in a place like this holding, where there arenÕt supplies enough to keep us fed and with the
Eika raiding at their will, should they wish to harass us here. You can be sure they have
scouts in these woods, watching us just as our scouts have gone ahead to watch them.Ó 
ÒWe will leave a messenger here to tell Henry where we are, if he arrives,Ó added the
count. An odd light of excitement glinted in LavastineÕs expression, a man who has seen
his heartÕs desire and at last knows which path will lead him to it. ÒBloodheart may have
numbers,Ó he said, Òbut I have a plan,Ó 
ÒDid you see how Count Lavastine praised my singing last night!Ó It was morning, and
Master Helvidius could not contain his excitement. ÒThe counts of Lavas are great
landholders in Varre, practically dukes given the power they can wield. Of course, they have
no blood connection to the royal line. Still, a lord of his consequence will wish to have a poet
of my gifts in his retinue.Ó 
Anna stood stunned. ÒYouÕd leave us?Ó 
ÒMistress Gisela doesnÕt appreciate my verse. And sheÕs lost most of her wealth with
this war. IÕd be better off attaching myself to a new household.Ó He hesitated. 
The salad leaves picked yesterday lay in a chipped soap-stone bowl, itself gleaned from
the ruins of the tannery after the Eika attack. Anna had traded the tansy for a cup of barley
from last seasonÕs scant harvest, and now Helen chewed happily on a little cake of spring
pudding: barley mixed with chopped bistort, dandelion leaves, and nettle tops, boiled in a
bag, then fried in lard on a battered tin sheet over the fire. 
ÒOf course, you could come with me,Ó he finished, but reluctance dragged on his
words. 
ÒBut Matthias canÕt walk, not to follow a lord like that. I donÕt even know where Varre is.
Poor little Helen probably canÕt walk so far either, and I canÕt imagine theyÕd give such as
us a place in a wagon.Ó 
Helvidius grunted, irritated now, and bit at his nails. He always had clean hands, which
Anna admired. ÒEh, what matter? TheyÕll likely all die fighting the Eika at Gent. But
perhaps I can sing to them tonight. I suppose theyÕll march on in the morning.Ó 
After all she and Matthias had done for him, how could Master Helvidius even think of
leaving them? How could she forage if there was no one to watch over Helen during the
day? But she did not voice these thoughts out loud. Instead, she took three of the little cakes
and two handfuls of the fresh greens, wrapped them in the corner of her shawl, and walked
over to the corner of Steleshame that stank of the tannery. 
Crowded already, the large inner yard of Steleshame was now packed with Court
LavastineÕs army. They had bivouacked anywhere they could find room, making
themselves free with the wellÑand not even the whole of the army had encamped inside.
Many remained outside to dig a ditch around the palisades as a first line of defense in case
the Eika raided again. 
But none of LavastineÕs soldiers paid any attention to her except to avoid bumping into

her as she wove her way through their ranks or pressed past those of the Steleshame
people who had come forward to offer berries or bread in exchange for news. At the
tannery, she found Matthias sitting on his stool. She paused to watch him. His face was as
pale as the bleached winter sky, but he worked vigorously. She waited until he had finished
scraping the hair side of the skin pegged out before him, then spoke his name. 
He turned, smiled, then frowned when she opened her shawl and offered him the food.
ÒThereÕll be bread tonight and a porridge. You should eat that yourself.Ó 
ÒIÕve had plenty,Ó she said, and for once it was true. ÒYouÕre never given enough. You
know itÕs true, Matthias. Now donÕt argue with me.Ó 
He was tired enough and hungry enough that this time he didnÕt argue, only ate. He had
barely finished the scant meal when, looking over her shoulder, his eyes widened and he
grabbed his stick and heaved himself to his feet. 
ÒMatthias!Ó she exclaimed, but he made a sign with his hand and dipped his head. She
spun. 
Ai, Lady! She touched her Circle, traced her finger around it, and gaped. Lord Wichman
might be the son of a duchess, but he was nowhere near as fine as this noble lord and his
son, who even fresh off the march looked as grand as Anna supposed the king might. The
noble lord was not as tall or robust as Lord Wichman, who walked beside him, but he had
the same kind of brisk and effortless pride which she had noticed in the master currier back
in Gent, when Matthias first apprenticed in the tanning works: Such a manÑor womanÑknew
their domain, and that they commanded it absolutely. No doubt the master currier was dead
now; she had never seen him among the refugees at Steleshame and supposed he had
stayed behind during the final attack to defend his beloved demesne. 
This lord had hair as colorless as the sand, a narrow face, pale blue eyes, and a keen
gaze. He paused to speak to one of the workmen, indicating some leather which lay over a
beam, and asked if the tannery had any leather cured and finished enough that his soldiers
might use it to repair their armor. Lord Wichman fidgeted, having no patience for this sort of
practical talk, and turned to speak to the lordling who stood at Count LavastineÕs side. 
ÒDonÕt stare!Ó whispered Matthias, nudging her with his free hand. 
Master Helvidius had said that the count traveled with his son. Yet this young man was
half a head taller than the count and had black hair rather than pale. He wore a padded coat
worked with silver-and-gold thread in the outline of a hound, and, indeed, two huge black
fierce-looking hounds walked meekly at his heels. He and his father were also attended by
the Eagle. In the daylight Anna could see that her skin had not the tone of soot at all but
rather that of a certain honey-colored soft leather prized by rich merchants for gloves. 
A messenger from the king; a noble lord and his son; even Lord Wichman, who after so
many months engaged in constant skirmishing looked ill-kempt beside his noble comrades.
The assembly quite took AnnaÕs breath away, but not nearly as much as when the young
lordling turned as if aware of her stare and looked right at her. 
She cringed, knowing she ought not to stare. ÒAnna!Ó But MatthiasÕ muttered warning
came too late. 
The young lord crossed over to her, the hounds right behind him, and bent to touch a
finger to her wooden Circle. ÒPoor child,Ó he said kindly. ÒI saw you at the roadside, I
think, when we were marching in. Did you come from Gent?Ó 
She could only nod. 
ÒAre you one of the children who escaped through the tunnel?Ó 
ÒYes, my lord,Ó said Matthias gamely, having a voice. Anna had lost hers. The black
hounds panted, tongues lolling, so near to her that she expected them to suddenly bolt past
their lord and tear her to pieces. But they made no movement, nor did they growl or bark.
They simply sat, watching their lord with eyes the color of melted honey. 
The young lord lifted the Circle from her chest and regarded it quizzically. ÒI once wore a
Circle fashioned such as this, but I have it no longer.Ó 
ÒWhat became of it?Ó asked Lord Wichman who, more restless than the hounds, had

come up beside the young lord. He glanced incuriously at Anna; he did not recognize her as
the girl he had chastised on that winter raid months ago. 
The young lordÕs mouth quirked into a smile as fleeting as WichmanÕs attention. ÒI
gave it to an Eika prince.Ó He let go of the Circle and Anna, gaping, staggered slightly as if
having lost the touch of his hand she was no longer anchored to the earth. 
To an Eika prince. 
It could not be. She wanted to ask but dared not. She ought to ask but was afraid to. 
The young lord had already looked past her to Matthias. ÒLady Above,Ó he said softly.
ÒYou have some injury, I think?Ó 
Matthias bobbed his head respectfully, fighting to balance himself on his crutch. ÒI was
taken as a slave for a time among the Eika, my lord.Ó His voice was amazingly steady.
ÒLord Wichman freed me on one of his raids, my lord,Ó he added, knowing it wise to flatter
as many lords as were within earshot. 
ÒYou took the wound then, among the Eika?Ó asked the young lord. He had dark eyes
and an expressive face, filled now with pity as he laid a hand on MatthiasÕ filthy and matted
hair. ÒPoor child. I wish you may have the healing you deserve.Ó 
ÒIÕm a man now!Ó retorted Matthias suddenly. 
Anna winced. 
Lord Wichman snorted and gave a stiff, sharp laugh. 
But the young lord only nodded. ÒSo you are, come young to it through hardship. What is
your name, friend?Ó 
This was too much even for Matthias, who lost his boldness. ÒM-m-matthias, my lord.Ó 
ÒAnd this is your sister?Ó The lord took his hand from MatthiasÕ head and smiled at
Anna. 
ÒMy sister, Anna. ItÕs short for Johanna, my lord, the blessed DaisanÕs discipla.Ó 
ÒSo it is. How came you to remain here when we have heard from the mistress of this
place that most of the refugeesÑthe childrenÑwere sent south?Ó 
ÒOur grandfather was too feeble to make the journey, so we stayed on here after the
others left.Ó 
ÒThen I pray Our Lord and Lady watch over you.Ó 
Only after he moved on, did Anna begin to cry, her tears as silent as the slip of rain down
a wall. 
ÒAnna!Ó Matthias set a hand on her shoulder. ÒAnna! What is it? Did they scare you?
The hounds were big, werenÕt they, fierce-looking, but theyÕre nothing like the Eika dogs.
You donÕt need to cry.Ó 
Struck dumb. 
She opened her mouth to speak but could not form words or make them whole in the air.
There was something she ought to have asked but had not asked, something she ought to
have done but did not do, something she was meant to accomplish but had turned her gaze
away from as the well-fed merchant turns her gaze away from a starving beggar, not wanting
to see him. 
ÒAnna!Ó Matthias clutched her shoulders, his weight sagging onto her as, frightened, he
shook her. ÒAnna! What is it? Ai, Lady, it was the hounds wasnÕt it?Ó He pulled her tight
against him in an embrace. The noble lords moved out of sight, heading back to the hall. 
It wasnÕt the hounds.  But she could not speak words to tell him so. 
Terrified now, he grabbed his stick and hobbled back to their hut with her in tow, but
Helvidius and Helen were gone. ÒAnna!  Say something to me!Ó
Unlike the Eagle last night, faced with a heartfelt plea, she had not spoken.  She had not
acted.  Like a fish tossed from water to dirt, she only thrashed helplessly. She was bitterly
ashamed, and scaredÑso scared. 
Lord protect us!Ó whispered Matthias.  ÒI must take you to the herbwife.  A devil has
gotten into your throat and stole your voice.Ó
She grabbed his hand and gripped it until he winced.  She shook her head fiercely, so

that he would understand.  She had been struck dumb by GodÕs hand, not that of the
Enemy or such of its minions as skittered through the world hoping for mischief.
But Matthias had always been stubborn.
In the morning, Count Lavastine and his army marched out, the count and his son at their
headÑand Lord Wichman and his unruly retinue with them. GiselaÕs niece stood in the
shadows and counted through a pouch filled with silver sceattas. 
After the army vanished down the forest road, Matthias took Anna to see the herbwife.
The old woman listened to their troubles and took a knife in exchange for her treatment: a
noxious-smelling salve which she applied to AnnaÕs throat and a more palatable tea
brewed of waybroad and spear-root which Matthias insisted on trying first. Anna gulped the
remainder down dutifully, but the day passed with no change in her condition. 
That evening, Matthias led Anna to Lord WichmanÕs deacon, who had remained behind
rather than ride into battle. A woman of noble birth, she eyed them with misgiving, as well
she might considering their filthy condition and obvious look of common-born children
seeking a boon. 
ÒShe canÕt speak, good deacon,Ó said Matthias as he thrust Anna forward. 
ÒManyÕs the child too weak or slow-witted to speak,Ó said the deacon patiently. ÒOr
has caught a sickness, although thatÕs more common in wintertime. Or she may have taken
a blow to the head in one of the skirmishes.Ó 
ÒNay, good deacon.Ó Matthias was nothing if not persistent. Otherwise, they would
never have survived Gent. ÒShe spoke as good as me until yesterday.Ó 
ÒGo see the herbwife, then.Ó 
ÒWeÕve done so already.Ó 
ÒThen itÕs in GodÕs hands.Ó A mute child among so many who were injured in
countless ways was of little concern to the deacon, good woman though she was. She
prayed over Anna, touched her on the head, and indicated she should move on. 
ÒDo not go yet, child,Ó she said to Matthias, who had moved away with Anna. ÒI
remember you. You were sore wounded by the Eika, were you not? I came to pray last rites
over you some months ago, but you survived by GodÕs mercy, and indeed I thought you
must live out the rest of your days as a cripple. I see that God have healed you in the
meantime. It is a blessing we must all be thankful for, that some have escaped this terrible
time with whole bodies and strong minds.Ó 
Anna had been so terrified at losing her voice that she had scarcely had time to notice
Matthias. He had been so busy fussing over her that he had taken no notice of himself. But
like the sun rising, the light dawned on her now: Matthias wasnÕt limping. 
Hastily he unwrapped the much worn and stained leggings from his calf, and there they
stood, both of them gaping while the deacon looked on mildly, unaware of how
remarkableÑindeed, how impossibleÑthe sight of his leg was now to their eyes. 
No festering wound discolored the skin; no horrible, unnatural bend skewed his calf
where the bone had broken and healed all wrong. The leg was straight, smooth, and strong. 
He was a cripple no longer. 
But even so, there was yet one more wondrous event in I store for them. 
Four days later the shout came from far down the west road. 
ÒThe king! The king rides to Steleshame!Ó 
Anna and Matthias, like every last soul in and around Steleshame, ran to line the road for
the adventus of King Henry as he and his retinue, armed for war, rode in to the battered
holding. 
The magnificence of his host would have struck any soul speechless. The king did not
notice her, of course. She was only another dirty common child standing barefoot in the dirt
beside the road. 
What a fine handsome man he was, upright and proud, strong and stern! He dressed
much like the other lords, no richer than they, but no one could have mistaken him for anyone
but the king. 

Surely someday her voice would return to her. Surely someday, if she lived to be an old
grandmother, she could tell this story to a host of children gathered at her feet and
astonished to hear that a soul as humble as her own had been privileged to see the king
himself. 
2
¡°It will be the ruin of me! I have already depleted my foodstuffs sending provisions with
Count Lavastine. Now I must feed this host, and give up the rest of my stores as well?Ó 
The mistress of Steleshame was overwrought and Rosvita had, alas, been given the task
of calming her nerves. Outside, within palisade and ditch, the army set up camp for the night.
Obviously, with Count Lavastine and his army ahead of them and the householder in
hysterics, they could not expect to stay in Steleshame for more than one night. Rosvita had
to admit that she was getting tired of the saddle. 
After SapientiaÕs recovery from childbed, they had ridden north at a steady but
unrelenting pace, wagons lurching behind, the army swelling its ranks with new recruits at
every ladyÕs holding at which they sheltered and feasted. 
ÒAnd with Lord Wichman gone now,Ó continued Mistress Gisela while her pretty niece
stood behind her and listened to this rant with the calm face of a woman who has learned to
survive by being pliant, Òwho will protect us against the Eika?Ó 
ÒI should think,Ó said Rosvita, Òthat with two armies sent against the Eika and with
Margrave Judith and Duchess Rotrudis likely to arrive at any day now from the southeast,
you need not fear the incursions of the Eika, good mistress.Ó 
But the householder only wailed and clutched at her nieceÕs arm. ÒAi, Lord! But the
count and his force are days ahead of you, Sister! It takes four days to ride to Gent with the
main road so neglected and dangerous. By now the Eika could have slaughtered them all
and be eating their bones as their eveningÕs feast!Ó 
ÒThen it is one feast you will not have to provide,Ó said the niece tartly, twisting her arm
out of her auntÕs grip. 
Sister Amabilia and Brother Fortunatus, hovering at RosvitaÕs back, both made sudden
piglike noises and Rosvita turned to see them covering their mouths with the sleeves of their
robes. Fortunatus began to cough. Amabilia snorted unsuccessfully in an attempt to stop
laughing and then, luckily, young Brother Constantine came forward to I remonstrate with the
young woman for making a joke out I of what was no joking matter. 
ÒI beg you, Brother,Ó interposed Rosvita swiftly, Òlet us soothe the fears of good
Mistress Gisela. We need only a simple supper, I should think, since the good mistress is no
noble chatelaine of a large estate to lay a fine tableÑ
But this was too much for the householder. Goaded into action by this assault on her
dignity and wealth, she turned on her niece and ordered fifty cattle slaughtered at once, as
well as one hundred chickens and . . . 
Rosvita and her clerics beat a hasty retreat to the table within the hall set aside for their
use. 
ÒIt sounds as if she means to kill every chicken in the I holding,Ó said Sister Amabilia. ÒI
wonder if there will be any left for the poor souls who bide here.Ó 
ÒThere will be no poor souls left at all,Ó retorted Brother Fortunatus, Òif King Henry does
not drive the Eika out of Gent.Ó 
Rosvita left them to their squabbling and walked outside. 
There she found Villam sitting on a bench, watching while the inner yard was raked so
that the kingÕs pavilion might be set up where no refuse littered the ground. His hand rested
quietly on a thigh. The empty sleeve of his lost arm was pinned up to the shoulder so that it
wouldnÕt flap. He smiled and indicated the bench beside him. She sat. 
ÒYou are serious today, Lord Villam,Ó she said, noting I his frown. 
He merely shrugged. ÒIt is hard for a man, even one as old as I, to watch as a battle

approaches while knowing he cannot fight in itÑand has no son to send out in his place.Ó
¡°True enough.Ó She did not glance at his missing arm, lost in the battle of Kassel, but
surely he did not regret the loss of the arm as much as he did the loss of his son, Berthold,
all those months agoÑmore than a year!Ñin the hills above the monastery at Hersfeld. Then
she followed his gaze and could not contain a gasp. ÒSurely she doesnÕt mean to ride into
battle so soon after giving birth?Ó 
Under an awning Princess Sapientia sat in a camp chair, attended by Father Hugh, her
favorites, her Eagle, and the servants and wet nurse who took care of baby Hippolyte. A
vigorous child, the infant was even now wailing heartily as an armorer measured a stiff coat
of leather against SapientiaÕs frame, stouter now after her pregnancy. 
ÒIt has been almost two months since the birth,Ó said Villam. 
ÒAlmost two months!Ó Rosvita shook dust off the hem of her robes and resettled them.
ÒI do not like it, I admit, although she has gained remarkably in strength.Ó Since Sapientia
had almost nothing to do with the infant, she had adjusted quickly to her new state: that of
uncrowned heir. 
Villam nodded. ÒIt isnÕt enough, truly, that she has proved her worthiness for the throne
by right of fertility. She must still show she has the ability to command and to lead, and this is
as good a test as any.Ó 
ÒAnd easy to hand.Ó Rosvita smiled wryly. 
It was true: Henry had neither crowned nor anointed Sapientia, but she was seen
everywhere with him, she rode beside him on their progress, sat beside him at feast and at
council, and was given leave to speak when it came time to exhort the ladies and lords of
Wendar to spare troops for the assault on Gent. The infant, who was pleasant to look upon
as well as strong, was noted and remarked on everywhere they went, and Sapientia kept it
by her at all timesÑexcept at nightÑas if to remind everyone of her accomplishment. . . and
of her new position as heir by that same right of fertility. 
ÒI think we need not fear, Sister,Ó added Villam, reading her silence with his usual
sagacity. ÒShe has grown steadier in the past months. And Father Hugh is wise enough to
counsel her.Ó 
ÒIs he?Ó 
ÒDo you doubt him?Ó he asked, genuinely surprised. ÒHe is much changed.Ó 
ÒI suppose he is,Ó she agreed, but absently, for looking at Hugh where he stood in
perfect humble attendance on his princess, she could not help but wonderÑagainÑabout the
book. 
Ai, Lady, the thought of the book nagged at her. It worried at her, this mouseÕs hunger,
day and night and even, that evening, while she sat in the war council held beneath the
broad ceiling of the kingÕs pavilion. The small and ill-fitted hall at Steleshame had been
deemed suitable for a householder but certainly not for a king and his retinue of nobles, so
they had adjourned to the pavilion, now cramped with bodies all wedged together. 
Sapientia sat on HenryÕs left, Villam stood to his right. Around them stood those nobles
important enough to demand or beg entrance to the nightly war council, chief among them
young Duchess Liutgard of Fesse, who had joined up with them northeast of Kassel several
weeks ago; Father Hugh; VillamÕs daughterÕs husband, Lord Gebhard of Weller Gass; the
latest Count of Hesbaye, a stocky, placid man rumored to be a doughty fighter; Lady Ida of
Vestrimark, who, as cousin to the late Countess Hildegard, was eager to personally avenge
her cousinÕs death as well as lay claim to her lands; and any number of sons or husbands
or nephews of prominent landholding noblewomen who had sent their male kinfolk as their
representatives. 
Sapientia alone of HenryÕs children now rode with the king. Theophanu had not yet
returned from the convent of St. Valeria, nor had they heard any word from herÑalthough she
might well be looking for them in Wayland if she had missed the messenger sent to the
convent with news of their march on Gent. Ekkehard had been left with the rest of the
children in the schola at the palace of Weraushausen, in the keeping of the monks of Eben,

some ten daysÕ ride southwest of Steleshame. The boy had begged to be allowed to
attend the march; he was almost of age, after all, and the experience would in truth help
temper him, but Henry had left him behind with the othersÑfor safekeeping. 
A servant brought wine and passed the cup among the restless nobles. 
ÒWeÕre only four days behind Count Lavastine!Ó exclaimed Duchess Liutgard in her
usual impetuous manner. ÒI say we march on tonight!Ó 
ÒAnd arrive there completely exhausted?Ó asked Villam. 
ÒBetter than arriving there to find the count dead and his army cut to pieces! We can see
well enough to march at nightÑthe moon is nearly full!Ó 
ÒBut our road lies through the forest,Ó said Henry, thus ending the discussion. ÒI, too,
see the need for haste, but not the need to be reckless. I have sent outriders ahead to alert
Count Lavastine. We will follow at a steady march without depleting ourselves.Ó 
Too restless to remain, with her mind wandering in such an irritable fashion, Rosvita rose
and went outside. Just beyond the awning stood the kingÕs Eagle, Hathui, her head
upturned to examine the heavens. 
It was a drastic step, but Rosvita took it nevertheless: She glanced around to make sure
they could speak without being overheard and then asked the woman what she knew of the
matter. 
ÒThe book?Ó said the Eagle, obviously startled. ÒIndeed, I know of the book. Liath
always carried it with her, and as far as I ever knew it belonged to her. I suppose itÕs true
she might have stolen it from Father Hugh.Ó 
ÒBut you donÕt think she did?Ó 
ÒWolfhere didnÕt believe she stole it, though she kept it hidden even from him. We all
knew she had it, but Wolfhere never demanded she show it to us. He said once to me that it
was her right to conceal it from the rest of us, as she wished.Ó 
Wolfhere. It seemed to Rosvita that far too much of this mystery revolved around a simple
EagleÑalthough by all accounts Wolfhere was by no means simple. ÒYou were traveling
through HeartÕs Rest when you came upon Liath and Hanna? The king always wants for
Eagles, itÕs true, and I suppose Wolfhere might have found them likely candidates.Ó 
ÒNay, Sister. Wolfhere was looking for Liath. Both Manfred and I had been sent out by
him to look for a girl answering to her description, but it was only when we joined up again
that he told us heÕd discovered her. That was when we rode to HeartÕs Rest together.Ó 
ÒManfred?Ó 
Rosvita could not read the expression on the EagleÕs face, but the marchlander made a
shrugging motion with one shoulder, as at a nagging pain. ÒOur comrade. He was killed at
Gent.Ó 
So did God remind even the strong that life is short, and grief long-lasting. ÒI will add his
name to my prayers.Ó 
ÒThank you, Sister!Ó For a moment Rosvita thought the Eagle meant actually to clasp
her hand as she would a comradeÕs, but she hooked her fingers under her belt instead and
with her other hand brushed something out of her eyes. ÒSo may he be remembered on
earth and sung into the Chamber of Light.Ó 
But the fate of an anonymous Eagle, however tragic, did not lodge for long in RosvitaÕs
thoughts. She had already begun to rearrange the evidence in her mind. Did it begin to form
a new and perhaps more interesting picture? ÒWolfhere went to HeartÕs Rest to find Liath.
He knew her?Ó 
ÒThat I donÕt know, Sister.Ó 
ÒFather Hugh tells me she stole the book from him while she was his slave,Ó said
Rosvita, more irritated than ever. HughÕs story was easy, and convenient, to believeÑand
not entirely at odds with what the Eagle had told herÑand he was the son of a margrave. But
HathuiÕs account of events had an EagleÕs eye behind it, and a certain ring of bald truth.
ÒWhy should I believe you, a common-born woman, over the son of a margrave?Ó 
Hathui smiled wryly. ÒGod makes the sun to rise on noblewoman and commoner alike.

The Lord and Lady love us all equally in Their hearts, my lady.Ó 
ÒYet Our Lord and Lady follow Their own will in parceling out to individuals whatever They
wish. To some They give more, and to others, less. Could we not also argue that we merit
what we each receive? That They confer on the elect these gifts of grace that set them apart
from others?Ó 
But the Eagle shrugged, her expression untroubled. ÒAll gifts are given to us by God.
Without such gifts, no matter how noble, we are dust. So we are all equal before GodÑand
the honorable word of a common-born woman no different than that of a nobly born man.Ó 
It was startling to hear a commoner speak so bluntly, but Rosvita could not gainsay the
truth in her words. ÒThere is wisdom in what you say, Eagle.Ó 
Hathui touched a finger to her lips as though to force words back before she blurted out
something unseemly. The wind lifted dust from ground already stirred up by the passage of
so many feet and so much activity. Soon, all too soon, the night would be alive with
EikaÑand many of those who marched in this army would die. Rosvita shuddered, although
it wasnÕt cold. 
ÒI would say one thing more, if you will, Sister.Ó 
ÒYou have my permission.Ó 
ÒWhat benefit to me to lie about this?Ó 
ÒYour own vows, to protect your sister Eagle.Ó 
ÒTrue-spoken. I admit freely to being a woman who holds to her vows. Ask yourself this:
What benefit to Father Hugh to lie about the book?Ó 
ÒThat would depend on what is in the book. Do you know?Ó 
ÒI do not. I cannot read, and Liath never showed the book to anyone, except perhaps to
Hanna.Ó 
Hanna. Ivar had nursed at the same breast as Hanna, making him and the young woman
milk siblings. To some extent, then, Hanna was kin to Rosvita even if the young Eagle was a
common-born woman and Rosvita born out of an old and noble lineage. 
Hanna might know. But to speak with the Eagle, Hanna, she would have to pry the young
woman out of Princess SapientiaÕs tight grasp, for Sapientia held all her creatures close
against her as if she feared that, given too much room to run, they would dash for
freedomÑor for someone more worthy. 
But there was no one elseÑno one else more worthy to become HenryÕs heir. Sapientia
had steadied in recent months. Perhaps Father HughÕs counsel was guiding her toward the
ÒwisdomÓ she was named for. She might yet grow into a queen. 
Thoughtful, Rosvita returned to the council in time to hear Henry announce that which they
all knew was preordained: 
ÒWe will ride on in the morning, battle ready. Should we be set upon as we march, we
will take up at once what positions we can along the road. Duchess Liutgard will command
the vanguard, which will take up the left flank. Her Highness Princess Sapientia will
command that portion of the ranks which will form the right flank. I will ride in the center,
commanding the center, and Margrave Villam will command the rear guard, with the
reserve.Ó 
So was it decided. There came from the assembled nobles a taut hiss of breath, a
gathering of resolve. Soon, and at long last, they would face the Eika. 
3
Count Lavastine sent a contingent of infantry northeast, ahead of the rest of his army.
Commanded by Sergeant Fell and reinforced by a levy of light cavalry from Autun, they
guarded four wagons which contained certain pieces from a siege engine as well as
sections of a huge chain forged by blacksmiths at Lavas Holding in the spring. 
ÒThe Eagle as well,Ó the count had said, Òso that she may report back to me the
success of your efforts.Ó 

They marched hard for three days, seeing nothing except the desolation of farming lands
gone wild, then set up camp on the lee of a bluff overlooking the western channel of the
Veser River. This was the channel all ship traffic used since the eastern channelÑsplit off
from the western by a spur of rocky land, was too shallow, spreading out into marsh before it
reached the sea. 
Artisans from the city of Autun quickly set to work felling trees and constructing two
engines, called ballistae by the ancient Dariyans. They also began work on a small catapult
that used a stout young tree, stripped of leaves, branches, and bark, as its arm. 
The work proceeded quickly. By the time Liath and the other mounted soldiers had
checked out the area, finding nothing but a few burned villages, swathes of heavily grazed
fields with no cattle in evidence, and a fallen keep built by some ancient race that had
guarded the river in another age, the engines were taking form. 
All the next day the engineers worked on their machines. It was so hot that they stripped
down to breechclouts as they worked, men and women alike sweating under the sun.
Meanwhile Sergeant Fell and a few of his men who had fought the Eika along the north
coast of Varre scouted the river as the tide ebbed. Near midday, at low tide, the river ran
shallow near the mouth, glistening tidal flats scored by deeper channels coursing seaward. 
Late that night, under the light of the gibbous moon, the work parties set out as the tide
ebbed again. On the last lip of solid land, they stripped and began the long trudge across
exposed sand and rocks, towing logs sharpened at one end. The dayÕs heat had spilled
over into nightÕs air, making it so heavy and warm that Liath was grateful for the pull of cool
water against her skin as they headed into the riverÕs main bed. Pebbles rolled smooth by
their passage downriver slipped under her feet. She smelled the salt of the sea. The waters
streamed past, brown with silt, and sang in their murmuring chorus of the long journey from
their original home in the mountains far to the south. A branch grazed her thigh and swirled
on. 
On the flats, where the water flowed no more than knee-deep at low tide, it was an easy
matter to drive in beams for piles, though the current was strong enough that a fair bit of
wrestling was required to get the angle right. Like the stakes set leaning forward to stop a
charge of heavy cavalry, this line of piles was to be angled and fastened so that the bow of a
ship might only drive it deeper. With the piles protruding half an armÕs length above the
water at the low, so Sergeant Fell said, then an Eika ship could not pass even at high tide. 
ÒHere, comrade!Ó called a woman to her. As she plunged forward, the water rose along
her thighs and she shivered as the cold current dragged at her, coursing around her hips
and tugging her seaward as she waded farther out. A man, seeing her struggle against the
pull of river, linked arms with her and together they got out to a raft anchored against the
current by a section of the heavy chain. She helped five laborers as they wrestled a log as
big around as her waist into the deep water and turned it up. Others hauled out rocks from
the shore and used these to weight the log on the seaward side while a burly man with a
blacksmithÕs thick arms hammered the log into place. Still more rocks were brought until
Liath, standing on this foundation, could touch the top of the log, the water only up around her
waist, submerged rocks slick under her bare feet. 
From this vantage, the moonÕs light cast a glamour over the scene; its light washed the
waters with a silver gleam that winked ceaselessly as the river rushed forward to the sea.
Overhead, many of the stars had been bleached to nothing by the moonÕs waxing light, but
at a glance she could identify the three jewels of the summer sky shining high above her,
diamond, sapphire, and citrine. The River of Heaven, unlike the earthly river that coursed
round her now, was only a faint mist. On a moonless night it would have stretched like a
shimmering beacon right across the zenith, dropping down into the coils of the Serpent in
the southern sky. The Penitent and the Eagle, its wings unfolded, rose to the east; in the
west, the Dragon set. She shut her eyes. The current dragged against her like the pull of
grief. 
ÒThatÕll hold,Ó said Sergeant Fell, startling her back to earth. He had waded out to test

their handiwork. ÒGo on, then. ThereÕs more to set in, all the way across. The tideÕs well
turned, so weÕve only a few hours before itÕll be too high to do the job Count LavastineÕs
set us to do. We canÕt sink piles into the deep channels, so these hereÕll have to hold
strong for the weight they must bear.Ó 
At last, with the tide rising around them and the riverÕs mouth a swirl of dangerous
currents, they finished the line across the entire mouth of the river, all but the deepest
channels whose current was too strong and too deep for driving in such stakes. Then all of
them gathered like so many hairless seals, soaking wet from their labors and by now
shivering from the cold, and with their full complement and many grunts and groans, dragged
the chain across the river and fastened it to the piles. 
With dawn the work was done and the engines put in place, well hidden along the bluff by
palisades of bush, log, and rock but within easy range of the channel. Exhausted, Liath
toweled herself dry with her tunic, dressed, and curled up in the sun behind the ballistae,
head pillowed on her hands. She fell asleep at once. 
And was woken even sooner by a hand shaking her shoulder. She staggered to her feet,
clutching for her sword, but Sergeant Fell touched his fingers to his lips for silence and
waved her forward. 
ÒStand ready,Ó he said to her before going on to the next man, his voice as low as if he
feared the Eika might hear him on the summer breeze. ÒWeÕll see how the trap works.Ó 
She stood full up and squinted into a setting sun. Opposite, the moon rose over the
eastern bluffs. 
Liath readied her horse, then slung on her quiver and got down on her belly to sidle up the
bluff and watch the Eika ship approach. It was running with the tide but against the wind. A
dozen oars on each side stroked at a leisurely pace toward the now-submerged posts.
Sunlight ran golden over the water like streaks of fire. 
ÒEasy, lads,Ó said Fell from below, speaking to the engineers at the ballistae. ÒBe
patient. Wait. Wait. SheÕs in the sweet spot and . . . Ho!Ó FellÕs call to fire rang out like a
smithÕs hammer. 
The air reverberated with the ballistaÕs release as a great iron-tipped javelin shot
through the air. All froze. The shipÕs bow ceased moving forward as it hit the chain, and its
stern swung wide, yawing under the pull of the current. The javelin hit the water and vanished;
at once Fell made adjustments as the second ballistaÕs shot splashed and subsided, this
time closer to the helpless ship. The first crew ratchetted back their machine for a second
shot. This javelin struck midship, passing through an oarsman and disappearing into the
ship. The sound of cracking wood and Eika shouts reached the shore as the fourth javelin hit
the ship at an angle, glancing off the wooden planks. She heard the catapult set loose at
last, and she gasped. It seemed the sun itself had loosed a burning brand, an arrow cast
gleaming from the fiery heights fletched with billowing smoke . . . but it was no arrow from
the sun but rather a ball of burning pitch launched from the catapult. Falling on the ship, it
splashed flame on Eika oarsmen and ship timbers alike. 
Fell guided the adjustment of the second ballista as the crew re-loaded and the ship
foundered. Another javelin followed by another ball of burning pitch struck the ship. Sail,
folded on the deck, caught fire. The Eika abandoned ship. Leaping into the waters, they
swam toward the shore, floundering in the tide. Sergeant Fell broke away from the crews
above and slid down the bluff to the soldiers waiting below. Liath ran down to her horse,
mounted, and followed a dozen riders down to the shore. There she found Fell waiting with
six spearmen and five archers. 
The first Eika righted himself in hip-deep water as an archer took careful aim and, at no
more than a stoneÕs toss, put an arrow through the EikaÕs eye as the savage blinked into
the blinding western sun. A trio of dogs blundered up out of the river, growling and yelping,
and at once the spearmen set upon them, jabbing and thrusting until the creatures howled
and thrashed and, finally, lay still. 
ÒTo the left!Ó shouted a rider. Liath cut out away from the others and found two Eika

emerging from the water just downriver. She quickly nocked an arrow and shot as she rode,
striking one Eika through the heart. The second charged after her with ax poised to chop her
down. She kicked her horse into a gallop as the frustrated Eika howled and struggled to
keep up. Within moments the Eika, hampered by the pull of the water, slowed to look for
other prey. Liath turned in the saddle and nocked another arrow, easing her horse to a walk.
It was an easy shot. She took it. 
Behind her, a dozen corpses littered the waterline, water streaming past and around
them as though around flotsam wedged into the sand. Sergeant Fell chased down what
appeared to be the last living EikaÑthis one unarmed. Ax raised, Fell whooped as he bore
down on the confused Eika. The sight was almost humorous. FellÕs men shouted
encouragement, but no one stepped in to help. Tough-skinned the Eika might be; FellÕs ax
cleaved its skull and it, too, dropped to the ground with a hideous scream. 
Across the river, under the light of the setting sun, Liath watched as a few Eika stumbled
up onto the eastern shore only to be met by the patrol left there last night. As for the rest, and
their dogs...they burned with the ship or drowned. 
Around her and above she heard the cheers of artisans, smiths, and soldiers alike. The
ebb tide slammed the Eika ship repeatedly against chain and piles until it splintered and
began to break up, flames spitting and failing as water swamped the deck. Below, on the
shore, a half dozen of FellÕs soldiers stripped again and dragged the Eika bodies to the
seaward side of the barricade where they rolled them into the water. The dead sank like
stone. 
4
 Duchess Liutgard led the vanguard at a grueling pace and by the first evening out of
Steleshame the train had fallen behind, its wagons bogged down where the road twisted
through a muddy swale. Men from VillainÕs reserve hurried forward to help them dig out,
and while Rosvita waited on a patch of higher and drier ground she saw a familiar Eagle
ride past. 
ÒI beg you, Eagle!Ó she called. ÒWhat news?Ó 
The young woman reined her horse aside. ÒThe vanguard has set camp for the night, my
lady. The king has decreed that the army must not get separated lest the Eika attack us in
pieces.Ó She glanced nervously back the way she had come. ÒIÕm riding a message for
Princess Sapientia, my lady.Ó 
ÒI wonÕt keep you long.Ó She could see by the EagleÕs expression that she wanted to
ride on but dared not disobey. ÒA few moments of your time wonÕt harm your errand, I trust.
Hanna, is it not?Ó The young woman nodded. She had a clean, strong face and wonderfully
pale hair the color of old straw. ÒI recall your comrade, Liath, once had a bookÑÓ 
Hanna blanched. ÒThe book!Ó She glanced around like an animal seeking a safe path
out of a burning forest. The horse minced under her, and she reined it back with the studied
if somewhat awkward determination of a woman who has come late to riding and means to
master it. 
ÒI see you know of which book I speak. Did she steal it from Father Hugh?Ó 
ÒNever!Ó No one Rosvita knew could feign this kind of passion, and surety. ÒIt was
never his. He stole it from her, just as he stole her freedom from her when she was
helpless.Ó 
ÒHelpless?Ó 
ÒHer da died leaving debts, and thenÑÓ 
ÒThat can scarcely be called helpless, if she was of an age to take on the debts as his
heir. But that is not my question, Eagle.Ó 
ÒAlways the book,Ó muttered Hanna. The book clearly had a long and interesting
history, and HannaÕs reaction only made Rosvita more determined to discover the truth. ÒI
swear to you by Our Lord and Lady and by the honor and virtue of the blessed Daisan that

the book is LiathÕs, not Father HughÕs. It belonged to her da before her, and he gave it to
her.Ó 
It was an impressive oath. ÒBut if Liath was Father HughÕs slave because he bought out
her debt price, then anything she had became his.Ó 
ÒShe didnÕt have it when he bought her. It wasnÕt included in the tally of debts and
holdings. I hid it for her. Ai, Lady!Ó She cursed, words learned from the soldiers, no doubt,
and then flushed. ÒI beg your pardon, my lady.Ó 
ÒYou must address me as Sister Rosvita, my child.Ó 
ÒYes, my lady. May I ask you a question, my lady?Ó 
Rosvita almost laughed out loud. May I ask you a question? Yet at the same time she
refused to acknowledge the Tightness of the law. How could anyone possibly argue that
Father Hugh had stolen LiathÕs freedom if he had paid the debt price legally? 
ÒWhy do you care aboutÑÓ And then, shuttering suddenly, her expression closed down
and she looked away. ÒMay I go on with my errand, my lady?Ó 
Rosvita sighed. ÒYou may go.Ó Of course she had been about to ask why Rosvita cared
about the book; but evidently she believed she already knew the answer. 
Had an injustice been done? Yet the tale Father Hugh told was different in no particular
except that of justice. Who was in the right? Whose claim would God defend? 
Brother Fortunatus struggled up from the mired wagons, his robes sloppy with mud.
ÒHere is a stool, Sister Rosvita.Ó 
ÒYou surprise me, Brother! For all your gossip, you have a kind heart within.Ó But she
sat gratefully, and he only chuckled and went back to oversee the soldiers trying to unstick
the wagons. 
After a time the wagons lurched on, all but the one which was hopelessly bogged down,
sunk to the axles in muck. Its contents were divided between other wagons or given to
servants to carry on their backs. By dusk they had caught up with the main group. 
Sentries riddled the forest on either side of the road. Trees had been chopped down to
form barriers in case of a raid, but beyond that Rosvita could see little of the disposition of
the camp. She and the other clerics were shown to the kingÕs pavilion, which lay snug in the
center of the sprawling camp, but although Princess Sapientia attended her father, talking
excitedly about the coming battle, Father Hugh did not. It took no effort for Rosvita to ease
herself away from the group gathered there, to gain directions to that part of the camp where
those soldiers under SapientiaÕs command had staked out a position. By this time it was
dark, but she had a single attendant with a torch and, as well, the moon was almost full, now
rising over the tree-tops. Its light streamed through the trees onto a broad clearing where
SapientiaÕs servants had set up her traveling tent. 
Father Hugh knelt below the awning, unattended except by a few distant guards who
chatted around a campfire. Here it was calm and quiet. 
Hugh knelt on a carpet, lush grass crushed beneath its edges. He was praying. Where
was the book? 
Hidden in the darkness, she remained anonymous. Any lady or captain went attended by
servant and torch in such a place as this and, in addition, she took care to stand just outside
the flameÕs corona so he couldnÕt recognize her clericÕs robes. She watched and
searched . . . And found it thrust under his left knee, almost hidden by a fold in his robes. 
He finished his prayers, sat back, and slid the book forward into the light cast by twin
lanterns. The distant croaking of frogs in an unseen pool scored the night with a chatter no
less intense than that of hundreds of soldiers whispering of the battle to come and the fury of
the Eika. He opened it delicately. 
Something lay within there, something she was not meant to see. She knew it in her
bones. Did Liath steal the book from Hugh, or Hugh from Liath? Should she believe the
testimony of the Eagles or that of a margraveÕs son now sworn to the church? 
 Suddenly he twitched, closed the book, sat back, and looked out into the darkness
toward her. 

An eddy in the breeze swirled around her as suddenly as a roiling current turns a boat in
the water. The sensation that Hugh could see her, that he knew she, Rosvita, was there
when by no possible natural means he ought to be able to, struck her so forcibly that without
meaning to she brushed her attendant on the arm and retreated. 
That fast. 
Only when she was back at the kingÕs tent, when the first sip of ale cooled her throat, did
she wonder why she had fled, and if it had been her own choice to do so. 
5
Ivar hooked his feet under the bench and yawned. If he slid his feet forward in his sandals,
he could rub his toes along the grain of the wood floor. Sweat prickled on his neck where the
heat of the sun washed his back. At the front of the room, the schoolmaster droned on about
the Homilies of the illustrious skopos, Gregoria, called ÒThe Great.Ó 
The slow haze of summer heat smothered the room. Behind, the new first-year novices
sat very quiet indeed; maybe they had fallen asleep. Ivar didnÕt dare turn to look because
that would attract Master Pursed-LipÕs attention. On the benches in front, Lord Reginar and
his pack bent to their task diligently. 
Their numbers had been reduced by one this spring when the unfortunate death of one
ladÕs two elder sisters in a Quman road had left him as his motherÕs only remaining heir.
Lord Reginar had railed bitterly against the fate that had deposited him in the cloister while
leaving his elder brothers free to fight the barbarians, a tirade that had for the first time given
Ivar some sympathy for the arrogant young lord. But his complaints had only precipitated a
private interview with his aunt, Mother Scholastica, after which he had emerged chastened
and so obediently humble that Ivar and his comrades wondered if the Mother Abbess had
actually worked magic on him. 
Ivar yawned again. Heat sapped all energy from his limbs, and the schoolmasterÕs voice
grated on him as annoyingly as the ever-present tickling of flies. From outside he heard the
barking of dogs and the neigh of a horse. The monastery kept few horses, so perhaps
visitors had come to stay in the guest house, either to worship in the church or merely to
spend a night before traveling on. But he couldnÕt bring himself to fret, as he once would
have, at the idea that these unseen people beyond had leave to go out into the world at will. 
 ¡°What is the world,Ó Tallin had asked, Òcompared to the sacrifice made by the
blessed Daisan? How little do our small jealousies and selfish desires mean next to his
agony, suffered on our behalf!Ó 
A distant if familiar voiceÑhis own self of a year ago-nagged at him sometimes. What
about Liath? What about his promise to Liath? But there was nothing he could do about
Liath, no court of higher appeal he could make than to his fatherÕs authority; his mother had
died years before and any inheritance she might have passed on to him had been
confiscated soon after her death by her siblings. 
Like Ermanrich, he had become resigned to his fate. 
He glanced sidelong at his comrades. 
Baldwin sat with chin cupped on hand and stared atten- lively at the schoolmaster
although Ivar knew him well enough by now to recognize that look as one of daydreaming.
Ermanrich sneezed, then wiped his nose on his sleeve and resumed fiddling with his stylus.
Even Sigfrid was restless; he had a habit of playing with the tip of his ear with his left hand
when he was thinking about something other than what went on in front of him. 
Ai, Lady. Ivar knew what they were thinking about. He I knew who they were thinking
about, all of them. 
The door to the schoolroom creaked open. As the schoolmaster faltered, every head
canted up to see who had i interrupted. Brother Methodius came into the room, his
expression so dour that Ivar had a sudden horrible fear that the old queen, whose illness had
taken a turn for the worse, had actually died. 

Methodius called the schoolmaster aside. A low conversation ensued. Ivar stretched his
shoulders and then regarded the words inscribed in the tablet before him: docet, docuit,
docebit. Thinking of Tallia, he wrote, nos in veritate docuerat. ¡°She had instructed us in the
truth.Ó 
Baldwin kicked his foot. Ivar started and looked up to see Brother Methodius signing to
them: Come, in silence. He stood obediently and followed the others out of the room and
down the stair, but it became immediately apparent that only he, Baldwin, Sigfrid, and
Ermanrich had been singled out. Perhaps Sigfrid knew why, or Ermanrich had heard
something from his cousin, but Ivar dared not ask, I not when Brother Methodius had already
enjoined them to silence. 
But quickly enough he began to fear the worst: Methodius led them to Mother
ScholasticaÕs study and ushered them inside, then took up a station beside the door as a
jailer bars an escape route from his prisoners. No one else was in the room. 
Both shutters in the room stood wide, and dust motes trailed through the sunlight.
Outside, a nun worked in the herb garden. From this angle Ivar could not tell if she was
weeding or harvesting, only see the curve of her back and the stately, measured movements
of a soul at peace with her place in the world and her understanding of God. 
Ivar was not at peace. 
Baldwin tugged surreptitiously at IvarÕs robe and angled his head, a slight jerk to the
right. There, through an open door, another room could be seen with the base of a simple
bed in view. There the old queen lay, failing fastÑor so rumor had it. A robed figure, shawl
cast over her head, knelt at the foot of the bed with her hands clasped in prayer. Ivar made a
noise in his throat, surprised. Even with the shawl covering her wheat-colored hair, he knew
her posture in prayer intimately by now; he dreamed of it at night. 
Suddenly Mother Scholastica stepped into view, concealing Tallia as she crossed the
threshold and closed the door behind her. The latch fell into place with an audible click. All
four novices dropped at once to their knees in an attitude of humility. Ivar heard her walk
across the room and settle into her chair. Crickets drowsed outside, their lazy rhythms
punctuated by a sudden burst of song from a wren. 
ÒHeresy,Ó said Mother Scholastica. 
They all four, as one, looked up guiltily at her. But she said nothing more, and her face
remained as still as if it were graven in stone as she regarded them in silence. Behind her, a
blackbird flitted to perch on the windowsill. He wore his black plumage as boldly as any
proud soldier wore his tabard, marked by a bright orange bill and an orange ring around his
keen eye. He hopped along the sill as they stared. Ermanrich coughed, and the bird took
wing, fluttering away into the garden. 
ÒYou have all been contaminated by the words of a girl who is not even sworn to the
church. Is this not so? Will you swear before me that you have not been tainted by her false
preaching? Will you swear that her false vision of the blessed Daisan has not tempted
you?Ó 
Each word rang like the iron-shod hooves of a warhorse charging to battle. Ivar cowered
under the weight of her outrage. Ermanrich sniveled. With his hands clasped before him and
his head bowed modestly, Baldwin looked the very picture of a saintly penitentÑhis
goodness made manifest in his beautyÑpraying before God to be forgiven his sins, of which
there were few and all of them trivial. 
But not one of themÑnot even her favored young scholar, Sigfrid, promised at age six to a
life of learning within the arms of the churchÑcrept forward to swear what she asked. 
They could not. 
They had heard Tallia speak of her visions. They had seen with their own eyes the marks
of flaying on her skin, the stigmata that mimicked the wounds borne by the blessed Daisan
in His trial of agony. 
They had witnessed the miracle of the rose. 
Mother Scholastica rose from her chair like the very angel of God rising to strike down the

wicked. ÒDo not tell me that you believe what she has told you? That you profess this
heresy yourself? Lady and Lord preserve us!Ó 
ÒI-I pray you, Mother,Ó began Sigfrid, stuttering slightly. His voice was hesitant, and he
was pale. ÒIf you only listened to what Lady Tallia teaches, if you had seen the miracle as
we did... Surely the good biscops at the Synod of Addai understood the matter wrongly
when they passed judgment on this matter. It was over three hundred years ago. They were
misled byÑÒ
¡°Silence!Ó 
Even Baldwin flinched back. 
ÒChildren.Ó Thus did she set them in their place. ÒDo you not understand that the
punishment for heresy is death?Ó 
But Sigfrid had a stubborn streak in him, hard to see beneath his unfeigned modesty. He
moved through the world with eyes for nothing but books and learning, but once fastened to
an idea, he did not let go of it. ÒIt is better to speak the truth and die than to keep silence
and live.Ó 
 ÒA miracle!Ó said Brother Methodius suddenly, and with deep disdain, although Mother
Scholastica had not given him leave to speak. ÒRoses grew in that courtyard before we
moved them to make way for the fence. Which has not done its duty!Ó 
ÒNay, Brother, do not blame the fence. It has served God and its purpose well enough
until now, and will continue to do so. It is the taint of heresy that has planted its seed in the
ranks of these novices. But now that we know how far it has spread, we can uproot it. These
four alone among the young men are stained. They are to enter seclusion. Brother, you will
watch over them, see that they speak to no one else, until they are sent away.Ó 
ÒIndeed, I will,Ó said Brother Methodius with such emphasis that Ivar felt a cold tremor of
doom in his heart. Brother Methodius, a small man of middle years whose scholarship was
greatly respected although he was only a man, and whose calm steadiness in the face of
emergency was legend, could be counted on to fulfill his promises. 
ÒSent away?Ó asked Baldwin, saintly posture crumbling. ÒYouÕre sending us home? I
beg you, MotherÑÒ
¡°The time for obedience came and went,Ó was her sharp retort, cutting off his pleading. 
Ermanrich grunted, hiding his thoughts. Sigfrid had his head bowed so deeply that Ivar
couldnÕt see his face. 
Ivar thought of home, but it meant nothing to him now. What would he do there? Go
hunting? Fight the Eika? Marry an heiress? Seek an estate of his own in the marchlands? 
After hearing TalliaÕs words, after seeing the miracle, these occupations seemed
so...trivial. No matter what Brother Methodius said about the rosebushes, Ivar knew a
miracle when he saw one. And he had seen one. Of course Mother Scholastica and Brother
Methodius did not want this miracle to be true, because it would overturn everything their
faith was based on. 
They believed in the Ekstasis, when the blessed Daisan had fasted and prayed for seven
days seeking redemption for all humanity and the Lord and Lady in Their mercy had
conveyed him directly to heaven. They did not want to believe that the blessed Daisan had
suffered and died on this Earth and been redeemed by the LadyÕs power because he
alone of all things on Earth was untainted by darkness, because he was the Son of God,
She who is Mother of all life. 
ÒYou will not be sent home,Ó said Mother Scholastica without any softening in tone or
expression. ÒEach one will be sent to a different place. This taint is a disease that has
affected all of you together. A flock of sheep is more easily brought to ruin when there is one
foolish and reckless creature among them ready to leap off the cliff while the others follow.
What you feel now is only a passing fancy. With enough hard labor, seclusion, and prayer
you will find your way back to the truth. Be assured that the Fathers of those establishments
to which we will commend you will be warned of the taint you carry with you. They will watch
you carefully, and compassionately, to see that you do not spread the disease to others and

that you are freed from it in the end.Ó 
Ermanrich had started sniveling again. ÒWhat about my cousin, Hathumod?Ó His nose
had flushed bright red. 
ÒShe has her own destination. It is not for you to know.Ó She nodded toward Methodius,
who lifted a hand for silence. Ermanrich choked down his sniffles, sneezed, and wiped his
eyes. Baldwin was trembling. Ivar felt nothing except a tingling in his knees; one side of his
left foot had gone numb. 
ÒErmanrich will journey to the abbey of Firsebarg. Baldwin will become one of the
brothers at St. Galle.Ó Baldwin caught the barest exhalation, like relief, in his throat. ÒIvar
will be dedicated to the monastery founded in the name of St. Walaricus the Martyr.Ó 
Ermanrich gasped. ÒBut thatÕs all the way east, in the marchlands.Ó 
ÒNay,Ó murmured Baldwin, Òfarther even than that. It lies in Rederii territory, outside of
the kingdom.Ó 
ÒHush,Ó said Mother Scholastica, her tone more of a threat for its softness. ÒYou have
not been given leave to speak. 
ÒSigfrid,Ó continued Brother Methodius in the same cool voice, Òwill remain here at
Quedlinhame, under our guidance.Ó 
Cast to the four winds: Ermanrich to the west, all the way into Varingia, Baldwin south to
the mountains of Way, and himself east beyond the marchlands into barbarian country, a
dangerous place in the best of times. 
ÒBut what of Tallia?Ó asked Sigfrid. Lifting his gaze from his hands, he wore a resolute
expression. Of them all, Sigfrid had remained most skeptical, and most torn, and yet his
belief, once won, was probably unshakable. Ai, Lady, thought Ivar with a stab of foreboding,
what would become of poor Sigfrid without his three comrades to look after him? 
But at this moment Mother Scholastica looked kindly upon her favorite novice, even one
who had disobeyed her order for silence. However severely she looked upon the others with
her hair covered and her robes sweeping to the floor in all their white splendor, with her
golden torque at her neck to remind them all of her earthly power and the abbessÕ ring on
her finger as a mark of GodÕs favor and authority, even her stern face softened when she
looked upon Sigfrid. ÒHer fate is no business of yours, child. She has no place within these
walls. The king may deal with her as he sees fit.Ó 
Sigfrid cast his eyes dutifully to the ground again and said nothing more. 
Ivar did not know what to think. He tried to think of Liath, but she slipped away. She had
slipped away long ago, but Tallia had remained. Tallia had wanted to remain and Liath had
not; she had not even been willing to escape with him. She had not had faith. When he
thought of her, he remembered keenly the mystery of her, for she was not beautiful in an
expected way but rather she was like no woman he had ever seen before. He remembered
the way she had a warmth about her that drew the eye and held it; he knew he still loved her.
But did not the blessed Daisan say that lust was a kind of false love and that it was only true
love whose peace lasted until the end of days? It was not TalliaÕs body he dreamed of at
night but the zealous fierceness of her passion. He wanted to hold on to so fierce a love. 
The murmur of voices sounded beyond the door. It cracked, swaying open, and Brother
Methodius stepped outside. A moment later he returned together with the sister
guest-master, a normally unflappable woman who now looked flustered. 
 ÒI pray your pardon for this interruption, Mother,Ó said the sister guest-master, glancing
at the novices with a frown. 
ÒYou would not come if you had no reason to. What is it?Ó 
ÒYou know of our guests, who sent a servant ahead this morning to warn of their
coming?Ó 
Mother Scholastica nodded. She took up her owl feather quill and set it to lie parallel to
the parchment leaves on which she had been writing. ÒAll was ready for them, as befit their
rank?Ó 
ÒOf course, Mother!Ó 

The abbess glanced up, evidently startled by this evidence that the guest-master was so
shaken by the turmoil that had driven her here, to this study, that she could not respond with
humor to this mild sally. ÒRest easy, Sister. I have no doubt they, and their mistress, return
to the kingÕs progress. Indeed!Ó She looked at Brother Methodius and as one mind with
two bodies they looked together toward the closed door that let onto the sickroom of the old
queen. ÒShe can take Tallia back with her.Ó 
ÒAnd Ivar as well,Ó added Methodius, Òsince she will eventually return east. Then we
can charge her with the ladÕs safety, and her own people will make sure he reaches St.
Walaricus safely.Ó 
ÒYes. I will warn her myself of the heresy, and she will know to watch out for it and to keep
them isolated from those weak of heart who might be tempted.Ó 
Still Ivar heard voices outside, one louder than the rest, impatient and startlingly loud in
the quiet of the cloistered grounds where silence and humility reigned. 
The sister guest-master gestured helplessly toward the door, even now swaying open
again. ÒBut she waits outside, Mother. Now. I could not dissuade her though I told her you
were in the midst of a conference of grave importance. Though no other would be so
brash...Ó Here she faltered, recalling prudence and the strictures of a woman sworn to the
church. ÒShe claims to have other businessÑurgent businessÑwith you.Ó 
ÒWith me?Ó It was so rare to see Mother Scholastica surprised that Ivar forgot for an
instant his own troubles and his own desires. Urgent business? 
The door was flung open. She had not waited outside. 
Ai, Lady, had she no respect for the authority of the church at all? 
She came in at the head of a troop of servants, lords, ladies, and richly dressed
stewards, a veritable herd of them. All laughed and chattered and then, belatedly, recalled
the respect due to a formidable abbess who was also the sister of the king. All bowed in
some manner, or knelt as need be. All but her. Ivar stared, mouth agape. 
Oh, God,Ó whispered Baldwin beside him, his voice barely audible. ÒGod, I pray You,
spare me this.Ó 
She was a great lady of middle years, a fine noblewoman dressed in great state, almost
as if she were a kingÕs sister herself. She had height, strength, vigor, and much silver in her
hair; no doubt she had children older than the young men kneeling on the floor, and perhaps
a grandchild besides. She was not unhandsome, and she wore the arrogance of a great the
realm as easily as she wore a light summer cloak, trimmed with a cunning embroidery of
birds and flowers, over her riding tunic and gold-braided leggings, but she did not look
particularly likable. No doubt she cared little whether she was liked; nobles such as she
demanded respect and the honor due to their position, nothing more, nothing less. 
ÒWho is it?Ó hissed Ermanrich from IvarÕs other side. 
ÒMargrave Judith,Ó said Mother Scholastica curtly. She did not incline her head in
greeting. Margrave Judith made no obeisance. 
Baldwin made a soft choking noise, as though a bone had caught in his throat. He had
gone paleÑalthough in Baldwin not even fear could dim his unfortunate beauty. 
ÒI greet you,Ó continued Mother Scholastica in the same crisp fashion, Òand offer you
the hospitality of Quedlinhame. You are here on your way to King HenryÕs progress? I fear
Queen Mathilda is too ill to receive visitors.Ó 
ÒI am grieved to hear it and I will pray for her quick recovery.Ó Margrave Judith spoke
with the tone of a woman who always gets what she wants, when she wants it. ÒBut I have
other business at Quedlinhame. Indeed, a matter dear to my heart for I am certainly now old
enough and powerful enough and with heirs enough to suit myself in such a matter.Ó 
HughÕs mother. Ivar could see nothing of the son in her except in height and in the
almost contemptuous imperious-ness with which she regarded the abbess. 
Baldwin stirred beside him like a leaf shaken in a strong wind. 
Mother Scholastica lifted a hand, palm up, to encourage the margrave to go on, but
instead the margrave turned and, as a basilisk fixes its prey with a fateful gaze before i

strikes, she looked directly at Baldwin. 
ÒI have come,Ó she said, Òfor my bridegroom.Ó 
Baldwin burst into tears. 
6
Lavastine had chosen to camp on a low hill about a league from Gent. He stood with a
hand on AlainÕs shoulder as they looked out over fields long since gone to riot with
half-grown wheat and barley struggling to lift their heads above weeds and grass. Herds of
cattle and sheep could be seen in the distance, but all had been moved a good way from
LavastineÕs position. The Eika knew they were here. 
ÒDo you think the Eika will let us wait?Ó 
Lavastine did not reply at once. Below, the soldiers had started digging a trench about
halfway up the hill. The ring of axes sounded from above them where, at the level height of
the hill, a copse of trees was being chopped down. 
ÒLook there.Ó Lavastine indicated the lay of fields before them and the distant herds.
ÒTheyÕve been grazed extensively. The Eika have turned all this good farmland into
pasture. Strange, that they are like to us in many ways and yet so unlike.Ó The eastern
shore lay gray-blue, with clouds streaking the horizon and tendrils of mist streaming up along
the riverÕs bank especially around the distant city walls and the square cathedral tower.
ÒCome.Ó 
ÒFather, is it wise for me to attend a war council? What if the Eika prince sees my life in
his dreams just as I see his in the hours when I sleep?Ó 
Behind Lavastine the sun sank toward the horizon, de-marked here by the tops of trees
ranged along the ridgetops that signaled the start of hilly country lying above the river plain.
Fires burned, smoke curling up into the sky, a clear beacon of their presence. Alain smelled
meat cboking and with that sudden sharp dislocation of his senses, he could hear the hiss of
the fire and taste the juices dripping down to snap and sizzle on wood burned down into
red-hot coals. Flies swarmed over offal from the slaughter of cattle, and he twitched and
tried to brush them off his arms before he stopped himself; the trash heap was well out of
sight of the countÕs pavilion. Fifth Brother had given him the gift of preternaturally keen
sensesÑjust as he had, with that exchange of blood so many months ago, given Alain the
ability to dream snatches of his life. 
Lavastine had been staring eastward, examining the city, which was now almost lost in a
haze made of equal parts river mist and twilight. His smile was as thin as the gleam of the
distant river. ÒYou will attend the council as befits a young lord who will one day hold great
responsibility as the Count of Lavas.Ó When he used this tone, Alain knew better than to
argue. 
They walked together back to the pavilion, where the captains of his army waited for him
under the awning. Lavastine sat and motioned to Alain to sit in the camp chair at his right.
Everyone else remained standing, even Lord Geoffrey, whose bland gaze made Alain
nervous. 
Alain studied the men and one woman ranged before them. LavastineÕs captain stood
steady at the countÕs left side, of course, a trustworthy man and a good soldier. Lord
Geoffrey had acquitted himself honorably at his cousinÕs side two years ago when they
turned back the Eika threat on the northwest coast; surely he would do as much now, when
the stakes were so high. Lord Wichman had months of experience fighting these Eika, but
he was reckless and arrogant and chafed under LavastineÕs ruleÑand yet under
LavastineÕs rule he remained. Biscop ConstanceÕs captain, sent in her place, was a son
of the Countess of Autun; Lord Dedi was a man near to LavastineÕs age, weary-looking,
laconic, and with a sure hand over his soldiers. Duchess Liutgard of Fesse had sent a
distant cousin with a troop of mounted cavalry; this young woman had a glance like the edge
of a sword and had gotten in at least three fist-fights on the way here, once breaking the

nose of a drunken young lordÑone of WichmanÕs retainersÑwho had asked her why she
fought instead of bred. Alain suspected that Lord Wichman admired her, although of course
he could not importune a noblewoman with as little thought for the consequences as he
could a freeholderÕs daughter. 
Several sergeants who commanded units of milites, freeholders massed as infantry,
stood in the background. One slapped at a fly. 
Lavastine whistled, and the great black hounds padded forward. Old Terror draped
himself over the countÕs feet while Ardent, Bliss, Fear, and Steadfast thrust their muzzles
into his hands seeking a pat on the head before they finally settled down. Sorrow and Rage
sat on either side of Alain, and Good Cheer lay down heavily on AlainÕs boots. Arrayed so,
they presented a formidable entourage. 
The count glanced at Alain, then set his hands on his mail-clad knees, silent for a moment
as he met the gaze of each of the captains standing in his council. Stout-hearted, or at least
foolhardy, none of them flinched from that gaze . . . only Alain. 
Ai, Lady, was it wise for him to sit in on this council and hear LavastineÕs plans? But he
dared not go against his fatherÕs wishesÑeven if it meant that Fifth Son might use what he
learned here against Lavastine and his army. Even if it meant that the Eika prince would see
the countÕs even, intelligent gaze in his dreams tonight. 
Having taken the measure of his captains, Lavastine went on. ÒWe know a score of Eika
clans hold the city under the leadership of their chieftain, Bloodheart. Given all we have
heard from Lord Wichman, who has fought them bravely these past monthsÑÓ He paused
here to indicate the young lord, who preened at this mention and looked sidelong at Lady
Amalia to make sure she had heard. ÒÑand from the testimony of the refugees and of our
own scouts, we must assume the Eika force outnumbers our own. We must also assume
Bloodheart knows this as well.Ó 
ÒWe havenÕt seen any Eika scouts,Ó protested Lady Amalia. ÒFor I would have ridden
them down and stuck them like the dogs they are had I seen any.Ó 
Wichman snorted. ÒYou havenÕt met the EikaÑor their dogs. That we see no Eika
doesnÕt mean they arenÕt there.Ó 
ÒMagic and illusion! I havenÕt seen such, nor do I believe it exists. Savages canÕt
control magic.Ó 
ÒYouÕll see it soon enough, Lady DoubtfulÑ!Ó 
Lavastine lifted a hand and gained their silence, although Wichman shifted restively, only
half listening now as he brooded over the bold and prideful Lady Amalia, who did not deign
to look at him. Her attention was reserved for the count. ÒBloodheart also knows that we
wait for the host of His Majesty, King Henry, who will arrive soon by swift march, Lord willing.
I think Bloodheart will not with draw his army while he still believes he can bleed these lands,
and for all of these reasons we must be vigilant and expect that great deeds await us.Ó 
He regarded his captains, then looked past them to the sergeants standing quietly at their
backs. ÒThrough the night we must dig a stockade. I want all those fitted to the work to labor
in shifts through the night until we have an earth palisade and a good deep ditch to protect
us against an Eika attack. Those who are not working must rest. Our victory will come about
through stout hearts and strong arms, and by the blessing of God, may They smile on this
enterprise and grant us triumph in this place.Ó With that, Lavastine rose as a sign of
dismissal. ÒGo to your places. I shall speak again with each of you before the night is
gone.Ó 
Lord Geoffrey hesitated as the others left. ÒIs this course of action wise? We should
attack while surprise is with us, or withdraw and await King Henry. That would be prudent.Ó 
The count waited in disapproving silence until Geoffrey began to look uncomfortable.
ÒDo you acknowledge my leadership, cousin, or reject it?Ó he demanded suddenly.
Flushed, Geoffrey knelt. ÒI ride with you, my lord.Ó ÒThen follow where I lead.Ó 
Geoffrey nodded in acquiescence and, with a final glance toward Alain, took himself off.
Only Lavastine, his captain, and Alain remained. 

The captain approached the count carefully, one eye on the houndsÑbut they only growled
softly at him and did not move. ÒYou know, my lord, that when I speak my mind it is from an
honest heart.Ó 
ÒThat is why I trust your advice,Ó replied Lavastine, and the merest quirk lifted his mouth,
as close as he ever came to showing amusement. ÒGo on.Ó 
ÒI advise that we withdraw back to Steleshame and wait there for the king and his army.
Then, if we unite our forces, the Eika will not be able to stand against us.Ó 
Lavastine and the captain were of a height, although the captain had broader shoulders
and the stocky build of a man who has marched much and hewn a great deal of wood. Old
Terror moved up beside him, sniffing at the captainÕs hand, and Alain knew then how brave
the captain truly was, for he did not flinch. 
ÒSit, Terror,Ó said Lavastine. ÒI think you for your council. I have great respect for your
knowledge of war, good captain, but we do not know how far behind us King Henry rides or
if he can ride to Gent at all. I have prayed that by some miracle we may welcome the king on
the field here, but since that is not to be, we must hold out here until he comesÑor until we
triumph through our own strength. I have given my word to take Gent.Ó 
ÒMy lord.Ó The captain coughed, looking uncomfortable, perhaps because the hounds
waited so close by. He glanced toward Alain, then seemed to flush and look away. Good
Cheer whined and thumped her tail. ÒMy lord, I pray that it is not your head that greets the
king from the walls of Gent. A vow may be broken if life and land are at stake.Ó 
ÒNay.Ó Lavastine turned to look out over the river plain. It was too dark now to see the
glint of river or the distant city walls, but the moon rose, full, gleaming in the mist that
swaddled the east. ÒThe value of an oath is far greater than the worldly gifts of life and land.
WeÕll speak more before the dawn. See now to your camp, and have faith.Ó 
To this the captain inclined his head obediently. ÒMy lord count,Ó he said to Lavastine,
and then, with a half turn, ÒMy lord Alain.Ó Without further words, he left. 
Was it truly wise to sit here and wait for the king with uncounted Eika nesting in Gent?
The captainÕs advice seemed prudent as dusk lowered over them and the eveningÕs wind
rose off the river. A corner of the pavilion came loose and began to flap, and a servant
hurried forward to bind it down. 
But the count seemed to know what he was doing. Then again, he always did. He had the
gift of a clear conscience and absolute conviction in his own judgment and, in most things,
he proved himself right. 
Lavastine turned to Alain as if he had completely forgotten the previous exchange.
ÒAlain, I want you to oversee the defenses here at the central portion of the camp. From the
top of the hill my banner can be seen by all the troops under my command. All shall rally here
should the day go ill for us.Ó 
ÒGo ill for us? But I thought you intended for us to wait here until King Henry arrives.Ó 
ÒSo I do.Ó LavastineÕs expression was shrouded as he glanced into the evening mist.
The huge moon had crested the low-lying mist and now washed the eastern sky with its light.
Alain could only pick out a few bright stars. ÒBut the Eika know we are here, and they are
not lacking in battle sense. We must be ready in case they attack us. If I fall, then our soldiers
must follow you.Ó 
ÒIf you fall!Ó 
Lavastine seemed not to have heard him. ÒIf the center is hit and the rampart and ditch
breached, then form the infantry into a wall of shields, spears, and axes. Against such a wall
the Eika will break in the same way surf breaks on a cliff. Should the shield wall breachÑare
you listening, Alain?Ó 
ÒY-yes, Father.Ó He was listening, but with horror more than anything. 
ÒAre you afraid, son?Ó the count asked, more gently. 
ÒY-yes, Father. I wouldnÕt lie to you, even about that.Ó 
The count reached out and with an odd, awkward gesture touched Alain on the cheek, a
brush more than a caress, almost as he would pat one of his beloved hounds. ÒThereÕs no

shame in being afraid, Alain. ThereÕs only shame if you let your fear cloud your good
judgment. Now then, listen carefully. You, and the men here in the center, will protect the
banner. Lady willing, you will know I am with you throughout. I will leave you Graymane as a
mount. I will ride the roan gelding.Ó 
ÒBut where will you be?Ó Alain demanded, confused and troubled by these orders. 
ÒI go now to inspect the camps and the work on the ditch and rampart.Ó 
Torches flamed below in a ring midway around the hill that rose like a bubble from the
fields below. Men worked diligently there in a silence punctuated by brief orders or sudden
laughter, and an occasional grunt as stones were hacked at, uncovered, and moved up to
reinforce the growing rampart of earth. Alain heard, as distantly as the flies, the stab of
shovels into the dirt, the spray of earth flung up onto the earthen rampart that would be their
first bulwark against an Eika attack. 
ÒDitch and wall will protect us,Ó murmured Lavastine, setting one hand on AlainÕs
shoulder and the other on TerrorÕs great head, Òbut it is our hearts and our determination
and our wits that will see us to victory. Remember that, Alain.Ó 
Leaving Alain with the hounds, he called his servants to him and went to inspect his
army. 
Alain called the hounds over and staked them out in a ring around the pavilion, all but
Sorrow and Rage, who sat placidly beside him. Then he stood for a while, gazing at the full
moon. Were those ragged shadows to the east the outline of GentÕs walls and towers? He
would see the city again if he slept. What would Fifth Son learn from him? What had
Lavastine told him that Bloodheart would wish to know? 
ÒI beg pardon, my lord Alain.Ó LavastineÕs captain appeared before him, inclining his
head respectfully. ÒThe men will work in shifts all night. We should have rampart and fosse
finished by dawn, though IÕm not sure we can have much faith in it. YouÕve seen them Eika,
my lord. Fought them, too, and killed your share.Ó He grinned, remembering the skirmish
last autumn, and his praise warmed AlainÕs heart and gave him courage. The captain
hadnÕt stayed so long at LavastineÕs side because he handed away praise to curry favor
for himself. Lavastine did not tolerate fools and sycophants; they did him no good. ÒThough
I pray to Our Lord that no such thing will be the case, IÕm still betting that the Eika will swarm
that wall like mice into a granary. Ai, well, your father the count knows what heÕs doing.Ó He
said it not to reassure himself but with complete confidence. ÒWeÕll leave three gates for
the mounted troops, each blocked by wagons. AllÕs proceeding as planned. IÕd advise you
to get some rest, my lord. When battle comes, you most of all will need your head clear.Ó 
Alain nodded. ÒVery good, Captain,Ó he said, but the words sounded lame. He felt
helpless and, what was worse, useless. Many of these men were veterans of numerous
campaigns against the Eika. Here, after a single battle in which he had killed a guivre that
was already wounded and probably dying and one skirmish in which heÕd been unable to
strike a blow and yet been praised for his killing, he was second in commandÑalbeit
watched over by an old veteran. 
Like the mail shirt he wore, the weight of this responsi bility weighed heavy on his
shoulders. But he had no one he could confide in, only the Eagle, and Lavastine had sent
her and a small contingent back to search for King Henry. Ai, Lady, he could not even
protect poor Liath. 
ÒCome now, my lord,Ó said the captain, who had not yet moved away. ÒI remember
when I was a lad. ThereÕs no use in worrying about the tide coming in, as itÕll come
whether you wish it to or no. Just get off the beach, thatÕs what my old dad always told
me.Ó 
Alain could not help but smile. ÒSpoken like my auntÑHe broke off, for it was still painful
to speak of Aunt BelÑhis aunt no longerÑbut the soldier only nodded and indicated to Alain
that the entrance to the pavilion lay open and servants waited to attend him. 
He had this responsibility now. He was LavastineÕs son and heir, and this night and in
the days to come, whether the Eika attacked or waited, he had his duty. 

Dismissing the captain, he went inside with Sorrow and Rage at his heels. He lay down
on a pallet, still in mail and tabard, with his helmet, sword, and shield beside him. Behind the
pavilion he heard horses snuffling, that group of riders under the command of the captain
who would remain with him here on the hill. His hand, drifting over the side, came to rest on
SorrowÕs head. Rage whined, turned a few tight circles, and settled down. 
Perhaps there would be no battle. Perhaps if Henry arrived in time, then peace might be
forged between Henry and Bloodheart. Perhaps Fifth Son dreamed of peace as well. 
But peace did not come to his dreams. 
Battered and still weakened by loss of blood, he sat as silent as stone in his chains and
listened as the Eika held a war council. His six dogs ringed him. They scratched at the
flagstone floor, sensing the excitement. Blood and death: At times like this Sanglant
wondered how much the dogs understood, how intelligent they really were. Voiceless they
might be, but they did not act mindlesslyÑyet neither had they the cunning of men, or of their
Eika masters. 
Bloodheart conferred with his son, the one in disgrace. 
ÒOne army,Ó said Bloodheart. 
ÒMany fewer in number than our own people, if my dreams are true dreams, and I believe
they are.Ó 
ÒSo you believe,Ó said Bloodheart. ÒWhat standard flies at the head of this army? That
of the king?Ó He leaned forward, claws extended, his great, scarred face a gleam of iron
and shadow. The scent of his anticipation lay sodden over the assembly of Eika soldiers. 
ÒBlack hounds on a silver field,Ó said the son. ÒA red eagle. A tower attended by
ravens.Ó 
Sanglant shut his eyes, fighting back the pain. If he shifted on the floor to find a more
comfortable position, stone scraped his flesh raw. His wounds had healed, licked clean by
his dogs, but the touch of Aoi magic had somehow scoured his senses so every touch of his
skin on stone or on the harsh coat of the dogs or on the coarse metal of his chains flamed
like fire through his body, every smellÑeven and especially his ownÑmade him reel, every
taste of such food as he could glean from the garbage tossed aside by Bloodheart and his
sons nauseated him. 
Black hounds on a silver field. That would be the Count of Lavas. This much he dredged
from his memory. A red eagle: Fesse. A tower attended by ravens: his aunt, Constance, if
indeed she still presided as biscop in Autun. 
But not King Henry. 
He shifted his shoulders to try their strength. The dogs, sensing his movement, growled
softly. 
Bloodheart sighed and sat back. ÒSo my scouts report also. The chieftain of this army is
not the king, then. Well enough. The king is coming, or so you report. And I sense him,
likewise, like a rot breathing in my bones.Ó When he grinned, his jewel-studded teeth
flashed in the light that lanced in low through the western windows. He looked toward his
prisoner. ÒBut he wonÕt arrive in time. A little army, this first one that troubles us.Ó He
fingered the bone flute at his belt, tugged it out, and lifted it to his lips. ÒIÕll chew up each
little army piecemeal, as it comes to me, and let the dogs fight over what remains. 
ÒAll but you.Ó Abruptly he jabbed at the son, who danced back and then had to slap
away the sudden assault of growling dogsÑBloodheartÕs pack, those who hadnÕt
transferred their allegiance to Sanglant. 
The Eika princeÕs own dogs bolted forward, teeth bared, but he kicked them back and,
slowly, all the dogs settled down while Bloodheart watched their interplay with unholy glee. 
¡°You! You returned here without my permission, and so you will taste no blood in the
coming battle. So will you remain behind, still in disgrace, to watch while your nest-brothers
run forth to the glory of slaughter.Ó 
The son did not protest this judgment, but an unfathomable expression flashed across his
sharp face before he retreated to the accompaniment of his brothersÕ howls and jeers. 

Bloodheart laughed, settling himself deep in his throne. He lifted his flute and began to
play while beyond, in the vast nave, the scrape and ring and grunt of Eika preparing for
battle filled the vault with reverberations as complex as those of a congregation singing a
hymn. 
Outside, like a pulsing echo, drums began to beat. 
7
Liath and ten lightly armed riders bearing spear and shield started south at dawn the
morning after the destruction of the Eika ship at the riverÕs mouth. They rode through woods
and fallow fields, many grazed, some growing wild after last yearÕs burning. Beside a
stream that drained downslope toward the Veser River they stopped to water and graze the
horses, and to eat. 
Soon they cut inland to avoid Eika patrols. The rough country above the river plain made
for hard going. They rode too deep in the woods, sundered now from the river bottoms by
the bluffs, to see the river or any indication that they neared Gent. 
When they stopped at nightfall, the cavalry captain took her aside. ÒHow far to Gent?Ó
he asked. 
ÒI donÕt know. A day or two from the riverÕs mouthÑthatÕs what Mistress Gisela told
usÑbut none survived in Steleshame whoÕd made the journey themselves and IÕm thinking
now that the dayÕs trip they mentioned from Gent to the sea was by boat, running with the
current.Ó 
These skirmishers had come from the county outside Autun, and swore allegiance to
Biscop Constance. Now, smiling wryly, Captain Ulric indicated the full moon rising through a
gap in the trees. ÒIf we can make our trail where thereÕs light enough to see, then perhaps
we can ride farther tonight. I donÕt like riding out here alone. God know the Eika might leap
out from behind any tree.Ó 
So, after a rest, they went on, nervous and watchful. 
It was a long night. 
In the predawn stillness, with the moon sliding below the trees, they groped their way
along an overgrown trail and came out to a burned farmstead. 
ÒI recognize this place,Ó said Liath, breath hissing between her teeth. She led them into
a meadow beyond the sad remains of buildings and there, in the clearing, she had light
enough to discern the landscape. 
ÒThis is the caveÕs mouth!Ó she exclaimed. ÒLook there!Ó The light on the eastern
horizon rimmed the bluff with a dim glow but its rocky slope lay still in darkness. ÒFrom the
height you can see the city. Who will follow me into the cave? IÕll need a torch once we get
inside.Ó 
None of the men seemed eager to follow her into the cave, but Captain Ulric picked out a
volunteer, left six men with the horses, and took another two to climb the bluff with him. 
ÒCome now, Erkanwulf,Ó she said to her companion, a slender young man with pale
hair, ÒI canÕt believe youÕd be afraid of the dark.Ó 
ÒAi, well, mistress,Ó he said politely but with a slight tremor in his voice, ÒIÕm not feared
of the dark. But my good mother did tell me that the old gods fled to the caves when the
deacons and fraters came to our country and drove them out of the villages and crossroads
and stone circles. How do I know that wasnÕt true in this land as well?Ó 
ÒI didnÕt see you flinch at fighting the Eika, friend. You dispatched one yourself, at the
riverÕs shore.Ó 
ÒSo I did, but theyÕre savages, arenÕt they? And they can die just like you and me can,
so thereÕs no reason to be feared of what is mortal.Ó She sensed him grin by his tone; it
was too dark to see. ÒUnless it has an ax and you donÕt, I suppose.Ó He chuckled,
perhaps recalling Sergeant Fell. But he followed Liath gamely enough as she thrust through
bushes and found the mouth of the cave. 

Setting flint to rock, Erkanwulf caught a spark and lit the pitch-soaked torch just as he
stepped inside. She sucked in breath, seeing the flame spit into existence. Could she have
lit it with the touch of her hand? It was still too dangerous for her to try. 
The young man had already gone forward, made bold by fire.  ÒSee here,Ó he called
back over his shoulder, his shadow writhing over the walls aas he moved into the back of the
cave.  ÒThereÕs no outlet. This must be the wrong cave.Ó 
ÒNo.Ó She shook herself free of this fruitless worrying; she couldnÕt unravel the mystery
of her own magic until she found a teacher. As Da always said: ¡°Harvest the wheat thatÕs
ripe instead of watching the shoots grow.Ó ¡°I know this is the right place.Ó Coming up
behind him, she stopped short. It was all rock, a rough wall of stone that curved back above
them, sealing them in... 
...and yet, wasnÕt there a kind of vibration to the wall, a disturbance in the barrier of
rock? 
ÒNo,Ó she said as it dissolved before her. ÒSee, there, you can see the break in the
wall,Ó she stepped forward as Erkanwulf gasped. 
ÒYouÕll walk right into the wallÑ!Ó 
She found the first step with her foot, poised there with the touch of air swirling up against
her like an echo of the riverÕs currents where the Veser met the sea. She smelled the dank
passages of stone, the dry scent of old earth, the holy remains of the dead who lay in the
cathedral crypt and, surely, the rank presence of the Eika in the cathedral itself and the
blood of all those who had died. 
Sanglant. And poor Manfred, and all the others who had fallen together with Gent. 
Erkanwulf gasped again. The torchÕs heat flamed against her back, and she shifted
sideways as he came up beside her. ÒBy our Lord! ItÕs as you said! IÕd never have seen it
with the shadows so deep here. Lady Above! Do you think the old spirits were hiding it from
us?Ó 
She turned back in time to see him retreat, face golden under the torchÕs light. He
looked all about himself as if he expected a peevish sprite to swoop down upon him with
elfshot nocked and ready to let fly. She laughed. ÒNay, friend Erkanwulf. Remember, I saw
the vision of St. Kristine with my own two eyes, and IÕll never forget it, so long as I live. I think
she hid the entrance so that only those in need could find it. Come on, then. WeÕve news to
take to Count LavastineÑÓ 
ÒAnd his army yet to find,Ó countered the young man as he followed her out. He snuffed
the torch, tossed it to his waiting fellows, and climbed the bluff after her. She could hear him
puffing and grunting as he scrambled, slipping on loose scree. Was that pounding his heavy
tread? 
As she reached the top, it hit her as the sound swirled around her like a breath of distant
wind off the river. It was not thunder or the pound of feet but rather the sound of Eika drums.
How could she hear them from this distanceÑunless the battle had already been joined? 
Captain Ulric and his two companions knelt on the ridge, looking eastward, all of them in
identical postures: hands flung up to shade their eyes from the glare of the rising sun. At
their feet, the hill dropped away precipitously to the river plain. Eastward, bright as a string
of jewels, lay the river, but although Liath knew where Gent must lie, the blinding glance of
the sun concealed it. 
ÒLook, there,Ó said Erkanwulf, pointing southeast. ÒDo you see that hill?Ó 
That hill: It lay somewhat south of their position and a short way out on the river plain. It
looked from this height more like a tumulus than a hill, treeless and bare at the height except
for banners and a handful of bright pavilions. 
ÒThatÕs the Lavas banner, and the tower of Autun,Ó said Erkanwulf. 
ÒYouÕre sure?Ó demanded Ulric, rising now. 
ÒWho else could it be? IÕve keen sight, you know that, Captain.Ó 
ÒThank God, then,Ó breathed the captain. 
The hill lay close enough that although the figures swarming round it looked small, she

could clearly see the earthworks, like a fallen coronet, that ringed it halfway down the slope.
LavastineÕs camp lay a good league west-southwest of Gent. Now, as the sun rose higher,
she could see the city itself and the river winding past it, tiny boats like childrenÕs toys
beached along the eastern shore. 
ÒThank God that theyÕre still here,Ó she asked, Òor that theyÕre here at all?Ó Liath
shaded her eyes. The drums pounded in her ears like distant surf threatening storm, like the
beat of the armyÕs heart. 
Ulric chuckled. ÒThank God that Lavastine hasnÕt taken the city without us. Else heÕd
get all the glory, and the cityÕs taxes for a tithe as his reward, no doubt.Ó 
Erkanwulf let out a sigh. ÒIÕd feared worse. I thought weÕd be as like to see the army
lying dead on theÑ
¡°Hush, boy,Ó broke in Ulric, drawing the Circle at his breast. ÒItÕs ill luck to speak of
such things.Ó 
ÒItÕs a peaceful day, at least,Ó retorted Erkanwulf. ÒYou canÕt have expected that.Ó 
ÒThe quiet before the storm,Ó said Ulrich ominously. 
ÒMore like the thunder before the storm!Ó said Liath. 
 No one said anything more. They all looked at her, puzzled, and then at the clear sky
above. 
ÒYou donÕt hear it,Ó she said suddenly. 
ÒHear what?Ó 
ÒThe drums!Ó 
ÒDrums?Ó 
None of them heard and none of them saw: In distant Gent, a league away, ants swarmed
out of the gates of the city. Except those werenÕt ants. 
In that moment she shut her eyes, swept by such a sickening tide of foreboding that she
staggered under its flood. Erkanwulf caught her by the elbow, and she opened her eyes,
shook him off, and spoke fiercely to the captain. 
ÒBy my EagleÕs sight, I swear to you, Captain, that I see what you cannot. The Eika are
marching out of their city even now to attack LavastineÕs army. We must ride to warn the
count. Now!Ó 
Perhaps it was her tone of voice. Perhaps it was the stories they had heard at
Steleshame of the horrific illusions that had marched alongside the Eika soldiers when the
savages had attacked the holding. Perhaps they had heard her own story of the fall of Gent,
retold endless times. 
No one argued, though Erkanwulf stared and stared eastward trying to see what she saw
until Ulric grabbed him by the arm and yanked him back. 
ÒCome, boy! You heard the Eagle!Ó 
No one heard the drums. No one saw the Eika coming. No one but her. She was the only
one who could warn LavastineÑand make him believe. 
IX THE FURY OF THE EIKA
1
Alain woke at dawn and scrambled outside to find his father sitting at his ease under the
awning, sipping wine. The count had unchained Terror, and the old hound rested his head
on LavastineÕs knee and gazed adoringly at his master. 
ÒDid you rest well?Ó Lavastine offered Alain the cup. 
ÒWell enough.Ó The wine hit AlainÕs stomach with a bracing flood of warmth. Rage
whined, scenting eastward. 
ÒDid you dream?Ó 
ÒJust nightmares of the Eika arming. Like locusts, swarming everywhere. But Fifth Son

did not leave the cathedral.Ó 
ÒIt seems the Eika intend no attack, then. Not this morning, at least. All lies at peace,Ó 
 ÒMy lord!Ó The captain hurried up. ÒA band of some dozen horsemen has been
sighted, riding hard from the north.Ó 
Lavastine jumped up and strode to the north corner of the hill. Alain thrust the cup into the
hand of a servant and hurried after him. He scrambled up onto the rough platform and from
there could clearly see the earthworks laid out below, ringing the hill, andÑto the northÑa
dozen or more riders galloping toward their position. As this group enveloped a pair of
waiting outriders, one rider slowed to pass on their news. At once the scouts turned and
followed the rest toward the hill. 
ÒThey ride with some urgency,Ó observed Lavastine calmly. He beckoned to a servant.
ÒMy arms. And another glass of wine.Ó Like Alain, he already wore sword and mail. 
ÒThatÕs Liath!Ó Alain saw scarlet flash in her EagleÕs cloak. 
Lavastine leaned down toward his captain. ÒBring the Eagle to me as soon as she
enters camp. Let the other captains assemble.Ó When he turned back to Alain, he regarded
the young man with a seriousness that made Alain flush with more than wineÑwith a dreadful
anticipation, a fluttering in his stomach. ÒNo matter what is said, or left unsaid, you must
trust me, Alain. Your part is to defend this hill.Ó His gaze shifted to encompass the expanse
of fields stretching eastward toward the river and Gent, which lay silent and peaceful under
the new sun. ÒHow quiet it is this morning,Ó he added softly. 
Voices swelled below, a hubbub of excited speech and shouting. The captain rode up the
hill, Liath right behind him. Her horse was foundering and, as soon as she dismounted, a
servant led it away. 
ÒMy lord count!Ó 
He lifted a hand for silence and counted his captains: Lord Geoffrey, Lord Wichman,
Lady Amalia, Lord Dedi of Autun. The sergeants had already assembled. ÒEagle, give us
your report.Ó 
Out it spilled so quickly that Alain could scarcely make sense of it: an illusion that
appeared as no illusion? the Eika attacking now? With each phrase she glanced east, her
expression so transparent that Alain thought he could read each least slight grimace or
widening of eyes. She was not as afraid of what she claimed to see as of how her news
would be received by her listeners. 
They all looked. They could not help it, her gaze drew their own so strongly toward the
plain lying bright and empty between their position and the distant city of Gent. 
There was nothing there, no army racing toward them, no drums beating to sound the
advance. 
Nothing but the quiet land under the morning sun. 
ÒAi, Lady,Ó she burst out at last, seeing their skeptical expressions. 
Alain stepped forward. 
Seeing him, she reached toward him like a supplicant. Sorrow and Rage, growling softly,
retreated behind him, and old Terror whined and slunk back behind Lavastine. ÒLord Alain!
You must believe me. TheyÕre halfway across the plains. TheyÕll overwhelm us if we
arenÕt ready for themÑif they donÕt overwhelm us with sheer numbers!Ó She grabbed
AlainÕs arm. Rage snapped at her just as Lavastine began to protest this liberty, but Alain
called Rage down and, with a look at his father, gained silence. ÒDonÕt you see?Ó she
cried, gesturing toward the east. 
He murmured under his breath. ÒI pray you, Lady of Battles, let me see with her sight. Let
me see with the inner heart, not the outer seeming.Ó 
In the late summer heat, waves of heat often rippled off the fields and rocks. It was like
that now, a distortion over the fields, an image of peace blurring and changing, dust rising in
a haze to cloud the sunÑ
There! Jogging at a ground-eating pace came the war bands of the Eika, drums
pounding at their backs, their shields a blur of blue and yellow. They had already covered

three quarters of the distance from city to camp; the haze of dust marked their passage. In
all there were a dozen or more units, each one marked out by spears decorated with
feathers, bones, and tattered strips of cloth braided into streamers. Each unit contained
many more than a hundred EikaÑand all had dogs loping beside them. 
ÒLord have mercy!Ó exclaimed Alain. ÒThere are at least three times as many of them
as of us!Ó 
ÒThereÕs no one there at all!Ó scoffed Lady Amalia. 
ÒAnd no illusion to see through,Ó added Lord Wichman. 
¡°That is the illusion,Ó said Liath, her tone ragged as she stared at Alain with hope flaring
in her eyes. 
Wichman snorted. ÒAi, IÕve had experience with these Eika,Ó he began, Òand there
was always some fearsome sight to be seenÑÓ He faltered as Count Lavastine moved up
beside Alain. 
ÒWhat do you see, son? Like the others, I see nothing.Ó 
Alain could only whisper. ÒItÕs true. What she says is true.Ó 
ÒThis is not what I had planned for,Ó said the count, as if to himself. Then, with no change
of expression, he turned to his captain. ÒTo arms! Sound the horn!Ó The captain signaled,
and at once the blare of the horn lifted, a high note caught in faint echoes off the distant
bluffs. The camp came alive with movement as soldiers prepared for battle and manned
both outer rampart at the base of the hill and the inner one near the top which used the slope
to best effect. 
Then, and only then, did the countÕs eyes widen with astonishment as he stared
eastward. His expression hardened as he examined the tide of Eika. He set a hand on
AlainÕs shoulder, and for the space of three breaths they stood thus, together, as the Eika
flooded toward them over the fields. Finally he turned even as the captains uttered oaths or
caught in gasps, at last seeing through the illusion. By now they could hear the howling of the
Eika dogs and the ululations of the screaming Eika. The drums shuddered like thunder
through the air. 
ÒMy captains!Ó Lavastine caught their attention and held it with his gaze and his posture.
A servant ran up beside the platform and handed his helmet and a cup of wine up to him.
This cup he passed among those assembled before him. 
ÒThere are more Eika than I hoped, but all is not lost. Our plan remains the same. Alain,
stay on the hill. You, and the bulk of our army, which holds the hill, are the anvil. I, with the
cavalry, will be the hammer. Had we more warning, we would have had more chance to
strike them unawares from the rearÑbut nevertheless our only hope is to use our cavalry to
destroy them on the field. Assemble your riders.Ó Each took a drink from the cup, pledging
their courage and strength, and left. Only LavastineÕs cap tain and the Eagle remained,
together with LavastineÕs personal servants, themselves armed and ready with shields
hitched across their backs and spears in hand. 
ÒAlain.Ó He touched the cup to his own lips and then handed it to Alain. ÒI will return to
you through the Eika host and meet you here. GodÕs grace upon you, son. Trust our
captain, who will remain beside you. Trust your own instincts. You are a born soldier.Ó 
He leaned forward and kissed Alain on the forehead. Stunned, Alain could only drop to
his knees before the count and grab his hand, to kiss it. 
ÒDo not kneel before me,Ó said the count irritably, lifting him up. ÒYou are my heir and
need kneel before no one but God.Ó 
ÒI will not fail you, Father,Ó said Alain, surprised he could speak at all. 
ÒOf course you wonÕt! Eagle, attend me.Ó 
Liath cast a glance over her shoulder, but only one, as she hurried after the count. The
hounds, barking, tails whipping with excitement, clustered around Alain as he watched them
go. 
The cavalry assembled on the western side of the hill, hidden from the Eika assaultÑor so
Liath prayed. She tried to estimate their numbers, perhaps three hundred in all. Behind, the

infantry who had dug into the hill numbered at most twice that many. As she moved down the
hill with the count, he inquired of the other business she had been about. 
ÒThe riverÕs mouth is chained. One Eika ship already has been destroyed. We found
the tunnel.Ó 
Lavastine watched as the units formed up under their banners: the black hounds of Lavas
behind him, the red eagle of Fesse behind Lady Amalia, Lord Wiehman and his men at the
head of the gold lion of Saony, Lord Dedi with the raven tower of Autun and the guivre of
Arconia. ÒHow far from here to the tunnel?Ó 
ÒI saw the Eika leave the gates of Gent and yet I arrived here before them.Ó She heard,
nearing their position, the beat of drums and a low shuddering roar. ÒIt lies just beyond that
bluff,Ó she lifted her hand to point, Òbeyond the small wood.Ó 
ÒYouÕve done well, Eagle.Ó 
Now he lifted a hand, seeing his cavalry in place. 
Ai, Lady. If only the count had waited in Steleshame, perhaps Henry would have come.
But he had had a plan, and yet, as plans often do, it had come to naught. He had planned to
meet the Eika in battle in the field, forcing their hand by moving siege engines into place
and then meeting their sally with his cavalry as his infantry used the tunnel to enter the city,
but now the opposite was true. His foot soldiers were pinned; to abandon his horses and
lead his cavalry soldiers, on foot, through the tunnel into Gent would condemn those on the
hill to annihilation. Yet surely the city had been emptied of Eika. A surprise attack from within
could take the city and probably hold it against an Eika army stuck outside the gatesÑbut by
then that army would have done their gruesome work at LavastineÕs camp, a camp
commanded by his only child. 
His people watched, expectant, as he paused before riding forth. They waited, three
hundred strong, horses shifting, spears waving against sky and the looming hill behind
them. 
He lowered his hand and, in silence except for the rumble of hooves, they moved out,
swinging wide to give themselves as much space as possible to maneuver. Above them,
from the hill, a roar of shouts followed by the clash of arms rolled across the valley like
thunder. 
The roar of the Eika host overwhelmed even the maddened beating of their drums as
they closed the distance. Alain stood at the top of the hill so that he could see his entire
force. 
ÒWhat is that?Ó he gasped, squinting toward Gent. It seemed to him a dome of fire
arched over and concealed the city, but surely no such thing could exist; it must be the sun
shining in his eyes. 
From below came the call to shoot, but the first volley of arrows had little effect against the
huge round shields or the tough hides of the Eika. Only a few dropped, among them a
handful of dogs. Arrows lodged in their arms or necks or quivered in their glittering mail
girdles, the metal ÒskirtsÓ woven of hundreds of interlinked rings of brass or ironÑbut still
they came on. 
In answer they sent a volley of spears, axes, and stones from their back ranks even as the
foremost Eika units swarmed onto the ramparts. Men braced behind earth and shield. 
The lead Eika leaped over the ditch onto the earthern walls and hacked at the palisade
stakes. A few of his comrades tried to slip between those stakes, turning shields sideways,
but spears thrust up through their armpits or stomachs and they died straddling the earthern
wall. To the left, a clot of Eika pressed hard against the wooden stakes, iron-tipped spears
forcing the shieldmen back from the rampart. Men-at-arms with spears dueled back, and a
small band of archers gathered behind the men-at-arms and riddled the Eika with arrows. 
Other Eika bands swarmed on all sides, trying to swamp the rampart from every
direction. Because the south slope of the hill was steep, the Eika had trouble maneuvering
up to the wall. From his platform, out of reach of arrow and spear, Alain saw the men there
tossing rocks and rolling logs into the Eika ranks. The north slope had a more gentle pitch

and here the Eika pressed hard against the north Ògate,Ó made of wagons rolled up
against a gap in the rampart. An Eika armed with a stone-bladed club leaped in a great
bound onto the wagon that sealed the gate and struck a man with such force the blow
shattered the manÕs shield and slammed him down to his knees. Already two arrows
protruded from the chest of the Eika. A dozen spears and swords wounded him. The
creature leaped again, arms outspread as if flying. A soldier thrust his spear upward, and
the weight of the EikaÕs fall drove the spear clean through its chest as the spearman
collapsed underneath its dead weight. More Eika clambered after him, screaming and
howling. 
ÒThere!Ó Alain cried as a hole opened in the eastern defense, but the captain was
already in motion sending rein to plug the gap. Was there nothing he could do? Only watch
as others fought, and bled, and died? 
Along the north wall, held by what remained of Lord WichmanÕs infantry, an able
sergeant with a long spear stayed close to the gate. His standard bearer leaped to and fro
shouting encouraging words of scripture and at one point dropped the standard over the
face of an Eika to confuse it as others set upon it with axes and swords. 
It seemed an eternity that Alain sat there, restraining himself. His father had told him to
wait until the time was right. If he acted too soon, there would be no reserve for when it was
truly needed. It was worse to stand and watch. If these men who were dying in order to
protect him knew that he could not strike a blow in battle and that in war he was a coward,
would they so willingly lay down their lives under his banner? Did he deserve their respect
and confidence? 
From the east rampart the sound of splintering wood signaled the breaking of the
stockade wall. Many logs, weakened by strokes of ax and sword or pulled up by Eika, split
or gave way as the weight of the Eika charge pushed into camp. On the south the line still
held, but on the north slope the wagons blocking the gate had been shattered. A pack of
Eika dogs bounded through the breach and over those men who now formed a shield wall
as they attempted to close the gap. 
Two dogs charged the gold lion banner of Saony. The standard bearer dropped the
standard to make a spear of it, and with a mace in his right hand he countercharged, but
one dog dodged nimbly aside and bowled the man over while the other grabbed the
standard in its teeth and shook it viciously. Still the man refused to yield the standard.
Splayed with his left hand gripping the banner-pole and the right arm fending off attack, he
lay helpless. 
ÒLord Alain.Ó The captain jumped up to the platform. AlainÕs horseÑhis fatherÕs
favorite gray gelding GraymaneÑwaited patiently beside. ÒTake your men to the north gate.
IÕll drive them off the east.Ó 
At last a decision had been made. Alain mounted and raised a hand, the only way to
communicate over the roar of battle surrounding them. He charged, two dozen men and
seven hounds behind him. 
At the north gate the weight of the Eika broke the line of shields. Men stumbled back to
leave a wide gap thick with Eika and their dogs. There came an Eika, grinning up at Alain in
a battle fury, his teeth studded with gems and his bone-white hair braided into a thick rope.
Alain leveled his lance and rode in, but it was like play, like a dream with no fury, no fire; he
charged for the sake of his men who died holding back the Eika, nothing more, nothing
less. 
The Eika stood its ground and at the last instant batted the lance aside and drove in
toward the geldingÕs neck with its stone-tipped spear. 
Alain reined sharply aside and the spearpoint passed through GraymaneÕs mane,
striking AlainÕs mailed right shoulder. The shaft of the spear splintered. The shock sent
Alain tumbling, his shield slapping into the EikaÕs face as he fell. He struck earth with a
slam, air driven from his lungs. A pack of dogs leaped on him, biting, ripping at his shield,
clawing and jumping over him. Only his mail saved him. He tried to reach for his sword, but it

lay twisted beneath him. He tried to roll, but a huge slavering dog landed on his chest,
slamming him back down, and lunged for his throat. 
Sorrow arrived first. His weight at full run slammed the Eika dog sideways, and Sorrow
pressed on, biting and clawing, heedless of a gash opened on his great black head. Then
Rage swept in, silent and deadly, and the Eika dog fell to lie twitching, hide opened in a
dozen places, its life bleeding away onto the dirt. 
Sorrow had already clamped down on the throat of another dog, twisting his massive
neck back and forth until the Eika dog died with a spasm. 
Then the other hounds charged in, a mass of black fur and fierce fighting that clouded
AlainÕs vision. He struggled up to his feet, drawing his sword. Tears streaked his face
beneath his helmet. 
ÒLady of Battles, forsake me not, I beg you.Ó 
He had never been so afraid in his life. Terror barked an alarm and Alain barely turned,
rising from his knees, in time to catch a blow from an Eika ax upon his shieldÑbut it drove
him back down to his knees. A spear stabbed past him, from behind, thrusting in the EikaÕs
face, shattering its gem-studded teeth. They came, his guard, forming up around him, crying
out to each other, calling Alain back. With an ax-blow one of the men severed an EikaÕs
hand at the wrist, and though the creature tried to retreat, howling in pain, the press of his
shield brothers forced him forward straight into Alain. 
Alain struck feebly at him, more reflex, more for his own defense. Ai, Lady, the savage
was helpless, disarmed now with foul greenish blood pumping from the wound. The
spearman struck again, catching the Eika at the throat and finishing him. As he fell, blood
gushing at AlainÕs feet, two more pushed forward. Alain could only fend off blows, hold hard
against the rush of Eika while his men with spears and axes did damage around him. 
ÒBack, Lord Alain!Ó they cried. ÒBack behind us!Ó 
Weeping with shame, he stumbled backward, the hounds following in among the legs of
his guard. The shield wall parted to let him into their ranks. 
All along the north face the line at the rampart gave in toward the center, and throughout
the camp LavastineÕs troops gave way from the wall to stand shoulder to shoulder against
the Eika tide. 
Alain prayed that his father would arrive soon. 
2
The heavy cavalry formed up in three open ranks, twenty paces between, with Lavastine
and his banner in the center of the lead rank. A line nearly a hundred horsemen wide swung
around the hill. Liath rode behind Lavastine. At first they advanced around the north side of
the hill at a trot. As the enemy came into full view, the first rank broke into a charge followed
by the second and third ranks. 
The banner of Lavas drove all the way into the back ranks of the Eika. The lances struck
high, hitting shields and heads, breaking through the Eika line in a hundred places.
Lavastine himself at the front bore onward, the steel of his sword winking in the morning sun
as he raised it between strokes. The second and third ranks thundered through behind him,
slaying the now disorganized Eika who had received the first charge. Liath followed
Lavastine and his guard and, as his charge slowed, she sheathed her sword and drew her
bow. Few of the horsemen fell at first, but as their charge slowed, the Eika began to mass
around any horseman who had become separated from his companions in the press, and
these poor souls were dragged off their mounts to disappear into the claws of the howling
Eika. 
Lord Wichman forged ahead, having learned this lesson from the Eika. Small pockets of
his men, under the banner of Saony, pressed on ever forward until they came around the
east side of the hill. Lady Amalia and her standard bearer had also pushed on deep into the
Eika forces, but as the troops from Fesse ground to a halt against stiff resistance, she and

her standard pressed on until they struggled alone, an island amidst a sea of Eika. 
There, Liath saw them, the red eagle banner of Fesse with a small knot of soldiers
surrounding Lady Amalia, all striking furiously around themselves as, one by one, their
horses staggered and collapsed or they themselves were dragged from their mounts. Her
black horse raised and kicked at Eika and dog alike, Lady Amalia seated firmly on its back.
She had lost both lance and shield and now cut so fiercely to either side with her sword that
her attack itself was her shield. 
The red eagle banner faltered and crumpled, drowned by the flood, and a great roar of
triumph rose from the Eika host. Beyond, the gold lion of Saony was never still as Wichman
and his men broke through the small openings between the Eika bands, slaying as they
rode, and then turned and charged again into their midst to rescue the red eagle. 
Lavastine had brought his riders through and now they regrouped. Behind them, Lord
Dedi, in a black tabard and beneath the standard of the raven tower, led a charge through
the ranks of those Eika who struggled to form back up, faltering as the weight of the horses
drove them again into disorder. 
Lacking armor, Liath stayed out of the thick of the fight. A few Eika charged her, perhaps
thinking an archer easy prey, but all fell pierced through the chest. 
To the east Gent sat silent. Its gates stood closed, shut tight, and she felt from within the
watchful eye, the gloating trimphant heart, of Bloodheart. The Eika standards that bobbed
upon the field were not his; he did not walk this bloody ground. She knew it. He waited, and
watched through his magic, while his Eika fought for him. What need had he to test his
strength on the field? He had already killed Prince Sanglant, the best among them. These
were but nuisances, rats to smash beneath his heel while he waited for his real prey to
arrive: the king. 
A movement flashed to her right. She shook off these disheartening thoughts and quickly
nocked, drew, and shot a charging Eika. Was this more of his magic, to dishearten his foes
as they felt him gloating over his imminent triumph? WasnÕt that all illusion was, the power
to project your own will upon others, to make them see what you wished them to see? 
Upon the hill the host of Eika massed thickest. She saw no trace of Alain or his guard
except the infantry standard which still commanded the height of the hill. Ai, Lord! Eika
swarmed the ramparts. The cavalry had not broken the back of the Eika charge, only
stemmed it in places. Even as Lavastine gave the signal to charge back through, she knew
the impetus of their attack had gone, that no help could be given to those trapped on the hill. 
The charge lumbered forward, gained speed, and Liath hunkered down as they
thundered through the back ranks. Ahead, a countercharge by Lord Dedi had cleared an
opening, and for this opening Lavastine rode with his cousin at his side and his men hard
behind him. 
The banner of Fesse had vanished beneath the churning sea of Eika. Beyond, the gold
lion of Saony regrouped and charged again only to withdraw swiftly, regroup and change
position, and charge again, slowly working ever eastward until the banner stood between
the Eika and the city. 
The standard of Lavas together with Lord Geoffrey and Liath and most of the men finally
reached the open ground, but as Liath turned to look behind she gasped. Lavastine,
perhaps unwilling, perhaps trapped by the press, remained behind with a half dozen of his
men, striking wildly about himself. Lord Geoffrey called out to him, but his voice made no
more sound amidst the tumult than the pouring of water from a cup against the booming
reverberation of a waterfall. 
An Eika dog charged under LavastineÕs mount, ripping at its underbelly, and the horse
leaped into the air only to be struck by three spears in its chest. Lavastine sank beneath the
waves. 
Without hesitation Geoffrey and his men charged headlong into the Eika, their onslaught
so irresistible that the outermost rank of Eika were trampled beneath them. The Eika
surrounding Lavastine, intent on their prey, went down under a furious wave of cuts and

jabs. 
Liath stared with an arrow loose in her hand as Geoffrey caught his cousin up behind him
and rode back to safety. LavastineÕs helmet bore two deep dents. Lavastine slid off the
back of the horse, struggled with his helm, then yanked it from his head and threw it with
disgust to the ground. He coughed, sucking in air. On the left side of his face, where his mail
coif covered his cheek, rivulets of blood ran and the metal rings had crushed into his skin
from the heat of a blow. 
A soldier brought a riderless mount, and the count swung on. 
Lord Dedi, already regrouped, rode up. ÒCount Lavastine! Lord have mercy, I thought
they had you.Ó 
Two troops of Eika formed into units under their dreadful banners and set out at a trot
after the retreating horsemen. 
LavastineÕs gaze swept the field. ÒWhere is Bloodheart?Ó he demanded. Anger flared
in his expression, then damped down to furious concentration as he surveyed the chaos
beyond. Of the cavalry, only the two groups with him now and the distant standard of Saony
still rode. ÒAi, Lord,Ó he breathed. ÒDoes my banner yet fly upon the hill?Ó 
All of them, Liath, Lord Geoffrey, Lord Dedi, the men surrounding them, and last of all
Lavastine, wiping blood from his eyes, turned. High up on the height of the hill the banner
pole above his pavilion snapped at that moment and fell amid an Eika assault. 
Lord Geoffrey leaned forward. ÒCousin, the day belongs to Bloodheart. Let us gather our
forces and retreat to join with Henry. We can prevent a rout of the men who yet remain on the
hill and screen their westward retreat if we move in on the western side.Ó 
ÒWhere is Bloodheart?Ó demanded Lavastine again, and he looked at Liath. 
She pointed to Gent. 
ÒThat the day is lost is an illusion,Ó he said hoarsely. ÒAn illusion cast by Bloodheart,
who is an enchanter.Ó Blood streamed from his head, matting his hair, and one of his hands
was streaked with blood trickling from a wound on his arm. ÒWe must have faith.Ó 
ÒFaith!Ó Geoffrey cried. ÒPrudence would have served us better! If only we had waited
for the king at Steleshame!Ó 
ÒFor how long? With what provisions? Our supplies run low, and this land is exhausted
by war and neglect. Nay, Geoffrey, I took the course that seemed wisest to me then. Now we
must take the only course open to us. We must strike from behind or all is lost, including that
which is most precious to me.Ó He glanced again at the hill, where the fighting ran thick and
the standard was lost, then deliberately away as if to shut it out of his thoughts. Only by that
small gesture could Liath see how much his son meant to him. Lord Geoffrey flinched back
as at a rebuke. 
ÒLord Dedi,Ó continued Lavastine. His voice had the brisk confidence of a man without
a care in the worldÑand no time to waste. ÒTake your men and ride Ôround to join with
Saony. Do not allow the Eika to return to the gates of Gent. Geoffrey, take half the men of
Lavas, the i standard, and those of Fesse that you can muster and join Lord Dedi. The rest,
with me.Ó His gaze, taut, like a bowstring strung tight, met LiathÕs. ÒEagle, how long must
they keep the Eika at bay for us to take the gates from within?Ó i She glanced at the sky,
judging the height of the sun. j ÒTo midday, at least.Ó 
ÒSo be it. Watch for us at the gates. If we do not appear, then save those you can and
join with Henry. God be with you.Ó 
The sound of the riders shifting to their new order rushed around her like the flow of the
river that night on the Veser. 
ÒEagle,Ó said Lavastine. Blood mottled his face and hair. Bruises stood out on the
sharp plane of his cheek. Behind, the pound of the drums throbbed over the field while the
clash of arms and the wail and shout of men and Eika alike rose like an unholy, intangible
wraith off the battleground. The count lifted a hand to ready his troops, those splitting off with
him, but he did not take his gaze from Liath. ÒLead on, Eagle. To your sight we now entrust
our victory.Ó 

3
Soon after midday a message eddied down through the column that was HenryÕs army,
and in its trail ran an audible buzz of excitement and fear. 
ÒHai! Hai!Ó shouted the messenger, none other than HenryÕs favored Eagle, Hathui, as
she pulled up her mount beside the wagon that held the clerical paraphernalia. She had a
strong voice that carried easily over the train of wagons now shuddering to a halt as their
drivers slowed oxen and horses and bent to listen. RosvitaÕs servingman stopped walking
and set a hand to the nose of the mule she rode. The other clerics, mounted on donkeys or
walking beside her, also came to a halt. 
ÒWord has come from an outrider that battle has been joined outside Gent. The train is
to travel on as far as it can before dusk while the army marches ahead.Ó 
ÒEagle!Ó Rosvita caught her attention before she could ride on. ÒHow far are we from
Gent?Ó 
The EagleÕs sharp gaze measured the cleric, and then suddenly the marchland woman
grinned grimly. ÒToo far, I fear. The scout who rode in had taken a horse from her comrade,
so that she could switch from one to the other and make better time. Even so, both horses
foundered when she reached us. The battle was joined about the hour of Terce, she
guesses, and it has taken her since thenÑwith two horsesÑto reach us.Ó The Eagle glanced
reflexively up at the sky. Rosvita squinted, wincing at the high glare of the sun. Sext had
passed, though they had not halted to sing the proper psalms. ÒOver three hours ago,Ó she
murmured; and the daylight hours in summer were long. 
ÒI wielded a wicked staff when I was a girl!Ó said Sister Amabilia suddenly. She twirled
her walking stick in her hands quite convincingly for a woman who had spent the last ten
years as a studious cleric. 
ÒThen itÕs well youÕll remain behind with the trainÓ said the Eagle, already looking
ahead, trying to sight the reserve that marched behind the halted wagons. ÒIf by some evil
chance the Eika escape our net and swing wide to attack those of you left behind the main
army, the infant Hippolyte will need stout defenders. I must go, Sister.Ó She nodded to
Rosvita and rode on. 
All was in an uproar as drivers, servants, and guard talked at once. But eventually the line
got going again. Soon the Eagle came thundering back toward the head of the line. After
her rode Villam and the cavalry reserve. He paused as he came alongside Rosvita, and
once again her servant stilled her mule so that she could speak with the margrave. 
ÒMy infantry, about one hundred men, I leave behind to guard you. Pull your wagons into
a circle if you havenÕt reached Gent by dusk. Then move on in the morning. Under no
account keep traveling in disorder. Princess Hip-polyte will be placed under your care.Ó 
ÒGo with God, Lord Villam,Ó said Rosvita, making the sign of the Unities to bless him
and his soldiers. ÒMay we see victory before the sun sets.Ó 
ÒMay we get there before the sun sets,Ó muttered Villam. He signed to his captain who
called out the order to advance. Soon Villam and his cavalry, too, vanished into the forest
ahead as the wagons trundled on. The reserve infantry jogged up and their captain deployed
them around the wagon train much as Rosvita imagined stock-drovers might surround a
large herd of cattle in the wild lands, protecting them from wolves. 
Soon the solitude grew eerie and disturbing. In two days of travel beyond Steleshame,
she had stopped hearing the distant sounds of the host ahead and the reserve behind. Now,
when she could no longer hear the distant sounds of their passage before and behind, she
noticed their lack. 
ÒHo!Ó A shout carried from the forward scouts. ÒParty ahead!Ó 
An anxious group of servants waited for them alongside the track. By this means Rosvita
could see how far ahead Duchess Liutgard and Princess Sapientia had pushed their
groups even in the course of the regular march. The men and women clustered here greeted

them with relief and explained that they consisted of those noncombatants who had for one
reason or another ridden ahead with the main army. Most importantly, they included
SapientiaÕs personal servants with her traveling pavilion and her baby, the precious child
whose existence conferred on Sapientia the right to rule after Henry. 
Father Hugh was not among them. 
Rosvita found one of his servingmen at once, a monk called Brother Simplicus who had
come with him from Firsebarg Abbey. He leaned against a tree a bit away from the others
and combed a hand nervously through his thinning hair. A beautifully carved chest rested on
the ground at his feet with a stone wedged under one corner so he could grip one side
easily when it came time to pick it up. 
ÒBrother,Ó she called, indicating that he should come over to her. He started, surprised
at her notice, and hefted the chest. It took some effort for him to lumber over to her; not a big
man, he had also the rabbity eyes of a man made nervous by small worries. 
ÒWhere is Father Hugh?Ó she asked kindly. 
With a grunt he set down the chest again, grimacing as he tipped it up on one foot. ÒHe
rode out with the army.Ó His nose was running. He glanced around, then wiped it on his
sleeve and twitched nervously under her gaze. ÒI begged him not to, good Sister. I am well
aware that a man of the church ought to walk in peace and...Ó Here he faltered, evidently
coming to the conclusion that she did not mean to rebuke him for his failure to keep his
noble superior from doing what the man had clearly already determined to do. ÒB-but he
armed himself in mail and helm and with sword strapped over his back rode out beside the
princess.Ó 
ÒNo doubt Father Hugh has training at arms,Ó she said, meaning to comfort him. With
some difficulty she kept her gaze off the chest. ÒEven in battle his presence may provide
ballast for the princess, should she need counsel. Many a good churchman or woman has
fought when desperate need arose.Ó But her thoughts were not on battle, not right now. For
some odd reason Sister AmabiliaÕs comment, made months ago, popped into her head:
ÒA birdÕs feathers may change in color, but itÕs the same duck inside!Ó 
And she smiled. ÒBrother Simplicus, bide with us as we travel. Set your chest in the
wagon so that you may walk more lightly. It looks to be a heavy burden.Ó 
 Ah, he was tempted. She recognized the look. He glanced at the chest and winced as it
shifted more heavily onto his foot, the other end pressing deeply into the loamy ground. First
he ran a hand through his thin hair, then scratched at his shaven chin nervously as he swept
the woods with a wary gaze, and finally toyed with the two thin gold chains at his neck. 
ÒI wonder,Ó commented Rosvita casually, Òif those trees conceal Eika scouts. Alas, I
fear they might spring out from the woods upon us at any moment.Ó 
He started, almost comical in his fear; not, she chided herself, that he didnÕt have good
reason to feel afraid. ÒNay, I dare not, Sister,Ó he said at last. ÒFather Hugh charged me
not to let it out of my grasp.Ó 
ÒWell, then,Ó she said, and signaled to the captain. The train lurched forward. 
But of course he tired after a while. He didnÕt look to be a strong man, pampered
perhaps by the light service set on him as HughÕs personal servingman. Finally, as he
staggered along with his eyes darting from one side to the other and his face blazoned with
an understandable fear that if he lagged, he might simply be left behind to suffer a terrible
death at the hands of Eika or bandits or such creatures as lurk in the woods at night, she
coaxed him to set the chest into the wagon. There he walked close beside with one hand
always clutching the rim, sometimes to test that the chest had not vanished, sometimes to
rest his weight and gain some respite as he puffed along. She did not offer to let him ride in
the wagon or on one of the ponies, although there were a few ponies to spare for riding. 
On they went, at a steady pace, but the track was neglected and narrow and, after all,
wagons cannot move as quickly as soldiers and horses. 
Dusk came, and the captain found a decent clearing. He supervised the wagons as the
drivers brought them into a circle, making a rough fortress of them. The livestock were

driven inside and in these cramped quarters rank with the smell of ox and horse manure and
crowded with drivers and grooms and servants terrified at being left this far behind and yet
relieved at being in a relative vale of peace, they set up a spartan camp. Rosvita led the
clerics in Vespers. 
Princess SapientiaÕs servants worked efficiently and quickly to set up her pavilion. In this
shelter they installed the baby. In the brief interlude between Vespers and Compline, Rosvita
went in to pay her respects. 
Little Hippolyte rested in the arms of her wet nurse with perfect equanimity. She had a
bright gaze for such a young baby, dark hair like her mother, and eyes as blue as her
fatherÕs. She had a happy gurgle compounded half of fat contentment and half of spit-up. In
particular, she liked to grasp things: fingers, jewelry, rolls of cloth, the hafts of spoons and,
once, that of a knifeÑquickly taken away but not before she could wave it lustily about while
her wet nurse squealed, her servingwomen crowed with laughter, and Rosvita finally and
gently pried the dangerous knife from her chubby little fingers. 
ÒAye, sheÕll fight off the Eika for us!Ó chuckled the servants. 
ÒLet us pray for her safety,Ó said Rosvita sternly, which made them frown and grow
serious. They were glad enough to kneel with her as she sang a brief Compline service over
the baby to give it the protection of GodÕs blessing for the night. 
Then she excused herself and retired to find that her own orders had been carried out
and her small traveling tent had been erected. A servant had lit a lantern and hung it from the
central pole where its light cast distorted shadows over the cloth walls and the carpet
pressed down over the meadow grass. Sister Amabilia had already lain down on her pallet
and was now snoring softly. The other clerics, sitting outside the tent reserved for the men
among their number, sat or stood around the wagon while they chatted softlyÑand not
without an edge of nervousness in their voices. 
Rosvita made her way to the healers and begged an infusion of one of the herb women,
something to calm nerves and bring sleep. It took only a few words to coax Brother
Simplicus into drinking it, and there was even some left over for Brother Fortunatus. She
regretted the deception of Brother Fortunatus but, unlike Amabilia and Con-stantine, he was
not a sound sleeper. 
She returned to her tent and knelt before her pallet for a long time while she prayed to
God to forgive her for what she was about to do. 
When at last she emerged from the tent, the camp lay as quiet as any camp could be
around her and the bright moon rode high above in the night sky. 
Brother Simplicus had chosen to sleep outside next to the wagon, lying on his mantle on
the ground. It was a warm night and pleasant. Gingerly she knelt beside him and teased out
his two necklaces: One was a fine silver Circle of Unity, the other a tiny cloth pouch tied with
a sprig of elder and smelling of licorice and a spice whose fragrance bit at RosvitaÕs nose
but whose name did not come to mind. Why would a monk in the Daisanite church be
wearing a heathen amulet? She tucked both objects back under his robe. 
There was no key. Hugh had kept the key himself. 
The chest was indeed heavy, but Rosvita was a robust woman still even if her back was
no longer as supple and strong as it once had been. She lugged it inside her tent and
half-dropped it down on her pallet; the thick batting absorbed the thunk of a heavy weight
hitting the ground. 
She glanced behind her. Sister Amabilia snored on. Then she tested the haft. It was
locked, of course, but she had expected that. 
Under the light of the lantern she wedged her knife between haft and lock. It didnÕt
budge. With a grimace, she examined the keyhole. A sprig of juniper had been thrust into it,
like a key. She scrabbled at it with her fingers, getting a grip on the slick needles, and pulled
it out. Its touch stung her fingers and she dropped it with a soft curse and touched her
smarting fingers to her lips, licking them until the pain subsided. 
She undid the brooch from her cloak and probed into the lock with the pin. She was

patient and at last found the right point to put pressure on. It unlocked with a soft pop. At
once she glanced back, but Amabilia slept on, not even stirring. Rosvita lifted the lid. The
book. 
Nested in a cowl of undyed linen, it lay on top of the rest of the chestÕs contents: a
manÕs fine embroidered tunic and a womanÕs pale gold silk overdressÑa curious item for
a churchman to carry with himÑas well as two other books. But she did not have time to
puzzle out their titles in the dim light afforded her by the lantern. At this moment, in this place,
she could not afford to be curious. She lifted the book out and turned it so the lettering on the
spine glinted in the lantern light: The Book of Secrets. 
Amabilia snorted and shifted in her sleep. Rosvita jerked back, startled. With a grimace,
she wrapped the book in the linen cloth and thrust it under her pallet, then closed the chest
and slipped a glove over her hand before she picked up the sprig of juniper and crammed it
back into the keyhole. 
Was it magic, hastily performed? She knew something of magic and of herbs but not
enough to know if Father Hugh employed their power. God have mercy if he had. 
Then she chastised herself for thinking such a thing of a good churchman like Hugh. He
had proved himself, if not chaste, then at least a good adviser. He was learned and
well-spoken. 
And he had stolen a Book of Secrets. 
ÒNo better a soul than mine,Ó she murmured. She braced herself, legs bent, and grunted
slightly as she picked up the chest and staggered outside. For some reason it seemed
heavier now. 
She replaced it in the wagon, brushed her hand over lock and wood to make sure there
were no obvious signs of entryÑsuch as Brother Simplicus might think to look forÑand then
retreated back to her tent. 
Of guards she saw none, but they would be set out along the perimeter. The camp lay
silent, brushed by the noises that attend any forest at night: the sigh of wind through the
trees, the chirping of crickets, the eerie hoot of an owl. 
The moon alone witnessed her sin. 
When Rosvita reentered the tent, Sister Amabilia blinked up at her and rubbed bleary
eyes as if to clear them. ÒWhat are you about, Sister?Ó 
ÒI am merely restless,Ó said Rosvita. ÒAnd with a full bladder now emptied. Go back to
sleep. WeÕll need our strength tomorrow.Ó 
Amabilia yawned, groped to find her walking staff laid on the ground beside her, and
then, reassured by its presence, she went back to sleep. 
Merely restless. Merely a liar. 
Merely a thief. 
She had spent more than half her life in the church and served faithfully and well, only to
find herself now shaking in the shadow of a lantern, in a tent in the wilds of a forest night.
Was it only her imagination or could she hear the howls of Eika and the screams of dying
men on the wind that fluttered the tent flaps and twined round the tent poles? 
ÒSister Amabilia?Ó she whispered; but there was no reply. 
She eased the book from under the pallet and opened it on the blanket, just where the
light streamed with its honey glow. It was hard to see, especially with eyes no longer young
and sharp as they once had been, but with her hands, leafing through the book, she
discovered at once that the binding contained not one book but three, bound together. The
third and last book was written in the infidel way, on paper, and in the language of the
JinnaÑwhich she could not read. The second book, bound into the heart of the volume, was
of such brittle papyrus that she hesitated to touch it for fear it would crumble under her
fingers. It, too, was composed in a language she could not read, but in this case she did not
even recognize the letters. ÒHide thisÓ was written in Arethousan at the top of the first page
of the middle manuscript, and there seemed to be other glosses, also in Arethousan, but the
ink was unreadable in this light. 

She turned back to the very first page of the first book, a good quality parchment
leafÑand written in Dariyan, she noted even before she noted the substance of the words or
the strange handwriting. Whoever had written this had been church-educated, certainly, for
the lettering paraded down the page with a trace of Aostan formalism. But the ÒqÓs curled
strangely, and the ÒsÓs had a Salian bent, while the ÒtÓs and ÒthÓs had the stiff, strong
backs of a cleric trained in a Wendish institution. With most calligraphy she could read in the
script where the scribe had gotten her training; this person wrote in such a hodgepodge of
styles that sheÑor heÑmight have come from anywhere, or everywhere. 
It was very strange. 
But nothing like as strange, and disturbing, as the words themselves. With mounting
horror, she mouthed the first sentence. 
¡°Through the art of the mathematici we read the alignment of the heavens and draw
down the power of the ever-moving spheres to work our will on the earth. I will now set down
everything I know of this art. Beware, you who read this, lest you become trapped as I have
in the snares of those who seek to use me for their own ends. Beware the Seven
Sleepers.Ó 
A twig snapped outside and she started violently, slapping the book shut and shoving it
under the blanket. God have mercy. She trembled like a sinner afflicted through GodÕs just
judgment with a palsy. 
The art of the mathematici. 
The most forbidden of sorceries. 
4
They left the horses with a half dozen of Captain UlricÕs men, the light cavalry from Autun.
A few of the light cavalry had torches among their equipment; Lavastine ordered other
branches collected from the brush, enough that each man carried two stout sticks. 
Liath stepped into the cave mouth and took hold of a torch. There was no longer time to
agonize over the gift she held within her, that Da had protected her against. AlainÕs lifeÑif
he even still livedÑhung in the balance. 
Wood burns. The torch flared to life, flames licking and smoking with a resiny smell.
Lavastine had come in behind her, and now she turned to see him staring at her. 
ÒItÕs a trick,Ó she said quickly. ÒAn EagleÕs trick.Ó 
ÒNot one I have heard tell of before now,Ó he replied, but he merely called to the forty
soldiers who followed him, mostly light cavalry pulled off the field, and every fourth man lit
torch or stick from the one she carried. 
She set foot on the stairs. Lavastine followed directly behind her, then some of his men
and, last, young Erkanwulf and the other Autun soldiers. Captain Ulric brought up the rear.
With each step downward the light of day faded, dimmed, grayed into oblivion. The rough
stone gripped her boots though now and again a trickle of water slipped under her feet,
welling up from some untraceable crack of moisture dripping through a seam in the rock.
She kept the torch thrust forward to see the steps below her. They were so evenly spaced
that she had to stop herself from trotting down them, from gaining too much speed. Ai, Lady,
was Alain alive yet on the hill or were he and his troops destroyed by the fury of the Eika
assault? Once she heard a man stumble and cry out behind her, and the slowed down,
waiting, as did Lavastine, who matched her step for step. Tension coiled on him like a
second skin, and he hissed between his teeth with impatience but said nothing as the man
behind caught up and they descended again. 
But after a hundred or more of such evenly placed steps even the most cautious man
became bolder and their pace increased as they descended down and ever down. 
They came to the base of the stairs, and the tunnel forged forward into a blackness so
profound that it seemed alive. She walked out far enough to give them room to assemble
behind her, forming up into twos. There was some jostling and whispering, and after a

moment Erkanwulf appeared, wan in the light of her torch. 
ÒIÕve been given leave to walk scout beside you,Ó he said, Òsince itÕs well known I
have keen eyesight.Ó 
ÒI thank you.Ó 
ÒAi, Lord, but I canÕt see a thing in front of us! Are you sure thereÕre no ditches or
abysses to swallow us up?Ó 
ÒThere were none before. But thatÕs not to say none could have opened up since.Ó 
He snorted. ÒI thank you, Eagle, for setting my heart at peace.Ó 
ÒForward,Ó said Lavastine behind her. ÒLet our pace be swift. Keep some distance
between youÑbut not too muchÑso if we are attacked, we are not caught up the one upon
the other.Ó 
She went cautiously at first, but the way lay silent and pitch-black before her, a weight of
still air stirred and lightened by their passing but by no other breath of life. All lay around her
in the flickering gaze of the torches as she recalled it: the smooth walls, the beaten earth
floor as though thousands had passed this way in some long ago time, the ceiling a handÕs
reach above. Now and again she heard the scrape of a metal spear point on the rock, and a
low curse from its bearer, shifting it down. Her bow and quiver rode easily on her back. She
held the torch in her left hand and her good friend LucienÕs sword in her right. The torch
burned without flagging, as did all the others. Erkanwulf walked on her left so the torch
illuminated the way evenly between them. But after a while she began to forge ahead of him,
sure of her path. Behind her, Lavastine strode swiftly, and his troops kept up by sheer force
of his will if nothing else. 
ÒAi, Lord,Ó whispered Erkanwulf. ÒItÕs sorely dark down here, Eagle. What if all that
rock caves in on us?Ó 
But she smelled only the metallic tang of earth, a distant whiff of the forge, and the dank
moisture of a place long hidden from the sun. ÒWhy should it fall now? If itÕs lain here for so
long?Ó 
ÒThe torches burn so strongly,Ó added Erkanwulf. ÒItÕs uncanny, it is.Ó 
ÒHush,Ó said Lavastine from behind, although the tramp of so many armed men through
the tunnel could not be hiddenÑor at least not by any gift she possessed. 
They walked steadily and, like the torches, without flagging. She realized now that the
journey out of Gent had taken so long for the most part because they had gone so slowly,
and because the refugees had been mostly frightened children or the weak and the
wounded. With forty robust soldiers behind her, she could lead at a brisk pace. 
ÒWhatÕs there?Ó muttered Erkanwulf even as she realized that in the far distance
ahead she could see a dull lightening cast of fire. And as they neared she saw that, indeed,
it was fire: A wall of it stretched from floor to ceiling, wall to wall, leaping and burning in the
tunnel with all the frenzy of a gleeful pack of fire daimones at their dance. 
ÒDefended!Ó said Lavastine angrily. 
Liath stared. Defended. But why, then, had the Eika not used the tunnel as a way to
ambush LavastineÕs army when it first arrived? 
ÒStay back,Ó she said to Erkanwulf. She strode forward with her torch outthrust to make
a barrier, but as she neared the wall of flame, it faded in her sight to become a whisper, a
haze, a memory of fire, nothing more. 
ÒEagle!Ó She felt Erkanwulf dart forward to grab at her as she stepped into the blaze.
He screamed. She stopped and turned round to order him back only to see the look on their
faces, as much as she could see expressions in the torchlight. Only Lavastine watched
impassively. Erkanwulf staggered back, a hand thrown up to shield his face from the heat.
The rest murmured or cried out, or covered their eyes to hide them from the horrible sight of
a young woman burned alive. 
ÒItÕs an illusion,Ó she said. 
Erkanwulf fell to his knees, gasping and coughing. 
Lavastine stepped up beside him. What courage it took him to do so she could not

imagine. Would she do the same, if she had only anotherÕs word to go by? Around her, the
ghost fire shimmered and leaped, burning rock no less than air. 
ÒIf Bloodheart has guarded this tunnel with illusion,Ó asked the count, ÒdoesnÕt that
mean he must know of it?Ó 
ÒPerhaps. But then why wouldnÕt he have used it for an ambush? Nay, Count Lavastine,
I think there is fire above, on the plain, and his illusion is all of one seam. Have you ever
seen an orrery? A model of the heavenly spheres?Ó 
ÒGo on,Ó said Lavastine curtly. 
ÒAs above, so below. His illusion may be one seamless part, and thus exists below the
ground as well as above it. ItÕs possible that these illusions would be seen by anyone
attempting to approach the city, that Bloodheart cast them without knowing they would
extend here, too.Ó 
ÒOr perhaps his soldiers wait for us, beyond.Ó 
In answer, she stepped through. A man shrieked, was brusquely ordered to be silent.
Beyond the wall of fire lay the silent tunnel, dark and quiet. She turned and could not see the
fire from this direction at all, only a misty haze and the men waiting on the other side. 
ÒNothing,Ó she said. ÒUnless Bloodheart ordered his men to wait for us on the stairs. It
would be very hard to fight up those stairs and win.Ó 
ÒMaking it a better place to set an ambush, then,Ó said Lavastine. ÒBut what choice do
we have but to go forward?Ó He nudged poor frightened Erkanwulf with the toe of a boot.
ÒCome. She has the true sight. We must trust in her.Ó 
ÒWe must trust in St. Kristine,Ó she said suddenly, Òfor without her intercession we
would never have found the tunnel. The heat will not burn you.Ó 
ÒI canÕt go through,Ó sobbed Erkanwulf, still with a hand flung up to protect his eyes. 
ÒNay, boy!Ó said Ulric from the back of the group. ÒThink of Lord Wichman and his
stories. They saw illusions at Steleshame, but that was all they were.Ó 
ÒI will lead.Ó Lavastine gripped his sword more tightly and walked forward into the fire. 
Even so, Liath felt him trembling slightly as he halted beside her. One by one, with
increasing confidence, his troops came along after. Only a few shut their eyes as they
passed through the illusion. 
They went on. 
After a time, she stumbled on a bottomless abyss, too wide across to jump. But even as
she stared, the gulf of air solidified into the rock floor, littered with pebbles and scored by old
footprints unstirred for months by the passage of wind or any other traffic, even the tiny
creatures of the dark, over them. 
This time, when she moved forward across the gaping abyss, Lavastine walked right
beside herÑthough when he took the first step out over the yawning chasm, she noticed that
he shut his eyes. 
She called back over her shoulder. ÒShut your eyes! Shut your eyes and walk forward.
Your feet will not lie to you.Ó 
In this way the soldiers followed, shuffling behind until the chasm lay behind them. With
mounting confidence they went on. The torches burned steadily without consuming
themselves. 
ÒAre you a mage?Ó asked Lavastine softly, beside her. ÒWhy do you possess this
power to see through illusion? Where comes it from?Ó 
How can I use it to my advantage? He did not say the last words aloud, but she heard
such calculation in his tone. 
ÒMy father laid aÑa mageÕs working on me,Ó she said, hoping that she spoke the truth
nearly enough that God would forgive her for lying. 
Lavastine made no reply. She could not even imagine what he was thinking; she
understood him less than any person she had ever met. 
They went on, pressing into the darkness that would lead them to the cryptÑand to the
Eika. And to Bloodheart. 

Liath led them and did not look back. 
5
Pressed back and back, Alain held his place in the second rank of shields, keeping low
so that the spearmen behind him could thrust over him. He braced hard with his feet to shore
up those in the front rank who bore the brunt of the Eika assault. His strength was all he had,
for surely it must be obvious to all by now that he could not fight. 
The Eika sagged back, and in the brief lull, he surveyed the hill. The west and south lines
still held at the wall, but to the east, facing Gent, and at the north gate where Alain had
thrown in his reserves, the army had fallen back and now presented a wall of flesh and steel
instead of earthen ramparts to face the Eika stone. Alain hoped that someone would take
his place in the ranks so he could gain a vantage point to observe the field below and the
progress of his father, but those with shields were already at the fore and none stepped up
to relieve him. 
The Eika gathered their strength. They, too, presented a line of shields, rounds painted
with cunning blue or yellow serpents twined into interwoven spirals. Twenty paces separated
the two lines. Aside from an occasional arrow or thrown stone, or the Eika stooping to stab
some poor wounded man left behind in the retreat, or the dogs feeding hideously on
corpses, the Eika remained still. 
Lord have mercy. One black hound sprawled in an awkward heap and, even as he stared
in horror, dogs leaped upon it to savage its corpse. Which one it was he did not know. He
felt the press of the other hounds around him, but he dared not take his eyes off the enemy
to count their number. Eika drummers had moved up to the second rank of their line and
they beat a rhythm like a slow heartbeat. It quickened, and the Eika became restless, just as
hounds would, scenting their prey but still held on a tight leash. The beating of the drums
boomed louder and faster and then, like thunder, it broke with deafening claps as the Eika
charged. 
 The soldiers around Alain braced themselves with wide stances. Spearmen shouldered
up beside Alain, wedging spears in between the foremost shields, a line of points to impale
the charging Eika on their own momentum. 
The Eika hit. Alain staggered, caught himself, and sank back. He reinforced his shield
with the pommel of his sword, but even so he, with the others, gave ground at a slow grind.
Round Eika shields pressed into the fray, first overlapping him to his left, then to his right. He
struggled as he caught an Eika shield with the corner of his own. If he could only draw the
strength of the earth up through his legs...a hound leaned against him, adding its strength,
but despite everything, his boots skidded on the dirt as he was forced back. The hound
scrabbled and whined and retreated. 
Over his head axes and spears did their work, but the huge shields of the Eika served
them well. The line gave back, back toward the center of camp, back until the banner of
black hounds on silver, placed near the top of the hill, vanished in the press. 
Now the Eika overran the edge of camp and strangely this gave them some respite,
since a number of the Eika would simply stop and pull back from the fighting to loot through
chest and bag. 
The east and north lines met and melded, and out of the din Alain suddenly heard the
captainÕs voice as he shouted orders. The captain carried the standard, now that the
banner was lost, and he rallied the troops with it by raising it high wherever the fighting was
fiercest and the cause seemed lost. 
ÒHold the line!Ó Alain cried, but only those men right round him could hear, and surely
they were already conducting themselves as best they could to keep their lord alive. 
At last the standard signaled the captainÕs approach. ÒLord Alain!Ó he cried. ÒLet him
back, let him back! Now close it up, lads. Form up to the rightÑÓ As Alain staggered out of
the press into the dusty reserve groundÑwhat little remainedÑthe captain turned on him. ÒI

lost track of you! Ai, Lord, what your father the count would say to meÑ
¡°WhereÕs my father?Ó Alain shouted. 
The captain waved vaguely to the east. ÒOut there. I saw Lord WichmanÕs banner, but a
host of Eika ran between them and the hill and the sun shines so as to hide the land. We
must trust to our swords and to the Lady.Ó 
From this vantage, Alain looked out over the plain. Eika swarmed like flies across the
land. Off to the right a small band of horsemen carrying the raven tower of Autun formed
upÑor made ready to retreat. Of Lord Wichman and the gold lion of Saony, of the Lavas
banner, he saw no sign. 
An unearthly dome of fire concealed Gent, as bright now as the sun that rode high above
them. Already it had passed midday while they struggled on the hill, and the sun had begun
its steady descent toward the western horizon. But a long afternoon and an endless high
summer twilight stretched before them. 
He whistled and even over the din of battle the hounds heard him and came to huddle at
his feet: Sorrow and Rage, both cut and bleeding but whole, thumped their tails into his legs;
Fear strained forward, barking wildly while blood streamed from a cut on his hindquarters;
Bliss had an ugly gash on his back and one of his ears had been ripped to shreds; Ardent
limped, old TerrorÕs jaw dripped with the greenish-tinted blood that belonged to the Eika.
Oddly, Steadfast had not a mark on her. But Good Cheer was missing. And Graymane was
gone. 
There was no time to mourn. 
He gave them all a quick pat, and they licked him vigorously. Who was reassuring whom?
As he straightened, he tried to make sense of the field. 
The east and north lines were gone and those ramparts given up to the Eika advance.
For the moment only flurries of fighting raged to the south and west, where the Eika had had
little luck up to now. Here, down off the top of the hill, Alain and his company waited and
watched as Eika looted LavastineÕs camp. Where the night before the commanders had
discussed strategy, the enemy now reveled. Alain could pick out individuals, Eika somewhat
larger than the rest and clad in glittering gold and silver mail girdles that draped from hip to
knee, flashing and glinting in the sunlight. Each of theseÑand there were not manyÑwalked
through the carnage with an easy lilting step. Each had a standard beside him, a grotesque
pole festooned with feathers and bones and skins and other unknowable things. These were
princelings like Fifth Son: BloodheartÕs many sons. 
They howled and the slow roll of the drums quickened. The Eika gave up their looting, the
dogs were kicked and slapped into obedience, and they formed up again. 
With a howl, they attacked. A huge Eika princeling hefted his obsidian-edged club and
sprang forward at their head. LavastineÕs captain bolted forward to brace the line for the
impact, but it was no use. The line of men split asunder as two shieldmen were bowled over
by the massive Eika. The captain thrust with the banner pole and stuck the Eika princeling in
the brow, the point lodging in the scaly forehead. The creature flailed and smashed its club
into the banner pole, breaking it, then grasped the splintered end, tugged, and heaved the
captain bodily forward and struck him to the ground. With the point of the pole still thrust out
from its forehead and the Lavas banner drapped over its shoulders like a cloak, the Eika
plunged on, roaring. 
Men screamed and retreated and the line dissolved into chaos. But Alain stepped up to
meet him with a blow swung with all of his strength. The Eika caught it with his bare hand,
the swordÕs point splitting the skin but doing no more damage than that, and then wrenched
Alain forward, and down, and lifted his club for the death blow. 
Alain tried to shift his shield, but it was too late. It was too little. More Eika swarmed past
toward the crumbling troops. The hounds had vanished into the maelstrom. 
I am with you Alain. You have kept your promise to me. 
The club arced down, but he was a shadow and she the life that lived within the light. She
was there, a thing of effortless and terrible beauty as she wielded the sword that is both war

and death. 
She rolled and the princelingÕs killing blow struck earth, spitting clods into the air, into
AlainÕs teeth. She cut to the back of the EikaÕs leg, hamstringing it, and the Eika fell. It
seemed no more than a dance as she rolled up to her feet, and with a second blow, as fast
as the lightning strikes to herald the coming of thunder, she beheaded the savage. 
With her, Alain retreated, but only to form up the line around himÑaround her. Where the
shields parted, where the line buckled or menÕs spirits wavered, he had only to go, the
shadow to her light, and she would go there as well. In her wake menÕs spirits lifted, and
they fought with renewed ferocity, shouting his name: ÒLord Alain! Lord Alain!Ó 
For where she stood, where Alain was, no charge could succeed. But even the Lady of
Battles could not succeed against the thousands, the endless onslaught of savage Eika and
their ravening dogs. 
The Eika surged forward. Drums pounded until he could hear nothing above them, not
even the clash of shield and sword, not even the screams of the wounded or the howling of
dogs. He could not be everywhere at once, and where he was not, the line gave way. 
The Eika came on and on up the hill from all sides, and soon all sides were
hard-pressed. The drums boomed. With a sudden shift of rhythm, the force of their
reverberation deafened him, and the very hill beneath trembled as the shield wall failed in a
dozen places and the battle no longer had order. 
It became a melee as men clumped together fighting desperately just to stay alive. Eika
flowed in from all sides. Fear clutched at AlainÕs throat as he realized how few were still
afootÑand those who fell had no chance against the dogs. 
Even the Lady stilled, staring. The hounds boiled up to him then, yipping. Sorrow took his
tattered tabard in his teeth and dragged him westward and in this way, with the Lady at the
point and Alain right behind her, they drove westward step by agonizing step down the hill
toward the distant shelter of the western forest. Men fell in beside him and behind him,
seeking shelter, seeking safety in what numbers they had left to them, a wedge of men
thrusting through the Eika onslaught. With each step they struggled as Eika raged forward.
They had no choice but to escape to the woods, for their hill and their campÑand the
day-was lost. 
All was lost. 
He could no longer see the plain, only the horde of Eika surrounding them. 
At the point of their wedge, the Lady cut a path westuntil they were at the west Ògate,Ó its
wagons smashed and dead bodies littering the gap. The drumbeat increased, and with
each beat the determination of the Eika to stop them from retreat grew. There, at the ruined
gate, their wedge ground to a halt. The sun beat down with the hammer blow of heat. 
With a great breath, like a beast so immense that its voice was that of a thousand and
more mouths, the Eika shifted, steadied, and howled until the roar of it drove men to their
knees under the merciless bright eye of the sun. 
Only the Lady blazed bright in answer. And only Alain could see her as, behind her, he
lifted his sword in desperation. 
ÒHold fast!Ó he cried. ÒGod is with us!Ó 
But no one could hear him. 
6
She did not count the stairs, only cursed each clank and rustle and whisper from the men
behind her. But no Eika waited for them where the stone steps curved upward and opened
into the crypt. She stumbled on a gravestone and fell to one knee as the rest came up
behind her, emerging one by one into black silence. 
Erkanwulf helped her up. 
Each least movement or murmured comment fell heavily, weighted by the dampening
earth and magnified by the stillness of the waiting dead. 

ÒHush,Ó said Lavastine. ÒListen.Ó 
They listened but heard nothing but their own breathing. 
ÒNow.Ó He did not need to speak loudly. In the dim light afforded by torches, ears
became keen of hearing. ÒWe must open the gates of Gent. And we must kill Bloodheart, if
we are able. My experience of the Eika tells me that they follow a war chief and will fight like
dogs among themselves if that leader is dead.Ó 
The tombs lay in dense silence around them. Torchlight made a haze of the air. In the
curve of shadow beyond the smoky glow Liath saw a glint of white, recognizable but
indistinct. 
ÒCaptain Ulric, you will take fifteen men. I will take fifteen men. We must take separate
routes for the western gates of Gent. Eagle.Ó She nodded. ÒThese seven men I leave
under your command. As the old stories say: Send a mage to kill a mage.Ó 
ÒMy lord countÑ!Ó she protested. 
He lifted a hand to silence her. ÒIt is your job to hunt down and kill Bloodheart.Ó 
ÒYes, my lord count,Ó she said obediently. At that instant a torchbearer turned and the
glow of the torch spread wings and illuminated the far doorway of this vaulted corner. 
Bones. Not safely interred in the sanctity of a tomb but scattered like leaves on the forest
floor, the bones littered the far vaults of the crypt, all tumbled together. As she moved
cautiously into the next chamber, she knew they were the bones of Dragons. The smell of
lime stung her nostrils. The Eika knew to cast lime over the remains. Little putrefaction
remained because of clay soil and moisture...and because it had been over a year since the
fall of Gent. Skulls grinned at her; open eyes bled pools of blackness. Ribs showed white
under tattered tabards and padded gam-besons chewed to pieces by rats. Skeleton fingers
clutched at her boots and a thighbone rolled under her so she slipped and almost fell. 
ÒLord have mercy!Ó breathed Erkanwulf beside her, ÒLook! The badge of the KingÕs
Dragons!Ó 
Reason enough to kill Bloodheart. 
They picked their way through the terrible remains of the kingÕs elite cavalry. At least the
Eika, for unfathomable reasons of their own, had dragged them down to decay among the
holy dead. 
She dared not look too closely for fear she would see the dragon helmet that marked the
remains of Sanglant. Her memory of him was so clean, so strong, of his living face watching
her in the silence of the crypt, his chin as smooth as a womanÕs under her fingers; of him
standing proud and confident in the midst of the crowd that had threatened to mob the
palace; of his last dash into the fight, when all had seemed lost. She could not bear to see
his beauty reduced to dust. So she stopped looking at the remains around her except to
place her feet with care so that she did not step on too many of them, poor dead souls. 
With each step, purpose weighed more heavily on her: She could become the instrument
of vengeance for what had been done to him and to his Dragons. It gave her heart as she
neared the steps that led up to the cathedral. 
When her boots nudged the bottom stair and she peered upward where spiderwebs
wreathed the canted wall and glittered like a silvery net of moonlight above her torch, she
turned back. ÒLet me scout ahead,Ó she whispered. 
ÒYour group will file up behind you,Ó said Lavastine. ÒWe dare not be caught here.Ó 
ÒLet me just scout first alone,Ó she said. ÒShould I be caught, and if they guess where I
have come from, then you are on an equal footing. Eika see in the dark no better than a
human manÑÓ Although not as well as she did, but she could not say so out loud. ÒÑand
you will have a better chance of fending them off...and of escape back through the tunnel.Ó 
ÒWhat of the dogs?Ó whispered Erkanwulf. ÒWhat if they smell us?Ó 
ÒThen again you are safer to remain here, where the smell of lime and damp will
somewhat cover your trail.Ó 
ÒAnd if they donÕt know of the tunnel,Ó said Lavastine quietly, Òthen they would have no
reason to look down here. If they discover you, theyÕd be as likely to look elsewhere and

thus give us time to get out and move for the gates.Ó He nodded curtly. ÒGo on.Ó 
Go on. So coolly he considered her death and resolved that it might benefit him. 
But Liath only smiled grimly, gave her torch to Erkanwulf, and set off up the stairs. 
The curve soon took her out of sight of the soldiers waiting below, but even the memory of
torchlight was enough to light her way. She heard the delicate tread of men coming up after
her. Soon a thin line of light limned the door that led out onto the nave, but she passed it by
and crept on up a narrower set of stone steps that led to the choir. 
Here, in a cramped landing, she set her hand on a thick door ring and rested her ear
against the rough planks. What she heard from beyond was faint, a teasing melody as light
as air. Dust coated the iron ring, slick under her fingers. She gave a nudge with her
shoulder. The door cracked open. Daylight blinded her and she had to stand for the count of
twenty until her eyes adjusted even to the thin line of light that now edged the stone column
around which the stairwell wound. From the nave she heard the sound of flutes. 
She tucked her sword against her and eased open the door. The choir walk ran empty, a
balcony no wider than an arm outstretched, all the way to the opposite end of the nave. A
layer of dust blanketed the floor. Tapestries whose brightly woven stories were muted by
dust hung on the walls beneath the huge second tier of windows through which the sun
shone, motes of dust everywhere streaming and dancing in the light. Where a few of the
tapestries brushed the floor, sagging or half fallen, their bases had been nibbled into ragged
ends by rats or mice. 
She set a foot forward and eased herself into the quiet walk. A dart of movement startled
her, and she froze. But it was only a mouse, bold enough enough to prowl the choir in broad
daylight. The sight of it gave her courage. If mice skittered about so freely, then it was not
likely anyone lurked up here. 
She stepped farther out, hugging the wall, and eased the door closed until it stood with
only a crack. Each step left a distinct print behind as she crept forward. 
She crouched and made her way along the solid railing. Above, the ceiling vaulted high to
span the nave. Flute music echoed below and beside and beyond her. She dared not look
at the windows for fear one glimpse of sunlight would ruin her eyes when she needed to look
below. Her quiver brushed the rail, and she rose slightly to peer over. 
And there, in a shaft of sunlight streaming in through the western windows, sat Bloodheart
on his throne. 
He played music on flutes crafted of bone, and she shuddered to hear him as the music
wafted into the air and twined and curled around as if it were a living thing. And she knew,
then: He wove with his flute, wove the very illusions that protected him. 
Next to him, almost in his shadow, crouched the skinny Eika priest she remembered.
Naked except for a loincloth, he rocked back and forth on his heels in time to the melody. A
wooden chest sat tucked against his feet, and one of his clawed hands rested protectively
on its painted lid. 
And there were dogs, packs of dogs all here and there, panting, lying in heaps, tongues
lolling and saliva dripping onto the flagstone floor. Beside the holy altar Bloodheart had let a
midden grow, a low mound of garbage, rags and trash and bones and old rusting chains
piled up against the most sanctified place in the cathedral. She winced to see the holy
Hearth defiled in such a fashion, but no doubt Bloodheart pleased himself by desecrating
the blessed Hearth of the Lady. 
She knelt, laid her sword down on the dusty walk, and with her heart afire with fear and
with an implacable burning determination, she slipped out Seeker of Hearts. In a moment
she had an arrow free and loosely nocked to the string. 
Light streamed down all around her, the blessed Daisan walking through his seven
miracles, each one outlined in glass. Light splintered everywhere, rainbows dancing in the
air of the nave, yet if she shifted slightly they would vanish only to reappear if she leaned
back. She rose again from her crouch, as silent as the breath of morningÑor of fateÕs
unyielding hand. 

The memory of the beauty of the cathedral hit her with doubled force. There the biscop
had led Mass. There the congregation had gathered, standing, to sing. There San-giant and
his Dragons had knelt, before the altar, that morning in their last brief moments of life before
they rode to their deaths. 
Voices. She froze, canting her head back to listen. Let Lavastine and his men not come
out yet! 
Into the cold emptiness of the nave, below, an Eika strode into her line of sight. He wore
the distinguishing marks of a princeling, a skirt of mail fashioned of gold and silver links that
draped from hips to knees, winking in and out of the light as he walked the floor between
shafts of sunlight, and a torso painted with an elaboration of the same swirling cross pattern
that graced BloodheartÕs chest. Strangely, he wore a wooden Circle of Unity around his
neck. 
AlainÕs prince! Could it be? 
In her surprise, she must have scuffed her boot on the floor. 
The Eika princeling faltered, and for that instant she panicked, not moving and yet with
her mind shut like a door, blank and empty. But he only faltered because he stared at the
heap of garbage beside the altar, which now stirred, woken by that scuff or by the perfume
of her secrecy or by the music of the flutes, to reveal dogs and some kind of ghastly
creature, surely not human, heavily chained and clothed in the tattered remains of a tabard
marked with a black dragon. Yet it had substance and weight, unlike a daimone; it had
unkempt black hair as tangled and ratted as that of a filthy ascetic who has sworn off the
trivial clothing of human grooming. It had arms and legs, hands and feet, very humanlike, and
a cast of skin made dark by grime. It was a hideous thing, so matted and foul that it might as
easily have been a grotesque illusion born out of BloodheartÕs vile magic. Or so she
hoped. Then it swung round, shoulders bracing as against an attack, and she saw its face. 
ÒGod have mercy,Ó she whispered, the sound forced from her by a shock so profound
that she forgot everything, everyone, and even her purpose for being here: The Eika
chieftain who sat, unwitting, below her, an easy target. ÒSanglant.Ó 
He uncurled completely from the midden and in that instant with his head flung up like that
of a hound tasting a scent on the air, she knew he had heard her. 
She knew he recognized her voice. 
Lady and Lord have mercy. Trapped. BloodheartÕs prisoner for over a year. 
He looked more like an animal than a man. 
Her throat burned, and she thought she was going to be sick. 
She rose. 
ÒNo!Ó he cried, lunging forward to the limit of his chains, lunging toward Bloodheart, or
toward the priest, she couldnÕt tell. The priest grabbed the chest and hopped backward just
as Sanglant was brought up short by the chains, jerked back painfully by the force of his
lunge. His dogs growled and leaped forward into the nave. They were not chained. 
Bloodheart lowered his flutes and barked out a command in his harsh language. Several
Eika soldiers jogged toward the prince, howling and jeering with their inhuman voices. 
She lifted Seeker of Hearts and drew down on Bloodheart, string drawn tight, her eye
sighted along the arrow to the swirling cross of paint that marked his chest over his heart. 
One shot was all she had. 
From behind and below she heard the eruption of shouts and pounding feet, the clang of
steel and a man screaming, then the howling of Eika calling to battle. 
Lavastine had not waited for herÑor perhaps he had heard SanglantÕs shout. It no longer
mattered. 
One shot. She poised, made ready to release, a perfect target, a perfect kill there at his
heartÑ
The bow tugged leftward. 
For that instant in which a breath is drawn and released by a person panting under the
threat of danger, she resisted. 

And then she gave in to it. 
ÒSeeker of Hearts, guide my hand,Ó she murmured. She let it pull her aim as it willed,
and she sighted again as the point of the arrow slid away from Bloodheart, past the little
wooden chest resting on the priestÕs knees, and rose slightly to fix on the left center of his
wizened, scaly torso. 
There.
She loosed the arrow. 
The point buried itself in flesh. The priest clapped both hands to his chest and tumbled
backward as the wooden chest on his knees spun forward and cracked on the stone floor. 
With a great, ear-shattering roar, Bloodheart lurched out of his throne, staggered, and
stumbled to his knees. His bone flutes scattered around him. One splintered and broke. 
ÒPriest! Traitor!Ó He roared again, a cry of pain and fury that echoed and hammered in
the nave, resounding and rebounding off the vault. One window cracked and shattered, and
shards of glass rained down from on high. 
ÒNestbrother!Ó he cried. A greenish fluid trickled from his mouth as he fell forward and
crawled, trying to reach the wooden chestÑor the old priest, both of which now lay within the
limits of the princeÕs chains. But Sanglant reached them first only to have the old priest
stagger to his feet, snap off the haft of the arrow embedded in his chest, and scramble out of
reach of prince and enchanter alike. Sanglant kicked the wooden chest out away from
BloodheartÕs groping hands. 
ÒNestbrother!Ó The Eika chieftainÕs voice was ragged now with a liquid lilt as though
blood drowned him in his unmarked chest. Dogs bolted in to nip and bite at him, sensing his
weakness, but he slapped them away and jerked up to his feet as bubbles of blood frothed
on his chin. ÒBy the bond between us I call on you to avenge me. Let your curse fall on the
oneÑÓ 
He clawed at his throat, staggered forward again while the old priest scuttled backward
and made some kind of averting sign with his hand as he spoke words Liath couldnÕt hear.
Dust swirled on the choir floor, caught up in a sudden whirlwind, and a swarm of unseen
creatures like stinging gnats spun around her, then sheared away as though wind had blown
them off. Flailing blindly, Blood-heart made one last desperate lungeÑOnly to drop, dead, at
SanglantÕs feet. 
And there on the westward flank of the hill, as the Eika horde took breath to make their
final charge and annihilate the last of LavastineÕs infantry, the drums clapped once. And not
again.
XVI THE UNSEEN CHAIN 
1
Captain Ulric, to the gate!Ó shouted Lavastine above the sudden outbreak of howling
and keening that shattered the silence made by BloodheartÕs death. At once, the sound of
fighting reverberated through the nave as Lavastine and his men bolted out of their hiding
place. 
She drew another arrow in time to see Lavastine himself cutting frantically, shield raised,
as a trio of enraged Eika bore him backward. A soldier fell beside him, struck down.
Lavastine was next, battered to his knees by their attack. 
Sanglant lunged forward at the sight of the nobleman trapped and struggling. Liath
winced, bracing herself for the jerk when he hit the limit of his chains, then gaped. 
There were no chains. All but the iron collar rattled to the ground, lay crumbling there as if
they were a hundred years old and turning to dust. Dust they became, sagging in heaps
around BloodheartÕs corpse. 
She nocked the arrow, but Sanglant and a half dozen Eika dogs hit the melee before she

could get a shot off. He had nothing, only his hands, to fight with. Without thinking, she swung
a leg over the railing, meaning to drop down, to save himÑ
His attack was as swift and as brutal as that of the Eika dogs. He had laid two Eika out
flat and ripped oneÕs throat out with his own teeth while she gaped in horror. An Eika swung
hard at him, but a dog leaped between them and took the cut meant for the prince while the
rest of the pack swarmed the would-be killer, bearing him down to the flagstones. The other
Eika retreated. The dogs gorged on the corpsesÑthree Eika, one human. Lavastine jumped
to his feet and he and Sanglant vanished from her line of sight as they ran toward the great
doors. She swung her leg back and stood, panting, half in shock, trying to steady herself. 
ÒEagle!Ó Erkanwulf called to her from the door. ÒYou must run! WeÕre sore
outnumbered, and weÕre to retreat through the tunnel!Ó 
ÒDown!Ó she screamed as she drewÑErkanwulf dropped to his hands and kneesÑand
shot the Eika who loomed behind the lad. The Eika fell with a surprised grunt and tumbled
backward down the stairs. She ran, tugged Erkanwulf to his feet, and drew her sword,
keeping Seeker of Hearts in her left hand. 
ÒAfter me,Ó she said. They had to clamber over the dead Eika soldier to get down the
curve of the stairs. She did not know what awaited them below, but as they came around the
last curve before the door that let onto the nave her nose caught a whiff of it. 
Just beyond the open door, Lavastine and his men had formed up. A line of Eika waited
beyond among the litter that carpeted the vast nave, but no one moved. They made a broad
curve to cut off access to the cathedral doors as well as leaving Lavastine and his men no
room to maneuver out in the expanse of the nave itself. 
Next to the door the creature that was Sanglant beat back five dogs, cuffing them until
they lay down, whining, and bared their throats to him. Blood from their gorging dripped from
their muzzles. 
The prince stank. There was no kinder way to put it; the reek hit her like a tangible
substance, something you could put your hands into. He started back at her appearance in
the door. Blood rimed his lips. His clothes, or what remained of them, hung in tatters on him,
cloth pressed into mail, stiff with grime; she had seen poor folk and beggars aplenty in her
travels but never anyone as wretched as this. It was hard to believe he was a man, still, or to
recall that he had ever been one. He was so foul that she had to look away, but even so she
caught a glimpse of his expression. Whatever he was, now, he was ashamed of it. 
ÒGod have mercy,Ó whispered Erkanwulf, behind her. ÒWhat is it?Ó 
ÒHush.Ó She slipped out the door. The dogs growled at her but kept their distance,
nipping at Erkanwulf as he dodged past. Sanglant slapped them down but said nothing.
Could he even speak? 
ÒWe retreat,Ó said Lavastine. ÒThere are a hundred or more of them beyond the door.
But Captain Ulric and his group got out ahead of me. We must hope they win through to the
gates.Ó 
ÒBloodheart is dead,Ó said Liath. 
Lavastine only nodded curtly. ÒMake ready to move,Ó he said to his men. Already she
noticed three faces missing, but she could not see beyond the Eika line to count them
among those who had fallen in the initial skirmish. ÒPrince Sanglant, you must go first, with
the Eagle. We must get you to safety.Ó 
The Eika line stirred and parted to reveal the Eika princeling who wore the Circle. In the
harsh tongue of the Eika, he barked an order and the line faded back by several steps as
the princeling stepped forward into the gap. 
Erkanwulf handed Liath another arrow from her quiver and she drew on the princeling,
sighting at his heart. 
He spoke again, still in the Eika language, and the Eika soldiers began an orderly
withdrawal from the cathedral. Liath stared, utterly bewildered. Slowly, cautiously, Lavastine
took one step forward. ÒBoth of you I have seen in AlainÕs dreams,Ó said the princeling in
perfect Wendish, pointing with the tip of his spear first at Lavastine and then at Liath. 

ÒFifth Son!Ó breathed Lavastine. 
¡°You captured me onceÑbut he freed me. For that reason, I spare your life now.Ó He set
the butt of the spear on the flagstones and canted his head arrogantly, or as at a sudden and
compelling thought. Compared to Sanglant, he was a glorious beast, not handsomeÑfor
Liath supposed she would never be able to find beauty in their sharp, metal-bright facesÑbut
striking. His eyes had the clarity of obsidian. Gold armbands curled around his arms like
snakes. He grinned at them, jewels winking in his teeth, and with each least shifting of his
weight the mail girdle he wore made a faint shimmering like distant high bells whispering
secrets. ÒTell me, Count of Lavas. Did Alain lie to me? King Henry did not come, nor did
you intend to wait for him as you told him you meant to.Ó 
Lavastine hesitated, but he did, after all, owe the Eika princeling something in return for
their lives. ÒVisions canÕt lie. I did not tell him everything I intended.Ó 
ÒAh.Ó Fifth Son whistled and his dogs bounded over to crowd at his heels. They, too,
had been feasting on the corpses, perhaps even on Bloodheart. Scraps of clothing stuck to
their tongues, and the saliva dripping from their jaws had an ocherous tint. Most of his
soldiers had cleared the cathedral, leaving it empty except for the ravaged corpses.
ÒYouÕre a wise foe, Count of Lavas. Alas for you that HenryÕs army did not come
sooner.Ó 
He did not turn to leave; he did not trust them that much. He edged sideways while never
letting his gaze leave them until he was at the great doors, awash in sunlight. Then he was
gone. 
Sanglant bolted. Lavastine started after him, but the prince ran not after the fleeing
princeling but rather to the altar where lay BloodheartÕs corpse. The old priest had
vanished; only the broken arrow haft remained. Sanglant upended the wooden chest and a
downy spill of feathers wafted into the air as a cloudy haze. What in GodÕs Names was he
about? He coughed and pawed through the clot of feathers desperately, finding nothing,
then gave up and knelt instead beside BloodheartÕs body. With a howl, he wrenched the
gold torque of royal kinship from the dead enchanterÕs arm. 
The five dogs, crowded at his heels and sniffing and scrabbling at the corpse, raised their
heads and howled wildly in answer. 
ÒWe had best be gone,Ó said Lavastine. ÒWe will head for the gates.Ó 
ÒIs that . . . creature . . . truly Prince Sanglant?Ó asked Erkanwulf, and several other men
muttered likewise. 
ÒQuiet!Ó snapped Lavastine, and then they hushed of their own accord because the
prince now walked toward them with his retinue of dogs nipping and barking at his heels. He
now held a spear and a short sword, gleaned from the corpses. Liath could not bear to look
at him, and yet she kept looking at him. She could not believe he was alive, and yet, even if
he was, could that . . . thing . . . truly be the man who had fallen at Gent over a year ago? 
He broke away before he reached Lavastine and his men, as if he didnÕt want to get too
close, and came to the huge, open doors of the cathedral. There, he stopped short as if
chains had brought him up. As if he dared to go no farther. 
ÒCome,Ó said Lavastine to the prince as he led his party up besideÑbut not too close
toÑthe dogs. A few of the men held their hands up over their noses, those who could reach
them under the nasals of their helms. The count crossed out onto the steps that fronted the
cathedral. The square beyond lay empty under the hazy afternoon sunlight. ÒWe must make
haste. My sonÑ
But he broke off, unable to speak further. In the far distance, Liath heard the sound of
horns and the frenzied shouting of Eika. 
That Sanglant had stepped out from the shelter of the cathedral she knew without looking,
because of the stench. But now he spoke. His voice was hoarse, as if it had grown rusty
from disuseÑbut then, his voice had always sounded like that. 
ÒThe horns,Ó he said, head flung back to listen. ÒThey belong to the king.Ó 

2
Stroke after stroke felled the Eika. As the Lady cleaved through them, some looked into
AlainÕs eyes, sensing the doom that came upon them, and others simply dropped their
weapons and fled. Even their savage fury could not stand long before the LadyÕs
wrathÑand surely not without the throbbing beat of the drums, now silent. 
But there were yet more of them, even in disorder, than remained of AlainÕs contingent.
When an Eika princeling rallied his forces and drove his soldiers back into the remaining
wedge of infantry, she pursued that princeling through the thick of fighting and slew him. His
forces faltered and broke and ran from her while AlainÕs men howled in glee and set back
to their work, but even so, Eika kept coming on, and on. There were so many, and their scaly
skin so tough to penetrate. 
We canÕt hope to win through. 
Then the call came, resounding from the last rank higher up upon the hill. 
ÒFesse! the banner of Fesse!Ó 
And then they heard the horns and the thunder of cavalry. 
ÒHenry!Ó cried another man, and they let out a great cheer: ÒThe king! The king!Ó 
With new spirit they pressed forward, cleaving and hacking at the Eika. Eika banners
wavered and retreatedÑor fell. Eika soldiers hesitated. Some withdrew in an orderly
fashion, some fought on, but slowly the hill cleared of them, and Alain struggled free of the
press and got to higher ground. 
It was true! There, sweeping across the field, came the banner of Fesse and the personal
standard of Duchess Liutgard herself. Farther, a line of cavalry under the standard of
Princess Sapientia cut wide toward the east, retreating toward the riverÕs shore pursued by
those Eika who fled to their ships. Long shadows from the afternoon sun hatched the
western road. Yet another mass of soldiers emerged from the forest under King HenryÕs
banner. 
AlainÕs legs gave out from under him and he staggered, dropped, and was only caught
by the sudden flurry of hounds that pressed against him, licking him, whining. He slipped on
a clod of dirt and fell hard on his rump. 
ÒMy lord Alain.Ó A soldier gripped his arm and bent with concern over him. ÒMy lord!
Here, here! Water for our lord!Ó 
They swarmed around him and for once the hounds sat quiet and allowed the soldiers to
bring Alain water, to slide his helm off and wipe his face in cool liquid. 
ÒI never saw a man fight so fiercely!Ó cried one of his soldiers. 
ÒAye, we would have been dead if not for you, my lord. You shone with the battle lust, you
did!Ó 
He winced and thrust himself up. 
ÒA victory!Ó they cried, celebrating around him with their cheers. Alain squinted, but
most of the fighting was now out of his view. The Eika were routed. 
And the Lady of Battles had vanished. 
ÒCome,Ó he said to the hounds. He began the hike to the top. 
ÒVictory!Ó sang his soldiers as the horns sounded distantly to announce the kingÕs
arrival on the field. 
Eika corpses littered the hillside, but for every Eika who lay dead, one of his own men
did, too. 
Some few lived, some stirred, groaning, and some few would be dead soon enough, not
having been granted the mercy of a quick passage out of life. His hounds pressed round
him, Sorrow, Rage, Terror, Steadfast, Ardent, Bliss, and Fear; battered and bloody, they yet
lived when so many others had perished, including poor Good Cheer. 
He gained the height of the hill at last to find the camp in utter carnage, tents torn down
and ripped by the passage of feet and the swell and ebb of uncaring battle, chests burst
open, bags whose contents lay strewn across corpses and churned-up ground alike.

Nothing remained of LavastineÕs pavilion. Of the rough wooden observing platform,
constructed so hastily yesterday, only a few logs still stood. Alain clambered up on them. 
From this vantage place at the top of the hill, Alain could see the banners of HenryÕs
armies, but none from among those which had marched out beside Lavastine at dawn. 
ÒI pray you, come down from there, my lord!Ó called one of the soldiers. ÒThere are still
Eika lurking, and they have bows.Ó 
As Alain jumped down he stumbled on a spear haft. He caught himself, grabbed for
purchase and gripped the cloth of a tabard. A dead man rolled limply into view. It was
LavastineÕs captain. The Lavas standard lay trampled by his side. 
Alain pried it out of the dirt and hoisted it high into the air, but as his men cheered around
him, he could only weep. 
3
 They rode like demons, but the vanguard commanded by Duchess Liutgard stayed
ahead of them and thus had the honor of thundering onto the battlefield first. 
But Princess Sapientia was not to be deterred from her fair share of the glory. After their
first awful pass through the battlefield when it seemed that every Eika fell beneath their
horsesÕ hooves with no resistance, Sapientia reined her horse around and for a mercy took
an instant to catch her breath and survey the chaos. 
For chaos was all that met HannaÕs eyes. She had never seen so many people in one
place at one time, nor heard such a din of screaming and howling melded together with the
clash of weapons. Sticking tight to SapientiaÕs side, she could at least consider herself well
protected. Father Hugh as well as certain oath-bound retainers kept close to the princessÕ
side in a ring meant to protect her from death. 
Hanna was not sure at that moment whether it was worse to witness the gruesome work
of a battle from afar or to be thrown into its swirling, deadly currents. She would have gladly
forgone both and risked another avalanche in the Alfar Mountains instead. 
ÒThe ships!Ó cried Sapientia suddenly and with a sudden gloating triumph in her voice.
ÒTo the ships! We shall stop them there!Ó 
And off they went, pounding across the battlefield again. Distant banners marked the line
of other units, some faltering, some pressing forward, but Sapientia paid no heed to the rest
of the battle. She wanted to stop the Eika from reaching their ships. And, indeed, as they
came up alongside the river they waited well out of the main fighting, which flurried round a
distant hill and the flat stretch of plain beyond it, and had only isolated groups of fleeing Eika
to contend with. These they slaughtered easily. 
Ships lay beached on both the eastern and western shore, but it was the western
shoreÑthe one they guardedÑwhich concerned them now. Eight ships were already
launched into the water, steadying for the flight downstream. A half dozen bodies floated
downstream in their wake. 
ÒSend men to burn any ships they can reach!Ó ordered the princess, gesturing toward
one of her captains. 
ÒYour Highness!Ó shouted Father Hugh. ÒIs it wise to break up our formation? And we
must not let the horses get pinned up against the river. WeÕll lose our mobility.Ó 
ÒBut they are all so disordered,Ó retorted Sapientia. ÒWhat matters it, as long as we
outnumber them?Ó It was done as she commanded. Melees broke out around the ships
and, soon after, smoke rose from a handful, fire scorching up the masts. 
A warning, the touch of a horn to lips, sounded from the outer ranks. Hanna stood in her
stirrups to get a look, but what she saw chilled her and she shuddered despite the heat of
the sun over the battleground. 
Eika did indeed flee the battle now in disorderly groupsÑbut not all of them, not those who
were wounded, dead, or dying, not those who had kept their wits about them in the face of
disaster. Pressing briskly and with purpose toward the riverÕs bank marched a host of

Eika, several hundred, in good order and with several standards borne before them. With
shields raised in a tight wall and the gaps between bristling with spears, they held off the
human soldiers who harried them from behind. Were those bones swaying from the
standards? Mercifully, from this distance, she could not tell for sure. 
ÒForm up!Ó cried Sapientia, but it was too late; in her overconfidence she had allowed
her troops to scatter. 
ÒSend the Eagle for help!Ó shouted Hugh. ÒIf they can be struck from behind while we
charge from this sideÑÓ 
ÒNay!Ó cried the princess, glancing back over her shoulder to see how many riders
remained with her. Others hastily mounted and galloped back from the shoreline. One man
took an arrow from the ships and fell tumbling down from his horse. ÒI wonÕt have it said I
begged for help at the first sign of trouble. May St. Perpetua be with us this day! Who is with
me?Ó With sword raised she spurred her horse forward straight toward the Eika line.
Battle-trained, it did not shy away from the glittering ranks of spears and stone axes. 
ÒDamn!Ó swore Hugh as her retainers followed her. He caught Hanna by the arm before
she could ride after them. ÒGo to the king!Ó Then, sword drawn, he raced after the princess
into the thick of the fight. 
Already the Eika line had swung north along the river, cutting off HannaÕs escape in that
direction. Princess Sapientia vanished into a maelstrom of battle as the Eika host
swallowed her troops. Some riders fled the skirmish, abandoning her; others bore down
after her into the Eika tide, both sides caught in a desperate struggleÑone for life, one for
honor. In a moment Hanna, too, would be trapped by the flood tide of the battle as it reached
the riverÕs bank. 
She kicked her horse to the south, down along the shoreline toward the ruins of Gent, and
as she rode, her spear scraping up and down along her thigh, she began to pray. 
4
 Sanglant led them through the streets at a steady jog. Fifth Son had withdrawn his
troops, but other Eika scurried through Gent, fleeing the battle now that the drums were
silent and Bloodheart, and his illusions, dead. 
Under the unsparing eye of the sun, the prince appeared perhaps more pathetic than
appalling. Yet he was a shocking enough sight with the five monstrous dogs in attendance
as if they were all that remained of his proud Dragons. Ò KingÕs Dragon he had once been.
Now, except for his shape and the princely authority of his bearing, he was scarcely different
from those dogs. 
But he had not forgotten how to kill. 
Their skirmishes were brief, and though Lavastine had lost three men in the fight within
the cathedral, he lost none now, not with Sanglant at their head. Eika were as like to run from
them, seeing the prince in his madness, as join the fray. 
The gates lay open and they found Ulric and most of his party on the bridge, staring at the
river plain beyond where the battle still raged. Clouds of dust as well as the lay of the land
obscured the fighting. 
ÒMy lord count!Ó cried Captain Ulric when he recognized their group. 
ÒBeware!Ó shouted one of his men. A volley of arrows showered into them. Two soldiers
dropped, one with a hand clasped to his thigh, another pierced in the throat. 
Sanglant growled and leaped, dogs after him, into a stand of brush that moments later
Liath saw contained four skulking Eika. She made ready to shoot... 
But there was no need. Sanglant struck down two even as his dogs bowled over and
rended the others, although one of the dogs was slashed so badly that its fellows
immediately turned on it and bit through its throat. 
ÒThere!Ó shouted Lavastine. Liath wrenched her gaze away from Sanglant to see a
troop of horsemen riding out Doos of the dusty murk that was the battleground. At once men

shouted and waved, and within moments Lord Geoffrey reined up. He had but twenty men
remaining as well as some extra horses following along. 
ÒCousin!Ó he cried, and he flung himself off his horse to clap Lavastine vigorously on the
shoulder. ÒAi, Lord! I thought you dead, surely.Ó 
ÒAny news of those who remained behind on the hill?Ó 
Lord Geoffrey could only shrug. Then, eyes widening, he stared at the apparition that,
silent but all the more frightening because of that silence, now commandeered one of the
riderless horses and swung up onto it. ÒLady have mercy!Ó he breathed. ÒWhat is it?Ó 
The prince flung away the spear and galloped northwest toward the thickest cloud of
dust. 
ÒEagle! Take a horse and ride after him. The king will have my head if he gets himself
killed. I doubt he is in his right mind.Ó With this cool assessment, Lavastine turned back to
his cousin. ÒHas the king arrived?Ó 
ÒI know not, cousin. It is madness out there, and most of our people long since lost.Ó 
ÒYouÕve done well to survive this long.Ó But Lavastine did not seem to mean the words
as praise, any more than he meant his earlier comment, calling Sanglant out of his right
mind, as censure. ÒEagle!Ó His gaze tripped over her where she still stood, gawping,
frozen, unable to act. ÒGo!Ó 
It was easier to obey than to think. She took the mount offered her and left them just as a
party of Eika came running and a new skirmish was joined. 
Chaos. 
Through the streaming battle she rode on the trail of Sanglant, who was himself all
movement. Eika fled in confusion or retreated in disciplined groups, and cavalry charged
through and reformed and charged back, scattering them, cutting down those who ran and
pounding again and again those who held steady. 
Sanglant drove his horse wherever the fight was thickest. Certainly he was brave;
perhaps he was also insane. After he rallied a group of horsemen who had gotten cut off
from their captain, she heard his name called out above the riot of noise like a talisman. She
tried merely to keep away from Eika, for in this tempest she had few clear shots and plenty
of chances to get hacked down from behind, though most Eika seemed to be running for
their lives. It was all she could do to keep Sanglant in her sight. 
Through the haze of dust she caught a glimpse of FesseÕs banner. Then it vanished,
whipping against the wind as its bearer galloped away in another direction with FesseÕs
duchess and troops. 
They had come so far over the ground that she did not know where she was. Her eyes
streamed from the dust kicked up and the glare of the westering sun. Ahead, a soldier
leaned from his horse and struck down one of the dogs following Sanglant and rode on,
spear ready to pierce the next which, loping after the prince, was unaware of the threat to its
back. 
But Sanglant was not unaware. He reined his horse hard around and brought the flat of
his sword down against the soldierÕs padded shoulder. The man tumbled to the ground and
the dogs leaped forward, only to be brought up short. Liath could not hear what the prince
shouted, only saw the terrified soldier scramble back onto his horse. 
Then, horns. ÒTo the princess! SheÕs surrounded!Ó 
ÒTo me! Form up!Ó the prince cried, his hoarse tenor ringing out over chaos. Shining
with the heat of battle on him, he was not as frightful a sight as he had first appeared when
he was BloodheartÕs prisoner, a wild, chained beast. Men came riding to form up around
him, and as his company gathered, they shouted jubilantly, sure of victory. Where Princess
SapientiaÕs banner had gotten trapped in a strong current of Eika battling their way to the
river, Sanglant and the newly regrouped cavalry drove in and scattered the enemy before
them. 
ÒThe king! King Henry comes!Ó 
Liath could not see the princess, for the entire flank had crumbled. But as the Eika line

dissolved into rout, she saw Sanglant struggle free of the crush and ride northwest out
beyond the fighting to where neglected fields lay drowsy under the afternoon sun. She fought
her way out of the press and galloped after him. 
He rode on, not looking back. Three Eika dogs pursued him as he left the battle behind,
and she was too far away to shout a warning. At her back she heard horsemen, and she
glanced behind to see a dozen or so men wearing the tabards of those he had rallied on the
field. 
Ahead, a line of trees and scrub marked the course of a tributary. There she lost sight of
him as he crashed in among the trees. When she found his abandoned horse, she
dismounted and prudently waited until her pursuit came up beside her. 
ÒMy God, Eagle!Ó said the man, a captain by his bearing and armor. ÒWas that Prince
Sanglant? We thought him dead!Ó 
ÒTaken captive,Ó she said. 
ÒAnd survived a year.Ó Around him, his men murmured. She heard in their voices the
melody of awe, composing now the beginning, she supposed, of another story of
SangiantÕs courage and cunning and strength. ÒBut whereÕs he gone?Ó 
They followed his track, made manifest by a litter of filthy shreds of tabard and tunic and
leggings, things that had once been clothing but now were only foul rags. He had dropped
the sword and the gold torque by the waterÕs edge. The current still bore sticks and grass
and, once, a bloodied glove quickly carried along the far bank, but where a bend in the
stream and a fallen tree made somewhat of a pool he had gone headlong into the water. 
When they reached him, he was methodically tearing off every last piece of clothing that
still hung on him, some of it adhered to his skin. The three Eika dogs had thrashed out after
him and now ferociously worried at the odorous remains, such as they could grab in their
jaws before it swirled downstream. 
ÒMy lord prince!Ó The captain strode forward, and at his exclamation the dogs howled
and made for shore. 
Sanglant barked at them. There was no other word for it; it was not a spoken command.
They obeyed nonetheless and contented themselves with sitting half in and half out of water
on a bank more pebble than sand, growling at any who came too near while the prince took
handfuls of sand and scoured his skin and then his hair as if he meant to scrape himself
raw. 
ÒLady bless us,Ó murmured one of the soldiers as if for all of them, ÒheÕs so thin.Ó 
But as if in the coarse river sand lay the property of truth, something emerged from the
scouring, something recognizable: the man she remembered, although he was clothed only
in water and that only up to his waist. 
ÒI will never love any man but him.Ó 
Said so long ago, spoken so recklessly, what had she bound herself to when she made
that declaration before Wolfhere? 
He turned. If he saw her among those who waited for him, he gave no sign of it. He
extended a hand. ÒA knife.Ó 
But the captain stripped off his own armor and his own tunic, and with tunic and knife he
advanced cautiously. The dogs nipped at him, but Sanglant waded out of the deeper water
and called them away. 
Liath could not help but look. Now that he was somewhat clean she could see that
although his hair was long and tangled, he still had no beard even after a year without any
means to shave it clean. He had no hair on his chest, either, but lower down he resembled
his human kinsmen in every respect. She looked away quickly, for this was not like the work
she and FellÕs soldiers had done at the riverÕs mouth, all of them equals in labor and none
of them having the leisure to be shy about what needed to be done. He was not a curiosity to
be stared at, or at least ought not to be. 
When she looked up again he had the tunic on, a plain garment of good, strong weave
and stained with sweat along the neck and under the arms, but compared to what he had

worn before it looked fitting for a prince. It hung loosely around his frame, though it was a
little short: He stood half a head taller than the robust captain, and despite his thinness he
was still a big man. Now, taking the knife, he began to hack at his hair. 
ÒI beg you, my lord prince,Ó said the captain. He had a kind of weeping plaint to his
voice as if he were about to burst into tears out of pity. ÒLet me cut it for you.Ó 
Sanglant paused. ÒNo,Ó he said. Then, and finally, as if only when he had scrubbed
himself clean of the breath of his captivity dared he acknowledge her, he looked up to where
she stood half hidden among the rest. He had known she was there all along. ÒLiath.Ó 
How could she not come forward? The knife had a good sharp edge and she had
trimmed DaÕs hair many a time, although this was utterly different. 
He knelt suddenly and with a sharp sigh. A tang of the old smell, the reek of his
imprisonment, still clung to him and no doubt would for some time, but standing this close
was no punishment. Ai, Lady, his hair was coarse and too matted to be truly clean yet, but
when sometimes she had to shift him to get a better angle for cutting, she touched his skin
and would bite her lip to stop herself from trembling, and go on. 
ÒWhat is this?Ó She scraped the back of her hand on the rough iron collar that ringed his
neck. Under it, the skin had been rubbed raw countless times and even now began to leak
blood. 
ÒLeave it.Ó 
She left it. No one dared go forward to pick up sword and torque, not with the dogs
guarding these treasures. 
The long rays of the sun splintered into glitters on the rippling current of the stream. Black
mats of hair littered the ground as she cut. Made cautious by the noise and the thrashing in
the water, the birds had fallen silent, all but a warbler among the reeds who sang vigorously
to complain about the disturbance. Far away, a horn lifted its voice and fell silent. Horses
shifted and snorted. A man whispered. Another peed, though she could only hear him, not
see, for he had faced into the trees to do his business. 
ÒHis heart,Ó Sanglant whispered suddenly. ÒHow did you know he had hidden his heart
in the priestÕs body? Whose heart lies hidden in Rikin fjall, then? It must be the priestÕs.Ó 
ÒI donÕt understand.Ó But perhaps she was beginning to. She said it more to keep him
talking, to hear his voice. She had thought never to hear that voice again. 
ÒHe couldnÕt be killed because he didnÕt have a heart. He hid it. HeÑÓ Then he halted
as suddenly as if he had lost his power of speech between one word and the next. 
ÒItÕs done,Ó she said quickly, to say something, anything, torn as she was between the
promise of this intimacy he had thrust upon her and her complete ignorance of what manner
of man he now was and how much he might have changed from the man she had fallen in
love with in besieged Gent. ÒIt will have to do, unless youÕd like me to comb it out, for I
hope I still have my comb in my pouch.Ó Then she flushed, cursing her rash words; only
mothers, wives, or servants combed a manÕs hair if he did not do it himself. 
Instead of replying he stood and turnedÑbut not to look at her. Belatedly she turned as
well when she heard the crashing in the trees. Another party approached. 
The soldiers were already kneeling. She was too stupid, too astounded, to do so, and
only at the very last moment, when the king broke from the trees, did she drop down as was
fitting. 
The king strode forward and stopped dead some ten paces from the prince. There was
silence except for the rushing mutter of the stream and the gurgle of water tumbling over the
fallen logÑand an echoing whisper from the kingÕs retinue, who followed him out from the
trees and stood staring at the scene before them. 
The sun eased below the highest trees. All lay bathed in the mellow glow of
midsummerÕs late afternoon, the opening hour of the long twilight. As the silence drew out,
the warbler quieted but now other birds, made bold by the quiet, began to call and sing: a
thin Òzee-zee-zeeÓ among the treetops and the monotonous Òchiff-chaffÓ song in the
scrub. A woodpecker fluttered away, rising and swooping down and rising again, yellow

rump a flash against the green foliage. Liath still held the knife in one hand and a last hank of
SanglantÕs hair in the other. 
At last the king spoke. ÒMy son.Ó It had a harsh sound, startlingly so, but when she saw
the tears start from his eyes and course down his cheeks, she understood that the
harshness stemmed from the depth of his remembered anguish and the fresh bloom of joy. 
He said nothing more, but he removed his finely embroidered short cloak from his own
back, unfastening the gold-and-sapphire brooch, and wrapped it around SanglantÕs
shoulders with his own hands, like a servant. This close, Liath could see his hands shaking
under the weight of such a powerful emotion: the incredible and almost overpowering pain of
seeing alive the beloved son he had thought dead. 
Sanglant dropped abruptly to his knees, exhausted or overcome by emotion, and laid his
damp head against his fatherÕs hands in the way of a sinner seeking absolution or a child
seeking comfort. 
ÒCome, son, rise,Ó said the king raggedly. Then he laughed softly. ÒI have already
heard many stories about your courage on the field and how you rallied troops who had
fallen into disarray.Ó 
The prince did not look up, but when he spoke, there welled up from him so much enmity
that the force of his emotion alone might have felled an entire company of Eika. ÒI would
have killed more of them if I could.Ó 
ÒMay God have mercy on us all,Ó murmured Henry. He took Sanglant by the elbow and
helped him rise. ÒHow did you survive?Ó 
As if in answerÑthe only answer he knew how to giveÑSanglant turned his head to look at
Liath. 
5
The hounds smelled him coming first. They broke away from AlainÑall of them, even
Sorrow and RageÑto bound down the hill with happy barks, their tails whipped into a blur.
Beyond, a company of mounted soldiers approached the ruined camp. Alain picked his way
down through the dead and dying to meet Count Lavastine. 
Along the ramparts where Eika dead lay in heaps and the few survivors dug among the
corpses to find any wounded who might yet have a hope of living, Alain handed the ragged
standard to Lavastine. ÒI thought you must be dead,Ó he said, then burst into tears. 
Lavastine raised one eyebrow. ÒDid I not say I would return to you through the Eika host
and meet you here? Come now, son.Ó He took him by the arm and led him down, away
from the terrible work yet to be done, stripping and then burning the dead Eika and giving a
decent burial to the hundreds who had fallen. The river plain beyond held a scene just as
dismaying to look upon: as if high waters had overtaken the fields and ditches, washing in a
flood tide of corpses and depositing them in eddies or along invisible streams where strong
currents had once flowed. 
ÒGood Cheer is dead.Ó Alain choked back tears in order to have breath to confess his
weakness. ÒAnd the good captain besides. I lost Graymane. We were overtaken by Eika.
So few are leftÑÓ 
ÒThat any are left is astonishing. Now, Alain, do not speak so. We will settle the
captainÕs widow very richly, I assure you, and mourn him as he deserves. And you see,
Graymane was found on the field and returned to me unharmed. As for Good CheerÑÓ He
busied himself patting the hounds, rubbing his knuckles into their great heads, and letting
them lick him as they jumped around and, finally, settled down around him. Was there a tear
in his eye? But a wind had picked up from the river and the spark of moisture vanishedÑor
was only a trick of the light. 
 Now those who remained of LavastineÕs infantry came forward to praise Alain and
speak of his great feats in driving back the Eika when all was lost, how he had
single-handedly struck down a huge Eika princeling, how he had shone in battle with an

unearthly light, surely granted to him by the LordÕs Hand. 
Alain was ashamed to listen, but Lavastine nodded gravely and set a hand possessively
on his sonÕs shoulder. Only Lord Geoffrey fidgeted, for he had also dismounted and now
attended his cousin. 
ÒWe must ride to where the king sets up camp,Ó said Lavastine. ÒWe have much to
accomplish.Ó 
ÒIsnÕt this work enough?Ó Alain gestured about them. 
ÒThat we killed Bloodheart and routed the Eika? It was what I hoped for, and indeed all
has fallen out as I wished.Ó 
ÒAs you wished, cousin!Ó Lord Geoffrey stepped forward. The remnants of LavastineÕs
cavalry, some hundred and fifty men when they had marched onto the river plain two days
ago, loitered behind him. Alain counted not more than thirty men as blood-spattered and
dirty as was Lord Geoffrey himself. 
LavastineÕs face was smeared with dust and on one cheek ragged circular cuts and a
ring of tiny bruises tore the skin where his mail coif had been crushed into his face. He found
an empty helmet on the ground and set a boot up on it. The wind skirled through his hair and
made the Lavas standard rustle and rise briefly, as if the black hounds embroidered there
had taken a scent. He picked a twig out of his light beard and with an expression of distaste
tossed it to the ground. With the wind came the scent of blood and death. In the air carrion
crows circled, but there were too many soldiers still roaming the field seeking out wounded
or stripping Eika of their mail skirts for the birds to land and feast. 
ÒNot my good soldiers,Ó said the count, musing. ÒTheir lives I regret, as I always do. But
we took Gent without HenryÕs aid. Thus it will be my privilege to present Gent like a gift to
Henry when we meet.Ó 
ÒWhat ambition is this?Ó demanded Geoffrey. 
ÒNot ambition for myself. For my son.Ó 
No one would have missed GeoffreyÕs blanch, but he made no reply. 
¡°My army took Gent,Ó continued Lavastine. ÒThat gives me a claim to it.Ó 
ÒBut surely the children of Countess Hildegard will inherit these lands,Ó protested Alain. 
ÒIf she has children. If they have survived the winter with the Eika raiding in their lands. If
her kin are strong enough to sway the king in his judgment. But if Henry is beholden to me,
Alain, then why not take GentÑwhich you will recall lies within his purviewÑand grant it to
Tallia as dower? Thus it will come into our hands, as part of the marriage settlementÑor the
morning gift, should she make one to you. Remember, Alain, as the daughter of a duchess it
is her right to gift you, as the son of a mere countÑÒ Here any waking soul could hear the
irony. ÒÑwith a morning gift. Although you may, of course, gift her with some smaller token
as well. Is that not so, Geoffrey?Ó 
Geoffrey simply gave a curt bow in acknowledgment, since his wife AldegundÕs lands
and inheritances were of a higher degree than any he could expect to receiveÑunless he
inherited, as he had once hoped to do, the county of Lavas from Lavastine. 
ÒMany a blood feud has started when a bride and groom of equal rank tried to outdo
each other in an elaborate morning gift. It can be considered an insult for a noble of lesser
degree to make a richer gift to his newly-wedded spouse than that which she gifts him, if her
position and kin are superior to his. That is why we will not ask for Gent outright. But through
Tallia we can still make a claim on these lands and on our rights to a portion of the tariffs
taken from the merchants and the port.Ó 
They made a ragged procession, thirty riders, perhaps sixty infantry, but a proud one. In
this way in the long lingering twilight of midsummer they picked their way across the
battlefield to the place where the king had set up camp. The royal banner snapped in the
evening breeze from atop the kingÕs pavilion. 
In front, tables had been set up and on them a victory feast laid outÑsuch as it was: mostly
mutton and beef from some among the many herds of cattle and sheep which under the
protection of the Eika had flourished on farmlands gone to pasture in the past year. But

there was also bread, not too stale, brought from Steleshame, and a few other delicacies
preserved for such a moment. A king must reward his followers, especially on the field after
such a triumph. 
With Alain at his side, Lavastine knelt before the king and brashly, even presumptuously,
offered Gent into the kingÕs handsÑLavastineÕs to offer because his troops had won
through at the gates. But Henry had anticipated Lavastine. The chair to the kingÕs right sat
empty, and it was to this chair that Henry waved the count, giving him pride of place. 
An unfamiliar man with a thin, haunted face and bronzish skin sat to the kingÕs left. He
was dressed as richly as any noble there, and Alain heard the servingfolk whisper that this
was the kingÕs lost son. Instead of the gold torque marking royal kinship, he wore a rough
iron slave collar around his neck. He did not speak. 
To Alain was given the signal honor of standing at the kingÕs right shoulder and pouring
him wine. From his place, Alain could seeÑand hearÑthe nobles arguing among
themselves, made irritable by hunger and the relief of a battle won at great cost. 
From her place to the right of Lavastine, thrust out from her usual seat of honor, Princess
Sapientia complained to her distant cousin. Duchess Liutgard. ¡°He stole my glory!Ó
ÒThatÕs not how I heard the tale! I heard your entire flank crumbled . . . and that he
arrived in time to rally your forces when you could not!Ó 
Of SapientiaÕs adviser and LiathÕs tormentor, Father Hugh, there was no sign. Liath
stood in the shadows next to one of her fellow Eagles, a tough-looking woman who came
forward, now and again, to whisper messages received from scouts into the kingÕs ear.
Liath had an arm draped around the shoulders of a straw-haired young Eagle Alain recalled
from the battle at Kassel. She and her companion surveyed the assembly as if to see who
was missing. 
HenryÕs army had taken light casualties, all but the flank commanded by Princess
Sapientia which had apparently had the misfortune to hit a ferociously vicious Eika attack
when they had come between a retreating princeling and his ships. 
Besides Lavastine and his cousin, there were few noble survivors of the army Lavastine
had brought to Gent. Lord Dedi was slain; Lady AmaliaÕs body had not yet been found.
Lord Wichman had been pulled, alive, from a veritable maelstrom of corpses, the detritus of
his final stand, but he lay sorely wounded in a tent and it was not known if he would live.
Captain Ulric, of Autun, had won through with most of his company of light cavalry intact. 
But it was the fate of the common men, nameless and unmentioned in this assembly,
which gnawed at Alain. Raised in a village, he knew what grief would come to their homes in
the wake of this news, all invisible to the sight of the great lords who marked it as a victory.
Who would till their fields? Who would marry their sweethearts now? What son could take
the place of the one who had fallen, never to return? 
There was still light to see as platters were brought and set before king and company, but
in the background the first torches were lit. The moon had risen in the east above the ruins of
Gent, and now as dusk settled over the land, the moon spilled its sullen light over the distant
fields where the nameless dead lay, men and Eika alike. 
A platter was set down before the king and his lost son. 
Without warning, the prince bolted down the food as if he were a starving dog let free with
the scraps. Gasps came, and gigglingÑquickly stifledÑfrom the assembly. From behind,
dogs began to bark and howl furiously, and in answer the Lavas hounds, which had been
staked out some way off, growled and barked in challenge. 
At once, the prince leaped up. Grease dripped from his lips. The king placed a hand,
firmly, on his sleeve. Alain felt such a terrible surge of pity for the prince that he moved
between Henry and Sanglant and made much of pouring more wine so as to draw attention
to himself and away from them. 
That was all it took. With an effort made the more obvious by the way his hands shook,
the prince commenced eating again, only very, very slowly and with such painstaking care
that anyone would know he could barely stop himself from gobbling down his food like a

savage. 
ÒYour Majesty,Ó said Lavastine, catching AlainÕs eye and indicating with the tilt of his
head that the young man could now move back. His ploy had served its purpose. ÒWith
great cost to myself and my people, I have freed Gent from the Eika and killed the creature
who held your son prisoner for so long.Ó 
ÒSo you have,Ó said the king, with some difficulty turning away from his son to regard the
count. 
ÒWe have spoken of a match between my son and Lady Tallia.Ó 
ÒYou are frank with me, Count Lavastine.Ó 
ÒI always will be, Your Majesty. You know what I want and what I have paid to gain it.Ó 
ÒBut do you know what I want,Ó responded the king, Òand what I need from you in order
to achieve it?Ó 
ÒNay, Your Majesty, I do not know, but I am willing to listen...Ó 
The king glanced up at Alain. ÒA good-looking lad. I have heard great praise of his
courage and skill at arms this day. That he held that small hill against such a tide of Eika is
incredible. I have no objection to a marriage between him and my niece Tallia...if it is
accompanied on your part by an oath that you and your heir will support me faithfully in all my
undertakings.Ó 
Before Lavastine could reply, the prince stumbled up from his chair and fled into the
darkness. The king made to rise. 
ÒNay, Your Majesty,Ó said Alain, who had a sudden idea of what was wrong. ÒIÕll go
after him, if you permit.Ó 
The king nodded. Alain followed. 
He had not gone six steps when Liath appeared beside him. 
ÒWhat happened?Ó she whispered, as anxious as a hound in a thunderstorm. 
ÒItÕs nothing serious,Ó he said quietly, gentling her with a touch on the arm. ÒItÕs best if
I go alone. Do you think he would want you to see him when heÕs not well?Ó Here he trailed
off. 
After a moment she nodded and returned to her post. 
Alain and a few men-at-arms found the prince just beyond the edge of camp, vomiting.
When he had done, he began to shake, resting on his hands. ÒAi, God,Ó he muttered as if
to himself. ÒDonÕt let them see me.Ó 
Alain ventured forward and laid a hand on his shoulder. At once the prince started up,
growling, just like a dog. 
ÒHush, now,Ó said Alain firmly, as he would to his own hounds, and the prince shook
himself and seemed to come to his senses. ÒIf youÕve been starved, then you canÕt put
rich food in your stomach all at once, or at least, thatÕs what my Aunt Bel would say.Ó He
still winced when he said the name. ÒShe who used to be my aunt,Ó he added to no one
except his smarting conscience. 
ÒWho are you?Ó said the prince. He had an oddly hoarse voice which made him seem
stricken with grief when in fact he was likely only exhausted and ill. But he had calmed
enough now to wipe at his mouth with the back of a hand. 
ÒI am LavastineÕs son.Ó 
Dogs began to bark again, and the prince lifted his head to scent, then started back and
became a man again. ÒGod have mercy on me,Ó he muttered. ÒWill I never be rid of the
chains Bloodheart bound me with?Ó 
ÒIt is the collar.Ó Why he spoke so freely Alain did not know, only thatÑunlike the
kingÑthis half wild prince did not awe him. ÒAs long as you wear it at your neck, then surely
you will not be free of BloodheartÕs hand on you.Ó 
ÒAs long as I wear it, I am reminded of what he did to me. I am reminded of what I was
and what he called me.Ó His voice was so bitter. Alain ached for him, and what he had
suffered. 
But even Alain was not immune from curiosity. ÒWhat did he call you?Ó 

The prince only shook his head. ÒIÕll go back now. I wonÕt forget this kindness youÕve
shown me.Ó 
They returned to where the king sat sipping at his wine and the company ate with the
self-conscious assiduousness of people who chafe with curiosity but know that their regnant
will not tolerate questions. The prince sat with exaggerated care and with even more
exaggerated care sipped sparingly at the wine and ate the merest scrap of meat and bread.
But sometimes his nostrils would flare, and he would lift his head and search into the
assembly as if he had heard a whispered comment that angered him. The rest of the feast
passed without incident. They ate lustily and drank without stinting on what was left of the
wine. 
ÒYou acquitted yourself well, son,Ó said Lavastine afterward when they had retired to a
tent commandeered from lesser nobles in HenryÕs train. ÒI am proud of you. Ai, Lord,
Prince Sanglant is more like to one of the hounds than to a human man. But I suppose it is
his motherÕs blood which stains him.Ó He scratched TerrorÕs ears and the old hound
grunted ecstatically. Alain tended the gash that had opened up FearÕs hindquarters. He
had already bound up ArdentÕs leg and washed the cuts on Sorrow and Rage. Steadfast
was asleep, while Bliss waited patiently for his turn under AlainÕs hands. 
Now that LavastineÕs wounds had been tended to, Alain and Lavastine and the hounds
were alone in the tent. From outside he heard the low rumble of activity as wounded were
carried in, scouts came and went, men looted and burned the Eika dead under the moonÕs
light, and sentries called out challenges. 
ÒHe must have suffered terribly,Ó said Alain, scratching Fear under his jaw. 
ÒBut he is alive. They say he came attended by Eika dogs, as faithful to him as his
Dragons once were. What do you think of that?Ó 
Alain laughed. ÒOught I to think something of it when I sit here with these faithful
beasts?Ó 
Lavastine grunted. ÒTrue enough.Ó He stretched, wincing. ÒWhen I was your age, I
would have felt no ache in my bones, even after a day such as this. What a strange creature
the Eika princeling was, to let us go like that in the cathedral when he could have killed us all.
How fore-sighted of you to free him, Alain.Ó 
ÒEven if meant sacrificing Lackling in his place?Ó The old shame still burned. 
ÒWho is Lackling?Ó Lavastine yawned, stretched again, and tied up the hounds, then
called for a servingman to take off his boots. ÒWhat happened to the Eagle, do you
know?Ó 
Alain saw there was no point in reminding his father about Lackling. ÒShe went back to
her duties.Ó 
ÒYou were wise to gain her loyalty, son. It seems to me that when you marry, Lady
TalliaÕs consequence will allow you to count Eagles in your retinue. You must ask for that
one. There is some power at work within her. It would be well to have it for our use, if we
can.Ó 
Marry Tallia. All else that Lavastine said swirled round him like the nightÕs breeze and
faded into nothing. Marry Tallia. 
Lavastine went on to discuss HenryÕs plans to send for Tallia and have her brought to his
progress, but the words passed in a haze. When the hounds were settled and a rough pallet
was set in place, Alain lay down beside his father and closed his eyes to see the terrible
images of battle bursting like fire against his eyes. The rose burned at his chest like a hot
coal. But slowly the pain faded. With the snoring of the hounds beside him and his fatherÕs
even breath on his ear, the awful images faded into a vision of Tallia, her wheatpale hair
unbound and her solemn face turned toward him. His wife. Bound to him by their mutual
oaths sworn before witnesses and blessed by a biscop. He slept, and he dreamed. 
Both current and wind aid him this night. He can smell the sea and the estuary before
he gets too close. He beaches his eight ships on the western shore and sends scouts
westward to guard against an incursion of the Soft OnesÕ soldiers, should they have sent

any in this direction to seek out the fleeing RockChildren. No doubt they are too busy
killing those who fled in disorder. No doubt they are too busy burying their own kind, for
they are distractible in their grief. 
The disaster brought on by BloodheartÕs death will hurt the RockChildren, certainly,
but only a fool would not find advantage in it. No one of BloodheartÕs ambitious sons
could have killed the enchanter without bringing down on himself BloodheartÕs
vengeance. Now that fate is reserved for another. 
Now, after the rout, how many of BloodheartÕs sons survive? How many had taken
their followers to raid eastward and did not fight at Gent at all? All this he must consider
before he knows how and when to act. 
The old priest sits in the belly of the boat and sings nonsense as he wipes blood from
the oozing wound in his chest and licks it off his fingers. 
¡°How did you do it?Ó he asks the old wizened creature. ÒWhy did you do it?Ó 
¡°Why are you curious?Ó asks the old priest, who talks mostly in questions. 
¡°Bloodheart found your heart hidden in Rikin fjall. He forced the bargain on you, to
hide his heart in place of your own.Ó 
¡°Will anyone ever find my heart now?Ó cackles the priest. No doubt he is half mad.
His kind usually are; it is the price they pay for their power. ÒWhat happened to your
heart?Ó he asks again. ÒHow did you manage to hide BloodheartÕs heart in your own
chest when it was meant to be hidden in the fjall?Ó 
¡°Did he think he was cleverer than I?Ó The old priest snorts, and for an instant cunning
sparks in his rheumy eyes. The creature is very old, the oldest male he has ever seen.
ÒDid he think I would take my old heart to where there might be battle? I could have been
killed!Ó 
¡°Do you fear death, then? The curse of the nestbrotherÑÓ ÒThe curse! The curse! Do
I look like a hatchling? I turned the curse. I stole BloodheartÕs voice and finished the
speaking for him. Hai! Hai!Ó He begins to sing, but the song has an unsettling flow, like a
river running uphill. Ò ÔLet this curse fall on the one whose hand commands the blade
that pierced his heart.Õ Ailailai!Ó 
There is no more sense to be gotten from the old creature, so he only tests the chains
with which he had bound the old priest before giving orders to his soldiers. Of those
cousins remaining to him, he leaves half to guard the ships. The other half he takes with
him as he trots north just above the bluffs to the very mouth of the river. 
Fifth son of the fifth litter, he knows how to make use of a lesson: He was captured once
by this male named Count Lavastine when his ship got bottled up at the mouth of the
Vennu River. It will not happen again. If a trap lies in wait at the mouth of this river, he will
be ready for it. 
He smells human soldiers long before he sees the telltale lines of a small fort set upon
a bluff and somewhat hidden by a cunning layer of branches and scrub. Some of the
plants woven into the log ramparts still live, though he can taste the brittle decay of the
others on his tongue when he licks the air. 
His cousins stir and growl restlessly behind him, for they were granted no leave to fight
when they fled Gent. He can taste their dissatisfaction, but they have not learned patience.
 
They will learn it from him tonight, or they will die. 
He lifts a hand and gestures to them to fan out. The ground slips beneath his feet, sand
and coarse grass and such plants as can stand the ever-present blast of the wind. He
bangs spear on shield and from the depths of the fort he hears the frantic rustling of men
struggling to ready themselves for battle. 
¡°Hear me!Ó he calls. ÒSend your leader to talk, for my force outnumbers yours.Ó He
tastes the air, scenting for their essences. ÒYou have but some thirty of your kind, and I

have over one hundred of mine. I give you this choice: Fight us and die, this night, or
retreat from your fort south and west to the camp of your kin, and live.Ó 
¡°How can we trust you?Ó shouts one of them, appearing only as a dark shadow of
helm against the sky and a certain tang of stubborn resiliance in the air. 
¡°I am the one whom Lord Alain freed at Lavas Holding. By the honor of that lord, I
swear I will do you no harm . . . as long as you retreat at once and leave this place to me.Ó
The man spits, though the spray cannot travel so far. ÒYou, an Eika, swearing by our
good Lord AlainÕs honor!Ó Stubborn creature! He has no time to waste. Soon the other
ships will come. 
¡°Then if you have a brave man among you, send him out and I will stand hostage
under his knife while the rest leave. When they are well away, he may follow unmolested.
But you must act now, or we will attack.Ó 
They confer. He canÕt hear them, but their fear is a bracing scent on the breeze,
pungent on his tongue. By now they must know they are surrounded and outnumbered. 
In the end, of course, they agree. They have no other choice except to die, and Soft
Ones always struggle to live even when they must live like dogs to do so. Like the old
priest, they fear death and the passage to the fjall of the heavens, and that fear can be
used against them. 
One of them emerges. He goes forward and lets the man stand with knife poised at his
throat while the others march in a swift but orderly fashion into a night made gray by the
lowering moon. His own soldiers storm the fort after them and circle down to the strand.
They bark to him. There are machines within the fort, and with some impatience he stares
at the man before him, who at last withdraws the knife and retreats slowly. 
¡°I remember you,Ó says the man, and then turns and runs as if expecting an arrow in
the back. At once, one of his cousins raises his bow and nocks an arrow for the easy shot.
He springs forward and bats bow and arrow down. 
The rash cousin swears. ÒYou are weak to let them run!Ó It takes only a moment to kill
him for his disrespect. Then he turns on the others. ÒQuestion me if you must, but do not
disobey me. I intend to accomplish what Bloodheart could not accomplish because he
was not willing to use the lessons of the WiseMothers to guide him.Ó 
He waits as blood leaks onto his feet and the fire that animated the cousin spills onto
the earth and soaks into the ground. No one speaks. 
¡°Then, go,Ó he orders, for he has already seen what the count set in place here. A
cunning man, the count, a worthy foe. 
Soon the other ships begin to come, fleeing the death of Bloodheart and the collapse
of his army and his authority. He watches dispassionately as they founder on the black
tide. Soon the mouth of the Veser is awash in wreckage as some swim free of the chain
and the piles to cast up on the western shore. Those who will not bare their throats before
him his soldiers kill. 
Soon he will have to dismantle the chain so he can sail through safely himself and
return to Rikin fjord with his prize, but for this night, at least, he will destroy as many of his
rivals as he can. 
There will not be many survivors from those who gathered at GentÑand those who
survive will belong to him. 
His followers do their work well, and efficiently. He climbs to the little fort and from this
vantage point he watches as the heart of Old-Man, the moon, sinks into the west and the
stars, the eyes of the most ancient Mothers, stare with their luminous indifference upon
the streaming waters and the silent earth. In the fjall of the heavens, the vale of black ice,
only the cold holds sway and their whispering conversations take lifetimes to complete.
But they are nonetheless beautiful. 

6
It was night, but Liath could not sleep. 
She had sent Hathui to sleep and offered to stand middle night watch, as one Eagle
always did, over the kingÕs pavilion together with the guards. 
With the moon one day past full, only the brightest stars were visible. But she could not
even concentrate enough to watch those stars and read their secret turnings in the language
Da taught her, the language of the mathematici. 
Sanglant was alive. 
Alive. 
Yet so changed. 
Yet not changed at all. 
ÒEagle.Ó 
The whisper came out of the shadows, twisted from the steady breath of the night breeze
on the many pavilions staked out around her. She stiffened and turned to seek out the
voice. 
Two guards with torches appeared out of the gloom. A third man led a mule, and there,
on the muleÕs back, sat a woman in the robes of a cleric. But she did not venture in far
enough that the guards beside the kingÕs tent could see her face. 
Cautiously, Liath walked out to meet her. 
It was Sister Rosvita, looking drawn and anxious. 
ÒArenÕt you with the train?Ó 
Rosvita allowed her servant to help her dismount and then waved him and her guards
away. They retreated and stood a few paces off. ÒI was, but I had to leave and come here,
and the moon gave enough light for the journey.Ó 
ÒBut some Eika may still haunt the woods!Ó 
ÒIt was not as far as I feared it would be. We saw no Eika. I must speak to you, Eagle. It
is by the LadyÕs grace that my path brought me directly to you.Ó 
To LiathÕs amazement, the cleric took a bundle wrapped in linen from a bag tied to the
muleÕs saddle and held it up before her. Liath knew immediately what it was. 
 ÒHow did you?Ó she whispered, scarcely able to force the words out. 
ÒDo you know what is in here? Nay, do not trouble yourself to answer. I see that you do. I
know you can read Dariyan...Ó The cleric spoke in a rush, clearly agitated though Liath had
never seen her anything but calm before. ÒWhy should I give this back to you?Ó 
She was half the clericÕs age. She could easily snatch the book from her and run. But
she did not, though neither could she compose an eloquent or compelling reply. ÒItÕs all I
have left of my da!Ó 
ÒWas your da a mathematicus?Ó 
There was no use in lying. Rosvita had obviously read in the book. ÒYes.Ó 
ÒAnd what are you, Eagle?Ó the cleric demanded. 
ÒKinless,Ó she said flatly. ÒAll I have are the Eagles. I pray you, Sister, I am no threat to
anyone.Ó 
Rosvita glanced up at the stars as though to ask them if this was truth, or a cunning
dissemblance. But the stars only spoke to those who knew their language, so she did not. ÒI
dare not keep this,Ó she said in a low voice. 
ÒHow did you get it?Ó 
ÒThat does not matter.Ó 
ÒCan youÑhow much did youÑ?Ó But she was afraid to ask. She shifted. Beyond, the
three servants who had escorted the cleric huddled close, sharing something from a leather
bottle. She thought she smelled mead, but there were so many smells mingling and
unraveling in the air around them that she could not be sure if it was honeyÕs fermented
sweetness or the aftertaste of drying blood. 
ÒI cannot read Jinna, although you can.Ó It was not a question. ÒAnd the fourth language

is unknown to me. I had only a moment to look at the Arethousan and the Dariyan, but I
needed no more than that to recognize what I was seeing. Lady protect you, child! Why are
you riding as a common Eagle?Ó 
ÒIt is what was offered me.Ó 
ÒBy Wolfhere.Ó 
ÒHe saved me from Hugh.Ó 
The moonlight bleached RosvitaÕs face of expression, but she shook her head and then
simply offered the book to Liath. 
Liath grabbed it and clutched it against her chest. 
ÒI think it properly belongs to you,Ó said Rosvita softly, hesitantly. ÒPray God I am right
in this. But you must come speak to me, Eagle, of this matter. Your immortal soul is at risk.
Who are the Seven Sleepers?Ó 
ÒThe Seven Sleepers,Ó Liath murmured, memory stirring. ¡°Beware the Seven
Sleepers.Ó Or so Da had written. ÒI only know what he wrote in the book.Ó 
ÒYouÕve never heard the story as related in EusebeÕs Ecclesiastical History?Ó 
ÒNay, IÕve not read Eusebe.Ó 
ÒIn the time of the persecution of Daisanites by the Emperor Tianothano, seven young
people in the holy city of SalÕs took refuge in a cave to gain strength before they presented
themselves for martyrdom. But the cave miraculously sealed over, and there they were left to
sleep.Ó 
ÒUntil when?Ó 
ÒEusebe doesnÕt say. But that is not the only place I have heard that name. Do you
know of a Brother Fidelis, at Hersford Monastery?Ó 
ÒI do not.Ó 
Ò ÔDevils visit me in the guise of scholars and magi,ÕÒ quoted Rosvita, recalling the
conversation vividly, Ò Ôtempting me with knowledge if only I would tell them what I knew of
the secrets of the Seven Sleepers.ÓÔ 
ÒWere they the onesÑ?Ó Liath broke off. Wind rustled the canvas of tents, and she was
suddenly reminded of the daimone who had stalked her on the empty road. She shuddered.
ÒI donÕt know what to do,Ó she murmured, afraid again. Da always said: ÒThe worst foe is
the one you canÕt see. 
Rosvita extended a hand in the fashion of her kind, a deacon about to offer a blessing.
ÒThere are others better able to advise you than I. You must think seriously about making
your way to the convent of St. Valeria.Ó 
ÒHow can I?Ó Liath whispered, remembering her vision of stern Mother Rothgard. ÒThe
arts of the mathematici are forbidden.Ó 
ÒForbidden and condemned. But it would be foolish of the church not to understand such
sorcery nevertheless. Mother Rothgard at St. Valeria is not a preceptor I would wish to study
under. She has little patience and less of a kind heart. But I have never heard it whispered
that she is tempted by her knowledge. If you cannot bring yourself to trust me, then go there, I
beg you.Ó She glanced behind toward her servants. ÒI must return to the train, or they will
wonder why I am missing. Morning comes soon.Ó 
She paused only to stare at Liath, as if hoping to read into her soul. Then she left. 
Liath was too stunned to move. Her arms ached where they clasped the book, and one
corner of the book pinched her stomach, digging into her ribs. She stood there breathing in
and out with the breath of the night. A flash of white startled her and she spun to see a huge
owl come noiselessly to rest on the torn-up ground just beyond the nimbus of lantern light
that illuminated the awning of King HenryÕs pavilion. It stared at her with great golden eyes,
then, as suddenly, launched itself skyward and vanished into the night. 
ÒLiath.Ó 
Of course he knew. 
She didnÕt turn to face him. She couldnÕt bear to. 
ÒYouÕve stolen the book,Ó he said, astonishment more than accusation in his voice. ÒI

left the field as soon as it was clear weÕd won the battle and rode all the way back to the
train, only to find it missing. How did you manage it? What magic did you employ?Ó 
She would not turn to face him, nor would she answer him, so he grabbed her by the
shoulder and spun her round to slap her so hard that guards looked up from their station by
the awning. 
But they knew the silhouette of a noble lord by his bearing and his clothes, and they knew
she was only a common Eagle. With a few coughs, they looked away again. It was none of
their business. 
Furious, he took her by the elbow to drag her away, but her feet were rooted to the earth.
She could not struggle, she could not fight, she could not flee. Her cheek stung. 
Ai, Lady, was he using sorcery on her? But then what had Da protected her from, if not
against this? He had protected her against other forms of magic. Why had he never
protected her against Hugh? 
ÒDamn you, Liath,Ó he said, sliding down that slippery slope to anger. ÒIt is my book
and you are my slave. Tell me so. Repeat it back to me, Liath. ÔI am your slave, Hugh.Õ
You will never escape me.Ó 
Had Hugh plumbed her soul far enough down, had he imprisoned her heart so tightly in
the frozen tower, that he could control the rest of her at his will? 
She was helpless. She would never break free. 
As his grip tightened, her boots shifted on the ground, failing, falling; she began to slide
into the darkness. 
ÒSay it, Liath.Ó 
Too stupified by fear even to weep, she whispered the only word that she could force out
of her throat: ÒSanglant.Ó 
7
 The rats came out at night to gnaw on the bones. The whispering scrape of their claws
on stone brought him instantly out of his doze. 
But he did not want to open his eyes. Why did God torment him in this way, giving him
such dreams? Why had his mother cursed him with life? It was better to die than to dream
that Bloodheart was dead and he was free. In this way, Bloodheart chained him more
heavily, weighted with despair. 
The dogs whined nearby, tails thumping against the ground. One growled. 
ÒHush, son,Ó said a voice like his fatherÕs. A hand touched his hair, stroking it gently as
his father had done years ago when he was a child and delirious with grief at the loss of his
nursemaid, the woman who had nursed him and helped raise him. She had died of a virulent
fever, and though he had sat at her bedside for days despite her whispered pleas and the
commands of his father that he must leave her or risk catching his death, he had not
leftÑand he had not gotten sick. 
Ò ¡®No disease known to you will touch him.Õ Ó 
The hand stroking his hair now had weight and warmth. 
He bolted upright, growling, and then flinched back from what he saw: not the cold nave of
the cathedral but the interior of a pavilion, its contours softened by the warm glow of a
lantern. His father sat in a camp chair beside the pallet on which he had been sleeping. Two
servingmen slept on the ground; otherwise they were alone. 
The king did not withdraw his hand but held it extended and brushed a stinging end of
hair out of SanglantÕs eye. ÒHush, child,Ó he said softly. ÒGo back to sleep.Ó 
ÒI canÕt sleep,Ó he whispered. ÒTheyÕll kill me if I sleep.Ó 
Henry shook his head slightly, a tiny gesture in the gloom. ÒWho will kill you?Ó 
ÒThe dogs.Ó 
Now the king sighed deeply and set a hand determinedly and firmly on SanglantÕs
shoulder. ÒYou are BloodheartÕs prisoner no longer, my son.Ó 

Sanglant did not reply, but his hand touched the iron collar. Henry took hold of that hand
and drew it away from the harsh touch of the slave collar. 
ÒNay, nay, child. WeÕll have it taken off.Ó He wet a clean strip of pale linen with his own
spit and dabbed at the raw scrapes along the curve of SanglantÕs neck where the collar
rubbed and pinched. At his own neck the gold torque he wore glinted as he bent closer and
then faded into the darkness at the curve of his neck as he leaned away, examining his son.
But it flashed in SanglantÕs eyes like a blinding stroke of lightning: symbol of the royal
kinship that had given Henry the right to try for the throne, just as SanglantÕs person, his
actual safe delivery into the world, had given Henry the right to rule after his father, the
younger Arnulf. 
ÒCome, then,Ó said Henry. ÒIf you canÕt sleep, then eat a little bit. I had food brought
inÑÓ 
ÒThat I might feed in private and not embarrass myself?Ó But he hadnÕt meant to snap
in the way of dogs nipping one at the other. He groaned and sank head in hands. 
But Henry only laughed quietly. ÒSometimes you werenÕt so different from this as a
child, Sanglant. It isnÕt so bad, after all, to be as alert as a hound. Sometimes I think the
princes are no better than those dogs who followed you out of Gent, fighting among
themselves. TheyÕd tear my throat out, some of them, if they thought they had the chance or
if I showed any least sign of weakness before them.Ó 
ÒA fine lord with his handsome retinue,Ó said Sanglant bitterly, remembering
BloodheartÕs taunt. 
ÒAlthough we might as well cut their throats now that theyÕre safely chained downÑ
¡°No!Ó He started up. At his full height, he towered above his father. ÒThey were faithful
to me. Like my Dragons.Ó 
ÒSit!Ó commanded Henry. Sanglant staggered, still exhausted, still disoriented, and
sank down in the other chair. A small table stood at his elbow with a basket of bread and a
bowl of berries, freshly picked. ÒBut we wonÕt kill them, for if we can keep them
chainedÑthey chew through leather, so my servants tell meÑthen they can serve as a
reminder to you.Ó 
Sanglant picked up the bowl and brought it to his nose, but the lush fragrance of the
berries made his stomach clench. He set down the bowl and tore off a hank of bread. Ai,
Lord, he was so hungry, but he must not gorge. He must take small portions at first and
teach his stomach how to eat again. ÒRemind me of what?Ó he asked, to stop himself from
bolting the hank of bread. 
ÒOf the princes and nobles of the realm.Ó 
ÒWhy should I want to be reminded of them?Ó Still he twirled the bread through his
fingers. It fascinated him: the sight of food that was his to take or leave as he wished. 
Henry leaned forward and dropped his voice for all the world like a conspirator. Sanglant
stilled, bread caught halfway to his mouth. ÒWe must move slowly and plan each step with
great care if we are to make you king after me.Ó 
Sanglant set down the bread. ÒWhy would I want to be king?Ó 
Henry began to reply, but the wind brought a different and more distracting sound with it:
LiathÕs voice, her fear, her desperation. She was calling for him. 
He started up so violently that the chair tipped and overbalanced. He was outside before
he heard it, like the echo of his passing, thud on the ground. The guards jumped aside,
startled, but he knew where he was going. 
Some noble lord had laid hands on her. 
Sanglant had grabbed his arm and ripped him off her before, at her gasp, he took hold of
himself and stopped to see who it was. 
It had been years, but he would never forget that face. ÒHugh.Ó He opened his hand, and
the other man shook him off and took a hasty step backward. He was furious; Sanglant
could smell his rage. 
ÒI beg your pardon, my lord prince. This Eagle serves Princess Sapientia, and I was just

escorting her back.Ó
ÒBy dragging her against her will?Ó The other manÕs voice changed, gentled, soothed,
but the tone only raised SanglantÕs hackles. 
ÒNo, she wants to come with me. DoesnÕt she? DoesnÕt she, Liath?Ó 
In answer she slid sidewise to nudge up against SanÕs chest. The bundle she carried
pressed painfully against his lower ribs. 
ÒLiath!Ó said Hugh, a command. But then, even in the old days in the kingÕs schola,
young Lord Hugh had expected obedience and resented those who would not, or did not
have to, give it to him. ÒLiath, you will come to me!Ó She made a sound in her throat more
like a whimper than a plea and turned her face into SanglantÕs chest. 
He could not help himself. It rose in his throat and was echoed from the three dogs who
remained to him, back behind the kingÕs pavilion: a low growl. 
Hugh, startled, took another step back, but then he caught himself and smiled sweetly.
ÒYou know what they call you now, some of them, donÕt you? The...Ó 
ÒStay away from her,Ó said Sanglant. 
But Hugh merely measured him and arched one eyebrow sardonically. Ò ÔDo not give
what is holy to the dogs.Õ Ò He turned with an arrogant shrug and walked away. 
She did not move. Without thinking he set a hand on her shoulder, drawing her closer into
him. Startled, she looked up. 
He had endured hunger for a long time. He had dreamed of her, but she had been a
shade, a remembered shadow given brightness by his own despair and need. Now he
touched her on the cheek, as she had once touched him in the silence of the crypt. She did
not respond, she did not draw back, but he felt the rhythm of her breathing. His was not so
steady. 
ÒMarry me, Liath,Ó he said, because it was now the only thing he knew to say to her.
HadnÕt she cut his hair, back there by the stream? HadnÕt she freed him from
Blood-heartÕs chains? HadnÕt his memory of her been all that kept him from drowning in
madness? 
The entrance flap to the pavilion stirred and the king emerged into a night suddenly
shadowed with the first intimations of dawn: a whistling bird, a tree edged gray instead of
black against the night sky, the lost moon and the fading stars. 
Henry halted just as Liath saw him and started back, taking a big step away from
Sanglant. 
 ÒYour Majesty!Ó she said in the tone of a thief caught with her hand in the royal treasure
chest. 
His face froze into a mask of stone. But his voice was clear, calm, and commanding.
ÒEagle, it is time to notify my son Ekkehard and those of the kingÕs schola left behind at
my palace at Weraushausen that we are safe and Gent retaken. You may leave now.Ó 
ÒMy lord king,Ó began Sanglant. 
But she stirred and took yet another step away. ÒItÕs my duty. I must go.Ó 
He let her go. He would not hold her against her will, not when he had been a prisoner for
so long. He hated himself fiercely at that moment for what he had become that was what
they were calling him now, that was what Bloodheart had called him. Why should she
remember anything she had felt before, or what he supposed she had felt, when they had
first met in Gent? 
He had always been an obedient son. 
She hesitated still, glancing once nervously toward the king, and with a sudden impulsive
lunge she thrust the bundle she carried into his arms. 
ÒKeep it safe for me, I beg you,Ó she whispered so only he could hear. Then she turned
and walked into the dawn twilight. 
He stared after her. She lifted a hand to flip her braid back over her shoulder and there it
swayed along her back, so sinuous and attractive a movement he could not keep his eyes
from it. 

ÒCome back inside, son,Ó said Henry, an order and yet also a plea. There was a tone in
his fatherÕs voice he could not at first interpret, but slowly old memories and old
confrontations surfaced to put a name to it. 
Jealousy. 
ÒNo,Ó he said. ÒI canÕt go back inside. IÕve been inside for so longÑÓ How long had it
been since he had heard the fluting and piping of birds at dawn? Seen the brightest of stars
fade into the sleepy gray dawn? Smelled fresh air, even if this was tinged with the distant
aroma of burning and death? 
Just before she passed out of sight beyond the distant tents, she paused and turned to
look back at him, then vanished into the awakening bustle of the camp. 
ÒIÕve forgotten how bright the sun is,Ó he said without taking his gaze from where he
had last seen her. ÒHow sweet the air tastes.Ó 
ÒWhat is that she gave you?Ó demanded Henry. 
A promise. But he did not say it out loud. 
 
EPILOGUE 
They came not just from Steleshame but from farther afield, folk who saw an opportunity
to rebuild in Gent or farm the empty fields that lay around it. They began to trickle along the
roads as soon as word spread that the Eika enchanter was dead and his army defeated.
And when victoryÑand the chance to make oneÕs fortuneÑwas the rumor, word seemed
able to spread as quickly as a bird could fly, trilling its message to all and sundry. 
ÒWeÕll go back,Ó said Matthias. ÒTheyÕll need workers in the tannery. Lord and Lady
Above, I donÕt know what weÕre to do with you and Helen! Two mutes!Ó Then he hugged
her to show he wasnÕt angry about it. He was scared; Anna knew that, just as she knew he
was right. They had to go back to Gent. They had to find Papa Otto who had saved them so
long ago. 
ÒMaster Helvidius will speak for you, wonÕt you, Master?Ó continued the young man. ÒIt
wonÕt matter that you canÕt talk.Ó 
But the old poet fidgeted. 
They sat on a logÑthe ruins of an outbuilding half burned and left to rot after the Eika raid
on the holding last autumnÑand watched the traffic on the road. Men dragging carts, women
burdened by heavy packs, two ragged deacons, laden donkeys, and now and again a rich
woman with oxen drawing her wagon and a small retinue of servants following behind. Now
indeed Mistress GiselaÕs claim that Steleshame had once been a bustling holding along a
main road seemed like truth and not an exaggeration built upon her own thwarted desire for
status and wealth. 
Their own small bundles leaned against the log to their right, but Matthias, for all his
eagerness, could not quite make the first step onto the road, and Master Helvidius had not
even removed his meager possessions from their hut. 
ÒThe army will march back by,Ó said Helvidius. ÒThere are many noble lords and ladies
among them who heard me declaim not four days ago. Surely theyÕll wish for a poet of my
skills in their retinue.Ó ÒYouÕd leave us! You wonÕt come with us!Ó Anna set a hand on
MatthiasÕ tattered sleeve. ÒWhat ever will I do in Gent?Ó whined Helvidius. ÒThe mayor
and his kin are dead. I donÕt know what lady will demand the right to collect the tolls there,
or if the king keeps them for himself. I heard it said that the king intends to found a royal
monastery there and dedicate it to St. Perpetua, the Lady of Battles, in thanks for the
deliverance of his son. Monks wonÕt wish to hear me sing of Waltharia or proud Helen!Ó
He pried HelenÕs grubby fingers off his knee and transferred her to Anna, but she lost
interest and squatted in the dirt to rescue a ladybug about to be crushed by the old poetÕs
wandering sandals. ÒNay, Gent wonÕt be the same place. I must seek my fortune
elsewhere.Ó 

ÒAnd what about us!Ó demanded Matthias, jumping to his feet. ÒYou would have died
over the winter if we hadnÕt taken you in!Ó 
Anna grabbed his hand and made a sign with her free hand. No. One of the lowly clerics
in the retinue of Lord Wichman had seen her plight and taught her a few simple hand signs,
those used among the monastics, with which to communicate. 
Matthias grunted and sat back down, looking sulky. They heard a new voice. ÒGo, then!
After all I have done for you, raised you when your dear mother died, taught you all I know of
spinning and weaving, fed you with my ownÑ!Ó 
ÒWhored me out when it suited your purpose!Ó The scene by the gates of Steleshame
had all the volume, and drama, that was lacking when Helvidius sang The Gold of the
Hevelli before an ill-attentive and drunken audience. ÒI will no longer claim kinship with you,
ungrateful child! Expect no hospitality in this hall! Stealing from me!Ó 
ÒI have taken no more than what my motherÕs inheritance brought me.Ó With those
words, GiselaÕs niece turned her back on her aunt and started down the hill. She carried a
rolled-up bundle of cloth and clothing on her back and she, unlike most of the travelers,
commanded an entourage: three women whom Anna knew came from the weaving hall and
a young man who had recently married one of them. The young man hauled a cart laden with
a dye vat, sheepskins, beams for a loom, and a number of smaller items tucked away in
pouches, pots, and small baskets; the women carried, variously, an infant, some of the small
parts of the loom, and rolled fleeces. 
ÒYouÕll starve!Ó Gisela shouted ungraciously after them. 
Anna had a sudden instinct that now was the time to leave. She got up, grabbed her
bundle, and beckoned to Matthias to do the same. He was so strong now that it was no
trouble for him to carry a bundle as well as little Helen, who for all her cheerful smiles and
gangling limbs still weighed next to nothing. Perhaps, somehow, Anna thought, sheÕd given
her voice in trade for his crippled leg; it wasnÕt such a bad exchange. 
Helvidius did not follow them. Helen began to cry. 
The little girlÕs cry brought the nieceÕs attention, who walked a short way ahead of them.
She halted her group and turned, surveying the children. 
ÒI recognize you,Ó she said. ÒYou were the last to escape from Gent. Come, walk with
us.Ó She addressed Matthias. ÒPerhaps you know Gent well enough to advise me.Ó 
ÒAdvise you in what?Ó Matthias asked cautiously. 
ÒI mean to set up a weaving hall. There are good sheep-farming lands east of the city, so
it will be easy enough to trade for wool. And ships have always sailed in and out of Gent,
trading to other ports.Ó 
Matthias considered. ÒI could help you,Ó he said at last, Òbut youÕd have to give some
kind of employment to my sister, Anna, and let our little one, Helen, free with the other
children in the hall.Ó Here he gestured toward the sleeping infant, cradled in swaddling
bands and tied to its motherÕs back. 
Anna tugged furiously on MatthiasÕ arm, but he paid no attention to her. 
But the niece only smiled. ÒAnd yourself, Master Bargainer? No, I recall now: You work in
the tannery.Ó 
ÒSo I do.Ó 
ÒVery well, then. I think we can make a fair bargain that will benefit each of us. Will you
walk with us?Ó She smiled so winningly at Anna that Anna could not help but smile back.
She was certainly a pretty woman, but she had something more than that inside, a certain
iron gleam in her eyes that suggested a woman who would make a way for herself despite
what obstacles the world threw into her path. 
Matthias glanced, questioningly, at his sister. Anna merely signed a Yes. 
But she could not stop her tears as they walked away from Steleshame. Despite
everything, she was sad to leave Master Helvidius and his stories behind. 
On the second day as they trudged along the forest road, they heard a song rising from
the east. 

ÒIt is good to give thanks to God, Their love endures forever. 
When I was in distress I called on the Lady, Her answer was to set me free. 
When I rode into battle I called upon the Lord, and though the enemy surrounded me
like bees to honey, though they attacked me as fire attacks wood, with the LordÕs name I
drove them away.Ó 
Ahead, travelers hastened to get off the road. Their party did so quickly as well, huddling
along the verge. Anna appraised the plants along the forestÕs edge but what could be
gleaned had already been taken, either by the folk ahead of them or by the two armies which
had so recently passed this way. She could go farther into the forest while they waited, find
berries and mushrooms, but even as she stepped back to do so, a glimmer of color flashed
in the trees, and she hesitated as the great procession rounded a corner. The sight of such
grandeur stopped her, and she could only stare helplessly with the others. 
¡°Open to me the gates of victory. I will praise God, for They have become my deliverer.
It is good to give thanks to God, for Their love endures forever.Ó 
Six standards were borne before the main procession. They fluttered sporadically and
she caught only glimpses of startling and disturbing creatures embroidered on their rich
fabric: a black dragon, a red eagle, a gold lion, a hawk, a horse, and another beast whose
fierce profile she did not recognize. Behind them rode a man carrying a silver banner
marked with twin black hounds. 
Anna had never imagined she might see the king twice! The weight of the cavalcade
thrummed through the ground and up into the soles of her feet. She gaped in awe as the
king himself, attended by his fine noble companions, rode past. Beside the king rode the
young lord who had spoken to them at Steleshame. Although the others laughed and spoke
joyfully, Lord Alain looked somberÑbut at least no harm had come to him. He leaned
sideways and for an instant she thought he would see her, but he was only speaking to the
thin, dark man beside him. 
¡°Sawn-glawnt!Ó breathed GiselaÕs niece, the phrase more oath than word. She pulled a
corner of her scarf up to conceal her face, hiding herself, but Anna did not see see Lord
Wichman among the kingÕs attendants. She could make out none but the king and Lord
Alain as individuals; they were too many and too bright to her eyes in their fine clothes and
rich trappings. 
After the king came soldiers, and after them the long train of wagons bumping along the
rutted road. She swallowed dirt chipped up by their wheels and shielded her mouth from
dust. After the passage of such an army, though, the road beyond was easier to tread and
they made good time, coming to Gent in the late afternoon of the fourth day. 
It was odd to cross the bridge into Gent when she had never crossed it going in the other
direction to leave. Once within the walls, Gent had changed so completely from those
months when they had lived in hiding that it was as if none of that nightmare had ever
happened. Few people walked the streets compared to the many who had once lived here,
but already the ring of hammers reverberated off the city walls. Carpenters and masons
labored to rebuild; lads hauled away trash. Women washed moldering tapestries or hung
yellowing linen and moth-eaten clothes out on lines to air. Children dragged furniture out of
abandoned houses while the goats they had been set to watch over foraged in overgrown
vegetable plots. 
Gent smelled of life, and summer, and the sweat of labor. 
They went to the tannery first, but it was deserted as was the nearby armory except for a
handful of men sorting through the slag for usable weapons. They complained that the
kingÕs forces had looted the armory for spear points and mail and axheads. A few dead
Eika dogs lay here and there with flies crawling over them. Their eyes had already been
pecked out by the crows. 
Matthias found the shed where the slaves had slept, but though he overturned rough
pallets and examined every scrap of cloth left behind, he found no trace of Papa Otto. They
heard voices outside and hurried out to find GiselaÕs niece talking to an ill-kempt man with

the telltale stains of leatherwork on his fingers. 
ÒI suppose some of the dead householders may have kin whoÕll come to claim an
inheritance,Ó he was saying to her. ÒAch, but whoÕs to say if theyÕre telling the truth? Or if
anything can be known about what was left behind?Ó 
ÒThatÕs why I thought it worth the risk,Ó she replied, eyeing him with interest. Through
the dirt Anna saw he was a young man, broad through the shoulders and without the dreary
hopeless expression she had seen in so many of the slaves. ÒI can take a house here in
town without worrying IÕll be thrown out for my pains. I saw how few escaped from Gent.
Ah.Ó She saw Matthias and Anna and beckoned them over. Helen clung to AnnaÕs skirts
and sucked on her dirty little finger. ÒThese are the children I spoke of.Ó 
He clucked his tongue and made an almost comical expression of amazement. ÒYou hid
here, in this tannery? Ach, now thereÕs a miracle that you survived and escaped. There
were very few of us here at the end...Ó 
ÒYou worked here?Ó demanded Matthias. ÒAs a slave to the Eika?Ó 
The man spit. ÒSo I did. Savages. I hid when the battle started. The rest of them fled, I
suppose. But IÕve nothing to go back to.Ó He glanced at GiselaÕs niece and shifted his
shoulders somewhat self-consciously under his threadbare and dirt-stained tunic. ÒI thought
IÕd start fresh, here, at the tannery. So, lad, you know the craft?Ó 
ÒDid you everÑÓ Matthias stammered while Anna pinched him to make him go on. ÒDid
you know of a slave named Otto?Ó 
ÒNay, child, I never heard of such a one, but I only came recently. ThatÕs why I lived.Ó 
Matthias sighed and picked Helen up, hugging the little girl tightly against him as he hid
his tears against her grimy shift. 
But Anna only set her mouth firmly, determined not to lose hope. That didnÕt mean that
Papa Otto was dead. He might have fled, he might have been taken elsewhere... 
ÒCome now,Ó said GiselaÕs niece briskly. ÒYou knew it was a slim hope to find him,
poor man. But weÕd best be moving on.Ó Here she glanced at their new acquaintance.
ÒThough weÕll be back with Matthias. HeÕs a good worker, and very clever. But thereÕs
so many folk coming back. WeÕd best stake out a claim before the best workshops are
taken.Ó 
Just behind the mayorÕs palace, abreast of the old open market-place, they found a
good-sized workshop with a sizable courtyard, a well, and access to the main avenue. Here
the servingwomen began to sweep and wash out the interior while the servingman went to
haul mud and lime to patch the walls. Anna drew water up from the well and filled the big dye
vat while GiselaÕs niece ventured out to see what kinds of pots and utensils she could
scrounge from the palace kitchens. 
ÒCome on,Ó said Matthias into AnnaÕs ear. He had been raking the courtyard with a
rake unearthed from a jumble of forgotten and rusty implements, but he now set down the
rake and tugged on her sleeve. ÒI just want to go see if the daimone is still there, or if we
can find the tunnel. WeÕll come right back.Ó 
She thought about it. Everyone else was busy. No one would miss them, and what was it
to the others, anyway, if they went to the cathedral to pray for the soul of Papa Otto, who had
saved their lives? 
It was a short walk to the cathedral, much quicker than the roundabout way they had taken
months ago, that night when they had fled Gent. Now they could mount the stone steps in
daylight. The long twilight lent a hazy glamour to the scene. The cathedral tower draped its
blunt, elongated shadow sidewise over the steps as they climbed to the great doors. Beside
the doors lay a heap of fresh garbage and when they ventured cautiously inside, they saw
two deacons patiently sweeping away the litter that had made of the nave a kind of forest
floor of loam and debris. Of the daimone there was no sign, and it was too dark to go down
into the crypt. Anna discovered she didnÕt want to go at all, and Helen began to snivel,
faced with the gaping black stairwell. 
ÒMaybe itÕs for the best,Ó muttered Matthias. ÒCome, letÕs go back. Hey, there!Ó

Helen, having backed away from the crypt door, now ran outside, and Anna and Matthias
ran after her only to find her pawing through a gauzy cloud of down feathers that had
surfaced in one of the piles of debris. 
ÒSheÕll take some teaching, poor thing,Ó said Matthias. ÒYou may be mute, Anna, but
at least you have your full kettle of wits. I fear our Helen does not.Ó He scooped her up and
started down the steps while the little girl crowed an incoherent protest. 
Something rested within the downy bundle. Anna nudged it with her toe and all at once
the bundle of feathers tipped, rolled, and spilled open. A hairless creature the size of her
hand plopped onto a lower step. 
It was not a rat, not even a malformed rat. It lay there, the kind of dead white of things that
never warm under the sunÕs touch, its grotesque little limbs splayed in all directions. It
didnÕt have recognizable eyes, only nubs where eyes had tried to grow. 
But at least it was dead. 
Sun and shadow shifted and the rich golden glow of the westering sun touched the
ghastly little corpse. 
It shuddered. Stirred. Curled. And came to life. 
Anna shrieked. 
As if the sound startled it or gave it impetus, it darted away. She blinked and in that
instant lost sight of it. 
Matthias turned, ten steps down, and looked up at her. Helen quieted in his arms. ÒWhat
is it, Anna?Ó 
But she couldnÕt speak to tell him. 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE
I have, to say the least, taken liberties with history as we know itÑbut then again thatÕs
half the fun of fantasy. However, IÕd like here to. acknowledge a very few of the sources,
without which the landscape of Crown of Stars would be much poorer. 
Passages quoted or adapted from the Bible have been taken from The New English
Bible (Oxford University Press, 1976). Some of the sayings of the blessed Daisan have
been taken from the New Testament, others from The Book of the Laws of Countries:
Dialogue on Fate of Bardai-san of Edessa (Van Gorcum & Co., 1965), translated by H. J.
W. Drijvers. In addition, DrijversÕ Bardaisan of Edessa (Van Gorcum & Co., 1966) has
been of immeasurable aid in my construction of the church of the Unities. 
For RosvitaÕs History I have drawn on Widukind of Cor-veyÕs History of the Saxons,
made accessible to me via a translation by Raymund F. Wood (UCLA dissertation, 1949). 
The life of the real St. Radegund, a Merovingian queen, is translated in Sainted Women
of the Dark Ages, edited and translated by Jo Ann McNamara and John E. Halborg with E.
Gordon Whatley (Duke University Press, 1992). 
I have also been inspired by the writings of Macrobius, Commentary on the Dream of
Scipio, translated by William Harris Stahl (Columbia University Press, 1952); Virgil, The
Aeneid, translation by W. F. Jackson Knight (Penguin Books, 1958); Polybius, The Rise of
the Roman Empire, translation by Ian Scott-Kilvert (Penguin Books, 1979); and the
unknown author, possibly Einhard, of Karolus Magnus et Leo Papa, translated by Peter
Godman in Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance (University of Oklahoma Press, 1985).
Medieval Handbooks of Penance, by John T. McNeill and Helena M. Gamer (Columbia
University Press, 1938) and Salvatore PaternoÕs The Liturgical Context of Early
European Drama (Scripta Humanistica, 1989) provided me with further glimpses of source
material from the early medieval church and society. 
I must also mention Valerie J. J. FlintÕs The Rise of Magic in Early Medieval Europe

(Princeton University Press, 1991) and Karen Louise JollyÕs Popular Religion in Late
Saxon England (The University of North Carolina Press, 1996), from which I derived a great
deal of information on magic and its uses, and Alison Goddard ElliottÕs Roads to
Paradise: Reading the Lives of the Early Saints (University Press of New England, 1987),
with its fascinating analysis of late antique and early medieval saintsÕ lives. C. Stephen
JaegerÕs The Origins of Courtliness (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985) and The
Envy of Angels (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994) gave me, I hope, some insight into
the court and clerical culture of the Ottonian period, which I of course adapted to my own
lurid purposes. 
Last, I must mention the work of Karl Leyser, in particular his wonderful Rule and Conflict
in an Early Medieval Society (Basil Blackwell, 1989), itself a treasure-house of inspiration
for a fantasist. 
APPENDIX
The Months of the Year: 
Yanu 
Avril 
Sormas 
Quadrii 
Cintre 
Aogoste 
Setentre 
Octumbre 
Novarian 
Decial 
Askulavre 
Fevrua 
The Days of the Week: 
Mansday 
Secunday 
Ladysday 
Sonsday 
Jedday 
Lordsday 
Hefensday 
The Canonical Hours: 
Vigils (circa 3:00 a.m.) 
Lauds (first light) 
Prime (sunrise) 
Terce (3rd hour, circa 9:00 a.m.) 
Sext (6th hour, circa noon) 
Nones (9th hour, circa 3:00 p.m.) 
Vespers (evening song) 
Compline (sunset) 
The Houses of Night (the zodiac): 
the Falcon 
the Child 
the Sisters 
the Hound 

the Lion 
the Dragon 
the Scales 
the Serpent 
the Archer 
the Unicorn 
the Healer 
the Penitent 
THE GREAT PRINCES OF THE REALM OF WENDAR AND VARRE:
Duchies in Wendar: 
Saony 
Fesse 
Avaria 
Duchies in Varre: 
Arconia 
Varingia 
Wayland 
Margraviates of the Eastern Territories: 
the March of the Villams 
Olsatia and Austra 
Westfall 
Eastfall 
OTHER KINGDOMS KNOWN TO THE WENDISH: 
Salia 
Aosta 
Karrone 
Alba 
Arethousan Empire 
Andalla (heathen) 
Jinna Empire (heathen) 
Polenie (pagan) 
Ungria (pagan) 
IMPORTANT CHURCH COUNCILS
77 Council of Darre: The biscop of Dariya (later called Darre) is named presiding
biscop, or skopos, of the Daisan-ite Church. 
243 Council of Nisibia: Outlaws adoption for inheritance purposes. 
285 Second Council of Nisibia: Against determined opposition, presbyters are named
as equal in honorÕto the biscops. Skopos Johanna ll denies that her insistence on this
matter has anything to do with a young presbyter, rumored to be her illegitimate son, whose
career in the church she has championed. 
327 Council of Kellai: Under the direction of the Skopos Mary Jehanna, the gathered
biscops and presbyters proclaim that the Lord and Lady do not prohibit what is needful, and
that therefore sorcery can lie within the provenance of the church, as long as it is supervised
by the church. Only sorcery pertaining to fate, and knowledge of the future, is condemned

and outlawed. 
407 Great Council of Addai: The belief in the RedemptioÑthe martyrdom of the blessed
Daisan in expiation for the sins of humankind followed by his ascension to heavenÑis
declared a heresy together with the revelation that he is the true Son, both Divine and
Human, of the Lady. In strong language, the Skopos Gregoria (called ÒThe GreatÓ)
declares that the only right belief is that of the Penitire, that the blessed Daisan fasted for six
days and that on the seventh, having reached the EkstasisÑthe state of complete
communion with GodÑhe was lifted bodily up to the Chamber of Light (the Translatus), and
that the blessed Daisan himself claimed no greater maternity than that of any other human: a
divine soul made up of pure light trapped in a mortal body admixed with darkness. 
499 Council of Arethousa: The Emperor of Arethousa refuses to accept the primacy of
the Skopos Leah I in Darre. A nephew of the emperor is installed as Patriarch. They adhere
to the greater of the Addaian heresies, that accepting the semi-Divinity of Daisan, although
they do not acknowledge his martyrdom. 
626 Council of Narvone: Presided over by the Skopos Leah llI, whose predecesor Leah
ll had in the year crowned the Salian king Taillefer as emperor of the reconstituted Holy
Dariyan Empire, the Narvone synod confirms the ruling of the Council of Kellai but, in a
deliberate repudiation of TailleferÕs powerful daughters, specifically condemns the arts of
the mathematici, tempestari, augures, haroli, sortel-egi, and the malefici, as well as any
sorcery performed outside the auspices of the church. 
 
 

