
The Linguist
A Personal Guide to Language Learning
By Steve Kaufmann
A Personal Guide to Language Learning All rights reserved
Copyright 2003 by Steve Kaufmann
The Linguist is a trademark of Steve Kaufmann
This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any
form without permis-sion in writing from Steve Kaufmann,
except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a
review.
First edition July 2003
Printed in Canada
ISBN 0-9733394-0-3
Published in Canada by Steve Kaufmann

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Are You a Linguist?
About Learning English
About this Book
A LANGUAGE ADVENTURE
The Start of the Journey
Two Solitudes in Montreal
I Take Charge of My Learning
Off to Europe
My Adventure Begins
“Sciences Po”
Travel and Culture
Hitchhiking in Europe
Paris in the 1960s
My First Real Job
Discovering Asian Culture
Creating An Opportunity, Ottawa 1967
Intensity, Hong Kong 1968
Reading and Vocabulary Growth
The Importance of Phrases
Pronunciation
Crossing Into China, Canton 1969
Working and Learning in Japan
Setting Language Goals, Tokyo 1971
Seeking Out Content
Is Japanese Difficult?
Polite Language
Japan Incorporated
Fitting In
Exploring Languages at Home
A World Apart
German

Italian
Cantonese
Language and International Business
Success
THE ATTITUDE OF A LINGUIST
Just Communicate
Resistance to Language Learning
Overcoming Resistance to Language
Learning
Communicate at Your Level
Discover Language Naturally
The Limits of Language Teaching
Natural Learning
Identity and Language
The Fundamental Similarity of Human
Beings
Human Culture is Universal
HOW TO LEARN A LANGUAGE
Conviviality
Focus On Input First
Listening
Reading
Learning Words and Phrases
Learn To Express Yourself
Pronunciation
Writing
Conversation
Create Intensity
Invest in the Tools
Set Clear Goals
A Final Word
APPENDIX
A History of English Speaking Canada
The Immigrant Experience
Job Opportunities

Zhuangzi’s Crooked Tree
Huizi said to Zhuangzi, “This old tree is so crooked and
rough that it is useless for lumber. In the same way, your
teachings have no practical use.”
Zhuangzi replied, “This tree may be useless as lumber, but
you could rest in the gentle shade of its big branches or
admire its rustic character. It only seems useless to you
because you want to turn it into something else and don’t
know how to appreciate it for what it is. My teachings are
like this.”
Zhuangzi, the Taoist philosopher, is supposed to have lived
in China over 2,300 years ago. He encouraged people to
achieve their potential through effortlessness, by not
resisting their own natures.
His famous story about the crooked tree appeals to me for
many reasons. Being in the forest industry, I know that a
crooked tree is not suitable for making standard commodity
lumber products, but it can make high quality decorative
products which feature its natural beauty and individuality.
Such a tree has grown to a ripe old age by adapting itself to
its environment. Whereas the trees in the industrial forest
are straight and look alike, the crooked tree grew alone, or
with a mixture of other trees of different ages and species.
This kind of tree will resist wind and disease better than the
more uniform trees of the plantation forest.
And so it is with people who follow their natures and pursue
their own path to self-fulfillment. They are more
independent and more secure. A true language learner must
be like this crooked tree of Zhuangzi.

That is why we chose a crooked tree as the logo for our new
language learning system called The LinguistTM.
Visit us at www.thelinguist.com!
Respect gods before demi-gods, heroes
before men, and first among men your parents,
but respect yourself most of all.
-Pythagoras, 6th century BC

INTRODUCTION
Are You a Linguist?
As I see it, everyone is a potential linguist. By that, I mean
that everyone can be fluent in another language. You do not
have to be an intellectual or an academic. After all, a
linguist is defined by the Concise Oxford Dictionary in very
simple terms: Linguist: n. Person skilled in foreign
languages.
Even speaking one foreign language qualifies a person as a
linguist. To become a linguist is a matter of choice, and
requires a certain state of mind. A linguist enjoys foreign
languages and appreciates the different ways that ideas are
organized and expressed in different cultures. A linguist is at
ease with people of another language and confident when
learning new languages.
The first step towards becoming a linguist, towards learning
a second language, is to realize that success depends not
on the teacher but on the learner. Each learner must
discover the language gradually in his or her own way. The
teacher can only stimulate and inspire. Enrolling in a
language school or taking a course will not ensure fluency. If
the learner does not accept this simple fact, time and
money spent on language programs will be wasted.
Language schools and language learning systems may
teach, but only the learner can learn.
Growing up in the English-speaking area of Montreal, a
predominantly French-speaking city, I remember that until
the age of seventeen, I only spoke English. I was not
interested in learning another language, although I had

been taught French at school from the second grade and
was surrounded by the French language. Yet today I can
speak nine languages and have derived immense
satisfaction and reward from being able to speak Mandarin
Chinese, French, Japanese, Spanish, German, Swedish,
Cantonese and Italian.
In order to try to understand why this happened, I began
writing down the history of my own language learning. I
realized that it was only when I had a genuine desire to
communicate or learn something meaningful in a new
language that I was able to learn. When the subject of study
was based on the details of the language itself, I resisted.
When teachers tried to impose abstract principles of
grammar and then test me on them, I remained passive. But
once I decided that I needed the language to connect with
real people or a new culture, I would throw myself into the
study of the language with passion and commitment. And I
needed passion, because for me language learning was very
hard work.
It was while learning Cantonese at the age of fifty-five that I
became aware that language learning had become easier.
Modern electronic technology and the Internet have
revolutionized language study. First of all, the Internet
provides a vast range of interesting and authentic second
language content for learners to choose from, in both audio
and electronic text formats. Second, content in electronic
format allows the reader to access instant dictionary
software and link to new context based learning systems.
Finally, the Internet can serve as the hub for a community of
learners and native speakers.
As I wrote my own story, I decided that I should try to
develop a new approach to language learning based on the

principles that worked for me, but taking advantage of
modern technology to ensure that a new generation of
language learners can learn more easily than I did. Under
my direction, a small group of language learners and
computer programmers immediately started developing
these ideas into a comprehensive new language learning
system. The more we worked on this project, the more
excited we became about our potential to increase the
number of real linguists worldwide, by making language
learning affordable, enjoyable and effective.
The word “globalization” is commonly used to describe the
intensity of international exchange that we are experiencing
today. Some people declare themselves in favour of
globalization, and others are against it. To me, globalization
is an irresistible trend, an inevitable direction of the
evolution of our world. It is somewhat pointless to be “for”
or “against” something that is inevitable. It is more useful to
invest time and energy in being able to enjoy and profit
from globalization, by becoming a linguist.
I do not think globalization needs to lead to the domination
of one language, such as English. Rather I see it as an
opportunity for all people, including English speakers, to
become better acquainted with other cultures.
Paradoxically, now that the world seems a much smaller
place, we are seeing a general renewal of interest in
regional languages and identities. There is an increasing
demand for effective methods of language learning, not only
for dominant languages like English, but also for languages
spoken by fewer people. The cost of preparing learning
materials for these languages and the effort needed to learn
them can be dramatically reduced by using The Linguist
approach.

I am confident that this book and the methods described in
it can help people to become linguists. I will be working hard
to make it happen.
About Learning English
English is well established as the most useful world
language.
The largest demand for second language instruction in the
world is for English. Whether we like it or not, English
dominates in business, science, travel and popular culture,
not to mention the Internet. English is a rather clumsy
language, combining the influences of Old English, Latin,
Norman French and natural evolution. As a result, English
has all kinds of inconsistencies of grammar and spelling to
frustrate the learner. Yet English dominates, whereas
artificial international languages like Esperanto have never
had any following.
Two thousand years ago, or even five hundred years ago, it
would have seemed ridiculous to suppose that the language
spoken on a small damp North Atlantic island would one day
be the world’s most widely used language. Certainly
Chinese, Latin, Greek, Arabic, or even Mongolian would, at
various times in history, have seemed more likely
candidates. Who knows what languages will be spoken in
another five hundred years? As Spencer Wells explains in
The Journey of Man, A Genetic Odyssey (Princeton
University Press) “[Although] Sogdian was once the lingua
franca of the Silk Road – in much the same way that English
is the language of commerce today, by the twentieth
century all dialects were extinct but one.”

If you are not a native speaker of English, then I encourage
you to read this book in English. This may be the first book
that you read in English, but you can do it. Perhaps most of
the English content you have read up until now has
consisted of short texts or articles. Perhaps the thought of
reading a whole book in English is intimidating to you. It
should not be.
This book, which contains over 4,000 of the most common
English words, is presented in a mixed media format that is
at the core of a language learning system we call The
Linguist. By reading this book in conjunction with our
system, you can be sure that these 4,000 words will become
part of your active vocabulary.
This book is printed on paper, the most comfortable and
intimate format. Books are portable and convenient. But I
have also recorded the contents on a CD so that you can
hear the language and allow it to stimulate those neural
networks in your brain which respond to the spoken
language. Finally, the book is available in electronic format
so you can look up words using dictionary software and take
advantage of the many functions you will find at our web
site, www.thelinguist.com.
About this Book
This book is divided into three sections that may be read in
any order.
• A LANGUAGE ADVENTURE describes my experience in
acquiring eight languages in a variety of environments and
at different stages of my life. I include personal observations
reflecting my curiosity about culture and history. These

observations may seem unrelated to language learning, but
they are not. A linguist needs to be a curious adventurer.
• THE ATTITUDE OF A LINGUIST describes the attitudes
that are essential to successful language study. More than
any other factor, your attitude will determine your success
in language learning. The description of these attitudes will
reinforce conclusions that the reader will make in reading
the autobiographical section.
• HOW TO LEARN LANGUAGES is about the nuts and
bolts of how to learn languages. You may wish to read this
section first; however, you should still read the whole book
to fully understand what is required to become a linguist.
All languages are equally worthy of our attention. At The
Linguist we hope to continue to expand the number of
languages we offer. We are confident that when you see
how easy and enjoyable it is to learn one language, you will
want to learn another.
Once you are a member at The Linguist, you can use our
site to learn as many languages as you want. Commit
yourself to becoming a linguist!
Happy the man who, like Ulysses, has made a fine voyage,
or has won the Golden Fleece,
and then returns, experienced and knowledgeable, to spend
the rest of his life among his family!
– Joachim du Bellay (1522-60), French poet
A LANGUAGE ADVENTURE

The Start of the Journey
Language learning is a form of travel, a journey of discovery.
I started traveling when I was very young and have always
found travel stimulating. A true linguist needs to be
adventurous and to overcome the fear of the unknown. To
illustrate this, let me tell you my story.
I was born in Sweden in 1945 and emigrated to Montreal,
Canada as a five year old with my parents and older brother
Tom. My memories begin in Canada. I have no recollection
of having spoken any language other than English as a
child, although I know that I spoke Swedish first. It is
possible that having to learn a second language as a child
helped me to become a better language learner as an adult.
However, I know other people who emigrated to Canada as
children and did not become linguists. I also know people
who were born in Canada and grew up only in English but
have become excellent linguists. I attribute my success in
language learning to a spirit of adventure and a willingness
to study with a great deal of intensity. I believe others can
do the same if they are prepared to embark on the exciting
journey of language discovery.
One of my earliest memories of Montreal is an incident in
1952.
A group of us six-year-olds had a favorite hiding place for
our baseball bat. After school we always retrieved the bat
and played baseball. One day the bat was gone.
Immediately we deduced that it was the new boy from
Estonia who had stolen the bat. It was obvious to us that it
was him. He did not speak English well. He was the outsider.
The only problem was that he had not taken the bat. He
probably did not even know what a baseball bat was used

for. In the end it was all settled amicably. I guess that I, after
one year in Canada, was already accepted into the in group.
Thereafter the boy from Estonia was too. This incident has
always remained with me as an example of how people can
unthinkingly stick together and resist the participation of an
outsider.
But acceptance is a two way street. Insiders may initially
resist a newcomer, but it is also up to the outsider to be
adventurous and make the effort to be accepted. In most
cases, when I have overcome my apprehensions and made
the effort to be accepted by a different language group, the
response has been more welcoming than I could have
imagined. I think there are far more examples of newcomers
hesitating or not making the effort to join and thereby losing
opportunities, than of newcomers being rejected. A
language learner is by definition an outsider, coming from a
different language group. You must take risks in order to be
accepted. This is a major principle of language learning: be
adventurous. It worked for me, and French was my first
language adventure.
Two Solitudes in Montreal
The life of an English speaking Montrealer growing up in the
Western part of the city in the 1950s was not very different
from the life of English speaking North Americans elsewhere
on the continent. To show their commitment to our new
homeland, my parents decided that they would speak only
English with my brother and me. I went to English school,
had only English friends, listened to English radio and
watched English television. As a result, by the time I turned
seventeen in 1962, I was effectively a unilingual English
speaker.

Of course we had French at school. I passed all my French
classes with good marks, but I could not function in French
in the real world. Most of the one million English speaking
Montrealers of that day were not interested in
communicating with their two million French speaking fellow
citizens in French. English was the language of business and
the dominant language of the North American continent. I
was no exception to this general attitude. We were hardly
aware of the larger French speaking city surrounding us.
This all seems extraordinary now, but in those days it was
quite accurate to talk of “two solitudes” in Montreal.
I should point out that the reality of Montreal has changed in
the last forty years. English speaking Montrealers are now
among the most bilingual people in Canada. French has
been made important and meaningful to them because of
political changes in the Province of Quebec. As a result,
Montreal is a vibrant city with a unique atmosphere of its
own.
There is an important point here. Obviously it is an
advantage for a language learner to live in an environment
where the second language is spoken. However, this does
not guarantee language acquisition. You must have a
positive attitude towards the language and culture you are
trying to learn. You cannot learn to communicate if you rely
on a classroom where the focus is on trying to pass tests.
Only a genuine desire to communicate with another culture
can ensure language learning success.
At age seventeen, I entered McGill University. One of my
courses was on French civilization. It was an awakening. I
found the course fascinating. I suddenly became interested
in French literature and theatre. With that came an interest
in French singers, French food and the ambiance of French
culture.

I was suddenly dealing with the real language and real
people.
Our teacher was really French, not an English speaking
person teaching French, as in high school. The texts we read
were real books, not French text books specially prepared
for language learners.
Perhaps because it was new to me, French culture seemed
more free and spontaneous than the English speaking North
American culture I had grown up with. It was an exotic new
world. I suddenly wanted to learn French. I went to French
theatre, made French speaking friends and started reading
the French newspapers and listening to French radio. I
became aware of the issues that concerned my French
speaking fellow citizens and, through attending meetings
and discussions, my French language skills improved
naturally. I also gained an understanding of the aspirations
and grievances of the French speaking Quebeckers.
The six million or so French speaking Quebeckers,
descendants of a few tens of thousands of French
settlers in the 17th century, had developed into a
conservative and inward looking society as a means
of self-protection against the growing influence of
English speaking North America. The French
language and the Catholic religion were the pillars of
their identity.
Their conservative attitudes towards education and
modern society had left them at a disadvantage in
competing with
English speaking Canadians, even within their own
province of Quebec. Of course the English speaking
minority in Quebec was only too glad to take

advantage of this weakness to dominate in all areas
of economic activity. Even though they controlled the
politics, the French speakers were second class
citizens in their own home.
A major sore point was the low status of the French
language.
Starting in 1960, a growing nationalist movement
based on French language rights and a constructive
program of secularization, modernization and
political activism brought about significant change in
the province. Most of this change has been positive,
even if there are examples of excess in defense of
the French language. The French speaking society of
Canada, and Quebec in particular, has its own specific
characteristics. Efforts to preserve its cultural
identity are justified. New immigrants are joining this
French language community and bringing fresh
influences as the nature of that society continues to
evolve, just as immigrants are joining and redefining
English Canada.
French was the first language I started to study seriously. I
was not sure of just how fluent I could become. I cannot say
that I was confident that I could succeed in speaking almost
like a native speaker. That confidence would come later.
Much later, when I started to learn other languages, I always
had the confidence that I could learn to be as fluent as I
wanted. Once you have mastered one new language you
gain the confidence necessary to master other languages.
You build up your confidence as you learn.
I became fluent in French by giving up the traditional
approach of trying to perfect my grammar. Perfection did
not matter anymore, only communicating did. I no longer

disliked language learning. I read what I liked even if I did
not understand all of it. I spoke with people who interested
me, struggling to understand and to make myself
understood. I was mostly interested in connecting with the
culture. I also started to appreciate the sound and structure
of the new language.
When you move from an attitude of resisting the
strangeness of a language to an attitude of appreciating its
unique ways of expression and turns of phrase, you are on
your way to becoming a linguist.
I Take Charge of My Learning
I took charge of my learning, and stopped relying on my
teachers. The teacher was only one of many resources
available to me in a city like Montreal. All of a sudden, with
no tests, no questions from teachers, and no grammar drills,
my French skills took a great leap forward! I had achieved
my first language breakthrough. I could feel the
improvements in fluency, comprehension and pronunciation.
This made language learning exciting. I was speaking and
listening to French in situations that interested me. I spoke
to myself in French, imitating proper pronunciation as much
as I could. Even when I did not understand what was said or
had trouble expressing myself, it did not frustrate me. I was
committed and I was enjoying the experience of
communicating. There was no turning back. By taking my
language learning out of the classroom, I had made it real.
I have held onto this central principle: learning done in real
situations is always far superior to artificial contexts such as
exercises, drills, or material specially designed for learners.
Time spent in genuine and interesting conversation is a
better learning environment than the formal classroom. I

also discovered another important principle of language
learning:
the learner has to be in charge, seeking out the language,
the people, the content. As the learner, I have to discover
the words and the phrases that I am going to need. All too
often it is the teacher or text books who decide which words
you should learn. These words have no importance, and as a
consequence are quickly forgotten.
Off to Europe
My Adventure Begins
The success of my efforts in Montreal made me more
committed to mastering French and so I decided to go to
France. Commitment leads to success and success
reinforces commitment.
In June of 1962, I quit my summer construction job and went
to the Montreal docks to look for a working trip to Europe.
For three days I climbed on board oceangoing freighters,
asked to see the Captain and then offered to work in
exchange for passage to Europe. On the third day I got
lucky. A small German tramp steamer, the Gerda Schell out
of Flensburg, had lost a sailor in Quebec City and needed a
crewman for the return voyage. I was on my way.
Aside from the hard work and constant tossing of the small
tramp ship on the North Atlantic, the voyage was an
opportunity to experience just how inaccurate cultural
stereotypes can be. The crew was half German and half
Spanish. Contrary to what I had been conditioned to expect,
the supposedly industrious Germans were laid back and

often drunk, whereas the supposedly temperamental
Spanish were tremendously hard working and serious.
We arrived in London after ten days at sea. I ate as much as
possible of the free food on the ship in the hope that I would
save money by not having to eat for the next day. In fact,
that strategy was not so wise and I ended up feeling ill.
London seemed an oddly exotic place to me, since everyone
spoke English and yet it was so different from home.
Speaker’s Corner in Hyde Park has stuck in my memory, as
has the old money system of shillings and pence and quids
and bobs and guineas. I also remember that I spent one
night sleeping on a sidewalk to get tickets to see Laurence
Olivier in Shakespeare's Othello but then had trouble
staying awake during the performance. I stayed in London
for one week and then pressed on for the continent to
pursue my language learning adventure.
I took the ferry from Dover in the United Kingdom and
arrived in Ostende in Belgium after nightfall. A Flemish
Belgian on a motor scooter gave me a lift to the medieval
city of Bruges. I was young and ignorant and had not read
the history of Flanders during the Middle Ages. Nor did I
realize that the same kinds of language tensions that
existed in Quebec were also burning in Belgium between the
Flemish speakers and the French speakers. I would return
later to Bruges to explore the well preserved medieval
atmosphere of that town. But I was a young man in a hurry
then, and the following day I hitchhiked on to France.
The French have a reputation for being rude, but the people
I met were friendly and hospitable. Outside of Lille in
Northern France, I was picked up by two school teachers
who allowed me to spend the night in a schoolroom, since
this was the period of the summer vacation. Then they

invited me out to dinner, where I met some people who
drove me to Paris the next day. I can still remember the
feeling as we drove down l’Avenue de la Grande Armée
towards the Arc de Triomphe, which I had seen so often in
film. I could not believe I was really there.
My French friends invited me to stay two weeks in their
modest apartment in the 20th Arrondissement, a working-
class district of Paris. I was given a short term job in a travel
bureau doing translations. I lived and ate with these people
for two delightful weeks, as I explored the city on foot and
via the Metro (subway). My new friends included me on
picnics to chateaux outside Paris and other social occasions.
I was sorry when I finally decided to move on south.
I realized very early in my stay in France that even my less
than perfect French enabled me to make friends and deal
with people in a relaxed manner. I was not self-conscious
nor concerned about how I sounded, I just enjoyed being
able to communicate. Of course, I occasionally met
Frenchmen who were not so friendly. It is true that many
public employees take a particular delight in saying “Non!”
Often if you inquire whether some service is available, you
are treated to a litany of rejection: “Ah non, alors là, non,
mais sûrement pas, mais cela va pas, non!”
But the secret to survival in a foreign country or culture is to
make light of the unpleasant and focus on the positive. My
French was far from perfect, and it was sometimes an
uneven struggle against the more arrogant and impatient
French fonctionnaires (officials) and shopkeepers. But today
I do not remember too many unpleasant incidents because I
did not attach much importance to them. I do remember,
however, a case when my lack of French got me into
trouble.

At one point in my first year in France I had an American
girlfriend whose parents were working in Alicante, Spain. We
decided to hitchhike there during the Easter holidays. I
brought along a gift, a record by Georges Brassens, a
popular French chansonnier. Being a converted Francophile,
I took great pleasure in listening to his songs even though I
did not always understand the words. Unfortunately, I did
not realize that his words can be quite spicy, if not outright
pornographic. When my hosts listened to the gift that I had
brought, they were shocked. I think they were concerned
about the kind of company their daughter was keeping.
I stayed in France for three years. My first year was in
Grenoble, an industrial city in the French Alps.
Unfortunately, I never had the time to ski. If I wasn't
studying, I was working. At various times I pressed bales of
waste paper and drove a delivery van for a printing shop,
was busboy in the Park Hotel, hawked the France Soir
newspaper in the major squares and cafés of Grenoble, and
taught English. I even managed to play hockey for the
Grenoble University hockey team. An added attraction of
Grenoble was the presence of a large contingent of Swedish
girls studying French. I was able to recover quite a bit of the
Swedish I had learned and forgotten as a small child.
“Sciences Po”
I was lucky enough to get a scholarship from the French
government for my second two years and moved to Paris
where I entered L'Institut d'Études Politiques (the School of
Political Studies). “Sciences Po,” as this school is called, is
located near St. Germain Cathedral in the heart of the
medieval part of Paris, just off the Quartier Latin, or
students' quarter. Sciences Po boasts many illustrious

alumni, including former Canadian Prime Minister Pierre
Trudeau.
The teaching culture at Sciences Po was different from North
America. The emphasis was on learning facts and being able
to organize them quickly according to a time-honored
formula. I still remember when a Law Professor told me that
“the form was more important than the content!”
The method for organizing your thoughts at Sciences Po was
simple. Whatever you wanted to say had to fit into the
following formula: Introduction, Part One, Part Two,
Conclusion. It was important that Part One and Part Two
were about the same length. Ideally, Part One presented
one point of view or Thesis, Part Two presented a contrary
position or Antithesis, and the Conclusion presented a
resolution or Synthesis. Voilà!
This emphasis on a logical and balanced presentation of
information is a useful discipline for communicating in any
language. This technique helped me to organize my essays
and oral presentations in French, which was after all still a
foreign language to me. When writing or speaking in a
foreign language it is particularly important to have a basic
formula for organizing your thoughts, otherwise it is too
easy to just ramble on because you lack control in the new
language.
Obviously writing a business report, writing an essay on
philosophy and writing an academic paper all require you to
organize your information in different ways. You need to be
more formal and structured than when you engage in casual
conversation. The preferred structure for such writing will
even vary from culture to culture. However, whenever I
wrote in a foreign language, and French was my first, I felt
that the individual sentences I wrote were the same as my

spoken language. In my mind I made no distinction between
the written and the spoken language, even though there
undoubtedly was one. I always tried to make them both as
similar as possible. I recommend this approach to all
language learners as a way to improve the accuracy of both
your written and spoken language.
The courses at Sciences Po were very stimulating. The most
interesting lecturers, such as Jean-Baptiste Duroselle, spoke
to overflowing audiences. We were taught plenty of facts
and the professors were very definite in their views, often
bristling with irony. They were not interested in the ideas of
their students.
Yet somehow I found this atmosphere more stimulating than
the one I had left behind at McGill University. Canadian
English speaking intellectual circles are less tolerant of
genuine originality than the French. This is particularly the
case in today's politically correct age. The reason for this, I
believe, is the deeper tradition of learning and greater
intellectual confidence of the French.
The French place importance on being able to express
yourself with elegance and precision. The most important
exam for students at Sciences Po was the Oral Exam, a
spoken essay.
Students were given a few minutes to organize a fifteen-
minute presentation to a senior panel of professors on a
subject selected at random. The students were judged as
much on their ability to express their views in a balanced
and logical way as on the actual content or information they
were able to provide.
There is a tendency today to teach spoken language as
different from written language. I disagree with this

approach. Effective spoken language is similar to effective
written language: clear, simple and elegant. While it is true
that native speakers can be a little sloppy in their spoken
language, I do not believe that this should be taught as a
model to new learners. Slang and excessive colloquialisms
do not suit the non-native speaker until he or she is
comfortable in the language. Learners should try to speak
the way they write. I have always tried to use the same
clear sentences and phrases when I speak as when I write in
a foreign language. I avoid a too casual spoken style or an
overly complicated written style. In this way regular writing
practice can be a great help to learning to speak correctly.
Travel and Culture
The French pride themselves on their logic. Whatever goes
against their logic is wrong, and is attacked without pity. For
this reason they are sometimes seen as unfriendly or
arrogant.
To me, however, France was not only a stimulating country
but also a very hospitable one. I received a scholarship that
enabled me to enjoy my last two years in France. I met
kindness and generosity from French people of all walks of
life. While hitchhiking in the countryside, I was often invited
to meals and to stay at people's homes.
My commitment to the French language and culture helped
create bridges with people. I am sure this would not have
been possible had I remained a typical Anglophone North
American.
There are many English speaking North Americans who
have been very successful at learning new languages.
However, it is more commonly non-English speakers who

make the effort to learn English. While this is unavoidable
because of the unique international usefulness of English, it
is a great loss to those English speakers who never
experience the personal enrichment of learning a new
language.
I delighted in visiting the countryside, seeing the historic
villages and towns, and talking with people in French. As
with most countries, France has regional accents. When you
speak a foreign language you have to imitate the native
speaker to acquire a native speaker accent. In my case, this
meant that I spoke with a Parisian accent in Paris, a
Southern accent on the Mediterranean, and so forth. This is
hard to avoid, at least in the early stages. But it is also a
good sign, since it shows that you are listening carefully to
the pronunciation of native speakers.
Nevertheless, I have always felt that it is best for a non-
native speaker to adopt the most standard form of the
language rather than a regional accent. In every country
there is a form of the language that is considered the
standard. It might be the French spoken in Tours, the
Mandarin spoken in Beijing, or the Japanese spoken in Tokyo.
It is always amusing to hear a foreigner speak in a regional
accent, but the neutral feel of the standard pronunciation is
usually the wiser course. Canadian English is such a
standard or neutral form of English.
In a similar vein, a language learner is best to stay clear of
idioms, slang and swear words. There is a lot of French
slang, or argot as it is called, that I still do not understand. It
does not bother me. I do not usually come across it in my
reading, and I am not expected to be able to use it when I
speak. Some language learners are in a hurry to use slang
expressions before they know how to use them. I think a

non-native speaker sounds best speaking in correct
standard language.
The history of France is a history of the different
people who have created Europe. Some of the
earliest examples of human painting and sculpture
are located in the caves of Southwestern France,
dating back as far as 20,000 years ago.
At the time of the Roman conquest over 2,000 years
ago, the Celtic Gauls were dominant in France,
although there were Greek colonies in the South,
various other tribes in the North and the ancient
Basques in the Southwest. The Romans brought with
them their civilization, and created an engineering
infrastructure that still survives in the
amphitheaters, roads and aqueducts that tourists
can visit today, especially in the South of France. With the
Romans came the staples of the Mediterranean
culinary tradition: bread, olive oil, and wine.
So France is a melting pot, as most countries are if
you go back far enough. This is reflected in the
varying myths of origin of the French. Sometimes
they emphasize their Gallic ancestry.
At other times, the French are proud of their Latin
roots and sympathize more with Mediterranean
people than with Northern Europeans. Certainly their
literature is dominated by references to the Classics
of Roman and Greek antiquity. Yet the early heroes of
France, including Clovis, Pepin le Bref, Charles
Martel, and Charlemagne, were Germanic Franks.
A concern with food and drink is one of the dominant
features of modern French culture, and the subject of

conversation at all levels of society. The French recognize
that elegantly and enthusiastically talking about a subject is
a large part of the enjoyment.
Long after my studies in France were over, I had the
opportunity to lead a group of Japanese wood industry
executives on a tour of wood processing plants in France. I
remember on one occasion we arrived at a modern door and
window plant near Toulouse. For many minutes our
delegation was kept waiting while our French hosts were
engaged in an animated discussion. My Japanese tour
members sat patiently, but eventually they wanted to know
what the argument was all about. I explained that our
French hosts were discussing what we were going to have
for lunch. I still remember my meal of salade tiède de
gésiers and cassoulet, eaten under the shade of pine trees
outside an old Mediterranean Chateau. My memory of the
factory we visited is less clear.
With French as with other languages, a familiarity with the
food is an important part of learning the culture and the
language.
Conviviality around a meal table can be the best learning
environment. Cicero, the Roman statesman and orator,
defined convivium as “To sit down to dinner with friends
because they share one's life.” This desire to communicate
over food is common to all languages and cultures, and no
doubt has an origin in the prehistoric sharing of the hunt. It
reinforces a feeling of reciprocity between people. As a poor
student, I did not often have the chance to enjoy haute
cuisine. However, it was not uncommon when I was
hitchhiking in Southern France for truck drivers to share with
me a full course lunch, including wine. How they continued
driving after that was a bit of a mystery to me. I understand

that the control on drinking and driving in France has
become more severe in recent years.
Hitchhiking in Europe
I am sure I hitchhiked tens of thousands of miles in those
years, criss-crossing Europe from Spain to Sweden to Italy
through Germany and all countries in between. There was
no better way to explore the history and geography, to meet
people and practice languages. Unfortunately hitchhiking is
no longer as easy as it used to be.
My accommodation varied a great deal. Mostly I stayed in
youth hostels, which were great places to meet up with
travelers from other countries. Often I met these same
travelers standing on the roads leading out of town with
their thumbs out, large rucksacks hidden beside the platane
trees, as we all tried to hitch a ride to our next destination.
I have lain awake frozen on a windswept mountain side on
the Route Napoleon on my way from the French Alps to the
Mediterranean, before being able to warm myself the next
day by napping in the gentle sun of the lavender fields of
Grasse just before reaching the sea at Nice. I have slept in
parks, in ditches, on beaches and in hotels of every
description. On two occasions, once in Boeblingen, Germany
and once in Perpignan, France I checked into the local jail,
where I was kindly accommodated until the morning. I had
not committed a crime, but it was late and raining. The
police seemed happy to have the company. I was the only
guest in both establishments, which were basic but clean.
My usual routes took me through southern France, the Midi,
with its quaint stone villages, dry Mediterranean vegetation,
Roman ruins, historical cities like Avignon, Nimes and Arles

and old men playing boules on the sandy town squares. The
temperature could easily exceed forty degrees Celsius in the
summer.
From there I would continue into Franco’s Spain, a favorite
holiday hitchhiking destination for me in the early 1960s.
Spanish vocabulary and grammar is similar to French, since
both languages can be considered dialects of Latin. With a
little bit of study and reading in Spanish, and daily
conversation with the friendly and talkative Spaniards, I was
able to bring my Spanish up to an acceptable level. On my
first visit to Barcelona, as I climbed aboard a crowded city
bus, I was overwhelmed by the friendliness of the people.
They helped me on with my rucksack, made sure I knew
where the Youth Hostel was located, and then invited me for
a drink at the local bar. We all drank out of a communal
wine pitcher with a long spout which was held at arm’s
length so a long stream of wine could flow into your mouth.
With my interest in history and adventure, I found
Spain to be as fascinating a mixture of peoples and
cultures as France.
Basques, Celts, Iberians, Greeks, Romans, Visigoths,
Arabs, Berbers, Jews, and Gypsies (originally from
India), have all contributed their genetic, cultural and
linguistic influence.
Nowadays we often forget that it was the
cosmopolitan Arab culture of Southern Spain, El
Andalus, that was the great teacher of medieval
Europe. As the Christians of Northern Spain
reconquered the Muslim South, scholars from all
countries of Europe flocked to Toledo and other
centres to translate Arab documents on science and

philosophy. The Arabs had surged out of the desert
to conquer lands from India to Spain. In this way,
they had come into contact with the learning of India,
Persia, Babylon, Egypt and Greece, which they had
absorbed into their culture. They also had significant
trading contact with Tang China and knowledge of
Chinese science and technology. Western science,
mathematics, medicine, music, architecture and
other fields of study were tremendously stimulated
by contact with the advanced civilization of the
Arabs. When I visited the graceful buildings and
gardens of Andalusia, I tried to imagine El Andalus at
the height of its brilliance.
In modern times, Spain has experienced an economic
miracle and construction boom that make it a different place
from the country I visited in the 1960s, but the older Spain I
first encountered had an unspoiled charm that I enjoyed
very much.
I visited Pamplona during the Fiesta de San Fermin on July 7.
The whole town was engaged in a three day party of
drinking and singing and conviviality. I could practice my
Spanish in every little bar and restaurant. It was all very
safe despite the drinking and revelry. I was mostly attracted
to the partying and declined to risk my life running with the
bulls. Besides, it required getting up very early in the
morning.
Spain, especially in the South, is a country of strong
impressions. The overpowering sun brings out the contrasts
between sun and shade, between the dark tones of the
trees and flowers, the brightness of the whitewashed houses
and the stingy orange of the dry earth. As I was told in those
days, “It is the sun which allows us to put up with Franco.”

Everywhere people were proud and friendly. My ability to
communicate in Spanish enabled me to walk into every
bodega and tapas bar, make friends and explore the culture
through the language.
Paris in the 1960s
While I enjoyed travel, my main purpose was to study. Paris
in the early 1960s was a magic place. I lived in a small
unheated and uncomfortable flat on the Rue du Faubourg St.
Honoré in a building that was built in 1789. I was on the
sixth floor and the toilet was on the third floor. I always
knew if my neighbor below me on the fifth floor was home
because I took a bath by pouring hot water into a small tub
in my kitchen. It was just impossible not to spill some water,
a few drops of which found their way down to my neighbor,
who then banged on his ceiling with a broom-handle.
It is remarkable that a building with such poor standards of
accommodation was located in a uniquely fashionable area
of Paris. The world headquarters of some of the leading
fashion and perfume companies of the world are on the Rue
du Faubourg St. Honoré. Estée Lauder was in my building,
for example. The Elysée Palace, home of the French
President, was just down the street. The Place de la
Concorde, la plus belle place du monde, was the next block
over. And I lived in an unheated room that had not changed
much since the French Revolution!
Within walking distance were the shops and eating places of
the wealthy: Fauchon, the great caterer and food store on
the Place de la Madeleine, the shops on the Grands
Boulevards and Maxim's restaurant. This was the world of La
Belle Époque, symbolizing to me the height of France’s

cultural influence preceding the tragic events of twentieth
century Europe.
The Champs Elysées was just around the corner. I would
often end my evenings strolling down this most beautiful
boulevard. I would start in the Middle Ages at Notre Dame
Cathedral, pass by the Renaissance at the Louvre,
experience l’Ancien Régime as I walked through the Jardins
des Tuileries designed by Louis XIV’s gardener and then
cross the Place de la Concorde where influences of the 18th
and 19th century come together in balance and harmony.
Continuing from there, it is hard not to fix one’s attention on
Napoleon Bonaparte’s heroic Arc du Triomphe which
overlooks the surrounding districts from the heights of the
Place de L’Étoile. Despite the intent of Napoleon in building
this monument to his victories, the lasting power of any
civilization is not its force of arms, but its contribution to
world civilization.
My bicycle took me everywhere I needed to go: to school, to
my part time jobs, and out on the town in the Quartier Latin.
Negotiating the traffic on the Place de la Concorde or Place
de L'Étoile with my bicycle was a daily challenge. On the
other hand, there was no better way to really experience
the feeling of living in Paris. It was also the easiest and
fastest way to get from point to point without worrying
about parking.
I had several part time jobs. One involved taking lunch with
French families while offering English conversation in return.
As a poor student used to the simpler university restaurant
fare, I always took advantage of these lunches to eat plenty
of good food and have a few glasses of wine, finishing with a
strong espresso coffee so I would not fall asleep. My second

job had me running an English language lab at the French
Agricultural Institute. Every Thursday, a plentiful lunch with
a “bourgeois family” was followed by a bicycle ride halfway
across Paris to the Agricultural Institute, on a full stomach. I
arrived sweating profusely just in time to turn on the central
controls for the language lab.
It was at the Agricultural Institute that a student walked out
of the lab in disgust at his inability to understand English. I
remember that the material we prepared for these students
was full of technical agricultural terms but was otherwise of
no interest to the young students. It is impossible to just
learn vocabulary in the hope that one day it will be useful.
These farm boys at the Agricultural Institute could not speak
English. What was the point of giving them obscure
technical terms that they would probably never use? As is
so often the case in language instruction, there was too
much emphasis on grammar and vocabulary in order to
prepare students for exams, rather than on how to
communicate.
We can only learn to use a language from interesting and
meaningful content. We should have allowed the students to
choose subjects that were familiar and of interest to them.
Some may have chosen farming, but many would probably
have preferred to listen to recordings of genuine
conversations in English between young people talking
about music, or going to a party. The objective should have
been to make English meaningful. Once these students were
able to communicate, the technical vocabulary of
agriculture could be learned quickly if necessary.
My First Real Job

Returning on my bicycle from a late night bowl of onion
soup at Les Halles, the produce market featured in the
movie Irma La Douce, I found a letter in my mailbox
advising me that I had been accepted into the Canadian
Foreign Trade Service. A friend of mine had persuaded me to
write the Foreign Service exam at the Canadian Embassy
some months earlier, and here I was now with a job!
This same friend and I had been planning to travel around
the world on Honda motorcycles if Honda would sponsor us.
The Foreign Service opportunity looked more promising.
As wonderful as my stay in France was, I often felt homesick
for Canada. Going abroad allowed me to better understand
and even to better appreciate my own home and original
culture.
Learning another language and culture does not take away
from the enjoyment of your own background, it only
intensifies it.
Yet I was destined to live abroad for many more years in
Asia before finally settling down in Vancouver.
Discovering Asian Culture
Creating An Opportunity, Ottawa
1967
He who depends on himself will attain the greatest
happiness.
– Yi Jing (Book of Changes), 2nd Millenium BC

I did not know when I entered the Canadian Diplomatic
Service that I would end up being immersed in the cultures
of both China and Japan. My language adventure would soon
confront me with the challenge of learning languages that
previously had seemed strange and distant to me. To
achieve fluency in these languages required commitment,
intensity and good learning techniques. But I could not have
succeeded without a strong interest in the people and the
culture, and the confidence that I would become a fluent
speaker of these languages.
In 1967 in the Canadian capital city of Ottawa, I began my
first full time job as an Assistant Trade Commissioner. Most
of our group of young and eager Trade Commissioners-in-
training had visions of serving their country in interesting
foreign postings.
However, fully one third of all Trade Commission posts are in
the United States. Everyone wanted to avoid an assignment
to Cleveland or Buffalo.
When the Trade Service announced that they were going to
appoint an officer to Hong Kong to learn Chinese in
preparation for the expected establishment of diplomatic
relations with the People's Republic of China, I figured that
this was my chance to avoid Buffalo.
I started taking Chinese lessons from an elderly Chinese
man in Ottawa. While I did not learn much by merely taking
lessons once a week, I let the Director of Personnel and
other senior people know what I was doing. Given the
opportunity, why would they not choose as a language
student someone who was already committed to learning
Chinese? Hong Kong was not my first choice as a posting; I
was in fact more interested in getting to Rio de Janeiro or
Rome or Madrid. But Hong Kong still sounded exotic.

I was very pleased when I was finally assigned to Hong
Kong. I was obviously chosen because I had already made a
commitment to learning the language. Commitment pays
dividends in many ways. As to the choice of Hong Kong, in
those days China was in the throes of the Cultural
Revolution and Taiwan was not politically acceptable for a
future Canadian representative to The People's Republic of
China. Instead, Hong Kong with its Mandarin speaking
émigré community was the most suitable place to learn
Chinese.
I remember that a good friend questioned whether I should
accept the assignment. “What if you cannot learn Chinese?”
he asked. But after my experience in mastering French, I
had no doubt that I could master Chinese, too. The reason
linguists can master several languages is largely because of
their increased confidence. Language learning becomes
demystified. Also, the more languages you learn, the more
you develop the ability to cope with new ways of saying
things. It is a bit like sports. A person who has developed
fitness in one sport can more easily learn another sport.
My kindly Chinese teacher back in Ottawa had warned me
to be wary of the charms of the attractive girls in Hong Kong
but I did not heed his advice. I ended up finding my wife,
Carmen, in Hong Kong and we are still happily married more
than thirty years later, with two sons and five grandchildren.
But I did not know that as I headed out to the exotic Far East
for the first time.
Intensity, Hong Kong 1968
I had visions of Hong Kong as a romantic city with curved
Chinese roofs and weeping willow trees. I was looking

forward to immersing myself in this exotic environment. It
was in June 1968 at the age of twenty two that I headed out
to Asia for the first time. I took holidays on my way to Hong
Kong and I was able to experience parts of the world that I
had previously visited only in my imagination: in Italy, the
magnificence of Rome and its disorderly traffic; in Israel, the
timelessness of a starlit summer night over the ancient city
of Jerusalem and the tension of a country after a recent war;
in Iran, the exoticism of the Teheran bazaar and its reckless
taxis bedecked with Christmas lights in June; in India, the
splendour of the Taj Mahal and the turmoil of life in New
Delhi; and in Thailand, the bright colours of Bangkok and the
elegance of its people and culture. My excitement about my
new assignment in Hong Kong was building throughout my
trip.
Finally I touched down in Hong Kong, where I was met by
the official car of the Canadian High Commission. As we
drove through congested Kowloon with its forest of drab,
gray, high-rise apartment buildings, I was suddenly brought
back to reality.
Hong Kong was no Shangri-la. However, as our car got onto
the vehicular ferry to cross over from Kowloon to Hong Kong
Island, I was suddenly treated to a waterborne kaleidoscope
of ocean freighters, barges, war ships, Chinese junks and
pleasure craft against a backdrop of modern skyscrapers
and stately colonial buildings, all overlooked by Victoria
Peak on the Hong Kong side.
Living in the Crown Colony of Hong Kong, as it was called in
those days, I always felt a little hemmed in. Before you
could go anywhere you had to fly out or take a boat. China
was essentially closed, and this could be depressing.
However, the least expensive way to cheer myself up was to
pay ten or fifteen Hong Kong cents to cross the harbour on

the Star Ferry. I never got tired of studying the skyline and
the traffic on the water during this fifteen minute crossing.
For the first months I lived on the Hong Kong side near
Stanley and Repulse Bay. I had an unobstructed view of a
romantic little bay where I could satisfy my desire for the
exotic by studying the Chinese transport junks plying up and
down the sparkling turquoise waters of the South China Sea.
This relatively sparsely populated part of the Crown Colony
had beaches, leafy semi-tropical vegetation and a large
European population. It was like a resort. I was expected to
live there and attend the Hong Kong University where all
previous diplomatic language students had studied. But
after a few months I chose to live and study on the more
densely populated Kowloon side, and I enrolled at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong. Just as I had wanted to
immerse myself in French culture in order to learn French, I
took the same attitude into my Chinese learning.
Hong Kong is Cantonese speaking, and therefore does not
offer immersion in Mandarin. However, it is Chinese and did
offer an intense exposure to Chinese culture. I was taken out
of my comfortable Western cocoon and exposed daily to the
sounds and smells of the busy streets and markets, the
shops selling Chinese medicine and other exotic products,
the energy of so many people bustling in street-side
workshops or peddling products they often carried balanced
on a pole. Near my school or in the crowded Tsimshatsui
district of Kowloon, I could eat inexpensive noodles or curry
rice lunches with workers or enjoy sumptuous Cantonese
meals in luxury restaurants. There were numerous
restaurants representing the cuisine of many different parts
of China: Beijing, Shandong, Sichuan, Chao Zhou and more,
all squeezed into narrow, crowded streets. This was my daily
living environment as I studied Chinese. Indirectly I was
being conditioned to accept the language.

I still remember my lunch-time conversations in Mandarin
with my teachers, over Hui Guo Rou (braised garlic pork),
Man Tou (steamed bread) and eel soup. These informal
gatherings were my most pleasant and relaxed learning
experiences. The teachers would talk of their childhood in
China or other interesting subjects. At a Chinese meal,
everyone helps themselves from common serving dishes
with their chopsticks.
I have always had a good appetite, and as the only
Canadian at the table I was quickly nicknamed “jia na da”
(“Canada” in Mandarin) with the emphasis on “na da,”
meaning “to reach and take a big piece.”
I made the right decision in choosing the Chinese University
of Hong Kong. The Chinese Language School was run by one
of the most effective language teachers I have met, Mr. Liu
Ming.
He welcomed people to the Chinese language and made
foreigners feel that they could learn Mandarin. He insisted
on hard work from the learner, because he himself was an
energetic and hard-working man. He inspired me to commit
to my new language challenge and was always flexible in
accommodating my requests. The staff of the language
school were very friendly and encouraging.
At first I was dependent on my one-on-one sessions with the
teachers. However, soon I began to find the classes were a
strain. I was obliged to go to class for three hours every
morning. Sometimes I was tired and hardly able to pay
attention. The effectiveness of the teachers varied. Some
teachers were intent on giving me explanations in English,
which I found particularly irksome. The fashion in those days
was to emphasize drills, which were often tiring and
annoying.

The best sessions were those when the teacher would just
talk about some interesting subject. I did most of my
learning at these more informal conversational sessions as
well as when studying intensely at home.
It was the energy of the Director, Liu Ming, who watched
over us and challenged us that really inspired me to work
hard. The texts we used were from the Yale-in-China
program. The first text was called Chinese Dialogues and
was set in the China of the pre-Liberation period. The
dialogues described a certain Mr.
Smith living, working and traveling around in China from
Shanghai to Nanking and Beiping (as it was called in the
Kuomintang days). This context was divorced from the
reality of late 1960s China, which was caught up in the
Cultural Revolution. I remember very little of the content of
this textbook, but I realize that an artificial text like this is
probably necessary at the beginning stage of learning a
language.
Reading and Vocabulary Growth
The next reader we had was more interesting. I still
recommend it. It was called Twenty Lectures in Chinese
Culture. Developed at Yale in 1963 as an early reader, this
book covered Chinese history and culture, in simple
straightforward language. I still occasionally read the book
to refresh my Chinese. Although the book is written for
learners in simple language, the subject is real: Chinese
culture and history.
Graded reading material is inevitable for the beginner, since
reading easier material helps to create confidence and
develop fluency. However, these readers should be on

subjects of interest and not resemble children’s stories.
Ideally there should be a selection for the learner to choose
from. But as soon as possible, all learners should move on to
real content.
After about four months, I read only authentic Chinese
content, mostly using readers which had specially prepared
vocabulary lists. The subjects varied, from history to politics
to literature. Suddenly a fascinating world opened up to me
in the original language: at first in books, and then as my
Chinese improved, through the people I met.
I threw myself into the study of Chinese. I did not have the
advantage of having studied Chinese in school for ten years,
as had been the case for French. Still, I was determined to
learn in as short a period of time as possible. I took charge
of my learning.
I had my tape recorder on from the time I woke up, either in
the background or at intensive sessions where I
concentrated on pronunciation. I worked hard to learn
Chinese characters, writing them down and reviewing them
daily. I read as much as I could, and reread the same
material frequently to improve my ability at reading Chinese
writing. I studied the vocabulary lists that went with these
texts. It always seemed as if I could never remember new
words, but eventually they stuck with me.
Hong Kong is not a Mandarin speaking city and so I was
quite isolated in my study. I could not just go out and talk to
shopkeepers or others in Mandarin. While there were some
Mandarin radio and television programs, I found I could only
understand some of the language and then it was gone. On
the other hand, I found that using a tape recorder to listen
over and over again to material that I already understood
was very beneficial to my learning. The problem was getting

hold of enough interesting audio content at my level of
comprehension.
When I lived in Hong Kong, tape recorders were not
portable.
Those were still the days of the open reel tape recorders
that were large, heavy and awkward. I had to sit at home
and listen.
Today, modern technology makes it possible to easily find
material of interest to download or record so you can take
your listening everywhere.
Since Chinese essentially has no phonetic script, I had to
learn three to four thousand characters, each requiring
fifteen or more strokes. Needless to say, vocabulary
acquisition is more difficult than in English. I realized that
the dictionary had to be the last resort of the language
learner. Looking words up in a conventional dictionary is one
of the least efficient and most wasteful activities of
language learning. Very often you forget the meaning of the
word as soon as you close the dictionary.
Using a Chinese Dictionary is even more difficult than
looking up a word in a language based on an alphabet.
One of the frustrations we all face in language learning is
the speed with which we forget newly learned words. It
seems as if everything has to be learned and relearned so
many times. In Chinese, this is an even greater problem
because of the difficulty of learning the characters. I had to
find a way to increase my speed of learning characters.
I developed techniques of working with new vocabulary
items that enabled me to reinforce learning and vocabulary
retention.

One system was based on the way Chinese children learn
characters. I bought exercise books that were divided into
squares for writing characters. I would start writing a
character six or seven times down the first column and then
write the sound or English meaning on the third column.
Then I would start a second character and do the same.
Soon I ran into the first character I had learned and had to
write it again. In other words, I reminded myself regularly of
words that I had just learned before I had a chance to forget
them. At first I could only learn ten new characters a day
but after a while I was up to thirty per day, with roughly a
fifty percent retention rate. The retention rate was higher if
the words were connected to content that I was reading or
listening to. This principle of systematically relearning new
words until they start to stick has been carried over to all
my language learning.
It was important for me to write Chinese, even though my
calligraphy was poor. When I wrote Chinese I had the time to
compose my sentences and choose my words carefully.
Writing helped me reinforce my vocabulary. It also was an
opportunity to practice sentence structure.
In modern Chinese the written language is similar to the
spoken language, and my writing certainly was. Chinese
classics, on the other hand, are written in an elegant short
hand quite different from the spoken language. Modern
Chinese writers often include some of this more refined
language in their prose. I did not bother with that. My
Chinese writing was simple and direct, quite sufficient to
translate newspaper editorials or whatever I was given as a
study assignment. Making my writing a sort of extension of
my spoken language helped me improve my ability to
express myself in Chinese. Language learners should write
often, and they should minimize any differences between
their written and spoken language.

Another principle of learning new vocabulary that has stuck
with me is the importance of context. It is easier to
remember the meanings of Chinese characters in compound
words consisting of two or more characters than individually.
I still have difficulty recognizing certain characters on their
own but easily can identify the meanings of characters in
compound words. This principle of learning words in the
context of phrases and larger content is useful in any
language, and became a fundamental feature of the
learning system we developed.
The Importance of Phrases
The principles of Chinese grammar are different from
English.
I deliberately ignored explanations of the theory of Chinese
grammar because these theoretical explanations made no
sense to me. Instead, I just accepted the various structural
patterns of sentences in Chinese as normal. I knew that with
enough exposure they would start to seem natural to me. I
found it easier to learn the structure of a new language from
frequent exposure to phrase patterns rather than trying to
understand abstract grammatical explanations of that
structure. I realized in studying Chinese, a language so
different from my own, that the fundamental component I
had to learn was not the word, but the phrase. Language
skill consists of spontaneously being able to use
prefabricated phrases and phrase patterns that are natural
to the native speaker and need to become natural to the
learner.
Phrases are the best models of correct practice in a
language.

Certain words naturally belong together in a way that the
learner cannot anticipate but can only try to get used to.
When words are combined in the natural phrases of the
language they achieve force and clarity. It is not grammar
and words that need to be learned, so much as phrases.
New vocabulary is more easily learned together with the
phrases where it is found, and even pronunciation should be
learned in the form of phrases.
These principles are at the core of The Linguist program.
Pronunciation
We are all capable of correctly pronouncing the sounds of
any foreign language. All humans have the same
physiological ability to make sounds, regardless of ethnic
origin. However, mastering the pronunciation of a new
language does require dedication and hard work. Chinese at
first represented quite a challenge.
When I wanted to master pronunciation I would spend hours
every day listening to the same content over and over. I
worked especially hard on mastering Chinese sounds with
the appropriate tone. I tried to imitate while listening. I
taped my own voice and compared it to the native speaker. I
practiced reading in a loud voice. Eventually my ability to
hear the differences between my pronunciation and that of
the native speaker improved. I would force my mouth to
conform to the needs of Chinese pronunciation. I would also
work on the rhythm of the new language, always
exaggerating and even accompanying my pronunciation
with the appropriate facial expressions and gestures.
Eventually I was able to achieve a near native quality of
pronunciation.

Once I was able to pronounce individual words and phrases
satisfactorily, I would find it easier to understand content
not designed for the learner: in other words, real authentic
material.
As my Chinese improved, I particularly enjoyed listening to
the famous Beijing Xiang Sheng comic dialogue performer
Hou Bao Lin, with his colourful Beijing rhythm of speech. In
recent years, to maintain my Mandarin, I sometimes listen
to CDs of famous Chinese storytellers, like Yuan Kuo Cheng,
narrating classic novels such as The Romance of the Three
Kingdoms.
The storytelling art in China is highly developed and when I
listen to one of these CDs I thoroughly enjoy being
transported back to a bygone era.
After struggling though the frustrations of confronting such
a different language I was soon able to enjoy my learning.
Within eight months of starting my studies, I could
appreciate essays by intellectuals and novels by Chinese
writers of the 1930s like Lao She and Lu Xun. I also became
familiar with the writings of Mao Tse Tung and the polemics
of the Cultural Revolution.
There were many words I did not understand, but it was not
my purpose to learn every new word. I was just reading for
pleasure and training my mind to the Chinese writing
system. I was working to develop my ability to guess at
meaning, an important learning skill which develops
gradually with enough exposure to a language. I was also
absorbing an understanding of the culture.
The world of the thirties in China was far removed
from the reality of China in the late 1960s. Pre-
Liberation China was full of tragedy, poverty, and

uncertainty. China was torn apart by internal rivalries
between different political forces and selfish local
warlords, while fighting off foreign invasion. These
were cruel and hard times. Yet to me, China was
fascinating and even romantic. With enough distance
in time or space, periods of warfare and struggle can
seem heroic. The Romance of the
Three Kingdoms, the epic Chinese novel, or the
glorification of the knights of Medieval Europe, are
but two examples of how legend and literature
romanticize periods of terrible human suffering.
Chinese society was looking for its place in a world
where foreign influence had all of a sudden collided
with a complex, brilliant and previously self-
contained Chinese civilization in decline.
The Chinese intellectual class that had been one of
the main supports of traditional China was now
searching for its new role. Some Chinese intellectuals
were defenders of Chinese orthodoxy, some were
champions of the new revolutionary thought of
Marxism, and yet others, like Dr. Hu Shih, were
extremely sophisticated explainers of Western
philosophy and its relevance to the new China, and
even of its relationship with Chinese philosophy.
The historic evolution of China was different from
that of Western Asia and the Mediterranean. The
power of the Chinese central state proved more
durable than the power of Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Greece or Rome. As Chinese culture and people
spread and mixed with local ethnic groups in South
China, no permanent separate states sprang up as
was the case in Europe with the interaction of
Romans and other peoples. In the North of China,

constant invasions and settlement by Turkic,
Mongolian, Tibetan and Tungusic peoples were a
dominant feature for 2,000 years. Yet throughout this
period, the prestige and power of Chinese culture
was not permanently challenged. This is in part
because of the flexibility of the Chinese writing
system, which could be used to represent meaning
even if words were pronounced differently. China was
able to maintain its unity while absorbing diverse
cultural and ethnic elements in different regions of
the country.
It is impossible to look at the refined scenes from
Chinese paintings of the Tang or Song periods
without admiring the high standard of living and
sophistication of Chinese society of the time,
compared to the lower level of culture at the same
period in Europe. It is interesting to speculate what
this technically and culturally sophisticated Chinese
society would have created under different historical
circumstances. But then, change is the only constant
of the human condition.
We in the Western world do not learn enough in
school about the involvement of Chinese civilization
with other parts of the world. The beneficiaries of
Chinese culture were not only neighboring East Asian
countries, who borrowed heavily from Chinese
culture, but also Western Europe. The introduction of
Chinese technology to Europe in the Early Middle
Ages was instrumental in stimulating progress in
technology and navigation.
Crossing Into China, Canton 1969

In 1969 I was finally able to see the China of my
imagination, and to use Mandarin in an environment where
it was the national language. I crossed into China from Hong
Kong at the Lowu bridge near a small village called Shen
Zhen. From the waiting room of the train station I could just
make out the rows of low traditional peasant houses behind
the posters with slogans exhorting the people to greater
revolutionary efforts.
Today, this quiet village has become one of the largest cities
in China, a vast urban sprawl of modern skyscrapers and
thriving capitalism, and a leader in high tech, fashion and
more.
As a foreigner, I was automatically seated in the soft seat
section on the train to Canton (today’s Guangzhou). This
entitled me to a cup of flower tea, which was regularly
refreshed with more hot water by an attendant as the train
rode through Southern Guangdong Province with its hills of
red earth and green rice fields. I strained to listen to the
constant political messages being broadcast on the train’s
public address system.
In Canton I stayed at the Dong Fang Hotel, a Soviet style
hotel which accommodated the European and North
American businessmen. The Japanese and Overseas Chinese
stayed elsewhere, according to the arrangements of the
Chinese authorities.
China was caught up in the turmoil of the Cultural
Revolution.
Early every morning the guests of the Dong Fang Hotel were
wakened to the stirring strains of Chinese revolutionary and
patriotic music. The walls of the city were covered in
slogans.

The air of this southern city was heavy with warm humidity
and tension. Military personnel were in evidence
everywhere.
To a foreigner visiting for a short period, Canton seemed
pleasant. There was very little traffic. The semi-tropical
vegetation of Canton's many parks was lush and green. The
pace of life appeared leisurely, especially when compared to
the hustle of Hong Kong. In addition, the legendary cuisine
of Canton did not disappoint. There was a selection of
excellent restaurants at reasonable prices. Still, it was
impossible not to notice the mood of tension and
discouragement among many of the people.
Being a foreign diplomat, I was assigned a guide from the
China Travel Service whose duty it was to keep an eye on
me. We spoke in Chinese and exchanged views on many
subjects. One day I asked him how he put up with the
constant barrage of slogans. My guide, a product of Mao's
China and obviously security-cleared to guide foreign
diplomats replied, “It is like Dr. Goebbels said in the Second
World War. If you tell a lie a thousand times, it becomes the
truth!”
So much for stereotypes! Far from accepting all the
propaganda, this person was well read and had an opinion
of his own. I was amazed!
Throughout 1969 and 1970 I was a regular visitor to the
Canton International Trade Fair in my capacity as a Trade
Commissioner. I was there to help Canadian businessmen in
their discussions with the representatives of Chinese trading
corporations. During the Cultural Revolution, the discussion
was about politics as much as it was about business, much
to the frustration of visiting Canadians. I tried to understand
what was really going on in China but it was rather difficult. I

was often invited to various presentations of the latest
showing of Chinese Revolutionary Opera, revised and
approved for its ideological content by Jiang Qing (Chairman
Mao's wife), leader of the Gang of Four who ran China in
those days.
Around that time, Canada was involved in negotiations with
China to establish diplomatic relations. I discovered that
Canada did not have its own interpreter present and relied
on the Chinese side to do the interpreting. Even though I
was a lowly language student, I immediately wrote a letter
to the director of Canada’s Foreign Service. I protested that
not to use our own interpreter was demeaning to Canada’s
image and discouraging to those of us who were studying
Chinese for the government. I recommended that my
colleague Martin Collacott, who had been studying for a
year longer than me, should be assigned to the
negotiations. Martin was soon on his way to Stockholm,
where the negotiations were taking place.
In 1970, Canada established diplomatic relations with the
People’s Republic of China. In October of that year, I
accompanied the first Canadian delegation to Beijing for a
ten day visit to help locate an Embassy building for Canada
and make other administrative arrangements. The old city
with its grey walls and hidden courtyards felt like one big
forbidden city.
The Imperial Palace (also known officially as The Forbidden
City) was majestic in its scale. In the maze of Hutungs or
lanes which surrounded it, I was reminded of Lao She's
famous novel, Rickshaw Boy. I pictured to myself the people
living behind these walls quietly carrying on the ageless
traditions of Chinese culture: painting, calligraphy, Peking
Opera, or poetry, while outside the authorities were trying
to discredit this very legacy for reasons of their own.

Every morning for breakfast we ate caviar which had come
from the Ussuri River. We dined on Peking duck and had
dinner in a Mongolian Restaurant that dated from the 1400s.
In those days there were no modern buildings and the city
looked much as it had for centuries. There was little traffic,
other than the bicycles fighting a stiff autumn wind blowing
in from the Central Asian steppes.
I thoroughly enjoyed my visits to China, even though it was
not easy to approach the people of China on a personal
basis. I visited China a few times in the seventies and early
eighties, then was not able to visit again until 2002.
Returning after such a long absence, I found the rate of new
construction and the transformation of China simply
unbelievable. After all my efforts at learning Chinese, thanks
to the changes taking place in China today, I will finally have
opportunities to use Mandarin regularly and develop
business and personal relationships with ordinary Chinese
people. This is very satisfying, since the goal of language
study is communication with people.
Working and Learning in Japan
Sumeba miyako.
(free translation) Home is where you make it.
– Japanese saying
Having studied Chinese, I was expected to be assigned to
Beijing as Assistant Trade Commissioner back in 1970.
Instead, I refused to go. The reason was a major personality
conflict with my immediate boss, the person designated to
be Senior Trade Commissioner in Beijing. I felt it would be
unpleasant to work in a post like Beijing where we would be

quite isolated from the general population, if I could not get
along with my superior. I promised the Trade Commissioner
Service that I would learn Japanese on my own if reassigned
to Tokyo. In this way the government would recoup some
value from their investment in my language training. My
superiors agreed.
I consider myself lucky to have lived in Montreal, Paris, Hong
Kong, Tokyo and now Vancouver. All of these cities have
personality. Montreal manages to inspire its citizens with a
certain Latin élan in a harsh climate that can only be
compared to Moscow amongst major world cities. Paris is a
living history and art museum with culinary flair. Hong Kong
is condensed exoticism on the edge of the largest and
longest running culture show in the world, China. Vancouver
is a comfortable and easy to live in cosmopolitan city
surrounded by some of the most spectacular scenery of any
urban environment in the world.
Tokyo is different. Tokyo is a collection of villages, each
different and each with its own personality. Overall, Tokyo is
not a beautiful city. For the people who live there, however,
and especially for most foreigners, it has a definite appeal. It
is the complete city. Tokyo has everything you might be
looking for in a metropolis, with the friendliness, politeness
and honesty of a small village. Tokyo was to become my
home for nine years.
I want to mention just one example of the friendliness and
politeness that I encountered while living in Japan. In the
1990s, long after I had moved back to Canada, I was visiting
Tokyo on business. I was getting ready to take the bus out to
Narita Airport to return home. I wanted to buy flowers to
send to Osaka, where I had been entertained at the home of
a customer. I entered a flower shop to ask if that kind of
service was available. The kind lady in the shop said no, but

told me that another flower shop five minutes away did do
this. She insisted that I leave my bags with her while I went
to her competitor to buy the flowers I needed. Where else
but in Tokyo?
Setting Language Goals, Tokyo 1971
Back in 1971 when I was first assigned to the Canadian
Embassy in Tokyo I did not know what to expect. But I was
determined to become fluent in Japanese, as I had promised
my employer. My Chinese learning experience had allowed
me to greatly improve my language learning methods and
confidence.
When I moved to Japan, I took these methods with me. I
made a commitment to learn Japanese on my own, within
six months.
I would make every necessary sacrifice to achieve a
breakthrough during this period. If I succeeded I would then
be able to live in Japanese, unlike the majority of Westerners
who lived in English.
When my wife and I moved to Japan, we had one child and
another on the way. My work at the Embassy was largely in
English. Therefore I had to work hard to surround myself
with a Japanese language environment to learn from.
Furthermore, in Japan I did not have the luxury of studying
the language full time at my employer's expense, as had
been the case in Hong Kong, nor had I studied the language
in school as had been the case for French. I had to do it on
my own while working full time.
Since the majority of foreigners were comfortable working
and living in English, I knew that I had to force myself to live

and work in Japanese as early as possible in order to avoid
falling into the comfortable routine of “getting by” in
English.
I had gained some initial exposure to Japanese while still in
Hong Kong from good friends among the members of the
Japanese consulate who were studying Chinese. One
Gaimusho (Foreign Affairs) official was Mr. Koichi Kato, who
subsequently became a leading Liberal Democratic
politician.
But my initial exposure to Japanese in Hong Kong was just a
foretaste to get me interested.
My first six months of living in Japan formed my period of
concentrated study, my make-or-break period. I had to find
my own learning material and continue to develop my own
language learning methods. I relied on bookstores to find
content that I needed. This content was not as good as the
content available for Chinese language study, and was
certainly a far cry from the material that is available for
studying any language today via the Internet.
Seeking Out Content
I knew that to progress in Japanese I had to expose myself
to as much Japanese language content as possible. As soon
as I could make out some of the meaning, I made a point of
always listening to Japanese radio even though there was an
English language radio station in Tokyo. I listened repeatedly
to tapes, and read what I could. Unfortunately there were
not nearly as many readers with vocabulary lists available in
Japanese as there had been for Chinese. Nowadays with the
Internet, modern dictionary software and a system like The
Linguist, a great range of material is accessible to the

motivated learner. It is possible to quickly progress from
specially prepared “textbooks” to the real language. The
sooner you can get away from learner language and start to
discover the real language, the faster you will progress.
You must be determined to find your own way to a new
language, and be careful of teachers imposing their versions
of the language on you. One evening I was driving home
listening to Japanese Public Educational Radio (NHK) when I
heard the following sounds coming from my radio. “Zey aa
sayrazu, zey aa sayrazu.” This went on for many minutes. I
thought it was a Buddhist chant. Finally I realized that it was
a radio English teacher with a heavy Japanese accent
repeating the phrase “they are sailors.” This kind of
repetitive mimicry of words is the opposite of meaningful
content and is of little use. In a way this reminded me of the
French instruction I had in school. Today there are young
native speaker English teachers in every Japanese city and
town. English teaching in Japan has progressed a great deal
since the 1970s.
As my Japanese improved, I tried to vary the type of content
to keep it interesting and to broaden my knowledge of the
language. For example, when our family went on a tour of
the Izu Peninsula, I took an audio version of Nobel Prize
winner Kawabata Yasunari’s novel The Izu Dancers along to
listen to in the car. We retraced the route of the itinerant
dancing troupe described in the novel while enjoying the
picturesque mountain and ocean scenery of the region.
One of the most interesting tapes that I listened to was an
NHK product called The History of the Showa Era. This
consisted of re-broadcast live radio news from the period
1925 to 1945.

Over time I was able to understand most of it. In my mind, I
can still hear certain phrases from radio personalities
announcing sports events or political or historical
happenings from that period. Today, with the expanded
production of audio books and e-books, there is a great deal
of authentic content available in many languages to suit the
interests of language learners.
While reading and repetitive listening are effective in
becoming familiar with a new language, genuine interaction
with native speakers is always the greatest stimulus and
training ground for the learner. My closest colleague at the
Canadian Embassy in Tokyo was the Japanese Commercial
Officer, Mr. “Nick”
Yazaki. He was a major help in my efforts to learn Japanese.
He had the advantage, from my point of view, of being
inclined to express himself in a most careful, painstaking
and long-winded way. I imitated his pronunciation and his
favourite turns of phrase. From the beginning he supported
me in my efforts to learn Japanese. He was an important
influence on my learning.
Finding a native speaker who is patient and supportive can
be invaluable in learning a new language.
In time, I was able to hold up my end of most conversations.
My conversation strategy was to try to keep what I had to
say simple and well within my capabilities. I tried to avoid
speaking quickly so that my thoughts did not run ahead of
my language.
This is easier said than done, however, and often I struggled
to express myself. But it was all part of the learning process.

Is Japanese Difficult?
I am regularly asked by Japanese people if Japanese is the
most difficult language to learn. They are disappointed if I
do not agree that it is. But every language has its own
unique difficulties, and with enough exposure all difficulties
can be overcome. There is no unlearnable language.
Certainly the legions of young English language teachers
who come to Japan to teach English are proof that Japanese
presents no major problems for the person who wants to
integrate with Japanese society. Many of these foreigners
become good Japanese speakers. Young Japanese people
are generally open and sociable and I often think these
foreign teachers benefit more from their stay in Japan than
their students who are trying to learn English.
A major obstacle to learning Japanese is the problem of the
Chinese characters, or Kanji as they are called in Japanese.
Many language learners can learn to speak well without
reading, but it is easier to gain a feeling for the language if
you can read it as you listen. Reading is a form of sensual
appreciation of the language quite different from listening,
and it strengthens your understanding of the language.
Having learned most of the characters I needed from
Chinese, I had an advantage.
However, the pronunciation in Japanese can be a problem.
Unlike Chinese, there are often several ways to pronounce
the same characters. The meaning of Chinese characters in
Japanese can sometimes be different from the meaning in
Chinese.
I had to design my own learning program based on my
interests and abilities. This is easily done in today’s digital
age but was very difficult to do when I lived in Tokyo.

Knowing the Kanji characters, at least in Chinese, I
concentrated on Japanese content that was weighted
towards Chinese characters, such as the newspapers and
the radio news, and then progressed to more day-to-day
conversation. I was able to conduct business in Japanese
fairly soon, but did not understand television soap operas
until later.
Living in a Japanese environment and reading the Japanese
newspapers daily trained my mind to read characters. I
observed that my ability to read Chinese improved while I
was in Japan although I essentially never read Chinese. I
think that my ability to speak Chinese also improved
because my brain was becoming even more capable of
processing different languages. Certainly learning new
languages has never crowded out previously learned
languages or confused me.
The relationship between writing systems and the
brain is interesting and illustrates the many sided
nature of language learning. According to Robert
Ornstein in The Right Mind:
Almost all pictographic systems [of writing] favor a
vertical layout, while most phonographic systems are
horizontal. And out of several hundred phonographic
systems that have vowels, almost all are written
toward the right, while of over fifty languages that
do not have any signs for vowels, all are written to
the left. This strongly suggests that there is a good
reason for the connection between type of system
and direction. And the most likely candidate is that
our eyes and brain work in different ways depending
on what sorts of scripts they are reading. It is likely
that the culture one encounters at birth and first few
years affects the way the hemispheres are organized.

The Greeks, as well as just about everybody else in
the world, developed their alphabet from the
Phoenician alphabet. By mid-700s BC, the new Greek
alphabet was in use but being written from right to
left in the same way as its parent. Within a hundred
and fifty years or so it was written in boustrophedon,
referring to the route an ox plows a field-alternately
right to left and left to right. But by about 550 BC it
had settled down into the familiar left to right.
Aside from the writing system, another early obstacle I
found in Japanese was the similarity of the sounds. This is a
common reaction when starting a new language, but
Japanese has, in fact, fewer different sounds than most
languages. Vocabulary acquisition was slow at first. This
problem disappeared as I got used to seeing and hearing
words in their natural contexts.
Difficulties encountered at the early stages in language
learning can be discouraging. However consistent exposure
and an open mind will gradually allow you to overcome
these problems.
Polite Language
Perhaps the most unique aspect of Japanese is the use of
different words and sentence structures for different social
situations. No language I have learned has such a difference
of vocabulary and structure depending on whether you are
talking casually to a friend, to a subordinate or very formally
to a
“senior” person. Just the word “I” has at least three
commonly used forms, watakushi, boku and ore, and the
same is true for “you” and the other pronouns.

To master these distinctions you must be involved often in
social situations that require you to use them correctly. Just
explaining the logic behind language patterns will not
enable you to master them. You have to become a little bit
Japanese in your mentality before you can switch on polite
or casual language depending on the social setting. This
requires considerable exposure either in real life situations
or through listening to appropriate material in recorded
form. It also requires you to accept the culture.
Until I mastered the different levels of politeness, I simply
spoke neutral Japanese. In fact, to a large extent I still do. I
think it is important not to try to be either too colloquial or
too formal when speaking a foreign language. It is normally
not expected of a foreigner. Nor is total mastery of the
politeness levels necessary for communication. Fully
understanding the nuances of polite words and phrases
requires a very advanced level of cultural sensitivity that
cannot be forced, but will develop naturally over time.
Apparently the sentence structure of Japanese is of
North Asian origin and therefore similar to Korean.
Much of the original vocabulary is, according to some
experts, vaguely related to Polynesian languages and
comes from the Jomon people who settled in Japan
starting 20,000 years ago. The Jomon were hunter-
gatherers who lived in Japan before different waves
of North Asian immigrants, called Yayoi people,
brought rice culture and the influence of their
language to Japan starting around 300 BC.
Incidentally, the Jomon people may have been the
first in the world to develop pottery— over 10,000
years ago.
The Chinese writing system was introduced to Japan
just over 1,500 years ago along with many Chinese

words, Chinese technology and the Buddhist religion.
The magnificent wooden structures found in Nara and
Kyoto include the oldest and largest wooden
buildings in the world. The techniques used in
construction are the best preserved and most
outstanding examples of Chinese wood building
technology, which dates back to the original Yellow
River civilization.
In recent times, the Japanese language has accepted many
foreign borrowed words, especially from English. Japanese is
a rich amalgam of many influences. Knowledge of the
Chinese characters is an advantage to a foreigner learning
Japanese, and the grammatical structure of Japanese is
similar to Korean. So neighboring Asian people have an
advantage in learning Japanese. However, the attitude of
the learner is a more important factor than geographic or
genetic proximity. I have met many foreigners from other
parts of the world who have a positive attitude and excel at
spoken Japanese.
At a time when I was already fluent in Japanese, my wife
who looks Asian, still could not speak Japanese very well.
Often we had triangular conversations with Japanese people
in public places. I spoke Japanese, and the Japanese person
replied to my wife. The Japanese person could not accept
the fact that the Western face, not the Asian face, was the
one actually speaking Japanese.
In a similar vein, years later in Canada, an older Japanese
lady made the following observation about a young child of
mixed Japanese-Caucasian parents who was late in starting
to talk. “Of course he is slow, since Japanese people have
trouble speaking English!”

I hear Caucasians marvel that a Caucasian can learn an
Asian language even though we are familiar with second
generation Canadians of Asian origin who are native
speakers of English.
How many times have I heard Chinese people say that
English is impossible to learn because Chinese culture is so
different from English? This kind of cultural preconception is
just another obstacle to proper language learning and needs
to be discarded. I am convinced that anyone, of whatever
culture or background, and of whatever age, can learn any
language if they commit to doing so.
A Westerner visiting or living in Japan who will only eat
“meat and potatoes” and does not enjoy sushi will usually
not be successful in learning Japanese. Similarly, Japanese
people who will only travel abroad in groups and will only
eat familiar food are unlikely to be successful in learning
other foreign languages, no matter how much time they
spend trying. Learning a language is like traveling. Both
activities are an adventure. There is no point in traveling
abroad and acting like you stayed at home.
Japan Incorporated
Japan in the 1970s and early 1980s was different from
today’s Japan. It was a less open society.
During the first four years of my stay in Japan I was First
Secretary at the Canadian Embassy. During this time I was
involved in initiating a program to introduce the North
American platform frame wood building system to Japan.
This program met the objectives of the Japanese Ministry of
Construction, which was concerned about the projected lack
of carpenters trained in the demanding traditional Japanese

building system. This was a time of rapid improvement in
living standards and a high annual level of house
construction.
I enjoyed my stint at the Embassy because of my close
involvement with my Japanese counterparts, especially
those like the Ministry of Construction officials and the
members of the Tokyo Young Lumbermen’s Association who
participated in the introduction of the new wood frame
building system. On the other hand, the social obligations of
the diplomatic service, the frequent evening cocktail parties
and entertainment which ate into my private life, were less
enjoyable.
At the end of my Embassy posting in October 1974, despite
vague plans to return to University to do Asian Studies, I
was recruited by Seaboard Lumber Sales, a leading
Canadian forest products company, to set up a subsidiary
company in Tokyo. I would never have been given this
opportunity had I not learned Japanese. I worked in the
forest industry in Japan from 1974 to 1977 for Seaboard and
then returned to Vancouver with my family. We returned to
Japan for a further two years in 1981 to 1982 on behalf of
another major Canadian forest products company,
MacMillan Bloedel Ltd.
This was a period when Japan, although very pleased to
export large amounts of manufactured goods, was only
slowly and reluctantly opening up its market to imports,
despite the efforts of foreign exporters and Japanese people
involved in import.
As the person in charge of MacMillan Bloedel’s operations in
Asia, I was responsible for marketing paper and pulp as well
as lumber. I occasionally encountered trade barriers.

The paper industry in Japan was a tightly knit community of
users, producers and government officials. It was
particularly difficult for our Japanese employees to be seen
promoting Canadian paper in competition with Japanese
producers. It was almost considered unpatriotic. A famous
book, The Day We Ran Out of Paper was written in 1981
under a pseudonym by an official of MITI (the Japanese
Ministry of International Trade and Industry). The message
of this book was that a Japanese newspaper publisher
importing foreign newsprint paper was selling out freedom
of speech to a foreign conspiracy. Times have changed now,
and Japanese paper companies themselves have built paper
mills in many countries of the world, including Canada.
In the 1980s, under trade liberalization pressure from the
United States, the Japanese Telephone Company (NTT)
allowed foreign paper producers to bid for the telephone
directory paper business. Our company was the first foreign
supplier to pass the quality testing. That was the easy part.
It was much more difficult to deal with the cozy relationships
between Japanese suppliers and customers, often described
by the term “Japan Incorporated.”
The Japanese paper producers, who were our competitors,
had retired senior executives of NTT, our common customer,
on their Boards of Directors. Furthermore, we had to deal
through a “fixer” agency company owned and run by retired
employees of NTT. The printing companies were also owned
and run by ex-employees of NTT. My ability to read and
speak Japanese helped me navigate this world of complex
relationships and create a market for our Canadian paper
products.
The Japanese paper market was dominated by a small
number of large producers and users and therefore it was
easy for semi-monopolistic trading practices to become

established. The lumber trade, however, was different. It
consisted of a large number of traditionally minded lumber
retailers, wholesalers and home builders. Paradoxically,
because of the larger number of participants, the traditional
Japanese lumber sector was more open than the modern
and sophisticated paper sector.
My relationship with the Japanese lumber trade was to
become a dominant experience in my life. I was able to
experience first-hand the Japanese love of nature and their
pursuit of excellence in product design and manufacture.
Their respect for their traditional house building system and
the skills of the carpenter, and their appreciation and
understanding of wood, have all had a profound and lasting
impact on me.
I also encountered the conservatism of that society. At times
I went against established practices to achieve the
objectives of my company. This often upset our Japanese
counterparts. I was once described as the “Kaufmann
Typhoon” in a lumber trade newspaper. However, I always
felt that Japanese business people were able to maintain an
attitude of respect, even when disagreeing on substantive
issues. Mutual respect is an important part of the mood of
Japanese society, and a large reason for their social
cohesion and success.
Fitting In
It is important to participate in the culture of a country, in
order to be in a state of mind to absorb the language. Not
all encounters are pleasant or welcoming, but you have to
persevere. Sometimes you meet resistance because you are
a foreigner. This phenomenon is not unique to any culture,

and can happen at any time. But most encounters will be
pleasant and memorable.
One of my proudest moments in Japan was when I
participated in the Kiba Matsuri, or Wood Market Festival. I
was a member of one of many groups of young men
wearing white shorts or loin cloth, a cotton happi coat and a
hachimaki wrapped around my forehead. We carried heavy
wooden shrines through Tokyo’s streets from morning to
night, drinking sake and getting showered with water by the
onlookers. We shouted Wasshoi every time the heavy
wooden shrine was thrown up into the air and caught again.
Since I was taller than the other men, I either had to carry a
disproportionate share of the load or constantly bend my
knees. I guess I did a little of both from 5:30 in the morning
until 3:30 in the afternoon. That night I could hardly crawl
into bed, I was so tired and sore.
I often noticed that some foreigners who studied Japanese
reached the peak of their language capability at the end of
their period of language learning. Once launched into
Japanese working life, they reverted back to living in English
and their Japanese skills deteriorated. They never pushed
themselves far enough to make living and working in
Japanese seem natural for them. I deliberately took a
different approach. This did not mean that I could not also
live in English with other Canadians, it just meant that I had
created another option for myself, that of living in Japanese.
The tendency for us to be most comfortable in our own
cultural community is normal; however, it is no help to
language learning. Once you really commit to the local
language and make more local friends and professional
acquaintances, the differences between people become less
obvious than the similarities. I thoroughly enjoyed my nine-
year stay in Japan. I came away with a profound

appreciation for Japanese culture and the refinement that
the Japanese bring to so many aspects of daily human
activities.
I am aware of cultural differences between people, just as I
notice differences of personality between individuals. Yet my
understanding of the essential similarity of all individual
human beings was only confirmed during my nine years in
Japan.
Above all, every human being is an individual, with hopes
and fears and ambitions. We seek comfort from belonging to
communities, whether local, national or religious. However,
an even greater sense of comfort is available to those of us
who recognize that, as individuals, we are all equal
members of the human family.
Japan is facing many economic difficulties today. The
traditional hierarchical structure of Japanese society has
inhibited the input of the younger generation towards
solving these problems. This will likely change. In what
Kennichi Ohmae, a leading Japanese thinker, calls “the
modern borderless world,” increased knowledge of foreign
languages will ensure a greater diversity of perspectives on
issues affecting Japanese society.
Exploring Languages at Home
Without going outside, you may know the whole world.
Without looking through the window,
you may see the ways of heaven.
– Laozi

It is always easiest to learn a language when you are living
in a society that speaks that language if you take advantage
of the opportunities that surround you. However, a new
language in the real world can be difficult to understand.
People may talk too quickly or use words that even the
intermediate non-native speaker does not understand. You
may feel hesitant in certain situations because you are not
fluent. This can be stressful.
In these cases I have always found it useful to create my
own world of language, a world of meaningful language
content for me to listen to or read without pressure. Until I
mastered Japanese, and even as I was living and working in
Japanese, I still sought out advanced Japanese readers with
meaningful content and vocabulary lists to read. I also
listened repetitively to interesting tapes to gain greater
confidence in using certain phrases and words.
I still listen to interesting material in languages that I speak
fluently. I take advantage of time that is available while
driving or exercising or doing chores around the house.
There is an increasing availability of high quality audio
books which can be easily enjoyed using the latest in
portable listening technology.
Electronic texts are also more convenient than ever. This
has great advantages for the learner. I regularly read
newspapers and articles on the Internet and use online
dictionaries and The Linguist system to increase my
vocabulary in different languages.
In situations where you are studying a new language away
from the native speaking environment, it becomes essential
to create this personal language world. This is what I have
done in Vancouver over the last twenty years as I sought to

improve my knowledge of languages that I had been
exposed to earlier but could not speak.
A World Apart
When I lived in Hong Kong I was not in a Mandarin speaking
environment, but I listened to and read a limited number of
texts: history and cultural books, modern literature, and
tapes of comic dialogues. These became like old friends and
provided the core of the vocabulary and phrasing that I
needed to use in my communication.
Communicating with this imaginary world was easier than
communicating with the real world, since it was readily
available and under my control. This friendly world of my
own exploration was a great source of strength in
preparation for the real test of communicating with native
speakers.
In 1512, Niccolo Machiavelli was briefly imprisoned
and tortured by the Medici family, then withdrew to a
simple country house outside Florence. During the
day he talked and played cards with the local people,
but at night he changed into formal clothes and
withdrew into his study. There he communicated with
the ancient historians through books, and wrote one
of the classics of Western literature, The Prince.
Machiavelli is an example of how we can
communicate with a culture through reading or
listening, even if we do not have daily personal
contact with the people.
While living in Vancouver well past the age of forty, I was
able to make great advances on the learning I had begun in

German, Swedish and Italian. I had some previous exposure,
but certainly did not have fluency or confidence. For each
language I had to commit myself to a concentrated period
of listening to comprehensible audio material and reading
texts with vocabulary lists.
At my home, I have at least fifty readers for German, Italian,
Spanish, and Swedish. I purchased these readers because
they all have vocabulary lists so that I could avoid using
dictionaries.
Unfortunately much of the content of these readers was
uninteresting to me, but it was the only content that I could
find.
What I was only able to do through great effort is made
easier and more effective today. Using modern technology,
vast amounts of content can be turned into accessible
learning material. You can seek out content that is of
interest to you, and learn the language from it. The
independent learner is more independent than ever before.
German
My ability in German is considered good by native speakers
and I have no difficulty in conversation, or in understanding
radio and newspapers. Although I had exposure to German
in my younger days at home, while working on a German
ship and while working on construction in Vienna, I really
could not carry on a conversation. In November 1986, I
decided to spend the month learning German.
I went to many secondhand bookstores in Vancouver looking
for reading books in the German language which had
vocabulary lists. I must have bought about ten or fifteen of

such books as well as various cassette tape products in
German.
The readers were full of the scribblings of the people who
had used them before. For one month I read and listened to
tapes in German, with the help of vocabulary lists. Of course
I achieved a dramatic improvement in my German. I was
subsequently able to improve on this during visits to
Germany. But it was hard work.
In German, the nouns have three genders. Word endings
change depending on case. This is very hard to master in
speech. Only repetitive listening has enabled me to cope
with this difficulty, not explanations and lists. I just speak
German the way I hear it and hope for the best. My German
is natural and fluent, but I am resigned to the fact that I am
not perfect in German grammar.
I never had to pass a test in German, but I have done
business in that language. I have also traveled to the
wonderful medieval towns of Germany, sat down in
restaurants and engaged the locals in lengthy conversations
in German. I know that I frequently get my genders and
cases wrong. It has not held me back. On the other hand, I
know that to improve my grammar I just have to listen and
read more, and occasionally refer to grammar texts to
reinforce what I am experiencing in the real language. The
isolated study of cases and genders, without a lot of
language exposure, will not enable me to improve my
grammar in real situations.
Italian
Italian is relatively easy for someone familiar with Spanish
and French. Concentrated listening to tapes and reading

soon brought my Italian up to a usable level. Unfortunately I
have too little opportunity to use it, but I always enjoy
watching an Italian movie and being able to understand
what is said. I also intend to buy more Italian ebooks and
audio books when I have the time.
Italian is known as the language of music and love. While
Italian may have the reputation of being an exceptionally
beautiful language, I find that all languages are beautiful
when I study them and start to understand them. When any
language is well spoken, it has its own elegance and beauty.
I always appreciate hearing people speak a language well,
with the appropriate choice of words and with clarity, and
with reference to the culture and history of that language.
It is impossible to study Italian without thinking of
the enormous cultural contribution of Italy to Europe
and the world. But Italy was as much a conduit of
culture as a creator.
It was the influence of Greece, itself stimulated by
other more ancient Mediterranean cultures, that was
Rome’s great teacher. The Romans respected Greek
culture and in their myth of origin they try to impute
their ancestry back to Aeneas of Troy. (This myth, like
so many myths of origin, is not true.) The legacy of
Rome’s law and literature and its great public works
have profoundly marked Western civilization. Long
after the collapse of the Roman Empire, the genius of
Italian culture again flourished in various city states.
As always in history, the stimulus of foreign contact
was paramount. Venice achieved its splendour
because of its dominance of the sea and contacts
with Byzantium and the East. Similarly the
involvement of Italian cities like Genoa and the cities
of Tuscany in foreign trade, including trade with the

Muslim world, contributed to their rapid growth in
the early Middle Ages and eventually led to the
Italian Renaissance.
Cantonese
It was after the age of fifty in Vancouver that I decided to
really work on Cantonese, since so many people in
Vancouver speak that language. I had always heard some
Cantonese when I was with my wife's Chinese relatives.
However, my ability did not go far beyond ordering food in a
restaurant, and even there I made mistakes.
I am never shy about using what little language knowledge I
have. Once in a restaurant when I wanted to order a dozen
spring rolls or chun gyun, I ordered a dozen chun doi or
“spring bags.” In Chinese the word chun means spring, and
has the connotation of sex. (I find that a very poetic
association.) Unfortunately for me, chun doi or spring bags
refers to the male sex organ and not to an item of food.
After the initial shock at what I had said subsided, there was
laughter all around.
My wife grew up speaking Cantonese. However, she and I
always spoke English at home and we were not about to
change the habits of thirty years. I was able to read the
Chinese newspaper in Mandarin but could not pronounce
the characters in Cantonese. I enlisted the help of my friend,
the Cantonese speaking Vancouver journalist Gabriel Yiu,
but really did not make progress.
I suppose I understood about ten percent of what was said
in conversation or on the radio. I believe a person needs to
understand well over ninety percent of most situations to be
considered fluent. I had a long way to go. The problem was

that I had a bad attitude. Subconsciously I felt that the
pronunciation, with nine tones, was simply too difficult. I
also felt that Mandarin, the national language, was good
enough and that I really did not need Cantonese. I did not
have commitment.
I started searching Chinese bookstores in Vancouver for
Cantonese learning material. I found a book that amounted
to a breakthrough. This book demystified the issue of the
nine tones of Cantonese. This system emphatically stated
that six tones were enough. This seemed very sensible to
me since I felt I could not even get six tones right and would
still be able to communicate adequately. In addition, the
author showed that these same tones existed in English, not
to distinguish the meaning of words, but to provide
emphasis in sentences. I suddenly realized that the
phenomenon of all these tones was already familiar to me
from English. I had been a prisoner of my fear of the tones.
Now the obstacle of the tones was removed and the doors
opened.
Next I needed material to listen to. I asked people to tape
simple content for me that I listened to over and over. Then
I bought a Minidisc player, which is a truly revolutionary tool
for the language learner. It can record from radio or
television as well as download from a computer. It can
record your own voice and store a great deal of material. Yet
it is light to carry and the sound quality is outstanding.
I soon started recording Cantonese radio programs,
including talk show programs. As my Cantonese improved, I
started to phone in to the Cantonese radio talk shows to
offer my opinions on different subjects. I recorded this all
and compared myself to the native speaker announcers. I
believe the Minidisc recorder enabled me to achieve a
degree of concentration in my learning that contributed to

my breakthrough in acquiring Cantonese. Unfortunately I
have not been able to find electronic texts in Cantonese
which correspond to the audio material that is available. I
am sure this will come and that it will facilitate the learning
of Cantonese.
By concentrating on content that I enjoyed listening to, and
with my knowledge of Mandarin to help me, my
comprehension gradually improved. This reinforced all my
previous experiences with language learning. It pointed out
once again the crucial role of the learner in achieving
success, and the importance of finding interesting material.
Also, my success at Cantonese confirmed to me that age is
no barrier to effective language learning, if the learner is
prepared to make the commitment.
While I am not totally fluent, I am able to carry on a
conversation, even to the point of phoning in to radio talk
shows. My six month period of greatest effort is now behind
me, and I will continue to improve just by listening to the
radio and meeting with people. I recently spent a few days
in Shen Zhen and Guang Zhou (Canton) after an absence of
twenty years. Of course I was amazed at the changes in
those places. I thoroughly enjoyed being able to speak
Cantonese with people that I met, which greatly added to
the enjoyment of my visit.
The hard work that I have put into the learning of languages
and creating a personalized learning environment has been
made dramatically easier with the Internet and modern
software systems. What I did with great effort can now be
done more effectively and more enjoyably. I am looking
forward to learning more languages myself, and continuing
to upgrade skills in the languages that I already speak.

Language and International Business
You never step in the same river twice, for fresh waters are
ever flowing in upon you.
– Heraclitus, 6th century BC
In June 1987, I started my own company in lumber export.
For six months my wife and I worked out of the basement of
our home with a fax machine and a phone. I traveled
thousands of kilometres by car in Western Canada. I
traveled tens of thousands of kilometres by air to Japan and
Europe. Fifteen years later we have offices in Vancouver,
Northern Alberta, Sweden and Japan, and a well established
international trading business. I could not have done this
without my knowledge of languages.
Admittedly success in business life does not depend solely
on language skills. There are countless examples of
outstanding business people who are able to get by only
speaking their first language, especially when that language
is English. However, being a linguist can help in many ways,
and it certainly helped me.
Opportunity
Throughout our lives we are surrounded by opportunities. It
is only by being active and acquiring knowledge that we are
able to see these opportunities and to take advantage of
them. In my case it was my willingness to learn languages
that created my opportunities.
Although I had already learned two languages in addition to
English, it was my move to Japan, and the subsequent
acquisition of the Japanese language, that made a major
difference to my life. Speaking Japanese, I was able to

create good personal contacts in the Japanese business
community.
For this reason I was later hired by two of the major
Canadian lumber exporting companies, on two separate
occasions to run their Asian marketing operations. This
eventually resulted in me starting my own company,
whereby I was able to achieve a certain degree of financial
independence.
I do not know what path I would have followed if I had gone
to Beijing after all. No doubt I would have become more
fluent in Chinese. I might still be in the diplomatic service or
in the academic field or perhaps other opportunities would
have come along. But pursuing languages was like a net for
me, allowing me to catch opportunities that would otherwise
have passed me by.
One example occurred in 1981. As President of MacMillan
Bloedel Asia Ltd., based in Tokyo, I was back in Vancouver
on a business trip. M. Bernard Guillemette, an important
customer from France, was also visiting Vancouver at the
same time. I was the only marketing person available at
MacMillan Bloedel who spoke French. Even though I was
responsible for the Far East, I ended up accompanying M.
Guillemette for a whole day visiting our sawmills. From that
day, we formed a lasting friendship.
Many years later, Guillemette et Cie. became my own
company’s best customer in Europe and has remained so.
What is more, in October 1992 I took part in Bernard
Guillemette’s sixty-fifth birthday party in Paris, a gala dinner
on a boat floating down the Seine. At that dinner I met
another guest, Mr.

Christer Johansson, President of Vida Timber of Sweden. We
struck up a friendship which also continues to this day.
Within four months of meeting Mr. Johansson, fluctuations in
international currencies made European lumber competitive
in Japan. Working with Vida, our company was among the
first exporters of lumber from Sweden to Japan. Vida has
subsequently grown to become one of the largest lumber
producers in Sweden and is our main supplier to Japan from
Europe. These relationships were partly the result of luck,
but could not have been achieved without my knowledge of
French and Swedish, not to mention Japanese.
When I started my own company, my main idea was to
focus on producing the special lumber sizes used in the
Japanese manufactured house industry. Not a particularly
brilliant idea, perhaps, but one that made sense at that
time.
Because I had close relations with various people in the
Japanese wood industry I had a good understanding of the
trends in the market. I also was confident that some of my
friends and contacts would trust me in my new venture. It
was my relationship with these people, the result of my
fluency in Japanese, that created this opportunity for me.
Even though our company was a newcomer with no history
of meeting commitments, I obtained the support of the
world’s largest home manufacturer, Sekisui House Limited,
to supply their housing components. My company grew to
be their largest wood supplier in the early 1990s. Similarly,
my friend Mr.
Hiroshi Higuma, the President of a medium sized regional
wholesaler called the Bungohama Company, agreed

immediately over a sushi lunch to switch his purchasing of
traditional Japanese lumber components to my company,
based on a mutual trust that had developed between us
over the previous ten years. These relationships depended
on my fluency in Japanese and could not have been
achieved in English. These international relationships have
continued over the years and are amongst the greatest
rewards of international business.
Even with my Canadian suppliers, language was a positive
factor in building trust. My two most important Canadian
partners are both linguists in their own way.
Mr. Norm Boucher, President of Manning Diversified Forest
Products Ltd., is a dynamic and self-reliant leader of the
lumber industry in Alberta. He is originally from Quebec and
speaks French. Even though we conduct most of our
business in English, our ability to communicate in French
created an additional degree of mutual understanding and
trust. Norm grew up in the harsh environment of Northern
Alberta to which he is still attached today. He likes to tell the
story of how tough his childhood was. As a young boy on
winter mornings, he would have to go out to a frozen lake in
minus thirty degree celsius weather and make a hole in the
ice to fetch water for the family. On his way back he had to
check the rabbit traps for the dinner stew. Once, during a
visit to Japan in the 1990s, we were at a sumptuous dinner
of Japanese food. Norm was struggling to eat with the
unfamiliar chopsticks. With his characteristic sense of
humour he told our Japanese hosts that when he was
growing up his family was poor and had to survive on rabbit
meat but at least they could afford a fork!
Mr. Ben Sawatzky has been my partner in developing the
Japanese market. He is President of Spruceland Millworks
Ltd.

and an outstanding business leader. He is quick to decide
what to do, and then follows his decision through to
completion. He started with one employee and now employs
one hundred fifty people in three plants. In addition, he
owns several ranches and has built a private school. Ben
speaks German and Spanish as well as English. We have
traveled together in Germany and Spain, and our interest in
languages has given us something in common beyond our
business dealings.
Ben always wanted to learn Japanese so he could join in the
conversation with our Japanese customers. He studied
Japanese off and on but not consistently. Once in Sendai at a
meal hosted by Japanese customers, he took advantage of
the fact that I had gone to the bathroom to try out his
language. Ben always speaks in a strong voice. He wanted
to say that the meal was “oishikatta” meaning “was
delicious” but he confused the past tense with the negative
and told our host in his usual forceful way that the meal was
“oishiku arimasen” meaning
“not good.” In language, a little knowledge can be a
dangerous thing!
Norm Boucher, Ben Sawatzky and Sekisui House are today
partners with me and some others in a successful joint
sawmill venture in Northern Alberta.
Success
To succeed in any endeavour requires enthusiasm and hard
work. This is true for an employee, for an entrepreneur and
for someone studying languages. This enthusiasm gives you
the energy to work hard to overcome obstacles and to take
advantage of opportunities. I have worked with many people

who had enthusiasm and were effective in their work. They
were not all linguists, but they had the knowledge and
ability that transcends language barriers. These kind of
people exist in every culture and language group. Such
people can also become good linguists if they are motivated
to do so.
But language is not a condition of success in business, just
an enhancer. If you are a good business person, the ability
to communicate in other languages can make you more
effective.
In business, you need credibility. People have to trust you.
Business is dependent on a network of people: colleagues,
employees, bosses, customers, suppliers, advisors, friends
and others on whom you can rely and who are prepared to
rely on you. If you are not trustworthy, reliable and effective
at what you do, speaking foreign languages will not help
you. I believe it was Voltaire who said of a certain French
nobleman that he spoke six languages and had nothing to
say in any of them.
However, speaking a foreign language fluently can be
invaluable in building relationships of trust. You need not
speak like a native speaker, but you need to be comfortably
fluent. You need to be able to communicate without
struggling and your counterpart needs to feel comfortable
communicating with you in the language. This is the
professional level of language competence that is required
for international business. It is definitely achievable with the
right attitude and method of study. I believe The Linguist
program can help any learner achieve this level of fluency.
Fish traps exist to capture fish.
Once you've got the fish you can forget the trap.

Rabbit snares exist to capture rabbits.
Once you've got the rabbit you can forget the snare.
Words exist to capture meaning.
Once you've got the meaning, you can forget the words.
Where can I find a man who has forgotten words?
I'd like to have a word with him!
– Zhuangzi, 4th century BC
THE ATTITUDE OF A
LINGUIST
Just Communicate
It may seem obvious, but to become a linguist you have to
want to communicate in another language. People who
succeed in learning another language have a goal in mind:
to get to know another people and their culture, not just to
learn a new language. It was only when I became motivated
to connect with a new culture and people that I was on my
way to becoming a linguist.
Not all language learners are motivated to use the language
they are learning. I remember clearly one day forty years
ago when I was in charge of a language lab at the
Agricultural Institute in Paris. One of my students suddenly
groaned “Merde, I have been studying English for ten years
and I still do not understand a thing!” With that he flung

down his headset and stomped out of the room. I can still
see him.
I can sympathize with his frustration. He speaks for all the
language learners who suffer through years of formal
classroom language teaching, memorizing, drilling,
answering questions, studying for tests– and yet do not
achieve fluency. He was fed up with trying to learn words
that were not relevant to him. He did not care about the
content of what he was studying. He had no desire to
communicate in English. The whole process was
meaningless to him.
The linguist knows that to become fluent in a new language
requires a commitment that goes beyond attending classes
or studying text books. A linguist stretches in order to
connect with a new culture, taking every opportunity to
confront the new language in real life situations. Without the
motivation to communicate in the new language, the
learner is left struggling with the technical details of
language that are so easily forgotten.
I remember how it was when I studied Latin in school. We
had competitions to see who could decline Latin nouns the
fastest, out loud. I could decline bellum, in both singular and
plural, in a few seconds. It literally sounded like a blur. But I
never had any intention of speaking Latin. I just wanted to
pass tests. My high school French was similar. My Latin is
now long since forgotten and I was unable to speak French
properly until after I left high school.
Language is about communicating, not about details of
grammar, nor vocabulary lists, nor tests, nor exercises. In
the quotation that starts this chapter, Zhuangzi tells us that
even the very words of language are artificial creations. It is
the heart to heart communication of meaning that is the

essential nature of language, and therefore of language
learning. All the rest is artificial. Fish traps are only useful for
catching fish. Words are only useful if communication takes
place. The learner has to want to start communicating.
Resistance to Language Learning
Not everyone wants to communicate in another language or
learn about other cultures. It is understandable that many
people are happier just using their own language and resist
learning a new one. Ironically, however, many of the people
who are trying to learn a second language are also actively
resisting it.
Meeting a different language and culture can be stressful. It
is certainly true that expressing thoughts and feelings in a
new language is an intimate activity. Your language reflects
your attitudes and personality, and therefore you feel most
comfortable in your native language. It is also possible for
people to resist a new language as a form of defense of
their own language and identity. Some people feel
inadequate and exposed when speaking in a second
language. Some learners actually resent having to speak a
new language, while others just find it tiring. People all too
often compare the new language to their own, rather than
just imitating it and learning it.
These reactions are similar to how people may behave when
they travel abroad. Whereas eager travelers simply
immerse themselves in their destination and enjoy
themselves, others are looking for reasons to say that “after
all, things are better at home.” Either it is the food, or the
cleanliness, or the weather, that confirms to them that they
were better off at home. Of course we are always happy to
come home from a trip, but why think of it while traveling?

Speaking your native language is easier and more relaxing,
but why focus on that while trying to communicate in a new
language?
It is disappointing to see that many learners do not take
advantage of the environments that surround them. It is
common for parents to send their children to foreign
countries to learn languages. When I studied Political
Science at the University of Grenoble, France in the early
1960s, there were many students from England and the
United States who were there to study the French language.
They were mostly interested in having a good time with
other English speaking friends. They did not take full
advantage of the opportunity of living in France. They were
not sufficiently motivated to get to know French people. As a
result, they did not improve their French as much as they
could have.
In a similar vein, I once spoke with a Japanese professor of
chemistry at a prestigious British university. He told me that
unfortunately many of the language students from Japan at
his university stay within their own language group. It was a
common joke that students from Tokyo returned to Japan
with an Osaka accent but little improvement in their English.
When we first learn to swim, the water can look uninviting.
Until we commit ourselves, communicating in a foreign
language can be the same. I remember hearing a recent
immigrant to Canada tell me that after leaving his
homeland, he first lived in Europe. He was invited to go out
drinking with his co-workers but felt that he did not
understand their sense of humor, so he stopped going out
with them. He related this incident to me, quite out of
context, presumably to convince me or himself that the
cultural gap between him and “the foreigners” was simply

too wide to bridge. Yet he wanted to improve his English. He
did not realize that he had to learn to find common ground
with “the foreigners” if he hoped to speak other languages
fluently. He did not have the attitude of a linguist.
The personal, professional and cultural opportunities that
come from being able to communicate in other languages
are obvious. I derive enormous pleasure from speaking
other languages, whether I am at home or traveling. What's
more, I have built up my business through my ability to
speak languages. Now, even when I am at home in
Vancouver, it is not unusual for me to speak French on the
telephone in the morning with a customer in Le Havre, or
Swedish or German with suppliers, then chat with waiters
over dim sum lunch in Cantonese, and then be on the
telephone to Beijing or Nagoya in the evening speaking
Mandarin and Japanese. I ran companies in Japan for six
years. I have had occasion to give speeches to forest
industry gatherings in Asia, Europe, Latin America and North
America in Japanese, Spanish, Italian, French, and Swedish,
as well as English.
Overcoming Resistance to Language
Learning
To become a linguist you must overcome the different forms
of resistance to language learning. It may take a personal
relationship or sudden positive experience to break down
this mental block to learning a new culture.
I remember an incident in Japan twenty years ago. I was
selling lumber for a major Canadian exporter. We were
having trouble getting our sawmills to produce the quality
that the Japanese customers wanted. We arranged for our

senior quality supervisor to come to Japan in order to better
understand the customers' needs.
The first days were a disaster. Our man was from a small
town in Canada and had worked at lumber grading and
quality for his whole life. He had definite views on how
lumber should be graded, and believed that it was not a
matter of adjusting our sawmills’ standards to the needs of
the customers, but of showing the customers why they were
wrong! In other words, our senior grader had a closed mind
when it came to understanding the views of our customers.
One evening we went out on the town for a few drinks. We
went to one of the bars in Japan where young ladies provide
entertainment in the form of flattery and idle chit-chat. One
pretty hostess asked our senior grader if he spoke Japanese.
He gave her an intense star-struck gaze and answered, “No,
but I can learn.” He had a delightful evening at that bar.
From the next day, he started to see the Japanese
customers’
point of view and we were able to develop a new and
successful Japanese lumber grade. This is the kind of event
that should happen to every learner in order to soften
resistance and increase interest in a language. The best
opportunity to break down resistance to a new language is
to make a friend in that language.
There are others who want to learn a new language and do
not resist the new language. Yet they do not become
linguists. They have another problem. They are afraid to
make mistakes. These people put pressure on themselves to
achieve accuracy or perfection at a stage when they have
no feel for the language, and cannot visualize themselves
comfortably using it. This is counterproductive and inhibits

their ability to communicate by making them self-conscious.
If you are willing to communicate at your level, even
imperfectly, you will start to gain the confidence and the
motivation to improve. Pronunciation, grammar and
vocabulary can then be learned naturally, when the time is
right.
By communicating and making mistakes I was able to learn
and improve. Roughly forty years ago, in a university class
in France, I was making an oral presentation. When I wanted
to say the word “responsible”, I said it with an “i” as in
English, instead of “responsable” with an “a” as in French.
Every time I pronounced it wrong there was laughter in the
room. Only later did I realize that people were laughing at
my mispronunciation.
But it did not bother me that people were laughing at me. I
was totally involved in giving my presentation and in getting
my meaning across. I ignored the reason for everyone’s
laughter until later. But their laughter helped me. Now I
never make that mistake.
Try to free yourself from the desire to achieve perfection,
which is vanity and will hinder your progress. Instead, seek
to communicate naturally and enjoy yourself. Your
improvement will be constant although uneven. You must
believe that you have the ability to communicate in the new
language and that by following the correct method you will
achieve your goals.
Just as in sports, confidence is an important ingredient for
success.
In a very useful book about golf, Robert J. Rotella deals not
with the techniques of golfing, but with developing the
necessary attitude. The book is called Golf is Not a Game of

Perfect. In golf, trying to be perfect undermines your
enjoyment and your confidence, and therefore leads to poor
performance.
The same is true, if not more so, in language learning. To
improve in golf it is important to practice, but it is critical to
get out and enjoy the game regardless of your score. It is
pointless to spend the whole time on the practice range.
To be a linguist you have to enjoy communicating in a new
language for its own sake, regardless of your level. Do not
spend your time in a vain attempt to master the language
from grammar rules and word lists. You will not enjoy this
tedious form of study, and it will not work.
Communicate at Your Level
How do you communicate when you are learning a new
language? Speaking and writing, as well as listening and
reading, are all forms of communication in the new
language. The key is to communicate in a way that suits
your interests and skill level.
When speaking, stay within your limits. Do not use slang,
idioms or complicated words. Try to limit the conversation to
subjects you can handle. Every time you communicate in a
new language, even a little, pat yourself on the back and
enjoy it.
This will build up your confidence.
Even at the earliest stages of learning a language your
objective has to be to communicate, not to learn the
language as an academic subject. It does not matter how
much you struggle nor how many mistakes you make, you

will progress faster by communicating than trying to master
theory.
My wife Carmen is a good example of this principle. When
we lived in Tokyo she had little time to study Japanese but
she communicated very comfortably with all the
shopkeepers in our neighbourhood by learning the names of
the vegetables and fish that she wanted to buy.
Years later, we entertained our friends and customers from
France, the Guillemettes, by spending a week driving them
around British Columbia. Bernard Guillemette and I sat in
the front and Carmen and Bernard’s wife, Monique who
spoke only French, sat in the back. Carmen's grammar was
atrocious but for one week she and Monique had a lively
and enjoyable conversation in French in the back seat. I am
sure that Carmen would be put in a beginner’s class for
grammar but she communicates better in French than most
English-Canadians who have studied French at school for
years. If she needs to improve her grammar she can do so,
but at least she now has a sense for the language and some
degree of confidence in communicating.
Carmen does not need to achieve fluency in French since
she has only the occasional need to speak it. To use a
language effectively in working situations requires real
fluency, but for social purposes the ability to communicate
is sufficient. Carmen has enough experience and confidence
in casual
communication that she could certainly achieve greater
accuracy if she chose to pursue that as a goal.
It is the same when you listen and read: focus on subjects
that are of interest or relevant to you. Your studies will be
much more enjoyable and effective if you read or listen to

aspects of the new culture that attract you or subjects that
you need to learn about. Seeking out meaningful content is
your first step to becoming a linguist. This can be on daily
life, business, an academic subject that you know already, a
hobby or common interest with a new friend, food, music, or
whatever. You must articulate your reason for
communicating. If you are only motivated by a sense of
obligation to learn the language, you will just see a bunch of
rules and words and language learning will be a difficult
struggle.
The term “meaningful content” appears often in this book. It
refers to real language situations, such as a conversation for
a genuine purpose, rather than a dialogue in class or a drill
or test question. It refers to reading and listening to content
that is of interest and comprehensible to you. The more the
context of your learning is realistic, the better you will learn.
You will get beyond the details of the language you are
learning and absorb the language naturally, because you
are interested in the content. That is real communication.
You will find what you are learning to be useful and
therefore it will be easier to remember and retain.
The classroom is not real life. To learn, you must expose
yourself to situations where you need the language,
because you want to communicate or learn something other
than the language itself. I attended the 2001 Christmas
Party of the Tsinghua University Alumnus Association of
Vancouver.
Tsinghua is the MIT of China, a world-class institute of
engineering and technology. Graduates of Tsinghua who
have immigrated to Canada have had varying degrees of
success integrating into Canadian society. Often, graduates
have difficulty finding work when they first arrive.

Two of the alumni I met at the party who were the most
fluent in English had taken unusual approaches to plunging
into Canadian society. One spent the first four months
selling door to door in Surrey and Delta, communities where
there are very few Chinese people. He had since moved on
to a better job—
but his English, after only four years in Canada, was
outstanding! Another alumnus had only been in Canada one
year but had opened a winemaking shop, which brought him
into contact with the neighborhood. Rather than worry about
their limited English or their status as highly educated
professionals, these two people just plunged into a real
context and as a result learned the language quickly.
Learning a new language can be intimidating, especially for
the first foreign language. However, by proceeding
gradually and gaining small victories, your confidence will
grow. It is important to remember that in learning a
language you are not learning knowledge so much as
acquiring a skill that takes time to develop. You have to get
used to it. You are learning by becoming, not from theory.
You will not always perform equally well. When you play
sports you are better on some occasions than on others,
regardless of how much you practice. Language learning is
the same way.
Enjoy the moments when you are doing well and learn to
forget the occasions when it seems that you are losing
ground.
Once you have learned a second language, you will have
the confidence to learn another one. In fact, the more
languages you know the better you will speak them all. You
will even speak your native language better, because your

ability to speak and to understand the nuances of meaning
is enhanced when you learn new languages. You will be on
your way to becoming a linguist.
Discover Language Naturally
We Englishmen, being far northerly, do not open our mouths
in the cold air wide enough to grace a southern tongue.
– John Milton (1644), English Poet
Each new language is a wonder of nature that we are all
capable of discovering. The teacher can only stimulate,
inspire and guide. It is up to you, the learner, to explore the
language and absorb it gradually on your own terms. You
should have the confidence that it is a natural thing for you
to do. Milton was obviously wrong when he suggested that
his northern countrymen were physically unable to learn
southern languages.
Seeing language learning as an extraordinary task can be a
self-fulfilling vision, preventing you from achieving your
potential.
If you do not believe you can speak another language, you
will certainly not succeed in doing so. You have to believe
you can learn in order to achieve success. Accept the fact
that you were born with the ability to learn to speak a new
language, to be a linguist. You just have to find the way to
develop this ability as an adult.
We generally accept that everyone has an equal gift for
learning their first language. Why should we assume that we
require a special “gift” to learn a second language? Some
people even claim that an ear for music is essential to
language learning. A good place to test this theory is at a

karaoke bar, where it can be easily demonstrated that there
is no correlation between singing ability and language skills.
We can all learn if we have the right attitude and if we find
the method that is most suited to our nature.
Some people may have better language learning ability than
others, but this innate learning ability is not the decisive
difference in language learning success. Why are so many
Dutch or Swedish people good at learning languages while
Germans and English, not to mention Americans, are
generally not as good at it? Why are French Canadians in
general more successful in learning English than French
people from France?
Why are Chinese people from Singapore usually better at
English than Chinese people from China or even from Hong
Kong?
I do not believe that some nationalities have a better innate
ability to learn languages than others. It is more likely that
the big difference is attitude. The successful foreign
language speakers take for granted that they will have to
communicate in another language, and do not feel that it is
an unusual thing to do. It is just expected. It is natural to
them. Many Dutch or Swedish people realize that they need
to speak foreign languages because few foreigners are
going to learn Dutch or Swedish. Similarly, a large number
of Singaporeans and Quebecois know they need English,
and simply accept that they are going to be English
speakers. There is no resistance. These people can all
naturally visualize themselves as fluent speakers of English.
The Limits of Language Teaching

Language needs to be discovered. It cannot be taught to an
unmotivated learner. Becoming a linguist depends on you,
not on schools or teachers. Language teachers are
dedicated to helping you improve, but they cannot make
you fluent. You have to acquire the language yourself. The
teacher can stimulate, explain, and provide the best
possible language resources. After that, you must take
charge and pursue your own learning, according to your
own interests and nature. If you do that you will learn,
naturally and without stress.
The language classroom is too often an artificial
environment where the emphasis is on teaching the
language according to a timetable imposed by the
curriculum. The expectation is that the teacher will impart
language knowledge or skills in a certain order. As long as
the textbook is covered in the prescribed time period and
test scores are positive, the assumption is that the language
has been learned. Unfortunately the results in terms of
fluency are mostly disappointing. The language classroom
can be stressful. The learners often dislike having the
teacher correct them in front of others, and are frequently
frustrated at their own inability to speak properly. There is
an underlying expectation that the students should perform
correctly, rather than just communicate. The students
alternately feel threatened or annoyed by their fellow
students, depending on whether their classmates are more
or less proficient at learning the new language than they are
themselves.
In the most effective classrooms it is not the language that
is studied, but some other subject of interest to the
students. In studying another subject the learners absorb
the language, and are less self-conscious about their own
language difficulties in their enthusiasm to communicate
about something of interest to them. After the learners are

exposed to a sufficient amount of interesting content by
listening and reading in the language, they gradually
become aware of the need for correct structure and word
use. Then they are motivated to work on these aspects of
the language.
It is best if the learners ask for help as they need it, rather
than having to respond to the timetable of the teacher. The
teacher is able to correct the students privately or on
written content and to offer relevant grammatical
explanations as required. The classroom can be a useful
learning environment if it is used in a flexible way which
puts the learner and not the teacher in control.
Another way in which the teachers, rather than the learners,
control conventional language teaching is through the
frequent use of tests to evaluate learners. For a variety of
reasons, educational authorities find it necessary to try to
objectively assess the language competence of non-native
speakers. For English, there are standardized tests which go
by names like TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language)
and TOEIC ( Test of English for International Communication)
and similar acronyms.
These tests may be a necessary evil for university entrance,
or for job interviews, but in my opinion results in these tests
are not a reliable indicator of language fluency. They should
not become an obsession, and must never become the goal
of language learning. The best judge of your language
competence is you, the learner. You know if you can read
more easily, if you can understand more of what you hear,
or if you are having an easier time expressing yourself.
Paradoxically you will score better on these tests by
acquiring a balanced ability in the new language rather than
by just studying to pass these tests.

Too many language learners focus on doing well on these
tests rather than on learning how to communicate
comfortably. In preparation for tests, especially for the major
standard tests, students will study word lists which are
isolated from any content. They will spend countless hours
reviewing specialized books with grammar rules, lists of
verbs, phrases, idioms and sample questions. They study
the techniques for getting high scores on these tests. In this
way they pursue study methods that are inefficient and
stressful. In the long run, an undue emphasis on getting a
high TOEFL or TOEIC score can divert you from the real goal
of achieving fluency in the language. The test is only an
interim goal on your way to academic and professional
success. If you focus on test results without really learning
the language, you are only fooling yourself. In the end you
will not be able to use the language effectively.
There are no shortcuts. To be comfortable in answering most
TOEFL and TOEIC questions, you need to become familiar
with the natural flow of the language in many different
contexts. This can best be acquired through intensive
listening and reading of a wide variety of interesting
material while using a program that helps you remember
new words and especially the most common phrases. This
kind of exposure to the new language in real situations, not
studying grammar and word lists, is the fastest and most
enjoyable way to learn.
In some countries, especially in East Asia, fierce competition
exists for entry into prestigious schools and universities.
Foreign language ability is an important subject and school
children are put through high pressure study programs to
achieve good marks on national tests. There are cram
schools with classes of fifty to seventy people. It is
impossible to learn to communicate in these situations.

Teachers devote themselves to revealing how to get high
marks in this examination hell. I can well understand that
this kind of teaching will discourage a learner’s interest in a
new language.
Public school systems everywhere have been widely
unsuccessful in teaching second languages. This has had a
negative influence on language learning. Many potential
linguists are conditioned to think that language is a tedious
subject that has to be taught in schools.
In my own case, I found studying theoretical explanations of
grammar uninteresting and not an effective way to learn
languages. I resisted doing exercises and answering
questions that tested my knowledge of grammar. After I left
high school I discovered that I learned faster through
systematic exposure to the language than if I relied on
formal teaching in a classroom environment. Sentence
structures that were strange and difficult at first eventually
felt natural if I encountered them often enough in my
reading and listening.
Occasionally I would consult grammar books to answer
questions that I had about the language. Sometimes the
explanations helped and at other times they did not. Much
like when I looked words up in a dictionary, I would usually
remember grammar rules or explanations (if I understood
them) only for a short period of time and then forget them.
In the end it was only through enough exposure to the
language that my grammar improved.
I was prepared to devote considerable effort away from
class to listening and reading on subjects of interest to me.
This was the natural and enjoyable way to discover the
language. I developed my own systems for expanding my
usable vocabulary, to ensure that I was able to retain words

and phrases rather than immediately forget them if I did not
see them again for a few days. These methods helped me
develop study programs for The Linguist.
There are undoubtedly learners who are happiest in the
structured environment of a conventional language
classroom and who are comfortable studying grammar and
preparing for tests. Even those learners can benefit from a
self-directed learning system like The Linguist. By
customizing the learning process to suit their needs and
interests, learners will find that their classroom language
experience will be more effective. In this way they will also
make it possible for themselves to continue progressing in
the language after the formal classes are ended.
Natural Learning
Speaking a new language is natural. You need only cultivate
the latent capabilities that you already possess, but which
need to be properly stimulated. The way of the linguist is
one that leaves you free to pursue your own needs and
interests, rather than having to learn according to an
externally imposed program.
You develop skills that you have within you. You integrate
with the target language, listening and imitating rather than
learning from theory.
Man is most nearly himself when he achieves the
seriousness of a child at play.
– Heraclitus
Children learn languages using these natural methods. They
just want to communicate. They cannot read grammars,
they do not do drills, they do not prepare for tests. They just

naturally want to learn. At birth, children of all nationalities
have the same innate ability to learn a new language. It is
true that children normally learn their mother tongue, but
they possess a universal language instinct that will enable
them to learn any language.
Children are exposed to a limited range of content which
matters to them: the language of their parents and their
friends at play. They concentrate on the words and phrases
that are important to them and find opportunities to use
them. They are not concerned about making mistakes of
pronunciation or grammar. Children absorb the language
without resistance.
Unlike the classroom language learner, they are not
constantly corrected but are encouraged in their efforts to
speak.
Children learn naturally, but adults can learn faster than
children. When I studied Mandarin Chinese or Japanese I
was able to read the newspaper and have serious
discussions within six months. It takes a child longer to
reach that level of vocabulary. Adults can use their greater
knowledge and broader interests to direct their learning,
and can progress quickly.
As a linguist, you should create your own customized
curriculum. If you control your learning, you will learn faster.
In listening and reading, comprehension depends on
context.
When listening to or reading material that you have chosen
and where the background is familiar, your comprehension
is higher than when you are struggling through
uninteresting material.

This is the natural way to build confidence and fluency in a
non-stressful way.
Gradually your range of interests will take you into new
areas, thus expanding your language ability. But the
decision of what to study should be yours. Furthermore, if
you accept the responsibility to seek out your own content,
you will take a major step towards cultivating the self-reliant
attitude needed for success in language learning.
Fred Genesee of McGill University, a leading researcher on
language learning and the brain, explains what happens
when we learn a new language:
When learning occurs, neuro-chemical communication
between neurons is facilitated, in other words a neural
network is gradually established.
Exposure to unfamiliar speech sounds is initially registered
by the brain as undifferentiated neural activity. As exposure
continues, the listener (and the brain) learns to differentiate
among different sounds and even among short sequences
of sounds that correspond to words or parts of words…
Students' vocabulary acquisition can be enhanced when it is
embedded in real-world complex contexts that are familiar
to them.
Through intensive and repetitive exposure to enjoyable
language material you will bathe your mind in the new
language.
This process is sometimes referred to as an “input flood”
which trains your mind and prepares it for the more difficult
task of expressing yourself in the new language. The linguist
accepts the new language without resistance, confident that

with enough exposure the difficulties of the language will
gradually be overcome.
Language learning is not primarily an intellectual activity. It
requires enthusiasm and repeated and concentrated
exposure to language contexts that become familiar over
time. I have often observed that foreign professional
athletes in North America are good language learners, often
more successful than foreign university professors. Hockey
or basketball players are able to deliver fluent interviews on
television, whereas the more intellectual professors are
likely to have very strong accents and speak in a more
stilted and unnatural manner. The reason is that athletes
have constant informal verbal interaction with teammates.
They need to fit into the team or they will not perform well.
They learn quickly, immersed in the comfortable and
familiar environment of their sport.
Unlike the athlete on a team, most language learners are
not exposed to constant and familiar language contexts.
That is why it is so important to create your own curriculum
based on learning contexts which cater to your interests and
needs.
Following your interests is the natural way to learn. The
greater your range of interests, the more curious you are
about the world around you, the better you will learn.
Identity and Language
Languages are unlike any other subject taught in a
classroom in that they involve the acquisition of skills and
behaviour patterns which are characteristic of another
community.

– R.C.Gardner, Social Psychology and Language
Learning, the
Role of Attitudes and Motivation
With your first encounter with a foreign language you are
coming into contact with an “other,” another language and
another culture. But actually that “other” is not as foreign as
you think. In time the new language and culture can
become natural to you, a part of who you are. You become a
linguist when you accept the fact that you can change. You
can acquire skills and behaviour patterns characteristic of
another culture. I have done it many times, and have seen
others with no previous experience of language learning do
the same.
In his excellent book El Bosque Originario (Ediciones Taurus),
on the genealogical myths of the people of Europe, the
Basque philosopher Jon Juaristi writes:
There is no nation without its tale or tales of origin. These
myths are based on the logic of exclusion, of a difference
constructed on the basis of exalting Us and negating the
Other. Recurring themes like aboriginality, divine selection,
purity of blood or language are supports of different variants
of a common narrative.
The linguist knows that the differences between people,
exalted in such traditions, are not based on biology but on
education.
The linguist sees these differences but also sees similarity.
The linguist is able to grow as a person and accept elements
of a new culture as part of his or her larger human identity.
Charles Pasqua, the former French Minister of Immigration,
once said that when an immigrant arrives in France his

ancestors become the Gauls, the ancient Celtic people who
lived in France at the time of the Roman Empire.
The resonance of M. Pasqua's statement is not diminished
by the fact that M. Pasqua, like new immigrants, had
ancestors who were not Gauls. However, in French history
and French myths of origin, the Gauls were important.
Pasqua is French, so at least symbolically, his ancestors
were the Gauls. This is part of his sense of belonging to the
group.
In a similar sense, as a human being, I consider all ancient
people as my ancestors. I can choose to partake of any of
the traditions and cultures I see around me if I make the
effort to learn them. As a result of having learned French I
am able to participate in French culture and consider it a
part of who I am.
When I approached the study of Chinese it was in order to
make this previously unknown culture a part of me, to
explore my human heritage. In learning new languages it is
never my intention to compare different cultures to see
which is “better,”
but to acquire something new and valuable and expand as a
human being. As a linguist it is important to let go of the
security of your native language and culture and broaden
your identity.
When I speak French, I try to become French; when I speak
Chinese I try to be Chinese; when I speak Japanese, I act as
if I am Japanese. Largely this is a form of theatre and not a
change of personality. But people do observe that my facial
expressions and gestures change when I speak different
languages.

Until we become fluent in a new language, when we speak it
we should engage in a certain degree of play-acting. Have
fun and pretend that you are what you are not. You should
empty your mind of your ancestral culture for a while in
order to better absorb the language you are learning. You do
not give up your original identity, and that is certainly not
the aim of language learning. But you do acquire the ability
to understand the values and way of thinking of another
culture.
I was a butterfly, flying contentedly
Then I awoke as Zhuangzi.
And now I don't know who I really am—
A butterfly who dreams he is Zhuangzi
Or Zhuangzi who dreamed he was a butterfly.
– Zhuangzi
Sports psychologists encourage competitive athletes to
visualize their success. Paul Kariya is one of the top ice
hockey players in the world. My younger son Mark played
hockey for Yale University against Paul Kariya when Kariya
played for Maine University. Apparently Kariya sat for an
hour before each game and visualized himself making plays
against the players on the other team. Paul Kariya is a
player of relatively small physical stature who has reached
the highest world level in a game of strength and speed. I
am sure this technique helped him. Be like Paul Kariya:
visualize your success! Try to visualize yourself as a fluent
native speaker.
Visualize yourself pronouncing like a native speaker and
thinking in the language. The ability to reason in the logic of

other languages exists within all of us. It is there for you to
develop. In that sense, language learning is a process of
self-discovery. You need to accept the spirit of the new
language, even if it seems strange at first. Let it be a force
for uncovering your latent language abilities. There is no
need to fear losing the logic or values of your native
language. You will only be enriched by acquiring additional
languages and new perspectives.
We have the potential to penetrate other cultures regardless
of our background, as long as we are curious enough to do
so.
There are many examples of people who were outstanding
artists in a second culture. Joseph Conrad, a Pole, is a
leading figure of modern English literature. Samuel Beckett,
an Irishman, wrote one of the prominent plays of modern
French literature, Waiting for Godot. There are many
outstanding non-European virtuosos performing European
classical music.
Many non-Asians dedicate themselves with success to Asian
arts or traditional sports.
The Fundamental Similarity of Human
Beings
With the discovery of DNA, we now understand what the
Taoists knew intuitively: all is one. Human beings are
remarkably uniform and have a common origin. As Richard
Dawkins brilliantly explains in River Out of Eden, our genes
have been handed down to us by those of our ancestors
who survived long enough to produce children. Many of our
characteristics, such as blood type and susceptibility to
certain diseases, cut across the lines of more superficial

differences like skin colour or body shape. While we may
look different from each other today, every person alive has
a common male ancestor who lived around 50,000 years
ago. To quote again from Spencer Wells in The Journey of
Man, A Genetic Odyssey,
“Physical traits that distinguish modern human geographic
groups only appear in the fossil record within the past
30,000
years. Most older fossils of Africans, Asians and Europeans
are very similar to each other.”
Our genes are so common that they can cohabit with the
genes of other human beings of any nation or race to create
members of a next generation. Genetic differences between
individuals are greater than the genetic differences between
ethnic groups.
And any one of us can speak any language.
I have been told that there are people who have paid money
to have an operation on their tongues in order to be able to
better pronounce a foreign language. Whether this is true or
not I cannot say, but the fact that such a story is told is an
indication of the persistence of the association of language
with ancestry.
If you were adopted at birth by someone of a different race,
you would naturally learn to speak their language without
needing a tongue operation.
Human Culture is Universal
Just as with genes, human culture has passed from
generation to generation, its form and content constantly

evolving. Like the genetic makeup of people, human culture
is universal despite its variations. The source of world
culture is everywhere the same: human creativity. Twenty-
five hundred years ago, philosophers in China, India and
Greece dealt with the same human issues as we do now,
and their thoughts are readily understood by people of
many different cultures today.
In fact, a closer study of the thoughts of Heraclitus,
Zhuangzi, and Buddha show remarkable similarities
between them. Their philosophies are not just accessible to
Greeks, Chinese or Indians. These thinkers have had an
influence that greatly exceeded their time and country. The
explanations that humans have sought to solve the riddles
of human existence are universal. It is precisely this
universality of human thought and feeling that makes
learning foreign languages such a natural and rewarding
adventure.
All cultures are connected. The ancient civilizations of the
Middle East spawned a literary revolution that dramatically
influenced the course of history. The Semitic alphabet, the
mother of all alphabets, indirectly made possible Greek and
Indian philosophical writings and the books of the great
religions. As thoughts were written down, it became possible
for others to read them, ponder them and comment on
them.
Chinese writing had the same effect on East Asian cultures.
It is on these foundations that the modern world is built.
In more recent times, the development of European science
and the industrial revolution were dependent on Chinese
technology, Indian mathematics and Arabic cultural
influence.

Religions created in the Middle East and India dominate the
world, while much of the world's popular music is influenced
by African rhythms.
Our modern world is the result of an ongoing process of
cultural creativity and interaction that started with the first
humans. Migration, trade, conquest, cultural exchange,
cultural synthesis and assimilation have been the constant
pattern of history on all continents. Globalization is not a
recent phenomenon, it is just that the speed and the scale
have increased as modern communications have shrunk the
globe.
Individuals in a Shrinking World
Canada is an interesting example of a country where
cultures are mixing and a new identity is emerging. Perhaps
Canada is at the same stage in its evolution as older
societies in Europe or Asia were one thousand or several
thousand years ago. Over the last fifty years, Canada has
absorbed many different peoples who are today united
through their common language, either English or French.
The process of blending in can take time, but today a
“native speaker” of Canadian English can be of African, East
Asian, South Asian, Mediterranean, Northern European, First
Nation or any other single or mixed origin.
My own case is an example of the impermanent nature of
national identity. My parents were born into a German
speaking Jewish community in the Austro-Hungarian Empire
in an area that subsequently became Czechoslovakia and
then the Czech Republic. My parents moved to Sweden in
1939. I was born in 1945 in Sweden and my family moved to
Montreal in 1951.

My national identity is Canadian, specifically English
Canadian.
However, depending on different historical factors beyond
my control, I could just as easily have ended up Austrian,
Czech, Swedish, Israeli, or a French speaking Quebecois.
Despite accelerated globalization, national or regional
identities are not disappearing, and in fact may be getting
stronger. However, today we have more freedom to choose
our identity.
We are all individual human beings. We can share in
different identities and understand different cultures. We are
stamped by our native culture but this is an accident of
history. It cannot limit us. As individuals we have the
opportunity and, I would say the responsibility, to explore
other cultures. The best way to do that is through language.
The pupil is … “schooled” to confuse teaching with learning,
grade advancement with education,
a diploma with competence.
- Ivan Illich, Educator and author,
Deschooling Society (1973)
HOW TO LEARN A
LANGUAGE
Conviviality

By now you understand that learning does not only take
place in a school. Learning is done by individuals who want
to acquire knowledge from others or from the world around
them. My own success as a linguist has been driven by an
interest in languages and the pursuit of conviviality in the
sense that Cicero meant it - enjoying the company of others
because they share our lives, regardless of their country or
language.
This attitude of autonomy, combined with a desire for
human communication, is common to many people around
the world.
The world is full of potential linguists who only need to find
the best way to develop their abilities. Are you one of these
people?
The famous Austrian linguist and philosopher Ivan
Illich proposed the creation of convivial learning
webs as a substitute for the formal education system
dominated by
“experts.” These convivial webs were to be informal
communities which provided resources for
independent-minded people to learn and share
knowledge in a manner that was more effective than
formal schooling. The Linguist language learning
system (www.thelinguist.com) brings Illich's vision to
life. I will use it to illustrate how language learning
should be organized.
How can a convivial language learning environment work in
practice? The Linguist website offers a varied and constantly
growing collection of interviews with real people in different
walks of life and in different languages, as well as texts on
many subjects, both fiction and non-fiction. This content is

in audio and text format. The audio can be downloaded and
the text can be read at the website. An online dictionary and
a powerful method for storing new words and phrases for
regular review are built into the system. In addition, there
are pronunciation and writing correction sections which are
unique and practical.
Members of The Linguist can communicate with other
learners and native speakers using instant messaging and
email, voice-chat, video-chat or even face to face meetings.
Members organize different events, with or without native
speaker coaches. In this convivial learning community, it is
up to the members to take the initiative. There is, however,
a recommended plan of study.
Focus On Input First
As a language learner, you want to learn to express yourself
comfortably in a new language. This is certainly achievable.
Before you can express yourself, however, you need to
absorb a great deal of your new language through listening,
reading, and learning words and phrases in a systematic
way. Therefore, you should focus first on gaining the right
language input.
Except for a small amount of beginner material, all the
content on The Linguist is real language and not artificial
content designed for language learners. You are able to
share in the lives of real native speakers. You can select
items where the background is familiar and of interest. The
Linguist system even tells you which content items are at
your level of vocabulary and language skill. You can build
your own language curriculum and will not need any

textbooks. Let's look at the different ways you can get the
necessary input in your new language.
Listening
The first thing to do is to listen. My experience with learning
Chinese, Japanese and other languages has confirmed to me
that the best way to improve fluency and comprehension is
the seemingly passive activity of listening over and over to
understandable content. This activity allows you to expand
your language skills in a non-stressful way. Listening is not
just for beginners. I still listen to my favourite tapes in
languages that I already speak well: in my car, while walking
or jogging, or doing chores around the house. You can
always improve pronunciation, rhythm, vocabulary and
fluency.
Start by choosing content at your level and just listen. If you
are a beginner, you may choose short items of a few lines.
Later you will be able to handle content of two to five
minutes in length.
As you progress you will want to listen to content that is
twenty minutes in length or even longer. Listen to the same
content over and over. The subject should be of interest, the
voices pleasing to you, and the level not too difficult. The
more familiar the background, the easier it will be for you to
understand.
Get in the habit of listening frequently: in the morning,
during the day and in the evening. Make sure you get a
convenient portable listening device such as a Minidisc
recorder, MP3 player, or CD player. Take the trouble to learn
how to download content and then record it onto your
portable device.

This way you do not have to buy CDs or tapes but can
quickly download what you want. You don't need to sit in a
room beside a tape recorder like I did when I was learning in
the late 1960s. Nor should you just sit in front of your
computer listening to the content from The Linguist. Do as I
did when I learned Cantonese at the age of fifty-five. Take
your lessons with you when shopping, driving, exercising,
washing the dishes and cleaning the garage. That is how to
accumulate the necessary exposure to the language.
When you first listen to new content, you need only get
used to the sounds. Try to get a sense for the rhythm. Do
not worry if you do not understand all of it. Listen a few
times without reading the text. Then read the text carefully,
look up new words in an online dictionary, and save new
words and phrases to a list for later review.
Even after you basically understand a text, you need to
listen, over and over, to make this content part of your
subconscious.
You may have to read the text again and you will certainly
review the new words and phrases many times. But mostly
you should listen.
Especially in the early stages, focus on a small amount of
content and get used to it, rather than trying to listen to
constantly changing content. By listening to the same
content repeatedly you will get better at hearing where one
word or phrase ends and the next one begins. You will also
start to recognize familiar words when you listen to new
content. Let the phrases ring in your mind even after you
stop listening.
Repeat certain phrases out loud. Try to imitate the correct
pronunciation.

Repetitive listening is like physical training. You are training
your mind to process the new language. Short, frequent
listening sessions can be better than fewer longer sessions.
Try to listen for one hour a day, broken into short segments
of ten to thirty minutes at a time.
I have never been in favour of modern audiovisual learning
materials such as computer assisted interactive games or
other tests and quizzes which create artificial learning
environments. I did not enjoy being tested on my
comprehension of what I was listening to. I resisted
questions that forced me to try to remember what I had
heard. I preferred to listen again, or to listen to new
material, or to engage in a general conversation on the
subject of my listening. I always felt that natural
communication was a more effective way to learn.
Listening is real communication. When you are listening,
you are absorbed in a pure language environment. You have
to use the sounds of the language to imagine the meaning.
Repetitive listening is an ideal learning environment, as long
as you choose content of interest to you, content that you
want to understand.
You should build up an ever-expanding library of such
material as part of a lifelong language learning strategy.
Reading
It is said that some people are visual learners and some
people learn better by hearing. But all learners can benefit
from doing both. Reading a lot is essential to achieving
fluency in a new language. To read a lot you must make it
enjoyable by finding material to read that is interesting. Our
website opens up a limitless source of interesting reading

material, consisting of our own content and the full range of
articles, e-books and other material that is accessible via
the Internet, and which our unique functionality makes
accessible to the learner.
At first you need to read to understand what you are
listening to and to reinforce your learning. As you progress
in your learning, you will read to gain new vocabulary and to
learn about the culture and other subjects in your new
language. Get in the habit of reading new content in an
electronic text format on your computer. On the computer
you can access software dictionaries and create a database
for words and phrases. This will make it easier to read and
understand unfamiliar material and ensure your reading
contributes to your vocabulary growth.
Reading should be a growing part of your learning activities.
As your vocabulary and confidence increase you will actually
start to enjoy reading conventional print versions of books
and periodicals in the new language. When reading away
from the computer, you should ignore the few words you do
not know and just enjoy yourself. I sometimes found it a
struggle to read in a foreign language when there were so
many words I did not understand. If I was interested enough
in the content I would persevere. Gradually my ability to
read in a number of languages improved. I now read these
languages for information and enjoyment rather than as a
learning task.
Whether you are a native speaker or a non-native speaker,
reading widely will enhance your ability to express yourself
clearly and eloquently.
Learning Words and Phrases

When I studied languages, I had to search bookstores for
language readers with vocabulary lists in order to avoid the
time consuming activity of using a conventional dictionary.
But these vocabulary lists were not customized to my
needs, and the content in these readers was often not
interesting to me. Many of the words on the vocabulary list
were known to me, whereas words that I did not understand
were often not explained.
There was no way for the editor of the book to predict what I
knew and did not know. While reading, I would constantly
refer to these vocabulary lists as a crutch, instead of
developing the important ability to guess at the meaning of
a word from the content around it. Using these word lists
was a necessary evil. It enabled me to read new material
but it also distracted me in my reading. However, the
biggest problem with these word lists was that I would
quickly forget most of the words on the list.
Working to expand your vocabulary is a fundamental
language learning task and one that is easily measured. You
may need to learn more than 10,000 words and phrases to
reach a university or professional level of fluency. In The
Linguist system you can measure your own steady progress
towards your own vocabulary goal. I think this is an
important motivator.
Learning new words and phrases can be frustrating. New
words are easy to forget and complex words and phrases
can have subtle shades of meaning which vary depending
on context.
Vocabulary learning is often handled in an inefficient
manner by learners. Learners look words up in a dictionary
and then forget them. They write lists which they never
refer to. They have no record of what they have learned,

and what they still need to learn. Often learners study
isolated lists of words and phrases in the hope that they will
remember them for tests.
There is an absence of method, measurement and planning.
At The Linguist we have developed an entirely new
approach to the learning of words and phrases that
dramatically speeds up language learning.
The Linguist does not provide vocabulary lists with each
lesson.
You must take the initiative. Just as you choose what to
listen to and read, you also decide which words and phrases
from your listening and reading will be most useful to you.
By choosing your own vocabulary items rather than being
spoon-fed, you will remember them better.
For this to work you must take advantage of the benefits of
electronic text. By reading on the computer you can obtain
instant explanations and translations of new words by using
dictionary software. You can enter new words and phrases
into your own personal database, where they can be
managed in many useful ways to enhance learning. You can
create customized lists of these words and phrases, based
on subject matter, function in the sentence, or root words.
Such customized lists drawn from your listening and reading
are far more useful than the “Word Books” and “Phrase
Books” that are sold widely to language learners. For a
proper explanation of how this system works, you will have
to visit www.thelinguist.com.
As well as acquiring new words, you also have to learn to
identify new phrases that can help you to speak like a
native.

These phrases can be any group of two or more words that
you feel will be useful for you to express yourself. Because
you choose these phrases, they will be more meaningful to
you than phrases that are provided out of context. By
following The Linguist process you will make these phrases
a part of your daily language. As you become accustomed
to using them, you not only acquire strings of new words,
you also naturally acquire correct grammar.
The Linguist does not teach grammar rules or give grammar
tests. Grammar is an abstraction, a theoretical explanation
of the function of words. Grammar represents a standard of
good practice and can be a useful reference, one which
many learners like to rely on. There are many good
grammar books around, and therefore we have deliberately
left grammar out of our system. Trying to memorize the
rules of grammar can be a distraction from learning the
language. Grammatical explanations often introduce an
artificial level of theory, with new technical terms that can
be more confusing than helpful.
Especially in the early stages, you should not let a concern
about grammatical accuracy prevent you from
communicating in the new language.
It is important to learn correct language, but this can only
be achieved after intense exposure to language input.
Rather than writing grammar tests, you are better to write
freely and have your writing corrected. This is explained in
more detail later.
Focus your efforts on phrases as the essential building
blocks of language. This will improve your structure and
style. You will have an easier time understanding the spoken
language and you will sound more like a native speaker if
you have trained yourself in phrases. This emphasis on

phrases starts with the first “how are you?” and continues
right up to the most advanced stage.
Learn To Express Yourself
In the study of a new language there comes a point when
you successfully express your thoughts on something that is
important to you. You feel a sense of triumph. Unfortunately
this happy moment is often followed by another encounter
where you find yourself tongue-tied and unable to really say
what you want to say. Comfortable fluency takes time and
practice. It is the ultimate goal and is certainly achievable
for everyone.
To express yourself in a new language you must first absorb
the language by listening, reading and learning vocabulary
as explained above. These activities will always account for
about three quarters of your effort while you are working to
achieve a basic level of fluency. But from the beginning you
also have to work on your skills of expression:
pronunciation, writing and conversation. Developing these
skills requires a conscious commitment to regular and
patient practice.
Pronunciation
Pronunciation should be a major area of emphasis from the
beginning, and throughout the first period of studying a new
language. You should set high standards and work hard on
pronunciation practice on your own. Many learners do not
put enough deliberate effort into pronunciation and resign
themselves to speaking as if they were pronouncing their
native language.

Any person can learn to pronounce any language,
regardless of nationality. Some people may achieve better
results than others, but we can all get pretty close if we
work at it. Mandarin Chinese, with its four tones, is very
different from English.
Nevertheless, I was determined to master Mandarin
pronunciation, and to learn to speak like a native. I believe I
have come pretty close, perhaps because I did not consider
the possibility that I could not do so. In fact, I made
pronunciation the major focus of my early effort, and I
recommend this to you as well. It takes longer to get a feel
for speaking in a grammatically correct manner, but you can
work on pronunciation from the beginning.
At The Linguist we provide you with audio files of the basic
sounds of the language using the five hundred or so most
commonly used words. You will be able to hear and repeat
examples of these sounds while reinforcing your knowledge
of this basic vocabulary. There are also texts using this basic
vocabulary where each sentence is an individual audio file
that you can repeat or download for repetitive listening.
Using this and other material at our website, your
pronunciation activity should consist of four steps to train
yourself to pronounce correctly:
First, LISTEN repeatedly to material within your basic range
of comprehension, concentrating on pronunciation. Listen
carefully to the intonation. Try to become conscious of the
rhythm and breathing pattern. Try to identify separate words
and phrases. With repetition, this gradually becomes easier.
The language sounds strange at first but will become more
familiar with repetitive listening.
Second, REPEAT individual words and phrases out loud, both
during and after listening. You will remember certain

phrases.
Try to say them over and over again to yourself while doing
other tasks. You will have trouble with certain sounds. Work
especially hard to master them. Then practice repeating
phrases and sentences with the proper emphasis and
intonation.
Third, READ sentences and paragraphs out loud, first very
slowly and then more quickly, and always in a loud voice.
Imagine you are a native speaker. Exaggerate - pretend you
are an actor. Have fun with it! You should alternate between
reading unfamiliar material, and reading something that you
have written and had corrected.
Fourth, RECORD your own pronunciation and compare it to a
native speaker. This will train you to hear the differences in
pronunciation between yourself and a native speaker. You
have to hear it to be able to pronounce it! Recording your
own pronunciation also serves as a record of your progress
as your pronunciation improves.
The sounds, the intonation and even the writing system of
your native language can influence your pronunciation of
the second language. You have to force yourself to train the
muscles of your mouth to make the new sounds accurately.
You may have to breathe differently to pronounce the new
language correctly.
Work at imitating the new rhythm. The more you are able to
establish freedom from the influence of your native
language, including the influence on pronunciation, the
better you will learn the second language.
Learn to be your own toughest pronunciation critic when
you are working on it alone, and then forget about it and be

relaxed when speaking to others. People are unlikely to
comment on your pronunciation, as long as you are easily
understood.
Remember that perfection is not the goal, just comfortable
communication.
Writing
The ability to write clearly is required for entrance to
university and for many workplace situations. Some learners
may not feel it is necessary for them to work on their writing
if they only want to learn to speak in the new language.
However, I recommend that everyone make the effort to
write regularly, even if only a little at a time. Writing is an
excellent way to train yourself in the proper use of the
language. You have the time to express yourself carefully
when you write, whereas in conversation you are under
greater pressure and need to be more spontaneous.
When you write, take the time to try to write correctly. Make
a plan of what you are going to write. If you do not organize
your thoughts ahead of time you may not make sense
writing in a foreign language. When correcting English I am
always amazed at non-native speakers who just dash off
emails and other texts without even using a spell-checker.
Anyone working as a professional in an international
company has to write correctly and understandably,
otherwise it is the very image of the company that is
damaged. If you are unable to do this for yourself, use the
services of a text correcting service.
If you have trouble with verb tenses, think through the time
when each action is taking place. Use the phrases you have
mastered when you write, instead of simply translating from

your native language. Many of the most common problems
relating to word order, choice of words, prepositions, verb
tenses and verb agreement can be eliminated by building
your written language around the phrases you have learned.
Until you are fluent, try to speak the way you write and
write the way you speak, in short, simple and complete
sentences. Do not speak in a casual way and then try to
write stilted or complicated prose. Even if native speakers
are sloppy in their speech and use a lot of slang, as a
learner you cannot afford to do so. You do not have a strong
enough foundation in the new language. You will need to be
aware of casual or slang speech in order to understand it.
But you are best to avoid it until you are quite fluent and
really sure when to use it. Even though it is hard work,
writing is an excellent way to develop genuine eloquence in
a new language.
If your speech is similar to your written style, each will
reinforce the other. It is less stressful to accept corrections
of what you write than to have your spoken language
corrected. The corrections in your written work can then be
applied to your spoken language. While spoken language is
more forgiving than written language, the same phrases and
words can be used effectively in both.
You should have your writing corrected regularly and your
mistakes analyzed and measured. The Linguist keeps a
statistical record of the kinds of errors you make most
frequently and recommends new phrases to replace the
incorrect ones. You can save these new phrases into your
database. Later you can create custom lists of words and
phrases in your database to use when writing and speaking.
In this way you can make sure that your expression in the
new language becomes richer and more accurate,
incorporating the new vocabulary that you are learning.

It is worth considering the self-teaching methods of Heinrich
Schliemann (1822-1890) the world-famous businessman
turned archeologist who discovered the site of ancient Troy.
As reported by Arnold Toynbee in A Study of History (Oxford
University Press 1963), Schliemann was able to express his
thoughts orally and in writing after about six weeks of self-
study, in Modern Greek, Ancient Greek, Persian, Arabic, and
Turkish. His method consisted of “reading a great deal aloud
without making a translation, taking a lesson every day,
constantly writing essays upon subjects of interest,
correcting these under the supervision of a teacher, learning
them by heart, and repeating in the next lesson what was
corrected on the previous day.” The motivated learner who
is prepared to work every day can achieve great things.
Fortunately language learning is much easier today than it
was in the 19th century.
When you receive a corrected version of something you
have written, take the time to look at it. Read it aloud
several times.
Focus on the corrected phrases. Make them a part of your
way of speaking in the new language. Especially if you do
not have easy access to native speakers for conversation,
this can be an inexpensive and yet intense learning activity.
You can improve your vocabulary, sentence structure,
pronunciation and general speaking skills. You can prepare
yourself for what most people find the most enjoyable part
of language learning: conversation with the native speaker.
Conversation
Your ultimate goal is to interact comfortably with native
speakers. At an early stage you will want to try out what you

have learned in order to build up your confidence and
fluency.
But conversation and speaking skills develop gradually and
cannot be rushed. Do not be in a hurry or put pressure on
yourself. Do not worry about how you sound, just focus on
communicating. You will often feel that you are struggling,
when in fact you are communicating quite successfully. The
key to successful conversation is to try to relax and enjoy
the experience. Focus on the meaning you are trying to
communicate, not on how well you are doing. Do not think
that your grammar and pronunciation are being judged, just
try to get your meaning across. Your listeners want to
understand you. When you are successful in
communicating, give yourself a pat on the back.
Use the phrases you know and build your conversation
around these phrases. If you are using The Linguist system,
you should print weekly lists of new words and phrases from
your learning and deliberately try to use them. You will find
that you can use your newly learned phrases as convenient
components and build your conversation around them.
Using them in conversation will also help you confirm that
you really know how to use them. Your ability to express
yourself will improve as you continue your intensive
listening, reading, vocabulary learning, pronunciation and
writing activities.
You will need to make an effort to find people to talk with. If
you live where the language is spoken, you may have
friends or co-workers who are native speakers. You may be
able to enroll in courses offered in the language you are
learning, but on subjects other than the language itself. This
and other activities can bring you into casual and friendly
contact with native speakers who share your interests. If
you do not have ready opportunities to meet native

speakers, you will have to organize small groups of learners
with or without native speaker coaches to meet and discuss
subjects of common interest.
You can organize meetings through The Linguist website, an
international community of native speakers, language
learners and language coaches. Members arrange meetings,
voice-chat sessions, lessons or other events on subjects of
interest with people all over the world. These encounters
are for interaction, feedback and stimulus. They should be
enjoyable and not stressful. They can vary from serious
forums on current affairs, business or academic subjects, to
more relaxed social exchanges.
A formal language school can also offer excellent interaction
and feedback, but one word of caution is necessary. Too
many people think that simply attending language school
will enable them to learn a language. In fact, whether you
are attending formal classes or not, you will do most of your
learning on your own. You direct your own listening and
reading activity. You work on learning and relearning words
and phrases, you train yourself to pronounce correctly, and
you work on your writing.
When you choose the activity that suits your mood, your
studies are more intense than when you are forced to follow
the teacher's agenda.
Create Intensity
Learning a new language is most enjoyable when you are
learning quickly, which requires intensity. In physical
training you often hear the expression “no pain, no gain.”
Only intensely overworking certain muscles will bring about
the increased strength and performance of those muscles.

Casual exercise will not do more than maintain an existing
level of fitness. The same is true of language training. Your
goal should be constant improvement towards fluency, not
just maintenance.
You need to overwork the language processing capability of
your brain by constant and frequent repetition during a
period of intense learning. This period may vary from three
months to twelve months depending on your starting point
and your goals.
During this period you must maintain a sustained
commitment to your task. Fluency cannot be attained
without sweat forming on your brow. It can still be
enjoyable, but just as in physical exercise, the methods of
training must be efficient. In fact, the greater the efficiency
of the training methods the more intense the learning
experience, and therefore the better the results.
The greatest intensity of learning is achieved when studying
on your own, or when involved in communicating on a
subject of interest with a native speaker. More than five
people in a classroom is distracting and even a one-on-one
class can be stressful if you are not in the mood. The more
you can control what you are studying, and the more you
follow your interests and inclinations, the faster you will
learn.
For this to work, you need structure and discipline in your
studies. You have to study a minimum amount every day.
You have to measure your progress. This kind of structure is
provided at The Linguist.
Invest in the Tools

If you are serious about learning the language, make sure
you equip yourself with the necessary tools and learn how
to use them. This initial investment is more important than
spending time and money on additional language classes.
The time and money you have available for language
learning is limited, so go out and buy reliable listening
equipment to take with you wherever you go. The likelihood
that you will put the required amount of time into listening
increases with the portability of the listening device. Also,
use good earphones.
The effectiveness of listening increases significantly with
good sound quality.
I own a portable CD player, a Minidisc player with small
microphone, a portable audio cassette player, and a small
hand-held computer with built-in MP3 player and
microphone. With this equipment at my disposal, I am ready
no matter what form the audio content comes in. I can buy
cassette language systems and CD based audio books,
download MP3 files, or record meetings, interviews and
lectures for later listening. I can also record my own voice
and upload files to a computer.
Choose what works for you. Decide how much you want to
spend, and what the greatest source of your audio material
will be. Language content from the Internet can be
downloaded into MP3 players or MD players. Most new
computers let you burn CDs. Most audio material you buy
today is in CD or cassette form, but the quality and shelf-life
of CDs is better than cassettes and in language learning,
sound quality is important. The MP3 player and MD player
have the great advantage of being very small with high
quality sound. But the choice is up to you.

To be a cost effective linguist today, you will need a
personal computer and high speed Internet access. If you do
not have this access at home you should identify a hub you
can use for downloading and accessing content. This can be
a library, your school, a friend or an Internet Café. Very
often this hub will offer instructions on how to access the
content and how to download.
You will also need a good online or offline software
dictionary which gives you instant explanations in the
language you are studying, as well as the all-important
translation into your own language. Contrary to the view of
some language teachers, I have always preferred to see the
translation of a new word into my own language, rather than
decipher an explanation in the language I was learning.
However, a dictionary can only provide you with a partial
meaning of a new word. It will take time and significant
exposure to the word in a natural context before you acquire
a wider sense of the meaning of the word and the
confidence to use it properly. You can also expect to forget
whatever you look up in a dictionary pretty quickly. That is
why it is so important to save all new words into a system
like The Linguist's database for further review and study, in
conjunction with your reading and listening.
Before you decide where you are going to study a language,
make sure you are equipped to succeed as an independent
language learner!
Set Clear Goals
To succeed in most activities you need to set goals. How
much time are you willing to commit each day, and for how
long?

What skill level do you want to achieve? How many words
do you know and how many do you want to know? How
fluent do you want to be? Do you need to participate in
business meetings in the new language? Do you need to
follow university lectures? How close to native level do you
want your pronunciation to be? Do you need to write
business reports or school reports in the new language?
You may decide that you can commit to two hours per day
for a period of six months or one hour a day for twelve
months. This degree of commitment would mean a total of
more than three hundred fifty hours and should produce a
language
breakthrough if the study methods are effective. During this
period of concentration, you will have to sacrifice familiar
activities in order to fulfill your commitment. If you develop
the habit of listening at various times during the day, doing
some casual reading, watching television, spending time in
more dedicated study and having regular conversation
sessions on subjects of interest, you can achieve the
required level of intensity.
The Linguist will help you diagnose your needs and set your
goals. We will also measure your progress towards your
goals.
But in the end you will be the one to know when you have
reached your target. You will know how good your
pronunciation is, or how comfortable you are in reading or
expressing yourself. You will know when you are a linguist.
You will then realize that you are never really satisfied with
your level. You will continue to want to improve, but by
pursuing your own interest in the language, the learning
process will always be enjoyable and satisfying.

A Final Word
In 2003 Mike Weir won the Masters Golf Tournament,
probably the most prestigious golf tournament in the world.
To defeat the world's best golfers required skill,
determination and hard work over a long period of time. But
above all it required an attitude. When Mike Weir was
thirteen years old he wrote a letter to Jack Nicklaus, at that
time the world's number one golfer. Mike, who was a left-
handed golfer, asked Jack if he should continue left-handed,
or try to switch to being right-handed, since almost all
successful professional golfers were right-handed. Jack was
gracious enough to reply, saying that Mike should stay left-
handed: in other words he should follow what was natural
for him. (Zhuangzi, the Taoist philosopher who inspired our
crooked tree logo, would have said the same!) What
impressed me about this story is Mike's commitment. He
believed in himself and felt it quite appropriate to ask the
world's greatest player (whom he did not know) to resolve
an important question for him. He dared to write to the king
of golf, and the king sent him an answer. Powered with that
sort of attitude, Mike was able to overcome many obstacles
and finally achieve greatness in his chosen field of
endeavour.
You have read about the attitudes necessary for successful
language learning. You have a description of effective
techniques for acquiring language skills. You know what has
to be done. Now it is up to you to believe in yourself and do
it.
If you create the right habits, you will succeed. The rewards
will more than compensate your efforts. Once you start
learning languages you will not stop with just one. At The

Linguist we will be continuing to add languages, while at the
same time working to improve the range of content and
learning tools we offer to our members.
Come and join us! I look forward to getting to know you at
www.thelinguist.com.
APPENDIX
For Immigrants and Potential Immigrants to Canada I
was initially motivated to write this book after seeing the
difficulty that many recent immigrants experienced in
Canada because of a lack of language and cultural skills.
The following background on Canada may be useful to you if
you are living in Canada as an immigrant or if you are
contemplating emigrating to Canada.
Immigrant receiving countries like Canada and the United
States consist of people whose families have come from
many countries. Language becomes a very important
unifying force and a marker of identity in these countries.
A History of English Speaking Canada
English speaking Canada is a new nation that has
undergone constant evolution. The first inhabitants of the
area that is now Canada came from Asia over 10,000 years
ago and eventually spread out over all of North and South
America. In Canada, these people were nomadic in some
areas and settled farmers and fishermen in other areas. In
the millennia that followed, nobody knows for sure how
many different people may have visited North America.
Certainly the Vikings did about one thousand years ago, and

fishermen from Western Europe starting coming to the area
off the East Coast of Canada about six hundred years ago to
fish for cod. In Eastern Canada, small permanent
settlements of English and French speaking people from
Europe eventually expanded across the North American
continent, driven by the search for furs and by the desire to
find farmland.
Canada became a colony of the British Empire in 1763. Soon
after, as a result of the American Revolution, Canada
received a major influx of Americans who wished to remain
loyal to the British Crown: the United Empire Loyalists. This
group determined how Canadians speak English today. The
majority of immigrants to Canada for the first half of the
19th century were British Protestants who reinforced strong
feelings of loyalty to the British Empire, opposition to the
United States, and a sense of rivalry with the entrenched
French speaking Catholic society of Quebec. The original
constitution of Canada was known as the British North
America Act.
Later immigration from other source countries caused
attitudes to evolve. Most Canadians have gradually come to
accept the increasingly varied makeup of Canada's evolving
mainstream society. But still Canadians cherish common
symbols, institutions and a way of life that are specific to
Canada. They expect most immigrants to accept this
Canadian way of life as a condition of making Canada their
home.
The northern environment, the legacy of the aboriginal
peoples, lingering Imperial British attachments, rivalry and
accommodation with the French-Canadians, and the ever-
changing influence of foreign-born people have all
contributed to the evolution of English Canadian identity.

The image of the northern landscape remains a strong
identification Canadians have with their country, even if
most Canadians live in cities today. The landscape paintings
of the early 20th century “Group of Seven” painters, and
symbols like the Maple Leaf and the Beaver are examples of
this identification with the rugged natural environment as
distinctively Canadian.
Ice hockey has been elevated to the rank of a national
ritual.
(Not all Canadians like hockey, but everyone recognizes the
association of hockey with Canada.) It is appropriate that
the hockey teams which created patriotic pride in Canada
by winning gold for Canada at the 2002 Winter Olympic
games were composed of players with very diverse
ancestries. To most Canadians, these players are just
Canadian hockey heroes. The question of the ancestral
origin of players with names like Yzerman, Iginla, Sakic,
Kariya, Gretzky, Jovanovski, Sunohara, or Wickenheiser is
simply not important.
The cement that holds English speaking Canadians together
is the English language itself. Even though Canadian culture
is now truly an amalgamation of influences from all over the
world, the English-Canadian language is uniform across the
country and is less varied than the pronunciation found in
Britain, the US or the Southern Hemisphere. Canadian
English is a very useful version of English for non-native
speakers. It is easily understood and not out of place
anywhere in the world.
The Immigrant Experience
English speaking Canada does not have a powerful

distinctiveness. The ever-increasing variety of people who
make up English Canada has meant the decline in
importance of British Protestantism, the British Empire and
British institutions. There is no longer a typical Canadian
name, nor ethnic origin, nor religion. This lack of clear
markers is what makes Canadian culture so accessible. Even
the relative neutrality of the Canadian accent and the lack
of regional accents make it easier for newcomers to blend
into Canadian society.
In contrast, older established national groups in the world
are more easily identified by common family names or
identifiable physical appearance. People from these older
cultures take pride in imagining their history going back for
hundreds or thousands of years. The new immigrant from
these older societies can have trouble stepping outside the
ancestral culture which has such a powerful appeal. Often,
in the mind of the new immigrant, the reality of Canadian
life is contrasted with an idealized version of the society left
behind. This can make the immigrant reluctant to join in the
new language and society.
The children of immigrants, on the other hand, are typically
more interested in just fitting into their new surroundings
and new identity, and they often learn English very quickly.
They become native speakers of the new language.
Human beings feel closest to family and kin. Beyond
the family, however, the nature of the “in group” can
vary depending on circumstances. Anthony Smith,
who directed my older son Eric’s post graduate study
at the London School of Economics, wrote an
important book entitled National Identity
(Penguin). In it, Smith distinguishes two visions of
national identity, which have been promoted by

ruling and intellectual elites in modern times.
In one vision of national identity:
…nations must have a measure of common culture
and a civic
ideology, a set of common understandings and
aspirations,
sentiments and ideas, that bind the population
together in
their homeland. The task of ensuring a common
public, mass
culture has been handed over to the agencies of
popular
socialization, notably the public system of education
and the
mass media.
In the other vision of national identity:
Whether you stayed in your community or emigrated
to
another, you remained ineluctably, organically, a
member of
the community of your birth and were forever
stamped by it. A
nation, in other words, was first and foremost a
community of

common descent….or rather presumed descent.
Canada is of the first kind. As the nature of human
societies continues to evolve, I am convinced that
attempts to freeze people's identity based on their
ancestry will prove vain.
When you emigrate, you are making the decision that your
descendants will change national identity. Your children and
grandchildren may learn to speak the ancestral language
and develop an interest in the ancestral culture, but this is
not certain. If they do so, it will likely be as people who are
culturally Canadian.
The difference in attitude between those of the older
generation of immigrants who want to maintain their
traditions and their local-born children who want to focus on
their new country can create a generation gap. I
experienced this in my own family when I was growing up.
While it is normal for people to be proud of their origins, it is
just as normal for people to want to belong to the society in
which they live. National identity is not automatically
passed on to the next generation, from parents to children.
It has never been that simple. Traditional nationalism is
created by ideology, mythology and politically motivated
history writing. National myths offer images of ancestral
figures from which all subsequent members of the
community are supposedly descended. People are
persuaded that their identity can be projected back to these
ancestors, who, if they existed at all in reality, were
certainly different from their present day descendants.
Canadian identity is not like this, since it draws its strength
from the present and a belief in a common future.

Over the last one hundred fifty years the foreign-born share
of Canada's population has usually been over fifteen percent
of the total. Historically, immigrants have at first
encountered difficulty finding appropriate employment and
fully fitting into society. Typically these problems disappear
with time and by the second generation the “newcomers”
are Canadian in outlook.
Job Opportunities
In the past, there were job opportunities for immigrants in
agriculture, mining, forestry or other manual occupations.
Today this is not the case. Ninety-four percent of immigrants
settle in metropolitan areas, especially in Canada's three
largest cities. The well-paid manual jobs are fewer and more
difficult to find. On the other hand, there is an anticipated
shortfall of skilled workers as the present baby-boom
generation retires. In some areas and job categories, this
shortfall is already here.
For the kind of skilled professionals required in health
services, in education, and in other modern sectors of the
economy, a comfortable knowledge of English is essential. A
technical expert or engineer, no matter how well qualified,
needs to work with other people and provide leadership.
This requires familiarity with the local culture. It is
impossible to overstate the importance of Canadian
language and cultural skills in the workplace.
The point is sometimes made that immigrants bring with
them the language and cultural skills of their homeland
which can create commercial opportunities for Canada. This
statement is true only to a very limited extent. In fact the
overwhelming majority of jobs are oriented towards the

Canadian and North American market, and to a lesser
degree to the other major economies of the world in Europe
and Japan. If you count only on employment using your
original language and culture, you are severely limiting your
opportunities.
By and large, employers are looking for people who not only
understand written English, but who are comfortable
communicating in English, and who can relate confidently
with co-workers and customers. This requires competent
English language skills and familiarity with Canadian
mainstream culture. In reality, most jobs require people who
can perform comfortably in the common language and
culture.
Unfortunately, a significant percentage of the recently
arrived skilled independent immigrants have difficulties
communicating in English. This is not different from the
situation fifty years ago when my parents came to Canada.
This phenomenon costs the individual immigrants and the
Canadian economy. It inhibits the full utilization of these
people's skills in a productive way. What is different today is
that immigrants tend to concentrate in a few cities, with the
result that there is a growing number of children born in
Canada to immigrant families who also have difficulty
speaking English.
At present, employers are not involved in the immigrant
recruitment and settlement process. It is left to the
Government Immigration Department to arbitrarily fix the
number of immigrants desired and then try as hard as
possible to achieve that goal. Immigration officials
determine who they think is likely to find employment in
Canada, but they are not very successful in this selection
process.

Many of the recent skilled immigrants have difficulty finding
appropriate employment. They often turn to various
government funded social service organizations for
assistance.
The result is a large number of frustrated and disappointed
immigrants who leave stable employment and a
comfortable social status behind in their country of origin to
find underemployment in Canada.
Take charge of your own language learning and don't rely on
others to teach you. An independent, self-reliant and
proactive approach to your language learning will help you
in all aspects of integrating into your new country. This will
be reflected in a more positive attitude generally that will
help you find and keep good employment. It is your English
communication skills, not your test results, that will help you
become comfortably established in your new country.

