

Trigonometry 
Problems
Translated 
for People 
who don’t 
Speak
Math!!
by W.
Michael
Kelley

ALPHA BOOKS
Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA •
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario
M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) • Penguin Books
Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England • Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s
Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.) • Penguin Group
(Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a
division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.) • Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India • Penguin
Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore, Auckland 1311, New
Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.) • Penguin Books (South Africa)
(Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa •
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Copyright © 2012 by W. Michael Kelley
All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher. No patent
liability is assumed with respect to the use of the information contained herein.
Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Neither is
any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of information
contained herein. For information, address Alpha Books, 800 East 96th Street,
Indianapolis, IN 46240.
ISBN: 978-1-61564-269-4 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2012933501
14   13   12      8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
Interpretation of the printing code: The rightmost number of the first series of
numbers is the year of the book‘s printing; the rightmost number of the second
series of numbers is the number of the book‘s printing. For example, a printing
code of 12-1 shows that the first printing occurred in 2012.
Printed in the United States of America
Note: This publication contains the opinions and ideas of its author. It is
intended to provide helpful and informative material on the subject matter
covered. It is sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not
engaged in rendering professional services in the book. If the reader requires
personal assistance or advice, a competent professional should be consulted.
The author and publisher specifically disclaim any responsibility for any liability,
loss, or risk, personal or otherwise, which is incurred as a consequence, directly
or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of this book.

Most Alpha books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk purchases
for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising, or educational use. Special books,
or book excerpts, can also be created to fit specific needs.
For details, write: Special Markets, Alpha Books, 375 Hudson Street, New York,
NY 10014.
ALWAYS LEARNING
PEARSON

Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Angles and Arcs [Pairs of rays and pieces of
circle]
Standard Position [Angles, front and center]
Measuring Angles [Degrees, radians, rotations]
Converting Between Angle Measurements [Especially
degrees and radians]
Complementary and Supplementary Angles [Sums of
90° and 180°]
Arc Length [To measure arcs, you first measure angles]
Chapter 2: Right Triangle Trigonometry [Including all
six trig functions]
Pythagorean Theorem [a2 + b2 = c2]
Trigonometric Functions [sin, cos, tan, cot, sec, and
csc]
Trigonometric Tables [When “close enough” is good
enough]
Calculator-Generated Trigonometric Values [So long,
trig tables]
Chapter 3: The Unit Circle [A little circle, a lot of
memorizing]
45°–45°–90° Triangles [
]
30°–60°–90° Triangles [
]
Cosine and Sine in the First Quadrant [As easy as 
]

Common Angles on the Unit Circle [And their
cosine/sine values]
Chapter 4: Trigonometric Values of General Angles
[Think outside the unit circle]
Reference Angles [Shrink rays that turn any angles into
acute angles]
Coterminal Angles [Two angles that end at the same
ray]
Angles Beyond the Unit Circle [Calculating trig values
you didn’t memorize]
Chapter 5: Graphing Sine and Cosine Functions [Get
on the right wavelength]
Periodic Functions [Graphs that repeat and sort of look
like a heartbeat]
Transforming Periodic Graphs [Move, stretch, squish,
and flip graphs]
Sine Functions [Oscillating between –1 and 1, until you
transform them]
Cosine Functions [The sine graph schooched slightly to
the left]
Chapter 6: Graphing Other Trigonometric Functions
[Tan, cot, sec, and csc]
Tangent [Large function values, limited domain]
Cotangent [A reflection of tangent]
Secant [U-shaped pieces that shoot off of the cosine
graph]
Cosecant [Similar to secant, but based off of sine]
Chapter 7: Basic Trigonometric Identities
[Simplifyingtrig statements]
Reciprocal and Cofunction Identities [Cos is reciprocal
of sec, cofunction of sin]

Negative Identities [What happens when you plug in –
x?]
Pythagorean Identities [For example, cos2 x + sin2 x =
1]
Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine and Cosine
[Expanding things like sin (x + y)]
Chapter 8: Advanced Trigonometric Identities
[“Advanced” means “brimming with fractions”]
Double-Angle Formulas [Ditch the 2s in sin 2x and cos
2y]
Power-Reducing Formulas [Rewrite squared functions
using double angles]
Half-Angle Formulas [Win half an argument by being
radical]
Product-to-Sum Identities [Add or subtract, instead of
multiplying, trig functions]
Sum-to-Product Identities [Do the opposite of the last
section]
Tangent Identities [Sum/difference, double/half-angle,
and power-reducing formulas]
Chapter 9: Inverse Trigonometric Functions [Arccosine,
arcsine, arctangent]
Graphs of Inverse Trigonometric Functions [Including
domain and range]
General and Exact Solutions [One vs. many answers]
Chapter 10: Simple Trigonometric Equations [Algebra
1, but with angles]
Linear Equations [Add, subtract, multiply, and divide
both sides by the same thing]
Zero Products [Factoring]
Quadratic Formula [When you can’t factor]
Functions of Multiple Angles [Instead of cos x = 1, solve
cos 5x = 1]

Chapter 11: Advanced Trigonometric Equations
[Trickier equations = clever-er solutions]
Square Roots [Eliminating squares instead of factoring
them]
Rational Equations [Fractions with trigonometric
numerators and denominators]
Pythagorean Identities [Convert one trig function into
another]
Squaring [With squares come Pythagorean identities]
Applying Trigonometric Identities [Other than the
Pythagorean identities]
Chapter 12: Area of Triangles and Sectors [Three-sided
polygons and pieces of pie]
Base and Height [Half of base times height]
Trigonometric Area Formulas [SAS, ASA, and AAS
triangle area formulas]
Heron’s Formula [SSS triangle area formula]
Area of a Sector [Surface area of a pizza slice]
Chapter 13: Oblique Triangle Laws [Oblique = Not a
right triangle]
Law of Sines [Given AAS, ASA, and occasionally SSA]
Law of Cosines [Given SAS or SSS]
Chapter 14: Vectors
Plotting Vectors [Using initial and terminal points]
Component Form [Move the initial point to the origin]
Magnitude [How long is the vector?]
Unit Vectors [Vectors with a magnitude of 1]
Chapter 15: Basic Vector Operations [Add/subtract
vectors and multiply by scalars]
Adding and Subtracting Graphically [Head-to-tail
technique]

Adding and Subtracting Algebraically [Calculate <a, b>
+ <c, d>]
Scalar Multiplication [Calculate c <a, b>]
Identifying Components Given Magnitude and Direction
[Instead of coordinates]
Chapter 16: Advanced Vector Operations [All about the
dot product]
Dot Product [Looks like multiplication, but it’s not]
Measuring Angles Between Vectors [The dot product in
disguise]
Orthogonal Vectors [Perpendicular vectors]
Vector Projections and Work [Create specific orthogonal
vectors]
Chapter 17: Parametric Equations and Polar
Coordinates [Different ways to map the coordinate
plane]
Parametric Equations [Two equations that describe one
curve]
Polar Coordinates [Plot points using distances and
angles]
Converting Between Polar and Rectangular Form
[Given points or equations]
Polar Graphs [They can be hard to BEAR (get it?)]
Chapter 18: Trigonometry of Complex Numbers [You
can’t spell “trig” without “i”]
Rectangular Form of Complex Numbers [Add, subtract,
multiply, divide, and graph]
Trigonometric Form of Complex Numbers [The reason
you learned polar coordinates]
Multiplying and Dividing Trigonometric Form [By
plugging into one of two formulas]
De Moivre’s Theorem [Raising complex numbers to
powers]

Roots of Complex Numbers [Square roots, cube roots,
etc.]
Appendix A: Table of Trigonometric Values [Nine pages
that answer the question “Why do I need a calculator?”]
Appendix B: The Unit Circle [Just in case you didn’t
memorize it]
Appendix C: Formulas and Identities [To memorize or
reference]
Index

Introduction
Are you in a Trigonometry class? Are you trying to help a
friend or loved one with a math class but discovering that
you don’t remember everything you used to know about
math? Are you the curious sort who used to dislike math but
now want to figure it out, once and for all?
If you answered YES to any of these questions, then you
NEED this book. Here’s why:
Fact #1: The best way to develop trigonometry
skills is by working out trigonometry problems.
There’s no denying it. If you could figure this class out
just by reading the textbook or taking good notes in
class, everybody would pass with flying colors.
Unfortunately, the harsh truth is that you have to buckle
down and work problems out until your fingers are
numb.
Fact #2: Most textbooks only tell you WHAT the
answers to their practice problems are but not
HOW to do them!
Sure your textbook may have 175 problems for every
topic, but most textbooks only give you the answers.
That means if you don’t get the answer right you’re
totally out of luck! Knowing you’re wrong is no help at
all if you don’t know WHY you’re wrong.
Math textbooks sit on a huge throne, like the Great and
Powerful Oz and say, “Nope, try again,” and you do.
Over and over, usually getting the problem wrong. What

a delightful way to learn! (Let’s not even get into why
they only tell you the answers to the odd problems.
Does that mean the book’s actual AUTHOR didn’t even
feel like working out the even ones?)
Fact #3: Even when math books try to show you
the steps for a problem, they do a lousy job.
Math people love to skip steps. You’ll be following along
fine with an explanation and then all of a sudden BAM,
you’re lost. You’ll think to yourself, “How did they do
that?” or “Where the heck did that 42 come from? It
wasn’t there in the last step!”
Why do math textbooks insist that in order to work out a
problem on page 200, you’d better know pages 1
through 199 like the back of your hand? You don’t want
to spend the rest of your life on homework! You just
want to know when you’re supposed to use the law of
sines and when you’re supposed to use the law of
cosines, which you’ll learn in Chapter 13.
Fact #4: Reading lists of facts is fun for a while,
but then it gets old. Enough with this list—let’s
cut to the chase.
Just about every single kind of trigonometry problem
you could possibly run into is in here. After all, this book
is HUMONGOUS! If 750 problems aren’t enough, then
you’ve got some kind of crazy math hunger, my friend,
and I’d seek professional help.
This practice book was good at first, but to make it
GREAT, I went through and worked out all the problems
and took notes in the margins when I thought something
was confusing or needed a little more explanation. I also

drew little skulls next to the hardest problems, so you’d
know not to freak out if they were too challenging. After
all, if you’re working on a problem and you’re totally
stumped, isn’t it better to know that the problem is
SUPPOSED to be hard? It’s reassuring, at least for me.
All of my notes are off to the side like this and point
to the parts of the book I’m trying to explain.
I think you’ll be pleasantly surprised by how detailed the
answer explanations are, and I hope you’ll find my little
notes helpful along the way. Call me crazy, but I think that
people who WANT to learn trigonometry and are willing to
spend the time drilling their way through practice problems
should actually be able to figure the problems out and learn
as they go, but that’s just my 2¢.
Good luck and make sure to come visit my website at
www.calculus-help.com. If you feel so inclined, drop me an
e-mail and give me your 2¢. (Not literally, though—real
pennies clog up the internet pipes.)
—Mike Kelley

Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Alpha Books, who continue to support The
Humongous Books, even as the publishing industry
redefines itself in an era of electronic books. The first
Humongous Book was released in 2006, and a mere six
years later, the series is six books strong!
Thanks to Lisa Kelley and Dave Herzog, who have tirelessly
worked for nearly a year to proofread, edit, and check all of
these problems as I developed them.

Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be or are
suspected of being trademarks or service marks have been
appropriately capitalized. Alpha Books and Penguin Group
(USA) Inc. cannot attest to the accuracy of this information.
Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as
affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.

Dedication
As always, this book is dedicated to the four most important
people in my life, my family.
For my wife Lisa, who not only supported me emotionally
during this book, she also supported me grammatically. Who
knew that she had a secret proofreading/copy editing
superpower? You are the only reason I make it through each
and every day. Without you I would be lost and (now) full of
spelling errors.
For my son Nicholas, who loves sports, video games,
reading comic books with Dad, and sneaking up on birds.
(That last one is new.) You’re growing up to be more than
just a well-behaved kid. You’re becoming a young man I am
incredibly proud of.
For my daughter Erin, the fastest girl in the continental
United States and the most generous person I know. You’d
willingly give up everything you have to make someone else
happy, and it still warms my heart that you have to sit by
Dad at every meal.
For my daughter Sara, who loves Curly from the Three
Stooges, fat penguins, and writing profusely, including her
new book “A New House for Old People.” Since you were a
baby, your smiles have been brilliant bursts of sunshine in
my otherwise cloudy day.

Chapter 1
ANGLES AND ARCS
Pairs of rays and pieces of circle
Trigonometry is the study of triangles and the component pieces
that form triangles: angles and sides. In this chapter, you will
concern yourself with the former, exploring the construction of
angles and the units of measurement that assign values to
angles. Specific attention is given to angles in standard position,
as the coordinate plane is an essential tool in the study of
trigonometry. Finally, you will calculate the lengths of arcs based
upon the angles that form them.
Welcome to trigonometry, an entire course dedicated to
studying one shape: the triangle. If you thought you knew
something about triangles before, well, you had no idea how
much you didn’t know about them. For the next 18
chapters, you and triangles are stuck on a desert island
together, so you may as well start getting to know one
another.
What is a triangle? It’s a two-dimensional shape formed by
three line segments. Specifically, each line segment
intersects the other two segments only at their endpoints. A
point of intersection is called a vertex (the plural is
vertices), and two intersecting sides form an angle. In this
chapter, you learn how to measure an angle using degrees
or radians (or rotations, if you are feeling sassy), and how to
convert between degrees and radians.
The big takeaway from this chapter is understanding what
radians are, because you’ll be using them a lot.
Standard Position
Angles, front and center

Note: Problems 1.1–1.3 refer to the diagram below,
triangle ABC.
1.1    Identify the sides and vertices of the triangle.
A triangle is a two-dimensional (or plane) figure that
consists of three line segments intersecting only at
their endpoints. Line segments are named according
to the points at which they begin and end, so the
sides of this triangle are 
. The vertices are
the three points at which the segments intersect: A,
B, and C.
These little bars look like line segments, which is
why they appear over the names of the segments.
When you refer to the LENGTHS of line segments,
you don’t use the bars: AB, BC, and AC.
Note: Problems 1.1–1.3 refer to the diagram
illustrated in Problem 1.1, triangle ABC.
1.2    List three different names for the largest angle of
the triangle.
The largest angle of the triangle appears at the
bottom of the diagram and has vertex B. One valid
name of the angle is simply B; angles may be
named using their vertices as long as the angle you
are describing is clear. For example, if multiple

angles share the same vertex, then simply
identifying the vertex is not enough information.
In these cases, you name an angle using three
points in a specific order: the first point lies on one
side of the angle, the second point is the vertex of
the angle, and the third point lies on the other side
of the angle. Therefore, ABC and CBA are also valid
names for the largest angle of this triangle.
To draw angle ABC, draw a straight line connecting A
to B, and then draw a straight line from B to C. The
vertex has to be the middle letter in the name of the
angle.
Note: Problems 1.1–1.3 refer to the diagram
illustrated in Problem 1.1, triangle ABC.
1.3    Are any of the angles in this triangle in standard
position? Why or why not?
An angle in standard position satisfies the following
conditions:
One side of the angle overlaps the positive
x-axis on the coordinate plane.
The vertex of the angle overlaps the origin
of the coordinate plane, the point at which
the horizontal and vertical axes intersect.
Therefore, angles in standard position must be, by
definition, drawn on the coordinate plane. Because
this triangle is not plotted on a coordinate plane,
none of its angles can be in standard position.

1.4    Draw an angle RST that is in standard position and
explain your answer.
The diagram below represents one solution to this
problem, though there are infinitely many correct
answers. However, all answers must conform to two
requirements. As Problem 1.3 explains, an angle in
standard position has one side that lies along the
positive x-axis. In other words, it overlaps the right
half of the horizontal axis, like side 
 in the diagram
below. Note that the sides of angles in standard
position are rays, which begin at a point (ray 
begins at point S), pass through a second specified
point (in this case T), and continue in that direction.
The other characteristic of an angle in standard
position is a vertex that lies on the origin of the
coordinate plane, the point with coordinates (0,0) at
which the x- and y-axes intersect. Note that point S,
the vertex of angle RST, lies on the origin.

Because the two conditions (regarding one side of
the angle and its vertex) are met, you conclude that
angle RST is in standard position.
1.5    Is angle XYZ, illustrated below, in standard position?
Why or why not?
Angle XYZ meets one requirement of an angle in
standard position, because side 
 lies along the
positive x-axis. However, the second condition is not
met; the vertex Y does not lie on the origin of the
coordinate plane. Therefore, angle XYZ is not in
standard position.
If you were to slide the angle to the left, keeping
side 
 on the positive x-axis, so that point Y
overlapped the origin, the result would be angle XYZ
in the diagram below, which is in standard position.
Any angle may be placed in standard position if it is
rotated and/or shifted properly.
Or you could just draw it in standard position to start
with and save yourself the trouble.

Note: Problems 1.6–1.8 refer to angle CDE in the
diagram below. Note that angle CDE is in standard
position.
1.6    Identify the initial and terminal sides of angle CDE.
The initial and terminal sides of an angle are,
respectively, the sides at which the angles begin
(initiate) and end (terminate). All angles in standard
position share the same initial side, which lies along
the positive x-axis. Therefore, the initial side of
angle CDE is 
. The remaining side of the angle is
the terminal side: 
.
Make sure to name the sides of the angle correctly.
Unlike line segments, whose endpoints may be
reversed when identifying a segment, the first point
in a ray must be the vertex of the angle, which lies

on the origin when an angle is in standard position.
Notice that D (the vertex of angle CDE) appears first
in both of the rays named above.
Note: Problems 1.6–1.8 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.6, which illustrates angle CDE in
standard position.
1.7    Identify two angles in the coordinate plane that
share the initial and terminal sides identified in
Problem 1.6.
According to Problem 1.6, the initial side of the
angle is 
 and the terminal side is 
. Imagine that
the angle is formed by a single ray, anchored at the
origin, that begins along the positive x-axis and then
rotates until it reaches its terminal position. Because
you may rotate clockwise or counterclockwise from
the initial side, you produce one of the two angles
illustrated below.
Rotating counterclockwise produces a smaller angle
(represented by the arrowed arc in the left portion of
the diagram above) than rotating clockwise. Both of
these angles share the same name: CDE.

Furthermore, both of the angles share the same
terminal side, so they are described as “coterminal.”
In trig, only the terminal side matters—not how you
got to that terminal side. Both of the angles in this
problem will have the same trigonometric values
(which you’ll learn about in Chapters 2 and 3), even
though they’re not the same size.
Note: Problems 1.6–1.8 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.6, which illustrates angle CDE in
standard position.
1.8    Draw an angle in standard position whose measure
is the opposite of angle CDE.
One of the fundamental assumptions of Euclidean
geometry is that all angles have a positive angle
measurement. However, angles assigned to the
coordinate plane and placed in standard position
allow you to measure in a more precise manner. In
Problem 1.7, you identify two different angles with
the same initial and terminal sides; the only
difference between the two angles is the direction
you travel, either clockwise or counterclockwise.
If you travel in a counterclockwise direction from the
initial side of an angle to its terminal side, the angle
formed has a positive measurement. Alternately, if
you travel in a clockwise direction, the angle has a
negative measurement. Assume, for the moment,
that angle CDE is formed by traveling
counterclockwise, beginning at the positive x-axis,
rotating through the first quadrant, and coming to
rest in the second quadrant.

The x- and y-axes divide the plane into four sections
called quadrants, which are numbered like this:
To draw an angle in standard position that has a
measure opposite of angle CDE, you simply rotate in
the opposite direction. In the figure below, angle
FDE is in standard position, so its initial side is the
positive x-axis. The angle is formed by rotating
clockwise through the fourth quadrant and coming
to rest in the third quadrant at its terminal side, 
.
This angle has the same measure as angle CDE, but
it is negative rather than positive. Therefore, the
angles have opposite measures.
Measuring Angles

Degrees, radians, rotations
Note: Problems 1.9–1.11 refer to angle ABC in the
diagram below. The angle’s initial side and terminal
side both lie on the positive x-axis.
1.9    Express the measure of angle ABC in revolutions.
According to the arrowed arc at the center of this
diagram, angle ABC begins at the positive x-axis,
rotates exactly once around the coordinate plane,
and terminates where it began, at the positive x-
axis. To visualize this angle, stand up and point at a
specific spot on the wall. Then, while standing in the
same location, slowly turn in the counterclockwise
direction, keeping your arm straight in front of you
as you turn. Once you have turned all the way back
around to your original starting point, your finger
will once again point at that initial location you
chose.
If you start at a fixed ray, rotate counterclockwise,
and then end at the precise moment you re-

encounter the initial ray, you have revolved exactly
one time. Angle ABC represents exactly one full
revolution about the origin in the coordinate plane.
Therefore, ABC measures exactly 1 revolution.
Note: Problems 1.9–1.11 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.9, in which both the initial and terminal
sides of angle ABC lie on the positive x-axis.
1.10    Express the measure of angle ABC in degrees.
Problem 1.9 explains that angle ABC measures
exactly one full revolution about the origin in the
coordinate plane. Therefore, angle ABC measures
360°, which is read “360 degrees.”
If someone changes their mind about something
and does the exact opposite, you may call that
“pulling a 180.” Half of one revolution is 360° ÷ 2 =
180°, so “pulling a 180” means facing the opposite
of your original direction. (A 180° angle in standard
position has a terminal side on the negative x-axis.)
Note: Problems 1.9–1.11 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.9, in which both the initial and terminal
sides of angle ABC lie on the positive x-axis.
1.11    Express the measure of angle ABC in radians.
Degrees are used more commonly than revolutions
to measure angles, and many students intuitively
understand the concept of degrees. Another unit of
angle measurement, called the radian, is not as
innately familiar to new trigonometry students, but
it is nonetheless an important concept. In fact, most

contemporary textbooks use radian measurements
significantly more than degree measurements.
In Problem 1.12, you are introduced to the radian in
greater detail. For this problem, however, you need
only understand the radian equivalent for 360°.
Angle ABC represents one full revolution on the
coordinate plane, so it measures 2π radians.
1 revolution = 360° = 2π radians
1.12    Explain what a radian is, and include an illustration
to supplement your definition.
Before you can measure an angle in radians, you
must first understand what a radian is. Consider the
following diagram, which depicts an angle QCP in
standard position and a circle centered at C, the
origin of the coordinate plane. Note that 
 and 
are radii of the circle, so both have length r.
Because they are radii, those segments share one
common endpoint (the center C) and each have one
other endpoint that lies on the circle itself. Those
points, Q and P, are boundaries of a small arc lying
entirely in the first quadrant: 
.

Because the vertex of angle QCP is also the center
of the circle, QCP is a “central angle” of the circle;
when the sides of a central angle intersect a circle
to define an arc (like 
 in this diagram), the angle is
said to “subtend” the arc. In other words, an angle
subtends an arc when its sides slice into a circle,
identifying a specific piece of the circle that is
bounded by the points at which the angle’s sides
intersect that circle.
In this illustration, angle QCP intersects circle C in a
very specific way. The length of the subtended arc 
 is exactly equal to the radius of the circle.
Therefore, angle QCP measures exactly 1 radian.
Roughly speaking, a radian measures approximately
57.29578°, so there are far fewer radians in 1
rotation than there are degrees. One rotation is
equal to more than 6, but less than 7 radians:
In the diagram below, each of the shaded central
angles has a measure of 1 radian. Notice that 6 full

radians fit within 1 rotation about the coordinate
plane, with an additional angle of approximately
0.28319 radians remaining.
1.13    Apply the circumference formula for a circle (C =
πd), in which d is the diameter of a circle with
circumference C, to justify your answer to Problem
1.11.
According to Problem 1.11, 1 rotation is equal to 2π
radians. Whereas Problem 1.12 visually
demonstrates that 1 revolution is equal to slightly
more than 6 radians, it does not offer convincing
proof that the number of radians is exactly equal to
2π. To verify this value, you need to apply the
circumference formula for a circle, C = πd, where d
is the diameter. Recall from geometry that the

diameter of a circle is twice the length of a radius: d
= 2r. Apply the substitution property to replace d
with 2r in the circumference formula.
As Problem 1.12 explains, a central angle measures
1 radian when it subtends an arc that is the same
length as the radius of a circle. Therefore, dividing
the circumference of the circle C by the radius r
calculates the exact number of arcs (with length r)
that the circle can be divided into.
This is like dividing 50 pieces of candy by 4 to see
how many pieces of candy 4 children would get if
you attempted to divide the 50 pieces evenly
among them.
Every circle can be divided into approximately
6.28319 arcs that are the same length as the radius
of that circle. Each of those arcs corresponds to a
central angle that measures 1 radian. Therefore, 1
rotation is equal to 2π ≈ 6.28319 radians. Note that
it is common to leave a radian measure in terms of
π rather than expressing it as a decimal (such as
6.28319); radians left in terms of π are more

accurate than answers expressed a finite number of
decimal places.
1.14    Angle XYZ is in standard position in the diagram
below. Express its measure in rotations, degrees, and
radians.
Angle XYZ has an initial side lying on the positive x-
axis and a terminal side that lies on the positive y-
axis. In other words, it begins and ends at the
horizontal and vertical lines that define the first
quadrant. In Problems 1.9–1.11, you measured
angle ABC, which extends through all four quadrants
of the coordinate plane. Because XYZ in this
diagram extends through exactly one quadrant, it is
exactly one-fourth the size of angle ABC.
To calculate the measure of the angle in revolutions,
degrees, and radians, divide the solutions to
Problems 1.9–1.11 by 4:

This notation is read “The measure of angle ABC is
equal to.”
Angles with terminal sides that lie on the x- or y-
axes (like angle XYZ in this example) are called
“quadrantals.” Their measures are multiples of 90°
(or π/2 radians).
1.15    If an angle measuring 0.45 rotations is in standard
position on the coordinate plane, in what quadrant
does its terminal side lie?
According to Problem 1.14, an angle terminating on
the positive y-axis has a measure of 0.25
revolutions. By extension, the negative x-axis is the
terminal side of an angle measuring 0.5 revolutions,
and the negative y-axis marks an angle of 0.75
revolutions. In the following diagram, 1 revolution is
divided into 8 equal parts to help you visualize
where the terminal sides of angles measured in
revolutions lie in the coordinate plane.

An angle measuring 0.45 rotations extends beyond
the first quadrant (which ends at 90° = 0.25
rotations) but is not large enough to extend beyond
the second quadrant (which ends at 180° = 0.5
rotations). Therefore, the terminal side of the angle
lies in the second quadrant.
1.16    If an angle measuring 225° is in standard position
on the coordinate plane, in what quadrant does its
terminal side lie?
According to Problem 1.14, the first quadrant spans
90°. Therefore, as you continue to rotate
counterclockwise, each time you pass through
another quadrant, you rotate another 90°. An angle
with a terminal side on the negative x-axis (which
marks the end of the second quadrant) has a
measure of 90° + 90° = 180°. Similarly, an angle
with a terminal side that lies on the negative y-axis
measures 180° + 90° = 270°.

Because 225° is greater than 180° but less than
270°, the terminal side of a 225° angle must lie
within the third quadrant. Consider the diagram
below as further verification of the answer. It
presents the angle in standard position and
illustrates a number of other terminal sides and
their respective angle measurements in all four
quadrants of the coordinate plane.
1.17    If angles measuring 
 radians are in
standard position on the coordinate plane, in what
quadrants do their terminal sides lie?
According to Problem 1.11, 1 complete revolution in
the coordinate plane measures 2π radians.
Reference the diagram below, which illustrates
common angle measurements expressed in radians,
and note that 5π/3 lies in the fourth quadrant.

Frankly, degrees are easier to deal with than radians
in this kind of problem—you just need to know which
degree range an angle falls in: 0–90 (quadrant I),
90–180 (quadrant II), 180–270 (quadrant III), or 270–
360 (quadrant IV). In Problems 1.24–1.30, you learn
how to convert degrees to radians, and because 
 the angle terminates in the fourth quadrant.
An angle in standard position measuring –5π/3
rotates the same distance in the opposite direction,
terminating in the first quadrant, as illustrated in the
following diagram.

1.18    Convert the angle measurement into decimal
degrees: 43° 18′.
Degrees, like hours, are divided into minutes and
seconds. In fact, just as one hour contains 60
minutes and each of those minutes contains 60
seconds, one degree contains 60 minutes and each
of those minutes contains 60 seconds. The
measurement is read “43 degrees 18 minutes.”
A quarter of a degree, like a quarter of an hour, is 15
minutes. In other words, 15 minutes = 0.25 hours or
degrees. The angle in this problem has 18 minutes,
so the decimal part of the answer will be larger than
0.25.

To convert the angle measurement d° m′ s″ (where d
= degrees, m = minutes, and s = seconds),
substitute the values into the following formula:
By dividing the minutes by 60 and the seconds by
3,600, you are converting each into decimal
degrees. The angle in this problem does not contain
any seconds, so you need only substitute d = 43
and m = 18 into the formula.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms, dividing 18 and
60 by 6, their greatest common factor.
Note that the fraction 3/10 is read “three tenths,”
which is equivalent to 0.3.
Or you could just type 3 ÷ 10 into your calculator
and you get 0.3.
Therefore, 
1.19    Convert the angle measurement into a decimal
accurate to the thousandths place: 165° 52’39”.
Substitute d = 165, m = 52, and s = 39 into the
conversion formula 
 introduced in
Problem 1.18.

Because these fractions are more complex than the
fractions in Problem 1.18, it is appropriate to use a
calculator to compute the decimal equivalents.
Include as many decimals as your calculator
provides in each step—rounding any of them before
the final answer may produce an inaccurate answer.
If you’re one of those “Calculators are evil!” sorts,
you might as well start getting over that now. If you
spend all your time getting bogged down with
arithmetic, the concepts of trig get lost in the
process. Embrace technology!
The problem directs you to round to the thousandths
place, which is three digits right of the decimal
point: 165.8775 ≈ 165.878.
Converting Between Angle Measurements
Especially degrees and radians
1.20    Express the angle measurement in degrees: 3
revolutions.
In order to convert from one unit of angle
measurement to another, you multiply it by a
fraction of the following form:

Select a simple angle when you create the fraction.
For example, Problems 1.9–1.10 state that 1
revolution = 360°. This problem instructs you to
convert from revolutions to degrees, so “an angle
measured in the new units” would be 360°, and “the
same angle measured in the old units” would be 1
revolution. Note that the units themselves are
omitted from the fraction:
Thus, to convert 3 revolutions into degrees, you
multiply by 360/1, or more simply, 360.
You conclude that an angle measurement of 3
revolutions is equivalent to an angle measurement
of 1,080°.
1.21    Express the angle measurement in revolutions:
210°.
According to Problem 1.20, to convert from one unit
of measurement to another, you multiply by the
fraction whose numerator is an angle expressed in
the new units to which you are converting and
whose denominator is the same angle expressed in
the old units from which you are converting. In this
case, you are converting from degrees to
revolutions, so the new units are revolutions and the
old units are degrees.
Once again, it is appropriate to select a simple angle
for the equal measurements. Apply the equivalency
relationship 1 revolution = 360°, like you did in
Problem 1.20.

Multiply 210° by the conversion fraction identified
above.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms by dividing its
numerator and denominator by the greatest
common factor of 210 and 360, which is 30.
Can’t remember how to reduce fractions? Check out
Problems 7.27–7.34 in The Humongous Book of
Basic Math and Pre-Algebra Problems.
Therefore, 210° is equal to 
, or 
 revolutions.
That little bar over the 3 means that the digit
repeats infinitely: 0.5833333333333….
1.22    Express the angle measurement in radians: 0.5
revolutions.
As Problems 1.20–1.21 demonstrate, to convert
from one unit of angle measurement to another, you
need to identify a fraction with values representing
the same angle in the old and new units. In this
problem, you are converting from revolutions to
radians, so the new units are radians and the old

units are revolutions. Because radians are typically
expressed as fractions, rather than decimals, you
should rewrite 0.5 as a fraction:
Like Problems 1.20–1.21, you can use the measure
of 1 full revolution about the coordinate plane to
create the necessary conversion fraction: 1
revolution = 2π radians.
Therefore, to convert 1/2 revolutions into radians,
multiply by 2π.
Crossing out these common factors in the
numerator and denominator is just a quick way to
say, “I divided both of these things by 2 to reduce
the fraction.”
1.23    Express the angle measurement in revolutions:
radians.
Apply the same angle measurements that you used
in Problem 1.22 (1 revolution = 2π radians). In this
problem, however, the new units are revolutions and
the old units are radians.

Multiply 7π/4 by the conversion fraction above.
Reduce the product to lowest terms, dividing the
numerator and the denominator by the greatest
common factor (π).
You conclude that 7π/4 radians = 7/8 revolutions.
1.24    Express the angle measurement in radians: 120°.
You’re not going to see many more references to
revolutions from now on, because you will work in
degrees and radians for the remainder of the
book.
Like the preceding problems in this section, you
must create a conversion fraction whose numerator
and denominator are measures of the same angle in
the new and old units, respectively. In this problem,
the new units are radians and the old units are
degrees. According to Problems 1.10–1.11, 1 full
revolution measures 2π radians and 360°.
This fraction should be reduced to lowest terms,
because the numerator and denominator are both
divisible by 2.

Therefore, you should multiply an angle
measurement by π/180 to convert it from degrees to
radians.
And, as you’ll see in Problems 1.27–1.30, you
multiply by 
 to convert from radians to degrees.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms.
Therefore, 120° = 2π/3 radians.
1.25    Express the angle measurement in radians: 270°.
As Problem 1.24 explains, to convert an angle
measurement from degrees to radians, multiply it
by π/180 and (when possible) reduce the resulting
fraction to lowest terms.
You conclude that 270° = 3π/2 radians.

1.26    Express the angle measurement in radians: –330°.
The sign of an angle measurement does not affect
the technique you apply to convert between
different units. Therefore, you should apply the
same technique modeled in Problems 1.24–1.25:
Multiply the angle measurement by π/180. Note that
the radian angle measurement must have the same
sign as the degree angle measurement, so your final
answer will be negative.
You conclude that –330°
 radians.
According to this, the numerator is negative. If a
fraction has a negative numerator or denominator,
the negative sign is usually written in front of the
fraction, like this.
1.27    Express the angle measurement in degrees: 
radians.
To convert from radians to degrees, multiply the
radian angle measurement by 180/π and reduce the
resulting fraction to lowest terms.

Therefore, π/4 radians = 45°. Because most radian
measurements contain π, they are easily
differentiated from degree measurements. (Degree
measurements always include the degree symbol,
as well.) Therefore, the word “radians” is usually
omitted when reporting an angle measurement. In
trigonometry, if no units are written next to an
angle, you should assume that the angle is
measured in radians. Hence, it is more common to
write the answer to this problem as π/4 = 45°.
So you don’t have to write “radians” next to radian
measurements to specify the units.
1.28    Express the angle measurement in degrees:
.
Apply the same procedure demonstrated in Problem 1.27:
Multiply the radian angle measurement by 180/π. Note that
an angle with a negative radian measure will also have a
negative degree measure.
Before you multiply 5 and 180 in the numerator of the
product, reduce the numerator value 180 and the
denominator value 6, which share a greatest common factor
of 6.

You conclude that –5π/6 = –150°.
1.29    Express the angle measurement in degrees:
.
One revolution is equal to 2π. Calculate the value
equivalent to 2π that has a denominator of 4, by
multiplying the numerator and denominator of 2π/1
by 4.
Because 15π/4 > 8π/4, you know that 15π/4 is larger
than 1 revolution. This does not affect the technique
you use to convert the angle measurement—you
still multiply by 180/π, but you should expect a
degree measurement larger than 360°.
Note that 180 and 4 share a greatest common factor
of 4. Eliminate it to reduce the fraction.

1.30    Express the angle measurement in degrees: 2.
All of the other radian measurements so far have
had π in them somewhere, which makes an angle of
2 radians feel weird. Not to worry—you still multiply
by 
 to convert it into degrees.
As Problem 1.27 explains, any angle measurement
written without units is assumed to be expressed in
radians. Therefore, this problem instructs you to
convert 2 radians into degrees.
You conclude that 2 radians = (360/π)°, which is
approximately equal to 114.592°.
Complementary and Supplementary Angles
Sums of 90° and 180°
Note: Problems 1.31–1.33 refer to the diagram
below, in which 
 and 
 are complementary.

1.31    Create an equation that describes the relationship
between the numbered angles in the diagram.
If two angles are complementary, then the sum of
their measures is 90°. In the given diagram, angles
CBD 
 and ABD 
 together form right angle ABC.
Recall from geometry that perpendicular lines (like
the x- and y-axes) form right angles, which measure
90°. Therefore, the sum of the measures of the
angles is 90°:
In the equation above,
 and 
 represent the
measures of  and 
, respectively.
Note: Problems 1.31–1.33 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.31, in which 
 and 
 are
complementary.
1.32    Given m
=31°, calculate m
.
The problem states that 
 and 
 are
complementary, so the sum of their measures is
90°.
+
=90°

Substitute 
=31° into the equation and solve for 
.
Note: Problems 1.31–1.33 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.31, in which 
 and 
 are
complementary.
1.33    Given 
, calculate m
.
This is just like Problem 1.32, but this time you’re
working in radians instead of degrees.
Complementary angles have measures that sum to
90°. This problem expresses the degree measure in
radians, so you should begin by converting 90° to
radians as well.
Problem 1.24 explains this step—how to convert
from degrees to radians.
Therefore, complementary angles measured in
radians have a sum of π/2.
Substitute 
 = π/11 into the equation

Multiply both sides of the equation by 22, the least
common multiple of 2 and 11, to eliminate the
fractions.
Reduce the fractions to lowest terms and solve for
m∠1.
The complement of π/11 is 9π/22.
1.34    In the diagram below, right triangle XYZ has acute
angle Z that measures . Calculate the measure of
the remaining acute angle.
The small square located at Y indicates that 
, so 
 is a right angle. According to a
geometric theorem, the acute angles of a right

triangle are complementary. Recall that acute
angles measure less than 90° (or π/2 radians), so in
this triangle, 
 and 
 are acute.
The measures of the angles in a triangle add up to
180°. If you subtract the 90° right angle from this
total, the two remaining acute angles have to add
up to the remaining 90°, so they are
complementary. For more details, see Problem 7.28
in The Humongous Book of Geometry Problems.
According to the diagram, 
 = π/6. Substitute this
value into the equation above and solve for 
.
Express the fractions in terms of the least common
denominator, 6.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms.
You conclude that 
 = π/3.

Note: Problems 1.35–1.37 refer to the diagram
below, in which 
 are supplementary.
1.35    Create an equation that describes the relationship
between the numbered angles in the diagram.
A pair of angles is supplementary if their measures
have a sum of 180°. In the given diagram, angles 3
and 4 combine to create a straight angle—the line 
. Lines are also described as “straight angles” and
have a measure of 180°. Therefore, angles 3 and 4
are supplementary, and their measures have a sum
of 180°.
Note: Problems 1.35–1.37 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.35, in which 
 are supplementary.
1.36    Given 
 = 75°, calculate 
.
According to Problem 1.35, angles 3 and 4 are
supplementary. Therefore, their measures have a
sum of 180°.
Substitute 
 = 75° into the equation and solve for 
.

Note: Problems 1.35–1.37 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.35, in which 
 are supplementary.
1.37    Given 
, calculate 
.
The measures of supplementary angles have a sum
of π.
x
180° = πradians
Substitute 
 = 5π/7 into the equation and solve for
.
1.38    In the diagram below, parallel lines l and m are
intersected by line p, which produces same-side
interior angles 1 and 2. Given 
, calculate 
.

Arrowheads in the middle of lines indicate that the
lines are parallel to each other.
According to a geometric theorem, when two
parallel lines are intersected by a third, non-parallel
line (called the transversal), same-side interior
angles are supplementary. Same-side interior angles
are defined as two angles on the same side of the
transversal located between the parallel lines.
In other words, angles 1 and 2 are same-side
interior angles because they are both on the same
side of p (both are above the line) and both are
located between parallel lines l and m. Therefore,
the angles are supplementary. Note that the
problem presents an angle measured in radians, so
rather than set the sum of the supplementary
angles equal to 180°, you should set it equal to π.
Substitute 
 = π/5 into the equation and solve for 
. Note that you will need to use common

denominators to simplify the result.
1.39    Calculate x in the diagram below. Express the
answer in terms of radians.
Because 
 and 
 combine to form a straight
line—which measures π radians—you can conclude
that the angles are supplementary. Thus, the sum of
their measures is equal to π.
Solve for x.

The answer 
 is also correct.
Arc Length
To measure arcs, you first measure angles
Note: Problems 1.40–1.41 refer to the diagram
below, in which θ is a central angle that subtends 
on a circle with radius r.
1.40    Assuming θ is measured in degrees, express m
in degrees.
This is the Greek letter theta, pronounced “THAY-
tuh.” In trigonometry, angles are often represented
by lowercase Greek letters. Other common letters: α
(alpha) and β (beta).

Recall, from Problem 1.12, that a central angle
subtends an arc when its sides intersect a circle. In
this diagram, central angle θ subtends 
 because
the sides of the angle intersect the circle at points C
and D.
This problem asks you to calculate the measure of
an arc, which is an entirely different task than
calculating the length of the arc. An arc’s measure is
exactly equal to the measure of the central angle
that subtends it. Therefore, because the central
angle subtending 
 measures θ°, you conclude that
the arc has the same measure: m
 = θ°.
Note: Problems 1.40–1.41 refer to the diagram in
Problem 1.40, in which θ is a central angle that
subtends 
 on a circle with radius r.
1.41    Assuming θ is measured in radians, calculate s, the
length of 
.
As Problem 1.40 explains, calculating the measure
of an arc and the length of an arc produce entirely
different results. To calculate the length of an arc,
multiply the length of the radius of the circle by the
measure of the central angle (in radians) that
subtends the arc. In other words, apply the formula
below, in which s represents arc length, r represents
the radius, and θ represents the radian measure of
the central angle.
You conclude that the length 
 of in the given
diagram is equal to r θ. Because no values are given
for either of the variables, you cannot simplify or
expand upon that answer any farther.

1.42    The circumference C of a circle is equal to πd,
where d is the diameter of the circle. Verify this
value using the arc length formula.
According to Problem 1.41, you apply the formula s
= rθ to calculate the length, s, of an arc given the
radius r and the measure of its central angle θ in
radians. The circumference of a circle is simply an
“arc” with a central angle of 2π radians—a full
revolution about the coordinate plane—so substitute
this value into the arc length formula.
The radius of a circle is exactly half the length of its
diameter: r = d/2. Substitute this value into the
formula and simplify.
According to the arc length formula, the
circumference of a circle, the “arc” with a central
angle of 2π and a radius of d/2, is πd. This exactly
matches the circumference formula for a circle, and
therefore verifies that the circumference formula is
true.

1.43    Calculate the length of 
 in the diagram below.
According to the diagram, the radius of 
 is r = 12 and its
central angle is θ = 3π/4. Apply the arc length formula.
1.44    A central angle θ on a circle with diameter 10
subtends an arc of length 
. Calculate the measure
of θ in degrees.

In this problem, you are given s = 35π/6 and d = 10. Recall
that the radius of a circle is half the length of the diameter,
so r = d/2 = 10/2 = 5. Substitute these values into the arc
length formula to calculate θ.
Multiply both sides of the equation by 1/5 to solve
for θ.
Therefore, the central angle is 7π/6. However, the
problem requests the angle measurement in
degrees. Multiply θ by 180/π to convert it into
degrees.
Check the problem when you’re done to make sure
you answer the question it actually asks.

1.45    Calculate the length of 
 in the diagram below,
given the radius of the circle is r = 7.
Note that the arc you are asked to measure is
named with three letters instead of two letters,
which were used to name the other arcs in this
section. This is because the arc measures more than
180° (π radians) and is therefore classified as a
“major arc.”
Major arcs are larger than a semicircle (half of the
circle) and are named using three points. Minor arcs
are smaller than a semicircle and are named using
just the endpoints.
The outer points in the name (X and Z in this case)
still represent the endpoints of the arc. The middle
point indicates which direction around the circle you
travel to get from one endpoint to the other.
Therefore, in the diagram above, 
 refers to the

smaller “minor arc” bounded by X and Z that passes
through W.
To calculate the length of 
, the darkened arc on
the circle, you must first calculate the length of 
,
which is subtended by central angle θ1, and subtract
the length of 
, which is subtended by central
angle θ2.
Express the fractions in terms of the least common
denominator (15) and simplify.

Chapter 2
RIGHT TRIANGLE TRIGONOMETRY
Including all six trig functions
Once you can measure angles using degrees and radians, as
explored in Chapter 1, you are sufficiently equipped to extend
that knowledge into the primary geometric figure of interest in
trigonometry: the triangle. In this chapter, you focus exclusively
on right triangles, and in so doing, you explore how all of the
basic trigonometric functions are defined (both with and without
the use of technology to aid you).
When you think “trigonometry,” you probably think “sine
and cosine.” (And you’re right.) You may not know that once
you calculate sine and cosine values of an angle, you can
calculate four other function values as well: tangent,
cotangent, secant, and cosecant. In this chapter, you’ll learn
how to evaluate all of those functions with and without a
calculator, but first it’s time to review the Pythagorean
theorem.
Pythagorean Theorem
a2 + b2 = c2
Note: Problems 2.1–2.3 refer to right triangle XYZ
in the diagram below.

2.1    Identify the hypotenuse of the triangle and justify
your answer. Then, classify the remaining sides of the
triangle.
The hypotenuse of a right triangle is its longest side,
and it is always located opposite the right angle. A
small square drawn at a vertex of a figure indicates
a right angle, so in this diagram, 
 is a right angle.
Therefore, the side opposite angle Y is the
hypotenuse: 
. Note that 
 is visibly longer than
either of the two remaining sides of the triangle, 
and 
, which are called the “legs” of the right
triangle.
Note: Problems 2.1–2.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.1.
2.2    State the Pythagorean theorem in terms of right
triangle XYZ.
According to the Pythagorean theorem, if you
square the lengths of the legs and then add those
squared values together, it is equal to the square of
the hypotenuse’s length. In other words, if a and b
represent the lengths of the legs of a right triangle
and c represents the length of the hypotenuse, then
a2 + b2 = c2.
The lengths of the legs in triangle XYZ are XY and
YZ; the length of the hypotenuse is XZ. Therefore,
according to the Pythagorean theorem, (XY)2 +
(YZ)2 = (XZ)2.
You use a bar to name a segment (
), but not when
you describe the LENGTH of that segment: XY. In
other words, XY is the length of 
.

Note: Problems 2.1–2.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.1.
2.3    Calculate YZ in terms of XY and XZ.
This problem directs you to calculate the length of
one leg (YZ) in terms of the lengths of the other leg
(XY) and the hypotenuse (XZ). Problem 2.2 states
the relationship between these lengths, as dictated
by the Pythagorean theorem.
(XY)2 + (YZ)2 = (XZ)2
Solve this equation for YZ. Begin by subtracting
(XY)2 from both sides of the equation in order to
isolate the term containing YZ.
(YZ)2 = (XZ)2 – (XY)2
The equation is now solved for (YZ)2, but you need
to solve for YZ. To eliminate the exponent, take the
square root of both sides of the equation.
You have to include the “plus or minus” sign
whenever you take the square root (or any even
root) of both sides of an equation. In this problem,
however, you drop it in the next step.
Because length must be a positive value, you omit
the possible negative solutions (and, therefore, the
“±” symbol on the right side of the equation).

2.4    Calculate the length of the hypotenuse of a right
triangle if the lengths of the legs are 5 and 12.
In the formula for the Pythagorean theorem, a2 + b2
= c2, the lengths of the legs are represented by a
and b. Therefore, if you substitute a = 5 and b = 12
into the formula, you can calculate the length of the
hypotenuse c. (Note that substituting a = 12 and b
= 5 produces the same result—it does not matter
which leg lengths are substituted into a and b.)
To solve the equation, take the square root of both
sides. Because length is a positive value, you should
omit possible negative solutions.
In other words, don’t worry about the “plus or
minus” symbol until further notice.
If a right triangle has legs of length 5 and 12, the
length of the hypotenuse is 13.
2.5    Calculate the lengths of the sides in the triangle
below.

This right triangle has legs of length 15 and x; the
length of the hypotenuse is x + 9. In order to
calculate the lengths of the sides, you will first need
to know the value of x. Substitute these values into
the Pythagorean theorem.
Apply the FOIL method to square the quantity (x +
9).
225 + x2 = x2 + 18x + 81
Subtract x2 from both sides of the equation and
solve for x.

If x = 8, the lengths of the legs are 15 and x = 8;
the length of the hypotenuse is x + 9 = 8 + 9 = 17.
2.6    Given a right triangle with hypotenuse length 7 and
one leg with a length of 4, calculate the length of the
remaining leg.
You are given the length of one leg and the
hypotenuse, so substitute a = 4 and c = 7 into the
Pythagorean theorem and solve for b, the length of
the remaining leg. (Alternatively, you could
substitute b = 4 and c = 7 into the Pythagorean
theorem and solve for a, but in either case, c must
be equal to 7, as it is the length of the hypotenuse.)
If one leg and the hypotenuse of a right triangle
have lengths 4 and 7, respectively, then the
remaining leg has length 
.
2.7    Calculate the length of the legs in the isosceles
right triangle below.

An isosceles triangle has at least two sides that are
the same length. It is not possible for a right triangle
to have three sides of the same length, so in an
isosceles right triangle, exactly two sides are the
same length—the legs. Therefore, in this triangle, CE
= DE.
A right triangle HAS to have one side that is longer
than the others, the hypotenuse. If all three sides
were the same length, you wouldn’t have a
hypotenuse. (There is a more formal way to prove
this—in math, there almost always is—but that’s not
the point of the problem, so don’t worry about it.)
Let x represent the length of each leg in the
triangle; in other words, let x = CE = DE. Substitute
CE = x, DE = x, and c = 10 into the Pythagorean
theorem.

Solve for x and simplify the radical.
If you need help simplifying radicals, check out
Problems 13.1–13.20 in The Humongous Book of
Algebra Problems. In fact, Problem 13.5 shows you
how to simplify this exact square root.
Note: Problems 2.8–2.9 refer to right triangle PQR
in the diagram below.
2.8    Identify the coordinates of points P, Q, and R, and
use them to calculate PQ and RQ.

Points P and Q lie on the same vertical line, which is
4 units right of the origin; thus, they both have an x-
coordinate of 4. While point Q is located on the x-
axis (and therefore has a y-coordinate of 0), point P
is 3 units above the x-axis (and therefore has a y-
coordinate of 3). Point R is located at the origin, so
its x- and y-coordinates are both 0.
P = (4,3)    Q = (4,0)    R = (0,0)
Note that 
 is a vertical segment, a portion of the
vertical line x = 4. To calculate the length of the
segment, simply subtract the y-coordinate of Q from
the y-coordinate of P.
Calculating the lengths of horizontal and vertical
segments is easier than calculating the lengths of
any other kinds of segments. For those, you need
the “general distance formula,” which is covered in
Problems 2.11–2.12.
PQ = 3 – 0 = 3
Similarly, 
 is a horizontal segment, a portion of the
horizontal x-axis. Therefore, subtracting the x-
coordinate of R from the x-coordinate of Q
calculates the length of the segment, QR.
QR = 4 – 0 = 4
Note: Problems 2.8–2.9 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.8.
2.9    Apply the Pythagorean theorem to calculate PR.
Note that triangle PQR has two perpendicular sides, 
 and 
. Perpendicular lines form right angles, so

PQR is a right triangle. In Problem 2.8, you calculate
the lengths of the legs: PQ = 3 and QR = 4.
Substitute the lengths of the legs into the
Pythagorean theorem and solve for PR, the length of
the hypotenuse.
2.10    Apply the technique demonstrated in Problems 2.8–
2.9 to calculate the distance between the origin and
a point with coordinates (7,24).
The line segment connecting the origin to point
(7,24) is the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose
horizontal leg has a length of 7 and whose vertical
leg has a length of 24, as illustrated in the following
diagram.

To calculate the length of the hypotenuse, apply the
Pythagorean theorem a2 + b2 = c2, in which a = 7, b
= 24, and c is the length of the hypotenuse—the
value for which you are solving the equation.
You conclude that the distance between the origin
and a point with coordinates (7,24) is 25.
2.11    Apply the general distance formula to calculate the
distance between points A = (2,3) and B = (–1,5).
The general distance formula is, as its name
suggests, a more general implementation of the
process applied in Problems 2.8–2.10. It does not
require that one of the endpoints of a segment is
the origin, nor does it require that you construct a
right triangle in the coordinate plane. Essentially,
both of those steps are completed automatically.

According to the general distance formula, the
distance between points A = (x1, y1) and B = (x2, y2)
is 
. Note that subscripts are used to
differentiate the coordinates in the formula. In other
words, the x- and y-coordinates of point A both have
the subscript “1” and point B coordinates have the
subscript “2.”
The subtraction parts of the formula, x2 – x1 and y2
– y1, calculate the horizontal and vertical distances
between the points, which are the lengths of the
legs of the right triangle whose hypotenuse is the
distance between the points.
In this problem, point A = (2,3), so x1 = 2 and y1 =
3. Point B = (–1,5), so x2 = –1 and y2 = 5. Substitute
x1, y1, x2, and y2 into the distance formula and
calculate D.
The distance between points A and B is 
.
2.12    Apply the general distance formula to calculate
the distance between points C = (–6,–9) and D = (4,–
7).
Substitute x1 = –6, y1 = –9, x2 = 4, and y2 = –7 into
the general distance formula and calculate D.

Reduce the radical expression.
2.13    Calculate the height of an isosceles triangle with a
base of length 6 and legs of length 8.
The height of an isosceles triangle is the length h of
the segment that is perpendicular to the base of the
triangle and extends to the vertex of the opposite
angle. As the diagram below illustrates, the
segment representing height divides the isosceles
triangle in half—including the base. Therefore, the
two halves of the base in the diagram below both
have length 3.

Notice that the height of the isosceles triangle
divides the figure into two right triangles, each with
a hypotenuse of 8 and legs of length h and 3. Apply
the Pythagorean theorem to calculate h.
The height of the isosceles triangle is 
.
2.14    Calculate the lengths of the sides of triangle ABC in
the diagram below.

You are asked to calculate the lengths of the sides of
right triangle ABC; in other words, you are to
calculate AB, AC, and BC. The length of the
hypotenuse is the easiest of the three lengths to
compute, as it is equal to the sum of the lengths of
segments 
 and 
.
Notice that 
 splits right triangle ABC into two
smaller right triangles: ABD and ACD. In each of
these triangles, two sides have known lengths and
the Pythagorean theorem can be applied to
calculate the remaining side. For example, right
triangle ABD has legs 
 and BD = 6. Substitute
these values into the Pythagorean theorem to
calculate AB.
Simplify the radical expression.
Now that you know the lengths of two sides of right
triangle ABC, you can once again apply the
Pythagorean theorem to calculate AC.

Or you can apply the Pythagorean theorem using
the smaller right triangle ADC. You know that 
and DC = 2, so substitute them into the equation
(AD)2 + (DC)2 = (AC)2 and solve for AC. You’ll get
the same answer.
The lengths of the sides of right triangle ABC are 
, AC = 4, and BC = 8.
Trigonometric Functions
sin, cos, tan, cot, sec, and csc
Note: Problems 2.15–2.19 refer to the right triangle
in the diagram below.

2.15    Identify one leg that is adjacent to, and one leg
that is opposite, angle α.
Trigonometric ratios (like sine, cosine, and tangent)
are defined in terms of the relationship between the
acute angles of a right triangle and the lengths of
the sides of that right triangle. Therefore, you need
to know how to describe the legs of a right triangle
as either “opposite” or “adjacent to” an acute angle.
Acute angles measure less than 90°, so the acute
angles of a right triangle are the two angles that
aren’t right angles.
In this triangle, side y is opposite angle α. Both of
the other sides in the triangle (x and z) are also the
sides of angle α; only the side opposite an angle is
not part of the angle itself. Consider the sides that
do form the angle, x and z. One of those sides is the
hypotenuse of the triangle (z); however, the
problem specifically states that you are to identify
the leg that is adjacent to α. Therefore, you
conclude that x is the leg adjacent to angle α.
The “hypotenuse” is always the longest side. Only
the legs are classified as “adjacent” or “opposite.”
Note: Problems 2.15–2.19 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.15.
2.16    Identify the leg that is adjacent to, and the leg that
is opposite, angle β.
Angle β is formed by sides y and z. Note that z is the
hypotenuse—and not a leg—of the right triangle.
Because y is a leg of the triangle and also a side of

angle β, you conclude that y is the leg adjacent to β.
Leg x is opposite β.
Note: Problems 2.15–2.19 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.15.
2.17    Calculate sin α and sin β.
The sine function (abbreviated “sin”) assigns a value
to acute angles within a right triangle. Specifically,
the sine of an angle is equal to the length of the leg
opposite that angle divided by the length of the
hypotenuse.
According to Problem 2.15, the length of the side
opposite α is y and the length of the hypotenuse is
z. Substitute these values into the equation above.
To calculate sin β, you apply the same technique.
The hypotenuse is still z, but the length of the side
opposite β (according to Problem 2.16) is x.
Note: Problems 2.15–2.19 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.15.
2.18    Calculate cos α and cos β.
The cosine function (abbreviated “cos”) is very
similar to the sine function. Its values are also
assigned to acute angles of a right triangle, and

those values are also derived from a ratio. However,
the cosine of an angle is equal to the length of the
adjacent side divided by the hypotenuse.
According to Problem 2.15, the side adjacent to α
has length x and the length of the hypotenuse is z.
To compute cos β, divide the length of its adjacent
side (y) by the length of the hypotenuse (z).
Note: Problems 2.15–2.19 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.15.
2.19    Calculate tan α and tan β.
Like the sine and cosine functions described in
Problems 2.17–2.18, the tangent function
(abbreviated “tan”) is defined based upon the
lengths of the sides of a right triangle. Unlike the
sine and cosine functions, however, it only uses the
lengths of the legs, not the hypotenuse:
You can remember which trig function goes with
which ratio using the four-syllable “word” SOH-CAH-
TOA, pronounced “SO-cah-TOE-ah.” (Catchy, right?)
It stands for “Sine equals Opposite over
Hypotenuse, Cosine equals Adjacent over
Hypotenuse, and Tangent equals Opposite over
Adjacent.”

Similarly, calculate the tangent of angle β. Note that
the opposite and adjacent legs of a right triangle
reverse when you are referring to different acute
angles within the triangle.
Therefore, the tangent values of the acute angles in
a right triangle are reciprocals of each other: x/y and
y/x. (Recall that the reciprocal of a fraction reverses
its numerator and denominator.)
Note: Problems 2.20–2.22 refer to right triangle
ABC in the diagram below.
2.20    Calculate cos C and sin C.
The length of the leg opposite acute angle C has
length AB = 5, and the length of the adjacent leg is
BC = 12. The hypotenuse of the triangle has length
AC = 13. According to Problem 2.18, cos C is equal
to the ratio of the lengths of the adjacent leg and
hypotenuse.

“Ratio” means fraction, so “the ratio of the adjacent
length and the hypotenuse” just means “the
adjacent length divided by the hypotenuse.”
The sine of acute angle C is equal to the length of
the leg opposite C divided by the length of the
hypotenuse.
Note: Problems 2.20–2.22 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.20.
2.21    Calculate tan C and cot C.
According to Problem 2.19, the tangent of an acute
angle is equal to the quotient of the opposite and
adjacent leg lengths.
The cotangent function (abbreviated “cot”) is one of
three basic trigonometric functions that are defined
as reciprocals of other trigonometric functions:

Cotangent is equal to the reciprocal of the tangent
function. Therefore, its value is the quotient of the
adjacent and opposite leg lengths.
Note: Problems 2.20–2.22 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.20.
2.22    Calculate sec A and csc A.
Don’t get confused: The last two problems dealt
with angle C. This problem involves the OTHER
acute angle in the triangle.
The secant and cosecant functions (abbreviated
“sec” and “csc,” respectively) are—like cotangent—
defined as the reciprocals of other trig functions.
Specifically, secant is the reciprocal of cosine and
cosecant is the reciprocal of sine.
The first letters of reciprocal functions DON’T
MATCH. In other words Secant is NOT the reciprocal
of Sine—it’s the reciprocal of cosine. Cosecant is
NOT the reciprocal of Cosine—it’s the reciprocal of
sine.
In the diagram, acute angle A has an opposite leg of
length BC = 12, an adjacent leg of length AB = 5,
and a hypotenuse of length AC = 13.

Note: Problems 2.23–2.24 refer to right triangle
LMN in the diagram below.
2.23    Calculate tan L.
The tangent of acute angle L is equal to the length
of the opposite leg divided by the length of the
adjacent leg.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms.
Note: Problems 2.23–2.24 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.23.
2.24    Calculate csc N.
The cosecant function is defined as the reciprocal of
the sine function. Therefore, csc N is equal to the

length of the hypotenuse divided by the length of
the opposite leg.
Sine equals opposite over hypotenuse, and cosecant
flips that fraction upside down: hypotenuse over
opposite.
According to the diagram, LM = 6. However, LN is
not given. You need to apply the Pythagorean
theorem to calculate the length of the hypotenuse.
Substitute LN = 10 into the cosecant equation.
Note: Problems 2.25–2.26 refer to isosceles right
triangle RST in the diagram below.

2.25    Calculate cot S.
The cotangent of an acute angle is equal to the
length of the adjacent leg divided by the length of
the opposite leg.
Note: Problems 2.25–2.26 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.25.
2.26    Calculate sec T.
The cosine of an acute angle is equal to the length
of the adjacent leg divided by the length of the
hypotenuse. Because the secant is defined as the
reciprocal of cosine, secant is equal to the length of
the hypotenuse divided by the length of the
adjacent leg.
According to the diagram, RT = 5; apply the
Pythagorean theorem to calculate ST.

Substitute the values of RT and ST into the secant
equation above.
Note: Problems 2.27–2.28 refer to right triangle
XYZ in the diagram below.
2.27    Demonstrate that the sine of one acute angle in a
right triangle is equal to the cosine of the other acute
angle. Explain why this is true.
Note that the angles and the sides of this triangle
are named using the same letters, but the names

are assigned in a very specific way. Each angle and
its opposite side share the same letter; the angles
are named with capital letters, and the sides are
named using lowercase letters. For example, the
shortest side x is opposite angle X, the smallest
angle in the triangle.
The two acute angles in the right triangle are X and
Y. Identify the sine of one angle and the cosine of
the other. In the solution below, sin X and cos Y are
compared, although a solution comparing cos X and
sin Y would also be correct.
Notice that the side opposite one acute angle is
always the side adjacent to the other acute angle—
side 
 in this example—and the length of the
hypotenuse (XY) does not change. Therefore, the
sine of one acute angle is always equal to the cosine
of the other acute angle.
Note: Problems 2.27–2.28 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.27.
2.28    Demonstrate that the tangent of an acute angle in
a right triangle is equal to the quotient of the sine
and cosine of that angle.
Although tangent may be defined as the length of
the opposite side divided by the length of the
adjacent side, it is equally correct to state that
tangent is equal to the quotient of sine and cosine.

Cotangent is the reciprocal of tangent: 
.
Select one of the acute angles in the right triangle—
the solution below investigates acute angle X—and
calculate its sine, cosine, and tangent values.
According to the problem, tan X is equal to the
quotient of sin X and cos X.
Substitute the values of sin X, cos X, and tan X into
the equation above.
This equation contains a complex fraction—a
fraction that, itself, contains frations. To simplify the
right side of the equation, multiply the numerator
and denominator by z.
The fractions in the numerator and denominator
have a greatest common factor of z. Reduce both

fractions.
Therefore, 
.
Trigonometric Tables
When “close enough” is good enough
2.29    Use the trigonometric table in Appendix A to
calculate sin 88°, accurate to five decimal places.
Before scientific and graphing calculators were
readily available to scientists, engineers, and
mathematics students, other tools were necessary
to calculate trigonometric values. Greek
mathematicians constructed the first trigonometric
tables, and they have been used for over two
thousand years to assist in the approximation and
estimation of trigonometric functions. Although you
will use a calculator for the vast majority of this
book, this section of problems demonstrates that
you can still derive surprisingly accurate estimations
using historical methods.
Here’s the real reason trig tables are included in the
book: Because some teachers still teach them, even

though technology gives you faster, more accurate
answers.
In Appendix A, angles between 0° (0 radians) and
90° (π/2 radians) are listed in quarter degree
increments. The first column represents an angle in
degrees; the second column represents the angle in
radians; and then the next six columns, in order, list
the cosine, sine, tangent, secant, cosecant, and
cotangent values of that angle. Locate the row of
the table that begins with 88°.
According to this row of the table, sin 88° ≈
0.99939. All values in the table are accurate to five
decimal places.
2.30    Use the trigonometric table in Appendix A to
approximate the measure of θ in radians, given tan θ
= 0.68728.
In order to approximate the angle θ that has a
tangent value of 0.68728, consult the tangent
column in the table and look for the value 0.68728.
Notice that the tangent values increase as the angle
increases, so the larger the angle, the larger the
tangent value.
The row corresponding to 34.50° (0.60214 radians)
contains the precise tangent value for which you are
searching: 0.68728.

Therefore, you conclude that θ ≈ 0.60214 radians if
tan θ = 0.68728. Remember that this trigonometric
table is accurate to five decimal places, but nearly
all of the values in the table are rounded. Thus, you
cannot conclude that θ is exactly equal to 0.60214
radians.
2.31    Determine whether each of the trigonometric
functions listed in Appendix A increase or decrease
as the angles increase from 0° to 90°.
Different trigonometric functions exhibit different
behavior on different intervals, so this problem
specifically identifies the interval described in
Appendix A, 0° to 90°. In Problems 2.32–2.36, you
use the table in Appendix A to approximate unlisted
trigonometric values; when you do, it is important to
know whether successive rows in the table increase
or decrease for the specific trigonometric function
you are investigating.
Three of the trigonometric functions increase
between 0° and 90°: sine, tangent, and secant. The
remaining three functions, termed the “cofunctions”
because their names are derived by adding the
prefix “co-” to the three functions already listed,
decrease: cosine, cotangent, and cosecant.
Here’s one way to remember which functions
decrease: “If it’s a CO-, down it goes!”
Note: Problems 2.32–2.33 explain how to
approximate tan 45.11° using the trigonometric
table in Appendix A.

2.32    Identify two consecutive rows in the table that
bound the given angle, 45.11°. List the angles that
bound 45.11° in the table and their corresponding
tangent values.
You are given an angle measured in degrees, and
each row of the table represents a degree
measurement exactly 0.25° larger than the
preceding row. Therefore, the rows that bound
45.11° are 45.00° and 45.25°; they are duplicated
below.
As Problem 2.31 explains, the tangent function
increases as the angles increase between 0° and
90°. According to the shaded values in the previous
table, tan 45° = 1 and tan 45.25° ≈ 1.00876. Thus,
1 < tan 45.11° < 1.00876.
In other words, because 45.11 is between 45 and
45.25, its tangent value is between the tangent
values of 45 and 45.25.
Note: Problems 2.32–2.33 explain how to
approximate tan 45.11° using the trigonometric
table in Appendix A.
2.33    Construct a proportion to interpolate tan 45.11°,
based on the bounding values you identified in
Problem 2.32. Round the estimate to the nearest
hundred thousandth.
According to Problem 2.32, 45.11° falls between the
45.00° and 45.25° rows in the trigonometric table,

so its value, x = tan 45.11°, falls between 1 and
1.00876. It may be helpful to imagine a new row of
the table that represents 45.11°, as illustrated by
the shaded row in the table below.
Estimating trigonometric values based upon values
that bound them is called “interpolating.” You
assume, for the sake of approximation, that the
angles and their corresponding trigonometric values
have a linear relationship on very small intervals.
While this is not true, it does provide a reasonably
rough estimate.
Trig graphs are not straight lines, but any graph sort
of looks like a straight line if you look at a very tiny
piece of it. This is a concept called “local linearity.”
Consider the three equations below, which
summarize the important information from the
trigonometric table. The left sides of the equations
contain the three angles in the problem (45°,
45.11°, and 45.25°), and the right sides contain the
corresponding tangent values for those angles (1,
the unknown value x, and 1.00876).
In the proportion, you will compare differences: How
different are two angles when compared to their
tangent values? Begin by comparing the values
given in the trig table. When an angle increases
from 45.00° to 45.25° (for a total increase of 45.25°

– 45.00° = 0.25°), the tangent value increases from
1.0 to 1.00876 (for a total increase of 1.00876 – 1 =
0.00876).
Now conduct the same comparison for the new
angle, 45.11°, and the bounding angle below it,
45.00°. In other words, note that an angle increase
of 45.11° – 45.00° = 0.11° corresponds to a tangent
value increase of x – 1.
You are left with four different values, two that
compare angle differences and two that compare
tangent value differences. Substitute them into the
following proportion:
Cross-multiply and solve for x.
Multiply the top of the left fraction by the bottom of
the right fraction and vice versa. Set those two
products equal.

The problem instructs you to round this answer to
the nearest hundred thousandth, so you should
round to the fifth decimal place: x ≈ 1.00385.
Therefore, tan 45.11° ≈ 1.00385.
The actual value of tan 45.11° is
1.0038471150116471310256758144812…, so the
estimate is very accurate for the first four decimal
places and less so after that.
Note: Problems 2.34–2.35 explain how to
approximate 
 using the trigonometric table in
Appendix A.
2.34    List the angles that bound 
 in the table, as well
as their corresponding cosine values.
Although the angles in the table are listed in
increments of 0.25°, the radian equivalents of those
angles are listed in the second column. Use a
calculator to compute the decimal equivalent of the
angle.
Now identify the two rows within the trigonometric
table that bound 0.285599 radians. These rows are
copied on the next page.
Note that the angle 0.285599 falls between the rows
containing radian values of 0.28362 and 0.28798.
Therefore, the cos 0.285599 will fall between
0.95882 and 0.96005.

Note: Problems 2.34–2.35 explain how to
approximate 
 using the trigonometric table in
Appendix A.
2.35    Construct a proportion to interpolate 
 based on
the bounding values you identified in Problem 2.34.
Round the estimate to the nearest thousandth.
According to Problem 2.34, cos π/11 lies somewhere
within the interval bounded above by 0.96005 and
below by 0.95882.
Apply the technique described in Problem 2.33,
comparing angle differences to trigonometric value
differences, as illustrated below.
Make sure to subtract in the same order each time.
In the computations above, values from the upper
rows are always subtracted from values in rows
below them. This leads to the negative value –
0.00123 among the results, because the larger the
angle in the table, the smaller its cosine value.

Substitute the four differences into the interpolation
proportion.
Remember, “co” functions decrease in the table, so
the “large trigonometric value difference” in the
proportion is negative.
Cross-multiply and solve for x.
You conclude that cos π/11 ≈ 0.960. The actual
value is 0.9594929736, so the estimate is
reasonably accurate.
2.36    Given sin θ = 0.89835, construct a proportion to
approximate θ using the trigonometric table in
Appendix A. Report the answer in degrees, rounded
to the nearest thousandth.
In this problem, you are given a trigonometric value
and are asked to identify the corresponding angle.
Begin by identifying the two consecutive rows in the
table with sine values that bound 0.89835 above
and below.

Apply the procedure modeled in Problems 2.33 and
2.35, calculating the proportional differences
between angles and their trigonometric values.
Construct a proportion that relates the differences
calculated above.
Solve the proportion for θ.
You conclude that θ ≈ 63.943°.
The actual angle (accurate to seven decimal places)
is 63.9420226°.
Calculator-Generated Trigonometric Values
So long, trig tables

2.37    Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the following value, accurate to eight decimal places:
sin 294.59°.
Different calculators require different rules of
syntax. On a basic scientific calculator, you type the
angle first and then press the sine button. Graphing
calculators usually require you to type the
expression in order as you would read it, using
parentheses to surround the angle: “sin(294.59).”
Make sure that your calculator is in degrees mode; if
you do not know how to do this, consult your
calculator owner’s manual. If you lost your manual,
it is most likely available to download on the
manufacturer’s website.
sin 294.59° ≈ –0.90930875
2.38    Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the following value, accurate to eight decimal places:
.
Ensure that your calculator is in radians mode and
use one of the following sequences of keystrokes,
depending upon the type of calculator you have:
Scientific calculator: Type “14 × π,” divide
by 9, and then press the tangent button
Graphing calculator: Type “tan(14π / 9)”
The calculator should report a tangent value of –
5.67128182.

2.39    Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the following value in radians, accurate to eight
decimal places: 
.
Recall that cosecant is the reciprocal of sine.
You can’t just reverse the numerator and
denominator of the angle. In other words, 
.
Use one of the following keystroke sequences to
compute this value on your calculator, and make
sure that your calculator is in radians mode:
Scientific calculator: Type “10 * π”, divide by
13, press the sine button, and then press
the reciprocal button, which is usually
labeled “1/x”
Scientific calculator (Alternate technique):
Type “10 * π”, divide by 13, press the sine
button, press the exponent button (usually
labeled “xy” or “^”), type 1, and then make
1 negative by pressing the “+/–” button
Graphing calculator: Type “(sin(10π/13))^–
1”
Raising a value to the –1 power produces its
reciprocal.
The value of csc 10π/13, accurate to eight decimal
places, is 1.50801664.

2.40    Given sin θ = 0.3304651, calculate θ in radians,
accurate to eight decimal places.
This problem lists a trigonometric value, and you are
asked to identify the corresponding angle.
Whenever the desired result is an angle, you need
to apply the inverse trigonometric function on your
calculator. The inverse sine function is written
“arcsin” or “sin–1.” Many calculators list inverse
functions on the same button as the functions
themselves, and to access them you must press a
“shift,” “alt,” or “2nd” button—followed by the
function button—to reach them.
Use one of the following keystroke sequences to
calculate θ, ensuring that your calculator is in
radians mode:
Scientific calculator: Type “0.3304651,” and
press the “sin–1” button
Graphing calculator: Type “sin–
1(0.3304651)”
Given sin θ = 0.3304651, you conclude that θ ≈
0.33679632.
Small angles have sine and tangent values that are
almost equal to the angles, themselves, in radians.
Check out the margin note on the first page of
Appendix A for more information.
2.41    Given sec θ = –1.81390613, calculate θ in degrees,
accurate to the thousandths place.

Recall that secant and cosine are reciprocal
functions. Therefore, if sec θ = –1.81390613, you
can conclude cos θ = –1/1.81390613. Ensure that
your calculator is in degrees mode and complete
one of the following keystroke sequences.
Scientific calculator: Type “1.81390613,”
make the value negative by pressing the
“+/–” button, press the reciprocal button
(usually labeled “1/x”), and then press the
“cos–1” button
Scientific calculator (Alternate technique):
Press “1”, make the value negative by
pressing the “+/–” button, divide by
1.81390613, and then press the “cos–1”
button
Graphing calculator: Type “cos–1(–
1/1.81390613)”
Given sec θ = –1.81390613, you conclude that θ ≈
123.456.
Note: Problems 2.42–2.43 refer to the diagram
below.
2.42    Given 
 and QR = 9, calculate PR and round
the answer to the nearest thousandth.

You are given the measure of one acute angle of the
right triangle (P) and the length of the opposite leg
(QR). You are asked to calculate the length of the
hypotenuse (PR). To solve this problem, you must
first identify the trigonometric ratio that relates an
angle measurement, the opposite leg, and the
hypotenuse. Recall that sine is equal to the ratio of
the lengths of the opposite leg and the hypotenuse.
Substitute the given information into the equation.
Multiply both sides of the equation by PR to
eliminate the fraction. Then, solve for PR.
Use a calculator to divide 9 by sin 71°. Remember to
set the calculator to degrees mode.
PR ≈ 9.519
Note: Problems 2.42–2.43 refer to the diagram in
Problem 2.42.
2.43    Given PR = 13.28 and PQ = 4.6, calculate 
 in
radians and round the answer to the nearest
thousandth.

In this problem, you are asked to calculate the
measure of an angle given the lengths of its
adjacent leg and the hypotenuse. Recall that cosine
ratio relates these sides in a right triangle.
Write out all the decimal places your calculator can
display. To get the most accurate answer possible,
don’t round to the thousandths place until the very
end.
To identify the angle that has a cosine of
0.3463855422, use the inverse cosine function on
your calculator. Make sure the calculator is set to
radians mode.
You conclude that 
.
2.44    A golfer standing at point A (in the figure below),
wishing to estimate the distance to the flag at point
P, walks a distance of 15 yards due north to point R
and determines that 
. Apply a trigonometric
ratio to compute AP, accurate to the nearest yard.

The golfer is attempting to calculate the length of
the leg opposite acute angle R given the measure of
R and the length of its adjacent leg. Apply the
tangent function.
Multiply both sides of the equation by 15 (to
eliminate the fraction) and solve for AP. Ensure that
your calculator is in degrees mode, because angle R
is measured in degrees.
You conclude that the distance between the golfer’s
original position (A) and the flag (P) is approximately
77 yards.
2.45    A high dive platform that towers 100 feet above the
ground is secured by 135-foot-long guy-wires, as
illustrated below. Calculate the measure of θ, the
angle formed by a guy-wire and the ground, in

radians, and report the answer accurate to three
decimal places.
In order to calculate the measure of an acute angle
based on the lengths of the opposite leg and the
hypotenuse, you should apply the sine function.
Ensure that your calculator is in radians mode, as
directed by the problem.
You conclude that the guy-wire makes an angle with
the ground that measures θ ≈ 0.834 radians.
2.46    The angle of elevation to the top of a building from
a point on the ground 50 feet away is 81°. Calculate
the height of the building and round your answer to
the nearest foot.
Construct a diagram based on the given
information.

Apply the tangent ratio and solve for h.
The height of the building is approximately 316 feet.

Chapter 3
THE UNIT CIRCLE
A little circle, a lot of memorizing
In Chapter 2, you explore trigonometric ratios (via tables and
calculator technology), but no rationale for the values of the
functions is provided. Why do sine and cosine values range
between–1 and 1, whereas the tangent and cotangent functions
may grow infinitely large, in both the positive and negative
directions? These are not questions you are yet equipped to
answer, but this chapter provides a significant step in the right
direction.
The unit circle is simply a circle, centered at the origin of the
coordinate plane, with a radius equal to 1 unit in length. By
graphing angles in standard position and examining the points
at which their terminal sides intersect the unit circle, you
generate the cosine and sine values of those angles (as well as
the secant, cosecant, tangent, and cotangent values, which are
based upon sine and cosine).
Now that you have worked through Chapter 2, you have
some experience with sine and cosine functions. However,
tables and calculators don’t tell the whole story. In this
chapter, you work with unit circles, which are circles that
have a center of (x,y) = (0,0) and a radius of r = 1. Believe
it or not, these simple circles are the birthplace of sine and
cosine—trig functions get their values from the coordinates
of points on the circle. This chapter leads you step-by-step
through the process, so take your time and soak it in.
By the end of the chapter, you will know the sine and cosine
values of the 16 most commonly used angles in
trigonometry. Forget tables—you’ll know these values off the
top of your head with nary a calculation. Sure, there’s some
memorization involved, but it’s worth it in the same way

memorizing multiplication tables was worth it back in grade
school.
45°–45°–90° Triangles
Note: Problems 3.1–3.3 refer to the diagram below,
featuring right triangle XYZ, in which XY = YZ.
3.1    Given 
 in the triangle, explain why both
acute angles measure 45°.
All triangles contain three angles whose measures
have a sum of 180° = π radians. Apply this
geometric theorem to the given triangle by adding
the measures of angles X, Y, and Z, and setting the
sum equal to 180°.
In this diagram, angle Y is a right angle, so 
.
Furthermore, you are given 
. Therefore, you
can substitute 90° for 
 and 
 for 
 in the
angle sum equation above.

Note that 
.
Solve the equation for 
.
So once you subtract the right angle from 180°, you
are left with 90°. Because the two remaining angles
have the same measure, you have to divide the
leftover 90° by 2. That gives you two angles that
each measure 45°.
You conclude that 
. Therefore, triangle
XYZ is a 45°–45°–90° triangle, a geometric
classification based upon the measures of its angles.
Note: Problems 3.1–3.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.1, in which XY = YZ.
3.2    Let l represent the length of a leg of triangle XYZ.
Apply the Pythagorean theorem to calculate XZ in
terms of l.
According to the Pythagorean theorem, given a right
triangle with legs of length a and b and a
hypotenuse of length c, you can conclude that a2 +
b2 = c2. In this problem, the legs of the triangle are 
 and 
 the hypotenuse is 
.

This problem states that each leg has length l. Thus,
l = XY = YZ.
To calculate the length of XZ in terms of l, solve the
equation for XZ.
This may feel familiar. It’s a geometry theorem that
is often written 
 · L, where H is the hypotenuse
length and L is the leg length.
Therefore, the length of the hypotenuse is 
 times
the length of the leg, l.
Note: Problems 3.1–3.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.1, in which XY = YZ.
3.3    Given XZ = 7, calculate the lengths of the legs.
According to Problem 3.2, the hypotenuse of a 45°–
45°–90° triangle is equal to 
 times the length of a
leg.
(length of the hypotenuse)= 
 (length of a leg)
Let l represent the length of a leg of triangle XYZ;
note that XZ = 7 is the length of the hypotenuse.

The length of the leg, l, is a fraction with an
irrational denominator. Traditionally, radicals within
a denominator are eliminated in a process called
“rationalizing the denominator.”
Multiply the numerator and denominator by the
offending square root: 
.
You conclude that the lengths of the legs are 
.
3.4    Calculate the length of the legs of an isosceles right
triangle if its hypotenuse has length 
.
Recall that the hypotenuse of an isosceles right
triangle is 
 times the length of a leg. Let l
represent the length of the leg and 
 represent
the length of the hypotenuse in the following
equation.
In other words, a 45°–45°–90° triangle
Solve for l.

Both legs of the isosceles right triangle have length 
.
Note: Problems 3.5–3.8 apply the properties of 45°–
45°–90° triangles to the coordinate plane in order
to generate coordinates on a unit circle.
3.5    Draw a unit circle on the coordinate plane with
central angle θ in standard position, given 
.
A unit circle has radius 1 and is centered at the
origin of the coordinate plane. Recall that an angle
in standard position has an initial side on the
positive x-axis and a vertex that lies on the origin,
as explained in Problems 1.3–1.5. You wish to
convert the radian angle measure π/4 into degrees
to help visualize where its terminal side lies in the
coordinate plane.
See Problem 1.27 if you can’t remember how to
convert from radians to degrees. Also, check out
Problem 1.17, which helps you visualize common
angles in radians.

Draw the unit circle and θ on the same coordinate
plane, as illustrated in the following diagram. Notice
that the terminal side of angle θ is also a radius of
the circle, and recall that a unit circle has radius r =
1.
Because you are constructing a 45° angle in the
coordinate plane, you can apply the properties of
45°–45°–90° triangles (specifically that the
hypotenuse of such a triangle is 
 times the length
of a leg) in Problems 3.6–3.8.
Note: Problems 3.5–3.8 apply the properties of 45°–
45°–90° triangles to the coordinate plane in order
to generate coordinates on a unit circle.
3.6    Consider the diagram you created in Problem 3.5, a
unit circle with central angle θ that measures 
radians. Draw a right triangle in the coordinate plane
whose legs represent the horizontal and vertical
distances between the origin and the point at which
the terminal side of θ intersects the unit circle.

The following diagram specifically examines the first
quadrant of the drawing generated in Problem 3.5;
the origin is labeled point A. Notice that C is the
point at which the terminal side of θ intersects the
unit circle. A vertical segment extends from C to the
x-axis, intersecting it at point B.
Because the x-axis is horizontal and 
 is vertical,
they form right angle ABC. Therefore, triangle ABC is
a right triangle, with a right angle measuring π/2
and two acute angles, each measuring π/4.
 triangle is the same thing as a 45°–45°–90°
triangle, but it’s written in radians instead of
degrees.
Note that AB represents the horizontal distance
between the origin and point C; similarly, BC
represents the vertical distance between the origin
and point C.
Note: Problems 3.5–3.8 apply the properties of 45°–
45°–90° triangles to the coordinate plane in order
to generate coordinates on a unit circle.

3.7    Calculate the lengths of the sides of the right
triangle you identified in Problem 3.6.
The hypotenuse of right triangle ABC below is also
the radius of the unit circle, so it has length AC = 1.
Let l represent the length of the legs.
Remember, 45°–45°–90° triangles are automatically
isosceles.
As Problems 3.2–3.3 explain, right triangles with
acute angles measuring π/4 radians (or 45°) have
hypotenuses that are 
 times the lengths of their
legs.
Solve for l.

Rationalize the denominator by multiplying both the
numerator and denominator by 
.
You conclude that AB = CB = 
.
Note: Problems 3.5–3.8 apply the properties of 45°–
45°–90° triangles to the coordinate plane in order
to generate coordinates on a unit circle.
3.8    Identify the coordinates of the point at which the
terminal side of θ intersects the unit circle.
The diagram below summarizes the conclusions
drawn in Problems 3.5–3.7. Of specific interest are
the lengths calculated in Problem 3.7, which
represent the horizontal and vertical distances
between the origin and point C.

Because AB = 
, point C is 
 units right of the
origin; therefore, the x-coordinate of point C is 
.
Similarly, the y-coordinate of point C is 
 because
BC = 
.
3.9    Identify the coordinates of point P in the diagram
below.

Like triangle ABC in Problems 3.6–3.8, this right
triangle has two acute angles that measure π/4 and
a hypotenuse of length 1 (because it is a radius of
the unit circle). Therefore, the legs of the right
triangle have the same lengths as the legs in
triangle ABC: 
.
Note that the x-coordinate of point P must be
negative, because P is in the second quadrant; you
must travel left from the origin to reach P. Hence,
the coordinates of P are (–
, 
).
The signs of the coordinates tell you what direction
to travel from the origin in order to reach the point:
+x coordinate: go right
–x coordinate: go left
+y coordinate: go up
–y coordinate:
   go down.
30°–60°–90° Triangles
Note: Problems 3.10–3.12 refer to the diagram
below.
3.10    Given 
, calculate 
.

The interior angles of a triangle have a sum of 180°.
Note that 
, because R is a right angle.
Substitute the measures of the two known angles
into the previous equation and solve for 
.
Note: Problems 3.10–3.12 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.10.
3.11    Let h represent the length of the hypotenuse (PQ),
and calculate QR in terms of h.
According to Problem 3.10, the angles of triangle
PQR have the following measures: 30°, 60°, and
90°. Such triangles are described as 30°–60°–90°
triangles, and their sides (like the sides of 45°–45°–
90° triangles) have lengths with well-defined
relationships.
In other words, if you know the length of one side of
a 30°–60°–90° triangle, you can quickly calculate
the lengths of the other two sides without the use of
trig functions.
Recall from geometry that the relative sizes of
interior angles relate to the lengths of the sides
opposite those angles. More specifically, smaller
angles within a figure have shorter opposite sides,
and vice versa. In this triangle, 
, so the

side opposite P is shorter than the side opposite Q.
The hypotenuse of the triangle is the longest side,
as it is opposite the largest angle, right angle R.
QR < PR
According to a geometric theorem, the shorter leg of
a 30°–60°–90° triangle—the leg opposite the 30°
angle—is exactly half the length of the hypotenuse.
In other words, if s represents the length of the
shorter leg and h represents the length of the
hypotenuse, then the following equation is true.
The shortest side of this triangle has length s = QR.
The answer QR = h/2, which expresses the product
as a single fraction, is also correct.
Note: Problems 3.10–3.12 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.10.
3.12    Let h represent the length of the hypotenuse (PQ),
and calculate PR in terms of h.
As Problem 3.11 explains, the length of the shorter
leg (s) of a 30°–60°–90° triangle is exactly half the
length of the hypotenuse (h). Let l represent the
length of the remaining leg of the triangle. Because l
is opposite a 60° angle, it is longer than s (which is
opposite a 30° angle) but shorter than h (which is
opposite a 90° angle). Additionally, l is exactly 
times as long as s.

The length of the longer leg in this triangle is l = PR.
According to Problem 3.11, s = QR = (1/2) h.
You may also correctly conclude that 
.
Note: Problems 3.13–3.14 refer to the diagram
below.
3.13    Calculate AC.
This diagram expresses the angle in radians. Recall
that multiplying an angle by 180/π converts it from
radians to degrees.
Right triangle ABC is a 30°–60°–90° right triangle
whose smallest acute angle is B, which measures
π/6 = 30°. Therefore, the side opposite B is the
shorter of the two legs in the triangle. According to
Problem 3.11, the shorter leg s is half the length of
the hypotenuse h.

Substitute the length of the hypotenuse into the
equation, as indicated on the diagram: BC = 18.
Note: Problems 3.13–3.14 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.14.
3.14    Calculate AB and verify your answer using a
trigonometric function.
As Problem 3.13 explains, ABC is a 30°–60°–90°
triangle; its hypotenuse has length BC = 18 and its
short leg has length AC = 9. According to Problem
3.12, the longer leg l of a 30°–60°–90° triangle is 
times as long as the shorter leg s.
The problem directs you to verify your answer using
a trigonometric function. Consider Problems 2.44–
2.45, in which you applied trigonometric functions to
calculate lengths and angle measurements of right
triangles given other lengths and angles.
In this problem, you are given 
B = π/6 and
hypotenuse length BC = 18. Notice that AB
represents the length of the side adjacent to angle
B, so you should apply the cosine function.

In Problem 3.13, you figured out that the length of
the side opposite angle B is AC = 9, so you could
also use the sine function: 
.
Multiply both sides of the equation by 18 to solve for
AB.
Use a calculator to compute a decimal equivalent of
AB, and notice that the decimal value is exactly
equal to 
, the length of AB that you just
calculated.
In Problems 3.24–3.30, you learn the EXACT value of
. If you come back to this problem, you can prove
these values are equal without having to compare
decimals.
Note: Problems 3.15–3.16 refer to the diagram
below.

3.15    Given YZ = 
, calculate the lengths of the other
sides of the triangle.
Note that π/3 = 60°, so XYZ is a 30°–60°–90°
triangle with a hypotenuse of length h = XY, a short
leg with length s = YZ, and a long leg with length l
= XZ. Because XYZ is a 30°–60°–90° triangle, s is
half the length of h.
Solve for XY.
Recall that the long leg of the triangle is 
 times as
long as the short leg.

You conclude that the side lengths of triangle XYZ
are YZ = 
, XZ = 12, and YZ = 
.
Note: Problems 3.15–3.16 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.15.
3.16    Given XZ = 
, calculate the lengths of the other
sides of the triangle.
As Problem 3.15 explains, triangle XYZ is a 30°–60°–
90° right triangle with a hypotenuse of length h =
XY, a short leg with length s = YZ, and a long leg
with length l = XZ. Recall that the length of the long
leg is 
 times the length of the short leg.
Substitute XZ = 
 into the equation and solve for
YZ.
The short leg of triangle ABC is half the length of the
hypotenuse.
Solve for XY.

The lengths of the sides of triangle XYZ are YZ = 
,
XZ = 
, and XY = 
.
Note: Problems 3.17–3.18 refer to the diagram
below.
3.17    Given right triangle RST and an arc of the unit
circle with radius RT = 1, calculate RS and RT, the
lengths of the legs of the right triangle.
Like triangle XYZ in Problems 3.15–3.16, RST is a
30°–60°–90° triangle. Its hypotenuse has length RT
= 1, the long leg has length l = ST, and the short leg
has length s = RS.
The longer leg is opposite the larger angle:


The short leg of a 30°–60°–90° triangle is half the
length of the hypotenuse.
The long leg of a 30°–60°–90° triangle is 
 times
the length of the short leg.
Note: Problems 3.17–3.18 refer to the diagram in
Problem 3.17.
3.18    Identify the coordinates of point T.
The x- and y-coordinates of a point are, respectively,
the signed horizontal and vertical distances from the
origin to that point. Note that these are signed
distances—the signs of the coordinates indicate
direction on the coordinate plane.
Points with positive x-coordinates are right of the
origin, and points with negative x-coordinates are
left of the origin. Points with positive y-coordinates
are above the origin, and points with negative y-
coordinates are below the origin.

According to Problem 3.17, the horizontal and
vertical distances between the origin and point T
are, respectively, RS = 1/2 and ST = 
. Point T lies in the first quadrant,
which is both right of and above the origin, so the x-
and y-coordinates of T are both positive.
3.19    Given right triangle XYZ and an arc of the unit
circle with radius XZ = 1, as illustrated below,
identify the coordinates of point Z.
Like Problem 3.18, this problem explores a 30°–60°–
90° (or π/6–π/3–π/2 radian) triangle with a
hypotenuse of length 1. The legs of XYZ have the
same lengths as the legs of triangle RST in Problem
3.18—the short leg has length YZ = 1/2 and the long
leg has length XZ = 
. Note that, in triangle XYZ,
the long leg represents the horizontal distance to Z,
and the short leg represents the vertical distance.

Point Z lies in the first quadrant, so its x- and y-
coordinates are positive.
This is point T from Problem 3.18, with the x- and y-
coordinates reversed.
3.20    Given an arc of the unit circle with radius 1 and a
point M on the circle, as illustrated below, identify
the coordinates of M.
The triangle in this diagram is a copy of the triangle
in Problem 3.19, reflected across the x-axis from the
first to the fourth quadrant. All π/6–π/3–π/2 radian
triangles with a hypotenuse of 1 have a long leg
that measures 
 and a short leg that measures
1/2.
Furthermore, if the central angle is π/6, the length of
the long leg is always equal to the x-coordinate (and
the short leg’s length is the y-coordinate). Note that

M lies in the fourth quadrant, right of the origin (so
its x-coordinate is positive) and below the origin (so
its y-coordinate is negative).
3.21    Given an arc of the unit circle with radius 1 and a
point N on the circle, as illustrated below, identify
the coordinates of N.
This triangle is a copy of triangle RST (from
Problems 3.17–3.18), a 30°–60°–90° (or π/6–π/3–π/2
radian) triangle with a central angle of π/3 and a
hypotenuse of 1. Therefore, its short leg represents
the horizontal distance between the origin and N;
the long leg represents the vertical distance.
Because N lies in the third quadrant, which is left of
and below the origin, both the x- and y-coordinates
are negative.

Cosine and Sine in the First Quadrant
As easy as 
3.22    Describe the relationship between the coordinates
of points on the unit circle and the angles in
standard position whose terminal sides intersect
those points. Justify your answer using the solution
to Problem 3.19.
The x-coordinate of the intersection point is the
cosine of the angle, and the y-coordinate is the sine
of the angle. For example, consider the following
diagram, the solution to Problem 3.19.
The angle θ = π/6 is in standard position, and its
terminal side intersects the unit circle at point Z = 
. Therefore, the length of the side adjacent
to θ is XY = 
, and the length of the side opposite
θ is YZ = 1/2. The hypotenuse of the triangle is XZ =
1. Apply trigonometric ratios to calculate cos θ and
sin θ.

Notice that cos θ is equal to the x-coordinate of
point Z, and sin θ is equal to the y-coordinate: 
.
The cosine is the adjacent side (which is always the
horizontal side for an angle in standard position)
divided by 1, so it’s basically equal to the adjacent
side, the x-coordinate. (Anything divided by 1 is
equal to itself.) Same goes for the sine, which equals
the length of the vertical side, the y-coordinate.
3.23    Draw a graph in the first quadrant that includes
the following elements:
I.    A unit circle
II.   The angles 
 in standard position
III.  The coordinates of the points at which the
angles intersect the unit circle
In Problems 3.8, 3.18, and 3.19, you generate the
coordinates for angles π/4,π/3 and π/6; add these to
a graph of the unit circle. The remaining angles, 0
and π/2, represent the positive x- and y-axes. Recall
that a unit circle is centered at the origin and has a
radius of 1. Therefore, a unit circle intersects the
positive x-axis at point (1,0) and the positive y-axis
at point (0,1), as illustrated in the following diagram.

The coordinates follow a very predictable pattern. If
you begin at the positive y-axis and proceed
clockwise, the x-coordinates of the points are: 0, 1, 
. (Because 
, you could even
conclude that the x-coordinates are 
.) It
is important that you are able to recite all of these
coordinates from memory, given the corresponding
angle.
Here’s another way to memorize the angles and
their points. It involves the denominators of the
angles and cosine values:
* 
, and 1 + 2 = 3
* 
, and 2 · 2 = 4
* 
, and 3 · 2 = 6

3.24    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.
In Problem 3.23, you generate the first quadrant of
the trigonometric unit circle. Notice that the angle θ
= π/4 intersects the circle at point 
.
According to Problem 3.22, points on the unit circle
represent trigonometric values of angles.
Specifically, the terminal side of angle θ in standard
position intersects the unit circle at point (cos θ, sin
θ). Therefore, the x-coordinate of the intersection
point is the cosine of the angle.
Because the x- and y-coordinates are the same for θ
= π/4, you can also conclude that 
3.25    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.
The angle π/3, in standard position, intersects the
unit circle at point 
. The y-coordinate of this
point represents the sine of the angle.
3.26    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.
According to the diagram, a right angle (measuring
π/2 radians) in standard position intersects the unit
circle at point (0,1). The x-coordinate of this

intersection point represents the cosine of the
angle.
3.27    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.
This problem asks you to identify the angle θ in the
first quadrant that has a sine of 1/2. Note that many
angles have this sine value, but only one of those
angles is between 0 and π/2 radians, lying within the
first quadrant.
Recall that the sine value of an angle is equal to the
y-coordinate on the unit circle. Because the terminal
side of θ = π/6 intersects the unit circle at point 
, you can conclude that sin π/6 = 1/2.
3.28    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate cos–1 0.
This problem asks the following question: “Of the
angles listed in the diagram you generated in
Problem 3.23, which has a corresponding point on
the unit circle whose x-coordinate is 0?” Notice that
the terminal side of θ = π/2 intersects the circle at
point (0,1). Therefore, cos –1 0 = π/2.
3.29    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.

Recall that the tangent of an angle is equal to the
quotient of its sine and cosine values.
As Problem 3.24 explains, 
Substitute these values into the equation above.
Any non-zero number divided by itself is equal to 1,
even a weird number like 
.
3.30    Use the diagram you generated in Problem 3.23 to
calculate 
.
The secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine
function, so begin by calculating cos π/3. The
terminal side of θ = π/3 intersects the unit circle at
point 
; the x-coordinate of this point is the
cosine of the angle.
The secant of an angle is equal to the reciprocal of
its cosine value.
The reciprocal of 
, or just 2.

Common Angles on the Unit Circle
And their cosine/sine values
3.31    Expand the drawing you created in Problem 3.23
to include the following elements:
I.    A unit circle passing through all four
quadrants of the coordinate plane
II.   The terminal sides of 
, π, 
, and 2π in standard
position
II.  The coordinates of the points at which the
angles intersect the unit circle
Although a unit circle is simply a circle with a radius
of 1, the term “unit circle” often refers to the
drawing described in this problem. This diagram,
duplicated in Appendix B for reference, lists the
most commonly used angles in trigonometry, as
well as their cosine and sine values.
Most teachers expect you to memorize this unit
circle, including all of the angles and their
coordinates.

Problem 3.23 generates a single quadrant of the
unit circle, but a clear pattern exists for the points in
the other three quadrants. Though the signs of the
coordinates change, the coordinates themselves
remain constant:
Angles with a denominator of 3 are paired
with the point 
Angles with a denominator of 4 are paired
with the point 
Angles with a denominator of 6 are paired
with the point 
Angles with a denominator of 1 or 2 have x-
and y-coordinates of 0 or ±1

To help you generate the angles in the unit circle,
consider the following observations:
Angles in the first quadrant have a
numerator of 1
The numerators in the second quadrant are
exactly one less than the denominators
The numerators in the third quadrant are
exactly one more than the denominators
The numerators in the fourth quadrant are
exactly one less than twice the
denominators
It is very important that you can reproduce the
entire unit circle from memory and recall
coordinates given an angle (or vice versa). Most
instructors expect you to identify the cosine and
sine values of these angles without the use of a
calculator.
3.32    The diagram below indicates that both cosine and
sine are positive for angles whose terminal sides lie
in the first quadrant. Determine whether cosine and
sine are positive or negative in the remaining three
quadrants to complete the diagram, and justify your
answer.

Recall that the cosine and sine of an angle on the
unit circle are, respectively, the x- and y-coordinates
of the corresponding points. Therefore, cosine is
positive whenever a point is right of the origin, in
quadrants I and IV. Cosine is negative in quadrants II
and III.
Sine is positive whenever a point is above the origin,
in quadrants I and II; sine is negative in quadrants III
and IV.
3.33    Identify the signs of the tangent function in each of
the four quadrants of the coordinate plane. Justify
your answer.
Tangent is equal to the quotient of sine and cosine.
To determine the sign of tangent in each quadrant,

divide the sign of the sine function by the sign of the
cosine function in that quadrant. For example, in
quadrant I, both the sine and cosine are positive,
and a positive number divided by a positive number
is equal to a positive number.
Follow the same procedure for the remaining three
quadrants.
Tangent is positive whenever cosine and sine have
matching signs. In other words, when they are both
positive (quadrant I) or both negative (quadrant III).
Note: Problems 3.34–3.35 explain how to identify
trigonometric values based on the unit circle
diagram you generated in Problem 3.31.
3.34    Assuming θ = 
 is an angle in standard
position, in what quadrant does its terminal side lie?
To identify the quadrant in which an angle’s terminal
side lies, note that each quadrant of the coordinate
plane represents 90° or π/2 radians. Given an angle
measured in radians, examine the number
multiplied by π:
If 0 < θ < 0.5, the terminal side lies in the
first quadrant

If 0.5 < θ < 1, the terminal side lies in the
second quadrant
If 1 < θ < 1.5, the terminal side lies in the
third quadrant
If 1.5 < θ < 2, the terminal side lies in the
fourth quadrant
The number multiplied by π is 7/6 = 
 which
belongs to the interval 1 < θ < 1.5. Therefore, π =
7π/6 lies in the third quadrant.
Note: Problems 3.34–3.35 explain how to identify
trigonometric values based on the unit circle
diagram you generated in Problem 3.31.
3.35    Calculate 
.
According to Problem 3.31, angles of the unit circle
with a denominator of 6 are associated with the
coordinate 
. Problem 3.34 explains that
the terminal side of θ = 7π/6 lies in the third
quadrant, in which the x- and y-coordinates of
points are both negative. Recall that the cosine of
an angle is the x-coordinate of the associated point.
If you memorize the unit circle, you don’t need to go
through all of this logic to answer the question—you
just write 
. This explanation is just meant to step
you through the thought process that happens
behind the scenes.

Note: Problems 3.36–3.37 explain how to identify
trigonometric values based on the unit circle
diagram you generated in Problem 3.31.
3.36    Assuming 
 is an angle in standard position, in
what quadrant does its terminal side lie?
As Problem 3.34 explains, you can use the number
multiplied by π in a radian angle measurement to
identify the quadrant in which the terminal side lies:
3/2 = 1.5. Notice that this angle does not lie within
the bounds of the third quadrant (1 and 1.5), nor
does it lie within the bounds of the fourth quadrant
(1.5 and 2). Instead, it is the boundary of the third
and fourth quadrants, the negative y-axis. Angles
like θ = 3π/2, whose terminal sides lie on the x- or y-
axes, are called “quadrantals.”
Note: Problems 3.36–3.37 explain how to identify
trigonometric values based on the unit circle
diagram you generated in Problem 3.31.
3.37    Calculate 
.
As the diagram in Problem 3.31 illustrates, the angle
θ = 3π/2 in standard position intersects the unit
circle at point (0,–1). The y-coordinate of this point
represents the sine value of θ.
3.38    Calculate 
 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.

The angle θ = 3π/4 intersects the unit circle at point 
. The y-coordinate of this point represents
the sine value of the angle.
Don’t keep looking back at the unit circle you made
in Problem 3.31. At this point, you need to have
those angles, their cosines, and their sines
memorized.
Note that the sines of angles terminating in the
second quadrant, like the y-coordinates of points in
the second quadrant, are positive.
3.39    Calculate 
 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
The terminal side of angle θ = 2π/3 intersects the
unit circle at point 
; the cosine of θ is the x-
coordinate of this point.
3.40    Calculate 
 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
The terminal side of angle θ = 11π/6 intersects the
unit circle at point 
; the cosine of θ is the x-
coordinate of this point.

Ensure that you are reporting the correct signs in
your final answer. Because θ = 11π/6 lies in the
fourth quadrant, its cosine is positive and its sine is
negative.
3.41    Calculate 
 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
The terminal side of angle θ = 4π/3 intersects the
unit circle at point 
 in the third quadrant.
Therefore, sin 
3.42    Calculate 
 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
Recall that the cosine of an angle is equal to the
quotient of its cosine and sine values.
See the margin note next to Problem 2.28.
The terminal side of π = 5π/6 intersects the unit
circle in the second quadrant at point 
. The
x-coordinate of the point represents its cosine value,
and the y-coordinate represents its sine value.
Multiply the numerator and denominator by 2 to
reduce the complex fraction.

3.43    Calculate csc π without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
The cosecant function is defined as the reciprocal of
the sine function.
The terminal side of θ = π, which lies along the
negative x-axis, intersects the unit circle at point (–
1,0). Therefore, sin π = 0. Substitute this value into
the equation above.
Division by zero is an undefined operation.
Therefore, you conclude that csc π is undefined.
No cosecant value exists for π or any multiple of π.
You’ll see this more clearly when you graph
cosecant at the end of Chapter 6—there are big
linear asymptotes where the graph doesn’t exist.

3.44    Calculate tan 0 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
Note that the “0” in this problem represents the
angle measurement 0 radians, which describes an
angle whose initial and terminal sides overlap on
the positive x-axis. The tangent function is equal to
the quotient of the sine and cosine functions.
The terminal side of angle θ = 0 lies along the
positive x-axis and intersects the unit circle at point
(1,0). Therefore, sin θ = 0 and cos θ = 1.
The tangent of an angle measuring 0 radians is
equal to 0.
3.45    Calculate sin–1 1 without the use of a trigonometric
table or a graphing calculator.
Inverse trigonometric functions provide a
trigonometric value and ask you to identify the
angle associated with that value. For example, sin–1
1 asks this question: “What angle θ has a sine value
of 1?” Recall that the sine of an angle is equal to its
y-coordinate on the unit circle.
Consider the diagram you created in Problem 3.31;
only one point on that diagram has a y-coordinate of
+1, the point that corresponds with central angle θ
= π/2. Therefore, sin–1 1 = π/2.

Chapter 4
TRIGONOMETRIC VALUES OF GENERAL ANGLES
Think outside the unit circle
In Chapter 3, you familiarize yourself with the most commonly
used angles in trigonometry. However, applications in the real
world are rarely limited to angles that follow precise, predictable
patterns. In this chapter, you explore strategies that analyze
angles of any measurement. You begin by calculating reference
angles and coterminal angles, which allow you to express angle
measurements more manageably.
Did you wonder why the trig tables in Appendix A only
covered angles between 0° and 90°? Was it because people
in the olden days couldn’t conceive of anything bigger than
a right angle? Nope. Here’s the real reason (drumroll
please): No matter how big and ugly an angle is, you can
find an angle between 0° and 90° that has the same cosine
and sine values (and therefore the same tangent,
cotangent, secant, and cosecant values as well). There’s no
need for a trig table that’s 32 pages long when you can
settle for one that’s a quarter the size. Genius!
Why bother rewriting angles at all, you ask? It allows you to
apply everything you learned about right triangle trig (in
Chapters 2 and 3) to angles of any shape and size.
Reference Angles
Shrink rays that turn any angles into acute angles
4.1    Given acute angle θ in the diagram below, draw
reference angles in the second, third, and fourth
quadrants that have the same measure as θ.

A reference angle is an acute angle formed by a
terminal side and the x-axis. Reference angles are
not necessary in the first quadrant, but each of the
other quadrants requires them. The diagram below
illustrates the reference angles for the second, third,
and fourth quadrants, each with an angle measure
of θ.

Even though the size of θ may change, all reference
angles are acute. All four together resemble a
bowtie with a knot at the origin. Whenever you draw
a reference angle, it will look like one of these four
pieces of bowtie.
Note: Problems 4.2–4.5 refer to angle α in the
diagram below.
4.2    Draw β, the reference angle for α.
The terminal side of α lies in the second quadrant.
Recall that a reference angle is formed by the
terminal side of an angle and the x-axis, in this case
the negative x-axis. In the diagram below, β is the
reference angle for α.

Note: Problems 4.2–4.5 refer to the diagram in
Problem 4.2. Note that β is the reference angle for
α.
4.3    Given 
, calculate sin α.
The sine function is defined in terms of a right
triangle, equal to the length of the leg opposite an
angle divided by the length of the hypotenuse. Draw
a vertical line segment extending from the terminal
side of β to the negative x-axis, forming a right
triangle as demonstrated in the following diagram.
Because sin β = 4/5, the length of the vertical
segment (the leg opposite β) is 4, and the length of
the hypotenuse is 5.
You may be wondering why the x- and y-axes are
dotted in this diagram. Forget, for the moment, that
β is in the second quadrant. It is a reference angle,
and is therefore not required to be in standard
position. You can treat the right triangle as you
would any triangle not confined to a coordinate
plane. Its lengths are positive.
The purpose of a reference angle is to provide the
values you need for the original angle. Only when
you refer to the actual angle do you need to concern

yourself with the quadrants of the coordinate plane
and the signs of the functions.
Because sin β = 4/5, and β is the reference angle for
α, you can conclude that sin α = ±4/5. Angles and
their reference angles have trigonometric values
that are either equal or are opposites.
This is very important.
Now it is time to calculate the sine value of α, the
original angle.
In the second quadrant, where angles α and β
terminate, you travel left and up from the origin.
Therefore, x-values are negative and y-values are
positive. The side opposite β (the reference angle)
has a signed length of +4, because you travel
upward from the x-axis to reach the terminal side.
The hypotenuse is always considered a positive
value.
Therefore, sin α = 4/5, which is exactly equal to the
given value, sin β.
Note: Problems 4.2–4.5 refer to the diagram in
Problem 4.2. Note that β is the reference angle for
α.
4.4    Given 
, calculate cos α.
In Problem 4.3, you draw a vertical segment from
the terminal side to the x-axis in order to create a
right triangle. You can use that triangle again in this

problem. Because cos β = 3/5 (and cosine is the
quotient of the adjacent leg and the hypotenuse),
the length of the adjacent leg is 3 and the length of
the hypotenuse is 5.
The length of the opposite side is still 4, but that’s
not needed in this problem.
Recall that the trigonometric values of an angle and
its reference angle are either equal or opposites, so
cos β = 3/5. You determine the sign of 3/5 when you
consider the quadrant in which the terminal side of
α and β lie.
The terminal sides of α and β lie in the second
quadrant. As a result, the side adjacent to β (which
is horizontal) extends left of the origin. Therefore, it
has a negative signed length. Remember that the
length of the hypotenuse is always considered
positive.
Here’s a quick guide to signed lengths for each
quadrant:


I: horizontal and vertical: +
II: horizontal = –, vertical = +
III: horizontal and vertical: –
IV: horizontal = +, vertical = –

Seem familiar? They are also the signs of the x- and
y-coordinates for each quadrant.
You conclude that cos α is the opposite of cos β.
Note: Problems 4.2–4.5 refer to the diagram in
Problem 4.2. Note that β is the reference angle for
α.
4.5    Given tan 
, calculate tan α.
Begin this problem in the same way you began
Problems 4.3–4.4, drawing a vertical line from the
terminal side toward the x-axis to form a right
triangle.

Angle α (and its reference angle β) terminate in the
second quadrant, where horizontal signed lengths
are negative and vertical signed lengths are
positive.
Note: Problems 4.6–4.7 refer to the diagram below,
in which θ is an angle in standard position that
measures 135°.
4.6    Draw α, the reference angle for θ, and calculate 
in degrees.
The reference angle for θ is formed by the negative
x-axis and the terminal side of θ, as illustrated
below.

Notice that θ and α are supplementary—together
they form a straight angle whose initial side is the
positive x-axis and whose terminal side is the
negative x-axis. Therefore, the sum of their
measures is 180°.
Substitute 
 into the equation and solve for 
.
Note: Problems 4.6–4.7 refer to the diagram in
Problem 4.6, in which θ is an angle in standard
position that measures 135°.
4.7    Generalize your solution to Problem 4.6 in order to
create a formula that computes the reference angle α
for any angle θ in standard position, such that 
. Construct the equivalent formula for
angles measured in radians, as well.
You have to specify that the angle is between 90°
and 180° for this formula to work, because all kinds

of angles terminate in the second quadrant. For
example, a 495° angle in standard position also
terminates in the second quadrant, and 180° – 495°
= – 315° is definitely NOT its reference angle.
In Problem 4.6, you recognize that an angle in
standard position terminating in the second
quadrant has a supplementary reference angle.
Therefore, the measure of the reference angle is the
difference of 180° and the original angle. In Problem
4.6, angle θ in standard position has a measure of
135°, and its reference angle α has measure 180° –
135°, as illustrated below.
Given any angle θ in standard position such that 
, you can conclude (A) the angle
terminates in the second quadrant, and (B) the
measure of its reference angle is equal to the
difference of 180° and 
.
If angle θ is measured in radians, the measure of its
reference angle α is computed according to the
following formula.

These formulas are equivalent because 
.
Note: Problems 4.8–4.9 refer to an angle θ in
standard position and its reference angle α. Note
that 
.
4.8    Draw angles α and θ in the coordinate plane and
calculate the measure of α in degrees.
Angle θ measures 250°. An angle in standard
position that terminates at the negative y-axis has a
measure of 270°. Therefore, the terminal side of θ
lies 270° – 250° = 20° clockwise from the negative
y-axis, as illustrated in the following diagram.
Reference angle α is formed by the terminal side of
θ and the negative x-axis. Unlike the
angle/reference angle pair examined in Problems
4.6–4.7, θ and its reference angle overlap.
Notice that θ passes through quadrants I and II
before it overlaps angle α in the third quadrant.
Therefore, to calculate the measure of α, you

subtract the measure of the angle whose initial side
is the positive x-axis and whose terminal side is the
negative x-axis.
According to Problem 4.6, the angle containing the
first two quadrants measures 180°.
Note: Problems 4.8–4.9 refer to an angle θ in
standard position and its reference angle α. Note
that 
.
4.9    Generalize your solution to Problem 4.8 in order to
create a formula that computes the reference angle α
for any angle θ in standard position, such that 
. Construct the equivalent formula for
angles measured in radians, as well.
Any angle whose measure falls between 180° and
270° has a terminal side that lies in the third
quadrant. As Problem 4.8 demonstrates, the angle θ
and its reference angle α overlap in the third
quadrant. Therefore, the measure of reference angle
α is exactly 180° less than the measure of angle θ.
To calculate the measure of reference angle α in
radians, express 180° as π.
Note: Problems 4.10–4.11 refer to an angle θ in
standard position and its reference angle α. Note
that 
.

4.10    Draw angles α and θ in the coordinate plane and
calculate the measure of α in radians.
Angle θ terminates in the fourth quadrant. (You may
wish to convert the angle to degrees if you have
trouble visualizing radian angle measurements.) Its
reference angle α is formed by the terminal side of θ
and the positive x-axis, as illustrated below.
Notice that angles θ and α, when combined, form 1
full rotation in the coordinate plane. Therefore, the
sum of their measures is 2π (or 360°).
You are given 
. Substitute this value into the
equation and solve for 
.
Express both terms using the least common
denominator 3 and simplify the expression.

Note: Problems 4.10–4.11 refer to an angle θ in
standard position and its reference angle α. Note
that 
.
4.11    Generalize your solution to Problem 4.10 in order
to create a formula that computes the reference
angle α for any angle θ in standard position, such
that 
. Construct the equivalent formula for
angles measured in degrees, as well.
As Problem 4.10 demonstrates, the measure of
reference angle α is equal to the difference of 2π
and 
. To express this formula in degrees, convert
2π into 360°.
4.12    Given angle θ in standard form that measures
165°, calculate the measure of its reference angle α.
Because 90° < 165° < 180°, the terminal side of θ
lies in the second quadrant. According to Problem
4.7, the measure of reference angle α for a second-

quadrant angle θ is computed according to the
following formula.
Substitute the given measure of θ into the equation
to calculate the measure of reference angle α.
4.13    Given angle θ in standard form that measures
321°, calculate the measure of its reference angle α.
Because 270° < 321° < 360°, the terminal side of θ
lies in the fourth quadrant. According to Problem
4.11, the measure of reference angle α for a fourth-
quadrant angle θ is computed according to the
following formula.
Substitute the given measure of θ into the equation
to calculate the measure of reference angle α.
4.14    Given angle θ in standard form that measures 
,
calculate the measure of its reference angle α.
Note that the terminal side of θ lies in the third
quadrant, because π < 7π/6 < 3π/2. According to
Problem 4.9, the measure of reference angle α for a
third-quadrant angle θ is computed according to the
following formula.
Problem 3.34 explains how to figure out where an
angle’s terminal side lies. In fact, it uses this exact

angle as an example. Make sure you understand this
trick before you move on to Problem 4.15.
Substitute the given measure of θ into the equation
to calculate the measure of reference angle α.
4.15    Given angle θ in standard form that measures 
,
calculate the measure of its reference angle α.
The quotient of the numerator and denominator
(excluding π) is equal to 
, so the terminal side
of θ lies in the second quadrant. Apply the
appropriate reference angle formula to calculate the
measure of reference angle α.
The book is using the trick from Problem 3.34.

Coterminal Angles
Two angles that end at the same ray
4.16    If angles α and β are in standard position on the
coordinate plane and are coterminal, what can you
conclude about α and β? Can you conclude that α
and β have the same measure? Why or why not?
If two angles in standard position are coterminal,
their terminal sides coincide. In other words, their
terminal sides lie on the same ray. Recall that the
angles are in standard position, so their initial sides
coincide as well; both initial sides lie along the
positive x-axis. Although angles α and β have a
great deal in common, you cannot conclude that
they have the same measure.
Just because two angles begin and end at the same
ray, they may differ in the direction or in the
number of rotations about the origin. For instance,
an angle in standard position measuring 0 radians
and an angle in standard position measuring 2π
radians are coterminal, but the latter angle has a
significantly larger measure.
Note: Problems 4.17–4.18 refer to angles α and β in
standard position, such that 
 and 
.

4.17    Graph angles α and β to visually verify that they
are coterminal.
Angle α is positive, so the angle is measured
clockwise from its initial side at the positive x-axis.
Note that an angle in standard position measuring
(π/2 or 90°) terminates on the positive y-axis. Angle
β is negative, so it is measured counterclockwise
from the positive x-axis.
Angles α and β share the same terminal side (the
positive y-axis), so the angles are coterminal.
Note: Problems 4.17–4.18 refer to angles α and β in
standard position, such that 
 and 
.
4.18    Verify arithmetically that α and β are coterminal.
Coterminal angle measures are calculated by adding
or subtracting rotations in the coordinate plane.
Because α and β are measured in radians, adding 2π
(which represents one rotation in radians) to an

angle measure or subtracting 2π from an angle
measure produces a coterminal angle measure.
In the context of this problem, adding 2π to 
 or
subtracting 2π from 
produces the measure of the
other angle.
Because the sum of one angle measure and either
2π or –2π produces the other angle measure, angles
α and β are coterminal.
Note: Problems 4.19–4.20 refer to angles α and β in
standard position, such that 
 and 
.
4.19    Verify arithmetically that α and β are coterminal.
If two angles in standard position are coterminal,
then their measures differ by multiples of 1
revolution. Adding 1 revolution (360°) to the
measure of angle α produces the measure of β.
Thus, α and β are coterminal angles.
In other words, if you add 360° to an angle measure
you get one coterminal angle. Add another rotation,
2(360°) = 720°, to get another coterminal angle.
Add 360° multiplied by 3 to get yet another
coterminal angle. You could also multiply 360° by –
1, –2, –3, etc.

Adding or subtracting 360° means looping around
the coordinate plane and ending up where you
started. That’s why the angles have overlapping
terminal sides—they rotate 360° and return to the
place they began.
Alternatively, you could subtract 360° from 
 to
verify that the result is 
, also proving the angles
are coterminal.
Note: Problems 4.19–4.20 refer to angles α and β in
standard position, such that 
 and 
.
4.20    Graph angles α and β to visually verify that they
are coterminal.
Angle α has a terminal side that lies in the third
quadrant. It has a reference angle with measure
225° – 180° = 45°, so its terminal side forms a 45°
angle with the negative x-axis. Angle β is formed by
rotating once fully around the coordinate plane
(360°) and then traveling 585° – 360° = 225° to
terminate on the same ray as angle α.

4.21    Given an angle θ in standard position with a
measure of 320°, calculate the measures of one
positive and one negative coterminal angle.
Coterminal angles have measures that differ by
multiples of 1 rotation (360°). Therefore, adding
360° to the measure of θ produces a coterminal
angle.
Subtract 360° from the measure of θ to produce a
negative coterminal angle.
Thus, angles in standard position that measure –40°,
320°, and 680° are coterminal.
4.22    Given an angle θ in standard position with a
measure of 
, calculate the measures of one

positive and one negative coterminal angle.
Coterminal angles have radian measures that differ
by multiples of 1 rotation (2π radians). Add and
subtract 2π from 9π/8 to produce the measures of
two coterminal angles, one positive and one
negative.
Thus, angles in standard position that measure –
7π/8, 9π/8, and 25π/8 are coterminal.
4.23    Given an angle θ in standard position with a
measure of 
, calculate the measures of one
positive and one negative coterminal angle.
Unlike Problems 4.21–4.22, adding 2π (one rotation)
to this angle does not produce a positive result, as
demonstrated below.
That’s because 
is larger than one rotation: 
and 
.

Although the result is not positive, by adding 2π,
you identify a negative coterminal angle
measurement. To continue the search for a positive
coterminal angle, add 2π to this result.
The result is still negative (and represents yet
another negative coterminal angle), so add 2π to
this result.
is also a valid negative coterminal angle.
Therefore, angles in standard position with
measures –21π/5, –11π/5, and 9π/5 are coterminal.
4.24    Given an angle θ in standard position with a
measure of 1,691°, calculate the measure of
coterminal angle α, such that 
.
In Problem 4.23, you must repeatedly add 1 rotation
to negative coterminal angle measures until the
result is positive. In this problem, you must subtract
1 rotation (360°) repeatedly until the difference is
greater than or equal to 0° but less than or equal to
360°.

Therefore, 
and α lies within the interval
bounded below by 0° and above by 360°.
4.25    Evaluate cos 840° without the use of a graphing
calculator or a trigonometric table.
Apply the technique described in Problem 4.24 to
identify an angle coterminal to 840° but lying within
the interval bounded below by 0° and above by
360°. In other words, subtract 360° from 840°; if the
difference is greater than 360°, subtract 360° from
the result and repeat the process as necessary.
It doesn’t matter how many times you whirl around
the origin, like a pointer on a board game spinner. It
only matters where that pointer lands on the unit
circle. Each time you subtract 360°, you ignore 1
rotation.
Because 840° and 120° are coterminal angles, they
have equivalent trigonometric values: cos 840° =
cos 120°. The problem indicates that you cannot
use a graphing calculator to evaluate the function,
so the angle is likely on the unit circle. Calculate the
radian equivalent of 120°.
Indeed, the angle belongs to the unit circle.
Assuming you have memorized the unit circle—as

directed in Chapter 3—you should remember that
cos 2π/3 = –1/2. You conclude that cos 840° = –1/2.
If you need to review the unit circle, refer to
Appendix B.
4.26    Evaluate sin –675° without the use of a graphing
calculator or a trigonometric table.
In Problem 4.23, you repeatedly add 1 rotation to
coterminal angle measurements until the result is
positive. Apply the same technique here, repeatedly
adding 360°, until the result is positive.
Because –675° and 45° are coterminal angle
measures, their trigonometric values are equal: sin –
675° = sin 45°. Note that 45° is equivalent to π/4
radians, and according to the unit circle, 
.
You conclude that 
.
4.27    Given an angle θ in standard position with a
measure of 
, calculate the measure of
coterminal angle α, such that 
.
This problem, like Problem 4.26, requires you to
repeatedly add 1 revolution to the angle
measurement until the result is positive. Note that 1

revolution is equal to 2π radians, and the
denominator of the given angle measurement is 7.
Therefore, you should repeatedly add 2π = 14π/7 to
the angle measurements.
Thus, 
. Because 0 ≤ 4π/7 ≤ 14π/7, α is
coterminal to θ and lies in the interval bounded
below by 0 and above by 2π.
4.28    Evaluate 
without the use of a graphing
calculator or a trigonometric table.
Calculate the angle coterminal to 10π/3 that lies
between 0 and 2π by subtracting one revolution (2π)
from the angle.
Because 10π/3 and 4π/3 are coterminal, they have
the same trigonometric values.
4.29    Evaluate 
without the use of a graphing
calculator or a trigonometric table.

Calculate the angle coterminal to –43π/6 that lies on
the unit circle by repeatedly adding 2π = 12π/6 until
the result is positive.
Because –43π/6 and 5π/6 are coterminal, they have
the same trigonometric values.
Multiply the numerator and denominator by 2 to
reduce the complex fraction.
.
Angles Beyond the Unit Circle
Calculating trig values you didn’t memorize

Note: Problems 4.30–4.32 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the
third quadrant, such that 
.
4.30    Construct a right triangle in the third quadrant
using θ’s reference angle α. Include the signed
lengths of the legs in your diagram.
A third-quadrant reference angle is formed by the
terminal side of an angle and the negative x-axis.
Do not worry about precisely calculating the size of
θ or its reference angle α in your diagram. It is more
important to label the triangle correctly than to
precisely predict the size of the angles.
Just make sure the terminal side is in the third
quadrant.
Recall that the tangent ratio relates the opposite leg
and the adjacent leg, so the length of the leg
opposite α is 1 and the length of the adjacent leg is
3.

Notice that you must travel left and down from the
origin to reach the end of the hypotenuse in the
diagram. Therefore, the horizontal leg and the
vertical leg both have negative signed lengths in the
diagram. However, tan θ is positive because it is
equal to the quotient of the two negative lengths, as
demonstrated below.
This is true for any third-quadrant reference angle
right triangle. Points in the third quadrant have
negative x-coordinates (negative horizontal lengths)
and negative y-coordinates (negative vertical
lengths).

Note: Problems 4.30–4.32 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the
third quadrant, such that 
.
4.31    Calculate sin θ.
In Problem 4.30, you construct a right triangle and
indicate the signed lengths of its legs: –3 and –1.
Substitute these lengths into the Pythagorean
theorem to calculate the length of the hypotenuse
of that right triangle. Note that it does not matter
whether you substitute the lengths of the legs
(which are positive values) or the signed lengths of
the legs (which are, in this case, negative values),
because the Pythagorean theorem squares them. In
both cases, the result will be positive.
The sides really have lengths of +1 and +3. The
negatives are only there to indicate direction, so
most teachers leave them out of the Pythagorean
theorem.
Update the diagram from Problem 4.30 to include
the length of the hypotenuse.

Apply the sine ratio. Substitute signed lengths into
the following formula, remembering that the length
of the hypotenuse is always considered a positive
value.
To rationalize the denominator, multiply the
numerator and denominator by 
.
Note: Problems 4.30–4.32 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the

third quadrant, such that 
.
4.32    Calculate cos θ.
In Problem 4.30, you construct a right triangle and
determine the signed lengths of its legs; in Problem
4.31, you compute the length of its hypotenuse.
Refer to that right triangle when you calculate cos θ.
Rationalize the denominator to complete the
problem.
Note: Problems 4.33–4.35 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the
second quadrant, such that 
.
4.33    Construct a right triangle in the second quadrant
using θ’s reference angle α. Include the signed
lengths of the legs in your diagram.
Second-quadrant reference angles are bounded
above by an angle’s terminal side and below by the
negative x-axis. You are given sin q = 3/4. Recall
that the sine function is the ratio of the opposite leg
length to the length of the hypotenuse. Therefore,
the side opposite reference angle α has length 3 and

the length of the hypotenuse is 4, as illustrated in
the following diagram.
Notice that the signed length of the vertical leg is 3.
It is positive because it lies above the origin, in the
second quadrant.
However, the horizontal leg is LEFT of the origin, so
it is going to have a negative signed length (as
you’ll see when you calculate it in Problem 4.34).
Note: Problems 4.33–4.35 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the
second quadrant, such that 
.
4.34    Calculate tan θ.
In Problem 4.33, you create a right triangle based on
angle α, the reference angle for θ. The vertical leg of
the triangle has length 3 and the hypotenuse has
length 4. Apply the Pythagorean theorem to
calculate the length of the horizontal leg.

Recall that horizontal lengths in the second
quadrant (as well as the third quadrant) have
negative signed lengths. Complete the diagram you
began in Problem 4.33, filling in the length of the
horizontal leg: 
.
To calculate tan θ, use the signed lengths in the
diagram.
Rationalize the denominator.

Note: Problems 4.33–4.35 refer to an angle θ in
standard position whose terminal side lies in the
second quadrant, such that 
.
4.35    Calculate sec θ.
The secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine
function, which divides the length of the adjacent
leg by the length of the hypotenuse. Therefore,
secant does the opposite—it divides the length of
the hypotenuse by the length of the adjacent leg.
Consider the diagram you completed in Problem
4.34, which states that the signed length of the leg
adjacent to α is 
 and the length of the
hypotenuse is 4.
This is worth repeating in case you haven’t quite
wrapped your head around it: You can calculate the
trig values of an angle (like θ in this problem) if you
calculate the corresponding trig values of its
reference angle (like α) using SIGNED lengths.
Rationalize the denominator.

Note: Problems 4.36–4.39 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that cos θ = 
and sin θ < 0.
4.36    Identify the quadrant in which the terminal side of
θ lies.
The problem lists a negative value for cos θ and
states that sin θ < 0, so sin θ is negative as well. As
explained in Problem 3.32, cosine and sine values
are both negative in the third quadrant. Therefore,
the terminal side of θ lies in the third quadrant.
Note: Problems 4.36–4.39 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that cos θ = 
 and sin θ <
0.
4.37    Construct a right triangle using θ’s reference angle
α. Include the signed lengths of the legs in your
diagram.
According to Problem 4.36, the terminal side of θ
lies in the third quadrant, so the right triangle
should be located there. The cosine function is
defined as the quotient of the adjacent leg’s length
divided by the length of the hypotenuse.
In the diagram below, the signed length of the leg
adjacent to reference angle α is –5, and the length

of the hypotenuse is 8.
Note: Problems 4.36–4.39 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that cos θ = 
and sin θ < 0.
4.38    Calculate cot θ.
In Problem 4.37, you construct a right triangle in the
third quadrant based on α, the reference angle for θ.
You are given the lengths of the hypotenuse and the
horizontal leg adjacent to α, but you need to apply
the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the length of
the vertical leg opposite α.

The vertical leg of this right triangle extends below
the origin, so its signed length is 
, as illustrated
below.
Now that you know the length of the adjacent leg,
you can calculate cot θ.
A negative divided by a negative is equal to a
positive.
Rationalize the denominator.

Note: Problems 4.36–4.39 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that cos θ = 
and sin θ < 0.
4.39    Calculate csc θ.
The cosecant function is defined as the reciprocal of
the sine function, so it is the quotient of the lengths
of the hypotenuse and the opposite leg.
Rationalize the denominator.
Note: Problems 4.40–4.43 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that tan θ = 
 and sin θ <
0.
4.40    Identify the quadrant in which the terminal side of
θ lies.
You are given a negative value for tan θ, and
according to Problem 3.33, tangent is negative for
angles that terminate in either the second or the
fourth quadrant. You are also given sin θ < 0, which
(according to Problem 3.32) is true for angles in the
third and fourth quadrants. Therefore, the terminal
side of θ must lie in the fourth quadrant to satisfy
both of these conditions.

Note: Problems 4.40–4.43 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that tan θ = 
 and sin θ <
0.
4.41    Construct a right triangle using θ’s reference angle
α. Include the signed lengths of the legs in your
diagram.
As Problem 4.40 explains, the terminal side of θ lies
in the fourth quadrant. The reference angle α is
bounded below by that terminal side and above by
the positive x-axis. Notice that the horizontal leg of
the right triangle extends right of the origin, so its
signed length is positive; the vertical leg extends
below the origin, so its signed length is negative.
Recall that tangent is equal to the quotient of the
opposite and adjacent legs. Thus, the signed length
of the vertical leg opposite α is –7, and the signed
length of the horizontal leg adjacent to α is +4, as
illustrated below.
Note: Problems 4.40–4.43 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that tan θ = 
 and sin θ <

0.
4.42    Calculate cot θ.
You are given tan θ = –7/4. Recall that cotangent is
the reciprocal of tangent. Thus, cot θ = –4/7.
Note: Problems 4.40–4.43 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that tan θ = 
 and sin θ <
0.
4.43    Calculate cos θ.
In Problem 4.41, you create a right triangle in the
fourth quadrant and list the signed lengths of its
legs. Expand the diagram, calculating the length of
the hypotenuse according to the Pythagorean
theorem.
The leg adjacent to reference angle α has signed
length 4, the leg opposite α has signed length –7,
and the length of the hypotenuse is 
, as
illustrated in the following diagram.

Use this diagram to calculate cos θ.
Note: Problems 4.44–4.45 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that 
and sin θ > 0.
4.44    Calculate the following: sec θ, sin θ, and csc θ.
To calculate sec θ, take the reciprocal of the given
cosine value and rationalize the denominator.

Simplify the fraction to lowest terms.
To calculate sin θ (and its reciprocal sec θ), you must
construct a right triangle based on α, the reference
angle for θ. Given 
, you can create a right
triangle with an adjacent side of length 
and a
hypotenuse of length 10.
Note that θ terminates in the second quadrant,
because the problem states that cos θ < 0 and sin θ

> 0. Furthermore, the signed horizontal length is
negative because it extends left of the origin.
Apply the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the
length of the leg opposite α.
Note that the signed length of the vertical leg is 
, because it extends above the origin. Now calculate
sin θ.
The reciprocal of sin θ is equal to csc θ.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms.

.
Note: Problems 4.44–4.45 refer to an angle θ in
standard position such that 
and sin θ > 0.
4.45    Calculate tan θ and cot θ.
In Problem 4.44, you construct a right triangle in the
second quadrant based on α, the reference angle for
θ. You also determine the signed lengths of the legs
of the right triangle. The diagram below summarizes
the information.
Use the right triangle above to calculate tan θ.
Because 
, and you figured out what θ were
in Problem 4.44, you could divide the sine by the
cosine to get the answer.

Calculate the reciprocal of tan θ and rationalize the
denominator to compute cot θ.
.

Chapter 5
GRAPHING SINE AND COSINE FUNCTIONS
Get on the right wavelength
In the preceding chapters, you explore sine and cosine as
numeric values based on the lengths of the sides of a right
triangle. However, this does not provide a holistic picture of the
trigonometric functions themselves. Graphing the functions and
transforming those graphs are visually effective ways to better
understand sine and cosine as periodic functions.
The graphs of cosine and sine are “periodic,” which means
that they repeat over and over as you travel horizontally
across the graph. More specifically, they look like waves that
wiggle above and below the x-axis to a maximum height of
y = 1 and a minimum height of y = –1.
In this chapter, you graph sine and cosine, but you don’t
stop there. You also find out what happens to the graphs
when you tweak them a little. For example, once you know
what the graph of sin x looks like, you’ll be able to quickly
sketch the graphs of 3 · sin x and sin 2x.
However, before you even think about sine and cosine, it’s
worth spending some time with less complicated periodic
graphs to see how they work.
Periodic Functions
Graphs that repeat and sort of look like a heartbeat
Problems 5.1–5.5 refer to the graph of periodic
function f(x) below.

5.1    Identify the domain of f(x).
The domain of a function is the collection of values
for which the function is defined. Given a graph of a
function, the most straightforward method to
determine its domain is to imagine a series of
vertical lines on the coordinate plane. Any vertical
line drawn on the plane that intersects the graph
represents an x-value for which the function is
defined (and, therefore, a value in the domain of the
function).
The collection of all the numbers you can plug into
the function, usually in place of x or θ.
Consider the graph of f(x) in this problem. If you
were to draw a vertical line at x = 1, it would
intersect the graph at height y = 3. Therefore, the
function is defined at x = 1, and f(1) = 3. In fact,
any vertical line drawn on the coordinate plane
intersects this graph, so the domain of f(x) is all real
numbers.
The correct answer in set notation, if required by
your instructor, is “{x | x is a real number}.” Note

that the small vertical line between the x’s in set
notation is read “such that.” Therefore, you read the
answer as “the set of all x, such that x is a real
number.” Written in interval notation, the domain is
(–∞,∞).
Interval notation indicates a set of possible values
between two boundaries. In this case the
boundaries are 
 (the ends of the real number
line), so all of the real numbers fall within the
boundaries.
Problems 5.1–5.5 refer to the graph of periodic
function f(x) in Problem 5.1.
5.2    Identify the range of f(x).
In Problem 5.1, vertical lines in the coordinate plane
help you determine the domain of f(x), the set of
possible inputs for a function. Similarly, horizontal
lines that intersect the graph of a function represent
members of the range—the set of outputs for the
function.
Consider the given graph of f(x). If you were to draw
a horizontal line along the x-axis, which has
equation f(x) = 0 (or y = 0), it would intersect the
graph repeatedly. The function has a vertical height
of 0 at x = –6, x = –4, x = –3, x = –1, x = 0, x = 2, x
= 3, x = 5, and x = 6. Keep in mind that f(x) is a
periodic function, so the repetitive pattern of its
graph will continue in both the positive and negative
directions along the x-axis. It will intersect the graph
infinitely many times over the entire domain of f(x).
Horizontal lines as high as f(x) = 3 and as low as f(x)
= –1 intersect the graph, but anything outside of

those bounds will not. For instance, the horizontal
line f(x) = 4 that is 4 units above the x-axis lies a
full unit above the peaks of f(x); it does not intersect
the graph, so f(x) = 4 does not belong to the
domain.
Because the horizontal lines between (and
including) f(x) = –1 and f(x) = 3 all intersect the
graph, the domain of f(x) is –1 ≤ f(x) ≤ 3. In set
notation, the range is {f(x) | –1 ≤ f(x) ≤ 3}, and in
interval notation, the solution is [–1,3].
Parentheses in interval notation indicate that the
boundaries are excluded, and brackets mean the
boundaries are included. For example, [–1,3] means
“all the numbers between –1 and 3, INCLUDING –1
and 3.”
Problems 5.1–5.5 refer to the graph of periodic
function f(x) in Problem 5.1.
5.3    Identify the minimum and maximum function
values of f(x).
Problem 5.2 states that the range of f(x) is –1 ≤ f(x)
≤ 3, because the function has a maximum height of
3 and a minimum height of –1.
Problems 5.1–5.5 refer to the graph of periodic
function f(x) in Problem 5.1.
5.4    Calculate the amplitude of f(x).
The “amplitude” of a function is defined as the
difference of the function’s maximum and minimum
values, divided by two. According to Problem 5.3,
those values are 3 and –1, respectively.

Visually, the amplitude of a periodic function
represents the distance a function stretches from
the horizontal line that is equidistant from the
function’s maximum and minimum values—the
“middle” of the function, as illustrated below.
Think of the max and min as the top and bottom of
a big rectangle that stretches across the graph. If
you divide that rectangle in half, the amplitude is
the distance from the “middle” to the top and
bottom of the rectangle.
Problems 5.1–5.5 refer to the graph of periodic
function f(x) in Problem 5.1.
5.5    Calculate the period of f(x).

Recall that a periodic function infinitely repeats the
same function values in the coordinate plane. The
smallest horizontal distance over which the function
does not repeat is called the period of the function.
In other words, the period is the number of units,
along the x-axis, it takes for the function to repeat
itself.
Consider the graph of f(x). It intersects the x-axis at
x = 0, rises to a height of 3 at x = 1, returns to the
x-axis at x = 2, dips below the x-axis until
approximately x = 2.5, and then returns to the x-
axis at x = 3. The function repeats the same pattern
again between x = 3 and x = 6. In fact, the same
pattern is repeated left of the y-axis, between x = –
6 and x = –3 and again between x = –3 and x = 0.
The values of f(x) repeat every 3 units along the x-
axis, so the period of f(x) is 3. More formally, the
period is equal to the difference of two x-values
marking the beginning and end of one complete
iteration of the graph. For instance, the rightmost
full iteration of f(x) begins at x = 3 and ends at x =
6. Therefore, the period is 6 – 3 = 3.

Problems 5.6–5.9 refer to the graph of periodic
function g(x) below.
5.6    Identify the domain of g(x).
As Problem 5.1 explains, any vertical line that
intersects the graph of g(x) represents a member of
the domain. Any vertical line drawn on this
coordinate plane will intersect the graph, so the
domain of g(x) is all real numbers. In set notation,
the domain of g(x) is {x | x is a real number}; in
interval notation, the domain is (–∞,∞).
Problems 5.6–5.9 refer to the graph of periodic
function g(x) in Problem 5.6.
5.7    Identify the range of g(x).
Different instructors require you to report the
answer different ways, so the book lists the three
most commonly used formats. You don’t have to use
all three—just figure out which your instructor
prefers.

The function reaches a maximum height of 10 (at x
= –10, x = 2, and x = 14) and a minimum height of
–4 (at x = –5 and x = 7). All horizontal lines between
g(x) = 10 and g(x) = –4 also intersect the graph, so
the range of g(x) is –4 ≤ g(x) ≤ 10. In set notation,
the range is {g(x) | –4 ≤ g(x) ≤ 10}, and in interval
notation, the range is [–4,10].
Problems 5.6–5.9 refer to the graph of periodic
function g(x) in Problem 5.6.
5.8    Calculate the amplitude of g(x).
According to Problem 5.7, the maximum and
minimum values of g(x) are 10 and –4, respectively.
Substitute these values into the amplitude formula
presented in Problem 5.4.
Problems 5.6–5.9 refer to the graph of periodic
function g(x) in Problem 5.6.
5.9    Calculate the period of g(x).
To identify the period, locate points on the graph
that have the same height and determine whether
or not they represent a point after which the graph
repeats. For example, the graph of g(x) reaches its
maximum height at x = 2 and again at x = 14. In
both cases, the graph immediately drops to a height

of g(x) = 2 exactly 2 units to the right: g(4) = g(16)
= 2. The pattern is further confirmed when you
move 1 unit to the right; both graphs jump 3 units
higher: g(5) = g(17) = 5.
In the following diagram, one period of g(x) is
shaded, representing the horizontal distance
between two points at which g(x) reaches its
maximum value. You are not required to use the
maximum values of a periodic graph to mark the
“beginning” and “end” of one period. You may
choose to mark the beginning and end of a period
using any two corresponding points, such as
minimum points or x-intercepts, and your final
answer will be the same.
One period of g(x) is bounded on the left by the
vertical line x = 2 and is bounded on the right by
the vertical line x = 14. The period is equal to the
difference between these x values.
Note: Problems 5.10–5.12 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) below.

5.10    Identify the domain and range of h(x) on the
interval –2π ≤ x ≤ 2π.
The graph has vertical asymptotes at x = –π and x =
π, so vertical lines drawn at these x-values will not
intersect the graph. Whereas h(x) gets infinitely
close to the asymptotes as you approach those
dotted vertical lines from the right and the left, the
graph never actually intersects them. Hence, the
graph is undefined at x = –π and x = π. The domain
of h(x) is all real numbers, excluding –π and π. In set
notation, the domain is {x | x is a real number such
that –2π ≤ x ≤ 2π, x ≠ –π, and x ≠ π}. In interval
notation, the domain is 
.
Asymptotes are lines that a function approaches but
never reaches; they are usually drawn as dotted
lines. While they are not technically part of the
function, they definitely shape its graph.
The problem only asks you to identify the domain
for the portion of h(x) displayed in this diagram (–2π
≤ x ≤ 2π), but h(x) is periodic. All of the function

values (and the undefined values) will repeat
infinitely.
Horizontal lines drawn on the coordinate plane will
intersect h(x) at and above the x-axis, so the range
of h(x) is all real numbers greater than or equal to 0.
In set notation, the range is {h(x) | h(x) ≥ 0}. In
interval notation, the range is [0,∞).
Note: Problems 5.10–5.12 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) in Problem 5.10.
5.11    Calculate the amplitude of h(x).
The minimum value of the function is h(x) = 0, but
the function has no finite maximum value. Its graph
increases without bound as it approaches the
vertical asymptotes. Therefore, amplitude is not
defined for h(x).
Note: Problems 5.10–5.12 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) in Problem 5.10.
5.12    Calculate the period of h(x).
One full period of the graph occurs between x = –π
and x = π. To compute the period, calculate the
difference of the x-values.
Remember, h(x) is undefined at , at the asymptote.
If you add the period 
to (or subtract it from) that
undefined x-value, you get other x-values at which
h(x) is undefined. For example, 
, so h(x) is
also undefined at 
.

Transforming Periodic Graphs
Move, stretch, squish, and flip graphs
Note: Problems 5.13–5.17 refer to the graph of
periodic function f(x) below.
5.13    Graph f(x) – 1.
It is helpful to identify key points on a graph before
you attempt to transform it. For example, (–6,–2), (–
4,2), (–2,–2), (0,2), (2,–2), (4,2), and (6,–2) may be
considered key points on the graph of f(x) because
they are the points at which f(x) changes direction.
When you transform a graph, think about the way in
which the transformation affects the individual
points you’ve identified. For example, to graph f(x) –
1, you subtract 1 from each of the f(x), or y,
coordinates of the points. The transformed key
points on the graph of f(x) – 1 are (–6,–3), (–4,1), (–
2,–3), (0,1), (2,–3), (4,1), and (6,–3), as illustrated
below.

Subtracting a constant from a function shifts its
graph vertically downward the corresponding
number of units.
Note: Problems 5.13–5.17 refer to the graph of
periodic function f(x) in Problem 5.13.
5.14    Graph f(x) + 2.
As Problem 5.13 explains, subtracting a constant
from a function shifts its graph downward the
corresponding number of units. Similarly, adding a
constant to a function shifts its graph upwards.
Thus, the graph of f(x) + 2 is simply the graph of
f(x) shifted up 2 units on the coordinate plane.
In other words, a real number (not a variable).

Note: Problems 5.13–5.17 refer to the graph of
periodic function f(x) in Problem 5.13.
5.15    Graph f(x + 1).
Problems 5.13–5.14 explore the transformations that
occur when constants are added to, or subtracted
from, a function. This problem is slightly different,
because it adds 1 to the input of the function, rather
than the output. Accordingly, the graph will shift in a
horizontal direction rather than vertically.
Think about how adding 1 to the input of a function
affects its graph. If you substitute x = 0 into f(x), the
output is 2, so f(0) = 2. You will get the same output
(2) from the function f(x + 1) if you evaluate it for x
= –1.
Because the graph of f(x) passes through the point
(x,f(x)) = (0,2).

Because 1 is added to each input value, f(x + 1)
reaches f(x)’s function values exactly 1 unit sooner
than f(x). Interpreted graphically, this means that
f(x + 1) is the graph of f(x) shifted 1 unit to the left,
as illustrated below.
A horizontal shift is also called a “phase shift.”
Note: Problems 5.13–5.17 refer to the graph of
periodic function f(x) in Problem 5.13.
5.16    Graph f(x – 3).
As Problem 5.15 explains, adding a constant to the
input of a function—in other words, adding it inside
the parentheses rather than outside—shifts the
graph to the left. Similarly, subtracting a constant
from the input of a function shifts the graph to the
right. Therefore, the graph of f(x – 3) is the graph of
f(x) shifted 3 units to the right.
In the following diagram, corresponding key points
on the graph are compared. The y-intercept of the
original, dotted graph of f(x) is (0,2). This point is
shifted 3 units to the right in the graph of f(x – 3),

and the corresponding coordinate on the new graph
is (3,2).
Many students errantly interpret f(x – 3) as a
leftward horizontal shift, because they equate a
negative number with leftward movement in the
coordinate plane. Remember, adding within
parentheses results in a leftward shift and
subtracting within parentheses results in a rightward
shift.
Note: Problems 5.13–5.17 refer to the graph of
periodic function f(x) in Problem 5.13.
5.17    Graph f(x – 1) + 2.
The graph of f(x – 1) + 2 undergoes two
transformations from the base graph of f(x).
Subtracting 1 within parentheses results in a
horizontal shift 1 unit to the right. Adding 2 results
in a vertical shift of 2 units upward, as illustrated
below.

Consider key point (0,2) on the original graph of f(x).
Shifting this point 1 unit to the right and 2 units up
produces new point (0 + 1, 2 + 2) = (1,4) on the
graph of f(x – 1) + 2.
Note: Problems 5.18–5.21 refer to the graph of
periodic function g(x) below.
5.18    Graph 2g(x).
Problems 5.13–5.17 explain what happens to a
graph if you add or subtract a number from the
function and/or the function’s input. Problems 5.18–
5.21 explain how to handle multiplication.

Multiplying a function by 2 stretches the graph of
the function vertically by a factor of 2. In other
words, its maximum and minimum values stretch
twice as far from the x-axis. Consider the graph of
g(x); its maximum value is 1 and its minimum value
is 0. Once transformed, the new graph 2g(x) will
have a maximum value of 1 · 2 = 2, but its
minimum value remains unchanged: 0 · 2 = 0.
Much like adding a constant to a function shifts its
graph vertically (as explained in Problems 5.13–
5.14), multiplying a function by a constant stretches
its graph vertically.
Note: Problems 5.18–5.21 refer to the graph of
periodic function g(x) in Problem 5.18.
5.19    Graph 
.
Multiplying a function by a positive real number less
than 1 will compress the graph, rather than stretch
it. The original graph of g(x) has maximum and
minimum values of 1 and 0, respectively. Multiply
each by 1/3 to calculate the maximum and
minimum values of (1/3)(g(x)): (1/3)(1) = 1/3 and
(1/3)(0) = 0.

Note that the scale of the following graph is slightly
modified to better visualize the effects of this
transformation. The original, dotted graph of g(x)
stretches to a maximum height of 1, but the
transformed graph of (1/3)(g(x)) reaches only one-
third as high.
Note: Problems 5.18–5.21 refer to the graph of
periodic function g(x) in Problem 5.18.
5.20    Graph g(3x).
Multiplying the input of a function—in other words,
multiplying inside parentheses instead of outside—
either compresses or stretches the graph
horizontally. The coefficient of the independent
variable (in this case 3 is the coefficient of the
independent variable x) identifies the number of
periods that will repeat within one period of the
original graph.
This transformation is a bit more complex than
simple shifts, so it bears some further explanation.
To calculate the period of a transformed graph,
divide the period of the original graph by the
coefficient within parentheses. In this example, the
original graph of g(x) has a period of 3. Note that
the period is a positive value, so you must take the
absolute value of the quotient.

The period of the transformed graph g(3x) is 1, so
rather than requiring a horizontal distance of 3 to
complete one period of the graph, g(3x) requires a
horizontal distance of only 1. Therefore, three
complete periods of the graph appear where only
one period of the graph appeared originally, as
illustrated below.
So the graph of g(3x) has three humps between x =
0 and x = 3 instead of one hump like g(x).
Note: Problems 5.18–5.21 refer to the graph of
periodic function g(x) in Problem 5.18.
5.21    Graph 
.
As Problem 5.20 explains, multiplying the input of a
function by a constant either compresses or
stretches the graph horizontally. While multiplying
by a positive constant greater than 1 results in a
compressed graph (as demonstrated in Problem

5.20), multiplying by a positive constant less than 1
elongates the graph.
To compute the period of the transformed graph 
, divide the period of the original graph g(x) by
the coefficient of x.
Multiply the numerator and denominator of the
complex fraction by 2 to simplify it.
The transformed graph has a period of 6, so one
period is twice as long as a period of g(x), as
illustrated below.
The coefficient of x tells you how much of the new
graph will appear in one period of the old graph. In
this problem, g(x) has a period of 3, so you know
that only 1/2 of the original graph fits in the same
horizontal space. In other words, the period of the
new graph is twice the period of g(x).

Note: Problems 5.22–5.25 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) below.
5.22    Graph –h(x).
Multiplying a function by –1 reflects its graph across
the x-axis. To generate the transformed graph –h(x),
multiply the h(x)-coordinates (or y-coordinates) of
each point on the original graph by –1. For example,
key points on the original graph h(x) include (–4,–1),
(–3,–4), (0,–1), (1,–1), (2,–4), and (5,–1). Therefore,
the graph of –h(x) will contain points (–4,1), (–3,4),
(0,1), (1,1), (2,4), and (5,1).

Note: Problems 5.22–5.25 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) in Problem 5.22.
5.23    Graph h(–x).
Multiplying the input of a function by –1 reflects the
graph across the y-axis. To generate the
transformed graph h(–x), multiply the x-coordinate
of each point on the original graph of h(x) by –1. For
example, the key points on the original graph h(x)
include (–4,–1), (–3,–4), (0,–1), (1,–1), (2,–4), and (5,–
1); they correspond to the points (4,–1), (3,–4), (0,–
1), (–1,–1), (–2,–4), and (–5,–1) on the transformed
graph h(–x).

Note: Problems 5.22–5.25 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) in Problem 5.22.
5.24    Graph –2h(x).
This problem combines two transformations:
multiplying a function by –1 (which reflects the
graph across the x-axis) and multiplying a function
by 2 (which stretches the graph vertically). To
generate the graph, multiply the y-coordinate of
each point on the original graph of h(x) by –2. For
example, the point (0,–1) on h(x) corresponds with
the point (0,2) on –2h(x).
In other words, this combines Problem 5.18 (where
you stretch by a factor of 2) and Problem 5.22
(where you reflect across the x-axis).

Note: Problems 5.22–5.25 refer to the graph of
periodic function h(x) in Problem 5.22.
5.25    Graph h(–x) + 4.
This problem requires you to perform two
transformations. Because the input of the function is
–x rather than x, you must reflect h(x) across the y-
axis. Then, because 4 is added to h(–x), you must
shift the graph of h(x) up 4 units.

Note that horizontal and vertical shifts should be
completed after all reflections, stretches, and
compressions have been completed. In other words,
address multiplied constants before constants that
are added or subtracted.
Sine Functions
Oscillating between –1 and 1, until you transform them
5.26    Graph sin θ on the interval –2π ≤ θ ≤ 2π.
The graph of function f(θ) = sin θ is a periodic wave
that intersects the horizontal axis at multiples of π.
Consider one period of the graph, bounded on the
left by θ = 0 and on the right by θ = 2π. The
following sine values are derived from the
trigonometric unit circle: sin 0 = sin 2π = 0, sin π/2
= 1, sin π = 0, and sin 3π/2 = –1. Therefore, the
points (0,0), (π/2,1), (π,0), and (3π/2,–1) belong to
the graph of sin θ, as illustrated below.

5.27    Graph f(θ) = sin(θ – π).
As Problem 5.16 explains, subtracting π from the
input of a function shifts the graph of sin θ a total of
π units to the right.
5.28    Graph f(θ) = sin θ + 1.
As Problem 5.14 explains, adding 1 to a function
shifts its graph up 1 unit.

5.29    Graph f(θ) = –sin θ.
As Problem 5.22 explains, multiplying a function by
–1 reflects its graph across the x-axis.
5.30    Graph f(θ) = sin (–θ).
As Problem 5.23 explains, multiplying the input of a
function by –1 reflects its graph across the y-axis.

Note that reflecting sin θ across either the x- or y-
axis produces the same graph.
This is true for this graph, not for all graphs.
5.31    Graph f(θ) = 3sin θ and calculate the amplitude of
f(θ).
The function y = sin θ has an amplitude of 1,
because the untransformed graph of sin θ stretches
to a maximum vertical height of 1 and a minimum
height of –1. According to Problem 5.18, multiplying
sin θ by 3 changes the amplitude of the graph,
which now reaches maximum and minimum heights
of 3 and –3, respectively. Therefore, the amplitude of
f(θ) is 3.
If a trig function is multiplied by a real number, the
absolute value of that real number is the amplitude
of the graph. In other words, the amplitude of f(x) =
A · sin x is |A|. Amplitude is always a positive value.

5.32    Graph f(θ) = sin 2θ and calculate the period of f(θ).
As Problem 5.20 explains, multiplying the input of a
function by a real number greater than 1 causes the
graph to compress horizontally. In this problem, you
compress the graph of y = sin θ by a factor of 2
because the input θ is multiplied by 2. In other
words, two complete periods of sin θ appear
between θ = 0 and θ = 2π on the horizontal axis, in
the interval where one period of the untransformed
graph normally appears.

To calculate the period of f(θ), divide the period of
the untransformed graph y = sin θ by the coefficient
of θ in the transformed graph f(θ).
If the new graph has equation f(x) = sin (Bx), then
divide by B.
5.33    Graph 
.
Adding π/4 to the input of the function y = sin θ
shifts its graph left π/4 units; subtracting 2 from the
function shifts the graph down 2 units.

5.34    Graph 
.
Transform the graph of y = sin θ, compressing it to
one-third of its original amplitude, reflecting it about
the x-axis, and then stretching the graph
horizontally, so that only one-fourth of the original
graph of sin θ appears between 0 and 2π.

Cosine Functions
The sine graph schooched slightly to the left
5.35    Graph f(θ) = cos θ on the interval –2π ≤ θ ≤ 2π.
According to the trigonometric unit circle, cos 0 =
cos 2π = 1, cos π/2 = 0, cos π = –1, and cos 3π/2 =
0. The graph of f(θ) = cos θ is very similar to the
graph of y = sin θ. In fact, as Problem 5.36 explains,
the two graphs are equivalent apart from a simple
horizontal shift.
5.36    Graph f(θ) = cos θ and 
to visually verify
that f(θ) = g(θ).

The graph of g(θ) shifts the graph of y = sin θ a
horizontal distance of π/2 units to the left. The
resulting graph coincides with the graph of f(θ) =
cos θ.
Overlaps
5.37    Graph 
.
Multiplying the cosine function by 4 stretches its
amplitude by a factor of 4. Thus, the graph of f(θ)
stretches to a maximum height of 4 and a minimum
height of –4. Subtracting 3π/4 from the input of the
function shifts the graph 3π/4 units to the right.
Each of the tic marks along the x-axis represents a
distance of π/4, so move the graph three tic marks
to the right.

5.38    Graph f(θ) = cos(–3θ) + 2.
When graphing a function using numerous
transformations, you should complete them in the
following order:
1. Horizontal and vertical stretching/compression,
which occur when either the function or its input is
multiplied by a real number
2. Reflections about the x- or y-axes, which occur
when either the function or its input is multiplied
by –1
3. Horizontal and vertical shifts, which occur when a
real number is added to (or subtracted from) a
function or its input
Technically speaking, the first two steps in the list
above may be reversed, but horizontal and vertical
shifts must always be completed last.
In this problem, the input of y = cos θ is multiplied
by –3, so the graph of y = cos θ is reflected about
the y-axis and compressed by a factor of 3. Then,

because 2 is added to the function, the graph is
shifted upward a distance of 2 units.
The graph of 
 is “y-symmetric,” because the
right and left sides of the graph look like reflections
of each other, as if the y-axis were a mirror. When
you reflect a y-symmetric graph across the y-axis, it
looks exactly the same as it did before you reflected
it.
Note: Problems 5.39–5.40 explain how to graph 
, which contains a specific pair of

transformations: a horizontal shift and a period
change.
5.39    Calculate the θ-coordinates on the graph of g(θ)
that correspond with θ = 0 and θ = 2π on the
untransformed graph of y = cos θ.
If you multiply the input of a function by a real
number and add a value to (or subtract a value
from) the input as well, you have to apply a specific
technique to graph this pair of transformations.
In other words, if you graph a function f(x) = cos (Bx
+ C), where B ≠ 1 and C ≠ 0, then you have to
apply this technique. In this problem, B = 1/2 and 
.
The period of the untransformed graph y = cos θ is
2π. Recall that one full period of cos θ occurs
between the horizontal boundaries of θ = 0 and θ =
2π. To locate the starting and ending points of one
period on the transformed graph g(θ), set the
parenthetical quantity 
equal to 0 and 2π and
solve for θ.

Note: Problems 5.39–5.40 explain how to graph 
, which contains a specific pair of
transformations: a horizontal shift and a period
change.
5.40    Graph g(θ).
According to Problem 5.39, the period of y = cos θ
that normally lies between θ = 0 and θ = 2π lies
between θ = 2π and θ = 6π on the transformed
graph of g(θ). Note that neither the amplitude of y =
cos θ nor its vertical position changes.
Look at the graph of cosine between 
Draw that same shape between the new boundaries,
5.41    Graph 
and calculate its period.

Apply the technique described in Problems 5.40–
5.41. Because one full period of y = cos θ lies
between θ = 0 and θ = 2π, set the parenthetical
quantity 
equal to both values of θ to identify
the values of θ that bound one period of f(θ).
The portion of the untransformed graph y = cos θ
that lies between θ = 0 and θ = 2π will lie between
θ = π/8 and θ = 5π/8 on the transformed graph of
f(θ).
The period of a transformed graph is equal to the
absolute value of the original, untransformed period
divided by the coefficient of θ.

Note that the difference of the θ-values calculated
above is also equal to the period of f(θ).

Chapter 6
GRAPHING OTHER TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS
Tan, cot, sec, and csc
Chapter 5 explores graphical transformations, the effects that
constants have on the graphs of functions depending upon their
placement within the function. For example, multiplying by a
constant within a function stretches or compresses that
function, whereas adding or subtracting a value within the
function shifts its graph but does not affect its shape. In this
chapter, you are introduced to the graphs of the four remaining
trigonometric functions, and you apply the same
transformations to these slightly more complex graphs.
Sine and cosine are defined for all real numbers, but that’s
not true for the other four trig functions. Because tangent,
cotangent, secant, and cosecant are all defined as quotients
containing sine and/or cosine, graphs in this chapter are a
little more complicated. Whenever quotients are involved,
you have to worry about dividing by zero, which is not
allowed.
Any time the denominator of a trig function could equal
zero, you have to create an invisible fence in the graph—like
the kind people dig into their yards to keep their dogs from
running away. These “fences” are vertical lines called
asymptotes, which functions (like dogs) can approach but
not cross.
Tangent
Large function values, limited domain
6.1    Graph f(θ) = tan θ on the interval –2π ≤ θ ≤ 2π.

Recall that tan θ is defined as the quotient of sin θ
and cos θ. Therefore, tan θ is equal to 0 whenever
sin θ = 0, but tan θ is undefined whenever cos θ =
0. Points of interest on the graph of f(θ) include (0,
0), (π/4, 1), and (–π/4, –1).
6.2    Based on the graph you created in Problem 6.1,
identify the domain, range, and period of f(θ) = tan
θ.
As Problem 6.1 explains, f(θ) = (sin θ)/(cos θ) is
undefined whenever its denominator is equal to 0,
as indicated by vertical asymptotes on the graph.
Therefore, the domain of f(θ) is all real numbers
such that θ ≠ (kπ)/2, where k is an odd number.

In other words, the domain of cosine excludes 
 as well as the opposites of those
numbers.
Apply the technique first described in Problem 5.2 to
identify the range of the graph. Note that f(θ) = tan
θ has neither a minimum nor a maximum value, and
any horizontal line drawn on the coordinate plane
intersects the graph. Therefore, the range of f(θ) is
all real numbers.
One full period of the graph appears between
consecutive asymptotes. For example, one period of
f(θ) = tan θ lies between θ = –π/2 and θ = π/2.
Subtract those θ-values to calculate the period.
6.3    Graph g(θ) = 2tan θ.
Multiplying the function y = tan θ by 2 doubles each
of the function values. Consider the point (π/4, 1) on
the untransformed graph of y = tan θ. Multiply its y-
coordinate by 2 to generate the corresponding point
on the graph of g(θ). You conclude that g(θ) passes
through the point (π/4, 2).
Flip back to Problem 5.18 if you need to review this
transformation.

6.4    Graph 
 and identify the domain of h(θ).
Adding π/2 to the input of the untransformed
function y = tan θ shifts its graph π/2 units to the
left.
This is explained in Problem 5.21.

6.5    Identify the function k(θ) graphed below, a
transformation of the graph y = tan θ.

Two transformations change the graph of y = tan θ
into the graph of k(θ). First, it is shifted 1 unit up on
the coordinate plane, so you must add 1 to tan θ to
create k(θ). Second, the period of the graph is
compressed horizontally, so you will need to
multiply the input by a real number value. It
appears that the graph is compressed by a factor of
2, but it is important to verify this observation
empirically.
Notice that one full period of the graph lies between
two consecutive vertical asymptotes, θ = –π/4 and θ
= π/4, for example. Thus, the period of k(θ) is the
distance between those θ-values.
The graph is, indeed, compressed horizontally by a
factor of 2, because the new period is half the size
of the original period 
. Thus, the input of
function k(θ) should be multiplied by 2.
This is explained in Problem 5. 21.
If you need further evidence, recall that the period
of a transformed graph is equal to the absolute
value of the untransformed period divided by the
coefficient of θ in the transformed function. In the
following formula, let x represent the coefficient of θ
in k(θ). Solve the proportion for x.

In conclusion, the graph of k(θ) is compressed
horizontally by a factor of 2 and is shifted up 1 unit.
Therefore, k(θ) = tan (2θ) + 1.
Cotangent
A reflection of tangent
6.6    Graph f(θ) = cot θ on the interval –2π ≤ θ ≤ 2π and
identify the period of f(θ).
Recall that f(θ) = cot θ is defined as the quotient of
cos θ and sin θ. Therefore, it is equal to 0 (and
intersects the x-axis) whenever cos θ = 0 and is
undefined whenever sin θ = 0.

Like the graph of y = tan θ, the graph of f(θ) = cot θ
passes through the point (π/4, 1), as demonstrated
below.
As illustrated in the graph of cot θ, one period of the
graph lies between vertical asymptotes θ = 0 and θ
= π. Therefore, the period of f(θ) is the distance
between those θ-values.
Thus, the graphs of tangent and cotangent both
have the same period, π.
6.7    Based on the graph you created in Problem 6.6,
identify the domain and range of f(θ) = cot θ.
The graph of f(θ) = cot θ has vertical asymptotes at
each multiple of π. Hence, the domain of cot θ is all
real numbers such that θ ≠ kπ, where k is an
integer. Like the graph of y = tan θ, the graph of f(θ)
= cot θ increases and decreases without bound, and
any horizontal line drawn on the coordinate plane
intersects the graph. Thus, the range of f(θ) is all
real numbers.
cot θ is not defined at 
6.8    Graph j(θ) = cot (–θ) + 2.
Compared to the untransformed function y = cot θ,
the input of j(θ) is multiplied by –1 and 2 is added to

the function value. Therefore, to graph j(θ), you
reflect the graph of y = cot θ about the y-axis and
move it up two units.
6.9    Graph 
.
All of the points on h(θ) are one-third as high as the
corresponding points on the graph of y = cot θ.
Furthermore, two periods of h(θ) lie in the interval 0
< θ < π, where only one interval of y = cot θ lies.

6.10    Create a function g(θ), a transformation of y = tan
θ that coincides with the graph of f(θ) = cot θ.
Reflecting the graph of tangent across the x-axis
and then moving it to the left π/2 units produces the
graph of f(θ) = cot θ. Thus, the graph of g(θ) = –tan
(θ + π/2) coincides with the graph of f(θ).
 and 
 are other correct
answers.
Note that there are numerous correct answers to
this problem. You can reflect the graph of y = tan θ
across either the x- or the y-axis, and you can shift
the reflected graph π/2 units to the left or the right.
Secant
U-shaped pieces that shoot off of the cosine graph
Note: Problems 6.11–6.13 explore the graph of f(θ)
= sec θ.
6.11    Draw the graph of y = cos θ as a dotted curve on
the coordinate plane and use the graph to determine
the domain and period of f(θ) = sec θ.
Notice that sec θ = 1/cos θ and tan θ = (sin θ)/(cos
θ) have the same denominator, cos θ. They also
have the same domain, because they are both

undefined only when cos θ = 0. Problem 6.2 states
that the domain of tan θ is all real numbers such
that θ ≠ kπ/2, where k is an odd number; that is also
the domain of f(θ) = sec θ.
If cos θ = 0 then 
, but you aren’t allowed to
divide by 0.
The function values of f(θ) = sec θ are equal to the
reciprocals of the corresponding values of cos θ, so
they repeat when the values of cos θ repeat.
Because y = cos θ has period 2π, you conclude that
f(θ) = sec θ also has period 2π.
In other words, if f(x) is the reciprocal of periodic
function g(x), then f(x) and g(x) have the same
period.
Note: Problems 6.11–6.13 explore the graph of f(θ)
= sec θ.
6.12    Demonstrate how the graph of f(θ) = sec θ can be
generated from the graph you created in Problem

6.11.
Recall that sec θ and cos θ are reciprocal functions.
Therefore, the larger one function is, the smaller the
other is. For example, according to the unit circle,
cos π/3 = 1/2. The corresponding value of secant is
larger: 
Given an even smaller cosine
value, the secant grows even larger: if cos θ =
1/100, then 
.
Graphically speaking, as the graph of cos θ gets
closer to the x-axis, the graph of sec θ increases or
decreases without bound. As illustrated in the
following graph, f(θ) = sec θ has the same vertical
asymptotes as the graph of y = tan θ; both are
undefined at θ = kπ/2, where k is an odd number. As
the graph of f(θ) = sec θ approaches the vertical
asymptotes at those values, the function values are
very large positive or negative numbers, like the
graph of tan θ.
If cosine is tiny and positive, secant is a huge
positive number; if cosine is tiny and negative, then
secant is a huge negative number.

Notice that the graphs of cos θ and sec θ share
point (0, 1). According to the unit circle, cos 0 = 1,
and the reciprocal of 1 is 1. Similarly, the graphs
share point (π, –1) because cos π = sec π = –1.
Note: Problems 6.11–6.13 explore the graph of f(θ)
= sec θ.
6.13    Use the graph you generated in Problem 6.12 to
identify the range of f(θ).
Horizontal lines drawn on the coordinate plane
intersect the graph of f(θ) at height f(θ) = 1 and
above, as well as height f(θ) = –1 and below.
However, the graph does not exist between heights
of –1 and 1. Therefore, the range of f(θ) is all real
numbers excluding any value y such that –1 < y <
1. In interval notation, the range of f(θ) is 
.
6.14    Graph g(θ) = –sec θ – 1.
Begin with the graph of y = sec θ and apply two
transformations. Multiplying a function by –1 reflects

it across the x-axis, and subtracting 1 from it moves
the graph down 1 unit.
6.15    Graph h(θ) = sec (3θ).
Consider one period of the untransformed secant
graph, beginning at θ = 0 and ending at θ = 2π. The
graph of h(θ) will contain three full periods of this
shape in the same horizontal interval, as illustrated
below.

Cosecant
Similar to secant, but based off of sine
Note: Problems 6.16–6.18 explore the graph of f(θ)
= csc θ.
6.16    Draw the graph of y = sin θ as a dotted curve on
the coordinate plane and use the graph to determine
the domain of f(θ) = csc θ.
In Problem 6.11, you determine the domain of sec θ
by examining the graph of its reciprocal, cos θ. As
that solution demonstrates, sec θ is undefined
wherever cos θ intersects the horizontal axis.
Similarly, f(θ) = csc θ is undefined at each value of θ
at which sin θ intersects the horizontal axis.

Thus, the domain of f(θ) is all real numbers such
that θ ≠ kπ, where k is an integer. Note that f(θ) =
csc θ has the same domain as y = cot θ, as cot θ
and csc θ have the same denominator, sin θ.
The sine function is equal to zero at positive and
negative multiples of 
Note: Problems 6.16–6.18 explore the graph of f(θ)
= csc θ.
6.17    Demonstrate how the graph of f(θ) = csc θ can be
generated from the graph you created in Problem
6.16.
Consider the solution to Problem 6.12, which
explains that small values on a function correspond
with large values on the reciprocal function. Thus,
whenever the graph of y = sin θ approaches the
horizontal axis, the graph of f(θ) increases or
decreases without bound.

Note: Problems 6.16–6.18 explore the graph of f(θ)
= csc θ.
6.18    Use the graph you generated in Problem 6.17 to
identify the range of f(θ).
Like the graph of y = sec θ, any horizontal line
drawn on the coordinate plane intersects the graph
of f(θ) = csc θ except horizontal lines between f(θ)
= –1 and f(θ) = 1. Thus, the range of f(θ), like the
range of y = sec θ identified in Problem 6.13, is all
real numbers excluding any value y such that –1 < y
< 1. In interval notation, the range of f(θ) is 
.
6.19    Graph 
.
One full period of y = csc θ lies between θ = 0 and θ
= 2π. Because the input of g(θ) is multiplied by 1/2,
only half of that period appears in the transformed
graph of g(θ), as illustrated below.

The period of cscθ (like the period of secθ) is 2π.
6.20    Graph 
.
The graph of h(θ) is the graph of y = csc θ reflected
across the x-axis and shifted to the left π/4 units.

Chapter 7
BASIC TRIGONOMETRIC IDENTITIES
Simplifyingtrig statements
This chapter is the first of two dedicated to trigonometric
identities, equivalency statements that will serve as tools for
future chapters and mathematics courses. The preceding
chapters focus on a concrete representation of trigonometric
functions—how they are defined in terms of right triangles, how
they derive their values from the unit circle, and how they are
affected graphically with the introduction of real number values.
In order to master more advanced trigonometric theorems,
however, you must first focus on comparatively more abstract
concepts.
The first six chapters of the book may have felt a little like
geometry, but the next clump of chapters will feel more like
algebra. This chapter marks the beginning of trig identities,
formulas you need to memorize. These formulas allow you
to manipulate complicated trig expressions and make them
much simpler looking and easier to deal with. And don’t
worry about having to commit even more things to memory
—unlike the unit circle, you’ll use these formulas so much,
the memorization will come naturally.
Each new section in this chapter brings a new batch of
identities to memorize. Basically, all of the problems in each
section will fall into one of two categories:
1. Simplifying trig expressions (sort of like simplifying
fractions to lowest terms, so that what you end up with
is nicer looking than what you started with)
2. Verifying identities (where you take an equation that
doesn’t look like it could possibly be equal and show
that it is)

Reciprocal and Cofunction Identities
Cos is reciprocal of sec, cofunction of sin
7.1    List the six cofunction identities and explain how
they are related.
Each of the three trigonometric functions that begin
with the prefix “co-” is described as the “cofunction”
of the function with the same name, when the prefix
is omitted. For example, sine and cosine are
cofunctions. If f(x) and g(x) are trigonometric
cofunctions, then substituting π/2 – x into one of the
functions is equivalent to substituting x into its
cofunction.
The other two pairs of cofunctions: secant/cosecant,
tangent/cotangent
For example, because sin x and cos x are
cofunctions, the following statements are true.
Ensure that you state the parenthetical quantity
correctly—you must subtract x from π/2, not vice
versa. Apply this pattern to the four remaining
cofunctions to complete the set of six cofunction
identities.

7.2    Simplify the expression: 
.
As Problem 7.1 explains, 
, so substitute
the equivalent quantity into the expression to
simplify it.
The product (sin x)(sin x) may also be written (sin
x)2, but the notation sin2 x is more common. Note
that the statement (sin x)(sin x) = sin x2 is incorrect
—multiplying sin x times itself is equal to the square
of the entire quantity (sin x), not just the sine of x2.
If an entire trig expression is squared, write the
exponent after the name of the function. In other
words, (cos 5x)(cox 5x)(cos 5x) = cos3 5x. If you
write “cos 5x3,” it looks like you’re plugging 5x3
into cosine, not raising (cos 5x) to the third power.
7.3    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply a cofunction identity to rewrite cot (π/2 – x) as
its cofunction, tan x.
Notice that tan x and –5 tan x are like terms, so they
should be combined to simplify the expression; the
result is –4 tan x.

7.4    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply the cofunction identity sin (π/2 – θ) = cos θ to
rewrite the numerator of the fraction.
Reducing the fraction (cos θ)/(cos θ) to lowest terms
produces the equivalent value 1. However, you
cannot conclude that (cos θ)/(cos θ) = 1 for all
values of θ. For instance, substituting θ = π/2 into
the expression produces an indeterminate value, as
demonstrated below.
Typically, instructors do not require you to state
limitations of simplified expressions, so 1 is an
acceptable answer for this problem.
7.5    List the six reciprocal functions and express each in
terms of sine and cosine.
Each of the six trigonometric functions can be
expressed as the reciprocal of another trigonometric
function, as demonstrated below.
Furthermore, the tangent and cotangent functions
may be expressed in terms of sine and cosine.

7.6    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply the cofunction identity cos (π/2 – θ) = sin θ to
rewrite the denominator.
According to a reciprocal identity, 1/sin θ = csc θ.
7.7    Simplify the expression: 
.
It is helpful to rewrite this expression as a product—
the numerator divided by 1 multiplied by the
denominator divided into 1.
Recall that 1/csc θ = sin θ.
Because 
 you could have rewritten 
 as 
 but that answer is not as simplified as 
.
7.8    Rewrite the expression as a single fraction: sec θ +
tan θ.
Express sec θ and tan θ in terms of sine and cosine.

The fractions have a common denominator, so they
may be combined.
7.9    Simplify the expression: sec x (cos x – 1).
Express sec x in terms of cosine using a reciprocal
identity.
Apply the distribution property, multiplying each of
the terms within the parenthetical quantity by 1/cos
x.
Note that cos x/cos x = 1 and 1/cos x = sec x.
= 1 – sec x
7.10    Simplify the expression: 
.
According to a cofunction identity, tan 
 = cot
x. Therefore, tan2 
 = cot2 x.
Rewrite the expression cot2 x · sec3 x in terms of
sine and cosine to simplify.

This answer is pretty good—it’s probably okay if you
stopped here. However, an answer without fractions
is usually better than one with fractions in it.
Apply reciprocal identities to eliminate the fraction.
7.11    Simplify the expression: 
.
Express cot θ in terms of sine and cosine, and apply
a cofunction identity to rewrite the denominator
within brackets.

7.12    Simplify the expression: 
.
Express sec x and cot x in terms of sine and cosine,
and apply a cofunction identity to rewrite csc2 (π/2 –
x) as sec2 x.
Apply the distributive property.
cos x = cos1 x, so when you multiply (cos x)(cos2
x), it’s the same as multiplying (cos1 x)(cos2 x). Add
the exponents when you multiply: (cos1 x)(cos2 x) =
cos1 + 2 x = cos3 x.
Negative Identities
What happens when you plug in –x?

7.13    Evaluate each of the six trigonometric functions
for –x to generate the negative trigonometric
identities.
Consider the graphs of the trigonometric functions
that you generate in Chapters 5 and 6. Any graph
that is symmetric about the y-axis—in other words,
the graph is a reflection of itself across the y-axis, as
though that vertical line were a mirror—is described
as an “even function.” If f(x) is an even function,
then f(–x) = f(x). You get the same output when a
real number and its opposite are substituted into the
function.
Of the six trigonometric functions, only two have y-
symmetric graphs and are, therefore, even
functions: cos x and its reciprocal sec x. Therefore,
cos (–x) = cos x and sec (–x) = sec x. The other four
trigonometric functions are origin-symmetric, and
are considered “odd functions.” If g(x) is an odd
function, then g(–x) = –g(x). Hence, substituting x
and –x into an odd function produce opposite
results: sin(–x) = –sin x, tan (–x) = –tan x, csc (–x) =
–csc x, and cot (–x) = –cot x.
Odd functions do exactly opposite things on either
side of the origin. Think of the graph of tangent as
an example. Immediately to the right of the origin,
the graph shoots up and to the right, but to the left
of the origin, the graph shoots down and to the left.
7.14    Simplify the expression: sin (–x) csc (–x).

Both sine and cosecant are odd functions, as
explained in Problem 7.13, so sin (–x) = –sin x and
csc (–x) = –csc x.
sin (–x) csc (–x) = (–sin x)(–csc x)
Apply a reciprocal identity to simplify the
expression, and note that the product of two
negative values is positive.
7.15    Write the expression as a single fraction: 3sec (–θ)
+ 2.
Secant is an even function, so sec (–θ) = sec θ.
Apply a reciprocal identity to express the first term
as a fraction.
In order to add the terms, they must share a
common denominator, so multiply the numerator
and denominator of the second term by cos θ.

7.16    Verify the statement: 
.
Whereas the preceding problems in this chapter ask
you to simplify an expression, this problem directs
you to verify a statement—an equation. In order to
prove the statement true, you will manipulate one
or both sides of the equation until it is absolutely
clear that both sides of the equation are equal.
In this problem, you should manipulate the right
side of the equation, applying the negative identity
cos (–x) = cos x.
Because tangent is defined as the quotient of sine
and cosine, tan x = sin x/cos x. is an obviously true
statement, so you have successfully verified the
original statement.
7.17    Verify the statement: 
.
In order to verify this statement, you will simplify
each side of the equation individually. Begin by
applying the negative identities cos (–x) = cos x and
tan (–x) = –tan x to the left side of the equation.
Now apply a cofunction identity to the right side of
the equation.

–cos x tan x = –(sin x)
The statement is not yet obviously true. Multiply
both sides by –1 and express tan x in terms of sine
and cosine.
Expressing everything in terms of sine and cosine is
a very useful trick for verifying trig statements.
Remember it.
The final equation (sin x = sin x) is an obviously true
statement that is logically equivalent to the initial
equation. Because the final statement is true, you
can conclude that the first statement is true as well.
7.18    Simplify the expression: 
.
Although it may appear so at first glance, cot (θ –
π/2) is not a cofunction identity, because the
argument of the trigonometric expression is θ – π/2,
not π/2 – θ. In order to apply the cofunction identity,
you must factor –1 out of the terms in order to
reverse them, as demonstrated below. Notice that

the –1 that is factored out of the expression still
appears within the argument of cotangent.
“Argument” means “the thing you plug into the
function.” In other words, the argument of sin x is x.
According to the negative identities, cot (–x) = –cot
x.
In other words, that –1 you just factored out of the
input can now be pulled out of the input and placed
in front of the function.
Apply cofunction identities and express the
functions in terms of sine and cosine.
7.19    Verify the statement: 
.
Apply negative identities to simplify the left side of
the equation, and then express the functions in
terms of sine and cosine.

Now that you have fully simplified the left side of
the equation, simplify the right side. Notice that
dividing by sec x is the same as multiplying by its
reciprocal, cos x.
Remember, once you get an obviously true
equation, you’ve verified the original statement.
7.20    Verify the statement: 
.
Both cosine and secant are even functions, so
according to the negative identities, cos (–x) = cos x
and sec (–x) = sec x. Note that adding fractions
requires common denominators, so you must
multiply the numerator and denominator of the first

fraction by sec x + 1 and multiply the numerator
and denominator of the second fraction by cos x +
1.
Multiply the factors in the denominator using the
FOIL method. Note that (sec x)(cos x) = 1 because
secant and cosine are reciprocal functions.
Any value divided by itself, even something big like
(sec x + cos x + 2), is equal to 1.
7.21    Write the fraction as a sum or difference of two
terms: 
.
Note that this problem simply asks you to simplify a
single expression, not to verify an equation (like
Problems 7.19 and 7.20). To begin, apply a negative
identity to express sin (–x) as –sin x.

If a fraction contains two or more terms in the
numerator and only one term in the denominator,
then you can rewrite that fraction as the sum or
difference of the individual numerator terms, each
divided by the common denominator.
For example, 
.
7.22    Verify the statement: 
.
Begin by applying negative identities to rewrite sin
(–x) and sec (–x), and then use the technique
demonstrated in Problem 7.21 to express the single
fraction on the left side of the equation as two
fractions with a common denominator.
If you add 1 to both sides of the equation, and apply
a reciprocal identity to rewrite sec x as 1/cos x, the
result is a proportion.

Cross-multiply to eliminate the fractions from the
equation and simplify.
Pythagorean Identities
For example, cos2 x + sin2 x = 1
7.23    List the three Pythagorean identities, in terms of θ.
Each of the three Pythagorean identities is an
equation that contains two squared trigonometric
functions, a sum, and the real number 1.
cos2 θ + sin2 θ = 1
1 + tan2 θ = sec2 θ
1 + cot2 θ = csc2 θ
Note that θ, x, or any other variable may be used in
the identities; the choice of variable does not affect
the validity of the statement. For example, the first
identity written in terms of x is equally valid: cos2 x
+ sin2 x = 1.
7.24    Verify that the Pythagorean identity relating sine
and cosine is true for θ = π/4.

According to Problem 7.23, cos2 θ + sin2 θ = 1.
Substitute θ = π/4 into each of the trigonometric
functions and square the values to verify that the
equation is true.
means the same thing as 
. Plug in 
to get 
and then square that.
Any non-zero real number divided by itself equals 1.
In this case, 4/4 = 1, so the statement is true.
7.25    Verify that the Pythagorean identity relating
secant and tangent is true for θ = π/6.
Substitute θ = π/6 into the Pythagorean identity 1 +
tan2 θ = sec2 θ and verify that the resulting
statement is true.

Multiply the entire equation by 3/4 to eliminate the
fraction in the denominators.
7.26    Simplify the expression: 
.
Recall that cos2 x + sin2 x = 1. If you subtract sin2 x
from both sides of that identity, you produce the
equally valid identity cos2 x = 1 – sin2 x. Therefore,
you can replace 1 – sin2 x in the numerator of this
expression with cos2 x.
Dividing by sec x is the same thing as multiplying by
its reciprocal, cos x. This works just like Problem 7.7,

where dividing by cosecant is the same as
multiplying by sine.
7.27    Simplify the expression: 
.
According to a Pythagorean identity, 1 + tan2 θ =
sec2 θ. If you subtract 1 from both sides of that
equation, you produce the equally valid identity tan2
θ = sec2 θ – 1. Use this identity to rewrite the
numerator of the fraction and simplify.
7.28    Simplify the expression: 
.
Factor sin x out of each term in the numerator, and
factor cos x out of each term in the denominator.
If you need to review factoring, look at Chapter 12 in
The Humongous Book of Algebra Problems.
If you subtract cos2 x and 1 from both sides of the
expression cos2 x + sin2 x = 1, the result is sin2 x –
1 = –cos2 x.

If you subtract cos2 x from both sides of the
Pythagorean identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1, the result
is sin2 x = 1 – cos2 x. Use this equation to rewrite
the parenthetical quantity in the denominator. Then,
simplify the fraction.
7.29    Verify the statement: csc4 θ – cot4 θ = 2csc2 θ – 1.
Factor the difference of perfect squares on the left
side of the equation.
(csc2 θ – cot2 θ) (csc2 θ + cot2 θ) = 2csc2 θ – 1
Recall that 1 + cot2 θ = csc2 θ. If you subtract cot2 θ
from both sides of that Pythagorean identity, the
result is 1 = csc2 θ – cot2 θ. Use this statement to
simplify the left side of the equation.
(1) (csc2 θ + cot2 θ) = 2csc2 θ – 1
Add and subtract like terms to simplify the
expression.
Subtract 
 from both sides, then add 1 to both
sides. You end up with a Pythagorean identity, so
you’re done.
7.30    Simplify the expression: 
.

In order to add the fractions, you need to express
them in terms of the least common denominator (1
– sin x)(1 + sin x).
Combine like terms in the numerator and multiply
the factors in the denominator.
Note that 1 – sin2 x = cos2 x, as explained in
Problem 7.26.
7.31    Verify the statement: 
.
Expand the left side of the equation, and rewrite the
single fraction on the right side of the equation as
the sum of two fractions with common denominator
cos2 θ.

According to a Pythagorean identity, 1 + tan2 θ =
sec2 θ.
Both sides of the equation are equal, so the original
statement is verified.
7.32    Verify the identity: 
.
This equation is a proportion, so you can cross-
multiply to eliminate the fractions.
Like most of the problems in this chapter, there are
different ways to verify the statement. For example,
you could rewrite cos2 x as (1 – sin2 x) and then
factor that as (1 + sin x) (1 – sin x). Then, you can
simplify the fraction on the right side of the
equation, eliminating (1 + sin x) from the numerator
and denominator.

Combine the fractions on the left side of the
equation and apply the Pythagorean identity cos2 x
+ sin2 x = 1, rewritten as 1 – sin2 x = cos x.
7.33    Verify the statement: 
.
Dividing by tan x is equivalent to multiplying by its
reciprocal, cot x.
Rewrite the trigonometric functions in terms of sine
and cosine and simplify.
Note that cos2 x – 1 = –sin2 x.
Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine and Cosine
Expanding things like sin (x + y)
7.34    Apply an identity to express both of the following
expressions as a sum of two products: sin (x + y) and
sin (x – y).

Sum and difference identities allow you to rewrite a
trigonometric statement whose argument is a sum
or a difference. The result is usually not simpler; you
transform a single trigonometric statement into a
sum or difference of two products. Though these
identities do not necessarily simplify an expression,
they are no less important.
The argument of sin (x + y) is (x + y).
sin (x + y) = sin x cos y + cos x sin y              sin(x – y) = sin
x cos y – cos x sin y
Notice that the left-hand formula above contains
addition signs on both sides of the equation. In the
right-hand formula, both are replaced by subtraction
signs. Because the signs match, some textbooks
combine the pair of formulas into a single formula,
as demonstrated below.
If the argument has addition in it, you substitute an
expression that also contains addition. Subtraction
works the same way.
sin (x ± y) = sin x cos y ± cos x sin y
Note: Problems 7.35–7.36 demonstrate two
different ways to calculate sin 105°, an angle not
on the standard unit circle, using two angles that
do appear on the standard unit circle.
7.35    Given 45° + 60° = 105°, apply a sum formula to
calculate the exact value of sin 105°.
Because 45° + 60° = 105°, you can write the
expression sin 105° as sin (45° + 60°). Notice that

both of the angles in the sum appear in the unit
circle (45° = π/4 radians and 60° = π/3 radians), and
you should have these sine and cosine values
committed to memory. Apply the sum formula for
sine (stated in Problem 7.34).
Note: Problems 7.35–7.36 demonstrate two
different ways to calculate sin 105°, an angle not
on the standard unit circle, using two angles that
do appear on the standard unit circle.
7.36    Given 135° – 30° = 105°, apply a difference
formula to calculate sin 105°.
In Problem 7.35, you apply a sum formula to
calculate sin 105°. In this problem, you apply a
difference formula, and the results are equal. Note
that 135° = 3π/4 radians and 30° = π/6 radians.

7.37    Apply an identity to rewrite each of the following
expressions as a sum of two products: cos (x + y)
and cos (x – y).
The cosine sum and difference formulas are similar
to the sine sum and difference formulas, with two
major dissimilarities. Rather than products of
different trigonometric functions (like sin x cos y),
the cosine formulas contain products of the same
function (cos x cos y). Furthermore, the signs within
the formulas are opposites; if the argument contains
an addition sign, you expand it into an expression
containing a subtraction sign.
cos (x + y) = cos x cos y – sin x sin y               cos (x – y) =
cos x cos y + sin x sin y
Because the two signs in each expression are
opposites, some textbooks combine the formulas
above into a single formula using the symbols “
” to indicate the change in sign.
Note: Problems 7.38–7.39 explain how to calculate
cos 
, an angle not on the standard unit circle,
using two angles that do appear on the standard
unit circle.
7.38    Identify two angles on the unit circle that have a
difference of 
.
Notice that 
, as demonstrated below.

Note: Problems 7.38–7.39 explain how to calculate
cos 
, an angle not on the standard unit circle,
using two angles that do appear on the standard
unit circle.
7.39    Apply the difference formula for cosine to the
angles you identified in Problem 7.38 to calculate cos
.
Recall that cos (x – y) = cos x cos y + sin x sin y.
7.40    Compare the trigonometric values calculated in
Problems 7.35, 7.36, and 7.39, and justify the
similarities or differences.

According to Problems 7.35, 7.36, and 7.39, sin 105°
= cos (–π/12). To explain why this is true, it is helpful
to express the degree measure in radians.
Therefore, these problems conclude that sin (7π/12)
= cos (–π/12). This is true according to the
cofunction identity sin (π/2 – θ) = cos θ, if θ = –π/12.
While it may be, at first, surprising that sin 105° =
cos (–π/12), a cofunction identity easily verifies the
equality of the statements.
7.41    Verify the cofunction identity 
.
Apply the difference formula for cosine to expand
the left side of the equation and demonstrate that
both sides of the statement are equal.

7.42    Students often mistakenly apply the distributive
property to trigonometric arguments, resulting in
incorrect claims such as 
.
Demonstrate that this statement is incorrect.
Do you see the error here? You can’t distribute the
letters “sin” through parentheses. Those letters
don’t represent a value—they are just the name of
the function.
Evaluate each side of the equation individually and
then compare the values to demonstrate they are
unequal. Begin with the left side of the equation.
Now simplify the right side of the original statement.
The left and right sides of the original statement
have different values, so the original statement is
incorrect.
7.43    Simplify the expression: 
.

Apply the difference formulas for sine and cosine.
7.44    Verify the statement: sin (x + y) + sin (x – y) = 2
sin x cos y.
Expand the expressions on the left side of the
equation and simplify.
The two sides of the equation are clearly equal, so
the original statement is verified.
7.45    Given an angle w that terminates in the third
quadrant and an angle z that terminates in the fourth
quadrant, such that 
, calculate sin (w +
z).

Two angles, w and z, are described in this problem.
You are given the quadrant in which those angles
terminate, and you are provided one trigonometric
value of each angle. In order to solve the problem,
however, you will need additional information, as
you discover when you expand the expression sin (w
+ z).
sin (w + z) = sin w cos z + cos w sin z
While you are given the values of sin w and cos z,
you also need the values of cos w and sin z to
substitute into the sum formula for sine. Apply the
techniques described in Problems 4.36–4.43 (and
illustrated in the following diagram), to calculate the
missing values.
x and y have negative SIGNED values because x is
left of, and y is below, the origin.
According to the diagram, 
.
Substitute these values, and the original values
given by the problem, into the expanded sum
formula for sine.


Chapter 8
ADVANCED TRIGONOMETRIC IDENTITIES
“Advanced” means “brimming with fractions”
Chapter 7 introduces the concept of trigonometric identities—
true statements that are applied to simplify and verify
trigonometric expressions and statements. In this chapter, you
explore more advanced trigonometric identities, including
double-angle, half-angle, power-reducing, product-to-sum, and
sum-to-product formulas. Most of the identities in Chapters 7
and 8 are expressed in terms of sine and cosine, but the final
section of this chapter explores identities involving the tangent
function.
Chapter 7 dealt with trig expressions containing “x.”
(Remember, x is called the “argument” of the expression
cos x.) This chapter deals with more complicated
arguments, like cos 2x and sin x/2.
Don’t start this chapter unless you’ve already finished
Chapter 7, because you’ll see some of those single-angle
identities seep through into these problems. Focus your
attention on the first and last sections of this chapter
(double angles and tangent identities). The rest of the
sections discuss identities that are used much less
frequently—they each have a particular niche that makes
them useful only in very specific circumstances.
Double-Angle Formulas
Ditch the 2s in sin 2x and cos 2y
8.1    Express sin 2x as a product of single-angle
trigonometric functions.

The expression sin 2x is described as a “double
angle,” because the argument of the expression is
2x rather than simply x. The identity below allows
you to rewrite the double-angle expression sin 2x as
the product of two single-angle expressions.
sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x
8.2    Verify your answer to Problem 8.1 by applying the
sum formula for sine.
Apply the sum formula for sine to expand sin 2x.
Note that sin 2x = sin (x + x).
This formula comes from Problem 7.34.
8.3    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply the double-angle identity sin 2x = 2 sin x cos
x to expand the numerator, and then simplify the
fraction.
8.4    Calculate sin 2θ, given cosθ 
.

This problem provides the cosine of θ and indicates
that θ terminates in the second quadrant. Apply the
technique modeled in Problems 4.30–4.45 (and
again in Problem 7.45) to calculate sin θ. Note that
sin θ = +5/13. Substitute the known values of cos θ
and sin θ to calculate sin 2θ.
Draw a right triangle in the second quadrant with an
adjacent side with signed length –12 and a
hypotenuse with length 13. Then use the
Pythagorean theorem to calculate the signed length
of the opposite side: +5.
8.5    Calculate sin 2α, given sinα 
.
Apply the technique described in Problem 8.4 to
calculate the value of cos α, knowing α terminates
in the fourth quadrant and sin α = –1/4. According to
the Pythagorean theorem, cosα
. Note
that cos α > 0 because angles in the fourth
quadrant have positive cosine values and negative
sine values. Substitute cos α and sin α into the sine
double-angle formula to calculate sin 2α.

8.6    Verify the statement: (1 – cos 2x)(1 + cos 2x) = 4
sin2 x cos2 x.
Multiply the terms left of the equal sign.
According to a Pythagorean identity, cos2 x + sin2 x
= 1. This identity is true for any value of x. For
example, if you replace x with 2x, the identity
remains valid: cos2 2x + sin2 2x = 1. If you subtract
cos2 2x from both sides of the new identity, the
result is sin2 2x = 1 – cos2 2x. Use this equality
statement to rewrite the left side of the equation
above.
sin2 2x = 4 sin2 x cos2 x
Note that sin2 2x = (sin 2x)(sin 2x).
8.7    Verify the statement: 
.
Recall that csc x and sin x are reciprocal functions.
Therefore, 
. Use this equality statement to

rewrite the left side of the statement. Express the
right side of the statement in terms of sine and
cosine.
Combine the fractions on the right side of the
equation using least common denominator 2 sin x
cos x.
According to a Pythagorean identity from Problem
7.23, cos2x + sin2x = 1.
8.8    Rewrite the double-angle expression cos 2x as a
difference of single-angle cosine and sine
expressions.
There are three different ways to convert the
double-angle expression cos 2x into a single-angle
expression, but only one way that contains both sine
and cosine: cos 2x = cos2 x – sin2 x.
Be careful with the sign:
cos2 x + sin2 x = 1
cos2 x – sin2 x = cos 2x

8.9    Verify your answer to Problem 8.8 using the sum
formula for cosine.
Notice that 2x = x + x. Apply the sum formula for
cosine (originally stated in Problem 7.37) to expand
cos (x + x).
8.10    Apply a Pythagorean identity to rewrite your
solution to Problem 8.8 in two different ways: (A) in
terms of cosine only, and (B) in terms of sine only.
If you subtract cos2 x from both sides of the
Pythagorean identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1, the result
is sin2 x = 1 – cos2 x. Use this equality statement to
rewrite the cosine double-angle formula in terms of
cosine.
Similarly, you can manipulate the Pythagorean
identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1 to assert that cos2 x = 1
– sin2 x. Use this equality statement to rewrite the
cosine double-angle formula in terms of sine.
Thus, there are three equivalent ways to rewrite cos
2x using single-angle trigonometric expressions.

8.11    Verify the statement: sin 4x = 4 cos3 x sin x – 4 cos
x sin3 x.
Note that 4x = 2x + 2x and apply the sum formula
for sine to expand sin 4x.
Thus, sin 4x is equal to 4 cos3 x sin x – 4 cos x sin3
x, as proposed in the original problem, and the
statement is verified.
8.12    Express cos 3x in terms of single-angle cosine
functions.
Note that 3x = x + 2x, and apply the sum formula
for cosine.
Apply the double-angle formula cos 2x = 2 cos2 x –
1, because the problem directs you to write the
expression in terms of cosine.
Instead of cos2 x – sin2 x and 1 – 2 sin2 x, because
each of those contains sine.

According to a Pythagorean identity, sin2 x = 1 –
cos2 x.
You get this by subtracting cos2 x from both sides of
the identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1.
8.13    Simplify the expression: 
.
Factor the difference of perfect squares in the
numerator. Notice that rewriting the denominator as
5 (2 sin θ cos θ) allows you to apply the sine double-
angle formula.
8.14    Use a double-angle formula to verify that cos
To use the double-angle formula, you need to find an
angle you can double to get π/3:
Multiplying π/6 by 2 produces the angle π/3.
Therefore, you can substitute π/6 into the cosine
double-angle formula to verify that cos (π/3) = 1/2,

as dictated by the unit circle. The following solution
applies the double-angle formula cos 2x = cos2 x –
sin2 x, but all three of the cosine double-angle
formulas produce the same result.
8.15    Calculate cos 2θ, given sin 
 and 
.
Unlike Problems 8.4–8.5, in which you needed to
construct a right triangle to calculate missing
trigonometric values, knowing that sin θ = –3/4 is
sufficient to complete this problem—as long as you
select the correct cosine double-angle formula.

8.16    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply a cofunction identity and a reciprocal identity
to rewrite the bracketed expression and then
distribute –2 sin x to each term.
Apply two double-angle formulas to simplify the
expression: sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x and cos 2x = 1 – 2
sin2 x.
Power-Reducing Formulas
Rewrite squared functions using double angles
8.17    List the power-reducing formulas for cos2 θ and
sin2θ.
Power-reducing formulas not only remove the
exponents from the trigonometric expression, they
also rewrite the expression entirely in terms of
cosine.
You end up with cosines of double angles.

8.18    Verify the power-reducing formula for sin2 θ that
you identified in Problem 8.17.
Expand the right side of the power-reducing formula
by applying the double-angle formula cos 2θ = 1 – 2
sin2θ.
The final statement sin2θ = sin2θ is obviously true;
therefore, the original statement is verified.
8.19    Apply a power-reducing formula to express cos4θ as
a sum of cosine functions raised to the first power.
Express cos4θ as (cos2 θ)2 and apply the power-
reducing formula to rewrite cos2θ.
To rewrite cos2 2θ using the power-reducing formula
 replace x with 2θ

Apply the power-reducing formula once again to
eliminate the exponent from the expression.
Add the constants to simplify the expression: 1/4 +
1/8 = 3/8.
The solution (1/8)(3 + 4 cos 2θ + cos 4θ) is also
correct.
8.20    Apply a power-reducing formula to express cos2 x +
sin4 x as a sum that includes cosine functions raised
to the first power.
Express sin4 x as the product (sin2 x)(sin2 x) and
apply the power-reducing formulas.

Once again, apply the power-reducing formula 
, this time replacing θ with 2x.
HANDY TIP: To check your answer for this (or any
other) problem that asks you to simplify, graph the
original expression and the simplified version as two
separate equations on your graphing calculator. If
the graphs overlap, you simplified correctly.
8.21    Verify the statement: (sin2θ)(cos2 θ) = (sin2 2θ).
Rewrite the factors on the left side of the equation,
applying power-reducing formulas.

Multiply the entire equation by 4 to eliminate the
fractions.
If x = 2θ, then the final statement is equivalent to
the Pythagorean identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1.
Because that statement is true, the original
statement is verified.
Half-Angle Formulas
Win half an argument by being radical
8.22    Generate the cosine half-angle formula based on its
power-reducing formula.
Substitute θ = x/2 into the cosine power-reducing
formula, and solve the equation for cos (x/2).
Look at Problem 8.17 to review the power-reducing
formulas.

Note that the half-angle formula contains a “±”
symbol, because the formula, itself, is not sufficient
to determine the sign of cos (x/2). Instead, you must
use additional information given by the problem,
such as the quadrant in which the angle lies.
8.23    Substitute θ =  into the power-reducing formula
for sin2 θ to generate the half-angle formula for sine.
Apply the technique demonstrated in Problem 8.22.
8.24    Apply a half-angle formula to calculate the exact
value of cos 22.5° without using a calculator or
trigonometric table.

Although you have not memorized the value of cos
22.5°, you have memorized the trigonometric
values for twice that angle: 2(22.5°) = 45°. To
calculate cos 22.5°, substitute 45° into the half-
angle formula presented in Problem 8.22. Note that
an angle in standard position that measures 22.5°
terminates in the first quadrant, so cos 22.5 > 0.
Sine and cosine are both positive in the first
quadrant.
Express the complex fraction as a sum of two
fractions with a denominator of 2. Note that 
.
8.25    Apply a half-angle formula to calculate the exact
value of sin 
 without using a calculator or
trigonometric table.

Apply the method demonstrated in Problem 8.24,
substituting 11π/6 into the half-angle formula for
sine, because 11π/12 is half of 11π/6. Note that the
angle 11π/12 lies in the second quadrant because 
. (According to the technique described in
Problem 3.34, the angle lies in the second quadrant
because 
.) Recall that sine values are
positive for angles in the second quadrant, so you
should replace the “±” sign in the half-angle formula
with a “+” sign.

8.26    Simplify the expression using a half-angle formula: 
.
This expression resembles the cosine half-angle
formula 
, if θ = 12x.
Therefore, you can conclude that 
is equal to
± cos 6x. Note, however, that the radical expression
given in the problem is positive, so cos 6x must be
positive as well. Surround cos 6x with absolute value
signs to ensure that its value is greater than zero.
8.27    Simplify the expression using a half-angle formula: 
.
This radical expression resembles the sine half-angle
formula 
, if θ = 5x.

The problem states that the radical expression is
negative. To ensure that the equivalent expression
sin (5x/2) is also negative, surround it with absolute
value bars and then take its opposite.
The absolute value bars work just like they did in
Problem 8.26. Then, you multiply that absolute
value expression (which HAS to be positive) by –1,
so the product HAS to be negative.
The solution 
 is also correct.
Product-to-Sum Identities
Add or subtract, instead of multiplying, trig functions
8.28    List the product-to-sum formulas that correspond
with each of the following four products: cos α cos β,
sin α sin β, cos α sin β, and sin α cos β.
The product-to-sum formulas are not typically used
to simplify a product, as the equivalent sums are
usually lengthier. They are specifically designed to
rewrite a product of sine and/or cosine expressions
as a sum of sine or cosine expressions.

Notice that a product of two matching trigonometric
functions (cos α cos β or sin α sin β) translates into
a sum containing cosine functions. Alternately,
products that include different trigonometric
functions (cos α sin β and sin α cos β) translate into
a sum containing sine functions.
8.29    Verify the product-to-sum formula for sin α sin β.
According to Problem 8.28, 
. Apply the sum and
difference formulas for cosine to expand the right
side of the equation and verify the statement.
If you need to review these sum and difference
formulas, flip back to Problem 7.37.
8.30    Write the following product as a sum or difference:
cos x sin 2x.
Apply the cos α sin β product-to-sum formula
presented in Problem 8.28. Note that α = x and β =
2x.

According to a negative identity presented in
Problem 7.14, sin (–x) = –sin x.
8.31    Verify the statement: 
.
Notice that cos2 4x = (cos 4x)(cos 4x). Apply the cos
α cos β product-to-sum formula to expand the left
side of the equation, such that α = 4x and β = 4x.
Multiply both sides of the equation by 2 in order to
eliminate the fractions, and recall that cos 0 = 1
(according to the unit circle).
Both sides of the equation are equal—the order in
which you add does not affect the sum according to

the commutative property of addition—so the
original statement is verified.
Sum-to-Product Identities
Do the opposite of the last section
8.32    List the sum-to-product formulas that correspond
with each of the following four sums: cos α + cos β,
cos α – cos β, sin α + sin β, sin α – sin β.
The sum-to-product formulas, like the product-to-
sum formulas discussed in Problems 8.28–8.31, are
not typically applied to simplify an expression.
Rather, they are used exclusively to express a sum
or difference as a product.
The sum-to-product formulas only apply when you
are adding or subtracting two cosines or two sines.
In other words, there IS a formula for cos x + cos y,
but there ISN’T a formula for cos x + sin y.
8.33    Demonstrate that the following expression is
equivalent to the corresponding sum-to-product
formula: 

Begin by evaluating the given expression; its angles
belong to the standard trigonometric unit circle.
Now apply a sum-to-product formula to rewrite the
expression as a product.
To combine π/2 and π/6, you must express π/2 in
terms of the least common denominator: π/2 = 3π/6.
The expression now contains angles that appear on
the standard unit circle. Evaluate the angles and
simplify the expression.

The original sum and the corresponding product
have the same value: 
.
8.34    Calculate the exact value of sin 105° + sin 15°
without using a calculator or trigonometric table.
Apply the sum-to-product formula for sin α + sin β,
such that α = 105° and β = 15°.
If you are accustomed to radian measures, note that
60° = π/3 and 45° = π/4.
8.35    Verify the statement: 
.
Apply sum-to-product formulas to expand the
numerator and denominator of the fraction.

The final statement (cot x = cot x) is true, so the
original statement is verified.
Tangent Identities
Sum/difference, double/half-angle, and power-reducing
formulas
8.36    Apply a sum or difference formula to calculate tan
75° without using a calculator or trigonometric table.
Problems 7.34–7.45 explore the sum and difference
formulas for sine and cosine; the sum/difference
formula for tangent is presented below.
In other words, tan (x + y) 
 and tan (x –
y) 
Note that “±” symbols appear on the left side of the
equation and in the numerator of the fraction.
Therefore, those signs match. The symbol “ ”
represents the opposite sign.

Notice that 75° = 30° + 45°. Therefore, you can
calculate tan 75° by substituting x = 30° and y =
45° (or x = 45° and y = 30°) into the sum formula
for tangent.
In order to evaluate this expression, you must
calculate tan 30° and tan 45°.
Substitute these values into the expression and
simplify.
Multiply the numerator and denominator by 3 to
simplify the complex fraction.

8.37    Simplify the expression: 
.
Apply the tangent difference formula, stated in
Problem 8.36.
Note that 
8.38    Simplify the expression: 
.
Begin by expressing the fraction as the numerator
multiplied by the reciprocal of the denominator.
Next, apply the sum formula for tangent and the
difference formula for sine.

Rewrite tan θ as the quotient of sin θ and cos θ to
simplify the product.
8.39    Generate the tangent double-angle formula based
on the sum formula for tangent.
Express tan 2x as tan (x + x) and apply the sum
formula introduced in Problem 8.36.
8.40    Demonstrate that the double-angle formula
generated in Problem 8.39 is true by evaluating 
.
Substitute x = π/6 into the double-angle formula
generated in Problem 8.39 and verify that the
resulting statement is true.
Note that 
.

Express tan (π/3) in terms of sine and cosine; then
cross-multiply.
Cross-multiply once again.
Because the resulting statement is obviously true,
you have verified that the tangent double-angle
formula tan 2x is true when x = π/6.
8.41    Simplify the expression: 
.

Factor the denominator, which is a difference of
perfect squares, and express the numerator in
terms of sine and cosine.
Manipulate the numerator, rewriting the expressions
in terms of tangent and secant. In addition, note
that (1 + tan2 x) in the denominator is equal to sec2
x, according to a Pythagorean identity.
See Problem 7.23, which states 1 + tan2 x = sec2x.
This is the tangent double-angle formula.
You conclude that 
.
8.42    Generate the power-reducing formula for tan2 θ by
applying the power-reducing formulas for sin2 θ and
cos2θ.
Note that tan2 θ = (sin2 θ)/(cos2 θ) and apply the
power-reducing formulas from Problem 8.17.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by 2 in
order to simplify the complex fraction.
8.43    Apply a power-reducing formula to calculate the
exact value of 
without using a calculator or
trigonometric table.
Applying the power-reducing formula for tangent
produces double-angle trigonometric expressions.
Note that 2(π/12) = 2π/12 = π/6.
Square the expressions in the numerator and
denominator individually.

Express the numerator and denominator in terms of
a least common denominator.
Multiply this fraction by 4/4 to cancel out the
denominators.
8.44    Apply a half-angle formula to calculate the exact
value of 
 without using a calculator or
trigonometric table.
Unlike the sine and cosine half-angle formulas from
Problems 8.22–8.23, there are two equivalent
versions of the tangent half-angle formula. The
formulas do not appear within a square root symbol,
so they are not preceded by “±”.
You had to use quadrant clues to figure out the signs
for cos (x/2) and sin (x/2). Not true for tan (x/2). The
sign works itself out automatically.

Note that 
, so substitute θ = 5π/4 into one of
the half-angle formulas above. Both produce the
same final answer, but the right-hand formula
requires less steps than the left in the context of this
problem.
Rationalize the denominator to simplify the
expression.
8.45    Demonstrate that the half-angle formula 
is true by evaluating it for θ = 2x.

Substitute θ = 2x into the given half-angle formula
and apply the following double-angle formulas: sin
2x = 2 sin x cos x and cos 2x = 2 cos2x – 1.
The final statement (tan x = tan x) is true, so you
have verified that the original statement is true
when θ = 2x.

Chapter 9
INVERSE TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS
Arccosine, arcsine, arctangent
In the preceding chapters, you have defined and applied the six
basic trigonometric functions: sine, cosine, tangent, cotangent,
secant, and cosecant. The input for each of these functions is an
angle (typically measured in radians or degrees) and the output
is a real number value. For example, cos (π/3) = 1/2. This
chapter explores the inverse trigonometric functions, which
reverse the domain and range of the original functions. The
inverse of cos x is arccos x, so arccos (1/2) = π/3.
A function is a set of inputs and outputs with one condition:
Every input is paired with only one output. If you go one
step further and guarantee that every output of a function is
matched to only one input, then the function is called “one-
to-one.”
Why does it matter? Only one-to-one functions have
inverses, and that’s a problem when you deal with periodic
functions, including all of the trig functions. Enough spoilers.
Time to get started.
Graphs of Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Including domain and range
9.1    The graph of a function f(x) passes through points
(–2,6), (0,3), and (4,–9) and has inverse function f–
1(x). Identify three points through which the graph of
f–1(x) passes.
If f(x) passes through points (–2,6), (0,3), and (4,–9),
then –2, 0, and 4 are members of the domain and 6,
3, and –9 are members of the range. Specifically, f(–

2) = 6, f(0) = 3, and f(4) = –9. To identify points on
the inverse function f–1(x), reverse the numbers in
the ordered pair.
If a number is a member of the domain, you can
plug it into the function and get some real number
output. Members of the range are outputs of the
function.
Thus, f–1(x) passes through points (6,–2), (3,0), and
(–9,4). In function notation, you conclude that f–1(6)
= –2, f–1(3) = 0, and f–1(–9) = 4.
Note: Problems 9.2–9.4 refer to the graph of
function g(x) below.
9.2    Explain how you can verify that g(x) is a function
based on its graph and determine whether or not the
function is one-to-one.

Every input x of the function may be paired with
only one output g(x). To verify this on the graph of
g(x), you apply a visual technique called the vertical
line test. If a vertical line drawn on the coordinate
plane intersects g(x), then that line represents an x-
value in the domain of g(x). However, if any vertical
line intersects the graph more than once, then g(x)
fails the vertical line test and is not a function. No
vertical line drawn on this graph intersects g(x)
more than once, so you can visually verify that g(x)
is a function.
If the vertical line x = 1 were to intersect g(x) at a
height of 2 and a height of –3, then g(1) = 2 and
g(1) = –3. See why that’s not allowed? The input x =
1 is paired with TWO outputs (2 and –3), but in a
function, input values can only be paired with ONE
output.
The horizontal line test is applied to the graph of a
function to determine whether or not that function is
“one-to-one.” In a one-to-one function, not only is
each input paired with only one output, each output
is paired with only one input. This graph passes the
horizontal line test—no horizontal line intersects the
graph more than once. Therefore, g(x) is one-to-one.
Only one-to-one functions have inverses, so if a
graph fails the horizontal line test, it does not have
an inverse function.
Note: Problems 9.2–9.4 refer to the graph of g(x) in
Problem 9.2.
9.3    Graph g  –1(x), the inverse function of g(x).

Notice that g(x) passes through points (–5,–4), (–3,–
1), (–2,0), (0,1), (3,4), and (4,5). Reverse the
coordinates to identify points on the graph of
inverse function g–1(x): (–4,–5), (–1,–3), (0,–2), (1,0),
(4,3), and (5,4).
Note: Problems 9.2–9.4 refer to the graph of g(x) in
Problem 9.2.
9.4    Explain how to transform the graph of g(x) to
generate the graph of g–1(x).
As Problem 9.3 explains, the x- and y-coordinates of
points on the graph of a function are reversed to
identify points on the inverse function. For instance,
if the graph of a one-to-one function g(x) passes
through point (a,b), then the graph of its inverse
function g–1(x) passes through (b,a).

Reversing the coordinates produces a reflection of
the original graph across the line y = x, which
passes through the origin and forms 45° (π/4
radians) angles with the positive x- and y-axes.
Consider the following diagram, in which function
g(x) and its inverse g  –1(x) mirror each other across
the dotted linear graph of y = x.
9.5    Explain why f(x) = cos x does not have an inverse
function if its domain is all real numbers but does
have an inverse if you restrict the domain to the
interval 0 ≤ θ ≤ π.
Any horizontal line that intersects the graph of f(x)
= cos x intersects it infinitely many times. As an
example, consider the horizontal line f(x) = 0, the x-
axis, which intersects the graph at x = (kπ)/2, where
k is an odd integer. According to the horizontal line
test, if any horizontal line intersects the graph more
than once (let alone infinitely many times), that

graph is not one-to-one and thus does not have an
inverse.
However, you can define an inverse function for
cosine if you restrict its domain to a small portion of
the graph. In the diagram below, a specific interval
of the graph of f(x) = cos x is highlighted. That
portion (lying between x = 0 and x = π) passes the
horizontal line test and is, therefore, one-to-one.
9.6    Graph arccos x.
As Problem 9.5 explains, the function f(x) = cos x
has an inverse function if you restrict the domain of
f(x) to 0 ≤ x ≤ π. The inverse of the cosine function
is arccosine and is written “arccos x.” Some
textbooks (and many calculators) use the notation
“cos–1 x” to represent the inverse cosine function,
but this notation is not recommended. Recall that
cos2x = (cos x)2, so cos–1x is easily confused with
(cos x)–1, the reciprocal of cosine rather than the
inverse of cosine.

Consider the darkened portion of the graph in
Problem 9.5. It passes through key points (0,1),
(π/2,0), and (π,–1). Reverse the coordinates to
identify points on the graph of f–1(x) = arccos x:
(1,0), (0,π/2), and (–1,π).
9.7    Identify the domain of arccos x.
Any vertical line that intersects a graph represents
an element of that function’s domain. Consider the
graph of arccos x generated in Problem 9.6. The
vertical lines x = –1 and x = 1 intersect the graph,
and so do all of the vertical lines between those x-
values. Therefore, the domain of arccos x is –1 ≤ x
≤ 1.
This makes sense. Cosine outputs values between –
1 and 1, so the INPUTS of arccosine are between –1
and 1. The outputs of a function are the inputs of its
inverse and vice versa.
9.8    Identify the range of arccos x.
Horizontal lines drawn on the coordinate plane
intersect the graph of arccos x at a lower bound of 0

and at an upper bound of π. Note that any horizontal
line between those bounds also intersects the
graph. Therefore, the range is 0 ≤ arccos x ≤ π.
9.9    Identify the restricted domain of sin x that has
inverse arcsin x.
As illustrated in the following graph, the portion of
sin x lying between x = –π/2 and x = π/2 passes the
horizontal line test and is one-to-one. The inverse
function arcsin x is defined for only that portion of
the graph.
9.10    Graph arcsin x.
Note that the darkened portion of the graph in
Problem 9.9 passes through key points (–π/2,–1),
(0,0), and (π/2, 1). Therefore, the inverse function
passes through points (–1,–π/2), (0,0), and (1,π/2),
as illustrated below.

9.11    Identify the domain and range of arcsin x.
Consider the graph of y = arcsin x, presented in
Problem 9.10. Vertical lines drawn on the coordinate
plane intersect the graph at x = –1, x= 1, and at all
of the x-values between them. Therefore, the
domain of arcsin x is –1 ≤ x ≤ 1.
Notice that the domain of arcsin x matches the
domain of arccos x (calculated in Problem 9.7); both
are equal to the ranges of the inverse functions, in
this case sin x. The range of arcsin x is equal to the
restricted domain defined in Problem 9.9: –π/2 ≤
arcsin x ≤ π/2.
9.12    Identify the restricted domain of tan x that has
inverse arctan x.
One full period of y = tan x lies between vertical
asymptotes x = –π/2 and x = π/2. If you restrict
tangent to this interval of the domain, you can
define inverse function arctan x. Thus, the restricted
domain of tangent is –π/2 < x < π/2. This is similar
to the restricted domain of sine (defined in Problem
9.9) but it excludes the upper and lower bounds.
9.13    Graph arctan x.
The graph of f(x) = tan x passes through points (–
π/4, –1), (0,0), and (π/4, 1). Thus, the graph of f–1(x)
= arctan x passes through points (–1,–π/4), (0,0),
and (1,π/4), as illustrated in the following graph.

9.14    Identify the domain and range of y = arctan x.
The graph of y = arctan x, presented in Problem
9.13, is defined for all real numbers; any vertical
line drawn on the coordinate plane intersects the
graph. The range of the function is equal to the
restricted domain of tan x (identified in Problem
9.13): –π/2 < arctan x < π/2.
Notice that the boundaries of the range are not
included—unlike the boundaries of the ranges of
arccos x and arcsin x—because the graph of arctan
x is bounded above and below by horizontal
asymptotes.
General and Exact Solutions
One vs. many answers
Note: Problems 9.15–9.17 describe three different
ways to present the solution to the same
trigonometric equation.
9.15    Identify the solutions to the equation sin θ = 0 on
the interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.

This is one loop around the coordinate plane. Notice
that the interval includes 0 but excludes 2π. Both of
those values represent the same angle—they both
terminate on the positive x-axis—so there’s no need
to include both.
According to the unit circle, sin θ = 0 when θ = 0
and θ = π.
Note: Problems 9.15–9.17 describe three different
ways to present the solution to the same
trigonometric equation.
9.16    List the values of θ for which the equation sin θ = 0
is true.
As Problem 9.15 states, sin 0 = sin π = 0. Because
sine is a periodic function, it is also equal to zero for
any angle kπ, where k is an integer. In other words,
the following set of angles is the solution set for this
equation.
θ = {…, –4π, –3π, –2π, –π, 0, π, 2π, 3π, 4π, … }
Note: Problems 9.15–9.17 describe three different
ways to present the solution to the same
trigonometric equation.
9.17    Identify the exact solution to the equation sin θ =
0.
To calculate the exact solution to this equation,
apply the inverse function for sine. In other words,
solve the equation for θ by taking the arcsine of
both sides of the equation. Notice that arcsin (sin θ)
= θ.

A function and its inverse cancel out—arcsine
cancels out sine. This is just like taking the square
root of both sides of the equation x2 = 16 to get x =
±4.
Problem 9.16 lists the angles that have a sine value
of 0. However, only one of them serves as the exact
solution. Remember that the restricted range of
arcsin θ is –π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2. Of all the angles listed in
Problem 9.16, only θ = 0 belongs to the restricted
range. Thus, the exact solution is θ = 0.
Note: Problems 9.18–9.19 describe two different
ways to present the solution to the same
trigonometric equation.
9.18    Identify all solutions to the equation tan x = 1 on
the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Recall that tangent is defined as the quotient of sine
and cosine: 
tan x = (sin x)/(cos x). The quotient is equal to 1 if
and only if the numerator and denominator are
equal. There are two angles on the unit circle with
equivalent cosine and sine values: θ = π/4 and θ =
5π/4, as demonstrated below.

Note: Problems 9.18–9.19 describe two different
ways to present the solution to the same
trigonometric equation.
9.19    Identify the exact solution to the equation tan x =
1.
Exact solutions require inverse trigonometric
functions, so take the arctangent of both sides of
the equation.
According to Problem 9.18, tan (π/4) = tan (5π/4) =
1. However, the range of arctangent is restricted to
the interval –π/2 ≤ x ≤ π/2. Of the two proposed
solutions, only x = π/4 lies within that restricted
interval. Therefore, the exact solution to the
equation is x = π/4.
9.20    Given point 
 on the graph of arcsin x, calculate
c.
If point (–1/2, c) lies on the graph of arcsin x, then
(c,–1/2) lies on the graph of its inverse function, sin
x. In other words, you need to identify the value c
such that sin c = –1/2. However, two angles on the
unit circle have this sine value, θ = 7π/6 and θ =
11π/6, and neither of those angles belongs to the
range of arcsin x (–π/2 ≤ arcsin x ≤ π/2).
But only the piece of sin x between 

Both angles are greater than the upper bound of the
range. Therefore, you need to calculate angles
coterminal to 7π/6 and 11π/6 to identify a valid
member of the range. Subtract 2π from each to
compute the coterminal angles.
If you are asking yourself “Why?” check Problem
4.22.
Notice that –π/6 belongs to the range of arcsin x (–
π/2 ≤ –π/6 ≤ π/2). Therefore, c = –π/6.
9.21    Calculate arccos –1.
For the rest of the problems in this chapter, use
the Problem 9.20 technique:
1. Find the angle(s) on the unit circle with the
correct trig value
2. Select the angle that falls in the correct
restricted range
3. If none of the angles are in the restricted range,
calculate coterminal angles
Begin by identifying the angle(s) on the unit circle
that have a cosine value of –1. Only one such angle
exists: θ = π. Recall that the restricted range for
arccosine is 0 ≤ θ ≤ π, and the angle θ = π is a valid
member of this interval. Thus, you conclude arccos –
1 = π.

9.22    Calculate 
Two angles on the unit circle have a sine value of 
: θ = π/3 and θ = 2π/3. Only the smaller of these
two angles falls within the restricted range of
arcsine (–π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2). Thus, arcsin
=π/3.
9.23    Calculate 
The two angles on the unit circle with a cosine value of 
are θ = 3π/4 and θ = 5π/4, but only the smaller of the two
angles belongs to the restricted range of arccosine.
Angles in the range of arccosine terminate in the
first and second quadrants, and the angles are
always positive. Angles in the range of arcsine and
arctangent terminate in the first or fourth
quadrants, and their terminal sides are no more
than 90° (π/2 radians) from the positive x-axis, in
either the clockwise or counterclockwise direction.
9.24    Calculate 
The two angles on the unit circle with a sine value of
 are θ = 5π/4 and θ = 7π/4. Neither of these
angles belongs to the restricted range of arcsine, so
calculate a coterminal angle to identify a
corresponding angle that does.

According to my notes for Problem 9.23, you’re
looking for a first or fourth quadrant angle when the
problem contains arcsine. Don’t even bother
calculating the coterminal angle of 
 because it
terminates in the third quadrant.
Thus arcsin 
9.25    Calculate arcsec (–2).
Recall that secant and cosine are reciprocal
functions. Similarly, arcsecant and arccosine are
reciprocal functions. In other words, if θ = arcsec (–
2), then θ = arccos (–1/2). The two angles on the
unit circle with a cosine value of –1/2 are θ = 2π/3
and θ = 4π/3. The smaller of the two angles belongs
to the restricted range of arccosine, so arcsec (–2) =
2π/3.
9.26    Calculate arctan
.
Tangent is defined as the quotient of sine and
cosine, so begin by expressing the argument 
 as a
quotient as well.

Although there are no angles on the unit circle with
a sine value of 
and a cosine value of 1, there are
angles with sine values of 
 and cosine values of
1/2. You can divide the numerator and denominator
of a fraction by the same number without affecting
the value of that fraction. In this problem, it is
helpful to divide the numerator and denominator by
2.
Four angles on the unit circle have a sine value of 
and a cosine value of ±1/2: θ
= π/3, θ = 2π/3, θ = 4π/3, and θ = 5π/3. However,
only two of those angles have negative tangent
values.
Recall that the restricted range of arctangent is –π/2
≤ θ ≤ π/2, so calculate the angle within that range
that is coterminal to 5π/3.
You conclude that arctan 

Chapter 10
SIMPLE TRIGONOMETRIC EQUATIONS
Algebra 1, but with angles
In Chapter 9, you explore the inverse trigonometric functions:
arcsin x, arccos x, and arctan x. Whereas the corresponding
trigonometric functions sin x, cos x, and tan x accept angle
inputs and produce real number outputs, their inverse functions
do precisely the opposite. They also eliminate trigonometric
functions from equations, which empowers you to solve
trigonometric equations.
In basic algebra, you learned a few basic equation-solving
techniques, including:
* Adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides
of an equation by the same number to isolate the variable
* Factoring an equation, when one side of the equation
equals zero
* Applying the quadratic formula when you can’t factor a
quadratic equation
In this chapter, you’ll use all of these techniques to solve
basic trigonometric equations. Make sure to work through
Chapter 9 and pay special attention to Problems 9.15–9.17.
They outline the major difference between trigonometric
and algebraic equations: the different ways you may have
to report a trigonometric solution.
Linear Equations
Add, subtract, multiply, and divide both sides by the same
thing
Note: Problems 10.1–10.3 refer to the trigonometric
equation sin x + 1 = 0.

10.1    Identify the solutions to the equation on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
To solve the equation sin x + 1 = 0 for x, you must
first isolate the expression containing x on one side
of the equal sign. Subtracting 1 from both sides of
the equation accomplishes this task, isolating sin x
on the left side of the equation.
When something is “isolated” it is all by itself. You
want sin x to be all by itself on one side of the
equation, but right now, there’s a “+ 1” next to it.
Move that number to the other side of the equation
by subtracting it from both sides.
sin x = –1
The problem instructs you to identify the solutions
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π, which is one rotation
about the coordinate plane and corresponds to the
unit circle. Only one angle x on the unit circle has a
–1 sine value: x = 3π/2.
Note: Problems 10.1–10.3 refer to the trigonometric
equation sin x + 1 = 0.
10.2    Identify the general solution to the equation.
Remember that sine has a period of 2π. Adding and
subtracting multiples of 2π to an angle will produce
angles with the same sine value. According to
Problem 10.1, x = 3π/2 is a solution to the equation;
adding and subtracting 2π to this solution identifies
two other angles that are also solutions to the
equation.

If you double the period (2 · 2π = 4π) and then add
and subtract that product (4π) from the solution x =
3π/2, you identify two additional solutions to the
equation.
If you continue this process by tripling the period (3
· 2π = 6π), quadrupling the period (4 · 2π = 8π), and
so on, you will identify an infinite number of possible
solutions. Rather than list them all, you use
shorthand notation to indicate a general solution of
x = 3π/2 (and all of its coterminal angles). Both of
the following solutions are correct, although the
solution on the right—in which k and 2π are
explicitly multiplied—is more common.
To create a general solution, identify the solution(s)
on one period of the function (in this case 0 ≤ x <
2π and then add k · (period) to each.
Note: Problems 10.1–10.3 refer to the trigonometric
equation sin x + 1 = 0.
10.3    Calculate the exact solution to the equation.
Begin by isolating sin x on the left side of the
equation: sin x = –1. In order to calculate an exact
trigonometric solution, you apply an inverse

trigonometric function. Solve sin x = –1 for x by
taking the arcsine of both sides of the equation.
As Problem 10.1 explains, the unit circle angle x =
3π/2 satisfies the equation, but that angle does not
fall within the restricted range of arcsine (–π/2 ≤ x ≤
π/2). Subtract 2π from x = 3π/2 to calculate a
coterminal angle that lies in the restricted range.
Look at Problems 9.20, 9.24, 9.25, and 9.26 for more
information. In each case, you have to calculate a
coterminal angle within a restricted range.
The exact solution is x = –π/2.
Note: Problems 10.4–10.5 refer to the trigonometric
equation 2 cos x – 1 = 0.
10.4    Identify the general solution to the equation.
In order to isolate cos x on the left side of the
equation, add 1 to both sides and then divide both
sides by 2.
Now identify the angles on the unit circle that have
a cosine value of +1/2. Two such angles exist: π/3
and 5π/3. These angles belong to the general
solution, as do all of their coterminal angles;

therefore, you need to add multiples of 2π (the
period of cosine) to each solution, as demonstrated
below.
Note: Problems 10.4–10.5 refer to the trigonometric
equation 2 cos x – 1 = 0.
10.5    Calculate the exact solution to the equation.
According to Problem 10.4, two angles on the unit
circle are solutions to the equation: x = π/3 and x =
5π/3. Only the smaller angle belongs to the
restricted range of arccosine (0 ≤ x ≤ π). Therefore,
the exact solution to the equation is x = π/3.
Note: Problems 10.6–10.7 refer to the trigonometric
equation 
.
10.6    Calculate the exact solution to the equation.
Isolate the trigonometric expression sin θ on the left
side of the equation.
Rationalize the denominator to reveal a familiar sine
value from the unit circle.

Apply the arcsine function to calculate the exact
solution.
According to Problem 9.24, the exact solution to this
equation is θ = –π/4.
Note: Problems 10.6–10.7 refer to the trigonometric
equation 
.
10.7    Identify the general solution to the equation.
As Problem 10.6 demonstrates, solving the equation
 for sin θ produces the following equation.
There are two angles on the unit circle that have a
sine value of 
 and θ = 7π/4. To construct
the general solution, add multiples of 2π (the period
of sine) to each solution.
Note: Problems 10.8–10.9 refer to the trigonometric
equation 2(tan x + 3) = 5 + tan x.
10.8    Identify all solutions to the equation on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
Isolate the expression tan x on the left side of the
equation.

There are two angles on the unit circle that have a
tangent value of –1: θ = 3π/4 and θ = 7π/4.
The tangent of an angle is equal to –1 whenever the sine
and cosine of that angle are opposite values.
Note: Problems 10.8–10.9 refer to the trigonometric
equation 2(tan x + 3) = 5 + tan x.
10.9    Identify the general solution to the equation.
To create the general solution to a trigonometric
equation, you identify the angles on the unit circle
that represent solutions and then add multiples of
the period to that solution. In Problems 10.2, 10.4,
and 10.7, you append the notation “+ 2kπ, such
that k is an integer,” because 2π is the period of
sine and cosine (as well as the period of secant and
cosecant).
However, the tangent and cotangent functions have
a period of π, so you should add kπ to the unit circle
solutions rather than 2kπ. According to Problem
10.8, the unit circle angles that satisfy this equation
are θ = 3π/4 and θ = 7π/4. Hence, you may be
tempted to report the following general solution.
This solution is not incorrect, but it is repetitive.
Notice that 7π/4 is equal to 3π/4 plus a multiple of π,
as demonstrated below.
Imagine that the solution to some equation was “x = 1 plus
any positive multiple of 2.” In other words, the solution set

is {3, 5, 7, 9, 11, …}. Even if “x = 11 plus any multiple of 2”
is another valid solution, you don’t need to write it because
it describes a set of values that are already included: {13,
15, 17, 19, …}.
Thus, the following solution is sufficient.
Note: Problems 10.10–10.11 refer to the
trigonometric equation 
.
10.10 Identify the general solution to the equation.
Multiply the entire equation by 12 (the least
common denominator of 1/4 and 1/3) to eliminate
the fractions.
Now isolate sec θ on one side of the equal sign.
The equality of a statement is preserved if you take
the reciprocal of both sides of the equation. Recall
that secant is defined as the reciprocal of cosine.

The two angles on the unit circle that have a cosine
value of –1/2 are θ = 2π/3 and θ = 4π/3. Include
coterminal angles (by adding multiples of 2π) to
create the general solution to the equation.
Note: Problems 10.10–10.11 refer to the
trigonometric equation 
.
10.11 Calculate the exact solution to the equation.
According to Problem 10.10, two angles on the unit
circle are solutions to the equation: θ = 2π/3 and θ
= 4π/3. Only the smaller of the two angles lies
within the restricted range of arccosine (0 ≤ θ ≤ π),
so you conclude that the exact solution to the
equation is θ = 2π/3.
Zero Products
Factoring
10.12 Explain how to apply the zero-product property to
solve the equation xy = 0.
According to the zero-product property, if two or
more expressions are multiplied and their product is
0, then at least one of those expressions must be
equal to 0. In the given equation, x and y are
multiplied to produce a product of 0, and the only
way to obtain a zero product is to include 0 as one
(or both) of the factors.
This isn’t true for any other number. For example, if you
multiply two numbers together and get 10, one of those
numbers doesn’t HAVE to equal 10.

Therefore, to solve an equation in which a product
equals zero (like xy = 0), set each factor equal to
zero. In this example, x = 0 and y = 0 are solutions
to the equation.
10.13 Apply the zero-product property to solve the
equation: x(x – 7)(x + 6) = 0.
The product x(x – 7)(x + 6) equals 0, so according to
the zero-product property, at least one of the factors
must be equal to 0. Set each factor—x, x – 7, and x
+ 6—equal to 0 and solve the resulting equations.
There are three possible solutions to the equation: x
= –6, x = 0, and x = 7.
10.14 Identify the solutions to the equation (cos θ – 1)(sin
θ + 1) = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
Apply the zero-product property, setting each of the
factors equal to zero and solving the equations.
Only angle θ = 0 has a cosine value of 1 on the
interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π, and only angle θ = 3π/2 has a
sine value of –1 on that interval. Therefore, θ = 0
and θ = 3π/2 are solutions to the equation.
10.15 Explain why the equation (2 cos x – 3)(cos x – 4) =
0 has no real solutions.
Apply the zero-product property to create two
equations from the factors.

The range of cos x is –1 ≤ x ≤ 1, but neither 3/2 nor
4 fall within that range. Therefore, there is no value
x for which cos x equals either 3/2 or 4, and the
original equation has no solution.
The graph of cosine is a wave that oscillates between a
maximum height of 1 and a minimum height of –1. Sine has
the same range. To review these graphs, check out Problems
5.26 and 5.35.
10.16 Identify the general solution to the equation: tan2 x
– tan x = 0.
The terms in the expression contain a common
factor: tan x. Factor this expression out of both
terms.
The result is a product equal to 0, so you can apply
the zero-product property to solve the equation.
Note that you can only apply the zero-product
property when the product is equal to zero. Note
that the period of tangent is π, so rather than
identify solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π, identify
solutions on the interval –π/2 ≤ x ≤ π/2.
Construct the general solution by adding multiples
of π (the period of tangent) to each solution you

identified.
10.17 Identify the solution to the equation 4 cos2 x – 1 =
0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Factor the expression left of the equal sign, a
difference of perfect squares.
Apply the zero-product property.
Four angles on the unit circle have a cosine value of
±1/2, so there are four solutions on the interval 0 ≤
x < 2π.
10.18 Identify the general solution to the equation: csc2 x
– 4 csc x + 4 = 0.
Factor the expression csc2 x – 4 csc x + 4 in the
same way that you would factor y2 – 4y + 4 = (y –
2)(y – 2).
(csc x – 2)(csc x – 2) = 0
The factors are equal, so the original expression
csc2 x – 4 csc x + 4 is a perfect square. Set the
repeated factor equal to 0 and solve for x. Recall
that cosecant and sine are reciprocal functions.

The angles on the unit circle with a sine value of 1/2
are x = π/6 and x = 5π/6. The problem directs you to
identify the general solution, so add multiples of 2π
(the period of cosine) to these angles.
10.19 Identify the general solution to the equation: tan2x
+ 6 tan x = –5.
You can apply the zero-product property only if one
side of an equation is equal to 0. Therefore, you
should add 5 to both sides of this equation before
factoring.
Set each factor equal to 0 and solve.
Note that the angle x = –π/4 has a tangent value of
–1. However, no angle on the unit circle has a
tangent value of –5. The angle does exist—
remember that the domain of arctangent is all real
numbers (as explained in Problem 9.14)—so it is
sufficient to report the solution as x = arctan (–5). To
construct the general solution, add multiples of π
(the period of tangent) to both solutions.
The angle 3π/4 also has a tangent of –1, but you don’t have
to list it because it is automatically included by the general
solution (if k = 1):

10.20 Identify the solutions to the equation 6 sin θ (sin θ
– 1) = 4 – sin θ on the interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
Apply the distributive property to simplify 6 sin θ
(sin θ – 1). Recall that the zero-product property
may only be applied when one side of the equation
is 0, so 4 must be subtracted from—and sin θ must
be added to—both sides of the equation.
If factoring this trinomial is tricky, work through Problems
12.35–12.44 in The Humongous Book of Algebra Problems.
Factor the expression left of the equal sign and set
each factor equal to 0.
There are two angles on the unit circle with a sine
value of –1/2, but there are no angles with a sine
value of 4/3. Recall that the range of sine (and the

domain of arcsine) is –1 ≤ θ ≤ 1, and 4/3 does not
belong to this interval.
10.21 Identify the general solution to the equation: cos4θ
= 1.
Subtract 1 from both sides of the equation to create
a difference of perfect squares. Factor the
expression.
One of the factors is a difference of perfect squares,
so it can be factored further.
(cos2 θ + 1)(cos θ + 1)(cos θ – 1) = 0
Apply the zero-product property. Setting the two
linear factors equal to 0 produces the equations cos
θ = –1 and cos θ = 1; the solutions are θ = π and θ
= 0, respectively.
However, setting the quadratic factor equal to 0
produces the equation cos2θ + 1 = 0, which has no
solution. Notice that subtracting 1 from both sides
produces the statement cos2θ = –1, but a squared
value cannot equal a negative number.
Thus, the general solution to the original equation is
θ = 0 + 2kπ and θ = π + 2kπ, such that k is an
integer. You may wish to express the solution as the
single expression θ = 0 + kπ.

10.22 Identify the general solution to the equation: cot3θ
+ 3 cot2θ + 6 = –2 cot θ.
Add 2 cot θ to both sides of the equation in order to
apply the zero-product property.
cot3θ + 3 cot2θ + 2cot θ + 6 = 0
If you need help factoring by grouping, check out Problems
12.20–12.25 in The Humongous Book of Algebra Problems.
Apply the factoring by grouping technique. Treat this
four-term expression as a pair of two-term
expressions, cot3θ + 3 cot2θ and 2 cot θ + 6. Notice
that the first pair of expressions has a greatest
common factor of cot2θ, and the second pair of
expressions has a greatest common factor of 2.
cot2 θ (cot θ + 3) + 2(cot θ + 3) = 0
Now both expressions have a greatest common
factor of (cot θ + 3), which should be factored out of
each.
(cot θ + 3)(cot2θ + 2) = 0
Apply the zero-product property and reciprocal
identities, as demonstrated below.

The equation cot2θ = –2 has no real solutions; no
squared value may equal a negative number.
However, the domain of arctangent is all real
numbers, so θ = arctan (–1/3) is a valid solution. To
construct the general solution, add multiples of π
(the period of tangent).
10.23 Identify the solutions to the equation 20 sin3 x + 3
= 12 sin2 x + 5 sin x on the interval –π/2 ≤ x ≤ π/2.
Subtract 12 sin2 x and 5 sin x from both sides of the
equation and factor by grouping.
Factor –1 out of (– 5 sin x + 3) so you end up with matching
factors (5 sin x – 3).
The quadratic factor 4 sin2 x – 1 is a difference of
perfect squares and can be factored further.
(5 sin x – 3)(2 sin x + 1)(2 sin x – 1) = 0
Apply the zero-product property. Notice that the
problem asks you to identify answers on the interval
–π/2 ≤ x ≤ π/2, which is the range of arcsine.
Therefore, you should calculate the exact solution to
each of the three equations.

Two of the solutions appear on the unit circle.
Although arcsin (3/5) does not, it is still a valid
solution; recall that the range of sine (and the
domain of arcsine) is –1 ≤ x ≤ 1, and x = 3/5
belongs to that interval.
Quadratic Formula
When you can’t factor
10.24 Identify the quadratic formula used to solve
quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, such that a, b,
and c are integers and a ≠ 0.
The quadratic formula allows you to solve a
quadratic equation using only its coefficients. This
technique, like the factoring technique described in
Problems 10.12–10.23, requires that one side of the
equation equals 0.
10.25 Apply the quadratic formula to solve the equation:
2x2 – 5x + 1 = 0.
Substitute a = 2, b = –5, and c = 1 into the
quadratic formula, identified in Problem 10.24.

There are two solutions to the equation: 
.
Note: Problems 10.26–10.27 demonstrate two
different ways to solve the quadratic trigonometric
equation 2 sin2 x + 3 sin x + 1 = 0. Identify all
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2 π.
10.26 Solve the equation by factoring.
Apply the technique described in Problems 10.12–
10.23, factoring the expression and then setting
each factor equal to zero, applying the zero-product
property.
The solution is 
.
Note: Problems 10.26–10.27 demonstrate two
different ways to solve the quadratic trigonometric
equation 2 sin2 x + 3 sin x + 1 = 0. Identify all
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.

10.27 Verify the solutions you identified in Problem 10.26
by applying the quadratic formula.
Substitute a = 2, b = 3, and c = 1 into the quadratic
formula. Note that the left side of the equation in
the traditional quadratic formula is simply “x,” but in
this problem, the left side of the equation is “sin x.”
Thus, sin x = –1 or sin x = –1/2. These are the same
equations produced by the zero-product property in
Problem 10.26, so the solutions are the same: x =
7π/6, 3π/2, 11π/6.
Note: In Problems 10.28–10.29, you solve the
equation 9 cos2x – 9 cos x + 2 = 0 using two
different techniques. In each problem, identify the
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < π.
10.28 Apply the quadratic formula to solve the equation.

The problem asks for the solutions that belong to
the restricted range of arccosine 
. Neither 1/3
nor 2/3 are cosine values on the unit circle, so leave
your answers in terms of arccosine.
Substitute a = 9, b = –9, and c = 2 into the
quadratic formula, and set the fraction equal to cos
x.
Thus, the solutions to the equation are x = arccos
(1/3), x = arccos (2/3).
Note: In Problems 10.28–10.29, you solve the
equation 9 cos2 x – 9 cos x + 2 = 0 using two
different techniques. In each problem, identify the
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ π.
10.29 Verify your answer to Problem 10.28 by factoring
the quadratic expression and applying the zero-
product property.
Factor the quadratic expression and set each factor
equal to 0.

These solutions are identical to the solutions in
Problem 10.28.
10.30 Apply the quadratic formula to identify the
solutions to the equation 12 cos2 x + 7 cos x = 10 on
the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ π.
In order to apply the quadratic formula, one side of
the quadratic equation must equal 0; subtract 10
from both sides of the equation.
12 cos2 x + 7 cos x – 10 = 0
Substitute a = 12, b = 7, and c = –10 into the
quadratic formula and set it equal to cos x.
The range of cosine is –1 ≤ cos x ≤ 1, so –5/4 is not
a valid cosine value. Therefore, the only solution to
this equation is x = arccos (2/3).

10.31 Explain why the equation 4 sin2 x – sin x + 2 = 0
has no real solutions.
Apply the quadratic formula, setting a = 4, b = –1,
and c = 2.
You cannot evaluate the square root of a negative
number, so there are no real solutions to this
trigonometric quadratic equation.
10.32 Identify the solutions to the equation 5 tan θ = –1 –
3 tan2θ on the interval –π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2.
Add 3 tan2θ and 1 to both sides of the equation.
3 tan2θ + 5 tan θ + 1 = 0
Substitute a = 3, b = 5, and c = 1 into the quadratic
formula.
Arctangent is defined for all real numbers, so both of these
solutions are valid.

Functions of Multiple Angles
Instead of cos x = 1, solve cos 5x = 1
Note: In Problems 10.33–10.36, you solve similar
equations, each with a different coefficient of x. In
each problem, identify all solutions on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
10.33 Solve the equation: sin x + 1 = 0.
Subtract 1 from both sides of the equation to isolate
sin x left of the equal sign.
sin x = –1
Taking the arcsine of both sides of this equation
solves it for x.
x = arcsin (–1)
Note that the range of arcsine is –π/2 ≤ arcsin x ≤
π/2, so if you were asked to supply the exact
solution to this equation, the answer would be x = –
π/2. However, the problem directs you to identify all
solutions within a single rotation on the coordinate
plane. The only angle on this interval with a sine
value of –1 is x = 3π/2. (Note that –π/2 and 3π/2 are
coterminal angles, and the choice of one angle
versus the other in the solution is dictated solely by
the interval specified in the problem.)
In other words, the angles between 0 and 2π including 0 but
excluding 2π
Note: In Problems 10.33–10.36, you solve similar
equations, each with a different coefficient of x. In
each problem, identify all solutions on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
10.34 Solve the equation: sin 2x + 1 = 0.

This equation is similar to the equation in Problem
10.33 (sin x + 1 = 0); only the arguments of the
equations differ. This equation contains argument
2x, a double angle. Regardless of this difference,
you still begin by isolating the trigonometric
function on one side of the equal sign. In other
words, you still begin by subtracting 1 from both
sides of the equation.
sin 2x = –1
Now apply the arcsine function to both sides of the
equation.
2x = arcsin (–1)
As Problem 10.33 states, angle 3π/2 has a sine value
of –1, but because this equation contains a double
angle (2x instead of x), you should list twice as
many solutions. Thus, you should calculate a
coterminal angle for the solution 3π/2 by adding the
period of sine (2π).
Rewrite the equation 2x = arcsin (–1), replacing
arcsin (–1) with the two solutions you have
identified.
To finish solving the equation, you must isolate x.
Eliminate its coefficient (2) by multiplying both sides
of the equation by 1/2.

Note that both of the final solutions belong to the
interval specified by the problem: 0 ≤ 3π/4 < 7π/4 <
2π.
Remember to adjust the total number of solutions
based on the coefficient of x, especially when the
problem asks you to list the solutions on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
Note: In Problems 10.33–10.36, you solve similar
equations, each with a different coefficient of x. In
each problem, identify all solutions on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
10.35 Solve the equation: sin 3x + 1 = 0.
In Problem 10.34, the trig expression contained 2x and you
had to list 2 times as many solutions. In this problem, the
trig expression contains 3x, so you will need to list 3 times
as many solutions.
Like Problems 10.33–10.34, you begin this problem
by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. In
order to solve any trigonometric equation, you must
isolate the expression containing the variable (in
this case sin 3x) on one side of the equation.
sin 3x = –1
Apply the arcsine function to eliminate the sine
expression containing x, the variable for which you
are solving.
3x = arcsin (–1)
Only one angle on the unit circle has a sine value of
–1: x = 3π/2. However, the coefficient of x is 3, so
you must list three solutions—three times as many
as the single solution 3π/2. Add 2π to 3π/2 (like you
did in Problem 10.34) to identify coterminal angle x

= 7π/2, and then add 2π to that angle in order
identify a second coterminal angle.
Return to the equation 3x = arcsin (–1) and replace
the arcsine expression with the three angles you
have identified.
Multiply both sides of the equation by 1/3 to solve
for x.
Note: In Problems 10.33–10.36, you solve similar
equations, each with a different coefficient of x. In
each problem, identify all solutions on the interval
0 ≤ x < 2π.
10.36 Verify your solutions to Problem 10.35 by
substituting each into the equation sin 3x + 1 = 0.
Problem 10.35 states that equation sin 3x + 1 = 0
has three solutions that lie between 0 and 2π: x =
π/2, 7π/6, and 11π/6. Substitute each into the
equation to verify that the resulting statements are
true.

In Problem 10.35, you calculated two angles coterminal to 
 If the angles are coterminal, then all three
have the same sine value: –1.
10.37 Identify the solutions to the equation sin 2x = 0 on
the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
In order to solve for x, you must first eliminate the
trigonometric equation that contains the variable.
Take the arcsine of both sides of the equation.
2x = arcsin 0
Only angles 0 and π have a sine value of 0 on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π. Because x has a coefficient of 2,
you should list twice as many solutions—four angles
instead of two. Add 2π (the period of sine) to x = 0
and x = π to identify two additional coterminal
angles: 0 + 2π = 2π and π + 2π = 3π.
2x = 0, π, 2π, 3π
Divide by 2 to solve for x.

10.38 Identify the solutions to the equation 
on
the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Take the arccosine of both sides of the equation.
The two angles on the unit circle that have a cosine
of 
 are 3π/4 and 5π/4. Calculate two coterminal
angles for each, adding 2π and then 4π to 3π/4 and
5π/4.
Multiply each term by 1/3 to solve for x.
10.39 Identify the solutions to the equation 
 on
the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Isolate cos 2x on the left side of the equation and
simplify the square root expression.
Take the arccosine of both sides of the equation.

Angles π/4 and 7π/4 have cosine values of 
, but
you should calculate one coterminal angle for each;
an x-coefficient of 2 requires twice as many
solutions.
Divide by 2 to solve for x.
10.40 Identify the general solution to the equation: 2(cos
3x – 2) = 3(cos 3x – 1).
Simplify both sides of the equation and isolate the
trigonometric expression on one side of the equal
sign.
To solve the equation cos 3x = –1 on the interval 
you need to write three times the number of solutions 
 However, for the general solution, don’t bother
with the coterminal angles 
 because your solution
already includes ALL coterminal angles.
Only angle π has a cosine of –1 on the interval 0 ≤ x
< 2π. Because the coefficient of x is 3, you may be
tempted to list three times as many solutions, most
likely 3π and 5π, which are angles coterminal to π.

However, this problem asks for the general solution,
which includes all coterminal angles. Therefore,
there is no need to list additional solutions based on
the coefficient of x.
π + 2kπ = 3x
Divide each term by 3, including 2kπ, to solve for x.
10.41 Identify the general solution to the equation: 3(tan
2x – 4) + 9 = 0.
Isolate 2x on one side of the equation.
Consider the full period of tangent lying between θ
= –π/2 and θ = π/2. Only angle π/4 has a tangent
value of 1 on that interval. Because you are asked
to report the general solution, there is no need to
list twice as many solutions (despite the fact that x
has a coefficient of 2); the general solution will
include all coterminal angles.
Solve for x, dividing each term by 2 or multiplying
each term by 1/2.

Note: Problems 10.42–10.43 refer to the equation 
.
10.42 Identify the solutions to the equation on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Isolate the trigonometric expression on the left side
of the equation and apply the arcsine function.
The two angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that have
a sine value of 1/2 are x = π/6 and 5π/6. Although
the coefficient of x is 1/2, you do not apply the
technique demonstrated in Problem 10.34; in other
words, a coefficient of 1/2 does not imply that you
should list half as many solutions. Fractional
coefficients between 0 and 1 do not require you to
identify additional coterminal solutions.
But you should check to make sure you don’t end up with
extra solutions that are outside the specified interval
To solve for x, multiply each of the terms by 2.

Note: Problems 10.42–10.43 refer to the equation 
.
10.43 Identify the four smallest positive solutions to the
equation.
Complete the steps outlined in Problem 10.42 to
isolate the variable expression x/2 on the left side of
the equation, but before you solve for x, list the
general form of the solutions.
Solve for x, multiplying each of the terms in the
equation by 2.
The two smallest positive solutions are π/3 and 5π/3.
To generate the next two solutions, substitute k = 1
into each of the expressions.
Thus, the four smallest positive solutions to the
equation are 
.

10.44 Identify the solutions to the equation 
 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
The left side of the equation is a factorable
quadratic expression: 3y2 – 5y – 2 = (3y + 1)(y – 2),
such that y = sec (x/2).
Check out Problem 10.18 if you need to review factoring and
the zero-product property.
Apply the zero-product property, setting each factor
equal to 0 and solving the two resulting equations
for sec x.
Apply the reciprocal identity cos θ = 1/sec θ and
solve for x.

Note that the domain of arccosine (like the range of
cosine) is –1 ≤ θ ≤ 1, so arccos (–3) is not defined;
this equation may be omitted from the final solution.
However, there are two angles with a cosine value
of 1/2.
The coefficient of x is 1/2. As Problem 10.42
explains, you do not have to identify additional
coterminal angles for fractional coefficients between
0 and 1. Multiply each term by 2 in order to solve for
x.
However, one of these solutions will no longer fit in the
interval 
once you solve for x.
Note that 10π/3 is greater than the upper bound of
the interval (2π), so the equation has only one valid
solution: x = 2π/3.
10.45 Identify the general solution to the equation: 
.
Subtract 4 from both sides of the equation; the
result is a quadratic expression left of the equal sign

and the number 0 right of the equal sign.
The quadratic expression cannot be factored, so
apply the quadratic formula, as demonstrated in
Problem 10.25. Note that the formula is set equal to
the trigonometric expression tan (x/3).
The numerator has a greatest common factor of 2.
Factor it out of that expression to simplify the
fraction.
The problem directs you to calculate the general
solution, so add multiples of π (the period of
tangent) to each solution.
Multiply each term by 3 to solve for x.

Chapter 11
ADVANCED TRIGONOMETRIC EQUATIONS
Trickier equations = clever-er solutions
In Chapter 10, you explore the fundamental concepts and
techniques of solving trigonometric equations, including:
• Exact solutions versus general solutions versus solutions on an
interval
• The role of inverse trigonometric functions
• The zero-product property and factoring
• The quadratic formula
• Equations containing single- and multiple-angle arguments
Some of the techniques in Chapter 10 are revisited in this
chapter, so ensure that you understand all of the bulleted items
above before attempting any of the problems in this chapter.
In this chapter, you learn a few more techniques for your
trigonometric equation solving toolbox. The four major
concepts of this chapter are: 
(1) rewriting trig equations using identities, (2) introducing a
squared function when you need one, (3) getting rid of a
square when you don’t need one, and (4) solving equations
that contain fractions.
If you need to review identities, flip back to Chapters 7 and
8. Make sure that you have the three Pythagorean identities
memorized, because you will see them a lot in these
problems.
Square Roots
Eliminating squares instead of factoring them
Note: In Problems 11.1–11.2, you solve the
equation tan2 x – 1 = 0 using two different

techniques. Report the solutions on the interval 0 ≤
x < 2π.
11.1    Solve the equation by factoring the expression tan2
x – 1.
The expression tan2 x – 1 is a difference of perfect
squares. Factor it and apply the zero-product
property, setting each of the individual factors equal
to zero and solving those equations.
If you need to review this technique, check out Problems
10.12–10.23.
The solutions to the equation tan2 x – 1 = 0 are the
angles x on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that have a
tangent of –1 or +1.
Note: In Problems 11.1–11.2, you solve the
equation tan2 x – 1 = 0 using two different
techniques. Report the solutions on the interval 0 ≤
x < 2π.
11.2    Solve the equation using square roots to verify your
solution to Problem 11.1.
Unlike the factoring and quadratic formula
techniques for solving quadratic equations, applying
square roots does not require that one side of the
equation be equal to 0. Begin by adding 1 to both
sides.
tan2 x = 1

Take the square root of both sides of the equation.
Note that any even root applied to both sides of an
equation requires the insertion of a “±” symbol.
For example, to solve the equation x2 = 16, you take the
square root of both sides to get x = ±4. There are two
answers, because +4 and –4 both equal 16 when squared.
Thus, the solutions to the equation are all angles x
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that have a tangent value
of either –1 or +1. This is the same set of angles
identified in the solution to Problem 11.1.
11.3    Identify the solutions to the equation 4 sin2 x – 4
sin x + 1 = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Factor the quadratic expression left of the equal
sign. Note that the quadratic formula will also
produce the correct solution to this equation, but it
requires more arithmetic than the technique
described in this solution.
(2 sin x – 1) (2 sin x – 1) = 0
Note that the factors are equal, so the left side of
the expression can be expressed as a square.
(2 sin x – 1)2 = 0
Take the square root of both sides of the equation.
Note that the “±” may be omitted because ±0 = 0.

Two angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π have a sine
value of 1/2.
11.4    Identify the solutions to the equation 2(cos2 x + 4)
– 9 = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Simplify the expression left of the equal sign and
then take the square root of both sides.
Rationalize the denominator on the right side of the
expression to reveal a familiar value of cosine.

There are four angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that
have a cosine value of 
.
11.5    Identify the solutions to the equation 3 csc2 2x = 4
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Isolate csc2 2x on the left side of the equation and
then take the square root of both sides.
Apply a reciprocal identity to express cosecant in
terms of sine. Then apply the arcsine function to
eliminate sine from the left side of the equation.

You use arcsine to get rid of sine and leave behind the 2x
that was plugged into it. The equation’s not solved until you
divide by 2 at the end and solve for x.
The four angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that have
a sine of 
 are π/3, 2π/3, 4π/3, and 5π/3.
However, because x has a coefficient of 2, you
should list twice as many solutions. Add 2π to each
of those four solutions to generate the list of eight
solutions below.
If the coefficient of x is N, then you have to list N times the
number of answers you normally would. (See Problem
10.34.) This is only true when you are identifying solutions
on a specific interval like 0≤ x < 2Π
Multiply each of the values by 1/2 to solve for x.
11.6    Identify the solutions to the equation 9 cot4 x – 1 =
0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Factor the difference of perfect squares and apply
the zero-product property.

Note that the equation cot2 x = –1/3 has no solution,
because no squared value can be equal to a
negative number. Solve the remaining equation by
taking the square root of both sides.
It is helpful to divide the numerator and
denominator of the fraction by 2 and express cot x
in terms of cosine and sine.
There are four angles with cosine values of ±1/2 and
sine values of ±√3/2.
Rational Equations
Fractions with trigonometric numerators and denominators
11.7    Solve the rational equation: 
.
A fraction is equal to zero when its numerator is
equal to zero but its denominator is not. To identify
possible solutions of this rational equation, set the
numerator equal to 0 and solve for x.

The numerator of the fraction is equal to 0 when x =
–3 or x = 3. However, one of those values is not a
solution to the equation. Substituting x = –3 into the
denominator results in 0, and dividing by 0 is an
undefined operation. Thus, there is a single solution
to this equation: x = 3.
Note: Problems 11.8–11.9 refer to the equation 
.
11.8    Identify the values of θ on the interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π
for which the fraction is undefined.
The fraction A/B is undefined when its denominator
is equal to zero (B = 0). The denominator of this
fraction is sin 2θ.
Note that sin 0 = 0 and p, according to the unit
circle. The coefficient of θ is 2, so you should
identify twice as many solutions on the interval 0 <
θ < 2π than you normally would.
There are four values of θ for which the fraction 
is undefined.

Note: Problems 11.8–11.9 refer to the equation 
.
11.9    Identify the solutions to the equation on the
interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
The solutions to the equation A/B = 0 are the values
for which A = 0 but B ≠ 0. Set the numerator equal
to 0 and solve for θ.
11.10 Identify the solutions to the below equation on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
The terms in the numerator have a greatest
common factor of 2cos x; factor it out of the
expression.
The fraction on the left side of the equation is equal
to 0 when its numerator is equal to 0. Apply the
zero-product property, setting each of the factors in
the numerator equal to 0.
2 ≠ 0       cos x = 0      2 cos2 x – 1 = 0
Clearly, 2 ≠ 0, so that factor should be discarded.
Any values of x for which cos x = 0 will also cause

the denominator to equal 0, so the equation cos x =
0 may also be discarded. The solutions to this
rational equation are limited to the solutions of the
equation 2 cos2 x– 1 = 0.
To solve a rational equation, you should factor the
numerator and denominator. If any factor appears in both
the numerator AND the denominator (like cos x in this
problem), then any x-value that makes that factor equal 0
will also make the denominator equal 0. Therefore, those x-
values can’t be solutions to the equation.
Rationalize the denominator and identify the
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
11.11 Identify the general solution to the equation: 
.
Factor the quadratic expressions in the numerator
and denominator.

The numerator contains factors (3 sin x + 5) and
(sin x – 1), so the x-values that cause either of these
factors to equal 0 are possible solutions to the
equation. However, the factor (sin x – 1) also
appears in the denominator, so any solutions to the
equation sin x – 1 = 0 will cause both the numerator
and denominator to equal 0. Discard this factor and
set the remaining factor of the numerator equal to
0.
There are no real number solutions to this equation,
because the range of sin x is –1 ≤ sin x ≤ 1. Hence,
there are no real solutions to the original rational
equation.
You can verify this visually. Graph (3*(sin(x))^2+2*sin(x)–
5)/((sin x)^2+sin(x)–2) on your graphing calculator. It
doesn’t intersect the x-axis, so there are no solutions.
11.12 Identify the general solution to the equation: 
.
The technique used in Problems 11.7–11.11 to solve
rational equations is only applicable when the
fraction is equal to 0. Add 2 to both sides of the
equation and then combine the terms left of the
equal sign into a single fraction.
To solve a rational equation, you need a single fraction on
one side of the equal sign and a zero on the other side.

The common denominator is tan x + 1.
The fraction is equal to 0 when its numerator is
equal to 0.
To construct the general solution, add multiples of π,
the period of tangent.
11.13 Identify the solutions to the below equation on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
The least common denominator of this equation is
(cos x – 1)(2 cos x – 1) = 2 cos2 x – 3 cos x + 1.
Express each fraction in terms of the least common
denominator.

Add 1/(2 cos2 x – 3 cos x + 1) to both sides of the
equation.
Set the expression in the numerator equal to 0 and
solve for x. Note that the factor (cos x + 1) does not
appear in the denominator, because 2 cos2 x – 3 cos
x + 1 = (cos x – 1)(2 cos x – 1). Therefore, solutions
to the equation cos x + 1 = 0 are also the solutions
to the original equation stated in the problem.
Pythagorean Identities
Convert one trig function into another
Note: In Problems 11.14–11.15, you solve the
equation sin2 x = cos2 x using two different
techniques. In each problem, identify the solutions
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
11.14 Rewrite the equation in terms of tan2 x and then
solve the equation for x.

Divide both sides of the equation by cos2 x, which
creates the quotient sin2 x/cos2 x = tan2 x left of the
equal sign. Solve that equation for x.
The tangent function is equal to ±1 when the
numerator and denominator are either equal or
opposite values.
Note: In Problems 11.14–11.15, you solve the
equation sin2 x = cos2 x using two different
techniques. In each problem, identify the solutions
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
11.15 Verify your solution to Problem 11.14 by rewriting
the equation in terms of sin2 x and then solving for x.
According to a Pythagorean identity, cos2 x + sin2 x
= 1. If you subtract sin2 x from both sides of the
identity, the result is cos2 x = 1 – sin2 x. Apply this
modified Pythagorean identity to rewrite the
equation sin2 x = cos2 x in terms of sine.
Solve the equation for x and identify the solutions
on the specified interval.

There are four angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that
have a sine value of 
. They are the same angles
identified as solutions in Problem 11.14.
11.16 Solve the equation sin2 x – cos x = 1 for x and
identify the solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
If you subtract cos2 x from both sides of the
Pythagorean identity cos2 x + sin2 x = 1, the result
is sin2 x = 1 – cos2 x. Apply this modified identity to
eliminate sin2 x from this problem, effectively
expressing the equation in terms of a single
trigonometric expression, cosine.
If you add cos2 x and cos x to both sides of the equation,
you don’t have to deal with as many negative signs.
Factor the quadratic expression.

0 = cos x (cos x + 1)
Apply the zero-product property and identify the
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
The solutions to the equation are x = π/2, π, and
3π/2.
11.17 Identify the solutions to the equation 3 sin x – 2
cos2 x = –3 for x and identify the solutions on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Apply the technique modeled in Problem 11.15,
applying the modified Pythagorean identity cos2 x =
1 – sin2 x to write the equation in terms of a single
trigonometric expression.
Factor the quadratic expression.
(2 sin x + 1)(sin x + 1) = 0
Apply the zero-product property and identify the
solutions to each equation on the interval 0 ≤ x <
2π.

The solutions to the equation are x = 7π/6, 3π/2,
and 11π/6.
11.18 Identify the solutions to the equation 3 tan2 x + 5
sec x + 1 = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
According to a Pythagorean identity, 1 + tan2 x =
sec2 x. Subtract 1 from both sides of that identity to
produce the equally valid statement tan2 x = sec2 x
– 1. Use this modified identity to rewrite the problem
in terms of a single trigonometric identity.
Apply the zero-product property and express the
secant equations in terms of cosine.
Note that –1 ≤ cos x ≤ 1, so there are no values of x
for which cos x = 3. Thus, that equation may be
discarded. There are two angles on the interval 0 ≤
x < 2π that have a cosine value of –1/2; these are
also the solutions to the original equation.

11.19 Identify the solutions to the below equation on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
cot3 x – cot x + csc2 x – 2 = 0
Recall that 1 + cot2 x = csc2 x. Apply this
trigonometric identity to rewrite the equation in
terms of a single trigonometric expression, cot x.
Factor the expression left of the equal sign by
grouping.
Factor (cot x + 1) out of both clumps, leaving cot2 x and –1
behind, like in Problems 10.22–10.23.
Note that the factor (cot x + 1) is repeated. Apply
the zero-product property.
In each of these steps, you take the reciprocals of both sides
of the equations. The reciprocal of cot x is tan x, the
reciprocal of –1 is –1, and the reciprocal of 1 is 1.

There are four angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that
have a tangent value of ±1.
11.20 Identify the general solution to the equation: sin4 x
+ 4 cos2 x = 0.
Note that (sin2 x)2 = sin4 x. Apply the modified
Pythagorean identity sin2 x = 1 – cos2 x to express
the equation in terms of a single trigonometric
function.
The expression left of the equal sign is a perfect
square—it is the product of two equal factors.
There are no real solutions to the equation cos2 x =
–1, because no squared value can be equal to a
negative number. Thus, there are no real solutions
to the original equation, sin4 x + 4 cos2 x = 0.

11.21 Identify the general solution to the equation: 3 sec2
θ + 4 tan θ = 5(sec2 θ – 1).
Combine like terms in the equation, setting one side
equal to 0.
Apply the trigonometric identity sec2 θ = 1 + tan2 θ
to rewrite the equation in terms of a single
trigonometric expression.
The quadratic expression right of the equal sign
cannot be factored, so apply the quadratic formula.
This technique is demonstrated in Problems 10.27–
10.32.
Reduce the fraction to lowest terms and solve for θ.

To construct the general solution, add multiples of π
(the period of tangent).
11.22 Identify the general solution to the equation: 
.
According to a Pythagorean identity, cos2 x + sin2 x
= 1. Subtract sin2 x and 1 from both sides of the
equation to produce the modified equation cos2 x –
1 = –sin2 x. Apply this modified identity to rewrite
the denominator cos2 x – 1 in the given equation.
Note that cos x/sin x = cot x and 1/sin2 x = csc2 x.

4 cot x + 3 csc2 x = –6 cot x
According to a Pythagorean identity, 1 + cot2 x =
csc2 x.
Factor or apply the quadratic formula to solve the
quadratic equation. In the solution below, the
expression 3 cot2 x + 10 cot x + 3 is factored into
the product (3 cot x + 1)(cot x + 3) and the zero-
product property is applied.
The general solution to the equation is x = arctan (–
3) + kπ, arctan (–1/3) + kπ, such that k is an integer.
Squaring
With squares come Pythagorean identities
Note: Problems 11.23–11.24 refer to the equation
cos x = sin x + 1.
11.23 Square both sides of the equation and apply a
Pythagorean identity to identify three potential
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
When you square both sides of an equation, you run the
risk of introducing extra “solutions” that are actually false.
That’s true here, and you’ll pluck out that false “solution”
in Problem 11.24.

Square both sides of the equation, as directed by
the problem. Note that (sin x + 1)2 ≠ sin2 x + 12.
This equation contains two trigonometric
expressions. Apply the technique demonstrated in
Problems 11.15–11.22 to rewrite the equation in
terms of a single trigonometric expression.
In other words, use a Pythagorean identity. Look for the trig
expression that is NOT squared (2 sin x in this equation) and
write everything in terms of that trig expression. To get rid
of cos2 x here, you use the modified Pythagorean identity
cos2 x = 1 – sin2 x.
Factor the quadratic expression.
0 = 2 sin x (sin x + 1)
Apply the zero-product property to identify the
solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
The three potential solutions to this equation are x
= 0, x = π, and x = 3π/2.
Note: Problems 11.23–11.24 refer to the equation
cos x = sin x + 1.

11.24 Test each of the potential solutions you calculated
in Problem 11.23 to identify the actual solutions to
the equation on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
According to Problem 11.23, the three potential
solutions to the equation are x = 0, x = π, and x =
3π/2. Substitute each into the original equation (cos
x = sin x + 1) to determine which, if any, satisfy the
equation.
The potential solution x = π does not satisfy the
equation. You conclude that the equation cos x = sin
x + 1 has two solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π: x
= 0 and x = 3π/2.
Note: Problems 11.25–11.26 refer to the equation
sec x – 1 – tan x = tan x.
11.25 Square both sides of the equation and apply a
Pythagorean identity to identify potential solutions on
the interval 0 ≤ x < π.
Before you square both sides of the equation, add
tan x to both sides and combine like terms.
sec x – 1 = 2 tan x
Now square both sides of the equation, noting that
(sec x – 1)2 is a simpler expression than (sec x – 1 –
tan x)2, the left side of the original equation.

Apply the modified trigonometric identity tan2 x =
sec2 x – 1 to rewrite the equation in terms of secant.
Combine like terms and factor.
Apply the zero-product property to identify potential
solutions to the equation. Notice that the problem
directs you to identify solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x
< π, which is the range of arccosine. Thus, you
should apply the arccosine function to identify the
exact solution for both of the following equations.
The potential solutions to the equation sec x – 1 –
tan x = tan x are x = 0 and x = arccos (–3/5).
Note: Problems 11.25–11.26 refer to the equation
sec x – 1 – tan x = tan x.

11.26 Test each of the potential solutions you calculated
in Problem 11.25 to identify the actual solution(s) to
the equation on the interval 0 ≤ x < π.
According to Problem 11.25, the two potential
solutions are x = 0 and x = arccos (–3/5). Begin by
testing the solution x = 0.
sec 0 – 1 – tan 0 = tan 0
Note that sec 0 does not exist. Secant and cosine
are reciprocal identities, and sec 0 = cos (1/0) is
undefined. As further evidence that sec 0 does not
exist, refer to the graph of y = sec x, which has a
vertical asymptote at x = 0.
Now determine whether or not x = arccos (–3/5) is a
solution to the equation, noting that secant and
cosine are reciprocal functions; sec [arccos (–3/5)] =
–5/3. Furthermore, tan [arccos (–3/5)] = –4/3.
If x = arccos (–3/5), then x = arcsec (–5/3). Because secant
and arcsecant are inverse functions, they cancel each other
out: sec [arcsec (–5/3)] = –5/3.
If x = arccos (–3/5), then x is an angle in the second
quadrant. Cosine = adjacent/hypotenuse, so you can draw a
reference triangle with a horizontal signed length of –3 and
a hypotenuse of length 5. That means the vertical side has
length +4.

If x = arccos (–3/5), then tan x = opposite/adjacent = +4/–3.
The only solution on the interval 0 ≤ x < π that
satisfies the equation sec x – 1 – tan x = tan x is x =
arccos (–3/5).
Note: Problems 11.27–11.28 present two different
ways to solve the equation cot x = csc x. In each
problem, identify all solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x
< 2π.
11.27 Rewrite the equation in terms of sine and cosine,
and solve the resulting rational equation.
Recall that cot x = cos x/sin x and csc x = 1/sin x.
Subtract 1/sin x from both sides of the equation and
combine the fractions, noting that they have
common denominator sin x.
A fraction is equal to 0 when its numerator is equal
to 0.

Although x = 0 is a potential solution, the original
equation contains terms cos x/sin x and 1/sin x, and
both of the terms are undefined when x = 0. Thus,
there are no real solutions to this equation.
The denominators (sin x) equal 0 when x = 0, and you can’t
divide by 0.
Note: Problems 11.27–11.28 present two different
ways to solve the equation cot x = csc x. In each
problem, identify all solutions on the interval 0 ≤ x
< 2π.
11.28 Verify your answer to Problem 11.27 by squaring
both sides of the equation and applying a
Pythagorean identity.
Square both sides of the equation and recall that 1
+ cot2 x = csc2 x.
Subtract cot2 x from both sides of the equation.
0 = 1
The statement 0 = 1 is untrue, so there are no
solutions to this—or the original—equation. This
verifies the answer to Problem 11.27, which
concluded that no real solutions exist.
Applying Trigonometric Identities
Other than the Pythagorean identities

11.29 Identify the solutions to the equation sin x = sin 2x
on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
According to Problem 8.1, sin 2x = 2 sin x cos x. Use
this identity to rewrite the right side of the equation.
Subtract one of the terms from both sides of the
equation. In the following solution, sin x is
subtracted from both sides.
0 = 2 sin x cos x – sin x
The terms on the right side of the equation have
greatest common factor sin x.
0 = sin x (2 cos x – 1)
Apply the zero-product property.
The equation sin x = sin 2x has four solutions on the
interval 0 ≤ x < 2π: 0, π/3, π, and 5π/3.
11.30 Identify the solutions to the equation cos 2x – 2
sin2 x = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
According to Problems 8.9–8.10, there are three
ways to rewrite cos 2x as a single-angle expression.
Apply the identity cos 2x = 1 – 2 sin2 x to express
the equation in terms of sine.

Isolate sin2 x on the left side of the equation.
Take the square root of both sides of the equation.
There are four angles on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π that
have a sine value of +1/2 or –1/2.
11.31 Identify the solutions to the equation (tan 2x)(sin
2x) = 0 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Apply the double-angle identities for tangent and
sine, as presented in Problems 8.39 and 8.1,
respectively.
In order to simplify the product on the left side of
the equation, express 2 tan x as the quotient 2(sin
x/cos x).

The fraction is equal to 0 when its numerator is
equal to 0.
11.32 Identify the solutions to the equation 4 cos2 (x – π)
= 3 on the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
Isolate the trigonometric expression left of the equal
sign.
Apply the difference formula for cosine (as defined
in Problem 7.37) to simplify the left side of the
equation.

If you divide both sides of this equation by –1, you get 
. If you divide the positive or negative version of
a number by –1, you get the negative or positive version. In
other words, you end up with the same two numbers.
11.33 Identify the solutions to the equation 
 on
the interval 0 ≤ x < 2π.
According to Problem 7.34, sin (x – y) = sin x cos y –
cos x sin y. In this problem, y = π/3.
Square both sides of the equation.
Rewrite the equation in terms of a single
trigonometric identity, noting that cos2 x = 1 – sin2
x.

You could also use the identity sin2 x = 1 – cos2 x to rewrite
the equation in terms of cosine.
Take the square root of both sides of the equation
and solve for x.
11.34 Identify the solutions to the equation 
on
the interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
Apply the half-angle formula for tangent (presented
in Problem 8.44) to express tan (θ/2) in terms of
single-angle sine and cosine expressions. In the
solution below, tan (θ/2) = (1 – cos θ)/sin θ is used
rather than tan (θ/2) = sin θ/(1 + cos θ), because
the former contains a single term in the
denominator and the latter contains two terms.

This only matters because you will need to write things in
terms of a common denominator, and that’s easier to do
when the common denominator only has one term in it.
Simplify the expression on the left side of the
equation, using least common denominator sin θ.
The fraction is equal to 0 when its numerator is
equal to 0 and its denominator is not.
Apply the Pythagorean identity sin2 θ = 1 – cos2 θ to
rewrite the equation in terms of cosine.
Divide each of the terms by 2 and factor.
Apply the zero-product property.

There are three possible solutions: θ = 0, π/2, and
3π/2. Substitute each into the original equation to
determine whether the solutions are valid.
The equation has a single solution, θ = π/2, on the
interval 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
11.35 Identify the solutions to the equation 
 on the interval 
.
Apply the sum and difference formulas for tangent,
presented in Problem 8.36.

Combine the fractions by writing them in terms of
the least common denominator, 1 – tan x.
The fraction is equal to 0 when its numerator is
equal to 0. Because the quadratic expression –tan2 x
+ 2 tan x + 1 is not factorable, you should apply the
quadratic formula. Mathematics convention dictates
that the coefficient of the squared term should be
positive when solving a quadratic equation, so
multiply each term by –1 to produce the equivalent
equation tan2 x – 2 tan x – 1 = 0.
Added bonus: The answers will be in the interval specified
by the problem 
. You won’t need to add or
subtract π and calculate coterminal angles when you’re
done.
There are two solutions on the interval –π/2 ≤ x ≤
π/2.


Chapter 12
AREA OF TRIANGLES AND SECTORS
Three-sided polygons and pieces of pie
The study of geometry includes a set of formulas used to
compute the areas of common figures, including triangles,
rectangles, parallelograms, trapezoids, and circles. However,
each formula only applies when very specific criteria are met.
For example, the most common formula used to calculate the
area of a triangle, A = (1/2)bh, only applies if you are able to
calculate the height of the rectangle—the length of the segment
perpendicular to the line containing one side and extending to
the opposite vertex.
As trigonometry is primarily focused on the study of triangles—
and secondarily on the relationship between triangles and
circles—this chapter explores additional formulas that calculate
the areas of triangles. It concludes with a set of problems in
which you calculate the area of a sector, a roughly triangular
region of a circle formed by two radii and an arc of the circle.
This chapter is all about area. Most of it focuses on
triangles. By the time you’re done, you’ll be able to
calculate the area of a triangle given:
 Base and height
 Two angles and one side
 Two sides and one angle
 The lengths of all three sides
You’ll also calculate the area of sectors, which are sections
of a circle that look like pieces of pie. Draw two radii on a
circle and then darken in the arc that connects the two
points at which those radii touch the circle and you have
yourself a sector.
Base and Height

Half of base times height
Note: Problems 12.1–12.3 refer to the diagram
below, rectangle ABCD in the coordinate plane with
length 6 and width 4.
12.1    Calculate the area of the rectangle by counting the
square units bounded by its sides.
The rectangle has a length of 6 and a width—or
height—of 4, so it is comprised of four rows of six
square units, each numbered individually in the
following diagram. Thus, its area is 6 · 4 = 24 square
units.

The area A of a rectangle with length l and width w
is A = lw.
Note: Problems 12.1–12.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.1, a rectangle ABCD in the coordinate
plane with length 6 and width 4.
12.2    Calculate the area of triangle DAB, based on your
answer to Problem 12.1.
Draw the segment connecting points D and B to
form triangle DAB. In the following diagram, the
region bounded by triangle DAB is shaded. Note that
it represents exactly half of the area of rectangle
ABCD.
According to Problem 12.1, the area of rectangle
ABCD is 24 square units. Therefore, the area of
triangle DAB is 12 square units.
Note: Problems 12.1–12.3 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.1, a rectangle ABCD in the coordinate
plane with length 6 and width 4.
12.3    Based on your solutions to Problems 12.1–12.2,
generate the formula for the area of a triangle with
two perpendicular sides of known lengths.

If a triangle has two perpendicular sides, one may
be described as the base of the triangle; the other
represents the height of the triangle. In Problem
12.2, you are given triangle DAB with perpendicular
sides 
 and 
 Let the base of the triangle be AB =
6 and the height of the triangle be AD = 4. The area
of DAB is half the product of the base and the
height.
If the base is AD = 4 and the height is AB = 6, you
get the same answer. Note that the height of a
triangle does not always equal the length of one of
its sides. However, if two sides are perpendicular,
you can automatically make one side the base and
the other the height.
12.4    Calculate the area of triangle XYZ below.

Two sides of triangle XYZ are perpendicular: 
 and 
 Let one of those lengths represent the base and
the other the height of triangle XYZ. For example, b
= YZ = 3 and h = XZ = 5. Substitute these values
into the triangle area formula.
12.5    Calculate the area of triangle CDE below.
Sides 
 and 
 are perpendicular, so consider one of
those lengths (either CD or DE) the base of the
triangle and the other length the height. You are
given DE = 4, but you must apply the Pythagorean
theorem to calculate CD.

Don’t worry about adding the “±” symbol here. The
lengths of the sides of a triangle are always positive
(unless you’re working in the coordinate plane and
you have to worry about the SIGNED length).
Let DE represent the base of triangle CDE and CD
represent the height. Apply the triangle area
formula.
12.6    Calculate the area of triangle JKL below.
Notice that the measure of angle L is 30°; angle J is
a right angle, so its measure is 90°. According to a
geometric theorem, the measures of the interior
angles of a triangle have a sum of 180°. Thus, the
measure of angle K is 180° – 30° – 90° = 60°. The
interior angles of the triangle are 30°, 60°, and 90°.
According to a geometric theorem, all such triangles
(called “30°–60°–90° triangles”) have lengths that
follow a specific pattern:

For more information, look at Problems 12.29–12.33
in The Humongous Book of Geometry Problems.
The short leg, opposite the 30° angle, is
exactly one-half the length of the
hypotenuse.
The long leg, opposite the 60° angle, is
exactly 
 times as long as the short leg.
The hypotenuse of triangle JKL has length KL = 14,
the short leg is half as long (JK = 7), and the long
leg is 
 times as long as the short leg (JL=7
). Two
sides of the triangle are perpendicular, so classify
one of their lengths as the base and the other as the
height of triangle JKL.
12.7    Calculate the area of isosceles right triangle MNP
below.

The legs of an isosceles right triangle have equal
lengths; each is 
 times as long as the
hypotenuse. In this problem, 
.
The legs of triangle MNP are perpendicular, so one
represents the base of the triangle and the other
represents the height.
Note: Problems 12.8–12.10 refer to the diagram
below, in which WX = 10 and the measure of angle
W is 60°.
12.8    Calculate the area of triangle WXZ.
Note that angle XZY is a right angle, measuring 90°.
Therefore, angle WZX is also a right angle. Recall
that the sum of the measures of the interior angles
of a triangle is 180°, so the measure of angle WXZ is
30°.

This little m and the angle symbol together are read
“the measure of angle.” In other words, 
 is
read “the measure of angle WXZ.”
Because angles WXZ, XWZ, and WZX measure 30°,
60°, and 90° respectively, you can apply the
technique described in Problem 12.6. Specifically,
30°–60°–90° right triangle WXZ has a hypotenuse of
length WX = 10, so the short leg is half as long: WZ
= 5. Furthermore, the long leg is 
 times as long as
the short leg: 
.
The legs of the right triangle are perpendicular to
each other, so they represent the base and height of
triangle WXZ. Apply the triangle area formula.
Note: Problems 12.8–12.10 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.8, in which WX = 10 and the measure of
angle W is 60°.
12.9    Calculate the area of triangle XYZ.
In Problem 12.8, you apply the properties of a 30°–
60°–90° triangle to calculate two lengths in the

diagram: WZ = 5 and 
, as illustrated in the
following diagram.
Note that two of the angles in the large triangle WXY
are known: angle XWY measures 60° and angle WXY
measures 90°. Therefore, angle Y measures 30°,
because the measure of the three interior angles of
triangle WXY must have a sum of 180°.
Angle Y is shared by triangles WXY and XYZ. Now
you know the measures of two angles in triangle
XYZ: angle Y measures 30° and angle XZY measures
90°. All three of the triangles (WXZ, XYZ, and WXY)
are 30°–60°–90° triangles, as illustrated in the
following diagram.
The short leg of right triangle XYZ has length xz=
; the long leg is 
times as long.

The legs of right triangle XYZ are perpendicular, so
set one length equal to the base and the other equal
to the height in the triangle area formula.
Note: Problems 12.8–12.10 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.8, in which WX = 10 and the measure of
angle W is 60°.
12.10 Calculate the area of triangle WXY by applying the
triangle area formula and verify your answer by
adding the areas you calculated in Problems 12.8–
12.9.
Big triangle WXY is made up of smaller triangles
WXZ and XYZ. You calculated the areas of the
smaller triangles in Problems 12.8 and 12.9, so if
you add those two answers, you should get the
area of the big triangle.
In Problems 12.8–12.9, you calculate the lengths of
many segments within the diagram. The following

illustration summarizes the calculations conducted
in those two problems.
If hypotenuse 
represents the base of triangle
WXY, then 
 represents the height of the triangle,
because it is perpendicular to the base and extends
to the opposite vertex, X. Apply the triangle area
formula.
Verify your answer by adding the areas of the
triangles that comprise triangle WXY.

12.11 Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the area of triangle LMN below, accurate to the
thousandths place.
Consider 
the base of triangle LMN and 
 the
height. Note that the height is not necessarily a side
of the triangle; it is simply a segment that is
perpendicular to one side of the triangle and
extends to the opposite vertex. In this problem, 
and 
 extends from base 
 to opposite
vertex M.
You are given the height (MP = 6) and part of the
base (LP = 2). You need to calculate the length of
the other portion of the base, NP, in order to apply
the triangle area formula. Notice that triangle MNP
is a right triangle. Apply the tangent ratio to
calculate NP.

Look at Problems 2.19 and 2.21 if you need to
review the tangent ratio.
Cross-multiply and solve for NP.
Calculate the base of triangle LMN. Do not evaluate
tan 35° yet, in order to avoid possible rounding
errors. Instead, wait until the final step of the
problem to compute tan 35°.
Apply the area formula to calculate the area of
triangle LMN.
Make sure your calculator is in degrees mode, not
radians mode. This chapter has a lot of degree

measurements in it, because angles not on the
coordinate plane are commonly measured in
degrees.
12.12 Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the area of triangle QRS below, accurate to the
thousandths place.
Notice that angles Q and R have a sum of 28° + 62°
= 90°. Recall that the measures of the interior
angles of a triangle have a sum of 180°, and use the
given information to calculate the measure of angle
S.
Because S is a right angle, QRS is a right triangle
and 
. Calculate the lengths of the legs using
trigonometric ratios.

Consider one leg to be the base of the right triangle;
the remaining leg is the height. Apply the triangle
area formula and round the product to the
thousandths place, as directed by the problem.
Trigonometric Area Formulas
SAS, ASA, and AAS triangle area formulas
12.13 Explain the relationship between the variables x, X,
y, Y, z, and Z in the trigonometric formulas for the
area of a triangle, and construct a diagram to
illustrate your answer.
Many trigonometric formulas, including the
trigonometric area formulas for triangles in this
chapter and the laws of sines and cosines in Chapter
13, contain multiple instances of the same letter,
one lowercase and one uppercase. In these
instances, the lowercase letter represents the length
of a side of the triangle and the uppercase letter
represents the measure of the opposite angle.
Corresponding letters (x and X, or y and Y, for
example) are always opposite each other in the
diagram.
Consider the following illustration, in which the side
with length x is opposite the angle with measure X.
Similarly, y is opposite Y and z is opposite Z.

12.14 Based on your answer to Problem 12.13, describe
the relationship between the sides and angles
identified in the triangle area formula 
.
In order to apply this triangle area formula, you
must know the lengths of two sides (x and y) and
the measure of one angle (Z). Refer to the diagram
you created in Problem 12.13, and note that the
sides with lengths x and y actually form angle Z.
Thus, the area formula A = (1/2)xy sin Z only applies
when you know the lengths of two sides of a triangle
and the measure of the included angle. Because of
these requirements, this formula is often described
as the side-angle-side (SAS) area formula.
Note: In Problems 12.15–12.16, you apply two
different techniques to calculate the area of
isosceles right triangle XYZ, illustrated below.

12.15 Calculate the area of isosceles right triangle XYZ by
applying the formula 
.
The problem states that XYZ is an isosceles right
triangle, so its legs have the same length: XZ = YZ.
Furthermore, isosceles right triangles are always
45°–45°–90° triangles, so the legs are equal to 
times the length of the hypotenuse (and,
conversely, the hypotenuse is 
 times the length of
each leg). Calculate the length of the legs.
Because two sides of the triangle are perpendicular 
, one represents the base and the other
represents the height of the triangle.

Note: In Problems 12.15–12.16, you apply two
different techniques to calculate the area of
isosceles right triangle XYZ, illustrated in Problem
12.15.
12.16 Verify your answer to Problem 12.15 by applying
the formula 
.
According to Problem 12.15, the legs of the triangle
have the same length: XZ = YZ = 9. Note that the
included angle is Z, a right angle measuring 90°.
In order to use the area formula (1/2) xy sin Z, angle
Z has to be formed by the sides with length x and y.
That means Z is the angle “included” by sides x and
y.
Note that sin 90° = sin (π/2) = 1.
This is the same area value calculated in Problem
12.15, thus verifying the solution.
12.17 Calculate the area of triangle QRS, illustrated
below. Report your answer accurate to the
thousandths place.

Angle R is formed by sides 
 and you are
given the lengths of those sides: RQ = 6 and RS = 8.
Therefore, you can apply the SAS triangle area
formula, A = (1/2) xy sin Z.
Don’t get confused by the variables—x, y, and z
don’t need to be in the problem. All you need are
two side lengths (that you plug into x and y) and an
angle (that you plug into Z) formed by those sides.
Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
sin 41°.
A ≈ 15.745
12.18 Use a scientific or graphing calculator to compute
the area of a triangle with an interior angle
measuring 48°, if the lengths of the sides forming
that angle are 10.4 and 13.9. Report your answer
accurate to the thousandths place.

Apply the SAS triangle area formula, setting x =
10.4, y = 13.9, and Z = 48°.
12.19 Identify the formula used to calculate the area of a
triangle given two of its angle measurements and the
length of one side.
If you know the measures of two angles and the
length of one side of a triangle, you can apply the
following formula to calculate the area. The side
with the known length need not be included by the
angles whose measurements are known. Therefore,
the formula is known alternately as the angle-side-
angle (ASA) and angle-angle-side (AAS) formulas, as
it satisfies both cases.
“Included” means “between.”
Note that the formula contains x and X, which
represent the known side length and the measure of
the opposite angle, respectively. Also note that the
formula requires the measures of all three interior
angles of the triangle.
If you are given two interior angle measures,
subtract them both from 180° to figure out the third

interior angle measure. Remember: those three
angles add up to 180°.
12.20 Apply the triangle area formula identified in
Problem 12.19 to calculate the area of triangle JKL
below. Report your answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
You are given two angle measures and the length of
one side that is not included between those angles,
typically described as AAS. (If the side were
included, you would describe the given information
as ASA.) Subtract the given angle measurements
from 180° to calculate the measure of angle L.
You are given side length JL = 3; angle K is opposite
that side. Substitute x = 3 and X = 25° into the AAS
triangle area formula, presented in Problem 12.19.
The remaining angle measurements are substituted
into Y and Z. In the solution below, Y = 110° and Z
= 45°; however, substituting Y = 45° and Z = 110°
produces the same final result.

Note: In Problems 12.21–12.22, you calculate the
area of triangle BCD, illustrated below, two
different ways.
12.21 Identify the base and height of the triangle and
apply the formula 
to calculate its exact area.
In other words, don’t use a calculator in this
problem. Unless you have a symbolic calculator,
your answer will be a decimal, which is usually an
approximate—rather than an exact—answer.
Note that BCD is a 30°–60°–90° triangle with
hypotenuse length BC = 16. Therefore, the short leg
is half the length of the hypotenuse (CD = 8) and its
long leg is 
 times the length of the short leg 
. Because 
 the length of one leg serves

as the base of the triangle and the length of the
other leg represents the height. Substitute these
values into the standard triangle area formula (A =
1/2bh).
Note: In Problems 12.21–12.22, you calculate the
area of triangle BCD, illustrated in Problem 12.21,
two different ways.
12.22 Verify your solution to Problem 12.21 by applying
the ASA triangle area formula. Do not use a scientific
or graphing calculator for this problem.
A known side length and the measure of its opposite
angle must be substituted into x and X, respectively,
in the ASA triangle area formula. In this diagram,
you are given BC = 16. Its opposite angle, D, is a
right angle, which measures 90°.

The numerator contains two fractions with a
denominator of 2. Multiply 256 by 1/2 to get 128.
Then, multiply 128 by 
to get a numerator of 
12.23 Calculate the area of triangle NPQ, given 
 and NQ = 7. Report your answer
accurate to the thousandths place.
It is helpful to construct a diagram that illustrates
the given information. Your diagram may not
precisely match the below diagram, but both will
return the same solution. Calculate the measure of
angle P by subtracting the measures of angles N
and Q from 180°: 
 = 180° – 80° – 35° = 65°.
You are given side length NQ = 7; its opposite angle
is P, which has a measure of 65°. Substitute these
values for x and X in the ASA triangle area formula.

12.24 Calculate the area of triangle BCE in the diagram
below, and report the answer accurate to three
decimal places.
The diagram does not provide sufficient information
to calculate the area of triangle BCE directly. Notice
that the area of the largest triangle, BDE, is equal to
the sum of the areas of triangles BCE and CDE.
Apply the SAS triangle area formula to calculate the
area of triangle CDE.

Calculate the measure of angle BED, noting that the
sum of the measures of the interior angles of
triangle BDE must equal 180°.
Apply the ASA triangle area formula to calculate the
area of triangle BDE.
Recall that the larger triangle is comprised of the
two smaller triangles.
Solve for the area of triangle BCE and substitute the
areas calculated above into the equation.
Heron’s Formula
SSS triangle area formula

12.25 Identify the formula used to calculate the area of a
triangle given only the lengths of its sides.
Heron’s formula allows you to calculate the area of a
triangle given only the lengths of its sides, x, y, and
z. In order to apply the formula, you must first
calculate the semiperimeter, s, of the triangle using
the following formula.
The perimeter of a triangle is the sum of the lengths
of its sides. The SEMIperimeter is equal to half of the
perimeter, just like a SEMIcircle is half of a circle.
Once you have calculated the semiperimeter, you
can apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area A.
Note: Problems 12.26–12.28 refer to isosceles
triangle XYZ below.
12.26 Calculate the semiperimeter of XYZ.

Triangle XYZ is isosceles because at least two of its
sides have the same length (XY = XZ = 5). The
semiperimeter is equal to half the sum of the
lengths of the sides.
Note: Problems 12.26–12.28 refer to isosceles
triangle XYZ, as illustrated in Problem 12.26.
12.27 Apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area of
triangle XYZ.
Heron’s formula is the square root of the product of
the semiperimeter and the differences of the
semiperimeter and each of the side lengths.
Note: Problems 12.26–12.28 refer to isosceles
triangle XYZ, as illustrated in Problem 12.26.
12.28 Verify your solution to Problem 12.27 by dividing
triangle XYZ into two congruent right triangles and
calculating their areas.

The segment connecting X and the base 
of the
isosceles triangle bisects that base, dividing it in
half, and is perpendicular to the base. In the
diagram below, 
and WY = WZ.
Apply the Pythagorean theorem to calculate WX.
If a triangle is drawn in the coordinate plane, you
may have to worry about signed length, meaning
the side of a triangle can have a positive or negative
value. This triangle is not drawn in the coordinate
plane, so its side lengths MUST be positive. In other
words, the answer WX = ±4 is wrong.
Both right triangles have a base of 3 and a height of
4. Use the standard triangle area formula to
calculate their areas.

Each of the right triangles has an area of 6. Together
they have a total area of 12, which verifies the
solution to Problem 12.27.
Note: Problems 12.29–12.30 refer to a triangle with
side lengths 7, 9, and 10.
12.29 Calculate the semiperimeter of the triangle.
Add the lengths of the sides and divide by 2.
Note: Problems 12.29–12.30 refer to a triangle with
side lengths 7, 9, and 10.
12.30 Calculate the exact area of the triangle.
Apply Heron’s formula, setting x = 7, y = 9, z = 10,
and s = 13 (as calculated in Problem 12.29).

Note: Problems 12.31–12.32 refer to triangle LMN,
illustrated below.
12.31 Calculate the semiperimeter of the triangle.
You are given the lengths of two sides of the right
triangle; apply the Pythagorean theorem to
calculate the third.
Calculate the semiperimeter of the triangle.

Note: Problems 12.31–12.32 refer to triangle LMN,
illustrated in Problem 12.31.
12.32 Calculate the exact area of the triangle.
Uh oh. That means no calculator and a bunch of
arithmetic. Bring it on!
According to Problem 12.31, 
Apply Heron’s formula.
Group the factors to simplify the product.
Multiply the factors within each bracketed group
using the FOIL method.

Note: Problems 12.33–12.34 refer to the diagram
below.
12.33 Calculate the lengths of the sides of triangle QRS.
Note that QST is a right triangle, so apply the
Pythagorean theorem to calculate ST (which is also
equal to x).

Now that you know ST = x = 5, you can substitute x
= 5 into the expressions that represent the lengths
of QR and RS.
The lengths of the sides of triangle QRS are RS = 6,
QS = 13, and QR = 16.
Note: Problems 12.33–12.34 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.33.
12.34 Apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area of
triangle QRS. Report the answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
According to Problem 12.33, the lengths of the sides
of triangle QRS are RS = 6, QS = 13, and QR = 16.
Calculate the semiperimeter.
Apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area of
triangle QRS.

Area of a Sector
Surface area of a pizza slice
12.35 Identify the formula used to calculate the area of a
sector with central angle θ.
A sector is a portion of a circle bounded by an arc
and two radii of the circle. To compute the area of a
sector, you need to know the measure of its central
angle θ and the radius r of the circle.
The vertex of a central angle lies on the center of a
circle and its sides extend outward from the center,
intersecting the circle.
Essentially, this formula multiplies the area of the
full circle 
 by a fraction that identifies how much
of the circle is contained within the sector. For
instance, a semicircle has a central angle of 180°,
and its area is 180°/360° = 1/2 of the circle.

Note: Problems 12.36–12.39 refer to the diagram
below, in which circle X has radius r = 2.
12.36 Calculate the area of circle X.
The area of a circle is the product of π and the
squared radius (r2) of the circle. The problem states
that the radius is r = 2.
Note: Problems 12.36–12.39 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.36. Note that circle X has radius r = 2.
12.37 Calculate the perimeter of the shaded sector,
assuming θ is measured in radians.
The sector is bounded by two radii 
 and an
arc 
. Each of the radii has length 2. Apply the
formula below to calculate the length of the arc.
The perimeter p of the sector is the sum of the
lengths of the bounding radii and the arc.

If the central angle of an arc is measured in degrees
rather than radians, the following formula calculates
the length of that arc; the formula multiplies angle θ
(measured in degrees) by π/180, thereby converting
the angle measurement to radians.
Note: Problems 12.36–12.39 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.36. Note that circle X has radius r = 2.
12.38 Calculate the area of the shaded sector, assuming
θ = π/6.
Apply the sector area formula presented in Problem
12.35. Note that the measure of the central angle is
expressed in radians, so you should also use radians
to express the measure of one full rotation: 2π.
Note: Problems 12.36–12.39 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.36. Note that circle X has radius r = 2.
12.39 Calculate the unshaded region of the circle,
assuming θ = 40°.

The unshaded region of the circle is also a sector. Its
central angle measures 360° – 40° = 320°. Because
the central angle is expressed in degrees, you
should also express the measure of one full rotation
in degrees when applying the area formula.
Note: Problems 12.40–12.42 refer to a circle with
radius 6 and a sector of the circle that has a central
angle measuring 100°.
12.40 Calculate the area and circumference of the circle.
The area A of a circle is equal to the product of π
and the square of the radius.
The circumference C of a circle is the product of 2π
and the radius.
Note: Problems 12.40–12.42 refer to a circle with
radius 6 and a sector of the circle that has a central
angle measuring 100°.
12.41 Calculate the area of the sector.

Apply the area formula for the sector of a circle.
Note: Problems 12.40–12.42 refer to a circle with
radius 6 and a sector of the circle that has a central
angle measuring 100°.
12.42 Calculate the perimeter of the sector.
The perimeter of a sector consists of two radii and
an arc of the circle. The radius of this circle is r = 6.
To calculate the arc length, apply the formula
introduced in Problem 12.37; use the version of the
formula intended for central angles measured in
degrees.
Add the lengths of the two radii to the arc length
you calculated.

Note: Problems 12.43–12.45 refer to the diagram
below, in which XY = 13 and XZ = 24.
12.43 Calculate the area of the sector, bounded by 
 Report the answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
Two sides of triangle XYZ are also radii of circle Y, so
they have the same length (XY = YZ = 13).
Therefore, XYZ is an isosceles triangle. Draw 
, the
segment connecting Y to the opposite side, and note
that it is perpendicular to—and bisects—
.
See Problem 12.28.

By drawing the perpendicular bisector, you have
divided XYZ into two congruent right triangles, WZY
and WXY. Furthermore, you know that the measure
of angle XYZ is equal to θ + θ. Apply a trigonometric
ratio to calculate θ.
Therefore, the measure of central angle XYZ is equal
to 2θ = 2arcsin (12/13). Apply the sector area
formula. In the solution below, the calculator is set
to degrees mode.
The area of the sector, accurate to the thousandths
place, is 198.745.

Note: Problems 12.43–12.45 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.43, in which XY = 13 and XZ = 24.
12.44 Calculate the area of triangle XYZ.
As Problem 12.43 explains, XY = YZ = 13. You are
given the length of the third side: XZ = 24.
Calculate the semiperimeter of triangle XYZ.
Now apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area of
triangle XYZ.
Note: Problems 12.43–12.45 refer to the diagram in
Problem 12.43, in which XY = 13 and XZ = 24.
12.45 Calculate the area of the shaded region, accurate
to the thousandths place.
The shaded region is the portion of the sector
investigated in Problem 12.43 that does not include
the area of triangle XYZ. Subtract the area you
calculated in Problem 12.44 from the area you
calculated in Problem 12.43.


Chapter 13
OBLIQUE TRIANGLE LAWS
Oblique = Not a right triangle
In Chapter 12, you apply different formulas to calculate the area
of a triangle. Often, the formula you choose is dictated by the
information provided in the problem. For example, Heron’s
formula only applies if you know the lengths of all three sides—
which is described as “SSS” or “side-side-side.”
In this chapter, you once again select between formulas—the
law of sines and the law of cosines—based on the information
you are given. Specifically, given any two angles and a side
(AAS or ASA), you apply the law of sines to calculate lengths of
the remaining sides. Given the lengths of all three sides, or two
sides and the included angle measurement, you apply the law of
cosines.
There are two important formulas to memorize in this
chapter—the law of sines and the law of cosines. Both refer
to triangles, and in both formulas, matching upper- and
lowercase letters represent opposite elements. In other
words, angle A is opposite the side with length a.
The law of sines is a bit easier than the law of cosines, and
you’ll see the law of sines more often. In fact, you will
probably use it in the later stages of problems that you start
with the law of cosines.
Two rules of thumb:
(1) Use the law of sines whenever you can
(2) Be careful when you are given two sides and a non-
included angle (SSA). You’ll see why in Problems 13.9–
13.12.
Law of Sines
Given AAS, ASA, and occasionally SSA

13.1    Given the diagram below, in which A is opposite a,
B is opposite b, and C is opposite c, state the law of
sines.
The law of sines states that the ratio of the sine of
an angle to the length of the opposite side is
constant in a triangle.
You may also express the law of sines using the
reciprocals of the ratios.
Note: Problems 13.2–13.4 refer to triangle ABC
below.

13.2    Calculate b and report your answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
You are given the measures of two angles and the
length of a non-included side: 
and c
= 4; in other words, you are given angle-angle-side
(AAS). You are asked to calculate b, the side
opposite angle B, which is also written AC. Because
you know the measure of angle C and the length of
the opposite side c, the ratio (sin C)/c should appear
in the law of sines proportion. You are asked to
calculate AC, which is equal to b, because it is the
length of the side opposite angle B.
The side is not sandwiched between the two angles.
In this diagram, 
 is the side included between
angles B and C.
AC and b are two different ways to write the same
length. One names the side according to its
endpoints and the other names the side according
to the opposite angle.

Cross-multiply and solve for b.
You conclude that b ≈ 8.894.
Note: Problems 13.2–13.4 refer to the diagram in
Problem 13.2.
13.3    Calculate the measure of angle A.
The measures of the interior angles of a triangle
have a sum of 180°. You are given two of those
measures, so subtract them from 180° to calculate
the measure of angle A.
Note: Problems 13.2–13.4 refer to the diagram in
Problem 13.2.
13.4    Calculate the perimeter of ABC and report your
answer accurate to three decimal places.
According to the diagram, the side opposite angle C
has length c = 4; in Problem 13.2, you calculate b,
the length of another side of the triangle. In order to
compute the perimeter, you need to calculate the
length of the remaining side, a. Apply the law of
sines once again.

According to Problem 13.3, the measure of angle A
is 85°. Note that you can replace (sin C)/c with (sin
B)/b in the proportion above, now that you know the
value of b. However, because b is a lengthy decimal
and c is an integer, (sin C)/c is preferred.
Add the lengths of the sides to calculate the
perimeter of ABC.
Substitute the exact values of a and b, the ugly
fractions, into the formula. If you use decimals
rounded to the thousandths place, it might lead to a
rounding error, making your solution slightly
inaccurate. If you hate typing fractions into your
calculator, you can use the long decimal
equivalents, but don’t round anything until the final
step of the problem.
Problems 13.5–13.7 refer to triangle RST in the
diagram below.

13.5    Calculate the measure of angle R.
The measures of two interior angles of triangle RST
are given. Subtract them from 180° to calculate the
measure of the remaining angle.
Problems 13.5–13.7 refer to triangle RST, illustrated
in Problem 13.5.
13.6    Calculate RT, accurate to the thousandths place.
You are given the measure of two angles and the
included side, or angle-side-angle (ASA). Apply the
law of sines, noting that angle S is opposite side 
and angle R is opposite side 
According to Problem 13.5, the measure of angle R
is 40°.

One fraction should always contain a known side
length opposite a known angle measure (in this
case, r and R). The other fraction should contain the
side or angle you’re calculating and the side or
angle opposite it (in this case, you are calculating s
= RT and
Problems 13.5–13.7 refer to triangle RST, illustrated
in Problem 13.5.
13.7    Calculate RS, accurate to the thousandths place.
Apply the law of sines, noting that t = RS because
side 
 is opposite angle T.
13.8    Calculate YZ in the triangle illustrated below.
Report your answer accurate to the thousandths
place.

You are given two angles and a non-included side
(AAS), so apply the law of sines. Note that you are
given the measure of angle Y (50°) and the length of
the opposite side (y = 7). You are asked to calculate
x = YZ, the length of the side opposite angle X.
Problems 13.9–13.12 refer to a triangle ABC, such
that 
, a = 3, and c = 5.
13.9    Explain why the information provided by the
problem classifies this as the ambiguous case for the
law of sines.
You are given the measure of one angle and the
lengths of two sides of triangle ABC. Note that one
of the side lengths given (a = 3) is opposite the
given angle measurement. Therefore, the angle is
not formed by the sides, classifying this information

as side-side-angle (SSA), rather than side-angle-side
(SAS). Unlike the preceding problems in this
chapter, you are given only one angle
measurement, rather than two.
The angle included between two sides is the letter
not named by the sides. In this case, angle B is
included between (and formed by) sides a and c. If
you had a triangle named MNP, and you were given
side lengths n and p, those sides would form angle
M, the remaining letter in the name of the triangle.
A SSA triangle is described as the ambiguous case,
because the law of sines cannot always reliably
predict whether or not an angle is obtuse when only
one angle measurement is known. Because of this
limitation, you should apply the law of cosines
(described in Problems 13.13–13.24) to calculate
any angle that may be obtuse, whenever possible.
However, in this case, you must apply the law of
sines and carefully interpret your answer.
Problems 13.9–13.12 refer to a triangle ABC, such
that 
, a = 3, and c = 5.
13.10 Demonstrate, via an illustration drawn to scale,
that angle C of triangle ABC may be acute or obtuse.
Use a ruler and a protractor to draw two different
triangles named ABC with side lengths a = 3 and c
= 5. Note that the angle opposite a must measure
20°. The diagram below illustrates two different
triangles that meet these requirements; in one case,
angle C is acute, and in the other, angle C is obtuse.

Because two different triangles may (and in this
problem actually do) satisfy the SSA conditions
described, there may be two different—and equally
valid—ways to calculate the measures of the
remaining sides and angles of the triangle. Hence, a
SSA triangle is considered the ambiguous case for
the law of sines. In Problems 13.11–13.12, you
calculate the two possible measures of angle C.
Problems 13.9–13.12 refer to a triangle ABC, such
that 
, a = 3, and c = 5.
13.11 Calculate the measure of angle C, assuming C is
acute. Report your answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
In the ambiguous case, you apply the law of sines
and use arcsine to calculate the measure of an
angle. Recall that the restricted range of arcsine is –
π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2. Because triangles not on the
coordinate plane must have positive angle
measurements, arcsine will report an angle between
0 and π/2. In other words, unless the unknown angle
is a right angle, it will be acute.

Therefore, 
.
Problems 13.9–13.12 refer to a triangle ABC, such
that 
, a = 3, and c = 5.
13.12 Calculate the measure of angle C, assuming C is
obtuse. Report your answer accurate to the
thousandths place.
According to Problem 13.11, angle C has a sine
value of approximately 0.5700335722. This is true
whether C is acute or obtuse. An angle in standard
position with a measure of approximately 34.753°
has that sine value, and so does a reference angle
with the same measure in the second quadrant. The
terminal sides of both angles intersect the unit circle
at the same height, so they have the same sine
value, as illustrated below.

Angle C is the highlighted angle in the diagram, an
obtuse angle in standard position that terminates in
the second quadrant. Calculate its measure by
subtracting the measure of its reference angle from
180° (as explained in Problem 4.7).
If C is an obtuse angle in triangle ABC, then it
measures 145.247°.
Law of Cosines
Given SAS or SSS
13.13 State the law of cosines, given a triangle ABC such
that a is the length of the side opposite angle A, b is
the length of the side opposite angle B, and c is the
length of the side opposite angle C.
The law of cosines takes one of three forms, based
on the information you are given in the problem. In
each case, the square of the length of one side is
equal to the sum of the squares of the other side

lengths minus double the product of those lengths
multiplied by the cosine of the angle opposite the
original side.
Added bonus: There is no ambiguous case for the
law of cosines. If the formula produces an answer,
you can be sure that answer is correct.
Problems 13.14–13.17 refer to triangle ABC,
illustrated below.
13.14 Explain why you must begin this problem with the
law of cosines, not the law of sines.
The law of cosines is usually applied to triangles in
which you are given the lengths of two sides and an
included angle (side-angle-side or SAS) or the
lengths of all three sides (side-side-side or SSS). In
this problem, you are given the length of all three
sides.
Problems 13.14–13.17 refer to triangle ABC,
illustrated in Problem 13.14.
13.15 Identify the angle measure you should calculate
first and explain your answer.

When possible, you should use the law of cosines to
calculate the largest angle in a triangle, in case it is
obtuse. As Problems 13.9–13.12 explain, the law of
sines is unable to differentiate between acute and
obtuse angles; the law of cosines does not suffer
this limitation. The largest angle in a triangle is
always opposite the longest side. Because the
longest side of this triangle is b = 9, you should
apply the law of cosines to calculate the measure of
angle B.
Because the restricted range of arccosine is 
it can calculate acute angles (whose measures are
greater than 0° but less than 90°) and obtuse
angles (whose measures are greater than 90° but
less than 180°).
Problems 13.14–13.17 refer to triangle ABC,
illustrated in Problem 13.14.
13.16 Calculate the angle you identified in Problem 13.15,
and report the answer accurate to the thousandths
place.
As Problem 13.15 explains, you should calculate the
measure of angle B first. Use the version of the law
of cosines that includes B.

If the cosine is negative, the angle is obtuse. If the
cosine is positive, the angle is acute.
The measure of angle B is approximately 127.169°.
Problems 13.14–13.17 refer to triangle ABC,
illustrated in Problem 13.14.
13.17 Calculate the measures of the remaining angles in
triangle ABC, accurate to the thousandths place.
According to Problem 13.16, angle B measures
approximately 127.1688997°; the opposite side has
length b = 9. Although you can apply the law of
cosines to calculate another angle measure in the
triangle, you should apply the law of sines instead,
because it requires less arithmetic to complete.
Furthermore, because you have already calculated
the measure of the largest angle in triangle ABC, the
ambiguous case is no longer a concern.
You can choose to calculate the measure of angle A
or C; below, the law of sines is used to calculate the
measure of angle A.

Angle A measures approximately 20.742°. Now that
you know two of the angle measures, you can
subtract them from 180° to identify the remaining
angle measure in the triangle. Use the unrounded
angle measurements to avoid possible rounding
errors.
Problems 13.18–13.21 refer to triangle XYZ,
illustrated below.
13.18 Calculate XZ using the law of cosines, and report
your answer accurate to the thousandths place.
The diagram provides the lengths of two sides and
the measure of the angle they form, so you are
given side-angle-side or SAS; therefore, the law of
cosines should be applied to calculate the missing
measurement. Note that side 
 is opposite angle Y,
so y = XZ.

Therefore, XZ θ 4.264.
Problems 13.18–13.21 refer to triangle XYZ,
illustrated in Problem 13.18.
13.19 Identify an angle that must be acute and calculate
its measure using the law of sines. Report your
answer accurate to the thousandths place.
Two side lengths are given in the diagram: XY = 4
and YZ = 8. According to Problem 13.18, XZ ≈
4.264. The largest angle must be opposite the
largest side, so angle X is larger than angles Y and
Z. A triangle can have, at most, one obtuse angle. In
this case, only angle X could be obtuse; thus, angle
Z must be acute.
Angle Z measures approximately 14.052°.
Problems 13.18–13.21 refer to triangle XYZ,
illustrated in Problem 13.18.

13.20 Calculate the measure of the remaining angle,
accurate to the thousandths place.
The diagram states that angle Y measures 15°;
according to Problem 13.19, angle Z measures
approximately 14.05191311°. Subtract these values
from 180° to identify the measure of angle X.
Angle X measures approximately 150.948°.
Problems 13.18–13.21 refer to triangle XYZ,
illustrated in Problem 13.18.
13.21 Verify your answer to Problem 13.20 using the law
of cosines.
Apply the law of cosines to calculate the measure of
angle X, given the lengths of the sides of the
triangle: x = 8, y ≈ 4.263888732, and z = 4.
Problems 13.22–13.24 refer to triangle LMN,
illustrated below.

13.22 Calculate the area of triangle LMN using only the
information given in the diagram, and report your
answer accurate to the thousandths place.
You are given the lengths of two sides and the
measure of the included angle (SAS); apply the area
formula introduced in Problem 12.14.
Problems 13.22–13.24 refer to triangle LMN,
illustrated in Problem 13.22.
13.23 Calculate MN, and report your answer accurate to
the thousandths place.
Given the lengths of two sides of a triangle and the
measure of the included angle, you should apply the
law of cosines to calculate the length of the side
opposite the included angle. Note that l = MN.

Thus, MN ≈ 2.299.
Problems 13.22–13.24 refer to triangle LMN,
illustrated in Problem 13.22.
13.24 Verify your answer to Problem 13.22 using Heron’s
formula.
Heron’s formula, first introduced in Problem 12.25,
allows you to calculate the area of a triangle based
on the lengths of its sides. You are given LM = 2 and
LN = 3; according to Problem 13.23, MN ≈
2.299249591. Begin by calculating the
semiperimeter, s.
Now apply Heron’s formula to calculate the area A of
triangle LMN.

Some calculators use more decimals than they
actually show on screen, so the number under your
square root may not end in “806” like the book’s
does. That’s okay, as long as you still end up with
the same answer rounded to the thousandths place:
2.298.
This is the same area value you calculated in
Problem 13.22, thus verifying your answer.

Chapter 14
VECTORS
Arrows on the coordinate plane
Vectors are directed line segments in the coordinate plane that
possess both magnitude and direction. In this chapter, you plot
vectors in the coordinate plane, identify equivalent and opposite
vectors, express vectors in component form, calculate vector
magnitude, and investigate unit vectors. Although Chapters 14–
16 deal exclusively with vectors, many of the concepts you
explore in this chapter are echoed in later concepts, including
complex numbers and the parametric representation of graphs.
If you have had your fill of triangles, you’re in luck. The final
five chapters of this book are a startling change of pace. For
example, in this chapter you study vectors, which are
basically rays lying in the coordinate plane. Like line
segments, they have a length you can calculate, but unlike
line segments, they have direction. One end of a vector is
represented by an arrowhead, while the other is just a point.
Plotting Vectors
Using initial and terminal points
Note: Problems 14.1–14.5 refer to vector v, which
has initial point P = (–2,3) and terminal point Q =
(5,1).
14.1    Plot v in the coordinate plane.
Vector v begins at point P = (–2,3) and extends to
point Q = (5,1), where it terminates, as illustrated in
the following graph. Note that the initial and
terminal points are not explicitly depicted on the
graph of the vector.

In other words, just draw an arrow whose pointy end
is the terminal point. Don’t draw dots on the graph
to represent the initial and terminal points of the
vector.
Note: Problems 14.1–14.5 refer to vector v, which
has initial point P = (–2,3) and terminal point Q =
(5,1).
14.2    There are two ways to name a vector. In this
problem, the vector is defined using the single letter
v. Identify the other, equally valid, name for the
vector.
In this problem, vector v is assigned a name, but
you can also identify a vector according to its initial
and terminal points. Because v has initial point P
and terminal point Q, you can refer to v as 
.
(Some textbooks use a slightly different arrow to
denote a vector: 
.) The first letter in the name
must be the initial point of the vector, so 
 is not
the same vector as v; they point in opposite
directions.

Note: Problems 14.1–14.5 refer to vector v, which
has initial point P = (–2,3) and terminal point Q =
(5,1).
14.3    Verify that the vector with initial point R = (0,5) and
terminal point S = (7,3) is equivalent to v and explain
your answer.
Equivalent vectors have the same length and
direction. However, you do not need to calculate the
lengths (or magnitudes) of two vectors to determine
whether or not they are equivalent. You simply need
to compare the horizontal and vertical changes
exhibited by both vectors.
If you travel along v from P to Q, you move 7 units
to the right and 2 units down. To calculate the
change in x (horizontal change), subtract the x-
coordinate of P from the x-coordinate of Q. Similarly,
calculate the change in y (vertical change) by
subtracting the corresponding y-coordinates.
Now calculate the changes in x and y that occur as you
travel from the initial point to the terminal point of 
Although v and 
 appear in different locations on
the coordinate plane, they both describe a vector
that travels 7 units to the right and 2 units down.
Thus, the vectors are equivalent.
Note: Problems 14.1–14.5 refer to vector v, which
has initial point P = (–2,3) and terminal point Q =
(5,1).

14.4    Let w represent a vector that is equivalent to v and
has initial point (–1,0). Identify the terminal point of
w.
Let (x, y) represent the terminal point of w. As
Problem 14.3 explains, equivalent vectors exhibit
the same changes in x and y as you travel from
their initial to their terminal points. Furthermore,
Problem 14.3 states that v exhibits a +7 change in x
and a –2 change in y.
Let (x, y) represent the terminal point of w.
Calculate the changes in x and y for vector w by
subtracting the coordinates of its initial point (–1, 0)
from the corresponding coordinates of its terminal
point (x, y). Recall that the change in x is equal to 7;
the change in y is equal to –2.
Thus, the terminal point of w is (6,–2). As you travel
along the vector to this coordinate from initial point
(–1,0), you move 7 units right and 2 units down.
Note: Problems 14.1–14.5 refer to vector v, which
has initial point P = (–2,3) and terminal point Q =
(5,1).
14.5    Assume z is the opposite vector of v. Identify the
initial and terminal points of z.
Vector v has initial point P and terminal point Q.
Reverse those points to identify the opposite vector
z. In other words, the initial point of z is Q and the
terminal point is P. A vector and its opposite have
the same length but opposite directions.

Note: In Problems 14.6–14.7, M = (0,6) and N = (–
3,–1).
14.6    Plot vector 
.
The vector begins at initial point M = (0,6) and
extends toward its terminal point N = (–3,–1), as
illustrated in the following graph.
Note: In Problems 14.6–14.7, M = (0,6) and N = (–
3,–1).
14.7    Construct a vector v that is equivalent to 
 and
plot it on the coordinate plane.
There is more than one correct answer to this
problem.
In the diagram below, 
 is illustrated as a dotted
vector. It is equivalent to v, which has initial point
(3,2) and terminal point (0,–5). Both vectors travel
left 3 units and down 7 units as you trace the path
from their initial to terminal points.

There is no single correct solution to this problem;
any vector with a terminal point 3 units left of, and 7
units below, its initial point is a valid solution.
14.8    Given P = (1.5, –3.5), Q = (–4, 9.5), R = (13, 6), and
S = (7.5, 19), determine whether or not 
 and 
 are
equivalent vectors and explain your answer.
Subtract the x- and y- coordinates of each vector’s
initial point from the coordinates of its terminal
point to determine whether the vectors demonstrate
the same changes in x and y.
Both vectors travel left 5.5 units and up 13 units
from their initial to terminal points, so they are

equivalent.
14.9    Given 
, the vector illustrated below, identify the
terminal point of the equivalent vector v, which has
initial point (9,–8).
Vector 
 has initial point A = (2,–2) and terminal
point (0,4). Thus, it exhibits a horizontal change of 0
– 2 = –2 and a vertical change of 4 – (–2) = 6. You
are given an initial point of (9,–8) for equivalent
vector v. Let (x,y) represent its terminal point.
Recall that equivalent vectors exhibit the same
horizontal and vertical changes.
The terminal point of v is (7,–2).
Note: In Problems 14.10–14.11, assume that 
 and 
 are equivalent vectors, such that A = (–4, 11), B
= (8, –3), C = (x – 1, 3x), and D = (4x, y + 2).
14.10 Calculate x.

Calculate the horizontal change exhibited by each
vector.
Make sure to distribute the negative sign to both
terms in the parentheses: x and –1.
Equivalent vectors have equivalent horizontal
changes, so 12 = 3x + 1. Solve this equation for x.
Note: In Problems 14.10–14.11, assume that 
 and 
 are equivalent vectors, such that A = (–4, 11), B
= (8, –3), C = (x – 1, 3x), and D = (4x, y + 2).
14.11 Calculate y.
Calculate the vertical change exhibited by each
vector.
Equivalent vectors have equivalent vertical
changes, so –14 = y + 2 – 3x. According to Problem
14.10, x = 11/3. Substitute that value into the
equation and solve for y.

Component Form
Move the initial point to the origin
14.12 Given a vector v in standard position, identify its
initial point and explain how to express it in
component form.
A vector v in standard position has an initial point of
(0,0)—the origin of the coordinate plane. The
coordinates of its terminal point are the components
of the vector. For example, if v has terminal point (a,
b), then the component form of the vector is v =
<a, b>.
If vector v goes right 5 units and up 9 units as you
travel from its initial point to its terminal point, then
v = <5,9>.
Note: In Problems 14.13–14.16, v = <2,–1 >.
These pointy grouping symbols (that look like less
than and greater than symbols) indicate that the
vector is in component form.
14.13 Identify the initial and terminal points of v,
assuming v is in standard position.
A vector in component form describes the horizontal
and vertical changes of the vector without tying it to
a specific position on the coordinate plane. Thus, v
may be located anywhere in the coordinate plane,
but you know that its terminal point is 2 units right
of, and 1 unit below, its initial point.

Some textbooks refer to vectors in standard position
as “standard vectors.”
This problem states that v is in standard position, so
its initial point is (0,0). Its terminal point has the
same coordinates as the component form of v.
Therefore, the terminal point of v is (2,–1).
Note: In Problems 14.13–14.16, v = <2,–1 >.
14.14 Plot v in standard position.
According to Problem 14.13, v has initial point (0,0)
and terminal point (2,–1).
Note: In Problems 14.13–14.16, v = <2,–1>.
14.15 Assume that w is the opposite of v. Express w in
component form.
If a vector has component form <a, b>, its opposite
vector has component form <–a, –b>. Thus, w = <–
2, 1>.
Note: In Problems 14.13–14.16, v = < 2,–1 >.
14.16 Plot w in standard position on the coordinate plane.
Problem 14.15 states that w = <–2, 1>. If w is in
standard position, then its initial point is (0,0) and

its terminal point is (–2,1).
Note: In Problems 14.17–14.18, V = (4,7) and W =
(1,6).
14.17 Express 
 in component form.
The component form of a vector describes its
horizontal and vertical changes as you travel from
the initial to the terminal point. Thus, you apply the
technique introduced in Problem 14.3, subtracting
the x- and y-coordinates of the initial point from the
corresponding coordinates of the terminal point.
In other words, if a vector has initial point (a, b) and
terminal point (c,d), then the component form of
that vector is <c – a, d – b>. In this problem, a = 4,
b = 7, c = 1, and d = 6.
Note: In Problems 14.17–14.18, V = (4,7) and W =
(1,6).
14.18 Plot 
 in its original position and in standard
position to visually verify that the vectors are
equivalent.
According to Problem 14.17, the component form of
the vector is <–3, –1>, so in standard position, the

vector travels from an initial point of (0,0) to a
terminal point of (–3,–1).
14.19 Given S = (–10,6) and T = (3, –3), express 
 in
component form.
Apply the technique described in Problem 14.17,
subtracting the coordinates of S from the
corresponding coordinates of T.
14.20 Given 
 and 
 express 
 in
component form.
Subtract the components of Q from the
corresponding components of R. Use least common
denominators to reduce the fractions to lowest
terms.

Note: Problems 14.21–14.22 refer to w, the vector
plotted below.
14.21 Express w in component form.
Vector w has initial point (–2,1) and terminal point
(2,–3).
Note: Problems 14.21–14.22 refer to w, the vector
plotted in Problem 14.21.
14.22 Plot w in standard position.
According to Problem 14.21, w = <4, –4>.
Therefore, in standard position, w has initial point
(0,0) and terminal point (4,–4).

14.23 Determine whether vectors r and s, plotted below,
are equivalent.
Vector r has initial point (–3,–5) and terminal point (–
1,–1); s has initial point (4,1) and terminal point
(6,6). Express both vectors in component form.

Both vectors exhibit the same horizontal change—
they travel 2 units to the right between their initial
and terminal points. However, r and s exhibit
different vertical changes, so they are not
equivalent vectors. Two vectors are equivalent if and
only if they have the same component form, and
<2, 4> ≠ <2, 5>.
In other words, if two vectors have the same
component form, then they are equivalent.
Furthermore, if two vectors are equivalent, then
they must have the same component form.
14.24 Given 
 and 
, such
that c and d are real numbers, express 
 in
component form.
Subtract the components of initial point P from the
corresponding components of terminal point Q and
combine like terms.
Magnitude
How long is the vector?
Note: Problems 14.25–14.26 refer to a vector in
component form: v = <3,4>.
14.25 Calculate 
.
The notation 
 represents the magnitude, or length,
of vector v. Given a vector v expressed in

component form v = <a, b>, the magnitude of v is
defined according to the following formula.
In this problem, the components of v are a = 3 and
b = 4. Substitute these values into the magnitude
formula.
The magnitude of v is 5, so the vector has a length
of 5.
Note: Problems 14.25–14.26 refer to a vector in
component form: v = <3,4>.
14.26 Verify your answer to Problem 14.25 by plotting v
in the coordinate plane and applying the
Pythagorean theorem.
Plot v in standard position in the coordinate plane,
with initial point (0,0) and terminal point (3,4). If you
draw a vertical segment connecting the terminal
point to the x-axis, you construct a right triangle
whose legs have lengths 3 and 4.

Apply the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the
length of the vector, the hypotenuse of the right
triangle.
It is no coincidence that the solutions to Problems
14.25–14.26 are equivalent, as the vector
magnitude formula is derived from the Pythagorean
theorem.
14.27 Calculate the magnitude of w = <–12, 5>.
Apply the vector magnitude formula introduced in
Problem 12.25.
14.28 Calculate the magnitude of r = <–6, –3>.
Remember to square both components when you
apply the magnitude formula. Magnitude is always a
positive real number value.
14.29 Given s = <4, –11>, calculate .

The magnitude of a vector is equal to the square
root of the sum of its components’ squares.
14.30 Given v=
, calculate 
Substitute the components of v into the magnitude
formula and use a least common denominator to
reduce the expression to lowest terms.
14.31 Given A = (2, –9) and B = (–4,–1), calculate 
.
Begin by rewriting the vector in component form: 
= (-6, 8). Substitute the components into the
magnitude formula.
<–4 – 2, –1 – (–9)>
= <–6,–1 +9>

=<–6,8>
14.32 Given P = (8, –5) and Q = (4, –14), calculate 
.
Express the vector in component form: 
. Next, apply the magnitude
formula.
Note: In Problems 14.33–14.34, 
 and 
14.33 Verify that 
Compute the magnitude of each vector individually.
Note: In Problems 14.33–14.34, 
 and 
14.34 Determine whether v and w are equivalent vectors
and explain your answer.
Equivalent vectors always have the same
magnitude, but vectors with the same magnitude

are not always equivalent. In order for two vectors
to be equivalent, they must have the same length
and direction. While v and w have the same length,
they do not have the same direction. If you plot v in
standard position, its terminal point is (4,4), which is
located in the first quadrant. Note that w, plotted in
standard position, terminates in the third quadrant.
Vectors are only equivalent if they have the same
component form. In other words, v = <a, b> and w
= <c, d> are equivalent only if a = c and b = d.
14.35 Given 
 and 
 calculate x.
Apply the magnitude formula, noting that the
magnitude of the vector is equal to 10.
Solve for x.

If you substitute either x = +8/3 or x = –8/3 into the
x-component of r, the magnitude of r is 10.
14.36 Given 
 and 
 calculate a.
Apply the magnitude formula to v, noting that its
magnitude is 
.
Square both sides of the equation and solve for a.
If a = –4 or a = +4, then 
Unit Vectors
Vectors with a magnitude of 1

14.37 Describe the relationship between a vector v and
its unit vector .
Given a vector v, the corresponding unit vector 
has the same direction as v with a magnitude of 1.
Just like a unit circle has a radius of 1, a unit vector
has a length of 1.
Note: In Problems 14.38–14.39, v = <4, 3>.
14.38 Given v = <4,3>, express its unit vector  in
component form.
Begin by calculating the magnitude of v.
To compute the unit vector, apply this formula: 
.
In other words, divide each component of v by the
magnitude of v.
Note: In Problems 14.38–14.39, v = <4, 3>.
14.39 Verify that the unit vector  identified in Problem
14.38 has a magnitude of 1.
According to problem 14.38, 
. Apply the
magnitude formula.

14.40 Given w = <–2, –5>, express the corresponding
unit vector  in component form.
Begin by calculating the magnitude of w.
Divide each of the components of w by the
magnitude of the vector and rationalize the
denominators.
Unless your instructor doesn’t mind square roots in
the denominator
14.41 Express the standard unit vectors i and j in
component form.
The standard unit vectors i and j (which may also be
written  and  or  and ) represent unit vectors in
the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively.

In other words, i is a horizontal vector with length 1
and j is a vertical vector with length 1. In
component form, i = <1, 0> and j = <0, 1>.
14.42 Write vector v = <8, 3> in terms of standard unit
vectors.
In standard positition, v stretches from the origin to
the point (8,3). It moves a total of 8 units to the
right and 3 units up. Each of those units in the
horizontal and vertical directions can be represented
by individual unit vectors: 8 horizontal vectors i and
3 vertical vectors j.
v = 8i + 3j
If a vector is in component form <a, b>, you can
write it in terms of standard unit vectors by
multiplying the x-component by i, multiplying the y-
component by j, and then adding those products
together.
<a, b> = ai + bj
14.43 Write vector 
 in terms of standard unit
vectors.
Apply the technique described in Problem 14.42:
Multiply the horizontal component by the standard
unit vector i = <1, 0>, multiply the vertical
component by the standard unit vector j = <0, 1>,
and add the products.

Note: In Problems 14.44–14.45, r = <1, 1> and s =
<4, 4>.
14.44 Identify the direction in which r travels by graphing
it in standard position and calculating its direction
angle, the measure of the acute angle it forms with
the positive x-axis.
Consider the diagram below, in which r is the
hypotenuse of a right triangle. The horizontal and
vertical legs of the triangle are, respectively, the x-
and y-components of r. In other words, both legs
have a length of 1.
Recall that the tangent value of an angle in a right
triangle is equal to the length of the side opposite
that angle divided by the length of the side adjacent
to that angle. Use this trigonometric ratio to
calculate θ.

You conclude that r has a direction of 45°, measured
counterclockwise from the positive x-axis when r is
in standard position.
More simply, the vector has a direction angle of 45°.
Note: In Problems 14.44–14.45, r = <1, 1> and s =
<4, 4>.
14.45 Verify that s has the same direction angle as r.
In the diagram below, s is plotted in standard
position, forming the hypotenuse of a right triangle
whose legs have a length of 4.
Apply the technique described in Problem 14.44;
use the tangent ratio to calculate the measure of θ.
You conclude that s, like r, has a direction angle of
45°.

14.46 Based on your answers to Problems 14.44–14.45,
identify a vector that has the same direction as v =
<a, b>.
Vectors r and s in Problems 14.44–14.45 have the
same direction angle: 45°. In fact, all vectors in the
first quadrant with equal x- and y-components have
direction angle 45°.
If you multiply both components of a vector by the
same positive real number, the result is a vector in
the same direction. In this case, multiplying each of
the components of r = <1, 1> by 4 produces the
vector s = <4, 4> in the same direction as r.
Therefore, if you multiply the components of v =
<a, b> by a positive real number c, then vector
<ac, bc> has the same direction as v.
If c is negative, then <ac, bc> and v travel in
opposite directions.
14.47 Explain why v = <–2, 5> and w = <–4, 10> have
the same direction and visually verify your answer by
plotting both vectors on the same coordinate plane.
According to Problem 14.46, multiplying both
components of a vector by the same positive real
number produces a vector in the same direction. In
this case, multiplying the components of v by 2
generates w.
<(–2)(2), (5)(2)> = <–4, 10>
Plot v and w to visually verify that the vectors have
the same direction. In the diagram below, the

shorter vector v overlaps longer vector w, so both
vectors have the same direction.
Note: In Problems 14.48–14.49, v = <12, –5>.
14.48 Create a vector of length 2 that has the same
direction as v = <12, –5>.
Begin by calculating , a unit vector in the same
direction as v. Apply the technique described in
Problems 14.38 and 14.40, which requires that you
first compute the magnitude of the vector.
Divide each component of v by the magnitude to
identify the unit vector in the same direction as v.
Now that you have identified a unit vector with the
same direction as v, you need to identify a vector in
that direction with a length of 2. Simply multiply

each component of by the desired magnitude, in
this case 2.
Remember, multiplying both components of a vector
by a positive real number produces a vector in the
same direction as the original vector, so <24/13, –
10/13> has the same direction as v and 
Note: In Problems 14.48–14.49, v = <12, –5>.
14.49 Verify that the vector you identified in Problem
14.48 has a magnitude of 2.
According to Problem 14.48, <24/13, –10/13> has a
magnitude of 2. Apply the magnitude formula to
verify this claim.
169 · 4 = 676
14.50 Create a vector of length 6 that has the same
direction as 
.
Calculate the magnitude of w.

Divide each component of w by its magnitude to
identify the unit vector  in the same direction as w.
You are directed to identify a vector in the same
direction with a magnitude of 6. Thus, you should
multiply both components of the unit vector by 6 to
complete the problem.
14.51 Create a vector of length d that has the same
direction as v = <a, b>.
This is just like Problems 14.48 and 14.50, but
you’re using variables instead of numbers.
Begin by calculating the magnitude of v.
Divide each component of v by its magnitude to
identify a unit vector  in the same direction as v.

You are instructed to create a vector of length d, so
multiply each of the components by that constant.

Chapter 15
BASIC VECTOR OPERATIONS
Add/subtract vectors and multiply by scalars
In Chapter 14, you are introduced to vectors, including how they
are plotted in the coordinate plane, how they can be expressed
in component form, and how they can be transformed into
vectors of any length in the same direction. All of those
concepts and operations involved a single vector.
In this chapter, you will explore vector operations, which involve
multiple vectors and real number values. You begin by
combining vectors via addition and subtraction, eventually
extending both of those operations through scalar
multiplication. At the end of this chapter, you return to the
familiar topic of component form, but with a complicating twist:
How can you determine the component form of a vector if you
are not given the coordinates of its initial or terminal points?
You start this chapter by adding two vectors together using
a very curious technique: You glue the terminal point of the
first vector to the initial point of the second vector. Once
you feel comfortable with vector addition (and subtraction,
which is almost the same thing) in the coordinate plane, you
graduate to the shortcut technique. Trust me, you will love
the shortcut. Less graphing + easy formula = happy you!
Next, it’s on to scalar multiplication, which is very
straightforward. In fact, you unknowingly applied it in
Chapter 14. Finally, you’ll dust off sine and cosine to
calculate the components of a vector that’s floating
somewhere in the coordinate plane, not in standard
position. Basically, given the magnitude and direction of a
vector, you’ll be able to write it in component form.
Adding and Subtracting Graphically
Head-to-tail technique

15.1    Describe the technique used to add vectors
graphically in the coordinate plane.
The sum of two vectors is also a vector, and it is a
simple matter to visualize that sum in the
coordinate plane through a technique known
informally as the head-to-tail method. To add vector
w to vector v, place the initial point of w at the
terminal point of v. The sum v + w is called the
resultant vector; it shares an initial point with v and
a terminal point with w.
In other words, move w so it starts exactly where v
ends.
15.2    Given v = <2,0>, calculate v + v by plotting the
resultant vector in the coordinate plane.
Vector v = <2,0> is a horizontal vector with a
magnitude of 2 and a direction angle of 0°; it points
directly to the right, due east from its initial point. If
you graph v in standard position, its initial point is
(0,0) and its terminal point is (2,0).
In order to calculate v + v, graph v in standard
position and then plot a second copy of v, such that
the second vector begins where the first ends. As
the following diagram illustrates, the second copy of
v has an initial point of (2,0) and a terminal point of
(4,0).

The resultant vector, illustrated in the following
diagram, represents v + v. It begins at the initial
point of the first vector (0,0) and ends at the
terminal point of the second vector (4,0).
Note that the resultant vector is in standard
position, because its initial point is the origin.
Therefore, the coordinates of its terminal point are
also its components: v + v = <4,0>.
15.3    Given r = <3,0> and s = <0,5>, calculate r + s by
plotting the resultant vector in the coordinate plane.
Plot r in standard position; it has initial point (0,0)
and terminal point (3,0). Next, plot s so that its
initial point coincides with the terminal point of r. In

other words, from its initial point (3,0), s travels a
horizontal distance of 0 and a vertical distance of 5
units up.
Just pretend that (3,0)—the terminal point of r—is
the origin, and plot s as you normally would.
The resultant vector r + s has initial point (0,0) and
terminal point (3,5). Therefore, r + s = <3,5>.
Note: In Problems 15.4–15.5, v = <–4,–1> and w =
<9,–2>.
15.4    Given v = <–4,–1> and w = <9,–2>, calculate v +
w by plotting the resultant vector in the coordinate
plane.
Plot v in standard position and then place the initial
point of w at the terminal point of v.

The resultant vector has an initial point of (0,0) and
a terminal point of (5,–3). Thus, v + w = <5,–3>.
Note: In Problems 15.4–15.5, v = <–4,–1> and w =
<9,–2>.
15.5    Demonstrate that vector addition is commutative
by plotting w + v in the coordinate plane and
verifying that the resultant vector is equal to the sum
calculated in Problem 15.4.
Commutative means the order in which you add
doesn’t matter: v + w = w + v.
Plot w in standard position and then place the initial
point of v at the terminal point of w.

The resultant vector has an initial point of (0,0) and
a terminal point of (5,–3). Thus, w + v = <5,–3>.
15.6    Given A = (0,3), B = (4,2), C = (–1,–5), and D = (–
7,1) calculate 
 by plotting the resultant vector
in the coordinate plane.
Express both of the vectors in component form by
subtracting the components of their initial points
from the components of their terminal points.
Plot 
 in standard position. Its terminal point, (4,–1),
is the initial point of 
.
Because 
 you should travel 6 units left and
6 units up from (4, –1).
You conclude that 

15.7    Given r = <0,5> and s = <6,4>, calculate r – s by
plotting the resultant vector in the coordinate plane.
In order to plot the resultant vector for vector
subtraction, rewrite the subtraction expression using
addition. In other words, rather than subtract s from
r, you add –s to r. Multiply both components of s by
–1 to calculate –s.
Plot r in standard position and then place the initial
point of –s at the terminal point of r.
You conclude that r – s = <–6,1>.
Note: In Problems 15.8–15.9, v = –2i – j and w = 4i –
3j.
15.8    Calculate v + w by plotting the resultant vector in
the coordinate plane.
Note that v and w are expressed in terms of
standard unit vectors i = <1,0> and j = <0,1>. To

rewrite each in component form, use the coefficients
of i and j as the x- and y-components, respectively:
v = <–2,–1> and w = <4,–3>. Plot v in standard
position and then place the initial point of w on the
terminal point of v, as illustrated in the following
diagram.
The resultant vector, v + w, has component form <2,–4>.
Note: In Problems 15.8–15.9, v = –2i – j and w = 4i –
3j.
15.9    Calculate v – w by plotting the resultant vector in
the coordinate plane.
According to Problem 15.8, v = <–2,–1> and w =
<4,–3>. Multiply the components of w by –1 in
order to generate the vector –w.
The vector sum v + (–w) is equivalent to the vector
difference v – w. Plot v in standard position and
then place the initial point of –w on the terminal
point of v.

Just like 10 + (–5) = 10 – 5 = 5
You conclude that v – w = <–6,2>.
15.10 Given r = <3,2> and s = <1,–4>, calculate r – s by
plotting the resultant vector in the coordinate plane.
Multiply the components of s by –1 to generate the
vector –s.
The vector r – s is equivalent to the sum r + (–s).
You conclude that r – s = <2,6>.

15.11 Given u = <–3,–1>, v = <–4,–5>, w = <–2,–8>,
calculate u + v – w.
Begin by multiplying the components of w by –1 to
generate vector –w.
Plot u in standard position and place the initial point
of v at the terminal point of u. Then, place the initial
point of –w at the terminal point of v. The resultant
vector stretches from the origin to (–5,2), as
illustrated in the following diagram.
You conclude that u + v – w = <–5,2>.
Adding and Subtracting Algebraically
Calculate <a, b> + <c, d>
Note: In Problems 15.12–15.13, v = <a,b> and w =
<c,d>.

15.12 Calculate v + w.
To compute the sum of two vectors in component
form algebraically, add the corresponding
components:
In other words, without having to graph the vectors
v + w = <a + c,b + d>
Add the x-components together to get the x-
component of the sum, and do the same thing for
the y-components.
Note: In Problems 15.12–15.13, v = <a,b> and w =
<c,d>.
15.13 Calculate v – w.
In Problem 15.12, you add corresponding x- and y-
components. In this problem, you subtract them.
v – w = <a – c,b – d>
Note: In Problems 15.14–15.16, r = <3,1> and s =
<6,8>.
15.14 Calculate r + s by plotting the resultant vector in
the coordinate plane.
Plot r in standard position and then place the initial
point of s at the terminal point of r. The following
diagram plots the resultant vector, r + s.

The terminal point of the resultant vector is (9,9), so
you conclude that r + s = <9,9>.
Note: In Problems 15.14–15.16, r = <3,1> and s =
<6,8>.
15.15 Verify your answer to Problem 15.14 by calculating
r + s algebraically.
Computing the sums of vectors algebraically is a
simple task: Add the x-components of r and s to
compute the x-component of the sum r + s.
Similarly, add the y-components of the individual
vectors to compute the y-component of r + s.
The solution r + s = <9,9> matches the solution to
Problem 15.14, thus verifying the answer.
Note: In Problems 15.14–15.16, r = <3,1> and s =
<6,8>.
15.16 Calculate r – s.

Subtract the components of s from the components
of r, applying the technique described in Problem
15.13.
15.17 Calculate the sum: <11,–9> + <–3,–4>.
Combine the corresponding components of each
vector.
15.18 Calculate the difference: <x – 3,y + 5> – <9 –
7x,8y>.
Subtract the components of <9 – 7x,8y> from the
corresponding components of <x – 3,y + 5>.
You conclude that <x – 3,y + 5> – <9 – 7x,8y> =
<8x – 12,–7y + 5>.
15.19 Given v = <–10,2>, A = (7,6), and B = (–9,5),
calculate 
.
Begin by expressing 
 in component form.
Review Problem 15.6 if you forget how to do this.

Now that both vectors are in component form,
calculate the difference.
15.20 Given L = (5,–1), M = (8,4), P = (–3,3), and Q =
(2,5), calculate 
.
Express the vectors in component form.
Calculate the sum of the vectors.
Note that you are asked to calculate the magnitude
of the vector sum.
You’re calculating magnitude because there are
double vertical bars around the vector in the original
problem. Look at Problem 14.25 if you need to
review the magnitude formula.

Scalar Multiplication
Calculate c <a, b>
15.21 Express c<a,b> in component form, assuming a, b,
and c are real numbers.
The vector <a,b> is multiplied by a real number c;
that real number is called a scalar. To multiply a
vector in component form by a scalar value,
multiply each of the components by the scalar. In
this example, multiply both a and b by c.
A vector has a value (magnitude) and a direction. A
scalar only has a value. However, that value
changes the SCALE of the vector. For example,
multiplying a vector by the scalar 2 doubles its
length.
c<a,b> = <ca, cb>
15.22 Express the vector in component form: 3<4,7>.
Multiply each of the components of vector <4,7> by
3.
15.23 Express the vector in component form: –5<–1,8>.

Distribute –5 to each of the components of the
vector.
Note: In Problems 15.24–15.27, v = <2,1>.
15.24 Calculate 
.
Apply the vector magnitude formula presented in
Problem 14.25.
Note: In Problems 15.24–15.27, v = <2,1>.
15.25 Express 4v in component form.
Multiply the x- and y-components of v by the scalar
4.
Note: In Problems 15.24–15.27, v = <2,1>.
15.26 Based on your answers to Problems 15.24–15.25,
explain how scalar multiplication affects the
magnitude of a vector.
In Problem 15.24, you determine that the magnitude
of v is 
 in Problem 15.25, you determine that 4v =
<8,4>. Calculate the magnitude of 4v and compare
it to the magnitude of v.

Vector 4v has magnitude 
 which is 4 times the
magnitude of v: 
 This demonstrates one
property of scalar multiplication: The product of a
scalar and a vector’s magnitude is equal to the
magnitude of the product of the scalar and the
vector.
In this problem, four times the length of v is equal to
the length of vector 4v.
Note: In Problems 15.24–15.27, v = <2,1>.
15.27 Visually verify that 4v is four times as long as v.
Note that 4v = v + v + v + v. Use the head-to-tail
technique demonstrated in Problems 15.1–15.11 to
add those four vectors together. As the following
diagram illustrates, the sum is a vector whose
length must be four times the length of v, because
it is literally comprised of four copies of that vector.

15.28 Prove that multiplying v = <a,b> by the scalar c
creates a vector with c times the magnitude of v.
This problem asks you to verify that 
. In
Problems 15.24–15.27, you verify this is true for a
specific vector and a specific scalar (<2,1> and 4,
respectively); in this problem you prove that the
same relationship between magnitude and scalar
multiplication holds true for all vectors and scalars.
Apply the magnitude formula to both sides of the
equation 
.
Factor c2 out of both terms on the left side of the
equation and simplify the radical expression.
Multiplying v = <a,b> by the scalar c creates a
vector with length 
, which is c times the
length of v.
Note: In Problems 15.29–15.31, u = <2,–4> and v =
<7,–5>.
15.29 Calculate 2u + 3v.
Multiply the components of u by 2, multiply the
components of v by 3, and add the vectors.

Note: In Problems 15.29–15.31, u = <2,–4> and v =
<7,–5>.
15.30 Calculate 
.
Multiply the components of v by 4, multiply the
components of u by 1/2, and subtract the vectors.
Or you could multiply the components of u by –1/2
and add them to 4v.
Note: In Problems 15.29–15.31, u = <2,–4> and v =
<7,–5>.
15.31 Identify the component form of the unit vector in
the direction of w = 4u – v.
Begin by calculating w.

Now calculate the magnitude of w.
According to Problem 14.38, given a vector w, the
corresponding unit vector is 
. It is equal to
the component form of the vector divided by its
magnitude.
Rationalize the denominators of the components.
Note: In Problems 15.32–15.34, r = <3x,8> and s =
<x – 1,5>.
15.32 Calculate 4s – 5r.
Multiply each of the factors by the appropriate
scalar values. Note that the x-component of s is x –
1, and both of those terms must be multiplied by 4
when you compute 4s.

Alternative: Instead of multiplying r by –5 and
adding 4s + (–5r), you could multiply r by 5 and
subtract 5r from 4s.
Note: In Problems 15.32–15.34, r = <3x,8> and s =
<x – 1,5>.
15.33 Calculate r – 2s.
When you compute –2s, make sure to distribute –2
to both terms in the x-component: –2(x – 1) = –2x +
2.
Note: In Problems 15.32–15.34, r = <3x,8> and s =
<x – 1,5>.
15.34 Given 
,calculate x.
According to Problem 15.33, r – 2s = <x + 2, –2>.
Apply the magnitude formula, noting that the
magnitude of the vector is equal to 
Square both sides of the equation to eliminate the
square root symbols.
Squaring both sides could produce extra solutions
that aren’t true, so you check the solutions at the

end of the problem.
Factor the equation: 0 = x(x + 4). Apply the zero-
product property to solve for x.
See Problems 10.12–10.13 to review the zero-
product property.
There are two potential solutions: x = 0 and x = –4.
Substitute each into r – 2s = <x + 2, –2> and
calculate the magnitude of the resulting vectors to
verify that each equals 
.
You conclude that 
 when x = 0 or x = –4.
Note: In Problems 15.35–15.36, v = <–3,–2y> and w
= <–5,4 – 3y>.
15.35 Calculate 6w – 7v.

Multiply the components of w by 6, multiply the
components of v by –7, and combine the vectors.
Note: In Problems 15.35–15.36, v = <–3,–2y> and w
= <–5,4 – 3y>.
15.36 Given A = (–5,11) and B = (–14,–3), and assuming
6w – 7v is equivalent to 
,calculate y.
Equivalent vectors have the same component form,
so begin by expressing 
 in terms of its
components.
According to Problem 15.35, 6w – 7v = <–9,24 –
4y>. Note that its x-component is already equal to
the x-component of 
. In order for the vectors to be
equivalent, the y-components must be equal as
well.

Identifying Components Given Magnitude and
Direction
Instead of coordinates
Note: Problems 15.37–15.38 refer to v = <x,y> with
direction angle θ, as illustrated in the diagram
below.
15.37 Evaluate cos θ, sin θ, and tan θ.
The length of the side adjacent to θ is x, the length
of the side opposite θ is y, and the length of the
hypotenuse is 
. Use these values to calculate cos
θ, sin θ, and tan θ.
Note: Problems 15.37–15.38 refer to v = <x,y> with
direction angle θ, as illustrated in Problem 15.37.
15.38 Identify the component form of v in terms of 
.
Note that the component form of the vector is v =
<x,y>. According to Problem 15.37, cos θ = x/ 
and

sin θ = y/
. Cross-multiply to solve these
trigonometric equations for x and y.
Substitute these values into v = <x,y>.
This is the formula that calculates the component
form of a vector v with direction angle θ and
magnitude 
.
Note: Problems 15.39–15.40 refer to v = <x,y> with
direction angle θ, as illustrated in the diagram
below.
15.39 Given 
 and θ = 45°, apply the vector
component formula you generated in Problem 15.38
to express v in component form.

Substitute the magnitude and the direction angle
into the formula 
. Note that 45° = π/4
radians, and cos 45° = sin 45° = 
You conclude that v = <6,6>.
Note: Problems 15.39–15.40 refer to v = <x,y> with
direction angle θ, as illustrated in Problem 15.39.
15.40 Verify your answer to Problem 15.39 by applying
the properties of a 45°–45°–90° triangle to calculate
x and y.
The right triangle in the figure has angles that
measure 45°, 45°, and 90°. Therefore, the length of
the hypotenuse is equal to 
times the length of the
legs. In this triangle, the hypotenuse has length 
and the legs have lengths x and y.
You know two angle measurements of the triangle: a
right angle and a 45° angle at the origin. All three
angles have to add up to 180°, so the third angle
measures 45°.

Recall that the lengths of the legs of a 45°–45°–90°
triangle are equal, so x = y = 6. These are also the
components of the vector: v = <x,y> = <6,6>. This
verifies your solution to Problem 15.39.
15.41 Given a vector w with direction angle θ = 180° and
magnitude 
, express w in component form.
Substitute the angle and magnitude into the vector
component formula generated in Problem 15.38.
Note that 180° = π radians; thus, cos 180° = –1 and
sin 180° = 0.
15.42 Given a vector r with direction angle θ = 135° and
magnitude 
, express r in component form.
Note that 135° = 3π/4 radians, so cos 135° = 
and sin 135° = 
. Substitute these values, as well
as the magnitude of r, into the vector component
formula.

15.43 Given a vector s with direction angle θ = 60° and
magnitude 
, express s in component form.
Note that 60° = π/3 radians, so cos 60° = 1/2 and
sin 60° = 
. Substitute these values into the
vector component formula.
Note: In Problems 15.44–15.45, v has direction
angle 30°, w has direction angle 270°, 
.
15.44 Express v and w in component form.
Apply the technique demonstrated in Problems
15.41–15.43 to express both vectors in component
form. Note that 30° = π/6 radians and 270° = 3π/2
radians; both angles appear on the standard unit
circle.

Note: In Problems 15.44–15.45, v has direction
angle 30°, w has direction angle 270°, 
.
15.45 Determine whether the following statement is true
and explain your answer.
This question asks whether the length of a vector
sum is equal to the sum of the lengths of the
individual vectors. In Problem 15.44, you express
both vectors in component form. Begin this problem
by calculating the sum v + w.
Calculate the magnitude of v + w.

Notice that the magnitude of the sum is not equal to
the sum of the individual magnitudes.
The magnitude of a vector sum is equal to the sum
of the magnitudes of the individual vectors only
when those vectors have the same direction angle.
Vectors v and w do not have the same direction.

Chapter 16
ADVANCED VECTOR OPERATIONS
All about the dot product
In Chapter 15, you explore vector addition, which combines two
vectors to produce another vector. Mathematically speaking,
this means that the vectors are considered “closed” under
addition. Simply stated, a set (like vectors) is closed under an
operation when performing an operation (like addition) on that
set produces another member of that set.
This is not an entirely new concept. The set of integers is closed
under addition, subtraction, and multiplication—if you add,
subtract, or multiply two integers, the result is another integer.
Note that integers are not closed over division, because dividing
two integers can produce a fraction: The operations 1 ÷ 2 and 3
÷ 5 produce fractions, not integers.
In this chapter, you explore the dot product, an operation under
which the set of vectors is not closed. The dot product of two
vectors is not a vector; it is a real number.
You spend the first half of the chapter getting familiar with
the dot product, answering questions like “How do I
calculate it?”, “Is it commutative?”, “Is it distributive?”,
“Does it prefer dogs or cats as pets?”…that sort of thing.
By the end of the chapter, you’ll be using the dot product to
calculate the angle between vectors, to identify orthogonal
(perpendicular) vectors, to create vector projections (and
actually understand what that means), and to apply all of
this in a real life situation. That’s a non-threatening way of
saying “word problems,” but don’t panic.
Dot Product
Looks like multiplication, but it’s not

16.1    Given v = <a, b> and w = <c, d>, explain how to
calculate the dot product v · w.
To calculate the dot product of two vectors, add the
product of their x-components to the product of
their y-components.
v · w = ac + bd
Even though the dot here looks like multiplication, it
stands for the “dot product.”
Note: In Problems 16.2–16.4, v = <1, 4> and w =
<5, 2>.
16.2    Calculate v · w.
Apply the formula presented in Problem 16.1, which
adds the products of the x-components and the y-
components.
Note: In Problems 16.2–16.4, v = <1, 4> and w =
<5, 2>.
16.3    Calculate 3v · w.
Before you apply the dot product, multiply v by the
scalar 3.
Now apply the dot product formula.

You conclude that 3v · w = 39.
Note: In Problems 16.2–16.4, v = <1, 4> and w =
<5, 2>.
16.4    Calculate 2v · (–3w).
Multiply both components of v by 2, multiply both
components of w by –3, and then compute the dot
product.
Note: In Problems 16.5–16.6, you verify that the dot
product is commutative using the vectors r = <–3,
7> and s = <–2, 10>.
In other words, r · s = s · r.
16.5    Calculate r · s.
Add the product of the x-components to the product
of the y-components.

Note: In Problems 16.5–16.6, you verify that the dot
product is commutative using the vectors r = <–3,
7> and s = <–2, 10>.
16.6    Calculate s · r.
According to Problem 16.5, r · s = 76. If the dot
product is commutative, then s · r will also equal 76.
The order in which you list the vectors does not
affect the value of the dot product—you still add the
products of the x-components to the products of the
y-components, and the result is the same.
Therefore, the dot product is commutative.
Only the order of the components changes: –2(–3)
instead of –3(–2), 10(7) instead of 7(10). Because
multiplication is commutative, the order doesn’t
affect the products.
Note: In Problems 16.7–16.8, you verify that the dot
product of a vector with itself is equal to the
square of the vector’s magnitude.
16.7    Given v = <–4, 6>, verify that 
In this problem, you demonstrate that the
relationship 
 is true for the specific vector v =
<–4, 6>; in Problem 16.8, you prove that the
relationship is true for any vector.
Calculate the dot product v · v on the left side of the
equation, and apply the vector magnitude formula

to calculate 
 on the right side of the equation.
The square and square root cancel out, leaving 52
on the right side of the equation.
Note: In Problems 16.7–16.8, you verify that the dot
product of a vector with itself is equal to the
square of the vector’s magnitude.
16.8    Prove that 
 for any general vector v = <a,
b>.
Apply the same technique you used in Problem 16.7.
In the solution below, note that the dot product v · v
is equal to the expression inside the radical symbol.
Note: In Problems 16.9–16.10, you use vectors u =
<–3, 5>, v = <–4, 2>, and w = <–9, –1> to
demonstrate that the dot product is distributive
over addition: u · (v + w) = u · v + u · w.
16.9    Calculate u · (v + w).
In this problem, you calculate the dot product of u
with the vector sum v + w. In Problem 16.10, you

verify that this value is equal to the sum of the dot
products u · v and u · w. In other words, the dot
product can be distributed over a sum (or a
difference). Begin by calculating v + w.
Calculate the dot product.
Note: In Problems 16.9–16.10, you use vectors u =
<–3, 5>, v = <–4, 2>, and w = <–9, –1> to
demonstrate that the dot product is distributive
over addition: u · (v + w) = u · v + u · w.
16.10 Demonstrate that u · (v + w) = u · v + u · w.
According to Problem 16.9, u · (v + w) = 44. In this
problem, you calculate the sum of the dot products
u · v and u · w to verify that the dot product with a
sum is equal to the sum of the dot products.
You conclude that u · (v + w) = u · v + u · w = 44.
16.11 Evaluate the expression: 
.

As Problems 16.9–16.10 demonstrate, the dot
product is distributive over a vector sum. Thus, you
can calculate the dot product of <3, 1/2> with each
of the terms in parentheses and then calculate the
sum.
Compute the sum using the least common
denominator, 16.
Note: In Problems 16.12–16.14, you use the vectors
v = <7, 2> and w = <–4, 3> to investigate how
scalar multiplication affects a dot product.
16.12 Demonstrate that 5(v · w) ≠ 5v · 5w.
As Problems 16.9–16.10 demonstrate, the dot
product is distributive over a vector sum. However,
scalar multiplication is not distributive over a dot
product. In this problem, you verify that multiplying
the dot product v · w by 5 is not equivalent to the
dot product of 5v and 5w. Simplify both sides of the
equation individually.

Note: In Problems 16.12–16.14, you use the vectors
v = <7, 2> and w = <–4, 3> to investigate how
scalar multiplication affects a dot product.
16.13 Demonstrate that 5(v · w) = 5v · w.
In Problem 16.12, you verify that scalar
multiplication is not distributive over a dot product.
However, multiplying a dot product of two vectors
by a scalar is equivalent to the dot product of those
vectors when exactly one of them—not both—is
multiplied by the scalar. According to Problem 16.12,
5(v · w) = –110; in this problem you verify that 5v ·
w = –110 as well.
In other words, if you multiply ONE vector by the
scalar and then calculate the dot product, you get
the same answer as if you’d taken the dot product
of the vectors first and then multiplied by the scalar.
You conclude that 5(v · w) = 5v · w = –110.

Note: In Problems 16.12–16.14, you use the vectors
v = <7, 2> and w = <–4, 3> to investigate how
scalar multiplication affects a dot product.
16.14 Demonstrate that 5(v · w) = v · 5w.
In Problem 16.13, you verify that multiplying v by
the scalar 5 and then computing the dot product
with w is equivalent to multiplying the dot product v
· w by the scalar 5. In this problem, you
demonstrate that multiplying the other vector (w)
by the scalar 5 has the same effect on the dot
product. Recall that 5(v · w) = –110.
Thus, 5(v · w) = v · 5w = –110.
Moral of the story: If a dot product is multiplied by a
scalar, you can multiply either one of the vectors by
the scalar and then calculate the dot product to get
the same result.
16.15 Evaluate the expression: 
.
You can either choose to calculate the dot product
and then multiply by the scalar 2 or, as Problems
16.12–16.14 explain, multiply exactly one of the
vectors by the scalar 2 and then compute the dot
product. In the following solution, the vector <–2,

6> is multiplied by 2 and then the dot product is
computed.
16.16 Evaluate the expression: 
.
In the following solution, the dot product is
computed and the resulting value is multiplied by
1/3.
Measuring Angles Between Vectors
The dot product in disguise
16.17 Identify the alternate dot product formula, which
expresses a dot product in terms of the magnitude of
the vectors.
According to Problem 16.1, given vectors v = <a,
b> and w = <c, d>, the dot product is defined
according to the following formula.

v · w = ac + bd
You can also calculate the dot product according to
an alternate formula, which is based on the
magnitudes of the vectors and the cosine of the
angle θ between those vectors.
The alternate version is handy when you don’t know
the components of the vectors.
Note: In Problems 16.18–16.21, v = <0, 5> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.18 Calculate v · w using the standard dot product
formula.
To apply the standard dot product formula, you must
know the components of the vectors.
Note: In Problems 16.18–16.21, v = <0, 5> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.19 Plot v and w on the coordinate plane and measure
their direction angles in degrees.
Both vectors have initial point (0, 0); v has terminal
point (0, 5) and w has terminal point (2, 2).

Vector v lies on the positive y-axis, which forms a
right angle with the positive x-axis. Therefore, the
direction angle of v is 90°. The direction angle of w
is 45°. To calculate this value, apply the technique
demonstrated in Problems 14.44–14.45.
The tangent of the direction angle is equal to the y-
component divided by the x-component.
Note: In Problems 16.18–16.21, v = <0, 5> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.20 Use the diagram you created in Problem 16.19 to
calculate the angle θ between v and w.
As the following diagram illustrates, the measure of
the angle between the vectors is equal to the
difference of the larger and smaller direction angles.

Note: In Problems 16.18–16.21, v = <0, 5> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.21 Verify your answer to Problem 16.20 by applying
the alternate dot product formula.
The alternate dot product formula comes from
Problem 16.17.
According to Problem 16.18, v · w = 10. If you
substitute this value and the magnitudes of v and w
into the alternate dot product formula, you can
solve for θ to verify that the measure of the angle
between v and w is 45°. Begin by calculating the
magnitudes of the vectors.
Substitute 
 and 
 into the alternate
dot product formula. Then, isolate cos θ on the right
side of the equation.

Rationalize the denominator and apply the arccosine
function to solve for θ.
According to the unit circle, 
.
The alternate dot product formula verifies the
solution to Problem 16.20—the angle between v and
w measures 45°.
16.22 Calculate the dot product of vectors r and s, which
form an angle measuring 30° and have magnitudes
of 2 and 9.
The alternate dot product states that r · s is equal to
the product of the magnitudes of the vectors and
the cosine of the angle between the vectors. In this
problem, you do not know which vector has a
magnitude of 2 and which has a magnitude of 9, but
that is irrelevant. The following solution assumes
that 
 but the dot product is unchanged if
.

16.23 Calculate the dot product of vectors u and v, which
form an angle measuring 60° and have magnitudes
of  and .
Substitute the magnitudes of the vectors and θ =
60° into the alternate dot product formula to
calculate u · v.
16.24 Calculate the dot product of vectors w and z, which
form an angle measuring 120° and have magnitudes
of 
 and 7.
Substitute 
, and 
 into the alternate
dot product formula.

16.25 Calculate the angle formed by 
.
Calculate the magnitudes of the vectors.
Now calculate the dot product of the vectors.
Apply the alternate dot product formula and solve
for θ.

According to the unit circle, 
.
Thus, vectors r and s form a 30° angle.
16.26 Calculate the angle formed by w = <–4, –3> and z
= <6, –1>, and report your answer as a degree
measurement accurate to the thousandths place.
Calculate 
.
Substitute these values into the alternate dot
product formula and solve for θ. Use a scientific or
graphing calculator set to degrees mode and
calculate the measure of the angle.

Unless two vectors have opposite directions, they
will form two angles: one that measures less than
180° and one that measures greater than 180°.
Arccos identifies the smaller one.
Note: In Problems 16.27–16.30, u = <–5, –12> and v
= <–8, 10>.
16.27 Calculate the angle θ between vectors u and v, and
report your answer accurate to the thousandths
place.
Calculate 
, and 
.

Substitute these values into the alternate dot
product formula.
Note: In Problems 16.27–16.30, u = <–5, –12> and v
= <–8, 10>.
16.28 Identify û and , unit vectors that have the same
direction angles as u and v.
According to Problem 
 Divide
each component of u and v by the magnitude of its
vector to identify the corresponding unit vectors.
Note: In Problems 16.27–16.30, u = <–5, –12> and v
= <–8, 10>.
16.29 Demonstrate that the dot product of the unit
vectors you identified in Problem 16.28 is equal to
the cosine of the angle between them.
If û and  are unit vectors, then they each have a
magnitude of 1. Substitute these values into the

alternate dot product formula.
Note: In Problems 16.27–16.30, u = <–5, –12> and v
= <–8, 10>.
16.30 Verify that the angle between u and v is equal to
the angle between unit vectors û and 
Calculate the dot product of the unit vectors.
As Problem 16.29 explains, the dot product of the
unit vectors is equal to the cosine of the angle θ
between them.
The angle between vectors u and v (calculated in
Problem 16.27) is equal to the angle between unit
vectors û and . Both measure approximately
118.720°.

Orthogonal Vectors
Perpendicular vectors
16.31 Describe the geometric relationship between
orthogonal vectors.
Orthogonal vectors are perpendicular to each other.
Therefore, intersecting orthogonal vectors intersect
at right angles.
Note: In Problems 16.32–16.36, you explore four
different techniques to verify that vectors u = <3,
3> and v = <5, –5> are orthogonal.
16.32 Plot u and v, and use their direction angles to
verify that the vectors are orthogonal.
Plot u and v in the coordinate plane. You will
measure the angle between them by calculating the
angles each vector forms with the positive x-axis.
Apply the technique demonstrated in Problem 16.19
to calculate the direction angle θ of vector u—the

measure of the angle formed by u and the positive
x-axis.
Similarly, the angle between v and the positive x-
axis measures 45°. The angle between u and v is
the sum of those angles: 45° + 45° = 90°. Lines—
and vectors—that intersect at 90° angles are
perpendicular, so u and v are orthogonal.
Note: In Problems 16.32–16.36, you explore four
different techniques to verify that vectors u = <3,
3> and v = <5, –5> are orthogonal.
16.33 Calculate the slopes of the lines that coincide with
u and v, and use them to verify that the vectors are
orthogonal.
“Coincide with” means “overlap.”
The slope of a vector in component form—and the
slope of the line that coincides with that vector—is
equal to the y-component of the vector divided by
the x-component. Therefore, the slope of the line
that coincides with u is 3/3 = 1. The slope of the line
that coincides with v is –5/5 = –1.
Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative
reciprocals of each other. Because 1 and –1 are
negative reciprocals, they represent the slopes of
perpendicular lines. You conclude that u and v are
orthogonal.

Note: In Problems 16.32–16.36, you explore four
different techniques to verify that vectors u = <3,
3> and v = <5, –5> are orthogonal.
16.34 Apply the standard dot product formula to verify
that u and v are orthogonal.
According to the standard dot product formula, <a,
b> · <c, d> = ac + bd.
You conclude that u and v are orthogonal because
they have a dot product of 0. In fact, any pair of
nonzero vectors that have a dot product of 0 are
orthogonal.
And vice versa: If vectors are orthogonal, they
always have a dot product of 0. This only works for
NONZERO vectors. The next problem explains why.
Note: In Problems 16.32–16.36, you explore four
different techniques to verify that vectors u = <3,
3> and v = <5, –5> are orthogonal.
16.35 Determine whether u and w = <0, 0> are
orthogonal vectors, and explain your answer.
If you calculate the dot product of u and w, the
result is 0.

In fact, the dot product of any vector and the zero
vector <0, 0> is equal to 0. However, you cannot
conclude that u and w are orthogonal based upon
the dot product value alone. Recall that orthogonal
vectors are perpendicular, so the angle formed by
the vectors should equal 90°.
Solve the alternate dot product formula for cos θ to
better understand why u and w do not form a 90°
angle.
Some textbooks (and teachers) prefer this version of
the formula.
Calculate the magnitudes of u and w.
Substitute the dot product and vector magnitudes
into the modified dot product formula.
Dividing by 0 is prohibited. Because you cannot
calculate θ, you cannot conclude that θ is a right
angle. Therefore, u and w are not orthogonal.

Note: In Problems 16.32–16.36, you explore four
different techniques to verify that vectors u = <3,
3> and v = <5, –5> are orthogonal.
16.36 Calculate the angle between u and v to verify that
the vectors are orthogonal.
Recall that u · v = 0, and according to Problem
16.35, 
. Calculate the magnitude of v.
Apply the modified dot product formula introduced
in Problem 16.35 to compute the angle θ between u
and v.
Vectors u and v form a 90° angle, so they are
orthogonal.
16.37 Determine whether the vectors <2, –3> and <6,
4> are orthogonal.
Calculate the dot product of the vectors.

Because their dot product is equal to 0, vectors <2,
–3> and <6, 4> are orthogonal.
16.38 Given A = (8, –2), B = (6, 1), C = (–3, –7), and D =
(4, –4), determine whether 
 and 
 are orthogonal.
Subtract corresponding coordinates to express the
vectors in component form.
Calculate the dot product of the vectors.
Vectors 
 and 
 are not orthogonal because their
dot product is not equal to 0.
16.39 Calculate the value of c for which vectors a = <4, –
2c> and b = <9, 3> are orthogonal.
If a and b are orthogonal vectors, then a · b = 0.
Compute the dot product and set it equal to 0.
Solve the equation for c.

16.40 Given A = (3, 4), B = (12, –10), and z = <5c, –2>,
calculate the value of c for which 
 and z are
orthogonal.
Express 
 in component form.
Because the vectors are orthogonal, you can set
their dot product equal to 0.
Solve for c.
Vector Projections and Work
Create specific orthogonal vectors
16.41 Given the diagram below, plot vectors a and b such
that a + b = v. Explain why the solution is not
unique.
In other words, explain why there isn’t one correct
answer to this problem.

As Problems 15.1–15.3 demonstrate, you add
vectors in the coordinate plane using the head-to-
tail method. The terminal point of the first vector
acts as the initial point of the second vector. In this
problem, you are asked to create two vectors, a and
b, that have a sum of v. Plot any vector in standard
position and label this vector a. Then, plot a new
vector b with an initial point at the terminal point of
a and the same terminal point as v.
The following diagram represents one solution to
this problem, but any vectors a and b that meet the
criteria described above are equally valid solutions.

Note: Problems 16.42–16.45 refer to vectors v and
w in the diagram below.
16.42 Plot the unique vector b on the coordinate plane,
such that: (1) b is orthogonal to w, (2) the initial
point of b lies on w, and (3) b and v share the same
terminal point.
Problem 16.41 tells you that there are many ways
to create two vectors that add up to v. In Problems

16.42–16.44, you create two perpendicular vectors
whose sum is v, and one of those vectors will
overlap vector w.
The figure below illustrates b, the vector that is
perpendicular to w, has an initial point lying on w,
and terminates at the same point as v.
Note: Problems 16.42–16.45 refer to the diagram in
Problem 16.42.
16.43 Based on your answer to Problem 16.42, identify
vector a such that a = projw v.
The notation “projw v” is read “the projection of
vector v onto vector w.” Because you are projecting
v onto w, the vector a you are seeking lies along
vector w (but a and w do not have the same
magnitude). As the diagram below illustrates,
vectors a and w share the same initial point, but the
terminal point of a is the initial point of vector b,
which you identified in Problem 16.42.

Note: Problems 16.42–16.45 refer to the diagram in
Problem 16.42.
16.44 Based on your answers to Problems 16.42–16.43,
describe the vector sum a + b.
According to the geometric technique of vector
addition, a + b = v. Although there are infinite pairs
of vectors that have a sum of v, which you
demonstrated in Problem 16.41, these vectors have
two unique properties: they are orthogonal and one
of the vectors lies along the vector w that was
specified in the problem.
Note: Problems 16.42–16.45 refer to the diagram in
Problem 16.42.
16.45 Identify the formula that expresses a = projw v in
component form.
Although it is important to understand the
geometric derivation of the projection vector a =
projw v, the graph alone is insufficient to calculate

the components of a. Instead, you should apply the
following formula.
Look at the fraction in this formula. It’s equal to a
dot product (which is a number) divided by a
magnitude squared (which is also a number).
Basically, this formula multiplies vector w by some
crazy number in parentheses. In other words, the
projection of v onto w is just a scalar multiple of w!
It has the same direction as w, but not the same
length.
Note: In Problems 16.46–16.47, v = <3, 0> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.46 Let a represent the projection of v onto w. Express
a in component form.
Substitute the vectors into the formula presented in
Problem 16.45 to calculate a = projw v.

Note that a = projw v is equal to the vector w
multiplied by the scalar 3/4.
You conclude that the projection of v onto w, in
component form, is a = <3/2, 3/2>.
Note: In Problems 16.46–16.47, v = <3, 0> and w =
<2, 2>.
16.47 Plot v, w, a = projw v, and b in the coordinate
plane, given a + b = v.
Construct vector b as directed in Problem 16.42. It
should be orthogonal to a = <3/2, 3/2>, have an

initial point on w, and terminate at the same point
as v.
16.48 Given v = <–2, 1> and w = <–6, –2>, identify
vectors a and b, such that a = projw v and a + b =
v.
Apply the vector projection formula to calculate a.

Perform scalar multiplication and reduce the
fractions to lowest terms.
Recall that a + b = v. Substitute v = <–2, 1> and a
= <–3/2, –1/2> into the equation and solve for b.
16.49 Calculate the work done moving a particle from
point A = (0,0) to point B = (4,1) on the coordinate
plane with a force of 6. Assume that the force is
applied in the same direction the particle is moving.
The technique you use does not account for
friction, so the answer is more theoretical than
realistic. That’s why the problem asks you to move
an atomic particle along a line instead of pushing
a massive couch along a steep ramp. The smaller
the mass of the object, the more realistic your
answer is.

The displacement of an object describes the
movement of that object from its initial to final
location. In this problem, the displacement vector d
has initial point A = (0,0) and final point B = (4,1). In
component form, d = <4,1>. The magnitude of the
displacement vector is the distance traveled by the
particle along that vector.
Force is also expressed as a vector: F. The
magnitude of the force vector is the total force
applied; in this problem, 
. Note that the force is
applied in the same direction as the displacement.
When force is applied in the same direction as
displacement, the formula for work done is 
.
The particle moves along a line with slope 1/4, so
the force is applied along the same slope. Imagine
that the particle is sitting on that line and you (in
microscopic form) are pushing the particle along the
line as well, up a teeny little ramp.
Note: In Problems 16.50–16.52, you calculate the
total work done to move a particle along
displacement vector d = <3,4> by applying force
vector F = <4,2>.
16.50 Calculate the component of force along the
displacement vector.

Unlike Problem 16.49, the force on this particle is
not applied in the same direction the particle is
moving. Your objective is to calculate a = projd F,
the vector representing the force applied along the
displacement vector. The magnitude of this vector is
the component of F along d.
Thus, the vector a = <12/5, 16/5> represents the
force applied along the displacement vector.
Calculate the magnitude of a to determine the
amount of force applied to the particle along d.

The component of force along the displacement
vector is 4.
Note: In Problems 16.50–16.52, you calculate the
total work done to move a particle along
displacement vector d = <3,4> by applying force
vector F = <4,2>.
16.51 Apply the dot product to calculate the total work
done.
The total work done to move an object with force
vector F along displacement vector d is equal to the
dot product of the vectors.
Even if F and d don’t share the same direction.
Note: In Problems 16.50–16.52, you calculate the
total work done to move a particle along
displacement vector d = <3,4> by applying force
vector F = <4,2>.
16.52 Verify your answer to Problem 16.51 by calculating
the product 
.
According to Problem 16.51, total work done to
move a particle along d using force F is equal to the
dot product: F · d = 20. Problem 16.49 presents an
equally valid, if slightly more complicated, method
to calculate work done. It states that the total work
done is equal to the product of the magnitudes of

the displacement vector d and the force applied in
the same direction. In other words, 
.
projd F represents force in the same direction as d.
According to Problem 
. Calculate 
.
Calculate 
.
W = 20 is the same solution generated in Problem
16.51.

Chapter 17
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND POLAR COORDINATES
Different ways to map the coordinate plane
Throughout this book, you have explored the coordinate plane.
Split horizontally by the x-axis and vertically by the y-axis, it
pairs a simple coordinate (x,y) with any point in two-dimensional
space. It is powerful in its simplicity, but it is not the only way to
map points in the coordinate plane.
In this chapter, you will explore parametrically defined curves, in
which a third variable called the parameter works in tandem
with the familiar variables x and y to define points in the plane.
You will also plot points using polar coordinates, which eschew x
and y and define the coordinate plane in an entirely new way.
Don’t worry—it’s not as though you’ll never see the normal
coordinate plane again. In fact, a lot of the problems in this
chapter focus on translating parametric and polar graphs
into old-fashioned “rectangular” form, which is a fancy way
of describing the coordinate plane you’re used to.
Spend some extra time studying polar form. Even though
the notation feels uncomfortable at first, polar form allows
you to create extremely complex graphs with ease. Also,
polar form makes a surprise cameo appearance in Chapter
18.
Parametric Equations
Two equations that describe one curve
Note: Problems 17.1–17.4 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t + 3 and y = 2t – 1.
17.1    Identify the point on the curve that corresponds
with t = –3.

A parametrically defined graph uses individual
equations to represent the coordinates of each
point. In this problem, the x- and y-coordinates of
each point are defined in terms of a third variable t
called the parameter. Substitute t = –3 into both of
the parametric equations to identify the coordinates
of one point on the graph of the parametric curve.
Thus, the parameter t = –3 corresponds with the
rectangular coordinates (x,y) = (0,–7) on the
parametric curve.
“Rectangular coordinates” are the coordinates
you’ve been using for the entire book, where x
represents horizontal distance from the y-axis and y
represents vertical distance from the x-axis.
Note: Problems 17.1–17.4 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t + 3 and y = 2t – 1.
17.2    Identify points on the parametric curve by
substituting the following values into the parameter:
–2, –1, 0, 1, and 2.
Apply the technique demonstrated in Problem 17.1
to substitute the values –2, –1, 0, 1, and 2 into t. In
the chart below, each value of t is substituted into
both parametric equations, producing a coordinate
pair (x,y) that represents a point on the graph of the
parametric curve.

Note: Problems 17.1–17.4 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t + 3 and y = 2t – 1.
17.3    Graph the parametric curve.
In Problem 17.2, you substitute five values of t into
the parametric equations to create five points on
the parametric curve: (1,–5), (2,–3), (3,–1), (4,1),
and (5,3). As the graph below illustrates, those
points trace a linear path.

Can a parametric “curve” be a straight line? Yes.
The term “curve” is just a generic way to refer to a
parametric graph, no matter how curvy it is or isn’t.
Note that the graph also passes through the point
(0,–7) that you identified in Problem 17.1.
Note: Problems 17.1–17.4 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t + 3 and y = 2t – 1.
17.4    Eliminate the parameter to express the parametric
curve in rectangular form.
To rewrite a parametric curve in rectangular form,
you need to eliminate the parameter, leaving
behind only the variables x and y. In this problem,
you should solve one of the parametric equations

for t and substitute it into the other parametric
equation.
If you subtract 3 from both sides of the parametric
equation x = t + 3, the result is x – 3 = t. Replace t
in the other parametric equation with the equivalent
value x – 3.
The parametric equations x = t + 3 and y = 2t – 1
describe the linear equation y = 2x – 7.
Note: Problems 17.5–17.7 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t2 – 3 and y = 4 – t.
17.5    Identify points on the parametric curve by
substituting the following values into the parameter:
–2, –1, 0, 1, and 2.
This problem asks you to generate a table of values,
substituting t = –2, –1, 0, 1, and 2 into the
parametric equations to produce points on the
graph.

The curve passes through points (1,6), (–2,5), (–3,4), (–2,3),
and (1,2).
Note: Problems 17.5–17.7 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t2 – 3 and y = 4 – t.
17.6    Graph the curve.
According to Problem 17.5, the curve passes
through points (1,6), (–2,5), (–3,4), (–2,3), and (1,2).

Note: Problems 17.5–17.7 refer to the curve defined
by parametric equations x = t2 – 3 and y = 4 – t.
17.7    Rewrite the parametrically defined curve in
rectangular form.
Solve the parametric equation y = 4 – t for the
parameter.
Substitute t = 4 – y into the parametric equation x =
t2 – 3 and solve for x to create a function in terms of
y.
You could also solve the equation for y to create
functions in terms of x, but that’s more complicated.
You have to use a technique called completing the
square. See Problem 17.10 for more information.
Note: Problems 17.8–17.10 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = t2 + 2t and y =
t2 – t.
17.8    Identify points on the parametric curve by
substituting the following values into the parameter:
–2, –1, 0, 1, and 2.
Generate a table of values by substituting t = –2, –1,
0, 1, and 2 into the parametric equations to identify

coordinates of points on the curve.
If a problem doesn’t give you values of t, these
numbers (–2, –1, 0, 1, and 2) are good values to
start with. You can always use more values of t if the
shape of the graph isn’t obvious.
Note: Problems 17.8–17.10 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = t2 + 2t and y =
t2 – t.
17.9    Plot the curve.
According to Problem 17.8, the curve passes
through points (0,6), (–1,2), (0,0), (3,0), and (8,2).
Although the parametric equations that define the
curve are simple quadratics, the resulting parabolic
curve has an axis of symmetry that is neither
horizontal nor vertical. This produces a graph that
appears to be rotated in the coordinate plane.

In other words, the parabola doesn’t open straight
up, down, left, or right. Instead, it opens in the
upper-right direction.
As this example illustrates, parametric equations
can produce very complex curves—curves that are
far more difficult to describe in rectangular form, as
you discover in Problem 17.10.
Note: Problems 17.8–17.10 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = t2 + 2t and y =
t2 – t.
17.10 Rewrite the parametrically defined curve in
rectangular form.
In order to eliminate the parameter t, you need to
solve one of the parametric equations for either x or
y. This requires you to complete the square. Begin

by adding 1 to both sides of the equation x = t2 +
2t.
It isn’t hard to complete the square, but it’s not
something you do very often. If you need to review
the technique, see Problems 14.12–14.19 in The
Humongous Book of Algebra Problems.
x + 1 = t2 + 2t + 1
Rewrite the right side of the equation as a perfect
square.
x + 1 = (t + 1)2
Solve for t.
The parameter t is equivalent to two different
expressions in terms of x: 
 and 
Substitute each into the parametric equation y = t2
– t.
The rectangular form of the parametric curve is 
Note: Problems 17.11–17.12 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = cos θ and y =
sin θ.
17.11 Graph the parametric curve.

The parametric equations in this problem contain
parameter θ instead of t. Furthermore, the
parameter is substituted into a pair of trigonometric
equations. Therefore, you should substitute angles
from the unit circle into the parameter (such as θ =
π/4 and θ = π/2) rather than integers (such as t = –
2, –1, 0, 1, and 2). In the following table of values,
unit circle angles in (and bounding) the first
quadrant are substituted into x = cos θ and y = sin
θ.
Each angle θ produces the corresponding coordinate
(cos θ,sin θ) on the unit circle. For example,
parameter θ = π/4 produces point 
Thus,
the graph of the parametric curve is the unit circle.

Note: Problems 17.11–17.12 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = cos θ and y =
sin θ.
17.12 Rewrite the parametrically defined curve in
rectangular form.
According to a Pythagorean identity, cos2 θ + sin2 θ
= 1. The parametric equations state that x = cos θ
and y = sin θ, so replace cos θ and sin θ in the
Pythagorean identity with x and y, respectively.
The parametric curve has rectangular form x2 + y2
= 1.
Note: Problems 17.13–17.14 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = 2cosθ and y =
5sinθ.

17.13 Based on the graph you generated in Problem
17.11, sketch the curve without using a table of
values.
Each of the points on this parametric curve, when
compared to the points on the unit circle, is 2 times
as far from the origin horizontally and 5 times as far
from the origin vertically. Whereas the unit circle
had a leftmost point of (–1,0) and a rightmost point
of (1,0), this parametric curve will stretch twice as
far, from point (–2,0) to point (2,0). Similarly,
whereas the unit circle has a maximum height of 1
and a minimum height of –1, this parametric curve
will have a maximum height of 5 and a minimum
height of –5.
Because x = 2 cos θ is twice as large as x = cos θ,
and y = 5 sin θ is 5 times as large as y = sin θ.

Note: Problems 17.13–17.14 refer to the curve
defined by parametric equations x = 2cosθ and y =
5sinθ.
17.14 Rewrite the parametrically defined curve in
rectangular form.
Solve x = 2cosθ for cos θ and solve y = 5sin θ for
sin θ.
Substitute x/2 for cos θ and y/5 for sin θ in the
Pythagorean identity cos2 θ + sin2 θ = 1.
If you wish to eliminate the fractions from the
equation x2/4 + y2/25 = 1, multiply each term by
the least common denominator: 100.
Polar Coordinates
Plot points using distances and angles
Note: In Problems 17.15–17.17, point A has polar
coordinates (r,θ) = 

17.15 Explain how to interpret the polar coordinate 3 of
point A.
The first coordinate of a point in polar form is called
the radial coordinate or radius, usually written r in
the coordinate pair (r,θ). This value represents the
distance between the point and a fixed location
called the pole. The pole is typically defined as the
origin of the coordinate system, so point A is a
distance of 3 units from the origin. This is not
sufficient information to plot point A, because there
are infinitely many points on the plane that are r = 3
units away from the origin.
Note: In Problems 17.15–17.17, point A has polar
coordinates (r,θ) = 
17.16 Explain how to interpret the polar coordinate π/6 of
point A.
The second coordinate of a point in polar form is
called the angular coordinate or polar angle, θ in the
coordinate pair (r,θ). This value identifies an angle
in the coordinate plane, measured from a ray called
the polar axis. Typically, the polar axis is the positive
x-axis.
Recall that positive angles in the coordinate plane
are measured in the counterclockwise direction and
negative angles are measured in the clockwise
direction. Thus, point A lies along the ray that forms
a π/6 = 30° angle with the positive x-axis.
Note: In Problems 17.15–17.17, point A has polar
coordinates (r,θ) = 

17.17 Plot A in the coordinate plane.
Consider the following diagram. The point
represents the pole, the ray represents the polar
axis, and the concentric circles centered at the pole
represent fixed distances from the pole. In other
words, any point with a radial coordinate of 3 lies on
the circle centered at the origin with radius 3—the
darkened circle in the diagram.
Concentric circles have the same center, in this case
the pole.
According to Problem 17.16, the angular coordinate
identifies the ray upon which point A lies. The
angular coordinate is θ = π/6, so point A lies at the
intersection of the darkened circle with radius 3 and
the ray that forms a π/6, or 30°, angle with the polar
axis.

Note: In Problems 17.18–17.21, you plot four similar
points to explore how negative signs affect polar
coordinates.
17.18 Plot the following point, expressed in polar
coordinates: 
The positive y-axis forms a π/2 (or 90°) angle with
the polar axis, so C1 is located on that ray.
Furthermore, C1 is located 4 units away from the
pole, as illustrated below.

Note: In Problems 17.18–17.21, you plot four similar
points to explore how negative signs affect polar
coordinates.
17.19 Plot the following point, expressed in polar
coordinates: C2 = 
Negative angular coordinates are measured in the
clockwise direction, so C2 lies on the ray directly
below the pole, whereas point C1 in Problem 17.18
lies on the ray directly above the pole.
Note: In Problems 17.18–17.21, you plot four similar
points to explore how negative signs affect polar
coordinates.
17.20 Plot the following point, expressed in polar
coordinates: C3 = 
When the radial coordinate of a point is negative,
the point does not lie on the ray described by the

angular coordinate. Instead, it lies on the opposite
ray. In this problem, C3 does not lie along the ray
measuring θ = π/2; it lies along the opposite ray, the
dotted ray in the figure below.
The second coordinate identifies a specific ray. If the
first coordinate is positive, then the point lies on
that ray. If the first coordinate is negative, the point
lies on the opposite ray.
Note: In Problems 17.18–17.21, you plot four similar
points to explore how negative signs affect polar
coordinates.
17.21 Plot the following point, expressed in polar
coordinates: C4 = 

Like Problem 17.19, this point has an angular
coordinate of –π/2. However, the radial coordinate is
also negative, so C4 lies on the opposite ray, the
dotted ray in the diagram below.
17.22 Plot the following point, expressed in polar
coordinates: p = 
Plot the ray in the counterclockwise direction that
forms a 3π/4 angle with the polar axis. Because the
radial coordinate is positive, P is located 2 units
away from the pole along that ray.

Note: In Problems 17.23–17.24, point Q has polar
coordinates (–5,210°).
The angular coordinate could be measured in
degrees or radians.
17.23 Plot point Q.
In the diagram below, the solid ray is 210° from the
polar axis in the counterclockwise direction.
Because the radial coordinate is negative, Q lies on
the opposite ray, 5 units from the pole.

Note: In Problems 17.23–17.24, point Q has polar
coordinates (–5,210°).
17.24 Construct polar coordinates (r,θ) for point Q such
that the radial coordinate is positive and the angular
coordinate is both positive and acute.
There is only one way to write a point using
rectangular coordinates, but there are infinitely
many ways to identify the same point using polar
coordinates.
The reference angle for a 210° angle is a 30° angle,
as illustrated below. Point Q lies 5 units away from
the pole on the dotted ray in the diagram, which is
30° from the polar axis. Therefore, Q = (5,30°).
17.25 Given point P = (1,0) expressed in rectangular
coordinates, identify two points in polar form that
coincide with P.

Point P lies on the polar axis, exactly r = 1 unit away
from the pole. The angular coordinates θ = 0 and θ
= 2π (or θ = 0° and θ = 360°) both describe the
polar axis, so the points (1,0) and (1,2π)—or (1,0°),
and (1,360°)—both represent P in polar form. All of
these points coincide; they describe the same point
in the coordinate plane.
These are not the only solutions to this problem. If
the radial coordinate is r = 1, any angle coterminal
to 2π is also a valid angular coordinate, so (1,4π),
(1,6π), and (1,–2π) are also polar representations of
P.
Note: In Problems 17.26–17.29, you identify four
different points in polar form that coincide with
point A, illustrated below.
17.26 Identify coordinates of point A = (r,θ), such that r >
0 and θ < 0.
This problem asks you to identify a positive radial
coordinate and a negative angular coordinate for A.
Note that A is 3 units from the pole, so r = 3.
Furthermore, A lies on the ray that is 45° from the
polar axis in the clockwise direction. Recall that
angles measured in the clockwise direction have

negative measures, so θ = –π/4. Thus, A has polar
coordinates (3,–π/4).
The diagram does not tell you that the angle
measurement should be negative—it only tells you
that the angle between the polar axis and the ray
containing A measures π/4. It’s up to you to know
that clockwise = negative angle.
Note: In Problems 17.26–17.29, you identify four
different points in polar form that coincide with
point A, illustrated in Problem 17.26.
17.27 Identify coordinates of point A = (r,θ), such that r >
0 and 0 < θ < 2π.
According to Problem 17.26, A could have angular
coordinate θ = –π/4 when r = 3. Add 2π to –π/4 to
identify a positive angle coterminal to –π/4.
Thus, point A has polar coordinates (3,7π/4), as
illustrated in the following diagram.
Note: In Problems 17.26–17.29, you identify four
different points in polar form that coincide with
point A, illustrated in Problem 17.26.

17.28 Identify coordinates of point A = (r,θ), such that r >
0 and 2π < θ < 4π.
According to Problem 17.27, A = (3,7π/4). To identify
an angular coordinate for A that is between 2π and
4π, add 2π to the angular coordinate to calculate a
positive angle coterminal to 7π/4.
The polar coordinate pair (3,15π/4) coincides with
point A.
Note: In Problems 17.26–17.29, you identify four
different points in polar form that coincide with
point A, illustrated in Problem 17.26.
17.29 Identify coordinates of point A = (r,θ), such that r <
0 and 0 < θ < 2π.
A ray and its opposite ray form a straight line, which
measures 180°, or π radians. Therefore, you can
subtract π/4 from π to get 3π/4.
Extend the ray containing point A, and note that it
forms a 3π/4 angle with the polar axis. Recall that a
negative radial coordinate indicates that you should
travel along the opposite ray. Thus, the point (–
3,3π/4) is located on the ray opposite θ = 3π/4, on
the solid ray in the following diagram.

Converting Between Polar and Rectangular Form
Given points or equations
17.30 In the diagram below, point P has rectangular
coordinates (x,y) and polar coordinates (r,θ). Apply
trigonometric ratios to express x and y in terms of r
and θ.
Note that the diagram contains a right triangle, so
you can apply trigonometric ratios to describe the
relationship between r, θ, x, and y.
Cross-multiply to solve the equations for x and y,
respectively.

You conclude that a point with polar coordinates
(r,θ) has rectangular coordinates (x,y) = (r cos θ,
rsin θ).
Note: In Problems 17.31–17.32, point B has polar
coordinates (r,θ) = (6,π).
17.31 Calculate the x-coordinate of B in rectangular form.
According to Problem 17.30, x = rcos θ. Substitute r
= 6 and θ = π into this formula to calculate r.
Note: In Problems 17.31–17.32, point B has polar
coordinates (r,θ) = (6,π).
17.32 Calculate the y-coordinate of B in rectangular form
and rewrite B in rectangular form.
Apply the formula y = r sin θ, generated in Problem
17.30.
According to Problem 17.31, the x-coordinate of B is
–6. You conclude that the rectangular form of B is
(x,y) = (–6,0).

You can double-check your answer by plotting both
the rectangular and polar coordinates to make sure
the points overlap.
17.33 Convert the point from polar to rectangular form: 
.
Substitute r = 2 and θ = 5π/6 into the formulas x =
rcos θ and y = rsin θ to calculate the rectangular
coordinates of the point.
You conclude that the point with polar coordinates
(2,5π/6) coincides with the point 
in rectangular
form.
17.34 Convert the point from polar to rectangular form: 
.
Add 2π to –π/3 to calculate a positive angle
coterminal to –π/3 that lies on the standard unit
circle.
Substitute r = –1 and θ = 5π/3 into the formulas x =
r cos θ and y = r sin θ to convert the polar
coordinates into rectangular coordinates.

You conclude that the point with polar coordinates (–
1,–π/3) has rectangular coordinates 
17.35 Rewrite the polar equation r = 2cosθ in rectangular
form.
Whereas a polar equation is written in terms of r and
θ, a rectangular equation is written in terms of x and
y. According to Problem 17.30, the following
statements are true.
Thus, you can replace the expression cos θ in this
problem with the equivalent fraction x/r.
Cross-multiply to eliminate the fraction.
r2 = 2x
Consider the diagram in Problem 17.30. It contains a
right triangle with legs of length x and y and a
hypotenuse of length r. Apply the Pythagorean
theorem: x2 + y2 = r2. This allows you to rewrite r2
in the equation r2 = 2x in terms of x and y.

x2 + y2 = 2x
You conclude that the rectangular equation x2 + y2
= 2x is equivalent to the polar equation r = 2cos θ.
Some instructors want you to end up with an
equation that equals 0, which means you’d have to
subtract 2x from both sides: x2 + y2 – 2x = 0.
17.36 Rewrite the polar equation r2 = 3secθ cscθ in
rectangular form.
Apply the reciprocal identities to express sec θ and
csc θ in terms of cosine and sine.
Cross-multiply to eliminate the fraction.
r2 (cos θsin θ) = 3
According to Problem 17.35, cos θ = x/r and sin θ =
y/r.

You conclude that xy = 3 is the rectangular form of
the polar equation r2 = 3secθ cscθ.
17.37 In the diagram below, point P has rectangular
coordinates (x,y) and polar coordinates (r,θ). Based
on the diagram, express r2 and tan θ in terms of x
and y.
According to the Pythagorean theorem, x2 + y2 = r2.
The tangent ratio establishes the relationship
between θ, x, and y.
Note: In Problems 17.38–17.39, point A has
rectangular coordinates (x,y) = (3,0).
17.38 Calculate the two possible radial coordinates of A in
polar form.
A point in polar form has coordinates (r,θ). You are
asked to calculate r, the radial coordinate.
Substitute x = 3 and y = 0 into the formula x2 + y2
= r2, presented in Problem 17.37.

Both r = 3 and r = –3 are possible radial coordinates
of A.
Note: In Problems 17.38–17.39, point A has
rectangular coordinates (x,y) = (3,0).
17.39 Calculate the angular coordinates of A that
correspond with the radial coordinates you calculated
in Problem 17.38.
Substitute x = 3 and y = 0 into the formula tan θ =
y/x, presented in Problem 17.37.
Many angles have a tangent of 0. One such angle is
θ = 0 and another is θ = π. The points (3,0) and (–
3,π) are polar representations of the rectangular
coordinate pair (3,0).
The point (3,0) in rectangular form lies on the x-axis,
three units right of the origin. In polar form, it lies r
= 3 units from the pole on the ray θ = 0 If you select
the ray θ = π instead, you have to travel in the
negative direction, along its opposite ray, to reach
the same point. In that case, r = –3.

17.40 Convert the point from rectangular to polar form:
(1,–1).
Apply the formula x2 + y2 = r2 to calculate the radial
coordinate of the point.
Select one value of r to represent the radial
coordinate. You now must calculate a corresponding
angular coordinate θ using the formula tan θ = y/x.
Note that the point (1,–1) lies in the fourth quadrant
of the coordinate plane, so you must select a value
of θ that lies in the fourth quadrant.
If you selected 
you’d need to pick a value of π
that lies in the second quadrant, which is opposite
the fourth quadrant. That’s because a negative
radial coordinate indicates movement in the
opposite direction, along the opposite ray.
Both θ = –π/4 and θ = 7π/4 are angular coordinates
that identify the correct ray in the fourth quadrant.
Thus, 
 and 
are both valid polar
representations of the point (x,y) = (1,–1).

17.41 Convert the point from rectangular to polar form: (–
2,–5).
Apply the formula tan θ = y/x to calculate the
angular coordinate.
Apply the formula x2 + y2 = r2 to calculate possible
radial coordinates.
The arctangent function only reports values on the
restricted range –π/2 ≤ θ ≤ π/2. Because 5/2 is
positive, arctan 5/2 is positive as well. However, the
point (–2,–5) lies in the third quadrant, which is
opposite the quadrant containing θ = arctan (5/2).
Thus, you must select the negative value of r to
ensure that you are traveling along the ray opposite

θ = arctan (5/2). You conclude that the polar form of
point (–2,–5) is 
Or you could add π to θ to get a coterminal angle
that lies in the third quadrant. If you do that, the
final answer is 
17.42 Rewrite the rectangular equation y = 2x + 1 in
polar form.
A rectangular equation is written in terms of x and y,
whereas a polar equation is written in terms of r and
θ. Recall that x = rcos θ and y = rsin θ. Substitute
these values into the rectangular equation.
Move the terms containing r to the left side of the
equation and factor the shared r out of both
expressions.
Solve for r.
Polar Graphs
They can be hard to BEAR (get it?)
17.43 Plot the graph of the polar equation r = 3.

The equation r = 3 describes the set of points that
are r = 3 units away from the pole. All points in the
plane that are a fixed distance r from a point (in this
case the pole), form a circle of radius r around that
point (called the center). In other words, r = 3 is the
polar equation for a circle with radius 3 that is
centered at the pole.
17.44 Based on your answer to Problem 17.43, construct
the polar equation of a circle with radius 5 that is
centered at the pole.
All points on the circle are a distance of r = 5 from
the pole, so the polar equation is r = 5.
17.45 Plot the graph of polar equation 
All of the points on the graph of θ = π/6 lie either on
the ray that is π/6 radians from the polar axis in the
counterclockwise direction or on the opposite ray.
Thus, the graph is a line consisting of that ray and
its opposite ray.
If r > 0, then the points have angular coordinate 
If r < 0, then the points have angular
coordinate 

17.46 Based on your answer to Problem 17.45, express
the y-axis of the rectangular coordinate system in
polar form.
The y-axis of the rectangular coordinate system
forms an angle measuring θ = π/2 with the positive
x-axis (or polar axis). Thus, one polar equation
representing the y-axis is θ = π/2. Other correct
solutions include (but are not limited to): θ = 5π/2, θ
= –π/2, and θ = –5π/2.
17.47 Rewrite the polar equation r = 4csc θ in rectangular
form and graph it.
Rewrite the cosecant function in terms of sine.
Cross-multiply to eliminate the fraction.
rsin θ = 4
As Problem 17.30 explains, y = rsin θ.
y = 4

Thus, r = 4csc θ is equivalent to the rectangular
equation y = 4, the horizontal line 4 units above the
x-axis.
17.48 Graph the polar equation r = 1 + 2sin θ by
constructing a table of values that includes the
following values of θ.
Plug 13 different values into θ to figure out the
corresponding value of r. This gives you 11 points
on the graph (in polar form).
Substitute each value of θ into the equation r = 1 +
2sin θ.

Plot each of the points generated by the table of
values to create the following graph, called a
limaçon.

17.49 Plot the graph of the polar equation: r = 2 sin3θ.
Apply the technique demonstrated in Problem
17.48, creating the table of values that contains the
following points: (0, 0), (π/6, 2), (π/3, 0), (π/2, –2),
(2π/3, 0), (5π/6, 2), and (π, 0). This polar graph is
called a three-petal rose curve.

17.50 Plot the graph of the polar equation: r2 = 4 cos 2θ.
Substitute unit circle values into θ to generate the
points on the graph. For example, substituting θ = π
into the equation produces the following values of r.
Thus, (2,π) and (–2,π) are points on the polar graph,
which is called a lemniscate.

Chapter 18
TRIGONOMETRY OF COMPLEX NUMBERS
You can’t spell “trig” without “i”
In the final chapter of this book, you briefly explore complex
numbers. Unlike the real numbers in the preceding chapters,
complex numbers are two-dimensional. Every complex number
is comprised of two distinct parts: a real number and an
imaginary number that is multiplied by 
The first problems of this chapter introduce complex numbers,
including how to graph them and how to combine them with
other complex numbers via addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division. You then use a familiar technique to express
complex numbers in a unique, trigonometric form, which allows
you to perform arithmetic operations on complex numbers with
ease.
This chapter is all about complex numbers. After a quick
intro to remind you how complex numbers work, you’ll
quickly transition into a new way to write complex numbers.
Basically, you use the same strategies you applied to polar
coordinates, measuring how far they are from the origin and
what angles are formed with the x-axis. Finally, you use a
handful of formulas to multiply and divide complex
numbers, raise them to powers, and calculate square and
cube roots.
Rectangular Form of Complex Numbers
Add, subtract, multiply, divide, and graph
Note: Problems 18.1–18.3 refer to the complex
number z = 5 + 3i.
18.1    Identify the real and imaginary parts of z.
A complex number is the sum of two distinct parts,
a real number part and an imaginary number part.

In this problem, the complex number z = 5 + 3i
equals the sum of its real number part 5 and the
imaginary part 3 that is multiplied by i. Note that 
; it is considered imaginary because you
cannot calculate the square root of a negative
number.
The imaginary part is the real number that is
multiplied by i. In other words, 3 is the imaginary
part of 5 + 3i, not 3i.
Note: Problems 18.1–18.3 refer to the complex
number z = 5 + 3i.
18.2    Identify the conjugate of z.
To derive the conjugate of a complex number,
change the sign of its imaginary part: 5 – 3i is the
conjugate of 5 + 3i.
Note: Problems 18.1–18.3 refer to the complex
number z = 5 + 3i.
18.3    Plot z on the complex plane.
The complex plane is similar to the coordinate
plane, but the horizontal and vertical axes do not
represent x and y. Instead, the horizontal axis
represents the real part of the complex number, and
the vertical axis represents the imaginary part. The
real part of z = 5 + 3i is 5, so z is located 5 units
right of the origin. The imaginary part of z is 3, so z
is located 3 units above the origin, as illustrated
below.

Therefore, z = 5 + 3i has rectangular coordinates (5,
3). More generally, any complex number a + bi has
rectangular coordinates (a, b).
To plot a complex point, treat the real part as the x-
coordinate and the number multiplied by i as the y-
coordinate.
18.4    Given the complex number z1 = –1 + 5i, identify its
conjugate z2 and plot z2 in the complex plane.
To calculate the conjugate of z1 = –1 + 5i, change
the sign of 5i, the imaginary part: z2 = –1 – 5i.
Therefore, z2 is located 1 unit left of, and 5 units
below, the origin. The rectangular coordinates of z2
are (–1, –5).

18.5    Simplify the expression: i6.
Recall that 
. Therefore, 
. Rewrite i6
as a series of i2 factors multiplied together.
You conclude that i 6 = –1.
Note: Problems 18.6–18.9 refer to complex numbers
c1 = 2 – 3i and c2 = 5 + i.
18.6    Calculate c1 + c2.
To add complex numbers, combine their real and
imaginary parts independently.

Note: Problems 18.6–18.9 refer to complex numbers
c1 = 2 – 3i and c2 = 5 + i.
18.7    Calculate c1 – c2.
In order to subtract c2 from c1, subtract the real and
imaginary parts of c2 from the corresponding parts
of c1.
Note: Problems 18.6–18.9 refer to complex numbers
c1 = 2 – 3i and c2 = 5 + i.
18.8    Calculate c1 c2.
Apply the FOIL method to multiply complex
numbers, the same technique you use to multiply
two binomials: (a + b)(c + d) = ac + ad + bc + bd.
Recall that i2 = –1.
Note: Problems 18.6–18.9 refer to complex numbers
c1 = 2 – 3i and c2 = 5 + i.

18.9    Calculate c1 ÷ c2.
Begin by writing the quotient as a fraction.
Multiply the numerator and denominator of the
fraction by 5 – i, the conjugate of the denominator.
Apply the FOIL method to calculate the product (2 –
3i)(5 – i) in the numerator and the product (5 + i)(5
– i) in the denominator.
Most instructors require you to express the real and
imaginary parts of the quotient as individual values,
as demonstrated below.
Divide each term of the numerator 7 – 17i by the
denominator 26.

Note: Problems 18.10–18.12 refer to complex
numbers z1 = 9 + 4i and z2 = 9 – 4i.
z1 and z2 are conjugates.
18.10 Calculate z1 – z2.
Subtract the real and imaginary parts of z2 from the
corresponding parts of z1.
Note: Problems 18.10–18.12 refer to complex
numbers z1 = 9 + 4i and z2 = 9 – 4i.
18.11 Calculate z1 z2.
Apply the FOIL method to calculate the product of
two complex numbers.
Notice that the product of a complex number and its
conjugate is a real number—it contains no
imaginary part.
That’s why you multiply by the conjugate when you
divide complex numbers. You need to get rid of the

complex number in the denominator.
Note: Problems 18.10–18.12 refer to complex
numbers z1 = 9 + 4i and z2 = 9 – 4i.
18.12 Calculate z1 ÷ z2.
Express the quotient as a fraction and multiply the
numerator and denominator by 9 + 4i, the
conjugate of the denominator.
According to Problem 18.11, (9 – 4i) (9 + 4i) = 97.
Trigonometric Form of Complex Numbers
The reason you learned polar coordinates
Note: Problems 18.13–18.16 explain how to convert
the complex number 
 into trigonometric form.
18.13 Calculate , the absolute value of c.
The absolute value of the complex number c = a +
bi is equal to 
. In this problem, 
 and b = 1.

Note that the absolute value of c is the distance
between c and the origin of the complex plane.
Note: Problems 18.13–18.16 explain how to convert
the complex number 
 into trigonometric form.
18.14 Calculate the modulus, r, of c in trigonometric
form.
The modulus r of a complex number in trigonometric
form is equal to the absolute value of the complex
number. According to Problem 18.13, 
Note: Problems 18.13–18.16 explain how to convert
the complex number 
 into trigonometric form.
18.15 Calculate the argument, θ, of c in trigonometric
form, and report the answer in radians.
To calculate the argument θ of the complex number
a + bi, evaluate arctan (b/a). In this problem, 
and b = 1.
Divide the numerator and denominator by 2 to
produce familiar values from the unit circle.

Tan = sine/cosine. This angle has a cosine of 
and a sine of 1/2.
Note: Problems 18.13–18.16 explain how to convert
the complex number 
 into trigonometric form.
18.16 Express c in trigonometric form.
A complex number c with modulus r and argument θ
has the following trigonometric form.
c = r(cos θ + isin θ)
According to Problems 18.14–18.15, complex
number 
has modulus r = 2 and argument θ =
π/6.
18.17 Given a complex number z = a + bi, such that a >
0 and b > 0, plot z in the complex plane and compare
the polar and trigonometric forms of z.
If a > 0 and b > 0, then complex number z = a + bi
appears in the first quadrant, as illustrated below.
Let r represent the length of the segment
connecting point z to the origin, and let θ represent
the angle formed by the x-axis and that segment.

In polar form, z has coordinates (r,θ). Note that the
radial coordinate r is equal to the modulus of z, and
the angular coordinate θ is equal to the argument of
z. Therefore, in trigonometric form, z = r(cos θ + isin
θ).
Note: Problems 18.18–18.20 refer to the complex
number c = –4 + 4i.
18.18 Calculate the modulus of c in trigonometric form.
Apply the modulus formula stated in Problem 18.13,
noting that the modulus of a complex number is
equal to its absolute value. In this problem, a = –4
and b = 4.
Note: Problems 18.18–18.20 refer to the complex
number c = –4 + 4i.
18.19 Calculate the argument of c in trigonometric form.
Substitute a = –4 and b = 4 into the argument
formula stated in Problem 18.15.

Technically, arctan (–1) = –π/4 because of
arctangent’s restricted range. However, the angle –
π/4 lies in the fourth quadrant, and c = –4 + 4i lies
in the second quadrant of the complex plane. Add π
(the period of tangent) to –π/4 to calculate a
coterminal angle that lies in the second quadrant.
If you use degrees instead of radians, the answer
would be 135°.
You conclude that the argument of c is θ = 3π/4.
Note: Problems 18.18–18.20 refer to the complex
number c = –4 + 4i.
18.20 Express c in trigonometric form.
Substitute 
 and 
 into the formula stated
in Problem 18.16.
18.21 Express the following complex number in
rectangular form and identify its real and imaginary
parts.

Distribute 5 to the terms in parentheses and
evaluate the trigonometric expressions.
The complex number c has real part  and imaginary
part 
18.22 Express the following complex number in
rectangular form and identify its real and imaginary
parts.
Distribute 3 to each of the terms in parentheses and
simplify the expression.
The complex number z has real part 0 and
imaginary part 3.
Multiplying and Dividing Trigonometric Form

By plugging into one of two formulas
Note: In Problems 18.23–18.25, 
18.23 Calculate z1 z2 using the trigonometric form of the
complex numbers.
Given complex numbers 
 and 
, you can apply the formula below to
compute the product z1 z2.
In this problem, r1 = 4, θ1 = π/3, r2 = 2, and θ2 =
2π/3.
Note: In Problems 18.23–18.25, 
18.24 Express z1 and z2 in rectangular form.
Distribute the modulus of each complex number
through the parentheses and simplify the
expressions.

Note: In Problems 18.23–18.25, 
18.25 Verify your solution to Problem 18.23 by
multiplying the rectangular forms of the complex
numbers.
According to Problem 18.23, z1 z2 = –8. In Problem
18.24, you identify the rectangular forms of the
complex numbers. Multiply the rectangular forms of
z1 and z2 to verify that the product is equal to –8.
You could write the product as –8 + 0i to make it
clear that the product is a complex number with an
imaginary part equal to zero.
The product of z1 and z2 is –8, whether you express
the complex numbers in rectangular or
trigonometric form.
18.26 Calculate the product: [3(cos 40° + isin 40°)]
[7(cos 225° + isin 225°)].

Substitute r1 = 3, θ1 = 40°, r2 = 7, and θ2 = 225°
into the product formula, presented in Problem
18.23.
Multiply the moduli (3 · 7) and add the arguments
(40° + 225°).
18.27 Given 
,
calculate z2.
Let r(cos θ + isin θ) represent z2 in trigonometric
form. Therefore, its modulus is r and its argument is
θ. To calculate r, note that the modulus of z1 z2 is
equal to the product of the moduli of z1 and z2.
The argument of the product z1z2 is 17π/24. Note
that this argument is equal to the sum of π/8 and θ,
the respective arguments of z1 and z2. Solve the
following equation for θ to identify the argument of
z2.

Now that you have calculated r and θ, you can
express z2 in trigonometric form.
Note: In Problems 18.28–18.30, 
18.28 Calculate c1 ÷ c2 using the trigonometric form of
the complex numbers.
To calculate the quotient of complex numbers c1 =
r1(cos θ1 + isin θ1) and c2 = r2(cos θ2 + isin θ2),
apply the following formula.
When you multiply complex numbers, you multiply
the moduli and add the arguments. When you divide
complex numbers, you divide the moduli and
subtract the arguments.
In this problem, r1 = 6, θ1 = π, r2 = 2, and θ2 = 3π/4.

Note: In Problems 18.28–18.30, 
18.29 Express c1, c2, and c1 ÷ c2 in rectangular form.
Distribute the modulus in each complex number and
evaluate the trigonometric expressions.
Note: In Problems 18.28–18.30, 
18.30 Verify your solution to Problem 18.28 by dividing
the rectangular forms of the complex numbers.
According to Problem 18.29, c1 = –6 and 
Calculate c1 ÷ c2 to verify that the quotient is equal
to 
The answer to Problem 18.28 written in rectangular
form

Apply the technique described in Problem 18.9,
multiplying the numerator and denominator of c1/c2
by the conjugate of c2.
Divide each of the terms in the numerator by the
denominator.
This verifies the quotient that you calculated in
Problem 18.28 and converted into rectangular form
in Problem 18.29.
18.31 Calculate the quotient: 12(cos 120° + isin 120°) ÷
[3(cos 25° + isin 25°)].
Substitute r1 = 12, θ1 = 120°, r2 = 3, and θ2 = 25°
into the formula introduced in Problem 18.28.

18.32 Given 
,
calculate c2.
Let c2 = r(cos θ + isin θ) represent the unknown
complex number. The modulus of the quotient (c1
/c2) is equal to the quotient of the moduli (r1/r2).
Cross-multiply and solve for r to calculate the
modulus of c2.
The argument of the quotient is equal to the
difference of the arguments. Solve the following
equation to calculate the argument θ of c2.

Thus, c2 has modulus r = 9 and argument θ =
28π/15.
De Moivre’s Theorem
Raising complex numbers to powers
Note: In Problems 18.33–18.36, z = 5(cos 30° + isin
30°).
18.33 Apply De Moivre’s theorem to calculate z2.
Given a complex number written in trigonometric
form, you can apply De Moivre’s theorem to raise
that complex number to exponents. Specifically,
given complex number z = r(cos θ + isin θ), the
following formula represents zn, such that n is an
integer.
In this problem, r = 5, θ = 30°, and n = 2.
You’re squaring the complex number, so n = 2. If
you were raising z to the ninth power, you would set
n = 9.
Note: In Problems 18.33–18.36, z = 5(cos 30° + isin
30°).
18.34 Verify your answer to Problem 18.33 by expressing
z in rectangular form and calculating z2.

Begin by converting z to rectangular form.
Calculate z2 in rectangular form using the FOIL
method.
This complex number is equal to 25(cos 60° + isin
60°), the solution to Problem 18.33 in rectangular
form.
Note: In Problems 18.33–18.36, z = 5(cos 30° + isin
30°).
18.35 Calculate z3.

Substitute r = 5, θ = 30°, and n = 3 into De Moivre’s
theorem.
Note: In Problems 18.33–18.36, z = 5(cos 30° + isin
30°).
18.36 Calculate z5.
Substitute r = 5, θ = 30°, and n = 5 into De Moivre’s
theorem.
18.37 Given 
calculate c4.
Substitute r = 2, θ = 7π/4, and n = 4 into De
Moivre’s theorem.
Although this answer is correct, it is customary to
identify an angle coterminal to 7π that lies between
0 and 2π, the bounds of 1 rotation on the unit circle.
You conclude that c4 = 16(cos π + isin π).

Subtract 
 until you get a value between 
Note: In Problems 18.38–18.39, z1 = 2(cos 40° + isin
40°) and z2 = 3(cos 15° + isin 15°).
18.38 Calculate (z1 z2)2.
The order of operations dictates that you multiply
inside parentheses before you raise the product to
the second power. To calculate z1 z2, apply the
formula presented in Problem 18.23.
Apply De Moivre’s theorem to raise the product z1 z2
= 6(cos 55° + isin 55°) to the second power.
Thus, (z1 z2)2 = 36(cos 110° + isin 110°).
Note: In Problems 18.38–18.39, z1 = 2(cos
40° + isin 40°) and z2 = 3(cos 15° + isin 15°).
18.39 Calculate 
Calculate the quotient inside the parentheses by
applying the formula from Problem 18.28.

Apply De Moivre’s theorem to raise the quotient to
the third power.
Roots of Complex Numbers
Square roots, cube roots, etc.
18.40 State the formula used to calculate the nth roots of
complex number z = r(cos θ + isin θ) and explain
how to apply it.
The number of nth roots of a complex number is
equal to n. For example, if you are calculating
square roots, then there are exactly n = 2 square
roots of z. Similarly, there are exactly n = 3 cube
roots of z. These roots are evenly spaced around the
unit circle according to the following formula.
In the formula, pk represents one root. The subscript
merely numbers the roots, from 0 to n – 1. For
example, when you calculate cube roots using this
formula, n = 3 and the names of the cube roots are
p0, p1, and p2. The highest subscript is 2, which is
exactly one less than n = 3.

Calculating roots is not complicated if you keep
these facts in mind:
• Each root has the same modulus, 
. Only the
arguments of the roots vary.
• The argument of the first root, p0, is equal to θ/n.
If you substitute k = 0 into 
, you get 
.
• To calculate the remaining arguments, add 360°/n
to the first argument.
Note: In Problems 18.41–18.42, c = 16(cos 100° +
isin 100°).
18.41 Determine how many square roots exist for c and
calculate the square root with the smallest argument.
You are asked to calculate the square roots of c, so n
= 2. The number of roots is equal to n, so there are
two square roots of c, named p0 and p1. The
modulus of the roots is equal to the square root of r
= 16, the modulus of c. Thus, p0 and p1 both have
modulus .
The smaller the subscript of p, the smaller the
argument of the root is. Therefore, p0 always
represents the root with the smallest argument. To
calculate the argument of p0, divide θ = 100° by n =
2.

You conclude that p0 is a square root of c; it has
modulus 4 and argument 50°.
p0 = 4(cos 50° + isin 50°)
Note: In Problems 18.41–18.42, c = 16(cos 100° +
isin 100°).
18.42 Calculate the remaining square root(s) of c.
As Problem 18.41 explains, c has two square roots:
p0 and p1. Both have the same modulus, so p1 also
has a modulus of 
 To calculate the argument of
the remaining root, first divide 360° by n = 2.
Add this value to the argument of p0, which is 50°
according to Problem 18.41. That sum is the
argument of p1.
You conclude that p1 = 4(cos 230° + isin 230°).
Note: In Problems 18.43–18.44, z = 8(cos 210° +
isin 210°).
18.43 Determine how many cube roots exist for z and
calculate the cube root with the smallest argument.
Exactly n = 3 cube roots exist for any complex
number: p0, p1, and p2. You are asked to calculate
p0, the cube root with the smallest argument.

Not all books name the roots the same way. Your
book might use a different letter than p, but the
process is the same.
Each of the roots has the same modulus: the cube
root of the modulus of z.
The argument of p0 is equal to θ = 210° divided by
n.
You conclude that p0 = 2(cos 70° + isin 70°).
Note: In Problems 18.43–18.44, z = 8(cos 210° +
isin 210°).
18.44 Calculating the remaining cube roots of z.
In Problem 18.43, you determine that p0 = 2(cos 70°
+ isin 70°). The moduli of p1 and p2 are equal to the
modulus of p0. To calculate the arguments of p1 and
p2, you must first divide 360° by n = 3. The angles
are evenly spaced at an interval of 360/n degrees
around the unit circle.
Add 120° to the argument of p0 to calculate the
argument of p1.

Add 120° to the argument of p1 to calculate the
argument of p2.
Recall that both p1 and p2 have modulus 2; their
arguments are 190° and 310°, respectively.
18.45 Calculate the fifth roots of 
You are directed to calculate all of the fifth roots of
complex number c. There are n = 5 fifth roots,
named p0, p1, p2, p3, and p4. Each of the roots has
the same modulus.
To calculate the argument of p0, divide θ = π/3 by n
= 5.

Dividing by 5 is equivalent to multiplying by 1/5, the
reciprocal of 5.
You now know the modulus and argument of p0, so
you can express the complex number in
trigonometric form.
The remaining roots have arguments that are
equally spaced around the unit circle, at an interval
of 2π/n.
This angle is measured in radians, so use the
formula 
 instead of 360°/n.
Add 2π/5 to the argument of p0 to calculate the
argument of p1.
Add 2π/5 to the argument of p1 to calculate the
argument of p2.

Add 2π/5 to the argument of p2 to calculate the
argument of p3.
Finally, Add 2π/5 to the argument of p3 to calculate
the argument of p4.
List all of the fifth roots, recalling that each has
modulus 


Appendix A
TABLE OF TRIGONOMETRIC VALUES
Nine pages that answer the question “Why do I need a
calculator?”
This table is presented in increments of quarter degrees;
each of the other values (including the equivalent radian
measure for the angle) is accurate to the thousandths place.
For angles less than 20°, the radian measure of an
angle is almost equal to its sine and tangent values.
That’s why some people use the radian measure of

an angle to approximate small sine and tangent
values.








Appendix B
THE UNIT CIRCLE
Just in case you didn’t memorize it
ANGLES MEASURED IN RADIANS
ANGLES MEASURED IN DEGREES


Appendix C
FORMULAS AND IDENTITIES
To memorize or reference
Chapter 1
• Degrees/minutes/seconds to decimal degrees: 
• Degrees to radians: 
• Radians to degrees: 
• Arc length: s = rθ
Chapter 2
• Pythagorean theorem: a2 + b2 = c2
• Distance formula: 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• Table interpolation: 
Chapter 3
• 
• 
Chapter 4
• Reference angle α for angle θ terminating in the
second quadrant: 
• Reference angle α for angle θ terminating in the third
quadrant: 
• Reference angle α for angle θ terminating in the
fourth quadrant: 
Chapter 5
• Amplitude of a periodic function: 
• Given periodic function g(x), the period of 
Chapter 7

• Cofunction identities:
• Reciprocal identities:
• Negative identities:
• Pythagorean identities:
• Sum and difference formulas:
Chapter 8
• Double-angle formulas:
• Power-reducing formulas:

• Half-angle formulas:
• Product-to-sum formulas:
• Sum-to-product formulas:
• Tangent identities:

Chapter 10
• Quadratic formula: 
Chapter 12
• Triangle area formulas:
• Heron’s formula: 
• Area of a sector: 
Chapter 13
• Law of sines: 
• Law of cosines:

Chapter 14
• Magnitude of 
• Unit vector of v in the same direction: 
Chapter 15
• Arithmetic vector addition: 
• Scalar multiplication: 
• Horizontal and vertical components of a vector:
Chapter 16
• Dot product: 
• Alternate dot product formula: 
• Modified dot product formula: 
• Vector projection: 
• Work:
Chapter 18

• Absolute value/modulus of complex number z = a +
bi: 
• Argument of complex number z = a + bi: 
• Product of complex numbers: 
• Quotient of complex numbers: 
• De Moivre’s theorem: 
• Roots of complex numbers: 
, such that 

Index
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF CONCEPTS WITH PROBLEM NUMBERS
This comprehensive index organizes the concepts and skills
discussed within the book alphabetically. Each entry is
accompanied by one or more problem numbers, in which
the topics are most prominently featured.
All of these numbers refer to problems, not pages, in the
book. For example, 4.9 is the ninth problem in Chapter 4.
Numbers & Symbols
30°–60°–90° triangle: 1.34, 3.10–3.21, 12.6, 12.8–12.10, 12.21
45°–45°–90° triangle: 2.7, 3.1–3.9, 12.7, 12.15–12.16, 15.40
π/4–π/4–π/2 triangle: see 45°–45°–90° triangle
π/6–π/3–π/2 triangle: see 30°–60°–90° triangle
A
absolute value
(of a) complex number: 18.13
(of a) real number: 8.26–8.27
adding
complex numbers: 18.6
vectors (algebraically): 15.12, 15.15, 15.17, 15.20, 15.29, 16.48
vectors (graphically): 15.1–15.11, 15.14, 15.27, 16.41, 16.44
adjacent leg: 2.15–2.16, 2.18–2.23, 2.43–2.44, 3.14
ambiguous case: 13.9–13.12
amplitude: 5.4, 5.8, 5.11, 5.31
angle
between vectors: 16.19–16.27, 16.29, 16.36
complementary: 1.31–1.34
converting units of measure: 1.20–1.30
coterminal: 4.16–4.29

degrees: 1.10, 1.14, 1.16
initial side: 1.6–1.8
minutes/seconds: 1.18–1.19
naming: 1.2
negative: 1.17, 1.26, 1.28
radians: 1.11–1.14, 1.17
reference: 4.1–4.5, 4.30, 4.33, 4.37, 4.44, 7.45
revolutions: 1.9, 1.14–1.15
right: 1.14
standard position: 1.3–1.8, 1.14
straight: 1.35–1.37
supplementary: 1.35–1.39
terminal side: 1.6–1.8, 1.15–1.17, 3.34, 3.36, 4.36, 4.40, 4.44
angular coordinate: 17.16, 17.45
arc
central angle: 1.40–1.45
length: 1.41–1.45, 12.37, 12.42
major: 1.45
measure: 1.40
minor: 1.45
radius: 1.41–1.45
arccosine: 9.5–9.8, 9.21, 9.23, 9.25, 11.25–11.26, 13.16, 13.21
arcsecant: 9.25
arcsine: 9.9–9.11, 9.17, 9.20, 9.22, 9.24, 12.43, 13.11, 13.17, 13.19
arctangent: 9.12–9.14, 9.19, 9.26, 11.12, 11.21, 11.35
area of a triangle
AAS: 12.19–12.20
ASA: 12.19, 12.22–12.24
base and height: 12.1–12.12, 12.15, 12.21, 12.28
Heron’s formula: 12.25–12.27, 12.29–12.34, 12.44, 13.24
SAS: 12.14, 12.16–12.18, 12.24, 13.22
SSS: 12.25–12.27, 12.29–12.34, 12.44, 13.24
argument: 18.15, 18.19
asymptote: 5.10, 6.2, 6.7, 6.12, 6.17, 9.14
B–C
base: 12.1–12.12, 12.15, 12.21, 12.28
calculator-based values: 2.37–2.45
central angle: 1.40–1.45, 12.35, 12.37–12.39, 12.41, 12.43
circle: 12.35–12.45, 17.12, 17.43–17.44
circumference: 1.13, 1.42, 12.40
cofunction identity: 7.1–7.4, 7.6, 7.11–7.12, 7.17–7.18, 7.40–7.41, 8.16
commutative: 15.5, 16.5–16.6

complementary angles: 1.31–1.34
complex fraction: 2.28
complex number
absolute value: 18.13
adding: 18.6
argument: 18.15, 18.19
conjugate: 18.2, 18.4, 18.9, 18.12, 18.30
De Moivre’s theorem: 18.33, 18.35–18.39
dividing: 18.9, 18.12, 18.28, 18.30–18.32, 18.39
imaginary part: 18.1
modulus: 18.13–18.14, 18.18
multiplying: 18.8, 18.11, 18.23, 18.25–18.27, 18.38
plot: 18.3–18.4
real part: 18.1
rectangular form: 18.1–18.17, 18.21–18.22, 18.24–18.25, 18.29–18.30, 18.34
roots: 18.40–18.45
trigonometric form: 18.16, 18.18–18.23, 18.26–18.28, 18.31–18.33, 18.35–
18.45
component form: 14.12–14.24, 14.31–14.32, 15.19–15.20, 15.38–15.44
compression: see graphing transformations
conjugate: 18.2, 18.4, 18.9, 18.12, 18.30
conversion fraction: 1.20–1.30
converting
between degrees and radians: 1.24–1.30
between degrees and revolutions: 1.20–1.21
between minutes/seconds to decimal form: 1.18–1.19
between parametric and rectangular form: 17.4, 17.7, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14
between polar and rectangular form: 17.30–17.42, 17.46–17.47
between radians and revolutions: 1.22–1.23
coordinate plane: 2.8, 3.5–3.8, 3.17–3.22
cosecant: 2.22, 2.24, 3.43, 4.39, 4.44, 6.16–6.20
cosine: 2.18, 2.20, 2.26, 2.27–2.28, 2.43, 3.14, 3.22, 3.24, 3.26, 3.28, 3.30, 3.32,
3.35, 3.39–3.40, 4.4, 4.28, 4.32, 4.37, 4.43, 5.35–5.41, 6.11, 12.12, 15.37–
15.44
cotangent: 2.21, 2.25, 3.42, 4.29, 4.38, 4.42, 4.45, 6.6–6.10
coterminal angles: 4.16–4.29
cube root: 18.43–18.44
D–E–F
De Moivre’s theorem: 18.33, 18.35–18.39
degrees: 1.10, 1.14, 1.16
diameter: 1.13, 1.42, 1.44
difference of perfect squares: 8.13, 8.41, 10.17, 10.21
direction angle (of a vector): 14.44–14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.37–15.44

displacement: 16.49–16.52
distributive: 16.9–16.16
dividing complex numbers: 18.9, 18.12, 18.28, 18.30–18.32, 18.39
domain: 5.1, 5.6, 5.10, 6.2, 6.4, 6.7, 6.11, 6.16, 9.7, 9.11, 9.14
dot product
alternate version: 16.17, 16.21–16.27, 16.29–16.30
modified version: 16.35–16.36
standard version: 16.1–16.16, 16.18, 16.30, 16.34, 16.37–16.40, 16.45–16.46,
16.48, 16.50–16.51
double-angle formula
cosine: 8.8–8.16, 8.18, 8.45, 11.30
sine: 8.1–8.7, 8.11–8.13, 8.16, 8.45, 11.29, 11.31
tangent: 8.39–8.41, 11.31
equation: see solving equations
equivalent vectors: 14.3–14.4, 14.7–14.11, 14.18, 14.34, 15.36
exact solutions: 9.17, 9.19, 10.3, 10.5–10.6, 10.11
factoring
difference of perfect squares: 10.17, 10.21
greatest common factor: 10.16
(by) grouping: 10.22–10.23
trinomials: 10.18–10.20, 10.26, 10.29, 10.44
force: 16.49–16.52
formula: see identity
function: 9.2
G–H
general distance formula: 2.11–2.12
general solution: 9.16, 10.2, 10.4, 10.7, 10.9–10.10, 10.16, 10.18–10.19, 10.21–
10.22, 10.40–10.41, 10.43, 10.45, 11.11–11.12, 11.20–11.22
graphing parametric curves: 17.1–17.3, 17.5–17.6, 17.8–17.9, 17.11, 17.13
graphing polar equations: 17.43–17.50
graphing transformations
horizontal compression: 5.20, 5.32, 5.38, 5.41, 6.5, 6.9, 6.15
horizontal shift: 5.15–5.17, 5.27, 5.33, 5.36–5.37, 5.39–5.41, 6.4, 6.10, 6.20
horizontal stretch: 5.21, 5.34, 5.39–5.40, 6.19
reflection about x-axis: 5.22, 5.24, 5.29, 5.34, 6.10, 6.14, 6.20
reflection about y-axis: 5.23, 5.25, 5.30, 5.38, 6.8
reflection about y = x: 9.4
vertical compression: 5.19, 5.34, 6.9
vertical shift: 5.13–5.14, 5.17, 5.25, 5.28, 5.33, 5.38, 6.5, 6.8, 6.14
vertical stretch: 5.18, 5.24, 5.31, 5.37, 6.3
graphing trigonometric functions

cosecant: 6.16–6.20
cosine: 5.35–5.41, 6.11
cotangent: 6.6–6.10
secant: 6.11–6.15
sine: 5.26–5.34, 6.16
tangent: 6.1–6.5, 6.10
greatest common factor: 10.16
grouping (factoring by): 10.22–10.23
half-angle formula
cosine: 8.22, 8.24, 8.26
sine: 8.23, 8.25, 8.27
tangent: 8.44–8.45, 11.34
head-to-tail technique: see adding vectors (graphically)
height: 12.1–12.12, 12.15, 12.21, 12.28
Heron’s formula: 12.25–12.27, 12.29–12.34, 12.44
horizontal line test: 9.2, 9.5
hypotenuse: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.20, 2.22–2.24, 2.26–2.28, 2.42–2.43, 2.45, 3.6–3.7,
3.11–3.14, 3.22
I–J–K
i: see standard unit vector
identity
cofunction: 7.1–7.4, 7.6, 7.11–7.12, 7.17–7.18, 7.40–7.41, 8.16
double-angle: 8.1–8.16, 8.18, 8.39–8.41, 8.45
half-angle: 8.22–8.27, 8.44
negative: 7.13–7.22, 7.33, 8.30
power-reducing: 8.17–8.23, 8.42–8.43
product-to-sum: 8.28–8.31
Pythagorean: 7.23–7.33
reciprocal: 7.5–7.10, 7.12, 7.14–7.15, 7.19–7.20, 7.22, 7.26, 7.30–7.33
simplifying: 7.1–7.4, 7.6–7.12, 7.14–7.15, 7.18, 7.21, 7.26–7.28, 7.30, 7.43,
8.3, 8.13, 8.16, 8.26–8.27, 8.37–8.38, 8.41
sum and difference: 7.34–7.45, 8.2, 8.29, 8.36–8.39
sum-to-product: 8.32–8.35
verifying: 7.16–7.17, 7.19–7.20, 7.22, 7.24–7.25, 7.29, 7.31–7.33, 7.41, 7.44,
8.2, 8.6–8.7, 8.9, 8.11, 8.14, 8.18, 8.21–8.23, 8.29, 8.31, 8.35, 8.39, 8.42
imaginary number: 18.1, 18.5
initial point: 14.1–14.14, 14.16, 14.18
initial side: 1.6–1.8
interpolation: 2.32–2.36
interval notation: 5.1–5.2, 5.6–5.7
inverse
functions: 9.1–9.4

trigonometric functions: 2.40–2.41, 2.43, 2.45, 3.27–3.28, 3.45, 9.5–9.26,
10.4–10.6, 10.11, 10.22–10.23, 10.28–10.30, 10.32, 10.45, 11.12, 11.21,
11.25–11.26, 11.35, 12.43, 13.11, 13.16–13.17, 13.19, 13.21
isosceles triangle: 2.7, 2.13, 3.4, 12.7, 12.15–12.16, 12.28, 12.43
j: see standard unit vector
L–M
law of cosines
formula: 13.13–13.14
SAS: 13.18–13.21, 13.23
SSS: 13.14–13.17, 13.21
law of sines
AAS: 13.2–13.4, 13.8
ambiguous case: 13.9–13.12
ASA: 13.5–13.7
formula: 13.1
SSA: 13.9–13.12, 13.17, 13.19
leg: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.28, 2.42–2.45, 3.6–3.7, 3.11–3.14, 3.22
lemniscate: 17.50
length (of an arc): 1.41–1.45
length, signed: 4.3–4.5, 4.30–4.35, 4.37–4.39, 4.41–4.45
limaçon: 17.48
linear trigonometric equation: see simple equation
magnitude: 14.25–14.36, 14.38–14.40, 14.48–14.51, 15.20, 15.24, 15.26–15.28,
15.31, 15.34, 15.38–15.45, 16.7–16.8, 16.49–16.50, 16.52
major arc: 1.45
maximum: 5.3–5.4, 5.8
measure
angle: 1.9–1.17, 1.20–1.30
arc: 1.40
minimum: 5.3–5.4, 5.8
minor arc: 1.45
minutes: 1.18–1.19
modulus: 18.13–18.14, 18.18
multiple-angle equation: 10.34–10.45, 11.8
multiplying
complex numbers: 18.8, 18.11, 18.23, 18.25–18.27, 18.38
vectors: see scalar multiplication or dot product

N–O–P
negative
angles: 1.17, 1.26, 1.28
identities: 7.13–7.22, 7.33, 8.30
notation
interval: 5.1–5.2, 5.6–5.7
set: 5.1–5.2, 5.6–5.7
one-to-one function: 9.2
opposite
leg: 2.15–2.17, 2.19, 2.23, 2.42, 2.44–2.45
vector: 14.5, 14.15, 15.7, 15.9–15.11
orthogonal: 16.31–16.40, 16.42, 16.47
parallel lines: 1.38
parametric equations: 17.1–17.14
perimeter
sector: 12.37, 12.42
triangle: 13.3
period: 5.5, 5.9, 5.12, 5.32, 5.41, 6.2, 6.5–6.6, 6.11
periodic functions: 5.1–5.41, 6.1–6.20
perpendicular: 12.4–12.12, 13.3, 16.31
plotting vectors: 14.1, 14.6, 14.14, 14.16, 14.22–14.23, 16.19, 16.32, 16.47
polar
angle: see angular coordinate
axis: 17.16
coordinates: 17.15–17.34, 17.37–17.41
equations: 17.35–17.36, 17.42–17.50
pole: 17.15
power-reducing formula
cosine: 8.17, 8.19–8.22, 8.42
sine: 8.17–8.18, 8.21, 8.23, 8.42
tangent: 8.42–8.43
product-to-sum formula: 8.28–8.31
projection (of a vector): 16.42–16.48, 16.50, 16.52
proportion: 2.33, 2.35–2.36
Pythagorean identity: 7.23–7.33, 8.6–8.7, 8.10, 8.18, 8.21, 8.41, 11.14–11.23,
11.25–11.26, 11.28, 11.33–11.34
Pythagorean theorem: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.14, 2.24, 2.26, 3.2, 7.45, 8.4–8.5, 12.5,
12.28, 12.33
Q–R

quadrantal: 3.36
quadratic equation: 10.16–10.19, 10.20, 10.24–10.32, 10.44–10.45
quadratic formula: 10.24–10.25, 10.27–10.28, 10.30–10.32, 10.45, 11.21, 11.35
radial coordinate: 17.15, 17.43–17.44
radian: 1.11–1.14, 1.17
radius: 1.41–1.45, 12.35–12.45, 17.15, 17.43–17.44
range: 5.2, 5.7, 5.10, 6.2, 6.7, 6.13, 6.18, 9.8, 9.11, 9.14
rational equation: 11.7–11.13, 11.27, 11.31, 11.34–11.35
rationalizing the denominator: 3.3, 3.7, 4.31–4.32, 4.34–4.35, 4.38–4.39, 4.43–
4.45, 14.40
real part of a complex number: 18.1
reciprocal: 2.21–2.22, 2.24, 2.26, 3.30, 6.12, 6.17
reciprocal identity: 7.5–7.10, 7.12, 7.14–7.15, 7.19–7.20, 7.22, 7.26, 7.30–7.33
rectangle: 12.1
rectangular form: 17.4, 17.7, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.30–17.42, 17.46, 18.1–
18.17, 18.21–18.22, 18.24–18.25, 18.29–18.30, 18.34
reference angle: 4.1–4.5, 4.30, 4.33, 4.37, 4.44, 7.45, 8.4–8.5, 13.12
reflection: see graphing transformations
restricted domain and range: 9.5, 9.9, 9.11–9.12, 9.14, 9.20–9.26
resultant vector: 15.1–15.11, 15.14
revolution: 1.9, 1.14–1.15
right angle: 1.14
right triangle
30°–60°–90° triangle: 1.34, 3.10–3.21
45°–45°–90° triangle: 2.7, 3.1–3.9
adjacent leg: 2.15–2.16, 2.18–2.23, 2.43–2.44, 3.14
cosecant: 2.22, 2.24
cosine: 2.18, 2.20, 2.26–2.28, 2.43, 12.12
cotangent: 2.21, 2.25, 3.42, 4.29, 4.38, 4.42, 4.45
hypotenuse: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.20, 2.22–2.24, 2.26–2.28, 2.42–2.43, 2.45, 3.6–
3.7, 3.11–3.14, 3.22
isosceles: 2.7, 3.4
leg: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.28, 2.42–2.45, 3.6–3.7, 3.11–3.14, 3.22
opposite leg: 2.15–2.17, 2.19, 2.23, 2.42, 2.44–2.45
Pythagorean theorem: 2.1–2.10, 2.13–2.14, 2.24, 2.26, 3.2, 7.45, 8.4–8.5,
12.5, 12.28, 12.33
secant: 2.22, 2.26, 4.35, 4.44
sine: 2.17, 2.20, 2.24, 2.27–2.28, 2.42, 2.45, 12.43
tangent: 2.19, 2.21, 2.23, 2.28, 2.44, 2.46, 12.11, 14.44–14.45
terminal side: 1.6–1.8, 1.15–1.17, 3.34, 3.36
roots of complex numbers: 18.40–18.45
rose curve: 17.49
S

same-side interior angles: 1.38
scalar multiplication: 14.46–14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.21–15.36, 16.3–16.4, 16.12–
16.16
secant: 2.22, 2.26, 3.30, 4.35, 4.44, 6.11–6.15
seconds: 1.18–1.19
sector
area: 12.35, 12.38–12.39, 12.41, 12.43, 12.45
perimeter: 12.37, 12.42
semicircle: 1.45
semiperimeter: 12.25–12.27, 12.29–12.32, 12.34, 12.44, 13.24
set notation: 5.1–5.2, 5.6–5.7
shift: see graphing transformations
side: 1.1
signed length: 4.3–4.5, 4.30–4.35, 4.37–4.39, 4.41–4.45
simple equation: 9.15–9.19, 10.1–10.11, 10.33–10.45
simplifying identities: 7.1–7.4, 7.6–7.12, 7.14–7.15, 7.18, 7.21, 7.26–7.28, 7.30,
7.43, 8.3, 8.13, 8.16, 8.26–8.27, 8.37–8.38, 8.41
sine: 2.17, 2.20, 2.24, 2.27–2.28, 2.42, 2.45, 3.22, 3.25, 3.27, 3.32, 3.37–3.38,
3.41, 3.45, 4.3, 4.26, 4.31, 4.33, 4.44, 5.26–5.34, 6.16, 12.43, 15.37–15.44
solution
exact: 9.17, 9.19, 10.3, 10.5–10.6, 10.11
general: 9.16, 10.2, 10.4, 10.7, 10.9–10.10, 10.16, 10.18–10.19, 10.21–10.22,
10.40–10.41, 10.43, 10.45, 11.11–11.12, 11.20–11.22
(on an) interval: 9.15, 9.18, 10.1, 10.8, 10.14, 10.17, 10.20, 10.23, 10.27–
10.30, 10.32–10.39, 10.42–10.44, 11.1–11.10, 11.13–11.19, 11.23–11.35
solving equations
(involving) double-angle identities: 11.29–11.31
(involving) half-angle formulas: 11.34
multiple angles: 10.34–10.45, 11.8
(using) Pythagorean identities: 11.14–11.23, 11.25–11.26, 11.28, 11.33–11.34
quadratic: 10.16–10.20, 10.24–10.32, 10.44–10.45
rational: 11.7–11.13, 11.27, 11.31, 11.34–11.35
simple: 9.15–9.19, 10.1–10.11, 10.33–10.45
(using) square roots: 11.2–11.7, 11.10, 11.14–11.15, 11.20
(by) squaring both sides: 11.23–11.26, 11.28
(involving) sum and difference formulas: 11.32–11.33, 11.35
(using) trigonometric identities: 11.4–11.23, 11.25–11.26, 11.28–11.35
zero-product property: 11.1, 11.3, 11.6, 11.10–11.11, 11.16–11.19, 11.22–
11.23, 11.25, 11.29–11.34
solving triangles: 13.1–13.24
square root: 11.2–11.7, 11.10, 11.14–11.15, 11.20, 18.41–18.42
standard position: 1.3–1.8, 1.14, 3.5–3.8, 3.17–3.22
standard unit vector: 14.41–14.43, 15.8–15.9
straight angle: 1.35–1.37
stretch: see graphing transformations
subtend: 1.12, 1.40
subtracting
complex numbers: 18.7, 18.10

vectors (algebraically): 15.13, 15.16, 15.18–15.19, 15.30–15.35
vectors (graphically): 15.7, 15.9–15.11
sum and difference formula
cosine: 7.37–7.39, 7.41, 7.43, 8.9, 8.29, 11.32
sine: 7.34–7.36, 7.40, 7.43–7.45, 8.2, 11.33
tangent: 8.36–8.39, 11.35
sum-to-product formula: 8.32–8.35
supplementary angles: 1.35–1.39
T
tangent: 2.19, 2.21, 2.23, 2.28, 2.44, 3.29, 3.33, 3.44, 4.5, 4.30, 4.34, 4.41,
4.45, 6.1–6.5, 6.10, 12.11, 14.44–14.45, 15.37
terminal point: 14.1–14.14, 14.16, 14.18
terminal side: 1.6–1.8, 1.15–1.17, 3.34, 3.36, 4.36, 4.40, 4.44
transformation: see graphing transformations
transversal: 1.38
triangle
area: see area of a triangle
right: 1.34
sides: 1.1
vertex: 1.1, 1.3
trigonometric form of a complex number: 18.16, 18.18–18.23, 18.26–18.28,
18.31–18.33, 18.35–18.45
trigonometric function
cosecant: 2.22, 2.24, 3.43, 4.39, 4.44, 6.16–6.20
cosine: 2.18, 2.20, 2.26–2.28, 2.43, 3.14, 3.22, 3.24, 3.26, 3.28, 3.30, 3.32,
3.35, 3.39–3.40, 4.4, 4.28, 4.32, 4.37, 4.43, 5.35–5.41, 6.11, 12.12, 15.37–
15.44
cotangent: 2.21, 2.25, 3.42, 6.6–6.10
inverse: 9.5–9.26
outside of the unit circle: 4.26, 4.28–4.45, 7.45
secant: 2.22, 2.26, 3.30, 6.11–6.15
sine: 2.17, 2.20, 2.24, 2.27–2.28, 2.42, 2.45, 3.22, 3.25, 3.27, 3.32, 3.37–3.38,
3.41, 3.45, 4.3, 4.26, 4.31, 4.33, 4.44, 5.26–5.34, 6.16, 12.43, 15.37–15.44
tangent: 2.19, 2.21, 2.23, 2.28, 2.44, 2.46, 3.29, 3.33, 3.44, 4.5, 4.30, 4.34,
4.41, 4.45, 6.1–6.5, 6.10, 12.11, 14.44–14.45, 15.37
trigonometric identity: see identity
trigonometric tables: 2.29–2.36
trigonometric triangle area formula: 12.13–12.14, 12.16–12.20, 12.22–12.27,
12.29–12.34

U–V
undefined: 5.10
unit circle: 3.8, 3.18–3.19, 3.23–3.45, 4.26, 4.28–4.29, 5.26, 5.35
unit vector: 14.37–14.43, 14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.31, 16.28–16.30
vector
adding algebraically: 15.12, 15.15, 15.17, 15.20, 15.29, 16.48
adding graphically: 15.1–15.11, 15.14, 15.27, 16.41, 16.44
angle between vectors: 16.19–16.27, 16.29, 16.36
component form: 14.12–14.24, 14.31–14.32, 15.19–15.20, 15.38–15.44
direction angle: 14.44–14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.37–15.44
displacement: 16.49–16.52
dot product: 16.1–16.18, 16.27, 16.29–16.30, 16.34–16.40, 16.45–16.46,
16.48, 16.50–16.51
equivalent: 14.3–14.4, 14.7–14.11, 14.18, 14.34, 15.36
force: 16.49–16.52
head-to-tail technique: see adding vectors (graphically)
initial point: 14.1–14.14, 14.16, 14.18
magnitude: 14.25–14.36, 14.38–14.40, 14.48–14.51, 15.20, 15.24, 15.26–
15.28, 15.31, 15.34, 15.38–15.45, 16.7–16.8, 16.49–16.50, 16.52
multiplying: see scalar multiplication or dot product
naming: 14.2
opposite: 14.5, 14.15, 15.7, 15.9–15.11
orthogonal: 16.31–16.40, 16.42, 16.47
plotting: 14.1, 14.6, 14.14, 14.16, 14.22–14.23, 16.19, 16.32, 16.47
projection: 16.42–16.48, 16.50, 16.52
resultant: 15.1–15.11, 15.14
scalar multiplication: 14.46–14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.21–15.36, 16.3–16.4,
16.12–16.16
standard unit vectors: 14.41–14.43, 15.8–15.9
subtracting algebraically: 15.13, 15.16, 15.18–15.19, 15.30–15.35
subtracting graphically: 15.7, 15.9–15.11
terminal point: 14.1–14.14, 14.16, 14.18
unit vector: 14.37–14.43, 14.48, 14.50–14.51, 15.31, 16.28–16.30
work: 16.49–16.52
zero vector: 16.35
verifying identities: 7.16–7.17, 7.19–7.20, 7.22, 7.24–7.25, 7.29, 7.31–7.33, 7.41,
7.44, 8.2, 8.6–8.7, 8.9, 8.11, 8.14, 8.18, 8.21–8.23, 8.29, 8.31, 8.35, 8.39, 8.42
vertex: 1.1, 1.3
vertical asymptote: see asymptote
vertical line test: 9.2

W–X–Y–Z
work: 16.49–16.52
y-symmetric: 5.38
zero-product property: 10.12–10.23, 10.26, 10.29, 10.44, 11.1, 11.3, 11.6,
11.10–11.11, 11.16–11.19, 11.22–11.23, 11.25, 11.29–11.34
zero vector: 16.35

