
LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
2
ImaJinn Books
www.imajinnbooks.com
Copyright ©2007 by Keri Arthur
NOTICE: This eBook is licensed to the original purchaser
only. Duplication or distribution to any person via email,
floppy disk, network, print out, or any other means is a
violation of International copyright law and subjects the
violator to severe fines and/or imprisonment. This notice
overrides the Adobe Reader permissions which are
erroneous. This eBook cannot be legally lent or given to
others.
This eBook is displayed using 100% recycled electrons.
Distributed by Fictionwise.com

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
3
LifeMate Connections: Eryn
By Keri Arthur
Chapter One
The wind was blowing a gale and the night was not only
bitter, but wet as well. Eryn swiped at the water dripping off
her nose and fleetingly wished she hadn't agreed to this
assignment. She would much rather be home, curled up in
front of a blazing fire, book and coffee in hand, than standing
here in the pouring rain, waiting for a go ahead.
She shoved her freezing hands into her pockets and
studied the building opposite. It was nothing out of the
ordinary—just a plain brown-brick warehouse that had
recently been converted into a bar. When originally built, the
warehouse had sat on the edge of what had been one of the
trendiest areas of town, but now, thanks to falling population
numbers, it was well outside city limits.
The old fashioned lantern lights on either side of the bar's
red metal doors cast warm shadows across the wet night, and
through the semi-fogged windows that lined the front of the
old building, people were visible, laughing, dancing, and
generally having a good time. She'd be warm enough once
she got inside.
If she ever got inside.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
4
She raised a hand, lightly touching the silver stud in her
left ear. "I'm freezing my butt off here, Jack. Are the suspects
inside or not?"
"One is." The deep voice practically blasted into her right
ear. "We're checking for the rest."
She winced and twisted the stud, adjusting the volume.
"Which one is in?"
"Gray eyes."
Eryn half smiled. They'd taken to calling him that simply
because the man seemed to have at least five names, and
none of them actually existed beyond a driver's license and a
passport. There was some suspicion he might be military or
covert operations, but there was little in the way of help or
information currently coming from those two areas.
"Harrison and Gantry nowhere in sight?"
"Not yet."
A droplet of water slid past the collar of her coat and down
her neck. She shivered. "I'm going to look like a drowned
mutt soon if we don't get moving."
"Darlin', even drowned you'd look damn delicious."
"Gee, thanks," she said dryly. "But compliments aren't
going to get you into my pants."
"Can't blame an old man for trying."
Eryn snorted softly. With men now outnumbering women
ten to one—thanks to the stupid one-child-per-family rule
governments the world over had introduced generations ago
in an effort to control population growth—trying was a good
word to describe the whole male-female relationship
experience. That rule no longer existed, thank God, but the

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
5
damage had been done already. The only good thing about
the out-of-kilter balance was that women could now pick and
choose as they pleased, and female promiscuity was no
longer frowned upon. In fact, it was positively encouraged.
There were even some sectors of the government who were
currently trying to pass a law that women could not settle
down with one particular man unless they'd had at least
fifteen previous partners.
Talk about men being afraid of never getting their end in,
she thought grimly.
This bar, LifeMate Connections, and others like it, were one
of the recent solutions for those men and women who actually
wanted to settle down and have a family. The three-story
building was not only a bar, but a hotel, with monitored
bedrooms and security close by. Women could "test drive" the
various offers without having to risk taking strangers home.
And, thanks to the strict medical checks everyone underwent
on joining, they also knew all the men inside were not only
free of disease, but extremely fertile, which was important in
an age of declining fertility. Once a woman had found a man
she thought might make a suitable mate, she could then
explore the relationship beyond the secure realms of the bar.
Only that decision had recently ended up getting five
women killed.
The task force had been formed as soon as it became clear
they had a serial killer on the loose, and had the brief to "do
anything necessary" to catch the killer. Eryn hadn't been
involved in early investigations, which wasn't a surprise since
she was a medical secretary at the coroner's office, not an

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
6
investigator. She was only here now because she was a
shifter with a keen sense of smell. The murderer left few
clues, and they needed someone with a hound's nose to sort
through the scents in the victims' apartments and pick out
the ones that didn't seem to belong. It wasn't the first time
she'd been asked to do this, and it probably wouldn't be the
last. And as long as she wasn't expected to go in when the
scent of death was fresh and ripe, she was fine with it. At
least it was a change from boring office duties.
But the only aroma she'd been able to pick up in all five
apartments was an odd one—a springtime, blossomy sort of
smell that seemed more suitable for a female than a male.
Maybe their killer was bisexual, though from all accounts,
neither Harrison nor Gantry were.
But the other reason she'd been selected was because she
was in her late twenties, with brown-black hair and green
eyes. Just the type the killer seemed to prefer.
Of course, despite the "do anything" brief, they couldn't
actually force her to become a decoy. Nor could they actually
demand that she go into the club and flirt with men who
might well be murderers. Especially when everyone knew that
flirting might not be all she had to do.
So, they'd outlined their plan and given her the option to
"volunteer." Which she had, all too readily. Besides the fact
that she trusted her instincts and her nose to keep her out of
a murderer's bed, this was a once in a lifetime opportunity to
experience what went on in the LifeMate bars without actually
having to pay for it. You had to be a member to get into
them, and membership was expensive. More than she could

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
7
currently afford, anyway, even with the female discount.
Though, like most women, she was saving for that moment in
the future when she decided to settle down and have a kid.
She shifted her weight from one foot to another, then said,
"Are we going or not? I've been standing here for over five
minutes. If anyone happens to be watching, that's going to
appear more than a little suspicious."
"The go ahead just came through, even though gray eyes
is still the only suspect there. Remember to keep the mike
open."
"You're just a bunch of dirty old men who want to get their
rocks off if I happen to get laid."
And once she'd sniffed out gray eyes, that was certainly
the plan. Hell, she'd been celibate for so long she was
beginning to think there was something wrong with her. The
fact that most of the people she worked with were boring old
scientists didn't help. Add to that the long hours she'd been
working of late, and you had long term frustration. Hell, these
last few days had been the first time in six months she'd
come within touching distance of decent looking men—and
she couldn't play with them because of the department's rule
of no fraternizing. A rule she wasn't about to break, because
even if the people she worked with were boring, the job itself
paid well, and she wasn't inundated with a whirlwind of
different scents everyday. A coroner's office might not be the
best place for a shifter with a keen nose to work, but it was a
hell of a lot easier to deal with than an office building filled
with scent-wearing humans. Now, that was hard to cope with.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
8
So, once she'd given gray eyes the metaphorical thumbs
up or thumbs down, she was going to see what offers came
her way and take a few of them for a test run. The powers
that be could hardly complain when that's exactly what they
put her in there for. And she could always argue that she was
merely ensuring her cover stayed intact.
"Listening and watching other people having sex is the
only joy we old men get these days," Jack replied dryly.
"Don't you know it's the only reason we arrange these little
excursions?"
She grinned as she crossed the road. At thirty-five, Jack
could hardly be described as old, though his silvery hair gave
him a distinguished appearance—at least until you looked
past the hair and saw the sexy twinkle in his blue eyes, and
the "come-get-me" smile. "You got a position on gray eyes?"
"He's in a booth at the rear right of the bar."
"Alone?"
"For the moment, yes."
"Has he been alone all night?"
"Been up to the bar a few times, getting drinks and talking
to a few of the ladies there, but otherwise, yes."
"You think he's waiting for someone?"
"Who knows? Besides, the bar's security cams cover the
upstairs areas more than the bar itself. He might have met
someone and we just didn't see it."
"The bar's not fully covered because the action happens
upstairs rather than downstairs."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
9
"Not all the time, lassie." Jack's voice was filled with
amusement. "Some pretty erotic things happen on the dance
floor, and in those back booths."
"Sounds to me like you've already got your rocks off
tonight."
"I love my job," he said solemnly.
She snorted and put a hand on the door. "Heading in now.
Talk to you later."
She touched the right stud, turning the voice-receive off,
then pushed open the heavy red door.
Warmth rushed out, chasing the chill from her face,
surrounding her in a honeyed heat that almost instantly made
her want to shuck off her coat.
She stepped inside and closed the door. It was then that
the many aromas hit and giddiness rushed over her. Mix layer
upon layer of perfume and aftershave with the scent of
humanity, alcohol and desire, and you had a somewhat lethal
combination. At least to a shifter whose sense of smell was as
sensitive as hers.
She left her hand on the door, using it as a support as she
battled the dizziness. Why hadn't she thought to shield her
olfactory sense? God, she knew better than to walk into any
public area with all senses on high—and shielding was
something she'd learned to do when she was still a pup.
Maybe it was the excitement of the chase. Or maybe it was
the prospect of finally being able to ease a few basic aches
that had made her forget. Either way, it was stupid, because
she was here to chase a killer, not just a scent, and she had
to remember that at all times. And she should have thought

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
10
to mention to Jack that shielding meant her sense of smell
wouldn't work unless she was extremely close to the subject.
Kissing a murderer was not something she really wanted
to do, but she'd do that, and more, if that's what it took to
stop this sick fiend from killing again. She might not have
seen the bodies, but she'd seen the photos, and that was
more than enough to wash away any doubts she had about
her part in this. At least she had basic cop training—all
employees at the coroner's office nowadays did—and she
certainly had the strength to protect herself.
And while some in the task force weren't entirely
convinced that the smell she'd caught belonged to the killer,
she was, if only because that springtime scent had held an
undertone of death. And if the suspects didn't match that
smell, then hey, she possibly had three very hunky men with
which to play.
When the dizziness abated, she unbuttoned her coat and
watched a security officer approach.
"First time here?" he said, checking her pass, then taking
her coat and offering a ticket in exchange.
"Yes."
"First drink is complimentary, then. Just head on over to
the bar and they'll scan your pass and give you whatever you
want."
She gave him a dimpled smile and watched the heat flare
in his brown eyes. After six months of flying solo, it was nice
to know she could still affect the opposite sex so readily.
"Thanks."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
11
He nodded and walked into the cloak room. She headed
down the steps, but hesitated on the bottom one, allowing
her gaze to sweep the room.
A long mahogany bar dominated the right side of the
room. Every woman who stood there had a good eight or nine
men surrounding her. Half a dozen barpersons tended to
these customers, all of them women dressed in barely there
outfits. Maybe to give those gentlemen who were missing out
something to look at.
Warm light infused the rest of the room, giving everything
a golden glow, but leaving shadows haunting the distant
corners. Tables clustered the front section near the door and
windows, but these gave way to booths that lined the walls,
leaving plenty of room for a dance floor.
She couldn't actually see the DJ, though she knew he was
here somewhere. The music throbbing across the babble of
conversation filled the air with lustful melodies designed to
seduce the senses and get bodies swaying. It ran across her
skin as sensually as a lover's kiss, making her tingle. Ache,
almost.
She closed her eyes, took a careful breath, inhaling the
muted, but nevertheless rich aromas of desire and sex. God,
it had been too long since she'd indulged her sensual side.
Shifters, no matter what the breed, tended to have an
extremely high sex drive, and for far too long, she'd
overlooked hers.
Well, not tonight. Not if she had anything to say about it.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
12
She walked across to the bar to collect her drink—choosing
French champagne, which was usually way out of her price
range—then moved toward the crowd edging the dance floor.
At least half a dozen men immediately gravitated towards
her. Knowing she couldn't head directly for gray eyes, she did
nothing more than chat, enjoying their attention and their
looks. Enjoying the heady smell of masculinity and arousal
that swirled around her, making her pulse race. But gradually,
she moved on, talking and flirting as she did so, but always
heading toward the rear booths and bachelor number one.
Only she didn't have to go that far, because suddenly he
was walking through the crowd towards her. She stopped,
gaze widening, her heart leaping to the vicinity of her throat
and seeming to lodge there. The images she'd seen of him on
the com-screens never could have prepared her for the
reality—the potency—of the man himself.
He was tall and powerfully built, with chiseled features and
dark golden hair. He moved with the lightness of a vampire,
yet instinct suggested he was a shifter, just like her. What
breed of shifter she couldn't say, and right then, didn't care.
Not when the sheer sexual energy radiating off him burned
her skin as sharply as a flame.
Their gazes met, and he paused, staring at her, his
beautiful face expressionless, yet his storm-clad eyes filling
with such desire it curled her toes.
And all she wanted to do was reach for him, touch him,
feel the warm strength of his body pressed firmly against
hers.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
13
Damn, this was unlike anything she'd ever experienced
before. Lust at first sight wasn't new—hell, she was a shifter,
a mutt, and instant attraction came with the territory. But this
was more than that. Not just lust, but something else,
something deeper. It was almost as if they were attracted on
levels that went far beyond base need.
In some respects, that was scary, if only because the man
her hormones had latched onto with such ferocity might well
be a killer.
God, fate wouldn't be such a bitch, would it?
He started moving again, and her gaze traveled
downwards, admiring the way his burgundy sweater clung to
his body, emphasizing the width of his shoulders and his
powerful arms. The way his jeans hugged his hips,
highlighting not only the lean strength of his legs, but the size
of his packaging. Damn, he was well built—in all areas.
He stopped when there were still several feet between
them, his gaze sliding casually down her body. Heat prickled
across her skin, firmly igniting the deep down ache. Her
nipples hardened, pressing almost painfully against the sheer
material of her dress. The throbbing ache got stronger,
especially when his gaze seemed to linger on her hips. For the
first time she wondered just how transparent the damp dress
was. Wondered if he could see she was wearing nothing
underneath.
Then his gaze rose to hers again, and the desire so evident
in his stormy eyes echoed right through her. Lust ignited the
air between them, caressing her skin with heat until it felt like
she was glowing.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
14
He smiled slowly, intimately, and her already erratic pulse
tripped into overdrive. It was the sort of smile that might be
shared by two lovers after a night of incredible sex, and that
was exactly the message his smile was meant to portray. And
she sensed it would be extraordinary between them. That he
would more than live up to the promises made by his heated
gaze and sexy smile.
"Grey Stockard." He offered his hand, his voice low and
rich, thrumming through her as warmly as a summer breeze.
Grey? Was it merely coincidence that they'd picked his
name without even knowing it? If that was his real name, of
course. "Eryn James."
His fingers were long and strong, and so hot they seemed
to wrap hers in an inferno. And suddenly she was fighting
images of those fingers sliding across her skin, exploring and
caressing and teasing. Oh, how she wanted that. Wanted to
be touched by this man.
She swallowed, battling to keep on an even keel, battling
to remember why she was here and who he might be.
"Pleasure to meet you," he said, raising her hand to his
lips, his breath warm against her knuckles as he brushed the
sweetest of kisses across her fingertips.
God, her heart was hammering so hard it felt as if it would
jump out of her chest.
"Care to dance?" he continued softly
Only if dancing was a euphemism for let's get down and
have wild sex.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
15
She hastily drank some champagne, but it did little to ease
the dryness in her throat or the deeper down burning. "I
thought you were on your way somewhere else."
"Only for a drink." The smile that tugged his lips was so
damn sensuous her knees threatened to give way. "And only
because I had nothing better to do."
Oh, she could think of lots of things he could do ... She
swallowed another hasty gulp of champagne, and felt the
buzz start in her head. Only she wasn't sure whether it was
the alcohol or the closeness of the man.
Somehow, she managed to say, "And you've found
something better now?"
"I believe I might have. If she's willing."
The wicked gleam in his eyes told her he wasn't just
talking about dancing, and her pulse rate soared even higher.
"She is." Very willing. She finished her drink in another
large gulp that made her head spin even more.
"Good."
He plucked the glass from her hand, put it on a table in a
nearby booth, then led her into the thick of the dance floor,
right into the very heart of the crush, until it seemed
everyone was pressing and touching everyone else, and the
smell of desire was so powerful it was almost liquid. Heat
swirled around her, through her, until it was impossible to tell
whether the hunger flaming her skin was hers or his or the
crowd's.
But however fiercely she wanted him, she was not so far
gone that she lost all sense of danger. She had to be careful.
Had to. Then he wrapped an arm around her waist and pulled

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
16
her close, and suddenly the need to be careful was all but lost
to the smell of raw virility and thick need. She closed her
eyes, losing herself in the aroma, allowing it to wash through
her pores and set her body alight even more.
Until she realized something was missing.
His scent.
Which was ridiculous. Everyone had a scent, and it was as
individual as a fingerprint. But underneath the sheer male
smell, there was nothing. Maybe the heat surrounding her,
drowning her, was affecting her senses.
He began to move in time to the music, and she swayed
with him. But it wasn't dancing, as such. With the crowd
pressed so close, true dancing had become impossible.
Besides, the way their bodies brushed was far too intimate,
far too erotic, to come under the label of simple dancing.
After a while, he raised a hand and brushed the strands of
hair from her cheek. Her skin quivered, burned, where he
touched. "Do you come here often?"
I plan to come tonight, and often, she thought, but
somehow kept the words inside. "First time. You?"
"Been here for just over a week."
And the murders had started just over two weeks ago. But
did that put him in the clear? Especially when he might have
been visiting other LifeMate bars? Damn it, had anyone
bothered checking that the dead women hadn't visited any
other bars? It hadn't been mentioned in the reports she'd
read.
"If you've been here that long, I'm surprised you haven't
been gobbled up."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
17
His gray eyes gleamed with amusement. "Oh, a few ladies
have tried that. And as much as I enjoyed the experience,
they weren't what I was looking for."
She had sudden visions of taking the thick hardness of his
cock in her mouth, teasing him and tasting him as he teased
and tasted her. Sweat prickled across her skin and the deep
down ache became positively painful. And while it was against
protocol to do that sort of thing here on the dance floor, she
was sorely tempted to rush him upstairs and grab a room.
Somehow, she managed to restrain the urge and after
thrusting the enticing images from her mind, said, "So, what
are you looking for?"
"I'm not really sure I'm actually looking." His hand slid
from her back to her butt, branding her skin through the thin
fibers of her dress and sending delicious slivers of anticipation
thrumming through her.
Then he pulled her tighter against him, so close that she
was breathing in as he breathed out, and the wild beat of his
heart echoed hers. His body was warm and hard, and the
thick heat of his erection rubbed erotically against her belly.
God, how she wished they were naked. Wished he was inside,
not outside.
She again managed to drag her mind from the sexual mire
it was seeping into, and raised an eyebrow. "Then why are
you here?"
He shrugged. "I was curious."
He was also lying. Why she was so certain, she couldn't
really say. She'd always been intuitive, but this went deeper.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
18
It was almost as if she tasted the lie in his words, and that
was odd indeed.
But if he hadn't come here to find a mate, what had he
come here for? To hunt down his next victim?
She didn't want to believe that—she really didn't. Yet it
was a possibility she had to consider.
"You're spending a lot of money just to satisfy curiosity."
He shrugged again. "If you've got it, why not use it?"
Why not indeed. And did that mean he was so rich that the
price this place charged was little more than petty cash? "If
you were looking, what would your type be?"
His eyes gleamed with amusement. "Someone who could
get me hot enough to come with just a look."
He was teasing, and avoiding the question. Obviously, a
man who didn't want to be pinned down. So how did he
become a member? The bar telepathically screened all
applicants to ensure those applying actually wanted kids. That
they weren't just using the bar as a free sex service. How did
Grey slip through their nets?
"And have you ever found someone like that?"
"Up until now, no."
The heat in his gaze was growing in intensity, sending
burning waves of desire lapping across her skin. She licked
her lips, saw his gaze drop, felt the hunger sizzling the air
leap several more notches. God, she wished she had a drink.
Wished she could just throw caution to the wind.
"So you've never actually dated any of the women here?"
His gaze jumped back to hers, the gray depths suddenly
holding the chill of winter. "No. Why do you ask?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
19
"Just curious. A few of the men I talked to earlier said
they'd tried it, but it hadn't worked out in the end."
"Really?"
He was suspicious. Not that it showed in his voice or his
expression. It was just something she felt.
Why would he be suspicious if he was innocent?
Tension slivered through her. "Yes, really."
He studied her for a second, gaze steely. "You wouldn't
happen to be a security officer testing me out, would you?"
She blinked. "What?"
His grip tightened on her rear, becoming almost painful.
"You heard. Are you, or are you not, security?"
"Not. And why would security be checking you out?"
"Because it's policy to randomly check new applicants to
ensure browsers haven't slipped through the net."
By browsers did he mean those who just wanted an easy
lay rather than commitment? And why would he think the
club did that? She wasn't aware of it, and she'd been briefed
by the manager on not only all the club's rules and regs, but
on the clubs layout and security.
"Well, given that you are browsing, I can see why you'd be
a little worried by the thought of me being security."
His smile was a slow burn of heat, and some of the tension
she'd felt in him eased. But not all. He was still wary, and she
again wondered why.
"A security officer is not someone I'd prefer to meet. Not
until I find what I'm looking for, anyway."
And he was looking, just not for a mate or children, but
something else entirely different. Entirely darker.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
20
A chill ran through her. Why was she getting these little
intuitive flashes? It was not something she'd been prone to in
the past. Not so clearly, anyway.
"I can play a security officer, if you'd like," she said,
keeping her voice light. Teasing. "Want me to haul you away
and interrogate you?"
His head lowered so that his breath caressed her mouth,
and his lips brushed hers as he spoke. "Interrogation was not
what I had in mind."
Her mind was shouting Yes! Yes! even as she asked, "What
did you have in mind, then?"
"This."
His mouth came down on hers. Not gently, not tentatively,
but forcefully. He was a man who knew exactly what he
wanted, exactly what she wanted, and his kiss reflected that.
It was urgent, hungry, his mouth plundering hers as their
tongues tangled, tasted, teased. And while it was everything
she wanted, it also made her want a whole lot more. Made
her want him more.
God, the man could kiss.
After what seemed like hours they came up for air. The
rapid pounding of her heart was a cadence that seemed to
override the babble of voices and the heavy, erotic music that
swirled around them. The scent of desire was so thick, so
strong, that all she could think about was how much she
needed this man to finish what he'd started. Lord, she literally
ached. She needed to touch, and be touched, and she needed
it as badly as she needed air.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
21
It didn't matter that he was a suspect, that he didn't have
a scent, that he'd lied to her more than once, and probably
wasn't who he said he was. Lust was all consuming, and it
was beginning to swamp all common sense.
"I want to fuck you," he said, his breath whispering heat
across her lips. "Right here, right now."
His coarse words made desire boil over. Oh God ... she so
wanted the same. But while desire might be all consuming,
she knew right here and right now wasn't exactly the right
thing to do. "That's against the rules."
"Look around us. Others are doing it."
"Just because others are doing it doesn't make it right. It
could get us thrown out." And in truth, that was the only
thing stopping her. She was here to do a job, and she
couldn't do that job if she was banned.
"I thought you were here to get down and have wild sex?"
Her gaze widened a little. She certainly hadn't said that
out loud—had he read her thoughts? Or merely her body
language? And if he could catch her thoughts, would that
explain his sudden suspicion? Had he realized she was here
for more than what she was saying?
"I am here for wild sex."
"Then what's stopping you?"
"I can't afford to get thrown out. I don't have the money to
reapply somewhere else."
"We won't get thrown out."
"You can't guarantee that."
"Yes, I can."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
22
There was something in his voice that made her want to
believe him. Or was that merely her hormones willing her to
listen to any lie in their quest for satisfaction? "How can you
be so sure? Are you the owner?"
He grinned. "I know the owner. Trust me, she won't throw
us out."
The words were barely out of his mouth when he kissed
her again, and whatever slivers of control she had were
totally and irrevocably smashed by the force of that kiss. By
the desire and passion behind it.
"Let's do it," he said into her mouth, the thick heat of his
erection grinding so sensually against her belly.
"Yes," she said quickly, knowing if she didn't she might
well combust.
She slid her hands to his hips and pulled down his zipper,
freeing him from the constraint of his jeans. He lifted her up
onto him. And then he was in her, filling her, and it felt so
good. So very, very good. She wrapped her legs around his
waist, pushing him deeper still, until it felt as if the long
length of him was going to spear right through her body. His
thick groan of pleasure was a sound she echoed. God, having
a man so deep inside was far better than she remembered.
And definitely far better than the goddamn vibrators she'd
been using as a substitute.
He began to move, thrusting so deliciously deep, and
thought slipped away. All she could do was move with him,
savoring and enjoying the sensations flowing through her. But
slow and sensuous sex was not what she wanted—or
needed—right now. Not after six frustrating months of flying

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
23
solo. She moved against him, taking control of the rhythm,
ramping up the speed. Needing it hard, needing it fast. He
matched her movements, thrusting quicker, deeper, until her
whole body quivered with the force of it, and she was
panting, sweating, aching with the need for completion.
God, the heat of him, the feel of so much hard flesh
pressed against her, inside and out, felt so good, so incredibly
good, that she just didn't want it to stop. But it would stop,
because the low down trembling was growing, fanning
upwards from the hotspot where their bodies met, a wave of
heat that seemed to suck the breath from her lungs. The
sheer intensity of the sensations swamping her had her
grabbing his shoulders, her fingers digging through his
sweater, into his flesh.
"Oh God." Her voice was little more than a fractured
whisper. "Make me come. Please make me..."
The rest of her plea was lost to a kiss that was savage,
urgent, and as glorious as the sex they were sharing. Their
already frantic tempo increased, his penis ramming deep, so
gloriously deep inside, reaching places she'd swear had never
been touched before now. And then suddenly she couldn't
think, couldn't breathe, couldn't do anything except merely
feel as her climax came, sending her spiraling into a place
that was sheer, unadulterated bliss. A second later he went
rigid against her, the force of his release tearing a long, deep
groan from his throat.
It was yet another sound she echoed. She rested her
forehead against his chest, listening to the wild beat of his
heart, knowing her own was just as erratic. And in the ashes

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
24
of that glorious aftermath, she hoped like hell she hadn't just
fucked a murderer.
The stud in her right ear suddenly went hot. Jack, wanting
to talk to her. She sighed, and raised her head.
"Well, that scratched an itch."
He kissed her nose, then released her, holding her arm
until she'd found her land legs again. "Why don't we take this
upstairs and ease a few more?"
The burning in her ear was getting stronger. Jack, getting
impatient. She wrinkled her nose and tried for a teasing
smile. "It's my first night here, you know. I'd like to try a few
offers, rather than settle for the first one."
His smile held a hint of arrogance. "Ah, but when you test
the best first, why try anything else?"
She raised an eyebrow. "But how do I know the first offer
is the best until I try the others?"
"Try them tomorrow night."
"I'll go to the restroom and think about it."
"I'll book a room."
"No guarantee I'll be there." Though she wanted to be. Oh,
how she wanted to be. It just depended on what Jack wanted.
"I'll chance that."
"It's your money." She stepped back, even though it was
the last thing she really wanted to do. As sated as she was,
part of her knew they'd only just scratched the surface when
it came to how good they could be together. "How will I find
you if I decide to take up the offer?"
"The security officer will escort you to my room."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
25
She nodded, but as she turned to go, he tugged her back
towards him and kissed her. It was an affirmation of intent
that left her shaken and stirred.
"No promises," she said, and was a little annoyed to hear
the breathless edge in her voice. Damn it, she was here to do
a job, and however much this man might affect her, she had
to remember he was a suspect. She had to be careful around
him.
A thought that hadn't exactly worried her a few moments
ago. God, what kind of fool was she?
The horny kind, that's what. And after six months in
isolation, her hormones were reasserting control with a
vengeance. But they might just have targeted the wrong
man.
"If you don't find me," he said. "I'll find you."
There was an edge in his voice that sent a tremor across
her skin. But it wasn't caused so much by the passion in his
voice but, rather, the almost calculating glint in his eyes.
This man was definitely after something more than sex.
And if that glint was anything to go by, he suspected that she
was here for something more than what she was saying, too.
Maybe fate could be a bitch after all.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
26
Chapter Two
Eryn fled to the restroom. After checking to ensure no one
was there, she leaned against the vanity and let out a long,
slow breath. Where had men like Grey been hiding all her
life? Suspect or not, the man wasn't only seriously sexy, but
he was seriously dangerous when it came to her blood
pressure. And he certainly knew how to show a woman a
good time—even in a short amount of time.
Which begged the question—why come here for sex?
Surely a man with his prowess and looks only had to crook a
finger and he'd have a dozen eager women panting for his
every attention—imbalance of the sexes or not.
It just didn't make any sense, especially when he'd
admitted he wasn't here to find a partner with whom he could
have children.
Frowning lightly, she did a quick clean up, then twisted the
right ear stud. "What?"
"Having a good time, are we?" Jack's voice was dry.
"The question is, are you?" she retorted.
"Well, actually, the boys and I thought you could be a bit
more vocal. Silent panting just doesn't do the job."
"Tough. I'm not a screamer." Though she had been known
to yodel on occasion. It was an unfortunate side effect of
being a beagle shifter. "And if you called me away to say that,
I'm going to bite you next time I see you."
"I might enjoy it."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
27
"I very much doubt it. Being bitten by a hound dog ain't
quite the same as being bitten by a woman."
"I guess not." Amusement touched his voice. "We did a
search on his name."
"And?"
"Grey Stockard doesn't exist."
Surprise, surprise. "How many aliases can one man have?"
"A few, apparently."
"But he does use Grey on most of them, so maybe that's
his real first name."
"Possibly. But a search on the name Grey revealed
thousands and thousands of them. Apparently, it was one of
the more popular choices thirty to thirty five years ago."
Which was about the age Grey looked—though with
shifters, you never really could be sure, as we tend to age at
a far slower rate than humans. "What about his claim of
knowing the owner?"
"We're checking that right now."
"What about his claim that security cruise through the bar
looking for browsers?"
"The club never mentioned that sort of security
arrangement, but then, they may not have figured it
important."
"Even the smallest tidbit could be important on a case like
this, couldn't it?" Especially if the killer turned out to be one
of the browsing security officers.
"Yes. You got anything for us?"
"Yeah, he has no scent." She closed her eyes, imagining
herself in his arms again, surrounded by his heat, the raw

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
28
sensual smell of him that was not his actual scent, but
delicious all the same. Desire stirred in her veins, a reminder
that she'd only just knocked the edge off need. Complete
satisfaction was a long way off yet. And, unfortunately, she
very much suspected there was only one man who could fill
the demands of her body.
"What do you mean?" Jack asked.
"It's like he's been wiped clean. There's nothing on him."
Nothing to track him by, which might well be the point.
"Is something like that usual?"
"No, it's extremely unusual."
"Meaning he's done it on purpose?"
"Very likely." Though how on earth did you erase a base
scent?
"Then we track him once he comes out of that bar, and see
if we can actually get something on him."
"You'd better use a good tracker. He's a shifter of some
kind and may well sense them."
"So we use a bird shifter."
"It'd be a good idea." At least Grey wouldn't scent a bird.
"Is that all you buzzed for?"
"No. Harrison just walked into the bar. Go suss him out."
"And leave Grey? Won't that make him suspicious?"
"Can't see why. You made it clear you were here to play
the field for a while."
Yeah, but she didn't want to play the field. She only
wanted to play with Grey. Which was a big bad when she
knew absolutely nothing about the man.
"Give me a position on Harrison."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
29
"Table near the corner window."
"I'll go give him a sniff."
"Do that, and report back. We'll see where we go from
there."
She knew where she wanted to go from there. To bed.
With Grey. "Turning you off again."
"Darlin', you could never turn me off."
She grinned. She'd learned very early on that Jack was a
serial flirt. As long as they were female, he didn't seem to
care whether they were young, old, beautiful or plain. He
treated them all to the same level of sexy banter. Why he
was still single she had no idea. The man was definitely a
good catch—though, unfortunately, not her type. If she ever
did settle down, it would be with another shifter, not a
human. She'd seen enough mixed marriages fizzle out to not
want to try one herself.
"Jack, you're incorrigible."
"That's the nicest thing anyone has said to me—does that
mean we can get down and get dirty?"
She laughed. "No, it does not."
"Damn."
"Bye Jack."
She turned off the receive and checked her reflection in
the mirror. The heat in her cheeks had faded a little, but not
the excited gleam in her eyes. She looked like a women on
the hunt, which she supposed she was. Only the object of her
lust was not a man she could see at this particular point in
time.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
30
She sighed, ran her fingers through her short hair to settle
it back into place, then headed out into the main bar area
again, grabbing a drink before moving on in search of her
quarry.
Harrison was one of several men clustered around a petite
blonde. Eryn flared her nostrils, carefully searching the scents
swirling around her, working through the thick maze of
flowers, forest, and fruits, finally catching a brief, tantalizing
taste of the one she was looking for. But the slither was gone
before she could pinpoint a direction. Frowning, she looked
around to ensure no one was watching her, then she slopped
half of her drink on the floor. She took a step, pretended to
slide, and cannoned into Harrison's hard form with a grunt.
There wasn't much fat on the man, that was for sure.
"Hey, careful there, little lady," he said, his hands firm on
her arms as he caught and righted her.
"Sorry," she said, forcing contriteness into her voice. "I slid
on the wet floor."
Keeping one hand on her arm, he frowned down at the
floorboards. "Some idiot must have spilt their drink. We'd
better get someone to clean that before somebody gets hurt."
His voice was rich, and held a twang that reminded her of
the Old West. In his faded denims, blue checked shirt and
brown boots, he certainly fit the image of a cowboy. Only she
had a suspicion the brown mop of hair had never been
restrained by a hat, and that the shiny boots hadn't even
tread across a well kept lawn, let alone the wilds of a cattle
ranch.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
31
He snapped his fingers, calling over a waitress, then his
blue gaze settled on her. As handsome as his rugged features
were, there was damn little in the way of response from her
hormones. Maybe they were still too busy languishing in the
afterglow of her brief time with Grey.
She raised a hand and brushed the droplets of wine from
his shirt. His body was taut under the cotton fabric, his
muscles well defined. "Lucky it's not red."
His grin was decidedly roughish. "It's only an old shirt
anyways." He stuck out a huge hand. "Tate Harrison, at your
service."
"Eryn James." She shook his hand, feeling the calluses
across his palm. He might not be a cowboy, but he definitely
wasn't a paper pusher, either. She lowered her shields a little,
trying to catch his scent without getting too close. The air was
a riot of aromas. They were too close to the blonde and her
entourage for her to pinpoint his scent from everyone else's.
"Listen, why don't we go over to the bar, and I'll buy you a
drink to apologize for spilling mine all over you."
"Apologies aren't necessary, but I'm more than happy to
accompany you to the bar."
He touched a hand to her back and guided her forward. His
fingers were pleasantly warm through the gauzy material of
her dress, but didn't brand her the way Grey's had.
Damn it, why was her mind so fixated on the man?
They found an untaken space down near the end of the
bar, and she ordered herself a wine and him a beer.
He hunkered down a little, his shoulders brushing hers as
he leaned muscular forearms on the mahogany surface and

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
32
wrapped a paw around his drink. "You been coming here
long?"
She met his gaze, seeing the blatant interest there and
half wishing she could respond more than mildly. The man
was first rate in the rugged looks department, and she very
much suspected that if she hadn't met Grey first, her
hormones might have latched onto a man like this.
But then, given the long drought they'd been suffering,
they might have latched onto any man she found even
remotely attractive. "First night."
"Ah. So you're merely testing the waters."
She nodded. "And I have no intention of settling on one
overture until I test all those on offer."
"That goes without saying." He took a drink of beer, then
added, "You looking for anything in particular?"
She couldn't help smiling. "Won't know that until I find it."
"Good. You'd be amazed at how many women come in
here with preconceived ideas about what—who—would make
a suitable mate."
She raised an eyebrow at the edge in his voice. "You sound
more than a little peeved by that."
"Hell, yeah. Preconceived notions cut down the options—
for all of us."
"So you haven't had much luck here yourself?"
He shook his head. "Of course, I'm not here all that
regular. I've spent time with eight or nine ladies, but nothing
has ever eventuated."
"Beyond the realms of the bar, you mean?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
33
He nodded and raised a large hand. "Seems the hands of a
plumber aren't what ladies want these days."
She raised a hand, placing her palm against his. His
fingers dwarfed hers. "Then those ladies are idiots. I can't
imagine the plumbing trade becoming obsolete any time
soon, and you guys are certainly raking it in when it comes to
the money side of things."
He grinned. "Most women don't realize that."
"Maybe you'd better start mentioning it."
"I just might." His fingers enclosed around hers. "Is my
current company at all interested in plumbers?"
"She would be, if she didn't already have an offer on the
table tonight."
"And he let you walk away from him? The man is a fool."
"Well, he did have to arrange a room."
"Little lady, if you'd agreed to be mine for the night,
there'd be no way in hell I'd let you leave my side until I got
you into a room and had my wicked way with you."
She had a vision of his rough hands skimming across her
naked, burning skin, and her pulse leapt. Maybe she wasn't
as immune to this man as she'd thought.
She raised an eyebrow, a grin teasing her lips. "And would
it be wicked?"
His blue gaze practically smoldered. "Wicked and wild.
That's a promise."
She drew his hand close, kissing his fingers, drawing in his
scent as she did so. Beneath the rich aroma of man was the
delicious hint of musk and earthiness. And no hint of the
cloying smell of death.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
34
Not the murderer, then. Which made him safe to play with,
if she chose to do so.
"I might just hold you to that promise."
"Please do."
She untwined her fingers from his and picked up her drink.
"Will you be here tomorrow night?"
"Probably not. But I might be able to make it Monday."
"Then maybe I'll see you then."
He nodded. "If I'm here, and you're here, you can bet your
boots I'll be seeing you."
She grinned and raised her glass. "To the possibility of
Monday night, then."
He clinked his glass against hers. "And to the prospect of
wild and wicked sex."
Oh, yes, please. But the image that darted through her
mind was not that of the man who stood in front of her. She
rose on her toes and kissed his suntanned cheek, drawing in
his scent again just to be sure. Definitely no springtime,
definitely no hint of death, and definitely safe to play with.
But safe wasn't what her hormones wanted, apparently.
Drink in hand, she made her way back to the restroom.
This time it was occupied, so she had to wait several minutes
before it was secure enough to get in contact with Jack.
"It's not Harrison," she said, when she could.
"You sure?"
"Yes. Death is not a smell you can easily hide, and our
murderer was entrenched in it." So entrenched, she
suspected it was the evil in his soul she was sensing more
than his actual scent.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
35
"Which leaves us with Stockard and Gantry. If either of
them aren't the killer, we're in the shit."
"Was this the only bar all five women attended?"
"Afraid so. And the only men all five saw are our three
current suspects."
"Grey said he's only been here for a week."
"Grey lied."
"But why lie over something as simple as that?"
"Darlin, if I knew that, I could probably tell you whether he
was our murderer or not."
She frowned. Somehow, she suspected the reasons for
Grey's lies were a whole lot more complicated than either
Jack or she suspected. "Have you been able to confirm
whether they saw any of these men outside the bar's limits?"
"Afraid not. He's picking loners, and even though three of
the five lived in apartment complexes, none of the neighbors
heard or saw anything."
Nothing unusual in that. The head-down-see-nothing
attitude seemed to have pervaded society ages ago. "And
security cameras?"
"You've read the reports. Most of the complexes were old
and didn't have cameras installed in the foyers."
Which was a required feature in all new apartment
buildings. Even some of the older buildings were installing
them for security purposes—hers had, and she knew many of
her neighbors felt safer for it.
"Has Gantry come into the pub yet?"
"No."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
36
"Then what do you want me to do?" Even as she asked the
question, part of her was willing him to give the right answer.
"You up to spending more time with Grey?"
She was up, down, and sideways for it. Hell, she was
practically combusting at the thought. "You do know I'm a
shifter, right?"
She could almost hear the gears in his mind turning,
wondering where the hell she was leading with a comment
like that. Eventually, he said, voice a little wary, "Yeah. So?"
"So, I haven't had sex in six months."
He burst out laughing. "Damn it, woman, that's an ache I
would willingly have eased."
"Intercourse between departmental employees is not
currently approved."
"Darlin', for you I'd break the rules."
She grinned. "I thought you loved your job."
"I do. But you're not the only one who's suffering a
drought."
"Well, if you stopped listening in on everyone else having
sex and started following up some of the offers you get, you
wouldn't be suffering a drought."
"But that would mean making an effort. I'm not sure I'm
ready for that."
"Then continue to suffer the drought," she said dryly,
"because this shifter isn't offering relief."
"Well, damn."
She smiled. "Where's Grey?"
He paused. "Coming out of room three-o-five and heading
toward the stairs."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
37
"Looking for me."
"Most likely." Jack hesitated. "You really don't have to take
this any further."
"But if I don't, we may never get any leads on this killer."
"Yeah, but still—"
"Jack, I'm safe in the club, and I'm more than capable of
protecting myself outside it. I want this killer stopped as
much as the rest of you."
"But bedding suspects goes way beyond the call of duty."
"Not for a shifter," she said dryly. Hell, a shifter in a
rutting haze would shag anything with two legs and a dick.
Not that she was anywhere near as desperate as that, but
given the way her hormones had latched onto Grey, she'd
been a lot closer to the mark than she'd thought.
"Shifters have a whole different set of morals when it
comes to sex," she continued. Humans might have finally
caught on to the "promiscuity is good" attitude, but shifters
had been there forever. "That's part of the reason I was
picked, wasn't it?"
"Well, that and the fact you resemble the other victims."
"So quit worrying about me, and just start worrying about
where you're going to fire those frustrated little sperms of
yours when you're listening to me having the best sex of my
life."
She cut off the sound of his choked laughter and left the
restroom. Grey was making a beeline across the dance floor,
heading straight towards her.
How had he known she was in the restroom?

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
38
He was still a good ten feet away when the force of him hit
her, sucking away her breath and leaving her gasping. Her
gaze rose to his. The gray depths smoldered with both desire
and annoyance, and his passionate mouth was little more
than a thin line. Trouble, with a capital T, headed her way.
And she couldn't wait for it to explode all over her. Or in
her, as the case may be.
He stopped so close that all she could smell was heat and
lust and man. Her breast brushed against the soft wool of his
sweater, sending little tingles of electricity shooting across
her body. God, she was puddling with desire for the man, and
he hadn't done anything except glare down at her.
What the hell was going on between them? They were
complete and utter strangers who'd shared a brief but
amazing encounter. Yes, some sort of connection was logical,
but this went beyond the usual sexual vibe of shifters. And it
was far stronger than anything she'd felt in her life so far.
"I told you I'd come get you if you didn't follow me."
His voice was a low rumble that echoed across the
recesses of her mind. It was as if she were somehow feeling
his words in her head as well as actually hearing them. She
raised an eyebrow, forcing herself to remain still and calm
when all she wanted to do was throw herself into this man's
arm and beg him to take her.
"And I told you I'd think about it."
"I have a room booked."
"And I have a room full of prospects to explore."
He considered her for a moment, then his gaze slid down
her body, taking in every inch, exploring in a way she wished

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
39
his hands would explore. By the time he'd finished little beads
of sweat dotted her body and her breath was little more than
pants of desire.
The man was definitely dynamite.
"Tell you what," he said, the smile touching his lips both
dangerous and confident. "Give me an hour. If, in that time, I
don't manage to give you the best orgasm of your life, you
walk free."
Walking right now might be a problem, let alone after
she'd spent an hour in his presence. "And if you do manage
such a feat, what happens?"
His slow grin became full-blown and damn near blew all
her circuitry. "Then you're mine for the entire night."
Oh, yes please...
She took a deep breath, trying to get some air into lungs
that felt as if they were burning. "And how are we going to
judge whether you've been successful or not?"
"You're a beagle shifter, aren't you?"
She stared at him for a minute, wondering how he'd
known. While shifters innately recognized others of their kind,
it was unusual to be able to pinpoint the exact breed. "Yes."
"And beagles yodel when they hit the extremes, don't
they?"
Jack was going to have a field day with that bit of news.
Especially if she did yodel. "Yeah, but we don't want to deafen
other patrons." Or turn them off their own activities.
"Our room is shielded against extremes of noise. Shifters
attend these bars as often as humans, and the owners do
cater for the rutting requirements of different breeds."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
40
Something else the manager hadn't thought to mention
when he'd been briefing her. What else had he left out? As
she'd said to Jack, even the tiniest bit of info could lead them
to the killer.
And she really, really, hoped that the killer didn't have
wicked gray eyes and a mind-blowing smile.
"Deal?" he asked softly.
"Deal," she said. And hoped like hell she didn't end up
regretting it.
He placed a hand on her elbow, his touch seeming to scald
her skin as he led her up the stairs and down the long
corridor to one of the end rooms. She glanced up, checking
the position of the security cams, knowing Jack would be
watching through them. She gave him a covert smile and a
wink before Grey guided her inside and locked the door
behind them.
As rooms went, it was pretty basic. The walls were done in
a God-awful red, while the carpet and ceiling were a beige
that might once have been white. The bed was king size and
covered in plain cotton sheets. There was also a sofa, and to
her right, a small bathroom.
"Love the color scheme," she said dryly, raising an
eyebrow as she turned to face him. The lust so evident in his
expression damn near fried her brains. She swallowed heavily
and added, "Was there no other choice?"
"Humans equate red with sexy." He shrugged, his muscles
rippling enticingly under his sweater. "And the choice was
red, black or white."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
41
"Great color range." Her words came breathless again. He
was far too close, and breathing air had become dangerously
scant.
"Well, people don't come here to admire the walls."
She certainly hadn't ... Thought stuttered to a halt as his
hand skimmed her side, then slid up her spine to her dress's
zipper.
"And there's only one thing I came here to admire," he
continued, his voice a low growl that did strange things to her
already erratic pulse rate. "Right now, she's far too covered
for my liking."
He slid down the zipper with agonizing slowness, then
moved his hands back to her shoulders and gently pushed the
straps down her arms. The dress shimmied down her body,
pooling at her feet. She stepped free and kicked it to one
side.
He stood back and his gaze roamed down her once more,
taking in her breasts, her curves, her legs, as slowly and as
devoutly as a connoisseur of the Old Masters might inspect
the Mona Lisa. It was an intimate inspection that made her
burn, until she was more than ready to take or be taken. But
she had a suspicion that this time, hard and fast was not an
option.
Unless she forced the issue, which she was more than a
little inclined to do. While logically she knew it was impossible
for someone to physically explode with lust, that's exactly
what she thought might happen if she didn't get some serious
loving sooner rather than later.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
42
"Glorious," he whispered, his gaze rising to hers again.
"Absolutely glorious."
His words made her heart do strange things. Glorious was
not a word she would have used to describe herself, but she
certainly loved the way the word sounded on his lips. Loved
the way he looked at her as he said it.
Somehow, she found the strength to say, "Equality of the
sexes is law rather than an option these days. I demand
equal ogling time."
He smiled. "I stripped you, so you should return the
favor."
No one this sexy had to suggest that twice. She closed the
brief distance between them and slid her hands under his
sweater. His skin was hot against her palms, his muscles well
defined. The sweater bunched against her forearms as she
reached his chest, then his shoulders, the wool smelling of
masculinity and raw desire. He raised his arms, helping her
only when their height difference meant she couldn't tug the
sweater free. He tossed it into the corner with her dress as
she skimmed her hands back down his chest and washboard
abs. Her fingers hit the button on his jeans, the cool metal a
sharp contrast against the heat of his skin. Her skin.
She raised her gaze to his as she slowly undid the button
and slid down the zipper, watching his pupils expand with
desire, until the black had almost covered the storm clad
gray.
Hooking her thumbs under the elastic of his shorts, she
pushed them and his jeans down his legs with the same sort
of agonizing slowness he'd used when he'd been admiring

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
43
her. Which left her at eye level with his cock. He was thick
and hard, and she couldn't wait to get him inside. To feel that
hardness probing deep.
But there was some tasting to be done first.
After tossing aside his jeans and shorts, she placed
butterfly kisses on both his thighs then ran her tongue across
the base of his penis. He jumped, ever so slightly, and his
soft groan was both a sound of sheer pleasure and an
encouragement to do more.
She smiled and licked her way up and down his shaft,
occasionally taking in his balls, enjoying his groans of
pleasure, the way his cock leapt, as if straining to reach the
warm wetness of her own desire. But she wasn't ready to
offer him that yet, simply because he wasn't yet as ready as
she to explode. So she laved her tongue back up, and swirled
her lips around the tip of him before fully taking him into her
mouth.
He thrust in response, his body shaking with the effort of
restraint as she rolled her tongue around him, alternately
tasting and sucking. His movements were becoming more
urgent, the salty taste of him beginning to seep into her
mouth, telling her he was close to the edge. But she didn't let
him cross it, pulling back instead.
"Tease," he whispered thickly. "Perhaps you need some of
your own medicine."
"What I need is you inside, right now."
She wrapped her arms around his neck and clambered up
his body, positioning herself above him, then driving him

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
44
deep. It felt like she was driving hot iron right through the
very heart of her. Damn, it was so good.
He shuddered, his body responding instinctively, thrusting
hard. Then he growled deep and slid his hands to her waist,
determinedly pulling her off and placing her back on her feet.
He took a deep breath and released it slowly. It whispered
across her cheeks as warmly as sin.
"Hard and fast is not going to make you yodel."
She grasped his cock, sliding her hand up and down,
teasing him, caressing him. Wanting him to ache as fiercely
as she ached. "Right now, I'll settle for simple satisfaction."
He pulled her hand away. "Damn it, woman, I want the
whole night, not an hour. It's yodeling or nothing."
She raised an eyebrow. "You're willing to let me walk out
that door right now? Let me find someone else who'll give me
what I want?"
"No, I am not." He placed several fingers between her
breasts, and gently propelled her backwards. "We had a deal,
and you will hold to your side of it."
The backs of her knees hit the side of the bed. He gave her
a sexy grin and lightly pushed, so that she fell backwards,
then added, "You will yodel before the hour is up."
She arched an eyebrow, a smile teasing her lips. "I don't
yodel for just anyone, you know."
"I'm not just anyone." He reached for the bottle of
massage oil on the bedside table and flipped the top off. The
rich smell of honey and citrus tantalized her senses. "Scoot
up the bed and roll over."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
45
She obeyed, her heart tripping so hard it would surely
jump out of her chest any minute now. Having this man's
hands on her was the closest thing to heaven she could have
imagined. Heaven itself would be having him inside, thrusting
deep and hard, but he seemed determined to draw this out as
long as possible. Which she didn't really mind, despite all her
protests.
"But you are just anyone, because I know nothing about
you."
He knelt at the end of the bed, poured a large dollop of oil
into his hands, and rubbed them together. "There's nothing
much to tell."
Somehow, she very much doubted that. This man had as
many secrets as his gray eyes had shades. "So you have no
existence outside the realm of this club?"
His voice held an odd edge of bitterness. "You could say
that. Close your eyes."
She did. He didn't start with her feet, as she'd half
expected him to, but her upper legs. His big hands pressing
and caressing her thighs, his thumbs scooting along the
inside of her leg, teasing her, driving her insane with desire.
Her sigh was a thick sound of pleasure and frustration
combined.
Yet as much as she'd have loved to simply lay there and
enjoy his touch, she couldn't. She was here to question this
man, and she had to keep trying to do that, even through the
erotic assault on her senses.
"You implied that you're rich. Considering money has
never fallen off trees, you must do something to get it."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
46
"My family was wealthy. I inherited it."
The warm scent of honey and citrus curled through the air,
arousing her senses almost as much as the steady, teasing
closeness of his fingers. But somehow she retained enough
presence of mind to continue the conversation. "So your
parents are dead?"
He nodded, something she oddly felt rather than saw.
"Ages ago."
"In an accident?"
"No, murdered."
His touch lightly skimmed her vagina, teasing her from
behind. She shuddered, and somehow resisted the urge to
press into his fingers, to shift and make them slide deep
inside, to where it ached so very badly. She licked her lips
and, voice croaky with desire, said, "Oh. Sorry."
He didn't reply to that, just began working his way up her
butt and across her back. Part of her mourned the loss of his
touch further down, but his fingers were weaving such a spell
that it felt as if she was walking a tightrope above a whirlpool
of desire. A rope that was threatening to give way at any
moment and plunge her headfirst into those glorious waters.
She wanted to drown in those waters. Just wanted to lay
here and enjoy his touch and his presence. Instead, she
asked, "Then what do you actually do?"
"Nothing terribly important."
She opened an eye and gave him a mock glare. "I'd really
like to know a bit more about the man who intends to make
me yodel."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
47
His soft chuckle shivered across her skin and made her
heart do strange little turns. "Who I am is not important.
What I can do is."
"Maybe to you." She paused, then decided to push him a
little more. Gentle persuasion certainly wasn't getting her
much in the way of information. "You know, I met a rather
sexy plumber on the way to the restroom. In two minutes I
found out more about him than I have with you in an hour.
Maybe I should just leave and seek out a partner more willing
to share."
His grip tightened on her shoulder, his touch almost
bruising. "You are mine."
"I belong to no one but myself."
The sudden edge of anger in her voice was unforced. If
there was one thing guaranteed to raise a shifter's ire, it was
the notion of "ownership." Way back in the past, before
shifters had gained rights in the eyes of the law, they were
considered genetic freaks who were more animal than
human, so humans had been able to own, and generally
abuse, a shifter as they saw fit. Even now, hundreds of years
later, the mere mention of ownership or control was a
guarantee of a firefight. And Grey, being a shifter himself,
should have known better than to use such a word.
"And if I choose to walk out of here," she continued hotly.
"I will do so, and you had better not try to stop me."
He took a deep breath and let it out slowly. His gray eyes
showed a moment of indecision, and perhaps just a little
frustration, then it was gone, lost to the wintry depths.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
48
He raised his hands. "If you want to walk, then do so
now." His voice was flat, yet the air between them fairly
burned with anger. Not hers. His. And it was aimed as much
at himself as her. Odd, to say the least. "Because if you stay,"
he continued, "you will hold to our bargain. And be very
aware of the fact that I intend to make you mine."
As much as she tried to retain her anger at his words, she
couldn't. How could she, when being his for the night equaled
many hours of sensual, erotic delights?
Yet as she continued to stare into the stormy depths of his
eyes, she wasn't at all sure he was talking about just a night.
The shiver that ran across her skin was part anticipation,
part alarm. And totally stupid. After all, hadn't he already
stated he was merely cruising? That he wasn't looking for
anything permanent?
For that matter, neither was she. Obviously, common
sense had flown out the window in the scramble for
satisfaction.
"All I'm asking is a fair exchange of information."
"What I do for a living doesn't affect what we both want—
or what I intend to do to you. Why are you so intent on
delving into my life, when, right now, all that matters is
quenching what lies between us?"
His voice was still flat, but his suspicion wasn't only in his
words but swirling in the heated air between them. He was
far too wary to be an innocent man, and yet, something
within her just couldn't see him as a killer. Not of innocent,
lonely women, anyway.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
49
Or did she simply want to believe that so she could be free
to enjoy his touch without regret, without worry?
"I don't think wanting to know a little more about you is
unreasonable. Even if both of us know nothing will come of
this liaison." She sat up. "This is ridiculous. I don't even know
why I'm here."
He raised an eyebrow at that, an almost condescending
smile touching his luscious lips. "You're here for the same
reason I am. Amazing sex."
True, but he was here for reasons other than sex. Exactly
what those reasons might be was what she had to uncover.
Amazing sex might be a pleasant by-product of her
investigations, but it couldn't be the total sum. Not with this
man. "I'm here to find a man to have kids with. You're merely
playing. Truth is, I'm wasting my time with you."
"Great sex is never a waste of time."
She swung her legs off the bed and walked over to grab
her dress. His expression was amused, as if he didn't really
believe she'd actually walk out the door.
And suddenly she knew that's exactly what she had to do.
The suspicion that stung the air, as well as the way he
reacted to personal questions, suggested he was well aware
that she was here to find out more about him. It didn't matter
why he suspected her, just that he did. And if she wanted to
retrieve the situation, she'd have to walk out. Staying would
only confirm his suspicions—and that could be dangerous.
"Great sex is something I can find anywhere. I'm after a
whole lot more." There was a ring of truth in her words that
surprised even her. "Thanks for reminding me about that."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
50
She grabbed her shoes, then turned her back on him and
walked out.
And tried to ignore the frustrated screaming of her
hormones.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
51
Chapter Three
"Well, this is an unexpected turn of events," Jack said into
her ear. "Me and the boys were set for a night of blissful sighs
and ear-shattering yodels."
"So was I," Eryn said dryly. She pulled herself onto the
vanity and leaned back against the mirror. The glass was cool
against her spine, and the water she'd splashed her face with
earlier dripped from her chin to her chest. Neither one did
anything to ease the overheated condition of her skin. "But
he's suspicious, and I really had no other option."
"An innocent man had no reason to be suspicious over
anything you said."
"I don't think he's the killer."
"Is that intuition or frustration speaking?"
"Both, if I'm at all honest."
"If there's one thing you've been, it's bluntly honest."
Amusement touched Jack's deep voice. "And I have to say,
it's shocked some of the boys here."
"They need to stop huddling in that van with you and get
out in the real world more."
"I keep telling them that, but I think they're enjoying the
voyeurism aspects of our job."
"Well, I guess it's cheaper than renting pornos. Where's
Grey?"
"Still in the room."
"He's waiting for me to come back." She said it as a
statement rather than a question, simply because she sensed

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
52
it was true. Though why he was so confident she would come
back was beyond her. They might share a connection that
went deeper than the usual sexual link of shifters, but they
were still strangers.
"Looks like it," Jack agreed.
"You uncovered any more facts about him yet?"
"We're checking files for unsolved murder cases."
"He didn't say it was unsolved," she interrupted.
"No, but I'm guessing from his tone it was. And given what
he said about money, it'll probably be a high society murder,
which at least narrows the search field."
"Anything else?"
"No. The man's identity has been wiped clean."
Just like his scent. It had to be deliberate. "There's been
no information or help forthcoming from military, FBI or CIA?"
"'They're looking into it' is the latest response. I'm not
holding out hope that they'll be much help."
"So you don't think Grey's one of their men?"
"No. But he's somebody's."
She hoped that "somebody" was on the side of good.
Hoped Grey was. She had a feeling he'd be a dangerous man
to be on the wrong side of.
"So, what do I do now? Leave?"
"I don't think that's an option, given what you told Grey."
She grinned. "Meaning I have permission to go forth and
fornicate?"
"You have official approval to do what you have to do to
maintain cover."
"Hot damn."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
53
Jack laughed. "Who said undercover work wasn't fun?"
"Not me." She hesitated. "What about Gantry and
Harrison?"
"Gantry's still a no show. Harrison's talking to a pretty
brunette." He stopped. "Grey's on the move."
"Where?"
"Heading down the stairs."
Her pulse raced with excitement. "Towards the restroom?"
"No."
Damn, she thought, disappointed.
Jack continued, "He's headed towards the back booths.
Seems to be angling toward Harrison."
"What?" Had Grey known Harrison was the man she'd been
talking about? If so, how? And what the hell did he intend to
do? Warn Harrison off?
"He's just brushed by Harrison and is moving on to the
men's room."
Coincidence? Something within her suspected not.
Suspected Grey's brief encounter with Harrison had been
intentional. Though she had no idea what it meant.
"And Harrison?"
"Still talking to the brunette." He hesitated. "Hang on, he
just headed to the restroom."
"You got camera's or listening devices in there?"
"No."
"That's a bit slack."
"People pissing, farting and shitting is not something we
need to hear or see. Especially when those people are men."
"Meaning you have devices in the women's room?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
54
"Well, no. Not for lack of trying, though."
"You're sick, you know that?"
"I try my damnedest."
She grinned. "You think Grey and Harrison know each
other?"
"Until we know more about Grey, we won't know."
"But Harrison is who he says he is?"
"Yep."
"You going to have security check out the men's?"
"Who's the cop here?"
"That a trick question?"
He chuckled softly. "You sure you're happy where you are?
I'd love to have you on my team."
"Being cooped up in a van with sex-starved men is not my
idea of fun."
"We could make it fun." He paused. "Security's just gone
in."
Footsteps approached the restroom door. She turned on
the tap and scooped up some water. "I'm about to get
visitors," she informed Jack. "I'll let you know when it's safe
to talk."
Three women pushed through the door, all noise and
energy. Eryn splashed the water over herself, closing her
eyes and ignoring the three of them as they visited the
toilets, washed their hands, and redid their makeup. They
were there for a good ten minutes, laughing and chatting like
giddy teenagers, though at least one of them was close to
forty.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
55
Eryn blew out a relieved breath when they finally left.
"Talk to me, Jack."
"Harrison's just come out of the men's room, and Grey's
still in there."
"And the security officer?"
"Reports that Grey was chatting on the phone when he
walked in, and Harrison was in one of the stalls. Neither man
said anything to the other."
"Did security stay in there until Harrison walked out?"
"No. But Harrison came out a few minutes after the
security guy. Looks like it was nothing more than a
coincidence."
Somehow, she wasn't buying that. "I might go chat some
more with Harrison. Where is he now?"
"Up at the bar, getting a drink."
"And the brunette he was chatting up?"
"On the dance floor with another man."
"Good. I might do some more probing, see if he can
remember anything about the five victims."
"Just be careful."'
"Subtle is my middle name."
"Somehow, I doubt that."
She grinned. "So I'll drag him to bed and question him
during sex. It's amazing how often truth comes out when the
little head is in control."
"I'm not going to dignify that comment with an answer."
"Coward."
"Totally."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
56
She turned off the receiver again and headed out. Pausing
just outside the door, she let her gaze roam across the
crowded room as she carefully took in the scents.
And just when she least expected it, she caught a wisp of
the one she was looking for.
Her heart leapt, then zoomed into high gear. She raised
her nose, sniffing lightly as she followed the faint aroma to
the right. It led her to the back booths, then drifted away,
lost to the unsubtle aromas of flowery perfumes and sweaty
sex.
She frowned, glancing around. Two couples inhabited the
closest booths, both of them getting down and dirty. The end
booth was inhabited by two dark-haired women chatting
animatedly.
Grey had been sitting in the end booth earlier this evening.
Coincidence? Maybe not. Yet if he was the killer, why couldn't
she smell that smell on him?
She opened her senses a little more, but the aromas lining
the air were too thick and too layered, threatening sensory
overload again. There was no way on Earth she was going to
be able to pick out one faint scent in a room as confined as
this, no matter how good her nose.
Still, she walked past each of the booths, acting as if she
was searching for someone as she carefully tasted the air.
And caught the faintest trace of that scent again. She
stopped, frowning. It seemed to be coming from the booth
with the two women in it. Maybe one of those two had met
the murderer sometime during the night.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
57
If that was the case, she'd have to tell Jack. They needed
a watch put on both women.
At least her catching the scent meant they were on the
right track. The killer had been here sometime in the last few
hours—maybe he was still here, somewhere. Given Gantry's
nonappearance, that would surely mean he was off the
suspect list, right alongside Harrison. Grey was the only one
left of the three suspects that she couldn't definitely say yay
or nay to.
And if he wasn't the killer, who was? Was it someone all
five women had rejected? Surely the police had considered
that possibility—though undoubtedly, it would be nigh on
impossible to check every single man the five women had
mated with at this place. As Jack had pointed out, the
security cameras didn't cover all areas. There were lots of
nooks and crannies where some loving could be had without
the camera catching on.
Which left her with Grey and Harrison. And given Grey's
reluctance to answer questions, the only man she could
interrogate was Harrison. Though she may have wiped him off
the suspect list, maybe he could tell them something that
might give them a clue as to who the real killer was.
A long shot, but longs shots were all they really had at this
point.
She turned and found her gaze meeting Harrison's. He was
still at the bar, but he was looking over his shoulder, and
there was something in his gaze that suggested he knew
exactly where to find her no matter where she was.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
58
A chill ran up her spine, though she wasn't exactly sure
why.
With him watching her so closely, she could hardly
disappear into the restroom and ask Jack to keep an eye on
the women. Especially since Harrison may have been
watching when she'd walked out of the restroom. She may
have wiped him off the suspect list, but that didn't mean she
was right.
She walked up to him, sliding her hand around his waist as
she stopped beside him. The heat of him hit like a club,
almost making her gasp. Lord, it was like walking into a
furnace of desire.
And that made her frown. Something was very off kilter.
He hadn't effected her so strongly before, so why was he
doing so now? Or was it merely the fact that the need for
satisfaction was growing in intensity, and her hormones were
becoming less fussy about where they got it?
She swallowed, then said, in a voice that was a little too
husky for her liking, "Care to by a girl a drink?"
His blue eyes met hers. The blatant interest she'd seen
earlier was now a bonfire. His lust lashed her skin, making
her pulse skip, and race. This man was primed and ready to
go—it was just a matter of deciding if she really wanted to go
that far.
Though if the desire stirring between them was anything to
go by, her hormones had already decided in the affirmative.
"Darlin, you can have anything you want—just as soon as I
manage to catch the attention of one of these lovely ladies."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
59
"Easily fixed." Eryn raised two fingers to her lips and gave
a shrill whistle. People jumped and stared, but the whistle
succeeded in getting them a barperson.
"That's a real handy trick." The amusement crinkling the
corners of his blue eyes sent another rush of desire shooting
through her veins. "You'll have to teach me."
"It's easy," she teased. "You just put your lips together
and blow."
"Keep talking sexy like that and I'm all yours."
She grinned. "Are cowboys really that easy?"
"When you've been on the range with nothing but a horse
between your legs and cattle all around you," he drawled,
"most definitely."
She laughed. "And has this particular cowboy ever been
near a horse or cattle?"
"Only the mechanical kind in country bars."
"Honesty. I like that."
He slid her glass of wine across to her. Their fingers
brushed, and electricity skittered across her skin, reigniting
the deep-down ache. Damn, what was going on here? Why
was she reacting to this man so strongly, when before her
reaction was, at best, lukewarm?
He wrapped a hand around his frosty beer. "How come
you're down here again? I thought you'd been grabbed for the
night."
She shrugged. "Turns out I made the wrong choice."
He raised an eyebrow. "How's that?"
"He wasn't after what I'm after."
"And you know this because...?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
60
She forced a smile. "Because he let me go."
"A fool indeed." He gave her a look that held enough heat
to smoke her insides. "Be assured I will not make the same
mistake."
She raised an eyebrow. "Presuming the offer comes to the
table."
He hesitated. "Of course."
"And the offer very much depends on how you feel about
questions."
"Darlin', with the prospect of wild sex in the offering, you
can ask me any damn thing you like."
She leaned a hip against the bar, taking a sip of wine
before saying, "You said you've spent time with eight or nine
women so far—what went wrong?"
He shrugged. "Everything."
His voice was a little vague, and she frowned. "In what
way?"
He hesitated, eyes a little distant, as if he was fighting to
find the memories. "Four of them were bi. They weren't
looking for anything long term, just a sperm donor."
"Then why did they come here? There're sperm banks all
over the place."
"Maybe they wanted a particular look, and that can't be
guaranteed at sperm banks." He shrugged again. "Let's not
dwell on the past. Let's talk about the future." He half turned,
facing her. "Or at least the next few hours."
She raised an eyebrow. "Presuming again that I have a
few hours to spare."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
61
"Even the busiest person can make a little time for wild
and wicked sex, can't they?"
"Maybe." She sipped her drink, but it did little to ease the
aching dryness in her throat. Oh, how she wanted to give in
to the desire throbbing through her veins. But as much as her
hormones might protest, she was here to do a job. Right now,
that job was questioning this man, not shagging him.
"What about the other five tryouts?"
He glanced at his drink, but not before she'd caught the
irritated flash in his eyes. "I told you before. The hands of a
plumber weren't what they were after."
"There has to be more to it than that."
He looked at her again, but the blue of his eyes was once
again distant and, just for a moment, reminded her oddly of
Grey. "Why? Women have all the power these days when it
comes to relationships, and believe me, they're using it."
She raised an eyebrow. "And you don't like the change?
You'd prefer that men once again did all the running in
relationships?"
"I believe in equality—in all areas."
"Including the bedroom?" She'd met lots of men over the
years who'd spouted similar beliefs, but most seemed to get a
little ticked off when a woman tried to take control and set
the pace. Promiscuity might be required, and women might
be able to pick and choose as they pleased, but most men
still liked to call the shots when it came to sex.
His brief glance was filled with enough heat to singe her
toes. "Particularly in the bedroom."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
62
"Meaning if we went upstairs now, you'd let me take
control and do whatever I want to you?"
His gaze met and held hers, and suddenly she couldn't
breathe, couldn't think. Could only stare deep into his eyes,
until they seemed to surround her, fill her. The world was
nothing more than a bluish-gray sea that pounded her skin,
and her mind was aflame with the heated wash of his desire.
"Only if you let me do whatever I want to you in return."
His words were so softly spoken they seemed nothing more
than a lush wind that whispered through her mind.
First it was Grey blowing her sockets, now it was Harrison.
Maybe she'd been a whole lot closer to the "shag anything"
edge than she'd thought. She blew out a breath, and
scrambled to hang onto the last remaining scraps of
resistance. "Did you date any of the last five women outside
of the bar?"
He reached out, running a finger down her cheek. His eyes
were distant, distracted, his touch a sear of lightning against
her skin. "No."
"Why not? Did they find someone better?"
"Yes."
Her gaze was still caught in his, and it was getting harder
and harder to reach for questions through the lust fogging her
brain. She forced a teasing grin and said, "Perhaps you'd
better tell me their names, just so I can understand why
those women passed up such a fine option."
He grinned. "I'd be a fool if I did."
She raised an eyebrow. "Scared of the competition,
cowboy?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
63
"Right now? No."
His finger had reached her lips and was outlining them.
She licked her lips, licked his finger. His skin was cool against
her tongue, and tasted faintly of beer and salt. "Then prove
it."
His finger paused, his touch branding her lips. "Why is this
even important?"
"Because I prefer men not afraid of a challenge." She
wrapped her lips around his finger, sucking on it lightly.
The scent of lust sharpened dramatically, drowning her in
its heat. "Their names were Gantry and Steepan."
The air around them trembled, as if the flames beginning
to consume the two of them were sucking in all available
oxygen. It was certainly harder to breathe. To think.
But she had to think. Had to, because he'd just given them
something. "And are they here tonight?"
"Gantry's not."
"And Steepan?"
He blinked, and awareness returned to his eyes. He
continued to stare at her for a moment, and she'd swear she
saw both surprise and anger in his eyes. But once again, that
anger wasn't aimed at her, but at himself.
She frowned at the thought. It had been Grey who'd been
angry earlier, not Harrison.
"I don't know if Steepan is here or not." He turned away,
and picked up his drink.
His lie vibrated through her. He not only knew whether or
not Steepan was here, but he actually knew him. Not as a

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
64
friend, but as a ... She hesitated, searching for the right
word. A colleague. A partner.
And she also knew he wasn't about to tell her more right
here and now. Whatever it was that had allowed the slip was
now securely locked away.
"Then what do you know?"
The sexy smile that suddenly tugged his lips made her
heart do a strange little dance. But it wasn't the smile itself,
but rather its odd similarity to Grey's smile.
"I know I want to fuck you something fierce."
His words vibrated through her, making the already fierce
ache fiercer. "Even with me in full control?"
"Yes."
"Then let's do it." The words were out before she could
stop them. But she couldn't regret them, not when the fever
of wanting burned through every part of her. Besides, as
she'd said to Jack earlier—the best time to question a man
was during the haze of sex.
If she could remember the questions.
Something close to triumph blazed in his eyes, then he
grabbed her hand, his fingers long, strong and hot as they
pressed firmly against hers. He tugged her towards the stairs,
not saying a word and not letting her go as he led her up to
the second floor, and arranged a room.
Once they were inside the white bedroom, she pulled her
hand from his and said, "Strip."
He didn't argue, just silently undressed and tossed his
clothes onto the sofa. Then he crossed his arms, watching her
as intently as she watched him. A smile tugged her lips. She

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
65
had a feeling he was ready to stand there all night if that's
what it took to convince her he believed in equality in the
bedroom. Only equality wasn't the true issue here—it was
whether he was willing to allow her to take complete control.
She finally allowed her gaze to slide past his face,
discovering what she'd instinctively known—that he worthy of
a long inspection. Broad shoulders, great arms, powerful
chest, slim hips and long, strong legs. And most importantly,
impressive packaging. Not the biggest she'd ever seen, but
still damn fine. And certainly on a par with Grey.
Her gaze rose to his again. Amusement touched the blue
depths, as if he was in on some joke he wasn't about to
share.
"Lay down on the bed," she said.
He turned on his heels and walked across the room. She
admired his butt as she followed him, then began opening the
drawers beside the bed as he lay down. In the second one
down, she found what she was looking for—silken rope.
His gaze flickered to the rope and back again. "Remember,
what you do to me, I get to do to you."
And didn't that thought make her pulse zoom. "The object
of this exercise is to discover whether or not you spoke
truthfully. Raise your arms above your head."
He did, crossing them at the wrists. "And how is tying my
hands going to achieve that?"
She grinned as she roped his hands to the headboards. "It
will test your willingness to let a woman be in as complete
control as most men like to be."
"I'm not most men."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
66
Grey had basically said the same thing. Was it a phrase
they taught in some secret man school or what?
"We shall see." She grabbed two more ropes and tied his
feet spread-eagled to the end bedposts. Then she met his
gaze across the long hard length of his body.
"Ready?"
A smile tugged one corner of his sensual lips. "I think you
can see that I am."
She could. And he was indeed ready—thick, and hard, and
pulsing with heat. Suddenly thankful she wasn't wearing any
panties, she climbed onto the bed and straddled him,
pressing herself against the heat of him, sliding him back and
forth through her slickness. He began to move with her, and
she stopped.
"Don't," she said softly, "move. Just stay still. This one is
for me, and me alone."
He didn't say anything, just watched her, an intentness in
his gaze that sent a delicious thrill down her spine. She
continued to hold his gaze and began to slide up and down his
shaft again, watching his pupils dilate with desire and lust,
until the blue was almost gone and all that was left was black
ringed by silver. Which was odd when his eyes were blue.
But she really wasn't worried by oddities right now, but
rather how damn fine everything was feeling. She closed her
eyes, concentrating on sensation, concentrating on sliding
him back and forth, teasingly touching all the right places, but
never for long enough. Pleasure spiraled, and her breath
caught, then quickened. She hadn't intended to fly solo all the
way, but right now, she just couldn't stop. It felt too good. He

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
67
felt too good, just sliding back and forth, back and forth. A
shudder ran through her, and she rubbed against him harder
as the sweet pressure began to build low in her stomach and
flutter upwards.
"Look at me," he demanded, voice harsh, raw.
She opened her eyes. His gaze consumed her, burned her.
The scent of his need swam around her, flaying her skin,
flaying her senses, until all she could feel, all she could smell,
was his desire. His body quivered beneath her, as if
demanding she unleash him, take him. She didn't, losing
herself instead to the rapture and power of denying him
pleasure, denying them both that moment of complete
oneness while at the same time satisfying her own needs.
And even though his frustration lashed at her, there was also
something fierce in his eyes, as if what she was doing was
exactly what he wanted her to do. And that, somehow, he
was deriving almost as much pleasure by watching her take
what she needed as he would have if he were inside her.
The thought became lost as the waves of pleasure rose
and rose, until they were a molten force that would not be
denied.
Yet even as her orgasm ripped through her, some small
part of her half-wished it was Grey she rode, that it was Grey
whom she would soon allow to pleasure her anyway he damn
well pleased.
Trust her to be landed with hormones that could never be
happy with what they had.
When the trembling eased, she took a deep breath and let
it out slowly. Sweat glimmered across the warm gold of his

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
68
skin, and his body trembled beneath her. His gaze was fierce,
hungry. Demanding. A tremor that was all anticipation ran
through her. What was still to come would be good. Real
good.
"Satisfied?" His voice was a growl that rumbled right
through her.
She allowed a small smile to touch her lips. "If you mean
am I satisfied that you're willing to let a woman take
complete control in the bedroom, then yes, most definitely.
"Good." He tugged on the rope, freeing his hands. "Your
turn."
Another tremor of excitement ran through her. The edge in
his voice, the heat in his eyes, suggested that her turn would
be a long, drawn out seduction, despite the fact that he was
quivering with need.
And women had turned away from this man? What kind of
fools were they?
She silently offered him her hands. He looped the silken
rope around her wrists, then undid the rope around his ankles
and shifted so she could lie down.
"On your stomach," he said, voice still rough.
She obeyed, and he straddled her, the heat of him
brushing her skin as he leaned forward and loosely looped the
rope around the middle post of the headboard.
Then he said, his words little more than a whisper of
warmth past her ear, "You will beg me to give you what you
denied me."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
69
"I don't beg for anyone," she replied, knowing even as she
said it that in her present state, begging was high on the
agenda if she didn't get what her body demanded.
"We'll see." His voice held a confidence that made her
quiver deep inside. And that quiver had absolutely nothing to
do with fear.
She closed her eyes, waiting for his touch. A top popped,
and the warm aroma of citrus and sunshine stung the air. She
cracked open an eye. What were the odds of two men
wanting to do the exact same thing to her?
Then his oiled hands slid over her back, and the question
was rolled away by pleasure. She closed her eyes again, all
but purring as his fingers worked magic up her back and
across her shoulders. By the time he'd finished she wanted
him badly, and she couldn't help groaning in frustration when
he climbed off.
"And what was wrong with finishing as we were?"
"The fact that you're not ready to beg me for it yet." He
slapped her butt lightly. Even the sting of his hand on her
flesh had excitement flushing through her body. "Turn
around."
She did. He moved down to her feet, tying them spread-
eagled, then started the whole massaging process all over
again. It was a sensual and erotic experience that had her
panting with need and aching like crazy. But still she wasn't
ready to beg, and the dangerous glint in his eyes suggested
he had no intention of moving on until she did. Part of her did
want to give him that, to just beg so she could feel the thick
heat of him inside. She needed that, needed him thrusting

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
70
deep, so very, very deep ... and yet, there was also
something undeniably exquisite in the torture of waiting. In
letting the moment, the tension, and the desire build, until
there was nothing between them but urgency and need. She
might not be far from that point, but she hadn't reached it
yet. And obviously, neither had he.
He reached across her and placed the oil back on the
bedside table. "Beg for me," he said softly, his words warm
whispers across her lips.
"No," she whispered back, then kissed him.
There was nothing soft, nothing sweet, about this kiss, and
yet it was incredibly passionate. It was the kiss of lovers, not
two strangers making love.
And then he was inside, driving deep, and she was arching
up to meet him, wanting everything he could give, as hard
and as fast as he could give it.
Only he didn't give her anything else, just pulled out of
her, leaving her empty and aching. His teeth nipped her
bottom lip lightly when she opened her mouth to protest.
"Beg for me," he whispered again.
"No," she panted, squirming beneath him, trying to
recapture his cock and drive him home again.
Only she didn't need to. The words were barely out of her
mouth when he was ramming hard inside her again. This
time, he stroked several times before withdrawing. The man
obviously had amazing control.
"Give me what I want," he said, his gaze holding hers,
fiercely determined.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
71
"No," she said, wondering why she felt it was so important
that she kept resisting. Damn it, she wanted to be fucked
hard, he wanted to oblige, and all she had to do was open her
mouth and say please.
But something deep inside had decided resistance was
important.
He shifted, moving to one side, then slid his hand down
her body and into her slickness. She shuddered, enjoying his
caress, the press of fingers against her heated, aching flesh.
Enjoying the feel of them sliding in and out, in and out, as his
thumb flicked teasingly across her clit. Teasing her, making
her ache, making her tremble and moan. And stopping each
and every time she came close to orgasm.
He didn't ask her again, but in the end, she had no choice
but to give him what he wanted. Not when her body was
screaming for completion.
"Please," she panted, "I need you ... want you ... inside."
He slid over the top of her, his grin wicked. Victorious. "Are
you begging me, Eryn?"
"Yes." God, yes. "Just do it."
With one swift, hard stroke, he was inside, and it felt so
good she could only groan. Then he began to move, thrusting
deep and strong, and it was fierce, and passionate, and so
damn good she wanted to scream.
And though she could barely even breathe let alone
scream, she knew this was what had been missing in her love
life up to now—a sense of connection that almost seemed
spiritual. She could feel him, not just inside her body, but on
the outskirts of her thoughts. As if the linking of flesh had

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
72
somehow linked their minds. Emotions swirled between
them—a kaleidoscope of color that was passion and warmth,
even caring, though she couldn't say how that was possible
when they didn't even know each other.
Yet she knew she only had to open up and that
kaleidoscope would completely fill her, mind, body and soul,
making them one in a way mere sex never could.
She didn't reach out. Didn't dare.
Thought slithered away as the pressure began to build. It
spiraled upwards, rapidly gaining momentum, until she
couldn't breathe, couldn't think, could only wait for the
inevitable peak. A peak she leapt over with abandon, twisting
and shaking and moaning. He came with her, his roar echoing
in her ears as his body slammed into hers and his release
flooded so very deep.
When the tremors finally eased, he laughed softly and
rested his forehead against hers. "Well, I'm damn glad you
finally gave in."
She grinned. "Yeah, so am I."
He dropped a kiss on her forehead and drew back a little.
"No yodeling though, which is somewhat disappointing."
She frowned. She'd said that to Grey, not Harrison, so why
would he make a comment like that? Or was it simply a
matter of him somehow realizing she was a beagle shifter?
"I'm not the type of girl who yodels for just anyone, you
know."
"I'm not just anyone," he said, a touch of male arrogance
in his tone. "Perhaps we need a replay."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
73
She shifted her hips, moving against him. Despite the fact
that they'd only just finished making love, he was still quite
firm inside her. It wouldn't take much to get him going—just
as it wouldn't take much to get her going.
"If the replay is slower, I'm all for it."
He gave her a wicked grin. "If slow is what the lady wants,
slow is what the lady gets." He reared back, undid the ties
around her legs, then reached forward, undoing the knots
around her hands. Then he drew her up onto her knees, and
wrapped his arms around her waist. His eyes were more gray
than blue, and held an intentness that made her soul shiver.
"This time I intend to make you yodel so loud the whole bar
will know your pleasure."
Her pulse zoomed at the thought, and she grinned as she
wrapped her arms loosely around his neck. "You can try."
He certainly did try.
And he damn well succeeded.
* * * *
Movement woke Eryn many hours later. She cracked open
an eye, watching him pad across the room and gather his
clothes.
"Where are you going?" she asked softly, a little surprised
he'd leave before their time in the room was up.
He barely even glanced at her as he pulled on his jeans.
"Work."
She looked at the clock on the bedside table, and frowned.
"It's three in the morning and still dark outside."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
74
He hesitated. "Yeah, but there's stuff I have to do before I
actually go to work."
He was lying. And the mere fact that she sensed this made
her frown. Damn it, Harrison was human, not shifter, and
they shouldn't have that sort of connection. If he was a
shifter, then okay, maybe, as it was a well known fact that
shifter pairings often connected on many different levels. But
she'd never heard of a human-shifter pairing sharing anything
more than great sex.
And while humans were more than capable of psychic
abilities, it wasn't telepathy or empathy happening between
them. It was something stranger—something deeper.
She sat up, drawing her knees to her chest and hugging
them. "What are you working on at the moment?"
He hesitated, and once again that odd, distant look crept
into his eyes. "Reinstalling pipes in Tennamar."
Tennamar was one of the old estates built on the fringes of
the city, and a good hour's drive away. So, it was logical he'd
leave early, considering he had to go home and get all his
gear—so why didn't she believe that was the reason he was
leaving? Why did she believe his reasons for going were a
whole lot darker—and more deadly?
"Will you be here tomorrow night?"
Something flashed in his eyes. Regret. Exasperation.
Neither of which made any sense. "Yes."
Yet he'd said earlier tonight he wouldn't be back until
Monday. That had been the truth. This wasn't. "Then maybe
I'll see you here."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
75
"Yes." He strode across the room and leaned down to kiss
her. It wasn't the good-bye kiss she'd been expecting, but
rather a promise of things to come. He raised a hand, his
fingers lightly brushing her cheek, his gaze intent, as if
memorizing every curve, every flaw, in her face. "Till next we
meet."
He spun before she could speak and walked to the door,
his movements grace itself.
She blinked, for the first time realizing what she was
seeing.
It wasn't the walk of a plumber with a hankering to be a
cowboy.
It was the walk of a man who moved with the grace of a
vampire and the power of a shifter.
Grey, not Harrison.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
76
Chapter Four
Eryn blinked again, wondering if her imagination was
playing tricks.
It wasn't.
That was definitely Grey's walk. And, suddenly, all the
other little niggles came flooding back. The ever-changing
color of his eyes. The way her hormones had latched onto him
after meeting him at the bar the second time. The sudden
lack of any scent besides masculinity. The deep connection
between them.
She wasn't crazy.
It was Grey.
He was shifter all right—just not the type she'd presumed.
He was a far rarer kind—a face shifter. A man who could
assume the identity of any man he touched.
That's why he'd brushed past Harrison. He'd wanted to
assume his identity. Which meant Harrison was probably still
in the men's room.
She waited until Grey had left the room, then scrambled
out of bed to grab her clothes. The footsteps leading away
from the room told her Grey was out of earshot.
"Jack, you awake?"
"Like I have any other choice with all the noise you've
been making."
"Get security into the men's right now. Before Harrison
gets there."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
77
She heard the snap of fingers, then the scramble of
movement in the background as Jack said, "Why?"
She grabbed her dress and pulled it on, then hunted
around for her shoes. "Because the man I've been with the
last few hours wasn't Harrison, but Grey. I'm betting the real
Harrison is still in the restroom."
"I think all that sex has blown your circuits."
She grabbed her shoes, dangling them from her fingers as
she made her way towards the door. "You ever heard of face
shifters?"
"No."
"They're an extremely rare form of shifter who can assume
the shape of anyone they touch."
"So why call them face shifters?"
"Because it's their face and hair that changes the most.
Generally, the body just shifts its mass around a little, but
doesn't actually change shape." Which explained the
amusement in the fake Harrison's eyes when he'd first
stripped. She should have recognized his body—or, at the
very least, his penis and balls, because she'd certainly spent
enough time licking her way around both.
Still, who'd have expected Grey to be a face shifter? And
that he'd usurp Harrison's position in her bed?
Damn it, why do that? Why bother?
"You think he took Harrison's place to check you out?" Jack
asked.
She stopped at the door and peered around. Grey was
nowhere in sight. "I really don't know what's going on. You
checking out that name he gave us?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
78
"Steepan? Sure am. So far, it's proving to be another dead
end frighteningly similar to Grey."
She padded barefoot down the carpeted hall. "Meaning
they might just work together?"
"Could be." Jack hesitated. "Security's just contacted us.
Seems you were right. The real Harrison is half undressed,
hog-tied and unconscious in one of the stalls."
"Where's Grey then?" She stopped at the top of the stairs,
but the right-angle bends prevented her from seeing the
entire bar.
"Just did an about face and is heading for the front door."
Meaning he must have seen security going in and guessed
his cover might be blown. "You going to arrest him?"
"If we arrest him for mugging Harrison, we may never get
to the bottom of this murder case."
So Jack—or at least the department—still thought Grey
was the probable killer. "Have you got someone ready to
follow him?"
"The eye is in the air as we speak. Come back to the van,
Eryn."
She bit her lip, wanting to follow Grey, yet knowing it
wasn't her job. And even though her alternate form was made
for hunting, she had to have a scent to follow. Grey was
nothing more than a tantalizing hint of masculinity—nice, but
difficult to follow on a clear night, let alone a rain soaked one.
"Okay," she said. "Be there in five."
She slipped on her shoes and headed down the stairs. Her
gaze automatically went to the door, and at that moment,
Grey, still wearing Harrison's form, looked over his shoulder.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
79
Even across the distance of the pub, his gaze had the power
to rock her. He half raised a hand, as if in good-bye, then
seemed to regret the gesture. He cut the movement off
abruptly and walked out into the night.
She blew out a breath she hadn't realized she'd been
holding, then made her way across the room to collect her
coat.
The rain hadn't eased, nor had the wind. Holding the
flyaway ends of her coat together, she splashed her way
towards the van, cursing and shivering as the fat drops of
water slithered past the collar and down her neck.
The van door was flung open as she approached, spilling
warm light into the gloom. She stepped into the van and
squeezed past Henry's rotund figure, hitting the warm,
crowded interior with a sigh of relief.
She shucked off the dripping coat, hanging it on a hook
near the door, then squeezed past Bob, Jack's other assistant.
He didn't even look at her, his gaze glued to the bank of com-
screens in front of him, watching the man who walked with a
predator's ease.
"What's he doing?" she asked, plunking onto a chair and
scooting it towards Jack.
He glanced at her, a sexy smile touching his lips. "He's
walking far too well for a man who's just had several hours of
amazing sex."
She raised an eyebrow. "If several hours are all it takes to
make you legless, you seriously have to get out of this van
and start working on your sexual fitness."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
80
"Ain't that a fact." He glanced back at the com-screen.
"He's heading down seventh."
"No detours? No car?"
"Not so far."
She raised her gaze to the image on the screen. "He
knows he's being watched."
Jack frowned. "How? We're using a hawk shifter. In this
weather, he shouldn't be able to see him, let alone scent
him."
"Grey's not that kind a shifter."
"Then how could he know he's being followed?"
"I don't know." She raised a hand, tapping the screen with
a finger. "But if he didn't know, why hasn't he changed back
to his true form?"
"Maybe he can't. Don't some shifters have time
restrictions?"
"Only because the sheer mass of their alternate shapes
can overtax their hearts. Elephants, for instance."
Jack raised a silvery eyebrow. "Never seen an elephant
shifter."
"They're rare."
"As rare as face shifters?"
"No."
Jack crossed his arms and leaned back in the chair.
"Seems to me a face shifter might be right at home in the CIA
or military."
She nodded. "Even as a cop, they'd be useful. Undercover
work would certainly be a whole lot safer if you could just
disappear into another identity."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
81
His expression became thoughtful. "You know, we hadn't
actually thought to check the files of other departments."
"You think he could be a cop?"
Jack shrugged. "You've been with the man, not me. What
does your gut instinct tell you about him?"
She hesitated. She'd worked with cops for nearly nine
years now, and Grey just didn't fit the profile. Then again,
neither did Jack. But look past the twinkle in Jack's eyes, and
you saw the calculation, the distance, that came with being a
cop for any length of time. Beyond the occasion flare of lust,
Grey's eyes very rarely showed anything. And when they did,
it was something altogether darker and more dangerous. He
was a killer, but was he a killer of innocents? Somehow, she
suspected not.
"If I had to take a guess, I'd say he was a trained
operative of some kind."
"Which leads us right back to the military or CIA."
"Or FBI. They have several new paranormal units, don't
they?"
"Yeah, but even the new Preternatural Units have to
announce their presence to local law enforcement."
"What if Grey is here unofficially?"
He raised an eyebrow. "You think he's here to hunt down
the killer?"
"Yes."
Jack studied her for a moment. "Then why bed all the
victims?"
"How should I know? Maybe he was feeling horny."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
82
Jack snorted. "Somehow, I think you're making excuses
for a man you're rather attracted to."
"Could be." She glanced up at the com-screen. Grey had
disappeared. "Where'd he go?"
"Not sure." He leaned the chair back, looking past her.
"Bob?"
"Went into the supermarket."
"Is there only one exit?"
"Yep. Though there's an employees exit around the back."
"There any way to keep an eye on that?"
"Henry's checking the traffic and security cameras around
the area now."
"Henry, hurry."
"I am, boss, believe me."
Eryn kept her eye on the screen, watching the people
come and go. Grey wasn't among them—or was he? As a face
shifter, he could assume the shape of any male he touched.
He could be the smart-looking black dude moseying out the
store right now with his hands filled with grocery bags. Or he
could be the gray-haired old man trying to hide the bottle of
whisky from his quick-stepping wife.
Her gaze went to the shabby-looking man currently
walking though the doors. He carried several bottles of beer,
and his thin lips were pursed, as if whistling. Like the others,
the body shape was about right, though he looked nothing
like Grey. Didn't even walk like him.
Yet she knew, without a doubt, that it was him. How, she
couldn't really explain, except to say that something deep
inside twitched in recognition.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
83
"There he is," she said, pointing at the fast disappearing
figure. "You'd better get someone into the store and check
the men's room. I bet he's knocked someone out and taken
their clothes."
Jack didn't waste any time refuting her certainty. "Henry,
get the cameras on him. Bob, contact our eye and advise him
of Grey's change of appearance. And get someone to check
the store out." Jack glanced at her. "You want to stick around
in case we lose him again?"
She nodded. Going home while it was pouring rain held no
appeal. She didn't have a car and would have to hike several
blocks to the subway. And while Jack would undoubtedly
arrange a car for her, home didn't have the appeal of sitting
here and watching Grey.
Leaning back in her chair, she kicked off her shoes and
rested her feet on the corner of the table. "I bet you twenty
bucks he'll attempt another changeover in the next ten
minutes."
Jack handed her a full coffee mug that had seen better
days. "No bet. Henry, make sure you don't lose him."
"We won't."
But after ten minutes of watching, they did. Only Grey
didn't go into another store and change form. He simply cut
through a tree-filled park, moving beyond the range of the
security cameras and their eye in the sky for all of one
minute. But one minute was all it took.
Jack swore, and threw down his ear mike in disgust.
"There goes our only chance to discover where he lived."
"He'll be back tomorrow night."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
84
Jack glanced at her. "If he knew he was being followed, he
might just cut his losses and run."
"He's not your killer. And he'll be back."
"You seem awfully certain of that."
"I am. He's after the killer, same as we are." Only she
suspected Grey had no intention of arresting the killer and
seeing him brought to trial. No, Grey had something far more
permanent in mind.
She sipped her coffee and tried to ignore the chill running
down her spine. It was a chill that had nothing to do with the
fact that she was lusting after a man who was, by training, a
killer, but rather the fact that she kept getting these strange
little insights and certainties about a man she only knew
sexually.
"So," she added, lifting her feet off the table, "we here
again tonight?"
Jack nodded. "Approval's been given. Hopefully Gantry will
make an appearance tonight."
"It's not Gantry."
"And you know this because...?"
"I smelled that smell in the club tonight. It couldn't have
been Gantry because he wasn't there."
He gave her a long look. "And you were intending to
mention this when?"
"When I remembered it, which I just did." She shrugged
an apology. "Trouble is, it was coming from a booth two
women were sitting in."
"Which could mean one of those two women has already
met the killer."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
85
Especially since both women looked like the type the killer
went after. "Might be worth putting a trace on them."
"Which booth were they in?"
"The same one Grey was sitting in earlier. Both women
had dark hair. One was in green, the other red."
Jack grunted as he wrote down the information. "We'll
grab their pics from the security cams. You want a ride
home?"
She hesitated, listening. The rain no longer pounded the
van's roof, though the vehicle still trembled under the assault
of the wind. She shook her head. "No, I like walking through
predawn hours like this. Everything smells so fresh, so new."
"Only a shifter would say something inane like that. The
rest of us would be happy to catch a lift so we could get home
to the warmth of our beds."
She would have been happy to catch a lift, too, if there'd
been someone home to warm her bed. But after too many
nights of going to bed alone, and too many mornings of
waking alone, she had to catch her pleasures where she
could. And there was something delicious about walking
through the wet hours just before dawn, especially when the
rest of the city had yet to stir.
She finished her coffee and placed the cup on the table.
"Same bat time?"
Jack nodded and held out a hand. "Ear pieces."
She undid them both and dropped them into his palm.
"You and the boys planning to stick around here?"
He glanced at his watch, then nodded. "Changeover is at
six."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
86
"Do you really think watching the bar's security cams day
and night is going to magically catch the killer?"
He shrugged. "Right now, we've got nothing else. Not
unless your nose picks up something, anyway."
"Even a hound has to have a scent to follow. And my nose
certainly didn't prove much of a help tonight."
"If you caught the scent once, you'll catch it again. Give it
time, Eryn."
Time was the one thing they didn't have much of, because
the countdown had begun. The killer was killing a woman
every four days. The four-day deadline was up tomorrow ...
today, she silently amended. But everyone in the van was
more than aware of that fact.
"See you tonight."
He nodded and turned back to the screen. She grabbed
her coat, pulling it on as she opened the door and stepped
into the crisp morning. She took a moment to breathe deep,
enjoying the sensation of air so fresh that it was filled with
nothing more than the sharp aroma of the passing storm and
the warm tang of wet concrete. It wouldn't stay that way for
long—even now, the city was stirring. Soon the fumes of cars
and factories and life would belch into the air, and this brief
moment of revival would be lost for another day.
God, how sad was her life that reveling in a wet dawn was
getting to be a high point?
She smiled wryly and shoved her hands into her pockets.
Truth was, until this assignment, she hadn't exactly realized
how stale her life had become. Yeah, she loved her job, and
hell, she loved sunrises, but there was more to life than that.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
87
And it was about time she started exploring other avenues of
enjoyment.
Like Grey.
She bit her lip and stepped out from the van's cover. The
wind blew her hair in a hundred different directions, and her
ears, which were oversensitive at the best of times, became
chilled. She reached back, snagging the jacket's hood,
tugging it over her head and tightening the draw strings.
What good did it do her lusting after Grey? While she
couldn't guess at his reasons for bedding the victims, she was
positive about one thing. He was here for one reason only—to
hunt down a killer. A relationship of any kind was not on his
agenda.
Which was a damn shame, because the connection that
had formed between them in such a brief amount of time
suggested even a casual relationship could be a mind-blowing
experience.
Still, she at least had the promise of tonight to look
forward to.
She splashed across the road, leapt the pool of water
gathering around the drain, then continued on towards the
subway. Another good thing about traveling at this hour was
the lack of people on the trains. Though few people didn't
necessarily equate to no aromas. She screwed up her nose,
trying to ignore the stale scent of sweat and humanity and old
perfume as she traveled the three stops to the station closest
to her apartment.
By the time she'd made it out of the subway, it had begun
to rain again. A car drove past, splashing a huge wave of

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
88
water across the pavement, drenching her legs and making
her toes even colder than they already were. Strappy high
heels and winter weather were not a good combination. Note
to self, she thought. Tonight bring warm pants and comfy
boots to change back into.
She hurried down the street. People were beginning to
crowd the pavement, all of them seeming to be in as much a
hurry as her to get out of the weather. Her apartment block
loomed through a silvery curtain of rain—a dour, ten-story
brick building that had absolutely nothing going for it except
for the size of the apartments. This close to the city center,
space was still a premium and large apartments were rare
and costly. But she paid the price willingly, simply because
the apartment was not only close to work but at least three
parks. Even when space had been at a premium and land
prices high, those who had run the city previously had kept
the precious parks intact. The outer suburban areas had not
fared so well, and there were now few places a shifter could
run unless they were willing to drive miles into the
countryside. And the cost of gas made that a rare event.
She crossed the street and headed for the building's front
steps.
Suddenly, awareness tingled across her skin, a touch as
warm as flame. She stopped abruptly, looking up. Shadows
haunted the entrance of the building, and though there was
little to be seen through the rain and the gloom, she knew
someone stood there. Not because she could smell him, but
because she could feel him.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
89
A figure detached itself from the blackness and moved into
the light. Her heart did an uneven little dance, and suddenly
air seemed a precious commodity.
Grey.
Here.
Waiting for her.
Eryn took a step back, then stopped. From the moment
she'd met him, she'd believed deep down that he meant her
no harm. She believed that still.
But why was he here, and how did he even know where
she lived?
His beautiful face was carefully blank, and the storm clad
eyes were just as neutral. Yet his emotions swam around her,
touching her senses as surely as the crisp air chilled her skin.
His determination was something she could almost taste; his
desire a wall of heat that made her heart sing. Yet it was the
slight edge of hesitancy that hit her the hardest.
He wasn't here by choice. Given the choice, he'd rather be
anywhere else.
"That's true, but not for the reasons you suspect," he said,
his voice a soft, deep growl that made her knees feel weak.
She ignored the sensation, and said flatly, "You're reading
my mind." Which was an obvious statement, but right then,
she couldn't think of anything to say but the obvious.
He nodded. Slivers of sunshine seemed to dance in his
rain-darkened hair. "We've formed a connection."
Something in his low voice suggested he wasn't all that
happy about it, and she felt invisible hackles rise. "Some

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
90
connection—you may know my thoughts, but I sure as hell
don't know yours."
"That's because you're not trained to do so."
She raised an eyebrow. "And you are?"
He hesitated, then nodded again. "Look, we need to talk."
"I agree, but there's no way in hell I'm taking you up to
my apartment." She wasn't that much of a fool.
Annoyance flashed through his eyes. "You're hardly
dressed to keep standing here in the rain and cold."
She shrugged and crossed her arms. "I have an alternate
shape that doesn't mind this sort of weather."
"I'm not standing here talking to a beagle." He looked to
the right. "There's a small diner open just up the road. Why
don't we go there for breakfast?"
"Fine." The owner of the diner was a fierce looking ex-
boxer whom she knew rather well, since she went there for
breakfast most mornings. If she needed help, he'd be there.
She stepped back and waved Grey forward. "After you."
Annoyance flashed through his eyes again. He paused
briefly, as if he wanted to say something, then moved down
the steps. She waited until he was several feet in front of her,
then followed. She might be fast, and she might be strong,
thanks to her shifter heritage, but he was a big man and
moved in a way that suggested speed as well grace. If his
intentions were dark, at least the slight distance between
them gave her enough of a head start to turn and run.
"You know I mean you no harm." His voice was still flat,
yet the air seemed to vibrate with his anger. He didn't like her

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
91
distrust, and given distrust was totally natural at this point,
she had to wonder why.
"No sensible person would trust a man who refuses to
answer simple questions."
He glanced over his shoulder. "Yet you had no problem
with having sex with me."
She shrugged. "That was in a safe environment."
"Where you were being monitored by the club and your
police cohorts."
So he knew. No surprise, really, if he could read her
thoughts. "If you know that much, you know precisely why I
was there."
"Yeah, I do, and that's what I want to talk to you about."
"Really?" She couldn't help the sliver of disappointment,
and perhaps it showed in her voice, because he flashed her a
dangerous smile that made her knees go all wobbly again.
"You're a fool if you think that's all I want to discuss with
you." He hesitated, his gaze sweeping her, leaving her hot
and tingly. "And you do not look like a fool."
"Thanks. I think."
He gave her another pulse-racing smile, then pushed open
the diner's door. She followed him inside, and wasn't
surprised when he chose a booth in the dimmest corner, as
far away from the counter and the few windows as possible.
After sliding in opposite him, she tucked her legs underneath
the seat. She had a suspicion that if she so much as brushed
her legs with his, things might get more than a little heated.
And while Dan, the owner, certainly wouldn't mind a free floor

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
92
show, she didn't want to go down that road until she'd
discovered why Grey was really here.
Dan followed them over and handed Grey a tattered menu
as he glanced at her. "The usual?"
She nodded. Grey ordered bacon, eggs, and toast, then
handed the menu back. She waited until Dan had left, then
said, "So, tell me, do you have a real name?"
He hesitated. "Grey."
She raised an eyebrow. "No last name?"
"None that matters anymore."
Or at least, not one that he was willing to trust her with.
That annoyed her, though given they were only bed buddies,
it shouldn't have. If not for the connection between them, it
probably wouldn't have.
"Who do you work for?"
Again he hesitated. "I can't tell you that."
"Then what the hell can you tell me?"
He crossed his arms on the table and leaned forward. The
heat of him washed over her, along with the wet, raw scent of
masculinity. Her pulse skipped and raced harder.
"The person you seek will never be found by you or the
police."
She raised an eyebrow at the certainty in his voice.
"Because he is too well trained, or because he's a face shifter
like you?"
A smile touched his luscious lips. Suddenly, it was all she
could do not to lean across the table and claim his mouth with
her own.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
93
As if sensing this, desire flared deeper in his eyes until the
stormy gray was almost lost to the black. "When did you
realize what I was?"
"When I was catching some butt action as you walked out
the bedroom door. It wasn't Harrison's walk."
Amusement creased the corners of his eyes, somehow
making his almost too perfect features more human. Yet
more unforgettable. "Very observant of you. And careless of
me."
"Hey, the boys were impressed you could even walk."
His smile grew, and her heart did a strange flutter. This
man was dangerous, all right, and not just to her health.
"Which is why I could not retrieve my sweater," he said,
his gaze drifting from her face to her breasts and back again.
Suddenly too warm, she peeled off her coat and dropped it
on the seat next to her. "How did you lose the cops in the
park?"
"How did they find me after the supermarket?"
"I saw you."
He studied her for a moment. "It would seem you are not
as oblivious to this link between us as you would have me
believe."
That much was certainly true, but she wasn't about to
admit it. Giving this man the knowledge of how deeply he
affected her would be a bad move on so many levels. Not the
least of which was the fact that he was a stranger who
refused to impart information about himself.
But would that stop her from having sex with him again?
Hell, no!

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
94
"And how did you come to that conclusion?"
"You sensed who I was, didn't you, even though I gave no
clues via appearance or walk?"
"Maybe."
A smile tugged his lips again. "I can understand your
hesitancy. Believe me, this was not on my agenda, either."
"Then what is?"
His smile faded into something cold and hard. "Catching a
killer."
The sudden change was a chilling reminder that she knew
nothing about this man other than the fact that he gave good
sex. She didn't even know if she could trust him, despite what
her instincts said.
She crossed her arms, and leaned back. "Are you
government?"
He paused, his expression assessing. After a moment, he
said, "Yes."
"U.S. government, I mean."
"Yes."
"CIA?"
"No."
"FBI?"
"No."
"Who then?"
"It doesn't matter."
It did matter, if only because of what was happening
between them. She needed to know more about him. Needed
to explore the possibilities that lay before them.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
95
But that required two willing participants, and she had a
suspicion willing wasn't in his repertoire at the moment. So
why was he here? Really?
"Do you know the killer?"
"Yes."
"He works with you?"
He hesitated, his gaze sliding past her for a moment, then
coming back full of warning. Not that she really needed one
when the sound of footsteps, as well as the tantalizing aroma
of bacon, pancakes and coffee, was evidence enough that
Dan was approaching.
She waited until he'd deposited the food and the coffee,
then picked up the small pot of maple syrup and poured it all
over her pancakes.
"If you eat a stack like that every morning, piled high with
butter and maple syrup, how the hell do you remain so slim?"
Grey asked, amusement glinting briefly in his eyes.
"Luck of the draw when it comes to the gene pool. Beagles
are naturally slender." She picked up her knife and fork. "You
were saying?"
He began to tuck into his bacon and eggs. "You need to
keep away from the bar tonight."
She blinked. "That's not what you were saying."
"No. But it's what I needed to say."
"Why?"
"Because the killer will strike tonight, and I don't want you
in the firing line."
His words made her heart do an odd little jig. "Better me
than someone who can't defend themselves."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
96
"There is no defense against the likes of this person. Not
for you, anyway."
"I'm a shifter. I'm fast. Strong."
His smile held a condescending edge. "Not against this
person. Not even against me."
She raised an eyebrow. "You're just a face shifter—no
disrespect intended. Granted, you're a male, and therefore
stronger than me by nature, but I still should have the edge
when it comes to speed."
"You think?"
"I wouldn't have said it otherwise."
He studied her for a moment, his gaze so intent she had to
quell the urge to squirm. Then, with a half smile, he put down
his knife and fork.
"Care to test that?"
She hesitated. "How?"
"On the count of three, you try to pull your right hand
away from the pancakes before I can grab it."
She put down her cutlery. It seemed too easy, which made
her suspect it would be the opposite. "Who counts."
He shrugged. "It doesn't matter."
"Okay. One."
He raised an eyebrow, amusement touching his lips again.
He crossed his arms, and rested them lightly on the table. It
was a pose that suggested this was no contest.
"Two."
Tension ran through her. He still looked relaxed.
Unconcerned. Like he had all the time in the world to lunge
across the table and grab her hand.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
97
"Three."
As fast as she could, she ripped her hand back, out of the
way. His hand blurred as it shot out. She got as far as the
edge of the table before his fingers wrapped around hers and
stopped her dead.
"Damn, that's fast," she muttered, trying to ignore the
press of his callused palm against her knuckles. Yet it was
impossible to ignore the warm response that spread from her
hand to the rest of her body.
"It almost wasn't fast enough." He shifted his grip and,
with his thumb, began to lightly caress the inside of her wrist.
Her pulse jumped into high gear again, and her throat felt
suddenly dry.
"What do you mean?" It came out little more than a husky
whisper, and the heat in his gaze went up several notches.
Even the air seemed to vibrate with the lust flaring between
them.
"You got your hand to the edge of the table. Most people
wouldn't have."
"Most people aren't shifters."
"Most shifters aren't that fast." His gaze rose to hers. "Or
this beautiful."
For several seconds she lost herself in the ethereal beauty
of his eyes, drinking in the heat, the sincerity, the desire, that
were all too evident in those ghostly depths.
It would be all too easy to fall for this man.
This stranger.
She blinked and tried to free her hand from his. He held it
fast, then with his free hand, pushed the food aside and

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
98
leaned across the table. She watched his approach, her gaze
skating between his lips and his eyes, torn between watching
the desire so evident in his gaze, and the advance of the
luscious mouth she just wanted to kiss forever. She closed
her eyes at the last moment, welcoming his kiss, opening her
mouth, drawing him deeper. God, he tasted good. She kissed
him long and hard, exploring his mouth with her tongue,
tasting him as thoroughly as he tasted her.
By the time he pulled back, her breathing was ragged and
tiny beads of perspiration dotted her overheated skin.
"I want you," he whispered, his breath so warm and fast
against her lips. He raised a hand, cupping her cheek, his
fingers seeming to burn where they touch. "Now."
Oh God ... she so wanted the same. Yet she couldn't. Not
here, not when she knew so little about him. Not when she
didn't even know what he really wanted.
He began to drop feather light kisses on her lips, her nose,
her cheeks. "Trust your instincts," he said. "They rarely lie."
"It's the rarely bit I'm worried about."
"I'm not lying, Eryn. I want you."
His mouth moved down her neck. She closed her eyes
again, enjoying the sensation, feeling warmth flooding all the
right places. "That I don't doubt. It's the rest of your story
I'm worried about."
"I've told you no lies here."
His tongue skimmed the moisture around the base of her
neck. A tremor ran through her. "It's the truths you haven't
told that concern me."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
99
"The only truth that matters right now is what's happening
between us."
His breath was a warm caress of air against her neck. She
licked her lips, fighting the urge to leap across the table and
take what he was offering.
"Tell me your name."
He pulled back a little, his gaze searching hers. "It matters
that much?"
"Yes."
An oddly pleased smile momentarily tugged his lips. "Grey
Harrison James McConnell—the third—at your service."
A laugh bubbled through her. "That's some moniker. No
wonder you're reluctant to announce it."
"It's the first time I've told anyone in what seems like
ages." He touched her face again, his fingers gentle as he
traced a line from her cheek to her lips. "In all honesty, I
shouldn't have even told you."
"Then why did you?"
"Because a drowning man should never forsake a life
buoy." His words were little more than a whisper against her
lips as his mouth claimed hers again. This time, the kiss was
a long and sensuous exploration that made her ache for far
more than sex. Because this time his kiss held more than just
passion.
This time, for the first time, she sensed that he was a
kindred spirit in loneliness.
Or was she reading far more into the kiss, and his actions,
than she ever should?
Forget doubt. Make love to me, Eryn.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
100
The words were a sensual plea that invaded every corner
of her mind. One that made her feel all weak and gooey. She
pulled back and took a shuddery breath. Fought to gather the
shattered wisps of control.
But where this man was concerned there was no control.
And certainly no backing away from the forest fire they'd
started last night.
"On one condition," she somehow managed to say.
"What condition?"
"You answer some questions."
He outlined her lips with a gentle finger, his gaze
distracted. "You may not like the answers."
"That doesn't matter. I just need answers."
His finger paused, his gaze suddenly sharpening. "And if I
don't give them?"
"Then I walk out the door right now, and you and I are
finished."
"That's akin to sexual blackmail."
"No, that's honesty. I may want you, Grey, but I want
answers more."
He released a breath that was full of frustration, then sat
back and picked up his knife and fork. "Okay. But I could get
into deep trouble for it."
She raised an eyebrow. "Then why agree to answer?"
He half smiled. "I'd rather be in trouble with my superiors
than have you walk out that door."
His words warmed her in a way his touch hadn't. "How
would they even know you've talked to me?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
101
"They know you've been assigned the case. They will know
I've bedded you. It's not hard to put two and two together—
unless, of course, you intend to keep what I tell you to
yourself."
"You know I can't."
He nodded. "Then it's yet another black blot on my
record."
"Sounds like you've got more than one."
"Trouble and I are familiar friends."
"So, who do you work for?"
"That I can't tell you. Not yet. Not until they give
clearance."
"So you're some sort of spy? Part of a secret government
service?"
"Spy? No. That's CIA territory."
She stared at him, remembering her earlier feelings,
remembering her certainty that he was here to find, and kill,
their killer.
"You're a hitman. A government hitman."
He grimaced. "Enforcer is a nicer term, but yeah, that's
basically what I am."
Her eyes widened at his confirmation. "The government
has its own hitmen?"
"There are many evils in this world that the court and the
justice system are incapable of dealing with. Evils that the
penitentiary system would never be able to hold."
"That doesn't give the government the right to be judge,
jury and executioner."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
102
"Would you rather evil be allowed to roam free, creating
havoc as it wishes?"
"That depends on what you term evil. And who decides."
"There are rules and checks in place."
She snorted softly. "Like rules ever stopped a government
from taking advantage of the system or doing the wrong
thing."
"No system is ever one hundred percent accurate. Even
the court system." He paused for a moment, eating some of
his meal. "Look, I'd rather not get into this any deeper right
now. What questions about the case do you have?"
She wolfed down some of her pancakes, barely tasting
them, then asked, "If you know for certain the killer will strike
tonight, do you also have an inkling of who the victim is?"
He considered her for a moment, expression flat. "Yes."
"How?"
"Our clairvoyants saw their images. There are seven
altogether."
"So even though you know the victims, history can't be
changed?"
"History can, but it always takes time. Five have died, but
there is always the hope we can save the other two."
"Why not tell me so I can tell the police the identities of
the other two?"
"Because I'm taking care of it."
She raised an eyebrow. "No, you're not. You're here with—
"
She cut off her words, and stared at him.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
103
He smiled grimly. "Yes," he said softly. "You're one of the
remaining two slated to die."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
104
Chapter Five
Coldness settled in the pit of Eryn's stomach and refused
to budge. She put down her knife and fork and pushed the
plate to one side. If she ate anything else right now, her
stomach might rebel.
"That doesn't make sense. And it certainly doesn't follow
the set pattern."
He raised his eyebrows. "You really think there's a pattern
in this madness?"
She frowned. "Yeah. The killer has been bedding his
victims before he kills them. The only person I was with last
night was you."
"Remember what you're dealing with."
She mulled over his statement. "He's assuming the identity
of the women's chosen partners?"
"Once they've decided on a mate, yes."
"But why?"
"Because the killer cannot stand them having what..." He
paused, as if choosing his words carefully. "...he cannot."
"Children?"
He shook his head. "Love. Acceptance."
Her eyebrows rose. "Acceptance?"
"In a department filled with freaks, your killer is
considered the freakiest."
"Why?"
Again, he hesitated. "Because he is something no one
thought could exist."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
105
"And that is?"
"Something I can't tell you."
"Can't, or won't?" she snapped.
"Can't." He reached out, capturing her hand before she
could pull it away. His fingers twined around hers, so warm
and strong and so, so right. Which was surely a sign her
common sense had flown out the window when it came to this
man.
"I have told you more than I should," he said softly. "Any
more, and it could be dangerous."
She snorted. "You've just told me I'm slated to die. What
could be worse than that?."
"Trust me, there are things far worse than death." He
squeezed her fingers. "I come from an organization that has
no wish to become known to the general public."
The ice in her stomach grew heavier. "Well, that's a great
choice, isn't it? Be killed by our killer, or be killed by the
people you work for."
"The people I work for don't kill innocents. But your
memories of this time—of us—are certainly under threat."
Her gaze widened in disbelief. "They'd erase it?"
"Definitely." He gave her a lopsided smile that sent her
hormones off in an excited little shuffle. "I don't want that. I
want you to remember our time together. Want you to
remember us."
"Why?"
"Because we're good together."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
106
That they were. But could they be anything more?
Somehow, given what he'd said about the department he
worked for, she suspected not.
A fierce twinge of regret ran through her. She ignored it
and changed tactics. "Why did you bed all the victims?"
"Because my telepathy skills are not strong, and I can
generally only read a woman's mind when we are in the midst
of making love."
That was an answer she certainly hadn't expected. Though
it did explain how he'd known where she lived. "But why did
you need to read their minds if you knew who the victims
were going to be?"
"What we didn't know was who they'd been with. Or who
their chosen partner might be." He shrugged. "It was the
fastest way to uncover which men we had to watch."
"Then whoever had the watch assignment wasn't much
good, because the women got killed anyway." She frowned.
"Were your people actually watching the victims'
apartments?"
"Yes."
"Then how did the killer get through?"
"He's a face shifter, and even we can't track all the forms
our people are able to take."
She stared at him for a moment. "That's why you don't
want the police to catch the killer. Your organization has no
intention of letting the authorities suspect that people like you
are out there. Or that the people you work for are out there."
He raised her hand to his lips and kissed her fingers. "A
quick mind as well as a stunning body. I chose well."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
107
She grinned. "Compliments won't get you said body. But
more answers just might."
His eyes gleamed with the hunger that still burned the air
between them. "How many more questions must I endure?"
"Six?"
He shook his head, amusement touching the corners of his
eyes. "I think I'll need to ease my hunger before I can answer
that many questions."
"Five, then."
Again he shook his head.
"Four?"
He didn't answer, just gently straightened one of her
fingers and raised it to his mouth. His gaze holding hers, he
placed her finger in his mouth and lightly sucked on it.
A tremor ran through her. Sweet Lord, this man could get
her hot enough to melt without even trying.
She licked her lips. "And you were accusing me of sexual
blackmail."
He simply gave her a smile that had enough heat to burn
the soles of her feet, and continued doing erotic things to her
finger.
"Three?" she somehow managed to croak.
He raised an eyebrow, then released her finger and
straightened her hand, placing a gentle kiss on her palm.
Desire curled through her, a furnace threatening to explode.
"Two?"
"One," he said, dropping a kiss on the inside of her wrist.
"Then we make love."
"Here?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
108
"The place isn't important."
"It is if it can get us arrested."
"Do you really think the owner will call the police?"
No. He'd sit back and enjoy the show. And give them free
coffee as a thank you afterwards. "Why the urgency?"
He gave her another of his mind-blowing smiles. "Because
I want you so fiercely it's becoming positively painful."
A feeling she could more than understand. "You'll answer
my other questions afterward?"
"If you make love to me again after I answer those
questions."
She raised her eyebrows. "Are you always this insatiable?"
"Until I met you, no."
There was no lie in his words, and her heart did another
odd dance. "Really?"
"Truly." He released her hand and slid out of the bench
seat. Her gaze scooted down his body and she saw that he
hadn't been exaggerating. His cock was so hard, his jeans so
taught against it, that she could see every little bump in his
skin. And oh, how she wanted to feel those bumps inside.
"I've never felt anything like this before," he continued. "I
need you as deeply as I need air."
She scooted along the seat as he sat down beside her. "If
that's a line, it's a damn good one."
He caught her hand again and tugged her towards him.
She shifted, pressing her back against the table as she
straddled him. Or rather, straddled his thick shaft. He kissed
her nose, and wrapped his arms around her waist. "No line,
just a truth I never expected."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
109
His hands began sliding up her back towards the zipper,
and it was becoming hard to think again. "Why?"
"Is that your question?"
His fingers skimmed her skin as he slid the zipper down,
sending delicious tremors skating through her body. "No."
He raised his hands to her shoulders, slipping his fingers
under the thin straps of her dress then sliding them down her
arms. "Then ask it, because I intend to make love to you, and
I will not be answering questions during the process."
The dress slithered to her waist, and the air felt gloriously
cool against her suddenly bared skin. She arched her back,
thrusting her breasts toward him. The heat surging between
them just about boiled over, and she couldn't help a grin of
satisfaction. Whatever lies this man might or might not be
telling her, there was no lying about the urgency of his desire
for her.
"A question then." She hesitated, sucking in a breath as
his lips closed in on a nipple, and he nipped it lightly.
"I'm listening," he said, before his tongue curled around
the nipple he'd just bitten, and sent exquisite sensations
humming through her nerve endings.
Listening? she thought, somewhat dazedly. Oh yeah. The
question. She cleared her throat. "Why not simply warn the
other women to stay away from the bar?"
"It was too late," he murmured, his breath brushing
coolness against the skin he'd just licked. "The killer was here
days before us, and the first four victims had all decided on
the men who would father a child."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
110
Something in the way he said that made her frown.
"Father a child? Isn't that putting the cart before the horse,
so to speak?" After all, couples had to test the realms of
compatibility in the real world before they actually discussed
the option of bringing a child into the world.
"In this case, no." He lightly nipped her other breast, and
she gasped, not in pain, but in pleasure.
"And that," he continued, "Was a second question."
"You said just one, but I never actually agreed to it."
His mouth moved up towards her neck, his kisses
featherlight, yet burning deep. "You want me to stop?"
"God, no."
His smile seemed to flow through her mind, a warmth as
bright as the sun itself. "Good," he murmured, as his mouth
claimed hers.
For the longest time, there was nothing but kissing and
tasting and teasing. And this sort of kissing was something
she'd never experienced before—because it was more than
just kissing, more than just a pathway to seduction. It was as
if, somewhere in the meeting of their mouths, they were
becoming one in a way far deeper than even the fusing of
their bodies.
Then his mouth left hers, and regret ran through her. But
only for a moment, as he began to nip, lick, and kiss a blazing
trail down her neck. She threw her head back and closed her
eyes, enjoying his touch, enjoying the sensations that boiled
through her.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
111
And suddenly, simply enjoying his touch wasn't enough.
She had to touch him, feel him, taste him, as thoroughly as
he was tasting her.
She undid his shirt buttons and thrust the material aside,
then slid her hands over his body, marveling at all the lean,
hard flesh. Loving the way his skin reacted to her caress. The
tremble that went through him when she plucked a nipple
with two fingertips.
She kissed the base of his neck, then his pulse point,
feeling a warm rush of feminine satisfaction at the way his
pulse raced. No, there was no denying this man's need for
her.
She raised her head and claimed his mouth once more,
kissing him fiercely but briefly.
"I need you," she whispered against his lips. "As much as
you need me."
He groaned and wrapped a hand around the back of her
head, pressing her forward and claiming her mouth again.
Not breaking the kiss, she rose onto her knees and
reached between them, freeing him from the restrictions of
his jeans. Then she thrust down on him. He groaned again,
his hands sliding down to her hips, his grip bruising as he
pressed her down harder. She echoed his groan and began to
move. He was right there with her, kissing and touching and
caressing as he moved so gloriously deep inside her. The
deep down ache bloomed, becoming a kaleidoscope of
sensations that washed through every corner of her mind.
She thrust back her head again, gasping for breath, the air
itself seeming to burn as fiercely as her skin.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
112
Then the shuddering began and she grabbed his shoulders,
pushing him deeper still, wanting to feel every inch of him
through every inch of her. Pleasure began to explode as his
movements become faster, more urgent.
"Look at me," he growled.
Her gaze met his, and something deep inside quivered. His
eyes burned with desire and passion, but something else,
something she couldn't name, seared the gray depths, stirring
her in ways she didn't think possible.
"You are mine," he said, and his hoarse voice seemed to
echo through her mind, through every fiber of her being.
Yes, she thought. Yes!
Then the passion exploded and she was quivering,
trembling, whimpering, as his warmth spilled into her and his
body went rigid against hers.
Finally, she collapsed against him. He wrapped his arms
around her, holding her so tight it felt as if he never intended
to let her go. And as much as she knew he would, she still
reveled in that brief, and oh so glorious, sensation of
belonging.
For several minutes neither of them moved. The air stirred
around them, lifting the heat from their skin without
managing to chill. From the general direction of the kitchen
came the rattle of harsh breathing, and she half smiled,
knowing then that Dan had indeed watched—and enjoyed. A
normal woman might have been embarrassed by that
knowledge, but she was a shifter. Exhibitionism was almost
as natural as an extremely high sex drive.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
113
She was just glad face shifters seemed to share the same
natural urges.
Grey stirred, pushing her back from him a little before
cupping her cheeks with his palms. His gaze held hers for
several seconds, then he smiled, and gave her a sweet,
gentle kiss. "I don't think I'm ever going to be able to get my
fill of you."
Her heart did another of those uneven little dances. Did
that mean he intended to keep on seeing her after the killer
was caught? Lord, she hoped so.
"I thought you had a killer to catch?"
"I do. But the killer strikes at night. That gives us most of
the day to play."
"I do need to get some beauty sleep, you know," she said
dryly.
His thumb skimmed to her mouth, outlining it gently,
sending another tremor through her. "Why? You're beautiful
enough as it is."
She grinned. "You haven't seen me pre-breakfast, before
coffee. Totally horrible."
"Well, technically, I have, seeing we came here to have
breakfast."
"Yeah, but that's different to waking up beside me after a
long night. Believe me, that can get hideous."
"Somehow, I doubt that." He slid the dress back up to her
shoulders, then zipped it.
Footsteps approached as she climbed off him. She looked
over her shoulder as Grey hastily adjusted himself. It was
Dan, and his smirk was as wide as the Grand Canyon. He was

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
114
also carrying a pot of coffee, and she couldn't help grinning.
He'd lived up to her expectations all right.
"You folks seem to be enjoying the ... er ... meal so much,
I thought it only decent I give you a free cup of coffee."
"That's mighty nice of you," Grey said, voice bland. "But
can we get that to go? We need to leave."
"That's a bit of a shame."
Her grin broke loose. "Don't think we'll make a habit of
enjoying breakfast so much, Danny boy. It might not be good
for your heart."
Dan met her gaze, brown eyes twinkling. "Don't you be
worrying about my old ticker, lassie. And the occasional hard
workout does it the world of good."
She smiled as he walked away, but the amusement quickly
faded when her gaze met Grey's. "So why do we have to go?"
He nodded toward Dan. "He'll be a little more aware of
what we do and say from now on. I can't answer any more
questions here. It's too dangerous."
He wasn't lying, and yet ... she had an odd sense that
there was an ulterior motive behind his words.
"So, we find another diner. There's plenty around."
"Do you really think we can hold off touching each other in
another diner?"
The look he gave her was smoldering, full of heat. And yet,
she wasn't buying it. Not entirely. Oh, she had no doubt that
he did want her, and want her badly, but there was also an
underlying niggle that he had plans for her. Plans that she
couldn't even begin to guess at.
So why did she trust him so much?

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
115
Instinct, she thought. It told her he didn't intend to harm
her, and she believed that one fact totally. Whether that
made her the world's biggest fool or not remained to be seen.
"I'm not sexually deprived." Well actually, she probably
was, but that was beside the point. "And I think we can
manage to keep our hands off each other long enough for you
to answer questions."
"Your apartment would be safer. Easier."
Again with her apartment. "Why are you so determined to
get me back there?"
"It's safer, simply because we don't risk being overheard."
He hesitated. "In my line of work, you learn not to trust the
face of the person sitting next to you."
His words had her looking over her shoulder, which was
dumb when the diner was empty. "My home is my sanctuary.
I rarely invite people back there."
His gaze darkened almost imperceptively. "You still don't
trust me?"
Which is not what she'd said at all, though indeed that was
part of the problem. She hesitated, then said, "I have no way
of checking out anything you've said, Grey. No way at all."
Anger flicked through his expression. "I thought a beagle
relied on instinct?"
"They do, but I've learned to doubt."
"Then what do you suggest?" His expression had gone
neutral, but there was nothing neutral about his voice as he
added, "That I walk away, leave what's going on between
us?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
116
His anger burned around her, flaying her skin as sharply as
a whip. Whatever else was going on, there was no doubt in
her mind that while this man might intend many things,
harming her wasn't one of them. Would it be complete
foolishness to let him inside her apartment? Probably. But
what other choice did she really have? He seemingly had the
answers she—the department—needed.
She considered him a moment longer, then said, "Give me
the name of the other possible victim. I'll pass it on to my
department."
"Genny Jones, Twenty-Fourth Street, Marshell
apartments." He paused, then added, "It won't do them any
good. They have no idea who to look for."
"Well, apparently, neither do your people; otherwise five
women would not have died." She gestured toward the pay
phone on the other side of the room. "Do you mind moving?"
He shifted. She climbed out of the booth and walked
across to the phone. After digging her credit card out of the
special compartment in her coat, she swiped it through the
phone slot and dialed Jack's cell number.
He answered second ring. "Senior detective Jack Turner
speaking."
"Jack? It's Eryn."
"Why the hell are you calling?" Though his voice warmed
immediately, he sounded tired, almost sleepy. Maybe she'd
caught him in bed. "Thought you'd be dead to the world by
now."
She grinned, and refrained from reminding him she was a
shifter. With a shifter's stamina. "I've got a name for you."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
117
Bed springs squeaked, then paper rustled. "What?"
"Genny Jones. Her address is apparently the Marshell
apartments, Twenty-Fourth Street."
"And she is?"
"Probably the next victim."
He paused. "I don't think I want to know how you know
this."
His words suggested he'd already guessed. "We're at
Greasy Dan's."
"Damn it, Eryn, you know—"
"He's not the killer."
"You willing to stake your life on that?"
Her gaze went to Grey's. He was leaning his butt against
the table, his arms crossed and face absolutely
expressionless. Yet she could taste his annoyance at her
actions as surely as she could still smell his raw masculinity
and thick desire.
"Yes." And if she let Grey into her apartment, that's
exactly what she was doing—staking her life on her instincts.
"I hope you know what you're doing."
So did she. "Remember I told you about those two women
at the table? I think this Genny Jones might be one of them."
Which would explain why she'd smelled that aroma when she
was close to them.
So how come she was the next one slated to die?
Especially when the killer had been no where near her?
"Don't take him back to your apartment," Jack said
forcefully.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
118
"Jack, if he intended to harm me, he could have done it
long before now. There's only us and Dan here in the diner.
It's a perfect place for murder."
"Yeah, but your apartment is where you feel safer;
therefore it's more dangerous because you're less on guard."
"I'm not a fool."
"I'm not saying you are. I'm just asking you to be careful.
Especially when we know so little about this man—this
stranger—you seem to trust so much."
"I'm being careful. I'll see you tonight."
He grunted. "You'd better."
She hung up and walked back to Grey. She stopped
several feet in front of him and crossed her arms, her pose as
defensive as his was hostile.
"You cannot go back to that bar tonight," he said, voice
flat.
His hearing was obviously as good as hers, because she
certainly hadn't been talking to Jack loudly. "I have a job to
do."
"You will die doing that job."
The ice slid back into her stomach. "Why? If the killer had
been anywhere near me, I would have caught his scent."
He raised his eyebrows at that. "You know his scent?"
"It lingered at the death scenes."
His expression was briefly curious. "And what did you
make of it?"
She shrugged. "It almost seems more a woman's scent
than a man's, except for the thick layer of death that
entwines it."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
119
Surprise flickered, not so much in his eyes, but in the air.
Across her senses.
"Interesting," was all he said.
"Maybe, but you still haven't explained why I'm the next
one slated to die when I've been nowhere near the killer."
He hesitated. "It will be my fault."
She raised her eyebrows. "How?"
"According to our clairvoyants, you will meet the killer
tonight. He will see me in your mind, and he will snatch you,
abuse you, then kill you to get at me."
"He hates you that much?"
"Yes."
"And are these killings related to his hatred of you?"
"No. I told you before what his reasons are for these
killings."
She rubbed her arms, but it failed to stop the goose bumps
fleeing across her skin. "And knowing all this, you still
approached me last night?"
"I'd intended to walk right past you, but our gazes met."
He shrugged. "I'm sorry, but I'm not superman. Even
knowing the risks, I could not ignore what rose between us."
Anger surged through her. "So you endangered my life to
satisfy lust?"
His anger lashed at her skin, every bit as powerful as her
own. "Not lust. What lies between us is more than lust, and
you know it."
"What lies between us may never have a chance to be
explored any further, thanks to your behavior."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
120
"I don't deny my stupidity, but it is a problem easily
solved. Just don't go to the bar tonight."
"I can't not go, especially if I'm going to meet the killer
tonight."
"You will die."
"I'm in a bar, surrounded by security and watched over by
police. He's not going to get me out of there without a fight.
From them, and from me."
"You don't know this person. You have no idea what he's
capable of."
"And despite the amazing sex we've shared, you don't
know me. Nor do you know what I'm capable of."
"I don't want to see you dead."
"Believe me, it's not something I want, either."
He grimaced, then pushed away from the table and held
out a hand. "We could argue about this all day. Or we could
go back to your apartment, share some more of that amazing
sex, and then figure out some sort of compromise that suits
us both."
She glanced at her watch. It was barely eight, which still
left plenty of time to play before she had to get some rest. "I
really do need to sleep," she warned.
"Then I'll keep watch."
The thought of him watching her as she slept sent a thrill
through her. She placed her hand in his, and he tightened his
fingers, pressing warmth and an odd sense of security into
her skin.
Even so, she still felt an odd reluctance to move. Not
because she feared for her safety, but because she feared for

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
121
something far more important—her heart. By letting Grey into
her apartment, she was letting him into her sanctuary—the
one place no man had ever been. It was a big step for her,
and one she wasn't sure Grey would ever appreciate.
She wasn't even sure he was worthy of such a step, even
if he did affect her in ways no man ever had.
But she couldn't exactly stand here, dithering, either.
"Let's go."
They were almost out the door when Dan called out,
reminding them to pick up the coffee. Grey rolled his eyes,
but went back to collect the cups while she huddled in the
doorway. Coffee in hand and sipping it as she walked, she led
him across the street and up the steps. Once there, she
punched in her code, using her body to shield her movements
from him. The door swung open and he ushered her through,
his touch pressing warmth into her spine and sending yet
another flash flood of desire crashing through her system.
Lord, even after all the sex they'd shared, it seemed her
hormones couldn't get enough of this man.
They climbed the stairs to her fourth floor apartment and
walked down the long corridor. Though neither of them said a
word, the air grew thick and heavy, and her breathing
quickened in response. And with each sharp intake of air, she
breathed in his desire, his need, until it filled every corner of
her body and made her burn.
Her hand trembled as she reached into her coat and took
out the keycard. She swiped it through the slot, then pushed
open the door and walked inside.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
122
The door slammed shut behind her. He took the almost
empty coffee container out of her hand, placing it on the hall
stand, then his hands were on her, pushing her coat down her
arms, pulling it off and flinging it across the room.
"I need you," he growled, kissing her shoulder, her neck,
her ear. "It's madness, but I just can't seem get enough of
you."
If this was madness, then she was just as insane as he.
She ducked away from his kisses and spun, grabbing his
shirt, popping the buttons in her haste to undress him. He
threw off the shirt, then quickly shucked off his jeans. She
slithered her hands down the flat of his stomach then took his
cock in her fingers, relishing the way he jumped, and seemed
to grow even larger under her heavy-handed caress.
He made a low noise in the back of his throat, then
grasped the middle of her dress, his big hands warm on her
skin. His gaze caught and held hers, his expression almost
fierce. With one swift movement, he tore the material from
her body and threw the remnants across the room as well.
God, she'd never been so aroused in her life.
"I need you," he repeated, then claimed her lips, his kiss
harsh and urgent.
"Then take me," she said, when she could.
He did. Up against the wall, driving deep, so wonderfully
deep, until it felt as if the rigid heat of him was trying to claim
every inch of her. Her blood boiled through her veins, and
every breath seemed a struggle, the air too thick with need
and desire to breathe easily. The low down pressure began to
build under the rush of passion and the sweet assault of

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
123
pleasure, and all too quickly it reached the boiling point. They
came as one, his roar getting lost in her howl, his body
slamming into hers so hard the whole wall seemed to shake.
Then it was over, and she was trembling, sweating, her
limbs so weak they seemed barely able to support her weight.
She took a deep, shuddery breath, and released it slowly.
"Sweet Lord, can it get any better?"
He dropped a kiss on her spine, then withdrew and turned
her around. Wrapping his arms around her, he pulled her
close and said, "I sure as hell want to hang around and find
out."
His words made her knees want to buckle. She somehow
managed to keep them locked and closed her eyes, listening
to the wild beat of his heart, knowing her own raced just as
badly. The smell of sweat and sex stung the air, and her nose
twitched. "I think I need a shower."
Yet she couldn't move. The odd weakness was still flowing
through her veins, and she was feeling more and more tired.
"I think you need sleep," he said, his breath brushing
warmth against her ear.
As if his words were a trigger, she yawned. "God, I
thought it was usually the man who rolled over and went to
sleep after sex."
His smile shimmered through her. "It's been a long, and
strenuous, night." He pulled back, but kept one arm around
her, supporting her. "Where's your bedroom?"
She waved weakly to her right. It seemed a huge effort to
do even that.
"Then let's get you over there."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
124
She nodded and walked towards her bedroom, only her
feet didn't seem too inclined to follow directions, and she was
stumbling more than she was walking. Only his grip kept her
upright.
And through the midst of tiredness, alarm rose. This
shouldn't be happening. Something was wrong.
She licked lips that suddenly seemed dry, and said,
"Grey—"
"Here's your bed. You'd better lie down."
"No. There's something wrong. Something's happening to
me."
He pressed her down on the bed and pulled the covers
over her. "Nothing is wrong," he said, voice soothing. "You
just need to sleep. To rest."
And suddenly she remembered the feeling that he had an
ulterior motive for coming into her apartment. His insistence
that they come here. That he come here.
It wasn't to love her. It was to stop her.
"How?" she murmured, the anger surging through her lost
in her sleepiness and not showing in her voice.
"The coffee. I'm sorry, Eryn, but I can't let you near that
place tonight." He brushed a kiss across her fingertips, then
released her and stepped back. "Hate me if you will. I'd
rather that than be faced with your death."
"You're damn well dead when I wake up."
He gave her a sweet half smile. "Better that than you
dying. Sleep tight."
Bastard, she said again, but the words stayed locked
inside. The last thing she remembered was watching him walk

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
125
out the door.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
126
Chapter Six
"Eryn!"
The voice was distant, but familiar. She murmured in
annoyance, turning onto her side, wishing the sharp voice
would just go away and let her sleep.
"Damn it, Eryn, wake up!"
"She can't hear you properly," a strange voice stated. "The
drug is still in her system."
"Can't you give her something to counteract it?"
"I have, but it'll take a little more time."
"We haven't got time." Footsteps echoed, pacing from one
end of her room to the other. To her sensitive ears, those
steps sounded as loud as a herd of elephants.
She groaned and flung herself around, grabbing her spare
pillow and dragging it over her head. Why wouldn't they just
leave her be? She needed to sleep. Needed to forget.
Something stirred through her mind.
Forget?
Forget what?
Fury.
The need to chase, to bring down her quarry and get
answers.
She frowned.
Chase who?
The man who'd betrayed her trust.
Grey.
Bastard.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
127
With that word echoing through her mind, she flung the
pillow off her head and sat upright.
And, at that point, realized there were men in her room.
Two of them, to be precise—one of whom she didn't know.
"Thank the Lord..." The elephant steps grew closer, and
suddenly Jack appeared in her field of vision.
She blinked owlishly at him. "What the hell are you doing
here?"
"What am I doing here?" he repeated, looking as frazzled
as she'd ever seen him. "Don't you realize what's happened?"
She blinked again, remembering, then replied, in a voice
low with anger, "Grey drugged me."
"Yeah, and it's now ten after ten. When you didn't report
for work, we thought the worst."
"He didn't intend to hurt me." She reached for the glass
she always kept on her bedside table, hoping the water would
chase away the last cobwebs of sleep.
"We had no way of knowing that." He sat on the edge of
the bed and grabbed the sheet, offering it to her. "So why did
he drug you?"
She pulled the sheet up around her. She wasn't bothered
by nudity and she didn't think Jack was, but she could hear
other people moving about her apartment. Maybe he didn't
want them finding excuses to catch a glimpse of the free
breast show. "He wanted to stop me from going to the bar
tonight."
"Why?"
"He said if I went there tonight, I'd die."
Jack raised an eyebrow. "Do you believe him?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
128
"Do I believe that he believes he's telling the truth? Yes. If
you're asking if I actually believe I'd die, then no. I can't see
how the killer would get me past security and all of you."
"But why does he think you'll meet the killer tonight?"
"The government mob he works for has psychics on the
team. They say seven people will die before the killer is
caught. They even gave him the victims' names."
"You'd think having all that information he'd be able to
stop the damn killer."
She grimaced. "The killer is a face shifter. Grey has the
same trouble tracking him down as we did tracking Grey."
"So why didn't they watch the victims' apartments and vet
everyone coming in or out?"
"Can you imagine the ruckus that would have caused if
they'd stopped and questioned every single person coming in
and out of the victims' apartment buildings? Besides, this is a
secret government organization he works for. I don't think
they'd be too happy with the sort of interest actions like that
would raise."
Jack frowned. "You sure he's not just spinning you a line?"
"He's not. He gave me his full name, by the way. You can
cross-check it against your search for high-society murders."
He dug an electronic notebook out of his pocket. "We came
up with ten possibilities. Tell me his name and I'll cross-check
now."
"Grey Harrison James McConnell—the third."
He grinned as he entered the name into the notebook.
"Now that's a moniker you could hang your hat on."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
129
"Ain't it just." She finished her glass of water and put it
back on the table. "If you're here, who's running the show at
the bar?"
"Bob and Henry are watching the screens. They'll give me
a call if they spot anything odd."
But how would they know, given no one had any idea what
their killer looked like? Except maybe Grey, and he certainly
wasn't telling.
Anger rolled through her. Damn it, he was going to get it
when she saw him again. She'd trusted him, and he'd
drugged her. The fact that he considered it for her own good
was beside the point. She'd trusted him, let him into her
sanctuary, and he'd gone and done that.
Disappointing, to say the least. And a sharp reminder that
no matter what might be going on between them, he was first
and foremost a government man.
"What about the two women I saw at the bar last night?"
"One of them was Genny Jones, as you suspected. We've
got a team staking out her apartment building. The other
woman we haven't been able to trace."
She frowned. "She'd have to have credit records, wouldn't
she?" And all credit cards had photo ID's on them these days.
He grimaced, though his gaze was still on the notebook.
"You'd think Grey would have a credit ID somewhere, too, but
apparently not."
The ice in her stomach stirred again, and her frown grew.
"But that doesn't make sense."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
130
"Nothing in this case is making a lot of sense." He paused.
"Bingo. It appears your mysterious lover was telling the truth
about his name."
He handed her the notebook. She quickly scanned the
story, taking in the gruesome facts about the murder of his
parents by rogue vampires, and the gutsy escape by him and
his younger sister. Her gaze fell on the picture of the two of
them. Grey was shielding his sister from the cameras, and the
careful neutrality was in his eyes even then. Or maybe it was
the blankness of shock. It couldn't have been easy to watch
vampires tear your parents apart, then have to fight for yours
and your sister's lives. Especially when you were barely ten
years old.
She handed the notebook back to Jack. "What's the bar
owner's name?"
A smile touched his lips. "Elizabeth Jane Magee—formally
known as Elizabeth Jane McConnell."
"His sister." At least that explained Grey's certainty that
the owner would not throw them out if security caught them
doing the sexual tango on the dance floor.
Jack nodded. "She obviously didn't trust our ability to solve
this case and called in her brother."
"Well, in some respects she was right, because we're really
no closer now than we were at the beginning." They might
have a scent, but a scent wasn't much good if you couldn't
find the source.
"No—" A beep cut across the rest of his words. Jack
stopped and pulled his cell phone from his jacket pocket.
"Senior detective Jack Turner speaking."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
131
He listened, his expression getting darker with every
passing second. The ice in Eryn's stomach grew tighter. She
knew, without even asking, what had happened.
She closed her eyes as he hung up, and wished she could
just block her ears. She didn't want to hear what Jack was
about to say. She really didn't.
"The killer has struck again," he said softly. "Genny Jones
was just found dead in her apartment."
* * * *
Even with full shields up, the smell of death and blood and
sheer evil was so thick in Genny Jones's apartment that Eryn
had to fight the urge to spin around and walk out. She was no
stranger to death, had seen it many times—and in many
forms—in her years at the coroner's office, but these deaths
had the power to get to her. Maybe because the killer was
taking away the very things that made the victims women—
and that was something any woman would react to.
She followed Jack into the bedroom. The forensic team
was still here, so she stopped at the door, keeping her hands
in her coveralls even though she wore gloves. Genny Jones's
body had not yet been taken away, and like the previous
victims, there was enough evidence in the rumpled state of
the bed to indicate lovemaking had occurred. Eryn suspected
that the samples being taken from the body would confirm
this, and that the DNA would match that found on the
previous victims.
Her gaze skated from the shocked expression frozen
forever on Genny Jones's face, to the bloody remnants of

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
132
what had once been breasts down to the gaping hole in her
stomach. Though she'd seen this all before, it had been via
photos. No photo on Earth could ever really convey the
sickening reality. Bile rose, and she swallowed heavily.
Grey had suggested that the killer was going after these
women because they had what he could not—love,
acceptance. Why, then, did the killer mutilate them like this?
It didn't make any sense. This was the act of someone who
hated women—or at the very least, hated the things that
made them women.
Jack stopped in the middle of the room and turned to face
her. His expression was grim. "The scent the same?"
She nodded. "It's stronger than before. He can't have been
gone all that long."
"Time of death was ten thirty-five. My people got here at
ten forty." Jack's hand rose, as if to thrust his fingers through
his hair before remembering that he wore the coveralls and
plastic hood. "Damn it, we were watching all the entrances.
None of the men Genny Jones had been seeing entered or left
the building."
"Remember what he is. He could have assumed the shape
of anyone living in this building. All he'd have to do was brush
past him."
"Problem with that is the fact that the only men who
entered were accompanied by women. Those men live here
with the women that accompanied them. We've checked.
They're all here, and none of them moved from their
apartments."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
133
"Then how did the killer get in without being seen? Or
out?" She glanced toward the window.
"Not via them," Jack commented, obviously guessing her
thoughts. "They're locked. Besides, we have cams in the
building opposite."
"And you didn't see the killer?"
"Blinds were drawn in the bedroom."
"What about infrared?"
His expression, if anything, grew grimmer. "It shows them
making love. It wasn't until the bedroom team made their
regular check-in that anyone realized the man making love to
her hadn't been seen walking into the building."
"You obviously got people over here quickly."
"But not quick enough." Jack's cell phone beeped, and he
paused to answer it.
A prickle of unease skated across her skin as his
expression became slightly incredulous. She crossed her
arms, waiting as he told whoever was on the other end of the
phone to wait where they were and he'd be right there.
"What?" she said, the minute he hung up.
He shook his head in disbelief. "One of my men has just
interviewed a women four apartments down who swears a
naked and bloody Genny Jones attacked her—two minutes
after Genny Jones apparently died."
Eryn blinked. "Impossible."
Jack's smile was wry. "Normally, I'd think so too, but
nothing in this case would surprise me any longer. Let's go
talk to her."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
134
He waved her forward, and she turned, leading the way
out of the apartment, relieved to be leaving the scent of
death and blood and evil. A detective stood at the door four
apartments down, and he gave them access without saying a
word.
Eryn paused, allowing Jack to head in first. But she'd
barely crossed the threshold when the smell hit her.
The killer had been in this apartment.
She bit her lip, holding back the information as Jack
questioned the old women. He got the same information his
detective probably had—Genny Jones had knocked on the
apartment, begging to be let in, stating that there was a man
in her apartment trying to kill her. The old women had let her
in and was promptly attacked and knocked unconscious. By
the time she came to, there was police everywhere. Eryn
rubbed her arms and met Jack's gaze. "The killer used this
apartment to clean himself up."
"Probably. That doesn't explain how he escaped. Or why
Genny Jones walked into this apartment a few minutes after
she'd apparently died."
"No." She hesitated. "I think we need to look at the tapes."
Because she had a horrible suspicion about what was going
on.
And if she was right, then Grey had lied to her.
Again.
Jack studied her for a moment, then nodded and moved
past her, leading the way out of the apartment and across to
the truck parked discretely in a shadowed alley.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
135
"Which tapes," he said, sliding a chair across to her while
he sat in the other spare one.
"Try the entrance tapes, twenty minutes before the
bedroom team report in."
Jack raised an eyebrow, but all he said was, "John?"
One of the men manning the com-screens nodded. After a
few seconds, images appeared on some of the screens above
them. She watched silently. About ten minutes in, she saw
what she was looking for. "Freeze it," she said, and rose,
pressing a finger against the screen. "Recognize her?"
Jack frowned. "Yeah. It's the woman Genny was talking to
at the bar last night."
"The woman who apparently doesn't exist," she said.
"Now, retrieve the tapes of the building for around the
murder time, and show them on a different screen."
The young officer did. A few minutes in, she again found
what she was looking for. "Freeze it," she said again, and
silently pointed to the image on the screen.
"The old women," Jack said, expression incredulous.
"Walking away when she was supposedly knocked out. What
the hell is going on?"
"Grey told me that our killer is a freak even among the
freaks. He wouldn't explain it, but I think I now know." Her
gaze went back to the screen, studying the woman who was
neither old nor a woman. "Our killer is a face shifter, all right,
but he's something no one thought could exist—a
hermaphrodite. A shifter able to take on both male and
female form."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
136
"And he's killing these women because he hates his female
half," Jack said flatly.
"At a guess, yes. Why else mutilate these women the way
he has?"
Jack scrubbed a hand across his face. "This doesn't exactly
help us catch him."
She bit her lip, staring at the frozen image of the dark-
haired woman entering the building. "Maybe it does," she said
slowly. "Look at her. Doesn't she rather resemble her—his—
victims? What if that's her true form? What if she's only killing
women who look like her?"
"Then we may finally have a picture to circulate. John, get
us a good, close shot. And keep playing the second tape. Let's
see where the old woman goes." Jack glanced at her. "If Grey
was telling the truth about the number of victims, this only
leaves us one—you."
She crossed her arms and began watching the tape. The
fake old woman toddled up the street. "I was 'volunteered'
into this to play bait. I still think that's the way to go."
"Not if you're going to end up dead."
"I have no plans to end up dead."
"I'm sure the other women would have said the same
thing."
She gave him a grin. "But I have the advantage of
knowing trouble might be headed my way. Besides, Grey
seemed convinced that it would happen only if I went to the
bar tonight."
"Grey obviously doesn't know everything, else he would
have caught the killer long before now."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
137
"True." On the screen, the old woman stepped to the curb
and began waving. Soon enough, a yellow cab slid to a stop
beside her.
"Get that cab's plate number, and see where he took the
old woman," Jack ordered. The second of the two men in the
van nodded. Jack glanced back to her. "I'm going to put a
watch on your apartment. And you're going to wear tracking
and audio tags at all times."
"I think that's going to extremes."
"I don't—" He stopped as his cell phone beeped again.
"What is this, peak hour?" he muttered, as he reached to
answer it. He was silent for a few seconds, then his silver
brows rose as he glanced at her. "It's for you."
"Me?" she said, surprised. She took the phone and said,
"Hello?"
"Eryn? It's Grey. Sorry to contact you via your boss, but I
couldn't think of any other way to get hold of you."
Just the sound of his warm, rich voice made her heart race
... and yet, there was something in his tone that made her
frown. Some lack that wasn't quite right. "What's the
problem?"
"We need to meet."
"Why?"
His chuckle was a low sound of desire that should have
sent heat rushing across her skin. It didn't, and that only
made her frown all the more.
"Why do you think?" he murmured sexily.
"Even you can't be that insatiable."
"When it comes to you, I'm afraid I am."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
138
She bit her lip. Damn it, something was definitely off kilter,
but she couldn't pinpoint exactly what.
She glanced at Jack, silently mouthing "trace the call,"
then said, "I'm actually not sure if I'm even speaking to you
after what you did this morning."
He paused, almost for too long, then said, "I was only
trying to protect you."
Her heart began to race, but with fear rather than
excitement. "Knocking me out like that wasn't nice."
"But what we did beforehand was damned nice."
"Nothing like a sofa tango," she agreed. Jack gave her the
thumbs up, so she added, "Where would you like to meet?"
"How about your place?"
No way in hell. "How about you buy me dinner? I think you
owe me that, at least."
"It's a little late, don't you think?"
"Not considering I haven't eaten all day."
He blew out a breath. "I'm afraid I don't know this city
well."
He didn't? When his sister lived here? Not likely. "How
about the diner where we had breakfast, then?"
He paused, and again it was overly lengthy. "Fine. How
about we say in an hour?"
She glanced at her watch. It was nearly eleven-thirty.
"How about we say at one? I've still got work to do."
"Fine. And don't bother to dress too fancy," he added, his
husky tone sending chills rather than warmth across her skin,
"because I don't plan for you to be wearing clothes for all that
long."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
139
"Can't wait," she said, and quickly disconnected.
"What was all that about?" Jack asked, shoving the phone
back into his pocket.
"That was Grey, wanting to meet me."
He studied her for a moment, his expression a little
confused. "You've said all along you trust him and that he's
not the killer, so what's the problem?"
"I don't think it was actually Grey calling me. I think it may
have been the killer."
"Why?"
"I'm not exactly sure." She hesitated. "This may sound
strange, but I think it was more the lack of reaction inside me
rather than anything he actually said."
Jack didn't quibble. "Then I was right—he is after you."
She nodded. "Where did the call come from?"
Jack glanced at the second of his men, who said, "Empty
warehouse in the Yanga Park district."
She looked at Jack. "I'll bet he's holding Grey hostage in
that warehouse. And I bet that's where he plans to take me
after we meet at the diner."
"Again, why?"
"To kill me, of course."
He shook his head. "I mean, why hold Grey?"
"Grey said the killer hated him. He didn't say why."
"Then taking you to that warehouse to kill you is a form of
torturing Grey?"
She nodded. It also meant that the killer had read Grey's
mind and knew how much he cared for her.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
140
It was a thought that sent both warmth and fear rushing
through her veins. God, would fate be such a bitch as to let
her glimpse possible paradise in Grey's arms, then snatch it
away?
Probably.
Ignoring the chill that ran down her spine, she glanced at
her watch. "If we're quick, we might be able to get to that
warehouse and rescue Grey before I go to that meet."
Jack didn't move. "You sure you want to do this?"
"You want to catch the killer, don't you?"
"Yeah, but—"
"No buts," she said, with a slight smile. "You brought me
onto this team to play decoy, and that's exactly what I plan to
do. And it might be our one and only chance to stop this
person.
Jack stared at her a moment longer, then simply said,
"Let's do it."
* * * *
The wind skated around her bare legs, touching her skin
with ice. Eryn shivered and rubbed her arms as she eyed the
old building at the bottom of hill. Like most of the buildings
around here, it had fallen into disrepair as the council and
residents argued over whether this whole area should become
park land or more residential space. In the meantime, it was
a playground for louts, drug users, and the homeless, as well
as being a nice hidey-hole for murderers.
She turned at the sound of footsteps and watched Jack
approach.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
141
"The cab let the old women off at The Commodore Hotel,"
he said, as he stopped.
"Hard to check the register when you have no idea what
name she's using."
"True. But there was a Grey Jamison checked in. We
showed the concierge Grey's pic, and it was definitely him.
The front desk hasn't seen Jamison since he went up to his
room early this afternoon, and he wasn't answering the
phone."
Because the killer had him. Question was, how? "I gather
your men checked the room?"
He nodded. "He's not there, and there was no evidence of
foul play."
Meaning Grey hadn't put up a fight? Why the hell not? She
rubbed her arms, her gaze drifting back to the warehouse.
God, she hoped he was okay.
"Everyone's in place here," Jack continued. "Infrared
reports three figures inside that warehouse."
"He left guards?"
Jack nodded. "There's one man near the front entrance,
two near the back. We're guessing that if Grey is there, he's
one of these." He handed her a Taser. "You'll have to get
close for this to knock them out, but I'm guessing that with
what you're almost wearing, it won't be a problem."
She slipped the Taser into the special pocket sewn into the
back of the short leather skirt. Combined with the studded
leather bra, the matching dog collar that now included
tracking and audio mikes, and six inch stilettos that could
certainly double as a weapon, she had on what she liked to

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
142
describe as her eye-popping outfit. Jack had been surprised
that she even had such an outfit in her wardrobe. He
obviously thought her as staid as everyone else, but hey, she
was a shifter and had her wild side—even if she didn't bring it
out to play very often.
She struck a pose. "So you like what you see?"
"Darlin', if those boys don't bone up the minute they see
you, I'll dye my hair pink." He handed her a riding crop and
several long strips of leather. "Just to complete the look."
"I won't ask where you managed to find one of these at
this hour." She looped the soft leather and tucked them into
the side of her skirt, then accepted the whip. Her gaze
scooted down his body. Talk about boning up...
She grinned. "You're enjoying your job again, I see."
"I'm a man, you're breathtaking, and a reaction is
natural." His grin faded, his expression becoming serious. "Be
careful in there, and remember, just give the word and we'll
be with you in seconds."
She nodded, placed a kiss on his cheek, then stepped back
and called to that place deep within, where the hound dog lay
waiting. Energy surged in response, running through her,
around her, momentarily snatching away sight and sense as it
reshaped and changed her body.
In beagle form, she headed towards the warehouse.
She pricked her ears and sniffed the air as she trotted
down the hill. Though she knew there were at least a dozen
cops scattered around the area, she couldn't hear them, and
she certainly couldn't smell them. Jack had said he'd called in
the best, and it looked as if he hadn't been exaggerating.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
143
And she knew then that the only reason she was going into
that warehouse at all was because she was the only one who
had a hope of sorting out friend from foe via smell. Especially
if those two men in there also happened to be face shifters.
She slowed as she approached the warehouse, searching
the air for the aroma of the man who stood near the
entrance. Pine and musk, intermingled with the stale stench
of sweat, teased her nostrils. She wrinkled her nose and
moved a little closer. Damn it, why did villains never seem to
bathe? Or was it simply something in their base smell that
made them seem so sour to her senses?
She slipped in through the semi-open door and stopped in
the shadows. Villain number one was half concealed by a
wooden crate, and more than half asleep. She went back
outside, shifted shaped, then boldly thrust open the door.
There was a scramble of movement, then a voice said,
"Stop right there, and get your hands ... Jesus!"
"Mr. Harding?" she said, keeping her voice low, throaty.
"I'm here, as requested."
His gaze scooted down her body, and came back up, filled
with heat. "Lady, as much as I hate to admit it, I think you've
got the wrong address."
She slapped the whip lightly against her thigh, watching
him for several long minutes. The smell of his excitement
began to stain the air. "This is one-three-four Jaybel Drive, is
it not?"
"Well, yeah, but—"
"Then I have the right address." She slid her gaze slowly
down his body, then deliberately licked her lips. "I must say,

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
144
you're in better shape than some of the other clients I've ...
cared for ... here."
He adjusted himself quickly, cast a quick, almost furtive
look toward the shadows on his right, then looked back at
her. His change of plans was evident in the lustful light in his
eyes. "Then maybe I am Mr. Harding. What do you plan to do
for me?"
She strode towards him, her stilettos drumming a sharp
tattoo on the concrete. The noise wouldn't carry to the other
guard, simply because this warehouse was large and divided
by lots of rooms.
She stopped when there were still several feet between
them, and raised the whip, pressing the tip lightly against his
chest. "That depends on how rough you like it." She let her
gaze slide down to his hand. "That gun real, or is it a toy you
bought along for us to play with?"
He licked his lips. "What do you mean by play?"
She raised her eyebrows, and slid one hand up her thigh,
pushing up the skirt and touching herself lightly. "Cold metal
inserted in warm places can give a delicious thrill."
He made a strangled sort of sound, and tried to step
forward. She pressed the whip harder against his chest.
"Naughty boy. You paid to be spanked and dominated, not
the other way around."
His breathing was becoming more and more rapid, and the
scent of his desire swirled around her. Despite her utter
distaste for the man, she couldn't help being a little aroused
by what she was doing. Maybe this was a game she could
play with someone she liked.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
145
Grey, for instance.
She smiled at the thought, and in that moment, awareness
surged, a firestorm that burned through every nerve ending.
Eryn?
The voice was groggy, the question uncertain, but it was
Grey, there was no doubt about that. The surge of desire and
relief was evidence enough of that.
Here. She formed the answer in her mind, hoping he could
read it. She'd never attempted mind communication before—
hadn't even been aware she was capable of it. She slapped
the whip against the guard's hip and added in a stern voice.
"Strip, and do it quickly."
Strip?
Just taking care of guard number one.
By fucking him?
The question had a note of fury that made her smile.
You say that like fucking him would be a bad thing.
You are mine! The words reverberated through her mind
so loudly, she couldn't help wincing. Yet they also made her
heart race and her feet want to do a cheerful little dance. She
was his.
Was it only a day ago those same words had made her
furious?
I'm only joking, Grey. I'm merely getting him naked so he
thinks he's going to hit the jackpot. When I get close to him,
I'll Taser him unconscious.
So what the hell are you wearing that makes him think
he's going to get lucky?
Think leather, think dominatrix.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
146
There was a long pause. I don't think thinking about that is
a good idea.
She had to restrain her grin. Hang on a moment. Got to
take care of the guard.
She slid the tip of the whip down the guard's chest, and
lightly flicked it over his cock. He shuddered and swallowed.
"Nice," she said, sliding the whip down his shaft and lightly
toying with his balls. "Very nice. Turn around."
He did, his breathing so hard his whole body shook. Yet he
was still a little wary—tension rode his shoulders, and he
watched her over one shoulder. He still had the gun. She had
to be careful.
She stepped closer, resisting the urge to wrinkle her nose
at the stale smell of him. Forcing a smile, she met his gaze as
she rubbed her studded bra across the width of his back.
"Like that?"
His thick groan was answer enough. She snorted softly.
"I'm not convinced." She stepped back and slapped the whip
against his bare butt. "Spread your legs."
He did. Quickly.
"What do you want me to do, little boy?"
He gave another thick groan. "Rub your breasts up and
down my back."
She gave him another slap with the whip. "I didn't hear
the magic word."
"Please."
She slapped him again. "I don't believe you meant it. And
who gave you permission to look at me?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
147
"Pretty please," he repeated, his words a shudder of
excitement as he turned his head away.
She smiled grimly and reached back, wrapping her fingers
around the Taser.
"Get ready," she whispered, slipping the whip between his
spread legs, caressing him even as she pressed the Taser
against his back. He didn't make a sound, simply collapsed.
She caught the gun from his nerveless fingers, then stepped
back so he could fall.
"Guard number one down and out," she said softly, more
for Jack's benefit than Grey's.
She took one strip of leather from her waist and quickly
hog-tied the guard. Then she shifted shape, and began
weaving her way through the many rooms that separated her
from Grey.
Well done, Grey said. But I doubt the second guard will be
as dense as the first.
What can you tell me about him?
He's big. And a horse shifter.
Yum. I've never had a horse shifter before. I'm told they
rather live up to a stallion's reputation.
Damn it, Eryn, enough.
His voice held that note of fury again, and she felt like
laughing. If he was reacting so readily to her teasing, he did
indeed care.
So, does this sudden sense of propriety mean you intend
to explore our relationship further?
Not if you continue to talk about fucking other men.
I'm a mutt. Mutts have sex on the brain.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
148
I'd rather this mutt concentrate on the business at hand—
me.
I'm here because of you. And I'll do whatever it takes to
get you free. But could she have sex with another man while
Grey was watching? Deep down, she knew the answer was
no. Grey was the only man she wanted inside her.
What else can you tell me about the guard?
His name is Leon Harvey. He's ex-military, and hired help.
So he has no loyalty to our killer?
No. And the killer's name is Marcy Jones. Though he
prefers Marshall.
So he is officially a she?
Officially, yes.
Mentally?
A male who hates his feminine side.
So does he really want acceptance? Love? Or was that just
a line you were spinning to get me off the track.
No line. And don't forget babies.
She frowned. So why is he slicing these women up the way
he is if he wants babies? Surely, as a male, he could find a
woman to impregnate?
His male side is sterile.
So if he wants kids, he has to rely on the very part of him
he hates?
Yes. And the anger he feels is taken out on women who
are similar in looks.
Which also explained how he was getting into the bars. He
was going there as a fertile woman, not a sterile man.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
149
She trotted through yet another doorway and entered a
long corridor. The tang of cigarette smoke began to taint the
air, along with the faint stench of burnt flesh.
Silver, she thought. They'd chained Grey with silver. Which
would explain why he hadn't escaped. It would also stop her
from freeing him. Silver burned, and stopped, shifters of any
race. She swallowed the rising sense of sick fury and asked,
Your guard a smoker?
Yes.
Then I must be getting close. She hesitated, sniffing the
air. The scent of man was coming from the left of the
doorway ahead. The scent of desire and raw masculinity from
the right. Did Ms. Marshall and Leon say anything to each
other before Marshall left that would help me get close to this
man?
I was out of it a lot of the time. Grey hesitated. He was
going on about a special form of torture he had planned for
me before he kills me, but that's really it.
I think he was planning to drag me back here, torture me,
then kill me, while you watched.
He phoned you, didn't he?
Said he was you.
You weren't fooled. He sounded oddly proud.
My hormones weren't fooled. She shifted shape. I'm about
to enter. Don't react.
If you look as good as I think you do, that's going to be a
little hard.
Oh, I expect you're going to be more than a little hard by
the time I've finished with you.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
150
Damn it, woman, what have you got—
You'll soon find out, she cut in, then cleared her voice and
added loudly, "Leon? Leon Harvey? I'm about to enter the
room, and I do not wish to be shot."
The sound of a safety being clicked off was unmistakable
in the sharp silence. "Do it. With your hands up."
She raised her hands and entered the room, glancing
immediately to the right.
And there she saw Grey.
Beaten and bloody.
Bruised and naked.
Tied spread-eagled to the wall behind him by silver chains
that had burned deep welts into his wrists and ankles.
Fury rushed through her, but she swallowed it down and
carefully schooled her face to blankness. Looking to her left,
she raised an eyebrow at the man holding the gun aimed at
her head and said calmly, "That the man Marshall wants me
to give the full treatment to?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
151
Chapter Seven
The big man with black hair and bay-colored skin didn't
even blink. "What are you blabbering about, woman?"
"That man." She waved a raised hand toward Grey,
ensuring her skirt rode up a little bit more as she did so.
Damn, that's a mighty fine thatch your flashing there,
came Grey's comment. But I do wish you'd stop flashing it at
all and sundry.
It's my thatch, and I'll damn well flash it where I want.
She hesitated, then said softly, God, you look like shit. To the
guard, she added, "Is he the man Marshall wants treated?"
I'm far better than I look. Marcia didn't seem to want to
cause me serious damage just yet. And I can see I'm going to
have a lot of trouble keeping your wilder tendencies all to
myself.
She hid her smile and kept her gaze on the guard. Hunger
flickered in the shifter's dark eyes, but there was no other
reaction. "What do you mean, treated?"
"What do you think I mean?" She allowed a saucy smile to
touch her lips, and lowered her voice a notch. "There's more
than one way to kill a man, you know. And some of them can
be both delicious and extremely, extremely, painful."
He frowned. "I don't know anything about this."
"Then call Marshall and confirm it, because my time is
expensive, and I don't think he's going to be happy if we
stand here wasting it."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
152
The big man continued to stare at her, the gun in his hand
unwavering. "I think I might. I don't like the feel of this."
"Fine. Shoot me or call him. Your choice. Just do
something because my arms are getting a little tired hanging
here above my head." She wriggled her fingers, making the
skirt rise and fall again.
He was a man. His gaze wavered briefly, and the heat in
his eyes grew. Though his heat was nothing compared to the
furnace running through her mind.
"I believe he should be at Dan's diner right about now,"
she continued, "waiting for his next ... er ... date. If you
hurry, you should catch him before he gets down to business
with her."
Marcia has a meeting with you?
I have twenty minutes to get there. Which left her five
minutes to free Grey, and no time to play with this guard.
You can't meet with him.
I not only intend to meet with him, but I intend to stop
him.
Not alone, you won't.
The guard frowned. "How do you know all that?"
"Maybe the fairies told me," she said dryly.
"He's paying you?"
"Big dollars for a few hours work." She arched an eyebrow,
letting her gaze slide slowly down his well muscled form. "If I
hurry just a little, shifter, you and I might be able to have a
little fun before the boss gets back."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
153
He lowered one weapon and raised the other. Even from
where she stood, it was obvious the rumors about horse
shifters were true. Man, he was big.
Too big for her liking.
"Is that a yes?" she added, staring pointedly at his
erection.
"I can't see how you'd know what you know if you weren't
on the books," he said. He pointed his chin at Grey. "What do
you intend to do?"
"Oh, lots of delicious things." She lowered her arms and
lightly slapped the whip against her leg. "I usually work alone,
but an audience might add to the fun. You want to watch?"
I thought the idea was to get him out of the room?
The idea is to getting him so aroused by what I'm doing to
you that he's not thinking straight, enabling me to get close
enough to Taser him unconscious.
Hang on, say that again? What you're doing to me? What
exactly are you going to do to me?
I'm not going to let this outfit go to waste, that's for sure.
His brief smile shimmered through her mind. Remember,
what you do to me, I shall do to you.
And, oh, she couldn't wait.
She tried to calm the excitement racing through her veins
and said to the guard. "Why don't you drag that box you were
sitting on over to that corner there?"
She pointed the whip to the corner to the right of Grey. It
put the man more in front than on the side, and would keep
him from seeing the Taser tucked into the back of her skirt.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
154
"Sounds fine to me." His voice was a little roughened by
desire, and she smiled, feeling better about herself than she
had in months. At the very least, the last few days had
proved that, despite the sexual drought, she'd lost none of
her allure as a woman.
She waited until the guard had positioned himself, then
strode over to Grey.
I have never seen a sexier walk, Grey commented, smoky
eyes gleaming with amusement and desire.
Hush. You're supposed to be dreading what I'm about to
do.
When you're looking like that? Darling, no man would be
capable of dreading what's coming.
The endearment made her heart do an odd little jig. She
stopped in front of him, and pressed the whip lightly against
his balls. "It seems the victim desires me."
The victim knows exactly what you're capable of, and
hungers for more.
She flicked the whip upwards, lightly striking his shaft. He
jumped, even though he had to know she would never hurt
him.
"By the time I'm finished, this will strain and quiver to sink
itself into my flesh, and you will be so mad with desire you
would rip out your heart if that is what I want."
Definitely. Aloud, he said, "Lady, you kid yourself."
His voice was a harsh croak, so different from the warm
richness of the voice that flowed through her mind.
She glanced at the guard, eyebrow raised. "Do you think
I'm kidding?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
155
"I think you're capable of anything." He settled back
against the wall, arms crossed and obviously ready to enjoy
the show. "And I don't believe you gave him permission to
speak."
"You are so right." She returned her gaze to Grey. "He
needs to be punished."
"Do your damnedest," Grey said flatly, his eyes gleaming
with cheeky challenge.
You'll regret that. It's just a shame I have to hurry. She
ran the whip up and down his cock. "I could strike this until to
you bleed, but that would lessen my fun and shorten
proceedings a little too much. Perhaps, then, I should try a
gentler form of punishment."
"Perhaps you should," the guard agreed eagerly. "Make
him experience pleasure, then make him watch someone else
achieving the pinnacle he is denied."
Now there's a self-serving suggestion if ever I've heard
one. She looked back at Grey. "That's sounds like an excellent
idea."
His amusement flooded her mind. As long as you promise
me the pinnacle later, he said, I can endure a long foreplay.
Done deal. She dropped to her knees and took him in her
mouth, moving him up and down as she turned to the guard
and held his gaze. His nostrils flared, and his breathing
quickened, as he undoubtedly imagined her doing the same
to him. Arousal and desire stung the air, so thick every breath
was filled with it.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
156
As the salty taste of Grey's semen began to touch her
taste buds, she withdrew and rose. "You," she said, pointing
the whip at the guard. "Come here."
She'd never seen anyone move so fast. "Kneel," she
demanded, as he drew close.
He dropped to his knees, his eyes glowing fiercely as he
stared up at her expectantly.
"Do not look at me," she added, flicking the whip across
his cheek.
He looked down. She reached back for the Taser, and
added, "Release yourself."
His thick groan was accompanied by the sound of a zipper
being pulled down.
You men are all the same, she said to Grey. Put the little
head in control, and common sense flies out the window.
Well, in this case it's understandable. You look like every
man's vision of paradise.
She couldn't help smiling. Thanks. And I think I'll use that.
Feel free.
So she did. "Prepare to enter paradise," she said to the
guard, then reached forward, tasering him unconscious.
"Guard number two down. It's safe to come in, Jack."
She turned once again to Grey, her gaze skating across his
body, taking in all the damage she really hadn't allowed
herself to fully see.
She touched a hand to the deep cut across his stomach—
one of many that decorated not only his stomach, but his
chest, arms and legs. They'd all stopped bleeding, but the
bruising underneath was just beginning to come out. Shifter

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
157
or not, he'd be sore for days. "God, you really do look like
shit."
Chain rattled as he tried to reach out and touch her. But
the chains pulled him up short and he hissed in frustration.
"Damn it, all I want to do is fold you in my arms and hold
onto you, and that's the one thing I can't do right now."
"Jack, bring bolt cutters with you." She rose up on her toes
and brushed a kiss across lips that looked swollen and sore.
"What did she—he—do to you?"
He grimaced. "She took what I once denied her."
She touched a hand to his cheek, staring into the ethereal
beauty of his eyes, seeing anger and something else,
something that gave her heart wings. It was recognition of
fate. Surrender to what was yet to be explored. "I don't
understand."
"Nor should you, because not a lot is known about face
shifters." He hesitated, taking a deep breath. "For a start, not
all of us are fertile. Of the twenty that I work with, less than
half the men have the ability to father children, and less than
a quarter of the women. I'm fertile, as is Marcia. But the
females of our race have an additional restriction—they can
only get pregnant with another face shifter."
"And Marcia wanted you to father her child."
He nodded. "I told her I would not waste my seed on
someone like her."
"You said that, knowing how unstable she was?"
"Yeah." He shrugged. "She wanted the truth, she got it.
She's hated me ever since."
"Did she try the other fertile men?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
158
"Yes. And got much the same response."
"So why fixate her hate on you?"
"Because I was her first rejection, and up until that
moment, I'd been pleasant to her. She probably believed I
liked her."
"So this—" She indicated the chains and his spread eagle
position. "Was a way of taking advantage of you? To try and
force conception?"
He nodded. "She drugged me and took your form. I
couldn't help reacting."
She frowned. "How did she even know about us?"
"She was at the bar when we met." He hesitated. "You
remember seeing a striking blonde holding court in the
corner?"
She nodded. That was where she'd forced an introduction
with Harrison. No wonder she'd caught that brief scent of
death—she'd been standing mere feet away from the
murderer!
"That was one of her forms. She said she also wore her
true form."
Which was the dark-haired woman she'd seen in the corner
booth. "I saw her talking to the last victim that night, but
made the connection far too late." She hesitated. "How did
she catch you?"
"She came to my hotel as you."
"How? I never touched her."
"It only has to be the lightest of touches. You probably
wouldn't have even noticed."
"But you knew I was drugged."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
159
"Yeah, but I also know that the drug can effect every
shifter breed differently. I thought you'd overcome the effects
and had come to give me hell." He shrugged ruefully. "As you
said, when a naked woman steps into the room, the little
head takes control and common sense flies out the window."
The sound of footsteps began to rattle across the concrete
in the other rooms. She smiled and dropped another gentle
kiss on his lips. "When this is all over, remind me to kiss the
rest of your bruises better."
"When this is all over, you're going to finish what you
started here," he said, dropping his gaze to his fading
erection.
"Gladly," she said. "But first, let's go catch that mad
hermaphrodite."
* * * *
Eryn accepted the coat Jack handed her with a grunt of
thanks. The night air had gone from merely bitter to freezing,
and even though she already wore one coat, it just wasn't
enough. Especially now that Grey's warmth no longer pressed
into her back.
Her gaze roamed across the night, searching for some sign
of Grey. He'd left a few minutes ago to get into position, and
had disappeared into the shadows as easily as a vampire.
Obviously, there was a lot more to face shifters than anyone
knew. But he'd promised to be close, promised that under no
circumstances would Marcia get near enough to hurt her. She
trusted that promise.
She just didn't trust Marcia.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
160
The woman was demented, and demented minds did not
think the way normal folk did.
Jack glanced at his watch. "It's time for you to get going."
She blew out a breath and nodded. The only reason Jack
and his crew weren't storming the place was because
everyone knew their foe might not be who they were
expecting him to be. There were six people currently in the
diner. Marcia could be any one of them. She might not even
be wearing Grey's form—might not change until he—she—
knew for certain Eryn was going to turn up. And since Marcia
was a trained operative, then she'd probably see a police
charge long before they got near the building.
She buttoned up the second coat and shoved her hands
into the pockets. "You'll come the minute I give the word?"
She knew he would, but she just wanted to hear him confirm
it yet again, if only to calm the rising tide of nerves.
"Darlin', I'll come for you anytime you want me to."
She laughed, as he'd no doubt intended, and swatted him
lightly on the arm. "One of these days, you're going to meet a
woman ready, willing and able to take you up on your
outrageous suggestions, and then you'll be in deep shit."
"Ah, but what woman is going to put up with her man
getting his jollies spying on other women?" He shook his head
in mock sorrow. "I love my work, and I'm not going to leave
it, so love and me ain't ever going to be companions."
"Just wait. It'll happen." Her gaze went to the diner again.
"Okay, I'm off."
"Just be careful."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
161
She nodded, hunched her shoulders a little, and then
stepped out into the wind. It whipped around her, blowing her
hair ten different directions as she trudged towards the diner.
"Evening Eryn," Dan greeted as she blew in through the
doorway. "You're a little early today, aren't you?"
She struggled to shut the door, then blew her hair out of
her face as she turned around. The scent of death was
evident, but the ceiling fans were slowly spinning, moving the
air, moving the scent. She couldn't pinpoint where that smell
was coming from.
"Or awfully late, as the case may be," she said, undoing
one coat as she looked over the other patrons. None of them
looked familiar. None of them smelled familiar.
As they'd suspected, Marcia had come here wearing
someone else's form.
"You want a coffee?" Dan asked.
"And a burger."
She made her way past the tables, taking in the scents as
she did so. None of the patrons sitting there smelled of death.
Frowning, she slid into a booth next to the window, wishing
there was something she could do other than simply play the
helpless bait.
She crossed her arms, staring at the other customers,
wondering which one of them was the fake. Marcia was here,
she was sure of it, so where the hell was she? Or rather, who
the hell was she?
And for that matter, where the hell was Grey? He'd
promised to stay close, but there was no shiver of recognition
coming from any of the people here.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
162
So where was he, if not inside the diner?
Dan brought over her coffee and burger, and the rich smell
made her stomach rumble. It was a reminder that she hadn't
eaten in a long while.
"You sound pretty hungry, Missy. You want me to start
cooking another?"
"My stomach can handle one," she said with a grin. "Two
before I go to bed might give me nightmares."
He nodded, and she dug into her burger, relishing it even
as she kept her eyes and ears open.
Three of the patrons chattered between themselves, their
topic the movie they'd just seen. Two others read
newspapers, and none of them looked like villains. But then,
why would they? Even if Marcia was one of them, she'd been
at this game long enough to look "normal."
Once she'd finished the burger, she picked up her coffee
and leaned back. If not for the fact that she'd caught the whiff
of evil when she'd first walked in, she might have thought this
a waste of time, that Marcia had decided against coming here.
But why would she do that, when she thought she had
Grey at her mercy and wanted to complete her revenge
against him?
It didn't make sense. So where was she? What the hell
was she waiting for?
Eryn yawned hugely. God, she was so tired—which was
damn surprising after she'd slept all day. But then, she
thought with a grin, if you factored in her exertions with Grey,
maybe it wasn't so surprising. Either way, she definitely
needed stronger coffee to keep her awake. She glanced

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
163
toward the kitchen and realized Dan was watching her. Had
been watching her for some time.
A chill ran through her, seeming to sap her strength in an
instant.
Oh God...
She glanced at the coffee cup, at the empty plate, then
back at Dan. He grinned.
Only it wasn't Dan's grin. It was something colder. More
deadly.
Dan wasn't Dan. Dan was Marcia.
"Jack, get in here now," she said, only the words stuck in
her throat and wouldn't come out. She thrust to her feet, the
sudden movement spinning the diner around and around.
He'd put something in the food. The coffee.
She was an idiot. A complete idiot.
Dan was approaching, his footsteps seeming to
reverberate through her head. There was anger in his gaze
now, and something in his right hand, something he hid from
the other patrons.
A knife.
A knife that flickered with blue fire under the diner's lights.
It was silver.
He couldn't get her with that knife. Couldn't lodge it in her
flesh. She'd never be able to shift shape if he did.
Without really thinking, she called to her hunter soul.
Magic swept through her, but the drug in her veins was
slowing all reactions, even the shapeshifting one. She smelled
his closeness, heard the sweep of air even as her body gained
beagle form. She dodged under the blade, felt the scrape of

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
164
fire as it cut across the flesh along her spine, then launched
herself at his throat.
He threw up his arms to protect himself. She latched onto
his forearm, her teeth sinking deep into his flesh, the metallic
taste of blood rushing into her mouth as she twisted and tore
at his arm. He staggered backwards, his scream a sound of
fury and pain combined.
Again the air screamed its warning. She released him,
dropping to the ground, trying to dodge the blow. She wasn't
fast enough by half. The blade sliced into her thigh, hitting
bone and lodging there. Agony flared, running like wildfire
through the rest of her body.
The woman hiding in Dan's friendly form laughed. It was a
cold, cruel sound that abruptly cut off, then became an odd
choking sound.
"I came here with orders to kill you, Marcia," Grey said, his
voice as cold as Eryn had ever heard it. "It was something I
wasn't going to enjoy until now. For touching her, for lodging
that knife in her flesh, I will watch you die and I will enjoy it."
"The police are coming," the man who was Marcia gasped.
"You know the rules. Do nothing when discovery could occur."
Grey snorted. "The rules, in this case, stopped applying
ages ago. Good-bye Marcia."
There was a slight hiss of air, another gargled sound, then
the thump of a body hitting the ground. Then warm hands
were on her and the knife removed.
Eryn?
His voice was warm in her mind, but it was far away, so
far away.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
165
I have to go. I can't stay and answer the questions your
boss undoubtedly has. Not yet. Heat brushed across her
forehead. A kiss so sweet and tender her heart ached. It may
take a while, but I'll be back. I promise you that. Just wait for
me, Eryn. Please.
Then he was gone, and all that was left was the familiar
coldness of sleeping alone.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
166
Chapter Eight
"Happy Birthday, Jack." Eryn raised her wine glass and
clinked it lightly against his. "How does it feel to be over the
hill and fast approaching forty?"
"Old." Amusement touched his blue eyes. "And I'm still
waiting for this goddess you reckon is out there. I think I'm
about ready for a woman to call my bluff and enrich my
world."
She grinned. "Maybe said goddess knows you're still not
ready to settle down. Maybe she's right under your nose, and
you're just not looking down."
He raised an eyebrow, the amusement in his expression
becoming decidedly sexy. "The woman under my nose right
now is one I'd willingly party with, only she keeps refusing my
offers."
"Because you're not really serious."
"Aren't I?"
"No." She took a sip of wine, then pointed with her glass at
the redhead dancing with Bob. "Amy's been known to throw a
lustful look or two your way."
"She's not serious, either. Trust me on that."
"You've flirted?"
"I flirt with everyone. She ran away faster than most."
Eryn grinned. "Maybe she has deep feelings she's afraid to
reveal."
"I doubt it." He took a sip of wine, then said, overly casual,
"So, how's your life been lately?"

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
167
She shrugged, feigning an indifference she didn't feel.
"Same old same old." Back to working with boring old farts
and wondering if her sex drive had upped and left.
It had been six months since she'd last seen Grey. Trust
him, he'd said. Wait for him, he'd said. Well, she had, and she
would, but the hope that she'd actually see him again was
beginning to fade.
"You sure you don't want to come work with me?" Jack
said. "We really could use your nose on a permanent basis."
"I'll think about it."
"You will?" He raised his eyebrows. "I've been nagging you
for months—why the change of heart?"
"Maybe I'm tired of working with boring old farts."
"Well, I've got the paperwork all written up. Just give me
the word and you're mine."
She grinned again. "Jack, I will never be yours."
His sigh was sorrowful—an effect spoiled by the cheeky
gleam in his eyes. "Ain't that a sad truth. You want to dance?"
"Nope. I might go out and get some fresh air. This room is
feeling a little close." Besides, she was feeling a little
depressed. Or maybe even a little sorry for herself. And
definitely a little angry at Grey for making promises and not
keeping them.
She finished her drink in one gulp that had her head
swimming, then made her way through the dancers and
headed toward the backyard.
Outside, the warmth of the day still lingered, and the night
was still and bright. She closed her eyes, raising her face to
the silvery light of the full moon, feeling the power of it wash

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
168
through her veins. Some shifters, and not all of them
children, believed the full moon had the power to grant
wishes. It wasn't something she believed in.
And the moon had certainly never granted any of her
wishes.
She blew out a breath and opened her eyes. The music
from the room behind her throbbed across the night, a rich
sound reminding her of that first night in the bar, and the
moment her gaze had met Grey's.
And once again, she experienced the sensations of that
incredible moment. Her heart leapt to her throat, and her
breathing stalled as the world around her seemed to fade into
silence. Fierce desire surged, burning her skin, sending little
beads of perspiration skittering across her flesh. And all she
wanted to do was find him, press herself against him. Feel
him on her, in her.
The memories were so strong, her reactions so fierce, that,
for a moment, it was easy to believe that he was here, that
the reactions were real rather than a response to memory.
But the night remained silent except for the music and the
distant wash of sea against sand. The air was filled with the
scent of the many wildflowers inhabiting Jack's untended
lawn, as well as the mellow aroma of alcohol. Raw masculinity
and thick desire—the only two scents she could classify as
Grey's—weren't even a blip on the smell radar.
She crossed her arms, her gaze sweeping the extent of
Jack's small yard. Suddenly, she felt too confined by
boundaries. She needed to be alone, needed to run, needed
to go ... where?

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
169
The wash of water seemed to grow stronger. The sea. She
needed to go see the sea. She didn't question the desire, just
turned around and walked back into the house.
"Jack," she shouted, once she'd spotted him. "I'm going for
a walk."
He gave her a wave of acknowledgment. She grabbed her
cardigan, just in case the wind was cooler down near the
water, then, after wrapping it around her shoulders, she
headed out.
The streets were silent, still. No surprise, considering it
was nearly three in the morning. She smiled, enjoying the
peace, letting it fill her, calm her, as she strolled toward the
ocean.
The wind down near the sand was every bit as cold as
she'd thought it was going to be. She stopped near the steps
and leaned against the railing, watching the moonlight play
among the waves, wishing Grey was here to enjoy it with her.
Damn it, why couldn't she stop thinking about him tonight?
"Perhaps because I don't intend to let you stop thinking
about me," he said, his voice so close it whispered heat past
her ear. "Not tonight, not ever."
Her heart did a giddy little dance, and a gasp that was all
joy escaped her lips. But as she tried to turn around and face
him, he stopped her, his hands so warm, yet so unbelievably
gentle on her arms.
"I don't know whether to kiss you silly for coming back,"
she said, leaning back against him. His arms slid around her
waist, holding her tight. She closed her eyes, and somehow

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
170
found the strength to add, "Or smack you senseless for the
heartache you've caused me."
"I'm sorry." His lips brushed her ear, sending a flash fire of
desire surging through every nerve ending. "But I dared not
risk seeing you again until I'd filled out the appropriate
paperwork and had all the right approvals."
"You're kidding?" She leaned her head back and met his
gaze. His eyes were as bright and as silver as the moon.
Perhaps the moon had listened. Perhaps she'd bought him
back to her.
"Not kidding," he said, brushing his fingers down her
cheek. She trembled, and his gaze darkened imperceptibly. "I
told you, the mob I work for is top secret and highly
classified. Anyone I intend to see on a permanent basis has to
be fully checked out."
"And that took six months?"
"Bureaucracy." He shrugged.
"So I'm approved?"
"Oh, yes."
She smiled and raised a hand, hooking it around his neck.
"And what about this business of seeing me permanently—
don't you think I should have had a say in that before you
cleared it with your people?"
"I believe," he said softly, his smile evident in his voice,
"that we have already discussed the matter. You agreed to be
mine."
Her knees did their usual "almost unable to support you"
act. "I believe I was insane with lust at the time."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
171
"Ah." Mischief shimmered in his eyes. "Meaning I'll have to
get you mad with lust every time I want agreement on certain
matters?"
"Depends on the matters in question."
"Only the important ones. The unimportant ones, like
where we're going to live, I will leave to your discretion."
"Is that a proposal? To a woman who is basically a
stranger?"
He grinned. "I thought we'd just agreed not to discuss
important matters until you're mad with lust? Besides, I do
believe you owe me a pinnacle."
Amusement bubbled through her. "Well, I suppose I do.
Shall we go somewhere more private?"
"This from the woman who insists on flashing her thatch to
all and sundry." He dropped a kiss on her shoulder, sending a
warm shiver scampering across her skin. "Besides, moonlight
is the perfect accompaniment to lovemaking, especially for
shifters of every breed."
"Not when we're on the main beach road and inviting
arrest." And yet, the shifter side of her did a mad caper at the
thought. Exhibitionism was part of her nature. She knew it,
and he knew it.
He undid the cardigan's loose knot and slid it from her
shoulders, looping it carelessly around the post. "What can
they see?" he said, his breath a heated caress against her
skin as he kissed her ear, her neck, her rapidly beating pulse
point. "A man and a woman cuddling close as they watch the
ocean."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
172
She licked her lips, closed her eyes, enjoying the
sensations rioting through her.
"Of course," he continued, sliding his fingers under her
top. "If the woman happens to be naked, then they might
have their suspicions."
Her breath caught as he teased the hard nub of a nipple.
"If the woman is going to be naked, she insists the man be
naked as well."
His throaty chuckle just about made her puddle. Lord, she
was so ready for him, and he'd barely even touched her. Was
there ever going to be a time when they could actually enjoy
a long lovemaking session?
"What makes you think he's not naked?"
Her eyes sprang open and she looked up at him. "You're
not!"
Amusement touched the lips she just wanted to kiss
forever. "Aren't I?"
"You have a shirt on. I can see that."
"Ah, but what about the bits you can't see?"
She felt for his leg, and met bare flesh. She swallowed, as
aroused by her discovery as she would have been had he
touched her. "You're wearing shorts."
He shifted, and suddenly she was touching heated flesh,
feeling the desire throbbing through his shaft. Felt him grow
even harder under her touch.
"Oh my," was all she could think to say.
"Oh my, indeed," he agreed. "And it's been like that since
you led me toward the pinnacle in that warehouse six months
ago, but wouldn't let me reach it."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
173
"Ah," she said. "Then I guess we'd better take care of
unfinished matters before we move on to more leisurely
discussions."
"You're not naked yet."
"And you call yourself a well trained government man?
Don't they teach you basic stuff, like undressing women in a
hurry?"
"The methods are rough and ready."
The deepening roughness in his voice made the low down
pool of desire tremble with expectation. "I think the situation
calls for such measures."
"Perhaps it does. Stand still."
He moved back a little, and she felt a little cooler without
his heat radiating across her skin. Metal touched her skin,
briefly cold, then her skirt and panties were falling to her feet.
Where the knife had come from she didn't know, and didn't
care.
"Now how am I going to go back to the party when my
clothes have been sliced apart?"
His arms went around her again, and he pulled her against
him. He might be wearing a shirt, but it was undone, and the
warm press of flesh against flesh had her hormones dancing
in delight.
"I have no intention of letting you go back to the party. I
have six months of loving to catch up on. You're mine for the
next week."
"I have to work."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
174
His hands slid under her top and cupped her breasts,
pressing them lightly together as his thumbs circled and
teased her nipples. "You're calling in sick."
"My boss won't like that."
"I don't care what your boss likes. I only care what you
like." He slid one hand back down to her stomach and pressed
her back against him even harder, until it felt as if their flesh
would fuse and their bodies would become one. Lord, he felt
so good, so hard and hot. Heat pooled where his fingertips
rested, quickly burning deep inside. "Tell me what you'd like
right now, Eryn."
For a moment, the exhibitionist part of her warred with the
need to simply feel him inside. The risk taker won.
She turned in his arms, and raised a hand to his cheek.
"Explore me," she said softly.
"Gladly." The hunger in his eyes made her tremble deep
inside. "But I'm afraid the exploration will be fast. I want you
so bad it's all I can do to just stand here."
"Then perhaps the exploration should wait."
He smiled and braced his hands on either side of the
railing. "I have been waiting to taste you and touch you for
six long months. Reaching the peak can damn well wait until
we're both ready to break."
She was about to admit she'd reached that point the
minute he appeared, but his mouth claimed hers. For the
longest time there was nothing but this man and this kiss and
the way it made her feel and the way it felt so right.
When they finally parted, both of them were breathing so
heavily the wash of the ocean was barely audible. His kisses

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
175
moved down her neck, reached the top of her breast. She
closed her eyes, throwing her head back and arching her
spine, offering him the swollen and aching peaks of her
breasts. He complied with her unspoken request, running his
tongue back and forth, until her whole body was shaking with
the desire to feel his mouth on her nipples again. When he
took in one throbbing nub and sucked on it fiercely, pleasure
exploded and she groaned.
His tongue moved on, trailing liquid heat down her
stomach. Anticipation sung through every fiber. When his
tongue delved into her moistness, she gasped in sheer
delight. His hands touched her thighs, gently pushing. She
widened her stance, allowing him greater access. Sensations
flowed like liquid fire through her veins, until her whole body
throbbed to the tune of that gentle yet insistent touch. The
quivering quickly became a tide that threatened to overload
her senses.
"Oh God, stop. Stop," she gasped. "I want ... you ...
inside."
He didn't hear her. Or didn't care. Just kept on tasting her
with his tongue. Then the sensations did overload her, and
her body bucked in elemental delight as her orgasm ripped
through her. She clawed at the railing, holding on tight as she
shuddered and drowned in a myriad of delicious sensations.
They'd barely begun to ease when his lips caught hers
again.
"This time," he whispered against her mouth, his gaze
fierce as it held hers. "You will howl your pleasure to the
moon."

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
176
Then he was inside, thrusting deep, filling her, liquefying
her. It felt so good, so fine, that she groaned again—a thick
sound he echoed. Her body tightened against him, and the
barely sated flow of pleasure began to spiral upwards again.
His body plundered as his lips had plundered, and there was
nothing gentle about it. The rich ache grew, spreading from
that low point deep in her belly and washing quickly across
the rest of her, until every inch burned and she could barely
breathe.
Through it all, his gaze held hers, as if demanding she pay
attention, demanding she acknowledge what lie between
them. Which she had many times during the long six months
that had separated them. This was little more than proof of
what she'd long known.
That this was right.
They were right.
It didn't matter if they were still strangers in so many
ways. They had the hours to explore each other, learn about
each other. A lifetime of hours, in fact.
Marry me, Eryn. Spend your life with me. Be mine forever.
I was yours from the minute you asked me to dance, and
then proceed to show me your definition of it.
His amusement bubbled through her mind, lifting her so
high it felt as if they were dancing amongst the stars.
That was your fault, woman. You looked too damn hot.
That's not much of an excuse.
Who said it was an excuse?
He kissed her then, his mouth as demanding as his body.
His strokes became faster, harder, so that her whole body

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
177
shuddered with it and it felt as if she would shatter into a
thousand pleasured pieces.
Then we've reached an agreement? came his thought.
Only if I'm not going to have to listen to you blabber
through my mind every time we make love.
In other words, shut up and concentrate?
Sounds like a plan to me. She wrapped her arms around
his neck and smiled into his beautiful eyes. After all, you have
a pinnacle you've waited six months to reach.
I'm reaching it, my love.
Then take me with you.
He did.
And all she could do was thank God she'd fallen for a man
who did what he was told where it mattered most.
Copyright 2007 by Keri Arthur
Published by ImaJinn Books, www.imajinnbooks.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without
prior written permission of both the copyright holder and the
above publisher of this book, except by a reviewer, who may
quote brief passages in a review. For information, address:
ImaJinn Books, P.O. Box 545, Canon City, CO 81212, or call
toll free 1-877-625-3592.

LifeMate Connections: Eryn
by Keri Arthur
178
If you are connected to the Internet, take a
moment to rate this eBook by going back to
your bookshelf at www.fictionwise.com.

