
Praise for Killer Presentations with Your iPad
“You will throw out the overabuse of bullet point ‘traditional’ slides and, instead, 
dive into the powerful ‘four gears’ (Creativity, Technology, Strategy, and Psychol-
ogy) so vital to making ultracompelling ‘Killer Presentations’ that will radically 
transform how you interact and engage your audience with an iPad—or any tablet.”
—Rose Newton, Assistant Professor of Communication Design,  
Texas State University
“Killer Presentations with Your iPad is the ultimate book, especially for those com-
panies that strive to be learning organizations and that want to be far ahead of the 
pack by giving strategic presentations that make a significant difference.” 
—Neil Douglas and Terry Wykowski, authors of 
Beyond Reductionism and From Belief to Knowledge
“Killer Presentations with Your iPad is a must-read. I found it interesting, insightful, 
and enjoyable to read. Shaped with creativity at the very core of the book, it should 
be kept by your desk and used as a constant guide for giving extraordinary presen-
tations that deliver spectacular results.”
—Steve Coker, Course Director, Senior Leader 
Education Division, Joint Special Operations University, 
United States Special Operations Command
“It’s not just about creating stunning visuals and applying the latest technology— 
it’s about the ultimate winning strategy. Killer Presentations with Your iPad will 
not just ‘supercharge’ and inspire you—it will show you how to be the ultimate 
rock-star presentation performer and WIN BIG!”
—Rad Bielicki, Creative Director at Zen Machine Inc.
“This superb book uses sound psychological principles to create stunning and effec-
tive presentations that will inspire you and your audience to strive for something 
‘beyond the ‘moredinary’’ and into the extraordinary!”
—Michael Devoley, MA, Professor of Psychology, 
Lone Star College–Montgomery
“Wow . . . is this ever needed in the communications world . . . it’s about time some-
one tackled it head on and with such insight!”
—Philip Morabito, CEO, Pierpont Communications, Inc.

This page intentionally left blank 

Killer  
Presentations
iPad
Ray Anthony and Bob LeVitus
with Barbara Boyd
how to engage 
your audience and 
win more business 
with the world’s 
greatest gadget
with Your
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Athens  London  Madrid   
Mexico City  Milan  New Delhi  Singapore  Sydney  Toronto

Copyright © 2014 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States  
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a 
database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-181663-2
MHID: 0-07-181663-1
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-181662-5,    
MHID: 0-07-181662-3.
E-book conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a  
trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in 
corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work 
is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the 
work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, 
distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You 
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to 
use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES 
OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED 
FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK 
VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,  
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in 
the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor 
its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any 
damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through 
the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, 
punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been 
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such 
claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.


	
Foreword
v
	
Acknowledgments
vii
	
Owner’s Manual
ix 

	C h a p t e r 1	 The Big Picture: The World Has Changed.
1 
Have You Changed Your Presentations?
	C h a p t e r 2	 Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
19
	C h a p t e r 3	 What Makes a Killer Presentation?
43
	C h a p t e r 4	 The P-XL2 Model:  
Gearing Up the Power of Your iPad
63
	C h a p t e r 5	 Creating Your iPad Presentation
85
	C h a p t e r 6	 Expert’s Corner: Advanced Ideas and Tips  
for Killer iPad Presentations
117
	C h a p t e r 7	 Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings  
with Your iPad
149
	C h a p t e r 8	 How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
167
	C h a p t e r 9	 Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
187
	
Resources
217
	
Index
241
C o n t e n t s
iii

This page intentionally left blank 

T
his book is very different and very valuable. Don’t be fooled by the title. 
It is not “about” the iPad—since I use a Nexus 7. This book is about 
reimagining, reinventing, and remaking your presentations even if you are 
using napkins and a pen in a coffee shop or drawing your ideas in dirt 
around a campfire. This is a must-have book even for people who simply 
want to kick butt and change the world.
Ray and Bob’s presentation model is called P-XL²—Presentation Excel-
lence Squared. It focuses on combining creativity, psychology, strategy, and 
technology in ways that not only cater to left-brain intellect, but also stir 
up and ignite right-brain emotions and feelings. In short, it’s a model for 
transforming any presentation or speech into an enchanting experience.
Read this book and it will help you create an inferno of possibilities 
and opportunities that propel you ahead at warp speed. By applying the 
uber-imaginative ideas and techniques in it, you will not only enchant oth-
ers into action, but find that giving Killer Presentations is immensely more 
satisfying, pleasurable, and worthwhile for you. The results you get will 
amaze and astound you.
	
Guy Kawasaki 
	
Advisor to Motorola  
	
and former chief evangelist of Apple
F o r e w o r d
v

This page intentionally left blank 

From Ray Anthony
Special thanks to my genius friend Charlie Lindahl, who did extensive, 
superb research for the Resources section along with contributing lots of 
great feedback and insights. Barbara Boyd is the ultimate professional, who 
helped us out with her writing contributions and iPad app reviews. Barbara 
is the author of several books about the iPad and Pinterest marketing. She 
was a delight to work with. Donna Mosher, my excellent editor, wonder-
fully helped to get my chapters tight and sparkling. Thank you so much, 
Donna, for your expertise and experience that made the real difference. 
Much appreciation goes to my two graphic designer friends, Allison Ashton 
and Leonard Broussard, who did illustrations for the book. Both of you are 
creative illustrators to the max. Thanks to Professor Michael Devoley of 
Lonestar College, who gave me great advice and feedback on the psychol-
ogy of communication. The fine people who posed for my photos include 
Peter Han, Christie Cannon, Serena Duncan, and Lori Van Deilen. Your 
modeling added much to the book. Final thanks go to Casie Vogel of 
McGraw-Hill, who was a delight to work with, and Carole Jelen of Water-
side Products, our most competent, “get-results” literary agent. And I thank 
Almighty God for giving me a rich life filled with overflowing opportuni-
ties and wonderful people!
From Bob LeVitus
Thanks to Ray Anthony for asking me to become a part of his vision. You’re 
the man! Thanks also to Charlie Lindahl for his excellent research and 
numerous helpful suggestions. And thanks to Barbara Boyd for ­stepping in 
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
vii

at the eleventh hour and doing magnificent work. I’d be remiss if I didn’t 
also offer profuse thanks to our editor, Casie Vogel, for her ideas, for her 
enthusiasm, and, most of all, for her patience with yours truly when dead-
lines loomed. I’d also like to thank everyone else at McGraw-Hill who had 
a hand in the book you now hold in your hand. I may not know you by 
name, but I appreciate the hard work you put into this project. Thank you 
all. And finally, thanks to my superagent, Carole “Swifty” Jelen, of Water-
side Productions. She’s been my literary agent for my whole career (almost 
25 years and still going strong), and she is the best in the biz, bar none. I 
don’t say it often enough, Carole, but you freakin’ rock!
viii	
Acknowledgments

Owner’s Manual
Important Safety and Operating Instructions
l
WARNING. When using an innovative, vanguard book such as this  
   one, certain precautions should be considered prior to implement-
ing the exclusive information, ideas, tips, and techniques within. Please 
observe to the following:
This is not a how-to book, but a how-to-magnificently-
■
■
succeed book.
Read through this whole book thoroughly to get maximum benefits 
■
■
from it.
Using creative presentation ideas such as those in the following pages 
■
■
can become an addictive activity.
Anecdotal evidence shows that using the concepts and techniques in 
■
■
this book has resulted in a drastic reduction in audience inattention, 
yawning, e-mail checking, restless leg syndrome, eye rolling, throat 
clearing, and seat squirming during presentations.
Sudden withdrawal (“presentation detox”) from using boring, text-
■
■
laden PowerPoint slides can result in bouts of euphoria, freedom of 
expression, and elation as you transition to our new P-XL2 Model™ 
that focuses on combining creativity, technology, strategy, and 
psychology for extraordinary results.
Ethics must be considered. Giving extreme Killer Presentations can 
■
■
decimate competition from rival presenters, salespeople, or others 
vying for the same goal. It is not warranted to pulverize your competi-
tors by using the intense shock and ah! power in this book.
ix

Whether you are an aspiring motivational speaker or an established 
■
■
professional one, be warned that applying the material in this book 
will cause standing ovations to increase, giving you goose bumps, 
flushing and redness of the face, and warming of the heart.
The producers of this product are not responsible for any potential 
■
■
adverse side effects as a result of its use, including a swelled head, 
shameless bragging, or impulse buying as a result of sudden career 
advancements, gains in making money, escalations in prestige, 
popularity, or power brought about by this book.
Congratulations and Thanks for Buying This Book!
We hope you enjoyed our opening tongue-in-cheek introduction. But in 
all seriousness, we believe that this book will certainly give you powerful, 
new, and vital ways to reimagine and reinvent your presentations so that 
they produce all kinds of benefits for you and your company. The very fact 
that we call this section the “Owner’s Manual,” instead of the traditional 
“Introduction,” should give you a first-peek preview of how different this 
book is.
Important:
	 1.	We wrote this book with the assumption that you have a working 
knowledge of how to use your iPad already. We will not cover the 
basics, but at times we may give some refresher tips to ensure your 
facility using your iPad in a presentation.
	2.	If you want to quickly get up to operating speed using your iPad with 
specific presentation apps along with useful tips, go to Chapters 5, 6, 
and 7 first and then read the rest of the chapters in order from 
­Chapter 1.
This Is a Hybrid Book About Four Key “Wares”
While our book focuses on the digital power of various impressive tech-
nologies, grabbing that huge sale, giving a winning pitch to investors, or 
launching into an impressive elevator pitch is as much about masterful 
presentation skills as it is about a great gadget like the iPad, along with 
x	
Owner’s Manual

its abundantly cool apps. However, when you combine the creativity-
­amplifying magic of an iPad with our P-XL2 Model and add in the new 
material and innovative techniques offered in the following chapters, you 
will learn how to impress your audiences as never before and achieve 
results you thought were beyond your grasp. A top-notch golf club or 
expensive camera does not a skilled golfer or photographer make, but they 
can give that critical, winning edge to those who already possess superior 
technique and skills. That’s why we chose to offer you the newest and 
most innovative strategies to win big with the help of your iPad in the 
presentation game.
Killer Presentations with Your iPad: How to Engage Your Audience and 
Win More Business with the World’s Greatest Gadget is all about how to 
give a stunning and riveting presentation using your iPad. Throughout the 
book, you will experience four primary “wares”:
Knowledge-ware.
■
■
 A great mix of traditional and new information 
about general presentation topics that will be invaluable in giving you 
a competitive edge
Hard-ware.
■
■
 Key iPad features, tips, and functionality along with cool 
presentation accessories
Soft-ware.
■
■
 New and established apps that give communication power 
to any type of presentation or speech
Idea-ware.
■
■
 Over 100 ideas and examples of imaginative concepts, 
approaches, and strategies that will transform your presentations, 
catapulting them out of the PowerPoint text dark ages into the 
exhilarating, visual, digital twenty-first century
At its essential core, Killer Presentations is a category-defining work 
focused on powerful, innovative communication that can have a profound 
effect on you and your audience. Get ready to explore new vistas of presen-
tation possibilities!
What Makes Killer Presentations Such a 
Different and Vital Book for You?
In most books, the introduction chapter goes through a summary descrip-
tion of every chapter. We’re not going to bore you by doing that. You can 
	
	
Owner’s Manual
xi

read the Table of Contents. Instead, we will tell you what makes this book 
unique and exceptional to help you become a Killer Presenter.
Focused on the iPad
You will learn about all the most important strategies for using your iPad 
to give a stunning presentation: apps, tools, tips, techniques, and ideas just 
for the iPad. No guessing involved. We’ll make it easy on you!
Compelling Photos and Screenshots
While we strive to describe things simply and accurately, we have included 
dozens of interesting photos throughout the book to show you precisely what 
the idea, tactic, or product is about. When it comes to the iPad and key apps, 
we give you enough screenshots to understand the technique and become 
competent with it.
Comprehensive Resources Section
In the back of the book we’ve provided a resources section. It includes informa-
tion about stock photos, videos, animations, audio and video special effects, 
props, costumes, displays, iPad apps, supporting equipment and accessories, 
audio and video equipment, and many more valuable products and services.
Cool Presentation Props
There are all types of props that can strengthen and enliven your key points, 
messages, and strategies. You will see photos, examples, and even stunning 
architectural models that will give you tons of great ideas. We discuss one 
of the hottest technologies going—3-D printers. We show you pictures of 
what they can do and how they can make a huge difference when showing 
prototypes and custom-made props during your talk.
Winning Strategies
How can you win any game or challenge if you don’t know exactly what it 
takes to be on top? We describe the components of presentation success; the 
30 traits, competencies, and skills for the ultimate (presenter’s) score card; 
and the 10 characteristics that define a Killer Presentation. You will have no 
doubt what it takes to win consistently with great results.
xii	
Owner’s Manual

Compelling Introductions and Conclusions
Killer Presentations includes a special chapter solely dedicated to explaining 
how to build, structure, and give introductions and conclusions to your 
presentation that are essential to establishing your credibility and profes-
sionalism. You will get over two dozen powerfully scripted examples of 
how to grab your group’s attention and hold it tightly. At the end of this 
chapter, you will see unique and highly imaginative handouts that serve as 
executive summaries of your presentation. This can give you an enormous 
competitive edge over those who have traditional (mediocre) endings to 
their presentation.
Choose from a Continuum of Mild-to-Wild Ideas
Goethe, the famous German writer and philosopher of the eighteenth cen-
tury, said, “Daring ideas are like chessmen moving forward; they may be 
beaten, but they may start a winning game.” He also said, “Boldness has 
genius, power, and magic in it.” Killer Presentations takes bold and daring 
creative communication to new levels that will give you the edge in win-
ning, but only if you choose to dial up more innovation in your business, 
technical, or sales presentations. There are those who think that imitating 
an art form is good. We believe, though, that innovating is the true “art 
nouveau” of presentations today. With the raw power of the iPad, along 
with other technology and apps available today, it is so much easier to add 
those brilliant, imaginative elements that make your speech or presentation 
outsparkle, outwit, and outmatch all others.
You have likely heard Einstein’s quotation, “Imagination is more impor-
tant than knowledge.” You will learn how to powerfully meld knowledge 
and imagination together to form the “mortar of communication.” Just as 
there are various tools to use in your presentation, so there are ideas. They 
add flavor to your talk. Everyone has experienced presentations that could 
definitely use more spice and flavor!
In Figure I.1, the Mi-Wi Idea Gauge shows the mild-to-wild continuum 
of creative ideas for you to think about and choose based upon your pre-
sentation situation. When it comes to giving a Killer Presentation, there 
is no right or wrong answer about whether to select mild creativity—to 
	
	
Owner’s Manual
xiii

essentially present mostly inside the box—or to go bodacious and adventur-
ous to present way outside the box. You can throttle back on the creativity 
power curve and still have a professionally conventional presentation with 
enough of the right stuff to get the job done . . . or you can light up the 
afterburners of your imagination to accelerate with a kick in the pants far 
ahead of other competitive presentations, if need be.
Killer Presentations will show you how to be the “master of creative 
communication disruption” by changing the rules for presentations—
or making new ones for yourself. Once you get used to leaving imita-
tion behind, going from inspiration to innovation, and experience the 
liberating results, you will never go back to the dark ages of ordinary 
presenting.
It’s been said that 80 percent of a big idea is figuring out how to deliver 
it. In this book you will see powerful examples of how it can and should 
be done. John Cage, an American composer and music theorist, said, “I 
can’t understand why people are afraid of new ideas. I’m frightened of old 
Figure I.1 
Mild-to-Wild 
Idea Gauge
xiv	
Owner’s Manual

ones.” In a world of lightning-quick changes and fierce competitors where 
you can be suddenly left in the dust, old ideas can be awfully dangerous. 
In the lists below, you will see the words that generally describe the ranges 
of mild-to-wild ideas for presentations, and Tables I-1 and I-2 give the pros 
and cons associated with moving along the Mi-Wi Idea Gauge.
We begin with these mild descriptors, which almost surely you are 
familiar with:
Descriptors for Mild Ideas
acceptable	
plain
predictable	
normal
conventional	
tried and true
traditional	
moderate
unchanged	
benign
established	
proven
average	
routine
cautious	
usual
ordinary	
ordinary
incremental	
tame
Table I-1 shows the pros and cons of using mild ideas.
Table I-1 Pros and Cons of Mild Ideas
Pros of Mild Ideas	
Cons of Mild Ideas
They are relatively safe
▶
▶
Typically these ideas are less risky with 
▶
▶
any audience
You don’t stand out in an obvious way
▶
▶
They are understood by and acceptable 
▶
▶
to most people
“Low-hanging fruit” of ideas requires less 
▶
▶
thinking effort on your part
They are dull and uninspiring
▶
▶
Such ideas usually yield mediocre reac-
▶
▶
tions from your group
You don’t stand out in an obvious way
▶
▶
They are unable to achieve impressive, 
▶
▶
stellar results for you
Your competitors can easily trump your 
▶
▶
presentation with better ideas
	
	
Owner’s Manual
xv

So, when should you use mild ideas in your presentation? Use mild ideas 
when you:
Are presenting to very conservative or older groups
■
■
Would rather not take any risk at all at possibly diminishing your 
■
■
credibility or professionalism
Feel you do not need to be more creative to easily reach your presenta-
■
■
tion objectives
And now for the wild ideas:
Descriptors of Wild Ideas
breakthrough	
exceptional
visionary	
bold
unconventional	
authentic
radical	
unorthodox
unusual	
exotic
clever	
astonishing
dazzling	
profound
unlikely	
remarkable
unprecedented	
daring
avant-garde	
advanced
Table I-2 identifies the pros and cons of using wild ideas.
Use wild ideas in your presentation when:
Your group will likely appreciate and need your creative communica-
■
■
tion approach
You face heavy competition from other presentations and you have 
■
■
little to lose
Your objective is to radically change the attitudes, beliefs, or values of 
■
■
the group to whom you are talking
Your presentation’s focus is to primarily entertain or amuse
■
■
You really want to stand 
■
■
far out from and far above the crowd
You want maximum impact from your presentation or speech and are 
■
■
willing to take chances
xvi	
Owner’s Manual

Your Exciting Transformation from 
Presenter to K-I-L-L-E-R Presenter
After reading Killer Presentations and effectively applying the ideas, tech-
niques, tips, and information within, you will see an ah!some difference in 
your presentations because you will:
	 1.	Quickly choose and use the best presentation apps with your iPad to 
make your talks interesting, compelling, entertaining, and, most of 
all, successful.
	2.	Learn about special iPad operating tips, accessories, and cool ways to 
make your iPad the “greatest gadget,” driving your presentations to 
new realms of excellence.
	 3.	Get accustomed to being more creative in how you communicate and 
also better appreciate how boosting your imagination can help in 
other ways in your job.
	4.	Engage and interact with your audiences (in person and through your 
iPad and theirs) in a dialogue that will boost their participation and 
cooperation.
	 5.	Start thinking more like a “street psychologist” who has to deal with 
various personalities and their needs, wants, concerns, and priorities 
Table I-2 Pros and Cons of Wild Ideas
Pros of Wild Ideas	
Cons of Wild Ideas
They can be exciting, stimulating, fasci-
▶
▶
nating, spectacular, and ingenious
They make you stand out positively from 
▶
▶
and above the crowd
They impressively show your breathtak-
▶
▶
ing originality
They can deliver extraordinary, over-the-
▶
▶
top results
They are a powerful way to overcome a 
▶
▶
competitor’s mild ideas
The wilder ones can fall flat and damage 
▶
▶
your credibility with certain groups
They may come across as outlandish, 
▶
▶
wacky, or too clever
The wilder the idea, the more risky it is 
▶
▶
since it has not be tried and proved
Wild ideas can require lots of brainstorm-
▶
▶
ing and fine-tuning to be effective
	
	
Owner’s Manual
xvii

regarding your presentation. This will help you to better influence 
their decisions and actions.
	6.	Become more of a “communication strategist” (not just focus on 
content). That will enable you to outthink and outpresent your 
competitors.
	 7.	When needed, become a “performer,” not just an accomplished 
“presenter,” and do it in the most professional way. You will actually 
enjoy doing presentations more because this book will give you more 
confidence. You will see how becoming a Killer Presenter can make a 
big difference in your career, your life, and your community.
Alexander the Great of Macedon (356–323 bc) was one of the world’s 
foremost leaders, military commanders, and conquerors. He said he did 
not fear an army of lions led by a sheep; he feared an army of sheep led by 
a lion. We can’t promise that you will be a roaring, conquering lion in the 
meeting room, on stage, or in the boardroom after reading this book, but 
it will certainly greatly increase your odds of that happening. American 
writer E. B. White said, “Always be on the lookout for the presence of won-
der.” We hope you discover that sense of wonder and embark on an exciting 
journey to transcendent communication through our book!
xviii	
Owner’s Manual

The Big Picture:  
The World Has Changed.  
Have You Changed 
Your Presentations?
I
n 1970, Alvin Toffler wrote Future Shock, an international bestselling book 
that chronicles the impact of “too much change in too short a period 
of time.” Toffler declared that society would be undergoing an enormous 
structural transformation—a revolution from an industrial society to a 
“superindustrial society” with unfathomable technological change. In the 
same year, Intel announced a DRAM memory chip storing more than 
1,000 bits of data, IBM Selectric typewriters filled offices, and minicomput-
ers were just starting to take off. Toffler called that “radical change.” At the 
time, it was considered so.
Can you imagine how “change” back in 1970 would appear to us 
today when we really can’t keep up with the lightning-quick onslaught 
of amazing innovations in science, medicine, aviation, engineering, and 
digital products that seem to come out overnight? Everything is spinning 
faster, more furiously, and often unpredictably in worldwide politics, soci-
ety, the environment, and the global economy. People’s sense of “future 
shock” almost 45 years ago now seems shockingly tame. You have heard 
the alarm about impending change all too often. What does it have to do 
with presentations?
C h a p t e r  1
1

If You Don’t Change, You Will Be 
Changed—and You May Not Like It!
With the introduction of the iPad, new presentation apps designed espe-
cially for it, and our innovative P-XL2 Model, it’s time to change or be 
changed.
The way your company gives important presentations can directly and 
indirectly affect its longevity and growth. Let’s compare the list of Fortune 
500 companies in the “future shock year” of 1970 with the 2012 list as a 
telling reference point. Only 78 companies appear in both lists. That means 
about 16 percent of the Fortune 500 companies in 1970 were still on the list 
42 years later. Almost 84 percent of the companies were gone—they either 
went bankrupt, merged, became private, or fell from the list of companies 
ranked by gross revenue. That’s a lot of churning and creative destruction—
it’s likely safe to say that new companies in new industries will replace 
many of today’s Fortune 500 companies over the next 42 years. 
Look at the computer industry in the 1970s. While Apple, founded in 
1976, is still a dominant force, you probably don’t remember or never heard of 
a group of big mainframe computer competitors known as the “BUNCH”—
Burroughs, Univac, NCR, Control Data, and Honeywell. Only NCR is 
still around, and it was radically restructured. Then, there were successful 
minicomputer firms like Digital Equipment Corporation, Data General, 
Wang, Datapoint, and others. Recall them? They all went belly up. They 
didn’t change when change was desperately needed. They shunned “planned 
abandonment” and clung tightly to yesterday’s successes rather than seeing 
they were no longer relevant in a changing world. The signs were there, but 
many chose to ignore them and hoped they would go away.
IBM, which is now over 100 years old, has been through numerous 
upsets and some near-death experiences in the industry. The company 
not only survived, but thrived, because it adapted, innovated, and moved 
quickly to take advantage of new trends and new directions. Who made the 
list of most admired companies in the world by Fortune magazine in 2013 
and why? Apple was number one. It, above all others, embraces and reli-
giously practices planned obsolescence. Apple and other companies, such 
as Google, Intel, Boeing, and John Deere (which made the most admired 
list), master changes that others dread or ignore. These companies know a 
2	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

competitor can pop up suddenly with a potentially disruptive technology, 
product, or process and threaten their market share. They have to keep their 
lead and never be complacent.
The most admired companies and those that have longevity on the 
Fortune 500 list are continually reinventing themselves to own the future. 
Some in those companies gave stirring Killer Presentations—critical pre-
sentations at a critical time—that helped to bring about necessary change 
and innovation. Those Killer Presentations were so compelling and con-
vincing that senior management bought into them, often in spite of initial 
reservations, doubts, or hesitancy to change course. Those presentations 
were the spark that made the difference between moving ahead as indus-
try rock stars or falling back into oblivion. Just as companies need to 
change, so do presentations that are stuck in a time warp around the 
black hole called PowerPoint.
What Is Your Business, and What Is 
Killer Presentations About?
Peter F. Drucker, who wrote 39 books, is considered one of the greatest 
management gurus and business thinkers of all time. He said the two 
essential functions that business needs to focus on are innovation and 
marketing—innovation in products, services, business models, processes, 
management techniques, and overall operations. And who would disagree 
about the critical nature of marketing in a world where clever spin doctors 
can weave gold from straw?
One of Drucker’s most important books is The Age of Discontinuity, 
which presents innovation and entrepreneurship as vital disciplines an 
organization must wholly embrace. Discontinuities are those unanticipated 
events that can suddenly shift and upset the landscape in an industry or 
for a company, requiring an immediate response either to mitigate loss or 
to capture opportunity. His books and advice were early warning systems, 
cautioning us to be the change and not suffer the change that is unrelenting 
and often unforgiving for those sitting on the sidelines. We know of com-
panies that lost huge deals because their competitors outpresented them 
with innovative Killer Presentations, while they continued to use presenta-
tion models that were becoming increasingly obsolete.
	
	
The Big Picture
3

Peter Drucker believed that the first responsibility of managers was to 
ask themselves a simple question: “What is your business?” He believed 
that only the customer could accurately answer that question from differ-
ent perspectives. For example, a person might say her company is in the 
financial software business, while her customer might say that the com-
pany was in the business of helping the customer to simplify and better 
understand financial variables to make better, faster, and safer investment 
decisions.
Okay, what does all this have to do with our book? This question begets 
two more. First, what is this book about? You will find that Killer Presenta-
tions is all about how to create innovative presentations—how to move far 
beyond the dull, predictable PowerPoint presentations that are giving you 
mediocre or disappointing results. Innovation is at the heart of this book. 
Second, what is the business of this book, as Drucker might ask? You the 
reader (as customer) might tell us it is ultimately about:
Closing more and bigger deals and gaining an increasing 
■
■
competitive lead
Having your company buy into a new marketing program 
■
■
and strategy
Convincing your management to adopt a new course of action
■
■
Getting your executives to shine in the public eye as a result of their 
■
■
“Killer” speeches
Persuading your management to develop exciting new products 
■
■
and services
Showing how to get a greater return on investments in new ventures 
■
■
and projects
Communicating a potential engineering solution that will solve a 
■
■
major problem
Enlightening your customers about your company’s new, improved 
■
■
value proposition
Selling your team on creating new training programs to 
■
■
improve operations
Communicating an exciting new vision for your organization that 
■
■
will galvanize and energize employees, customers, and 
other stakeholders
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Following the advice in this book will transform your presentations into 
a powerful strategic tool to improve your business operations, affect your 
financials, and give your company that much-needed competitive boost. 
The goal of just “giving more effective presentations” will become a thing 
of the past. Killer Presentations will bring about much needed change and 
progress in your organization . . . and in your career.
State of Presentations and How You 
Can Take Smart Advantage of It
If Killer Presentations can bring about numerous benefits for your organi-
zation, the converse is true: bad presentations will lose deals, cause missed 
opportunities, and otherwise negatively affect the chances of success in any 
number of organizational ventures and projects.
Besides being a waste of time for most people, bad presentations are 
costly, notes Dave Paradi, coauthor of Guide to PowerPoint. He says that, 
according to Microsoft, about 30 million PowerPoint presentations (of all 
types) are given every day. Assuming conservatively that there are four 
people per presentation, that each presentation takes on average a half hour, 
and that the time wasted in a poor presentation is one-quarter of the pre-
sentation time, Paradi calculates that bad presentations waste 15 million 
person-hours per day. Based on an average (conservative) salary of $35,000 
per year for those attending the meeting, the cost of that wasted time is a 
staggering $252 million each day. And that does not include costly oppor-
tunities lost in other ways.
Ray Anthony’s company conducted a comprehensive 25-question 
research survey with over 200 executives from 14 companies in which 
he asked mostly C-level individuals to rate presentations given to them.1 
Keep in mind that presentations given to important decision makers are 
likely to be better prepared and delivered than those lower-priority talks 
done on an everyday basis. The question asked in the survey was, “Look-
ing back on presentations that you were a member of, how would you 
1  Summary Report. “A Winning Executive Presentation.” A report involving the analysis of data received 
from responses to the executive survey, which covered the important area of giving an effective presenta-
tion to senior executives.
	
	
The Big Picture
5

rate the overall quality of those presentations?” Here were the responses 
from the survey:
	 8 percent	 Excellent
	21 percent	 Good
	38 percent	 Acceptable
	23 percent	 Mediocre
	10 percent	 Poor
Only 30 percent rated typical presentations given to them as excellent 
or good! Acceptable, mediocre, and certainly poor presentations (the other 
70 percent) would not likely impress executives enough to encourage them 
to approve a project or commit to something important. When it came to 
rating the quality (design, type, other) of visual aids used by most people 
giving presentations to the executives, here were their answers:
	0	percent	
Excellent quality
■
■
	42	percent	
Good quality
■
■
	53	percent	
Moderate quality
■
■
	 5	percent	
Poor quality
■
■
In this case, executives said that about 6 out of 10 presentations essen-
tially had mediocre visuals that could adversely affect their understanding 
of the content and their decision making.
Ray Anthony’s former company, Genesis Training Solutions, surveyed 
almost 500 salespeople and sales managers in 29 organizations from 9 
industries on creativity in selling.2 Some key findings indicated that:
92 percent either agreed or strongly agreed that using creativity in 
■
■
selling is critical in today’s market.
95 percent wanted to be more creative in their jobs.
■
■
When asked, “How much creative potential do you use on the job?” 
■
■
the average answer for all respondents was 60 percent. Only 5 percent 
of people admitted they were using their full creative power at work.
2  Creativity . . . in Selling? Research findings on personal creativity assessment and management and 
organizational indicators of sales innovation. Genesis Training Solutions.
6	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

When asked which of 23 sales activities would improve with increased 
■
■
creativity, “Delivering Sales Presentations” was ranked first, with 
“Creating Competitive Sales Strategies” as second in importance.
The survey confirmed the overwhelming importance and competitive 
advantage of being more creative in selling and presenting from the per-
spective of sales professionals and their managers.
Do You Want to Grab a Huge Opportunity?
If a select percentage of presentations can be that important, and if most are 
bad, you may be wondering why more people don’t deliver more Killer Pre-
sentations. One reason is that everyone is overworked these days, whether 
in Europe, America, China, Japan, or elsewhere. People are simply doing 
more and working longer hours; they find little extra time to devote to what 
they might perceive as a lower-priority task. Yet it really does not take a lot 
more time to put together a better talk and learn several key techniques and 
skills that will make you shine in front of a group.
Second, if everyone else is giving relatively shoddy PowerPoint presenta-
tions, why bother if managers don’t seem to care? How many companies 
are pushing staff to improve their presentations? Third, many professionals 
(especially executives) don’t believe they need presentation or speech train-
ing or coaching. Finally, most people don’t appear to see anything really 
wrong about the way they give presentations, especially if they have not yet 
experienced consistently negative consequences. However, when people can 
experience the real difference a Killer Presentation can make, they wonder 
why they haven’t jumped on board that bandwagon sooner.
Here’s the huge opportunity to be grabbed: if most presentations are 
poorly done and you have to give important (sales, marketing, technical, 
or executive-level) presentations, you have a perfect chance to shine above 
other presenters, including your competition. Delivering an especially 
impressive Killer Presentation or speech will quickly elevate your profes-
sional image and status, perhaps putting you in front of people who could 
be influential to your career. With competition so (internationally) iFre-
netic and iFerocious, giving superb presentations will assure you a leading 
	
	
The Big Picture
7

edge in many outcomes. In that case, you and your iPad might stand for “I 
Produce Awesome Deliverables!”
How Presentations Have Changed over Time
Business presentations have come a long way over the last century. Visual 
aids came into widespread use in the 1920s and 1930s with the introduction 
of filmstrips and large charts, often called poster boards. The 1950s saw the 
frequent use of 35-mm slides in the ubiquitous Kodak carousel projector, 
overhead transparencies displayed through an overhead projector, and flip 
charts. Some training events and some rare presentations showed 16-mm 
film from a projector.
Now fast-forward to May 22, 1990, and the official launch of Microsoft 
PowerPoint as part of the Microsoft Office Suite. Instead of waiting days or 
weeks to get your 35-mm slides back, you could now create everything on 
your computer and use it immediately. You could print out your slides as 
handouts and make changes right up to the moment you got up to present. 
And you had all those fancy animations, transitions, sounds, and abilities 
to do much graphic or otherwise distracting damage to your presenta-
tion. In 2003 Apple introduced its Keynote software as an alternative to 
PowerPoint.
As powerful as PowerPoint and Keynote were, perhaps 95 percent of 
users still designed and presented as if the programs were simply digital 
replacements for 35-mm slides. Of course, there were new and impressive 
capabilities, but most of us shunned good design techniques and filled the 
slides with machine gun bullets, paragraphs of small text, crowded tables, 
and incredibly busy charts that could only be read with an electron micro-
scope. The misuse of PowerPoint (and even Keynote) continues to this day, 
as you know. It’s not that PowerPoint is the sole problem itself—it’s how 
it is used and abused. Unfortunately, its many options led people to think 
that you should have some exploding or other fancy transition after each 
slide. And because they are available, why not mix a couple dozen different 
animations on slides that take up precious time and do nothing but add 
visual noise to clutter up one’s presentation?
“The future has a way of arriving unannounced,” said journalist and 
commentator George Will. And so it was on April 3, 2010, Apple ushered 
8	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

in a new era in giving presentations with the iPad, followed by the mini on 
December 2, 2012. New apps like iPresent were especially designed for the 
innovative new capabilities of the iPad. Now, instead of giving one-sided, 
sequential presentations with dated software apps, you could deliver more 
interactive presentations—the start of a revolution in presentations.
But just as laptops using PowerPoint and Keynote were a technological 
advancement over 35-mm slides, replacing your laptop with an iPad without 
changing your presentation style is merely another technical evolution. The 
iPad begs for a whole new model, a paradigm shift, in presenting (like the 
P-XL2 Model we developed and describe in the book) and for new presen-
tation apps. Only then will the exclusive features, abilities, and power of 
the iPad bring about more than evolution. They offer the possibility for a 
revolution. Viva la revolución!
Use Killer Presentations as a Vital 
Strategic Asset and Tool
Killer Presentations that are creative, compelling, and strategically designed 
will give your company a decided advantage over your competitors and 
contribute toward your steady growth and long-term prosperity. Improving 
presentations internally will work wonders in your organization, association, 
government agency, military branch, or university. Companies that inte-
grate presentations as part of a grand strategy can expect boosted business 
opportunities and the more efficient use of resources as a result. Whether 
justified or not, your presentations to audiences often appear as an impres-
sionistic microcosm and reflection of your organization’s branding and pro-
fessionalism. Important presentations made by your organization’s leaders 
are “executive visibility amplifiers” that can operate in both directions—
helping or hurting one’s image, career, and reputation. Killer Presentations 
will help people in your company grab the big deals you thought were out 
of reach. Your marketing professionals will promote your company and its 
products and services with renewed vigor. And your R&D, manufactur-
ing, and product design teams will be able to give sharply focused internal 
presentations that help your higher-ups make favorable decisions.
Finally, by engineering and applying your presentations as vital strategic 
tools in your organization, your presentations will help improve overall 
	
	
The Big Picture
9

­productivity, efficiency, quality, effectiveness, and innovation in your oper-
ations, thus boosting revenues and profits. Here are some recommendations 
for developing and using Killer Presentation as strategic assets and tools in 
your organization:
Identify high-priority presentations that will have a major impact 
■
■
on your organization and apply the information, ideas, and tech-
niques in this book to transform them into Killer Presentations. 
This includes your company story, high-profile C-level (CEO, COO, 
CFO) presentations, boardroom presentations, and major sales and 
marketing presentations.
Create organizational standards for presentations that define and 
■
■
describe excellence in communication and then monitor those stan-
dards for compliance. These are guidelines and core competencies you 
can take from several chapters in our book.
Create a valuable centralized company “presentation resource library” 
■
■
of videos, animations, photos, audio files, illustrations, and graphics 
for people to use in their custom presentations. Direct them to outside 
resources such as those listed at the back of the book.
Showcase superb Killer Presentations that have been creatively 
■
■
designed and successfully delivered by the best presenters in your 
organization. Consider building an ongoing archive of the finest 
presentations in your company as exemplary models from which your 
employees can get good ideas.
If possible, evaluate the presentations of your competitors and identify 
■
■
specific ways to outshine them in every respect.
Every six months or less, do a review of what new software, apps, iPad 
■
■
accessories, resources, and technology are available to enhance your 
company’s presentations. Have a continuous presentation improve-
ment process in place.
Provide your staff with excellent presentation training, coaching, 
■
■
and mentoring.
Consider having quarterly Killer Presentation contests where you let 
■
■
anyone volunteer to give a five-minute presentation on any company-
related topic. These contests can be delivered live, or entries can be 
videotaped and sent in. Winners get prizes, and their entries serve as 
10	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

model presentations for others to emulate and to further improve. 
Think about incentives and rewards that will encourage great 
presentations.
When questioned about his colonial policies, an English statesman and 
diplomat, the Marquis of Salisbury, replied, “Gentlemen, get larger maps.” 
If your organization will incorporate Killer Presentation models, ideas, and 
characteristics as a strategic tool and asset to be exploited throughout your 
corporate culture, you will have “larger maps” to explore and be positioned 
to conquer new territories of business opportunities and possibilities. You 
will have polished professionals who do more than just “give out” informa-
tion—they will “get through” to others, and that will make all the differ-
ence in the world.
Why the iPad? Why Now? And Some 
New Killer Technologies for It!
Welcome to a new world of presentation and visualization possibilities 
using that marvelous gadget called the iPad. People are wondering “Does 
the iPad replace a laptop when it comes to giving presentations? What’s 
really a better device to use for presentations?” That’s like asking, “What is 
better for transporting stuff—a truck or a big SUV?” The answer to those 
types of questions is, “It depends upon what you want to do.” While your 
iPad has new and exciting capabilities that your laptop doesn’t, your laptop 
has some clear advantages too when it comes to using it for certain select 
types of presentations.
In this part of the chapter we will look at some important comparisons 
between both types of devices. We will describe how presentation formats 
will change and should change. And you will discover exciting new devel-
opments in virtual and augmented reality among other future innovations 
in how we will communicate, understand, and “see things” in ways never 
before imagined. Throughout our book, we highlight the wondrous things 
only an iPad can do when it comes to giving that Killer Presentation. Make 
no mistake about it, though; your iPad is not a replacement for your laptop. 
It was not meant to be. Your iPad is a different and highly flexible com-
munication tool for a unique set of uses.
	
	
The Big Picture
11

A question we sometimes get asked is, “Why didn’t Steve Jobs use an iPad 
when he gave his presentations at MacWorld, for example?” The answer is 
that his presentations were straightforward, sequential (slide after slide), one-
way talks that did not require interaction with the audience and that did not 
need to randomly access information to answer suddenly posed questions. 
So it was easier and better to use a laptop and hold a small, remote RF mouse 
that had only three buttons: slide forward, reverse, and screen blackout.
Your iPad Is a “Natural” Communication Device
Now let’s say you are sitting in an airline club in the morning having a relax-
ing cup of coffee, waiting for your flight to take off in two hours. You are 
using your iPad to check the news, read your e-mails, and perhaps catch 
glimpses of a morning TV show. You strike up a conversation with a friendly 
person next to you, and as an astute sales professional, you rather quickly 
discover that she may be a potential prospect for your company’s products.
As the conversation slowly shifts into a subtle sales mode, you ask if she 
would like to see a two-minute video of your product line. You adjust your 
iPad case into a better viewing angle for her on the counter next to your 
coffee and start your video. No taking out your laptop, setting it up, play-
ing with a mouse or touchpad—just a simple, informal, comfortable, and 
natural transition into a business conversation using your iPad. Notice the 
difference? Because people see the iPad in a different light, the ability to give 
an unexpected, on-the-spot informal presentation is a very valuable asset 
uniquely suited to it.
When you hear the term elevator pitch, you likely envision a brief, encap-
sulated summary (30 seconds to about 2 minutes) designed to compellingly 
present an idea or product or service in an accidental meeting (like in an 
elevator). What better tool to use than an iPad where you can say, “May I 
show you something in less than a minute that I think you’ll be quite inter-
ested in?” You can’t do that easily and gracefully with a laptop in an elevator 
or elsewhere. But you can communicate a concise value proposition fluidly 
and naturally with your iPad.
Motivational speakers can walk into their audiences with an iPad and 
interactively summon information as they engage people’s questions or com-
ments. And the iPad is perfect for imaginative virtual reality and augmented 
12
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

reality applications. Overall, your iPad is ideal for spontaneous communica-
tion. But when it comes to very structured presentations (with limited audi-
ence interaction) that may require showing advanced 3-D or engineering 
application software, your laptop may still be your best bet to get the job 
done. Let’s take a look at how both devices stack up in several categories.
Differences Between a Laptop Computer and an iPad
In considering the differences between the two, we identified the pros and 
cons of each. Table 1.1 shows the pros and cons of a laptop—whether it is a 
Retina display MacBook Pro or other high-end laptop—as it compares with 
Table 1.1 Pros and Cons of a Laptop
Pros of a Laptop 	
Cons of a Laptop
Faster processor
▶
▶
Greater RAM (working memory) storage
▶
▶
Larger screen size (about the same reso-
▶
▶
lution as that of an iPad)
Greater connectivity with more 
▶
▶
devices (i.e., Firewire, HDMI, Ethernet, 
Thunderbolt)
Better audio speakers
▶
▶
High-level multitasking
▶
▶
Superior graphic processing for render-
▶
▶
ing, gaming, video
Very high storage capacity (especially 
▶
▶
with external disk drives)
Able to run complex software
▶
▶
Run Windows and PC applications (using 
▶
▶
Apple Boot Camp Software or Parallels 
Desktop for Mac)
Upgradable and customizable hardware
▶
▶
More versatile portable workstation
▶
▶
Heavy to carry, bulky
▶
▶
No touch screen
▶
▶
Lower battery life
▶
▶
Much less convenient to give on-the-
▶
▶
spot presentations
Less suitable for taking notes, diagram-
▶
▶
ming, mind mapping
Impossible to walk with and difficult to 
▶
▶
operate while presenting
Does not have many of the cool, useful 
▶
▶
apps that the iPad has
	
	
The Big Picture
13

Table 1.2 Pros and Cons of an iPad
Pros of an iPad 	
Cons of an iPad
Much lighter, easier to handle during 
▶
▶
presentations
Less likely to malfunction or break down
▶
▶
Terrific portability and ease of use
▶
▶
Can be used more creatively in 
▶
▶
presentations
More flexible and useful in daily activities
▶
▶
Full flash memory for speed
▶
▶
Immediate startup
▶
▶
Better for informal, impromptu one-on-
▶
▶
one presentations
Access to app store with over 500,000+ 
▶
▶
apps
Better camera and flexibility in using it
▶
▶
Longer battery life
▶
▶
Better for interactive (nonsequential) 
▶
▶
presentations
Typically less expensive apps
▶
▶
4G LTE connectivity
▶
▶
“Cool factor” when used competently
▶
▶
Great videoconferencing with FaceTime
▶
▶
Touch screen and finger gestures
▶
▶
Can be used as a creative prop during 
▶
▶
presentations
Connectivity with other iPads and 
▶
▶
iPhones
Better at doing virtual walkthroughs and 
▶
▶
augmented reality
GPS and accelerometers, allowing 
▶
▶
impressive capabilities
Content loading through iTunes
▶
▶
No optical drive, direct USB port, or SD/
▶
▶
Micro SD slot
No upgrades in software or hardware 
▶
▶
features
No Adobe Flash feature
▶
▶
Data backup inconvenient and slow
▶
▶
14	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

an iPad. Keep those in mind when you look at the pros and cons of an iPad 
shown in Table 1.2. While specifications and capabilities of both devices 
will change over time, you can see the general comparative differences.
Bear in mind that compared with laptops, iPads are relatively new to 
the presentation scene, and we predict that the hardware, software, acces-
sories, and add-ons will dramatically improve in capabilities, making the 
iPad even more flexible, powerful, and valuable to use in presentations.
Engaging Them with Your iPad
The one overriding advantage of your iPad is its ability to better engage 
your audiences (compared with using a laptop with PowerPoint) by apply-
ing a new format of flexible and responsive presenting—whether it is with 
one person or a thousand. After all, that’s part of our book’s title, Killer 
Presentations with Your iPad: How to Engage Your Audience and Win More 
Business with the World’s Greatest Gadget.
In the recent excellent business book American Turnaround: Reinvent-
ing AT&T and GM and the Way We Do Business in the USA, author Ed 
Whit­acre, the former CEO of those two companies, talked about the 
antithesis of engagement in presentations that he attended as the top boss. 
He told how meetings at GM almost always had PowerPoint presentations 
using a large number of detailed slides and charts, accompanied by a thick 
booklet.
He made no qualms about his distaste for that method of restrictive, 
inflexible, and inefficient communicating, “I consider PowerPoints to be 
a waste of time and money, for the most part, and I had neither of those 
to spare during this period (with GM). If someone came in to see me and 
started in with those slides, I’d say, ‘wait, stop,’ and make them shut it 
down and talk to me. I don’t need all those charts. I just need to know the 
end conclusion or larger point—tell me that, and then let’s talk about it. 
But tell me—don’t point with some laser from the other end of the room 
and click, click, click through fifty slides . . . .”3
3  Ed Whitacre, American Turnaround: Reinventing AT&T and GM and the Way We Do Business in the 
USA, New York: Business Plus, 2013, p. 210.
	
	
The Big Picture
15

Before board meetings at General Motors, Whitacre would pull senior 
managers aside and actually coach them on presentations. He slowly weaned 
them off using long, complicated PowerPoint presentations overflowing 
with numbers and charts and wordy explanations and instead recom-
mended a streamlined format for their presentations. He said, “I told them 
to prepare short—ten minutes max—presentations that covered need-to-
know information only: how many cars we sold by type, what the average 
price was, how much money we made—those things that directly related to 
GM’s business and the bottom line.”4 Whitacre related how pleased board 
members were with the new presentations that enabled them to ask ques-
tions and become more engaged as opposed to sitting through a daylong 
meeting, which was happily pared down to a few hours using the new, brief 
presentation formats.
Your iPad Can Be the Engine to Run a 
“Nonpresentation Presentation”
Let’s take a look at how an iPad with a different format of presenting might 
impress someone like Ed Whitacre if a senior executive, for example, came 
in to discuss his new truck engineering and design plans for the future to 
get the top guy’s feedback and approval. First, our executive would know 
what he wanted from Mr. Whitacre (his goal), how he planned to achieve 
it (his strategy), and, most importantly, what Whitacre expected of him. 
In advance of the meeting, he would select high-priority areas of content 
such as sales projections, competitive analysis, photos of prototypes, and 
anything else he needed for his basic dialogue (not one-sided presentation) 
with the boss. He would start off with a concise, effective summary of his 
key points and ask Whitacre if they were the main areas he was interested 
in and what else he would like to know.
The head of truck engineering would not start showing slides. He would 
cover his key information by discussing it conversationally as he engaged 
Mr. Whitacre. When needed, he would access his iPad and look down at 
additional data to provide that information. His aim would be to show 
the CEO that he knows his engineering business inside and out and does 
4  Ibid., p. 212.
16	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

not need to depend upon lots of slides. However, while he was interacting 
with Whitacre and maintaining eye contact with him, he would be casually 
and naturally using his iPad—at timely points in his discussion—to focus 
attention on photos of the future truck prototypes along with key engineer-
ing and financial data relating to production costs and profit structures—
no sequential slide after slide, but only visuals and data randomly accessed 
and shown as needed from a special iPad presentation app like iPresent 
(described in detail in Chapter 5).
But this smart executive had one more card up his presentation sleeve: 
by doing his homework ahead of time, he found out the likely types of 
questions Whitacre would ask, especially about competition. So, using his 
iPad, he was able to quickly and easily navigate to other automotive and 
industry websites to answer the CEO’s questions and show him competitive 
designs and responses from those industry experts regarding how GM was 
viewed by focus groups after the unveiling of new-concept truck designs.
The engaging, interactive “presentation” in this what-if example was 
more of a natural give-and-take structured conversation with readily avail-
able important data, photos, and other information (both planned and in 
reserve if needed) that were easily accessed from the executive’s iPad and 
projected onto a 60-inch TV in the meeting room. The executive in charge 
of the truck division had a prepared but fluid presentation that focused not 
on slides, but on the exact information and visuals needed and wanted by 
Whitacre—when he asked for it. That’s the way to engage someone and still 
provide great information with your iPad!
The world is constantly changing—it is changing as you read this. Cre-
ating innovative presentations and designing them as strategic assets in 
your organization will give you a significant winning competitive edge.
	
	
The Big Picture
17

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  2
Let’s Face It—You Are 
the Winning Message!
You have likely heard the saying in the sports world that winning is a game 
of inches (or seconds). The difference between a home run and a double or 
a triple, for example, is a baseball that has passed over the fence by maybe 
just an inch. It could be the decisive run that spells victory in a World 
Series. Likewise, in today’s fiercely competitive business world, just a slight 
difference—in this case, in how you design and deliver a presentation—
can be the determining factor in whether you and your team win or lose a 
gigantic deal you have been working on for months. It pays handsomely to 
understand how the communication game is played and what the rules and 
scoring system are so you can play by them, improvise, and even change the 
rules in your favor to score and win.
If you know what performance indicators, characteristics, and com-
ponents will make you and your presentation stand out and above others, 
then you have the advantage. You own the high ground of fighting for 
your winning game. Even a slight edge may be all that is necessary to tilt 
an audience in your favor. But this chapter and the next two are about giv-
ing you a large edge—a wow advantage—for a whizbang, game-changing 
Killer Presentation.
In this chapter, you will get to fully appreciate that, along with your 
content, you are the message (not just the messenger). Your credibility, your 
presentation style, and the way you interact with the audience are paramount 
in winning. You will know exactly what traits and behaviors describe not 
only a Killer Presenter with an iPad, but a leader with command presence 
who will impress, inspire, and galvanize an audience into action. Playing 
19

the best presentation game involves knowing the typical errors most people 
make. We include 15 things to avoid, so you can overcome them before they 
cause a loss. And who wouldn’t want to learn how Steve Jobs owned the 
stage and how acting and storytelling can turn you from a presenter into a 
performer, even in the boardroom. Let’s get started!
Projecting a Command Presence Leadership Aura
Many types of presentations involve not just providing information, but 
recommending implementation of a program, major change, or innovation 
of some kind. If you are proposing being in charge of making change hap-
pen, the audience of decision makers and recommenders wants to ensure 
that you and your team have the strong leadership qualities to make it a 
success, especially if it is a complex and costly endeavor. Whether bold or 
otherwise, a plan, strategy, or idea is only as good as its execution. An audi-
ence needs to feel that sense of leadership ability from the presenter.
Men and women who display strong leadership characteristics in front 
of executives or other important audiences quickly move up their career 
ladder, earn more money, and make a meaningful difference in the work 
and personal lives of others. Ask those who have risen quickly in their 
organization, and most will tell you that the image they projected was 
a key factor. It is one thing to come across as a professional during one’s 
presentation—it’s another to come across as a consummate professional 
who is a dynamic “get-it-done” leader. Consider the following ways to help 
you become that kind of leader.
Mastery of Your Topic. Clarence B. Randall, former chairman of Inland 
Steel Company and a special assistant to the president of the United States 
(during Eisenhower’s administration), aptly said, “The leader must know, 
must know that he knows, and must be able to make it abundantly clear 
to those around him that he knows.” Whom would you trust more—a 
person who had to read from his 48 slides or a person who used no notes 
or other presentation aids but effectively communicated an impressive in-
depth knowledge of his topic and proposed an impressive plan?
Numerous executives have told us that they wish more people would 
come into a presentation without slides (or only a few) and just update them 
20	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

on their department or division by clearly and concisely communicating 
key information. One chief operating officer from a major southern Cali-
fornia energy company told us, “My directors should know their operating 
and financial numbers cold without referring to those damn slides and be 
able to have a well-structured, but informal conversation with me instead of 
tediously clicking through slide-by-slide or constantly referring to detailed 
notes to inform me.” When you see a presenter who is not glued to a lectern 
or projection screen but able to (seemingly extemporaneously) articulate 
key information in an organized, fluent way, you get the strong sense that 
this is a person in total command of her topic.
Throughout several chapters of Ray Anthony’s book Talking to the Top: 
Executive’s Guide to Career-Making Presentations,1 he lists the results of a 
comprehensive survey he did with over 200 C-level and senior executives 
from major corporations regarding their opinion of presentations given 
to them. Here are the top four areas deemed “very important” that senior 
executives wanted from people presenting to them and the percentage that 
listed it as top priority:
Knowledge of topic, 98 percent
■
■
Ability to be concise, yet thorough and accurate, 79 percent
■
■
Enthusiastic and energetic, 72 percent
■
■
Fluent and clear in communication, 71 percent
■
■
According to Anthony’s research findings, the one thing that would 
overwhelmingly impress executives—more than anything else—about 
presenters was their having “an absolute mastery of their topic.” That is 
essential to building a leadership image on the platform!
Decisiveness and Crispness in Answering. You won’t find a strong leader 
hesitating, vacillating, or “overanswering” when it comes to a question. For 
example, if an executive asks a presenter if she is confident that her proposed 
project should be implemented and why, the command presence presenter 
would reply something like, “This project absolutely should be capitalized 
upon for three primary reasons: One, if we don’t, our competitors will—
1  Ray Anthony, Talking to the Top: Executive’s Guide to Career-Making Presentations, New York: Prentice 
Hall, 1995, p. 153.
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
21

very soon. Two, we can accomplish it better than anyone else. And three, 
the attractive financial returns on investment are perfectly attainable.” 
Notice how concise, positive, and self-assured that type of response is.
Positive and Confident Attitude. History tells us that General George S. 
Patton, Jr., had “an unequaled sense of what was possible on the battlefield,” 
and he proved it. It was the ultimate “can-do and will-do” belief and behav-
ior. Napoleon said, “A leader is a dealer in hope.” Audiences want to know 
that the task or goal (which has risks, challenges, and obstacles of varying 
types and degrees associated with it) being proposed by the presenter will be 
accomplished in a successful way. The saying “A frightened captain makes 
a frightened crew” applies to how an audience reacts if a presenter seems 
tentative, nervous, or otherwise not completely confident in the outcome 
he or she is advocating. Being calmly optimistic and definitively positive in 
tone and word reassures people that their decision to support the presenter 
is a good one.
Dynamic Voice and Gestures. A dynamic person is one full of stamina 
and new ideas. Leaders are high-energy, constructive, and forward-thinking 
people. Can you picture a successful leader being constantly tired or acting 
withdrawn and pessimistic? Several techniques can help make a presenter 
more dynamic. Strong voice volume along with well-timed, deliberate pauses 
and eye contact with the audience is important. Purposeful gestures are also 
highly effective. One gesture in which the person’s arms are spread far from 
the body in an arclike way from the waist up is what experts call a “power 
gesture” because it enlarges the presenter’s personal physical area. Another 
unique and strong gesture is one where the arm temporarily freezes in a 
certain position rather than continuing to move. For example, if a presenter 
talks about a “beckoning vision [of the corporation, for example] over the 
horizon,” she points her arm and hand outward and holds that pose (for 
maybe 7 to 15 seconds) as if solidly pointing toward the distance as she talks 
about it. That stationary (energy-implied) gesture—as she continues—is 
highly effective in a somewhat exaggerated, attention-getting way.
Purposeful Body Movement. For many presenters, there are often two 
opposite forms of body movement that negatively affect their image. The 
first is standing rigidly either behind a lectern or without a lectern, not 
22
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

moving around the front or sides of the room or stage. That makes a pre-
senter seem inanimate and devoid of energy. The other kind of movement 
occurs when a presenter is constantly rocking back and forth on his feet or 
moving side to side (like little dance steps) in nervous fashion.
A unique technique we recommend for those wanting to project confi-
dent command is what we call a “bolt-and-move” body movement. This is 
where a speaker moves in a purposeful direction toward the audience and 
stops with feet planted firmly on the ground—as if they were bolted to 
the floor. After a while she may move again to another part of the room or 
stage and again “bolt” her feet to the floor. This is effective movement with 
energy, yet without shuffling or shifting.
Bold, Big-Picture Thinker and Strategist. Leaders focus on future 
change, innovation, and big-picture visions of exciting possibilities. They 
demonstrate that their daring ideas, proposed solutions, or innovations 
are congruent and aligned with the overall strategic goals and mission of 
their organization. By creating and communicating a well-thought-out, 
aggressive plan and strategy for success, along with demonstrating the will 
and drive to achieve impressive results, you will clearly display important 
leadership characteristics.
Avoid 15 Potentially Deadly Mistakes 
Most Presenters Make
Everyone occasionally makes mistakes when giving presentations, even 
Killer Presenters. But it’s the type and extent of the mistakes that deter-
mine the negative impact they will have. These 15 mistakes will adversely 
affect the way your audience pays attention to, understands, and accepts 
the information or ideas you are discussing. Part of creating and giving a 
Killer Presentation is not entirely what you do—it’s also what you don’t 
do—and you need to know both to get it right. Here are the common no-
nos to avoid.
Mistake 1. Not Knowing How to Use Your iPad Competently
It doesn’t take much to be a laptop wizard. You load your PowerPoint 
or Keynote presentation, put it in play mode, and advance the slides by 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
23

­keyboard, mouse, or remote control. But your iPad is different, and it oper-
ates differently. You no longer push your mouse or click your presentation 
remote; you are a “finger maestro” who is using your iPad as a creative 
instrument of powerful interactive communication. You need to know 
what apps can help you, how to use them, and how to work your iPad 
seamlessly, competently, and smoothly to do some (as Steve Jobs would 
say) “amazing things.”
Mistake 2. Keeping It Boring and Dull
The three biggest things that make a presentation dull are (1) a monotone, 
lifeless presenter, (2) uninteresting content that is of no apparent benefit to 
the audience, and (3) terrible visuals, each one full of text. People have a lot 
on their plates and a lot on their minds as they enter a meeting room for a 
presentation. So unless a presenter applies the ideas and techniques we give 
in this book, he or she can expect to have attendees who are physically in 
the room but are mentally and emotionally elsewhere for a while. If you are 
aiming to get superior results, you can’t do it with a dull and monotonous 
presentation or speech.
Mistake 3. Including Too Much Detail
You don’t have to “data-dump” people to get them to fully understand 
what you are discussing. Decision makers need relevant summary bits of 
data and information to see the value of making a decision, not to be fully 
educated on every small aspect of your topic. Decide how much “absolutely 
necessary” information is required and then include the rest in more com-
prehensive handouts or online sites for those who want more. Unless you 
are giving a technical, scientific, or engineering-based presentation where 
lots of specific data are wanted, keep it simple and clear with just enough 
“important stuff.”
Mistake 4. Running Overtime
It is never a good idea to talk longer than your scheduled time. If your 
presentation goes past your allotted limit, you will not only lose your audi-
ence, but annoy or even alienate them. Always strive to end earlier (5 or 
10 minutes) than the time you are given, especially if it is before lunch or 
24	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

toward the end of the day. A smart tactic some speakers use is to actually 
ask for at least 25 percent more time for their presentation than they think 
they will need, because most presentations usually take longer than we 
expect or plan. That will impress and please your group. Those who want 
to hear more will seek you out afterward.
Mistake 5. Causing “Death by Bullets” . . . 
Oh, the Mental Pain and Suffering!
“Death-by-bullets” PowerPoint-type visuals are a daily occurrence that are 
way too common in meetings, mainly because speakers use them as detailed 
notes so they don’t have to prepare to become more familiar with the con-
tent. It’s much easier to pack copious amounts of small-size text and compli-
cated diagrams on a slide, instead of trying to create elegantly simple, cleanly 
designed slides that will visually convey messages, main points, and priority 
information immensely better than what you can say with text.
What’s even worse is that presenters read each bullet point (or entire para-
graphs) word for word. People can read about 7 to 10 times faster than you 
can speak. Keep your well-designed text, graphics, illustrations, and other 
visuals “lean and clean” with just the key points that further your goals.
Mistake 6. Winging It (Worse Yet, Faking It)
We are always amazed at and puzzled by people who apparently brag that 
they “speak off the cuff” and don’t need to prepare or rehearse their speeches 
or presentations, even important ones. It seems that they are not aware that 
they come across in an unflattering way by rambling, going off on tangents, 
and not being crisp, clear, and focused. Don’t fool yourself. Even if you’ve 
given a presentation a number of times before, always prepare and look for 
ways of making it even more concise, understandable, and convincing for 
each unique audience.
Mistake 7. Taking Chances with Unknowns
Imagine coming into a meeting room “cold” and having to quickly give 
your speech or presentation with a projector and screen in the wrong posi-
tion for your liking. What if you have not used a certain presentation-
related piece of equipment that you are given and you are confused about 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
25

how to operate it? Your audience will see how unprepared you are. Your 
presentation could be in serious jeopardy.
Highly paid professional speakers always check out the room they will 
be speaking in long before they get up on stage. Most arrive at least four 
hours early or even a day before to familiarize themselves with the stage, 
the seating setup, and anything else relating to their performance. They 
test out the microphone and PA system. (Most professionals actually bring 
their own wireless systems and presentation remotes and controls to ensure 
predictable excellent operation.)
Mistake 8. Having Poor Eye Contact
If you want to evaporate rapport with your audience, bury your head in 
your iPad or your notes, or turn your back on the group and stare at the 
projection screen as you talk about your visuals. Or instead, you can engage 
your audience by making direct eye contact with various people around 
the room. Learn how to use your iPad in such a way that most of your eye 
contact is with the group and you only periodically need to glance down to 
operate your iPad in an inconspicuous way. Effective eye contact shows your 
poise and confidence while building trust with the group. It demonstrates 
that you are interested in and focused on the people in your audience, not 
yourself or your iPad or anything else. Looking at people also will enable 
you to gauge their reactions (e.g., are they receptive, confused, bored, rest-
less?) so you can dynamically adjust your presentation, if needed.
Mistake 9. Making Excuses and Apologizing
Speakers often make the mistake of alerting the audience to their speaking 
inexperience, lack of full preparation, nervousness, or the fact that some-
thing was missing in their presentation. Many think that this is an act of 
humility or that the audience will sympathize with them. Chances are the 
group was not even aware of a speaker’s perceived deficiencies or lack of 
confidence until he or she “sent up a verbal flare that lit up the sky.” These 
apologies or excuses only serve to hurt a speaker’s credibility and make an 
audience feel uncomfortable and distracted. If you feel that you messed up, 
chances are people might not know. Don’t tell them—let them discover it 
all by themselves!
26	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Mistake 10. Giving a Canned Pitch
How often do you give a “slide presentation” instead of a “presentation 
using slides”? There is a huge difference between those two options. It may 
be much easier and faster to take a shortcut by picking out certain slides 
from a standard slide deck to give an off-the-shelf presentation. But cus-
tomizing content, visuals, and presentation style to each unique audience 
is always the preferred thing to do.
With major presentations, it is essential to find out as much as you can 
about the pain points, priority needs, and information desires of the people 
you will be talking to so you can tailor and precisely target your presenta-
tion to their preferences. In that way, you’ll make a “can” pitch instead of 
a “canned” one.
Mistake 11 . Not Communicating Benefits 
and Value to the Audience
Unfortunately, many presenters fail to communicate how their audience 
members can use, apply, and directly gain advantage from the information 
or ideas they are hearing. It is extremely important to repeatedly (in dif-
ferent ways) articulate how people will specifically benefit and gain value 
from what you are discussing or proposing. Using a combination of directly 
mentioning the benefits and subtly implying them to those in the audience 
will maintain the interest of the audience members and better engage them 
in the presentation.
Mistake 12 . Showing Low-to-No Energy, Passion, or Conviction
If people have to sit and listen to monotone and dispirited speakers, they 
will quickly tune out, turn off, and either daydream, doodle, or work their 
iPhone. You don’t have to be a motivational speaker to rivet a group’s atten-
tion. Even a moderate level of emotion, energy, and passion will go a long 
way in having people feel that you are committed to and excited about what 
you are discussing. You can’t raise the level of energy and excitement of any 
audience above that of your own. So use a quickened speech rate, a boosted 
voice volume, variations of tone, and more purposeful and energetic body 
language. Passion promotes success. It promotes profit.
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
27

Mistake 13 . Making It All About “Me, We, Us, Our”
Presenters from sales and marketing groups who talk about their products, 
services, or company make the common mistake (we estimate about 95 
percent of people do this!) of spending their time and attention on what we 
call the “narcissistic focus”—NARFO. With NARFO, presenters say, “Our 
company does . . . ,” “Our engineers do . . . ,” “Our products excel in . . . ,” “We 
believe that . . . ,” and “Our philosophy is . . .”
Instead, strive to put verbiage more on “them.” For example, change 
your focus by saying something like, “You will find that our products will 
boost your productivity by speeding up ABC’s [their company name] opera-
tions in the following three ways: . . . ,” or “You told us that you wanted to 
work with a company that provided superb service to your field offices.” 
Make it all about them—what they want, they need, they prefer—and cure 
yourself of the NARFO complex.
Mistake 14. Neglecting to Reduce Visual 
Distractions and Confusion
When a presenter puts up a slide or visual on the screen and leaves it up 
after she is finished talking about it, the bright image is distracting and 
interferes with people focusing on the speaker. As soon as you are finished 
referencing a part of a slide, make a point of either hiding the content or 
transitioning to an all-black slide. Now the bright light goes away, and the 
audience’s attention refocuses on you, away from the visual.
If you use PowerPoint or Keynote on a laptop, depress the “B” key to 
instantly blacken the screen or bring the image back. Keynote on the iPad 
has no such option. Until the feature is added, just use an all-black slide in 
the appropriate place.
Another major distraction occurs when a presenter stands in front of a 
projection screen, partially blocking the view for some people in the audi-
ence. If an important part of the visual is overshadowed, that could affect 
the outcome of your presentation. Besides, it’s annoying to have someone 
stand or constantly move in front of a viewing device. Stand in a position 
where everyone can see your visuals at all times.
Finally, a mistake presenters make is to put up a visual and talk about 
different parts on it without directing the audience members’ attention to 
28
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

what specific part of the graphic, photo, or illustration they should be focus-
ing on. They are trying to understand and see what the speaker is referring 
to on the visual. As a result, they could be intent on finding the pertinent 
place on the slide and not be paying attention to what the presenter is say-
ing. Consider highlighting and emphasizing specific parts of a visual by 
underlining, using different colors, or drawing a temporary circle or box 
around an area to bring focus to that part.
Mistake 15. Not Engaging and Involving the Audience
Who wants to listen to a nonstop “presentation filibuster”? If you want to 
rivet people’s attention, look for ways to interact with them. You can do 
that in a number of ways, including using your iPad to connect with their 
devices—before, during, and after your presentation. Encourage their opin-
ions and elicit feedback from people in your group to open up productive 
discussions. Ask rhetorical or real questions to get them to think and respond 
to you. Effective eye contact around the room is an indirect way of interact-
ing with people. There is something “psychologically reciprocal” about how 
when you look at someone, it begs them to look back. That engages them.
By being extremely vigilant to avoid these common 15 mistakes, you will 
find that your presentations and speeches will begin to shine compared 
with those of others, thus awarding you the stellar results you hoped for 
and worked toward.
Describing the Ultimate Killer Presenter: 
Master of Wow Experiences
Chess master. Master mechanic. Martial arts master. Master’s tournament. 
The word master in those examples denotes an expert—someone of great 
and exemplary skill—a consummate professional who delivers the absolute 
highest level of performance. A Killer Presenter is a truly transcendent 
master speaker who creates a moving and memorable experience for an 
audience. Table 2.1 lists 30 characteristics of a Killer Presenter. After you 
look at the descriptors, ask yourself how many people you have seen in 
your career who have ever approached this level of ability and seeming 
perfection. Many high-earning professional speakers and corporate ­trainers 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
29

are, indeed, masters of the platform and classroom. Don’t be intimidated, 
though, by the “ultimate scorecard” and feel that these daunting perfor-
mance characteristics are out of reach for you. They are not. We have known 
numerous people who have risen relatively swiftly from stage-frightened, 
speaking-shy novices to presentation maestros after disciplined work on the 
skills and traits that are described.
Use the performance indicators in the table to help you gauge your 
upward progress. The more of these you develop, the stronger your perfor-
mances will be. Even if you achieve 50 percent of these characteristics, you 
will likely be 100 percent ahead of the average presenter! Make it a habit to 
review these 30 traits, competencies, and skills and score yourself on how 
you did with each one. That frequent self-evaluation will quickly build your 
skills into “Killer” ones that will make a big difference in your presentations 
within a short period of time.
Table 2.1 “Ultimate Scorecard” for Giving a Killer Presentation:  
30 Traits, Competencies, and Skills
	 1.	 Is expert in the use of the iPad, apps, and 
latest technology for presentations
	 2.	 Develops superbly designed visuals (clear, 
attractive, and simple), animations, and 
video and knows how to direct audience 
focus to key areas on the visuals for under-
standing, context, and message emphasis
	 3.	 Displays extensive knowledge of the 
topic and can effectively discuss any 
aspect without detailed slides
	 4.	 Shows marvelous use of purposeful cre-
ativity and showmanship to add pizzazz
	 5.	 Uses great, colorful, descriptive, and 
psychologically impacting language 
for effect
	 6.	 Uses creativity to make presentation 
interesting, fascinating, and compelling
	 7.	 Makes a captivating positive first impres-
sion and sterling lasting impression
	 8.	 Is a “grand strategist” who uses 
best approaches to reach every 
presentation goal
	 9.	 Uses powerful verbal and visual meta-
phors and analogies
	10.	 Has competent working knowledge 
about audiovisual equipment used 
in presentations
	11 .	 Uses voice and body language to add 
interest and meaning to the spoken word
	12 .	 Focuses relentlessly on addressing the 
highest-priority needs and wants of 
the group
	13 .	 Develops quick, strong rapport with audi-
ence, earning trust and respect
30	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

What Can You Learn from the 
Dude Who Did the iPad?
Steve Jobs was a showman and salesman par excellence, considered by 
many to be an iconic Killer Presenter. He surely fit most (if not all) of the 
traits and skills described in Table 2.1, didn’t he? Carmine Gallo, a com-
munications expert, wrote a remarkable book about Jobs, The Presentation 
Secrets of Steve Jobs: How to Be Insanely Great in Front of Any Audience;2 we 
highly recommend reading it.
2  Carmine Gallo, The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs. How to Be Insanely Great in Front of Any Audience, 
New York: McGraw Hill, 2010.
	14.	 Radiates a supremely confident, 
in-charge command presence 
leadership aura
	15.	 Is supremely polished, poised, and pow-
erful in the ability to be persuasive
	16.	 Strongly stimulates, motivates, inspires, 
and moves an audience to commitment 
and action
	17.	 Makes compelling appeals to both left-
brain logic and right-brain emotion
	18 .	 Is an excellent facilitator as well as pre-
senter who knows when to be each
	19 .	 Takes complex, difficult-to-understand 
topics and elegantly simplifies them
	20.	 Skillfully performs and subtly entertains, 
not just informs
	21 .	 Does not become ruffled by hostile 
audience members—“cool and pleasant 
under fire”
	22 .	 Handles touchy or sensitive issues diplo-
matically and tactfully
	23 .	 Uses appropriate humor and wit and 
knows just how to play with audiences
	24.	 Is a masterful storyteller who will hold an 
audience spellbound with tales
	25.	 Makes main presentation points and key 
messages stand out vividly
	26.	 Speaks in a natural, sincere, and conversa-
tional way
	27.	 Carefully observes and listens to audience 
members to detect subtle clues about 
how they are reacting and feeling during 
the presentation and adjusts content and 
style accordingly
	28 .	 Gives audience a realistic view of a topic 
with pros and cons, benefits and risks, to 
put forth a recommendation in an accu-
rate and clear perspective for the group
	29 .	 Comes across as a riveting, dynamic, and 
charismatic public speaker
	30.	 Taps into and activates an audience’s col-
lective desires, hopes, and dreams
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
31

Learning about how Steve Jobs presented will give you more valuable 
insights and perspectives on how to ace the presentation game. First of all, 
he is one of the rare CEOs of a major corporation that took on the role of 
“chief presenting officer” and evangelist for his products. Other big shots 
would lock themselves in the executive suite and delegate that perceived 
lower-priority task to others. Not Steve. He proudly and purposely used his 
finely honed presentation skills to be the ultimate spokesman for Apple.
He didn’t just present—he generated buzz, pizzazz, and an electrically 
charged atmosphere. When he first got on stage and the applause died 
down, he often teased his audience into a ramped-up state of anticipation 
and longing for the next revolutionary Apple product. “There is something 
in the air!” for example, he said, egging on his eager onlookers at one of 
his major events. As Gallo said in his book, “A Steve Jobs presentation is 
intended to create an experience—‘a reality distortion field’—that leaves 
his audience awed, inspired, and wildly excited.”3 And his fans loved it! 
Granted, the keynotes we saw were a large-audience, on-stage performance 
that most of us seldom would do. While different rules and skills typi-
cally apply to those types of keynotes and product demonstrations, many 
of Steve Jobs’s techniques will help you even if you are presenting to one 
person in the elevator.
Jobs was clearly charismatic, but in a more subdued way, as opposed to 
what people may envision as someone being energetic (in an exaggerated 
way), purposely exuberant, or perhaps flamboyant. Look at the way he was 
dressed. He didn’t try to call attention to himself, but you knew that his 
charisma was there. It was like a powerful car engine under the hood that 
you could hear idling, restrained, but ready to unleash some serious whip-
lash. A big part of his charisma was evidenced by his outward passion and 
enthusiasm for the products.
His communication style was direct, simple, and (like his products and 
services) elegant in its execution and persuasion quality. He let his person-
ality come through with absolutely no hint of chest thumping, shouting, 
or showboating. Jobs gave few media interviews in his lifetime, especially 
on TV, because he was essentially shy and private in that regard. Yet he 
3  Ibid., xii.
32
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

overcame any stage fright he had in public and sharpened his presentation 
skills to a razor’s edge over many years to reach that impressive master 
presenter status.
One of the things he did so well is what we advocate in our book—he 
had a natural, relaxed style of presenting that made people feel comfortable, 
as if he were talking just to them. A genuine feel of a good conversation. 
That’s it . . . but it was more than enough. He made giving a presentation 
look easy. He wasn’t “trying” to present. It seemed so natural and effortless. 
Part of that secret was his discipline to prepare, practice, and rehearse—
aloud—for hours before his keynotes so that his carefully chosen (for 
impact) words would perfectly synchronize with his visuals, making his 
points and messages drill into your psyche.
He made sure that his transitions, his introductions of other speakers, the 
videos he showed, and the demonstrations he gave were silky smooth. And 
when things would sometimes go “bump on the stage,” with a product not 
fully cooperating or a glitch in getting to a website, for example, Jobs kept 
his cool, made no big deal out of it, and calmly recovered to the extent that 
almost no one noticed, whereas other less poised and hot-headed presenters 
would lose their composure and bring undue attention to the problem.
Do you remember what the box containing your iPad looked like when 
you bought it? It was all white with a photo of an iPad lying flat on top. On 
the two sides of the box were matching silver Apple logos and the word iPad 
(in black) on the other two sides. That’s it! Typical Apple simple elegance in 
design. Well, so were Jobs’s visuals. Did you ever see him use an elaborate 
keynote software template? His background slides were white—no headers, 
no footers, no fancy designs or colors to distract. White background gave 
him lots of white space, so that his photos (usually just one per slide) or 
minimal text (usually several words in black font) would have high contrast 
and would “pop” against all that blank white space. Most templates waste 
“prime real estate” on a slide.
Why use a busy, graphically sophisticated template with $10,000 worth 
of artwork and $1 worth of communication value? Jobs didn’t. It was Leon-
ardo da Vinci who said, “Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.” Jobs 
often referenced that quote and worked and lived by it. We are not saying 
never to use a template for your slides. If called for, just use one that has a 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
33

simple, elegant design for the specific purpose you intend and leave all the 
extraneous footer fluff out.
You certainly can have a Killer Presentation without slides filled with 
bullets. Jobs was never a “visual shooter.” People who know what they are 
talking about do not need bullet-ridden PowerPoints. Presenters like Jobs, 
and then Tim Cook and others who took over the reins of Apple, aim to 
have slides with well-designed graphics, illustrations, diagrams, photos, and 
animations that visually communicate ideas, messages, and key informa-
tion immensely better than stark numbers, text, or even the well-spoken 
word by itself. Unfortunately, few presenters add meaningful video to their 
presentations as Jobs did (about his products and TV advertisements). In 
your Keynote app, you can import full-screen, high-resolution video easily 
and quickly. Good-quality video (with excellent audio) can add wonders to 
your messages and help distinguish your presentations from all others.
A couple of caveats about his presentations and style. First, don’t try to 
copy Steve Jobs’s presentation style of delivery or anyone else’s. That was his. 
You have your own special speaking style that reflects your unique person-
ality. Second, the type of presentation scenario Jobs gave is different from 
the ones most of us will encounter. So understand that some of the things 
he did would not apply to presentations you give in everyday life to small 
groups or even larger ones. He was Steve Jobs of Apple—both a powerful and 
immensely respected “brand.” He had enormous credibility and respect. He 
would not have had to start from zero to persuade people as we usually do.
We don’t have his world-famous brand or image or his adoring fan club. 
He had a much easier job than we would when trying to convince the public. 
We face skeptical audiences, disinterested buyers, and strong competitors. 
Nevertheless, we can learn from his techniques, strategies, and ideas he so 
effectively used over his lifetime. Tim Cook and others at recent Apple new-
product keynotes have effectively used Jobs’s presentation methods and even 
many of his signature superlatives. In that respect, Steve still lives on.
Go Ahead—Act Up in Your Presentation!
“It’s not enough for an actor to be honest. It’s the actor’s job to make the 
kind of choices that motivate exciting results,” said Ivana Chubbuck, who 
34	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

runs a popular acting school in Los Angeles. Acting in your presentations 
can deliver some exciting results as well. Maybe you have a bit of the act-
ing bug to begin with. Or perhaps you haven’t yet thought of the idea of 
exhibiting some inherent thespian talents. But know that a little theatrics, 
humor, curiosity, or suspense-evoking drama could spice up your speaking 
delivery skills and ways of entertaining your audience. If you are shy or 
experience moderate-to-severe stage fright or just want to put some pizzazz 
in your talks or videos, take an acting class and learn some great techniques 
along with a good dose of confidence.
When asked how an actor can be president, Ronald Reagan replied, 
“How can a president not be an actor.” We agree and believe the same 
applies to successful leaders, public speakers, and sales and business pre-
senters. You will find that a lot of professional and motivational speakers 
have invested their time to effectively learn and apply acting skills. Reagan 
did not likely mean that the free world’s most powerful leader should be 
someone he wasn’t or that the president should fake it by playing the star-
ring role on the world’s stage. He meant that leaders should use acting 
techniques to project and use their best voice in speeches and to develop 
confident, dynamic, and poised body language that displays that impor-
tant command presence leadership aura to any audience. Ronald Reagan 
projected charisma and a warm but forceful personality, likely forged and 
tempered by his confidence-building acting experiences.
It was another statesman, Sam Rayburn, former speaker of the U.S. 
House of Representatives, who said, “The real actor has a direct line to the 
collective heart.” Logic impresses, but emotions move people to action. 
Learning a few key acting skills, or using your inborn talents, will enable 
you to show emotions—even subtly—in ways that will directly affect and 
move people. While presentation trainers and coaches generally agree that 
getting some good acting lessons can help people develop a more refined 
and poised stage presence and boost charisma, some others are divided on 
whether acting techniques can help or hurt people as they strive to become 
better public speakers.
Famed movie star Michael Caine said, “If you catch someone ‘act-
ing,’ that actor is doing something wrong.” Beginning actors often believe 
that it is necessary to continually speak, make gestures, or change facial 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
35

­expressions to help the audience interpret the script. But the savvy actors 
and public speakers use the art of the subtle, the slow, the not moving or 
making a sound to richly enhance the performance.
Bad acting, for example, shows a person reeling around the room when 
playing a character who is drunk, when in real life, the intoxicated person 
makes a strong effort to appear sober. Likewise, if presenters are trying 
to “act,” they will come across as being unnatural, contrived, or perhaps 
stiff and mechanical. In that case, the audience might see such a presenter 
as being disingenuous, and that could damage the trust that person is 
attempting to develop with the group. Audiences like real people who are 
genuine with no put-ons, pretensions, or artificiality. You don’t have to 
be an aspiring Meryl Streep or a Daniel Day-Lewis to use some relatively 
modest acting methods to leverage how your communication and behavior 
should be directed to what you are trying to accomplish.
An iPad as Acting Companion
Here’s an example of how an aspiring Killer Presenter can use acting and 
creativity in a most unusual and impactful way. Let’s say a woman is a semi-
professional, part-time speaker who talks mostly to women’s professional 
associations about being a better leader on the job and in the community. 
She wants to develop a following and a reputation as an engaging, imagina-
tive presenter. At Las Vegas several weeks before her next presentation, she 
saw a female ventriloquist and wished she could do that. While she was out 
running one day—pop!—the idea came to her out of nowhere in an instant: 
instead of being a ventriloquist with a dummy, how about a spin-off idea 
from that? She thought of doing a skit.
The speaker had a life-size, front-facing enlarged photo of her made 
from her beltline up. She went to a sign store (one that makes big displays 
for trade shows) and had the people there attach her photo to a rigid piece of 
plastic that was then cut around her upper body and face to create a contour 
shape depicting her real body. She asked them to also cut out an oval area 
in the middle of her face and attach brackets in the back that would hold 
a full-size iPad; a hidden stand enabled the plastic silhouette to stand up 
straight. In addition, she had a speaker installed on the back (connected to 
that iPad) with inconspicuous holes cut through the plastic to let the sound 
36	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

out. She recorded a number of video clips of herself talking from a script 
that she wrote. Once edited, the videos just showed her head—life-size—
filling the iPad screen. She stored all the videos on her iPad as part of an 
engaging skit where she would be “talking to herself” (her “plastic self”) in 
front of her audiences.
She titled her new talk, “I Talked to Myself and I Believed Me This 
Time!” At her next women’s business association luncheon where she was 
the featured speaker, she set up this life-size (from the waist up) photo-on-
plastic replica such that when positioned on a table it was as tall as she was 
and looked exactly like her, right down to wearing the same outfit she wore. 
After being introduced, she said, “How many of us give ourselves frequent 
negative self-talk each day? We tell ourselves, ‘I’m not smart enough, thin 
enough, attractive enough, educated enough.’” Almost all hands reluctantly 
went up in the audience. She continued, “This was me two years ago,” as 
she faced her clone. Holding her mini iPad, she activated the first video 
clip on the embedded iPad that had her video face speaking to her. She was 
acting out a dialogue with her other self!
Three times during her 30-minute speech, she played out (in her talk-
ing-to-herself skits) how she transformed from negative self-talk to almost 
total positive affirmations. She varied her voice tone and pitch (both natural 
and recorded on video), facial expressions, hand gestures, and body lan-
guage (expressing changing emotions during the dialogues) to make her 
rendition of self-talk come alive to the audience. She had rehearsed this 
for hours until the back-and-forth between her and her “iPad self” was 
smooth, realistic, and wonderfully enlightening and entertaining. Without 
a single acting lesson, her natural talents were sufficient to rivet her audi-
ences throughout.
An Ancient Art—Powered by Your iPad— 
Is Even More Vital in Today’s Presentations
Abe Lincoln and Ronald Reagan were superb practitioners of it. Professional 
speakers do it with seasoned aplomb. Steven Spielberg is among the best at it. 
Agents of change apply it as a powerful tool. It’s been around since the dawn 
of humanity. It’s great storytelling! And using acting techniques (whether 
natural or learned) will make stories sparkle and spring to life and cause 
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
37

people to ponder, to laugh, to cry, or to reevaluate something. Storytelling 
is a passport to the heart and soul and is one of the most neglected forms of 
communication in business presentations today. People will forget most dry 
facts, statistics, and other information, but not an imagination-sparking, 
burst-your-belly-laughing, or tug-at-your-heartstrings story that can sear into 
peoples’ memories, sometimes forever. Stories can change lives.
Unfortunately, storytelling is often counterintuitive and dismissed as 
frivolous by many “buttoned-down” business executives, especially those 
coming from engineering and technical backgrounds where science rules the 
day. Yet even in the most conservative cultures in business and government 
organizations—which are overdosed with sterile facts and figures—stories 
serve as purposeful narratives to achieve important outcomes. Just about 
everyone loves a good story that can teach, entertain, and build bridges to 
new ideas and relationships. Now with the power of the iPad, storytelling 
will move into a new, more visual dimension and streamlined process.
If you are a salesperson, you can develop 30- to 60-second “success 
stories” about how your products or services help your customers achieve 
the results they want. You can also prepare satisfied customers to tell their 
own stories (in videos that you get produced) about how working with 
your company has enabled them to achieve various stellar results. Maybe 
you are an entrepreneur or innovator pitching to investors. In addition to 
providing them with the “hard-core data” that they require, you might tell 
them several interesting short stories about how your new product, service, 
business, or invention came to be and what an impressive impact it had—
and will continue to have—on others. And instead of giving the traditional 
(yawn-inducing) PowerPoint presentation about your company with all the 
boring stuff that tells little about the uniqueness, personality, and soul of 
your company, weave an interesting story that sets your company and its 
employees apart from the other look-alikes in your industry.
A Business Story with Heart and Soul
While we changed the scenario somewhat, the following example is based 
upon a real presentation that occurred with a senior executive from an 
American car company who told his story (along with photos) to the com-
38
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

pany’s board of directors, in addition to hundreds of product design people 
who worked for him. Success stories have a setting, a situation, and a solu-
tion, which this story does. The person telling this example story, Brad X, 
is an innovative executive of a large manufacturer, whose company, like 
thousands of others, felt the need to shift some factories overseas. The sto-
ryteller has several goals regarding his tale:
	 1.	To engage the emotions of the group by showing the human side of 
events that impacted so many lives (that we care about) in so many ways
	2.	To tell a personal story involving himself that the audience can empa-
thize with
	 3.	To have the people in the audience see and hear for themselves what 
happened and what can happen now
	4.	To challenge the influential people in the audience to create a happy 
ending to now “their” story
Brad invited 48 people—technologists, business executives, state and 
federal agency leaders, potential investors, and the top management of a 
leading innovation center—to hear his presentation, whose title and theme 
was “renewal.” At the beginning of the presentation, he walked to the 
lectern carrying what looked like a rich leather-bound book. He began, 
“Today I want to tell you a story from my book,” and he raised his leather 
book, with gold-leaf lettering on the cover spelling out the title “Renewal,” 
for all to see.
His audience did not realize that this handmade, vintage-looking, 
leather book (called the BookBook from http://www.twelvesouth.com) 
was a case that creatively hid his iPad. He placed the book on the lectern, 
opened it up, and said, “I want to tell you a story playing out in many cit-
ies across the country that is representative of what happened in my com-
munity.” He explained, “This is my hometown growing up,” as he showed 
photos from his iPad of his high school, the ball fields he played in, and the 
movie theater he and his friends frequented. He followed with more photos 
of an ice cream parlor, variety stores, and quaint restaurants with the smil-
ing people who worked there. “These were the wonderful family-owned 
businesses I cherish and remember. It was a wonderful place to grow up. 
Families were friendly, happy, and helped each other. Life was good.”
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
39

Brad continued, “Here are some photographs of our local manufactur-
ing companies that made quality products and employed thousands of peo-
ple who supported their families with a decent living.” As he looked down 
at his iPad, people still thought he was reading (he was using his notes on 
the iPad as memory joggers). They wondered how he could articulate all 
the details and how the photos popped up on the projection screen. Next, 
he showed photos of a bustling railroad depot with forklift trucks, shipping 
containers, and loading docks, with hordes of workers. “Look at the activity 
back then!” he passionately exclaimed.
Now his voice and facial expression grew more solemn. “But something 
happened there over the last 20 years,” he said. “Factories started to close 
down or go overseas. The railroad and trucking companies lost business as 
a result. The trickle-down effect hit small businesses in my town. People 
who owned their restaurants for generations had no choice but to close.” 
While Brad continued his story of woe, he showed photos of shuttered 
factories deteriorating, rail yards in rusty disrepair, foreclosure signs on 
homes, and “Going Out of Business” signs on store windows. “Somehow 
we took our eye off the ball. In the last 20 years in the USA, we had over 
46,000 factories either close or shift to other countries, and the effect has 
been devastating to people who lost their dream, their retirement, their 
sense of security,” he said with a genuine sadness in his voice.
“I went back recently and talked to those still living in what some are 
calling a semi-ghost town. Here’s what they said.” From his iPad, Brad 
showed four 1-minute video clips of interviews with various people who 
have suffered the ravages of an economic reversal. The disappointment, 
pain, and sorrow in people on the video were palpable. “This is playing out 
all over our country and in Europe and elsewhere. My company was reluc-
tantly forced to move a large percentage of production overseas. But we 
want to bring manufacturing back here and do it more profitably and bet-
ter than we have ever done. I’m here to tell you that we can do something 
about it! We can have a major renewal,” as he picked up his iPad BookBook 
case and pointed to the gold-leaf title on the cover.
“My company has partnered with several prestigious government 
research laboratories, along with two computer companies that have devel-
oped the fastest supercomputers. And in partnership with three of the 
40	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

nation’s top engineering universities, we have developed a new model, a 
new process, and a new technology of manufacturing that will bring back 
prosperity, full employment, and the middle-class quality of living that 
millions have lost. We have discovered the ‘Renewal Formula!’ Now I want 
to tell you how—together with your help—we can transform these rusted 
factories—starting here, but spreading all over the country—into the most 
modern, thriving engines of economic fortunes ever experienced.”
From his “iPad story book,” he then showed five short videos of passion-
ate testimonials from the country’s leading researchers, financial analysts, 
and manufacturing experts about the efficacy and validity of his proposed 
renewal of manufacturing.
He then shifted into laying out his strategic implementation plan, 
including virtual reality walk-throughs of the proposed new factories 
and 3-D animations of the newly developed integrated technologies. He 
wrapped up with hard-core forecasts of estimated returns on investment, 
payback, and other financial investment considerations. His summary was 
crisp, his call to action was direct, and his ending was dramatic and memo-
rable. He told his audience, “My theme and message are about vital renewal 
of our manufacturing base.” From his iPad, he activated an animation that 
showed the word renewal in a large font; as the audience watched, the word 
new within the larger word renewal moved upward and the letters came 
together to create the word real. He ended, “This opportunity is both new 
and real, and together we can make it happen!”
As with all impacting stories, Brad used a psychological shift of per-
spective that changed the direction of the story from good to sad to “even 
better than before” to draw the audience emotionally into his story before 
he communicated his impressive plan leading to a probable happy ending 
that elicited the support and commitment of those at his presentation.
This chapter is about you becoming the winning message by showing 
your leadership, by avoiding the common mistakes most presenters make, 
by using a little acting to spark up your talks, and by becoming more of a 
storyteller instead of a bullet talker. Do those things and your Killer Pre-
sentations will win big!
	
	
Let’s Face It—You Are the Winning Message!
41

This page intentionally left blank 

What Makes a Killer Presentation?
H
ow many of the hundreds or thousands of presentations that you have 
attended throughout your business career were absolutely outstand-
ing? The few that were exceptional you indeed remembered and marveled 
at. You might have forgotten most of the details, but you did not forget 
how you felt—mesmerized, mentally stimulated, and perhaps emotion-
ally moved. They provided a deeply rewarding experience that excited you, 
maybe opened you up to fresh new ideas, somehow lifted your spirits, or 
even imparted a deep renewed optimism.
Average presentations leave your mind wandering while you check the 
time and messages on your iPhone. The bad ones are simply insufferable. 
No one should have to sit through a time-wasting, energy-robbing presenta-
tion when everyone can learn to make a much better presentation. The right 
words spoken just right by the right speaker have immense, spellbinding 
power. Great leaders, richly paid professional speakers, successful execu-
tives, top salespeople, and others who made a difference in their industry 
and the world surely know that.
In this chapter you will learn what a Killer Presentation is—how it is 
described and how audiences typically react to it. If you want to develop 
business presentations and speeches that are light-years ahead of others, 
you have to reimagine and then reinvent them. We will give you ideas and 
valuable examples to do just that with your iPad. Finally, you will be able 
to significantly improve by leveraging the vital Ideal 10 characteristics that 
will help you gain that “unfair advantage”!
There are all kinds of presentations and speeches. Some inform; others 
persuade. There are those that entreat, convince, and galvanize. Still others 
entertain, amuse, instill, and inspire. They can amaze, shock, and create 
C h a p t e r  3
43

ah! reactions. A Killer Presentation, though, is in a class by itself, as you 
will discover.
How Can You Tell If You or Someone Else 
Has Performed a Killer Presentation?
A Killer Presentation makes a formidable, positive impact! And your 
iPad, used effectively, is an “impact generator and amplifier”—that means 
excellent, exceptional, outstanding. A Killer Presentation is a transcendent 
one—surpassing others—being supremely superb by exceeding ordinary 
standards and expectations. It’s a masterful performance! The best presen-
tations and speeches open the eyes, minds, and hearts of people in atten-
dance. A Killer Presentation can “disrupt”—reverse or otherwise radically 
change the thinking, attitudes, assumptions, and beliefs of people about 
a certain topic. It has the power to get people to do things they might not 
have done or even thought possible. Depending upon the type of Killer 
Performance experienced by people, you might describe it with a range of 
adjectives, such as those listed here:
Various Descriptors of a Killer Presentation
admirable	
eye-opening	
mesmerizing
awesome	
fascinating	
mind-warping
captivating	
galvanizing	
motivating
compelling	
gripping	
moving
convincing	
impressive	
riveting
dazzling	
insightful	
rousing
engrossing	
inspiring	
stirring
enjoyable	
interesting	
surprising
entertaining	
irresistible	
undeniable
exciting	
life-changing	
unforgettable
While describing a Killer Presentation or speech in various glowing 
terms is helpful, the surest way to know if you have given a sterling per-
formance is in how an audience reacts, during the presentation and after-
ward. It’s all about impact—how that information, your vocal delivery, 
44	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

and visuals affected people intellectually and emotionally, described in the 
following ways:
People listened and watched with rapt attention and searing  
■
■
interest.
You didn’t see people fidgeting, looking at their watches, or working 
■
■
their iPhones or iPads.
People sat straight up and leaned forward at times.
■
■
They had direct, constant eye contact with you and the screen display-
■
■
ing visuals.
The audience asked lots of questions throughout and perhaps after 
■
■
your presentation ended.
Decision makers and influential people in the group openly shared 
■
■
supportive comments, such as “That’s right on target” or “We need to 
do that!” or “I like that!”
You saw heads nodding (sometimes vigorously) in agreement with 
■
■
many of your points.
Facial expressions showed enthusiastic endorsement or had that 
■
■
indescribable look that says, “Wow!”
People smiled, laughed, interacted, and engaged with you and among 
■
■
themselves.
Many came up to you afterward to engage in a discussion or congrat-
■
■
ulate you on a great job.
Bottom-line reactions: If it was a Killer Speech (like a motivational talk 
or political speech), the audience erupted in a sustained standing ovation. 
If it was a Killer Business Presentation, the audience members immediately 
wanted to support, fully commit to, and take decisive action upon what 
you were asking them to do. If it was a Killer Sales Presentation, they made 
their unanimous decision right then and there to buy.
Reimagining and Reinventing Your Presentations
Let’s venture into the unexplored frontiers of the mind to look at some 
examples of how to reimagine, reinvent, and remake the art of the Killer 
Presentation. And let’s temporarily put aside conventionality and assumed 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
45

practicality to look into new and exciting ways to get information and ideas 
across in a more interesting, innovative, and impactful way. Here are three 
examples to show you what we mean:
Example 1. What if you created a business presentation as a board game 
(like Monopoly) using iPads to deliver information or sell something? 
Moves might be made on a real, large game board (with attractive game 
pieces), depending upon the action created on each player’s iPad. Every 
time people make a positive move, they get important pieces of infor-
mation or a clue to get closer to winning the game—which has specific 
benefits associated with it: maybe winning prizes, incentives to buy, or 
something else.
Example 2. Say you wanted to build a presentation for technical training, 
teaching the operation of advanced machine tools as a (custom-built) game. 
Points would be accumulated every time a player did something right on 
the simulation of a machine tool shown on the iPad. What if you con-
sidered using some devices like iCades, which are miniaturized portable 
arcade cabinets (with a physical joystick and buttons) using an iPad as the 
arcade display panel.
Example 3. Suppose you have to make a sales presentation that involves 
advanced technology-based products or services, and your audience con-
sists mostly of engineering and technical people who typically love solv-
ing problems or finding answers to tough questions. In this scenario, you 
develop a Jeopardy-type game where product information and your sales 
proposal are both hidden behind the electronic cards on a 60-inch TV. 
Participants answer using their own or presenter-supplied iPads (with 
some clues). Perhaps the winner gets a check to present to his or her char-
ity, regardless of whether a sale is made.
Continuing the push for ingenious communication, imagine where key 
information is given:
As a 30-minute newscast delivered by two anchors sitting at a desk 
■
■
using their iPads to show information on a large-screen TV or 
rear-projection screen.
46	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

In the form of several “really cool” magic tricks done by a profes-
■
■
sional magician (possibly using an iPad as his prop) as part of your 
presentation team. Maybe a video is shown of the magician (if a 
live performance is not possible).
With a ventriloquist and her dummy who, after giving a brief 
■
■
presentation, also answer (prepared and rehearsed) content-related 
questions and amusingly interact with and play off the audience. 
Going a creative step further, suppose the dummy was holding an 
iPad and the ventriloquist was moving the dummy’s hand as if 
operating the iPad (but another person on the presentation team 
was really doing it from the sidelines).
Through people performing a humorous live skit where they act out 
■
■
a story regarding the presentation topic.
By children (who are actually accomplished, articulate actors).
■
■
If you are looking for something a little more traditional, picture your 
critical, high-stakes sales presentation being mostly delivered in a more 
conventional presentation format (but still using some Killer techniques). 
It then ends with a five-minute videotaped “news documentary” that tells a 
compelling success story dated six months in the future as if the prospects 
in the audience had authorized the sale. The news story would unfold a 
convincing, realistic, and attractive picture of how the organization and 
each major stakeholder had specifically benefited from buying. What a 
potentially powerful way to end one’s presentation!
Who Wants to Risk It and Change?
Some of these more unusual ways of reimagining and reinventing a presen-
tation can be valuable—yes, even quite practical—and extremely benefi-
cial, depending upon the type of people in your group, their organizational 
culture, and the situation or event involved. Highly creative presentations 
are ideal for many types of:
Trade shows
■
■
Association presentations
■
■
TED Talks
■
■
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
47

Motivational or entertainment-type speeches
■
■
Videotaped presentations shown on a website or YouTube  
■
■
and Vimeo
Training workshops
■
■
Multilevel marketing events
■
■
Award shows
■
■
Public seminars
■
■
TV appearances
■
■
Product demonstrations
■
■
Where do you draw the line when it comes to leaning toward “wild 
and crazy” with your presentation? You would not do these radical, highly 
unconventional presentations for a board of directors you know to be 
conservative, for an executive-level presentation, or at meetings where the 
risk of being different is not warranted, nor advisable. You would not take 
the chance to possibly diminish your professional credibility and alienate 
people who prefer a standard-type, traditional, no-nonsense presentation. 
Remember, the favorite ice cream flavor for most people is vanilla.
Even if you are giving presentations to the most buttoned-down group, 
you still can use many of the creative techniques in your iPad-based pre-
sentation that we cover in this book, but definitely hold off on the megaton 
imaginative techniques—or the bacon-flavored rocky road ice cream (there 
is such a thing!) ideas. Standing out and doing things differently means 
taking risks. If you are unsure of whether adding some super high-octane 
fuel to your presentation is a good idea, then start out making it incremen-
tally more imaginative. Gamble with something that you can afford to lose 
or that you stand a slim chance of winning.
If you never take risks, you will never distinguish yourself from the 
faceless crowd that plays it safe to not lose, instead of playing to win (big) 
with that knockout performance. But keep in mind, there are those special 
innovative and strongly entrepreneurial companies with groups of counter-
culture senior leaders who would embrace and appreciate your reinvented 
presentations. Obviously, knowing your audience and their sensitivities and 
preferences, their organizational culture, and their acceptance and toler-
ance for uniqueness is key to determining how imaginative you should be. 
48	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Following are two detailed examples of how you can safely create innova-
tive presentations and reap impressive results.
Scenario 1. A Company Story as a Short Film
Whether it is a three-minute, five-minute, or slightly longer overview of 
one’s company prepared for potential customers, suppliers, investors, or 
others, just about all such presentations are straitlaced, predictable, and, 
well, boring! Just the plain, dull facts about the company’s history, all 
the products and services, the financial data over time, and the different 
departments in the company. Included in many is the standard manage-
ment structure organization chart with a bunch of boxes and names, with 
maybe a few photos thrown in of some of the bigwigs, a snapshot of the 
company’s headquarters, and a stiffly posed photo of the board of direc-
tors. These PowerPoint presentations essentially give dry information in the 
vain hope of somehow showing off the company or organization. But most 
bland ones fall short and fall down.
What would a Killer Presentation of a company history look like? The 
following example is a composite of several real company stories that illus-
trate a century-old U.S.-headquartered company that is a manufacturer of 
specialty textiles, fabrics, and chemicals. The employees pride themselves 
on being innovative, with a legacy of doing good and nurturing a culture 
of integrity, environmental responsibility, and a rewarding, fun workplace 
in which to enjoy a longstanding, enriching career.
The goal of the film-style presentation is to tell a story in a typical week 
of several employees, customers, and others who interact with the company. 
The film opens with an actor portraying the founder who established the 
ethical values and creative, caring culture that is sustained and embraced 
to this day. The timeline quickly shifts to other actors playing the company 
leaders who succeeded him and who held fast to the founder’s principles, 
even when the company’s future was threatened, especially after the U.S. 
textile industry could not compete with foreign, low-cost operations. The 
message is “This company knows how to survive and thrive through great 
leadership, dedicated people, and innovation that together create profit-
able, high-value niche textile products.” With a bit of drama and suspense, 
the film shows how the company’s numerous PhD researchers experiment, 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
49

struggle, and ultimately achieve remarkable success by developing impres-
sive breakthroughs in chemical compounds, technology, and manufactur-
ing processes that help to keep the company on a fast track in its fiercely 
competitive industry.
The story explores the lives of people using the company’s unique 
products and captures the emotional impact—the difference the prod-
ucts make in their lives. Rather than having a predictable sequential story 
flow, the movie is broken up by clips showing how employees interact with 
one another in extraordinarily productive ways while actually having fun. 
Cameras follow managers and executives around, showing how their brand 
of “servant leadership” fosters a more collaborative, less hierarchical organi-
zation and promotes an efficient culture that produces quicker and superior 
results among teams of talented, dedicated people.
While seeing beautiful cinematography of the exquisite worldwide cam-
puses, world-class research and education facilities, and futuristic-looking 
manufacturing operations along with the personal side of the company, 
viewers would clearly get the impression that this was not just an excellent 
company but a truly exceptional one with a responsible, caring, and altruis-
tic corporate soul. In spite of telling a “soft story,” the video cleverly, subtly, 
and indirectly embeds hard information about key financial data and other 
information viewers would want to know.
The company story is designed, written, and scripted in a collabora-
tive development between employees, customers, suppliers, and leaders in 
the communities where the company has facilities. They use iPads with 
programs like FaceTime and Skype and note-taking, drawing, and brain-
storming apps along with sample photos and rough videos to efficiently 
storyboard their ideas. Now compare that type of presentation about a 
company next to a series of PowerPoint slides filled with text, sterile facts 
and figures, and a bunch of posed people and photos of buildings!
So how does one develop a more interesting and hard-hitting presenta-
tion about your company? Start by looking for answers to these types of 
unusual questions:
What really makes us different and special—from the perspective of 
■
■
our employees, customers, the communities we work in, our suppliers, 
and others?
50	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

What is the “soul” of our company? How does our culture deeply 
■
■
reflect that?
How do our people self-actualize on the job to the benefit of custom-
■
■
ers and other company stakeholders?
How do we describe our leadership philosophy around here? What 
■
■
have been the positive results?
What do customers say we do best by a long lead—so much better 
■
■
than anyone else?
What fascinating and relevant bits of trivia do we have about our 
■
■
founder and our people, products, customers, and organization?
What distinctive business model do we leverage to give us advantages 
■
■
and short- and long-term outstanding performance?
What are our most impressive financial metrics and trends, and how 
■
■
do we measure success beyond those admirable financials?
How did our company get where it is today?
■
■
What interesting information about our programs to enhance produc-
■
■
tivity, effectiveness, efficiency, quality, and innovation throughout our 
company would impress people in our presentations?
What are the two or three biggest mistakes this company has made 
■
■
but has corrected and learned from in ways that actually made this 
company better and stronger?
What philosophy and values do we not just declare but really 
■
■
work by?
What future vision is our company implementing to make a real 
■
■
difference in our industry?
Scenario 2. Entire Interactive Presentation from One Visual
One of the nation’s largest energy producers, traders, and distributors devel-
oped an innovative new customer approach to buying gas, electricity, and 
energy-related services that reduced risk, improved price certainty, and gave 
customers better control over buying energy. The problem was that this new 
approach was a major departure from the way customers were used to deal-
ing with energy issues. There was a high probability that it would confuse 
the customer and jeopardize sales if not communicated just right. Typically, 
most salespeople in the company used a printed, bound booklet of 35 to 40 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
51

PowerPoint slides. They would sit with a customer, who flipped through 
the booklet in a sequential manner as the salesperson went through each 
slide.
Around “8 B.I.P.”—8 years before iPad—the energy company contracted 
with Ray Anthony’s company to achieve several challenging objectives: dra-
matically simplify how the concept and new solution was communicated; 
make it easier, faster, and more effective for the salespeople to present the 
information; and make the presentation truly interactive, where a prospect 
could follow the presentation and ask questions rather than having to fol-
low a bunch of printed slides, one after the other.
Together with the client, Ray’s company developed an attractive lami-
nated and framed visual (about 16 by 24 inches) with self-explanatory illus-
trations, graphics, and minimal but critical text, all carefully designed to 
replace the 32 slides that were initially used. Three blank pieces of magnetic 
cardboard lightly adhered to a metal frame to cover the entire visual. This 
enabled the sales rep to selectively remove an individual cardboard covering 
(as needed), showing a portion of the chart instead of immediately reveal-
ing all eight graphic illustrations that might have (visually) overwhelmed 
the prospect had they been shown all at once. The color-coded visual cat-
egorized the information on it, enabling the salesperson to comfortably and 
confidently address the vital points without delivering a one-sided pitch.
The visual was engineered in such a way that, should the prospect want 
information out of sequence, the salesperson could simply move to a dif-
ferent area on the large visual and address just about any aspect related to 
the prospect’s requirements, concerns, and wants. The design prompted 
the salesperson to talk about the visual and its information (as a form of 
memory jogger) in a more natural and random way, as opposed to having 
to go through 32 individual slides sequentially.
This “reinvention” of the presentation was a major hit with salespeople 
and prospects, resulting in high sales closing rates. Think about designing 
your own interactive “one visual tells all.”
The “Ideal 10”
If your presentations are not just unique, but superior in many charac-
teristics, you will snag the immediate attention and tightly hold on to 
52	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

the often-fleeting interest of audiences. Before we explore our four-part 
game-changing model of a breakthrough presentation system in the next 
chapter, let’s first understand the characteristics of a superb presenta-
tion or speech on which this innovative model will focus. We call these 
characteristics the “Ideal 10.” Every time you plan an important presen-
tation, you should check it for how well it incorporates these 10 vital 
characteristics.
It is an exceedingly rare speech or presentation that can attain all 
these criteria together. But if one does so, then that performance is often 
described by people who experience it as electrifying, mesmerizing, and 
dazzling. Though most general business presentations don’t need all these 
10 characteristics, it helps to add as many of them as possible to your most 
important presentations and speeches.
Ideal 1. Enlightening
It’s important to provide thorough and accurate information to people at 
your presentation. However, “enlightening” them whenever possible goes 
beyond doing an effective job of educating or informing your audience 
about your topic. It is about giving people valuable added perspectives 
and rich, new dimensions surrounding your topic that they would not 
have been aware of. It provides a deeper, more meaningful insight and 
appreciation into the true nature and importance of your topic. It is about 
“illuminating”—shedding light upon—making clearer and freeing people 
from unproductive or obsolete beliefs and ideas. When it comes to advo-
cating change about something, presenters often have to awaken people to 
the deeper importance of real, critical issues. Here are just a few ways to 
enlighten people about your topic:
	Ask yourself what unusual facts, statistics, stories, metaphors, or 
■
■
examples surrounding your topic would be most interesting, 
illuminating, and especially relevant to your audience. Presenters 
can do this by asking a rhetorical question such as, “Did you know 
that . . . ?”
	Determine what would expand your audience’s deeper understanding 
■
■
and appreciation of your topic beyond the general information that 
most people know. What could you tell people, for example, about 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
53

your products and technology, your company, and its leadership or 
history that might get people to wonder and say, “Wow, I didn’t 
realize that. How fascinating!”
Ideal 2. Concise
Suppose your boss told you to condense your usual 30-minute presentation 
about one of your key products into a 10-minute talk. What if she wanted 
you to also make a product presentation into a two-minute video to be put 
on the company website? Can it be done effectively? Yes, because a vast 
majority of presentations have “information fat” within them that can be 
cut out or pared down. But it requires making smart choices about what 
priorities to focus upon, along with a concerted effort to communicate in 
more efficient and lean ways.
Writers know it is much harder to write short articles or newspaper 
columns than it is to write a book. That’s because you have to have a 
frugality of words and spare sentence structure while striving to have 
an extravagance of meaning. The same applies to giving presentations. 
The ancient Roman orator and philosopher Cicero aptly said, “Brevity is 
the best recommendation of speech, whether in a senator or an orator.” 
Picture being able to condense your information, ideas, and key messages 
into “efficient packets” or “sound bites,” as you often hear on TV news 
programs. You only cover those key topics with the select information 
needed by the people in your audience to enable them to understand and 
be able to make informed decisions afterward. This is critical because the 
more you say or display, the less people remember. To keep your presenta-
tion concise:
Separate your content into three categories: 
■
■
critical information 
your listeners need, important information to help their under-
standing, and desirable information they might want if you had 
sufficient time. Present your information in priority-descending 
order.
Think about how photos, videos, animations, graphics, illustra-
■
■
tions, and charts would more efficiently and effectively communi-
cate your information and messages than spoken words or text.
54	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

First structure your presentations as a brief “elevator talk” or 
■
■
executive summary of several minutes and then build your infor-
mation further upon these lean structures.
When it comes to your sales or marketing presentations, adopt the 
philosophy that the fewer the words (and the fewer the slides), the greater 
the profit.
Ideal 3. Complete
Even though a Killer Presentation should be as concise as needed to reach 
its goals, it has to be complete in that you, as presenter, must ensure that 
you tell your audience all that is needed for you to achieve your intended 
objectives. There should be no empty spaces or ambiguous gaps in your 
content that might cause audience members to be confused, poorly 
advised, or misled in their conclusions. But “complete” is a relative char-
acteristic, because what is considered complete for one type of presenta-
tion might be incomplete for another. TV news stories (such as told on 
the evening news for NBC, CBS, and ABC) use short, one-minute-video 
sound-bite stories to summarize information versus a documentary that 
provides much more information in 30 to 60 minutes. Both are “com-
plete” for the purpose they are serving and the context in which they 
are developed. Here are a few questions to ask yourself to ensure your 
presentation is complete:
	Based upon what I know about my audience’s needs, wants, prefer-
■
■
ences, and priorities, what categories and level of detail of information 
are truly necessary?
Looking at my presentation, what might possibly confuse people, 
■
■
unintentionally mislead them, create skepticism, or cause them to ask 
excessive questions regarding the points I am communicating?
What should ideally be put in a handout or other references (e.g., 
■
■
websites) rather than in the presentation?
Does my ending summary effectively encapsulate all my vital points?
■
■
“Complete” also means having a balance of content types, not an 
excess of one type of information, whether text or statistics or audiovisual 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
55

in nature. Carefully select a powerful mix of content such as those in the 
following list:
 Types of Presentation Content
analogies	
contrasts	
forecasts	
projections
anecdotes	
definitions	
graphs	
quotations
animations	
demonstrations	 humor	
research studies
assumptions	
descriptions	
illustrations	
statistics
audio files	
diagrams	
interviews	
stories
cartoons	
examples	
metaphors	
testimonials
case studies	
exhibits	
models	
test reports
charts	
explanations	
news articles	
white papers
comparisons	
facts	
photos	
videos
Ideal 4. Motivational
Any time your presentation is designed to persuade, influence, or get the 
members of your audience to act upon your requests or recommendations, 
you have to give them enough compelling motives for doing what you are 
asking. Perhaps it’s galvanizing someone to change in some manner or take 
a new course of action. Motivating others is about letting people know 
they can and should do something, even in spite of possible difficulties 
or challenges. Motivating people involves your appealing to or affecting 
their specific emotional hot buttons (e.g., pride, fear, joy, altruism, justice, 
personal reward, satisfaction). Even motivating people to just apply the 
information you provided to their jobs can be important, as opposed to a 
passive communication of information with no seeming purpose in mind. 
Here are a few ways to motivate people:
Use convincing testimonials, inspiring success stories, and other forms 
■
■
of evidence and proof to give weight to your points and messages.
Determine the specific emotions you want to activate to arouse your 
■
■
audience’s interest and desire to think and act in a way you recom-
mend. Build an emotional connection and trust with your group.
Communicate exactly how it is possible for people to achieve what 
■
■
you advocate.
56	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Show passion, enthusiasm, and excitement for your topic. Focus on an 
■
■
optimistic “can-do” attitude that your group can accomplish what you 
are recommending.
Ideal 5. Compelling
When a presenter gives a compelling presentation, she is providing urgent, 
undeniable, and extraordinarily convincing reasons—in an irresistible and 
appealing way—to make a decision about something. This aspect of a pre-
sentation is forceful (from both an intellectual and emotional standpoint) 
and demands attention from an audience. It can be overpowering in its 
ability to convince people to do something right away. While the term 
captivating generally reflects a speaker’s impressive presentation delivery 
techniques, compelling often refers to the information, messages, or ideas 
that are so strong as to be unable to be easily refuted. To make your pre-
sentation more compelling:
	Use strongly convincing evidence and forms of proof to back up your 
■
■
claims.
	If selling a product that performs some operation, give a realistic 
■
■
demonstration of its most impressive features and capabilities.
	Apply a rich mixture of “persuasively combustible” facts, statistics, 
■
■
examples, photos, testimonials, videos, diagrams, and other persuasive 
pieces of content to dramatically illustrate (from numerous perspec-
tives) and solidly establish the validity and urgency of your points.
Ideal 6. Entertaining
Famous former Tonight Show host and comedian Johnny Carson said some-
thing profound when he observed: “People will pay more to be entertained 
than educated.” In our speaking experiences, we found this to be absolutely 
true. So why not, of course, aim for both—inform and entertain—within 
your Killer Presentation? Few business presentations need to be outwardly 
and directly entertaining, but adding some “spice, punch, and pizzazz” 
to your presentation, even in subtle and discreet ways, will reawaken an 
­audience’s attention that has been eroded by such boring presentations that 
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
57

people have resorted to self-induced out-of-body experiences to escape the 
tedium.
No, we’re not suggesting your doing a stand-up comedy act, imper-
sonations, or a song and dance, but rather your adding professional, taste-
ful, and appropriate elements of showmanship, just like Steve Jobs did 
at his new-product presentation keynotes. Businesspeople would warmly 
welcome a presenter using some clever ways to amuse or fascinate them 
and otherwise have them enjoy the presentation. To provide an interesting 
“experience” for them, here are a few tips:
	Use fascinating stories and anecdotes to make your points “pop” and 
■
■
come alive. Show amusing videos or movie excerpts that are meaning-
ful and relevant to your objectives.
	Show imaginative cartoon illustrations with relevant captions that 
■
■
support your main messages and bring forth a chuckle.
	Try using purposeful props in your presentation to spotlight your 
■
■
concepts.
	Use stunning video and graphics, illustrations, and photos to add 
■
■
more variety and attention to your facts, statistics, and other informa-
tion about your topic.
	If appropriate, play with people in your audience by bantering with 
■
■
them, asking questions, eliciting feedback from them, or engaging 
them in some way that interests them.
Ideal 7. Captivating
There are some speakers who are so charismatic, dynamic, and charming, 
who possess a magnetic stage presence, that they will lockset an audience’s 
interest throughout every moment of the presentation. Although the term 
captivating generally refers more to a speaker’s impressive qualities, the use 
of video, multimedia, or fascinating information—conveyed in an imagi-
native way—helps an audience to be eagerly fixated on your talk. To make 
your presentation more captivating, try these ideas:
	Make sure your speech or presentation is sufficiently fast paced, never 
■
■
rushing it, but keeping a tempo that moves things along at a good clip.
58	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

	Use your voice and body as an instrument of communication. Vary 
■
■
your volume, inflection, and speech rate to make it interesting. Apply 
well-timed pauses for emphasis and oral punctuation. Let your body 
movement and hand gestures synchronize with your words to add 
visual attraction to your delivery.
	Display enthusiasm, energy, and passion for your topic so that those 
■
■
feelings can’t help but rub off on people.
	Wow them with words—use highly colorful language (including 
■
■
descriptive examples and insightful analogies that verbally paint a 
vivid picture of what you are describing, explaining, advocating, or 
countering, for example.
	Tell a stirring story (perhaps with a strong human interest slant) that 
■
■
perfectly ties your critical information together into a riveting tale.
	Brainstorm creative ways to pump up the interest level of your group 
■
■
with unusual approaches such as having magic tricks or other engag-
ing theatrical effects.
Ideal 8. Clear
When every person in your audience can accurately understand, digest, 
and interpret your information, then your presentation is crystal clear to 
them. Your content and intentions will leave no doubt, confusion, or ambi-
guity about what you are communicating or asking for—your messages 
are transparent and obvious to your group. However, with many presen-
tations, there are unintended misunderstandings that prevent a presenter 
from achieving his goals. The reasons can be vague, or abstract language, 
badly designed visuals, a poorly organized, disjointed flow of information, 
a speaker’s body language and facial expressions that contradict his spoken 
word, and specific terminology and acronyms (e.g., technical, medical, sci-
entific) that are not correctly understood.
Any time you can involve several senses of people in your group, the 
better they can understand exactly what you are saying. A Houston-based 
energy equipment consulting firm uses a multisensory (auditory, visual, and 
tactile), multimedia presentation approach for maximum clarity to teach 
skills critical for those who inspect and repair offshore rigs and equipment.
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
59

Instead of typical PowerPoint presentations that demonstrated the 
assembly and repair of oil-well components, this company developed inno-
vations to make the learning process of complex components much easier 
and clearer for the students. Its training room contains a huge 20-foot 
Cyviz high-resolution projection screen featuring a superwide display of 
2-D and 3-D images that significantly improve students’ understanding.
While realistic 3-D images of cross-sections of equipment are valuable, 
the energy company went one significant step further to ensure the clearest 
understanding of the complex equipment that people were learning about. 
Using expensive 3-D printers, it created dozens of intricately detailed, color-
coded models of components that trainees could physically hold, take apart, 
view from any perspective, and then reassemble. Making your presentation 
absolutely clear is a vital prerequisite of getting your group to agree with 
your ideas or recommendations and then to act upon them.
Ideal 9. Memorable
What do you recall about the last few presentations you attended? Did 
anything really stand out or hit you? If you’re like most people, probably 
not much. How many of your presentations or speeches are worth remem-
bering? If you have impacted an audience by using engrossing content and 
multimedia and props, or perhaps providing people with some “touching” 
experience, your audience will likely have a profound recollection of such 
a riveting event.
Top motivational speakers are known to tell powerful, heartfelt stories 
that people remember vividly (and perhaps were deeply affected or changed 
by) even decades later. It is often true that people will forget the name of 
the dynamic speaker, but not how he or she made them feel. One of the 
most charismatic, surprising, and memorable business presentations in any 
movie occurred at the climactic moments toward the end of the terrific 
movie Executive Suite. That scene epitomized how a brilliantly executed 
Killer Presentation will suddenly upset, stir, and sway a determined group 
to a surprising turnaround. Don’t miss this movie! Several things that make 
a presentation or speech memorable are:
	A powerful, unusual, and mesmerizing story
■
■
60	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

	A dazzling display of diverse creativity and fascinating information 
■
■
used throughout the presentation that make it so different from and 
better than others
	A gripping introduction and powerful conclusion
■
■
Ideal 10. Inspiring
There are a few visionary corporate, organization, and government leaders 
who can consistently deliver emotionally moving speeches that give hope 
to and uplift the spirits of those in the crowd. While a consummate pre-
senter can stir a group to action by building a convincing, airtight business 
case, inspiring an audience involves tapping deeply into people’s emotions 
and making them feel optimistic, special, or good about something—or 
capable of achieving something of extraordinary and significant worth and 
meaning to others.
Considered by most experts to be the finest inspirational masterpieces 
of American rhetoric is Martin Luther King Jr.’s brilliantly written speech 
“I Have a Dream,” given on August 28, 1963. Using piercingly emotional 
words, appeals to higher human values and principles, powerful metaphors 
and themes running throughout, and perfectly timed repetition of the 
phrase “I have a dream” was part of the electrifying oratory that held the 
crowd of 250,000 civil rights supporters in Washington, D.C., spellbound. 
Dr. King’s superb ebbs and peaks of vocal mastery and his buildup to the 
crescendo ending (“Free at last! Free at last! Thank God Almighty, we are 
free at last!”) forever elevated him to an exalted place among the greatest 
public speakers of all time. Go online and read the full text of Dr. King’s 
speech. While you are there, Google “50 Top Inspiring Movie Speeches” 
to hear clips from each one. You will see what made them exhilarating and 
galvanizing. To better inspire others, consider these tips:
	Tell moving stories about seemingly “ordinary people” who have 
■
■
beaten the odds and achieved remarkable feats through discipline, 
hard work, and dedication.
Challenge those in your audience to tackle a worthwhile cause or 
■
■
project and to excel at it.
	
	
What Makes a Killer Presentation?
61

Be vulnerable and forthright about your own struggles, setbacks, and 
■
■
mistakes, but also your hard-won victories. Share generously from 
your own experiences.
Communicate a sense of strong optimism while appealing to people’s 
■
■
higher, noble principles.
When you learn to reimagine and remake your presentations, you 
will see a new world of opportunities coming your way. Gary Hamel, an 
American management expert and author, said, “Revolutionaries recognize 
that competition is no longer between products or services; it is between 
competing business concepts—when its most effective business concept 
innovation leaves competitors in a gut-wrenching quandary.” The following 
chapters will give you even more great ideas and information to become the 
ultimate Killer “Revolutionary” Presenter.
62	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

C h a p t e r  4
The P-XL2 Model:  
Gearing Up the Power of Your iPad
L
aunched in 2010, the iPad was brought out by a beaming Steve Jobs, who  
    introduced it to the world as a truly “magical and revolutionary device.” 
Innovators quickly came out with imaginative apps in just about every 
industry and application. But those doing presentations were using the iPad 
merely as a lightweight replacement for their laptops, still mostly giving 
“boredom-by-bullets” slide presentations because they did not know how 
to best use this thunderous tablet to create and deliver presentations worthy 
of its fantastic features and capabilities. That’s tantamount to driving your 
ferocious Ferrari slowly around a crowded parking lot. That’s not what Fer-
raris are built for. Likewise, your “digital Ferrari” iPad needs an open road 
to open up full throttle! This chapter is about helping you to do just that. 
You will be introduced to our exclusive P-XL2 Model, where P-XL2 stands 
for “presentation excellence squared.” Our P-XL2 Model is engineered to 
mate with the power of the iPad so you can truly reimagine and reinvent 
your presentations into Killer ones.
Conventional presentations yield conventional results. It’s as simple as 
that. Being part of the crowd of PowerPoint plodders is a recipe for stark 
mediocrity. Remarkably successful people, those who stand out and above 
the faceless crowd, habitually do what other people won’t do or can’t do. 
Albert Einstein profoundly said, “I must be willing to give up what I am 
in order to become what I will be.” Rule-breaking innovators and noncon-
forming visionaries venture where others don’t go because there’s practi-
cally no competition out there on the unbeaten paths. So there’s a much 
greater chance for spectacular success. Killer Presenters go the extra mile 
63

to ­presentation excel-lence. It’s harder work that’s smarter work—but effort 
that pays off mighty big!
Your iPad deserves and demands an equally dynamic new presentation 
model to enable you to give presentations that far exceed the bounds of 
ordinary. Otherwise, simply substituting your iPad for a laptop while using 
a stuffy, traditional style of presenting is like putting a Ferrari engine in 
an old beat-up Chevy and expecting it to handle like a supercar. You need 
a Ferrari transmission, chassis, and suspension to get the most out of that 
roaring, sophisticated engine. So your iPad begs for our special methodol-
ogy to match it and let it redline.
Figure 4.1 depicts the powerful P-XL2 Model as a transmission (con-
nected to the iPad “engine”) with four gears—technology, strategy, creativ-
ity, and psychology—with each being able to mesh with the others in various 
combinations depending upon your presentation. For example, some of 
your (perhaps more conservative business) presentations will require lots of 
strategy, some technology and psychology, but less creativity, while others 
(such as motivational or entertainment-focused speeches) might need an 
abundance of technology and creativity with less psychology and strategy. 
Figure 4.1 
P-XL2 Model 
depicted as an 
iPad “engine” 
connected to a 
“transmission” 
with the 
four gears of 
technology, 
strategy, 
creativity, and 
psychology.­
(Copyright Ray Anthony)
64	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

This model or system is about engaging, shifting gears, and synchronizing 
the four model components as needed to achieve the 10 ideal characteristics 
of a Killer Presentation (discussed in the previous chapter).
Playing It Safe Can Be Risky and Costly When 
Giving That All-Important Presentation
Giving a “good” presentation is no longer (good) enough in our hypercom-
petitive, fast-changing world. A large construction company we know of 
recently lost a multibillion dollar bid primarily because its presentation to 
the client was “fine and acceptable,” but it did not wow the decision mak-
ers, who went with this company’s strongest competitor that did do a Killer 
job. Teams of engineers, project managers, and executives in this company 
spent months working on their proposal and presentation, focusing on a 
very complex construction and technical solution that they were confident 
would win the bid. They mistakenly believed that the oral presentation (to 
the potential customer) would account for a lesser portion of the customer’s 
decision-making criteria and that the presentation was essentially a manda-
tory rubber-stamp activity to go through. Nevertheless, this construction 
company spent millions preparing to try to win this gigantic deal.
The construction company had an insular culture with a “clenched 
state of mind” where outside (“not invented here”) ideas and imaginative 
approaches were shunned and where senior executives felt that their cur-
rent presentation model, process, and style—which had been relatively 
successful in the past—would garner them the biggest project in the com-
pany’s more than 100-year-old history. Well, it didn’t. When a fierce, highly 
respected competitor, just like the construction company’s rival, focuses on 
innovating its presentations to craft an A+ game, it “creatively disrupts” the 
decision-making score for the buyer—greatly in the competitor’s favor. And 
that is exactly what happened.
The conventional “play-it-safe” presentation that had mostly worked 
before did not work now. Doing things differently and standing out means 
taking some risks. But fitting into the crowd of look-alikes means you can’t 
be seen—you can’t be viewed as special, unique, or superior. So you incur 
the danger of being left in the dust. Smart presentation game changers con-
sistently win, leaving their competitors surprised, shocked, and dismayed at 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
65

their losses. If you don’t take some prudent, calculated, and smart risks—if 
you don’t play to win instead of playing not to lose—you will never distin-
guish yourself from the average crowd. As the saying goes, “To get some-
thing you never had, you have to do something you never did.”
Not only did this bidding company lose the biggest deal in its history, 
but it lost millions of dollars in preparation time and other costs. The com-
pany also lost industry bragging rights that would have won it larger and 
more profitable deals from others in the future, never mind the demoraliz-
ing effect it may have had on certain members of the business development 
and project team who might have been carving capstones for their careers 
but now might be thinking more of headstones.
Had this company’s executives spent more time and imagination 
exploring more options to compellingly communicate not just the com-
pany’s technical excellence, but its overall ability to deliver a best “partner-
ship experience in all aspects” for the customer, it would have increased its 
chances of winning the deal.
Even when the odds seemed stacked against you, and even though your 
company might be initially considered the furthest trailing bidder before 
the final presentation, using our P-XL2 Model with your iPad or a laptop 
can snatch victory from apparent defeat. In the fabulous film Executive 
Suite (which we also mentioned in an earlier chapter), famed actor Wil-
liam Holden used strategy, psychology, and some creativity that brilliantly 
demonstrated how one can make a group of people do a sudden 180-degree 
reversal from their feelings and intended decision. Get a DVD of this movie 
and see how he powerfully did it! And as an example that life imitates art, 
later on in this chapter is a true story that illustrates how a Killer Presenta-
tion using our model won a huge deal in spite of enormous odds against it 
happening.
Four Key Components of the P-XL2 
Model for Killer Presenters
This is an extraordinarily effective model developed, refined, and tested 
by Ray Anthony and his company over a span of years to give profession-
als a presentation methodology to achieve the Ideal 10 traits of a winning 
66	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

presentation. What makes it unique and impactful from a communication 
and persuasive standpoint is its ability to appeal to all people in some way. 
It brings presentation skills to a new height whether you are using an iPad, 
laptop, or no computer at all!
With our model, you combine the four key elements of technology, 
strategy, creativity, and psychology in various ways and degrees (that you 
decide upon) to superbly inform, convince, motivate, entertain, and inspire 
audiences as never before. For example, when a presenter uses creative ideas 
with digital technology (such as video, multimedia, webcasts, Skype pre-
sentations) on a platform like the latest iPad, the positive effect on audi-
ences is greatly amped up. Likewise, you can use technology (e.g., showing 
an emotionally charged video using an ultrahigh-definition television 
[HDTV]) with the element of psychology and strategy (targeted to elicit 
specific feelings from the audience) to increase your chances of reaching 
your presentation objectives. As you experiment and create your own mix 
of formulas, these four elements will interact in all sorts of wondrous ways 
to produce breakthrough levels of communication and expanded possi-
bilities. The following will give you more details on each of the four vital 
components of this Killer-icious, game-changing presentation model.
Technology
The nineteenth-century original thinker, philosopher, and psychologist 
William James said, “Language is the most imperfect and expensive means 
yet discovered for communicating thought.” Did he have a crystal ball that 
showed that today’s technology—with your iPad at the critical core—will 
give you an unbridled advantage in helping you communicate immensely 
more effectively and powerfully if you use it smartly? Your iPad is like 
“Hollywood in a box.” You have the raw power to display and discuss any-
thing from abstract concepts to complicated solutions as never before. The 
trick, though, is to know exactly how to link up this digital genie with your 
imagination, along with visual and audio resources to make your commu-
nication burst out alive in living color.
Slides with bullet points, like spoken language alone, simply cannot 
convey information, ideas, formulas, visions, and especially emotions as 
effectively as other forms of media. Over two millennia ago, Aristotle said, 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
67

“The mind never thinks without a picture.” Technology has enabled mul-
timedia—the ultimate pictures—to come of age. But the power of multi-
media is still largely untapped and underutilized in today’s presentations. 
The term multimedia means multiple media elements consisting of photos, 
graphics, illustrations, animations, video, music, text, numbers, sound and 
visual special effects, and even 3-D photorealistic renderings and props. As 
you have seen in movies, on TV, and in video games, incredibly powerful 
special effects and 3-D animation software can essentially do whatever one 
can imagine.
George Lucas and his teams at Lucasfilm Limited and Industrial Light 
and Magic started the amazing digital special effects revolution with the 
first Star Wars film in 1977. Steve Jobs, who cofounded and served as CEO 
of Pixar Animation Studios, also knew the unlimited power and potential 
of computer-generated imagery. As the executive producer of the critically 
acclaimed film Toy Story, he set the bar high for animated features; sub-
sequently many others (Finding Nemo, The Incredibles, Cars, Toy Story 3, 
and more) were given Academy Awards for Best Animated Features. Pixar 
actually sells the same software—RenderMan Pro Server and RenderMan 
Studio—it uses to create its legendary animations. Some outrageously 
innovative and visionary Killer Presenters will surely find ways to use the 
software for magnificent effects in their presentations.
Just as high-definition (HD) video cameras and televisions are becom-
ing commonplace, new ultrahigh-definition (UHD, also called 4K) video 
cameras, televisions, and projectors are coming on the scene. These new 
entrants promise even more spectacular resolution and overall image qual-
ity and are now available in large-screen televisions in sizes ranging from 
50 to over 80 inches from Sony, LG, Sharp, Samsung, and many others. 
UHDTV has a resolution of 3,840 × 2,160 pixels, or four times the resolu-
tion of HD video (1,920 × 1,080 pixels), giving your visuals, text, videos, 
photos, and graphics the clearest, cleanest, most vivid images yet.
Presenters can now give their audiences the ultimate immersive, life-
like visual experience as never before. There are videographers using UHD 
cameras (such as the various RED cameras) that you can hire to shoot abso-
lutely stunning videos for your upscale presentations, and you can project 
the videos onto giant screens using a Redray player, for example.
68	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

While video has been getting a lion’s share of publicity, technology in 
audio PA systems is still a vital component of a presenter’s success. Instead 
of relying on a hotel (or resort) meeting room’s ceiling speakers that often 
produce inferior sound, Killer Presenters use state-of-the-art external public 
address speakers and quality microphones that produce superb-clarity audio 
(so necessary but often neglected in one’s big event, seminar, or speech) 
without feedback or distortion. Whenever possible, rent or buy top-quality 
speakers from JBL, QSC, Mackie, Electro-Voice, Line 6, or Bose. These 
manufacturers and others have the latest amplifier, digital signal process-
ing, and feedback suppression circuitry and speaker technology that will 
make a huge difference in how well your voice sounds and projects.
Here are some questions you should ask yourself to ideally leverage tech-
nology-related (hardware and software) products in your presentations:
How can I use stock video (or video from YouTube, Vimeo, and other 
■
■
sites) to help make my points more understandable and help deliver 
me more (intellectual and emotional) impact? What HD or UHD 
video might I shoot (with a camcorder, DSLR camera, iPad, iPhone, 
or RED camera) to customize my message to this audience or poten-
tial customer?
How might I begin to explore and apply gesture-based presenting 
■
■
techniques to navigate and manipulate my visuals (as seen in the 2002 
Tom Cruise movie Minority Report)?
What types of animation (both stock and custom) would take my 
■
■
visuals to a new level of effectiveness? How can I use animation 
software to better illustrate trends, relationships, causes and effects, 
outcomes of a process or system, or any meaningful change in vari-
ables? Learning Apple’s Motion or Adobe After Effects will give you a 
relatively easy and quick way to animate text, illustrations, charts, and 
graphs and enable you to do impressive special effects aimed at adding 
meaning and value to your points. Consider contracting with multi-
media developers who use more sophisticated animation and 3-D 
rendering software to create photorealistic images.
In what ways can I creatively use green screen (Chroma Key) tech-
■
■
niques for video and photographs to create unique and stunning 
backgrounds for my visuals?
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
69

How can I use iPads (handed out) with smaller groups (fewer than 
■
■
five) in a novel approach to deliver “up-close and personal” media to 
my audience?
In what ways might I use an iPad to radically improve the way I 
■
■
creatively present multimedia (e.g., place iPads and wireless speakers 
around a room where I selectively show visuals or photos with voice 
narration, music, or audio effects)?
During my presentation, how can I use a live Skype interview with 
■
■
someone in another part of the world to give impact and immediacy 
to the messages I am communicating?
How might I use technology to better interact with and engage the 
■
■
members of my large live (and also webcast) audience to answer 
questions, ask them questions, or otherwise get them more involved in 
a relevant way?
What are some impressive and imaginative ways I can incorporate 
■
■
social media into my speech (e.g., have audience members use Twitter 
to ask me questions or make comments while on stage)?
For my large-scale events, how can I use multiscreen imaging, com-
■
■
puter-controlled lighting, and other stage effects to upgrade the 
production value of my presentation?
Strategy
Successful companies have well-thought-out, detailed sales and marketing, 
engineering, manufacturing, R&D, and financial investment strategies, 
among others. Strategy is management’s game plan—a road map that serves 
as a guide to achieve a set of goals and strengthen the performance of the 
enterprise. So why don’t most presenters develop and work their presenta-
tion strategy? After all, it is one of the most important factors in determin-
ing a winning talk, and yet it is one of the most neglected parts of planning 
one’s presentation. The answer is that most speakers aren’t even aware they 
need such an important course of action in their talk. Not so with Killer 
Presenters—they are great strategists! Being so gives them a decided advan-
tage over other presenters vying for the same deal or opportunity. Most 
people confuse choosing and organizing their content for a strategy. That 
comes under the umbrella of strategy, but it’s only a part of it.
70	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Derived from the Greek word strategos, a strategy was seen in the nar-
row sense as “the art of the general.” Alexander the Great (356 BC–323 BC) 
was considered among the greatest commanders of all times because of his 
use of brilliant strategy, among other things. Strategy is a decisive “force 
multiplier” not only in military and business situations but in presenta-
tions as well. Tactics are those more detailed and specific steps that support 
a strategy.
If your goals are what you want to achieve (in terms of specific audi-
ence understanding, acceptance, commitment, behavior, or actions), then 
your strategy describes how you intend to achieve your specific aims. With 
strategy, you are methodically thinking about the ideal (least risk versus 
gain, quick, effective, easy, most cost-justified) ways to get your desired 
results at the end of your presentation. Here are some questions to con-
sider asking yourself when using strategy in planning and delivering your 
presentations:
Based upon the specific goals I want to accomplish, the audience I am 
■
■
presenting to, and the current situation I am facing with this group, 
what is my overall strategy and set of tactics to get my planned 
results? Examining the P-XL2 Model, how might I smartly incorpo-
rate creativity, technology, and psychology into my overall strategy?
What actions and activities need to be done 
■
■
before my presentation to 
set the stage and also after my presentation to ensure the fulfillment 
of my objectives?
What resources (people, equipment, technology, visuals, handouts, 
■
■
other) will I need to support the attainment of my goals?
Should I use a slow, indirect, and subtle approach with this group, or 
■
■
should I begin and maintain a direct, strong, unwavering advocacy of 
my position?
What are the strengths and weaknesses of my competitor presenters? 
■
■
How do I leverage what they lack, and how do I counter their 
advantages?
What are the two or three greatest impediments to reaching my 
■
■
presentation goals, and how can I eliminate or mitigate them?
What is the best content (information and structured messages) 
■
■
I should use to convince the people in my audience and compel them 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
71

to act upon my requests? What should I avoid discussing, and how 
should I handle touchy or risky subjects that might come up?
What is the singular most important point, fact, or message that I 
■
■
need to repeat and otherwise slam home to my audience?
What forms of solid “proof” (e.g., statistics, verifiable facts, results of 
■
■
research, historical precedents, demonstrations, success stories) must I 
provide to give strong credence and substance to my claims?
What is my approach (i.e., direct, indirect, subtle, or assertive) to ask 
■
■
for audience support, commitment, or action?
Creativity
If you want to transform yourself into a “communication artist” and win 
an Oscar at the “Presentation Academy Awards,” engage your imagination 
in high gear. At the core of Killer Presentations is creativity that, like a 
center gear, drives the other gears in the iPad’s “transmission.” Too many 
speeches and presentations have predictable rhythms and formats (actually 
“boremats”). But these enfeebled presentations will never get you the over-
the-top results that consummately innovative ones will do. Certainly, not 
every talk requires the pizzazz of an astonishing meeting-room Cirque du 
Soleil performance. However, when you want to wow your audience with a 
terrific performance and experience or when you want to snatch that huge, 
once-in-a-decade deal away from your strongest competitors, you need to 
ramp up your presentation with bold and daring ideas that will brilliantly 
distinguish it from even excellent presentations from others in the bid. 
Audiences don’t expect you to be amazing, but when you are, the results 
and accolades you get will also be just that—amazing.
Being creative means doing something from a perspective that is (slightly 
to hugely) original. Whether you call it clever, ingenious, inventive, inno-
vative, original, or just cool, using creativity in your presentation is about 
getting the edge over others and making a major splash with your audience. 
We’re often asked, “Where I can I get good ideas to make my presentation 
come alive?” The short answer is everywhere! The essential thing is to be on 
the lookout for ideas that you can copy and modify from sources that are 
seemingly unrelated to presentations. One of the best sources for inspiring, 
amusing, and jaw-dropping presentations can be had by going online and 
72	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

watching TED Talks (TED.com). You will see great examples of speaking 
skills, fascinating content, cleverly used props, interesting visuals, stage 
decorations, and more. Other areas to seek out useful ideas include:
Slideshare (look at the slide content, photos, and visual designs and 
■
■
illustrations)
Google (search for the “funniest graduation speeches of all time” for 
■
■
humor ideas)
Interesting websites (look at their designs, videos, and content)
■
■
Magazines and books (with lots of photos, illustrations, and snappy 
■
■
advertisements)
Museums, art galleries, and craft shows
■
■
Toy stores (online and walk-in stores)
■
■
Catalogs of all kinds (trade show products, signs, gadgets, tools, and 
■
■
others)
Gift and card shops (hobby, arts-and-crafts, and artist supply stores)
■
■
Department stores (e.g., Sears, Macy’s, Dillard’s, Kohl’s, Neiman 
■
■
Marcus, Nordstrom)
Office supply, electronics, and gag-gift stores
■
■
Home decorating and big box stores (e.g., Wal-Mart, Home Depot, 
■
■
Costco, Lowe’s)
Supermarkets (look at all the food and product packaging to see how 
■
■
it grabs your attention and interest)
Comedy clubs, plays, and YouTube to find other humorous ideas
■
■
Here are some questions that you can ask yourself to prompt you to add 
more creativity to your presentations:
How can I use my iPad as an entertaining and meaningful prop, not 
■
■
just as my presentation device?
What profound metaphors or analogies would give a new spin and 
■
■
perspective on my main points?
In what ways can I use the element of surprise, intrigue, anticipation, 
■
■
curiosity, or controversy to add impact and excitement?
How might I begin my presentation in a highly unusual, attention-
■
■
grabbing, and interest-generating way that is captivating and yet 
totally professional in nature?
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
73

What interesting small or large physical props, toys, or novelty items 
■
■
can I use to add emphasis, power, and improved meaning to my 
messages?
What clever mixes of humor can I add to my presentation such as 
■
■
jokes, amusing stories and anecdotes, funny quotations or sayings, 
jocular visual cartoons and illustrations, or belly-laugh-inducing 
videos (e.g., from YouTube)?
What professional kinds of “theatrics” might I employ to entertain my 
■
■
audience while reinforcing my key points—perhaps acting, using 
costumes, or cleverly orchestrating my presentation with a prepared 
copresenter (who might play devil’s advocate, for example)?
How can I use or adapt ideas or themes from TV shows, video games, 
■
■
or movies?
What tests, games, or puzzles directly relating to my topic can I use?
■
■
What background signs, trade show–type visuals, special lighting, 
■
■
decorations, props, or stage sets can I use to bolster the theme or tone 
and mood of my presentation and add more background “eye appeal” 
to my talk?
What audio (music, excerpts from historical speeches, special effects 
■
■
sounds, ambient sounds) would make my points stronger and more 
memorable and add an entertainment value to my presentation?
The boardroom doesn’t have to be the bored room. Even conservative 
businesspeople can’t stand to sit through dull, lifeless presentations. So 
don’t be afraid to use new ideas or even aim for a tectonic creative shift to 
make your presentations more entertaining, meaningful, engaging, and 
fascinating.
Psychology
Psychology gives understanding, meaning, and direction to our everyday 
activities. It explains how we think, how we feel, and how we act or react. 
Killer Presenters, motivational speakers, top-notch salespeople, and those 
who persuade and influence people use psychology to guide others to make 
decisions, buy a product or service, or act in some intended way. You don’t 
have to be an Erich Fromm, a Dr. Phil, or a cognitive scientist to use basic 
street psychology to understand and get the attention of the people to 
74	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

whom you are presenting and to affect their perceptions, emotions, and 
behavior regarding your topic.
Successful influencers are typically those who learn, possess, and dis-
play high levels of emotional intelligence—a valuable empathic skill at 
reading others’ emotional needs, desires, moods, and motivators. They are 
able to pick the (emotion-influencing or igniting) tactics that are most 
appropriate and implement them in an effective manner. We cannot stress 
this enough: psychology is at the very core of persuading, influencing, and 
getting people to act upon your request. Successful leaders know the raw 
power of applied psychology to galvanize and move the masses toward a 
vision, mission, and set of objectives set by the leader. There are psychologi-
cal triggers and hot buttons that a presenter can attempt to activate in a 
nonmanipulative way to get his audience to either reinforce that group’s set 
of beliefs, attitudes, preferences, assumptions, or perceptions or to change 
them (to some needed degree). The psychology element in presentations, 
like that of the strategy component, is one of the most neglected yet most 
important aspects on which to focus.
Cognitive affect is a fancy scientific term for how factual information 
of all kinds is perceived and then processed. It involves attention, under-
standing, reasoning, problem solving, and decision making—basically, 
logical and rational thinking by your audience during your presentation. 
The companion psychological aspect is emotional affect, a term for reactions 
and arousal of human feelings that have a high probability of producing 
changes in awareness, mood, and behavior. Both cognitive affect and emo-
tional affect will impact and change the way people process information 
and choose to do something advocated by the presenter
One streetwise psychological principle is this: people often want what 
they don’t need and often need what they don’t want. Some hard-core 
financial businesspeople, for example, will spend exorbitant amounts of 
money for prestigious, luxury items like a corporate jet, a lavish office, or 
other extravagant things that others might consider a wasteful, nonproduc-
tive investment. Their emotional affect drives them to obtain these expen-
sive perks, while their cognitive affect finds facts to justify and rationalize 
their decision. The point for presenters to remember is that emotions and 
feelings almost always trump intellect and logic, even in spite of people 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
75

saying otherwise about their decisions and behavior. The essence of per-
suasion or influence is getting people to want something (create or make 
them aware of their desire) and then convince them they absolutely need 
it—perhaps can’t do without it!
Another psychological principle to know is that people are much more 
motivated to eliminate painful, unpleasant, or stressful situations than they 
are to gain something of benefit or pleasure. Obviously, successful present-
ers try to show people how to reduce or eliminate their “pain points” while 
also improving satisfactory conditions and making them aware of getting 
“pleasure points.” The list below identifies feelings that people would want 
to rid themselves of on their jobs or in their lives. Ask yourself how in your 
presentations you might show the members of your audience how they can 
reduce or even reverse their unpleasant feelings.
Pain Points and Negative Feelings
abandoned	
dread	
intimidated	
scared
anxious	
envy	
needy	
shamed
bewildered	
fearful	
neglected	
stressed
concerned	
frightened	
overwhelmed	
trapped
confused	
frustrated	
panicky	
troubled
dejected	
guilty	
pessimistic	
unappreciated
disappointed	
helpless	
puzzled	
unsure
discouraged	
infuriated	
rejected	
vulnerable
drained	
insecure	
resigned	
worried
Psychologists, counselors, psychotherapists, and other students of 
human behavior know that, as a whole, people crave a deep sense of belong-
ing, meaning, and purpose in their lives and that they need to feel self-
worth and self-respect. We want to know that we contribute in some way 
and degree to what we do at work, at home, and in our communities. 
Who of us doesn’t want to believe that our existence somehow matters on 
this earth? That is not abstract or esoteric psychobabble, but noble human 
nature begging to leave behind some worthwhile legacy of good.
Successful motivational, inspirational speakers, for example, are mas-
ters at making people feel good and optimistic about themselves and letting 
them know that they are fully capable of doing the extraordinary. These 
76	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

speakers often appeal to one’s higher human principles, benevolence, and 
noble aspirations and causes. Killer Presenters, in business, psychologically 
tap into and influence the feelings of those in their audience, getting them 
to yearn for something new, something better—something within their 
reach and grasp.
The following questions to ask yourself will help you leverage psychol-
ogy to strengthen your presentation strategy, content, and delivery style:
What are some sure ways to get my audience to like, respect, and trust 
■
■
me so I can better utilize emotional affect during my presentation? 
How can I quickly develop rapport and display credibility with this 
particular type of audience?
Have I sufficiently analyzed the people in my audience to find out 
■
■
what they collectively want, need, and expect (intellectually and 
emotionally) from my speech or presentation? Do I know where they 
currently stand in terms of their beliefs and general feelings toward 
my topic?
What are the specific emotions and their sequence that I would like 
■
■
the members of my audience to feel during and after my presentation? 
What is the most critical emotion I would like to be able to evoke 
from them? What is the best way for me to do that?
How can I appeal to both the (logical, analytical, methodical, detail-
■
■
oriented) left-brainers and the (emotional, creative, expressive, concep-
tual) right-brainers in the group?
What “touching” photos, videos, visuals, metaphors, music, or visual 
■
■
or audio special effects could bring forth the set of emotions I want 
my audience to experience?
What stories could I tell that might deeply move people to intended 
■
■
positive or negative feelings such as pride, righteous indignation, 
hope, fulfillment, faith, confidence, or relief, for example?
What are the top two or three pieces of cognitive-affect information 
■
■
and messages that I absolutely need to communicate to enable people 
to justify and rationalize their decision to accept my 
recommendation?
Overall, how would I describe my psychologically based persuasion 
■
■
strategy for my group?
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
77

What type of presentation style is best for this audience: relaxed and 
■
■
conversational? high energy and motivational? serious and all busi-
ness? or action oriented with a sense of urgency?
How Do You Win an “Impossible” Deal Leveraging 
Our P-XL2 Model? A Brief Case Study
Suppose you had a slim-to-none chance (estimated to be 5 percent or less) of 
getting one of the biggest deals in your division’s history in your company 
and you wanted to go all out to try to win it, even if you went down in 
flaming glory? How can you up the odds and, maybe, pull off an incredible 
upset? Well, the following is a true story that occurred several years ago. 
While the general concepts and basic strategies are accurately described, we 
are changing some of the information and parts of the scenario to respect 
our client’s confidentiality. We have also added some new aspects to the 
story to indicate how we would now incorporate the use of the iPad (which 
was not available back then) to enable this company, a top four accounting 
firm, to win what people in the industry considered a long shot, at best.
How about this for a challenge: what if your competitor—which is the 
main service provider for the bank whose project you are trying to win—is 
willing to provide its initial services, worth several million dollars, for free 
just to keep you and your company out? And what if your competitor is 
doing over 100 times the amount of business your company is doing with 
that particular bank? Finally, what if your client is totally satisfied with 
your competitor, which has been firmly entrenched in that account for 
many years? Can a “superset” composed of an innovative Killer Proposal 
and Killer Presentation really snatch a deal that appears all but unattain-
able? Here’s the real story of amazing victory.
Ray Anthony had done Concept Presentation training for the senior 
partners in New York City for one of the top four accounting firms. A 
senior partner in the training session asked if Ray was interested in helping 
the firm try to get an enormous but extremely difficult-to-close deal with 
one of the world’s largest international banks.
His accounting firm was doing about $1.5 million a year in revenues 
with this bank, while the firm’s competitor, another top four accounting 
78	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

firm, was doing over $150 million per year with the bank. The competing 
firms were initially bidding on about a $2 million deal that would grow 
to over $100 million in several years. The firm estimated that it stood a 
minuscule chance of winning—unless it took some extraordinarily bold 
and daring steps to create a proposal and presentation unlike any other it 
had ever done.
The accounting firm realized that it would have to smartly apply Ray 
Anthony’s P-XL2 Model in every aspect of its proposal and presentation to 
win what would be one of the largest deals in the tax group’s 30-plus-year 
history. The following summarizes the analysis, in the group members’ own 
words and outlines how they designed and delivered their winning Killer 
Proposal and Killer Presentation.
Goal. Win the deal!
Situation analysis. Our strongest competitor (believed easily favored to 
win the deal) has been the bank’s primary accounting and tax process-
ing firm for the last ten years. They are well liked and respected and 
have an impressive record of customer service and quality operations. 
This entrenched firm is willing to do the initial deal (worth $2 million) 
for free just to keep us and other accounting firms out to get the rich 
rewards of extended projects, conservatively estimated to approach an 
extra $100 million within five to seven years. Our competitor’s exec-
utives have a strong professional and personal relationship with the 
bank’s top management.
Decision-making criteria. The bank will choose the accounting firm that 
can deliver the best metrics of service including quality, responsiveness, 
and return on investment with consideration to obtaining the best fee 
structures. An important decision criterion is for the winning account-
ing firm to be able to apply continuous improvement in operations (and 
resulting benefits of savings, quality, and processing innovations) over a 
five-year contract period.
Strategy. If we are to win this deal, we must:
Take calculated risks to create an innovative, daring, and bold 
■
■
proposal and oral presentation unlike any other we have done to 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
79

sharply differentiate ourselves from all other bidders in ways that 
make them pale in comparison to us.
Develop and substantiate a vastly superior value proposition for the 
■
■
bank that no other competitor can match.
Create a compelling visual metaphorical theme (that is psychologi-
■
■
cally symbolic) that is immediately recognizable and memorable 
and that encapsulates the powerful solution we offer.
Impressively quantify our value proposition (including our propri-
■
■
etary IT processing technology) in such a way that it leaves no 
doubt as to the specific ways and extent our solution can produce 
both exclusive and superior results in which the bank would greatly 
benefit.
Here is how the accounting firm leveraged the components of technol-
ogy, strategy, creativity, and psychology in the P-XL2 Model.
Theme and Concept
The metaphorical theme the firm chose was “generating powerful results.” 
While the title may initially sound somewhat mild, the visualization and 
execution of it were not. The people at the firm designed a three-part visual 
that was the focus of the proposal and oral presentation. The first part was 
the firm’s exclusive, proprietary Digital INTERprise Engine. It powered 
the service delivery model—the company’s accounting process—that was 
depicted as a generator (the second part). The output from the powerful 
generator was represented by lightning bolt–type arrows (part three) point-
ing upward to signify increases in savings, efficiencies, and other important 
results wanted by the bank. The lightning bolts psychologically symbolized 
the potential power and blazing speed of the output.
Next, the bidding team came up with a Killer concept (along the lines of 
ROI, or return on investment) called “72 POI—Points of Impact” (generat-
ing results). To quantify how this solution was far superior to its competitors’ 
solutions, the firm objectively identified 33 service delivery functions for tax 
processing that were just as effective as those of the competitors that were 
bidding, 21 that were better than all the others, and 18 that were exclusive 
—that no other provider could do because of the firm’s proprietary technol-
ogy. So not only could the firm match the best that all the others could do, 
80	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

but it identified and quantified the vital “value-added” 39 other—better and 
exclusive—functions that generated the extraordinary results.
Three-Part Killer Proposal
Instead of giving the bank a traditional, letter-size, portrait-format written 
proposal (either spiral bound or in a three-ring binder), the accounting firm 
provided its proposal in three extraordinary “parts,” each for a different 
purpose. The first was a somewhat conventional proposal, but with some 
creative changes. Written in two columns on a landscape (horizontal) legal-
size paper, it was actually elegantly designed using black and blue shades of 
ink for text and diagrams. This changeover to a horizontal, legal-size format 
with its two-column printing enabled the accounting firm to include all 
information in a proposal that was thinner, less intimidating, and more 
attractive to read than a letter-size, single-column document.
Accompanying the written proposal was a unique “proposal on a chart” 
given to each of the five decision makers from the bank. It showed the detailed 
three-part generator diagram of the firm’s solution along with the critical 
proposal points on a foam core board 30 inches by 24 inches. The clients 
could see at a glance the entire scope and differentiation of the firm’s value 
proposition. The foam core piece was a well-designed, captivating “visual 
executive summary on a board” for those who chose to view that in place of 
(or in addition to) a detailed written proposal.
The third part of the proposal set included five iPads to be lent to each 
of the bank’s executives involved in the deal. Using iBook as the proposal 
platform on the iPads, it contained a voice-narrated executive summary 
accompanied by some compelling animated charts, diagrams, and critical 
pieces of information. The iBook summary proposal also contained three 
concise 90-second videos by the senior partners on the bidding team who 
articulated their value proposition and emphasized their differentiated solu-
tion via the powerful three-part visual.
The most important message, though, was of the accounting firm’s 
chairman. That video was actually shot outside the client bank’s New 
York City main headquarters location as opposed to a more traditional 
(i.e., boring) in-office shoot. Sitting informally on the steps of the bank 
­headquarters plaza on a sunny, warm spring day, wearing a crisp white shirt 
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
81

and classy red tie, the firm’s chairman did a splendid, sincere job explaining 
why his firm’s teams would work so well with the bank’s employees and 
how together they would accomplish numerous, impressive breakthroughs 
in joint operations—setting new standards of productivity, quality, and 
efficiency. And of course, he vocalized his commitment to his accounting 
firm’s total support and excellence in this project.
The ending of the chairman’s four-minute video was the high point, 
where he recounted a heartfelt personal story. He said that when he was 
a young manager starting out in his firm, one of his first, most satisfying 
projects was working with this international bank in Europe; and he noted 
how well the project had gone because of the chemistry between the people 
and because of the shared values, principles, and norms of both organiza-
tions’ cultures. He concluded by saying that he expected the same results 
and great experience to be duplicated again should the bank choose his 
firm. His final statement was, “If you give us an opportunity to work with 
you on this huge undertaking, we will, in turn, give the bank numerous 
opportunities to maximize your financial returns on this investment. That’s 
our goal . . . that’s our deep commitment.”
The psychology in designing and delivering three imaginatively designed 
proposal pieces was not just that each served its unique purpose, but that 
the pieces symbolized how differently the firm approached situations and 
the extent to which it was devoted to over-the-top excellence. After all, if 
it would exert that much creativity, effort, and innovation in creating an 
extraordinary set of communication tools, then it would certainly channel 
its out-of-the-box thinking to do the same in an ongoing business relation-
ship with the bank.
The Killer Presentation
The set of proposals greatly impressed the people involved in making the 
decision for the bank. As a result, the accounting firm easily made the short 
list. Now two firms would be allowed just 30 minutes to give their oral 
presentation to highlight their solution prior to being chosen a winner. Two 
senior partners were selected to be the copresenters for the firm. Again, the 
strategy—like that for the proposal—was to do something bold, innova-
tive, and fiercely convincing around the value proposition and 72 POI. The 
82
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

presenters focused on demonstrating precisely how their solution was not 
only vastly different, but vastly better. And they aimed to give a superbly 
orchestrated, dual-presenter “performance.” Here’s how it unfolded:
After brief welcoming remarks, they each gave a crisp, one-minute exec-
■
■
utive summary—backed up with two visuals from their iPads—that encap-
sulated all the key points critical to making a decision in their favor.
PowerPoint was not even considered. They used two forms of “ultravisu-
■
■
als” in an innovative hand-off fashion. The first visual was a large storyboard 
(60 by 40 inches), which was a less detailed version of their summary pro-
posal board. It had a number of Velcro pieces; one presenter would attach 
the pieces to build the ongoing process and story of their solution. Once that 
piece was added to the storyboard and very concisely described, the other 
presenter, using his iPad, would show a brief animation (projected onto a 
screen nearby) of how that process actually operated to bring about several 
of the POI. It took almost three days of countless rehearsals to create smooth 
segues from one presenter using the storyboard to the other presenter using 
his iPad to transition to the next part of the story. The storyboard, with its 
Velcro pieces, made it simpler to understand how the firm engineered its 
superior solution for the bank; while the iPad, using 3-D animation, capti-
vatingly showed interactions, causes and effects, relationships, and projected 
trends between the firm’s technology and service delivery model to produce 
the savings, efficiencies, productivity, and quality from their 72 POI.
They concluded their presentation with a matching executive summary 
■
■
(as in the beginning) and followed it with their clincher ending with the 
slogan “ONLY,” as in:
“ONLY our firm has the proprietary technology ‘INTERprise’ 
system.”
“ONLY we have extensive experience already with your systems, 
processes and procedures.”
“ONLY our firm has the ‘72 Points of Impact,’ 39 that are better or 
exclusive to you.”
“ONLY we can give you short- and long-term solutions that match 
your most stringent requirements.”
	
	
The P-XL2 Model
83

The closing presenter then showed a new video from the firm’s chair-
■
■
man, who said, “I’m so proud of my team for putting together this tax 
solution for your international group, and I commit to the bank and to each 
of you [the chairman then actually mentions the five names of the bank’s 
decision makers] to put our entire firm behind this project to make it a 
resounding success!”
Finally, the two presenters reached into a box and gave out the only 
■
■
handout in the presentation, a laminated replica of one of the lightning 
bolts with a written summary on it of their key points.
The accounting firm was open to trying something daring and boda-
cious, but always with a focus on being professional. Change is difficult, 
and not everyone thought it a good idea to create a scheme that some per-
ceived as a radical departure from a traditional, “safe” presentation. But the 
firm took the chance and won big time!
Leveraging the P-XL2 Model will give you astonishing results compared 
with what you get with the “traditional” presentations you have been giv-
ing. Get ready to win that elusive deal you’ve been salivating over and 
prepare for some raucous standing ovations at your future speeches. This 
model has got serious game and can be the ultimate best practice in the 
presentation arena. Learn how to work it!
84	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Creating Your iPad Presentation
N
ow that you’ve nailed the P-XL2 Model structure, this chapter will 
show you how to combine two of the quadrants—technology and 
creativity—to produce fabulous presentations that reinforce your strategy 
and play into the psychology of your audience. If you think of the purpose 
of a presentation as communicating information, you start to realize there 
are endless opportunities to make a presentation using the P-XL2 Model.
Today’s technology takes your presentations beyond bulleted text and 
simple line graphs, and using your iPad as the means of communication is 
an efficient and entertaining solution to any presentation, large or small. 
With your iPad in hand, you can control and manipulate your presenta-
tion to respond to the needs of your audience with a simple tap or swipe. 
To present on the fly, use your iPad as a virtual whiteboard or create Killer 
Presentations with eye-popping images, graphics, video, sound, and links 
to websites with presentations like those we discuss in this chapter.
We explain how to move presentations you’ve already created from 
your computer to your iPad. We then give you ideas for using the iPad’s 
preloaded apps to add zing to your presentation. The core of this chapter 
covers our top picks of presentation apps. Last, we explore ways to connect 
your iPad to a projector or monitor and discuss the physicality of presenting 
with an iPad, which is to say, we do a quick survey of iPad stands and other 
options for securing the iPad when it’s not in your hand.
Throughout you’ll find iPad tips, tools, and techniques to fire your 
imagination and help you avoid embarrassing snafus. You want your audi-
ence to remember you and your message, not the iPad presentation that 
didn’t work.
C h a p t e r  5
85

Using Computer-Created Presentations on Your iPad
To give a presentation on your iPad, you need something to present. For 
our purposes, regardless of the media type—slides, videos, photos, music, 
links—we refer to the media that represents your message as either “presen-
tation” or “visuals.” There are two ways you can put a presentation on your 
iPad: create a presentation on your computer and then transfer it to your 
iPad or create a presentation on your iPad using a presentation app.
If you’re an iPad newbie or prefer taking one step at a time, using a 
tried-and-true presentation method (i.e., PowerPoint or Keynote) with new 
technology limits your potential-error factor. Even though your iPad can 
house hundreds of design, photo manipulation, video, and presentation 
apps that create Killer visuals, in some cases, a linear PowerPoint or Key-
note “slide show” is called for. And sometimes, you just don’t have time 
to create something new and exciting, and so your best answer is to use 
something you’ve already made.
In this simplest of examples, there are two steps: (1) Copy your presenta-
tion to your iPad, which we explain next, and (2) then connect your iPad 
to the audiovisual equipment used to project the presentation, which is 
explained toward the end of the chapter.
Whether you make frequent presentations or it’s a nerve-racking once-
in-a-blue-moon experience, you’ve probably encountered PowerPoint, the 
presentation application part of Microsoft’s Office productivity suite. If you 
work on a Mac, you might know, and even prefer, Keynote, the presenta-
tion part of Apple’s iWorks productivity suite.
A doctor we know gives about 25 presentations a year at medical confer-
ences. His computer is a storehouse of PowerPoint slides. When he has an 
“Why bother?” you ask. Consider the following:
The iPad is lighter to tote along.
▶
▶
Held like a clipboard, the iPad lets you look at your audience more frequently rather than 
▶
▶
bobbing your head up and down from laptop screen to audience.
Using touch-screen gestures to move from slide to slide is natural and intuitive.
▶
▶
Your audience will think you’re really cool.
▶
▶
86	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

upcoming presentation to make, he usually creates a new master slide (the 
layout used for all the slides) and then puts together a presentation that 
comprises new slides and slides from other presentations. He either takes 
his computer to the conference and connects it directly to the AV system 
or copies the presentation to an external flash drive, from which it is then 
copied to the AV system by a conference technician. As long as connecting 
to the AV system is an option, our fine physician can put his presentation 
on his iPad, take his iPad and the proper VGA or HDMI cable connector 
to the conference, and project his presentation from his iPad.
Moving a Keynote Presentation from Your Mac to Your iPad
If you use a Mac and Keynote to prepare your presentation, you can simply 
purchase a copy of Keynote for your iPad ($9.99 at the iTunes Store), save 
your presentation to iCloud on your Mac (see Figure 5.1), and then open 
it in Keynote on your iPad. Make sure iCloud is turned on for Keynote 
in your iPad Settings by tapping Settings on the Home screen, scrolling 
down to tap Keynote, and then tapping Use iCloud to the On position (see 
Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.1 
Save your 
­Keynote presen-
tation to iCloud.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
87

Are you a Mac user but don’t have 
Keynote? You might want to invest in 
a copy. At just $19.99 in the Mac App 
Store, it’s every bit as good as the iPad 
version and possibly even better. It may 
be faster to develop your show in Key-
note on the Mac and then use your iPad 
to run it.
Keep in mind a few caveats when 
moving a Keynote presentation from 
Mac to iOS:
■  Recorded audio (voice-over narra-
tion) is not imported.
■  Comments are not imported.
■  Many Mac fonts are unavailable on 
the iPad.
■  Web links and slide-to-slide links 
are maintained, but all other links 
are removed.
And refer to Apple’s presentation support document, Best Practices for Cre-
ating a Presentation on a Mac for Use on an iPad (http://support.apple.com/kb 
/HT4114?viewlocale=en_US&locale=en_US), to learn which templates and 
fonts are supported on the iPad.
Moving a PowerPoint Presentation  
from Your Mac or Windows PC to Your iPad
MS-PowerPoint isn’t available for the iPad, but there are many iPad apps, 
including Keynote, DocsToGo, and SlideShark, that convert PowerPoint 
files to a readable format. If you plan to use Keynote, just open iCloud 
on your web browser, click the iWorks icon, and then click the Keynote 
tab. Click and drag the PowerPoint presentation file to the Keynote win-
dow. Then, on your iPad, tap open Keynote, and your presentation is 
available. Remember, you need an Internet connection to perform these 
operations.
Figure 5.2 
Activate iCloud 
for Keynote in the 
iPad Settings.
88
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Syncing the Presentation File via iTunes
Connect your iPad to your computer with the USB-to-dock connector 
cable that came with your iPad or use Wi-Fi syncing if you’ve turned that 
option on. Open iTunes and click the iPad tab in the upper right of the 
window. Go to the Apps tab and scroll down to the File Sharing section of 
the window. Apps that allow document transfer are listed in a pane on the 
left. Click the app you want, in this case Keynote, and then click the Add 
button at the bottom of the Documents pane on the right, as shown in Fig-
ure 5.3. Scroll through the directories and files in the Chooser that appears, 
or type the file name or kind (for example, “ppt” to find PowerPoint files or 
“key” for Keynote files) in the search field. When you find the document 
you want to transfer, click it; then click the Open button. Remember, if you 
want to select multiple files, hold the Shift key to select contiguous files or 
hold the Command key to select multiple noncontiguous files. Either way, 
click the Open button after you have selected the file or files you want to 
transfer to your iPad. When you finish selecting files, click the Sync button 
to move those files to your iPad.
Figure 5.3 
Sync presentation 
files from your 
computer to your 
iPad using iTunes.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
89

Creating Presentation Elements 
with iPad’s Preloaded Apps
Even without downloading presentation apps to your iPad, you can put 
together a slide show or play a video using the Photos app to show images 
you capture with the iPad’s built-in camera, but don’t limit your presenta-
tion imagination to the Photos app. Here, we give you ideas for using iPad’s 
preloaded apps as part of your presentation.
Calendar.
■
■
 Use the Week view to display a conference program or the 
Month view to plan and discuss deadlines. When dates are set, make 
the calendar public so the staff can access it from their iPads or 
computers.
Camera.
■
■
 Capture and edit photos or video that you want to share 
with others. Use your iPad’s camera on the spot to work with the 
audience or capture images you want to talk about.
■  Clock. The world clock can kick off 
the event by showing the different 
locations and local times. Use the 
stopwatch or timer when conduct-
ing timed exercises in a classroom 
or workshop setting.
■  FaceTime. As long as you have 3G 
or LTE cellular or Wi-Fi connec-
tion, you can use FaceTime to 
conduct a video chat with other 
iPad, iPhone, or Mac users (see 
Figure 5.4). Having someone speak 
to the audience via FaceTime is 
guaranteed to make an impression.
■  Maps. Maps adds great visual 
interest to a Killer Presentation. 
With satellite views and 3-D 
images, you can show things like 
housing density, or land available 
for building or for agriculture, 
Figure 5.4 
FaceTime brings 
remote experts 
to your meeting.
90	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

or directions of how to get from 
here to there.
Messages
■
■
. Anyone in the audience 
with an iPhone or iPad can send 
you messages during your presen-
tation. Ask members of your 
audience to send questions to you 
during your presentation and then 
select those you want to answer.
Music.
■
■
 Choose music to accom-
pany your slide show from Photos. 
Tap the Slideshow button and then 
tap Play Music to the On position. 
Tap the Music button, which 
opens the Music app in a window 
within Photos. Choose the music 
you want to play during your 
slide show.
Newsstand.
■
■
 Grab some of the latest 
headlines that relate to your 
presentation and show them to support your point of view.
Notes.
■
■
 In the absence of a whiteboard, this is a great place to make 
to-do lists or record notes while in a meeting.
Photo Booth.
■
■
 Liven up your meeting with Photo Booth photos or 
create images that you later use in another app. For example, the 
photo in Figure 5.5, created using the Mirror effect, could be used to 
introduce a collaboration idea playing on the phrase “Two heads are 
better than one.”
Photos.
■
■
 Here’s where all your photos, videos, and screen captures end 
up. To use images from another app, create the image you want; then 
hold the Home button and On/Off button simultaneously to save a 
screen capture to Photos. If you use Photo Stream, you also have 
access to photos from your computer or other iOS devices. Take 
advantage of the Photos editing tools to rotate, crop, and correct your 
shots. Once all your desired images are saved in Photos, create an 
Figure 5.5 
Photo Booth 
lets you create 
funhouse-
type photos to 
liven up your 
presentation.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
91

album of the images you want to include in your slide show (see 
Figure 5.6), choose a transition style and background music, and let 
the show begin.
Reminders
■
■
. Make a list of all the tasks associated with your project; 
add deadlines, reminders, and notes about who’s responsible; and then 
refer back to the Reminders to make a status update.
Safari.
■
■
 Your iPad’s web browsing app is the gateway to websites that 
you want to view during your presentation. If you use iCloud, you can 
access bookmarks from Safari on your computer (as long as you turn 
on that feature on both your iPad Settings and your computer’s 
iCloud preferences). Save web pages you want to display in the 
Reading List and then view them whether you’re online or offline.
To keep the presentation running smoothly, open the apps you plan to 
use in your presentation before beginning and then switch between them 
as needed by quickly pressing the Home button twice, revealing the open 
Apps bar, which allows you to switch between apps without returning to 
the Home screen.
Figure 5.6 
Photos works in 
a pinch to create 
and display 
simple slide show 
presentations.
92
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Presentation Apps You Can Download to Your iPad
PowerPoint isn’t the only game in town anymore, hundreds of presenta-
tion apps are available for downloading to the iPad, and it seems more 
crop up every day. Some simply convert PowerPoint slides to a format that 
is viewable on the iPad, and others let you create linear presentations or 
more sophisticated multimedia HTML5 presentations. At the end of this 
section, we’ve included a chart to help you choose the app or apps that best 
suit your needs.
What You Need to Know About Cloud Servers
Before we turn our attention to the apps that will help you build a Killer 
Presentation, we want to say a few words about cloud servers. Although 
some apps mentioned here give you the option of syncing slides or presen-
tations from your computer to your iPad with iTunes, most support cloud 
servers, and we encourage you to work that way. It’s an easier, cleaner way 
to transfer files, and you always have a backup. Essentially, create presen-
tation files and elements on your computer and upload them to the app-
specific cloud server or a remote storage service such as DropBox or Google 
Drive. Then access the cloud through the app on your iPad and download 
the presentation. That way, even if you don’t have an Internet connection 
when you make your presentation, you have your media. If you create a 
presentation on your iPad, you can send it in the other direction too, that 
is, back to the cloud to be accessed from your computer. Remember, cellu-
lar data transfers are limited to 50 MB, so you’ll want to have Wi-Fi access 
when you access your presentations from the cloud service.
Cloud storage gives many people access to the same presentation, and 
so it is possible for someone in the home office to tweak the presentation 
to reflect up-to-the-second information and upload the presentation to the 
cloud while you’re traveling to the client’s office with your iPad in tow. 
Download the revised presentation and show up to the client with the most 
accurate, current information available.
Because they support cloud computing, most of these apps require you 
to set up a username and account before you can begin using them. We’re 
not crazy about having yet another password to remember, but with online 
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
93

access, usernames and passwords are unavoidable. The plus side is receiving 
e-mail about new features and app updates.
And now, here are the promised apps that combine creativity and tech-
nology to help you create your iPad presentation.
iPresent
Free one-month trial; $21 to $50 per month per user subscriptions
http://www.ipresent.com
iPresent takes sales presentation software to a new level. It combines output 
from traditional presentation media, such as PowerPoint slides, PDF files, 
and video, and lets the user create gesture-driven menus to navigate seam-
lessly between the various types of media. Presenters get the best of both 
worlds—professionally designed interfaces that make it really easy to tell a 
story, combined with a custom look achieved in just a few minutes.
The biggest difference between iPresent and other presentation tools 
such as Keynote or Powerpoint is that iPresent encourages you to break up 
your content into many different areas, any of which you can navigate to 
quickly and easily. The presenter engages the audience, especially in smaller 
meetings, and can dynamically respond to audience questions, requests 
for clarification, or details on an interesting point—digressions that often 
disrupt and sometimes destroy a conventional presentation.
If your company offers many products or services with literally thousands 
of variations, you customize your presentation so that you talk about a spe-
cific variant in more detail depending on the questions the audience raises. 
iPresent holds a collection of information from which you pick and choose 
appropriately, leaving your audience with specific, relevant information and 
avoiding information overload. Each presentation, while starting from a 
common point of departure, evolves into a personalized interaction between 
presenter and audience, resulting in an informed and satisfied audience.
We spoke with Phil Lenton, CEO of iPresent, who gave us some history 
and insight: “When we started to formulate the ideas for iPresent in early 
2011, we were in the privileged position of having worked already with some 
great forward-looking companies that use the iPad as a premium sales tool. 
We saw common themes emerging and built iPresent with the following 
objectives in mind:
94	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

“The need for an interface that was rich, beautiful, gesture-driven—in 
■
■
short, one that felt ‘Apple’-y enough to live up to being on an Apple 
device.
“The need for access—all the time, not just when connected to the 
■
■
Internet—to a wide range of different material for the salesperson to 
have at their disposal.
“The need for companies to be able to frequently update their mate-
■
■
rial; the freshest presentations are always the best. When you present 
up to date material your audience know you’re taking them seriously.”
iPresent responds to the needs of twenty-first-century presenters by sup-
porting rich HTML5 content without leaving behind the often necessary, 
twentieth-century presentation tools such as video, slides, and PDF files to 
generate interactive, creative content that really wows an audience.
iPresent goes beyond the traditional speaker-audience presentation 
scenarios with three creative ways for sharing and showing presentations: 
Kiosk Mode for self-service use; iPresent Multicast, a mechanism for shar-
ing your iPresent screen with many other iPads, in the same room and 
remotely; and the possibility of e-mailing content from the app.
iPresent provides the right balance of central control, with the corpo-
rate office generating presentations while giving the individual salespeople 
a chance to shine, to be creative and responsive to the audience with the 
freedom to move around but within a structure designed and approved 
by the company they work for. Information comes down from corporate 
quickly and seamlessly, but the Briefcase feature enables users to integrate 
personalized content and presentations with the company content, all in 
one package.
Phil Lenton also let us in on some of the plans for new features for 
iPresent:
Companion phone app—content, interactive slide controller
■
■
More platforms—Windows 8 tablets, Android tablets, even more 
■
■
conventional access for Macs and PCs through the browser
Data forms
■
■
Easier ways to build interactive HTML5 content
■
■
More menu customization
■
■
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
95

After you set up your account, you can begin building your presentation. 
iPresent refers to the visuals that accompany your presentation as a Content 
Set, which comprises resources that include the document, slide, spreadsheet, 
graphic, audio files, and video files. iPresent offers menu templates in several 
different styles: carousel, dock, and scrolling tiles among them. You choose 
a menu design that correlates with your business message and then add your 
logo, color scheme, and background image. The carousel menu works best 
for about six headings, while others, such as the tile menu, provide space for 
larger quantities. In a nutshell, first you upload resources (your media files) 
or a URL to your iPresent account; next you build the content set using one 
of the menu templates and then link resources to the menu items.
You, or members of your sales team, log in to the corporate account 
from the iPresent app. The content set appears, and you simply tap it to 
download. The spinning gear begins to turn, letting you know files are 
being downloaded. iPresent gives you an ETA for the download time, 
which we find to be a fantastic feature—you know if you have time to run 
to the water cooler; or if you’re downloading just minutes before your pre-
sentation, you know if you have to stall while your content appears. Once 
the content set is on your iPad, you can view it directly on the iPad screen 
or connect your iPad to a projection system.
Following are two examples of how companies are using iPresent.
In the first example, a worldwide event producer has a large number of 
salespeople responsible for sell-
ing exhibition space, advertising, 
and sponsorship for their many 
events. These salespeople have a 
wealth of information available, 
including videos, PowerPoint 
files, case studies, and ROI cal-
culators, that they can use in 
presenting to potential custom-
ers. They also need up-to-date 
Figure 5.7 With iPresent, presen-
tations are customized for each client.
96	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

information, as availability on specific events can change on a daily basis. 
iPresent enables the sales force to organize content in a far better way, 
ensuring that potential customers aren’t subjected to long sequences of 
standard presentations but instead are shown content relevant to them. 
(See Figure 5.7.)
In our second example, the executive board and senior management 
teams of a global airline company have extensive, mostly confidential, 
information to evaluate at their monthly meetings. Historically, board 
members would be e-mailed documents, which were then printed and car-
ried around. Any last-minute changes or new documents had to be resent 
and reprinted. Now the company uses iPresent to prepare extensive “board 
packs” prior to each meeting. Access to all the content can be carefully 
controlled, and last-minute changes can be easily pushed out to everyone. 
The content in iPresent is carefully arranged to match the agenda, and so 
attendees can spend more time focusing on making strategic decisions and 
less time trying to find documents.
Keynote
$9.99
http://www.apple.com
For creating presentations on 
your iPad, Keynote is hard to 
beat. Apple describes Keynote as 
“the most powerful presentation 
app ever designed for a mobile 
device.” A bold claim that’s 
absolutely true in our humble 
opinions. Keynote was built 
from scratch for the iPad (and 
other iDevices), so it’s easy to 
create compelling presentations 
complete with high-end features 
like animations, transitions, and builds. While the feature set is similar to 
PowerPoint’s, the user experience is pure Apple. (See Figure 5.8.) Keynote 
is a Swiss Army arsenal for presentations and will do more to make you 
Figure 5.8 With a feature set similar to that of PowerPoint, 
Keynote lets you create elegant presentations entirely on your iPad.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
97

look good than any other app we 
know of.
You can run your presenta-
tion in full-screen view and pres-
ent right from your iPad or use 
video mirroring to present on an 
HDTV. There’s even a Present-
er’s Display so you can preview 
your slides and notes on your 
iPad screen while you display the 
appropriate slide to your audi-
ence. (See Figure 5.9.)
If you’re a Windows user or 
use PowerPoint on the Mac, you’ll be happy to know that both the iPad 
and Mac versions of Keynote can import most PowerPoint presentations 
with little or no loss of functionality.
To make working with Keynote even easier, many developers and 
designers offer Keynote templates for a small fee. Download the templates 
app, choose one, and you need only replace the text and image placeholders 
with your own words and pictures.
Doceri
Free; Doceri Desktop version, free trial, $30 single-site license. Stylus and 
watermark replacement available for purchase
http://doceri.com
We’re impressed with Doceri’s fun, creative user interface. This is a great 
resource in both corporate and educational classroom settings. Build an 
interactive presentation ahead of time; or because Doceri is so simple to 
use, turn your iPad into an electronic blackboard and “write on the board” 
as you talk, illustrating your point or jotting down questions and com-
ments from the people in the audience while facing them.
One of our favorite features is the proprietary timeline tool, which lets 
you move back and forth in the presentation by sliding your finger along 
the timeline (see Figure 5.10). Instead of tapping “Undo” 15 times or eras-
ing, just drag the slider back to the point where you want to start over.
Figure 5.9 
The Presenters 
Display lets you 
see the slide 
your audience 
is viewing, your 
presenter’s 
notes, plus your 
choice of the 
current time or 
elapsed time.
98
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

To make a screencast, cre-
ate your presentation and then 
record your voice-over sepa-
rately. Move the timeline tool 
to the point where you want to 
insert the voice-over, and if you 
make a mistake, rerecord pieces 
as needed rather than starting 
from the beginning. You can 
also share your presentation or 
screencast. For example, if there 
were exercises or homework 
problems during your presenta-
tion or workshop, students could download them on their computers or 
iPads at home and work on them.
Add Doceri Desktop to your computer to display your presentation 
on your computer screen while managing it from your iPad. This also lets 
you run PowerPoint and Keynote presentations and write on top of them 
with Doceri’s different pen tools. If you have a classroom with a computer 
at each desk, put Doceri Desktop on each computer; your students or par-
ticipants see your presentation on the screen, while you see the presenta-
tion along with the presentation tools on your iPad. There’s a one-time site 
license fee associated with Doceri Desktop (after the initial trial period), 
but if you find yourself using Doceri, Doceri Desktop is probably a good 
addition to the package.
Perspective
Free app; fee-based publishing
http://pixxa.com/perspective
Perspective gives you a new . . . umm . . . perspective on presenting by 
turning your data into a story (see Figure 5.11). Granted your data are 
interesting to you, but making them interesting to your audience is the 
challenge for all presenters. Perspective takes a traditional slide presenta-
tion style and adds color and animation to your mind-numbing, stale 
charts and graphs.
Figure 5.10 
Use Doceri’s 
timeline tool to 
undo whatever 
you did by sliding 
back in time.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
99

We love that you can build 
your story directly on your iPad. 
The user interface is clean and 
takes full advantage of iPad tech-
nology; rather than trying to re-
create how things are done on a 
computer, Perspective’s tools are 
original yet intuitive. To cre-
ate your story, tap the Add but-
ton and then select a scene that 
fits the information you want to 
share. To add graphics or images, 
Perspective accesses Photos on 
your iPad, or you can conduct an image search. When we tried Perspective 
and built the first scene of our story with the title “Presentation Success,” 
Perspective offered a selection of related photos found on the Internet—and 
did it in an incredibly fast response time. You can integrate existing data 
from Excel, CSV, or PDF files and add a voice-over so viewers can listen to 
your story even when you can’t be there to tell it.
Prezi
iPad version free with all licenses
http://www.prezi.com
Prezi has received a lot of positive press for its innovative design and free-
form presentation style—there’s nothing linear about Prezi. If traditional 
presentations are like a train on the track, each car pulling the next, 
Prezi presentations are like a painting, a cloud here, a tree over there, a 
river flowing through the woods. And when you step back, you see the 
complete picture; and the farther you step back, the more of the picture 
you see. The iPad version is more limited than the desktop version; it only 
lets you use text and photos, and there isn’t a way to link the frames. The 
best way to take full advantage of Prezi is to create presentations on your 
computer and then access them through the cloud service. Aside from the 
original, free-form design, one of the biggest advantages of Prezi is the 
number of training and learning resources available on the website. You 
Figure 5.11  
Perspective 
searches for 
appropriate 
copyright-free 
images based 
on your text.
100	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

can even sign up for a webinar to learn how to use Prezi, which is prob-
ably your second best learning tool for making presentations (this book 
being your first!).
If any app here encourages  
you to go bulletless, it’s Prezi. This 
is more of an intellectual chal-
lenge than a tip, but try to create 
at least one presentation with-
out any bullets. Steve Jobs never 
used bullets, and he was one of 
the greatest presenters of our 
time . . . so why not try it yourself? 
It makes you think differently 
about what the audience sees and 
might be just what your presenta-
tion needs. (See ­Figure 5.12.)
SlideRocket
Free
http://App.sliderocket.com
You must set up an account on the SlideRocket.com site before you can 
access SlideRocket on your iPad. SlideRocket is a user-friendly app and 
website with a smorgasbord of features. You can upload existing Power-
Point or PDF files or create a new presentation on your computer using a 
SlideRocket template and theme or something you design on your own. 
Remember, “themes” are the colors, typefaces, and graphic style, and 
“templates” are the layouts of the elements in the presentation. All these 
options let you mold and bend a presentation to your liking.
SlideShark
Free with fee-based upgrade options
http://www.slideshark.com
Create your presentations in PowerPoint on your computer and then transfer 
them to your iPad by uploading or e-mailing them to the secure SlideShark 
server from your computer or accessing them from a cloud service (­SlideShark 
Figure 5.12  Create simple text and image 
Prezi presentations on the iPad.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
101

works with the most popular). 
SlideShark converts your Power-
Point file (including hyperlinks) 
to a SlideShark file, which you 
then download to your iPad. Use 
common playback controls and 
gestures to view your presenta-
tion. There are two on-screen 
timers that are really handy: one 
shows the elapsed presentation 
time, and one shows how long 
the current slide has been open. 
Being able to use these tools when 
your iPad isn’t connected to a projector is helpful for practicing your presen-
tation (you do practice, don’t you?). A built-in laser pointer appears when you 
press and hold on the screen. (See Figure 5.13.)
SlideShark lets you share a link to your presentation so it can be 
watched online on demand. Built-in analytics track who’s watching and 
where, which helps you measure your client base and the effectiveness of 
your presentation. The team version of SlideShark is a good option if you 
have multiple people giving the same presentation. Each member has a 
personal folder, while the administrator manages shared content. Again, 
built-in analytics show which presentations are being used most.
2Screens—Presentation Expert
$4.99; 2Screens Remote, $2.99
http://www.elpstudio.net/2screens/pe/about.html
2Screens offers PDF or PowerPoint file access and web access along with 
whiteboard creation. Access your PDF or PowerPoint files from several 
cloud storage services and then store your files locally or leave them in 
the original remote location. Write on top of your traditional slide pre-
sentation or even a web page accessed through the app, or open a white-
board to illustrate a point to your audience or brainstorm with your team 
(see Figure 5.14). Notes are saved with the relevant presentation so you 
find them the next time you give that presentation. There are some nice 
Figure 5.13  
SlideShark reads 
your PowerPoint 
files and has 
great presenter 
options.
102	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

graphic functions for creating a 
whiteboard presentation directly 
on your iPad too.
The strength of 2Screens lies 
in seamlessly switching between 
your presentation, websites, and 
the whiteboard during your 
presentation; and if you’re an 
iPhone user, the companion app, 
2Screens Remote, turns your 
iPhone into a remote control. 
The file structure is straightfor-
ward, so finding the item you 
want to switch to is quick and is invisible to your audience. 2Screens nicely 
blends traditional presentation and new media.
If you use PDF files to make your presentation, check out PDF Splicer 
(free with ads, $4.99 without); this nifty app could be a huge time-saver. 
You can cut pages from your PDF files or merge two PDF files together.
Presentation Note
Free, lite version; $4.99, full version
http://www.doxout.com
We like Presentation Note because it’s one of the few apps that doesn’t ask 
you to create a username and password since your files, although processed 
by Presentation Note, are stored locally. You can transfer PowerPoint or 
PDF files through various cloud services, and icons on the Presentation 
Note home screen automatically connect the app to your preferred cloud 
service. If your computer and iPad are on the same network, log in to the 
Presentation Note server from your browser and upload files directly from 
your computer; then download them directly to your iPad.
Presentation Note assumes you’ll connect your iPad to a projection 
system, and so the presentation controls—a slide counter, timer, laser, 
and slide Advance and Back buttons—reside at the top of the screen at 
all times. A marker icon opens a whiteboard on top of your slide so that 
you can explain something from your iPad. We appreciate the enhanced 
Figure 5.14 
Emphasize a 
point by writing 
directly on 
your 2Screens 
presentation.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
103

laser pointer options: your finger can be a dot or tail, which is active only 
while your finger is on the screen; or it can create a line, which underlines 
text or images or draws arrows or circles that remain on the screen until 
you move to the next slide. The capability to use your iPhone as a remote 
control with the free Presentation Note Remote app is a handy addition. 
If you’re new to making presentations from your iPad and don’t want to 
spend a lot of money or create a user account, Presentation Note is a good 
place to begin.
Documents To Go
$9.99; Premium Version, $16.99
http://www.dataviz.com/dtg_home.html
If you rely heavily on the 
MS-Office productivity 
suite, Documents To Go is 
extremely useful since it lets 
you view, edit, and create MS-
Office documents, including 
PowerPoint. (See Figure 5.15.) 
The editing is limited for Pow-
erPoint, but in a pinch you 
can change your text or add 
a slide at the last minute. The 
nice thing is that you work in 
the familiar PowerPoint envi-
ronment. Docs To Go also 
lets you view PDF, iWork, and other file types. You can upload files to your 
iPad from various cloud storage servers, such as Dropbox and SugarSync, 
or via an iTunes connection; the changes you make will sync automatically 
between devices if you use the desktop version on your computer as well.
Keep in mind, if you plan on using cloud services to keep your presenta-
tions in sync, especially with iCloud, make sure you close your file on one 
device before opening it on another. If you make changes on one device, 
leave the file open, and then make changes on a different device, chances 
are you’ll lose the changes you made on the first device.
Figure 5.15 
Documents 
To Go is the 
closest thing 
to PowerPoint 
on your iPad.
104	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

If you’re scratching your head and thinking, “These all sound great, 
which do I choose?” this chart should help you:
The Technology Is the Tool . . . 
Design Tips for Killer Visuals
We encourage you to use your iPad as more than a slide projector, but in the 
end, the iPad is a tool—a really great one—but still just a tool to get your 
message across. Technology can be a huge help, but the quantity of options 
can make you lose sight of the objective: getting your message across. The 
bottom line is to strive to make your content compelling and original by 
using the new tools that are available.
	
	
Upload 
PowerPoint
	
Upload  
Keynote
	
Upload PDF 
	
Create ­Presentations 
on Desktop
	
Create Presentations 
on iPad
	
View on Multiple 
iPads
2Screens	
x	
	
x	
	
x	
Doceri	
w/desktop version	
	
	
x	
Documents To Go	
x	
x	
x	
	
x	
iPresent	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x
Keynote	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x
Perspective	
	
	
x	
	
x	
Presentation Note	
x	
	
x	
	
	
Prezi	
	
	
	
x	
limited	
x
SlideRocket	
x	
	
x	
x	
	
x
SlideShark	
x	
x	
x	
	
	
x
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
105

Although slides still form the basic element of most normal presenta-
tions, go beyond ho-hum text and stagnant graphics; integrate appropriate 
video and audio in your Killer Presentations. Keep the following in mind 
when creating your visuals, regardless of the app or technology you use to 
convey your message:
Use a maximum of 40 words on each visual, preferably fewer.
■
■
Use large, bold sans serif typefaces like Arial or Helvetica and not more 
■
■
than three different typefaces together.
Use images such as charts, diagrams, illustrations, graphics, photos, 
■
■
and videos to communicate your points, themes, and messages rather than 
text alone.
Wean yourself off templates or use them with caution. Choose tem-
■
■
plates that are simple and clean lined. Busy templates can be distracting, 
become tiresome during the course of the presentation, and occupy space 
that is better used to enlarge an image. Look at how Apple’s Steve Jobs, Tim 
Cook, and others presented: just a plain white (or black) background, a few 
words, and a strong image.
Use high-quality video and animations to better communicate key 
■
■
ideas, facts, concepts, and, yes, emotions. Animations that show a process, 
trend, or relationship are more effective than a static visual. Consider hav-
ing a skilled videographer or multimedia person develop custom anima-
tions for important presentations.
However, make sure your video isn’t so amazing that the message is lost 
■
■
in the media.
Limit the number of elements on your visual. Display an entire complex 
■
■
image and then show pieces of it on the subsequent slides. Some of the 
worst slides we’ve seen are charts that list studies or articles referenced in 
the presentation. Give the audience essential information and provide refer-
ences on request.
Each visual should make one point. The primary concept should jump 
■
■
out immediately. For example, showing a slide with a simple title and single 
106	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

image, a presenter might say, “This visual shows you the initial complex 
design of our older turbocharger. Just look at the 187 parts that are prone 
to wear and tear and malfunction. Here [next slide] see how we redesigned 
that equipment, which now has only 35 parts and is 68 percent more reliable 
and durable!”
Use brief, descriptive, catchy titles that encapsulate your visuals. Look 
■
■
at the difference between “Recovering Sales” and “Sales Are Rebounding 
Strongly” or between “Our New Product” and “Our Competition-Killing 
New XD5 Laser.”
Keep it simple. Skip the elaborate transitions between slides (which take 
■
■
up time and are distracting). Just use cuts between slides. Stick to a few 
colors that work well together; avoid stark contrasts.
If your app permits, you can use your fingers to expand or shrink the 
■
■
image on your iPad and move it around so people can better see what you want 
them to. Many apps have laser functions where touching the screen creates 
that focusing red dot that draws attention to the area. Some have a feature that 
lets you temporarily draw on the visual while you are presenting.
If not talking about the information on your visual, black it out until 
■
■
you are ready to bring it up again or move onto the next slide. We’ve yet to 
find an app that does this, and so your options are to:
Cover the projector lamp.
▶
▶
Put black slides at intervals where you know you take a break for 
▶
▶
questions or where you tell a story and you want the audience to focus 
its attention on you and not the screen.
Add a hyperlink to a black slide and click the link when you want to 
▶
▶
go there; then click back to where you left off.
The blackout slide gives your audience a break from multiple sensory 
inputs and is a sign that a transition is taking place in the presentation, such 
as moving on to the Q&A time or handing off to another speaker.
Do 
■
■
not read any text on your slides word for word. Instead point to the 
line of text and conversationally explain in slightly different, more detailed 
words.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
107

Be careful not to repeat the same phrase over and over. For instance, 
■
■
vary the way you introduce slides, such as “This slide shows . . . ,” and 
“Now here you will see . . . ,” and “Take a look at the chart in this 
slide . . .”
Tell stories, give vivid examples, share anecdotes, and engage your 
■
■
audience by asking for comments, feedback, opinions, and feelings about 
your topic. We recently saw a spellbinding presentation given by an engi-
neer and complimented him on his presentation style afterward, intrigued 
by how he had honed his skill. We learned that acting was his hobby, and 
he used some of his stage tricks to keep his audience involved and inter-
ested. Consider hiring a speech coach or taking an acting course at your 
local community college to acquire skills that make you that compelling 
speaker.
Giving Your Presentation Without 
Tripping Over the Connector Cable
Now that your presentation is available on your iPad, you’re probably anx-
ious to show it off. You can view it on the iPad’s fabulous screen, although 
this is realistically practical only when you have one or two people looking 
over your shoulder. A better way to show your presentation to a larger audi-
ence is to connect your iPad to a projector, HDTV, or computer monitor, 
either via cables or Wi-Fi. In Chapter 7, we discuss apps that give you a 
third option, which is to broadcast your presentation to iPads that your 
viewers hold in their hands.
Apple offers a variety of cables and adapters that let you “mirror” your 
iPad’s screen on a larger one. This means that what you see on your iPad 
appears on the big screen. Presentation apps take mirroring one step fur-
ther. They show your presentation on the big screen, but you see extra tools 
such as a timer, presentation notes, and thumbnail images of your entire 
slide show on your iPad.
Here we give you the information you need to determine the type of 
cables and connectors you’ll want to keep in your equipment bag, and we 
also give you tips for walking around the stage or conference table.
108	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Connecting Your iPad to a Projector or HDTV
To choose the correct cable, determine which version of iPad you have and 
what kind of projector or monitor you’ll be connecting to. Use the com-
posite AV Cable ($39), 30-pin to VGA Adapter ($29), and 30-pin Digital AV 
Adapter ($39) for second- and third-generation iPads with 30-pin dock con-
nectors as well as the Lightning to VGA Adapter ($49) and Lightning Digi-
tal AV Adapter ($49) for the iPad mini and fourth-generation iPad. Older 
TVs and projectors are likely to offer VGA or composite inputs but not 
digital HDMI ports; newer projectors and HDTVs are likely to offer digital 
HDMI inputs and may also sport VGA and composite video ports.
There are a couple of downsides to cable solutions. The first, which 
affects all of the above, is that you’re tethered to your iPad by a rather short 
cable. Wouldn’t you rather be free to move about with your iPad in your 
hand? The second drawback applies only to VGA adapters: video purchased 
from the iTunes Store will generate the dreaded “Connected display is not 
authorized” error if you try to view it via any of the VGA adapters.
A better, albeit somewhat more expensive and technically challenging, 
solution is to use a $99 Apple TV (see Figure 5.16), a little black box that lets 
you wirelessly stream what’s on your iPad screen to any HDTV or ­projector 
Figure 5.16 
Stream what’s 
on your iPad 
screen to an 
HDTV or video 
projector with 
Apple TV. (Photo 
courtesy of Apple, Inc.)
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
109

that has at least one HDMI port. Apple’s AirPlay technology, which is 
baked into most Apple devices, is what makes it possible. And like so much 
of what Apple does, it (usually) just works.
If that sounds awesome, it is. The freedom of moving around while 
maintaining full control of your video and audio is a rush, and we can’t 
recommend it highly enough. Of course, this is what we use when we pres-
ent, if possible.
But before you get too excited, here’s what you’ll need (in addition to 
your iPad) to make it happen:
An Apple TV ($99)
■
■
A Wi-Fi (802.11a, g, or n) network
■
■
An HDTV or video projector with an available HDMI port
■
■
In a perfect world you’d bring all of the above and more to every presen-
tation. There’s no substitute for testing, and if you own it, you can test it at 
your convenience. However, you’ll sometimes have to rely on services pro-
vided by the venue. Fortunately, many typical meeting spaces, like hotels, 
convention centers, meeting rooms, classrooms, board rooms, and such, are 
equipped with gear that fulfills both the network and video requirements; 
just show up with your iPad, an Apple TV, and an HDMI cable, and you’re 
good to go.
A less expensive solution is to download AirServer (free seven-day trial, 
$15 for lifetime use on five computers) to your computer. This handy soft-
ware turns your computer into an AirPlay server. Connect your computer 
to the HDTV or projector and then tap the AirPlay button on your iPad. 
Wireless iPad use was never so simple.
If you use a Mac running Mac OS X 10.8 (Mountain Lion) or later, you 
can use AirPlay to stream your Mac screen to your Apple TV. This is huge, 
especially if you want to use a laptop and an iPad at different times in your 
presentation. And it’s easy to switch from one to the other and back again 
without missing a beat.
When it comes to Internet access or Wi-Fi bandwidth, always expect 
the worst. If your presentation needs Internet access, consider bringing your 
own. Apple’s AirPort Express ($99) is a powerful dual-channel Wi-Fi router 
that can be set up and administered from your iPad. Or consider renting 
11
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

or buying a 4G hotspot from any wireless carrier. Both fourth-generation 
iPads and iPhone 5s or later with 4G can act as a wireless hotspot for up to 
five devices. A 4G hotspot can be as fast as Wi-Fi and just as reliable, but 
remember that you’re paying for the data you consume.
To check your iPad’s data usage, tap Settings > General > Usage > Cel-
lular Usage; to enable the personal hotspot feature, tap Settings > Cellular 
Data > Personal Hotspot.
Using a Personal Projector
As far as video projectors are concerned, neither of us owns one. We’ve 
found adequate projection equipment available at just about every venue 
we’ve presented in. And more and more facilities these days offer digi-
tal (HDMI) input in addition to (or instead of) VGA. While it is easy 
for us to recommend Apple TV and AirPort Express, which are tiny and 
inexpensive, you’re on your own if you want a video projector, although 
we have listed suggestions in the Resources. We are intrigued by the pico 
projectors, which weigh less than a pound and cost under $500. We sug-
gest reading all the reviews you can find and buying from a vendor with at 
least a two-week return policy and no restocking fee. Then, if the system 
doesn’t perform to your liking, you can take it back and get a refund or try 
a different model.
Bringing Your Own Audio
Another consideration is audio. Your presentation may include theme or 
ambient music or video soundtracks. And the audience needs to be able to 
hear your voice clearly. If the venue has its own sound reinforcement (as 
many do), it will provide a microphone, but you’re responsible for connect-
ing your iPad (or laptop) to the house sound system. VGA connections 
don’t support audio, so if you’re using VGA, you’ll need to connect your 
iPad (or laptop) with a cable from its headphone jack to the sound system. 
HDMI supports audio and video so you won’t usually need a separate cable 
for audio when you’re using it. Still, it’s not a bad idea to pack an audio 
cable in your bag of tricks, just in case.
Hardware in hand, keep in mind these tips for glitch-free connections 
on the day of your presentation:
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
111

Master your tools.
■
■
 We have a tendency to dive right in and start using 
new apps without bothering to RTFM (read the fine manual). That’s 
OK; we understand. But after the thrill wears off a little, you’ll be 
rewarded many times if you take the time to check out the built-in 
help, watch the tutorial videos, and visit the developer’s website to 
learn about great features, free bonus content, and time-saving 
techniques.
Test everything before you leave your home or office.
■
■
 Before you walk 
out, check that you’ve packed everything you will need.
Plan for Murphy’s law.
■
■
 Whatever can go wrong, will. Pack spares for 
everything you can. Pack a spare dock or Lightning connector cable 
and video adapter. We’ve often had to resort to plan B after arriving at 
a venue where the equipment wasn’t what we expected. We carry an 
assortment of cables and adapters, even ones we probably won’t need.
Charge your rechargeable devices before, during, and after your show.
■
■
 Of 
course, you want your iPad fully charged at the beginning of any 
presentation. But if you’re also using other rechargeable devices like 
wireless speakers, iPhones, or a Bluetooth keyboard or headset, make 
sure they’re fully charged, too.
Turn on Find My iPad, the built-in feature that can locate a misplaced 
■
■
iPad and display its current location on a map and that also can remotely 
send it a message, lock it, or erase your personal information. If you wait 
until your iPad is misplaced, it’s too late. So turn that locator on now 
before you forget. You’ll thank us someday. Tap Settings, tap iCloud, 
and then tap Find My iPad so its switch is on.
Handling Your iPad While You Present
Take it from us—using your iPad in a natural, unobtrusive, and poised 
fashion while maintaining eye contact and connecting with the audience, 
takes practice. You’ll hear us say it again and again, but if a presentation is 
worth giving, it’s worth practicing until you get it right.
If you’re using a wired solution, you won’t want to move your iPad 
around much, if at all, because you risk disconnecting the video cable, 
which isn’t at all pretty. Most HDTVs and projectors take anywhere from 
a few seconds to a minute or more to restore video after disconnection. And 
112
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

nothing will stop your presentation momentum faster than 30 seconds of 
dead air.
Dozens of different iPad stands are available. Coauthor Bob has tested 
more than a dozen, and several stand out:
iKlip Studio (http://www.ikmultimedia.com, $29.99), from IK Mul-
timedia, is an adjustable tabletop stand aimed at musicians who need to 
keep their iPads stable in the recording studio or on stage. It folds flat and 
is made of lightweight, shock-resistant thermoplastic, so it’s easy to trans-
port. It has rubber footpads to prevent your iPad from unwanted sliding, 
and its design makes it easy to switch from landscape to portrait. (See 
Figure 5.17.) The same company also 
makes iKlip ($39.99), an adjustable 
iPad holder for microphone stands.
In addition to holding your iPad 
steady, it’s perfect for turning your 
iPad into a teleprompter; just mount 
the camera on a mic stand and mount 
the iKlip below the camera lens. 
Several teleprompter apps are avail-
able such as Teleprompt+ for iPad 
($14.99), PrompterPal ($4.99), and 
ProPrompter ($9.99), all of which can 
be downloaded from the App Store. 
Best Prompter Pro ($3.99) lets you 
record yourself so you can practice 
and play back.
Another solid desktop stand is the NuGuard GripStand GripBase 
bundle (http://www.newertech.com, $59.99), which includes a pair of 
interchangeable stands: a sturdy weighted base and a smaller foldout 
stand that doubles as a handle for carrying or hanging your iPad. (See 
Figure 5.18.)
Perhaps the most utilitarian option is ZeroChroma’s Vario-SC (http://
www.zerochroma.com, $49.95), which combines a rotating 11-position 
stand that folds flat when not being used and a sturdy protective case that 
can be combined with an Apple Smart Cover for additional ­protection. 
Figure 5.17 
iKlip Studio 
is a sturdy, 
inexpensive 
desktop iPad 
stand. (Photo courtesy 
of IK Multimedia)
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
113

The ­Vario-SC, unlike the other stands we’ve discussed, is something you’ll 
put on your iPad and leave on forever, so there’s nothing extra to pack, 
carry, or lose. It’s the case 
Bob uses with his iPad 
even when he’s not pre-
senting. (See Figure 5.19.)
Sanity Check: Is the iPad the Best Tool for the Job?
At some point in the presentation planning process, you’ll need to deter-
mine what (if any) video, audio, computing, and connectivity gear you’ll 
need to support your show. While this book is about Killer Presentations 
with your iPad, remember that your iPad is not mandatory for every pre-
sentation. There are going to be times when, for whatever reason, a laptop 
Figure 5.18  GripBase (left) 
and GripStand (right) offer 
flexible options for securing 
your iPad when you speak. 
(Photo courtesy of Newer Technology)
Figure 5.19  
The Vario-SC 
combines a stand 
and an iPad case; 
once you put it 
on, you’ll never 
want to take it off.  
(Photo courtesy of 
ZeroChroma)
11
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

will be a better choice than an iPad. There will also be times when an iPad 
is a better choice than a laptop. In many (or most) cases, a combination of 
laptop and iPad will help you deliver the most compelling presentation.
As a sanity check, before you even start to consider which devices to use 
for a presentation, consider the pros and cons.
Laptop (or even desktop) computers have a proven track record when 
it comes to presenting. We’d venture that the majority of presentations 
you’ve seen in your lifetime involved some version of PowerPoint running 
on a Mac or PC laptop. As a result, you’ll usually find more resources avail-
able for a laptop than for an iPad. If you’re presenting in a public space, 
you’ll have a better chance of finding help to connect a laptop than to con-
nect an iPad. Our experience has been that if you show up with a laptop, 
someone there will be familiar with connecting it to the projection and 
sound systems. Finally, if anything happens to your laptop, there’s a better 
chance of finding a replacement for it than an iPad. Show up with an iPad, 
however, and you’re probably on your own when it comes to getting it up 
and running, connecting it to the venue’s audio and video gear, or finding 
a replacement if necessary.
Another consideration is that most laptops offer a variety of ports and 
slots, providing a myriad of options when it comes to peripherals and data. 
For example, if your presentation includes streaming video, a laptop’s Eth-
ernet port provides faster and more reliable Internet access than any wireless 
connection. The iPad, with a single proprietary connector—either a dock 
or Lightning connector depending upon your iPad’s vintage—limits you 
to peripherals designed for the iPad and certain USB devices (using Apple’s 
Lightning to USB Camera Adapter or Apple iPad Camera Connection Kit, 
available for $29 each). Furthermore, with iPad storage topping out at 64 
GB, you may not have enough free space for a media-heavy presentation.
The bottom line: don’t present with an iPad just because you can. Do it 
to add dramatic flair and the sense of the unexpected to your show. Con-
sider the technical challenges you’ll face and ask yourself whether it’s worth 
it. If the answer isn’t an enthusiastic yes, you might want to leave the iPad 
out of this particular presentation.
	
	
Creating Your iPad Presentation
11
5

This page intentionally left blank 

Expert’s Corner:  
Advanced Ideas and Tips 
for Killer iPad Presentations
N
ow that you understand the basics of using your iPad as your tool for 
giving presentations, we’re going to introduce you to the enhance-
ment apps. We review apps that help you create media on your iPad. We’ve 
divided the chapter by category so you can easily find what you need most. 
Remember, these apps help you create visuals—charts, enhanced photos, 
videos, voice-overs, animation—that you can then insert as part of your 
presentation.
The end of this chapter presents a Q&A with coauthor Bob LeVitus, 
who shares his technical expertise about all things iPad. Glance through 
this section to find answers to your questions and to learn advanced tips 
that can help you avoid problems that may come up in the future.
Using Media-Creation Apps on Your iPad
The App Store holds millions of iPad apps. To narrow our choices, we 
checked the release dates and chose only apps that had been updated or 
released within the last year. We made sure there was an active website 
so you can contact the developer in the event of a problem with the app 
(although you will want to double-check since, as we all know, URLs can 
sometimes change or disappear). We considered the ratings and reviews, 
reading them with a critical eye to make sure that unsatisfied users hadn’t 
expected more than the app claims offer. We looked at the user interface 
and picked apps that we like. Of course, these criteria are subjective; your 
C h a p t e r  6
11
7

aesthetic preferences and needs could be different from ours. For example, 
since we’re writers and not sketch artists, we tend toward apps that enhance 
our drawing skill rather than give us free rein.
The following sections are presented in the order that you might use 
the apps to create a presentation: from planning to making charts to photo 
manipulation and animation. Don’t limit yourself to the apps we present 
here. Make sure you stroll the aisles of the App Store and read reviews from 
some of the tech pubs and websites, as you’re sure to find some that better 
suit your particular needs or that you find easier to use.
Brainstorming or Mind-Mapping Apps
Mind maps help us identify patterns in our thinking, link ideas, and find 
solutions to problems. Whether it’s a sales presentation, a staff meeting, or 
a trade conference, the end result will be better if you have a plan before 
you begin. Creating a mind map can help you clarify your presentation 
ideas and create sequential links or hyperlinks between them, as well as 
identify the type, content, and media that will best support your message. 
We chose the following apps for their flexibility in mind-mapping style. 
All allow you to change the colors, shapes, and graphics used. You can 
work alone, or if you work on a team, hook your iPad up to a projector so 
everyone can see and contribute to the mind map; then share it via e-mail 
or a cloud server.
MindMaple
Free, lite version; $4.99, full version
http://www.mindmaple.com
If you’re new to mind mapping or want an easy-to-use app, MindMaple 
could be a good choice. Create the first, central cell. Then all you need to 
do is drag your finger out of it to create subcells, or “children”; and from 
those, drag your finger to create more subcells, or tangent “sibling” cells. 
When in view, the toolbar runs down the side of the screen, and tapping the 
relevant tool lets you add a note, task information such as the deadline or 
responsibilities, or a callout to a specific cell, as well as set up relationships 
or boundaries. If you want to share the map with others, make sure they 
have the free MindMaple Viewer app so they can open and view the file.
118
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Mindomo
Free (three maps); $6 a month for single user, unlimited maps and other 
goodies, special corporate and education pricing—see the website for 
details
http://www.mindomo.com
Mindomo offers a built-in presentation mode, which means the mind map 
is the visual of your presentation. You can also use Mindomo to plan your 
presentation and then create the 
presentation itself in another 
app. A neat feature of Mindomo 
is the ability to store your mind 
map on a cloud server and pro-
vide a direct link to share it with 
others. The Mindomo website 
gives great mind-mapping tips, 
and we paraphrase a few here:
Make your desired outcome 
■
■
or call to action the center 
of the map; everything else 
on the mind map leads to 
that outcome either directly or sequentially (see Figure 6.1).
Use a mind map to support your talk. Your audience will appreciate 
■
■
seeing the entire context at once.
Start in the upper right corner and work clockwise through your 
■
■
topics or messages.
Use sections and subsections to break down information, tasks, 
■
■
and facts.
DropMind
Free (three maps with limited features), $11.99
http://dropmind.com/pricing/ipad
DropMind is a powerful mind-mapping tool, especially if you work with 
a team and want an app that’s integrated with a desktop and web-based 
version. The desktop version also offers integration with MS-Office. We 
­appreciated the efficiency of the Next button on the keyboard, which 
Figure 6.1 
Before creating 
any media, plan 
your presentation 
using an app 
like Mindomo.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
119

quickly creates sibling cells as you think of them. Another feature we found 
helpful is the option to select multiple cells so you can color-code them at 
the same time rather than doing so one by one.
In addition to providing multiple views and sharing the map as an 
image, PDF, or DropMind (.dmmx) file or putting it on Facebook or Twit-
ter, the full version also allows sharing as an outline, cloning to create 
another map, printing, inserting images from your Photos library and iPad 
camera, and cloud syncing. The in-app instructions are well written too.
Using Keynote Templates on Your iPad
Although we promote wowing your audience with a multimedia, interactive, 
nonlinear presentation, sometimes time or necessity dictates a sequential 
presentation. One of the easiest ways to create such a presentation is to use a 
predesigned template. With the options listed here, you can find a template 
that conveys the mood of your presentation and reflects your style. All offer 
template themes and then multiple slide 
layouts within each theme; you need only 
replace the text and image placeholders.
Templates for Keynote
$1.99
http://www.no8ody.com
With 50 templates that each offer a selec-
tion of over 20 slides, Templates for Key-
note gives you the biggest bang for your 
buck. We like the preview layout of the 
slides within each template—and then 
simply tapping Open takes you directly 
into Keynote. You can apply your own 
color scheme and typefaces or keep the 
ones provided.
Figure 6.2 Templates for Keynote Pro 
suggests the type of text or image to put in the 
placeholder.
12
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Templates for Keynote Pro
$9.99
http://www.made-for-use.com/templates-for-keynote-pro.html
The 36 colorful, graphic templates come with more than 725 slides in all. 
We appreciate the descriptive placeholder text, which offers presentation 
advice such as “Brief and precise heading” or “This is the Action Title: Try 
to summarize your slide in one sentence here.” (See Figure 6.2.) A variety 
of tables, charts, pictures, diagrams, and quotes are included.
Templates for PowerPoint Pro
$9.99
http://www.made-for-use.com/templates-for-keynote-pro.html
Developed by the same company as Templates for Keynote Pro, these 10 
templates provide more than 100 slide-ready graphics. The style is all busi-
ness, and the templates can be imported to the mobile office suite app of 
your choice. Presentations are divided by context, such as marketing, con-
sulting, sales, and research and development.
Templates for Keynote Presentations 
and Templates for PowerPoint Presentations
$3.99 each (if you use other iWork apps such as Pages and Numbers, you 
might want to purchase Templates for iWork for $7.99 instead)
These templates have built-in special effects like the “magic move” transi-
tion from one slide to the next and 3-D charts. The maps and infograph-
ics give some options that the other template apps don’t have. If you use 
both PowerPoint and Keynote, a few PowerPoint-compatible templates are 
included with the Keynote version.
KeynoteZone Collection
$19.99
http://www.keynotezone.com/themes_ios/index.html
Don’t be put off by the price; the templates in Keynote Zone Collection 
are original and edgy. On the website, you can view all 11 themes and the 
associated slides, along with a video showing the themes in action, before 
buying so that you know what you’re getting. Considering the cost of 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
121

­hiring a graphic designer, overall 
you may find this to be an eco-
nomic solution to wow potential 
clients. (See Figure 6.3.)
Apps That Create Diagrams, Charts, and Graphs
Charts and graphs always seem to find their way into presentations. The 
familiar, modular display of information helps our brains instantly grasp 
the concepts being communicated: pie charts visually show who or what is 
getting the bigger slice of the whole, a peak in a line graph can be cause for 
celebration or alarm, and bar charts make comparisons easy to understand. 
Diagrams, on the other hand, are where the fun begins. The apps here are 
creative powerhouses that provide stencils, which you put together to form 
flowcharts, objects, and instructional schematics.
In the App Store, you’ll found a slew of specialized graphing and dia-
gramming apps for creating Venn diagrams, Carroll diagrams, UML 
diagrams, flowcharts, graphs for tracking stock prices, graphs for ana-
lyzing Google Analytics, and depth and pressure graphs for petroleum 
professionals.
OmniGraphSketcher and Omnigraffle
$14.99 and $49.99, respectively
http://www.omnigroup.com/products/omnigraffle-ipad/
(See Figure 6.4.)
Figure 6.3 View all the 
KeynoteZone Collection templates 
online before purchasing.
122
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Grafio
Free, lite version; $8.99, full version
http://www.tentouchapps.com/grafio
(See Figure 6.5.)
ViDia
$6.99
http://genarks.biz/Home-en.html
Sketching Apps
The beauty of apps is that if you want an app that’s specific to your pro-
fession or your audience, chances are you’ll find it. In this category, there 
are apps for engineers and architects as well as medical and automotive 
professionals, even shoe designers. The small selection here is the tip of the 
iceberg of sketching, drawing, painting, and designing apps. However, we 
sorted by rating to bring the top-rated apps to the top of the list and then 
pulled out those that we think would be useful for creating a presentation, 
since that’s our focus.
Figure 6.4 Create elegant diagrams with OmniGraffle’s 
seemingly endless supply of stencils. (Image courtesy of OmniGroup)
Figure 6.5 Create unique diagrams 
every time with Grafio’s built-in 
shapes library. (Image ­courtesy of Grafio)
	
	
Expert’s Corner
123

All the sketching apps offer a selection of brushes, pens, and pencils in 
varying widths, weights, and color choices. If you sketch or paint with their 
physical counterparts, you’ll know which to choose in the virtual world. 
What changes between the apps are the user interface and the quality of the 
image. We’ve suggested just a few here, but your best bet is to try some of 
the free versions available, so you can find the app you’re most comfortable 
working and creating with.
SketchBook Express for iPad, SketchBook Pro for iPad
Free, $4.99; additional brushes available as in-app purchases
http://www.sketchbook.com
iCanvas Pro
Free
http://www.satwebapps.com/
ic/wp/
SketchTime
$1.99
http://sketchtimeapp.com
(See Figure 6.6.)
TouchDraw
$8.99
http://elevenworks.com/home
Photo Editing and Enhancement Apps
You can simply use the Camera app that came with your iPad to capture 
photos and videos, which you then import to your presentation, or you can 
use any of the myriad apps for photo manipulation. Photo and Video is a 
category of its own in the App Store. We list just a few that have features we 
find particularly useful, but your needs, capabilities, preferences for aesthet-
ics, and user interface may be, and probably are, different. Use our comments 
as a guide to think about what you need in a photo editing app.
Figure 6.6 
Sketching in 
SketchTime 
comes close to 
real sketching—
just pen, paper, 
and an eraser.
12
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Snapseed
Free
http://www.snapseed.com
Snapseed is probably the most 
advanced editing tool of the bunch, 
with capabilities far beyond what 
many apps that cost money offer. 
Its Auto Correct option seems to 
work better than others, including 
iPhoto’s, making it perhaps the best 
one-click-fix tool. (See Figure 6.7.)
Most of the tools and filters 
work the same: just drag your fin-
ger up or down to select an option and drag left or right to increase and 
decrease the strength of the effect. And an omnipresent button lets you 
instantly compare your modifications with the original.
PhotoToaster
$1.99
http://www.eastcoastpixels.com/
cgi-bin/product.php?p=4
For ease of use, PhotoToaster wins 
hands down. To begin, access the 
photo you want to edit from Pho-
tos and crop, rotate, straighten, 
and lighten your photo. Lighting 
brushes let you lighten or darken 
specific areas of a photo rather 
than the whole photo. Choose 
from dozens of global preset filters 
or edit the lighting, effect, vignette, texture, and border singly and build 
your own filter presets. The thumbnail images at the bottom of the screen 
show your selected photo with each effect in that category so you can com-
pare side by side (see Figure 6.8). You can manually set the adjustments with 
sliders that increase or decrease the intensity of the effect.
Figure 6.8 
See how each 
PhotoToaster 
filter affects 
your photo.
Figure 6.7 
Snapseed is 
powerful, elegant, 
and easy to use.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
12
5

iPhoto
$4.99
http://www.apple.com
Another excellent multipurpose photo editor is Apple’s iPhoto. It gives you 
even more control over your retouching with brushes that paint adjust-
ments where you need them and with edge detection to help you apply the 
corrections more precisely. (See Figure 6.9.)
Other useful tools include graduated filters, beautiful black-and-white 
conversion you adjust with a finger drag, vignette effects, a tilt-shift fil-
ter, and artistic effects including one that turns your photo into a vibrant 
watercolor.
Camera Professional Effects
Free; $0.99 to remove ads
http://freshtouch.us/index.php?id=2
This is really two apps in one: filters add special effects to your photos, and 
manual controls change your iPad into an SLR camera. The Quickshot 
Figure 6.9 
iPhoto’s brushes 
give you superb 
control over 
adjustments.
12
6	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

function shoots rapid-fire photos without stopping to show you the photo 
you just took. The Slowshutter function lets you set the resolution, shutter 
speed, and sensitivity, which improves low-light photography; and with 
the Multishot function you set the number of frames per second and the 
number of frames you want to take. The countdown timer, useful when you 
want to put yourself in the picture, can be used on its own or in conjunc-
tion with the other functions. Overall for 99 cents, we think this is a pretty 
neat app for capturing cool images to add to your presentation.
ArtStudio
$4.99
http://www.iphoneclan.com/artstudioipad/
If you’re a Photoshop user, you may prefer ArtStudio, which includes a 
full-featured drawing and painting environment, layers, masks, and a com-
prehensive array of photo editing and compositing tools. ArtStudio is the 
most Photoshoplike graphics app we know of for the iPad.
Aside from photo editing, there are hundreds of photo filters available. 
Most have simple editing features such as panning, zooming, cropping, and 
rotating; and once your subject is in position, you apply a filter that may be 
an effect such as aging or pixelating, a color wash, an exposure setting, or 
an artistic effect, for example, turning your photo into a sketch or painting. 
Here are just a few we like:
Instagram
Free
http://www.instagram.com
Glaze
Free; more filters available as in-app purchases
http://www.the11ers.com/glaze/press/
FX Photo Studio HD
$1.99
http://www.fxphotostudioapp.com
	
	
Expert’s Corner
12
7

XnView Photo Fx
Free
http://www.xnview.com/mobile/
There’s nothing to keep you from installing and using all the aforemen-
tioned apps and many more. Often one app does a particular task better 
than another app. And not all presets and templates are created alike. You 
may prefer the look of one app’s options better than the same options in 
another app. Of course, you could buy every app mentioned for less than 
a decent dinner for one, so we recommend getting the ones that appeal to 
you so you have plenty of options when creativity strikes.
Video Capture and Editing
There can be much more to a presentation than just static slides and still 
images. A frequently seen and effective way of using video is creating an 
“endless-loop” presentation to occupy an audience’s attention before a big 
presentation, workshop, or speech. We usually prefer to create and edit 
audio and video on desktop computers with multiple displays, but there are 
times when it’s necessary to create video or audio materials with our iPads. 
So here are just a few of the apps we’ve found useful for producing movies 
or soundtracks on iPads.
iMovie
$4.99
http://www.apple.com
Apple’s iMovie delivers a lot 
of bang for five bucks. First 
and foremost, it provides a 
full-featured HD video edit-
ing environment that makes 
it possible to shoot and edit 
an entire movie production 
right on your iPad. You can 
add video, photos, music, and 
sound effects to your produc-
Figure 6.10 
The precision 
editor makes it 
easy to edit clips 
accurately with 
your finger.
128
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

tion; trim the length of individual clips; split clips; and create freeze frames 
quickly and easily. It even has a precision editor for frame-accurate editing! 
(See Figure 6.10.)
One of our favorite features is iMovie’s “Instant Movie Trailers,” which lets 
you create professional-looking movie trailers in just a couple of minutes.
As an aside, much like the template apps for Keynote and PowerPoint, 
there are apps that provide styles for iMovie too, such as Intro Designer for 
iMovie, Scrolling Credits, Extras for iMovie, and MovieDrops for iMovie—
all available at the App Store.
CuteCUT
Free; $3.99 pro version
http://cutecut.mobivio.com
CuteCUT is a straightforward app for creating and editing a multimedia 
video—and no, that’s not an oxymoron. You can combine video, still pho-
tos, text, and drawings you make within the app, your own music or in-app 
songs and effects, and voice-overs. Each element is a track or layer of your 
video. One of the features we found particularly useful is the pinch-and-
spread gesture that can expand or compress the timeline so you find exactly 
the point you want to trim or sync with other tracks. Even dilettante vid-
eographers will find CuteCUT easy to use right from the start.
ReelDirector
$1.99
http://www.nexvio.com
Another video editing app of 
note is ReelDirector, which 
also lets you edit video; reor-
der, trim, and split clips; add 
transitions, opening titles, and 
closing credits; and apply the 
Ken Burns effect to still pho-
tos to simulate motion. (See 
Figure 6.11.) The editing inter-
face is straightforward, letting 
Figure 6.11  
ReelDirector can 
automatically 
create your 
opening titles and 
closing credits.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
129

you drag and drop clips to change their order. Trimming clips is also easy, 
so don’t be afraid to let the camera keep rolling.
Pinnacle Studio
$12.99
http://www.pinnaclesys.com/
Pinnacle Studio is perhaps the most full-featured and capable video edi-
tor for the iPad. It’s easy to use with a storyboard mode, in addition to a 
traditional timeline, and includes one of the best selections of high-quality 
transitions and effects we’ve seen. It also includes animated and static titles 
that are as good as any we’ve seen, and they look great on the big screen. 
(See Figure 6.12.)
Pinnacle Studio has a montage mode unlike any other we’ve come 
across. Just drag photos onto the template, and the app generates a great-
looking animated montage.
Figure 6.12  
Pinnacle Studio 
is probably the 
most advanced 
video editor 
on the iPad.
13
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Action Movie FX
Free with two effects; in-app purchase for more special effect packs at $0.99 
each
http://www.actionmoviefx.com
There are thousands of iPad apps that work with video. And while many of 
them are amateurish or just plain dumb, some, like Action Movie FX, are 
gems for presenters. Action Movie FX lets you add big-budget Hollywood-
style special effects to video shot with your iPad.
Think about trying this: Create a prop box that says “The Competition” 
and shoot a few seconds of video of it. Now add the Action Movie FX of a 
giant boulder dropping onto it and crushing it. Add a voice-over that says, 
“The power to crush the competition,” and you’ve got 10 seconds of video 
that’s sure to make the point. And since the effects are HD, they all look 
fantastic on a big-screen or projection TV.
CollabraCam
$5.99
http://collabracam.com
CollabraCam lets you collaborate on video projects, shooting video with 
up to four iPads (or other iDevices) and then viewing, recording, or edit-
ing the footage in real time. It even has a built-in communication system 
so the “director” can provide cues such as camera movements or angles to 
each “cameraman.”
Now, here’s one last video tip before we move on: if you shoot video 
with your iPad, make sure you have adequate light. Video shot with your 
iPad camera looks noticeably darker than the same picture shot as a still. 
Remember that light is your friend when you record video with your iPad. 
Experiment with lighting if you can, but more is usually better.
Audio Production and Editing Apps
If you plan to record and run your presentation independently—for exam-
ple, showing it at a kiosk in a trade show or in the lobby of your company’s 
building, using it as a loop to entertain your audience before the actual 
presentation begins, or perhaps distributing it via e-mail or through your 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
131

website—you’ll want to add voice and maybe even music to the visuals. 
The apps here let you create or record audio on your iPad and then edit the 
recordings to accompany your presentation. Once the audio file is created, 
you import it to your presentation file to create one master file.
Remember, some presentation apps have the option to record voice-
over directly with your visuals. The advantage is that you work with 
one file; the disadvantage is that your audio editing options are usually 
limited.
GarageBand
$4.99
http://www.apple.com/apps/garageband/
If you need music for your presentation, GarageBand turns your iPad 
into a reasonably powerful recording studio. It’s also so easy to use that 
almost anyone can create music, even if you know nothing about music. 
It’s packed with professionally recorded loops and Smart Instruments that 
play notes or chords that sound good together no matter where you tap! If 
you need music for a project—from a simple drumbeat to a full orchestra—­
GarageBand makes it hard for you to fail.
TwistedWave  
Audio Editor
$9.99
http://twistedwave.com/ios 
.html
For professional-level voice 
editing options in an easy-
to-use app, TwistedWave 
Audio Editor is worth the 
investment. Choose to work 
in mono or stereo and then 
record your voice, even with 
the iPad’s microphone. After 
recording, the split screen 
Figure 6.13  Use TwistedWave Audio Editor to edit your 
recorded presentation, a voice-over, or an interview.
132
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

shows the normal wave pattern at the top and an expandable wave form 
below so you can cut at exactly the spot you want and edit accordingly 
using the buttons on the toolbar that runs across the bottom of the screen 
(see Figure 6.13). A variety of effects allow you to clean up or alter your 
recording. The dynamics processor and pitch and speed functions give 
you great flexibility in tweaking your recording. We appreciated the mul-
tiple file formats and compression values in which you can save your 
recording, making it easy to share the audio files with many other pre-
sentation apps.
Hokusai Audio Editor
Free; $9.99 Pro Pack; $2.99 each, Tools Pack and FX Pack; $1.99 Fun Pack
http://www.wooji-juice.com/products/hokusai/
Hokusai presents a clean-lined, minimalistic user interface. A tool win-
dow holds the buttons needed for recording or importing tracks. Tap and 
hold to select a portion of the recorded audio. A contextual menu will 
appear so you can work on the selected piece. You can cut, copy, delete, 
trim, or add effects such as fading in or out, or even reverse the audio so 
you can look for hidden messages heard only by you when your audio is 
played backward (just kidding about the secret messages). Adding syn-
thesizers or white noise is as simple as adding a new track. Hokusai lets 
you export as a Wave file, as an MPEG-4 audio file, or as a ringtone with 
various options for audio quality.
Animation Apps
Animation is truly an art of its own that combines drawing capabilities, 
wit, and videographer and director skills. We mention two apps here, but 
we admit that unless you have the time and talent to create your own 
animation, you may be better off buying stock video and animations or 
contracting with someone to create an animation for you. In the Resources 
section at the back of this book, we give you a healthy list of stock houses, 
so you’ll want to check that out. In the meantime, if you want to play 
around with creating video on your iPad, you’re sure to have fun—without 
too much frustration—with either of these apps.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
133

VideoScribe HD
$4.99; $1.99 to remove branding
http://www.sparkol.com/home.php
Want to make one of those watch-it-being-drawn videos that are popular 
for communicating a message or teaching, but you don’t know how to 
draw? Let VideoScribe do it 
for you. As soon as you open 
the app, you can be up and 
running. Tap the plus sign to 
begin a new project and then 
start choosing images that 
relate to your message from 
the vast library that comes 
with VideoScribe. Tap the 
Text button to add text. Tap 
the Music button to choose 
an accompaniment from the 
VideoScribe music library or 
record a voice-over. Tap the 
Playback button to view your work in progress, and when it’s just the way 
you want, tap the Video button (that little filmstrip in the upper right cor-
ner) to create and save your video file. (See Figure 6.14.)
Animation Desk for iPad
Free, lite version, $4.99, full version
http://kdanmobile.com/en/
Animation Desk works like a flip-book: you draw a series of sketches with 
slight changes on each one and tap Play to see the animation. Instead of 
redrawing each page of a paper flip-book, however, with Animation Desk 
you can duplicate a frame and make the necessary changes to move for-
ward, or you can use a virtual onionskin overlay to trace the parts of the 
previous frame that remain the same and only draw in the changes. With 
the Stamp Tool, you can capture a pattern from one frame and paste it in 
subsequent frames. The Stamp Tool also has a resizing tool, so you could 
create an image and then resize it so it appears to shrink or grow during the 
Figure 6.14 
Convey your 
message in a 
fun, entertaining 
way with 
VideoScribe HD.
13
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

animation. Overall, even if you aren’t Walt Disney, Animation Desk for 
iPad helps you create a decent animation that could be a fun and entertain-
ing part of your presentation.
Expert’s Corner Q&A
For the last section of this chapter, we put ourselves in the presenter’s shoes 
and came up with some questions you might have. The first half of the 
questions focuses on practical presentation problems that are somewhat 
likely to happen. The second half looks at up-and-coming technologies that 
you may not have even heard of and gives you some ideas to think about 
for using those technologies in your presentations.
I Want to Write on Top of My Slides While I’m 
Presenting. Is There a Way to Do That?
Yes, we’ve tried it with Doceri, 2Screens, bContext, and Power Presenter. 
Just open an existing Keynote or PowerPoint presentation or PDF file from 
the desired app and use the writing tool.
I Transferred One of My Keynote Presentations to My iPad 
and Got a Message That Several Fonts Were Missing. Can 
I Load Those Fonts onto My iPad, and How Do I Do It?
Although you can’t load fonts into Keynote on your iPad, there are a few 
work-arounds that you can consider:
Design your Keynote presentation directly on your iPad; that way, 
■
■
any font you choose is supported by your iPad.
When designing your Keynote presentation on a computer, use only 
■
■
fonts from the 50 or so that are supported on the iPad.
Use the fonts you want, including custom fonts, but export your 
■
■
Keynote presentation to PDF or image files. You won’t be able to edit 
the deck on your iPad, but your presentation will look like you want 
it to.
Use an app like Inkpad ($7.99). Upload your font families to Dropbox 
■
■
and then link Inkpad to your Dropbox account. Inkpad can access 
the font families in Dropbox, and you can create text. That text can 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
13
5

then be cut and pasted into your Keynote presentation. There’s a great 
explanation about how to do this at the Working iPad website (http://
workingipad.net/tutorial/2012/2/20/install-and-use-typefaces-fonts-
on-your-ipad.html).
Sometimes Images Projected from My iPad Are 
Blurry. Is There a Way to Correct This?
After you confirm that your projector is focused, make sure your presenta-
tion is set to display at 1,024 × 768, which is the iPad resolution. You usually 
find this in the app settings (the button that looks like a gear).
Can I Transfer Images Directly from My Digital Camera 
to My iPad Without Going Through My Computer?
Yes, the iPad Camera Connector Kit comes with a USB adapter, also 
referred to as a dongle, and an SD card reader. Connect the USB adapter 
to your iPad and then connect the USB cable from the USB adapter to your 
digital camera. Open Photos and transfer images by choosing the correct 
option on your camera’s display. If your camera uses an SD card reader, 
pop the SD card out of your camera and into the reader—your images are 
transferred into Photos.
An added plus of the iPad Camera Connector Kit is that the USB 
adapter also works for other USB-enabled peripherals such as keyboards, 
microphones, and headsets.
I Wanted to Use a Song from My Music Library in a 
Presentation, but Nothing Happened When I Tried to 
Import It. What Happened (Or Didn’t Happen)?
You can only import songs from your Music library that are not copy-
righted, which means most commercially recorded and sold music is off 
limits. We give you some ideas for finding stock music in the Resources 
section at the end of the book.
I’d Like to Put a Podcast in My Presentation. How Do I Do That?
The easiest way to do this is via iTunes. Download the podcast on your com-
puter and then convert it to an MP3 file. (See the iTunes Help section if you’re 
13
6	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

not sure how to do this.) The MP3 file can then be added to most presentation 
apps. You could also incorporate a hyperlink to the podcast’s web page.
How Do I Switch Between Apps During a Presentation? 
Do I Have to Build Hyperlinks to the App, or Can I Use 
the Multitask (Open Apps) Bar During Presentations?
This depends on exactly what you want to do. Hyperlinks provide flex-
ibility in your presentation; when a specific question arises, you can jump 
to the part of the presentation—slide, video, or website—that correlates to 
the question. If going to another app is a planned part of your presenta-
tion, make sure that app is open before you begin. You can double-click 
the Home button and then use the Multitask bar to go to the other app, 
and then you can double-click the Home button again to return to your 
presentation app and pick up where you left off.
How Do I Connect with Other iPads or iPhones That My 
Audience Brought or Are Located in Remote Locations?
We talk about this in depth in Chapter 7, but essentially all devices must have 
the same app installed; then your iPad (or a computer if you prefer) acts as 
the server, and the guest iPads or iPhones are clients. Some apps provide just 
viewing privileges; others let your audience interact with your presentation.
Can I Connect a Microphone to My iPad to 
Record My Presentation While Giving It?
Yes, several manufacturers make USB and wireless (Bluetooth) micro-
phones that connect or pair with the iPad so you can record your presenta-
tion. These are great options for recording your presentation while making 
a video or voice-over; however, if you need to record while you’re giving 
your presentation, you have to use one of the following work-arounds:
Digitally split the audio inside the iPad so that one side of the split 
■
■
goes to an Airplay-enabled amplifier and the other is recorded by 
the iPad.
Record on an Airplay-enabled device with a digital recorder.
■
■
Run your presentation on a Mac attached to an amplification device 
■
■
and control the presentation from your iPad.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
13
7

That said, you may get better results by recording your presentation with 
traditional audio and video recording equipment.
How Can I Use a Stylus for My Presentation, 
and What Kinds of Styli Are There?
Because most of us are more adept at using a writing instrument instead of 
our fingers to write and draw, a stylus is a great option if you plan to write on 
your slides during your presentation; or use an app, such as a brainstorming 
or whiteboard app, where you draw or write. Bear in mind, though, that a 
stylus does give you one more item to juggle during a presentation, whereas 
you’re unlikely to drop your finger. You’ll find both cabled styli that plug into 
the audio port and USB styli that plug into a USB adapter connected to your 
iPad’s dock, or there are Bluetooth styli that you pair with your iPad.
We’ve compiled an (almost) exhaustive list of available styli in the 
Resources section. Before you make your purchase, think about how you’ll 
be using the stylus—to write, to sketch, to paint—and choose the tip style 
accordingly: fine line, thick, brush, or even crayon. Personally, we prefer a 
wireless stylus, as it keeps the dock and audio port free for other peripheral 
devices and is one less wire to get tangled up in!
What Other Devices Can an iPad Control?
More than you might imagine. Here’s a brief list of things you can control 
with your iPad:
Projectors (e.g., Epson)
■
■
Quadcopters (e.g., AR2)
■
■
Televisions (e.g., Samsung)
■
■
Audio devices (e.g., Denon)
■
■
Musical Instruments
■
■
Vacuum cleaners
■
■
Thermostats (NEST)
■
■
What Are Some Options for Remote Sound?
With remote sound apps, use your iPad to control the sounds emitted from 
another device, such as an iPhone, iPod, or another iPad. Apps such as 
138
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Sound Ninja or Remote Sound Box come with sounds, whereas Sound 
Remote controls the Music app playing audio installed on another iOS 
device.
If you want to get your audience up and moving, you could install a 
remote sound app on iPhones or iPads hidden around the room and then 
control the noise that comes from them for your audience members to find 
the devices. You can also use them to direct your audience’s attention to a 
certain part of the room.
Can Siri Participate in My Presentation?
With her dry wit and signature voice, we think Siri would be a terrific foil 
to many types of presentations; just make sure you do a test run of your 
requests if you don’t want any inappropriate surprise responses.
How Can I Use Gaming Interfaces or 
Gestures as Part of a Presentation?
Think about using an actual game in your presentation. Games often have 
spectacular animation and visuals that take advantage of the iPad’s ret-
ina display. Colorful and fast-action games can be a compelling intro or 
example. And don’t limit yourself to commercial games like Bad Piggies. 
There are also motivational and team-building games available for the iPad 
platform.
Consider using gaming hardware, such as the Fling (http://tenonede 
sign.com/fling.php), to manipulate your presentation.
Remember, the accelerometer detects your iPad’s movements, and so 
you can creatively turn or rotate images by turning your iPad during a 
presentation.
How Do You Use Gesture Recognition with the iPad?
Gesture recognition lets you control your iPad without touching the screen. 
Without getting too technical, your hand or body motion is detected by the 
iPad’s camera, triggering an action. For example, Wave-o-rama is a photo 
album app that moves from one photo to the next when you wave your 
hand in front of the iPad screen, and FoodSteps offers touch-free navigation 
of recipes so you don’t sully your iPad screen with flour-covered fingers. 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
139

Keep your eyes open for more apps that use gesture recognition—it’s the 
next big thing in device control.
How Do I Use the Accelerometer to Do Creative Things?
The accelerometer detects motion and can be used to rotate images or your 
screen orientation. The best use of the accelerometer that we’ve seen is in 
the presentation that promotes the city of Stockholm, which has gone viral 
on YouTube. Check it out (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=53_qvMQf 
vOE) if you haven’t looked at it, and you’ll see what we mean about Killer 
Presentations. In this presentation, a bottle of wine appears on the iPad, the 
iPad is tilted, and the bottle tilts as if to pour a glass of wine; here, the pre-
senter, who is a street magician, uses some sleight-of-hand moves to actually 
pour wine out of the iPad! Again, this is a custom presentation designed by 
a programmer, but the end result is mind-blowingly memorable.
Aside from Using My iPad to Control My Presentation, What Are 
Some Clever Ways I Can Use It to Connect with My Audience?
If you think of your iPad as a prop, there are lots of ways you can incorpo-
rate it as a visual. Here are just a few ideas to get you started:
Take ventriloquism to a new (and easier) level and use your iPad as a 
■
■
sidekick. You can create an animation or video with one of the apps 
we discussed earlier and then time it so you ask questions and the 
image on your iPad answers.
Use it as a sign or even as a graphic; if you are presenting with another 
■
■
person, you could display a giant arrow on your iPad when you pass 
the mic.
With multiple iPads, construct an image, putting a part of the image 
■
■
on each iPad. Think of an Eiffel Tower displayed across five iPads; you 
could pull the first one to metaphorically talk about the foundation 
(of your business), the second to talk about structure, and so on, to 
the apex of the tower.
Take photos or video of the audience and display the images instantly 
■
■
as part of your presentation.
Use an augmented reality app to bring your audience into your 
■
■
presentation (see the next question).
140	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

What Augmented Reality Applications 
Are Available for the iPad?
Augmented reality apps access your location using the iPad’s GPS, and 
location services show you more information about what’s around you or 
pick up on QR codes in printed advertising. For example, open an app 
like juniao and see information about the office supply store down the 
street; or open Layar and point your iPad to a page in a magazine, and 
the website of the article on the page opens in Safari.
In ViewAR, augmented reality gets most interesting for presenta-
tions. By placing virtual objects in your present setting, we think ViewAR 
would be a fantastic addition to a presentation. (See Figure 6.15.) You can 
use the ViewAR library of 3-D images and impose them on what you 
see through your iPad’s camera, or you can upload a gallery of your own 
images. Imagine your t-shirts or your products have your logo; now imag-
ine turning your iPad toward the audience and projecting a picture of the 
audience wearing the t-shirts or holding your project in their hands.
Figure 6.15 
ViewAR inserts 
virtual 3-D 
objects into your 
surroundings.
	
	
Expert’s Corner
141

How Presentations Are Evolving 
Now and into the Future
We are on the cusp between the present and the future of presentations and 
its incredibly exciting possibilities. On the basis of various trends and pro-
jections of technology that we researched, we can forecast with a degree of 
certainty that the future of presentations 5 to 10 years from now will likely 
involve these amazing innovations:
There will be total interactivity with audiences as opposed to a 
■
■
one-way pitch or speech.
Virtual and augmented reality will be commonplace at work, at home, 
■
■
and at play.
The use of ultrahigh-resolution video and photorealistic 3-D anima-
■
■
tions will increase greatly.
There will be a vast improvement in holograms and projected hologra-
■
■
phy that will result in “almost real” 3-D images.
Full gesture-based recognition will be used to bring up information 
■
■
and control all aspects of the presentation and equipment.
Artificial intelligence will be able to sift through enormous amounts 
■
■
of data to detect, and show trends, relationships, cause-and-effect 
correspondence, projections, and other meaningful implications and 
results drawn from raw data.
Virtual meetings with vastly improved capabilities will significantly 
■
■
reduce in-person meetings and improve communication productivity.
Entire walls will turn into ultrahigh-resolution 
■
■
interactive video 
systems, with glasses-free 3-D to follow.
Video thin film (with wireless capability) will enable presenters to 
■
■
unfurl various sizes of “video posters” as 3-D visuals to use with 
gestures to present information.
Latest Video and Visualization Systems
Most major TV and high-end projection manufacturers are now coming 
out with higher-resolution presentation projectors and televisions. Called 
UHD or 4K (3,840 pixels × 2,160 pixels for a total of 8.3 megapixels), this 
new format has a resolution four times greater than our current HD sys-
142	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

tems. The major benefit of this higher-resolution video occurs when larger 
images are projected or shown on TVs bigger than 70 inches—pixilation is 
dramatically minimized, and the sharpest details can be easily seen. Even 
as this technology is entering the market, 8K UHD, which is 7,680 pixels 
× 4,320 pixels (for a total of 33.2 megapixels) is being developed and is pro-
jected to come onto the scene in a few years.
Gigapixel Panorama Images and Video
Gigapixel panorama images (1 billion-plus pixels) offer outstanding-resolu-
tion digital image bitmaps. A specially made panoramic robot camera takes 
thousands to tens of thousands of photos sequentially to cover a 360-degree 
panorama, if needed. Photos of a building’s interior, for example, can be seen 
from floor to ceiling, front to back, in incredible detail just by scrolling.
A 320-gigapixel photo of London is the world’s largest panorama, com-
prising more than 48,000 individual frames collated into a single panorama 
by a powerful computer system (go to http://www.360cities.net/ to see it and 
other fantastic photos). A software program perfectly aligns and “stitches” 
together the images. These images can be displayed on the Internet and 
viewed within seconds using a special viewer. This technology is being used 
in some presentations for sales and marketing, architecture, tourism, virtual 
tours, and more. For your presentations, you can actually buy panoramic and 
gigapixel stock photos and vector art from companies like Shutterstock (http://
www.shutterstock.com), Stockfree Images (http://ww.stockfreeimages.com), 
and Big Stock Photo (http://www.bigstockphoto.com).
There are companies doing 360-degree panoramic moving videos, the 
latest innovation of this type. A panoramic video enables viewers to actu-
ally “experience” a real location or setting as if they were there. Imagine 
giving a presentation to potential buyers of a luxury resort condominium in 
the Caribbean. You hand out iPads offering interactive tours of the resort’s 
lobby, swimming pools, dining rooms, recreation areas, and beaches, where 
you see real people eating, playing volleyball in the water, sitting at a beau-
tiful lanai bar, and otherwise having a fabulous time.
Because they are panoramic moving videos, the individual participants 
can tilt the iPads and look upward, for example, at the balcony on the sev-
enth floor suite they are interested in buying or tilt the iPad downward to 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
143

see—up close—the beautiful tile designs and lush landscaping surround-
ing the swimming pool and hot tubs. The location-based 360-degree video 
panoramas can include other numerous applications for architecture, city 
planning, geographic mapping, and other “tour-type” experiences right 
from the iPad!
Holograms for That Extra Presentation Impact
Holograms can add a rich, new dimension to your iPad Killer Presentation. 
A hologram is a 3-D image produced by two beams of light by holography. 
One company at the forefront of holographic visualization technology with 
more than 40 patents is Zebra Imaging (http:www.zebraimaging.com). It 
produces some of the most realistic 3-D color images on sheets of plastic up 
to 24 inches by 34 inches (600 mm by 850 mm) that are ideal for architec-
ture, engineering and construction, advertising, retail, and sales.
These are true 3-D holograms that when rotated or tilted display com-
ponents as if they were solid in shape and form. Holograms use regular 
light sources at any angle allowing you to see the hologram without special 
viewing equipment. To create these detailed and accurate images on light-
weight plastic sheets, you download Zebra Imaging’s software and “frame” 
your data (from programs such as Autodesk 3Ds Max, Autodesk Maya, or 
Sketchup) for 3-D holographic printing. Zebra Imaging helps you engage 
clients with rich, realistic 3-D presentations that enhance collaboration. For 
big deals you are trying to close, you can create compelling leave-behinds 
along with your proposals or oral presentations.
3-D Virtual Reality Interactive Walk-Throughs Using Your iPad
There is another visual revolution under way for giving presentations about 
and exploring new commercial properties and industrial facilities—it’s 3-D 
virtual reality. This is a perfect application for an iPad, because it can act as 
a remote control device to take a tour. You can be at home, on a construc-
tion site, in your car—just about anywhere—and view a realistic presenta-
tion that you fully participate and involve yourself in.
As opposed to panoramic video, virtual reality offers immersion into a 
photorealistic, computer-generated environment developed using 3-D ren-
dering software (such as 3ds Max, Maya, Lightwave, SolidWorks, Daz3D, 
144	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

and RealFlow) to create realistic-looking interior and exterior scenes. Some 
of the everyday things that take on extraordinary realism include subtle 
light reflections and shading; detailed textures of wood, marble, leather, 
glass, and fabrics; fully furnished areas; trees, shrubs, grass, and water; and 
people—all of this only adding to the virtual touring experience.
With interactive 3-D virtual walk-throughs comes the ability for iPad 
users to control their own journey (including a “flyover”) around the out-
side and inside of a new home, a resort community, a factory, a refinery, or 
anywhere else using computer gaming technology. These walk-throughs 
are ideal for showing a property or industrial facility’s design, layout, size, 
dimensions, and spatial relationships.
With your iPad, you move forward and backward, look up and down, 
and look right and left to virtually tour and explore a fully realistic, fully 
furnished and decorated home or any other building or even a complex, 
computer-generated environment like a planned amusement park. The 
iPad’s gyroscope and accelerometer provide precise motion-sensing accu-
racy and measurement in the direction you are moving or rotating it in 
space, as well as the speed and angle of the movement.
With its touch-screen features, you can even use your iPad (within this 
virtual environment) to activate interactive (“hot”) areas within the anima-
tion to, say, operate factory controls or open the curtains of a 3-D resort 
home to see the golf course. You can do it from your iPad anywhere or any 
time at your convenience!
When it comes to communicating, 3-D interactive animated walk-
throughs are the next big “high-impact” presentation tool. To see what we 
mean by photorealistic 3-D renderings, animations, and walk-throughs, 
check out iCreate (http://www.icreate3d.com), from a firm based in the 
United Kingdom, that does a variety of 3-D renderings, animations, and 
virtual tours. Download iCreate’s free iPad app “icreate 3d” from the Apple 
App Store and use your iPad to experience the future.
Example of Walking Through a Refinery with Your iPad
Epic Software Group (http://www.epicsoftware.com) in The Woodlands, 
Texas, created a walk-through project for a company that builds large infra-
structures. The company came to Vic Cherubini, the owner of the animation 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
145

and multimedia production firm, to create a virtual reality walk-through 
iPad application for a 3-D drilling rig to be used for safety training pur-
poses. Epic’s 3-D artists and animators created the pieces for a drill rig from 
photos they shot on rig sites. Epic chose the Unity 3D game engine to build 
the simulation because it had attractive features for the iPad. For example, 
when you move around the rig with your iPad, as you get closer to a piece 
of equipment, you can hear the sound of machines get louder, then softer as 
you move away.
Epic Software Group went beyond the iPad walk-through by including 
interactivity throughout the virtual tour. As you move through, around, up, 
and down the animated rig with your iPad, it features interactive elements: 
videos, animations, 3-D graphics, photos, web links, and PDF files about 
technologies for that part of the rig. Epic added a number of rig workers 
whom you can interact with (see Figure 6.16). If you pass by an animated 
worker, he will stop, turn, and begin telling you about his job on the rig.
Far-Out Augmented Reality Can Be an Ah!some Part  
of Your Presentations
Another ideal application powerfully suited for your iPad is augmented 
reality (AR), which is still a relatively unknown development to most peo-
Figure 6.16 
An animated rig 
worker describes 
what he does 
on the oil rig.
146	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

ple and is in its infancy stage. Some futurists are calling it the “new Pow-
erPoint” when it comes to widespread use for presentations. Google Glass 
is leading one of the charges in implementing AR, which enables anyone 
to view a real, physical world combined—“augmented”—with computer-
generated graphics, video, animations, 3-D renderings, and sound that is 
composited over a real view, enhancing what we hear, see, and feel.
AR works by using a particular app for your iPad. When you open that 
app and point your iPad’s camera at a “hot” area that has been “augmented,” 
your iPad combines what the camera sees with a new virtual display from 
the app. Let’s say an architectural magazine has its major advertisements 
prepared as hotspots. If you had an app that read those advertisements, 
your iPad might show a video about that architectural company; or it might 
take a flat drawing of a floor plan on that page and show you a 3-D render-
ing of it or give a virtual tour of the building.
You can move your iPad to see different sides and views of this 3-D 
model of the floor plan. You could be on a subway station or at a bus stop 
and see a billboard that tells you it is AR enabled; if you point your iPad or 
iPhone at it with the appropriate AR app opened, that billboard (which may 
be an advertisement for a new movie) can turn it into a video trailer. IKEA 
jumped into AR with its 2013 catalog app that featured an AR viewer, 
enabling people to look at furniture in 3-D and to see video and other 
digital content for readers.
Changing the Meaning of Presentation “Gestures”
Another emerging technology involves touch-free gesture recognition. 
Machine vision algorithms track your hand gestures and finger-pointing 
from your iPad’s camera and convert them into commands for your iPad. 
Gesture recognition works with other devices and TVs. You can control 
many of your iPad’s functions and applications during presentations using 
this technology. Gesture recognition can track your fingertips to allow you 
virtual mouse functions such as touch-free point and click, tap and drop, 
and wave and grab on your iPad. With a wave of your hand or a lift of your 
finger, you can operate your iPad or laptop!
The Leap Motion Controller (http:www.leapmotion.com) is a small 
piece of hardware selling for less than a hundred bucks that does an 
	
	
Expert’s Corner
147

­impressive job of gesture recognition. Another company to look at is eye-
Sight (http://www.eyesight-tech.com), which is completely software based. 
Gesture recognition is developing rapidly and will continue to become 
more sophisticated in its ability to naturally and effectively manipulate 
all kinds of digital devices, not just the iPad. We recommend you begin 
checking out this technology for selective use in your presentations. Take 
care: if it is used inappropriately, a presenter might come across as a “talking 
mime,” with hands and fingers flailing about in a distracting mode.
148	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Presenting at In-Person and 
Virtual Meetings with Your iPad
I
n this chapter, we show you how to effectively use your iPad—and those 
of your attendees—in meetings. We explain how you can communicate, 
interact, and collaborate with other iPads, iPhones, or smart devices that 
audience members have, whether they are in the room with you or across 
the globe. If you consider that possibility when creating your presentation, 
you can choose apps that let your audience participate from their iPads.
First we talk a bit about facilitating a meeting and engaging your audi-
ence. We also explore a few of the whiteboard apps available, which can 
be projected from your iPad to the big screen and sometimes shared with 
other iPads in the room. We talk next about presenting at in-person meet-
ings, where you and your audience are physically in the same room, and we 
review interactive apps that are suitable for those situations. From there, 
we segue into the increasingly frequent and important virtual situations 
such as webinars and virtual meetings. We give you some statistics about 
webinars and provide tips for creating a presentation that your audience 
watches without you, such as on your website, by opening a file from an 
e-mail or viewing at a kiosk. We discuss the etiquette of virtual meetings 
and present a few of the videoconference apps that are a key component 
for many corporations that have worldwide offices or permit remote and 
work-from-home situations.
Whiteboards: The Backbone of Collaborative Planning
If you teach in a scholastic, corporate, or continuing education setting or 
facilitate meetings, you’ve probably encountered the whiteboard. If your 
C h a p t e r  7
149

experience is anything like ours, the markers are dried out and pale, the 
eraser is missing, and the board itself has a faint shadow of what was writ-
ten on it before. Your iPad as a virtual whiteboard has none of these prob-
lems and has added features that a physical whiteboard can’t provide, such 
as the ability to print the contents or share them via e-mail, a cloud server, 
or a social network.
Whiteboard Apps
Your iPad as a whiteboard lets you facilitate your meeting by writing main 
points and then incorporating comments from others at the meeting. Some 
whiteboard apps have interactive functions that allow iPad users with the 
same app installed to write on the board projected from your iPad. Before 
your meeting begins, keep in mind these tips:
Even in an informal meeting, outline your agenda at the beginning 
■
■
and include how long you think the meeting will take. People like to 
know what to expect and are more likely to pay attention when there’s 
a schedule to follow.
Virtual whiteboards let you incorporate photos, images, diagrams, 
■
■
drawings, and text. Use these items to guide the discussion or com-
municate your message.
Leave time for your participants to speak, either to ask questions or to 
■
■
express a related experience or idea.
BaiBoard
Free
http://www.baiboard.com
Although you need an Internet connection to use it, this is a great white-
board app, and it’s free! In addition to classic whiteboard functions, Bai-
Board provides diagramming stencils, and it offers the possibility to add 
photos from Photos or Camera and to take snapshots of your work in 
progress. A number is assigned when the board is created and your meet-
ing begins. Other meeting participants open BaiBoard on their iPads and 
access the same board by number. Participants working from a computer 
can sign in to the URL assigned to the board. Work singly or in presenta-
tion mode and open a text or voice chat with participants who are in remote 
150	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

locations. Save your board to a cloud server or share via e-mail or social 
networks.
Whiteboard Guru
$4.99
http://www.whiteboardguru.net
Whiteboard Guru is the most 
whiteboardlike of the apps we tried. 
The lines, shapes, and stencils are 
always blue, although you can 
choose a red, blue, black or green 
pen to write or draw. Use the key-
board instead of the pen to write 
something, and text appears in a 
neat handwriting font. The video 
recording feature works smoothly, 
and the audio pickup is good. We 
can see using this to create a short instructional video, which you can then 
edit in Photos. (See Figure 7.1.)
Stickyboard2
$4.99
http://www.qrayon.com/home/
stickyboard2/
If you like to plan or manage your 
projects with sticky notes on white-
boards, you’ll love Stickyboard2. 
(See Figure 7.2.) This app mimics 
its physical counterpart perfectly 
with the added advantages of being 
able to e-mail the board as a PDF or 
text file, zoom out to make a bigger 
board when you run out of space, 
and provide a keyboard to type your 
notes, which is especially helpful if your penmanship is less than perfect.
Figure 7.1 Use Whiteboard Guru to create instructional videos.
Figure 7.2 Create color-coded plans with virtual sticky notes.
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
151

InkFlow
Free; $7.99 for Plus version, which adds a color palette, pencil, eraser and 
brushes, unlimited pages, additional fonts, and other functions.
http://www.qrayon.com/home/inkflow/
InkFlow is a cross between a whiteboard and a notepad. Add text and 
images by drawing, handwriting, or typing text and inserting photos. 
Zooming in and out helps create effects such as bolding handwritten text 
or stretching a sketched design or figure. After your design, list, or brain-
storm is created, you can share it via e-mail, tweet it as a photo, or export 
it as a JPG or PDF file.
Live and Up-Front: In-Person Meetings 
Where Everyone Has an iPad
We talked about situations where you present information one-on-one, in 
small groups, or in a large conference. Often, however, the purpose of a meet-
ing is to discuss something with your audience or to plan something or solve 
a problem with a client, partner, or your staff. Each attendee needs to refer 
to the same information and often contributes documents or, at minimum, 
comments, and your role may shift to that of meeting facilitator rather than 
principal presenter. With each attendee participating on an iPad with a meet-
ing app, the group interaction becomes dynamic and efficient.
The idea of all the people in the meeting seeing your visuals on their 
iPads is enthralling, and your first thought might be “I’ve got their atten-
tion now,” but the opposite may be true. If your participants are bored, 
with iPad in hand what’s to stop them from drifting over to their e-mail 
accounts or, worse yet, putting up a Facebook post or tweeting “Trapped 
in a dark, boring conference room . . .” Your visuals need to be interesting, 
but as with any presentation, you want your audience or participants to 
focus on you and your message. Here are a few general facilitating tips to 
keep them engaged:
Dale Carnegie once said that the key to giving a message is to “tell 
■
■
them what you’re going to say, say it, then tell them what you’ve said.”
Consider the outcome you want from the meeting or training and 
■
■
make sure each visual or point supports that outcome.
152	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Use interactivity to your advantage. Since everyone has access to the 
■
■
presentation, ask frequently for input. While you’re doing the talking, 
ask someone else to take notes. It can be interesting to see if the key 
points someone else picks up are the key points that you wanted 
to convey.
Prepare questions for your participants that can be used throughout 
■
■
your presentation or meeting. One of the best ways to engage people 
is to ask questions, even if you are the one giving information. Ques-
tions about the topic at hand move participants’ focus to the meeting 
instead of to thoughts of whether they put enough money in the 
parking meter. Questions such as “What do you know about worm 
composting?” (or whatever your topic is) give you, as presenter, an 
idea of the participants’ knowledge of the material at hand; if they 
already know the basics, you can skim that part and get into the more 
interesting, advanced, and new-to-them information. Perhaps the 
most important effect that questions can have on participants is 
making them feel considered and affirmed, letting them know their 
presence in your meeting is valued.
Think back to your schooldays when the teacher always seemed to 
■
■
know when you weren’t paying attention and called on you in that 
moment. Develop the skill of looking around the room at each 
person. Make eye contact with each attendee; and if you see a per-
plexed face, ask, “Does this make sense to you, Jim?” or ask a head-
shaker, “What do you think about that, Sara? Do you agree?”
Meeting Apps
With the meeting apps below, you create a meeting and upload any docu-
ments you want to present or discuss at the meeting. Attendees must have 
the attendee version of the app on their iPads. Then when they open the 
app, they log in to the meeting. Some apps require each user to create an 
account, which is usually an e-mail address and password. After the meet-
ing begins, everyone can see, point at, and sometimes write on your pre-
sentation from their devices. Some apps have an, ahem, Android version as 
well, and most offer the possibility to log in to a URL from a browser on a 
computer. Think of a meeting where each participant presents an idea ahead 
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
153

of time. The supporting documents for each idea are uploaded, and during 
the meeting as the individual participants talk about their ideas, they open 
their supporting documents and can circle or highlight key points; then 
they can pass the presenter role to other participants to write on the open 
documents and to present their ideas as well.
Taccto—Interactive Meeting Platform
Free for meetings limited to 15 minutes, one document per participant and 
nine recorded meetings; $49 a year unlimited duration, documents, and 
recordings
http://tacc.to/site/
This is an easy-to-use, nicely 
organized meeting app that 
literally keeps everyone on the 
same page. When the meet-
ing begins, each participant 
logs in via the Taccto app or 
through a web browser using 
the assigned meeting URL—
you have to have an Internet 
connection to use Taccto. The 
organizer begins the meeting 
by opening a document from 
the collateral manager or opening the in-app whiteboard. Participants see 
the same on their iPads, on another device with a web browser, or on a large 
screen connected to the organizer’s iPad. By switching the presenter role 
among participants, everyone can write on the same document or white-
board. Perhaps the most useful elements of Taccto are that it records the 
audio and visual of your meeting and that you can insert a bookmark at 
key moments to quickly return to that interaction or topic. (See Figure 7.3.) 
We see Taccto as a great tool for many types of team efforts.
MightyMeeting
Free for attendees; various price levels for hosting after a free 14-day trial
http://www.mightyhd.com
Figure 7.3 
Taccto lets you 
collaborate 
in real time 
with multiple 
presenters.
154	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

The benefit of MightyMeeting is that it works for both in-person and 
remote participants in your meeting. We tried it during an international 
connection, and it was quick to set up and easy to use. You can also send 
invitations via e-mail from the MightyMeeting app, which provides a URL 
that gives invitees access to your meeting from a web browser. If you use 
MightyMeeting with remote participants, it’s a good idea to simultaneously 
conduct a conference call so you can have a conversation while everyone 
is looking at your presentation. All participants can add documents to 
the meeting from their devices as well as mark up the document being 
displayed. A blank “whiteboard” page is added to the end of each PDF file 
so you can add notes, and you can also open a Sketchbook page to create a 
new document within MightyMeeting.
LilyPad
Free for a limited time; meet-
ing costs start at $0.99
http://www.lilypadapp.com
Tap Set Up a Meeting, and 
the meeting wizard takes you 
through setting up the time 
for the meeting; adding items 
to be used during the meeting 
including PDFs, URL links, 
and polling questions; and 
inviting attendees. You can 
also instantly invite someone 
after the meeting begins or open a document and create a meeting on the 
spot. If you want to share more documents while the meeting is in progress, 
tapping the Agenda list accesses your docs. The best part about LilyPad is 
the way you can interact with your attendees by conducting live polls (see 
Figure 7.4). When the meeting is finished, a follow-up e-mail is automati-
cally sent to anyone who was invited, along with any attachments from the 
pond (the area where LilyPad stores files related to the meeting) and your 
meeting notes, if you wish. Your meetings are stored on the LilyPad server 
so you can review your past meetings anytime.
Figure 7.4 
Use LilyPad’s 
meeting setup 
wizard to create 
a new meeting.
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
155

FeedbackFruits
Free
http://www.feedbackfruits.com/
If you want a way to gather feedback after a presentation or course, take a 
look at FeedbackFruits. Although still in the development stage, this free 
app is one to watch. It was developed for university students, but we think it 
could be a simple way to receive feedback on any course you teach. Down-
load the app, create an account, and add your course. People who attend 
your course download the app, create an account, and enroll, after which 
they can send feedback about your course.
You can also use the apps mentioned in this section in a situation where 
you are the presenter to a captive, noncontributing audience. But interac-
tivity, when it’s available and it works, can be awesome when you want to 
interact with your audience . If you do decide to interact with your audi-
ence, you can also simply use social media. Your audience members send 
Facebook posts or tweets to you, and you access them directly from the 
iPad you’re presenting with. Keep in mind, though, that while this can be 
a spectacular tool, it can also be a train wreck. Think long and hard about 
how it would improve your show before you blithely ask your audience to 
tweet their opinion.
Virtual Meetings:  
Videoconferences, Webinars, and Webcasts
The meeting apps we just described let people sign in remotely, but they 
don’t transmit voice. If you want to have a live interaction with people 
who aren’t in the room with you—a virtual meeting—you want to set up 
a conference call, which could be audio alone, or audio and video, or a 
webinar.
Videoconferences are mostly used for meetings where the objective is 
to have input from and interaction between each of the attendees, such as a 
staff meeting with people in several remote locations or a client and service 
provider meeting. The difference between a videoconference and a video 
call is that in a video call, such as Skype or Apple’s own FaceTime, only 
two people are involved. With a videoconference more than two people in 
different locations are involved, and that’s why you need a service and the 
156	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

associated app that coordinates the incoming “calls” from several different 
locations to one common place.
During a webinar—or web-based seminar—the presenters transmit 
their information, and the attendees watch and listen, asking questions at 
the appointed Q&A times. Some webinars are conducted via a call-in ser-
vice. Many people call a conference-enabled phone number while viewing 
the visuals on a browser. Questions are asked audibly from the telephone. 
Mind Your Ps and Qs—Virtual Meeting Etiquette
Whether you conduct a videoconference, webinar, or webcast, a little etiquette can go a long 
way. The bottom line is respect for the other presenters and attendees, but here are a few dos 
and don’ts you should remember:
Show up on time.
▶
▶
Turn off your phones, both cellular and office. If you’re expecting a call you absolutely can’t 
▶
▶
miss or your young children are home alone, set your phone on vibrate and turn the ringer 
off. If you must respond, mute your audio-video and leave the room. You might want to 
remind other meeting attendees to do the same at the beginning of your meeting.
Turn off instant messaging and audible e-mail alerts on your computer.
▶
▶
Microphones are sensitive, and noises that you don’t notice, such as shuffling papers or 
▶
▶
clearing your throat, will be amplified, and potentially disruptive, to other participants. 
Mute all microphones except that of the speaker.
Remember you’re on camera; behave as you would at an in-person meeting. We wish we 
▶
▶
didn’t have to say this, but we’ve seen the worst: don’t pick your nose, twirl your hair, or 
chew with your mouth open. One frequent webinar presenter we know goes so far as to 
drink from a nontransparent mug so viewers can’t see down her throat when she takes 
a sip.
Stay present. Don’t read e-mail or exchange text messages while you’re in the meeting. 
▶
▶
People will see that you’re doing something else.
If there’s more than one presenter, don’t hog airtime. The purpose of a videoconference is 
▶
▶
usually exchange of ideas and conversation; let each person have her say. Here again, at 
the beginning of the videoconference, you can set some ground rules about time limits 
for speaking.
It goes without saying, don’t interrupt—and for Pete’s sake, don’t yell.
▶
▶
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
157

A webcast is a limited version of a webinar. The presentation or video is 
broadcast live in streaming, but the attendees, who can number in the 
thousands, submit questions via text chat. The telephone isn’t involved. A 
larger number of people may attend, but the interaction with the audience 
is more limited than in a webinar.
Technologically, there’s not a big difference between webinars and vid-
eoconferences, but the objective is different. In both cases you and your 
invited audience members sign in to a website at the pre-established time. 
You may or may not need a specific app to do this, but you do need a service 
provider; many service providers offer both videoconference and webinar 
technology. Webinar service providers often offer analytics about attendees, 
and some offer pre-event and post-event marketing support as well.
Apps for Virtual Meetings
The videoconference and webinar apps for the iPad are free, but the host 
pays to rent the virtual conference room. The services and functions of 
the apps here are very similar. You can share slide presentations, work on 
spreadsheets or reports, design documents, and accomplish many produc-
tive tasks with your remote colleagues in real time. The apps discussed 
here lend themselves to hosting a videoconference or webinar remotely and 
displaying what you want the audience members to see on their screen (PC, 
smartphone, or tablet), with the ability to answer questions posed by the 
audience. If you work in a large corporation, your company may already 
have an account with a meeting and webinar service provider, and so you’ll 
probably want to use that app and service. If not, go to the service provid-
ers’ websites and compare prices and services to determine which one is 
right for you. Most providers offer tiered service, so you can pay for as many 
or as few features as you need. A few offer a free trial period. Think about 
the following when comparing service providers:
How often will you conduct a videoconference or webinar? If you 
■
■
conduct frequent virtual meetings or webinars, consider a flat 
monthly fee; for once-in-a-while events, a per-use fee may be more 
convenient.
Do you want to stream an event (webcast) without audience call-in 
■
■
features?
158	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

How many attendees do you anticipate? Some services limit the 
■
■
number of attendees; others have unlimited attendees.
What kinds of statistics or polling services are included? You 
■
■
probably want to know where your attendees come from and if 
they stayed for the whole event or disconnected midway through, 
and you likely also want to have an interactive Q&A portion and 
maybe even a follow-up survey, which some service providers 
manage.
If you’re planning a webinar, do you need help marketing it? Some 
■
■
service providers offer an online marketing strategy and service.
Do you want a recording of your meeting that can be stored, 
■
■
distributed, or accessed after the meeting?
Do you need a distribution site for your webinar, or will you keep it 
■
■
on your own website?
ClickMeeting
http://www.clickmeeting.com/pricing.html
Web Ex
http://www.webex.com/iphone/
GoToMeeting
http://www.gotomeeting.com/fec/
NetConference
http://www.netconference.com/about/netconference/
e3 Webcasting
http://e3webcasting.com
BrightTalk
http://academy.brighttalk.com
InterCall
http://www.intercall.com
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
159

Remember, you can use these tools in your in-person presentations as 
well. One of the most powerful collaborative features that your iPad offers 
is the ability to bring in a remote guest to participate in a one-to-one vid-
eoconference on the iPad via FaceTime or Skype; or you can have more 
than one remote participant join you in your presentation through one of 
the other videoconferencing apps mentioned here, which allow multiple 
video connections. When you need an expert opinion, it can be ever so 
much more powerful to see and hear that expert speaking to your audi-
ence live.
Webinars as a Marketing Tactic
According to a study from October 2012 conducted by MarketingProfs 
and the Content Marketing Institute, 59 percent of B2B content marketers 
will use webinars, ahead of print magazines (31 percent) and podcasts (27 
percent); the most used tactic is social media (nonblog) at 87 percent. The 
data we found interesting identify which tactics marketers believe are most 
effective. The top three are in-person events (67 percent of those polled 
believe them to be effective), case studies (64 percent), and webinars and 
webcasts (61 percent).1
Any size business can benefit from the interaction and immediacy that 
a webinar can offer; one of the greatest advantages of online marketing of 
any kind is that you can create a big presence even if you’re a one-person 
operation. People sign up for a webinar to learn something, which means a 
webinar is a great venue for sharing information relevant to your field but 
is less effective for introducing your company, so information about your 
company should be subtle and implicit.
Take advantage of the current “give it away for free” marketing trend, 
which translates into the more knowledge you share with your potential 
customers or business partners, the more likely they are to buy something 
1  “B2B Content Marketing: 2013 Benchmarks, Budgets and Trends-North America” was produced by 
MarketingProfs and the Content Marketing Institute and was sponsored by Brightcove. A survey was 
mailed electronically to a sample of B2B marketers from among members and subscribers of Marketing-
Profs and Content Marketing Institute. A total of 1,416 responded, in August 2012, from North American 
companies, representing a full range of industries, functional areas, and company sizes. Read more at 
http://www.marketingprofs.com/charts/2012/9184/2013-b2b-content-marketing-benchmarks-budgets-
and-trends#ixzz2OYTGq7Fo.
160	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

from you. It’s not enough to show your product—in fact, sometimes you 
shouldn’t show it at all—you need to share your expertise, which is inherent 
in your product or service. Your customers and partners need to view your 
business as something that will add value to their business (B2B) or life 
(B2C). Your initial response may be “But I worked hard to invent my secret 
sleuthing formula. I want to be paid for it” or “My competition will steal 
my ideas and sell them as theirs.” You won’t survive as a one-hit wonder; 
give away what you invented yesterday, and you’re more likely to sell what 
you invented today as well as your future inventions.
Webinars or webcasts are Killer ways to give stuff away. Whether you 
provide a service or procedure or sell a physical product, think about infor-
mation and added value that you can provide. For example, let’s say you sell 
mattresses. You offer a webinar on the latest research in polyphasic sleep or 
on dream interpretation. People come to think of you as the sleep expert, 
not just the mattress seller. You begin to build a relationship with potential 
partners and clients, and that’s the way business is done today.
Remember, although we’ve focused our discussion on client or partner 
communication, webinars are an excellent outlet for limited-access press 
conferences, board meetings, or industry-specific events with a smaller, 
discreet audience.
Tips for Creating Killer Webinars
You want to use the same attention and professionalism in planning your 
online events as you would for an in-person presentation. Take these steps 
when planning your webinar:
Create an agenda that incorporates introduction time, periodic Q&A 
■
■
breaks, and closing. Webinars usually run from 60 (informational) to 
90 (tutorial) minutes.
A moderator (this might be you) can help keep everything on track, 
■
■
especially if your speakers are in different locations. Even with only 
one speaker, a moderator can introduce the speaker and screen and 
choose and read questions from the audience to the speaker, leaving 
the speaker to concentrate on the presentation at hand.
Take advantage of any technical support your webinar service pro-
■
■
vider has to offer.
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
161

As with all presentations, rehearse, rehearse, and rehearse again. 
■
■
While you can create a script for practicing, you don’t want to read 
from it the day of the webinar. You need to convey an expertise that 
shows the information is part of your cellular makeup.
Choose a location that’s quiet and free of audible and visual distrac-
■
■
tions (some webinars broadcast in voice-only, conference-call style, 
but for our purposes, we presume you are presenting visually as well). 
If you or your speakers are going to be on screen, make sure the 
lighting is good, probably brighter than you think necessary, and the 
background is neutral. We’ve seen too many webinars with grainy 
talking heads, a problem that could have been improved, if not solved, 
with good lighting.
Avoid clothes with busy patterns, which can create focusing problems 
■
■
for the camera.
Use a quality microphone or headset connected to your computer 
■
■
or iPad.
Sit or stand about an arm’s length from the videocamera lens.
■
■
When referring to your visual support, in a webinar even more so 
■
■
than an in-person presentation, don’t read your bulleted slides. This 
leaves your audience wondering why you bothered with the webinar 
instead of just sending a PDF.
Your visuals should support what you’re saying, whether with a 
■
■
phrase on a clean background or with a graph or diagram. Think 
about using builds where information is added as you talk about it 
and results in a complete image that you can recap at the end. This 
keeps your audience focused on what you’re saying in the moment 
rather than trying to interpret what’s displayed.
Keep in mind that some may be viewing the webinar on the smaller 
■
■
screen of an iPad Mini or even iPhone or other smart device, so your 
visuals should be clearly visible on these types of screens.
Use a sans serif font, such as Arial or Helvetica, in 24 points or 
■
■
larger and use a background that is in high contrast with the text. 
Make sure you have a margin around the visual to allow for 
letterboxing.
Explain the interactive controls to your attendees in the beginning.
■
■
162	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Use on-screen pointers and overlay features to highlight specific parts 
■
■
of your visuals.
We particularly liked these two tips from Ken Molay, president of 
■
■
Webinar Success and author of the white paper “Best Practices for 
Webinars”: Address your audience in the second person you so that 
each listener feels you are speaking directly to him or her, and use 
names when answering attendees’ questions. When talking about dry, 
technical data, add value statements such as “Here’s an interesting 
fact . . .” or “What’s curious about this is . . .”
Presenting in Absentia:  
When Your Presentation Must Speak for Itself
While webinars and videoconferencing are situations where you are present 
to give your presentation to people in remote locations, you may have more 
opportunities to present when you aren’t there—for example, in a video 
embedded in your website, sent in an e-mail, or displayed at a kiosk. The 
visual impact and voice inflection of a recorded presentation are perhaps 
more important for videos than for in-person presentations. Your viewer 
may be making dinner while your presentation is running in the back-
ground, or listening to voice-mail, or drinking a morning cup of joe and 
absentmindedly watching your video online. Your visuals need to be so eye-
catching, your words so stirring, that viewers will stop what they are doing, 
pay attention, and really listen to what you have to say. Be passionate; if 
you’re bored with your presentation, your audience will find you boring. If 
appropriate, add something completely silly and out of place and then tell 
your viewers you wanted to see if they were paying attention.
Apps for Video Presentations
Here are two apps that cater specifically to the needs of this type of 
presentation.
9slid
es
Free; upgrade to gold, $9.99
http://www.9slides.com/ipad
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
163

Given the power of the app, we 
were amazed at how easy 9slides 
is to use. Essentially, 9slides dis-
plays a split screen: on the left 
is the video of the presenter; on 
the right are the visuals (see Fig-
ure 7.5). The visuals move ahead 
in conjunction with the recorded 
presentation. Once your pre-
sentation is on the 9slides site, 
e-mail the link to people you 
want to view your presentation 
or add the URL link to your 
website. You could also house your iPad at a kiosk and open only your 
presentation or a series of your presentations, which people can watch as 
they wish. 9slides is also a great way to distribute your presentation after 
you give it.
Download the free version if only to access the public 9slides presenta-
tions, including Guy Kawasaki’s commencement speech, “10 Hindsights,” 
given to the Menlo College class of 2012. The visuals are fantastic—this is 
a Killer Presentation!
Penxy
Free
http://penxy.com
Penxy lets you record and/or 
broadcast your PowerPoint or 
PDF files and accompanying 
audio, so it’s an app that works 
for live and recorded presenta-
tion (see Figure 7.6). You then 
Figure 7.5 
 9Slides 
combines video 
and visuals for 
online viewing.
Figure 7.6 Penxy offers live 
broadcast of your presentations.
164	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

create an event and upload content to that event. You can broadcast the 
presentation and audio live while recording simultaneously, or you can 
record only. The user interface is stylish and easy to understand. If you 
plan to broadcast live, you obtain a link to your broadcast and share it. 
Broadcasts can be viewed in any browser or accessed from Penxy.com. 
One of the features we like is the immediacy created with your audience 
with broadcast presentations: field questions from the audience during live 
broadcasts and poll your audience with a multiple-choice question and see 
the results live.
The hardest thing about recorded presentations is not seeing your audience’s 
reaction. If you post a video on one of the social networks or your website, 
you can obtain analytics to see who watched your presentation, when, and 
from where, but analytics can’t measure the reaction of the viewer, which 
is important to know. Engage your viewers by giving them a call to action. 
Marketing guru Marie Forleo produces a weekly vlog to share her knowl-
edge and drive business to her seminars and coaching business (http://
www.marieforleo.com). Each one ends with a specific call to action, which 
may be as simple as answering a question related to the content or a more 
involved prodding to do something and then write about the results. Each 
week, there’s a string of comments on her website following the vlog. She’s 
created a community.
In the end, regardless of the technology you use, your presentation 
should create a connection between you and the viewer. Go for an emotional 
pull, and your chances of creating that connection increase considerably.
	
	
Presenting at In-Person and Virtual Meetings
165

This page intentionally left blank 

How to “Prop Up”  
and “Model” Your Presentation
Y
ou can really spark up your presentation or speech by using props to 
slam your points home and wake up and grab the attention of your 
group. They can add variety, drama, interest, and entertainment to your 
talk so your group will vividly remember your key messages or informa-
tion. Some special props can also activate an emotional effect upon your 
audience. Props are one of the most underutilized tools and yet one of the 
best ways to put more punch in your presentations while setting you apart 
from other speakers.
Here’s a rather over-the-top example of “prop-agating” interest in one’s 
event right from the start. About 700 people from start-up technology 
companies are gathered in a major conference in a hotel ballroom in Aus-
tin, Texas, waiting to hear a well-known expert and showman speak on 
“disruptive innovation.” The elevated stage is decorated with some awesome 
visuals and cool-looking props. On the projection screen a clock with a sec-
ond hand ticks down the time from 30 seconds, getting louder as it reaches 
10 seconds to showtime. The lights dim.
A recorded voice simply announces the “disruptor’s” name. A spotlight 
shines on the back of the room. A man dressed in Western clothes and 
cowboy boots pedals a tricycle furiously up the aisle toward the stage. He 
jumps up onto the stage and shouts, “I’m tired of riding this silly old, slow 
thing.” He disappears behind a curtain and flies back out, riding a Segway 
scooter and doing figure eights on the stage as the audience erupts with 
laughter, surprise, and applause.
C h a p t e r  8
167

Twin iPad minis in “holsters” are attached to his cowboy belt. He walks 
up to stage center, pauses, looks around the room, and begins, “You guessed 
it. I’m a maverick and a technology Wild West cowboy. If you want to rev 
up your company, I’ll show you how to get off your trike and onto a new 
platform that will move you ahead at warp speed.” That was a fictional-
ized example of an unexpected, creatively theatrical opening presentation 
scenario that applied a series of props along with a costume!
Props Can Impart an Urgent Tone to Your Talk
Let’s say a vice president of strategic product development for a manufac-
turer of construction equipment is giving a presentation with a serious 
undertone. He decides to take a calculated (big) risk that he feels is war-
ranted. A leading consulting firm has almost convinced his top manage-
ment to go a certain route in developing different vehicles—a course that 
he strongly opposes. Shortly into his presentation, he pulls out an inter-
esting and shocking prop—a realistic-looking, backward-firing pistol (see 
Figure 8.1). He holds the gun in his hand in such a way that, if fired, he 
would shoot himself in the head.
He tells his group of high-level engineering, manufacturing, and mar-
keting executives, “I so strongly oppose the new product direction we are 
being advised to take, I’m willing to go to the extreme of using this prop 
to make an urgent point: in less than six months, we will be shooting our-
selves for doing it. The pain and damage will be irreparable.” With that, 
he uses his iPad to bring up a visual animation of the reverse-firing gun 
shooting with a loud crack as flame 
and smoke erupt from the barrel. A 
bullet from the gun whizzes toward a 
three-dimensional word PROFIT that 
appears to be made of solid glass. It 
impacts the animated graphic, shat-
tering PROFIT to pieces as another 
audio file interjects the shrill sounds 
of glass breaking.
He tells the group, “I will explain 
and justify why we should not take this 
Figure 8.1 
Real-looking 
reverse-firing 
pistol
168	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

deadly course of action. I will give you a new product strategy that will save 
us from harm in the years ahead.” This dramatic, theatrical use of a prop 
to emotionally and visually emphasize his contrarian message helps him 
ultimately reverse the group’s decision. In this fictionalized example, what 
made the “performance” even more impactful was how the presenter used 
some simple acting techniques to creatively handle the gun as if it were real 
and dangerous and loaded!
Mike Rayburn (http://www.mikerayburn.com) is an award-winning 
motivational speaker, entertainer, and guitar virtuoso. He uses his guitar as 
a prop in his inspiring talks. He masterfully plays the guitar unlike anyone 
you have ever seen, playing just with one hand (you have to see this!) and 
then playing with the other only on the neck of the guitar, but not by pick-
ing the strings! He uses his radically unique, superb style to illustrate that 
we can and should consider doing things differently. You may later forget 
his name, but not his artistic, entertaining, and humorous performance, 
totally driven by his guitar as a prop for his insightful messages.
What really is a prop? The term prop is a shortened version of the the-
atrical term property, used to describe any typical stationary, portable, or 
handheld object (e.g., telephone, remote control, chair, umbrella, window) 
used by an actor in a performance. The same concept of props applies to a 
presenter or public speaker.
Getting Suited Up to Express and Impress
An outfit, costume, uniform, or disguise is also considered a prop of sorts. 
Something as basic as a themed hat, even if used briefly, can add some vari-
ety to a presentation. Ray Anthony’s company built a custom construction 
helmet (see Figures 8.2 and 8.3) that is worn by one of his clients (a business 
development professional) when the client talks about how innovative his 
company is.
Another example: In a video about organizational change management, 
Lori, a corporate trainer, talks about “policing” the plan to change one’s 
culture and organizational structure. Dressed as a New York City police 
officer, she uses directional sign props to make her points about following 
the right directions (see Figure 8.4). Later she moves to sit in a director’s 
chair (also a good prop) with some additional prop items around her, rather 
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
169

Figure 8.3 Custom-made 
bracket to hold 
lightbulb on helmet
Figure 8.4  
Police outfit (costume) with props has an added effect.
Figure 8.5  
This shows that props are great for use in videos.
Figure 8.2 
Construction 
helmet 
with rubber 
novelty 
lightbulb
170	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

than just standing up and talking to the camera for her 
other video presentations (see Figure 8.5).
And still one example more: Christie, a trainer 
and consultant, conducts “experiential training” 
where she and her team teach people about navigat-
ing organizational change and innovation by hav-
ing them play a competitive game. She first gives a 
one-hour presentation on the basics of “navigating” 
change. Then participants drive a remote con-
trol truck through an obstacle course 
filled with dinosaurs, robots, roadblocks, 
brick walls, and bridges. To make the ses-
sion even more realistic, thematic, and 
fun, Christie and others get dressed up in 
racing suits for her presentation and the 
game (see Figure 8.6).
Tips on Selecting and Using 
the Right Props
When deciding upon meaningful props to help illustrate your topic, use 
them—but don’t abuse them by having too many that clutter your talk. 
In conservative organizational cultures, acceptable props can be product 
prototypes, scale models of buildings, miniature die-cast models, or 3-D 
printed objects, all designed to give a more accurate and deeper perspec-
tive on the information being conveyed. Motivational and professional 
speakers generally have greater leeway than other presenters in using a 
wider variety of props in a more animated, fun, and theatrical way. When 
it comes to effectively selecting and generally using props for business, 
sales, and technical presentations or speeches, consider the following 
seven guidelines:
	 1.	Ask yourself where and when in your presentation a prop would add 
real value and interest to your talk and how you can smoothly inte-
grate it into the flow of your talk. Don’t use a potentially distracting 
prop that doesn’t contribute to the presentation.
Figure 8.6 
Another example 
of wearing an 
outfit to add 
spice to a training 
presentation
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
171

	2.	Think through how you would best use that prop. While the prop 
will get the audience’s attention, it’s up to you to create that connection 
between the prop and your important point.
	 3.	Determine if your props will likely strengthen your credibility and 
assist in reaching your goals with that particular audience or if they 
could possibly diminish your professionalism and endanger your 
desired outcomes. If used improperly, props can be seen as being 
gimmicky or amateurish or somehow trivializing a point.
	4.	 Don’t use the same props others might be employing. Be imaginative 
in your selection.
	 5.	Make sure your props are large enough to be seen and are easily visible 
to all in your audience.
	6.	If operating a prop, explain what you are doing step-by-step, if 
necessary. Practice with it, especially if it requires skill. If your use of 
the prop fails unexpectedly, have a backup plan to recover or a self-
deprecating joke to make so you can easily move on. As a general rule, 
keep your prop hidden until you’re ready to use it.
	 7.	If you want people in the audience to be part of showing or operating 
the prop, ask them beforehand and instruct them on what you want 
them to do. They need to know what you’re going to talk about, how 
you want them to act and react, where you want them to be when you 
are presenting, when you want them to come on, and when they 
should leave the area.
More Ways Presenters Effectively 
Use a Variety of Props
Here are some creative examples to demonstrate how various props can be 
used for effect:
1. A consultant who was talking about creating a clear, enticing vision for 
organizations bought an inexpensive pair of eyeglasses. During his presen-
tation, he “accidentally” knocked them off his face and stepped on them as 
he was looking for them. “If I can’t see where I’m supposed to go, I won’t get 
there,” he said, effectively reinforcing his message on the value of creating 
a crystal-clear corporate vision.
172	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

2. An author of creativity books who was giving a talk on that topic to 
an association pulled out a replica of the human brain made of a flexible 
substance. He then took a very large set of pliers. When he tightened the 
pliers around the model with both hands, you could see the replica brain 
(“painfully”) being squeezed. He wanted to emphasize that we do this to 
our creativity by censoring our ideas “tightly.”
3. An accomplished amateur magician and professional speaker to corpora-
tions was talking about his topic, “Using the Full Magic of Technology in 
Your Job.” While he was using his iPad to show photos, illustrations, and 
video to support his topic, he was also doing magic tricks from his iPad 
such as pulling objects (e.g., round balls, paper documents, photos, and 
toys) seemingly right out of the screen.
4. A sales professional selling commercial-duty drills to prospective buy-
ers at a free seminar asked for a volunteer in the audience. She handed the 
person two seemingly identical black rubber balls (which she bought online 
from a novelty gift site) and asked the volunteer to carefully inspect each 
one. After the volunteer said that he found them identical in every respect, 
she then asked him to drop one ball on the table in front of the group. He 
did, and it bounced about two feet. She then told him to drop the other 
“identical” ball. He did it, but this ball fell totally flat with a quiet thud, 
without bouncing. She explained how commercial-duty drills may look 
alike, but it’s what’s on the inside—like the two balls—that determines 
how they perform. Bringing home the message, she said, “Our brushless 
motors inside give our models 40 percent more torque and 65 percent more 
durability than any other brand. They will never fall flat while operating.”
5. A financial advisor was giving a presentation about her firm’s investment 
products to a group of about 80 potential clients. She was using her iPad and 
her iPresent app to show video testimonials, animated charts, and graphs 
of investment returns and other captivating visuals that spelled out smart 
strategies to get high returns on one’s money. One of the props she gave out 
to each person in attendance was a bunch of real-looking $1 million bills. 
At a point in her talk, she asked the attendees, “Who thinks they are good 
at grabbing money?” Three eager people raised their hands. “Come up here 
and bring your millions with you. I need you as volunteers.” With that she 
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
173

took one of their bills and asked the first person 
to try to grab the bill as she dropped it from her 
fingers (see Figure 8.7). It went right past the vol-
unteer’s fingers. She did this three times with each 
person, and only once did one of the volunteers 
even come close to snatching it as it fell.
She made her point, saying, “It often looks 
easy to keep from losing money, but unless you 
know how to grab it and keep it and build your 
fortunes, millions can be lost by all of us.” Go 
ahead and try this exercise to make your own dif-
ferent points, especially in sales situations. You 
will be amazed how difficult it is to grab a piece 
of currency!
6. An expert in organizational problem solving was talking to an audi-
ence of professionals responsible for corporate change management and 
mergers at a large association convention. His focus was on how to pre-
vent damaging organizational “fires” from occurring and also how to stop 
them once started. On stage were three 60-inch TVs displaying visuals 
from his iPad, in addition to the large projection screen. He discussed the 
major types of fires that most organizations cause themselves.
On one of the TVs, he showed a video of a raging inferno. Behind 
his podium, he grabbed a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher and aimed it 
toward the TV. With a theatrical flair, he let loose a cloud of white gas, 
and out went the fire on the screen. He did this with the other types 
of company fires on the other two TVs. That prop and how he used it 
made a memorable impression on his group. As a gift to each person 
attending, he gave out a miniature red fire extinguisher with his name 
and contact information to garner more business as a result of his “hot” 
performance.
7. A friend of ours, Peter H., is a successful consultant, trainer, and dynamic 
speaker on creativity topics. With some of his speeches, he talks about the 
need to “shout out loud” to management when it starts neglecting critical 
innovation that jeopardizes the company. He will pick up a megaphone 
Figure 8.7 
A simple bill used 
creatively makes 
for a memorable 
activity.
174	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

and “shout” (not too loud, though) for about 20 seconds 
to make his point (see Figure 8.8). His branding on his 
business card is a laminated, die-cut-shaped megaphone.
Impressive Architectural Models 
for Your Presentation
While the magical iPad will do wonders in creating your 
Killer Presentation, there are other tools that are better 
suited for your intended purposes and can wonderfully 
complement your iPad-based presentation or sales pitch. 
Architects know that nothing beats an actual physical 
model when selling a project or making an important 
presentation. The higher the quality of the model, the 
more impact the message will have. These impressive 
models are used for making sales, evaluating a design, 
and doing planning and development work. They also 
make wonderful permanent displays.
Myles Burke (http://mylesburke.com) is a producer of 
premium-quality architectural models. In an interview 
with David Myles, one of the firm’s founders, he told Ray 
Anthony that detailed models are critical for giving a 
Killer Presentation. Real estate developers, he noted, put 
a great deal of effort and money into a project. Along with 
graphically rich poster boards of suite layouts, renderings, and material 
boards, they will often use a highly detailed scale model as their primary 
display tool for ratcheting up sales.
“Renderings can be visually attractive, but are limited to two-dimen-
sional media. They can’t begin to convey the full story, while a model com-
municates three-dimensional space and objects. At a glance, a viewer can 
visualize length, width and depth, perspective, context, and relationships 
of design and structure,” says Myles. Just look at Figures 8.9 to 8.14, which 
show stunning architectural designs produced by the skilled model makers 
of Myles Burke, to appreciate the presentation power of true-scaled, realis-
tic depictions of the real thing.
Figure 8.8  
This presenter 
used a 
megaphone 
to emphasize 
his key point.
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
175

Myles said, “Our intent is to accurately and compellingly portray the 
project in its entirety—this is how many stories the building is . . . this part 
is red brick, this part is green tinted glass . . . this is its relationship to the 
street. We put a great deal of effort into making the model ‘believable,’ 
so that when the viewer looks at it, little is left to their imagination as to 
what it would be like to live or work there. For example, you can make a 
model out of brown cardboard and say it still resembles the real building, 
but when you have textured brick, and layered facades that cast shadows 
on themselves, these important visual cues supply the viewer with an abun-
dance of information as to understand the project completely.”
When it comes to presentations, the more visually interesting and fas-
cinating something is, the longer a viewer observes, studies, and perhaps 
marvels at it. Myles sums it up: “This is the reason why a scale model is 
usually found to be the visual centerpiece of an important presentation. 
Scale models present themselves.”
Figure 8.9 Models can be huge!  
(Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.10 Accurate and detailed 
building materials show realism. 
(Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
176	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Figure 8.13  Incredible detail shows sizes, dimensions, 
and relationships. (Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.14 Lighting adds important 
perspective. (Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.11  This model shows the layout and 
scope of a project. (Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.12  Models make for impressive displays.  
(Copyright Myles Burke. Used with permission.)
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
177

Oversized Props for “Big” Effect
We occasionally use big props on stage (or in the front or side of the room) 
either as decoration or for our use in certain parts of the presentations. 
They are effective for larger audiences where a smaller prop would have 
less visual impact. These oversized items are also great for use in videos, in 
photographs, at trade shows, and in training workshops. Go to http://www 
.greatbigstuff.com to see some interesting everyday items that are “bigger 
than life.” Below are just a few examples of big and really big from that 
company:
Baseball bat and ball	
■
■
■  Six-foot wooden ruler
Computer keys	
■
■
■  Calculator
Can opener	
■
■
■  Chess set
Candy bars	
■
■
■  Monopoly pieces
Pink eraser
■
■
Ray Anthony uses large Scrabblelike letters (see Figure 8.15) 
that he builds in various combinations, mostly as background 
display for his videos and also as a static display on stage for 
keynote speeches. You can also buy these from the Great Big 
Stuff website and even make complicated arrangements of the 
wooden letters by attaching them to wooden strips on the back 
with screws and glue. One favorite prop that audiences like is the 
giant lighter (see Figure 8.16), which actually gives off a big flame 
when you put lighter fluid in it.
Figure 8.15 Use giant letters 
for your key messages.
Figure 8.16 This lighter serves as a multiuse 
prop for presentations, videos, and photos.
178	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

One big prop that people who teach 
creativity techniques, or talk about prod-
uct designs, or focus on anything related to 
ideas, use is the giant plastic lightbulb (see 
Figure 8.17) that has an optional electric light 
inside to illuminate it. A popular professional 
speaker who talks about brainpower and 
ideas uses the large lightbulb to take photos 
with attendees holding a copy of his book. 
He then puts the pictures on his website for 
people to download them. Another presenter 
(see Figure 8.18) uses an arrow made of plas-
tic that he employs selectively—maybe only 
two times during a speech or presentation—
to emphasize (especially in a humorous fash-
ion) key points or parts of an illustration, 
map, or diagram. Other examples of these 
impressive oversized items are shown in Fig-
ures 8.19 and 8.20.
Figure 8.17 A popular big prop for many uses
Figure 8.18  You can use props 
like this to emphasize.
Figure 8.20 An example of a prop 
used for a fun training video
Figure 8.19  Props can be visual metaphors.
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
179

Models of All Kinds
Presenters use various types of models as static display props (e.g., set 
out on a table close to them) or ones they pick up and handle. Some are 
detailed die-cast models of trucks, construction equipment, cranes, fire 
trucks, or farm tractors with which they illustrate their points. There is a 
large collection of impressive (including museum-quality) die-cast models 
for those presenters in the construction and building industries. However, 
most detailed die-cast models are only one-sixteenth scale at their largest. 
They are useful primarily with small groups who can easily see them. But 
they are fine for display in meeting and presentation rooms. TWH Col-
lectibles (http://www.twhcollectibles.com) and 3000 Toys (http://www 
.3000toys.com) are great sources of intricate, high-quality die-cast models.
Fun-type models that we have seen some presenters use in illustrating 
their topics are attractive, laser-cut cardboard pieces of famous buildings 
and landmarks (see Figures 8.21 to 8.23). Amazon sells these buildings, 
Figure 8.21  A large variety of skyscrapers are available.
Figure 8.22  These paper models can 
be very impressively detailed.
18
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

called 3-D puzzles and made by compa-
nies such as Daron. You can find famous 
bridges, cathedrals, memorial buildings, 
palaces, skyscrapers, towers, and other 
landmarks from around the world. Most 
only cost between $6 and $15 each, and you 
can assemble these rather impressive-looking mod-
els in 30 to 60 minutes or less. Depending upon your 
presentation topics, you might find myriad uses for them as talk-
ing points in your presentations and training courses or as props in your 
videos or photos.
Even more compelling are highly detailed plastic model kits that are 
typically used in big G-gauge train layouts. We have seen some present-
ers use these as displays (includ-
ing making detailed dioramas) in 
their meeting rooms or use them 
as props when talking about top-
ics related to them. For example, 
one manager in the energy indus-
try shows a model of a refinery 
(that his team built) to discuss 
the operation of today’s complex 
industrial processes (see Figure 
8.24). A human resources spe-
cialist who gives presentations to 
new hires shows a large, old-time 
detailed model of her company’s brewery to illustrate the company’s rich 
history (see Figure 8.25). And a college instructor of agricultural topics 
might show a model of a grain building to add some realism and fla-
vor to her talk (see Figure 8.26). Piko is a company that sells numerous 
model kits you can use as not only props in your presentation, but as 
Figure 8.24 
This model would 
be impressive 
as a display 
in a presen-
tation room.
Figure 8.23  Models like this cathedral are 
great for travel or architectural presentations.
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
181

attractive static displays in your meetings, trade shows, or training events. 
Check out http://www.piko-america.com/Model-Buildings.html for more 
information.
3-D Printing for Prototypes, Conceptual 
“Products,” and Props in Your Presentation
Imagine a future in which a device connected to a computer can “print” 
a solid, complex object made of different materials, colors, finishes, and 
textures just like the real thing—even an operating product with precision 
gears, slides, levers, wheels, and many other detailed movable parts. Well, 
3-D printing is at the stage where it can do that right now. Cathy Lewis, 
chief marketing officer for 3D Systems Corporation (http://www.3dsystems 
.com), one of the world’s largest manufacturers of powerful 3-D printers, 
told Ray Anthony in an interview that product developers, engineers, inven-
tors, medical professionals, manufacturers, marketers, and salespeople who 
need to precisely communicate their ideas by showing realistic concepts 
and prototypes need to learn more about 3-D printing and how to use it for 
impressive effect in their Killer Presentations.
It is easy to understand why 3-D printing—by which a digital file from 
design software such as AutoCad, Autodesk 123D, Cubify Invent, SketchUp, 
Figure 8.26 This grain building 
model has a lot of visual impact.
Figure 8.25 You can turn models 
into presentation dioramas.
182
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

or Solidworks is translated into a physical object by a 3-D printer—is con-
sidered an “additive” form of fabrication or manufacturing. The piece is 
made by building up multiple layers of material. The printing head moves 
back and forth over a flat surface and builds an object, using hundreds or 
thousands of layers.
Because a wide variety of materials can be used, high-resolution 3-D 
printing has altered the product development landscape forever. If you are 
a sunglass manufacturer, for example, and you want to show major buyers 
new, impressive designs as part of your sales presentation, rather than show 
them three-dimensional renderings or animations, use a 3-D printer to cre-
ate several samples of the real thing within a day or two. Your buyers can 
see your product, feel the material, explore the designs up close, and even 
try on the glasses for fit and feel. That may be compelling enough to land 
the deal right then and there.
You can print your product prototype today and place it in the hands of 
a customer focus group or your company’s internal evaluation team tomor-
row as part of your presentation of new product plans. When people can 
touch, hold, try out, or operate these realistic prototypes at presentations, 
you have opened up a new dimension that far exceeds the best visuals 
one could show. Cathy Lewis says, “3D printers can create almost any-
thing from smartphone and tablet accessories to finished jewelry and toys, 
from custom hearing aids, individualized prosthetics, and Invisalign clear 
orthodontics to functional airplane, UAV, and car parts. In the twenty-
seven years of 3D printing, perhaps ten million people have actually used 
this technology to advance their products, companies, and careers. Now 
hundreds of millions will be able to take advantage of this marvelous capa-
bility.” Smart companies are therefore using sophisticated 3-D printers to 
show “real” products as part of their Killer Presentations.
Companies recognize that being first to market is critical in the battle 
for revenue. You can greatly compress your design cycles by printing mul-
tiple (each slightly different) prototypes on demand and identifying design 
errors and inadequacies much earlier. Engineers and designers in all sorts 
of industries—automotive, defense, tools, electronics, aerospace, consumer 
goods, sporting equipment, and others—have the intention, during their 
working presentations and brainstorming sessions, to fine-tune their new 
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
183

product designs with the feedback from their group. So having a quickly 
available, accurate prototype to examine, test, and refine can be invaluable 
in making decisions on how to best proceed.
Amazing Results with This Powerful Technology
Look at Figures 8.27 to 8.31 from 3D Systems to see the impressive func-
tionality and capabilities of today’s leading 3-D industrial machines. Many 
commercial models can use multiple materials at once, creating some intri-
cate models with complex geometries that offer a variety of colors, textures, 
and attributes. Machines from 3D Systems can even print text labels, logos, 
design comments, or images directly onto the models being printed!
Industrial-quality machines such as 
those from 3D Systems and Mcor Corpo-
ration can offer several hundred thousand 
to over a million colors with a high reso-
lution. Intricate designs for architecture, 
action figures, and character models are 
rising in popularity with this capability. 
Another leading manufacturer of impres-
sive commercial-duty 3-D printers is 
Figure 8.27 You can print an entire assembly 
like this. (Copyright 3D Systems. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.28  An example of an accurate prototype 
design. (Copyright 3D Systems. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.29  Architects are using printers for small 
buildings and parts. (Copyright 3D Systems. Used with permission.)
18
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Stratasys (http://www.stratasys.com), which offers a wide variety of printers 
from small desktop models to its largest Production Series models. Visit the 
Stratasys website to find out more about applications and case studies that 
can ultimately support your Killer Presentations with prototypes, models, 
and props.
Whenever people attending a presentation can see ways to better evalu-
ate for themselves the form, fit, and function of real objects or product or 
engineering prototypes, it is the most convincing and compelling way to 
have them understand what you are communicating. If your business and 
job would benefit by it, learn more about how 3-D printing will add more 
Killer to your presentations.
Prop(el) Your Presentation Far Ahead of Others
While your iPad is the main engine powering your Killer Presentation, 
don’t forget to consider using some interesting and compelling props, mod-
els, prototypes, and displays in your presentations and speeches. They will 
help you better communicate your ideas and messages and add that extra 
important “flavor” to your talks.
Figure 8.30 Looks exactly like the real 
thing! (Copyright 3D Systems. Used with permission.)
Figure 8.31  Printed prototypes showing a variety 
of true colors. (Copyright 3D Systems. Used with permission.)
	
	
How to “Prop Up” and “Model” Your Presentation
18
5

This page intentionally left blank 

Riveting Openings 
and Killer Conclusions
T
he introduction and conclusion are the most important parts of a Killer 
Presentation. People are affected more emotionally, intellectually, and 
behaviorally by the very first and last things they see, hear, smell, touch, 
taste, sense, or experience than they are by almost anything encountered 
in between. It pays to spend extra time preparing, rehearsing, and fine-
tuning your presentation’s introduction and conclusion. Throughout the 
following pages, you will discover great tips, techniques, observations, and 
even valuable scripted examples on starting and ending your presentation 
with a bang. Or in the words of old-time movie mogul Samuel Goldwyn, 
a movie (like a presentation) should start with an earthquake and build to 
a climax.
Grab ’Em from the Start:  
Crafting Your Riveting Opening
Why a riveting opening? You only get one chance to make a favorable, 
all-important first impression. It’s the reason you need to make a splash 
with your audience right from the start of your presentation. In an April 
2012 Harvard Business Review article titled “Use Your 118 Seconds Wisely,” 
the author noted that the average elevator ride in New York City takes 118 
seconds. He says this is the ideal timing of an effective “elevator pitch,” 
with the first 8 seconds the key to grabbing the attention of the listener. 
The same applies to a more lengthy presentation, only you have a slightly 
longer “grace period.”
C h a p t e r  9
18
7

The introduction is a like a delicious appetizer—setting anticipation for 
the delightful entrée (the main body and substance of your presentation) 
next on the menu. It should be like the exciting blast-off of a rocket ship 
or the takeoff of a jet. It should give the audience an exciting and enticing 
snapshot of what will follow. It sets the tone, quality, intent, and perhaps 
the urgency of the presentation. It communicates so much so quickly about 
your credibility, image, and speaking style. Done well, it says you are pre-
pared, poised, and confident. If your first two or three minutes of speaking 
come across as lifeless, rambling, or anxious, the audience will tune out in 
a heartbeat. But if the opening remarks and your engaging style evoke the 
curiosity of the people in your audience, spark their imaginations, stir their 
emotions, and captivate them, the audience will be motivated to concen-
trate on your entire presentation. Blow the introduction, and you will have 
a mighty tough job trying to recover the audience.
Before we dig into what makes an opening a riveting “Killer,” let’s look 
at a few examples:
Imagine sitting in an audience of hundreds waiting for a renowned moti-
vational speaker to present “Let’s S-O-A-R to New Heights.” At the back of 
the room is a larger-than-life cardboard cutout of a man and woman with 
wings, flying together among the clouds. On either side of the room are free-
standing seven-foot-tall signs. One says, “Your Attitude Determines Your 
Altitude,” and the second reads, “Why Walk or Run When You Can Fly?”
The lights dim, and the energetic theme music swells to a crescendo, but 
instead of a traditional introduction, the projection screen plays a stunning 
video of eagles flying: soaring and diving in spectacular displays of aerial 
mastery. Then the screen fades to black, the stage lights come on, and the 
presenter is standing center stage, smiling at the crowd with an iPad in his 
hand.
“Let’s soar!” he says. As he taps his iPad screen, the spotlight picks up a 
remote control hovercraft rising on the right side of the stage. Easily con-
trolling the craft with his iPad, he flies it down the aisle to the cutout in 
the back of the room. All eyes are on the drone as it hovers over the flying 
man and woman. He continues, “Today I’m going to show each of you 
how to lift your wings and fly high in your career and life.” Still controlling 
the nearly silent remote drone with his iPad, he sends it across the room 
188
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

above the heads of the captivated audience, coming to a stop and hovering 
over one of the freestanding signs. “The main focus of my speech today is 
how changing your attitude will change your life,” he says. The craft again 
flies over the audience, this time hovering above the second sign. “You’ll 
discover it takes the same energy to fly as it does to walk, and you will soar 
if you want to.”
“Just look at the screen,” he says, flying the drone over the audience 
again, but this time activating an HD video camera and transmitting what 
it sees—a top-down view of the audience—to the large projection screen 
above the stage. Finally, iPad in hand, he flies the drone around the room 
a bit and then has it hover two feet above his head as he says, “If I can soar, 
you can soar. Now let’s learn to fly high together!” The audience erupts in 
raucous applause. What a beginning!
Jennifer R., a financial advisor, is giving a presentation about retirement 
income to 45 people in a closed room in a restaurant. She welcomes the 
group and starts off by unveiling an oversize replica of a slot machine she is 
using as a prop. She says, “Many of us enjoy a bit of gambling as a form of 
entertainment, but none of us would ever consider seriously chancing our 
hard-earned lifetime savings, would we?” as she jerks the handle and the 
wheels spin, but with no resulting win. The audience members nod their 
heads in agreement. She then takes her iPad, walks to a table, and asks a 
woman to look at the iPad screen (which has the face of a slot machine). 
“Push this special button,” she tells the woman.
Smiling, the woman touches the iPad, the wheels spin, and the audi-
ence sees the action projected on the 60-inch LCD television in front of 
the room. “Three sevens!” Jennifer shouts, above a perfectly timed, loud 
audio of coins crashing. “You win!” She then walks to another table and 
asks a distinguished-looking gentleman also to push the button on her 
special “always a winner” slot machine app on the iPad’s screen. As all 
eyes focus on the TV in the front of the room, the reels spin, and three 
winning cherries are displayed on the big screen, accompanied by the 
sound of more coins shooting out. “Another winner!” she enthusiastically 
yells out.
Jennifer transitions, saying, “We all know that slot machines pay out 
about 95 percent of what they take in. So the house always wins—over a 
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
189

period of time. But my company has developed a rock-solid, proven finan-
cial system that consistently pays out between 110 and 115 percent or more 
of your investment over an extended period of time, an impressive accom-
plishment, indeed, in these low-yield times. No gambling. No risk. No 
taking a chance. Instead, a guarantee of steady wins over time. According 
to Conservative Investor’s Weekly, our investment model has provided the 
highest rates of return for the most people of any investment firm in the 
world. Tonight I will show you conclusively how to invest and win with 
your hard-earned money.” She uses her iPad slot machine app to bring 
up three jackpot symbols, along with the loudest sound yet of a real slot 
machine winning, to slam her point home. That’s the way she starts off, and 
her group can’t wait to hear what she has to say!
Lori, an account manager from a leading open innovation firm, is 
about to give her first presentation to the R&D group of a leading mul-
tinational consumer goods company that is interested in learning how 
it can connect with worldwide innovators who have already developed 
specific technologies. She found out that the 
head of R&D is an avid fisherman.
Soon into her presentation introduction, 
she pulls out a miniature (but fully func-
tioning) fishing rod and reel (called the fish-
Figure 9.1 
Presenter using 
her two props 
for an impressive 
beginning
Figure 9.2 Clever acronym with 
a metaphorical graphic
19
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

ing rod pen, which she bought on 
Amazon.com) and takes her iPad 
and holds it up to show this visual 
(see Figures 9.1 and 9.2). She says, 
“Today is about catching F.I.S.H., 
and that stands for ‘Future Innova-
tions Served Here.’ I will introduce 
you to a process that will triple the 
effectiveness of your already highly productive research activities and 
double your ability to commercialize your innovations through teaming 
up with our tens of thousands of scientists, researchers, and engineers who 
are in our database.”
Next, she grabs the handle of a small fishing net and pulls out 10 small 
fish—each an impressively intricate origami piece of art made from a dol-
lar bill (see Figure 9.3)—and gives one each 
to the attendees at the presentation. She dis-
covered the fish in the book Dollar Origami: 
10 Origami Projects Including the Amazing Koi 
Fish by Won Park. Because of the complex-
ity and elegance of the origami dollar fish, 
she had an experienced origami artist create 
them. After gifting each of the attendees, the 
account manager adds, “Our F.I.S.H. are all 
designed to give you superior revenue oppor-
tunities and unprecedented returns on your 
investment. Let’s talk about great F.I.S.H.ing 
for you!” as she launches into the main part 
of her presentation.
After Lori finishes her presentation, she 
performs an impressive “matching conclusion” 
by pulling out her fishing rod and reel (see 
Figure 9.4) and saying, “Let’s go F.I.S.H.ing 
together to get a big catch!” With that she 
hands out a novel gift—that miniature fish-
ing rod and reel she bought from Amazon.
Figure 9.4  
Presenter reminding 
people to go 
“F.I.S.H.ing”
Figure 9.3  
An example of 
the origami fish 
that Lori gave to 
each person in 
the group. (Artwork 
and design by Won Park)
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
191

com (see Figure 9.5)—to each of 
the people attending her presen-
tation. What an impact!
Not all presentations launch 
with the kinds of wow illustrated 
in these three examples. And 
you don’t need a $300 Parrot 
AR Drone quadricopter, a cool 
slot machine replica and iPad 
app, or fishing props to craft a 
Killer opening, either. But what 
a difference an exciting, creative introduction can make. How often have 
you seen a business presenter or public speaker start off in a lackadaisical 
or making-it-up-on-the-spot way that invites you to tune out, daydream, 
or concentrate on something else entirely? No matter how compelling 
the content, if you don’t grab people’s attention from the start, you can’t 
expect them to still be with you 30 minutes later.
This next section will give you tools, insights, information, and ideas to 
help you craft and deliver compelling and captivating introductions every 
time using the four components—technology, strategy, psychology, and 
creativity—of the P-XL2 Model (covered in Chapter 4).
What Do You Want Your Introduction to Accomplish?
Consummate presenters know the art of teasing and tantalizing their audi-
ence by building up suspense, curiosity, anticipation, and eagerness to hear 
or see what happens next. Besides riveting your audience’s attention and 
starting to build rapport and credibility as a subject-matter expert and 
competent speaker, other goals of your presentation’s introduction may 
include:
An overview of things to come
■
■
The significance, benefits, and value of the information you’re about 
■
■
to provide
Promises or commitments
■
■
A call to action: what you want them to do when you finish
■
■
Figure 9.5 Gift 
of real fishing 
equipment 
within a “pen”
192
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Building Block Approach for Designing 
Your Killer Introduction
There are a number of parts—communication components—you can use 
to create quality introductions (and conclusions). Think of them as links 
in a chain or building blocks (like Legos) that can be snapped together 
as needed. You can join any number of building blocks in any combina-
tion or order you wish. How you create your building block introduction 
depends upon the nature of your presentation, your audience, your speak-
ing style, and the time you have to prepare. The blocks in the examples of 
the following pages are by no means the only types of building blocks you 
might use; additional building blocks you come up with are limited only 
by your imagination. Consider the following building blocks (with scripted 
examples) for your next presentation.
Introduction Building Block 1. Amenities
The purpose here is to greet the audience, start building rapport, and get off 
to a friendly, smooth, and natural start. Look at this example:
“I’m delighted to talk about our multifaceted solution for your proj-
ect. I’d like to thank Fred W. and Joan R. for their support in providing 
the relevant information we needed and for brainstorming terrific creative 
ideas with us. I’ve enjoyed working with all the fine professionals in your 
company and look forward to a close and beneficial relationship with all 
of you here today.”
Introduction Building Block 2. Team Member Introductions
If giving a team presentation, introduce yourself and other members of 
your company’s team who will be presenting or contributing information 
from the sidelines. Here is an example:
“For those of you who don’t know me, my name is Paul K. I’m your 
account manager and the team leader for this presentation. I’ve been in the 
automated controls industry for over 15 years in the areas of engineering, 
technical support, and marketing. Like many of you, I have a degree in 
electrical engineering. Let me introduce the members of my presentation 
team and tell you how they will be contributing to our presentation today. 
Starting from the left is . . .”
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
193

Introduction Building Block 3. Theme
If you have a theme, you might want to unveil it in your introduction and 
then play off it throughout your presentation to support your key points. 
As an example:
“Our theme for this presentation—that I’ve just displayed on the screen 
from my iPad—reflects the impact it will have on your profits and competi-
tive edge. WINNER stands for With Integrated Networks—Numerous 
Excellent Returns. The integrated network we design for your future will 
give you exceptional returns on your investment. Our partnership in this 
project will, indeed, be a WINNER for both of our companies.”
Introduction Building Block 4. Objectives and Expectations
In this part of an introduction, you tell the members of your audience what 
they can expect from you and also what you would like to get from them, 
as this example illustrates:
“We have three objectives. The first is to give you a detailed overview of 
the solution we’re proposing based upon the requirements you gave us. Our 
second objective is to have a constructive dialogue during our presentation 
where you share your opinions and feelings about the solution we developed 
for you. Our third is for us, as a group, to reach a decision on whether this 
solution should be implemented, how, and in what time frame.”
Introduction Building Block 5. “Housekeeping”
Often called “housekeeping” in standard business presentations, this 
optional building block communicates the structure and logistics of one’s 
talk, as this example shows:
Mention your agenda and review it: “To reach our objectives, I’ve created 
an agenda of topics. You have a copy in front of you. I’ll start out by sum-
marizing our project goals, operational needs, and support requirements to 
ensure we are addressing all your key issues. Next, we’ll cover . . .”
Gain acceptance of the agenda from your audience: “Is this agenda 
acceptable?”
Discuss presentation duration and process: “My presentation will last 
about 45 minutes. Feel free to ask questions at any time. I invite your feed-
back and comments as well.”
19
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Let your audience know how to access additional information: “At the 
end, you will get a DVD with more details about our leading-edge products 
that includes [describe contents]. We will also give you several links to our 
website and others that you will find useful in evaluating how our products 
best fit your needs.”
Introduction Building Block 6. Verifying Needs and Findings
If you are selling a big-ticket product or service or presenting a complex 
project, consider summarizing the needs, wants, priorities, requirements, 
and preferences that your group expressed to you. Confirming this in a 
concise, accurate way will boost your credibility and help ensure that your 
presentation will meet your audience’s expectations. Here is an example:
“You’ve provided us with information regarding your new program. 
I’d like to quickly summarize what I understand that you’ve told us and 
confirm that we’re on track. Then, my team will discuss the details of this 
major project.
“What’s most important to this implementation is . . .
“Your top priority is . . .
“Two major technological requirements driving the success of this 
project are . . .
“During our presentation, you want us to focus on . . .
“Have I accurately summarized the big picture? Is there anything that 
has changed that we need to know about before we continue?”
Introduction Building Block 7. Relevant Quotation
You can use a quotation that makes a strong point and ties into the major 
thrust of your presentation, such as the following:
“The new currency of this digital age and economy is ideas. The futurist 
Denton Redman said, ‘I can’t fathom why so many people are frightened 
of new ideas and concepts. I’m really afraid of the old ones.’ And Mary 
Calter, an innovator in aerospace, wrote, ‘We should assume not that the 
old way is wrong, but that there is a better way now we should consider.’ 
For our organization to fast-forward ahead in the industry, we mustn’t be 
frightened of new, even radical ideas.”
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
19
5

Introduction Building Block 8. Startling Facts or Statistics
There is nothing quite as effective as surprising or shocking statistics or 
facts related to your topic. Notice how the following example does this:
“Our start-up firm is on the cusp of developing a working prototype of 
a quantum computer, so revolutionary, that in about 10 years, we will have 
a model the size of my iPad that will be more powerful than all the world’s 
supercomputers combined! While even the best computer quickly works on 
one computation at a time, a quantum computer—using single atoms in a 
parallel processing mode—will do a million computations at once and even 
do it faster! Quantum computing will bring about more changes in the next 
20 years than all the technological breakthroughs we’ve experienced over 
the last 100 years combined! In my presentation, I will give you a nontechni-
cal overview of this supertechnology based on quantum mechanics and the 
stuff of science-fiction-turned-reality.”
Introduction Building Block 9. Rhetorical Questions
Rhetorical questions are those that are asked solely, not to elicit a reply from 
your audience, but to create curiosity, suspense, or even drama. Done right, 
these questions nicely set the stage for your answers to those questions. 
Look at how this example offers a series of rhetorical questions in this sales 
presentation introduction:
“How is it possible that a ‘disruptive technology’ like ours can be sig-
nificantly more reliable, efficient, and productive than even the best current 
technology that costs four times as much? Why are we the only one in our 
industry that has developed the radical innovations you’ll hear about in our 
presentation? And how can you trust a relatively small company like ours 
to meet your most demanding requirements now and far into the future? 
The answers you hear will impress you!”
Introduction Building Block 10. Clever or Amusing Anecdote
An amusing anecdote or short, relevant piece of humor (though not nec-
essarily a joke) will help to spotlight your topic, as the following example 
shows:
“Tongue-in-cheek comedian George Carlin said, ‘There are only two 
places in the world: over here and over there.’ Well, we are ‘over here,’ pro-
19
6	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

viding the largest selection of products along with fanatically great customer 
service that enables our customers to grow and prosper. Our competitors 
are ‘over there,’ trying but failing to imitate our exceptional business model. 
I will tell you how being ‘over here’ with us will make all the difference in 
the world for you and your organization.”
Introduction Building Block 11 . Executive Summary
If needed, give your audience an enticing big-picture overview of your 
product, proposal, or idea and effectively highlight its benefits. The most 
effective executive summaries use enumeration to help the audience absorb 
each distinct point, as the following illustrates:
“In the next 60 seconds or less, I’ll tell you the essence of our proposal 
and how it will reap impressive rewards for our reality TV production 
company. There are three significant reasons why we need to make this 
investment in transitioning from film cameras to all video cameras from 
BLUE Corporation:
“One: Improved workflow and savings. We measured the increase in produc-
tivity in shooting three of our weekly 30-minute programs with the new 
cameras we rented: 40 percent reduction in work-hours across the board 
with about 25 percent less reshoots needed. That translates into savings of 
at least $62 million per year.
“Two: Leapfrog the competition. While other networks are currently shoot-
ing for high-definition TV, we will shoot in 4K resolution—way ahead 
of those—so we can develop programs now that are ready for the new 
ultrahigh-definition TVs.
“Three: Increased functionality. With these new BLUE cameras, we can now 
do so many more types of shoots, and do them so much more easily and 
quickly and with greater abilities than ever before, enabling us to produce 
even more innovative programming for our viewers.
“When you add up these three significant benefits of buying BLUE 
cameras, you will likely come to the same conclusion we did—this is a 
superb chance to leap ahead. Over the next 30 minutes, I will give you 
specifics on what I’ve just summarized for you.”
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
19
7

Introduction Building Block 12 . Transition Statement
This brief (transition) statement acts as a bridge—a segue—alerting the 
audience that you are now finished with the introductory remarks and will 
be getting into the detailed substance (body) of your presentation, as these 
two examples illustrate:
“Let’s now get into the details of how our product will meet or exceed 
every one of your requirements and specifications.” Or “You heard our 
executive summary. Now it’s time for us to back up the impressive benefits 
we’ve projected for you. We’ll begin by talking about . . .”
Implement the Introduction Building Block Approach
Let’s take a look at an introduction that uses the building block approach 
to create a riveting beginning that powerfully sets the stage for the informa-
tion that follows. Read the following fictionalized example, and see if you 
can identify which specific building blocks were combined.
Scenario. Ryan W. is an executive vice president in charge of advanced 
R&D for a major automotive company. He is giving a presentation to his 
company’s board of directors to present the findings from his department’s 
recent development of a prototype of a revolutionary new car and truck 
engine. His objective is to get the board’s approval for funding to put the 
engine into mass production. He had his engineering department use a 
color 3-D printer to create a one-tenth-scale mock-up of a half cross section 
of the new engine and cut a piece out of the cross section to place his iPad 
inside (as a case for it) for stunning visual and theatrical effect. Here is his 
introduction:
“Sixteenth-century statesman Francis Bacon smartly said, ‘A man must 
make his opportunity as oft as find it.’ We did both: we found it and made 
it! Over the next 30 minutes, I’m going to tell you about a radical break-
through in engine design that will be a financial bonanza for our company 
and guarantee us industry leadership far into the future. It is an opportu-
nity we must not pass up.”
From behind the lectern he pulls out the iPad with the realistic engine 
backing and shows it to the group. He touches the iPad screen to bring up 
a photo along with an audio file and says, “Listen. This is the sound of the 
198
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

world’s quietest engine—running at low speed. Not our engine, though.” 
While it is quiet, the group can clearly hear its sound. He touches his iPad 
screen, shows a photo, and activates another audio file, telling them, “That’s 
the sound of our new engine—at full throttle—8,000 rpms!”
The board members look puzzled because the sound is quieter than the 
low-speed running engine! “No mistake,” Ryan emphasizes. “This is the 
smoothest, quietest engine on the planet,” he proudly boasts. He looks at 
the screen and says, “Now the sound of horsepower . . . ,” as he uses his iPad 
to display a video of four wild horses galloping; the sound this time is the 
loudest so far. “That’s like the horsepower of current cars.” He pauses and 
says, “But here is the horsepower of our superengine,” as he touches his iPad 
screen to bring up a new video of a much larger pack of horses running at 
full gallop. The sound of hooves crashing against the ground is temporar-
ily deafening, if only for a few fleeting seconds, but it definitely makes 
the comparative point in a most dramatic, auditory way—this engine is 
unbelievably powerful!
He continues, “Six months ago, my R&D team produced a quantum-leap 
breakthrough in nanotechnology and ceramics engine design. Our exhaus-
tive lab tests show it will produce 80 percent more horsepower per pound 
than any engine in production, average over 135 miles per gallon in a midsize 
car, reduce engine emissions by 97 percent, and improve reliability by at least 
85 percent. Astonishing isn’t it? As impressive as the engineering wizardry is, 
so are the financial implications with this engine for our company:
“Over the next four years, we can grab five extra points of market share, 
giving us $71 billion in additional revenues during that time.
“Return on investment for the first year of production is estimated to 
be between 35 and 40 percent, far exceeding our investment hurdle rate of 
16 percent.
“We can get this engine to the marketplace within 18 months, leapfrog-
ging over our competitors and keeping them from copying us by at least 
four years.
“We will reduce our warranty expenses by approximately $1.2 billion 
per year because of significantly increased reliability.
“We must capitalize upon this opportunity. I will ask for your approval 
for the budget and for your ongoing support in three other ways to ensure the 
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
199

complete, successful outcome of this stunning breakthrough. Now, I will get 
into detail on this exclusive window of opportunity available to us . . .”
Tips for Crafting Captivating 
Presentation Introductions
Here are a few more things to consider as you’re assembling your Killer 
intros:
Be creative
■
■
. If using your iPad, think of how you can use it not only as 
a controlling device but also as a clever prop. Also think of unconven-
tional or entertaining ways you can introduce your talk with photos, 
illustrations, animations, stirring videos, audio special effects, narra-
tion or music, props, or theatrical effects.
Make it impressive
■
■
. Nothing is worse for the members of an audience 
than to hear a presentation start off dry and boring and feel they have 
to put up with 30 or 45 minutes more of yawn-filled pain. Ask yourself 
how you might immediately start off to impress the people in your 
group and how you could stimulate them intellectually and even 
emotionally in that first critical minute.
Keep it concise
■
■
. Get to your salient points quickly or risk losing your 
audience. Your lead-in should be concise but not rushed. Generally 
speaking, the introduction and conclusion should each take between 5 
and 10 percent of the total time of your presentation. If your presenta-
tion is 30 minutes, the introduction and conclusion would each be 
about 1½ to 3 minutes long.
Show confidence and energy
■
■
. Begin your introduction with enthusiasm, 
poise, and passion. Use a strong voice volume, a slower speech rate, a 
smile, and good eye contact.
Avoid credibility killers
■
■
. Don’t project false modesty or brag. And 
never apologize or make excuses as in these examples:
“I’m sorry I’m not the person scheduled to give this presentation. 
They called me at the last minute, and I threw something together real 
quickly. So if the information is a little incomplete or a few slides have 
spelling errors, please excuse that.” Or “I’m so honored to address this 
200	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

group. I feel almost inadequate since you are distinguished executives, 
many with credentials far more impressive than mine.”
Make It Memorable: Crafting Killer Conclusions
Creating a standing ovation-quality conclusion is as critical to the suc-
cess of your presentation as is a terrific introduction. The conclusion is the 
capstone, climax, and finale of your “performance.” If an introduction is 
the presentation’s appetizer, then the conclusion is the dessert—that last 
delicious part of a fine meal (presentation body) that lingers on one’s (intel-
lectual and emotional) taste buds. An impressive conclusion cements the 
speaker’s credibility at its high point and shows consistent presentation 
excellence, right to the very end.
We remember the final things that are said much more than anything 
mentioned in the middle. It’s the reason trial lawyers spend extra time 
preparing their summation remarks to the jury. Their goal is to create such 
an overwhelming impression of innocence or guilt that it steers the jury’s 
decision making toward the desired verdict.
Building Block Approach for Designing 
a Memorable Conclusion
A great conclusion also has building blocks you connect together, with 
stunning results. You can use most of the building blocks relevant to craft-
ing an introduction, but with some exceptions and variations. Remember 
that the following examples are only a partial set of building blocks. Let 
your imagination come up with others.
Conclusion Building Block 1. Transition Statement
Use transition statements to signal and announce that the end of your pre-
sentation is imminent. This will alert and perk up your group for an extra 
dose of concentration. Examples:
“In conclusion . . .”
“I’ll conclude by briefly summarizing key points made during the last 
30 minutes.”
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
201

“At this point, I’d like to wrap up by quoting something a famous 
[e.g., statesman] said that shines a spotlight on this issue. He 
said . . .”
Conclusion Building Block 2. Summary of Key Points
Summarizing your important points in a simple but compelling way will 
help your audience to vividly remember. Enumerating your points facili-
tates understanding. Here is an example of a sales presentation summary:
“Today we gave you an overview of our system’s solution including the 
features, capabilities, implementation, and operational benefits for your 
company. Our industry-leading order processing system will ensure your 
explosive growth in the next decade for four vital reasons:
“One. It will easily and cost-effectively grow with your company even if your 
transaction volume skyrockets to 800 percent over the next five years.
“Two. It is the quickest system to implement on the market. We can get 
it installed in two months, which is five months sooner than any other 
supplier.
“Three. Its remarkable online reliability is unmatched anywhere—99.95 
percent average.
“Four. Your return on investment will be between 25 and 35 percent, far 
exceeding your expectations and financial requirements.
“These are the four quite compelling reasons for you to partner with us 
right now.”
Conclusion Building Block 3. Challenge to Your Audience
This is used to encourage an audience to surmount obstacles or inspire and 
motivate the audience members to take specific action. Here is an example 
of a challenge:
“It won’t be easy for us to turn our company around. Our survival is 
at stake. I challenge each of you to stretch yourself to find and implement 
radical ideas. Together, we will lead this company—and your future with 
it—into the most exciting era we have ever known. I call upon you to test 
202	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

just how good you really are when the going is the roughest—to show your 
right stuff and your best stuff. That is my challenge to all of you!”
Conclusion Building Block 4. Relevant Quotation
The right quotation adds punch to your concluding remarks. You can even 
repeat the same quotation throughout your conclusion for dramatic effect. 
Here’s such an example:
“General Douglas MacArthur said, ‘There is no security on this earth, 
just opportunity.’ Blistering technological, economic, social, and political 
change can erode our security. But we can maintain security in our lives 
if we take advantage of possibilities hidden within our tumultuous world. 
They abound for hands outstretched to snatch them first! General MacAr-
thur was right—there is no security on this earth, just opportunity. So let’s 
become eager and tireless opportunity seekers.”
Conclusion Building Block 5. Fascinating or Startling  
Facts or Statistics
Consider leaving your listeners with a “shocking” statistic or fact that helps 
them to tightly focus on your main theme or dominant message(s). Look 
at this example:
“As I said, all of us can better tap into our brains to come up with 
incredible ideas to catapult the company light-years ahead of competitors. 
Computers are used as an analogy for the power of our brains. One scientist 
noted that if we took the latest computer chips and stacked them together 
10 stories high and built them the size of the state of Texas, the unimagi-
nable computing power still wouldn’t equal that of the human brain! Each 
of you has more brainpower than a Texas-size computer. Unlock its full 
imagination potential—use it for awesome effect!”
Conclusion Building Block 6. Reference to a News Article
Use a story from a news source, website, or magazine to add impact to a 
final point. Example:
“The New York Times, in the business section, recently ran a story titled 
‘Flat-Out Change Is Driving Profits Through the Roof.’ It told the stories 
of two successful large companies along with two thriving start-ups. The 
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
203

­article highlighted how each company created a vibrant climate of continu-
ous improvement with spectacular results in productivity, efficiency, quality, 
and profitability. These four very different companies had returns on their 
investments that were 40 to 65 percent greater than their nonchanging indus-
try counterparts! Flat-out positive changes will supercharge your business 
too. The results will be unmatched, unbeatable, and, yes, unbelievable!”
Conclusion Building Block 7. Humor or Amusing Tale
“Leave ’em laughing” has long been the motto of entertainers. When people 
leave with a smile or chuckle, they are more likely to remember the message 
spotlighted by an amusing quip like this one:
“In our design of new products, we’ve got to do our homework and 
pass the test with our customers. It’s like the story of five college students 
taking organic chemistry. Because each had done well on previous quiz-
zes, they were so confident that they decided to party hard that weekend. 
They did . . . and slept through the morning of their final exam. They put 
together a quick strategy and, as a group, explained to their professor that 
they went to a friend’s house to study, but on the way home they got a flat 
tire, making them late. The professor agreed to give them a make-up test. 
In separate rooms, he handed each a final exam booklet. The first problem, 
worth 50 points, was a simple and easy question. ‘This is going to be a 
cinch,’ they thought. Each finished the answer, then turned to the second 
page and read with dismay: ‘For the other 50 points: Which tire went flat?’ 
Now, I don’t ever want our customers to catch us off guard and ask ‘Which 
tire?’ Doing our product design homework and passing their tough test is 
our way of getting straight As. No excuses!”
Conclusion Building Block 8. Trial Closes and Close
If you desire a winning pitch, you often need to use trial closes and a close—
terms common to the sales profession. Unfortunately, most presenters who 
want to persuade their audience to buy or do something, when finished 
with their presentation, say, “Are there any questions?” Then the presenters 
thank the audience and leave, not knowing how people reacted to their 
presentation and, most important, neglecting to ask people to do what the 
presenters wanted.
204	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

A trial close is a question that doesn’t seek commitment, but instead 
it asks people for an opinion to gauge their attitude and motivation to act 
upon something. How people respond to trial close questions will help you 
test their receptivity to your presentation.
General trial closes are nonthreatening questions used to engage your 
group to check for overall reception regarding the points discussed in your 
presentation. Examples:
“Ladies and gentlemen, what’s your overall reaction to this concept?”
“What are your gut feelings about the makeup and projected results of 
this plan? Do you think it’s the best one for us to implement now?”
“Exactly how close is our proposed solution to what you told us that 
you need and want? Is there anything that doesn’t hit the target 
dead center?”
Specific trial closes assume that the people in your audience are already 
favorably inclined to what you are proposing and asking of them. They 
focus on the mechanics of going forward, as these examples show:
“When is the earliest we might get our respective staffs together to 
begin?”
“Before we deal with moving forward to the next step, which is 
discussing contract preparation, is there anything else we need to 
discuss or resolve?”
“What does the group see as the next steps to possibly start imple-
menting this strategy?”
The close is a question that asks for a decisive commitment from a per-
son or group to agree to buy some product or service or support and fund a 
program or project you are advocating. Once you have “taken the tempera-
ture” of your audience with general trial closes, followed by specific ones, 
and determined that their “heat index” indicates “hot” (very interested), 
then it is time to try to wrap up the deal using closing questions that ask 
the audience for decisive commitment and action. Look at these:
“Sounds as if you want to go ahead with this purchase. Is that cor-
rect?” (You see nods and vocal agreement.) “I’m delighted! Here is 
what we need to get the order processed.”
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
205

“Can we get the contract approved from you for us to begin?”
“I’ll need the funding, personnel, and your commitment—as I’ve 
described in detail—to support this plan. Can I get your OK to 
proceed?”
Implement the Building Block 
Approach for a Killer Conclusion
As with a great introduction, a compelling conclusion should be carefully 
crafted with specific objectives in mind that make a lasting impact upon 
an audience. Read the following fictionalized examples and see if you can 
identify which specific conclusion building blocks were used.
Scenario. A leading nanotechnology scientist gave a presentation using 
her iPad to a large association of government and corporate researchers who 
were familiar with nanotechnology. In her conclusion, she wanted to stress 
the vital importance and opportunity potential with nanotechnology and 
appeal to them to accelerate nanotechnology innovation in their organiza-
tions. Here is how she finalized her presentation:
“It’s time for me to conclude. As I mentioned, nanotechnology is the 
amazing creation of things at the atomic level to develop amazing new 
products, devices, chemical compounds, and much more. Soon, we will 
have materials 50 to 100 times stronger than steel but one-sixth its weight.” 
She holds up her iPad over her head and continues.
“Using nanomaterials, my iPad would weigh less than one-half the 
weight of a business card, have incredible new capabilities, and be practi-
cally indestructible! There are three key points to consider as you continue 
in your basic and applied research:
“One: Enormous industry. Even though a nanometer is 1/80,000 the diam-
eter of a human hair, nanotechnology is going to be the biggest industry 
in the world. In the United States alone, nanotechnology is projected to 
be a $3 trillion business, employing from 750,000 to over a million people 
by 2020.
“Two: Tremendous investment. The U.S. government will be investing over 
$100 billion in nanotechnology research and commercialization, while cor-
206	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

porations and venture capitalists will quadruple that amount over the next 
five years.
“Three: Massive impact. Nanotechnology breakthroughs will force you to 
radically rethink your research efforts in practically every regard because 
they will eventually alter the landscape of all industries like a giant tsunami 
hitting land.
“Robert Smalley, a Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, said, ‘The impact 
of nanotechnology on the health, wealth, and lives of people will be at 
least the equivalent of the combined influences of microelectronics, medi-
cal imaging, computer-aided engineering, and man-made polymers in the 
twentieth century.’
“I encourage and challenge each of you to master the magical proper-
ties of nanotechnology and apply it in the most imaginative ways. I’ll leave 
you with just one final thought.” She smiles and says, “Think small—really 
small!”
As she gets laughs and chuckles from that remark, she puts a visual 
on the screen filled with word SMALL and then pinches her iPad screen 
to reduce the word to a miniscule size for a dramatic effect to support her 
vocal ending.
Scenario. A well-known sales trainer was giving a two-hour public 
workshop to about 150 people. He made his money not only from charging 
attendance fees but also from selling his books, DVDs, newsletter subscrip-
tions, and other materials at the back of the room. Before the session began, 
he hid two Wi-Fi speakers under the chairs in the last row of seats, where 
people would not notice them. (The chairs had coats and other items on 
them so others would not sit in those rows.)
As he was wrapping up his conclusion, he activated an audio file on his 
iPad to transmit an audio track to the speakers. A male voice was heard from 
the back of the room: “Hey Mr. [his name], how about giving us a bigger 
discount on your books and other stuff?” Seconds later, a female audio voice 
calls out, “Yeah, how about it? You said 20 percent before on certain items, 
but how about a 40 percent discount on all your stuff?” The sales trainer 
played off the voices, and the audience quickly caught on as the trainer then 
said quite cleverly, “Okay, I won’t give you a 40 percent discount . . . I’ll take 
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
207

half off everything! Obviously you folks know that I had two speakers blurt 
out their voices from my iPad. I wanted to amuse you and also reinforce how 
creativity helps get the point across in a surprising and helpful way. I’ll see 
you at the back of the room for your 50 percent discount!”
Tips for Crafting Killer Endings
Here are a few more tips for a strong ending:
Tell them what you told ’em. Always encapsulate your presentation in 
■
■
a simple, concise, and memorable way to remind the people in the 
audience of the most compelling points.
Leave them on a high note. Make sure they walk out feeling better 
■
■
about your topic (more hopeful, more positive, more confident) than 
when they came in.
Do it! Few things irritate an audience more than a long-winded, 
■
■
drawn-out conclusion. Some presenters may say, “ . . . in conclusion” 
several times and ramble on before they actually get to it. The audi-
ence is eager to have you finish once you’ve announced your intention 
to do so.
Do not introduce new information. The conclusion is not the place to 
■
■
bring up something you forgot to say during the main portion of your 
presentation. If it’s not important, why bring it up? Besides, you will 
lose credibility—people will think you did not prepare adequately if 
you could forget such a key piece of information.
Avoid an unprepared conclusion. Mediocre presenters approach the 
■
■
conclusion in an unprepared, disjointed, and often abrupt way. Plan 
and structure your conclusion ahead of time and rehearse it several 
times so it is strong and smooth. Know exactly what you will stress 
and how you will put extra voice projection, passion, and body 
language dynamics into conveying the final messages. Avoid off-the-
cuff rambling, weak, or indecisive remarks such as:
“Well, that’s about it. I’m finished.”
“Sorry it took so long, but I’m finally done now.”
“This kind of concludes the presentation. Ah . . . any questions?”
208	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Have a crisp summary. Succinctly review the most important points 
■
■
for your group to remember, make a decision about, or act upon 
immediately. An effective summary typically has four to six key 
points. If possible (without diluting important items), boil everything 
down to its sheer essence in three points or less.
Appeal to your audience for justified action. Whether it is to approve 
■
■
your plan, program, or project, or to ask for funding to implement a 
solution, or to buy something, always finish with confidence, convic-
tion, and optimism. Project an assumptive attitude that the audience 
will buy into your idea, plan, or request.
Explain specifically what you want the members in your audience to 
■
■
do and the exact steps they should take to do it. Never make a vague 
request, such as “We need your support.” Spell out exactly what type 
and degree of support (specific activities, commitments, money, 
resources, time, etc.) you require.
Justify the need for immediate action. Restate the benefits that people 
■
■
will receive when they act decisively or describe the negative conse-
quences of inaction without it sounding contrived.
Like an introduction, your concluding remarks should take about 5 to 
10 percent of the total presentation time. As noted earlier, if you have 30 
minutes to speak, that means your concluding remarks might take about 
a minute and a half.
Ah!some Executive Summary Handouts
Want to really impress the people in your group and deliver a final, memo-
rable wow! reaction? Then consider giving them a special executive sum-
mary handout that contains key pieces of information to assist them in 
making a decision to buy your product or service. These types of exclusive 
handouts will reward you with a competitive advantage, especially when 
your presentation’s goal is to sell, persuade, or otherwise convince an audi-
ence to take a particular action. While effective presenters always verbally 
summarize the key points either orally or in combination with a visual 
from their iPads, an imaginatively designed giveaway (a type of “handout”) 
can be just the novel tool to propel your group to make a decision in your 
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
209

favor. We have helped many clients design these for a most impressive effect 
against their toughest competitors.
Design and Construction Tips
Following are several (fictitious but based upon real) scenarios of creative 
executive summaries, some of which are powerful visual metaphors. Many 
are made from printing a summary of key messages and information on 
paper, laminating the paper, spraying it with an adhesive like 3M Super 
77, and then mounting it to a white or black foam core board. Then, using 
an X-Acto knife, you can cut the board into various shapes.
Have your graphic designer visit places like Michael’s and Hobby Lobby 
or other arts and crafts, toy, and hobby stores for terrific ideas and materi-
als. When creating these summary handouts, it’s important to understand 
the personality profile of the key decision makers who will be getting these. 
Look at the following examples to see what we mean to get ideas.
Large “Pill”
Scenario. An account manager gave an informal presentation regarding her 
company’s sales training program with highlights on how it would increase 
sales for the client. To further emphasize how 
her firm’s program would affect revenues and 
profits, at her presentation’s conclusion, she 
handed out four of these “summary props” 
(see Figure 9.6) to each of the sales and mar-
keting people and asked them to open up 
the “pill” for the amusing but important 
“prescription” inside (see Figure 9.7), which 
addressed many of their stated needs and 
problems. This was designed to appeal to 
each of the four creative types of personali-
ties that the account manager identified.
Figure 9.6 Interesting handout with clever name
21
0	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Keep on Truckin’ to a Sale
Scenario. The vice president of sales for 
a major manufacturer of trucks and cus-
tomized trailers gave a presentation to 
a leading maker of computer and elec-
tronic components with the intention 
of closing a $60 million deal. Potential 
customers from purchasing, manu-
facturing, and operations were in the 
audience.
After giving a comprehensive and 
compelling presentation from his iPad 
using video and 3-D animations of the 
design, engineering, and operation of 
his commercial trucks, he wanted to 
leave an executive summary (see Figure 
9.8) of the company’s superior value 
proposition for the decision makers 
and recommenders attending his pre-
sentation. Since many of the people 
involved in the decision were of an ana-
lytical type of personality, the summary 
handout was designed to have detailed 
information.
The employees in the seller’s graphic 
design department printed the sheet, 
laminated it, glued it to a foam core 
board, and bought an eight-inch die-
cast model truck and epoxy-glued it to the board. 
Finally, they customized the trailer with a slogan and 
the name of the prospective customer on the side of the trailer.
Figure 9.7  
This amusing “prescription” 
addresses serious points.
Figure 9.8 This impressive 
handout summarizes key points.
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
211

Picture This!
Scenario. A partner in a small technology consulting firm just finished a 
presentation outlining how her firm could help a potential client improve 
its engineering designs through implementation of 3-D printers. After her 
conclusion, she said, “We framed our solution toward four major benefits 
for you. We want you to picture the impact we will 
make for you if you select our firm for this proj-
ect.” The CEO of the engineering company was a 
typical bottom-line “just-tell-me-the-results” per-
sonality, who was not concerned about the tech-
nical details of the 3-D printer that the company 
was considering buying; he only wanted to know 
the major operational and financial results that the 
printer could deliver.
So the presenter handed out identical picture 
frames (see Figure 9.9) to each of the people attend-
ing, conveying the simple and concise but powerful 
benefits. What a great “bottom-line” summary pre-
sented in such a clever and visually elegant way!
Pointing Out Key Information
Scenario. An advanced technology engine company wanted to symbolize 
that its offering to a prospective customer—a boat builder—would deliver 
a quantum leap in benefits. So the engine company decided to create an 
executive summary handout in the shape of a vertical arrow, signifying an 
upward “leap” in features and functionality. The printout was laminated 
and spray-glued to a black foam core board and cut out with an X-Acto 
knife in the shape of the arrow. At the end of the presentation, five “arrows” 
were given to the attendees of the presentation (see Figures 9.10 and 9.11), 
with very favorable reactions and ending in a sale.
The decision maker for this purchase was identified as a detail-oriented, 
analytical type of personality, so the presenter included fairly comprehen-
sive information in the summary handout, while also noting the bottom-
line benefits on the lower part of the arrow to make sure that everyone saw 
the ultimate (strategic) outcomes of the products. Think of the various 
Figure 9.9 
A simple, elegant, 
and powerful 
summary
212
	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

geometric shapes (circles, hexagons, triangles, 
others) you can develop for an executive sum-
mary handout.
Opening the Door 
to More Revenues
Scenario. The founder of a small but 
innovative firm gave an interactive 
presentation using her iPad to Solix, 
a company in the residential con-
struction industry. She was pitch-
ing training, organizational change, 
and innovation development to the 
company.
The executive summary she gave 
out right after her presentation con-
clusion (see Figure 9.12) focused on 
seven key benefits for the founder’s 
Figure 9.10 The arrow summary is a visual metaphor.
Figure 9.12  Creative handout with 
real miniature wooden door
Figure 9.11  The handout has both a 
detailed and “bottom-line” summary.
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
213

personality, who was interested in just bottom-line results. The design of 
the summary handout was printed, laminated, and glued to a foam core 
board. A hole was cut out, and a real wooden dollhouse door with win-
dow panes was inserted and glued in place. Behind the door, you could 
see three rolled stacks of money!
Customers Want It Fast
Scenario. The account manager of a marketing communications com-
pany focused on providing superior results quickly to a client with whom 
he was trying to close a deal. The metaphor in this executive summary 
handout was speed of execution in advertising, promotion, and multic-
ity events. Since the account manager talked up how creative his firm 
would be in developing marketing 
programs for the client, he wanted 
to demonstrate his own creativ-
ity by delivering an imaginative 
iPad-based presentation and by 
providing an executive summary 
that was specifically designed to 
appeal to the fun-loving, imagina-
tive, and bold-thinking personal-
ity types that defined the clients 
at the presentation.
The account manager’s graphic 
designer found and purchased four 
metal cars that opened up (see Fig-
ure 9.13). The designer developed a 
small five-page booklet that sum-
marized all the key aspects of the 
proposed marketing and event 
programs. The executive summary 
booklet fit perfectly within each car that was given to the attendees of the 
presentation. Notice in Figure 9.14 how the key message on the front of 
the booklet highlighted the two critical goals stated by the potential client: 
“Fast Marketshare Gains and Big Profits.”
Figure 9.13  
Symbolic and 
unique “handout”
Figure 9.14 
Concise presen-
tation summary 
booklet of 
key points
21
4	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

They Got a “Hot Sale”
Scenario. A company called Incredible! Ovens 
sells commercial ovens to restaurants. The account 
manager had finished her iPad-based presentation 
to the owners of a family-owned business, Crazy 
Pizza, which is expanding into other markets. 
The patriarch, who started the business 30 years 
ago, grew up in an Italian town about 20 miles 
from Pisa (famous for its leaning tower) and sat 
in on the presentation. The close-knit family of 
owners are all warm, gracious, and affable people, 
who value close and personal relationships with 
those they do business with. The account man-
ager, knowing her audience, gave a professional 
but cordial and informal type of presentation. She 
ended her presentation with a Killer surprise.
She brought along her company’s young mar-
keting intern, who came in wearing an Italian-made 
pizza apron and carrying both a specially designed 
executive summary (see Figure 9.15) and a 3-D 
paper model of the Leaning Tower of Pisa, which 
she assembled from an $8 kit bought on Amazon.
com, to present to the founder of the company. The 
high-quality paper model (see Figure 9.16) only 
took 30 minutes to assemble, and it added a lot of 
emotional capital to the presentation.
The executive summary had eight key points 
to show how Incredible! Ovens had a superior 
value proposition not only in its technology but 
in its projected financial results for the customer. 
When the Crazy Pizza family members saw the 
line at the bottom of the executive summary page 
(“Want a ‘Pizza’ the Action?”—see Figure 9.17), 
all smiled, some laughed, and the patriarch nod-
ded his head yes.
Figure 9.15 
Apron and custom 
handout designed 
to impress 
and endear
Figure 9.16 
A gift for the 
company’s 
founder who 
came from Pisa
	
	
Riveting Openings and Killer Conclusions
21
5

The executive summary, in the shape of the seller’s 
company logo, was made of several layers of different-
color foam board and had a porcelain figure of a pizza 
maker glued to a cutout pizza, giving this executive 
summary an impressive 3-D appearance (see Figure 
9.18). The creative touches, especially provided by the 
apron-clad, friendly young woman, added a delightful 
human touch to the presentation, bringing big smiles 
to the five family owners who attended it. Guess who 
warmed up to the deal right away?
Having a terrific presentation introduction and 
conclusion is the mark of a consummate Killer Pre-
senter. Those two things will elevate your presenta-
tion above others, boosting your credibility and your 
professional image. And when you add in giving out 
imaginative executive summary handouts for your 
special presentations, you might just be on the verge 
of being incredible!
Figure 9.17 This presentation summary 
was brief but compelling.
Figure 9.18  Only a Killer Presenter 
would develop something like this.
21
6	
Killer Presentations with your iPad

Stock Photos, Illustrations, and Vector Images
The websites in these pages show millions of royalty-free photos, illustrations, 
clip-art, graphics, and 3-D models in thousands of categories that are invalu-
able for inclusion in your presentations. Photos are offered in various sizes 
(e.g., small, medium, large, full size, ranging from about 1 megapixel to over 
16 megapixels. Remember, vector images are fully scalable and resolution inde-
pendent, so you can create giant (projected or printed) images that remain 
crisp and sharp without any blurred or distorted pixelization.
123RF, http://www.123rf.com
Absolute Vision, http://www.absolutvision.com/
Bigstock, http://www.bigstockphoto.com/
CanStockPhoto, http://www.canstockphoto.com/
ClipDealer, http://us.clipdealer.com/photo/
Colourbox, http://www.colourbox.com/
Corbis Images, http://www.corbisimages.com/
Digital Juice, http://www.digitaljuice.com/
Dreamstime, http://www.dreamstime.com/
Fotolia, http://us.fotolia.com/
Gettyimages, http://www.gettyimages.com/
iStockphoto, http://www.istockphoto.com/photo
Pixmac, http://www.pixmac.com/
pond5, http://www.pond5.com/
Shutterstock, http://www.shutterstock.com/
R e s o u r c e s
21
7

Video Clips and Animations
Typically called stock video footage, there are millions of video clips and ani-
mations available in HD (1,920 × 1,080) in thousands of categories just like 
stock photos. These captivating visuals, if used (full screen and high resolution) 
in Apple’s Keynote presentation software on your iPad, can add tremendous 
visual and communication clout to your presentation.
a Luna Blue, http://www.alunablue.com/
CallOuts, http://www.callouts.com/
ClipDealer, http://us.clipdealer.com/video/
Daily Motion, http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xq32k8_sci-fi 
-machine-artloops-royalty-free-video-background-in-hd_shortfilms
Digital Juice, http://www.digitaljuice.com/
DVarchive, http://www.dvarchive.com/stock-footage-collection/1323/1/
animationofbusiness/animationsofbusinesspresentations
Footage, http://www.footage.net/
Fotolia, http://us.fotolia.com/Info/Videos
Gettyimages, http://www.gettyimages.com/footage
Gmanvideo, http://www.gmanvideo.com/
iStockphoto, http://www.istockphoto.com/video
MammothHD, http://www.mammothhd.com/
Motionelements, http://www.motionelements.com/
pond5, http://www.pond5.com/
revostock, http://www.revostock.com/
Shutterstock, http://footage.shutterstock.com/
T3Media, http://www.t3licensing.com/video/home/hd.do
Wavebreak Media, http:// www.wavebreakmedia.com/
Animated Backgrounds and Effects
These resources for your presentations consist of a wide variety of animated 
and video backgrounds and mattes, special effects, shapes and patterns, lower 
thirds, character animations, swipes, transitions, motion backgrounds, and 
more in hundreds of categories much like those for stock photos and videos.
218
	
Resources

ActionBacks, http://www.actionbacks.com/
Animation Factory, http://www.animationfactory.com/en/
AniStock, http://www.anistock.com/animated graphs and illustrations
Cartoon Solutions, http://www.cartoonsolutions.com/
Digital Juice, http://www.digitaljuice.com/
IgniteMotion, http://www.ignitemotion.com/
Motionelements, http://www.motionelements.com/
Photobucket, http://photobucket.com/
pond5, http://www.pond5.com/stock-video-footage/1/animation.html
Studio 1 Productions, http://www.studio1productions.com/
Wavebreak Media, http://www.wavebreakmedia.com/
Music and Sound Effects
Music, audio special effects, excerpts from famous recorded speeches, and 
other audio venues can add much value to your presentations. You can get 
various-length royalty-free music in dozens of categories such as pop, cor-
porate, cinematic, comedy, country, soul, R&B, blues, folk, world beat, and 
many others. There are also shorter music passages known as bumpers, sting-
ers, intros and exits, and logos that act as brief (e.g., 5–10-second) music-based 
segues, similar to what you hear on the radio as a transition from one segment 
to another. In addition, there are hundreds of thousands of all kinds of sound 
effects to add interest and emphasis to your presentations and videos.
Audio Jungle, http://audiojungle.net/
Audio Network, http://www.audionetwork.com/
ClipDealer, http://us.clipdealer.com/audio/
Digital Juice, http://www.digitaljuice.com/
iStockphoto, http://www.istockphoto.com/audio
Music 2 Hues, http://www.music2hues.com/
pond5, http://www.pond5.com/
RoyaltyfreeMusic.com, http://www.royaltyfreemusic.com/
Shockwave-Sound.com, http://www.shockwave-sound.com/
Sound-Ideas, http://www.sound-ideas.com/
Stock Music Boutique, http://stockmusicboutique.com/
Stockmusic.net, http://www.stockmusic.net/
	
	
Resources
219

Other Presentation and Proposal-Related Resources
Depending upon the type of your presentation, you might benefit from other 
diverse resources such as displays and racks, paper products, tables, product mer-
chandising, props, toys, theatrical supplies, gags, promotional items, AV equip-
ment, and other support materials that you use either before, during, or after your 
presentation (including back-of-the-room use, display or sales as props, display 
items, stage and room decorations, giveaways, or other). Check out the follow-
ing eclectic sources to give you insights and ideas on things that might add value, 
interest, and meaning to your presentations, training workshops, or speeches.
Amusitreonix 3D, http://www.amusitronix.com/, virtual reality games
Aurora History Boutique Models, Props, Costumes, Replicas, http://
www.aurorahistoryboutique.com/Historical-Props.cfm
Backdrop Outlet, http://www.backdropoutlet.com/
Beemak Display Products, http://www.beemak.com/
Big 3D Productions, http://big3dproductions.com/
Bits and Pieces, http://www.bitsandpieces.com/
BuyOnline Now Binding Machines, http://www.buyonlinenow.com/
binding-machines.asp
Creations & Collections Ltd., http://www.CreationsAndCollections.com
Crestline, http://www.crestline.com/
Custom Movie Props, http://custommovieprops.com/, mechanical props, 
models, miniatures, and prop fabrication
Custom Prop Shop, http://www.custompropshop.com/
Dino Rentos Studios, The Prop Magician, http://dinorentosstudios.com/
home.php
eHow Stage Props, http://www.ehow.com/stage-props/
Entertainment Earth, http://www.entertainmentearth.com/
Genuine Hotrod, http://www.genuinehotrod.com/
Great Big Stuff, http://www.greatbigstuff.com/home.html
How to do street magic, http://www.howtodotricks.com/
howtodostreetmagic.html
Illumivation Studios, http://www.illumivationshop.com/, custom stage 
props
K-Log, http://www.k-log.com
22
0	
Resources

Lamination Depot, http://www.laminationdepot.com/
Landmark Creations Premier, http://www.landmarkcreations.com/, 
custom inflatable stage props
Lilliput, http://www.LilliputMotorCompany.com
Magic 4 Speakers, http://www.magic4speakers.com/
MyBinding.com, http://www.mybinding.com/
Norcostco Costume Rental, http://www.norcostco.com/
Office Playground, http://www.officeplayground.com/
Paper Direct, http://www.paperdirect.com/
Peachtree City Foamcraft, http://www.foamcraft.info/foam-props.php, 
3-D foam props
Penguin Magic, http://www.penguinmagic.com/
Philadelphia Theatrical Supply & Props, http://shop.ptsonline.biz/
PrizeWheel Games, http://www.prizewheel.us/
Production Advantage Inc., http://www.productionadvantageonline.com/
Prop Warehouse, http://www.prop-warehouse.com/stage.htm
Quill, http://www.quill.com
Scenic Arts Studios Backdrops, http://www.scenicarts.com/, theater props
Schenz Theatrical Supply, http://www.schenz.com/
Siegel Display Products, http://www.siegeldisplay.com/default.aspx
Signals, http://www.signals.com/
Stage Backdrops, http://www.perryscenic.com
StageLightingStore.com, http://www.stagelightingstore.com/
The Costumer, http://www.thecostumer.com/, theatrical supplies and 
equipment
The Magic Tricks Homepage for Speaking, http://www.magic-tricks.ws/
magictrick126.html
Theatre House Theatrical supplies, http://www.theatrehouse.com/
Theatre Services Guide, http://www.theaterservicesguide.com, props, 
costumes, equipment, accessories
USI, http://USI-laminate.com/
Wall Street Gifts, http://www.wallstreetgifts.com/
Western Stage Props, http://www.westernstageprops.com/
What on Earth, www.whatonearthcatalog.com/
Wireless, http://www.thewirelesscatalog.com/
	
	
Resources
221

Trainer Resources
Business seminars, workshops, and presentations can be greatly enhanced by 
playful materials, games, signs, awards, icebreakers, prizes, e-learning, crowd 
warmers, recognition products, presentation equipment, and toys, even though 
they might be more typically used for corporate training events.
Baudville, http://www.baudville.com/?home=new
Crown Awards, http://www.crownawards.com/StoreFront/indexmain 
.html
Epic Engraving Awards and Recognition, http://www.epicengraving.com/
Games for Trainers, http://www.gamesfortrainers.com
Gamethingy, http://www.gamethingy.com
Glasstap, http://www.glasstap.com
gNeil, http://www.gneil.com/solutions/MotivationRecognition/default 
.aspx?sessionid=6008.221m4c-412
Successories, http://www.successories.com/
Terryberry, http://www.terryberry.com/
Trainers Warehouse, http://www.trainerswarehouse.com/
Trade Show Resources
One of the tricks of effective creativity in business is using ideas or things 
from seemingly unrelated areas and applying them in most unusual ways. You 
can do this by exploring trade show resources, some of which might prove 
very useful in certain types of presentations and speeches, especially as back-
ground displays, props, promotional items, novelties, prizes, games, or other 
giveaways. Explore some of the following websites and think of ways that the 
products, typically used at trade shows, might spice up your presentation from 
various perspectives.
4imprint, http://www.4imprint.com/
Abracadabra Magic, http://www.abra4magic.com
Branders.com, http://www.branders.com/
Camelback Displays Trade Show Games, http://www.camelback 
displays.com/Games.htm
Displays2go, http://www.displays2go.com/
Gimmees.com, http://www.gimmees.com/
222
	
Resources

Godfrey Group, http://www.godfreygroup.com/
Infinity Exhibits, http://www.infinityexhibits.com/
M.F. Blouin Merchandising Solution, http://www.mfblouin.com/
Plan It Interactive Trade Show Games, http://www.interactivegame.com/
Prizewheel.us, http://www.prizewheel.us/
Quality Trade Show Products, http://www.qtsp.com/
The Inside Track, http://www.theinsidetrackinc.com/
Trade Show Advisor, http://www.trade-show-advisor.com/, ideas 
and strategies
Trade Show Marketing.com, http://www.tradeshowmarketing.com/
tradeshow-ideas, ideas, news, and articles
TradeShowAttractions.com, http://tradeshow-attractions.com/
Tradeshowdirect, http://www.tradeshowdirect.com/
Audio, Video Lighting, and Photography
As a presenter, professional speaker, or trainer, you might need to buy, rent, or 
set up microphones, public address systems, stage lighting, projectors, video 
and still cameras, screens, AV carts, or other gear and accessories to support 
your presentation development and delivery.
AV, http://avequipment.com/services.php
B&H Photo, Video, Pro Audio, http://www.BandH.com
CheapLights.com, http://www.cheaplights.com
Creative Stage Lighting Co., http://www.creativestagelighting.com/
Full Compass, http://www.fullcompass.com
IDJ Now, http://www.idjnow.com/
Markertek, http://www.markertek.com
Musician’s Friend, http://www.musiciansfriend.com
ProAudio.com, http://www.proaudio.com/
ProAudioMart, http://www.proaudiomart.com/
Projector Central, http://www.projectorcentral.com/
PSSL, http://www.pssl.com/
SLD Lighting, http://sldlighting.com/
StageLightingStore.com, http://www.stagelightingstore.com/
Sweetwater ProGear, http://www.sweetwater.com
Timewalker Toys, http://www.timewalkertoys.com/
	
	
Resources
223

Magic Books and DVDs
It is amazing how captivating and compelling simple magic tricks can be in 
adding meaning and persuasive effect to your presentation or speech. You 
don’t have to spend months learning and practicing “magic” to incorporate 
elements of it in your performance. The resources below are a great way to 
start your sleight of hand.
All New Tricks for Trainers: 57 Tricks and Techniques to Grab and Hold the 
Attention of Any Audience . . . and Get Magical Results by Dave Arch
Amazing Easy to Learn Magic Tricks with Everyday Objects, DVD, by 
Magic Makers
Amazing Easy to Learn Magic Tricks: Money Tricks, DVD, by 
Magic Makers
Card Trick Magic, DVD, by Stephane Vanel
The Complete Idiots’s Guide to Magic Tricks by Tom Ogden
Incredible Self-Working Card Tricks, DVD, various volumes, by 
Michael Maxwell
Learn Magic, DVD boxed set, starring Timothy Noonan
Learn Powerful Street Magic—Unlocking the Secrets, Volume 1, DVD, 
starring Jon Petz
Magic for Dummies by David Pogue
Magic: The Complete Course, book and DVD, by Joshua Jay
Presenting and Training with Magic: 53 Simple Magic Tricks You Can Use 
to Energize Any Audience by Ed Rose
Street Magic: Great Tricks and Close-Up Secrets Revealed by Paul Zenon
Presentation Apps
This category almost doesn’t need an introduction. We list a few more apps than 
those you find in Chapter 7. Although grouped under one heading, there are 
different kinds of presentation apps: those that simply open and project a PDF 
file, such as a PowerPoint or Keynote deck saved as a PDF; those that open and 
project PowerPoint or Keynote files; and those that allow you to create a deck on 
your iPad. Many access your files from one or more of the most popular cloud 
storage services, such as Box or DropBox, and some have a proprietary online 
storage system that also lets other people view your presentation online.
22
4	
Resources

2Screens Presentation Expert (ELP Studio), http://www.elpstudio.net/ 
2screens/pe/about.html, documentation manager, file viewer, web 
browser, and whiteboard app
Corkulous 2 (Appigo), http://www.appigo.com/corkulous, free and pro 
corkboard presentation and creation app
Doceri, http://doceri.com, presentation and whiteboard app
Haiku Deck (Giant Thinkwell), http://www.haikudeck.com/, free iPad 
app to create and show slides
iPresent (Compsoft, PLC), http:// www.ipresent.com/, presentation sales 
environment including enterprise cloud-based content management
Keynote (Apple, Inc.), http://www.apple.com/iwork/keynote/, iPad 
presentation app
PDF Presenter (Alterme), http://www.ifomia.com/apps/presenter/index.
html, presentation app for PDF documents
Perspective (Pixxa), http://pixxa.com/perspective, presentation and 
charts app
PresentationNote (Doxout), http://www.doxout.com, PowerPoint and 
PDF viewer app
Prezi, http://prezi.com/, tablet presentation and slide show with cloud-
based enterprise storage
Showpad (In the Pocket), http://www.showpad.com/, presentation sales 
tool incorporating cloud-based enterprise storage
SlideRocket, http://app.sliderocket.com, create presentations, import 
PowerPoint and PDF files
SlideShark, http://www.slideshark.com, PowerPoint viewer app, online 
viewing
Productivity Apps
In the computer world, three productivity suites (apps that create word pro-
cessing, spreadsheet, and presentation files) dominate the field: MS-Office, 
Apple’s iWorks suite, and Open Office, the freeware version of MS-Office. In 
the iPad world, although an MS-Office for iPad doesn’t exist, there are many 
apps that let you view, edit, create, and share MS-Office files. Most of these 
apps can access your existing files through a cloud server or via an iTunes sync, 
or they can access them by opening the file from an e-mail message.
	
	
Resources
22
5

Documents To Go Premium Office Suite (Dataviz), http://www.data 
viz.com/DTG_iphone.html, all-in-one, cloud-enabled office editing 
suite for Microsoft-formatted documents
GoDocs (Lightroom Apps), http://lightroomapps.com/products/godocs/, 
ultimate solution for Google documents
Numbers (Apple, Inc.), http://www.apple.com/apps/iwork/numbers/, 
spreadsheet app
Office2 HD (ByteSquared), http://www.bytesquared.com/products/office/
ipad/, all-in-one cloud-enabled office editing suite for Microsoft-
formatted documents
Pages (Apple, Inc.), http://www.apple.com/apps/iwork/pages/, word 
processing and page layout app
Quickoffice Pro HD for iPad (QuickOffice), http://www.quickoffice.com/
quickoffice_pro_hd_ipad/, create, edit, and view all Microsoft Office 
document, spreadsheet, and presentation formats
Utility and Document Conversion Apps
When you have to edit a document on the go, these apps help you travel light. 
Sync the file to your iPad with iTunes or one of the popular cloud storage 
services and then edit on your iPad.
GoodReader (Good.iWare Ltd), https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/good 
reader-for-ipad/id363448914?mt=8
iAnnotate PDF (Branchfire, Inc.), https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ian 
notate-pdf/id363998953?mt=8
Note-Taking Apps
Those undisciplined scraps of paper that hold your shopping and to-do lists as 
well as great ideas are banished from sight with the help of note-taking apps. 
These apps keep your lists and thoughts in one place, and most offer cloud 
backup so you eliminate the risk of accidentally throwing away your notes for 
the next great American novel.
Evernote, http://www.evernote.com/, cross-platform (including iPad) 
note-taking, media collection, and assembly application
22
6	
Resources

Notability (Ginger Labs), http://www.gingerlabs.com/cont/notability.php, 
full-featured note-taking app including provisions for handwriting, 
sketching, and audio recording
Notes Plus, http://notesplusapp.com/versions/version-3, note-taking app 
with optional handwriting recognition module
NoteTaker HD (Software Garden), http://www.notetakerhd.com/, 
note-taking and PDF annotation app designed for stylus input
OneNote (Microsoft Corp.), https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/microsoft 
-onenote/id410395246?mt=8, note-taking app from Microsoft
Paper (Fifty-three), http://www.fiftythree.com/paper, note-taking app 
designed for stylus and pressure-sensitive stylus input
Paperport Notes (Nuance Communications), http://www.paperport 
notes.com/, note-taking and PDF markup app with audio capabilities 
(speech-to-text notes)
Penultimate (Evernote), http://evernote.com/penultimate/, note-taking 
app designed for stylus input
Simplenote (Simperium), http://simplenoteapp.com/, free no-frills 
note-taking app
Sketching and Drawing Apps
Say goodbye to pencil sharpeners and ink-stained fingertips with these sketch-
ing and drawing apps. Each comes with an assortment of virtual pencils, pens, 
and brushes with a selection of colors and widths. Create design elements and 
images to include in your presentations.
Art Rage (Ambient Design Ltd.), http://www.artrage.com/artrage-ipad 
-info.html
Art Studio for iPad (Lucky Clan), http://www.iphoneclan.com
Artist’s Touch for iPad (Artamata), http://www.artamata.com/index 
.html, simple painting app
iDraw (Indeeo), http://www.indeeo.com/idraw/, vector drawing package
Inspire Pro (Kiwi Pixel), http://kiwipixel.com/InspirePro/index.html, 
brush-oriented digital painting tool
Layers for iPad (J. Benjamin Gotow), http://www.layersforipad.com/, 
painting app with layers
	
	
Resources
22
7

Omnigraphsketcher (Omnigroup, Inc.), http://www.omnigroup.com/
products/omnigraphsketcher-ipad/, multitouch graph sketching tool
Procreate (Savage Interactive Pty Ltd), http://procreate.si/
Zen Brush (Psoft Mobile), http://psoftmobile.net/en/zenbrush.html, 
simple ink-brush tool, designed to work with capacitive brush styli
Teleconferencing Apps
When you can’t meet with your audience in person, teleconferencing apps 
are the next best thing to being there. Whether your viewers have an iPad or 
computer, as long as you both are using the same app, you can communicate 
in real time and display your presentation while talking to your audience and 
then have an active discussion.
Adobe Connect (Adobe), https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/adobe-connect 
-mobile-for-ios/id430437503?mt=8, cross-platform conferencing and 
whiteboard sharing app
Fuzebox, http://www.fuzebox.com/, cross-platform conferencing app 
that supports audio, video, and text
Google Hangout (Google), http://www.google.com/+/learnmore/
hangouts/, cross-platform conferencing app that supports audio, 
video, and text
GotoMeeting (Citrix), http://www.gotomeeting.com/, cross-platform 
conferencing app that supports audio, video, and text
Mighty Meeting (MightyMeeting, Inc.), http://www.mightyhd.com/, 
cross-platform conferencing and whiteboard sharing app
Skype (Microsoft Corp.), http://www.skype.com/, cross-platform video 
conferencing app
Webex (Cisco), http://www.webex.com/, cross-platform conferencing app 
that supports audio, video, and text
Meeting Apps
If you’re responsible for scheduling, planning an agenda, and facilitating meet-
ings, these apps can be a time-saver and a resource for sticking to the agenda 
and keeping the meeting running smoothly, leaving you free to concentrate 
on content rather than structure.
228
	
Resources

eScribe for iPad (eScribe), http://www.escribecorporate.com/escribe-for 
-the-ipad.php
Meeting Pad (Sekala Software), http://www.sekala-software.com/
Meeting+ for iPad (App Potential), http://apppotential.com/
Collaboration Apps
Working on a team can often mean sending a document from one team mem-
ber to the next and then incorporating everyone’s ideas. Collaboration apps 
let you work on a document or whiteboard simultaneously. Everyone can view 
the same document at once and see comments and changes in real time. Cor-
rection tape and photocopiers become things of the past.
AirSketch (Qrayon, LLC), https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/air-sketch/
id376617790?mt=8, project PDF documents (such as exported Power-
Point or Keynote decks) to a computer on the same local network; 
then annotate them in real time
Collusion (Collusion, Inc.), https://collusionapp.com/, make notes in real 
time with other users anywhere in the world
Conference Pad (Regular Rate & Rhythm), http://www.regularrateand 
rhythm.com/apps/conference-pad/, control a presentation on up to 15 
iPads, iPhones, and iPod Touches from your device, simultaneously 
and wirelessly over Bluetooth or Wi-Fi
Murally (Mural.ly), https://beta.mural.ly/, whiteboards on steroids for 
visual collaboration
Share Board (SID 5p. z.o.o.), http://www.sid-on.com/en/business/, up to 
four users connect simultaneously via Bluetooth or local Wi-Fi to 
create, innovate, draw, share pictures, play games, or just have fun
Smoothboard Air (Smoothboard Tech), http://www.smoothboard.net/, 
collaborative interactive whiteboard software for iPads and Android 
tablets that revolutionizes interaction in the classroom
Stickyboard 2 (Qrayon, LLC), http://www.qrayon.com/home/sticky 
board2/, giant whiteboard with a never-ending stack of sticky notes
SyncPad (Fifth Layer), http://mysyncpad.com/, transforms any iPad or 
browser into the ultimate whiteboard for real-time collaboration
TapStream (B.U.G.), http://www.bug.co.jp/tapstream/en/index.html, 
stream video from iPhone and iPad to iPad
	
	
Resources
229

Cases
While protecting your data may be the most important thing you do, protect-
ing your iPad is a close second, if only to avoid the hassle of replacing it. Cases 
come in many shapes and materials. Some are a simple cover that protects the 
iPad screen and puts it to sleep when closed; others have a foldout keyboard 
or stand, solar panels to charge the battery, or pockets to hold papers or credit 
cards.
Bay Street Case (ACME Made), http://www.acmemade.com/product/
The-Bay-Street-Case-for-iPad,74,20.htm, folio case with zipper
BookBook (Twelve South), http://twelvesouth.com/products/bookbook 
_ipad/, hardback leather case for iPad
Canvas (Switch Easy), http://www.switcheasy.com/product/CANVAS 
_ThenewiPad, full case and stand with magnetic on-off
Chrome Bezel (HardCandy Cases), http://www.hardcandycases.com/
chrome-bezel-the-new-ipad-case.html, case with chrome bezel
Clamcase (Clamcase), http://clamcase.com/
DodoCase (Dodocase), http://www.dodocase.com, hardback leather case 
for iPad
GelaSkins (Gelaskin), http://www.gelaskins.com/store/tablets_and_
ereaders/iPad_2nd_3rd_4th_Gen/collection/Most_Popular, patterned 
cases and covers
Graduate Edition Case (Pad & Quill), http://www.padandquill.com/
cases-for-ipad/cases-for-ipad-ipad2-ipad3-ipad4/graduate-edition-case 
-for-ipad-4-3-2.html, leather and wood case
Hardgraft Folios (Hardgraft), http://www.hardgraft.com/ - /category/
ipadcases, leather cases and folios
Latitude Case (M*Edge), http://www.medgestore.com/products/ipad3 
-latitude.psp, nylon case
Logitech Ultrathin Keyboard Cover, http://www.logitech.com/en-us/
product/ultrathin-keyboard-cover
Nuud (Lifeproof), http://www.lifeproof.com/en/ipad/, full ruggedized 
and waterproof case
Otterbox (Otterbox), http://www.otterbox.com/apple-ipad-cases/apple 
-ipad-cases,default,sc.html, ruggedized iPad cases
23
0	
Resources

PadBook (Piano Media), http://www.pianomedia.net/padbook/index 
.php, soft case for iPad and Apple wireless keyboard
SeeSaw (Griffin), http://store.griffintechnology.com/ipad/seesaw-for-ipad 
-2-3-4th-gen, stand and case for classroom iPad
ShockDrop (HardCandy Cases), http://www.hardcandycases.com/
shockdrop-ipad3-case.html, ruggedized case
SlateShield (PPC Techs), http://www.slateshield.com/, integrated case 
solution including stand and handle
Slim Kickstand (Incipio), http://www.incipio.com/cases/ipad-cases/
new-ipad-cases/ipad-retina-new-ipad-slim-kickstand-folio-case.html, 
vegan leather with kickstand
Solar Keyboard Folio (Logitech), http://www.logitech.com/en-us/
product/solar-keyboard-folio?crid=1325, solar-powered keyboard case
Survivor Case (Griffin), http://store.griffintechnology.com/ipad/ 
survivor-ipad-3
VersaVu (Targus), http://www.targus.com/us/ipad/versavu.aspx, flexible 
display case
XTREME for iPad (G-Form), http://g-form.com/products/xtreme-ipad 
-case/, ruggedized case and magnetic cover
ZeroChroma Folio (ZeroChroma), http://www.zerochroma.com/
product/folio
Stands and Holders
Portability is one of the advantages of the iPad, but there are times when a 
stand is a helpful accessory. If you use your iPad as a teleprompter, you’ll prob-
ably want it more than an arm’s length away while you’re speaking, and so a 
floor stand (much like a microphone stand) makes sense. If you’re watching a 
video on your iPad with a small group, a tabletop stand lets you position the 
iPad for maximum viewing. Magnetic and wall-mounted holders are great for 
hanging your iPad on a whiteboard or refrigerator.
A-Frame (Griffin), http://store.griffintechnology.com/a-frame, foldable, 
portable aluminum stand
BlueLounge Nest (Bluelounge), http://www.bluelounge.com/products/
nest/, inexpensive tablet stand
	
	
Resources
231

Bookarc (TwelveSouth), http://twelvesouth.com/products/bookarc 
_ipad/, vertical stand for iPad
Compass Mobile Stand (TwelveSouth), http://twelvesouth.com/products/
compass/, easel-type stand
ElectroStand (Electrostand), http://electrostand.com/, flexible iPad stand 
with charger
Floor Stand (Arkon), http://www.arkon.com/tablet-accessories/tablet-
floor-stand.html, extending tablet floor stand with quick-release 
holder
FridgePad (Woodford Design), http://woodforddesign.com/products/
fridgepad, refrigerator magnet iPad mounting system
Joule Stand, http://www.elementcase.com/iPad-Accessories-a/274.htm
LuxA2 H4 (Luxa2), http://www.luxa2.com/media_detail.aspx?s=26, 
hands-free stand
Magnus (Ten One Design), http://tenonedesign.com/magnus.php, 
magnetically attached aluminum stand
Padfoot (Michiel Cornelissen), http://www.michielcornelissen.com/pad 
foot_stand_for_ipad.html, lightweight and inexpensive viewing 
stand
PadPivotNST (PadPivot), http://www.padpivot.com/, lap and desk 
stand
Prizm (Hub Innovations), http://hubinnovations.com/home.html, 
lightweight and sturdy multidevice stand
Rev360 (Hub Innovations), http://hubinnovations.com/home.html, 
360-degree stand with hand strap
Stabile 2.0 (ThoughtOut), http://www.thoughtout.biz/products/
Stabile_2.0.html, robust, light steel-based stand
SwingHolder (Stand For Stuff), http://www.standforstuff.com/, floor 
stand for iPad
VirtualCurve (VirtualCurve), http://www.virtualcurve.com/portfolio 
-item/ipad-stand-design/, tall aluminum-based iPad stand
WallMount (Woodford Design), http://woodforddesign.com/products/
wallmount, simple and inexpensive wall mount
WedgePad (WedgePad), http://wedgepad.com/wedgepad-ipad-lap-stand, 
soft lap stand
232
	
Resources

Extended Display Devices
Without a doubt, your iPad has a beautiful, high-resolution screen, but there 
are times when you want a bigger view. You can connect your iPad to a larger 
monitor either directly with the appropriate cable or wirelessly with AppleTV 
or Cube. Alternatively, you can connect your iPad to a projector, depending 
on the model, with a cable or wirelessly.
3M, http://solutions.3m.com/wps/portal/3M/en_US/Consumer 
Projectors/Home/Product/StreamingProjector/, streaming portable 
pico projector with built-in Roku stick
Acer K330 (Acer), http://us.acer.com/ac/en/US/content/model-features/
EY.JCN01.008, portable and mobile projector, streaming projector
AppleTV (Apple), http:// www.apple.com, HD content and Airplay 
remote display device
Cube (TeraDek), http://www.teradek.com/pages/cube, mobile wireless 
monitor for iPad
DLP Pico Projector for iPad (Aiptek), http://www.aiptek.de/index.php/
en/products/pico-projectors/mobilecinema-i50D, mobile cinema 
projector designed for iPad
IN1110 (Infocus), http://www.infocus.com/projectors/portable 
-projectors/infocus-in1110-projector-series/infocus-in1110-projector, 
lightweight projector with optional Wi-Fi
iProjection App (Epson), http://www.epson.com/cgi-bin/Store/jsp/
Landing/ProjectorApp.do, app for wireless Epson projector 
connections
Liteshow III (Infocus), http://www.infocus.com/accessories/wireless-and 
-networking/infocus-liteshow-iii, wireless interface for any VGA-
based projector
Mobi-Show App (Casio), http://www.casioprojector.com/features/
features/mobi-show, app for wireless Casio projector connections
NP-3111X (NEC), http://www.necdisplay.com/p/multimedia-projectors/ 
np-m311x, 3,100-lumen portable projector
Pico PK120 (Optoma), http://www.optomausa.com/products/detail/
Pico-PK120, Pico DLP projector
	
	
Resources
233

PowerLite 915W WXGA 3LCD Projector (Epson), http://www.epson 
.com/cgi-bin/Store/jsp/Product.do?sku=V11H388020, midscale 
projector with Wi-Fi
XJ-M245 DLP (Casio), http://www.casio.com/products/projectors/
signature_models/xj-m245/, lamp-free Wi-Fi WXGA projector
Styli
One of the iPad’s key innovations was the stylus-free touch screen that needed 
just a fingertip, or two, to do whatever you wanted to do. Once the fat-fingers 
jokes died down, everyone got used to tap-typing, but as more creative apps 
were developed, the need for a stylus resurfaced, as artists are loathe to stop 
at finger painting. Choose a tip that best matches the types of work you’ll 
be doing and keep in mind the two types of styli available when deciding 
which you prefer: a capacitive stylus reacts the same regardless of how hard 
you press on the screen, whereas a pressure-sensitive stylus behaves more like 
a real pencil or charcoal so your sketches have depth, shadow, and expression. 
Another consideration is how the stylus connects to the iPad, either via a cable 
or wirelessly.
Alupen Pro (Just Mobile), http://www.just-mobile.com/iphone/
alupenpro.html, stylus with pen
Bamboo Stylus (WACOM), http://www.wacom.com/products/stylus/
bamboo-stylus, full-featured stylus with clip and small rounded tip
Boxwave Stylus (Boxwave), http://www.boxwave.com/apple-ipad-2 
-stylus/bwdcd/zgcz-z?gclid=CMCKsvSav7UCFQyqnQod01YALA, 
inexpensive capacitive stylus with thick tip
Crayola Light Marker (Griffin), http://store.griffintechnology.com/
crayola-light-marker-for-ipad, midair crayon using image processing 
on iPad
Hand stylus (Hand Design), http://handstylus.com/, stylus with clip
Jaja (HEX3), http://hex3.co/products/jaja, fine-line touch- and pressure-
sensitive stylus, wireless without Bluetooth
Jot Flip (Adonit), http://adonit.net/jot/flip/, fine-line capacitive stylus
Jot Touch (Adonit), http://adonit.net/jot/touch/, fine-line touch- and 
pressure-sensitive stylus with Bluetooth
23
4	
Resources

Kuel H10 (SPIGen), http://www.spigen.com/sgp-stylus-pen-kuel-h10 
-series.html, ministylus
Lunatik Touch Pen (Lunatik), http://www.lunatik.com/products/
touch-pen, pen/stylus with unique switching mechanism
LYNKtec TruGlide (LYNKtec) http://www.lynktec.com/TruGlide 
-microfiber-tip-stylus-s/1819.htm, stylus with unique microfiber tip
Maglus Stylus (Applydea), http://the-maglus.myshopify.com/products/
the-maglus-stylus-with-removable-tip-and-spare-tip-and-storage-
keyring, sturdy casing with unusual shape
Monteverdi Stylus Pen (Monteverdi), http://www.monteverdepens.com/
onetouch_stylusskins.html, high-quality and stylish pen and stylus 
combination
Nomad Brush (Nomad Brush), http://www.nomadbrush.com/, 
capacitive brush
Pogo Stylus (TenOne Design), http://tenonedesign.com/stylus.php, 
inexpensive stylus with clip
PogoConnect (TenOne Design), http://tenonedesign.com/connect.php, 
Bluetooth 4.0 smart pen
Sensu Brush (Sensu), http://www.sensubrush.com/, capacitive brush for 
iPad
Studio Neat Cosmonaut (Studio Neat), http://www.studioneat.com/
products/cosmonaut/, thick stylus (body and tip)
Virtuoso Stylus with Pen (Kensington), http://www.kensington.com/
kensington/us/us/s/2836/stylus.aspx, capacitive stylus with pen
Sound
Audio is a key component of your presentation, and if you make frequent pre-
sentations in your office, investing in a sound system may make sense for you. 
Here we’ve listed Airplay-compatible receivers to which you connect speakers. 
If you take your show on the road, a wireless speaker system may be the better 
choice.
Audio Dock Air (Audyssey), http://www.audyssey.com/products/audio 
-dock-airplay, Bluetooth wireless speaker system via Airplay
	
	
Resources
23
5

Bluetooth Music Receiver (Belkin), http://www.belkin.com/us/p/ 
P-F8Z492, Bluetooth receiver and adapter for iPad and iPhone
Bose Soundlink (Bose), http://www.bose.com/controller?url=/shop 
_online/digital_music_systems/bluetooth_speakers/soundlink 
_wireless_speaker/index.jsp, Bluetooth wireless speaker system via 
Airplay
Bowers & Wilkins Zeppelin Air (Bowers & Wilkins), http://www 
.bowers-wilkins.com/Wireless-Music-Systems/Wireless-Music 
-Systems/Zeppelin-Air/explore.html, Bluetooth wireless speaker 
system via Airplay
Denon AVR-3311CI (Denon), http://usa.denon.com/us/product/pages/
productdetail.aspx?pcatid=avsolutions%28denonna%29&catid=avrecei
vers%28denonna%29&pid=avr3311ci%28denonna%29, Airplay 
-compatible audio receiver
inAir 5000 (Altec-Lansing), http://international.alteclansing.com/
iceland/index.php?file=north_product_detail&iproduct_id=inair™_ 
5000, Bluetooth wireless speaker system via Airplay
IoDock Pro (Alesis), http://www.alesis.com/iodock, turns iPad into a 
full-blown recording system
Miccus Home RTX (Miccus), http://www.miccus.com/products/
blubridge-home, high-power, long-range Bluetooth receiver
Pioneer VSX-1021-K (Pioneer), http://www.pioneerelectronics.com/
PUSA/Home/AV-Receivers/Pioneer+Receivers/VSX-1021-K, Airplay-
compatible audio receiver
Pioneer VSX-1021-K (Pioneer), http://www.pioneerelectronics.com/
PUSA/Home/AV-Receivers/Pioneer+Receivers/VSX-1021-K, Airplay-
compatible audio receiver
Stelle Audio Pillar (Stelle), http://stelleaudio.com/our-products/, high-
fidelity stereo cylinder
TableTop Virtual Music Studio (Retronyms), http://retronyms.com/, 
turns iPad into a full-blown recording system
Yamaha HTR-4065 (Yamaha), http://usa.yamaha.com/products/audio 
-visual/av-receivers-amps/htr/htr-4065/?mode=model, Airplay-
compatible audio receiver
23
6	
Resources

Storage
Unlike hardware, which you can repurchase with relative ease, replacing or 
more than likely re-creating your files and data is difficult at best, impossible 
at worst. Storage is an important aspect of data management, and you have 
a couple of choices for backing up the data on your iPad: an external drive, 
either wireless or wired, or cloud storage. The external drive is Internet-free but 
runs the risk of theft or destruction and is of limited use if kept in the same 
location as your iPad. Cloud storage has two advantages: (1) you, or another 
authorized person, can access your files from another device no matter where 
you are, and (2) because your files are in a remote location, it’s like keeping 
them in a fireproof and theft-proof vault; even if your iPad, computer, and 
flash drive go down with a sinking ship, you’ll be able to access files in the 
cloud as soon as you replace your hardware. Even fee-based services are a small 
price to pay for the peace of mind they offer. Here we give you some options 
for both, and you might want to consider using both: an external drive to use 
in the event your iPad crashes and a cloud service for sharing and extreme 
backup restoration.
Wireless with Built-in Battery Power
AirStash (Wearable, Inc.), http://www.airstash.com/, wireless flash drive 
with built-in streaming
iUSBport (Patronica), http://www.protronica.co.uk/onlinestore/gbu0-
catshow/iusbport.html?gclid=CJ2LwfaunbUCFdRbPAodm0QAMw, 
USB via wireless attachment interface for mobile devices
Hard Drives
G-Drive (G-Technology), http://www.g-technology.com/products/ 
g-connect.cfm, wireless storage—500 GB with battery power
GoFlex Satellite (Seagate), http://www.seagate.com/external-hard-drives/ 
portable-hard-drives/wireless/seagate-satellite/, wireless storage— 
500 GB with battery power
HyperDrive (Sanho), http://www.hypershop.com/SearchResults.asp? 
Cat=183, USB drive, up to 1 TB
Wireless Plus (Seagate, Inc.), http://www.seagate.com/external-hard 
-drives/portable-hard-drives/wireless/wireless-plus/?cmpid=ppc 
	
	
Resources
23
7

-_-satellite-_-g-_-us-_-seagate_wireless_plus_1tb-_-e, wireless drive 
up to 1 TB with 10-hour battery power
Cloud Storage Services
Box, https://www.box.com/, cloud storage, free (2G) to paid from $15 
a month
DropBox, http://www.dropbox.com/, cloud storage, free (2G) to paid 
from $9.95 a month
GDrive (Google), http://drive.google.com, cloud storage, free (5G) to 
paid from $2.49 a month for 25G
iCloud (Apple), http://www.apple.com/icloud, cloud storage, free (5G) 
to from $20 a year for 10G
Just Cloud, http://www.justcloud.com/, cloud storage from $19.95 a 
month	
Sugarsync, http://www.sugarsync.com/offers/affiliate1/index.2.html, 
cloud storage from $4.95 a month
Transporter (Connected Data, Inc.), http://filetransporterstore.com/, 
online, but off-cloud, storage solution for private file sharing, access, 
and protection
Zip Cloud, http://www.zipcloud.com/, cloud storage from $4.95 a month
Cabling
There are all kinds of iPad accessories: monitors, speakers, chargers, musical 
instruments, and styli, and while many offer a wireless option, often you’ll find 
a cabled option is your best bet. (Remember, a wireless option consumes more 
of your iPad’s battery than a cabled option.) Apple manufactures and sells most 
of the adapters you might ever need, but there are third-party cables too.
Apple Adapters, http://store.apple.com/us/product/, 30-pin (non-
Lightning) to HDMI adapter, Lightning A/V Digital adapter, 
Lightning to HDMI adapter, Lightning to 30-pin adapter, Lightning 
to micro-USB adapter
Apple Lightning 3m/10ft Sync Cable (Woodford Design), http://
woodforddesign.com/products/lightning-3m-10ft-cable, Lightning to 
USB extra-long sync cable
238
	
Resources

MIXIT Audio Cable (Belkin), http://www.belkin.com/us/AV10127 
-Belkin/p/P- AV10127;jsessionid=538F1DBE83C40AAA6571A1E279952
ED5, mini-audio cable (mini to mini) for iPad
Power
Your iPad is a fantastic presentation tool as long as the battery is charged. 
You’d be well served to invest in a charger block or power stand if you’re going 
to be presenting all day with your iPad. If you’re on the road, keep a car char-
ger handy so you can juice up between one appointment and the next.
Apple 12W USB Power Adapter (Apple), http://store.apple.com/us/
product/MD836LL/A/apple-12w-usb-power-adapter?fnode=3c, 12-W 
USB power adapter
Car Charger with Lightning to USB (Belkin), http://www.belkin.com/
us/F8J078-Belkin/p/P-F8J078;jsessionid=538F1DBE83C40AAA6571A1 
E279952ED5, car charger with Lightning to USB connector
Chargeblock for iPad (Miccus), http://www.miccus.com/products/
chargeblock-for-ipad, chargeable battery for iPad with USB battery 
backup
Duracell Portable Battery (Duracell), http://www.duracellpowermat 
.com/wireless-battery-backup/index.html, chargeable battery pack via 
USB or Duracell Powermat
HyperJuice (Sanho), http://www.hypershop.com/HyperJuice-External 
-Battery-for-MacBook-iPad-iPhone-USB-s/91.htm, external battery for 
up to two iPads plus a MacBook
HyperJuice Plug (Sanho), http://www.hypershop.com/HyperJuice-Plug 
-15600mAh-Atmosphere-p/p15-blue.htm, high-capacity (up to 15,600 
mAh) USB battery backup
iPad Power Case (FrontGate), http://www.frontgate.com/webapp/wcs/
stores/servlet/ipad-power-case/466244?redirect=y, case doubles tablet 
battery life
Mini Auto Charger (Incipio), http://www.incipio.com/cases/power 
-solutions/power-solutions-for-apple/ipad-power-solutions.html, car 
charger with Lightning connector
	
	
Resources
239

Mojo Battstation Tough Dual Pro (ibattz), http://www.ibattz.com/
products_power_battstation.php - prettyPhoto, chargeable high-
capacity power pack (up to 8,400 mAh)
Mophie Powerstand (Mophie), http://www.mophie.com/product-p/ 
1195_pwrstd-ipad-alm.htm, stand with built-in power dock
Power Rack for iPad (Bretford), http://apple.bretford.com/products/
powerrackforipad, charging dock for up to eight iPads
PowerBlock Plus (Griffin), https://store.griffintechnology.com/
powerblock-plus, ac charger block for iPad
PowerDuo (Griffin), https://store.griffintechnology.com/powerduo-for 
-ipad, AC and DC charging set for iPad
Powerjolt SE (Griffin), https://store.griffintechnology.com/powerjolt-se 
-ipad, DC car charger for iPad
Spark Tablet Case (Voltaic), http://www.voltaicsystems.com/spark.shtml 
?gclid=COm_hr-54rUCFShgMgod0CwA7g, solar-powered iPad 
tablet case
ZAGGsparq (ZAGG), http://www.zagg.com/accessories/zaggsparq.php 
?gclid=CKrgoYO74rUCFYk7MgodX3Iamg
240	
Resources

A
Accelerometer, 140
Acting, 34–36, 108
Action (in conclusions), 209
Action Movie FX, 131
After Effects (Adobe software), 69
The Age of Discontinuity (Peter Drucker), 3
AirPort Express, 110
AirServer, 110
Alexander the Great, 71
Amazon, 180–181
Amenities, 193
American Turnaround (Ed Whitacre), 15
Analytics, 165
Anecdotes, clever/amusing, 196–197
Animation, 68, 83, 106, 133–135, 218–219
Animation Desk for iPad, 134–135
Anthony, Ray:
on executives’ priorities for presentations, 21
presentation built around one visual, 52
props used by, 169, 178
P-XL2 development, 66–67
P-XL2 presentation example, 78–79
Apologizing, 26
Apple, 2, 8–9, 31–34
Apple Motion software, 69
Apple TV, 109–110
Apps:
creating presentation elements with, 90–92
downloadable presentation apps, 93–105
switching between, 137
for virtual meetings, 158–160
(See also specific types, e.g.: Enhancement 
apps)
AR (see Augmented reality)
Architectural models, 175–177
Aristotle, 67–68
Arts and craft stores, 210
ArtStudio, 127
Attitude, 22
Audience, challenges to, 202–203
Audio:
hardware, 223–224
production/editing apps, 131–133
receivers, 237–238
remote sound, 138–139
resources, 223–224, 237–238
royalty-free sound effects, 219–220
technology, 69, 111
Augmented reality (AR), 12–13, 141, 146–147
B
B2B (business-to-business), 160
Backgrounds, animated, 218–219
BaiBoard, 150–151
Batteries, external, 240–241
Battery chargers, iPad, 240–241
Benefits, communicating, 27
Best Practices for Creating a Presentation on a 
Mac for Use on an iPad (Apple support 
document), 88
Best Prompter Pro, 113
Blackening the screen, 28, 107
Blackouts, 107
Blurry images, 136
Body movement, purposeful, 22–23
Boeing, 2
Brainstorming apps, 118–120
Brevity, 54–55
BrightTalk, 159
Building block approach, 193–208
Bullet points, excessive, 25
BUNCH, 2
Burroughs, 2
Business-to-business (B2B), 160
I n d e x
241

C
Cables and connectors, 108–109, 111, 239–240
Caine, Michael, 35
Calendar, 90
Camera, 90, 136
Camera Professional Effects software, 126–127
“Canned pitches,” 27
Captivating presentations, 58–59
Carnegie, Dale, 152
Carson, Johnny, 57
Cases (iPad), 231–232
Challenging your audience, 202–203
Charts, 122–123
Cherubini, Vic, 145–146
Chroma Key, 69
Chubbuck, Ivana, 34–35
Cicero, 54
Clarity, 59–60
ClickMeeting, 159
Clock, 90
Close (question), 205–206
Closings (see Conclusions)
Clothing, 169–171
Cloud servers, 93–97
Cloud storage devices, 239
Cognitive affect, 75
Collaboration apps, 230
CollabraCam, 131
Compelling presentations, 57
Competition, 62, 65–66
Completeness, 55–56
Conciseness, 54–55, 200
Conclusions, 201–216
building block approach for, 201–208
crafting, 201, 208–209
executive summary handouts, 209–216
Confidence, 200
Content Set (iPresent), 96
Control Data, 2
Conviction, lack of, 27
Cook, Tim, 33
Creating iPad presentations, 85–115
cables and connectors for presenting, 
108–109
from computer-created presentations, 86–89
creating elements with preloaded apps, 
90–92
design tips for visuals, 105–108
with Doceri, 98–99, 105
with Documents To Go, 104–105
downloadable presentation apps, 93–105
evaluating suitability of iPad for presen-
tation, 114–115
with iPresent, 94–97, 105
with Keynote, 97–98, 105
with Perspective, 99–100, 105
with Presentation Note, 103–105
with Prezi, 100–101, 105
with SlideShark, 101–102, 105
with 2Screens, 102–103, 105
(See also Enhancement apps)
Credibility killers, 200–201
CuteCUT, 129
Cyviz high-resolution projection screen, 60
D
Daron, 181
Data General, 2
Datapoint, 2
Deals, winning, 78–84
“Death by bullets,” 25
Detail, excess, 24, 25
Diagrams, 122–123
Digital Equipment Corporation, 2
Digital INTERprise Engine, 80
Dioramas, 181
Discontinuities, 3
Disruption, creative, 44, 65
Distractions, visual, 28–29
Doceri, 98–99, 105
Docs To Go, 88
Document conversion apps, 227
Documents To Go, 104, 105
Dollar Origami (Won Park), 191
Drawing apps, 123–124, 228
DropBox, 93
DropMind, 119–120
Drucker, Peter F., 3
E
Effects, animated, 218–219
Einstein, Albert, 63
Elevator pitch, 12, 187
Emotional affect, 75
Energy, lack of, 27, 200
Enhancement apps, 117–148
for animation, 133–135
for creating diagrams, charts, and graphs, 
122–123
242	
Index

expert’s Q&A about, 135–141
and future of presentations, 142–148
Keynote templates, 120–122
for media creation, 117–120
for photo editing and enhancement, 124–128
for sketching, 123–124
for video capture and editing, 128–131
Enlightening presentations, 53–54
Entertaining presentations, 57–58
Epic Software Group, 145–146
Equipment, unfamiliar, 25–26
E3 Webcasting, 159
Etiquette, 157
Excuses, making, 26
Executive Suite (film), 60, 66
Executive summary, 197, 209–216
Expertise, sharing, 161
Extended display devices, 234–235
External batteries, 240–241
External hard drives, 238–239
Eye contact, 26, 153
EyeSight, 148
F
FaceTime, 90, 160
Facts, startling, 196
“Faking it,” 25
FeedbackFruits, 156
File storage, 238–239
Find My iPad, 112
Findings, verifying, 195
The Fling, 139
Fonts, 106, 135–136
Forleo, Marie, 165
Fortune 500, 2–3
4G hotspots, 111
4K video, 68, 142–143
Future of presentations, 142–148
Future Shock (Alvin Toffler), 1
FX Photo Studio HD, 127
G
Gallo, Carmine, 31, 32
Games, 139
GarageBand, 132
General Motors (GM), 15–16
General trial closes, 205
Gesture recognition, 139–140, 147–148
Gestures, 22
Gigapixel panorama images/video, 143–144
Glaze, 127
GM (General Motors), 15–16
Goldwyn, Samuel, 187
Google, 2
Google Drive, 93
Google Glass, 147
GoToMeeting, 159
Graphio, 123
Graphs, 122–123
Green screen, 69
GripStand GripBase bundle, 113, 114
H
Hamel, Gary, 62
Handouts, executive summary, 209–216
Hard drives, external, 238–239
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia 
Interface), 109–111
HDTV (High-Definition Television), 97, 
109–110 (See also Ultrahigh-definition 
video/television [UHD/UHDTV])
Hobby stores, 210
Hokusai Audio Editor, 133
Holden, William, 66
Holders (iPad), 113–114, 232–234 
Holograms, 144
Honeywell, 2
Hotspots, personal, 111
“Housekeeping,” 194–195
Humor, 204
Hyperlinks, 137
I
“I Have a Dream” speech (Martin Luther 
King, Jr.), 61
IBM, 2
iBook, 81
iCanvas Pro, 124
iCloud, 87, 88, 104
iCreate, 145
“Ideal 10,” 52–62
IK Multimedia, 113
IKEA, 147
iKlip Studio, 113
Illustrations, royalty-free, 217
Images, blurry, 136
iMovie, 128–129
Impressiveness, 200
In absentia presentations, 163–165
Industrial Light and Magic, 68
	
	
Index
243

KeynoteZone Collection, 121–122
Killer concept, 80–81
Killer Presentations, 43–62
as captivating, 58–59
as clear, 59–60
as compelling, 57
as complete, 55–56
as concise, 54–55
enhancement apps for (see Enhancement 
apps)
as enlightening, 53–54
as entertaining, 57–58
identifying, 44–45
as inspiring, 61–62
as memorable, 60–61
as motivational, 56–57
P-XL2 examples, 78–79, 82–84
qualities of, 52–62
reimagining and reinventing presentations 
in, 45–47
taking risks with, 47–52
(See also P-XL2 [Presentation Excellence 
Squared] Model; specific topics)
Killer Proposals, 78–79, 81–82
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 61
Knowledge, sharing, 160–161
L
Laptop computers, 12, 13, 15, 115
Large-screen television, 68
Leadership ability, presenter’s, 20–23
Leap Motion Controller, 147–148
Lenton, Phil, 94–95
Leonardo da Vinci, 33
Lewis, Cathy, 182, 183
LilyPad, 155
Lucas, George, 68
Lucasfilm Limited, 68
M
Macs, 87–88, 110
MacWorld, 12
Magic, books and DVDs on, 224–225
Mainframe computers, 2
Maps, 90–91
Marketing, 3
Mastery (of topic), 20–21
Mcor Corporation, 184
Media-creation apps, 117–120
Meeting apps, 153–156, 229
Information, new, 208
InkFlow, 152
Inkpad, 135–136
Innovation, 3
Inspiring presentations, 61–62
Instagram, 127
Intel, 2
Interaction with audience, 29
InterCall, 159
Internet access, 110–111
Introductions (see Openings)
iPad:
alternatives to, 114–115
broadcasting presentations on, 108
engaging audience with, 15–16
introduction of, 8–9
for Killer Presentations, 11–12 (See also 
Creating iPad presentations)
laptop computers vs., 13, 15, 115
as “natural” communication device, 12–13
for “nonpresentation presentations,” 16–17
pros and cons of, 14–15
syncing/moving presentation files to, 87–89
iPad Camera Connector Kit, 136
iPad mini, 9
iPad stands/holders, 232–234
iPhone, 102–104
iPhoto, 126
iPresent, 94–97, 105
iTunes, 89, 104, 136–137
J
James, William, 67
Jobs, Steve, 12, 31–34, 68, 101
John Deere, 2
Justified action, appeal to audience for, 209
K
Kawasaki, Guy, 164
Key information, pointing out, 212–213
Keynote presentation software, 8
for creating iPad presentations, 86
description, 97–98
features compared with other software, 105
missing font work-arounds, 135–136
for moving PowerPoint presentations from 
PC to iPad, 88
moving presentations from Mac to iPad, 
87–88
templates, 120–122
244	
Index

P
PA systems, 69
Pain, avoiding, 76
“Pain points,” 76
Panoramic videos, 143–144
Paradi, Dave, 5
Park, Won, 191
Passion, lack of, 27
Patton, George S., 22
PCs (personal computers), 88, 89 (See also 
Laptop computers)
PDF Splicer, 103
Penxy, 164–165
Personal computers (PCs), 88, 89 (See also 
Laptop computers)
Perspective software, 99–100, 105
Photo Booth, 91
Photo editing/enhancement apps, 124–128
Photography, 223–224
Photos, 90–92, 217
Photos app, 90–92
PhotoToaster, 125
Piko, 181, 182
Pinnacle Studio, 130
Pixar Animation Studios, 68
Playing it safe, 65–66
“Pleasure points,” 76
Podcasts, 136–137
Power gestures, 22
Power supplies, iPad, 240–241
PowerPoint:
for creating iPad presentations, 86
and “death by bullets,” 25
and Documents To Go, 104
and Keynote software, 98
launch of, 8
and Presentation Note, 103
and SlideRocket, 101
and SlideShark, 101–102
and 2Screens, 102
PowerPoint presentations, 5–6, 15–16, 88
Preparation, lack of, 25
Presentation(s), 1–17
history of visual aids for, 8–9
innovative, 4
and knowing what your business is, 3–4
need for change in, 2–3
“nonpresentation,” 16–17
quality of, 5–8
Meeting presentations, 149–165
for in absentia presentations, 163–165
in-person meetings when all participants 
have iPads, 152–156
for virtual meetings, 156–163
whiteboards, 149–152
Memorableness, 60–61
Microphones, 137
Microsoft Office, 8, 104
MightyMeeting, 154–155
MindMaple, 118
Mind-mapping apps, 118–120
Mindomo, 119
Mistakes, deadly, 23–29
Models, 175–177, 180–182
Molay, Ken, 163
Motion (Apple software), 69
Motivational presentations, 56–57
Movies, 68
Multimedia, 68
Music, 91, 136, 219–220
Music Library, 136
Myles, David, 175–176
Myles Burke, 175
N
Napoleon Bonaparte, 22
Narcissistic focus (NARFO), 28
NCR, 2
Needs, 75–76, 195
NetConference, 159
News articles, references to, 203–204
9slides, 163–164
“Nonpresentation presentations,” 16–17
Note-taking apps, 227–228
NuGuard GripStand/GripBase bundle,  
113, 114
O
Objectives and expectations (openings),  
194
OmniGraffle, 122, 123
OmniGraphSketcher, 122
Openings, 187–201
building block approach for, 193–200
crafting, 187–192, 200–201
goals of, 192
Outfits, 169–171
Oversized props, 178–179
Overtime, running, 24–25
	
	
Index
245

storytelling ability, 37–41
traits, competencies, and skills, 29–31
Presenters Display (Keynote software feature), 
97, 98
Prezi, 100–101, 105
Productivity apps, 226–227
Projectors, video, 109–111, 142–143, 234–235
PrompterPal, 113
ProPrompter, 113
Props, 167–185
architectural models as, 175–177
costumes/outfits/uniforms/disguises, 
169–171
creative examples of, 172–175
to impart urgent tone, 168–169
models as, 180–182
oversized, 178–179
selecting and using, 171–172
for summaries, 210–216
3-D printing of, 182–185
Prototypes/prototyping, 182–185
Psychology, 74–78, 82
Public address (PA) systems, 69
P-XL2 (Presentation Excellence Squared) 
Model, 63–84
case study using, 78–84
creativity in, 72–74
key components of, 66–67
and playing it safe, 65–66
psychology in, 74–78
strategy in, 70–72
technology in, 67–70
Q
Qualities (of presenter) (see Presenter qualities)
Questions, audience, 21–22, 153
Quotations, 195, 203
R
Randall, Clarence B., 20
Rayburn, Mike, 169
Rayburn, Sam, 35
Reagan, Ronald, 35
“Reality distortion field,” 32
ReelDirector, 129–130
Reimagining/reinventing your presentations, 
44–47
Remote sound, 138–139
RenderMan Pro Server, 68
RenderMan Studio, 68
as strategic asset, 9–11
using iPad, 11–17
(See also Killer Presentations; specific types, 
e.g.: Meeting presentations)
Presentation apps, downloadable, 93–105, 
225–226
Presentation Excellence Squared model (see 
P-XL2 Model)
Presentation Note, 103–105
Presentation resources, 217–241
animated backgrounds and effects,  
218–219
audio hardware, 223–224
audio receivers, 237–238
cables, 239–240
cases, 231–232
collaboration apps, 230
document conversion apps, 227
extended display devices, 234–235
file storage, 238–239
iPad cases, 231–232
iPad stands/holders, 232–234
magic books/DVDs, 224–225
music and sound effects, 219–220
note-taking apps, 227–228
photography resources, 223–224
power, 240–241
presentation apps, 225–226
productivity apps, 226–227
projectors, 234–235
sketching/drawing apps, 228
stands and holders, 232–234
stock photos, illustrations, and vector 
images, 217–218
storage, 238–239
styli, 235–236
teleconferencing apps, 229
trade show resources, 222–223
trainer resources, 222
utility apps, 227
various resources, 220–222
video lighting resources, 223–224
The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs (Carmine 
Gallo), 31
Presenter qualities, 19–41
acting ability, 34–37
deadly mistakes presenters make, 23–29
leadership ability, 20–23
learned from Steve Jobs, 31–34
246	
Index

Team members, introducing, 193
Technology, 67–70
TED Talks, 73
Teleconferencing apps, 229
Teleprompt+, 113
Teleprompters, 113
Templates, 106, 120–122
Templates for Keynote app, 120
Templates for Keynote Presentations app, 121
Templates for Keynote Pro app, 120, 121
Templates for PowerPoint Presentations app, 
121
Templates for Powerpoint Pro app, 121
“10 Hindsights” (Guy Kawasaki), 164
Text, 106, 107
Theme, introducing, 194
3-D printing, 182–185
3D Systems, 184
3-D virtual reality, 144–146
Time, scheduled, 24–25
Titles, 107
Toffler, Alvin, 1
Topic, mastery of, 20–21
TouchDraw, 124
Touch-free gesture recognition, 147–148
Toy stores, 210
Toy Story (film), 68
Trainer resources, 222
Transition statements, 198, 201–202
Trial closes, 204–205
TwistedWave Audio Editor, 132–133
2Screens, 102–103, 105
Typefaces, 106
U
Ultrahigh-definition video/television (UHD/
UHDTV), 68, 142–143
Uniforms, 169–171
Unity 3D game engine, 146
Univac, 2
Unprepared conclusions, 208
Urgency, 168–169
“Use Your 119 Seconds Wisely” (Harvard 
Business Review article), 187
Utility apps, 227
V
Value, communicating, 27
Vario-SC stand, 113–114
Vector images, 217
Repetition, 108
Rhetorical questions, 196
Risks, taking, 47–52
S
Safari, 92
Salisbury, Marquis of, 11
Second person, addressing audience in, 163
Simplicity, 107
Siri, 139
SketchBook Express for iPad, 124
SketchBook Pro for iPad, 124
Sketching apps, 123–124, 228
SketchTime, 124
Skype, 70, 160
Slide shows, 86–87
SlideRocket, 101, 105
Slides, 135
SlideShark, 88, 101–102, 105
Snapspeed, 125
Social media, 160
Songs, 136
Sound (see Audio)
Sound effects, royalty-free, 219–220
Specific trial closes, 205
Stands (iPad), 113–114, 232–234
Star Wars (film), 68
Statistics, startling, 196, 203
Stickyboard2, 151
Stock photos, 217
Stock video footage, 218
Storage, 238–239
Storyboards, 83
Storytelling, 37–41, 49–50, 108
Stratasys, 185
Strategy:
defined, 71
presentations as part of, 9–11
P-XL2 case study, 79–80
and P-XL2 Model, 70–72
Structured conversation, 17
Styli, 138, 235–236
Summary, 202, 209
Summary props, 210–216
Switching between apps, 137
T
Taccto, 154
Tactics, 71
Talking to the Top (Ray Anthony), 21
	
	
Index
247

W
Wang, 2
Wants, needs vs., 75–76
Web Ex, 159
Webcasts, 158
Webinars, 157–158
as marketing tactic, 160–161
tips for creating, 161–163
videoconferences vs., 158
Whitacre, Ed, 15–16
Whiteboard Guru, 151
Whiteboards, 149–152
Wi-Fi, 110–111
Will, George, 8
“Winging it,” 25
Wireless file storage, 238
Wireless hotspots, 111
Wireless styli, 138
World clock, 90
Writing on slides, 135, 138
X
XnView Photo FX, 128
Y
You as the message (see Presenter qualities)
“You” statements, 28, 163
Z
Zebra Imaging, 144
ZeroChroma Vario-SC stand,  
113–114
Velcro, 83
VGA adapters, 109–110
VGA connections, 111
Vida, 123
Video:
capture/editing software, 128–131
clips, stock, 218
latest formats, 68, 142–144
lighting resources, 223–224
presentation apps, 163–165
in presentation design, 106
using P-XL2 model, 81–82, 84
Video projectors:
connecting iPad to, 109–111
latest formats, 142–143
resources for, 234–235
Videoconferences, 156–160
VideoScribe HD, 134
ViewAR, 141
Virtual meetings, 156–163
apps for, 158–160
etiquette for, 157
Virtual reality, 12–13, 144–146
Visual distractions, 28–29
Visuals:
design tips for, 105–108
in presentation design, 107
for reinventing presentations, 52
(See also specific types of visuals)
Voice, 22
248	
Index

Ray Anthony is one of the most innovative presentation experts in the world 
today. His highly acclaimed book Talking to the Top broke exciting new 
ground on how to give winning presentations to top leaders and executives. 
Ray has helped numerous Fortune 500 companies close “impossible” huge 
deals using his visionary strategies, ideas, and techniques and coached their 
executives on how to give Killer Speeches.
As a charismatic keynote speaker, Ray has enthralled audiences as he 
instructed them in how to wow people with amazing creativity and technol-
ogy in their presentations. His sixth book, Fast Forward . . . And Step on It! is 
a tour de force about organizational innovation, which he has spelled out to 
the CIA, NASA, and numerous other leading organizations.
He is an accomplished photographer, videographer, and producer. In his 
prior “corporate life,” he worked for two major companies, selling multimil-
lion dollar complex computer systems in the Wall Street area to international 
banks. Ray has been on numerous TV and radio programs and has a BS and 
MA in economics.
Bob LeVitus, often referred to as “Dr. Mac,” has written or cowritten over 65 
popular computer books, with millions of copies in print. His titles include 
OS X Mountain Lion for Dummies, iPhone for Dummies, Incredible iPad Apps 
for Dummies, and Microsoft Office 2011 for Mac for Dummies for John Wiley 
& Sons; Stupid Mac Tricks and Dr. Macintosh for Addison-Wesley; and The 
Little iTunes Book, third edition, and The Little iDVD Book, second edition, 
for Peachpit Press.
Bob has also penned the popular “Dr. Mac” column for the Houston 
Chronicle for more than 15 years and has been published in pretty much every 
A b o u t  t h e  A u t h o r s
249

magazine that ever used the word Mac in its title. His achievements have 
been documented in major media around the world. (Yes, he was the one 
juggling a keyboard in USA Today a few years back!)
Bob is known for his expertise, trademark humorous style, and ability 
to translate techie jargon into usable and fun advice for regular folks. Bob 
is also a prolific public speaker, presenting more than 100 Macworld Expo 
training sessions in the United States and abroad, keynote addresses in three 
countries, and Macintosh training seminars in many U.S. cities.

